
What are Vedas?

here seem to be apparently differing views and confusion 
on what exactly is meant by Vedas. So, before we prove 
the divinity and infallibility of Vedas and deal with other 
allegations of Hinduism haters in upcoming chapters, let us first 
authoritatively clear this confusion and understand what Vedas are.
	
Vedic literature includes several texts:
	
Veda Mantra-Samhitas – Rik, Yajuh, Sama, Atharva
	
Brahmans associated with each Mantra Samhita
	
Aranyaks
	
Upanishads (actually part of above)


Divine Vedas

	
Upavedas (each Mantra Samhita has an associated Upaveda)
In reality, only the Mantra-Samhitas are the divine Vedas. Oth-
er texts like Brahmans, Aranyaks, Upanishads, Upavedas, six Dar-
shan, Geeta, etc. are texts written by sages. These texts are the 
human creation and not divine. So, these texts should be accepted 
only to the extent that they comply with Vedas (Mantra-Samhitas) 
and understood in the context of these.
Doubt
We heard Brahmans are part of Vedas and therefore they are also 
divine and eternal.
Agniveer
Brahmans are neither divine nor eternal. Only the Vedic mantras 
are eternal as per our traditional knowledge and wisdom.
Brahmans are explanations of Vedas by putting them in contem-
porary contexts. 
Doubt
But Katyayana Rishi has stated that Brahmans are divine Vedas. 
Then why don’t you also accept Brahmans as part of Vedas?
Agniveer
Brahmans are also known as Itihas, Puran, Kalp, Gatha and Nar-
ashansi. Brahmans are explanations of  Vedic mantras by Rishis. They are 
not divine creations but developed by great saints.
	
Apart from Katyayan Pratijna Parishishth of Shukla Ya-
jurveda (which is not authored by Katyayana as per many 
scholars), no other text states that Brahmans are part of 


What are Vedas?

Vedas.
	
The claim that ‘Mantra and Brahman are together called 
Vedas’ is also found in Shraut Sutras of Krishna Yajurveda. 
But Krishna Yajurveda itself is a mixture of Brahman and 
Mantras. Hence, this claim is relevant only for the specific 
text. 
In the same manner, as ‘Dhatu’ means the root of  the word in 
Panini Grammar, but ‘Dhatu’ means metal in Material Science and 
body elements in Ayurveda. No such reference of Brahmans be-
ing Vedas is found in branches of Rigveda, Shukla Yajurveda, and 
Samaveda.
	
Vedas contain no history, they being permanent knowledge 
of Ishwar. But Brahman texts contain history and descrip-
tion of historical persons.
	
All major texts of Vedic literature clearly proclaim that the 
Mantra-Samhitas of Rigveda, Yajurveda, Samaveda and 
Atharvaveda are divine Vedas. Here are some references:
Rigveda: Rigveda 10/90/3, Rigveda 4/58/3, (as explained by 
Nirukta 13/6)
Yajuveda: Yajuveda 31/7, Yajuveda 35/5, Yajuveda 17/91
Atharvaveda: Atharvaveda 19/6/13, Atharvaveda 10/7/20, 
Atharvaveda 1/10/23, Atharvaveda 15/6/9, Atharvaveda 15/6/8, 
Atharvaveda 11/7/24
Upanishads: Brihadaranyak Upanishad 2/4/10, Chhandog-
ya Upanishad, 7/1/2, Brihadaranyak Upanishad 1/2/5, Mundak 
Upanishad 1/1/5, Chhandogya Upanishad 7/7/1, Taittriya Upa-


Divine Vedas

nishad 1/1, Taittriya Upanishad 2/3
Brahmans: Shatpath Brahman 11/5/8, Gopath Purva 2/16, Go-
path 1/1/29
Mahabharat: Drona Parva 51/22, Shanti Parva 235/1, Vana Par-
va 187/14, Vana Parva 215/22, Sabha Parva 11/31
Manu Smriti: Manu Smriti 1/23
Purans: Padma 5/2/50, Harivansh, Visgnu Puran 1/22/82, 
Vishnu 5/1/36, Brahm Vaivart Prakriti 14/64
Miscellaneous: Mahabhashya Pashpashanhik, Kathak Samhita 
40/7, Sayan in his explanation of Atharvaveda 19/9/12, Nrising-
hapurvataapani, Vrihadaranyavaartikasaar by Saayana 2/4, Sarva-
nukramanibhumika, Ramayan 3/28, etc.
	
Even Shankaracharya states that “Chaturvidha Mantrajaat-
am” to conclude that four Mantra Samhitas alone are Vedas 
(explanation of Brihad 2/4/10 by Shankaracharya)
	
Even Brahmana texts do not claim that they are also Vedas.
	
Shatpath Brahman states that Vedas have 8.64 lakh alpha-
bets. Had Brahmans been included, this would have been 
significantly higher.
	
Only Mantras have been preserved through Paatha Vidhis 
of Jata, Mala, Shukha, Rekha, Dhwaj, Danda, Ratha and 
Ghana. No such effort has been made to preserve the Brah-
man texts.
	
Swar Bhed and Maatras are used for Mantras only. Not for 
Brahmans.


What are Vedas?

	
Each Mantra has a specific Rishi, Devata, Chhanda and 
Swar, That is not so for Brahman texts.
	
Yajuh Pratishakhya states that one should say ‘Om’ before 
Mantras and ‘Atha’ before Brahman verses. Something sim-
ilar is stated in Aitareya Brahman also.
	
Brahmans themselves detail the descriptions of people who 
wrote them. They elaborate on Mantras and even state at 
places while explaining meanings of Mantras that “Naatra 
Tirohitamivasti” – we have not elaborated those parts which 
are straightforward and have explained the complex parts.
Doubt
How can you say Puranas are Brahmans? Puranas refer to 18 Pu-
ranas by Ved Vyasa.
Agniveer
No, this is a misconception. These new Puranas are of much re-
cent origin. Purana refers to old.
	
Taittriya Aranyak 2/9 and Ashwalayan Grihyasutra 3/3/1 
clearly state that Brahmans alone are called Kalpa, Gatha, 
Puran, Itihas or Narashansi.
	
Even Acharya Shankar states so while commenting on Bri-
hadaranyak Upanishad 2/4/10.
	
Same is the view of Sayana in explanation of Taittriya Ara-
nyak 8/21.
	
Shatpath Brahman is much older than most other scriptures. 
It states in 13/4/3/13 that one should listen to Puranas on 


Divine Vedas

the ninth day of Ashwamedha Yajna. Had Puranas referred 
to these new Puranas like Brahmavaivart, what would Ram, 
Krishna, etc. had listened on ninth day? 
	
Brahmans were written generations before Veda Vyasa was 
born. And these new Puranas are falsely attributed to Veda 
Vyasa. If one reads Brahmavaivart Puran in detail, he would 
clearly understand that it cannot be written by a yogi who 
wrote the commentary on Yoga Darshan.
Doubt
Even Vedas have a history. See there is the name of Jamadagni and 
Kashyap Rishis in Yajurveda 3/62. Many Vedic mantras talk of 
historical persons.
Agniveer
Do not be confused. 
	
Jamadagni and Kashyap do not refer to historical people. 
As per Shatpath, Jamadagni refers to Eyes and Kashyap re-
fers to Prana or life force.
	
Similarly, all names in Vedas refer to some specific attri-
butes. Later people used them to keep their names. 
Just as Lal and Krishna in Mahabharat do not refer to Advani 
and Maya in Shankaracharya’s texts do not refer to Mayavati, same 
is the case with Vedas.
Doubt
What about branches of Vedas. There are 1131 branches of Vedas. 
Most of them are lost today. How can we then claim that we have 


What are Vedas?

original Vedas?
Agniveer
Branches of Vedas are not Vedas. They are explanations of Vedas. 
	
The Branches make changes in original mantras to simpli-
fy the meanings as per prevailing norms. Similarly, many 
branches modify the sequence of mantras for specific Ya-
jnas or other purposes. Some branches mix Mantras and 
Brahmans also.
	
Four original Mantra-Samhitas are Apaurusheya.
	
Branches and Brahmans are correct only to the extent they 
comply with Vedas. They are human creations.
	
Traditionally, original Mantra-Samhitas have been pre-
served, and only these have been commented upon by 
scholars.
Doubt
What about Upanishad, Upavedas, Geeta, etc.? Are they not divine 
like Vedas?
Agniveer
These are great works by great legends. But they are not parallel to 
Vedas which are divine. 
	
Had they been divine, Ishwar must have ensured that they 
are also preserved just like the four Vedas. 
	
So these should be interpreted in light of Vedas and those 
portions that contradict the Vedas should be rejected. After 


Divine Vedas

all, no one is superior to Ishwar. This holds true for all texts 
in the world. 
	
All scriptures of our culture proclaim in one pitch that Ve-
das alone are the ultimate truth. This should be the ultimate 
benchmark for us.
Doubt
But Vedas contain only rituals and worship of gods. Don’t we need 
other texts for philosophy and other practical applications as well?
Agniveer
This is a misconception propagated by those who have never even 
read the Vedas. All great works of our culture are attributed to 
Vedas by their authors. 
	
Vedas are the source of all true knowledge.
	
Vedas are a source of all philosophical texts like Upani-
shads and Geeta. 
	
While other texts are useful to understand the Vedas and 
truth, there is nothing in them which cannot be found in 
Vedas.
	
Vedas are the ultimate benchmarks. Other texts are stairs to 
reach up to that. But we should be careful that no stair leads 
us away from the Vedas.
	
Vedas believe in One and Only One Ishwar who pervades 
everywhere. 
	
Vedas hardly have any rituals because they refer to knowl-
edge which is timeless. 


What are Vedas?

It is a pity that misguided people have misrepresented Vedas to 
serve their own petty designs. It is our utmost duty to rise above 
all prejudice, explore the Vedas and promote the true perspective 
of Vedas.
May the truth prevail!



Origin of Vedas
S
keptics argue that there are conflicting reports on the origin 
of Vedas. They believe there are multiple views and there 
is no unanimity on how Vedas came into existence. This is 
because the origin of Vedas is not as simple as a human-like God 
sitting on some throne sending some angel to narrate divine mes-
sage to some human being. Vedas represent eternal knowledge that 
is already within us. Its origin and dissemination are critically linked 
with the creation of universe and propagation of intelligent life. 
This is one of the most complex subjects. And hence various anal-
ogies are used to explain it in a way we can understand.
In reality, truth is beyond what we see today. And yet we have to 
find our way through what we know today to understand what we 


Origin of  Vedas

don’t know yet. This is called Thought-Experiment.
Newton used a thought-experiment to deduce that the moon 
is a falling projectile that does not hit the earth due to its curva-
ture. In reality, Newton never did such an experiment, nor can one 
prove if this is indeed historically true. All we know is that this 
analogy helps us understand laws of motion in-universe better.
In the same vein, Vedas, Upanishads, Geeta and even Puranas 
use a variety of analogies to explain different aspects of the origin 
of Vedas. So let’s clear some doubts and prove that except Ishwar 
no one can originate Vedas.
Doubt
Who originated Vedas? What scriptures say about the origin of 
Vedas?
Agniveer
Ishwar – the ultimate one – has originated Vedas. Let us get the 
evidence from our scriptures. 
	
Yajurveda 31/7 clearly states that Rigveda, Yajurveda, Sa-
maveda and Atharvaveda were originated from Him – the 
ultimate Ishwar who is omnipresent.
	
Atharvaveda 10/7/20 reiterates the same essence beauti-
fully. It says that Rik, Yajuh, Sama and Atharva originated 
from the ultimate Ishwar. It asks “Which Deva (provider 
of bliss/knowledge) gave the Vedas?” and answers that the 
one, who is controlling and maintaining the entire universe, 
is the creator of Vedas. Atharvaveda is like the mouth of 
that Ishwar, Samaveda is like the hair on the skin, Yajurveda 


Divine Vedas

is akin to the heart and Rigveda is the Prana or source.
	
Shankaracharya writes in a commentary on Geeta 3/15 that 
Vedas are never created or destroyed. They merely get illuminated and 
de-illuminated but remain in Ishwar.
	
Rigveda 10/190/3 states that the creation remains same in 
all cycles and hence even the constitution of the creation – 
the Vedas – also remain the same.
Doubt
You said various analogies are used to explain the origin of Vedas. 
Please give an example.
Agniveer
Shatpath Brahman gives a beautiful analogy. Shatpath Brahman 
14/5/4/10 states that Ishwar, who is present even beyond the 
Akash/Sky created the Vedas. 
The way breath goes out of the body and then comes in, during 
the inception of creation Ishwar creates the Vedas and illuminates 
the world, and in the phase of dissolution (Pralaya), Vedas no more 
remain in the world. 
In other words, just as exhalation and inhalation happen, all 
forms of knowledge – Vedas, Upanishads, Formulae, History, 
etc. – get manifested and get submerged in Supreme Being. Like 
breathing, this is a cyclical process. However, just as a sapling re-
mains inside the seed, Vedas still remain in knowledge of Ishwar, 
unchanged.


Origin of  Vedas

Doubt
By giving this analogy, are you trying to say that God is human like 
creature?
Agniveer
This is a silly doubt because this is only an analogy. Knowledge cannot 
come out from nostrils! God is omnipresent and formless, and not 
someone who is sitting in the sky. 
Doubt
But Vedas are not exclusively mentioned in the Shloka. Hence, ei-
ther all kind of knowledge is divine, or nothing is divine.
Agniveer
This is also shallow logic. Because
	
The divinity of Vedas is not same as the divinity of Bible 
or Quran. Divinity in the context of Vedas only means that 
eternal laws of nature as represented in language are un-
changeable.
	
Mention of various fields of knowledge shows a process. 
First, the Vedas are mentioned and then other fields. This 
means that first wisdom of Vedas is imbibed and then other 
fields of knowledge emanate from the Vedic wisdom.
	
There are other references in scriptures that focus only on 
Vedas. The objective in this particular shloka was to show a 
process of knowledge propagation. 


Divine Vedas

Doubt
When Ishwar is shapeless, how did He create the Vedas?
Agniveer
Ishwar does not need physical organs like humans to perform His 
tasks. Such limitations do not exist in the case of Ishwar. Vedas 
describe Ishwar as the possessor of infinite limbs and mouths. It 
implies that Ishwar can perform all His functions without recourse 
to physical organs or support of anyone else. When Ishwar can 
create such a magnificent world, why should one doubt His capa-
bility to create Vedas!
Shwatashwataropanishad 3/19 states that he holds everyone 
even though He has no hands and legs!
Doubt
No soul can create the world, but they can definitely create books 
of grammar and other fields of knowledge. Why then is Ishwar 
necessary to create the Vedas?
Agniveer
The knowledge possessed by humans is dependent. It needs training 
and dissemination of knowledge to research further and discover 
new knowledge. If you keep a person isolated in the jungle since 
birth, he or she would be unable to learn the ways of humans even 
a bit. Even today we find many tribes in jungles that live like ani-
mals. Similarly, knowledge is necessary at inception for humans to 
possess the capability to discover new knowledge or create books.


Origin of  Vedas

Doubt
Ishwar has gifted humans with basic knowledge or natural in-
stincts. This natural instinct is superior to all texts because only 
through this knowledge and instincts we understand anything. So 
with the progress of this knowledge, why should people not be 
able to design Vedas? Why should then we have to consider that 
Ishwar originated Vedas?
Agniveer
Was natural instinct not available with jungle tribes and child born 
and brought up in isolation? Why could not they turn scholars? 
Why chimpanzees fail to evolve and learn over centuries. Why in-
sects continue to commit suicide in light and not learn from it?
	
Even language originated from Vedas. In the absence of 
belief in Vedas, the origin of language also remains a mys-
tery for modern superstitious scientists!
	
Even we learn because we go to schools or receive lessons 
from our mentors. How could then people during early 
ages learn to draft Vedas? 
	
Remember, we are talking about the Vedas which contain a 
huge number of Mantras, in a language that is more encom-
passing than any later languages. 
	
We are talking about the Vedas that cover a wide number 
of topics and contain such fine thoughts that surpass any 
text of later era. 
	
We are talking about the Vedas that are preserved through 
Paatha and Maatra method in such a manner that change of 


Divine Vedas

even a single syllable is not possible!
	
What is claimed to be basic knowledge is merely sufficient 
to allow us to learn more complex knowledge and not create 
new knowledge out of  nothingness. 
	
The eye is capable of seeing only when linked with the mind. 
The mind is only capable to function when linked with the 
soul. Similarly, the basic knowledge or natural instinct is 
only capable of  leading us to higher sources of knowledge. 
But they can not discover the knowledge of Dharma, Ar-
tha, Karma and Moksha (Duties, Purpose, Desire, and Sal-
vation). That is why initial knowledge from Ishwar is nec-
essary to kickstart the process of knowledge assimilation.
	
Yogadarshan 1/26 states that He is the teacher of the old-
est teachers and is unhindered by time. 
	
Kumarilbhatta writes in his treatise on Meemansa that Ve-
das are Apaurusheya (not created by humans) because no 
one knows their creators. 
	
Sankhya 5/6 states the same. 
	
Sayana also reiterates the same opinion.
Doubt
What was the purpose of Ishwar in creating the Vedas?
Agniveer
Let me counter-question: What was the purpose of Ishwar in not 
creating the Vedas?
	
Ishwar has infinite knowledge, and He is benevolent. 


Origin of  Vedas

Knowledge is the most valuable attribute to possess. So 
unless Ishwar illuminates us with His knowledge, He does 
not remain benevolent. Ishwar justifies his attributes only 
by illuminating us with His knowledge – the knowledge of 
Vedas.
	
Ishwar is like our parents. He loves us and wants us to be 
blissful. Thus, He has gifted us with knowledge of Vedas so 
that we can use this knowledge to maximize our bliss. 
	
Had Ishwar not blessed us with this knowledge, the pur-
pose of creation would have defeated. Everything else in 
the world makes sense only when we possess the knowledge to 
utilize them for our ultimate objective of maximizing bliss.
	
Knowledge is more bliss-producing than all the wonders of 
creation. And when Ishwar has gifted us with such wonder-
ful gifts of creation, why would He keep Vedas to Himself 
and defeat His very purpose of creation, as well as His core 
attribute of benevolence?
And such is this knowledge, unlike Bible, Quran, and Puranas, 
that WD Brown wrote in “Superiority of Vedic Religion” that “Ve-
dic religion is thoroughly scientific where science and religion meet 
hand in hand. Here theology is based on science and philosophy.”
In “The Bible in India” by L Jacoliot, it is stated that “Veda, of 
all revelations, is the only one whose ideas are in perfect harmony 
with modern science.” 
A Huge number of other scientists who scratched the surface 
of Vedas share such views.


Divine Vedas

Doubt
How did Ishwar arrange for a pen, ink, and paper to write Vedas in 
the inception of creation?
Agniveer 
As discussed earlier, when Ishwar can create the universe without 
any additional tools, why should He be unable to create Vedas?
Ishwar did not illuminate Vedas by publishing them in begin-
ning of civilization. He illuminated the minds of noble Rishis – 
Agni, Vayu, Aditya and Angira during the inception of civiliza-
tion. Shatpath Brahman 11/5/2/3 elaborates this. These Rishis in 
their state of meditation receive the knowledge of Vedas, and they 
adopt it in the same manner as a toy moves when its button is 
pressed – in exactly the manner it is supposed to move!
Doubt
Agni, Vayu, and Aditya appear to be the name of inanimate objects 
Fire, Air, and Sun.
Agniveer
This doubt is baseless because inert matter can not acquire knowl-
edge. If someone says, Court has issued summon; it does not mean 
the building of court has issued summon. It means that the people 
working in court have issued the summon. Similarly, knowledge 
can be acquired only by humans. These names are titles and not 
names printed on their ration cards.
Doubt
Ishwar may have given them knowledge, and they then created 


Origin of  Vedas

Vedas with this knowledge.
Agniveer
This is another baseless doubt. When knowledge is sourced from 
Ishwar, then Vedas created by Rishis are also sourced from Ishwar. 
Why would Rishis add their own masala for distortion when they 
have the knowledge of Ishwar in pure form?
Doubt
If Ishwar is Just, why did He not illuminate everyone’s mind with 
Vedas and chose only four among them? Ishwar is biased.
Agniveer
The choice of only four Rishis confirms that Ishwar is just because 
justice implies meritocracy. Meritocracy means rewarding one as per 
his or her deeds. Ishwar chose the most meritorious among them for 
dissemination and further propagation of Vedas as per their past 
deeds. Rigveda 10/71/7 states that though all possess eyes and 
ears, intellect differs among humans.
Doubt
But we are talking of inception of creation. How can we talk of 
past deeds then?
Agniveer
Creation and Dissolution is a continuous cycle without beginning 
or end. During the beginning of creation, souls take birth as per 
their deeds in previous creation. Never is the account of past deeds 
completely vacant in this process.


Divine Vedas

Doubt
Why is Ishwar anti-women? Why did He not choose women for 
the dissemination of Vedas?
Agniveer
The soul has no gender. Ishwar gave Rishis the body of men dur-
ing the inception of civilization because a male is more suited 
for propagation of knowledge among rest of the people who are 
thriving only through their natural instincts. A male is more suited 
to tame such uncivilized people. However, in a later phase, many 
women also became Rishis who discovered new meanings of these 
Vedic mantras.
Doubt
Are Chhandas like Gayatri also created by Ishwar?
Agniveer
Yes, when Ishwar has infinite capabilities, why doubt this one?
Doubt
According to references from Svetashvatara Upanishad and 
Mundak Upanishad, Brahma was directly taught by God and he, in 
turn, taught the other Rishis. 
Agniveer
All that the alleged verses state is that Brahma was the first person 
to master the four Vedas and propagated an integrated view to rest 
of the civilization. Some texts state that four other Rishis first had 
one Veda each inspired within them and then they together taught 
Brahma. So there is nothing conflicting here.


Origin of  Vedas

Even if we believe that Brahma mastered Vedas directly from 
God, and then he taught the other Rishis, how does that change the 
reality? Vedas still remain the oldest text and unchanged as per best 
available evidence. They also contain nothing objectionable to our 
understanding. Further, Vedas themselves ask us to think logically 
rather than accept things blindly. What else do we need as a better foun-
dation?
Doubt
Brahma created Vedas from his four mouths, and Ved Vyas later 
compiled them in written form and divided into four parts- we 
hear this in history.
Agniveer
This theory has no basis. No authoritative text mentions this. This 
theory is propounded in Puranas which are much later dated and 
full of blatant discrepancies. Some people believe Puranas to be 
perfect and derived from Ishwar. But this claim is only as true as 
the claim of Quran and Bible hailing from Ishwar.
	
The fact is that Brahma learned the four Vedas from these 
Rishis. Brahma was a person with one head, two hands and 
two legs and not the caricature as represented in false Pu-
ranas. 
	
Ved Vyas was a commentator of  Yoga Darshan and writer of  Ma-
habharat. Nowhere, except in Puranas, we found the theory 
of Ved Vyas being a writer of four Vedas. 
	
Puranas contain false stories of Jesus, Muhammad, and 
Victoria. Puranas condemn women. They denigrate our 
role models like Ram and Krishna. They accuse Bible and 


Divine Vedas

Quran. So, if we believe that Puranas are true, then we also 
have to believe in the nonsense mentioned above. 
	
Further, there is no foolproof mechanism to claim that the 
books we call Puranas today are authentic. This prerogative 
or litmus test of authenticity is passed only by Vedas.
	
If Vedas were one in inception and later divided into four 
parts by Veda Vyas, then no text before Veda Vyas should 
refer to Vedas in the plural. Also, names of four Vedas 
should not be present. But if we look at actual references, 
this does not hold true. Therefore, Vedas must have been four 
from inception.
See the following references for usage of Vedas in plural or 
name of more than one Vedas:
Rigveda: Rigveda 10/90/9, Rigveda 4/58/3
Atharvaveda: Atharvaveda 4/36/6, Atharvaveda 19/9/12, 
Atharvaveda 16/6/13, Atharvaveda 10/7/20, Atharvaveda 
11/7/14, Atharvaveda 12/1/38, Atharvaveda 11/7/24, Athar-
vaveda 15/6/7-8
Yajurveda: Yajurveda 31/7, Yajurveda 34/5, Yajurveda 18/29, 
Yajurveda 36/1, Yajurveda 12/4, Yajurveda 10/67, Yajurveda 
17/61
Other texts: Shatpath Brahman 6/7/2/6, Taittriya Samhita 
4/1/10/5, Maitrayani Samhita 16/8, Shankhayan Grihya Sutra 
1/22/15, Gopath Brahman 1/13, Shatpath Brahman 14/5/4/10, 
Brihad Upanishad 3/4/10, Aitareya Brahman 25/7, Gopath Brah-
man 3/1 


Origin of  Vedas

	
Such references also come in Upanishads, Manu Smriti, Ma-
habharat, Sarvanukramani, Ramayan and many other texts.
	
The fact that Mahabharat is said to be fifth Veda by many 
Pundits implies that Vedas were originally four. 
	
Ayurveda, Dhanurveda, Gandharvaveda, and Arthaveda are 
called Upaveda which implies that Vedas are four in number.
Doubt
Angiras calls the four Vedas as ‘lower knowledge’ (Apra) and says 
that God cannot be known through the Vedas.
Agniveer
Angiras is completely correct in stating that God cannot be known 
through the Vedas. That is exactly what Agniveer also says.
	
Here what the author means is rote memorization of Vedas 
or interpretation of Vedas literally without applying mind 
and implementing them blindly.
	
Mugging up Vedas verbatim and expecting a recitation of 
mantras to give salvation would be completely fruitless. 
God – or whatever label you give it – can be known only 
through activation of Vedas that is within each of us. 
Doubt
In Veda Samhitas, we find names of Rishis before each Sukta or 
Chapter. They must have written those verses.
Agniveer
These are names of Rishis who researched on particular verses of 


Divine Vedas

Vedas. Many verses have a large number of Rishis.
Brahma was born long before Vyas, Madhuchhanda, and other 
Rishis. When Brahma studied Vedas from original four Rishis, as 
explained even in Manu Smriti, there is no doubt that Vedas exist-
ed long before these Rishis.
We will scrutinize this false allegation in greater depth in sub-
sequent chapters.
Doubt
Why we find two names to denote knowledge of Ishwar – Veda 
and Shruti?
Agniveer
Veda is derived from ‘Vid’ root. Vid means ‘knowledge’ as in Vidya, 
or existing as in Vidyamaan, or benefit or thought. Shruti is derived 
from ‘Shru’ root meaning ‘to listen.’ Since by studying them we get 
knowledge, understand the truth, derive benefits and can become 
thinkers, they are called Vedas. And since we have been listening 
to this knowledge from the inception of civilization and none ever 
saw the originator (since He is shapeless), they are called Shruti.
Doubt
How old are Vedas?
Agniveer
As per the details of texts like Surya Siddhanta and traditions 
throughout India, Vedas are supposed to around 1.97 billion years 
old. 
Scholars have debated over whether this period refers to the 


Origin of  Vedas

time of origin of earth or humans and it remains a topic of re-
search. 
However, in India, whenever a Yajna happens, people call out in 
detail the time since origin in units of Manvantar, Yuga and Year. 
This calculation is same across all parts of India.
Doubt
What about works of Wilson and Max Muller who claim Vedas to 
be 2000-3000 years old?
Agniveer
They were rogue Christian missionaries with no knowledge of 
Sanskrit or Indian culture who came with the purpose of destroy-
ing Indian culture. 
They have been quite successful in their designs and perform-
ing their duties for which British paid them. But unfortunately, 
their crazy theories have no basis whatsoever. 
There is no logical or rational foundation for their claims, but 
they are parroted by communists and missionaries because they 
thrive on denigrating the foundations of our culture. Vedas existed 
since the inception of civilization and shall remain till the dissolu-
tion of creation 2.33 billion years from now.



Eternity of Vedas

hose who believe in death for apostates and hell for every-
one except their own gang members have been creating 
frivolous articles to counter Agniveer and defame Vedas. 
While their frustration is justified (because of reduced dominance 
in cyberspace), their methods are not.
In this brief chapter, I will share my views on yet another at-
tempt to attack Vedas simply because they cannot defend their 
own fanaticism in a logical manner. 
We will discuss the concept of the eternity of Vedas. As usual, 
we will provide a brief of allegation/doubt and our response.


Eternity of  Vedas

Doubt
Vedas comprise of words, phrases and verses. Just as a sculpture 
is not formed without someone making it, in the same manner, 
Vedas must also have been made by someone. They did not exist 
before creation and shall not exist after dissolution. Hence, Vedas 
cannot be eternal.
Agniveer
Words (Shabda) are of two types – eternal and effect. Words in the 
knowledge of Ishwar are eternal because they represent relation 
with specific perfect knowledge. However, the words created by 
us are effects of various factors including our existing knowledge, 
tendencies and mindsets and hence non-eternal. The knowledge 
of Ishwar is eternal in lines of eternal powers of Ishwar. Thus, 
Vedas are eternal. Let us understand it in a different manner. 
	
By words, we imply the relation with specific knowledge. 
For example, when someone calls or writes your name, that 
pronunciation or handwriting is not eternal. But the fact 
that it implies a relation with you is unchangeable.
	
 If one has to represent you in sound, calling your name 
would be the best possible way. But pronunciation of the 
name is not you. However, you remain unchanged.
	
Similarly, the words printed in Vedas or their pronuncia-
tions are not eternal. However, the knowledge that they rep-
resent is eternal.
	
Alternatively, Vedas represent eternal knowledge. The best 
representation of Vedas in sound is the Mantras we chant 
and best representation of Vedas in vision is the print of 


Divine Vedas

mantras. This is just like best representation of you on plain 
paper is your photo.
Because we are ignorant, we are unable to grasp the full mean-
ing of Vedas from what we listen or see. But in Ishwar’s perfec-
tion, which is devoid of such ignorance, Vedas represent eternal 
knowledge.
As we progress in our efforts to free ourselves from ignorance, 
Vedas become clearer and clearer to us. That is why it is fruitless 
to simply mug up Vedic mantras. What is actually mugged up is 
non-eternal. Only when those mantras become a representation of 
knowledge, they imply we actually understand the eternal Vedas.
This eternity is what differentiates Vedas from other books like Qu-
ran, Bible, etc. Because Vedas represent eternal knowledge that can 
be progressively grasped to utmost capacity of the soul only when 
progressively freed from ignorance. Blind belief in a book called Vedas 
or sounds of mantras without understanding them is fruitless. Be-
cause when we do so, we are trying to master the non-eternal. Unless 
and until that relationship with eternal knowledge exists, mugging 
up Vedas, or worshipping cover of Vedas, or believing that Vedas 
worship will lead us to Heaven even though we do not understand 
it, is sheer stupidity.
This concept of eternity forms the foundation of  the principle of  
tolerance imbibed in Vedas. There is no concept of compulsion or 
blind belief like in Islam or Christianity. Vedas are not supposed to 
represent beginning points of blind belief for ignorant souls. On 
the contrary, Vedas represent the ultimate benchmarks of  knowledge 
that can be fully understood when fully devoid of ignorance. So 
one is expected to simply follow the path of truth, do thorough 
introspection, extend one’s capabilities and then embrace Vedas in 


Eternity of  Vedas

a more organic manner rather than through brute-force blind faith.
Doubt
When the universe dissolves completely, even the books of Vedas 
get destroyed, and even study of Vedas stops. Why are then Vedas 
eternal?
Agniveer
As discussed earlier, Vedas do not represent books, paper, ink, etc. 
They represent ‘relation’ between Shabda (sound/word) and knowl-
edge. In other words, they are the ‘best or most perfect representation’ of 
eternal knowledge in sound/words. 
	
When the universe dissolves, even then the eternal knowl-
edge remains same in Ishwar. It is in hidden form because 
there is no creation to manifest it in sounds/words. 
	
Just as sapling remains hidden in seed, Vedas still remain 
and germinate when creation happens again, and the op-
portunity arises to represent this eternal knowledge in 
sound/words.
	
Rigveda 10/190/3 states that Ishwar creates the universe 
exactly in the same manner as it created previously. Thus, 
in all creations, the same sounds/words perfectly represent 
the eternal knowledge of Vedas. Hence, the same Vedas, 
as we see or hear today, represent the eternal knowledge 
always without an iota of change.
	
In each creation, Ishwar institutes the method of preserv-
ing Vedas in the same manner through Paatha Vidhis and 
Maatra markups as earlier. Thus, Vedas remain as protected 


Divine Vedas

even in a mundane world as always. 
Doubt
As per texts of grammar, union of certain alphabets leads to 
change and removal of alphabets as in Sandhi. Thus, words would 
be different when separated and when united. How can then words 
be eternal?
Agniveer
As discussed above, such rules of grammar are only effects. They are 
not cause – the knowledge. 
	
Even when words change as per rules of grammar, the 
knowledge they represent remains eternal. Hence, Vedas 
remain eternal.
	
As per Aarsh texts, Shabda or words mean the ‘meaning’ that 
is embraced when we hear from ears, see from eyes, speak 
from the mouth and understand from ‘intellect.’ Thus, 
Shabda (meaning) is eternal. The only physical process of 
grasping or propagating Shadba is non-eternal.
	
If you and I say the same word, both produce different 
sound patterns. But the meaning is unchanged. Similarly, Vedas 
– the knowledge of Ishwar – is eternal regardless of the 
way we speak or combine words as per grammar.
Doubt
Even Shabda get destroyed after pronunciation. And they do not 
exist before pronunciation. How can then Shabda be eternal?


Eternity of  Vedas

Agniveer
This question arises if we misrepresent the meaning of ‘Shabda’ as 
per our own conceptions. 
	
As discussed earlier, Shabda represents the relationship with 
knowledge. This relationship is eternal and unchanged.
	
Pronunciation is an effect and hence not eternal. 
	
Regardless of pronunciation happening or not, the relation 
of a particular pronunciation with the meaning it represents 
is eternal.
In fact, all Shabda are eternal, as propounded by scholars of 
grammar like Panini and Vyas. Hence, those Shabda that represents 
eternal knowledge to maximize our bliss – the Vedas – are also eternal.
All the Darshans – Meemansa Darshan by Jaimini (1/1/18), 
Vaisheshik Darshan by Kanad (1/1/3), Nyaya Darshan by Gautam 
(2/1/67), Yoga Darshan by Patanjali (1/26), Sankhya Darshan by 
Kapil (5/51) and Vedanta Vedanta by Vyas (1/1/3) consider Shad-
ba to be eternal. 
	
Shankaracharya also states the same in his commentary on 
Vedanta.
Yajurveda 40/8 lists the properties of Ishwar as follows:
Paryagat – Omnipresent
Shukram – All-powerful
Avranam – Without any gaps
Asnaviram – Without nerves, arteries, and veins


Divine Vedas

Shuddham – Perfectly devoid of ignorance or miseries
Apaapaviddham – Pious
Kavi – Knower of all
Manishi – Intelligent
Paribhoo – Controls everything and everyone
Swayambhoo – Unborn
Shashwateebhya – Eternal
Arthan Vyadadhaat – Provides true knowledge
Hence, he eternally provides us with His true eternal knowl-
edge of Vedas.
Further, something cannot happen from nothing and existence 
cannot spring up from non-existence. If Vedas are available today, 
they have to be eternal always. If Ishwar has always been the same, 
he shall always bless us with his eternal knowledge.
We see that experience gives rise to sanskaras (tendencies or 
habits). Sanskaars give rise to memory, and we use this memory to 
decide what to accept and what to reject. One who studies Sanskrit 
creates sanskaras of Sanskrit in his mind, and one who studies Lat-
in creates sanskaras of Latin in his mind. Thus, if Ishwar did not 
give guidance of Vedas in the inception of civilization, no human 
could have experienced knowledge. 
Without experience, even sanskara of knowledge would not 
have been possible. Without sanskara, even memory would have 
failed, and hence the growth of knowledge would not have been 
possible. Thus, unless Ishwar kickstarts this process at the incep-


Eternity of  Vedas

tion of civilization, this process of pursuit of knowledge would 
not have started at all, just as it did not start in other species of the 
animal world.
Doubt
But even by normal actions, humans feel pain and pleasure, and 
they could have used that to gradually enhance knowledge and 
then create Vedas. Why then we need to believe that Ishwar creat-
ed Vedas?
Agniveer
We have already discussed this doubt in chapter ‘Origin of Vedas.’ 
We deduced that no species or even tribes in jungles or an isolated 
child could enhance knowledge beyond most primitive level. He 
can only have barely sufficient knowledge for survival unless pro-
vided knowledge externally.
For example, Chimpanzees do not feel the need to introspect 
on death and life even when they see so many of them dying. If 
humans think so much on this, it has to have origin through exter-
nal training. Unless Ishwar guides us at the beginning of civiliza-
tion, we will remain animals.
Doubt
Some mantras talk of the creation of new verses and being wor-
shiped by new and old Rishis. Hence, Vedas are not eternal.
Agniveer
Which verse talks about the creation of new Vedic mantras by 
human beings? I never heard one. But yes, humanity has always 
created new verses, new songs, new articles, new poems, etc. in all 


Divine Vedas

creations. There is the difference between the creation of  mantras of  Vedas 
and creation of  other verses inspired by Vedas.
Same goes for Rishis – they keep emerging in society. So, if 
mantras say so, it is eternally true. Vedas are the seeds, but you need 
to create a tree out of the seed for the benefit of self and society.
Eternal Ishwar and His eternal knowledge
The entity is identified by its traits only. Therefore, eternal entities 
have eternal traits, and non-eternal entities have non-eternal traits.
Destruction is nothing but disaggregation of elements that cre-
ate something to be no more perceived by our senses, and creation 
is a combination of elements to form something that can be per-
ceived by senses.
Thus, only those objects are created or destroyed in which ag-
gregation and disaggregation are feasible.
Since Ishwar is omnipresent without gaps, it is impossible for 
Ishwar to disaggregate. Hence, Ishwar is eternal and so is His 
knowledge.
Vaishek 4/1 states that only the effect of the cause is non-eter-
nal. For example, the pot was the effect of clay coming together. 
So pot is non-eternal. Similarly, clay was the effect of certain atoms 
coming together. So clay is also non-eternal. But the fundamental 
entity that forms the atoms is eternal.
In the same way, Ishwar is also eternal because He is not the effect 
of  any other cause. And hence His knowledge – the Vedas – is also 
eternal.
Just as Ishwar is eternal, so is His knowledge.



Divinity of Vedas
A
ll prominent scholars and researchers agree on Vedas be-
ing the oldest texts known to humankind. Nonetheless, 
Vedas remain the most meticulously preserved texts avail-
able today. The unique methods devised from the very inception 
of Vedas have ensured that Vedas are available even today in same 
original form. We will explain these methods of preserving Vedas 
in the next section of the book. Many scholars have called this the 
greatest wonder of human civilization.
Someone like Abdullah Tariq, the mentor of Zakir Naik and 
celebrated Islamic scholar, also vociferously asserts that Vedas 
are the first divine texts. Even Zakir Naik does not refute it, even 
though he does not state it so clearly owing to his Wahabi founda-


Divine Vedas

tion. However, he does try to manipulate Vedic mantras to try to 
show Muhammad’s prediction in them. This very act of his proves 
that he regards Vedas as authoritative first divine texts.
This attempt of Zakir is not his original but directly copy-past-
ed – word to word – from works of the famous Qadiyani scholar 
Maulana Abdul Haque Vidyarthi. The whole Qadiyani movement 
is based on the assertion of Vedas being the first divine texts and 
Mirza Ghulam being the last Prophet. While we have refuted the 
wrong interpretations of Vedic mantras by likes of Zakir Naik and 
Maulana Vidyarthi, one indeed must applaud their efforts to pro-
mote the acceptability of Vedas as first divine texts among Mus-
lims, with whatever little knowledge and huge constraints they had.
It has primarily been the atheist and communist circles that have 
refuted the idea of Vedas being divine, despite agreeing on Vedas 
being oldest. This refutation of Vedas being divine is primarily 
driven from their founding assumption that we all are chemical 
reactions and nothing more than that. The logical flaws and un-
explained questions arise from this assumption of these ‘atheist/
communist chemical reactions’ are not the focus of this chapter.
What is interesting is that the baton of the atheists has now 
been taken by several Muslim apologetics who have come up with 
a series of articles refuting Vedas of divine status. They, however, 
in their enthusiasm forget that by refuting divinity of Vedas they 
are proving their Islamic scholars wrong and destroying the very 
foundation of Islam. In other words, they are digging their own 
graves. We would request them to first issue a fatwa against those 
Muslim scholars who use Vedas to prove Muhammad in them or 
admit them to be first holy texts. And next, they should demon-
strate the same objectivity towards their own modern Quran.


Divinity of  Vedas

What we would attempt in this chapter is to explain why Vedas 
cannot be considered as the creation of Rishis as alleged first by 
atheists/ communists and now by neo-Muslim apologetics.
Now, the question that would come next is – Who created or wrote 
the Vedas if  not these Rishis?  I believe this question to be on the same 
pedestal as “Who created life? Who created the universe? Who is 
managing everything so immaculately? Who provided intelligence? 
Why are humans the only intelligent species? etc.”
These are serious questions for introspection and analysis. We 
have an opinion on these and quite a firm one. However, in the 
spirit of Vedas, each of us has the liberty to explore and believe 
in whatever appears most reasonable to him or her after his or her 
most sincere understanding.
So even if someone refuses to agree to our viewpoints and ar-
guments, that does not mean Vedas throw that person into some hellfire and 
would give us sweet grapes to eat in some Heaven. On the con-
trary, as one proceeds ahead in pursuit of truth to best of his un-
derstanding, the further path would be clearer, and Ishwar would 
give him the best results he deserves.
This is the fundamental difference between Vedic ideology and 
other dogmatic ideologies. There is no blinded foundation, no 
compulsion – only commitment to a scientific and rational temper.
With this heavy introduction, let us start our analysis. I will pro-
vide various allegations presented by those who claim that Vedas 
have been created by Rishis and then offer my explanations as well 
as counter-arguments. 


Divine Vedas

Allegation: Rishis were Mantra Karta – creator of  
Mantra.
Vedas are not divine. Instead, they are human creations like Rama-
yan, Mahabharat, and Quran. The only difference is that Ramayan 
and Mahabharat were written by one author and Vedas, like Guru 
Granth Sahib, were written by several people over a period of 
time. So, they are merely a collection of works of a large number 
of people who were later called as Rishis. These Rishis were later 
claimed to be ‘seers’ (Drashta) to prove that Vedas are not human 
creation (Apaurusheya). This is clear from various references in lit-
erature where Rishis have been called ‘Mantra Karta’ or creator of 
the mantras.
For example:
	
Aitareya Brahman 6/1
	
Tandya Brahman 13/3/24
	
Tattiriya Aranyak 4/1/1
	
Katyayana Shraut Sutra 3/2/9
	
Grihya Sutra 2/1/13
	
Nirukta 3/11
	
Sarvanukramani Paribhasha Prakaran 2/4
	
Raghuvansh 5/4
Today, all mantras have a Rishi, who is basically the person who 
wrote that mantra. Thus, believing Vedas to be not created by Rishis 
is merely a superstition.


Divinity of  Vedas

Agniveer 
The basic foundation of this claim of Rishis being authors of 
mantras is the presence of word ‘Mantrakarta’ or its root in var-
ious forms. We will analyze this later in the chapter. But first, we 
begin with some logical as well as historical evidence that clearly 
implies that Rishis cannot be considered authors or creators of the 
Vedic mantras.
Let’s start with the scrutiny of the claim that “All mantras have 
a Rishi who is basically the person who wrote that mantra”.
Please note that the original Veda Samhitas do not contain the 
name of any Rishi. They simply comprise the mantras. Howev-
er, traditionally each Vedic Sukta (hymn) is associated with one or 
more Rishis who are supposed to be among the first persons to 
have introspected on those hymns. 
The book ‘Sarvaanukramanika’ or ‘Sarvanukramani’ by Katyaya-
na is considered to be the prime basis of names of these Rishis 
(apart from a few other Anukramanis). Non-Vedics consider these 
Rishis to be authors instead of researchers of Vedic mantras.
Counter-Argument 1: Several Rishis of  same Sukta
There is no evidence in history of several people creating any piece of  
literature which is exactly same. Either the subject or language is bound 
to differ. 
	
Vedas contain several Suktas (hymns) which are attributed 
to two or even hundred and thousand Rishis. No sane per-
son can, thus, consider these Rishis to be authors of these 
mantras. 


Divine Vedas

	
For example refer the following from Sarvanukramanika 
(list of Vedic Rishis) which names more than one Rishis 
for Rigvedic Mantras: 5/2, 7/101, 7/102, 8/29, 8/92, 8/94, 
9/5, 5/27, 1/100, 8/67, 9/66, and 9/16 (Aarshanukrama-
ni).
	
In fact, Gayatri Mantra containing only 24 alphabets is 
supposed to have 100 Rishis! And Rigveda 8/34 has 1000 
Rishis.
	
How 1000 people can together ‘create’ 3 small sentences 
is a mystery that only non-Vedic pseudo-intellectuals can 
explain!
Some argue that Katyayana – the author of Sarvanukramani-
ka – was unconfirmed about Rishis of some Mantras because the 
historical tradition had broken by his times. Hence, he attributed 
these mantras to more than one Rishi and used ‘Vaa’ or ‘Or’ to 
assert that one of these Rishis authored that particular mantra.
	
However, this argument only shows escapism. 
	
If indeed Sarvanukramanika is unreliable, why to give refer-
ences from this book in first place to justify that Vedas were 
authored by Rishis whose names are listed in the book?
	
The book Nirukta by Yaska described meanings and deeper 
insights of several Mantras and is considered to be older 
than Sarvanukramanika. Acharya Shaunak, who wrote Bri-
haddevata, draws heavily from Nirukta. Now Brihaddevata 
was amply used by Katyayana to write his Sarvanukraman-
ika.
	
Nirukta 4/6 states that Trit Rishi discovered the meaning 


Divinity of  Vedas

of Rigveda 1/175 Sukta. Brihaddevata 3/132 − 3/136 also 
states the same. 
	
However, Katyayana lists several Rishis of the mantra and 
joins their names with ‘Vaa’ or ‘Or’. This means that use of 
multiple names of Rishis is not because of the breakdown 
of historical tradition but deliberate to emphasize that several 
Rishis introspected on the mantra/ sukta.
	
Nirukta 1/4 clearly states that ‘Vaa’ can be used not only to 
list ‘exclusive alternatives’ but also ‘collection.’ Same is also 
explained in Vaijayanti Kosh.
	
What more, ‘Vaa’ has been used in a different context by 
Katyayana himself in Sarvanukramanika. 
	
In Paribhasha Prakaran 12/2 he clearly writes that ‘Vaa’ im-
plies that in addition of Rishi of the previous verse, there is 
an additional Rishi for this new verse. To know more, refer 
Anukramani of Rigveda 3/23, 5/27, 8/2, 9/98. 
	
Interestingly, if we look into Aarshanukramani of Shaunak 
for Rigveda 9/98, he uses ‘Cha’ meaning ‘And’ for the name 
of Rishi where Katyayana has used ‘Vaa’ in his Sarvanukra-
mani.
	
Similarly, if we see Sarvanukramanika 8/92 and Aarsha-
nukramani 8/40, we see that wherever Katyayana has used 
‘Vaa,’ Shaunak has used ‘Cha.’ Sarvanukramanika 1/105 is 
one more reference.
	
Hence, the same hymn/Sukta of  Vedas has more than one rishis 
in several cases implying that rishis cannot be authors of  Vedas.


Divine Vedas

Some argue even further that it may have happened that differ-
ent Rishis have written different verses (mantras) of same Sukta 
(Hymn) and hence several Rishis have been mentioned for many 
Suktas. However, this is the only flimsy reasoning. There is no ev-
idence to believe that a sage like Katyayana made such a blunder.
	
Sarvanukramanika 9/66 states that ‘Pavasva’ sukta has 100 
Vaikhanas Rishis. However, the Sukta has only 30 mantras. 
We have already given an example of 1000 Rishis of 3 man-
tras.
	
Wherever different Rishis have introspected on different 
mantras of the same Sukta, Katyayana has mentioned it 
clearly. For example, Sarvanukramanika 9/106 states that 
of ‘Indramachha’ Sukta comprising 14 mantras, Chakshu-
sha introspected on three mantras, Manava Chakshu on 3, 
Apsava Chakshu on 3 and Agni on five mantras.
	
In Sarvanukramanika 5/24, it is mentioned that 4 Rishis saw 
one mantra each of a Sukta that comprises four mantras.
	
Similarly, readers can check Sarvanukramanika 10/179 and 
10/181.
Hence, there is no way one can conclude that multiple Rishis 
manufactured different mantras of Suktas of Vedas.
The only plausible explanation is that Rishis were geniuses who 
introspected on different mantras of Vedas that already existed.
Counter-Argument 2: Several Rishis of  a single 
Mantra
There are several mantras in Vedas that appear several times in sev-


Divinity of  Vedas

eral places in different contexts. If Rishis were authors or creators 
of mantras of Vedas, then the name of same Rishi should have 
come in all places. However, we see that different Rishis are linked 
with the same mantra in different places.
For example:
	
Rigveda 1/23/16-18 and Atharvaveda 1/4/1-3
	
Rigveda 10/9/1-7 and Atharvaveda 1/5/1-4 - 1/6/1-3
	
Rigveda 10/152/1 and Atharvaveda 1/20/4
	
Rigveda 10/152/2-5 and Atharvaveda 1/21/1-4
	
Rigveda 10/163/1,2,4 and Atharvaveda 2/33/1,2,5
	
Atharvaveda 4/15/13 and Atharvaveda 7/103/1
	
Rigveda 1/115/1 and Yajurveda 13/46
	
Rigveda 1/22/19 and Yajurveda 13/33
	
Rigveda 1/13/19 and Rigveda 5/5/8
	
Rigveda 1/23/21-23 and Yajurveda 10/9/7-9
	
Rigveda 4/483 and Yajurveda 17/91
All these pairs have different Rishis. 
This is just a very small sample. One can find hundreds of such 
examples in Vedas. Apart from accepting that Rishis no way relate to 
the authorship of  Mantras, there is no other means to explain these.
Hence, rishis are not authors of mantras but experts of  mantras.


Divine Vedas

Counter-Argument 3: Existence of  mantra before 
birth of  Rishi
If we assume that Rishis created the mantras, then there is no way 
that the mantra could have existed before the Rishi was born. But 
such examples exist amply. For illustration:
	
The ‘Kasya Noonam’ verse of Rigveda 1/24 is attributed 
to Rishi Shunahshep as per Sarvanukramanika. It states that 
the Rishi of this Sukta of 15 mantras is Shunahshep who 
was the son of Ajeergat. 
	
If we review Aitareya Brahman 33/3 and 33/4, it is men-
tioned that Shunahshep offered his devotion to Ishwar 
through ‘Kasya Noonam’ mantra. 
	
If we review Nirukta Samuchchaya of Vararuchi, it is men-
tioned that Ajeergat worshiped through this mantra.
	
Thus, both father and son worshipped through this mantra. 
Then how come the only son is called Rishi of  the mantra? If the 
son was the author of the mantra, then the father could not 
have been known this mantra!
	
Also, the events of the stories of Aitareya Brahman and 
Nirukta Samuchchaya preclude any possibility of a father 
learning this mantra from son.
	
Hence, the mantra existed in father’s times, but the son is 
called the Rishi of the mantra. This implies that Rishi is not 
the author of the mantra but an expert of  mantra.
Rigveda 3/22 is attributed to Vishwamitra as per Taittriya Sam-
hita (5/2/3) and Kathaksamhita. 


Divinity of  Vedas

	
However, Sarvanukramani 3/22 and Aarshanukramani 3/4 
state that the mantra existed even during times of Gaathi – 
the father of Vishwamitra.
	
So even in this case, both son and father are Rishis of the 
mantra implying that they were not authors but experts of  
the mantra.
The western school of thought states that ‘Yadu’ and Turvashu’ 
whose names come in Rigveda 10/62/10 were historical kings. 
These two names mostly come together in Rigveda. 
	
We believe that these do not refer to any historical persons 
but certain concepts.
	
Mahabharat Adiparva 95 states that Yadu and Turvashu 
were born in 7th generation from Manu (Manu – Ila – 
Pururava – Ayu – Nahush – Yayaati – Yadu, Turvasu).
	
Mahabharat Adiparva 75/ 15-16 states that Nabhane-
dishtha was the son of Manu and brother of Ila.
	
Thus, if Vedas gave history and Nabhanedishtha wrote 
Rigveda 10/62/10, how could he use the names of people 
born in 6th generation from him? So either Vedas contain 
no history or Nabhanedishtha is not the author of the man-
tras!
Many argue that Nabhanedishtha lived for long and wrote the 
mantra during his last days. 
However, even this cannot be true because 
	
Aitareya Brahman 5/14 states that he received these man-
tras’ knowledge from his father when he returned from Gu-


Divine Vedas

rukul after education.
	
By the way, Nirukta 2/3 provides meanings of Yadu and 
Tuvanshu, which do not mean any historical person(s) but 
humans.
	
Nabhanedishtha is the Rishi of Rigveda 10/61 and 10/62 
as per Sarvanukramani.
Vishwamitra is considered Rishi of Rigveda 3/33 which con-
tains phrase “Vipaat Shutudri.” 
	
If we refer to Nirukta 2/24 and Brihaddevata 4/105-106, 
they state the story of Vishwamitra who was a priest of 
king Sudaas and came near the union of two rivers ‘Vipaat’ 
and ‘Shutudri.’ 
	
However, Mahabharat Aadiparva 177/4-6 and Niruk-
ta 9/26 explain that these rivers were named ‘Vipaat’ and 
‘Shutudri’ by ‘Vasishtha’ after killing of his sons by King 
Saudaas, the son of king Sudaas. 
	
Thus, how could Vishwamitra use ‘Vipaat’ and ‘Shutudri’ 
in the mantra when these names were created by Vasishtha 
much later?
	
The fact is that the mantra existed even before Vishwam-
itra. 
	
‘Vipaat’ and ‘Shutudri ‘in the mantra are not names of any 
rivers. Names of these two rivers were borrowed from the 
Vedic mantra. 
	
Since Vedas are oldest texts, it is not surprising to find 
names of places and people derived from Vedas. 


Divinity of  Vedas

	
This is akin to people naming their children and places as 
Ram, Sita, Krishna, Shivaji Park, etc. inspired by already ex-
isting words.
Aitareya Brahman 5/14, Tattriya Samhita 3/1/3 and Bhagvat 
9/4/1-14 narrate a story that Nabhanedistha was instructed by his 
father Manu to propagate Rigveda 10/61-62. 
	
Thus, even though Nabhanedishtha is Rishi of the mantra, 
he was certainly not its author, and the mantra was known 
even to his father.
Vamadeva is the Rishi of Rigveda 4/19,22,23 as per Sarva-
nukramani. 
	
However, Gopath Brahman Uttarardha 6/1 and Aitareya 
Brahman 6/18 state that Vishwamitra was the seer of the 
mantra and Vamadeva popularized the mantra. 
	
Thus, both were experts of the mantras and not authors.
Kavash Elush is the Rishi of Rigveda 10/30-32 as per Sarva-
nukramani. 
	
However, Kaushitaki Brahman states that Kavash ‘also’ un-
derstood the mantra. 
Thus, it implies that other Rishis have also understood the man-
tras and hence Rishi is not the author.
Counter-Argument 4: ‘Mantra Karta’ does not im-
ply author of  Mantra
Karta is obtained from Krit. Krit is derived from root Krinj in past 
tense as per Kvip Pratyaya (refer Ashtadhyayi 3/2/89)


Divine Vedas

So let us understand what ‘Krinj’ means.
	
Rishi means ‘seer’ as per Nirukta 2/11. Again Nirukta 3/11 
implies Rishi is Mantra Karta. Hence, Karta implies ‘seer’ 
of mantra as per Nirukta of Yaska. 
	
In other words, Krinj root is used to mean ‘see’ also apart 
from ‘doer.’
	
The same meaning of Krinj root is vetted by Sayana in his 
commentary on Aitareya Brahman 6/1, Bhattabhaskar in 
his commentary of Taittriya Aranyak 4/1/1 and Karka in 
Katyayana Shrautsutra 3/2/9 explanation.
The story of Tandya Brahman 13/3/24 is explained by 
Manusmriti. 
	
Here Manu explains Mantra Karta to mean ‘teacher of 
mantra.’ Thus ‘krinj’ root also implies ‘teaching’. 
	
Even Sayana considers Mantra Karta to mean Mantra-Seer 
in explanation of this verse from Tandya Brahman.
Patanjali Bhashya of Ashtadhyayi elaborates that Krinj also 
means ‘to establish’ or ‘to implement’. (Refer 1/3/1)
Jaimini 4/2/6 implies Krinj to mean ‘acceptor’.
There is not even one single evidence of ‘Mantra Karta’ or ‘Mantra 
Kaar’ or a related phrase being used to mean ‘Author of Mantra’ in 
any Vedic or post-Vedic literature.
Thus, Sarvanukramani is clear that whosoever ‘saw’ or ‘realized’ 
meaning of the mantra is its Rishi. (Paribhasha 2/4)
Thus, all the references provided by non-Vedics to imply Rishi 


Divinity of  Vedas

as Mantra-Karta actually mean Mantra-Seer.
We provide a list of references from ancient literature that refer 
Rishis as Mantra Drashta or Seer of Mantras:
	
Taittriya Samhita 1/5/4, 2/6/8, 5/2/1, 
	
Aitareya Brahman 3/19, 
	
Shatpath Brahman 9/2/2/38, 9/2/2/1, 
	
Kaushitaki Brahman 12/1, 
	
Tandya Brahman 4/7/3, 
	
Nirukta 2/11, 3/11,
	
Sarvanukramani 2/1, 3/1, 3/36, 4/1, 6/1, 7/1, 7/102, 8/1, 
8/10, 8/42, 
	
Brihaddevata 1/1, 
	
Arshanukramani 1/1, 
	
Anuvakanukramani 2, 39, 1/1
What is most startling is that the very texts from which excerpts 
are provided by Vedas haters to allege that Rishis were authors of 
the mantras are the very texts which clearly state that Rishis were the ‘seers’ 
or ‘experts’ of  the mantras.
Doubt
What about the names of historical people like Vishwamitra, Jam-
adagni, Bharadwaja, etc. that appear in Vedas as well as Rishis of 
Vedic mantras?


Divine Vedas

Agniveer
These words denote some special attributes and not any historical 
person. For example,
Shatpath Brahman states that Prana mean Vasishtha, Mind 
means Bharadwaja, Auditory sense implies Vishwamitra, etc. Same 
is asserted in Aitareya Brahman 2/2/1. Kanva in Rigveda 8/2/16 
refers to any person with sublime wisdom as per Nighantu (Vedic 
vocabulary).
Doubt
Why do many mantras have Rishis of the same name that appear 
in the mantras?
Agniveer
No Rishi was identified as per his ration card or passport. One 
gets a name either by birth or choice or popularity or by deeds. In 
fact, legendary persons are known more by deeds or choice than 
a birth name. Thus, Subhash Chandra Bose got the name ‘Netaji’. 
Moolshankar is known as Swami Dayanand Saraswati. Mohandas 
is more popular has Mahatma Gandhi. Thus, Vedic Rishis came 
to be known by the names exemplifying their research. Hence, we 
see that 
	
Narayana is Rishi of Purusha Sukta, 
	
Bhishaq (meaning doctor) is Rishi of Rigveda 10/97 focus-
ing on medicines, 
	
Rigveda 10/101 has Rishi Budha Saumya (intellectual and 
sober person) because the sukta deals with related themes. 


Divinity of  Vedas

There are countless such examples.
The point is the Vedic Rishis were not working with agenda of 
marketing their birth names. They were Yogis, who were devoted to discov-
ering the nectar of  Vedas and rise beyond the cycles of  death and birth. Thus, 
name is just a matter of social convenience for them. So, no won-
der, names of most Vedic rishis are related to the subject of their 
specializations regardless of their birth name and even gender.
Doubt
They cannot be revealed because there is no Paramatma, and as 
per the theory of evolution and discoveries of archaeology, the 
man could not be so advanced millions of years ago. Further, this 
is against modern science.
Agniveer
There is no way modern or any science can prove that Paramatma 
does not exist. So-called scientists have no answer to fundamental 
questions of universe – Who does ensure that the laws of universe 
work? What started this process of creation and degeneration? 
What ensures that we feel pain and sorrow and pleasures? And 
who is “we”?
Atheists have no answers to these. As a man with advanced 
studies of modern science by the grace of my education, I could 
find no answers except vague statements to these answers.
Theory of evolution is a largely rejected theory today because 
recent discoveries of science and genes do not provide any con-
clusive evidence towards it. There is no proven theory (and mere 
conjectures) to answer how humans got created from dust? Why 
we see snippets of advancements of science and technology in 


Divine Vedas

ancient ages if those were indeed primitive times (like iron pillar 
of Delhi, pyramids of Egypt, speed of light in Sayana Bhashya, 
description of aeroplane making in Vimana Shastra, etc.)
Archaeology is a big hoax. What these archaeologists do is cre-
ate entire structure of humanoid in diagrams merely from a big 
tooth like stone they discover in one place. There are several excel-
lent resources on net available which discuss these hoaxes in detail. 
The modus operandi of archaeologists suffer from very serious 
flaws: They have scratched not even 0.1% of entire earth surface 
and yet make tall claims, they forget that decay of organic/inor-
ganic things they expect to discover can be much more severe than 
what their simple math calculations predict. Their dating methods 
are at best grossly inaccurate; their conjecture that any object could 
be tooth or bone is highly based on imaginations alone.
Please read creation-evolution encyclopaedia on the internet 
for a good detailed review among many available from scholars.
Thus, there is no evidence whatsoever to prove that Vedas were 
not revealed and plethora to prove that they are revealed.
This fact of the revelation of Vedas is the core foundation of 
our culture. The moment you try to shake it, you would foolishly 
put yourself in the same category as Islam or Christianity. Any dif-
ference with them then becomes only a temporary political issue 
and not one based on sound logic and reason. The whole of so-
called Hindutva and culture movement then falls flat. Because if 
none is the ultimate truth, how you justify that some other psycho, 
rapist, murderer, jihadi, etc. is wrong and you are right. After all, in 
that case, everyone is equally wrong and equally right.


Divinity of  Vedas

Doubt
Islam is a brutal religion. Islam is based on the belief that Quran 
is revealed text. Hence, anyone who believes on any revealed text 
is brutal. Since we are not brutal, we cannot believe that any text 
(Vedas or anything else) can be revealed.
Agniveer
This is the logic Sri Elst has provided. Perhaps this is the irony 
of those who may have mugged up a lot of facts but did not do 
a thorough practical course in science and logical analysis. That is 
why perhaps, our ancient education system had so much of strong 
emphasis on math and science. Even Dayanand emphasized the 
same for same reason – Rote mugging and worshipping stones 
will make your intellect stone! (If I am correct, this is as per Vidur 
Niti.)
By this logic, whatever Islam believes in, we cannot believe in 
same! They believe that humans have two legs. So we cannot have 
two legs! They believe that one should not consume alcohol, so we 
should start becoming drunkards. They believe Christians will go 
to hell. Hence, we should believe Christians should go to heaven!!
Let me tell you the fundamental difference between Quran Di-
vine Vedas:
	
Quran was revealed (if at all!) few hundred years ago. Even 
foreign so-called scholars believe Vedas to be first texts of 
mankind. A revealed text must be revealed at the beginning 
of creation and not in between.
	
Quran is written in Arabic, a language specific to geography. 
Vedas are in Vedic Sanskrit, which is the mother of all lan-


Divine Vedas

guages of the world today.
	
Quran contains location-specific descriptions and customs. 
Vedas contain no geography or history.
	
Quran believes itself to be the final edition of God’s mes-
sage. Now first, God’s message, by definition, has to be 
flawless and not subject to modifications. And if indeed 
modifications are necessary in God’s message, then there 
can be no FINAL edition. The process should then con-
tinue.
	
Vedas on the other hand are one and same – they cannot be 
altered, contain fundamental truths. Their applicability may 
change depending in times. But the core rules are always 
applicable.
	
A revealed text should contain a source of all possible 
knowledge. Only Vedas pass this litmus test.
	
Vedas cannot be altered at all. Many editions of Quran ex-
ist.
So to assume that Vedas are not revealed because Quran is not 
revealed is only a defect of logic-less mind and prejudice.
Summary  
	
Vedas were provided at the inception of civilization by 
Paramatma and not created by a human.
	
All ancient Aarsh texts and even new Puranas consider Ve-
das as revealed knowledge. Even Vedas claim so. Further, 
there is no evidence whatsoever to make a claim that Rishis 
write Vedas.


Divinity of  Vedas

	
Rishis are those people who through their deep meditation 
found meanings of these verses. The Suktas on which a 
particular Rishi meditated is referred with that Rishi’s name. 
So Rishi are Mantra-Drashta and not Mantra-Rachayita. 
They are seers and not creators of Mantras.
	
Many mantras in Vedas have more than one rishis. Some 
have even thousand Rishis. How can thousand Rishis to-
gether make one verse?
	
The same Mantra in Vedas occurring at different sections 
has different Rishis. How can that be possible if  Rishis 
were creators of  mantras?
There is no documentary or historical evidence so far for the 
creation of Vedas by any human. 
The creator of the mantras/Vedas is the very same Purusha 
who created this universe, this life, this intelligence, this curiosity 
and the ability to seek answers to the curiosity of “Who wrote the 
Vedas?” Even if someone disagrees with this, there exists no other 
plausible explanation to attribute authorship of Vedas till date.
I conclude with the words of legendary Swami Dayanand Saras-
wati: “Whosoever Rishi first introspected on a mantra and propagated its 
meaning is remembered along with that mantra. Whosoever claims that Rishis 
created the mantras is a fraud. Rishis were the propagator of  the meaning of  
the mantras.”
In next section of the book, we will see how our ancient rishis 
have persevered Vedas and answer many allegations of Vedas hat-
ers who are trying to ‘prove’ that Vedas have been textually cor-
rupted.  



SECTION 2                                         
PRESERVATION AND INFALLIBILITY OF 
VEDAS




Preservation of Vedas
W
e are thankful to several scholars whose source we 
could not track but whose works were used for the cre-
ation of this book. Our forefathers devised a number 
of methods to preserve the unwritten Vedas in their original form 
to safeguard their tonal and verbal purity.
In this chapter, I have provided some analytical, unbiased and 
objective pointers on how Vedas have been preserved in a pristine 
state. I have provided details on how Vedas have been preserved so 
purely and how it’s not possible to alter even a single syllable. No 
other text in the world can claim to have such fail-safe method of  preservation. 


Divine Vedas

Swara Protection of  Vedas
They laid down rules to make sure that not even a syllable was 
changed in chanting, not even a Swara was altered. In this way, 
they ensured that the full benefits were derived from intoning the 
mantras. They fixed the time taken to enunciate each syllable of a 
word and called this unit of  time or time interval “matra.”
How we must regulate our breathing to produce the desired 
vibration in a particular part of our body so that the sound of the 
syllable enunciated is produced in its pure form: this science is ex-
plained in the Vedanga called ‘Shiksha.’
If you see a Vedic mantra in the Samhita, you would find cer-
tain marks after syllables. For example, see the following image:
These marks called Swara Chinha. They depict the method of 
pronunciation. These markers ensure that not even a single syllable 
can be altered from any Vedic mantra.
In traditional gurukuls, pupils memorize the locations of these 
Swaras through specific hand or head movements. Thus, you would 


Preservation of  Vedas

see them moving their hands or head while reciting the Vedic man-
tras. And if the slightest error in Swara is found in recitation, they 
would easily pin-point it.
Further, different gurukuls specialize in studying different 
Patha methods (explained after this section) would still have the 
same Swara system in place, thereby easily tracking the accuracy of 
each Vedic mantra to last syllable.
Paatha Protection of  Vedas
A remarkable method was devised to make sure that words and 
syllables are not altered. According to this, the words of a man-
tra are strung together in different patterns like “vakya”, “pada”, 
“karma”, “jata”, “mala”, “sikha”, “rekha”, “dhvaja”, “danda”, “ratha”, 
“ghana”. These represent different permutations of reciting words 
of a Vedic Mantra.
We call some Vedic scholars “ghanapathins,” don’t we? It 
means they have learnt the chanting of the scripture up to the 
advanced stage called “ghana.” “Pathin” means one who has learnt 
the “patha.” When we listen to ghanapathins chant the ghana, we 
notice that they intone a few words of a mantra in different ways, 
back and forth.
It is most delightful to the ears, like nectar poured into it. The 
sonority natural to Vedic chanting is enhanced in ghana. Similarly, 
in the other methods of chanting like karma, jata, sikha, mala, and 
so on the intonation is nothing less than stately, indeed divine.
The chief purpose of such methods, as already mentioned, is to 
ensure that not even a syllable of a mantra is altered to the slightest 
extent. The words are braided together, so to speak, and recited 


Divine Vedas

back and forth.
Vakya patha 
In ‘vakyapatha’ and ‘samhitapatha’ the mantras are chanted in the 
original (natural) order, with no special pattern adopted. In the 
vakyapatha some words of the mantras are joined together in what 
is called ‘Sandhi’. There is sandhi in Tamil also; but in English the 
words are not joined together. You have many examples of sandhi 
in the Tevaram, Tiruvachakam, Tirukkural, Divyaprabandham and 
other Tamil works. Because of the sandhi, the individual words are 
less recognizable in Sanskrit than even in Tamil.
Pada patha 
In padapatha, each word in a mantra is clearly separated from the 
next. It comes next to samhitapatha and after it is kramapatha. In 
this the first word of a mantra is joined to the second, the second 
to the third, the third to the fourth, and so on, until we come to 
the final word.
In old inscriptions in the South we find the names of some 
important people of the place concerned mentioned with the ap-
pellation “kramavittan” added to the names. “Kramavittan” is the 
Tamil form of “kramavid” in the same way as “Vedavittan” is of 
“Vedavid”. We learn from the inscriptions that such Vedic scholars 
were to be met throughout South India in the past.
(Note: South India has a great contribution in preserving the 
Vedic traditions during a long critical era of Indian history when 
North India was occupied in struggling for survival from brutal at-
tacks of barbaric invaders and their progenies from West Asia. We 
find the tradition of Vedic Gurukuls uninterrupted even till today.)


Preservation of  Vedas

Jata patha 
In jata patha, the first word of the mantra is chanted with the sec-
ond. Then the order is reversed. The second word of the mantra 
is chanted with the first. Then, again, the first word is chanted with 
the second, then the second with the third, and so on. In this way, 
the entire mantra is chanted, going back and forth.
Shikha patha
In shikhapatha, the pattern consists of three words of a mantra, 
instead of the two of jata.
Ghana patha
Ghanapatha is more difficult than these. There are four types in 
this method. Here also the words of a mantra are chanted back 
and forth, and there is a system of permutation and combination 
in the chanting. To explain all of it would be like conducting a class 
of arithmetic. 
We take all kinds of precautions in the laboratory, don’t we, 
to protect a life-saving drug? The sound of the Vedas guards the 
world against all ills. Our forefathers devised these methods of 
chanting to protect the sound of our scripture against change and 
distortion.
Prakrtipatha and Vikrtipatha
Samhitapatha and padapatha are called “prakrtipatha” (natural way 
of chanting) since the words are recited only once and in their nat-
ural order. The other methods belong to the “vikrtipatha” (artifi-
cial way of chanting) category. (In krama, though the words do not 


Divine Vedas

go in the strict natural order of one-two-three, there is no reversal 
of the words-the first after the second, the second after the third, 
and so on. So we cannot describe it fully as vikrtipatha). Leaving 
out krama, there are eight vikrti patterns, and they are recounted in 
verse to be easily remembered.
Jata mala sikha rekha dhvaja dando ratho ghanah
Ityastau-vikrtayah proktah kramapurva maharsibhih
All these different methods of chanting are meant to ensure 
the tonal and verbal purity of the Vedas for all time. In pada the 
words in their natural order, in krama two words together, in jata 
the words going back and forth. The words tally in all these meth-
ods of chanting, and there is the assurance that the original form 
will not be altered.
The benefits to be derived from the different ways of chanting 
are given in this verse.
Samhitapathamatrena yatphalam procyate budhaih
Padu tu dvigunam vidyat krame tu ca caturgunam
Varnakrame satagunam jatayantu sahasrakam
Considering that our ancestors took so much care to make sure 
that the sound of the Vedas did not undergo the slightest change, 
it is futile for modern researchers to try to establish the date of 
our scriptures by finding out how the sounds of its words have 
changed.
What more, today different schools of Vedas exist in South 
India, which memorizes Vedas in different means, as explained 
above. And if you compare the mantras memorized by different 


Preservation of  Vedas

schools, you will find a variation of not a single syllable. Remember 
we are talking lakhs of syllables!! And still no variations. That’s why 
even Max Muller, a bitter critic of Vedic philosophy, could also 
not help but state that such a foolproof method of preservation is 
among the greatest wonders and miracles of the world!
An example of Ghana Patha
We give below a sentence from the Yajur Veda, obviously with-
out the swaras, in its original Samhita pATha form, also its pada 
text and then the order of the words in the Ghana recital. A pundit 
who has learnt the Ghana recital of one complete Veda (he takes 
thirteen years of whole time work to reach that stage) is called a 
Ghana-pAThi.
First, we give the rule for the Ghana mechanics of recitation:
If the original order of words in a sentence is:
1/2/3/4/5
The Ghana recital goes as follows:
12/21/123/321/123/
23/32/234/432/234/
34/43/345/543/345/
45/54/45/
5 iti 5.
samhita sentence:
eshAm purushANAm-eshAm paSUnAM mA bher-mA ro-mo 


Divine Vedas

eshAM kincanAmamat //
Meaning:
Oh God! Do not frighten these our men and animals, may none 
of these perish or lack health.
Pada text:
eshAM/purushANAM/eshAM/paSUnAM/mA/bheH/mA/
arah/mo-iti-mo/eshAM/
kim/chana/Amamat/Amamad-ity-Amamat/
Note: The ninth break here and the last break are the results of 
a technicality which you may ignore unless you want to specialize 
in this art.
Now for the ghana recital (without the svaras; with the svaras it 
would be a delight to hear). The recital is a non-stop recital, except 
for a half-pause at the place shown by /. There is no break any-
where else. The hyphens shown are for requirements of those who 
can decipher the grammar; they will not be reflected in the recital.
eshAM-purushANAM-purushANAm-eshAm-eshAM 
puru-
shANAm-eshAm-eshAm
purushANAm-eshAm-eshAm purushANAm-eshAM /
purushANAm-eshAm-eshAM 
purushANAM 
purushA-
NAm-eshAM paSUnAM
paSunAm-eshAm purushANAm purushANAm-eshAM paSU-
nAM /
eshAM paSUnAM paSUnAm-eshAm-eshAM paSUnAm-mA 


Preservation of  Vedas

mA paSUnAm-eshAm-eshAM paSUnAm-mA /
paSUnAm-mA mA paSUnAM paSUnAm-mA bher-bher-mA 
paSUnAM paSUnAm-mA bheH /
mA bher-bher-mAmA bher-mAmA bher-mAmA bher-mA /
bher-mAmA bher-bher-mAro aro mA bher-bhermA araH /
mA ro aro mAmA ro momo aro mA mA ro mo /
aro mo mo aro aro mo eshAm-eshAm mo aro aro mo eshAM/
mo eshAm-eshAm mo mo eshAm kim kim-eshAm-mo mo es-
hAm kim / mo iti mo/
eshAm kimkim-eshAmeshAM kim-cana cana kim-esham-esh-
aM kim-cana /
kim cana cana kim kim canAmamad-Amamat cana kim kim 
canAmamat /
canAmamad-Amamac-cana canAmamat /
Amamad-ityAmamat /
The significant point to note here is that in Sanskrit the order 
of words does not matter.
If you do it with an English sentence like:
“Rama vanquished Ravana”
It will go like this:
Rama vanquished vanquished Rama Rama vanquished Ravana 
‘Ravana vanquished Rama’ Rama vanquished Ravana … and so on.


Divine Vedas

You can see the absurdity now. In Sanskrit, this absurdity would 
not arise. So a Ghana recitation is supposed to be equivalent to 
a recitation of the Veda 13 times and to that extent is multifold 
fruitful! The 13 is because except for two beginning and two end-
ing words in a sentence the others are repeated 13 times. (You can 
check it with the word paSUnAM above).
Summary
All the Veda Mantras have been preserved (till today) (at least three 
millennia according to western calculations) without ever put-
ting them into writing. This must be considered a great linguistic 
achievement of which India can be legitimately proud. The liter-
ature which consists of diverse poetical and prose compositions 
were simply learnt by rote, the training being given by the teacher 
saying each word or combinations of words once with the proper 
incantations (called Swaras) and the students saying it twice. They 
then learnt to recite it in continuous form along with the incanta-
tions. The continuous recitation of a Vedic text is called Samhita 
pAtha. The accuracy of the text is preserved by resorting to an 
artifice of nine different techniques or modes of the recital.
The first is the pada pATha, which simply recites each word of 
the text separately; pada means word; pAtha means reading. The 
euphonic changes that occurs from the Samhita pATha to the pada 
pATha is itself very technical (Sanskrit grammar would be crucial 
here) but makes sense.
In addition, there are eight other techniques of recitation; the 
sole purpose of each is to preserve the original Samhita text with-
out the loss or addition of a single syllable or swara. The swaras 
are a significant part of the recital of the Vedas, whatever be the 
mode. The eight modes are called:


Preservation of  Vedas

krama, jaTa, ghana, mAlA, ratha, ShikhA, daNDa and rekhA.
In each mode the order of recital of the words is specified as a 
particular permutation of their original sequence.
All these elaborate and sophisticated approaches have ensured 
that the first texts of humanity – The Veda Samhitas – are available to 
us today in exactly the same pure original form.



Infallibility of Vedas
E
ven if someone conclusively proves that Vedas available 
today are textually corrupted/ incomplete or that an alien 
came in a spaceship to replace original Vedas with a dupli-
cate inferior variety, it does not matter much. This is because:
Vedas are not supposed to be merely mugged up and fol-
lowed blindly or narrated like a parrot to invoke its divine pow-
ers or split the moon. 
The very word ‘Veda’ means knowledge. And hence, Vedas have 
to be followed or adopted only to the extent that it is intuitive or rea-
sonable to your own mind. So, if you bring even the greatest scholar 
in the world to prove to me that Rigveda 1/1/5 means “The one 


Infallibility of  Vedas

who claim to be a doctor, possesses a goat-beard but wear a suit-
tie and tie, and asserts that all non-believers would go to Hell and 
apostates deserve being killed – should be greeted with footwear”, 
then I am not going to believe it. Because my own intellect and 
whatever I understood from Vedas so far tell me that fake should 
be countered with arguments and intellect, and not with symbolic 
gestures of frustrations that are insulting.
And by following my conscience in this manner to best of my 
abilities without bringing ego in the picture, I would be following 
the Vedas.
Vedas are supposed to be already encoded within our 
minds. What we read in books is merely a way to decode this knowl-
edge. This is like the Laws of Motion. You don’t have to mug up 
what Newton wrote in Latin in Principia to understand the laws 
of motion. You approach the knowledge intuitively. And then to 
fulfill needs of further understanding, you may also learn Latin 
or whatever as situation demands. But you do so because you are 
driven by logic and not guided by the blind belief that mugging up 
will give to Heaven. We still refer to the texts because though tech-
nically it is possible for all of us to deduce the Laws of Motion and 
Theory of Relativity all by ourselves but it would become a very 
time-consuming process. We don’t take works of Newton or Ein-
stein for mugging up blindly; we use them as check-posts to help 
us guide to the right path in a manner that is intuitive/ logical to us.
So, even if few pages of Principia are torn, or there are some 
misprints, or a few pages mixed up, it does not matter much be-
cause all that means is that for some parts, we will have to put a 
bit more extra effort to understand what exactly they meant. And 
especially if  you are only a Class 1 student, these apparent 


Divine Vedas

mistakes would actually mean nothing at all for you.
In the same vein, if an advanced scholar of Vedas complains 
of being stalled due to inaccessibility to certain portions of Vedas, 
it could still be understood. We are still puzzled on how Fermat’s 
Theorem could be elegantly solved because some pages of his di-
ary are found missing! But if you asked after reading the last sen-
tence – Who is Fermat? then you don’t even need to bother about 
the missing pages!
Those attempting to belittle the Vedas come with malevo-
lent intent and not genuine intention to seek the truth. While 
a Vedic follower would very clearly proclaim that we would reject 
any translation of Vedas that do not appeal to our conscience or 
is logically unsound, these fanatics would never say that they would 
follow the same standard for their text. They would never assert 
that there remains a scope that their text has been tampered with 
because it was written only 20 years after the suspicious death of 
original founder by a murdering group of fighters.
They cannot do so because their cult has a rule – if  someone 
turns apostate – kill him. So it’s one-way traffic – they shall never 
accept the truth and would continue to ridicule and decimate the 
non-believers. But the rest of us are supposed to accept their way 
merely because we are not taught to be fanatic!
Proving textual corruption in Vedas will not result in the 
conclusion that any other text is divine. And even if corrup-
tion is proved in Vedas, that does not have much significance for 
reasons discussed above. So such attempts only showcase that 
the monkey of Panchatantra lives even today. I say this because 
the same sites and people that attempt to prove corruption in the 
Vedas are also the ones who openly promise permanent Hell for 


Infallibility of  Vedas

non-believers and defend those who justify death for apostates.
The goal of this chapter is to reassure that while we should 
keep caution of these dangerous monkeys, we should not take 
their monkey arguments seriously.
There is another story in Panchatantra about monkeys where a 
king and the minister went for a trip. They saw a lot of monkeys 
in a place. Every monkey was doing some monkey act – throwing 
stones, jumping, fighting each other, making noises, etc. But there 
sat a monkey in one remote corner who was sitting in lotus posi-
tion with eyes closed. The king said to the minister, “Look! This 
monkey looks like a saint. How peacefully is he sitting in med-
itation! Let us go and seek his blessings.” The minister replied, 
“O King! Don’t be duped by these acts of monkeys. Even this 
pretence of meditation by a monkey is a monkey act. Let’s move 
ahead.” The king refused, went to the monkey and bowed in front 
of him. Suddenly the monkey jumped, snatched the crown of the 
king, and ran away!
We hope the kings of this world would pay heed to this humble 
minister and protect their crowns.
Let me assure you that all these allegations on Vedas are base-
less. There is always a remote possibility that 
	
Vedas are corrupted or 
	
There are seven skies or 
	
The moon was split into two when someone pointed finger 
or
	
The hobbits of Lord of the Rings actually live in our cities 


Divine Vedas

or 
	
The sun is smaller to Earth and sets in a mud pond or
	
Certain stones can snatch your clothes and run away or
	
Certain donkeys have the face of a woman and can fly you 
to the moon and seven skies. 
And when I find reasonable evidence for these, I would be glad 
to not only accept these but promote them as well. But for that to 
happen, more rational and plausible evidence have to be brought 
in light than these outdated frivolous ones.
Part 1: Different number of  Vedas
Allegation 1
Different texts talk of a different number of Vedas. No one is sure 
whether there is one Veda, two Vedas, three Vedas, or four Vedas.
Agniveer
I can define you as one person, or a group of one brain, two eyes, 
two nostrils, two ears, etc. or as two different persons due to split 
personality causing confusion or whatever. But they all point to the 
same thing.
Similarly, scholars have defined Vedas variously. 
	
If you consider only knowledge, Vedas are only one.
	
If you consider Para and Apara knowledge (liberating and 
mundane knowledge), then Vedas are two. 
	
If you focus on Knowledge, Action, and Contemplation, 


Infallibility of  Vedas

Vedas are three. 
	
If you consider Rik, Yajuh, Sama, Atharva, Vedas are four. 
	
If you consider each mandala of Rigveda as separate, then 
there are ten Rigvedas. Similarly, we have forty Yajurvedas. 
	
If you take each mantra as a different Veda, you have more 
than 20,000 Vedas.
So number does not matter. They all point to the same set of 
mantras.
Many Upanishads and Manu Smriti talk of Vedas coming from 
Agni, Vayu, Aditya, Angira. Some view these as Rishis in the incep-
tion of human civilization. Others term them as innate sources of 
nature that inspired the Rishis. Whatever be the case, there is no 
denial that selected few Rishis got the knowledge of Vedas first, 
and then they propagated in a manner that there remains perfect 
standardization since then.
	
These names Agni, Vayu, Aditya, Angira are nothing more 
than Unique IDs. These names depict their areas of spe-
cialization in the same manner as Subhash Chandra Bose is 
called Netaji and Krishna is called Madhusudan. 
	
It is not that they were born with birth certificates of these 
names on the basis of which they were admitted in some 
schools or their Voter Cards were made. So just because 
Aditya is called Surya somewhere does not affect the Vedas 
in any manner. 
	
Atharvaveda is also called Angirasa because they depict 
characteristics of a particular Veda. Vedas are themselves 


Divine Vedas

called by different names depending upon what aspect of 
their property we want to focus upon.
	
The beauty of Vedic literature lies in the fact that words are 
not used with pre-decided arbitrary meanings to force the mind to 
think in specific directions. Instead, words are derived from 
roots (which again are based on how each pronunciation 
impacts our minds), and hence verses allow the mind to think 
originally and discover new essence in a state of deep con-
templation. So the focus is on liberation and not imprisonment of  
intellect. 
	
And since it is already within us, we don’t simply mug up the meaning 
or even translate a meaning. We feel the meaning within.
	
The very test of whether you understand a mantra or not 
is that whether you could intuitively feel the meaning from 
within. If not, don’t worry! Keep practicing, keep using your 
faculty of thinking and keep following your inner voice!
Vedas are very commonly classified into three because they rep-
resent three kinds of knowledge – Theory, Actions, Contemplation. 
	
Rigveda focuses more on theory
	
Yajurveda on actions and 
	
Samaveda on Contemplation. 
Note that they are not independent silos. They are merely over-
all themes. You cannot be an expert in one unless you are also the master 
of  other two. And that is why you would find a lot of repetition of 
verses in the different Vedas. It is just that the feeling changes with 
a change in context.


Infallibility of  Vedas

Atharvaveda is all about Practical Applications – integration of 
the wisdom of rest of the three Vedas. So often it is not referred 
separately. It is automatically included in the themes of rest of the 
three Vedas in the same manner as Practical classes are assumed to 
be part of the subject of Physics along with Theory. So primarily, 
Rik, Yajuh, and Sama are mentioned in the literature. Atharvaveda 
is also called Chhanda and mentioned wherever necessary.
Allegation 2
Why Manu Smriti and Swami Dayanand talk of completing a study 
of Vedas in 36 years by devoting 12 years on each Vedas? This 
means Vedas are only three.
Agniveer
As explained earlier, Atharvaveda is already included in the course 
curriculum. It is impossible to understand any Veda without re-
ferring to Atharvaveda for all of us except those who might have 
mastered all this in their previous birth and are born as Rishis since 
birth. For lesser mortals, when Rigveda or Yajurveda or Samaveda 
is to be mastered, the relevant portions of Atharvaveda have to 
be practiced to understand the applications. After all, the theory is 
incomplete without practical.
This confusion comes in the minds of those for whom the 
study of scripture only mean becoming a Haafiz who could mug 
up and narrate the verses like a parrot. While mugging up is often 
useful, and at times very necessary to preserve the Vedas, it is a 
very special course for very specific minds. For most of us, spend-
ing 12 years reading Physics will not mean spending time mugging 
the books. 
Further, you don’t need to spend 12 years to mug up each Veda! 


Divine Vedas

Something like Yajurveda has less than 2000 mantras that can be 
completed in less than a year if mugging is all that has to be done.
In reality, even when you are mastering one particular 
Veda, you must study other Vedas as well and gain a reason-
able proficiency in them. This is like Engineering Colleges hav-
ing courses on Physics, Maths, English, Psychology, Economics, 
etc. as well.
So if you put 36 years on Vedas, don’t worry. Atharvaveda 
would automatically be taken care of.
Allegation 3
What about 1131 branches/ shakhas of Vedas? Everyone knows 
that only a few of them remain today. All the other branches are 
lost.
Agniveer
Branch refers to a particular recension style of Vedas to emphasize 
certain aspects and to make it relevant to existing time and society. 
Branches or Shakhas are not eternal. But original Vedas have been 
preserved as they were even till today. Most Shakhas went extinct 
during a long period of misrule. But nonetheless, our forefathers 
ensured that they did not allow the tradition of memorizing and 
preserving the original Vedas from generation to generation.
Some fools argue that why original Vedas are also called by the 
name of Shakhas? The answer is that the name of Shakha is de-
rived from the Rishi who ensured its preservation from generation 
to generation. Some Rishis chose to promote the variations so as 
to propagate their meaning among masses and specialized stu-
dents. Some volunteered to continue preserving the original Vedas 


Infallibility of  Vedas

so that more Shakhas could be created in future. Why should we 
not acknowledge these Rishis? Hence 
	
Shaakal chose to preserve the Rigveda,
	
Madhyandin chose to preserve Yajurveda, 
	
Shaunak chose to preserve Atharvaveda and
	
Kauthum chose to protect Samaveda. 
These refer not only to individuals but entire traditions.
None apart from misled fanatics ever had any disputes over 
these Shakhas and the originals. Even Western Indologists and de-
tractors who were otherwise skeptic of Vedas and their meanings 
had to admit that original Vedas are available to us in the same 
form as the oldest evidence available without any doubt.
“The texts of the Veda have been handed down to us with 
such accuracy that there is hardly a various reading in the proper 
sense of the word or even an uncertain accent in the whole of the 
Rig-Veda.”
Maxmuller announces in Origin of Religion (p 131)
“As far we are able to judge at present, we can hardly speak 
of various readings in the Vedic hymns in the usual sense of that 
word. Various readings to be gathered from a collection of differ-
ent manuscripts now accessible to us there are NONE.”
Maxmuller in Rigveda Vol 1, p XXX
“Extraordinary precautions soon began to be taken to guard 
the canonical text. Thus fixed against the possibility of any change 
or loss the result has been its preservation with faithfulness unique 


Divine Vedas

in literary history.”
Macdonell in A History of Sanskrit Literature (p 50)
“Since that time, nearly 3000 years ago, it (the text of the Ve-
das) has suffered no changes whatsoever, with care such that the 
history of other literatures has nothing similar to compare with it.”
Keigi in Rigveda (p 22)
“These hymns, however, were not committed to writing on 
payrus, palm-leaves or baked clay-bricks, but to human memory 
carefully cultivated for the purpose and were handed down from 
generation to generation without the loss of  even a single word or syllable.”
Abinash Chandra Dass in Rigvedic India (p 5)
Should I say more? Except that, I don’t know the cure for para-
noia.
Part 2: Corruption in Rigveda
Allegation 4
Some verses of Rigveda are missing. Nirukta 7/8 talks of a verse 
offering an oblation to Vishnu and Agni in Rigveda but there is no 
such verse in current Rigveda. So the verse was lost.
Agniveer
Nirukta wasn’t preserved in the way Rigveda was. So Rigveda is 
much more authoritative, especially after scrutiny by even the 
skeptics as mentioned above.
	
The Vishnu of Vedas is same as the Agni. Both refer to 
same Singular Supreme Entity. Only the misled see polythe-


Infallibility of  Vedas

ism in Vedas. 
	
Joint oblation to Vishnu and Agni applies to any mantra 
that can be interpreted to imply those characteristics of Su-
preme that are common in the meaning of Agni and Vish-
nu. 
	
This is a research subject for those who have skills to con-
template deeply on mantras. There is nothing conflicting 
in it. 
	
At best one can say that – Since I don’t know anything 
about Vedas because knowing that would put me in Hell, 
hence I cannot understand it.
Interestingly, the very people who are currently raising this childish allega-
tion are the ones who also attempt to prove that Vedas talk of  only one Single 
God. But they use this argument when they want to prove that Vedas and 
their modern scripture both talk of  the same Singular God, but because their 
scripture is latest, hence that latest version should be followed. Hence, everyone 
should start believing in their religion to escape Hell.
But here, since the purpose is to create doubt, the exactly oppo-
site argument is being propagated. Remember we talked about the 
monkeys? Now recall the advice of the minister.
Allegation 5
There is corruption in the recitation of certain mantras. For exam-
ple Rigveda, 10/29/1 has a word that is pronounced as ‘Va +Yah’ 
in one Pada Patha and ‘Vayo’ somewhere. Scholars interpret the 
words differently and come with conflicting meanings. Another 
example is word ‘Mehanaasti’ which is interpreted as “Ma + Iha + 
Naasti’ in some Pada Patha.


Divine Vedas

Agniveer
Whether we take the word as ‘Va + Yah’ or Vayo, they both are 
pronounced in the same manner. Same is true for ‘Ma + Iha + 
Naasti’. However, in Vedic mantras, these words come us Vayo and 
Mehanaasti. Scholars can have disputes over how the word should 
be interpreted. This is a research topic. Depending on their views, 
they can have different Pada Paatha or break-up of the words. Per-
haps during Yaska’s time, someone broke the word in the wrong 
manner and hence he had to counter it. Similar to the way even we 
have to counter the most outdated concepts even today despite the 
availability of thoroughly verified and edited Vedas!
Pada Paatha is not original Vedas. It is one way of  preserving Vedas. 
There are nine more. We have discussed this in chapter five. If 
an error comes in Pada Patha, it is corrected by comparing with 
other methods. And hence today, there is no doubt over what the 
original Vedic mantras are. (Thanks to efforts of sages like Yaska 
from time to time.) 
Allegation 6
There are different versions of Rigveda available today each having 
a different number of mantras. Hence, Rigveda is corrupted.
Agniveer
So finally they discovered what even Max Muller and Macdonell could not 
discover. Like the splitting of the moon in NASA images and black 
holes in the universe because their text says that certain stars dis-
appear in the daytime! But unfortunately, this one is also a very 
dated allegation that did not even stand for a few days when it first 
emerged. The difference in number comes only due to different methods of  
calculation. 


Infallibility of  Vedas

If I ask anyone to list those verses of Rigveda which are present 
in one version but not in another, no one can produce it. At least, 
in last thousands of years of documented history, no one could 
produce it.
Part 3: Corruption in Yajurveda
Allegation 7
There are different versions of Yajurveda as well. There is Black 
and White Yajurveda which have significant differences. Ishopani-
shad was an Upanishad later inserted in Yajurveda as 40th Chapter.
Agniveer
Black or Krishna Yajurveda is a branch (Shakha) and not original 
Yajurveda. 
	
It contains original mantras modified along with historical 
and explanatory descriptions to suit research interests of a 
specific kind. Shukla.
	
White Yajurveda refers to those branches of Yajurveda that 
modify the original mantras if required but do not add ad-
ditional texts. 
	
The Madhyandini Yajurveda of Shukla Branch is the origi-
nal Yajurveda and rests are its variations. 
	
In case you do not have access to original Yajurveda, start 
with a branch. That would be much easy to approach due to 
explanations and simplifications. And when you have mas-
tered them, you can have the taste of the original.
Keen minds that are less paranoid and more zealous can ap-


Divine Vedas

proach the original directly as well!
	
Ishopanishad is nothing but the 40th Chapter of Yajurveda 
as it appears in a particular branch of Black Yajurveda with 
some modifications. 
	
Because this is the greatest text on spiritualism and philos-
ophy and mother of all other texts like Geeta, other Upa-
nishads, and even Darshans, it has a special place in Vedic 
literature. 
	
Being the mother of all Upanishads, it is called Isha Upa-
nishad. 
Only a paranoid can explain why he or she thinks that Isha 
Upanishad cannot be part of Yajurveda.
Allegation 8
Swami Dayanand added an additional word “Gamyaat” in Yajurve-
da 9/20 while explaining the mantra. Hence, Yajurveda is corrupt.
Agniveer
Did Swami Dayanand add the word in the mantra? No. 
	
The word is found only in Hindi translation in some edi-
tions. 
	
Swami Dayanand used to dictate meaning in Sanskrit to his 
pundits who would then translate it in Hindi as well as tran-
scribe what he said.
	
Even if he or his pundit added the word in explanation, 
then you should be thankful to him for attempting to simpli-
fy things instead of taking exceptions.


Infallibility of  Vedas

	
Even if Swami Dayanand added the word in the mantra, 
that does not make Yajurveda corrupted. It only means that 
Swami Dayanand made an error. 
	
When did Vedas or Agniveer or Swami Dayanand claim 
that humans are fully perfect?
Allegation 9
Arya Samaj translation of Vedas has an additional mantra at the 
end of Yajurveda Chapter 25. Hence, Yajurveda is corrupt.
Agniveer
So if I understand properly, your anger is towards additional bonus 
that Arya Samaj translation gives you. This means that you admit 
original Vedas to be a subset of existing Vedas with one less man-
tra. Hence, there is no loss of information at least.
	
Now if we review this mantra, is it against rest of the Vedas 
in its message? If not, then what is the cause of concern? 
	
If you get one additional sentence in Einstein’s text on rel-
ativity that was written later by an editor but only empha-
sizes what Einstein says in rest of the paper, how is that a 
problem?
	
This is an objection only for those who think that if they 
mug up the book of divine and say a big sorry for all their 
misdeeds and laziness to Supreme Lord, they would easily 
get Heaven full of virgins. 
	
But for Vedic followers, there are no shortcuts to success. 
You have to practice what you learn in actions and keep 
exploring the truth within. And when you have liberated 


Divine Vedas

yourself from ignorance significantly, you would well have 
re-ignited the Vedas within. 
	
So one harmless mantra in one edition makes absolutely no 
difference. The only cause of concern could have been if 
the verse misled you, which it does not.
By the way, the 25th Chapter has only 47 mantras, and that is 
accepted by one and all. Some publishers publish an additional 
mantra due to the relevance of context. Perhaps someone insert-
ed it years ago, and then no printer bothered to or rather was not 
competent enough to scrutinize it. 
Allegation 10
Yajurveda 26/26 has a word ‘Ayohate’ which is used as ‘Apohate’ in 
Arya Samaj version. Hence, Yajurveda is corrupted.
Agniveer
This is a printing mistake. The real word is Ayohate. In Devanagri 
script, ‘Ya’ and ‘Pa’ appear almost similar. Such errors are found 
in several places in Vedas because the first time they were being 
printed, they were being typeset from hand-written manuscripts. 
However, Pt Damodar Satvalekar did a great job of scrutinizing 
all published mantras with manuscripts and manuscripts with var-
ious Paatha methods to give to us extremely authentic editions of 
Rigveda.
But thankfully, the meaning does not change because that was 
based on the actual word.
So yes, printed versions may have corruptions. But neither the 
original Vedas nor ‘the potential of humans to discover the Vedas 


Infallibility of  Vedas

from within and compare with those outside’ has been corrupted.
Allegation 11
Yajurveda 39/5 has a word “Vishyandane” which is used as “Vish-
pandane” in Arya Samaj version. Hence, Yajurveda is corrupted.
Agniveer
This is same as the previous allegation.
Allegation 12
Yajurveda 13/58 has a phrase “Lokam Taa Indram” that is missing 
in Arya Samaj version. Hence, Yajurveda is corrupted.
Agniveer
It does not matter whether this text is there or not. The meaning 
of the phrase is implied in the overall meaning of the mantras 
continued from itself up to this last mantra of Chapter 
13. So for the sake of completion of meaning, you can put the 
phrase, and for the sake of brevity, you can skip it. A conservative 
approach would be to keep it. But if the focus is to understand 
meaning alone, it can be skipped. We suggest the phrase for the 
sake of completeness.
Part 4: Corruption in Samaveda and Atharvaveda 
Allegation 13
Samaveda has Kauthum and Jaimini branches having a different 
number of verses as well as songs. Hence, Samaveda is corrupted.


Divine Vedas

Agniveer
I have already mentioned that Kauthum Rishi preserved the orig-
inal Samaveda. 
Further, Samaveda songs make no sense for the disturbed mind. 
They represent the melodies that generate from within when one 
reaches a high level of enlightenment and exalted state. Jaimini 
branch offers more variety. You can experiment with them to find 
what melody touches you the most. However, keep caution – avoid 
spicy food, meat, alcohol, anger, frustration, hatred, etc. study oth-
er Vedas as well and practice meditation. Without foundation of 
this, you may be simply wasting your time.
Allegation 14
Atharvaveda 20/127/3 is different in different versions. Arya Sa-
maj has word ‘Rishaye,’ and Gayatri Pariwar has word ‘Ishaya.’ 
Hence, Atharvaveda is corrupted.
Agniveer
This is again a case of printing mistake due to bad handwriting in 
Devanagri manuscript or error by the typist. The correct word is 
‘Ishaya.’ Printing mistakes are not attributable to original texts.
Allegation 15
Shatpath Brahman 13/4/3/4-8 states that young men should lis-
ten to Atharvaveda and young ladies to Angirasaveda on consec-
utive days. Before that, Rigveda and Yajurveda should be listened. 
This means that:
	
There is no mention of Samaveda, and hence, Samaveda is 
not a Veda.


Infallibility of  Vedas

	
Atharvaveda and Angirasveda are different. Rishi Angiras 
was 4th generation from Rishi Atharva.
Agniveer
I shall not comment on what exactly this reference from Shatpath 
means. But even if we take it at face value:
Samaveda is not mentioned because Samaveda cannot be sim-
ply listened like other Vedas. Samaveda is all about emotions and 
meditation. Further, bulks of mantras in Samaveda are already in 
Rigveda. So there is no purpose of listening to them again. How-
ever, if the same mantras are meditated upon with emotions and 
sung, new revelations would come. But this is not in the context of 
the ritual described. You need to separately practice this art.
Even if Rishi Angiras was born 4th generation from Rishi 
Atharva (I shall not comment on the authenticity of this histo-
ry), how does it matter? Names of Rishis depict their deeds and 
specializations and not the names in their Class X pass certificate. 
So, a specialist in Atharvaveda can name himself Rishi Atharva. 
Similarly, another Rishi can use a synonym of Atharva, i.e., Angi-
ras and use as his name. This is similar to we are using Agniveer 
as our name. Now just because we call ourselves Agniveer, it does 
not mean that we are the author of all the mantras in Vedas that 
have word ‘Agni.’
In chapter “Divinity of Vedas,” we have already understood 
authorship of Vedas as per available evidence and claims.
Atharvaveda and Angirasveda refer to the same text. They are 
also called Chhanda in some places. Atharvaveda has the privilege 
of multiple names because it is an all-rounder. It adopts from Rik, 
Yajuh, and Sama Vedas are brings forth their applied aspects. To 


Divine Vedas

there are multiple dimensions to it deserving multiple names.
But if this is the argument for Vedas being corrupted then Qu-
ran is perhaps the most corrupted text in the world because Quran 
is referred by a huge number of names in Quran itself. The word 
Quran was later adopted for the text by fighting followers long 
after the death of the peace-loving founder. The founder never 
knew that this book would be called Quran. Quran is also referred 
by names reserved for Jewish and Christian texts in Quran itself! 
That is why some scholars conclude that original Quran refers to 
Bible or Old Testament or some unchangeable text which was ex-
isting ever before Testaments and was much bigger in size. This is 
a matter of scholarly debate, and we shall leave it to scholars.
But we believe that such frivolous means should not be adopted 
to claim corruption in any text. There should be something more 
substantial, reasonable and rational.
Final countdown
There are various versions of the article floating in cyberspace that 
allege corruption in Vedas. However, all end with one single con-
clusion which we reproduce below:
“The above analysis proves beyond the shadow of  a doubt that Vedas 
have suffered heavy interpolations and changes. Talking strictly, even if  one 
accusation of  the above analysis stands, the entire Vedic literature will be 
unacceptable as a genuinely inspired document.”
Agniveer
This exposes the motive of the author(s)/allegator(s). They just want 
to throw 100 arrows blindly in the hope that at least one will hit 
the bull’s eye.


Infallibility of  Vedas

They term their assertions regarding Vedas as “accusations” 
that speaks volumes about their terrorism-inspired mindset. 
Truth-seeking is only warfare for them. The authors/allegators in-
spired by the Panchatantra monkey only want the crown of the 
king. This also shows their desperation and insecurity complex 
arising out of the recent depletion of fanatic dominance over cy-
berspace and elsewhere as well.
Unfortunately, none of the arrows came even close to hitting 
the dart-board. The reason is simple – they were hitting at com-
pletely opposite direction. And since Earth is perhaps not round 
as per the scriptures they blindly believe in, there is no chance of 
the arrows even making a full circle to hit from the back! We hope 
next time when they ‘accuse’ someone they would do a more thor-
ough and unbiased research. But that would demand rejection of 
company and idol-worship of fanatics.
To take this argument to an extreme, let us state something. 
Even if all the allegations…sorry “accusations” stand, still that 
would NO WAY AFFECT the Vedic religion. This is because the 
very essence of Vedic religion is to not blindly and literally trans-
late any text as a recipe for life. Instead, it is all about opening the 
minds and discovering the Vedas within.
The amount of Vedas we know from available benevolent lit-
erature is sufficient for us to make a head-start. And as we prog-
ress in practice of accepting truth by rejecting falsehood without 
bringing ego, laziness, frustration, fear, etc. in the picture, the Law 
of Karma would automatically ensure that we would get the right 
tools and texts that we need to progress further.
But until we make ourselves eligible in this manner, the most 
immaculately preserved Vedas would also be nothing different 


Divine Vedas

from the tons of books in the libraries that no one ever issued. 
So instead of raising frivolous paranoia about what we don’t even 
understand, all we have to do is to promise the following:
‘I promise to accept truth through a continuous process of  rejecting false-
hood every moment to best of  my abilities in the most sincere manner.’ And 
let Law of Karma manage the rest.
Conclusion 
Vedic texts are like Science textbooks for us and not a roadside 
Mantra-Tantra book that promises to help us getting a job, mar-
riage, money, destruction of the enemy, mesmerism over a lover, 
invisibility, control of Jinna and ghosts, etc. by blankly reciting cer-
tain mantras on the microphone and moving some bones.
If you think Vedas are akin to Jhaad Phoonk of Pagla Baba 
Banarasi, or Ajmer Sharif ka Jaadu, or Shahdara Wale Miyanji ke 
Totke or something similar, you are at a wrong place. Get these 
addresses from any Railway Station rather than daring to open the 
minds to think honestly, if you want easy answers. However, your 
own scripture might be a good replacement for these Babas and 
Miyans.
For rest of us, please firmly understand that even if someone 
proves us that Vedas have vanished into thin air, nothing is going 
to change. Vedas would still remain a genuine inspired document 
and Law of Karma would still work!
Don’t worry though! Vedas remain as preserved as they were 
always.
But yes, be wary of monkeys snatching away your crown! After 
all, you are a king!



Corruption in Rigveda?

here have seen a significant upsurge in interest towards 
Vedas in the cyberspace. The concept of universal broth-
erhood devoid of sectarian beliefs, rejection of blind faith 
in miracles as necessary to be spiritual, as well as the view that reli-
gion and science are one and same – seem to be what the modern 
world exactly demands. Thus, Vedas seem to offer what the world 
needs today.
A greater awe is derived from the fact that the very first texts 
of the mankind which elaborate on the very lessons whose surface 
is barely been scratched by so-called modern subjects like human 
rights, gender-rights and democracy has been so immaculately pre-
served and protected that not only each alphabet but even its pitch 


Divine Vedas

remains unchanged since its inception. 
The rise of Vedic movement has also brought to fore a series 
of misleading allegations being propagated by those who refuse to 
accept that all humans – regardless of their beliefs – can be blessed 
by the Supreme or those whose blood boils at the very mention 
of life being anything beyond a chemical reaction. This does not 
come as a surprise especially when we have even a ‘Flat Earth So-
ciety’ today or die-hard believers in ‘Moon being split into two by 
a human finger some 1400 years ago’.
One old time allegation that has been keep emerging in present 
time is: different versions of  Rigveda have a different number of  mantras. 
Earlier, the allegation was propounded by atheists or evangelists. 
But this time, the allegation is driven by those
	
Who cannot digest the fact that a book that is considered 
divine can actually recommend that God/ Ishwar/ Allah 
does not punish anyone merely because he or she does not 
believe in Him or even His book.
	
Who find it rebelling to support a book that says that men 
and women have equal rights and opportunities and in fact, 
women education is even more critical for the society.
	
Who cannot accept that a divine book can assert that blind 
belief is the cause of miseries, and hence even that book 
should not be believed blindly.
	
Who cannot accept that a divine book recommends simply 
adherence to the truth to best of one’s intent and enhanc-
ing knowledge through noble actions as only criteria for 
being spiritual even if that goes against the dictates of that 
book itself in the short run.


Corruption in Rigveda?

	
Who cannot accept that a divine book can be a book of 
best practices rather than a book that threatens those who 
do not adopt it blindly.
In this chapter, we will analyze this allegation of different ver-
sions of Rigveda having a different number of mantras and show 
that it does not hold any water. However, I would also like to add 
that even if one is able to prove that there are minor aberrations 
in so-called different versions of Vedas that does not make Ve-
dic Dharma less relevant. Because the essence of Vedic Dharma 
would still remain valid – to accept the truth, seek truth proactively and 
reject falsehood/ blind belief. When Vedas don’t demand one to blindly 
believe in the book and stop applying one’s brains, and in fact cau-
tion against such an approach in first place, this allegation loses its 
steam completely. A rough analogy would be that someone claims 
that CBSE is not a useful Board for education right from Class 1 
to Class 12 because two pages of its math book for class 11 have 
printing errors!
Having said that, I would like to state that our Rishis were ge-
nius enough to devise ways to protect the wisdom of Vedas in 
most perfect manner. We have seen the glimpse of this wonder 
earlier. And thus, in reality, there is only one version of Rigveda 
that exists. There may be printing or proof-reading errors in some 
of the published versions. But there is complete unanimity on more than 
10,000 mantras of  Rigveda being the same ones since ages.
This is true that different scholars have enumerated a different 
number of mantras in Rigveda. For example,
	
Shaunakiya Anuvakanukramani – 10580 and 1 Paada
	
Chhandasankya Parishishta – 10402


Divine Vedas

	
Riksarvanukramani Commentrator Jagannath – 10552
	
Charanvyuh Commentraror Mahidas – 10552
	
Venkatmadhav – 10402
	
Swami Dayanand Saraswati – 10589
	
Prof MacDonald – 10442
All of these calculations are largely correct (except perhaps 
minor errors and omissions). The difference in number appears 
merely because of the difference in calculation approach. Let us un-
derstand how.
Note: The words Mantra or Richa are used interchangeably here and im-
ply a verse of  Vedas – Rigveda in the current context. Also, note that even the 
verses from various branches or Shakhas or Vedas are called Mantras for ease 
of  convenience. But since Shakha represents a variation from original Veda 
Samhita or collection of  Vedic Mantras, the verses of  a Shakha that differ 
from original Vedas are not technically Mantras. So, from a conventional 
sense, a verse in Vedas or its branches is called a Mantra or Richa.
Dwipada and Chatushpada Mantras
In Rigveda, there are several mantras which are considered to be 
comprising 2 Paadas (Dwipada or couplet) or sometimes compris-
ing 4 Paadas (Chatushpadas or quadruplet). Paada means one 
portion of  the verse. For a shloka, each line of shloka represents 
one Paada.
Now, in Rigveda, there are 157 Dwipada Richas or mantras. Of 
these, 17 Dwipadas are Nitya Dwipada or permanent Dwipada. 
Other 140 Dwipadas are temporary (Naimittika). These 140 Dwi-
padas are actually 140/2= 70 Chatushpada Richas.


Corruption in Rigveda?

In Brahman texts, these mantras are used as Dwipadas during 
Yajnas by reciting Dwipadah Shansati. Yaska also mentions these 
mantras as Dwipadas in Nirukta 10/21 (oldest text on Vedic defi-
nitions).
The Paribhasha (Definitions) Chapter of Riksarvanukramani 
mentions: Dwirdwipadastvrichah Samaamananti. Shadgurushishya 
explains it as ‘Richoadhyayane’.
In simple language, during the learning phase, the student 
should practice by making one Richa out of 2 Dwipadas or cou-
plets. In other words, combine 2 Dwipadas to make 1 Chatushpa-
da. By “Samaamananti” it is implied that during post-Yajna prayers, 
2 Dwipadas do not mean 1 Richa.
To give an example, the “Pashva na Taayum” sukta of Rigveda 
1/65 is considered to have 10 Richas during post-Yajna prayers. 
But during education phase, one considers the sukta to have 5 Ri-
chas.
Sayanacharya writes in his commentary of Rigveda 1.65 that 
the 1/65-70 suktas are Dwipada but are studied as Chatushpada 
during education. If a sukta has an odd number of Dwipadas, then 
the final Dwipada is studied as Dwipada itself. Even the meanings 
of Dwipadas are very close. However, during Yajna or application, 
each Dwipada is considered separately during prayers.
Thus, Ashwalayan Shraut 8/12 (a text on Yajna rituals) consid-
ers Rigveda 1/65 as Dwipada.
Mahidas, commentator of Charanvyuh also writes that during 
Havan, each Dwipada is recited separately, but during the study 
period, two Dwipadas are recited together.


Divine Vedas

Charanvyuh lists the 140 temporary Naimittika Dwipadas. The 
17 permanent or Nitya Dwipada are also listed in Upalekha Sutra 
6/1-2.
Riksarvanukramani and its 10552 Richas
Riksarvanukramani enumerates 10552 Richas in Rigveda consider-
ing these 140 Dwipadas as Dwipadas themselves which is same as 
that enumerated by other scholars ignoring errors and omissions.
Ignoring the 80 mantras of 11 Balakhilya Sukta, which are not 
considered by Shaishiri branch of Rigveda, we have 10472 Richas. 
Riksarvanukramani author Katyayana lists both these numbers in 
his text.
(Note: Today, only the original Rigveda is available, and all the 
branches or shakhas have gone extinct due to centuries of misrule. 
We shall discuss the concept of branches in slightly more detail in 
a future para. However, all should know that Rigveda 8/49 to 59 
are called Balakhilya Suktas. They are part of the original Vedas but 
not considered in some of the branches aka variations in original 
Rigveda Samhita propagated by Rishis for better understanding. As 
we shall later see, when Anuvakanukramani was written, Shaishi-
ri branch of Rigveda was very popular. It was a minor variation 
of original Rigveda and omitted Balakhilya Suktas. Thus based on 
that, Riksarvanukramani lists calculations including and excluding 
Balakhilya Suktas.)
The same is stated as true by Jagannath, the commentator of 
Riksarvanukramani as well as Mahidas, commentator of Cha-
ranvyuh.


Corruption in Rigveda?

Chhandasankhya Parishishta and its 10402 Richas
This text is not available in complete form. But from whatever is 
available, the 11th Shloka states that:
“Evam Dashasahasrani Shatanam Tu Chatushtayam Richam 
Dwayadhikamakhyatamrishibhistatvadarshibhih” meaning:
The Seer Rishis have stated the number of Richas in Rigveda 
as 10402.
(The previous 10 shlokas of this text break these Richas in 
different Chhandas – Gayatri 2451, Ushnik 341, Anushtubh 855, 
Brihatee 181, Pankti 312, Trishtup 4253, Jagatee 1348, Atijagatee 
17, Shakvaree 19, Atishakvaree 9, Ashti 6, Atyashti 84, Dhriti 2, 
Atidhriti 1, Ekapada 6, Dwipada 17, Baarhatapragaath 194, Ka-
kubha Pragaath 55, Mahabarhat Pragath 1)
Note: If you add these up, it does not match with 10402. This 
is because Pragraath Chhandas are considered Dwricha. This is 
clearly mentioned in the 9th shloka of this text as well. Thus these 
194+55+1=250 Pragaath = 500 Richas. This is also explained in 
Paribhasha Chapter or Definitions Chapter of Riksarvanukra-
mani as well as Ashtadhyayi 4/2/55 (So Asyaadiritichhandansah 
Pragaatham). Making this adjustment, the numbers match.
Now, if we count 70 Chatushpadas to be actually 140 tempo-
rary Dwipadas, we will have to add 70 to this number which gives 
10472. Adding 80 mantras from 11 Balakhilya Suktas that is not 
considered in Shaishiri Shakha (branch), we get 10552 mantras which 
are same as that provided by Riksarvanukramani.
Note: Each Veda has different Shakhas or branches which are 
variations of the original Mantra Samhita. These variations were 


Divine Vedas

devised by sages for a variety of reasons – to bring minor changes 
(addition, deletion, and modification) in language and content to 
make them easily approachable by people with a certain way of 
thinking, to focus on specific themes, to add with specific experi-
ences and stories, etc. Thus, each of these traditions of variations 
including the original Samhita is called a Shakha or the branch. Of 
all these, the original Samhita is most widespread and preserved 
most meticulously. Thus, while most of the Shakhas have been lost 
or their manuscripts burnt by invaders in the long period of mis-
rule, the original Samhitas are still well-protected. Even UNESCO 
has acknowledged this wonder. Refer UNESCO Portal on the 
internet where it lists Rigveda as the first literary documents in the history 
of  humankind.
Venkatmadhav and his 10402 Richas
Venkatmadhav has written two commentaries on Rigveda. In the 
commentary of the abridged commentary of Ashtak 5 Adhyaya 5, 
he writes that: “I counted 10402 Richas in Vedas including Dwipa-
das. When I counted Dwipadas separately, I found 10480 Richas.
Now 10402 Richas is in lines with other authorities (10402 + 70 
(Dwipadas) + 80 (Balakhilya Mantras)) = 10552.
But number 10480 does not match with calculations. The cause 
of this error by Venkatmadhav was that instead of adding 70 for 
140 temporary Dwipadas, he added 78 for 157 temporary + per-
manent Dwipadas. Thus, he got 10480 Richas excluding Balakhilya 
Suktas.
If we adjust for this error, we find that all scholars reach up to 
the same number of Richas because they all were looking at the 
same Vedas.


Corruption in Rigveda?

Anuvakanukramani
Shaunak in his Anuvakanukramani mentions about the number of 
Richas in Rigveda in two different places.
In shlokas 40, 41, and 42 he details the number of Richas in 
each of the 9 Varga categories. Here he reaches the number of 
2006 vargas and 10417 Richas. He mentions that this is for Shais-
hareeya branch/ shakha of Shakal Samhita (the original Rigveda). 
(Taan Parane Shakale Shaishareeye Vadanti)
The additional 15 Richas is due to the difference in shakha as 
mentioned by Shaunak himself.
He further writes that Rigveda has 10580 Richas and 1 Pada. 
But he uses words “Paaranam Samprakeertitam” in the shloka im-
plying that this is the total number of Richa if we consider all 
different ways of recitation or in other words, this is the union 
of total Richas in all Shakhas (branches) together and not of the 
original Samhita.
Almost similar shloka appears in Laugakshi Smriti that uses 
exactly the same words for entire shloka except ending it with 
‘Paarayanavidhau Khalu’ meaning ways of recitation. To further 
clarify, the next shloka clearly states that ‘Purvoktasankhyashchetu 
Sarvashakhoktasootragaah’ or the number in the previous shloka 
is for all the Shakhas together.
Another similar version of the shloka appears in Charanvyuha 
Parishishta.


Divine Vedas

Maxmuller edition of  Rigveda and Dwipada Richas 
error
Maxmuller published the first printed version of Rigveda in 1873. 
This was a commendable task considering the efforts required 
to collate the mantras together from different Paatha Vidhis and 
proof-reading them. However, certain serious errors, especial-
ly with regards to temporary Dwipada Richas remained in this 
edition. Most of the future scholars took Maxmuller version as 
a starting point and hence the errors continued to creep in their 
calculations.
In Maxmuller edition,
	
The 60 temporary Dwipada Richas of 1.65-70 have been 
published as 30 Chatushpadas. Each Chatushpada has been 
counted as one mantra.
	
In 5th Mandal, 24th Sukta, the 4 Dwipada Richas have been 
published as 2 Chatushpadas. However, each Mantra has 
counted as 2. Thus after Chatushpada, 1-2 is published as 
mantra numbers. After second Chatushpada, 3-4 is pub-
lished as mantra numbers.
	
The rest of the 76 temporary Dwipadas have been pub-
lished as Dwipadas.
Maxmuller edited the original Rigveda and hence obviously in-
cluded the Balakhilya Suktas. Thus the total number of  Richas 
in his edition adds up to 10552 if we adjust for above three 
factors.
Today, almost all scholars refer to Maxmuller edition for their 
analysis. Apart from the above obvious discrepancies and a few 


Corruption in Rigveda?

minor typographical errors, this edition of Vedas is unanimously 
accepted as an undisputed published form of the original Rigveda.
Swami Dayanand and his 10589 Richas
Swami Dayanand never got into the exact calculation of a number 
of Rigvedic verses because he had more important priorities. His 
introduction to the translation of Rigveda lists 10589 as the num-
ber of Richas in Rigveda.
However, when we add up the number of mantras in each 
Mandal provided in the same text, we get 10521 (1976+429+617+
589+727+765+841+1726+1097+1754).
However, there are several typographical errors in this calcula-
tion:
(The texts of Swami Dayanand have several errors and omis-
sions arising because of two primary reasons – one, he had to 
rely on several other less competent people for the writing of his 
works. Second, the publication technology was still primitive, and 
Swami Dayanand had to publish his works under financially ex-
treme situations. He was involved in a huge number of tasks in 
his life, and hence such omissions do creep in his works. However, 
well aware of these possibilities, he on several occasions categor-
ically summarized his overall stand and mentioned that even if 
what he has written is found to be against evidence, that should 
also be rejected.)
	
The number of mantras in 8/20 has been typed as 36 in-
stead of 26. Thus the total number of mantras in this Man-
dala should be 1716 instead of 1726.
	
The number of Richas in 9th mandal is 11 less than the to-


Divine Vedas

tal of the suktas in that Mandal. Thus, the right number of 
Richas in 9th Mandal is 1108 as per his own tables.
Adjusting for these two typographical errors, we get 10522 Ri-
chas. Now Swami Dayanand based his calculations on the Max-
muller edition that lists 60 Dwipada Richas as 30 Chatushpada 
Mantras.
So when we add 30 to this, we get 10552 Richas which exactly 
matches the calculations by other scholars.
The number 10589 mentioned in the text is a simple typograph-
ical error happening due to unclear handwriting in manuscript 
confusing 1 for 9 and 2 for 8 in Devanagari.
Thus, Swami Dayanand’s Rigveda also has 10522 Richas.
Prof  Macdonald and his 10442 Richas
Prof Macdonald has made some severe blunders in his analysis 
of Vedas. We shall not discuss those in this book. However, with 
regards to the number of Richas in Rigveda, he gives the number 
as 10442.
If we add 30 to this due to Maxmuller error mentioned above, 
we get 10472 Richas. Adding 80 Balakhilya Suktas, we get 10552 
Richas which match the actual calculations.
Pandit Satyavrat Samashrami and his 10522 Richas
Pandit Satyavrat Samashrami states in his text ‘Aitareyalochan’ that 
Rigveda has 10522 Richas including Balakhilya Suktas. If we add 
30 from Maxmuller error, we get 10552 which again match the 
original calculations.


Corruption in Rigveda?

Conclusion
Many scholars – Maxmuller, Macdonald, Satyavrat Samashrami, 
Venkatmadhav have erred in listing the total number of verses in 
Rigveda due to the differential treatment accorded to Dwipada and 
Chatushpada Richas. However, if we adjust for these differences 
in our calculations, we find that Rigveda has one and only version 
that contains 10552 mantras or Richas. If we consider Dwipadas 
as Chatushpadas, then Rigveda has 10482 mantras.
In its longest history for any text available today, there has been 
an alteration of not even a single syllable, alphabet or even pitch 
of pronunciation. Thus, all the apparent differences in the number 
of Richas are merely due to typographical errors, the difference in 
Shakha or Dwipada/Chatushpada issue.
In reality, there is no difference right from ‘A’ of Agnimeeley 
Purohitam of Rigveda 1/1/1 up to Susahasati (last word of Rigve-
da), and there is one and only one version of Rigveda.
This is a matter of great pride not only for Hindus or Indi-
ans but every human being. Because Vedas belong to entire hu-
manity and teach a religion of universal humanism that engulfs all 
thinking creatures (Manushya) regardless of their birth, caste, sect, 
rituals, colour, and gender in a fragrance of compassion, justice, 
rationality and honesty.
I conclude with the final mantra of Rigveda that summarizes 
the essence of all the 10552 mantras:
May our motivation and inspiration be same – welfare of  all. May our 
hearts be same – with affection for all. May our mind be same – full of  pure 
thoughts of  selflessness and may we all continue to increase each other’s hap-


Divine Vedas

piness together!
 In next section, we will debunk commonly propagated myths 
and misconceptions on Vedas and provide their refutations. 



SECTION 3                                   
DEBUNKING MYTHS ON VEDAS



Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

he objective of this chapter is to bust certain baseless 
myths regarding Vedas propagated sheerly on the basis 
of the hypothesis that “A false shouted thousand times 
becomes the truth.”
Agniveer has no problems in people believing what they want 
to believe. That does not mean that Agniveer considers everything 
to be true, nor does it mean that Agniveer believes that only Ag-
niveer knows the ultimate truth.
Yes, we do critically analyze various ideologies including the 
ideologies that we were born with in order to discover truth.


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

So yes, Agniveer believes in a formless omnipotent birth less 
deathless Supreme Lord, it believes in Ashtanga Yoga as the only 
path to achieve that Lord.
But that DOES NOT mean that Agniveer would hate 
those who disagree with Agniveer. Nor would Agniveer carry 
a hidden or explicit agenda to convert everyone to its own 
ideology. Yes, we call for everyone to convert to the Vedic reli-
gion. Because…..
Vedic Religion – A summary
In summary, Vedic Religion refers to an urge to constantly accept 
the truth and reject falsehood to best of one’s abilities and intent 
regardless of existing beliefs, rituals, and habits. In other words, 
to follow Vedic religion means becoming a Scientist because Veda 
itself means ‘knowledge.’ Even belief in any books called Vedas is 
not a prerequisite. None other than fanatic minds would attempt 
to find fault with such a concept. And hence, we want the entire 
world to follow this Vedic religion.
Now, when we look at the reality, people are born in different 
social setups and fed with a variety of versions of truth specific to 
their societies for a reasonably long period of life. So, people tend 
to define their ‘Self’ as Hindu, Shia, Sunni, Christian, Indian, Paki-
stani, Kashmiri, Tamil, Japanese, etc. The goal of Vedic religion is 
to rise above these man-made distinctions to realize the truth. But 
for the majority, current belief-system is the starting point, and it 
is impossible to reject all prejudices fed over the years since early 
childhood. So, all that Vedic religion urges is to look around, ana-
lyze, explore and reject the obvious irrational and gradually move 
forward. If you feel that sudden clarity like Buddha, feel free to 
jump ahead faster. But all you have to do is to keep moving up like 


Divine Vedas

Fire. This will unleash the legend within.
Why Vedas are different?
Compared to the popular way of approaching Bible or Quran 
or Puranas or any other religious scripture with which Vedas are 
wrongly bracketed, Vedas have a fundamental difference.
And that difference is that unlike any other so-called divine text, you are 
not threatened by any unseen force to follow blindly or face the wrath. Nor are 
you incentivized with divine support for accepting the dictums of  the text. On 
the contrary, Vedas assert that if  you believe in something blindly, you shall be 
punished as per law of  actions.
Therefore, one is completely Vedic if he cannot understand the 
importance of Vedas. On the contrary, blind belief even in Vedas 
without knowing its meaning puts you in darkness.
When it comes to interpreting divine texts, Bible followers have 
little options that blindly believe in modern translations of Bible 
(original is lost. And new ones are also said to be translations of 
translations of translations of original in different language(s))
You either believe in Jesus that you do not see, or perish in Hell 
forever. A clergy will not accept someone as true Christian if he 
believes in many good teachings of Bible but refuses divinity to 
Jesus or counters many portions of Bible with whom he or she 
differs.
Same is the case with Quran (as per dominant ideology of fa-
natic Islam). Regardless of all other good or scientific concepts 
claimed in Quran, you still have to believe in certain unseen things 
even if your mind cannot reason them or suggest an alternative 
model of the world. So you must consider Muhammad as last 


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

Prophet. Mere belief in his being Prophet is also not sufficient. 
You must believe that he is the last one. You must believe in Judg-
ment Day, Heaven, Hell, Angels and an Allah on a throne on 7th 
sky. If you question anyone of these, you are a non-believer and 
hence would go to Hell.
A rational mind, if born in a fanatic dominated country has 
limited choice.
	
Either be honest ( that since he never saw any of these 
things and think that logically other models of world can 
also be given where there are no Prophets, or that Muham-
mad was not a Prophet but a great man, or that there can be 
future Prophets as well, or that one does not need angels to 
talk to Allah, or that instead of Heaven and Hell there can 
be other ways of redemption, or that Judgment Day can 
happen every second as per law of Karma, and be killed or 
punished.
	
Or pretend to believe blindly and live safe. Thus, all actions 
would be against the true spirit of Islam, but one would 
wear its badge to save himself.
	
Or stop reasoning, get brainwashed, be with power brokers 
and become a fanatic.
The Vedic approach would be that of a scientist. Review the 
prevailing Vedic models, analyze and accept only what sounds 
reasonable. Discover more thorough analysis. Feel free to present 
alternative or modified models. Discuss with scholars and keep re-
fining. Keep challenging assumptions and continue building better 
and better models that explain the truth.
When a Vedic mantra is interpreted, one need not blindly 


Divine Vedas

mug the mantra or its meaning. One can freely differ from 
prevailing meanings to come up with new insights. The only 
criteria are that the meaning discovered should be with rea-
son and free from contradictions.
So Vedas in themselves are not to be taken as absolute truth in 
the same manner that theory of relativity need not be believed in 
unless one has studied and understood the principles behind. If 
one jumps the gun and mugs up the Einstein paper on relativity 
without even knowing the basic laws of physics, we do not call 
such a person scientist. Newton and Galileo were greater scientists 
for us because they propagated the truth best known to them in 
most logical manner. Same is the case with Vedas.
Thus, any attempt to denigrate Vedas is a foolish exercise. Even 
if you somehow convince the world (of people who know noth-
ing of Vedic approach to understanding Mantras) that a particular 
mantra means something very wrong, that does not matter much. 
All that people have to do is to clearly reject such meaning for the 
mantra that goes against their conscience. This will not bring them 
punishment as an apostate. And tomorrow, when people become 
eligible to understand mantra better, they are free to revise their 
stand as well.
So it is not the book which is important but the knowledge within each 
of  us. Book merely serves as a guide to ensure we are on the right 
track and have right benchmarks in place. Just like any Physics or 
Mathematics book.
Having said all this, in reality, we could not find one single ev-
idence of Vedas having anything objectionable in our research so 
far. In previous sections, we have already seen how Vedas have 
been deliberately misinterpreted by those who want to defend their 


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

verbatim interpretations of some scripture in the era of scientific 
rationalism. 
We shall now analyze in an unbiased manner some more myths 
(in fact allegations) being propagated with ulterior agenda. You can 
review the sources of these from Google. We do not want to serve 
as publicity platforms for fanatics.
(Note: To make book compitable with various ebook formats, Hindi alle-
gations have been rewritted with English words.) 
Allegation 1: Vedas call for the destruction of  
non-believers
Agniveer
Vedas call for the destruction of only the Rakshas, Dasyus, Daas 
or Asurs. What they mean, have been discussed in detail in book 
‘Dalits of Hinduism.’
In short, they refer to terrorists who kill innocents and destroy 
public property. For example, Osama Bin Laden, Kasab, Naxalite 
and Maoist killers are Rakshas and Asurs. It has nothing to do with 
one’s personal beliefs. As you would see in the book, even those 
who were born in Arya (noble peaceful) families deserve to be 
called Dasyu if they indulge in terrorism.
Claim 1
Hey ann vale! [va vajra vale parameshvar], tujhko stuti karne vale 
log achhe prakar prasann karein. Tu [hamare liye] dhan kar, ved 
dweshon ko nasht kar.
[O Granter of Grain! May bless us with Strength!


Divine Vedas

May you always be pleased with your devotees. May you show-
er us with wealth & happiness without bounds. May you destroy 
those who hate Vedas!]
 [Atharvaveda 20/93/1]
See how Vedas call for destruction of those who hate Vedas.
Agniveer
The controversial phrase is Brahma Dvishah Ava Jahi
So it calls for the destruction of  hatred against Brahma 
and NOT any Vedic text hater. Brahma is a more subtle concept 
and refers to the source behind the entire creation and hence the 
feeling that all human beings are equal. It also refers to pure intel-
ligence. 
So the mantra calls for the destruction of those forces that at-
tempt to harm the scholars or sources of intelligence. In other 
words, those who want to bomb our schools, centers of excel-
lence, intelligence departments or attempt to harm our intelligent 
masses should be destroyed just as we destroyed Osama Bin Laden 
and Talibanis.
Also, the mantra does not say that people should be destroyed 
specifically. It says that the very forces – including systems 
and processes – that attempt to thwart free intellectual pur-
suits should be destroyed because only through freedom of in-
trospection and enhancement of knowledge one can seek happi-
ness for self and society. 
Claim 2
“Hum log jis se dvesh karein aur jo hum se dvesh kare, us ko ham 


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

sher adi pashuon ke mukh mein daal dein.”
[Those whom we hate, and those who hate us, may we put them 
into mouth of lions and other flesh eating animals.]
 [Yajurveda 15/15 - Dayanand Interpretation]
See how Dayanand hated others.
Agniveer
First, fanatic minds should attempt to review complete picture in 
order to reduce their fanaticism. First of all, a follower of Vedas is 
not allowed to hate just anybody who disagrees with us. On the con-
trary, as per Yajurveda 40.6 and Yajurveda 40.7 one should view the entire 
living world as equivalent to himself  and guided by the same Supreme Force 
and never have any hatred.
As detailed in previous references, hatred is reserved ONLY for 
those who blatantly flout this guideline and cause damage to in-
nocents. In other words, ONLY terrorists deserve our hatred. 
There is not one mantra in entire Vedas that call for hatred on the 
basis of personal or theological beliefs.
So terrorists should be dealt with iron hand and be firmly de-
stroyed just as Osama Bin Laden was killed. Those who deal with 
terrorists softly bring havoc to society. This is what happen-
ing in India and Europe.
Once again, the definition of terrorist is clear – He is someone 
who kills innocents and harms public property. Very rightly, these 
are the most severe crimes in all civilized countries of the world – 
perfectly in lines of Vedas. 
In any case, Swami Dayanand never translated mantras in Hindi. 


Divine Vedas

He translated them in simple Sanskrit, which was then translated 
into Hindi by other scholars.
But in this, to ensure that no illogical meaning is derived, the 
original translation clearly specifies that this phrase refers ONLY 
to violent people. Refer Yajurveda Bhashyam Part 2 page 510 pub-
lished by Ramlal Kapoor Trust, which is based on original manu-
scripts. I reproduce the relevant portion:
“Ve rakshak hum log jis hinsak se virodh karein aur jo hinsak hum se 
virodh karein us ko in vyaghr adi pashuon ke much mein sthapan karein.”
[“May we be able to out in Lions’ mouth all those violent ones 
who revolt against our security personnel, and those violent ones 
whom security personnel are duty-bound to subjugate.”] 
    
So this mantra refers only to violent people and ONLY offi-
cial security personnel are allowed to carry such operations, not 
ordinary masses, as per Swami Dayanand. In other words, mantra 
says that Police and Military should protect people by destroying 
terrorists.
Claim 3
“Ved nindak ko kat dal, cheer dal, fad dal, jala de, phoonk de, 
bhasm kar de.” 
[“Tear apart and burn down to ashes anyone who criticizes Ve-
das.”]
[Atharvaveda 12/5/62] 


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

Agniveer
This is Taqiah (cheating legitimized in the name of religion) at its 
best.
The current context of the mantra starts at least from 12.5.47 
and continues till 73. Quoting selectively only shows malafide in-
tentions.
In reality, the mantra is dedicated to Brahmagavi. This refers to 
fundamental unchangeable laws of nature.
The entire chapter details how those who refuse to act as per 
unchangeable laws of nature, due to false ego, get destroyed. 
There is no mention whatsoever of  any person or group of  a 
person trying to kill anyone.
The mantras assert that those who try to silence the voice of 
intellect or truth get destroyed themselves. These mantras have 
been the foundation of all revolutionary movements that have 
ever happened to oppose the voice of tyranny. The chapter is an 
inspiration for all truth seekers. It elaborates how ultimately laws 
of nature destroy the greatest of power achieved through tyranny. 
It elaborates how wealth obtained through tyranny is actually a 
curse. It elaborates why the mightiest of rulers should be scared of 
harming a truth-seeking scholar.
Mantra 12.5.58 clearly calls this Brahmagavi ‘Aghnye.’ So it is in 
feminine gender and means ‘non-violent.’ So, it is clear that the 
mantras talk of wider laws of nature and not inciting into killing 
innocents because of difference in viewpoints. On the contrary, 
the mantras clearly assert that those who think of killing innocents 
get destroyed as per Laws of nature.


Divine Vedas

So yes, the mantra does say that Brahmagavi – or Fundamental 
Truths of Nature destroy the perpetrators of terror and hatred in 
most merciless manner.
Again, this belief forms the foundation of peaceful living and is 
rightly encouraged in all civilized societies of the world that believe 
in tolerance and co-existence.
Claim 4
“Vedanuyayi satyaveer purush nastikon ka nash karein”
[“Those who are followers of Vedas & brave truth-seekers 
should destroy atheists.”] 
[Atharvaveda 12/5/54]
 Agniveer
The mantra has only four words – Oshanti Samoshanti Brah-
mano Vajrah. None refers to atheists even remotely.
Some people may interpret the mantra which means “The 
Brahmagavi – Laws of Nature – are unchangeable and destroys 
them who do not comply with it.” This implies the destruction 
of Naastik. But here Naastik will not mean Atheists but those who 
attempt to harm scholars and peaceful people.
Etymologically, Naastik means one who does not believe in 
what exists. Those who refuse to see the evident truth and act 
haughtily – like dictators and tyrants – are also Naastiks. So one 
may interpret the mantra accordingly.
But this interpretation is not to be found in any word of the 
mantra which has been reproduced above. So even if someone 


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

used the word Naastik, obviously it has to be interpreted in right 
context.
Waking till late in the night is bad. Osama was a bad person. Osama was 
killed because he was bad. This does not mean that all who wake till late in 
the night should also be killed!
Only fanatic minds would deliberately try to give such logics.
Claim 5
Swami Dayanand Saraswati claims in Satyarth Prakash that one 
should not eat with English, Muslim, Chandals etc. Is this not prej-
udiced?
Swami Dayanand while criticizing PrarthnaSamaj & Brahmo-
Samaj writes, “Those who didn’t even try to keep their distance 
with Muslims, Christians, Chandals, etc. in eating practice; thought 
that our country will improve merely by breaking the barriers of 
caste discrimination and having meals together. But such practices 
instead of improving our nation’s situation are bound to denigrate 
it even further.” 
[Satyarth Prakesh, 11th Chapter]
“It’s unrighteous to dine along with Christians and Muslims no 
matter how noble-hearted.”
What is this if not simply foolish discrimination? 
Would you still like to continue being a part of such a samaj? 
Agniveer
Ideally, we should not be analyzing this because it does not refer to 
Vedas. Swami Dayanand was also a human, and there may be ty-


Divine Vedas

pographical errors in his writings. Therefore, instead of following 
him as Prophet, wise people should look at the overall theme of 
his message and act accordingly.
However, still we could not help analyze this because whatever 
has been presented is a blatant, shameless lie. This alone exposes 
the intent and designs of  those who wrote or promoted such 
hatred against Vedas. As per Quran, they are worst of the crea-
tures.
Hindus are very particular about food habits. This is not to do 
with religion but standards of hygiene. While the western world 
adopted practices like washing hands with soap after loo or clean-
ing hands several times before eating only after the advent of soap 
and wash basin technology, Hindus have been following hospi-
tal-standard hygiene practices since the inception of civilization. 
So, just as a doctor would not eat with a sweeper because of  
hygiene issues, same is true with Hindus.
Even today, in the west, people do not even clean their parts 
after loo with water properly. They simply rub with dry paper. In 
very few places, people actually wash hands with soap after loo. 
125 years ago, when Dettol was not there, people would simply rub 
off hands in dust or sprinkle some water. No conservative Hindu 
will take a bite without a bath. And before and after each meal, he 
would clean hands, face, and feet properly. Even within a family, 
people would not touch each other or eat with them unless they are 
clean. The utensils used for loo, bathing and cooking are different. 
Anything that touches one’s saliva or even lips is never eaten by 
others even after washing. It is simply thrown away.
In some cultures, exchange of saliva is considered a symbol 
of love. They even encourage eight people eating from the same 


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

plate. But a follower of scientific hygiene practices would desist 
from this, not because he hates other people, but because he can-
not medically justify the exchange of saliva, dirt within fingernails, 
nasal outpourings, etc. So the medical rule is that each should eat 
in a separate plate and after due hygiene care to prevent infections.
Further, as Swami Dayanand himself elaborates in next para, 
food habits vary as per geography and availability. Therefore, blind-
ly imitating anyone’s food habit without analyzing its relevance in 
the current situation is foolishness.
Nonetheless, contrary to fanatic claims, it was Arya Samajis 
who promoted Food Together as a concept to break caste barriers. 
Swami Shradhananda – direct disciple of Swami Dayanand – has 
organized perhaps the highest number of people ever in ‘Food to-
gether’ campaigns. But this ‘Food Together’ does not mean eating 
from the same plate. It means eating from different plates but at 
the same place after due hygiene practices. It also does not mean 
eating dry breads simply because English eat it even though there 
are more nutritious and tasty foods in India.
So all that Dayanand implied was eating with foreigners (from 
the same plate) who have not complied with hygiene practices 
like bath and cleaning hands properly after loo, or blindly imitat-
ing their food when we have more relevant and tastier options 
available. As a matter of  fact, the variety and quality of  good 
food available in India is comparable to no other place in the 
world. 
Regardless of all, the reference provided is fake. Satyarth 
Prakash does not even have any reference to Chandals here.
The actually text is as follows:


Divine Vedas

Angrez yavan antyajadi se bhi khane ka bhed nahi rakha. Un-
honein yahi samjha hoga ki khane peen aur jati-bhed todne se hum 
aur humara desh sudhar jayega… 
And here is the propagated fraud version:
Angrez musalman aur chandal adi se bhi khane peene ka antar 
nahi rakha. Unhonein yahi samajha hoga ki khane aur jat-pat ka 
bhed-bhav todne se hum aur hamara desh sudhar jayega….
Notice the most shameless fraud. To malign Swami 
Dayanand, Yavan has been replaced by Musalmaan, Antyaj by 
Chandal and Jaati-Bhed by ‘Jaat Paat ka Bhed Bhaav’.
This completely changes the meaning and intent of the author.
	
In very next paragraph, Swami Dayanand explains what he 
means by Jaati Bhed. He very clearly asserts that among hu-
mans, Jaati Bhed or classification is NOT birth based but as 
per nature, habits and actions. He also states that difference 
in food habits among humans is due to geographical and 
availability factors.
	
‘Antyaj’ means someone who is neither Brahmin, Kshatriya, 
Vaishya nor Shudra. In other words, only those who reject 
hygiene practices completely are Antyaj. For example, peo-
ple who do not bath, do occult practices with dead bodies 
and eat without care of hygiene, etc.
	
Yavan does not mean Muslim but someone who hates Hin-
dus. Or else, the same Swami would not have started his 
Lahore Arya Samaj from home of a Muslim while Swamiji 
was staying there (in a Muslim’s home)


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

	
English, of course, were rulers. So Swami Dayanand was 
very clear that trying to please those who aim to harm us 
or ridicule our ways of living by eating with them from one 
plate – after utter disregard of personal hygiene and vernac-
ular food- will do no good.
	
Immediately after this section, Swami Dayanand praises 
Englishmen in the next section of Satyarth Prakash for 
their loyalty to their culture and nation. He says that English 
do not even wear shoes of any place except England, and 
never gave up their own way of living even after 100 years 
of stay in India. That is why they are the leaders.
Thus, he was referring to standing by one’s noble standards in-
stead of imitating blindly in order to please others. What he wrote 
was with the spirit of nationalism. Dayanand was the first person 
to give a call to Swadeshi movement. Satyarth Prakash is the first 
text that talks of Swaraj and pride of Swadesh. That is why ev-
eryone regards Swami Dayanand as the grandfather of freedom 
and Swadeshi movement. So instead of  praising the founder 
of  modern freedom movement of  India in both political and 
social domain, fanatics feel pride in condemning the same! 
Fools rush where angels fear to tread!
Allegation 2: Vedic God is lecherous
Yajurveda 30.5 says that just as God created Brahmin for Vedas, 
He created lecherous for sex. So, just as Brahmin’s dharma is Ve-
das, Kshatriya’s dharma is protection, Vaishya’s dharma is busi-
ness, Shudra’s dharma is service, similarly dharma of a lecher is 
to promote vulgarity and adultery. So Vedas legitimize spread of 
vulgarity.


Divine Vedas

Yajurveda 30/5 mein likha hai ki logon ko vibhinn dharm aur 
vyavasayon mein Ishvar ne paida kiya. Jahan Ishvar ne ache vyava-
saya paida kiye vahin bure vyavasay bhi paida kiye. Usne jahan ved 
ke liye brahmann ko paida kiya, vahin samagam ke liye vyabhichari 
ko paida kiya.
Jis prakar Brahman ka dharm ved hai, Kshatriya ka Dharm niti 
ki Raksha, vaishya ka dharm vyapar, shudra ka dharm seva hai, isi 
prakar ek vyabhichari ka dharm vyabhichar hai. Duniya mein jis 
prakar har koi vyakti apna apna dharm faila raha hai, isi parka vo 
bhi apna dharm faila rahi hai, aur anya logon ke gumrah hone ka 
karan ban rahi hai.
Agniveer
The standard of allegation itself speaks volumes of the intellect of 
the creator of this argument.
I am not sure what the source of this translation is, but given 
that the modern fanatics have an obsession to condemn Swami 
Dayanand, let us review his translation.
To understand the context, let us review the previous mantra 
30.5 as well. It says that may the just king give everyone due reward and pun-
ishment as per his or her deeds in the same manner as Supreme Lord provides 
fruits of  actions justly to all living beings. The mantra is a reemphasis on 
Law of Karma that motivates us all to conduct noble actions and 
desist us from foolish deeds.
The next mantra states that:
May the Lord (of  the world as well as country) give due reward or pun-
ishment to various people – Brahmin for promotion of  wisdom, Kshatriya for 
right leadership, Vaishya for conduct of  business, Shudras for their selfless 


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

service, thief  for thriving in darkness, murderers for killing noble people, impo-
tent for sinful acts (one who conducts sinful acts is impotent as per Vedas as he 
or she is incapable of  producing anything worthwhile), terrorists for attacking 
innocent people, lechers for adultery, criminals for lowly acts.
The rest of the mantras in the chapter provide more such ex-
amples.
So it is very obvious that Vedas do not justify lechery. On the 
contrary, they demand the ruler to give everyone due reward or 
punishment. There is no reference of any creation or birth here. 
Further, the implication of the mantra is that one should be pun-
ished or rewarded only on the basis of actions. So even a person 
whom people consider to be a potential criminal but does not con-
duct any such act, in reality, does not deserve punishment. This is 
exactly what is followed in any civilized country.
Vedas even have mantras where they do Namaste to criminals 
and thieves. This does not mean Vedas support them. Because 
the same Vedas ask for destruction of criminals. But Vedas also 
want us to realize that one should hate the tendency of crime but 
not the soul of the criminal. Because the same soul has the 
capability to also reach salvation. Each soul is enlightened by 
same Supreme Lord. So while one should give due punishment to 
the culprit, that should not be with a feeling of hatred, but with a 
sense of duty for the wellbeing of all. This appropriate behavior 
with all is the Namaste that Vedas talk of. We all should realize that 
even the worst of criminals are also children of God like you and 
me. We should thus hate their crimes but not the person behind.
Even if we take the meaning as asserted by fanatic minds, one 
fails to find the flaws. As per the law of Karma, all get next birth 
as per their previous deeds. So the perverts and criminals of today 


Divine Vedas

who exhibit such tendencies from early childhood (like Akbar who 
beheaded an unconscious Hemu at the age of 12) also take birth as 
per laws of Supreme. Any theist would agree to this.
But where does the mantra says that one should strive to be a 
criminal or lecher? At best one can say that the mantra says that 
lechers are also given birth by Supreme. Nowhere does the man-
tra says that if one is born naked doing urination in bed, he or 
she should continue the same throughout life! On the contrary, to 
strive to be more and more mature is the mission of Vedas.
Perhaps, fanatics have a different agenda in life!
I openly challenge anyone to reproduce one evidence from Ve-
das that promote any form of violence over peace-lovers or vul-
garity or adultery or any other vice. 
Allegation 3: Vedic God is a fraud
There are several mantras in Vedas that called God a fraud (Maya-
vi). Swami Dayanand suggests that one should use fraud to defeat 
enemies. So Vedic God is a cheater.
Rigved mein anek jagah Indro ko Mayi (Dhokebaaz) kaha gaya 
hai. Udaharan ke taur par dekhiye Rigved 1:11:7
Mayabhirindra Mayinam tavam shushnamavatirah 
vidush te tasya medhirastesham sharavansyut tir
“Hey Indradev! Apni maya dwara aapne ‘shushan’ ko parajit 
jiya.  Jo budhiman apki is maya ko jante hain, unhein yash aur bal 
dekar vriddhi pradan karein.”
Is mantra ka bhav arth Dayanand is prakar karte hain.


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

“Buddhiman manushyon ko Ishvar Agya deta hai ki – Sam, 
dam, dand aur bhed ki yikti se dusht aur shatru janon ki nivritti 
karke chakravarti rajya ki yathavat unnati karni chahiye”
Pundit ji, sam, dam, dand aur bhed ko to aap jante hi hoge.
Sam: Bahlana fuslana
Dam: Dhan dekar chup karana
Dand: yadi bahalane fuslane se nahi mane to tadna karna
Bhed: Phoot dalna
Iske atirikt rigved 4/16/9 mein Dayanand ji ne bhi apne bhashya 
mein ‘Mayavan’ ka anuvad makkar liya hai. Pandit Jayadev Sharma 
ne apne Rigved Bhashya mein ‘Mayavan’ka anuvad kutil mayavi 
kiya hai. To siddh ho gaya ki Vedic Ishvar Mayi, arthat dhokebaz 
hai.
Agniveer
I am not sure of the source of first translation quoted by the fa-
natic brigade. But let us review the complete essence provided by 
Swami Dayanand. It states:
“Buddhiman manushyon ko Ishvar agya deta hai ki – sam, dam, 
dand aur bhed ki yukti se dusht aur shatru janon ki nivritti karke 
chakravarti rajya ke yathavat unnati karni chahiye tatha jisse is san-
sar mein kapati, chhali aur dusht purush vriddhi kop rapt nah on, 
vaise upay nirantar karne chahiye.”
So it is clear that the likes of Osama Bin Laden and perpe-
trators of genocide be destroyed through all means. To catch a 
criminal, the police are allowed to use fake decoys. All civilized 


Divine Vedas

societies allow the use of such means to destroy criminals and ter-
rorists. Hitler was captured in his bunker. Osama was eliminated 
in a night operation. Many criminals are caught by police through 
this method. If criminals be allowed to freely use fraud but we do 
not counter them with Bheda (tact), then soon the whole world 
will be Somalia!
Thankfully such stupid concepts do not appeal to most civilized 
nations of the world, and hence, the world is still a sensible place 
to live!
I challenge to provide one single reference where Vedas 
assert that Supreme Lord or a just king used fraud against 
innocent peaceful people. Not one single mantra would call for 
Fraud or cheating anyone simply because we disagree on certain 
points. But yes, Vedas are very clear that Osamas of the world be 
destroyed under any circumstance – without harming innocents – 
by hook or crook.
But to ensure that one does not misinterpret such mantras to 
justify crookedness in general, Vedas also clearly specify that all in-
nocent peaceful persons be protected at all costs. For example, the 
3rd mantra of same Sukta emphasizes that peaceful people be not 
only protected, but one should also put special efforts to increase 
their prosperity under all circumstances.
In brief, Vedas recommend exactly what is the ideal 
benchmark for any civilized country of  today.
The translation of Rigveda 4.16.9 as per Dayanand’s commen-
tary is available on Arya Samaj Jamnagar site. There is not even re-
motest reference to Supreme Lord being fraud or Makkar or Maya-
vi as alleged by the fanatics. I also checked five other publications 


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

but failed to find such an interpretation anywhere.
On the contrary, the Mantra asserts that the king should con-
stantly increase the prosperity of peaceful, noble people and de-
stroy the terrorists who commit fraud and hatred.
The controversial word here is Mayavanabrahma = Mayavan + 
Abrahma. So, instead of calling Brahma as Mayavan (fraud), the 
mantra calls Abrahma (or those devoid of intellect or opposite of 
Brahma) as fraud. The next word used for them is ‘Dasyu’ making 
the meaning very clear – Those who use fraud, hate intellect and 
perform terrorism should be destroyed.
Had fanatic minds known even the basics of Sandhi (rules of 
joining of words) in Hindi or Sanskrit, they would not have com-
mitted such a blunder. 
As per whatever scripture they believe in, they should plead 
apology for making such wily attacks on a scripture respected by 
millions as their foundation. 
Allegation 4: Vedas have selfish prayers
Vedas have nothing but selfish prayers. For example, Rigveda 
3.53.14 calls for looting people of other countries.
Kim te karnvanti keekateshu gavo nashiram duhre na tapantigharmam 
Aa no bhara paramagandasya vedo naichashakham maghavanrandhaya nah
Hey Indra, anarya deshon ke keekat vasiyon ke gauon ka tum-
he kya labh hai? Unka doodh som mein milakar tum pee nahin 
sakte. Un gauon ko yahan lao .Paramagand (Unke Raja), ki sampat-
ti hamare pas ajaye. Neech vansh valon ka dhan hamein do.
 [Rigveda 3/53/14]


Divine Vedas

Ye anaryon ke dhan aur sampatti ko lootne ki kaisi prarthna 
vedon mein ki gayi hai?
 ‘Keekat’ shabd ki yakhya karte hue Vyask Acharya ne apni pus-
tak ‘Nirukta’ mein likha hai,
“Keekata nam desho anaryanivasah” 
[Nirukta 6/32]
Arthat Keekat vah desh hai kahaan anaryon ka nivas hai. Is par 
tippani karte hue prasiddh vidvan Pandit Raja Ram Shastri ne likha 
hai – “Keekat anarya jati thi, jo Bihar mein kabhi rahti thi, jis ken 
am par Bihar ka nam Keekat hai.” 
[Nirukta, Page 321] 
Swami Dayanand ne Keekata ka arth karte hue likha hai 
 “Anarya desh mein rahne vale malechh”
To Pandit ji aap hi faisla kijiye ki ye dusron ka dhan lootne ki 
svarthi prarthna hai ya nahin. Maine keval ek udaharan diya, any-
atha aisi svarthi prarthnaon ke atirikt vedon mein aur kuchh hai 
bhi nahin.
Agniveer
Another shameless act of fraud! Perhaps we deserve more intel-
lectual haters! When it has been clearly established that ‘Anarya’ 
means terrorist, and the ‘allegators’ have themselves given refer-
ence from Nirukta and Swami Dayanand (I am not sure of later 
source), where is the confusion?
The mantra prays that Cows that give milk and sources of pros-
perity have no utility in places where terrorists thrive. They better 


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

be put to use for the prosperity of noble people.
In other words, if Al-Qaeda or Maoists have lots of weapons 
and wealth, these better come to peaceful people than stay with 
them. This means that the country should adopt policies that 
ensure that wealth goes to deserving people and not crimi-
nals and terrorists. It is on the basis of such mantra that all civi-
lized nations put strict control and security on the distribution of 
currency and critical resources.
Vedas also have prayers that call for reformation of terror-
ists into civilized beings. Refer Rigveda 6.22.10 that states that 
‘Daas’ should be made ‘Arya’. How could it be possible if  
these were to denote races or specific geographies?
Hence, the whole allegation is as baseless as chair without legs.
Allegation 5: Vedas imprison married women
Vedas provide no option of divorce for women and force them to 
tolerate the husband regardless of his deeds. It’s the Hindu Law 
that allows divorce rights to women.
Hindu Vivah Adhiniyam, 1955 ke anusar vishesh sthitiyon 
mein, yatha dusht svabhav, murkh, vyabhichari, namard hone par 
stree apne pati ko talak de sakti hai. Lekin Hindu dharm mein talaq 
ka koi pravadhan nahin hai. Pati chahe dusht swabhav vala, much, 
aur rogi ho tab bhi stree pati ko nahin chhod sakti. Use apne hi pati 
ke sath jeena aur marna hai.
Agniveer
If  divorce is so much against Hinduism, what made Hindus 
themselves adopt such a law for themselves? As per Hindu law, 


Divine Vedas

a woman need not seek permission from husband for a divorce. 
But as per Islamic Laws, women can opt only for Khula – request 
for a divorce. The husband may or may not accept it. His decision is 
final. Countries like Saudi Arab have stopped Khula since several 
years and hence women there have no options. There are rational 
voices within Islam who demand equal rights for women and Ag-
niveer is fully with them.
I challenge allegators to cite one single mantra from Vedas that 
asserts that woman cannot leave her husband under any circum-
stance.
On the contrary, there are countless references in the Vedic lit-
erature which demand freedom of women and equal rights. I have 
complied Vedic Mantras singing the glory of women in book ‘Be-
yond Flesh there lies a human being’.
Allegation 6: Vedas incite violence
Vedas call for the destruction of enemies and incite people to in-
dulge in warfare.
Vedon ke vachan bhi suniye:
 “Dharm ke dveshi shatruon ko nirantar jalaiye. Neechi dasha 
mein karke sookhe kaath ke samaan jalaiye.”
[Yajurveda 13/12]
Dayanand Rigveda 1/7/4 ke bhavarth mein likhte hain,
“Parameshvar ka yah svabhav hai ki yuddh karne vale dhar-
matma purushon par ani kripa karta hai aur alasiyon par nahin. Jo 
Manushya jitendriya vidyan alasya ko chhode hue bade bade yud-
dhon ko jeet ke praja ko nirantar palan karte hain, vo hi mahabha-


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

gya kop rapt ho ke sukhi rahate hain.”
Agniveer
Yet another foolish allegation! It has been made amply clear as 
what is Dharma and whom does Vedas extol to fight against. The 
Vedic message is that Ahimsa Paramo Dharmah – Non-violence 
is the greatest religion. You can refer second chapter of Upadesh 
Manjari by same Swami Dayanand Saraswati to know who is being 
quoted.
So those who are terrorists are enemies of  Dharma and 
deserve to be destroyed with an iron hand. And those who do 
not do so bring miseries to themselves and their nation.
If what USA did against Osama Bin Laden or what India did 
against Pakistan in Indo-Pak wars or what Shivaji did against Afzal 
Khan and Aurangzeb or NSG heroes did against terrorists in Taj 
Mumbai is indeed wrong, then yes Vedas do urge us to not sit idle 
and indulge in such wrongs. The only condition (as mentioned 
before) is that no innocent/ peaceful person should be made a 
victim.
But of course, fanatics like Al Qaeda would hate to accept that 
others shall also resist their terror attacks with iron hand!
Allegation 7: Vedas are manmade creations and not 
divine
Arya Samaj ka yah dava ki Ved Ishvar ke vani hai, ya ek ilhami 
granth hai, puri tarah se galat hai. Vedon ka adhyayan karne se pata 
chalta hai ki ve rishiyon dwara banaye gaye hain. Is vishaya ka pura 
vivaran karna yahan sambhav nahin hai, lekin main kuchh praman 
apke samne prastut karta hun -


Divine Vedas

Tatiriya Brahman 2/8/8/5 mein likha hai “buddhiman rishi 
mantron ke banana vale hain”
Iske atirikt is bat ke spasht praman milte hain ki samay samay 
par vedon ken aye naye mantra bante rahte hain aur ve pahle bane 
sangrahon mein milaye jate rahe hain (samhitaon atha vadon mein). 
Khud Vedon mein hi is bat ke praman milte hain –
Atha somasya parayati yuvabhyamindragni satomam janayami 
navyam
Arthat “Hey Indra aur Agni, tumhare sompradankal mein 
pathaniya ek naya stotr rachta hun.” 
[Rigveda 1/109/2]
Akaari te harivo parabrahm navyam dhiya
Arthat “Hey Hari vishishth Indra, hum tumhare liye naye stotra 
banate hain.”
[Rigveda 4/16/21]
Ye cha poorva rashayo ye cha nootna indra brahmani janayanta viprah
Arthat “Hey Indradev, pracheen evam naveen rishiyon dwara 
rache gaye stotron se stutya hokar apne jis prakar unka kalyan, 
vaise hi hum stotron se stotaon ka mitravat kalian karein.”
[Rigveda7/22/9]
Spasht hai in stotron va mantron ke rachayita sadharan manushya 
thae, jinhone poorvajon dvara rache mantron ke kho jane par ya 
unke aprabhavkari siddh ho jane par ya unhein parishkrit karne ya 
unhein parishkrit karne ya apni nayi rachna rachne ke uddeshya se 
samay samay par naye mantra rache. 


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

Isliye Ved sarvagya Paramatma ki rachna nahin siddh hote.
Agniveer
It hardly matters if someone believes Vedas to be divine or not. 
Because Vedic God will neither put him in Hell for blasphemy nor 
promise a paradise full of harlots for obedience. The Vedic Law 
of Karma is much more robust, comprehensive, just and rigorous.
Nonetheless, if at all any text can claim divinity; Vedas undoubt-
edly have the most reasonable case. The bulk of the allegations on 
Vedas being manmade have been comprehensively dealt in previ-
ous section of the book. So here we are not going to do into any 
technical detail to refute the allegation. But one thing is clear that 
mantras quoted from Vedas to prove them being manmade show 
foolishness of the author of this allegation. 
The mantras state that scholars create new things for the ben-
efit of people. What is so absurd about it? Which mantra does 
say that scholars actually construct new Vedic mantras? Resnick 
Halliday is a famous Physics book. Now we have its 8th edition 
perhaps which improves upon earlier editions. So does it means 
new mantras of Vedas are being created?
Such problematic thinking obstacles can emerge in only those minds which 
consider so-called divine texts as objects of  blind belief  and not those who 
believe in reason and intellect.
It seems from the quality of allegations as if the allegation-mak-
er is forced to make such allegations at gun-point!


Divine Vedas

Allegation 8: Vedas promote birth-based caste dis-
crimination
Vedas promote caste discrimination through Purush Sukta. Fur-
ther Manu Smriti adds to more hatred against lower castes.
Vishv ke dharmon mein Hindu hi ek aisa dharm hai jis mein 
samajik  bhed bhav ke beej shuru se hi vidyaman rahe hain. Hindu 
dharma samajik bhed-bhav ko na keval dharm dwara anumodit 
karta hai, balki is dharm ka prarambh hi bhed bhav ke path se hota 
hai. Hindu dharm ne shuru se hi manav-manav ke beech bhed 
kiya hai. Rigveda ke purush sookt ne spasht kaha hai ki “braahman 
paramatma ke much se, Kshatriya uski bhujaon se, vaishya us ke ur 
se tatha shudra us ke pairon se paida hue.”
Brahmano asya mukhamaseed baahu raajanyah kartah 
Ooorootadasya yad vaishyah padmaam shoodro ajaayata 
[Rigveda 10/90/12]
Agniveer
If there is one text in the world that talks of pure meritocracy, it 
is the Vedas. But those on gun-point have no option but to keep 
abusing Vedas regardless of facts.
I assert there is not even remotest reference to the caste sys-
tem in Purush Sukta. The current Manu Smriti is an adulterated 
literature. (To know what Holy Vedas and original Manu Smriti say 
about Caste System, I suggest read book ‘Dalits of Hinduism’. All 
allegations on caste system have been comprehensively addressed 
in the book.)
On the contrary, if we look at available translations of scrip-


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

tures like Bible and Quran, they smell of racism and hatred against 
non-believers. They call for special tax on non-believers and con-
demn them to eternal Hell. Many enlightened Christians and Mus-
lims are thus attempting to reinterpret these texts but they are 
termed as apostates by the fanatics. Sir Syed Ahmad Khan, found-
er of Aligarh Muslim University, was decreed a fatwa of death 
for his liberal views on these issues. Galileo was imprisoned for 
proving that earth is round and sun does not move around earth!
Allegation 9: Vedas talk of  miracles
Vedas contain several stories of miracles that do not make any 
sense.
Srishti ke aarambh mein manushyon ke javaan java tapak jane ke 
atirikt kaeen aur chamatkaarik ghatanaon ka vivaran Vedon mein 
milta hai. Udaaharan ke liye dekhiye:
 
1. Rigveda 3/33/5 mein vishvamitra jee ne mantra padh kar satulaj 
aur byaas nadiyon ko khada kar diya tha. Suniye - 
Ramadhvam me vachase somyaaya rataavareerup muhoortsmevaih
Par sindhumachha bahartee maneeshaavashyurahve kushikasya sunooh
Arthat, “Hey jalavati nadiyon, aap hamare namr aur madhur 
vachanon ko sunkar apni gati ko ek kshan ke liyeviram de dein. 
Hum Kushak putr apni raksha ke liye mahatee stutiyon dwara aap 
nadiyon ka bhalee prakaar sammaan karte hain.”
Nirukt 2/24 se 26 mein is mantra ka spasht arth bataya gaya 
hai. Ab Rigveda ke is mantra mein apke liye do prashn hain. Yahan 
Vishvamitra sedhe seedhe nadiyon ko sambodhit kar rahe hain, na-


Divine Vedas

diyon se baat kar rahe hain. Is ko aap kya kahenge? Aur keval rishi 
vishvamitra ke mantra japane se hi ve nadiyan kaise thahar gayeen?
2. Rigveda 4/19/9 ke anusar deemak dwara khaye gaye kunvari 
ke bête ko indra ne fir se jeevit kiya aur sare angon ko ikattha kar 
diya.
Vamreebhih putram agrubvo adaanam niveshanaad dhariv aa jabharth 
Vaya andho ajhyad ahim aadadaano nir bhood ukhachhit sama aranta 
parva
Arthat, “Hey Indradev, aapne deemakon dwara bhakyamaan 
agru ke putra ko unke sthaan se baahar nikala. Bahar nikale jate sa-
may andhe agru putra neaahi (sarp) ko bhalee prakar dekha. Uske 
baad cheentiyon dwara kate gaye angon ko aapne (indradev ne) 
sanyukt kiya (joda). 
3. Rigveda 4/18/2 mein vaamdev rishi ne mnaa ke pet mein se 
Indradev se baat ki- 
Naaham ato nir ayaa durgahaitat tirashchataa paarshvaan nir gamaani 
bahooni mein akrtaa kartvaani yudhyai tavaen parchhai
Arthat vaamdev kahate hain, “Hum is yonimarg dwara nahin 
nirgat honge. Yah marg atyant durgam hai. Hum bagal ke marg se 
niklenge. Anyon ke dwara karne yogya anekon karya humein karne 
hain. Humein ek sath yuddh karna hai, tatha ek sath vad-vivad 
karna hai.”
4. AtharvaVeda 4/5/6-7 Chor ke liye aise mantra hain jinko 
japne se gharke sare sadasya so jate hain aur chor bade aram se 
chori kar sakta hai.
Svaptu Mata swaptu Pita swaptu kshva svaptu vishpatih  
Swapantvasyai Jnaatayah swa swapatvayamabhito janah


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

Swan swapnaabhikaranen sarvam nishvaapayaa janam 
Otsooryamanyaantsvaapayaavyoosham Jaagritaadahamindra ivaarishto 
akshitah
Arthat “Mnaa so jaye, pita so jaye, kutta so jaye, ghar ka swami 
so jaye, sabhi baandhav evam parivar ke sab log so jayein | Hey 
swapna ke adhisthata dev, swapna ke sadhanon dwara aap samast 
logon ko sula dein tatha anya logon ko suryodaya tak nidrit ra-
khein. Is prakar sabke so jane par hum indra ke saman, ahinsit 
tatha kshaya rahit hokar pratah kaal tak jagte rahenge.”
Agniveer
I now really wonder that perhaps fear of Hell and lure of Heaven 
of harlots is too fantastic for fanatic minds to retain any element 
of reason.
Suddenly the fanatics have stopped referring to Dayanand and 
have started giving foolish interpretations. Of course, there can 
be alternate meanings as well, but you would have to work really 
hard to lower your intellect in order to discover stupid miracles in a 
scientific text like Vedas.
Rigveda 3/33/5
Just as wide rivers full of water reach their goal by meeting with 
ocean, similarly intellectual pursuits bring peace and happiness to 
those willing to be followers of intelligence.
Rigveda 4/19/9
Just as rivers emerging from mountains acquire the lands of the 
plains, similarly the king should snatch away property rights of a 
son who does not believe in charity. In all situations, king should 


Divine Vedas

work for prosperity of the subject. 
Rigveda 4/18/2
O Lord, may I not come through the way of womb which is 
very painful. May I do such actions that I need not take this path 
again and I get free from cycle of death and birth. I shall put my 
best efforts for this.
Atharvaveda 4/5/6-7
Which fool said that this contains a mantra to recite so that 
thieves sleep? It simply states that everyone should have a peaceful 
sleep in night. However, the guard should keep vigil till others get 
awake. 
This mantra says that guards should not sleep in night and sol-
diers at borders with fanatic country should also keep vigil.
Allegation 10: Vedas were given improperly by God
When mantras of Vedas overlap, there was no need to give four 
Vedas to four different Rishis. This shows Vedas are fake.
Yadi agni rishi ko, aap ke anusar, Ishvar ne Rigveda diya to Ad-
itya rishi ko Samaveda kyon diya? Kya Rigveda mein koi kami rah 
gayi thi jo Samaveda dena pada? Samaveda to Rigveda Mandal 9 
ki poori nakal hai. Sivay 15 mantron ke jo naye hain, Samaveda 
ke 1800 mantra Rigveda  mein pahle se hain. Ye 15 mantron bhi 
Agni ko kyon nahin diye? Yadi ye kaha jaye ki Samaveda ke mantra 
gaane ke liye alag kiye gaye hain to Rigveda mein likha ja sakta tha 
ki Mandal 9 ko ga liya karo. Iske atirikt Yajurveda aur Atharvaveda 
bhi vyarth hain jin mein ek bada hissa Rigveda seliye gaya hai. Kya 
Agni rishi ko Rigveda dete samay aapke Ishvar bhool gaye the ki 


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

use Samaveda, Yajurveda aur Atharvaveda bhidena hai?
Agniveer
The four Vedas have four different themes. 
	
Rigveda is analytical and focuses on knowledge. 
	
Yajurveda is practical and focuses on actions. 
	
Samaveda is devotional and focuses on emotional intelli-
gence.
	
Atharvaveda is implementation-oriented. 
All four require different faculties and hence provided to dif-
ferent Rishis. Overlap of mantras does not mean anything. The 
same sentence indifferent contexts bring out different meanings. 
Further with different tones, meaning changes completely.
Only fools will claim that all duplicate sentences and equations from any 
text book be removed!
Allegation 11: Vedas talk of  stupid methods of  birth
Vedas talk of crazy method by which Agastya and Vasishtha were 
born.
Rigveda main ata hai ki mitra aur varun devata Urvashi naamak 
apsara ko dekh kar kampidit hue. Un ka veerya skhalit ho gaya, jise 
unhonein yajna kalash mein daal diya. Usi kalash se Agastya aur 
Vasishth utpann huye:
Utaasi maitravaruno vasishdorvashya brahman manaso adhi jatah      
Darapsam sakannam brahmana vishve devah pushkare tavaadadant 


Divine Vedas

Sa paraket ubhayasya paravidvan sahradan utva sadanah                 
Yamen tatam paridhim vayishyannapsarasah pari jajne vasishthah
Satre hu Jaatavishita namobhih kumbhe retah sishishatuh samanam     
Tato hey man udiyaya madhyat jatam rashimahurvasishtham
[Rigveda 7/33/11-13]
 “Hey Vasishtha, tum mitra aur varun ke putra ho. Hey Braah-
man, tum Urvashi ke man se utpann ho. Us samay mitra aur varun 
ka veerya skhalan hua tha. Vishvadevagan ne daivya stotra dwara 
pushkar ke beech tumhein dhaaran kiya tha. Yajna mein dikshit mi-
tra aur varun ne stuti dwara prarthit hokar kumbh ke beech eksath 
hi (raet) veerya skhalan kiya tha. Anantar maan (Agastya) utpann 
hue. Log kahte hain ki rishi vasishth usi kumbh se janme the.”
Agniveer
Not again! Another bogus claim! When Vedas contain no history, 
it is in vain to discover historical persons in Vedas. By that logic, 
Nayak in Vedas refer to Zakir Naik and Rahman in Quran refers 
to Dayanand!
Further, what happened to love for translation by Swami 
Dayanand? One can refer his translation and see that
Vasishtha refers to scholar
Mitra-Varun to bipolar forces (in this case Prana and Udana or 
exhalation and inhalation)
Urvashi – special knowledge
The first mantra states that those who attempt to control their 
breathing through Pranayam and pursue knowledge with full en-


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

thusiasm obtain extreme bliss.
Second mantra states that first birth happens through parents. 
But one who takes second birth through education achieves true 
bliss and glory.
Now some fanatics may allege that I have provided wrong an-
swers. And in reality, some angel has told them that actual mean-
ings of these verses are indeed very bad. But how does that matter, 
when I state that I refuse to believe in something against intellect? 
When I assert that any wrong interpretation deserves outright re-
jection, where is the reason for hatred apart from a general hatred 
against non-believers?
For example, in Agniveer we are raising voice to thrash all those 
translations and interpretations of Vedas that defend caste system 
etc. as trash. Thus, those who still are hell-bent on denigrating Ve-
das even after such a rational stand of Agniveer are those:
	
who are fanatic intolerant creatures
	
who have a general hatred against non-believers
	
who know that their cult prohibits apostasy but welcomes 
conversions
	
who want to justify their own vices in name of some scrip-
ture or prophet
Allegation 12: Vedas contain Polytheism
There is no one omnipresent God in Vedas. There are many God 
and Goddesses in Vedas. That means Vedas contain polytheism. 


Divine Vedas

Agniveer
Vedas contain worship of one and only one Paramatma. Logics 
given by believers of this myth are as follows:
Logic 1: Vedas contain names of  many Gods and Goddesses.
Refutation: Paramatma is omnipotent and limited human mind 
cannot comprehend all attributes of Paramatma at the same time. 
So Vedas contain prayers to same one Paramatma. Different man-
tras, however, focus on different attributes of Paramatma and 
hence use different adjectives for Paramatma.
Even Vedas claim that there is only one Ishwar and not more 
than that.
Logic 2: Vedic suktas have names of  Devatas associated with them. These 
are the various Gods and Goddesses.
Refutation: The name of Devata associated with Vedic mantras 
refers to the subject of that particular Sukta. That has nothing to 
do with various Gods and Goddesses in the conventional sense. 
There are 33 devatas referred in Vedic texts, but this is also clear-
ly elucidated that these refer to inanimate objects and not worth 
being worshipped. Vedas clearly proclaim that Paramatma is One, 
and He alone is to be worshipped.
The whole confusion comes because ignorant assume Deva-
ta to be a synonym of Paramatma. Devata means something or 
someone that gives, enlightens or illuminates. So in many contexts, 
Paramatma is also Devata. But so are soul/ Atman and all other 
animate and inanimate objects which satisfy this meaning of Deva-
ta. Thus, parents, teacher, scholars, spouse are also devatas. Deva-
tas deserve respect because they give us selfless benefits.


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

But Devata is not the goal of Worship, only Paramatma is, and 
Vedas are extremely clear on this. To know 100+ answers on Vedic 
God and life purpose, I recommend reading the book ‘Questions 
only Hinduism can answer.’
Allegation 13: Vedas by Western scholars are far 
better
Vedas can be interpreted by Western scholars better because they 
are more scientific.
Agniveer
To be eligible to interpret Vedas, one has to qualify certain mini-
mum basic requirements.
Vedas are for every human being. But to be able to decipher 
meanings of Vedic mantras in scholarly manner, several require-
ments are must:
	
Understanding of roots of Vedic words, grammar and us-
ages.
	
A scientific and rational temper of mind.
	
And most importantly, being a yogi.
Just as you do not get admitted to IIT or IIM without passing 
the entrance test, one cannot be eligible to comment on Vedas 
unless he or she is a yogi.
In other words, one cannot be taken seriously on Vedic matters 
if he or she is a drunkard, meat-eater, prone to anger, egoist, frus-
trated, hedonist, etc. Simply put he or she has to be a yogi to be a 
Rishi (one who can understand the true meaning of Vedas).


Divine Vedas

Thus, Vedas is not a text which every Tom, Dick or Harry can 
start commenting upon merely by studying some basic conven-
tional Sanskrit grammar and reading few Sanskrit books. The man-
tras of  Vedas are to be unlocked through the process of  deep meditation and 
contemplation. More one progresses on yogic path, more clearly is he 
or she able to understand Vedas. But for a non-yogi with the stone 
mind, only stones can be obtained from Vedas.
Most western scholars, based upon their PhDs from universi-
ties based on and equipped for non-Vedic studies start assuming 
that they have a preferential superiority over analyzing Vedas. They 
simply ignore the eligibility conditions for entering into the Vedic 
arena.
This is not a blanket statement against all foreigners, but simply 
on the basis of works of most prominent Western Indologists. 
This is also not to say that these problems are not infecting those 
native of India. In fact, the problem is much more severe because 
of their inferiority complex coupled with prejudiced mindsets – 
likes of Romila Thapar, DN Jha, etc. are ready examples.
Thus, all those who claim to have a superior claim on Vedas be-
cause of their so-called scientific studies need to be analyzed more 
in detail. People who turn out to be non-yogis (As per Patanjali 
Yoga Sutra) have to reject out rightly.               
Allegation 14: Vedas contain History
Vedas contain History because Vedas have words like Pururuva, 
Ram, Tutvasu. There is also a phrase called ‘Rigvedic History’.
Agniveer
This is a masterstroke of Hinduism haters. Because Hindu haters 


Vedas Promote Hate and Crime

know that if Hindus accept imagining history in Vedas then it will 
rob Hindu dharma of its true identity and will make Hinduism 
even more vulnerable to attacks of conversion agents.
Accepting history in Vedas will be a grave mistake.  Because if 
Vedas contain history, then all other texts, including new Purans 
at once become fraud texts without any further analysis. The list 
includes:
	
New Puranas (Shiv, Vishnu, Bhagvat, etc.)
	
Upanishads
	
Brahmans
	
Darshans (Yoga, Nyaya, Meemansa, Vedaant, etc.)
	
Ramayan
	
Mahabharat
	
Smritis: Manu etc.
and all other texts of ancient times which we associate with 
Hindu culture or knowledge.
Because each of them proclaims clearly that Vedas/ Shruti are 
first knowledge to mankind, given at the beginning of creation and 
hence self-sufficient proofs. This is one common theme that unites 
all the various factions of so-called Hinduism.
The phrase ‘Rigvedic History’ is as paradoxing as “dark sun” 
– Just as the sun cannot be dark, similarly, Vedas do not have any 
history.
To say that Vedas contain history because of words like Pururu-


Divine Vedas

va, Ram, Tutvasu is like saying Bhagvad Puran and poems of Soor-
das are stories of BJP because it contains mention of Lal Krishna 
Advani, Murli Manohar, Sushma Swaraj, Arun Jaitley, Atal, etc.
It’s like saying the history of freedom struggle is about ances-
tors of SushmaSwaraj!
Half-baked self-proclaimed intellectuals inspired by Max Muller 
et al continue their spree to discover various crazy people in Vedas. 
So far the list contains Christ, Muhammad, Kabeer, Ram, Krishna, 
etc.
Conclusion
In reality, there is not a single evidence so far that Vedas have an-
ything except rationality, justice, morality and inspiring lessons for 
entire humankind. Vedas belong to entire humanity and hence all 
rational minds should explore Vedas to seek amazing lessons for 
life instead of hating them due to a general hatred against non-be-
lievers. Hatred leads to miseries. May we all revive the spirit of 
Vedas in entire humanity and strengthen our foundations.
I request fanatic minds to analyze Vedas from its true con-
text. Only then shall the mantras make sense to them. Else if they 
search a place in London with a map of New York, then failure 
and wastage of time and energy would be the only outcome.
Om Shantih Shantih Shantih



Soma and Alcohol in Vedas

his chapter contains an analysis of the claim that Vedas 
talk about alcoholism or intoxication by use of some nar-
cotic called Soma. The growing popularity of Vedas in re-
cent months seems to be the catalyst for a sudden surge in this 
allegation. Agniveer has received a challenge to explain his stand 
on this issue. So, let’s explore the truth on Soma in Vedas and si-
lence Vedas haters. 
Allegation 1: All Vedic Rishis were addicts of  Soma
All leading scholars have asserted that Vedas speak of merits of 
consuming Soma or intoxicants. All Vedic Rishis were addicts of 
Soma.


Divine Vedas

Agniveer
The above statement is not at all an allegation. On the contrary, 
it’s a fact. And it’s a fact that makes me admire Vedas so much. It’s 
a fact that has compelled renowned intellectuals of the world to 
admire Vedas in awe. It’s a fact that drives us to put our best efforts 
to spread the culture of Soma consumption across the world.
What needs to be understood is that this intoxication of Soma 
is no ordinary intoxication. It is that intoxication which inspires 
noble souls to relentlessly pursue the vision of universal well-being 
and even to face harshest of miseries with a peaceful smile.
Multiple meanings of  Soma
Soma has multiple meanings. However, the core essence is that 
Soma refers to something that produces happiness, peace, 
relaxation and enthusiasm. Probably that is why in a later era, 
its usage as a synonym of alcohol or intoxicant got popular. After 
all, a hungry dog sees only meat in everybody! Same goes for per-
verted beings.
Alternate meanings of  Soma 
Let us now review some alternate meanings of Soma:
	
Soma refers to Moon because moonlight provides 
peace. That is why Mo(o)nday is Somvaar. Now, is Moon 
a wine-shop that it is so called (assuming that Soma means 
alcohol or narcotic)?
	
A peaceful and amicable person is called Saumya. Now 
if Soma means an intoxicant, then why people across differ-
ent parts of India name their children Saumya? One is in-


Soma and Alchohol in Vedas

vited to read any dictionary to know what ‘Saumya’ means. 
Refer dictionaries of Marathi, Gujarati, Kannada, Bengali, 
Malayalam etc. and you would find scores of words derived 
from Soma that mean friendliness.
	
The famous temple of  Gujarat, that was plundered by 
a butcher called Mahmud Ghazni, is called Somnath. 
If Soma means intoxicant, then perhaps the temple should 
have allowed it! But as referred earlier, it means a gentle lord 
or lord of the moon.
	
Soma also refers to certain medicines that promote 
longevity and act as a relaxant. For example, Giloya 
which is very useful in heart diseases and provides a cooling 
effect on the body.
Primary meaning of  Soma in Vedas
In Vedas however, in most places, Soma refers to God or Ishwar 
focusing on those qualities of  Ishwar that provides us with peace, bliss, satis-
faction and global vision. In few places especially in Atharvaveda, it has 
come to mean certain medicines. But nowhere can it be termed 
to mean a mundane intoxicant.
Rigveda 1/91/22 
“O Soma, You alone create the medicines that heal us. You 
alone create the water that quenches our thirst. You alone create 
all moving objects, sense organs, and living beings and also give us 
this life. You have provided expanse to this universe, and you alone 
enlighten the world to eradicate darkness.”
Only a fool would claim that Soma refers to any intoxicant or 
alcohol when Soma is said to be the creator of the universe, stars, 


Divine Vedas

life, objects, etc. Very clearly Soma refers to the Supreme Lord – 
the Ishwar or God.
And hence, Soma intoxication implies entrenching oneself  
completely in devotion to that Supreme Lord. 
	
To see Him everywhere and guide oneself solely by His 
inspiration is Soma intoxication. 
	
To follow only the inner voice that communicates with us 
every moment and rejecting all worldly and sensory pres-
sures is Soma intoxication. 
	
To rise completely above the old habits, past tendencies, 
and false ego is Soma intoxication. 
	
To surrender totally to Him is Soma intoxication.
Rough analogy would be with Superconductivity. Once a mate-
rial is taken below a certain threshold temperature, suddenly resis-
tance becomes zero. Similarly, when we have practiced following 
our inner voice sufficiently, suddenly the world seems different – 
so enlightening, so refreshing, so blissful and so blessed by Him 
everywhere. This stage of  heightened association with Ishwar is the stage of  
Soma intoxication that Vedas describe in detail.
And yes, it is only when Rishis have reached this stage that they 
get Vedic inspirations and are able to comprehend the meaning 
of Vedic mantras. It is then that the Rishis ‘see’ the Vedic mantras 
through the eyes of intellect. In fact, one is called Rishi only after 
she or he has reached this enlightening stage of Soma intoxication.
Ayurveda very clearly defines what an intoxicant is:


Soma and Alchohol in Vedas

Sharngadhar 4/21
A substance that destroys intellect is called an intoxicant.
To understand Soma better and see why it cannot refer to any 
material/mundane chemical even closely related to alcohol, intox-
ication or narcotics; let us review a few more mantras on Soma.
Rigveda 9/24/7
Soma is not only pure in it but also purifies everything else. 
Soma is extremely sweet and promotes noble qualities. It destroys 
sinful tendencies.
Even a dumb person can understand that Soma refers to some-
thing intellectual and spiritual and not something as disgusting as 
alcohol or narcotics.
Rigveda 9/37/36
O Soma, purify us from everywhere. Enter us with excitement 
and strengthen our speech. Inculcate a sharp intellect within us.
Thus, while alcohol or narcotics taking is to dumb the mind, 
Rishis yearn for Soma because it sharpens the mind and gears 
them into noble actions.
Rigveda 9/108/3
O Soma, You purify everything. You are the best source of en-
lightenment. You lead us towards immortality.
Should I say more!


Divine Vedas

Atharvaveda 14/1/3
Ordinary people consider that as Soma, which is used as med-
icine. But the enlightened ones seek the Soma of intellect which 
materialistic minds cannot even comprehend!
Pavamana Parva of  Samaveda Purvarchika 
If we review the Pavamana Parva of Samaveda Purvarchika, we 
can get a wider glimpse of the Vedic Soma.
It is described as something that brings enthusiasm, tolerance 
and valor.
1.2: O Soma, purify me.
1.3: O Soma, you are the source of vitality and bliss.
1.4: O Soma, your intoxication is worth imbibing.
6.5: O Soma, you give birth to our intellect.
6.8: Use Soma to produce intellect.
9.2: Soma provides us with intelligence.
7.12: Intelligence seeks Soma.
9.6: Soma enhances intellect.
Thus, while Soma produces intoxication, this intoxication actu-
ally strengthens our intellect and reduces dumbness.
Pavamana Parva 2.5 describes Soma as Chetan or living. Thus, 
Soma is not something inert. It is a living force that enhances intel-
lect. It is the Supreme Lord!


Soma and Alchohol in Vedas

How can thus a sensible person relate it with a mundane narcotic?
Adjectives of  Soma
This Parva of Samaveda provides some more adjectives of Soma:
3.2: One who sees everything actively (Vicharshani)
5.9: Extremely intelligent (Vipra)
5.9: Best of the scholars (Angirastamah)
9.1: Expert (Vichakshanah)
8.4: Knows self (Swarvidah)
2.10: Sees everything clearly (Kavi)
3.6: Knows his duties perfectly (Kratuvit)
11.1: An intoxication that inspires us to perform duties perfect-
ly (Kratuvittamo Madah)
8.4: One who knows the path clearly (Gatuvittamah)
1.7: Adept (Daksha)
1.8: Source of adeptness (Dakshasadhana)
4.2: Adeptness that provides happiness (Daksham Mayobhu-
vam)
5.11: Provides strength (Vajasatam)
6.7: Protector of the world (Bhuvanasya Gopaa)
If this be not enough, the Parva also states Soma to be:


Divine Vedas

5.1: One seated on the home of immortality
6.3: One who inspires noble minds towards fundamental truth 
(Rita)
6.2: Speaks to us (Inner voice)
2.3: Destroys hatred
4.12: Inspires towards friendship and solidarity
4.14: Destroys meanness and violence
10.11: Destroys corrupt mindset
8.4: Devoid of sins
6.6: Provides whatever is worth obtaining
6.1: Greatest donor
7.4: Carrier of life force
4.3: Desired by non-violent minds
This is merely a small sampler from the copious references from 
Vedas that very clearly establish Soma as the pure blissful Ishwar 
and its intoxication as a complete surrender to the Supreme Lord.
Vedas and intoxication
Almost every other mantra of Vedas yearns for enhancement of 
intellect/ health and repulsion towards all those tendencies and 
articles that destroy these. Be it the Gayatri Mantra or the Mrityun-
jaya, all exemplify this.
To conclude, let me provide a few references from Vedas that 


Soma and Alchohol in Vedas

condemn intoxication.
Rigveda 10/5/6 
One becomes sinful if he or she crosses even one of the seven 
restraints. Yaskacharya defines these seven sins in his Nirukta as 
Theft, Adultery, Murder of a noble person, Abortion, Dishonesty, 
Repeating misdeeds and consumption of alcohol.
Rigveda 8/2/12
Those who consume intoxicants lose their intellect, talk rub-
bish, get naked and fight with each other.
Rigveda 7/86/6 
An action performed as per the inner voice does not lead to 
sins. Dumb arrogance against inner voice, however, is a source of 
frustration and miseries in the same manner as intoxication and 
gambling destroy us. Ishwar inspires those with noble, elevated 
thoughts towards progress and propels down those who decide to 
think lowly. Lowly acts performed even in dreams cause decline.
Atharvaveda 6/70/1
Weak minds are attracted towards meat, alcohol, sensuality and 
womanizing. But O non-violent mind, you focus your mind to-
wards the world in the same manner as a mother cares for her 
child.
In summary, intoxication is considered as a recipe for 
weakness, failure, and destruction!


Divine Vedas

Allegation 2: Vivekananda said that Vedas justified 
alcoholism
Even Vivekananda has asserted that Vedas justified alcoholism. 
“The old gods were found to be incongruous — these boisterous, 
fighting, drinking, beef-eating gods of the ancients — whose de-
light was in the smell of burning flesh and libations of strong liq-
uor. Sometimes Indra drank so much that he fell upon the ground 
and talked unintelligibly. These gods could no longer be tolerated.” 
(Search ‘Maya and the evolution of the conception of God’ on the 
internet for the source of this allegation.)
Agniveer
If this is indeed written by Swami Vivekananda, it only shows that 
he had not studied Vedas properly, and his thoughts on Vedas were 
influenced by western indologists. It also shows that every human 
being, how so much great may have imperfections. So, one should 
not accept anyone blindly and instead apply her own analytical fac-
ulty to discover the truth.
While I respect Swami Vivekananda as a charismatic personali-
ty, powerful orator and impressive writer on neo-Vedanta, he is not 
an authority in matters of Vedas. It seems that Swami Vivekananda 
due to his lack of study of Vedas coupled with a bias towards meat 
made this statement if at all he stated so.
Beef and alcohol have no place in Vedic dharma. Instead of 
quoting personal views of Swami Vivekananda or any person for 
that matter, one should quote from Vedas to refute the stand that 
has been taken by us as well as all Sages from the inception of 
Vedas till date.


Soma and Alchohol in Vedas

By the way, another interesting point to think about is that if 
indeed Vedas recommend beef and alcohol, why have been the 
traditional Vedic Brahmins farthest from these vices for ages? All 
allegations on beef and animal sacrifice in Vedas have been de-
bunked in my book ‘A Hindu’s fight for Mother Cow’. 
Allegation 3: As per Radhakrishnan Vedic rishis 
used to drink alcohol
Vedic scholars like Radhakrishnan and K M Munshi – founder of 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhawan – have also stated that Vedic rishis used 
to drink alcohol and eat beef.
Agniveer
I am not sure about Dr. Radhakrishnan, but I agree that K M 
Munshi held such views that he expressed in his novel Lopamudra. 
I would only say that many works of K M Munshi have been de-
rogatory to Hindu ancient heritage and Hindu role models as well 
as are completely baseless. Several of his novels are full of vulgar-
ity. His series on Krishna was extremely offensive. Same goes for 
Lopamudra. He was a political person, and it is unfortunate that he 
treaded into an area that he shouldn’t have unless he had the right 
competence. The works of Bharati Vidya Bhawan in this area have 
been most damaging and misleading. 
But regardless of views of personalities how so much famous or 
influential – Dr. Radhakrishnan, KM Munshi, Swami Vivekananda 
or whosoever – I would seek specific and logical references from 
Vedas instead of empty quotes.


Divine Vedas

Allegation 4: Vedic Mantras on Soma are useless 
today
If Soma means a medicinal plant that no one knows, then all the 
verses of Vedas that talk of Soma become useless today.
Agniveer
I have shown earlier that Soma means bliss-providing Ishwar. But 
even if Soma means a medicine that no one knows today, that does 
not make Vedas irrelevant. That only implies that humanity should strive 
to explore such useful medicines. 
A book like modern Quran that demands blind acceptance 
without having even the time to understand it (there is only one 
life as per modern scholars of Quran!) has a huge number of vers-
es that are supposed to be Gaib or incomprehensible for humans. 
Then what is the problem with having a vast number of verses 
in Vedas that are not understood by dumb minds today? After 
all, Vedas provide you with a long cycle of rebirths to finish your 
homework! It also does not demand that one should complete the 
course of Vedas or even believe in Vedas to achieve some Heaven 
and escape some permanent Hell.
Allegation 5: Soma, Mada, Madhu relate to intoxi-
cation in Vedas
If Vedas do not talk of alcohol or intoxication, why do we have 
words like Soma, Mada, Madhu in Vedas that relate to intoxication?
Agniveer
This is the most stupid argument. Vedas offered the first words 
that depicted root essence, based on that later vocabularies were 


Soma and Alchohol in Vedas

built. For example, Soma means bliss giving. Intelligent people 
used it to depict friendly people. But for people on the path of de-
cline, even alcohol is apparently bliss giving. Same for other words.
Don’t we have similar examples in other languages? Gay means 
a ‘happy person’. But what it means today is known to all of us. 
Interestingly, older dictionaries would not even have a homosexual 
as a meaning for gay. Meat means not only flesh but also the ‘sub-
stance of a point’. In fact, almost all words have multiple mean-
ings. Only dumb people would try to distort the meaning of a 
sentence through the wrong usage.
Conclusion
In conclusion, the only reasons why one would see alcohol in Ve-
das is, either they have not studied Vedas, or they have an antipathy 
towards Vedas.
For rest of us, Vedas only encourage for enhancement of intel-
lect and knowledge. And thus, condemn anything that diminishes 
these.
The Soma Ras of Vedas is the divine devotion of the Supreme 
that elevates us from all miseries, all frustrations, all doubts, and all 
sins and galvanizes us towards virtuous actions with unimaginable 
enthusiasm and ultimate bliss.
May we all work together to spread pursuit of this Soma in the 
entire universe and pray for the immortality of all.
The call of Soma is for the brave. The call of Soma is for the 
Yajna (noble, selfless actions). The call of Soma is for those war-
riors who have glorified themselves through constant struggle and 
relentless efforts. 

