 
"Man is no different from animals," says Sri Sankara Bhagavatpada in his 
Sutrabhasya. "Pasvadibhiscavisesat". 
Texts tell us: "Human beings and animals have the same urges. They eat and 
sleep and copulate and besides, the feelings of fear are common to both. 
What, then, is the difference between the two? It is adherence to 
Dharma that distinguishes human beings from animals. Without Dharma 
to guide him man would be no better than an animal." 
"Aharanidrabhayamaithunam ca samanyametat pasubhirnaranam 
Dharmo hi tesamadhiko visesah dharmena hina pasubhissamanah" 
 
The Lord says in Bhagavad Gita: "When a man thinks of the objects of 
sense, attachment to them is born; from attachment arises desire; and 
from desire arises anger. Anger causes delusion and from delusion springs 
loss of memory; loss of memory leads to the destruction of the sense of 
discrimination; and because of the destruction of his sense of 
discrimination man perishes." 
 
Dhyayato visayan pumsah sangastesu pajayate 
Sangat samjayate kamah kamat krodho bhijayate 
Krodhad bhavati sammohah sammohat smrtivibhramah 
Smrtibhramsad buddhinaso buddhinasat pranasyati 
Commenting on these two slokas of the Gita, Swami Chinmayananda says 
that evil develops from our wrong thinking or false imagination like a tree 
developing from the seed. Thought has the power to create as well as to 
destroy. Rightly harnessed, it can be used for constructive purposes; if 
misused it will be the cause of our utter destruction. When our mind 
constantly dwells on a "sense-object" an attachment is created for that 
object. When we keep thinking of this object with increasing intensity, 
our attachment to it becomes crystallized as burning desire for the same. 
But as obstacles arise to the fulfilment of this desire, the force that at first 
caused the desire now turns into anger. 


 
Swami Chinmayananda further observes that anyone whose intellect is in 
the grip of anger becomes deluded and loses his sense of discrimination 
since he is also deprived of his memory. A man who is the victim of anger 
is capable of doing anything, forgetful of himself and his relationship with 
other people. Sri Sankaracharaya observes in this connection that a 
deluded fool will fight even with revered persons like his own parents and 
preceptors, forgetting his indebtedness to them. 
Says Socrates: "The noblest of all investigations... is what man should be 
and what he should pursue". And Samuel Taylor Coleridge observes: "If 
man is not rising upward to be an angel, he is sinking downward to be a 
devil. He cannot stop at the beast." 
It is perhaps because of his understanding of the instincts of man and the 
need for human actions to be inspired by dharma that the famous poet 
Nilakantha Diksita said: "If, even after being born a man, one does not 
have any sense of discrimination, it would be better for such a one to be 
born an animal since animals are not subject to the law that controls the 
senses." 
 
Our rishis knew that "all except God will perish". Man with his capacity 
for discrimination must be able to grasp the truth that the Atman is not 
different from the Bhraman. The Atman has neither a beginning nor an 
end. Every individual goes through a succession of births and, determined 
by his karma, either sinks further and further down or rises further and 
further up. But in life after life the Atman remains untainted. 
There is a difference of opinion even among the learned as to the 
meaning of the word "dharma". The word is derived from "dhr" to 
uphold, sustain or nourish. The seers often use it in close association with 
"rta" and "satya". Sri Vidyaranya defines rta as the mental perception and 
realization of God. The Taithriya Upanishad also uses it with "satya" and 
"dharma". It exhorts students to speak the truth and practise dharma 
("Satya vada"; "Dharmam chara"). According to Sankara Bhagavatpada, 
satya means speaking the truth and dharma means translating it (Satya) 
into action. 


 
"Satyamiti yathasastrarthata sa eva anusthiyamanah dharmanama 
bhavati." 
 
In this connection, the explanation given by Sri.K.Balasubramania Aiyar is 
relevant:: "An analysis of the significance of these three words (rta, satya 
and dharma) brings out clearly to us the fundamental basis of dharma as 
the ideal for an individual. While rta denotes the mental perception and 
realization of truth and satya denotes the exact true expression in words 
of the truth as perceived by the mind, dharma is the observance, in the 
conduct of life, of truth. In fact, dharma is the way of life which translates 
into action the truth perceived by the man of insight as expressed by him 
truly. In short, rta is truth in thought, satya is truth in words and dhrama 
is truth in deed." 
To right-thinking people "dharma" and "satya" are interchangeable words 
and their goal is --- as it has always been --- to rise higher so as to realize 
Him who alone is the Truth. For them there is no pursuit higher than that 
of practising truth in thought, word and deed. 
"Bhutahitam" is Sri Sankarcharya's answer to the question (that he 
himself raise), "Kim Satyam?" It means that truth (or truthfulness) is what 
is spoken for the well-being of all living beings. To the question,"Ko 
dharmah?", his answer is "Abhimato yah sistanam nija kulinam". It means 
that dharma is that which is determined by the elders and by learned 
people. 
 
Of the four purusharthas or aims of life, dharma is always mentioned 
first, artha second, karma third and moksha last. The four stanzas of the 
Mahabharata that together go by the name of "Bharata-Savitri" contain 
these profound truths: Dharma is eternal but neither happiness nor 
sorrow is eternal; the Atman is everlasting but not that which embodies 
it; and from dharma arise artha and kama. They also contain Vedavyasa's 
lamentation: "With uplifted arms I cry but no one listens to me, 'From 
dharma spring artha and kama. Why is dharma then not practised?' " 
 
Sri Sankara Bhagavatpada observes that even the wise and the learned, 


 
even men who have a vision of the exceeding subtle Atman, are 
overpowered by tamas and do not understand it even though clearly 
explained in various texts. 
The Reality is perceived by one who has sraddha or faith which, according 
to the saints, is acceptance of the truth as proclaimed by the scriptures 
and as taught by the guru. By following the reasoning of the sastras and 
the path shown by the guru the bonds of avidya are broken and one 
becomes aware of the Atman. One's own experience obtained through 
one-pointed meditation of the Truth is another means to achieve the 
same goal. These moments are indeed blessed, the moments during 
which the Truth dawns on us as we receive instruction from our guru and 
as we gain wisdom that is supported by the authority of the scriptures. 
Yes, these indeed are moments of bliss when the senses are quietened 
and the mind is firmly fixed on the Atman. Thus dharma, to be precise 
Veda Dharma, has been and is essential for man to become a real man. 
 
According to Sri Chandarsekharendra Saraswati, the Mahaswami, dharma 
is our only protection. In this book, the Great Acharya recounts all that 
we need to know about dharma and presents in an integrated form the 
various systems of thought that have flourished in this country. "The 
Vedas", Sri Mahaswami affirms, "represent the lofty principle that it is the 
one Truth that is envisaged as all that we perceive." 
The discourses that make up this book are remarkable for their simple 
and enchanting style. The most complex of ideas are explained with such 
lucidity as to make them comprehensible to the ordinary reader. Sri 
Mahaswami deals not only with the wisdom of the Samhita part of Vedas 
and with other scriptural matters, he takes in his stride even modern 
scientific concepts like those of time and space. It is all at once so wide-
ranging and so profound that we bow our heads in reverence to the 
Great Master of our time, the Sage of Kamakoti Pitha. His approach 
shows that he has no doubts in his mind, no hesitation in affirming the 
truths in the Vedas and sastras. 


 
The point to be noted is that if you believe in the sastras, you must 
believe in them fully. If you are an atheist, you could of course reject all 
the sastras. But to make a show of being very clever and twist the sastras 
as you like, accepting some parts and rejecting and changing some 
others, is an offence more grave than that of being an atheist. To think 
that Mother Veda should dance to your tune is also a great offence. 
Learning the Vedas with such an attitude is tantamount to ridiculing 
them. 
 
"I am not angry with the reformists, nor do I suspect their intentions. 
They go wrong because of their ignorance and thoughtlessness. If they 
wish to pull down the fence so as to go to the other side, they must think 
of the possibility of the few still remaining there crossing over to this 
side." 
 
The Great Acharya has commanded us to protect the old dharmic 
traditions and keep them alive: 
"All old dharmic traditions must be protected and kept alive. Sri Sankara 
Bhagavatpada has commanded us to do so. I bear his name; so it is my 
duty to remind you of his command. Whether or not you will heed his 
command, I should like to impress upon you that the sastric customs have 
the purpose of ensuring the good of all mankind." 
I am aware of the alarm sounded by Vedavyasa, but I still sincerely 
believe that the words of the Great Master of our time shall rekindle the 
lamp of wisdom and lead us from darkness unto light. It is my great 
privilege to write the Foreword to this book. The translator has done a 
service to people like us who believe in the saha-chintan and the words of 
the Yajurveda: 
"Vayam rastre jagryama purohitah". 
Let us be awake and alert to the noble cause of the nation, to the India of 
the Rigveda our svadesa from the Himavan to the ocean. There is need 
for a fresh commitment on the part of its people to the ideal expressed 


 
by the time-honoured saying, "Janani janmabhumisca svargaadapi 
gariyasi." 
 
P.S.Mishra,  
Judge,  
High Court of Madras,  
Chennai,  
March 13,1995 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Preface 
When India was straining at the leash during the unique "Weaponless 
War" conceived, planned and led by Mahatma Gandhi to win freedom, 
some of the finest flowers of Indian manhood and womanhood were 
forced to languish in prison for long years. During his ninth incarceration, 
this time in the Ahmednagar Fort Prison (August 9, 1942 to July 15, 1945), 
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, one of the best among them, embarked upon a 
voyage of "Discovery of India". He "discovered" for himself and for us, the 
common people, an India that is "a myth and an idea, a dream and a 
vision and yet very real and pervasive." 
Nehru, with the poetic touch so characteristic of him, looked upon India 
as "a lady with a glorious past, whose deep eyes had seen so much of 
life's passion and joy and folly and looked deep down into wisdom's well". 
It is this "wisdom’s well" that is represented by our Vedic heritage, the 
"living words", as Gurudeva Rabindranath Tagore put it, "that have issued 
from the Illuminated Consciousness of our great ones." 
This offering of Hindu Dharma: The Universal Way of Life deals with 
another kind of discovery of India, a discovery in the spiritual realm, 
made by Jagadguru Sri Chandrasekharendra Saraswati Swamigal, the 68th 
Sankaracharya of Kanchi Kamakoti Pitha. The Sage of Kanchi was 
spiritually supreme, intellectually pre-eminent. He was verily an 
akshayapatra - inexhaustible reservoir - of the spiritual wisdom of India 
dating back to the beginning of Time, and of Vedic Dharma. So was he 
with regard to modern knowledge, current affairs and contemporary men 
and matters. 
In a special easy in the Bhavan's journal this true sanatani hailed Gandhiji, 
a staunch Hindu and a secularist nonpareil, as one of the "greatest 
redeemers of Hinduism". Hailing Gandhiji's services to Hinduism, he said: 
"From the time Gandhiji came into the arena, he augmented his political 
movements by his spiritual researches and devotion. Almost all the 
features of Hinduism that were discarded as weeds by the previous 
reform movements were clearly explained by Gandhiji as being of 


 
indispensable utility. His views on Ramanama, the Ramayana, Varna 
dharma, Aharaniyama and his definition of God are such that the most 
faithful Hindu cannot but profit spiritually by digesting them." 
During one of the satsangas, some members of the Bhavan’s family were 
privileged to have with him, this remarkable advaitin said that Jawharlal 
Nehru was "an advaitin at heart." 
II 
The Mahaswami will shine forever as one of the greatest exemplars of 
sanatana dharma, the Universal Way of Life. This sanatani extraordinary 
personified in himself all that is best and noblest in Hinduism. He always 
stressed that Hinduism is the latter-day name given to mankind's earliest 
religion - sanatana dharma. It is beginning less (anadi), endless (ananta) 
and hence eternal (sanatana), because it is in consonance with Nature's 
Laws. 
To drive home the eternal or the sanatana aspect of our religion, the 
Mahaswami used to narrate a telling episode: "There was a palm-tree 
around which a creeper entwined itself. The creeper grew fast and within 
months it entwined the entire tree. 'This palm has not grown a bit all 
these months,' said the creeper laughing. The palm-tree retorted: 'I have 
seen tens of thousands of creepers in my life. Each creeper before you 
said the same thing as you have now said. I do not know what to say to 
you'. Our religion is like this tree in relation to other faiths." 
We were fortunate to have lived in the times, and to have had frequent 
darshans, of one with such "illuminated Consciousness", whose nearly 
-year- long Pilgrimage on Earth ended on January 8, 1994. He was a 
realized soul, and whenever he spoke, he spoke in the accents of the 
Vedic seers precise, profound and authentic words that found a 
permanent lodgment in the hearts of his listeners. 
The Mahaswami's words of distilled wisdom, as compiled by his ardent 
devotee Sri Ra. Ganapati run into six volumes covering more than 6,500 
pages. Sri Ra. Ganapati and Sri A. Tirunavukkarasu of Vanadi Padippakam, 


 
the publisher, deserve our eternal gratitude for their invaluable efforts to 
preserve for posterity the Sage of Kanchi's words of wisdom. 
Being in Tamil, these volumes, with their precious content, remain a 
closed book to tens of thousands of devotees in India and abroad who do 
not know that language but are athirst and ever-yearning for the 
Mahaswami's spiritual ambrosia. 
The English versions of selected discourses, which have so far appeared in 
book-form, touch but a fringe of what the Mahaswami has said about 
sanatana dharma. The Bhavan, too, has had the privilege of contributing 
its humble mite in this direction --- we have published Aspects of Our 
Religion, The Vedas, Adi Sankara: His Life and Times, The Guru Tradition 
and Kanchi Mahaswami on Poets and Poetry. 
This volume of nearly 800 pages has been rendered into English from the 
Tamil by R.G.K. It is a monumental effort reflecting enormous, dedicated 
and unremitting labour over a long period of time. In translation, the 
transformation is normally from gold to lead but R.G.K. has ensured that 
the sheen of the original is retained. He has also spared no pains to 
explain obscure points of legend, puranic allusions and scriptural 
references covering both Sruti and Smrti. 
We are thankful to Justice Sri P.S. Mishra , at present Chief justice of 
Andhra Pradesh, for his illuminating Foreword and Sri A. Kuppuswami for 
his learned Introduction. 
III 
The Bhavan has been the blessed recipient of the Mahaswami's grace 
right from its inception in 1938. He has been one of the Bhavan's greatest 
guides and philosophers. He very closely watched with a benign concern 
that landmark projects of the Bhavan like the monumental 11-volume 
History and Culture of the Indian People covering nearly 5,000 years from 
the Vedic Age to the Modern Age. This is the only comprehensive history 
of India written by Indians --- a team of 100 eminent scholars, each a 
specialist in his chosen field. They laboured on it for 32 years under the 


 
inspiration and guidance of Kulapati Munshi, with the doyen of Indian 
historians Dr.Romesh Chandra Majumdar as General Editor. The 
Jagadguru then observed: "Distinguished historians like K.M. Munshi are 
engaged in writing afresh our history without any bias". 
Commending Kulapati Munshi's ceaseless efforts through the Bhavan for 
the revival of Sanskrit, of India's ages-old traditions and the resuscitation 
of ethical and spiritual values embedded in sanatana dharma, the 
Mahaswami remarked: "Munshi is not an old fashioned sanatanist like 
me. He is a reformist and a friend and follower of Gandhiji. And he was a 
member of the Nehru Cabinet. So he cannot be included among the 
‘reactionaries’!" 
During the Bhavan's Silver Jubilee in 1962, the Mahaswami sent the 
following benediction: 
The Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan has made the people of Bharata Varsa in 
general and the intellectuals in particular evince interest in the various 
aspects of our culture and progress. 
"May we pray: Give fresh vigor to the Bhavan, a unique institution, in 
directing its attention more and more, with greater and greater 
fulfillment, to the dissemination of moral principles and devotion." 
He also sent along with it a cash "donation" of Rs1,000. Kulapti Munshi 
shed copious tears of joy and exclaimed in ecstasy: "This is the holiest of 
holy prasads. This is invaluable, inestimable and much more than several 
thousand crores of rupees. Nothing, nothing, can surpass divine grace." 
IV 
The Mahaswami brings out the essentials of sanatana dharma in a 
language that is at once simple and clear. Commendable indeed is the 
cogency of the narrative. We are left in no doubt about any aspect of out 
eternal Dharma. 


 
As will be seen in this volume, the Mahaswami's approach is catholic. He 
avers: "The goal of all religions is to lead people to the Paramatman 
according to the different attitudes of the devotees concerned. Our 
forefathers were well aware that all religions are different paths to realize 
the one and only Paramatman." 
More than a century ago, in 1893, did not Swami Vivekananda thunder at 
the World Parliament of Religions in Chicago that "Mankind ought to be 
taught that religions are but the varied expressions of THE RELIGION, 
which is Oneness, so that each may choose the path that suits him best"? 
The Discovery of India by Jawaharlal Nehru, the Political Monarch of 
Modern India and Free India's first Prime Minister (1947-1964), inspired 
the people of India, particularly its youth, to regain our political freedom. 
This was true also of the people, particularly the young, of many nations 
of South-East Asia and Africa then under foreign domination. 
The eminent historian, parliamentarian and author of several scholarly 
volumes such as the Bhavan's publications: The Fundamental Unity of 
India (first published in London in 1914 with a Foreword by the Rt Hon'ble 
J. Ramsay MacDonald, first Labour Prime Minister of Britain, 1929 (he was 
also P.M. during 1929-35) and Hindu Civilization, Dr Radha Kumud 
Mookerji, has pointed out the uniqueness of the Vedas, especially the 
Rgveda, thus: 
"The Vedas, and especially the primordial work known as the Rgveda, 
represent not merely the dawn of culture, but also its zenith. Indian 
thought is seen at its highest in the Rigveda... On the one hand it is the 
first book of India and also of mankind. At the same time, it shows the 
highest point of human wisdom. We see in it the whole process of 
evolution, from its beginning to its completion." 
Ekam sad vipra bahudha vadanti (The truth is One, the wise speak of it in 
different ways). 
This volume Hindu Dharma: The Universal Way of Life is in the nature of a 
discovery of Vedic India, Immortal India, by Pujyasri Chandrasekharendra 


 
Saraswati, the Moral Monarch of this century. Sooner than later, this is 
bound to immensely inspire not only the people and youth of India but 
also the people and youth of the world over to restore and retain values, 
purity and sanity in personal and public life. This is our hope and prayer, 
nay conviction. 
Vedokhilo dharmaulam; Dharmo rakshati rakshitah - the Vedas are the 
root of all Dharma; Dharma protected, protects. 
S. RAMAKRISHNAN 
General Editor 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay,  
st Mahaswami Jayanti, June 12, 1995 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Introduction 
The word "Introduction", used with reference to a publication, signifies 
"the preliminary matter" prefixed to it. Does the present work, 
comprising as it does the discourses on Hindu Dharma, or more properly 
Veda Dharma, delivered by the greatest spiritual luminary of the century 
(that is the Sage of Kanchi) and translated into English by a seasoned 
writer, need an Introduction? For days this was the question that 
revolved in my mind following the request made by Sri R.G.K., that I 
should write an Introduction to this translation. (Sri R.G.K, a good friend 
of mine, was formerly Assistant Editor of The Illustrated Weekly of India.) 
 
I felt that I was not qualified for the job of writing the Introduction. I was 
reminded of the short Introduction I had written to the Guru Tradition 
which also incorporates the discourses of the Sage of Kanchi and which is 
also translated by Sri R.G.K. --- this book was published in 1991. I should 
like to quote a sentence from it: "It is only the devotion to the sacred feet 
of the Great Guru of Kanchi, implanted in my heart in my boyhood days 
and nurtured during the past six decades and more, combined with the 
persistent desire of the translator (an esteemed friend), that has 
embolded me to pen this short piece which is but an apology for an 
Introduction." 
As desired by the translator, I have gone through the entire typescript of 
Hindu Dharma and this gives me the courage to write a few lines by the 
way of a preliminary note. 
The lectures delivered decades ago in Tamil by His Holiness the Sage of 
Kanchi on diverse aspects of our Dharma, on our ancient culture and our 
arts and on a variety of other subjects have been brought out in six 
volumes by Vanadi Padippakam, a well-known publishiing house of 
Madras. But until now adent followers of Hindu Dharma, who do not 
know Tamil, have not had access to these discourses given by the 
incomparable preceptor of our time, discourses that are as extensive and 
educative as they are enlightening and enchanting. Sri.R.G.K. deserves 
the thanks of people living outside Tamil Nadu, both in India and abroad, 


 
for throwing open to them the treasure-house of the upanyasas of the 
Great Acharya. 
Translating any work from one language into another is an arduous task, 
especially if the work translated consists of the spoken word. I know for a 
fact that the translator of this book has toiled for months on end and 
tried his best to maintain fidelity to the original. 
It is my earnest hope that middle-aged people and youngsters --- 
particularly teachers and students --- belonging to regions outside Tamil 
Nadu will get copies of Hindu Dharma and benefit by reading the same. I 
would like to make a humble request to the publishers to take such steps 
as would bring the book within easy reach of all especially teachers and 
students. 
May the Divine World Mother and the Sage of Kanchi, who remains 
shining as the all-pervading "cit", grant long life and health to Sri R.G.K to 
enable him to bring out further English translations of the Great Acharya's 
discourses. 
A.KUPPUSWAMI 
Kanchipuram, 
March 10,1995 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Translator's Note 
More than 20 years ago, I said in an article in The Illustrated Weekly of 
India that "Hindus know less about their religion than Christians and 
Muslims know about theirs". Wanting to verify the statement, my editor 
Sardar Khushwant Singh asked my colleagues (most of them were 
Hindus), in schoolmasterly fashion, to name any four Upanishads. For 
moments there was silence and it was a Muslim lady member of the staff 
who eventually responded to the editor's question by "reeling off" the 
names of six or seven Upanishads. 
Why are "educated" Hindus ignorant about their religion? Is it their 
education itself that has alienated them from their religious and cultural 
moorings? If so it must be one of the tragic ironies of the Indian 
condition. The Paramaguru himself speaks of our ignorance of the basic 
texts of our religion (Chapter 1, Part Five): "We must be proud of the fact 
that our country has produced more men who have found inner bliss 
than all other countries put together. It is a matter of shame that we are 
ignorant of the sastras that they have bequeathed to us, the sastras that 
taught them how to scale the heights of bliss. Many are ignorant about 
the scripture that is the very source of our religion -- they do not know 
even its name... Our education follows the Western pattern. We want to 
speak like the white man, dress like him and ape him in the matter of 
manners and customs..." 
The fact is that during the past two or three centuries Hindus have gone 
through a process of de-Hinduization which in some respects is 
tantamount to de Indianization. Various other reasons are given as to 
why Hindus do not have a clear idea of their religion. One is that it is not a 
religion in the sense the term is usually understood. Another is that it is 
not easily reduced to a catechism. A third reason is that, unlike other 
faiths, it encompasses all life and activity, individual, social and national, 
and all spheres of knowledge. Hindu Dharma is an organic part of the 
Hindu. It imposes on him a discipline that is inward as well as outward 
and it is a process of refinement and inner growth. Above all it is a quest, 
the quest for knowing oneself, for being oneself. 


 
Hindu Dharma, it must be remembered, is but a convenient term for 
what should ideally be known as Veda Dharma or Sanatana Dharma, the 
immemorial religion. Indeed, it might be claimed with truth, that this 
Dharma is more than a religion, that it is an entire civilization, the story of 
man from the very beginnings of time to find an answer to the problems 
of life, the story of that greatest of all adventures, that of the human 
spirit trying to discover its true identity. "From our total reactions to 
Nature," says J.W.N. Sullivan, "Science selects a small part only as being 
relevant to its purpose..." Everything is relevant to Hinduism because its 
"purposes" is to know the Truth in its entirety, not fractions of truth that 
may have their own purposes but not the Great Purpose of knitting 
together everything to arrive at the ultimate knowledge. It needs a 
master to speak about such a religion. We must consider ourselves 
blessed that we had such a master living in our own time, I mean the Sage 
of Kanchi, Pujyasri Chandrasekharendra Saraswati Swami, to teach us our 
Dharma. He was no ordinary master, but a Master of Masters. 
This Great Master's discourses on Hindu Dharma, included in Volumes I 
and II of Deivattin Kural, are divided into 22 parts (there are two 
appendices in addition) in this book. There is, however, 'nothing rigid 
about this arrangement and we have here a single great stream that 
takes us through the variegated landscape that has come to be called 
Hinduism. To vary the imagery, it is a vast canvas on which the 
Paramaguru portrays the Hindu religion and it is a luminous canvas and 
there is nothing garish about the colors he dabs on it. 
The Great Acharya does not lecture from a high pedestal. Out of his 
compassion for us he speaks the language that everybody understands. 
(We must here acknowledge our profound indebtedness to Sri Ra. 
Ganapati, the compiler of Deivattin Kural, and Sri A. Tirunavukkarasu, the 
publisher, for having preserved the Sage of Kanchi's light of knowledge 
and wisdom for posterity.) 
Throughout these discourses we recognize the Great Swami's synaptic 
vision. He sees connections where others see only differences. Is this not 
the special quality of a seer, the special quality of a mystic, who refuses to 


 
see things in compartments? Indeed, during the long decades during 
which Sri Chandrasekharendra Saraswati Swami was the Sankaracharya of 
Kanchi Kamakoti Pitha he was a great unifying force, a great civilizing 
influence. The manner in which he braids together the karmakanda and 
jnanakanda of the Vedas is indeed masterly. So too the way he presents 
the message of the Vedas or the essence of the Upanishads. Here we 
have something like the architectonics of great music or of a great 
monument like the Kailsanatha temple of Ellora or the Brhadisvara 
temple of Tanjavur. The Paramaguru takes all branches of knowledge in 
his stride, linguistics, astronomy, history, and physics. He combines 
ancient wisdom with modern concepts like those of time and space -- he 
is aware, though, that some of these concepts are not new to our own 
scientific tradition. All the same, it must be noted that he does not speak 
what is convenient for today but what is true for all time. 
It is difficult to summarise the ideas of our religion or to present the 
teachings of our Master in a few words. But it is necessary to underline 
certain points. For instance, the message of the Vedas on which Hindu 
Dharma is founded. "The Vedas hold out," declares the Paramaguru, the 
ideal of liberation here itself. That is their glory. Other religions hold 
before people the ideal of salvation after a man's departure for another 
world." To repeat, the ultimate teaching of the Vedic religion is liberation 
here and now. After all, what is the purpose of any religion? Our Acharya 
answers the question: "If an individual owing allegiance to a religion does 
not become a jnanin with inward experience of the truth of the Supreme 
Being, what does it matter whether that religion does exist or does not?" 
 
"That thou art," is the great truth proclaimed by the Vedas. But how are 
you to realize the truth of "That"? Our Master's answer is: "Now itself 
when we are deeply involved in worldly affairs." In fact he tells us the 
practical means of becoming a jivanmukta, or how to be liberated in this 
life itself. After all, he was a jivanmukta himself and he speaks of truths 
not from a vacuum but from actual experience. That reminds one of the 
special feature of Hindu Dharma which is that it contains the practical 
steps to liberation; in other words Hinduism leads one to the Light in 
gradual stages. Critics call this Dharma ritual-ridden without realizing that 


 
the rituals have a higher purpose, that of disciplining you, cleansing your 
consciousness, and preparing you for the inward journey. In a word, 
chitta - suddhi is the means to a higher end. From work we must go to 
worklessness. The Paramaguru's genius for synthesizing ideas is 
demonstrated in the way he weaves together karma, bhakti, yoga and 
jnana. 
 
In our Vedic religion, individual salvation is not --- as is often alleged --- 
pursued to the neglect of collective well-being. "The principle on which 
the Vedic religion is founded," observes the Sage of Kanchi "is that a man 
must not live for himself alone but serve all mankind." Well, varna 
dharma in its true form is a system according to which the collective 
welfare of society is ensured. As expounded by the Paramaguru, we see it 
to be radically different from what we are taught about it in school. 
Critics call caste a hierarchic and exploitative arrangement. But actually, 
the system is one in which the duties of each jati are interlinked with 
those of others. In this way society is knit together, leaving no room in it 
for jealousies and rivalries to arise. One point must be specially noted: 
the Great Acharya lays stress again and again on the fact that no jati is 
inferior to another jati or superior to it. 
In the Varna dharma, as explained by our Master, the Brahmin does not 
lord it over other communities. Why do we need Brahmins at all? To 
preserve the Vedic dharma, to keep alive the sound of the Vedas which is 
important for the well-being not only of all Hindus but of all mankind. 
This duty can be performed only on a hereditary basis by one class of 
people. The Great Acharya goes to the extent of saying that we do not 
need a class of people called Brahmins if they do not serve other 
communities, indeed mankind itself, by truly practicing the ancient Vedic 
dharma. To paraphrase, if a separate class called Brahmins must exist and 
it must exist is not for the sake of this class itself but for the ultimate 
good of mankind. The Paramaguru makes an impassioned plea to 
Brahmins to return to their dharma. He also points out that in varna 
dharma, in its ideal form, there are no differences among the jatis 
economically speaking -- all of them live a simple life, performing their 
duties and being devoted to the Lord. 


 
It is varna dharma that has sustained Hindus or Indian civilization for all 
these millennia, observes the Paramaguru. And all our immense 
achievements in metaphysics and philosophy, in literature, in music, in 
the arts and sciences must be attributed to it. Above all, it is varna 
dharma that has made it possible for this land to produce so many great 
men and women, so many saintly men, who have been the source of 
inspiration for people all these centuries. Now this system has all but 
broken up and with it we see the decay of the nation. 
There are so many other matters on which the Sage of Kanchi speaks -- 
for example, conducting an upanayana or a marriage meaningfully. He 
speaks with eloquence about our ideals of marriage and condemns 
dowry, describing it as an evil that undermines our society. There are, 
then, moving discourses on philanthropy, love and so on in which we see 
the Great Master as one who is concerned about the happiness of all, as 
one whose heart goes out to the poor and the suffering. His short 
discourses like "Outward Karma - Inward Meditation" or "Karma --the 
Starting Point of Yoga" encapsulate his philosophy with power and 
beauty. And the message of Advaita runs like a golden thread all through 
the book. 
Altogether in these discourses we come face to face with a Great Being 
who is beyond time and space and we experience the "oceanic feeling", a 
term (originally French) coined by Romain Rolland and made familiar by 
Sigmund Freud. To us the Sage of Kanchi means an ocean of wisdom and 
an ocean of compassion. To think of him is to sanctify ourselves however 
unregenerate we may be. I must now, in all humility, pay obeisance to 
Pujyasri Jayendra Saraswati Swami and Pujyasri Sankara Vijayendra 
Saraswati Swami and seek their blessings Sri Mettur Swamigal, gentle, 
devout and learned, has been a source of inspiration to me in my work. 
 
I am thankful to Sri P.S. Mishra, Chief Justice of Andhra Pradesh, for his 
learned Foreword. 
The venerable Sri A. Kuppuswami, who is a spry 84 and who served his 
Master, the Sage of Kanchi with devotion for almost a lifetime, read the 


 
typescript of this book running into more than 1,000 pages and made 
valuable suggestions. I have always relied on him for advice and I am 
grateful to him for his Introduction, although I feel I don't deserve a bit 
the appreciative references he has made to me. 
I am indebted to Sri V. Sivaramakrishnan, Associate Editor of Bhavan's 
journal, for reading the proofs. With his practised eye he detected a 
number of errors - he also suggested a number of improvements. I must 
add that Sri Sivaramkrishnan has himself written a book based on the 
Sage of Kanchi's discourses on Sanskrit and Tamil poets and their works. 
The Kamashi Seva Samithi lost one of its stalwarts in the death of its 
Secretary, Sri V. Krishnamurthi. For most of us the Samithi meant Sri 
Krishnamurthi and Sri Krishnamurthi meant the Samithi. Members of the 
Samithi and devotees of the Sage of Kanchi were distraught by his passing 
but they find consolation in the thought that he must be still be serving 
the lotus feet of his Master. 
Sri P.N. Krihnaswami, Chairman of the Samithi, brought me cheer 
whenever I felt depressed about the progress of the book. I look upon 
him as a model of devotion to the Lord and service to fellow-men. So 
many others belonging to the Samithi have helped me in my work like Sri 
R.S. Mani, Sri V. Narayanaswami, Captain N. Swaminathan, Sri B. Ramani, 
and Sri A.G. Ramarathnam. 
Dr W.R. Antarkar, a distinguised Sanskrit scholar, has laid me under a 
deep debt of gratitude by giving the once-over to the Sanskrit part of the 
main text. But he is not to be held responsible for mistakes, if any, that 
still remain uncorrected. I must also thank Sri L.N. Subramanya 
Ghanapathi, Dr R. Krishanmurthi Sastrigal , Sri S. Lakshminarayana, 
Srimati (Dr) Visalakshi Sivaramkrishnan and Sri V. Ramanathan for their 
assistance. 
Thanks are particularly due to Siromani R. Natrajan, of Manjari fame, for 
his help in preparing the Tamil Glossary. He checked the notes I had made 
and added copious notes of his own. Owing to pressure on space all the 
material povided by him could not be incorporated. I also owe a debt of 


 
gratitude to Srimathi Bhavani Vanchinthan, a gifted Tamil teacher, for 
"double-checking" the glossary and to Srimati Saroja Krishnan for her 
help. 
Mrs. Margaret Da'Costa converted my typescript into computer format in 
record time. I am thankful to her as well as to Kumari Sandhya 
Ganapahty: this dedicated young lady worked day and night for nearly 
three months to carry out my corrections. Sri R. Ganapathy gave his 
daughter a helping hand. There were also inputs by Sri R.S. Mani and Sri 
N. Ramamoorthy. 
I must thank Sri S. Ramakrishan, Executive Secretary of Bharatiya Vidya 
Bhavan, for the readiness which he agreed to publish HIndu Dharma and 
for his unfailing courtesy, encouragement and coooperation. I must 
acknowledge the help received from other officials of the organisation 
like Sri A.P. Vasudevan, Sri C.K. Venkataraman and Sri P.V. Sankarankutty. 
I am grateful to Sri Atul Goradia of Siddhi Printers for the fine job of work 
he has done in printing this book. He is remainded unfazed by all the 
problems encountered in the course of the production of this work. 
In all humuility I place Hindu Dharma as an offering at the sacred lotus 
feet of Pujyasri Chandrasekharendra Sarasvati Swami. As one who has 
miles to go to become jnanin, I can look upon Mahaguru only in the form 
I knew him before he attained videhamukti. The dvita-bhava, it is said, is 
the appropriate attitude in which one expresses one's devotion to one's 
guru. Our Great Master is the Infinite dissolved in the Infinite. But do we 
not separate the Infinite from the Infinite to meditate on it and to 
worship It as the Saguna Brahman? It is thus that I adore the lotus feet of 
the Mahaguru. As the Upanishads proclaim, "Purnasya purnamadaya 
purnmevavsisyate." 
"CHINNAVAN"  
Bombay, May 19,1995 
 


 
For the Reader's Attention 
Sanskrit words are not italicized; but titles of Sanskrit works are, except 
those of well-known classics like the Ramayana, the Mahabharata, the 
Bhagavad Gita (or the Gita for short). 
No uniform style is adopted in the use of Sanskrit words; they occur 
either in their stem form or in the nominative singular. 
"Brahmin" is used instead of "Brahmana"; "Sankara" instead of "Samkara" 
or "Sankara", the last-mentioned being the correct form; and the 
anglicized "Sanskrit" instead of "Samskrtam". 
The term "Self" in this translation denotes the "Atman" -- this is in 
keeping with the generally accepted usage. "Jivatman" is referred to as 
the "individual self". 
"Devas" are referred to as "celestials" in order to distinguish them from 
gods like Siva, Rama, Krsna, Ganapati and so on. 
What may be called "Hindi-ised'' Sanskrit words like "bhajan"and "pandit" 
are italicized. 
"Atmic" and "sastric", though admittedly hybrid derivatives, are used as a 
matter of convenience. "Atmaic" (Atmanic?) and "sastraic" are perhaps 
less euphonic. 
"Acarya" with a capital "A", unless otherwise indicated, means Adi 
Sankara or Sri Sankara Bhagavatpada. 
"Matha" with a capital "M" refers to the Kanchi Matha. 
"Paramaguru", 
meaning 
the 
"Supreme 
Guru", 
refers 
to 
Sri 
Chandrasekharendra Saraswati Swami. 
Words put in square brackets and intended to explain a term or passage 
in the main text are added either by the compiler of the discourses or by 


 
the translator. But simple meanings of words in the main text are given in 
round brackets. 
In "References", some notes appear with "Ra. Ga": it means these are by 
Sri Ra Ganapati, the compiler. The translator wishes to own responsibility 
for errors, if any, in the rest of the "References." 
For the quotations from the Upanishads used in the main text or 
reproduced "References", the translator has relied mostly on 
Ekadasopanisadah printed at the Nirnayasagara Yantralaya and published 
by Ba. Ra. Ghanekar. 
The Guru Tradition, referred to in "References", comprises discourses by 
the Paramaguru and is published by the Bharatiya Vidya Bhawan. 
In the main text as well as in the notes there are references to places in 
Tamil Nadu. It must be noted that the names of the districts mentioned 
may not all of them be correct since they keep changing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
Part 1 
Religion in General 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Dharma Alone Protects 
The pipal and the neem are the royal children of Mother Nature's 
kingdom of trees. As the New Year approaches they shed their leaves, 
sprout tender green shoots again not long after. It is all the work of 
Mother Nature.  
The custom of marrying the pipal to the neem and of installing the idols 
of Vinayaka and Nagaraja under them goes back to the dim past. After 
the winter months these trees will be bare and Vinayaka and Nagaraja 
will remain exposed to the sun. This is the time when we may sit under 
the open sky and bask in the sun because it is now neither too warm nor 
too cold. When it rains or when the sun beats down harshly on us, we 
need to shield ourselves with an umbrella. And when it is bitterly cold we 
cannot sit in the open and gaze at the sky. But now, when the leaves fall 
and the warmth of the sun is comforting (it is believed that with 
Sivarathri the cold season bids you goodbye with the chant, "siva, siva"), 
we may sit in the open, by day or at night, to gaze upon the sky. To 
proclaim the beneficial nature of this season as it were- when the pipal 
and the neem are shorn of their leaves- Mother Nature worships the gods 
under the trees (Vinayaka and Nagaraja) with the rays of the gentle sun.  
Nagaraja may also be called Subrahmanya. Indeed to the Telugu-speaking 
people the name 'Subbarayudu" denotes both Subrahmanya and the 
snake. The Tamil-speaking people worship snakes on Sasti, a custom that 
has existed from time immemorial. Mother Nature's concern for 
Vighnesvara and Subrahmanya, the children of Parvati and Paramesvara, 
is but an expression of her love for all of us who too are but the offspring 
of the same primordial couple. There is fullness about this love. As I said 
just now, when it is neither too warm nor too cold, Vighnesvara and 
Nagaraja are exposed to the sun. But, as the sun gets warmer with the 
advance of spring, Mother Nature protects these deities from the heat. 
How? The trees now burgeon and form a green umbrella over Vinayaka 
and Nagaraja. The shedding of leaves, the burgeoning again, all this is a 


 
part of the natural process and according to the immutable law of the 
universe, which has been in force from the very beginning of time.  
There is a law governing the behaviour of everything in this universe. All 
must submit to it for the world to function properly. Otherwise things will 
go awry and end up in chaos. It is the will of the Lord that all his creation, 
all his creatures, should live in happiness. That is why he has ordained a 
dharma, a law, for each one of them. It is compliance with this dharma 
that ensures all-round harmony. While Isvara protects his children from 
rain and sun, he also provides them, when needed, with the warmth of 
the gentle sun. His love for his children is expressed in the schema 
ordered by him for the functioning of Nature and the law he has laid 
down for trees is a part of it.  
To be worthy of Isvara's love we must possess certain qualities, certain 
virtues. If there is a law that applies to trees, there must be one that 
applies to us also. We shall deserve the Lord's love and compassion only 
by living in accordance with this law and by working for the well-being of 
all mankind. What is called dharma is this law, the law governing the 
conduct of man. Isvara has endowed man with intelligence, but it is by 
using this very intelligence that human beings keep violating their 
dharma. If it is asked why they do so, all we can say in answer is that it is 
but the sport of the Lord. Man goes seeking this and that, believing that 
they will make him happy, and all the while he keeps violating his 
dharma. But he will discover sooner or later that it is dharma alone that 
gives him happiness in the end.  
There is something that somehow turns people all over the world 
towards dharma. It is this something that inspires human beings 
everywhere to go beyond their material needs and do things that appear 
strange. How? One man reads the Bible, cross in hand; another smears 
ashes all over his body; and a third man wears the Vaisnava mark. From 
generation to generation mankind has been practicing such customs even 
without deriving any perceptible material benefit. What is the reason for 
this?  


 
Man first earned the means for his daily upkeep. But he soon discovered 
that meeting the needs of the present would not be enough. So he tried 
to earn more and save for his needs also. The question, however, arose as 
to what precisely constituted his "future". As he reflected on it, it became 
clear that his "future" on this earth would be endless, that he would not 
live a thousand years or ten thousand. So he concerned himself with 
earning enough to see him through his life and at the same time leaving 
enough for his children.  
What happened to a man after his death was the question that worried 
him next. The great men who emerged from time to time in various 
climes came to believe that the entity called man did not cease to exist 
even after his body perished. The truth dawned on them that the money 
and property acquired for the upkeep of a man's body served no purpose 
after his passing. As a next step they formed a view of what a human 
being must do in this life to ensure for himself a happy state in afterlife. 
Religious leaders in different countries taught different ways to achieve 
this. The cross, the namaz , the sacred ashes, the sacred earth came to be 
adopted in this manner by people belonging to different religious 
persuasions.  
"You must look upon the world as belonging to the Lord, and it is your 
duty to so conduct yourself as to conform yourself to this belief. This 
constitutes the dharma of humanity. Acts dictated solely by selfish 
interests will push one into unrighteousness. A man must learn to be less 
and less selfish in his thoughts and actions; he must always remember the 
Lord and must ever be conscious that he is the master of this entire 
world”. This view is the basis on which all religions have evolved.  
No religion teaches us to live according to our whims and fancies; no 
religion asks us to acquire wealth and property for our personal needs 
alone. If a man believes that he alone is important, that he is all, he will 
live only for himself. That is why all religions speak of an entity called God 
and teach man to efface his ego or I-feeling. "Child, “they tell him" , "you 
are nothing before that Power, the author of this universe. It is he -- that 
Power -- who has endowed you with intelligence. Your intelligence, your 


 
intellect, must guide you on the path of dharma, righteousness. For this 
purpose, you must look up to this Power for support. “The great 
importance attached to bhakti or devotion in all religions is founded on 
this belief, the need for divine support for virtuous conduct.  
Ordinarily, it is not easy to develop faith in, or devotion to, God expressed 
in abstract terms. For the common people devotion must take the form 
of practical steps. That is how ritual originated. Sandhyavandana, the 
namaz and other forms of prayer are examples of such ritual. The 
religious teach people their duties, how they must conduct themselves to 
God in the very midst of their worldly life.  
"Love everyone.” "Live a life of sacrifice." "Serve mankind.” Such are the 
teachings of the various religions. If a man lives according to these tenets, 
it is believed that his soul will reach God after it departs from his body. 
Those who subscribe to Advaita or non-dualism declare that the soul will 
become one with the Godhead. According to another system of belief, 
after reaching the Lord, the soul will serve him and ever remain happy as 
the recipient of his compassion. There is no need to quarrel over the 
nature of the final state. "By following one path or another we attain the 
Lord. And that will be the end of all our sorrows, all our frustrations and 
all our failures in this world. There will now be nothing but bliss, full and 
everlasting. “No more than this do we need to know for the present.  
If the Paramatman is to draw us unto himself we must, without fail, 
perform our duties to him as well as to the world. It is these duties that 
constitute what is called dharma. Again, it is dharma that serves us when 
we dwell in our body and when we cease to dwell in it. It serves us in life 
and afterlife. When we are in this world we must do that which would 
take us to a desirable state after we depart from it. We take an insurance 
policy so that our relatives will be able to take care of themselves when 
we are gone. But is it not far more important to ensure that we will be 
happy in our after life? Dharma is after life insurance. But in this life too it 
is dharma that gives us peace and happiness.  
There need be no doubt or confusion about the dharma we ought to 
follow. We are all steeped in the dharma that our, great men have 


 
pursued from generation to generation. They have inwardly realized 
eternal beatitude and we know for certain that they lived without any 
care, unlike people in our own generation who are always discontented 
and are embroiled in agitations and demonstrations of all kinds. All we 
need to do is to follow the dharma that they practiced. If we tried to 
create a new dharma for ourselves it might mean trouble and all the time 
we would be torn by doubts as to whether it would bring us good or 
whether it would give rise to evil. It is best for us to follow the dharma 
practiced by the great men of the past, the dharma of our forefathers.  
Man is subject to all kinds of hardships and misfortunes. To remind 
ourselves of this, we eat the bitter flowers of the neem on New Year's 
Day-that is on the very first day of the year we accept the bitterness of 
life. During the Pongal ceremony, which is celebrated almost towards the 
close of the year, we have sugarcane to chew. If we have only sweetness 
in the beginning we may have to experience bitterness towards the end. 
We must not have any aversion for the bitter but welcome it as the 
medicine administered by Mother Nature or by dharma. If we do so, in 
due course, we will learn to regard any experience, even if it were 
unpleasant, as a sweet one.  
Great indeed were the misfortunes suffered by Sri Rama during his exile 
in the forest. To a son going on a long journey the mother gives food to 
take with him. Kausalya does the same when her son Rama leaves for the 
forest, but she does so after much thought, for she wants the food to last 
during all the fourteen years of his exile. And what is that food? Kausalya 
gives Rama the eternal sustenance of dharma. Raghava, she says to him, 
"it is dharma alone that will protect you, and this dharma is what you 
yourself protect with courage and steadfastness.” It is the escort of 
dharma that the mother provides her son sent out from his kingdom.  
Yam palayasi dharmam tvam dhrithaya ca niyamena ca 
Sa vai Raghava-sardula dharmastvamabhiraksatu 
It was dharma that brought victory to Rama after all his struggle. If a man 
treads the path of dharma he will win universal respect. If he slips into 
adharma, unrighteousness, even his brother will turn a foe. The 


 
Ramayana illustrates this truth. Sri Rama was regarded with respect by 
the vanaras. What about Ravana? Even his brother Vibhisana forsakes 
him.  
Dharma --- and dharma alone is our protecting shield. How did Ravana 
with his ten heads perish and how did Sri Ramachandra rise with his head 
held high as Vijayaraghava (the victorious Raghava)? It was all the doing 
of dharma.  
One's religion is nothing but the dharma practiced by one's forefathers. 
May all adhere to their dharma with unwavering faith and courage and be 
rewarded with everlasting bliss.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Papa and Punya 
Nobody wants to be known as a sinner, but all the same we keep 
transgressing the bounds of morality and disobey the divine law. We wish 
to enjoy the fruits of virtue without being morally good and without 
doing anything meritorious.  
Arjuna says to Bhagavan Krsna: "No man wants to commit sin. Even so, 
Krsna, he does evil again and again. What is it that drives him so? ". The 
lord replies "It is desire. Yes, it is desire, Arjuna ".  
We try to gain the object of our desire with no thought of right or wrong 
(Dharma or Adharma). Is fire put out by ghee poured into it? No, it rises 
higher and higher. Likewise, when we gratify one desire, another, much 
worse, crops up. Are we to take it, then, that it would be better if our 
desires were not satisfied? - No. Unfulfilled desire causes anger, so too 
failure to obtain the object we hanker after. Like a rubber ball thrown 
against the wall such an unsatisfied desire comes back to us in the form 
of anger and goads us into committing sin. Krsna speaks of such anger as 
being next only to desire (as an evil).  
Only by banishing desire from our hearts may we remain free from sin. 
How is it done? We cannot but be performing our works. Even when we 
are physically inactive, our mind remains active. All our mental and bodily 
activity revolves around our desires. And these desires thrust us deeper 
and deeper into sin. Is it, then, possible to remain without doing any 
work? Human nature being what it is, the answer is "No". "It is not 
difficult to quell one’s thinking nor is it easy to remain without doing 
anything--”, says Tayumanavasvamigal. We may stop doing work with the 
body, but how do we keep the mind quiet? The mind is never still. Apart 
from being until itself, it incites the body to action.  
We are unable either to efface our desires or to cease from all action. 
Does it then mean that liberation is beyond us? Is there no way out of the 


 
problem? Yes, there is. It is not necessary that we should altogether stop 
our actions in our present immature predicament. But instead of working 
for our selfish ends, we ought to be engaged in such work as would bring 
benefits to the world as well as to our inward life. The more we are 
involved in such work the less we will be drawn by desire. This will to 
some extent keep us away from sin and at the same time enable us to do 
more meritorious work. We must learn the habit of doing work without 
any selfish motives. Work done without any desire for the fruit thereof is 
Punya or virtuous action.  
We sin in four different ways. With our body we do evil; with our tongue 
we speak untruth; with our mind we think evil; and with our money we 
do so much that is wicked. We must learn to turn these very four means 
of evil into instruments of virtue.  
We must serve others with our body and circumambulate the Lord and 
prostrate ourselves before him. In this way we earn merit. How do we use 
our tongue to add our stock of virtue? By muttering, by repeating, the 
names of the Lord. You will perhaps excuse yourself saying: "All our time 
is spent in earning our livelihood. How can we think of God or repeat his 
names? “A householder has a family to maintain; but is he all the time 
working for it? How much time does he waste in gossip, in amusements, 
in speaking ill of others, in reading the papers? Can't he spare a few 
moments to remember the Lord? He need not set apart a particular hour 
of the day for his japa. He may think of God even on the bus or the train 
as he goes to his office or any other place. Not a paisa is he going to take 
with him finally after his lifelong pursuit of money. The Lord's name 
(Bhagavannama) is the only current coin in the other world.  
The mind is the abode of Isvara but we make a rubbish can of it. We must 
cleanse it, install the Lord in it and be at peace with ourselves. We must 
devote atleast five minutes every day to meditation and resolve to do so 
even if the world crashes around us. There is nothing else that will give us 
a helping hand when the world cosmos is dissolved.  
It is by helping the poor and by spreading the glory of the Lord that we 
will earn merit.  


 
Papa, sinful action, is two-pronged in its evil power. The first incites us to 
wrong-doing now. The second goads us into doing evil tomorrow. For 
instance, if you take snuff now you suffer now. But tomorrow also you 
will have the same yearning to take the same. This is what is called the 
vasana that comes of habit. An effort must be made not only to reduce 
such vasana but also cultivate the vasana of virtue by doing good deeds.  
It is bad vasana that drags us again and again into wrong-doing. 
Unfortunately, we do not seem to harbour any fear on that score. People 
like us, indeed even those known to have sinned much, have become 
devotees of the Lord and obtained light and wisdom. How is Isvara 
qualified to to be called great if he is not compassionate, and does not 
protect sinners also? It is because of sinners like us that he has come to 
have the title of "Patitapavana" [he who sanctifies or lifts up the fallen 
with his grace]. It is we who have brought him such a distinction.  
"Come to me, your only refuge. I shall free you from all sins. Have no fear 
(sarvapapebhyo moksayisyami ma sucah). “The assurance that Sri Krsna 
gives to free us from sin is absolute. So let us learn to be courageous. To 
tie up an object you wind a string round it again and again. If it is to be 
untied you will have to do the unwinding in a similar manner. To 
eradicate the vasana or sinning you must develop the vasana of doing 
good to an equal degree. In between there ought to be neither haste nor 
anger. With haste and anger the thread you keep unwinding will get 
tangled again. Isvara will come to our help if we have patience, if we have 
faith in him and if we are rooted in dharma.  
The goal of all religions is to wean away man- his mind, his speech and his 
body- from sensual pleasure and lead him towards the Lord. Great men 
have appeared from time to time and established their religions with the 
goal of releasing people from attachment to their senses, for it is our 
senses that impel us to sin. "Transitory is the joy derived from sinful 
action, from sensual pleasure. Bliss is union with the Paramatman. “Such 
is the teaching of all religions and their goal is to free man from worldly 
existence by leading him towards the Lord.  
 


 

The Purpose of Religion 
Religion is the means of realizing dharma, artha, kama and moksa. These 
four are called purusarthas.  
In Tamil, dharma is called “aram”; artha is known as “porul’; and kama 
and moksa are called “inbam, “and vidu respectively. “Artha” occurs in 
the term “purusarthas”, but it is itself one of the purusarthas? What a 
man wants for himself in his life- the aims of a man’s life- are the 
purusarthas. What does a man want to have? He wants to live happily 
without lacking for anything. There are two types of happiness: the first is 
ephemeral; and the second is everlasting and not subject to diminution. 
Kama or in barn is ephemeral happiness and denotes worldly pleasure, 
worldly desires. Moksa or vidu is everlasting happiness, not transient 
pleasure. It is because people are ignorant about such happiness, how 
elevated and enduring it is, that they hanker after the trivial and 
momentary joys of kama.  
Our true quest must be for the fourth artha that is vidu or moksa. The 
majority of people today yearn for the third artha that is kama. When you 
eat you are happy. When you are appointed a judge of the high court you 
feel elated. You are delighted when presented with a welcome address by 
some institution, aren’t you? Such types of happiness are not enduring. 
The means by which such happiness is earned is porul. Porul may be corn, 
money, and house. It is this porul that is the way to happiness. But the 
pleasure gained from material possessions is momentary and you keep 
constantly hungering for more.  
Moksa is the state of supreme bliss and there is no quest beyond it. We 
keep going from place to place and suffer hardships of all kinds. Our 
destination is our home. A prisoner goes to his vidu or his home after he 
is released. But the word vidu also means release or liberation. Since we 
are now imprisoned in our body, we commit the grave mistake of 
believing that we are the body. The body is in fact our goal. Our real 


 
home is the bliss called moksa. We must find release from the goal that is 
our body and dwell in our true home. God has sentenced us to goal (that 
is he has imprisoned us in our body) for our sins. If we practice virtue he 
will condone our sins and release us from the prison of our body before 
the expiry of the sentence. We must desist from committing sinful acts so 
that our term of imprisonment is not extended and endeavor to free 
ourselves and arrive in our true home, our true home that is the Lord. 
This home is bliss that passeth understanding, bliss that is not bound by 
the limitations of time, space and matter.  
Lastly, I speak of the first purusartha, dharma. Dharma denotes 
beneficent action, good or virtuous deeds. The word has come to mean 
giving, charity. “Give me dharmam. Do dharmam, mother, “cries the 
beggar. We speak of “dana-dharma” [as a portmanteau word]. The 
commandments relating to charity are called “ara-kattalai”in Tamil. 
Looked at in this way, giving away our artha or porul will be seen to be 
dharma. But how do we, in the first place, acquire the goods to be given 
away in charity? The charity practiced in our former birth- by giving away 
our artha- it is that brings us rewards in this birth. The very purpose of 
owning material goods is the practice of dharma. Just as material 
possessions are a means of pleasure, so is dharma a means of material 
possessions. It is not charity alone that yields rewards in the form of 
material goods; all dharma will bring their own material rewards.  
If we practice dharma without expecting any reward in the belief that 
Isvara gives us what he wills- and in a spirit of dedication, the impurities 
tainting our being will be removed and we will obtain the bliss that is 
exalted. The pursuit of dharma that brings in its wake material rewards 
will itself become the means of attaining the Paramporul. Thus we see 
that dharma, while being an instrument for making material gain and 
through it of pleasure, becomes the means of liberation also if it is 
practiced unselfishly. Through it we acquire material goods and are 
helped to keep up the practice of dharma. This means that artha itself 
becomes a basis of dharma. It is kama or desire alone that neither fulfils 
itself nor becomes an instrument of fulfilling some other purpose. It is like 
the water poured on burning sands. Worse, it is an instrument that 


 
destroys everything dharmic thoughts, material possessions, liberation it-
self.  
All the same it is difficult, to start with, to be without any desire 
altogether. Religion serves to rein in desire little by little and take a man, 
step by step, from petty ephemeral pleasure to the ultimate bliss. First 
we are taught the meaning and implications of dharma and how to 
practice it, then we are instructed in the right manner in which material 
goods are to be acquired so as to practice this dharma; and, thirdly, we 
are taught the proper manner in which desires may be satisfied. It is a 
process of gaining maturity and wisdom to forsake petty pleasure for the 
ultimate bliss of moksa.  
Moksa is release from all attachments. It is a state in which the Self 
remains ever in untrammeled freedom and blessedness. The chief 
purpose of religion is to teach us how this supreme state may be 
attained.  
We know for certain that ordinary people do not achieve eternal 
happiness. The purpose of any religion is to lead them towards such 
happiness. Everlasting blessedness is obtained only by forsaking the quest 
for petty pleasures. The dictates of dharma help us to abandon the 
pursuit of sensual enjoyments and endeavor for eternal bliss. They are 
also essential to create a social order that has the same high purpose, the 
liberation of all. Religion, with its goal of liberation, lays down the tenets 
of dharma. That is why the great understand the word dharma itself to 
mean religion.  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Man and Beast 
Animals grow transversely. That is why they are called "tiryak" in Sanskrit. 
Man who grows upright ought to have, unlike beasts, a high ideal before 
him. He will then obtain more happiness than all other creatures. But 
what do we see in reality? Man experiences greater sorrow than all other 
creatures. Animals do not know so much desire, so much sorrow and so 
much humiliation, as do humans. More important, they are innocent of 
sin. It is we humans who keep sinning and suffering as a consequence.  
In one sense it seems to me that Isvara has not endowed us with the 
same advantages that he has endowed animals with. We are not fitted 
with weapons of defense. If a cow feels threatened it has horns to defend 
itself. The tiger has its claws. We have neither horns nor claws. Sheep 
have hair to protect them from the cold of winter, so too other animals. 
But man is not similarly equipped. So he cannot repulse an attack; nor 
can he run fast like the horse, which has no horns but is fleet-footed. 
Against all these handicaps, man has the advantage of being more 
intelligent than all other creatures.  
In order to protect himself from the cold of winter, man removes the hair 
(fur) of animals and weaves it into rugs. When he wants to travel fast he 
yokes a horse to his cart. God has furnished man with this kind of skill; 
though he has neither claws nor horns to defend himself, a human being 
can forge weapons on his own. With the strength of his intelligence he 
remains the master of all other creatures and also rules over the entire 
world of inert matter.  
All species of animals have their own habitats. Some types of bear that 
are native to the cold climes do not thrive in our country. The elephant is 
a denizen of the forests of India and some other countries of South-East 
Asia and Africa, but it does not flourish in a cold climate. But man inhabits 
the entire earth. He uses his brains to make any part of this planet fit for 
him to live.  


 
But, even with his superior intelligence, man suffers. All hardships stem 
from the fact of birth. How can one save oneself from being born again? 
But, then, what is the cause of our birth? The wrongs committed by us 
are the cause of our birth and we have taken this body of flesh and blood 
to suffer punishment for the same. Suppose a certain number of 
whiplashes are to be administered according to the law. If the body 
perishes after ten lashes, we take another birth to suffer the remaining 
strokes. The sins we commit in satisfying our desires are the cause of our 
being born again and again. If there is no "doing", there will be no birth 
also. Anger is responsible for much of the evil we do and desire is at the 
root of it. It is of the utmost importance that we banish desire from our 
hearts. But it is not possible to remain without any action after having 
cultivated so many attachments. If the attachments were done away with 
we would cease to sin.  
What is the cause of desire? Desire arises from the belief that there is 
something other than ourselves and our being attached to it. In truth it is 
the one Sivam that manifests itself as everything.  
The cow sees its reflection in the mirror and charges it imagining it to be 
another cow. If a man sees his own image thus, does he think that there 
is another person in the mirror? He is not perturbed by his image because 
he knows that it is himself. Similarly, all that we see is one and the same 
thing. Desire springs from our belief in the existence of a second entity, 
and it causes anger, which, in turn, plunges us in sin. A new birth 
becomes inevitable now. If we are enlightened enough to perceive that 
all objects are one, there will be no ground for desire. There must be an 
object other than ourselves, a second entity, to be desired. No desire 
means no anger and no sin. In this state there will be neither any "doing" 
nor any birth. And, finally, there will be no sorrow.  
How do we obtain such enlightenment or jnana? Our body is sustained by 
our mother's milk. It is Amba who nourishes us with the milk of jnana. 
She is indeed the personification of jnana. We will be rewarded with the 
light of wisdom if we firmly hold her lotus feet and dissolve ourselves in 
her. One who does so becomes God.  


 
The first step in this process of enlightenment is to make a man truly a 
man, by ensuring that he does not live on an animal level. The second 
step is to raise him to the heights of divinity. All religions have this goal. 
They may represent different systems of thought and philosophy. But 
their concern ought to be that man is not condemned as he is today to a 
life of desire and anger. All religions speak in one voice that man must be 
rendered good and that he must be invested with the qualities of love, 
humility, serenity and the spirit of sacrifice.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Devotion Common to all Faiths 
All religious traditions have one purpose, to elevate man by freeing him 
from his cares and worries. A human being has worries that are not 
shared by other creatures. But it must be noted that all religious systems 
proclaim that man can not only free himself from his cares, if he makes 
an effort, but that he can also attain the enlightenment that is not within 
the reach of other creatures. They speak in one voice that he will be rid of 
his cares if he goes for refuge to the Great Power that rules all worldly 
activities. Devotion or bhakti is a feature common to all religious schools- 
Advaita (non-dualism), Dvaita (dualism), Visistadvaita (qualified non-
dualism), Saiva Siddhanta, Christianity, Islam and so on. The Buddha did 
not speak of devotion but it seems his followers cannot regard their 
master without bhakti. They have deified the Buddha and created images 
of him that are bigger than those sculpted for any deity. In very recent 
times a number of jnanins have laid stress on inquiry into the Self as the 
sole means of liberation. But they are themselves worshipped as God by 
their followers. Bhakti is an inborn characteristic of man; it is indeed an 
organic part of him.  
Devotion in the Advaita system implies adopting an attitude of non- 
difference between the worshipper and the worshipped; that is the 
devotee must look upon Isvara as not being different from himself. It 
might be asked: "The devotee who worships the omnipotent and 
omniscient Lord has only very limited strength and knowledge. How can 
the two of them be the same? “But the question also arises: "Does God 
regard us as being different from himself? If there are objects, entities, 
different from God how did they originate? If they came into existence as 
entities separate from Him how can He hold sway over them? ". 
If we think on these lines it will become clear that the one and only 
Paramatman exists in various forms: if the ocean stands for Isvara we 
have in contrast the pond, the well and the little quantity of water 
contained in a spoon and soon that stand for diverse living beings. The 


 
water in all is the same. There maybe differences in the strengths of the 
various entities. But if you go to the base, the ground or root, you will 
discover that they are the same. If we go to the root we will become one 
with the root. This is liberation according to Advaita. Merely to talk about 
non-dualistic liberation is nothing more than an Intellectual exercise and 
will serve no purpose. The truth of such liberation must become an 
inward reality. In other words the quest must culminate in actual 
experience and it can be had only with the grace of Isvara. Great sages 
proclaim that it is only with the blessings of that Power which keeps us in 
a constant whirl of action that the whirl will stop and that we will have 
the Advaitic urge to seek the ground. "Isvaranugrahadeva pumsam 
Advaitavasana.” 
Even in the initial stages when we feel that Isvara and his devotee are 
separate, we must try to cultivate the awareness, albeit to a small degree, 
that the Paramatman who appears as Isvara is the same as the 
Paramatman that has become "us". If such be our approach, our love for 
the Lord will become more intense. After all, is there anything or anyone 
we love more than ourselves?  
Isvara awards us the fruits of our actions. If we become more and more 
devoted to him, as recipients of his grace, we will get closer and closer to 
him. He will himself reveal to us who he is and there will be no need for 
us to inquire about him or into him. In response to our devotion he will 
deign to reveal his true nature to us. He declares so in the Gita: "Bhaktya 
mam abhijanati yavan yascasmi. . . .” (By devotion he comes to know who 
in truth I am. . . ).  
Countless are the attributes of Isvara that bespeak his surpassing beauty 
and auspicious qualities. Devotees find constant delight in contemplating 
them. But for the jnanin, the enlightened one, the ideal is the Godhead 
that has no attributes and it is in his Godhead that he is finally absorbed. 
Sagunopasana (worship of Isvara with attributes) is the first step towards 
this end. For it our religion has evolved the concept of "istadevata" ("the 
deity of one's choice", "the deity one likes").  


 
What is special about sanatana dharma or Hinduism as it has come to be 
called? Alone among all religions it reveals the one and only Godhead in 
many different divine forms, with manifold aspects. The devotee 
worships the Lord in a form suited to his mental make-up and is thus 
helped to come closer to the Lord with his love and devotion. These 
different forms are not the creation of anyone's imagination. The 
Paramatman has revealed himself in these forms to great men and they 
have had close contact, so to speak, with the deities so revealed. They 
have also shown us how we too may come face to face with these 
divinities, given us the mantras to accomplish this and also prescribed the 
manner in which the divine forms, whose vision they have had, are to be 
adored.  
Bhakti or devotion is common to all religions whatever the manner of 
worship they teach. It is not exclusive to our faith in which different 
deities are reverenced.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

The Unity of Religions 
All religions have one common ideal, worship of the Lord, and all of them 
proclaim that there is but one God. This one God accepts your devotion 
irrespective of the manner of your worship, whether it is according to this 
or that religion. So there is no need to abandon the religion of your birth 
and embrace another.  
The temple, the church, the mosque, the vihara may be different from 
one another. The idol or the symbol in them may not also be the same 
and the rites performed in them may be different. But the Paramatman 
who wants to grace the worshipper, whatever be his faith, is the same. 
The different religions have taken shape according to the customs 
peculiar to the countries in which they originated and according to the 
differences in the mental outlook of the people inhabiting them. The goal 
of all religions is to lead people to the same Paramatman according to the 
different attributes of the devotees concerned. So there is no need for 
people to change over to another faith. Converts demean not only the 
religion of their birth but also the one to which they convert. Indeed they 
do demean God.  
"A man leaves the religion of his birth because he thinks there is 
something wanting in it," so you may think. 'Why does the Svaamigal say 
then that the convert demeans the new religion that he embraces? “I will 
tell you why. Is it not because they think that God is not the same in all 
religions that people embrace a new faith? By doing so, they see God in a 
reduced form, don't they? They presumably believe that the God of the 
religion of their birth is useless and jump to another faith. But do they 
believe that the God of their new religion is a universal God? No. No. If 
they did there would be no need for any change of faith. Why do people 
embrace a new faith? Is it not because that the continuance in the 
religion of their birth would mean a denial of the blessings of the God of 
the new faith to which they are attracted? This means that they place 
limitations on their new religion as well as on its God. When they convert 


 
to a new religion, apparently out of respect for it, they indeed dishonour 
it.  
One big difference between Hinduism and other faiths is that it does not 
proclaim that it alone shows the path to liberation. Our Vedic religion 
alone has not practiced conversion and the reason for it is that our 
forefathers were well aware that all religions are nothing but different 
paths to realise the one and only Paramatman. The Vedas proclaim: "The 
wise speak of the One Truth by different names.”Sri Krsna says in the 
Gita: "In whatever way or form a man worships me, I increase his faith 
and make him firm and steady in that worship.”And says one of the 
Azhvars: "Avaravar tamatamadu tarivari vahaivahai avaravar iraiyavar". 
This is the reason why the Hindus have not practiced- like adherents of 
other religions- proselytisation and religious persecution. Nor have they 
waged anything like the crusades or jehads.  
Our long history is sufficient proof of this. All historians accept the fact of 
our religious tolerance. They observe that, an empire like Srivijaya was 
established in the East, people there accepted our culture and our way of 
life willingly, not because they were imposed on them by force. They 
further remark that Hinduism spread through trade and not through 
force.  
In my opinion the Vedic religion was once prevalent all over the world. 
Certain ruins and relics found in various regions of the planet attest to 
this fact. Even historians who disagree with my view concede that in the 
past people in many lands accepted Indian culture and the way of life 
willingly and not on account of any force on our part.  
All religions that practice conversion employ a certain ritual. For instance, 
there is baptism in Christianity. Hinduism has more ritual than any other 
religion, yet its canonical texts do not contain any rite for conversion. No 
better proof is needed for the fact that we have at no time either 
encouraged conversion or practiced it.  
When a passenger arrives at a station by train he is besieged by the driver 
of the horse-cart, by the rikshavala, by the cabbie, and so on. He hires the 


 
vehicle in which he likes to be driven to his destination. It cannot be said 
with reason that those who ply different vehicles are guilty of competing 
with one another for the fare. After all it is their livelihood. But it makes 
no sense for the adherents of various faiths to vie with one another to 
take a man to the one and only destination that is God.  
There is a bridge across a river, consisting of a number of arches, each of 
them built to the same design and measurement. To the man sitting next 
to a particular arch it would appear to be bigger than the other arches. So 
is the case with people belonging to a particular religion. They feel that 
their religion alone is great and want others to join it. There is in fact no 
such need for anyone to leave the religion of his birth for another.  
That the beliefs and customs of the various religions are different cannot 
be a cause for complaint. Nor is there any need to make all of them 
similar. The important thing is for the followers of the various faiths to 
live in harmony with one another. The goal must be unity, not uniformity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Qualities of Religious Teachers 
Today students of philosophy and seekers all over the world accept 
Advaita or non-dualism as the supreme system of thought. Since you call 
me a teacher of Advaita you will naturally expect me to say that it is 
because of the excellence of this Vedantic system that it has so many 
followers. 
But, on reflection, the question arises as to whether all people do indeed 
subscribe to non-dualism. The world over people follow so many different 
religions, subscribe to so many different philosophical systems. People 
belonging to the same country go from one faith to another. During the 
time of the Buddha many adherents of the Vedic religion embraced his 
system. In later centuries many Hindus became converts to Christianity or 
Islam. Jainas have become Vaisnavas with the name of "Pustimargins". 
During the time of Sri Ramanuja a number of people went over to the 
Visistadvaita (qualified non-dualism) fold. Similarly, Sri Madhva's school 
of Dvaita or dualism also gained many adherents. When Adi Sankara held 
sway, non-Vedic religions like Buddhism and Jainism suffered a decline. 
Those following the path of karma then- the karma marga is a part of the 
Vedic religion- returned to Advaita, which indeed is a wholly Vedic 
system. 
Why did religions that had flourished at one time go under later? Do 
people really follow a religion or subscribe to a philosophical system after 
making a proper inquiry into the same? Perhaps only thinking people 
embrace a religion after an assessment of its doctrines. The same cannot 
be said about the generality of people who any faith. If it is claimed that 
the common people accept a religion for its concepts, they must be able 
to speak about them and tell us how these doctrines are superior to 
those of other religions. The fact is that the vast majority of the followers 
of any faith know precious little about the beliefs or doctrines on which it 
is founded. 


 
I believe that the growth or expansion of a religion is in no way related to 
its doctrines. The common people do not worry about questions of 
philosophy. A great man of exemplary character and qualities appears on 
the scene- a great man of compassion who creates serenity all round- and 
people are drawn to him. They become converts to his religion in the firm 
belief that the doctrines preached by him, whatever they be, must be 
good. On the other hand, a religion will decline and decay if its 
spokesmen, however eloquent they are in expounding its concepts, are 
found to be guilty of lapses in character and conduct. It is difficult to give 
an answer to the question why people flock to religions that have 
contradictory beliefs. But if we examine the history of some religions- 
how at one time people gloried in them and how these faiths later 
perished- we shall be able to know the reason. At the same time, it would 
be possible for us to find out how at the first place they attracted such a 
large following. If you find out how a religion declined you will be able to 
know how it had first grown and prospered. 
The decay of a religion in any country could be attributed to the lack of 
character of its leaders and of the people constituting the establishment 
responsible for its growth. 
When we listen to the story of the Buddha, when we see again and again 
his images that seem to exude the milk of human kindness, compassion 
and tranquility spring in our own hearts and we feel respectful towards 
him. People must have been attracted to him thus during his time. How, 
in later times, there was a moral decline in the Buddhist monastic 
establishments will be seen from MattaVilasam written by Mahendra 
Pallava. This work shows how Buddhism came to be on the decline and 
demonstrates that the rise or fall of a religion is dependent on the quality 
and character of its spokesmen. 
After the Buddha came AdiSankara to whom people were drawn for his 
incomparable goodness and greatness. Later appeared Ramanuja and 
Madhva who, in their personal lives, stood out as men of lofty character. 
They too were able to gather round them a large following and extend 
the sway of their respective systems. Recently came Gandhiji as a man of 


 
peace and sacrifice. Millions of people accepted his teachings, which 
indeed came to constitute religion, "Gandhism". If a system owes its 
growth to the excellence of the philosophical principles on which it is 
based, Gandhism ought to be at the peak of its glory today. But what do 
we see in reality? The Gandhian way of life as practiced now is all too 
obvious to need any comment. 
The question here is not about the religions that try to draw people to 
themselves either through force or the lure of money. It is but natural for 
ignorant people to become converts to a new religion through rites like 
baptism after receiving various inducements and "social rewards". It was 
in this manner, they say, that Christianity extended its influence during 
times of famine. It is also said that Islam was propagated with the sword, 
that masses of people were forced to join it by force of arms. Here again 
there is proof of the fact that that the common people do not adopt a 
religion for the sake of any principle or out of any interest in its 
philosophical system. There is one matter to consider. The padres 
[Christian missionaries] converted mainly people living in the ceris [that is 
people on the outskirts of a village or town]. Their usual procedure was to 
tell these poor folk that they were kept suppressed in the religion of their 
birth and offer them inducements in the form of free education and 
medical treatment and the promise of a better status. 
Not all, however, fell to such lures. However much they seemed to be 
suppressed in the religion of their birth, many of them refused to be 
converted, ignoring the advantages held out. Why? One reason was their 
good nature and the second was respect for the great men who have 
appeared in our religion from time to time. They told themselves: "Let us 
continue to remain in the religion of our forefathers, the religion that has 
produced so many great men." 
We must not censure those who convert people to their faith. They 
believe that their religion represents the highest truth. That is why they 
practice conversion by compulsion or by placing various temptations 
before people belonging to other faiths. Let us take it that they try to 
bring others into their fold because they believe that that is the only 


 
means of a man's salvation. Let us also presume that they believe that 
there is nothing wrong in carrying out conversion either by force or 
through the offer of inducements because they think that they are doing 
it for the well-being of the people they seek to convert. 
If religions that resort neither to force nor to money power have grown, it 
is solely because of the noble qualities of their teachers. Outwards guise 
alone is not what constitutes the qualities of the representative or the 
spokesman of a religion. Whatever the persuasion to which he belongs he 
must be utterly selfless, bear ill-will towards none, in addition to being 
morally blameless. He must live an austere life, and must be calm and 
compassionate by nature. Such a man will be able to help those who 
come to him by removing their shortcomings and dispelling the evil in 
them. 
Producing men of such noble qualities from amongst us is the way to 
make our religion flourish. It is not necessary to carry on propaganda 
against other religions. The need is for representatives, for preceptors, 
capable of providing an example through their very life of the teachings 
of our religion. It is through such men that, age after age, sanatana 
dharma has been sustained as a living force. Hereafter too it will be 
through them that it will continue to remain a living force. 
If a militant proselytizer appears on the scene, I shall not be able to 
gather a force to combat him. Nor can I spend crores and crores like 
those religious propagandists who build schools and hospitals to entice 
people into their faith. Even if I were able to do so, conversions carried 
out in such a manner would be neither true nor enduring. Suppose a 
group comes up that has more muscle and money power; it will undo my 
work with its superior force and greater monetary strength. We should 
not, therefore, depend on such outward forces to promote our religion 
but instead rely on our Atmic strength to raise ourselves. In this manner 
our religion will flourish without any need for aggressive propaganda or 
the offer of inducements. 
At present many intellectuals abroad talk in glowing terms of Advaita, 
may be because of its lofty character as a philosophical system. They 


 
come to the school of Vedanta after examining it and after being inwardly 
convinced of its truth. But the common people need the example of a 
great soul, a great life [not abstract principles]. 
A man of peace and compassion, a man of wisdom and self-sacrifice, 
must arise from our midst. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
Part 2 
The Vedic Religion: Introductory 


 

The Religion without a Name 
We speak of the "Hindu religion", but the religion denoted by the term 
did not in fact have such a name originally. According to some, the word 
"Hindu" means "love"; according to some others a Hindu is one who 
disapproves of himsa or violence. This may be an ingenious way of 
explaining the word.  
In none of our ancient sastras does the term "Hindu religion" occur. The 
name "Hindu" was given to us by foreigners. People from the West came 
to our land across the Sindhu river which they called "Indus" or "Hind" 
and the land adjacent to it by the name "India". The religion of this land 
came to be called "Hindu". The name of a neighbouring country is 
sometimes applied to the land adjacent to it. Let me tell you an 
interesting story in this connection.  
In the North people readily give alms to anybody calling himself a bairagi. 
The bairagis have a grievance against Southerners because they do not 
follow the same practice. "iIlai po po kahe Telungi" is one of their ditties. 
"Telugus do not say "po, po" but "vellu" for "go, go".”Po" is a Tamil word. 
Then how would you explain the line quoted above? During their journey 
to the South, the bairagis had first to pass through the Telugu country 
(Andhra); so they thought that the land further south also belonged to 
the Telugus.  
There is the same logic behind the Telugus themselves referring to Tamil 
Nadu as "Arava Nadu" from the fact that a small area south of Andhra 
Pradesh is called "Arva". Similarly, foreigners who came to the land of the 
Sindhu called all Bharata beyond also by the same name.  
However it be, "Hinduism" was not the name of our religion in the distant 
past. Nor was it known as "Vaidika Mata" (Vedic religion or as "sanatana 
dharma" ( the ancient or timeless religion). Our basic texts do not refer to 


 
our faith by any name. When I thought about it I felt that there was 
something deficient about our religion.  
One day, many years ago, someone came and said to me: "Ramu is here." 
At once I asked somewhat absent-mindedly: "Which Ramu?” Immediately 
came the reply: “Are there many Ramus?” Only then did it occur to me 
that my question, "Which Ramu?“ had sprung from my memory of the 
past. There were four people in my place bearing the name of "Ramu". 
So, to tell them apart, we called them "Dark Ramu". When there is only 
one Ramu around there is no need to give him a distinguishing label.  
It dawned on me at once why our religion had no name. When there are 
a number of religions they have to be identified by different names. But 
when there is only one, where is the problem of identifying it?  
All religions barring our own were established by single individuals. 
"Buddhism" means the religion founded by Gautama Buddha. Jainism 
was founded by the Jina called Mahavira. So has Christianity its origin in 
Jesus Christ. Our religion predating all these had spread all over the 
world. Since there was no other religion to speak about then it was not 
necessary to give it a name. When I recognised this fact I felt at once that 
there was no need to be ashamed of the fact that our religion had no 
name in the past. On the contrary, I felt proud about it.  
If ours is primeval religion, the question arises as to who established it. All 
inquiries into this question have failed to yield an answer. Was it Vyasa, 
who composed the Brahmasutra, the founder of our religion? Or was it 
Krsna Paramatman who gave us the Bhagavad-Gita? But both Vyasa and 
Krsna state that the Vedas existed before them. If that be the case, are 
we to point to the rsis, the seers who gave us the Vedic mantras, as the 
founders of our religion? But they themselves declare: “We did not create 
the Vedas.” When we chant a mantra we touch our head with our hand 
mentioning the name of one seer or another. But the sages themselves 
say: "It is true that the mantras became manifest to the world through us. 
That is why we are mentioned as the 'mantra rsis'. But the mantras were 
not composed by us but revealed to us. When we sat meditating with our 
minds under control, the mantras were perceived by us in space. Indeed 


 
we saw them (hence the term mantra-drastas). We did not compose 
them. "[the seers are not "mantra-kartas". ] 
All sounds originate in space. From them arose creation. According to 
science, the cosmos was produced from the vibrations in space. By virtue 
of their austerities the sages had the gift of seeing the mantras in space, 
the mantras that liberate men from this creation. The Vedas are 
apauruseya (not the work of any human author) and are the very breath 
of the Paramatman in his form as space. The sages saw them and made a 
gift of them to the world.  
If we know this truth, we have reason to be proud of the fact that we do 
not know who founded our religion. In fact we must feel happy that we 
have the great good fortune to be heirs to a religion that is eternal, a 
religion containing the Vedas which are the very breath of the 
Paramatman.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

The Universal Religion 
In the dim past what we call Hinduism today was prevalent all over the 
world. Archaeological studies reveal the existence of relics of our Vedic 
religion in many countries. For instance, excavations have brought up the 
text of a treaty between Rameses II and the Hittites dating back to the 
th century B. C. In this, the Vedic gods Mitra and Varuna are mentioned 
as witnesses to the pact. There is a connection between the name of 
Ramesses and that of our Rama.  
About 75 per cent of the names of places in Madagascar have a Sanskritic 
origin.  
In the Western Hemisphere too there is evidence of Hinduism having 
once flourished there. In Mexico a festival is celebrated at the same time 
as our Navaratri; it is called "Rama-Sita". Wherever the earth is dug up 
images of Ganapati are discovered here. The Aztecs had inhabited Mexico 
before the Spaniards conquered that land. "Aztecs” must be a distorted 
form of "Astikas". In Peru, during the time of the holy equinox [vernal?] 
worship was conducted in the sun temple. The people of this land were 
called Incas: "Ina" is one of the Sanskrit names of the sun god. Don't we 
call Rama Inakula-tilaka?  
There is book containing photographs of the aborigines of Australia 
dancing in the nude (The Native Tribes of Central Australia, by Spencer 
Killan, pages 128 & 129). A close look at the pictures captioned "Siva 
Dance", shows that the dancers have a third eye drawn on the forehead.  
In a virgin forest in Borneo which, it is said, had not been penetrated by 
any human being until recently, explorers have found a sacrificial post 
with an inscription in a script akin to our Granthas characters. Historians 
know it as the inscription of Mulavarman of Kotei. Mention is made in it 
of a sacrifice, the king who performed it, the place where the yupas was 
installed. That the king gave away kalpavrksass as a gift to Brahmins is also 


 
stated in this inscription. All such details were discovered by Europeans, 
the very people who ridicule our religion.  
Now something occurs to me in this context, something that you may find 
amusing. You know that the Sagaras went on digging the earth down to 
the nether world in search of their sacrificial horse. An ocean came into 
being in this way and it was called sagara after the king Sagara.  
The Sagaras, at last found the horse near the hermitage of Kapila 
Maharsi. Thinking that he must be the man who had stolen the animal 
and hidden it in the nether world they laid violent hands on him. 
Whereupon the sage reduced them to ashes with a mere glance of his 
eye. Such is the story according to the Ramayana. America, which is at 
the antipodes, may be taken to Patala or the nether world. Kapilaranya 
(the forest in which Kapila had his hermitage), we may further take it, was 
situated there. It is likely that Kapilaranya changed to California in the 
same manner as Madurai is something altered to "Marudai". Also 
noteworthy is the fact that there is a Horse Island near California as well 
as an Ash Island.  
Another idea occurs to me about Sagara and sagara. Geologists believe 
that ages ago the Sahara desert was an ocean. It seems to me that Sahara 
is derived from sagara.  
Some historians try to explain the evidence pointing to the worldwide 
prevalence of our religion in the past to the exchange of cultural and 
religious ideas between India and other countries established through 
travels. I myself believe that there was one common religion or dharma 
throughout and that the signs and symbols that we find of this today are 
the creation of the original inhabitants of the lands concerned.  
The view put forward by some students of history about the discovery of 
the remnants of our religion in other countries- these relating to what is 
considered the historical period of the past two or three thousand years- 
is that Indians went to these lands, destroyed the old native civilizations 
there and imposed Hindu culture in their place. Alternatively, they claim, 


 
Indians thrust their culture into the native ways of life in such a way that 
it became totally absorbed in them.  
The fact, however, is that evidence is to be found in many countries of 
their Vedic connection dating back to 4, 000 years or more. That is, with 
the dawn of civilization itself, aspects of the Vedic dharama existed in 
these lands. It was only subsequently that the inhabitants of these 
regions came to have a religion of their own.  
Greece had an ancient religion and had big temples where various deities 
were worshipped. The Hellenic religion had Vedic elements in it. The 
same was the case with the Semitic religions of the pre- Christian era in 
the region associated with Jesus. The aborigines of Mexico had a religion 
of their own. They shared the Vedic view of the divine in the forces of 
nature and worshipped them as deities. There was a good deal of ritual in 
all such religions.  
Now none of these religions, including that of Greece, survives. The Greek 
civilization had once attained to the heights of glory. Now Christianity 
flourishes in Greece. Buddhism has spread in Central Asia and in East Asia 
up to Japan. According to anthropologists, religions in their original form 
exist only in areas like the forests of Africa. But even these ancient faiths 
contain Vedic elements.  
Religious and philosophical truths are often explained through parables, 
stories, so that ignorant people can understand them easily. Since 
metaphysical concepts are difficult to grasp, either they have to be told in 
the form of a story or they have to be given the form of a ritual that is 
they must find expression as religious acts. For the common people the 
performance of a rite is a means of finding the truth present in it in the 
form of a symbol. I do not, however, agree with the view that all rituals 
are nothing but symbolic in their significance and that there is no need to 
perform them so long as their inner meaning is understood.  
Ritual as ritual has its own place and efficacy. Similarly, I would not say 
that stories from the Puranas are nothing but illustrations or explanations 
of certain truths or doctrines. As stories they are of a high order and I 


 
believe that they really happened. But, at the same time, they 
demonstrate the meaning of certain truths. As for rites, their 
performance brings up benefits. But in due course, as we learn to 
appreciate their inner meaning we shall become purified in mind. This is 
the stage when we shall no more yearn for any benefits from their 
performance and will be rewarded with supreme well-being (that is, 
liberation).  
It is likely, though, that, with the passage of time, some stories or rites 
will become far removed from their inner meaning. Or, it may be, the 
inner meaning will be altogether forgotten. So it must be that, when new 
religions took shape abroad, after the lapse of thousands of years-
religions not connected with the Vedic faith that is the root-the original 
Vedic concepts become transformed or distorted.  
You must be familiar with the story of Adam and Eve which belongs to 
the Hebrew tradition. It occurs in the Genesis of the Old Testament and 
speaks of the tree of knowledge and God's commandment that its fruit 
shall not be eaten. Adam at first did not eat it but Eve did. After that 
Adam too ate the forbidden fruit.  
Here an Upanisadic concept has taken the form of a biblical story. But 
because of the change in the time and place the original idea has become 
distorted-or even obliterated.  
The Upanisadic story speaks of two birds perched on the branch of a 
pippala tree. One eats the fruit of tree while the order merely watches its 
companion without eating. The pippala tree stands for the body. The first 
bird represents a being that regards himself as the jivatman or individual 
self and the fruit it eats signifies sensual pleasure. In the same body 
(symbolized by the tree) the second bird is to be understood as the 
Paramatman. He is the support of all beings but he does not know 
sensual pleasure. Since he does not eat the fruit he naturally does not 
have the same experience as the jivatman (the first). The Upanisad 
speaks with poetic beauty of the two birds. He who eats the fruit is the 
individual self, jiva, and he who does not eat is the Supreme Reality, the 
one who knows himself to be the Atman.  


 
It is this jiva that has come to be called Eve in the Hebrew religious 
tradition. "Ji" changes to "i" according to a rule of grammar and "ja" to 
"ya". We have the example of "Yamuna" becoming "Jamuna" or of 
"Yogindra" being changed to "Joginder ". In the biblical story "jiva" is 
"Eve" and "Atma" (or "Atman") is "Adam". "Pippala" has in the same way 
changed to "apple". The Tree of Knowledge is our "bodhi-vrksa". "Bodha" 
means "knowledge". It is well known that the Budhha attained 
enlightenment under the bodhi tree. But the pipal (pippala) was known 
as the bodhi tree even before his time.  
The Upanisadic ideas transplanted into a distant land underwent a 
change after the lapse of centuries. Thus we see in the biblical story that 
the Atman (Adam) that can never be subject to sensual pleasure also eats 
the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge. While our bodhi tree stands for 
enlightenment, the enlightenment that banishes all sensual pleasure, the 
biblical tree affords worldly pleasure. These differences notwithstanding 
there is sufficient evidence here that, once upon a time, Vedic religion 
was prevalent in the land of the Hebrews.  
Let me give the another example to strengthen the view that however 
much a custom or a concept changes with the passage of time and with 
its acceptance by people of another land, it will still retain elements 
pointing to its original source. Our TiruppavaiT and TiruvembavaiT are not 
as ancient as the Vedas. Scholars ascribe them to an age not later than 1, 
 years ago. However it be, the authors of these Tamil hymns, AndalT 
and ManikkavacakarT, belong to an age much later than that of the Vedas 
and epics. After their time Hindu empires arose across the seas. Even the 
Cola kings extended their sway beyond the shores of the country. More 
worthy of note than our naval expeditions was the great expansion in our 
sea trade and the increase with it of our foreign contacts. As a result, 
people abroad were drawn to the Hindu religion and culture. Among the 
regions that developed such contacts, South-East Asia was the most 
important. Islands like Bali in the Indonesian archipelago became wholly 
Hindu. People in Siam (Thailand), Indochina and the Philippines came 
under the influence of Hindu culture. Srivijaya was one of the great 
empires of South-East Asia.  


 
[Here the Paramaguru briefly touches upon the stages representing the 
emergence of various religions]. In primeval times the Vedic religion was 
prevalent everywhere: this was the first stage. In the second stage new 
religions emerged in various parts of the world. In the third stage these 
decayed and their place was taken by Buddhism, Christianity or Islam. In 
the subsequent stage the Hindu civilization became a living force outside 
the shores of India also, particularly in South-East Asia. This was the 
period during which great temples reminding us of those of Tamil Nadu 
arose with the spread of our religion and culture: Angkor-vat in 
Cambodia; Borobudur in Java, Indonesia; Prambanan, also in Java. Now it 
was that our Tiruppavai and Tiruvembavai made their passage to 
Thailand.  
Even today a big festival is held in Thailand in December- January, 
corresponding to the Tamil Margazhi, the same month during which we 
read the Tiruppavai and Tiruvembavai with devotion. As part of the 
celebrations a dolotsava (swing festival) is held. A remarkable feature of 
this is that, in the ceremony meant for Visnu, a man with the make-up of 
Siva is seated on the swing. This seems to be in keeping with the fact that 
the Tiruppavai and Tiruvembavai contribute to the unification of 
Vaisnavism and Saivism.  
If you ask the people of Thailand about the Pavai poems, they will not be 
able to speak about them. It might seem then that there is no basis for 
connecting the festival with the Pavai works merely because it is held in 
the month corresponding to the Tamil Murgazhi. But the point to note is 
that the people of that country themselves call it "Triyampavai- 
Trippavai".  
Those who read the Bible today are likely to be ignorant about the 
Upanisads, but they are sure to know the story that can be traced back to 
them, that of Adam and Eve. The Thais now must be likewise ignorant 
about the Pavis but, all the same, they hold in the month of Dhanus every 
year a celebration called "Triyampavai - Trippavai. " As part of it they also 
have a swing festival in which figures a man dressed as Siva. Here the 
distortion in the observance of a rite have occurred during historical 


 
times- one of the distortions is that of Siva being substituted for Visnu. 
Also during this period the Thais have forgotten the Pavis but, 
significantly enough, they still conduct a festival named after them. 
Keeping these before you, take mind back to three thousand years ago 
and imagine how a religion or a culture would have changed after its 
passage to foreign lands.  
It is in this context that you must consider the Vedic tradition. For all the 
changes and distortions that it has undergone in other countries during 
the past millennia its presence there is still proclaimed through elements 
to be found in the religions that supplanted it.  
How are we to understand the presence of Hindu ideas or concepts in the 
religious beliefs of people said to belong to prehistoric times? It does not 
seem right to claim that in the distant past our religion or culture was 
propagated in other countries through an armed invasion or through 
trade, that is at a time when civilization itself has not taken shape there. 
That is why I feel that there is no question of anything having been taken 
from this land and introduced into another country. The fact according to 
me, is that in the beginning the Vedic religion was prevalent all over the 
world. Later, over the countries, it must have gone through a process of 
change and taken different forms. These forms came to be called the 
original religions of these various lands which in the subsequent period- 
during historical times- came under Buddhism, Christianity or Islam as the 
case may be. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Distinctive Features of Sanathan Dharama 
Our religion has a number of unique or distinctive features. One of them 
is what is called the theory of karma, though this theory is common to 
religions like Buddhism which are offshoots of Hinduism.  
What is the karma doctrine? For every action there is an equal and 
opposite reaction. There is an ineluctable law of physics governing cause 
and effect, action and reaction. This law pertaining to physical 
phenomena our forefathers applied to human life. The cosmos includes 
not only sentient beings endowed with consciousness but also countless 
insentient objects. Together they constitute worldly life. The laws, the 
dharma, proper to the first order must apply to the second also. 
According to the karma theory, every action of a man has an effect 
corresponding to it. Based on this belief our religion declares that, if a 
man commits a sin, he shall pay the penalty for it. Also if his act is a 
virtuous one, he shall reap the benefits thereof.  
Our religion further asserts that one is born again and again so as to 
experience the consequences of one's good and bad action. "Do good.” 
"Do not do evil,” such are the exhortations of all religions. But Hinduism 
(and its offshoots) alone lay stress on the cause-and -effect connection. 
No religion originating in countries outside India subscribes to the cause-
and-effect connection, nor to the reincarnation theory as one of its 
articles of faith. Indeed religions originating abroad hold beliefs contrary 
to this theory and strongly oppose the view that man is born again and 
again in order to exhaust his karma. They believe that a man has only one 
birth, that when his soul departs on his death it dwells somewhere 
awaiting the Day of Judgment. On this day God makes an assessment of 
his good and bad actions and, on the basis of it, rewards him with eternal 
paradise or sentences him to eternal damnation.  
Some years ago, a well-known writer from Europe came to see me 
nowadays you see many white men coming to the Matha. This gentleman 


 
told me that the Bible stated more than once that God is love. He could 
not reconcile this with the belief that God condemns a sinner to eternal 
damnation without affording him an opportunity for redemption. On this 
point a parade had told him: "It is true that there is an eternal hell. But it 
is eternally vacant. " 
The padre's statement is difficult to accept. Let us suppose that the Lord 
in his compassion does not condemn a sinner to hell. Where then does he 
send his soul? Since, according to Christianity, there is no rebirth the 
sinner is not made to be born again. So he too must be rewarded with 
heaven (as much as the virtuous man). This means that we may merrily 
keep sinning without any fear of punishment. After all, God will reward all 
of us with heaven. This belief implies that there is no need for morality 
and truthfulness.  
According to our religion too, Isvara who decides our fate after death on 
the basis of our karma is infinitely merciful. But, at the same time, he 
does not plunge the world in adharma, in unrighteousness- that is not 
how his compassion manifests itself. What does he do then? He gives us 
another birth, another opportunity to reap the fruits of our good and bad 
action. The joys of heaven and the torments of hell truly belong to this 
world itself. The sorrow and happiness that are our lot in our present 
birth are in proportion to the virtuous and evil deeds of our past birth. 
Those who sinned much suffer much now and, similarly, those who did 
much good enjoy much happiness now. The majority is made up of 
people who know more sorrow than happiness and people who 
experience sorrow and happiness almost in equal measure. There are 
indeed very few blessed with utter happiness. It is evident from this that 
most of us must have done more evil than good in our past birth.  
In His mercy the Lord gives us every time a fresh opportunity to wash 
away our sins. The guru, the sastras, and the temples are all his gifts to 
wipe away our inner impurities. That Isvara, in his compassion, places his 
trust even in a sinner confident that he will raise himself through his own 
efforts and gives him a fresh opportunity in the form of another birth to 
advance himself inwardly- is not such a belief better than that he should 


 
dismiss a sinner as good for nothing and yet reward him with heaven? If a 
man sincerely believes, in a spirit of surrender, there is nothing that he 
can do on his own and that everything is the Lord's doing, he will be 
redeemed and elevated. But it is one thing for God to bless a man who 
goes to him for refuge forsaking his own efforts to raise himself and quite 
another to bless him thinking him to be not fit to make any exertions on 
his own to advance inwardly. So long as we believe in such a thing as 
human endeavour we should think that Isvara's supreme compassion lies 
in trusting a man to go forward spiritually through his own efforts. It is in 
this way that the Lord's true grace is manifested.  
That God does not condemn anyone to eternal punishment in hell is the 
personal opinion of a particular padre. It cannot be said that all religions 
like Christianity which believe that a man has only one birth agree with 
this view. They believe that God awards a man hell or paradise according 
to the good or evil he has done in one single birth. Since sinners who 
deserve to be condemned to hell predominate, the Day of Judgment has 
come to be known by the terrible name of doomsday. Here we have a 
concept according to which the Lord's compassion seems to be 
circumscribed.  
There is strong evidence to support the reincarnation theory. A lady from 
the West came to see me one day and asked me if there was any proof of 
reincarnation. I did not have any discussion with her on the subject. 
Instead, I asked her to visit the local obstetric hospital and find out all 
about the children born there. There was a learned man who knew 
English where we were camping then. I asked him to accompany the lady. 
Later, on their return from the hospital, I asked the woman about her 
impressions of the new- born children. She said that she had found one 
child plump and lusty, another skinny; one beautiful and another 
ungainly. One child was born in a comfortable ward [that is to a well-to-
do mother] and another to a poor mother.  
"Leave aside the question of God consigning a man to eternal hell after 
his death,” I said to the foreign lady. "We are not witness to such a 
phenomenon. But now you have seen with your own eyes how differently 


 
the children are born in the hospital that you visited. How would you 
account for the differences? Why should one child be born rich and 
another poor? Why should one be healthy and another sickly? And why 
should one be good-looking and another not so good looking?  
"If you accept the doctrine that men are born only once, you cannot but 
from the impression that God is neither compassionate nor impartial- 
think of all the differences at birth- and that he functions erratically and 
unwisely. How are we to be devoted to such a God and have the faith 
that he will look on us with mercy? How are we to account for the 
differences between one being and another if we do not accept the 
doctrine that our life now is determined by the good and the bad we did 
in our past births. “The lady from the West accepted my explanation.  
Such an explanation is not, however, good enough for people in modern 
times. They demand scientific proof of reincarnation. Parapsychologists 
have done considerable research in the subject and their findings are in 
favour of the theory of rebirth. During the studies conducted in various 
parts of the world they encountered people who remembered their past 
lives. The latter recalled places and people they had seen in their previous 
birth-places and people that have nothing to do with them now. The 
parapsychologists verified these facts and to their amazement found 
them to be true. The cases investigated by them were numerous. Most of 
us are wholly unaware of our past lives, but some do remember them. 
According to the researchers the majority of such people had been 
victims of accidents or murder in their previous lives.  
The doctrine of the incarnations of the Lord- avataras- is another unique 
feature of our religion. The Reality (Sadvastu) is one. That It manifests 
itself as countless beings is one of our cardinal tenets. It follows that it is 
this one and only Reality that transforms itself again and again into all 
those beings that are subject to birth and death. Also it is the same 
Reality that is manifested as Isvara to protect this world of sentient 
beings and insentient objects. Unlike humans he is not subject to the law 
of karma. It is to live out his karma- to experience the fruits of his actions- 
that man is born again and again. But in birth after birth, instead of 


 
washing away his old karma, he adds more and more to the mud sticking 
to him.  
If the Lord descends to earth again and again it is to lift up man and show 
him the righteous path. When unrighteousness gains the upper hand and 
righteousness declines, he descends to earth to destroy unrighteousness 
and to establish righteousness again- and to protect the virtuous and 
destroy the wicked. Sri Krsna Paramatman declares so in the Gita.  
Isvara is to be known in different states. That the Lord is all- that all is the 
Lord- is a state that we cannot easily comprehend. Then there is a state 
mentioned in the "vibhuti yoga"of Gita according to which the Lord 
dwells in the highest of each category, in the "most excellent" of things. 
To create the highest of excellence in human life he sends messengers to 
earth in the guise of preceptors (acaryas), men of wisdom and 
enlightenment (jnanins), yogins and devotees. This is another state in 
which God is to be known. Not satisfied with the previous states, he 
assumes yet another state: he descends to earth as an avatara. The word 
"avatarana" itself means "descent". Isvara is "paratpara", that is "higher 
than the highest", "beyond what is beyond everything". Yet he descends 
to earth by being born in our midst to re-establish dharma.  
Sindhanta Saivas do not subscribe to the view of Siva having avataras. Nor 
they agree with the belief that Adi Sankara and Jnanasambandhar were 
incarnations of Siva and Muruga (Subrahmanya) respectively. Their view 
is that if Isvara dwells in a human womb, in a body of flesh, he makes 
himself impure. According to Advaitins even all those who inhabit the 
human womb made up of flesh are in substance nothing but the 
Brahman. They see nothing improper in the Lord coming down to earth.  
All Vaisnavas, without exception, accept the doctrine of divine avataras. 
Philosophically speaking, there are many points of agreement between 
Vaisnavas and Saivas though the former are not altogether in agreement 
with the view that it is the Brahman itself that is expressed as the 
individual self. When we speak of the avataras, we generally mean the 
ten incarnations of Visnu. Vaisnavas adhere to the doctrine of avataras 
because they believe that Visnu descends to earth to uplift humanity. 


 
Indeed it is because of his boundless compassion that he makes himself 
small [or reduces himself] to any degree. In truth, however, the Lord is 
neither reduces nor tainted a bit in any of his incarnations because, 
though in outward guise he looks a mortal, he knows himself to be what 
in reality he is.  
Altogether the Vedic dharma that is Hinduism accepts the concepts the 
concept of incarnations of the Lord. Saivas too are one with Vaisnavas in 
believing in the ten incarnations of Visnu.  
That the one and only Paramatman who has neither a form nor attributes 
is manifested as different forms with attributes is another special feature 
of our religion. We worship idols representing these forms of deities. For 
this reason others label us polytheists. There view is utterly wrong. 
Because we worship the one God, the one reality, in many different forms 
it does not mean that we believe in many gods. It is equally absurd to call 
us idolaters who hold that the idol we worship is God. Hindus with a 
proper understanding of their religion do not think that the idol alone is 
God. The idol is meant for the worshipper to offer one-pointed devotion 
and he adores it with the conviction that the Lord who is present 
everywhere is present in it also. We see that practitioners of other 
religions also have symbols for worship and meditation. So it is wholly 
unjust to believe that Hindus alone worship idols - to regard them with 
scorn as idolaters is not right.  
That ours is the only religion that does not proclaim that its followers 
have an exclusive right to salvation is a matter of pride for us Hindus. Our 
catholic outlook is revealed in our scriptures which declare that whatever 
the religious path followed by people they will finally attain the same 
Paramatman. That is why there is no place for conversion in Hinduism.  
Christianity has it that, if a man does not follow the teachings of Jesus 
Christ, he shall be condemned to hell. Islam says the same about those 
who do not follow the teachings of the Prophet Mohammed. We must 
not be angry with the adherents of either religion on that score. Let us 
take it that Christians and Muslims alike believe that followers of other 
religions do not have the same sense of fulfillment as they have. So let us 


 
presume that it is with good intentions that they want to bring others 
into their fold (Christianity or Islam as the case may be) out of a desire to 
help them.  
Let us also assume that if they resort to means that seem undesirable, it 
is to achieve what they think to be a good objective, luring others into 
their faith. It was thus that they carried out conversions in the past, by 
force of arms. Islam, particularly, expanded its sway in this way. It is often 
said that Christianity spread with the help of money power. But Christians 
also used their army to gain adherent, though with the force of arms was 
associated the philanthropic work of the missionaries. White men had the 
advantage of money that the Muslims of the Arabian Desert did not 
possess. Christian missionaries built schools, hospitals and so on to 
induce the poor to embrace their faith.  
We may not approve of people being forced into a religion or of 
conversions carried out by temptations placed before them. But we need 
not for that reason doubt that those who spread their religion in this 
fashion really believe that their work will bring general well-being.  
We cannot, however, help asking whether their belief is right. People 
who do not follow either Christ or the Prophet, are they really 
condemned to hell? A little thinking should show that the belief that the 
followers of Christianity or Islam have an exclusive right to salvation 
cannot be sustained. It is only some 2, 000 years since Jesus was born and 
only about 1, 400 years or so since the birth of the Prophet. What 
happened to all the people born before them since creation? Are we to 
believe that they must have passed into hell? We are also compelled to 
infer that even the forefathers of the founders of Christianity and Islam 
would not have earned paradise. If, like Hindus, all those who lived 
before Christ or the Prophet had believed in rebirth, we could concede 
that they would have been saved: they would have been again and again 
until the arrival of Christ or the Prophet and then afforded the 
opportunity of following their teachings. But if we accept the logic of 
Christianity and Islam, according to which religions there is no rebirth, we 


 
shall have to conclude that hundreds of millions of people for countless 
generations must have been consigned to eternal hell.  
The question arises as to whether God is so merciless as to keep 
dispatching people for ages together to the hell from which there is no 
escape. Were he compassionate would he not have sent, during all this 
time, a messenger of his or a teacher to show humanity the way to 
liberation? Why should we worship a God who has no mercy? Or for that 
matter, why should there be any religion at all?  
The countries are many and they have different climates and grow 
different crops. Also each part of the world has evolved a different 
culture. But the Vedas encompassed lands all over this planet from the 
very beginning. Latter other religions emerged in keeping with the 
changing attitudes of the nations concerned. That is why aspects of the 
Vedic tradition are in evidence not only in the religions now in force but 
in what we know of those preceding them. But in India alone has 
Hinduism survived as a full-fledged living faith.  
It must also be added that this primeval religion has regarded - and still 
regards - with respect the religions that arose subsequent to it. The Hindu 
view is this: "Other religions must have evolved according to the degree 
of maturity of the people among whom they originated. They will bring 
well being to their adherents. " "Live and let live" has been and continues 
to be the ideal of our religion. It has given birth to religions like Buddhism 
and Jainism and they [particularly Buddhism] have been propagated 
abroad for the Atmic advancement of the people there.  
I have spoken about the special characteristics of Hinduism from the 
philosophical and theological points of view. But it has also another 
important feature which is also distinctive- the sociological.  
All religions have their own philosophical and theological systems. Also all 
of them deal with individual life and conduct and, to a limited extent, 
with social life. "Look upon your neighbour as your brother.” "Regard 
your adversary as your friend.” Treat others in the same way as you 
would like to be treated yourself. " "Be kind to all creatures. " "Speak the 


 
truth.” "Practice non-violence.” These injunctions and rules of conduct 
relate to social life up to a point- and only up to a point. To religions other 
than Hinduism social life or the structure of society is not a major 
concern. Hinduism alone has a sturdy sociological foundation, and its 
special feature, "varnasrama dharma", is an expression of it.  
Varna dharma is one and asrama dharma is another (together they make 
up varnsrama dharma). Asrama dharma deals with the conduct of an 
individual during different stages of his life. In the first stage, as a 
brahmacarins, he devotes himself to studies in a gurukulas. In the second 
stage, as a youth, he takes a wife, settles down in life and begets children. 
In the third, as he ages further, he becomes a forest recluse and, without 
much attachment to worldly life, engages himself in Vedic karma. In the 
forth stage, he forsakes even Vedic works, renounces the word utterly to 
become a sannyasin and turns his mind towards the Paramatman. These 
four stages of life or asramas are called brahmacarya, garhasthya, 
vanaprastha and sannyasa.  
Varna dharma is an "arrangement" governing all society. It is very much a 
target of attack today and is usually spoken of as the division of society 
into "jatis". But "varna" and "jati" are in fact different. There are only four 
varnas but the jatis are numerous. For instance, in the same varna there 
are Ayyars, Ayyangars, Roas, etc - these are jatis. Mudaliars, Pillais, 
Reddiars and Naikkars are jatis belonging to another varna. In the 
Yajurveda (third astaka, fourth prasna) and in the Dhamasastra a number 
of jatis are mentioned- but you do not meet with them today.  
Critics of Varna dharma brand it as "a blot on our religion" as "a vicious 
system which divides people into high and low". But, if you look at it 
impartially, you will realize that it is a unique instrument to bring about 
orderly and harmonious social life.  
 
 
 


 

The Vedas - the Root of All 
Our religion consists of two major divisions, Saivism and Vaisnavism. The 
doubt arises as to whether we are speaking here of two separate faiths or 
of a single one.  
Christianity too has two major divisions but people belonging to both 
conduct worship in the name of the same God. In Buddhism we have the 
Hinayana and Mahayana streams but they do not make two separate 
faiths since both are based on the teachings of the same founder, the 
Buddha.  
Do Saivas and Vaisnavas worship the same god? No. However it be with 
ordinary Vaisnavas, their acaryas or teachers never go anywhere near a 
Siva temple. Their god is Visnu, never Siva. In the opinion of the 
worshippers of Visnu, Siva is also one of his (Visnu's) devotees. There are 
extremists among Saivas also according to whom Visnu is not a god but a 
devotee of Siva. How then can the two groups be said to belong to the 
same religion?  
Are they to be regarded as belonging to the same faith by virtue of their 
having a common scripture? The divisions [sects] of Christianity have one 
common scripture, the Bible; so too is the Qur'an the common holy book 
for all divisions of Islam. Is such the case with Saivas and Vaisnavas? 
Saivas have the Tirumurai as their religious text, while Vaisnavas have the 
Nalayira-Divyaprabandham as their sacred work. For Saivas and Vaisnavas 
thus the deities as well as the scriptures are different. How it be claimed 
that both belong to the same religion?  
Though divided into Saivas and Vaisnavas, we have been saved by the fact 
that the white man brought us together under a common name, "Hindu". 
But for this, what would have been our fate? In village after village, we 
would have been fragmented into separate religious groups- Saivas, 
Vaisnavas, Saktas, worshippers of Muruga, Ganapati, Ayyappa, and so on. 


 
Further, in these places followers of religions like Christianity and Islam 
would have predominated. Now two regions of our subcontinent have 
become Pakistan, Had we not been brought together with the label of 
Hindu, the entire subcontinent would have become Pakistan. The very 
same men who created Pakistan through their evil design and sowed the 
seeds of differences among us with their theory of two races- Aryans and 
Dravidians- unwittingly did us a good turn by calling us Hindu, thereby 
bringing into being a country called "India. " 
So are we one religion or are we divided into Two faiths? The belief that 
Saivas and Vaisnavas have separate deities and religious works does not 
represent the truth. Though the present outlook of the two groups 
suggests that they represent different faiths, the truth will be revealed if 
we examine their prime scriptures. The saints who composed the 
Tirumurai of the Saivas and the Nalayira-Divyaprabandham of the 
Vaisnavas never claimed that these works of theirs were the prime 
religious texts of respective sects. Nor did they regard themselves as 
founders of any religion. Vaisnavism existed before the Azhvars and so 
too there was Saivism before the Nayanmars.  
The original scripture of both sects is constituted by the Vedas. Saivas 
describe Isvara thus: 
Vedamodarangamayinanai 
Vedanathan, Vedagitan, aranan kan 
Similarly, the Vaisnava texts proclaim, "Vedam Tamizh seytaMaran 
Sathakopan. "If we pay close attention to their utterances, we will 
discover that the Vedas are the prime scripture of both sects. The 
Tevaram and the Nalayaira-Divyaprabandham are of the utmost 
importance to them (to the Saivas and Vaisnavas respectively); but the 
Vedas are the basis of both. The great saint-poets who composed the 
Saiva and Vaisnava hymns sing the glories of the Vedas throughout. 
Whenever they describe a temple, they go into raptures, saying, "Here 
the air is filled with the sound of the Vedas and pervaded with the smoke 
of the sacrificial fire. Here the six Angas of the Vedas flourish. " In the 


 
songs of these hymnodists veneration of the Vedas finds as much place as 
devotion to the Lord.  
The Vedas reveal the One Truth to us in the form of many deities. The 
worship of each of these divine beings is like a ghat on the river called the 
Vedas. Sekkizhar says the same thing: "Veda neri tazhaittonga mihu 
Saivatturai vilanga. " 
Apart from Saivism and Vaisnavism, there are a number of sectarian 
systems like Saktam, Ganapatyam, Kaumaram, and Sauram (worship of 
Sakti, Ganapati, Kumara or Subrahmanya and the Sun God). The 
adoration of these deities is founded in the Vedas, according to the Texts 
relating to them: "Our deity is extolled in the Vedas, " each system 
contains such a declaration.  
Thus we find that there is but one scripture as the source common to the 
different sects and schools of thought in the Hindu religion.  
This source includes the Upanisads. On ten of them (Dasopanisad) the 
great teachers of the Saiva, Vaisnava, and Smarta traditions have written 
commentaries. The Upanisadic texts proclaim that the Brahman is the 
one and only Godhead: In the Kathopanisad it is called Visnu; in the 
Mandukyopanisad it is called Sivam. All the deities mentioned in the 
Samhitas of the Vedas- Mitra, Varuna, Agni, Indra and so on - are 
different names of the same Truth. So it is said in the Vedas: "Ekam sad 
vipra bahudha vadanti. " 
It emerges that for all the divisions in our religion there is but one 
scripture- a scripture common to all- and one Godhead which is known by 
many names. The Vedas are the common scripture and the Godhead 
common to all is the Brahman. Thus we can say with finality, and without 
any room for doubt, that all of us belong to the same religion.  
The Vedas that constitute the scripture common to all and which reveal 
the Godhead that is common to us also teach us how to lead our life, and- 
this is important- they do us the ultimate good by showing us in the end 
the way to become that very Godhead ourselves. They are our refuge 


 
both here and the hereafter and are the source and root of all our 
different traditions, all our systems of thought. All sects, all schools of our 
religion, have their origin in them. The root is one but the branches are 
many.  
The Vedas are the source not only of various divisions of Hinduism, all the 
religions of the world may be traced back to them. It is our bounden duty 
to preserve them for all time to come with their glory undiminished.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

The Vedas in their Original Form 
It is sad that people keep fighting over this or that language. It seems that 
it would be better for us to be voiceless than keep quarrelling in this 
manner. Language is but a tool, a tool to convey our thoughts and 
feelings, to make ourselves understood. It cannot be the same in all 
countries. Each community, each region or country, has its own tongue. 
So it is absurd to quarrel over claims that one's language is superior to 
another's. We could at best say that "we know that language" or "we do 
not know it". But to talk of "my language" and "your language" is not 
right. It is also wrong to give greater importance to one's mother tongue 
than to God or religion. I would go to the extent of saying that we have 
no need even for Sanskrit, considered merely as a language, as a language 
per se. But our Vedas and sastras, which are basic to our religion, are in 
that language and, since they must be preserved, Sanskrit too must be 
kept alive.  
After composing his Kural Tiruvalluvar went to Madurai for its 
arangetram. There, in the city, was the pond of the golden lotuses and 
the seat of the learned (the Samgapalagai). The poet placed his work on 
this seat. At once all the learned men seated on the Samgapalagai fell 
into the pond but the book remained on it. It was thus that the Kural was 
presented to the public. Many distinguished poets and savants have sung 
the praises of this work and its content. In Tiruvalluvar-Malai which 
contains these praises one poet says: 
Ariyamum centamizhum araynditaninidu 
Siriyadu tenronraicepparidal-Ariyam 
Vedam udaittu Tamizh Tiruvalluvanar 
Odu Kuratpavudaittu 
"I thought about the question, which is superior, Sanskrit or Tamil. 
Sanskrit and Tamil are equal in their greatness. We cannot say that the 
one is superior to the other. The reason is that the Vedas are in Sanskrit 


 
and now in Tamil we have the Kural. If there were nothing equal to the 
Vedas in Tamil, Sanskrit should have been said to be superior. Now the 
Kural is present in Tamil as the equal of the Vedas. Both languages- 
Sanskrit and Tamil- are now seen to be equally. " 
Why is Sanskrit considered a great language? In his praise of the 
Tirukkural here the poet gives the answer: it is because the Vedas are in 
that language. Some do not seem to attach any special significance to the 
fact that the Vedas are in Sanskrit. They think that these sacred texts 
could be known through translations.  
Nowadays a number of books are translated from one language into 
another and in this process the original form or character is changed or 
distorted. The words spoken by a great man on a particular subject may 
not be fully understood today. But if they are preserved in the original in 
the same language, there is the possibility of their meaning being fully 
grasped at some future date. You use a beautiful word to convey an idea 
in your language, but its equivalent may not be found in any other 
tongue. Also, it may become necessary to express the same in a 
roundabout way.  
There is also the possibility that the opinion expressed first, in its original 
context, may not come through effectively in a translation. We must 
consider the further disadvantages of the translation being circumscribed 
by the mental make-up of the translator, the limitations of his knowledge 
and understanding of the subject dealt with. The translation done by one 
may not seem right to another. When there are a number of translations 
of the same work, it would be hard to choose the right one We shall then 
be compelled to go back to the original.  
This is the reason why I insist that the Vedas must be preserved in their 
original form. They are the source of the philosophical systems associated 
with the great acaryas. These masters evolved their doctrines from their 
own individual viewpoints, without making any modifications in the 
Vedas to suit them; nor did they establish any religions of their own 
outside the Vedic tradition. The source, the root, of their systems of 
thought is one and the same- the Vedas. It is because this source has 


 
remained unchanged in its original character that thinkers and teachers 
have, from time to time, been able to draw inspiration and strength from 
it to present new viewpoints. But these viewpoints have not meant the 
creation of new religions. The reason is that all of them- all these 
systems- belong to the larger system called the Vedic religion.  
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 3 
The Vedic Religion And Varna Dharma 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Division of Labour 
The proper functioning of society is dependent on a number of factors. 
Meeting the needs of man entails many types of physical as well as 
intellectual work. It is totally wrong to claim that one kind of work is 
inferior to another kind or superior to it.  
We need rice, all of us, don't we? Also salt, clothing, books, and so on. 
Would it be possible - or practicable - for each one of us to grow rice or 
wheat, to make salt or to produce clothing and books? The tiller grows 
crops not only for himself but for the entire community. The weaver 
weaves for all of us. Some carry on trade for the sake of the entire 
society. And some wage war on behalf of all of us to defend the country 
What about the Atmic well-being of mankind? Well, some people are 
charged with the caring of such well-being: they practice meditation, 
perform puja, conduct sacrifices and carry out the ordinances of the 
sastras that are meant for the good of all mankind. Our dharmasastras 
have cut out an ideal path of happiness for us by creating a system which 
is to the advantage of all and in which different sections of people are 
allotted different occupations.  
How has this allotment been made? Is it according to the capacity of 
earth? If so there is the risk of everyone having an excessive idea of his 
own ability. If work is assigned according to the predilection of each 
individual, everyone will claim that he is suited for jobs that are 
"prestigious" and, in the end, no one will come forward to do other jobs. 
How should a system be devised in which people fill vocations in a 
manner that ensures the smooth functioning of all society? It must be 
one that works not only for the present but for all time. This is not 
possible if everyone competes with everybody else for every kind of job. 
It is as an answer to such problems that varna dharma in which vocations 
are hereditarily determined came into existence.  


 
The principle behind this arrangement is that a man must do the work 
handed down to him from his forefathers - whatever such work be - with 
the conviction that it has been ordained by Isvara and that it is for the 
good of the world. The work he does in this spirit itself becomes a means 
of his inward advancement.  
The religious observances meant to free people from worldly existence 
vary according to their callings. We cannot expect a man who does hard 
physical work to observe fasts. Those who do intellectual work do not 
need much bodily nourishment. They are enjoined to perform many a rite 
and to observe a number of fasts so that they will learn not to take pride 
in their body. There would be no room for disputes and 
misunderstandings among the various sections of people if they realised 
that the differences in the observance of religious practices are in keeping 
with the different vocations.  
If we keep performing the rites prescribed even without understanding 
their meaning, It will stand us in good stead in later life when we do come 
to understand the meaning. It would indeed be commendable if each one 
of us carried out the duties prescribed and helped others to carry out 
theirs. ":Why do you pursue that vocation, that dharma? Why don't you 
do the work that I do? Or shall I take up your dharma, your duties? " We 
must not give room for such feelings of rivalry or become victims of the 
competitive spirt. When a man thinks of abandoning his dharma - the 
duties allotted to him by birth - you must persuade him not to do so and 
impress upon him that he must remain loyal to his dharma since it serves 
not only him individually but all others.  
As I said earlier there is no gradation among people doing various kinds of 
work: the man who does one type of job is neither inferior to the man 
doing another kind of job nor superior to him. It is to ensure that society 
functions properly that the sastras have divided jobs into a number of 
categories and assigned them to different groups of people.  
If we are guided only by our likes and dislikes in the choice of our 
occupation - or if we are engaged in work according to our sweet will - 
the common purpose of society will suffer. You see today that everyone is 


 
intent on filling his pockets with other people's money. If there were no 
principle to guide us in the fulfilment of the common good, the only 
concern of people would be that of finding such work as can bring them a 
lot of cash. There is no place for any division of labour in all this and so 
also no concern for the well-being of mankind in general.  
If everyone does his hereditary work and performs the rites that his 
forefathers performed, there will be no cause for feelings of rivalry or 
jealousy. There is the further advantage that life in the community will go 
on smoothly without any hindrance to the common work and, at the 
same time, each individual will feel pure inwardly. All this must be taken 
into account if, in the name of carrying out reforms, society is not 
"deformed".  
The government has the obligation to provide food, clothing and housing 
to all irrespective of the work they do. Jealousies and rivalries will 
develop if people hunger for things beyond these essentials. All the 
trouble today arises from the fact that the satisfaction gained from 
money is greater than that gained from anything else. This attitude must 
change. With maturity of outlook a man will come to realise that the 
fulfilment he obtains from doing the work allotted to him properly is itself 
his God.  
You see such a variety of eatables in front of you. The ragas (musical 
modes) you listen to are numerous. And many and varied are the types of 
work essential to the smooth functioning of society. You add salt to your 
rasam to give it the right flavour. But if you add it to a sweet drink the 
result will be rasabhasa (the drink will not be palatable). Similarly there 
would be rasabhasa if the svara (musical note) of one raga were used in 
another [the music so produced would be cacophonous, not pleasing to 
the ear]. People today are lacking in taste. While narrating a moving 
incident from a puranic story the Bhagavatar tells cheap jokes which the 
audience relishes immensely. When there are so many delectable things 
to eat, people smoke tobacco which is injurious to health. These are all 
instances of rasabhasa on a small scale. The rasabhasa on a big scale is 
the confusion created in the varna system [making a mess of it], a system 


 
that has contributed so much to the welfare of our people through its 
enunciation of different codes of conduct for different sections of the 
community.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

What is Varna Dharma? 
In the old days the kitchen fireplace was fuelled with dried wood, cow 
dung and so on. On rainy days it was difficult to light it. But if only a few 
sparks were produced they could be fanned into a flame so as to set the 
wood or cow dung on fire. Our sanatana dharma has not entirely 
perished. A few sparks of it are present in the life of a small number of 
great men still living in our midst. It is my ardent wish to keep blowing on 
them with a view to propagating our ancient religion in its true character.  
Our reformers want to do away with varna dharma so as to make 
Hinduism no different from other faiths.  
In this context, I must ask you: What is religion? Religion is like a 
therapeutic system meant to cure the ills contracted by the self. The 
physician alone knows about the disease afflicting the patient and how it 
is to be treated. Our sanatana dharma is the medicine prescribed by our 
sages and creators of the dharmasastras who never sought anything for 
themselves and who, in their utter selflessness, were concerned only 
about the good of mankind.  
In other countries other physicians have prescribed medicines in the form 
of their own religious systems. Would your doctor like to be told that he 
should treat you in the same way as another doctor treats his patient? 
There are several systems of medicine. In one there is a strict diet 
regimen, in another there is not much strictness about the patient's food. 
In one system the medicines administered taste sweet; in another they 
taste bitter. To be restored to health we have to follow strictly any one 
method of treatment, not insist on a combination of the various 
therapies.  
Other religions lay down only such duties as are common to all their 
followers. In the Vedic religion there are two types of dharma, the one 
being common to all and the other to individual varnas. The duties 


 
common to all Hindus, the universal code of conduct, have the name of 
"samanya dharma". Non-violence, truthfulness, cleanliness, control of the 
senses, non-acquisitiveness (one must not possess material goods in 
excess of what is needed for one's bare requirements, not even a straw 
must one own in excess), devotion to Isvara, trust in one's parents, love 
for all creatures - these form part of the samanya dharma. Then each 
varna has its own special code of conduct or "visesa dharma" determined 
by its hereditary vocation.  
If the special duties (visesa dharma) of the various varnas were made 
common to all (that is made part of the samanya dharma) a situation 
would arise in which no one would observe any dharma. To illustrate, I 
shall give you an example. Abstaining from meat was laid down as a 
common dharma in Buddhism. But what do we see today in countries 
where that religion has a wide following? There almost all buddhists eat 
meat. In contrast to this is what obtains in our religion. Our seers and 
authors of the dharmasastras had a profound understanding of human 
nature. They made abstention from meat applicable to a limited number 
of people. But others follow the example of these few, on days of fasting, 
on special occasions like the death anniversaries of their parents, on days 
sacred to the gods.  
The religions that flourished once upon a time in other countries- 
religions that had one common code of conduct for all its adherents - 
have become extinct. In Europe the Hellenic religion is gone. So too in 
West Asia the prehistoric Hebrew faiths no longer exist. And in the East 
only a residue remains of Confucianism, Shintoism, etc. Religions like 
Buddhism, Christianity and Islam too have but one code of conduct for all 
their adherents. Their followers in various countries now find less and less 
inner satisfaction. The number of people who have lost faith in their 
religion is on the increase in all these lands. They become either atheists 
or turn to the yoga, bhakti or jnana schools of Hinduism.  
It is difficult to say how long people will continue to owe allegiance to the 
religions that arose in various countries during historical times. I say this 
not because I happen to be a representative of Hindus nor is it my wish to 


 
speak in demeaning terms about other religions. My wish is indeed that 
people following different religions ought to remain in their respective 
folds and find spiritual fulfilment in them. I do not invite others to 
embrace my faith. In fact I believe that to do so is contrary to the basic 
tenets of my religion. Nothing occurs in this world as an accident. People 
with different levels of maturity are born in different religions: so it is 
ordained by the Lord. I believe that a man grows inwardly by practising 
the tenets of the religion of his birth.  
I speak about what I feel to be the worthy features of Hinduism- features 
that are not found in other religions - it is neither to speak ill of the latter 
nor to invite their followers to our side. Non-Hindus attack these unique 
aspects of our religion without taking the trouble of understanding them 
and some Hindus themselves are influenced by their views. That is why I 
am constrained to speak about the distinctive doctrines of our religion. 
Acceptance of concepts like karma, the Lord's incarnations, etc. will in no 
way weaken their [of non-Hindus] attachment to the basic beliefs of their 
own religions. What is the fundamental concept of any religion, its living 
principle? It is faith in the Lord and devotion to him. For others to view 
these special concepts of Hinduism sympathetically does not mean that 
their faith in God or devotion to him will be affected in any way.  
I say all this not because I think that other religions are in any trouble nor 
because I have reason to be happy if indeed they are. I echoed the views 
of distinguished students of religion like Toynbee, Paul Brunton and 
Kostler. I merely repeated their view that lack of faith in religion - indeed 
atheism - is growing day by day everywhere and that all religions are 
struggling for their survival.  
This trend is seen to be on the rise in our own country. But foreigners 
who have made a study of religious beliefs all over the world are 
unanimous in their view that in comparison with other countries things 
are better here. "The religious urge has not yet reached a lamentable 
state in your country, " They tell us, Sadhakas, seekers, keep coming to 
India in large numbers. A little thought should show without a shadow of 
doubt that if religious feeling is on the decline and atheism on the rise in 


 
India it is due to the fact that we have become increasingly lax in 
observing varna dharma and have come to believe that all Hindus should 
be made into one without any distinction of caste.  
When a religion divides its followers in many ways, we think that there 
will be no unity or integrity among them. It also seems to us that such a 
religion will fall apart as a result of internal squabbles. Since the time of 
Alexander, India has been invaded by wave after wave of foreigners 
belonging to other faiths. Considering the divisions in our religion and the 
series of foreign invasions, Hinduism should have ended up in smoke. But 
what we actually see is different. Religions which have no distinctions of 
caste and which prescribed the same duties and rites for all their 
followers have disappeared in the flow of time. Similar systems still 
surviving today are faced with danger, as is attested to by the 
intellectuals amongst their own followers. But Hinduism with its many 
divisions is still breathing. We must try to understand the secret of its 
survival without being carried away by emotions.  
We have practised varna dharma for millennia and it has continued to be 
a living force. What is its secret? Or think of this. It is the special duty of 
Brahmins to preserve the mantras. But have they ever been in a majority? 
No. Have they enjoyed the power of arms? No. Have they had at least 
money power, the advantage gained from wealth? The answer again is 
"No". (Brahmins acquiring the habit of accumulating money is a recent 
phenomenon. It is of course quite undesirable). How or why did other 
castes accept the divisions laid down in the sastras created by the 
Brahmins who did not have the strength derived either from money or 
from numbers?  
A great man like the Buddha or the Jina arose to proclaim: "We do not 
need the Vedas, nor do we need the sacrifices prescribed by them. Let us 
have one uniform dharma for all people. We do not need Sanskrit either. 
Let us write our new sastras in Pali or some other Prakrt, in a language 
understood by the common people. "It is true that some people were 
persuaded to embrace these new religions, Buddhism and Jainism, but 


 
the attraction of these faiths was momentary and the two gradually 
declined. The old Vedic religion emerged again with new vigour.  
A great man has sung thus: "It is needed a wonder that life remains in this 
body with its nine apertures (nava-dvara or nine gates). If it departs it is 
no matter to be wondered at. “Likewise, it would not have been a matter 
for surprise if Hinduism had perished with all its constant exposure to 
attack from outside. It is indeed a miracle that it is not dead.  
If some faiths in India itself and outside have declined and if our religion 
alone has survived for ten thousand years, does it not mean that it has 
something that is lacking in others? This something is the varna system. 
Our present-day reformers argue that the varna division is responsible for 
the disintegration of our society. The fact is it is precisely this division, 
varna dharma, that has sustained it and kept it intact. It follows that this 
dharma has features that are superior in character to concepts like 
equality, features that are vital to the very well-being of people. Our 
society is divided on the basis of it, but it must be noted that this division 
has helped our religion to preserve itself successfully against all 
onslaughts.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Unity in Diversity 
Talking of the varna system I am reminded of the early days of aviation. In 
the beginning the air ship[dirigible balloon] was filled with one gas bag. It 
was discovered that the vessel would collapse even if it sprang just one 
leak. So it was fitted with a number of smaller gas bags and kept afloat 
without much danger of its crashing. The principle of different duties and 
vocations for different sections of society is similar to what kept the old 
type of airship from collapsing. In the varna system we have an example 
of unity in diversity.  
Fastening together a large number of individual fire sticks is not easy: the 
bundle is loosened quickly and the sticks will give way. The removal of 
even one stick will make the bundle loose and, with each stick giving way, 
you will be left with separate sticks. Try to tie together a handful of sticks 
at a time instead of all the sticks together. A number of such small 
sheaves may be easily fastened together into a strong and secure larger 
bundle. Even if it becomes loose, none of the smaller bundles will come 
away. This is not the case with the large bundle bound up of individual 
sticks. A bundle made up of a number of smaller sets will remain well 
secured.  
To keep a vast community bound together in a single uniform structure is 
well-nigh an impossible task. Because of its unmanageable size it is not 
easily sustained in a disciplined manner. This is the reason why - to revert 
to the example of the fuel sticks - the community was divided into jatis 
[similar to the smaller bundles in the analogy of the fire sticks] and each 
jati assigned a particular vocation. Each varna was divided into a number 
of jatis [smaller bundles], with each jati having a headman with the 
authority to punish offenders. Today criminals are sentenced to prison or 
punished in other ways. But the incidence of crime is on the increase 
since all such types of punishment have no different effect. In the jati 
system the guilty took the punishment to heart. So much so that, until 
the turn of the century, people lived more or less honourably and there 


 
was little incidence of crime. The police and the magistrates did not have 
much work to do.  
What was the punishment meted out to offenders by the village or jati 
headman? Excommunication. Whether it was a cobbler or a barber - 
anyone belonging to any one of the jatis now included among the 
"backward" or "depressed" classes - he would feel deeply stung if he 
were thrown out of his jati: no punishment was harsher or more 
humiliating than excommunication.  
What do we learn from all this? No jati thought poorly of itself or of 
another jati. Members of each jati considered themselves the supreme 
authority in managing their affairs. This naturally gave them sense of 
contentment and satisfaction. What would have happened if some jatis 
were regarded as "low" and some others as "high"? Feelings of inferiority 
would have arisen among some sections of the community and perhaps, 
apart form Brahmins and Ksatriyas, no jati would have had any sense of 
pride in itself. If each jati had no respect for itself no one would have 
taken excommunication to heart. When the entire society was divided 
into small groups called jatis, not only did one jati have affection for 
another, each also trusted the other. There was indeed a feeling of 
kinship among all members of the community. This was the reason why 
the threat of excommunication was dreaded.  
Now some sections of the community remain attached to their jatis for 
the only reason that they enjoy certain privileges as members belonging 
to the "backward" classes. But they take no true pride in belonging to 
their respective jatis. In the old days these sections "enjoyed" no special 
privileges but we know it to be a fact that, until some three or four 
generations ago, they were proud of belonging to their jatis. We must 
add that this was not because - as is the case today - of rivalries and 
jealousies among the various groups. There were indeed no quarrels, no 
rivalries, based on differences of jati. Apart from pride, there was a sense 
of fulfilment among members of each jati in pursuing the vocation 
inherited from their forefathers and in observing the rites proper to it.  


 
Nowadays trouble-makers defy even the police. But in the past, in the 
system of jatis, there was no opposition to the decisions of the headman. 
The police are, after all, part of an outward system of discipline and law 
enforcement. But in jati rule the discipline was internal since there was a 
sense of kinship among the members of each jati. So in the jati set-up 
crime was controlled more effectively than in today's system of restoring 
to weapons or the constabulary. Though divided according to jatis and 
the occupations and customs pertaining to each of them, society 
remained united. It was a system that ensured harmony.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Divided by Work but still of One Heart 
I spoke about the different jatis, the work allotted to each of them and 
the rites and customs prescribed for each. What I said was not entirely 
correct. The vocation is not for jati; it is jati for the vocation. On what 
basis did the Vedic religion divide the fuel sticks[that is the jatis] into 
small bundles? It fixed one jati for one vocation. In the West economists 
talk of division of labour but they are unable to translate their ideas into 
practice. Any society has to depend on the proper execution of a variety 
of jobs.  
It is from this social necessity that the concept of division of labour arose. 
But who is to decide the number of people for each type of work? Who is 
to determine the proportions for society to function in a balanced 
manner? In the West they had no answer to these questions. Everybody 
there competes with everybody else for comfortable jobs and 
everywhere you find greed and bitterness resulting from such rivalries. 
And, as a consequence of all this, there are lapses from discipline and 
morality.  
In our country we based the division of labour on a hereditary system 
and, until it worked, people had a happy, peaceful and contented life. 
Today even a multimillionaire is neither contented nor happy. Then even 
a cobbler led a life without cares. What sort of progress have we achieved 
today by inflaming evil desires in all hearts and pushing everyone into the 
slough of discontent? Not satisfied with such "progress" there is talk 
everywhere that we must go forward rapidly in this manner.  
Greed and covetousness were unknown during the centuries when varna 
dharma flourished. People were bound together in small well-knit groups 
and they discovered that there was happiness in their being together. 
Besides they had faith in religion, fear of God and devotion, and a feeling 
of pride in their own family deities and in the modes of worshipping 
them. In this way they found fullness in their lives without any need to 


 
suffer the hunger and disquiet of seeking external objects. All society 
experienced a sense of well-being.  
Though divided into a number of groups people were all one in their 
devotion to the Lord; and though they had their own separate family 
deities, they were brought together in the big temple that was for the 
entire village or town. This temple and its festivals had a central place in 
their life and they remained united as the children of the deity enshrined 
in it. When there was a car festival(rathotsava) the Brahmins and the 
people living on the outskirts of the village[the so-called backward 
classes] stood shoulder to shoulder and pulled the chariot together. We 
wonder whether those days of peace and harmony will ever return. 
Neither jealousy nor bitterness was known then and people did not trade 
charges against one another. Everyone did his job, carried out his duties, 
in a spirit of humility and with a sense of contentment.  
Considering all this, would it be correct to say that Hinduism faced all its 
challenges in spite of the divisions in society? No, no. Such a view would 
be totally wrong. The fact is that our religion has survived as a living force 
for ages together because of these very divisions. Other great religions 
which had but one uniform dharma for all have gone under. And there is 
the fear that existing religions of the same type might suffer a similar 
fate. What has sustained Hinduism as an eternal religion? We must go 
back to the analogy of the fuel sticks. Like a number of small bundles of 
sticks bound together strong and secure-instead of all the individual sticks 
being fastened together-Hindu society is a well-knit union of a number of 
small groups which are themselves bound up separately as jatis, the 
cementing factor being devotion to the Lord.  
Religions that had a common code of duties and conduct could not 
withstand attacks from within and without. In India there were many sets 
of religious beliefs that were contained in, or integrated together with, a 
common larger system. If new systems of beliefs or dharmas arose from 
within or if there were inroads by external religious systems, a process of 
rejection and assimilation took place: what was not wanted was rejected 
and what was fit to be accepted was absorbed. Buddhism and Jainism 


 
sprang from different aspects of the Vedic religion, so Hinduism(later) 
was able to digest them and was able to accommodate many other sets 
of beliefs or to make them its own. There was no need for it to treat 
other systems as adversaries or to carry on a struggle against them.  
After the advent of Islam we adopted only some of its customs but not 
any of its religious concepts. The Moghul influence was felt to some 
extent in our dress, music, architecture and painting. Even such 
impressions of the Muslim impact did not survive for long as independent 
factors but were dissolved in the flow of our Vedic culture. Also the 
Islamic impact was largely confined to the North; the South did not come 
much under it and stuck mostly to its own traditional path.  
Later, with the coming of the Europeans, faith in the Vedic religion began 
to decline all over India, in North as well as South. How did this change 
occur? Why do all political leaders today keep excoriating the varna 
system, giving it the name of "casteism"? And how has the view gained 
ground everywhere that the division of jatis has greatly hindered the 
progress of the nation? And why does the mere mention of the word jati 
invite a gaol sentence?  
I shall tell you later, as best I can, about who is responsible for this state 
of affairs. For the present let us try to find out why some people want to 
do away with varna dharma. To them it seems an iniquitous system in 
which some jatis occupy a high status while some others are pushed 
down to low depths. They want all to be raised to the same uniform high 
level.  
Is such a step possible or practicable? To find an answer, all that we have 
to do is to examine conditions in countries where there is no caste. If 
there were no distinctions of high and low in these lands, we should see 
no class conflicts there. But in reality what do we see? People in these 
countries are divided into "advantaged" and disadvantaged" classes who 
are constantly fighting between themselves. A true understanding of our 
religion will show that in reality there are no differences in status based 
on caste among our people. But let us for argument's sake presume that 


 
there are; our duty then is to make sure that the feelings of differences 
are removed, not get rid of varna dharma itself.  
One more point must be considered. Even if you concede that the social 
divisions have caused bitterness among the different sections here, what 
about the same in other countries? Can the existence of such ill-will in 
other lands be denied? The differences there, based on wealth and 
status, cause bitterness and resentment among the underprivileged and 
poorer sections. In America, it is claimed that all people have enough 
food, clothing and housing. They say that the Americans are contented 
people. But what is the reality there? The man who has only one car is 
envious of another who has two. Similarly, the fact that one person has a 
bank balance of a hundred million dollars is cause for heart-burning for 
another with a bank balance of only a million. Those who have sufficient 
means to live comfortably quarrel with people better off over rights and 
privileges. Does this not mean that even in a country like the United 
States there are conflicts between the higher and lower classes of 
society?  
The story is not different in the communist countries. Though everyone is 
said to be paid the same wages there, they have officers and clerks who 
do not enjoy the same status. As a result of the order enforced by the 
state, there may not be any outward signs of quarrel among the different 
cadres, but jealously and feelings of rivalry must, all the same, exist in the 
hearts of people. In the higher echelons of power there must be greater 
rivalry in the communist lands than elsewhere. The dictator of today is 
replaced by another tomorrow. Is it possible to accord the same status to 
all in order to prevent the growth of antagonisms? Feeling of high and 
low will somehow persist, so too the competitive urge.  
It seems to me that better than the distinctions prevailing in the West-
distinctions that give rise to jealousies and social discord-are the 
differences mistakenly attributed to the hereditary of vocations. In the 
old days this arrangement ensured peace in the land with everyone living 
a contented life. There was neither envy nor hatred and everyone readily 
accepted his lot.  


 
The different types of work are meant for the good of the people in 
general. It is wrong to believe that one job belongs to an "inferior" 
category and another to a "superior type". There is no more efficacious 
medicine for inner purity than doing one's work, whatever it be, without 
any desire for reward and doing it to perfection. I must add that even 
wrong notions about work(one job being better than another or worse) is 
better that the disparities and differences to be met with in other 
countries. We are[or were] free from the spirit of rivalry and bitterness 
that vitiate social life there.  
Divided we have remained united, and nurtured our civilization. Other 
civilizations have gone under because the people of the countries 
concerned, though seemingly united, were in fact divided. In our case 
though there were differences in the matter of work there was unity of 
hearts and that is how our culture and civilization flourished. In other 
countries the fact that there were no distinctions based on 
vocations(anyone could do any work) itself gave rise to rivalries and 
eventually to disunity. They were not able to withstand the onslaught of 
other civilizations.  
It is not practicable to make all people one, nor can everyone occupy the 
same high position. At the same time it is also unwise to keep people 
divided into classes that are like water-tight compartments.  
The dharmasastras have shown us a middle way that avoids the pitfalls of 
the two extremes. I have come as a representative of this way and that is 
why I speak for it: that there ought to be distinctions among various 
sections of people in the performance of rites but there must be unity of 
hearts. There should be no confusion between the two.  
Though we are divided outwardly in the matter of work, with unity of 
hearts there will be peace. That was the tradition for ages together in this 
land-there was oneness of hearts. If every member of society does his 
duty, does his work, unselfishly and with the conviction that he is doing it 
for the good of all, considerations of high and low will not enter his mind. 
If people carry out the duties common to them, however adverse the 


 
circumstances be, and if every individual performs the duties that are 
special to him, no one will have cause for suffering at any time.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Why only in this Country 
The question arises: "What about countries other than India? And what 
about the religions practised there? They do not have a system of jatis 
nor do they have in force any division of labour based on heredity. Why 
should we alone have such an arrangement? . " 
It will be conceded that even such countries as do not have any social 
division based on vocations have produced wise men who have 
contributed to the growth of knowledge and statesmen, administrators, 
agriculturists, traders and labourers. But if you look at the matter 
impartially- and not necessarily as a proud patriot-you will realise that no 
other country has had such a great civilization as we have had. It is true 
that great civilizations flourished in other lands too, but they did not last 
thousands of years like ours. To say this is not to blow our own trumpet. 
From the time of Alexander until today-when we seem to have fallen into 
an abyss from the heights of glory-foreigners have been filled with 
wonder for the Hindu civilization.  
Other countries, it is true, have given birth to great men, to men of God, 
to philanthropists, to men of sacrifice. But if you take a census of all 
nations, you will see that no other nation would have given birth, 
generations after generation for thousands of years in an uninterrupted 
manner, to such a large number of great men, saintly men, wise men, 
philosophers, devotees and philanthropists. They will outnumber all such 
men produced in other countries put together. Foreigners refer to India 
as the "land of saints", as the "land of sages". They express their profound 
admiration for our Vedanta, for our metaphysics, and all our ancient 
works.  
The whole world acknowledges our unparalleled contributions to art, 
sculpture, music, poetry, astronomy, medicine. It never ceases to wonder 
at our great works of philosophy and literature like the Upanishads, the 
Bhagavad-Gita, the Ramayana, the Sakuntalam, etc. Scholars abroad are 


 
of the opinion that there are hardly any devotional works outside India 
like the Tamil Tevaram and Divyaprabandham. They note the Kural, in the 
same language, to be an astonishingly profound and lucid ethical work 
that is yet so brief. Foreigners come to our land, leaving their home and 
hearth, to find out all about our gopurams, our sculptures, our dances like 
Bharatanatyam all of which have cast a spell over them. Europeans 
enslaves us, ascribed all kinds of faults to us and held us in bondage with 
their policy of divide and rule. But, all the same, out of admiration for our 
culture they have sought out our sastras, our ancient texts, conducted 
research into them and translated them into their own languages.  
To what special factors are we to attribute the existence of such a great 
and unique civilization? In looking for an answer you will discover that 
there was something in our social structure that was not shared by other 
countries, that is varna dharma. According to our reformers all our ills are 
due to the caste system. But it is this land with this unique system - 
varnasrama - that has excelled all other nations in metaphysics, in the 
arts, in social values and in wisdom. Stability in society and peace go hand 
in hand. Without them, without an atmosphere conducive to creative 
work, no arts, no philosophy, no culture could have flourished generation 
after generation. Philosophers and sages and geniuses in the field of arts 
would not have otherwise been thrown up in such amazingly large 
numbers.  
The religions that governed life in other countries did not evolve a social 
structure capable of creating this kind of stability. One might say that the 
question of creating a sociological foundation was overlooked in them. 
They did not lay down rules for orderly social life and had but general 
interdictions and injunctions like "Do not steal"; "Do not tell lies"; "Do not 
commit adultery"; "Live a life of sacrifice". In Buddhism and Christianity 
the institutionalized system is meant only for the monks. Unlike in 
Hinduism in none of these religions was attention directed towards 
weaving together the entire society into a fabric in which one member 
formed a support to another.  


 
One does nod deny that there was scientific advancement in other 
nations. they had a system of defence and they carried on trade and 
commerce. But the spirit of rivalry vitiated all walks of life in these lands. 
No community had an occupation entirely to itself. Everyone could 
compete with everyone else for every kind of job. In our country people 
had their own hereditary calling and they were assured of their 
livelihood. This meant peace and stability in society. We must remember 
that it was because our people were bound together in their unique 
varna system that they excelled in culture and character, not to mention 
the fact the stability afforded by the system facilitated the birth of 
countless numbers of individuals who exemplified all that is noble in 
mankind. In contrast, in the absence of a similar institution, jealousy and 
rivalry became disturbing factors in the life of other countries.  
Our nation should have witnessed many a revolution if, as claimed by our 
social reformers, the people were kept suppressed in the varna system. 
However, the term "social revolution" was new to us until recently. It is 
only after reading a about the French Revolution, the American 
Revolution and the Soviet Revolution that we have known that 
compulsions would arise for great masses of people to be plunged in 
unrest. The common people in other countries were again and again 
involved thus in revolutionary movements. But we note- and this is 
important - that no revolution has achieved anything of permanent value. 
If there is an upsurge today there is another fifty or a hundred years later. 
we have to conclude from this that people abroad have remained 
discontented most of the time.  
Today's situation is all too obvious to be stated. The whole world is in 
turmoil. Indiscipline, strikes, social upsets and savage orgies of violence 
have become the order of the day. It is only in a country like the Soviet 
Union where there is a dictatorship that comes down heavily on those 
who voice any opposition to it that there is hardly any unrest. However, it 
is said that the volcano of unrest might erupt any time there. Now and 
then an intellectual or writer escapes from that land to tell us about the 
tyranny from which people suffer there. Obviously in the Soviet Union 
too people are not happy and contented.  


 
India has seldom had an autocracy or dictatorship of this type. It would 
not have taken the strides it did in the sciences and arts had it been a 
slave country or a country ruled by despots. people here never lamented 
before others that they were kept suppressed. All our works of 
knowledge and wisdom, all our arts and all our temples would not have 
been possible if the mind was not enabled to unfold itself in an 
atmosphere of freedom. It would also be preposterous to suggest that a 
majority of the common people were victims of superstition and delusion 
and lived in fear of witchcraft. You could speak thus of the tribes living in 
the forests of Africa or South America. In these places the priest was like 
a king. He would be fearsome even to look at and he was able to impress 
his tribesmen that he could do anything with his utterances(his mantra- 
like formulae). He had also the power to punish people. Such was not the 
case in our country. People here were fairly knowledgeable irrespective 
of the jatis to which they belonged and they were devoted and advances 
in matters pertaining to the Self.  
If you go through the Puranas (including the Tamil Periaypuranam) You 
will learn that there were great men in all jatis. Imperial rulers like 
Chandragupta and ministers like Sekkizhar belonged to the fourth varna. 
Our priests had no authority to punish anyone, According to the canonical 
texts the priest must be a man of spotless character and, if he commits a 
wrong, he must punish himself. If a white man happens to come into 
physical contact with a black man, the latter is taken to task. But if a 
priest in our country comes into similar contact with an untouchable, it is 
he (the priest) who is enjoined to have a bath. Let us leave aside for the 
moment the question of untouchability. The point to note is that it was 
not by inspiring fear, by the threat of punishment or by suppression, that 
such customs were practised. A civilization like ours that is glorified all 
over the world could not have flourished if some sections of the people 
were suppressed or were victims of deception. It is only when the 
dharmasastras are advantageous to all that there will be no cause for any 
section of the people to revolt.  
When the ancient varna system was in force, our civilization grew steadily 
without giving any cause for revolt or discontent among the people. But, 


 
that apart, look at the state of India after it broke with the old system of 
division of labour and took to the new path adopted by other countries 
on the pretext of "progress" and "equality". Everywhere you se 
immorality, dishonesty, corruption and prostitution. Agitations, strikes, 
demonstrations, hartals, curfew, etc, have become the order of the day. 
Is it not obvious from this that there is much discontent among the 
people? In matters of trade we have come to such a pass that we are the 
target of attack and ridicule of other nations for our dishonest practices. 
The time is past when everyone had nothing but praise for India. Even a 
small country like Pakistan drags us into war. Does this not show that our 
spiritual strength has diminished so much?  
How did we lose our inner vitality? By giving up what have we become 
weak? What was it that nurtured our civilization and kept it growing for 
thousands of years? By parting with what have we descended so low as 
to be ashamed of calling ourselves heirs to this civilization? The fact is 
that, so long as we practised varna dharma that is unique to our country, 
our civilization stood like a rock arousing the admiration of all the world. 
But after this dharma began to decline we have been on the descent day 
by day.  
Why should this country alone practise varna dharma? Because this 
dharma is necessary if we want to sustain a civilization that can promote 
the growth of philosophy, nourish our arts and culture, inspire us more 
and more in our inward search and help us in the realization of Godhead. 
If the varna system, is followed at least in this country, it will be an 
example to the rest of the world.  
If there is not varna dharma, it means at once the growth of social 
disharmony, the rise of jealousies and discontent among the people. Men 
will compete with one another for the jobs they like or are convenient to 
them. There will be competition for education on the same lines. Since all 
will not succeed in their efforts or in their desire or ambition being 
satisfied, the result will be hatred and resentment everywhere. Look at 
what is happening now in India. When educated unemployment is on the 
increase, it is suggested that admissions to colleges must be restricted, 


 
that there are too many engineers already in the country and that some 
engineering colleges must be closed down. Here we see that the theory 
of throwing open everything to everybody does not work; imposing some 
restriction on people is seen to be inevitable. In the old days a man's 
work, whatever it was, became second nature to him and he had a sense 
of pride in it as an "asset", legacy that had come to him from his 
forefathers, indeed a prized family "possession". He also did his job 
efficiently and sincerely. Money was a secondary consideration then. 
Since everything was done on the basis of trust and with a high degree of 
personal involvement - the worker was always conscious that he was 
doing his work- there were no problems. The whole society prospered.  
No civilization can flourish in the absence of a system that brings 
fulfilment to all. Varna dharma brought fulfilment and satisfaction to all.  
Is it possible to bring Varna dharma back to life? Whether we fail in 
during all we can in reviving the system or whether we abandon our 
efforts finding them to be futile, we must at least recognise that it is this 
system that our thousands of years brought well-being to all communities 
of our religion and to our country and throughout them to the whole 
world outside. Again, we must at least have the good sense not to find 
fault with such a system.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Who is Responsible for the Decay of Varna Dharma? 
Politicians and intellectuals alike say that jati is part of an uncivilized 
system. Why? Who is responsible for the disintegration of so worthy an 
arrangement as varna dharma?  
These are question that I raised and I shall try to answer them. The wrong 
ideas that have developed about varna dharma must be ascribed to the 
Brahmins themselves. They are indeed responsible for the decay of an 
ages-old system that contributed not only to our Atmic advancement but 
also to the well-being of the nation as well as of all mankind.  
The Brahmin relinquished the duties of his birth-the study of the Vedas 
and performance of the rites laid down in the Vedic tradition. He left his 
birthplace, the village, for the town. He cropped his hair and started 
dressing in European style. Giving up the Vedas, he took to the Mundane 
learning of the West. He fell to the lure of jobs offered by his white 
master and aped him in dress, manners and attitudes. He threw to the 
winds the noble dharma he had inherited from the Vedic seers through 
his forefathers and abandoned all for a mess of pottage. He was drawn to 
everything Western, science, life-style, entertainment.  
The canonical texts have it that the Brahmin must have no love for 
money, that he must not accumulate wealth. So long as he followed his 
dharma, as prescribed by the sastras, and so long as he chanted the 
Vedas and performed sacrifices, he brought good to the world, and all 
other castes respected him and treated him with affection. In fact they 
looked upon him as a guide and model.  
Others now observed how the Brahmin changed, how his life-style had 
become different with all its glitter and show and how he went about 
with all the pretence of having risen on the scale of civilization. The 
Brahmin had been an ideal for them in all that is noble, but how he 
strayed from the path of dharma; and following his example they too 


 
gave up their traditional vocations that had brought them happiness and 
contentment, and left their native village to settle in towns. Like the 
Brahmin they became keen to learn English and secure jobs in the 
government.  
For thousands of years the Brahmin had been engaged in Atmic pursuit 
and intellectual work. In the beginning all his mental faculties were 
employed for the welfare of society and not in the least for his own 
selfish advancement. Because of this very spirit of self-sacrifice, his 
intelligence became sharp like a razor constantly kept honed. Now the 
welfare of society is no longer the goal of his efforts and his intelligence 
has naturally dimmed due to this selfishness and interest in things 
worldly. He had been blessed with a bright intellect and he had the grace 
of the Lord to carry out the duties of his birth. Now, after forsaking his 
dharma, it is natural that his intellectual keenness should become 
blunted.  
Due to sheer momentum the bicycle keeps going some distance even 
after you stop pedalling. Similarly, though the Brahmin seeks knowledge 
of mundane subjects instead of inner light, he retains yet a little 
intellectual brightness as a result of the "pedalling" done by his 
forefathers. It is because of this that he has been able to achieve 
remarkable progress in Western learning also. He has acquired expert 
knowledge in the practices of the West, in its law and its industries. 
Indeed he has gained such insights into these subjects and mastered their 
finer points so remarkably well that he can give lessons to the white man 
himself in them.  
A question that arises in this context is how Vedic studies which had not 
suffered much even during Muslim rule received a severe set-back with 
the advent of the European. One reason is the impact of the new sciences 
and the machines that came with the white man. Granted that many a 
truth was revealed through these sciences- and this was all to the good 
up to a point. But we must remember that the knowledge of a subject per 
se is one thing and how we use it in practice ins another.  


 
The introduction of steam power and electricity made many types of 
work easier but it also meant comforts hitherto unthought-of of to gratify 
the senses. If you keep pandering to the senses more and more new 
desires are engendered. This will mean the production of an increasing 
number of objects of pleasure. The more we try to obtain sensual 
pleasure the more we will cause injury to our innermost being. The new 
pleasures that could be had with scientific development and the 
introduction of machines were an irresistible lure for the Brahmin as they 
were to other communities. Another undesirable product of the sciences 
brought by the white man was rationalism which undermined people's 
faith in religion and persuaded some to believe that the religious truths 
that are based on faith and are inwardly experienced are nothing but 
deception. The man who did not give up his duties even during Muslim 
rule now abandoned them for the new-found pleasures and comforts. He 
dressed more smartly that the Englishman, smoked cigarettes and even 
learned to dance like his white master. Those who thus became proficient 
in the arts of the white man were rewarded with jobs.  
Now occurred the biggest tragedy.  
Up till now all members of society had their hereditary jobs to do and 
they did not have to worry about their livelihood. Now, with the example 
of the Brahmin before them, members of other castes also gave up their 
traditional occupations for the jobs made available by the British in the 
banks, railways, collectorates, etc. With the introduction of machinery 
our handicrafts fell into decay and many of our artisans had to look for 
other means of livelihood. In the absence of any demarcation in the 
matter of work and workers, there arose competition for jobs for the first 
time in the country. It was a disastrous development and it generated 
jealousy, ill-will, disputes and a host of other evils among people who had 
hitherto lived in harmony.  
Ill feelings developed between Brahmins and non-Brahmins also. How? 
Brahmins formed only a small percentage of the population. But they 
were able to occupy top positions in the new order owing to their 
intelligence which, as I said before, was the result of the "pedalling" done 


 
by their forefathers. They excelled in all walks of life- in administration, in 
academics, in law, in medicine, engineering and so on. The white man 
made his own calculations about developing animosity between 
Brahmins and non-Brahmins and realised that by fuelling it he could 
strengthen his hold on the country. He fabricated the Aryan-Dravidian 
theory of races and the seeds of differences were sown among children 
born of the same mother. It was a design that proved effective in a 
climate already made unhealthy by rivalry for jobs.  
As if to exacerbate this ill-will, the Brahmin took one more disastrous 
step. On the one hand he gave up the dharma of his caste and joined 
hands with the British in condemning the old order by branching it a 
barbarous one in which one man exploited another. But, on the other 
hand, though he spoke the language of equality, he kept aloof from other 
castes thinking himself to be superior to them. If in the past he had not 
mixed physically with members of other castes, it did not mean that he 
had placed himself on a high pedestal. We must remember that there 
was a reason for his not coming into physical contact with other castes. 
There have to be differences between the jatis based on food, work and 
surroundings. The photographer needs a dark room to develop his films. 
To shoot a film, on the contrary, powerful lights are needed. Those who 
work in a factory canteen have to scrupulously clean; but those who dust 
machinery wear soiled clothes. This does not mean that the waiter in a 
canteen is superior to the factory hand who dusts machines. The man 
who takes the utmost care to keep himself intellectually bright, without 
any thought of himself, observes fasts, while the soldier, who has to be 
strong and tough, eats meat.  
Why should there be bad feelings between the two, between the 
Brahmin and the Ksatriya? Does the Brahmin have to come into physical 
contact with the Ksatriya To prove that he does not bear any ill-will 
towards him? If he intertwined with the Ksatriya he would be tempted to 
taste meat and such a temptation might eventually drag him into doing 
things that militate against his own duty. Each community has its own 
duties, customs and food habits. If all jatis mixed together on the pretext 


 
of equality without regard to their individual ways of life, all work would 
suffer and society itself would be plunged into confusion.  
It was with a definite purpose in view that the village was divided into 
different quarters: the agrahara (the Brahmin quarter), the agriculturists 
quarter and so on. Such a division was possible in rural life but not in the 
the new urban way of living. With urbanization and industrialization it 
becomes necessary for people belonging to various jatis to work together 
on the same shift, sit together in the same canteen to eat the same kind 
of food. The Brahmin for whom it is obligatory to observe fasts and vows 
and to perform various rites was now seen to be no different from others. 
Office and college timings were a hindrance to the carrying out of these 
rites. So the Brahmin threw them to the winds. He had so far taken care 
to perform these rites with the good of others in mind. Like a trustee, he 
had protected dharma for the sake of society and made its fruits available 
to all.  
All that belonged to the past. Now the Brahmin came forward 
proclaiming that all were equal and that he was one with the rest. All the 
same he became the cause of heart-burning among others and -ironically 
enough- in becoming one with them he also competed with them for 
jobs. That apart, though he talked of equality, he still thought himself to 
be superior to others, in spite of the fact that he was not a bit more 
careful than they about the performance of religious duties. Was this not 
enough to earn him more hatred?  
The Brahmin spoiled himself and spoiled others. By abandoning his 
dharma he became a bad example to others. As a matter of fact, even by 
strictly adhering to his dharma the Brahmin in not entitled to feel 
superior to others. He must always remain humble in the belief that 
"everyone performs a function in society; I perform mine". If at all others 
respected him in the past and accorded him a high place in the society it 
was in consideration of his selfless work, his life of austerity a, discipline 
and purity. Now he had descended too such depths as to merit their most 
abrasive criticism.  


 
It is my decided opinion that the Brahmin is responsible for the ruin of 
Hindu society. Some people have found an explanation for it. The 
Brahmin, if he is to be true to his dharma, has to spend all his time in 
learning and chanting the Vedas, in performance sacrifices, in preserving 
the sastras, etc. What will he do for a living? If he goes in search of money 
or material he will not be able to attend to his lifetime mission- and this 
mission is not accomplished on a part-time basis. And if he takes up some 
other work for his livelihood, he is likely to became lax in the pursuit of 
his dharma. It would be like taking medicine without the necessary diet 
regimen: the benign power gained by the Brahmin from his Vedic learning 
will be reduced and there will be a corresponding diminution in the good 
accruing to mankind from his work.  
This is one reason why Brahmin alone are permitted by the sastras to beg 
for their living. In the past they received help form the kings_ grants of 
lands, for instance-in consideration of the fact that the dharma practised 
by them benefited all people. But the sastras also have it that the 
Brahmins must not accept more charity than what is needed for their 
bare sustenance. If they received anything in excess, they would be 
tempted to seek sensual pleasures and thereby an impediment would be 
placed to their inner advancement. There is also the danger of their 
becoming submissive to the donor and of their twisting the sastras to the 
latter's liking. It was with a full awareness of these dangers that in the old 
days the Brahmins practised their dharma under the patronage on the 
rajas(accepting charity to the minimum and not subjecting themselves to 
any influence detrimental to their dharma).  
The argument of those who have found an excuse for the conduct of 
latter days Brahmins goes thus. "Brahmins ceased to receive gifts from 
rulers after the inception of British rule. How can you expect them to live 
without any income? Force of circumstances made them to English 
education and thereafter too seek jobs with the government. It is unjust 
to find fault with them on that score. " 
There is possibly some force in this argument but it does not fully justify 
the change that has come over Brahmins. Before the British, the Moghuls 


 
ruled us and before them a succession of sultanates. During these periods 
a few pandits must have found a place in the darbar. But all other 
Brahmins adhered to their dharma, did they not, without any support 
from any other ruler? The phenomenon of the Brahmin quarter becoming 
deserted, the village being ruined, all pathasala (the Vedic school) 
becoming forlorn and the lands (granted to Brahmins) turning into mere 
certificates is not more than a hundred years old. Did not Vedic dharma 
flourish until a generation ago?  
The Vedic religion prospered in the past not only because of the 
patronage extended to the Brahmins by the Hindu rulers. People 
belonging to all varnas then were anxious that it should not become weak 
and perish. They saw too it that the Brahmin community did not weaken 
and contributed generously to its upkeep and to the nurturing of the 
Vedic tradition. Today you see hundreds of Vedic schools deserted. There 
are few Brahmin boys willing too study the scriptures. Who had raised 
the funds for the Vedic institutions? [In Tamil Nadu] the Nattukottai 
Nagarattars, Komutti Cettis and Vellalas. The work done by Nagarattars 
for our temples indeed remarkable. Throughout Tamil Nadu, if they built 
a temple they also built a Vedic school with the belief that the Vedas 
constituted the "root" of the temple. This root, they felt, was essential to 
the living presence of the deity in the temple and for the puja conducted 
there. Similarly, the big landowners among the Vellalas made lavish 
donations to the Vedic schools.  
If the Brahmin had not been tempted by the European life-style and if he 
were willing to live austerely according to the dictates of the sastras, 
other castes would have come forward to help him. It is not that the 
others deserted him. He himself ran away from his dharma, from his 
agrahara, from his village and from the Vedic school because of his new 
appetite for the life of luxury made possible with the new technology of 
the West. He forgot his high ideals and paid scant respect of the principle 
that the body's requirements are not more that what it takes- in physical 
terms- to help the well-being of the Self. All told the argument that the 
Brahmin was compelled to abandon his dharma because he was denied 
his daily bread does not hold water. We cannot but admit that the 


 
Brahmin became greedy, that he yearned far more that what he needed 
for his sustenance.  
Let us concede that the Brahmin left his village because he could not feed 
himself there and came to a city like Madras. But did he find contentment 
here? What do we see today in actual practice? Suppose a Brahmin 
received a salary of Rs1000 in Madras today. If he gets a job in Delhi with 
double the salary he runs off there. When he goes to Delhi he would 
abandon totally the dharma he was able to practise at least to a small 
extent in Madras. Later, if he were offered $4000 a month in America he 
would leave his motherland for that country, lured by the prospect t of 
earning a fortune. There, in the United States, he would became totally 
alienated from his religion, from his dharma, from all his money. The 
Brahmin is willing to do anything, go to any extent, for the sake of money. 
Fort instance, he would join the army if there were the promoter of more 
income in it. If necessary he would even take to meat and to drinking. The 
usual excuse trotted out for the Brahmin deserting his dharma does not 
wash.  
I will go one step further. Let us suppose that, the following the import of 
Western technology, other communities also became averse to observing 
their respective dharmic traditions. Let us also assume that, with their 
thinking and feelings influenced by the Aryan-Dravidian theory concocted 
by the English, these castes decided not to support the Brahmins any 
longer. Let us further assume that to feed himself(for the sake of a 
handful of rice) the Brahmin had to leave hearth and home and work in 
an office somewhere far away from his native village. Were he true to his 
dharma he would tell himself: "I will continue to adhere to my dharma 
come what may, even at the risk of death". With this resolve he could 
have made a determined effort to pursue Vedic learning and keep up his 
traditional practices.  
There is no point, however, in suggesting what people belonging to the 
generation that has gone by should have done. I would urge the present 
generation to perform the duties that the past generation neglected to 
perform. To repeat, you must not forsake your dharma even on pain of 


 
death. Are we going to remain deathless? As it is we accumulate money 
and, worse, suffer humiliation and earn the jealousy of others and finally 
we die losing caste by not remaining true to our dharma.  
Is it not better then to starve and yet to be attached firmly to our dharma 
so long as there is breath in us? Is not such loyalty to our dharma a 
matter of pride? Why should we care about how others see us, whether 
they honour us or speak ill of us? So long as we do not compete with 
them for jobs they will have no cause for jealousy or resentment. Let 
them call us backward or stupid or think that we are not capable of 
keeping abreast of the times. As we not now already their but of ridicule? 
Let us be true to our dharma in the face of the mockery of others, even in 
the face of death. is not such a lot preferable to suffering the slings of 
scorn and criticism earned by forsaking our dharma for the sake of filling 
our belly? People nowadays die for their mother land; they lay down their 
lives for their mother tongue. They do not need a big cause like the 
freedom of the country to be roused too action: they court death, 
immolate themselves, even for a cause that may be seem trivial like the 
merger of a part of their district in another. Was there any demonstration 
of faith like this, such willingness to die for a cause or a belief, when the 
British came here with their life-style? At the same time did we protect 
our dharma with courage, in the belief that even death was a small pride 
to pay for it?  
The Lord himself has declared in the Gita that it is better to die abiding by 
one's dharma than prosper through another man's dharma ("nidhanam 
reyah"). Brahmins who had seen no reason to change their life-style 
during the long Muslim period of our history changed it during British 
rule. Why? New sciences and machinery came with the white man. The 
motor car and electricity had their own impact on life there. Brahmins 
were drawn to comforts and conveniences not thought of before. This 
could be for a reason for their change of life, but not a justification.  
The Brahmin is not to regard his body as a means for the enjoyment of 
sensual pleasures but as an instrument for the observance of such rites as 
are necessary to protect the Vedas- and the Vedas have too be protected 


 
for the welfare of mankind. The basic dharma is that to the body of the 
Brahmin nothing must be added that incites his sensual appetite. It was a 
fundamental mistake on the part of the Brahmin to have forgotten the 
spirit of sacrifice that incites his dharma and become a victim of the 
pleasures and comforts easily obtained form the new gadgets and 
instruments. There is pride in adhering to one's dharma even when one is 
faced with adverse circumstances. Brahmins (during British rule) 
committed a grave mistake by not doing so and we are suffering the 
consequences. See the ill-will in the country today among children of the 
same mother. We have created suffering for others also. At first Brahmins 
were denied admission to colleges and refused jobs. Now things have 
come to such a pass that other communities also suffer the same fate.  
All was well so long as man, using his own innate resources, lived a simple 
life without the help of machines. With more and more factories and 
increasing machine power, life itself has become complicated. The 
situation today is such everyone is facing difficulties in getting admission 
to college or in getting a job.  
People ask me: "What is the remedy today? Do you expect all Brahmins 
to leave their new life-style and return Vedic learning? "Whether or not I 
expect them to do so and whether or not such a step seems possible, I 
must ask them to do so( to return to their Vedic dharma). Where is the 
need for a guru-pitha or a seat on which an acarya is installed if I am to 
keep my mouth shut and watch idly as the dharma that is the source of 
everything is being endangered? Even if it seems not possible (Brahmins 
returning to the dharma of their birth) it must be shown to be possible in 
practice: that is the purpose of the institutions called mathas. They must 
harness all their energies towards the attainment of this goal.  
During the years of the freedom struggle some people wondered 
whether the white man would quit because of satyagraha. Many things in 
this world regarded as not being within the realm on possibility have 
been shown to be possible. It is not for me to say that this (return of all 
Brahmins to the Vedic dharma) is not possible; to take such a view would 
be contrary to our very dharma. it is up to you to make it possible in 


 
practice or not to make it possible. All I can do is too keep reminding you 
the message of the dharmasastras.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

The Least Expected of Brahmins 
Whether or not the present Hindu society changes and whether or not it 
can be changed, it is essential to have a class of people whose very life-
breath is Vedic learning. I do not speak thus because I am worried about 
the existence of a caste called Brahmins. Nothing is to be gained if there 
is such a caste and it serves only its own selfish interests. If a caste called 
Brahmins must exist, it must be for the good of mankind. The purpose of 
the Vedas, the purpose of the sound of the Vedas, is the well-being of the 
world. That is the reason why I feel that, hereafter at lease, there ought 
not to be even a single Brahmin who does not chant the Vedas. The only 
remedy for all the ills of the worlds, all its troubles is the return of all 
Brahmins to the Vedic dharma.  
In this context I should like to tell you the least expected of Brahmins. I 
am prepared to ignore that they have neither the courage nor the spirit 
of sacrifice to come back to their dharma. But they can at least make 
their children take to it. In the next generation there must not be a single 
Brahmin who is not conversant with the Vedas. You must work for this 
goal and make sure that your sons learn these sacred texts.  
If you are averse to making your sons mere Vaidikas and are anxious that 
they should lead a life of comfort like you( what you think to be a life of 
comfort), I am prepared to come one step further down to make the 
following suggestion. You would not perhaps like your children to take up 
Vedic learning as a lifelong vocation and would like to give them an 
education on modern lines so as to prepare them for office or factory 
work or to make them doctors, engineers, and so on. I am prepared to go 
with you so far. But I would ask you to perform the upanayana of your 
son when he is eight years old. He must then be put in a Veda class held 
for one hour in the evening after school hours. He must be taught the 
Vedas in this manner for ten years.  


 
This is the least Brahmins can do to preserve tradition. Arrangements to 
impart Vedic learning to children must be made in every Brahmin 
household. I know that there are not enough teachers, a sad reflection on 
the state of dharma. Considering this and the likely economic condition of 
parents I would suggest that Veda classes may be conducted for all 
children together of a locality or. neighbourhood. Children of poor 
families may be taught on a cooperative basis.  
Step by step in this ways the boys will be able to memorize the mantra 
partof the Vedas and also learn the prayoga to conduct rites like 
upakarma. I speak here about "prayoga", the conduct or procedure of 
rites, because in the absence of purohits (priests) in the future everyone 
should be able to perform Vedic rites himself.  
The sound of the Vedas must pervade the world for all time to come. 
Everyone must sincerely work towards achieving this end. It is your duty 
to ensure the good not only of the Brahmin community, not only of all 
the castes of India, but of all the countless creatures of earth. It is a duty 
imposed on you by Isvara- it is a divine duty.  
It is important that we perform this duty we owe to the people of the 
present. But it is equally important that we perform it so as to be saved 
from committing a crime against future generations. "As it is nobody 
cares for the Vedas" you are likely to tell me. "Who is going to care for 
them in the coming years? What purpose is served by all the efforts we 
take now to keep up their study? “I do not share this view. When the 
wheel keeps turning that part of it which is now down has necessarily to 
come up. Modern civilization with its frenzied pace is bound to have its 
fall after attaining its peak. We have been carried away by the supposed 
comforts made possible by advanced technology. But one day we will 
realise that they do not give us any felling of fullness and that we have 
indeed created only discomforts for ourselves through them.  
The example of America is enough to drive home this point. People there 
are believed to have attained the acme of luxury and yet fell empty 
within. They are anxious to dispel the disquiet created by modern 
comforts. Americans who have some degree of awareness have been 


 
drawn towards Vedanta, yoga, devotional music and so on. Others want 
to forget sensual enjoyment somehow. They swallow all kinds of 
tranquilizers and are immersed in a deep stupor.  
This fate may overtake our country also. We are always tempted by the 
feeling that there is some worldly pleasure yet to be savoured and we 
know no rest until we have done so. After draining pleasures to the dregs 
we will discover the impermanence of it all. That is the moment when we 
will turn to matters of the Self, to the quest of enduring bliss. When we 
realise the peace and harmony that society derived from Vedic practices, 
we will be keen to take to the path shown by them. If we of this 
generation create a break in the chain of Vedic study kept for ages, from 
generation to generation, we shall be committing the unforgivable crime 
of denying our descendants the opportunity of learning the Vedas.  
"There are so many books dealing with the Vedic mantras and sacrifices, 
volume after volume produced by Indian and foreign scholars, “the 
suggestions is likely to be made. "Surely future generations can read 
them and learn the Vedas thus. " 
Before I speak about this I have to answer important question, a question 
that goes to the very heart of the Vedic tradition. It is this: "What do you 
mean by saying that the sound of the Vedas protects the world" The 
mantras are certain sounds expressed in the form of words. These words 
have their own profound meaning. Could we not learn the mantras and 
their meaning from books? Why should there be a class of people 
specially devoted to the chanting of the Vedas? If the meaning of these 
scriptures is to be preserved there is no cause for worry since there are 
books too serve such a purpose. There is no need for an exclusive caste 
functioning on a hereditary basis and charged with the duty of preserving 
these texts. But the question of the meaning of the Vedas apart, why 
should there be a class of people whose duty it is to chant the Vedic 
hymns preserve their sound in the form it has come to us from time 
immemorial? “This question must be answered.  
Vedic hymns and preserve their sound in the form it has come to us from 
time immemorial? “This question must be answered.  


 

Preserving the Vedas: Why it is a Lifetime Mission 
[This chapter contains an illuminating exposition of the physics and 
metaphysics of sound.] 
“If the divisions of labour on a hereditary basis is good for all society, 
what specifically is the benefit gained from the vocation of Brahmins, that 
is preserving the Vedas?” is a question frequently asked.  
The potter makes pots for you; the washerman launders your clothes; the 
weaver weaves clothes for you to wear; the cowherd brings you your 
milk; the peasant tills the land to grow rice for you to cook and eat. 
Everyone does some work or other essential in the life of everybody else. 
The rice (or wheat) grown by the tiller sustains us all. The cloth woven by 
the weaver is indispensable to our modesty; it is also needed to keep us 
warm in the cold season. We drink the milk brought by the cowherd and 
also use it to make buttermilk; we cook our food in the pot made by the 
potter. We find that all jatis provide commodities useful for the society. 
What is the Brahmin's contribution in this context? What vocation is 
assigned to him by the Sastras which are the basis of varna dharma?  
The Brahmin has to learn the Vedas by listening to his teacher chanting 
them; this is adhyayana. If adhyayana is chanting the Vedas, adhyapana is 
teaching the same. The sastras have charged the Brahmin with the 
additional duty of performing various rites including Vedic sacrifices.  
The Vedas contain lofty truths. People in modern times may not be 
averse to the idea that these truths are worthy of being cherished. 
Society requires knowledge, arts, etc. The Vedas are a storehouse of 
knowledge. So the idea that we must have a special class of people to 
propagate the truths contained in the Vedas may seem reasonable 
enough. According to the sastras, however, such a special class is needed 
to preserve the sound of these scriptures. This class is constituted by the 
Brahmins and they perform their function on a hereditary basis. The idea 


 
that propagating the truths of the Vedas will help mankind may be 
acceptable to many, but not the belief that a small group of people can 
contribute to the good of the world by preserving the sound of the Vedas. 
The community stands to lose if the peasant does not till the land and the 
potter, weaver, carpenter, etc., do not do their respective jobs. But would 
you say the same thing about the work of the Brahmin? What difference 
would it make to the society if he ceased intoning the Vedas?  
To understand the questions raised above we must first try to find out 
the nature of the Vedas. No purpose is served by approaching three 
subject entirely on an intellectual level. We must accept the words of 
great men who know the Vedas deep in their hearts. "How can we do 
that, sir?” some people might protest. "We are rationalists and we can be 
convinced of a truth or statement only on the basis of reason or direct 
knowledge. " 
What do we do then? How can anyone claim, as a matter of right, that all 
subjects ought to be brought within the ken of human reasoning? Man is 
but one among countless creatures. Take for instance the experiments 
conducted by a physicist in his laboratory. Does a cow understand them? 
If the scientist formulates certain laws on the basis on his experiments, 
does the cow say that "These laws of physics do not exist"? But how are 
humans ignorant of physics to know about such laws? They trust the 
statements made by people proficient in the subject.  
To illustrate, take the example of any common appliance. Let us assume 
that you are told that it works on the basis of certain principles of science. 
Don't you accept these principles by observing how the appliance works? 
In the same way we must have faith in what great men say about the 
Vedas, great men who live strictly adhering to the sastras. We must also 
place our faith on our scripture on the basis of the fruits or benefits 
yielded by them, the benefits we directly perceive. One such "fruit" is till 
there for all of us to see. It is Hinduism itself, the religion that has 
withstood the challenges of all these millennia. Our religion has produced 
more great men than any other faith. People have been rewarded with 
the highest inner well-being [the highest bliss] as a result of their faith in 


 
the Vedic tradition. There is no insistence on their part that everything on 
earth must be brought within the realm of reason or direct perception.  
"The sages transcended the frontiers of human knowledge and became 
one with the Universal Reality. It is through them that the world received 
the Vedic mantras, “this is one of the basic concepts of our religion. If you 
do not accept that human beings can obtain such Atmic power as 
exemplified by these seers, any further talk on the subject would be 
futile. One could point to you great men whom you can see for yourself, 
great men who have perfected themselves and acquired powers not 
shared by the common people. But if you think of them to be cheats or 
fraudulent men, any further talk would again be useless. In your present 
state of limited understanding, the argument that denies the existence of 
anything beyond the range of human reason and comprehension itself 
betrays the height of rationalism.  
You have come here to listen to me instead of going to a political meeting 
where you can hear interesting speeches. So I believe that few of you 
here are full-fledged rationalists. You may not therefore refuse to listen 
to me if I speak to you about why the Vedas should be preserved 
according to the time-honoured tradition. But it is also likely that even if 
some of you happen to be rationalists, you may still be willing to listen to 
me thinking that there may be some point in what the Svamiyar has to 
say.  
Some people are at a loss to understand why the sound of the Vedas is 
given so much importance. How does sound originate or how is it 
caused? Where there is vibration, where there is movement or motion, 
there is sound. This is strictly according to rational science. Speech is 
constituted of vibrations of many kinds. We hear sounds with our ears. 
But these are sounds that are converted into electric waves and these we 
cannot hear. We know this from the working of the radio and the 
telephone. All that we hear or perceive others are indeed electric waves. 
Science has come to the point of recognizing all to be electric waves- the 
man who sees and listens, his brains, all are electric waves.  


 
There are countless numbers of inert objects in the world- land masses 
and mountains, rivers and oceans, and so on. Also there are sentient 
creatures of many kinds. All of them must have been created out of 
something. During creation this something must have vibrated in many 
different ways and given rise to all that we see today. If all movements 
are sound, there must have existed numerous different kinds of sound 
before creation. In this creation one is sustained by another. In the 
process of mutual sustenance, different movements and sounds must be 
produced. It is not necessary that vibrations should form a part only of 
gross activities. Science has discovered that even our thinking process is a 
kind of electric current or energy. Each thought process is a form of 
electric current or energy and it must produce a vibration and a sound. 
This kind of sound being very subtle we do not hear it with our ears. Just 
as there are bacteria which we do not see with our naked eye, there are 
many sound that our ears do not pick up. According to science any 
physical or mental movement must produce a sound.  
The idea that each movement produces its own sound may be put 
differently thus: to create a particular sound a particular movement must 
be produced. Take the case of vidvan singing. If you want to sing like him 
or creates birquas like him, you will have produce the same vibrations 
that he creates in his throat.  
Sound and vibration(or motion) go together. The vibrations produce 
either a gross object or a mental state. We come to the conclusion that 
creation is a product of sound. This ancient concept is substantiated by 
science itself.  
Creation, the many things connected with it, thoughts and movements 
and the sound associated with them fill space. What happens to the 
sound produced by the clapping of our hands? It remains in space. Good 
as well as bad action produce their own sounds as well as movements 
associated with them. Conversely, the creation of these types of 
movements will result in good as well as evil. To produce good thoughts 
in people, good movements must be created: the sounds corresponding 
to them must be produced. If we can generate such sounds for the good 


 
of mankind than such good thoughts? The mantras of the Vedas are 
sounds that have the power to inspire good thoughts in people.  
One more thing. We need food for our sustenance. And to grow food 
there must be rain. The formation of clouds and their precipitation are 
dependent on certain vibrations. Rainfall depends on the production of 
particular sounds which, in turn, create particular vibrations. The same 
applies to all our needs in life. It is true that unnecessary and evil objects 
are also produced by sound. But the one and only goal of the sound of 
the Vedas is the creation of well-being throughout the world.  
But are sound and vibrations spontaneously produced? If vibrations arise 
on their own they will be erratic and confusing and not related to one 
another. But what do we see in the cosmos? There is a certain orderliness 
about it and one thing in it is linked to another. What do we infer form 
this? That a Great Intelligence has formulated this scheme that we see, 
that it has created it from its own vibrations.  
The Vedas are sounds emanating from the vibrations of this Great 
Intelligence, the Great Gnosis. That is why we believe that the mantras of 
the Vedas originate from the Paramatman himself. We must take special 
care of such sounds too ensure the good of the world. Yes, the Vedic 
mantras are sequences of sounds that are meant for the good of the 
world.  
Doubts are expressed on this point. People argue: "We hear the mantras 
of the Vedic distinctly. But we do not hear the sounds in space, the 
sounds of creation. How can the two be the same? " 
What exists in the cosmos in present in the individual being. The belief 
that the "microcosm" inherits the "macrocosm" is not in keeping with our 
commonsense view of things. But all people, including atheists, will agree 
that there are "instruments" in our body in the form of the senses that 
we can grasp what exists in the macrocosm. The sun in the macrocosm is 
felt by our body as heat. We perceive the flower in our garden through its 
scent. We savour the sweet taste of sugarcane with our tongue. With our 
eyes we learn that one object is red, that another it yellow.  


 
Unless the macrocosm and microcosm are constituted of the same 
substance the one will not be able to be aware of the other. Indeed the 
very conduct of life will not be possible otherwise. If we go one step 
further, the truth will dawn on us that it is not merely that the 
macrocosm and the microcosm are constituted of the same substance 
but that it is the same substance that becomes the macrocosm and the 
microcosm. The yogins know this truth directly from their experience.  
Whatever is present in space is also present in the individual being. These 
elements exists in the human body in a form that is accessible to the 
senses. The sounds a person makes in his throat have their source in 
space in a form not audible to us. The radio transforms electrical waves 
into sound waves. If a man can grasp the sounds in space and make them 
audible, he will be able to create with them what is needed for the good 
of the world. Yoga is the science that accomplishes such a task. Through 
yogic practice (perfection) one can become aware of what is in the 
macrocosm and draw it into the microcosm. I shall not be able to give you 
proof of this in a form acceptable to human reason. Yoga transcends our 
limited reason and understanding. The purpose of the Vedas is to speak 
about matters that are beyond the comprehension of the human mind.  
You must have faith in the words of great men or else, to know the truth 
of such matters, you must practise yoga strictly observing its rules. It may 
not be practicable for all those who ask questions or harbour doubts 
about the Vedas to practice yoga in this manner. Even if you are prepared 
to accept the words of a true yogin, how are you, in the first place, to be 
convinced that he in indeed a true yogin and not a fraud? Altogether it 
means that you must have faith in someone, in something. Later such 
faith will be strengthened from your own observations, inference and 
experience. There is no point in speaking to people who have either no 
faith or refuse to develop it through their own experience.  
There is a state in which the macrocosm and the microcosm are 
perceived as one. Great men there who have reached such a state and 
are capable of transforming what is subtle in the one into what is gross in 
the other. I am speaking here to those who believe in such a possibility.  


 
When we look at this universe and their complex manner in which it 
functions, we realise that there must be a Great Wisdom that has created 
it and sustains it. It is from this Great Wisdom, that is the Paramatman, 
that all that we see are born and it is from It that all the sounds that we 
hear have emanated. First came the universe of sound and then the 
universe that we observe. Most of the former still exists in space. The 
space that exists outside us exists also in our heart. The yogins have 
experience of this hrdayakasa, this heart-sky or this heart-space, when 
they are in samadhi (absorbed in the Infinite). In this state of theirs all 
differences between the outward and the inward vanish and the two 
become one. The yogins can now grasp the sounds of space and bestow 
the same on mankind. These successions of sounds that bring benefits to 
the world are indeed the mantras of the Vedas.  
These mantras are not the creation of anyone. Though each of them is in 
the name of a rsi or seer, in reality it is not his creation. When we say that 
a certain mantra has a certain sage associated with it, all that we mean is 
that it was he who first "saw" it existing without a beginning in space and 
revealed it to the world. The very word "rsi" means "mantra-drasta" (one 
who saw- discovered- the mantra), not "mantra-karta" (one who created 
the mantra). Our life is dependent on how our breathing functions. In the 
same way the cosmos functions in accordance with the vibrations of the 
Vedic sounds- so the Vedic mantras are the very breath of the Supreme 
Being. We must thus conclude that, without the Vedas, there is no 
Brahman: To put it differently, the Vedas are self-existent like the 
Paramatman.  
The mantras of the Vedas are remarkable in that they bring blessings to 
the world in the form of sound- even if their meaning is not understood. 
Of course, they are pregnant with meaning and represent the lofty 
principle that it is the One Truth that is manifested as all that we 
perceive. They also confer blessing on us by taking the form of deities 
appropriate to the different sounds (of the mantras).  
Sound does not bring any benefits, any fruits, by itself. Isvara alone is the 
bestower of benefits. However, instead of making the fruits available to 


 
us directly, he appoints deities to distribute them in the same manner as 
the king or president of a country appoints officials to carry out his 
dictates. The mantras represent various deities in the form of sound. If 
we attain perfection (siddhi) by constant chanting and meditation of a 
mantra, it should be possible for us to see the deity invoked in his 
physical form. The deities also arise if we make offerings into the 
sacrificial fire reciting specific mantras. If a sacrifice is conducted in this 
manner, the deities give us their special blessings. We do not pay taxes 
directly to the king or president. In the same way, we pay taxes in the 
form of sacrifices and Vedic chanting to the aides of the Paramatman for 
the sake of the welfare of the world. The sounds of the mantras 
constitute their form.  
The Vedas have won the admiration of Western scholars for their poetic 
beauty. They bring us face to face with many deities- they bring us also 
their grace. Above all, through the Upanisads they teach us the great 
truths relating to the Self. The Vedas are thus known for the profundity of 
the truths contained in them, but their sound is no less important. Indeed 
their sound has its own significance and power. All mantras, it must be 
noted have power, not only Vedic mantras.  
The sound of some mantras have greater value than their meaning. Their 
syllables chanted in a particular manner create a special energy, but their 
meaning has no special significance. Take the mantra recited to cure a 
man stung by a scorpion. The words, the syllables, constituting the 
mantra have no special meaning. Indeed, they say, the meaning is not to 
be told. But by chanting the mantra, the vibrations are caused in space 
and one stung by a scorpion will be cured: the potency of the syllables of 
the mantra is such. The efficacy of sounds varies with the difference 
mantras. Evil is caused by reciting certain mantras or formulae: this is 
called "abhicara"[understood as the black magic in the West]. In all this 
the clarity with which the syllables are enunciated is important. There 
was the practice of knocking off the teeth of those who practiced billi 
sunyam (a form of black magic). The black magician, if toothless, will not 
be able to articulate the mantras properly and so his spells will not have 
the intended effect. If the syllables of the spell are not clearly and 


 
properly enunciated, they will not give us the desired benefit. If we 
appreciate the fact that sounds have such power, the question of the 
language of the mantras loses it importance. It would be meaningless 
then to demand that the mantras must be expressed in some other 
language [that we understand]. It would be equally meaningless to 
wonder whether the mantras of the sraddha ceremony should be 
rendered into English, Tamil or some other language so that our departed 
parents would understand them better.  
The Vedic mantras do good to all creatures in this world and the 
hereafter: we must have implicit faith in this belief. It is not proper to ask 
whether what we ourselves cannot here with our ears will be heard by 
the seers. There is such a thing as the divine power of seeing and hearing. 
Our sight is dependent on the lens in our eyes. Were this lens different 
what we observe would also be different. Through the intense practice of 
yoga we can obtain the divine power of seeing and hearing.  
We must not inquire into the Vedas with our limited powers of 
perception and with our limited capacity to reason and comprehend. The 
Vedas speak to us about what is beyond the reach of our eyes and ears 
and reasoning- that is their purpose. There are things that we 
comprehend through direct perception. We do not need the help of the 
Vedas to know about them. What cannot be provoked by reasoning and 
what is beyond the reach of our intellect - these the seers have gifted us 
in the form of the Vedas with their divine perception. How do we learn 
about the affairs of other countries? We are not eyewitnesses to them 
but we depend on newspaper reports of these affairs. There is another 
kind of newspaper which tells us about matters that cannot be known 
through any worldly means and this newspaper is constituted of the 
Vedic mantras that are the gift of the seers.  
We have to accept the Vedas in faith. Develop a little faith in them and 
experience for your self the fruits yielded by them. In due course you will 
be convinced about the truths told about them.  
Even today we see how mantras are efficacious though what we see is 
more often their power to do evil rather than good. The very word 


 
"mantrikam" inspires dread in us. If mantras have the power to do evil, 
they must also have the power to do good. We do hear reports of how 
mantras are beneficent, for instance how the mantras invoking the god 
Varuna produce rains.  
It may be that sometimes the "Varunajapa" does not succeed in bringing 
rains. But this is no reason why all mantras should be rejected outright as 
of no value. Sick people die even after the regular administration of 
medicine. For this reason do we condemn medical science as worthless? 
We have an explanation for the patient's failure to recover: his illness and 
reached such an advanced stage that no medicine could be of any avail. 
Similarly, no mantra is of any help when it has to contend against the 
working of powerful karma. There is also another reason. If you are not 
strict about your diet, the medicine taken may not work. Similarly, if we 
are lax in the observance of certain rules, the mantras will not produce 
the desired result.  
Yoga is a science. In a scientific laboratory, certain rules have to be 
observed in the conduct of experiments. If the electrician refuses to wear 
gloves or to stand on a wooden stool during his work, what will happen? 
So too, anyone practising yoga has to follow the rules governing it. To 
return to Varuna japa. If the japa is not always successful, it is because- as 
I have found out through inquires- of the failure of those performing the 
rite to observe the rule of "alavana"[taking food without salt].  
In Tirivanaikka (near Tirucirapalli) people have seen with their own eyes a 
tree bare of foliage putting forth green shoots under the spell of mantras. 
The sthalavrksa here [the tree sacred to a place or temple] in the white 
jambu. That is why the place (Tiruvanaikka) is also called Jambukesvaram. 
Once the tree was dead expect for one branch or so. Then the cettiars- 
the trustees of the temple- had an Ekadasa-Rudrabhiseka conducted for 
it. And behold, by the power of mantras the tree put forth fresh leaves.  
Each sound has a specific impact on the outward world. Experiments 
were once conducted by a lakeside by producing a certain pattern of 
svaras on an instrument. It was observed that as a result of the vibrations 
so created the light on the water shone as particles. Later these particles 


 
took a specific shape. From such scientific proof it is possible to believe 
that we can perceive the form of a deity through chanting the 
appropriate Veda mantras. It is not that sound is transformed into light 
alone in the outward world. It is pervasive in many ways and produces 
various kind of impacts. The sound of the Vedic mantras pervading the 
atmosphere is extremely beneficial. There are ways in which sound is to 
be produced to make it advantageous to us. Some notes are to be raised, 
some lowered and some to be uttered in an even manner. The Vedas 
have to be chanted in this way. The three different ways of chanting are 
"udatta", "anudatta" and "svarita". The sound and svara together will 
turn the powers of the cosmos favourable to us.  
The question that now occurs is why there should be a separate caste 
committed to Vedic learning practices even if it is conceded that Vedic 
mantras have the power to do good.  
In answering this question we must first remember that the Vedas are 
not to be read from the written text. They have to be memorized by 
constant listening and repeated chanting. The learner then becomes a 
teacher himself and in this manner the process goes on from generation 
to generation. Maintaining such a tradition of learning and teaching is a 
whole-time occupation. Neither the teacher nor the taught may take up 
any other work.  
We must also remember that the Brahmin is expected to master subjects 
other than the Vedas also, like the arts and crafts and the various 
sciences(sastras). He has in fact to learn the vocations of other jatis (but 
he must not take up any for his own livelihood). It is the responsibility of 
the Brahmin to promote knowledge and culture. He is expected to learn 
the hereditary skills of all jatis, including the art of warfare, and pass on 
these skills to the respective jatis to help them earn their livelihood. The 
Brahmin's calling is adhyayana and adhyapana (learning and teaching the 
Vedas). According to the sastras he must live in a modest dwelling, 
observe strict rules and vows so as to gain mastery of the mantras. He 
must eat only as much as is needed keep body and soul together. All 
temptations to make money and enjoy sensual pleasures he must sternly 


 
resist. All his actions must be inspired by the spirit of sacrifice and he 
must pass his days sustaining the Vedic tradition and practices for the 
good of mankind.  
It is the duty of other jatis to see that the Brahmin does not die of 
starvation. They must provide him with bare necessities of life and such 
materials as re needed for the performance of sacrifices. Wages are paid 
to those who do other jobs or a price is paid for what they produce. The 
Brahmin works for the whole community and serves it by chanting 
mantras, by performing sacrifices and by leading a life according to the 
dictates of religion. That is why he must be provided with his upkeep. The 
canonical texts do not say that we must build him palace or that he must 
be given gifts of gold. The Brahmin must be provided with the 
wherewithal for the proper performance of sacrifices. In his personal life 
he must eschew all show and luxury. It is by taming his senses- by burning 
away all desire- that he gains mastery over the mantras.  
I have said more than once that the Vedas are to be learned by constant 
listening, that they are not to be learned from the written text. Let me tell 
you why. The sound of the Vedas must pervade the world. This is of 
paramount importance, not that the text itself should be maintained in 
print. Indeed, the Vedas must not be kept in book form. If the printed text 
is available all the time, we are likely to neglect the habit of memorizing 
the hymns and chanting them. There is not the slightest doubt about this. 
"After all it is in the book. When the need arises we can always refer to it. 
Why should we waste our time in memorizing the mantras? “Thus an 
attitude of indifference will develop among those charged with the duty 
of maintaining the Vedic tradition.  
Nowadays we have what is called the "pancanngaran" (pancangakkaran), 
that is the "almanac-man". We understand his job to be that of officiating 
at the rites performed by members of the fourth varna. But from the 
term "almanac"-man" we know that this is not his main duty. The 
pancangakkaran or almanac-man is truly one who determines the five 
angas" or components of the almanac. Each day has five angas: tithi, vara, 
naksatra, yoga and karana. To find out whether a particular day is 


 
auspicious or whether certain work or function may be performed on a 
particular day, all these five factors have to be taken into account. Today 
astronomers in Greenwich observe the sun, the moon and the stars to fix 
the timings of sunrise and sunset. Three or four generations ago, every 
village had an almanac-man who was an expert in such matters. He could 
predict eclipses, their exact timings, with the precision of present-day 
astronomers. He inscribed the five angas relating to the day on a palm-
leaf and took it round from house to house to help people in their worldly 
and religious duties. In the past he had also another name "Kuttai 
Cuvadi"(meaning "Shortened Palm-leaf").  
How have the present day almanac-men forgotten their great science? 
With the advent of the printing press the almanac could be printed for a 
whole year and made available to people. There was no longer any need 
for the old, type of almanac to pancanga, an important part of 
astronomy, is now on the verge of extinction.  
The Vedas would have suffered a similar fate had we stuck to a system of 
learning them from written or printed texts. Their sound would not have 
then filled the world and created all-round well-being.  
Our forefathers realised that to put anything in writing was not the best 
way of preserving it since it bred indifference to the subject so preserved. 
One who recited the Vedas from the written text ("likhita-pathaka") was 
looked down upon as an "adhama" (one belonging to the lowest order 
among those chanting the Vedas). In Tamil the Vedas are known as the 
"unwritten old text"(ezhutakilavi). In Sanskrit the Vedas are also called 
"Sruti", which means "that which is heard", that is to say not be learned 
from any written text. Since listening to the Vedas as they were chanted 
and then memorizing them was the practice, preserving the Vedic 
tradition came to be full-time vocation. The teacher taught pada by 
pada(foot by foot) and the student repeated each pada twice. In this way 
the sound of the Vedas filled the whole place. It was thus that the study 
of our own scripture, with all its recessions which are like the expanse of 
a great ocean, was maintained in the oral tradition until the turn of the 
century. This treasure, this timeless crop that sustains our inner beings, 


 
has come to us through the ages as ordained by the Lord. There can be no 
greater sin that that of neglecting this treasure and allowing it to perish.  
If the Vedic tradition becomes extinct there is no need for a separate 
caste called Brahmins. Nowadays the cry is often heard, "Brahmin, get 
out". But do we hear cries like, "Potter, get out" or "Washerman, go 
away?” If the potter and the washerman leave the village they will be 
brought back by force and retained. Why so? Because the community 
needs their services.  
So long as the Brahmin possessed sattva-guna (the quality of goodness 
and purity) and so long as he kept the Vedic tradition going and lived a 
simple life, others recognized his value for society. They regarded him 
with affection and respect and paced their trust in him. They realised that 
if society was not afflicted by famine and disease (as in the case today), it 
was because the sound of the Vedas pervaded everywhere and the 
performance of Vedic recites created a healthy atmosphere around and 
brought its own blessings.  
This was not the only way in which the Brahmin served society. His 
personal example was itself a source of inspiration to people. They saw 
how he curbed his sensual appetites, how he lived a life of peace, how he 
was compassionate to all creatures, how he mediated on the Lord, how 
he performed a variety of rites strictly adhering to sastric rules and 
without any expectations of rewards. They saw a whole case living a life 
of selflessness and sacrifice. Naturally, they too were drawn to the 
qualities exemplified by its members. They emulated their example, 
observed fasts and vows to the extent permitted by the nature of their 
occupations. It is preposterous to accuse the Brahmin of having kept 
other jatis suppressed. There is a special way of life that the scriptures 
have prescribed for him and in remaining true to it he becomes a 
personal example for others desirous of raising themselves.  
It is equally preposterous to suggest that other where kept down because 
they were denied the right to learn the Vedas. I have already spoken to 
you that preserving the Vedic tradition is a hereditary and lifelong 
vocation. Any calling must be pursued on a hereditary basis. Otherwise, 


 
there is the risk of society being torn asunder by jealousies and rivalries. 
The maintenance of the Vedic tradition is a calling by itself. There will be 
confusion and chaos in the system of division of labour if people whose 
vocations are different are allowed to pursue one common tradition. 
Also, as a consequence, will not the social structure be disturbed? Every 
vocation has as high a place on the social scale as any other. Why should 
anyone nurse the ideas that the pursuit of the Vedic dharma belongs to a 
plane higher than all other types of work?  
Some castes are not permitted to learn the Vedas but there is no bar on 
their learning the truths contained in them. This is all that is needed for 
their Atmic advancement. We need only one class of people charged with 
the mission of keeping the sound of the Vedas alive in the world. The 
ideas contained in them for spiritual uplift are open to all. The songs of 
non-Brahmin saints like Appar and Nammazhvar are replete with Vedic 
and Vedantic thoughts.  
Were it true that Brahmins had monopolised Atmic knowledge and 
devotion and kept others downtrodden, how would you explain the rise 
among the non-Brahmin jatis of so many great saints, not only the 
examples just mentioned above, Appar and Nammazhvar, but a number 
of other Nayanmars and Azhvars? The Nayanmars included men 
belonging even to jatis regarded as "low". Where do you find men of 
inner enlightenment like Tayumanavar and Pattiinattar? Apart from the 
fact that there were among non-Brahmin men worthy of being lauded by 
Brahmins for other enlightenment and devotion, there were individuals 
from the fourth varna who established empires and gave new life and 
vigour to the Vedic dharma. That Brahmins exploited other castes is a 
recently invented myth.  
I do not claim that Brahmins are free from faults or are not guilty of 
lapses. Nobody is free from faults. But on the whole the Brahmin has 
done good to society and has been a guide to all its members. That is why 
he was enabled to live with dignity all these centuries.  
When other communities now see that the Brahmin no longer serves 
society in any manner, they raise the cry, "Brahmin, get out". If they do 


 
not serve society and if all they do is to join others in the scramble for 
money, where is the need for a separate caste called Brahmins? It occurs 
to me that, if the caste called Brahmins serves no purpose to society, I 
shall be the first to seek its destruction. Nothing has any right to exist if it 
has no utility value. There is no need for a caste called Brahmin if the 
world does not stand to benefit from it.  
Now there are "toll-gates" located in many places but often without any 
"gate". In the past a toll used to be collected from people crossing the 
boundary marked by these "gates". Later such a system was discontinued 
and no purpose was served by the gate. Nothing exists without a 
purpose. Now, if the Brahmin without Vedic learning has become as 
purposeless as the toll-gate without any toll actually charged, with what 
reason or justice can we say that he must not be thrown out?  
The Brahmin today deserves to be reproved, if he expects to be treated 
with any special respect. Criticism, however, should be it. The Brahmin 
must be faulted for abandoning his dharma, but the dharma itself, the 
Vedic dharma, is another matter. It is not proper to find fault with the 
dharma itself and it is the duty of others to help the Brahmin practice it. 
the Vedic dharma must be sustained so as to ensure the well-being of the 
world. Other jatis must support the principle that there must be a caste 
whose hereditary calling it is to maintain the Vedic tradition. If they 
themselves have lost faith in the Vedic dharma, they cannot find fault 
with the Brahmin for having forsaken it. If they believe that the Vedic 
dharma is not wanted, then it would mean (according to their own logic) 
that the Brahmin is not committing any offence by giving up his 
hereditary vocation. It also follows that for the sake of his livelihood he 
will have too take up some other job, competing with the others for the 
same. So to hold that there is no need for the Vedic dharma and that, at 
the same time, the Brahmin should not do any work other than the 
pursuit of that dharma does not stand to reason. On the other hand, it is 
proclaimed that the Vedic dharma is all wrong and must cease to exist 
but, on the other, the man whose duty it is to practice that dharma is 
hated for trying to do some other work. Is this just? It is part of humanity 
to see that not even a dog or a jackal goes hungry and it is a dharma 


 
common to all religions. Even those who maintain that we do not need 
any religion speak for compassion and the spirit of sacrifice in all our 
actions. So it is not just to insist that a man must not pursue his 
hereditary vocation and that he must not, at the same time, do any other 
work but die of starvation.  
Others can help greatly by making the Brahmin true to himself as the 
upholder of the Vedic dharma. I have heard it said that in the old days 
some Brahmins would go to the untouchable quarter and tell people 
there: "You and we, let us become one.” Whereupon the untouchables 
would reply: "No. no. You keep doing your work. That is for the good of 
both of us. Don't come here again". They would prevent the Brahmins 
from approaching them again by breaking their pots in front of them, the 
pots which were their only asset. Though people then were divided in the 
matter of work and did not mix together, they had affection for one 
another and believed that each did his work for the common good.  
Even today the common people are not non-believers, nor have they lost 
faith in the Vedas. I feel that they will continue too have respect for the 
Vedic dharma and that the propaganda of hate [against Brahmins and the 
Vedas] is all to be attributed to political reasons. People, I repeat, do have 
faith in the Vedas, in Vedic rites and customs and if the Brahmin becomes 
a little better [that is by being true to his vocation] all hatred will vanish. 
As I said before, instead of expecting respect from others, he must 
remain true to his dharma even at the risk of his life. It is my belief that 
society will not allow him to suffer such an extreme fate. But my stand is 
that, even if it does, he must not forsake his dharma. Whatever the 
attitude of others, whether they help him or whether they run him down, 
the Brahmin must uphold the Vedic tradition for the well-being of all.  
What I have spoken for the Brahmin community applies in principle too 
other also. The duties about which I have to speak to them (non-
Brahmins) are many. They too are eager to know about them and I am 
confident that, things are properly explained, they will pursue faithfully 
their respective dharmas. I must, however, be qualified to give them 
advice. It is generally believed that I have a special relationship with the 


 
Brahmin community. In the Matha a number of Vedic rites are 
performed. So, rightly or wrongly, the impression has gained around that 
I have much to do with the case whose duty it is to uphold the Vedic 
dharma. That being the case, a question will arise in the minds of people 
belonging to other communities if I speak to them on matters of dharma, 
even if it is assumed that they will listen to me with affection and respect. 
The question is this: "Brahmins are so much dependent on his support. 
Yet we don't see them acting on his advice and correcting themselves. So 
why should he come to speak to us of our duties? " 
As a matter of fact, both are same to me, Brahmins and non-Brahmins. I 
am indeed more dissatisfied with Brahmins than with the others because 
they have abandoned the Vedic dharma, the dharma that confers the 
highest inner well-being on all. Even so, since it is believed that Brahmins 
are specially attached to me, I keep admonishing them to go back to the 
Vedic dharma with all their hearth, with all their strength. If Brahmins 
observe in practice a fraction of what is expected of them, then alone 
shall I be qualified to remind other communities of their duties. Brahmins 
must try as best they can to keep up the Vedic tradition. That is how they 
will help me to speak to other communities of their duties.  
All mankind, all creatures of earth, must live in happiness. Everybody 
must practise his allotted dharma for the good of all with the realisation 
that there is no question of any work being "higher" than any other or 
"lower". Preserving the sound of the Vedas must remain the duty of one 
class so as to ensure plenty in this world as well as to create universal 
Atmic uplift. To revert to the question I put to you first. Leaving aside the 
vocation of the Vedic dharma, let us assume that the hereditary system is 
beneficial in respect of all types of work. But why should the preservation 
of the Vedic dharma be the lifelong vocation of one class? It is now 
established, as I conclude, that however it may be with the other 
vocations, whether or not they exist, whether or not there is a mix-up in 
them, the pursuit of the Vedic dharma must remain a separate calling.  
(See also the chapter entitled, "Can a New Brahmin Caste be Created?” in Part 
Nineteen; and Part Twenty, "Varna Dharma and Universal Well-being").  


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Is Cutting off the Head a Cure for Headache? 
Today everybody- from the top leader down to the man in the street- is 
asking: Why should there be caste? With a little thinking, you will realise 
that the division of society into various jatis is for the good of all. It serves 
in two ways. While, on the one hand, it contributes to the progress of the 
entire community, on the other, it helps each individual to become pure 
of mind and obtain ultimate liberation.  
You do not have to accept this view because it comes from me or because 
it is that of the sastras. You may think that people like me are 
reactionaries opposed to progress. But consider the opinion of a man 
whose goal, all will agree, was the advancement of this nation. This man 
was determined to do away with all differences among the people, 
eradicate superstition and elevate the" backward classes" to the level of 
the rest of society. This man was Gandhiji who extolled the varnasrama 
system and whole-heartedly accepted it. I mention this because I 
thought, if not anything else, at least the views of Gandhiji would 
persuade you to accept the fact that the varna system has good features.  
Gandhiji has written an essay entitled, "My Varnasrama Dharma". In it he 
says:"Varnasrama is a system that has happened on its own. It is natural 
and inherent in a man's birth. It is a natural law that Hinduism has 
systematised into a science. This system makes a fourfold division of 
labour and lays down the duties of each section but not its rights. For any 
individual to think himself to be superior to others and look down upon 
another as inferior to himself is against the very spirit of Hindu culture. In 
the varnasrama system each individual learns to discipline himself and 
the energies of society are prevented from being frittered away. I keep 
fighting against untouchability because I consider it an evil but I support 
varnasrama as healthy for society and believe that it is not the product of 
a narrow mind. This arrangement gives the labourer the same status as it 
does a great thinker". Gandhiji supported varnasrama with greater ardour 
than sanatanists.  


 
It would be pointed out that Gandhiji's actions were such as to suggest 
that he was opposed to difference in society based on rites and customs. 
He supported even intercaste marriage. How is all this to be reconciled 
with the fact that he upheld varnasrama? Gandhiji thought that, though 
varna dharma was a worthy system, it had broken down and that it was 
not possible to revive it. What was the use of keeping the remains after 
the essence had been extracted from a thing, he asked. So he thought 
that retaining the outward differences in society was not justified after 
the principles on which these differences were founded were not longer 
in force.  
I do not think like him. Varnasrama is the backbone of our religion. If it is 
to be abandoned on the pretext that it is beyond repair, we do not 
require either a matha or a man to preside over it. For any individual to 
run an institution labelling himself as its head [that is as the head of any 
matha] after the root of all dharma is gone, is tantamount to exploiting 
society. If the old system of caste is in reality extinct, there is no need for 
a matha and it should be disbanded. But I nurse the belief that such a 
thing has not happened yet. Nor do I think that caste will before long 
inevitably cease to exist. I am also confident that, if we are awake to the 
problem at least now and mobilise all our strength and resources to take 
the necessary steps, we shall be able to impart the varna system new life 
and vigour.  
No matter how the varna system has become muddled with reference to 
other vocations, Vedic learning which is the life-breath of all occupations 
still survives in the pathasalas here and there. In these schools the 
scriptures are taught strictly in the traditional way. There is enthusiastic 
support for the efforts taken to spread Vedic learning. Students join the 
pathasalas in fairly large numbers. There is a small group committed to 
the cause of the Vedic tradition and to its continuance. My duty is the 
creation of more and more such groups and to work for their growth. If 
Vedic learning flourishes, a way will open up to counteract the veil 
consequences of the muddle created in the other varnas. And if Brahmins 
become an example and a guide- if not all of them, at least a few- by 


 
remaining true to their old ways of life, others will return to their 
hereditary duties.  
Since Gandhiji believed that varnasrama dharma could neither be 
mended nor revived in its true form, he wanted it to be totally scrapped. I 
think otherwise. Though [the flame of] varna dharma has become dim it 
is not totally extinguished and I feel that there are some sparks still, left 
which could be fanned into a bright flame again. We must learn the 
lesson from our history during the past fifty years that our society will 
have to pay dearly if it gives up varna dharma. You will learn this lesson 
from the fate suffered by the great civilisations that flourished in the rest 
of the world where such a system did not obtain.  
The disintegration of the old system of hereditary vocations must be 
attributed to the introduction of machinery and the establishment of big 
factories. There is not much scope for machines in a simple life. The old 
varna system could be saved if poeple live a simple life and are occupied 
with the old handicrafts and cottage industries. Gandhiji spoke untiringly 
of his ideal that all work must be done by human power. He was against 
monstrous machines and urged people to live a simple life, eschewing all 
luxury. In this respect his views are in conformity with the ideals of varna 
dharma.  
Today the various schemes introduced by the government together with 
the changed outlook of the people militate against the ideal of a simple 
life and the system of handicrafts. But, ironically enough, politicians and 
others keep singing the praises of Gandhiji unceasingly without 
translating his ideas into action. Gandhiji was a reformer who ardently 
wished the good of society and worked in the cause of egalitarianism. He 
was not a hard-nosed sanatanist who tenaciously clung to the canonical 
texts merely because they were old. People had faith in one like him. I 
thought that the views of such a man on varnasrama should make a deep 
impression on you.  
Why are people generally opposed to caste? Because they believe that 
caste is responsible for the differences and disparities in society and the 
quarrels arising from them. I have told you so often that in reality no jati 


 
is inferior to another or superior to it. However, critics of varna dharma 
argue that, whether or not in reality it has caused differences in society, 
an impression had gained ground that it has. As you can see for yourself, 
they add," There are quarrels arising out of them. We want to do away 
with the system of jatis because we don't want these fights to go on 
indefinitely and divide society."  
To speak thus, however, is to suggest that we must cut of the head to 
cure headache. If the old dharma suffers from a headache in the form of 
quarrels in society, it is our duty to restore it to health. How? We must 
speak to the people concerned about the true principles and remove the 
misunderstanding that cause quarrels. This is the mode of treatment to 
keep the old system of varna healthy. It is preposterous to suggest that, 
because of the disputes, the dharma that is the root and source of our 
society should itself be done away with.  
If there is something that is the cause of a dispute, it does not stand to 
reason to destroy this something itself. We cannot conduct the affairs of 
the world in this manner. There will naturally be people for this and 
against any question. Such differences are inevitable. Today there are two 
issues which have been the cause of a great deal of conflict. These are 
languages and ideology. It would be absurd to argue that we want neither 
any language nor any ideology because they are the cause of conflict.  
Nowhere else in the world today do we witness the sort of clashes that 
we face in our own country on the question of language. The caste of 
quarrels are not of the same scale as these- the frenzy aroused by 
language is so intense. The Tamil and the Telugu keep quarrelling with 
one another, so too the Bengali and the Bihari, the Kannadiga and the 
Maharastrian. Then there is the English vs. Hindi controversy. People 
indeed come to blows on the language issue. How would you solve this 
problem? Would you suggest universal dumbness as a solution, that is 
abolition of all speech, all tongues?   
Disputes concerning political ideology, about the type of government 
wanted, are far too numerous. There is the big divide between 
communism and capitalism: it has been the cause of trouble throughout 


 
the world. Without any world war actually breaking out, thousands of 
people have perished in the clash of ideologies. Apart from the struggle 
between capitalism and communism you see other kinds of unrest in 
various parts of the world: monarchy giving way to republicanism; the 
rise of dictatorial governments. Large numbers of people become victims 
in these ideological wars. Although everybody claims that he is for 
democracy, at heart there are so many differences between one man and 
another on the question of political ideology and hence all the quarrels.  
Would it be right to argue that all ideologies must be scrapped merely 
because they lead to quarrels? Any government is constituted on some 
ideologies basis or other, is it not? No ideology would mean no 
government - is it not so? Are we then to abolish the institution of 
governments and be alike animals [in the absence of any authority to 
enforce law and order]? If languages are not wanted because they are the 
cause of trouble and if governments are not wanted because they lead to 
ideological wars, it follows logically that religions and jatis also are not 
wanted since they too create disputes. Going a step further we may ask: 
Is it not because we human beings exist that we keep quarrelling among 
ourselves? So should we. . . . [The Paramaguru just smiles without 
completing the sentence].  
Though there is a vociferous campaign carried on against caste, jati crops 
up as a crucial factor in elections. It is on the basis of caste that all parties 
conduct their electioneering. The cry," We don't want any jati", seems 
really to mean," We don't want a particular jati".  
Maintaining the system of jatis on a nominal basis is not justified if each 
of the jatis does not have a special social responsibility to discharge. To 
assign a vocation to each group or jati on a hereditary basis is for the 
good of all society. It is particularly important that this country has a 
section of people whose lifetime work is to keep chanting the Vedas, the 
Vedas which bring happiness to all living creatures through the loftiness 
of their sound and the profundity of the truths contained in them. 
Performance of the rites that form part of the Vedic tradition is as much a 
duty of this section as that of learning the mantras.  


 
Modernists think that it is the varna system that is responsible for 
quarrels in society over questions of"high" and" low" among the various 
jatis. On the contrary, I think it is precisely for the purpose of ridding 
society of feelings of differences in status that we need the caste 
system." If we are born in this jati, well, it is the will of Isvara. Our 
vocation has also been handed down to us in the same manner. Let us 
stick to it and do good to society as best we can. If somebody else finds 
that he has some other vocation, it is also according to the will of the 
Lord. Let each one of us do the work allotted to us in a spirit of dedication 
to Isvara". If such an attitude develops there will be no room to think or 
feel that one kind of work is better than another kind or worse.  
We must try to cultivate this outlook and inculcate it in everybody. We 
must set an example through our own life- there is no better way of 
making people understand the true spirit of the system of jatis. Then 
even our "oral propaganda" will not be necessary. If there is ill-will in 
society, it is because the concept of varna dharma is not properly 
understood. We must resolve right now to practise this dharma in its true 
spirit so that there will be no cause for society to be raven by bitterness.  
With the decay of jati dharma, livelihood has become a major problem 
for everybody. The obsession with money is a natural consequence of this 
worry. Until 70 or 75 years ago, nobody had any problem about his 
means of sustenance. The worry or concern then was about one's duty. If 
obtaining the means of livelihood were the only goal of life, the less well-
off would be jealous of those who are affluent and occupy high places in 
the society. It would also lead to misunderstanding and quarrels. If each 
man is concerned only about his duty and about doing it well, questions 
of status will not arise. But if money and status are the objectives, it will 
naturally mean that the man who has more money and occupies a higher 
place is superior to the man who is less prosperous and occupies a lower 
position. The point is such differences do not exist in true varna dharma. 
Even if the social order of jatis were abolished and together with it the 
quarrels among the various communities came to an end, society would 
have to face another problem, that is class conflict. We see this 
phenomenon all over the world today.  


 
Our society must be one in which there are no differences of high and 
low. All will then live in harmony as the children of Isvara without fighting 
among themselves. They will live as a united family helping one another 
and spreading a sense of peace and happiness everywhere. I ask you to 
follow the old dharma so that we may achieve such an ideal society. If we 
take a small step now towards such a goal, Isvara will give us a helping 
hand for us to go further ahead. I keep praying to him.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

My Work 
I could live in solitude in some village somewhere, performing puja and 
meditating. For the conduct of the Matha it is not at all necessary to have 
so much money as I receive from people in the cities. In my opinion the 
mathas ought to have only the minimum of strength in terms of money 
and men. A large entourage and a battalion of hangers-on are not 
essential to their maintenance. A matha's financial support and strength 
are nothing but the quality of the individual presiding over it. 
If I leave my life of solitude and come to the city it is not because you give 
me a lot of money. You have great affection and devotion for me and you 
are so glad that I am present here at your request. You wanted me to 
come here and you are happy that I am in your midst. This is your 
business. But I have my own business, my own work, in coming to this 
city . What is it? 
I have come with the hope of making some arrangement according to 
which Brahmins will not give up the Vedic dharma and will continue to 
practise it without a break. The purpose of my being here is to ask to 
prepare a scheme for the promotion of the Vedic dharma which is the 
source and root of all our systems of thought and ways of life; the scheme 
must ensure that the dharma does not become extinct in this generation 
itself. The Vedas which know no origin should be kept shining for ever 
their original authentic form. The Brahmin must be a servant who will 
keep holding up this light, this torch, to illumine all the world. This is a 
duty he cannot but perform not only for today but for the generations to 
come. 
"Brahmanya" or Brahminhood did not come into being for Brahmins to 
lord it over others or for their own individual advancement. Its purpose is 
that the Brahmin should serve as a peon to hold up the Vedic lamp and 
show the path of Vedic dharma to mankind. If I come to the cities it is to 


 
urge the Brahmin community there not to extinguish this lamp, for to put 
out this light would be to plunge the whole world in darkness for all time. 
In the towns and cities people come to listen to me in their thousands. So 
I am able to talk directly to a large number of people. It is with this idea in 
mind that I come to the big towns though it means some detriment to the 
observance of the rites associated with the Matha. 
You spend a lot of money on constructing pandals in locality after locality 
for people to gather and listen to me. You come to hear my discourses in 
the midst of all your problems. However, my conscience does not permit 
me to give an entertaining talk without speaking to you about what is 
wrong with your way of life and perhaps causing you hurt thereby. It 
would serve you no purpose if I take all your money but fail to tell you 
about what is good for you and the world. That is why I keep asking you 
again and again to protect the Vedic tradition and to practise the ancient 
dharmas. Whether or not I will succeed, I have come here to urge you 
again and again to do it.  
You honour me with a "shower" of gold coins and celebrate with much 
pomp the day of my installation on the Pitha. You do so because of your 
great affection for me. You appoint committees, collect money and toil 
day and night for the purpose. But how are we to be sure that the acaryas 
who will succeed to the Pitha in the future will also be similarly 
honoured? If the Vedic dharma becomes extinct why should there be a 
matha at all or a mathadhipati ( head of the matha)? So I tell you: "I see 
that you are so enthusiastic about honouring me with a shower of gold 
coins to celebrate the day of my ascending the Pitha. Why don't you have 
the same enthusiasm to work for the preservation of the Vedic dharma? 
Why don't you appoint committees for the purpose, draw up schemes, 
raise funds? 
"It does not matter if you are unable to create conditions in which 
Brahmins henceforth will make the pursuit of the Vedic dharma their 
lifelong vocation. All I ask you is the minimum you can do, make 
arrangements to impart to your children the Vedic mantras, to teach 
them the scripture for at least one our a day from the time they are eight 


 
years old until they are eighteen. Teach them also the prayoga (the 
conduct of rites). Do this on a cooperative basis in each locality. If you 
succeed in this you will have truly honoured me with a shower of gold 
coins." 
Nothing is achieved without effort. If we take up some work for own sake 
we are ready to suffer any amount of hardship. There is a university in a 
distant land and you are told that if you take a degree from it you will get 
a very attractive job. What do you then? You get the syllabus from that 
institution by post at once, manage to go and study there. Must we 
abandon our dharma on the plea that its pursuit involves a great deal of 
trouble? If there is trouble it means the benefits yielded will be 
proportionately greater- also it should be a matter of greater pride. 
I have come to give you trouble in this fashion. I wonder why I should not 
stay here and keep giving you trouble until you agree to complete the 
arrangements to carry out my suggestion. After all, I have to stay 
somewhere, so why not here? 
It gives me joy that more and more bhajans are conducted in the towns 
than before, that work connected with temples is on the increase and 
that puranic discourses are given more often than before. But we must 
remember that the Vedas constitute the basis of all these. If our scripture 
suffers a decline, how long will the activities based on its survive? The 
Vedas must be handed down from father to son, from generation to the 
next. It is because we have forgotten this tradition that our religion itself 
has become shaky. All the trouble in the world, all the suffering and all 
the evil must be attributed to the fact that the Brahmin has forsaken his 
dharma, the Vedic dharma. 
I am not worried about the system of jatis destroyed, but I am worried 
about the setback to the welfare of mankind. I am also extremely 
concerned about the fact that, if the Vedic tradition which has been 
maintained like a chain from generation to generation is broken, it may 
not be possible to create the tradition all over again. 


 
The good arising in a subtle from the sound of the Vedas and the 
performance of sacrifices is not the only benefit that constitutes 
"lokaksema" or the welfare of mankind. From Vedanta are derived lofty 
truths that can bring Atmic uplift to people belonging to all countries. 
How did foreigners come to have an interest in our Vedanta? When they 
came to India they discovered here a class of people engaged in the 
practice of the Vedic dharma as a lifetime calling. They were curious to 
find out in what way the Vedas were great that an entire class of people 
should have dedicated themselves to them all their life. They conducted 
research into these scriptures and discovered many truths including those 
pointing to the unity of the various cultures of the world. 
The Vedas bring universal good. This is not all. In the beginning, in my 
opinion, the Vedic culture was prevalent throughout the world. Others 
also, it is likely, will arrive at the same view on a thorough inquiry into the 
subject. The fact that there is something common to all mankind should 
be a source of universal happiness and it should also contribute to a 
sense of harmony among the various religions. Apart from this, I feel that 
people belonging of the truths of the Vedic religion. 
If a separate class of people ready to sacrifice everything for the cause of 
the Vedic tradition did not exist, how would you expect people of other 
countries to become interested in this tradition? If we ourselves discard 
something that is our own, thinking it to be useless, how can we expect 
others to take an interest in it? Because of our neglect we have been 
guilty of denying others the benefits to be earned from the Vedas. It is 
the responsibility of the present generation to ensure the continuance of 
the Vedic tradition not only for the happiness of people belonging to all 
castes in this country but for people throughout the world. Without this 
task accomplished, no purpose is going to be served by honouring me 
with a shower of gold coins. 
Why then did I agree to the kanakabhiseka? Had I not agreed to it, would 
you have gathered in such large numbers to listen to me? 
To dispel the hatred, anger and bitterness that vitiate our social life 
people whose duty it is to sustain the Vedic dharma must remain true to 


 
it and set an example to others by living a life of virtue and tranquillity. 
The benefits that come from such a life may not be immediately 
perceptible. What happens when there is a hartal? All shops are closed 
and people have to suffer much inconvenience. Think of what will happen 
when the work of preserving the Vedic dharma come to a stop? The ill 
effects suffered by society will not be felt immediately but over a period. 
People then will realise the advantage of having an exclusive class that is 
devoted to Vedic learning as a lifelong mission. If you (Brahmins) alone do 
not fall in your duty, one day all the present hatred in society will be 
wiped away and happiness will reign instead. 
In the hoary past it was in the Tamil country that Manu lived. It was here 
that Vedic learning, Atmic enlightenment and devotion attained their 
heights of glory. "Dravidesu bhurisah," they say. We had not only saints 
like Tayumanavar and Pattinattar in Tamil Nadu, but also great men 
belonging to other religions like Vedanayagam Pillai and Mastan Sahib 
who became Vedantins because of the special quality of the Tamil soil. 
The original home of the Vedas is this land. It is believed that, as the age 
of Kali comes to a close, Kalki (the tenth incarnation of Visnu) will be born 
in the Tirunelveli region of the Dravida land with the mission of protecting 
the Vedas. He will be born the son of a Brahmin who will be steadfast in 
performing the duties of his birth- so it is mentioned in the Puranas. In a 
land like this there ought not to be any opposition to the Vedic dharma. I 
have come here, to this city [Madras], to remind you that Brahmins hold 
the key to the Vedas, to the continuance of the Vedic tradition. 
Our religion places on its followers more restraints than any other faith 
does on its, but these are meant to elevate man to his true state, to take 
him to his true destination. There are restraints to be observed by the 
individual as well as by the community. Any restraint is like the 
embankment of a lake or a river. If the embankments are damaged, or if 
they are swept away, the whole area will be devastated. Today there are 
no restraints at all in the life of the individual or of society, no restraints 
in a religion that once imposed the maximum number of restrictions on 
its followers. 


 
I go from place and keep giving discourses. I do so to keep Brahmins 
under some check or restraint because they are expected to be 
pathfinders for the rest of the entire society. There is a general belief that 
Brahmins are more attached to me than are others- whether or not 
Brahmins themselves think so or I think so. So, if I first succeed a little in 
binding them to their dharma, I will have the strength to teach others 
their dharma. 
In brief, what do I ask of Brahmins? Before giving up his mortal frame, the 
Acarya composed five stanzas that contains the essence of his teachings. I 
keep telling Brahmins today what the Acarya says right at the start: Veda 
nityam adhiyatam". The same exhortation is made by the saint-poetess 
Auvvaiyar. It reads almost like a Tamil translation of the words of the 
Acarya- "Odamal orunalum irrukkavendam". What the Acarya says in a 
positive manner ("You must chant the Vedas every day"), Auvvaiyar puts 
in a negative way ("Not a single day should you pass without chanting the 
Vedas"). In Tamil the Vedas are called "Ottu". The Thirukkural has also the 
same term. The place where the Vedas worshipped Isvara is known as 
Vedapuri: in Tamil it is "Tiruvottur" ("Tiru-Ottu-ur"). Vedic chanting has 
survived up till now from the time of Brahma's creation. I keep visiting 
places to give people trouble and make them spend money during these 
visits. I do so only to impress upon them that the chanting of the Vedas 
must go on for ever. 
So many thousands of you are gathered here. It is my hope that my words 
will have made an impact on at least ten or twenty of my listeners and 
that these ten or twenty will remember them and try to act according to 
them. 
It was only after people emigrated to the big towns and cities that they 
found themselves compelled to lead a life contrary to the teachings of 
their dharma. It is in urban centres that you see some of the worst 
aspects of modern civilization. That is why I had decided not to come to 
such places, preferring to stay in the villages. But people from these 
urban centres insisted that I should visit them and, though I was touched 
by their affection, I was at first reluctant to accede to their request. I told 


 
them: "I shall come if you agree to return to our old ways of life, even if it 
be to a small extent. You need not take lessons in the Vedas all at once. 
But, as a beginning, you must adopt the external symbols of our Vedic 
dharma. The peon wears a uniform, doesn't he? The Brahmin must wear 
the pancakaccha and sikha. There are not symbols proclaiming his 
superiority; on the contrary, they denote that he is a servant of all other 
communities, a servant of the Vedas. You must wear these symbols if you 
want me to come to your city." 
It was in vain that I had laid down these conditions. Perhaps there was no 
desire on the part of the Brahmins. I had spoken to change their style of 
dress or their outlook or perhaps they did not have the courage to do it. 
But they requested me again and again that I should visit them. 
Eventually, I reconciled myself to accepting their invitation even though 
they had not acted on my words. "They still have some respect and 
affection for me, "I told myself.”I will agree to their request and see 
whether my purpose will be served if I go into their midst and speak to 
them directly again. After all, what is the Matha for? It is meant for the 
welfare of the people, to cure them of their ills and turn them to the right 
path. It is my duty to speak to them again and again- whether or not they 
like it- about how in my opinion they have gone wrong". 
Thus I started visiting the towns again. When people welcome me in great 
joy, honour me wherever I go, decorate the roads with bunting, how can I 
wound their feelings by speaking about what is wrong with them? 
Everybody has problems in life. The world is plunged in turmoil and 
people face all sorts of hardships. In the midst of all this they come to me 
hoping to forget their problems. Is it right for me to remind them of their 
faults? Or am I to keep everybody happy by turning my religious 
discourse into an entertaining performance? 
Am I to speak to people about what is good for them, what is good for 
society, or am I to make them happy for the moment by making my talk a 
kacceri-like performance? But there are musicians for kacceris and why 
should I be invited to perform something similar? If I were to give a 
kacceri-like performance for the sake of money, I would have to make the 


 
listeners happy for the time being. But my purpose is not money. If 
money comes, it is spent in feeding more than the usual number of 
people, in holding assemblies of the learned, etc. The affairs of the Matha 
could be managed with the smaller amounts received in the villages. 
However, an effort must be made, all the same, to speak to the entire 
community of people about what is good for them, for their life. Is this 
not the very purpose of the Matha? 
Thinking on these lines, I came to this conclusion: "It is up to them (the 
people I am to address in the towns) to listen to me and act on my advice. 
Whether or not they like it, I will speak to them about their duties, about 
what they should do for spiritual uplift as well as for the happiness of 
mankind. "I can do no more than speak to them about their duty. I have 
no authority to punish them if they fail in this. Even in political parties 
which believe in the oneness and equality of all, disciplinary action is 
taken against erring members- some are expelled like untouchables. I 
have no authority to excommunicated anyone for any of their offences. 
Nor do I ask for myself such authority to be exercised over men. The only 
right I ask for is to have the ears of people. I cannot but do what I can do- 
that is why I am here. 
Sufficient it would be even if a single individual somewhere paid heed to 
my words and acted according to them. He would be the starting point in 
the direction of the desired growth. Have not movements that do not 
have an iota of justification behind them grown with just ten people to 
start with? For a good cause also it would be enough if ten people joined 
together initially. 
I keep speaking in the hope of finding such people. You must not feel 
unhappy thinking that I am very much dissatisfied with you. I am not 
unaware of the complexities and problems of modern life. If one is 
trapped in it, I know how difficult it is to be freed from it. In the midst of 
all this, you make arrangements in a big way for kumbhabhisekas, 
bhajans, discourses, etc. I am happy about it all. I feel encouraged by it to 
speak to you about that which is the very basis, the very life-breath, of 
these activities of yours. It is that of fostering the Vedic dharma. 


 
Though there is much room for offences against the sastras in the present 
way of life and though there is cause for worry about the future. I am 
reassured by certain signs that promise our well-being. Instead of 
lamenting that "all is lost", the proper thing to do is to promote the good 
aspects in present-day life and to speak about what still needs to be 
done. In this way those who have taken the wrong path will sooner or 
later see the light and turn to the path of wisdom. 
All this gives me the confidence to speak about the old ways of life and 
the old customs. I do not claim that all that is old is necessarily good. At 
the same time, I feel that nothing should be rejected merely because it is 
old. An object (or deed) is to judged not on the basis of whether it is old 
or new; it is to be accepted or rejected after finding out how useful it is. 
Let us accept what is good in the new and reject what is bad in the old. 
Likewise, let us reject what is bad in the new and accept what is good in 
the old. Kalidasa says the same thing. 
You have invited me with much affection and treated me with much 
honour. So I feel reluctant to tell you about what is bad in your present 
way of life. I have dealt with many subjects- about devotion, jnana, 
culture, and so on. True, they are edifying topics. But they are all like the 
branches, flowers and fruits supported by something deeper, supported 
by the root constituted by the Vedas. Nothing grows with this root, 
without the Vedic tradition being nourished. It is pointless to speak about 
other matters after leaving out this vital subject. The preservation of the 
Vedic dharma is the basic service we render to our religion, and while on 
the subject, we have necessarily to do well on the drawbacks in the 
present way of life. After speaking to you about other matters, about 
mixing with you. I have become friends with you and I feel I could take up 
then topic of the Vedas since I feel I need not be as reluctant as I was 
before in telling you about what is wrong with your way of life.  
The very purpose of my visit is this. But is it proper for me to speak about 
it right at the start? Since you have done your job by honouring me and 
pleasing me, I feel I can now do my job by speaking about the importance 
of sustaining the Vedic way of life. I have given you so much trouble for 


 
this purpose and put you to a lot of expense. As if this were not enough, I 
am asking you, like Vinoba Bhave, for "sampatti-dana". 
Every Brahmin must learn the Vedas and teach his sons the same. 
Necessary though this is, there is something even more important to be 
done as a matter of priority: it is to make sure that the schools that teach 
the Vedas (the pathasalas) which are gasping for breath as it were are not 
closed down but given new life. For this purpose both teachers and 
taught must be given monetary help. More Vedic schools must also be 
established not only to teach the mantras but also their meaning and to 
conduct examinations. During the years of study the students must be 
given a stipend. On passing their examinations they must be given 
substantial awards, the amount depending upon their marks. You have to 
do all this to maintain the Vedic dharma. Naturally, you need capital for 
it. 
Trusts have been created for this purpose. A number of people have 
made gifts of land (bhudana)- like Vinoba Bhave I too have received 
bhudana. Now ceilings of landowning have come into force. It is difficult 
to foresee how the rights of landowners will be affected in the future. 
That is why I am asking for sampatti-dana. 
Everyone of you must put one rupee in a piggy bank every month on the 
day on which your janma-naksatra falls. Think of me as you do it for, after 
all, it is I who am asking you to do it. After twelve months you must send 
the Rs 12 so collected to the Veda Raksana Nidhi. On your janma-
naksatra, the Matha will send you prasada (vibhuti-sacred ashes-
kumkum, mantraksata). You will be the recipient of the blessings of 
Candramaulisvara if you contribute to the Veda Raksana Nidhi year after 
year. 
You pay taxes and spend so much on so many things. Take this contribute 
to the Veda Raksana Nidhi as a tax imposed by me: pay one rupee every 
month for my sake. If everyone agreed to do so, it would mean great 
support to the task of preserving the Vedic dharma. The maintenance of 
the Vedic tradition is uppermost in my mind and it is a duty we have to 
carry our for the good of future generations. 


 
If you ask me why the Vedic dharma must be perpetuated, the answer is 
that the sound of Vedic mantras and the conduct of Vedic rites like 
sacrifices will bring universal material and spiritual well-being. Second, if 
people in every country of the world are to know that the Vedic religion 
was once a universal religion and, if unity and peace are to be achieved 
on the basis of such awareness, there must be a class of people in our 
country who will devote themselves solely to Vedic learning. I maintain 
that fostering the Vedic dharma is of the utmost importance because it 
will bring prosperity and inward tranquillity to people not only in our 
country but all over the world. 
There should not be even a single Brahmin in the next generation who 
will not be able to chant the Vedas. We need the Brahmin not to exercise 
authority over others, but to carry out the duty of protecting the 
primordial dharma- and this not only for the unity of our land but for the 
oneness of the whole world. 
How can we claim that a small group of people in this country (dedicated 
to maintaining the Vedic tradition) can create happiness throughout the 
world? Well, take the case of a powerhouse. Only four or five work in it 
but the entire town receives light. If these four or five people do not 
work, the whole town will be plunged in darkness. In the same way only a 
few people are required to keep the auspicious world lamp of the Vedas 
burning. My mission here is to protect somehow the seed capital 
necessary for it. For the sake of this, I agreed to all the festivities you 
conducted in my honour. The chant of "Jaya-Jaya Sankara, Hara-Hara 
Sankara" heard during these festivities brought so many people here to 
listen to my discourses. Those who conducted the festival in my honour 
must pay heed to what I wish to say. You exert yourself in many ways in 
the cause of so many things. Why not to exert yourself a little for my sake 
also? You do so much for yourself: you go to your office; you have your 
own pastime; and you conduct all kinds of businesses. For my sake do this 
job of protecting the Vedic dharma. 
Why should I speak differentiating between you and me ["For your sake" 
and "my sake"]. My work is also your work. Maintaining the Vedic 


 
tradition is the one job that ensures the supreme good of all. Doing this 
duty means well being for you- and I shall be earning a name as a result! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 4 
The Sastras and Modern Life 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

The Cure for the Disease called Modern Civilisation 
People are caught between two groups holding opposing views. On the 
one side they feel the pull of individuals like us who maintain that they 
must take to the path shown by the sastras; on the other they find 
themselves drawn in the opposite direction by the reformers who want 
these sastras to be changed. From a youthful age people nowadays are 
used to reading reports extolling the changes that go by the name of 
reforms. It is all due to the influence of modern education. All this 
notwithstanding, people have not altogether given up the old customs. A 
fraction of the dharmas laid down in the sastras and followed for ages is 
still to be seen in our domestic and social life. On the one hand, there is 
the habit formed by custom and, on the other, the habit now being 
learned through the new system of education.  
It is universally recognised that contentment is lacking in the modern way 
of life. People don't dispute the fact that the peace that once existed in 
the previous generations no longer obtains today. They have more money 
now -or that at any rate is the belief. But are they yet free from poverty? 
The claim is made that everything is in abundance, that we grow more 
food than what is needed. Yet there is anxiety everywhere about the 
supply of essentials.  
In the place of the old thatched hut or modest titled house now stands a 
multistorey building. Then we had just four or five utensils to cook, a 
basket made of palm-fronds, containers made of gourd shells. Now the 
house is crammed with all sorts of articles and gadgets that are part of 
today's "civilized" life. People enjoy new comforts and make new 
acquisitions, yet they are not as happy and contented as were their 
forefathers.  
Even now there are people who at heart long for a life of peace lived 
according to the old tradition. But they do not have the courage to give 
up either the trammels of modern life or the feeling of pride in the 


 
changes effected under the reformist movement. They are in an awkward 
predicament because they are not fully committed either to the 
traditional way of life or to the new. Let me tell you how people cannot 
decide for themselves-how they are neither here nor there. In most 
homes you will see Gandhiji's portrait and mine. Now Gandhiji advocated 
widow marriage-and I ask people to wear a sikha. Those who respect 
Gandhiji do not, however, have the courage to marry widows nor do they 
have the courage to wear a sikha. Poor people, they have no moorings 
and keep swinging between one set of beliefs and another. We must have 
the courage of our convictions and unflinching faith in the sastras.  
If we start making small compromises in our adherence to the sastras, it 
will eventually mean following only such scriptural practices as we find 
convenient in our everyday life. Some people tell me with all good 
intentions: "The dharmasastras are the creation of rsis. You are like a rsi. 
You must make changes in the sastras in keeping with the times. “Their 
view is that just as we remove weeds from the fields we must change our 
customs and duties according to our times. If I take out some rites and 
observances from sastras now, thinking them to be "weeds", later 
another man will turn up and remove for the same reason. At this rate, a 
time will come when we will not be able to distinguish the weed from the 
crop and the entire field will become barren.  
It is important to realise that if we are to remain true to the sastras it is 
not because they represent the views of the seers but because they 
contain the rules founded on the Vedas which are nothing but what 
Isvara has ordained. That is the reason why we must follow them. It is my 
duty to see that the sastras are preserved as they are. I have no authority 
to change them.  
We must not give up the sastric way of life thinking it to be difficult to 
follow. If we are not carried away by the glitter of modern mundane life, 
if we reduce our wants and do not run after money, there will be no need 
to abandon the customs and rites laid down by our canonical texts. If we 
are not obsessed with making money there will be plenty of time to think 
of the Lord. And peace, contentment and happiness will reign.  


 
Money is not essential to the performance of the rites enjoyed by the 
sastras, nor is pomp and circumstance essential to worship. Even dried 
tulasi and bilva leaves are enough to perform puja. The rice we cook for 
ourselves will do as the naivedya. "Marriage is also a sastric ceremony. 
We spend a lot of money on it. What about such expenses? " it is asked. 
All the lavish display we see at weddings today are unnecessary and do 
not have the sanction of the scriptures. Specifically, the dowry that forms 
such a substantial part of the marriage expenses has no scriptural 
sanction at all. If money were important to the performance of the rites 
enjoyed by our canonical texts it would mean that our religion is meant 
for rich people. In truth it is not so.  
Of the four aims of life - dharma, material acquisitions, desire and 
liberation - we seek gratification of kama alone (in the form of pleasure, 
love, etc.). And to have our desires satisfied we keep struggling to acquire 
material things. Our efforts must be directed towards obtaining liberation 
through the practice of dharma. All that we need to do for this ideal is to 
resolve to live a simple life. There should then be no compulsion to run 
after money and other material goods and other. It would naturally 
become easier for us to practice dharma and reap the ultimate fruit that 
is eternal bliss.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Religion and Society 
While adherence to the tenets of our religion entails certain 
inconveniences in our workaday life, following the rules of the 
dharmasastras, people feel, creates difficulties in social life. On this 
pretext reformers want to change the sastras. 
Unfortunately, they are not aware either of the truths on which the 
dharmasastras are founded or their ultimate purpose. By "social life" 
they-the reformers-do not have in mind anything relating to the Self. 
They take into account political orders that keeps changing every now 
and then, the sciences, trade and commerce, fashion, etc. If our worldly 
existence alone were the objective of social life, the rules pertaining to it 
would also be subject to change. But our scriptures do not view social life 
as having such an objective alone. They (the sastras) are meant for the 
Self, for the Atman, and their goal is our release from worldly existence. 
That which has to do with mundane life is subject to change but not the 
truths relating to the Self. The injunctions of the sastras have the purpose 
of establishing changing society on the foundation of the unchanging 
Truth; they cannot be subject to change themselves. 
If our goal were but a comfortable and happy life in this world, matters 
concerning social life could be changed now and again. But ours is an 
exalted goal and it concerns the Self. The rules of worldly life are in 
keeping with this high purpose and they cannot be changed according to 
our convenience. The sastras do not regard happiness in this world as of 
paramount importance. They teach us how we may experience joy in the 
other world even by suffering many kinds of hardships or discomforts 
here. So it is not right to seek changes in them to suit our worldly 
existence. 
The views of the reformers must have been shaped by our present 
system of education and so it is no use blaming them. In other countries 
no contradiction exists between their religion and their system of 


 
education. Unfortunately, the schools established by the British in India 
had nothing to do with our religion. People were compelled to take to 
Western education for the sake of their livelihood. Soon a situation arose 
in which they came to be steeped from childhood itself in an alien system 
of instruction. They had therefore no way of developing acquaintance 
with, or faith in, our ancient sastras. And, since they were kept ignorant 
of their scriptures and their underlying purpose, they persuaded 
themselves to take the view that the sastras could be changed according 
to their convenience. 
Our youngsters are exposed to the criticism of our religion and our sacred 
texts from a tender age. They are told that the Puranas are a tissue of 
lies, that the sastras help the growth of superstition. How can they have 
any attachment to our faith, to its rites and traditions? 
Faith in religion and God must be inculcated in people from their 
childhood. They must get to know about great men who lived and 
continue to live an exemplary life true to the tenets of our religion. Faith 
in the works of the seers must be instilled in them, works based on the 
experience of the seers themselves, experience beyond a life of 
sensation, and pointing the way to spiritual uplift. They must also be 
helped to believe that the rsis formulated the sastas in such a way as to 
make worldly happiness and social life subservient to the advancement of 
the Self. Only then will people recognize that the rules of religion have a 
far higher purpose than the comforts and conveniences of temporal life. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Neither too Much Ease nor too Many Comforts 
Now people want to live in comfort and to be provided with all sorts of 
amenities. There is no end to their unseemly desires. In America, it is said, 
everybody has a bungalow, car, radio, telephone, etc. But are people 
there contented? No. There is more discontent in that country than in our 
own. There the incidence of crime is more than anywhere else. It is all 
right that every American has a car. But today's car is not good enough 
for them tomorrow. More and more new models keep coming in the 
market and each new model offers more comfort than the previous one. 
This means that the American citizen is compelled to earn more with the 
appearance of each new car. A time may come when aircraft will be used 
in the U. S. for people to fly from house to house.  
Similarly, we see such a progression all over the world in the matter of 
housing. First there was the hovel or the hut; then came the dwelling 
with the tiled roof; afterwards houses with cement and concrete walls. 
The flooring also changed over the years. First the floor was wiped with 
cowdung; then it was plastered and cemented; the mosaic flooring came 
later; and the search is on for smoother and shinier surfaces. It is the 
same case with clothing - better and finer fabrics are being made 
everyday. Although we are already living in comfort we are all the time 
using our ingenuity to discover objects and gadgets that will make our life 
still easier. However, all the time we are likely to have the feeling of 
uneasiness with all the comforts we already possess and this means there 
will be no end to our yearnings. Not knowing any contentment or peace 
of mind we are compelled to earn more and more. It is like thinking that 
fire can be extinguished by pouring petrol on it; we keep discovering 
newer and newer objects but in the progress we keep further inflaming 
our longing for ease and comfort.  
This truth was known to our sages, to our forefathers. They taught us that 
we ought not to seek more than our bare needs. In recent times Gandhiji 
impressed upon the people the same lesson.  


 
In this century, people seek ostentatious living in the name of progress. 
So long as the hunger for new comforts continue neither the individual 
nor society will have contentment. There will always be feelings of rivalry, 
jealousy and heart-burning among people. In the varnasrama dharma, 
the Brahmin and non-Brahmin are equal economically speaking. In spite 
of the caste differences, the same simple living is enjoined on all. The 
ideal of equality can be achieved only if all people live a simple life. In this 
order every individual experiences contentment and inner happiness and 
no one has cause of envying others their prosperity.  
No man, whatever his vocation, should have either too much money or 
too many comforts. Above all what is important is that for which all these 
are intended but that which cannot be truly obtained through them: 
contentment and a sense of fullness within. Only when there is inner 
satisfaction can one meditate on the Lord. And only in the mind of a man 
who has such contentment is the Ultimate Truth realised as a reality. 
When a person has too many comforts he will be incapable of going 
beyond the stage of sensual pleasures. If he is addicted to enjoyments, 
without any need for physical exertion, he will do injury to his mind, and 
his inner being. Hard work and the capacity to suffer discomforts are 
essential for those who yearn for Atmic uplift. They will then learn to 
realise that there is comfort in discomfort and in hard work.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Sastra or Conscience? 
The goal of dharma is universal welfare. The great men who produced the 
works on Dharmasastra didn't have a trace of self-interest in them and 
had nothing but the thought of the happiness of all creatures. These 
treatises are the authority on which dharma is founded. You find the form 
of things, the image, with your eyes; you perceive sound with your ears; 
you know dharma with the help of Dharmasastra.  
The Vedas (Sruti) are the root of all dharma. After Sruti comes Smrti. The 
latter consists of the "notes" based on Smrti. It is the same as 
Dharmasastra. Another guide for the dharma is the example of great 
men. The Puranas provide an answer to how great men conducted 
themselves. Then there is sistacara to guide us, the life of virtuous people 
of noble character. Not everybody's conduct can be a guide to us. The 
individual whose life is an example for the practice of dharma must have 
faith in the sastras and must live in accordance with their ordinances. 
Besides, he must be free from desire and anger. The conduct of such men 
is sistacara. Another authority or guide is what we know through our 
conscience in a state of transparency.  
In matters of the Self, of dharma and religion, the Vedas are in the 
forefront as our guide. Next come the dharmasastras. Third is the 
conduct of the great sages of the past. Fourth is the example of the 
virtuous people of our own times. Conscience comes last in determining 
dharma.  
Now everything has become topsy-turvy. People give importance first to 
their conscience and last to the Vedas. We must consult our conscience 
only as a last resort when we have no other means of knowing what is 
dharma with reference to our actions. Why is conscience called one's 
"manahsaksi"? Conscience is fit to be only a witness (saksi), not to be a 
judge. A witness often gives false evidence. The mind, however, doesn't 
tell an untruth - indeed it knows the truth of all things. “There is no deceit 


 
that is hidden from the heart (mind), “says Auvvai. Conscience may be 
regarded as a witness. But nowadays it is brought in as a judge also in 
dharmic matters. As a witness it will give us a true report of what it sees 
or has seen. But on the basis of it we cannot give on what is just with any 
degree of finality. "What I think is right,” everybody would try to satisfy 
himself thus about his actions if he were to be guided only by his 
conscience. How can this be justified as the verdict of dharma?  
We often hear people say, "I will act according to what my conscience 
tells me.” This is not a right attitude. All at once your conscience cannot 
be given the place of a judge. It is only when there is no other way open 
to you that you may tell your mind: "You have seen everything as a 
witness. Now tell me your opinion. “The mind belongs to each one of us 
as individuals. So it cannot be detached from our selfish interests. The 
place it has in one's personal affairs cannot be given to it in matters of 
religion. On questions of dharma the opinion of sages alone is valid, sages 
who were concerned with universal welfare and who transcended the 
state of the individual concerned with his own mind [or with himself].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 5 
The Vedas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

 
The Basic Texts of Hinduism: Our  
Ignorance of Them 
There are books aplenty in the world dealing with a vast variety of 
subjects. The adherents of each religion single out one book for special 
veneration, believing that it shows them the way to salvation. The 
followers of some faiths even build temples in honour of their holy 
scriptures. The Sikhs, for instance, do so; they venerate their sacred book, 
calling it the "Granth Sahib" [and enshrine it in temples].  
Thus the followers of each religion have come to have a work showing 
them the way to their spiritual uplift. Such books are believed to enshrine 
the utterances and commandments of God conveyed through the 
founders of the respective faiths. For this reason they are called the 
revealed texts. We call the same "apauruseya" (not the work of a human 
author). What men do of their own accord is "pauruseya" and what the 
paramatman reveals, using man as a mere instrument, is "apauruseya".  
What is the authoritative work of our Vedic religion? People of other 
faiths are clear about what their sacred books are. Buddhists have the 
Tripitaka, Parsis (Zoroastrians) the Zend-Avesta, Christians the Bible, and 
Muslims the Qur'an. What work is basic to our religion, common to 
Saivas, Vaishnavas, Dvaitins (dualists) and Advaitins (non-dualists) and the 
followers of various other (Hindu) traditions? Most of us find the answer 
difficult. Why?  
There is an important reason. People born in other religions are taught 
their sacred texts in schools. Or they receive instructions [at home] in 
their respective faiths for two or three years, and then have what is called 
"secular" education. So even at a youthful age they are fairly conversant 
with the religion into which they are born. We Hindus receive no religious 
instruction at all. How has this affected us? Whenever adherents of other 
faiths go seeking converts, we become a convenient target for them. How 


 
is it that people belonging to other religions do not leave their faith to 
embrace another in any considerable numbers? The reason is that they 
learn about the tenets of their religion in childhood itself and remain 
firmly attached to it. In contrast, we are not taught even the elements of 
our religion in our early years. Worse, we speak ill of our scriptures and 
have no qualms about even destroying them.  
Our education follows the Western pattern. We want to speak like the 
white man, dress like him and ape him in the matter of manners and 
customs. We remain so even after our having won independence. In fact, 
though we keep speaking all the time about our culture, about swadeshi 
and so on, we are today more Westernised than before. Remaining a 
paradesi (alien) at heart we keep talking of swadeshi. Religion has been 
the backbone of our nation's life from time immemorial. If we wish to 
remain swadeshi, both inwardly and outwardly, we must receive religious 
instructions from childhood itself. The secular state is of no help in this 
matter because, in the secular set-up, education continues to be 
imparted to our children on the Western pattern, and the children are 
taught that our sastras are all superstition. The result is that most of us 
do not know what the sacred text is, that is common to all Hindus.  
Our Atma-vidya (science of the Self) is extolled by people all over the 
world. (In our country learning even subjects that are apparently 
mundane like political economy, economics, dance, etc, has a 
transcendent purpose). Foreigners come to India in search of our sastras 
and translate them into their own languages. If we want to be respected 
by the world we must gain more and more knowledge in such sastras as 
have won the admiration of the world. We cannot earn more esteem 
than others for achievements in fields like science and technology. We 
feel proud if one or two Indians win Nobel prize but the rest of the world 
hardly takes any notice of it. Its attitude may be expressed thus: "The 
strides we have taken in science and technology do not give us 
satisfaction. So we go to the Hindus seeking things that are beyond. But 
they themselves seem to forsake the philosophical and metaphysical 
quest for our science and technology". We must be proud of the fact that 
our country has produced more men who have found inner bliss than all 


 
counties put together have. It is a matter of shame that we are ignorant 
of the sastras that they have bequeathed to us, the sastras that taught 
them how to scale the heights of bliss.  
Many Hindus are ignorant of the scripture that is the very source of their 
religion - they do not know even its name. "What does it matter if we 
don't know?” they ask. "What do we gain by knowing it? "  
Though we are heirs to a great civilization, a civilization that is universally 
admired, we are ignorant of its springs. "Who cares about our culture? 
Money is all that we need, “such is the attitude of our people and they 
keep flying from continent to continent in search of a fortune. Some of 
them come to me and tell me: "People abroad ask us about our religion, 
about the Vedas, about the Upanishads. They want to know all about the 
Gita and yoga, about our tenples and Puranas and about so many other 
things. We find it difficult to answer their questions. In fact we seem to 
know less than what they already know about these matters. We are 
indeed ashamed of ourselves. So would you please briefly put together 
the concepts of our religion and philosophy? "  
What does this mean? We are proud of living as foreigners in our own 
land, but the foreigners themselves think poorly of us for being so. We 
are inheritors of the world's oldest religion and culture; yet we have no 
concern for them ourselves. How would you then expect foreigners to 
have any respect for us?  
Perhaps it would have mattered much if we were an unlettered people. 
Others would have thought us to be ignorant, not anything worse. But 
what is the reality today? We read and write and talk a great deal. 
Science and technology, politics, cinema, fiction -- these are our interests. 
Yet foreigners think poorly of us because we ignore what is unique to our 
land, the sastras relating to the Self.  
There are so many books on our religion but we seem to have no need for 
any of them. All our reading consists of foreign literature. We know all 
the works of Milton and Wordsworth, but know precious little of the 
poetry of Bhavabhuti and Ottakkuttar. We are acquainted with the 


 
history of the Louis dynasty and of the Tsars, but we know nothing of the 
solar and lunar dynasties of our own country. Why, we do not know even 
the names of the seers of the various gotras. We are thoroughly 
acquainted with things that are of no relevance to us, but of the subjects 
that have aroused the wonder of the world we are ignorant, ignorant 
even of the names of the sastras on which they are founded. Even if men 
learned in the scriptures come forward to speak about them we refuse to 
listen to them. It causes me great pain that our country and countrymen 
have descended to such abysmal depths of ignorance.  
The reason for this sorry state of affairs is that we are not as anxious to 
know about our culture, as we are to find out how much it would fetch us 
in terms of money. Indeed the true purpose of earning money and other 
activities of ours must be to know this culture fully, live in consonance 
with its spirit and experience a sense of fulfilment. Why should we care to 
know about our religion? A question like this is absurd. Religion itself is 
the purpose of all our actions - it is its own purpose. The need be no 
purpose for religion although the performance of religious rites brings us 
great benefits such as tranquillity of mind, affection for all and, finally, 
liberation. Unmindful of all this, we want to know whether it would fetch 
us money. If we were truly interested in religion and truly attached to it, 
we would never be worried about the purpose served by it.  
"Brahmanena niskarano dharmah sadango Vedadhyeyo jneyasca,” so say 
the sastras. It means that a Brahmin must learn the Vedas and sastras not 
because there is any reason for it, not because there is any purpose 
served by the same. It is only in our childhood that we learn the subject 
without asking question about how useful it is. A schoolgoing chiild does 
not ask:"Why should I learn history or geography? “Our religious texts 
must be taught early in life. When a child grows up and goes to college, 
he believes his studies will prove useful to him. If he reads for a B.L. or 
L.L.B. degree, it is to become a lawyer. Similarly, if he reads for an L. T (or 
B. Ed.) degree or on M. B. B. S., it is to become a teacher or a doctor. If 
you ask a teenager to study our religious texts, he would retort: "Why 
should I learn them? How will it help in my career? “So religious texts 
should be taught in childhood itself that is before the youngster is old 


 
enough to question you about their utility [or harbour doubts about the 
same]. Only then will we develop an interest in our religion and sastras. 
Do we pay our children for their being interested in sports, music or 
cinema? Similarly, they must be made to take an interest in religion also 
and such interest must be created in the same way as in sports and 
entertainment. If children take to sports and entertainment which afford 
only temporary pleasure, they are bound to take religion which will 
confer on them everlasting happiness. The present sorry state of affairs is 
due to our basic education being flawed.  
Today we have come to such a pass that people ask whether knowledge 
of religion is of help in their upkeep. This is a matter of shame. The 
sastras admonish: "Do not ask whether Vedic education will provide you 
food. We eat and live but to learn the Vedas. “Your approach must be 
based on this principle. A child born in a faith which has such high ideals 
is cut off from all opportunities of religious instruction at his very birth. 
Our concern is imparting him worldly knowledge from very start. Our 
children must be brought up properly and faith in God inculcated in them 
early in life.  
We spend so much on our youngsters- but what do we spend on their 
religious instruction? A father spends thousands on his son's upanayana. 
But if he were to spend one tenth of the sum towards achieving what 
constitutes the very purpose of the upanayana ceremony - making the 
child a good brahmacarin - faith in our religion would be kept alive. To 
repeat, far better would it be to spend money on achieving the goal of 
upanayana than on the upanayana ceremony itself. The child must be 
given religious instruction by a private tutor and taught the duties of the 
brahmacarin. Why should teachers conversant with such matters be 
denied an income? If religion is taught in childhood itself, people will be 
free from doubts as they grow up and the teacher too will be benefited. 
Today the situation is so lamentable that most of us do not know even 
the name of the text that forms the foundation and authority of our 
religion.  


 
The fact that our people are not taught religion at an early age is one 
reason why there are so many differences among them. One man is a 
theist and another atheist. One performs religious rites without devotion 
while another is devoted but does not perform any rites. The differences 
and disputes are many. As for the doubts harboured by people about our 
religion there is no end. If our religion were taught in childhood itself 
there would be unanimity of views and freedom from doubts. We know it 
for a fact that there are not so many doubting people among followers of 
other religions as there are among ours: the reason is that, unlike us, they 
are better informed about the concepts of their respective religions.  
What is the book of our religion? A definite answer even to this question 
seems to be a difficult task for people these days. However, if we follow 
the truths of that book which is the basic work of our religion there will 
be universal uplift.  
Followers of most religions point to a single book as their sacred text 
even if the matters mentioned in it are dealt with in other works of theirs 
also. A man may write one book today; tomorrow a second man will 
come up to write another. There may be good as well as bad points about 
them and it would be difficult to determine the value of each. So is it not 
to our advantage if a single book is accepted for all time as our basic 
religious text? That is why every religion treats such a single book as its 
prime scripture.  
What are the works that tell us all about our religion? The libraries are 
chock-full of books on Hinduism; indeed there are hundreds of thousands 
of them. The subjects that come under our religion are also numerous. It 
all seems to cause confusion. But we must remember that there are a few 
texts that constitute a common basis for all the other numerous works.  
By practising the tenets of our religion many have had the beatific 
experience and remained in tranquil samadhi, without knowing death 
and oblivious of the outside world. We see such men even today. There 
are books from which we learn about Sadasiva Brahmendra, Pattinattar, 
and similar realised souls. Other religious systems have not produced as 
many realised souls as has our own faith. Is it possible that a religion that 


 
has been a source of inspiration for such a large number of great men 
should have no authoritative texts?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Why Religion? 
Why do we need religion? Why do we listen to a religious teacher? We do 
so hoping to have our problems solved and our faults corrected. We do 
not seek a preceptor when we are not in trouble or when we feel that 
there is nothing lacking in us. The more we are besieged by troubles the 
more often we go to worship in temples or seek the darshan and advice 
of great men.  
We approach great men, saintly persons, hoping to find a remedy for our 
suffering and to have our doubts cleared. When we are harassed by 
difficulties, we try to find solace in books or in listening to the advice of 
men of wisdom and virtue. Or we go on pilgrimage and bathe in sacred 
ponds or rivers. Thus we hope to find mental peace by and by. Those who 
know utter tranquillity remain in bliss. It does not matter to them in the 
least whether they are stabbed or injured otherwise, whether they are 
honoured or maligned.  
Great men arise in all jatis, great men who experience inner peace. What 
is religion? It is that which shows the way to santhi, the peace that 
passeth understanding. Religion is known as "mata" or "dharma". Dharma 
is the means to attain the ultimate good that is liberation -- and it is the 
same as "mata".  
The pursuit of dharma is first meant for happiness and well-being in this 
world. When it is practised, without desiring happiness here, it will lead 
to liberation. Yes, this is dharma; this is mata.  
"Dharma" which is the term used by the sastras for religion denotes all 
the moral and religious principles that constitute the means to obtain 
fullness of life. We have many a work that teaches us this dharma, but we 
remain ignorant of them. Since they deal with matters that are the very 
basis of dharma, they are called "dharma-pramanas". "Pramana" is that 
which establishes the truth or rightness of a thing (or belief). We have 


 
fourteen basic sastras that pertain to dharma, that is canonical texts that 
deal with what has come to be known as Hinduism and what has been 
handed down to us from the time of the primordial Vedas. These 
treatises tell us about the doctrines and practices of dharma.  
Angani Vedascatvaro mimamsa-nyayavistharah  
Puranam dharmasastram ca vidya hyetascaturdas  
- Manusmrti  
 
Purana-nyaya-mimamsa-dharmasastrangamisritah  
Vedah sthanani vidyanam dharmasya ca caturdasa  
- Yagnavalkyasmrti  
The term "caturdasa" occurs in both verses. It means "fourteen". We 
learn from these two stanzas that we have fourteen authoritative works 
on dharma embracing all aspects of our religion.  
"Vid" means "to know". From it is derived "vidya" which means a work 
that imparts knowledge, that sheds light on the truths of religion. That 
there are fourteen treatises on vidya is mentioned in the above two 
stanzas: "vidya hyetascaturdasa" and "vidyanam dharmasya ca 
caturdasa". The fourteen are not only sastras that impart knowledge but 
also treatises on normal principles. That is why they are called 
"vidyasthanas" and "dharmasthanas" : "sthanani vidyanam dharmasya ca 
caturdasa". Though "vid" means to know, the word does not connote 
every type of knowledge. The "vid" in "vidya" means knowledge of truth. 
The English words "wit" and "wisdom" are derived from this root. And it 
is from the same root that we have "Veda", which term may be said to 
mean literally the "Book of Knowledge". As sources of knowledge the 
fourteen sastras are called "vidyasthanas", that is they are "abodes of 
knowledge or learning". The dharmasthanas ("abodes of dharma") are 
also the abodes of vidya.  
 
  
   


 

The Fourteen Abodes of Knowledge 
The fourteen "abodes" of knowledge are: the four vedas; the six Angas or 
limbs of the Vedas; Mimamsa, Nyaya, the Puranas and Dharmasastra. You 
must have seen at least references to the Vedas and the six Angas. The 
Tamil work Tevaram says: "Vedamodarangamayinanai". According to this 
devotional work Isvara is the form of the four Vedas and the six Angas.  
The fourteen dharma-pramanas (authorities of dharma) are called 
"caturdasa-vidya". The well-known poetic work 'Naisadham' mentions 
that Nala was conversant with these fourteen branches of learning. The 
poet (Sriharsa ) plays on the word "caturdasa": he says that "Nala 
accorded caturdasa to the caturdas-vidya", meaning he gave the fourteen 
branches of learning four dasas: reading, understanding what is read, 
living according to the teachings contained in what is read, and making 
others also live in accordance with them.  
Caturdasatvam Krtavan kutah svayam  
Na vedmi vidyasu caturdasasvapi  
-Naisadham, 1. 4  
All religious knowledge is encompassed by these fourteen branches of 
learning.  
There are yet four more vidyas. If you add to the fourteen already 
mentioned, you will have eighteen vidyas -astadasa-vidya which are all-
inclusive. Of them, the fourteen already mentioned are directly 
concerned with dharma. The remaining four - Ayurveda, Arthasastra, 
Dhanurveda and Gandharvaveda - do not directly deal with dharma. They 
are not dharmasthanas (abodes of dharma) but they qualify to be 
vidyasthanas (abodes of knowledge). The first fourteen, as already 
mentioned, are both dharmasthanas and vidyasthanas (abodes of dharma 
as well as abodes of knowledge).  


 
The dharmasthanas and vidyasthanas are together commonly known as 
the sastras. The word "sastra" means an order or commandment. We 
speak of a royal "sasana", meaning a royal "edict". There is a chapter in 
the Mahabaharaaata in which Bhisma expounds the ordinances of 
dharma to Yudhisthira and it is called "Anusasana-parva". Aiyanar is 
called "Sasta" because he keeps the hosts of Siva under his control 
(through his orders). Works on sastras incorporate the ordinances that 
are calculated to keep us disciplined and ensure that we tread the right 
path.  
While all the fourteen sastras are basic and authoritative texts, the Vedas 
are their crown. Just as Buddhism, Zoroastrianism (Zarathustrianism), 
Christianity and Islam have the Tripitaka, the Zend-Avesta, the Bible and 
the Qur'an respectively as their scriptures, we have the Vedas as our 
prime scripture.  
Of the fourteen branches of learning the first four (the four Vedas) form 
the basis for the subsequent ten. Together they constitute the complete 
corpus of sastras on which our religion is founded.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Past Glory and Present Shame 
The fourteen branches of learning were taught in our country from the 
remote past until the inception of British rule. Let me tell you something 
interesting about them. You must have read about the Chinese pilgrim 
Fahsien and Hsuan Tsang. The former visited India early in the fifth 
century A. D. and the latter in the seventh century A.  
D. They have both recorded impressions of their travels here and given 
particularly glowing accounts of the big universities of Nalanda and 
Taksasila. We learn about these institutions from archaeological 
investigations also. They were at the peak of their glory when Buddhism 
flourished in the country. It is noteworthy that syllabuses of both these 
universities included the caturdasa-vidya. Ofcourse Buddhist religious 
texts were also taught, but only after the student had learned the 
fourteen Hindu sastras. The reason: acquaintance with Vedic learning was 
a help to any religious community in acquiring knowledge and in 
character building. The Buddhists thus believed that education to be 
called education must include a course in the Hindu caturdasa-vidya.  
In the South also these sastras we taught at gatikasthanas and other 
institutions established by the rajas of Tamil Nadu. In the copper-plate 
inscriptions, dated 868 A. D. , there is a reference to an educational 
institution at Bahur, between Cuddalore and Pondicerri, where it is stated 
that the fourteen vidyas were taught. Similarly, there was a school at 
Ennayiram, between Vizhupuram and Tindivanam, where the ancient 
sastras were part of the syllabus as evidenced by an inscription of 
Rajendra Cola (11th century). There are many more similar examples.  
Nowadays considerable research is conducted into Tamil history. It has 
inspired stories and novels. However, nobody seems to have dealt with 
the information that I have gained from my own historical inquiries -- that 
the Tamil rulers supported the Vedas and sastras in a big way. There is 
much talk about the need for impartiality in all matters and about the 


 
importance of having a scientific outlook, but we do not see any evidence 
of it in practice.  
The Buddhists were opposed to the Vedas, but they believed that an 
acquaintance with the fourteen Hindu sastras was necessary to nurture 
the intelligence and shape the moral character of the students learning in 
their institutions. But people here who claim to have faith in our religion ( 
it does not matter thet they do nothing to promote our sastras) maintain 
silence about the work done by Tamil kings in the past in the cause of 
Vedic learning.  
We have come to such a pass that, if we are asked about our vidyas, we 
can do no better than keep silent. Indeed we do not even know what is 
meant by "vidya". In all likelihood we think it to be jugglery, witchcraft or 
magic. Vidya and kala are the same. Kala means knowledge that waxes 
like the moon. Now most people think that "kala" means only dance.  
we must no longer be ignorant of our sastras our indifferent to them and 
we must try to be true to ourselves. That is why I want to speak briefly 
about the fourteen--or eighteen--branches of learning. You must atleast 
learn their names.  
Siksa, Vyakarana, Mimamsa, and Nyaya are among the fourteen sastras. 
You may find these subjects somewhat tiresome and think that they do 
not serve the Self in any way. But I ask you, what about all your daily 
activities? You take so much time to read the newspaper which has a 
whole page or two on sports. What purpose does it serve in your daily 
life? Or, for that matter, in your inward growth?  
One day, some years ago, I happened to be in a certain town. It was 
noontime and, as I went out, I saw a big crowd in front of a shop. The 
radio was blaring out the news and I was told that the crowd had 
gathered to listen to it. I asked a passer-by what was so exciting about the 
news. He said that a cricket match was being played somewhere, some 
thousands of miles away across the seas in a far-off continent, and that 
the latest score was being announced.  


 
The fact is that people are prepared to spend their time, money, and 
energy on things they fancy but are of no practical value to them. Now I 
ask you to take an intrest in our sastras. They are certainly more useful 
than cricket and such other things. They may not seem to bring you any 
direct spiritual benefit. While their ultimate purpose is to take us to the 
path of enlightenment, they are essential to our knowledge and to 
making us mature.  
Knowledge is a treasure and it is a gift of the Lord. If you sharpen it with 
good education and the spirit of inquiry, the Ultimate Reality will be 
revealed to you in a flash. Man alone is the recipient of the divine 
blessing called speech. If it is used wisely he will have an abundance of 
good will. That is why so many sastras relating to speech like Vyakarana, 
Nirukta, Siksa have been developed. Everyone of you must have atleast a 
basic knowledge of these subjects.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
 


 

The Root of our Religion 
The Vedas -- Rgveda, Yajurveda, Samaveda and Atharvanaveda -- are the 
first four of the pramanas (authoritative texts) of our religion and also the 
most important. Of the remaining ten, six are Angas of the Vedas and 
four are Upangas.  
Man possesses a number of angas or limbs. In the same way the Vedas 
personified -- the Vedapurusa -- has six limbs. (It must be noted that the 
Vedas are also spoken of as Vedamatha, Mother Veda.) The four 
Upangas, though not integral to the Vedas, are supporting limbs of the 
Vedapurusa. The Angas, as already stated, are six in number -- Siksa, 
Vyakarana, Chandas, Nirukta, Jyotisa and Kalpa. The four Upangas are 
Mimamsa, Nyaya, Purana and Dharmasastra.  
The Vedas are fundamental importance; the Angas and Upangas derive 
their importance from them. Ayurveda, Dhanurveda, Arthasasthra and 
Gandharvaveda are called Upavedas, subsidiary Vedas. Their connection 
with the prime scripture is thus obvious.  
The Vedas must be learned along with the Angas and Upangas. Such a 
thourough study of the scripture is called "Sa-Anga-Upanga-adhyayana" 
(study of the Vedas with the Angas and Upangas). The term 
"sangopanga", which has come into popular usage, is derived from this. If 
a speaker deals with a subject thoroughly, whether it be politics or 
something else, we use the word "sangopanga" in describing his 
performance. The term refers to the ancient caturdasa-vidya (the six 
Angas plus the four upangas). We have totally forgotten the old system of 
education but our culture is so steeped in it that we still use the term 
(sangopanga) to refer to any full scale treatment or exposition of a 
subject. The inference is clear. That for centuries the Vedas, together 
with their Angas and Upangas formed such an intimate part of life in 
Tamil land that a term associated with this tradition, "sangopanga", is still 


 
used by the common people there. But the irony of it is that today we do 
not know even the names of these old sastras.  
The Vedas form the core of our religion and are the direct authority for 
our dharma and for all our religious practices. They are our Bible, our 
Qur'"an, our Granth sahib. But, of course, the Vedas are far far older than 
these scriptures of other faiths. All of them originate from truths found in 
the Vedas. The very word "Veda" connotes what is authoritative. There is 
a practice of reffering to the Bible, the Quran and other scriptures as the 
"Christian Veda", "Mohammedan Veda", "Parsi Veda", "Sikh Veda" and so 
on. Christians in India refer to the Bible as "Satya-Veda".  
It is rather difficult to speak about the Vedas as a topic. One does not 
know where to begin and how to conclude. It is a bewildering task. The 
magnitude of our scripture is such -- and such is its glory.  
"Pramanam Vedasca", says the Apastamba Dharmasutra. The Vedas are 
indeed the sources of all dharmas as well as the authority on which they 
are founded. A book that has been cherished by the great men of the 
Tamil country from the earliest times is Manu-dharma-nul (Manusmriti). 
Throughout India, Manu's dharmasastra is held in the highest esteem. In 
Tamil Nadu there was a king who earned the name of "Manu-niti-kanda-
Cola" for the exemplary manner in which he administered justice. Once a 
calf got crushed under the wheel of the chariot ridden by his son. The 
king was so fair and strict that, when the aggrieved cow, the mother of 
the calf, sought justice, he ordered his son to be crished to death under 
the wheel of the same chariot. For us "Manu-niti-sastra"(Manusmriti) is 
the authority on dharma. But does it claim that it is the authority for all 
dharma? No. "Vedokhilo dharmamulam", says Manu, i. e. the Vedas 
constitute the root of all dharma. They prescribe the dharma for all time, 
he says.  
We must obey the dictates of the Vedas. When we are asked to accept a 
statement without questioning it, it is customary to remark; "Is that the 
word of the Vedas?” This confirms the fact that the common people 
believe that the word of the Vedas, or their injunction, must be obeyed 


 
without being questioned. The "Vedavak" (the word or pronouncement 
of the Vedas) has been our inviolable law for thousands of years.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Eternal 
It is not possible to tell the age of the Vedas. If we say that an object is 
"anadi" it means that nothing existed before it. Any book, it is reasonable 
to presume, must be the work of one or more people. The Old Testament 
contains the sayings of several Prophets. The New Testament contains 
the story of Jesus Christ as well as his sermons. The Qu'ran incorporates 
the teachings of the Prophet Mohammed. The founders of such religions 
are historical personalities and their teachings did not exist before then. 
Are the Vedas similarly the work of one or more teachers? And may we 
take it that these preceptors lived in different periods of history? Ten 
thousand years ago or a hundred thousand or a million years ago? If the 
Vedas were created during any of these periods they can not be claimed 
to be "anadi". Even if they were created a million years ago, it obviously 
means that there was a time when they did not exist.  
Questions like the above are justified if the Vedas are regarded as the 
work of mortals. And, if they are, it is wrong to claim that they are 
"anadi". We think that the Vedas are the creation of the rsis, seers who 
were mortals. So it is said, at any rate, in the text book of history we are 
taught.  
Also consider the fact that the Vedas consists of many "Suktas". 
Jnanasambandhar's Tevaram consists of number of patigams. And just as 
each patigam has ten stanzas, each sukta consists of a number of 
mantras. "Su +ukta"="sukta". The prefix "su" denotes "good" as in 
"suguna" or "sulocana". "Ukta" means "spoken" or "what is spoken". 
“Sukta" means "well spoken", a"good word" or a "good utterence" (or 
well uttered).  
When we chant the Vedas in the manner prescribed by the Sastras, we 
mention the name of the seer connected with each sukta, its metre and 
the deity invoked. Since there are many mantras associated with various 
seers we think that they were composed by them. We also refer to the 


 
ancestry of the seer concerned, his gotra, etc. For instance, "Agastyo 
Maithravarunih", that is Agastya, son of Maithravaruna. Here is another : 
"Madhucchanda Vaisvamitrah", the sage Madhucchanda descended from 
the Visvamitra gotra. Like this there are mantras in the names of many 
sages. If the mantras connected with the name of Agastya were 
composed by him it could not have existed during the time of 
Mitravaruna; similarly that in the name of Madhucchandana could not 
have existed during the time of Visvamitra. If this is true, how can you 
claim that the Vedas are "anadi"?  
Since the Mantras are associated with the names of sages, we make the 
wrong inference that they may have been composed by them. But it is 
not so as a matter of fact. "Apaurseya" means not the work of any man. 
Were the Vedas composed by one or more human beings, even if they 
were rsis, they would be called "pauruseya". But since they are called 
"Apauruseya" it follows that even the seers could not have created them. 
If they were composed by the seers they (the latter) would be called 
"Mantra-kartas" which means "those who 'created' the Mantras". But as 
a matter of fact, the rsis are called "Mantra-drastas", those who "saw” 
them.  
When we say that Columbus discovered America, we do not mean that 
he created the continent: we mean that he merely made the continent 
known to the world. In the same way the laws attributed to Newton, 
Einstein and so on were not created by them. If an object thrown up falls 
to earth it is not because Newton said so. Scientists like Newton 
perceived the laws of Nature and revealed them to the world. Similarly, 
the seers discovered the Mantras and made a gift of them to the world. 
These Mantras had existed before the time of their fathers, grand fathers, 
great grand fathers . . . . But they had remained unknown to the world. 
The seers now made them known to the mankind. So it became 
customory to mention their names at the time of intoning them.  
The publisher of a book is not necessarily its author. The man who 
releases a film need not be its producer. The seers disclosed the mantras 
to the world but they did not create them. Though the mantras had 


 
existed before them they performed the noble service of revealing them 
to us. So it is appropriate on our part to pay them obeisance by 
mentioning their names while chanting the same.  
Do we know anything about the existance of the mantras before they 
were "seen" by the rsis? If they are eternal does it mean that they 
manifested themselves at the time of creation? Were they present before 
man's appearance on earth? How did they come into being?  
If we take it that the Vedas appeared with creation, it would mean that 
the Paramatman created them along with the world. Did he write them 
down and leave them somewhere to be discovered by the seers later? If 
so, they cannot be claimed to be anadi. We have an idea of when Brahma 
created the present world.  
There are fixed periods for the four yugas or eons, Krta, Treta, Dvapara 
and Kali. The four yugas together are called a caturuga. A thousand 
caturugas make one day time of Brahma and another equally long period 
is his night. According to this reckoning Bramha is now more than fifty 
years old. Any religious ceremony is to be commenced with a 
samkalpa("resolve") in which an account is given of the time and place of 
performance in such and such a year of Brahma, in such and such a 
month, in such and such a fortnight (waxing or waning moon), etc. From 
this account we know when the present Brahma came into being. Even if 
we concede that he made his appearence millions and millions of years 
ago, he can not be claimed to be anadi. How can then creation be said to 
have no begining in time? When creation it self has an origin, how do we 
justify to the claim that the Vedas are anadi?  
The Paramatman, being eternal, was present even before creation when 
there was no Brahma. The Paramatman, the Brahman are the Supreme 
Godhead, is eternal. The cosmos, all sentient beings and insentient 
objects, emerge from him. The Paramatman did not create them himself: 
he did so through the agency of Brahma. Through Visnu he sustains them 
and through Rudra he destroys them. Later Brahma, Visnu, Rudra are 
themselves destroyed by him. The present Brahma, when he became 
hundred years old, will unite with the Paramatman. Another Brahma will 


 
appear and he will start the work of creation all over again. The question 
arises: Does the Paramatman create the Vedas before he brings into 
being another Brahma?  
We learn from the Sastras that the Vedas has existed even before 
creation. Infact, they say, Brahma performed his function of creation with 
the aid of Vedic mantras. I shall be speaking to you about this later, how 
he accomplished the creation with the mantras manifested as sound. In 
the passage dealing with creation the Bagavatha also says that Brahma 
created the world with the Vedas.  
Is this the reason (that Brahma created the world with the Vedic mantras) 
why it is said that the Vedas are anadi? Is it right to take such a view on 
the basis that both the Vedas and Isvara are anadi? If we suggest that 
isvara had made this scriptures even before he created the world, it 
would mean that there was a time when the Vedas did not exist and that 
would contradict the claim that they are anadi.  
If we believe that both Isvara and the Vedas are anadi it would mean that 
Isvara could not have created them. But if you believe that Isvara created 
them, they cannot be said to be without the origin. Everything has its 
origin in Isvara. It would be wrong to maintain [according to this logic] 
that both Isvara and the Vedas have no beginning in time. Well, it is all so 
confusing.  
What is the basis of the belief that the Vedas are anadi and were not 
created by Isvara? An answer is contained in the Vedas themselves. In the 
Brhadaranyaka Upanishad (2.4.10) - the Upanishads are all part of the 
Vedas - it is said that the Rg, Yajus and Sama Vedas are the very breath of 
Isarva. The word "nihsvasitam"is used here.  
It goes without saying that we cannot live even a moment without 
breathing. The Vedas are the life-breath of the Paramatman who is an 
eternal living Reality. It follows that the Vedas exist together with him as 
his breath.  


 
We must note here that it is not customory to say that the Vedas are the 
creation of Iswara. Do we create our own breath? Our breath exists from 
the very moment we are born. It is the same case with Iswara and the 
Vedas. We can not say that he created them.  
When Vidyaranyaswamin wrote his commentary on the Vedas he prayed 
to his guru regarding him as Iswara. He used these words in his prayer: 
"Yasya nihsvasitam Vedah" (whose --that is Isvara's -- breath constitutes 
the Vedas). The word "nihsvasitam" occurs in the Upanishads also. Here 
too it is not stated that Iswara created the Vedas.  
The Lord says in the Gita: "It is I who am known by all the Vedas 
"(Vedaisca sarvair aham eva vedyah).” Instead of describing himself as 
"Vedakrd" (creator of the Vedas), he calls himself "Vedantakrd" (creator 
of philosophical system that is the crown of the Vedas). He also refers to 
himself as "Vedavid" (he who knows the Vedas). Before Vedanta that 
enshrines great philosophical truths had been made know to mankind, 
the Vedas had existed in the form of sound, as the very breath of Isvara -- 
they were ( and are) indeed Isvara dwelling in Isvara.  
The Bhagavata too, like the Gita, does not state that the Lord created the 
Vedas. It declares that they occured in a flash in his heart, that they came 
to him in a blaze of light. The word used on this context is "Sphuranam", 
occuring in the mind in a flash. Now we can not apply this word to any 
thing that is created a new, any thing that did not exist before. Bramha is 
the premordial sage who saw all the mantras. But it was the Parmatman 
who revealed them to him. Did he transmit them orally? No, says the 
Bhagavatha. The paramatman imparted the Vedas to  
Bramha through his heart: " Tene Bramha hrdaya Adikavaye" says the 
very first verse of that Purana. The Vedas were not created by the 
Parmatman. The truth is that they are always present in his heart. When 
he mearly resolved to pass on the Vedas to Bramha the latter instantly 
received them. And with their sound he began the work of creation.  
The Tamil Tevaram describes Isvara as "Vediya Vedagita". It says that the 
Lord keeps singing the hymns of various sakas or recensions of the Vedas. 


 
How are we to understand the statement that the "Lord sees the Vedas"? 
Breathing itself is music. Our out-breath is called "hamsa-gita". Thus, the 
Vedas are the music of the Lord's breath. The Thevaran goes on: 
"Wearing the sacred thread and the holy ashes, and bathing all the time, 
Isvara keeps singing the Vedas". The impression one has from this 
description is that the Lord is a great "ghanapathin". Apparsvamigal refers 
to the ashes resembling milk applied to the body of Isvara which is like 
coral. He says that the Lord "chants" the Vedas, “sings " them, not that he 
creates ( or created ) them. In the Vaisnava Divya Prabandham too there 
are many references to Vedic sacrifices. But some how I donot remember 
any reference in it to the Lord chanting the Vedas.  
In the story of Gajendramoksa told by the Puhazhendi Pulavar ( a Tamil 
Vaishnava saint - poet), the elephant whose leg is caught in the jaws of 
the crocodile cries in anguish. "Adimulame" [vocative in Tamil of Adimula, 
the Primordial Lord]. The Lord thereupon appears, asking "What? " The 
poet says that Mahavisnu "stood before the Vedas" ("Vedattin mum 
ninran"). According to the poet the lord stood infront of the Vedas, not 
that he appeared at a time earlier than the scriptures. The Tamil for "A 
man stood at the door" is "Vittin mun ninran". So "Vedattin mun ninran" 
should be understood as "he stood at the comencement of all the Vedas". 
Another idea occurs to me. How is Perumal (Visnu or any other Vaisnava 
deity ) taken in procession? Preceeding the utsava-murthy ( processional 
deity) are the devotees reciting the Tiruvaymozhi. And behind the 
processional deity is the group reciting the Vedas. Here too we may say 
that the Lord stood before the Vedas ("Vedattin mun ninran").  
In the visnava Agamas and puranas, Mahavisnu is refered to specially as 
"Yajnaswaroopin" 
(one 
personifying 
the 
sacrifice) 
and 
as 
"Vedaswaroopin" (one who personifies the Vedas). Garuda is also called 
"Vedaswarupa". But none of these texts is known to refer to Visnu as the 
creator of the Vedas.  
It is only in the "Purusasukta", occuring in the Vedas themselves, that the 
Vedas are said to have been "born" "(ajayatha)". However, this hymn is of 
symbolical and allegorical signifcance and not to be understood in a literal 


 
sense. It states that the Parama-purusa (the Supreme Being) for sacrifice 
as an animal and that it was in this sacrifice that creation itself was 
accomplished. It was at this time that the Vedas also made their 
appearence. How are we to understand the statement that the Parama-
purusa was offered as a sacrificial animal? Not in a literal sense. In this 
sacrifice the season of spring was offered as an oblation (ahuthi) instead 
of ghee: summer served the purpose of samidhs (fire sticks); autum havis 
(oblation). Only those who meditate on the mantras and become 
absorbed in them will know there meaning inwardly as a matter of 
experience. So we can not construe the statement literally that the Vedas 
were "born".  
To the modern mind the claim that the breath of Isvara is manifested in 
the form of sound seems nonsensical, also that it was with this sound 
that Bramha performed his function of creation. But on careful reflection 
you will realise that the belief is based on a great scientific truth.  
I do not mean to say that we must accept the Vedas only if they conform 
to present-day science. Nor do I think that our scripture, which proclaims 
the truth of the Paramatman and is beyond the reach of science and 
scientist, ought to be brought within the ken of science. Many matters 
pertaining to the Vedas may not seem to be in conformity with science 
and for that reason they are not to be treated as wrong. But our present 
subject -- how the breath of the Parmatman can become sound and how 
the function of creation can be carried out withit -- is in keeping with 
science.  
 
   
   
   
    


 

Sound and Creation 
(This Chapter must be read in conjunction with  
Chapter 8, Part 3 and of this part.) 
What is sound? According to modern science, it is vibration. "If you 
examine the core of an atom you will realise that all matter is one.” This 
Advaitic conclusion is arrived at according to nuclear science and the 
concepts of Einstein. All this world is one flood of energy (sakti); 
everything is an electromagnetic flow. But how do we account for the 
manifestation of different objects? It is to be attributed to different type 
of vibrations.  
Where there is vibration there is a sound. Conversely, to produce a sound 
the vibration corresponding to it must also be created. The scientific 
concept that the different vibrations of the same energy are the cause of 
creation is the same as the belief that world was created with the breath 
of the Paramatman manifesting itself as the sound of the Vedas.  
Consider human beings and other creatures. What is it that determines 
their health and feelings? The breath that passes through our nadis, 
blood vessels, during respiration produces vibrations and on them 
depends the state of our health. Those who keep their breathing under 
control through the practice of yoga are healthy to an amazing degree. 
They do not bleed even if their veins are cut. They are able to remain 
buried in the earth in samadhi stopping their pulse and heartbeat. They 
are not poisoned even if they are bitten by a snake or stung by a 
scorpion. The reason is that they keep the vibrations of the nadis under 
control during breathing.  
Breath is vital not only to the body but also to the mind. The mind which 
is the source of thought and the vital (pranik) energy that is the source of 
breath are the same. Healthy or unhealthy thoughts are to be attributed 
to different vibrations of the nadis. You may test this for youself. See for 


 
yourself how you breathe when you are at peace before the sanctum of a 
deity or in the presence of a great and wise person and how you breathe 
when your mind is quickened by desire or anger. The happiness you 
experience when you take part in something divine, like a bhajan or 
atemple festival, must be different from the pleasure that sensual 
gratification gives you: the vibrations of the nadis concerned will also be 
correspondingly different.  
When you experience joy of an elevated kind the passage of breath will 
be through the right nostril, but when you are enjoying sensual pleasure 
it will be through the left. When you meditate, with increasing 
concentration, on the Reality Serene which is the source of all your urges 
and feelings, the breath will pass through both nostrils slowly, evenly and 
rhythmically. When you are absorbed in the object of your meditation 
breathing itself will cease, but there will still be life. The great awareness 
called jnana will then be in bloom as it were.  
The inert body of a man and the awareness that is the vital essence of his 
life are both dependent on the course of his breathing. They grow or 
decay according to it. The course of a man's breath keeps his inner 
vibrations in order.  
Is it not from the Paramatman that so many countless inert objects and 
so many sentient beings have originated and grown? The movements 
appropriate to these should have also occured in the Ultimate Object that 
is the Paramatman.  
Even according to non-dualism, the Brahman that is utterly still and is 
unconditioned and has no attributes (nirguna) manifests itself in the 
countless disguises of this cosmos with the power of Maya, Maya that 
cannot be described. Disguises or no disguises, we have to concede the 
existence, in a mundane sense, of the inert world and of the sentient 
beings. But we must remember that even Maya has its source in Isvara 
who is "Mayin". But the power of Maya apart, all that we see have arisen 
from the vibrations in the Object called the Parabrahman. At the same 
time, with all these vibrations, this Object remains still and tranquil 
inwardly. This stillness not withstanding, there are movements that are 


 
apparent to our perception. They are not disorderly movements but 
constitute a system embracing vast heavenly bodies like the sun at one 
end and the tiniest of insects on the other or even something as humble 
as a blade of glass.  
It is this orderliness that goes to make worldly life happy. The 
Paramatmam has created this by bringing all powers of nature within an 
orderly system. But if you sometimes see flaws in it and the natural forces 
going against us, it is because he likes to be playful now and then.  
The human mind can go astray to any length. Indeed it keeps wandering 
aimlessly like a globin or an imp. Whatever the extent to which cosmic life 
is orderly, it (the human mind) breaks free from all control and runs 
about like a mad dog.  
When the powers of nature are unfavourable to us, is there a way to 
change their behaviour and make them favourable to us? Is there also a 
means by which our mind could be brought under control when it goes 
haywire? If everything is caused by vibration, by sound, there must be a 
way of making the forces of nature favourable to us and of purifying our 
mind and bringing it under control through this very sound. The Vedas 
constitute such sound.  
By controlling our breath through the practice of yoga, it is possible to 
gain access to the breath of the Paramatman and by this means perform 
such actions as can uplift our own Self as well as mankind. Here the 
vibrations of the nadis do not produce the sound that is audible to us. 
Science tells us that there are sounds outside the range of human hearing 
in the same way as there is light that does not pass through the lens of 
the human eye.  
However, it is possible to bring within us (within our reach) that which is 
without. When a musician sings on the radio, the sound of his music is 
converted into electromagnetic waves which travel through space. But 
how do we hear music? The receiving set captures the electromagnetic 
waves and reconverts them into sound waves.  


 
(Science is not opposed to religion. It seems to me that it even helps in 
the growth of religion. A century ago, before the radio and the telephone 
were invented, it would not have been easy to counter the arguments of 
an atheist who dismisses claims made on behalf of the sound of the 
Vedas as absurd. Now the discoveries of science have come to our rescue. 
)  
It is possible for humans to earn the power of energy possessed by such 
an inert object as the radio set. Indeed we can earn much more, do much 
more. It is tapas, ascetic endeavour, that will give us such energy. What is 
tapas? It is the determination to find the truth: it is keeping the mind 
one-pointed in this search, forsaking food, sleep, home, everything. But 
when you are a seeker like this, you must remain humble and erase the 
least trace of egoism in you. You must realise that the truth you seek will 
be revealed to you only with the grace of Isvara. The sages performed 
austerities in this manner and attained to the highest plane of yoga. They 
could perceive the vibrations in creation, that is the course taken by the 
breath of the Supreme Godhead. Besides, they also knew them as sound 
capable of being heard by the human ear in the same manner as electric 
waves converted into sound waves. It is these sounds that they have 
passed on to us the mantras of the Vedas.  
The Vedas are called "Sruti. " That which is heard is Sruti. "Srotra" means 
the "ear". The Vedas have been handed down orally from generation to 
generation and have not been taught or learned from any written text. 
That is how they got the name of "Sruti". Why were these scriptures not 
permitted to be written down? Because the sound of the Vedas cannot 
be properly transcribed. There are sounds or phonemes that cannot be 
accurately represented in any script. For instance, the one between "zha" 
and "la". Such sounds have to be learned by listening. Besides there are 
svaras for Vedic mantras (tonal variations, proper accentuation):"udatta" 
(raised syllable), "anudatta"(lowered syllable) and "svarita"(falling 
syllable). Mistakes in enunciation are likely even if diacritical or some 
other marks are used in the printed text. Wrong chanting will not bring 
the desired results. There is much difference in the vibrations caused by 
pronouncing a syllable laying stress on it and pronouncing it without any 


 
stress. Correspondingly, there will be changes in our feelings and urges 
and the divine forces that rule nature. There is a story in the Taittiriya 
Samhita of the Vedas which illustrates how wrong chanting can produce 
results contrary to what is intended. Tvasta, the divine carpenter, 
chanted a mantra with the object of begetting a son who would be the 
slayer of Indra. But he went wrong in the intonation of some syllables. So, 
unwittingly, he prayed for a son who would be slain by Indra instead of 
one who would slay that celestial. And his prayer (that had gone wrong in 
the intonation) was answered. When the wavelength shifts even minutely 
on our radio we receive the broadcast of a different transmitting station. 
Fine-tuning has to be done to get the required station. So is the case with 
the intonation of Vedic mantras. There should not be the slightest 
mistake in the svaras. Just as we receive a different station on our radio 
when the wavelength is changed, so the result is different when we go 
wrong in the intonation.  
This is the reason why it is of the utmost importance to learn the Vedas 
by listening - hence the name "Sruti", in Tamil "Ezhutakkilavi" (unwritten 
old text). Another explanation occurs to me for the name "Sruti". The 
sages heard, did they not, the sound of the divine vibrations that cannot 
be perceived by the common people? Did they read the Vedas in any 
book or did they compose them themselves? Sruti is an apt name for the 
Vedas since they were made known to the world after they had been first 
heard by the sages.  
The Vedic seers have the name of "mantra-drastas" --a "drasta" is one 
who sees. In Tamil it is "parppavan". "Parppan" also means the same 
thing. If the sages "saw" the mantras it would mean that they did not 
"hear" them. Which of the two versions is correct? Did the sages see the 
mantras or did they hear them? If they saw them, in what script did they 
appear? There was no script at the time, neither Devanagari nor Grantha 
nor Brahmi, the basis of all. But, then, the sound of Vedas, their svaras, 
cannot be truly written down in any script.  
The answer to this problem is that when the sages were meditating the 
mantras of the Vedas appeared to them in a flash in their hearts. It may 


 
be that in this state of theirs they could neither see nor hear anything. 
The mantras must have appeared in a flash in the inner recesses of their 
minds.  
"Seeing" or "looking" does not denote merely what is perceived by the 
eye. It is a term that covers a variety of perceptions and experiences. 
When we say that a man has "seen" all sorrows in his life, does the term 
"seen" imply only what he "saw" with his eyes? Does it not mean what he 
has "experienced"? The term "mantra-drasta" also could be taken in a 
similar manner as referring to what is perceived through experience. It is 
further believed that the sages were able to hear the Vedas with their 
divine ears.  
Arjuna wished to see the Lord's cosmic form (visvarupa). The Gita has it 
that Krsna Paramatman said to him: “You will not be able to see my 
cosmic form with these eyes of yours. I will give you a celestial eye. . . . . " 
Just as Arjuna was endowed by the Lord with a divine eye, the sages must 
have been invested with celestial ears to grasp the sound emanating from 
the Paramatman and pervading the vast space.  
The vibrations of the Vedas serve the purpose not only of creation and 
the conduct of life. There are indeed Vedic mantras that help us to 
transcend this life and become one with the Ultimate Truth. When a man 
returns by the same way as he comes, does he not arrive at the starting 
point? In the same way when we go seeking how creation came about, 
we are led to the point where there are no vibrations, no movements, 
where there is utter stillness. Some mantras that create vibrations in our 
nadis accomplish the same noble task of taking us to such a goal. Such are 
the Upanisadic mahavakyas and Pranava.  
In sum, the Vedas are not anyone's compositions. The sages did not 
create them, nor were inscribed by the Paramatman on palm-leaves.  
 
 


 

Western Vedic Research 
In the present sorry state in which the nation finds itself it has to learn 
about its own heritage like the Vedas from the findings of Western 
soholars called "orientalists" and from Indians conducting research on the 
same lines as they. I concede that European scholars have made a very 
valuable study of the Vedas. We must be thankful to them for their work. 
Some of them like Max Muller conducted research out of their esteem for 
our scriptures. They took great pains to gather the old texts and 
published volume after volume incorporating their findings.  
Two hundred years ago Sir William Jones, who was a judge of the Calcutta 
high court, started the Asiatic Society. The number of books this 
institution has published on Vedic subjects should arouse our wonder. 
With the help of the East India Company, Sir William published the 
Rgveda with the commentry of Sayana and also a number of other Hindu 
works. Apart from Englishmen, indologists from France, Germany and 
Russia have also done outstanding work here. "The discovery of the 
Vedas of the Hindus is more significant than Columbus's discovery of 
America, " thus exclaimed some indologists exulting in their findings.  
These foreigners discovered Vedic and Vedantic texts from various parts 
of the country. They translated the dharma-, grhya- and srauta - sutras. 
The Kundalini Tantra gained importance only after Arthur Avalon had 
written extensively on it. A number of Westerns have contributed studies 
of other aspects of our culture also. It was because of the Protection of 
Ancient Monuments Act that came into force during the viceroyalty of 
Lord Curzon that our temples and other monuments were saved from 
vandals. Fergusson took photographs of our artistic treasures (sculptures) 
and made them known to the world. Men like Cunningham, Sir John 
Marshall and Mortimer -Wheeler did notable work in Indian archaelogy. It 
was because of the labours of Mackenizie who gathered manuscripts 
from various parts of India that we come to know about many of our 
sastras. The department of epigraphy was started during British rule.  


 
We suffered in many ways at the hands of the British but it was during 
their time that some good was also done. But this good was not unmixed 
and had undesirable elements in it. The intention of many of those who 
called themselves orientalists or indologists was not above reproach. 
They wanted to reconstruct the history of India on the basis of their study 
of the Vedas and, in the course of this, they concocted the Aryan- 
Dravidian theory of races and sowed the seeds of hatred among the 
people. Purporting to be rationalists they wrongly interpreted, in an 
allergorical manner, what cannot be comprehended by our senses. In 
commenting on the Vedas they took the view that the sages were 
primitive men. Though some of them pretended to be impartial, their 
hidden intention in conducting research into our religious texts was to 
propagate Christianity and show Hinduism in a poor light.  
A number of Westerners saw the similarity between Sanskrit and their 
own languages and devoted themselves to comparative philology.  
We may applaud European indologists for their research work, for making 
our sastras known to a wider world and for the hard work they put in. But 
they were hardly in sympathy with our view of the Vedas. What is the 
purpose of these scriptures? By chanting them, by filling the world with 
their sound and by the performance of rites like sacrifices, the good of 
mankind is ensured. This view the Western indologists rejected. They 
tried to understand on a purely intellectual plane what is beyond the 
comprehension of the human mind. And with this limited understanding 
of theirs they printed big tomes on the Vedas to be preserved in the 
libraries. Our scriptures are meant to be a living reality of our speech and 
action. Instead of putting them to such noble use, to consign them to the 
libraries, in the form of books, is like keeping living animals in the 
museum instead of in the zoo.  
 
 
 
 


 

Date of the Vedas: Inquiry not Proper 
The idea that the Vedas are eternal does not fit into the mental outlook 
of Western indologists. Their claims to impartiality and to conducting 
research in a scientific manner notwithstanding, they are not prepared to 
accord an elevated status to the Hindu texts. Many Hindu research 
scholars have also found themselves unable to accept the view that the 
Vedas are eternal.  
Modern historians have adopted chiefly two methods to determine the 
date of the Vedas: the first is based on the astronomical references in the 
scriptures and the second on the morphology of the language of the 
same. But have they, using either method, come to any definite 
conclusion? Each investigator has arrived at a different age. Tilak has 
assigned the date 6000 B. C to the Vedas. According to some others it is 
 B. C or 1500 B. C.  
There is no difference of opinion among historians about the dates of the 
scriptures of other religions. They are agreed that the Buddhist Tripitaka 
was written during the time of Asoka but that the teachings of the 
Buddha included in it belong to an earlier time. There is similar unanimity 
of view in that the New Testament is 2000 years old. And all are agreed 
that the Qur'an was composed 1, 300 years ago. In the case of Vedas 
alone have historians not arrived at a decisive date.  
I mentioned that two methods were adopted in reckoning the age of the 
Vedas. There are references in these scriptures to the position of certain 
heavenly bodies. The date of the Vedas, fixed at 6000 B. C. or so, is based 
on an astronomical conjunction mentioned in them.  
But is it right to say that such an astronomical conjuntion would not have 
occured earlier too? Conjunctions similar to the one on the basis of which 
the date of 6000 B. C. has been arrived at must have occured not only 
before the present creation, but even far far earlier. Which of these is to 


 
be taken as the one mentioned in the Vedas? The sages had a vision that 
could penetrate through the eons. So such calculations will not hold in 
the case of the Vedas which the great sages brought together with their 
trans-sensual powers of perception. We find thus that the internal 
astronomicl "evidence" found in the Vedas and made much of by modern 
researchers does not help in fixing their date.  
The second method is linguistic. Here we have to consider not only the 
language but also the script. Brahmi is tha source of all the scripts in use 
today in most parts of the country. Devanagari and the Tamil scripts may 
seem totally unrelated, but the fact is otherwise. A study has been 
conducted on the changes the Brahmi script has undergone during all 
these centuries on the basis of the edicts found throughout the land. A 
chart made from the results of this study shows that the scripts in use 
today in different parts of the country, though seemingly unrelated, were 
evolved from the original Brahmi. An amusing thought occurs to me that 
the scripts prevelent today are Brahmi letters with moustaches and 
horns. Something like a moustache affixes itself to the middle of Brahmi 
letters. The Devanagari (u and u) appear similarly formed. Many letters of 
the Tamil alpbabet look like Brahmi letters that have sprung horns. From 
the edicts and inscriptions we can find out with some precision the period 
taken for each alteration in the script. It is in this manner that the dates 
of some edicts have been determined.  
The Vedas, however, have never been inscribed on stone anywhere. So 
there is no question of our fixing their date on the basis of any of the 
scripts. Other aspects of language have to be considered in this context. 
The morphology of words and the character of their sound keep changing 
with time. Many Tamil words belonging to the Sangam period have 
changed thus. It is a phenomenon common to all languages. Erosion takes 
place in the case of some sounds. Sometimes their meaning also does not 
remain the same. Take the Tamil word “veguli": it means a "simpleton", 
but earlier it meant "anger" or " an angry man ". In the old days the Tamil 
"manda” did not mean "dead": a Tamil scholar told me that it meant 
"famous". Such instances are to be met with in Sanskrit also. We do not 
understand the Vedas the same way as later poetical works in Sanskrit. 


 
Compared to other languages such changes are not numerous in our own 
tongues. Even an Englishman cannot follow one line of Anglo-Saxon 
English (Old English) which is only 1, 000 years old. In the course of about 
 years English has changed so much in America as to merit a name of 
its own, "American English".  
The period over which a phoneme changes its character has been 
calculated. But the time taken for a change in the meaning of a word has 
not been determined with the same definiteness. Scholars have tried to 
fix the date of the Vedas by examining the character of the sound of their 
words. “Every two hundred years the sound of a word undergoes such 
and such a change, " observes one authority of linguistics.” A Vedic 
sound, in the form we know it today, is the result of a number of 
mutations. If it has undergone ten mutations, it means that the Vedas are 
, 000 years old. Or, if thirty, they are 30x 200 = 6, 000 years old, which 
would mean [according to this logic] that our scripture did not exist 
before 4000 B. C" We hear such views expressed frequently.  
One example would be enough to prove how wrong such a basis of 
calculation is to fix the date of the Vedas.  
We have so many utensils at home. We use some of them more often 
than others. The bell-metal in which cook rice morning and evening has 
to be washed twice a day. So it wears faster. Supposse we have another 
vessel, quite a big one, an "anda" for instance. It is kept in the store room 
and not used except perhaps during a wedding or some other festive 
occasion. Since it is washed only at infrequent intervals it does not wear 
as fast as the bell-metal vessel which we perhaps bought as recently as 
last year. The anda must have come as part of grandmother's dowry and 
must be very old. Even so, it does not show any sign of wear. Are we to 
infer that the bell-metal pot was bought before the anda? The dinner-
plate and the rose water sprinkler came together as your daughter-in -
law's dowry. In ten years, the plate has gone out of shape but the 
sprinkler retains its glitter and polish.  
The same is the case with the sounds of words of everyday speech on one 
hand and the Vedic words on the other, the difference between them 


 
being similar to that between the two types of vessels mentioned above. 
Words in common daily use undergo erosion in many ways. Though the 
Vedas are chanted everyday special care is taken to preserve the original 
sound of their words. I shall tell you later about the Vedangas, Siksa and 
Vyakarana and about how a system was devised by our forefathers to 
preserve the sound of each Vedic syllable from undergoing any mutation. 
The Vedic sounds are not subject ot erosion like the utensils in daily use 
or the words in common speech. They are like the anda which, though 
old, is well preserved.  
Modern indologists have also put forward the view that the Rgveda is the 
oldest of the Vedas, that the Yajurveda, the Samaveda and the 
Atharvaveda came later (in that order). They also believe that in each 
recension or sakha of a particular Veda, the Samhita is the oldest part, 
the Brahmana and Aranyaka being of later origin. They try to fix the date 
of these different texts on the basis of the differences in their language. 
Also they have carried out research into how certain words used in the 
Vedas are seen in a different form in the Ramayana, the Mahabharata 
and the works of poets like Kalidasa.  
The linguistic research conducted by these indologists will not yield true 
results because they ignore the basic differences that I have pointed out 
between the sound of the Vedas and that of other works. The slight 
changes perceived today in certain Vedic sounds, despite all the care 
taken to preserve them in the original form, could not have come about 
in 200 years but over some thousands of years. If you realise that the 
"wear and tear" we speak of cannot apply to the Vedas but may be to 
other works or to spoken languages, you will agree that to fix the date of 
the Vedas, as modern indologists have tried to do, is not right.  
Hindi is only some centuries old. However, since it is spoken in a large 
area and contains Sanskrit, Arabic and Persian words, it has changed in a 
comparatively short period. Tamil, though spoken in a smaller region, has 
not changed so much. Even so you will not understand Kamban's 
Ramayana to the same extent as you will the songs of Tayumanavar. As 
for Jnanasambandhar's Tevaram itself you will not understand it as easily 


 
as Kamban's Ramayana. And then there is the Thirumurugarrupadai 
which is more difficult than the Tevaram. So Tamil has also not remained 
the same all these centuries. Though Sanskrit was known all over India it 
was not a spoken language like Hindi or Tamil. It was a literary language 
and has not changed even to the extent Tamil has. As for the Vedas, they 
have been preserved with greater care than the poetical works and it is 
rarely that you see changes in them. So, according to linguistic experts, if 
it takes 1000 years for certain changes to occur in other languages, it 
should take 100, 000 years for the same in the Vedas.  
The Vedas have been preserved with the utmost care in the firm belief 
that the mantras will be efficacious only if each syllable is chanted with 
precision so far as its sound and textual correctness are concerned. It was 
for this purpose that a separate caste was assigned with the mission of 
caring for them. Research conducted without realising this truth will not 
serve any purpose. Modern investigations have not succeeded in 
establishing that the Vedas are not eternal. Faith in the belief that they 
are anadi will be strengthened if you appreciate the care with which they 
have been preserved during all these ages and also consider the different 
ways in which their sound has been kept alive.  
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  


 

Methods of Chanting 
Our forefathers devised a number of methods to preserve the unwritten 
Vedas in their original form, to safeguard their tonal and verbal purity. 
They laid down rules to make sure that not a syllable was changed in 
chanting, not a svara was altered. In this way they ensured that the full 
benefits were derived from intoning the mantras. They fixed the time 
taken to enunciate each syllable of a word and called this unit of time or 
time interval "matra*"uot; . how we must regulate our breathing to 
produce the desired vibration in a particular part of our body so that the 
sound of the syllable enunciated is produced in its pure form: even this is 
determined in the Vedanga called Siksa. The similarities and differences 
between the svaras of music and of the Vedas are dealt with. So those 
differences between the sounds voiced by birds and animals on the one 
hand and the Vedic svaras on the other. With all this the right way is 
shown for the intonation of Vedic mantras.  
A remarkable method was devised to make sure that words and syllables 
are not altered. According to this the words of a mantra are strung 
together in different patterns like "vakya", "pada", "karma", "jata", 
"mala", "sikha", "rekha", "dhvaja", "danda", "ratha", "ghana".  
We call some Vedic scholars "ghanapathins", don't we? It means they 
have learnt the chanting of the scripture up to the advanced stage called 
"ghana". "Pathin" means one who has learnt the "patha". When we listen 
to ghanapathins chant the ghana, we notice that he intones a few words 
of a mantra in different ways, back and forth. It is most delightful to the 
ear, like nectar poured into it. The sonority natural to Vedic chanting is 
enhanced in ghana. Similarly, in the other methods of chanting like 
karma, jata, sikha, mala, and so on the intonation is nothing less than 
stately, indeed divine. The chief purpose of such methods, as already 
mentioned, is to ensure that even not even a syllable of a mantra is 
altered to the slightest extent. The words are braided together, so to 
speak, and recited back and forth.  


 
In "vakyapatha" and "samhitapatha" the mantras are chanted in the 
original (natural) order, with no special pattern adopted. In the 
vakyapatha some words of the mantras are joined together in what is 
called "sandhi". There is sandhi in Tamil also; but in English the words are 
not joined together. You have many examples of sandhi in the Tevaram, 
Tiruvachakam, Tirukkural, Divyaprabandham and other Tamil works. 
Because of the sandhi the individual words are less recognisable in 
Sanskrit than even in Tamil. In padapatha each word in a mantra is clearly 
separated from the next. It comes next to samhitapatha and after it is 
kramapatha. In this the first word of a mantra is joined to the second, the 
second to the third, the third to the fourth, and so on, until we come to 
the final word.  
In old inscriptions in the South we find the names of some important 
people of the place concerned mentioned with the appellation 
"kramavittan" added to the names. "Kramavittan" is the Tamil form of 
"kramavid" in the same way as "Vedavittan" is of "Vedavid". We learn 
from the inscriptions that such Vedic scholars were to be met throughout 
the Tamil country.  
In jata patha, the first word of the mantra is chanted with the second, 
then the order is reversed-the second is chanted with the first. Then, 
again, the first word is chanted with the second, then the second with the 
third, and so on. In this way the entire mantra is chanted, going back and 
forth. In sikhapatha the pattern consists of three words of a mantra, 
instead of the two of jata.  
Ghanapatha is more difficult than these. There are four types in this 
method. Here also the words of a mantra are chanted back and forth and 
there is a system of permutation and combination in the chanting. To 
explain all of it would be like conducting a class of arithmetic.  
We take all kinds of precautions in the laboratory, don't we, to protect a 
life-saving drug? The sound of the Vedas guards the world against all ills. 
Our forefathers devised these methods of chanting to protect the sound 
of our scripture against change and distortion.  


 
Samhitapatha and padapatha are called "prakrtipatha" (natural way of 
chanting) since the words are recited only once and in their natural order. 
The other methods belong to the "vikrtipatha" (artificial way of chanting) 
category. (In krama, though the words do not go in the strict natural 
order of one-two-three, there is no reversal of the words-the first after 
the second, the second after the third, and so on. So we cannot describe 
it fully as vikrtipatha). Leaving out krama, there are eight vikrti patterns 
and they are recounted in verse to be easily remembered.  
Jata mala sikha rekha dhvaja dando ratho ghanah  
Ityastau-vikrtayah proktah kramapurva maharsibhih  
All these different methods of chanting are meant to ensure the tonal 
and verbal purity of the Vedas for all time. In pada the words in their 
natural order, in krama two words together, in jata the words going back 
and forth. The words tally in all these methods of chanting and there is 
the assurance that the original form will not be altered.  
The benefits to be derived from the different ways of chanting are given 
in this verse.  
Samhitapathamatrena yatphalam procyate budhaih  
Padu tu dvigunam vidyat krame tu ca caturgunam  
Varnakrame satagunam jatayantu sahasrakam  
Considering that our ancestors took so much care to make sure that the 
sound of the Vedas did not undergo the slightest change, it is futile for 
modern researchers to try to establish the date of our scriptures by 
finding out how the sounds of its words have changed.  
 
 
 
 


 

Word of God 
We must not distrust the belief that the Vedas are not the work of mere 
mortals. Followers of other religions too ascribe divine origin to their 
scriptures. Jesus says that he merely repeats the words of God and, 
according to Muslims, the prophet speaks the words of Allah. What we 
call "apauruseya" is revealed text in their case. The word of the Lord has 
come through the agency of great men to constitute religious texts.  
Whatever our field of work, must be dedicated to it with one-pointedness 
of mind for its truths to be revealed. They say that such truths come to us 
in a flash. A professor told me that the Theory of Relativity occurred to 
Einstein in a flash, that he knew it intuitively. If we accept such claims, 
how can we dismiss the belief that Vedas are not the work of mortals, 
that they revealed themselves to the seers in their heart-space, seers 
who were inwardly pure?  
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 
 


 

The Vedas are Infinite 
If the cosmos of sound (sabda-prapanca) enfolds all creation and what is 
beyond it, it must naturally be immensely vast. However voluminous the 
Vedas are, one might wonder whether it would be right to claim that they 
embrace all activities of the universe. "Anantah vai Vedah", the Vedas 
themselves proclaim so (the Vedas are endless). We cannot claim that all 
the Vedas have been revealed to the seers. Only about a thousand sakhas 
or recensions belonging to the four Vedas have been revealed to them.  
Brahma, the Creator, alone knows the Vedas in their entirety. Before the 
present Brahma there was a great deluge and, preceding it, there was 
another Brahma. And, similarly, before him too there must have been 
another Brahma. But through all these vast vistas of time, through 
successive deluges, the vibrations caused by the Paramatman's breath 
have existed in space, the vibrations that urged the first Brahma to do the 
work of creation. These vibrations are indestructible. The Brahma who 
appears after each great deluge performs his function of creation with 
them.  
The sounds we produce are never destroyed. I remember reading that 
what Jesus Christ spoke 2, 000 years ago could still be recaptured in his 
own voice and that efforts are being made for the same. I don't know 
how far these efforts have succeeded. But I do know that there does exist 
such a possibility (of receiving a voice or sound from the past). We know 
that a sound, once it is produced, remains in space without ever being 
destroyed.  
Brahma created this world with the sound of the Vedas and this sound is 
not destroyed even during a great deluge. We build a village or town with 
stone, earth, timber, iron, etc. All these materials are derived from the 
will of the Paramatman, from his thought, from the vibrations that are his 
will or thought. Brahma saw the sounds corresponding to these vibrations 


 
as the Vedas and the chanted them and brought all the world into 
existence.  
We often see reports in the newspapers of trees flowering or fruiting in 
abundance in response to the vibrations of certain sounds. Some 
vibrations have also the effect of stunting the growth of plants. Here is 
proof of the fact that sound can create, sustain and destroy.  
Brahma could create the universe with the sound of the Vedas because of 
his power of concentration. A siddha can cure a sick man if he intones the 
Pancakasara mantra - the mantra that we mutter every day - and applies 
holy ashes to the patient's body. He is able to do it because he has 
greater power of concentration than we have. If the mantra is to be 
efficacious it has to be chanted without any tonal error whatsoever. Only 
then will it bring the desired result. Brahma had the power of 
concentration to the full since he came into being as an "instrument" for 
creation.  
Much could be accomplished from the void of space through electricity. 
From the spiritual reality called the Nirguna Brahman (the unconditioned 
Brahman without attributes) emanates everything. During the deluge, 
this spiritual reality goes to sleep. Take the case of a sandow. When he is 
asleep his strength is not evident. But when we see him wrestling with an 
opponent we realise how strong he is. Similarly, during the time of 
creation, the spiritual reality is revealed to perform manifold functions. 
From the Nirguna Brahman comes a flow of energy to perform such 
functions. Brahma came into being as a part of this flow. Since he was all 
tapas all concentration, he could grasp all the Vedas with his 
extraordinary power. He created the world with their sound. The Vedas 
are infinite and so too creation takes forms that are countless.  
The great sage Bharadvaja kept chanting the Vedas over three lifetimes. 
Paramesvra appeared before him and said to him: "I will grant you a 
fourth life. What will you do during it? “The sage replied: "I will keep 
chanting the Vedas again.” It is not possible to learn the Vedas in the 
entirety even over many, many lifetimes. Paramesvra took pity on 
Bharadvaja for all his efforts to accomplish a task that was impossible to 


 
accomplish. Wanting to change his mind, Paramesvara caused three great 
mountains to appear, took a handful of earth and said to the sage: "The 
Vedas you have learned all these years are like this handful of earth. 
What you have yet to learn is vast, like these mountains. “It is believed 
that Vedagiri or Tirukkazhukkunram is the place where the Vedas 
appeared in the form of these mountains. When I was circumambulating 
the hill there, people accompanying me intoned instead, "Veda, Veda, 
Mahaveda".  
The story of Bharadvaja occurs in the Kathaka of the Vedas. We learn 
from it that the Vedas are so infinite. The classification into the four 
Vedas and the one thousand or so recensions was a later development. 
Brahma came into being, his heart was filled with all Vedic sound. The 
Vedas showed him the way to perform his function of creation. He 
recognized that the sound of the Vedas pervaded everywhere. To him 
occur all Vedas. Only some mantras have revealed themselves to the 
sages and these constitute the Vedas that are our heritage.  
At the time of chanting a mantra we usually mention the rsi associated 
with it, its chandas or metre and the name of the deity invoked. In the 
Telegu country they mention the three for all mantras. The sages learned 
the mantras with the power of concentration acquired through 
austerities. They were bestowed with celestial ears, so they could hear 
the mantras in space. It is said in the science of yoga that if our heart-
space becomes one with the transcendent outward space we will be able 
to listen to the sounds in it. Only those who have attained the state of 
undifferentiated oneness of all can perceive them. It is in this way that 
the seers became aware of the mantras and made them known to the 
world. It must be remembered that they did not create them. They 
brought us immeasurable blessings by making the mantras known too us.  
If someone offers us water form the Ganga (Ganga-tirtha, Gangajal) we 
receive it, prostrating ourselves before him.  
The man did not of course create the Ganga, but all the same reverence 
him in recognition of the fact that the must have travelled a thousand 
miles to bring us the few drops of the holy water. We cannot adore the 


 
seers sufficiently for their having made us the gift of the mantras which 
are beyond the grasp of our ears. That is why before canting a mantra we 
hold the sacred feet of the rsi concerned with our head.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Mantrayoga 
The fourteen worlds constitute an immensely vast kingdom. It has an 
emperor and all living beings are his subjects. This kingdom as well as its 
ruler is eternal and it has its own laws. If the kingdom and the king-
emperor are eternal, the law also must be so. This law is constituted by 
the Vedas. Though the kingdom, the cosmos, is called "anadi", it is 
dissolved and created again and again. The only eternal entities are the 
Paramatman and his law, the Vedas.  
The world comes into being, grows and is dissolved in the deluge. Thus it 
alternates between being and non-being. The emperor and the law 
remain eternal. At the time of every creation the emperor, the 
Paramatman, also creates authorities or "officials" and invests them with 
the yogic power necessary for them to function. In the yoga sastra is 
taught the truth that one's ears are not to be differentiated from outward 
space. When we meditate on this truth we acquire a celestial ear. It is 
with this ear and with the grace of the Paramatman that the authorities 
appointed by him obtain the sound waves that are always present in 
outward space. They were the first to know the Vedas and they are the 
maharishis (the great seers or sages) of the mantras.  
Vedic chanting is a mantrayoga. The vibration in each nadi creates certain 
feelings or urges in the consciousness. Sensual desire is aroused by some, 
sloth by some and sorrow by some others. To reverse this, when there is 
sensual desire there is a vibration in some nadis, and when there is anger 
there is vibration in some other nadis, and so on for each type of feeling 
or emotion or urge. We know this from actual experience. When we are 
at ease there is a special glow on our face and this glow is caused by 
some nadis being cool and unagitated. There is a saying "One's inner 
beauty is reflected outwardly on one's face". Our emotions cause their 
own reactions in our nadis. If we succeed in bringing the nadis under 
control we shall be masters of our urges and feelings. There will then be 
no need to depend on any external agency for the purpose.  


 
One way of acquiring control over the nadis is the practice of Rajayoga of 
which pranayama is the most important feature. Mantrayoga is another. 
When we vocalize a syllable, the vital breath is discharged through the 
space intervening our throat, tongue, lips, the upper and lower parts of 
the mouth, etc. It is then that the syllable is voiced or the "aksara dhvani" 
produced. Vibrations are created in the nadis located in those parts of the 
body where the vital breath courses through as a consequence of the 
aksara-dhvani.  
What are the Vedic mantras like in this context? Chanting them means 
only voicing such syllables as would cause beneficent vibrations of the 
nadis, beneficent vibrations that would produce such mental states as 
would lead to well being in this world and the hereafter and ultimately to 
liberation. No other type of vibration is caused by the chanting of the 
mantras.  
What is a mantra? "Mananat trayate": that which protects you by being 
turned over again and again and again in the mind. By birth the Brahmin 
is invested with the duty of chanting mantras again and again and 
producing such vibrations in the nadis as would bring Atmic well being. 
Through the power of the mantras he must create this well-being not 
only for himself but also for all creatures.  
How are the mantras to be chanted so that we may master them and 
derive the full benefit from them? But first let us consider the faulty ways 
of chanting.  
Giti sighri sirahkampi tatha likhitapathakah  
Anarthajno lpakanthasca sadete pathakadhamah  
"Giti" means one who chants a mantra as he likes setting it to tune, as it 
were, like a raga. The Vedas must be recited only in accordance with the 
tones appropriate to them. “Sighri" is one who hurries through a hymn. 
To derive the full benefit from the mantra the right matras must be 
maintained in the chanting. "Sirahkampi" denotes one who keeps shaking 
his head as the chants.  


 
There must be a certain poise about the man who chants the Vedas. The 
nadi vibrations must be such as are naturally produced in the course of 
the intonation. There must be no other vibrations. If the head is shaken 
as in a music recital the nadi vibrations will be affected. The 
"likhitapathaka" is one who chants, reading from the written text. As I 
have said so often the Vedas must be taught and learned without the 
help of any written text. The "anarthanjna" is one who does not know the 
meaning (here one who does not know the meaning of what he chants). 
All those belonging to these six categories are described as 
"pathakadhamah" belonging to the lowest types among those who chant 
the Vedas.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 



 
Sound and Meaning 
An interesting thought occurs to me here. In Sanskrit the suffix "taram" is 
used for the comparative degree. "Viryavat" means "strong", "Viryavat 
taram" means "stronger". It is said in the Chandogya Upanishad (1. 1. 10) 
that he who meditates on the truth of Omkara (Aumkara) with a 
knowledge of its meaning, will gain benefits that are "viryavat taram". 
The implication here is that those who practice such meditation without 
knowing the meaning will obtain benefits that are “viryavat". In his 
commentary on this Upanishad, Sankaracharya remarks that those who 
meditate on Omkara, even without grasping the principle behind it, will 
gain much benefit though it may not be the same measure as that gained 
by those who meditate on it knowing its meaning.  
We may or may not know the meaning or significance of a religious rite, 
but we will be duly rewarded if we perform it in deference to great men 
who have urged us to do it or because we follow the example of our 
forefathers who have done it. What matters is the faith inspiring our 
action. This applies particularly to mantra upasana (worship through 
chanting mantras) more than to anything else. The reason is that in such 
worship the proper voicing of the syllables of the mantra and the 
vibrations created are what matter in bringing beneficial results. The 
meaning of the mantras comes later.  
In this context it seems to me that performing a rite without knowing its 
meaning yields results that are "viryavat taram", that is more potent than 
performing it with knowledge of its meaning (the benefits in the latter 
case are "viryavat"). The chanting of mantra, or the muttering of it, 
without knowing it's meaning, is also more rewarding than chanting or 
muttering it knowing the meaning. How?  
A man sends a petition to the collector through his lawyer. Another man, 
an unlettered peasant, has his petition written by somebody else but he 
personally hands it to the collector. He requests the official to treat his 
case sympathetically. The latter is moved by the man's simple faith and 
decides to help him. If we approach the collector through a lawyer and if 


 
he takes it amiss, he might turn against us. Also, if he finds that we have 
knowingly committed a wrong, he will have greater reason too be 
displeased with us. But if he realises that we have committed a mistake 
unknowingly, he may be inclined to forgive us.  
We must not refuse to perform a rite because we do not know it's 
meaning, nor must we ask why we should perform what is prescribed in 
the sastras. Conducting a ritual without knowing its significance, it occurs 
to me, is "viryavat taram".  
You may take it that this observation of mine has not been made in any 
seriousness. But, when I see that intellectual arrogance and deceit are on 
the increase and that the ignorant are being deprived of their one asset, 
humility, it seems to me that doing things in mere faith is to be lauded.  
You must, in fact, be intellectually convinced about the need to perform a 
religious duty and, at the same time, you must be humble. The mantras 
are the laws of the dharmasastras. If we knew their meaning we would be 
better able to live according to them.  
The term "alpakantha" in the verse quoted above [in the previous 
chapter] means one who has a thin voice (one who chants the Vedas in a 
thin voice). The Vedic mantras must be intoned full-throatedly, 
sonorously and their sound must pervade space to the maximum extent 
possible.  
The sound of the mantras does good to the man chanting them as well as 
to the listener by producing vibrations in the nadis of both. As it fills the 
air it will be beneficent both in this world and in the next. This is the 
reason why the Vedas must be chanted with vigour, so that their sound 
reaches the utmost limits possible.  
 
 



 
The Glory of the Vedas 
The Vedas are eternal and the source of all creations and their greatness 
is to be known in many different ways. As I have already stated, their 
sound produces in our nadis as well as in the atmosphere vibrations that 
are salutary not only to our own Self but to the entire world. Here we 
must understand "lokakshema" or our welfare of the world to mean the 
good of mankind as well as of all other creatures. This concern for all 
creation that finds expression in the Vedas is not shared by any other 
religion. "Sanno astu dvipadesancatuspade"-- this occurs in a mantra: the 
Vedas pray for the good of all creatures including bipeds, quadrupeds etc. 
Even grass, shrubs, trees, mountains and the rivers are not excluded from 
their benign purview. The happy state of all these sentient creatures and 
inert objects is brought about through the special quality of the Vedas.  
The noble character of their sound apart, the Vedas are also notable for 
the lofty truths that find expression in the mantras. The tenets of these 
scriptures have aroused the wonder of the people of other lands, of other 
faiths. They are moved by the poetic beauty of the hymns, the subtle 
manner in which principles of social life are dealt with them, the 
metaphysical truths embedded and expounded in them, and the moral 
instruction as well as scientific truths contained in them.  
Not all mantras that create benign vibrations are necessarily meaningful. 
In this context we have the example of the music. The alapana of a raga 
(the elaboration of a musical mode) is "pure" sound, that is, it has no 
words, but it is still is capable of producing emotions like joy, sorrow, etc. 
During the researches conducted by a university team, it was discovered 
that the vibrations created by the instrumental music quickened the 
growth of the plants and resulted in a higher yield. Here is a proof that 
the sound has the power of creation. Also to be noted is the fact that the 
instrumental music played to the plant does not obviously have any 
verbal contact--- this establishes that the sound has its own power.  
The remarkable thing about the Vedas is that they are of immeasurable 
value as much for their sound as for their verbal content. While the sound 


 
has its creative power, the words are notable for the exalted character of 
the meaning they convey.  
There are Tamil hymns of a very high order. To read them is to be moved 
by them; they touch our hearts with their intense devotion. But we have 
recourse only to a few of them for repeated incantation to expel a poison 
or to cure a disease. The authors of these hymns like Nakkirar, 
Arunagirinadhar and Sambandamurti have composed poems that are 
more moving and beautiful. But the sound of the hymns chosen for 
repeated incantation are potent like mantras. Among our Acharya's 
works are the Saundaryalahari and the Sivanandalahari. the recitation of 
each stanza of the Saundaryalahari brings in a specific benefit. The same 
is not said about the Sivanandalahari. The reason is the special mantrik 
power (of the sound) of the former.  
There are mantras that are especially valuable for their sound but are 
otherwise meaningless. Similarly there are works pregnant with meaning 
but with no mantrik power. The glory of the Vedas is that they are a 
collection of mantras that are at once notable as much for the energising 
character of their sound as for the lofty truths they proclaim. A medicine, 
though bitter, does the body good, while some types of food, though 
delicious, do harm. Are we not delighted to have something like 
kusmanda-lehya, which is sweet to taste and is at the same time 
nourishing to the body? Similarly, the Vedas serve a two fold purpose: 
while they have the mantrik power to do immense good to each one of us 
and too the world, they also contain teachings embodying great 
metaphysical truths.  
It must here be emphasised that on the doctrinal level the Vedas deal 
both with worldly life and the inner life of the Self. They teach how to 
conduct ourselves in such a manner as to create Atmic well-being. And 
their concern is not with the liberation of the individual alone; they speak 
about the ideals of social life and about the duties of the public. How the 
Brahmin ought to lead his life and how the king must rule his subjects and 
what ideals women are to follow: an answer to these-stated in the form 


 
of laws-is to be found in these scriptures. The Vedas indeed constitute 
the apex of our law-books.  
 
   
   
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Yajna or Sacrifice 
I spoke about the glory of the Vedas, about the features that contribute 
to their greatness as a scripture. One such feature yet to be dealt with is 
yajna or sacrifice.  
What is a yajna? It is the performance of a religious duty involving Agni, 
the sacrificial fire, with the chanting of the mantras. The word itself is 
derived from the root "yaj" meaning "to worship", to evince devotion. 
The performance of a yajna is meant to please the Paramatman and the 
various deities. Yajna is also called "yaga".  
We have already seen the definition of the word "mantra”: "mananat 
trayate iti mantrah" (that which protects us by being repeated and 
meditated upon). "Tranam" means to protect. All of you must be familiar 
with the words in the gita: "paritranaya sadhunam" (to protect the 
virtuous). "Mananam" means repeating, turning over something in the 
mind. There is no need to vocalise the words of the mantra. Even if it is 
repeated mentally, healthy vibrations will be produced in the nadis. If the 
same --the Vedic mantra -- is chanted loudly ("Vedaghosa") it will give 
divine joy to the listeners even if they do not understand the meaning. 
Such a sound has the power to make mankind happy.  
Mind, speech and body are dedicated to the Vedas when you mutter a 
Vedic mantra mentally and vocalise it outwardly during the performance 
of a rite involving the body. Of the Vedic rites of this kind yajna or yaga is 
the most important.  
(See Chapter 5, Part Nineteen, for a detailed account of the various sacrifices.)  
 
   


 

Not in Other Religions 
The concept of yajna or sacrifice is not present in other systems of 
worship. There is a big difference between our religion, the "Vedic mata", 
and other faiths. Religions like Christianity and Islam speak of one God. 
The Vedas too proclaim that there is but one God and that even an 
ordinary mortal is to be identified with him. This Paramatman, this 
Godhead, is to be realised as an experience by constant inquiry 
conducted with our inner being. It needs much wisdom and maturity to 
attain this state. When we unite with this one and only Reality, all those 
world disappears for us.  
How do we prepare ourselves for such a state? The answer is: now itself, 
when we are deeply involved in worldly affairs. In the very midst of our 
mundane existence we must live according to the dictates of dharma and 
the teachings of the sastras. In this way our consciousness will be 
purified. We will become mature within and will be severed from the 
world. The duties and rites that will take us to this goal are enshrined in 
the Vedas. The most important of the rites is yajna. There is a very old 
Tamil word for it - "velvi". In yajna, offerings are made to different deities 
instead of to the one and only Paramatman. This sacrament is unique to 
our religion.  
In a yajna we are enjoined to offer various materials in the sacred fire 
with the recitation of mantras. Making such offerings in the sacrificial fire 
is called "homa". Though the materials are placed in the fire it does not 
mean that they are necessarily offered to Agni. Only such materials as are 
placed in the fire with the chanting of mantras invoking Agni himself are 
meant for that deity. But the oblations meant for other deities like Rudra, 
Vishnu, Indra, Varuna, Matarisvan (Vayu), and so on are also made in the 
holy fire. Agni conveys them to the deities invoked. Just as letters 
addressed to various people are put in the same letter-box, the oblations 
meant for various deities are conveyed through one devata, Agni.  


 
An important difference between the Vedic religion and other faiths is 
this: while followers of other religions worship one God we worship many 
deities and make offerings to them in the sacrificial fire.  
We often say, don't we, that the Lord is pleased if we keep helping one 
another? Reformists forsake puja and ritual, saying, "Serving people, 
serving the poor, is as good as serving God". We will receive the 
Paramatman's blessings if we serve the devas also through sacrifices, for 
they too are His creation.  
The Vedas proclaim that the one Brahman, call it the Truth or Reality, is 
manifested as so many different devatas or deities. Since each devata is 
extolled as the Paramatman we know for certain that monotheism is a 
Vedic tenet. It is wrong to believe that the Vedas subscribe to polytheism 
merely because they speak of many deities. In doing so they mean that 
the one and only Brahman is revealed as many deities. It is for the 
conduct of the affairs of the cosmos that the Paramatman has created 
the various divine powers. These (divinities) dieties are also in charge of 
the forces of nature, the feelings and urges of man. The Supreme 
Godhead has created them in the same way as he has created us. He 
fashioned us out of himself - which means that he is that came to be so 
many human beings also.  
This is the reason why non-dualism proclaims that the Paramatman and 
the jivatman (the individual self) are one and the same. In the same way, 
it is he who is manifested as the many deities. However, until we are 
mature enough to recognise the truth of non-dualism and realise it 
within, and until we reach the state in which we realise that we are not 
separate from the Paramatman, we have to perform rituals and help one 
another. In the same way the deities are also to be looked upon as 
separate entities and are to be worshipped through sacrifices. This is the 
law of the Vedas.  
If we and all other creatures are to be happy in this world, we must have 
the blessings of the deities who govern the cosmic forces. It is for this 
purpose, to propitiate and please them for their grace, that the Vedas 
impose on us the duty of performing sacrifices.  


 
If we attain jnana, the wisdom to realise within the oneness of all, there 
will be no need for these deities. We may worship the Paramatman 
directly. However, so long as we make efforts to find release from this 
pluralistic cosmos, we have to worship the deities as separate entities.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 


 

The Threefold Purpose of Yajna 
The Vedic sacrifices have threefold purpose. The first is to earn the 
blessings of the deities so that we as well as all other creatures may be 
happy in this world. The second is to ensure that, after our death, we will 
live happily in the world of the celestials. But our stay in devaloka, the 
celestial world, is not for all time. It will last only until such time as we 
exhaust the merit earned by us in this world. The joy known in the 
celestial world is also not full or entire unlike the bliss experienced by 
great devotees and jnanins. It is nowhere equal to the bliss of the Atman: 
which is also described as "experiencing" Isvara.  
Sankara has stated in his Manisa-Pancaka that the joy that Indra knows is 
no more than a drop in the ocean of Atma-ananda or the bliss of Self-
realisation. However, life in svarga, the paradise of the celestials, is a 
thousand times happier than life on earth with its unceasing sorrows. The 
second purpose of performing sacrifices is to earn residence in this 
paradise.  
The third purpose is the most important and it is achieved by performing 
sacrifices, as taught by the Gita, without any expectation of reward. Here 
we desire neither happiness in this world nor residence in paradise. We 
perform sacrifices only because it is our duty to invoke the blessings of 
the Gods for the welfare of the world. In this way our consciousness will 
be cleansed, a pre-requisite for enlightenment and final liberation. In 
other words the selfless performance of sacrifices means that we will 
eventually be dissolved in the Paramatman.  
Sankara, who has expounded the ideals of Self-realisation and jnana, 
says: "Vedo nityam adhiyatam taduditam karma svanusthiyatam" (Chant 
the vedas every day. Perform with care the sacrifices and other rites they 
enjoin upon you). The Acharya wants us to conduct sacrifices not for 
happiness in this world, nor for the enjoyment of the pleasure of 
paradise. No, not for any petty rewards. Sankara exhorts us to carry out 


 
Vedic works without our hearts being vitiated by desire. This, according 
to his teaching, is the way to make our mind pure in order to realise the 
Self.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

The Celestials and Mortals Help Each Other 
The sacrifices, you will have seen, are of the utmost importance to our 
Vedic religion. The Lord himself has spoken about them in the Gita. When 
Brahma created the human species he also brought the yajnas or 
sacrifices into existence, bidding mortals thus: "Keep performing 
sacrifices. You will obtain all good fortune. May these sacrifices of yours 
be the cow (Kamadhenu) that grants you all you desire"  
Saha-yajnah prajah srstva puro'vaca Prajapatih  
Anena prasavisyadhvam esa vo'stvista-kamadhuk  
If we assume that Brahma "created humans and with them sacrifices", it 
is likely to be construed that he first created human beings and then 
sacrifices. But actually it is stated in the Gita that Prajapati created yajna 
along with humankind (saha-yajnah prajah srstva). Yajna is mentioned 
first and then praja (mankind).  
Since the mantras of the Vedas are the source of creation, the vibrations 
produced by chanting them will bring the divine powers invested with the 
authority of performing certain functions. To recite such mantras at a 
sacrifice is like writing the address on an envelope. It is by performing 
homa in this way that the oblation is conveyed to the deity invoked by 
Agni.  
The dog is stronger than the cat, the horse stronger than the dog, the 
elephant stronger than the horse, and the lion stronger than the 
elephant. To extend this sequence, who are stronger than men? The 
devas, or celestials. While in this world they remain dissolved in the five 
elements, in the celestial world they exist in a visible form. Those who 
have obtained siddhi or perfection by chanting the mantras can also see 
them in their gross form in their celestial abode besides receiving their 
blessings in their subtle form. The gods emanated from the Paramatman 


 
as a result of the vibrations produced by the mantras. We may therefore 
describe the mantras as the "sonic" form of the deities.  
The deity appears during a sacrifice when he is invoked with mantras. 
Those who are wise and mature will perceive them with their eyes. Even 
if they do not, the power of the deities will be subtly revealed to them. 
However, offerings cannot be made directly to them. When you write a 
letter you have to stick a stamp on it or put the seal of the registrar. 
According to the "regulations" of the Vedas, any oblation intended for the 
celestials must be offered in the sacred fire in a form acceptable to them.  
What remains after the sacrificial fire has consumed the offering 
("yajnasista") is taken as prasada by the performers of the sacrifice. The 
question is asked: how does the same reach the deities invoked? We 
should not entertain such doubts. The deities are not like us created of 
the five elements. So they do not require food in the gross form. Even in 
our case the food we eat is burned (digested) by the gastric fire. Its 
essence alone is conveyed to all parts of the body in the form of blood. 
The subtle essence of the offerings is conveyed by the sacrificial fire to 
the deities invoked.  
You know how a toast is proposed to the guest of honour at a dinner or 
banquet. The host and invitees drink to his health. This means that, when 
a group of people drink or eat ceremonially, the benefit goes to someone 
else. Do you ask how this is possible? Such things can be explained only 
on the basis of a certain mental attitude. Good intentions and good 
thoughts have their own creative power.  
When the thought waves of the Paramatman have come to us in the form 
of mantras, they must truly be pregnant with the utmost power for good. 
The offerings made to the deities with the chanting of mantras will 
increase their strength. The celestials are of course strong but they are 
neither almighty nor full. They too have their wants and desires and these 
are met by the sacrifices performed by us. If they help us by making our 
mundane existence happier we have to help them by performing 
sacrifices. If we conduct yajnas so that they may flourish, they will in 
return bless us with well-being. Sri Krsna says in the Gita:  


 
Devan bhavayata'nena te deva bhavayantu vah  
Parasparam bhavayantah sreyah param avapsyatha  
Our religious texts are replete with accounts of how people have merited 
the grace of Isvara and pleased the celestials by performing sacrifices.  
If the celestials bring us rains, bless us with food, health, etc, why should 
we perform sacrifices so as to provide them with food, we are asked. " 
Why should we feed the deities when we ourselves are dependent on 
them for our food and clothing? Why cannot they manage to obtain food 
on their own? How would you explain the Lord's statement (in the verse 
quoted above), 'Parasparam bhavayantah'? To say that we must regard 
the celestials as great beings and make obeisance to them seems 
reasonable enough. So let us worship them. But, instead of this, why are 
we seemingly elevated and placed on an equal footing with them? What 
is the meaning of our being told: 'You sustain them and let them sustain 
you -you feed them by performing sacrifices and let them bless you with 
rains'? "  
When I consider such questions, it seems to me that the world of the 
celestials is like England and that they themselves are like Englishmen. Is 
there much agricultural land in England? No. Yet Englishmen lorded it 
over the world. They boasted: "The sun never sets on our empire.” What 
was the secret of their world dominance?  
England is poor in food resources. It has plenty of coal and chalk - coal 
that is black and chalk that is white. These are the main resources of 
Englishmen but they cannot eat them. If machines and factories are to be 
installed in countries where food crops are grown in plenty, they will 
need a lot of coal and chalk. That coal is essential to industry is well 
known. (Petrol and electricity came later. Now there is atomic power 
also. ) For some industries like cement, chalk (limestone) is essential.  
Englishmen thought up a shrewd plan. They induced other countries to 
start factories using machinery and fomented new, unnecessary desires 
among people there. And they sold lumps of coal and chalk to these 


 
countries and got in return foodgrains, cotton, etc, in abundance. In this 
way they brought country after country under their heel.  
There are no agricultural lands in the celestial world. The vedas have no 
means to feed themselves. "Durbhiksam devalokesu manunam udakam 
grhe", so it is said in the first prasna (first part) of the Taittiriya Aranyaka. 
Rain is produced when the clouds precipitate. It is only on earth that rain 
can be made use of - it fills the rivers, lakes and wells. The celestials have 
to come to our households for water. On earth alone there is plenty 
because of cultivation carried on by irrigating the fields. There is famine 
in the celestial world since it has no agricultural land: this is the meaning 
of the words quoted from the Aranyaka.  
However, we need the grace of the gods if we are to be blessed with 
rains. To deserve such grace we must perform sacrifices. Otherwise there 
will be no rains on earth. The result will be famine or the rain will fall into 
the sea and not on land, or it will be either ativrsti (too much rain) or 
anavrsti (no rain). We have to depend on the denizens of the celestial 
world to send us the right quantity of rain to create abundance on this 
planet.  
Just as England has plenty of coal but does not have sufficient agricultural 
land, the celestials have an abundance of grace but no crops to grow - 
they cannot also sustain themselves with their power of grace. Because 
they send us rain we are able to raise crops and sustain ourselves. For our 
part we can enhance their power of grace by chanting the Vedas. The 
oblations offered in the sacrificial fire with such chanting become their 
nourishment.  
Our country grows cotton. When our spinning mills did not prosper, the 
English took our cotton to Lancashire, made "nice" cloth and sold it to us, 
making in the process four times profit. The celestials produce rain for us 
from the water vapour formed from our own seas. But, unlike the English, 
they do not make any profit out of it (in the transaction). In fact the 
blessings they give us are far more than the sustenance we give them. As 
I said earlier, the celestials are much stronger than we are. The Lord has 
assigned us the duty of performing various rites and the celestials have to 


 
find satisfaction in them. By doing so, it seems, he has raised us to the 
level of the celestials. "Parasparam bhavayantah" he says in the Gita. The 
gods and mortals support each other.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

The Capacity to Work and the Capacity to Protect 
The Lord has endowed us with the capacity to work and the celestials 
with the capacity to protect. There is a similiar division of functions in this 
world also.  
The field and the factory are associated with labour. The police station, 
the lawcourt and other offices have the function of protection. The 
administrative offices are meant to ensure that what is produced in the 
field and in the factory is made available to the households in an 
equitable manner. The offices do not "produce" anything, nor do they 
have any crops to harvest. They are free from the noise of the machines 
and from cowdung and dust. Those who work in an office need not make 
their hands aand nails dirty and can spend their time sitting comfortably 
on chairs with the fans whirling over them. There is hardly any bodily 
exertion-it is allpen-pushing. The celestial world is like this: it is the office 
that affords protection to all the worlds. We do not find fault with people 
who man offices for not ploughing the fields or operating the machines. If 
they start doing such work, they will not be able to do their duty of 
protecting us. The celestials resemble these officials.  
The earth is the field as well as the factory. It is all slush and mud, all din 
and noise, and it is oily, sticky, dusty. We have to toil here all day long. 
Performing the rites according to the canons means suffering all this, like 
the smoke of the sacrificial fire, exhaustion due to fasting-indeed you 
have to sweat through the elaborate rites.  
The Lord does not regard the celestials as belonging to a higher plane nor 
does he think that we mortals belong to a lower one. The peasant and the 
factory worker produce food and other articles. The official sitting 
stylishly in his cubicle will starve and will be denied essential goods but 
for the work done by the peasant and the factory hand. All the same, it is 
because of the protection afforded by the official that the corn harvested 


 
by the farmer and other essential articles produced by the factory worker 
are made available to all members of soceity.  
The engineer gives the order to dig irrigation canals. The agricultural 
officer supplies pesticides. , Another official issues the license to start a 
factory. The government, which means also the police, assists in the just 
distribution of the goods manufactured by it. (It is for this purpose that 
the government is constituted, no matter how it functions in practice.) 
Thus it is a system in which one is dependent on another. A contributes to 
B's happiness and B to A's.  
It is against such a background that we have to consider the words of the 
Gita, "Parasparam bhavayantah". Though the devas look to us for our 
help, it must not be forgotten that they belong to a higher plane and that 
we must be respectful towards them.  
In other religions the one God is worshipped directly by all. They do not 
have a system of sacrifices meant to please a number of deities. Among 
us, only sanyasins worship the Paramatman directly. Others have to 
please and propitiate the various deities and obtain well-being through 
their blessings. It is to please the deities that we perform a variety of 
sacrifices.  
A big king is not directly approached by all. The subjects have their 
favours granted by the officials appointed by him. These officials do not 
function on their own; they look after the welfare of the people under 
royal orders. Some customs of our religion are reminiscent of such a 
system. Paramesvara is the supreme king-emperor. We, human-beings, 
are his subjects. Varuna, Agni, Vayu and such celestials are his officials. 
We have to obtain a number of benefits through them and we perform 
sacrifices with a view to enhancing their power to do us good. The 
oblations 
we 
make 
in 
the 
sacrificial 
fire 
constitute 
their 
food:"Agnimukhah devah".  
We say "na mama" (not mine) when we offer any material in the sacred 
fire. Such an oblation is consumed by Agni aand conveyed to the 
celestials invoked. It is thus that they obtain their sustenance. In this way 


 
we also propitiate our fathers (pitrs), those belonging to our vamsa or 
clan. The Vedas contain directions about how rites meant for pitrs are to 
be performed.  
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Rites for Celestials and Rites for Fathers 
The rites meant for the deities must be performed with devotion and 
those meant for the pitrs or fathers must be performed with faith. What 
is done with devotion is yajna and what is done with faith is sraddha. 
While performing the former, the sikha must be gathered into a knot and 
the sacred thread must rest on the left shoulder, and while performing 
the latter the sikha must be worn loose and the sacred thread must rest 
on the right shoulder.  
The sikha and the sacred thread are meant for these two purposes. 
Sannyasins do not have either. When they renounce the world they also 
renounce the rites for the fathers and cease to worship a number of 
deities. They adore the Paramatman directly without any worldly desire 
in their hearts. The followers of other religions too wear neither a sikha 
nor a sacred thread and they worship the Supreme God directly [that is 
without going through the stages in which the various deities are 
worshipped].  
Let me tell you about the two positions of the sacred thread while 
performing the rites for the celestials and the fathers. We must face the 
east as we conduct various rituals. The north is the direction in which we 
make the passage to the celestials. This path is called ""uttarayana". Our 
departed fathers reside in the south. The saint-poet Tiruvalluvar calls 
them "tenpulattar", those dwelling in the south. "Dakshinayana" is the 
way to the world of the fathers. Bhagavan Krsna speaks of the two paths 
in the Gita.  
When we sit facing the east to perform rites for the pitrs, which shoulder 
is to the south? The right one. So the sacred thread must rest on it.  
To do "pradakshina" means to go facing the south. (In majority of temples 
the raja-gopuram - the main entrance tower - is in the east. When you 
enter it and start circumbulating you will be facing the south. )  


 
When we sit facing the east to perform rites for the gods our left shoulder 
is to the north. So the sacred thread must rest on it. When we are not 
engaged in either of these two rites- that is when we are doing our office 
work or something else- the sacred thread must not rest on either 
shoulder and must be worn like a garland. (No one seems to observe this 
rule in practice now. Except during the rites for the fathers, most people 
have their sacred thread resting on their left shoulder. )  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 


 

The Purpose of Sacrifices 
Why is it that religion alone has the rites called yajnas or sacrifices?  
If a crop grows in surplus in our place we trade it with what is available in 
plenty in another and is not produced in our own. The carpenter, the 
blacksmith and other artisans make useful articles and serve us in many 
ways. In return we give them what they need for their upkeep. We feed 
the cow grass and it yields us milk. We pay the government taxes and it 
gives us protection. The affairs of the world are conducted on the basis of 
a system of exchange. Similarly, we conduct an exchange even with 
worlds other than our own. Engineers and other experts can canalise 
water obtained from the rains but they cannot produce the rains. If we 
want the rains to come, we have to despatch certain goods to the abode 
of the celestials. It is this kind of exchange that the Gita speaks of:  
Devan bhavayatanena te deva bhavayantu vah  
Parasparam bhavayantah sreyah param avapsyatha  
It means: "You keep the devas satisfied with the performance of 
sacrifices. And let them look after your welfare by producing rain on 
earth. Thus, helping each other, be more and more prosperous and 
happy. "  
 
 
 
 
   
   


 

Is Sacrificial Killing Justified? 
A yaga or sacrifice takes shape with the chanting of the mantras, the 
invoking of the deity and the offering of havis (oblation). The mantras are 
chanted (orally) and the deity is meditated upon (mentally). The most 
important material required for homa is the havis offered in the sacrificial 
fire - in this "work" the body is involved. So, altogether, in a sacrificial 
offering mind, speech and body (mano-vak-kaya) are brought together.  
Ghee (clarified butter) is an important ingredient of the oblation. While 
ghee by itself is offered as an oblation, it is also used to purify other 
sacrificial materials - in fact this is obligatory. In a number of sacrifices the 
vapa(fat or marrow) of animals is offered.  
Is the performance of a sacrifice sinful, or is it meritorius? Or is it both?  
Madvacharya was against the killing of any pasu for a sacrifice. In his 
compassion he said that a substitute for the vapa must be made with 
flour and offered in the fire. ("Pasu" does not necessarily mean a cow. In 
Sanskrit any animal is called a "pasu".)  
In his Brahmasutra, Vyasa has expounded the nature of the Atman as 
found expressed in the Upanishads which constitute the jnanakanda of 
the Vedas. The actual conduct of sacrifices is dealt with in the 
Purvamimamsa which is the karmakanda of the Vedas. The true purpose 
of sacrifices is explained in the Uttaramimamsa, that is the jnanakanda. 
What is this purposse or goal? It is the cleansing of the consciousness and 
such cleansing is essential to lead a man to the path of jnana.  
The Brahmasutra says: "Asuddhamiti cen na sabdat". The performance of 
sacrifices is based on scriptural authority and it is part of the quest for 
Self realisation. So how can it be called an impure act? How do we 
determine whether or not an object or an act is impure or whether it is 
good or bad? We do so by judging it according to the authority of of the 


 
sastras. Vyasa goes on to state in his Brahmasutra that animal sacrifice is 
not sinful since the act is permeated by the sound of the Vedas. What is 
pure or impure is to be known by the authority provided by the Vedas or 
rather their sound called Sabdapramana. If sacrifices were impure acts 
according to the Vedas, they would not have accepted them as part of 
the Atmic quest. Even if the sacrificial animal is made of flour (the 
substitute according to Madhvacharya) it is imbued with life by the 
chanting of the Vedic mantras. Would it not then be like a living animal 
and would not offering it in a sacrifice be taken as an act of violence?  
Tiruvalluvar says in his Tirukkural that not to kill an animal and eat it is 
better than performing a thousand sacrifices in which the oblation is 
consigned to the fire. You should not take this to mean that the poet 
speaks ill of sacrifices.  
What is in accordance or in pursuance of dharma must be practised 
howsoever or whatsoever it be. Here questions of violence must be 
disregarded. The Tirukkural says that it is better not to kill an animal than 
perform a thousand sacrifices. From this statement it is made out that 
Tiruvalluvar condemns sacrifices. According to Manu himself conducting 
one asvamedha (horse sacrifice) is superior to performing a thousand 
other sacrifices. At the same time, he declares that higher than a 
thousand horse sacrifices is the fact of one truth. If we say that one thing 
is better than another, the implication is that both are good. If the 
performance of a sacrifice were sinful, would it be claimed that one 
meritorious act is superior to a thousand sinful deeds? You may state that 
fasting on one Sivaratri is superior to fasting on a hundred Ekadasis. But 
would you say that the same is better than running a hundred 
butcheries? When you remark that "this rite is better than that rite or 
another", it means that the comparison is among two or more 
meritorious observances.  
In the concluding passage of the Chandogya Upanishad whwre ahimsa or 
non-violence is extolled you find these words, "Anyatra tirthebhyah". It 
means ahimsa must be practised except with regard to Vedic rites.  


 
Considerations of violence have no place in sacrifices and the conduct of 
war.  
If the ideal of non-violence were superior to the performance of 
sacrifices, it would mean that "sacrifices are good but non-violence is 
better". The performance of a thousand sacrifices must be spoken of 
highly but the practice of non-violence is to be regarded as even higher: It 
is in this sense that the Kural stanza concerning sacrifices is to be 
interpreted. We must not also forget that it occurs in the section on 
renunciation. What the poet wants to convey is that a sanyasin does 
better by abstaining from killing than a householder does by conducting a 
thousand sacrifices. According to the sastras also a sanyasin has no right 
to perform sacrifices.  
There are several types of sacrifices. I shall speak about them later when I 
deal with "Kalpa" (an Anga or limb of the Vedas) aaand "Grihasthasrama" 
(the stage of the householder). What I wish to state here is that animals 
are not killed in all sacrifices. There are a number of yagnas in which only 
ghee (ajya) is offered in the fire. In some, havisyanna (rice mixed with 
ghee) is offered and in some the cooked grains called "caru" or 
"purodasa", a kind of baked cake. In agnihotri milk is poured into the fire; 
in aupasana unbroken rice grains (aksata) are used; and in samidadhana 
the sticks of the palasa (flame of the forest). In sacrifices in which the 
vapa of animals is offered, only a tiny bit of the remains of the burnt 
offering is partaken of - and of course in the form of prasada.  
One is enjoined to perform twenty-one sacrifices. These are of three 
types: pakayajna, haviryajna and somayajna. In each category there are 
seven subdivisions. In all the seven pakayajnas as well as in the first five 
haviryajnas there is no animal sacrifice. It is only from the sixth haviryajna 
onwards (it is called "nirudhapasubandha") that animals are sacrificed.  
"Brahmins sacrificed herds and herds of animals and gorged themselves 
on their meat. The Buddha saved such herds when they were being taken 
to the sacrificial altar, “we often read such accounts in books. To tell the 
truth, there is no sacrifice in which a large number of animals are killed. 
For vajapeya which is the highest type of yajna performed by Brahmins, 


 
only twenty-three animals are mentioned. For asvamedha (horse 
sacrifice), the biggest of the sacrifices conducted by imperial rulers, one 
hundred animals are mentioned.  
It is totally false to state that Brahmins performed sacrifices only to 
satisfy their appetite for meat and that the talk of pleasing the deities was 
only a pretext. There are rules regarding the meat to be carved out from 
a sacrificial animal, the part of the body from which it is to be taken and 
the quantity each rtvik can partake of as prasada (idavatarana). This is not 
more than the size of a pigeon-pea and it is to be swallowed without 
anything added to taste. There may be various reasons for you to attack 
the system of sacrifices but it would be preposterous to do so on the 
score that Brahmins practised deception by making them a pretext to eat 
meat.  
Nowadays a large number of animals are slaughtered in the laboratories 
as guinea-pigs. Animal sacrifices must be regarded as a little hurt caused 
in the cause of a great ideal, the welfare of mankind. As a matter of fact 
there is no hurt caused since the animal sacrificed attains to an elevated 
state.  
There is another falsehood spread these days, that Brahmins performed 
the somayajnas only as a pretext to drink somarasa (the essence of the 
soma plant). Those who propagate this lie add that drinking somarasa is 
akin to imbibing liquor or wine. As a matter of fact somarasa is not an 
intoxicating drink. There is a reference in the Vedas to Indra killing his foe 
when he was "intoxicated" with somarasa. People who spread the above 
falsehoods have recourse to “Arthavada" and base their perverse views 
on this passage.  
The principle on which the physiology of deities is based is superior to 
that of humans. That apart, to say that the priests drank bottle after 
bottle of somarasa or pot after pot is to betray gross ignorance of the 
Vedic dharma. The soma plant is pounded and crushed in a small mortar 
called "graha". There are rules with regard to the quantity of essence to 
be offered to the gods. The small portion that remains after the oblation 
has been made, "huta-sesa", which is drunk drop by drop, does not add 


 
up to more than an ounce. No one has been knocked out by such 
drinking. They say that somarasa is not very palatable. .  
The preposterous suggestion is made that somarasa was the coffee of 
those times. There are Vedic mantras which speak about the joy aroused 
by drinking it. This has been misinterpreted. While coffee is injurious to 
the mind, somarasa cleanses it. It is absurd to equate the two. The soma 
plant was available in plenty in ancient times. Now it is becoming more 
and more scarce: this indeed is in keeping with the decline of Vedic 
dharma. In recent years, the Raja of Kollengode made it a point to supply 
the soma plant for the soma sacrifice wherever it was held.  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Animal Sacrifice in the Age of Kali 
An argument runs thus: In the eons gone by mankind possessed high 
ideals and noble character. Men could sacrifice animals for the well-being 
of the world because they had great affection in their hearts and were 
selfless. They offered even cows and horses in sacrifice and had meat for 
sraddha. As householders, in their middle years, they followed the 
karmamarga (the path of works) and performed rites to please the deities 
for the good of the world. But, in doing so, they desired no rewards. 
Later, they renounced all works, all puja, all observances, to become 
sannyasins delighting themselves in their Atman. They were men of such 
refinement and noble character that, if their brother, a king, died heirless 
they begot a son by his wife without any passion in their hearts and 
without a bit detracting from their brahmacharya. Their only motive was 
that the kingdom should not be plunged in anarchy for want of an heir to 
the throne.  
In our own Kali age we do not have such men who are desireless in their 
actions, who can subdue their minds and give up all works to become 
ascetics and who will remain chaste at heart even in the company of 
women. So it is contended that the following are to be eschewed in the 
Kali age: horse and cow sacrifices, meat in the sraddha ceremony, 
sannyasa, begetting a son by the husband's brother. As authority we have 
the following verse:  
Asvalambham gavalambham sanyasam palapatrikam  
Devarena sutotpattim kalau panca vivarjayet  
According to one view "asvalambham" in this verse should be substituted 
with "agniyadhanam". If you accept this version it would mean that even 
those sacrifices in which animals are not killed should not be performed. 
In other words it would mean a total prohibition of all sacrifices. The very 
first in the haviryajna category is agniyadhana. If that were to be 


 
prohibited it would mean that, apart from small sacrifices called 
"pakayajnas", no yajna can be performed.  
According to great men such a view is wrong. Sankara Bhagavatpada, 
whose mission in life was the re-establishment of Vedic dharma, did not 
stop with the admonishment that Vedas must be chanted every day 
("Vedo nityam adhiyatam"). He insisted that rites imposed on us by the 
Vedas must be performed: " "Taduditam karma svanusthiyatam. " Of 
Vedic rites, sacrifices occupy the foremost place. If they are to be 
eschewed what other Vedic rites are we to perform? It may be that 
certain types of sacrifices need not be gone through in the age of Kali.  
If, according to the verse, agniyadhana is interdicted, and no big sacrifice 
is to be performed in the age of Kali, why should gavalambha (cow 
sacrifice) have been mentioned in the prohibited category? If 
agniyadhana is not permissible, it goes without saying that gavalambha 
also is prohibited. So, apart from certain types, all sacrifices are to be 
performed at all times.  
According to another verse quoted from the Dharmasastra, so long as the 
varnasrama system is followed in the age of Kali, in however small a 
measure, and so long as the sound of the Vedas pervades the air, works 
like agniyadhana must be performed and the sannyasasrama followed, 
the stage of life in which there is no karma. The prohibition in Kali applies 
to certain types of animal sacrifices, meat in sraddha ceremonies and 
begetting a son by the husband's brother.  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

The One Goal 
Briefly told, a yajna is making an oblation to a deity in the fire with the 
chanting of mantras. In a sense the mantras themselves constitute the 
form of the deities invoked. In another sense, the mantras, like the 
materials placed in the fire, are the sustanence of the celestials invoked. 
They enhance their powers and serve more than one purpose. We pay 
taxes to the government. However, the various imposts - professional tax, 
land tax, motor vehicles tax, and so on - are collected by different offices. 
There are also different stamp papers for the same. Similarly, for each 
karma or religious work there is an individual deity, a separate mantra, a 
particular material, etc, but the ultimate goal of all these is dedication to 
the Supreme God. We know that different departments are meant for the 
same government. Similarly, we must realise that the sacrifices 
performed for the various deities have behind them one goal, the 
Paramatman.  
The king or president is not personally acquainted with us who pay the 
taxes. But Paramesvara, the Supreme Monarch, knows each one of us 
better than we know ourselves. He also knows whether we pay the taxes 
properly, the taxes called sacrifices. Paramesvara cannot be decieved.  
As mentioned before, for each sacrifice there are three essential 
requirements: the mantra, the material for oblation, and the deity to be 
invoked, the three bringing together speech, hand [body] and mind.  
 
 
 
 
 


 

Those who conduct Sacrifces 
One who performs a yajna or sacrifice spending on the material and 
dakshina is called a "yajamana". "Yaj" (as we seen already) means to 
worship. The root meaning of "yajamana" is one who performs a 
sacrifice. In Tamil Nadu nowadays we refer to a "mudalali" as yajaman. It 
is the mudalali who pays the wages. So it is that we have given him the 
same place as the yajamana who pays dakshina in sacrifices. That even 
common folks refer to the mudalali as yajaman shows how deep-rooted 
the Vedic culture is in the Tamilland.  
There is another word which also testifies to the fact that Tamil Nadu is 
steeped in the Vedic tradition. A place where people are fed free is called 
a "cattiram" by Tamils. In the North the corresponding word for the 
sameis "dharamsala"(dharmasala).  
How would you explain the use of the word cattiram in the South? It is 
derived from "sattram" which is the name of a type of Vedic sacrifice. In 
other sacrifices there is only one yajamana who spends on the material 
and the dakshina. The priests recieve the dakshina from him and conduct 
the sacrifice on his behalf. In a sattra all are yajamanas. As we have 
mentioned earlier any sacrifice brings benefits to all mankind and also 
serves to cleanse the mind of all those who participate in it - even those 
who witness the rites are benefitted. But the merit accrues chiefly to the 
yajamana.  
The speciality of a sattra is that all the priests conducting it are 
yajamanas. It is a kind of socialist yajna in which the merit is equally 
shared. From this type of sacrifice has originated the term signifying a 
place or establishment where anyone can come and eat as a matter of 
right. In a cattiram the one who feeds does not consider himself superior 
to the one who eats. There is reason to believe that satras had a special 
place in the tradition of Tamil Nadu.  


 
Among the rtvik Brahmins there are three classes. The "hota"(hotr) 
chants the rks, the hymns from the Rgveda in praise of the deity, invoking 
the devata to accept the oblation. Because of the high place accorded to 
him in a sacrifice we hear even today the remark made with reference to 
anyone occupying a high position, “hota".  
The Rgveda is replete with hymns to various deities. The Yajurveda 
contains mostly the methods and directions for the conduct of sacrifices. 
The Brahmin who looks after the conduct of the sacrifice is the 
"adhvaryu". The "udgata"(udgatr) intones the mantras of the Samaveda 
to please the deities. There is a Brahmin supervising the sacrifice and he 
is called the brahma.  
The Vedas themselves are called "Brahma". That is why one who learns 
them (the student) is called a "brahmacharin". The supervisor of the 
sacrifice, brahma, performs his function in accordance with the 
Atharvaveda. Thus the hota, the adhvaryu, the udgata and the brahma 
represent the four Vedas in a sacrifice. In later times, however, the 
opinion emerged that the brahma is not connected with the Atharvaveda 
to the same extent as the hota, adhvaryu and udgata are connected 
respectively with the Rg, Yajur and Sama Vedas. In actual practice also we 
see that those taking part in sacrifices are conversant with the first three 
Vedas only and not with the Atharvaveda. For this reason the view is put 
forward that all sacrifices, from the somayaga to the asvamedha, are to 
be performed only on the basis of the Rg, Yajur and Sama Vedas.  
There are sacrifices which come independently under the Atharvaveda. 
Acording to Valmiki's Ramayana, Indrajit performed the Nikhumbhila 
sacrifice mentioned in this Veda. The other three Vedas have a far wider 
following. Though we customarily speak of the four Vedas (Caturveda), 
the Rg, Yajur and Saman are bracketed together and specialy spoken of as 
"Trayi".  
(There are three types of sacrifices mentioned in the Atharvaveda: 
"santikam" for peace; "paustikam" for strength; and “abhicharikam" to 
bring injury to enemies).  


 

The Four Vedas 
"Anantah vai Vedah", the Vedas are unending. The seers have, however, 
revealed to us only a small part of them but it is sufficient for our welfare 
in this world and next. We are not going to create many universes like 
Brahma that we should know all the Vedas. We need to know only as 
many as are necessary to ensure our good in this world.  
In each of the four Vedas there are different "pathas" and "pathabhedas" 
or "pathantaras". The same musical composition or raga is sung in 
different "panis". For instance, the same musical composition or raga is 
expounded in different styles by, say, Maha-Vaidyanatha Ayyar, 
Konerirajaouram Vaidyanatha Ayyar and Sarabha sastri. Just as in some 
panis there are more sangatis to a composition than in some others, 
there are more suktas in some pathas than in others. There may also be 
differences in the order of the mantras.  
Each pathantra or each version is called a sakha or recension. The various 
sakhas are branches of the Vedic tree, indeed a great tree like the Adyar 
banyan [in Madras]. The branches big and small belong to one or another 
of the four Vedas, Rg, Yajur, Saman and Atharvan.  
Modern indologists are of the view that the Rgveda came first, that the 
Yajurveda came later and so on. But, according to our sastras, all Vedas 
are eternal. To state that one Veda belongs to a period prior to, or later 
than, another is not correct since all the Vedas are associated with the 
sacrifice that came to mankind with creation itself. The same argument 
holds good in the matter of fixing the dates of the divisions of any of the 
sakhas - the Samhita, the Brahmana and Aranyaka. The Vedas belong to a 
realm in which there is no scope for any research. If we believe that they 
were discovered by seers who knew past, present and future -- 
themselves, though, remaining in a state beyond time -- we will realise 
that it is meaningless to attempt to fix their date.  


 
In the Rgveda itself the Yajurveda and the Samaveda are mentioned in a 
number of passages. In Purusasuktha occuring in the Rgveda (tenth 
mandala, 90th suktha) there is a reference to the other Vedas. We learn 
from this, don't we, that one Veda does not belong to a period prior to, or 
later than another?  
I stated that each recension consisted of the Samhita, the Brahmana and 
the Aranyaka. When we speak of "Veda-adhyayana" (the study or 
chanting of the Vedas) we normally have in mind the Samhita part only. 
When we bring out a book consisting of the Samhita alone of the Rgveda 
we still call it the "Rgveda". The Samhita is indeed the very basis of 
asakha, its life-breath. The word means "systematised and collected 
together".  
The Rgveda Samhita as all in the form of poetry. What came to be saled 
"sloka" in later times is the"rk" of the Vedas. "Rk" means a "stotra", a 
hymn. The Rgveda Samhita is made up entirely of hymns in praise of 
various deities. Each rk is a mantra and a number of rks in praise of a 
deity constitute a sukta.  
The Rgveda, that is its Samhita, has 10, 170 rks and 1, 028 suktas. It is 
divided into ten mandalas or eight astakas. It begins with a sukta to Agni 
and concludes with asukta to the same deity. For this reason some 
believe that the Vedas must be described as the scripture of fire worship, 
a view with which we would be in agreement if Agni were believed to be 
the light of the Atman (the light of knowledge of the Reality). The 
concluding sukta of the Rgveda contains a hymn that should be regarded 
as having a higher significance than the national anthem of any country: it 
is a prayer for amity among all nations, a true international anthem. "May 
mankind be of one mind, " it goes. "May it have a common goal. May all 
hearts be united in love. And with the mind and the goal being one may 
all of us live in happiness. "  
"Yajus" is derived from the word "yaj" meaning "to worship". "Yajna" (as 
we have already noted) is also from the same root. Just as "rk" means a 
hymn, "yajus" means the worship associated with sacrifices. The chief 
purpose of the Yajurveda is the practical application of the Rgvedic hymns 


 
in the religious work called yajna or sacrifice. The Yajurveda describes in 
prose the actual conduct of the rites. If the Rgveda serves the purpose of 
adoring deities verbally the Yajurveda serves the same purpose through 
rites.  
The Yajurveda is different from the other Vedas in that it may be said to 
be divided into two Vedas which are considerably different from one 
another: the Sukla-Yajurveda and the Krsna-Yajurveda. "Sukla" means 
white, while "Krsna" means black. The Samhita of the Sukls-Yajurveda is 
also called "Vajasaneyi Samhita". "Vajasaneyi" is one of the names of the 
sun god. It was the sun god who taught this Samhita to the sage 
Yajnavalkya.  
There is a long story about this, but let me tell it briefly. Before the time 
of Yajnavalkya, the Yajurveda was an undivided scripture. Yajnavalkya 
learned it from Vaisampayana. Later some misunderstanding arose 
between the two and the guru bade his student to throw up what he had 
taught him. Yajnavalkya did so and went to the sun god for refuge. The 
latter taught him a new Vedas, an addition to the scripture that is 
endless. That is how we came to have Vajasaneyi or Sukla-Yajurveda. The 
other Yajurveda already taught by Vaisampayana acquired the apellation 
of "Krsna", so "Krsna-Yajurveda"  
In the Krsna-Yajurveda, the Samhita and the abrahmanas do not form 
entirely different parts. The Brahmanas are appended here and there to 
the mantras of the Samhita.  
The glory of the Rgveda is that it is replete with hymns to all deities. 
Scholars are of the opinion, besides, it contains teachings for our life. The 
wedding rites are based on tht part of this Veda which pertains to the 
marriage of the daughter of the sun god. There are also passages of a 
dramatic character like the dialogue between Pururavas and Urvasi. In 
later times Kalidasa based one of his dramatic works on this [the 
Vikramorvasiyam]. The hymn to Usas, the goddess of dawn, and similiar 
mantras are considered to be of high poetic beauty by men of aesthetic 
discernment.  


 
Since the Rgveda is placed first among the four Vedas it must naturally 
have an exalted position. It is the matrix of the works (karma) of the 
Yajurveda and the songs of the Samaveda.  
The importance of the Yajurveda is that it systematises the karmayoga, 
the path of works. The Tattitiriya Samhita of the Krsna-Yajurveda deals 
with sacrifices like darsa-purnamasa, somayaga, vajapeya, rajasuya, 
asvamedha. Besides it has a number of hymnic mantras of a high order 
not found in the Rgveda. For example, the popular Sri Rudra mantras are 
from the Yajurveda. The Rgveda does contain five suktas known as 
"Pancarudra", but when we mention Sri Rudra we at once think of the 
mantras to this deity in the Yajurveda. That is why a supreme Saiva like 
Appayya Diksita laments that he was not born a Yajurvedin - he was a 
Samavedin.  
Among the followers of the four Vedas, Yajurvedins predominate. The 
majority in the North(Brahmins) belong to the Sukla-Yajurveda while 
most people in the South belong to Krsna-Yajurveda. The day on which 
Yajurvedins perform their upakarma is declared a holiday. There is no 
such holiday for upakarma of Rgvedins and Samavedins. This is because 
Yajurvedins are in a majority. The Purusasukta of the Rgveda occurs with 
some changes in the Yajurveda. Today it is generally understood to be a 
Yajurvedic hymn.  
For non-dualists, the Yajurveda has a special importance. A doctrine and 
its exposition consist of three parts: the sutra, the bhasya and the vartika. 
The sutra states the doctrine in a apophthegmatic form; the bhasya is a 
commentary on it; and the vartika is an elucidation of the commentary. 
To non-dualists the term "vartikakara" at once brings to mind 
Surasvaracharya. What is the commentary or bhasya for which he wrote 
his vartika?  
Sankara's bhasya on the Upanishads are to be regarded as sutras. He 
wrote, in addition, a bhasya for the Brahmasutra also. His disciple 
Suresvara wrote a vartika on his master's commentaries. In this work he 
chose only two of the ten Upanishads for which Sankara had written his 
commentary - the Taittiriya Upanishad and the Brhadaranyaka 


 
Upanishad. These two are from the Krsna and Sukla- Yajurvedas 
respectively, which means both are from the Yajurveda. Nother 
distinction of the Yajurveda is that of the ten Upanishads 
("Dasopanishad") 
the first and the last are from it 
- the 
Isavasyopanishadnand the Brhadaranyaka Upanishad.  
"Sama" denotes that which brings equipoise or tranquillity to the mind. 
There are four well-known ways of dealing with an opponent or rival: 
sama, dana, bheda and danda. The first method is that of conciliation, 
making an enemy a friend through affection. THe Samaveda enables us to 
befriend the divine forces, even the Paramatman. How do we make a 
person happy? By praising him. If the panegyricis set to music and sung 
he would be doubly pleased. Many of the mantras of the Rgveda are 
intoned with a cadence in the Samaveda; thus we have Samagana. While 
the rks are chanted with the tonal differences of udatta, anudatta and 
svarita, the samans are intoned musically according to certain rules. Our 
music, based on the seven notes (saptasvara), has its origin in Samaveda. 
All deities are pleased with Samagana. We become recipients of their 
grace not only through the offerings made in the sacrificial fire but 
through the intoning of the samans by the udgata. Samagana is 
particularly important to soma sacrifices in which the essence of the 
soma plant is offered as oblation.  
Though the samans are indeed Rgvedic mantras, they are specially 
capable of pleasing the deities and creating Atmic uplift because they are 
intoned musically. This is what gives distinction to the Samaveda. Sri 
Krsna Paramatman says in the Gita : "Vedanam Samavedosmi"(Of Vedas 
Iam samaveda). The Lord is everything, including good as well as bad. 
Even so, as he speaks to Arjuna about the things in which his divine 
quality specially shines forth, he mentions the Samaveda among them. In 
the Lalitha-Sahasranama (The One Thousand Names of the Goddess 
Lalitha), Amba has the name of "Samagana-priya (one who delights in 
Samagana); she is not called "Rgveda-priya" or "Yajurveda-priya". 
Syamasastri refers to the Goddess Minaksi as "Samagana-vinodhini" in 
one of his compositions. In the Siva-astottaram ["Siva astottara-satam, 
the 108 names of Siva], Siva is worshipped thus:"Samapriyaya namah" 


 
The Tevaram extols Siva as one who keeps chanting the Chandoga-Saman 
(Chandoga-Saman odum vayan). Appayya Dikshita has sought to establish 
that Isvara or Siva, Amba and Visnu are "Ratna-trayi" (the Three Gems) 
occupying the highest plane. And all three have a special relationship with 
Samaveda.  
"Atharvan" means a purohita, a priest. There was a sage with this name. 
That which was revealed by the seer Athrvan is the Atharvaveda. It 
contains mantras with which one wards off misfortunes and disasters and 
brings about the destruction of one's enemies. The Atharvaveda is a 
mixture of prose and poetry. The mantras of other Vedas also serve the 
same purpose as those of the Atharvaveda. But what is special about the 
latter is that it has references to deities not mentioned in the others and 
has mantras addressed to fierce spirits. What has come to be known as 
"mantrikam" (magical rites) has its source in this Veda.  
But it is to be noted that the Atharvaveda also contains mantras that 
speak of lofty truths. It has the Prithvi-sukta, the hymn to earth, which 
glorifies this planet with all its creatures.  
The Atharvaveda is noteworthy for the fact that the brahma, the 
supervisor of sacrifices, is its representative. The Atharvaveda, that is its 
Samhita, is rarely chanted in the North and is not heard at all in the 
South. But we must remember that of the ten important Upanishads 
three belong to this Veda - Prasna, Mundaka and Mandukya. It is believed 
that those who seek liberation need nothing to realise their goal other 
than Madukya Upanishad.  
We learn from stone inscriptions that the Atharvaveda had a following 
until some centuries ago. Information about Vedic schools is provided by 
such inscriptions found near Perani, not far from Tindivanam, at 
Ennayiram and a place near Walajabad, in the neighbourhood of 
Kancipuram. Even during the reign of the later Colas the Atharvaveda was 
learned in the Tamil country.  
There are eighteen divisions among the Brahmins of Orissa. One of them 
is made up of "Atharvanikas", that is Atharvavedins. Evev today 


 
Atharvavedins are to be met, though their number is small, in parts of 
Gujarat like Saurashtra and in Kosala( in U. P).  
Gayatri is the mantra of mantras and it is believed to be the essence of 
the three Vedas - which means that the Atharvaveda is excluded here. 
According to one view, before he starts learning the Atharvaveda, a 
brahmacharin must go through a second upanayana ceremony. Generaly, 
the Gayatri imparted to a child at Brahmopadesa ceremony is called 
"Tripada- Gayatri" - it is so called because it has three padas or three feet. 
Each foot encompasses the essential spirit of one Veda, The Atharvaveda 
has a seperate Gayatri and if people belonging to other Vedas want to 
learn this Veda they have to go through a second upanayana to receive 
instruction in it. For the followers of the first three Vedas, however there 
is only one Gayatri and those belonging to any one of them can learn the 
other two Vedas without another upanayana.  
(See chapters 36 and 38 of this part for more on sakhas or recensions of 
the Vedas).  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
 


 

To Discover The One Truth 
All Vedas have one common goal though there are differences among 
their adherents. What is the goal? It is the well-being of the entire world 
and all creatures living in it, and the uplift of the Self of each one of us 
and its everlasting union with the Ultimate Reality.  
We may take pride in the Vedas for another reason also. They do not 
point to a single way and proclaim, "This alone is the path" nor do they 
affirm, "This is the only God" with reference to their own view of the 
Supreme Being. Instead, they declare that, if one adheres to any path 
with faith or worships any deity with devotion, one will be led towards 
the Truth. The scripture of no other religion speaks thus of the many 
paths to liberation. On the contrary, each of them insists that the way 
shown by it alone will lead to liberation. The Vedas alone give expresion 
to the high-minded view that different people may take different paths to 
discover the one and only Truth.  
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 


 

Brahmana and Aranyaka 
So far, in speaking of the Vedas, I have dealt mainly with the Samhita part 
of each sakha or recension. We have already seen that the Samhitas are 
the main text of the Vedas. Apart from them, each sakha has a Brahmana 
and an Aranyaka.  
The Brahmana lays down the various rites - karma - to be performed and 
explains the procedure for the same. It interprets the words of the 
mantras occuring in the Samhita, how they are to be understood in the 
conduct of sacrifices. The Brahmanas constitute a guide for the conduct 
of yajnas.  
The word "Aranyaka" is derived from "aranya". You must have heard of 
places like "Dandakaranya" and "Vedaranya". "Aranya"means a "forest". 
Neither in the Samhita nor in the Brahmana is one urged to go and live in 
a forest. Vedic rites like sacrifices are to be preformed by the householder 
(grhastha) living in a village. But after his mind is rendered pure through 
such rites, he goes to a forest as a recluse to engage himself in 
meditation. It is to qualify for this stage of vanaprastha, to become 
inwardly pure and mellow, that Vedic practices like sacrifices are to be 
followed.  
The Aranyakas prepare one for one's stage in life as an anchorite. They 
expound the concepts inherent in the mantras of the Samhitas and the 
rites detailed in the Brahmanas. In other words, they explain the hidden 
meaning of the Vedas, their metaphorical passages. Indeed, they throw 
light on the esoteric message of our scripture. For the Aranyakas, more 
important than the performance of sacrifices awareness of their inner 
meaning and significance. According to present-day scholars, the 
Aranyakas incorporate the metaphorical passages representing the 
metaphysical inquires conducted by the inmates of forest hermitages.  


 
The Brhadaranyaka Upanishad, as its very name suggests, is both an 
Aranyaka and an Upanishad, and it begins with a philosophical 
explanation of the horse sacrifice.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

The Upanisads 
The Upanisads come at the close of the Aranyakas. If the Samhita is the 
tree, the Brahmana the flower and the Aranyaka the fruit (i. e. in its 
unripe stage), the Upanishads are the mellow fruit - the final fruit or 
"phala". The Upanisads are to the seeker the direct means of realising the 
non-difference between the jivatman (individual self) and the 
Paramatman. The purpose of the Samhita and the Aranyaka is to take us 
to this path of knowledge. Though a number of deities are mentioned 
here and there in the Upanisads, the chief objective of these texts is 
inquiry into the Ultimate Reality and the attainment of the stage in which 
one becomes wise enough and mature enough to sever oneself from all 
karma. It is on this basis that the Vedas are divided into the karmakanda 
and the jnanakanda, the part dealing with works and the part dealing 
with knowledge [enlightenment]. The two are also spoken of as the 
Purvamimamsa and the Uttaramimamsa respectively.  
The great sage Jaimini's sastra based on his inquiry into the karmakanda 
is called Purvamimamsa. His teaching is that the karmakanda, 
constituting the Vedic rites and duties, is itself the final fruit of the 
scripture. Similiarly, Vyasa has in his work, the Brahmasutra, inquired into 
the jnanakanda and come to the conclusion that it represents the 
ultimate purpose of the Vedas. The Upanisadic jnanakanda is small 
compared to the karmakanda. The Jaiminisutra has a thousand sections 
("sahasradhikarani"), while Vyasa's Brahmasutra has only 192 sections. 
Just as the leaves of a tree far outnumber its flowers and fruits, in the 
case of the Vedic tree the karmakanda is far bigger than the jnanakanda.  
In other countries philosophers try to apprehend the Truth on an 
intellectual plane. The Upanisadic inquiry is differnt, its purpose being to 
realise inwardly the Truth perceived by the mind or the intellect. Is it 
enough to know that halva is sweet? You must ecperience its sweetness 
by eating it. How are the Upanisads different from other philosophical 
systems? They (the Upanisads) consist of mantras, sacred syllables, and 


 
their sound is instinct with power. This power transforms the truths 
propounded by them into an inward reality. The philosophical systems of 
other countries do not go beyond making an intellectual inquiry. Here, in 
the Vedas  
-in the karmakanda - a way of life is prescribed for the seeker with actions 
and duties calculated to discipline and purify him. After leading such a life 
and eventually forsaking all action, all Vedic karma, he meditates on the 
truths of the Upanisads. Instead of being mere ideas of intellectual 
perception, these truths will then become a living reality. The highest of 
these truths is that there is no differnce between the individual self and 
the Brahman.  
It is to attain this highest of states in which the individual self dissolves 
inseperably in the Brahman that a man becomes a sannyasin after 
forsaking the very karma that gives him inward maturity. When he is 
initiated into sannyasa he is taught four mantras, the four [principal] 
mahakavyas. The four proclaim the identity of the individual self 
(jivatman) with the Brahman. When these mahavakyas are reflected upon 
through the method known as "nididhyasana", the seeker will arrive at 
the stage of realising the oneness of the individual self and the Brahman. 
The four mahavakyas occur in four differnt Upanisads. Many are the rites 
that you have to perform, many are the prayers you have to recite and 
many are the ways of life you are enjoined to follow - all these according 
to the Samhitas and Brahmanas. But, when it comes to achieving the 
highest ideal, the supreme goal of man, you have no alternative to the 
Upanisads and their mahavakyas.  
"The Brahman means realising the jnana that is the highest" (Prajnanam 
Brahma): this mahavakya occurs in the Aitareya Upanisad of the Rgveda. 
"I am the Brahman" (Aham Brahmasmi) is the mahavakya belonging to 
the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad of the Yajurveda. "That thou art" or "the 
Paramatman and you are the one and the same" (Tat tvam asi) is from 
the Chandogya Upanisad of the samaveda. THe fourth mahavakya, "This 
Self is the Brahman" (Ayam Atma Brahma), is from the Mandukya 
Upanisad of the Atharvaveda.  


 
In his Sopana Pancaka, which contains the sum and the substance of his 
teachings, the Acharya urges us to chant the Samhitas (of the Vedas), 
perform the duties laid down in the Brahmanas and, finally, to meditate 
on the mahavakyas after recieving initiation into them, the purpose being 
our oneing with the Brahman.  
The Vedas find their final expression in the Upanisads. Indeed, the 
Upanisads are called "Vedanta". They form the final part of the Vedas in 
two ways. In each recension we have first the Samhita, then the 
Brahmana which is followed by the Aranyaka, the Upanisad coming at the 
close of the last-mentioned. The Upanisads throw light on the meaning 
and the purpose of the Vedas and represent the end of the scripture in 
more than one sense: while their text forms the concluding part of the 
Vedas, their meaning represents the Ultimmate Truth of the same. A 
village or town has a temple; the temple has its gopuram; and the 
gopuram has a sikhara over it. The Upanisads are the sikhara, the summit, 
of our philosophical [and metaphysical] system.  
"Upa-ni-sad" means to "sit near by". The Upanisads are the teachings 
imparted by a guru to his student sitting by his side [sitting at his feet]. 
You could also take the term to mean "that which takes one to the 
Brahman". "Upanayana" may be interpreted in two ways: leading a child 
to his guru; or leading him to the Brahman. Similiarly, the term Upanisad 
could also be understood in the above two senses.  
If a student sits close to the teacher when he is recieving instruction it 
means that a "rahasya" (a secret or a mystery) is being conveyed to him. 
Such teachings are not meant to be imparted to those who are not 
sufficiently mature and who are not capable of cherishing their value. 
That is why in the Upanisads themselves these words occur where subtle 
and esoteric truths are expounded:"This is Upanisat. This is Upanisat". 
What is held to be a secret in the Vedas is called a "rahasya". In the 
Upanisads the term "Upanisat" is itself used to mean the same.  
(See of this part, entitled "The Ten Upanisads") 
 


 

The Brahmasutra 
I said that every doctrine or system has a sutra (text consisting of 
aphoristic statements), a bhasya (commentary) and a vartika (elucidation 
of the commentary). The systems founded by Sankara, Ramanuja, 
Madhva, Srikantha (acarya of Saiva-Sidhanta) belong to Vedanta. All 
these acaryas cite the authority of the Vedas in support of their 
respective doctrines and they have chosen the same ten Upanisads to 
comment upon according to their different philosophical perceptions. 
The Upanisads are not in the form of sutras; yet for the Vedantic system 
they must be regarded as having the same "place" (or force) as the 
sutras.  
How is a sutra to be understood? It must state truths in an extremely 
terse form. What is expressed in the least possible number of words to 
convey an idea or truth is a sutra, an aphorism. According to this 
definition the Upanisads cannot be said to be sutras. However, there 
does exist a basic text for all Vedantic schools in the form of sutras. This is 
the Brahmasutra.  
In the Brahmasutra, on which there are commentaries according to the 
various philosophical schools, Vyasa presents in an extremely terse form 
the substance of the ten (principal) Upanisads. Since he dwelt under the 
badari tree (jujube) he came to be called "Badarayana" and his work 
became well-known as "Badarayana-sutra". Who or what is man (the 
individual self)? What is the nature of the world (jagat) in which he lives? 
And what is the truth underlying all this? The Brahmasutra, which is a 
basic text of all Vedantic schools, seeks to answer these fundamental 
questions. Vyasa does not project his personal views in his work. All he 
does is to make a penetrating study of the science of Vedanta that is 
already constituted by the Upanisads. Since it is an inquiry into the 
Upanisads which form the latter part of the Vedas, the Brahmasutra is 
called "Uttaramimamsa"  


 
There are 555 sutras in the Brahmasutra which is divided into four 
chapters, each consisting of four padas (or "feet"). Altogether there are 
 sections or "adhikaranas" in it. The Brahmasutra is also called 
"Bhiksu-sutra" since it deals with sannyasa, the final goal of the seeker. 
And, because it is all about the Self in the body, it has another name, 
"Sariraka".  
"Sutra" literally means a rope or string. The word occurs in the term 
"mangala-sutra", the thread worn by the bride at her wedding. Keeping 
the meaning of thread or string in mind, our Acarya has made a pun on 
the word in his commentary: "Vedanta-vakya-kusuma-grathanarthatvat 
sutranam". If the flowers that are Upanisads in the tree called the Vedas 
are strewn all over the earth, how can we gather them to make a 
garland? Our Acarya remarks that in the Brahmasutra the flowers are the 
Upanisads are strung together to form a garland.  
All Hindu philosophical systems are based on the Brahmasutra, but the 
Brahmasutra itself is based on the Upanisads. That is why it has become 
customary to describe all Vedic schools of thought as "Upanisadic 
systems". When Westerners keep extolling our philosophy, chanting, 
"Vedanta! Vedanta!” they have in mind the Upanisads. If a person turns 
against the petty pleasures of this world and makes a remark suggestive 
of jnana, people tell him, "Arre, are you mouthing Vedanta? "  
If the Vedas were personified as Purusa, the Upanisads would be his head 
or crown. That is why these texts are called "Sruti-siras".  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Veda and Vedanta: Are They Opposed to One Another? 
The rituals mentioned in the karmakanda of the Vedas are sought to be 
negated in the jnanakanda which is also part of the same scripture. While 
the karmakanda enjoins upon you the worship of various deities and lays 
down rules for the same, the jnanakanda constituted by the Upanisads 
ridicules the worshipper of deities as a dim-witted person no better than 
a beast.  
This seems strange, the latter part of the Vedas contradicting the former 
part. The first part deals throughout with karma, while the second or 
concluding part is all about jnana. Owing to this difference, people have 
gone so far as to divide our scripture into two sections: the Vedas (that is 
the first part) to mean the karmakanda and the Upanisads (Vedanta) to 
mean the jnanakanda.  
Vedanta it is that Lord teaches us in the Gita and in it he lashes out 
against the karmakanda. It is generally believed that the Buddha and 
Mahavira were the first to attack the Vedas. It is not so. Sir Krsna 
Paramatman himself spoke against them long before these two religious 
leaders. At one place in the Gita he says to Arjuna:"The Vedas are 
associated with the three qualities of sattva, rajas and tamas. You must 
transcend these three qualities. Full of desire, they (the practitioners of 
Vedic rituals) long for paradise and keep thinking of pleasures and 
material prosperity. They are born again and again and their minds are 
never fixed in samadhi, these men clinging to Vedic rituals. “In another 
passage Krsna declares: "Not by the Vedas am I to be realised, nor by 
sacrifices nor by much study . . . .” 
Does not such talk contradict all that I have spoken so far about the 
Vedas, that they are the source of all our dharma?  
With some thinking we will realise that there is in fact no contradiction. 
Would it be possible for us, in our present condition, to go beyond the 


 
three gunas even to the slightest extent and realise the true state of the 
Self spoken of in the Upanisads? The purpose of the Vedic rituals is to 
take us, by degrees, to this state. So long as we believe that the world is 
real we worship the deities so as to be vouchsafed happiness. And this 
world, which we think is real, is also benefited by such worship. Thinking 
the deities to be real, we help them and in return we are helped by them. 
Living happily on this earth we long to go to the world of the celestials 
and enjoy the pleasures of paradise. So far so good. But if we stopped at 
this stage would it not mean losing sight of our supreme objective? Is not 
this objective, this goal, our becoming one with the Paramatman? Would 
it not be foolish to ignore this great ideal of ours and still cling to 
mundane happiness?  
In our present state of immaturity it is not possible to think of the world 
being unreal. Recognising this, the Vedas provide us the rituals to be 
performed for happiness in this world. Because of our inadequacies we 
are unable to devote ourselves to a formless Paramatman from whom we 
are not different. So the Vedas have devised a system in which a number 
of deities are worshipped. But, in course of time, as we perform the 
rituals and worship the deities, we must make efforts to advance to the 
state of wisdom and enlightenment in which the world will be seen to be 
unreal and the rites will become unnecessary. Instead of worshipping 
many deities, we must reach the state in which we will recognise that we 
have no existence other than that of our being dissolved in the 
Paramatman. We must perform Vedic sacraments with the knowledge 
that they prepare us to go to this state by making our mind pure and one-
pointed.  
If we perform rituals with the sole idea of worldly happiness and carry on 
trade with the celestials by conducting sacrifices (offering them oblations 
and receiving benefits from them in return), we will never come face to 
face with the Truth. Even if we go to the world of the celestials, we will 
not be blessed with Self-realisation. Our residence in paradise is 
commensurate with the merit we earn here and is not permanent. 
Sooner or later we will have to return to this world and be in the womb of 
a mother. The ritual worship and other sacraments of the Vedas are to 


 
some extent the result of making an adjustment to our present immature 
state of mind. But their real purpose is to take us forward gradually from 
this very immature state and illumine us within. It would be wrong to 
refuse to go beyond the stage of ritual worship.  
If, to begin with, it is not right to refuse all at once to perform Vedic rites, 
it would be equally not right, subsequently, to refuse to give them up. 
Nowadays, people are averse to ritual to start with itself. "What? " they 
exclaim. "Who wants to perform sacrifices? Why should we chant the 
Vedas? Let us go directly to the Upanisads. “Some of them can speak 
eloquently about the Upanisads from a mere intellectual understanding 
of them. But none has the inward experience of the truths propounded in 
them and we do not see them emerging as men of detachment with a 
true awareness of the Self. The reason for this is that they have not 
prepared themselves for this higher state of perception through the 
performance of rituals. If this is wrong in one sense, refusal to take the 
path of jnana from that of karma is equally not justifiable.  
If one has to qualify for the B. A. degree one has to begin at the beginning 
- one has to progress from the first standard all the way to the degree 
course. One cannot naturally join the B. A. class without qualifying for it. 
At the same time, is it not absurd to remain all the time as a failure in the 
first standard itself?  
In the old days there were many people belonging to the latter category 
(that is people who refused to take the path of knowledge and wished to 
remain wedded to the path of karma). Now people belonging to the 
former category predominate (that is those who want to take the path of 
jnana, without being prepared for it through karma). During the time of 
Sri Krsna also the majority clung to rituals. His criticism is directed against 
them, 
against 
those 
who 
perform 
Vedic 
sacraments 
without 
understanding their purpose and who fail to go beyond them. 
Unfortunately, this is mistaken for criticism of the Vedas themselves. The 
Lord could never have attacked the Vedas per se. After all, it was to save 
them that he descended to earth again and again.  


 
In keeping with his times, Krsna Paramatman spoke against people who 
confined themselves to the narrow path of karma. If he were to descend 
to earth again to teach us, he would turn against those who plunge into a 
study of the Upanisads, spurning Vedic rites. It seems to me that he 
would be more severe in his criticism of these people that he was against 
those who were obsessed with karma.  
Graduating to the Upanisads without being prepared for them through 
the performance of Vedic rites is a greater offence than failure to go 
along the path of jnana from that of karma. After all, to repeat what I said 
before, on has to go through the primary and secondary stages of 
education before qualifying for admission to college. The man who insists 
on being admitted to the B. A. class without qualifying for it is not 
amenable to any suggestion. The one who wants to remain in the first 
standard learns at least something; the other type is incapable of learning 
anything.  
The Vedas and Vedanta are not at variance with one another. The 
karmakanda prepares us for Vedanta or the jananakanda. The former has 
to do with this world and with many deities and its adherents are subject 
to the three gunas. But it is the first step to go beyond the three gunas 
and the sever oneself from worldly existence. If we perform the rites laid 
down in the karmakanda, keeping in mind their true purpose, we shall 
naturally be qualifying for the jnanakanda.  
Some questions arise here. The sound of the Vedas and the sacrifices 
benefit not only the person who chants the Vedas and performs the 
sacrifices but all creatures. If such a man (that is like the one who learns 
the Vedas and conducts sacrifices) renounces the world thinking it to be 
unreal and becomes a jnanin, what will happen to the world, to its 
welfare? Even if you think that the world is unreal, it is real in the sense 
that it is the cause of so much suffering. The jnanin does not perform any 
rites like sacrifices so as to rid the world of its troubles. Who will then 
work for the welfare of the world?  
The answer: the jnanin is an exalted state of awareness and while being 
in it he does not have to perform any sacrifices or other rites to ensure 


 
the good of the world. His life itself is a sacrifice, a yagna, and through 
him the world will receive the Lord's blessings even if he looks upon it as 
unreal or a "sport" of the Supreme Being. Whey do people flock to a 
jnanin? Why do they fall at his feet even if he keeps himself aloof from 
them? It is because they receive his grace. Whether or not he wants to 
give any blessings, the Lord's grace flows into this world through him. In 
his very presence people feel tranquil and, sometimes, even their worldly 
desires are satisfied. A jnanin who realises within that there is no deity 
apart from himself can give his blessings in greater measure than the 
deities themselves. So it is wrong to think that, since he does not perform 
sacrifices, he does not do anything for the good of the world.  
Followers of other faiths are mistaken in their view of Hinduism. they 
separate the Vedantic system from the Vedic system of sacraments and 
observe: "To the Hindus what matters is individual salvation. They ignore 
the wellbeing of the world. Meditation, yoga, samadhi are a means of 
individual liberation. Hindus are unlike the followers of Jesus Christ and 
the Prophet Mohammed because they do not preach love and 
brotherhood nor do they promote the growth of social consciousness 
among themselves. "  
One who has a proper understanding of our religion will recognise that it 
is wrong to divide Hinduism into two compartments, the Vedic religion 
and the Vedantic. As a sannyasin in the final stage of his life a man 
becomes a Vedantin and jnanin and merits liberation for himself. But we 
must remember that he leaves behind him another stage of life in which 
he has worked for the welfare of the world by chanting the Vedas and by 
performing rituals. Indeed it was because of this work that he became 
mentally pure and qualified for the Vedantic path and for his own release 
from worldly existence.  
Also to be noted is that even after achieving perfection in Vedanta and 
becoming a jnanin, he keeps blessing the world without performing any 
rites and, indeed, by virtue of his mere presence. I am not examining here 
the big question of which of the two goals of a religion is greater, 
individual liberation or collective welfare. That is a separate subject. Let 


 
us leave aside for the present the question of social welfare. The question 
to be answered now is this: If an individual owing allegiance to a religion 
does not become a jnanin with inward experience of the Truth of the 
Supreme Being, what does it matter whether or not that religion exists?  
All rituals, all worship, are meant to make a man aware of the Reality. 
Varnasrama with its one hundred thousand differences and with its 
countless stipulations as to who can do what is a preliminary 
arrangement to arrive at the stage in which there is a oneing of all, with 
all the differences banished. If we fail to go beyond the stage of karma, 
observing all the differences of varnasrama, we shall be committing a 
wrong. Krsna Paramatman directs his criticism against those who claim 
that the karmakanda of the Vedas alone matters, that the jnanakanda 
does not serve any purpose. In doing so he seems to attack the Vedas 
themselves. In reality he faults those who are, in his words, "Veda-vada-
ratah", those who are deceived by flowery accounts of the Vedas without 
realising their true meaning and those who do not exert themselves to 
rise to the level of experiential jnana.  
To start with, we must perform the rites prescribed by the Vedas. But in 
this there must be the realisation that they are but steps leading us to the 
higher state in which we will ultimately find bliss in our Self, a state in 
which there will be neither rites nor duties to perform. Similarly, to start 
with, the deities must be worshipped but again with the conviction that 
such worship serves the ultimate purpose of arriving at the point where 
we will recognise that the worshipper and the worshipped are one. Thus, 
to begin with, all differences in functions must be recognised and life 
lived according to them. Different divisions of people have different 
duties, and the customs and rites assigned to each are such as to help 
them in the proper discharge of those duties. But in the very process of 
maintaining such differences there must be the conviction within that 
ultimately there are no differences, that all are one.  
If the Vedas are to be learned and chanted and if the Vedic rituals are to 
be practiced - and the Vedas must be learned and chanted even as the 
Vedic rituals must be practiced - it is because in this way we shall be led 


 
to that supreme experience of the Reality in which there will be no need 
for these very Vedas. First the flowers, and from them the fruit. Though 
the flower looks beautiful, the fruit emerges only when it wilts or falls to 
earth. A tree does not fruit before it flowers. In the same way, to plunge 
into Vedanta without first going through a life of Vedic discipline is 
neither wise nor in keeping with reality. It is equally wrong to remain 
confined to the karmakanda and refuse to make an effort to acquire 
Vedantic knowledge: it is like wishing that we must have only flowers and 
no fruits. There must be a sense of balance, a sense of proportion, in 
everything we do.  
There is a passage in the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad similar to that in the 
Gita: "He who becomes aware of the nature of the Atman - for him the 
Vedas will no longer be Vedas, the gods will cease to be gods, Brahmins 
will no longer be, Brahmins. . . . . . . ".  
As we have already seen, "Sruti" by which we mean the Vedas, contains 
not only the Samhitas but also the Brahmanas, Aranyakas and the 
Upanisads. The Gita is not Sruti and it is customary to regard it as 
belonging to the category of Smrti. I shall speak to you later about Smrti 
when I deal with Dharmasastra, one of the fourteen branches of learning 
(caturdasa-vidya). The Smrti that is the Gita observes: "Vedic rites and 
worship are futile if they do not take you to the path of jnana. " The 
Puranas too are among the three categories of authoritative texts of our 
religion - the other two being Sruti and Smriti - and they have the same 
view about a life confined to rituals. The sages in the Daruka forest were 
proud about their sacrificial worship, but Paramesvara curbed their pride 
-how he did so is narrated in the Saiva Puranas. The Bhagavata tells us 
how the yajnapatnis, the simple and unpretentious wives of the sages, 
were able to see Mahavisnu as he appeared in the form of the 
Yajnapurusa. But their husbands who were wedded to ritual could not 
see the Lord and very much regretted it.  
Sruti is higher as an authority than Smriti or the Puranas. I referred to a 
passage from the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad to show that we have the 
testimony of the Sruti itself to prove that rituals are not enough for Atmic 


 
advancement. However, it might be argued that Sruti itself is divided into 
the karmakanda and the jnanakanda and that, after all, it is natural that in 
the jnanakanda the quest for jnana should be spoken of highly. So there is 
nothing remarkable about it declaring that rituals cannot be the final goal 
of the seeker.  
However, in the karmakanda itself there is criticism of the view that 
rituals are all and they are the ultimate goal. Sri Krsna declares in the Gita 
that it is laudable to perform the many sacrifices mentioned in the Vedas 
realising their true purpose ("Evam bahuvidha yajna vitata Brahmano 
mukhe"). However, all these sacraments have their culmination in jnana 
("Sarvam karm'akhilam Partha jnana parisamapyate").  
The same idea is expressed forcefully through an illustration in the Vedic 
karmakanda itself: "He who performs only rituals, without wakening to 
Isvara feeds the fire to raise the smoke and nothing else" (Taittiriya 
Kathakam, first prasna, last anuvaka, fourth vakya). If you feed the fire 
with firewood you must keep the pot over it to cook rice. Once who does 
not exert oneself to be "cooked" in jnana is like the man who lights the 
kitchen fire without keeping the cooking pot on it. This is what the Vedas 
say. What purpose is served by building a big sacrificial fire if you do not 
offer the oblations in it? The result will be only smoke and more smoke. A 
sacrifice must be performed with the consciousness that you are offering 
the fruit of your karma itself as an oblation. Otherwise there will be 
nothing but smoke.  
"The Self must be offered as an oblation in the fire of the Brahman. All 
sensual pleasures must be offered in the fire of self-control. The five vital 
breaths must be given over in sacrifice in one another ", says the Gita. 
Vedic sacrifices involving materials and works have this goal. A man may 
perform any number of sacrifices but he would be a fool to perform them 
without realising this truth. The Vedas too say that such a man in 
unintelligent. What do you expect his buddhi (intuitive intelligence) to 
become> It would also be like the smoke of the sacrificial fire that 
darkens everything in its course and ends up in nothing.  


 
When Vedic rites are performed in a spirit of dedication to Isvara they will 
loosen your ties little by little, instead of keeping you bound to this world. 
If you perform rites to please the Lord, without expecting any reward, 
your mind will be cleansed and you will transcend the three gunas. This is 
the meaning and purpose of "yajna". Is not the word understood in 
English as "sacrifice"? "Yaga" also means sacrifice, "tyaga". When an 
offering is placed in the fire we say "na mama" ("not mine"): it is this 
attitude of self-denial that is the life and soul of a sacrificial rite. Is it 
possible to retrieve what has been offered in the fire? Even if it were, it 
would soon disintegrate. In this way you must reduce your ego-sense to 
ashes, also your possessiveness ("ahamkara-mamakara"). One who 
performs a sacrifice without being conscious of such high ideals but with 
the purpose of petty gains like ascending to paradise - is he not a fool?  
There is no contradiction between the karmakanda and the jnanakanda. 
In the karmakanda itself jnana is given an elevated place and the 
limitations of karma mentioned. There are hymns incorporating high 
philosophical truths in the Samhita part itself of the Vedas like, for 
instance, the "Nasadiyasukta", the "Purusasukta" and the "Tryambaka 
mantra". Also to be noted is the fact that the Upanisads themselves 
mention rites (karma) like the "Naciketagni". How would you explain this 
if the karmakanda and the jnanakanda were opposed to one another? 
The underlying idea is that we must graduate from the one to the other 
[from karma to jnana].  
As we have already seen, the Gita (which is a Smrti) says that sacraments 
performed in a spirit of dedication to Isvara are a means of obtaining 
jnana. The same idea is found expressed in a Sruti text, the Isavasya 
Upanisad. The first of the ten major Upanisads, it commences with the 
statement : "Live a hundred years performing Vedic rites. But do so in a 
spirit of dedication to Isvara. Then it will not keep you bound. " So it 
would be wrong to believe that the Upanisads teach inaction.  
Karma, however, is not the goal of the Vedas. You must go beyond the 
stage of performing Vedic rituals even if they be for such a noble purpose 
as that of creating welfare in the world, cleansing your consciousness and 


 
propitiating the deities. Your must rise higher to the plane where you will 
realise that nothing other than the Paramatman exists, that the 
phenomenal world is unreal, that there are no entities called deities 
(devatas) with an independent existence of their own and that there is no 
"I". When you come to this state there will be no need for the Vedas too 
for you: this is stated in the Vedas themselves.  
The Vedas are the laws laid down by Paramesvara. All people, all his 
subjects, must obey them. But there is no need for the man who is always 
steeped inwardly as well as outwardly in the Reality that is the 
Paramatman to refer to this law with respect to all his actions. That is 
why it is said that for such men the Vedas cease to be Vedas. (We too do 
not respect the Vedas as the law. For us also the Vedas are not Vedas. But 
we do not have even a whiff of jnana!).  
If you do not realise that the karmakanda is a means to take you to the 
"paravidya" that is constituted by the Upanisads, then the Vedas (that is 
their karmakanda) is an apara vidya like any other subject such as history 
or geography that is learned at school. It is for this reason that the 
Mundaka Upanisad includes the Vedas in the category of apara-vidya. 
This Upanisad describes a person who performs Vedic rites for ephemeral 
enjoyments, mundane benefits, as a mere beast (pasu).  
To the jnanin who is united with the Paramatman the deities are not 
entities outside of himself for they too have emanated from the same 
Parmatman. Indeed, these deities inhere in him since he is dissolved in 
the Paramatman to become the Paramatman. If he does not have such 
inward experience of being dissolved in the Supreme Godhead, when he 
worships a deity as an entity separate from him, he must do so regarding 
it as integral to the Atman. Even if it be necessary to carry out all our 
outward functions according a system based on differences, we must 
always be conscious of the truth that in the end we will be united with 
that fundamental Reality in which all these differences wil cease to exist. 
The Brhadaranyaka Upanisad declares: "He who worships the deities as 
entities entirely separate from him does not know the truth. For the gods 
he is like a pasu (beast)". (1.4.10) 


 
The word "pasu" is very meaningful here. In a superficial sense it means 
one who does not possess the sixth sense of a human and lives on an 
animal level. Let me tell you the inner meaning. Why do we keep a cow? 
Because it gives us milk. That is why we feed it grass, oil cake, cottonseed 
and so on. We offer oblations in the fire to please the gods. In return they 
grant us blessings in the form of rain, crops, etc. These celestials, as we 
have seen, are superior to us but they do not know the bliss that is 
boundless. Indeed they are unaware of even a fraction of the bliss that a 
jnanin who is but a mortal experiences.  
The Taittiriya Upanisad (2. 8. 1) and the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad (4. 3. 
) deal with the ananda, bliss, experienced by various orders like 
bumans, the fathers, the celestials. We have here something of an 
arithmetical  
table on bliss. The bliss experienced by each order is a hundred times 
greater than that experienced by the preceding one - it is all in the 
ascending order. Among the celestials the degrees of bliss known to 
Indra, Brhaspati and Prajapati are given separately. The highest bliss is 
experienced by the jnanin, the bliss of knowing the Brahman 
(Brahmananda). Thus the devas (celestials) are deficient in the matter of 
bliss. Also, they do not make any effort to attain to the highest state of 
blessedness. They look forward to the gains to be made from us, from the 
sacrifices we perform from our worship. For this reason they do not like 
us humans to become jnanins. This is clearly stated in the Brhadranyaka 
Upanisad: "The celestials do not like humans who realise the Self" 
(1.4.10). Why? When a man realises himself he will not perform any 
sacrifices and other rites to please the deities.  
Take the case of our domestic servant. We pay him a small wage and we 
know that we will have to pay more if we appoint a new man in his place. 
He wants to go to school, pass some examination or other so that, 
eventually, he will be able to take some better job and do well in life. If he 
really appeared for an examination, would we honestly like him to pass? 
No. We would like him to fail. If he passes he will find a better job for 
himself and have a better "status" than now. We may not find it easy to 


 
hire a new servant on the same small wages. We are similarly situated in 
our relationship to the celestials. They will not like us to become jnanins 
because we will then cease to worship them.  
If a jnanin is not dear to the devas, it follows that one who is not jnanin is 
dear to them. In other words he who is dear to the gods is an ajnanin. 
That is why in grammar an idiot ("murkha") has the name of 
"devanampriya:" ("dear to the gods or celestials "). This term has its 
source in the Upanisads. In his commentary on the Brahmasutra, Sankara 
Bhagavatpada says to one who maintains that the Paramatman and the 
jivatman (individual self) are different: "Idam tavad devanamapriyah 
prastavyah" (This is what you idiot should be asked). You had probably 
thought that "devanampriya" to be a big title of honour.  
In the Asokan edicts the emperor is referred to as "devanampriya". Even 
before the time of Asoka, Panini had said that the term meant an idiot. 
For this reason it would be wrong to believe that the followers of the 
Vedic religion in later times took the word to mean an idiot with the 
deliberate intent of denigrating the Buddhist Asoka. Our Acarya, as I have 
said earlier, refers in his commentary on the Brahmasutra to one who 
does not know the true purpose of the Vedas as a "devanampriya", 
meaning by the term an "idiot". But now in the Asokan edicts the same 
appellation in given to one opposed to the Vedas, one who belongs to the 
non-vedic Buddhist religion.  
One who follows the Vedic tradition and becomes a jnanin by learning the 
truths propounded in the Upanisads no longer performs sacrifices to 
please the gods. No more will he be dear to them now. Since sacrifinces 
are prohibited in Buddhism obviously the celestials do not like followers 
of that religion. Then why is Asoka, who was a great supporter of 
Buddhism, called "devanamapriya"? As a Buddhist he would not have 
performed Vedic rituals, but at the same time he would not have come 
under the influence of Vedanta to become a jnanin. Asoka must have 
earned the appellation of "devanamapriya" in the sense that anyone who 
did not follow the teachings of Vedanta does not become a jnanin.  


 
(It is also likely that someone not acquainted with such matters, a 
sculptor or a government official, must have inscribed the title 
"devanampriya" thinking it to be highly complimentary to the emperor. )  
When a man, dear to the celestials, ceases to perform sacrifices on 
turning to the path of jnana, they place obstacles before him. We read in 
the Puranas stories of the apsarases who disturb the sages in meditation 
and austerities.  
Until a man becomes a jnanin he keeps performing the rites intended for 
the celestials. In return they bring him various benefits. They have to be 
given their share of the oblations. If a man helps us we have to help him 
in return. Is that not so? We have to help the celestials who bring us rain 
and other benefits. That is why we perform sacrifices. Some Brahmin or 
other gives the "havirbhaga" (a share in the oblations) to the devas, doing 
so as a representative of us all. It is like one man paying taxes on behalf of 
all.  
To the celestials a person who performs Vedic rituals is like a milch cow. 
When the cow goes dry what use is it to man (its owner)? The celestials 
will be pleased with a person so long as he remains a milch cow 
(performing sacrifices and other rites). If he ceases to be a milch cow they 
will dislike him, cause him suffering. That means man is like a cow to the 
devas in more that one sense: in the sense that he is ignorant (not a 
jnanin); and in the sense that they do not protect him when he stops 
performing rites (do we take care of a cow that has gone dry?).  
It is part of wisdom and enlightenment to realise that the gods are not 
separate from us. Vedanta points a way to realise this truth, and shows us 
how we may free ourselves from works and even worship of the gods and 
reach the stage where there is no difference between us and all the rest. 
Let me tell you about the great esteem in which Vedanta has been held in 
this country.  
Though the Vedas are infinite, the seers have brought us only a few of 
them. But since, in this age of Kali, even these are difficult to master, they 
divided them into 1, 180 sakhas or recensions, each with Samhita, 


 
Brahmana, Aranyaka and Upanisad. Later, out of these many passed into 
oblivion. Now the remaining too are threatened with extinction because 
people belonging to this generation have brought Vedic studies to such a 
sad state and earned merit thereby!  
We have some Upanisads belonging to recensions of which neither the 
Samhitas nor the Brahmanas are studied. Even their texts are not 
available. The Samhita of the Sankhayana Sakha of the Rgveda is no 
longer chanted now; the fact is we have lost it. But the Kausitaki Upanisad 
which is a part of this recension is still extant. The Baskala 
Mantropanisad, also from the Rgveda, is still available: I am told a palm-
leaf manuscipt of the same is in the Adyar Library, Madras. But neither 
the Samhita nor the Brahmana of the Baskala Sakha is known to us. The 
Katha Upanisad belongs to the Katha Sakha of the Krsna-Yajurveda. Did I 
not tell you that the Upanisad comes at the end of the Aranyaka? The 
Kathopanisad is very famous and is one of the major Upanisads; but its 
Aranyaka is not available. The Atharvaveda is totally forgotten in the 
South and is studied but in one or two parts of the country. But still 
extant are Prasna, Mundaka and Mandukya which belong to this Veda 
and which form part of the Dasopanisad.  
All this points to the fact that, while parts of many Vedic recensions that 
pertain to karma or works have become extinct or have been forgotten, 
many of the Upanisads which are the means of jnana have been 
preserved. Great care has been taken to protect that part of our heritage 
which shows us the way to wisdom and light.  
The Upanisads are believed to have been large in number. Two hundred 
years ago, an ascetic belonging to Kancipuram wrote a commentary on 
 Upanisads. He earned the name of "Upanisad Brahmendra". His 
monastic institution is still to be seen in Kanci.  
 
 
 


 

The Ten Upanasids 
Sankara Bhagavatpada selected ten out of the numerous Upanisads to 
comment upon from the non-dualistic point of view. Ramanuja, Madhva 
and others who came after him wrote commentaries on the same based 
on their own philosophical points of view. These ten Upanisads are listed 
in the following stanza for the names to be easily remembered.  
Isa-Kena-Katha-Prasna-Munda-Mandukya-Tittari  
Aitareyan ca Chandogyam Brhadranyakam dasa  
Sankara has followed the same order in his Bhasya (commentary).  
"Isa" is Isavasya Upanisad (Isavasyopanishad). It occurs towards the end 
of the Samhita of Sukla-Yajurveda. The name of this Upanisad is derived 
from its very first word, "Isavasya". The next, "Kena", is Kenopanisad. The 
Isavasyopanisad proclaims that the entire world is pervaded by Isvara and 
that we must dedicate all our works to him and attain the Paramatman.  
An elephant made of wood looks real to a child. Grown-ups realise that, 
though it resembles an elephant in shape, it is really wood. To the child 
the wood is concealed, revealing the elephant; to the grown-up the 
animal is hidden revealing the wood. Similarly, all this world and the five 
elements are made of the timber called the Paramatman. We must learn 
to look upon all this as the Supreme Godhead.  
Marattai maraittadu mamada yanai  
Marattil maraindadu mamada yanai  
Parattai maraittadu parmudal bhutam  
Parattil maraindadu parmudal bhutam  
Tirumalar says in this stanza that, because of our being accustomed to 
seeing the five elements all the time, we must not forget that the 
Paramatman is hidden in them. We must recognise that it is indeed he 


 
who pervades them and learn to see that everything is instinct with 
Isvara. Sankara expresses exactly the same idea in his Bhasya when he 
speaks of "dantini daru vikare". I don't wish to enter into a debate as to 
who came first, Tirumular or Sankara. Great men think alike.  
The Kenopanisad is also called the Talavakara Upanisad since it occurs in 
the Talavakara Brahmana of the Jaimini Sakha of the Samaveda. This 
Upanisad contains a story about the devas. The celestials in their 
arrogance failed to recognise the Supreme Being whose crown and feet 
are unknown. Ambika then appeared to give instruction in jnana to Indra, 
the king of the devas. She explained to him that all our power emanated 
from the one Great Power, from the one Mahasakti.  
The Acarya has written two types of commentaries for this Upanisad, the 
first word by word as in the case of the other Upanisads and the second 
sentence by sentence. In his Saundaryalahari he has the Kenopanisad in 
mind when he prays to Amba: "Place your feet on my head, the feet that 
are held by Mother Veda.” The Upanisads (Vedanta) are also called 
"Veda-siras", "Sruti-siras", the "head" or "crown" of the Vedas - the 
Upanisads which are the "end" of the Vedas (Vedanta) are also their 
crown. To say that Amba's feet are placed on the head of Mother Veda 
means that they are held by the Upanisads. It is in the Kenopanisad that 
we see Amba appearing as Jnanambika (the goddess of jnana). 
"Samaganapriya" is one of her names in the Lalitasahasranama (The One 
Thousand Names of Lalita): this is in keeping with the fact that Amba's 
glory is specially revealed in an Upanisad belonging to the Samaveda.  
What we see is the object and who see it are the subject: the seen is the 
object, the seer is the subject. We can see our body as an object, we can 
know about it, know whether it is well or ill. It follows that there is an 
entity other than it that sees it, the subject called "we". That which sees is 
the Atman. The subject called the Atman cannot be known by anything 
else. If it can be known, it also becomes an object and it would further 
mean that there is another entity that sees: and that will be the true 
"we". The Atman that is the true "we" can only be the subject and never 
the object. We may keep aside objects like the body and experience 


 
ourselves, the subject called "we", but we cannot know the "we". "To 
know" means that there is something other than ourselves to be known. 
It would be absurd to regard the Atman as something other than 
ourselves. The true "we" is the Atman, the Self. "Knowing " it implies that 
that which knows it("we") is different from that which is known (the Self). 
What can be there that is different in us from our true Self? What is it 
that is other than the Self that can know the Self? Nothing. We say 
"Atmajnana" which literally means "knowing the Atman". But is the 
phrase, "knowing the Atman", used in the sense of a subject knowing an 
object? No. "Atmajnana" means the Self experiencing itself, and that is 
how "jnana" or "knowing" is to be understood. This is the reason why the 
Kenopanisad says that "he who says that he knows the Atman does not 
know it". It goes on:"He who says that he does not know knows. He who 
thinks that he knows does not know and he who thinks he does not know 
knows. "  
The Kathopanisad comes next. It occurs in the Katha Sakha of the Krsna 
Yajurveda. this Upanisad contains the teachings imparted by Yama to the 
brahmacarin Naciketas. It begins as a story and leads up to the exposition 
of profound philosophical truths. The Gita contains quotations from this 
Upanisad.  
What I said just now about the subject-object relationship is explained in 
depth in the concluding part of the Kathopanisad. How do we remove the 
ear of grain from the stalk? And how do we draw the pith from the reed? 
Similarly, we must draw the subject that is the Self from the object that is 
the body, says the Kathopanishad. "Desire, anger, hatred, fear, all these 
appertain to the mind, not to the Self. Hunger, thirst and so on appertain 
to the body - they are not 'mine'. " By constant practice we must learn to 
reject all such things as do not belong to the Self by "objectifying them". 
If we do so with concentration, in due course we will be able to overcome 
the idea that has taken root in us that the body and the mind constitute 
the "we". We can then exist as the immaculate Self without the 
impurities tainting the body and the mind.  


 
The Kathopanisad compares the spiritual exercise of separating the Self 
from the body and the mind to that of drawing off the pith, bright, pure 
and soft, from the reed. Before you is the spadix of a plantain. When it 
wilts do you also droop? Think of the body as a lump of flesh closer to you 
than this spadix of the plantain. This spadix is not the subject that is "we", 
but the object. On the same lines you must become accustomed to think 
of the body as an object in relation to the subject that is the Self. During 
our life in this world itself - during the time we seem to exist in our body - 
we must learn to treat the body as not "me", not "mine". Moksa or 
liberation does not necessarily mean ascending to another world like 
Kailasa or Vaikuntha. It can be attained here and now. What is moksa? It 
is everlasting bliss that comes of being freed from all burden. He who 
lives delighting in his Self in this world itself without any awareness of his 
body is called a "jivanmukta". The supreme goal of the Vedas and 
Vedanta is making a man a jivanmukta.  
Krsna Paramatman speaks of the same idea in the Gita. He who, while yet 
in this world ("ihaiva"), controls his desire and anger before he is released 
from his body ("prak sariravimoksanat") - he will remain integrated (in 
yoga) and achieve everlasting bliss. "Ihaiva" = "iha eva", while yet in this 
world. If you realise the Self, as an inner experience, while yet in this 
world, at the time of your death you will not be aware that your body is 
severed from you. The reason is that even before your death, when you 
are yet in this world, the body does not exist for you. So is there any need 
for what is called death to destroy it? There is no death for the man who 
has absolute realisation of his body being not "he" (when you mention 
the body the mind is also included in it). Where is the question of his 
dying if he knows that the body is not "me" (that is "he")? The death is 
only for his body.  
The man who has no death thus becomes "amrta" ("immortal"). Hymns 
like the Purusasukta which appear in the karmakanda of the Vedas also 
speak of such deathlessness. This idea recurs throughout the Upanisads.  
The body, and the mind that functions through it, are the cause of 
sorrow. All religions are agreed that liberation is a state in which sorrow 


 
gives place to everlasting happiness. However, according to religious 
traditions other than Advaita (non-dualism), a man has to go to some 
other world for such bliss after his death. Sankara Bhagavatpada 
establishes that true liberation can be won in this world itself if one 
ceases to identify oneself totally with the body and remains rooted in the 
Self.  
"Tadetat asariratvam moksakhyam", so he proclaims in his Sutrabhasya 
(1. 1. 4). The word "asariri" is popularly understood as a voice we hear 
without knowing its origin (disembodied voice). It means to be without a 
body. "Asariratvam", bodylessness (being incorporeal), is a state in which 
one is not conscious of the existence of one's body. This is liberation, says 
the Acaya. To remain bodyless, disincarnate, does not mean committing 
suicide. When we reduce our desires little by little a stage will be reached 
when they will be totally rooted out. When they are thus eradicated, 
consciousness of the body will naturally cease too. The Self alone will 
remain then, shining. To arrive at such a state is not necessary to voyage 
to another world. It is this idea that the Vedas and Vedanta refer to when 
they say "Ihaiva, ihaiva" (Here itself, here itself) - the ideal of liberation 
here and now.  
We have two enemies who prevent us from reaching the state of amrta 
(deathlessness): according to the Gita they are desire and anger. The 
basis for this is the Chandogya Upanisad (8. 12. 1) which is a part of the 
Sruti - the passage in which "priya apriya" occurs: the words mean "what 
one likes and what one hates". The first is denoted  
by desire, of Kama, the second by anger. The Chandogya Upanisad says 
that one who has no body (that is one who is not conscious of his body) is 
not affected either by desire or by anger. That is (it says): "If you wish to 
be free from the evils of desire and anger you ought to make ourself 
without your body (free yourself of our body) right now when you are yet 
in this world".  
A jivatman (individual self) is divided into three parts in association with 
the ego: "gaunatman", "mithyatman" and mukhyatman". These are 
mentioned in Sankara's commentary on the Brahmasutra.  


 
Gauna-mithyatmano'sattve putradehadi badhanat  
Sadbrahmatmahamityevam bodhe karyam katham bhavaet  
-Sutrabhasya, 1. 1. 4  
It is part of human nature to believe that one's children and friends are 
the same as oneself and that their joys and sorrows are one's own. That is 
what is meant by "gaunatman". "Gauna" denotes what is ceremonial or 
what is regarded as a formality. We know that our children and friends 
are different from us and yet we want to believe that they are our own.  
The "I-feeling" in relation to the body which is closer to us than our 
children and friends is "mithyatman".  
There is a state in which the pure Self is seen separate from the body and 
identified inwardly with the Brahman: it is called "mukhyatman".  
When the first two - gaunatman and mithyatman - are separated from us 
we will be freed from attachments to our children, friends and the body 
as well as its senses. The realisation will dawn then that "I am the 
Brahman". Now there will be nothing for us to "do". This is the meaning 
of the Sutrabhasya passage.  
Svami Vivekananda who wanted to rouse the people of India chose a 
mantra from the Kathopanisad ("Arise, awake", etc) for the Ramakrsna 
Mission. This Upanisad is the source of many a popular quote. For 
instance, there is the mantra which states that the Self cannot be known 
either by learning or by the strength of one's intellect. "Know that the Self 
is the Lord of the chariot, that the body is the chariot and that the 
intellect is the charioteer", is another.  
"In the cavern of the heart the Supreme Being is radiant like a thumb of 
light. . . . . .”  
Then there is the mantra we recite at the time of the "diparadhana rite" 
("Na tatra suryo bhati. . . "): "The sun does not shine there, nor the moon, 
nor the stars. There is no flash of lightning. Agni too does not shine there. 
When he (the Paramatman) shines everything shines; all his shines by his 


 
light. “All our knowledge is derived from that Great Light. With our 
limited knowledge we cannot shed light on that Reality.  
Later, the Kathopanisad mentions what Sir Krsna Paramatman says in the 
Gita about the cosmic pipal tree, the symbol of samsara or worldly 
existence. If all the desires of the heart are banished a man can become 
immortal and realise the Brahman here itself.  
After the Kathopanisad comes the Prasnopanisad, the Mundakopanisad 
and the Mandukyopanisad, all three being from the Atharvaveda. 
"Prasna" means "question". What is the origin of the various creatures? 
Who are the deities that sustain them? How does life imbue the body? 
What is the truth about wakefulness, sleep and the state of dream? What 
purpose is served by being devoted to Om? What is the relationship 
between the Supreme Godhead and the individual self? These questions 
are answered in the Prasnopanisad.  
"Mundana" means "tonsure". Only sannyasins, ascetics with a high 
degree of maturity, are qualified to study the  
Mundakopanisad -that is how it came to be so called. This Upanisad 
speaks of the Aksarabrahman, aksara meaning "imperishable" and also 
"sound". We speak of "Pancaksara", "Astaksara"and so on. The source of 
all sound in "Pranava", or "Omkara". Pranava is a particularly efficacious 
means to attain the Aksarabrahman.  
One mantra in the Mundakopanisad asks us to string the bow of Omkara 
with the arrow of the Atman and hit unperturbed the target called the 
Brahman. Like the arrow you must be one with the Brahman. It is also in 
this Upanisad that the individual self and the Paramatman are compared 
to two birds perched on the body that is the pippala tree. The jivatman 
(individual self) alone eats the fruit (of karma) and the Paramtman bird is 
merely a witness. This is the basis of the biblical story of Adam (Atman) 
and Eve (jiva). Adam does not eat the apple (pippala) but Eve does.  
The motto of the Union of India - "Satyameva Jayate" - is taken from this 
Upanisad. .  


 
There is also a mantra which speaks of sannyasins who, after being 
jivanmuktas in this world, become "videhamuktas" (liberated without 
their body). It is chanted when ascetics are received with honour with a 
"purna-kumba".  
The Mundakopanisad speaks of the jnanin thus: "Different rivers with 
different names lose their names and forms in the ocean. Similarly the 
knower (jnanin) freed from name and form unites inseparably with the 
Brahman. "  
Next is the Mandukyopanisad. "Manduka" means "frog". Why the name 
"Frog Upanisad"? One reason occurs to me: the frog does not have to go 
step by step. It can leap from the first to the fourth step. In the 
Mandukyopanisad the way is shown to reach the turiya or fourth state 
from the state of wakefulness through the states of sleep and dream. By 
devoting oneself to (by intense meditation of) Om (that is by aksara 
upasana) 2one can in one bound go up to the fourth state. That perhaps 
is the reason why this Upanisad is called "Mandukya". According to 
modern research scholars, the Mandukya Upanisad belonged to a group 
of people who had the frog as their totem! (It is also said that the sage 
associated with the Upanisad is Varuna who took the form of a frog. )  
The text of the Mandukyopanisad is very brief and contains only twelve 
mantras. But it has acquired a special place among seekers because it is 
packed with meaning. It demonstrates the oneness of the individual self 
and the Brahman through the four feet (padas) of Pranava. There is a 
famous passage occurring towards the end of this Upanisad which 
describes the experience of the turiya or fourth state in which all the 
cosmos 
is 
dissolved 
in 
"Siva-Advaita" 
(Sivo' 
dvaita). 
Sankara 
Bhagavatpada's guru's guru, Gaudapadacarya, has commented on this 
Upanisad (Mandukyopanisad-Karika) and Sankara has written a further 
commentary on this work.  
Now 
the 
Taittriya 
Upanisad. 
I 
had 
referred 
earlier 
to 
the 
misunderstanding that developed between Vaisampayana and his disciple 
Yajnavalkya. In his anger the teacher asked his student to eject the Veda 
he has taught him. Yajnavalkya did as bidden. Later the sun god taught 


 
him the Sukla-Yajurveda which had until then not been revealed to the 
world.  
It was with the power acquired throught mantras that Yajnavalkya 
beceame a gander to throw up the Veda he had first learned from 
Vaisampayana. Now that master's other disciples, bidden by him 
assumed the form of tittri birds (partridges) and consumed what had 
been ejected by Yajnavalkya. Thus this recension of the Yajurveda came 
to be called "Taittiriya Sakha". The name "Taittiriya" is also applied to the 
Samhita, Brahmana and Aranyaka of this sakha. The Taittiriya Upanisad is 
part of the Taittiriya Aranyaka and it is perhaps studied more widely thatn 
any other Upanisad. Many mantras employed in rituals are taken from it. 
There are three part to it - "Siksavalli", "Anandavalli" and "Bhruguvalli".  
Sikshavalli contains matters relating to education rules of the 
brahmacaryasrama (the celibate student's stage of life), its importance, 
order of Vedic chanting, meditation of Pranava. The "Avahanti homa" is in 
Siksavalli. It is performed by the acarya to ensure that disciples come to 
learn from him without any let or hindrance. We know from our own 
experience that, even today, as a result of performing this sacrifice, Vedic 
schools which were in decay have received a new lease of life with the 
admission of many new students.  
Siksavalli mentions "Atma-svrajya" that is eternal, a state which 
treanscends in meaning the "svarajya" we are familiar with in politics.  
"Satyam vada, dharmam cara" (Speak the truth, do your duty according 
to dharma): such exhortations to students are contained in this Upanisad. 
Students are urged not to neglect the study of the Vedas at any time. 
They are asked to marry and beget children so that Vedic learning will be 
kept up from generation to generation. "Matr-devo bhava, pirt-devo 
bhava, acarya-devo bhava, athithi-devo bhava" (Be one to whom your 
mother is a god; be one to whom your father is a god; be one to whom 
your teacher is a god; be one to whom your guest is a god) - all such 
mantras are in this Upanisad. The importance of charity and dharma is 
specially stresed here.  


 
Earlier I spoke to you about a "multiplication table" of bliss in which each 
successive type of bliss is a hundredfold greater that the previous one. 
Anandavalli is the part of the Taittriya Upanisad in which you see this. The 
highest form of bliss of ananda in this "table" is Brahmananda (the blis of 
realising the Brahman).  
Different sheaths (kosas) of man are mentioned in this Upanisad. The first 
is the "annamaya-kosa" (the sheath of food), the flesh that grows with 
the intake of food. Inside it is the "pranamaya-kosa" (the sheath of vital 
breath). Then comes the "manomaya-kosa" (the sheath of mind) that 
gives rise to thoughts and felings. The fourth is "vijnanamaya-kosa" (the 
sheath of understanding). And, finally, the fifth, the "anandamaya-kosa" 
(the sheath of bliss). It is here that the Self dwells in blessedness. Each 
sheath is personified as a bird with head, wings, body, belly - there is a 
philosophical significance in this. This Upanisad contains the oft-quoted 
mantra ("Yato vaco. . . "). It says: "He who knows the bliss of the 
Brahman, from which speech and mind turn away unable to grasp it, such 
a man does not have to fear anything from anywhere. "  
"Bhrguvalli" is the teaching (upadesa) imparted by Varuna to his son 
Bhrgu. "Upadesa" here is not to be understood as something dictated by 
the guru to his student. Varuna encourages his son to ascend step by step 
through his own experiments and experience. Bhrugu performs 
austerities and thinks that the sheath of food is the truth. From this stage 
he advances gradually through the sheaths of breath, mind and 
understanding and arrives at the truth that is the sheath of bliss. He 
realises as an experience that the Atman (the nature of bliss) is the 
ultimate truth.  
This does not mean that the Taittriya Upanisad rejects the factual world 
represented by the sheath of food. Whiule being yet in this world, taking 
part in its activities, we must become aware of the supreme truth. For 
this we must strive to make life more dharmic, as a means of Atmic 
advancement. That is why even those who have attained the sheath of 
bliss are admonished. : "Do not speak ill of food. Do not throw it away. 
Grow plenty of food". Even the government has used this mantra for its 


 
grow more food campaign. The Taittriya Upanisad concludes with the 
mantra which says: "I am food, I am food, the one who eats it. . . ".  
The Aitareya Upanisad forms part of the Aitareya Aranyaka of the Rgveda. 
the name is dereived from the fact that it was the sage Aitareya who 
made is widely known. A jiva (individual self) originating in the father, 
says the Upanisad, enters the womb of the mother. He is born in this 
world and goes through his life of meritorious and sinful actions. Then he 
is born again and again in diferent worlds. Only by knowing the Atman 
does he find release from the bondage of phenomenal existence.  
The sage called Vamadeva knew about all his previous births when he 
was in his mother's womb. He passed through all fortresses and, like an 
eagle soaring high in the skies, voyaged seeking liberation. In this context 
prajnana, direct perception of the Atman, is spoken of in high terms. It is 
not merely that one attains the Brahman through such jnana (prajnana) - 
the fact is such prajnana itself is the Brahman. And this is the mahavakya 
of the Rgveda: "Prajnanam Brahma".  
The Chandyoga and Brhadaranyaka Upanisads are the last two of the ten 
major Upanisads and is also the biggest. They are bigger than all the other 
eight of the ten put together. The first is part of the Chandogya Brahmana 
of the Samaveda. "Chandogya" means relating to "chandoga", one who 
sings the Saman. The Tamil Tevaram refers to Paramesvara as "Candogan 
kan". The Zoroastrian scripture called the Zend-Avesta could be treaced 
back to "Chandoga-Avesta. "  
Just as there are passages in the Gita form the Kathopanisad, so has the 
Brahmasutra passages from the Chandogya Upanisad. In these two 
Upanisads the teachings of a number of sages are put together.  
The introductory mantras of the Chandogya Upanisad refer to Omkara as 
"udgita" and explains how one is to meditate on it. A number of vidyas 
are mentioned like "Aksi", "Akasa", "NMadhu", "Sandilya", "Prana", and 
"Pancagni". These help in different ways in knowing the Ultimate Reality. 
"Dahara vidya" is the culmination of all these: it means perceiving the 
Supreme Being manifested as the transcadent outward sky in the tiny 


 
space in our heart. A number of truths are expounded in this Upanisad in 
the form of stories.  
From the story of Raikva we learn about the strange outward behaviour 
of one who has realised the Brahman. There is then the famous story of 
Satyakama who does not know his gotra, but is accepted as a pupil by 
Gautama. The guru thinks that Satyakama must be a true Brahmin since 
he does not hide the truth about him. Before the pupil is taught he is 
made to undergo many tests. The guru's wife, out of concern for the 
pupil, speaks to her husband for him. When we read such stories we have 
before us a true picture of gurukulavasa in ancient times.  
In character Svetaketu was the opposite of Satyakama and was proud of 
his learning. His father Uddalaka Aruni teaches him to be humble and in 
the end imparts to him the mantra, "Tat tvam asi" (That thou art), the 
mantra which proclaims the non-difference between the individual self 
and the Brahman. "Tat tvam asi" is the mahavakya of the Samaveda.  
Unlike Svetaketu, the sage Narada, who had mastered all branches of 
learning, was humble and full of regret that he had remained ignorant of 
the Atman. He finds enlightenment in the teachings of Sanatkumara 
which are included in the Chandogya Upanisad. In the Taittriya Upanisad 
Bhrgu is taught to go step by step to obtain higher knowledge [from the 
sheath of food to the sheath of bliss]. Here Sanatkumara teaches Narada 
to go from purity of form to purity of the inner organs ("antah-karanas"). 
That is the time when all ties will snap and bliss reached.  
Another story illustrates how different students benefit differently from 
the same teaching according to the degree of maturity of each. Prajapati 
gives the same instruction to Indra, the king of the celestials, and to 
Virocana, the king of the asuras. This is what Prajapati teaches him: "He 
who sees with his eyes, he is the Self". He subtly hints at the object that is 
behind the eye, knowledge, etc, and that is the basis of all these. Without 
understanding this, the two se themselves in a mirror and take the 
reflection to be the Self. You see only the body in the mirror and Virocana 
comes to the conclusion that that is the Self. It is from this idea that 
atheism, materialism and the Lokayata system developed. Although Indra 


 
also took this kind of wrong view from his reflection, eventually [similar 
to the story in the Taittriya Upanisad of Bhrgu advancing from the sheath 
of food to the sheath of bliss] he goes in gradual stages from the gross 
body to the subtle body of sleep and later to the turiya or fourth state 
mentioned in the Mandukyopanisad -the turiya is the Self.  
The Brhadaranyaka Upanisad comes last. "Brhad" means "great". It is 
indeed a great Upanisad, Brhadaranyaka. Generally, an Upanisad comes 
towards the close of the Aranyaka of the sakha concerned. While the 
Isavasyopanisad occurs in the Samhita of the Sukla-Yajurveda, the 
Brhar\daranyaka Upanisad is in the Aranyaka of the same Veda: as a 
matter of fact the entire Aranyaka constitutes this Upanisad. There are 
two recensions of it: the Madhyandina Sakha and the Kanva Sakha. 
Sankara has chosen the latter for his commentary.  
This Upanisad consists of six chapters. The first two are the 
"Madhukanda", the next two are the "Muni-kanda" in the name of 
Yajnavalkya, and the last two are the "Khila-kanda". NMadhu may be 
understood as that which is full of the flavour of bliss. If we have the 
realisation that all this world is a personification of the Parabrahman it 
would be sweet like nectar to all cretures - and the creatures would be 
like honey to the world. The Atman then would be nectar for all. This idea 
is expressed in the Madhu-kanda.  
It is in this Upanisad that the celebrated statement occurs that the Atman 
is "neither this, nor this" ("Neti, neti"). The Self cannot be described in 
any way. "Na-iti" - that is "Neti". It is through this process of "Neti, neti" 
that you give up everything - the cosmos, the body, the mind, everything 
- to realise the Self. After knowing the Atman in this manner you will 
develop the attitude that the phenomenal world and all its creatures are 
made up the same essence of bliss.  
The first kanda contains the teachings received by the Brahmin Gargya 
from the Ksatriya Ajatasatru. This shows that kings like Ajatasatru and 
Janaka were knowers of the Brahman. We also learn that women too 
took part on an equal footing with the sages in the debates in royal 
assemblies on the nature of the Brahman. There was, for instance, Gargi 


 
in Janaka's assembly of the learned. The Brhadaranyaka Upanisad also 
tells us about Yajnavalkya's two wives: of the two Katyayani was like any 
housewife and the second, Maitreyi, was a Brahmavadini (one who 
inquires into the Brahman and speaks about it). The instruction given by 
Yajnavalkya to Maitreyi occurs both in the Madhukanda and the 
Muni-kanda. Here we have a beautiful combination of story-telling and 
philosophical disquisition.  
When Yajnavalkya is on the point of renouncing the world, he divides his 
wealth between his two wives. Katyayani is contented and does not ask 
for anything more. Maitreyi, on the other hand, is not worried about 
about her share. she tells her husband: "You are leaving your home, 
aren't you, because you wil find greater happiness in sannyasa that from 
all this wealth? What is that happiness? Won't you speak about it? "  
Yajnavalkya replies: "You have always ben dear to me, Maitreyi. Now, by 
asking this question, you have endeared yourself to me more. " He then 
proceeds to find out what is meant by the idea of someone being dear to 
someone else. His is indeed an inquiry into the concept of love and 
affection. He says: "A wife is dear to her husband not for the sake of his 
wife but for the sake of his Self. So is a husband dear to his wife for the 
sake foor the sake of her Self. The children too are dear to us not for their 
sake but for the sake of the Self. So is the case with our love of wealth. 
We have affection of a person or an entity because it pleases our Self. It 
means that this Self itself is of the nature of affection, of love, of joy. It is 
to know this Self independently of everything else that we forsake all 
those who are dear to us and take to sannyasa. When we know It, the 
Self or the Atman, we will realise that there is nothing other than It. 
Everything will become dear to us. To begin with, when we had affection 
for certain people or certain things, we had dislike for certain other 
people and certain other things. If we cease to be attached to those 
people or to those things that we loved and realise the Atman, then we 
will become aware that there is nothing other thatn the Atman. Then, 
again, we will dislike none and will love all without any distinction. "  


 
Before renouncing the world, Yajnavalkya held disputations on the 
Ultimate Reality with Kahola, Uddalaka Aruni and Gargi in Janaka's royal 
assembly. These debates, together with the teachings he imparted to 
Janaka, are included in Muni-kanda. The concept of Antaryamin (Inner 
Controller) belongs to Visistadvaita (qualified non-dualism). The basis for 
this is to be found in Yajnavalkya's answer to a question put to him by 
Uddalaka Aruni.  
According to non-dualism all this phenomenal world in Maya. The idea 
behind the concept of Antaryamin is that if the world is the body, the 
Paramatman dwells in it as its very life. Though Yajnavalkya accepts this 
concept on a certain level, at all other times his views are entirely in 
consonance with non-dualism. In his concluding words to Maitreyi, the 
supreme Advaitin that he is, Yajnavalkya remarks: "Even if you be little 
dualistic in your outlook, it means that you look at something other than 
yourself, smell, taste, touch and hear something other than yourself. But 
when you have realised the Self experientially, all these 'other things' 
cease to exist. That which is the source of seeing, hearing, tasting, 
smelling, and so on - how can you see, hear, taste, smell That? " 
Expounding non-dualism Yajnavalkya tells Janaka (4. 3. 32), "Like water 
mingled with water all become one in the Paramatman. " "He who is 
freed from all desire existes as the Brahman even when he is in the world 
(with his body) and when he dies is united with the Brahmin.  
The two concluding chapters that form the Khila-kanda of the Upanisad 
bring together scattered ideas. (If a thing is broken or divided it is called 
"khila". That which is whole and unbroken is "akhila". )  
A story in the Khila-kanda illustrates how the same teaching is interpreted 
differently according to the degree of maturity of the aspirants. The 
devas (the celestial race), humans and the demons (asuras) seek 
instruction from Prajapati (the Creator). Prajapati utters just one syllable, 
"Da", as his teaching. The devas who do not possess enough control over 
their senses take it to mean "damyata" ("control your senses"). Humans 
who are possessive understand the syllable as "datta" ("give", "be 


 
charitable"). The asuras who are cruel by nature take the same as 
"dayadhvam" (be compassionate).  
A mantra occurring in the concluding part of the Brhadranyaka Upanisad 
seems to me not only extremely interesting but also comforting. What 
does it say? "If a man suffers from fever it must be taken that he is 
practising austerities (tapas). If he recognises illnesses and afflictions to 
be tapas, he passes on to a very high world" (5. 11. 1). [Etadvai paramam 
tapo yadvyahitastapyate paramam haiva lokam jayati ya evam veda. . . ]  
What is the meaning of this statement and what is interesting about it? 
And how is it comforting?  
By observing vows, by fasting, by living an austere life and by suffering 
physically, we will become less attached to the body, and the sins 
accumulated in our past lives will diminish. Tapas is a way of expiating the 
sins of past lives. The offences committed with our body are wiped away 
by the very body when it undergoes suffering (that is by bodily tapas).  
That is why the Puranas speak of great men having performed austerities. 
Ambika herself - she is the mother of the universe - performs tapas. Not 
heeding the word of her husband Paramesvara, she [as Sati] attends the 
sacrifice conducted by her father Daksa. Because of the humiliation she 
suffers there she immolates herself in the sacrificial fire and is reborn as 
the daughter of Himavan. As atonement for disobeying her husband's 
command during her past life and for the purpose of being united with 
him again, she performs severe austerities. Kalidasa gives a beautiful and 
moving account of this. How bitterly cold it will be during the winter in 
the Himalaya. But in that season Parvati (that is Ambika) performs 
austerities seated on icy rocks or standing on frozen lakes. In the summer, 
when the sun is beating down harshly, she does tapas with fires burning 
all round her. Performing austerities with the fires on four sides and with 
the sun burning above is called "pancagni-tapas".  
Many great men have performed such severe austerities.  


 
How about ourselves? If they, the great men, were guilty of one or two 
lapses, we cannot even keep count of our sins. But we have neither the 
will nor the strength to perform a fraction of the austerities that they 
went through. How then are we going to wipe away our sins?  
It is when we are troubled by such thoughts that we find the foregoing 
Upanisadic mantra comforting. Since ours is not a disciplined life we keep 
suffering from one ailment or another. The Upanisadic mantra seems to 
be directed to us: "You must learn to think that the affliction you are 
suffering from is tapas. If you do so you will be freed from your sins and 
liberated. " Though the message is not given in such plain terms, such is 
the meaning of the mantra.  
We often speak of "jvara-tapa" or "tapa-jvara" (literally "hot fever"). 
"Tapa" means "boiling" or "cooking". The root is "tap" to burn. "Tapana" 
is one of the names of the sun. Even if we do not perform the austerities 
mentioned in the sastras, we must take it that the fever contracted by us 
is the tapas Isvara has awarded us to become free from our sins.  
When we are down with malaria we keep shivering in spite of covering 
ourselves with blankets. Our attitude now must be to suffer the affliction 
in lieu of the tapas we ought to perform in the winter months remaining 
on snow. Do you feel that your body is being roasted when your are 
suffering from typhoid or pneumonia and a running temperature of 105° 
or 106°F? You must comfort yourself, believing that God has given you 
the fever as a substitute for the pancagni-tapas you are unable to 
perform.  
You will in due course learn to take such an attitude and develop the 
strength to suffere any illness. Instead of sending for the doctor or 
rushing to the medicine chest you may take it easy, telling yourself, "Let 
the illness take its course". When we happen to fall ill as a means of 
reducing our burden of sin, is it right to seek a cure for it? Also we save on 
doctor's fees, medicine, etc. The gain bigger that all the rest in that of 
learning to take the high attitude of treating suffering as not suffering. 
This is called "titiksa".  


 
All this is briefly indicated in the Upanisadic mantra. When we keep 
lamenting that we are unable to expiate our sins - when we are unable to 
perform tapas - we may take comfort from the fact that when we suffer 
from a disease it is God's way of making us perform austerities.  
In the last chapter of the Brhadranyaka Upanisad we have strong proof of 
the fact that Vedanta is not opposed to the karmakanda. Here are 
mentioned the pancagni-vidya and the rites to be performed to beget 
virtuous children (supraja).  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 


 

What do the Vedas Teach Us? 
The Vedas speak of a variety of matters. So how are we to accept the 
view that their most important teaching is the concept of Self-realisation 
expounded in the Upanisads constituting the Vedanta? They mention a 
number of sacrifices like agnihotra, somayaga, sattra and isti and other 
rituals in addition. Why should it not be maintained that it is these that 
form their chief purpose?  
What are the rites to be performed at a marriage? Or at a funeral? How 
best is a kingdom (or any country) governed? How must we conduct 
ourselves in an assembly? You will find answers to many such questions 
in the Vedas. Which of these then is the main objective of our scripture?  
The Vedas tell you about the conduct of sacrifices, ways of worship, and 
methods of meditation. How is the body inspired by the Self? What 
happens to it (the body) in the end? And how does the self imbue the 
body again? We find an answer to such questions in these sacred texts. 
Also we learn from methods to keep the body healthy, the rites to protect 
ourselves from enemy attacks. What then is the goal of the Vedas?  
The Upanisads proclaim that all the Vedas together point to a single Truth 
(Kathopanishad, 2. 15) What is that Truth? "The Vedas speak in one voice 
of a Supreme Entity revealing itself as the meaning of Omkara. "  
There was a judge called Sadasiva Ayyar. He had a brother, Paramasiva 
Ayyar, who lived in Mysore. "The Vedas deal with geology, "so wrote 
Paramasiva Ayyar. "In those early times, people in India looked upon the 
sun and the moon with wonder, “some Westerners remark. "it was an 
age when science had not made much advance. People then regarded 
natural phenomena according to their different mental attitudes. Not all 
are capable of turning their thoughts into song. But some have the talent 
for the same. The songs sing by people in the form of mantras constitute 
the Vedas. “Though the Upanisads declare that the Vedas speak of the 


 
One reality, there is an impression that they speak of a variety of entities. 
There is a well-known stanza on the Ramayana:  
Vedavedye pare pumsi jate Dasarathatmaje  
Vedah Pracetasadasitssaksadramayanatmana  
"Vedavedye"=one who is to be known by the Vedas. Who is he? "Pare 
pumsi"=the Supreme Being. The Supreme being to be known by the 
Vedas descended to earth as Rama. When he was born the son of 
Dasaratha, the Vedas took the form of Valmiki's child Ramayana. 
According to this stanza, the goal of the Vedas is the Supreme Being or 
Omkara, the One Truth. Just as the kathopanisad speaks of "sarve 
Vedah", the lord says in the Gita:"Vedaisca sarvair ahameva vedyah"(I am 
indeed to be known by the Vedas)  
Considering all this, we realise that, although the Vedas deal with many 
matters, all of them together speak of one goal, the One reality. But the 
question arises why they concern themselves with different entities also 
when their purpose is only the One entity?  
It is through the various entities, through knowledge of a multiplicity of 
subjects, that we may know of this One Object. Yoga, meditation, 
austerities, sacrifices and other rites, ceremonies like marriage, state 
affairs, social life, poetry: what is the goal of all these? Itis the One 
Reality. And that is the goal of the Vedas also. All objects and all entities 
other than this true Object are subject to change. They are like stories 
remembered and later forgotten. (In our ignorance) we do not percieve 
the One object behind the manifoldness of the world. The Vedas take us 
to the One Reality through the multifarious objects that we do know.  
To attain this One reality we need to discipline our mind in various ways. 
Performing sacrifices, practising austerities, doing the duties of one's own 
dharma, building gopurams, digging ponds for the public, involving 
ourselves in social work, samskaras like marriage, all these go to purify 
our consciousness and, finally to still the mind that is always agitated. 
(cittavrtti-nirodha). The purpose of different works is to help us in our 
efforts to attain the Brahman.  


 
"Ved"[from"vid"] means to know. The Upanisads proclaim:" The Atman is 
that by knowing which all can be known. “The goal of the Vedas is to shed 
light on this Atman. The rituals enjoined on us in their first part and the 
jnana expounded in the second have the same goal-knowing Iswara, the 
Brahman or the Atman. The beginning of the beginning and the end of 
the end of our scripture have the same ultimate aim. During the 
"mantrapuspa" ceremony at the time of welcoming a great man this 
mantra is chanted:"Yo Veda dau svarah prokto Vedante ca prathisthitah. 
“These words are proof of the words mentioned above. The mantra 
means:" What is established in the beginning of the Vedas as well as their 
end is the One Truth, the Reality of Isvara. “The works associated with the 
beginning and the jnana associated with the end-there is no difference 
between the goals of the two.  
For the rituals that are divided in a thousand different ways and for the 
knowledge (jnana) that is but one, the subject is common. That is the 
Vedas have a common subject. The senses are incapable of perceiving the 
Self. They are aware only of outward objects and keep chasing them. This 
is mentioned in the kathopanisad (4.1). When one's attention is diverted 
from the object in hand we say "parakku parppadu"[in Tami] our object is 
the Self. To be diverted from it and to look around-or look away-is to be 
"paramukha"-it is the same as "parakku parppadu". It is this idea that is 
expressed by the kathopanisad. But the mind does not easily remain fixed 
on our goal. So it is only by performing outward functions that we will 
gain the wisdom and maturity to turn our look inward. We will develop 
such inner vision only by refusing to be dragged down by the mind and 
the senses, and for this we must perform Vedic works.  
After learning about, or knowing all other matters by inquiring into them 
and by making an assesment of them, we are enabled to grasp that by 
knowing which we will know everything. That is the reason why the 
Vedas deal with so many branches of learning, so many types of worship, 
so many different works and so many arts and so many social duties. By 
applying the body in various rites we lose consciousness of that very 
body. By directing our thoughts to various branches of learning, by 


 
examining various philosophical systems and by worshipping various 
deities the mind and the intellect will in due course be dissolved.  
We are more conscious when we are engaged in evil actions than 
otherwise. By thinking about evil matters the mind becomes coarser. 
Instead, if we perform Vedic sacraments and worship and chant Vedic 
mantras for the well-being of the world, the desires of the body and the 
mind will wilt. Eventually, we will develop the maturity and the wisdom 
to gain inner vision. In this way we will obtain release here itself ("ihaiva") 
Release from what? From samsara, from the cycle of birth and death. 
When we realise that the body and the mind are not"we" and when we 
become free from them-as mentioned in the Upanisads- we are liberated 
from worldly existence.  
The purpose of the Vedas is achieving liberation in this world itself. And 
that is their glory. Other religions promise a man salvation after his 
departure for another world. But we cannot have any idea of that type of 
deliverance. Those who have attained will not return to this world to tell 
us about it. So we may have doubts about it or may not believe it at all. 
But the Vedas hold out the ideals of liberation here itself if we renounce 
all desire and keep meditating on the Self. Moksa then will be within our 
grasp at once. There is no room for doubt in this.  
Other paths give temporary relief like quinine administered to a person 
suffering from malaria. If malarial fever is never to be contracted by the 
patient again the root cause of the disease must be found and eradicated. 
The Vedic religion goes deep into the root of life and cuts away that 
which separates it from the supreme being The freedom realised in this 
manner is eternal and not "temporary relief"(from the pains and sorrows 
of worldly existence)  
The karmakanda of the Vedas deals with matters that give only such 
temporary relief. However, it must be realised that a man racked by 
difficulties cannot at once be placed in a position where he would all the 
time delighting in his Self. Through the “Temporary relief" gained from 
performing Vedic rites, his consciousness is freed from impurities and he 
becomes "qualified" for everlasting peace. Sacrifices, vows, philanthropic 


 
work, and so on, do not take us to the final goal but they are necessarily 
to reduce ourselves physically, to cleanse our consciousness and make 
our mind one-pointed in our effort to reach our final goal.  
A variety of subjects are spoken in detail in the Vedas but all of them have 
the one purpose of leading us to the Vedantic enquiry into Truth and 
jnana. The concluding portion of a work, speech, article etc, is usually the 
most significant. If we want to find what so-and-so has said in a speech or 
in an article, we do not have to read all of it. We glance through the first 
para and, skipping through, come to the last. Here we get the message of 
the speech or article. We are able to decide on the content of either by 
going through the first and concluding passages. The first and last parts 
alike of the Vedas speak of the Paramatman; so that can be said to be the 
"subject" of the Vedas.  
The government enacts many laws. But, later in the course of their 
enforcement, doubts arise with regard to their intention. Then another 
law is enacted to settle its meaning:it is called the law of interpretation. 
In this way Mimamsa has come into being as the law of interpretation for 
the Vedas which constitute the eternal law of the Lord. I will speak to you 
in detail about Mimamsa which is one of the fourteen branches of the 
Vedic lore. But one aspect of it I should like to mention here itself.  
According to Mimamsa sastra, there are six ways in which to determine 
the meaning of the Vedic pronouncement or "vakhya". They are listed in 
this verse:  
Upakrama-upasamharau abhyasao purvata phalam  
Arthavado pappati lingam tatparya-nirnaye  
"Upakrama" and "upasamhara" together form the first method. The 
other five are "abhyasa", "apurvata", "phala", "arthavada" and 
"upapatti". These six are employed to determine the meaning or intent 
not only of Vedic passages but of, say, an article or discourse.  
"Upakrama" means the initial part of work, treatise, and "upasamhara" 
the conclusion. If the first and concluding parts of a work speak of the 


 
same idea, it is to be taken as its subject. "Abhyasa" is repeating the same 
thing, the same idea, again and again. If the same view or the idea is 
repeated in a work, it must be understood as its theme. "Apurvata" 
denotes an idea not mentioned before or mentioned for the first time. So 
a view or idea expressed afresh in the course of work or discourse is to be 
taken as the purpose or message intended. "Phala" is fruit, benefit, 
reward or result. If, in the course of work or speech, it is said, “If you act 
in this manner you will gain such and such a fruit or benefit", it means 
that the purpose of the work or speech is to persuade you to act in the 
manner suggested so that you may reap the fruit or "phala" held out.  
Suppose a number of points are dealt with in a work or discourse. Now, 
based on them, a story is told and, in the course of it, a particular matter 
receives special praise. This particular point must be regarded as the 
purpose of the work or speech in question. The method employed here is 
“arthavada ". If a viewpoint is sought to be established with reasoning it 
must be treated as the subject of the work concerned. Here you have 
“upapatti ".  
A gentleman told me his view of the Vedas based on his reading of the 
first and last hymns: "The chief point about the Vedas is fire worship 
(Agni upasana). In the upakrama there is 'Agnimile' and in the 
upasamhara also there is a hymn to Agni. Both the beginning and the end 
being so, the purpose of the Vedas (their 'gist') is fire worship". Agni is the 
light of the Atman, the light of the jnana. The light of jnana is nothing but 
the spirit of the Self which is the knower, the known and the knowledge: 
this is the ultimate message of the Vedas.  
However, to understand the hymns in question in a literal sense and 
claim that the Vedas mean fire worship is not correct. The greatness of 
our scripture consists in the fact that it does not glorify one deity alone. 
The Vedas proclaim that the Atman, the Self, must be worshipped, the 
Atman that denotes all the deities (Brahadranyaka Upanishad), 4. 5. 6 : 
"Verily, O Maitreyi, it is the Self that should be perceived, that should be 
seen, heard and reflected upon. It is the Self that must be known. When 


 
the Self is known everything is known". This truth that the Yagnavalkya 
teaches his wife Maitreyi is the goal of the Vedas.  
What is the implication of the word "goal"? Now we are here at a 
particular point. From this point, where we start, we have to go to 
another point which is final. Such a meaning is suggested by the 
word"goal". "Atah" is what is pointed to at a distance ("that") as the goal. 
"Itah" is where we are now(here), the starting point. From "here"we have 
to go "there" to reach the goal.  
But as a matter of fact, is not "that", the goal, here itself (this)? Yes, when 
we recognize that everything is the Brahman, we will realise that "that" 
and "this” are the Brahman-in other words, "that"and "this" are the 
same. What we now think to be "this" becomes the true state denoted by 
"that".  
Like "atah" the Vedas refer to the Paramatman as "TaT"which means 
"that". At the conclusion of any rite or work it is customary to say "Om 
TaT sat". It means, "That is the Truth".  
We add the suffix "tvam" to some words:"purasatvam", "mahatvam" and 
so on. Here "tvam" means the quality or nature of a thing. The quality of 
"mahat" is "mahatvam". The nature of "purusa" being a "purusa"is 
"purusatvam". All right. What do we mean when we refer to the truth, 
the Ultimate Truth, as "tattvam"? "Tattvam"means" being TaT". When we 
speak of enquiry into tattva or instruction in tattva it means enquiring 
into the nature of the Brahman (or rather Brahmanhood or what is meant 
by the Brahman. )  
If the Vedas proclaim the Paramatman as "Tat", that is a distant entity, 
how does it help us? Actually, it is not so. What is far away is also close 
by. The Vedas proclaim:"Durat dure antike ca"  
Once the parents of a girl arranged her marriage to a boy who happened 
to be a relative. But the girl said "I'll marry the greatest man in the world. 
"She was stubborn in her decision and the parents in their helpnessness 
said to her "Do what you like.”  


 
The girl thought that the king was the greatest of men and that she would 
get married to him. One day, as the king was being taken in a palanquin, 
an ascetic passed by. The king got down and prostrated himself before 
the sanyasin and got into his palanquin again. Witnessing the scene the 
girl thought to herself:"I was wrong all these days in thinking that the king 
was the greatest of men. The ascetic seems to be greater. I must marry 
him. "She then followed the holy man. .  
The ascetic stopped on his way to worship an idol of Ganapati installed 
under a pipal tree. The girl saw it and came to the conclusion:"This 
Ganapati is superior to the sanyasin. I must marry him. “She gave up her 
chase of the ascetic and sat by the idol of Ganapati.  
It was a lonely place and no devotee came up to worship the god. After 
some days a dog came and relieved itself on the idol. The girl now 
decided that the dog must be greater than Ganapati. She went chasing 
the dog and as it trotted along, with the girl keeping pace with it, a boy 
threw a stone at it and it wailed loudly in pain. a young man saw this and 
reprimanded the boy for his cruelty. The girl now told herself "I had 
thought that the boy was superior to the dog. But here comes a young 
man to take him to task. So he must be the greatest of them all. 
"Eventually it turned out that the young man was none other then the 
groom that her parents had chosen for her.  
The girl in the story went in pursuit of one she thought was far away but 
in the end it turned out that what she had sought was indeed closeby.  
"You look for God thinking him to be far from you. So long as your 
ignorant(that is without jnana)he is indeed far from you. Even if you look 
for him all over the world you will not find him. He is in truth with you. 
""Durat dure antike ca, "says the sruti (Farther than the farthest, nearer 
than the nearest).  
When we look afar at the horizon it seems to be the meeting point of the 
earth and the sky. Suppose there is a palm-tree there. We imagine that if 
we go upto the tree we will arrive at the point where the earth and the 
sky meet. But when we actually arrive at the spot where the tree stands 


 
we see that the horizon has receded further. The further we keep going 
the further the horizon too will recede from us. "We are here under the 
palm tree but the horizon is still far away. We must also go further to 
overtake it. "Is it ever possible to overtake the horizon? When we are at a 
distance from the palm the horizon seems to be near it. But when we 
came to it the horizon seemed to have moved away further. So where is 
the horizon? Where you are that is, the horizon. You and the horizon are 
on the very same spot. What we call "That" the lord who we think is far 
away, is by your side. No, he is in you. "That thou art, "declare the Vedas-
He is you (or you are He).  
"That you are "or "That thou art"(Tat Tvam Asi)is a Vedic mahavakya. The 
"Tvam" here does not mean the quality or essential nature of any entity 
or object. The word has two meanings:"essential nature"("beingness")is 
one meaning; and" you "or "thou" is another. The Acarya has used 
"Tvam" as a pun in a stanza in his saundaryalahari.  
It is a combination of the two words "taat" and "tvam" that the word 
"tattvam" has come into use. Any truth arrived at the conclusion of an 
inquiry is "tattva"-thus it denotes the One Truth that is the Paramatman.  
What we call "I", what we think to be "i", that indeed is Isvara; or such 
awareness is Isvara. If you do not possess the light within yiou to discern 
this truth you will not be able to even concieve of an entity called Isvara, 
The consciousness of "I" is what we believe to be the distant "That". 
"That and you are the same, child "is the Ultimate message of the Vedas.  
What we call "this"("idam") is not without a root or a source. Indeed 
there is no object called "this" without a source. Without the seed there 
is no tree. The cosmos with its mountains, oceans, with its sky and earth, 
with its man and beast, and so on has its root. Anger, fear and love, the 
senses, power and energy have their root, Whatever we call "this " has a 
root. Whatever we see, hear and smell, what we remember, what we feel 
to be hot or cold, what we experience-all these are covered by the 
term"idam". Intellectual powers, scientific discoveries, the dicoveries yet 
to come - all come under Idam and all of them have a root cause. There is 
nothing called "idam" or "this"without a root. Everything has a root or a 


 
seed. So the cosmos also must have a root cause; so too all power, all 
energy contained in it.  
To realise this Truth examine a tamarind seed germinating. When you 
split the seed open. you will see a miniature tree in it. It has in it the 
potential to grow, to grow big. Such is the case with all seeds.  
The mantras have "bijaksaras"(seed letters or rather seed variables). Like 
a big tree (potentially) present in a tiny seed, these syllables contain 
immmeasurable power. If the bijaksara is muttered a hundred thousand 
times, with your mind one-pointed, you will have its power within your 
grasp.  
Whatever power there is in the world, whatever intellectual brilliance 
whatever skills and talents, all must be present in God in a rudimentary 
form. The Vedas proclaim, as if with the beat of drums:"All this has not 
sprung without a root cause, The power that is in the root or seed is the 
same as the power thast pervedes the entire universe. Where is that seed 
or root? The Self that keeps seeing all from within, what we call "idam" is 
the root.  
When you stand before a mirror you see your image in it. If you keep four 
mirrors in a row you will see a thousand images of yourself. There is one 
source for all these images. The one who sees these thousand images is 
the same as one who is their source. The one who is within the millions of 
creatures and sees all "this" is the Isvara. That which sees is the root of all 
that is seen. That root is knowledge and it is the source of all the cosmos. 
Where do you find this knowledge? It is in you. The infinite, transcendent 
knowledge is present partly in you-the whole is present in you as a part.  
Here is a small bulb. There you have a bigger bulb. That light is blue, this 
is green. There are lamps of many sizes and shapes. But their power is the 
same-electricity, electricity which is everywhere. It keeps the fan whirling, 
keeps the lamps burning. The power is the same and it is infinite. When it 
passes through a wire it becomes finite. When lightning strikes in flashes, 
when water cascades, the power is manifested. In the same way you 
must make the supreme Truth within manifest itself in a flash. All Vedic 


 
rites, all worship, all works, meditation of the mahakavyas, Vedanta-the 
purpose of all these is to make the truth unfold itself to you-in you-in a 
flash.  
Even the family and social life that are dealt with in the Vedas, the royal 
duties mentioned in them, or poetry, therapeutics or geology or any 
other sastra are steps leading towards the realisation of the Self. At first 
the union of "Tat" and "tvam"(That and you) would be experienced for a 
few moments like a flash of lightning. The Kenopanisad (4. 4) refers to the 
state of knowing the Brahman experimentally as a flash of lightning 
happening in the twinkling of an eye. But with repeated practice, with 
intense concentration, you will be able to immerse yourself in such 
experience. It is like the electricity produced when a stream remains 
cascading. This is moksa, liberation, when you are yet in this world, when 
you are still in possession of your body. And, when you give up the body, 
you 
will 
become 
eternal 
Truth 
yourself. 
This 
is 
called 
"videhamukthi"(literally bodiless liberation). The difference between 
jivanmukthi and videhamukthi is only with reference to an outside 
observer; for the jnanin the two are identical.  
The goal of the Vedas is inward realisation of the Brahman here and now. 
We learn about happenings in the world from the newspapers. The news 
gathered by reporters stationed in different countries, at different 
centres, also through news agencies. It is recieved through letters, 
telegrams or teleprinter messages. There are things that cannot be 
known by such means, things that are not comprehended by the ordinary 
human mind. Should we not have a special newspaper to keep us 
informed about them? The Vedas constitute such a paper. They tell us all 
about things that cannot be known to ordinary news-gatherers and also 
about things occuring in aplace where there is neither telegraphy nor any 
teleprinter. It is through the medium of this newspaper that the sages 
who possess trans-sensual powers keep us informed about matters that 
are beyond this world and beyond the comprehension of the average 
man.  


 
There are, however, certain portions in the Vedas that are to be 
discarded. "To be discarded" is not to be taken to mean to be rejected 
outright as wrong. There cannot be anything wrong about any part of the 
Vedas. Even to think so is sacrilegious. There are matters in these texts 
that are prelimnary to an important subject or that lend support to it. 
According to the arrangement made by our forefathers the important 
part is to be retained and the other prelimnary or supporting portion is to 
be excluded. Certain things are necessary at a certain stage of our 
development. But these are to be excluded as we go step by step to a 
higher stage.  
There are then passages that are of atmost importance and have the 
force of law. These are to be accepted in full, Things that are to be 
discarded belong to the category of "arthavada" and “anuvada".  
The Vedas contain stories told to impress on us the importance of a 
concept, stories that raise ideas to a higher level. The injunctions with 
which these stories are associated must be acepted in full but the stories 
themselves may be discarded as "arthavada", that is they need not be 
brought into obsevance.  
What is "anuvada"? Before speaking about a new rule or a new concept, 
the Vedas tell us about things that we already know. They go on 
repeating this without coming to the new rule or concept that is things 
known to us in practical life and not having the authority of Vedic 
pronouncements. This is "anuvada".  
Anuvada and artavada are not of importance and are not meant to 
convey the ultimate purpose or message of the Vedas. What we do not 
know otherwise through any other authority and what the Vedas speak of 
is "vidhi". And that is the chief "vada", the true tattva, the true intent of 
the Vedas.  
To explain further. What is mentioned in the Vedas but can be known by 
other (mundane) means is not incontrovertible Vedic authority. The 
purpose of the Vedas is to make known what is not known. They speak 
about things we know and do not know, but their chief purpose is the 


 
latter- what they state about what we do not know. It is out of 
compassion that they speak about what is known to us as a prelude to 
telling us what we do not know. But if telling us they deal with things that 
we do not know? If the Vedas deal at length with the things that we are 
ignorant about, would it not be ridiculous to discard them and retain only 
what we know already? Indeed such an act would be sacrilegious. The 
question, however, arises: why should things known to us have been 
dealt with at length?  
The Vedas could have been silent about them. Well, what is that we 
know, what is that we do not know?  
There are two views about all mundane objects, worldly phenomena. Do 
all the objects that we percieve constitute one entity or are they all 
disparate? Opinion is divided on this. Based on our physical perceptions 
we regard all objects to be separate from one another. It is only on such a 
basis that our funtions are carried out properly in the workday world. 
Water is one hting and oil is another. To light a lamp we need oil [to feed 
the wick]. We cannot use water for the same. But if the lamp flares up 
and objects near by catch fire we will have to put it out with water. With 
oil the fire will only spread. We have thus to note how one object is 
different from another and to learn how best each is to be used.  
To view each object as being distinct from another is part of "Dvaita", 
dualism. Many of the rituals in the Vedas, many of the ways of worship 
found in them, are based on the dualistic view. As Advaitins (followers of 
the non-dualistic doctrine) we need not raise any objections on this score. 
We must, however, find out whether or not the Vedas go beyond 
dualism. If they do not, we have to conclude that their message is Dvaita. 
But what is the truth actually found expressed in them?  
The non-dualist truth is proclaimed in a number of hymns and in most of 
the Upanisads, but this is not in keeping with our outward experience. 
The ultimate Vedic view is that all objects are indeed not separate from 
one another but are the outward manifestation of the same Self.  


 
Our religious and philosophical works have two parts -purvapaksa and 
siddhanta. In the purvapaksas or initial section of a work, the point of 
view to be refuted [the view opposed to that of the author of the work] is 
dealt with. If we read only this part we are likely to form an impression 
opposite to what the work intends to convey. To refute an opinion other 
than one's own, one has naturally to state it. This is the purpose of the 
purvapaksa. In the siddhanta section there is refutation of the systems 
opposed to one's own before the latter is sought to be established. 
scholars abroad are full of praise for the fact that in our darsanas or 
philosophical works the views of systems opposed to those expressed in 
the darsanas are not concealed or ignored but that their criticisms and 
objections are sought to be answered.  
From what is said before, does it mean that non-dualism is incorporated 
in the purvapaksa of the Vedas so as to be refuted in the latter part? No, 
it is not so. The jnanakanda in which the Upanisads lay emphasise on non-
dualism is the concluding part of the Vedas. The karmakanda which 
speaks of dualism precedes it. So if the Vedas first speak about the 
dualism that we know and later about the non-dualism that we do not 
know, it means that the non-dualistic teaching is the supreme purpose of 
the Vedas.  
I will tell you why the dualism in te purvapaksa in the Vedas is not 
rebutted. The works and worship performed with a dualistic outlook are 
not a hindrance for us to advance on the path of non-dualistic 
experience. On the contrary, they are a means to make precisely such 
progress. So the works and worship are not to be taken as constituting a 
point of view opposed to the main message of the Vedas and to be 
refuted in the second part. First the flower, then the fruit. Similiarly, we 
have to afvance to non-dualism from dualism. The flower is not opposed 
to the fruit, is it? Do we despise the flower because the fruit represents 
its highest [natural development]?  
From the non-dualistic standpoint there is no need to counter other 
systems, viewed on their own proper levels. It is only when these levels 


 
are exceeded that the need arises to counter them. That is how our 
Acarya and other exponents of non-dualism countenanced other systems.  
By the grace of Isvara scientific advancement so far has done no injury to 
things Atmic and indeed modern science takes us increassingly close to 
Advaita whose truth hitherto could not be known by anything other than 
the Vedas. In the early centuries of science it wasd thought that all 
objects in the world were different entities, seperate from one another. 
Then scientists came to the conclusion that the basis of all matter was 
constituted by the different elements, that all the countless objects in the 
world resulted from these elements combining together in various ways. 
Subsequently when atomic science developed it was realised that all the 
elements had the same source, the same energy.  
Those who meditate on the Self and know the truth realise that this 
power, this Atman, is made up of knowledge, awareness. And it is 
knowledge (jnana) that enfolds not only inert objects but also the 
individual self to form the non-dualistic whole.  
Whether it is one energy or one caitanya, the One Object that both 
vijnanins (scientists) and jnanins (knowers) speak of is not visible to us. 
We see only its countless disguises as different objects, that is we see the 
One Object dualistically [or pluralistically]. You need not seek the support 
of the Vedas for this, for what is obvious. Why do you need the testimony 
of the Vedas for what our eyes and intellect recognize? If they speak of a 
truth that we are not aware of but which we can realise from what we 
know, and if this truth is proclaimed to be their final conclusion, we must 
accept it as their ultimate message. This message is the doctrine, the 
truth, that the individual self is inseperably (non-dualistically) dissolved in 
the Paramatman to become the Paramatman.  
 
   
   


 

Essence of the Upanisadic Teaching 
What is the essence of the Upanisadic teaching? How do we realise the 
ideal state mentioned in the Upanisads [the oneing of the individual self 
and the Overself]?  
The phenomenal universe, in the view of modern science, is embraced by 
the concepts of time and space [It exists in the time-space frame]. The 
Upanisads declare that only by being freed from time and space factors 
can we grasp the ultimate truth that is at the source of the cosmos. I told 
you about the horizon - where we are right there the horizon is. 
Recognition of this truth takes us beyond space. In this way we must also 
try to transcend time.  
Is it possible?  
To give us the confidence that it is, an example could be cited from 
everyday life. To spend the time we lap up newspaper reports of the fight 
going on in a distant country like, say, the Congo [now called Zaire]. If a 
dispute or trouble erupts nearer home, in a country like Pakistan (or at 
home in Kasmir), we forget the Congo and turn to Pakistan or Kasmir. The 
newspapers themselves push reports of the Congo trouble to some 
corner and highlight developments in Pakistan or Kasmir. But when a 
quarrel breaks out even nearer, say, a quarrel over Tiruttani between the 
Tamils and the Telugus, Pakistan and Kasmir are forgotten and the 
boundary quarrel claims all our interest, Now, when we come to know of 
a street brawl in our neighbourhood, we throw aside the newspaper to 
go out and see for ourselves what the trouble is all about. Again, when 
we are watching the street fight, a friend or relative comes and tells us 
that a war is going on in our own home between the wife and the 
mother. What do we do then? We forget the street brawl and rush home 
at once.  


 
On an international level the Congo dispute is perhaps of great 
importance. But we pass from that to quarrels of decreasing importance. 
Our interest in each, however is in inverse proportion to its real 
importance. Why? The Congo is far away in space. We are more 
concerned about what happens nearer us than about distant occurences. 
It is all like coming to the horizon, the spot where we are.  
Now let us turn our gaze inward. If we become aware of the battle going 
on within us, the battle fought by the senses, all other quarrels will 
become distant affairs like the Congo dispute. Let us try to resolve this 
inner conflict and try to remain tranquil. In this tranquility all will be 
banished including place, space, and so on. When we are asleep we are 
not aware of either knowledge or space, but the jnana (in the state of 
enlightenment of the inner truth) we will experience knowledge without 
any consciousness of space.  
The time factor is similar. How inconsolably we wept when our father 
died ten years ago. How is it that we do not feel the same intensity of 
grief when we think of his death today? On the day a dear one passes we 
weep so much, but not so much on the following day. Why is it so? Last 
year we earned a promotion, or won a prize in a lottery. We jumped for 
joy then, did'nt we? Why is it that we don't feel the same thrill of joy 
when we think about it today?  
Just as nearness in space is a factor in determining how we are affected 
by an event, so too is nearness in time. Evev when we are turned outward 
and remain conscious of time and space, they lose their impact without 
any special effort on our part. So the confidence arises that we can be 
totally freed from these two factors of time and space if we turn inward. 
When we are asleep we are oblivious of time and space without any 
effort on our part. But we do not then have the awareness of being free 
from them. We must go to the state spoken of by Tayumanavar, the state 
in which we sleep without sleeping and are full of jnana and are 
immersed in the bliss of freedom from time and space. Then nothing will 
affect us, not even a quarrel right in our prescence, in our home. Even 
when we recieve a stab wound we will not be affected by it - it would be 


 
like a happening in a remote land like Congo. When someone very dear to 
us dies in our prescence - husband, wife or child - it would be an 
occurence remote in time, like our father's passing ten years ago.  
Let us, for the time-being, forget arguments about non-dualism and 
dualism. Let us think about our real need. What is it?  
Peace. Tranquility.  
We are affected by good and bad things alike. We cry, we laugh. Both 
sorrow and joy have their impact on us. Even excessive laughter causes 
pain in the stomach, enervates us. When we are tickled we react angrily. 
"Stop it!" we cry. Even when we dance for joy we are fatigued. We like to 
remain calm without being affected by anything, without giving way to 
any type of emotion. Such is our need. Not dualism or non-dualism.  
Let us consider what we must do for this goal. One point will become 
clear if we think about how the impact produced by a happening or an 
emotion is wiped away. "When news about the Congo war broke how we 
became engrossed in newspaper reports of the dispute. How did we lose 
interest in it later? Why does it not have any impact on us now? " If we 
think on these lines we will realise that the impact of any event - or 
whatever - is progressively reduced as it is pushed further in space. If we 
also consider why we are not as much affected now by our father's death 
as we were ten years ago when he died, we will realise that with receding 
time we are less and less affected by past events. So if we are to remain 
detached we must learn to think that what happens close by is happening 
in a remote place like the Congo.  
Similarly, we must also learn to think that all the happy and unhappy 
incidents of the moment occured ten years ago. We must assiduously 
train ourselves to take such an attitude. No joy or sorrow is everlasting. 
They are all relative [that is they do not have their own integral or 
independent force but rely on other factors]. So without being part of 
anything or else dependent on anything, we must remain in the absolute 
state of being ourselves. Then alone will be free from all influences and 


 
experience eternal peace. This is how Einstein's Theory of Relativity is 
applied to the science of the Self (Atmavidya).  
The essence of Upanisadic message is the burning desire to be from time 
and space. It would be in proportion to the extent to which we burn 
within in our endeavour to be free from the spatio-temporal factor that 
we will be rewarded with the grace of Isvara and be led towards the 
fulfilment of the great ideal.  
There is no need to go to the mountains or to the forest for instruction. 
Space and time teach us how to remain unaffected by events. All that we 
need to do is to pray to the Lord and make an effort to develop the will 
and capacity to put happenings of the moment back in time and distant in 
space  
The first of the ten [major] Upanisads. Isavasya, says:"It is in motion and 
yet it is still. It is afar and yet near. It is indeed within. . . . . ". This 
statement refers to space and time and creates the urge in us to be freed 
from both. The next mantra asks us to see time and space and all 
creatures in our Self itself. Then there will be no cause for hatred, 
delusion or sorow, that is nothing will affect us. Another mantra of the 
same Upanisad declares that the Self is all - pervading, going beyond 
space, and distributing things through the endless years according to 
their natures.  
On the whole, the Upanisads speak of the same basic truth of space and 
time that modern science teaches. But there is this difference. For science 
this truth is a mere postulate. For the Upanisads it is a truth to be realised 
within as an experience.  
This is a conclusion of the Upanisads which themselves are the concluding 
part of the Vedas.  
 
   


 

Vedic Sakhas 
When the Vedas are said to have no end, how can one talk of there being 
an "end to the Vedas (Vedanta)"? The mesage of the Vedas, the truths 
proclaimed by them, the teachings with respect to self-realisation occur 
in the concluding part (Upanisads) of each of the Vedas, that is Vedanta.  
Why should the Vedas, which are infinite have been divided into so many 
sakhas or recensions? A man must be imparted all that is necessary to 
purify his mind and prepare him for Self-realisation. For this purpose he 
needs hymns, mantras, employed in the performance of sacrifices and 
other works; he has to examine the principles behind the sacrifices; and, 
finally, he has to inquire into the Paramatman adopting the meditative 
practice called nididhyasana so as to make the Ultimate Truth an inner 
experience. It is not necessary for him to learn all the countless Vedas; in 
any case it would be an impossible task. You remember the story I told 
you of the great sage Bharadvaja who could go only three steps up the 
Vedic mountain. What a man needs to learn to refine himself, become 
free from all impurities and finally mingle in the Supreme Being- the text 
confirming to such needs is separated from the unending Vedas to make 
a sakha.  
A Vedic recension includes all the works relating to a Brahmin's life from 
birth to death. A Brahmin must memorise the mantras of the Samhita, 
perform sacrifices according to the Brahmanas to the chanting of the 
mantras, and later cross the bridge constituted by the Aranyaka, the 
bridge that connects the outward with the inward, that is study intensely 
the Upanisads that are concerned exclusively with the inward. In this way 
he finally becomes liberated, with the inward and the outward becoming 
one.  
For the wise and the mature a single mantra is enough to free them from 
worldly existence. But to become pure an ordinary man needs to perform 
many works and conduct worship in many ways. He has to do japa and 


 
meditation. Each sakha contains mantras, rituals and instruction in the 
science of the Self to enable him to find release.  
(See of this part entitled "Sakhas now studied".) 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Brahmins and Non-Brahmins 
What about non- Brahmins? Is it not necessary for them too to become 
pure within? Even if they do not have to perform Vedic rituals or chant 
mantras, they too have to become cleansed inwardly by doing their 
alloted work. Whatever his caste or jati, if a man performs his hereditary 
work in a spirit of dedication to Isvara he will become liberated. This is 
stated clearly in the Gita:"Svakaramana tam abhyarcya siddhim vindati 
manavah. "  
One man has the job of waging wars, another that of trading and rearing 
cattle, a third has manual work to do. What work does the Brahmin do for 
soceity?  
Is not the grace of the Supreme-Being important even in worldly life? The 
Brahmin's vocation is doing such works as would enable all jatis earn this 
grace. The devas or celestials are like the officials of the Paramatman. It is 
the duty of the Brahmin to make all creatures of the world dear to them. 
The work he performs, the mantras he chants are intended to do good to 
all jatis. Since he has to do with forces that are extra-mundane, he has to 
follow a religious discipline of rites and vows more strictly than what 
others have to follow so as to impart potency to the mantras. If it were 
realised that he has to perform rituals and observe vows for the sake of 
other communities also, people would not harbour the wrong notion that 
he has been assigned some special [priveleged] job.  
Apart from this, the Brahmin has to learn the arts and sastras that pertain 
to worldly life, the traits and vocations of all other castes and instruct 
them in such work as is theirs by heredity. His calling is that of the 
teacher and he must not do other jobs. His is a vocation entailing great 
responsibility and is more important than the job of affording bodily 
protection to people, or of trade or labour. For the Brahmin's duty is to 
preserve the arts and crafts and other skills by which other communities 
maintain themselves to nurture their minds and impart them knowledge.  


 
If the man discharging such a responsibility is not mentally mature, his 
work will not yield the desired results. If he himself is not noble of mind 
he will not be able to raise others to a high level. At the same time, he has 
a handicap which he does not share with others. If he believes that he is 
superior to others because he does intellectual work, he will only be a 
hindrance to himself. That is why the Brahmin has to be rendered pure. 
Since there are reasons for him to feel superior to others, there must be 
the assurance that he does not suffer from the least trace of egoism and 
arrogance. That is why he is tempered by means of the forty samskaras 
and his impurities wrung out.  
If the mantras are to be efficacious, the one who chants them must be 
disciplined and must observe a variety of vows. There is, for instance, the 
mantra to cure a person stung by a scorpion. The man who chants it must 
observe certain strict rules. If he is lax in the matter, the mantra will have 
no effect- this is what the mantrikas themselves say. There are rules for 
the recitation of each mantra, a time when it is to be chanted and when it 
is not to be. If the rules are violated it will have no effect. It is said that 
the mantras are more efficacious when recited during eclipses.  
A Vedic sakha contains all the rites needed to be performed by a Brahmin 
to become pure within.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Sakhas now Studied 
People in the distant past had remarkable abilities and possessed great 
yogic and intellectual power. So theym could gain mastery of many Vedic 
recensions. As for the great sages it wsas a matter of the Vedas revealing 
themselves to them in a flash. Others with their unusual abilities were 
able to master not only the Vedas but other branches of learning. The 
Vedas in their infinitude being like the expanse of an endless ocean, no 
one has been able to master all of them. Even so in the remote past there 
were individuals conversant with a large number of sakhas.  
In later times men began to lose their divine yogic power. At the 
beginning of the age of Kali it became very weak indeed. The life-span of 
man began to get shorter and his health and intelligence declined. It is all 
the sport of the Paramatman. Why should there have been a dimunition 
in human power and human intelligence? It is dificult to answer the 
question. Would it not be natural to expect an increase, generation after 
generation, in the number of people learning the Vedas, performing 
sacrifices and conducting Atmic inquiry? Why is it not so? Again it is a 
question that is hard to answer.  
The Paramatman conducts the cosmic drama playing in strange and ever 
new ways. Although scientists like Darwin speak of evolution, in the 
matter of Atmic strength, intellectual enlightenment, character and yogic 
power, we seem to have be en going further and further down on the 
scale.  
Since the Krta-Yuga there has been a decline in the powers of man. In 
that age a man lived so long as his skeleton lasted. Even if his blood dried 
up and his flesh was destroyed he survived until his bones collapsed. 
People in the Krta age had much power of knowledge. They were called 
"asti-gata-pranas".  


 
In the Treta age people were "mamsa-gata-pranas", that is they lived so 
long as their flesh lasted and did not perish even when their blood dried 
up. They had a special capacity for performing sacrifices. In the Dvapara 
age people were "rudhira-gata-pranas" and lived until such time as their 
blood dried up. They were known especially for the puja they performed. 
We of the Kali age are "anna-gata-pranas" and life will remain in our body 
so long as the food [nourishment] lasts. We have little capacity to 
meditate, perform rituals and puja. But we are capable of chanting the 
names of the Lord - Krsna, Rama, and so on. It is true that by muttering 
the names of the Lord we will be liberated.  
Even so we must not allow the Vedas to become extinct. They were 
bequeathed to us from the time of creation. Must we allow them to be 
lost?  
When Sri Krsna departed from this world, grim darkness enveloped the 
world. There is “darkness" in his name itself (" Krsna" means dark). He 
was also born in darkness, in the dungeon of a prison at midnight. But he 
was the radiance of knowledge for all the world, the light of compassion. 
When he departed much injury was done to jnana, and darkness 
descended into the world. Kali, who is the evil incarnate, acceded to 
authority. All this is the sport of Paratman, the sport that is inscrutable. 
Sri Krsna came as a burst of light. Then, urged by his compassion, he 
decided that the world must not go to waste. He thought that it could be 
saved by administering an antidote against the venom of Kali. This 
antidate was the Vedas. It would be enough if precautions were taken to 
make sure that the “Kali Man" did not devour them-the world would be 
saved. In the darkness surrounding everything they would serve the 
purpose of a lamp lighting the path of mankind. In the age of Kali they 
would not shine with the same effulgence as in the previous ages. But the 
Lord resolved that they must burn with at least the minimum of lustre to 
be of benefit to mankind and this he ensured through Vedavyasa who 
was partially his incarnation.  
The sage who was to carry out Bhagvan Krsna's resolve was not then 
called Veda Vyasa. His name too was Krsna and, since he was born on an 


 
island, he had the appellation “Dvaipayana" ( Islander). Badarayana is 
another name of his. Krsna Dvaipayana knew all the 1, 180 sakhas ( 
recensions) of the Vedas revealed to the world by various sages. They 
were mingled together in one great stream. Being remarkably gifted, our 
ancestors could memorise all of them. For the benefit of weaker people 
like us, Vyasa divided them into four Vedas and subdivided each into 
sakhas. It was like damming a river and taking the water through various 
canals. Vyasa accomplished the task of dividing the Vedas easily because 
he was a great yogin with vision and because he had the power gained 
from austerities.  
The Rgvedic sakhas contain hymns to invoke the various deities; the 
Yajurvedic sakhas deal with the conduct of sacrifices; l the Samaveda 
sakhas contain songs to please the deities; and the Atharvaveda sakhas, 
besides dealing with sacrifices, contain mantras recited to avert 
calamities and to destroy enemies. The Samaveda had the largest number 
of recensions, 1, 000. In the Rgveda there were 21; in the Yajus 109(Sukla-
Yajur Veda 15, and Krsna Yajur Veda 94); and in the Atharvaveda 50.  
While, according to one scholar, the Visnu Purana mentions the number 
of sakhas to be 1, 180, another version is that there were 1, 133 
recensions- the Rgveda 21, the Yajurveda 101, the Samaveda 1, 000 and 
the Atharvaveda 11.  
Considering that people in the age of Kali would be inferior to their 
forefathers, Krsna Dvaipayana thought that it should be sufficient for 
them to learn one sakha of any one of the four Vedas. It was the Lord that 
put this idea into his head. Vyasa assigned the Rgveda sakhas to Paila, the 
Yajurveda sakhas to Vaisampayana, the Samaveda sakhas to Jaimini and 
the Atharvanaveda sakhas to Sumantu. ]  
Krsna Dvaipayana came to be called "Vedavyasa" for having divided the 
Vedas into four and then having subdivided them into 1, 180 recensions. 
"Vyasa" literally means an "essay" or a "composition". Classifying objects 
is also known as "vyasa".  


 
According to Krsna Dvaipayana's arrangement, though it is obligatory for 
a person [that is a Brahmin] to learn only one recension, it does not mean 
that there is a bar on learning more. The intention is that at least one 
sadha must be studied. Even after Vyasa's time, there have been 
examples of panditas mastering more than one sakha from the four 
Vedas. (Vyasa divided the Vedas some 5, 000 years ago. This has been 
established to some extent historically. Instead of accepting this date 
arrived at according to our sastras, modern historians maintain that the 
date of the Mahabarata must be 1500  
B. C. But of late, opinion is veering round to the view that the epic dates 
back to 5, 000 years ago.  
I said that there was no bar on anyone learning more than one sakha. 
Even today we find North Indians with appellations like "Caturvedi", 
"Trivedi" and "Dvivedi".  
We had a "Trivedi", who was governor of one of our states. "Duve" and 
"Dave" are derived from "Dvivedi". One descended from a family well 
versed in the four Vedas is called a "Caturvedin". In Bengal he is called a 
"Catterji". Those who have mastered three Vedas are "Trivedins". Today 
it is rare to see a man who has learned even one Veda, but the fact that 
members of some families still call themselves "Trivedins" or 
"Caturvedins" show that in the past there must have been individuals 
who knew more than one Veda. Jnanasambandhar calls himself 
"Nanmarai Jnanasambandhar". Since he was suckled by Amba herself it 
must have been easy for him to master the four Vedas.  
During these 5, 000 years and more since Vedavyasa divided the Vedas, 
many sakhas have been lost. Out of the 1, 180 we are in the unfortunate 
position of having only six or seven. Of the 21 sakhas of the Rgveda there 
is only one extant- it is called the Sakala Sakha, or the Aitareya Sakha, 
since the Aitareya Upanishad occurs in it. Of the 15 recencions of the 
Sukla- Yajurveda only two are extant, the Kanva Sakha having a large 
following in Maharashtra and the Madhyandina Sakha in North India. Of 
the 94 sakhas of the Krsna- Yajurveda, the Taittiriya has a large following, 
particularly in the South. We have lost 997 of the 1, 000 sakhas of the 


 
Samaveda. In Tamil Nadu those who follow the Kauthuma Sakha are 
more in number than those who follow the Talavakara Sakha, while in 
Maharastra there is a small following for Ranayaniya. Once it was feared 
that out of the 50 recensions of the Atharvaveda none was extant. But on 
inquiry it was discovered that there was a Brahmin in Sinor, Gujarat, who 
was conversant with the Saunaka Sakha of this Veda. We sent students 
from here (Tamil Nadu) to learn the same from him.  
The Aitareya Brahmana and the Kausitaki Brahmana (also called 
Sankhayana Brahmana) of the Rgveda are still available to us. The 
Aitareya Upanisad and the Kausitaki Upanisad, which are part of the 
Aranyakas belonging to these, are still extant.  
Of the Sukla- Yajurveda we have the Satapatha Brahmana. This is 
common- with minor differences- to both the Madhyandina and Kanva 
Sakhas. It is a voluminous work which serves as an explanation for all the 
Vedas. Only one Aranyaka is extant from this Veda and it constitutes the 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad. I have already mentioned that the Isavasya 
Upanisad belongs to the Samhita part of the Veda.  
Of the Krsna- Yajurveda the Taittiriya Brahmana alone is extant. Among 
the Aranyakas of this Veda we have the Taittitiya; the Taittiriya Upanisad 
and the Mahanarayana Upanisad are part of it. The latter contains a 
number of mantras commonly used. The Maitrayani Aranyaka and the 
Upanisad of the same name also belong to the Krsna- Yajurveda. As 
mentioned before, of the Katha Sakha only the Upanisad( Kathopanisad) 
is available, not the Samhita, Brahmana and Aranyaka.  
(Similarly, the Svetasvatoaropanisad of the Krsna-Yajurveda is still extant, 
but no other part of the relevant sakha.)  
Nine hundred ninety- seven sakhas of the Samaveda are lost and of its 
Brahmanas only some seven or eight have survived- Tandya, Arseya, 
Devatadhyaya, 
Samhitopanishad, 
Vamsa, 
(Sadvimsa, 
Chandogya, 
Jaiminiya). The Talavakara Aranyaka of this Veda is also called the 
Talavakara Brahmana. The Kenopanishad comes at the end of it: so it is 


 
also known as the Talavakara Upanisad. The Chandogya Brahmana has 
the Chandogya Upanisad.  
To repeat what I mentioned earlier, we still have three important 
Upanisads from the Atharvaveda- Prasna, Mundaka and Mandukya. (The 
Nrsimha Tapini Upanisad also belongs to this Veda.) The only Brahmana 
of this Veda to have survived is Gopatha.  
We should be guilty of a grave offence if the seven or eight sakhas of the 
, 180 that still survive become extinct because of our neglect: there will 
be no expiation for the same.  
In the South, which is called "Dravidadesa", Vedic learning is still kept 
alive by the Namputiris in Kerala. And it was well maintained in Andhra 
Prades until recently. A great encouragement to this was the annual 
Navrathri festival at Vijayavada every year when examinations for Vedic 
students and an assembly of Vedic scholars were held. Those who took 
part in the assembly were given cash awards as well as certificates. 
Brahmacarins and pandits came from all over the country to take part in 
the examination and the assembly respectively. The certificate was highly 
valued. A scholar returning home with the certificate was honoured by 
householders all along the way. There was a custom in Andhra Prades to 
set aside a tidy sum to be presented to Vedic scholars at weddings. Vedic 
learning flourished in that state because of such incentives.  
A Brahmin ought not to run after money; if he does he ceases to be a 
Brahmin. However, we have to consider the fact that today any 
occupation or profession other than that of the Vedic scholar is lucrative. 
One learned in the Vedas cannot make ends meet. Such being the case it 
becomes incumbent on us to devise a system by which the Vedic scholar 
too can live without any care. It is because the minimum needs of Vedic 
students and scholars were met in the Telugu country that scriptural 
learning flourished there.  
We are making efforts to promote Vedic learning all over India and in 
particular in Tamil Nadu- and a scheme has been drawn up to raise funds 
for pathasalsas( Vedic schools). In Tamil Nadu there was patronage for 


 
Vedic learning until the reign of Hindu rulers like the Nayakas. Later it 
received encouragement from the princely states. A Brahmin who has 
mastered an entire Veda sakha is called a "srotriya", from "Sruti" meaning 
the Vedas. It was customary for Tamil rajas to donate land to such 
Brahmins and sometimes an entire village was given away, it being 
exempt from taxes. This is described as "iraiyili" in old inscriptions. 
"Brahmadesam" is the name given to lands made over to Brahmins as 
gifts. In the royal edicts the word used is "Brahmadeyam". 
"Caturvedimangalam" was the name given to a village donated by royalty 
to Brahmins proficient in all four Vedas. Those who spent all thier time in 
learning and teaching the scriptures had no other source of income. So 
they were exempt from kisti. This exemption was in force even during the 
rule of the Nawabs, the East India Company and its successor British 
government. Even though the British did nothing to promote Vedic 
studies, they exempted srotriya villages from taxes. However, the 
Brahmins during the time sold their lands, converting them into 
certificates, and abandoned the villages of their forefathers to settle in 
towns. This also meant something most unfortunate, severing their 
connection with the long Vedic tradition.  
Our country has an ages- old tradition- and it is a glorious tradition- that 
has no parallel in any generation, worked not only for their own Atmic 
uplift but for the well- being of the entire society. And this they have 
done to the exclusion of being involved in worldly affairs. Later, however, 
they (Brahmins) failed to recognise the unique importance of such a 
tradition and broke away from it to take to the Western way of life. A 
situation soon arose in which others also forgot the importance of having 
a class of people devoting themselves solely to the Atmic quest.  
 
   
   
   


 

Duty of Brahmins 
If any purpose has been served by listening to me all the while, it is up to 
you [Brahmins] to take whatever steps you think fit to promote Vedic 
learning. Every day you must perform “Brahmayajna" which is one of the 
five great sacrifices ( mahayajnas). The term "Brahma" in “Brahmayajna" 
means the Vedas. The power of the mantras must be preserved in us as 
an eternal reality. It must burn bright like a lamp that is never 
extinguished. For this reason it is that we perform Brahmayajna. We must 
offer oblations to the presiding rsi or seer of our Vedic recension. Failing 
that, the least we can do is perform the Gayatri- japa every day. Gayatri is 
the essence of the Vedas, their substance. To qualify to chant it, you must 
be initiated into it by a Guru. The Gayatri you thus learn must be mentally 
repeated at least a thousand times every day. Again, the least you can do 
-and you must do it- is to chant the mantra atleast ten times morning, 
noon and dusk. The sun god is the presiding deity of Gayatri. Sunday, the 
day of the sun, is a universal holiday. On this day you must get up at 4 in 
the morning and, after your ablutions, recite the Gayatri a thousand 
times. This will ensure your well-being as well as of all mankind.  
All Brahmins must learn to chant the Purusasukta, the Srisukta, Sri 
Rudram, etc. I am speaking particularly to office going Brahmins here. 
Since they will find it difficult to devote themselves fully to Vedic learning 
they must try to acquire at least a minimum of scriptural knowledge. But 
it should be creditable if they accomplish something-in the present case 
learning the Vedas- in the face of difficulties. If you start learning the 
scripture now you will be able to complete your study in a few years. But 
you need faith and devotion. The Vedas are a vidya that has come down 
to us through the millennia. If you study them with determination you are 
bound to succeed. Haven’t you seen 50 and 60 year old people engaged 
in research in the hope of gaining a Ph. D. or some other degree? If you 
have the will you will have the way to accomplish anything however 
difficult. There are examples of individuals who at 40 had been totally in 
the dark about the Vedas but who later learned to chant them with 


 
ardour. As a matter of fact there are such men among the office- bearers 
of our Veda Raksana Nidhi Trust. So what are needed are faith as well as 
resoluteness.  
Leave aside the question of Brahmins who are in jobs and are middle- 
aged or older. Whether or not they themselves can chant the Vedas or 
want to learn to chant them, they must see to it that their sons at least 
receive instruction in the scriptures. Perhaps the children cannot be sent 
for a full-time course in the Vedas, but the parents could at least ensure 
that, after they perform the upanayana of their sons at the age of eight 
years, the boys are taught the Vedas for one hour every evening for a 
period of eight years. A Vedic tutor may be engaged on a cooperative 
basis for all children of a locality or village. This should be of help to the 
children of poor Brahmins.  
Above all, efforts must be made to ensure that the existing Vedic schools 
that are in bad shape are not forced to close down. These institutions 
must be reinvigorated and more and more students encouraged to join 
them. To accomplish this task both teachers and taught must be 
adequately helped with money.  
Let me repeat that Brahmins ought not to be afforded more than the 
minimum cash or creature comforts. But we see today that there are 
many lucrative jobs to tempt them. So there is the danger of their not 
being fully involved in their svadharma (own duty) of learning and 
teaching the Vedas if they are not kept above their want. We must 
provide them with certain facilities so that we are not faced with the 
unfortunate situation in which such Brahmins become more and more 
scarce. There are new comforts, new avenues of pleasure, not known in 
the past. It is unrealistic to expect a few Brahmins alone to deny 
themselves all these and adhere to their svadharma. If we adopt such an 
attitude the Vedic dharma will suffer. So when some Brahmins are 
engaged exclusively in their dharma it is obligatory on our part to help 
them with money and material. Though they must not be afforded any 
luxuries, we must provide them with enough comforts so that they are 


 
not enticed into other jobs. We have drawn up a number of schemes 
bearing this in mind.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Veda-bhasya 
The sound of the Vedas must be kept alive. For this purpose, it would be 
enough if Brahmins memorised the mantras and chanted them every day. 
The power of the sound, the power of the mantras vocalised, is sufficient 
to bring good to mankind. I said, you will remember, that chanting the 
Vedas with faith, even though without knowing their meaning, is 
“viryavattaram". The statement, however, does not fully reflect my view.  
A student will have to spend many years to memorise the Vedas and 
study their meaning. It is not easy to keep him confined to the Vedic 
school for such a long time. I must explain here why I said that " it is not 
necessary to know the meaning of the Vedas and their sound is all we 
need". To insist that a student should chant the Vedas only if he knows 
the meaning of the mantras is expecting too much of him. It might also 
mean that nobody would come forward even to memorise the hymns. In 
that case how will their sound be kept alive? That is why I said, half 
seriously and half sportingly, that “the meaning is not necessary, the 
sound would be sufficient. . . . ".  
There must indeed be a large number of people who can chant the Vedas 
and keep their sound alive. In addition, there must be a system by which 
some of them at least will be taught their meaning. That is how we have 
come to be seriously involved in teaching the Veda-bhasya (commentary 
on the Vedas). It is because the Vedas are profound in their import that a 
number of great men have commented upon them. Their efforts must 
not go in vain.  
We perform a number of rites in our home: marriage, sraddha, 
upakarma, and so on, and during these functions we chant Vedic mantras 
as instructed by the priest. By the grace of Isvara we have not reached 
the unfortunate state of totally discarding such rites. However, there is a 
declining trend, a weakening of Vedic practices. One important reason for 
this is that we do not know the meaning of the mantras chanted. 


 
Educated people nowadays have no true involvement in rites in which 
they have to repeat the mantras after the priest without knowing the 
meaning.  
We cannot expect to convince people that the chanting of the mantras 
(even without knowing their meaning) is beneficial. The hymns for each 
function are different and also different in significance. If we appreciate 
this fact, we will realise that there is a scientific basis for them. Besides, 
they have an emotional appeal which willl be evident only when we know 
their meaning. So to know the meaning of the mantras is to have greater 
involvement in the functions in which they are chanted. That is the 
reason why the mouthing of syllables purposelessly has come to be 
[irreverently] likened to the chanting of “sraddha mantras". The meaning 
of the mantras (including those chanted at sraddhas) must be understood 
by the priest as well as by the performer of the rites; we must evolve a 
scheme for theis purpose.  
First the priest himself must know the meaning of the mantras and the 
significance of the rituals at which he officiates. Today the majority of 
priests are ignorant of the meaning of what they chant. If a karta or a 
yajamana (the man on whose behalf a rite is conducted) asks his priest, 
“What does this mean? ", the latter is unable to give an answer. How 
would you then expect the karta to have faith in the rites?  
I believe that many middle-aged people today are keen to know the 
meaning of the mantras. I also think that if they tend to lose faith in 
rituals it is because they have to repeat parrot-like the hymns chanted by 
the priest. So we are making efforts to ensure that those who officiate at 
rituals (the upadhyayas) accquire proficiency in Veda-bhasya to enable 
them to explain the meaning of the mantras.  
According to the Nirukta (one of the six Angas of the Vedas) a Brahmin 
comes under a curse by chanting the Vedas without knowing their 
meaning.  
A number of great men have written commentaries on the Vedas so as to 
inspire faith in the sacraments. Sri Madhvacarya has written a 


 
commentary for the first 40 suktas of the first kanda of the Rg Veda. 
Skandasvamin has also written a bhasya on the Rg Veda. To 
BhattaBhaskara we owe a commentary on the Krasna-Yajur Veda, and to 
Mahidhara on that of the Sukla-Yajur Veda. In recent times, Dayananda 
Saraswati and Aravinda Ghose as well as his disciple Kapali Sastri have 
written expository treatises on the Vedas. Though there are so many 
commentaries, the one by Sri Sayanacarya is particularly famous: many 
scholars, including Western Indologists, treat it as authoritative.  
There are five Vedas if you reckon the Yajur Veda to be two with its Sukla 
and Krsna divisions. Sayana has written commentaries on all the five. 
Expository treatises on the Vedas had been written before him but he 
was the first to write a bhasya for all the Vedas.  
Though Sayanacarya's commentary had been studied for centuries, a 
stage came recently when we feared that it would cease to hold any 
interest for students. Those who learned to chant the Vedas, without 
knowing their meaning, became priests while those who studied poetry 
and other subjects did not learn even to chant the mantras. So much so 
interest in the study of the Veda-bhasya declined. It was at this time that 
the Sastyabdapurti Trust was formed with a view to maintain the study of 
the Veda-bhasya.  
When the Trust started to conduct examinations, the Veda-bhasya meant 
no more than the printed text of the Vedic commentary kept in 
bookshops. The publishers were then worried that not many copies 
would be sold. After the creation of the Trust we gave students not only 
scholarships but also copies of the Veda-bhasya. Our worry now was 
whether there would be enough copies in stock for fresh students. It is 
with the grace of Parasakti, the Supreme Goddess that we have 
succeeded in reviving the study of the Veda-bhasya. And so long as we 
have her grace there will be students ready to learn the subject and there 
will also be enough copies of the text.  
On the eve of a wedding, upanayana or simanta ceremony, we must 
consult a Vedic scholar who knows the Veda-bhasya to explain the 
meaning of the mantras employed in these rituals. On the day of the 


 
function itself the time at our disposal would be short. If we grasp the 
meaning and significance of the mantras beforehand we will have a more 
rewarding involvement in the function.  
Nowadays, we do not have a month's time in which to prepare for a 
wedding. The problem facing the bride's people is which group is to play 
the band, who is to give the dance recital, how the marriage procession is 
to be conducted. . . We attach the least importance to that which is the 
very soul of the marriage sacrament, I mean the Vedic mantras chanted 
at that time. Those who recite these mantras, the Vedic panditas, are also 
treated as the least important to a marriage celebration. There are 
perhaps a few who have faith in the mantras and for their benefit and 
enlightenment at least some Brahmins must be instructed in the Veda-
bhasya.  
We print invitation cards for wedding and upanayana ceremonies and 
distribute them among a large number of friends and relatives - in fact we 
invite an entire town or village to the function. And we spend thousands. 
But we do not pay any attention to the ritual itself, to its significance. This 
is not right.  
If we know the meaning of the mantras chanted at a function, we stand 
to gain more benefits from it. We go through rites because we do not 
have the courage to give them up. Similarly, we must come to realise that 
it is wrong to perform a rite without knowing the meaning of the mantras 
chanted; we must therefore take the help of a pandita in this matter. As 
mentioned before, going through works with a knowledge of the 
significance and meaning of the mantras is more beneficial. We must 
have faith in the Upanishadic saying" Yadeva vidyaya karoti tadeva 
viryavattaram bhavati".  
At an upanayana, it is the brahmacarin (as the karta) who chants the 
mantras; similarly it is the groom alone who intones them at a marriage. 
What do you expect of all invitees to do at such functions? Do they come 
only for the luncheon or dinner, or to keep chatting, to see the dance 
recital or to listens to the nagasvaram music? Is their part only to make 
themselves happy in this manner? No. The Vedic mantras deserve our 


 
highest respect. When they are being intoned we must honour them by 
listening to them intently. The mantras create well- being for all. If the 
invitees and others at a function listen to them and are able to follow 
their meaning they will earn merit even though they do not have the role 
of the karta in it.  
Take the case of the asvamedha (horse sacrifice). Only a king who has 
subdued all other rulers, that is a maharaja or a sarvabhauma, is qualified 
to perform it. So only a monarch during a particular period in history, a 
monarch whose sway extends all over the world, is entitled to conduct 
this sacrifice. The asvamedha brings more benefits than any other rite. 
Now the question arises: In any generation only one individual is perhaps 
capable of earning so much merit (by performing the horse sacrifice). 
Why are the Vedas so partial that they have made it impossible for the 
vast majority of people (who cannot perform the sacrifice themselves) to 
earn such merit? Is it true that only a ruler, who has immense strength 
and enormous resources at his command, is capable of benefiting from 
such a sacrifice? If people of good conduct and character are denied the 
same merit as a powerful emperor can earn, does it not amount to 
deceiving them? How can the Vedas be so partial to one man?  
In truth no partiality can be ascribed to the Vedas. A Vedic rite is 
admittedly beneficial to the man who performs it. But, at the same time, 
it does good to all the world. If I light a lamp in the darkness here does it 
not bring light to all the people present and not to me alone?  
It may be that the performer of a Vedic work receives more special 
benefits than others. But the sastras shows the way by which these 
others may also reap the same fruits as the karta- in fact the Vedas 
themselves mention it. If ordinary people cannot conduct a horse 
sacrifice they may get to know how it is performed. They may pay 
attention to the hymns chanted during the sacrifice and also try to follow 
their meaning. In this way they derive the full benefits of the sacrifice 
performed by an imperial ruler. This fact is referred to in the section 
dealing with horse sacrifices in the Vedas.  


 
In the same way, whether it is a marriage or a funeral, the merit will be 
earned in full if we closely follow the rite and listen to the mantras with 
due knowledge of their meaning.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

My Duty 
My duty is to impress upon you again and again that it is your 
responsiblity to keep the Vedic tradition alive. Whether or not you listen 
to me, whether or not I am capable of making you do what I want you to 
do, so long as there is strength in me, I will keep telling you tirelessly: 
"This is your work. This is your dharma. “It is for the sake of the Vedas 
that the Acarya established this Matha. So, no matter how I keep 
deceiving you in other ways, as one bearing his name I should be guilty of 
a serious offence if I failed to carry out with all sincerity at least the 
responsibility placed on my shoulders of protecting the Vedic dharma. 
That is why I keep speaking again and again, and again, not minding the 
tedium, about the need to sustain this dharma.  
It has not been all talk. A number of concrete schemes have been and are 
being implemented in pursuance of our ideal. I have come here to beg of 
you for your help. If you think I am not begging for your help, take it that I 
am issuing you a command to serve the cause of the Vedas. However it 
be, the work I have undertaken must be done.  
Vedam odiya Vediyarkkor mazhai  
Niti mannar neriyinarkkor mazhai  
Madar karpudai mangaiyarkkor mazhai  
Madam munru mazhai enappeyyume  
According to this well known Tamil poem, the earth will become cool and 
the crops will grow in plenty only if it rains thrice a month. It rains once 
for the Brahmin who chants the Vedas in the right manner; it rains once 
for the king who rules justly; and again it rains once for the woman who 
ramains true and constant to her husband.  
It is not in my hands to make sure that the rulers rule justly, strictly 
adhering to dharma. Sannyasins like me have nothing to do with the 
government. But I believe that, as the head of a Matha with the duty of 


 
protecting dharma, I have a responsibility with regard to the other two 
matters. How does a religious head see to it that a woman adheres to her 
dharma, remains true to her husband? The trends seen today are 
contrary tc stridharma (code of conduct for women). I have the title of 
"guru" and so it is my duty to warn womanhood against things that are 
likely to undermine their dharma. When child marriages were prevalent 
there was little opportunity for women to go astray. If a girl is already 
married before she attains puberty she will develop strong attachment 
for her husband. If she is not married at this age she is likely to feel 
mentally disturbed. But our hands are tied because of the Sarda Act.  
But, if I have not entirely washed my hand of the subject, it is because of 
the hope that public opinion could be created against the Sarda Act and 
the government compelled to respect it. After all, so many other laws 
have been changed in response to public opinion or otherwise. 
Unfortunately, the attitude of parents and of women in general has 
become perverse. Instead of trying to conduct the marriage of their 
daughters in time, parents send them to co-educational colleges and later 
to work along with men. When I see all this I inwardly shed tears of 
blood: I am losing my confidence in my ability to arrest this trend.  
If Brahmins keep chanting the Vedas, the rulers will rule justly and 
women will remain steady in their wifely dharma. It is in this hopw that all 
my efforts are turned to maintaining the Vedic dharma.  
You must make a gift of your sons for this purpose, also of your money. 
Well-to-do people must help children of the poor with cash so that they 
may be encoruaged to learn the Vedas. We need money to pay the 
teachers, to buy books, to administer the Vedic schools. We have drawn 
up a modest scheme to raise funds. You pay one rupee a month and in 
return you will receive (by post), apart from the belssings of the Veda 
Mata(Mother Vedas), the prasadas of Sri Candramaulisvara after the puja 
performed to him at the Kanci Matha. If you send your donation 
mentioning your naksatra [the asterism under which you are born] the 
prasada will be sent to you every month of the day on which the asterism 
falls.  


 
Nowadays, we receive "chain letters" invoking the name of Sri 
Venkatacalpati (of Tirupati) and with the threat added, "if you don't send 
copies of this letter to such and such number of people, you shall turn 
blind or shall be crippled.” Out of fear many people make copies of the 
letter to be sent to various addressees. I too sometimes wonder whether 
we could do something similar to promote the Vedic dharma!  
I do not ask you much- just one rupee a month. Don't you pay the 
government taxes, whether or not you like to do so? Take this - the one 
rupee- as a levy imposed by me. It is a tax you pay to run my government, 
my sarkar which is no bigger than a mustard seed. You deny yourself a bit 
of your pleasure for this, your outing to beach or your visit to the cinema. 
You will thus carry out a fraction of your duty and my duty will have been 
fulfilled.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Greatness of the Vedas 
The glory of the Vedas knows no bounds and it is manifested in the affairs 
of the world in a manner that defies comparison.  
Of all the sacred places on earth Kasi comes foremost. When we speak in 
praise of other hallowed centres, we say that they are equal to Kasi in 
holiness. From this we know the importance of that city. In the south 
there is a pilgrim centre which has come to be called "Daksina Kasi 
(Southern Kasi). There is an Uttara Kasi (Northern Kasi) in the Himalaya. 
Vrddhacalm in Tamil Nadu is also known as "Vrddha Kasi". In Tirunelveli 
district (of Tamil Nadu) there is a town called " Tenkasi" (this also means " 
Southern Kasi"). When we speak in praise of a sacred place it is 
customary to describe it as being "equal to Kasi". But Kumbhakonam is 
considered greater than Kasi (" in greatness it weighs one grain more 
than Kasi"). Here is a stanza that speaks of the high place accorded to 
Kumbhakonam.  
Anyaksetre krtam papam punyaksetre vinasyati  
Punyaksetre krtam papam Varanasyam vinasyati  
Varanasyam krtam papam Kumbhakone vinasyati  
Kumbhakone krtam papam Kumbhakone vinasyati  
"The sin committed in any (ordinary) place is washed away in a sacred 
place. That committed in any sacred place is washed away in Varanasi 
(that is Kasi). The sin committed in Varanasi is wiped away in 
Kumbhakonam. And the sin earned in Kumbhakonam, well it is destroyed 
only in Kumbhakonam. "  
The glory of Kasi is that all other sacred places are likened to it. Even 
when a place is said to be superior to Kasi the implication is that Kasi is 
uniquely great. It has acquired a distinction by being made an object of 
comparison. A great man has composed a poem on Kasi. " ksetranam 
uttamanam api yad upamaya ka pi loke prasastih, " so it begins. It means: 


 
"By being likened to it even highly esteemed places become famous- that 
is Kasi.”  
Similarly, when you speak highly of scared tirthas you liken them to the 
Ganga or say that they are more holy than that river. We must conclude 
from the foregoing that Kasi comes first among the sacred places and that 
the Ganga is the holiest of the tirthas.  
It is in this way that, when any work is to be extolled, it is said tob e 
“equal to the Vedas". The Ramayana is a very famous poetic work. There 
are many versions of it. Take any language in India: the story of Rama will 
be seen to be a theme in drama, poetry, music, etc, in its literature. The 
greatness of the Ramayana is such that it is exalted to the position of a 
Veda. "Vedah Pracetasadasitsaksadramayanatmana. " The Veda itself was 
born as Ramayana to Valmiki, the son of Pracetas.  
The Mahabharatha too is celebrated as a Veda: in fact it is called the fifth 
Veda ("pancamo Vedah").  
Vaisnavas glorify the Tiruvaymozhi as a Veda. It is the work of 
Nammazhvar, who is also called Sathakopan and Maran. They say: 
"Maran Sathakopan composed the Tamil Veda.” The famous Tamil work 
on ethics, the Tirukkural, is also called the "Tamil Veda.”  
 
During the time of the author of the Kural, Tiruvalluvar, there was the 
"Kadai Samgam" in Madurai. In that city there was a seat received as a 
gift from Sundaresvara. Only the worthy could sit on it. The unworthy 
would be pushed aside. Was such a ting possible? We cannot believe it; 
but we do believe that when a coin is inserted in a machine we get a 
ticket.  
[Here the Paramaguru tells the story of Tiruvalluvar and his Kural and 
how the poets of his time came to regard Tamil as great as Sanskrit since 
it had now come into possession of a work like Kural which, they said, 
was equal to the Vedas. This story occurs in Chapter 5, Part Two, and 
“The Vedas in their Original Form.”]  


 
Saivas [in Tamil Nadu] regard the Tiruvacakam as the Tamil Veda. To the 
Christians in India the Bible is the "Satya - Veda. " Thus we see that the 
Vedas have a special place of honour. The Vedic river is ageless and it 
traverses the length and breadth of our land as the very life-blood of our 
culture. This river should not be allowed to dry up. There is no greater 
responsibility for a Hindu than that of keeping the Vedas a live and 
vibrant tradition.  
The sound of the Vedas must pervade everywhere, must fill all space. The 
truths enshrined in them must be spread far and wide and the rituals 
enjoined on us by them must be made to flourish. Sufficient it would be if 
the Vedic dharma remains vigorous and is maintained atleast in our land. 
If a man's heart is stout he will survive even if all other parts of his body 
are afflicted. In the same way, if the Vedas flourish in this land all nations 
will prosper and live in peace and happiness. This is the prayer of the 
Vedic dharma.  
"Lookah samastah sukhnio bhavantu.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Sadanga: Introductory Discourse 
The Six Limbs of the Vedas  
Among the basic texts of Hinduism, the six Angas or limbs of the Vedas 
are next in importance to the Vedas themselves. The Vedapurusa has six 
limbs or parts- mouth, nose, eye, ear, hand, foot. These are called 
"Sadanga". The Tamil term "cadangu" denoting any ceremony is derived 
from this word. The Tamil Tevaram refers to Sadanga in this line, 
"Vedamo(du) aru angam ayinan. "  
In the past all moral and religious edicts were inscribed on the stone walls 
of temples. In a sense the temple in ancient and medieval times was the 
"subregistrar's office" that "registered" all [acts of, contribution to] 
dharma. In the princely state of  
Travancore there used to be an official called “Tirumantira olai". In the 
old days all kings in Tamil Nadu had such an official. He was like the 
present-day private secretary. His duty was to write down the ruler's 
orders or communication and the royal message would be sent to the 
people concerned.  
In those days the raja had to be informed about all private charities. In 
fact they required the royal asent and were instituted on royal orders. 
These were written down by the olai with these concluding words, “to be 
inscribed on stone and copper.” The royal command was passed on to 
the place which received the charity. The authorities there had all this 
inscribed on the walls of the local temple. Most of the stone inscriptions 
to be found in temples are of this nature.  
Inscriptions were also made on copper- plates. If more than one plate 
was needed, the plates were pierced and held together with a ring. The 
local council or assembly had to accept these inscriptions. The copper-
plates were kept underground in the temple premises in a place called 


 
"ksema". The life of a land, its destiny, was entrusted in the hands of the 
lord and it was natural that the temple was considered the standing 
monument to its life. It had something of the function of the registrar's 
office, the epigraphy department, and so on.  
Let me now come to subject of the local assembly.  
Every village had a Brahmin sabha or assembly. Its membership was open 
to those who knew the Vedas and the Mantra-Brahmana. People guilty of 
certain offences and their relatives were debarred from membership. The 
names of candidates wanting to be members were written on pieces of 
palm-leaf and a child would be asked to pick one from the lot. The one 
whose name was inscribed on it was adopted as a member. Details of 
such elections to the local assembly are mentioned in theUttaramerur 
Inscriptions. There were a number of divisions of the sabha to look after 
different subjects like irrigation, taxation, etc. All charities, whether in the 
form of land or money, had to be made through the sabha. So too cattle 
offered to the temple or the lamps to be lighted there. The members of 
the sabha had to give their written consent for all this. This is how we 
have come to know the names of some of them. We also learn the titles 
conferred on some Brahmins like "Sadanganiratan" and "Sadangavi", the 
latter being an eroded form of "Sadangavid" "Sad+anga +vid" = one who 
knows the six angas or limbs of Vedic learning. From these old 
inscriptions we come to know that there were many such Brahmins even 
in small Villages, Brahmins proficient in the "Sadanga". That is why Vedic 
rites themselves came to be called "cadangu" in Tamil Nadu. The Brahmin 
who gave away his daughter in marriage to Sundaramurtisvami was 
called "Cadangavi Sivacariyar.”  
The six Angas are Siksa (Phonetics); Vyakarana (grammar); Nirukta 
(lexicon, etymology); Kalpa (manual of rituals); Chandas (prosody); Jyotisa 
(astronomy-astrology). A Brahmin must be acquainted with all. That he 
must be well- versed in the Vedas goes without saying. He must first learn 
to chant them and proficiency in the six Angas will later help him to gain 
insights into their meaning.  


 
Siksa is the nose of the vedapurusa, Vyakarana his mouth, Kalpa his hand, 
Nirukta his ear, Chandas his foot and Jyotisa his eye. The reason for each 
sastra being identified with a part of the body will become clear as we 
deal with the Angas individually.  
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 6 
Siksa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Nose of the Vedapurusa 
Siksa comes first among the six limbs of the Vedas, the nose of the 
Vedapurusa. The function of the nose here is not to be taken only as that 
of perceiving smells. It has also the function of breathing; in fact it is one 
of the organs of breathing. Siksa serves as the life-breath of the Vedic 
mantras.  
Where is the life of a Vedic mantra centred? Each syllable of a hymn is to 
be enunciated strictly according to its measure. Clarity of pronunciation is 
what is intended. Apart from this, each syllable is raised, lowered or 
pronounced evenly -- udatta, anudatta, savarita. If attention is paid to 
these points, there will be tonal purity. A mantra yields the desired fruit if 
each syllable is vocalised with clarity and tonal accuracy. The phonetic 
and tonal exactitude of a mantra is even more important that its 
meaning. In other words, even though the meaning is not understood, if 
the tonal form takes shape correctly, the mantra will bring the intended 
benefit. So the life-breath of the Vedas, which are a collection of mantras, 
is their sound [the "sound form”].  
There is a mantra to cure scorpion sting. Its meaning is not revealed. Its 
potency is in its sound. Certain sounds have certain powers associated 
with them. It is sometimes asked: Why should the sraddha mantras be in 
Sanskrit? May they not be in English or Tamil? Those who raise these 
questions do not realise that it is the sound that matters here, not the 
language as such. If the teeth of a sorcerer were knocked off, his 
witchcraft [magic] would have no effect. Why? Because the man would 
not be able to recite this spell properly.  
Enunciation of the mantras is most important to the Vedas. What do we 
do about it? Siksa is the science that deals with the character of Vedic 
syllables it determines their true nature. The science of the sounds of 
human speech is called phonetics and it is more important to the Vedic 
language that to any other tongue. The reason is that even if there is a 


 
slight change in how you vocalise a syllable the efficacy of the mantra will 
be affected. [The result sometimes will be contrary to what is intended].  
 
It is because of the importance of Vedic phonetics that Siksa has been 
placed first among the six Angas. It is dealt with in the Taittiriya 
Upanishad. Its "Siksavalli" begins like this: "Let us now explain the Siksa 
sastra ". The name of the sastra occurs here as well as in many other 
Vedic texts with a long "i" ("Siksa"). Sankara observes in his commentary: 
"Dairghyam Chandasam": it means that the usually short "i" occurs as 
long [in the Vedas]. (Such examples are to be found in Tamil poetry also. ) 
I told you that the Vedic language is not called Sanskrit but Chandas. 
"Chandasam", from "chandas", denotes here a Vedic usage.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 
 
 


 

Yoga and Speech 
When you play the harmonium, the nagasvaram or the flute, the sound is 
produced by the air discharged in various measures through different 
outlets. Our throat has a similar system to produce sound. It is not that 
the throat alone is involved in this process. How do we speak and sing? 
Speaking or singing is an exercise that has its source below the navel in 
the "muladhara" or "root-base' of the spinal column. From this point the 
breath is brought up in various measures as we speak or sing. The human 
instrument made by the Lord is far superior to the harmonium, the 
nagasvaram or the flute. These latter can produce only mere sounds and 
cannot articulate the syllables a, ka, ca, etc. Man alone possesses this 
faculty. Animals can produce one or two types of sound but do not have 
the ability to articulate.  
We may gauge the importance of articulate speech form the fact that the 
Lord has bestowed this faculty only on man. Such a wonderful gift of 
Isvara must not be squandered or abused in idle gossip or useless talk. 
We must use it to grasp the divine powers and endeavour to create the 
well-being of mankind thereby. And we must also try to raise our own 
Self with it. All these lofty purposes can be served with the Vedic mantras 
that the sages have gathered from space for our benefit.  
If you recognise this fact you will realise why there should be a sastra 
called Siksa specially for the purpose of guiding us in the enunciation of 
Vedic mantras. This science as developed by our forefathers arouses the 
wonder of linguistic scientists even today. It teaches us how the syllables 
are to be produced accurately and describes in the minutest detail how 
the passage of the breath coming from the pit of the stomach is to be 
controlled. Further, it tells us on which parts of the body the breath must 
impinge and how it must be discharged from the mouth.  
In a sense, air going into our body in different ways is a manifestation of 
the yogic science: it is because of the vibrations caused in our nadis as a 


 
result of the passage of our breath that our emotions and powers take 
shape. There is a saying, "What is in the macrocosm is present in the 
microcosm. " As mentioned before, the vibrations within us produce 
vibrations outside also and these are the cause of worldly activities. That 
is why those who have mastered the mantras have the same powers as 
those who have achieved yogic perfection controlling their breath. The 
one is mantrayoga, the other is Rajayoga.  
Siksa explains how each syllable of a mantra is to be produced by the 
human voice, what its tone should be like. It lays down the duration or 
matra for each syllable. In determining the matra the short and long 
syllables (the "hrsva" and "dirgha") are taken into account. Siksa also 
describes how words that are joined together (according to the rules of 
"sandhi" ) are to be enunciated without breaking them. All such matters 
as help in the correct chanting of the mantras are included in this sastra.  
Siksa explains in very fine detail how the sounds of the various syllables 
are to produced. A sound like "ka" is to be created from between the 
neck and the throat; another like "na" is nasal. To produce the sound of 
'ta" the tongue should come into contact with particular teeth  
-this is mentioned in this sastra; so too how the tongue should touch the 
upper palate for a sound like "na". Phonemes like "ma" arise from 
completely closing the lips together and those like "va" (labia-dental) are 
produced using both the lips and the teeth. It is all scientific and at the 
same time part of mantrayoga and sabdayoga.  
 
   
   
   
    


 

Root Language - Sanskrit 
In speaking about the Vedas I stated that the sound of a word was more 
important that its meaning. That reminds me. In the Vedic language 
called "Chandas" and in Sanskrit which is based on it, there are words the 
very sound of which denotes their meaning. Take the word "danta". You 
know that it means a tooth. We have to use our teeth to produce the 
sound of the word "danta" - the tongue has to make an impact on the 
teeth. You will note this phenomenon when you ask a toothless person to 
say "danta". He will not he able to vocalise the word clearly.  
From such small observations comparative philology can discover an 
important fact: which word has come first in what language. Sanskrit, 
Greek, Latin, German, French, etc, have been jointly referred to as 
belonging to the Indo-European group and derived from one mother 
language. Western philologists do not accept Sanskrit as the original 
language, the mother of all Indo-European tongues. But words like 
"danta" point to the fact that Sanskrit is the root language.  
Consider the English word "dental". There is so much similarity between 
"dant" and "dent". In languages like French and Latin also the word for 
tooth is akin to "dent", though it is "da-kara" and not the "da-kara" of 
Sanskrit. "Why shouldn’t you derive the Sanskrit word 'danta' from 
'dental'? " it might be asked. But you must consider the fact that to say 
"danta" you have to make use of your teeth. Not so to say "dental". You 
get the sound "dental" as a result of the tip of your tongue touching your 
upper palate. It is only in Sanskrit that the sound of the word itself 
signifies its meaning. So that must be the root form of the word. Hence 
languages like English, French, Latin, etc, must have been derived from 
Sanskrit.  
By interchanging the letters of some words you get other words which 
are related in meaning to the original. What is the nature of the animal 
called lion, the quality you associate with it most? It is violence. "Himsa" 


 
is violence and the word turns into "simha" to denote the lion. Kasyapa 
was the first among the sages. Celestials, non-celestials, human beings, all 
may be traced back to him. He knew the truth or, rather, saw the Truth. 
Jnana is also called "drsya". Kasyapa is thus a seer, "Pasyaka": "Pasyaka 
became Kasyapa".  
In Tamil one who sees, the seer, is "parppan". It is in this sense, as men 
who know the Truth or Reality that Brahmins in the Tamil land came to be 
called "Parppans". But now the word is used in a pejorative sense.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 


 

Pronunciation 
Siksa deals with "uccarna", "svara", "matra", "bala", "sama" and 
"santana". The sound of each mantra is determined with the utmost 
accuracy. How different sounds have their source in different parts of the 
body and how they are vocalised, all such details which are of scientific 
and practical importance are dealt with in this Anga. If it says, "Join your 
lips in this way and such and such a sound will be produced as you 
speak", you may verify it for yourself in practice and find it to be true.  
Here I am reminded of an interesting fact. The lips come into use in "pa", 
"ma", "va". They are not used in "ka", "nga", "ca", "na", "ta", "na", "ta", 
and "na". A poet has composed a Ramayana which can be read without 
using your lips. It is called "Nirosthya- Ramayana". "Ostha" means "lip". 
"Austraka", the word for camel, is derived from it and the Tamil word 
"ottagai" has the same origin. "Nir-osthya" means without lips. Nirosthya-
Ramayana was perhaps composed by its author to demonstrate his 
linguistic ingenuity. But another reason occurs to me. The poet must have 
been very much concerned about ritual purity and felt that the story of 
Sri Ramancandra must be read without bringing the lips together.  
There is a beautiful verse in Paniniya Siksa (its author, as the name itself 
suggests, is Panini) which tells us how careful we must be in pronouncing 
Vedic syllables.  
Vyaghri yatha haret putran  
Damstrabhyam na ca pidayet  
Bhitapatanadhedabhyam  
Tadvad varnan prayojayet  
"The Vedic syllables must be pronounced with clarity. The character of 
their sound should not be distorted a bit. But no force must be used in 
vocalising the syllables. There should be no damage done - no erosion of 
the sound - and no violence should be suggested in the pronunciation. 


 
How does a tigress carry its cubs? Tigresses and cats carry their young 
ones by holding them firmly with their teeth, yet in doing so they do not 
cause any hurt to the little ones. The Vedic hymns must be chanted in the 
same way, the syllables enunciated gently and yet distinctly. Panini, the 
author of the above stanza, has written the most important work on 
grammar, a subject which comes next (after Siksa) among the Vedangas. 
Apart from him many others written on Siksa. There are thirty works in 
this category. Panini's and Yajnavalkya's are particularly important.  
Each Veda has attached to it a "Pratisakhya" which examines Vedic 
sounds. There are also ancient commentaries on them and these too are 
included in Siksa.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 


 

Scripts 
The evolution of the script of any language must be based on symbols or 
signs denoting various "units" of its speech (phonemes). Most of the 
European languages including English are written in the Roman script. 
There is a script called Brahmi and the Asokan edicts are in it. In fact it is 
from Brahmi that the scripts of most Indian languages have evolved and 
these include not only the Devanagari script in which Sanskrit is written 
but also the Tamil and Grantha scripts.  
The Brahmi lipi or script has two branches. Of the two, the Pallava 
Grantha script was prevalent in the South and it is from it that scripts of 
most of the Dravidian languages evolved.  
The Telugu script has a unique feature. While in all other scripts the 
letters are written in a clockwise fashion, in Telugu there are letters 
written in an anticlockwise fashion, that is the loops are shaped leftward. 
Parasakti, the Supreme Goddess, is to the left of Isvara and there is leftist 
worship associated with her (“vama-marga"). For this reason it is believed 
that some of the letters of the Sricakra should be written in Telugu. The 
Andhra language itself is said to have a Saiva character. In most parts of 
India, the child is first taught to write the "Astaksari", [prayer to Vishu] 
but in Andhra Pradesh it is the "Siva Pancaksara". There are places sacred 
to Siva in three corners of this state: Kalahasti in the south, Srisailam in 
the west and Kotalingaksetram in the north. It is because this land is 
within the area marked by these lingas that it is called "Telungu-desa" 
(from "Trilinga"). Appayya Diksita has composed a stanza in which he 
expresses his regret that he was not born in Andhra.  
Andhratvam Andhrabhasacapyandhradesa svajanmabhuh  
Tatrapi Yajusi Sakha na 'lpasya tapasah phalam  
Appayya Diksita was a Samadevin by birth. "Of the Vedas I am the 
Samaveda, "so says Bhagavan in the Gita. But Diksita, a great devotee of 


 
Siva, regrets that he was not born in Andhra, and that too as a Yajurvedin, 
and states that the reason for this was his failure to perform austerities in 
sufficient measure. The Yajurveda, it will be remembered, contains the 
Siva-Pancaksara mantra.  
Let me revert to the question of script. As I said before, almost all the 
scripts in India today have evolved from Brahmi. But it is hard to make 
out elements of the original Brahmi in them. So anything that we find 
difficult to understand or make out is referred to as "Brahmi-lipi". Later 
this came into usage as "Brahma-lipi", the Creator's "writing" on our 
forehead [our destiny]. Now anything we find difficult to understand or 
cannot make out is called "Brahma-lipi". Another old script is "Kharosthi". 
"Khara-ostham" means the lips of a donkey - these resemble bellows. The 
loops protrude in the script. Persian is written in Kharosthi.  
Brahmi was our common script just as Roman is today for most European 
languages. Now Devanagari [with variations] is the common script for 
most Northern languages. We do not realise that each letter or syllable 
represents a particular sound or phoneme. There are two different letters 
in Tamil to represent "na". Why should there be two to represent the 
same sound, we wonder, thinking it to be unique to that language. But 
there is a subtle difference between the two "na"s.  
In Telugu there is only one "na". So is the case with other languages. 
There are two types of "r" common to Tamil and Telugu. But the two 
types differ in the two languages. In Tamil, two 'r's together of one of 
these two types form a consonant with a special sound value (kurram, 
marrum, sorannai). In Telugu it is different. The Tamil word for horse is 
"kudirai"; in Telugu it is "kurram" - the two r's are pronounced fully. In 
Tamil there is no such phoneme. There are some other unique phonemes 
in Telugu. In some words "ja" is pronounced as "za". Andhras pronounce 
"sala" as "tsala". The Devanagari and Grantha alphabets have 50 letters. 
In Telugu there are 52 (including the additional letters in the "ja" and "ca" 
groups. The Telugu-speaking people sometimes interchange "tha" and 
"dha". I am told you find this in some of the compositions of Tyagaraja 
himself.  


 
When we transliterate passages from one language into another we must 
keep these peculiarities in mind. In English also for the same labial there 
are two letters, "v" and "w". A professor told me that there is a difference 
between the two. The English "v" should be pronounced with the lower 
lip folded and the upper row of teeth coming into contact with it. When 
"w" is pronounced the lips do not come into contact with the teeth but 
are turned round. Words like "Sarasvati" and "Isvara" must be written 
with a "v" (not as "Saraswati" and "Iswara").  
Sanskrit, more than any other language, exemplifies the principle of 
phonetic spelling. In English the spelling is erratic and confusing. I 
remember reading a newspaper heading recently: "Legislature wound up. 
" Absent-mindedly I read the word "wound" in the sense of a hurt or 
injury. Of course it was actually used as the past participle of "wind". Now 
the word "wind" can also mean a breeze but then it is pronounced 
differently. So it is all confusing. Is the word "put" pronounced in the 
same way as "cut" or "but"? In "walk" and "chalk", the "l" is silent.  
Seemingly, such is not the case with Tamil which contains many words 
from other languages like Sanskrit. In other Indian languages for each 
series of consonants there are four different letters in place of the one in 
Tamil. For instance, the same "ka" is used for "kan" (Tamil for eye) and 
the Sanskrit "mukha" (in Tamil it is written as "mukham") while "Ganga" 
is written as "kanga" and "ghatam" (pot in Sanskrit) is written as "katam". 
In Tamil the word for mace (the weapon wielded by Bhima) and for story 
are written alike as "katai", instead of as "gadai" and "kathai".  
In Tamil, unlike in other Indian languages, "ka" serves the purpose of 
"kha", "ga", and "gha". "ta" serves for "da" also. Words that have almost 
opposite meanings are spelt identically: "Dosam" and "tosam" meaning 
blemish and happiness respectively are written identically. Letters from 
the Grantha script are added in Tamil for proper pronunciation _ "sa", 
"ha", "ja", "ksa", etc. In the past these letters were not used in Tamil 
poetry following the tradition of poetic usage. But now some authors do 
not use these Grantha characters even in prose. Since they find it difficult 
to get rid of Sanskrit words from the Tamil vocabulary, the next best thing 


 
they can do perhaps is to rid the language of the letters representing the 
phonemes of Sanskrit which have no equivalents in the Tamil alphabet. 
This causes confusion. If an author writes "catakam" in the strict Tamil 
manner it can read also as "sad(h)akam" or "jatakam". From the very 
beginning Tamil has not had all the consonants. But why should 
characters added to meet this deficiency be dropped? Does it mean 
"victory" for Tamil and "defeat" for Sanskrit? Why should there be a fight 
over languages? There is no need to nurse any bitterness against 
languages that we think are not our own.  
The Tamil script is adequate to write words that are strictly Tamil. The 
difficulty is when it comes to its adopting words from other languages 
with sounds representing "kha", "ga", "gha", etc. In Sanskrit, Telugu, 
Kannada and so on, there are letters for the entire "ka-varga", "ca-varga", 
"ta-varga", "ta-varga", and "pa-varga". In English, as we have already 
seen, we cannot pronounce the words according to their spelling. It is not 
so in Tamil. But in that language too the script is not entirely self-
sufficient. You may not agree. But I will tell you what I learned from my 
own experience.  
A Northerner learned the Tamil alphabet sufficiently well, that is he 
learned to read the individual letters of the alphabet. But he had no one 
to help him in pronouncing the words properly. He wanted to learn Tamil 
because he was keen to read the Tevaram and the Tiruvacakam in the 
original. After learning the alphabet he tried to read the Tevaram from a 
book. Though he had no knowledge of the language he thought he could 
earn merit by reading the hymns of the great saints even without 
understanding their meaning. Then, one day, he came to me and 
announced: "I am going to recite the "Tevaram".” I felt happy and asked 
him to go ahead.  
His recitation caused me amusement. The passage he had was a famous 
one - what Appar had sung at Tiruvaiyaru of his experience of seeing 
everything in the form of Umamahesvara [that is the entire cosmos 
revealed as Siva ] and the song was "Madar piraikkanniyanai. . . “He got 
the very first word wrong. Instead of "madar" he said "matar". It sounded 


 
so strange to me. Then he said "malaiyan makalotu" for "malaiyan 
mahalodu" laying stress on the "k" and the "t". For "padi" he said "pati". I 
was on the verge of laughter. His recitation went on in this fashion. He 
said "pukuvar" instead of "puhuvar".  
I heard him silently because I thought a Northerner learning a Tamil song 
deserved to be encouraged. But soon I found that I could no longer suffer 
his erratic reading. So I told him in a friendly manner that his 
pronunciation was faulty. To this he said: "What can I do? It is all in the 
book. “What he said was right and it showed that in Tamil too the words 
are not always written according to how they are pronounced. Letters 
that come in the middle of a word are not pronounced as they are 
written. We write "makalotu" but say "mahalodu"; we write "atarkaka" 
but say "adarkaha". "Ka" becomes "ha" in the middle and end of the 
word. "Ta" in the beginning of a word remains "ta" but in the middle 
becomes "da". For instance, "tantai" (father) is pronounced as "tandai" 
and "Katavul" (God) and "itam" (place) pronounced as "Kadavul" and 
"idam". Such matters are dealt with in detail in Tamil grammar books.  
Like Sanskrit, Tamil too has excellent works on grammar -for example, the 
Tolkappiyam and Nannul. They deal with the morphology of words and 
their vocalisation. For instance there are such rules: After such and such a 
syllable "sa" becomes "ca", "ka" becomes "ha".  
Generally speaking, if "ka" is the initial letter of a word in Tamil it retains 
its sound of "ka". In the same way if the initial letter of a word is "ta" it 
retains its true sound, but in the middle or end of a word it sounds "da". 
"Pa" is "pa" if it is the initial letter of a word but sounds "ba" in the middle 
of a word. (In Tamil we do not see "pa" occurring as an independent 
letter in the middle or end of a word. "Anpu"(love), "ampu"(arrow), 
"inpam"(pleasure) -"pa" in these words is joined with other letters. 
Words like "japa" (muttering the names of the Lord or any mantra); 
"sapam" (curse), "kapam" ("kapham", phlegm), "supam" ("subham", 
auspicious) have letters belonging to the "pa-varga" independently in the 
middle of the words but they are from the Sanskrit.  


 
There is something interesting about "ca". While in Tamil "ka", "ta", "pa". 
etc, retain their true sound when they are the initial letters of words, "ca" 
as the initial letter is voiced as "sa". "Catti" (cooking vessel) and "civappu" 
(red) are pronounced as "satti" and "sivappu". But when the letters come 
together as "cca", they are not pronounced as "ssa"- for example, 
"accam" (fear), "paccai"(green). "Col" (to speak) is pronounced as "sol", 
but "peryarccol" and "vinaiccol" are not pronounced as "peyerssol" and 
"vinaissol". But in Malayalam which is derived from Tamil "ca" in the 
beginning of a word is pronounced as "ca": "civappu" is "civappu". But at 
other times when the "cca" comes in the middle of a word the word in 
pronounced as "ssa", not "cca", e. g, place names like "Kavisseri", 
"Nellisseri", while Tamils pronounce the same as "Kavicceri" and 
"Nellicceri". In words like "accan" (father) and "Ezhuttaccan", however, 
there is no change.  
The genius of the Tamil language is to be known from its works on 
grammar- how a word is changed and where. However, the 
pronunciation is not in strict consonance with the spelling.  
It is only in Sanskrit that the pronunciation is fully phonetic but for two 
exceptions. One is when there is a visarga before "pa". Visarga more or 
less has the same sound as "ha" - not a full "ha", though. In Tamil Nadu it 
is pronounced fully as "ha" and Northerners who slur over it are made 
fun of. But their pronunciation is correct according to the rules of Siksa. 
With the visarga occurring before it, "pa" becomes "fa".  
The second exception: "Subrahmanya", "Brahma", "vahni"(fire) are 
pronounced as "Subramhanya", "Bramha" and "vanhi". But all words with 
"ha" coming as a conjunct consonant are not like this as, for example, 
"jahvara"(deep, inaccessible), "jihva"(tongue), "guhya"(secret), and 
"Prahlada" [son of the demon Hiranyakasipu and a great devotee of 
Visnu].  
 
 


 

A Language that has all Phonemes 
From the foregoing it is clear that Sanskrit has the "f" sound. In fact there 
is no sound vocalised by humans that is not present in that language. 
"Zha" is not, as is usually imagined, unique to Tamil. It exists in the Vedic 
language which is the source of Sanskrit. The "da" in the Yajurveda has to 
be pronounced as "zha" in the corresponding passages in the Samaveda. 
In the Rgveda also in some places the "da" has to be similarly 
pronounced. The very first word in the first sukta of the Rigveda, 
"Agnimile", has to be pronounced almost as "Agnimizhe" - not a full "zhe" 
for "le", but almost.  
There is a sound very close to "zha" in French. But neither in that 
language nor in Sanskrit is there a separate letter to represent that 
sound. "Ja" and "ga" serve the purpose of"zha" in French. In Sanskrit "la" 
serves the same purpose  
(I am told there is "zha" in Chinese.)  
The three-dot symbol in Tamil, called "aytam", is present in Sanskrit also. 
There is a Panini sutra, "h kap pauc". According to it, if a visarga comes 
before a word beginning with "ka"(Ramah + Karunakarah), it will not have 
the sound of "h", as mentioned before, but of "h" in the "aytam". Here it 
is the visarga that is the aytam that becomes the "f" before "pa-kara".  
Ramah + panditah =Rama f panditah. This "f" sound is called 
"upatmaniya". "Tma" suggests the sound created by blowing the pipe to 
build the kitchen fire. When you blow thus you get the "f" sound. The 
initial letter of the English word "flute" is "f", is it not?  
One more point about "fa". We generally pronounce "fa" as "pa". But it 
would be wrong to think that we [in the South] pronounce coffee as 
"kapi" in the same way. In Sanskrit "kapisa" means dark brown - that is 
the colour of coffee powder. Our kapisa is the white man's coffee.  


 
What Tamils call kurriyalukaram is present in Sanskrit also -r and l. People 
write both "Rigveda" and "Rugveda"  
-the first letter of the word is neither "Ri" nor "Ru". It represents in fact 
the Kurriyalukara sound. It is between "u" and "i". We write "Krishna" in 
Roman. In the North some people write the same as "Krushna". It is 
amusing to listen to Andhras pronouncing "hrdayam" as "hrudayam". 
Both the "ra-kara" and "la-kara" of Sanskrit have vocalic forms. But in "la-
kara" the vocalic form comes only in conjunction with another consonant. 
In the ra-kara vocalic form we have examples like "Rg", "rsi"; in the "la-
kara" vocalic form we have "klpta".  
In Sanskrit the vocalic "r" and "l" are not included among the consonants 
but regarded as vowels: a, a, u, u, i, i, r, l, e, ai, o, au, am, ah.  
There is no short "e" or "o" in Sanskrit. I felt this to be a minus point for 
that language. Parasakti, the Supreme Goddess, is the personification of 
all sounds. So should there not be all sounds in a language (like Sanskrit)? 
Why should it lack these two sounds (short "e" and short "o")? On going 
through Patanjali's commentary on the sutras of Panini, I discovered that 
Sanskrit too had these short vowels and it was a comforting discovery. 
Patanjali says that, in chanting the Satyamugri and Ranayaniya Sakhas of 
the Samaveda the short "e" and "o" are used.  
Thus Sanskrit embraces all sounds. It has also a script in which the sound 
of every letter is determined with the utmost accuracy.  
 
 
 
 
   
   


 

Languages and Scripts: Indian and Foreign 
A special feature of our language is that each syllable of every word is 
pronounced distinctly. Take the English word "world". The sound of the 
first syllable has no clear form; it is neither "we" nor "wo". Then the letter 
"r" is slurred over. There are many such indistinct words in foreign 
tongues. They come under the category of "avyakta-sabda" (indistinct 
sounds). In our country all languages are "spasta"(clear and distinct).  
In the languages of many other countries there is no accord between 
spelling and pronunciation. For the sound of "ka" there are three letters 
in English "k", "c" and "q". Such is not the case with our languages. The 
"f" sound in English is represented in three different ways as illustrated in 
the words "fairy", "philosophy", "rough". When you say "c" as a letter of 
the English alphabet, it sounds like a "sa-kara" letter, but many words 
with the initial letter "c" have the "ka-kara" sound. The "sa-kara" sound 
occurs only in a few words like "cell", "celluloid", "cinema". The spelling is 
totally unrelated to the pronunciation as in "station" and "nation".  
The Roman alphabet has only 26 letters and is easy to learn. The 
alphabets of our languages have more letters and are comparatively 
difficult to learn. But, once you have learned them, our languages are 
easier to read and write than their European counterparts. Take English, 
for instance. Even a person who has passed his M. A. has often to consult 
the dictionary for spelling and pronunciation.  
But among Indian languages themselves Sanskrit is the best in the matter 
of spelling and pronunciation. By saying this I do not mean that the 
languages of other countries are inferior to ours. At the same time, so far 
as our own country is concerned, I do not wish to downgrade other 
tongues in comparison with Sanskrit. I merely mentioned some facts to 
underline the point that Sanskrit fully represents the Supreme Being 
manifested as the Sabda-brahman.  


 
If we develop the attitude that all languages are our common heritage, 
we will not run down other people's tongues. We often forget the fact 
that the purpose of language, any language, is communication, exchange 
of ideas. It is our failure to recognise this basic fact that is the cause of 
fanatical attachment to our mother tongue and hatred of other 
languages. We are often asked to be broad-minded and to develop an 
international outlook, but in the matter of language we remain narrow-
minded. I feel sad when I think of it.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 


 

Aksamala 
"Rudraksa" means the eye of Rudra or Siva. "Rudraksa-mala" is a 
"garland" (rosary) made up of such "eyes". "Aksa" means eye. In Tamil 
the rudraksa is called "tirukkanmani"[the sacred pupil of the eye] 
What is the meaning of "aksamala" or "sphatika-aksamala"? Here the 
word "aksa" is not taken to mean the eye but the letters of the alphabet 
from "a" to "ksa". In the Sanskrit alphabet "a" comes first and "ksa" 
comes last. To learn the "A" to "Z" of a subject means to have a thorough 
grasp of it. To convey the same idea in Sanskrit we say "a-karadi ksa-
karantam". There are 50 letters from "a" to "ksa". So an aksamala 
consists of 50 beads. There is of course a 51st bead which is bigger than 
the rest and it is called "Meru". The sun, the legend goes, does not go 
beyond the Meru mountain during his daily journey. When we make one 
round thus, muttering the name of the Lord or a mantra, first clockwise 
up to the Meru and then anticlockwise up to the Meru again, we will have 
told the beads a hundred times. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Importance of Enunciation and Intonation  
You must not go wrong either in the enunciation or intonation of a 
mantra. If you do, not only will you not gain the expected benefits from it, 
the result might well be contrary to what is intended. So the mantras 
must be chanted with the utmost care. There is a story told in the 
Taittiriya Samhita (2.4.12) to underline this.  
Tvasta wanted to take revenge on Indra for some reason and conducted a 
sacrifice to beget a son who would slay Indra. When he chanted his 
mantra, "Indrasatrur varddhasva ", he went wrong in the intonation. He 
should have voiced "Indra" without raising or lowering the syllables in it 
and he should have raised the syllables "tru" and "rddha"(that is the two 
syllables are "udata"). Had he done so the mantra would have meant, 
"May Tvasta's son grow to be the slayer of Indra". He raised the "dra" in 
Indra, intoned "satru" as a falling svara and lowered the "rddha" in 
"varddhasva". So the mantra meant now: "May Indra grow to be the killer 
of this son (of mine)". The words of the mantra were not changed but, 
because of the erratic intonation, the result produced was the opposite 
of what was desired. The father himself thus became the cause of his 
son's death at the hands of Indra.  
The gist of this story is contained in this verse which cautions us against 
erroneous intonation.  
Mantrohinah svarato varnato va  
Mithya prayukto na tamarthamaha  
Sa vagvajro yajamanam hinasti  
Yathendrasatruh svarato' paradhat  
What was the weapon with which Tvasta’s son was killed? Not Indra's 
thunderbolt but the father's wrongly chanted mantra.  
 


 

Versions with Slight Differences 
I have spoken about the importance of maintaining the purity of Vedic 
syllables. All over India, from the Himalaya to Ramesvaram and all 
through the ages, the Vedas have been taught entirely in the oral 
tradition, without the aid of any printed books and without one part of 
the country being in touch with another. And yet 99 percent of the texts 
followed everywhere is the same to the letter.  
So it means that there is a difference of one per cent, is there not? Yes, 
there is, among the recensions in the different regions. Is it proper to 
have such slight differences? After claming that the consequences would 
be unfortunate even if one syllable of a mantra goes wrong, how are we 
to accept that the same mantra in the different recensions or in the 
different regions differ by one percent? If the original Vedas in their true 
form are one, will not the departure by even one percent mean 
undesirable consequences?  
There is an answer to this question. You will come to harm if the 
medicine you take is different from what you physician has ordered. 
Similarly, if you chant a mantra with its syllables changed, you will suffer 
an adverse consequence. The rule that the medicine prescribed must not 
be changed applies to the patient, not to the doctor. The patient cannot, 
on his own, change the medicine that his doctor has prescribed. But the 
doctor can, cannot he? There is more than one medicine available to 
treat a particular ailment. So there is nothing wrong if the doctor 
substitutes one medicine for another. While treating two patients 
suffering from the same illness the doctor may, while prescribing 
essentially the same medicine for both, make small changes in the 
ingredients according to their different natures.  
It is in the same manner that the sages have introduced slight changes in 
the different Vedic recensions, but these are not such as to produce any 
adverse effort: indeed, even with the changes, the mantra yields the 


 
expected benefits. As a matter of fact, the sages have introduced the 
changes for the benefit of people who are entitled to learn the particular 
recensions. The rules with regard to these are clearly stated in the 
Pratisakhyas.  
The syllables of the mantras in the different recensions do not vary to any 
considerable degree. Nor are they unrelated to one another. On the 
whole they sound similar. Even when the letters vary there is a kinship to 
be seen between them.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
   


 

Vedic Vocalisation and the Regional 
Languages If we relate certain characteristics of the different languages of 
India to how Vedic chanting differs syllabically from region to region, we 
will discover the important fact that the genius of each of these tongues 
and the differences between them are based on how the Vedas are 
chanted in these regions. I make here certain observations based on my 
own philological researches.  
The letters da, ra, la and zha are phonetically close to one another. Ask a 
child to say "rail" or "Rama", in all likelihood it will say "dail", "Dama". The 
reason is "da" is phonetically close to "ra". Quite a few people say 
"Sivalatri" for "Sivaratri". And some say "tulippora" for "tulippola" (Tamil 
for "just a little"). Here "la" and "ra" sound similar. I spoke about how "ra" 
and "da" change. So "la" can change to "da". "La" is very close to "la". 
Usually what we pronounce as "lalita", "nalina", and "sitala" will be found 
in Sanskrit books as "lalita", "nalina" and "sitala". There is no need to say 
how "la" and "zha" are close friends. Madurai is indeed the city of Tamil 
but here people say "valapalam" (plantain) for "vazha-pazham". That is 
they use "la" for "zha", a letter we believe to be unique to the Tamil (or 
Tamizh) language.  
Here I should like to mention an idea likely to sound new to you. What is 
considered unique to Tamil, "zha" [retroflex affirmative], is present in the 
Vedas also. Jaimini is one of the Samaveda sakhas: it is also called the 
Talavakara Sakha. The "da" or "la" of other Vedas or sakhas sounds like 
"zha' in the Talavakara Sakha. Those who have properly learned this 
recension say "zha" for "da" or "la". Perhaps it is not a full"zha" sound but 
something approximating to it, or something in which the "zha" sound is 
latent.  
The "zha-kara" occurs even in the Rgveda in some places. Usually "da" 
and "la" are interchanged and where there is "da-kara" in the Yajurveda it 
is "la-kara" in the Rgveda. The very first mantra in the Vedas is Agnimide". 


 
"Agnimide" is according to the Yajurveda which has the largest following. 
In the Rgveda the same word occurs as "Agnimile". The "le" here is to be 
pronounced almost as "zhe". In the famous Sri Rudra hymn of the 
Yajurveda occurs the word "Midustamaya". The same word is found in 
the Rgveda also and the "du" ini the "midu" sound like "zhu" instead of 
sounding like "lu" - that is the "zha-kara" is latent in how the syllable is 
vocalised.  
Generally speaking, the "la" in the Rgveda is "da" in the Yajurveda and 
"zha" in the Talavakara Samaveda. Now let us take up the regions where 
each of the Vedas has a large following and consider the social features of 
the language spoken in each such region.  
The view is propagated that the Vedas belong to the Aryans, that the 
Dravidians have nothing to do with them. Let us take three of the four 
Dravidian states for consideration, that is the regions where Tamil, Telegu 
and Kannada are spoken.  
The "zha-kara" is special to Tamil, "da" to Telugu and "la" to Kannada. 
Where "zha" occurs in Tamil, it is "da" in Telugu and "la" in Kannada. Take 
the Sanskrit word "pravala" (coral). It is "pavazham" in Tamil, "pakadalu" 
in Telegu and "havala" in Kannada.  
"Pavazham" is derived from "pravala", so too "pakadalu" in Telegu, in 
which language the original Sanskrit word has changed more than in 
Tamil: the "va" of "pravala" has become "ka" but it is according to the 
genius of that language. How has the word changed in Kannada? In Tamil 
and Telegu the change from the Sanskrit "pra" to "pa" is but small. But in 
Kannada the "pra" becomes "ha" and that of course is according to the 
genius of that language. The "pa" in the other languages becomes "ha" in 
Kannada. Thus "Pampa" becomes "Hampa" and then "Hampi" (you must 
have heard of the ruins of Hampi). The Tamil "pal" for milk is "halu" in 
Kannada and the Tamil "puhazh" (fame) is "hogalu" in Kannada. In the 
same manner "pravala" becomes "havala" in Kannada.  
It was not my purpose to speak about the "pa-ha" relationship. All I 
wanted to point out was how the "la" of Sanskrit is the "zha" of Tamil and 


 
the "da" of Telugu. In Kannada, however, there is no change. The "la" 
remains "la".  
You see this difference not only with respect to words of Sanskrit origin 
but also with respect to those belonging to the Dravidian group. The word 
"puhazh"(or pugazh) cited earlier is an example in this connection- it is 
not a Sanskrit word.  
(From our present state of investigations we know this: our people 
belong to one family. They are not racially divided into Aryans and 
Dravidians but are divided into those speaking languages related to 
Sanskrit on the one hand and those speaking Dravidian tongues on the 
other. Further research is likely to reveal that even this linguistic 
difference is not real and that both Sanskrit and Dravidian languages are 
from the same parent stock. Some linguists are known to be examining 
the possible bounds that unite Sanskrit and Tamil. If we go back to very 
early times, we may discover that the two languages are of the same 
stock. But during the thousands of years subsequent to that period, the 
Dravidian languages must have evolved separately. It is in this sense that I 
speak of the "Dravidian" languages as being distinct from Sanskrit. )  
I wondered whether there was any special reason why the "zha" of Tamil 
should be the "da" of Telugu and the "la" of Kannada. I came to the 
conclusion that the differences were related to how the Vedas are 
chanted in the regions where these languages are spoken.  
The predominant Veda in the western region [of Peninsular India], 
including Maharastra and Karnataka, is the Rgveda. In the region from 
Nasik to Kanyakumari, the Rgveda has the widest following. Kannada is 
one of the languages spoken here and "la" has a unique place in it. And 
this "la", special to Kannada, which is considered a Dravidian regional 
language, is Vedic in origin.  
If we go to that part of the eastern seashore and the hinterland that form 
Andhra Pradesh, we find that 98 out of 100 people (Brahmins) here are 
Yajurvedins. The remaining two percent are Rgvedins. There are 
practically no Samavedins in Andhra Pradesh. Since Yajurvedins are the 


 
predominant group the Rgvedic "la" is "da" here, so also the "la" of other 
languages.  
In Tamil Nadu also Yajurvedins are in a majority though not to the same 
extent as in Andhra Pradesh. Here 80 percent are Yajurvedins, 15 percent 
Samavedins and 5 percent Rgvedins. In ancient times, however, the 
Samavedins formed quite a large group- there is evidence for such a 
belief. It is likely that there were Brahmins belonging to all the 1,000 
recensions of the Samaveda in the Tamil land. Isvara is extolled in the 
Tevaram as "Ayiram-sakhai-udaiyan" (one with a thousand Vedic 
recensions).  
Among the Samavedins those belonging to the Kauthuma Sakha form the 
majority. But in the old days the followers of the Jaiminiya or Talavakara 
Sakha were quite large in number. Cozhiyar are people of the Cola land. 
Even today they are all Samavedins and they follow the Talavakara Sakha- 
the Cozhiyar residing in Tirunelveli (which is identified as a Pandya 
territory) still belong to this recension. Originally the Samaveda had a 
great following not only in the land of the Colas but also in the land of the 
Pandyas.  
"Cozhiyar" may be understood as Brahmins belonging to the Tamil land 
from very ancient times. They are indeed the Brahmin "Adivasis" of that 
region. I will tell you how. Among Tamil Smarta Brahmins there is a sect 
called "Vadamas"(Vadamar). They must have come to the Tamil land 
from the North, especially from the Narmada valley. Their very name 
suggests that they are from the North. Cozhiyar must have been 
inhabitants of Tamil Nadu from the earliest times.  
From what I have said about "Vadamar" I should not be taken to mean 
that I believe that all Brahmins in the South came from the North as is 
suggested by some people today. As a matter of fact, in the very word 
"Vadamar" there is proof that all Brahmins did not come from the North. 
If all Brahmins in Tamil Nadu or in the rest of the South had their original 
home in the North, why should one sect have been singled out for the 
name of "Vadamar"? The rest of the Brahmins must have belonged to the 


 
Tamil land form the very beginning Cozhiyar are among these first 
Brahmins.  
There is one proof to show that "Vadamar" originally belonged to the 
Narmada valley. Only they, among the Brahmins [in the South], recite the 
following verse in the sandhyavandana; it is a prayer for protection from 
snakes.  
Narmadayai namah pratah Narmadayai namo nisi  
Namostu Narmade tubhyam pahi mam visa-sarpatah  
Among the Cozhiyar there was a great man called Somasimara Nayanar 
who was one of the 63 Nayanmars. Somasi is not an eatable, but means a 
"somayajin", one who has performed the soma sacrifice. Sri 
Ramanujacarya's father had also performed the same sacrifice and he 
was called "Kesava Somayajin". The Samaveda has an important place in 
the soma sacrifice.  
If there were a large number of Cozhiyar Brahmins in the very early times 
in Tamil Nadu, it means that the Talavakra Sakha of the Samaveda must 
have had a large following then. I have spoken about the Cola and Pandya 
kingdoms but not of the Pallava and Chera lands. In the dim past there 
was no Pallava kingdom. The "Muvendar" are the Cheras, colas and 
Pandyas. The region where the Pallava kingdom arose later was then part 
of the cola territory. So the early Brahmins who had come form the 
North, the Vadamar, settled in the northern part of Tamil Nadu that is the 
Pallava territory. Subsequently they came to be called "Auttara 
Vadamar". There are Samavedins among the "Vadamar" also, but they do 
not belong to the Talavakara Sakha but to the Kauthama Sakha. The 
"Vadamar" came to the Tamil land long after the Tamil language had 
developed into its classical stage. So their Vedic chanting is not germane 
to out subject. The same could be said about the Pallavas after the 
Sangam literature came to flourish.  
Let us now turn to the Chera land. Malayalam is spoken in Kerala. If I did 
not touch upon this language when I dealt with Tamil, Telugu and 
Kannada, it was because of the fact that it appeared much later than the 


 
other three. Until about a thousand years ago, Kerala was part of the 
Tamil land and its language too was Tamil. Malayalam evolved from 
Tamil. If the Tamil "zha" is "da" in Telegu and "la" in Kannada, it remains 
"zha" in Malayalam. Tamils say "puzhai" for a river. Malayalis say "puzha". 
If the former say "Alappuzhai" and "Amblappuzhai"[both names of places 
in Kerala], the latter say "Alappuzha" and "Amblappuzha".  
Leaving aside the question of the Malayalam language, let us turn to the 
subject of the Vedic tradition of Kerala. The Malayala Brahmins called 
Namputris have a long tradition of learning the Vedas in the sastric 
manner. There are among them Trivedins(those well-versed in the 
Rgveda, Yajurveda and Samaveda, and among the last-mentioned a 
number of people following the Talavakara Sakha). The Pancanmana 
family is one such and it has behind it a fine Vedic tradition. They belong 
to the Talavakara Sakha. Today those who follow the Kauthama Sakha are 
in a majority among the Samavedins in Tamil Nadu but in Kerala the 
Samavedins belong to the Talavakara Sakha.  
From generation to generation, the Namputiris have been chanting the 
Talavakra Sakha. They pronounce the "da" or "la" of other sakhas as 
"zha"- which means they follow the same practice as in Tamil Nadu. Both 
the palm-leaf and printed versions of the Talavakara Sakha, in Tamil Nadu 
as well as in Kerala, have "zha" in the relevant places.  
Thus we see that from early times the Talavakara Sakha of the Samaveda 
has had a following in the Tamil land larger than in any other part of the 
country. And with this recension has come the "zha" which is a phoneme 
not found elsewhere. Naccinarkkiniyar is among the commentators of the 
Tamil Samgam works. In his commentary on the Tolkappiyam (famous 
Tamil grammatical treatise), he mentions "four Vedas": "Taittiriyam, 
Paudikam, Talavakaram and Samam". He mistakes recensions for full-
fledged Vedas. However, we note from his list that the Talavakara Sakha 
had the place of a full-fledged Veda in Tamil Nadu. "Taittiriyam" is a 
recension of the Krsna_Yajurveda. The Kausitaki Brahmana of the 
Sankhayana Sakha of the Rgveda is called "Pausa". What Naccinarkkiniyar 


 
calls "Paudiyam" is referred to by the Azhvars as "Pauzhiyam"- here again 
you see the relationship between "zha:" and "da".  
All told the phonemes unique to the languages spoken in the different 
regions have evolved on the basis of the differences in pronunciation in 
the various Vedic recensions.  
So far I have confined myself to the languages of the Dravidian region. 
Now I will speak on the same theme with reference to the other parts of 
India and to other countries of the world.  
It is customary in the North to use "ja" for "ya" and "ba" for "va"- both in 
literary and colloquial usage. The use of "ba" for "va" is noticeable 
particularly in Bengal and "ja" for "ya" in Uttar Pradesh, and Punjab, etc.  
In Bengal they follow the dictum, "vabayorabhedam" -there is no 
difference between "va" and 'ba". In Tamil too"Bhisma" is sometimes 
referred to as "Vittumar" and "Bhima" as "Vima". In Bengali, all "va's" are 
vocalised as "ba's". Indeed "Bengal" itself is from "Vanga".  
Bengalis say "Bangabasi" for "Vangavasi"(a resident of Bengali). Once 
they realised that changing all"va's" universally into "ba's" was not right 
and called a parisad [a meeting of scholars] to consider the question- it 
was called the "Vanga Parisad". According to one of its decisions all "ba-
kara" in Bengali books to be printed thenceforth was to be changed to 
"va-kara". They strictly carried out the decision. But in doing so they also 
changed what should naturally be "ba" into "va"- for instance, "bandhu" 
into "vandhu", "Bangabandhu" into "Vangavandhu".  
As observed earlier, in other regions of the North too "ba" is used for 
"va". For example, the name "Bihar" itself is from "Vihar". (Once there 
were many Buddhist viharas, temples or monasteries, in this region) The 
name "Rasbihari" is from "Rasavihari". How would you explain this 
practice? Such usage is laid down in the Pratisakhya of the Vedic 
recension followed in these parts. People there applied the rule of the 
Pratisakhya to their ordinary writing and speech also. It also follows that 


 
the rules laid down by the Vedic sastras have been faithfully followed in 
this region.  
Yajurvedins, it will be remembered, from the majority in the country 
taken as a whole. The Krsna-Yajurveda is followed in the South and the 
Sukla-Yajurveda in the North. There is a sakha of the latter called 
"Madhyandina" and it has a large following in the North. In its Pratisakhya 
it is said that "ja" may be used in place of 'ya", and "ka' in place of 'sa". 
we say in the South "yat Purusena havisa"(from Purusasukta); the 
Northern version of the same is "jat Purusena havika". We are amused by 
such chanting and we even feel angry that the Vedas are being distorted. 
At the same time we feel proud that we in the south maintain the purity 
of the Vedic sound. However, the "ja" and 'ka" in the Northern intonation 
have the sanction of the Siksa sastra.  
It is only phonemes that are close to one another that are interchanged. 
There are examples in Tamil also to show that "ja" and " ya" are closely 
related. "Java(the "Javaka" island) is referred to in Tamil works as 
"Yavaka". Generally, if 'ja" comes as the initial letter of a word it is spelt 
as 'sa" in Tamil, but if it comes in the middle it becomes "ya'- "Aja(n)" and 
"Pankaja(m)" become "Ayan and Pangayam". "Sa" is a form of sa. If "sa" 
and 'ka" are interchangeable so too, it seems, "sa" and "ka". In keeping 
with this, what is "kai" (hand) in Tamil is "sey" in Telugu. "Doing" 
(performing some work) is the function of the hand (in Tamil "seyvadu"). 
So better than the Tamil "kai" is the Telegu "sey" which denotes the 
function of the hand. In Sanskrit the word "kara" has the meaning of "to 
do" as well as the hand - "Samkara"("Sankara") one who does good; 
"karomi" is "I do". One wonders whether in Tamil too "sey" was originally 
used to denote the hand and then "kai" came to be used. Now "sey" is a 
verb in that language. The "sa"(or "sa"), it is likely, changed to "ka" and 
then "kai". One more point: "sa" and "ksa" are related sounds. So for 
"ksa" to become "ka" is natural "Aksam" -"akkam"; "daksinam" - 
"dakkanam"; "ksanam" _"kanam". Such examples could be multiplied.  
We have seen that "ba" becomes "va" in Tamil while in the Northern 
languages it is the other way round. Similarly, "ja" becomes "ya" and 'sa" 


 
becomes "ka" in Tamil while in the Northern languages "ya" and "sa" 
become "ja" and "ka" respectively. That is according to the Vedic 
recension followed there and the rules of the Siksa relating to it. That is 
the reason why Northerners chant "jat" Purusena havika" for "yat 
Purusena havisa".  
This change is to be seen in so many other words in the North: "Jamuna" 
for Yamuna"; "jogi" for yogi(n); "jug-jug" for yuga-yuga; "jaatra for 
"yatra". "Sa" is changes to ka" and so "rsi" becomes "riki". As we have 
seen, "ksa" and "sa" are related. Even in the South we hear people saying 
"Lasimi for "Laksmi"- they even write like that. In the North "ka" is used 
for "ksa"- for instance "Khir" for "ksira". The same applies to Tamil usage 
also-"Ilakkumi" for "Laksmi".  
Let us now turn to other countries, first to the land which saw the birth of 
Christianity, to the Semitic countries like Palestine and Israel. The Old 
Testament is basic to the Quran also. Some characters are common to 
Christianity and Islam, but in Arabic they are pronounced differently. 
Joseph becomes "Yusuf" and Jehovah becomes "Yehivah". There are 
differences among the Christian nations too. In some languages you see 
"ja-kara" to be prominent. "Jesu" and "Yesu", the name of the very 
founder of Christianity, is spelt differently. "Ja-kara" is a characteristic of 
Greek also. We could trace the root of all this to the Vedas. Jehivah or 
Yehovah 
is 
the 
same 
as 
the 
Vedic 
deity 
Yahvan. 
"Dyau-
Pitar"(Dyava_Prithivi) becomes Jupiter. Sanskrit words lose their initial 
letter when borrowed by other languages. So Dyau_Pitar becomes "Yau-
Pitar" and then Jupiter.  
What were originally Yahvan and Dyau-pitar changed to Jehovah and 
Jupiter with the addition of the "ja-kara". In the beginning the Vedic 
religion was practised everywhere. It is likely that the Madhyandina 
Sakha was followed in Greece and its neighbourhood.  
 
 
 


 

Impact of Siksa Sastra 
In the foregoing we noticed that certain Vedic syllables had a special 
association with certain regions and that these were absorbed in the 
languages spoken there. We also learned from this that the Vedas 
flourished in all countries. There was never a period in Tamil Nadu, the 
land we know intimately when Vedic dharma was not practised there.  
The name "Tamizh" itself has the "zha" characteristic of the Talavakara 
Sakha of the Samaveda. Am I right in making such a claim? Or is it all the 
other way around? Suppose the argument goes like this: it is the "zha" 
characteristic of Tamil and the "ja" characteristic of Northern tongues 
that are seen as the distinguishing phonemes in the Vedic texts prevalent 
in Tamil Nadu and the North respectively. In other words what was 
already present in the regional languages came to be absorbed in the 
Vedic sakhas prevalent in the areas concerned. Did I put the whole thing 
topsy-turvy when I made the statement that the Vedic "zha", "ja" and 
"ba" became characteristic for the Tamils, Northerners and the Bengalis 
respectively, that these were reflected in the speech of each of these 
linguistic groups?  
That the rules of the Siksa sastra had their impact on the regional 
languages is the correct view. The rules of the Pratisakhya do not apply to 
one area alone but to all those parts where the Vedic recension 
concerned is followed. If there is a Brahmin chanting the Talavakara in 
Kamarupa (Assam) or Kasmir, he will use "zha" where others use "da" or 
"la" in the mantras. A Brahmin who chants hymns from the Krsna-
Yajurveda has to use "da" instead of "zha" or "la" whether he belongs to 
Gujarat or Maharastra or any other place in India. In the same way, it is 
not only the Kannadiga, any Rgvedin anywhere will use "la" where others 
use "da" or "zha" in chanting the mantras. The Pratisakhya determines 
the sound of Vedic mantras not for a particular area alone but for the 
whole country. In course of time the local language takes on the 
characteristics of the sakha where it is practised.  


 
The name of the month "Margasirsi" is derived from the fact that 
generally the full moon falls on the day to which is conjoined the asterism 
of Mrgasirsa during that month. Margasirsi is Margazhi in Tamil. "Si" 
changed to "di" and "di": to "zhi". It is according to the genius of that 
language that "sa" becomes "da". "Purusa" is called "purudan" in Tamil 
and "Nahusa" is "Nag(h)udan" in Tamil poetry. Kambar calls Vibhisana 
"Vidanan". But, if Margasirsi changed to "Margasirdi" and then the "sir" in 
the middle dropped, should not the word have the final form of 
"Margadi"? How do you explain the presence of the "zha-kara"? In other 
words, how does the name of the month finally take the name 
"Margazhi"? The "zha-kara" must be attributed to the Talavakara Sakha 
that was predominant in Tamil Nadu.  
People belonging to this recension use "zha" and Krsna-Yajurvedins use 
"da", don't they? This habit they still retain unconsciously. The Telugu 
Vaisnavas sing the Tamil Divyaprabandham during worship in the 
temples. In Tirupati the Tamil Tiruppavai is sung before the Lord. It starts 
with the words "Margazhi-t-tingal". "Zhi" is difficult for Telugus to 
vocalise. How is it that they do not say "Margali" or "Margali" then? They 
say "Margadi-t-tingal", that is with the "da-kara" instead of the "zha-
kara". When they chant hymns from the Samaveda that is prevalent in 
Tamil Nadu they unconsciously use the “da-kara" for the "zha-kara". "Da 
is in the blood of the Yajurvedins, so they say "Margadi" instead of 
"Margazhi".  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Names of Months 
 From our inquiry into the derivation of the Tamil margazhi from 
Margasirsi, you must have formed an idea of how the genius of one 
language differs from that of another. You may note this from how the 
original Sanskrit names of other months have changed in Tamil. Usually, 
as observed before, the name of a month is derived from the asterism 
under which the full moon falls in that month. Citra-purnima is a sacred 
day. The Tamil Cittirai does not represent much of a change from the 
Sanskrit "Citra".  
Vaishaka is connected with the asterism Visakha; it is "Vaikasi" in Tamil. 
Just as Madurai becomes Marudai, so the Sanskrit, Vaishaki has changed 
to "Vaikasi" in Tamil. (In Bengal the month is called "Baisakhi", )Visakha is 
the asterism under which Nammazhvar was born. Now Vaisakha purnima 
is celebrated as Buddha purnima.  
The month Anusi is associated with the asterism of "Anusa"[Anuradha]. 
The full moon usually falls under this asterism during this month. In Tamil 
the month is called "Ani"- the "sa-kara" of the original has dropped.  
There are two "Asadhas"- Purvasadha and Uttarasadha (Earlier Asadha 
and later Asadha). Purvasadha is called "Puradam" in Tamil; in the Tamil 
name the "rva" of the original is eroded and the "sa" has dropped. 
Similarly, Uttarasadha is "Utradam "in Tamil. The Sanskrit "Asadhi" is the 
Tamil month of "Adi".  
Sravana means that which is associated with the asterism Sravana. In the 
Tamil "Onam" the "sra" of the original has dropped and "vana" has 
become "onam". Since it is the asterism sacred to Mahavisnu the 
honorific "Tiru" [equivalent of Sri] is prefixed to its name --thus we have 
"Tiruvonam". (Ardra is the asterism sacred to Siva. It is called “Adirai" in 
Tamil and with the prefixing of "Tiru" it becomes "Tiruvadirai". It is not 
customary to add “Tiru" to the Tamil names of other asterisms. In the 


 
South, there is a festival of lights in the month of "Karttigai" --the original 
Sanskrit name is Krttika. During this time alone is “Tiru" added to 
"Karttigai". But to the asterisms sacred to Hari and Hara-- Visnu and Siva--
"Tiru" is added. Here is proof of the fact that it is part of the religious 
culture of Tamils not to maintain any distinction between these two 
gods). To come back to Sravana. The full moon in this month generally 
falls under the asterism of Sravana. In the Tamil name of "Avani", the 
“sra" of the original has dropped.  
For this linguistic phenomenon of letters dropping off in Tamil there is the 
example of "Izham" for Simhala [the island nation known as Sri Langa]. 
"Sa" and "sa" become "a" in Tamil. If "sahasra" is "sasiram" in Kannada, it 
is "ayiram" in Tamil.  
"Ayiram" reminds me of other numbers. The Tamil numbers onru, irandu, 
mundru (one, two, three) seem to have no connection with the Sanskrit 
eka, dvi, tri. But ancu and ettu (five and eight) seem to be related to the 
Sanskrit panca and asta. The English "two" and "three" are related to the 
Sanskrit dvi and tri. Sexta, hepta, octo, nano, deca -- these are obviously 
connected with the Sanskrit sasta, sapta, asta, nava and dasa. But the 
very first number "one" seems totally unrelated to the Sanskrit "eka". 
But, strangely enough, it appears to have some connection with the Tamil 
"onru". The Telugu equivalent is made up of the "o" of the Tamil "onru" 
and the "ka" of the Sanskrit "eka" -- "okati". If we consider all this, just as 
we are one racially, in the matter of language for Sanskrit and Dravidian 
tongues.  
In Simhala the "sa" and "ha" of "Simha" have dropped off and the word 
has become "Ilam" and the "la" has changed to "zha" to become "Izham".  
Like Asadha, Prosthapada has also a Purva and an Uttara. Purva-
Prosthapada is “Purattadi" in Tamil: "asta" changing to "atta" is already 
known to us. Uttara-Prosthapada is "Utrattadi" in Tamil. The full moon 
falls under this asterism or the one near it in the Tamil month Purattasi 
which name is derived somehow from Prosthapadi.  


 
We call Asvayuja Asvini or "Asvati". The full moon conjoined with the 
asterism Asvayuja makes the month Asvayuji which in Tamil is "Aippasi".  
The "Karttika" of Sanskrit (adjective of Krttika) has not changed much in 
its Tamil equivalent of Karttigai. The "Tirukkarttigai" festival of lights 
usually falls on a full moon. I stated with how Margasirsi changes to 
"Margazhi". The full moon of that month is celebrated as Tiruvadirai, the 
day sacred to Siva.  
"Pusya" is the Tamil "Pusam". (We in Tamil Nadu have got so used to 
"Pusam" that we have made the asterism "Punarvasu" into 
"Punarpusam". Of course there is no Sanskrit equivalent like 
"Punarpusya") "Pausya" means what is associated with Pusya. Pusya is 
also known as Taisya. The Tamil name of the month "Tai" is the result of 
the second syllable of "Taisya" dropping off.  
The month "Magha" is named after the asterism Magha --in Tamil it is 
"Masi". The "si" ending is reminiscent of "Vaikasi", "Purattasi" and 
"Aippasi".  
There are two asterisms called Purva-Phalguna and Uttara-Phalguna. In 
the corresponding Tamil names the important part of the Sanskrit 
original, "Phalguna", has dropped off. So "Purva-Phalguna" is mere 
"Puram" in Tamil and "Uttara-Phalguna" is mere "Utram". But the month 
in which the full moon falls under the asterism of Uttara-Phalguna is 
"Panguni" for Tamils. It is a festive day in many parts of the south. We 
celebrate it as Panguni-Utram Tiruk-kalyanam.  
From an examination of the Tamil names of the months we form an idea 
of how the phonemes of Sanskrit change in Tamil.  
 
 
 
 


 

Other Notable Aspects of Siksa 
The general rule is that the sound of the Vedas ought not to be changed, 
that there should be no tonal alterations. But there are rules permitting 
slight modifications based on the differences between the recensions - 
and these rules are according to the Siksa sastra. Slight tonal changes are 
also allowed. In some hymns of the Rgveda the "a-kara" and "e-kara" are 
drawn out further than in the other Vedas. In some recensions we have 
"m" and in some others "gm" - these are called "anusvara". The 
differences are not so much related to letters or syllables as they are tone 
and accent.  
Sound means so much to the Vedic tradition, so due importance must be 
given to it. Thus Siksa sastra is the Vedapurusa's organ of breathing.  
The 50 letters of the Sanskrit alphabet are derived from the Vedic sounds. 
If you add "jna" to them you will have  
. These letters are called "matrka". The word has more than one 
meaning. Importantly, "matr" or "mata" means Amba, the World Mother. 
The 51 letters make up her form - Amba, Parasakti, personifies them. If 
the cosmos is the creation of this Supreme Goddess and, if it is also 
remembered that creation was accomplished with sound, Amba must be 
the incarnation of the 51 letters. The Sakta Tantras declare that the 51 
letters are the limbs of Amba and correlate the letters with different 
parts of her sacred body. The 51 Sakti pithas [seats of the Supreme 
Goddess] are associated with one or another of these letters.  
If siksa is particularly esteemed as the breathing organ of the 
Vedapurusa, we must also remember that it is made more glorious by the 
fact that it sheds light on the 51 letters which personify Amba.  
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 7 
VYAKARANA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Mouth of the Vedapurusa 
Vyakarana or grammar is the "mukha" of the Vedapurusa, his mouth. The 
Tamil word for grammar is "illakanam". Grammar deals with the 
"laksanas" of a language. "Laksmana(n)" is "llukkumanan" in Tamil. In the 
same way, "laksana(m)" becomes "illakanam" in that language.  
There are a number of works on Sanskrit grammar. The most widely used 
and important is the one by the great sage Panini. There is a gloss - a 
vartika- on his "Vyakarna-sutra" by Vararuci. Patanjali has written a 
bhasya or commentary on Panini's sutras. These three are the chief works 
on Sanskrit grammar.  
There is a difference between grammar and other sastras. In the case of 
other subjects the original sutras constituting them are esteemed more 
than their bhasyas. But, in the case of grammar, or Vyakarana, the Vartika 
is more valued than the sutras and still more valued is the bhasya.  
According to one reckoning, there are six sastras. Vyakarana is one of 
them. Four of the sastras are particularly important: apart from 
Vyakarana, Tarka (logic), Mimamsa and Vedanta. Vyakarna is also one of 
the vedic sadanga (six limbs of the vedas).  
"Sucant sutram ", so it is said. (The sutra is just an indication of 
something, a truth or a principle.) Every sastra has a bhasya and each 
such bhasya is known by a particular name. The vyakarana bhasya (of 
Patanjali) alone is called "Mahabhasya", "the great commentary ".  
 
 
 
 


 

Grammar and Siva 
Siva temples have a mandapa (pavilion or hall) called “vyakarana-
danamandapa". In Tamil it has come to be called “vakkanikkum 
mandapam". There are such halls in many temples in the Chola territory 
of Tamilnadu. One such is in Tiruvorriyur near Madras. Why should there 
be a mandapa for grammar in Siva temples? What is Siva's connection 
with language? Is not Siva in his form of Daksinamurti all silence?  
Nrttavasane Nataraja-rajo nanada dhakkam navapancavaram  
Uddhartukamah Sankadisiddhanetadvimarse Sivasutrajalam  
I will speak briefly about this stanza. The silent Siva remains still [as 
Daksinamurti]. But the same Siva [in another form of his] keeps dancing 
all the time and it was from his dance that the science of language was 
born.  
Nataraja is the name of the dancing Paramesvara. "Nata" is a member of 
a troupe which also consists of the "vita" and "gayaka". The nata dances. 
Nataraja is the king of all dancers-- he who cannot be excelled as a 
dancer-- and he is also called Mahanata [the great dancer]. The 
Amarakosa, the Sanskrit lexicon, has these two words: “Mahakalo 
mahanatah". In Tamil they say “Ambala- k-kuttaduvan". We find from 
royal inscriptions that in the old days Brahmins too had such Tamil 
names- “Ambala-k-kuttaduvan Bhattan", for instance.  
There used to be a publishing establishment in Bombay called the 
NirnayaSagara Press. It once brought out old poetical works in Sanskrit 
under the general name, “Kavyamala Series ". There were some books in 
this series with the name “Pracinalekhamala”. Reproduced in one of them 
is the text of a copper-plate inscription belonging to the Vengi kingdom. 
Vengi is situated between the Godavari and the Krsna.  


 
The Cola rulers of the Telugu country and the Colas of Tanjavur were 
related by marriage. Rajaraja Cola (Narendra) reigned in Tanjavur; it was 
he who built the Brhadisvara temple. Kulottunga Cola who belonged to 
the family of the grandson of a king of Vengi ruled as a member of the 
Cola dynasty of Tanjavur. Once he visited the Cola kingdom and on his 
return took some 500 Brahmins with him to promote Vedic learning in 
Vengi. The "Dravidalu" of Andhra Pradesh are the descendants of these 
Brahmins.  
The names of all these Brahmins and their gotras are mentioned in the 
copper-plate inscription together with the subjects in which they were 
proficient and duties they had to perform. The landed property allotted 
to each is referred to, so also the names of the donors and of the 
recipients. The Brahmins from Tamil Nadu had to teach the Vedas and 
sastras. That is why gifts of lands were made to them.  
“Rupavatara-vaktuk eko bhagah": these words are from the inscription. It 
means “one share to the Brahmin who is proficient in the Rupavatara.” 
Rupavatara is a work on grammar.  
In Ennayiram, near Tindivanam (Tamil Nadu), there was a school with 340 
students. Of them 40 studied Rupavatara, says an inscription of Rajendra 
Cola I. In Tribhuvanam, Pondicerri (Pondicherry), also there was a Vedic 
school supported by Rajadhiraja (A. D. 1018-1050) where the Rupavatara 
was taught. We also learn from an inscription of Vira-Rajendra Devam 
dated A. D 1067, that this grammatical work was taught at a school in 
Tiru, ulldal, near Kanchi.  
Siddhanta-Kaumudi is a very popular treatise on grammar. It is a 
commentary on Panini's sutras by Bhattoji Diksita who was a disciple of 
Appayya Diksita. The latter was born in Adayappalam and was the author 
of 104 works, many of them on Saiva themes. His Kuvalayananda, a work 
on poetics, is also famous.  
Ardha-matra-Iaghavena putrotsavam manyante vaiyakaranah  
 


 
This speaks of the great joy experienced by grammarians: if they gain as 
much as half a matra it is a cause for jubilation like the birth of a son to a 
man who has been long childless.  
The sutras are very brief and very precise. The Siddhanta- Kaumudi is also 
famous for its brevity and exactitude; there is no circumlocution in it, no 
beating about the bush. May be the sutras themselves are wordy but not 
Bhattoji Diksita's commentary on the same. Written some 400 years ago, 
it is very popular even today and is the first book of grammar prescribed 
for students. (Bhattoji Diksita also wrote the Tattavakaustubha and 
dedicated it to his guru, Appayya Diksita. In this he seeks to establish that 
there is no Truth other than the Brahman and that, to claim that there is, 
is not in keeping with the teachings of the Upanisads. Bidden by his guru, 
he also wrote an attack on Madhvacarya's philosophy of dualism. The 
work, Madhvamatavidhvamsanam, is a cause of dispute among 
philosophers but Bhattoji Diksita's commentary on grammar is acceptable 
to all systems. )  
Before Siddhanta-Kaumudi, Rupavataram was the grammar work famous 
among students. "Rupam" here means the "complete form of sound"; 
"avataram" is descent, but in the present context "history". Rupavataram 
was published by Rangacari, of Presidency College, Madras.  
That gifts of land were made to scholars who taught Rupavataram [the 
reference here is to the Vengi inscription], shows the importance 
attached to sanskrit grammar in those times.  
The Vengi inscription dates back to 850 years ago. As mentioned earlier, 
the names of Brahmins who received gifts are given in it. Many of them 
had the title "Sadangavid" (learned in the six Vedic Angas). Some had 
Tamil names -- "Ambala-k-kuttaduvan Bhattan", "Tiruvarangamudayan 
Bhattan", etc. Of the foregoing two names the first is associated with the 
Cidambaram temple which is Saiva and the second with the Srirangam 
temple which is Vaisnava. Both Brahmins were Smartas, even the one 
with the Vaisnava name. There has been as much devotion to Siva as 
there has been to Visnu at all times. In the North and in Kerala, even 
today, Smartas perform puja in all temples. The man called 


 
"Tiruvarangamudayan Bhattan" is not to be taken as a Vaisnava from his 
name. The Sanskrit equivalent of the name is Rangasvamin. "Udayan" 
means "svamin", "svam" denoting possession.  
The Tamil name of Nataraja is "Tiruvambala Kuttaduvan". I wanted to 
speak about Nataraja and his connection with grammar. Let us go back to 
the stanza with the first word, Nrttavasane” “Nataraja performs an awe- 
inspiring dance. It seems to bring together all the dance that all of us have 
to perform, the rhythms of all our lives. The head of the Nataraja idol has 
something that seems spread over it, something falling down on both 
sides. What is it? It is the god's mass of matted locks. I am reminded of 
the snapshot photographs taken nowadays. A snapshot is a rapid 
photograph that captures an object in one of its fleeting moments. It is 
not a study that is static but one suggestive of motion. Nataraja dances 
fast, but momentarily seems to stop dancing. His matted locks give the 
impression of fanning out over the two sides of his face. The sculptor of 
those times seems to have taken a mental snapshot of that moment to 
create the image of Nataraja.  
Nataraja has a drum in one hand, called the dhakka or damaruka. The tala 
of this drum (the time kept by it) is in keeping with the "footwork" of the 
dancing god, the movement of his feet. The beat of his drum is referred 
to in the words, "nanada dhakkam".  
There are chiefly three types of musical instruments. Those made of skin 
like the dhakka, the tavil (drum accompaniment to nagasvaram music), 
the kanjira (a kind of hand drum), the mrdanga; stringed instruments like 
the vina, the violin; wind instruments like nagasvaram, the flute. The final 
beat of the drum is called cappu. Similarly at the end of Nataraja's dance 
(" nrttavasane ") the damaruka produced the cappu sound.  
When Nataraja dances, Sanaka and his brother sages, Patanjali 
Vyaghrapada and so on stand round him. They are great ascetics, so they 
are able to see the dance. Nataraja's dance can be seen only by those 
who have the inner vision of jnana. The Lord himself bestowed on Arjuna 
the divine eye with which the pandava could see his cosmic form. Vyasa 
imparted the same power to Sanjaya so that he could describe this 


 
wondrous form to Dhrtarastra. Only they (Arjuna and Sanjaya) could see 
Krsna's universal form. Others on the battlefield of Kuruksetra could not. 
Because of the great efforts made by them, the celestials, the sages and 
yogins obtained the divine eye to see the dance of Nataraja. In the Gita 
such sight is called "divya-caksus" (divine eye).  
Sanaka and others saw the dance with their real eyes. Visnu played the 
drum called the maddala, while Brahma kept time. At the close of the 
dance, the concluding beats (cappu) produced fourteen sounds. It is 
these fourteen that are referred to in the stanza ("Nrttavasane", etc) as 
"navapancavaram"; "nava" is nine and "panca" is five, so fourteen in all. 
"Nanada dhakkam navapancavaram. " If the number of sounds produced 
by Nataraja's dhakka is fourteen, the branches of Vedic learning are also 
the same number (caturdasavidya). If the foundation of Hindu dharma is 
made up of these fourteen vidyas, Nataraja'a cappu produced fourteen 
sounds which, according to the verse, were meant for the [Atmic] uplift of 
Sanaka and others. You must have seen in the sculptural representations 
of Daksinamurti in temples four aged figures by his side. They are the 
Sanaka sages. It is not Saiva works like the Tevaram and the Tiruvacakam 
alone that mention how instruction was given to the four but also the 
Vaisnava songs of the Azhvars.  
The fourteen sounds produced by Nataraja's drum are the means by 
which the reality of Siva is to be known and experienced within us in all 
its plenitude. Nandikesvara has commented upon the fourteen sounds in 
his Sivabhaktisutra.  
Among those present at Nataraja's dance was Panini. His story is told in 
the Brhatkatha which was written by Gunadhya in the Prakrt called 
Paisaci. Ksemendra produced a summary of it in Sanskrit and, based on it, 
Somadeva Bhatta wrote the Katha-sarat-sagara. It is the source of some 
of the stories of The Arabian Nights, Pancatantra and Aesop's Fables. 
Perunkathai is a Tamil version, the title being Tamil for Brhatkatha.  
The story of Panini is told in the Katha-sarit-sagara. In Pataliputra 
(modern Patna), in Magadha, there were two men called Varsopadhyaya 
and Upavarsopadhyaya - the second was the younger of the two. 


 
Upakosala was Upavarsopadhyaya's daughter. Panini and Vararuci were 
Varsopadhyaya's students. Panini made little progress in his lessons. So 
his teacher asked him to go to the Himalaya and practise austerities. The 
student did so and through the grace of Isvara received the power to 
witness the tandava dance of Nataraja. With this divine gift of the Lord, 
Panini indeed saw the tandava and heard the fourteen sounds at its 
conclusion. For him these sounds meant the fourteen cardinal sutras of 
grammar and on them he based his Astadhyayi. As its very name 
suggests, this work, which is the source book of Sanskrit grammar, has 
eight chapters.  
The fourteen sounds are recited at the upakarma ceremony. Since they 
emanated from the drum of Mahesvara(Nataraja), they are called 
"Mahesvarasutras". Human beings can produce only inarticulate sounds 
on the musical instruments played by them. The hand of Paramesvara is 
verily the Nadabrahman and Sabdabrahaman incarnate, so his cappu on 
the damaruka at the conclusion of his tandava sounded as a 
series(garland) of fourteen letters:  
. a i un; 2. rlk; 3. e on; 4. ai auc; 5. hayavarat; 6. lan; 7. nama nana nam; 
. jha bha n; 9. gha da dha s; 10. ja ba ga da da s; 11. kha pha cha tha tha 
catatav; 12. kapay; 13. sa sa sar; 14. hal-iti Mahesvarani sutrani.  
When you listen to these sutras at the upakarma ceremony, you are 
amused. You repeat them after the priest without knowing what they are 
all about. They are the concluding strokes Siva made on his drum as he 
stopped dancing, stopped whirling round and round.  
We say, don't we, that the anklets sound "jal-jal", that the damaru sounds 
"timu-timu", that the tavil sounds "dhum-dhum"? These are not of course 
the sounds actually produced by the respective drums. Even so the words 
give us some idea of the beats. We don't say "pi-pi" to describe the sound 
of a drum or "dhum-dhum" to describe the sound of the pipe. The sound 
produced by plucking the strings of the instruments like the veena is 
usually described as "toyn-toyng". From this it follows that, thought the 
musical instruments do not produce articulate sounds, they create the 
impression of producing the phonemes of human speech. If this be so in 


 
the case of instruments played by humans, why should not the drum 
beaten by Nataraja during his pancakrtya dance produce articulate 
sounds?  
How did Panini make use of the fourteen sounds? He created an index 
from the sutras to vocalise the letters or syllables together. According to 
the arrangement made by him, the first letter or syllable of a sutra voiced 
with the last letter or syllable of another sutra will indicate the letters or 
syllables in between. For example, the first syllable of "hayavarat", "ha", 
and the last letter of "hal", "l", together make "hal". This embraces all the 
consonants in between. Similarly, the first letter of the first sutra, "a", and 
the last letter of the fourth sutra together form "ac"-this includes all the 
vowels. The first letter of the first sutra and the last letter of the 
fourteenth sutra together form "al" - it includes all letters.  
"Halantasya" is one of the sutras of Astadhyayi. "Al" itself has come to 
mean writing.  
"A-kara" is the first letter in all languages. In Urdu it is alif; in Greek it is 
alpha. Both are to be derived from "al". So too "alphabet" in English. Here 
is another fact to support the view that, once upon a time, the Vedic 
religion was prevalent all over the world.  
We know thus that the prime source of grammar is constituted by the 
Mahesvara-sutras emanating from the drum of Nataraja. Since 
Paramesvara was the cause of the sabda-sastras (all sciences relating to 
sound, speech), "grammar-pavilions" have been built in Siva temples, but 
not in Visnu shrines.  
By the side of Nataraja are Patanjali and Vyaghrapada. I had been to a 
temple near Sirkazhi (in Tamil Nadu). There, beside Nataraja, were 
Patanjali and Vyaghrapada. Beneath their images were inscribed their 
names. Patanjali's name was seen here as "Padamcolli" - the error must 
be attributed to the ignorance of the man who had inscribed the names. I 
was however happy that ironically enough, this name benefited the sage 
and that even ignorance was the cause of something appropriate. 
"Padam" has the meaning of grammar [as in] "padavakya pramana". Here 


 
"pada" means grammar. So "Padamcolli" [the second half of the name in 
Tamil] means one who "says" grammar.  
When I saw this inscription I was reminded of another thing. We speak of 
"gunaksara-nyaya". "Guna" here means an insect like the white ants 
which eats into wood and palm-leaves. Sometimes in this process letters 
are formed accidentally. If something meaningful results from an act 
committed unconsciously or unwittingly it is said to be according to the 
"gunaksara-nyaya". This term is thus applicable to Patanjali being written 
as "Padamcolli"  
Some years ago I happened to see the Sahitya-Ratnakara. The author of 
this poetical work is Yajnanarayana Diksita who composed it 400 hundred 
years ago during the reign of Raghunatha Nayaka of Tanjavur. Diksita was 
a great devotee of Siva and in one of his hymns there is a reference to 
grammar.  
Adau pani-ninadato' ksara-samamnayopadesena yah  
Sabdanamanusasananyakalayat sastrena sutratmana  
Bhasyam tasya ca padahamsakaravaih praudhasayam tam gurum  
Sabdarthapratipatti-hetumanisam Candravatamsam bhaje  
- Sahitya-Ratnakara, 11. 124  
"Aksara-samamnayam" in this stanza means grammar, a grouping 
together of letters. Isvara's breath constitutes the Vedas. The wind 
produced by his hand [as he beats the drum] is "Aksara-Veda", the 
Mahesvara-sutras. It is called "sabdanusasanam". "Pani-ninadatah" 
means "produced sounds with your hands" or "the sounds came by to 
Panini". Thus the words have two meanings. The idea is that Panini 
created his grammar with the sounds produced by Isvara with his hand.  
The stanza goes on to say: "With the movement of your hand the sutras 
of grammar were created and with the movement of your feet its 
commentary has been produced.” Patanjali, author of the Mahabhasya, 
was an incarnation of the primordial serpent Adisesa. Adisesa is now the 
anklet of Parameshvara. It is in keeping with this that the poet says that 


 
Siva created the bhasya with the movement of his feet. He concludes by 
remarking that sound and meaning originate in Siva.  
In this way, Siva is the prime source of grammar. That is why there are 
mandapas in his temples where vyakarana is to be taught.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 


 

Works on Grammar 
In the stanza [in the previous chapter] we saw that the poet calls Siva 
"Candravatamsa". It means the god who has the moon for a head 
ornament. "Candrasekhara" and "Indusekhara" mean the same. 
Remarkably enough, "Indusekhara" occurs in the titles of two 
grammatical works. One is Sabdendusekharam, and the other 
pariposendusekharam. A student who has read grammar up to 
Sabdendusekharam is considered master of the subject.  
If there are thirty books on Siksa, there are any number on grammar. 
Foremost among them are Panini's sutras, Patanjali's bhasya for it and 
vararuci's vartika (mentioned earlier). I make this statement in the belief 
that Vararuci and Katyayana is the same person. Some think that they are 
not. Vararuci was one of the "Nine gems" of Vikramaditya’s court.  
Bhartrhari's Vakyapadiyam is also an important grammatical treatise. 
There are said to be nine [notable] Sanskrit grammar works, "nava- 
vyakarana". Hanuman is believed to have learned them from the sun god. 
Sri Rama praises him as "nava-vyakarana-vetta ". One of these nine works 
is Aindram authored by Indra. It is said that the basic Tamil grammar 
book, the Tolkappiyam, follows Aindram.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 


 

Sanskrit and Tamil Grammar 
Just as "illakanam", the Tamil word for grammar, is derived from the 
Sanskrit "laksana", so too a number of other words that have to do with 
grammar in that language are of Sanskrit origin. For instance, there are 
two terms used in Tamil grammar, pakuti (pahuti) and vikuti (vihuti). To 
illustrate in the word "Ramanukku" (for Raman ), "Raman " is pakuti and 
"ku" is "vikuti". Both terms pakuti and vikuti are derived from Sanskrit 
grammar. "How do you say so? " it might be asked. "Is it not pakuti an 
original tamil word derived from "pakuttal? "  
Pakuti in the sense of that which has been divided is indeed a Tamil word. 
But I say that there is another pakuti that is a corrupt form of the Sanskrit 
"prakarti". It is in the sense of "prakarti" that the word "Raman" in 
"Ramanukku" is described as pakuti. As for "vikuti" it is from the Sanskrit 
"vikriti": there is no such word as "vikuttal" in Tamil corresponding to 
pakuttal. From the undisputed fact that vikuti is from vikriti, we may 
conclude for certain that pakuti is from prakrti.  
(Vikrti also called "pratyaya", that which gives many meanings to the 
same prakrti. When it is said "Ramanai aditten"-(I) beat Raman-the 
pratyaya "ai" added makes Raman the person who is beaten. If it is said 
Ramanal adipatten-(I) was beaten by Raman-the prakrti Raman with the 
al makes him the one who beat.)  
It is not my purpose to claim that Sanskrit is superior to Tamil. When do 
feelings of superiority arise to make us happy? When we are conscious of 
differences between what we believe is "ours" and what we believe is 
"theirs". Where we to have racial bias, we could be tempted to speak in 
appreciative terms of what is "ours" and to deprecate what is "theirs". If 
we realise that to harbour feelings based on racial differences is itself 
wrong, that our languages have sprung from the same family, from the 
same cultural tradition, there will be no cause for speaking highly of one 
language at the expense of another.  


 
On the subject of grammar I have mentioned certain facts and it is not my 
intention to elevate one language above another.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Sanskrit: The Universal Language 
Sanskrit is the language of all mankind; it is an international language and 
also the language of the gods. The gods are called "girvanas"; so Sanskrit 
is called "Gairvani". While the emperor of Tamil poetry, Kambar, 
describes it as the "devabhasa", the Sanskrit poet Dandin calls it “daivi 
vak"(divine speech) in his Kavyadarsa: “Samskrtam nama daivi vak. "  
Sanskrit has no syllable that indistinct or unclear. Take the English 
"word". It has neither a distinct "e-kara" nor "o-kara". There are no such 
words in Sanskrit. Neither is the "r" in "word" pronounced distinctly nor is 
it silent.  
Sanskrit, besides, has no word that cannot be traced to its root. Whatever 
the word it can be broken into its syllables to elucidate its meaning. 
Sanskrit is sonorous and auspicious to listen to. You must not be ill 
disposed towards such a language, taking the narrow that it belongs to a 
few people.  
To speak Sanskrit is not to make some noises and somehow convey your 
message. The sounds, the phonemes, in it are, as it were, purified and the 
words and sentences refined by being subjected to analysis. That is why 
the language is called "Sanskrit"[Samskrtam]. The purpose of Siksa, and in 
greater measure of Vyakarana, is to accomplish such refinement.  
To speak the language of Sanskrit itself means to be refined, to be 
cultured. As the language of the gods it brings divine grace. The sounds of 
Sanskrit create beneficial vibrations of the nadis and strengthen the 
nervous system, thereby contributing to our health.  
 
 


 

Linguistic Studies and Religion 
Use this Use Hindu Dharma Acharya's Call Voice of Sankara Personal 
Experiences Sri Adi Sankara Namo Namah Dasoupadesam Naamavali / 
Pushpaanjali Tamil Telugu   
Siksa, Vyakarna and the subjects I have yet to deal with -Chandas and 
Nirukta-are Vedangas-(limbs of the vedas) connected with language. 
After I said that I would deal with matters basic to our religion, I have 
been speaking about linguistic studies and grammar. Next I am going to 
deal with prosody. By works on religion we ordinarily mean those 
[directly] relating to God, worship, devotion, jnana, dharma and so on. 
Would not the right thing for me then be to speak about such works?  
When we dealt with the vedas a number of matters cropped up, matters 
regarded as germane to religion. Religion will find a prominent place in 
the subjects that I have yet to speak about, Kalpa, Mimamsa, the Puranas 
and Dharmasastra., But in between has arisen the science of language 
that has apparently no connection with religion.  
In the Vedic view everything is connected with the Lord. There is no 
question of dividing subjects into "religious" and "non-religious". Even the 
science of medicine, Ayurveda, which pertains to physical well being, is 
ultimately meant for Atmic uplift- or for that matter, military science 
(Dhanurveda). That is why they were made part of traditional lore. So too 
political economy which is also an Atma-sastra.  
Why are works belonging to these fields held in great esteem? All 
subjects, all works, that teach a man to bring order, refinement and 
purity in every aspect of his life and help him thus to take the path to 
liberation are regarded as religious in character.  
Sound is the highest of the perceived forms of the Paramatman and 
language is obviously connected with it. It is the concern of Siksa and 


 
Vyakarana to refine and clarify it and make it a means for the well-being 
of our Self.  
Grammar 
is 
associated 
with 
Sabdabrahman. 
Worship 
of 
the 
Nadabrahman which is the goal of music is a branch of this. If sounds are 
well discerned and employed in speech they will serve not only the 
purpose of communication but also of cleansing us inwardly. The science 
of language is helpful here.  
I have already mentioned that Pathanjali's commentary on Panini's Sutras 
is called the Mahabhasya. The prefix "Maha" in the name of the work is 
an indication of high degree of importance given to grammar in our 
tradition. Illustrious teachers have written commentaries on the Vedas, 
on the Brahmasutra, on the Upanisads, on the Bhagavadgita, and so on. 
But none of these has "maha" prefixed to it. There is a saying that a 
scholar derives as much happiness from learning the Mahabhasya as from 
ruling an empire.  
Mahabhasyam va pathaniyam  
Maharajyam va sasaniyam  
I recently came across another piece of evidence like the Vengi inscription 
to prove how in the old days our rulers nurtured and propagated the 
science of grammar.  
Dhar was a state in the formal Central Provinces (now a part of Madhya 
Pradesh). It is the same as Dhara which was the capital of Bhojaraja who 
was a great patron of arts and who made lavish gifts to poets and artists. 
There is a mosque in the town of Dhar now. Once a cave was discovered 
in the mosque which on examination revealed some writings in Sanskrit. 
But the department of epigraphy could not carry out any investigations 
until some years after freedom. Then, with the permission of the 
authorities of the mosque, they studied their finding.  
To their amazement they saw a wheel inside with verses dealing with 
grammar inscribed on it in the form of a chart. The mosque stands today 
where a temple to Sarasvati stood during Bhojaraja's time. The idea 


 
behind the wheel is that the science of language (grammar) must form 
part of the temple to Sarasvati, the goddess of speech---and grammar is 
the Vedapurusa's mouth. They say that grammar could be learnt at a 
glance from this wheel. It is because the science of language is worthy of 
worship that the wheel inscribed with grammar was installed in the 
temple. With the blessings of Vagdevi(Sarasvati) we have obtained the 
wheel, though long after the mosque was built at that site. The 
department of epigraphy has published the text of the inscription with an 
English translation.  
We learn thus that sastras like grammar were not regarded merely as of 
worldly interest but in fact considered worthy of worship. That is why 
rulers promoted them.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
   
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 8 
CHANDAS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Foot of the Vedapurusa 
We so often hear people [Tamils] speak of "Chanda-t-Tamizh". Men of 
devotion say that the praises of the lord must be sung in "Chanda-t-
Thamizh". "Chanda (m)" is derived from "Chandas".  
"Chandas", as I have already said, means the Vedas. Bhagavan says in the 
Gita that the Vedas are leaves of the pipal tree called Creation--
Chandamsi yasya parnani. Instead of "Veda", the Lord uses the word 
"Chandas". However, the "Chandas" I am going to speak about does not 
mean the Vedas but prosody and represents the foot of the Vedapurusa.  
The Rgveda and the Samaveda are entirely poetical in form. The 
Yajurveda consists of both prose and poetry. It is because poetry forms 
their major part that the Vedas are called Chandas.  
The tailor takes your measurement to make your suit. He will not 
otherwise be able to cut the cloth properly. Similarly, poetry gives form to 
our thoughts and feelings. Your shirt has to be so many inches wide, so 
many inches long, isn't so? Similarly, poetry also has its measurement 
expressed in "feet" and number of syllables. The Sastra that deals with 
such measurement is "Chandas" and the text on which it is chiefly based 
is Chanda sutra by Pingala. People who have received initiation into a 
mantra touch their head with their hand, mentioning the name of the 
sage associated with the mantra, touch their nose mentioning the 
chandas and touch their heart mentioning the deity invoked.  
All Vedic mantras in verse are Chandas. Non-Vedic poetry is in the form of 
"slokas". Prose is called "gadya" and poetry "padya". In Tamil, poetry is 
called "seyyul", in Telugu "padyam". The term chandas also refer to 
poetic metre (prosody). There is a metre called "Anustubh" in which are 
composed the Ramayana and the Puranas.  


 
There are rules governing the number of feet in each stanza, and the 
number of syllables in each foot. The metre "Arya" is based on matras, 
syllables short and long. Take the word "Rama": the long syllable "Ra" is 
two matras while the short one "ma" is one matra. There are stanzas in 
which each foot is determined by the number of syllables, no matter 
whether they are short or long. Other metres are based on matras.  
Men of devotion:  
The word the Paramaguru actually uses for "men of devotion" is the 
Tamil adiyars, meaning those who support the feet of the Lord with their 
head or those who are at the feet of the Lord.  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Pada or Foot 
I said Chandas is the foot of the Vedapurusa. Poetry also has its foot. In 
tamil poetry there are "iradikkural" (stanzas with two feet), naladiar 
(stanzas with four feet), etc: "adi" here has the same meaning as "pada", 
that is foot. Naladiar does not mean four adiyars. Great devotees are 
called adiyars because they lie at the lotus feet of the Lord. (In Sanskrit 
too we have similar terms like "Acaryapada", Govindapada", and 
"Bhaghavatpada". Naladiar means stanzas with four feet.  
If "foot" is called "pada" or "pada" in Sanskrit, it is known as "adi" in 
tamil. (It goes without saying that "foot is the English equivalent) A stanza 
must have a certain number of feet and its metre must have a certain 
number of letters or syllables. "Pada", "adi", "foot"--thus all languages 
have words with the same meaning to denote a line of a stanza. The 
realisation that there is something common to all mankind, something 
that shows the unity of the human race, is inwardly satisfying. 
One-fourth of a mantra or a stanza is called a "pada". In Tamil one out of 
four parts is called "kal"(that is foot). The foot ("leg") forms one-fourth of 
the human body. From the head to the waist is one half of the body and 
from the waist to the feet is another half. And half of the latter half, i.e. 
one fourth is "kal" in Tamil or foot (leg). The waist is called "arai" in that 
language, meaning half. 
In Tamil "kal" usually means the entire leg and "padam" or "padam" is 
used to denote the foot. But in some contexts kal is used in the sense of 
the foot. For instance, in terms "ullangal" and "purangal" (sole and upper 
part of the foot respectively) only the foot is referred to. In Sanskrit too 
"pada" means both leg and foot. 
   
   


 

Feet and Syllables 
A Vedic mantra or the stanza of an ordinary poem is divided into four 
parts. In most metres there are four feet and each foot is divided into the 
same number of syllables or mantras. When the feet are not equal we 
have what is called a metre that is "visama": "vi+sama" = "visama". 
"Sama" indicates a state of non-difference,  
of evenness. When we do something improper, departing from our 
impartial "middle position", our action is characterised as "visama". The 
word is also used in the sense of "craftiness" or "cunning". But the literal 
meaning of "visama" is "unequal".  
To repeat, if all padas of a stanza are not uniform they are said to be 
"visama". If alternate lines or padas are equal they are called "ardha-
samavrtta". The first and second are unequal here, so too the third and 
the fourth. But the first and third and the second and the fourth are 
equal.  
In most poems the padas are equal. Let me illustrate with a sloka with 
which, I suppose, all of you are familiar:  
The four feet of this stanza:  
 
Suklambaradharam Visnum 
Sasivarnam caturbhujam 
Prasannavadanam dhyayet 
Sarvavighnopasantaye 
Each pada in this has eight syllables.  
Only vowels and consonants in conjunction with vowels are to be 
counted as syllables; other consonants are not to be counted. Then alone 
will you get the figure of eight. The eight syllables in the first pada are :1. 


 
su; 2. klam; 3. ba; 4. ra; 5. dha; 6. ram; 7. vi; 8. snum. The other padas will 
have similarly eight syllables each.  
The stanza with four feet, each foot of eight syllables, is "Anustubh", 
which metre is used in the Vedas and in poetical works of a later period.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 


 
Chapte 4 
How Poetry was born 
There is no tonal variation in poetry as there is in Vedic mantras. The 
unaccented poetic stanza corresponding to the accented Vedic mantra 
owes its origin to Valmiki, but its discovery was not the result of any 
conscious effort on his part.  
One day Valmiki happened to see a pair of kraunca birds sporting perched 
on the branch of a tree. Soon one of the birds fell to the arrow of a 
hunter. The sage felt pity and compassion but these soon gave way to 
anger. He cursed the hunter, the words coming from him spontaneously: 
"O hunter, you killed a kraunca bird sporting happily with its mate. May 
you not have everlasting happiness".  
Manisada pratistham tvam  
Agamah sasvatih samah  
Yat krauncamithunadekam  
Avadih kamamohitam  
Unpremeditatedly, out of his compassion for the birds, Valmiki cursed the 
hunter. But, at once, he regretted it. "Why did I curse the hunter so? " 
When he was brooding thus, a remarkable truth dawned on him. Was he 
not a sage with divine vision? He realised that the very words of his curse 
had the garb of a poetic stanza in the Anustubh metre. That the words 
had come from his lips, without his being aware of them himself (in the 
same way as he had, without his knowing, felt compassion and anger in 
succession), caused him amazement.  
It occurred to him that the stanza he had unconsciously composed had 
another meaning. The words aimed at the hunter were also words 
addressed to Mahavisnu. How? "O consort of Laksmi, you will win eternal 
fame by having slain one of a couple who was deluded by desire. " 
Ravana and his wife Mandodari are the couple referred to here and 
Ravana was deluded by his evil desire for Sita. Sri Rama won everlasting 


 
fame by slaying him. Without his being aware of it, the words came to 
Valmiki as poetry. Realising it all to be the will of Isvara, the sage 
composed the Ramayana in the same metre.  
The "sloka" (without the Vedic tonal variation) was born in this manner. 
Valmiki was filled with joy that he had come upon the sloka as a medium 
that facilitated the expression of the highest of thoughts in a form that 
made it easy to remember like the Vedas themselves.  
Prose is not easily retained in memory, not so poetry composed in 
metrical form. That is why in ancient times everything was put down in 
verse. Prose developed [in any significant sense] only after the advent of 
the printing press after which books began to be produced in large 
numbers for ready reference, obviating the need to memorise everything.  
However it be, in conveying an idea or a message (or in imparting 
information) poetry has greater beauty and greater power. The 
Ramayana was the first poetical work, hence its name "Adikavya". We 
received the gift of the birth of various metrical forms used in the hymns 
to various deities, in the Puranas and in other poetical works.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
    


 

Some Metrical Forms 
"Indravajra", "Upendravajra", "Bhujangavijrmbhita", "Sragdhara" are 
some of the metres in devotional and other poetical works. Some of them 
are intricate and only highly gifted people are capable of composing 
them.  
As mentioned earlier, the foot of a stanza with eight syllables Anustubh. 
With nine syllables it is "Brhati" and with ten "Pankti". "Tristubh" has 
eleven syllables and "Jagati" twelve. We have a 26-syllable metre 
("Bhujangavijrambhita") which belongs to the category of "Utkrti". 
Beyond this is "Dandaka" of which there are several types. The metre in 
which Apparasvamigal's Tiru-t-tandagam is composed is related to this 
metre.  
Some metres have beautiful names. In poems composed in a certain 
metre the flow of words reminds of a playful tiger lunging forward; the 
metre is appropriately called "Sardulavikridita". "Sardula" means tiger; 
"vikridita" is playfulness. (This metre, belonging to the category of 
"Atidhriti", has 19 syllables). Each pada in it is divided into 12 and 7 
syllables. Adi Sankara's Sivanandalahari is partly in this metre (a number 
of verses from the 28th stanza onwards). The initial verses of the part 
called "Stuti-satakam" of the Muka-Pancasati (which is a hymn to 
Kamaksi) are in this metre. The concluding one hundred verses, 
"Mandasmita-satakam", are entirely in this metre. "Bhujangaprayata" is 
the name of another metre which suggests a snake(bhujanga) gliding 
along. Our Acharya's Subrahmanya-bhujangam is in this metre. It belongs 
to the Jagati type with 12 syllables a foot, divided into six and six as in  
Ma-yu-ra-dhi-ru-dham  
Ma-ha-va-kya-gu-dham  
Our Achrya's Saundaryalahari is in the Sikharini metre. It has 17 syllables 
in each pada. (It belongs to the category of Atyasti) The 17 syllables are 


 
divided into two parts of six and 11. The "Padaravinda-satakam" of the 
Muka-Pancasati is in this metre. The metre called "Sragdhara" suggests a 
flow of words breaking through the floodgates of poetry. It has 21 
syllables (belonging to the "Prakrti" class) and each pada has three sets of 
seven syllables. Our Acarya's hymns to Siva and Visnu (describing them 
from foot to head and from head to foot - padadikesanta and kesadi-
padanta) are in this metre.  
I mentioned "Indravajra" first. It belongs to the Tristubh category with 11 
syllables in each pada. Another 11 syllables metre is "Upendravajra". A 
mixture of both is "Upajati": Kalidasa's Kumarasambhavam is in this 
metre.  
All these metres belong to the post-Vedic period and are employed in 
poetical works as well as in hymns to various deities. "Gayatri", "Usnik", 
"Anustubh", "Pankti", "Tristubh" and "Jagati" are Vedic metres.  
"Gayatri" is a maha-mantra, the king of mantras. A mantra is usually 
named after the deity it invokes. "Siva-Pancaksari", "Narayana-Astaksari", 
"Rama-Trayodasi": in each of these the name of the deity as well as the 
number of syllables in the mantra are combined. The deity for Gayatri is 
Savita. Gayatri is the name of the metre also. The metre too, one should 
infer from this, has divine power expressed through the sound and tone 
of a mantra.  
Gayatri, unlike most other mantras and slokas, has only three feet. Each 
foot has eight syllables and altogether there are 24 syllables. Because it 
has only three padas or feet it is called "Tripada-Gayatri". There are other 
Gayatris also. The first Vedic mantra, "Agnimile", is in the Gayatri metre.  
(The 24-syllable Gayatri metre used in poetry and non-Vedic hymns has 
four padas, each of six syllables. Usnik has also four padas, each of seven 
syllables).  
So far I have spoken about metres based on the number of syllables, that 
is without worrying about whether a syllable is long or short. In prosody 
the long and short syllables are called "guru" and "laghu" respectively. 


 
Poems that make no distinction between "short" and "long" are called 
"vrttas": those based on mantras are called "jati". In the latter type, a 
short syllable is one mantra and a long syllable is two mantras. Instead of 
the number of syllables what matters here is the number of matras.  
The "Arya-satakam" of Muka-Pancasati is in the Arya metre. Amba, as 
Arya, belongs to the most plane; so it is proper that the verse used in 
singing her praises should also belong to an equally high order. That is 
why they are in the Arya metre, which is based on matras and not on the 
number of syllables. if you go by the number of syllables you are likely to 
be misled into thinking that the metre differs from verse to verse.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 


 

Uses of Chandas Sastra 
Siksa sastra may be said to be a "guard" to ensure the right enunciation of 
a (Vedic) mantra. But it is Chandas that determines whether the form of 
the mantra is right. Of course the form of a mantra can never be wrong. 
The mantras, as mentioned so often, were not created by the sages and 
are not the product of their thinking. It was Bhagavan who caused them 
to be revealed to them. Man, beast, tree and other sentient creatures 
and insentient objects of creation exist as they should be according to the 
law of nature. In the same way, the metre of a Vedic mantra must be 
naturally correct. However, Chandas helps us to find out whether a 
mantra or sukta that is being taught or chanted has come down to us in 
its true form. We may check the hymn according to its metre and if we 
find it faulty we may correct it in consultation with people who are well-
versed in such matters.  
Apart from the mantras, which appeared on their own, are the 
composition of poets. Chandas is of help in giving shape to poetic thought 
and imagination. Like tala to music is chandas to poetry.  
It is because poetry is composed according to a certain measure and its 
rhythm determined in a certain order of syllables that it acquires a 
definite form. It is also easy to memorise. Modern society is discarding all 
those rules of discipline meant to give it a definite character and purpose. 
In keeping with this new trend, poetry too is being written without any 
metre and "poets" compose as they please. People don't realise that to 
be free means to be firmly attached to a system, that discipline is the 
road to a higher freedom.  
Chandas is the means by which we ensure that the Vedic mantra is 
preserved in its original form, it being impossible to add one letter to it or 
take away another. The very purpose of the Vedas is the raising up of the 
Self. Must we then permit a single sound to be added to it or be taken 
away?  


 

Foot for the Vedas, Nose for the Mantras 
Each mantra has a deity (the deity it invokes), its own metre and its own 
seer (the seer who revealed it to the world). Mentioning the name of the 
rsi and touching our head with our hand have their own significance, that 
of holding his feet with our head. We first pay obeisance to the sages 
because it is from them that we received the mantras. We then mention 
the chandas or metre of the hymn and touch our nose with our hand. 
Chandas protects the sound of a mantra and is like its vital breath. So we 
place our hand on that part of our body with which we breathe. Without 
breath there is no life. While for all the Vedas taken as a whole Siksa is 
the nose and Chandas the foot, for the mantras proper Chandas is the 
nose. 
When we commence to chant a mantra we must meditate on its adhi 
devata, or presiding deity, and feel his presence in our hearts. This is the 
reason why we touch our hearts as we mention the name of the deity. 
The Vedapurusa stands on Chandas. “Chandah pado Vedasya": the Vedic 
mantras are supported by Chandas. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 9 
NIRUKTA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Ear of the Vedapurusa 
Nirukta serves the purpose of a Vedic dictionary, or "kosa". A dictionary is 
also called a "nighantu", which term is used in Tamil also. Nirukta, which 
deals with the origin of words, their roots, that is with etymology, is the 
ear of the Vedapurusa. It explains the meaning of rare words in the Vedas 
and how or why they are used in a particular context. Many have 
contributed to Nirukta, the work of Yaksa being the most important.  
Take the word "hrdaya" (heart). The Vedas themselves trace its origin. 
"Hrdayam" is "hrdi ayam" : it means that the Lord dwells in the heart. 
"Hrd" itself denotes the physical heart. But with the suffixing of "ayam" - 
with the Lord residing in it - its Atmic importance is suggested. The 
purpose of any sastra is to take you to the Supreme Being. "Hrdaya" is so 
called because Paramesvara resides in "hrd". Thus each and every word 
has a reason behind it. Nirukta makes an inquiry into words and reveals 
their significance.  
"Dhatu" means "root" in English. In that language one speaks of the root 
only of verbs, not of nouns. In Sanskrit all words have dhatus. Such words, 
transformed or modified, must have been adopted in other languages. 
That is why we do not know the root of many words in these tongues. 
After all, such an exercise would be possible only if the words in question 
belonged naturally to them. Take the English work "hour". Phonetically it 
should be pronounced "h o u r" ("h" being not silent) or "h o a r". At one 
time the word indeed must have been pronounced "hoar". "Hora-sastra" 
is the name of a science in Sanskrit, "hora" being from "ahoratram" (day 
and night). "Hora" is two and half nadikas or one hour. The English "hour" 
is clearly from this word. In the same way "heart" is from "hrd". There are 
so many words like this which could be traced to Sanskrit. It must have 
taken a long time for words in other languages to evolve into their 
present form. That is why those who speak them find it difficult to 
discover their origin [or root].  


 
How does it help to listen to someone speaking a language without 
understanding what he says? It is as good as not listening to him. In other 
words it is like being deaf. Nirukta finds the meaning of words by going to 
the root of each. That is why it is called the ear of the Vedapurusa: it is 
the ear of Sruti which itself is heard by the ear.  
Western scholars learned Vyakarna and Nirukta from pandits in Kasi and 
acquainted themselves with the origin of words as described in the latter 
sastra. From this they developed the new science of philology. It is 
primarily from our Vyakarana and the Nirukta that the linguistic science 
has developed.  
From their researches, Western scholars have arrived at the conclusion 
that all languages have one source. People all over the world are the 
descendants of the original inhabitants of the area where this primal 
language was spoken. There are differences of opinion with regard to this 
area, the home of this tongue. We need have no worry about it. After all, 
we believe that all places on earth are our home. "Yadum mure!" is a 
famous Tamil declaration. "Svadeso bhuvanatrayam" - the three worlds 
are our motherland.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 


 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Part 10 
JYOTISA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Chappter 1 
Eye of the Vedapurusa 
Of the fourteen branches of learning basic to our Vedic religion, I have so 
far dealt with siksa, Vyakarana, Chandas and Nirukta. These four form 
part of Sadanga (the six limbs of the Vedas). I will now speak about 
Jyotisa, it being the first of the remaining two of the Sadanga. Jyotisa, 
which is the science of the celestial bodies and the eye of the 
Vedapurusa, consists of three "skandhas" or sections. So it is called 
"Skandha-trayatmakam". Sages like Garga, Narada and Parasura have 
written samhitas (treatises) on this subject. The sun god, in disguise, 
taught the science to Maya, the carpenter of the Asuras. The work 
incorporating his teachings is called the Suryasiddhanta. There are 
treatises on astronomy written by celestials and sages and ordinary 
mortals. Of them some are by Varahamihira, Aryabhata and 
Bhaskaracarya. In recent times we had Sundaresvara Srautin who wrote a 
work called Siddhanta-Kausthubham.  
Why is Jyotisa regarded as the eye of the Vedapurusa?  
What purpose is served by the eye? Near objects may be perceived by 
the sense of touch. With our eyes we learn about distant objects. Just as 
our eyes help us to know objects that are distant in space (that is just as 
we see distant object with our eyes), Jyotisa sastra help us to find out the 
position of the heavenly bodies that are distant in time (their 
configuration many years ago in the past or many years hence in future).  
We can find out directly the positions of the sun and the moon and other 
heavenly bodies. Just as we can know near objects, even if we are blind, 
by feeling them with our hands, we can learn about the positions of the 
heavenly bodies near in time even without the help of astronomy. What 
is 50 feet away is to be perceived by the eye. Similarly, if you want to 
know the position of planets 50 years ago or 50 years hence, you have to 
have recourse to Jyotisa.  


 
We cannot, however, form a full picture of near objects only by feeling 
them. For instance, we cannot know whether they are green or red. For 
this, we must see them with our eyes. Again, even if we are able to see 
the planet with our naked eye, we will need the help of astrology to find 
out its effects on our life, how its positions in the heavens will influence 
our destiny.  
This is the reason why Jyotisa is called the eye of the Vedapurusa. Vedic 
rituals are performed according to the position of the various planets 
[and the sun and the moon]. There are rules to determine this. The right 
day and hour [muhurta] for a function is fixed according to the position of 
the celestial bodies. Here again, Jyotisa performs the function of the eye.  
This Anga of the Vedas is indeed called "nayana" which word means "to 
lead". A blind man needs to be led by another. So it is the eye that leads. 
Astronomy / Astrology is the eye that enables us to fix the hours for Vedic 
rituals.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 


 

Astronomy and Astrology 
Astronomy examines the position of the planets and other heavenly 
bodies. It does not concern itself with how they affect the life of the 
world or the individual. It is not its function to find out how far the 
celestial bodies are beneficial to us or how they may be made favourable 
to us. Such functions belong to astrology. Jyotisa includes both astronomy 
and astrology.  
Telling us about the results of performing a ritual at a given time, keeping 
in mind the position of the planets, the sun and the moon and the 
naksatras ( asterisms ), comes under the purview of astrology. The hours 
favourable to the performance of Vedic rites are determined according to 
calculations based on the movement of planets. All this entails 
mathematical work. 
The measurements of the place where a sacrifice is to be conducted 
(yajnabhumi) are based on certain stipulations. These must be strictly 
adhered to if the sacrifices are to yield the desired benefits. Mathematics 
developed in this way as a handmaid to the Vedic dharma. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Ancient Mathematical Treatises 
Jyotisa, as we have seen, consists of three sections. There was a scholarly 
man in the Matha who was particularly learned in this science. We 
wished to honour him with a title and decided upon "Triskandha-
Bhaskara". "Skandha" literally means a big branch springing from the 
trunk of a tree. The three skandhas of Jyotisas are: siddhanta, hora and 
samhita.  
The siddhanta-skandha deals with arithmetic, trigonometry, geometry 
and algebra. The higher mathematics developed by the west in later 
centuries is found in our ancient Jyotisa.  
Arithmetic, called "vyakta-ganita" in Sanskrit, includes addition, 
subtraction, multiplication and division. "Avyakta-ganita" is algebra. "Jya" 
means the earth and "miti" is method of measurement. "Jyamiti" evolved 
with the need to measure the sacrificial place:"geometry" is derived from 
this word. The "geo" in geography is from "jya". There is a mathematical 
exercise called "samikarana" which is the same as "equation".  
The sixth Anga of the Vedas, Kalpa (I will speak about it later ), has a great 
deal to do with the fifth, that is Jyotisa. Kalpa has a section on "sulba-
sutras". These sutras mention the precise measurements of the 
"yajnavedi" (sacrificial altar). The character of the yajnabhumi is called 
"cayana". The sulba- sutras deal with a number of cayanas like, for 
instance, the one shaped like Garuda. They tell us how to construct a 
brick-kiln ---the number of bricks required for the cayana of such and 
such shapes. The siddhanta-skandha is used in all this.  
There is an equation in the Apastamba sulba sutras which could not be 
proved until recently. Westerners had thought it to be faulty merely as 
they could not solve it. Now they accepted it as right. That Indians had 
taken such great strides in mathematics; thousand of years ago has 


 
caused amazement in the West. There are a number of old equations still 
to be solved.  
Our sastras mention branches of mathematics like "rekhaganita, 
"kuttaka", "angapaka", etc. "Avyakta-ganita" is also called "bijaganita".  
Eight hundred years ago there lived a great mathematician called 
Bhaskaracarya. An incident in his life illustrates how relentless destiny is. 
Bhaskaracarya had a daughter called Lilavati. The great astrologer that he 
was, he found that she had "mangalya-dosa" in her horoscope, but he felt 
confident that he could change his daughter's destiny, as foreshadowed 
by the stars, with his ingenuity and resourcefulness, as an astrologer. He 
decided to celebrate Lilavati's marriage during a lagna in which all the 
planets would be in positions favourable to the bride. This should, he 
thought, ensure that Lilavati would remain a "dirgha-sumangali".  
In those days there were no clocks as we have today. A water-pot was 
used to measure time. It consisted of an upper as well as a lower part. 
The water in the upper receptacle would trickle down through a hole into 
the lower container. The lower part was graduated according to the unit 
of time then followed - nazhikai (nadika), one sixtieth of a day or 24 
minutes. So the time of day was calculated by observing the level of the 
water in the lower container. ("Water-clock" and "hour-glass" are English 
names for such an apparatus. Since water evaporates quickly sand was 
used instead. )  
According to the custom then prevailing, Lilavati's marriage was to be 
celebrated when she was still a child. On the appointed day, she sat 
beside the water--clock and bent over it fascinated by the apparatus. As 
she fumbled around a pearl from her nose--stud got loosened and fell 
into the apparatus lodging itself in its hole. The flow of water into the 
lower receptacle was reduced. So what the clock indicated as the hour 
fixed for the marriage was not the right one---the auspicious hour had 
passed. Nobody including Lilavati, had noticed the pearl dropping into the 
water-clock. When they came to know about it, it was too late. They 
realised that destiny could not be overcome.  


 
Later Bhaskaracarya wrote a mathematical treatise and named it 
"Lilavati" after his daughter. The father taught his widowed daughter 
mathematics and she became highly proficient in the subject. Lilavati 
deals with arithmetic, algebra, etc. It is a delightful book in which the 
problems are stated in verse as stories. Bhaskaracarya also wrote the 
Siddhanta-Siromani which deals with how the positions and movement of 
the heavenly bodies are determined.  
We learn the text of an edict in the Pracinalekhamala that a Gurjara 
(Gujarat) king had made an endowment to popularise the works of 
Bhaskaracarya.  
Parts 7, 8, 9 and 10 of Euclid's Geometry are believed to be lost. All the 12 
books on mathematics in Sanskrit are still available. "Making additions 
several times is multiplication; carrying out subtraction several times is 
division. " We remain ignorant of such easy methods of calculations dealt 
with in our mathematical texts.  
Varahamihira lived several years before Bhaskaracarya, that is about 1, 
 years ago. He wrote a number of treatises including the Brhat-
Samhita and the Brhajjatika. The first is a digest of many sciences, its 
contents being a wonderful testimony to the variety of subjects in which 
our forefathers has taken strides. Brhajjatika is all about astrology.  
Aryabhata, famous for his Aryabhatiya-Siddhanta, also lived 1, 500 years 
ago. The vakya--ganita now in use is said to be based on his Siddhanta. 
Varahamihira and Aryabhata are much acclaimed by mathematicians 
today.  
All these books on mathematics also deal with the movements of the 
celestial bodies. There are seven "grahas" according to the ancient 
reckoning--the five planets and the sun and the moon. Rahu and Ketu are 
called "chaya-grahas" (shadow planets) and their orbits are opposite of 
the sun's and the moon's.  
 


 

Planets, Stars 
How do the planets differ from the stars? The planets revolve round the 
sun; the stars do not belong to the sun's "mandala" [they are not part of 
the solar system]. If you hold a diamond in your hand and keep shaking it 
about, it will glitter. The stars glitter in the same way and twinkle, but the 
planets do not twinkle.  
The sun and the stars are self-luminous. The stars dazzle like polished 
diamonds. The planets Jupiter and Venus shine like the bigger stars but 
they do not twinkle. The sun too has the brilliance of the stars[it is in fact 
a star]. If you gaze intently at the sun for a moment the watery haziness 
surrounding it will vanish. Then it will look like a luminous disc of glass 
floating in water and it will not be still. The moon is not like it. I will tell 
you how to prove the sun twinkles. Observe the sun sun's light pouring 
down from an opening in the roof. Observe similarly moon's light also 
coming into your room. You see the sun's rays showing some movement 
but not the moon's. The planets are also like the moon.  
If the star is a big one, we may be able to see its light refracted into the 
seven colours (vibgyor), like the colours emanating from a brilliant 
diamond.  
The sun is called "Saptasva" (one with seven horses--the sun god's chariot 
is drawn by seven horses). It is also said that there is only one horse 
drawing the chariot but it has seven different names. "Asva" also means 
"kirana" or ray. So "Saptasva" could mean that the sun emits seven types 
of rays or colours. It is of course the same light that is split into seven 
colours. In the Taittiriya Aranyaka it is clearly stated that the same "asva" 
or ray has seven names: "Eko asvo vahati saptanama.”  
The stars are self-luminous, while the planets shine by reflected light. The 
light of the stars is not still. That is how we say, " Twinkle, twinkle little 
star ". The stars rise in the east and set in the West. The planets too travel 


 
westward but they keep moving a bit towards the east every day. It is like 
a passenger walking westward on a train speeding eastward. The seven 
planets thus keep moving eastward.  
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

The Grahas and Human Life 
The conditions of man correspond to the changes in the position of the 
nine grahas. A human being does not enjoy happiness all the time nor 
does he always suffer hardships-- that is he experiences a mixture of 
happiness and sorrow. While he may be pushed up to a high position 
today, he may be thrust down to the depths tomorrow. It is not man 
alone that is subject to changes of fortune. Establishments too have their 
ups and downs, so also nations.  
The sages saw a relationship between the position and movements of the 
planets and the destiny of man, the sorrow and happiness experienced by 
him. There is a branch of astrology called "hora--skandha". If we knew the 
planetary position at the time of commencing a job or enterprise, with its 
help we should be able to find out how it would take shape, how we 
would fare in it. If our horoscope is cast on the basis of the configuration 
of the planets at the time of our birth, our fortunes over the entire period 
of our life can be predicted.  
Different reasons are given for the ups and downs in a man's life for his 
joys and sorrows. It is similar to finding out the different causes of the 
ailment he suffers from. The physician will explain that the disease is due 
to an imbalance in the "dhatus". The mantravadin will say that it is due to 
the gods being displeased with the patient, while the astrologer will 
observe that it is all in his (the patient's) stars. The pandit versed in 
Dharmasastra will explain that the illness is the fruit of the man's past 
actions, his karma. And the psychologist will express the view that the 
bodily affliction is related to an emotional disturbance. What is the true 
cause?  
All these different causes may be valid. All of them together go to create 
an experience. When it rains it becomes wet and the place is swarmed 
with winged white ants. Frogs croak. All these are indicators of the rain. 
Many outward signs manifest themselves as the fruits of our past karma. 


 
They are all related to one another. The course of the planets governing 
our life is in accordance with our karma. We come to know the 
consequences of our past actions in previous births in various ways. 
Astrological calculations help us to find out such consequences as 
indicated by the heavenly bodies.  
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Omens, Signs 
Where can you discover water? Where does ground water occur? Or 
where do streams flow inside the earth? By what signs on the surface do 
you make out the presence of water underground? How are perfumes 
manufactured? What are the right measurements for a house? These 
questions are discussed in the samhita-skandha of Jyotisa. Also omens 
and signs.  
"Sakuna" is one thing, "nimitta" quite another. "Sakuna" literally means a 
bird: only signs connected with birds come under the category of 
"Sakuna". All things in this world are interrelated: all happenings are 
linked to one another. If we know the precise scale and manner in which 
events are woven together, we would be able to know everything. 
Everything in this world occurs according to the will of the One Being and 
according to a precise system. So with reference to one we can know all 
others. Palmistry, "arudam" (a method of divination), astrology, all are 
interrelated.  
What does a bird flying from right to left indicate? What is foretold by the 
chirping of such and such a bird? Question like these belong to the 
sakuna-sastra. "Nimitta" means omen. "Nimittani ca pasyami viparitani 
Kesava" says Arjuna to Krsna before the start of the battle of Kuruksetra. 
He uses the right word "nimitta" while we use the word "sakuna" 
carelessly. When a cat crosses our path it is an omen; when an eagle flies 
above us it is a sakuna.  
To go back to Arjuna, the Lord tells Arjuna: "Nimittamatram bhava 
Savyasacin". This is in answer to Arjuna telling Krsna, lamenting, that it is 
sinful to kill one's enemies [or one's kin]. Says Krishna: "I have already 
resolved to slay them in this battle. So they are already as good as dead. 
It is I who will kill them. You are a mere tool." (Nimittamatram bhava).  


 
A nimitta does not produce any result on its own. It points to the result 
that has already been ordained by some other factor - or, in other words, 
it merely indicates the fruits of our past karma.  
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Modern Discoveries in Ancient Works 
There are a few scientific discoveries that are not found mentioned in 
Varahamihira's Brhat-Samhita.  
How do heavenly bodies remain in the skies? How is it that they do not 
fall? Everybody thinks that it was Newton who found the answer to such 
questions. The very first stanza in the Suryasiddhanta, which is a very 
ancient treatise, states that it is the force of attraction that keeps the 
earth from falling.  
In Sankara's commentary on the Upanisads there is a reference to the 
earth's force of attraction. If we throw up an object it falls to the ground. 
This is not due to the nature of object but due to the earth's force of 
attraction. "Akarsana-sakti" is force of attraction, the power of drawing or 
pulling something. The breath called "prana" goes up, "apana" pulls it 
down. So the force that pulls something downward is apana. The Acarya 
says the earth has apana-sakti. The Prasnopanisad (3. 8) states: "The deity 
of the earth inspires the human body with apana". In his commentary on 
this, Sankara observes that, just as an object thrown up is attracted by 
the earth, so prana that goes up is pulled down by apana. This means that 
our Upanisads contain a reference to the law of gravitation. There are 
many such precious truths embedded in our ancient sastras. Because of 
our ignorance of them we show inordinate respect for ideas propounded 
by foreigners, ideas known to us many centuries before their discovery by 
them. Our Jyotisa is also some thousands of years old. Even so it foresaw 
the mathematical systems prevalent in the world today.  
At the beginning of the kalpa, all grahas were in alignment. But over the 
ages they have changed their courses. When another kalpa commences, 
they will again remain in alignment.  


 
The "samkalpa" we make before the performance of any ritual contains a 
description of the cosmos, a reference to the time cycle, and so on. All 
this is part of Jyotisa.  
Centuries ago, we knew not only about the earth's force of attraction but 
also about its revolution round the sun. Aryabhata, Varahamihira and 
others spoke of the heliocentric system long before the Western 
astronomers or scientists. Until the 16th century people in Europe 
believed that the earth remained still at the centre of the universe and 
that the sun revolved around it.  
They further believed that this was how day and night were created. If 
anybody expressed a different view he was burned at the stake by the 
religious leaders.  
"It is the earth that revolves around the sun, not the sun round the 
earth", declared Aryabhata. He used a beautiful term to describe the logic 
behind his view: "laghava-gaurava nyaya". "Laghu" means light, small, etc 
and "laghava" is derived from it. The opposite of "laghu" is "guru", 
weighty, big, etc. "Guru" also denotes a weighty personality, a great man, 
like an acarya or teacher, one who has mastered a sastra. If the acarya is 
guru the disciple must be laghu. The student is small and "light" 
compared to his guru. So he goes round the latter. This is based on 
"laghava-gaurava nyaya". By adducing this reason for the earth going 
round the sun, Aryabhata combined science with a traditional sastric 
belief.  
In the old days religious leaders in Europe were opposed to science and 
even burned scientists as heretics. But today we join the descendants of 
the very same people to make the preposterous charge that the Hindu 
religion stood in the way of scientific advancement, that it ignored the 
matters of this world because of its concern for the other world. As a 
matter of fact our traditional sastras are a storehouse of science.  
"The sun remains still and it is the earth that goes round it. It is only 
because the earth revolves round the sun that it seems to us that the sun 
rises every day in the east and sets in the west". This is mentioned in 


 
Aitareya Brahmana of Rgveda. The text says clearly: "The sun neither rises 
nor sets".  
That all learned people in India knew about the earth's revolution is 
shown by a passage in the Sivotkarsa-Manjari by Nilakantha Diksita who 
was minister of Tirumala Nayaka. One stanza in this work begins like this: 
"Bhumir bhramayati" and from it we must also gather that the author's 
great-uncle, Appayya Diksita, also knew about this truth. What is the 
content of this verse?  
Siva is called "Astamurti". Earth, water, air, fire, space, the sun and the 
moon, the yajamana or sacrificer--they are all the personification (murti) 
of Isvara. Among them only the yajamana has no bhramana or motion. All 
the rest have bhramana, says Appayya Diksita. That he has said so is 
mentioned in the verse in question by his younger brother's grandson, 
Nilakantha Diksita.  
We see that air has movement, that fire does not remain still, that water 
keeps flowing. When we look up into the sky, we notice that the sun and 
the moon do not remain fixed to their spots. As for space, it is filled with 
sound and it cannot be still. But the earth apparently stands still. Even so, 
says Appayya Diksita, it has motion. "It revolves".  
Let us now consider the shape of the earth. Europeans claim that they 
were the first to discover that the earth is like a ball, that in the past it 
had been thought to be flat like a plate. All right. What word do we use 
for "geography"? "Bhugola sastra", not just "bhu-sastra". We have known 
from early times that the earth is a "gola", a sphere.  
We call the universe with all its galaxies, "Brahmanda". It means the egg 
created by Brahma (the cosmic egg). An egg is not exactly spherical in 
shape, but oval. According to modern science the universe too is oval in 
shape. The cosmos is always in motion, so observe modern astronomers. 
"Jagat" is the word by which we have known it from Vedic times. What 
does the word mean? That which does not stand still but is always in 
motion, that which "is going".  


 
In our country too there were people who refused to believe that the 
earth rotates on its axis. I will tell you the view of one such school of 
thought. The earth's circumference is about 25, 000 miles. So if it rotates 
once in 24 hours then it means it rotates more than 1, 000 miles an hour 
or 16 or 17 miles in one minute. Those who did not accept the fact of the 
earth's rotation tried to prove their point thus:"There is a tree in 
Mylapore [in Madras]. Imagine there is a crow perched on one of its 
branches. It leaves its perch this moment and soars high and, by the next 
minute, it perches itself again on the branch of the same tree in 
Mylapore. If the rotation of the earth were a fact how would this be 
possible? The crow should have descended to a place 16 or 17 miles away 
from where it had started.  
I have not checked on how this argument was answered. But when I 
asked people who know modern science they said: "Surrounding the 
earth for some 200 miles is its atmosphere. Beyond that there are other 
spheres. When the earth rotates these too rotate with it". I may have 
gone slightly wrong in stating the view of modern science. However it be, 
there is no doubt that when the earth rotates, its atmosphere also 
rotates with it.  
What are called Arabic numerals actually belong to India. This fact was 
discovered by Westerners themselves. The zero is also our contribution 
and without it mathematics would not have made any advance. 
Bhaskaracarya established the subtle truth that any quantity divided by 
zero is infinity ("ananta"). He concludes one of his mathematical treatises 
with a benedictory verse in which he relates zero to the Ultimate Reality.  
When the divisor goes on decreasing the quotient keeps increasing, does 
it not? If you divide 16 by 8 the quotient is 2; if the same quantity is 
divided by 4 the result is 4. Divided by 2, the quotient is 8. Divided by 
zero? The quotient will be infinity. Whatever the number divided, the 
result will be infinity if the divisor is 0. Bhaskaracarya gives it the name of 
"khahara". "Kham" means zero, "haram" means division. Bhaskaracarya 
says : "I pay obeisance to the Paramatman that is Infinity".  
 


 

Not Blind Belief…. 
"Hindu sastras are all nonsensical, “exclaim critics of our religion. "They 
say that north of the earth is the Meru Mountain, that our one year is one 
day for the celestials residing there, and that the sun revolves round it. 
They believe that, besides the ocean of salt, there are oceans of 
sugarcane juice and milk, in fact several kinds of oceans. They describe 
the earth with its five continents as consisting of seven islands. It is all 
prattle. “Why should the ocean be salty? Who put the salt in it? Why 
should not there have been an ocean tasting sweet or of milk? Is the talk 
about the seven islands and the seven oceans absurd? What to the 
sastras say about the position of the earth, the same sastras that speak 
about the seven oceans, and so on? "Meru is situated on the northern tip 
of the earth,” they state. "Directly opposite to it is the Pole star 
(Dhruva).”  
The northern tip of the earth is the North Pole. Is the Pole star directly 
opposite to it? No. "Eons ago,” scientists explain, "it was so. But later big 
changes took place and the earth tilted a bit. “The sastras refer to a time 
when the Pole star was directly opposite the North Pole and at that time 
the seven islands and the seven oceans must have existed. When the 
rotating earth tilted a bit the oceans must have got mixed and become 
salty and in the process the seven islands must have become the five 
continents.  
If there is a place above the North Pole it must be Meru where we have 
our svarga or paradise. Let us imagine that this earth is a lemon. A spot 
on its top is the Meru peak. In relation to that spot any other part of the 
fruit is south. Where can you go from there, east or west? You can go 
only south. You will learn this if you mark a point on the top of the lemon. 
For all countries of the earth, for all "varsas", north is Meru. "Sarvesamapi 
varsanam Meruruttaratahsthitah.”  


 
On the North Pole it is six months day and six months night. We must 
have been taught this in our primary classes. It means our one year is one 
day on the North Pole. This is what is meant by saying that our one year is 
one day for the celestials.  
When the earth rotates, the northernmost and southernmost points are 
not affected. In some places there will be sun for 18 hours and in other 
places only for six hours. There are many differences in the durations of 
day and night with regard to different places on earth. Only on some days 
does the sun rise directly in the east and is overhead without departing 
even by one degree. On other days it rises from other angles (from north-
east to south-east). Such is not the case on the North Pole. There the sun 
shines six months and the other six months it is darkness. And, again, 
during the sunny months it would seem as if the sun were revolving 
round this place(the North pole).  
The six-month period when there is sun in the North Pole is called 
uttarayana and the similar sunny period on the South Pole is daksinayana.  
The North Pole is called “Sumeru" and the South Pole "Kumeru". 
("Sumeria" is from Sumeru. In that land, it is said, the Vedic gods were 
worshipped. ) Just as the North Pole is the abode of the gods, the South 
pole is the abode of the fathers (pitrs) and hell. To see the gods and the 
pitrs who are in the form of spirits and the denizens of hell one must 
obtain divine sight through yoga. Merely because we do not possess such 
sight we cannot deny their existence. There was Blavatsky who was born 
in Russia, lived in  
America and later came to India. She speaks about the worlds of the gods 
and of the spirits. A great scientist of our times, Sir Oliver Lodge, affirmed 
the existence of spirits and deities and stated that mankind could benefit 
from them. If you ask why Jyotisa, after dealing with the science of 
astronomy, should turn to spiritualism, the answer is that there is no 
contradiction between the two as supported by the example of a scientist 
like Sir Oliver who too turned to spiritualism.  


 
Our sastras came into existence at a time when mortals mixed with the 
gods. We would be able to appreciate this fact if we tried to understand 
the samkalpa we make at the time of performing any religious function. 
The samkalpa traces the present from the time of creation itself. From 
Jyotisa we learn the position of the grahas at the commencement of the 
yuga: then they were all in a line.  
Some calculations with regard to heavenly bodies today are different 
from those of the past. And, if the findings at present are not the same as 
seen in the sastras, it does not mean that the latter are all false. The 
sastras have existed from the time the grahas were in a line and the 
North pole was directly opposite the Pole star. Since then vast changes 
have taken place in nature. Valleys have become mountains, mountains 
have become oceans, and oceans have become deserts and so on. 
Geologists speak about such cataclysmic changes, and astronomers tell us 
about the change in the courses of the heavenly bodies. So what we see 
today of the earth and the heavenly bodies is different from what is 
mentioned in the sastras.  
The date of creation according to Jyotisa agrees more or less with the 
view of modern science.  
Kali yuga--the age of Kali--has a span of 432, 000 years. Dvapara yuga is 
twice as long, 864, 000 years, Treta yuga is 1, 296, 000 years and Krta 
yuga 1, 728, 000 years. The four yugas together, called maha yuga, are 4, 
, 000 years long. A thousand mahayugas add up to the period of 14 
Manus. The regnal period of a Manu is a manvantara. There are royal and 
republican rulers on earth, but God has appointed Manu as ruler of all the 
worlds. There are fourteen Manus ruling the world successively from the 
creation of man. The word "manusya" and “manuja" are derived from 
Manu. So too the English word "man". In the samkalpa for any ritual we 
perform we mention the year of the seventh Manu, Vaivasvata. If we go 
back to the first Manu, Svayambhuva, we arrive at a date for the origin of 
the human species which agrees with the view of modern science.  
The Sanskrit word, "man", means to think. Manu was the first of the 
human race with its power of thinking. There is a saying in English:" Man 


 
is a thinking animal”. “Since man's distinctive characteristic is his capacity 
to think the descendants of Manu came to be called "manusyas.”  
The life-span of the fourteen Manus put together make one day 
(daytime) of Brahma, that is 4, 320, 000, 000 years. His night has the 
same length. While one day of Brahma is thus 8, 640, 000, 000 years his 
one year is 365 such days and his life-span is 100 such years. The life of 
his cosmos is the same. When Brahma's life comes to an end the 
Brahman alone will remain and there will be no cosmos. Then another 
Brahma will start creation all over again. It is believed that Hanuman will 
be the next Brahma.  
Bhuloka, Bhuvarloka, Suvarloka, Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka and 
Satyaloka comprise the seven worlds. The gods, mortals and so on live in 
these worlds. Bhuloka, Bhuvarloka and Suvarloka form one group. 
"Bhurbhuvassuvaha,” we pronounce this so often while performing 
rituals. The remaining four belong to higher planes. When Brahma goes 
to sleep at night the first three worlds will be dissolved in the pralaya 
(deluge). This is called "avantara-pralaya"("intermediate deluge"). All 
other worlds will perish when his life-span ends.  
Scientists say that the heat of the sun is decreasing imperceptibly. 
Without the warmth of the sun there will be no life on earth. Scientists 
have calculated the time when the sun's heat will be reduced so much 
that life on earth cannot be sustained. Then this world itself will perish. 
The date on which this will occur agrees with that given by our sastras for 
the next "avantara-pralaya".  
Half of Brahma's allotted life-span is over. This life-span is divided into 
seven "kalpas". Now we have come more than half way of the fourth 
kalpa, "Svetavaraha". We mention in samkalpa how old Brahma is at the 
time we perform a rite, which year we are in of the saka era, also the year 
according to the 60-year cycle beginning with Prabhava--all details of the 
almanac including the day, the asterism and the lagna. The date of 
Brahma's appearance, according to this calculation is said to agree with 
the view of modern science of when this cosmos came into being.  


 
Brahma is called "Parardha-dvaya-jivin". It means he lives for two 
"parardhas". A "paradha" is half the number meant by "para". When 
Brahma is called "Paradha-dvaya-jivin" it means he lives as many years as 
is meant by 2*1/2 paras. Two half paras are the same as one para. Then 
why say "parardha-dvaya" instead of just one "para". The reason for this 
is that Brahma has already completed half of one para and is going on 51. 
So it is meaningful to use the term "half of para"[two half-paras].  
Fourteen Manus reign successively during one daytime of Brahma which 
lasts a thousand caturyugas. So one manvantara is 71 caturyugas. Now 
running is the 28th caturyuga, the Vaivasvata manvantara. And of it, it is 
Kali Yuga now. In our samkalpa we mention all this and, in addition, the 
day according to the moon, the Lagna, etc. We also mention how we are 
situated in the space, from the Brahmanda down to the locality where we 
are performing the function (for which the samkalpa is made). It is all 
similar to writing the date and address on a letter.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 


 

Empirical Proof 
A ray of light pouring through an opening in the roof of a building falls on 
a particular spot. Normally, we shall not be able to tell where the same 
ray of light will fall next year. But a prediction can be made with the help 
of Jyotisa. This is how it was done in the olden days. A pearl attached to a 
thread was hung from the roof. If a man was able to indicate correctly in 
advance where its shadow would fall on a particular day, he received a 
reward from the king. One's competence in other sastras is established 
through argument, but in Jyotisa it has to be proved by actual 
demonstration. You cannot deceive anyone by employing the methods 
taught by this science. The sun and the moon are witness to what you do. 
"Pratyaksam Jyotisam sastram.” 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 11 
KALPA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Hand of the Vedapurusa 
The sixth limb or Anga of the Vedapurusa is Kalpa, his hand. The hand is 
called "kara" since it does work (or since we work with it). In Telugu it is 
called “sey ". Kalpa is the sastra that involves you in "work". A man learns 
to chant the Vedas, studies Siksa, Vyakarana, Chandas, Nirukta and 
Jyotisa. What does he do next? He has to apply these sastras to the rites 
he is enjoined to perform. He has to wash away his sins, the sins earned 
by acting according to his whims. This he does by the performance of 
good works. For this he must know the appropriate mantras and how to 
enunciate them correctly, understanding their meaning. Also certain 
materials are needed and a house that is architecturally suited to the 
conduct of the rituals. The fruits yielded by these must be offered to the 
Isvara. Kalpa concerns itself with these matters.  
Why does a man learn the vedas? Why does he make efforts to gain 
perfection with regard to the purity and tone of their sound by learning 
Siksa, grammar and prosody? And why does he learn Jyotisa to find out 
the right time to perform rituals? The answer is to carry out the 
injunctions of Kalpa.  
How is a rite to be performed, what are the rituals imposed upon the four 
castes and on people belonging to the four asramas (celibate students, 
house-holders, forest recluses and ascetics)? What are the mantras to be 
chanted during these various rites and what are the materials to be 
gathered? What kind of vessels are to be used, and how many rtviks 
(priests) are needed for the different rituals? All these come under the 
province of Kalpa.  
A number of sages have contributed to the Kalpa sastra. Six sages have 
composed Kalpasutras for the Krsna-Yajurveda which is predominantly 
followed in the South - Apastamba, Baudhayana, Vaikhanasa, Satyasadha, 
Bharadhvaja, Agnivesa, Asvalayana and Sankhayana have written 
Kalpasutras for the Rigveda but the former's is most widely followed. For 


 
Sukla-Yajurveda there is the Kalpasutra by Katyayana. For the Kauthuma, 
Ranayaniya and Talavakara Sakhas of the Samaveda, Latyayana, 
Drahyayana and Jaimini respectively have composed Kalpasutras.  
Kalpa contains Grhyasutras and Srautasutras for each recension. Both 
deal with the 40 samskaras to be performed from conception to death. 
The cremation of the body is also a sacrifice, the final offering: it is called 
"antyesti" and it is also to be performed with  
the chanting of mantras. "Isti" means a sacrifice and in antyesti the body 
is offered in the sacred fire as a "dravya" or material.  
A Brahmin has to perform 21 sacrifices: seven "haviryajnas" based on 
agnihotra; seven pakayajnas and seven somayajnas. Of them the seven 
haviryajnas and the seven somayajnas are not included in the 
Grhyasutras. They belong to the Srautasutras. Together with these there 
are forty rites for a Brahmin -- they are called samskaras. A samskara is 
that which refines and purifies the performer.  
Agnihotra is performed at home and yajnas [of a bigger type] in specially 
constructed halls. While the srautasutras contain instructions for the 
conduct of big sacrifices, the Grhyasutras are concerned with domestic 
rites. The names given before are of the authors of Srautasutras.  
The Kalpasutras deal with the forty samskaras and with the eight 
"Atmagunas" [qualities to be cultivated by individuals]. Apart from the 
seven haviryajnas and seven somayajnas (together 14) the remaining 26 
belong to the category of Grhyasutras. Among them are garbhadhana, 
pumsavana, simanta, jatakarma, namakarana, annaprasana, caula, 
upanayana and vivaha. I shall be dealing with them later.  
The eight Atmagunas are compassion, patience, freedom from jealousy, 
purity or cleanliness, not being obstinate, keeping a cool mind, non-
covetousness and desirelessness. These are among the "samanya-
dharmas", universal virtues, to be cultivated by all jatis.  


 
When we do "abhivadhana" [as we prostrate ourselves before the fire or 
before a preceptor or any elder], we mention, among other things, the 
sutra that we follow. To illustrate: Samavedins mention Drahyayana-
sutra. Drahyayana has authored only Srautasutra. Another, Gobhila, has 
written a Grhyasutra. In the old days when it was a common practice to 
conduct big sacrifices the Srautasutras which deal with them were 
mentioned in the abhivadhana. This practice continues though we no 
longer perform srauta sacrifices and go through only such functions as 
marriage which are dealt with by Grhyasutras.  
In the past even poor people performed srauta rituals. They got all the 
materials required by begging. Brahmins who were called "prati-
vasanthasomayajins" conducted soma sacrifices every year during the 
spring [that is what the term means]. If a man had enough income to 
meet three years' expenses (of his family) he conducted the soma 
sacrifice during every season of spring.  
Now there is a decay in all fields. Things have turned topsy-turvy. People 
spend three times their annual income but, ironically enough, owing to 
changes in trade and commercial practices all, including the rich, suffer 
from poverty and hardship. There must be moderation in everything. All 
the ingenuity and resourcefulness of our times have led only to indigence 
even in the midst of plenty. The rich man has brought himself to a 
position of not being able to afford all his expenses. With moderation 
alone will there be the means to do good works.  
The sikha, the pundra and the religious rites vary from sutra to sutra. 
Some wear "urdhva-sikha" [lock of hair on the crown of the head], some 
"purva-sikha" [lock of hair on the forepart of the head]. Similarly there 
are differences in wearing the marks on the forehead: some wear vertical 
marks (urdhva-pundra) and some horizontal (tripundra). These are 
according to the tradition one follows.  
Cayana is an important feature of sacrifices. There are two types of sulba-
sutras in Kalpa: "samanya" (ordinary or common) and "visesa" (special). 
There are sulba-sutras by Katyayana, Baudhayana, Hiranyakesin and so 
on. In the south there is what is called "Andapillai-prayoga". "Andapillai" 


 
belong to Tiruppanantal and was named after the deity Ganesa ( "pillayar 
") of Tiruvidaimarudur (Tanjavur district). It is according to his method 
that srauta works are performed. The srauta sacrifices are large-scale 
sacraments not conducted in the home but in a "yagasala". Rites that are 
not so big are "grhya" and performed at home. Since big sacrifices have 
become rare, the Grhyasutras have gained greater importance. Besides, 
alien sastras, alien practices, are becoming more and more popular.  
All our sastras have one goal, that of holding the lotus-feet of Isvara. 
Whatever we read must be in the form of an offering to the Lord and it 
must be capable of bringing us Atmic merit. Our sastras belong to such a 
category. It is a matter for regret that the conduct of srauta works (havir 
and soma sacrifices), which are of the utmost importance to the Vedic 
religion, has become very rare.  
Among those who have authored Kalpasutras, but for Drahyayana and 
Katyayana, all the rest, like Apastamba, Baudhayana and Asvalayana, 
have written both Srauta and Grhya sutras.  
Apart from the above two types of sutras, we have the "Dharmasutras". 
These deal with a man's individual, domestic and social life. The 
Dharmasastra is based on them. What we understand by the English term 
"law" is derived from them. They are also the basis of the moral and legal 
sastras of Manu, Mitaksara and so on. (The following Dharmasutras have 
been handed down to us: those of Vasistha and Visnu for the Rgveda; 
those of Manu, Baudhayana, Apastamba and Hiranyakesin for the Krsna-
Yajurveda; and those of Gautama for the Samaveda). Since the 
Atharvaveda has hardly any following its Kalpasutras are not in 
observance.  
Kalpa deals with rites in their minutest detail. All the actions of a Brahmin 
have a Vedic connection. Through each and every breath he takes in, with 
each step he takes, he will be able to grasp the divine powers for the 
well-being of the world because of this Vedic connection and only 
because of it. The Kalpasutras contain rules with regard to how a Brahmin 
must sit, eat, wear his clothes and so on.  


 
This "limb" of the vedas also deals with the construction of houses. Why? 
The design -- or architecture -- of a Brahmin's dwelling must be such as to 
help him in the performance of his duties according to the scriptures. If, 
say, there is a rule about the doorway where he should offer the " 
vaisvadeva-bali ", should not the doorway be constructed in the required 
sastric manner? Is the modern "flat" suitable for such rites? The character 
of the place where the " aupasana " is to be performed is described in 
Kalpa. A class-room where children are taught has to meet certain 
requirements: it must have a desk, benches, etc. The laboratory has to be 
different from it. Similarly, the architecture of a house and the design of a 
class-room differ functionally.  
I perform puja. The place where I do it must have a certain special 
character. All rooms are similar in a bungalow. If a puja is performed in 
such a place, rules regarding ritual purity and difference based on varna 
and asrama cannot be properly maintained since people will come 
crowding together. The bungalow is built according to the white man's 
way of life. There must be separateness and at the same time 
togetherness; there must be a place for everybody. Even if we wish to 
have a place according to our customs and traditions, the new type of 
house does not help in this way. Our architecture has developed 
according to our traditions and needs. A cement floor cannot be 
maintained clean after eating. When washed or scrubbed with water, the 
" eccil " will spread. Westerners living in bungalows (or flats) eat at table.  
We must build our houses according to our architectural science. The 
term "grhastha" itself is from "grha" (house). Those who observe ritual 
purity in matters like eating, living and clothing, must build their houses 
according to our architectural concepts. But we are now accustomed to 
living in houses built in an alien style. At first we may feel some qualms 
about the difficulty in practising our customs and traditions. Eventually, 
however, we are likely to get used to style of living and become careless 
about our religious observances. Instead of abandoning such houses, we 
abandon the religious and other practices which are part of our dharma.  


 
I shall be speaking to you in some detail about the 40 samakaras included 
in Kalpa when I deal with Dharmasastra.  
We have discussed ten of the caturdasa-vidya, the fourteen branches of 
vedic lore - the four vedas, Siksa, Vyakarana, Chandas, Niruktha, Jyotisa, 
and Kalpa. Four remain.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 12 
MIMAMSA-KARMAMARGA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Explication of Vedic Laws 
Of the fourteen branches of learning (caturdasa-vidya), after the four 
Vedas and the Sadanga, we have the four Upangas of the vedas 
remaining. "Upa+anga"="Upanga. "The prefix "upa" is added to suggest 
what is auxiliary to a subject.”Sabhanayaka" means speaker; "upa-
sabhanayaka" means deputy speaker. In the same way we have, after the 
six Angas (Sadanga), the four Upangas. These are Mimamsa, Nyaya, the 
Puranas and Dharmasastra.  
"Mam" is the root of the word "Mimamsa"; "san" is the pratyaya. 
"Mimamsa" means "esteemed or sacred inquiry", an exposition. What is 
esteemed or worthy of worship? The Vedas. Mimamsa is an exegesis of 
the Vedas. Nirukta explains the meaning of the words of the Vedas, also 
their etymology in the fashion of the dictionary. Mimamsa goes further, 
to find out the significance of the mantras, their intent. It also gives its 
decisions on these points.  
We have already discussed the karmakanda and the jnanakanda of the 
Vedas. Karmakanda is called the purva-bhaga,the first or early part of 
each Vedic recension, and the second or concluding part is the uttara-
bhaga. Mimamsa too is divided in this way into Purvamimamsa and 
Uttaramimamsa. The first holds that sacrifices and other rites of the 
karmakanda form the most important part of the Vedas, while the second 
maintains that the realisation of the self taught in the jnanakanda is their 
true goal. I spoke about the Uttaramimamsa when I dealt with the 
Upanishads and the Brahmasutra.  
Uttaramimamsa, that is the Brahmasutra as well as the Upanishads, 
constitutes"Brahmavidya" or Vedanta here. It is the foundation of the 
three important philosophic systems - Advaita (non-dualism or monism), 
Visistadvaita (qualified non-dualism or qualified monism) and Dvaita 
(dualism).  


 
Our present subject is Purvamimamsa. As a matter of fact the term 
"Mimamsa" itself usually denotes "Purvamimamsa". But mention of it 
brings to mind Uttaramimamasa also.  
Every system has, as we have seen its sutras, bhasya, and vartika. The 
Purvamimamsa-sutra is by Jamini Maharsi, its bhasya by Sabarasvamin 
and its vartika by Kumarilabhatta. Kumarilabhatta's Bhattadipika remains 
the most important Purvamimamsa work. Kumarila was an incarnation of 
Kumarasvamin or Subrahmanya. Prabhakara has written a commentary 
or Purvamimamsa in which he expresses views which, on some points, 
are divergent from Kumarlibhatta's. So, two different schools are 
identified in Mimamsa-"Bhatta-mata" and "Prabhakara-mata". Let us 
consider Mimamsa in general terms, ignoring the difference between the 
two schools. "Bhattamata", it is obvious, gets its name from the fact that 
it represents the views of Kumarilabhatta.  
Jaimini's Purvamimamsa-sutra is a voluminous work and has twelve 
chapters, each having a number of "padas" and each pada having a 
number of "adhikaranas". In all, there are 1000 adhikaranas.  
The Vedas constitute the law of Isvara. Since they are eternal and endless 
the law is also eternal. All of us are the subject of the monarch called 
Isvara. He has engaged many officials, authorities, like Indra, Vayu, 
Varuna, Agni, Yama, Isana, Kubera, Nirrti and so onto take care of this 
world. They need a law to protect the creatures of all the fourteen 
worlds. How should we, the subjects of Isvara, conduct ourselves 
according to this law, how are the officials appointed by Isvara to rule 
over his domain? We may find out the answer to these by examining the 
Vedas. There are judges who deliberate on the laws of this world and 
resolve doubts concerning them with the help of lawyers. If the Vedas are 
the law that determines how dharma is to be practised, it is jaimini who 
interprets the meaning of this law. His interpretation is Mimamsa.  
When there is legal dispute, a verdict is given, say, according to the 
decision of the Allahabad or Bombay high court based on similar cases. 
The decision given by one court with regard to one case may be applied 
to a similar case that comes up before another court. In Jamini's 


 
Mimamsa a thousand issues (or points) are examined, taking into account 
the views opposed to those of the author of the sutras, and the meaning 
of the Vedic passage determined with cogent reasoning. To explain: first, 
a Vedic statement is taken up; second, questions are raised about its 
meaning ("samasya"); third, the opposing school's point of view is 
presented ("purvpaksa"); fourth, that point of view is refuted 
("uttarpaksa"); and, fifth, a conclusion is arrived at ("nirnaya"). The 
process of arriving at the meaning of each issue or point constitutes an 
adhikarana.  
The sutras of Jaimini are very terse. Sabara's commentary on them is 
called Sabaram. The word "sabari" usually means a hunter. "Sabari" of 
the Ramayana, they say, was originally a huntress. Sabara, the Mimamsa 
commentator, had an aspect of Isvara in him. It is believed that Isvara 
composed the commentary (Sabaram) when we appeared as a hunter to 
grant the Pasupata weapon to Arjuna.  
Since it has one thousand adhikaranas, Purvamimamsa is called 
"Sahasradhikarani". One must add here that in this work the meaning of 
the Vedic texts are determined by countering many a captious argument 
("kuyukti").  
While Purvamimamsa concerns itself with the meaning of the 
karmakanda of the Vedas, Uttaramimamsa deals with the meaning of the 
jnanakanda that is the Upanisads. The Upanisads speak primarily of the 
Paramatman and our inseparable union with him. Vyasa, in his 
Brahmasutra, determines the meaning of the divine law constituted by 
the Upanisads. Ironically enough, the sage who composed the sutras for 
Uttaramimamsa, Vyasa, was the guru of Jaimini who composed the sutras 
of Purvamimamsa.  
Suresvaracarya wrote a commentary on the Taittiriya and Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisads from the non-dualistic point of view. It is not worthy that he 
had earlier been and adherent of Purvamimamsa. He made the transition 
from the path of works to the path of jnana, on becoming a disciple of 
Sankara and wrote a commentary on his guru's bhasya. Before becoming 
a disciple of our Acarya and a sannyasin he was called Mandanamisra. 


 
The story goes that Sankara approached Mandanamisra for a 
philosophical disputation during a sraddha performed by the latter. Vyasa 
and Jaimini were the two Brahmins to take part in the ceremony.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

No Concept of God in Mimamsa 
Why should the Acarya have sought a debate with Mandanamisra, the 
mimamsaka? (A mimamsaka is an adherent of Purvamimamsa. We 
Uttaramimamsakas are called "Vedantins". ) The Acarya it was who 
revivified the Vedic religion and re-established it on a firm footing. Why, 
then, should such a preceptor have been critical of Mimamsa which is an 
Upanga of the very Vedas we prompted?  
Before answering this question, we must consider the goal of any sastra 
or system, whether it be Mimamsa or anything else. Any discipline, to 
repeat what I said before, must have the ultimate purpose of leading us 
towards Isvara. I further observed that even subjects like grammar, 
lexicography, prosody had such an end in view and that was the reason 
why they were included among the fourteen branches of Vedic learning. 
Now what is the concept of God like in Purvamimamsa?  
We must here consider how Vedanta or Uttaramimamsa views God, for it 
is the system to which is the Acarya gave his whole-hearted support and 
which he also commented upon. After all, it is the Acarya who chiefly 
matters to us. And to him it is that Vyasa's Brahmasutra matters most. 
What does this text have to say about Isvara?  
The Brahmasutra declares: "Karta sastrarthavattvat. " It means Isvara is 
the creator of the cosmos. Even adherents of other religions call God 
“Karta ". But Isvara is more than a Karta and has one more function. We 
do good and bad - good actions and bad actions. It is Isvara who 
vouchsafes us the fruits of such actions: "Phalam ata upapatteh". Isvara is 
the "phaladata" (giver of the fruits of our actions) of our karma. We do 
good and evil with our mind, speech and body. The lord is witness to all 
this and he dispenses the fruits of our actions. These are the two 
characteristics (laksanas) of Isvara according to Uttaramimamsa.  
What does Purvamimamsa say about Isvara?  


 
Both Sankhyas and mimamsakas belong to the Vedic system. But the 
Sankhyas believe that Isvara is not the Karta or author of the jagat 
(universe). "Isvara is pure knowledge, jnana, " they say. "This cosmos is 
insentient, made of earth and stone. What constitutes jnana cannot be 
the cause of insentient matter. To believe that Isvara is the author of the 
universe is not right. "Such is the Sankhya view. Supporters of Sankhya 
describe Isvara, who unattached to the universe and is pure jnana, as 
"Purusa". It is this Purusa that our Acarya calls the ultimate "Nirguna-
Brahman" (the Brahman without attributes). However, he criticises the 
Sankhya concept maintaining that the Nirguna-Brahman itself becomes 
the Saguna-Brahman of Isvara to create the world and to engage itself in 
other activities.  
To mimamsakas only such rites matter as are enjoined on us by the 
Vedas. They are silent on the question of Isvara and of who created the 
world. However they are emphatic on one point - that Isvara is not the 
one who dispenses the fruits of our actions. They don't quarrel on the 
point of whether or not Isvara is the Karta of the universe. They declare: 
"It is wrong to claim that Isvara gives us the fruits of our actions according 
to whether they are good or evil. He is not the one who metes out the 
fruits of our actions. It is the Vedic works performed by us that decide the 
fruits to be earned by us. "  
So adherents of both Sankhya and Mimamsa, in their different ways, 
reject the view of the Vedas and the Brahmasutra that Isvara possesses 
the two laksanas mentioned earlier. The mimamsakas believe that Isvara 
doesn't dispense the fruits of our actions because, according to them, the 
Vedic works we perform give rewards on their own. We earn merit or 
demerit according to how the Vedas and sastras view our actions. So it is 
our karma that brings its rewards or retribution, as the case may be, not 
Isvara.  
Among the religious systems that accept the Vedas, Sankhyas and 
Mimamsa alone hold the view that Isvara is not the creator of the world, 
that he does not award the fruits of our actions.  


 

Nyaya and Mimamsa: They brought 
about the Decline of Buddhism 
Many believe that Buddhism ceased to have a large following in India 
because it came under the attack of Sankara. This is not true. There are 
very few passages in the Acarya's commentaries critical of that religion, a 
religion that was opposed to the Vedas. Far more forcefully has he 
criticised the doctrines of Sankhya and Mimamsa that respect the Vedic 
tradition. He demolishes their view that Isvara is not the creator of the 
world and that it is not he who dispenses the fruits of our actions. He also 
maintains that Isvara possesses the laksanas or characteristics attributed 
to him by the Vedas and the Brahmasutra and argues that there can be 
no world without Isvara and that it is wrong to maintain that our works 
yield fruits on their own. It is Isvara, his resolve, that has created this 
world, and it is he who awards us the fruits of our actions. We cannot find 
support in his commentaries for the view that he was responsible for the 
decline of Buddhism in India.  
Then how did Buddhism cease to have a considerable following in out 
country? Somebody must have subjected it to such rigorous attack as to 
have brought about its decline in this land. Who performed this task? The 
answer is the mimamsakas and the tarkikas. Those who are adept in the 
Tarka-sastra (logic) are called tarkikas. The Tarka is the part of Nyaya 
which is one of the fourteen branches of Vedic learning and which comes 
next to Mimamsa. People proficient in Nyaya are naiyayikas; those well 
versed in grammar are "vaiyakaranis"; and those proficient in the Puranas 
are "pauranikas".  
Udayanacarya, the tarkika, and Kumarilabhatta, the mimamsaka, 
opposed Buddhism for different reasons. The former severely criticised 
that religion for its denial of Isvara. To mimamsakas, as I have said earlier, 
Vedic rituals are of the utmost importance. Even though they don't 
believe that it is Isvara who awards us the fruit of our actions, they 
believe that the rituals we perform yield their own fruits and that the 


 
injunctions of the dharmasastras must be carried out faithfully. They 
attacked Buddhism for its refusal to accept Vedic rituals. Kumarilabhatta 
has written profusely in criticism of that religion. He and Udayanacarya 
were chiefly responsible for the failure of Buddhism to acquire a large 
following in this country. Our Acarya came later and there was no need 
for him to make a special assault on that religion on his own. On the 
contrary, his chief task was to expose the flaws in the systems upheld by 
the very opponents of Buddhism, Kumarilabhatta and Udayanacarya. He 
established that Isvara is the creator of the universe and that it is he who 
awards the fruits of our actions.  
I am mentioning this fact so as to disabuse you of the wrong notions you 
must have formed with regard to Sankara's role in the decline of 
Buddhism. There is a special chapter in one of Kumarilabhatta's works 
called "Tarkapadam" in which he has made an extensive refutation of 
Buddhism. So too has Udayanacarya in his Bauddhadhikaram. These two 
acaryas were mainly responsible for the decline of Buddhism in our land 
and not Sankara Bhagavatpada. What we are taught on the subject in our 
textbooks of history is not true.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 


 

Buddhism and Indian Society 
In my opinion at no time in our history did Buddhism in the fullest sense 
of that religion have a large following in India. Today a number of Hindus, 
who are members of the Theosophical Society, celebrate our festivals like 
other Hindus and conduct marriages in the Hindu way. There are many 
devotees of Sri Ramakrsna Parmahamsa practising our traditional 
customs. Sri C. Ramanujacariyar, "Anna" (Sri N. Subramanya Ayyar) and 
some others are intimately associated with the Ramakrsna Mission but 
they still adhere to our traditional beliefs.  
When great men make their appearance people are drawn to them for 
their qualities of compassion and wisdom. In the organisations 
established after them our sanatana dharma is followed with some 
changes. But a large number of the devotees of these men still follow the 
old customs and traditions in their homes.  
Many regard Gandhiji as the founder almost of a new religion 
(Gandhism), and look upon him as one greater than avataras like Rama 
and Krsna. But in their private lives few of them practise what he 
preached- for instance, widow marriage, mixing with members of other 
castes, and so on. People developed esteem for Gandhiji for his personal 
life of self-sacrifice, truthfulness, devotion and service to mankind. But 
applying his ideas in actual life was another matter.  
It was in the same way that the Buddha had earned wide respect for his 
lofty character and exemplary personal life. "A prince renounces his wife 
and child in the prime of his youth to free the world from sorrow": the 
story of Siddhartha, including such accounts, made an impact on people. 
They were moved by his compassion, sense of detachment and self-
sacrifice. But it did not mean that they were ready to follow his teachings. 
They admired the Buddha for his personal qualities but they continued to 
subscribe to the varnasrama system and the ancient way of religious life 
with its sacrifice and other rites. Contrary to what he wished, people did 


 
not come forward in large numbers to become monks but continued to 
remain householders adhering to Vedic practices.  
Emperor Asoka did much to propagate Buddhism; but in society in 
general the Vedic dharma did not undergo any change. Besides, the 
emperor himself supported the varnasrama dharma as is evident from his 
famous edicts. But for the Buddhist bhiksus (monks), all householders 
followed the Vedic path. Though they were silent on the question of 
Isvara and other deities, some book written by great Buddhist monks 
open with hymns to Sarasvati. They also worshipped a number of gods. It 
is from Tibet that we have obtained many Tantrik works relating to the 
worship of various deities. If you read the works of Sriharsa, Bilhana and 
so on in Sanskrit, and Tamil poetical works like that of Ilango Adigal, you 
will realise that even during times when Buddhism wielded influence in 
society, Vedic customs and varnasrama were followed by the generality 
of people.  
Reformists today speak in glowing terms about Vyasa, Sankaracarya, 
Ramanujacarya and others. But they do not accept the customs and 
traditions I ask people to follow. Some of them, however, come to see 
me. Is it not because they feel that there is something good about me, 
because they have personal regard for me, even though they do not 
accept my ideas? Similarly, great men have been respected in this 
country for their personal qualities and blameless life notwithstanding 
the fact they advocated views that differed slightly from the Vedic 
tradition or were radically opposed to it. Our people any way had long 
been steeped in the ancient Vedic religion and its firmly established 
practices and, until the turn of the century, were reluctant to discard the 
religion of their forefathers and the vocations followed by them. Such 
was our people's attitude during the time of the Buddha also. When his 
doctrines came under attack from Udayanacarya and Kumarilabhatta 
even the few who had first accepted them returned to the Vedic religion.  
 
 


 

Sankara and Non-Vedic Systems 
The Acarya views the last stage or asrama in a man's life as the years 
during which he renounces Vedic works and devotes himself to 
meditation and metaphysical inquiry. But, unlike the Buddha, he does not 
want Vedic karma to be given up in the earlier stages. According to him, 
only after a man cleanses his consciousness through years of Vedic rituals 
is he to become exclusively devoted Atmic inquiry. First accept the karma 
that Mimamsa asks us to perform and finally give up that very karma as 
suggested by Buddhism. 
The Acarya goes along with systems like Buddhism, Mimamsa, Sankhya, 
and Nyaya up to a point. He accepts them on a certain level, but on 
another level he disapproves of them. Each of these systems regards one 
aspect of truth to be final. Our Acarya harmonises them all into a single 
whole Truth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Sankhya 
According to Sankhya, the Atman is Purusa and is the basis of all, though, 
at the same time detached from everything. In its view Maya which keeps 
everything going is Prakriti. The cosmos is contained in 24 "tattvas" 
["thatnesses" or principles or categories] of which Prakrti is one- Prakrti is 
indeed the first of these and it has the name of"pradhana". From it arises 
the second tattva of "mahat" which is the intellect of Prakrti (like the 
intellect of man). From mahat (the great) is derived the third tattva of 
"ahamkara", the ego, self-consciousness, the feeling that there is a 
separate entity called "I".  
Ahamkara divides itself into two: first as the sentient and knowing life of 
a man, his mind, his five jnanendriyas and five karmendriyas. The second 
is constituted by the five "tanmatras" and the five "mahabhutas” of the 
insentient cosmos. The jnanendriyas are faculties with which a man gets 
to know outside objects: the eyes that see objects, the nose that smells, 
the mouth that tastes, the ear that hears and the skin that feels by touch. 
With his karmendriyas he performs various actions. The mouth serves as 
a karmendriya also since it performs the function of speech. The hand, 
the leg, the anus and the genitals are all karmendriyas. The "asrayas" for 
jnanendriyas are sound (ear), feeling, sparsa (skin), form (eye), flavour or 
taste (mouth), smell (nose). These five are tanmatras. The tattvas in their 
expanded insentient forms are space (sound), air (feeling or touch), water 
(flavour), earth (smell), fire (form)- these are mahabhutas. Thus Prakrti, 
mahat, ahamkara, mind, the five jnanendriyas, the five karmendriyas, the 
five tanmatras, and the five mahabhutas- all these make up the 24 
tattvas.  
These tattvas are accepted by non-dualistic Vedanta also. According to it, 
it is Isvara (the Brahman with attributes) who unites Purusa (or the 
Atman without attributes) with Prakrti or Maya. Sankhya, however, is 
silent on Isvara.  


 
The three qualities of sattva, rajas and tamas, according to the Sankhya 
philosophy, are accepted by all Vedantic systems including non-dualism. 
Sattva denotes a high state of goodness, clarity and serenity; rajas is all 
speed and action and passion; and tamas denotes sleep, inertia, sloth. 
The Gita has much to say on the subject in its "Gunatraya-vibhaga yoga". 
The Lord says: "Nistraigunyo Bhava" (Go beyond all three gunas and dwell 
in the Atman). Sankhya also believes that all undesirable developments 
are due to an imbalance of the gunas and that they must be maintained 
evenly. But, unlike the Gita, Sankhya does not tell us the means to 
achieve this- like worship of Isvara, surrender to him, Atmic inquiry and 
so on.  
Purusa alone has life, Prakrti is inert. By itself Prakrti is incapable of 
performing any function. It manifests itself as the 24 tattvas only in the 
presence of Purusa. But Sankhya also speaks contradictorily that Purusa is 
"kevala-gnana-swarupin" unrelated to Prakrti. "Kevala" means what is by 
itself, isolated, without the admixture of anything else. "Kaivalya" is the 
name Sankhya gives to liberation. The state in which an individual, after 
discarding the 24 tattvas and being released from inertia, remains in the 
vital Purusa by himself is "kaivalya". (In Tamil "kevalam" has somehow 
come to mean "inferior" or "unworthy".)  
Advaita also has the goal of one being absorbed in Purusa, that is the 
Atman, and discarding all else as Maya. To attain this state, the Acarya 
has cut out a path for us, the path that takes us to final release through 
works, devotion and philosophic inquiry. Sankhya does no such thing. 
Most of its teaching relates to forsaking the 24 tattvas.  
Another unsatisfactory aspect of Sankhya is this. Purusa (the Atman) is 
jnana by itself and has no function. Prakrti has a function but is insentient 
and without jnana. How does this insentient Prakriti unfold itself as the 
 tattvas? According to Sankhya, this phenomenon occurs in the 
presence of Purusa. This is not a convincing explanation. How does Prakrti 
perform its function under Purusa that has no function? Supporters of 
Sankhya answer: "Are not iron filings brought into motion by the 
presence of a magnet? Does the magnet consciously want to keep them 


 
in motion? The magnet is by itself and the iron filings are in motion. 
Similarly, though Purusa is by himself, Prakrti is activated as a 
consequence of its vitality. "  
Purusa and Prkrti work together like a cripple carried by a blind man. The 
cripple cannot walk and the blind man cannot see. So the cripple perched 
on the shoulders of the blind man shows the way and the latter follows 
his directions. Similarly, Prakrti which has no jnana carries Purusa who is 
full of jnana, but Prkrti without jnana is behind all affairs of the world. 
This may sound good as a story or a metaphor but it does not make sense 
unlike the explanation provided by the Advaita concept- that the Nirguna-
Brahman becomes Saguna-Brahman (Isvara) to conduct the world.  
Another important difference between Advaita and Sankhya is this. 
Although Sankhya believes in a Purusa made up of jnana it does not state 
unequivocally like Advaita that all souls are the same as Purusa. All 
individual souls, according to Sankhya, exist by themselves. Though the 
ideas of Sankhya are confusing sometimes, it is regarded as one of our 
basic systems of philosophy. ("Sankhya” means enumerating, numbers: 
from it comes Sankhya.)  
The author of Sankhya Sutra is Kapila Maharishi. Notable works of this 
system are Isvarakrsna's Sankhya karika and Vijnanabhiksu's commentary 
on the Sankhya-sutra.  
The Gita too deals with Sankhya. When Bhagavan Krsna speaks of the two 
paths, Sankhya and Yoga, He means jnana by the former and karmayoga 
by the latter (not Rajayoga.)  
Sankhya does not go beyond asking us to have an awareness of Purusa 
separate from Prakrti. Rajayoga, however, goes further from this point 
and tells us the practical means, the "sadhana", to be followed to become 
aware of Purusa dissociated from Prakrti. The concept of Isvara and 
devotion to him is part of yoga and it has lessons to bring the mind under 
control. What generally goes under the name of yoga is Patanjali's 
Rajayoga, according to which yoga is the stopping the mental process (or 


 
the oscillating vitality of consciousness). It is this yoga that has become 
popular in Western countries.  
Sankhya and yoga are not included in caturdasa-vidya but, all the same, 
they are important among our sastras.  
Though devotion to Isvara is not part of Mimamsa, it accepts the 
authority of the Vedas. Likewise Sankhya too respects the authority of the 
Vedas and does not support belief in Isvara. 
Buddhism on the one hand, Nyaya and Mimamsa on the other which 
were opposed to it, and Sankhya, which does not accept Isvara but 
respects the pramanas of the Vedas: of these our Acarya accepts 
elements that are to be accepted and rejects elements that are to be 
rejected. He establishes the Vedantic system which harbours all these 
and which is their source. Sankara's view is not at variance with the 
ultimate message of Buddhism, that is the exalted state of jnana. He 
accepts some of the basic concepts of Sankhya like Purusa that is jnana by 
itself and equivalent to the Nirguna-Brahman and Prakrti which is the 
same as Maya. At the same time, he accepts the Vedic rituals of 
Mimamsa and the Isvara of Nyaya. But he sees each of them as an aspect 
of the one Truth, not as the final goal which it is to the various individual 
systems mentioned. He integrates these different aspects into a 
harmonious whole in his own system of thought.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   


 

Mimamsa and Adi Sankara 
As we have already seen, Udayana and other supporters of the Nyaya 
system criticised Buddhism on the score that it was silent on the question 
of God, while mimamsakas like Kumarilabhatta attacked the same 
because it did not favour Vedic rituals. The acarya was in sympathy with 
these views and believed that Vedic sacraments, considered all-important 
by the mimamsakas were essential to the cleansing of the mind and to 
the proper conduct of the affairs of the community. However, he was 
opposed to the mimamsakas not only because they did not accept an 
entity like Isvara as the dispenser of the fruits of our actions but also 
because they did not believe that, after being rendered pure by works, 
there is any need for one to go further and take the path of jnana. He also 
did not agree with their view that to become a sanyasin giving up all 
karma is not right.  
Kumarilabhatta and Mandanamisra are particularly important among the 
mimamsakas. The Acarya had a debate with Kumarilabhatta during the 
last days of that mimamsaka and won him over to his viewpoint. 
Similarly, Mandanamisra also became a convert to Advaita Vedanta and 
came to be one of the Acarya's chief disciples assuming the title of 
Suresvaracarya.  
If the Acarya opposed Mimamsa, which is one of the fourteen branches 
of Vedic lore, it was not because he thought it to be wholly unacceptable. 
He was in agreement with the sacraments dealt with in that system, but 
he differed from it on the question of devotion to the Lord. He further 
believed that the fruits yielded by the rites, rewards like paradise, must 
be dedicated to Isvara and that in this very act of renunciation the mind is 
purified. Sankara's teaching is this: it is only if we realise that Isvara is the 
Phala-data, the one who awards the fruits of our actions, that we will not 
be tempted by petty rewards like paradise. Only then will we be inspired 
to go beyond to attain the higher reward of inner purity. The Vedic works 
were wholly acceptable to our Acarya. But for the mimamsakas they were 


 
an end in themselves; they did not transcend them to become devoted to 
the Supreme Godhead and to acquire jnana, the final realisation that 
Isvara and we are one and the same. Sankara criticised mimamsakas for 
their failure to understand this truth. That he did not oppose Vedic karma 
is proved again by the fact that in his upadesa (teaching) -it is called 
Sopana-Panchaka- before giving up his  
body he made the admonishment that the Vedas must be chanted every 
day and that the rites mentioned in them must be performed.  
Vedo nityam adhiyatam  
Taduditam karma svanushtiyatham  
The Acarya, however, taught us not to stop with karma (performed for 
the sake of karma), but to go beyond it. The rites that we conduct must 
be made an offering to Isvara. This is a means of obtaining inner purity 
and also that of receiving instruction in jnana. That is the time when we 
must give up all karma to meditate upon the teaching we have received, 
indeed meditate on it with intensity and make it our inner experiential 
reality. Sankara takes us, step by step, in this way to final release. He 
opposed the mimamsakas because they failed to understand the purpose 
of Vedic karma and refused to go beyond it.  
We must accept the Mimamsa system's interpretation of the Vedas, 
especially because it surrenders wholly to the "Sabda-pramana", the 
sound of the Vedas, its authority, and it is in this spirit that it has 
understood the meaning of the scripture. An interesting thought occurs 
to me. Mimamsa does not surrender to a perceptible God nor seek to 
understand his form. Does that matter? The Vedas themselves constitute 
a great deity. The sound of the Vedas does not take the form of a deity 
that can be seen with our eyes but one that can be perceived with our 
ears. Let us perform the works that that sound bids us to do without 
asking questions. Such an act implies an attitude of surrender and it is in 
this spirit that the mimamsakas have determined the meaning of the 
Vedas. So whether or not they believed in a tangible God, they knew the 
God that could be grasped by the ears. (that is they had a good 
understanding of the meaning of the Vedas).  


 

Determining the Meaning of Vedic Texts 
The Vedas, as we know, contain "vakyas" and "adhyayas". How are we to 
know their content, their meaning? What must we do to find out their 
purpose, their message?  
The rules according to which the Vedas are to be interpreted are 
contained in the Mimamsa sastra. If the Vedas are the law, Mimamsa is 
the law of interpretation. As I said before, when the government enacts a 
great number of laws, doubts arise as to their intention and application. 
So to interpret these, the government enacts another law. Mimamsa is 
such a law with reference to the Vedas. It formulates certain methods to 
discover the meaning of the Vedic texts. 
Six methods are mentioned: upakarma-upasamhara, abhyasa, apurvata, 
phala, atharvada, upapatti. According to Mimamsa the meaning, the 
intent, of the Vedic Mantras may be understood by applying these 
methods 
The reader is requested to refer to chapter 34, Part Five, in which these six 
methods of Mimamsa sastra are dealt with. 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 


 

Mimamsa Beliefs 
Let me now speak a little more on the doctrines of Mimamsa.  
Let us not worry about whether or not there is a God. Let there be a God 
or let there be none. Our duty is to perform the rites prescribed by the 
Vedas and they will yield fruits on their own. Any work we do produces its 
own results, doesn't it? Why do we need God in between? The work 
generates results on its own. Do we pay the greengrocer if he fetches 
plantain leaves from our own garden? It is the same to give credit to 
Isvara for the fruits we reap by performing karma. We till the land and 
rice grows on it. It is the same with performing karma. If we do what we 
do not know, as told by the Vedas, we will derive certain benefits. Why 
should we think that the cosmos was created by God? It has always 
existed as it exists today: why should we believe that it came into being 
all of a sudden? "Na kadacit anidrsam jagat.” This universe has always 
existed as it exists today. Do works; they will yield fruits on their own. 
When the engine is wound the car starts. It is all like that.  
The Vedas speak about things not comprehended by the human mind. If 
we perform rites imposed on us by them, the fruits thereof will naturally 
follow. Sound has always existed: it has indeed no beginning and the 
Vedas are this sound. Like time and space they are ever-present.  
If you do evil, the consequence shall be evil; if you do good the result 
shall be correspondingly good. The rites keep yielding fruits, and we keep 
enjoying them - and thus we go on and on. No God is required for all this. 
We should never cease to do work because not to work is sinful. It will 
take us to hell.  
There are three types of karma: "nitya", "naimittika", and "kamya". 
"Nitya-karma" as the name suggests includes sacraments that must be 
performed every day. "Naimittika" rites are conducted for a specific 
purpose or reason or on a specific occasion. For instance, when there is 


 
an eclipse we must bathe and offer libations to our fathers. When a great 
man visits our home he has to be honoured ceremonially - this is also 
naimittaka. Nitya and naimittaka rites are to be performed by all. A 
kamya-karma is a ritual that has a special purpose. When there is a 
drought we conduct Varuna-japa to invoke the god and seek his blessings 
in the form of rain. When we are desirous of a son we perform the 
"putrakamesti"(sacrifice to beget a son). These belong to the kamya 
category.  
The sacraments to be performed everyday are defined in Mimamsa. 
"Akarane pratyavaya janakam, karane'bhyudayam"-this statement refers 
to two types. The non-performance of certain rites brings us ills, troubles- 
these form one type. On the other hand some rites bring us happiness- 
these form the second type. A good house, wealth, sons, fame, 
knowledge are part of “abhyudaya". Vedanta speaks of "nihsreyas", the 
supreme bliss of liberation. “Abhyudaya” is different; it is happiness on 
the lower plane. Mimamsa is concerned with the latter, and does not 
speak of the ultimate blessedness of release from worldly existence.  
If rites belong to the category of "nitya" are not performed, we will have 
to face trouble. Suppose you ask a man to perform sandyavandana and 
he replies: " I won't do it. I don't care whether or not it does me good ". 
Mimamsa has an answer to it: Sandyavandana is not a kamya or optional 
rite and its non-performance will bring you unhappiness.  
It stands to reason to say the performance of certain rites will bring you 
happiness. But how do you justify the statement that the non-
performance of certain other rites will have ill-effects? Not performing 
sandyavandana is sinful, but its performance is not claimed to bring any 
good. It is because this rite belongs to the category referred to in this 
statement, "akarane pratyavaya janakam. . "  
Worshipping the deity in the temple, feeding the poor, such acts are said 
to be beneficial and belong to the second category referred to in the 
statement, ". . . . karane abhyudayam ". This makes sense. But how is it 
sensible to say “akarane pratyavaya janakam"? Are there examples to 
illustrate this dictum? Yes, there are.  


 
We give alms to beggars, or make a donation to some organisation or 
other in the belief that there is merit to be earned thereby. Sometimes 
we do not practice such charity because we may not feel the urge to earn 
any special merit. We have, of course, to do our duty, but not helping 
people with money or material cannot be said to be sinful.  
Suppose we have borrowed Rs. 500 from a friend or an acquaintance. 
How far are we justified in refusing repayment of the loan, saying: " I 
don't wish to earn any merit by returning your money? ". Is it possible to 
escape the obligation to the lender in this manner? He will naturally tell 
us: " I came to ask you for my money. I don't care about whether you or I 
earn any merit ". If we refuse to repay a loan we will be taken to court 
and eventually we will have to repay it along with the penalty. This 
illustrates the statement: “Akarane pratyavayajanakam. . . "  
Not performing sandyavandana is like not repaying a debt. In Tamil the 
sandyavandana performed at dawn and dusk are aptly called “kalai-k-
kadan” and " malai-k-kadan " [" morning debt " and " evening debt " ]. 
These are beautiful terms.  
You may wonder how sandyavandana can be described as something 
“borrowed ". The Taittiriya Samhita (6. 3) of the Vedas says: “A Brahmin is 
born with three debts. These are “rsi-rna",”deva-rna " and " pitr-rna (that 
is a Brahmin is indebted to the sages, the devas and to his fathers) ". The 
first debt is repaid by chanting the Vedas; by conducting sacrifices and 
other rites the second is repaid; and by offering libations and performing 
the sraddha ceremony the third is repaid. The Vedas enlighten us on 
matters of which we are ignorant. From the pronouncements made in 
them, those who have faith will find reasons to perform the rites. Others 
who perverse in their reasoning will find an excuse for not performing the 
same.  
There are two brothers. One is a magistrate and the other a Vedic 
scholar. The first cannot refuse to attend the court saying, “My brother 
does not go to any law court. Why should I? ". The authorities will tell 
him: "You applied for the job of a magistrate. We issued orders 
appointing you to the office and you accepted the job. So there is no 


 
choice for you but to attend the court ". Similarly, we have applied for 
liberation, for moksa, and have received orders that we have to perform 
certain rites. The one who issued orders is not seen by us but he sees all 
and is witness to all. Such is the view of the Vedanta.  
Mimamsa believes that the karma that we “applied for " gives its own 
reward. According to it, the fruit of Vedic works come to us 
“automatically ".  
Our birth in this world is according to our past karma and we have to 
perform the rites that are proper to it. If we do not, we will suffer. The 
customs and rites must be adhered to properly. The duty of a Brahmin is 
to know the truth contained in the Vedas, to bring solace to those who 
are sorrowing and to give instruction to people in their respective 
vocations. Similarly, each man must perform the duties allotted to him by 
virtue of his birth. The oil-monger must produce oil; the cobbler must 
make footwear; and so on. The Brahmin must keep his body, mind and 
Self pure and he must be careful about what he eats. The reason for this 
is that not only has he to remain meditating on the Paramatman, he has 
also the duty of bringing others to the path of dhyana. It was for the 
proper discharge of such duties that in the old days he was given gifts of 
rent-free lands. Then every worker was allotted land. If he stopped doing 
the work assigned to him society would suffer. So he forfeited his land an 
and it was allotted to another worker.  
According to the sastras, not to do the work assigned to us is not only 
sinful but also disadvantageous in a worldly sense. In the past one earned 
respect only because one did one's karma, the duties expected of one. 
Our nation is in a lamentable state today only because of the failure on 
the part of the people to follow their respective callings, callings inherited 
from their forefathers. If everybody does his allotted job, performs the 
duties expected of him by birth, there should be happiness for all even in 
a mundane case. If there is so much poverty in the country today it is 
because of our failure to maintain the social order in which everybody is 
expected to do his allotted work, contributing to the social prosperity and 
harmony.  


 
Sandyavandana and the like are everyday rites. The non-performance of 
nitya-karma is a sin; performance means we will not incur any demerit. 
That apart, there will be general well-being. If we repay a loan in 
instalments it means that we shall no longer remain indebted to the 
lender (here we see a gain); additionally we earn a name for being honest 
and trust-worthy. By performing nitya-karma no sin will attach to us and, 
besides, it should mean some good to us. Thus there are two types of 
gains.  
Vedanta too accepts the idea implicit in the statement "Akarane 
pratavaya janakam, karane' bhyudayam". We must never fail to perform 
nitya-karma; for instance, Srauta rites like agnihotra and Smarta rites like 
aupasana.  
It is the view of mimamsakas that agnihotra must be performed so long 
as one is alive. So they do not favour the sannyasasrama (the last stage of 
life, that of the ascetic). In this asrama there are no rites like agnihotra. 
Giving up works, according to the mimamsakas, is extremely sinful. To do 
so consciously and become an ascetic is like embracing another religion. 
The Isavasyopanishad (second mantra) says that a man must live a 
hundred years performing works. The Taittiriya Brahmana has it  
that to extinguish the agnihotra fire is to earn the demerit of killing a 
hero.  
According to Mimamsa, to give up nitya-karma is tantamount to doing 
evil karma. "The sannyasin deprives himself of karma ('karma- bhrashta'). 
To look at him is sinful and you must atone for it. To look at the sinner, to 
talk to him, to dine with him, “say Mandanamisra and mimamsakas like, 
"is to earn sin. To look at a sanyasin is equally sinful. "  
The jnanakanda of the Vedas, speaks of sannyasa, the Parabrahman, 
liberation, jnana and so on. Why should concepts be attacked? What is 
answer of the mimamsakas to this?  
It is true, they say, that the Upanisads speak of jnana and Parabrahman. 
But what are the Vedas? The Vedas are sound, they are made up of 


 
words. Why did they come into existence? To tell us about things that we 
do not know. The Vedas constitute the Sabda-pramana which speaks 
about things that cannot be perceived by the eyes and are beyond 
conjecture. Their purpose is not to tell us about matters that are of no 
use. All words serve a two-fold purpose. They bid you "Do this" or "Do 
not this. "  
Pravrttirva nivrttirva nityena krtakyena va  
Pumsam yenopadisyete tacchastram abhidhiyate  
Words that speak of things that serve no purpose belong to the category 
of useless, idle talk. Suppose a man says, "The crow flies." How does the 
statement help you? "The crow is black." Do these words also help you in 
any way? Take this sentence for example: "Tomorrow night a discourse 
will be held here." This has some purpose. It gives a bit of information 
and implicit in it is an invitation to people to come and listen to the 
discourse. Such usefulness is "pravrtti". If someone says that there will be 
a discourse at Kumbhakonam tomorrow, it is as good as gossip. You are in 
Madras and how will you go to Kumbhakonam in such a short time to 
listen to the discourse? Any word, any sabda, must have some objective 
or other. It must either involve you in work, "pravrtti" or keep you out of 
it, "nivrtti". If the Vedas mention all the five terrible sins (panca-maha-
patakas) and bid us not to commit them, it is nivrtti, because they warn 
us against committing those dreadful crimes.  
Words that do not serve the purpose of either pravrtti or nivrtti are 
useless. One part of the Vedas asks you to do this or that and another 
part asks you not to do this or that (ordinances regarding what you must 
do and what you must not). But there is another part which is like story-
telling. The stories are meaningful only if they are connected with the 
injunctions and interdictions of pravrtti and nivrtti.  
Suppose there is an advertisement of a tonic that claims to give you 
vigour and strength. It carries an illustration showing a man wrestling 
with a lion. What is the purpose of this drawing? It is a kind of deception, 
the idea behind it being to induce you to buy the tonic, and make money. 
Such "stories" in the Vedas become purposeful only because of the 


 
injunctions associated with them and they belong to the category of 
"arthavada". Why does a doctor print his certificate in advertising his 
medicine? To persuade people to buy it (the medicine). In this way in 
arthavada untruth is mixed with truth. The untrue part is called 
"gunavada". There is another term called "anuvada". It means stating 
what is already known. For instance, the statement that "fire burns".  
Mentioning the ingredients of a medicine is an example of 
"bhutarthavada". "Gunarthavada" is to tell a story, even though untrue, 
to make it useful for the observance of a rule. "Do not drink liquor" is an 
injunction (or interdiction). To tell the "story" that a man who got drunk 
was ruined is arthavada. The purpose- or moral- is that one must not 
drink. To say that if a man drinks he will be intoxicated is anuvada. All 
told, the stories or statements belonging to arthavada must make us 
conform to the commandments of the Vedas.  
In dealing with a sacrifice, the Vedas ask us to pay the daksina in gold, not 
in silver. According to the Taittiriya Samhita silver should not be given as 
daksina in sacrifices. In this connection a long story is told to illustrate the 
"nisedha" or the prohibitory rule regarding silver. ("Do this" is a "vidhi"; 
"do not do this" is a "nisedha".) But the words by themselves in such 
arthavada do not serve any purpose.  
It is in this manner that the mimamsakas try to counter the objections 
raised against their system by adherents of the jnanakanda of the Vedas.  
When the Upanisads speak about the Brahman there is no mention of 
any work to be performed. The Upanisads themselves show that the 
realisation of the Brahmans is a state in which there is no action. When 
do the Vedas become an authority? When they speak about the 
performance of a karma. So the Upanisads belong to the arthavada 
category because they deal with existing things. What is it that we must 
know? Existing things or the karma we ought to perform?  
"The Brahman exists. The Atman is the Brahman" In such 
pronouncements there is no mention of any rites to be performed. It is 
obligatory for us to conduct sacrifices and we need the Vedas only for 


 
that purpose, to tell us about such works, not to speak about the things 
that exist. What exists will be known at one time or another, even if we 
do not know it now. That part of the Vedas which speaks of existing 
things belongs to arthavada. So the Upanisads are not to be regarded as 
an authority. Then what is their purpose? They are meant to elevate the 
sacrificer. By extolling him he would be made to perform more and more 
works. It is not right to forsake karma to become a sannyasin. The 
Upanisadic declaration that the individual self is the same as the Brahman 
is meant only to glorify one who leads a life of works. The man who takes 
the tonic (in the story mentioned earlier) will never be able to wrestle 
with the lion. Similarly, the individual self will never attain the Brahman. 
The Upanisads are in the nature of a story and we do not need any talk of 
the Brahman, jnana, moksa, Isvara, and so on. Karma is all for us. So goes 
the argument of the mimamsakas.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 
 


 

Sankara’s Reply 
What is Sankara's reply to this argument?  
What the Vedas state need not necessarily serve the purpose of involving 
us in any work. The mimamsakas accept the Vedas because, according to 
them, the karma mentioned in them serves a purpose. So the purpose 
served by karma is the message of the Vedas, not the karma itself. If to be 
without any karma, without any work, is itself a great purpose, must not 
the jnanakanda of the Vedas then be acceptable since it deals with a 
condition in which there is no karma to be performed, or nothing is to be 
done? That is if being without karma is "useful" by itself - if it serves a 
"purpose" - that can also then be the message of the Vedas. So the 
underlying goal of the Vedas is not karma itself but the purpose behind it.  
The Vedas admonish us: "Do not drink wine". How do we react to this 
interdiction? We react by doing nothing; there is indeed nothing for us to 
do. The message of this Vedic commandment is that we ought not to ruin 
ourselves by drinking. To remain without doing anything is called 
"abhava". All nisedha (prohibition) belongs to the abhava category. The 
mimasakas themselves admit that the Vedas forbid certain actions. If it is 
beneficial not to perform certain actions, how can you object to the 
possibility that not doing any karma at all can also constitute a great 
purpose? Vedanta has great "use" thus since it serves the supreme 
purpose of the action-less or quiescent state in which we realise the Self. 
This cannot be rejected as arthavada.  
Krsna says in the Gita: "Sarvan karma' khilam Partha jnane 
parisamapyate" (All works, Partha, find their goal in jnana). All karma 
must be consecrated to Paramesvara, must be laid at the feet of the 
Supreme Lord. To be without work, and experience the bliss of the 
Brahman is he greatest of "uses". In this state there is no birth again and 
it means freedom from worldly existence. That is the ultimate message of 


 
the Vedas. The karmakanda must be woven together with the jnanakanda 
if it is to be meaningful and if it is to serve a purpose.  
Sankara succeeded in convincing Mandanamisra, Kumarilabhatta and 
others about the rightness of this view. To recapitulate his argument: 
"The karmakanda of the Vedas mentions works because their 
performance is of some use in cleansing the mind. If the purpose 
achieved by not performing them is a million - million times greater than 
that gained by performing them, then that must be understood to be the 
message of the Vedas, the ultimate teaching of the jnanakanda. The 
karmakanda helps a seeker in his early stages. The performance of rites 
creates inner purity and takes him to Isvara. Karma performed for the 
sake of karma leads a man nowhere. The Vedas speak of the sannyasin's 
stage of life in which the ascetic, as he attains the Paramatman, becomes 
the Paramatman". The Acarya spoke in this vein to Mandanamisra 
[converted him to his point of view] and gave him initiation into 
sannyasa.  
In the karmakanda certain acts are declared sinful. If a person keeps 
doing them it is because he feels he finds some pleasure in them. But 
such pleasure is momentary and becomes an obstacle in his efforts to 
know the joy that is greater. The mimamsakas, respecting the injunctions 
of the Vedas, abjure sinful acts. By the performance of Vedic karma they 
derive certain fruits, a certain degree of happiness, find well-being in 
their mundane existence and go to the pitr-loka or devaloka. But these do 
not mean everlasting bliss. When the fruits of their virtuous acts are 
exhausted, the joys also come to an end. Even if they go to the world of 
the celestials they will have to plunge into this world again on exhausting 
their merit. "Ksine punye martyalokam visanti".  
What is that well-being which is eternal? The answer is that which is 
experienced by the jnanin when he dissolves in the Supreme Godhead. 
Then there is no "doing" for him. One must abjure sinful acts that afford 
petty momentary pleasure and instead perform noble works such as 
those mentioned in the Vedas. But what use are even these if they do not 
lead to the experience of plenary bliss? Are we, however, capable of 


 
directly attaining such blessedness abandoning Vedic karma? No. Jnana is 
not easy to obtain. For it the consciousness, the mind, must be made 
pure and un-oscillating. So Vedic rituals are essential.  
But they must be performed not for impermanent rewards like paradise 
but for the removal of inner impurities. We must not be deflected from 
the higher path by the fruits yielded by karma-these must be placed 
devotedly at the feet of the Lord. He will bless us with the higher fruit of 
inner purity and then the mind will become mellow enough for Atmic 
inquiry, for the inward journey. That is the way to the supreme 
blessedness, the quiescent state in which one is oneself.  
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Vedanta and Mimamsa 
Advaita or non-dualism is in agreement with Mimamsa up to a point. It 
accepts Vedic karma as well as the six pramanas (perceptions or sources 
of knowledge) defined by Kumarilabhatta. Sankara's non-dualism, 
Ramanuja's qualified non-dualism, and Madhva's dualism are all Vedantic 
doctrines and all three are not against Vedic rituals. While non-dualism 
accepts all the six pramanas of Mimamsa, qualified non-dualism accepts 
only three-pratyaksa, anumana and the Vedas. I will explain these terms 
when I deal with Nyaya.  
The three leading Vedantic teachers (Sankara, Ramanuja and Madhva), 
do not completely reject Mimamsa, but the paths they have cut out go 
beyond the mimamsic view: devotion in the case of Visistadvaita and 
Dvaita and jnana in the case of Advaita.  
Mimamsa is called karmamarga since it teaches that karma is all. But 
karma here does not have the same meaning as in Vedanta which speaks 
of the three paths- karma, bhakti and jnana. In Vedanta karma is not 
performed for the sake of karma and is not an end in itself, but 
consecrated to Isvara without any expectation of reward. This is also 
karmamarga or karmayoga. It is this view of karma that the Lord 
expounds in the Gita. In the karmamarga of mimamsakas there is no 
bhakti. But, all the same, the Vedic rituals create well-being in the world, 
lead to a disciplined and harmonious social life and bring inner purity to 
the performer. Mimamsa holds karma to be a goal in itself; Vedanta 
regards it as a means to a higher end.  
 
   
 


 

How Mimamsa is Esteemed 
Mimamsa is of great help in understanding the meaning of the Vedic 
texts. For this reason many scholars, including those opposed to its 
karmamarga, have made a thorough study of it and also written books on 
it. Raju Sastri of Mannargudi (Tanjavur district), who was an outstanding 
Vedantin, Venkatasubba Sastri of Tiruvisanallur, Nilamegha Sastri of the 
same 
place, 
Krsnamacariyar 
of 
Rayampettah, 
Krsnatatacariyar, 
Cinnasvami Sastri of Nandakullatur, and so on, were "scholar-lions" who 
made a deep study of Mimamsa. Ironically enough, Tiruvisanallur 
Ramasubba Sastri was opposed to sacrificial rites. However, though he 
was against the srauta karma that is such an important part of Mimamsa, 
he was impressed by the theoretical excellence of the system and was 
himself recognised as an authority on the subject. 
The Sanskrit College, Mylapore, Madras, has produced outstanding 
mimamsakas. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 13 
NYAYA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Science of Reasoning 
Nyaya is also called Tarka-sastra and its author is Gautama. Its main 
purpose is to establish by reasoning that the Karta or Creator of all this 
world is Parameswara. Indeed, it seeks to prove the existence of Isvara 
through inference. Reasoning thus has a major place in Nyaya.  
Logic or reasoning is of course indispensable to any study. The Vedas 
make a statement and Mimamsa determines its meaning.  
Though we have faith in the Vedas, doubts arise in our minds regarding 
the meaning of scriptural passages. If these doubts are cleared through 
reasoning the message of the Vedas will be affirmed. When we construct 
the marriage pandal we test the strength of the bamboo or timber posts 
by trying to shake them. In the same way we must subject truths to 
proper tests so as to confirm them. All logical reasoning must be accepted 
but it must be firmly rooted in authority. Also, arguments must not be of 
a carping character, stemming from the urge to be merely contrary.  
When Sankara was about to depart from this world his disciples 
requested him for a brief upadesa. It was then that he imparted his 
succinct teaching in the form of five stanzas which go by the name of 
Upadesa-Pancaka or Sopana-Pancaka. "Dustarkat suviramyatam - 
Srutimatastarko'nusandhiyatam", is a line from it. It means that you must 
give up the habit captious arguments and that in dealing with a question 
you must employ proper reasoning, duly respecting the views of the 
Vedas.  
Without reason to guide us it is like roaming aimlesssly in the forest. But 
reason must be founded on authority. Nyaya finds the meaning of Vedic 
passages in this manner.  
Kanada too created a Nyaya sastra: it is called Vaisesika. One object is 
distinguished from another on the basis of the special characteristics or 


 
"particularities" of the two. The name "Vaisesika" is derived from the fact 
that it inquires into such particularities. There is a good deal of science in 
this Nyaya sastra. Atmic matters like the individual self, the cosmos, 
Isvara, moksa or liberation are examined (in Vaisesika "moksa" is known 
by the name of "apavarga").  
The Nyaya inquiry into truth is through the four pramanas or instruments 
of knowledge of "pratyaksa", "anumana", "upamana" and "sabda". 
Pratyaksa is direct perception, what is perceived by the eyes and the ears 
and so on. It is anumana or inference that is central to Nyaya. What is 
anumana? We see smoke rising from the summit of a distant mountain: 
we notice only the smoke, not the fire, which is concealed by the rock 
perhaps. But even if we do not see the fire we may infer that the forest 
has caught fire. This is anumana. Here the fire is called "sadhya" and the 
means by which we infer its presence is "sadhana", "linga" or "hetu".  
In our Vedantic system we must reflect upon the teaching imparted by 
our guru. This is manana and it means going over an idea (in this case the 
instruction received from the teacher) again and again in the mind, 
making use of our own ability to reason. Here anumana is of help. Is it not 
through inference that we are able to know things that cannot otherwise 
be perceived? The individual self and the Paramatman are not directly 
perceived by our senses. Nor do we know the liberation of senses. Nor do 
we know the nature of liberation or how to attain it. We have to know 
such things by inference. Knowing an object on the basis of another 
known object is anumana. When we hear the roar of the thunder we 
know, by inference, that there are clouds [that the sky is overcast]  
By performing Vedic works [let us take it] we have become pure within. 
We have also found a good teacher and we have faith in his instruction. 
But, if we happen to hear something different from what he tell us, 
doubts naturally arise in our minds. These doubts have to be cleared; 
they must be discussed and a decision arrived at. Here we must have 
recourse to a pramana (source or instrument of knowledge) like anumana 
or inference. Both Nyaya and Vaisesika conduct inquiries based on 
anumana.  


 

Padarthas 
Our religious system is such that if we go to the root of all padarthas 
(categories)and understand their source, the Truth will become illumined. 
We must make use of all pramanas (source or instruments of knowledge) 
for this purpose. (That by which we perceive objects is a pramana).  
Objects that are apprehended by the senses, that is by the eyes, ears, etc, 
are not many. Others have to be known by inference.  
And inference helps us in understanding the truths of the truths of the 
Vedas. That is why Nyaya is called an Upanga (an auxiliary "limb") of the 
Vedas.  
In Nyaya the padarthas are divided into seven categories. Of them there 
are two divisions: "existent" and "non-existent" -- "bhavo abhavasca", the 
latter being the seventh padartha. "Bhava" or the existent is further 
divided into six sub-catagories.  
How does that which does not exist become a padartha? What does 
"padartha" mean? In a literal sense, it is the meaning of a pada or word. 
Is there not a word which means No? There is non-existence of certain 
objects in some places, and not in some others. Here there are no 
flowers. There, in the pavilion where the puja is performed, there are 
flowers which means that the non-existence of flowers does not apply to 
the pavilion. So there is non-existence [of objects] in some places and on 
certain occasions. Thus the fact of non-existence [of a thing] in certain 
places and at certain times is also to be known as padartha.  
The seven padarthas are: dravya (substance), guna (quality), karma 
(action), 
samanya 
(association), 
visesa 
(difference), 
samavaya 
(inheritance) and abhava (non-existence). Dravya, guna and karma are 
padarthas that belong to the category of "sat" or being. We can 
demonstrate their existence but not of the other four padarthas. Dravya 


 
can also be shown in its gross form. But qualities like jnana, desire, 
happiness, sorrow, etc, cannot be shown as independent entities. 
Redness is the quality of, say, the lotus and it cannot be separated from 
that flower. That on which it is dependent is dravya. And, though qualities 
like happiness and sorrow cannot be "shown", we can know whether a 
person is happy or sad: we "see" in him happiness or sorrow. When we 
see a red lotus we know what is red. Karma is work, activity. Such "work" 
as movement, running, is karma and it is also dependent on dravya. 
When a man runs, his "running" cannot be separated from him. But we 
do see him running and know that he is not sitting or lying down. That 
means we “see" the running. Samanya is the fourth padartha and it 
means "jati" ("species"). We see a number of cows. They have the 
common quality of being cows. This common quality is of jati. Among 
objects or individuals that have a common quality there may still be 
differnces. This is what is called "visesa". Suppose there is a herd of cows 
(they belong to the same jati): among them we will be able to tell apart 
individual cows because of their distinctive characteristics.  
What is "samavaya"? The quality of a substance cannot be separated 
from it(the substance), nor the work associated with it. The parts of a 
whole object cannot be separated if it is still to remain the object that we 
know it to be. Here we have samavaya, the quality inhering in something. 
Fire has a radiant form. But this radiance cannot be separated from it. 
Here again is an example of samavaya. When one dravya or substance 
combines with another substance we have "samyoga". The two can 
remain independently without combining. There is samavaya when a 
substance combines with guna or quality and there is samavaya again 
when dravya and karma combine. The quality and the karma cannot be 
separated from the substance.  
I have already spoken about "abhava".  
Each of the seven padarthas is now further subdivided. Dravya or 
substance is divided into nine: prithvi (earth), ap(water), tejas (fire), vayu 
(air), akasa (space), kala (time), dik (direction), the Atman (Self), 
manas(mind). The first five are called "pancabhutas". Corresponding to 


 
them in the body are the five sense organs, the eyes that see, the ears 
that hear, the tongue that tastes, the organ of touch that feels warmth 
and cold, the nose that smells. The organ of touch is not skin alone; the 
entire body possesses the sense of touch. It is because it exists within the 
body too that we feel stomach ache, chest pain, etc.  
These faculties are associated with individual parts of the body. Sight is in 
the eyes; the ears cannot see. Music is heard by the ears; the eyes and 
the nose cannot hear it. If an object comes into contact with your tongue, 
you know its taste but not its smell - the nose does not know that 
sugarcane is sweet. So these five qualities can be recognized individually 
by the five sense organs. The eye recognizes the quality called tangible 
form, "rupa", which means colour, size, shape, etc. White, yellow, green, 
red, brown are some of the colours. The nose perceives pleasant and 
unpleasant smells. Heat and cold are known by the skin. The tongue 
apprehends the six different flavours (rasas). Thus there are five different 
sense organs for five different qualities and they are called jnanendriyas.  
Without the sense organs or indriyas the quality of an object will not be 
recognised. If we had six organs we could perhaps know six gunas or 
qualities and if we had a thousand sense organs we could perhaps 
appreciate a thousand qualities. We have no knowledge of all objects of 
the universe. If we did not possess the sense organ of touch we would 
not be able to feel heat and cold. We cannot claim that we have 
knowledge of cold or heat (that is we can feel heat and cold) because 
they exist. We recognise qualities only be means of our sense organs. The 
blind and the deaf do not perceive form or sound though form and sound 
do exist in the world. All the five qualities, form, flavor, smell, touch, and 
sound, are known respectively with the eye, tongue, nose, skin and ear. 
The Lord had invested the pancabhutas, the five elements, with these five 
qualities. The earth has all the five gunas or qualities. It has form and 
flavour. Our body, aubergines, jaggery- all are earth. Earth has smell. The 
fragrant flower is indeed earth. Earth has qualities like cold and heat 
known by the sense of touch and it has also sound. If you drop one end of 
a string to earth and keep the other end of it to your ear you will hear 
sound. Water has four qualities but not smell. It smells only when we mix 


 
perfume in it. If we beat its surface it sounds. Though earth has all the 
five qualities its special quality is smell which is absent in the other four 
elements. The special quality of water is flavour. Without water there is 
no rasa. That is why the sense organ of taste, the tongue, is always wet. If 
the tongue becomes dry you will not be able to appreciate any taste. As a 
matter of fact, the word "rasa" itself also means water. Fire has neither 
smell nor flavour but it has form, sound and touch, form being its special 
quality. Vayu or air has no form, but it has sound and touch- the last-
mentioned is its special quality. That is how we know when the wind 
blows on us. Akasa or space has only one quality, sound.  
To sum up, akasa or space has only one quality; vayu or air has, in 
addition to sound, the quality of touch; agni or fire has the three qualities 
of sound, touch and form; water has the qualities of sound, touch, form 
and rasa; but earth has all the five qualities. Such are the pancabhutas or 
five elements.  
The remaining four subdivisions of dravya (substance) are time, dik, the 
Atman and manas. Terms like "hour", "yesterday", "today", "year", 
"yuga", indicate time. "Dik" means direction or area, the points of the 
compass, what we mean by "here" or "there". In short it denotes "space", 
"akasa". The Atman is the entity that knows all this. He or It is of two 
types, the intelligent and the unintelligent, the Paramatman and the 
jivatman. The Paramatman is a mere witness to all that passes in the 
world while the jivatman or the individual self is trapped in it(the world) 
and given to sorrow. The individual souls are many while the Paramatman 
is one and only one. Both the jivatman and the Paramatman are spiritual 
entities of jnana.  
According to Vedanta, knowledge itself is the Atman; the Atman is jnana 
in a plenary sense. Apart from it, and outside it, there is nothing to be 
known. Indeed we cannot speak of different jivatmans. According to 
Nyaya, the Atman is a dravya or substance, knowledge (jnana) being its 
quality.  
Nyaya describes the Paramatman alone as jnana that is full since there is 
nothing that is not known to him. The individual self possesses only a 


 
little knowledge. So we are called "kinjijnas", "kinjit" meaning little. The 
Paramatman is "Sarvajna", the One who knows all. We are in a mixed 
state of being dependent both on jnana and ajnana. The Paramatman is 
dependent on (or is) jnana alone. The Atman is "vibhu", all-pervading. 
Nyaya also says that the Paramatman is all-pervading, but it does not 
speak of the two being the same, the Atman and the Paramatman. The 
reason for this is that, according to Nyaya, knowledge exists 
independently in each individual as a separate factor. The place where it 
dwells is the mind- and it is the mind that causes sorrow and happiness.  
In Nyaya guna is divided into 24 categories and karma into five. The Truth 
will be known, says Nyaya, if we have knowledge of the padarthas and 
develop detachment that will lead to release. Liberation is a state in 
which we know neither sorrow nor happiness. Even if we adhere to the 
Vedantic concept of liberation, Nyaya affords a method to reflect upon 
the instruction received from our guru. We are able to know the 
pancabhutas or the five elements, the individual self and the mind. But 
how are we to know the Paramatman? He alone is not known. It is to 
know him that we must employ anumana, the method of inference. To 
know the rest "pratyaksa pramanas" or direct sources of knowledge are 
sufficient. The Vedas proclaim the existence of Isvara; Nyaya establishes it 
with anumana or inference.  
Let us now see a small example of inference. We know that the throne on 
which I am seated must have been made by someone. Because we don't 
know him, can we describe the fact of its having been made itself to be 
false? We have seen other thrones being made and from that we deduce 
that there must be somebody who must have made this one also. 
Similarly, there must be someone who must have created this universe. 
He is omniscient, omnipotent and compassionate- and he is the protector 
of all. Such matters are dealt with in Nyaya: a proposition is stated, 
objections raised and answered.  
 
 


 

Pramanas 
The pramanas other than "pratyaksa" and "anumana" are "upamana" and 
"sabda". What is "upamana"? It is knowing what is not known by means 
of comparison with the known. There is an animal called "gavaya". We do 
not know what it looks like. It is like a wild buffalo: to look at it is like a 
cow, so it is said. We go to the neighbourhood of the forest and there we 
spy an animal resembling a cow, so we conclude that it must be a gavaya. 
Here we have recourse to upamana.  
"Sabda-pramana" is verbally testimony, the pronouncements of the 
Vedas and the words of great men. When the scriptures speak of things 
that we do not know, their words must be accepted as authority. The 
naiyayikas, or exponents of Nyaya, believe that the Vedas are the words 
of Isvara. The words of great men who are wedded to truth are also 
verbal testimony.  
These four pramanas are accepted in Kumarilabhatta's school of 
Mimamsa. To them he has added two more: "arthapatti" and 
"anupalabdhi". Thus there are six pramanas in all and they are part of the 
non-dualistic doctrine also.  
Our Sastras give a clear idea of arthapatti through an illustration. "Pino 
Devadatto diva na bhunkte". What does the statement mean? "The fat 
Devadatta doesn't eat during daytime". Though Devadatta does not eat 
during daytime, he still remains a fat fellow. How? We guess that he must 
be eating at night. There is something contradictory about an individual 
not eating and still not being thin. Here arthapatti helps us to discover the 
cause of Devadatta being fat. Our guess that he eats at night does not 
belong to the category of anumana. To make an inference there must be 
a hint or clue in the original statement itself. There must be a "linga" like 
smoke from fire, thunder from clouds. Here there is no such linga.  


 
It is the same with upamana. When we come to the conclusion that the 
animal we have seen is the beast called "gavaya", it does not mean that 
we made an inference or anumana. We did not recognise the animal by 
means of any sign but from the fact that its appearance tallied with the 
description we had been given.  
The last pramana is anupalabdhi. It is the means by which we come to 
know a non-existent object. I spoke about "abhava", the last of the seven 
padarthas according to Nyaya. Anupalabdhi is the means by which we 
know abhava. Suppose someone tells us, "Go and see if the elephant is in 
the stable". We go to the stable to see for ourselves whether or not the 
elephant is there. We find that there is no elephant in the stable: to 
recognise such absence (non-existence) is anupalabdhi.  
Arthapatti and anupalabdhi are part of Mimamsa and Vedanta, not of 
Nyaya. (However, anupalabdhi is mentioned only in the Kumarilabhatta 
school of Mimamsa, not in the Prabhakara School)  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 


 

Rational Way to Know God 
Vaisesika takes up the thread of inquiry from where Nyaya leaves it with 
its pramanas. According to the great sage Kanada, the founder of 
Vaisesika, everything ultimately is made up of atoms. Isvara created the 
world by different combinations of atoms. In both Nyaya and Vaisesika, 
the cosmos and the individual self are entities separate from Isvara.  
As we inquire into the origin of conscious life and the insentient atom and 
go step by step ahead in our inquiry, we realise in the end the monistic 
truth that everthing is the manifestation or disguise of the same 
Paramataman. Nayaya is an intermediate stage to arrive at this truth.  
Naya or Tarka (logic) gives rationalism its due place, but this does not lead 
to materialism, atheism or the Lokayata system. Through intellectual 
inquiry, Nyaya comes to the conclusion that, if the world is so orderly 
with so many creatures in it, all of them interlinked, there must be an 
Isvara to have created it. Nyaya recognises that there are areas that 
cannot be comprehended by human reason and that the truths that 
cannot be established rationally must be accepted according to how the 
Vedas see them. This means that Nyaya takes every care to see that 
reasoning does not take a course that is captious (remember what I told 
you about the Acarya's view that tarka should not become kutarka) and 
that it leads to the discovery of truth.  
To examine something with the instrument of knowledge is to purify that 
very knowledge. It is also a means of obtaining intellectual clarity. When 
there is lucidity the truth that is beyond the reach of this very intellect 
will appear to us in a flash. [In other words there will be an intutive 
perception of the truth].  
It is indeed commendable to have faith in the Lord and in the sastras even 
without carrying out any intellectual inquiry. But are we able to have such 
complete faith that will take us across worldly existence? Instead of idling 


 
away one's time, without making any intellectual effort to discover the 
truth, would it not be better to keep thinking even if it be to arrive at the 
conclusion that there is no God? A person who does so is superior to the 
idler who has no intellectual concern whatsoever. Perhaps the athesit, 
where he to continue his inquiry, would develop sufficient intellectual 
clarity to give up his atheism. But the idler has no means of advancing 
inwardly.  
This is one reason why even "Carvakam" was accepted as a system in 
India. "Caru-vakam"="Carvakam”: that which is pleasing to the ear. 
Carvakam believes that there is no need to worry about God or any Sprit 
or to observe vows and fasts or to control one's senses. Live as you please 
according to your whims and according to the dictates of your senses.  
Sorrow, however, is inevitable even in a life in which we consciously seek 
pleasure. Indeed sorrow will predominate. The purpose of religion is 
overcoming sorrow.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  


 

We Need Al Types of Knowledge 
We must make good use of our brain and mind. Indeed, we must make 
them sharp as if by frequent honing so that they will help us in finding the 
truth. Why did Sankara master all the sastras, all the arts, all the sciences, 
Sankara who thought the world was Maya? Why did he ascend the 
"sarvajna-pita" (seat of omniscience)?  
I said Nyaya was also known as Tarka, "Anviksiki". We learn from the 
Sankara-Vijaya that the Acarya mastered Nyaya or Anviksiki, Kapila 
Maharsi's "Kapilam" (Sankhya), Patanjali's Yoga-sastra ("Patanjalam"), 
Kumarilabhatta's Mimamsa ("Bhatta-sastra").  
Anviksikyaiksi tantre paracitiratula  
Kapile kapi lebhe  
Pitam Patanjalambhah paramapi viditam  
Bhatta ghattartha-tattvam  
Advaita embraces even those sastras that apparently do not speak about 
it. That is why I am speaking about all such sastras though I am called 
"Sankaracarya". Non-dualism inheres dualism, qualified non-dualism, 
Saivism, Vaisnavism and so on. It enfolds even those systems that are 
critical of it. Advaita does not state that other systems are totally false. If 
it opposes them it is only to the extent needed to counter their argument 
against itself. It concedes them the place they deserve.  
 
   
   
   
    


 

Tarka Treatises 
Gautama Maharsi who composed the Nyaya-sutra is called "Aksapada". 
He was always so wrapped up in thought that he was often oblivious of 
the outside world. We call scientists, professors and such people "absent-
minded" and retail jokes about them. Gautama too was absent-minded. 
One day as he was walking along, brooding over some philosophical 
problem, he fell into a well. Isvara then rescued him and fixed eyes to his 
feet. Thus, as he walked, he would be guided by the pair of new eyes. 
That is how he came to be called "Aksapada", one with eyes on his feet. 
So goes the story.  
Vatsyayana wrote a bhasya for the Nyaya-sutra and Uddyotakara a 
vartika. Vacaspatimisra, who was a great non-dualist, wrote a gloss called 
Nyaya-vartika-tatparya-tika. Udayanacarya write a gloss on this gloss: it is 
known as Tatparya-tika-parisuddhi. He also wrote the Nyaya-kusumanjali. 
To recall what I said before, he was foremost among responsible for the 
decline of Buddhism in India. Jayanta wrote a commentary on the Nyaya-
sutra called Nyaya-manjari. Annambhatta wrote the Tarka-samgraha and 
himself wrote a commentary on it called Dipika. Usually students of 
Nyaya start with the last-mentioned two works.  
It is believed that the Ravana-bhasya, a commentary on Kanadas 
Vaisesika-sutra, is no longer available. However, a bhasya-like work called 
Padartha-dharma-samgraha by Prasastapada is still extant. Udayana has 
commented on it. Recently, Uttamur Sri Viraraghavacariyar wrote a book 
called Vaisesika-rasayana.  
Vaisesika came to be called "Aulukya-darsana". "Uluka" means an owl-the 
English word "owl" is from "ulu". What belongs to, or what is concerned 
with, the owl is "aulukya". Kanada himself was called "Uluka". If Gautama, 
always lost in thought, fell one day into the well, Kanada was so absorbed 
in his philosophical investigations by day that he had to go begging for his 
food at night. He got the nickname of "Uluka" from this fact, that is he 


 
was not seen during day time and went about at night. (Bhagavan says in 
the Gita. that the night of the ignorant man is the day of the wise and 
enlightened man, jnanin. So all jnanins are owls in this sense).  
Vaisesika is also called "Kanada-sastra" after the name of its founder, 
Kanada. Not the Tamil "kanada". A scholar has said jocularly that Kanada 
founded his system after having seen (kandu). Grammar and Vaisesika 
are believed to be of great help in the study of all subjects. So the saying:  
Kanadam Paniniyam ca sarvasastropakarakam.  
Like grammar (which originated in Nataraja's damaru), Nyaya and 
Vaisesika are also connected with Siva. In the Vaisesika treatises 
obeisance is paid to Mahesvara who is regarded as the Paramatman. The 
Saiva schools hold the view that Isvara is the "nimitta" or cause of the 
universe.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 


 

Cause of Creation 
“Causes" or "karanas" are divided into two categories: "nimitta" and 
"upadana". You need earth or clay as a material to make a pot. So earth is 
the upadana for the pot. But how does it become a pot? Does it become 
a pot by itself? It has to be shaped by a potter. So the potter is the cause- 
he is the nimitta. (The "nimitta" we spoke about in jyotisa is different.)  
Nyaya and Vaisesika believe that Isvara created the universe with the 
ultimate particles called "anu-s". Here Isvara is the nimitta-karana and the 
"anu-s" are the upadana-karana. To shape the clay into a pot a potter is 
needed. Without him there is no earthen pot, or in other words, the pot 
without the potter is non-existent. So when he shapes it out of clay he is 
the cause and the pot the effect. This is called "arambha-vada" or "asat-
karya-vada". "Sat" means that which exists (the real) and "asat" that 
which does not. There is no pot in mere clay. The non-existent pot is 
produced from the clay. It is in similar fashion that Isvara created the 
universe with the "anu-s" -what he created did not exist in the particles. 
This is the doctrine of Nyaya.  
Adherents of Sankhya, as we know, do not believe in an Isvara. According 
to them Prakrti itself exfoliated into the universe. Such a belief is not to 
be mistaken for the contemporary athestic view. I say so because 
Sankhya also postulates a Purusa who is jnana, similar to the Nirguna-
Brahman. According to it the inert Prakrti can function in such an orderly 
fashion only in the presence of Purusa. The presence of Purusa is the 
cause but he is not directly involved in creation. Crops grow on their own 
in the sunshine. Water dries up, clothes become dry and it is all because 
of the sun. Does the sun worry about which crop is to be grown or which 
pond is to be dried up? Your hand becomes numb when you hold a lump 
of ice in it. Is it right to reason that it is the intention of ice to benumb 
your hand? Similar is the case with Purusa for he is not attached to 
creation. But with the power received from him, Prakrti creates the world 
out of itself. There is no Isvara as a nimitta-karana. According to Sankhya, 


 
Prakrti has transformed itself as the created world. This is called 
"parinama-vada".  
While asat-karya-vada is the principle on which the naiyayikas base their 
view of creation, supporters of Sankhya base their theory on sat-karya-
vada. Adherents of the former believe that the clay is the upadana 
(material cause) for the making of the non-existent pot while the potter is 
the nimitta or efficient cause. The sat-karya-vadins belonging to Sankhya 
argue thus: "The pot was there in the clay in the beggining itself. The oil-
monger presses the sesame seeds to extract the oil that is already 
present in them. Similarly, the pot concealed in the clay emerged as a 
result of the work of the potter. It is only by using the clay that you can 
make the pot. You cannot make a pot with sesame seeds nor do you get 
oil by pressing the clay. The pots are all anu-s of the clay; they came into 
existence by the anu-s being shaped. "  
Our acarya says: "There is neither arambha-vada nor parinama-vada here. 
It is the Brahman, with its power of Maya, that appears in the disguise of 
creation. For the potter who is the Paramatman there is no other entity 
other than himself called clay. So the arambha-vada is not right. To say 
that Paramatman transformed himself into the cosmos is like saying that 
the milk turns into curd. The curd is not the same as the milk. Would it 
not be wrong to state that the Paramatman became non-existent after 
becoming the cosmos? So the parinama-vada is also not valid. On the one 
hand, the Paramatman remains pure jnana, as nothing but awareness, 
and, on the other, he shows himself through the power of his Maya as all 
this universe with its living-beings and its inert objects. It is all the 
appearence of the same Reality, the Reality in various disguises. If a man 
dons a disguise he does not become another man. Similar is the case with 
all these disguises, all this jugglary of the universe. With all the apparent 
diversity, the one Reality remains unchanged. “This argument is known as 
"vivarta-vada".  
There is vivarta in the phenomenon of a rope appearing to be a snake. 
The upadana-karana(material cause) that is the rope does not change 
into a snake by nimitta-karana(efficient cause). So the arambha-vada 


 
does not apply here. The rope does not transform itself into a snake; but 
on account of our nescience (avidya) it seems to us to be a snake. 
Similarly, on account of our ajnana or avidya the Brahman too seems to 
us as this world and such a vast plurality of entities.  
Nyaya lays the steps by which we may go further to realise the truth on 
which our Acarya has shed light.  
Nyaya and Vaisesika teach us how we may become aware of padarthas 
(categories) through reasoning and become detatched from them to 
realise "apavarga" in which there is neither sorrow nor joy. But they do 
not take us to a higher realm. Dualism also has its limitations thus. To 
grasp the One Reality that is non-dual and realise inwardly that we too 
are that Reality is to experience absolute liberation.  
It must be said as one of the distinctive features of Nyaya that it inspires 
us to go in quest of apavarga by creating discontent in in our worldly 
existence. Another of its distinguishing features is that it employs all its 
resources of reasoning to contend against the doctrines of the Buddhists, 
the Sankhyas and Carvakas to establish the principle of Isvara as 
Karta(Creator).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Some Stories and Some Arguments 
Gangesa Misropadhyaya deals with 64 methods of logic in his 
Tattvacintamani. Since we were taxing our brains with philosophical 
questions, let me tell you a story, the story of Gangesa.  
Gangesa was dull-witted in his youth. He belonged to a "kulina" Brahmin 
community of Bengal. "Kulina" means one from a good "kula" or clan. It 
was a custom in Bengal to give away a number of "inferior" Brahmin girls 
in marriage to young men born in "kulina" families. A kulina would 
sometimes take more than fifty wives. Gangesa had only one wife and he 
lived with his in-laws. Who would give away more than one girl in 
marriage to a dull fellow?  
Bengalis eat fish. Six months in a year the whole land is inundated. There 
is no place then to grow vegetables. So during these months Bengalis eat 
fish. In the eastern parts of Bengal fish is called "jala-puspa" and regarded 
as a vegetable.  
Fish was regularly cooked in the house of Gangesamisra's in-laws. People 
would call him "Ganga". Since he was slow-witted he was thought to 
deserve only the bones of fish at mealtime. Others were served the flesh 
and everybody would make fun of him. Gangesa, unintelligent though he 
was, could not stand it any more. One day he ran away from home, went 
to Kasi without telling anyone. Nobody bothered about it at home. "Let 
the stupid fellow go wherever he likes,” they told themselves.  
Many years passed. One day, Gangesa returned home. People thought 
that he must still be an idiot. When he sat down to eat he was as usual 
served the bones of fish. Thereupon Gangesa exclaimed "Na'ham Ganga 
kintu Gangesamisrah" (I am not Ganga but Gangesamisra). Were he still 
the the dim-witted Ganga of the past it would have been all right to serve 
him the bones. Now there is a "Misra" tagged on to his name. It meant 


 
that he had returned home with a qualification or a title, that he was now 
a learned man. The message was brief but clear.  
The in-laws realised that Ganga was now a great man. It was the same 
Gangesamisra who later wrote the Tattvacintamani. Many have written 
commentaries on it. The one by Raghunathasiromani is called Dhitti. It 
was after his time that the title "Siromani" came into use. Gadadhara has 
written a big tome to comment on ten sentences of Tattvacintamani, and 
not one sentence of it is superfluous. If a student reads five arguments 
presented in Gadadhari (Gadadhara's work) he would become a wise 
man; if he studies ten, he would be wiser still. Pramanya-vada is dealt 
with in it and it is believed that he who studies it will be brighter than all 
others. Gadadhari is still read by students of logic.  
To explain pramanya-vada is to tax one's brain. But during the time of our 
Acarya even parakeets, it is believed, were capable of discussing it. 
(Arguments about pramanas is pramana-vada.)  
Sankara Bhagvatpada went to Mahismati, the home town of 
Mandanamisra, where he happened to see women carrying water to 
their homes from the river. He asked one of them about Mandanamisra's 
house. In that city even ordinary women were learned. So their reply to 
the Acarya's question came in verse. Here is one of the stanzas from it:  
Svatah pramanam paratah pramanam  
Kirangana yatra ca sangiranti  
Dvarastha nidantara sanniruddhah  
Janihi tan-Mandanapanditaukah  
From such incidents we know how wrong it is to say that in olden days 
only men in India were educated and that the women were condemned 
to remain unlettered. Not only females of the human species, even birds- 
in the present case "young parakeet women" (kiranganas) - discussed 
philosophy. “When you come to the doorstep of that house where the 
female parakeets discuss svatah-pramana and paratah-pramana, know 
that house to be that of Mandanamisra, “is what the women said to 
Sankara.  


 
Svatah-pramana and paratah-pramana are part of the pramanya-vada I 
spoke to you about earlier. Let us now try to have some idea of this vada. 
An interesting story comes to mind.  
A Southerner went to Navadvipa in Bengal to learn logic. Most of the 
logicians in the country were then in Bengal. This Southerner who went 
there was a poet. Through his poetry he had earned a small fortune. 
Tarka was too tough for him and he could not make head or tail of it. All 
his efforts to study it were in vain. In the bargain he lost his poetic muse 
and now he had also spent all his money. If he had retained his poetic 
talent he could have still earned some money. With the little poetic talent 
left in him he lamented thus:"Namah pramanya-vadayah mat-kavitvah 
paharine" (I bow to pramanya-vada that has robbed me of my poetic 
talent).  
Let us briefly examine the pramanya-vada which the parakeets were 
discussing.  
When we see an object we form a certain idea of it. Some kinds of 
knowledge are right and some, wrong. When we see a piece of glass we 
may think it to be sugar-candy. This is wrong knowledge. Right knowledge 
is "prama", wrong knowledge is "brahma". Then there is "samsaya-jnana" 
as well as "niscaya-jnana". "Samsaya-jnana" is knowledge about which we 
have doubts and "niscaya-jnana" is knowledge of which we feel certain. 
Sometimes, though our knowledge of an object (as we see it) is wrong, 
we think it to be right. An example is that of glass being mistaken for 
sugar-candy. Then there is the case of our perception of an object being 
recognised to be wrong at the very time we see it. For example, a tree 
seen reflected upside down in a pond: this is "apramana". At the very 
moment of our recognition an object we have two kinds of knowledge 
about it -pramana and apramana. What seems true to us at the very 
moment of our seeing an object is "pramanya-graha-jnana"; and what 
seems untrue at such a moment is "apramanya-graha-askandhikajnana". 
In brahma too as in prama there is pramana-jnana. That is why when we 
mistake glass for sugar-candy our knowledge seems pramana.  


 
When an object appears to be true (pramana) or false (apramana), is the 
perception subjective (arising out of ourselves) or objective (arising from 
the object itself)? If it is subjective it is "svatah-pramana"; if objective 
"paratah-pramana". The parakeets in Mandanamisra's house were 
discussing these two pramanas.  
Whether our perception is pramana or apramana is not a subjective 
matter. It is dependent on the quality of the object perceived. It is only 
when we know its usefulness in practice that we can confirm whether our 
perception is right or wrong. This is the view of Nyaya- whether our 
perception is right or wrong is objective. The view of Mandanamisra and 
other mimamsakas is the opposite. Mandanamisra's view is this: certainty 
about jnana is dependent on the jnana itself. But that our jnana is 
apramana is dependent on the outside object. "Pramanyam svatah; 
apramanyam paratah".  
The word "vada" itself is nowadays wrongly taken to mean stubbornly 
maintaining that one's view is right. As a matter of fact it truly means 
finding out the truth by weighing one's view against one's opponent's. It 
was in this manner that Sankara held debates with scholars like 
Mandanamisra and it was only after listening to the other man's point of 
view that he arrived at non-dualism as the ultimate Truth. Vada means an 
exchange of thoughts, not a refusal to see the other man's point of view. 
To maintain that one's view of a subject is the right one without taking 
into account the opinion of others is "jalpa", not vada. There is a third 
attitude. It is to have no point of view of one's own and being just 
contrary: it is called "vitanda".  
Nyaya received a new impetus, particularly in Bengal, after the dull-
witted Gangesa, having blossomed into a great intellect, returned from 
Kasi, that is from the 12th century onwards; and it became to be called 
"Navya-Nyaya", "navya" meaning new. There is also another reason for 
this name. Gangesa and others who came after him belonged to 
Navadvipa in Bengal. The area is now called "Nadiad". Sri Krsna Caitanya 
belonged to Navadvipa. He was a great scholar, a master of many sastras 
and had the name of Krsna always on his lips. He propagated bhakti, 


 
especially through bhajana (singing the praises if the Lord) as the path to 
liberation.  
Nyaya holds that the world is real (not Maya), that the Paramatman is 
different from the individual self. Even so it was opposed to atheism and 
established the existence of Isvara. Besides it laid the foundations for the 
path leading us to Advaita.  
Nyaya is an Upanga of the Vedas and is highly intellectual in character. 
Puranas come next in the fourteen branches of learning (caturdasa-vidya) 
but they are dismissed by educated people as a product of superstition.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 14 
PURANAS 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Magnifying Glass of the Vedas 
The Puranas are the magnifying glass of the Vedas. The principles and 
rules of dharma that are briefly dealt with in the Vedas are enlarged or 
elaborated upon in them in the form of stories. A subject briefly touched 
upon may not make a deep impression on the mind. If the same were 
told as an absorbing story it would at once make an impact on the mind 
of the listener or reader.  
The Vedas urge us to speak the truth ("Satyam vada"). How one becomes 
exalted by remaining truthful at all costs is illustrated by the story of 
Hariscandra. "Dharmam Cara" (Follow dharma, live a life of dharma) is a 
Vedic injunction consisting of just two words. The importance of the 
pursuit of dharma is explained through the long story of Dharmaputra 
[Yudhisthira] in the Mahabharata. "Matr-devo bhava" and "Ptir-devo 
bhava" ("Be one to whom the mother is god" and "Be one to whom the 
father is god"): these two admonishments are enlarged on, as it were, 
through the magnifying glass in the story of Sri Rama. Such dharmic 
virtues as humility, patience, compassion, chastity, which are the subject 
of Vedic ordinances, are illustrated through the noble examples of men 
belonging to ancient times, women of hallowed reputation. By reading 
their stories or listening to them we form a deep attachment to the 
virtues and qualities exemplified by them.  
All these men and women whose accounts are contained in the Puranas 
had to undergo trials and tribulations. We keep commiting so many 
wrongs. But consider these Puranic characters who had to suffer more 
than we suffer. Indeed some of them had to go through terrible ordeals. 
However, by reading their stories we do not form the impression that 
adherence to dharma means suffering. On the contrary, etched in our 
minds is the example of men and women of great inner purity who in 
their practice of dharma stood like a rock against all difficulties and 
challenges. At the same time, we moved by their tales of woe and 
thereby our own inner impurities are washed away. Finally, the glorious 


 
victory they achieve in the end and fame they achieve help to create a 
sturdy bond in us with dharma.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 


 

Puranas and History 
Our nation, it is often alleged, does not have a sense of history. In my 
opinion the Puranas are history. But to our educated people today history 
means the history of the past two thousand years since the birth of 
Christ. They do not believe that the events of earlier eras, including those 
mentioned in the Puranas, are history. Some of them admit, though, that 
there is an element of truth in Puranic stories as shown by recent 
researches. But these relate to theories like the division of the Indian 
people into races like Aryans and Dravidians, theories they fancy are 
supported by the Puranas. The rest, like the miracles or accounts of 
supernatural occurrences, they dismiss as fables or as a tissue of lies. 
Since they are unable to comprehend matters that are beyond our senses 
they treat the Puranas as mystery.  
Now children have no choice but to read the textbooks of history written 
by such people. But I believe that it is not a good to keep children 
ignorant of the Puranas. It is not my purpose to say that you should not 
read history, but I should like to mention that the puranas are also history 
and that our youngsters have a great deal to learn from them, a great 
deal that will help in moulding their conduct and character. No such 
purpose is served by the history taught in schools.  
One reason why they say history must be read is their belief that "history 
repeats itself". The idea is that the lessons of the past would be helpful to 
us in the future. We learn from history about the circumstances that 
usually lead to war and about how great civilizations rise and fall. We can 
be on guard against a repetition of these circumstances and this, we are 
told, is one of the "uses" of history.  
The same events are repeated kalpa after kalpa. According to our sastras, 
the Ramayana, the Mahabharata, the Bhagavata, the Dasavatara (the 
story of the ten incarnations of Visnu) and the Puranas are re-enacted 
kalpa after kalpa. Here too we see history repeating itself.  


 
Have we in reality learned any lesson from history, I mean from the 
history taught in schools? No. We learn how such men as Cenghiz Khan, 
Timur, Ghazni, and Malik Kafur appeared from time to time and caused 
devastation in various countries and how they massacred innocent 
people. But by reading accounts of their infamous deeds have we been 
able to prevent the appearence of such scourages again? Hitler and 
Mussolini rose to perpetrate the same kind of outrages on people.  
We are witness in our own times to governments losing their support 
because of charges of bribery and corruption made against them and 
other malpractices ascribed to them including partisanship and nepotism. 
When one such government falls, another group forms a new 
government and they too lose the support of the people in the 
subsequent elections for the same reasons. Here is an example of our 
failure to learn any lesson form history.  
History must be taught along with lessons in dharma; then alone will it 
serve the purpose of bringing people to the right path. The Puranas do 
precisely this.  
History contains no more than accounts of monarchs and other rules in 
chronological order. It does not give importance to their moral character: 
whether wicked rulers suffered an ill fate or whether just and righteous 
rulers earned a high place. According to the law of Karma, Isvara 
determines the fate of people on the basis of their actions, meritorious 
and sinful. Such justice is not necessarily meted out during the lifetime of 
a person. The fruits of a man's action are reaped in subsequent births. It 
is not the task of history to deal with such questions, nor do historians 
have the capacity to inquire into such matters. Whether a wicked ruler 
like Hitler was consigned to hell on his death and whether he had a lowly 
rebirth is a subject for the Puranas. Those who composed these texts had 
the reqisite insight to deal with such questiions; indeed the very purpose 
of these stories is this, to impart moral lessons. From history we do not 
derive any edification.  
The Puranas are also, as I said before, history. Besides, they contain 
lessons in papa and punya (demerit and merit). In fact, their choice of 


 
stories and narration are such as to bring people closer to the path of 
dharma. Again, the Puranas contain accounts of individuals who by virtue 
of their steadfast adherence to dharma attained to an elevated state in 
this birth itself. At the same time, they also tell is about persons who, by 
their acts of adharma, came to harm in this very birth itself. There are in 
fact no Puranic stories that do not contain some moral lesson or other.  
"The experience of the past narrated in history are a pointer of future 
events. The stories of good men who performed virtuous deeds and 
benefited from them should be a source of inspiration for us. In the same 
way, the stories of wicked men who brought evil to the world and 
themselves suffered on account of their acts contain a warning for us". Is 
the stufy of history really usefull in this way? It is not. To improve 
ourselves morally and spiritually we must turn to the Puranas.  
The purpose of the Puranas is not to give [as history does] a chronological 
account of kings or their quarrels without imparting lessons on good and 
evil. We do not need such history since it does not contain any guide for 
the condcut of our life. History must be capable of bringing us Atmic 
rewards.  
The Puranas too deal with the lineages of various ruling houses. They give 
accounts of dynasties descended from the moon and the sun 
(candravamsa and suryavamsa) and contain list of successive rulers of 
varous kingdoms. But in most cases only the names of rulers are 
mentioned or only brief references made to them. Detailed accounts are 
given only of rulers whose lives have a lesson for us. For instance, the 
Bhagavata tells the story of Uttanapada, the father of Dhruva, and of 
Dhruva's son, but only very briefly. However, the story of Dhruva himself 
is told in detail, Dhruva who is an example for all of us in devotion, 
determination and courage.  
English historians dismiss the Puranas as false. But on the pretext of 
carrying out impartial research they twist history to suit their ends like, 
for instance, their "divide and rule" policy. It is in this way that they have 
propagated the Aryan-Dravadian theory. If the Puranas are a lie, what 
about the history written by these Englishmen? Efforts are going on to 


 
reconstruct our history. But prejudicial acounts cannot be ruled out in 
these new attempts also. What ever claim the historians make to 
impartiality, it is hard to say how far the new history (or histories) are 
likely to be truthful.  
Vyasa, who composed the eighteen Puranas, the great men who wrote 
the various Sthala Puranas, and the Tamil author Sekkizhar were unbiased 
in their accounts.  
It is not right to view history merely as an account of the rise and fall of 
empires or of wars, invasions, dynasties amd so on. Each and every 
subject has a history of its own. But we find that political history is given a 
dominant place. The emphasis in the Puranas is on dharma and, 
incidently, they also deal, in a subsidiary manner, with the ruling 
dynasties, with holy men as well as with ordinary folk. They contain 
details also of cultural life, the arts and the sciences. The thrust of the 
Puranas, however, is dharmic and Atmic.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  


 

Are the Puranas a Lie of Are They Metaphorical? 
Those who distrust the Puranas maintain that they contain accounts that 
are not in keeping with day-to-day realities. The stories in these texts 
refer to the arrival and departure of celestials and of their awarding 
boons to devotees. To the critics such accounts seem false. A woman is 
turned into a stone because of a curse, then the curse is broken with the 
grant of boon; or the sun is stopped from rising - such stories seem 
untrue to us because they are beyond the realms of possibility and refer 
to acts beyond our own capacity.  
Since such things do not happen these days, is it right to argue that they 
could not have occurred at any time? In the past the mantras of the 
Vedas had their own vibrant power because of the exemplary life led by 
those who chanted them. Then people practised severe austerities and 
cultivated yogic power of a high order. These facts are borne out by 
ancient books. Through their mantras, austerities and yoga, people then 
could easily draw to themselves powers of a divine nature. Where there 
is light there is shadow. So with divine powers there also existed demonic 
forces that could be seen in their gross form during those times. Today 
the war between the celestials and the demons is still being waged (the 
combat between good and evil). Eons ago people could perceive these 
forces of good and evil because of the special vision gained from their 
austerities. Scientists say that all light waves and sound waves cannot be 
grasped by the human sense organs. Some of them go step further to 
observe on the basis of their researches, that there are indeed "good and 
evil dieties".  
Even today there are present in this world any number of yogins and 
siddha-purusas. They are unscathed by fire or snow, they can produce 
rain or stop it, and have powers that cannot be comprehended by our 
senses. But we do not have faith in such phenomena and we keep 
doubting everything. In the past there must have been more people than 


 
we find today with such abilities or "siddhis". The Puranas contain 
accounts of many a miracle.  
Historians dismiss miracles as not part of history. Jnanasambandhar cured 
Kun Pandyan of his fever with the sacred ashes that had the potency 
imparted by his muttering of the Pancaksara. The Pandyan was made 
upright with his hunch removed ("kun" in Tamil means "hunch" or 
"hump"). Historians disbelieve such stories. Mahendra Pallava bound 
Apparsvamigal with ropes to a stone and threw him into the Kadila River. 
The saint remained floating down the stream. It was this phenomenon 
that persuaded the Pallava king to return to the Vedic religion from 
Jainism.  
Again, historians refuse to accept such accounts as true. There is, 
however, circumstantial evidence to show that a Pallava and a Pandyan 
king were restored to Saivism from Jainism. Historians agree that in the 
sixth and seventh centuries Jainism declined in Tamil Nadu and that the 
Vedic religion (particularly Saivism) came to be on the ascendent. If such 
a big change was to happen, that is if two important monarches of the 
time felt it necessary to change their religion, the sort of miracles 
mentioned in the stories of Jnanasambandhar and Appar must have 
occured. The fact that these rulers did not record the incidents in stone or 
copper-plate does not mean that they (the incidents) did not take place 
at all.  
There is a stroy told in the tradition relating to gurus about 
Ramanujacarya. He exorcised a ghost from the daughter of the Jaina king 
Pittideva who ruled Hoysala [in Karnataka]. Thereupon the monarch 
embraced Vaisnavism. Historians do not lend credence to such stories of 
exorcism. Ramanuja lived in the 11th century. Jainism languished in the 
Hoysala kingdom and Vaisnava worship and temples prospered. Pittideva 
himself came to be called Visnuvardhanadeva. This is now confirmed as a 
historical fact. How can you deny that these changes occured as a result 
of the incidents narrated in the story told above? English-educated 
people dismiss such accounts in the Puranas as lies since they cannot be 
proved scientifically. This attitude is not right.  


 
Even today human skeletons that are ten or twelve feet long are found 
here and there. Also are discovered the skeletons of huge animals which 
are extinct today but which agree with the descriptions contained in the 
Puranas. From such discoveries it seems likely that in the hoary past 
demons as tall as palm-trees must have existed, also animals like yalis 
with the body of a lion and trunk of an elephant. A human skeleton of 
which the legs alone measure 16 feet and the remains of an animal ten 
times bigger than an elephant have been discovered in the Arctic region.  
It has been determined that the animals belonged to many hundered 
thousand years ago. If we take the help of mythology also it would be 
seen that our Puranic stories are not untrue.  
Man, who was as tall as a palm, is now only six feet; at another time he 
was only the size of our thumb. The physical characterstics of creatures 
changes from age to age. This is stated in the Puranas.  
The Puranas are ridiculed because they contain references to vanaras, 
monkeys akin to humans, to creatures with the face of a man and the 
body of an animal; and than to a character with ten heads. It is all lies, 
critics say. Some however, believe that the Puranic stories are all 
"symbols", that they are allegorical representations.  
It is true that in the Puranas certain principles, certain truths, are 
conveyed in the form of stories. But, for that reason, the stories 
themselves cannot be called false. Even in modern times we read in the 
papers about the birth of a child with two heads and four hands or one 
that is neither human nor animal. They called such children freaks. A 
freak is the product of an error in nature, nature in which we do not 
usually meet with an error. What are called freaks today could have been 
created in the past in larger numbers for a special purpose. People in 
those days had supernatural powers and, in keeping with the same, the 
birth of such unusual children would not have been impossible. We 
cannot claim that what we know now is all that is to be known and that 
there could not have existed anything different from the existing orders 
of creatures.  


 
It does not stand to reason to treat what we do not know and what we 
cannot know as untrue. In our own times we see that what we normally 
regard as unbelievable happens now and then. We read reports of 
children and older people recalling their past births. In recent years such 
reports seem to have become more common than before.  
We distrust the Puranic story, according to which, Kasyapa had a wife 
called Kadru who gave birth to snakes. But many of you must have read a 
newspaper report last year (1958) of a snake born to a Marwari woman. 
When I read it I was reminded of another story.  
It refers to a family I had heard about before I became Svamigal. In that 
family neither the daughters nor the daughters-in-law wore screwpine 
flowers in their hair. When asked the reason for it they told a "story" - but 
by story is not meant anything made up.  
"Ten or fifteen generations ago", one of the family members, a woman, 
said, a snake was born in our family. The family was ashamed of its birth 
and concealed the fact from others, but, all the same, it was brought up 
in the home, fed milk, etc. This wonder child could not be taken out. The 
mother went out only when she had some work of the utmost 
importance. There is a saying: if you are married to a stone, well, the 
stone is your husband. Likewise, if a snake is born to you, the snake is 
your child. One day the mother had to go to the wedding of a very close 
relative.  
There was an old woman in the house. We do not know who she was, 
whether she was the grandmother of the snake child. In those days the 
family cared for even distant relatives who were otherwise helpless. 
Nowadays children are over-anxious to leave their parents to set up their 
own households. The joint family was then still a strong institution. A 
great-aunt or a distant cousin of the grandfather's was looked afterby the 
family. The old woman in our story was blind. The mother of the snake 
child left it in the care of this woman when she went to the wedding.  
What have you to do to a snake child? You don't have to bathe it or do up 
its hair. Do you have to dress it? Or carry it in your arms? But it had to be 


 
fed at fixed hours. Before leaving, the mother had told the woman: 'Feed 
it boiled milk. Feel around for the stone mortar and pour the milk in the 
cavity. The snake will feed on it. ‘She had probably trained the snake to 
feed in this manner.  
The old woman did as she had been told. But one day she probably 
overslept and it was past the time to feed the snake. When the snake 
scrept up to the mortar it didn't find any milk in it. It waited for some 
time but soon fell asleep crouching in the mortar itself. It was now that 
the old woman brought the milk. It had not been cooled and was piping 
hot. She could not naturally see the snake lying coiled in the mortar as 
she poured the hot milk into it.  
Alas, the milk was too hot for the snake and it died.  
The mother who had gone to attend the wedding had a dream in which 
the snake child appeared and said to her: Mother, I am dead. You come 
and cremate me amid the clump of screwpine. Hereafter no daughter or 
daughter-in-law in your family shall wear srewpine flowers in the hair.  
"From that day, no one in our family has worn screwpine flowers,” the 
woman said concluding her story.  
When I heard this account first I was astounded and wondered whether 
such things really happened.  
Many years later, after I had become Svamigal, people belonging to that 
family [in which the snake child was born] came to see me. It was not to 
speak about the snake child of the past. There was an old copper-plate 
inscription in their family. They had come to know about my interest in 
old inscriptions and they brought the copper-plate for me to see.  
The inscription on it belonged to the time of Acyutaraya who reigned 
after Krsnadevaraya. According to it a Brahmin had donated lands to 108 
fellow Brahmins. He had done so on behalf of his king. I will tell you why. 
The Brahmin's time is taken up by chanting the Vedas and performing 
rituals. He is not expected to earn a salary or do any work other than 


 
practising Vedic dharma (today of course Brahmins work in offices and 
other establishments). But he had to maintain his family. That is why the 
sastras permit him to receive gifts, and that is how in the past kings and 
wealthy citizens honoured Brahmins with donations. But, contrary to 
present-day allegations, Brahmins did not extort such offerings, but 
maintained their self-respect, receiving only the minimum needed for 
their upkeep. They would accept gifts of land only from Ksatriyas 
belonging to a high lineage.  
Some kings were unhappy that Brahmins did not accept gifts from them 
and so were denied the opportunity of earning merit. A way out 
presented itself to them (and to affluent citizens who were in a similar 
predicament). They prevailed upon an indigent Brahmin to accept a large 
gift, say, an entire village. But the gift was not wholly intended for him. 
He was expected to keep only a small plot of land to himself and divide 
the rest among other Brahmins. These latter did not incur 
"pratigraha-dosa" (the taint of receiving gifts) by accepting charity from a 
fellow Brahmin. This was how the affluent donor managed to earn punya.  
But would not such a practice bring demerit to the Brahmin who first 
receives the gift of land? It is not wrong on the part of a wealthy man to 
honour a Vedic scholar with a donation. But what about the Brahmin who 
receives it? Legally the property becomes his, and when he keeps only a 
small part of the land to himself and gives away the rest to others not a 
trace of papa sticks to him.  
It is however, bad to receive charity from a king. Great men like Tyagaraja 
spurned the gits offered them by rulers like Sarabhoji. Tyagaraja sang in 
anger: "Nidhi cala sukhama. . .? " (Is it money that brings happiness?)  
The Nattukkottai Cettis (Nagarattar) built many cattirams (dharmasalas) 
but Brahmins were reluctant to eat in them. So the Cettis made over the 
cattirams to a Brahmin and thereby it was made to appear that he was 
feeding the other Brahmins.  
According to the copper-plate inscription I mentioned earlier, a Brahmin 
had distributed the land received from Acyutaraya among 108 fellow 


 
Brahmins. All their names and gotras are mentioned in it, together with 
the subjects in which they were proficient. Among them figures the 
names of the ancestor of the people who came to see me, people 
descended from the family in which the snake child was born. The 
copper-plate had come as a family heirloom through so many 
generations. An interesting fact emerging from the inscription was that 
the name of the ancestor mentioned on thecopper-plate was Nagesvara. I 
was told by my visitors that the family had a Nagesvara every successive 
generation.  
I could guess at once that the name was associated with the snake child. 
It seemed to answer my doubts about its story. When I heard the news 
last year of the birth of a snake to a woman, I had more reason to believe 
the earlier story of the snake child.  
 
It is wrong on my part to blame you for not having sufficient faith in the 
Puranas. I myself had doubts about the story of the snake child - it had all 
the character of a legend. It was only when I read the newspaper report 
of the birth of a similar snake child that I believed it to be fully authentic.  
Today we are prepared to believe any story however bizzare it be if it is 
printed in the papers. But we treat the Puranas as no more than fables. 
"Those who composed the Puranas had nothing worthwhile to do. They 
had the stylus and palm-leaves and they went on inscribing story after 
story. Some of the stories seem ingenious enough but most are absurd”, 
such is our way of thinking.  
 
 
 
 
   


 

Meaningful even if Imaginary 
There is perhaps an element of the imaginary in the Puranas. It is also 
possible that they contain interpolations. But who is to determine what 
parts are imaginary and what passages constitute the interpolations? And 
who is to seperate the authentic from the spurious? If each one of us 
removes what seems interpolatory, nothing will be left of the stories in 
the end. So it would be better to preserve the Puranas in the form in 
which they have been handed down to us notwithstanding the apparent 
errors and distortions.  
If there are stories in the Puranas that read like fables, let them be so. Do 
they not bring us mental peace and take us nearer to the Lord? We go 
shopping and make good purchases. Are we to be happy on this score or 
are we to be unhappy that there was something wrong with the shop or 
the shopkeeper? There may be mistakes in the Puranic accounts of the 
earth and the heavens. After all, we can have accurate knowledge of such 
matters from our books on geography and astronomy. The point to 
remember is that the Puranas contain what geography, astronomy and 
history do not: the truth of the Ultimate Reality. Besides, they speak 
about devotion and dharma.  
It is argued that Rama could not have lived hundreds of thousands of 
years ago, i. e., in the Treta yuga, that it is not likely that the sort of 
civilization described in the Ramayana would have obtained in that 
distant period. Similar criticisms are made about stories in the Puranas 
and the epics. I do not accept them. But, for the sake of arguments, let it 
be that Rama did not live in the Treta age. And let us also presume that 
all those stories that happened, according to the Puranas, in the earlier 
Krta yuga, did not really belong to that age let us suppose that they date 
back to a comparatively recent period to 7, 000 or 8, 000 years ago. But 
for that reason would the story of Rama or others be less valuable? And 
would the lessons we learn from such accounts be less meaningful?  


 
The Puranas mention the ages in which the stories recounted in them 
really happened. According to critics it is not these ages alone that are 
wrong but also the date(s) traditionally ascribed to the Puranas 
themselves.  
According to the sastras, Vyasa composed the Puranas 5, 000 years ago, 
at the begining of the age of Kali. But they must have existed before him 
also. In the Chandogya Upanisad Narada speaks about the subjects 
learned by him and they include the Puranas. From this we infer that they 
must have existed during the time of the Vedas and the Upanisads. Just 
as Vyasa divided the Vedas into a number of branches for the benefit of 
people of later times with their diminished capacity to learn, he also 
composed the Puranas, which are detailed in their treatment, with the 
same purpose in view.  
Western-educated people think that the Puranas are not very ancient. So 
let them be. Devotees throng the Kandasvami temple in Madras. They 
feel the presence of the deity there. If they think that there is an end to 
their sorrows by worshipping at this shrine, what else is required of a 
temple? Is there any purpose in conducting an investigation into the 
origin of the temple, whether it had existed during the time of 
Arunagirinathar and whether he had sung his Tiruppagazh in it? Carrying 
out research into the Puranas is similarly futile. If we bear in mind that 
their purpose is the cleansing our mind there should be no need to 
harbour any doubts concerning them.  
There is no bigger superstition than the belief that the results of 
[historical] investigations represent the absolute truth. Much of today's 
research is hollow, much of it faulty. However, even the view of modern 
research scholars that the Puranas are imaginary serves to show up the 
purpose for which they are intended: to demostrate that one who does 
good prospers, that another who does evil suffers - or is raised up by the 
compassionate Lord.  
Somehow the Puranas are regarded as of secondary importance not only 
by people who claim to have a "modern" outlook, but also by those 
proficient in the sastras. Also pauranikas (those who have made a 


 
thorough study of the Puranas and give discourses) are regarded as 
inferior to those who give talks on other branches of learning. However, 
scholars who have earned the title of "Mahamahopadhyaya" like 
Yajnasvami Sastri and Kabe Ramacandracar have given puranic 
discourses. Today Srivatsa Somadevasarma is devoting himself fully to the 
printing of all the Puranas in Tamil (eventhough in an abridged form).  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
 


 

Vyasa's Priceless Gift to Us 
Vyasa divided the Vedas to make them easier for people to learn. It was 
to help mankind similarly that he composed the "astadasa Puranas" (the 
eighteen Puranas).  
I regard Vyasa as the first journalist, the ideal for all newspapermen of 
today. He composed the Puranas and made a gift of that great treasure to 
humanity. How have they (the Puranas) benefited us? They encompass 
stories, history, geography, philosphy, dharma, the arts. Vyasa's narration 
holds the interest not only of intellectuals but of ordinary people, even 
the unlettered. Is this not the aim of journalists, holding the interest of 
the general reader? However, most of them stop with this, exciting the 
interest of people or pandering to their taste. But Vyasa had a loftier 
purpose: he made the Puranas engrossing with the Purpose of taking the 
reader (or listener) to the goal of dharma and the Supreme Being. If 
holding the interest of people somehow is their sole objective, the papers 
are likely to propagate subjects or views that are contrary to the ideals of 
dharma. If journalists keep Vyasa as their forerunner and ideal, their 
writing will assume a noble character and contribute to the good of the 
world.  
Vyasa composed the Puranas in 400, 000 "granthas". A grantha is a stanza 
consisting of 32 syllables. Of these the Skanda Purana alone accounts for 
, 000. It is perhaps the world's biggest literary work. The remaining 17 
Puranas add up to 300, 000 granthas. Apart from them Vyasa composed 
the Mahabharata, also nearly 100, 000 granthas.  
Each Purana is devoted to a particular deity. There are Saiva, Vaisnava 
and Sakta Puranas. The 18 Puranas: Brahma Purana (Brahma), Padma 
Purana (Padma), Narada Purana (Naradiya), Markandeya Purana, Visnu 
Purana (Vaisnava), Siva Purana(Saiva), Bhagvata Purana, Agni Purana 
(Agneya), Bhavisya Purana, Brahma-Vaivarta Purana, Linga Purana, 
Varaha Purana (Varaha), Skanda Mahapurana, Vamana Purana, Kurma 


 
Purana (Kaurma), Matsya Purana (Matsya), Garuda Purana (Garuda) and 
Brahmanda Purana.  
Our Acarya in his commentry on the "Visnu-Sahasranama" cites many 
passages from the Visnu Purana. This Purana, composed by Vyasa's father 
Parasara, is an important source of Ramanuja's Visistadavita (qualified 
non-dualism).  
One of the precursors of qualified non-dualism was Alavandar. Ramanuja 
wanted to meet him but as he arrived at his place he saw him lying dead. 
Alavandar had wanted to entrust Ramanuja with three important tasks. 
When he passed away three fingers of his right hand were seen bent in. 
Ramanuja understood the meaning of this phenomenon, that he had 
three tasks to perform. When he spoke out what they were, the three 
fingers unbent. One of the three tasks was to write a commentry on 
Brahmasutra from the standpoint of qualified non-dualism. The second 
was to do a commentry on the Tiruvaymozhi and the third to perpetuate 
the memory of Parasara and Vyasa. As the author of the Visnu Purana, 
Parasara occupied a high position. It was with this in mind that Ramanuja 
named the two sons of his chief disciple, Kurattazhvar, Parasarabhatta 
and Vedavyasabhatta. The first grew up to be an important teacher of 
Vaisnavism.  
Though Parasara was the original author of the Visnu Purana it was Vyasa 
who wrote it in the present form. The sage who had divided the Vedas 
now composed the Puranas so that the truths embedded in the Vedas 
would make a deep impression on the minds of the common people. 
There was also another reason. Not all people have the right to learn the 
Vedas. It is believed that Vyasa composed the Puranas to enlighten such 
people (as have no access to the Vedas) on the scriptural truths.  
If Vyasa's father was the author of the original Visnu Purana, his son 
Sukracaraya it was who instructed King Pariksit in the Bhagavata. There is 
a difference of opinion about the Bhagavata, whether the term should 
refer to Visnu-Bhagavata or Devi-Bhagavata. The former is devoted to the 
incarnations of Visnu, particularly Krsna, while the latter deals with the 
divine sport of Amba. We need both and both are great works. In the 


 
systems propagated by Caitanya, Nimbarka and Vallabhacarya, the Visnu-
Bhagavata has a place no less important than that of the Vedas. At the 
same time, non-dualists who are opposed to their ideas also treat this 
Bhagavata with the utmost respect.  
Though there is a seperate Siva Purana, three-fourths of the Skanda 
Purana is devoted to Siva. It also includes the story Skanda or Muruga. 
Kacciyappa Sivacariyar of Kancipuram has written a Kanda Puranam in 
Tamil: it is devoted [as the name itself suggests] mainly to Subramanya or 
Skanda. "Durga-Saptasati" is a part of the markandeya Purana. "Candi-
homa", in which oblations are made to the goddess Candi, is performed 
with the recitation of the 700 stanzas of this hymnal work: each stanza is 
regarded as a mantra.  
"Bhavisya" means the future. The Bhavisya Purana contains many matters 
including the evil doings of the age of Kali. In the Puranas, apart from the 
story of the Mauryas and others rulers, there is also a reference to the 
advent of the white man. Critics discount such accounts believing that 
they could not have written by Vyasa at the begining of the Kali yuga. 
"Somebody must have written them recently. “They argue, “And put the 
name of Vyasa to them.” Admittedly, there must be interpolations here 
and there in the Puranas but it is not correct to say that the Puranas were 
all recently written. Men with yogic power can see past, present and 
future. Sitting in one spot they can see happenings all over the world. It is 
not easy for people to write works like the Puranas and ascribe their 
authorship to the great men of an earlier era.  
The Garuda Purana deals with the world of the fathers and related 
matters. It is customory to read it during the sraddha ceremony.  
"Lalitopakhyana", the story of Lalitambika, occurs in the Brahmanda 
Purana, so also the "Lalita-Sahasranama" (The one thousand Names of 
Lalita). The reading of the 18 Puranas is to be concluded with this Purana 
which contains a description of the coronation of Rajarajesvari. Devotees 
of the goddess take special pride in this fact.  


 
The Puranas contain many hymns, hymns that include the one hundred 
and eight or the one thousand names of various deities. But the "Visnu 
Sahasranama" (The one thousand names of Visnu) and the "Siva-
Sahasranama" (The one Thousand Names of Siva) are part of the 
Mahabharata. The "Pradosa-stotra" is in the Skanda Purana.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 


 

Upa-puranas and Others 
Apart from the 18 major Puranas there are an equal number of Upa-
puranas. Among them are the Vinayaka Purana and the Kalki Purana. 
There are also, in addition, a number of minor Puranas. The Puranas that 
speak of the glory of various months such as the Tula Purana, the Magha 
Purana and the Vaisakha Purana are parts included into the 18 major 
Puranas or Upa-puranas. There are also what are called Sthala Puranas, 
some of them part of the Puranas mentioned above and some existing 
independently. The puranas that sing the glory of the Kaveri and the 
Ganga exist both separately and as part of the major Puranas or of the 
Upa-puranas. In the Tula Purana, for instance, the importance of the 
Kaveri is the theme. It mentions how auspicious it is to bathe in that river 
in the month of Tula (October-November). 
If there are Puranas devoted to the deities there are also those dealing 
with devotees. The Tamil Periyapuranam tells the story of the 63 Saiva 
saints called Nayanmars. The same is available in the Sanskrit as 
Upamanyu Bhaktavilasa. Bhakta-Vijaya deals with poet-saints like 
Tukaram and Namadeva who were specially devoted to the deity 
Panduranga of Pandharpur.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Itihasas and Puranas 
For the learned and the unlettered alike in our country the Ramayana and 
the Mahabharata have for centuries been like their two eyes, pointing to 
them the path of dharma. The two poetic works are not included among 
the Puranas and are accorded a special place as "itihasas".  
"Pura " means "in the past". That which gives an account of what 
happened in the past is a "Purana", even though it may contain 
predictions about the future also. The term can also mean what was 
composed in the past. The genre called "novel" written in prose came 
after a long period in literature dominated by poetry and drama. When 
the novel was introduced into India it came to be called "navinam". If 
"navinam" means new, purana means old.  
A Purana must have five characteristic features - (laksanas). The first is 
"sarga" (creation of the cosmos); the second is "prati-sarga" (how eon 
after eon it expanded); the third is "vamsa" (the lineage of living 
creatures beginning with the childrern of brahma); the fourth is 
Manvantara (dealing with the ages of the 14 Manus, forefathers of 
mankind during the 1, 000 caturyugas); and the fifth is "vamsanucarita" 
(genealogy of rulers of the nation including the solar and lunar dynasties). 
Besides there are descriptions of the earth, the heavens the different 
worlds.  
"Itihasam"="iti-ha-sam" (it has happened thus). The "ha" in the middle 
means "without doubt", "truly". So an itihasa means a true story, also a 
contemporarary account. Valmiki composed the Ramayana during the 
lifetime of Rama. Vyasa, author of the Mahabharata, lived during the 
time of the five Pandavas and was witness to the events narrated by him 
in his epic.  
In the Puranas Vyasa has dealt with the stories or events of the past 
which of course is in keeping with their name (that is “Puranas"). But 


 
how? Vyasa could see into the past as he could into the future. So what 
he has written of the past must be an eyewittness account. However, his 
contemporaries would not have known about them. The Mahabharata 
and Ramayana are different. When these works were first made known 
to the world most people must have been familiar with the characters 
and events described in them. There is thus no reason to doubt their 
authenticity. The "ha" in" itihasa"confirms this.  
The word "itihasa" can also mean "thus speak they" (that is "great men 
say that it must be so").  
"Aitihya" is not an account of what is directly witnessed: it is to be 
accepted as a matter of faith. It is also derived from "iti" (thus great men 
have spoken "). What we actually observe is "this"; what is told by others 
is "thus".  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 


 

The Epics and their Greatness 
If the Puranas are described as constituting an Upanga of the Vedas, the 
itihasas(the epics) are so highly thought of as to be placed on an equal 
footing with the Vedas. The Mahabharata is indeed called the fifth Veda 
("pancamo Vedah"). Of the Ramayana it is said: "As the Supreme Being, 
who is so exalted as to be known by the Vedas, was born the son of 
Dasaratha, the Vedas themselves took birth as the child of Valmiki [in the 
form of the Ramayana]. "  
Vedavedye pare pumsi.  
Jate Dasarathatmaje  
Vedah Pracetasadasit  
Saksadramayanatmana  
 
(As the son of Pracetas Valmiki is called Praacetas.)  
The stories of the Ramayana and the Mahabharata are in the blood of our 
people, so to speak. Today not many read these epics, but forty or fifty 
years ago it was not so. If our people were then known in the rest of the 
world for their truthfulness and moral character, the most important 
reason for it was that they were steeped in the Ramayana and the 
Mahabharata. In the old days Tamil rajas made gifts of land to learned 
men to give year-round discourses on the Mahabharata in the temples. 
Until thirty or forty years ago people gathered in their hundreds to listen 
to the pusari tell stories from the Mahabharata through song to the 
accompaniment of his drum udukku. For common folks then the pusari's 
performance was both "cinema" and "drama". Cinema and drama have 
their own ill effects but not the art of the pusari. By listening constantly to 
stories from the Mahabharata people remained guileless, respecting such 
virtues as truthfullness and morality. The esteem in which the 
Mahabharata was held in the Tamil country may be known from the fact 
that the temple of the village deity was called "Draupadai Amman koyil".  


 
The bigger Puranas contain a number of independent stories, each 
highlighting a particular dharma. In the itihasa or epic it is one story from 
beginning to end. In between there are episodes but these resolve round 
the main story or theme. In the Puranas, as mentioned above, each story 
speaks of a particular dharma, while in the itihasa the main or central 
story seeks to illustate all dharmas. For instance, "Hariscandra 
Upakhyana" illustrates the dharma of truthfulness alone; the story of 
Sravana speaks of filial affection; that of Nalayani of a wife's chastity and 
uncompromising loyalty to her husband; the story of Rantideva speaks of 
self-sacrifice and utter compassion. But in the Ramayana and the 
Mahabharata, based on the life of Rama and the Pandavas respectively, 
all dharmas are illustrated through the example of the different 
characters portrayed in them.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 


 

Why Differences among the Gods? 
Each Purana is in the main devoted to a particular devata. In the Siva 
Purana it is stated: "Siva is the Supreme Being. He is the highest authority 
for creation, sustenance and dissolution. It is at his behest, and under 
him, that Visnu funtions as protector. Visnu is a mere bhogin, trapped in 
Maya. Siva is a yogin and jnana incarnate. Visnu is subject to Siva and 
worships him. Once when he opposed Siva he suffered humiliation at his 
hands". Stories are told to illustrate such assertions.  
In the Vaisnava Puranas you see the reverse. They contain stories to 
support the view that Visnu is superior to Siva. "Is Siva a god, he who 
dwells in the burning grounds with spirits and goblins for company?” 
these Puranas ask.  
In each Purana thus a particular deity is exalted over others. It may be 
Subrahmanya, Ganapati or Surya. Each such deity is declared to be the 
Supreme God and all others are said to worship him. When, out of pride, 
they refuse to worship him they are humbled.  
Doubts arise in our minds about such contradictory accounts. "Which of 
these stories is true?” we are inclined to ask. "And which is false? They 
cannot all of them be true. If Siva worships Visnu, how does it stand to 
reason that Visnu should adore Siva? If Amba is superior to the Trimurti 
(Brahma, Visnu and Mahesvara), how is it right to say that she remains 
submissive to Parameswara as his devoted consort? The Puranas cannot 
all of them be true. Or are they all lies? "  
Logical thinking seems to point to the conclusion that all Puranic stories 
cannot be true. But, as a matter of fact, they are. A deity that suffers 
defeat at one time at the hands of another emerges triumphant on 
another occasion. And a god who worships another deity is himself the 
object of worship at other times. How is this so and why?  


 
The Paramatman is one and only one. He it is that creates, sustains and 
destroys. And it is he who exfoliates as the the many different deities. 
Why does he do so? He has not cast people in the same mould. He has 
created them all differently, with different attitudes, the purpose being to 
make the affairs of the world interesting by imparting variety to them. 
The Paramatman himself assumes different forms to suit the 
temperament of different people so that each worships him in the form 
he likes and obtain happiness. This is the reason why the one and only 
Paramatman manifests himself as so many different deities.  
Everybody must have firm faith in, and devotion for, his chosen deity. He 
must learn to believe that this deity of his is the Paramatman, that there 
is no power higher. That is the reason why each manifestation or form of 
the Supreme Godhead reveals itself to be higher than other forms or 
manifestations. It is thus that these other forms are shown to have 
worshipped it or suffered defeat at its hands. Altogether it means that 
each deity worships other deities and is in turn worshipped by others. 
Also each god suffers defeat at the hands of other gods and, at the same 
time, inflicts defeat on them.  
In the Saiva Puranas all those aspects that proclaim the glory of Siva are 
brought together. Similarly, in the case of the Vaisnava Puranas that deal 
with Visnu. Amba, Subrahmanya and other deities are each of them dealt 
with in such a way as to show him or her to be the highest among the 
devatas.  
The purpose of exalting a particular deity over the another is not to 
depreciate the latter. The underlying idea is that a person who worships 
his chosen god has unflinching faith in him and becomes totally devoted 
to him. Such exclusive devotion is called "ananyabhakti". The idea here, 
however, is not to regard other devatas as inferior to one's own chosen 
deity- an example of "nahi ninda nyaya".  
Those who are capable of looking upon all deities as the manifestations of 
the one and only Paramatman have no cause for exclusive devotion to 
any one of them. It is only when we think that one deity is separate from- 
or alien to-another that the question arises of giving up one for another. 


 
If we realise that all are the different disguises of the One Reality, the 
various gods and goddesses potrayed in the Puranas, with all the 
differences among them, will be understood to be nothing but the lila or 
sport of Supreme Being. It is the One alone that seems divided into 
manifold entities. This is to help men of various attitudes and 
temperaments. If this truth is recognised we shall be able to see the 
stories in the Puranas- stories that seem contradictory- in the true light.  
In the story of Banasura we see that Siva is vanquished by Krsna. But in 
the story of Tiruvannamalai, Visnu meets with failure in finding the feet of 
Siva. Both stories must be treated as truthful. The first is to make 
devotees of Krsna worship him as the Paramatman and the second to 
make devotees of Siva adore him similarly. Although we think that one is 
winner and the other the loser or that the one is superior to the other or 
inferior to him, the two know themselves to be one. Does one triumph 
over oneself- or does one inflict defeat upon oneself? So all this is play. 
The Parmatman indulges in sport assuming multifarious forms.  
The purpose of the Puranas is to show people the right path. Pativratya is 
a virtue that is of the utmost importance. Amba herself exemplifies it. The 
Parasakti, the Supreme Power that she is, remains subject to her 
husband. Faith and devotion must grow in the world and for it the Lord 
himself must show the way. This is why in some temples Visnu is 
represented as a worshipper of Siva and in some other shrines Siva is 
seen as a devotee of Visnu. The same with other deities. I have spoken 
more about Siva and Visnu since Saivism and Vaisnavism are the two 
major divisions.  
To sum up, if a deity is glorified in the Puranas, and stories told in support 
of it, it is to create exclusive devotion to him as the Paramatman. And, if 
any god is potrayed as inferior to another, the true purpose of it is not to 
denigrate him but to develop unflinching faith in the latter.  
 
   


 

The One as Many 
As already emphasised, the one and only Paramatman is revealed as so 
many different deities. If one person develops a great liking for a certain 
deity, another chooses to have a liking for some other. To make a man a 
confirmed devotee of the form in which he likes to adore the Lord, the 
Paramatman on occasion diminishes himself in his other forms.  
Tirukandiyur is in Tanjavur district, Tamil Nadu. In the temple here Siva is 
seen to be a lesser god than Visnu. He once plucked off one of Brahma's 
heads, became thus the victim of a curse and was freed from it through 
the grace of Visnu. In the same district is Tiruvizhimalai where it is Visnu 
who is seen to be a lesser god than Siva. Reciting the "Siva-
Sahasranama"(The One Thousand Names of Siva), Visnu offers lotuses at 
the feet of Siva. When he is nearing the end of his worship he finds that 
he is short of one lotus. What does he do now? Visnu, the lotus-eyed, digs 
out one of his own eyes and offers it at the feet of Siva. The latter is 
pleased and gives him the cakra or discus. Siva is called 
here"Netrarpanesvara"(Siva to whom an eye has been offered); at 
Tiruakandiyur Visnu is "Hara-sapa-vimocana"(one who freed Siva from a 
curse). When we listen to the story of Tirukandiyur we learn that Visnu is 
a god of great compassion who frees his devotees from the most terrible 
of curses. Similarly, from the Tiruvizhimalai story we realise that no 
sacrifice is too great for a devotee- Visnu offers one of his own eyes to 
the god he worships, that is Siva. The question here is not who is the 
greater of the two, Siva or Visnu.  
In the old days we used to have the lanterns in our homes. There were 
lanterns with glass on all the four sides- or three sides. Let us take the 
latter type. The wick inside the glass is lighted. The three sides made of 
glass are painted in three different colours [or only two sides are 
painted]. The light burning inside will be seen to be a different colour 
from each side. We may take these three sides to represent creation, 
protection and dissolution, the three functions performed by the 


 
Paramatman. It is the one Light that is responsible for all the three, like 
the wick burning inside the lamp with the three sides.  
One side of the lantern, let us assume, is painted red. It symbolises 
creation. If we remove red from the pure light of the spectrum, the other 
six colours also will be separated. This is what is meant by the one 
becoming the many of creation. Brahma, the Creator, is said to be red in 
colour. Another side of the lantern is painted blue. The first and last 
colours of the spectrum are violet and red. The beggining is red (or 
infrared) and the end violet (or ultraviolet). Mahavisnu, during the very 
act of sustaining all creation, demonstrates through jnana that this world 
is not the whole self-fulfilling truth but the disguise of the Paramatman, 
his sport. In the fire of jnana the cosmos is charred. This is the state in 
which an object, without being entirely disintegrated, retains its form but 
loses its colour: it is like a lump of charcoal. Such a entity as the world still 
exists, but its own quality, Maya, is burned out and is suffused with Visnu-
"Sarvam Vishnumayam jagat". In Tamil Visnu is called"Kariyan, 
Nilameniyan"(one who is like charcoal, one whose body is blue). Blue, 
black and violet are more or less similar colours. The light coming from 
the blue side of the lantern is Visnu.  
The third side of the lamp is not painted. We saw that when all is burnt in 
jnana the residue is a lump of charcoal. But if this charcoal is burned 
further the ultimate product is ash. It has no form and is just powder or 
dust. Now the colour also changes from black to white. White is the 
colour close to pure light. All the colours are inherent in that light, which 
means all the cosmic functions and activities emanating from the 
Paramatman are made extinct, are burned out. Now the Paramatman 
alone remains. That is the ashes remain when everything is burnt out- 
that is what lasts in the end. It is indeed Paramesvara otherwise called 
Mahabhasma. Samhara, destruction, may seem a cruel function. But 
what Siva does, though seemingly cruel, is truly an act of compassion 
because he goes beyond destruction to unite us with the Truth. When 
Visnu sportingly bestows jnana on us the cosmos seems like a lump of 
charcoal.  


 
"Sarvam Vishnumayam jagat, "we say. But now all the sport has ended 
and we have come to the state of supreme jnana: there is neither 
"sarvam"nor "jagat". Now it is all "Sivamayam". It is the one lamp that is 
the light of the Brahman. When it is seen through the red side of the 
lantern it becomes Brahma; through the blue side it is Visnu; and through 
the unpainted side it is Siva.  
Our great men have in the past sung of the One manifesting as three 
("Oruvare muvuruvay"). There were great poets in our country who were 
not interested in propagating any philosophy or any system of thought-
they were men possessing a broad outlook and an open mind who 
expressed their views freely. These poets have said that it is the same 
entity that is manifested as the Trimurthi (Brahma, Visnu and Mahesvara) 
and indeed as the 33 crore devatas. Bana says that the same Object 
becomes three to perform three functions, "sarga-sthiti-nasa-hetave". 
Kalidasa clearly states, "Ekaiva murtirbibhide tridha sa" (The Paramatman 
is One; it is this One that divides itself into three for the three different 
functions).  
If we were divided into two schools, the one insisting that the Saiva 
Puranas alone are authoritative among the Puranas and the other 
claiming that only the Vaisnava Puranas are to be relied upon, we would 
keep quarelling without ever being able to take a clear and dispassionate 
view of things. "The Truth is One. The wise speak of it by different 
names". There is no greater authority for us than this Vedic 
pronouncement. So all of us, without making any distinction between the 
Saiva and Vaisnaiva systems, must listen to the stories of all deities and 
be rewarded with freedom from worldly existence.  
Tiruvisanallur Ayyaval was a great man. His real name was Sridhara 
Venkateswara. But out of respect people referred to him as 
"Tiruvisanallur Ayyaval". He lived some three hundred years ago and was 
the senior contemporary of Bhagavannama Bodhendra. Bodhendra 
propagated devotion to Rama and Govinda, that is he taught people to 
sing these names of the Lord. At the same time Ayyaval spread the glory 
of Siva by singing his names. Neither of the two respected any distinction 


 
between Siva and Visnu. So the two of them jointly propagated the 
"nama siddhanta" in the Tiruvisanallur. They had respect and affection for 
one another and established the doctrine that in the age of Kali repeating 
the names of the Lord [nama japa] is the sovereign remedy for all ills. 
Whenever a bhajana is held obeisance is paid to these two (first 
Bodhendra and then Ayyaval) before singing the praises of the deities.  
During a sraddha ceremony Ayyaval fed an untouchable. The village 
headman gave the ruling that he had to bathe in the Ganga in expiation. 
Ayyaval made the sacred river rise in the well in the backyard of his 
house. This story is well known. The incident took place on the new moon 
of the month of Karttigai (November-December). Even today devotees in 
large numbers bathe in the water of this well in the belief that it is as 
good as taking a dip in the holy Ganga.  
Ayyaval gives his own account of how Sri Rama broke the bow of Siva. 
"Svakara pratipadita svacapah, "this is how he put it. That is Rama broke 
his bow with his own hands. The story usually told is that the bow of Siva 
was cracked by Narayana and that later Narayana who descended to 
earth as Rama broke it completely. Ayyaval does not like the idea of Siva 
being represented as inferior to Rama. He does not make any distinction 
between Siva and Visnu and believes that Siva is Visnu and Visnu is Rama 
(so Siva and Rama are the same). Logically, in his view, the bow of Siva is 
the bow of Rama. That is why he says Rama broke his own bow with his 
hands. All such acts are needed for his sport, he declares.  
 
   
   
   
    
 


 

Many paths to the One Goal 
The Azhvars sing the glory of Visnu and the Nayanmars of Siva. In the 
Vedas all deities are hymned in the same way. The Upanishads do not 
speak much about deities; they are concerned with truths of the Self. 
Tiruvalluvar speaks about God and philosophical matters and his views 
are in keeping with the Vedic tradition. But the emphasis in his work is on 
morals and ethics. As for Tirumular, he does not deal so much with God, 
devotion, etc, as he does with aspects of yoga like pranayama, dhyana, 
dharana and samadhi. "Each great man, like each great work, speaks 
about a particular system, a particular path. Which of these is to be 
followed? “such a question arises in the minds of people. Whatever 
system or path you follow, follow it with faith. Do not give it up midway. 
In the end it will lead you to the Paramatman. In the beginning the paths 
may seem different but all of them take you to the same goal.  
Devar kuralum Tirunanmarai mudivum  
Muvar Tamizhum munimozhiyum--Kovai  
Tiruvacakamum Tirumular sollum  
Oruvacakam en(ru)unar.  
The same idea is expressed in the "Sivamahimna-stotra". This hymn 
glorifying Siva is by Pushpadanta. He was a gandharva who, under a curse 
of Isvara, was condemned to live on earth. One stanza in his hymn says: 
"Trayi (the three Vedas), Sankhya(philosophical inquiry), yoga, the 
Pasupata system, Vaisnavism- people follow any of them according to 
their different dispositions. Like the rivers merging in the ocean all these 
paths have one meeting point, the Paramatman. "  
It is this spirit of catholicism that Englishmen exclaim: "Jevhovah, Jove or 
Lord!". Jehovah is the Semitic God of the region of Israel, the home of the 
Bible. Jove is another name of Jupiter. The word "Lord" applies to the God 
of any faith; it is common to all religions. Realised people in the West also 
speak that the one Being is the same, call him by any name you like.  


 
If the Puranas are read in an attitude of respect and humility and with the 
honest intention that we should benefit by reading them, there will be no 
cause for any confusion. We will gain the wisdom to treat them as works 
meant for our ultimate well-being.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Who Taught the Puranas? 
In the Puranas themselves it is mentioned that they were narrated by Siva 
to Parvati or to Visnu. It is also said that Visnu taught them to Narada or 
some other sage. Thus the stories told by the gods were later passed on 
from one sage to another sage or to a king. In the end of Puranas were 
narrated by Vyasa to Suta, and by Suta to the sages in Naimisaranya. 
It was from a high seat offered by the sages of Naimisaranya that Suta 
taught the Puranas. We may gather from this the esteem in which the 
Puranas were held. Also that knowledge was respected more than birth. 
We also realise that caste was no consideration when it came to learning 
noble subjects. The learned man, whatever his caste, was listened to with 
respect. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

They Speak like a Friend 
There are three ways in which a good task may be accomplished. The first 
is by issuing an order or a command backed by the authority of the 
government. This is called"prabhusammita". A rich or powerful man 
orders his servant to do some work: it is also "prabhusammita". Whether 
or not the servant likes the work, he is compelled to obey the order for 
fear of punishment. Without occupying any seat of authority a friend asks 
us to do something and we do it- not out of fear but out of affection. A 
friend who is well disposed towards us is a "suhrd". His order given as a 
companion, as a sakha, is "suhrd-sammita". If there is any means by 
which you will do a work more willingly than in this manner, it is the 
loving words of your wife. The job your employer asks you to do is felt to 
be a burden, but the same is made lighter if it is a friend who asks you to 
do it. But if it is the wife who asks you to do the same it will be still 
lighter. This is "kantasammita".  
The injunctions of the Vedas are "prabhusammita", the teachings of the 
Puranas 
are 
"suhrd-sammita" 
and 
the 
works 
of 
poets 
are 
"kantasammita".  
Yadvedat prabhusammitadadhigatam sabdapramanacchiram  
Yaccharthapravanat-Puranavacanadistam suhrdsammitad  
Kantasammitaya yaya sarasatamapadya-kavyasriya  
Kartavye kutuki budho viracitas-tasyai sprham kurmahe  
-Prataparudriyam, stanza 8  
The Vedas ask you to "do like this" or "do like that". They do not say why. 
To question them, it is believed, is to dishonour them. The Puranas, 
however, tell you in a friendly manner:"If you do like this you will benefit 
in such and such a manner. If you do the same in some other way you will 
suffer. . . "Such lessons are driven home to people through stories. Yes, 
the special feature of the Puranas is that they not only tell you why you 
should do a work, they also state the reason for the same through 


 
absorbing stories. "Hariscandra acted like this. Nala did like that. That is 
why they were happy in the end though they had in between to suffer 
much. Besides, they earned such fame for their virtuous life and noble 
character that they will be remembered for all time. "The moral derived 
from the stories of Hiranyakasipu, Ravana, Duryodhana and so on are the 
opposite. They occupied high positions and wallowed in pleasure but in 
the end they were ruined and are remembered today for their 
wickedness and the evil they did. Such stories are a source of inspiration 
as well as a warning for us: they encourage us to do good and pull us back 
from evil. The Puranas tell us true stories. A suhrd, a sincere friend, will 
not tell us false tales. He will speak to us only the truth and what is good 
for us in a persuasive manner.  
What about poetry? What does the poet do? He mixes fact with fancy 
and invents stories with his power of imagination, exaggerating one thing, 
playing down another and repeating a third. He has the licence to do all 
this. The function of the poet is to invest reality with the imaginary or the 
fanciful so as to make his narrative compelling. The friend is unlike the 
wife. In trying to impress upon you your duty, he is persuasive but does 
not go beyond stating the facts. The wife is different. She is anxious to 
correct her husband and take him to the right path. She exaggerates a 
fact or plays down another, she adds and subtracts. By being "nice" to her 
husband she will somehow make him do the right thing. So goes at least 
the legend. Poetry, in the place of the wife; the Vedas, in the place of 
superior authority; and the Puranas, in between, in the place of a friend: 
the three teach us dharma in different ways.  
 
 
 
 
 


 

Puranic Discourses and Films 
In the days gone by Mother would rise with birdsong and go about her 
household chores. As she sprinkled the house and surroundings with 
cowdung water, as she decorated the courtyard with kolam and as she 
churned the curds, she recited tales from the Puranas. Children got to 
know such stories by listening to their mother or grandmother. A deep 
impression is made on their youthful minds by listening to narratives that 
contain lessons in dharma, stories told with such art that the characters 
come to life. When the boys and girls grow up they add to their 
knowledge of the Puranas by reading or by listening to the pauranikas.  
Today all such good practices are forgotten. From childhood itself people 
become addicted to film songs, politics, fiction, newspapers. It is true that 
puranic themes are enacted on the stage or potrayed on the screen and 
may be some people benefit a little. But it is doubtful whether they will 
have the right kind of knowledge of the Puranas from them. More often 
than not the impact made by puranic films is unhealthly since the 
producers usually attempt to make them as spicy or as exciting as 
possible with the addition of undesirable features for, after all, the 
purpose of making movies is popular entertainment, not providing moral 
or spiritual instruction. Cinema does not come under the category of 
kanta-sammita because the producers or directors abuse their licence, so 
much so that the original story is changed in an objectionable manner.  
Those who frequently go to see a film or a dramatic performance become 
more interested in the qualities of the actors and actresses than in those 
of the characters of the stories itself.  
You must listen to puranic discourses given by great men of virtuous 
conduct who are also steeped in the qualities of the high-souled 
characters whose stories they tell. Only then would you be drawn to the 
virtues exemplified by these characters and to the dharma practised by 
them. To listen to discourses given by pauranikas who are after money 


 
and fame and who do not practise the dharma that they ostensibly 
uphold is no better than seeing a drama or a movie. Dramatic (and 
cinematic) performances are likely to do good if they are based on the 
principles of drama enunciated in our canonical texts. For instance, only a 
couple married in real life can performance the roles of a hero and a 
heroine [husband and wife] in a play. The sastras have also restrictions 
with regard to the enactment of erotic scenes [portrayal of srngara].  
Nowadays puranic and other religous discourses are held almost every 
day in the towns and cities. I myself am amazed to see so many listed in 
the engagement columns of newspapers. Talks are given on religious 
themes, on stories, on the Puranas, in fact subjects I myself am not 
familiar with. People flock to them, educated people who may be said to 
be "modern" or "sophisticated". It seems as if there is a religious 
awakening.  
But a point to consider is how far discourses given by pauranikas are in 
good taste. Adding a few stories on their own to the main theme is all 
right so as to enhance audience interest. Similarly, a little bit of humour 
and brief references to politics also seem to be not altogether improper. 
But these should not be far removed from the main story, the main 
theme, and must be without prejudice to the truths to be driven home to 
the listeners. Otherwise the whole exercise will be in bad taste 
("rasabhasa”). That which calls the Lord to mind is "rasa", a true flavour. 
The puranic stories must be told without straying too far from the text 
and a healthy impression must be made on the minds of the audience. 
The narrator must have faith in Isvara, must adhere to traditional 
customs and must firmly believe in dharma and in the principles he 
himself expounds in the course of his discourse. If he has profound 
knowledge of the subject of his talk he will not be tempted to depart 
from the main theme to tell irrelevant stories or make tangential 
references to current happenings. Puranic discourses will serve no 
purpose if they are treated as a pastime like films and fictions.  
In the villages and the smaller towns not so many discourses and bhajans 
are held as in the cities and bigger towns. It is in places where more and 


 
more people have taken to the modern style of living (and perhaps as a 
reaction to it according to the Newtonian law) that you see a growth of 
interest in subjects related to our religious and cultural traditions. 
Religious or puranic discourses must be held in every village, also bhajans, 
at least on every Ekadasi.  
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 


 

Sthala Puranas 
Even those who respect the Puranas are not prepared to accept that the 
Sthala Puranas, that is the short Puranas pertaining to particular places, 
are authentic. If educated people think the [major] Puranas to be nothing 
but lies, they go so far as to treat the Sthala Puranas as nothing better 
than rubbish. "It was here that Indra was freed from his curse. . . ““It was 
here that Agasthya witnessed the marriage of Siva and Parvati ". Such 
statements give rise to scepticism about the Sthala Puranas. "How are 
such things possible?” they ask. “These Puranas must have been made 
up. They must have originated in the desire of some individuals to give a 
certain importance to places to which they belong. "  
People with faith who are acquainted with our traditions will tell you; 
"Kalpa after kalpa, the same stories are repeated, but sometimes with 
slight differences. Astory associated with one place in one kalpa may 
recur in another place in a different kalpa. "  
It is natural for people to take pride in claiming that their birthplace is 
associated with the great men mentioned in the Puranas. This is a fact 
that all of us must recognise. Ordinary unlettered folk like to believe that 
Rama or Krsna had once visited their village, also great sages, and that 
they were freed from terrible sins. Encouraged by such belief they 
conduct the festivals of the local temples with great enthusiasm and are 
rewarded with faith and devotion. We should view this attitude with 
sympathy and understanding. Why should we who claim to be 
"intelligent" disturb the faith of these people of innocence and deprive 
them of their sense of fulfiment? The Lord himself says in the Gita that in 
such matters you must not produce some information as "fact"and create 
agitation in the minds of ordinary people. "Na buddhibhedam janayed 
ajananam karmasanginam.”  
By this you should not take it that I am one with the critics who hold that 
the Sthala Puranas are not true, nor should you think that I accept them 


 
[these Puranas] only for the reason that, notwithstanding the fact that 
they are not true, they do some good to the people. I believe that the 
Sthala Puranas are by and large authentic. Some of the stories told in 
them may not be so, but for that reason I would not maintain that all 
Sthala Puranas are false.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 


 

The Authenticity of Sthala Puranas 
We ought to have implicit faith in the Vedas, so too in the statements 
made in the Tamil Vedas of Saivas and Vaisnavas-the Tevaram and the 
Divyaprabandham. There are places whose glory has been sung in the 
Tevaram of the Nayanmars and in the pasurams of the Azhvars. These 
songs allude to what is said about such places in the Sthala Puranas. That 
there are such references in these Tamil devotional works, which are 1, 
 years old, is proof of the antiquity of these Puranas.  
For instance, take the Perumal of the Srirangam temple (Tamil Nadu). The 
idol is unique in the sense that it faces south. There is an explanation for 
this in the Sthala Purana pertaining to the temple. When Vibhisana was 
returning to Lanka after attending the coronation of Sri Ramacandra, 
Rama gave him the idol of Ranganatha that he himself had been 
worshipping. On his way the idol somehow got installed on the island 
skirted by the two arms of the Kaveri. Vibhisana was sad that he could 
not take it with him to his capital Lankapuri. So, out of compassion for 
him, Sri Ranganatha lay facing south. This incident is described in detail in 
the Sthala Purana of Srirangam. It is also mentioned in the songs of the 
Azhvars.  
If the reason for Vishnu facing south in Srirangam was known during the 
time of the Azhvars, the Sthala Purana of that place must surely predate 
the work of these Vaisnava saint-poets.  
The linga in the Ekamranatha temple in Kancipuram was shaped by Amba 
herself. At the time she was worshipping it the Lord created a flood, but 
she kept embracing the linga and it was thus saved from being carried 
away in the flood. The Lord then appeared from the linga. This Sthala 
Purana episode is told in the Tevaram also. Sundaramurtisvamin's poems 
sing the glory of Amba performing puja here.  


 
In Jambukesvaram (Tiruvanaikka), near Srirangam, a great sage called 
Jambu was transformed into a jambu tree. Siva enshrined himself under it 
in his linga form. There a spider wove a conopy of web over the linga and 
worshipped the Lord. An elephant destroyed this canopy and performed 
abhiseka to the linga. The spider, naturally enraged, crept into the 
elephant's trunk, ascended up and bore into its head. The animal then 
dashed against the jambu tree and it was killed along with the spider. The 
spider was reborn as KoccenkotCola who built the Jambukesvaram 
temple. This story occurs in the Sthala Purana- and it is referred to in the 
Tevaram also. In the sanctum sanctorum of the temple, the Kaveri wells 
up all the time. This wonderful phenomenon is mentioned in the Tevaram 
of Appar and in the Patttupattu.  
At midday, in Tirukkazhukunram, two eagles descend on the hill and 
receive sweet rice offered by the temple priest. After consuming the rice 
the birds fly away. Some people have doubts about the antiquity of this 
phenomenon. From the time of the Tevaram itself the place is known as 
(Tiru) kazhukkunram. What better evidence is needed?  
In Tiruvidaimarudur (in Tanjavurdistrict) bathing on the occasion of 
Taippusam is specially auspicious according to the Ksetra-mahatmyam. 
Appar and Sambandhar have spoken about the festival in their songs 
dating back to 1, 500 years ago.  
Srirangam, Jambukesvaram, Kancipuram, Tirukkazhukunram  
and Tiruvidaimarudur are great holy places. So it may be argued, there is 
nothing remarkable about their being mentioned in the old Tamil texts. 
But it is noteworthy that puranic stories associated even with smaller 
places are referred to in old Tamil religious works.  
The Sthala Puranas have it that in certain places that are not so famous 
sages and celestials appeared as bees to worship the deities there. Even 
today we see huge honeycombs before the sanctum itself. One such 
place is Nannilam. It is also called "Madhuvanam". Sittambur, near 
Tirutturaippundi, is called Tiruccirremam in the Tevaram. Here too there 
is a honeycomb before the sanctum. The story goes that siddhas come 


 
here as honeybees to worship the Lord. Puja is performed to the 
honeycomb also everyday. Similarly, there is a honeycomb in the 
Vaisnava temple of Tirukkannamangai. There are references to such 
places in both the Tevaram and the Divyaprabandham.  
The antiquity and authenticity of the Sthala Puranas are supported by 
such stories (stories relating even to minor incidents associated with not 
so big places) occuring in the Tevaram, Tiruvacakam and the Nalayira-
Divyaprabandham.  
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 


 

Interconnected Stories 
The events described in one Sthala Purana are linked to those mentioned 
in another. Thus the strand of the same story is taken through a number 
of Puranas. We have to read them together to learn the entire story. That 
one Sthala Purana begins where another ends is one proof of their 
authenticity. Another proof that could be adduced is that it is these 
Sthala Puranas that fill the gaps in the 18 main Puranas and Upa-puranas.  
Once Siva and Amba (Parvati) played dice in Kailasa. "I have won the 
game,” said Amba. "No, I am the winner,” said Siva. The two played thus 
to impart lessons in dharma to mankind. If now their game of dice ended 
in a quarrel it was because the divine couple wanted the world to learn 
that playing for stakes was an evil, that it leads to disputes and 
misconduct.  
To resume the story. In his anger Siva cursed Amba thus: "You shall be 
born a cow and shall keep roaming the earth.” Siva is Pasupati, lord of 
animals. Yes, he is the Lord that controls the animal senses (the indriyas) 
that are in a frenzy. It is to demonstrate that he does not bless people 
with a big ego that he cursed even Parasakti (the Supreme Power). 
Though she is Mahasakti herself she realised her error and, the great 
pativrata that she is, she became submissive to her husband. She roamed 
the earth as an ordinary cow.  
In her One Thousand Names ("Sahasranama") Amba is extolled as 
"Gomata, Guhajanmabhu.” She came to the earth as Gomata (Mother 
Cow).  
Visnu is Amba's brother, is he not? He is very much attached to her and, 
as soon he knew that his brother-in-law (Siva) had "driven her out", he 
thought to himself:"Let him not protect her, lord of animals though he 
be. I will have my sister under my protection. “So taking the guise of a 
cowherd he accompanied the divine cow. He was not the victim of any 


 
curse that he should roam the earth thus. It was to demonstrate to the 
world the dharma of filial affection that he came down to the world of 
mortals with her. (He developed a liking for the job of the cowherd now. 
That is how he took delight in grazing cows in his incarnation as Krsna. He 
then came to be called Gopala which name also means "Pasupati". If you 
reflect on these two names of Siva and Visnu you will cease to make any 
distinction between the two gods. )  
Tiru-Azhundur is the place to which sister and brother came as cow and 
cowherd. It is the same as "Terazhundur". It also happens to be the 
birthplace of Kambar and in fact there is a locality here called 
"Kambarmedu". Tirumangai Azhvar performed the "mangala sasanam" in 
a temple here. Visnu is in the sanctum sanctorum as Gopala with the cow. 
Since he came as a companion of the cow he is called "Gosakha". 
"Gosakhaksetra" is another name for Terazhundur. "Gosakha" in Tamil is 
"Amaruviyappan", the initial "a" in the name meaning cow. There is a 
temple to Siva also here. According to our ancient system of town-
planning there must be a temple to Siva at one end of a village or town 
and one to Visnu at the other. If the Visnu temple at Terazhundur is 
associated with the songs of the Azhvars the Siva temple is associated 
with the Tevaram hymns of Jnanasambandhar. The places sung by the 
Azvars are said to have had "mangalasasanam", while any place 
associated with the Tevaram is called "patal perra sthalam" [place that 
has been sung]. Many places in the South have had both types of 
distinction. Terazhundur is one of them. Near it is a village called Pillur 
where Visnu, as the cowherd grazed the cow that was Amba. ("Pillur" 
means a place where grass grows, pil meaning grass. In the Tanjavur 
region pul is known as pil. ) Mekkirimangalam also is one of the places 
where Visnu grazed the cow and An-angur another (an=cow).  
For brother and sister to worship Siva, Visnu installed Vedapurisvara 
(Siva) in Gosakhaksetra. (Both the Vedapurisvara and Amaruviyappan 
temples are today under the same manegement.)  
The cow as well as the Brahmin is essential to the practice of Vedic 
dharma. Milk and ghee are indispensable to sacrifices, while without the 


 
Brahmin the sacrifices cannot be performed. This fact is underlined in the 
prayer, "Gobrahmanebhyo subhamastu nityam" [May cow and Brahmin 
ever prosper].  
The one (that is Siva) who had cast a curse on Amba came as 
Vedapurisvara to the same place where Amba had also come. Until 
recently there were many Brahmins in this place learned in the Vedas and 
sastras. Sambandhar often refers to them as "Azhundai Maraiyor"(Vedic 
scholars of Azhundur). The Azhvars call Visnu by these names: 
"Chandoga", "Pauzhiya", "Taittiriya", "Samavediyane".  
One day, when the cow (that is Amba) was grazing, her hoof dug into the 
earth and a stone was revealed. It proved to be a Siva linga. The cow, 
thinking that she had commited an offence against Siva, ran about in 
bewilderment. Visnu pacified her and brought her back. The place where 
this incident occured is "Tirukkulambiyam". Visnu was pained by all these 
developments and regretted that his sister had shown herself to be 
egoistic, albeit playfully, and that this fact had led to such unfortunate 
consequences.  
It was Visnu who had married Minaksi to Sundaresvara. Wishing to unite 
them again he now performed puja to propitiate Siva. The latter was 
pleased and he said to Visnu: "Keep grazing the cow until you come to the 
river Kaveri. Bathe her in the river and she will be restored to her original 
form. I shall tell you later when I will marry her. "  
Visnu, as bidden by Siva, bathed the cow in the Kaveri. The place where 
the cow was seen after she had bathed in the river is "Tiruvaduturai". (It 
is also important for the reason that it was here that Tirumular composed 
his Tirumantiram.)  
Amba was restored to her original form and Siva himself appeared on the 
scene. But he wanted to play a game again. There is a place called 
Kurralam. (It is not the same as the Kurralam in Tirunelveli district that is 
famous for its waterfall. This Kurralam is near Mayuram in Tanjavur 
district. It was once called Tirutturutti. This is one of the 44 places which 
Appar, Sambandhar and Sundaramurti have sung. ) A sage was 


 
performing austerities here for Amba herself to be born as his daughter. 
Siva thought that this was the opportune moment to grant his wish. He 
said to Amba: "Go and be born the daughter of the sage at Tirutturutti. I 
will come and marry you at the appropriate time. "  
Siva made his appearance as promised. There is proof for the fact that 
the one who gave his word at Gosakhaksetra appeared here also in that 
in this place too the deity is called Vedesvara. The sage and Visnu-the 
latter had been waiting for the day his sister would be married again to 
Siva- received Siva and took him to the place of marriage. The spot where 
Siva was received came to be called "Etirkolpadi". The "vrata" before the 
marriage was performed by Siva in a nearby place which later came to be 
called "Velvikkudi". The spot where he saw Amba as the bride and 
performed the palika ceremony is called "Kurumulaippali". The marriage 
pandal was spread over two or three villages. The one in the middle came 
to be called "Tirumananjeri ". It was here that Visnu married Parvati to 
Paramesvara and it was an occasion of great joy for him.  
From this account you will realise how wrong it is to dismiss Sthala 
Puranas as of no significance. The present story contains a warning 
against the evil consequences of ahamkara and gambling and tells us how 
a wife should be dutiful towards her husband and how a brother should 
be affectionate towards, and concerned about, his sister. Actually I did 
not tell the story with this idea in mind. I wished to demonstrate how a 
number of Sthala Puranas fit into one another, how the incidents 
narrated in different Sthala Puranas are woven together- those of 
Terazhundur, Pillur, Anangur, Tirukkulambiyam, Tiruvaduturai, Kurralam, 
Etirkolpadi, 
Velvikkudi, 
Kurmulaippali 
and 
Tirumananjeri. 
The 
interconnected narrative also shows that the story must be authentic.  
A story with which people of Tanjavur should be more familiar links 
Kumbakonam with places in its neighbourhood.  
During the great deluge Brahma prepared himself for the next creation. 
He put all the seeds in amrta(the elixer of immortality) and kept them 
together in a mudpot to the chanting of Vedic mantras. With due 
ceremony, he placed a coconut with mango leaves on it and invested the 


 
same with the sacred thread. Now he placed the pot on the summit of 
Meru. When it came floating in the waters of the deluge, Paramesvara 
wished to recommence creation. Then the coconut on the pot was 
dislodged in the storm and fell into the water. At once the water receded 
revealing the land there. This spot is four miles north-west of 
Kumbhakonam. The deity here is even today called "Narikelesvara", 
("narikela" means coconut). Then the mango leaves fell off. The water 
receded there too revealing land. This is Tiruppurambayam, four miles 
north-west of Kumbhakonam. "Payam" [or bayam] is "payas", that is 
water, but in this context deluge. "Puram" means outside or beyond 
something: 
the 
name 
of 
the 
place 
[Tiruppurambayam] 
thus 
means"outside the waters of the deluge". Now the sacred thread (sutra) 
also got loosened from the pot and fell off. The deity in the place where 
the sutra fell is "Sutranatha", "sutra" meaning the "sacred thread".  
The kumbha(pot) had a "nose" in addition to a "mouth"- it was like a gindi 
or kamandalu. My pot too has a nose in addition to its mouth. Water is 
filled in the pot through the mouth and poured out through the nose. The 
pot with the amrta was also similiar. Paramesvara watched the scene. 
Since the pot with the elixer and the seeds in it were not overturned on 
their own, he decided to break it with his arrow so as to bring out its 
contents. The place where he discharged the arrow is called "Banapuri"- 
now it is known as "Vanatturai". The deity here is "Banapurisvara" and 
the 
spot 
where 
the 
mouth 
of 
the 
pot 
fell 
in 
pieces 
is 
"Kudavayil"("Kudavasal"). Paramesvara wanted the amrta to be 
discharged in the sastric manner, from the nose of the pot. The place 
where the nose broke and the elixir or ambrosia fell is holier than other 
places. It is called "Kumbhakonam", "kon"("konam") meaning nose. In the 
Tevaram the place is referred to as "Kudamukku". Here the mudpot itself 
came to be the linga and even today it is so. The linga is ceremonially 
bathed along with a protective wear outside. "Kumbhesvara" is the name 
of the deity. The Mahamagham pond is the spot where the amrta first 
fell.  


 
Since the place is hallowed by the fact that it was here that the amrta fell, 
the Vaisnava deity here, Sarngapani, is called "Ara-amudan" by the 
Azhvars. To Vaisnavas Kumbhakonam itself is "Kudandai".  
Thus there are many sacred places that are interconnected, which fact 
also confirms that the Sthala Puranas are authentic. Tiruvazhundur, 
Kumbhakonam, etc, are situated within a radius of four miles. There will 
be further confirmation of the authenticity of these Puranas if we note 
how the places mentioned in them and which are far apart are connected 
together. Ramesvaram, Vedaranyam and Pattisvaram are not near one 
another. Ramesvaram, in Ramanathapuram district, is on the seacoast. 
Vedaranyam is in a corner of Tanjavur district and is also on the seashore 
in the taluqa of Tirutturaipundi. In the same district, but by no means 
close by, is Pattisvaram which is near Kumbhakonam. These places which 
are far apart are connected by the same thread of a story. Would you call 
such a story baseless?  
In all these three places there are great Siva temples and the name of the 
deity in each is "Ramalinga", suggesting that they are connected with 
Rama. That he installed lingas in these places strengthens the concept of 
Saiva-Vaisnava unity. These places have some other special features too. 
Of the four great religious centres, known as "car-dham", Ramesvaram 
alone is in the South. In the North is Badrinath(a), in the west 
Somanath(a), in the east (Puri)Jagannath(a) and, of course, Ramesvaram 
in the south.  
Vedaranyam is associated with the salt sathyagraha during the freedom 
movement. 
The 
place 
is 
mentioned 
in 
the 
Tevaram 
as 
"Tirumaraikka"(Tamil for Vedaranyam). Here the temple door was closed 
after the Vedas had worshipped the deity Siva. Appar sang his patigam 
here and the door flung open. Tirujnanasambandhar made the door shut 
again when he sang before the deity.  
Pattisvaram is the place where Siva was worshipped by Patti, one of the 
four daughters of Kamadhenu. Like Tiruvaduturai mentioned before there 
are many places where the cow has performed worship. Tiru-Amattur is 
near Panrutti. It is connected with Appar. Here too the cow has 


 
performed puja. Pattisvaram is a similiar place. When Jnanasambandhar 
was a child he sang the praises of Siva and went dancing before the deity 
in the hot sun. The Lord was moved by the sight and ordered his 
attendants to build a pandal to protect his devotee from the sun. 
Jnanasambandhar was an incarnation of Subrahmanya. Govinda Dikshita 
was a minister to the Nayaka kings of Tanjavur. He was very much drawn 
to Pattisvaram and made additions to the temple there. Images of 
Dikshita and his wife may be seen before the sanctum of Amba.  
Where did Agastya witness the marriage of Siva and Parvati? Three places 
are mentioned, that is three places are associated with the same event. 
As mentioned before, the Ramalinga was installed in three places, but in 
each place a different reason.  
Rama commited a threefold sin by slaying Ravana. Ravana, the son of the 
sage Visravas, was a Brahmin. By killing him Rama incurred the sin of 
"Brahmahatya". To wipe away the same he installed the linga at 
Ramesvaram.  
Some people today describe the war between Rama and Ravana as a 
quarrel between Aryans and Dravidians. Such a view is totally baseless 
and there is no better proof of this than the fact that Ravana was a 
Brahmin. If the Ramayana is a lie so must be the battle between Rama 
and Ravana. It cannot be claimed that there is a historical basis for this 
battle alone. If the Ramayana is accepted as true the account of Ravana 
contained in it must also be taken to be so. It is said again and again in 
the epic that Ravana was the son of a sage, that he was conversant with 
the Vedas, that he pleased Siva by chanting the Samaveda and that it was 
for this reason that he was saved from being crushed under Kailasa. It 
does not stand to reason to accept only that part of the Ramayana which 
suits you and reject the rest.  
Leave aside the Ramayana and what it says about Ravana: the temple of 
Ramesvaram is there for all of us to see. It has the biggest corridor in the 
world ("prakara", ambulatory). All India worships Ramanathasvamin in 
the form of the linga Rama installed for the removal of the sin he had 
incurred by killing the Brahmin Ravana. For centuries our forefathers in 


 
Tamil Nadu never thought of Ravana as belonging to a caste other than 
that of Brahmins.  
Apart from being a Brahmin, Ravana was also a great warrior. All the 
worlds trembled before him. He fought successfully all the powerful 
rulers of the time except two- Kartaviryarjuna and Vali. By killing such a 
warrior Rama committed the sin of"virahatya". It was in expiaation of it 
that he installed the linga (Ramalinga) at Vedaranyam.  
In addition to the qualifications already mentioned, Ravana had another; 
he was an ardent devotee of Siva and proficient in playing the vina, 
besides being a singer. Excellence such as this comes under the term 
"chaya": it means both light and shadow. The goddess Minaksi is 
addressed as "Marakatachaya" (emeraldine in radiance). By killing Ravana 
who possessed chaya, Rama also earned the sin of "chayahatya". To 
expiate it he installed the linga at Pattisvaram.  
From the sastric point of view, by slaying Ravana Rama brought on 
himself the threefold sin of Brahmahatya, virahatya and chayahatya. 
Actually Rama is patita-pavana and he cannot be tainted by any sin. By 
uttering His name a man is freed from the most terrible of sins. So Rama 
has no need to perform any prayascitta (he does not have to do any 
expiatory rite)- he is "Taraka Rama ". But he had descended to this world 
to serve as an ideal for all mankind and so he acted strictly according to 
the canons even with reference to matters that might be considered 
trivial. In the observance of dharma according to the sastras no one 
excelled Him. Throughout the Ramayana we see this remarkable trait in 
His character. He regarded himself as an ordinary individual, observed all 
the rules of the sastras; in this way he also performed the prayascitta 
according to them. This is not mentioned in the Ramayana of Valmiki; but 
the Sthala Puranas of Ramesvaram, Vedaranyam and Pattisvaram fill the 
gap.  
"The Ramayana does not contain these incidents. They must some old 
wives'tales. “To think so is not correct. The incidents described in the 
Sthala Puranas are in keeping with Rama's character. He must have 


 
performed the three types of penitence. What is left out in the Ramayana 
of Valmiki is mentioned in the Sthala Puranas.  
Ravana had caused suffering to all mankind and it was with an evil intent 
that he had stolen Sita, the mother of the world. Rama killed such a 
wicked character amd made all the world happy. At a time when there 
was a universal rejoicing over his victory, Rama thought himself to be a 
sinner because he had killed an enemy eminent in three different ways. 
The loftiness of His character is further enhanced by these acts. That he 
installed the linga in three different centres goes to demonstrate the 
unity of Hari and Hara (Visnu and Siva).  
These Sthala Puranas do not contradict one another nor is there any 
overlapping in them. Those pertaining to Ramesvaram, Vedaranyam and 
Pattisvaram deal respectively with how Rama, by installing the linga in 
each place, was freed from the sins of Brahmahatya, virahatya and 
chayahatya. Rama must have proceeded north from Ramesvaram along 
the coast. From Vedaranyam he must have gone to Pattisvaram in the 
interior. It is the strand of the same story that takes us through three 
Sthala Puranas. The three places are 150 or 100 miles apart from one 
another. When there were no fast modes of transport these distances 
correspond to 1, 500 or 1, 000 miles today. The fact that the stories 
belonging to the three places fit into one another shows that the Sthala 
Puranas relating to them must be true.  
I would like to express a view that might seem strange to modern 
researchers and traditional scholars alike. It is generally believed that the 
Sthala Puranas cannot be considered authoritative to the same extent as 
the Ramayana. But I think that such of them as are authentic are more 
authoritative than the Ramayana, the Mahabharata, the Visnu Purana 
and Bhagavata Purana, and so on. I have come to this conclusion from 
examples like the one I have cited above.  
Now I am going to speak about Sthala Puranas that connect places in 
different parts of the country.  


 
There are two versions of the Kaveri Purana. One gives importance to the 
Amma mandapa on the Kaveri in Srirangam. It states that bathing in the 
Kaveri in the month of Tula (October-November) is specially meritorious. 
The chief character in this Purana is the Cola king Dharmavarman. He 
reigned from Niculapuri. The Sanskrit words "nicula", "nicola", "coli" 
mean a garment covering the body [or a part thereof] like a case ("urai" 
in Tamil). The place called "Uraiyur" is known in Sanskrit as "Niculapuri". 
The kingdom with its capital as Niculapuri came to be called Coladesa 
(Cozhadesa). What is remarkable about a corn-cob? The grains growing 
on the top of the stalk are encased in the "cob". It means the grains of 
the cereal called colam or maize wear a coli so to speak.  
In the second version of the Kaveri Purana the bathing ghat called Tula-
ghattam in Mayavaram [Mayuram] is given importance. It is popularly 
called "Lagadam": the word must be a distortion of "Tula-ghattam". This 
ghat has been specially built for the convenience of pilgrims who bathe in 
the Kaveri in the month of Tula. There are such ghats in six or seven other 
places on the Kaveri, all built to the same plan. While in the first version 
of the Kaveri Purana Srirangam and Dharmavarman figure as important, 
in the second, apart from Mayavaram, a Brahmin couple find a prominent 
place. The couple were liberated by bathing at this ghat.  
The Brahmin was called Nathasarman and his wife Anavadya. They were 
freed from wordly existence by bathing day after day in the Kaveri in the 
month of Tula in the manner prescribed by the sastras.  
The Brahmin couple had during their pilgrimage visited Kedara and Kasi. 
(This story is known only in Mayaram. ) Kasi is a thousand miles from 
here. One of the ghats there is called "Kedarghat". The Sthala Purana of 
Kedarghat mentions that the Brahmin couple, Nathasarman and his wife 
Anavadya, bathed there.  
People in our parts are not much familiar with the story of Nathasarman. 
He is not like Rama, Krsna, Hariscandra, Nala and so on to be known all 
over the land. It is amazing that the story of such a man as told in the 
Sthala Puranas of Mayavaram and of Kasi, a thousand miles away, tally. 


 
This story shows how wrong it is to be sceptical about the authenticity of 
Sthala Puranas.  
Kasi, which is a thousand miles from Kancipuram, is famous for the 
goddess Annapurni. In Kanci too, when the World Mother observed the 
 dharmas, she distributed food among people. Opposite the doorway 
of the sanctum of the Kamaksi temple in Kanci is the sanctum of 
Annapurnesvari. It has a vimana or tower that is unlike that of any other 
temple in the South. It has six spires ("sikharas"). The explanation for this 
is the fact that the tower of the Annapurnesvari temple in Kasi too is 
similar. Even in such small matters there is agreement about places as far 
apart as Kanci and Kasi. Are Sthala Puranas then to be dismissed as of no 
consequence?  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 


 

Importance of Sthala Puranas 
In my opinion, the Sthala Puranas not only enables us to have an insight 
into history but also enrich our knowledge of local culture and local 
customs. It seems to me that if they are read together in a connected 
manner they will throw more light on our history than even the 18 major 
Puranas and Upapuranas. In fact, they fill the gaps in the major Puranas.  
Local legends do help in a proper understanding of history. For instance, 
educated people today do not believe that Sankara Bhagavatpada visited 
any of the temples or that he brought the puja performed there under a 
certain system. "The great non-dualist that he was and exponent of the 
path of jnana, " they argue, "he would not have concerned himself with 
devotion, temple worship, the Agasmas, and the like. " But let us examine 
the stories that tell us that he gave new life to certain temples, temples 
that are thousand miles or more apart. Their connection with the Acharya 
is confirmed from such stories and local legends. The priest who conducts 
the puja in Badrinath(a) in the Himalaya is a Namputiri Brahmin from 
Kerala -he is called "Rawal". Here, in Madras, the puja at the 
Tripurasundari temple at Tiruvorriyur is also by a Namputiri. This is proof 
of the oral tradition according to which the Acharya was a Namputiri who 
engaged fellow Namputiris to conduct puja in the temples he revived.  
In teaching us lessons in dharma also the Sthala Puranas are in no way 
inferior to the major Puranas. It is in fact these local Puranas which are a 
few hundred in number that throw light on the finer points of dharma. 
Unfortunately, even the religious-minded among the educated class 
today think poorly of them. But, until recently, these Puranas were 
treated with respect by learned men in Tamil Nadu. Distinguished Tamil 
scholars have written Puranas after those existing in the name of great 
sages and also a number of Sthala Puranas. There are works in Tamil 
describing the importance and significance of places and temples - they 
are known variously as Sthala Puranas, manmiyam, kalambagam, ula, etc. 
("Mahima" means greatness or glory; manmiyam is its Tamil form. )  


 
Tamil literature is divided into the Sangam, Tevaram-Divyaprabandham 
and Kambar-Ottakuttar periods. Scholars describe the 16th century as the 
period of the Sthala Puranas. The chief authors of such works are Kamalai 
Jnanaprakasar and Saiva Ellappa Navalar. We know the worthiness of 
Sthala Puranas from the fact that among their authors are Kacchiyappa 
Sivachariyar (he composed the Kanda Puranam), Paranjyoti Muni (he is 
the author of the Thiruvilayadal Puranam), Umapati Sivachariyar (a 
distinguished teacher of Saivism), Sivaprakasa Svami, the Irattai Pulavars, 
Antakkavi Viraraghava Mudaliar, Kottaiyur Sivakkozhundu Desigar, 
Trikuta Rasappakavirayar. In recent times there was Mahavidvan 
Minaksisundaram Pillai who was the guru of U. V. Svaminatha Ayyar. He 
has written a number of Sthala Puranas. We learn from this that Sthala 
Puranas have a place of honour in the Tamil religious tradition and 
literature.  
A distinguished Sanskrit scholar and authority on the sastras, Karungulam 
Krsna Sastri, has written a Tamil work called Vedaranya Mahatmyam.  
Tamil rulers gave their support to Sthala Puranas and their propagation. 
More than four and half centuries ago, the Puranas relating to 
Pancanadaksetra (Tiruvaiyaru, Tanjavur) was translated into Tamil. The 
translator mentions that he undertook the work as desired by Govinda 
Diksita who was responsible for the founding of the Nayaka kingdom of 
Tanjavur.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   


 

Preserving the Puranas 
For a thousand or ten thousand years our temples and the festivals 
associated with them have nurtured our religious traditions against 
various opposing forces. Every temple has a story to tell; every temple 
festival has a legend behind it. These have been preserved in the Puranas. 
To ignore or neglect this great heritage, this great treasure, is to cause 
serious hurt to the religious feelings of our people. 
In the past, when there was no printing press, the palm-leaf manuscripts 
were jealously guarded generation after generation. Is it right to keep 
them in neglect when so many books are churned out by the printing 
presses today, the majority of them injurious to our inner advancement? 
It is our duty to preserve the Puranas for future generations. Not to do so 
is to deprive them of great source of inspiration.  
   
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 


 

Palm-leaf Manuscripts in Libraries 
In the old days palm-leaf manuscripts were preserved in almost every 
house. They contained the texts of the epics, the Puranas, Sthala Puranas, 
and so on. When the palm-leaves were in danger of being damaged, their 
contents would be copied with a stylus on new leaves. The damaged 
leaves would be consigned to the Kaveri or some other sacred river, or to 
some pond on the occasion of Patinettam Per [see next para]  
The 18th day of the Tamil month of Adi (July-August) has a special 
significance for the Kaveri. The river would be in spate. The swelling 
waters on this day are called Patinettam Perukku or Patinettam Per.  
Our forefathers went on inscribing on palm - leaves with their stylus until 
their hands ached. They copied old texts to be preserved for posterity. 
This tradition lasted until perhaps the time of our fathers. People of our 
generation have thrown these precious manuscripts into the river 
without making copies of them. So much so it is doubtful whether the 
texts of many Puranas will ever be available to us. Not only Puranas, but 
also a number of sastras. However, some scholars have taken great pains 
to go from place to place to collect manuscripts and preserve them in 
libraries. The Sarasvati Mahal Library in Tanjavur, the Oriental 
Manuscripts Library and the Adyar Library, Madras, have good collections 
of manuscripts. The Theosophical Society Library, Adyar, has done 
commendable work in this respect. Sarabhoji and other rulers of Tanjavur 
took great trouble to collect manuscripts for the Sarasvati Mahal.  
The palm-leaf is called edu in Tamil. It has two sides with a rib in between 
- either of the two sides after the removal of the rib is called an edu. The 
plantain leaf also has a rib. When it is split across the rib, each part is an 
edu. For long the palm-leaf was our paper, nature's paper which was not 
easily damaged. The letters had to be inscribed on it with a stylus.  


 
The palm-leaves containing the text of Jnanasambandhar's Tevaram 
compositions went upstream against the current of the river Vaigai and 
were laid ashore. The spot where the manuscript lodged itself is called 
"Tiruvedakam" ("Tiru +edu + akam"). Here the deity lord Siva is called 
"Patrika Paramesvara". Nowadays the word "paper" is understood as a 
newspaper, magazine, periodical, etc. "Patrika" means a magazine today. 
The lord associated with the spot where the palm-leaves, nature's paper, 
were laid ashore is "Patrika Paramesvara", which could be taken to mean 
"the Lord the journalist". "Patra" and "Patrika" mean the same, a leaf. In 
the past letters were written on palm-leaves. That is why a letter also 
came to be called "patra".  
There is an interesting story about the Sarasvati Mahal. In olden days the 
worst injury an invader thought he could inflict on a country was to burn 
down it's libraries. When the treasury is to the economy of the nation the 
library is to its culture; indeed the library represents its cultural treasury. 
Since there was no printing press then, there would not be many [palm-
leaf] copies available of works, and of some works there would be only a 
single copy. To destroy the library of the nation, containing rare works, 
would be a greater outrage than looting its treasury or dishonouring its 
women. We must be proud of the fact that our sastras on policy strictly 
forbid the destruction of an enemy country's treasures of knowledge and 
it's places of worship, nor do they permit the dishonouring of its women.  
When Jainas like Amarasimha lost to Hindu religious teachers in 
arguement, they themselves wanted to burn their books. But great men 
like our Acarya stopped them from doing so. Holding the hands of their 
opponents they requested them not to destroy their books. Their attitude 
was that no work must be destroyed whatever the philosophy or religious 
system it upholds.  
Conquerers belonging to other countries took special delight in setting 
fire to the libraries of the conquered land if it was known to be culturally 
advanced. They perpetrated such outrages without reflecting for a 
moment on the fact that knowledge is common to all, even such 
knowledge as possessed by an enemy. They could cause anguish to the 


 
people intellectually superior to them by destroying their books. It was 
thus that during the 15-16th centuries Muslim invaders set fire to the 
library in Alexandria in Egypt (it had books collected from the time of 
Alexander) and the library in Constantinople (Istanbul) which had been 
built up over the centuries by the Greeks and the Romans. Once old 
Sangam were swept off when the sea rose - it was an act of nature. But it 
is due to their cultural backwardness that foreign forces destroyed the 
libraries of the country they invaded.  
The Sarasvati Mahal of Tanjavur was once under threat when Muslim 
forces had spread all over the south and the Nawab of Carnatic had the 
upper hand. For the Muslim invaders burning down the Sarasvati Mahal 
library was equivalent to destroying the great temple of Tanjavur. At that 
time there was a Maharastrian Brahmin called Dabir Pant who was a 
minister to the Maratha Raja (the Maratha rulers here belonged to Sivaji's 
family). An idea occured to him just in time to save the library. He said to 
the vandals: "This library has ofcourse Hindu books. But it also has many 
copies of Qur'an." "What? The Qur'an also?" the invaders cried. " We 
won't set fire to the library in that case, "so saying they departed.  
Then came to India Englishmen, Frenchmen and others. They had a thirst 
for knowledge and research and were anxious to learn even from foreign 
sources. The Germans came to our country and searched for palm-leaf 
manuscripts to take home with whem. We must be grateful to some of 
these foreigners through whose efforts a number of our sastras were 
redicovered. There was, for example, Mackenzie who was surveyor-
general of India. He went from place to place to collect palm-leaf 
manuscripts. There was at that time no speacial department to deal with 
them but Mackenzie had them read by experts and took steps to have 
them preserved. Mackenzie's men even came to our Matha at 
Kumbakonam to gather information.  
It is believed that Westerners took with them some of our science 
manuscripts from the Sarasvati Mahal espeacially those pertaining to the 
art of warfare. It is further claimed that Hitler made some type of 
weapons and aircraft on the basis of knowledge contained in these texts.  


 
There are palm-leaf manuscripts still with us like Bhojaraja's 
Samarangana Sutra. From these we learn that we had long ago not only 
"astras" to be employed with mantras but also "sastras" that were 
product of science. Digests like Varahamihira's Brhatsamhita bring 
together the various disciplines of our land.  
Some of our ancient palm-leaf manuscripts contain texts not only of our 
religious systems but also of various arts and sciences. Also the Puranas. 
But we have lost many of our Sthala Puranas. We must do our best to 
preserve what remains and, at the same time, continue the search for 
more manuscripts.  
The Puranas give us instruction, in the form of engrossing stories, on the 
truth of the Paramatman proclaimed by the Vedas, the dharmas, and the 
moral and ethical codes of conduct that they lay down. The teaching they 
impart touches our very hearts. The lessons of the Puranas, the stories of 
noble men and women contained in them, have shaped our lives. The 
Puranas have indeed served as a source of our inspiration for our people 
from time immemorial. We must no longer be apathetic to them and 
must make a determined effort to preserve them as a treasure. Let us 
make a comparative study of puranic literature and take an integrated 
view. This will be to our own benefit as well as to that of all mankind.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    


 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Part 15 
DHARMASASTRA 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Realising the Ideals of the Puranas 
The noble characters who figure in the Puranas serve as an ideal for all of 
us to follow. When we read their stories we are inspired by their example 
and we ask ourselves why we cannot be like them ourselves, why we 
should not share their qualities. But, even if we wanted to emulate their 
lives, would we be able to live like them without deviating at any time 
from the high principles that they upheld?  
Man by nature is always unstill: he cannot keep his mind quiescent even 
for a moment. Bhagavan says in the Gita: "Not for a moment can a man 
remain still, without doing work". So one must know the right path for 
work. One must make one's mind pure, acquire the highest of qualities 
and, finally, transcending these very qualities, realise the Brahman.  
How can we live according to the tenets of our religion? How can we 
wash away our sins and cleanse our Self? And what must we do to attain 
everlasting happiness? Is not our present birth a consequence of the sins 
we committed in our past lives? We have to free ourselves from them 
and be careful not to sin afresh. We must elevate ourselves, our mind and 
character, so that we are not embroiled in sin again. The purpose of 
religion is this, to ennoble us and turn us away from sin. But how? How 
do we live according to the teachings of our religion? We do not know 
how.  
In our present condition, what do we claim to know? Perhaps a little bit 
of Ramayana, the Bhagavata and other Puranas. We learn about the 
religious life lived by the characters portrayed in these works. But neither 
the Puranas nor the epics deal with the rights in a codified form, nor do 
they contain directions for their proper performance.  
The Puranas and the epics give a dominant place to devotion. Is it 
possible to be engaged in devotion all the time, or to keep singing the 
glory of the Lord day and night? Or, for that matter, to be similarly 


 
engaged in a puja and meditation throughout? No. We have a family to 
look after. We have to bath and eat and we have so much other work to 
do - all this takes time. The remaining hours cannot be set apart for puja. 
It would all be tiresome and we have, besides, to do other good works. 
How do we get such information?  
From the Dharmasastra.  
Of the fourteen branches of learning (caturdasa-vidya) Dharmasastra 
comes last. Puranic characters, who represent our ideal, show us the 
goal. The path to attain that goal starts with the performance of karma, 
works. The Dharmasastra contain practical instructions in our duties, in 
the rites to be performed by us. In the Vedas these duties are mentioned 
here and there. The Dharmasastra is an Upanga that deals with them in 
detail and in a codified form.  
There is an orderly way of doing things, a proper way, with regard to 
household and personal matters including even bathing and eating. The 
ordinances of Vedas cover all aspects of life and to conduct ourselves 
according to them is to ennoble our Self. Whatever we do must be done 
in the right manner - how we lie down, how we dress, how we build our 
house. The idea is that all this helps our being. Life is not 
compartmentalised into the secular, worldly and the religious. The Vedic 
dharma is such that in it even mundane affairs are inspired by the 
religious spirit. Whatever work is done is done with the chanting of 
mantras and thus becomes a mean of Atmic progress. Just as worldly life 
and religious life are integrated, harmonised, so are the goals of 
individual liberation and common welfare kept together.  
The devotion we imbibe from the Puranas is part of the Vedas also. But 
with it is associated a good deal of karma. When devotion takes the form 
of rite called puja there are certain rules to be observed. Apart from puja 
there are sacrifices and rites like sraddha and tarpana as important 
elements of the Vedic dharma. But these are not codified in the Vedas 
nor is any procedure laid down for each of them.  


 
"Vedo khilo dharmamulam,” says Manu (The Vedas are the root of all 
dharma. ) The work that the Vedas bid us perform for our inner well-
being also serve the purpose of bringing good to the world. What is called 
dharma is that which fosters both individual and social welfare. The 
Vedas are the root of this dharma, its fountainhead.  
But the rites and duties are not given in an orderly form in the Vedas, nor 
is the procedure for works laid down in detail. Of the Vedas that are 
infinite we have obtained only a very small part. And we do not 
comprehend fully the meaning of many of the passages even of this small 
part.  
As we have seen the sixth Vedanga, Kalpa, contains the Dharmasutras, 
Grhyasutras and Srautasutras, relating to rites based on the Vedas. But 
the sutras are brief and do not constitute a detailed guide. The 
dharmasastras elaborate upon them without leaving any room for doubt.  
The Dharmasutras (by Apastamba, Gautama and others) are terse 
statements and are so according to the very definition of the term 
"sutras". The dharmasastras (by Manu, Yagnavalkya, Parasara and others) 
are called Smrtis and are in verse and detail in treatment. Their basis, 
however, is constituted by the Vedas. The function of Dharmasastra is to 
analyse and explicate the sutras of Kalpa which have to some extent 
systematised the Vedic rules and injunctions. If Kalpa gives instructions 
about the constructions of the Vedic altar, of houses, etc, Dharmasastra 
provides a code of conduct embracing all human activities.  
We want to perform a ritual, but how do we go about it? We do not know 
where the propriety or otherwise of performing it is mentioned in the 
Vedas. Nor do we know where instructions are given about it. What are 
we to do then? We do not know anyone who has mastered all the Vedas. 
Extracting information from them about the rite we want to perform is 
impossible because they are like the expanse of a vast ocean. If the Vedas 
bid us "Do like this, " we do so. But since we do not know their 
ordinances well enough, what are we to do? The answers to this 
questions are given by Manu: "The sages who had mastered the Vedas 


 
composed the Smrtis. Find out what they have to say. "What we call 
Smrtis make up Dharmasastra.  
"Vedo'khilo dharmamulam  Smrtisile ca tadvidam".  
"Smrti" is what is remembered. "Vismrti" is insanity. Manu 
observes:"There is Smrti for the Vedas in the form of notes. The sages 
who had a profound understanding of the Vedas have brought together 
the duties and rites (dharma and karma) mentioned in them in the form 
of notes and they constitute the Smrtis. They are written in a language 
that we can easily understand. Read them. They tell you about your in 
detail, the do's and don'ts, and how the rites are to be performed. "  
We have seen that the sixth Vedanga, Kalpa, contains instructions about 
the Vedic works. The Grhyasastras, Dharmasastras and Srautasastras of 
Kalpa deal with sacrifices and other rites. The Smrtis elaborate on them 
and contain detailed instructions with regard to the rite one has to 
perform through one's entire life. Actually, there are rituals to be 
conducted from the time of conception until death. The Smrtis also lay 
down the daily routine to be followed by all of us.  
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
 


 

Smritis and Allied Works 
Manu, Parasara, Yajnavalkya, Gautama, Harita, Yama, Visnu, Sankha, 
Likhita, Brhaspati, Daksa, Angiras, Pracetas, Samvarta, Acanas, Atri, 
Apastamba and Satatapa are the eighteen sages who mastered the Vedas 
with their superhuman power and derived the Smrtis from them. Their 
works are known after them like Manusmrti, Yajnavalkya-smrti, Parasara-
Smrti and so on, and they contain all that we need to know about all the 
dharmas to be adhered to and all the rituals to be performed during our 
entire life.  
Apart from these eighteen, there are eighteen subsidiary Smrtis called 
Upasmrtis. It is customary to include the Bhagavadgita among the Smrtis.  
What we find in one Smrti may not be found in the other. There may also 
be differences between one Smrti and another. These give rise to doubts 
which are sought to be cleared by works called "Dharmasastra 
Nibandhanas".  
There are some Smrtis which do not contain instructions with regard to 
all observances. For instance, some do not mention sandhyavandana. The 
reason must be it is such a common rite that everybody is expected to 
know it. Then some omit the sraddha ceremony and some others are 
silent on various types of "pollution" (for instance, that due to the birth of 
a child in the family or death of a relative). Certain matters are taken for 
granted. After all, we do not have to be told about how to breathe or eat.  
The nibhandanas do not leave out any rite or dharma. Differences 
between various Smrtis are sought to be reconciled in them.  
Each region follows its own nibhandhana. In the North, it is the one 
authored by Kasinatha Upadhyaya. In Maharastra, it is the Mitaksara: it 
has the force of law and is accepted as such by the law courts. 
Nirnayasindhu by Kamalakara Bhatta is also accepted as an authority 


 
there. In the South, Vaidyanatha-Diksitiyam by Vaidyanatha Diksita is 
followed. These are the important authorities for householders. 
Sannyasins follow Visvesvara-samhita. In Tamil Nadu the Dharmasastra 
means the Vaidyanatha-Diksitiyam. The nibandhana has been translated 
into Tamil.  
The Dharmasastras are not as difficult to follow as the Vedas and can be 
understood with a little knowledge of Sanskrit.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 


 

Vaidyanatha-Diksitiyam 
Vaidyanatha Diksita's own name for his work is Smrti-Muktaphala-
Nibhandana-Grantha. We know very little about the author of this 
extremely useful book. Diksita must have lived some two hundred years 
ago; he belonged to Kandiramanikkam, near Nacciyarkoil (in Tanjavur 
district). It must be noted that he himself practised the dharmas he had 
dealt with in his nibhandana and he is also believed to have performed 
big sacrifices.  
Vaidyanatha-Diksitiyam is considered superior to similar works by 
Medhatithi, Vijnesvara, Hemadri and so on. Exhaustive in nature, it deals 
with the duties and rites pertaining to the different castes and asramas 
(the four stages of life), ritual purity, sradhha, prayascitta, stridharma, 
dayabhaga, dravyasuddhi. It even gives directions about the division of 
paternal property. When the Hindu code Bill was introduced in free India 
some put forward the view that the division of property must be based 
on the sastras. Such division is called "Dayabhaga". The division of 
property in Kerala, in the uncle-nephew line, is called marumakkatayam. 
The word "dayadi" is derived from "daya".  
Diksitiyam is the last among the nibhandanas. In the preparation of this 
work Vaidyanatha Diksita had the advantage of making a comparative 
study of all the previous works on Dharmasastra. Before it the authority 
followed it to some extent in the South was the nibhandana of 
Tozhappar. Vaisnavas and Smartas alike today accept the Diksitiyam as an 
authority.  
The nibhandanas are not like the Vedas (Sruti), the Kalpa-sutras and the 
Smrtis. Since they came later it is not easy to make them acceptable to 
all. Diksita, it must be noted, does not show the least trace of bias in his 
work and has followed the Mimamsa in determining the meaning of 
Vedic texts. He has brought together previous sastras and arrived at 
conclusions only after resolving the contradictions in them. This is the 


 
reason why his work is considered as authority in the South. When the 
Smrtis differ in some matters, he takes a broad view and suggests: "Let 
each individual follow the practices of his region and the tradition of his 
forefathers".  
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 


 

Freedom and Discipline 
There are a hundred thousand aspects to be considered in a man's life. 
Rules cannot be laid down to determine each and every one of them. 
That would be tantamount to making a legal enactment. Laws are indeed 
necessary to keep a man bound to a system. Our sastras do contain many 
do's and don'ts, many rules of conduct.  
There is much talk today of freedom and democracy. In practice what do 
we see? Freedom has come to mean the licence to do what one likes, to 
indulge one's every whim. The strong and the rough are free to harass 
the weak and the virtuous. Thus we recognise the need to keep people 
bound to certain laws and rules. However the restrictions must not be 
too many. There must be a restriction on restrictions, a limit set on how 
far individuals and the society can be kept under control. To choke a man 
with too many rules and regulations is to kill his spirit. He will break loose 
and run away from it all.  
That is the reason why our Sastras have not committed everything to 
writing and enacted laws to embrace all activities. In many matters they 
let people follow in the footsteps of their elders or great men. Treating 
me as a great man and respecting me for that reason, don't you, on your 
own, do what I do-wear ashes, perform Pujas and observe fasts? In some 
matters people are given the freedom to follow the tradition or go by the 
personal example of others or by local or family custom. Only thus will 
they have faith and willingness to respect the rules prescribed with 
regard to other matters.  
Setting an example through one's life is the best way of making others do 
their duty or practice their dharma. The next best is to make them do the 
same on their own persuasion. The third course is compulsion in the form 
of written rules. Nowadays there are written laws for anything and 
everything. Anyone who has pen and paper writes whatever comes to his 
mind and has it printed.  


 
Hindu Dharmasastra has come under attack for ordering a man's life with 
countless rules and regulating and not allowing him freedom to act on his 
own. But, actually, the sastras respect his freedom and allow him to act 
on his own in many spheres. Were he given unbridled freedom he would 
ruin himself and bring ruin upon the world also. The purpose of the code 
of conduct formulated by our sastras is to keep him within certain 
bounds. But this code does not cover all activities since the makers of our 
sastras thought that people should not be too tightly shackled by the 
dharmic regulations.  
You may feel that with regard to some aspects of life there is an element 
of compulsion in the sastras, but you may not feel the same when you 
follow the tradition, the local or family custom or the example of great 
men. Indeed you will take pride in doing so. This fact is accepted, in the 
large-heartedness of its author, by the Vaidyanatha-Diksitiyam. Previous 
works on Dharmasastra shared the same view. The Apastamba-sutra is an 
authority widely followed. In its concluding part the great sage 
Apastamba observes: "I have not dealt with all duties. There are so many 
dharmas still to be learned. Know them from the fourth varna. "From this 
it is clear that the usual criticism that men kept women suppressed or 
that Brahmins kept non-Brahmins suppressed is not true. In a renowned 
and widely accepted dharmasastra such as that of Apastamba women 
and Sudras are authoritatively recognised to be knowledgeable in some 
aspects of dharma.  
Asvalayana and some other "original" authors of sutras say that the word 
of women is to be respected in the matter of the arati in weddings and 
application of paccai. The posts supporting the marriage pandal are 
installed to the chanting if mantras. Even so, if the servant or worker 
erecting the pandal has a story to tell about it or some tradition 
connected with it, you must not ignore it. In this way everyone is 
respected in the sastras and given what is called "democratic" freedom.  
The dharmasastras include the samskaras and other rituals to be 
performed by the fourth varna. That caste has not been ignored and its 


 
duties and rituals are dealt with in the chapters on varnasrama, anhika 
and sraddha in the Diksitiyam.  
The dharmasastras have usually chapters on "acara" and "vyavahara". 
The first denotes matters of custom and tradition that serve as a general 
discipline. The second means translating them in terms of outward rites 
or works.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   


 

Signs and Marks 
If we call ourselves Hindus we must bear certain external marks, outward 
symbols.  
The boy scouts have a uniform of their own. Army and navy men are 
distinguished by certain insignia. There are number of divisions in police 
force. Even though their functions will not change if they wear one 
another's uniforms or badges, there is a strict rule with regard to their 
dress and insignia. The policeman's cap must not be worn by the sailor. 
There is a certain discipline and orderliness among all these forces.  
This discipline as well as orderliness is essential in religion also. That is 
why different jatis and different asramas have different functions and 
signs. According to the dharmasastras we must wear the dhoti or the sari 
in such and such a way or apply the mark to the forehead in a particular 
manner. All this is not meant for social discipline alone. There is a high 
purpose, that of purifying our inner life.  
The court attendant has a tavali. The officials do not have it. Is it sensible 
to why? But we do not take the same attitude with regard to the different 
signs and marks assigned to the people according to their vocations and 
family customs. We make a noise in the name of equality. Even though 
we remain divided in the matter of vocations-which indeed is for the 
welfare of the entire community-we are of one heart. This is the ideal 
behind the social arrangement in which different jatis are assigned 
different rites and external symbols, these in keeping with their natural 
qualities and callings. There is no high or low in all this. But we keep 
fighting among ourselves imagining that there is.  
Now we have come to such a pass that nobody wears any of the external 
marks of our religion. At the same time, we are not ashamed of wearing 
other types of signs or badges. To wear those marks that bring uplift of 
the Self we are ashamed. We dismiss all religious marks and symbols as 


 
part of superstition. But those who want to proclaim themselves to be 
reformers don a particular type of cap or upper cloth and these external 
trappings are given greater importance than symbols of a divine nature.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 


 

Smritis - not Independent Works 
There is a wrong impression about the dharmasastras even among those 
who treat them with respect. They think that the rules and duties of the 
Smrtis were formulated by their authors on their own. They call these 
authors "lawgivers" who, in their opinion, laid down "laws" that reflect 
their own views. Further they think that the dharmasastras were 
composed in the same way as our Constitution. Such a view gives rise to 
another idea. We keep amending the Constitution whenever we find that 
it stands in the way of certain measures being introduced. It is asked, on 
the same logic, why the dharmasastras too should not be changed 
according to the beliefs and ideas of the present times.  
People ask me:"Why should not the sastras be changed to suit the times? 
The government changes its laws, does it not? “They sing my praises and 
tell me: "You are like the sages, the authors of the Smrtis. If only you 
make up your mind you can change the Smrtis to suit our times. “In effect 
what they respectfully suggest is this: "Please change the sastras as we 
would like them to be changed.”  
If the Smrtis really represent the views of the authors there is nothing 
wrong in what these people think about them and about what they want 
me to do about them. But those who want the dharmasastras changed do 
not see to know that they (the Smrtis) do not reflect the view of the sages 
who composed them. What the authors of the Smrtis have done is to 
present us in an orderly fashion what is already contained in the Vedas. 
The Vedic word cannot and must not be changed at any time and on any 
account. The same applies to the rules and laws laid down in the Smrtis.  
I may not be capable enough, or worthy enough, to persuade you to live 
according to the sastras. But changing them is certainly not my function. I 
have been installed here (in the Matha) to make people perform their 
duties and rites. That is according to the command of the Acarya. I do not 
possess the authority to revise the sastras according to what is felt to be 


 
convenient to the present times or what is in keeping with the new 
beliefs.  
If the sages had created the Smrtis on their own, to represent their own 
views, there would be no compulsion to accept them. If the Smrtis are 
not needed we could reject them outright. If their contents are not based 
on the Vedas and include rules and directions that reflect the views of the 
authors, then we can do without them. In this way so many people have 
written down so much about so many things. We too may write down 
whatever comes to our mind. The Smrtis must be looked upon as an 
authority for today and tomorrow and for all time because they are 
founded on the Vedas. But what is the proof for this claim?  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 


 

The Source of Smritis is the Vedas 
The best testimony to the claim that the Smrtis are founded on the Vedas 
is provided by the words of mahakavi (great poet). Sankara, Ramanuja 
and Madhva, the founders of our religio-philosophical systems, proclaim 
that our dharmasastras are in accord with the Vedas. But they had, each 
of them, a doctrine to establish. Besides they had also the goal before 
them of preserving the tradition and they would not naturally go against 
it. With a poet it is different. He has no doctrine to establish, no belief to 
promote. He speaks what he feels to be the truth since he does not have 
to lend his support to any particular concept or system.  
The greatest of the mahakavis, Kalidasa, makes a reference to the Smrtis 
in his Raghuvamsam.  
As all of you know, Dasaratha was the father of Rama. Dasaratha's father 
was Aja and Aja's father was Raghu. Rama was named Raghurama after 
his great-grandfather. We do not often come across "Dasarathi" among 
the names of Rama. Usually one is named after one's grandfather. But 
Rama did not take the name of Aja and is better known after his great-
grandfather. Raghu had such fame and glory. The name Raghava also 
means one belonging to the family of Raghu.  
Raghu's father was Dilipa. For long he did not have a son. The guru of 
Dilipa's family was Vasistha. Dilipa approached him and said to him: 
"Svamin, I don't have a child. Bless me that my family will continue and 
prosper. “Vasistha had a cow called Nandini, the daughter of Kamadhenu. 
The sage asked the king to look after the cow and worship her with faith. 
He blessed Dilipa thus: "A son will be born to you.” Think of it, a king was 
asked to look after the cow. How humble he must have been.  
Dilipa took charge of the cow right away. Like a cowherd he took Nandini 
to the forest, grazed her, bathed her and looked after with devotion. He 
carried a bow with just one arrow to protect her from wild beasts. He 


 
scratched the cow, stopped on the way if she stopped, lay down if she lay 
down, walked if she walked. If we sit down our shadow too will seem to 
sit down, if we stand up so too our shadow will seem to stand up, if we 
run then too our shadow will seem to run. "Chayeva tam 
bhupatiranvagacchat", says Kalidasa. Dilipa followed the cow like a 
shadow.  
Every day, as Dilipa took the cow to graze, his wife Sudhaksina would 
follow him to some distance and then return home. Very religiously she 
would send her husband out with Nandini and wait in the evening for 
them to return from the forest. Sudhaksina kept caring for Dilipa and, if 
the king followed Nandini like a shadow, she too followed him in turn like 
a shadow.  
The duties of a Pativrata are described by Janaka during the marriage of 
his daughter Sita to Rama. He says to Rama: "My child Sita will follow you 
like a shadow (chayevanugata)". This is in Valmiki Ramayana. Kalidasa 
retells the story of Rama that Valmiki has told. He speaks about Lava and 
Kusa who came after Rama and also about Rama's predecessors. And he 
gives to his great poetical work the title of Raghuvamsam after Rama's 
great-grandfather Raghu of unsurpassed fame. Verily, to speak of this 
family is to sanctify one's speech.  
In the passage describing how Sudhaksina followed Dilipa as he goes 
grazing the cow, the poet makes a reference to the sages creating the 
Smrtis. He does so not in pursuance of any doctrine, not also after any 
deliberation. 
He 
speaks 
spontaneously 
about 
the 
Smrtis, 
unpremeditatedly. The poet describes how Sudhaksina follows the cow to 
some distance. Nandini is in the front and Sudhaksina walks behind. The 
cow raises a little dust with her hoofs and the queen goes some distance 
looking at the hollowed dust. Kalidasa excels all other poets in similes. 
Each poet has some distinction or other. There is a saying: "Upama 
Kalidasasya" (For similes Kalidasa-Kalidasa excels in similes). It is in the 
context of Sudhaksina following Nandini that the poet brings in the simile 
of the queen following the cow like the Smrtis following the Vedas.  
 


 
Tasyah khuranyasapavitrapamsum  
Apamsulanam dhuri kirtaniya  
Margam manusyesvaradharmapatni  
Sruterivartham Smrtiranvagacchat  
-Raghuvamsam, 2. 2  
"Pamsu" means dust. As Nandini goes grazing, dust is raised. "Khura" is 
hoof. "Khuranyasa" means placing of the hoof and "pavitra pamsum" the 
sacred dust.  
The dust raised by the cow is particularly sacred. It sanctifies any place. 
Such is the case even with the dust raised by an ordinary cow, not to 
speak of the so sacred Nandini, Kamadhenu's daughter. Sudhaksina is a 
woman of spotless character - there is not a speck of dust on it -and such 
a woman has now cow dust on her. "Apamsu" means free of dust and 
refers to Sudhaksina of unblemished character. She goes step by step 
along the hollowed path following the dust raised by the hoofs of the 
cow. How? Like the Smrtis composed by the sages that follow the Vedas - 
"Sruterivartham Smrtiranvagacchat".  
"Anvagacchat" = (she) followed. Here the upamana (that with which a 
comparison is made) for the cow is Sruti or the Vedas. The "hoof steps" of 
the cow are to be taken as the meaning of the Vedas.  
So Sudhaksina followed in the "hoof steps" of Nandini like the Smrtis 
following the meaning of the Vedas. Also, like the Smrtis not going in the 
entire way with the Vedas, she did not go all the distance with the cow. 
The idea is that the Smrtis do not repeat all that is said in the Vedas. They 
are "notes from memory", but they truthfully follow the Vedas in their 
meaning. They do not, of course, represent all thousands of mantras of 
the scriptures but, all the same, they tell us how to make use of the 
Vedas.  
"Sudhaksina with her pure antah-karana followed her husband and, 
without deviating even a little, walked along the path of the dust raised 
by Nandini's hoofs". Having said so much, Kalidasa thought he must bring 
in a good simile for Sudhaksina following the cow dust and it occurred to 


 
him in a flash: "Like the Smrtis following faithfully the meaning of the 
Vedas.”  
The upamana is always superior to the upameya. If a face is compared to 
the lotus or the moon, the lotus or the moon must be more beautiful 
than the face. Here Sudhaksina, of matchless purity of character, 
following her husband Dilipa is likened to the Smrtis closely following the 
Vedas. No better authority is needed to support the view that the Smrtis 
are in accord with the Vedas.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 


 

Sruti-Smriti - Srauta-Smarta 
To discriminate between Sruti and Smrti is not correct. Sruti, Smrti and 
the Puranas, all three belong to the same tradition. Sankara is said to be 
the abode of the three ("Sruti-Smrti-Purananam alayam"). If the three 
were at variance with one another how can they exist in harmony in the 
same person?  
Those who follow the tradition of Acarya are called "Smartas". The word 
"Smarta" literally means one who adheres to the Smrtis. To say that the 
Acarya descended to earth to uphold the Vedas and that those who 
follow his path are Smartas implies that the Vedas and Smrtis are one.  
The rites that are not explicitly mentioned in the Vedas but are dealt with 
in the Smrtis are called Smarta karmas and those that are explicitly 
mentioned are called Srauta karmas. This does not mean that the Smarta 
rites are in anyway inferior to Srauta. The householder's Smarta works 
include such an important rite as aupasana; equally important are the 
domestic rites like sraddha and the seven pakayajnas. Vedic mantras are 
chanted in all these. Those who composed the Smrtis and laid down the 
performance of such rites must have been fully aware of the spirit of the 
Vedas. It is not proper to think that the Smrtis are inferior to the Vedas or 
that the Puranas are inferior to the Smrtis. We must learn to take an 
integrated view of all of them.  
In Puranas the Vedic truths are illustrated in the form of stories. The 
Smrtis bring the Vedic dharmas and karmas in the form of instruction and 
injunctions and tell us how the rites are to be performed.  
The sages had intuitive knowledge of the Vedas. As mentioned so often 
they did not compose them - they saw them. There was no intellectual 
effort on their part in this. "Srutim pasyanti munayah" (The sages see the 
Vedas). They used their intelligence to examine what they saw and, 
remembering it all, derived from the Vedas the duties and rites for 


 
various castes. This they gave us in a codified form called Smrti. As I said 
before "Smrti" means memory. For the sages the Vedas constituted an 
experience that just happened to them. The Smrtis or the dharmasastras 
are derived from their memory of it. "Samskara-janyam jnanam Smrtih", 
the Nyaya-sastra define Smrti thus. It means that Smrti is knowledge 
derived from Samskara. Here "Samskara" means "atindriya". But what 
exactly is it?  
We go to Kasi and worship at the temple of Visvanatha there. Many days 
after our return home, we go to the local temple which has a sanctum of 
"Kasi Visvanatha". At once we remember the experience we had of seeing 
the deity Visvanatha at Kasi. In between for many days, that is between 
our visit to Kasi and to the local temple, we had no memory of this deity. 
We come across so many people every day but we hardly think of them 
later. But, when we happen to see them subsequently, we tell ourselves: 
"Ah, we must have seen them before somewhere.” In between there was 
no memory of the people. This "in between state" is called "samskara" or 
"atindriya". In that state there is an impression of our experience within 
us. When this impression manifests itself as an "expression" we have 
"Smrti" or memory. All told, Smrti is the result of our experience and 
samskara an impression of that experience within us.  
The experience constituted by the Vedas and manifested as the memory 
is the Smrti or Dharmasastra. Smrti does not become Smrti without its 
Vedic root. Are not the Vedas the"experience" that is the source of the 
Smrtis? Without such a source the name suggesting "notes of memory" 
would be meaningless. How can we describe as notes of remembrance" 
anything that is new and is not founded on something prior to it?  
There is no second opinion regarding the fact that what is called 
"Srauta"(directly mentioned in the Vedas) is wholly authoritative. But 
what is not directly mentioned in Sruti but included in Smrti - that is 
Smarta - is not to be taken to be less authoritative. Smarta never 
contradicts Srauta. In some matters Smritis may go beyond Sruti, but that 
too is fully authoritative being based on the inner spirit of Sruti. Just as 
the Sthala Puranas fill in the gaps in the major Puranas and the epics, so 


 
the Smrtis speak of what is left out in the Vedas. We use terms "Sruti 
pramana" and "Smrti pramana"(the authority of the Vedas and the 
authority of the Smrtis), but making such a distinction does not mean that 
we should treat Sruti and Smrti different or that we should think that the 
one is inferior to the other.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 16 
THE FORTY SAMSARAS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Samskara 
I used the word "samskara" above [in the previous chapter - of part 
Fifteen]. I also explained its meaning according to the Tarka-sastra 
(science of logic) as "impression on memory". But this is not how the 
word is generally understood. "Sam(s)"=well; "kara"=making. "Samskara" 
means making something good, refining or purifying it. 
The dharmasasthras deal with such samskaras as purify a man so as to 
make him fit to be united with the Paramathman. From the 
dharmasastras we know in detail the forty samskaras that are based on 
the Kalpa-sutras and that are to be performed by a man during his life's 
journey.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Paradise or the Path of Atmajnana? 
Our worldly existence is a mixture of joys and sorrows. Some experience 
more joy than sorrow and some more sorrow. Then there may be a rare 
individual here or there who can control his mind and keep smiling even 
in the midst of sorrow. On the other hand, we do see a quite a number of 
people who have much to be happy about but who keep a long face. If a 
man lacks for something it means he is unhappy.  
All creatures long for everlasting happiness. There are two abodes of 
eternal happiness. One is devaloga, the world of celestials or paradise, 
the other is Atmajnana, the state of awareness of the Self. The Atman, 
the Self is bliss; it is the Brahman. To realise this truth is to attain 
everlasting blessedness. But this state, this joy supreme, is not 
experienced by the mind or the senses. It is the highest, the most exalted 
state and it transcends the senses and the mind; it is a state in which a 
man becomes aware that "the body is not I, the intelligence is not I, the 
consciousness is not I".  
Paradise is the place where happiness is always experienced by the mind 
and the senses. Music and dance - music of the gandharvas, dance by 
Rambha and Menaka - Kalpaka, the tree that grants all wishes, 
Kamadhenu, the cow that grants all wishes, the garden known as 
Nandana: devaloka means all these. It is indeed a playground and there it 
is always joy. But a difference exists between the joy known in paradise 
and the bliss experienced by the knower of the Self. It is true that there is 
eternal happiness in paradise but not so far the man who goes there 
because he will not be a permanent resident of it. If he has earned a good 
ideal of merit he will be able to reside there until he is reborn. When he 
has enjoyed the fruits of his meritorious actions, the Lord will send him 
back to earth. It is true that there are accounts in the Puranas of mortals 
who earn a great ideal of merit and become gods themselves to reside in 
the celestial world. But the same Puranas also tell us that the gods 
themselves are not permanent denizens of paradise. There are stories in 


 
these texts of the celestials being hounded out of paradise by demons 
like Surapadma and Mahisasura and of Indra, their king, himself being 
pushed down to earth to undergo suffering there.  
On a hypothetical basis, eternal happiness may be ours in svarga or 
paradise. But there is no instance of anyone having actually lived there 
permanently nor does it seem possible for anyone to do so.  
Happiness gained through the senses is derived from external objects. 
These cannot be ours for all time. There were occasions when Indra had 
to suffer all by himself when he lost everything, including Kamadhenu, 
the Kalpaka tree, Airavata and even Indrani. So the happiness associated 
with paradise, which is dependent on external objects, can never be 
enduring. "Sadananda" or eternal bliss is for him who has neither 
anything external nor internal and who dwells in his Self as a sthita-prajna 
( a man of steady wisdom) as explained by the Lord in the Gita, one who 
remains nailed to his Self. The joy experienced by Indra is but a droplet of 
the vast ocean of Atmic bliss, so says the Acarya in his Manisa Pancakam: 
"Yad Saukhyambudilesalesata ime Sakradayo nirvrtah".  
According to Upanisads you will have external bliss if the senses and the 
mind are removed in the same way as you draw off the rib from a stalk of 
corn and remain just the Atman. It needs great courage to pluck out the 
body and the senses realising that “I am not the body. Its joys and 
sorrows are not mine". Such courage is not earned without inner purity. 
Conduct of religious rituals is meant for this, for cittasuddhi (purity of the 
consciousness). There are forty samskaras to refine a man with Vedic 
mantras and to involve him in the rites associated with those mantras. 
These are the first steps towards the indissoluble union of the individual 
self with the Absolute - it is Advaitic mukti, non - dualistic release.  
We must strive to become inwardly pure by the performance of works. 
Then, with the inner organs (antah - karana) also cleansed, we must 
mediate on the Self and become one with It. This is the concept of 
Sankara. If a man has such a goal before him and keeps performing rituals 
throughout (even without becoming a sannyasin) he goes to Brahmaloka 
on death. During the great deluge when Brahma is absorbed in the 


 
Brahman he too attains non - dualistic liberation, so says Sankara. But if a 
man performs rituals for the sake of rituals without keeping before him 
the goal of oneness with the Brahman he will be rewarded with paradise, 
but not the paradise that is eternal. Though the stay be brief he will enjoy 
greater happiness there than on earth. It is samskaras that earn a man 
heaven.  
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 


 

Three Types of Worlds 
We speak of three worlds: devaloka (world of the celestials), 
manusyaloka (this world of ours), and naraka (hell). The first has nothing 
but pleasure; in the second it is a mixture of happiness and sorrow; and in 
the third there is nothing but pain and sorrow. According to our sastras a 
man who has committed terrible sins goes through torments of hell 
before taking lowly birth again in this world.  
Our sastras also have it that this world of ours is better than the others. 
How? From here we may make the journey to any other world. If a man is 
condemned to hell he cannot escape from it and will be forced to stay 
there until he has paid for his sins. If we go to paradise we cannot extend 
our stay there however much we may wish to do so. When the fruits of 
our meritorious acts are executed we will have to tumble down to earth. 
It is only here that we have some freedom and we may earn merit or 
demerit by our actions. We may use our hands to perform puja - or we 
may use them to hurt others. We may sing the praises of Isvara - or we 
may speak ill of people. We have the power to do good and evil in this 
world. For each of our faculties of action (karmendriya) God has given us 
this twin capacity.  
There is not this kind of freedom in the other worlds. Is a cow capable of 
earning merit? The devas are like cows. So far as the cow is concerned 
there is neither merit nor sin in its life. On this earth (bhuloka) only those 
like us human beings can win liberation - we can do so through good 
actions. Other worlds are like hotels where the denizens eat what we 
harvest here. There you may enjoy the fruits you have merited here by 
your actions in proportion to the punya you have earned or the papa you 
have piled up. Our world alone is karmabhumi (world of works). And even 
in this world only human beings are capable of thinking and acting on 
their own. All other creatures live by instinct. Those who live in the other 
worlds have no right for karma.  


 
A man's actions, his works, together with his character, determine his 
passage to other worlds. Only in this karmabhumi can we perfect our 
character by performing virtuous acts and thus qualify to go to another 
world.  
There is a proper time and a proper place for the conduct of a religious 
rite. Do you think a sraddha can be performed at midnight? There is a 
right time for it as well as a proper place. It is in India particularly, that is 
Bharatavarsa, the Vedic karma must be performed, but even in this land 
it is not permitted during certain periods. It has to be carried out in 
hallowed places and during sanctified hours.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 


 

Meaning of Samskara 
What is karma? It means work. Suppose you have to make a vesti (dhoti). 
There are a number of processes, a number of works for it. The cotton 
has to be gathered from the field; it has to be cleaned and spun into yarn; 
then the yarn has to be woven into cloth and dyed. In the same way a 
man has to be made a knower of the Atman through a series of rituals. 
Karma has to be performed in such a way as to purify him both outwardly 
and inwardly. Such a karma is called samskara.  
That which removes the impurities from an object, takes away all the bad 
or evil elements, and imparts good qualities to it is samskara. For 
instance, we talk of "kesa-samskara". It means shaving or delousing and 
applying oil to the hair. Samskara is like combing the hair and applying oil 
to it. Certain types of samskara are conducted on land. First the land is 
allowed to dry in the sun, then it is ploughed and irrigated. Seeds, say, of 
paddy, are sown and after they sprout the seedlings are transplanted. 
The weeds are removed, the field irrigated again and the excess water 
drained off. When the corn is ripe, the crop is harvested, threshed and 
the chaff winnowed. The paddy has to be "seasoned" and pounded 
before the rice is used.  
How many different steps are there in making cotton into a vesti. The 
weaver has to take great care that the yarn does not get tangled. Our Self 
is in a tangle caused by the senses. It has to be untangled and made 
eternally happy. There are many obstacles to accomplishing this. Now 
and then we experience some happiness in the midst of all our trouble 
and suffering. This happiness must be made to endure for ever. For that 
we must go to Brahmaloka. In the presence of Isvara there will be no 
sorrow. After the great deluge we will become one with him. We have to 
prepare ourselves now itself towards that end.  
The sages have laid down the forty samskaras and the eight "Atmagunas” 
for this purpose.  


 
When we use the term “Atmaguna” or speak about the Atman being 
rendered pure, there is a suggestion that we are dualists (Dvaitins) who 
hold that the individual self is different from the Paramatman. In truth 
there is only one Atman, one Self, and there is no difference between the 
jivatman or individual self and the Parabrahman. The Self is ever pure. So 
it is wrong to believe that it has to be purified by the samskaras. It is 
nirguna, unconditioned and without attributes. So it is also wrong to 
speak of what are called Atmagunas, since the Atman has truly no gunas 
or qualities or attributes.  
However in practice, owing to Maya we do not realise that we are the 
Atman without qualities. It is the Self perceived in our dualistic life that is 
referred to when we speak of samskaras and it is full of impurities that 
have to be removed through the samskaras. It has also durgunas or bad 
qualities which have to be removed by cultivating the eight good 
qualities. Once we succeed in this, there will be neither any samskara nor 
any guna. We will transcend all gunas, all qualities, including the highest 
of them, sattvaguna. Finally there will be only the Self without any karma, 
without any gunas and without any distinction between the jivatman and 
the Paramatman. But to come to this state we have to go through the 
process of samskaras and cultivate the eight Atmagunas.  
If we wish to emulate the example of the noble character of the Puranas, 
we will have to contend against various obstacles like our attachments 
and desires, our feelings of hatred and fear. We will have to be disciplined 
through works and we will have to observe the rules about our daily 
routine, about how we should sit and stand and eat and dress. In this way 
we will rein in our mind, subdue our passions and ego, and our feelings of 
anger, hatred, fear and sorrow will gradually wither away. The samskaras 
and Atmagunas are interconnected. They will help us to acquire the 
qualities of the noble Puranic characters whose stories we listen to or 
read.  
 
 
 


 

The Eight Qualities 
The eight gunas or qualities are: daya, ksanti, anasuya, sauca, anayasa, 
mangala, akarpanya, asprha.  
"Daya" implies love for all creatures, such love being the very fulfilment 
of life. There is indeed no greater happiness than that derived by loving 
others. Daya is the backbone of all qualities.  
"Ksanti" is patience. One kind of ksanti is patiently suffering disease, 
poverty, misfortune and so on. The second is forgiveness and it implies 
loving a a person even if he causes us pain and trouble.  
"Anasuya" you know is the name of the sage Atri's wife. She was utterly 
free from jealousy: that is how she got the name which means non-
jealousy. Heart-burning caused by another man's prosperity or status is 
jealousy. We ought to have love and compassion for all and ought to be 
patient and forgiving even towards those who do us wrong. We must not 
envy people their higher status even if they be less deserving of it than 
we are and, at the same time, must be mature enough to regard their 
better position as the reward they earned by doing good in their previous 
life.  
"Sauca" is derived from "suci", meaning cleanliness. Purity is to be 
maintained in all matters such as bathing, dress, food. There is a saying 
often quoted even by the unlettered: "Cleanliness makes you happy and 
it even appeases your hunger". To see a clean person is to feel ourselves 
clean.  
In Manu's listing of dharmas that are applicable to all, ahimsa or non-
violence comes first, followed by satya (truthfulness), asteya (non-
covetousness; non-stealing is the direct meaning), sauca (cleanliness) and 
indriya-nigraha (subduing the senses or even obliterating them).  


 
The fifth Atmaguna is "anayasa". It is the opposite of "ayasa" which 
denotes effort, exertion, etc. Anayasa means to have a feeling of 
lightness, to take things easy.  
One must not keep a long face, wear a scowl or keep lamenting one's 
hardships. If you lose your cool you will be a burden to yourself as well as 
to others. Anayasa is a great virtue. In many of our rituals there is much 
bodily exertion. When we perform a sraddha we have to remain without 
food until 2 or 3 in the afternoon. There is no end to the physical effort 
we have to put in to conduct a sacrifice. Here anayasa means not to feel 
any mental strain. Obstacles, inevitable to any work or enterprise, must 
not cause you any mental strain. You must not feel any duty to be a 
burden and must develop the attitude that everything happens according 
to the will of the Lord. What do we mean when we remark that the 
musician we listened to yesterday touched the "tara-sthayi" so 
effortlessly? Does it mean that he performed a difficult musical exercise 
with ease? Similarly, we must learn to make light of all the hardships that 
we encounter in life.  
What is "mangala", the sixth guna? Well, "mangala" is mangala. There is 
mangala or an auspicious air about happiness that is characterised by 
dignity and purity. One must be cheerful all the time and not keep 
growling at people on the slightest pretext. This itself is extremely 
helpful, to radiate happiness wherever we go and exude auspiciousness. 
It is better than making lavish gifts and throwing money about.  
To do a job with a feeling of lightness is anayasa. To be light ourselves, 
creating joy wherever we go, is mangala. We must be like a lamp 
spreading light and should never give cause for people to say, "Oh! He 
has come to find fault with everything". Wherever we go we must create 
a sense of happiness. We must live auspiciously and make sure that there 
is happiness brimming over everywhere.  
"Akarpanya" is the next guna. Miserliness is the quality of krpana or 
miser. "Akarpanya" is the opposite of miserliness. We must give 
generously and whole-heartedly. At Kuruksetra Arjuna felt dejected and 
refused to wage war with his own kin. In doing so, according to the Gita, 


 
he was the guilty of "karpanya dosa". It means, contextually, that he 
abased himself to a woeful state, he became "miserly" about himself. 
Akarpanya is the quality of a courageous and zestful person who can face 
problems determinedly.  
"Asprha" is the last of the eight qualities. "Sprha" means desire; a 
grasping nature. "Asprha" is the opposite, being without desire. Desire is 
at the root of all trouble, all evil and, all through the ages, it has been the 
cause if misfortunes. But to eradicate it from the mind of men seems an 
almost impossible task. By performing rites again and again and by 
constantly endeavouring to acquire the Atmic qualities one will 
eventually become desireless. Says Valluvar:  
Parruga parrarran parrinai apparrai  
parruga parru vidarku  
Tirumular goes a step further. "It is not enough, “he says, "to be attached 
to Isvara who is without attachment and be free from other attachments. 
You must be able to sever yourself from the attachment to Isvara 
himself".  
Asai arumingal, asai arumingal  
Isanodayinum asai arumingal  
The Buddha calls desire thirst. Intense desire for an object is "trsna". (The 
Buddha calls it "tanha" in Prakrt). His chief teaching is the conquest of 
desire.  
Desirelessness is the last of the eight qualities. The first one, daya, is the 
life-breath of Christianity. Each religion lays emphasis on a particular 
quality, though all qualities are included in the teachings of Buddha, Jesus 
Christ, the Prophet Mohammed, Guru Nanak, Zoroaster, Confucius and 
the founders of all other religions. Even if these qualities may not have 
been pointedly mentioned in their teachings, it is certain that none of 
them would regard people lacking them with approval. 
 


 

Gunas in Practical Life 
All religions teach people to be loving, to be truthful and to be free from 
jealousy, desire and greed. But our religion goes further by imposing on 
us the performance of various samskaras to acquire these qualities in 
practical life. There is no use in merely preaching, in asking people to be 
like this or that. A man must be kept bound to a system consisting of such 
works as would help him in practice to acquire the noble qualities 
expected of them. Our religion alone does this.  
Other religions, it is claimed, teach love and desirelessness. But Hinduism, 
it is alleged, does not give any importance to such qualities and is, 
besides, ritual-ridden. This view is totally erroneous. In fact, our religion 
does more than others: while laying emphasis on the eight qualities, it 
imparts lessons to take people beyond them, to a state that transcends 
these very qualities. It also believes that merely talking about the 
qualities will serve no purpose. After all, we know, don't we, that we have 
to be virtuous, truthful, loving and so on? Still we find it difficult to live 
according to these ideals. What purpose is served if our canonical texts 
merely keep urging us again and again to acquire noble qualities? That is 
why, unlike other faiths which contain a great deal of ethical and moral 
instruction, our religion teaches ethics and morality only to the extent 
needed. But is that all? Without stopping with mere precept it tells us 
how we may- in actual practice- cultivate and acquire them. This it does 
first by telling us stories through the Puranas of virtuous people who 
obtained fame and of evil-doers who got ill fame. But it recognises that 
such examples are not enough to provide the necessary inspiration, so it 
lays down a number of samskaras for the purpose of obtaining inner 
purity. Ours is the only religion that gives practical training in making 
people virtuous and in acquiring moral excellence. Instead of being proud 
of this fact, is it right to feel that there is something lacking in our 
religion?  


 
The first of the eight qualities is love which is the chief teaching of Jesus 
and the last of them is desirelessness which is the cardinal teaching of the 
Buddha.  
Is it enough to give oral instruction about the qualities? In other words, is 
it enough merely to preach them? It is man's nature to be engaged in 
some work or other. And, after all, if you want to accomplish something 
you will have to work for it. Gandhiji taught truth and non-violence, spoke 
about them all his life. In his asrama he was all the time not only doing 
some work or other himself, he was also urging others to do the same. 
His followers called him a hard taskmaster. He asked them to keep 
turning the charka and expected them to clean their toilets themselves.  
The dharmasastras have prescribed rites to make us inwardly pure and 
impart us the eight qualities. In this context the sutras of Apastamba and 
Gautama have a dominant place. Among the Smrtis Manu's is the most 
important.  
Apastamba and Gautama deal with the dharmas common to all people. 
The former lays down the duties and samskaras separately for the 
different castes also. Gautama deals with the forty samskaras and the 
eight Atmagunas. These forty-eight are the means to take a man to 
Brahmaloka on his death. He goes before the presence of Isvara, which is 
like going to a great jnanin. He can remain quiescent in bliss. When Isvara, 
who conducts the world himself becomes formless, he too [the man who 
attains Brahmaloka] will be dissolved in him. Until then he resides in the 
world of Isvara (saloka) and later attains sayujya, that is becomes one 
with him. "Yasyaite catvarimsat samskarah astavatmagunah sa 
Brahmanah sayujyam salokatam jayati", so it is said.  
The body is involved in various ways in performing the forty samskaras. 
When you work in an office you use your hands and feet and mouth, 
don't you? So is the case with the samskaras. He who performs them and 
cultivates the eight Atmagunas goes directly to the Brahmaloka in which 
world there is neither sorrow nor happiness. When are you without 
sorrow and happiness? When you are with the One who creates them.  


 
The Atmic qualities are described as "Atmasakti". This term has recently 
come into use in newspaper language. In the old Sanskrit and Tamil texts 
we do not see the term "Atmasakti" used, only "Atmagunas".  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 


 

Importance of Agni 
The samskaras cover an individual's entire life-span -"Nisekadi 
smasanantakam" - from the moment before he is conceived in his 
mother's womb to the time when his body is offered to Agni. "Niseka" 
(impregnation) is a rite performed with the sacrificial fire as the witness; 
and the funeral rites which come last are performed in the fire.  
Agni, the sacred fire, must be kept burning throughout a Brahmin's life. 
The Brahmacarin or bachelor - student must perform the samidadhana 
everyday. After he is married, with Agni as witness, he becomes a 
grhastha (householder). He must now perform the aupasana in the fire. 
For the vanaprastha (forest recluse), there is a sacred fire called 
"kaksagni". The sannyasin has no sacrament involving the sacred fire: he 
has the fire of knowledge (jnanagni)in him. His body is not cremated -that 
is there is no Agni-samskara for it- but interred as a matter of respect. 
Strictly speaking, it must be cut into four parts and consigned to the four 
quarters of a forest. There it will be food for birds and beasts. In an 
inhabited place the severed parts of the body would cause inconvenience 
to people. That is why they were thrown into the forest. There it would 
be food for its denizens; if buried it would be manure for the plants. Now 
over the site of the interment of a sannyasin's body a Brindavana is 
grown [or built] : this again is done out of respect. At such sites all that is 
to be done is to plant a bilva or asvattha tree.  
All castes have rites to be performed with the sacred fire. During 
marriage people belongings to all varnas must do aupasana and the fire in 
which the rite is performed must be preserved throughout. Today, only 
Parsis seem to keep up such a practice of preserving the fire. Their 
scripture is called the Zend-Avesta which name must have been derived 
from the Vedic "Chando-Vasta". Their teacher was Zoroaster 
[Zarathustra] : this name must have been derived from "Saurastra". Their 
homeland is Iran (from "Arya"). If the fire kept by them is extinguished at 
any time they spend a good deal of money in expiatory rites. With us 


 
rituals performed in the sacred fire have been on the decline from the 
turn of the century. The lifestyle of our people has changed. If there is 
faith, this great treasure (rites performed in the fire) could be preserved. 
The most important reason for the loss of faith is the present system of 
education.  
This body of ours has to be finally offered in the fire as ahuti (oblation) to 
the deities. It is treated as a dravya (material for sacrifice) with ghee 
applied to it before it is offered in the fire. The ceremony is called 
"dahana-samskara".  
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 


 

Names of Samskaras 
The forty samskaras which are meant to purify the individual self are: 
garbhadhana, 
pumsavana, 
simanta, 
jatakarma, 
namakarana, 
annaprasana, caula, upanayana, the four rites like prajapatya 
(Vedavratas) performed during gurukulavasa (the years the celibate 
student spends in the home of his guru), the ritual bath on completion of 
gurukulavasa, marriage, the five mahayajnas performed everyday by the 
householder. We have listed nineteen so far. Then there are seven 
pakayajnas, seven haviryajnas and seven somayajnas to be conducted by 
the householder. Thus 19+21=40  
The seven pakayajnas are: astaka (anvastaka), sthalipaka, parvana, 
sravani, agrahayani, caitri, asvayuji. The seven haviryajnas: agniyadhana, 
agnihotra, darsa-purnamasa, agrayana, caturmasya, nirudhapasubandha, 
sautramani. The seven somayajnas: agnistoma, atyagnistoma, uktya, 
sodasi, vajapeya, atiratra, aptoryama.  
Out of the forty samskaras some are to be performed everyday, some at 
certain times and some at least once in a lifetime. In the first category 
there are five mahayajnas (panca-mahayajnas).  
Rites done to the chanting of mantras are more beneficial than those 
done without it - a sacrament involving mantras is a samskara. The social 
service that a house holder does is included among his daily panca -
mahayajnas. The panca - mahayajnas are: brahmayajna, devayajna, 
pitrayajna, manusyayajna and bhutayajna. The chanting of the Vedas 
constitutes brahmayajna. Sacrifices and puja are devayajna. Tarpana is 
pitrayajna. Feeding guests is manusyayajna. And offering Bali to various 
creatures is bhutayajna.  
Aupasana and agnihotra are part of the daily religious routine. Though a 
pakayajna, aupasana is not included in the group of seven pakayajnas 
mentioned above, while agnihotra is one of the seven haviryajnas. Darsa -


 
purnamasa is a haviryajna to be performed once in fifteen days. The 
other five haviryajnas and the seven somayajnas are to be performed 
once a year or, at least, once in a lifetime. As if out of consideration for 
us, the Smrtis have granted us this concession: that the difficult 
somayajnas need be undertaken only once in a lifetime.  
But for the parvani - sraddha which is to be performed once a month and 
the sthalipaka every Prathama, the other five pakayajnas are to be 
performed once a year.  
To put it differently: the five mahayajnas (brahmayajna, devayajna, 
pitrayajna, manusyayajna, bhutayajna) together with agnihotra and 
aupasana are to be performed everyday; darsa-purnamasa and sthalipaka 
once a fortnight; parvani-sraddha once a month. The other yajnas are to 
be conducted once a year or at least once in a lifetime.  
On a plot of land growing one crop, harvesting is done once a year, while 
on another plot growing three crops the same is done once every four 
months. Some crops have to be watered everyday, some on alternate 
days. Such jobs are samskaras. But there are differences in the samskaras 
for different crops. The same is the case with the samskaras meant for 
human beings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Samskaras Performed by Parents 
The samskaras begin with garbhadhana that is from the moment of 
conception [or, more correctly, impregnation]. The "sarira-pinda" must 
be formed to the chanting of mantras. People mistakenly think that rites 
like Pumsavana and simanta are meant for the mother. Actually, they are 
for the life taking shape in her womb, the foetus and are meant to purify 
it. The elders have a responsibility in this matter. One may not do the 
rites meant for oneself, but it is sinful to be negligent about those meant 
for another life. Nowadays people omit to perform garbhadhana, 
simanta, etc, since they think that such rites are not fashionable.  
Where there should be some delicacy in man-woman relationship people 
act without any sense of shame after the fashion in the West. But, when 
it comes to performing Vedic rites in which the well-being of the new life 
created is involved, they feel a sense of awkwardness. Such an attitude is 
not right.  
Garbhadhana, pumsavana and simanta are performed before the child is 
born. The sexual union of man and wife must be sanctified by the 
mantras. Instead of being an act of animal passion, it is raised to the level 
of a samskara with the chanting of mantras: the purpose is the well-being 
of the life to be formed. It is madness to give up such rituals without 
realising the high principles inspiring them and, instead, thinking them to 
be "uncivilized". If there is any feeling of delicacy on your part about the 
garbhadhana (rtusanti) ceremony, you do not have to invite a crowd. But 
the rite itself must be gone through within the four walls of the home. It 
is no longer the custom to have a four-day wedding with the couple doing 
daily aupasana. Nor is the rite of sesahoma conducted following the day 
of wedding. The couple has sexual intercourse on the same day as the 
marriage without any ceremony and the chanting of mantras. This is an 
evil practice and sinful. Since the intercourse takes place in an animal 
manner, the children born too will be likewise. Pumsavana must be 


 
performed in the third month of pregnancy and simanta in the sixth or 
eighth.  
Nowadays both rites are gone through together anyhow.  
On the birth of a child, its jatakarma must be performed. Gifts must be 
given away. Namakarana is on the eleventh day. Even this, the naming 
ceremony, has a purificatory purpose according to the sastras. There are 
rules regarding the name to be chosen for the child in accordance with 
the naksatra or asterism under which it is born. It must be one from the 
many names of the Lord and to call the child by such a name is itself a 
samskara since it has a cleansing effect. We do not have the custom of 
"christening" our children as "Longfellow" or "Stone". But nowadays even 
in this land similar names are given to children. Also when the child's 
name is that of the Lord it is corrupted or twisted clumsily. The name 
given to a child during a Vedic ritual must be treated with some respect.  
When the child is six months old it is time for its annaprasana. The 
samskaras from the garbhadhana to namakarana are performed by the 
parents on behalf of the child. In annaprasana, even though the father 
chants the mantras, it is [obviously] the child that takes anna or food.  
If the mother takes medicine, the baby is nourished, is it not? In the same 
way the inner thoughts and feelings of the parents will affect the foetus 
and its character will be shaped accordingly. There is a difference 
between what you write when your mind is calm and what you write 
when you are in an angry mood: the first will be good to read while the 
second will not be so pleasant. The body too is subject to good and bad 
influences. The sexual union must take place when the couple is imbued 
with good thoughts: it will then lead to the creation of a blob of life 
(pinda) that will have the potential to develop into a noble character. This 
is the reason why the marriage is consummated with the intonation of 
mantras.  
There are people who have not altogether ceased to observe such rites, 
but sometimes they go through two or three rites together. There is a 


 
right time for every samskara and there are mantras as well as dravyas 
(materials) appropriate to them.  
Caula comes after annaprasana. It is meant for the "sikha" which is 
essential to the conduct of all good rites. The sannyasin has no sikha and 
is shaven-headed; in fact, the sikha has to be removed with the recitation 
of mantras at the time one receives initiation into sannyasa. It is worn in 
the caula ceremony with the chanting of mantras and with a vow made to 
Paramesvara (as part of the samkalpa). So it is wrong to remove it as we 
like in violation of this vow. Is it proper to remove this lock of hair as if it 
were just a handful of leafy vegetables? People install the sivalinga or 
salagrama for worship. Would it be right on their part to discard them as 
they like. It would be a different matter if they were stolen or lost 
accidentally. Similarly, to wear a sikha ceremonially and then remove it, 
as and when we like, and wear a crop is not proper.  
The chanting of the Vedas, the performance of Vedic rituals and the 
dharma practised by the householder with his wife strengthen both body 
and mind (the latter through the vibrations in the nadis produced by the 
mantras). The sikha on the Brahmarandhra is a protection and a means of 
obtaining such strength. It is like the tiles on the roof of a house. Only 
when you cease to perform Vedic rites is it not needed, that is when you 
are no longer a householder and became an ascetic. Today even as 
student-bachelors or as householders we have ceased to chant the Vedas 
and practise Vedic rites. So, naturally, we do not wear the sikha also.  
Upanayana comes after caula. It is the first samskara that a boy performs, 
chanting the mantras himself. Those conduced until this ceremony are 
meant to protect the child from the evil influences arising from the sins 
committed by its parents. These are either "garbhika" or "baijika" 
(belonging to the womb or to the seed or sperm). The samskaras 
performed by the parents are to remove the ills caused to the child by 
these harmful influences.  
Any samskara must be performed at the right time and by doing so we 
are absolved of our sins. To wash away the papa earned by us in the past 


 
we have to go through samskaras in which our body, mind and speech 
are applied.  
We think evil with our mind, tell lies with our mouth, and sin with our 
body also. Indeed we practise all kinds of deception. The wrongs 
committed by mind, speech and body must be wiped away by applying 
mind, speech and body to virtuous purposes. With the mind, 
Paramesvara must be meditated upon; with the faculty of speech, 
mantras must be chanted; and with the body, noble deeds must be 
performed. It is from the time of upanayana that one becomes mature 
enough to perform samskaras that bring together mind, speech and body.  
I must speak about another matter. Apart from the samskaras that a 
father performs specifically for the sake of his child (from garbhadhana to 
caula), those (including other types of rites) he conducts otherwise also 
benefit the children. This is according to the saying, "The good done by 
mother and father goes to protect the children". Until recently the 
children of Vaidika Brahmins were particularly bright, the reason being 
the impetus they received from the samskaras performed by their 
forefathers. What our ancestors did by way of good works served as the 
foundation of our moral and intellectual uplift for two or three 
generations. Children born afterwards have been so much embroiled in 
worldly affairs as to have become degraded.  
Our fathers did not perform any samskaras. So we may feel sorry that we 
have been deprived of the benefits that would otherwise have come to 
us. Let us not give room for our children to make the same complaint 
about us. Let us perform samskaras for our sake and theirs.  
 
 
 
 
   


 

Why not All Samskaras for All? 
Jatakarma, namakarana, annaprasana and caula are common to all jatis. 
Only Brahmins, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas have the upanayana ceremony. 
There is nothing discriminatory about this nor need there be any quarrel 
over the same. People belonging to the fourth varna do physical work to 
serve the world and in the process acquire inner purity. They will gain 
proficiency in their hereditary vocations only by learning them from their 
parents or grandparents. They do not require gurukulavasa over some 
twelve years [as in the case with Brahmins] nor do they have to learn the 
Vedas. If so their work will suffer.  
Upanayana is the first step taken towards gurukulavasa. When a boy 
learns the Vedas he must have no ego-feeling. At home he has a lot of 
freedom. His father will not be able to discipline him because his 
affection will come in the way. That is why the child is to be brought 
under the care of a guru. Vocations that require physical effort are 
different from the pursuit of the Vedas. There is no room for intellectual 
arrogance in them or for the nursing of the ego. So such work may be 
taught at home by the father or some other elder in the family.  
Those who serve by doing manual work do not require to go through 
upanayana or gurukulavasa. Certain special skills or the finer aspects of 
an art or craft that cannot be taught at home may be learned from a 
Brahmin teacher. The Brahmin is expected to be proficient in all arts, all 
subjects, but none of these is meant to be a source of his livelihood. His 
vocation is teaching and the chanting of the Vedas and the performance 
of Vedic rites.  
There is a relationship between the samskaras described for a man and 
his vocation and mental outlook. So it would be wrong to think poorly of 
certain jatis who do not have to perform certain samskaras. You may 
think it strange, but it is my view that it is those who have to undergo 
more samskaras than others that must have been thought of poorly. The 


 
idea is that these people need more rites to be rendered pure. Others are 
not in need of so many to be cleansed within. The larger the dose of 
medicine taken by patient the greater must be his affliction.  
None excels the sages in impartiality. They do not talk glibly like us of 
equality but they are truly egalitarian in outlook since they look upon all 
as one with Isvara. The conduct of the world's affairs is such that it 
requires people following different vocations, doing different jobs and 
with different mental qualities in keeping with them. It is in conformity 
with these differences and dissimilarities that the sages assigned the 
samskaras also differently to different people. There is no question of 
high or low among them.  
It is in observance of the same principle that the sastras lay down 
upanayana for the first three varnas (Brahmins, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas) 
and also certain samskaras connected with it.  
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 


 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Part 17 
BRAHMACHARYASRAMA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Upanayana 
The upanayana of a boy is performed when he is old enough to 
understand things and chant the mantras. During this ceremony he is 
asked to go begging for alms. "Bhiksacaryam Cara", he is told. "Badham", 
he replies ( "I will do so"). So, before his upanayana, the child must know 
enough Sanskrit to understand what is meant by "Bhicksacaryam Cara". 
When he starts learning at the age of five he will have a basic knowledge 
of Sanskrit by the time he is eight years old, the age fixed for the 
upanayana samskara.  
The world will stand to gain if eight-year-old children wear the sacred 
thread, have sufficient knowledge of Sanskrit and chant the Gayatri 
mantra. Today things have so changed that Godlessness is thrust into 
tender minds.  
Upa=near; nayana=to take or lead (a child). Near whom or what is (the 
child) taken? Near the guru. That is what upanayana means. Who is a 
guru? One who has mastered the Vedas. There is one guru during the 
brahmacaryasrama (student-bachelorhood) and another during the last 
asrama of sannyasa. The first guru is learned in the Vedas, Vedangas and 
so on while the second is one who has forsaken all including the Vedas. In 
the first asrama you acquire vidya; in the last asrama you realise jnana. .  
Upanayana is initiation into the brahmacaryasrama while "samavartana" 
is the completion of this stage of life. "Samavartana" means "return". To 
repeat, from the upanayana to the samavartana is student-bachelorhood 
or the brahmacaryasrama. Samavartana thus denotes returning home on 
completing one's study of the Vedic discipline in the gurukula.  
Upanayana is the "purvanga" of student-bachelorhood. Any "anga" must 
have something that gives its distinctive character. This is called "angi". 
Thus for the anga called upanayana the angi is brahmacarya. The word 
"Brahma" has six different meanings. In the tern "Brahmacarya" it means 


 
the Vedas. An entire asrama or stage in life is set apart for the study of 
the Vedas: this is brahmacarya. The minimum period for student-
bachelorhood is twelve years which is the time taken to master the 
Vedas.  
"Brahma" also means Visnu as well as Siva. The word, in addition, is also 
used to denote a Brahmin, tapas or austerities and the Paramatman. 
When you say Brahma with a long "a" at the end (Brahma) it means the 
Creator.  
At mealtime we do "parisecana", that is we sprinkle water over our food, 
say, rice. It is the anga for the meal. The rice must be eaten o1nly after it 
has ceremonially been made a prasada of Isvara. This is the purpose of 
the parisecana. Is it not foolish to refuse the food after it has been made 
a prasada of Isvara. Not to learn the Vedas after one has had the 
upanayana is akin to refusing to eat the food placed before one after one 
has done the paricesana. In this sense the majority of people who have 
had their upanayana must be called foolish.  
There are four "vratas" between the purvanga called the upanayana and 
the uttaranga called the samavartana. These are prajapatya, saumya, 
agneya, and vaisvadeva [see following para].  
There are certain rules to be followed to master a mantra. The Vedas are 
replete with mantras that help you to go forward spiritually and find 
release from worldly existence. "Brahmacarya" may be described as the 
total discipline required to master the Vedas. There are also rules meant 
for the study of each part of these scriptures. Each Veda has four 
"kandas", each associated with a great sage. Brahmayajna is performed in 
honour of them. For each kanda there is also a separate vrata. During 
student-bachelorhood when a kanda is studied its vrata must also be 
observed. The kandas are prajapatya, saumya, agneya and vaisvadeva. 
After completing the four kandas the pupil will have his samavartana with 
the permission of his guru.  
The four vratas mentioned above are for students of the Krsna-Yajurveda. 
For students of the Rgveda there are the Mahanamni, Maha, Upanisad 


 
and Godana vratas. Thus each Veda has its own vratas. I mentioned those 
for the Krsna-yajurveda first since it is widely followed [in the South].  
Samavartana is also called "snana" and one who has gone through it is a 
"snataka". Everybody must learn his own Veda [the Veda that is his by 
birth] and other subjects in addition. When we perform upakarma we 
must start learning a new part of the Vedas. Later, at the time of 
utsarjana, it must be discontinued and the study of the Vedangas taken 
up. The Vedas, to repeat, must be studied during the six months roughly 
of Daksinayana, from the south of Sravana to Taisya. The next six months 
must be devoted to the Vedangas.  
To master the mantras the student must strictly observe the rules 
pertaining to the brahmacaraya and to the particular part of the Veda 
that is being studied. Nowadays we do not observe anything, we do not 
even learn the Vedas or a part thereof. Before the wedding ceremony, we 
perform a rite called "vrata": in one hour we go through a number of 
samskaras without understanding what we are doing and why we are 
doing them. Perhaps, I find myself giving this discourse because so much 
at least survives of the Vedic tradition.  
The importance of the upanayana ceremony lies in this: it makes a person 
fit to receive instruction in the Vedas and spread their divine power 
throughout the world. Parents must realise this fact and perform their 
son's upanayana at the right time.  
"Dvi-ja" ("iru-pirappalan" in Tamil) is the name given to a Brahmin, 
Ksatriya or Vaisya. They merit the second birth only when they become 
qualified to learn the Vedas. Such a birth is meant, as mentioned earlier, 
to spread the divine power all over the world, and it is through the 
upanayana ceremony that they become qualified for it. Performing this 
ceremony at the right time is the responsibility of the parents. At present, 
in matters like this, no regard is paid to the canons. In contrast, in the old 
days, people had faith in the scriptures and acted according to their 
dictates.  
 


 

The Sastras and Popular Custom 
It is to be regretted that, while the rules and injunctions of the 
dharmasastras are conveniently disregarded, certain popular customs 
prevalent in this part or that part of the country are being followed as if 
they had sastric validity. For instance, the belief has gained ground that 
the upanayana of a son must not be performed if he has an elder sister 
yet to be married. Another belief is that three brahmacarins must not 
stay together in a family at the same time. The upanayana of boys is 
delayed on this pretext. It is not right to go against the dharmasastras in 
preference to such popular customs and disregard the upper age limit 
fixed by them for the upanayana samskara. The customs mentioned 
above must have originated as a matter of convenience or for some 
sentimental reason. Popular practices may be followed so long as they 
are not contrary to the dictates of the dharmasastras.  
Let us quote here again what Apastamba says concluding his 
dharmasastra: "What I have dealt with so far does not exhaust all the 
rules. There are still many more. These must have evolved according to 
the custom of the family or the region concerned and may be known 
from women and members of the fourth Varna..." We must, however, 
remember that Apastamba does not want us to go against the 
dharmasastras.  
The upanayana samskara must not be postponed on any pretext 
whatsoever. Sometimes the marriage of a girl is delayed because the 
parents do not have enough money to meet all the wedding expenses. 
This is also not justified and is against the sastras. I will speak about it 
later when I deal with the vivaha (marriage) samskara. There is a lot of 
"show" in our weddings and this has come to be accepted as inevitable. 
Even if we, for our part, do not like any lavish display at weddings we 
yield to the wishes of the groom's people. The marriage of a girl is 
delayed until her parents manage to raise the money to celebrate it in a 
big way. It is also held up because a suitable groom does not turn up. 


 
Then there is the problem of the groom's people giving approval to the 
alliance.  
There are no such reasons for the "thread ceremony" to be delayed nor is 
there is any compulsion to make it expensive. It is not like a marriage in 
which we have to take into consideration the views and wishes of the 
groom's people. So there can be no valid excuse for failure to perform the 
upanayana of a son at the right time. The delay is unforgivable on any 
count.  
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 


 

Basic to the Vedic Tradition 
When a child falls ill the parents take special care of it. How wrong would 
it be to neglect a sick child? If there is anything worse it is not to perform 
the upanayana of one's son at the proper age and fail to impart him the 
Gayatri mantra. This rite is for his Atmic uplift as well as for the good of 
the world. It is sheer vanity that the "thread ceremony" is nowadays 
performed like a mini-wedding. This is one reason why it gets postponed 
since the parents have to find enough money to "celebrate" it on a lavish 
scale. Delaying this samskara for such reasons must be condemned in the 
severest terms possible.  
We in the Matha are ready to do anything [to help parents to perform the 
upanayana of their children at the proper age]. We arrange "mass 
upanayana" ceremonies. A number of other religious organisations also 
have similar arrangements. The Gayatri is common to all. Mass 
upanayana is conducted for boys belonging to boys belonging to different 
denominations, Smarta, Vaisnava, Madhva, etc, and is being done fairly 
satisfactorily. This practice must grow with more and more participants.  
Well-to-do parents think that such mass ceremonies are meant for 
people without means. But, at the same time, they do not perform the 
upanayana of their children on their own at the right time. In this 
samskara the importance of which is hard to exaggerate, there is no 
question of some being able to spend more on it than some others or 
some being able to afford the expense more than others. Money or 
property has nothing to do with it. It is sad that in upanayana rite 
considerations that are not relevant to it are brought in with the result 
that the samskara that is at the heart of the Vedic tradition is emptied of 
all its meaning.  
It is the duty of parents to make sure that, after they are invested with 
the sacred thread their sons chant the Gayatri everyday without fail. 
Some boys discontinue chanting this mantra the very first day after the 


 
upanayana ceremony. Parents must see to it that they don't. They must 
also make sure that the children perform the sandhyavandana without 
being distracted by cricket matches, cinema, party meetings, etc. I am not 
sure how far my urging is going to help, considering nowadays that 
parents nowadays are themselves more interested in clubs, films, 
meetings and the races than in matters concerning the Self. If there is any 
realisation on their part that their own lives have been lived in vain, they 
may perhaps want their children to do better. But will the boys listen to 
them? In all likelihood they will turn back to tell their parents: "why do 
you ask us to perform sandhyavandana and recite the Gayatri? What 
about you?"  
In this unfortunate situation, if I am wasting your time by speaking about 
such matters, it is because I have a duty to remind you of your 
responsibility with regard to your children's Atmic advancement.  
I do not know whether you will do what I ask you to do, nor do I know 
how you will do it. I will have to carry out the duty imposed on me by the 
Matha. The Matha bids me to see it that the upanayana of children is 
performed when they are of the right age, all those children who are 
entitled to learn the Vedas. Further, the Matha also bids me to see to it 
that, once the boys are invested with the sacred thread, they perform the 
sandhyavandana without fail everyday and that they learn to chant the 
Vedas at least one hour a day.  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Qualities of a Brahmacarin 
The celibate-student must perform samidadhana every day, beg for his 
food and take no salt. If he is a Brahmin he must keep a staff (danda) or 
palasa, if he is a ksatriya a staff of asvattha. The Vaisya brahmacarin has a 
staff of udumbara. The staff helps the student to retain his learning. It is 
similar to the lightening conductor or the aerial and is scientifically valid 
as to "fix" these hymns. That is why it should be kept-to safeguard the 
treasure called the Vedas that the student has acquired. The brahmacarin 
must wear the skin of the black antelope (krsnajina) and must not wear 
any upper cloth. There are rules the electrician has to observe for his 
safety: he must stand on a rubber plank or wear rubber gloves during 
work. Similarly there are rules prescribed by our great men of the past to 
protect the Atmic electricity, the Atmic energy.  
Today we perform upakarma as a one-day ceremony without keeping up 
the study of the Vedas. We do not go through the utsarjana at all. For our 
failure to do it we mutter a mantra in expiation, the mantra called 
"Kamokarsit"which says, “I did not sin. Kama (desire) did it. Anger did it. . 
. “There is no need to repeat this mantra if we perform the utsarjana.  
Brahmacarya implies adherence to a number of rules with regard to food, 
the performance of rites and the observance of vratas. If a brahmacarin 
makes any mistake in chanting the Vedas, in matter of tone or 
enunciation, he must do penance for the same on upakarma day. On this 
occasion he eats no more than a few sesame seeds; otherwise he fasts 
the whole day; and on the following day he offers 1,008 sticks of the 
palasa in the sacred fire chanting the Gayatri. He should do this every 
year. Nowadays brahmacarins perform this rite only on the day following 
the first upakarma following the upanayana. Actually this a rite all 
Brahmins are expected to perform, though we find today householders 
doing only Gayatri-japa. When you merely mutter the mantra you feel 
sleepy and you may go wrong in the japa. But such will not be the case if 
you also perform a homa as you chant the Gayatri. Sticks offered in the 


 
fire must be those of palasa, if not of the asvattha; darbha grass may be 
used if the other two are not available.  
At mealtime the student can have his fill. The only restriction is that he 
must not give free rein to his appetite. He must beg for his food for such a 
practice makes him humble. The sastras do not require him to fast. The 
student must be nourished properly during his growing years. But he 
must, at the same time, learn to develop sattvic qualities and there must 
be nothing rude or rough about him. It is by serving his guru that these 
qualities are inculcated in him.  
During the twelve years in the gurukula the student must learn his 
recension of the Vedas and also the caturdasa-vidya. On completion of 
his stay in the gurukula he performs the samavartana, returns home and 
marries.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 


 

Naisthika Brahmacarya and Family Life 
In the past, some students continued to reside with their guru without 
performing the samavartana. Even after his passing, they remained 
brahmacarins and remained so all their life.  
Our dharma takes into account the natural urges of man. The general rule 
is that, on his return home from the gurukula, the student must marry 
and settle down. It is difficult to go against the natural urges. But going 
along with nature does not mean being swept away in the flow of urges. 
After all the goal of all our efforts is reaching the other shore-that is 
release from the worldly existence. The householder must lead a life of 
dharma with his wife. But later he must become a forest recluse first and 
then, renouncing everything, a sannyasin. This path to asceticism through 
stages is based on the fact that curbing the natural instincts is likely to be 
harmful. A person who decides in his youth to become a naisthika 
brahmacarin (lifelong student-bachelor)may later succumb to his natural 
passions. This would be an offence against the asrama code of conduct 
and therefore sinful. As a householder he is not guilty of any offence if he 
goes by his natural urges within the constraints of dharma.  
There are exceptions to any rule. Those who have firmness and maturity 
of mind and strength of character obtained from the samskaras 
preformed in an earlier birth may become lifelong brahmacarins. We 
have the example of Samarta Ramadasa who lived more than 300 years 
ago. It was he who inspired Sivaji to uphold our dharma against the 
onslaught of Islam. Ramadasa, the naisthika brahmacarin, personified one 
aspect of Hanuman.  
Sri Sankara Bhagavatpada was an incarnation of Paramesvara and his 
mission was re-establishment of the Vedic dharma. He went directly from 
the brahmacarya to the ascetic stage of life. His disciples too, with the 
exception of Suresvaracarya, did the same. Sankara gave initiation into 
sannyasa to Padmapada, Hastamalaka and Totaka. In the Sankara Matha 


 
also brahmacarins are initiated into sannyasa because, according to the 
rule, only such sannyasins can occupy the Pitha. All this points to the fact 
that everybody need not become a householder before donning the 
ascetic's garb. But it must be conceded that only a few will have the 
wisdom and mellowness necessary to skip two asramas (that of the 
householder and the forest recluse) to take to sannyasa. Naisthika 
brahmacarins do not have to perform the following samskaras: marriage, 
the five mahayajnas, the seven pakayajnas, the seven haviryajnas and the 
seven somayajnas. Their antah-karana must be sufficiently pure even 
without going through these rituals. So they are exceptional cases.  
Dahana-kriya(cremation)is the last samskara according to the sastras. It is 
argued, on the basis of this, that they (the sastras)do not enjoin all, even 
the aged, to take to sannyasa. If everybody were to live through all the 
asramas (that of bachelor-student, householder, forest recluse and 
ascetic) there would truly be no question of the cremation rite for 
anybody. Are not sannyasins their attaining siddhi, instead of being 
consigned to the flames? If we believe that asceticism is only for the 
mature, and not even for the aged among the rest, the above argument 
cannot be said to be wrong.  
The view that cremation rite applies only to those who die too young to 
become sannyasins is unfounded. Indeed not only those who die 
prematurely but also the old are to be cremated [if they do not become 
sannyasins]. So the inference is that sastras do accept aged people also 
not taking to sannyasa.  
A person who has the light of knowledge in him and is free from passion 
must live in the forest giving up family responsibilities and performing 
only Vedic rites. He must leave his children and property behind and take 
only his wife with him to the forest. The wife, however, is not meant for 
carnal pleasure but is a partner in the conduct of rites involving the 
sacred fire-sacrifices, aupasana, etc. This is the meaning of vanaprastha. A 
person qualifies for this stage of life when he is mature enough to leave 
home and hearth, children and relatives. Later he gives up the Vedic 


 
karma itself and turns his mind exclusively to the quest of the Self. This is 
the time when he enters the sannyasasrama.  
The man who has thus separated himself from his wife and given up 
Vedic works is initiated into sannyasa by his guru. He must constantly 
meditate on the Paramatman and experience the Truth as an inward 
reality. Also, he must have the realisation that, "That Truth am I, all else is 
false play.”Then he is by himself, beyond his body and mind, as the 
Ultimate Truth. This is moksa, liberation. Such a man will continue to 
dwell in his body until the fruits of his past karma are exhausted. But he 
will not be affected by such karma as a sannyasin who has inward 
realisation. From the point of view of the outside world he may still dwell 
in his body; but even in this state he is liberated. He is now a 
"jivanmukta". 
When 
the 
body 
perishes 
he 
becomes 
a 
"videhamukta"(liberated without the body). And he himself is now the 
unconditioned Ultimate Truth.  
He who becomes a sannyasin without having lived as a householder and 
he who becomes a sannyasin after doing so, performing all the forty 
samskaras and acquiring all the eight Atmic qualities, becomes alike the 
Ultimate Truth.  
What is the fate of the man who does not become an ascetic but who 
keeps performing, until his death, all the samskaras and cultivates the 
eight Atmic qualities? He is cremated on his death, is he not? After all, the 
majority of people belong to this category. What happens to such people 
after their death?  
Sankara does not state that they will dissolve in Ultimate Reality. They do 
not have the intense urge, the burning desire, to grasp the Brahman, 
abandoning everything. If they have the all-consuming desire for the 
Truth, no force can hold them back from their quest. It is because they do 
not possess such a desire that they do not obtain non-dualistic release. 
However, they have faith in the sastras and perform works according to 
them and contribute to the well-being of the mankind and they are also 
thereby rendered pure inwardly. So, though they are not united with the 
Paramatman, they go to the presence of Isvara, Isvara who is the 


 
Paramatman with attributes (Saguna Brahman)and is behind the affairs of 
the world.  
This is called "Hiranyagarbha-sthana" and it is the same as Brahmaloka. In 
this there is no inseparable dissolution in the Paramatman, but the man 
who attains it remains in bliss "experiencing" Isvara. Such a state is also to 
be described as moksa. There is nothing wanting, there is no sorrow, and 
there is the presence of the Lord. What more is wanted? This state is 
reached by those who perform all the samskaras even though they do not 
become ascetics.  
But one day Isvara (the Saguna Brahman)will put a stop to the activities of 
all worlds and dissolve them in the great deluge(maha-pralaya). He will 
now become the Nirguna Brahman, the Paramatman without any 
attributes. At this time all those who reside by his side will unite with the 
Paramatman as the Paramatman, that is non-dualistic liberation.  
In the great deluge all creatures-even those who have not performed any 
of the prescribed rituals, creatures like worms, reptiles and so on also -
will merge with the Paramatman. Then what is special about the one who 
unites with the Supreme Being after having performed all the samskaras? 
When the Paramatman, as the Isvara with attributes, creates the worlds 
again those who do not perform the samskaras will be born again 
according to the karma of their past lives. Only those who have properly 
gone through the samskaras and been rendered pure will be inseparably 
united with the Brahman.  
I have come far from the subject of upanayana. I had sought an answer to 
the following questions: "Can a person remain a brahmacarin all his life? 
Can a brahmacarin become a sannyasin without going through the stage 
of the householder? ''  
 
  
 


 

Upanayana: When to Perform It? 
A Brahmin child's upanayana must be performed when he is eight years 
old from conception that is when he is seven years and two months old 
from birth. A Ksatriya's is to be performed at the age of twelve. Krsna 
Paramatman who belonged to the clan of Yadus (Yadavas) was invested 
with the sacred thread at that age. The corresponding age for a Vaisya is 
sixteen.  
According to the sastras, the lower limit of Brahmin youngsters is eight 
years and the upper limit is sixteen which means a grace of eight years. It 
is sinful in the not to have performed upanaya of a Brahmin boy before 
his passing the upper age limit.  
Uttarayana is the right period to perform upanayana-from the Tamil 
month Tai to Ani. when the sun journeys northwards. While this is the 
right time for marriages also, the season of Spring (Chittirai to Vaikasi)is 
considered particularly auspicious. For upanayana the month specially 
favoured is Masi. Upanayana and marriage are not favoured during 
Daksinayana (from the Tamil month Adi to the end of Margazhi).  
Nowadays, for various reasons, the upanayana and marriage ceremonies 
are delayed for as long as possible and celebrated in any month other 
than Margazhi. The results are there for you to see. But one must be 
happy perhaps that a function called marriage is still performed 
somehow. So long as people perform it, let them perform it at any time. If 
we take this attitude, marriages may be permitted in any season as a 
desperate step. But upanayana is a different matter. It should never be 
permitted in Daksinayana. If it is for some reason celebrated during this 
period, I would ask for its performance again in Uttarayana. Money is the 
main problem in conducting an upanayana or a marriage. Parents 
postpone the upanayana because they want to perform it at the same 
time as the marriage of their daughter so as to minimise the expenses.  


 
The upanayana is sometimes performed when the boy is only five years 
old. This is called "kamyopanayana", "Kamya" meaning in persuance of 
desire. Such early upanayana is all right if you want the child to develop 
inwardly at an early age. But seven years is the proper age for the child to 
be invested with sacred thread because by now he would have learned 
enough Sanskrit to chant the mantras clearly. Nowadays, the "thread 
ceremony" is conducted together with the marriage, that is when the 
"boy" is 30 or 35 years old. So to suggest that the upanayana needs to be 
performed only when the child is seven years old - and not at five - would 
be taken as a joke. Joke or no joke, it [the delay in performing the 
upanayana] should make you uneasy deep within if you have some 
concern for the Vedic dharma.  
Adi Sankara's upanayana, it is believed, was performed when he was five 
years old. If the child is extraordinarily intelligent and can articulate 
words properly, his upanayana may be performed at five years.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  


 

Models to Follow 
It often occurs to me that two divine children demonstrate their purpose 
of descent to the earth through their very upanayana samskara. One of 
the two is Sankara who gave new life to the Vedic religion and the other 
is Jnanasambhandhar. The Tamil Periyapuranam mentions that 
Jnanasambhandhar's upanayana was performed when he was a small 
child. From the fact that he calls himself "Nanmarai Jnanasambandhan" 
we know that he was conversant with all the four vedas. Both the Acarya 
and Jnanasambandhar had to listen only once to grasp their lessons: that 
is why they were called "ekasantagrahins". So they could learn the vedas 
in one or two years. Indeed, there was no need to teach them, for they 
were capable of learning everything on their own. The one (Sankara) was 
an incarnation of Siva and the other of Subrahmanya. If they had 
accomplished their respective missions only after their upanayana had 
been performed and after they had received instruction in Gayatri, it was 
only to show ordinary people like us the importance of that samskara.  
There was a poet called Ramabadhra Dikshita who spoke about himself 
thus" Before Gayatri came to me, Sarasvati was already there with me." 
Before he was eight years old the usual age for imparting the Gayatri 
mantra, he had begun to compose poems. Jnanasambandar too sang his 
composition "Todudaya ceviyan" when he was only three years old. He 
had already been performing miracles. But even so he had his upanayana 
ceremony performed and was taught the Gayatri Mantra. If he did so it 
was to show the world that he was able to accomplish his great mission in 
life only by upholding the Vedic dharma. He has opened our eyes to the 
significance of the upanayana samskara and the Gayatri Mantra.  
 
 
 


 

Why Early Upanayana 
Let us leave aside the question of child being inspired by Sarasvati before 
he is imbued with Gayatri. The more important thing is that before Kama 
takes hold of a boy he must be inspired by Gayatri. That is why the age of 
upanayana is fixed at eight. When one is possessed by Kama one would 
be dragged away from one's ideal, that of acquiring the power of 
mantras. Even the power already acquired would be destroyed. That is 
the upanayana ceremony is performed early so that the boy is helped to 
become perfect by constant repetition of Gayatri Mantra. After 16, he 
will not be able to do the same. If he somehow ascends one span 
spiritually, he will the next moment descend by one cubit. That is why the 
upanayana samaskara must be performed early.  
We do not take such samaskaras seriously nowadays. We do things to no 
purpose, and at the same time we do not have the courage to give up 
such rites altogether. So we go through them "somehow” for a false 
sense of satisfaction. Far better it would be, instead, to have the courage 
to be an atheist. The atheist at least has some convictions, so it seems to 
me.  
If the Gayatri mantra is learned in childhood itself it would be retained 
like a nail driven into a tender tree. Gayatri imparts in great measure 
mental strength, lustre and health. It will increase the child's power of 
concentration, sharpen his intelligence, and make him physically strong. 
Later in life, when he feels the urge of Kama, Gayatri will prevent him 
from being dragged downward and be a protective shield for his body 
and intelligence. When one learns to meditate on the Gayatri in 
childhood itself, it would be a great help, as one grows up, in not wasting 
one's seed, in acquiring Brahmic lustre and qualities like studiousness, 
humility, devotion to God and interest in matters of the Self.  
Parents nowadays deny their children the opportunity of being afforded 
such great benefits and for no reason.  


 
A student spends the years of his gurukulavasa in Gayatri-japa; study of 
the Vedas and the Vedangas, begging for his food, serving his guru, 
observing various religious vows. When he completes his education thus, 
he will have become a young man ready for his samavartana. Later he 
must go to Kasi and, on his return home, take a wife. He is called a 
"snataka" between his samavartana and his return from his journey to 
Kasi. Samavartana is equivalent to today's convocation ceremony. In 
present-day marriages there is a farcical procedure called "Kasi-yatra"  
Marriage is one of the forty samskaras.  
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
 


 

Domestic Life and the Carnal Desire 
Great men have spoken in the past about the evil done by the carnal 
desire. Remarkably enough, our Vedic dharma has turned the same into 
an instrument for the purification of the Self by means of samskara and 
by imparting to it an element of propriety. It is not easy for an ordinary 
man to go to the forest and live as a recluse there or become a sannyasin. 
To become mellow, he has to go through all the rough and tumble of life, 
experience all the joys and sorrows of his worldly existence. In the years 
of tenderness he must taste bitter, in boyhood or student-bachelorhood 
he must taste astringent, as an unripe fruit [in youth] he must taste sour 
and as a mellow fruit [in old age] he must taste sweet. Ordinary people 
must go through all these stages so as to become mellow finally and to be 
filled with sweetness. What has not ripened naturally, or by itself, cannot 
be ripened forcibly. In this context one is reminded of the words of 
Ramalingaswamigal who speaks of a "prematurely ripe and withered fruit 
dropping". The sages know that such would be the result if a man were 
forced into maturity by going against nature. The duties of marriage and 
the life of a householder are intended to make a person mellow naturally. 
Besides are there not many beings that are to be born again as a 
consequence of their past karma? How can they be reborn in the absence 
of the samskara called marriage?  
The householder has to continue to chant the Vedas he was taught as a 
brahmacarin. He has also to teach these scriptures, perform a number of 
sacrifices and rites like aupasana and sandhyavandana. At present the 
conduct of sacrifices has become rare and not many learn the Vedas. But 
the tradition of sandhyavandana and Gayatri-japa is still followed though 
only to a very small extent. I will now speak about the Gayatri mantra.  
 
 
 


 

Gayatri 
"Whoever sings is protected,” that is "Gayatri". "Gayantam trayate 
yasmat Gayatrityabhidhiyate."  
"Sings" is not used here in the sense of singing a song. It means intoning 
or chanting (the mantra) with affection and devotion. People who chant 
the Gayatri in this manner are protected. While speaking about this 
mantra the Vedas use these words: "Gayatrim Chandasam mata". 
"Chandas" means the Vedas. So Gayatri is the mother of all Vedic mantras 
(that is the Vedas proclaim them so). It has twenty-four aksaras (letters or 
syllables) and three feet, each foot of eight syllables. That is why the 
mantra is called "Tripada Gayatri". Each foot is the essence of a Veda. 
Thus Gayatri is the essence of Rgveda, Yajurveda and Samaveda. The 
Atharvaveda has its own Gayatri. To receive instruction in it you must 
have a second upanayana.  
Says 
the 
Manusmriti: 
"Tribhya 
eva 
tu 
Vedebyhah 
padam 
padamaduduham". It means that each pada of Gayatri is taken from one 
of the (three) Vedas. We have forsaken all else that is Vedic. What will be 
our fate if we give up the Gayatri mantra also?  
Gayatri-japa is essential to all rites performed according to the sastras.  
(See also chapter 12) 
 
 
  
   
  


 

The Brahmin must keep his Body Pure 
The Brahmin must keep his body chaste so that its impurities do not 
detract from the power of the mantras he chants. "Deho devalaya prokto 
jivah prokto sanatanah. " (The body is a temple. The life enshrined in it is 
the eternal Lord. ) You do not enter the precincts of a temple if you are 
unclean. Nothing impure should be taken in there. To carry meat, 
tobacco, etc, to a temple is to defile it. According to the Agama sastras 
you must not go to a temple if you are not physically and spiritually clean.  
The temple called the body - it enshrines the power of mantras - must not 
be defiled by an impurity. There is a difference between the home and 
the temple. In the home it is not necessary to observe such strict rules of 
cleanliness as in the temple. Some corner, some place, in the house is 
meant for the evacuation of bodily impurities, to wash the mouth, to 
segregate during their periods. (In the flat system it it’s not possible to 
live according to the sastras). In the temple there is no such arrangement 
as in a house.  
Wherever we live we require houses as well as temples. In the same way 
our body must serve as a house and as a temple for Atmic work. The 
Brahmin's body is to be cared for like a temple since it is meant to 
preserve the Vedic mantras and no impure material is to be taken in. It is 
the duty of the Brahmin to protect the power of the mantras, the 
mantras that create universal well-being. That is why there are more 
restrictions in his life than in that of others. The Brahmin must refrain 
from all such acts and practices as make him unclean. Nor should he be 
tempted by the sort of pleasures that others enjoy with the body.  
The Brahmin's body is not meant to experience sensual enjoyment but to 
preserve the Vedas for the good of mankind. It is for this purpose that he 
has to perform rites like upanayana. He has to care for his body only with 
the object of preserving the Vedic mantras and through them of 
protecting all creatures. Others may have comfortable occupations that 


 
bring in much money but that should be no cause for the Brahmin to feel 
tempted. He ought to think of his livelihood only after he has carried out 
his duties. In the past when he was loyal to his Brahminic dharma the 
ruler as well as society gave him land and money to sustain himself. Now 
conditions have changed and Brahmin today has to make some effort to 
earn his money. But he must on no account try to amass wealth nor must 
he adopt unsastric means to earn money. Indeed he must live in poverty. 
It is only when he does not seek pleasure and practices self-denial that 
the light of Atmic knowledge will shrine in him. This light will make the 
world live. The Brahmin must not go abroad in search of fortune, giving 
up the customs and practices he is heir to. His fundamental duty is to 
preserve the Vedic mantras and follow his own dharma. Earning money is 
secondary to him.  
If the Brahmin keeps always burning the fire of mantras always burning in 
him, there will be universal welfare. He must be able to help people in 
trouble with his mantric power and he is in vain indeed if he turns away a 
man who seeks his help, excusing himself thus: "I do the same things that 
you do. I possess only such power as you have."  
Today the fire of mantric power has been put out (or it is perhaps like 
dying embers). The body of Brahmin has been subjected to undesirable 
changes and impure substances have found a place in it. But may be a 
spark of the old fire still gives off a dim light. It must be made to burn 
brighter. One day it may become a blaze. This spark is Gayatri. It has been 
handed down to us through the ages.  
 
 
 
 
   
   


 

Gayatri and Sandhyavandana 
If the Gayatri has not been chanted for three generations in the family of 
a Brahmin, its members lose caste (they cease to be Brahmins). The 
quarter where such Brahmins live cannot be called an "agrahara". It is 
perhaps not yet three generations since Brahmins gave up the Gayatri. So 
they still may be called Brahmins.  
In the same way if the Brahmin family has not performed sacrifices for 
three generations its members will be called "Durbrahmanas", 
degenerate Brahmins. Even though degenerate the label "Brahmin" sticks 
to them. There are prayascittas (expiatory rites) by means of which the 
corrupted Brahmins will be remade true Brahmins. But there is no such 
hope for a Brahmin in whose family Gayatri has not been chanted for 
three generations. A member of such a family ceases altogether to be a 
Brahmin and cannot be made one again. He is just a "Brahmana- 
bandhu", a kin or a friend of Brahmins. The same rule applies to Ksatriyas 
and Vaisyas with regard to the Gayatri mantra; they become "ksatriya-
bandhus" and "Vaisya-bandhus" respectively.  
The spark I mentioned earlier must be built into a fire. The spark by itself 
does not serve any purpose. But it has in it the potential to grow into a 
bright flame or a radiant fire.  
At least on Sundays, all those who wear the sacred thread must do 
Gayatri japa a thousand times. They must not eat unclean food, goto 
unclean places and must atone for lapses in ritual observances and in 
maintaining ritual purity. Henceforth they must take every care to see 
that their body is kept chaste and fit for it to absorb mantric power.  
Even in times of misfortune the Gayatri must be muttered at least ten 
times at dawn, midday and dusk. These are hours of tranquility. At dawn 
all creatures including human beings rise and the mind is serene now. At 
dusk all must be restful after a day's hard work: that is also a time of 


 
calm. At noon the sun is at its height and people are at home and relaxed 
and their mind is calm. During these hours we must meditate on Gayatri, 
Savitri and Sarasvati. In the morning the dominant presence is that of 
Visnu, at noon that of Brahma and at sundown of Siva. So we must 
meditate on Gayatri in the morning as Visnu personified, at noon as 
Brahma personified and at dusk as Siva personified.  
Gayatri contains in itself the spirit and energy of all Vedic mantras. Indeed 
it imparts power to other mantras. Without Gayatri-japa, the chanting of 
all other mantras would be futile. We find hypnotism useful in many ways 
and we talk of "hypnotic power". Gayatri is the hypnotic means of 
liberating ourselves from worldly existence as well as of controlling desire 
and realising the goal of birth. We must keep blowing on the spark that is 
the Gayatri and must take up the Gayatri-japa as vrata. The spark will not 
be extinguished if we do not take to unsastric ways of life and if we do 
not make our body unchaste.  
Gayatri-japa and "arghya" (offering libation) are the most important rites 
of sandhyavandana. The other parts of these rites are "angas" (limbs). 
The least a sick or weak person must do us to offer arghya and mutter the 
Gayatri ten times. "Oh only these two are important aren't they? So that's 
all we do, offer arghya and mutter the Gayatri ten times a day. “If this be 
our attitude in due course we are likely to give up even these that are 
vital to sandhyavandyana. A learned man remarked in jest about the 
people who perform arghya and mutter Gayatri only ten times thus 
applying to themselves the rule meant for the weak and the unfortunate: 
"They will always remain weak and be victims of some calamity or other". 
Sandhyavandana must be performed properly during right hours. During 
the Mahabharata war, when water was not readily available, the warriors 
give arghya at the right time with dust as substitute.  
Arghya must be offered before sunrise at noon and at sunset. Once there 
was a man called Idaikattu Siddha who grazed cattle. He said: "Kanamar 
konamar kandu kodu adugan pohutu par." "Kanamal/r" means before 
you see the sun rise and "konamal/r" means when the sun is overhead 
and "kandu" is when you see the sun before sunset. These are the three 


 
times when you ought to offer arghya. "Adu" means "niradu", bathe in 
the Ganga. "Kan" here means "visit Setu" or “have darsana of Setu". 
"Pohutu par"- by bathing in the Ganga and by visiting Setu your sins will 
be washed away. Here is mentioned the custom of going to Kasi, 
collecting Ganga water there and going to (Setu) Ramesvaram to perform 
the abhiseka of Ramanathasvamin there.  
Only by the intense repetition of Gayatri shall we be able to master all the 
Vedic mantras. This japa of Gayatri and arghya must be performed 
everyday without fail. At least once in our lifetime we must bathe in 
Ganga and go on pilgrimage to Setu.  
If a man has a high fever, people looking after him must pour into his 
mouth the water with which sandhyavandana has been performed. 
Today it seems all of us are suffering all the time from high fever! When 
you run a high temperature you have to take medicine; similarly Gayatri 
is essential to the self and its japa must not be given up at any time. It is 
more essential to your inner being than medicine is to your body. 
Sandyavandana must be performed without fail everyday. Gayatri-japa 
can be practised by all of us without much effort and without spending 
any money. All that you require is water. Sandyavandana is indeed an 
easy means to ensure your well being. So long as there is life in you, you 
must perform it.  
Gayatri must be worshiped as a mother. The Lord appears in many forms 
to bestow his grace and compassion on his devotees Mother loves us 
more than anybody else. We know no fear before her and talk to her 
freely. Of all the forms in which Bhagavan manifests himself that form in 
which he is revealed as mother is most liked by us. The Vedas proclaim 
Gayatri to be such a mother.  
This mantra is to be repeated only by men. Women benefit from the men 
performing the japa. Similarly when the three varnas practise gayatri-japa 
all other jatis enjoy the benefit flowing from it. We may cease to perform 
a rite if the fruits yielded by them are enjoyed exclusively by us. But we 
cannot do so if others also share in them. Those entitled to Gayatri 
mantra are to regard themselves as trustees who have to mutter it on 


 
behalf of others like women and the fourth varna who are not entitled to 
it. If they fail in their duty of trustees, it means they are committing an 
irremediable offence.  
The mantras are numerous. Before we start chanting any of them, we say 
why we are doing so, mention the "fruit" that will yield. The benefit we 
derive from the Gayatri mantra is the cleansing of the mind (cittasuddhi). 
Even other mantras have this ultimate purpose, but cittasuuddhi is the 
direct result of Gayatri-japa.  
Even in these days it is not difficult to perform sandhyavandana both at 
dawn and dusk. Office goers and other workers may not be at home 
during midday. They may perform the madhyahnika (the midday 
vandana) 2 hours 24 minutes after sunrise that is called "sangava kala".  
We must never miss the daily sandhyavadana unless we find it absolutely 
impossible to perform. When we fall ill, in our helplessness we ask others 
for water or kanji in the same way, we must ask our relative or friend to 
perform sandhyavandana on our behalf.  
Let us all pray to God that he will have mercy upon us so that the fire of 
mantras is never extinguished in us and that it will keep burning brighter 
and brighter.  
 
   
   
   
    
 
  


 

Other Aspects of Sandhyavandana 
"Astra" and "Sastra" are terms used in Dhanurveda (military science) to 
denote two types of weapons. Knife, arrow, spear, club and so on-real 
weapons-come under the term "sastra". "Astra" is what is energised by a 
mantra into a weapon. If you discharge just a darbha or a blade of grass 
chanting or muttering the appropriate mantra it will be turned into a 
weapon. Sastras are also discharged similarly with mantras. If you hurl 
something at a object or person muttering the mantra proper to it, the 
object or person will be destroyed when hit.  
The twice-born (Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaisyas) have the duty of 
discharging "Astras" every day to destroy asuras or the evil forces 
besieging mankind. Does not "Astra" mean that which is discharged, 
thrown or hurled? What is the "Astra" which is to be thrown or 
discharged [by the twice - born]? We throw water so as to drive away or 
destroy the demons or evil forces that have taken hold of the minds of 
people. This water, the astra, is the same as the libation offered during 
sandhiyavandana. We must keep this purpose in mind when we offer 
arghya : "May sinfulness and falsehood be annihilated. May the sun of 
knowledge shine brightly. May those obstacles that keep the sun of 
knowledge dim in us to be demolished. "Whatever you do or do not do, 
you must perform this arghya thrice a day. Do it somehow “holding your 
breath"  
When a person does a job earnestly and whole-heartedly, we say that he 
does it "holding his breath". As a matter of fact sandhyavandana is to be 
performed holding one's breath. If we do this all the evil forces will be 
destroyed. Nowadays all we do is to hold our nose with our fingers. The 
sastras do not say, "Nasikam ayamya", but say, "Pranam ayamya. " It 
means, instead of merely holding the nose, control the vital breath, the 
prana itself or the life force.  


 
All work must be done with one-pointedness. There must be such one-
pointedness of the mind to turn water into a weapon (astra). The breath 
is controlled for this purpose. You will ask: "How is it that if you control 
your breath the mind will be still?” We see that when the mind is still the 
breath also stops. When our wonder is aroused, when we are grief-
stricken or when we are overjoyed, the mind becomes one-pointed. We 
exclaim "Ha" and the breath stops for a moment. But soon we breathe 
fast. We do not stop breathing with any effort on our part-the stopping is 
involuntary. The mind stops when it is enwrapped or absorbed in 
something. Then we heave a sigh-take a long breath-making up for the 
momentary stoppage of breathing. We learn from this that, when 
breathing momentarily stops, the mind becomes one-pointed. This is the 
reason why the breath is controlled when arghya, libation, is offered.  
If we practice pranayama we will train ourselves to have mental 
concentration. This is important to yoga. Practicing pranayama for long is 
difficult and it must be done under the guidance of a guru. In 
sandhyavandana we do it only ten times. For some rites it is performed 
three times as a preliminary step. If we had practiced pranayama 
regularly from the time of our upanayana we should have become 
yogisvaras by now. What we do we must do properly. When we practice 
pranayama as a part of sandhyavandana we must stop our breath for 30 
seconds or so, not more. When the vital breath stops, the mind will 
become still. If the arghya is offered in this state the evil forces will be 
truly be driven away. The water that we pour or throw when our mind is 
still will turn a weapon to destroy all evil.  
After employing the arghya weapon against the evil forces, we must 
perform Gayathri-japa. Pranayama we must do according to our ability, 
holding the breath for a while, then realising it: this process may be 
repeated without controlling the breath for too long a time. All the steps 
in sandhyavandana- samkalpa, marjana, arghya-pradana, japa, stotra, 
abhivandana-have for their purpose the blessings of Isvara: this is stated 
in the samkalpa that we make at first. From beginning to end 
sandhyavandana is dedicated to Paramesvara and pranayama is an 
important part of it.  


 
According to the sastras even the sick must do pranayama three times a 
day. This means that breath-control is not such as to cause trouble or 
discomfort. Indeed it could mean a cure for the illness and a prescription 
for long life.  
Rsayo dirgha-sandhyatvad dirghamayuravapnuyuh  
Prajnam yasasca kirtim ca brahmavarcasameva ca  
-Manusmrti, 4. 94 
In abhivadana we mention the name of the sage from whom we are 
descended. It is our duty to observe Vedic rituals at least for the fact that 
we belong to the gotra of that sage. After him there have been so many 
rsis in the line. We use the terms "trayarseyam", "pancarseyam", 
"ekarseyam", meaning that, in the gotras concerned, there were three 
sages, fives sages, one sage. . . They must have lived long and secured 
knowledge, fame, Brahmic lustre and spiritual eminence by performing 
sandhyavandana. This is what the Manusmrti stanza means.  
By our neglect we should not sever the thread, the tradition, handed 
down to us uninterruptedly. We must perform sandhyavandana as an 
offering to Paramesvara and must do so understanding its meaning and 
with faith and devotion. There must be one-pointedness in it and no 
mantra must be left out.  
We sin with our mind, speech and body. I told you that these sins must be 
washed away by performing rites with the same mind, speech and body. 
In sandhyavandana we mutter the mantras with our mouth and, even as 
we repeat the Gayatri, we meditate on it with our mind and in such rites 
as 
marjana 
(sprinkling 
of 
water) 
we 
acquire 
bodily 
purity. 
Sandhyavandana is karmayoga, bhaktiyoga and jnanayoga combined [it 
unites the three paths of karma, devotion and knowledge].  
 
 
 


 

What about Women? 
I said that the twice-born must perform sandhyavandana with the well-
being of women and other jatis in mind. I also explained why all 
samskaras are not prescribed for the fourth varna. Now we must consider 
the question of women, why they do not have such rituals and samskaras.  
Even though we perform the punyaha-vacana and namakarana of 
newborn girls and celebrate their first birthday, we do not conduct their 
caula and upanayana nor the other samskaras or vows laid down for 
brahmacarins. Of course, they have the marriage samskara. But in other 
rites like sacrifices the main part is that of the husband, though she (the 
wife) has to be by his side. In aupasana alone does a woman have a part 
in making oblations in the sacred fire.  
Why is it so?  
The rites performed before a child is born are intended for the birth of a 
male child (niseka, pumsavana, simanta). Does it mean, as present-day 
reformers and women's libbers say, that Hindu women were downgraded 
and kept in darkness?  
What reason did I mention for the fourth varna not having to perform 
many of the samskaras? That these were not necessary considering their 
vocations and the fact that they can work for the welfare of the world 
without the physical and mental benefits to be derived from the 
samskaras. If they also spend their time in Vedic learning and in sacrifices, 
what will happen to their duties? So most of the samskaras are not 
necessary for them. They reach the desire goal without these rites by 
carrying out their duties. "Svakarmana tam abhyarcya siddhim vindati 
manavah", so says the Gita. I have spoken to you about this earlier.  
Just as society is divided according to occupations and the samskaras are 
correspondingly different, so too there are differences between men and 


 
women in domestic life. Running a household means different types of 
work, cooking, keeping the house clean, bringing up the children, etc. By 
nature women can do these chores better than men. If they also take an 
active part in rituals, what will happen to such work? Each by serving her 
husband and by looking after her household becomes inwardly pure.  
In truth three is no disparity between men and women, nor are women 
discriminated against as present-day reformers allege. Work is divided for 
the proper maintenance not only of the home but the nation on the 
whole; and care has been taken not to have any duplication. There is no 
intention of lowering the status of any section in this division of labour.  
The body, in the case of certain people, is meant to preserve the mantras 
and there are samskaras which have the purpose of making it worthy of 
the same. Why should the same rituals be prescribed for those who do 
not have such tasks to carry out? Glassware to be sent by railway parcel is 
specially taken care of since it is fragile. Even greater care is taken in 
dispatching kerosene or petrol. If the same precautions are not taken in 
transporting other goods, does it mean that they are poorly thought of? 
Astronauts are kept in isolation before being sent up in space and after 
their return. Mantras have their own radiation that is even more 
powerful than what is found in space. If you appreciate this fact, you will 
understand why Brahmins are separated from the rest and special 
samskaras prescribed for them.  
The body of a Brahmin (male) is involved in the nurturing of mantras. So 
from the time of conception itself it is to be made pure through 
samskaras like pumsavana, simanta and so on. There are samskaras with 
the same objective also after the boy child is born.  
The vocations have to be properly divided for the welfare of mankind. If 
everybody paid attention to this fact, instead of talking of rights, it would 
be realised that the sastras have not discriminated against women or any 
of the jatis.  
 


 

The High Status of Our Women 
Those who complain that women have no right to perform sacrifices on 
their own must remember that men too have no right to the same 
without a wife. If they know this truth they would not make the allegation 
that Hindu sastras look down upon women. A man can perform sacrifices 
only with his wife. He does them for the well-being of all mankind and for 
his own inner purity. It is for this purpose that, after the samavartana 
following the completion of his student-bachelorhood, he goes through 
the samskara called marriage.  
Marriage or vivaha is known as "saha-dharma-carini-samprayoga". It 
means (roughly) union with a wife together with whom a man practises 
dharma. The clear implication is that carnal pleasure is not its chief 
purpose, but the pursuit of dharma. The sastras do not ask a man to 
pursue dharma all by himself but require him to take a helpmate for it. 
The wife is called "dharma-patni", "saha-dharma-carini", thus underlining 
her connection with dharma, and not with kama or sensual pleasure. 
Here is proof of the high esteem in which the sastras hold women.  
The celibate-student and the ascetic alike follow the dharma of their 
respective asramas (stages of life) not in association with anyone else. 
The householder has to conduct the karma as well as the dharma of 
domestic life with his wife as a companion, such being the rule laid down 
in the sastras. The dharma of domestic life is their common property. 
Only a householder with a wife may perform sacrifices, not student-
bachelors and ascetics. If the wife were meant only for sensual 
gratification, would the dharmasastras have insisted that a man cannot 
perform sacrifices after her death? Women's libbers, who note that a 
woman cannot perform a sacrifice on her own, must also recognise that 
fact that the husband loses the right for the same without the wife and 
this is according to the Vedas themselves. ("Patnivatasya agnihotram 
bhavati". ) A great man lamented thus at the time of his wife's death: 
"You have taken away all my sacrifices as well as other rituals. " Our 


 
sastras have thus given a high place to women in the matter of duties and 
works.  
(See also Part Eighteen) 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 18 
MARRIAGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

For the Practise of Dharma 
Dharma, artha, kama and moksa are the four purusarthas, the four aims 
of life. The first of them, dharma, is a lifelong objective. The pursuit of 
artha (material welfare) and kama (desire, love) must be given up at a 
certain stage in a man's life. But so long as such a pursuit lasts, it must be 
based on dharma. When a man renounces the world and becomes an 
ascetic, he transcends dharma, but he does not go contrary to it nor 
speak against it. Indeed, his life is governed by the dharma of sannyasa.  
I have alreAdy spoken about Purvamimamsa (karmakanda) and 
Uttaramimamsa (jnanakanda). The Purvamimamsa-sutra opens with 
"Athato dharmajignasa", meaning "starting the inquiry into Dharma". The 
"Uttaramimamsa-sutra" (or Bramhasutra), on the other hand, starts with 
"Athato Bramhajignasa", "meaning"starting the inquiry into the 
Brahman".  
When you inquire into the Brahmin and meditate on it you are not 
conscious of the Dharma. Dharma is for the dualistic world of karma. 
Since the phenomenal world does not exist in non-dualistic jnana there is 
no consideration of dharma in it. But this does not mean that [non-
dualistic jnana]is contrary or opposed to dharma; and all that is meant is 
that 
it 
goes 
beyond 
dharma. 
Bhagwan 
declares 
in 
theGita: 
"Sarvadharman parityajya mam ekam saranam vraja" (Forsaking all 
dharmas come to me alone for refuge). Are we to construe that the Lord 
asks us to go to him for refuge as perpetrators of adharma? The true 
meaning of the words of the Lord is this: "Give up all inquiry into dharma 
and adharma. Go beyond them and comprehend the Object that is the 
source of both". What is sought is an inward experience. The actions 
performed by the jnanins who have their inner realisation will naturally 
be in conformity with the dharma. The doings of the high-souled ascetics 
may not be consciously based on dharma, but, nevertheless, they would 
be nothing but dharmic.  


 
All told, dharma is always a part of man's life. When he reaches a high 
spiritual state, he may not be conscious of it, but dharma will abide him 
and will keep shining as a light in all that he does.  
The pursuit of the second of the four aims of life, artha, must be based on 
dharma. The same applies to the third aim, that of kama. Kalidasa 
expresses the same thought in his Raghuvamsam when he speaks in 
praise of Dilipa: "Abhyarthakamau tasyastam dharma eva manisinah" 
(With Dilipa, the wise, even artha and kama were of the nature of 
dharma). The householder's stage of life commences with marriage. In it 
both material well-being and desire have their source in dharma. The 
student-bachelor and the ascetic are not concerned with the acquisition 
of wealth or carnal pleasure. The householder's stage of life, or, 
grhasthasrama, is a bridge between the two and in it both are permitted 
[within the bounds of dharma]  
A man needs money and material goods to live in this world. As for kama 
or carnal desire, it is needed so that children may be born according to 
their past karma. Until we have lived out our karma we too will have to 
be in this world. In this way if we want to give a "chance" to others, we 
have to earn money and experience kama so that they [these others] may 
be born again. We need householders to feed sannyasins who have given 
up karma. It would not be practical for all people in this world to become 
ascetics. The sastras extol householders as the backbone of the society 
since they live, or are expected to live, according to the dictates of the 
dharma and fulfil the requirements of student-bachelors and ascetics.  
After completing one's student-bachelorhood and acquiring learning and 
good qualities, one must marry so as to perform religious rites and live a 
life guided by dharma. Marriage is included among the forty samskaras, 
which fact shows that it is a sacred rite that sanctifies life. Just as 
upanayana is preliminary (purvanga) to the student-bachelor's stage of 
life, marriage is preliminary to that of the householder. Its purpose is 
disciplining the senses and the basis for the performance of various 
duties.  


 
The householder's life is not to be taken to mean merely the enjoyment 
of sensual pleasure along with the carrying out of duties that mean good 
to the world. The fact is that the sastras have formulated this stage of life 
in such a way as to make kama itself instinct with dharma. "Dharma" 
means essentially bringing everything within certain limits, under a 
certain discipline and decorum. Kama must be inspired by dharma, that is 
one must bridle one's passions in one's conjugal life, so that, step by step, 
the carnal urge will lose its keenness and eventually one will gain 
mellowness to graduate to sannyasa. That stage, though, comes later. But 
at first, even now, in the householder's stage of life, the passions have to 
be curbed, little by little, but not forcibly. In the gurukula the celibate-
student is brought under strict discipline. That saves him from being 
swept away by animal passion.  
Though we talk of animal passion, we must note that animals mate only 
during a particular season. They have the sexual urge only when the 
female of the species is ready for pregnancy. Man is baser in such 
matters. Brahmacarya helps to control the carnal urge as it first shows up. 
Then, in the householder's life, since kama is made subservient to 
dharma, the passions are kept under check.  
What is the sastric method to control the carnal urge? From the day of a 
women's period there should be no intercourse for four days. Then it is 
permitted for twelve days. Again there should be no intercourse until the 
women has her next period. Even during the twelve days mentioned 
above the couple should not meet during the new moon, on days 
conjoined by certain asterisms, etc., If such rules are followed the couple 
will remain healthy mentally as well as physically.  
 
 
 
 
 


 

Upanayana for Girls 
If brahmacarya prepares boys [or young men] to live according to 
dharma, what about girls? A girl has neither Upanayana nor 
Brahmacaryasrama. Should not a woman's mind also be disciplined like a 
man's. If you echo the criticism of reformers and say that injustice has 
been done to woman by denying them the Brahmacaryasrama and 
Upanayana, my answer is "No".  
Men marry after their Upanayana and student-bachelorhood. Now for 
women marriage itself is Upanayana. Just as a boy dedicates himself to 
his guru, a girl must dedicate herself to her husband from her childhood 
until the start of their conjugal life and beyond. The Manusmriti says: 
"Strinam upanayanam-sthane vivaham Manurabravit" (Manu says that 
for women marriage is in place of upanayana). If you ask for an external 
sign of this like sacred thread worn by the men, we may at once point to 
the married woman's mangalasutra.  
I said that "Upanayana" means "taking near", taking a boy near his guru 
for his brahmacaryasrama. A woman's guru is her husband. Being joined 
to him in wedlock is her upanayana.  
According to the sastras, a boy's upanayana must be performed when he 
is seven years old. A girl must be married at the same age. If a boy is to be 
initiated into brahmacarya before his mind is disturbed by kama, a girl is 
to be married before she feels the carnal urge. She must also accept her 
husband as her guru. According to sastras, the guru must be looked upon 
as Isvara. In the same way a child bride must think of her husband as both 
guru and Isvara and dedicate herself whole-heartedly to him. She will be 
able adopt such an attitude only when she is married very young. Later 
she might start to reason about things, ask questions and develop egoistic 
feelings.  


 
Laying oneself at the feet of the guru or Isvara -- in short surrender --- is 
the best means of liberating oneself. This concept of surrender is 
proclaimed in the carma sloka of the gita, surrender to Isvara, guru or 
husband: once you surrender to an individual or deity you no longer own 
any thing. Isvara will give you his grace through the one to whom you 
surrender.  
According to the system devised by sages, a boy is made to surrender to 
his guru at the time of his upanayana ceremony, while a girl does the 
same to her husband at the time of her marriage.  
It is not that the girl is considered inferior and asked to surrender to a 
man, that is her husband. The boy too is asked to surrender as a child to 
the guru. It is the view of the sastras that the age at which the girl is 
married and surrenders to her husband must be the same as that at 
which the boy surrenders to the guru.  
Talking of the husband and the wife, the question whether the one is 
superior to the other or inferior is of no consequence. Equally 
unimportant is the question of rights and status. If this is realised 
surrender will be seen to be of the utmost importance. We must 
appreciate the fact that it is in keeping with this view that the concept of 
upanayana has taken shape in the case of boys and marriage in the case 
of girls.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

The Age of Marriage and the Law 
We saw that it would be best to perform a boy's upanayana when he is 
seven years old. A girl must be married about the same age so that she 
too will develop the attitude of surrender. But you will ask:" Is it possible 
these days? Will it not be against the law? "  
It would not be right on my part to ask you to disobey the law. Those who 
rule us today themselves resorted to civil disobedience once. They 
justified their action thus: "Some people have enacted what are called 
laws. But we won't let them come in the way of our freedom." Why do I 
ask you not to defy the law that stipulates the minimum age for the 
bride? Not because people are not spirited enough to rise in protest 
against it, not because they are not ready to go to gaol or even die 
instead of accepting a law that has brought down the marriage samskara 
with its high ideal of Atmic well-being to the mundane level. I ask you not 
to disobey the law because the attitude of defiance, if extended to other 
matter, will jeopardise discipline and order in society itself. We must, 
however, keep impressing upon the government the sastric view with 
regard to the age at which a girl ought to be married.  
But it is not the government alone that has gone against the sastras. 
More than 90 per cent of our people do not respect the sastric view. The 
few conversant with the scriptures must keep enlightening the rest about 
this view. Without going against the law they must resolve themselves to 
do their best, in a peaceful manner, to restore a worthy custom, no 
matter whether it takes a hundred years or even more to yield results. 
Why, even if we do not live to see the results, even if it takes a thousand 
years, we must sow the seeds now. Nothing will be achieved without 
effort. The tree does not grow if the seed is not sown.  
We must, in a persuasive manner, keep impressing upon the government 
and the public that the Dharmasastra itself is a great legal code.  


 

Controversy about Age of Marriage 
At the turn of the century, extremely influential people, among Hindus 
themselves, demanded the abolition of child marriage and advocated 
that girls ought to be married only after they attain puberty. They held 
meetings and passed resolutions against child marriages. Not that they 
were wanting in faith in the Vedas, most of them; indeed they claimed 
that their view had support in the scriptures themselves. Among them 
were distinguished men like M. Rangacaryar, Sivaswami Ayyar, 
Sundaramayyar and Krsnasvami Ayyar. Then there was the Rt Hon'ble 
Srinivasa Sastri who was particularly vehement in his criticism of the 
system of child marriage.  
Vaisnavas and Smartas learned in the sastras held meeting at Kancipuram 
and Tiruvaiyuaru respectively and put forward the view that, according to 
the Vedas, girls in the past were married after they had attained puberty. 
They found an explanation for the origin of the custom of child marriages. 
Their view was this : After the advent of Islam in India, Hindu girls were 
abducted and dishonoured in large numbers. Girls already married were 
spared, they claimed. That is how the now custom of child marriage came 
into practise. The reformers now argued that we must go back to what 
they thought was the original Vedic practice and put an end to the 
uncivilized custom of pre-puberty marriages.  
They cited their own evidence from the sastras in support of their view. 
One piece of evidence they presented was drawn from the Vedas 
themselves, that is the mantras chanted during the marriage rite. The 
other was from the Manusmriti which is respected by all as the foremost 
among the dharmasastras.  
What do the marriage mantras say? Before answering the question I must 
tell you another matter. Each part of our body has a deity associated with 
it. ("adhidevata" or tutelary deity). The sun god with the eye, Indra with 
the hand and so on - thus there are divine forces inwardly associated with 


 
us. Apart from this, during different stages of our life various deities hold 
sway over us. Thus, a girl is under the sway of Soma (the moon god) from 
birth until the time she is old enough to wear clothes herself. (The dhoti 
or vesti that men wear is called "soman".) Then, until the girl has her 
menarche, she is under a gandharva. Thereafter, for three years, she is 
under Agni. When she is under the moon god as a little child she is cool 
like moonlight. Gandharvas are playful and beautiful, so when a girl is 
under the gandharva she is particularly attractive. Under Agni she has the 
fire that kindles kama. This is a worldly interpretation of how certain 
deities have hold over a girl. But let that be.  
What is the meaning of the Vedic mantras quoted by the reformers in 
support of their view? The mantras are chanted by the groom addressing 
the bride: "At first Soma had hold on you; then the gandharva became 
your guardian; thirdly Agni became your master. I, as a human being, 
have come as the fourth to hold sway over you. Soma passed you on to 
the gandharva and the gandharva to Agni. Agni has now given you over to 
me."  
Are we not to construe from the Vedic mantras, which are chanted at the 
marriage ceremony, that at the time of the wedding the girl has already 
had her menarche, three years after being under the guardianship of 
Agni? The reformers maintain that their argument against child marriage 
is not contrary to the sastras. The marriage custom, according to them, 
changed after the Muslim invasion and they want the original practice 
restored. No sanatani, they argue, can cite any authority better than the 
Vedas.  
The reformers also quote a stanza form the Manusmriti in support of 
their argument:  
Trini varsanyudikseta kumari rtumati sati  
Urdhavam tu kaladetasmadvindeta sadrsam patim  
The sloka means: "A girl who has come of age must wait for three years 
for a groom to come seeking her hand. If no such groom turns up, she 
may herself go looking for a groom." Here too it is post-puberty marriage 


 
that is indicated. Not only that. Manu's code of conduct, it is argued, is 
"modern" in that it permits a girl to look for a husband herself without 
any need for her elders to do so. After Manu, the reformers contend, the 
orthodox Vedic scholars changed everything and made the marriage 
custom barbarous.  
"In the light of these Vedic mantras and the dharmasastra quoted, are 
not the reformers right? What is your answer, Svamiji?" I will give my 
answer.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 


 

Eight Forms of Marriage 
The dharmasastras, including the Manusmrti, mention eight forms of 
marriage.  
Brahmo-daivastathaivarsah  
prajapatya-statha 'surah  
Gandharvo raksasascaiva  
Paisavastamah smrtah  
-Manusmrti, 3. 21  
The eight types are: brahma, daiva, arsa, prajapatya, asura, gandharva, 
raksasa and paisaca.  
After the student bachelor has completed his gurukulavasa, his parents 
approach the parents of a girl belonging to a good family and ask them to 
give away their daughter in marriage to their son--to make a gift of their 
daughter (kanyadana) to him. A marriage arranged like this is brahma. In 
it this girl's family does not give any dowry or jewellery to the boy's 
family. There is no "commercial transaction" and the goal of a brahma 
marriage is the dharmic advancement of two families. Of the eight forms 
of marriage the dharmasastras regard this as the highest.  
Marrying a girl to a rtvik (priest) during a sacrifice is called "daiva". The 
parents, in this type, after waiting in vain for a young man to turn up and 
ask for their daughter's hand, go looking for a groom for her in a place 
where a sacrifice is being conducted. This type of marriage is considered 
inferior to brahma. In the sastras womanhood is elevated in that it is the 
groom's family that has to seeking bride for their son.  
The third form, "arsa" suggests that it is concerned with the rsis, sages. It 
seems the marriage of Sukanya to Cyavana Maharsi was of this type. But 
from the dharmasastras we learn that in arsa the bride is given in 
exchange for two cows received from the groom. If the term is taken to 


 
mean "giving away a girl in marriage to a rsi", we must take it that the girl 
is married off to an old sage because the parents could not celebrate her 
marriage according to the brahma rite at the right time. The fact that 
cows are taken in exchange for the bride shows that the groom does not 
possess any remarkable qualities. According to the sastras, in marriages 
of noble kind there is no place for money or anything smacking of a 
business transaction.  
In prajapatya there is no trading and kanyadana is a part of it as in the 
brahma ceremony. But from the name prajapatya it must be inferred that 
the bride's menarche is imminent and that a child must be begotten soon 
after the marriage. For this reason the bride's father goes in search of a 
groom, unlike in the brahma type. The brahma type is a better type of 
marriage than prajapatya since, in it, the groom's people go seeking a 
bride who is to be the Grahalaksmi of their household.  
In the asura type the groom is in no way a match for the girl, but her 
father or her relatives receive a good deal of money from the man who 
forces them to marry her to him. In arsa in which cows are given in 
exchange for the bride there is no compulsion. Nor is the groom wealthy 
or powerful like his counterpart in the asura type. Many rich men must 
have taken a second wife according to the asura type of marriage.  
The next is gandharva. The very mention of it calls to mind Sakuntala and 
Dusyanta. The gandharva type is the "love marriage" that has such 
enthusiastic support these days.  
In the raksasa form the groom battles with the girl's family, overcomes 
them and carries her away. It was in this manner that krsna Paramatman 
married Rukmini.  
The eighth and last is paisaca. In asura even though the girl's willingness 
to marry the man is of no consequence, at least her people are given 
money. In raksasa, though violence is done to the girl's family, the 
marriage itself is not against her wish. Rukmini loved Krsna, did she not? 
In paisaca the girl's wish does not count, nor is any money or material 


 
given to her parents. She is seized against her wish and her family 
antagonised.  
We have the brahma type at one end and the paisaca at the other. There 
cannot be the same system or the same arrangement for everybody. Our 
sastras have taken into account the differences in temperament and 
attitude among various sections of people and it is in keeping with the 
same that they have assigned them different rites, vocations, etc. All our 
present trouble arises from the failure on the part of men, who advocate 
the same system for all, to recognise this fact.  
There are tribals living in the forests who look fierce and have a harsh 
way of life. But at heart they may be more cultured than townspeople, 
not to speak of the fact that they are useful to society in many ways. They 
have frequent family feuds. In consideration of this raksasa and paisava 
marriages may have to be permitted in their case. After the marriage, 
they are likely to forget their quarrels and live in peace with each other. 
Ksatriyas who are physically strong and are used to material pleasure are 
allowed the gandharva form of marriage and their girls have even the 
right to choose their husbands as in the svayamvara ceremony.  
It is for these reasons that the dharmasastras, which are based on the 
Vedas and which constitute Hindu law, permit eight forms of marriage. In 
all these eight, the bride and groom have the right to be united in 
wedlock with the chanting of mantras. But brahma is the highest of the 
eight forms. In it the bride must not have attained puberty. "Pradanam 
prak rtoh": -- this statement is in the dharmasastras themselves. A girl's 
marriage, which has same significance for her that the upanayana has for 
a boy, must be performed when she is seven years old (or eight years 
from conception)  
Unfortunately, in the case of some girls, a groom does not turn up in time 
for a brahma marriage to be performed. Meanwhile, they grow old and 
their marriage is conducted in the arsa, daiva, or prajapatya way. Only 
these types are permitted for Brahmins. But for the rest other types are 
also allowed. They may marry a girl who has come of age either in the 
gandharva way or in a svayamvara.  


 
The marriage mantras are intended for all the eight forms. It means that 
they are employed even in the marriage rite of girls who have attained 
puberty. The two mantras quoted above are recited in all the eight types 
of marriage. They are addressed by the groom to the bride who comes to 
him after she has attained puberty and after she has been under the 
guardianship successively of Soma, gandharva and Agni. The mantras are 
chanted not only in brahma marriages but also in all other forms. The 
same are addressed by the groom to his child bride also. Though his 
marriage is being solemnised to the child bride now, he will start living 
with her only after she comes of age, after she becomes a young woman. 
He will bring her home to live with him only after she has come 
successively under Soma, gandharva and Agni. So he chants the mantras 
in advance.  
Nowadays we sometimes perform a number of samskaras together long 
after they are due according to the sastras. For example, we perform the 
jatakarma if a son as well as his namakarana and caula during his 
upanayana when he is 20 or 22 years old and not long before his 
marriage. Similarly, instead of such postponement of the rites, in the 
brahma marriage the mantras mentioned above are chanted in advance.  
I will give you an example in this context. When the brahmacarin 
performs the samidadhana he prays before Agni to grant him good 
children. How absurd would it be for our reformers to argue, on the basis 
of this prayer, that a young boy must have children when he is yet a 
celibate-student and that he may become a householder only later. The 
point to note is that the boy prays on advance for good children. The 
Vedic mantras cited by reformers must be seen in the same light.  
The mantras [quoted by reformers] are appropriate for the marriage of a 
girl who has come of age also.  
This is our reply to the school of opinion represented by the Rt Hon'ble 
Srinivasa Sastri. If the mantras in question are chanted at the time of the 
marriage of girls who have come of age, it does not mean that all 
marriages are to be celebrated after the girls have attained puberty. 
According to the brahma form of marriage, the girl must not have had her 


 
menarche. There is incontrovertible proof for this in the Vedic mantra 
chanted at the end of the marriage rite. .  
I told that a girl is under the sway of a gandharva between the time she is 
able to wear her clothes without anybody's help and her menarche. His 
name is Visvavasu. The mantra I referred to is chanted by the groom 
addressing this demigod. "O Visvasu,” it says,”I bow to you. Leave this girl 
and go. Go to another girl child. Have I not become the husband of this 
girl? So give her over to me and go to another girl who is not married and 
lives with her father. “During the wedding the groom performs a puja to 
this gandharva and prays to him to free the girl from his control. Here is 
proof that the bride is not under Agni and has not had her menarche  
The question now is about the verse (from the Manusmrti) cited by the 
reformists. According to it, a girl may wait three years after her menarche 
and then seek her husband on her own.  
There is an answer to this. The general rule according to the 
dharmasastras is that a girl must be married before she attains puberty: 
"Pradanam prak rtoh.” What happens if this injunction is not followed? If 
groom does not come on his own, seeking the girl's hand, her father or 
brother must look for a groom and marry her off. But if they turn out to 
be irresponsible or otherwise fail to find a groom? Or if the girl has no 
guardian, no one to care for her? The lines quoted by the reformers from 
the Manusmrti apply to such a girl. She may look for a husband on her if 
none of her relatives, neighbours or well-wishers take the trouble of 
finding her a groom even after she has attained puberty.  
Though the reformists quote from the Vedas and sastras in support of 
their view, they fail to take into account the context in which the relevant 
passages occur. They see them in isolation. That is why they keep arguing 
that the customs followed by people steeped in our traditions are 
contrary to the sastras.  
In the Chandogya Upanisad there is mention of a sage called Cakrayana 
Usasti whose wife had not come of age. The reformists do not examine 


 
such references in our ancient texts with a cool head but are carried away 
by their emotions.  
In the past the common people did not know how to counter the 
arguments of the reformists. Even so they did not accept their views 
thinking it best to follow the practices of their elders, of great men. That 
is why the bill brought twice by the Rt Hon'ble Srinivasa sastri before the 
legislative council to amend the marriage act (with reference to the age 
of marriage) did not receive enough support. Later (Harbilas) Sarda 
introduced the bill which [on its passage] came to be called the Sarda Act. 
Many people (in the South) think Sarda was a woman and call the law 
named after him the "Sarda Act". The Central legislative assembly was 
equally divided on the bill -- 50 percent for and 50 per cent against. Then 
the British asked one of the nominated members to vote in favour of the 
bill; and thus the minimum age of marriage for girls was raised by a legal 
enactment. The bill was passed not on the strength of public opinion but 
because if the government's intervention. The mind of our British rulers 
worked thus: "The Congress has been demanding svaraj but we have 
refused to grant it. Let us give it some satisfaction by being of help in 
inflicting an injury on the (Hindu) religion. "  
Now things have changed. There is no respect any longer for old customs 
and traditions. When the Sarda Act came into force in British India, some 
Sanskrit scholars returned the "Mahamahopadhyaya" title conferred on 
them by the government. Among them were Pancanana Tarkaratna 
Bhattacarya of Bengal and Laksmana Sastri Dravid. The latter was settled 
in Kasi and had the "Dravid" tagged on to his name to make it known that 
he belonged to the land of the Tamils. How many people today are 
inspired to rise in protest against the changes introduced by our 
government in our sastric observances.  
Our children must be taught the substance and meaning of the sastras in 
a comprehensive manner. To speak to them about one aspect here and 
another there will lead to a haphazard and confused view. The half-baked 
research carried on in the Vedas has given rise to the opinion that the 
scriptures favour love marriage. The canonical texts must be seen in their 


 
entirety. When a subject is examined, its underlying meaning and 
purpose must be grasped. Also they must be seen in the light of other 
relevant passages occurring elsewhere. A conclusion must be arrived at 
only after a thorough inquiry into all points.  
The brahma marriage is for all castes. Other forms of marriage are also 
permitted for non-Brahmins, also post-puberty marriage. If the idea is to 
give importance to carnal pleasure these other forms may be permitted. 
But brahma is the best if the purpose of the marriage samskara is the 
advancement of the Self.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 


 

Why Child Marriage 
The samskara called marriage has a manifold purpose. One of its 
important ideals is to make women inwardly pure through their 
attachment to their husbands. With such attachment and devotion alone 
will they make their way to the Ultimate. The disciple cleanses his mind 
by surrendering to his guru. The wife must surrender to her husband for 
the same purpose.  
Our karma and the cycle of births and deaths we are subject to stem from 
the unceasing activity of our mind. We sin by pandering to the desires of 
the mind and are born again and again. When the mind becomes still 
there will be neither karma nor janma (birth)--this state is liberation. 
Stilling the mind is extremely difficult. It may be possible to attain the 
eight great siddhis; but it is impossible to still the mind and be oneself, so 
says the Tamil saint-poet Tayumanavar.  
If we cannot control or still our mind on our own, the next best thing is to 
dedicate it to another person, not allowing it to sway according to our 
likes and dislikes. We shall not then be subject to the consequences of 
doing things on our own which means we shall not be subject either to 
sin or rebirth. If we lay our mind at the feet of another person we will 
absolve ourselves of the responsibility of being a "karta' or doer. So we 
will not suffer the consequences that we will otherwise have to suffer for 
our actions like papa, punya or another birth. We are taught to dedicate 
ourselves to Isvara in an attitude of surrender, implying that we do not do 
anything on our own. But only one in a million is disposed in this way. 
However, there are a large number of examples in the history of our 
religion of women who have shown that a wife can be liberated by 
looking upon her husband as Isvara. The husband is the Lord in flesh and 
blood; even if he be a stone the husband is a husband. Total loyalty to 
him and the desire to die a "sumangali" are the ideals that have inspired 
the dharma of our womanhood from time immemorial.  


 
It is true that all countries have produced great women.  
All religions too have given birth to men and women of exemplary 
character. But it cannot be claimed that the qualities mentioned above 
are as much a characteristic of life in other countries as it is in our own, in 
our religion and in our culture. To think of changing all this in the name of 
civilization or modernity would be to cut at the very roots of our great 
cultural and religious heritage.  
A girl must become attached to her husband [that is she must be married] 
before her mind is distributed by thoughts of love and desire and before 
she begins to take an interest in her body. The innocent child that she is 
now, she will have the humility to regard her husband in an attitude of 
surrender in the thoughts that he alone is her guru and that he alone is 
her Isvara  
Women in Andhra Prades and Maharastra even today observe many 
vratas. Unmarried girls in these parts of the country worship Siva, looking 
upon him as their husband. When they get married they worship the 
husband as Siva. First a girl, before her marriage, worships Siva as her 
husband; later whoever comes into her life as her husband she looks 
upon as Siva.  
In childhood a girl does not ask questions. It is now that she will, out of 
her simple faith, look upon her husband as Paramesvara. This faith, 
formed in her innocence, will take firm root in her mind when she 
becomes older and begins to understand things. It is all the influence of 
our ages-old dharma of womanhood. A woman's devotion to her husband 
will now be enduring and she will always look upon him as Paramesvara. 
When a wife dedicates herself to her husband and does not nurse any 
feelings of honour or dishonour so far as she herself is concerned, her ego 
will become extinct. And that means cessation from wordly existence; in 
other words, liberation. Devotion, jnana, austerities, worship, sacrifices, 
yoga -- all these have for their goal the eradication of the ego. This a 
woman obtains naturally and with ease through devotion to her husband.  


 
There are such examples of womanhood in our land, women who were 
totally dedicated to the husband. In the ethos of our nation they are 
exalted even above the gods. Among them are Nalayani, Anasuya, 
Sitadevi who was Mahalaksmi herself, Daksa's daughter Sati who was 
indeed Parasakti (the Supreme Goddess), Savitri, Kannagi, Vasuki (wife of 
Tiruvalluvar). To think of them is to feel ecstatic with a sense of pride. We 
bow to them in respect at the very mention of their names. Why it is so 
we cannot say.  
We often hear critics of our traditions exclaim thus: "The husband is God 
to the wife? It's just babble. It's all superstition. It's suppression of 
woman. An outrage. “Whatever the criticism be, this is the custom of our 
land. In this land called Bharata we have the Himalaya and the Ganga. If 
you ask why they should be there, is there any answer? It is the same 
with the woman who were queens of chastity. Do Europeans think of the 
Alps as we think of Kailasa? Do we think of the Ganga in the same way as 
the Americans think of Mississippi? Don't we experience in our hearts the 
divinity of our mountains and our rivers? For people in other countries 
marriage is only a family arrangement. Our sastras have inspired our 
conjugal life with the ideal of surrender to the husband as the supreme 
means for the wife to obtain purity of the Self. If the system of child 
marriage is opposed and changed on the pretext of bringing about the 
social advancement of women, it will only serve the purpose of causing 
injury to their Atmic advancement. It would mean creating a small 
convenience for our women at the expense of the very great spiritual 
reward that is theirs as the inheritors of our traditions.  
To say that child marriage is harmful to a woman's body is empty talk. 
Tough the girl is married as a child she will be ready for conjugal life only 
after she becomes physically mature. Besides on many days like the full 
moon and the new moon the couple will have to practice continence. 
Now such restrictions are not observed. Physical weakness has become 
more common among people and neurologists prosper at their expense.  
That the system of early marriage led to the existence of child widows is 
said to be a blot on the Hindu religion. But the number of children who 


 
become widows is exaggerated, and the implication is that their 
husbands must have died when they were in the age-group of 15-25. 
From what I have heard there are few deaths in this age-group. So the 
number of child widows cannot be many. I would not deny their 
existence altogether. It is painful to see even one child becoming a 
widow. But considering the great benefits that child marriage brings we 
must made an allowance for misfortunes like young girls being widowed.  
Even now, if she is so fated, where is the assurance that a girl married at 
the age of 20 or more will not become a widow when she is still young? 
We hear reports of couples who have been married only for two or three 
months being killed in rail or plane accidents. Such tragedies do create 
anguish. If the reason for banning child marriage is the phenomenon of 
child widows, what is the guarantee that girls married when they are 
older in years will not become widows?  
If, according to the custom of our land, women are to look upon the 
husband as the Lord in order to be released from worldly existence, the 
only way to accomplish it is by following the sastras. "Our women receive 
high education, manage jobs, marry as they like. All this means progress" 
we often hear such talk. But that they are exposed to the gaze of all and 
sundry, become mentally and emotionally disturbed and are trapped in 
awkward situations is a matter of constant worry to me, even fear.  
Reformists rise in protest against child marriages and cry angrily: "women 
are suppressed and are subjected to cruelties like marriage. They are 
denied their social rights." But I feel angrier when I think of the fact that 
conditions created in the name of social reform have put the great family 
treasure of women in jeopardy. I mean their prized possession of chastity. 
In fact I feel like shedding tears. Like Arjuna I too feel like crying that 
"when women are spoiled the family, the clan, declines. No, the whole 
world will go to rot. And all will go to hell (Strisu dustasu Varsneya jayate 
varnasamkarah. Samkaro narakay'aiva)"  
That women agree to be exposed like this, that their parents look on this 
with approval, burns me with anguish.  


 
Leave aside all talk of progress or advancement. My constant worry is 
that our girls must not be exposed to risks to their character. People try 
to console me with the assurance that nothing happens to our women 
because they go to school or college or because they work in offices. I too 
have not lost faith in our women. But I see that they go about as they 
please and that they have many opportunities to go astray. Cinema, 
fiction, newspapers -- all these diversions are such as are calculated to 
cause them injury. All such things fill me with fear.  
Now and then I do hear reports of unpleasant happenings involving 
women. How can we right a wrong, what can we do after all the damage 
has been done? Can we allow even a single incident to happen in this 
land of ours that brings a taint to its womanhood? It makes my blood boil 
to think of what is happening to women in society. I seem to suffer all the 
worry and all the fear that parents ought to suffer about their daughters. 
I do not believe that all women will go astray or will be corrupted. 
Reformists say that the presence of even one child widow is a blot on our 
society. I am afraid that even if one woman goes astray or is corrupted it 
should be a blot on our society that is a thousand times worse.  
Vedam odiya Vediyarkkoru mazhai  
Niti mannar neriyinukkor mazhai  
Madar karpudai mangayarkkor mazhai  
Madam munru mazhaiyenappeyume  
To ensure that the king or the government will rule justify ("Niti 
mannanneri") is not in my jurisdiction. But it is my responsibility to see 
that the Brahman chants the Vedas ("Bedam odiya Vediyarkkoru."). It is 
also my duty to see that women are not afforded the "chance" to stray 
from the path of virtue and chastity and that before a girl feels the urge 
of kama she will learn to look upon her husband as Isvara. Yes, it is my 
responsibility to see that women do not deviate a bit from pativratya. I 
feel that I must do all I can for this and I keep drawing up plans for the 
same. The goal is far off and it is receding faster than the speed with 
which I try to reach it. But I will not give up the race. Nor will I nod in 
approval of what is happening in the name of modernity. I have not been 


 
installed on this Pitha to watch helplessly the world go by and cry in 
despair:" What is lost is lost. It is impossible to stem the tide of Kali and 
change things. "  
From the remote past the Vedic tradition has flourished in this land, so 
too stridharma. These have been nourished by this Matha for some two 
thousand years. I have the title of "Jagadguru" and bear the name of 
Sankara Bhagavadpada. I cannot therefore keep my mouth shut as this 
heritage of ours is being destroyed. There will be no greater offence than 
it. As Bhagavan says in the Gita I must do my work in the belief that 
victory or failure is in his hands. I will not retrace my steps and shall keep 
exerting myself to achieve the goal. The result will depend on my 
sincerity, on my inner purity and on the intensity of my austerities. If no 
appreciable results are seen so far, it means that I am lacking in sincerity 
of purpose, mental purity and austereness. I feel so however much I am 
applauded by the world.  
Had we lost all, I would not have spoken on this subject. If all is lost where 
is the need to put in any effort? The Matha itself may be disbanded. But 
all is not lost. A spark still remains. Proof of it is the presence of so many 
of you here wanting to listen to me. It does not matter whether or not 
you will do what I ask you to do. The fact is you keep listening to me 
patiently. That is why I tell you that there is a spark still left. I am trying to 
find out whether it could be fanned into a bright flame. If I too go the way 
that people go -- that is the way -- I should be disloyal to Sankara 
Bhagavatpada.  
It does good -- does it not? -- to speak my mind and unburden myself of 
my feelings. You will remain devoted to me and I shall keep giving you my 
blessings: this relationship between us will continue. But if I fail to bring 
you to the path for which the Matha exists and yet accept money from 
you, it means that I am guilty of extortion. That is why I gave candid 
expression to my feelings.  
With the grace of the Supreme Goddess we have had some success in 
implementing the plans drawn up for the preservation of our Vedic 
heritage. True we far from having achieved the goal of ensuring that the 


 
scriptures are chanted in every home. But the fear that we once had felt 
that Vedic learning might become extinct by the next generation or so no 
longer exists. Today all over the country many students are learning not 
only to chant the Vedas but also to understand their meaning.  
The Child Marriage Act has my hands tied. According to the 
Dharmasastra, a girl must be entrusted in the hands of a man, that is her 
husband, before she starts feeling the urge of kama. She will then 
become steeped in the belief that he is her Lord. And when she begins to 
feel the natural urges she will dedicate her body to him. This is the law of 
the Dharmasastra. But the law of state is contrary to the law of the 
Dharmasastra. Even so I will not ask you to disobey it. However, we must 
keep speaking untiringly of the law of the Dharmasastra and wait and see 
whether the government changes its mind.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 


 

Our Duty Now 
Let the authorities take their own time to change their mind. What is our 
immediate duty? If the limit fixed by the law for a girl's marriage is 14, 16, 
 or whatever, let us celebrate it immediately on her attaining this age. 
We must prepare for the day in advance, deciding in the groom and 
making all other arrangements for the wedding. It would be 
reprehensible on our part to prolong the period of waiting after a girl 
begins to feel the biological urge and the consequent emotional 
disturbance. It is one thing if the marriage gets postponed owing to 
circumstances beyond our control, but quite another if we do not exert 
ourselves sufficiently to conduct it in time.  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 


 

Make Marriages Simple 
Girls today are sometimes married at the age of 25 or 30, far beyond the 
limit fixed by the law. The inability to raise the money required for the 
wedding is one reason for this. All the ostentation at weddings, dowry 
and other gifts given to the groom's people have no sanction in the 
sastras. To demand a suit for the groom or a pair of boots, an expensive 
wrist-watch or other luxury articles is nothing but extortion. It is as good 
as milking the bride's party dry. This kind of plunder is not approved by 
the sastras. So too the procession called "janavasam", with all its glitter, 
taken out on the eve of the wedding as though it were an essential part 
of the ceremonies.  
In the past, when the bride and groom were very young, the wedding 
included functions to keep the couple in good cheer since they would 
perhaps have felt uncomfortable before the smoke of the sacred fire. 
There were elements of play like nalangu and also the procession.  
"Kanyam Kanaka-sampannam" (the bride adorned with gold): these 
words occur in the sastras relating to the marriage rites. Gold symbolises 
the grace of Laksmi but a mangalasutra with a grain of gold as part of it is 
enough. There is no need for other types of expensive jewellery, diamond 
studs, and so on. No silks are required. A cotton sari will serve the 
purpose of the kurapudavai. Above all the custom of dowry must be 
scrapped. There is also no justification on holding a lavish wedding dinner 
for the whole neighbourhood. Nor is a music or dance recital needed. A 
big pandal too is not necessary.  
 
 
 
 


 

Duty of Motherhood 
Our women must give up their fondness for diamonds and silks. This will 
be great help to our family and social life. Indeed womanhood itself will 
stand to gain and stridharma will flourish. Woman should think of the 
millions of silkworms killed to make the sari with which they drape 
themselves. They claim that they are vegetarians. So should they not feel 
remorse about being indirectly responsible for the destruction of 
countless silkworms because of their love of silk saris. If women of well-
to-do families realise this and stop wearing silk, they will no longer set a 
bad example to their less fortunate sisters. It is because if the example of 
the wealthy that the poor too hanker after silks and diamonds. Then the 
groom's people bring pressure on the bride's parents for silks and 
diamond studs. This is one reason for the marriage of girls being delayed.  
It is a crime to have turned the marriage samskara into an economic 
problem. After all, we too have daughters. That being so, merely because 
we belong to the groom's family, we cannot take an arrogant attitude and 
dictate terms to the bride's family, demanding this and that. We should 
not lay down conditions like Shylock and tell the girl's parents: "Give us a 
big dowry, bring us expensive vessels, bring us diamonds and silks". Such 
behaviour is unpardonable: it is one reason why girls remain unmarried, 
pining away at home. If you happen to be the groom's parents you must 
satisfy yourself about the girl's character, family, etc. "This girl will be the 
Laksmi of our home and she will brighten it": with such thoughts you 
must accept the bride, without laying down any conditions for the 
marriage and without insisting that you must receive gifts in the form of 
money, jewellery and so on.  
In this matter women have a special responsibility. They must naturally 
have respect and sympathy for fellow women. When they celebrate their 
son's marriage they must conduct themselves in the manner I suggested 
earlier. The presents given by other parents to their sons-in-law must not 
be an example for them to make similar demands. On the contrary, they 


 
must set an example to the parents of other prospective grooms, telling 
themselves: "Why should we be guilty of the sort of wrongs that others 
have committed? We will try to bring about a change and set an example 
for others to follow". This is how our motherhood must be motivated.  
"We gave a dowry to the groom's people when our daughter was 
married". Or: "My father gave a dowry to my in-laws when I was married, 
so there is nothing wrong if I accept the same now". You must be warned 
against taking such an attitude. This evil custom of dowry that 
undermines our very dharma must be done away with. Someone must 
take the first step [take the lead] in a spirit of sacrifice. People make 
sacrifices in this or that cause. If their village is included in a neighbouring 
district a hundred or a hundred thousand people rise on protest and 
court arrest. Some of the agitators set fire to themselves. Shouldn't we 
make a little sacrifice in the cause of preserving the great ideals of our 
womanhood?  
Women come to see me and seek my blessings, saying: "We recite the 
Saundaryalahari, the Abirami Antadi". What they do is commendable. But 
they would deserve the compassion of Amba better if they sincerely 
followed my advice in the matter of marriage. They must not dictate 
terms regarding dowry, jewellery, gifts, and so on, and must agree to the 
marriage alliance with their whole heart. There are girls like them, or 
rather women, who are getting on in years but still remain unmarried. 
They are emotionally disturbed and nurse a hurt to their sense of honour 
because of their sad predicament, but may be later they will become so 
hardened as to have no feelings whatsoever. You must try to change the 
system that is responsible for the fate of such women. If your hearts melt 
in sympathy for them Amba will also look upon you with a kind eye.  
You cannot justify the acceptance of a dowry and other gifts on the 
pretext that they are given by the girl's parents on their own. This can 
lead to others also doing the same and cause a bad chain reaction. If the 
girl's parents give a dowry on their own, they will expect the same from 
the parents of their son's bride. You must refuse a dowry even when it is 
given voluntarily. If the girl's people are wealthy you may tell them: 


 
"Don't give us any money. If you wish you may give it your daughter in 
the form of stridhana. "  
The groom's parents spend on clothes, travel, etc, and expect the 
expenses to be "reimbursed" by the girl's parents. This is not at all 
justified. They must tell themselves: "Our son is getting married. Why 
shouldn't we ourselves spend for it? It is shameful to take money from 
someone else to buy our own requirements. Will it not mean that we 
can't afford them ourselves?" Unfortunately, people think that they have 
certain rights and privileges as the groom's parents and fleece the bride's 
people by intimidating or browbeating them. Whether the dowry is given 
voluntarily or out of compulsion, it is money stolen. It is all a vicious circle 
that causes injury to society itself. We must somehow see to it that this 
evil system of dowry is scrapped.  
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 


 

Duty of the Bridegroom 
Young men who are contemplating marriage can also help in the matter. 
Ordinarily, no son should go against the wishes of his parents. It would 
not be proper for me to ask young men to defy their parents. In any case, 
nowadays they do not obey their parents as they used to in the past. So I 
should not [normally] encourage children to go against the wishes of their 
parents. I am not unaware of all this. However, I find that immense 
damage is being done to our ancient stridharma by the money factor 
brought into the conduct of marriages.  
In this context, I must ask young men to lend me their support. They must 
clearly tell their parents that they will agree to marry and settle down 
only on condition that the usual dowry and other gifts are not taken from 
the bride's parents. I feel I should even ask them to offer satyagraha, 
against the system of dowry. But if they are to be true to the spirit of 
satyagraha, they must not marry on their own on the plea that their 
parents did not listen to them. Satyagraha implies an element of sacrifice. 
The young men offering it must tell their parents firmly: "You say that you 
will not celebrate my marriage without taking a dowry. All right, I will not 
marry and will remain a bachelor if you don't change your mind." If young 
men are so determined there will be a change of heart in any mother or 
father. The biggest reform young men can help in bringing about is to 
stand firm in their refusal to accept any dowry. To take pride in an 
intercaste marriage or a "love marriage" is not right because that would 
be going against the sastras. The duty of sons is to try and put an end to 
the dowry system. There can be no greater reform than this.  
The Vedas equate mother, father and guru with Isvara. I must repeat 
what I stated earlier that no son shall act against the wishes of his 
parents. But as a guru I would ask him (I have the label of guru, haven't 
I?) to make an exception in the matter dowry. So, acting on my advice--
the advice of a guru--he must plead with his parents that they must not 
take any dowry since it is against the sastras, if necessary he must offer 


 
satyagraha to convince them of his determination and sincerity of 
purpose.  
This oppressive system called dowry is a canker eating into our society. By 
excising it our young men will be doing a great service to society, at the 
same time giving an impetus for it to blossom again. They must work for 
the eradication of this evil not only out of faith in our religion but also as 
a duty towards fellow men.  
Marriage is an ancient institution, a guarantee for the future of mankind 
and a dharmic protection for society. That being so, young men must 
marry the girls chosen by their elders. But the dowry system is 
undermining the very foundations of society and young people ought to 
have nothing to do with it. If they have a duty to their parents, they have 
also a duty to society, haven't they? Thus it becomes obligatory on their 
part to refuse firmly to marry if their parents insist on taking a dowry. 
Such refusal will be a service done not only to the family and society but 
also to womanhood and religion. Young men must take a vow to act in 
the manner I have suggested and help in putting an end to the malignant 
system called dowry.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Arrangements made by the Matha 
Girls must be married at least at the age permitted by the law if not at the 
age of seven or eight. Towards this purpose we have started the 
Kanyakadana Trust. Daughters of poor parents must not remain 
unmarried after they have attained puberty merely because they have no 
money. The Trust extends help to conduct their marriage on a modest 
scale. Much merit will be earned by contributing towards such marriage 
expenses.  
Other communities have not degenerated to the same extent as have 
Brahmins. Among non- Brahmins the dowry system is not as oppressive. 
Their women do not go to college in such large numbers as their Brahmin 
sisters do, nor do they, like the latter, go about as freely wherever fancy 
takes them.  
The Trust was created to help daughters of poor families. In my opinion, 
donations for the Kanyadhana Trust and the Veda Raksana Nidhi Trust 
must be accepted from Brahmins alone. The reason is that others ought 
not to be made to pay a penalty for the wrongs perpetrated by the 
Brahmin. The biggest offence he has committed is that of forsaking Vedic 
learning. By not conducting the marriage of his daughter at the minimum 
age permitted by the law he commits an offence equally grave. So it is his 
responsibility to support the arrangements made to remedy the wrongs 
done by him. Other communities must not be made to pay for the same. 
To do so would be to add to the list of his sins. After all, he takes up any 
calling today, does any job so long as it brings him money. He spends 
lavishly on clubs, on entertainment, and so on. So is it not reasonable that 
he should be asked to contribute to the two Trusts?  
The Kanyakadana Trust meets the expenses of the tirumangalyam 
(mangalasutra), the 18- cubit sari, the dhoti for the groom, etc. It is ready 
to help in conducting a simple, inexpensive wedding.  


 
The arrangements made for the Kanyakadana trust have not yielded the 
same satisfactory results as those made for the Veda Raksana Nidhi Trust. 
Not much has been done to solve the problem for which the former body 
was started. I say this with great regret. The little bit we have done for 
the corrupted Brahmin community is like administering a concoction 
made of dried ginger to a man who has swallowed a crowbar. Parents do 
not in the least worry about damming the swollen stream of adharma. So 
not many come forward to make use of the Trust. They are no longer 
worried about their daughters not being married at the right time. They 
take it easy while their daughters work and earn. What do we do with the 
Trust? Instead of looking for a groom, parents look for a man who can 
recommend their daughter for a job. Things have become so bad in our 
land- it is all so unfortunate. We extend help at best to hold some 50 
marriages. Every year 5, 000 women go to work. Ten times that number 
go looking for a job. So only some 50 girls come to us for help to be 
married at the minimum age according to the law. The only purpose 
served by the Trust is that of giving me some satisfaction that I have not 
failed in my duty.  
I have spoken frankly, without mincing words, in the hope that, with their 
sense of self- respect and sense of urgency aroused, parents will take 
timely steps to celebrate the marriage of their daughters without losing a 
moment after the girls are old enough for the same according to the law.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

The Real Reform 
The law has stipulated the minimum age for marriage. I wish it had also 
stipulated the maximum age considering the attitude of people today. 
We are not in the least justified in blaming the Law if girls aged 25 or 30 
remain unmarried. The reason is our own indifference. Take the 
upanayana samskara. After all, it does not come under the Sarda Act. . 
Why then do we perform our son's upanayana together with his marriage 
when he is 30 years or so? It is all due to our indifference to our sastras, 
our dharma.  
Apart from this general apathy, most parents want to celebrate the 
upanayana and marriage on a lavish scale, indeed like festivities. Both get 
postponed since the money has to be raised. That even a lifetime's 
earnings are not sufficient to meet the expenses of a daughter's marriage 
is preposterous. The result is the samskaras are not performed at the 
proper time as required by the sastras.  
According to our scriptures money has nothing to do with these 
samskaras. That today it has come to be so is a tragedy- and it is a tragedy 
that is of our own making. In none of the eight forms of marriage does 
the groom have to be given any money. Even in the asura type it is the 
groom that pays money, that is in exchange for the bride. If such a 
transaction is considered demoniac, what would the rsis who authored 
our sastras have thought of the prevailing custom of dowry, of the 
groom's parents telling the bride's people: "Give us your daughter in 
marriage and also cash." They could not have even imagined that such a 
custom would ever crop up. There obtained the custom of "Kanya-sulka" 
- money offered to the bride or "bride price" - which has some support in 
the canons. But you cannot find an iota of justification in our scriptures 
for the present dowry system.  
Putting an end to this custom- this evil- is the marriage reform that is the 
true need of the country. Instead of carrying out such a reform, what we 


 
have done is to stipulate- in the name of reform- the minimum age of 
marriage for girls. And this has played havoc with our family and social 
life. I am referring to the present phenomenon of girls going to work. 
When it became difficult to find the money for the dowry, for the gifts to 
be made to the groom's people and for the lavish celebration of the 
wedding, the Sarda act came in handy by obviating the need to be in a 
hurry to hold the function.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   


 

Working Women 
When the marriage of girls got delayed and they had to stay at home 
doing nothing, the parents wondered why their daughters should not 
study, go to work and start earning. The money would also come in handy 
when the girls were to be married. Thus started the practice of women 
going to work. At first the parents felt a little embarrassment or a sense 
of shame about doing something they thought to be improper, that is 
depending on the daughter's own earnings for her marriage expenses. 
They were also worried and fearful about the girls being exposed to 
various risks and temptations. But, in due course, this worry and fear 
vanished. Also the parents came to think that there was no need to feel 
awkward about their daughters going to work.  
According to the Puranas, even royal sages like Janaka were worried that 
their daughters stayed at home without being married. They felt so 
uncomfortable as if they were carrying fire inside them. At first we felt 
sheepish that our women went to work. But, by and by, we learned to 
accept it. Now we take it as an advance, a step forward in our civilization. 
Parents have thrown all sense of responsibility to the winds and are not 
worried in the least about their daughters going out to work and, indeed, 
they take pride in it. Our dharma has sunk to such low depths. Working 
girls come to me blessings for promotion in their office. Turning a blind 
eye to everything- seeing and not seeing- I have earned the name of 
being a good Svamiyar.  
"That women are receiving higher education and are working is a great 
step forward", proclaim the reformists. "A great injustice done to them in 
the past has been undone," they add. My own view is that no injustice 
was ever done to women in the past and I would go to the extent of 
saying that, if at all any injustice was done, it was to men. You may be 
amused by this remark. Let me explain. A male, after his student- 
bachelorhood, graduates to the stage of the householder. He has now to 
perform many duties and rituals like aupasana and a number of other 


 
samskaras with the ultimate object of finding release from worldly 
existence. A woman attains the same goal by dedicating herself to her 
husband and to do so is to go beyond all the samskaras performed by a 
man. Though reformists think this to be an injustice done to women, to 
me it appears that the sastras favour women more than they do men. I 
tell you why. How does a man realise himself? He has to perform many 
religious works; he has to learn the Truth and feel it inwardly through 
nididhyasana. In this way alone does he erase his mind.  
A pativrata does not need such difficult sadhana, such ardent and intense 
practice, to reach the same goal and all she has to do is to surrender to 
her husband. By respecting the wishes of her husband such a wife 
obliterates not only her own wishes, but all feelings of honour and 
dishonour and all ego-sense. In this way she comes close to stilling her 
mind. When the mind is utterly dedicated to another person in and 
attitude of surrender, should it not be close to being blotted out? Is there 
any "promotion" for a woman higher than this?  
A woman exalted by inner purity occupies a position far higher than 
another who earns a promotion in her office. This is how many a woman 
in the history of this land won powers far greater than those earned even 
by the sages. According to Tiruvalluvar, if such a woman says, "Let there 
be rain", it will rain, it must rain. If she says to the sun, "Don't rise", it will 
not rise. Such a woman can retrieve her husband from Yama. Our sastras, 
our traditions, give these women a place more elevated than that 
accorded to any sage or deity. We see from Puranas that a woman of 
lofty character can transform even gods into little children by sprinkling 
water on them. Our religious texts speak about how a woman may rise to 
true heights of glory and how she is enshrined in a temple and 
worshipped. They do not ever condemn her to an inferior position. It 
seems to me that it is the reformists who do so by preventing her from 
rising to the heights of glory.  
If marriage is one of the many samskaras to render a man pure, for a 
woman it is the single samskara that gives her the ultimate fruits of all 
samskaras. Now the essence of this samskara is cast away and what 


 
remains, the refuse, is retained. Marriage and the householder's stage of 
life are not meant for carnal pleasure alone. They constitute a path for 
liberation. If this truth is understood people will appreciate that the role 
assigned to women by the sastras is just and proper.  
Few seem to have realised the undesirable economic consequences of 
women going to work. I am referring to the unemployment problem. 
Until some years ago parents had this excuse for their daughters going to 
work: "Let her work till she gets married. Otherwise she will have to stay 
at home brooding over things and being sorry for herself. Going to work 
will be a way of spending time. Besides, the girl's earnings will come in 
handy for the dowry and other expenses of marriage." The idea then was 
to let the daughter work until her marriage and then ask her to resign her 
job. The groom and his people thought it demeaning for the bride to 
work after the marriage.  
This attitude changed not before long. How? During the past one century 
or so, the Brahmin community has developed an increasing appetite for 
money. Owing to this greed that grew with the years, girls going to work 
even after their marriage became a more widely accepted practice. The 
result is that the noble duties of motherhood like child care are 
neglected. It is the same as in Western countries and there is no warmth 
and sincerity governing relationships involving parents and children and 
other family members.  
On the economic front too the phenomenon of more and more women 
working has had an undesirable consequence. These days hundreds of 
young men are unemployed. At the same time, in some families both 
husband and wife work and earn. If the husband alone worked, the wife' 
s job would go to a young man who is without work. Unfortunately, 
husbands no longer take pride in caring for the wife and family with their 
earnings alone; they want the wife also to earn. At first the parents are 
reluctant to send their daughters to work. Then the husband did the 
same perhaps half- heartedly. As for the wife, she is now proud to be 
working. In fact, she is so used to working outside that she does not like 


 
being confined to her home. When she earns on her own she wants to 
spend as she likes without being questioned by her husband.  
To stay at home does not mean to be locked in. There is no shortage of 
sastras and Puranas in Sanskrit and in other languages. If women develop 
a taste for them, they will keep reading them for a whole lifetime and 
find happiness. They may form satsanga groups and read such books by 
turns at home. There is no need to form a club or some other 
organisation nor any board. The satsanga may be held at home without 
any office-bearers like president, secretary, committee members and so 
on. I suggest this to avoid contests and rivalry for positions. Women may 
also keep themselves occupied in making pure kumkuma from turmeric 
and in collecting unbroken rice grains ("aksata") for use in mathas, 
temples and other religious establishments. To stay at home does not 
mean being caged in while doing such work. Besides, women will not lose 
their most precious possession, feminity. Work mentioned above will be a 
means for the freedom of their Self and for bliss.  
For women, surely, this is far better than going to work out of greed and 
loosing their feminity in the process, not to speak of earning the higher 
reward of Atmic well-being. It is also in keeping with a woman’s nature. 
For a woman to work in an office on the pretext that she is otherwise 
confined to the four walls of her home is the cause of so many problems, 
so many evils. Though there is much talk of women's liberation, what we 
actually see is that they have to work under so many people and have too 
be answerable to so many of them. Is there peace in such a life? In the 
liberation that is so much talked about, is there the bliss of domestic life? 
Are working women able to cook at leisure, eat and enjoy the warmth 
and affection of children?  
What purpose is served by all such talk? Each man thinks of his own 
selfish interests and is least bothered about others. People never pause 
to wonder whether others suffer on their account. There is no feeling for 
others, no sense of justice. In some families there is "double income" 
because both husband and wife earn while in some others even one 
member does not have a job and so no income. It is a sad state. If women 


 
decide not to work after their marriage it is possible that the vacancies 
thus created will be filled by the unemployed men. Families without any 
means so far will then benefit. Working women must think about this and 
those who try to bring equality between men and women and ought to 
consider the logic behind my observations.  
Nowadays people do not know where to apply the principle of equality 
and where not to. Each entity or aspect of life has its own way of being, 
its own character; that is how life in the universe is ordained. It is wrong 
to contend that there must be a sameness about everything, that all 
things must be equal. To insist on such sameness and equality is to wreck 
the natural order of life. Each finds its fulfilment and true happiness in 
being related to another as intended by nature and in promoting the 
common social life. To pursue an arbitrary kind of equality instead of this 
means not only the denial of happiness on the individual level but 
jeopardizing family and social life.  
Nature has assigned the job of child- bearing to women. However much 
we fight for equality we cannot change this fact of life. It is natural 
dharma of women to care for children and to be Grahalakshmis. They do 
not lose anything by doing so, nor do they become superior in any sense 
by refusing to do it. Equality in such matters has no meaning.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    


 

Any Use Talking? 
Samskaras such as marriage are akin to making chillies less hot by 
tempering them with ghee: they serve to tame the natural urges. We add 
ghee to the chilli so that it does not inflame the intestines. Carnal 
pleasure and worldly enjoyment are part of life of a householder but they 
are kept within certain limits so that he is not overcome by them. For a 
woman a life of chastity and loyalty to her husband, together with the 
care of the household, constitutes a samskara that is equivalent to all 
samskaras prescribed for her husband put together. All of us must 
recognise this fact.  
The goal of this nation is Atmic well- being. We must all pray with a pure 
heart to Isvara that we remain true to this goal. As we pray, we must have 
also faith in the Lord's grace. If we keep speaking about the ideals of 
marriage and womanhood, one day perhaps people will see the light. As 
things stand now, I am afraid that one day our people will be pushed to 
the wall. That will be the time when they will realise how they brought 
disaster upon themselves. When they have such an awakening they will 
recognise the need to find a way out of their predicament. That is why I 
keep speaking about the path shown by the sastras.  
"What purpose is served today by speaking about varnasrama, child 
marriage and so on? "This is a natural question." This is a natural 
question. “Three- quarters of it is all gone. Many aspects of our life are 
governed by the laws of the state and these are contrary to the 
ordinances of the sastras". This is true. The laws are such as to have our 
hands tied.  
We are called a "secular state". It means, we are told, a state does not 
concern itself with the matters of religion. It further mans that the 
government can interfere only in social matters and not in religious 
affairs. But ours is a religion in which all aspects of life, individual and 
social, are woven together. So the laws enacted by the state to govern 


 
social life have an impact on our religion too. Our rulers do not recognise 
or accept this fact. They limit their view of religion to certain matters and 
think that all else belongs to the social sphere and are the concern of the 
government.  
All religions contain features that relate to the social life of their 
followers. Does the government interfere with them as it does with the 
social foundations of Hinduism? No. It is this fact that causes pain. 
Though our rulers swear by the principle of secularism, they do not apply 
the same standard or yardstick to all religions. The minorities rise in 
protest against measures affecting their religious life introduced by the 
government. “These are against the Qu'ran", the cry is raised. Or, if the 
people affected are Christians, they say: "These are not in keeping with 
Christian doctrines". Yielding to such pressure, the government exempts 
the minorities concerned from the scope of the measures.  
In spite of its claim to being secular, the government thinks it fit to 
interfere with anything that has to do with the Hindu traditions. 
Representatives of the minority communities come forward to speak in 
protest against acts of interference. But what about the Hindus? Even if a 
couple of Hindus speak up they are dubbed "reactionaries" or 
"obscurantists" and the government goes ahead with its measures or 
laws brushing them aside. Our rulers often proclaim that "a secular state 
means a state that does not concern itself with any religion, that it does 
not mean that the government is opposed to religion as such, and that 
the prosperity of all religions is acceptable to the state"., But in actual 
practice what do we see? The government's actions are not opposed to 
any religion barring Hinduism. The Hindu religion has become a no-man's 
land.  
You will wonder why I am harping all the time on sastric matters fully 
aware though I am of what is happening in the country.  
My answer is that, whatever the present situation be, we cannot foresee 
how things will take shape in the future. In the previous generation we 
thought dollars grew in the American soil and that people there were not 
wanting in anything. But what is the situation there today? We now know 


 
that no other people experience the same lack, the same emptiness, in 
their lives as do the Americans. It is only after reaching the heights of 
worldly pleasure that the realisation has dawned on them that the very 
pursuit of pleasure has created a void in their lives, an emptiness in the 
very Self. They realise that, floating as they did in a sea of dollars, they 
were drawn to all kinds of evil like drinking, loot, murder and prostitution. 
Now as they have no peace of mind they come to our country in large 
numbers seeking peace in our yoga, in our philosophy and in our 
devotional music.  
We learn from this that what seemed good two or three generations ago 
is now seen to be evil. When people realise this they go in quest of 
liberation. The government, however well intentioned it be, has 
introduced measures that are against the sastras, thinking that they are 
good. But some day in the future people will realise that they are 
harmful. Even today we see signs of such realisation on the part of people 
here and there. There is a saying: "In the beginning it looked good. It was 
like a colt but as the days passed. Well, it was seen in its true form". The 
same could be said about some of the reforms introduced by the 
government, reforms contrary to the sastras. They look fine now but 
eventually we will realise that they will lead to a hopeless situation in 
society. Bhagvan speaks of two types of happiness in the Gita. "Yad tad 
agre visamiva, parinamemrtopamam." Here the first type is described. 
This type of happiness is like poison in the beginning but like ambrosia, 
amrta, in the end. It is the sattvika or the highest type of happiness, 
like"halahala", the terrible poison, emerging first and amrta coming up 
later. The sastras may now seem to be bitter like poison because of the 
discipline they impose on the individual, the family and society, but in 
due course they will be seen to be sweet. Now all bonds, all shackles will 
break and the incomparable bliss of Atmic freedom will be experienced. 
Here the poison is tasted momentarily but the amrta will be everlasting.  
"Yad tad agremrtopamam pariname visamiva", here the second type of 
happiness is referred to. In the beginning this type of happiness will taste 
sweet like ambrosia but, with the passage of time, it will turn bitter like 
poison. In America the dollar once tasted sweet like nectar but later 


 
turned bitter like poison. In India too, the reforms that are contrary to the 
sastras "taste" good now but they will be found to be poison in the times 
to come, when both the individual and society will suffer in the absence 
of contentment as well as discipline. People will then seek the amrta. 
Should they not know where they can find it? But by then the poison will 
have gone to their head and they will be in danger. So it is our duty to tell 
them where they can find the amrta. It is for them, for future 
generations, that we must keep speaking about the sastras instead of 
burying them deep in the earth.  
Even though we ourselves do not imbibe the sastric nectar today we must 
preserve the sastras to help future generations when they will have 
become spiritually weak because of the poison going to their head. This 
lamp of the sastras should show the way at least in the times to come.  
Nothing can be done now because I have my hands tied. But if I keep 
speaking to you unceasingly about the sastras it is because I am not yet 
gagged.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 


 

Marriage Expenses and the Sastras 
Even if it is not possible for us to celebrate a marriage according to the 
sastras in respect of the age of the bride, could we not be true to their 
tenets at least in the matter of expenses? As I have made it clear so often 
a marriage has nothing to do with questions of money in any sense. Even 
though we have neither the will nor the courage to act according to the 
sastras in all matters, we could at least see to it that marriages are not 
turned into what may be called an economic problem; in other words we 
could follow the canonical texts at least in conducting weddings more 
economically.  
The marriage ceremony is in fact almost as inexpensive a rite as 
sandhyavandana. How much is to be spent on it? The newly-weds have to 
be presented with new clothes (cotton will do), a tirumangalyam 
(mangalasutra) with a piece of gold attached to it. Only a few close 
relatives need be fed. At the time of the muhurta an auspicious 
instrument must be played. This will cost you a small sum. The other 
expense is the daksina paid to the priest. All this is fully in accord with the 
sastras. Even a poorly paid clerk can perform his daughter's marriage in 
this simple manner.  
If wealthy people make marriages so lavish or showy affair, it would be a 
bad example for others not so wealthy. The money they otherwise spend 
on a music or dance recital or on other items that add glitter to the 
wedding must be used for marriages in poor families. This means that 
money that is otherwise wasted is converted into dharmic currency. It 
should be possible for every affluent man to celebrate the marriage of his 
daughter economically and save money with which a poor girl can be 
married and made happy. "Mass marriages" may be conducted in the 
same way as "mass upanayana".  
The rent charged for the pandal itself [or the “hall" or mandapa] takes up 
half the wedding expenses. You cannot hold a marriage ceremony in a flat 


 
even on a small scale. Philanthropists should join together to construct 
small mandapas in various localities for the marriage of the daughters of 
less fortunate people.  
There was a time when girls blushed when the very word marriage was 
mentioned. Then came a time when young women waiting to be married 
pined away at home, cried their hearts out, wondering whether they 
would be married at all. Now things have come to such a pass that 
women are on their own, not married and working like men in offices. 
The very life-breath of our culture, stridharma is being stifled. We hear 
reports of unseemly incidents happening here and there.  
What is particularly tragic is that no one seems to be concerned about 
finding a remedy for all the unhappy occurrences. What is worse, these 
happenings are sought to be justified in terms of psychology, this and 
that. Stories are written on the undesirable incidents and films produced 
based on them and encouragement given to wrong-doing. If we question 
the people who give encouragement they turn back and speak to us 
about freedom of imagination, freedom of art, and so on. In this 
republican age there is freedom for everything except for the pursuit of 
the sastras.  
I started by saying that according to the scriptures questions of money 
have no place in the marriage ceremony. Talking of marriage expenses, I 
must consider the complaint that a wedding lasting four days(which is 
how it ought to be celebrated) can be very expensive.  
The sastras do not ask you to perform rituals likely to impoverish you. The 
marriage proper, the solemnisation of the wedding, is a one-day affair. 
The groom must spend the following three days in his own house 
observing brahmacarya. During these days there is no need for any music, 
nor any nalangu, or any other celebration. Let those who want to reform 
the marriage ceremony, think of changing it in this manner.  
The groom’s people must tell the bride's parents: The marriage proper 
will be celebrated in your house. The remaining three days' functions will 
be held in our house without your having to spend anything". On the day 


 
following the marriage the householder ( the young man just married) 
must bring the "aupassanagni" (the sacred fire in which the aupasana is 
performed) to his home. There are mantras to be chanted as this fire is 
being brought, as it is placed on the cart, as the bullocks are yoked to the 
cart, etc. You may do the same nowadays if you go by car or train. In the 
old days marriage alliances were formed between families living in 
neighbouring villages. So it was easy to carry the auspicious fire from the 
bride's to the groom’s house.  
The four- day function may be performed in another way also. The place 
where the marriage is celebrated is to be treated as the groom’s house. 
Or the three-day function may be conducted in the house of a relative. 
No one need be invited for food, not even the girl's family. (The sastras 
do not permit the completion of the marriage rites in a single day.) The 
priest has to be paid a daksina-this is the only expense.  
According to the sastras, the groom must observe what is called 
"samvatsara diksa" from the day of marriage (diksa for one year); he must 
practise brahmacarya during these months. The marriage is to be 
consummated only later. Such practices have however changed. Until the 
recent past, the groom observed diksa at least for four days if not for a 
whole year. Now everything is performed on a single day. One is 
reminded of the saying: “The donkey is reduced to an ant and the ant 
itself eventually vanishes into thin air".  
During the marriage, Andhras wear cotton clothes dipped in turmeric 
water. However well-to-do they are they follow this simple custom. In the 
North too women wear ordinary clothes at weddings. We must try to 
follow their practice.  
One of the marriage rites is “pravesa homa" which is performed when the 
groom returns to his house. He has to carry the sacred fire of the 
marriage with him and perform aupasana in his home. It is for the sake of 
convenience -- and with the approval of the sastras - that it is allowed to 
be done where the groom's party stays for the marriage. To perform a 
marriage in a temple as a one-day ceremony - and “be done with it" - is 
not right. Even rich people who spend lavishly on clubs and races follow 


 
this practice because of their reluctance to conduct the function 
according to the sastras. Unfortunately, the poor are likely to follow their 
example. There is no extra expense involved in performing a marriage in 
the sastric manner as a four-day function.  
How are marriages celebrated today? The bride is one who has already 
attained puberty and the marriage is gone through in just one day. On the 
following day the bride is taken to the house of her in-laws. Another 
unsastric practice is that of consummation on the same day as the 
marriage.  
The groom is expected to observe brahmacarya at least for three nights 
after marriage. There are eight types of brahmacarya. Even though a man 
cannot be continent throughout, he must remain chaste at least on 
certain days. The least that is expected of him is celibacy for a minimum 
of three days after the marriage. This rule is no longer observed. Worse, 
the consummation, as mentioned before, is on the same day as the 
wedding is solemnised.  
The undesirable practices now associated with the marriage samskara are 
due to the anxiety to curtail expenses. If all rites are performed on the 
same day there is a saving in the matter of feeding the guests, the music, 
etc. Curiously enough, despite such an anxiety to curtail expenses, there 
is a great deal of ostentation in our weddings. To obviate the expenses 
incurred thus, parents perform the upanayana of their son along with the 
marriage of their daughter.  
We must try to reduce the unnecessary expenses incurred in performing 
Vedic samskaras. Friends and relatives can help much in this respect. 
They need not attend a marriage or upanayana even if invited. Instead, 
the money that they would otherwise spend in travel may be presented 
to the bride's [or the brahmacarin's] father. The fewer the invitees 
present at a wedding the less expensive will it be to feed them.  
 
   


 

Three Ways to Economy 
I feel that the marriage expenses could be reduced in three ways. First, 
both men and women must discard silks and other costly wear and use 
clothing of the lowest quality. Second, coffee must be given up; instead 
wheat kanji or buttermilk may be taken as a substitute. I say this because 
coffee has become a habit and a substitute may be needed for those who 
find it difficult to give it up. According to medical science buttermilk is as 
good as amrta (ambrosia). Expenses will be reduced by 60 per cent this 
way. If you check on the money you spend on rice and on milk and coffee, 
you will find that you spend more on the last two items than on the first. 
Third, you must refuse to take a dowry. If this advice of mine is taken 
there is no room for ostentation and vanity in our life. At the same time, 
apart from better physical health, there will be inner advancement. 
Above all, sastric life will be revived. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Ideals of Marriage 
The Vedas are learned during the years of student-bachelorhood. Then 
the "theory" taught has to be put into practice; in other words the rites 
prescribed in the Vedas must be performed. For this purpose a man has 
to take a helpmate after he has completed his brahmacaryasrama. This 
helpmate is a "property" that can never be separated from him. She is 
not meant not only to be a cook for him, not only one to give sensual 
gratification. She is called "dharma-patni" and also "yajna-patni". She has 
to be with her husband in the pursuit of dharma and has also to be a 
source of encouragement in it. As a dharma patni, she has to be by his 
side during the performance of sacrifices; she must also play a supportive 
role in all those rituals that have the purpose of making the divine powers 
favourable to mankind.  
It must be noted that a wife creates well-being for the world even as she 
does the work of cooking or as a source of sensual gratification for her 
husband. I will tell you how. It is not that she cooks for the husband 
alone. She has to provide food every day to the guests, to the sick and to 
the birds and beasts and other creatures. This is how she serves the 
purpose of "atithyam" and "vaisvadevam". The children born to here are 
not to be taken as the product of pleasure she affords her husband. She 
gives birth to them to perpetuate the Vedic dharma. Yes, even the raising 
of sons is intended for the dharmic life of the future. No other religion 
has before it such a goal for the marriage samskara.  
In our religion the man-wife relationship is not concerned with the 
mundane alone. It serves the Atman as well as the good of mankind. In 
other religions too marriages are conducted, say, in a church with God as 
witness. But ideal of marriage is not as lofty as ours. The purpose of 
marriage in our religion is to purify the husband further and to impact the 
wife fullness as his devoted and self-effacing companion. There is no such 
high purpose in the marriage of other religion. In other countries the 
man-woman relationship is akin to a family or social contract. Here it is an 


 
Atman connection. But this very connection is a means of disconnection 
also - of freeing the Atman, the self, from the bondage of worldly 
existence. There is no room for divorce in it. Even to think of it is sinful.  
[To sum up and further explain] the three objectives of a samskara of so 
elevated a character as marriage. The first is to unite a man with a 
helpmate after he has completed the study of Vedas. This helpmate is 
expected not only to run his household but assist him in the practice of 
the Vedic dharma. The second is to bring forth into this world children of 
noble outlook and character who are to be heirs to the great Vedic 
tradition, citizens of the future who will be the source of happiness in this 
world. The third is to create a means for women to be freed from worldly 
existence. A man who is not yet fully mature inwardly is assisted in his 
karma by his wife. By doing so, by being totally devoted to her husband, 
she achieves maturity to a degree greater than he does. The fourth 
objective is the subordination of sensual gratification to the other three.  
We have forgotten the first three important objectives. All that remains is 
the fourth, the enjoyment of carnal pleasure. If people take my advice in 
respect of the noble ideals of marriage as taught in the sastras a way will 
open out to them for their inner advancement. May Candramaulisvara 
bless them.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 19 
GRAHASTHASRAMA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Grhastha and Grhini 
After a young man has completed his gurukulavasa and performed the 
samavartana he has to wear a "double sacred thread". He must discard 
the marks of his student-bachelorhood - the staff, the antelope skin, the 
girdle - and wear the pancakaccha and an upper cloth. As a celibate-
student he was not permitted to use any footwear; he could not also 
adorn himself with sandal-paste, ear-studs and flowers. He may now even 
darken his eyes with lampblack. Adorning himself and putting up his 
umbrella he must approach the king or a royal representative. The latter 
must be impressed by his learning and the quality of his brahmacarya. 
The young must acquire [from the king or the royal representative] 
money and material as a gift for his marriage, so say the sastras.  
One point that emerges from this is that the marriage expenses are to be 
borne by the groom or his parents. A second point is that a young man 
who has had samavartana must wear the "double sacred thread" and 
pancakaccha even if he remains single. One's strength or potency is 
preserved by wearing a cloth whose ends are pleated, or made into folds, 
and tucked in. Muslims have the end of the cloths sewn together. Even 
people who do not belong to the twice born caste - except in Tamil Nadu 
and Kerala - tuck in their dhotis or vestis, not to speak of pancakaccaha. 
(Today even when they come to see me, people come in trousers. That 
being the case it is ridiculous or meaningless to speak of differences 
between the two types of wears).  
In these days there is neither gurukulavasa nor samavartana nor the 
pilgrimage to Ganga. But there is an extra "item" in weddings called 
"Paradesi-k-kolam" just to extort money or gift from the bride's family. 
The groom is presented with an umbrella, a pair of sandals and a walking 
stick. A ceremony called "kasiyatra" (the pilgrimage or journey to kasi) is 
conducted in which groom darkens his eyes with lampblack and wears a 
gold chain.  


 
Those who do not marry and remain "naisthika brahamacarins" (lifelong 
brahamacarins) are exceptions to the rule that no man ought to remain 
even a single moment without belonging to one of the asramas. That is 
after the proper conclusion of his student-bachelorhood he has to 
prepare to become a householder.  
The Brahmin is born with three debts: he owes a debts to the sages, to 
the celestials and to the fathers. He repays the first by learning the Vedas 
as a student-bachelor; the second by taking a wife and performing 
sacrifices; and the third by begetting a son. So without marriage he 
cannot repay the second and third debts.  
Sons are primarily intended for the repayment of the debts to the fathers. 
Performing the sraddha ceremony is not enough. Forefathers of the past 
three generations are to be made to ascend from the manes. So even 
after a man dies, for two generations the daily libations must be offered 
to him. That is why the birth of a son is considered important. (The case 
of the naisthika brahmacarin and the sannyasin is different. Because of 
their inner purity and enlightenment, they can liberate, not just two 
generations, but twenty-one generations fathers without performing any 
sraddha ceremony).  
Panigrahana (the groom taking the hand of the bride in his), 
mangalyadharana, saptapadi (the bridal pair taking the seven steps round 
the sacrificial fire) are important rites of the marriage function. There is a 
controversy about whether or not mangalya-dharana is a Vedic rite. It is 
an unnecessary controversy. Mangalya-dharana is a custom that is 
thousands of years old and it is an essential part of the marriage 
samskara.  
As I said before, after completing his student-bachelorhood a young man 
must take a wife for the pursuit of dharma. The latter should dedicate 
herself to him so as to become pure within. The purpose of marriage is a 
life of harmony and the procreation of virtuous children.  
Grhasthasrama is called illaram in Tamil and it is extolled by the wise in 
the Tamil country also. "Grha" means a house. A young man who returns 


 
to his house from the guru's and practises dharma is a "grhastha". One 
who resides in a house, a grha, is a grhastha. The Tamil wife calls her 
husband "ahamudayan", "ahattukaran", "vittukaran": these terms have 
to do with the house or the home. Only the wife can refer to her husband 
thus, not others. She herself is called "grhini", not "grhastha". The latter 
would mean no more than "one who resides in a house". But "grhini" 
means the house belongs to her (the wife), that she manages the 
household. The husband is the illaratan in Tamil and it means one 
performs the dharmic rites in the house, "il-arattan". The wife is "illal", 
one who owns the house.  
The husband is not called illan (illan, as it happens, means one who does 
not possess anything or one who is indigent). The wife is also called 
illattarasi (queen of the house), "manaivi"(owner of the house), or 
"manaiyal"; but the husband does not have similar appellations like 
"illattarasan"(king of the house), "manaivan" or "manaiyan"(owner of the 
house). In Telugu the wife is called "illu" (corresponding to the illal of 
Tamil).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


 

Aupasana 
Panigrahana, mangalya-dharana, saptapadi and other rites are performed 
on the day of the wedding. Aupasana begins with marriage and is 
performed every day until one becomes a sannyasin or until one's death. 
The sacred fire that is witness to the marriage is preserved throughout 
and aupasana performed in it every day.  
The sacred fire has an important place in the Vedic religion. The student-
bachelor performs samidadhana twice a day offering samidhs (sticks of 
the flame of the forest or palasa) in the fire. This rite is not continued 
after his marriage. When a person becomes a householder he has a 
number of rites to perform in the sacred fire. In place of samidadhana he 
now has the aupasana. The latter word is derived from "upasana" which 
term is used in the sense of puja, chanting of mantras, meditation, etc. 
But, according to the Vedas, aupasana is a rite performed in the sacred 
fire by all Hindus.  
Though members of the fourth varna do not wear the sacred thread they 
have the marriage samskara and, along with it, aupasana. Dharmasastras 
like the Vaidyanatha-Diksitiyam describe how sudras are to go through 
the jatakarma and namakarana ceremonies. The work deals with how the 
fourth varna should perform puja, the sraddha ceremony and apara-
karma (obsequies). Reformers ignore all these and allege that members 
of the fourth varna have no "right" to any rituals. Instead they must try to 
persuade people of this varna to perform the rites they are enjoined 
upon. Aupasana is one of the "rights" of this caste and it is to be 
conducted every day with the recitation of certain verses.  
 
 
 


 

Can a new Brahmin Caste be Created? 
The fact that aupasana is to performed by all castes gives rise to the 
questions: "Why only aupasana? Why should not all castes have the right 
to learn the Vedas, chant the Gayatri and perform sacrifices?” On the 
other hand, we have atheists who want the Vedas to be consigned to the 
flames and the idols of Gods like Ganesa to be broken and, on the other, 
we have people calling themselves reformist who want to extend to all 
the right to perform Vedic rites.  
Do I not lamblaste Brahmins for having become a degenerated class? 
Taking a cue from this the reformers argue: "After all, it is the Brahmin 
who has become debased and it is he who has debased others also. Now, 
when new life is being breathed into the Vedic dharma, why should 
Brahmins alone be given the right to it, Brahmins who have failed in their 
duty? All those castes that believe that the Vedas and Vedic works are 
essential to the well-being of mankind must be enabled to learn the 
Vedas and perform Vedic rites. All of them must have the right to wear 
the sacred thread and learn the scriptures."  
Organisations like the Arya Samaj have accepted the right of all to learn 
the Vedas and perform sacrifices. Here and there a Subramanya Bharati 
or someone like him imparts Brahmopadesa to a Pancama. The reformists 
ask why the Vedas cannot be made common to all.  
This is not acceptable in the least. I am a representative and spokesman 
of the sastras. It is my duty to state that this (making Vedic dharma 
common to all castes) is not permitted by the sages who created the 
sastras and assigned the duties special to each caste. They (the sages) 
were known for their spirit of sacrifices and impartiality and they had no 
interest other than the happiness of mankind.  
A man sins in two ways. If he forsakes his hereditary karma, he commits 
one kind of sin-such a man is called a "karma-bhrasta". But if he forsakes 


 
his karma and takes up the karma of another (that is if he practices the 
religious customs and duties of another caste) he becomes a 
"karmantara-pravista". According to the sastras he is guilty of a greater 
offence than the karma-bhrasta.  
Why? There are two reasons.  
An individual who forsakes his karma because he believes that varna 
dharma itself is meaningless may be said to act out of conviction and he 
may be said to be obeying his conscience. In his action we may find some 
justification. But, in the matter of the sastras, the question is not one of 
conscience. The question is: what about the man opts for the customs 
and rites of others? He does so because he believes that the customs and 
rites to which he is born are not as good those of the latter. To think that 
one vocation or one type of work is inferior to another, or superior to it, 
is not in keeping with modern ideas of socialism and the principle of 
dignity of labour. At the same time, it is not also in accord with the 
sastras. The karma-bhrasta who discards all varna dharma believes that 
the sages created a system not suitable to the times. He does not, 
however, think that they were partial to some castes. But not so the 
karmantara-pravista who thinks that the sages were partial. He chooses 
another man's dharma because he believes that it is better for his inner 
advancement than his hereditary calling and dharma. His action implies 
that the sages practised deception by creation the division of varnas. So 
his offence is greater.  
It is true that Brahmins have gone astray. But what is the meaning of 
creating a new class of Brahmins? It amounts to saying, "He (the Brahmin) 
has forsaken his dharma. Now I will take it over." To take up another 
man's dharma, apart from forsaking one's own dharma is a grave offence, 
worse than nearly giving up one's own dharma. I have stated repeatedly 
that all karma has only one purpose, that of destroying one's ego-sense, 
ahamkara. What is the foundation of varna dharma? It is one's willingness 
to follow the vocation and dharma that belong to one by hereditary 
without any consideration of one's likes and dislikes.  


 
Such willingness is based on the realisation that the vocation and dharma 
that have come to us are according to the will of Isvara, that they are 
manifested through the Vedas and sastras and that to practise them is to 
destroy our ego.  
What does it mean to create a new caste, to create new Brahmins? 
However good the intention behind such a process may be- even if it be 
the desire that Vedic works must be performed and that the sound of the 
Vedas must fill the air - the ego-consciousness will obtrude in it like the 
nut jutting out from a cashew fruit.  
Apart from this, however much you talk of equality and rationalism, the 
newly created Brahmins will suffer from an inferiority complex and will be 
racked by doubts as to whether they can practise their new dharma and 
whether they can chant the mantras and practise the rites in the same 
manner as people who are Brahmins by birth.  
The Arya Samaj and other reformist organisations have for their part 
abolished caste and given everybody the right to learn Vedas. Then how 
is it that non-Brahmins have not joined these organisations in large 
numbers or taken to the study of the Vedas? One important reason is a 
certain hesitation in joining anything new. Another, equally important, is 
that people believe that it is one thing to become an atheist but quite 
another for the old Vedic customs to be changed.  
So, though a couple of reformers may start a movement to through open 
Vedic learning to everybody, only four or five percent of the people will 
join them. The remaining 95 percent or so will continue to be in the old 
Hindu set-up. Also the few who join the new caste will have at heart a 
sense of fear and a feeling of inferiority. They will keep doubting whether 
their actions will yield the desired result. If that be so, how will their 
minds be pure? It is not only the ego-sense that makes the mind impure 
but fear, the feeling of inferiority and being racked by doubts. Rites 
performed in such a frame of mind will not serve the purpose of creating 
happiness in the world. Besides, members of the new caste are likely to 
develop conceited thinking that they are doing what Brahmins by birth 
ceased to do or could not do - there will a spirit of challenge in their 


 
action. When they practise what others were practising [or were 
expected to practise] there will naturally be a desire on their part to make 
an exhibition of it. There will no sincerity in their actions. All told, neither 
they nor the world will benefit from their works.  
We must recognise facts for facts and not be carried away by emotions. 
Have I not you about the power of the sound of the Vedas? This sound is 
not produced easily by everybody in the right manner. What I say applies 
not only to the sound of Vedas or the Vedic language but also to other 
languages and their sound. Take the case of German or Urdu. Some 
words in these two languages are tongue-twisting. Telugu is spoken in our 
neighbourhood but we find it difficult to vocalise some of its sounds. 
Suppose a German child or a Muslim or Telugu child were to be born in 
Tamil Nadu. These children would be able to pronounce such words easily 
-that is German, Urdu or Telugu as the case may be-because to them they 
would come naturally.  
However vehemently you may deny the existence of hereditary factors, 
you find evidence of the same every day in all spheres. Those who have 
been the custodians of the Vedas all these centuries will find it easy to 
learn and chant the Vedas despite the present gap of two or three 
generations in their tradition. The same cannot be said of other 
communities. The mantras will serve no purpose if they are wrongly 
enunciated. However well-intentioned the new class of people studying 
the Vedas maybe, their efforts will not be fruitful.  
Another point. Here we have a class of people born into a dharma and 
practising it hereditarily for thousands of years and acquiring in the 
process certain qualities. If such people forsake that dharma, how would 
you expect others who are strangers to it to take their place especially in 
the present new circumstances.  
There are today two unfortunate developments in the country. One is 
that of the Brahmins giving up Vedic learning and Vedic works and the 
second that of other communities wanting to practise the Vedic dharma. 
It is difficult to say which of the two is worse. Not performing the duty 


 
that belongs to us by birth is an offence. But, as the Lord says in the Gita, 
to take up the duty of another is a greater offence.  
"Svadharme nidhaman sreyo paradharmo bhayavahah". It is better to die 
within the sphere of one's own duty than to take up another's duty. 
Perilous and fearful is the duty of other men. Since death is certain 
anyway, if we carry out the duty that is properly ours there will be no 
rebirth for us. What do we mean by saying that another man's dharma is 
fearful? If a person practises another man's dharma he will be pushed 
into hell. Suppose such a man does not believe in a certain place called 
hell, we may then take it that he will suffer infernal sorrow in this or next 
birth. Apart from this, not being an atheist, he will be eaten up by the fear 
that he is perhaps committing a sin by pursuing another man's dharma. 
Were he not a non-believer he would not have faith in the Vedas and 
sastras and would not in the first place take up the Brahmin's vocation. So 
the one who has faith in the Vedas would be constantly nagged by the 
worry: "The sastras proclaim that the sound of the Vedas will bring good 
to the world. But the same sastras proclaim, don't they, that the pursuit 
of another man's dharma is fearful? "  
The point to be noted is that if you believe in the sastras you must believe 
in them fully. If you are an atheist you could of course reject all of them. 
But to make a show of being very clever and twist the sastras as you like, 
accepting some parts or rejecting or changing some others, is an offence 
more grave than that of being an atheist. To think that Mother Veda 
should dance to our tune is also a great offence. Learning the Vedas in 
such an attitude is tantamount to ridiculing them.  
I am not angry with reformists, nor do I suspect their motives. They go 
wrong because of their ignorance or thoughtlessness. If they wish to pull 
down the fence to go to the other side, they must think of the possibility 
of the few still remaining there walking over to this side.  
If people truly feel that their present vocation is as honourable as the 
practice of Vedic dharma, they will not think of taking up some calling 
other than their own. "Brahmins have forsaken the Vedas. So the world is 
not filled with the sound of the Vedas which is so essential to its well-


 
being. To fill this vacuum a new Brahmin class must be created. "Those 
who want to take the place of the Brahmins, who are traditionally duty-
bound to follow the Vedic dharma, will have a feeling of conceit, not to 
speak of a spirit of challenge and a sense of inferiority also. If you really 
want to work for the goal of making the Vedas a living reality again, your 
efforts must be directed towards turning those who were engaged in the 
preservation of the Vedic heritage back to the dharma to which they 
hereditarily belong.  
If I criticise Brahmins it is not because I feel that they cannot be corrected 
or that I have washed my hands of them. Nor do I feel that Brahmins 
alone as a caste are responsible for all ills of today. If I administer them a 
reproof now and then for their having given up their dharma during 
Islamic and British rule and for being lured today by the glitter of modern 
civilization, it does not mean that they are to be wholly blamed for 
everything. Placed as they are in today's circumstances any caste or class 
would have done the same. Those who find them guilty now think that 
they would acquit themselves better if they were in their place. But they 
too would have been compelled to make the same mistakes by the force 
of circumstances. If people hereditarily engaged in intellectual pursuits 
find themselves unable to apply their minds to Atmic matters and instead 
find themselves in involved in mundane affairs, it means a topsy turvy 
slide-down.  
I do not justify such behaviour nor the descent into worldly affairs from 
the heights of spirituality. Nowadays reformists try to justify even 
prostitution on psychological grounds. Similarly, I wish to point out that 
they is a psychological explanation for the degeneration of Brahmins also. 
If I criticise Brahmins, it does not mean that others should join in the 
attack, thinking that they (the Brahmins) alone are worthless people. It is 
the duty of these others to make Brahmins worthy of their caste. After 
all, during the past forty or fifty years, Brahmins have been an easy target 
of attack and ridicule. How silently they have suffered all this, also the 
humiliation at the hands of their detractors. Until some four or five 
generations ago, Brahmins were the guardians of all our Atmic wealth, all 
our arts. Considering this, is it not the duty of others to bring them back 


 
to the practise of their true dharma? They must be tactfully reminded of 
the high dharma they had once pursued and the spirit of sacrifice for 
which they were known.  
It is likely that in the past a few ignorant Brahmins treated other 
communities harshly. This is no reason why their descendants today 
should pay for it and be maligned and harassed in a spirit of vengefulness. 
It must also be borne in the mind that Brahmins themselves have been in 
the forefront in the fight against "the old unjust practices" and in giving 
other communities a high place in society. So there is no point in fuelling 
the flames of hatred. Nor can it be claimed truthfully that such hatred is 
part of "Tamil culture".  
Unfortunately, what Brahmins did in the name of reforms resulted in the 
wrong kind of equality for, instead of raising people belonging to the 
lower strata to a higher level, it had the effect of bringing the upper 
classes downward. Equality can be of two types: in the first all occupy a 
high level in society; in the other all occupy a low level. To carry a load 
uphill is difficult but it is easy to push it down. Quality has suffered in the 
attempt to create equality. It is not desirable to have that kind of equality 
in which everyone does the same kind of work. Nor should it be thought 
that they is no equality in a system in which the various vocations, the 
various types of work, are divided among different groups of people. I 
have already spoken a great deal on the subject. Our endeavour must be 
to create unity in diversity, nor uniformity.  
It is important to remember that neither hatred of Brahmins nor dislike of 
Sanskrit has ever been a part of Tamil culture and civilization. Sanskrit is 
the repository of Atmic and religious sastras, a storehouse of poetry and 
works on arts. Everyone must learn to regard it as "our own language". 
The need for the existence of "Brahmanya" as a separate entity must be 
recognised. This is essential to the preservation of the Vedas, the 
performance of sacrifices, etc, whose purpose is the good of mankind. 
Today the Vedas, the Upanisads and so on are available in print. Anybody 
can read them and try to understand them. But everybody need not learn 


 
to chant the Vedas; it takes many years to do so. Everybody need not also 
perform sacrifices.  
There ought to be an element of humility on the part of those who wish 
to carry out reforms; there must be sincerity of purpose. Then no need 
will arise to go contrary to the sastras.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   


 

Aupasana and Women 
I said [in an earlier talk] that members of all castes must perform 
aupasana. The husband and the wife must do it together. Even when the 
husband is away the wife must perform it by offering unbroken rice 
grains in the sacrificial fire. The Vedas themselves have given women 
such a right.  
Aupasana is the only Vedic right that a woman is entitled to perform on 
her own. Of course, there are so many pauranic vratas and pujas that she 
can perform according to the sastras, but these belong to a different 
category. Besides, she has naturally a share in all the works of her 
husband. Apart from caring for the household, she does not have to 
perform any rite (other than aupasana). Even if she does, it will not yield 
any fruit, for such is the rule according to the Vedic dharmasastras  
We hear people talk of "rights". It is my wish to create an awareness 
among women about their right, the right to aupasana. I should like every 
home to become bright with the sacred aupasana fire. Women should 
fight for this right of theirs and impress upon their husbands the 
importance of performing aupasana. "Even though you have given up all 
scriptural karma, you at least do the Gayatrijapa to retain your tenuous 
connection with the Vedic dharma. If you do not do this japa or even 
forget the mantra, one day you will feel repentant over it thinking of the 
upanayana samskara you had", women should tell their husband. "As for 
me I have had no upanayana, nor am I entitled to mutter the Gayatri. If at 
all I have any right according to the Vedas, which are the source not only 
of our religion but of this world and of creation itself, it is this aupasana. If 
you refuse to perform it I will be denied my Vedic right. " In this manner 
women must fight for this sacred right of theirs and make their husbands 
perform aupasana. Aupasana is indeed their one great Vedic "property".  
Women must bear in mind the importance of aupasana and agnihotra 
(like aupasana, agnihotra must also be performed twice a day). "So many 


 
fires are burning in the home", they must tell themselves. "We make 
coffee on the fire and cook food or make the water warm to bathe. By 
not performing aupasana we will be extinguishing that fire which was 
witness to our marriage."  
The sacred fire must be kept burning by adding rice husk to it now and 
then. In many ways it is advantageous to pound rice at home for, apart 
from the husk, we will have nutritious hand-pounded rice to eat. Also the 
poor labourer who does the pounding will get a little cash or a few 
handfuls of rice for his or her sustenance. (For the unbroken rice grains 
offered in the fire the housewife must pound the rice herself. This is a 
piece of work done to the accompaniment of mantras).  
It does not cost much to perform aupasana nor does the rite take long to 
go through. All you need is the will to do it. Hand-pounded rice is also 
good for your health. Milled and polished rice is not good. Besides in 
hand-pounding there is something of the Gandhian ideal too.  
The aupasana fire will keep away all evil spirits and afflictions of all types. 
Many Brahmins today have exorcist rites performed by others with neem 
leaves or bamboo sticks. They go to a mosque for relief, or they come to 
me praying for help. Aupasana is a remedy for all ills and wearing the 
aupasana ashes is a great protection.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Agni and the Vedic Religion 
The householder has the duty of performing a number of rites in the 
sacred fire. Aupasana is the first of them. Agni is of the utmost 
importance to the Vedic religion. This deity is called "Agni-Narayana". The 
hymns to Rudra also show that he has a connection with the god of fire. 
In Tiruvannamalai (in Tamil Nadu) Isvara revealed himself as a mountain 
of fire. In Kerala there is the custom of worshipping Amba [the Mother 
Goddess] in the form of light (in the flame of the lamp); the idol or yantra 
is not important. The goddess is invoked in the lamp itself. We speak of 
Subrahmanya who originated from Siva's third eye as fire incarnate. Thus 
Agni is of great importance to us. According to researchers, the term 
Aryan means fire-worshipper. Fire worship is the dominant feature of the 
religion of Zoroastrianism which is a branch of Vedism. 
The sacred fire should keep burning and glowing in home after home. 
Ghee, milk and other oblations offered in it will produce the aroma that 
will bring health and mental uplift to all. 
I have already stated that whatever the deity invoked in a sacrifice, the 
oblation must be placed in the sacred fire. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Sacrifices 
Four hundred yajnas or sacrifices are said to be mentioned in the Vedas. 
Of these, aupasana alone is to be performed by all the four varnas. 
Though the first three varnas have the right to all the other sacrifices, in 
practice these were performed mostly by Brahmins and Ksatriyas only. 
But later Ksatriyas too neglected to perform them. There are yajnas to be 
conducted specially by them to earn physical strength, victory in war, and 
so on. Sacrifices like rajasuya and asvamedha were performed by imperial 
rulers. They are yagas that have to be performed by Vaisyas for a good 
agriculture yield, for wealth, etc. As mentioned before, the yajamana of a 
sacrifice may be a Ksatriya or a Vaisya but the four priests must be 
Brahmins. (The idea behind it is that if members of these two castes were 
to participate directly in the sacrifices their duties like protecting the 
country and looking after agriculture would suffer.)  
Not all sacrifices need be performed by all Brahmins. A number of them 
are meant to serve one specific purpose or another. For instance, you 
must have heard of the putrakamesti in the Ramayana, the sacrifice 
performed to beget a son.  
Any rite meant to fulfil a wish is "kamya-karma" and it comes under the 
optional category. Then these are rites that are obligatory on your part to 
conduct for the good of your Atman as well as of the world. They come 
under the category of "nitya-karma", but the word "nitya" here does not 
denote "daily".  
In the category of nitya-karma there are 21 sacrifices. There is no 
compulsion with regard to the rest of the 400. But the 21, included in the 
forty samskaras, must be performed at least once in a life time. As we 
have seen, these are divided into groups of seven - pakayajnas, 
haviryajnas and somyajnas.  


 
Marriage is conducted with offerings made in the fire, is it not? Aupasana, 
which must be performed every day, is commenced in this fire and it 
must be preserved throughout one's life. The seven pakayajnas, rites like 
upanayana and sraddha must be conducted in the aupasana fire. The son 
lights his aupasana fire during his marriage from his father's aupasana 
fire. The son's aupasana fire, like his father's must be maintained 
throughout his life. Thus, without any break, the sacred fire is kept 
burning in the family generation after generation.  
All rites in which the aupasana fire is used and pertain to an individual 
and his family are "Grhyakarmas". The seven pakayajnas also belong to 
this category. They are related exclusively to the family and are not very 
elaborate. Even so they are conductive to the good of the world outside 
also. Grhyasutras deal with such rites. They belong to the Smritis and are 
called "Smarta-karmas".  
The elaborate works that are especially meant for the well-being of 
mankind are called "Srautakarmas". They are so called because their 
procedure is directly based on the authority of Sruti or the Vedas. The 
sastras dealing with them are "Srautasutras".  
I told you, do you remember, that there was no question of Sruti being 
superior to Smrti or vice versa? Similarly, the Srautasutras and the 
Grhyasutras are of equal importance. In the sanatana dharma that goes 
under the name of Hinduism both are to be cared for like our two eyes.  
The aupasana fire (lighted at the time of marriage from that of the 
groom's father) is divided into two in a ceremony called "agniyadhana". 
One part is called "grhyagni" or "smartagni": it is meant for rites to be 
performed at home. The second part is srautagni and meant for srauta 
rites. These two sacred fires must be preserved throughout.  
Grhyagni is also called aupasanagni since the daily rite of aupasana is 
performed in it. This is the fire contained in one "kunda" and so it is called 
"ekagni". Rites conducted in the family are included in the chapter called 
"Ekagni-kanda" in the Apastamba-sutra. The samskaras and other rites I 
have so far mentioned are mostly in accordance with this work since the 


 
majority of Brahmins in the South are Krsna-Yajurvedins following this 
sutra. Rigvedins and Samavedins who constitute a minority follow the 
Asvalayana and Gobhila-sutras respectively. These differences, however, 
relate only to the rites performed at home. There are no differences in 
the srauta rites with regard to the different Vedas.  
Srautagni meant for the srauta rites is in the form of three fires burning in 
three mounds. So it is called tretagni. The section in the Apastamba-sutra 
dealing with rites performed in it is called "Tretagni-kanda". One who 
worships the three Agnis is called a "tretagni" or "srautin" and, if he 
worships the srauta and grhya fires, he is called an "ahitagnin". One who 
performs an elaborate sacrifice like a somayajna is called a "yajva", 
"diksita" or "makhin". And one who conducts the greatest of the 
somayajnas, vajapeya, is known as a "vajapeyin". Sacrifices are called 
variously "kratu", "makha", "isti", "stoma", "samsta". There are some 
differences between these. Ancient Tamil works contain references to 
"mutti" (tretagni or srautagni).  
One of the three sacred fires, one of the tretagni, is called "garhapatya" 
and it belongs to the master of the household. It must be kept burning in 
the garhapatya mound which is circular in shape. In this no oblations are 
to be made directly. Fire must be taken from it and tended in another 
mound for the performance of rites relating to the fathers (this is 
different from the usual sraddha and is ritual performed to the manes 
every new moon) and also for certain deities. This mound is in the south, 
so it is called "daksinagni" and it is semicircular in shape. Offerings to 
deities are made generally in a third fire in the east called "ahavaniya" 
and it is also to kindled from the garhapatya fire. In the North any yaga or 
sacrificial rite is called a "havan", the word being derived from 
"ahavaniya". The ahavaniya mound is square in shape. Big sacrifices like 
somayajnas and other meant to propitiate deities are to be conducted in 
the fire taken from the ahavaniya mound to the yagnasala or the hall 
where a sacrifice is held.  
If aupasana is a grhyakarma, agnihotra is a srauta ceremony and it too 
must be performed twice a day. Agniyadhana mentioned before and 


 
agnihotra are the first two of the seven haviryajnas. Those who perform 
agnihotra are called agnihotrins. (Nowadays smoking is referred to as 
agnihotra and going to the races as asvamedha. Such references are 
intended to be humorous but are indeed blasphemous.)  
If the agnihotra fire is extinguished for whatever reason, it must be 
kindled again through a new adhana (agniyadhana) ceremony. The same 
applies to the aupasana fire. Now in the majority of houses neither the 
aupasana nor the agnihotra fire burns. I have mentioned here how these 
fires can be renewed since most of you perhaps must not have kept them 
after your marriage.  
In aupasana unbroken rice grains are offered in the fire and in agnihotra 
milk, ghee or unbroken rice grains. (It has become customary now to 
offer milk in the agnihotra. )  
As already mentioned, the daksinagni and the ahavaniyagni are made 
from the garhapatyagni. When srauta rites for the fathers have been 
performed in the daksinagni and other srauta rites in the ahavaniyagni, 
the two fires no longer have the exalted name of "srautagni" and are just 
like any other ordinary fire and they have to be extinguished. Only the 
garhapatya and aupasana fires are to be kept burning throughout.  
On every Prathama (first day of the lunar fortnight), a pakayajna and a 
haviryajna have to be performed in the grhyagni and srautagni 
respectively. The first is called sthalipaka. "Sthali" is the pot in which rice 
is cooked and it must be placed on the aupasana fire and the rice called 
"caru" cooked in it must be offered in the same fire. The rite that is the 
basis of many others (the archetype or model) is called "prakrti". Those 
performed after it, but with some changes, are known as "vikrti". For the 
sarpabali called sravani and the pakayajna called agrahayani, sthalipaka is 
the prakrti.  
The haviryajna performed on every Prathama is "darsa-purna-isti", 
"darsa" meaning the new moon and "purna" the full moon. So the "istis" 
or sacrifices conducted on the day following the new moon and the full 
moon (the two Prathamas) are together given the name of darsa-purna-


 
isti. The two rituals are also referred to merely as "isti". This is the prakrti 
for haviryajnas.  
For soma sacrifices "agnistoma" is the prakrti, the word "stoma" also 
meaning a sacrifice. In conjunction with "agni", the "sto" becomes "sto" -- 
"agnistoma". "Sthapita" becomes "establish" in English: here the “sta" of 
the first word becomes "sta" in the second. Some unlettered people 
pronounce "star" and "stamp" as "istar" and "istamp". Such phonetic 
changes are accepted even in the Vedas.  
I will now deal briefly with the remaining paka, havir and soma sacrifices.  
Pakayajnas are minor sacrifices and are performed at home. Even srauta 
rites like the first four haviryajnas -adhana, agnihotra, darsa-purna-masa 
and agrayana -are performed at home. The last three haviryajnas -
caturmasya, nirudhapasubandha and sautramani - are performed in a 
yagasala.  
The yagasala is also known as a "devayajna". The Kalpa-sutras contain a 
description of it, not omitting minute details. There are altars called 
"cayanas" to be built with bricks. (There are no cayanas for havir and 
pakayajnas.) As I said before there is the application of mathematics in all 
this. Several kinds of ladles are used in making offerings in the fire, 
"tarvi", "sruk" and "sruva". Their measurements are specified, also the 
materials out of which they are made. No detail is left out. In a nuclear or 
space research laboratory even the most insignificant job is carried out 
with the utmost care, so is the case with sacrifices which have the 
purpose of bringing forth supernatural powers into the world.  
To repeat, pakayajnas are simple, "paka" meaning "small", "like a child". 
Cooked food is also "paka"; that is why the art of cooking is called 
"pakasastra" and the place where cooking is done is called "pakasala". 
Just as in sthalipaka cooked rice is offered in the fire, so too in pakayajnas 
cooked grains are offered in the fire. The watery part is not to be drained 
off - this rite is called "caruhoma". But in aupasana unbroken rice (not 
cooked) is offered. In the pakayajna called "astaka" purodasa is offered in 
the fire. Astaka is performed for the fathers. The bright half of a month 


 
(waxing moon) is special to the celestials while it is the dark half (waning 
moon) for the fathers. The latter is called the "apara-paksa" since during 
this fortnight rites for the fathers are performed. The eighth day of the 
dark fortnight (Astami) is particularly important for them. The astaka 
sraddha must be performed on the eighth day of the fortnight during the 
Sisira and Hemanta seasons (the first and second half of winter) - in the 
[Tamil] months of Margazhi, Tai, Masi and Panguni. The astaka performed 
in Masi is said to be particularly sacred. The rite gone through on the day 
following the astaka is "anvastaka".  
"Parvani", one of the pakayajnas, is the prakrti (or the archetype) for 
sraddhas. Since it is performed every month it is called "masisraddha". 
(This is according to the Apastamba-sutra. According to the Gautama-
sutra "parvana" denotes the sthalipaka performed during each "parva" ).  
The pakayajna "sravani" is also called "sarpabali". On the full moon of the 
month of Sravana caru rice and ghee are placed in the fire and flowers of 
the flame of the forest are offered similarly by both hands. Designs have 
to be drawn with rice flour over an anthill or some other place and 
offerings made to snakes with the chanting of mantras. This ceremony 
must be held every full-moon night up to Margazhi (mid-December to 
mid-January).  
On the Margazhi full moon, apart from completing the sarpabali, the 
pakayajna called "agrahayani" must be performed. Like "sravani", the 
name "agrahayani" is also derived from the name of the month of the 
same name -Agrahayani is Margazhi. "Hayana" means "year" and the first 
month of the year is "Agrahayana". In ancient times the year started with 
this month. The first of January [of the Gregorian calendar] falls in mid-
Margazhi. It was from us that Europe took this as their new year. Though 
we changed our calendar later, they stuck to theirs. There are two more 
pakayajnas called "caitri" and "asvayuji": these fall respectively, as their 
names suggest, in Cittirai and Aippasi.  
Caitri is conducted where four roads meet. Since it is performed for Isana 
it is called "isanabali”: Isana is Paramesvara (Siva). In the other 
pakayajnas the deities worshipped are different but through them 


 
Paramesvara is pleased. It is like a tax paid to the ruler through the sub-
collector. In Caitri it is as if the tax is paid directly to the ruler.  
In Aippasi, kuruva rice is harvested [in Tamil Nadu]. This is first offered to 
Isvara in the rite called "asvayuji" before it is taken by us. Similarly samba 
rice is eaten only after agrahayani is performed in Margazhi.  
The haviryajnas are more elaborate, though not so large in scale as the 
somayajnas. Anything offered in the sacrificial fire is called "havis". In 
Tamil works like the Tirukkural it is referred to as "avi". However, ghee is 
specifically referred to as "havis". Sacrifices in which the soma juice is 
offered are called somayajnas and those that are not elaborate are 
categorised as pakayajnas. Now the other srauta sacrifices among the 
forty samskaras are called haviryajnas.  
When I spoke to you earlier about sacrifices I referred to the men who 
conduct them. The sacrificer is the yajamana and those who perform the 
sacrifice for him are rtviks (priests) who consist of the hota, adhvaryu, 
udgata and brahma.  
In pakayajnas there are no rtviks; the householder (as the yajamana) 
performs the rites with his wife. In haviryajnas there are four rtviks and 
the yajamana. But the udgata's place is taken by the agnidhra. The udgata 
is the one who sings the Saman. It is only in somayajnas that there is 
Samagana, not in haviryajnas. In caturmasya and pasubandha there are 
more than the usual number of priests. But there is no need to deal with 
them here. I wanted to give you only a basic knowledge of the important 
sacrifices that had been conducted for ages until recently.  
"Agrayana" is performed on the full moon of Aippasi. In this syamaka 
grains are offered in the fire. Caturmasya gives the impression that it 
includes a number of sacrifices. Some of you probably know that 
"caturmasya" is a term that refers to sannyasins staying at the same place 
during the rainy season. But it is also the name of a haviryajna to be 
performed by householders once every four months, in Karttigai, 
Panguni, Adi. From this onwards the sacrifices are to be performed in a 
yagasala [built in a public place].  


 
The haviryajna called nirudhapasubandha (or simply "pasubandha") is the 
first yajna in which there is animal sacrifice, "mrgabali". Though I have 
used the word "bali", technically speaking - or according to the sastras - it 
is not strictly a bali. "Bali" means that which is offered directly - and not in 
the fire. What is offered in the fire is ahuti or havis. The floor offered in 
the anthill for the snakes is sarpabali. In what are called 
panca-mahayajnas there is a rite called "vaisvadeva": in this offerings are 
made in the fire or they are thrown inside and outside the house with the 
chanting of mantras. The latter are meant for various creatures of the 
earth and are termed as bali.  
When we make an offering to a deity with mantras we must say "svaha". 
When it is made to the fathers we must say "svadha". The corresponding 
word to be said when offerings are made to various creatures is "hanta". 
Here we have something like the gradation of authority: "your majesty", 
"your honour", and so on.  
There are rules to determine which part of the sacrificial animal's body is 
to be offered in the sacrificial fire. This is not the same as bali. What is 
offered in the fire is "homa". In pasubandha only one animal is sacrificed.  
In yajnas involving animals there is a yupa-stambha or sacrificial post of 
bamboo or khadira to which the animal is tethered.  
In the last haviryajna called "sautramani" sura (liquor or wine) is offered 
to appease certain inferior powers or deities for the welfare of the world. 
Our government, which otherwise strictly enforces prohibition, relaxes 
the rules to entertain foreigners with drink, considering the gains to be 
had from them. The oblation of liquor in sautramani is to be justified on 
the same grounds. It is never offered in the sacrifices meant for higher 
deities. What is left over of the liquor - what is purified by mantras  
-is imbibed by the performers of the sacrifice, the quantity taken in being 
less than a quarter of an ounce. To say that Brahmins drank the soma 
juice and sura to their heart's content on the pretext of performing 
sacrifices is an outrageous charge. I have already spoken about the 


 
falsehood spread about the partaking of the meat left over from a 
sacrifice.  
I will now deal briefly with somayajnas or somasamstas. What is a 
samsta? The conclusion of the Samavedic hymns chanted by the udgata is 
called samsta. Compositions recited in praise of deities are generally 
known as stotras. But in the Vedic tradition the Rgvedic hymns are 
"sastras". In the Samaveda such hymns which suggest the seven notes or 
saptasvara are called stotras. In soma sacrifices it is this, singing of the 
stotras of the Samaveda, that is the major feature. Homa (placing 
oblations in the fire) is the dominant feature of paka and haviryajnas 
while in somayajna it is the singing of stotras.  
The name somayaga is derived from the fact that the essence of the soma 
plant, so much relished by the celestials, is made as an oblation. Apart 
from this, animals are also sacrificed. Even so the singing of the Saman 
creates a mood of ecstasy. When a musician elaborates a raga and 
touches the fifth svara of the higher octave the listeners are transported 
to the heights of joy. So in the singing of stotras of the Samaveda during 
the samsta all those assembled for the sacrifice feel as if heaven were 
upon earth. This is one reason why somayajna is also known as 
"somasamsta".  
In such soma sacrifices there is the full complement of priests - the hota, 
the adhvaryu, the udgata and the brahma. Each priest is assisted by three 
others. So in all there are sixteen priests in a soma sacrifice. Agnistoma 
which is the first of the seven somayajnas is the prakrti (archetype) and 
the other six are its vikrti. These six are: atyagnistoma, uktya, sodasi, 
vajapeya, atiratra and aptoryama.  
Vajapeya is regarded as particularly important. When its yajamana 
(sacrificer) comes after having had his ritual bath (avabhrtha snana) at the 
conclusion of the sacrifice, the king himself holds up a white umbrella for 
him. "Vaja" means rice (food) and "peya" means a drink. As the name 
suggests, the vajapeya sacrifice brings in a bountiful crop and plentiful 
water. The name is appropriate in another sense also. This sacrifice 
consists of soma-rasa homa, pasu-homa (23 animals) and anna -or vaja-


 
homa. The sacrificer is "bathed" in the rice that is left over. Since the rice 
is "poured over" him like water the term "vajapeya" is apt.  
In the old days a Brahmin used all his wealth in performing the soma 
sacrifice. Much of this was spent in daksina to the priests and the rest for 
materials used in the sacrifice. Now people are concerned only with their 
wealth and do not perform even sandhyavandana which does not cost 
them anything. Among Namputiris, until some forty or fifty years ago, at 
least one family out of ten performed the somayajna. Since only the 
eldest member of the family could conduct the sacrifice he alone had the 
right to property.  
There was also a time when even poor Brahmins performed this sacrifice 
every spring ("vasante vasante ") by begging. A Brahmin who conducted 
the sacrifice every year was thus called "prati-vasanta-somayajin".  
The Vedas will flourish in the world if at least the somayajna called 
agnistoma or jyotistoma is performed.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
 


 

Other Samskaras 
There are certain rites common to all Hindus though they are not 
included in the forty samskaras. The ears of a child must be pierced 
ceremonially ( "karna -vedhanam" ). Initiating a child into the alphabet 
("aksarabhyasa") is another samskara.  
Cremation is not included in the forty samskaras but, as already pointed 
out, it is also a sacrifice, the last one, antyesti, and performed to the 
chanting of mantras by the son or a close relative of the deceased.  
An ahitagnin’s cremation must be performed with the sacred fires he had 
tended, that is by bringing together his grhyagni and tretagni. The four 
fires will consume his body and transport his soul to a sacred world. If a 
person has not worshipped the tretagni and kept only the aupasanagni, 
his cremation must be performed with that fire.  
There is no cremation, of course, for a sannyasin.  
Since cremation is regarded as the last sacrifice, it follows that it is a rite 
that belongs to all except the inwardly mature and enlightened who take 
to sannyasa. If sannyasa were compulsory for all there would be no 
dahana-kriya or cremation mentioned in the sastras.  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Sahagamana 
When people nowadays talk of "sati" or "sahagamana" they mean it to be 
a custom in which the widow is forcibly thrown into the funeral pyre of 
her husband. We do not know for sure whether such an act of cruelty was 
indeed committed at any time in the past in any part of our land, that of 
forcibly pushing a widow into the funeral pyre of her husband. In any case 
sati has never been a widely practised custom. Only women of exemplary 
chastity and devotion, who did not wish to live after the passing of their 
husband, resorted to sahagamana. I have heard stories of such pativratas 
in my childhood. When the relatives lamented, "Oh, you are burning 
yourself alive, "the widows exclaimed, "This fire does not burn me. I am 
dying in the warmth of my husband's embrace." Such noble women died 
with a smile on their lips.  
When Hanuman set the Asoka woods ablaze with his burning tail, Sita 
remained unhurt because of her pativratya. When Kumarilabhatta was 
being scorched in the burning heap of rice-husk, he felt it cool in the 
presence of Sankara. Because of her supreme devotion to her husband 
the funeral pyre was as comforting as sandal-paste to a woman 
immolating herself. It seems even the cloth of such women were not 
consumed by the fire and were removed from the burning body to be 
cherished with devotion.  
A wife of exemplary pativratya falls dead on the death of her husband. In 
the story of Kannagi we come across such an example of devotion. When 
the Pandyan king dies owing to his profound feeling of guilt, his queen 
also dies with him. There is a similar story told of Padmavati, wife of 
Jayadeva, author of the Gita-Govindam. In order to test her devotion for 
her husband, the queen light-heartedly tells her that Jayadeva, who had 
been out on a journey, was dead. Thereupon Padmavati falls dead. The 
queen is filled with remorse for her thoughtlessness and it is said that 
Jayadeva was able to restore his wife to life with the grace of Krsna.  


 
Only women highly devoted to their husbands resorted to sahagamana. 
They were not forcibly thrown into the fire and were indeed prevented 
from taking such an extreme step. When Pandu died, Madri, one of his 
two wives and mother of Nakula and Sahadeva, ascended the funeral 
pyre of her husband as expiation for her being the cause of his death. The 
great men who permitted this act of sacrifice prevented Kunti, the second 
of the two wives, from taking a similar step. They said to her:" Desist from 
such an extreme act. Your duty now is to bring up your own children as 
well as Madri's."  
When Pukazhanar, father of Apparsvamigal (he had not yet come to be 
called by that name--he was then Marul Nikkiyar), died his wife Madiniyar 
immolated herself in her husband's funeral pyre. This story is told in the 
Periyapuranam. The chastity of Madiniyar's daughter was even of a 
higher order. Her name was Tilakavati. She was young and not yet 
married. It was her devotion to her husband-to-be that makes her a 
memorable character. She had been betrothed to Kalippakayar who was 
commander-in-chief of the Pallava army. But at the same time 
Pukazhanar died word came that the young Kalippakayar had been killed 
in battle. The young Tilakavati decided at once to put an end to her life. "I 
became his (Kalippakayar's) wife the moment I was betrothed to him. I 
will not look upon anybody else as my husband. Since he is gone I too will 
follow him in death. "Then Appar, that is Marul Nikkiyar, said, to his 
sister: "What will I do without my parents and without you? I am such a 
small boy. I too will accompany you to the other world." Tilakavati had 
now no choice but to change her mind so that she could look after her 
young brother. (True to her name she has remained as ornament to 
womanhood). Later her brother embraced Jainism with the new name of 
Dharmasena and it was she who weaned him from it. She was indeed 
instrumental in his becoming the poet-saint celebrated as Apparsvamigal.  
In Rajasthan there were so many noble women who earned a place in 
history by resorting to sahagamana.  
I should like to emphasise here that there was no compulsion for a widow 
to ascend the funeral pyre of her husband. But women who voluntarily 


 
resorted to sahagamana were revered and the sastras supported their 
action. Even today we hear rare cases of "sati", though the law does not 
permit it and the relatives dissuade such women from taking the extreme 
step. This seems to me particularly worthy of appreciation. In the old days 
the circumstances were favourable for the widow to perish in the fire 
with her husband. So, without being compelled by others and urged only 
by the desire to attain to a higher world, one or two widows immolated 
themselves. But today, in the age of Kali and of reforms, the 
circumstances are not favourable for such an act of sacrifice. So, despite 
this, if a woman decides to follow her husband in death it must be out of 
true devotion to him.  
I have often impressed upon you the importance of gurukulavasa. Like 
sati it is now a forgotten tradition. We find it difficult nowadays to run a 
gurukula. So if one or two boys come forward to study with a preceptor in 
his home and are prepared to observe bhiksacarya (that is begging for 
their food) their example must be considered worthier than that of 
brahmacarins of the past.  
Like sanyasa, sahagamana has never been compulsory. I will tell you an 
important reason for this. The dharmasastras deal extensively with the 
conduct of widows. If everybody was expected to be a sannyasin there 
would be, as I said before, no need for cremation to be brought under the 
purview of the sastras. Similarly, if every widow was expected to 
immolate herself in the funeral pyre of her husband, where would be the 
need for a separate code of conduct for them (that is for the widows)?  
Nobody can foretell when the hand of death will strike. It can come in 
one's childhood or during the time one is a householder. So everyone 
cannot be expected to die a sannyasin. If the sastras insist that on the 
death of a man his widow must also be cremated with him, then there 
will be no need for codifying "vidhava dharma"(code of conduct for 
widows).  
 


 

Goal of Samskaras 
I have dealt with a large number of samskaras, indeed more than forty of 
them. The Brahmin is expected to perform sacrifices almost all through 
his life, thereby making his life itself a sacrifice in the cause of mankind. 
On his death his body is cremated with the chanting of mantras and this 
rite also bring good to the world. While the samskaras refine a man, 
purify him, the mantras chanted at the time create benign vibrations in 
the world. And, while each karma is apparently meant for the performer 
as an individual, it also brings benefit to the entire world. In truth there is 
no karma that does not benefit mankind in general. All rites begin with 
the prayer, "Jagat--hitaya Krsnaya". When we chant the Gayatri we do 
not say, "may the sun god quicken or inspire my intelligence", but "our" 
intelligence. So the gayatri is a prayer made on behalf of all creatures (It 
would be perverse to argue that it should be enough if one Brahmin did 
the Gayatri-japa for the benefit of all--the word "our" is not to be 
construed thus. Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaisyas must mutter the 
Gayatri not only for their own good but for that of all castes, all creatures 
including animals, birds, insects, all sentient beings.)  
You must have seen that sacrifices constitute the major portion of the 
samaskaras. There is a mantra in the Brhadaranyaka Upanishad (4. 4. 22) 
which describes the benefits derived from their performance. It says that 
Brahmins endeavour to realise the Self through Vedic learning, through 
the performance of sacrifices, through charity, through austerities and 
through fasts. But when this purpose has been accomplished they 
renounce all (rites including sacrifices) and become sannyasins. It follows 
that all the elaborate sacraments are performed for the cessation of 
these very sacraments. Of all the benefits derived from the rituals like 
sacrifices this is the highest, the very abandonment of rituals. How does a 
big karma like a sacrifice prepare you for the renunciation of that very 
karma, that very sacrifice?  


 
There are two types of karma. One is doing what we like. This, instead of 
purifying the mind, muddles it and make our burden of karma heavier. 
The second is the performance of rites without any expectation of 
rewards, dedicating them to Isvara in a spirit of sacrifice. In the second 
type we are cleansed inwardly and the burden of our karma is made 
lighter and ultimately we are taken to the point beyond which it is not 
necessary to perform any rites. A man who has renounced all works in 
this way may, with the compassion of Parasakti, continue to work for the 
good of mankind. But even though he is a doer he will not be conscious of 
that ability.  
How is the impurity of the mind washed away? If you perform a big 
sacrifice without any desire in your heart, without any feelings of hatred 
against anybody and without any consideration of loss or gain, success or 
failure, your mind will be cleansed. The mind, body and speech must be 
totally involved in it and must remain fixed on a single goal. Then all the 
impurities will be burnt away. It is like the rays of the sun passing through 
a magnifying glass and converging on a piece of paper and burning it. 
There are a hundred thousand things to do in a sacrifice; there are so 
many mantras to be chanted; so many different materials to be collected. 
So the performer's mind will be fixed on a single goal.  
If a king is to perform a horse sacrifice (asvamedha), he has to look into 
so many different requirements. Different animals have to be brought to 
the place of sacrifice including even a tiger. If a man devotes himself for a 
number of years with a single-minded purpose and devotion to some 
work or other his mind will be made pure and he will reach the stage 
when there will be no need for him to perform any more rites. To build a 
gopuram, to dig a large pond or to be engaged in some other public work 
is to make one's mind taintless. In fact the mental purity so achieved 
seems to my mind to be a reward greater than anything else.  
Even if a man does not take to sanyasa after performing sacrifices as a 
householder, he goes to the meritorious world. With the grace of Isvara 
he becomes one with that very Isvara. And, when Isvara himself is 
absorbed in the Brahman as the Paramatman, he too becomes one worth 


 
him. When Isvara emerges to create the world he does not become 
trapped in it. Or there is another way of putting it. Krsna Paramatman 
speaks of the "yoga-bhrasta ", one who dies without realising the Self in 
spite of practising yoga. In his next birth such a man starts where he left 
off in the earlier birth and ascends to a higher state. What is said about 
people who practise yoga applies also to those who perform sacrifices. It 
means that a man who conducts sacrifices but dies before becoming a 
sannyasin is born again with a greater sense of discrimination in his next 
birth and with enough maturity to forsake all karma and become a 
sannyasin.  
Those who are not entitled to all samskaras will reach state by doing their 
work properly, by being devoted to God, by reciting his praises, by 
performing aupasana and by offering libations to their fathers.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 


 

A Day in the Life of a Brahmin 
"How can any Brahmin perform so many samskaras these days?" is 
perhaps a natural question. "What is the use of speaking about things 
that are not practicable?"Suppose I myself give two lists, the first 
containing the samskaras that are easy to perform these days and the 
second containing those that are not so easy. What will happen then? 
You will keep on adding items to the second from the first list and, 
eventually, I am afraid nothing will be left for you to perform. So, on your 
retirement at least, you must perform all the religious rites imposed on 
you as Brahmins. You must not ask for an extension of service with your 
present employers nor look for a new job.  
Let me now speak about a Brahmin's daily religious life according to the 
sastras. It is indeed a harsh routine. A Brahmin must get up five nadikas, 
or two hours, before sunrise. "Panca -panca-usatkale", so it is said. 
"Panca-panca" means five*five - "panca-panca usatkale"denotes during 
the 25th nadika". From sunset to sunrise is 30 nadikas. So a Brahmin must 
rise during the 25th nadika-from this time to sunrise is "Brahma 
muhurta".  
After getting up, he cleans his teeth, bathes in cold water and performs 
sandhyavandana and japa. Next he goes through aupasana and agnihotra. 
These rites come under "devayajna", sacrifices to the gods. Next is 
"Brahmayajna", the daily study and chanting of the Vedas. As part of this 
rite there are some tarpanas or libations to be offered. (For people 
following certain sutras these come later). If daytime is divided into eight 
parts one part would have been over by now.  
In the second part of the daytime, the Brahmin must teach his disciples 
the Vedas-this is adhyapana. Afterwards, he must gather flowers himself 
for the puja he is to perform. Since he is not expected to earn a salary- 
and if he does not own any land received as gift -he must beg for his food 
and also for the materials for the conduct of various sacrifices. The 


 
Brahmin has the right to beg, but it is a restrictive right because it means 
that he can take only the minimum needed for the upkeep and what is 
required for the performance of the rituals. A considerable part of what 
he receives as gifts is to be paid as daksina to the priests officiating at the 
sacrifices he performs.  
Of the six "occupations" of the Brahmin one is "pratigraha" or accepting 
gifts. Another is "dana", making donations to others. It is asked why 
Brahmins alone have the right to receive gifts. The answer is that they are 
also enjoined to make gifts to others. Indeed, the Brahmin accepts gifts 
for the purpose of the charity he himself has to render. This apart, he has 
also to make gifts during the rites to be mentioned next, "atithya" and 
"bhutayajna".  
After the second part of the day and a portion of the third have been 
spent thus, the Brahmin must bathe again and perform madhyahnika. 
Next he does pitr-tarpana, that is he offers libations to the fathers; and 
this rite is followed by homa and puja. In the latter rite he must dedicate 
to the deities all those objects that he perceives with his five senses (the 
five jnanendriyas). It must now be midday and the fourth part of the 
daytime will have been over and the Brahmin must have completed the 
rites meant for the deities, the Vedas and the fathers.  
Of the five great sacrifices or panca-mahayajnas, two remain- 
manusyayajna or honouring and feeding the guests and "bhutayajna" 
which includes bali to the creatures of the earth and feeding the poor 
(vaisvadeva). Rice is offered in the sacrificial fire and also as bali ( that is 
without being placed in the fire). In bali, food is placed in different parts 
of the house to the chanting of mantras-food meant for outcastes, 
beggars, dogs, birds, etc. In the manusya-yajna, guests are entertained 
and it is also known as atithya. The Brahmin has his mealtime only after 
going through these rites. Until then he must not take anything except 
perhaps some milk or buttermilk, but never coffee or any snacks. If he has 
any other sacrifices to conduct, paka, havir or soma, his mealtime will be 
further delayed. If he has a sraddha to perform also he will have to eat 


 
later than usual. A sraddha ceremony must be commenced only in the 
"aparahna": I will tell you what it means.  
Daytime, we have seen, is divided into eight parts. But it can also be 
divided into five, each of six nadikas. If the sun rises at 6, 6 to 8. 24 is 
morning or "pratah-kala"; 8. 24 to 10. 48 is "sangava-kala"; and 10. 48 to 
. 12 is "madhyahnika". From 1. 12 to 3. 36 it is "aparahna"; and from 3. 
 to 6 (or sunset) is "sayam-kala". (The time close to sunset is "pradosa". 
"Dosa" means night, the prefix "pra" meaning "pre" or "before". The 
English "pre' is derived from "pra". Pradosa thus is the time before night).  
I said that the time for sraddha is aparahna. Rites meant for the gods may 
be performed only after the completion of the sraddha. After his meal, 
the Brahmin must read the Puranas. Next he has the duty of teaching 
members of other castes their hereditary vocations, arts and crafts. He 
does not have a moment for rest or relaxation. For soon it will be time for 
his evening bath, sandhyavandana, sacrifices and japa. Vaisvadeva has to 
be performed at night also before the Brahmin has his meal and retires to 
bed. On most nights he takes only light food consisting of fruits, milk, etc. 
On Ekadasi he has to fast the whole day.  
There is not a moment without work. It is clear that, if the Brahmin 
created the sastras, it is not because he wanted to live a life of ease and 
comfort. On the contrary, the sastras impose on him a life of hardship 
and austerity, a life of utter physical and mental discipline.  
Even today Brahmins who work in offices or other establishments must 
try to live according to the sastras. They must get up at 4 a. m. (Brahma 
muhurta), perform aupasana, agnihotra, Brahmayajna, etc, in the 
traditional manner. They may perform puja and madhyahnika during the 
sangava time (8. 24 a. m. to 10. 48 a. m. ). "Madhyahnika" as the name 
suggests is a midday rite but, making allowances for present-day life, it 
may be performed during the sangava kala. In the evening too the rites 
may be gone through in the sastric manner. as they say, if there is a will 
there is a way. On holidays it must be possible for a Brahmin to perform 
all the rites expected of him.  


 
Even those who are on the morning shift and have to rush to their places 
of work must perform the rites as best they can. In the evening the 
Gayatri-japa be extended to compensate for non-performance in the 
morning. If it is morning shift for a week, will it not be mid-shift or night 
shift in the subsequent weeks? There could be adjustments made to suit 
these timings.  
Brahmins must feel repentant if they fail to perform the rites they are 
duty-bound to perform. They must devote the years of their retirement 
to the pursuit of their dharma instead of feeling sorry for not going out to 
work. There are rare cases ---perhaps one in a lakh---of people who have 
learned the Vedas during their retirement and lived the rest of their life 
according to the tenets of the sastras.  
The rites of our religion go back to a time when no other faith was 
prevalent. We must make every effort to ensure that they do not cease to 
be performed. They are not meant for our sake alone [as individuals] but 
for the welfare of all mankind.  
(See also Chapter 3, Part Twenty) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 20 
VARNA DHARMA FOR UNIVERSAL 
WELL-BEING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Jatis - Why so many Differences? 
There are four varnas - Brahmin, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras. We 
identify "varnas" with "jatis". In point of fact, varna and jati are not the 
same. The varnas are only the four mentioned above, that is Brahmins, 
Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras. Within each there are many jatis. Among 
Brahmins there are Ayyars, Ayyangars, Raos, and so on. In the fourth 
varna there are Mudaliars, Pillais, Reddis, Naikkars, Nayudus, Gaundars, 
Padayacis.  
In common parlance jati is used for varna. I am also using the two as 
interchangeable terms.  
The sastras lay down separate rites and practices for the four jatis (that is 
the four varnas). This means that within the fold of the same religion, 
Hinduism, there athe vre numerous differences. Food cooked by one 
caste is not to be eaten by the another. A young man belonging to one 
jati is not to marry a girl belonging to another. The vocation practised by 
one jati is not to be practiced by the another. The differences are indeed 
far too many.  
Apart from the large number of divisions in each varna already existing, 
more and more divisions (or jatis) are coming into being. Thus Hinduism 
appears to be a strange religion.  
Hindus today feel ashamed of the fact that a religion of which they have 
otherwise reason to be proud (because it once belonged to the whole 
world) should have so many differences in it. Other religions too have 
their dos and don'ts. The Ten Commandments are meant for all 
Christians. So are the injunctions of the Quran for all Muslims. But in 
Hinduism the dos and don'ts are not the same for all. What one man does 
as part of his dharma becomes adharma if done by another. For instance, 
it is dharma for one man to wear the sacred thread and chant the Vedas, 
while the same is adharma for another. If the person who chants the 


 
Vedas does not bathe and keep his stomach empty he will be guilty of 
adharma. Another, however, need not necessarily bathe nor observe 
fasts. When I see that our religion is still alive with all these differences, I 
am reminded of the words of a great man. . "That one day all of us will 
die is not to be wondered at. The real wonder is that we have nine 
openings (or gates) in our body but our life does not escape through any 
of them. "  
Navadvare sariresmin ayuh sravati santanam  
Jivatityadbhutam tatra gacchatiti kimadbhutam  
Similarly one must wonder at the fact that our religion is still alive in spite 
of all its differences and in spite of the fact that people are troubled by 
doubts about the same.  
For the same it is offence to chant the Vedas, while for the others it is an 
offence not to chant the same. Why should there be so many differences 
in our religion and why should it seem to be discriminatory? Some feel 
that it is shameful even to speak about the differences and believe that 
they are a blot on our faith, which has otherwise many worthy features. 
While some Hindus try to satisfy themselves about these somehow, many 
find them to be a constant irritant. Then there are also people who feel 
angry about these differences and turn atheists as a reaction to the same.  
Some are at heart proud of Hinduism but want the varna system to be 
scrapped and all Hindus to form a single class without any distinction as is 
the case with the followers of other religions. "The Vedas must be thrown 
open to all and there must be one common form of worship for all", they 
declare. "We must do away with the system of separate religious rites 
and practices." Some go further and claim that such was the concept 
obtaining in our religion during the time of our forefathers. "The original 
thinkers of our religion who proclaimed the oneness of the individual self 
and the Paramatman, "they argue, "would not have believed in such 
differences among the individual souls. Krsna Paramatman says in the 
Gita that the vocations are assigned to people according to differences in 
their nature, not according to their birth." So they hold caste to be a blot 


 
on our religion and believe that the system of hereditary occupations did 
not originally obtain but was a later invention.  
We must examine these views in some detail.  
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 


 

Caste according to the Vedas and the Gita 
Let us first consider the view that according to the Vedas themselves 
caste is not based on birth. (After all, the Vedas are the source of our 
religion. So it is essential to be clear on this point.) Earlier I sought to 
counter the view that there was Vedic sanction for post-puberty 
marriages. The present contention about what the Vedas say about caste 
is similar, being based on a passage read out of context. What is 
mentioned as an exception to the rule is being interpreted as a rule itself. 
I will give firm proof in support of the view that caste is based on birth 
and not on the nature or quality of individuals. The caula of children 
belonging to particular caste is performed at the age of three, the 
upanayana at five or seven. These are samskaras based on birth and 
performed in childhood. So it would be absurd to claim that one's 
vocation is based on one's nature of qualities. Is it possible to determine 
one's qualities or nature in early childhood?  
Let us now come to Gita. It is true that the Gita speaks of "samadarsana", 
"seeing the selfsame thing in everything and everybody. But it would be 
perverse to argue on this basis that the Gita does not recognise any caste 
distinctions. When, according to Krsna, do we attain the stage of 
samatva, the stage when we will look upon all as equal? We must 
consider the context: The Lord speaks of the samadarsana of the wise 
man who is absorbed in the Atman and for whom there exists nothing 
[other than the Atman] including creation - and even the fact that Isvara 
is the creator is of no consequence to him. The Lord says that all are 
equal for a man when he renounces karma entirely to become an ascetic 
and attains the final state of enlightenment. The Vedas and the 
Upanisads say the same thing. Only an individual belonging to the highest 
plane can see all things as One [as one Reality]. Samadarsana is not of this 
phenomenal world of plurality nor is it for us who are engaged in works. 
The Lord speaks in the Gita of samadarsana, samacitta and samabhuddhi 
from the yogin's point of view, but by no means does he refer to 
"samakaryatva" as applied to our worldly existence.  


 
Some concede that Bhagavan does not deny caste differences, but 
however argue that, according to the Lord, caste is not based on birth but 
on the individual qualities of people. In support they quote this line from 
the Gita. "Caturvarnyam mayasrstam guna-karma-vibagasah".  
When do we come to know the qualities that distinguish an individual? At 
what age does he reveal his nature? How are we to determine this and 
impart him the education and training necessary for the vocation that will 
be in keeping with his qualities? Take, for instance, the calling of the 
Brahmin who has to join the gurukula when he is seven or eight years old. 
His education covers a period of twelve years; after this alone will he be 
qualified for his vocation which includes, among other things, teaching. If 
a man's occupation were to be fixed until after his character and qualities 
are formed, it would mean a waste of his youthful years. Even if he were 
to learn a job or trade thus at a late age it would mean a loss not only to 
himself but also to society. The Lord speaks again and again that we must 
be constantly engaged in work and that we must not remain idle even a 
moment. How then would he approve of an arrangement in which every 
individual has to be without any work until his vocation is determined 
according to his character?  
Does this mean that the Lord lends his support in theory alone to the 
system of vocations according to the differing qualities of people and that 
in actual practice he wants occupations to be based on birth? But he is 
not like a politician [of these days] speaking one thing and doing 
something entirely different.  
What do we see in Krsna's own life as a divine incarnation? When Arjuna 
refuses to fight saying that it is better to become a mendicant than spill 
the blood of friends and relatives even if it be to rule over an empire, 
what does the Lord tell him? He urges Arjuna to fight. "You are born a 
Ksatriya and you are duty-bound to wage war. Take up your bow and 
fight".  
Here too it may be argued thus: "Arjuna was a great warrior and a great 
hero. His reluctance to take up arms against friends and relatives must 
have been a momentary affair. His inner quality and temperament were 


 
that of a man of valour. So the Lord enthuses him to go to war. What he 
refers to as Arjuna's svadharma (own duty) cannot be the same as his jati 
dharma (caste duty). The Lord must be referring to Arjuna's natural 
character as his svadharma. "  
If such an argument is correct, what about the character of Dharmaputra 
(Yudhisthra)? From the very beginning he is averse to war and anxious to 
make peace with the Kauravas. Does he not go so far as to say that he 
would not insist on half the kingdom but he would be satisfied with just 
five houses? Krsna goes to the Kauravas as his envoy [of peace] but is 
himself dragged into war by them. Earlier he encouraged Yudhisthra to 
subjugate all his neighbouring kingdoms to become an imperial ruler and 
perform the rajasuya. Does Dharmaputra desire such glory? His inner 
character and temperament show that he is not warlike by nature nor do 
they suggest that he desires the status of a mighty imperial ruler. Sri 
Krsna Paramatman makes such a man practice his dharma of a Ksatriya. 
All this shows that by svadharma it is jati dharma that the Lord means. 
Men like Dronacarya were born Brahmins but they took up the duty of 
Ksatriyas. Bhagavan does not deprecate them since they were otherwise 
great men, but all the same he does not show any displeasure when 
Bhima taunts Dronacarya for having forsaken the dharma of his birth. 
Thus we have confirmation that by svadharma the Lord means the jati 
dharma of birth.  
Then, why does he use the phrase "guna-karma-vibhagasah" in the Gita?  
 
 
 
 
   
   


 

Character and Vocation by Birth 
It is jatidharma that goes to make the inner guna (inner quality or nature) 
of an individual. So Sri Krsna's dictum in the Gita that the caturvana 
division is in accord with the gunas and the idea that the caste is based on 
birth are one and the same. There is no conflict between the two. You 
cannot find fault with Sri Krsna for his practice being at variance with his 
precept.  
Parasurama and Dronacarya were Brahmins but they were Ksatriyas by 
nature. On the other hand, Visvamitra, a valorous Ksatriya king known for 
his violent and passionate temperament, became a Brahmin rsi. Cases 
like this are extremely rare, and are exceptions to the rule of jati dharma. 
On the whole we see that the Lord functions on the basis that, whatever 
be the outward qualities of individuals, their inner quality is in keeping 
with their hereditary vocations.  
How can birth be the basis of the quality on which one's occupation is 
based? Before a man's individual character develops, he grows in a 
certain environment, the environment evolved through the vocation 
practiced in his family from generation to generation. He adopts this 
vocation and receives training in it from his people. It is in this manner 
that his guna is formed, and it is in keeping with his work. Everybody 
must have the conviction that he is benefited by the occupation to which 
he is born. When people in the past had this attitude in the past they 
were free from greed and feelings of rivalry. Besides, though they were 
divided on the basis of their vocations, there was harmony among them. 
Children born in such a set-up naturally develop a liking and aptitude for 
the family vocation. So what is practised according to birth came to be 
the same as that practised according to guna. Whatever the view of 
reformers today, in the old days an individual's ability to do a job was in 
accord with his guna; and in the dharma obtained in the past a man 
practised his calling according to his guna. Now it has become topsy-
turvy.  


 
What is the view of the psychologists on this question?  
According to them, heredity and environment play a crucial part in 
determining a man's character, abilities and attitudes. In the past all 
vocations were handed down from grandfather to father and from father 
to son. Besides, each group practising a particular occupation or trade 
lived in a separate area in the village. The Brahmins, for instance, lived in 
the agrahara and, similarly, each of the other jatis had its own quarter. So 
the environment also helped each section to develop its special skills and 
character. These two factors - heredity and environment - were greatly 
instrumental in shaping a person's guna and vocation.  
Instead of speaking about the subject myself, I will cite the views of 
Gandhiji who is much respected by the reformists: "The Gita does talk of 
varna being according to guna and karma, but guna and karma are 
inherited by birth." So the fact that Krsna Paramatman's practice is not at 
variance with his doctrine is confirmed by Gandhiji. Modernists should 
not twist and distort the Vedas and sastras and the pronouncements of 
Krsna Paramatman to suit their own contentions.  
Krsna is usually imperative in his utterances. "I speak, you listen," such is 
his manner. But when he speaks of people and their duties, he does not 
inpose himself saying "I speak thus", but instead he points to what is laid 
down in the sastras to be the authority. During Krsna's own time the 
various castes were divided according to birth: we learn this, without any 
room for doubt, from the Mahabharata, the Bhagavata and the Visnu 
Purana. I mention this because some research scholars today are likely to 
put forward the view that caste based on birth evolved after the time of 
Krsna. The epic and the Puranas mentioned above declare categorically 
that during the age of Sri Krsna Paramatman the sastras dealing with 
varnasrama were the authority for dharma. It was at such a time, when 
an individual's vocation was determined by birth that the Lord declared in 
clear terms:  
Yah sastra -vidhim utsrjya  
vartate kama-karatah  
Na sa siddhim avapnoti  


 
na sukham na param gatim  
Tasmacchastram pramanam te  
karyakaryavyavasthitau  
Jnatva sastravidhanoktam  
karma kartum iha'rhasi  
-Bhagavadgita, 16. 23 & 24 
Whoso forsakes the injunctions of the sastras and lives according to his 
own desires does not obtain liberation, finds no happiness. (The Sastras 
determine your work, what is right and what is wrong. You must know 
the way shown by the sastras and pursue the work - vocation -according 
to them.)  
Sri Krsna establishes that an individual owes his caste to his birth. There 
should not be the slightest doubt about it.  
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 


 

Vocations according to Guna not in Practice 
Critics of varna dharma will perhaps argue thus: "Let the pronouncements 
of the Vedas and of Krsna be whatever on the subject of jati dharma. We 
do not accept them because they represent a partisan view. We must 
devise a system in which vocations are determined according to one's 
guna or quality and mental proclivity and not according to birth. Caste 
systems must be done away with."  
What is the relationship between a man's vocation on the one hand and 
his guna - his character and natural inclination - on the other? If you 
pause to think about the question, you will realise that this relationship is 
highly exaggerated these days. Everybody suffers from the sense of self-
importance and wants a great measure of freedom for himself in all 
things. That is the reason why people insist that their feelings and 
thoughts must be respected. They do not pause for a moment to consider 
whether such feelings are helpful to society, whether they are good or 
harmful for it. And if they are harmful, should they not be checked for the 
sake of the community? Freedom is demanded for everything without 
such questions being taken into consideration.  
If we examine how far the natural inclination and character of a man have 
to do with the work he likes to do, we will discover that in 90 out of 100 
cases there is no connection at all between the two. A person of vairagya 
(that is one who is detached and without any passion) would not like to 
stick to any job. Another who is full of energy and enthusiasm and who 
does his work after careful planning would be averse to any job of a 
routine nature. Some are keen to join army and some the navy and, in 
contrast, there are some others who would turn their face against either 
even if compelled to do so. Those with a flair for writing, music or 
painting would discountenance any type of drab work.  
But how many get the job for which they think that they are fitted and for 
which they have a natural aptitude? Not even 10 per cent.  


 
All sorts of people come to the Matha to see me. They pay their respects 
and tell me about what they want to do in life. I gather the impression 
that most of them are in jobs that are not in keeping with their interests 
or aptitude. A father comes and tells me: "My son has applied for 
admission to the engineering college as well as to the commerce college. 
If he fails to get admission to the first he will join the second. If he joins 
the engineering college there is nothing like that. I seek your blessings." Is 
there any connection between the job of an engineer and that of a 
commerce graduate? Even so the boy in question is prepared to the work 
of an engineer (like surveying) or of a commerce graduate (like auditing). 
A young man tells me: "I have passed myIntermediate" I am not sure 
whether I should join the medical college or prepare for the IAS 
examination. “Again what is the connection between the work of a doctor 
and that of a collector perhaps? If one's profession is based on one's 
qualities, how is it that a young man who wants to become a doctor also 
contemplates a career in the IAS?  
What would you say of a lawyer or an industrialist joining a political party 
and eventually becoming a minister? Among ministers today we see not 
only lawyers and industrialists but also ex-officials, doctors, professors, 
and so on. Are the qualities required for a minister the same as those 
required for a doctor, lawyer or professor?  
There being no compatibility between a man's job and his qualities and 
natural inclination is a phenomenon not confined to the "higher" levels. 
Sometimes a devotee comes and tells me: "I was a counter clerk in a 
cinema. Now I have joined in the army. Please bless me". Another says: "I 
was a waiter in a restaurant but now I manage a Kiosk." What is the 
connection between the job of a cinema assistant and a soldier or 
between that of a waiter and that of a wayside shopkeeper?  
Today the government professes to be "socialistic". Its view is that 
appointments are to be made not on the basis of caste but on the basis of 
character and educational qualifications of the candidates. But when it 
conducts examinations for big positions some are selected for IAS and 
some for IPS from the same group of candidates. Now from the point of 


 
view of natural inclination what is the relation, say, between a collector 
and a police superintendent? So long as no technical work is involved, 
employees of one department are transferred to another where the work 
is entirely different. In these instances there is nothing to support the 
theory of quality and mental proclivity in the allotment of work.  
The majority of people do not choose their jobs according to their inborn 
character. They somehow learn to adjust themselves to their work 
whatever it happens to be. On the whole there is competition for such 
jobs are very paying. To talk of inborn nature, quality or mental outlook is 
all bunkum. Would it not be ridiculous if "svadharma" comes to mean the 
job or vocation that brings the maximum money for the minimum of 
work?  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 


 

A Wrong Notion 
A wrong notion has gained currency that in the varnasrama system the 
Brahmins enjoys more comfort than the others, that he more income, 
that he has to exert himself less than the others.  
In the order created by our sastras the Brahmin has to make as much 
physical effort as much physical effort as the peasant. Since, at present, 
there is ignorance about the rites he has to perform, people erroneously 
believe that he makes others work hard and he lazes about and enjoys 
himself. The Brahmin has to wake up at four in the morning and bathe in 
cold water, rain or shine, warm or cold. Then, without a break, he has to 
perform one rite after another: sandhyavandana, Brahmayajna, 
aupasana, puja, vaisvadeva and one of the 21 sacrifices. If you sit before 
sacrificial fire for four days you will realise how difficult it is with all the 
heat and smoke. How many are the vows and the fasts the Brahmin has 
to keep and how many are the ritual baths.  
Other castes do not have to go through such hardships. A Brahmin cannot 
eat "cold rice"in the morning like a peasant - he has no "right" to it. The 
dharmasastras are not created for his convenience or benefit, nor to 
ensure that he has a comfortable life. He would not have otherwise 
imposed on himself the performance of so many rites and a life of such 
rigorous discipline. When he has his daytime meal it will be 1 or 2. (On 
the day of a sraddha it will be three or four). This is the time the peasant 
will have his rest after his meal under a tree out in the field where he 
works. And the Brahmin's meal, mind you, is as simple as the peasant's. 
There is no difference between the humble dwelling of the peasant and 
that of the Brahmin. Both alike wear cotton. The peasant may save 
money for the future but not the Brahmin. He has no right either to 
borrow money or to live in style.  
In the "Yaksa-prasna" of the Mahabharata the simple life of Brahmin is 
referred to:  


 
Pancamehani saste va sakam pacati svagrahe  
Anrani caapravasi ca sa varicara modate  
If day time is divided into eight parts, the Brahmin may have his food only 
in the fifth or sixth part after performing all his rites. Before that he has 
neither any breakfast nor any snacks. And what does he eat? Not any rich 
food, no sweets like almonds crushed in sweetened milk. "Sakam pacati" 
- the Brahmin eats leafy vegetables growing on the banks of rivers, such 
areas being no one's property. Why is he asked to live by the river side? It 
is for his frequent baths and for the leafy vegetables growing free there 
and for which he does not have to beg. He should not borrow money: 
that is the meaning of the word "anrni", because if he developed the 
habit of borrowing he would be tempted to lead a life of luxury. Poverty 
and non-acquisitiveness (aparigraha) are his ideals. A Brahmin ought not 
to keep even a blade of grass in excess of his needs.  
Now even the government and big industrialists are in debt. If there any 
people who live according to the sastras, without being indebted to 
anybody and without bowing to anybody and at the same time 
maintaining their dharma, it is the tribe called narikuravas.  
"Apravasam" (mentioned in the verse) means that a Brahmin must not 
leave his birth place and settle elsewhere. Honour or dishonour, profit or 
loss, he must live in his birth place practising his dharma. Nowadays, for 
the sake of money, people settle in England or America abandoning their 
motherland and their traditional way of life - and they are proud of it. 
Such a practice is condemned severely by the sastras.  
If all the castes worked hard and lived a simple life there could be no ill-
will among people and there would then be no cry that caste must be 
done away with. One reason for the "reformist view" is that today one 
caste is well-to-do and comfortable while another is poor and has to toil. 
Simplicity and hard work bring satisfaction and inward purity. Such a 
state of simple and happy life prevailed in our country for a thousand, ten 
thousand years.  


 
I said that in these days too vocations are not chosen on the basis of a 
man's qualities or natural inclinations. The only considerations are 
income and comforts. All the people are on the lookout for all kinds of 
jobs and this has resulted in increasing rivalry and jealousy, not to speak 
of growing unemployment.  
In the beginning, when vocations were determined on the basis of birth, 
everyone developed an aptitude for the work allotted to him as well as 
the capacity to learn it easily. This is no longer the case now. In the past a 
man's vocation was like a paternal legacy and he was naturally very 
proficient in it. Now there is a universe inefficiency and incompetence.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 


 

Equal Opportunities 
As we have already seen, we cannot sustain the claim that vocations are 
determined today according to the qualities of individuals and their 
inclinations or aptitudes. Also untenable is the demand for equal 
opportunities for all. To take an example: there are a certain number of 
seats in medical and engineering colleges. For highly specialised and new 
subjects like nuclear science the seats are very few. When the candidates 
possessing the same qualifications (or merit) apply for admission to the 
colleges teaching these subjects only a fixed number are selected. 
Naturally, it is not practicable to choose all. Would it be right to contend 
that all candidates, even though equally qualified, who want to do 
research in a new science like atomic physics, should be given an 
opportunity? All those who apply for high positions in the government 
will not be selected for appointment even though they possess more or 
less same qualifications. The government decides that we need so many 
doctors in the country, so many scientists, so many specialists and so 
many officials. In choosing them, a number of candidates are naturally 
rejected. This system is accepted by all.  
It is in the same way as candidates are selected for seats in the colleges or 
for appointments in the government that a certain percentage of people 
are thought to be sufficient for the purpose of conducting the rites meant 
to invoke the heavenly powers for the happiness of mankind  
-and these few function on a hereditary basis. Not more are needed for 
such a task since all the other work required for the proper functioning of 
the society will otherwise suffer. This is the principle on which vocations 
are divided. People agitate for the application for the principle of equality 
(a product of French Revolution) to scriptural matters without realising 
that it has hardly any place even in worldly affairs.  
 


 

Strength of Unity 
When there are so many jatis and each lives separately from the rest, 
how can the community remain united as a whole? But the fact is unity 
did exist in the past. Indeed it is now that our society is divided because 
of ill-will among the various groups. The binding factor in the past was 
faith in our religion and its scriptures. The temple strengthened this faith 
and the sense of unity, the temple which belongs to the whole village or 
town and which is situated at its centre. People had the feeling of 
togetherness in the presence of Isvara as his children. In festival all jatis 
took part contributing to their success in various ways.  
In the rathotsava (car festival) of a temple, all sections including Harijans 
pulled the chariot together. On returning home they did not bathe before 
eating. This practice has the sanction of the sastras. [Talking of the past] it 
was a time when people were divided in their callings but were of one 
heart. Though stories are concocted that there was no unity since society 
was divided into a number of jatis, the fact is people then had faith in the 
sastras and in the temples and this faith was a great unifying force. 
Today, ironically enough, hatred and enmity are spread between the 
various jatis in the name of unity. That is the reason why nowadays the 
cry against the caste has become a cry against the vedic dharma and 
temples.  
The vedas themselves proclaim that when a man attains to the highest 
state [that is jnana] he does not need either the Vedas themselves or the 
temples. The Upanisads too have it that in the state of jnana or supreme 
awareness the Vedas are not Vedas, the Brahmin is not a Brahmin, the 
untouchable is not an untouchable. It is to reach this state - the state in 
which the Vedas and all the differences in society cease to be- that you 
need the very Vedas, temples and caste differences. The condition of 
utter non-difference, may it be noted, is realised through these very 
means.  


 
He who constantly strives to be free from worldly existence ultimately 
discovers that everything is one, so proclaim the Vedas. Krsna 
Paramatman pronounces the same truth when he says that in the end 
there is worklessness -"Tasya karyam na vidyate".  
In the phenomenal world with its works and day-to-day affairs, it does 
not make sense to claim that there are no differences. The sastras, 
however, teach us that even in such a world we must be filled with love 
for all castes, for all creatures and we must look upon all as the same 
without regarding one as inferior to the rest or superior. It means the 
attitude of non-difference is in love, not in karma. "We must always feel 
inwardly that all are one and we must be permeated with love for all. But 
in karma, in action there must be differences," such is the teaching of the 
sastras.  
"Bhavadvaitam sada kuryat, kriyadvaitam na karayet", so it is said. 
Oneness must be a matter of our feelings, not our actions. Unless 
differences are maintained outwardly the affairs of the world will be 
conducted neither in a disciplined nor in a proper manner. It is only then 
that Atmic inquiry can be practised without confusion and without being 
mentally agitated, In sanatana dharma worldly life has been systemised 
as though it were real for the very purpose of its being recognised and 
experienced as unreal.  
In this worldly life, the four varnas developed branches and many jatis 
came into being. From the saptasvaras (the seven notes) are formed the 
 melakarta ragas. And from them have developed countless musical 
modes called janya ragas. In the same way, from the four varnas the 
numerous jatis were born. Separate dharmas separate customs and rites, 
evolved for these jatis.  
 
 
 
 


 

Hinduism and Other Religions 
We feel apologetic about the differences in Hindu society especially since 
we think that the followers of other religions are not divided in the same 
way as we are. The latter are scornful of Hinduism on this score and some 
Hindus themselves feel that the differences in our society are unjust. But, 
if you pause to reflect on the subject, you will realise that if our 
civilization has survived from prehistoric times until today it is only 
because of these very differences in our society, the differences 
according to varna dharma. 
In other religions too, even if there is no caste according to their 
scriptures, the communities are divided. Some of the divisions are almost 
like jatis and they do not intermarry. Muslims are divided into Sias (Shias), 
Sunnis and Ahmadiyas. In the south the Pattanis (Pathans) and Labbai 
Muslims do not intermarry. Among Christians there are Catholics, 
Protestants and followers of the (Greek) Orthodox Church. Hindus are 
divided on the basis of labour or work, but are united on another level. 
But followers of other religions, though themselves divided, speak ill of 
us. Yet we do not respond properly to their criticism. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

The Eternal Religion 
The moral and ethical ordinances in other religions are applicable to all 
their followers. In Hinduism too there is a code of conduct meant for all 
varnas and all jatis. But in addition to this, there are separate dharmas for 
jatis with different vocations. There is no intermingling of these vocations 
and their corresponding dharmas. This fact is central to Hinduism and to 
its eternal character.  
This religion has flourished for countless eons. What is the reason for its 
extraordinarily long history. If Hinduism has survived so long it must be 
due to some quality unique to it, something that gives it support and 
keeps it going. No other religion is known to have lasted so long. When I 
think of our religion I am reminded of our temples. They are not kept as 
clean as churches or mosques. The latter are frequently whitewashed. 
There are so many plants sprouting from the gopurams and our temples 
support all of them. The places of worship of other religions have to be 
repaired every two or three years. Our sanctuaries are different because 
they are built of granite. Their foundations, laid thousands of years ago, 
still remain sturdy. That is why our temples have lasted so long without 
the need for frequent repair. We do so much to damage them and are 
even guilty of acts of sacrilege against them, but they withstand all the 
abuses. All are agreed that India has the most ancient temples. People 
come from abroad to take photographs of them. These temples still stand 
as great monuments to our civilization in spite of our neglect of them and 
our indifference. It is not easy to pull them down. Perhaps it is more 
difficult to demolish these edifices than it must have been to build them.  
Our religion to repeat is like these temples. It is being supported by 
something that we do not seem to know, something that is not present in 
other faiths. It is because of this "something" that in spite of all the 
differences, it is still alive.  


 
This something is varnasrama dharma. In other religions there is a 
common dharma for all and we think that that is the reason for their 
greatness. These religions seem to touch the heights of glory at one time 
but at other times they are laid low. Christianity supplanted Buddhism in 
some countries. Islam replaced Christianity or Christianity replaced Islam. 
We know these developments as historical facts. The civilizations and 
religions that evolved in ancient Greece and China no longer exist today. 
Hinduism is the witness to all such changes in other religions and it is 
subject to attacks from inside and outside. Yet it lives-it refuses to die.  
There was a palm-tree round which a creeper entwined itself. The 
creeper grew fast and within months it entwined the entire tree. "This 
palm has not grown a bit all these months", the creeper said laughing. 
The palm-tree retorted: "I have seen ten thousand creepers in my life. 
Each creeper before you said the same thing as you have now said. I don't 
know what to say to you." Our religion is like tree in relations to all other 
faiths.  
Although there are separate duties and religious rites for the different 
castes in our religion, the fruit of the rites are same for all.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Brahmins are not a Privileged Caste 
It is alleged that Brahmins created the dharmasastras for their own 
benefit. You will realise that this charge is utterly baseless if you 
appreciate the fact that these sastras impose on them the most stringent 
rules of life. There is also proof of the impartiality of the dharmasastras in 
that the Brahmin who is expected to be proficient in all the arts and all 
branches of learning can only give instruction in them but cannot take up 
any for his livelihood however lucrative it be and however less 
demanding than the pursuit of the Vedic dharma.  
Now it is claimed that all people are equal in all spheres, that all are equal 
before the law. But members of legislative bodies, judges, etc, enjoy 
certain privileges and cannot be treated on the same footing as the 
common man. These privileges have indeed been codified. If anyone 
criticises a judge he will be charged with contempt of court. Even I may 
be hauled up for contempt for my remarks. People who call themselves 
democrats and socialists have managed for themselves special 
allowances, special railway passes, etc, that the common people are not 
entitled to. In contrast, the Brahmins who have preserved the 
dharmasastras have bound themselves to vigorous discipline, roasted 
themselves, as it were, in the oven of ritual practices. If the Brahmin's 
purity is affected by someone he punishes himself by bathing and fasting.  
The Brahmin must be conversant with the fourteen branches of the Vedic 
lore. He must be proficient even in Gandharva-veda or music and must be 
acquainted with agricultural science, construction of houses, etc. At the 
same time he must give instructions in these subjects to pupils from the 
appropriate castes. His own vocation is the study of the Vedas and he 
must have no other source of income.  
Visvamitra was the master of Dhanurveda (military science). When he 
performed sacrifices, the demons Subahu and Marica tried to play havoc 
with them. Though a great warrior himself he did not try to drive away 


 
the demons himself. Instead, he brought Rama and Laksmana for the 
purpose. Visvamitra thereafter gave the instruction to the two in the use 
of astras and sastras.  
If the Brahmin is asked, "Do you know to wield a knife? " he must be able 
to answer, "Yes, I know". If he is asked, "Do you know to draw and paint" 
again he must say, "Yes". But he cannot wield a knife or become an artist 
to earn his livelihood. All he can do is to learn these arts and teach others 
the same according to their caste. He is permitted to receive a daksina to 
maintain himself and he must be contented with it however small the 
sum may be. The Brahmin's speciality' his true vocation, is Vedic learning.  
If members of certain castes are seen to enjoy certain privileges there 
must be some reason for the same. The man selling tickets has a room to 
himself and those who buy them have to stand outside and cannot 
complain about it saying that the practice offends against the principle of 
equality. If everybody gets in on the pretext of equality how can the ticket 
seller function? Will the man be able to sell the tickets properly? 
Everybody needs some special convenience to carry out his duties. A 
member of a joint family who falls ill has to be afforded certain special 
comforts- other members are not justified in demanding the same. In our 
religion there are many duties and rites that are common to all. But to 
carry out one's special duties certain conveniences are needed: as a 
matter of fact what are called conveniences are actually not 
conveniences or privileges, and also they are necessary to carry out the 
duties of the caste concerned for the welfare of the society as the whole. 
It is important to accept this truth: the special dharma of any jati is meant 
not only for those who constitute that jati but for society as a whole.  
Love must spring from the heart, so too the sense of unity. Unity is not 
achieved by all jatis becoming one. What do we see in Western countries 
where intermarriage is not prohibited and where all people mix together? 
There is much rivalry and jealousy among people there. According to our 
sastras, everyone in the past performed his duty and helped others to 
perform theirs and this was how they remain united. The daughter-in-law 
does not speak to the father-in-law out of respect for him. Would you call 


 
such respect ill-will? If someone close to us and belonging to our own 
caste has some "pollution", we do not touch him. Does it mean that we 
dislike him? It seems we all are mentally confused and do not have a 
proper appreciation of our different dharmas.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
 


 

Universal Well-being 
According to the canonical texts, the Brahmin must perform vaisvadeva 
everyday in front of his house-the offering of bali to the Pancama is a part 
of this rite. The goal of Vedic works is the happiness of all mankind, 
indeed the happiness of all the worlds ("Lokah samastah sukino 
bhavanthu"). The sound of the Vedas creates universal well-being, so too 
Vedic sacrifices.  
As a ruler, the Ksatriya wages wars and does policing work for the 
security of all citizens. The Vaisya too serves society - to think that he 
takes home all the profit he makes is unfair. The lord speaks of the 
dharma of Vaisyas in the Gita. "Krsi-gauraksya-vanijyam Vaisya-karma 
svabhavajam." The third varna has three duties-raising the corps, cow 
protection and trading - and it carries them out for the welfare of all 
people. The Vaisya ploughs the field and grows crops for the benefit of 
the entire community. Similarly, the milk yielded by his cow is meant for 
general consumption and for sacrifices. A Vaisya must also take care to 
see that the calves have their feed of milk. As a trader he procures 
commodities from other places to be sold locally.  
However rich a man may be, he cannot sustain himself with money alone. 
He has to depend on traders for essential goods. Trading is the dharma of 
Vaisyas and it is an offence on their part not to practise it. Similarly, 
Brahmins would be committing a sin if they gave up Vedic rituals and 
earned money by doing other types of work. It is wrong to think that the 
trader carries on his trade for his good alone. Just imagine what would 
happen if there were a hartal and all shops were closed for a week. Surely 
people would suffer when essential goods are not readily available. 
Vaisyas must conduct their business in the belief that their vocation is 
one that is ordained by the Lord and that is for the good for the entire 
community.  
 


 

The Fourth Varna has its own Advantages 
The dharma of the fourth varna involves much physical exertion and 
effort in its practice. Outwardly it may seem that its members do not 
enjoy the same status and comforts as others do. But we must note that 
they are comparatively free from the discipline and rituals to which the 
rest are tied down. In the past, they knew more contentment than the 
other castes, living as they did by the side of the lord. Vyasa himself says: 
"Kalih saduh, Sudrah saduh" (The age of Kali is no way inferior to other 
ages nor the sudras inferior to other castes. Kali is indeed elevated and 
Sudras exalted. ) In other yugas or ages Bhagawan is attained to with 
difficulty by meditation, austerities and puja, but in Kali he is reached by 
the mere singing of his names. The Brahmin, the Ksatria and the Vaisya 
are likely to have self pride, so they cannot attain atmic liberation easily. 
The Brahmin is likely to be in vain about his intellectual superiority, the 
Ksatria about his power as a ruler and the Vaisya about his wealth. So 
these three varnas will tend to stray from the path of dharma. A member 
of the fourth varna, on the contrary is humble.  
Has not Valluvar said, "Humility raises one to gods"? This is the reason 
why the Sudra, being humble, resides by the side of the lord. One must 
not be subject to one's ahamkara or ego-sense. It is as a means of 
effacing their ego and making them deserve the grace of Isvara that the 
first three castes are authorised to learn Vedas and to perform the Vedic 
rites. Performing Vedic rites implies a number of restrictions in the 
matter of food, habits, etc. It is only with the "pathya" of this discipline 
that the medicine called the Vedic dharma will be efficacious. Any lapse in 
the observance of the rules of personal conduct and religious life will be a 
serious offence and it will have to be paid for by suffering. So the first 
three castes must be ever careful about their religious practices. The 
fourth varna is free from most of these restraints. The labour put in by 
the Sudra will cleanse him inwardly: it is his Vedic observance; it is his 
God; and through it he easily achieves perfection. This is why Vyasa 
proclaimed, raising both hands, "Sudrah sadhuh"  


 
If a Sudra does not have enough food to fill his belly, if he does not have 
enough clothing, and if he does no roof over his head to shelter him from 
rain and sun, the whole community and the government must be held 
responsible-and both must be held guilty.  
I repeat that the Brahmin's means of livelihood was in no way better than 
the Sudra's, nor did he enjoy more comforts than members of the fourth 
varna.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
   
 
   
 
 
 


 

Removal of Ego 
"All that is fine. But what about the question of self-respect?" ask 
reformers who profess to be socialists. For them, however, to raise such a 
question is to remain untrue to their own ideals. They talk a great deal, 
don't they, about dignity of labour? They proclaim that no job, no work, is 
degrading. Gandhiji cleaned his toilet himself. Rajagopalachari washed his 
clothes himself when he was premier. To demonstrate the principle of 
dignity of labour VIPs like the mayor sweep the streets one day in a year. 
Photographs of important men doing such work are published in the 
newspapers. If the reformists think that manual work is degrading it 
means that they are opposed to the ideals they themselves uphold.  
If you ask me, "ahamkara" or ego-feeling is a cover for all such ideas as 
"status", "self -respect", etc. If you look at the question from the angle 
that the Sudra does not have the self-pride associated with the Brahmin, 
the Ksatriya and the Vaisya, you will realise the truth of Vyasa's dictum, 
"Sudrah sadhuh". The sastras are one with the socialists in proclaiming 
that all types of work are equally noble. If the socialists say so from the 
worldly or material point of view, the sastras say the same from the 
spiritual point of view. To explain, since the well being of mankind is 
dependent on the performance of variety of jobs, there is no question of 
one job being inferior to another job or superior to it. If everybody does 
the work allotted to him thinking it to be an offering to Isvara, all will be 
rewarded with inner purity, so say the sastras. When work is 
accomplished in a spirit of dedication to God, the consciousness will be 
cleansed. And this, inner purity, is a means to becoming aware of the Self.  
You may look at your work from two angles. One is from that of dignity of 
labour according to which principle no work is degrading. The second is 
from that of consecrating your work, whatever it be to God. In either case 
"self-respect” has no place in it. If there is neither vanity nor ego-sense in 
doing one's duty or work, there will be no cause for anger, no reason to 
feel that one is assigned a particular set of religious practices that is 


 
humiliating. One should then be willing to accept the religious ordinances 
prescribed according to one's vocation. It must be noted that if a Brahmin 
enjoys bodily comforts in the same manner as a Ksatriya or a Vaisya, his 
mantras will cease to be efficacious. If a labourer keeps fast like a 
Brahmin he will not be able to do his duty, that is he will not able to do 
physical work satisfactorily.  
"According to the sastras,” once a learned man told me, "the Brahmin 
must wear white, the Ksatriya red, the Vaisya yellow and the Sudra blue. 
At first, I wondered whether in this order one caste was regarded as 
inferior to another. On reflection, I saw the reason behind it. "Until then I 
myself had not given any thought to the subject. So I asked the pandita to 
explain the principle behind the arrangement he has spoken about. He 
said: "Even the slightest stain will be visible on the white. When a 
Brahmin performs a sacrifice he has to be careful that he does not spill 
anything or waste anything. If he does, his white clothes will show it. He 
has necessarily to be frugal since he must not bother others for money or 
material. The Ksatriya, as a warrior, spills blood, but the bloodstains on 
his dress should not show, nor should it be a cause of fear for others- that 
is why he wears red. A Vaisya handles a variety of commodities in the 
bazar but it yellow that sticks to his clothes the most. That is why the 
Vaisya must wear yellow so that the yellow stains will not show easily. 
Blue is most suitable for those who work in dust and grime. Even in 
modern days workers wear blue uniforms. So blue is the most suitable 
colour for Sudras". You will thus appreciate the reason behind each type 
of wear. The sastras are indeed mindful of the conveniences and 
comforts of each jati. If you realise this, you will understand the meaning 
of saying, "Sastraya ca sukhaya ca." You will thus also appreciate the 
reason behind many a sastric rule and realise that there must be an inner 
meaning to those rules the significance of which you have yet to grasp.  
Today even intelligent people do not know the meaning behind different 
caste duties. "How can the work done by one man be according to 
dharma and meritorious while the same done by another is contrary to 
dharma and sinful?" they ask. In the olden days even unlettered people 
knew that it was a sin to adopt the vocation and duties of another jati 


 
because it was injurious to society. They worked together during temple 
festivals and in carrying out public duties but in matters like food and so 
on they did not mix together since such mixing, they knew, was harmful 
to their traditional vocations. The mingling of castes, they realised, would 
damage the system of vocations, the system that was devised for the 
good of all society. For thousands of years all castes have lived according 
to this system, finding happiness and fulfilment in it. If they had not 
found such happiness and fulfilment, they would have surely rebelled 
against the system.  
After the inception of British rule, Brahmins lost their royal grants of land 
but got jobs in the government. With the introduction of machines and 
increased urbanisation, the handicrafts were destroyed and village life 
received a setback. While other communities found it difficult to get jobs, 
Brahmins were able to earn their upkeep without any physical exertion. 
This shook the very foundations of the system of four varnas and the 
British now used the opportunity to introduce new principle of 
egalitarianism and the race theory. People lost their faith in the sastras 
and with it there was a change in the outlook. If by the grace of Isvara, 
the old system is restored, the work done by every individual - from the 
Brahmin to the Pancama - will bring inward purity to all. Besides there 
will the realisation that each, according to his hereditary occupation, will 
contribute to the general welfare of the mankind. If we pause to reflect 
on the subject, we will feel proud of varna dharma instead of feeling 
ashamed of it-and we will also develop a deep respect for those who 
created it.  
 
 
 
 
   


 

The Ultimate Purpose of Varna Dharma 
When factories took the place of handicrafts and cottage industries, the 
small village communities became urbanised. The needs of people 
multiplied, so too the number of occupations. Today when the old way of 
life is gone, it seems impossible to revive the system of hereditary 
vocations. Is it any longer practicable how to insist that only Ksatriyas 
ought to man the defence services, that only Vaisyas can transact trade 
and business, that the members of the fourth varna must continue to 
remain labourers? Is it at all possible to revive the old system? I am not 
unaware of the state of affairs now prevailing. If so why do I keep 
extolling varna dharma? There are two reasons.  
Whatever be the situation today - and whether or not we can return to 
the old order - it is not right to claim as people nowadays do that the old 
order was utterly unjust, that it was created by the vested interests for 
their own good and convenience. We must be able to convince the critics 
that the old order was not unjust at all and that there is nothing like 
varna dharma to help people to attain inner purity. They must also be 
made to realise that this dharma, apart from helping society to function 
in a disciplined and harmonious manner, will bring well-being to all and 
give an impetus to culture.  
There is even more important reason. Today the functions of Ksatriyas, 
Vaisyas and Sudras have changed and become mixed Even so the work of 
the government goes on somehow. Defence, the manufacture of various 
articles, trade, and labour - all these go on somehow. But, unlike in the 
past, there is jealousy as well as rivalry in all fields. Even so, the duties of 
the three castes are carried out despite the fact that varna dharma has 
broken up. They are a practical necessity for day-to-day life as well as for 
the functioning of the government. So they are performed, albeit 
unsatisfactorily.  


 
There is, however, a function higher than all these. It is that of taking all 
of them - all these functions - to their ultimate point. And this function 
belongs to the Brahminic way of life and it has become almost extinct. To 
teach dharma by precept and practise, the dharma that is the foundation 
of all activities, to invoke the divine powers through the vedic chant for 
the good of all mankind, to create high ideals through their own austere 
life, to nurture the Atmic strength of the community, to promote the arts, 
to nourish culture-these embrace the dharma of Brahmins and it is now 
on the verge of extinction.  
The need for the Brahminic dharma is not widely recognised because of 
its subtle and intangible character. There is no realisation of the other 
three varnas. Indeed, it is this dharma that gives meaning to life and 
creates a path for the fulfilment of life. We ignore it and devote ourselves 
solely to the functions of the varnas. If any improvement is made in them 
we are happy. But what use is material prosperity without Atmic and 
cultural advancement? Material progress is no progress at all. Americans 
have realised this truth - we ought also to realise the same. So however 
confusedly the functions of other castes are carried out, the Brahmin 
must function in the right manner as a pathfinder for others by living a 
life of simplicity and sacrifice, performing Vedic rites and creating worldly 
and Atmic well-being for mankind. In this way the soul of India will be 
kept alive.  
If the Brahmin caste is restored to order, it might well be the beginning of 
the end of confused state of the other castes. In this land alone has there 
existed - and existed for ages-a jati for the protection of dharma and the 
Atmic uplift of all. If this jati becomes extinct there will be all-round 
decay. If I have spoken at length I have this purpose in view, that this jati 
must be revived in its true form so as to prevent the general decline of 
the nation. The Brahmin jati must not live a life of self-indulgence. On the 
contrary it must perform rites all through the day for the welfare of 
society. Brahmins must live austerely, with love for all in their hearts. If 
they are restored to their dharma our society in its entirety will be 
brought to the path of dharma and will be saved.  


 

The Universal Remedy 
In the past, though people were divided on the basis of caste, they were 
free from hared and ill-will. It is now that we see ill-will and hatred 
everywhere in the country. One state is at loggerheads with another; one 
state has dispute with another over the sharing of river waters; and again 
one state has a quarrel with another on the question of boundaries. In 
the past, Cettiars [of the South] built dharmasalas [free boarding and 
lodging houses] for pilgrims from Kasi. Correspondingly, the Sethjis 
constructed dharmasalas for pilgrims going to Kasi and Badrinath. People 
then were united as devotees of the Lord. Everything has gone awry 
today because of increased political activity and empty talk. So, as a 
medicine for our ills, as a sovereign remedy, we must pray that people 
become more devoted to the Lord. 
The incessant cry that "Caste must go" has resulted in an aggravation of 
hatred between one jati and another. Though the propaganda against 
caste has been going on for 30 or 40 years, the caste factor comes to the 
fore even today during elections. Caste feelings run so high that violent 
clashes between communities are not infrequent. Here it is not hatred 
between Brahmins and non-Brahmins. Fortunately, the Brahmin has been 
made to distance himself from politics. It is a matter for some comfort 
that, even though they have not quit politics on their own, others have 
pushed them out of it. So the present quarrels are between other castes. 
In the Andhra Pradesh the Khammas and the Reddis are quarrelling 
between themselves; in Karnataka the Lingayats are at war with some 
other community. Ironically enough, it is in these days when the cry of 
equality is the loudest that we witness so many caste wars. This 
phenomenon is something unknown to the sastric tradition. Here [in 
Tamil Nadu] candidates are chosen for elections on the basis of jatis. 
Padayacis in one district, Gaundars in another, Tevars in a third, 
Mukkulattars in a fourth, and so on. Elections are fought not on the basis 
of ideology but on that of caste. 


 

Sankara and Sanatana Dharma 
There is a saying in English:" Give a dog a bad name and hang him." The 
dog is a faithful animal and full of gratitude for its master. Few would 
relish the idea of a dog being hanged. So if any dog is to be hanged, it is 
perhaps to be given a bad name.  
Reformers who claim to be modern do the same with our dharmasastras. 
For ages these sastras have done this nation nothing but good. But the 
reformers want to sentence them to the noose on the plea that they have 
given rise to many an evil. Some feel that there is no need for the division 
of the society based on our ancient and eternal sastras. So they invent 
outrages ostensibly perpetrated in pursuance of the tenets of the 
dharmasastras. "In our country there is a stipulation about who can do 
what,” they say opposing the varna system. "As a result, the people have 
become divided. There is no unity among Hindus. This is a cause of our 
having frequently come under the heel of foreign powers."There is not an 
iota of truth in this allegation.  
It may be that when a common adversary confronted us there was no 
unity among the rajas. But there is nothing to support the view that, 
because of differences arising out of caste, this or that section of the 
people helped the invader. Ironically enough, it is today that there is so 
much disunity and hatred with all the clamour for the abolition of caste 
differences. In the past, on the contrary, there was nothing but happiness 
in the society when caste distinctions were maintained. When there were 
disputes between two villages over a plot of land, boundary or canal, the 
inhabitants of either village remained united as one man-from the 
Brahmin to the untouchable. If it was the example of unity provided by a 
village, you could very well imagine how the country on the whole would 
have remained united.  
People divided into small communities were enabled and encouraged to 
live together in a well-knit manner and the members of each community 


 
were proud of belonging to it. And these had also their headsman. If 
anybody was proved guilty of an offence he was excommunicated. Such a 
punishment was considered a disgrace since people were greatly 
attached to their respective communities apart from being proud of 
belonging to them. And this acted as a deterrent to crime. Now there is 
no institution to unite people together in this manner on a heart-to-heart 
basis. Perhaps it is not possible also to cement people together today 
since they are all part of a larger system which is not easy to control. 
What is the result? The incidence of crime is on the increase and 
correspondingly the responsibilities of the police. Those who are opposed 
to the sastras must pause to think about such developments.  
There is bound to be opposition to any idea, any system and it is indeed 
to be welcomed. It is by respecting the views of the opposition that we 
discover our own drawbacks and prepare to remedy them. But it is quite 
another matter to oppose a system for its imaginary defects because the 
only consequence then would be that its good features would come 
under threat.  
I will give you an example of criticism that is totally unfounded or 
imaginary. Some people think its "uncivilised" to wear any sacred marks 
on the forehead. It is given a bad name as a "caste mark". As a matter of 
fact the sacred ashes (bhasma or vibhuti), for example, are worn by all 
castes, from the Brahmin to the Harijan. So is the case with the Vaisnava 
namam (made of Tiruman or the sacred earth):it stands for truth that 
everything is of the earth and mingles with the earth, that all is Visnu. The 
ashes are the symbol of the Paramatman. When the body is cremated all 
that remains is the ashes which are the symbol of the eternal Brahman. Is 
it right to condemn the use of such symbols that stand for great truths?  
All old dharmic traditions must be protected and kept alive. Sri Sankara 
Bhagavatpada has commanded us to do so. I bear his name. So it is my 
duty to remind you of his injunction. Whether or not you will heed it, I 
should impress upon you that the sastric customs have the purpose of 
ensuring the good of all mankind.  
 


 

Cry “Grow” – Don’t Cry “Perish” 
To speak on the other hand of the glory of Tamil culture, constantly 
recalling the words of Tiruvalluvar and others who extol love and divine 
grace, and to raise on the other hand the cry of hatred against a certain 
community - with the display of posters everywhere proclaiming such 
hatred - does not seem to me right. It goes against the very spirit of Tamil 
land and causes me great anguish. If you cry "Grow", instead of crying 
"Perish", all the hatred and all the quarrels will vanish. Instead of 
agitating the abolition of the caste system, people must star a movement 
to build more and more temples and spread devotion.  
If everybody joins in this endeavour, the devotion that brought all of us 
together in the past as one family will again become a powerful source to 
reunite us and create a sense of universal well-being. If there is devotion, 
there will be no caste hatred. Such was the case during all these 
centuries. There was caste in the old days but it did not cause bitterness 
amongst the communities. It is not caste itself that is to be faulted but 
the hatred arising from it. So to attempt to destroy this institution is like 
burning a house to kill a rat. The movement to put an end to the caste 
system has disrupted the old division of labour and together with it 
caused discontent, disquiet and jealousy among people. Hatred among 
the different communities has grown like a big tree with many branches.  
It is time that we opened our eyes to the evil and started making effort to 
substitute the campaign with its cry of destruction with a movement to 
bring all classes and castes together so as to promote devotion to Isvara 
and service to humanity. It will be one way of ignoring caste hatred. 
Countering caste hatred as such might have the effect of refuelling it. If 
we ignore it and turn our minds to other matters - other noble matters - 
bitterness due to caste will cease by itself. Suppose you are admonished 
not to think of the monkey while taking medicine, you will perhaps be 
tempted to do the opposite (that is to think of the monkey). Similarly, 
when we keep all the while speaking against the caste hatred, the effect 


 
will be the opposite, that of reminding people of caste differences and of 
arousing feelings of inferiority among some sections and of superiority 
among others.  
It is important for all to become involved in a good cause, like the 
construction of a temple, or some public welfare scheme. Good feelings 
like love will surely spring in the hearts of people; at the same time much 
good will be done to society in general. Today, it is because people are 
not involved together in such [constructive] work that they turn their 
minds to destructive ideas, to argumentativeness and to gossip and 
quarrels. Unfortunately, some people think that if they inflame hatred 
between the communities or instigate quarrels or disputes, they will be 
able to gather a crowd of admirers round them. If we are all the time 
engaged in constructive work there will be fewer opportunities for 
trouble-making; indeed people will not find the time to do evil.  
People go in procession until their legs ache, raising cries against this and 
that. Would there not be all-round growth and prosperity if all this 
manpower were employed to good work, if all the energy of people were 
turned to some constructive task? There is one type of "growth" that is 
higher than all others; it is the love that springs in the hearts of people. I 
think there must be a "tight" time-table for all: performing religious rites; 
worshipping at temples; listening to religious discourses; all castes 
working together for a divine cause or being engaged in social service. 
Adhering to such a time-table would mean universal happiness and 
prosperity. Besides, it would obviate the necessity of raising the cry of 
hatred against any caste.  
There are certainly no differences between one jati and another so far as 
"status" is considered; that is one jati is not inferior to another or 
superior to it. All jatis have produced great men -Appar, Nammazhvar, 
Sekkizar, Nandanar and Kannapar to name a few. The Acarya himself has 
sung the praises of Kannappar in his Sivanandalahari. The sastras declare 
that it is a sin for anybody to regard himself as superior to others. Great 
men have shown us the way in this matter. They have spoken, abasing 
themselves, "Nayinum kadaiyen"; "nayadiyen". People don't share this 


 
kind of humility in the present age of freedom - and that indeed is the 
cause of much of our trouble. We must regain the old sense of humility 
and modesty. If so, Jati will be confined to work, functions, and will not in 
the least be a cause of any feelings of differences. If all people adopt the 
same style of living that is simple and virtuous, there will be no cause for 
jealousy or heart-burning.  
Whether or not we have the courage or the spirit of sacrifice to work 
towards this ideal, a way will open out for us if we at least recognise the 
ideal. May we have success in achieving this ideal with the blessings of 
Amba.  
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 21 
FROM WORK TO WORKLESSNESS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Outward Karma – Inward Meditation 
I have, in the course of my talks, dealt with a large number of religious 
rites. It may seem that the rituals, the puja to Paramesvara and the 
service done to fellow men are meant for "others". But in truth they are 
meant for ourselves. By helping others, by serving them, by worshiping 
the Lord, we are rewarded with a sense of fullness. Others may really 
benefit from our help or may not. But when we serve them we 
experience inward peace and happiness- about this there is no doubt. 
What is called "paropakar"(helping others) is indeed upakara done to 
oneself (helping oneself).  
In serving others we may have to undergo hardships, make sacrifices and 
exert ourselves physically. But the happiness and sense of fullness we 
obtain is far greater compared to the trouble taken by us. The Lord does 
not have to gain anything form the puja we perform. In worshipping him, 
in reading the sacred texts, in going on pilgrimages we find inward joy. 
Why do we perform puja and why do we help others? It is all our own 
satisfaction.  
Our affection for our wife, children and others is in fact affection for 
ourselves. According to the Upanisadic teaching of Yajnavalkaya, it is for 
our own inner contentment that we love others. We perform puja to the 
Lord purportedly because of our devotion for him and we do social 
service presumably because of our love of mankind. But in truth the 
reason is we like ourselves and find happiness in such acts. For the sake 
of such happiness we do not mind encountering difficulties or making 
sacrifices.  
If we spend money on ourselves or go seeking sensual pleasure, we do 
not obtain the same inner satisfaction. Work done for our own sake leads 
to disquiet and sorrow. We see our face in the mirror and note that there 
is no tilaka on our forehead. What happens if we apply a tilaka of dark 
unguent to the mirror [to the image]? It will be blackened. To apply a 


 
tilaka to the image means applying it to the one who is in front of the 
mirror. Doing things for ourselves [serving ourselves]is indeed like 
applying a dark spot to our mind- it is blackening ourselves. We take the 
image of the Paramatman reflected in the Maya mirror that is the mind 
to be ourselves. To bedeck the image in reality means adorning the 
Paramatman. This is the reason why serving humanity gives us a sense of 
fulfilment because humanity is a manifestation of the Paramatmam. 
Worshipping the Supreme Being the same. Only then will the black spot 
that we apply to ourselves will become an ornament. We decorate Amba 
to decorate ourselves. If we adorn ourselves we only enlarge our ego and 
feed our arrogance. When Amba is bedecked everybody will be happy 
about it. When we wear a well-laundered dupatta and preen ourselves, 
do others feel happy about it? They will speak scornfully of us: "See, how 
well-ironed he looks."  
All of you give me heaps of garlands. You do so because you think I am 
great and want to express your devotion for me. You also feel that 
instead of wearing them yourselves the garlands would be an ornament 
for me. If I decorate myself with them thinking myself to be a great man, 
it would means that I am satisfying my ego. But you bring me garlands 
with devotion and would it be right for me to spurn them? So just as you 
want to see me decorated I want to see Amba adorned and so I offer the 
garlands to her.  
To go in search of money, fame and sensual pleasure, thinking them to be 
good, is to blacken our minds. What is it that is good for us? That which is 
good for the world -- and it is but a form of Paramatmam. This truth is 
known to our inner being; we realise it deep in our mind. That is why we 
find greater fulfilment in doing good to others, unmindful of all the 
difficulties, than in finding comforts for ourselves.  
The world is a manifestation of the Paramatman and so must we be too. 
We must remove the mirror called the mind and experience the truth 
within us that we are none other than the Paramatman. This is what 
called meditation. All the work we do ought to lead finally to 


 
worklessness, to the mediation of the Atman. The goal of all the 
sacraments I speak about is this.  
Our actions make us happy in many ways. But in none of these actions do 
we find the peace that we enjoy during sleep. How we suffer if we lose 
even a single night's sleep? There is so much happiness in sleep. Do we 
not realise from this that the supreme "comfort"or happiness is 
worklessness. Dhyana or meditation is the state of being absorbed in the 
Paramatman, a state of non-doing.  
In sleep we are not conscious that we are happy. It is only when we are 
awake that we realise that we are happy when we were asleep. The 
ultimate goal of meditation is samadhi in which we are fully conscious of 
the great bliss experienced by us. If we teach ourselves to remain in a 
state of non-doing within (inside ourselves) we will experience tranquillity 
even though we keep working outwardly. The inner peace will never be 
disturbed.  
The quietude of Daksinamurti is the bliss of knowingness. It is not the 
same as the stilling of mind during sleep. In sleep there is no voluntary 
control of the mind; the mind becomes still because of exhaustion. Such 
stillness we are not capable of sustaining on our own. What becomes still 
during sleep, without being subject to our control, returns on our 
awakening again without being subject to our control.  
Death too is a kind of sleep. In it, too, the mind is stilled. But with rebirth 
when the individual self becomes incarnate the mind starts to be active 
again. If we learn to control the mind voluntarily it will be able to remain 
in that state. Though Daksinamurti remains still without doing anything 
he is full of awareness. It is because he is inwardly a non-doer that he is 
able to do so much in an outward sense. The Daksinamurthi who remains 
still is the one who dances the dance of bliss, who destroys the demon 
Tripura and who keeps roaming as a mendicant. After granting boons to 
his devotees he goes from place to place. He is still inwardly but is in a 
frenzy outwardly. If we manage to still ourselves inwardly we will be able 
to do so much outwardly.  


 
We are the opposite of Daksinamurti. We don the disguise of non-
detachment in order to make others believe that we are at peace with 
ourselves, but inside we remain all the time agitated.  
Outward calm is the first step towards inward stillness -- and this stillness 
is to be brought about in degrees and will not be gained at once. That is 
why the wise tell us:"Reduce all your sensual activities. Do not join the 
crowd. Try to disengage yourself from all work including that of doing 
good to the world. Keep away from money and dwell in the forest." But 
do we listen to that advice? We shall do so only when our mind is 
cleansed.  
That is why so many rituals are prescribed to purify the mind, the 
consciousness. It means that, instead of asking us not to do this and that, 
we are asked to do (perform) this and that rite. It is natural for us to be 
involved in some work or other. So, without any regard for our personal 
likes and dislikes, we perform the rites laid down in the sastras. Even here 
our personal likes and dislikes will intrude but, unlike in the matter of 
meditation, we succeed to some extent at least in curbing them during 
the conduct of the rites. In due course, with the grace of the Lord, we will 
be able to perform good works without minding the discomfort and 
ignoring our personal likes and dislikes. Desire and hatred will be reduced 
and the mind will become pure. With the mind cleansed we will be able 
to perform one-pointed meditation. This is the time when we will be 
mature enough to forsake all works and become a forest recluse and 
practice meditation. If we are able to meditate with utter one-
pointedness then everything will acquire the character of the 
Paramatman. There will be no need to leave everything and remain 
holding the nose with the hand. The forest, the village, solitude and 
crowd -- they are all the Paramatman. Both work and meditation are the 
Paramatman. Our inner peace will not be shaken by anything. Like 
Daksinamurti we can remain still and tranquil and yet be all bustle 
outwardly.  
In the Gita, the Lord exhorts Arjuna to practise svadharma-in the case of 
Arjun it means waging war. The lord also propounds the yoga of 


 
meditation in which there is no"doing". He refers to the example of 
Janaka who was all the time working for the welfare of the people but at 
the same time remained in the ultimate meditation called Brahma-nistha. 
He himself, says the Lord, is like Janaka. There is apparently a 
contradiction in all this. But in reality no. The one arises from the other. In 
the beginning when it is not easy to control the mind and meditate on the 
Atman, performs rituals. Then gaining mental purity through them, that is 
the rituals fore sake karma and practise meditation and yoga, nothing will 
affect us. In this all is still inwardly and yet outwardly there will be much 
activity.  
Briefly put, this is the concept of Bhagavatpada: ultimately everything 
(the phenomenal world) will be seen to be Maya. The One Object, the 
One and Only Reality, is the Brahman. We must be one with It, non-
dualistically, without our having to do anything in the same way as the 
Brahman. I who bear the name of Sri Sankara, keep speaking about many 
rites, about puja, japa, service to fellow men, etc. It is because inour 
present predicament we have to make a start with rites. In this way, step-
by-step, we will proceed to the liberation that is non-dualistic. It is this 
method of final release that is taught us by Sri Krsna Paramatman and by 
our Bhagavatpada. At first karma, works, then upasana or devotion and, 
finally, the enlightenment called jnana.  
If we advance in this way, by degrees, with faith and devotion, we will 
obtain the wisdom and mellowness for Atmic meditation and inner 
control. Afterwards, we may keep doing any kind of work outwardly for 
the good of mankind.  
What is the best means of Practising Atmic meditation? We must be 
imbued with the tranquillity that is Parasakti incarnate and remember 
every day Daksinamurti in his quiescence. Let alone the idea of forsaking 
all work and becoming plunged in meditation. Let us leave aside, for the 
time being, karma, which, itself is transformed into the high state of 
meditation. These are conditions to which we must arise at a later stage 
in our inward journey. But right now-at the beginning-let us train 


 
ourselves in the midst of our work to remain at peace and learn to 
meditate a little.  
To start with, let karma, devotion and meditation be practised together. 
These are not supposed to one another but are complementary. In the 
end all will drop off one by one and the samadhi of dhyana alone will 
remain. When we start our inward journey we must keep this goal of 
samadhi before us. So every day, having aside all other work, we must 
practise meditation for some time. But all the same we must not dismiss 
rituals as meaningless or as a part of superstition. We must keep 
performing them. It is only when our impurities are washed away thus 
that we will realise the self-luminous Reality in us.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 
 
 


 

Hpw to Cultivate Character and Good Conduct 
How do we acquire character, how do we come to possess good 
qualities? By living according to the precepts of the vedas and sastras and 
by following the good customs practised by our own forefathers as well 
as by performing the rites that have been passed down to us. Good 
conduct springs from a good mind. So the mind must be free from evil.  
Everybody does not possess a good mind. Look at your child. It is all the 
time up to some mischief or other. It cuts paper with scissors or cuts 
down little plants and shrubs. It is naughty all the time. When the same 
child is sent to school it is brought under a discipline. It has fixed timings 
to go to school and return home, to read its lessons, etc. It is no longer 
found to be wayward.  
In the same way if we have no opportunity of being involved in evils 
thoughts and activities, we will also come under a certain discipline. That 
is why the sastras lay down rules to keep us involved in good works. 
When we are conducting religious rites we must have no ego-feeling. The 
preceptors of the Vedic way have shown us the path to consecrate our 
karma to Isvara. The Lord has given us strength to perform them but also 
the intelligence and the means. Even a little ego-sense would be ruinous 
because it is capable of taking many disguises and of sizing us at an 
unwary moment.  
Are we able to see ourselves in a soiled mirror? If we dust it and clean it 
well, we can see our reflection clearly. Even a clean mirror cannot 
produce a proper image if it keeps shaking. The mirror must both be 
clean and steady; only then will the reflection be true and clear. The 
mind, the consciousness, is like a mirror. The Supreme Being is the only 
Truth. When there are no evil thoughts in us, the mind-mirror will also be 
clean. If it is fixed on a single object it will remain steady-like a mirror that 
does not shake. Only than will the Paramathma be reflected in it.  


 
Who created this world? Who gives us food, clothing and comforts? Who 
is an ocean of grace? If we wish to know it is we must keep our mind 
steady and free from impurities.  
Suppose a copper pot has remained immersed in a well for ten years or 
so. How much rubbing will it have to take before it becomes clean? The 
more we rub it the cleaner and brighter it will be. If our mind has been 
made impure with evil actions over many years it can be made chaste 
only by the performance of many a good deed, many a good-work.  
Is it enough to keep the copper vessel clean for today? What will happen 
to it tomorrow or the day after? It will become dirty again if it is not 
rubbed. Similarly, we must keep our mind ever pure by the daily 
performance of good works. In due course, atime will come when the 
citta, the consciousness, will vanish and Self alone will remain. 
Thereafter, there will be no need to be cleansed. Until then we have to 
keep our mind pure through good actions and good conduct.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 


 

“Samsare Kim Saram?” 
In his Prasnottara-Ratnamalika, our Acarya asks: "Samsare kim saram?” 
(What is the meaning of worldly existence?) He responds to the question 
himself:" You asked the question thus. Keep asking again and again. That 
is the meaning of samsara”. ("Bahusah abhi vicintyamanam idam eva.")  
"What is the purpose of my birth? Why was I born? “You must ask 
yourself this question again and again. You must also have some concern 
about whether you will reach the goal of your birth. "Why do you keep 
sinning?" is a problem that always worries us. "Why do you get angry? 
And why do we desire this and that? Can't we remain always happy 
without sinning, without anger and desire?" We do not seem to know the 
answers to these questions.  
The fruit is formed from the flowers, first in the tender unripe form and 
finally in the mellow form. The flowers smell fragrant to the nose and the 
ripe fruit tastes sweet to the palate. The mellow or ripe fruit is full of 
sweetness. How did the fruit taste before it became ripe and sweet? The 
flower was bitter, the tender fruit was astringent, the unripe fruit was 
sour and the fruit that is mellow now is sweet. Peace means sweetness. 
When the heart is all sweetness all attachments disappear. There is 
attachment only so long as there is sourness. When you pluck an unripe 
fruit from a tree there is sap in the stem as well as in the fruit. It means 
that the tree is not willing to part from the fruit and vice versa.  
But when the sweetness is full, all the ties will be snapped and the fruit 
will drop to earth by itself. The tree releases the fruit or the fruit frees 
itself from the tree. The separation is without any tears and happy [there 
is no sap]. Similarly, step-step by step, a man must become wholly sweet 
like a mellow fruit and free himself happily from the tree of samsara, the 
cycle of births and deaths. Desire, anger, and so on, are necessary stages 
in out development like bitterness, astrigency, sourness and sweetness in 
the growth of a fruit.  


 
When we are subiect to urges like desire and anger we will not be to free 
ourselves fully from them but we must keep asking ourselves why we 
become subject to these urges and passions. We must constantly wonder 
whether they serve any purpose. If we do not remain vigilant about them 
we will become victims of their deception.  
There must be astringency when it is time for astringency and sourness 
when it is time for sourness. But neither astringency nor sourness must 
remain a permanent state. Just as a tender fruit becomes mellow, we too 
must become mellow and sweet. If we do so there is no need to seek 
liberation on our own. If we are as we should be in the different stages of 
our life, liberation shall come in the natural process. On the other hand, if 
we make and effort at an inappropriate time [if we force ourselves] it will 
be like making the fruit prematurely ripe. Such a fruit will not taste sweet.  
We should not, however, remain always in the same state as the one in 
which we find ourselves today, indifferent to everything. At the same 
time, when our bag of sins still to be emptied, we cannot thirst for the 
supreme knowledge. Instead, let us keep doing our duty hoping that we 
will realise the supreme knowledge, if not now, after many a birth. Let us 
adhere to the dharma prescribed by the Vedas. If we do so, we will 
proceed gradually to the supreme jnana. Now we are aware only of 
outward matters and outward disguises. So let us start with the outward 
rites of our religion and the outward symbols and signs. By degrees then 
let us go to the inner reality through the different stages from that of the 
tender fruit to the fruit that is mellow and sweet.  
 
 
 
 
   
   


 

Inward and Outward 
I have stated again and again that the people must perform the rites 
handed down to them from forefathers, that they must adhere to the 
practices pertaining to the tradition to which they belong and they must 
wear the symbols appropriates to the same, like the holy ashes or 
Tiruman, the rudraksa, etc. Some people hold the view that all that is 
needed is conduct and character, that conduct is a matter of the mind, 
that religious customs are but part of the external life.  
In truth, however, your outward actions and the symbols worn by you 
outwardly have an impact on the inner life. There is a relationship 
between bodily work and inner feelings. Let me illustrates this truth. One 
day, unexpectedly, a man comes to know he was won prize in a lottery, 
say, one lakh rupees. His joy knows no bounds, but it makes its own 
impact on his body. He becomes so excited that his breathing itself stops 
for a moment and he faints. "A particular feeling creates a specific change 
in the process of breathing". From this practical observation yoga 
develops lessons in breathing to create healthy and noble feeling and 
urges. Often the outward appearance reflects the inner feelings. When 
you are angry your eyes become red, your lips quiver. When you are 
sorrowful your eyes become moist and you shed tears. If you are happy 
you are agape, showing all your teeth. Thus there is a definite connection 
between the body and the mind, between the boy and the inner feelings. 
Based on this fact, the wise have devised yogic postures that are 
calculated to nurture particular Atmic qualities.  
Will soldiers be less valorous if they do not wear their uniforms? All over 
the world members of the defence services wear uniforms and it is 
claimed that they keep them fighting fit and inspire courage in them.  
The symbols worn outside, the samskaras performed outwardly, are 
inwardly beneficial. If you think that it is all a disguise so it will be. You 
must resolve to wear the symbols in all sincerity and perform the rites 


 
too. Then they will truly cause purity within. Outward action helps you 
inwardly.  
It perhaps natural that I should give importance to samskaras, to the 
custom of wearing symbols like the sacred ashes, rudraksa, etc. After all, I 
am the head of Matha and you will come to me only if I wear all these. 
You will give me money for the conduct of the Matha. So all these 
symbols that I wear serve a purpose in my case. But your case is different. 
You have your own means of livelihood and you may be able to perform 
samsakaras even more sincerely than I do and make yourself pure by 
wearing the symbols of our religion.  
Let us wear the signs that remind us of the Supreme Truth. Let us 
perform the rites that keep us away from evil. Let us be of good conduct 
and character and cleans our consciousness. And let us meditate on the 
Ultimate Reality, experience It inwardly, realise bliss.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 


 

Do We Need Rituals? 
Some ask me whether religious functions, puja, etc, are not "mere" 
rituals. Atmic awareness is an inward experience. As for rituals they are 
outward actions. The question is how rituals will help in experiencing the 
Self.  
Rituals are indeed not necessary for one who has realised the Self. But we 
must put the question to ourselves whether we have truly realised It, 
whether we are mature enough for realisation, whether we have become 
inwardly pure. Were we honest we would admit that we are far from 
having become mature for awareness of the Self. By taking many births, 
by performing many works and by the vasana of previous lives, we have 
concealed the bliss of knowing the Self. By conducting good rites, and by 
associating ourselves with noble objects, we have to banish the evil 
habits sticking to us from our past lives. Then there will be an end to 
karma itself and we will embark on Atmic inquiry. Until then we have to 
perform what are called "mere" rituals.  
The proper thing for ordinary people is to conduct all the rites mentioned 
in the sastras. The benefits obtained from them may be seen in practice. 
When a person takes care to go through the rites strictly in the manner 
prescribed in the canonical texts, he will gain one-pointedness of mind. 
This should be of immense help to him in contemplating the Self later. 
And the desire to follow the sastras in all aspects of life will mean that he 
will be brought under a certain discipline. When we conduct rites 
according to the sastras our determination and will power will be 
strengthened. Since we subordinate our views to the injunctions of the 
scriptures, we will cultivate the qualities of humility and simplicity.  
So what do we gain by performing "mere" rituals? We will acquire one-
pointedness of mind, discipline, non-attachment, will power, humility. On 
the whole it will help us to live a moral life. Without moral conduct there 
can never be Atmic inquiry and Atmic experience.  


 
The Buddha did not prescribe any Vedic rites. But he too laid stress on 
morality and discipline. The Pancasila that Nehru often spoke about is of 
the utmost importance to the Buddhists. The Buddha points to the value 
of morality without the performance of Vedic rites. What about the 
Purvamimamsakas? They believe that Vedic rites are of the utmost 
importance and that is no need to worry about God. In our sanatana 
dharma, however, there is a weaving together of rites, the good conduct 
and discipline arising out of them, devotion to Isvara and finally 
knowledge of the Self.  
Morality does not arise by itself. If you want milk you must keep a cow. If 
you keep a cow you will get not only milk but also cow dung. Then there 
will come up a haystack. When you keep the cow called karma you will 
not only derive not only morality and good conduct from it but also 
something that you feel is not wanted, that is cow dung. When you keep 
a cow must keep the place free from cow dung - that is a part of 
commonsense or wisdom. It is in this manner that you must obtain the 
real benefits from religious rites.  
If rituals are not necessary for true Atmic knowledge, even the murti 
called Isvara is not necessary for the same. But we can dispense with 
rituals and Isvara only when we reach a high plane of knowledge. At first 
Isvara is very much necessary for our inward journey and there are so 
many reasons for it. I will tell you one. We need an entity that exemplifies 
all that is good. Have we not for ages together thought of Isvara as such a 
one, one who represents all virtues and all auspicious qualities. When we 
mention the word "Isvara" we at once think of him as one without any 
evil. If anything or anyone combines beauty, compassion, power and 
enlightenment to the full it must be Isvara. It is a psychological principle 
that we become that which we keep thinking of. By meditating on Isvara's 
manifold auspicious qualities our own undesirable qualities will give place 
to good ones.  
There are many benefits that flow from rituals, puja, etc. One of them is 
that they help to make us good. They are also of value in taking us to the 
path of workless yoga and the inward quest.  


 

Karma is the Starting Point of Yoga 
People usually think that yoga means no more than controlling the breath 
and sitting stone-like. The literal meaning of the word is "joining", 
"uniting". All through our life's journey we have to join ourselves to 
various objects. But such joining is no permanent. That is why the mind 
remains unsteady. If we are joined to an object without the least 
possibility of being seperated from it, it is yoga in the true sense. The root 
of the minds of all of us is the one Paramatman. Yogins control their 
breath to turn their mind to this prime root object. The root that gives 
rise to thoughts is the same as the root that gives rise to the breath. So if 
the breath is fixed on the root, the mind too will be absorbed in it.  
The opposite of yoga is "viyoga". When the man dies we say that he has 
attained viyoga. The Lord says in the Gita that a particular kind of viyoga 
is itself yoga. What is it? If you keep away sorrow, that is if sorrow does 
not attach itself to you, you have the yoga of disconnection (Tam viyad 
dukha-samyoga-viyogam yoga-samjnitam. )  
What we normally understand to be pleasure in a worldly sense is truly 
sorrow. All experiences that creates separation from the Paramatman are 
sorrow. It is because the citta or consciousness is unstill that we undergo 
sorrow and happiness. These disappear when the mind is still. To make 
the mind pure it to train it in one-pointedness. This is the mean of yogic 
perfection. To start with, all will be able to control their breath like 
yogins. If we are absorbed in a worthy subject, in some good work, our 
mind will remain untainted to some extent. If we try to control our mind 
in one go, so to speak, it will free itself and wander in all directions. If we 
keep doing some noble work or take an interest in some noble subject 
the mind is less likely to become unstill.  
In the old days they used to wear what is called an arikandam, that is an 
iron ring, round the neck to keep themselves disciplined and live 
according to the sastras. In the same way we must wear an arikandam to 


 
keep the mind from going astray. To be involved in good actions is itself a 
kind of arikandam.  
Performing sacrifices, observing fasts and vows, building great temple 
towers, digging ponds, etc, were a means in the past to cleanse the mind 
by making it one-pointed. In the midst of such good work also one 
experiences difficulties, even humiliation, but one should not be daunted 
by criticism or obstacles. This itself becomes the means of mental 
purification. Then come pranayama, meditation, etc.  
The kazhakkodi keeps rolling without gathering any dirt. If you smear 
some ashes on it they will not stick to it. Like the kazhakkodi we too must 
not be affected by pain or pleasure and keep journeying towards the 
Paramatman and becoming one with It. Such union is called yoga - it is 
our original as well as ultimate state. In between we somehow become 
different. That is why we do not understand that ultimate and original 
state now. To reach that state we must make a beginning with the 
performance of rites.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
 


 

Karmayoga 
Arjuna asks [Krsna] whether it is not a sin to wage war and slay friends 
and relatives in battle. It seems to us a natural and reasonable question. 
Sri Krsna Paramatman gives an answer in the Bhagvadgita. An action that 
outwardly seems to be bad and cruel need not necessarily be sinful. Acts 
that apparently cause pain to others may have to be committed for the 
good of the world and there is no sin in them. Then what action is sinful 
and what is meritorious? The Lord answers this question also. Only such 
deeds as are motivated by desire and hatred can be sin. Those performed 
for the well being of the world without being impelled by desire and 
hatred are meritorious even though they may seen to be cruel.  
The question arises: Is there any action that does not spring from desire 
or hatred? I will give an example. When a judge awards punishment to a 
man found guilty of crime is he driven by desire or hatred? His sentence 
may seem cruel but it is indeed for the Atmic well-being of the accused 
himself. If one's son is suffering from advanced insanity does one not 
keep him in chains? Is that sinful? It is for the son's good as well for the 
good of others who might come to harm by him.  
It is this manner that the sastras have kept us bound, ordering us to do 
this and that. It is for our benefit as well as the world's, says Sri Krsna, 
that we must live according to the tenets of the sastras: 
"Tasmatcchastram prmanam te karyakarya-vyvasthitau" (the sastras are 
the authority as to what you must do and must not). The Gita today 
enjoys wide esteem. Even people who have no respect for our religious 
customs and traditions - researchers, Western scholars, etc - speak in 
praise of it. They interpret variously the Gita's teaching on the 
svadharma. There is no room for doubt about what the Gita says about 
svadharma: It is the karma allotted to a man by the sastras.  


 
When there is neither selfish desire nor hatred, there will be nothing 
unpleasant about any kind of work. One can then be always happy doing 
one's allotted work.  
The reason for desire and hatred is ego-feeling, ahamkara. When there is 
no ego-sense, considerations of high and low, or inferior or superior, will 
be found meaningless. We will kept doing our work happily as a matter of 
duty and thus also contribute to the world's happiness. The Karmayoga 
taught by the Gita is doing one's work without ahamkara, in a spirit of 
dedications to the Lord. This tradition of desireless action that purifies 
our inner being has existed in this land from the Vedic period. Sri Krsna 
Paramatman presents it to us as a boon encased in a handy casket.  
We must keep applying this teaching with ardour in every work and 
action of our life. Every time we do a work we must ask ourselves: "How 
do we benefit from this work? Will it bring us fame? Are we moved by 
desire or hatred? Are we being partial to somebody in carrying it out?" If 
there is any of these elements associated with our action it must be 
considered sinful even if it seems exalted to the outside world. If we do 
something on our own, dictated by our own desire, there will be much 
wrong-doing in accomplishing it. So, as Sri Krsna says, all our actions must 
be founded on the sastras. If everybody acts with equal love for all and 
with a pure heart there will be neither any rivalry nor any quarrel in 
society. The world then will be filled with joy.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 22 
DHARMAS COMMON TO ALL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

How to Control the Mind 
What is the obstacle to one-pointed meditation? The answer is the unstill 
mind. All problems are caused by the mind, by the desires arising in it. It 
is not easy to control the mind and keep it away effectively from desire. If 
we ask the mind to think of an object, it seems to obey us for a moment, 
but soon it takes its own course, wandering off. When I speak to you 
about meditation and tranquillity, for a moment your mind will perhaps 
become still and you will be happy. But in a trice it will go astray and the 
calm you experienced for a few seconds will give place to unquietness.  
If you bid your mouth to keep shut, it obeys you for a brief moment. 
Similarly, if you close your eyes asking them not to see anything, they 
shut themselves off from the outside world for some moments. But try as 
you might to tell your mind not to think of anything, it will not listen to 
you.  
The mind must be kept under control. Thinking and non-thinking must be 
governed by your will. Only then can we claim that it is under our control, 
that we are masters of our own consciousness.  
Lunatics are usually referred to as people with no control over their 
minds. In fact none of us have any control over the mind. A madman 
keeps blabbering. But what about us? We let the mind go freely to keep 
blabbering inwardly.  
Do you know what it means to have mental control? Suppose you are 
suffering from a severe pain. If you ask your mind not to feel the pain, it 
shall not feel it in obedience to you [that is you will not feel the pain]. 
Even if a tiger comes face to face with you and growls you will feel no fear 
if you ask your mind not to be afraid of the beast. Now we keep crying for 
no reason. If the mind is under control we will keep smiling even if there 
is cause for much sorrow. And under the gravest of provocations it will 
not be roused to anger and will remain calm.  


 
First we must train our mind not to keep wandering. One way of doing it 
is to apply it to good activities. When oil falls in a steady flow, without 
spraying, it is called "tailadhara". The mind must be gathered together 
and made steady. It must be accustomed to think of noble and exalted 
objects like the Lord. Eventually, the very act of "thinking" will cease and 
we will dissolve in Isvara to become Isvara.  
Yoga is controlling the mind in this manner.  
Before we pass on, we must find a way to control the mind. Otherwise, 
we will be born again and we will be subject to the constant unquietness 
of the mind again. So we must use the opportunity of this birth itself to 
subdue the mind even while we are in the midst of so much that can 
rouse our desire or anger. A man who has succeeded in bridling his mind 
thus is called a "yukta" by the yogins. He is a "sukhin", one who truly 
experiences bliss, so says Sri Krsna You must not turn away from yoga 
thinking that it is meant only for people like the sages. Who needs 
medicine? The sick. We suffer from manovyadhi, mental sickness. So we 
must take the medicine that cures it.  
There are two different ways of mastering the mind- the first is outward 
(bahiranga) and the second is inward(antaranga). We must have recourse 
to both. The Matha has a cartman and a cook. Their work is outward in 
nature. Then there are those who prepare the wicks of the lamps, gather 
flowers for the puja - they are "inward" workers. Both types are needed 
for the functioning of the Matha. By employing both the outward and 
inward means, the mind must first be applied to good things one-
pointedly and eventually lead to a state in which it does not think of 
anything at all.  
The outward means consists, for example, of sandhyavandana, sacrifices, 
charity and so on. The best inward means is meditation. There are five 
inward (antaranga) means to aid meditation. They are ahimsa (non-
violence), satya (truthfulness), asteyam (non-stealing), sauca (cleanliness) 
and indriya-nigraha [subduing the senses, if not obliterating them]. To 
practise ahimsa is to imbue the mind with love for all and not even think 
of harming others. Asteyam means not coveting other people's goods. 


 
For satya, or truthfulness, to be complete one's entire being, including 
body, mind and speech, must be involved in its practice. Sauca is hygiene, 
observing cleanliness by bathing, maintaining ritual purity, etc. Indriya-
nigraha implies limits placed on sensual enjoyment. "The eyes must not 
see certain things, the ears must not hear certain things and the mouth 
must not eat certain things"-restrictions with regard to what you can see, 
listen to, eat and do with your body. The body is meant for sadhana, for 
Atmic discipline. The senses must be "fed" only to the extent necessary to 
keep the body alive. These five dharmas are to be practiced by all Hindus 
without any distinction of caste or community.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 
 
 
 


 

Ahimsa 
According to the Manusmriti, ahimsa is the foremost among the dharmas 
that are common to all. It is included in the yoga of mind control. Ahimsa 
means much more than non-injury; it implies not doing harm to others 
even by thought or word.  
By nature none of us wants to cause any hurt to other people. But if 
others do us harm we want to retaliate in anger. Suppose one of our 
children sets fire to our house in all innocence. We do not punish it but 
try to extinguish the fire and thereafter take care to see that the child is 
kept away from fire and other dangerous objects. We must learn to think 
that all those who cause us pain are like this child. If a person tries to hurt 
us, we must lovingly prevent him from doing so. We must not bear any ill-
will against him nor think of retaliating. This is true ahimsa.  
The practice of ahimsa contributes greatly to the yoga of mind control. 
The mind is like a demon. But see what wonders the demon- the vetala- 
accomplished for Vikramaditya after he had been brought under control. 
The mind will do us unlimited good if it is made subservient to us. 
Anjaneya [Hanuman] acquired his immense strength and was able to 
perform so many great and good deeds only because he had conquered 
his mind. The mind's power is immeasurable. All the cosmos is the work 
of the Supreme Goddess and in this creation of hers even the mind of a 
tiny ant pervades the entire universe.  
Many great men, many yogins, have stated that they were able to control 
their minds by adhering to true ahimsa. When we practise ahimsa, anger 
will naturally give way, the mind will become clear and will easily be 
controlled.  
Though the chief aim of non-violence the control of the mind, there is 
another unexpected benefit that it brings. It is called "avantara 
prayojana". All of you came to the Matha to see the puja. But with that 


 
you listened to the nagasvaram music and saw persons whom you had 
not seen for long - and now you listen to my discourse. All these belong 
to the category of avantara prayojana. Thus if a man practises true non-
violence (by body, mind and speech), he will be rewarded with a benefit 
that he had not expected. In his presence all creatures will forget their ill-
will and cease to cause hurt to any other creature.  
Ahimsa- pratisthayam tatsannidhau vairatyagah -yogasutra.  
-- Yogasutra, 2. 35  
The minds of even cruel people will be transformed in the presence of 
men practising utter ahimsa: in other words when a man is full of love he 
can make other people also loving and this is an avantara prayojana.  
A sannyasin must observe total non-violence. He must not even pluck a 
leaf from a tree and must not do violence to plants by cooking them. It is 
because of the rule of absolute non-violence enjoined on him that there 
is an interdiction on his performing rites in the sacred fire. Tending a fire 
for the conduct of a ritual might unwittingly make us responsible for the 
destruction of some insects. It is because the sannyasin has no Agni 
ceremony that when he dies his body is not cremated but interred. When 
he is initiated into sannyasa he takes a vow that he shall never be the 
cause of fear to any creature.  
"Ahimsa paramo dharmah" (Non-violence is the supreme dharma). 
Buddhism and Jainism impose total non-violence on their followers. Not 
so our religion except in the case of ascetics. In Hinduism an exception to 
the general dharma of non-violence is made in the case of a righteous or 
just war and in a sacrifice in which sometimes animals are killed. It is to 
fetch the divine powers to earth and to appease them that animals are 
sacrificed in yajnas. It is our belief that the animals so sacrificed will attain 
to a high state that they cannot otherwise through their own efforts. 
Altogether it means the good of the animals and the welfare of the world.  
In a war, heroes of the army sacrifice themselves in the cause of the 
nation. Is it not better to lay down one's life for the sake of others than 
fatten oneself doing nothing?  


 
It is easy to claim oral allegiance to the principle of non- injury but 
difficult to practise the same. Quarrels and disputes are inevitable in the 
workaday world. In dealing with them action that is apparently violent 
may have to be taken. In reality such action is not regarded as violent. 
The intention or purpose is important here, not the action itself. Certain 
types of violence are justified according to the sastras and not considered 
sinful, because such violence is committed not for our personal delight 
but in pursuance of our duty towards the society: the offering of an 
animal in sacrifice, sentencing a murderer to death, killing an enemy in 
war.  
If a religion makes the practice of non-violence universally applicable, 
there will be problems. Obviously, all cannot practise it at all times. So 
those who find it not practicable to follow this rule of ahimsa are made 
liable to sin. Our religion has taken a more realistic view on the question. 
As we have seen, Buddhism imposes total non- violence on its followers. 
But what do we see in practice? In all those lands where Buddhism has a 
hold there are armies that take part in fighting. Besides, almost without 
exception, everybody is a meat-eater there.  
If a great dharma or principle is made common to all, in the end it is likely 
to lead to a situation in which no one will respect it in practice. In our 
religion- to repeat- the rule of absolute non-violence is meant only for 
sannyasins. Following their example, Brahmins, Vaisnavas in regions like 
Gujarat and Sivas in the South like the Vellalas and Komutti Cettis practise 
ahimsa. Without being bound by any sastric injunction they have 
voluntarily adopted the principle and practised it from generation to 
generation. Influenced by the example of the sattva guna of ascetics 
these communities have become vegetarians on their own. And, 
following their example and without being compelled to do so, other 
castes too abstain from meat on days likes the new moon, on the day of a 
sraddha, and days sacred to the various deities. When a principle is 
imposed only on a few, since it is difficult to make it universal it becomes 
an ideal for others to whom it may not formally apply: they try to practise 
it as far as they can. Non-violence is a samanya dharma( a dharma 


 
common to all) in Hinduism. It is kept as an ideal though, on occasion, 
adherence to it is not practicable.  
In the Vedic dharma the definition of ahimsa is the absence of ill-feeling 
in all action.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Truthfulness 
Truthfulness means mind and speech being well integrated. The wise say 
that speech being at variance with the mind is untruthfulness.  
Vangmanasyoh aikarupyam satyam  
God has given man the gift of speech so that he may give expression to 
his thoughts and feelings. If what we speak is at variance with what we 
think (with our mind) God will take away the faculty of speech from us in 
our next birth- that is we will be born in the animal kingdom.  
There are, as we have seen before, exceptions made in our sastras to the 
rule of absolute non-violence: in waging a war to preserve dharma, in 
offering animals in sacrifice. Are there similar exceptions to the rule of 
truthfulness? You will perhaps say none. But, as a matter of fact, there 
are.  
In a locality there must be a number of undesirable characters. Let us 
suppose that a certain citizen is annoyed with such characters and gives 
open expression to his anger. "He committed this outrage. That other 
man is guilty of such and such a crime, “he keeps recounting the 
misdeeds of the bad elements. In doing so he is being truthful, that is his 
speech and mind are in accord. But by giving expression to his feelings no 
purpose is served for neither he not the community is benefited. It is a 
futile kind of accord - that of his speech and mind - and it cannot be 
called truthfulness.  
Take the example of another person. He is full of evil thoughts and, if he 
gives expression to them, can he be called truthful? No.  
So truthfulness, now we see, is not merely accord between mind and 
speech. It means voicing good thoughts, thoughts that are beneficial and 
are liked by people: "Satyr bhuahitam priyam."  


 
Doing good through thought, word and deed is truthfulness. All that does 
ill is untruthfulness. It is not enough that you speak to a man what is good 
for him. You must speak with affection and the one to whom your words 
are addressed must find them acceptable. If you speak harshly nobody 
will listen to you even if you mean well. Thus words that serve no purpose 
do not constitute a truth. Your speech must be beneficial and, at the 
same time, capable of bringing happiness to the man to whom it is 
addressed. This is truthfulness.  
The wise say: "May he speak the truth. May his speech be pleasing. May 
he not speak the truth that is unpleasing. And may he not speak an 
untruth that is pleasing."  
Satyam brutapriyam bruyan- 
Na bruyatsatyamaptiyam  
Priyam ca nanrtam bruyad- 
A mind that is subject to desire and anger will not give rise to words that 
bespeak affection and cause well-being. Truthful words that create good 
are the product of a mind free from desire and anger.  
What is truth then? Thought and speech must be in accord; the mind 
must be serene; and the words spoken must do good to the speaker as 
well as the listener.  
For a man rooted in truth there is an avantara prayojana, an incidental 
benefit, gained from his speech. Since such a person habitually speaks the 
truth, his words will become the truth. Such a man will never deliberately 
utter a lie. But, if unwittingly or out of ignorance, he commits an error 
while speaking, that error will turn out to be the truth. I will tell you a 
story to illustrate this.  
In Tirukkadavur, in Tanjavur district, there was a great devotee of Amba 
called Abhiramibhatta. He would often go into an ecstasy of devotion to 
the goddess. During such times he would speak like one mad. Someone 
poisoned the ears of the raja Sarabhoji against him. "Abhiramibhatta is a 
drunkard," he told the ruler. "His devotion is a mere pretence." Sarabhoji 


 
wanted to find out the truth. So he went to see Abhiramibhatta in 
Tirukkadavur and asked him: "What day of the moon is it today?" The 
Bhatta was then lost in devotional joy and, thinking only of the radiant 
face of Amba which was like the moon, said that it was a full moon day. 
Actually it was the new moon. The raja concluded that what he had heard 
about the Bhatta must be true and said scornfully: "Is that so? Let us look 
up and see whether the full moon has risen."  
At that very moment the full moon did appear in the sky. Abhiramibhatta 
was steeped in truthfulness. By mistake he had spoken an untruth but 
Amba made it the truth by hurling her ear stud into the sky causing it to 
shine like the full moon. The blessings as well as the curses of great men 
come true because of the force of their innate and habitual truthfulness. 
This is the "incidental benefit" they derive from their habit of 
truthfulness. But truthfulness must not be practised with the deliberate 
intention that what one speaks must come true. Power such as this is 
earned unintentionally and unconsciously.  
A man will purify himself completely if he performs the forty samskaras 
and adheres to principles like non-violence, truthfulness, non-
covetousness, cleanliness and also controls his senses. He will then 
develop the maturity and wisdom to find out who in truth he is, who 
Isvara is and what the Ultimate Reality is.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   


 

Sesame and Water: Where do they Go? 
All human beings must express their gratitude to their fathers (pitrs) and 
to the gods- they have a debt to pay their fathers, rites to perform for the 
gods. We must serve our fellow creatures to the best of our ability and 
extend hospitality at least to one guest a day. This is atithya or what 
Thiruvalluvar calls "virundu", also known as manusyayajna. Then there is 
Brahmayajna to perform, the word "Brahma" here denoting the Vedas. 
Brahmayajna means chanting the Vedas and making others chant them. 
This is a duty carried out by a few on behalf of all. One of the rites 
common to all is bhutayajna, demonstrating our love to all creatures, 
feeding them etc. Pitryajna, devayajna, manusyayajna, bhutayajana are 
rites all are duty-bound to perform in one way or. If each individual does 
his work according to the Vedic dharma and does it in a spirit of 
dedication to Isvara he may be said to be performing Brahmayajna. 
Thiruvalluvar has said more or less the same thing as the Vedas say:  
Tenpulattar, deivam, virundu, okkal, tan enru angu  
aimbulattaru ombal talai.  
Tenpulattar are the pitrs, the fathers. All are duty-bound to pay their debt 
to them. Mother Veda says: "Matr-devo bhava, pitr-devo bhava.” (Be one 
to whom the mother is a deity. Be one to whom the father is a deity.) 
Auvvai, who brings us the essence of the Vedas, observes: Annayum 
pitavum munnari deivam" [Mother and Father are the deities first 
known.]  
We must treat our parents with respect and do all we can to keep them in 
comfort. We cannot make sufficient recompense for all the sacrifices they 
make on our behalf. After they depart from this world we must without 
fail offer libations to them and perform the sraddha ceremony, all in the 
sastric manner. Though they ridicule the idea of performing sraddha, 
even reformers have agreed that we must care for our parents.  


 
"The sesame you offer, the water, the balls of rice, the plantains and 
other items of food remain here," point out the reformists. "Or we see 
someone removing them before our own eyes, or eating them. You say 
that the departed parents are born again in this world. If that is true, is it 
not madness to claim that what is offered here will reach them?" Some of 
you must be harbouring similar doubts.  
Let me tell you a story.  
A certain man had sent his son to college in a distant town. One day the 
boy woke up to the fact that he had to pay his examination fee in a few 
days. So he wrote to his father: "Please send such and such a sum by 
telegraphic money order.” The father was a little perplexed. All the same 
he went to the telegraph office and handed the clerk at the counter the 
money that had to be sent to his son. "Please send it by telegraphic 
money order," he told the clerk. He had thought that the clerk would 
make holes in the notes, put a length of wire through them and send the 
whole thing to his son. Moments later the clerk said to the man: "Your 
son will get your money. It has already been sent. “The villager was again 
puzzled. He saw the money still in the cash box without the notes strung 
together. He told the clerk:"My money is still here. You haven't made 
holes in the notes yet." The clerk assured him: "It will reach your son." 
Now he turned to his work of sending messages: "Ka-tu-katu-katu." The 
poor village was still not satisfied.  
But the money of course reached his son.  
Offering libations to one's fathers is similar. If this rite is performed 
according to the sastras, the deities concerned will convey them to those 
for whom they are meant. If the fathers are reborn as cows the offering 
made to them will be taken to them in the form of grass or hay. The 
deities in charge carry out the orders of the Paramatman. So the father of 
the mother whose sraddha is performed need not personally come to 
receive the offering.  
Does not the telegraphic money order reach the addressee? If the 
addressee resides in a foreign country our currency will not be valid 


 
there. If rupees are paid here arrangements are made to pay the money 
in dollars, pounds of whatever. The things offered to the fathers 
according to the sastras are conveyed in a form suitable to them.  
What is important is a sense of gratitude to our fathers and faith in the 
sastras. At parties a toast is proposed to somebody and all the guests 
drink or eat to his health. They do so in the belief that by virtue of the 
mental power the man toasted will become healthy. Sraddha means that 
which is done in faith. Faith is of the utmost importance. If we do 
something we must do it according to the rules laid down for it. When 
you write a letter how do you make sure that it reaches the addressee? "I 
will write the address as I like. Why should I drop the letter in that 
letterbox over there? I have a better box at home." would you speak 
thus?  
In the state of worklessness, love, devotion, and jnana are not bound by 
any rules. But when an action has a purpose behind it you have to respect 
the rules pertaining to it.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  


 

Puja 
Every family must perform puja to Isvara. Those who find it convenient to 
do so may conduct elaborate types of puja after receiving proper 
initiation into them. Others need perform only a brief puja, not lasting 
more than ten minutes or so. Office goers must offer at least this brief 
worship. The sacred bell must ring in every home.  
Images must be installed to worship Siva, Amba, Visnu, Vinayaka, and 
Surya. This is called "pancayatana puja". According to one custom, no 
graven images [images with limbs] are used but instead natural objects to 
represent the five deities. The "bana-linga" for Siva is obtained from the 
Omkara -kunda of the Narmada River. The svarnamukhi stone for Ambika 
(it has a golden streak on it) is to be taken from the bed of the 
Svarnamukhi river in Andhra Prades. The symbol of Vishnu, salagrama, is 
obtained from the Gandaki River in Nepal. The crystal stone for surya is 
got from Vallam, near Tanjavur. The sonabhadra stone for Vinayaka is 
obtained from the Sone River, a tributary of the Ganga. These five stones 
are symbolic of the unity of India.  
None of these five stones has eyes, nose, ears, etc. Since they have no 
corners that become untidy, they are easy to bathe and dry. Being small 
they do not occupy much space. No big puja hall or room is necessary. A 
small casket is enough.  
Pancayatana puja was revived by Sankara Bhagavatpada. As the creator 
of the Sanmata system (the worship of six deities)he added Subrahmanya 
to the five. So with the five stones we may add a small spear to represent 
Velayadah (Subrahmanya) who bears the spear.  
Not much effort is needed for the puja. If you have the will, it could be 
performed wherever you happen to be.  


 
At home when you do the puja you have to present to the deities cooked 
rice called "maha-naivedya". The Lord has created the entire cosmos for 
our sake. Our sense organs take delight in the various objects in creation. 
All that gives us joy, all that is beneficial in creation, must be offered to 
the Lord [symbolically] before being partaken of by us. When we offer 
any food as naivedya to Him, do we really give it away to Him? We just 
place it before Him and then partake of it ourselves.  
Some ask, scornfully, whether the Lord himself eats what is offered to 
Him. "Nivedana"does not mean making the Lord really "eat" what is 
offered. He does not have to eat. Puja is meant to make us inwardly pure 
and the Lord does not have anything to gain from it. "Nivedayami" means 
"I am making it know to you (informing you)" and does not mean "I am 
feeding you". You must speak thus to Isvara:"O Lord, in your compassion 
you have given us this food." Then you must eat the food thus offered, 
thinking of Him. Without His grace how does the rice grow? Experts may 
conduct research and write big tomes on rice. But are they capable of 
making one grain of rice? What is called synthetic rice is made out of 
materials already created by Isvara. So all that seems to be made of man 
must be finally traced to God's creation. To enjoy what he has given us 
without first presenting it to Him would be tantamount to thieving.  
He who is present everywhere must be present where we want Him to be 
present so that He may be grasped by us. Whatever the material out of 
which His image of symbol is made-stone, earth, copper- he will come to 
us in that material and in that image or symbol. He will do so out of His 
compassion and He has the power to do so. We would have no need for 
him otherwise.  
The Lord must be worshipped in every home. He must be invoked and it 
must be made known to Him that we are using nothing but what he has 
made over as a gift to us. If we keep doing so, we will in due course have 
the wisdom not to use in puja things not fit to be offered to Him. We 
ourselves will come to possess good qualities.  
 


 

Philanthropy 
[In the chapter entitled, "Sesame and Water: Where do They Go?", the 
Paramaguru spoke of the debt to be paid to our fathers, our duty to 
worship Paramesvara as well as to feed the creatures of the earth. He 
stated that Tiruvalluvar also spoke of the same dharma in his "Kural": 
"Tenpulattar deivam, virundu, okkal tan enru angu aimbulattaru ombal 
talai."]  
Here (in the foregoing quotation)is one good proof that Tiruvalluvar 
respected the authority of the Vedas. Some suggest that he did not 
belong to the Vedic religion and that he was a Jaina or a Buddhist. And 
some claim that he transcended all religions. It is also suggested that he 
openly condemned sacrifices in which animals are killed. In support of 
their view they quote a stanza from the Kural.  
[The Paramaguru's comment on the Kural passage is contained in Chapter 
, Part Five.]  
Tiruvalluvar who composed his Kural, with its universal appeal, was not 
an atheist opposed to the Vedic dharma. What he refers to as virundu is 
the same as the Vedic manusyayajna.  
Every morning a handful of rice (uncooked) must be set apart for the 
poor. All the families must do this without fail every day. The rice thus 
kept must be collected from house to house, from quarter to quarter, 
cooked offered to the deity of the local temple as naivedya and then 
distributed among the poor. With the handful of rice set apart for the 
poor, keep just one paisa also. The paisa collected from each family 
would be sufficient to buy salt, chilli powder, etc, to mix with the rice to 
make it more palatable. It would also serve to buy firewood and to pay 
the rent for the vessels. To carry out such a scheme is to do a great 
service to the poor - and to the Lord. Charity like this should encourage 
temple going, not to speak of devotion. Since the food is first offered as 


 
naivedya, it would mean that the poor will take it as prasada which will 
impart them inner purity.  
Annadan or the gift of food is one kind of service of paropakara. We talk 
of service to the poor, social service and so on. Today all this is done with 
much fanfare and publicity. In the past the needy were served naturally, 
without making any noise. Service comes under "purta- dharma" and it 
includes digging wells and ponds for the public, feeding the poor, building 
temples for the spiritual well-being of people, laying our gardens. 
Excavating wells and ponds has been mentioned first. The importance of 
this word may be gauged from such remarks in ordinary conversation: 
"What’s he doing? Digging a well or something?"It is extremely 
meritorious to excavate pond outside the village to slake the thirst of 
cattle. All the people in a village must join together without the 
distinction of poor and rich, high or low - work involving physical effort. It 
will incidentally contribute to greater social harmony.  
With education we purify our intelligence, with meditation we cleanse 
our mind, with sloka or poetry we clarify our speech. How do we purify 
our body? By exerting ourselves in the service of others. As we keep 
serving people in this way we will obtain inward purity. When all take 
part in the work of digging a pond or well, without any differences, 
without one man feeling superior to another or inferior to him, our ego 
too will be dug away. More important than the water welling up in the 
pond is the love welling up from our hearts. No outward show is needed 
in social service; we must not make an exhibition of our work. Collect 
pieces of glass scattered on the footpath and keep them away in a safe 
place; even this service to people and a means of cleansing ourselves. We 
must try to please the Lord with the very hands and feet that he has given 
us - we must do so by serving others and by looking upon all as himself.  
 
 
 
 


 

To Serve Others is to Feel Blessed 
A man can be fortunate in many ways. But there is nothing that makes 
him more fortunate than the opportunity he has of serving others.  
When we serve our family we are not conscious of how we help it. We 
must learn to help people who are not our kin - other families, our village 
or home town, our nation, indeed all mankind. We have so many 
problems ourselves, we suffer so many hardships, and we have so many 
worries and cares. We must not, however, mind serving others in the 
midst of all our difficulties. We will forget our problems when we are 
immersed in the work of helping others. There is a saying:"Feed milk to 
your neighbour's child, your child will be nourished." The Lord will raise 
us up from our troubles as we do good to others. However, it is not with 
such considerations of profit that we must try to help people in 
difficulties. We must not worry about how others will benefit from our 
work, but consider how we will become naturally pure. Also, we must 
think of the happiness we will experience by serving our fellow men.  
Service should not be confined to mankind but must be extended to the 
animal kingdom. In the olden days ponds were dug exclusively for cattle 
and stone pillars were installed here and there for them to scratch 
themselves. Everyone must feed at least one cow every day with a 
handful of grass. This is called "go-grasam" and this act is extolled in the 
sastras, "Grasam" means a mouthful and the English word "grass" is 
derived from it.  
Conducting sacrifices, offering oblations to the fathers and performing 
sraddha must be regarded as an extension of the service we do in this 
world to the denizens of other worlds. These rites must be gone through 
with the intoning of mantras.  
There must be many others like us, many groups, who want to be 
engaged in social work. It should be ideal if the efforts of all were brought 


 
together under one body of like-minded members. Care must be taken 
that associations so formed do not break up; they must be managed 
honestly with a proper enforcement of discipline. Those who do 
philanthropic work must be men of courage and enthusiasm who take 
praise and blame equally.  
You ought not to waste your time in eating places displaying appetizing 
fare nor in establishments where alluring objects are exhibited. Instead, 
you must spend your time in helping others. You will ask whether it is 
wrong to spend a little time in gaiety in the midst of life's worries and 
hardships. I should like to impress on you that the happiness you find in 
helping others is not to be found in anything else.  
Krsna Paramatman was playful, wasn't he? But all his playfulness was an 
outward phenomenon for inwardly he served others all the time. How 
sportingly did he save people from trouble and how many were the men 
who were helped by him. To protect the cowherds the child Krsna lifted 
up the big Govardhana Mountain. And, again, as a little child he danced 
on the hoods of the dreaded Kalinga (Kaliya) that poisoned the Yamuna. It 
all seemed play, all the heroic acts he performed to save the people of 
Gokula. Nobody sported like Krsna but at the same time nobody served 
mankind like him. It was not worldly service alone that he did. He served 
mankind by imparting jnana. As a preceptor of Arjuna and Uddhava alike 
he taught great truths. All this he did with a smile, spreading serenity 
everywhere. Whatever he did he did with utmost ease. Those who have 
taken up the work of serving humanity must be inspired by his example.  
Among the various incarnations of the Lord, the service rendered to 
humanity was the greatest in that of Krsna. During the avatara of Rama, 
Anjaneya appeared as seva (service) personified. We must be inspired by 
their example [of Krsna and Hanuman] as we work for others; we must be 
unselfish like them and shun publicity.  
We keep aloof from the outside world when we are ritually impure. We 
must regard any day on which we fail to do any service to others as a day 
of impurity. Paramesvara is the father of all creatures. By serving our 


 
fellow men we serve the Lord. This is the message of Tirumular in his 
Tirumantiram;  
Nadamada-k-koyil nambar-k-konriyil  
Padamada-k-koyil Bhagavarkadame  
 
It means: Serving people is worshipping the Lord.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Making all Creatures Happy 
We must not fail to perform sacrifices to the celestials, offer libations to 
our fathers and perform sraddha. In the past, apart from these, our 
ancestors did puja to the gods, fed guests and performed vaisvadeva 
which rite is meant for all creatures. You must have some idea of these 
rites even if you do not perform them. I will speak to you about 
vaisvadeva.  
To sustain ourselves, we cause hurt to so many creatures, don't we? We 
take pride in keeping our house clean but we forget that every household 
is a butchery. According to dharmasastras it is not one butchery but five 
butcheries together. What are these five?  
Pancasuna grhasthasya vartante harahah sada  
Khandani pesani culli jalkumbha upaskarah  
Khandani is used to cut vegetables- it stands for one type of butchery. 
Vegetables also do have life. The second butchery is represented by the 
grinding our pounding stone. We mercilessly grind corn, pulses, etc, in it.  
Here an answer must be given to objections raised by meat-eaters about 
vegetarian food. They tell us:"Like the goats, cows and fowl that we eat, 
vegetables and cereals also have life." True. Though there is no difference 
in kind between them, there is a difference in the degree of violence 
done to vegetables and animals. Plants have life and feelings like humans 
but they do not have the sensation of pain to the same degree as animals 
and birds have. This has been scientifically established. Also, but for 
certain leafy vegetables which we uproot to be prepared as food, most 
other vegetables are obtained from plants without killing them: it is like 
removing our nails or hair. The plant suffers only a little pain. Pain even to 
this degree will not be caused if we eat the fruits of these plants after 
they drop ripe. As for the cereals they are harvested only after the crop is 
ripe and dry.  


 
There is one more argument in favour of vegetarianism. Now only certain 
types of meat like beef are eaten. Horsemeat is not usually eaten. During 
World War I or II, when the question arose as to whether the soldiers 
could be fed horsemeat, the non-vegetarians themselves opposed the 
idea. People who think it civilized to eat birds and animals condemn 
tribes in some remote land who eat human flesh as barbarous and call 
them cannibals. We must tell meat-eaters who remind us that vegetables 
also have life. "Yes, but when it comes to violence, are all creatures the 
same? Why do you make a difference between animal flesh and human 
flesh? Similarly, we make a distinction between plants and animals. 
Vegetarianism also promotes sattvic qualities. "Unavoidably, for the sake 
of existence, we have to keep at home instruments of butchery like the 
khandani, pesani, etc.  
The third butchery is represented by the culli or the kitchen fire. Many 
insects perish in the cooking fire. An ant crawls about the oven or 
fireplace and is burnt. Sometimes when we keep a pot on the floor or the 
shelf an insect or two get crushed. In the summer insects come seeking 
wet places, places for example where vessels are kept. The water-pot is 
also included among the objects of butchery. Then there is the upaskara, 
the broomstick. Aren't many tiny insects killed as we sweep the floor? 
Thus there are five instruments or objects of butchery in our home.  
We must not cause harm even to those creatures that hurt us. But what 
do we do? We cause pain to, or kill, even harmless creatures. It is sad to 
think that to live, to sustain ourselves, we have to keep hurting so many 
living things. But it all seems unavoidable. We do not kill deliberately. 
There is an expiation for the sin committed unwittingly. It is the 
prayascitta of the "vaisvadeva". We perform this function to ask the Lord 
to forgive us our sin of having caused the destruction of various creatures 
and to pray for their happiness in afterlife. Vaisvadeva is meant for the 
excommunicated and for all creatures of earth like dogs, crows, insects, 
all. This rite absolves us of many a sin.  
The pancha-mahayajnas were conducted for eons by the sages, by the 
children of Brahma. All performed them from the hoary past until the 


 
time of our grandfathers. The five great sacrifices are to be performed 
uninterruptedly until the deluge. But we have had the "good fortune" of 
having broken this tradition. Worse, we have deprived future generations 
of the benefits to be derived from them.  
I have dealt with a variety of rites. Perform at least those you can without 
prejudice to your office or professional work. If you fail to do so you must 
be regretful and make amends for the same.  
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

Towards Mental Purity 
There are a number of simple rites the performance of which will free you 
from inner impurities. From generation to generation our forefathers 
performed them and earned happiness and contentment. We must 
follow in their footsteps. We do not have to go in search of any new way 
of life, any new doctrine or belief.  
We can learn from the great men of our past who have left us lessons not 
only in Atmic matters but in the conduct of family and social life. For 
instance, kinship and friendship in their time were based on high 
principles. When there was a marriage or obsequial ceremony all friends 
and relatives came forward to help. It was cultured behaviour at its best 
and it was not based on any empty outward show. People then were truly 
and sincerely interested in helping the needy and the poor. At weddings 
they gave a little cash to the bride's parents, five or ten rupees, and the 
burden of those who conducted the marriage was lightened.  
When everybody pays a little to the needy, the donor does not feel the 
pinch but the donee has a tidy sum with which to celebrate a marriage or 
perform an obsequial ceremony. Among relatives in the past there was 
not much gap between the rich and the poor. And the rich man helped 
his poor relatives. All this is part of dharma. The man who helps purifies 
himself more than the man who is helped.  
Now things have changed. The well-to-do do not help their poor relatives. 
Annadana(gift of food) was part of the noble tradition of the past. How is 
it today? At present too the well-to-do feed people, but with this 
difference that those fed are also well-to-do like them. When they give 
parties, banquets, etc, a great deal of money and material is spent in this 
manner. Where is the room for dharma or mental purity in all this? A 
party is given not with any noble intention but to promote one's selfish 
interests. The man who gives it thinks that he is practicing deception on 
the invitees. But the invitees, however, knew that the host has no true 


 
feelings of affection for them. The host and the guest thus deceive one 
another. Altogether parties and toasts are nothing but part of modern art 
of deception and have nothing to do with the cleansing of mind.  
If you help a poor man with food or material, you and he are equally 
happy: there is affection on both sides. In parties, on the contrary, there 
is even ill-will. Hatred and resentment are caused in the hearts of have-
nots by the parties given by the haves [for the haves]. Among relatives 
there should be no distinction between the rich and the poor.  
You must not think that only the affluent can help the poor and earn 
merit. If you are not well off you may serve others by helping them 
physically. All of you in a locality may join together to dig a pond. All this 
contributes to inner purity. How do you deserve the grace of Isvara? By 
constantly serving others, by being compassionate to all creatures. Your 
mind, your consciousness, will also become clear. In this pure 
consciousness of yours, in this pure citta, you will see the image of the 
Lord. Do you see any image in turbid water? We have made our minds 
muddy with impurities. We must make them limpid by being devoted to 
the Lord and by serving mankind. Then Isvara will be within our grasp.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 


 

Fault-Finding 
To live a life inspired by dharma means coming under a certain discipline 
and following certain rules of conduct. It is important for people to 
acquaint themselves with these rules. It would be ideal if they lived 
according to them on their own because to abide by them out of 
compulsion is not a matter of pride. "Sampradaya" or tradition is 
something that has evolved naturally and it is natural that people adhere 
to them. The customs and rules making up a sampradaya are not all of 
them written down in the sastras.  
Anything laid down as a law becomes a matter of compulsion. Nowadays 
everywhere people are asked to "Do this" and "not to do that." Notices 
are displayed about this and that. They are displayed even where I 
perform the puja (in the Matha), notices that say, "Don't keep talking", 
"Don't wear shirts", etc.  
When I speak thus and ask you not to do this or to do that, I myself am 
guilty if offending against the good rule I just spoke about. When I say, 
"Don't do", it becomes a law. I should speak to you thus: "You think about 
it yourselves whether it is right to have such notices."  
"Do not magnify the faults of others," say the wise. "But if there is 
something good about a man speak appreciatively about it." I myself, 
however, am bringing your faults into the open. But, to repeat, you must 
not bring to light the drawbacks of others but only their good qualities. 
See, even the crescent moon is cool and radiant. That is why Siva wears it 
in his matted hair, makes its beauty known to the world. The same Siva 
swallowed the terrible halahala poison concealing it from everyone, so 
says Dandin in one of his poems.  
Pointing a finger at the faults of others or exaggerating them in speech 
and writing has become the practice today. The more learned a man is, 
the more eager he is to find fault with others. "Finding fault is indeed the 


 
work of a vidvan," it is said. "The word vidvan itself is said to mean a 
dosajna." But a dosajna is one who knows the faults of something or 
somebody, not one who reveals them to the world or exaggerates them. 
If you think a person has any drawbacks you must speak to him about 
them in a friendly manner [so that he may correct himself] but not 
constantly harp on them and expose them to the outside world.  
We must be worthy enough to speak about the faults of others and we 
cannot take upon ourselves the role of an adviser when we need to 
correct ourselves. Advice given by us then would be counterproductive. If 
we tell a man what is wrong about him he might even feel boastful about 
it. When are we fit to advise others? When we are worthy enough and 
when we know that our word will have the desired effect.  
If we praise a person for his good qualities he will have greater 
enthusiasm to cultivate them further. But there should be restraint in 
praise too- praise indeed is a tricky thing. That is why the wise say: "Isvara 
and the guru alone may be praised directly. Friends and relatives, instead 
of being praised to their face, must be spoken of well to others. You may 
praise a servant only after he has carried out the job entrusted to him. (It 
is like patting a horse after a ride). You may never praise your son."  
Pratyakse guravah stutyah  
Parokse mitrabandhavah  
Karyante dasabhrtyasca  
Na svaputrah kadacana  
I have been finding fault with you all the while. As I said fault -finding is 
not an exercise to be welcomed but the stanza just quoted frees me from 
any blame because it says that children should not be praised and that 
you must tell them what is wrong with them. So no fault can be ascribed 
to me for my having found fault with you.  
 
 
 


 

Kama 
It is customary to speak of kama (desire) and krodha (anger) together. 
Krsna Paramatman says in the Gita that desire and anger goad a man into 
sinful action.  
When we intensely desire an object we try to get it by fair means or foul. 
It is a deadly enemy, desire: it eggs us on to commit sin. Equally deadly is 
anger. When we fail to get the object of our desire we turn our anger 
against the man who, we believe was an obstacle. Unfulfilled desire 
becomes anger.  
If we throw a rubber against the wall, it bounces- in other words it 
returns to us. The ball thrown is desire and it is the same ball that 
becomes anger as it bounces. The attack we believe we make on others in 
our anger is actually an attack we make on ourselves-and we are hurt 
more than those we wanted to hurt. When we are angry our whole body 
shakes. Anger indeed causes pain both to the body and the mind and we 
make ourselves ugly when we are angry. You will know the truth of this if 
you see a photograph taken when you are in foul mood.  
Hunger is appeased by eating. But is fire assuaged in the same way? You 
keep feeding it and it keeps devouring everything. Fire is bright but it 
chars all that it consumes. Or, in other words, it turns everything black. 
That is why it is called "krsnavartman". Kama or desire is similar. It flares 
up like fire. The more it is fed the more it becomes hungry. Indeed kama 
blackens our mind. When a desire is gratified there is joy for the moment, 
but soon it goes in search of more "food" and the process we lose our 
peace of mind and happiness and become victims of sorrow and anger.  
Sorrow and anger are two forms of unrequited desire. If we think that 
those who are a hindrance to the gratification of our desire are inferior to 
us, we turn our anger against them, and if we think they are superior, all 
we do is to grieve within ourselves. Anger is packed with more evil power 


 
than even desire. Naisadham, the story of Nala, illustrates this truth 
beautifully. As King Kali makes his appearance, desire and anger (kama 
and krodha) accompany him as his two army commanders. The herald 
sings their praises. "There is no place that kama cannot gain entry to. No, 
there is a place he cannot enter. It is the fortress in which anger resides. 
This fortress is the heart of Durvasas. " Durvasas does not know desire 
but he is subject to fits of anger.  
We must be extremely wary of this terrible sinner called anger. A little 
thought will convince us that we are not in the least qualified to be angry 
with anybody or to shout at anybody. We are even more guilty than those 
against whom we turn in our anger. We know this in our heart of hearts. 
Even if we are guiltless, before we rush to find fault with someone, we 
must ask ourselves whether we would not have committed the offence 
we think he is guilty of were we placed in the same circumstances as he.  
We must try our best to keep anger always at a distance.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
    
 
  
 


 

Are We Worthy of Being Angry? 
Often we find ourselves angry with some person or other. Anger is 
provoked in two ways. When we see a man guilty of an offence we lose 
our temper. But we do not pause to think whether we too are not like 
him. Even if we have not been guilty of sinful deeds we must have had 
sinful thoughts. Perhaps we have reason to think that we have sinned less 
than others. This must be because we are a little more mature. Even so, 
how difficult do we find it to correct ourselves. Would it not be more 
difficult for a habitual sinner to retrieve himself? We need not associate 
ourselves with him. The sastras proclaim that the first step towards Atmic 
improvement is to sever ourselves from evil people and to seek the 
company of virtuous men. But there is no point in looking upon sinners 
with hatred or anger. All we can and must do is to pray that they turn to 
the path of virtue. If, by the grace of the Lord, we acquire a little grace 
ourselves we must use it to take them to the right path.  
Our opponent is not likely to change his attitude towards us simply 
because we are angry with him. Instead, he might turn against us with 
greater venom. Hatred thus will be kept fuelled on either side. One must 
realise one's mistakes and try to reform oneself. We cannot congratulate 
ourselves if a person corrects himself fearing our anger. Also the change 
thus brought about in him will not be enduring. If we think that there is 
something wrong with a man we must try to correct him with love.  
Why do people sin? The reason must be their mental condition and the 
circumstances in which they are placed. If we happen to be free from any 
guilt, it must be because we are more favoured by circumstances. When 
you see a sinner you must pray: "O Ambika, I too might have sinned like 
him. But in your mercy you do not give me the occasion to do so. Be 
merciful to him in the same way."  
We must not be angry with a man even if he bears ill-will against us. Our 
innermost mind knows how far we deserve to be spoken ill of. It may be 


 
that the man who nurses bad feelings against us is doing so not because 
of any wrong done by us. We know, however, in our heart of hearts that 
the sins we have committed are indeed great. Such is our predicament 
that we must shed tears before Amba, atone for our sins and pray that 
they are washed away. In that way are we qualified to point accusing 
finger at others?  
The question arises: may we direct our anger against others when we are 
free from all sin? Were we truly sinless, we would be all love and 
affection. Where is then the question of our being angry with anyone? 
Even towards a sinner we should have then no feeling other than that of 
love. On the other hand, if we are guilty of wrongs ourselves we have no 
right to be angry with those we think are sinners. In the state of utter 
sinlessness we realise it all to be the sport of Amba. In her sport who 
merits praise, who deserves blame? Anger, in any case has no place in our 
life.  
As I said earlier, according to Krsna Paramatman the two great forces 
inciting man to sin are desire and anger. In other words we hurt ourselves 
with our anger. Our opponent may ignore our anger but then we hurt 
ourselves with it-both our body and mind suffer. The natural dharma of 
man is to be loving and affectionate. And to be loving and affectionate is 
to be ever in bliss. Love is Sivam, it is said. We must always learn to attain 
the condition of love that is Sivam.  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   


 

Love and Sorrow 
The purpose of human birth is to live a life full of love for all. No joy is 
greater than that of loving others. Amassing wealth, acquiring property, 
earning fame, bedecking oneself give but transient pleasure, not any 
sense of fullness. The happiness that permeates our inner being is the 
happiness of loving others. When we love others we are not conscious of 
our suffering, the physical exertion we make and the money we spend: 
indeed the joy of loving gives us a transcendent feeling. A life in which 
there is no love for others is a life lived in vain.  
I said that when we love a person we forget our sorrows. But one day, at 
last, it may be that the object of our love itself becomes the cause of 
great sorrow. One day the person we love leaves us forever-or one day 
we will leave him forever. "O he has left me forever"-"O I am leaving him 
for ever": we lament in this manner. We feel disturbed when we realise 
that all the happiness that love gave us has at last proved to be a lie and 
ended in sorrow. "Is the final outcome of love then sorrow?” We ask 
ourselves in agitation. The greater our love for a person the more intense 
our grief when he or she is separated from us forever. We may then even 
wonder whether a life without love, a life of selfishness or a life of 
insensibility would be better. One leading such a life will not be affected 
by being separated from the object of his affection.  
A selfish or self-centred man, however, gathers only sin. Is it not a life 
lived without joy- a life lived without a sense of fullness- a life lived in 
vain, a life like that of a log of wood or stone?  
[The problem then is]: Our love for others ends in sorrow. However, if 
there is no love there is no meaning in life. What is the solution to this 
problem? We must create such love as will never change, love that will be 
enduring. The object of our love must never become separated from us, 
never desert us. If there were such an object and if we devoted all our 


 
love to it we would never be separated from one another- there would be 
eternal bliss, everlasting fullness.  
To explain, we must love the One Object that never changes. What is that 
Object? The Paramatman. The Paramatman will never be separated from 
us. Even if our life departs it will dissolve in the Paramatman and become 
one with him. Only that love is everlasting which is dedicated to him.  
The question arises: If one is to love the Paramatman that never perishes, 
does it mean that we must not love anyone else, that we must not love 
others because they will perish one day? If our love for the Supreme 
Being keeps growing the truth will dawn on us that there is no one or 
nothing other than He. All those whom we loved, all those who caused us 
sorrow by being separated from us, they too will seem to us the 
imperishable Supreme Being. We must learn to look upon the entire 
universe as the Paramatman and love it as such. Our love then shall never 
be a cause of sorrow.  
Even if it be that our love is not such as to embrace the universe with all 
its creatures as an expression of the Paramatman, we can learn to love 
with ease all those great men of Atmic qualities as the Paramatman, so 
also our sadguru who is full of wisdom and grace. Sufficient it would be to 
love them and surrender to them. Through them the Paramatman will 
give us his blessings. When someone we love dies we should not grieve 
for him. We must console ourselves that only the body which was the 
disguise of the Paramatman has perished, that the one who was in that 
disguise has become united with the Paramatman. Our love then will be 
everlasting. We must first learn to have such love for Isvara and for 
people of goodness, for men of God. Then step by step, we must enlarge 
it to embrace all creation. In this way the purpose of our life will be 
fulfilled.  
 
 
 


 

Love 
What is called love may be divided into three categories. We love great 
men for their high qualities, I mean distinguished men, men of truth, 
philanthropists, jnanins, men of grace. We mix with our friends and 
relatives intimately and affection develops between them and us. Then 
we love people- love them ostensibly for a specific purpose, for the 
reason that we stand to gain from them. For instance, we may seem to 
love a rich man hoping that he would help us in our business or some 
other enterprise. We may love our employer because he pays us our 
wages.  
These three types of love are neither true nor everlasting. If our employer 
sacks us we will cease to have either respect or affection for him. If 
people with whom we have had close contacts leave for a distant place or 
die or if we lose touch with them, we are likely in due course to forget 
them. All the sorrow we felt in the beginning because of being separated 
from them will eventually be forgotten. Were it true love the grief also 
should be enduring. Even our love for a great man is not lasting. If there 
happens to be a diminution in his qualities- or if he seems to us not as 
great as we thought he was- we will love him in correspondingly lesser 
measure.  
All three categories of love have some reason [or motive] behind them. 
That is why they are not everlasting. We love great men because they 
possess certain qualities: there is an element of selfish interest in our 
feelings for them: because we think they will be helpful in our 
advancement.  
True love knows neither reason nor motive. When do we love a man 
truly? When our affection for him is unchanging and unwavering- we love 
him even if he does not apparently move closely with us or does not 
seem to possess inward qualities or the capacity to bless us; we love him 
even when we do not have any selfish interest to be served by him. Does 


 
anyone possess such love? Yes, only One. It is Isvara - he alone has such 
love.  
God loves us for no reason. If he needed a reason he would not give us 
even a morsel of food. It is Paramesvara who forgives all our misdeeds 
and protects us- and he is all love. It is his love that is manifested in the 
three categories mentioned earlier.  
We must learn to have such love as is revealed through Paramesvara; 
that is love that is universal, love that is not based on any reason or 
interest. Why should we dislike a man because we think he is guilty of 
certain wrongs? Are we not similarly guilty ourselves? Do we then discard 
ourselves? We must have the same attitude towards others as we have 
towards ourselves. There is nothing remarkable about our love for a great 
man; the remarkable thing is to love a sinner also. If you ask me, you 
must have greater concern and affection for him. "He commits wrongs 
like us," we must tell ourselves. "His mind goads him into doing them. We 
must have sympathy for him and try to correct him". There may be a few 
whom Isvara, out of his compassion, has given the gift of blessing others. 
Such men must take it upon themselves the task of freeing others from 
sinful actions.  
We must, to start with, learn to have disinterested love for an individual, 
that is love that is not tainted by self-interest. Eventually, this love will 
permeate us, inspire our inner being, and we will then be able to enlarge 
it to embrace all. It is the teaching of the wise that we must have such 
love for our guru, love without any consideration of the fruits thereof. We 
must not look for any reason to love our preceptor. If we constantly 
"practise" to have such love for our guru we will be the recipients of his 
blessings. Our love for him will eventually grow into love that will 
encompass all. If our love is manifested in this manner there will be 
fullness, tranquility and bliss.