The study's conclusions include robust rationales for searching artifacts within the Solar System . 2 March Scientists report substantially more precise and regionally subdivided end times of the Acheulean , finding that it persisted long after the diffusion of Middle Palaeolithic technologies in multiple continental regions and ended over 100,000 years apart. A study of data on half a million U.K. citizens shows associations between meat intake with risks of some of 25 common conditions, including ischaemic heart disease and diabetes, as well as a lower risk of iron deficiency anaemia . A study published on 31 March finds higher intake of processed meat was associated with "a higher risk of mortality and major CVD". 3 March COVID-19 pandemic : Scientists report that a much more contagious SARS-CoV-2 variant , Lineage P.1 , first detected in Japan, and more recently found in Brazil, as well as in several places in the United States, may be associated with COVID-19 disease reinfection after recovery from an earlier COVID-19 infection. Scientists demonstrate a bioinspired self-powered soft robot for deep-sea operation at the deepest part of the ocean at the Mariana Trench .

The extensive pesticide pollution risks worldwide are estimated with a new environmental model. 30 March – Scientists report evidence of subglacial sediment stored since 1966 that indicates that Greenland was ice-free and vegetated at least once within the last million years. 31 March The first high-bandwidth, wireless brain-computer interface is demonstrated, with 200 electrodes providing 48 megabits per second (Mbit/s) of neural signals.

The first 3D atomic imaging of an amorphous solid is presented, showing the 18,000 atoms in a particle of metallic glass . A report about the leading causes of death in the U.S. for 2020 is published. April April 2021 in science Science Summary video for this section 2 April: Scientists describe how the dinosaur-killing impact is an origin of neotropical rainforests like the Amazonia and replaced its species composition. 2 April – Scientists report that the event that caused the mass-extinction of non-avian dinosaurs gave rise to neotropical rainforest biomes like the Amazonia , replacing species composition and structure of local forests.

During ~6 million years of recovery to former levels of plant diversity , they evolved from widely spaced gymnosperm -dominated forests to the forests with thick canopies which block sunlight, prevalent flowering plants and high vertical layering as known today. 6 April: A study finds that carbon emissions from Bitcoin mining within China are about to exceed the total annual carbon emissions of countries like Italy (within an estimated ~3 years). 6 April A study finds that carbon emissions from Bitcoin mining in China – where a majority of the proof-of-work algorithm that generates current economic value is computed, largely fueled by nonrenewable sources – have accelerated rapidly, would soon exceed total annual emissions of European countries like Italy and Spain in 2016 and interfere with climate change mitigation commitments. COVID-19 pandemic : Scientists report the "estimated incidence of a neurological or psychiatric diagnosis in the following 6 months" after diagnosed COVID-19 infection was 33.62% with 12.84% "receiving their first such diagnosis" and higher risks being associated with COVID-19 severity. 12 April: The construction of the first (eco-)house 3D printed from clay , Tecla , is completed. 7 April Physicists report that results from muon g-2 studies involving the muon subatomic particle challenge the Standard Model and, accordingly, may require an updating of currently understood physics. NOAA reports the largest annual increase in methane emissions since records began, with a rise of 14.7 parts per billion (ppb) in 2020. A study finds that humans engaged in problem-solving tend to overlook subtractive changes, including those that are critical elements of efficient solutions. This tendency to solve by creating or adding elements is shown to intensify with higher cognitive loads in the case of individuals . Scientists report one of the two oldest known reconstructed modern human genomes to date ( ~45.000 ya ) which was found in Koněprusy Caves , Czech Republic, includes long Neanderthal segments and considered to be close to a population that later branched to present-day Europeans and Asians. Scientists confirm, with new genomic data, that initial European modern humans mixed with Neanderthals with continuity to later people in Eurasia and report that such admixture appears to have been more common than previously thought. 8 April – Scientists report rough spectral signatures of 958 molecules that may be involved in the atmospheric production or consumption of phosphine, which could prevent misassignments and, if accuracy is improved, be used in future detections and identifications of molecules on other planets such as Venus.

On 10 April, a news report informs about a launched NASA-funded mission to design and test robotic balloons for future scientific exploration of Venus .

On 19 April scientists who reported the detection of well-established or likely biosignature , monophosphine, on Venus publish a preprint recovering the detection of PH 3 in the Venusian atmosphere – which was challenged by critical studies – with the proposed SO 2 -attribution alternative being inconsistent with the available data. 9 April Neuralink reveals a male macaque with chips embedded on each side of its brain , playing a mind-controlled version of Pong . Scientists show that the brains of early Homo from Africa and Dmanisi , Western Asia "retained primitive, great ape -like organization of the frontal lobe " until ~1.5 million years ago and therefore long after Homo emerged and first dispersed from Africa – much later than previously thought (~2.5 Mya). Scientists present a tool for epigenome editing , CRISPRoff , that can heritably silence the gene expression of "most genes" and allows for reversible modifications. 12 April The magazine Scientific American announces that it will stop using the term " climate change " in articles about human-caused global warming and substitute " climate emergency " instead. News outlets report that the first prototype 3D printed house made out of clay , Tecla , has been completed.

The low-carbon housing was printed by two large arms from a mix that includes locally sourced soil and water. Such buildings could be highly cheap, well-insulated, stable, get produced rapidly, require only very little easily learnable manual labor , mitigate carbon emissions from concrete , require less energy, reduce homelessness , help enable intentional communities , and enable the provision of housing for victims of natural disasters as well as for migrants to Europe near their homes, rather than political facilitation of their influx. Scientists develop a prototype and design rules for both-sides-contacted silicon solar cells with conversion efficiencies of 26% and above, Earth's highest for this type of solar cell. 13 April Scientists report the discovery of a billion-years-old, likely holozoan , protist , Bicellum brasieri , showing that the evolution of differentiated multicellularity – such as of animal lineages – occurred at least 1 bn years ago and possibly mainly in freshwater lakes rather than the ocean.

In a preprint , an astronomer describes for the first time how one could search for quantum communication transmissions sent by ETI using existing telescope and receiver technology. He also provides arguments for why future searches of SETI should also target interstellar quantum communications. COVID-19 pandemic : Scientists report that patients who consistently met scientific guidelines of 150+ min/week exercise or similar physical activity had a smaller risk of hospitalisation and death due to COVID-19, even when considering likely risk factors such as elevated BMI . 14 April – Astronomers report that the supermassive black hole M87* , first, and to date, the only black hole to be imaged, will be further studied by many observatories from around the world and present results of simultaneous observations and their subsequent analysis. 19 April: The semi-autonomous Mars helicopter Ingenuity performs the first powered aircraft flight on another planet in human history. 29 April: The first, core module of the Chinese Tiangong space station is put into orbit. 15 April COVID-19 pandemic : The CDC , according to numerous media sources, reports that there were 5,800 COVID-19 breakthrough infections , and 74 deaths , in people fully vaccinated for the COVID-19 virus .

On 21 April, scientists report that in a cohort of 417 vaccinated persons 2 women had vaccine breakthrough infections and identify their variants' viral mutations . Scientists report the creation, for the first time, of human-monkey hybrid embryos . Biologists report that an estimated 2.5 billion adult Tyrannosaurus rex dinosaurs roamed the Earth over the 2.4 million years of their existence. A study assesses that only 3% of the planet's terrestrial surface is ecologically and faunally "intact", with low human footprint and healthy populations of native animal species. Researchers demonstrate the whitest ever paint formulation, which reflects up to 98.1% of sunlight and could be used in place of air conditioners . 16 April – Scientists report that in the case of Alaskan forests, such boreal forests recovered from wildfires by shifting to a deciduous - coniferous mix, which could offset the carbon emitted during the fires. 17 April – New Horizons reaches a distance of 50 astronomical units (AU) from the Sun, while remaining fully operational. 19 April – NASA's Ingenuity helicopter, part of the Mars 2020 mission, performs the first powered aircraft flight in history not to take place on earth.

The test location is named " Wright Brothers Field " . 20 April Perseverance performs a test of its MOXIE instrument to convert carbon dioxide into oxygen for the first time on Mars.

The Ivanti Pulse Connect Secure data breach of unauthorized access to the networks of high-value targets since at least June 2020 via CVE - The first, core module of the Chinese Tiangong space station , Tianhe , is placed in low Earth orbit. It is one of three permanent modules intended to be fully assembled in 2022 for a designed lifespan of 10–15 years, is 16.6 m in size and could host three astronaut scientists. May May 2021 in science Science Summary video for this section 1 May A study that follows up on the randomized Abecedarian Early Intervention Project shows that 5 years of cognitively and linguistically stimulating center-based care starting between 3 and 21 weeks of age can result in significant changes in midlife brain structure in males. A meta-analysis of randomized trials suggests that lowering blood pressure at normal or high-normal blood pressure ranges is effective for prevention of major cardiovascular disease . 4 May Genetic signatures linked to extreme longevity in humans are identified by researchers and include genes for efficient DNA repair . A study assesses benefits of fast action to reduce methane emissions when compared to slower climate change mitigation of this form.

On 6 May a U.N. report assesses benefits and costs of rapidly mitigating methane emissions. 5 May – Scientists report that Mediterranean diets protect against memory decline and mediotemporal atrophy such as in Alzheimer's by decreasing amyloidosis and tau-pathology . 6 May Researchers find that China's CO 2 emissions surpassed that of all OECD countries combined for the first time in 2019.

On 20 May China's CO 2 emissions are found to be 9% higher than pre-COVID-19-pandemic levels in 2021-Q1 with CO 2 emissions from fossil fuels and cement production having grown by 14.5% compared to 2020. Researchers report that bees were successfully trained to detect COVID-19 infections via samples. Researchers publish the first in-depth study of Web browser tab interfaces in over a decade and provide UI design considerations. 7 May Operation of the U.S. Colonial Pipeline is interrupted by a ransomware cyber intrusion. Researchers address a key problem of perovskite solar cells by increasing their stability and long-term reliability with a form of "molecular glue" . Two studies complement research published September 2020 by quantum-entangling two mechanical oscillators. 10 May – A pan-coronavirus mRNA nanoparticle vaccine with activity against all major SARS-CoV-2 variants is described in Nature , showing potent effect in macaques . 11 May NASA reports on the continuous measurement, for the first time, of the density of material in interstellar space by the Voyager 1 space probe and the detection of interstellar sounds of vibrations of dense interstellar plasma . A new record for the smallest single-chip system is achieved, occupying a total volume of less than 0.1 mm 3 . Scientists estimate, with higher resolution data, that land-use change has affected 17% of land in 1960–2019, or when considering multiple change events 32%, "around four times" previous estimates and investigate its drivers. News reports inform about open source oxygen concentrators of which some are developed, locally manufactured – with prices below imported products – and used during a COVID-19 pandemic wave in India . Scientists report that degrowth scenarios, where economic output either "declines" or declines in terms of contemporary economic metrics such as current GDP , have been neglected in considerations of 1.5 °C scenarios reported by the IPCC , finding that investigated degrowth scenarios "minimize many key risks for feasibility and sustainability compared to technology-driven pathways" with a core problem of such being feasibility in the context of contemporary political decision-making and rebound- and relocation-effects. 12 May Scientists report to the United States Congress of the continuing threat of COVID-19 variants and COVID-19 escape mutations .

The maximum lifespan for humans is placed at between 120 and 150, according to a longitudinal analysis of blood markers . Scientists elaborate mechanics of memory consolidation during sleep which may allow purposely enabling or strengthening this reactivation of experiences and information. 26 May Scientists develop a light-responsive days-lasting modulator of circadian rhythms of tissues via Ck1 inhibition which may be useful for chronobiology research and repair of organs that are "out of sync". 27 May – The U.S. Department of Energy launches Perlmutter , a next-generation supercomputer with four exaflops of AI performance, the world's fastest when measured by 16-bit and 32-bit mixed-precision math. 28 May Biologists report the development of a new updated classification system for cell nuclei and find a way of transmuting one cell type into that of another. China's EAST tokamak sets a new world record for superheated plasma, sustaining a temperature of 120 million °C for 101 seconds and a peak of 160 million °C for 20 seconds. 29 May – Medical scientists in Vietnam report a new, more contagious, form of the COVID-19 virus , that may be a mixture of the variants first detected in India and Britain. 30 May – The most comprehensive 3D map of the human brain – of a 1 mm 3 sized millionth of a brain and requiring 1.4 petabytes of storage space – is published. June June 2021 in science Science Summary podcast based on this section 2 June NASA selects DAVINCI+ and VERITAS , two proposed spacecraft to study the atmosphere and surface of Venus , as the next missions in its Discovery Program . A new study provides experimental evidence of asymmetric response of interfacial water to applied electric field by using a single layer graphene electrode and a novel surface-sensitive non-linear spectroscopy technique with implications for various water-related processes such as in water purification. Scientists report that COVID-19 caused substantial changes to blood cells , sometimes persisting for months after hospital discharge, with implications for COVID-19 diagnostics and treatment. 3 June – Scientists report that due to decreases in power generation efficiency of wind farms downwind of offshore wind farms , cross-national limits and potentials for optimization need to be considered in strategic decision-making . 7 June: Astronomers report detecting substantial amounts of methane , a possible sign of microbial life , on Enceladus . 7 June Astronomers report detecting substantial amounts of methane , a possible sign of microbial life , on Enceladus , a moon of the planet Saturn . Biologists report the restoration of bdelloid rotifers after being frozen for ~24,000 years in the Siberian permafrost .

The Juno spacecraft performs its only flyby of Jupiter 's moon Ganymede , the first flyby of the moon by any spacecraft in over 20 years. 8 June – Toshiba achieves quantum communications over optical fibres exceeding 600 km in length, a new world record distance. 9 June Astronomers at the Canadian Hydrogen Intensity Mapping Experiment (CHIME) report the detection of over 500 Fast Radio Bursts from outer space . Researchers from Google report a machine learning approach for microchip floorplanning that can outperform human designers. Researchers report the development of quantum nonlinear light microscopy with higher sensitivity and beyond the biological photodamage limit. 10 June: Researchers report the development of a plant proteins-based biodegradable packaging alternative to plastic molecularly similar to high-strength spider silk . 10 June A trial of mosquitoes infected with Wolbachia bacteria results in a 77% reduction of dengue fever incidence and 86% reduction of hospitalisations in Yogyakarta , Indonesia . A Venus-orbiting spacecraft, EnVision , is chosen by the European Space Agency as the fifth Medium-class mission in its Cosmic Vision plan, targeting a launch in the early 2030s. Researchers report the development of the first quantum brain scanner which uses magnetic imaging and could become a novel whole-brain scanning approach. Researchers report the development of a plant proteins-based biodegradable packaging alternative to plastic molecularly similar to high-strength spider silk . 11 June: Biologists report that DNA polymerases , long thought to only transcribe DNA into DNA or RNA, can also write RNA segments into DNA . 11 June – Biologists report that DNA polymerases , long thought to only transcribe DNA into DNA or RNA, can also write RNA segments into DNA . Polθ was found to promote RNA-templated DNA repair , with large implications for many fields of biology. 14 June – Astronomers describe the largest known spinning structures in the Universe, consisting of " tendrils " of galaxies spanning hundreds of millions of light-years in length. 15 June: Scientists complement extensive evidence that cosmetics are widely designed with formulations and disposals that are harmful to human health and ecosystems, often containing PFAS . 15 June Scientists report measurements of the rapidly increasing rate of the Earth's energy budget imbalance of global warming . Scientists complement extensive evidence that cosmetics are widely designed with formulations and disposals that are harmful to human health and ecosystems, often containing PFAS . 16 June – Astronomers report that the Great Dimming of Betelgeuse , a red supergiant star , resulted from expulsion of a substantial amount of dust from the star, and not a sign of its destruction. 17 June The first, three-person crew is sent to the Chinese space station Tiangong , which to date consists of the first and core module Tianhe . Researchers present a quantum computing demonstrator that fits inside two 19-inch racks , the world's first quality standards-meeting compact quantum computer. 18 June – The existence of a "pulse" in Earth's geological activity, occurring approximately every 27.5 million years, is reported.

The next pulse is due in about 20.5 million years. 19 June – A previously unknown comet, 2014 UN271 , is reported by astronomers at the Dark Energy Survey .

The object is estimated at between 100 and 200 km in size, potentially making it the largest comet ever discovered, and will pass as close as Saturn in January 2031. 23 June Astronomers report the determination of 1,715 stars (with likely related exoplanetary systems ) within 326 light-years (100 parsecs ) that have a favorable positional vantage point—in relation to the Earth Transit Zone (ETZ)—of detecting Earth as an exoplanet transiting the Sun since the beginnings of human civilization (about 5,000 years ago). A study finds that over half of a cohort of home-isolated young patients (16–30 y.) infected with COVID-19 still had symptoms after 6 months , including fatigue (21%). 24 June – Astronomers provide a new calculation for when the first stars formed, placing this event between 250 and 350 million years after the Big Bang . 25 June Chinese archaeologists report that a skull discovered in Harbin in 1933 by a Manchukuo National Railway bridge, known as Homo longi or "Dragon Man", belongs to a previously undiscovered species of early humans closely related to Homo sapiens dating back 146,000 years ago.

The first comprehensive analysis of a Nesher Ramla Homo individual (120–140 kya) suggests an unrecognized group of hominins may have existed and, admixed with Neanderthals , was involved in the evolution of Middle Pleistocene Homo in Europe and East Asia . Scientists report that natural immunity to COVID-19 via forms of prior infection combined with vaccination synergizes to extraordinarily large immune responses. 26 June – The first, small clinical trial of CRISPR gene editing in which a – lipid nanoparticle formulated – CRISPR (with mCas9) gene editing therapeutic is injected in vivo into bloodstream of humans concludes with promising results. 28 June Scientists publish calculations of water activity levels in Venusian clouds based on data from space probes, concluding these to be two magnitudes too low at the examined places for a natural microbiotic explanation for potentially detected phosphine on Venus . Researchers report the development of embedded biosensors for pathogenic signatures – such as of SARS-CoV-2 – that are wearable such as face masks . 29 June The first detection of a neutron star – black hole collision is reported, with a second such event following 10 days later. A study concludes that public services are associated with higher human need satisfaction and lower energy requirements while contemporary forms of economic growth are linked with the opposite. Authors find that the contemporary economic system is structurally misaligned with goals of sustainable development and that to date no nation can provide decent living standards at sustainable levels of energy and resource use. They provide analysis about factors in social provisioning and assess that improving beneficial provisioning-factors and -infrastructure would allow for sustainable forms of sufficient need satisfaction. Scientists report that solar-energy -driven production of microbial foods from direct air capture substantially outperforms agricultural cultivation of staple crops in terms of land use . 30 June The smallest and most massive white dwarf ever seen is reported.

The star, named ZTF J1901+1458 , has a diameter of just 4,300 km but is 1.35 times the mass of the Sun. A study of the Laacher See volcano uses dendrochronology and radiocarbon dating to narrow the time of the eruption to 13,006 BP with an error of just 9 years, and shows that the onset of the Younger Dryas happened synchronously over the entire North Atlantic and Central European region. July Science Summary podcast based on this section 1 July Construction begins on the Square Kilometre Array , with first light planned for 2027.

In the debate about the cognitive impacts of smartphones and digital technology a group reports that, contrary to widespread belief, scientific evidence doesn't show that these technologies harm biological cognitive abilities and that they instead only change predominant ways of cognition – such as a reduced need to remember facts or conduct mathematical calculations by pen and paper outside contemporary schools . However, some activities – like reading novels – that require long attention spans and don't feature ongoing rewarding stimulation may become more challenging in general. A study finds that ~9.4% of global deaths between 2000 and 2019 – ~5 million annually – can be attributed to extreme temperature with cold-related ones making up the larger share and decreasing and heat-related ones making up ~0.91 % and increasing. 2 July The first scientific review in the professional academic literature about global plastic pollution in general finds that the rational response to the "global threat" would be "reductions in consumption of virgin plastic materials, along with internationally coordinated strategies for waste management " – such as banning export of plastic waste unless it leads to better recycling – and describes the state of knowledge about "poorly reversible" impacts. Researchers report that a mix of microorganisms from cow stomachs could break down three types of plastics . Scientists identify GPR75 variants as alleles protective against obesity in ~640,000 sequenced exomes . 5 July Scientists report the discovery of a bone carving , one of the world's oldest works of art , made by Neanderthals about 51,000 years ago. A scientific review summarizes evidence from nutrition research for diets for atherosclerosis prevention . 7 July A preprint finds the SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant to cause a ~108 % increased – or more than twice as large – risk for hospitalization, a ~234 % increase for ICU admission and 132% for death compared to non- VOC variants. Researchers present a programmable quantum simulator that can operate with 256 qubits . 8 July – Scientists report that in the past – with little relevance to future evolution – lower temperatures were associated with larger Homo body sizes and that long-term variability in precipitation was correlated with brain size . 10 July: Scientists report the discovery of long extrachromosomal DNA structures, they call " borgs ", which appear to incorporate genes from organisms they encounter in or near archaea in mud. 10 July – Scientists report in a preprint the discovery of long extrachromosomal DNA structures, they call borgs , which appear to incorporate genes from organisms they encounter. These structures, which could turn out to be an unknown form of giant viruses or "giant linear plasmids ", co-occur with a species of archaeon which may host them, shares many of their genes, whose main chromosome is only three times larger and whose capacity for anaerobic oxidation of methane as well as other biological functions – such as production of proteins – the borgs may augment. 12 July – Scientists report in a preprint that the viral load in the first positive test of infections with the SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant was on average ~1000 times higher than with compared infections during 2020. 14 July Researchers report finding the earliest known fossil life on Earth , in the form of "putative filamentous microfossils", possibly of methanogens and/or methanotrophs , that lived about 3.42-billion-year-old in "a paleo-subseafloor hydrothermal vein system of the Barberton greenstone belt in South Africa ." Astronomers report the detection, for the first time, of an isotope in the atmosphere of an exoplanet .

In specific, the isotope Carbon-13 ( 13 C) was found in the atmosphere of a gas giant exoplanet named TYC 8998-760-1 b . Researchers used a brain-computer interface to enable a man who was paralyzed since 2003 to produce comprehensible words and sentences by decoding signals from electrodes in the speech areas of his brain. Researchers describe effects of deforestation and climate change in a transformation of Amazonia from carbon sink to carbon source (see above ) . 15 July – Scientists report that the Chicxulub impactor likely was an outer main-belt asteroid , a carbonaceous chondrite C-type asteroid . 16 July Recently thought subglacial lakes under the Southern Polar cap of Mars based on a 2018 MARSIS measurement could also be clay minerals and frozen brine. Japan achieves a new world record Internet speed over ~3.000 km: 319 Tbit/s , beating a previous record of 178 Tbit/s. A study concludes only 1.5-7 % of "regions" of the modern human genome to be specific to modern humans. These regions have neither been altered by archaic hominin DNA due to admixture nor are shared with Neanderthals or Denisovans according to their used genomic datasets. They also found two bursts of changes specific to modern human genomes which involve genes related to brain development and function . A study using whole-genome resequencing indicates that Cannabis sativa was first domesticated about 12,000 years ago in the early Neolithic period in East Asia , with the results being consistent with a single domestication origin. 18 July – Journalists and researchers report the discovery of spyware , called " Pegasus ", developed and distributed by a private company which can and has widely been used to infect iOS and Android smartphones often – partly based on 0-day exploits – without the need for any user-interaction or significant clues to the user and then be used to exfiltrate data, track user locations, capture film through its camera, and activate the microphone at any time. 22 July: DeepMind 's AlphaFold AI predicts the 3D structures of ~350,000 proteins. 19 July Researchers review 217 analyses of on-the-market products and services as well as existing alternatives to mainstream food, holidays, and furnishings, and conclude that total greenhouse gas emissions by Swedes could be lowered by to date up to 36–38 % if consumers – without a decrease in total estimated expenditure or considerations of self-interest rationale – instead were to obtain those they could assess to be more sustainable. Researchers report that higher exposure to woodland urban green spaces is associated with improved cognitive development and risks of mental problems for urban 15-16 years old adolescents . Scientists report that wild pigs are causing soil disturbance that, among other problems, globally results in annual carbon dioxide emissions equivalent to that of ~1.1 million passenger vehicles, implying that wild pig meat – unlike other meat products – has beneficial effects on the environment . 28 July: The first direct observation of light from behind a black hole . 20 July Researchers conclude that a previously rejected abiotic origin of phosphine concentrations on Venus reported in September 2020 – high rates of active plume volcanism – could be plausible. A scientific review concludes that, except for poultry, at 50 g/day unprocessed red (~9 % increase) and processed meat (~18 %) appear to be risk factors for ischemic heart disease . Scientists report that worldwide adolescent loneliness and depression increased substantially after 2012 and that loneliness in contemporary schools appears to be associated with smartphone access and Internet use . 28 July: Scientists publish an update to the World Scientists' Warning to Humanity . 22 July Astronomers using the Atacama Large Millimetre/submillimeter Array (ALMA) report the first clear detection of a moon-forming disc around an exoplanet; in this case, the Jupiter-like planet PDS 70c . DeepMind announces that its AlphaFold AI has predicted the structures of over 350,000 proteins , including 98.5% of the ~20,000 proteins in the human body.

The 3D data along with their degrees of confidence for accuracy is made freely available with a new database, doubling the previous number of protein structures in the public domain. 26 July The Galileo Project , headed by Avi Loeb , is launched.

The project seeks to gather and report scientific evidence of extraterrestrials or extraterrestrial technology – such as of UFOs/UAP with alien origins – on or near Earth via telescope technology. Scientists report to have created the first complete neuron-level-resolution 3D map of a monkey brain which they scanned within 100 hours. A study finds that the increasing probability of record week-long heat extremes occurrence depends on warming rate, rather than global warming level and provides projections. A scientific review summarizes studies about long COVID . 28 July The first direct observation of light from behind a black hole is reported, further confirming Einstein's theory of general relativity . Metallic water is prepared for the first time in an ordinary Earth lab.

In an update to the World Scientists' Warning to Humanity , scientists report that evidence of nearing or crossed tipping points of critical elements of the Earth system is accumulating, that 18 of 31 planetary vital signs have reached record values, that 1990 jurisdictions have formally recognized a state of climate emergency , that frequent and accessible updates on the emergency are needed, that COVID-19 " green recovery " has been insufficient and that root-cause system changes above politics are required. 29 July – A study indicates gut microbiomes with large amounts of microbes capable of generating unique secondary bile acids are a key element of centenarians ' longevity . 31 July – A kitchen robot – one of the first of its kind – for autonomous preparation of school meal program or delivery-service level amounts of discrete meals is demonstrated. August 9 August: The IPCC begins releasing its latest major report on climate change . 2 August – Engineers report the development of a prototype wave energy converter that is twice as efficient as similar existing experimental technologies, which could be a major step towards practical viability of tapping into the sustainable energy source. 4 August Scientists identify genetic determinants of ovarian ageing and possible effects of extending fertility in women. Scientists describe the molecular mechanisms by which insect olfactory systems are sensitive enough to recognize and discriminate a vast number of molecules with very few smell receptors. 5 August New observations of the M-type star L 98-59 and its surrounding system reveal three new bodies: a planet in the habitable zone , an ocean world , and a planet with half the mass of Venus, making it the lightest exoplanet ever to be measured using the radial velocity method . A study introduces an early-warning indicator for critical transitions of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) and finds early-warning signals in eight independent AMOC indices. A, possibly abrupt, likely irreversible collapse from the current strong to a weak mode is thought to have severe impacts on Earth system components and global climate .

The Sixth IPCC report assesses a 'medium confidence' that such a collapse won't happen by 2100. 8 August – The National Ignition Facility achieves a 70% yield, compared to the laser energy required to sustain fusion, from inertial confinement fusion energy , an 8X improvement over previous experiments in spring 2021 and a 25X increase over the yields achieved in 2018. 9 August The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) releases the first part of its Sixth Assessment Report , which summarizes the state of physical science on climate change based on over 14,000 papers and concludes that effects of human-caused climate change are now "widespread, rapid, and intensifying". Neuroscientists show that transplantation of fecal microbiota from young donor mice into aged recipient mice substantially rejuvenates the brains of the latter, complementing similar results of a 2020 study. A scientific review assesses the long-term effects of COVID-19 , including in prevalent cases of long COVID . A researcher reports that solar superstorms would cause global months-long Internet outages . She describes potential mitigation measures and exceptions – such as user-powered mesh networks , related peer-to-peer applications and new protocols – and the robustness of the current Internet infrastructure . 10 August A study based on OSIRIS-REx data concludes there to be a 1:1750 chance of an impact of asteroid (101955) Bennu by 2300, with the highest chance of impact being in 2182. A small-scale study suggests that persistent blood clotting is a cause of long COVID . 11 August – Researchers report promising results of ongoing testing and development of an engineered monoclonal antibodies based female contraception . 12 August – Scientists report that the Ayta Magbukun people in the Philippines have the highest level of Denisovan ancestry in the world and describe the related genetic history in the region. 13 August – Researchers demonstrate that probiotics can help coral reefs mitigate heat stress, indicating that such could make them more resilient to climate change and mitigate coral bleaching . 16 August Scientists conclude that personal carbon allowances could be a component of climate change mitigation . They find that the economic recovery from COVID-19 and novel digital technology capacities open a window of opportunity for first implementations of such monetary/credit feedback and decreasing default levels of emissions concessions. Researchers assess regionally-differentiated drivers and risks associated with worldwide pollinator decline , informing globally-relevant policy responses. 17 August – Scientists report of human brain organoids that could intrinsically develop eye-type sensory structures. 18 August – A study suggests that the global policy Montreal Protocol intended to control the production of ozone-depleting substances has also substantially mitigated climate change . 20 August – Medical scientists confirm that hormone irisin confers neurobiological effects of physical exercise and, when its circulating levels are increased, can be an exercise mimetic in mice which may be useful for interventions to improve cognitive function or alleviate Alzheimer's disease . 22 August – Astronomers conclude in a preprint that – controversially due to there being only few data points – there is high confidence " Planet 9 " exists, that it likely has a mass of ~6.2 Earths and is closer than thought previously and report its likely orbit. Researchers present a bioprinting method to produce steak-like cultured meat . 24 August Cerebras announces a new hardware and software platform that can support AI models of 120 trillion parameters, enabling neural networks greater than the equivalent number of human brain synapses . Researchers present a bioprinting method to produce steak-like cultured meat , composed of three types of bovine cell fibers. 26 August – Astronomers report a new class of habitable exoplanets , named hycean planets (from hydrogen and ocean ), which are described as hot, water-covered planets with a hydrogen-rich atmosphere that are possibly capable of harboring life . 27 August – Scientists report about vaccine effectiveness, pandemic severity impacts and regional prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant overall and its newly subdivided subvariants named from AY.1 onwards, the first two of which were differentiated like so – also termed "Delta Plus" – in June.

On 10 August a preprint reports a case of asymptomatic transmissions associated with high viral load among vaccinated patients infected by AY.3. 28 August – The world's northernmost island, a small patch of land measuring 60 x 30 metres, is reported by scientists off the coast of Greenland .

The name Qeqertaq Avannarleq is proposed, which means "the northernmost island" in Greenlandic . 30 August The comprehensive 2021 ESC Guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention is published.

On 27 August the 2021 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure is published. A preprint study of nationwide data of Israel's vaccination programme finds a strong effect of waning immunity from the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine after 6 months. 31 August – Scientists report that the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum ~56 million years ago was directly preceded by volcanism and that data about the event supports the existence of substantial climate-shifting tipping points in the Earth system . September 1 September NASA reports the successful sampling of a rock on Mars , named "Rochette" , after a less successful first attempt. Scientists report the development of a new solar-energy passive off-grid chemically stored on-demand cooling system for houses and/or refrigeration without electrical components which may be useful for climate change mitigation and adaptation . 2 September: The WHO adjusts its air quality guidelines after studies found that i.a. air pollution is associated with substantially increased mortality even below current WHO guideline values. 2 September Observation of a new class of supernova triggered by a black hole or neutron star crashing into the core of a companion star is reported by astronomers, based on studies of an extremely luminous source of radio waves called VT 1210+4956. Astronomers report the detection of peculiar radio waves from near the galactic center whose unidentified source could represent a new class of astronomical objects. A study finds that outdoor air pollution is associated with substantially increased mortality "even at low pollution levels below the current European and North American standards and WHO guideline values".

On 22 September, for the first time since 2005, the World Health Organization (WHO), after a systematic review of the accumulated evidence, adjusted their air quality guidelines whose adherence could save millions of lives, protect against future diseases and help meet climate goals. 3 September Bioengineers report the development of a viable CRISPR-Cas gene-editing system, "CasMINI", that is about twice as compact as the commonly used Cas9 and Cas12a . Researchers report that autoantibodies against one's own ACE2 enzymes (the major entry point receptors for COVID-19), autoimmune disease , may be a (main) cause of long COVID . Earlier studies suggested this may explain unusual pattern of organ damage by COVID-19. Scientists report that the accelerated, higher-variability warming of the Arctic can cause (more frequent) extremely cold winter weather across parts of Asia and North America – including the February 2021 North American cold wave – via a, observed and modeled, stratospheric polar vortex disruption . 6 September – Experts report that one-third of all chondrichthyes fish species are threatened with extinction, mainly caused by overfishing. 8 September Cysteamine , an antioxidant drug already approved for human use, is shown to reverse atherosclerosis , the process responsible for heart attacks and strokes, in mice. Scientists provide the first scientific assessment of the minimum amount of fossil fuels that would need to be secured from extraction per region as well as globally, to allow for a 50% probability of limiting global warming by 2050 to 1.5 °C. Scientists report that Earth is reflecting less light – a dimming of ~0.5% in reflectance over two decades may have both been co-caused by climate change as well as substantially increase global warming. 10 September Scientists report what could be the discovery of the oldest rock art , likely dating back to ~169–226,000 years ago , much older than what was previously thought to be the earliest known drawing, made ~73,000 years ago. Children likely intentionally placed a series of hands and feet in mud.

The findings could also be the earliest evidence of Hominins on the above 4000 m a.s.l. high Tibetan Plateau . 43 expert scientists publish the first scientific framework version that – via integration, review , clarifications and standardization – enables the evaluation of levels of protection of marine protected areas and can serve as a guide for improving, planning and monitoring marine protection -quality and -extents such as in efforts towards the 30%-protection-goal of the "Global Deal For Nature" and the UN's SDG 14 .

The CDC reports that despite prevalence of the Delta variant people vaccinated against COVID-19 are ~11 times less likely to die from COVID-19 (age-standardized rates of 1.6 versus 0.1 and 1.1 versus 0.1 weekly deaths per 100,000 U.S. citizens), showing vaccines' effectiveness at preventing severe disease . 22 September: Astronomers report the discovery of the Per-Tau Shell, a giant star-forming spherical shell. 24 September: Projecting effects of greenhouse gas emissions only for up to 2100 is found to be short-sighted. New models for climate change scenarios for up to 2500 are published. 13 September – A scientific review concludes that accumulating data suggests dietary restriction (DR) – mainly intermittent fasting and caloric restriction – results in many of the same beneficial changes in adult humans as in studied organisms, potentially increasing health- and lifespan . A review published on 22 September provides an overview of DR as an intervention and develops a framework for a proposed field of " precision nutrigeroscience". A study published on 29 September identifies circadian-regulated autophagy as a critical contributor to intermittent time-restricted fasting-mediated lifespan extension in Drosophila and suggests that only certain forms of and/or combinations with intermittent fasting – intervals during which no food but only e.g. water and tea/coffee are ingested – may be effective beyond the benefits of healthy body weight. 15 September Physicists report candidate dark energy particles, Sun-produced local environment-adjusted " chameleon particles ", at the dark matter detector XENON1T experiment. Scientists confirm that widespread phytoplankton blooms can be a feedback effect of wildfires.

The climate change-exacerbated 2019–2020 Australian wildfires caused oceanic deposition of wildfire aerosols, enhancing marine productivity and thereby increased oceanic carbon dioxide uptake. A study using satellite data complements these findings, constraining the amount of CO 2 emissions of the fires from November 2019 to January 2020 to around 715 million tons. Media outlets report that the world's first cultured coffee products have been created by two biotechnology companies, still awaiting regulatory approval for near-term commercialization . Such products, for which multiple companies' R&D have acquired substantial funding, may have equal or highly similar effects, composition and taste as natural products but use less water, generate less carbon emissions, require less labor and cause no deforestation . 16 September – Scientists report evidence of clothes being made 120,000 years ago based on findings in deposits in Morocco , a country in the northwestern part of Africa. 17 September Scientists report that harmful algal blooms , which have been linked to deforestation , global warming and soil erosion , are proliferating in lakes and rivers around the globe. They add that such toxic algal blooms were a prominent feature of previous mass extinction events , in particular of the End-Permian Extinction . Researchers report in a preprint the discovery of i.a. the so far closest known relative virus, with a 96.8% similarity, to SARS-CoV-2 in samples from wild horseshoe bats in northern Laos – 0.7% more similar than the virus RaTG13 discovered in China in 2013. Their findings indicate that, as of 2021, SARS-CoV-2-like viruses potentially infectious for humans circulate in bats in the Indochinese peninsula and that the pandemic virus may not originate from Wuhan . Other scientists complement these findings, reporting in a preprint published on 20 September, that they could not find any SARS-CoV-2 related viruses in any samples collected in China, including from the only two domestic caves where RaTG13 and RmYN02 were detected, indicating such viruses may currently not circulate in bats in the country. 22 September – Astronomers report the discovery of a nearby spherical structure, a ' superbubble ', on the edges of which giant molecular clouds ( Perseus and Taurus ) with regions of star formation are being formed, the Per-Tau Shell. 23 September Scientists report the discovery of human footprints in the state of New Mexico that are understood to be ~23,000 years old, around the time of the last Ice Age . Researchers report the world's first artificial synthesis of starch .

The material essential for many products and the most common carbohydrate in human diets was made from CO 2 in a cell-free process and could reduce land, pesticide and water use as well as greenhouse gas emissions while increasing food security.

After commissioning two impact assessment studies and a technology analysis study, the European Commission proposes the implementation of a standardization – for versions of USB-C – of phone charger products, which may increase device- interoperability , convergence and convenience for consumers while decreasing resource-needs, redundancy and electronic waste . 24 September: The first CRISPR-edited food, tomatoes, goes on public sale. 28 September: Researchers develop machine learning models for genome-based early detection and prioritization of high-risk potential zoonotic viruses. 24 September Researchers conclude that projecting effects – such as regional inhabitability, human migration and food insecurity – of greenhouse gas emissions only for up to 2100, as widely practiced in research and policy-making , is short-sighted and model climate change scenarios for up to 2500. Media outlets report that in Japan the first CRISPR-edited food has gone on public sale. Tomatoes were genetically modified for around five times the normal amount of possibly calming GABA . CRISPR was first applied in tomatoes in 2014. Biomedical researchers demonstrate a switchable Yamanaka factors - reprogramming -based approach for regeneration of damaged heart without tumor-formation in mice. 26 September – Researchers estimate that children born in 2020 (e.g. " Generation Alpha ") will experience 2–7 times as many extreme weather events, particularly heat waves, compared to people born in 1960 (e.g. " Baby Boomers " and " Generation X ") under current climate policy pledges over their lifetimes, raising issues of intergenerational equity . 27 September Landsat 9 , described as the world's most important satellite, is launched by NASA to study the Earth and its environment . Biochemists and space scientists report that sunlight-, acidity- and water activity-levels in Venus' clouds may have the potential to support Earth-like phototrophy such as photosynthesis . 28 September Medical scientists report that COVID-19 measures may have, apparently, caused the global extinction of the influenza B virus lineage B/Yamagata. Pathogen researchers report the development of machine learning models for genome-based early detection and prioritization of high-risk potential zoonotic viruses in animals prior to spillover to humans. They conclude that their tool could be used for virus surveillance for pandemic prevention via (i.a.) measures of "early investigation and outbreak preparedness" and would have been capable of predicting SARS-CoV-2 as a high-risk strain. October 1 October – A company conducting a preliminary small (~380 patients × 2) clinical trial launched a year ago reports that molnupiravir substantially reduced the risk of hospitalization (7.3% to 14.1%) and death (8 to 0) from COVID-19 . 4 October The 2021 Nobel Prize in Medicine is awarded to David Julius and Ardem Patapoutian for their findings about how heat, cold and touch can initiate signals in the nervous system. Metascientists report, based on a citation analysis , that "structures fostering disruptive scholarship and focusing attention on novel ideas " could be important as in a growing scientific field citation flows disproportionately consolidate to citing already well-cited papers, possibly slowing and inhibiting canonical progress . 5 October The 2021 Nobel Prize in Physics is awarded to Syukuro Manabe , Klaus Hasselmann and Giorgio Parisi for their work on climate change , resulting from the role of humanity. 6 October The 2021 Nobel Prize in Chemistry is awarded to Benjamin List and David W.C. MacMillan for their work in creating a tool to build molecules, that may be useful for studies on developing new drugs and reducing the effect of chemicals on the environment.

The WHO endorses the first malaria vaccine . A study of data traffic by popular smartphones running variants of the Android software finds substantial by-default data collection and sharing with no opt-out and implications for users' privacy , control and security. With 17 studies a consortium of MICrONS researchers concludes the first phase of a long-term project (BICCN) to generate an atlas of the entire mouse (mammalian) brain, releasing an atlas and census of cell types in the primary motor cortex . 7 October – Scientists show experimentally, with brain organoids grown from stem cells, how differences between humans and chimpanzees are also substantially caused by the 98% of DNA outside the protein-coding genes, often discarded as " junk DNA " – in particular via CRE -regulated expression of the ZNF558 gene for a transcription factor . 8 October – A new eco-friendly way of extracting and separating rare earth elements is described, using a bacteria-derived protein called lanmodulin, which binds easily to the metals. 11 October: Scientists project public health impacts of an imminent Red Sea oil spill from the FSO Safer . 11 October Scientists report more precise dating of what appear to be the earliest bipedal footprints with hominin -like characteristics, the Trachilos footprints . They are found to be ~6.05 million years old , which is around the time of Orrorin – the previously earliest theorized species of Homininae until these footprints were controversially dated in 2017, despite being discovered outside of Africa in Crete , Greece. However, these apes are not necessarily associated with human evolution.

The pilot project of the "world's first automated, driverless train " is launched in the city of Hamburg , Germany.

The conventional, standard-track, non-metro train technology could theoretically be implemented for rail transport worldwide and is reported to also be substantially more energy efficient . Scientists project public health impacts, along with some of the environmental damage, of a, simulated, imminent Red Sea oil spill from the FSO Safer . 12 October – Scientists report that for 13,115 cities extreme heat exposure of a wet bulb globe temperature above 30 °C tripled between 1983 and 2016. It increased by ~50% when the population growth in these cities is not taken into account. Urban areas are often significantly warmer than surrounding rural areas. 13 October – Astronomers report the detection of hundreds of Fast Radio Bursts (FRBs) from a single system. 15 October – The first brain metabolome atlas of the mouse brain – and of an animal (a mammal) across different life stages – is released. 16 October The spacecraft Lucy is launched by NASA, the first mission to explore the Trojan asteroids . A comprehensive study by Scientists for Future concludes that nuclear fission energy cannot meaningfully contribute to climate change mitigation as it is "too dangerous, too expensive , and too sluggishly deployable" as well as "an obstacle to achieving the social-ecological transformation". 18 October – A study shows for the first time how immunity is inherited, via epigenetic changes , in mice (mammals). 19 October – Media outlets report about novel technologies for virtual try-ons of clothes for more sustainable fashion and improved online shopping, which increased relatively due to the COVID-19 pandemic . 20 October: Scientists report that, according to their genetic analysis, today's domestic horses descend from the lower Volga-Don region , Russia. 20 October Astronomers report the first evidence of a giant impact between two exoplanets , which occurred in the HD 172555 system, based on analysis of gas and dust concentrations. Scientists report that, according to their analysis, today's domestic horses descend from the lower Volga-Don region , Russia. 273 ancient horse genomes further indicate that these populations replaced almost all local populations as they expanded rapidly throughout Eurasia from about 4200 years ago, that certain adaptations were strongly selected for by horse riding , and that equestrian material culture – including Sintashta spoke-wheeled chariots and in the case of Asia Indo-Iranian languages – spread alongside. Researchers report on the first natural protein that, using lanmodulin, complexes actinium , a natural but radioactive element used in cancer therapy , alongside yttrium-90 . 21 October Medical researchers announce that on 25 September the first successful xenotransplantation of a genetically engineered pig kidney , along with the pig thymus gland to make the immune system recognize it as part of the body, to a brain-dead human with no immediate signs of rejection , moving the practice closer to clinical trials with living humans. A study shows how COVID-19 may inflict long-term brain damage , including in cases of ' long COVID ', via endothelial cell -death disrupting the blood–brain barrier . 22 October Researchers describe and substantiate the hypothesis that a recent decrease in brain size "in the last 3,000 years" (previously thought to instead have occurred during the last ~28,000 years) has resulted from externalization of knowledge and group decision-making , partly via social systems of distributed cognition and sharing of information . A study by Villmoare et al. (2022) that reanalyzes the used data refutes their findings. It concludes that "the samples need to be specific enough to test the hypothesis across different times and populations". A study shows that mandatory face masks and social distancing can allow for relatively safe public transport during the COVID-19 pandemic , reducing infection rates by 93.5% and 98.1% in tracking-based simulations of common contemporary forms of public transport during congestion peak-hour. 25 October Astronomers report, with two studies, that ' BLC1 ' does not appear to be a technosignature or extraterrestrial radio transmission because 15 similar observations were made between 2019 and 2020 that did not originate from around Proxima Centauri – and hence are likely results of forms of local radiofrequency interference – and propose a sequence of "verification checks for narrowband technosignature signals". Another, clearer case of quantum advantage with Zuchongzhi is reported. A third study reported that Zuchongzhi 2.1 completed a task of classically simulating random circuit sampling that "is about 6 orders of magnitude more difficult than that of Sycamore ". 27 October: Researchers release a " policy sequencing" framework, in particular for policies of polycentric governance for completely halting and preventing deforestation . 27 October Astronomers propose a " Confidence of Life Detection " scale (CoLD) for reporting evidence of life beyond Earth . Astronomers report that the orbits of the detected exoplanets hosted by the star HD 3167 are unusual: two planets (HD 3167 c; HD 3167 d) revolve around the poles of the star, whereas the third planet (HD 3167 b) orbits around the equator of the star instead. Researchers release a " policy sequencing" framework, in particular for policies of polycentric governance for completely halting and preventing deforestation based on data about already implemented government-designed policies, UN- decided REDD+ initiatives and voluntary private sector initiatives of recent deforestation interventions.

The world's first urban autonomous vessels , ' Roboats ', are deployed in the canals of Amsterdam , Netherlands.

The ships developed by three institutions could carry up to five people, collect waste , deliver goods , and provide "on-demand infrastructure". A potentials-assessment study proposes hypothetical portable solar-powered atmospheric water harvesting devices which are under development, along with design criteria, finding they could help a billion people to access safe drinking water , albeit such off-the-grid generation may sometimes "undermine efforts to develop permanent piped infrastructure ". 28 October An open letter by The test results showed one "mismatch" for 2019, low inhibition values in 2020 and 152 positive samples (40%) in 2021. A preprint published on 1 November found that ~80% of samples between late November 2020 and January were positive. Such spillovers may cause reservoirs for mutating variants that spill back to humans – a possible source for variants of concern other than immunocompromised people . A review outlines research and data about COVID-19 vaccinations for children – recommended in the U.S. a day previously (for 5–11 years olds) by the CDC – including about populations-levels factors. 24 November: Launch of NASA's Double Asteroid Redirection Test (DART) 4 November Astronomers report, in the Astronomy and Astrophysics Decadal Survey for the 2020s, recommended scientific priorities and investments for the next decade to help achieve the following primary goals: search for habitable exoplanets and extraterrestrial life , study black holes and neutron stars and study the growth and evolution of galaxies . A study contributes to a disentangling of the current geopolitical and economic implications of and incentives for a swift renewable energy transition , suggesting i.a. that how fast fossil energy markets decline is primarily decided by the major energy importers China, India, Japan and the EU and that transition dynamics may reverse the free-rider problem in the case of energy sectors, specifically from strategic national standpoints which are not short-term. Researchers demonstrate a novel X-ray imaging technique , "HiP-CT", for 3D cellular-resolution scans of whole organs, using the ESRF 's EBF.

The published online Human Organ Atlas includes the lungs from a donor who died with COVID-19. 5 November – A company reports that a phase 2/3 clinical trial shows that Paxlovid can reduce COVID-19 hospitalizations of high-risk adults by 89% when given within three days after symptom onset. 8 November – Scientists prove that the brain (the insular cortex of mice/mammals) also "remembers" immune activity against past infections, with reactivation – or stimulation – of the neurons being able to cause – or shape – the inflammatory immune response . 9 November Astrophysicists report the discovery of unexplained blockage of high-energy cosmic rays entering the Galactic Center , such as a strong magnetic field. Scientists report the detection of coronaviruses closely related to SARS-CoV-2 ( 92.6% nucleotide identity ) in two bats sampled in Cambodia in 2010, complementing i.a. a study published on 17 September. 10 November – Researchers report the development of chewing gums that could mitigate COVID-19 spread .

The ingredients – CTB - ACE2 proteins grown via plants – bind to the virus. 11 November Astronomers using the Very Large Telescope report the discovery of a black hole in NGC 1850 by viewing its influence on the motion of a star in close proximity, the first direct dynamical detection of a black hole in a young massive cluster.

The first-ever simulation of baryons on a quantum computer is reported by a university. Astronomers identify a long filament of cold, dense gas connecting two of the Milky Way 's spiral arms , the first known observation of such a galactic structure in the Milky Way. Bionanoengineers report a novel therapy for spinal cord injury – an injectable gel of nanofibers that contain moving molecules that cause cellular signaling and mimic the matrix around cells in mice. A study investigates how tidal energy could be best integrated into the Orkney energy system .

On 3 November, a review assesses the potential of tidal energy in the UK's energy systems, finding that it could, according to their considerations that include economic cost-benefit analysis, deliver 34 TWh/y or 11% of its energy demand. 14 November – A time-allocation study estimates that in 2020 over 130 million hours of researchers' time were spent on peer review . 16 November A study reports the second case of a person whose immune system apparently cleared the HIV on its own without a therapy . Biochemists report one of the first supercomputational approaches for the development of new antibiotic derivatives against antimicrobial resistance . Scientists report a large extent of alternative splicing – cases of a single gene (a template) being used to create instructions ( mRNAs ) for building different proteins – in the mouse and human cortex and release the transcriptomes on a public database. A tech company reveals a new 127 quantum bit processor named ' IBM Eagle ', which is the most powerful quantum processor ever made. 26 November: The WHO reports the Omicron variant as a SARS-CoV-2 variant of concern .

The image shows one Nextstrain -based visualization of genetic distance of several such variants. 17 November A systematic review and meta-analysis finds that mask-wearing cuts the incidence of COVID-19 by 53%.

The first 256- qubit quantum computer is announced, by a startup company, founded by scientists and funded by DARPA .

The largest public dataset of whole genomes is made available through a Web platform.

The entire genomes of 200,000 UK Biobank participants, linked to anonymized medical information, are made more accessible for biomedical research than prior, less comprehensive datasets. Scientists call for the creation of space biosecurity measures and inform the creation of planetary protection policies that aim to prevent forward contamination of extraterrestrial bodies as well as backward contamination. Scientists report the development of a vaccine of mRNAs for the body build 19 proteins in tick saliva which, by enabling quick development of erythema (itchy redness) at the bite site, protects guinea pigs against Lyme disease from ticks . 19 November The first autonomous cargo ship , MV Yara Birkeland is launched in Norway.

The fully electric ship is expected to substantially reduce the need for truck journeys. A report by Brazil's INPE based on satellite data finds deforestation of the Amazon rainforest has increased by 22% over 2020 and is at its highest level (13,235 km 2 ) since 2006. 21 November – Sri Lanka announces that it will lift its import ban on pesticides and herbicides, explained by both a lack of sudden changes to widely applied practices or education systems and contemporary economics and, by extension, food security, protests and high food costs.

The effort to become the world's first completely organic farming nation was challenged by effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. 22 November Scientists detect a quantum effect that blocks atoms from scattering light. A study using data on ~30,000 patients, for the first time, indicates that aspirin may be associated with an increased (26%) risk for heart failure in persons with at least one cardiovascular risk factor. An author notes that the findings require confirmation and the link with heart failure to be clarified. 24 November – NASA launches the Double Asteroid Redirection Test (DART), the first attempt to deflect an asteroid for the purpose of learning how to protect Earth. 25 November – Researchers systematically assess impacts of climate change mitigation options on 18 constituents of well-being , finding largely beneficial effects of demand-side solutions based on inputs from 604 studies. 26 November – The WHO announces the classification of the Omicron variant as a SARS-CoV-2 variant of concern .

The variant, that became dominant (74% of samples) in South Africa in November, was detected by the NGS-SA genomic surveillance on 8 November and reported to the WHO on 24 November. It has a large number of mutations that, according to early preliminary evidence, appear to increase risk of reinfection, may increase transmissibility compared to Delta and may affect vaccines' efficacies with a key question being whether it causes less severe prognoses. 29 November – A team of scientists reports a new form of biological reproduction in xenobots that are made up of and are emersed in frog cells. December 1 December Scientists discover the footprint of an ancient hominid that lived alongside Lucy . Researchers develop an energy system model for 100% renewable energy , examining feasibility and grid stability in the U.S. 2 December A method of DNA data storage with a hundred times the density of previous techniques is announced. A stem cell -based treatment for type 1 diabetes is announced. 3 December – Scientists demonstrate that grown brain cells integrated into digital systems can carry out goal-directed tasks with performance-scores .

On 27 December, a preprint finds that "the rapid spread of the Omicron VOC primarily can be ascribed to the immune evasiveness rather than an inherent increase in the basic transmissibility". Studies also showed the variant to escape the majority of existing SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies, including of sera from vaccinated and convalescent individuals. A scientific review summarizes research and data about telemedicine . Its results indicate that, in general, outcomes of such ICT -use are as good as in-person care with health care use staying similar.

The Reproducibility Project : Cancer Biology shows that of 193 experiments from 53 top papers about cancer published between 2010 and 2012, only 50 replication experiments from 23 papers could be completed with effect sizes of that fraction being 85% smaller on average than the original findings. None of the papers had its experimental protocols fully described and 70% of experiments required asking for key reagents. 8 December Researchers report the development of face masks that glow under ultraviolet light if they contain SARS-CoV-2 when the filter is taken out and sprayed with a fluorescent dye that contains antibodies from ostrich eggs. Studies, some of which using large nationwide datasets from either Israel and Denmark, find that vaccine effectiveness of multiple common two-dosed COVID-19 vaccines is substantially lower against the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant than for other common variants including the Delta variant , and that a new (often a third) dose – a booster dose – is needed and effective, with it i.a. substantially reducing deaths from the disease compared to cohorts who received two doses. Applied behavioural scientists demonstrate a novel type of intervention studies, a "megastudy", and investigate the efficacy of 54 different designed by separate teams interventions to increase weekly gym -visits of ~60,000 members of a fitness chain, such as digital feedback in the form of redeemable points that are rewarded for returning to the gym after a missed workout. 9 December The Imaging X-ray Polarimetry Explorer , a collaboration between NASA and the Italian Space Agency , is launched by SpaceX . It is the first satellite capable of measuring the polarisation of X-rays that come from cosmic sources, such as black holes and neutron stars .

The Log4Shell security vulnerability in a Java logging framework is publicly disclosed two weeks after its discovery. Because of the ubiquity of the affected software, experts have described it as a most serious computer vulnerability.

In a high-level meeting, the importance of security maintenance of open-source software – often also carried out largely by few volunteers – to national security was clarified. A study reviews modern analytic procedures, including mass spectrometry techniques, for characterization, analysis, and identification of unknown materials and how such were applied to study materials that, according to witnesses, dropped from hovering unknown aerial objects (or UFOs) . It suggests that the full range of current capabilities of materials analysis have not been applied so far and, after reviewing a range of proposed explanations, that these materials' purposes and characteristics, such as their isotope ratios , are very odd and remain unexplained. Scientists report the development of a genome editing system, called "twin prime editing", which surpasses the original prime editing system reported in 2019 in that it allows editing large sequences of DNA, addressing the method's key drawback. An mRNA vaccine against HIV with promising results in tests with mice and primates is reported. 25 December: The James Webb Space Telescope , the long-awaited successor to the Hubble Space Telescope, is launched. 10 December – A vaccine to remove senescent cells , a key driver of the aging process, is demonstrated in mice by researchers from Japan. 13 December Astronomers report that AT 2018cow , an extreme FBOT , "could be a neutron star or black hole with a mass less than 850 solar masses," based on high-time-resolution X-ray observation studies. Scientists studying the huge Thwaites Glacier in West Antarctica report evidence that it could "shatter like a car windscreen" within five to ten years, potentially adding 65 cm to global sea levels in the long term. Observations of 16 years of timing data from the double pulsar PSR J0737−3039 are reported to be in agreement with general relativity by studying the loss of orbital energy due to gravitational waves . Researchers report the development of a database and analysis tool about perovskite solar cells which systematically integrates over 15,000 publications, in particular data about over 42,400 photovoltaic devices. 14 December – Sagittarius A* , the supermassive black hole at the centre of the Milky Way , is imaged with 20 times greater detail than ever before, by astronomers using the GRAVITY instrument on the Very Large Telescope in Chile. 15 December Scientists call for accelerated efforts in the development of broadly protective vaccines, especially a universal coronavirus vaccine that durably protects not just against all SARS-CoV-2 variants but also other coronaviruses , including already identified animal coronaviruses with pandemic potential. Researchers report that NOX4 facilitates certain beneficial adaptive responses to exercise mediated by ROS (the opposite of antioxidants ), which may be relevant to aging, diabetes, muscle-related and obesity interventions. 16 December Tokamak Energy announces a more efficient design for the cryogenic electronics in fusion reactors . This provides a 50% reduction in the power needed for the cooling of high-temperature superconducting magnets. Researchers propose buffer-zones around nature reserves where pesticide-use is drastically reduced, based on Germany-wide field study data which i.a. found insect samples in such areas to be contaminated with ~16 pesticides on average. Researchers report the development of perovskite solar cells based on self-constructed high-throughput screening of mixtures and contact layers, that – based on the stability tests – are estimated to last for over two years under normal circumstances.

In two separate studies, researchers, using vanadium dioxide , report the development of a "smart-roof coating" for radiative cooling that switches to warming during cold temperatures and "smart windows" that self-adapt to heat or cool for energy conservation in buildings . 20 December – The first known magnetosphere around an exoplanet is reported, surrounding the hot Neptune HAT-P-11b . 22 December – Japanese scientists announce a key step in the development of a quantum computer using photons , which eliminates the need for an ultracold environment used to cool existing machines. 23 December – An international team reports the use of an electron microscope to change the chirality of a carbon nanotube , creating a transistor with a length of just 2.8 nanometres. 24 December – A study suggests that, based on the strength of positive selection pressure, the molecular spectrum of mutations and known mutations for adaptation to mouse hosts, the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant may have evolved in mice and then spilled back to humans. 25 December – The James Webb Space Telescope , "NASA's most powerful and complex space telescope" and successor to the Hubble Space Telescope , launches successfully. 26 December – A third convergent graphical shell and UI framework , based on KDE /Kirigami, for the Linux operating system on phones , desktops and other devices, is released. 28 December – Scientists report that production of ammonia in the clouds of Venus, possibly by life, may make the environment less acidic and suitable for life , with the atmospheric model matching observations better than earlier ones. 30 December China's EAST tokamak sustains 120 million °C plasma for 17 minutes (1,056 seconds) for the development of fusion energy (which requires i.a. temperatures over 150 million °C). Researchers report the development of "nanoantennas" made out of DNA that attach to proteins and produce a signal via fluorescence when these perform their biological functions , in particular for distinct conformational changes , i.a. enabling monitoring their motion.

The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition . 114 (nqaa448): 1049– 1058. doi : 10.1093/ajcn/nqaa448 . ISSN 0002-9165 . PMID 33787869 . Retrieved 22 April 2021 . ^ Andreoni, Manuela; Londoño, Ernesto; Casado, Leticia (3 March 2021). "Brazil's Covid Crisis Is a Warning to the Whole World, Scientists Say – Brazil is seeing a record number of deaths, and the spread of a more contagious coronavirus variant that may cause reinfection" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 3 March 2021 . ^ Zimmer, Carl (1 March 2021). "Virus Variant in Brazil Infected Many Who Had Already Recovered From Covid-19 – The first detailed studies of the so-called P.1 variant show how it devastated a Brazilian city. Now scientists want to know what it will do elsewhere" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 3 March 2021 . ^ "Soft robot dives 10 km under the ocean" . Physics World . 23 March 2021 . Retrieved 17 April 2021 . ^ Laschi, Cecilia ; Calisti, Marcello (March 2021). "Soft robot reaches the deepest part of the ocean" . Nature . 591 (7848): 35– 36. Bibcode : 2021Natur.591...35L . doi : 10.1038/d41586-021-00489-y . PMID 33658698 . Retrieved 17 April 2021 . ^ Li, Guorui; Chen, Xiangping; Zhou, Fanghao; Liang, Yiming; Xiao, Youhua; Cao, Xunuo; Zhang, Zhen; Zhang, Mingqi; Wu, Baosheng; Yin, Shunyu; Xu, Yi; Fan, Hongbo; Chen, Zheng; Song, Wei; Yang, Wenjing; Pan, Binbin; Hou, Jiaoyi; Zou, Weifeng; He, Shunping; Yang, Xuxu; Mao, Guoyong; Jia, Zheng; Zhou, Haofei; Li, Tiefeng; Qu, Shaoxing; Xu, Zhongbin; Huang, Zhilong; Luo, Yingwu; Xie, Tao; Gu, Jason; Zhu, Shiqiang; Yang, Wei (March 2021). "Self-powered soft robot in the Mariana Trench" . Nature . 591 (7848): 66– 71. Bibcode : 2021Natur.591...66L . doi : 10.1038/s41586-020-03153-z . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 33658693 . S2CID 232114871 . Retrieved 17 April 2021 . ^ "Strange microbe "breathes" nitrates using a mitochondria-like symbiont" . Ars Technica . 17 March 2021 . Retrieved 18 April 2021 . ^ Graf, Jon S.; Schorn, Sina; Kitzinger, Katharina; Ahmerkamp, Soeren; Woehle, Christian; Huettel, Bruno; Schubert, Carsten J.; Kuypers, Marcel M. M.; Milucka, Jana (March 2021). "Anaerobic endosymbiont generates energy for ciliate host by denitrification" . Nature . 591 (7850): 445– 450. Bibcode : 2021Natur.591..445G . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03297-6 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMC 7969357 . PMID 33658719 . ^ Mandavilli, Apoorva (5 March 2021). "In Oregon, Scientists Find a Virus Variant With a Worrying Mutation – In a single sample, geneticists discovered a version of the coronavirus first identified in Britain with a mutation originally reported in South Africa" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 6 March 2021 . ^ Chen, Rita E.; et al. (4 March 2021). "Resistance of SARS-CoV-2 variants to neutralization by monoclonal and serum-derived polyclonal antibodies" . Nature Medicine . 27 (4): 717– 726. doi : 10.1038/s41591-021-01294-w . PMC 8058618 . PMID 33664494 . ^ "Welcome to 'Octavia E. Butler Landing' " . NASA . 5 March 2021 . Retrieved 5 March 2021 . ^ "Most distant quasar with powerful radio jets discovered" . ESO . 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 8 March 2021 . ^ Baker, Harry (14 March 2021). "Scientists want to store DNA of 6.7 million species on the moon, just in case – The 'lunar ark' would be hidden in lava tubes" . Live Science . Retrieved 14 March 2021 . ^ "Engineers Propose Solar-Powered Lunar Ark as 'Modern Global Insurance Policy' " . University of Arizona . 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 14 March 2021 . ^ "Global heating pushes tropical regions towards limits of human livability" .

The Guardian . 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ Zhang, Yi; Held, Isaac; Fueglistaler, Stephan (March 2021). "Projections of tropical heat stress constrained by atmospheric dynamics" . Nature Geoscience . 14 (3): 133– 137. Bibcode : 2021NatGe..14..133Z . doi : 10.1038/s41561-021-00695-3 . ISSN 1752-0908 . S2CID 232146008 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ "FAO – News Article: Food systems account for more than one third of global greenhouse gas emissions" . www.fao.org . Retrieved 22 April 2021 . ^ Crippa, M.; Solazzo, E.; Guizzardi, D.; Monforti-Ferrario, F.; Tubiello, F. N.; Leip, A. (March 2021). "Food systems are responsible for a third of global anthropogenic GHG emissions" . Nature Food . 2 (3): 198– 209. doi : 10.1038/s43016-021-00225-9 . ISSN 2662-1355 . PMID 37117443 . ^ "Self-decapitating sea slugs drop their heads and regrow whole bodies" . New Atlas . 9 March 2021 . Retrieved 22 April 2021 . ^ Mitoh, Sayaka; Yusa, Yoichi (8 March 2021). "Extreme autotomy and whole-body regeneration in photosynthetic sea slugs" . Current Biology . 31 (5): R233– R234. Bibcode : 2021CBio...31.R233M . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2021.01.014 . ISSN 0960-9822 . PMID 33689716 . ^ a b "Spacecraft in a 'warp bubble' could travel faster than light, claims physicist" . Physics World . 19 March 2021 . Retrieved 22 April 2021 . ^ "Microscopic wormholes possible in theory" . phys.org . Retrieved 22 April 2021 . ^ Blázquez-Salcedo, Jose Luis; Knoll, Christian; Radu, Eugen (9 March 2021). "Traversable Wormholes in Einstein-Dirac-Maxwell Theory" . Physical Review Letters . 126 (10) 101102. arXiv : 2010.07317 . Bibcode : 2021PhRvL.126j1102B . doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.126.101102 . hdl : 10773/32560 . PMID 33784127 . S2CID 222378921 . Retrieved 22 April 2021 . ^ Schirber, Michael (9 March 2021). "Wormholes Open for Transport" . Physics . Retrieved 22 April 2021 . ^ Maldacena, Juan ; Milekhin, Alexey (9 March 2021). "Humanly traversable wormholes" . Physical Review D . 103 (6) 066007. arXiv : 2008.06618 . Bibcode : 2021PhRvD.103f6007M . doi : 10.1103/PhysRevD.103.066007 . ^ Dunham, Will (11 March 2021). "There's light-speed travel in 'Star Wars' and 'Star Trek.' Is it possible?" . Reuters . Retrieved 22 April 2021 . ^ "Breaking the warp barrier for faster-than-light travel" . phys.org . Retrieved 22 April 2021 . ^ Lentz, Erik W (9 March 2021). "Breaking the warp barrier: hyper-fast solitons in Einstein–Maxwell-plasma theory" . Classical and Quantum Gravity . 38 (7): 075015. arXiv : 2006.07125 . Bibcode : 2021CQGra..38g5015L . doi : 10.1088/1361-6382/abe692 . ISSN 0264-9381 . S2CID 219635854 . Retrieved 22 April 2021 . ^ "Scientists use lipid nanoparticles to precisely target gene editing to the liver" . EurekAlert! . 1 March 2021 . Retrieved 2 March 2021 . ^ Qiu, Min; Glass, Zachary; Chen, Jinjin; Haas, Mary; Jin, Xin; Zhao, Xuewei; Rui, Xuehui; Ye, Zhongfeng; Li, Yamin; Zhang, Feng; Xu, Qiaobing (9 March 2021). "Lipid nanoparticle-mediated codelivery of Cas9 mRNA and single-guide RNA achieves liver-specific in vivo genome editing of Angptl3" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 118 (10) e2020401118. Bibcode : 2021PNAS..11820401Q . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2020401118 . ISSN 0027-8424 . PMC 7958351 . PMID 33649229 . ^ "Unique CRISPR gene therapy offers opioid-free chronic pain treatment" . New Atlas . 11 March 2021 . Retrieved 18 April 2021 . ^ Moreno, Ana M.; Alemán, Fernando; Catroli, Glaucilene F.; Hunt, Matthew; Hu, Michael; Dailamy, Amir; Pla, Andrew; Woller, Sarah A.; Palmer, Nathan; Parekh, Udit; McDonald, Daniella; Roberts, Amanda J.; Goodwill, Vanessa; Dryden, Ian; Hevner, Robert F.; Delay, Lauriane; Santos, Gilson Gonçalves dos; Yaksh, Tony L.; Mali, Prashant (10 March 2021). "Long-lasting analgesia via targeted in situ repression of NaV1.7 in mice" . Science Translational Medicine . 13 (584) eaay9056. doi : 10.1126/scitranslmed.aay9056 . ISSN 1946-6234 . PMC 8830379 . PMID 33692134 . S2CID 232170826 . ^ "B.1.1.7 SARS-CoV-2 variant significantly more dangerous" . News-Medical.net . 22 March 2021 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ Challen, Robert; Brooks-Pollock, Ellen; Read, Jonathan M.; Dyson, Louise; Tsaneva-Atanasova, Krasimira; Danon, Leon (10 March 2021). "Risk of mortality in patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 variant of concern 202012/1: matched cohort study" . BMJ . 372 : n579. doi : 10.1136/bmj.n579 . ISSN 1756-1833 . PMC 7941603 . PMID 33687922 . ^ Forster, Victoria. "U.K. Coronavirus Variant Is Significantly More Deadly, Says New Study" . Forbes . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ Davies, Nicholas G.; Jarvis, Christopher I.; Edmunds, W. John; Jewell, Nicholas P.; Diaz-Ordaz, Karla; Keogh, Ruth H. (15 March 2021). "Increased mortality in community-tested cases of SARS-CoV-2 lineage B.1.1.7" . Nature . 593 (7858): 270– 274. Bibcode : 2021Natur.593..270D . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03426-1 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMC 9170116 . PMID 33723411 . ^ "Leaked Documents Raise Concerns Over Integrity of mRNA Molecules in Some COVID-19 Vaccines" . SciTechDaily . 10 March 2021 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ Tinari, Serena (10 March 2021). "The EMA covid-19 data leak, and what it tells us about mRNA instability" . BMJ . 372 : n627. doi : 10.1136/bmj.n627 . ISSN 1756-1833 . PMID 33692030 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ "Light-shrinking material lets ordinary microscope see in super resolution" . UC San Diego . 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 1 June 2021 . ^ Lee, Yeon Ui; Zhao, Junxiang; Ma, Qian; Khorashad, Larousse Khosravi; Posner, Clara; Li, Guangru; Wisna, G. Bimananda M.; Burns, Zachary; Zhang, Jin; Liu, Zhaowei (10 March 2021). "Metamaterial assisted illumination nanoscopy via random super-resolution speckles" . Nature Communications . 12 (1): 1559. Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.1559L . doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-21835-8 . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 7946936 . PMID 33692354 . ^ a b Covey, Kristofer; Soper, Fiona; Pangala, Sunitha; Bernardino, Angelo; Pagliaro, Zoe; Basso, Luana; Cassol, Henrique; Fearnside, Philip; Navarrete, Diego; Novoa, Sidney; Sawakuchi, Henrique; Lovejoy, Thomas; Marengo, Jose; Peres, Carlos A.; Baillie, Jonathan; Bernasconi, Paula; Camargo, Jose; Freitas, Carolina; Hoffman, Bruce; Nardoto, Gabriela B.; Nobre, Ismael; Mayorga, Juan; Mesquita, Rita; Pavan, Silvia; Pinto, Flavia; Rocha, Flavia; de Assis Mello, Ricardo; Thuault, Alice; Bahl, Alexis Anne; Elmore, Aurora (2021). "Carbon and Beyond: The Biogeochemistry of Climate in a Rapidly Changing Amazon" . Frontiers in Forests and Global Change . 4 618401. Bibcode : 2021FrFGC...4.8401C . doi : 10.3389/ffgc.2021.618401 . ISSN 2624-893X . ^ Fox, Alex. "The Amazon Rainforest Now Emits More Greenhouse Gases Than It Absorbs" . Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ Bowler, Jacinta (16 March 2021). "Microbes Unknown to Science Discovered on The International Space Station" . ScienceAlert . Retrieved 16 March 2021 . ^ Bijlani, Swati; Singh, Nitin K.; Eedara, V. V. Ramprasad; Podile, Appa Rao; Mason, Christopher E.; Wang, Clay C. C.; Venkateswaran, Kasthuri (2021). "Methylobacterium ajmalii sp. nov., Isolated From the International Space Station" . Frontiers in Microbiology . 12 639396. doi : 10.3389/fmicb.2021.639396 . ISSN 1664-302X . PMC 8005752 . PMID 33790880 . ^ "Scientists determine the origin of extra-solar object 'Oumuamua" . Phys.org . 17 March 2021 . Retrieved 17 March 2021 . ^ Jackson, Alan P.; et al. (16 March 2021). "1I/'Oumuamua as an N2 ice fragment of an exo-Pluto surface: I. Size and Compositional Constraints" . Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets . 126 (5) e06706. arXiv : 2103.08788 . Bibcode : 2021JGRE..12606706J . doi : 10.1029/2020JE006706 . ^ Desch, S.J.; et al. (16 March 2021). "1I/'Oumuamua as an N2 ice fragment of an exo-pluto surface II: Generation of N2 ice fragments and the origin of 'Oumuamua" . Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets . 126 (5) e06807. arXiv : 2103.08812 . Bibcode : 2021JGRE..12606807D . doi : 10.1029/2020JE006807 . ^ "Having it all: Protecting biodiversity, carbon capture, and fish stocks" . Ars Technica . 24 March 2021 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ "Targeted ocean protection could offer 3X the benefits" . World Economic Forum . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ Sala, Enric; Mayorga, Juan; Bradley, Darcy; Cabral, Reniel B.; Atwood, Trisha B.; Auber, Arnaud; Cheung, William; Costello, Christopher; Ferretti, Francesco; Friedlander, Alan M.; Gaines, Steven D.; Garilao, Cristina; Goodell, Whitney; Halpern, Benjamin S.; Hinson, Audra; Kaschner, Kristin; Kesner-Reyes, Kathleen; Leprieur, Fabien; McGowan, Jennifer; Morgan, Lance E.; Mouillot, David; Palacios-Abrantes, Juliano; Possingham, Hugh P.; Rechberger, Kristin D.; Worm, Boris; Lubchenco, Jane (April 2021). "Protecting the global ocean for biodiversity, food and climate" . Nature . 592 (7854): 397– 402. Bibcode : 2021Natur.592..397S . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03371-z . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 33731930 . S2CID 232301777 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ "Europe's heat and drought crop losses tripled in 50 years: study" . phys.org . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ Brás, Teresa Armada; Seixas, Júlia; Carvalhais, Nuno; Jägermeyr, Jonas (18 March 2021). "Severity of drought and heatwave crop losses tripled over the last five decades in Europe" . Environmental Research Letters . 16 (6): 065012. Bibcode : 2021ERL....16f5012B . doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/abf004 . ISSN 1748-9326 . ^ Yirka, Bob (19 March 2021). "Data from Insight reveals size of Mars's core" . Phys.org . Retrieved 19 March 2021 . ^ "Seismic detection of the martian core by insight" (PDF) . Retrieved 29 April 2021 . ^ Pastore, Rose (19 March 2021). "Physicists Discover the Elusive Odderon, First Predicted 50 Years Ago" . Gizmodo . Retrieved 19 March 2021 . ^ Ferreira, Becky (22 March 2021). "Scientists Have Discovered a New Pattern In a Repeating Signal from Space – What astronomers found in the most precise time measurement of a fast radio burst ever captured" . Vice . Retrieved 23 March 2021 . ^ Nimmo, K.; et al. (22 March 2021). "Highly polarized microstructure from the repeating FRB 20180916B" . Nature Astronomy . 5 (6): 594. arXiv : 2010.05800 . Bibcode : 2021NatAs...5..594N . doi : 10.1038/s41550-021-01321-3 . S2CID 230524168 . Retrieved 23 March 2021 . ^ Thebault, Reis (23 March 2021). "Thanks to Trump-era covid relief bill, a UFO report may soon be public — and it'll be big, ex-official says" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 23 March 2021 . ^ Lewis, Tanya. "Slovakia Offers a Lesson in How Rapid Testing Can Fight COVID" . Scientific American . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ Pavelka, Martin; Van-Zandvoort, Kevin; Abbott, Sam; Sherratt, Katharine; Majdan, Marek; Group5, CMMID COVID-19 working; Analýz, Inštitút Zdravotných; Jarčuška, Pavol; Krajčí, Marek; Flasche, Stefan; Funk, Sebastian (23 March 2021). "The impact of population-wide rapid antigen testing on SARS-CoV-2 prevalence in Slovakia" . Science . 372 (6542): 635– 641. Bibcode : 2021Sci...372..635P . doi : 10.1126/science.abf9648 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMC 8139426 . PMID 33758017 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Overbye, Dennis (24 March 2021). "The Most Intimate Portrait Yet of a Black Hole – Two years of analyzing the polarized light from a galaxy's giant black hole has given scientists a glimpse at how quasars might arise" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 25 March 2021 . ^ "Scientists discover how humans develop larger brains than other apes" . phys.org . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ Benito-Kwiecinski, Silvia; Giandomenico, Stefano L.; Sutcliffe, Magdalena; Riis, Erlend S.; Freire-Pritchett, Paula; Kelava, Iva; Wunderlich, Stephanie; Martin, Ulrich; Wray, Gregory A.; McDole, Kate; Lancaster, Madeline A. (15 April 2021). "An early cell shape transition drives evolutionary expansion of the human forebrain" . Cell . 184 (8): 2084–2102.e19. doi : 10.1016/j.cell.2021.02.050 . ISSN 0092-8674 . PMC 8054913 . PMID 33765444 . ^ "NASA Analysis: Earth Is Safe From Asteroid Apophis for 100-Plus Years" . NASA . 26 March 2021 . Retrieved 26 March 2021 . ^ "Tokamak Energy on track to be the first private company to achieve 100 million degree plasma temperature, paving the way to commercial fusion energy" . Tokamak Energy . 29 March 2021 . Retrieved 30 March 2021 . ^ "Average westerner's eating habits lead to loss of four trees every year" .

The Guardian . 29 March 2021 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ Hoang, Nguyen Tien; Kanemoto, Keiichiro (29 March 2021). "Mapping the deforestation footprint of nations reveals growing threat to tropical forests" . Nature Ecology & Evolution . 5 (6): 845– 853. Bibcode : 2021NatEE...5..845H . doi : 10.1038/s41559-021-01417-z . ISSN 2397-334X . PMID 33782576 . S2CID 232420306 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ Penney, Veronica (1 April 2021). "If You Build It, They Will Bike: Pop-Up Lanes Increased Cycling During Pandemic" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ Kraus, Sebastian; Koch, Nicolas (13 April 2021). "Provisional COVID-19 infrastructure induces large, rapid increases in cycling" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 118 (15) e2024399118. Bibcode : 2021PNAS..11824399K . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2024399118 . ISSN 0027-8424 . PMC 8053938 . PMID 33782111 . ^ "A third of global farmland at 'high' pesticide pollution risk" . phys.org . Retrieved 22 April 2021 . ^ Tang, Fiona H. M.; Lenzen, Manfred; McBratney, Alexander; Maggi, Federico (April 2021). "Risk of pesticide pollution at the global scale" . Nature Geoscience . 14 (4): 206– 210. Bibcode : 2021NatGe..14..206T . doi : 10.1038/s41561-021-00712-5 . ISSN 1752-0908 . ^ "Scientists stunned to discover plants beneath mile-deep Greenland ice" . phys.org . Retrieved 22 April 2021 . ^ Christ, Andrew J.; Bierman, Paul R.; Schaefer, Joerg M.; Dahl-Jensen, Dorthe; Steffensen, Jørgen P.; Corbett, Lee B.; Peteet, Dorothy M.; Thomas, Elizabeth K.; Steig, Eric J.; Rittenour, Tammy M.; Tison, Jean-Louis; Blard, Pierre-Henri; Perdrial, Nicolas; Dethier, David P.; Lini, Andrea; Hidy, Alan J.; Caffee, Marc W.; Southon, John (30 March 2021). "A multimillion-year-old record of Greenland vegetation and glacial history preserved in sediment beneath 1.4 km of ice at Camp Century" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 118 (13) e2021442118. Bibcode : 2021PNAS..11821442C . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2021442118 . ISSN 0027-8424 . PMC 8020747 . PMID 33723012 . ^ "Researchers demonstrate first human use of high-bandwidth wireless brain-computer interface" . Brown University . 31 March 2021 . Retrieved 1 April 2021 . ^ Simeral, John D; Hosman, Thomas; Saab, Jad; Flesher, Sharlene N; Vilela, Marco; Franco, Brian; Kelemen, Jessica; Brandman, David M; Ciancibello, John G; Rezaii, Paymon G; Eskandar, Emad N.; Rosler, David M; Shenoy, Krishna V; Henderson, Jaimie M.; Nurmikko, Arto V; Hochberg, Leigh R. (2021). "Home Use of a Percutaneous Wireless Intracortical Brain-Computer Interface by Individuals With Tetraplegia" . IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering . 68 (7): 2313– 2325. Bibcode : 2021ITBE...68.2313S . doi : 10.1109/TBME.2021.3069119 . ISSN 1558-2531 . PMC 8218873 . PMID 33784612 . ^ "Century-old problem solved with first-ever 3D atomic imaging of an amorphous solid" . University of California . 31 March 2021 . Retrieved 9 April 2021 . ^ Yang, Yao; Zhou, Jihan; Zhu, Fan; Yuan, Yakun; Chang, Dillan J.; Kim, Dennis S.; Pham, Minh; Rana, Arjun; Tian, Xuezeng; Yao, Yonggang; Osher, Stanley J.; Schmid, Andreas K.; Hu, Liangbing; Ercius, Peter; Miao, Jianwei (April 2021). "Determining the three-dimensional atomic structure of an amorphous solid" . Nature . 592 (7852): 60– 64. arXiv : 2004.02266 . Bibcode : 2021Natur.592...60Y . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03354-0 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 33790443 . S2CID 214802235 . Retrieved 29 April 2021 . ^ Rabin, Roni Caryn (31 March 2021). "Covid-19 was the third leading cause of death in the U.S. in 2020, federal health researchers report" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ Ahmad, Farida B.; Anderson, Robert N. (31 March 2021). "The Leading Causes of Death in the US for 2020" . JAMA . 325 (18): 1829– 1830. doi : 10.1001/jama.2021.5469 . ISSN 0098-7484 . PMC 8145781 . PMID 33787821 . ^ a b Carvalho, Mónica R.; Jaramillo, Carlos; Parra, Felipe de la; Caballero-Rodríguez, Dayenari; Herrera, Fabiany; Wing, Scott; Turner, Benjamin L.; D'Apolito, Carlos; Romero-Báez, Millerlandy; Narváez, Paula; Martínez, Camila; Gutierrez, Mauricio; Labandeira, Conrad; Bayona, German; Rueda, Milton; Paez-Reyes, Manuel; Cárdenas, Dairon; Duque, Álvaro; Crowley, James L.; Santos, Carlos; Silvestro, Daniele (2 April 2021). "Extinction at the end-Cretaceous and the origin of modern Neotropical rainforests" . Science . 372 (6537): 63– 68. Bibcode : 2021Sci...372...63C . doi : 10.1126/science.abf1969 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 33795451 . S2CID 232484243 . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ "Dinosaur-killing asteroid strike gave rise to Amazon rainforest" . BBC News . 2 April 2021 . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ a b Jiang, Shangrong; Li, Yuze; Lu, Quanying; Hong, Yongmiao; Guan, Dabo; Xiong, Yu; Wang, Shouyang (6 April 2021). "Policy assessments for the carbon emission flows and sustainability of Bitcoin blockchain operation in China" . Nature Communications . 12 (1): 1938. Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.1938J . doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-22256-3 . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 8024295 . PMID 33824331 . ^ Lu, Donna. "Bitcoin mining emissions in China will hit 130 million tonnes by 2024" . New Scientist . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ "The early results are in: Two-thirds of Australia's severe COVID sufferers are in for the long haul" . www.abc.net.au . 9 May 2021 . Retrieved 10 May 2021 . ^ Taquet, Maxime; Geddes, John R.; Husain, Masud; Luciano, Sierra; Harrison, Paul J. (1 May 2021). "6-month neurological and psychiatric outcomes in 236 379 survivors of COVID-19: a retrospective cohort study using electronic health records" .

The Lancet Psychiatry . 8 (5): 416– 427. doi : 10.1016/S2215-0366(21)00084-5 . ISSN 2215-0366 . PMC 8023694 . PMID 33836148 . ^ a b Palumbo, Jacqui. "Is this 3D-printed home made of clay the future of housing?" . CNN . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ Overbye, Dennis (7 April 2021). "Finding From Particle Research Could Break Known Laws of Physics - It's not the next Higgs boson — yet. But the best explanation, physicists say, involves forms of matter and energy not currently known to science" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 7 April 2021 . ^ Marc, Tracy (7 April 2021). "First results from Fermilab's Muon g-2 experiment strengthen evidence of new physics" . Fermilab . Retrieved 7 April 2021 . ^ B. Abi, T. Albahri (7 April 2021). "Measurement of the Positive Muon Anomalous Magnetic Moment to 0.46 ppm". Physical Review Letters . 126 (14) 141801. arXiv : 2104.03281 . Bibcode : 2021PhRvL.126n1801A . doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.126.141801 . PMID 33891447 . S2CID 233169085 . ^ "Despite pandemic shutdowns, carbon dioxide and methane surged in 2020" . NOAA . 7 April 2021 . Retrieved 10 April 2021 . ^ "People add by default even when subtraction makes more sense" . Science News . 7 April 2021 . Retrieved 10 May 2021 . ^ Adams, Gabrielle S.; Converse, Benjamin A.; Hales, Andrew H.; Klotz, Leidy E. (April 2021). "People systematically overlook subtractive changes" . Nature . 592 (7853): 258– 261. Bibcode : 2021Natur.592..258A . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03380-y . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 33828317 . S2CID 233185662 . Retrieved 10 May 2021 . ^ "Neanderthal ancestry identifies oldest modern human genome" . phys.org . Retrieved 10 May 2021 . ^ Prüfer, Kay; Posth, Cosimo; Yu, He; Stoessel, Alexander; Spyrou, Maria A.; Deviese, Thibaut; Mattonai, Marco; Ribechini, Erika; Higham, Thomas; Velemínský, Petr; Brůžek, Jaroslav; Krause, Johannes (7 April 2021). "A genome sequence from a modern human skull over 45,000 years old from Zlatý kůň in Czechia" . Nature Ecology & Evolution . 5 (6): 820– 825. Bibcode : 2021NatEE...5..820P . doi : 10.1038/s41559-021-01443-x . ISSN 2397-334X . PMC 8175239 . PMID 33828249 . ^ "Europe's oldest known humans mated with Neandertals surprisingly often" . Science News . 7 April 2021 . Retrieved 10 May 2021 . ^ Hajdinjak, Mateja; Mafessoni, Fabrizio; Skov, Laurits; Vernot, Benjamin; Hübner, Alexander; Fu, Qiaomei; Essel, Elena; Nagel, Sarah; Nickel, Birgit; Richter, Julia; Moldovan, Oana Teodora; Constantin, Silviu; Endarova, Elena; Zahariev, Nikolay; Spasov, Rosen; Welker, Frido; Smith, Geoff M.; Sinet-Mathiot, Virginie; Paskulin, Lindsey; Fewlass, Helen; Talamo, Sahra; Rezek, Zeljko; Sirakova, Svoboda; Sirakov, Nikolay; McPherron, Shannon P.; Tsanova, Tsenka; Hublin, Jean-Jacques; Peter, Benjamin M.; Meyer, Matthias; Skoglund, Pontus; Kelso, Janet; Pääbo, Svante (April 2021). "Initial Upper Palaeolithic humans in Europe had recent Neanderthal ancestry" . Nature . 592 (7853): 253– 257. Bibcode : 2021Natur.592..253H . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03335-3 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMC 8026394 . PMID 33828320 . ^ "Life on Venus? Scientists Shed More Light on Molecules Linked to Life on Other Planets" . SciTechDaily . 13 April 2021 . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ Zapata Trujillo, Juan C.; Syme, Anna-Maree; Rowell, Keiran N.; Burns, Brendan P.; Clark, Ebubekir S.; Gorman, Maire N.; Jacob, Lorrie S. D.; Kapodistrias, Panayioti; Kedziora, David J.; Lempriere, Felix A. R.; Medcraft, Chris; O'Sullivan, Jensen; Robertson, Evan G.; Soares, Georgia G.; Steller, Luke; Teece, Bronwyn L.; Tremblay, Chenoa D.; Sousa-Silva, Clara; McKemmish, Laura K. (2021). "Computational Infrared Spectroscopy of 958 Phosphorus-Bearing Molecules" . Frontiers in Astronomy and Space Sciences . 8 639068: 43. arXiv : 2105.08897 . Bibcode : 2021FrASS...8...43Z . doi : 10.3389/fspas.2021.639068 . ISSN 2296-987X . ^ "Robotic Balloons To Explore Venus? This Northwest Company Is Working On It" . Northwest Public Broadcasting . 11 April 2021 . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ Greaves, Jane S.; Richards, Anita M. S.; Bains, William; Rimmer, Paul B.; Clements, David L.; Seager, Sara; Petkowski, Janusz J.; Sousa-Silva, Clara; Ranjan, Sukrit; Fraser, Helen J. (19 April 2021). "Reply to: No evidence of phosphine in the atmosphere of Venus from independent analyses". Nature Astronomy . 5 (7): 636– 639. arXiv : 2104.09285 . Bibcode : 2021NatAs...5..636G . doi : 10.1038/s41550-021-01424-x . S2CID 233296859 . ^ "Elon Musk's Neuralink 'shows monkey playing Pong with mind' " . BBC . 9 April 2021 . Retrieved 10 April 2021 . ^ "Monkey MindPong" . Neuralink . 9 April 2021 . Retrieved 10 April 2021 . ^ "Elon Musk startup shows monkey with brain chip implants playing video game" .

The Guardian . 9 April 2021 . Retrieved 10 April 2021 . ^ "Ancient humans may have had apelike brains even after leaving Africa" . Science News . 8 April 2021 . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ Aubourg, Lucie 04/08/21 AT 5:32 (8 April 2021). "Mind Blown: Modern Brains Evolved Much More Recently Than Thought" . International Business Times . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ León, Marcia S. Ponce de; Bienvenu, Thibault; Marom, Assaf; Engel, Silvano; Tafforeau, Paul; Warren, José Luis Alatorre; Lordkipanidze, David; Kurniawan, Iwan; Murti, Delta Bayu; Suriyanto, Rusyad Adi; Koesbardiati, Toetik; Zollikofer, Christoph P. E. (9 April 2021). "The primitive brain of early Homo" . Science . 372 (6538): 165– 171. Bibcode : 2021Sci...372..165P . doi : 10.1126/science.aaz0032 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 33833119 . S2CID 233185978 . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ "New, reversible CRISPR method can control gene expression while leaving underlying DNA sequence unchanged" . phys.org . Retrieved 10 May 2021 . ^ Nuñez, James K.; Chen, Jin; Pommier, Greg C.; Cogan, J. Zachery; Replogle, Joseph M.; Adriaens, Carmen; Ramadoss, Gokul N.; Shi, Quanming; Hung, King L.; Samelson, Avi J.; Pogson, Angela N.; Kim, James Y. S.; Chung, Amanda; Leonetti, Manuel D.; Chang, Howard Y.; Kampmann, Martin; Bernstein, Bradley E.; Hovestadt, Volker; Gilbert, Luke A.; Weissman, Jonathan S. (29 April 2021). "Genome-wide programmable transcriptional memory by CRISPR-based epigenome editing" . Cell . 184 (9): 2503–2519.e17. doi : 10.1016/j.cell.2021.03.025 . ISSN 0092-8674 . PMC 8376083 . PMID 33838111 . S2CID 233195037 . ^ "Citing grave threat, Scientific American replaces 'climate change' with 'climate emergency' " . Yahoo! . 12 April 2021 . Retrieved 13 April 2021 . ^ "First 3D printed clay house completed" . WLNS 6 News . 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ "Mario Cucinella Architects and WASP creates 3D-printed sustainable housing prototype" . Dezeen . 23 April 2021 . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ "Both-sides-contacted solar cell sets new world record of 26 percent efficiency" . techxplore.com . Retrieved 10 May 2021 . ^ Richter, Armin; Müller, Ralph; Benick, Jan; Feldmann, Frank; Steinhauser, Bernd; Reichel, Christian; Fell, Andreas; Bivour, Martin; Hermle, Martin; Glunz, Stefan W. (April 2021). "Design rules for high-efficiency both-sides-contacted silicon solar cells with balanced charge carrier transport and recombination losses" . Nature Energy . 6 (4): 429– 438. Bibcode : 2021NatEn...6..429R . doi : 10.1038/s41560-021-00805-w . ISSN 2058-7546 . S2CID 234847037 . Retrieved 10 May 2021 . ^ "Billion-year-old fossil reveals missing link in the evolution of animals" . phys.org . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ "Scientists Find Billion-Year-Old Fossil Life, 'Something Which Has Never Been Described Before' " . Gizmodo . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ Strother, Paul K.; Brasier, Martin D.; Wacey, David; Timpe, Leslie; Saunders, Martin; Wellman, Charles H. (13 April 2021). "A possible billion-year-old holozoan with differentiated multicellularity" . Current Biology . 31 (12): 2658–2665.e2. Bibcode : 2021CBio...31E2658S . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2021.03.051 . ISSN 0960-9822 . PMID 33852871 . ^ "We could detect alien civilizations through their interstellar quantum communication" . phys.org . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ Hippke, Michael (13 April 2021). "Searching for interstellar quantum communications" .

The Astronomical Journal . 162 (1): 1. arXiv : 2104.06446 . Bibcode : 2021AJ....162....1H . doi : 10.3847/1538-3881/abf7b7 . S2CID 233231350 . ^ Reynolds, Gretchen (14 April 2021). "Regular Exercise May Help Protect Against Severe Covid" .

The Astrophysical Journal Letters . 911 (1): L11. arXiv : 2104.06855 . Bibcode : 2021ApJ...911L..11E . doi : 10.3847/2041-8213/abef71 . ISSN 2041-8205 . ^ a b Johnson, Alana; Hautaluoma, Grey; Agle, DC; Northon, Karen (19 April 2021). "Release 21-039 - NASA's Ingenuity Mars Helicopter Succeeds in Historic First Flight" . NASA . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ a b Gamillo, Elizabeth. "China Launches First Module of New Space Station Into Orbit" . Smithsonian . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ Gilbert, Ben; Brubeck, Hilary (15 April 2021). "CDC: 5,800 COVID-19 infections, 74 deaths in fully vaccinated people" . Business Insider . Retrieved 18 April 2021 . ^ Krieger, Lisa M. (15 April 2021). "COVID vaccines: The mystery of "breakthrough" infections after shots - CDC reports 5,800 COVID-19 infections, 74 deaths in fully vaccinated people" .

The Mercury News . Retrieved 18 April 2021 . ^ Tinker, Ben; Fox, Maggie. "So far, 5,800 fully vaccinated people have caught Covid anyway, CDC says" . CNN . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ Howard, Jacqueline. "Only 2 'breakthrough' infections among hundreds of fully vaccinated people, new study finds" . CNN . Retrieved 11 May 2021 . ^ Hacisuleyman, Ezgi; Hale, Caryn; Saito, Yuhki; Blachere, Nathalie E.; Bergh, Marissa; Conlon, Erin G.; Schaefer-Babajew, Dennis J.; DaSilva, Justin; Muecksch, Frauke; Gaebler, Christian; Lifton, Richard; Nussenzweig, Michel C.; Hatziioannou, Theodora; Bieniasz, Paul D.; Darnell, Robert B. (21 April 2021). "Vaccine Breakthrough Infections with SARS-CoV-2 Variants" . New England Journal of Medicine . 384 (23): 2212– 2218. doi : 10.1056/NEJMoa2105000 . PMC 8117968 . PMID 33882219 . ^ Subbaraman, Nidhi (15 April 2021). "First monkey–human embryos reignite debate over hybrid animals - The chimaeras lived up to 19 days — but some scientists question the need for such research" . Nature . Retrieved 16 April 2021 . ^ Wells, Sarah (15 April 2021). "Researchers Generate Human-Monkey Chimeric Embryos - Don't worry, there are not human-monkey babies — yet" . Inverse . Retrieved 16 April 2021 . ^ Tan, Tao (15 April 2021). "Chimeric contribution of human extended pluripotent stem cells to monkey embryos ex vivo" . Cell . 184 (8): 2020–2032.e14. doi : 10.1016/j.cell.2021.03.020 . PMID 33861963 . S2CID 233247345 . ^ Chang, Kenneth (15 April 2021). "How Many Tyrannosaurus Rexes Ever Lived on Earth? Here's a New Clue. - An estimation of the iconic predator's total population can teach us things about dinosaurs that fossils cannot" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 17 April 2021 . ^ Marshall, Charles R. (16 April 2021). "Absolute abundance and preservation rate of Tyrannosaurus rex" . Science . 372 (6539): 284– 287. Bibcode : 2021Sci...372..284M . doi : 10.1126/science.abc8300 . PMID 33859033 . ^ Carrington, Damian (15 April 2021). "Just 3% of world's ecosystems remain intact, study suggests" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 16 April 2021 . ^ Plumptre, Andrew J.; Baisero, Daniele (2021). "Where Might We Find Ecologically Intact Communities?" . Frontiers in Forests and Global Change . 4 626635. Bibcode : 2021FrFGC...4.6635P . doi : 10.3389/ffgc.2021.626635 . hdl : 10261/242175 . ^ "Whitest-ever paint could help cool heating Earth, study shows" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ "Mars Helicopter Tech Demo" . Watch Online . NASA . 18 April 2021 . Retrieved 18 April 2021 . ^ "NASA's Perseverance Mars Rover Extracts First Oxygen From Red Planet" . NASA . 21 April 2021 . Retrieved 21 April 2021 . ^ Goodin, Dan (30 April 2021). "More US agencies potentially hacked, this time with Pulse Secure exploits" . Ars Technica . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ "Check Your Pulse: Suspected APT Actors Leverage Authentication Bypass Techniques and Pulse Secure Zero-Day" . FireEye . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ "A potential model for a real physical warp drive" . phys.org . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ Bobrick, Alexey; Martire, Gianni (20 April 2021). "Introducing physical warp drives" . Classical and Quantum Gravity . 38 (10): 105009. arXiv : 2102.06824 . Bibcode : 2021CQGra..38j5009B . doi : 10.1088/1361-6382/abdf6e . ISSN 0264-9381 . S2CID 231924903 . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ "Malaria vaccine hailed as potential breakthrough" . BBC News . 23 April 2021 . Retrieved 23 April 2021 . ^ Datoo, Mehreen S.; Natama, Magloire H.; Somé, Athanase; Traoré, Ousmane; Rouamba, Toussaint; Bellamy, Duncan; Yameogo, Prisca; Valia, Daniel; Tegneri, Moubarak; Ouedraogo, Florence; Soma, Rachidatou; Sawadogo, Seydou; Sorgho, Faizatou; Derra, Karim; Rouamba, Eli; Orindi, Benedict; Lopez, Fernando Ramos; Flaxman, Amy; Cappuccini, Federica; Kailath, Reshma; Elias, Sean; Mukhopadhyay, Ekta; Noe, Andres; Cairns, Matthew; Lawrie, Alison; Roberts, Rachel; Valéa, Innocent; Sorgho, Hermann; Williams, Nicola; Glenn, Gregory; Fries, Louis; Reimer, Jenny; Ewer, Katie J.; Shaligram, Umesh; Hill, Adrian V. S.; Tinto, Halidou (5 May 2021). "Efficacy of a low-dose candidate malaria vaccine, R21 in adjuvant Matrix-M, with seasonal administration to children in Burkina Faso: a randomised controlled trial" .

The Lancet . 397 (10287): 1809– 1818. doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00943-0 . ISSN 0140-6736 . PMC 8121760 . PMID 33964223 . ^ Famiglietti, James S.; Ferguson, Grant (23 April 2021). "The hidden crisis beneath our feet" . Science . 372 (6540): 344– 345. Bibcode : 2021Sci...372..344F . doi : 10.1126/science.abh2867 . PMID 33888627 . S2CID 233353241 . Retrieved 10 May 2021 . ^ "The largest assessment of global groundwater wells finds many are at risk of drying up" . ScienceDaily . Retrieved 10 May 2021 . ^ Jasechko, Scott; Perrone, Debra (23 April 2021). "Global groundwater wells at risk of running dry" . Science . 372 (6540): 418– 421. Bibcode : 2021Sci...372..418J . doi : 10.1126/science.abc2755 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 33888642 . S2CID 233353207 . Retrieved 10 May 2021 . ^ " 'Hellish' new planet discovered" . University of Southern Queensland . 27 April 2021. Archived from the original on 29 April 2021 . Retrieved 27 April 2021 . ^ Brett Christopher Addison; et al. (25 April 2021). "TOI-1431b/MASCARA-5b: An Ultra-hot Jupiter Orbiting One of the Hottest & Brightest Known Exoplanet Host Stars". Posters from the Tess Science Conference Ii (Tsc2 : 64. arXiv : 2104.12078 . Bibcode : 2021tsc2.confE..64A . doi : 10.5281/zenodo.5126266 . S2CID 233393912 . ^ "Scientists say active early learning shapes the adult brain" . medicalxpress.com . Retrieved 14 June 2021 . ^ Farah, Martha J.; Sternberg, Saul; Nichols, Thomas A.; Duda, Jeffrey T.; Lohrenz, Terry; Luo, Yi; Sonnier, Libbie; Ramey, Sharon L.; Montague, Read; Ramey, Craig T. (1 May 2021). "Randomized Manipulation of Early Cognitive Experience Impacts Adult Brain Structure". Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience . 33 (6): 1197– 1209. doi : 10.1162/jocn_a_01709 . hdl : 10919/103551 . PMID 34428792 . S2CID 233638156 . ^ "Many more people could benefit from blood pressure-lowering medication" . medicalxpress.com . Retrieved 14 June 2021 . ^ "expert reaction to study looking at pharmacological blood pressure lowering for primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease across different levels of blood pressure | Science Media Centre" . Retrieved 14 June 2021 . ^ Rahimi, Kazem; Bidel, Zeinab; Nazarzadeh, Milad; et al. (1 May 2021). "Pharmacological blood pressure lowering for primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease across different levels of blood pressure: an individual participant-level data meta-analysis" .

The Lancet . 397 (10285): 1625– 1636. doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00590-0 . ISSN 0140-6736 . PMC 8102467 . PMID 33933205 . ^ "Do people aged 105 and over live longer because they have more efficient DNA repair?" . eLife . 4 May 2021 . Retrieved 7 May 2021 . ^ Garagnani, Paolo; et al. (4 May 2021). "Whole-genome sequencing analysis of semi-supercentenarians" . eLife . 10 e57849. doi : 10.7554/eLife.57849 . ISSN 2050-084X . PMC 8096429 . PMID 33941312 . ^ Ocko, Ilissa B; Sun, Tianyi; Shindell, Drew; Oppenheimer, Michael; Hristov, Alexander N; Pacala, Stephen W; Mauzerall, Denise L; Xu, Yangyang; Hamburg, Steven P (1 May 2021). "Acting rapidly to deploy readily available methane mitigation measures by sector can immediately slow global warming" . Environmental Research Letters . 16 (5): 054042. Bibcode : 2021ERL....16e4042O . doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/abf9c8 . ISSN 1748-9326 . S2CID 234859914 . ^ "Global Methane Assessment: Benefits and Costs of Mitigating Methane Emissions" . 5 May 2021 . Retrieved 13 June 2021 . ^ "Study: Mediterranean diet may help ward off dementia" . UPI . Retrieved 13 June 2021 . ^ Ballarini, Tommaso; Lent, Debora Melo van; Brunner, Julia; et al. (5 May 2021). "Mediterranean Diet, Alzheimer Disease Biomarkers and Brain Atrophy in Old Age" . Neurology . 96 (24): e2920– e2932. doi : 10.1212/WNL.0000000000012067 . ISSN 0028-3878 . PMC 8253566 . PMID 33952652 . S2CID 233869025 . ^ a b "China's CO2 emissions 9pc higher than pre-pandemic in 2021 Q1: research" . South China Morning Post . 21 May 2021 . Retrieved 13 June 2021 . ^ Schonhardt, Sara. "China's Greenhouse Gas Emissions Exceed Those of All Other Developed Countries Combined" . Scientific American . Retrieved 13 June 2021 . ^ "China's Greenhouse Gas Emissions Exceeded the Developed World for the First Time in 2019" . Rhodium Group . Retrieved 14 June 2021 . ^ He, Laura. "China's construction boom is sending CO2 emissions through the roof" . CNN . Retrieved 13 June 2021 . ^ "Analysis: China's carbon emissions grow at fastest rate for more than a decade" . Carbon Brief . 20 May 2021 . Retrieved 19 June 2021 . ^ "Bees in the Netherlands trained to detect COVID-19 infections" . Reuters . 6 May 2021 . Retrieved 13 June 2021 . ^ "Overcoming tab overload: Researchers develop tool to better manage browser tabs" . techxplore.com . Retrieved 14 June 2021 . ^ Chang, Joseph Chee; Hahn, Nathan; Kim, Yongsung; Coupland, Julina; Breneisen, Bradley; Kim, Hannah S; Hwong, John; Kittur, Aniket (6 May 2021). "When the Tab Comes Due:Challenges in the Cost Structure of Browser Tab Usage". Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery. pp. 1– 15. doi : 10.1145/3411764.3445585 . ISBN 978-1-4503-8096-6 . S2CID 233987809 . ^ "Cyber attack shuts down U.S. fuel pipeline 'jugular,' Biden briefed" . Reuters . 8 May 2021 . Retrieved 13 June 2021 . ^ " "Molecular glue" strengthens the weak point in perovskite solar cells" . New Atlas . 10 May 2021 . Retrieved 13 June 2021 . ^ Dai, Zhenghong; Yadavalli, Srinivas K.; Chen, Min; Abbaspourtamijani, Ali; Qi, Yue; Padture, Nitin P. (7 May 2021). "Interfacial toughening with self-assembled monolayers enhances perovskite solar cell reliability" . Science . 372 (6542): 618– 622. Bibcode : 2021Sci...372..618D . doi : 10.1126/science.abf5602 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 33958474 . S2CID 233872843 . Retrieved 13 June 2021 . ^ "Vibrating drumheads are entangled quantum mechanically" . Physics World . 17 May 2021 . Retrieved 14 June 2021 . ^ Lépinay, Laure Mercier de; Ockeloen-Korppi, Caspar F.; Woolley, Matthew J.; Sillanpää, Mika A. (7 May 2021). "Quantum mechanics–free subsystem with mechanical oscillators" . Science . 372 (6542): 625– 629. arXiv : 2009.12902 . Bibcode : 2021Sci...372..625M . doi : 10.1126/science.abf5389 . hdl : 1959.4/unsworks_79394 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 33958476 . S2CID 221971015 . Retrieved 14 June 2021 . ^ Kotler, Shlomi; Peterson, Gabriel A.; Shojaee, Ezad; Lecocq, Florent; Cicak, Katarina; Kwiatkowski, Alex; Geller, Shawn; Glancy, Scott; Knill, Emanuel; Simmonds, Raymond W.; Aumentado, José; Teufel, John D. (7 May 2021). "Direct observation of deterministic macroscopic entanglement" . Science . 372 (6542): 622– 625. arXiv : 2004.05515 . Bibcode : 2021Sci...372..622K . doi : 10.1126/science.abf2998 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 33958475 . S2CID 233872863 . Retrieved 14 June 2021 . ^ "New vaccine blocks COVID-19 and variants, plus other coronaviruses" . medicalxpress.com . Retrieved 19 June 2021 . ^ "Neutralizing antibody vaccine for pandemic and pre-emergent coronaviruses" . Nature . 10 May 2021 . Retrieved 10 May 2021 . ^ Hatfield, Miles; Cofield, Calla (11 May 2021). "As NASA's Voyager 1 Surveys Interstellar Space, Its Density Measurements Are Making Waves" . NASA . Retrieved 11 May 2021 . ^ Ocker, Stella Koch; Cordes, James M.; Chatterjee, Shami; Gurnett, Donald A.; Kurth, William S.; Spangler, Steven R. (10 May 2021). "Persistent plasma waves in interstellar space detected by Voyager 1" . Nature Astronomy . 5 (8): 761– 765. arXiv : 2105.04000 . Bibcode : 2021NatAs...5..761O . doi : 10.1038/s41550-021-01363-7 . ISSN 2397-3366 . PMC 8740711 . PMID 35005245 . S2CID 234342819 . ^ "Tiny, Wireless, Injectable Chips Use Ultrasound to Monitor Body Processes" . Columbia University . 12 May 2021 . Retrieved 14 May 2021 . ^ Shi, Chen; Andino-Pavlovsky, Victoria; Lee, Stephen A.; Costa, Tiago; Elloian, Jeffrey; Konofagou, Elisa E.; Shepard, Kenneth L. (1 May 2021). "Application of a sub–0.1-mm3 implantable mote for in vivo real-time wireless temperature sensing" . Science Advances . 7 (19) eabf6312. Bibcode : 2021SciA....7.6312S . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.abf6312 . ISSN 2375-2548 . PMC 8104878 . PMID 33962948 . ^ "Nearly a fifth of Earth's surface transformed since 1960" . phys.org . Retrieved 13 June 2021 . ^ Winkler, Karina; Fuchs, Richard; Rounsevell, Mark; Herold, Martin (11 May 2021). "Global land use changes are four times greater than previously estimated" . Nature Communications . 12 (1): 2501. Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.2501W . doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-22702-2 . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 8113269 . PMID 33976120 . ^ "Indian tech cos join hands to make open source based oxygen concentrators; to be priced at around Rs 40k" .

The Economic Times . Retrieved 13 June 2021 . ^ "Open Source Oxygen Concentrators Reference Designs | Three Examples" . Electronics For You . 11 May 2021 . Retrieved 13 June 2021 . ^ "1.5°C degrowth scenarios suggest need for new mitigation pathways" . phys.org . Retrieved 14 June 2021 . ^ "1.5°C degrowth scenarios suggest need for new mitigation pathways: Research" . Scienmag: Latest Science and Health News . Retrieved 14 June 2021 . ^ Keyßer, Lorenz T.; Lenzen, Manfred (11 May 2021). "1.5 °C degrowth scenarios suggest the need for new mitigation pathways" . Nature Communications . 12 (1): 2676. Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.2676K . doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-22884-9 . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 8113441 . PMID 33976156 . ^ Zimmer, Carl (12 May 2021). "Scientists warn U.S. lawmakers about the continued threat of coronavirus variants" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 13 May 2021 . ^ "Brain Computer Interface Turns Mental Handwriting into Text on Screen" . Howard Hughes Medical Institute . 12 May 2021 . Retrieved 14 May 2021 . ^ Willett, Francis R.; Avansino, Donald T.; Hochberg, Leigh R.; Henderson, Jaimie M.; Shenoy, Krishna V. (May 2021). "High-performance brain-to-text communication via handwriting" . Nature . 593 (7858): 249– 254. Bibcode : 2021Natur.593..249W . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03506-2 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMC 8163299 . PMID 33981047 . ^ "China lands its Zhurong rover on Mars" . BBC News . 15 May 2021. Archived from the original on 15 May 2021 . Retrieved 15 May 2021 . China has successfully landed a spacecraft on Mars, state media announced early on Saturday.

The six-wheeled Zhurong robot was targeting Utopia Planitia... ^ "Archivists Want to Make Sci-Hub 'Un-Censorable' " . Gizmodo . Retrieved 13 June 2021 . ^ "Mothers can influence offspring's height, lifespan and disease risk through mitochondria" . phys.org . Retrieved 14 June 2021 . ^ Yonova-Doing, Ekaterina; Calabrese, Claudia; Gomez-Duran, Aurora; Schon, Katherine; Wei, Wei; Karthikeyan, Savita; Chinnery, Patrick F.; Howson, Joanna M. M. (17 May 2021). "An atlas of mitochondrial DNA genotype–phenotype associations in the UK Biobank" . Nature Genetics . 53 (7): 982– 993. doi : 10.1038/s41588-021-00868-1 . ISSN 1546-1718 . PMC 7611844 . PMID 34002094 . S2CID 234768578 . ^ "Google showed off its next-generation AI by talking to Pluto and a paper airplane" .

The Verge . 18 May 2021 . Retrieved 21 May 2021 . ^ "LaMDA: our breakthrough conversation technology" . Google . 18 May 2021 . Retrieved 21 May 2021 . ^ Musunuru, Kiran; et al. (May 2021). "In vivo CRISPR base editing of PCSK9 durably lowers cholesterol in primates" . Nature . 593 (7859): 429– 434. Bibcode : 2021Natur.593..429M . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03534-y . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 34012082 . S2CID 234790939 . Retrieved 13 June 2021 . ^ "Cornell researchers see atoms at record resolution" . Cornell University . 20 May 2021 . Retrieved 22 May 2021 . ^ Chen, Zhen; Jiang, Yi; Shao, Yu-Tsun; Holtz, Megan E.; Odstrčil, Michal; Guizar-Sicairos, Manuel; Hanke, Isabelle; Ganschow, Steffen; Schlom, Darrell G.; Muller, David A. (21 May 2021). "Electron ptychography achieves atomic-resolution limits set by lattice vibrations" . Science . 372 (6544): 826– 831. arXiv : 2101.00465 . Bibcode : 2021Sci...372..826C . doi : 10.1126/science.abg2533 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 34016774 . S2CID 230435950 . Retrieved 15 June 2021 . ^ "A new replication crisis: Research that is less likely to be true is cited more" . phys.org . Retrieved 14 June 2021 . ^ "Research findings that are probably wrong cited far more than robust ones, study finds" .

The Guardian . 21 May 2021 . Retrieved 14 June 2021 . ^ Serra-Garcia, Marta; Gneezy, Uri (1 May 2021). "Nonreplicable publications are cited more than replicable ones" . Science Advances . 7 (21) eabd1705. Bibcode : 2021SciA....7.1705S . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.abd1705 . ISSN 2375-2548 . PMC 8139580 . PMID 34020944 . ^ Zimmer, Carl (24 May 2021). "Scientists Partially Restored a Blind Man's Sight With New Gene Therapy" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 13 June 2021 . ^ Sahel, José-Alain; Boulanger-Scemama, Elise; Pagot, Chloé; Arleo, Angelo; Galluppi, Francesco; Martel, Joseph N.; Esposti, Simona Degli; Delaux, Alexandre; de Saint Aubert, Jean-Baptiste; de Montleau, Caroline; Gutman, Emmanuel; Audo, Isabelle; Duebel, Jens; Picaud, Serge; Dalkara, Deniz; Blouin, Laure; Taiel, Magali; Roska, Botond (24 May 2021). "Partial recovery of visual function in a blind patient after optogenetic therapy" . Nature Medicine . 27 (7): 1223– 1229. doi : 10.1038/s41591-021-01351-4 . ISSN 1546-170X . PMID 34031601 . S2CID 235203605 . ^ "Engineering matter at the atomic level" . Riken . 25 May 2021 . Retrieved 25 May 2021 . ^ Otsuka, Keigo; Fang, Nan; Yamashita, Daiki; Taniguchi, Takashi; Watanabe, Kenji; Kato, Yuichiro K. (25 May 2021). "Deterministic transfer of optical-quality carbon nanotubes for atomically defined technology" . Nature Communications . 12 (1): 3138. arXiv : 2012.01741 . Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.3138O . doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-23413-4 . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 8149403 . PMID 34035306 . ^ "Humans Could Live up to 150 Years, New Research Suggests" . Scientific American . 25 May 2021 . Retrieved 28 May 2021 . ^ "Gero scientists found a way to break the limit of human longevity" . EurekAlert! . 25 May 2021 . Retrieved 28 May 2021 . ^ "Longitudinal analysis of blood markers reveals progressive loss of resilience and predicts human lifespan limit" . Nature . 25 May 2021 . Retrieved 28 May 2021 . ^ "Press (re)play to remember: How the brain strengthens memories during sleep" . medicalxpress.com . Retrieved 14 June 2021 . ^ Schreiner, Thomas; Petzka, Marit; Staudigl, Tobias; Staresina, Bernhard P. (25 May 2021). "Endogenous memory reactivation during sleep in humans is clocked by slow oscillation-spindle complexes" . Nature Communications . 12 (1): 3112. Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.3112S . doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-23520-2 . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 8149676 . PMID 34035303 . ^ "Resetting the biological clock by flipping a switch" . phys.org . Retrieved 14 June 2021 . ^ Kolarski, Dušan; Miró-Vinyals, Carla; Sugiyama, Akiko; Srivastava, Ashutosh; Ono, Daisuke; Nagai, Yoshiko; Iida, Mui; Itami, Kenichiro; Tama, Florence; Szymanski, Wiktor; Hirota, Tsuyoshi; Feringa, Ben L. (26 May 2021). "Reversible modulation of circadian time with chronophotopharmacology" . Nature Communications . 12 (1): 3164. Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.3164K . doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-23301-x . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 8155176 . PMID 34039965 . ^ "US Energy Department launches the Perlmutter AI supercomputer" . ZDNet . 27 May 2021 . Retrieved 28 May 2021 . ^ Baylor College of Medicine (29 May 2021). "Biologists Construct a "Periodic Table" for Cell Nuclei – And Discover Something Strange, Baffling and Unexpected" . ScioTechDaily . Retrieved 29 May 2021 . ^ Hoencamp, Claire; et al. (28 May 2021). "3D genomics across the tree of life reveals condensin II as a determinant of architecture type" . Science . 372 (6545): 984– 989. doi : 10.1126/science.abe2218 . PMC 8172041 . PMID 34045355 . ^ "Chinese 'Artificial Sun' experimental fusion reactor sets world record for superheated plasma time" .

The Nation . 29 May 2021 . Retrieved 31 May 2021 . ^ Peltier, Elain; Kolata, Gina (29 May 2021). "Vietnam says it has detected a more contagious hybrid of variants first seen in India and Britain" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 29 May 2021 . ^ "Google and Harvard map brain connections in unprecedented detail" . New Atlas . 2 June 2021 . Retrieved 13 June 2021 . ^ Shapson-Coe, Alexander; Januszewski, Michał; Berger, Daniel R.; Pope, Art; Wu, Yuelong; Blakely, Tim; Schalek, Richard L.; Li, Peter; Wang, Shuohong; Maitin-Shepard, Jeremy; Karlupia, Neha; Dorkenwald, Sven; Sjostedt, Evelina; Leavitt, Laramie; Lee, Dongil; Bailey, Luke; Fitzmaurice, Angerica; Kar, Rohin; Field, Benjamin; Wu, Hank; Wagner-Carena, Julian; Aley, David; Lau, Joanna; Lin, Zudi; Wei, Donglai; Pfister, Hanspeter; Peleg, Adi; Jain, Viren; Lichtman, Jeff W. (30 May 2021). "A connectomic study of a petascale fragment of human cerebral cortex". bioRxiv 10.1101/2021.05.29.446289 . ^ "NASA Selects 2 Missions to Study 'Lost Habitable' World of Venus" . NASA . 2 June 2021 . Retrieved 3 June 2021 . ^ "What we know about water may have just changed dramatically" . Scienmag: Latest Science and Health News . 4 June 2021 . Retrieved 15 June 2021 . ^ "What We Know About Water May Have Just Changed Dramatically" . USC Viterbi | School of Engineering . Retrieved 15 June 2021 . ^ Montenegro, Angelo; Dutta, Chayan; Mammetkuliev, Muhammet; Shi, Haotian; Hou, Bingya; Bhattacharyya, Dhritiman; Zhao, Bofan; Cronin, Stephen B.; Benderskii, Alexander V. (2 June 2021). "Asymmetric response of interfacial water to applied electric fields". Nature . 594 (7861): 62– 65. Bibcode : 2021Natur.594...62M . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03504-4 . ISSN 0028-0836 . PMID 34079138 . S2CID 235321882 . ^ "How a COVID-19 infection changes blood cells in the long run" . phys.org . Retrieved 10 July 2021 . ^ Kubánková, Markéta; Hohberger, Bettina; Hoffmanns, Jakob; Fürst, Julia; Herrmann, Martin; Guck, Jochen; Kräter, Martin (2 June 2021). "Physical phenotype of blood cells is altered in COVID-19" . Biophysical Journal . 120 (14): 2838– 2847. Bibcode : 2021BpJ...120.2838K . doi : 10.1016/j.bpj.2021.05.025 . ISSN 0006-3495 . PMC 8169220 . PMID 34087216 . ^ "Are wind farms slowing each other down?" . techxplore.com . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Akhtar, Naveed; Geyer, Beate; Rockel, Burkhardt; Sommer, Philipp S.; Schrum, Corinna (3 June 2021). "Accelerating deployment of offshore wind energy alter wind climate and reduce future power generation potentials" . Scientific Reports . 11 (1): 11826. Bibcode : 2021NatSR..1111826A . doi : 10.1038/s41598-021-91283-3 . ISSN 2045-2322 . PMC 8175401 . PMID 34083704 . ^ a b Affholder, Antonin; et al. (7 June 2021). "Bayesian analysis of Enceladus's plume data to assess methanogenesis" . Nature Astronomy . 5 (8): 805– 814. Bibcode : 2021NatAs...5..805A . doi : 10.1038/s41550-021-01372-6 . S2CID 236220377 . Retrieved 7 July 2021 . ^ Gooden, Tai (7 July 2021). "One of Saturn's Moons Has Shown Possible Signs of Microbial Life" . Yahoo News . Retrieved 7 July 2021 . ^ Renault, Marion (7 June 2021). "This Tiny Creature Survived 24,000 Years Frozen in Siberian Permafrost – The microscopic animals were frozen when woolly mammoths still roamed the planet, but were restored as though no time had passed" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 7 June 2021 . ^ Shmakova, Lyubov; Malavin, Stas; Iakovenko, Nataliia; Vishnivetskaya, Tatiana; Shain, Daniel; Plewka, Michael; Rivkina, Elizaveta (7 June 2021). "A living bdelloid rotifer from 24,000-year-old Arctic permafrost" . Current Biology . 31 (11): R712– R713. Bibcode : 2021CBio...31.R712S . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2021.04.077 . ISSN 0960-9822 . PMID 34102116 . S2CID 235365588 . ^ "Hello, Ganymede! NASA's Juno makes closest visit to Jupiter's largest moon since 2000" . Space.com . 7 June 2021. ^ "See the First Images NASA's Juno Took as It Sailed by Ganymede" . Jet Propulsion Laboratory . ^ "Toshiba Announces Breakthrough in Long Distance Quantum Communication" . Toshiba . 12 June 2021 . Retrieved 12 June 2021 . ^ "Researchers create an 'un-hackable' quantum network over hundreds of kilometers using optical fiber" . ZDNet . 8 June 2021 . Retrieved 12 June 2021 . ^ Pittaluga, Mirko; Minder, Mariella; Lucamarini, Marco; Sanzaro, Mirko; Woodward, Robert I.; Li, Ming-Jun; Yuan, Zhiliang; Shields, Andrew J. (July 2021). "600-km repeater-like quantum communications with dual-band stabilization" . Nature Photonics . 15 (7): 530– 535. arXiv : 2012.15099 . Bibcode : 2021NaPho..15..530P . doi : 10.1038/s41566-021-00811-0 . ISSN 1749-4893 . S2CID 229923162 . Retrieved 19 July 2021 . ^ Chu, Jennifer (9 June 2021). "CHIME Telescope Detects More Than 500 Mysterious Fast Radio Bursts From Outer Space" . SciTechDaily . Retrieved 10 June 2021 . ^ Pleunis, Ziggy; Good, Deborah C.; Kaspi, Victoria M.; Mckinven, Ryan; Ransom, Scott M.; Scholz, Paul; Bandura, Kevin; Bhardwaj, Mohit; Boyle, P. J.; Brar, Charanjot; Cassanelli, Tomas; Chawla, Pragya; Fonseca, Emmanuel; Gaensler, B. M.; Josephy, Alexander; Kaczmarek, Jane F.; Leung, Calvin; Lin, Hsiu-Hsien; Masui, Kiyoshi W.; Mena-Parra, Juan; Michilli, Daniele; Ng, Cherry; Patel, Chitrang; Rafiei-Ravandi, Masoud; Rahman, Mubdi; Sanghavi, Pranav; Shin, Kaitlyn; Smith, Kendrick M.; Stairs, Ingrid H.; Tendulkar, Shriharsh P. (8 June 2021). "Fast Radio Burst Morphology in the First CHIME/FRB Catalog" .

The Astrophysical Journal . 923 (1): 1. arXiv : 2106.04356 . Bibcode : 2021ApJ...923....1P . doi : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac33ac . S2CID 235368275 . ^ "AI system outperforms humans in designing floorplans for microchips" . Nature . 9 June 2021 . Retrieved 10 June 2021 . ^ Mirhoseini, Azalia; Goldie, Anna; Yazgan, Mustafa; Jiang, Joe Wenjie; Songhori, Ebrahim; Wang, Shen; Lee, Young-Joon; Johnson, Eric; Pathak, Omkar; Nazi, Azade; Pak, Jiwoo; Tong, Andy; Srinivasa, Kavya; Hang, William; Tuncer, Emre; Le, Quoc V.; Laudon, James; Ho, Richard; Carpenter, Roger; Dean, Jeff (June 2021). "A graph placement methodology for fast chip design" . Nature . 594 (7862): 207– 212. Bibcode : 2021Natur.594..207M . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03544-w . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 34108699 . S2CID 235395490 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ "Quantum microscope uses entanglement to reveal biological structures" . Physics World . 15 June 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Casacio, Catxere A.; Madsen, Lars S.; Terrasson, Alex; Waleed, Muhammad; Barnscheidt, Kai; Hage, Boris; Taylor, Michael A.; Bowen, Warwick P. (June 2021). "Quantum-enhanced nonlinear microscopy" . Nature . 594 (7862): 201– 206. Bibcode : 2021Natur.594..201C . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03528-w . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 34108694 . S2CID 235395587 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ a b Kamada, Ayaka; Rodriguez-Garcia, Marc; Ruggeri, Francesco Simone; Shen, Yi; Levin, Aviad; Knowles, Tuomas P. J. (10 June 2021). "Controlled self-assembly of plant proteins into high-performance multifunctional nanostructured films" . Nature Communications . 12 (1): 3529. Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.3529K . doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-23813-6 . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 8192951 . PMID 34112802 . ^ " 'Miraculous' mosquito hack cuts dengue by 77%" . BBC News . 10 June 2021 . Retrieved 10 June 2021 . ^ "Randomised Controlled Trial" . World Mosquito Program . 10 June 2021 . Retrieved 10 June 2021 . ^ Utarini, Adi; Indriani, Citra; Ahmad, Riris A.; Tantowijoyo, Warsito; Arguni, Eggi; Ansari, M. Ridwan; Supriyati, Endah; Wardana, D. Satria; Meitika, Yeti; Ernesia, Inggrid; Nurhayati, Indah; Prabowo, Equatori; Andari, Bekti; Green, Benjamin R.; Hodgson, Lauren; Cutcher, Zoe; Rancès, Edwige; Ryan, Peter A.; O'Neill, Scott L.; Dufault, Suzanne M.; Tanamas, Stephanie K.; Jewell, Nicholas P.; Anders, Katherine L.; Simmons, Cameron P. (10 June 2021). "Efficacy of Wolbachia-Infected Mosquito Deployments for the Control of Dengue" . New England Journal of Medicine . 384 (23): 2177– 2186. doi : 10.1056/NEJMoa2030243 . ISSN 0028-4793 . PMC 8103655 . PMID 34107180 . ^ "Europe will join the space party at Planet Venus" . BBC News . 10 June 2021 . Retrieved 10 June 2021 . ^ "Researchers build first modular quantum brain sensor, record signal" . phys.org . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Coussens, Thomas; Abel, Christopher; Gialopsou, Aikaterini; Bason, Mark G.; James, Tim M.; Orucevic, Fedja; Kruger, Peter (2024). "A modular optically pumped magnetometer system". Quantum Science and Technology . 9 (3): 035045. arXiv : 2106.05877 . Bibcode : 2024QS&T....9c5045C . doi : 10.1088/2058-9565/ad4e60 . ^ " 'Vegan spider silk' provides sustainable alternative to single-use plastics" . phys.org . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ a b Chandramouly, Gurushankar; Zhao, Jiemin; McDevitt, Shane; Rusanov, Timur; Hoang, Trung; Borisonnik, Nikita; Treddinick, Taylor; Lopezcolorado, Felicia Wednesday; Kent, Tatiana; Siddique, Labiba A.; Mallon, Joseph; Huhn, Jacklyn; Shoda, Zainab; Kashkina, Ekaterina; Brambati, Alessandra; Stark, Jeremy M.; Chen, Xiaojiang S.; Pomerantz, Richard T. (11 June 2021). "Polθ reverse transcribes RNA and promotes RNA-templated DNA repair" . Science Advances . 7 (24) eabf1771. Bibcode : 2021SciA....7.1771C . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.abf1771 . ISSN 2375-2548 . PMC 8195485 . PMID 34117057 . ^ "New discovery shows human cells can write RNA sequences into DNA" . phys.org . Retrieved 10 July 2021 . ^ "Discovery of the largest rotation in the universe" . Leibniz Institute for Astrophysics Potsdam . 14 June 2021 . Retrieved 20 June 2021 . ^ "Astronomers discover largest known spinning structures in the universe" . Space.com . 14 June 2021 . Retrieved 20 June 2021 . ^ Wang, Peng; Libeskind, Noam I.; Tempel, Elmo; Kang, Xi; Guo, Quan (14 June 2021). "Possible observational evidence for cosmic filament spin" . Nature Astronomy . 5 (8): 839– 845. arXiv : 2106.05989 . Bibcode : 2021NatAs...5..839W . doi : 10.1038/s41550-021-01380-6 . ISSN 2397-3366 . S2CID 235417561 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ a b Whitehead, Heather D.; Venier, Marta; Wu, Yan; Eastman, Emi; Urbanik, Shannon; Diamond, Miriam L.; Shalin, Anna; Schwartz-Narbonne, Heather; Bruton, Thomas A.; Blum, Arlene; Wang, Zhanyun; Green, Megan; Tighe, Meghanne; Wilkinson, John T.; McGuinness, Sean; Peaslee, Graham F. (15 June 2021). "Fluorinated Compounds in North American Cosmetics" . Environmental Science & Technology Letters . 8 (7): 538– 544. Bibcode : 2021EnSTL...8..538W . doi : 10.1021/acs.estlett.1c00240 . hdl : 20.500.11850/495857 . S2CID 236284279 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Ramirez, Rachel. "The amount of heat the Earth traps has doubled in just 15 years, study shows" . CNN . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Loeb, Norman G.; Johnson, Gregory C.; Thorsen, Tyler J.; Lyman, John M.; Rose, Fred G.; Kato, Seiji (2021). "Satellite and Ocean Data Reveal Marked Increase in Earth's Heating Rate" . Geophysical Research Letters . 48 (13) e2021GL093047. Bibcode : 2021GeoRL..4893047L . doi : 10.1029/2021GL093047 . ISSN 1944-8007 . ^ "Many cosmetics contain hidden, potentially dangerous 'forever chemicals' " . Science News . 15 June 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Overbye, Dennis (17 June 2021). "Betelgeuse Merely Burped, Astronomers Conclude - The dramatic dimming of the red supergiant in 2019 was the product of dust, not a prelude to destruction, a new study has found" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 17 June 2021 . ^ Montargès, M.; et al. (16 June 2021). "A dusty veil shading Betelgeuse during its Great Dimming" . Nature . 594 (7863): 365– 368. arXiv : 2201.10551 . Bibcode : 2021Natur.594..365M . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03546-8 . PMID 34135524 . S2CID 235460928 . Retrieved 17 June 2021 . ^ "China set to send first crew to new space station Thursday" . ABC News . Retrieved 10 July 2021 . ^ "Quantum computer is smallest ever, claim physicists" . Physics World . 7 July 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Pogorelov, I.; Feldker, T.; Marciniak, Ch. D.; Postler, L.; Jacob, G.; Krieglsteiner, O.; Podlesnic, V.; Meth, M.; Negnevitsky, V.; Stadler, M.; Höfer, B.; Wächter, C.; Lakhmanskiy, K.; Blatt, R.; Schindler, P.; Monz, T. (17 June 2021). "Compact Ion-Trap Quantum Computing Demonstrator" . PRX Quantum . 2 (2) 020343. arXiv : 2101.11390 . Bibcode : 2021PRXQ....2b0343P . doi : 10.1103/PRXQuantum.2.020343 . S2CID 231719119 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ "The Earth has a pulse -- a 27.5-million-year cycle of geological activity" . Science Daily . 18 June 2021 . Retrieved 21 June 2021 . ^ Rampino, Michael R.; Caldeira, Ken; Zhu, Yuhong (1 November 2021). "A pulse of the Earth: A 27.5-Myr underlying cycle in coordinated geological events over the last 260 Myr" . Geoscience Frontiers . 12 (6) 101245. Bibcode : 2021GeoFr..1201245R . doi : 10.1016/j.gsf.2021.101245 . ISSN 1674-9871 . ^ "The Largest Comet Ever Found Is Making Its Move Into a Sky Near You" .

The New York Times . 28 June 2021 . Retrieved 1 July 2021 . ^ "Alien astronomers on hundreds of nearby exoplanets could have spotted life on Earth" . Physics World . 23 June 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Kaltenegger, L.; Faherty, J.K. (23 June 2021). "Past, present and future stars that can see Earth as a transiting exoplanet" . Nature . 594 (7864): 505– 507. arXiv : 2107.07936 . Bibcode : 2021Natur.594..505K . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03596-y . ISSN 0028-0836 . PMID 34163055 . S2CID 235626242 . Retrieved 23 June 2021 . ^ "Half of young adults with COVID-19 have persistent symptoms after 6 months" . medicalxpress.com . Retrieved 10 July 2021 . ^ Blomberg, Bjørn; Mohn, Kristin Greve-Isdahl; Brokstad, Karl Albert; Zhou, Fan; Linchausen, Dagrun Waag; Hansen, Bent-Are; Lartey, Sarah; Onyango, Therese Bredholt; Kuwelker, Kanika; Sævik, Marianne; Bartsch, Hauke; Tøndel, Camilla; Kittang, Bård Reiakvam; Cox, Rebecca Jane; Langeland, Nina (23 June 2021). "Long COVID in a prospective cohort of home-isolated patients" . Nature Medicine . 27 (9): 1607– 1613. doi : 10.1038/s41591-021-01433-3 . ISSN 1546-170X . PMC 8440190 . PMID 34163090 . S2CID 235625772 . ^ "Astronomers work out when the first stars shone" . BBC News . 24 June 2021 . Retrieved 24 June 2021 . ^ Laporte, N; Meyer, R A; Ellis, R S; Robertson, B E; Chisholm, J; Roberts-Borsani, G W (24 June 2021). "Probing cosmic dawn: Ages and star formation histories of candidate z ≥ 9 galaxies" . Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society . 505 (3): 3336– 3346. arXiv : 2104.08168 . doi : 10.1093/mnras/stab1239 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ " 'Dragon Man' skull may be new species, shaking up human family tree" . Science . 25 June 2021. Archived from the original on 25 June 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Ni, X.; Ji, Q.; Wu, W.; et al. (2021). "Massive cranium from Harbin in northeastern China establishes a new Middle Pleistocene human lineage" .

The Innovation . 2 (3) 100130. Bibcode : 2021Innov...200130N . doi : 10.1016/j.xinn.2021.100130 . PMC 8454562 . PMID 34557770 . ^ "These ancient humans looked a little like Neanderthals and nothing like us. So who were they?" . www.abc.net.au . 24 June 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Hershkovitz, Israel; May, Hila; Sarig, Rachel; Pokhojaev, Ariel; Grimaud-Hervé, Dominique; Bruner, Emiliano; Fornai, Cinzia; Quam, Rolf; Arsuaga, Juan Luis; Krenn, Viktoria A.; Martinón-Torres, Maria; Castro, José María Bermúdez de; Martín-Francés, Laura; Slon, Viviane; Albessard-Ball, Lou; Vialet, Amélie; Schüler, Tim; Manzi, Giorgio; Profico, Antonio; Vincenzo, Fabio Di; Weber, Gerhard W.; Zaidner, Yossi (25 June 2021). "A Middle Pleistocene Homo from Nesher Ramla, Israel" . Science . 372 (6549): 1424– 1428. Bibcode : 2021Sci...372.1424H . doi : 10.1126/science.abh3169 . ISSN 0036-8075 . S2CID 235628111 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ "Why COVID-19 vaccines can provide stronger immunity than natural infection" . New Atlas . 28 June 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Crotty, Shane (25 June 2021). "Hybrid immunity" . Science . 372 (6549): 1392– 1393. Bibcode : 2021Sci...372.1392C . doi : 10.1126/science.abj2258 . ISSN 0036-8075 . S2CID 235628127 . ^ KaiserJun. 26, Jocelyn (26 June 2021). "CRISPR injected into the blood treats a genetic disease for first time" . Science | AAAS . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Gillmore, Julian D.; Gane, Ed; Taubel, Jorg; Kao, Justin; Fontana, Marianna; Maitland, Michael L.; Seitzer, Jessica; O'Connell, Daniel; Walsh, Kathryn R.; Wood, Kristy; Phillips, Jonathan; Xu, Yuanxin; Amaral, Adam; Boyd, Adam P.; Cehelsky, Jeffrey E.; McKee, Mark D.; Schiermeier, Andrew; Harari, Olivier; Murphy, Andrew; Kyratsous, Christos A.; Zambrowicz, Brian; Soltys, Randy; Gutstein, David E.; Leonard, John; Sepp-Lorenzino, Laura; Lebwohl, David (26 June 2021). "CRISPR-Cas9 In Vivo Gene Editing for Transthyretin Amyloidosis" . New England Journal of Medicine . 385 (6): 493– 502. doi : 10.1056/NEJMoa2107454 . PMID 34215024 . S2CID 235722446 . ^ "Scientists say there's no life on Venus — but Jupiter has potential" . www.cbsnews.com . Retrieved 10 July 2021 . ^ Hallsworth, John E.; Koop, Thomas; Dallas, Tiffany D.; Zorzano, María-Paz; Burkhardt, Juergen; Golyshina, Olga V.; Martín-Torres, Javier; Dymond, Marcus K.; Ball, Philip; McKay, Christopher P. (28 June 2021). "Water activity in Venus's uninhabitable clouds and other planetary atmospheres" . Nature Astronomy . 5 (7): 665– 675. Bibcode : 2021NatAs...5..665H . doi : 10.1038/s41550-021-01391-3 . hdl : 10261/261774 . ISSN 2397-3366 . S2CID 237820246 . Retrieved 10 July 2021 . ^ "Face masks that can diagnose COVID-19" . medicalxpress.com . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Nguyen, Peter Q.; Soenksen, Luis R.; Donghia, Nina M.; Angenent-Mari, Nicolaas M.; de Puig, Helena; Huang, Ally; Lee, Rose; Slomovic, Shimyn; Galbersanini, Tommaso; Lansberry, Geoffrey; Sallum, Hani M.; Zhao, Evan M.; Niemi, James B.; Collins, James J. (28 June 2021). "Wearable materials with embedded synthetic biology sensors for biomolecule detection" . Nature Biotechnology . 39 (11): 1366– 1374. Bibcode : 2021NatBi..39.1366N . doi : 10.1038/s41587-021-00950-3 . hdl : 1721.1/131278 . ISSN 1546-1696 . PMID 34183860 . S2CID 235673261 . ^ "LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA finds elusive mergers of black holes with neutron stars" . EurekAlert! . 29 June 2021 . Retrieved 1 July 2021 . ^ "Scientists catch 1st glimpse of a black hole swallowing a neutron star" . Space.com . 29 June 2021 . Retrieved 1 July 2021 . ^ Abbott, R.; et al. (June 2021). "Observation of Gravitational Waves from Two Neutron Star–Black Hole Coalescences" .

The Astrophysical Journal Letters . 915 (1): L5. arXiv : 2106.15163 . Bibcode : 2021ApJ...915L...5A . doi : 10.3847/2041-8213/ac082e . hdl : 2440/131486 . ISSN 2041-8205 . S2CID 235670241 . ^ "Securing decent living standards for all while reducing global energy use" . phys.org . Retrieved 10 July 2021 . ^ Vogel, Jefim; Steinberger, Julia K.; O'Neill, Daniel W.; Lamb, William F.; Krishnakumar, Jaya (29 June 2021). "Socio-economic conditions for satisfying human needs at low energy use: An international analysis of social provisioning" . Global Environmental Change . 69 102287. Bibcode : 2021GEC....6902287V . doi : 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2021.102287 . ISSN 0959-3780 . ^ "Growing food with air and solar power: More efficient than planting crops" . phys.org . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Leger, Dorian; Matassa, Silvio; Noor, Elad; Shepon, Alon; Milo, Ron; Bar-Even, Arren (29 June 2021). "Photovoltaic-driven microbial protein production can use land and sunlight more efficiently than conventional crops" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 118 (26) e2015025118. Bibcode : 2021PNAS..11815025L . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2015025118 . ISSN 0027-8424 . PMC 8255800 . PMID 34155098 . S2CID 235595143 . ^ "A white dwarf living on the edge" . EurekAlert! . 30 June 2021 . Retrieved 1 July 2021 . ^ Caiazzo, Ilaria; Burdge, Kevin B.; Fuller, James; Heyl, Jeremy; Kulkarni, S. R.; Prince, Thomas A.; Richer, Harvey B.; Schwab, Josiah; Andreoni, Igor; Bellm, Eric C.; Drake, Andrew; Duev, Dmitry A.; Graham, Matthew J.; Helou, George; Mahabal, Ashish A.; Masci, Frank J.; Smith, Roger; Soumagnac, Maayane T. (July 2021). "A highly magnetized and rapidly rotating white dwarf as small as the Moon" . Nature . 595 (7865): 39– 42. arXiv : 2107.08458 . Bibcode : 2021Natur.595...39C . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03615-y . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 34194021 . S2CID 235698482 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Johannes Gutenberg-Universität . "Eruption of the Laacher See volcano redated" . uni-mainz.de (Press release). Archived from the original on 1 July 2021 . Retrieved 1 July 2021 . That is 126 years earlier than the generally accepted dating based on sediments in the Meerfelder Maar from the Eifel region in Germany. ... This means that the also occurred in Central Europe 130 years earlier, around 12,870 years ago respectively. This is in line with the onset of the cooling in the North Atlantic region identified in ice cores from Greenland. ... 'This strong cooling did not take place time transgressively, as previously thought, but rather synchronously over the entire North Atlantic and Central European region,' said Frederick Reinig. ^ Reinig, Frederick; Wacker, Lukas; Jöris, Olaf; Oppenheimer, Clive; Guidobaldi, Giulia; Nievergelt, Daniel; et al. (30 June 2021). "Precise date for the Laacher See eruption synchronizes the Younger Dryas". Nature . 595 (7865): 66– 69. Bibcode : 2021Natur.595...66R . doi : 10.1038/S41586-021-03608-X . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 34194020 . Wikidata Q107389873 . firmly date the to 13,006 ± 9 calibrated years before present (BP; taken as AD 1950), which is more than a century earlier than previously accepted. ...thereby dating the onset of the Younger Dryas to 12,807 ± 12 calibrated years BP, which is around 130 years earlier than thought. ^ "World's largest radio telescope to be built after almost 30 years of planning" . Space.com . 30 June 2021 . Retrieved 1 July 2021 . ^ "Smart technology is not making us dumber: study" . phys.org . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Cecutti, Lorenzo; Chemero, Anthony; Lee, Spike W. S. (1 July 2021). "Technology may change cognition without necessarily harming it" . Nature Human Behaviour . 5 (8): 973– 975. doi : 10.1038/s41562-021-01162-0 . ISSN 2397-3374 . PMID 34211150 . S2CID 235709853 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ "Extreme temperatures kill 5 million people a year with heat-related deaths rising, study finds" .

The Guardian . 7 July 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Zhao, Qi; et al. (1 July 2021). "Global, regional, and national burden of mortality associated with non-optimal ambient temperatures from 2000 to 2019: a three-stage modelling study" .

The Lancet Planetary Health . 5 (7): e415– e425. Bibcode : 2021LanPH...5.e415Z . doi : 10.1016/S2542-5196(21)00081-4 . ISSN 2542-5196 . PMID 34245712 . S2CID 235791583 . ^ "Is global plastic pollution nearing an irreversible tipping point?" . phys.org . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ MacLeod, Matthew; Arp, Hans Peter H.; Tekman, Mine B.; Jahnke, Annika (2 July 2021). "The global threat from plastic pollution" . Science . 373 (6550): 61– 65. Bibcode : 2021Sci...373...61M . doi : 10.1126/science.abg5433 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 34210878 . S2CID 235699724 . ^ Spary, Sara (2 July 2021). "Cows' stomachs can break down plastic, study finds" . CNN . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Quartinello, Felice; Kremser, Klemens; Schoen, Herta; Tesei, Donatella; Ploszczanski, Leon; Nagler, Magdalena; Podmirseg, Sabine M.; Insam, Heribert; Piñar, Guadalupe; Sterflingler, Katja; Ribitsch, Doris; Guebitz, Georg M. (2021). "Together Is Better: The Rumen Microbial Community as Biological Toolbox for Degradation of Synthetic Polyesters" . Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology . 9 684459. doi : 10.3389/fbioe.2021.684459 . ISSN 2296-4185 . ^ "Gene variants related to controlling body weight isolated" . medicalxpress.com . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Akbari, Parsa; et al. (2 July 2021). "Sequencing of 640,000 exomes identifies GPR75 variants associated with protection from obesity" . Science . 373 (6550) eabf8683. doi : 10.1126/science.abf8683 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMC 10275396 . PMID 34210852 . S2CID 235699731 . ^ Feehly, Conor (6 July 2021). "Beautiful Bone Carving From 51,000 Years Ago Is Changing Our View of Neanderthals" . ScienceAlert . Retrieved 6 July 2021 . ^ Leder, Dirk; et al. (5 July 2021). "A 51,000-year-old engraved bone reveals Neanderthals' capacity for symbolic behaviour" . Nature Ecology & Evolution . 594 (9): 1273– 1282. Bibcode : 2021NatEE...5.1273L . doi : 10.1038/s41559-021-01487-z . PMID 34226702 . S2CID 235746596 . Retrieved 6 July 2021 . ^ "A plant-based diet is the best way to avoid heart disease, according to a new report" . Washington Post . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Riccardi, Gabriele; Giosuè, Annalisa; Calabrese, Ilaria; Vaccaro, Olga (6 July 2021). "Dietary recommendations for prevention of atherosclerosis" . Cardiovascular Research . 118 (5): 1188– 1204. doi : 10.1093/cvr/cvab173 . PMID 34229346 . ^ "New delta variant studies show the pandemic is far from over" . Science News . 30 July 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Fisman, David N.; Tuite, Ashleigh R. (2021). "Evaluation of the relative virulence of novel SARS-CoV-2 variants: A retrospective cohort study in Ontario, Canada" . Canadian Medical Association Journal . 193 (42): E1619– E1625. doi : 10.1503/cmaj.211248 . medRxiv 10.1101/2021.07.05.21260050v3 . PMC 8562985 . PMID 34610919 . ^ "Harvard-led physicists take big step in race to quantum computing" . Scienmag: Latest Science and Health News . 9 July 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Ebadi, Sepehr; Wang, Tout T.; Levine, Harry; Keesling, Alexander; Semeghini, Giulia; Omran, Ahmed; Bluvstein, Dolev; Samajdar, Rhine; Pichler, Hannes; Ho, Wen Wei; Choi, Soonwon; Sachdev, Subir; Greiner, Markus; Vuletić, Vladan; Lukin, Mikhail D. (July 2021). "Quantum phases of matter on a 256-atom programmable quantum simulator". Nature . 595 (7866): 227– 232. arXiv : 2012.12281 . Bibcode : 2021Natur.595..227E . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03582-4 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 34234334 . S2CID 229363764 . ^ Burton, Charlotte (8 July 2021). "Human body size shaped by climate, evolutionary study shows" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Will, Manuel; Krapp, Mario; Stock, Jay T.; Manica, Andrea (8 July 2021). "Different environmental variables predict body and brain size evolution in Homo" . Nature Communications . 12 (1): 4116. Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.4116W . doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-24290-7 . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 8266824 . PMID 34238930 . ^ a b c Al-Shayeb, Basem; Schoelmerich, Marie C.; West-Roberts, Jacob; Valentin-Alvarado, Luis E.; Sachdeva, Rohan; Mullen, Susan; Crits-Christoph, Alexander; Wilkins, Michael J.; Williams, Kenneth H.; Doudna, Jennifer A.; Banfield, Jillian F. (10 July 2021). "Borgs are giant extrachromosomal elements with the potential to augment methane oxidation". bioRxiv 10.1101/2021.07.10.451761 . ^ Cepelewicz, Jordana; Whitten, Allison (21 July 2021). "Plasmid, Virus or Other? DNA 'Borgs' Blur Boundaries" . Quanta Magazine . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ Dance, Amber (16 July 2021). "Massive DNA 'Borg' structures perplex scientists" . Nature . 595 (7869): 636. Bibcode : 2021Natur.595..636D . doi : 10.1038/d41586-021-01947-3 . S2CID 236001172 . ^ Andrew, Shakespeare, William Gurr (30 July 2021). "Previously undiscovered DNA 'borgs' found on California wetlands" .

The Independent . Archived from the original on 30 July 2021 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Reardon, Sara (21 July 2021). "How the Delta variant achieves its ultrafast spread" . Nature . doi : 10.1038/d41586-021-01986-w . PMID 34290423 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ Li, Baisheng; et al. (2022). "Viral infection and transmission in a large, well-traced outbreak caused by the SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant" . Nature Communications . 13 (1) 460. Bibcode : 2022NatCo..13..460L . doi : 10.1038/s41467-022-28089-y . medRxiv 10.1101/2021.07.07.21260122v2 . PMC 8786931 . PMID 35075154 . ^ Schultz, Isaac (14 July 2021). "These Squiggles May Be Some of the Oldest Fossil Life on Earth - Researchers say the fossils were left by 3.42-billion-year-old microbes. They could offer clues as to what sort of life may exist on other planets" . Gizmodo . Retrieved 14 July 2021 . ^ Cavalazzi, Barbara; et al. (14 July 2021). "Cellular remains in a ~3.42-billion-year-old subseafloor hydrothermal environment" . Science Advances . 7 (9) eabf3963. Bibcode : 2021SciA....7.3963C . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.abf3963 . PMC 8279515 . PMID 34261651 . ^ Starr, Michelle (14 July 2021). "Isotopes Detected in The Atmosphere of an Exoplanet For The First Time" . ScienceAlert . Retrieved 14 July 2021 . ^ Zhang, Yapeng; et al. (14 July 2021). "The 13CO-rich atmosphere of a young accreting super-Jupiter" . Nature . 595 (7867): 370– 372. arXiv : 2107.06297 . Bibcode : 2021Natur.595..370Z . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03616-x . hdl : 1887/3254588 . PMID 34262209 . S2CID 235829633 . Retrieved 14 July 2021 . ^ "Think before you 'speak': brain–computer interface restores speech in paralysed man" . Physics World . 5 August 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Moses, David A.; Metzger, Sean L.; Liu, Jessie R.; Anumanchipalli, Gopala K.; Makin, Joseph G.; Sun, Pengfei F.; Chartier, Josh; Dougherty, Maximilian E.; Liu, Patricia M.; Abrams, Gary M.; Tu-Chan, Adelyn; Ganguly, Karunesh; Chang, Edward F. (15 July 2021). "Neuroprosthesis for Decoding Speech in a Paralyzed Person with Anarthria" . New England Journal of Medicine . 385 (3): 217– 227. doi : 10.1056/NEJMoa2027540 . PMC 8972947 . PMID 34260835 . S2CID 235907121 . ^ Schwartz, John (14 July 2021). "Parts of the Amazon Go From Absorbing Carbon Dioxide to Emitting It" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ Gatti, Luciana V.; Basso, Luana S.; Miller, John B.; Gloor, Manuel; Gatti Domingues, Lucas; Cassol, Henrique L. G.; Tejada, Graciela; Aragão, Luiz E. O. C.; Nobre, Carlos; Peters, Wouter; Marani, Luciano; Arai, Egidio; Sanches, Alber H.; Corrêa, Sergio M.; Anderson, Liana; Von Randow, Celso; Correia, Caio S. C.; Crispim, Stephane P.; Neves, Raiane A. L. (July 2021). "Amazonia as a carbon source linked to deforestation and climate change" . Nature . 595 (7867): 388– 393. Bibcode : 2021Natur.595..388G . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03629-6 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 34262208 . S2CID 235906356 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ "Dinosaur-killing rock traced to population of "dark primitive asteroids" " . New Atlas . 29 July 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Nesvorný, David; Bottke, William F.; Marchi, Simone (1 November 2021). "Dark primitive asteroids account for a large share of K/Pg-scale impacts on the Earth". Icarus . 368 114621. arXiv : 2107.03458 . Bibcode : 2021Icar..36814621N . doi : 10.1016/j.icarus.2021.114621 . ISSN 0019-1035 . S2CID 235765478 . ^ Khuller, Aditya R.; Plaut, Jeffrey J. (16 July 2021). "Characteristics of the Basal Interface of the Martian South Polar Layered Deposits". Geophysical Research Letters . 48 (13) e2021GL093631. Bibcode : 2021GeoRL..4893631K . doi : 10.1029/2021GL093631 . S2CID 232045163 . ^ Bierson, C. J.; Tulaczyk, S.; Courville, S. W.; Putzig, N. E. (16 July 2021). "Strong MARSIS Radar Reflections From the Base of Martian South Polar Cap May Be Due to Conductive Ice or Minerals". Geophysical Research Letters . 48 (13) e2021GL093880. Bibcode : 2021GeoRL..4893880B . doi : 10.1029/2021GL093880 . S2CID 237755186 . ^ "Internet: Un nouveau record de débit à 319 Tbit/S" . 16 July 2021. ^ Fox, Will. "Japan sets new Internet speed record: 319 Tbit/s" . FutureTimeline.net . ^ "Only a tiny fraction of our DNA is uniquely human" . Science News . 16 July 2021 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ Schaefer, Nathan K.; Shapiro, Beth; Green, Richard E. (1 July 2021). "An ancestral recombination graph of human, Neanderthal, and Denisovan genomes" . Science Advances . 7 (29) eabc0776. Bibcode : 2021SciA....7..776S . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.abc0776 . ISSN 2375-2548 . PMC 8284891 . PMID 34272242 . ^ "Cannabis first domesticated 12,000 years ago: study" . phys.org . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Ren, Guangpeng; Zhang, Xu; Li, Ying; Ridout, Kate; Serrano-Serrano, Martha L.; Yang, Yongzhi; Liu, Ai; Ravikanth, Gudasalamani; Nawaz, Muhammad Ali; Mumtaz, Abdul Samad; Salamin, Nicolas; Fumagalli, Luca (1 July 2021). "Large-scale whole-genome resequencing unravels the domestication history of Cannabis sativa" . Science Advances . 7 (29) eabg2286. Bibcode : 2021SciA....7.2286R . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.abg2286 . ISSN 2375-2548 . PMC 8284894 . PMID 34272249 . ^ "What is Pegasus spyware and how does it hack phones?" .

The Guardian . 18 July 2021 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ a b Callaway, Ewen (22 July 2021). "DeepMind's AI predicts structures for a vast trove of proteins" . Nature . 595 (7869): 635. Bibcode : 2021Natur.595..635C . doi : 10.1038/d41586-021-02025-4 . Retrieved 1 August 2021 . ^ Kanyama, Annika Carlsson; Nässén, Jonas; Benders, René (2021). "Shifting expenditure on food, holidays, and furnishings could lower greenhouse gas emissions by almost 40%" . Journal of Industrial Ecology . 25 (6): 1602– 1616. Bibcode : 2021JInEc..25.1602C . doi : 10.1111/jiec.13176 . ISSN 1530-9290 . ^ Woodyatt, Amy (20 July 2021). "City children have better mental health and cognition if they live near woodlands" . CNN . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Maes, Mikaël J. A.; Pirani, Monica; Booth, Elizabeth R.; Shen, Chen; Milligan, Ben; Jones, Kate E.; Toledano, Mireille B. (19 July 2021). "Benefit of woodland and other natural environments for adolescents' cognition and mental health" . Nature Sustainability . 4 (10): 851– 858. Bibcode : 2021NatSu...4..851M . doi : 10.1038/s41893-021-00751-1 . hdl : 10044/1/98026 . ISSN 2398-9629 . S2CID 236096013 . ^ "The climate impact of wild pigs greater than a million cars" . phys.org . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ O'Bryan, Christopher J.; Patton, Nicholas R.; Hone, Jim; Lewis, Jesse S.; Berdejo-Espinola, Violeta; Risch, Derek R.; Holden, Matthew H.; McDonald-Madden, Eve (2021). "Unrecognized threat to global soil carbon by a widespread invasive species". Global Change Biology . 28 (3): 877– 882. doi : 10.1111/gcb.15769 . ISSN 1365-2486 . PMID 34288288 . S2CID 236157683 . ^ a b "Astronomers detect light behind black hole for first time" .

The Guardian . 28 July 2021 . Retrieved 29 July 2021 . ^ Dorminey, Bruce. "Phosphine In Venus' Atmosphere Points To Volcanics, Not Life, Says Paper" . Forbes . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ Truong, Ngoc; Lunine, Jonathan I. (20 July 2021). "Volcanically extruded phosphides as an abiotic source of Venusian phosphine" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 118 (29) e2021689118. Bibcode : 2021PNAS..11821689T . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2021689118 . ISSN 0027-8424 . PMC 8307446 . PMID 34253608 . ^ "Eating processed meat raises risk of heart disease by a fifth" .

The Guardian . 21 July 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Papier, Keren; Knuppel, Anika; Syam, Nandana; Jebb, Susan A.; Key, Tim J. (20 July 2021). "Meat consumption and risk of ischemic heart disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis" . Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition . 63 (3): 426– 437. doi : 10.1080/10408398.2021.1949575 . ISSN 1040-8398 . PMID 34284672 . S2CID 236158918 . ^ "Teens around the world are lonelier than a decade ago.

The reason may be smartphones" . Washington Post . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Twenge, Jean M.; Haidt, Jonathan; Blake, Andrew B.; McAllister, Cooper; Lemon, Hannah; Le Roy, Astrid (20 July 2021). "Worldwide increases in adolescent loneliness" . Journal of Adolescence . 93 : 257– 269. doi : 10.1016/j.adolescence.2021.06.006 . ISSN 0140-1971 . PMID 34294429 . ^ a b Ripple, William J; Wolf, Christopher; Newsome, Thomas M; Gregg, Jillian W; Lenton, Timothy M; Palomo, Ignacio; Eikelboom, Jasper A J; Law, Beverly E; Huq, Saleemul; Duffy, Philip B ; Rockström, Johan (28 July 2021). "World Scientists' Warning of a Climate Emergency 2021". BioScience . 71 (9): 894– 898. doi : 10.1093/biosci/biab079 . hdl : 1808/30278 . ISSN 0006-3568 . ^ "Astronomers make first clear detection of a moon-forming disc around an exoplanet" . ESO . 22 July 2021 . Retrieved 22 July 2021 . ^ Benisty, Myriam; Bae, Jaehan; Facchini, Stefano; Keppler, Miriam; Teague, Richard; Isella, Andrea; Kurtovic, Nicolas T.; Pérez, Laura M.; Sierra, Anibal; Andrews, Sean M.; Carpenter, John; Czekala, Ian; Dominik, Carsten; Henning, Thomas; Menard, Francois; Pinilla, Paola ; Zurlo, Alice (1 July 2021). "A Circumplanetary Disk around PDS70c" .

The Astrophysical Journal Letters . 916 (1): L2. arXiv : 2108.07123 . Bibcode : 2021ApJ...916L...2B . doi : 10.3847/2041-8213/ac0f83 . ISSN 2041-8205 . S2CID 236186222 . ^ "Galileo Project: scientists to search for signs of extraterrestrial technology" .

The Guardian . 27 July 2021 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ Mann, Adam. "Avi Loeb's Galileo Project Will Search for Evidence of Alien Visitation" . Scientific American . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ "Public Announcement" . Projects.Iq.Harvard.edu . Archived from the original on 12 August 2021 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ "Chinese team hopes high-res image of monkey brain will unlock secrets" . South China Morning Post . 1 August 2021 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ Xu, Fang; Shen, Yan; Ding, Lufeng; Yang, Chao-Yu; Tan, Heng; Wang, Hao; Zhu, Qingyuan; Xu, Rui; Wu, Fengyi; Xiao, Yanyang; Xu, Cheng; Li, Qianwei; Su, Peng; Zhang, Li I.; Dong, Hong-Wei; Desimone, Robert; Xu, Fuqiang; Hu, Xintian; Lau, Pak-Ming; Bi, Guo-Qiang (26 July 2021). "High-throughput mapping of a whole rhesus monkey brain at micrometer resolution". Nature Biotechnology . 39 (12): 1521– 1528. doi : 10.1038/s41587-021-00986-5 . ISSN 1546-1696 . PMID 34312500 . S2CID 236453498 . ^ "Extreme heat waves in a warming world don't just break records – they shatter them" . PBS NewsHour . 28 July 2021 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ Fischer, E. M.; Sippel, S.; Knutti, R. (August 2021). "Increasing probability of record-shattering climate extremes" . Nature Climate Change . 11 (8): 689– 695. Bibcode : 2021NatCC..11..689F . doi : 10.1038/s41558-021-01092-9 . ISSN 1758-6798 . PMC 7617090 . PMID 39650282 . S2CID 236438374 . ^ "Long-Covid: Diese Behandlungen soll es geben" . T-Online.de (in German). 7 August 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Crook, Harry; Raza, Sanara; Nowell, Joseph; Young, Megan; Edison, Paul (26 July 2021). "Long covid—mechanisms, risk factors, and management" . BMJ . 374 n1648. doi : 10.1136/bmj.n1648 . ISSN 1756-1833 . PMID 34312178 . S2CID 236323430 . ^ "Stanford astrophysicists report first detection of light from behind a black hole" . Stanford . 28 July 2021 . Retrieved 29 July 2021 . ^ Wilkins, D. R.; Gallo, L. C.; Costantini, E.; Brandt, W. N.; Blandford, R. D. (July 2021). "Light bending and X-ray echoes from behind a supermassive black hole" . Nature . 595 (7869): 657– 660. arXiv : 2107.13555 . Bibcode : 2021Natur.595..657W . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03667-0 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 34321670 . S2CID 236493644 . ^ "Water as metal" . Fritz Haber Institute . 2 September 2025 . Retrieved 21 November 2025 . ^ Mason, Philip E.; Schewe, H. Christian; Buttersack, Tillmann; Kostal, Vojtech; Vitek, Marco; McMullen, Ryan S.; Ali, Hebatallah; Trinter, Florian; Lee, Chin; Neumark, Daniel M.; Thürmer, Stephan (2021). "Spectroscopic evidence for a gold-coloured metallic water solution" . Nature . 595 (7869): 673– 676. Bibcode : 2021Natur.595..673M . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03646-5 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 34321671 . S2CID 236497289 . ^ "Critical measures of global heating reaching tipping point, study finds" .

The Guardian . 28 July 2021 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ "Clues to healthy aging found in the gut bacteria of centenarians" . New Atlas . 2 August 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Sato, Yuko; et al. (29 July 2021). "Novel bile acid biosynthetic pathways are enriched in the microbiome of centenarians" . Nature . 599 (7885): 458– 464. Bibcode : 2021Natur.599..458S . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03832-5 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 34325466 . S2CID 236514774 . ^ "Kitchen robot in Riga cooks up new future for fast food" . techxplore.com . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Sources for data and graphic: Annual global mean surface temperature data from: "Global temperature / Get the data / Global mean temperature / NOAAGlobalTemp / Download as CSV" . Met Office (UK). 2026. Archived from the original on 18 January 2026. Natural driver graphic is at: "IPCC Sixth Assessment Report / Working Group 1: The Physical Science Basis / Figures: Summary for Policymakers / Figure SPM.1(b)" . Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2021. Archived from the original on 13 January 2026. Click on "Datasets". Natural driver dataset is downloadable by clicking on "gmst_changes_model_and_obs.csv" at: "Summary for Policymakers of the Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report - data for Figure SPM.1 (v20221116)" . Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 16 November 2022. Archived from the original on 16 February 2024. ^ "New clean energy tech extracts twice the power from ocean waves" . techxplore.com . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ Xiao, Han; Liu, Zhenwei; Zhang, Ran; Kelham, Andrew; Xu, Xiangyang; Wang, Xu (1 November 2021). "Study of a novel rotational speed amplified dual turbine wheel wave energy converter". Applied Energy . 301 117423. Bibcode : 2021ApEn..30117423X . doi : 10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.117423 . ISSN 0306-2619 . ^ "Researchers identify new genes linked to longer reproductive lifespan in women" . medicalxpress.com . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ Ruth, Katherine S.; et al. (August 2021). "Genetic insights into biological mechanisms governing human ovarian ageing" . Nature . 596 (7872): 393– 397. Bibcode : 2021Natur.596..393R . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03779-7 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMC 7611832 . PMID 34349265 . S2CID 236928198 . ^ "Study reveals how smell receptors work" . phys.org . Retrieved 22 September 2021 . ^ del Mármol, Josefina; Yedlin, Mackenzie A.; Ruta, Vanessa (September 2021). "The structural basis of odorant recognition in insect olfactory receptors" . Nature . 597 (7874): 126– 131. Bibcode : 2021Natur.597..126D . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03794-8 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMC 8410599 . PMID 34349260 . ^ "New ESO observations show rocky exoplanet has just half the mass of Venus" . ESO . 5 August 2021 . Retrieved 5 August 2021 . ^ Demangeon, O. D. S.; et al. (September 2021). "Warm terrestrial planet with half the mass of Venus transiting a nearby star". Astronomy & Astrophysics . 653 : A41. arXiv : 2108.03323 . Bibcode : 2021A&A...653A..41D . doi : 10.1051/0004-6361/202140728 . S2CID 236957385 . ^ "Ocean current system seems to be approaching a tipping point" . phys.org . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ "Atlantic Ocean currents weaken, signalling big weather changes - study" . Reuters . 5 August 2021 . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ Boers, Niklas (August 2021). "Observation-based early-warning signals for a collapse of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation" . Nature Climate Change . 11 (8): 680– 688. Bibcode : 2021NatCC..11..680B . doi : 10.1038/s41558-021-01097-4 . ISSN 1758-6798 . S2CID 236930519 . ^ Hannam, Peter (11 August 2021). " 'How lucky do you feel?': The awful risks buried in the IPCC report" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ "NIF Experiment Puts Researchers at Threshold of Fusion Ignition" . National Ignition Facility . 18 August 2021 . Retrieved 28 August 2021 . ^ "Climate change: IPCC report is 'code red for humanity' " . BBC. 9 August 2021 . Retrieved 9 August 2021 . ^ "Major climate changes inevitable and irreversible – IPCC's starkest warning yet" .

The Guardian . 9 August 2021 . Retrieved 9 August 2021 . ^ "Climate change widespread, rapid, and intensifying – IPCC" . IPCC. 9 August 2021 . Retrieved 9 August 2021 . ^ "Gut bacteria from young mice reverse signs of brain aging in old mice" . New Atlas . 10 August 2021 . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ Boehme, Marcus; Guzzetta, Katherine E.; Bastiaanssen, Thomaz F. S.; van de Wouw, Marcel; Moloney, Gerard M.; Gual-Grau, Andreu; Spichak, Simon; Olavarría-Ramírez, Loreto; Fitzgerald, Patrick; Morillas, Enrique; Ritz, Nathaniel L.; Jaggar, Minal; Cowan, Caitlin S. M.; Crispie, Fiona; Donoso, Francisco; Halitzki, Evelyn; Neto, Marta C.; Sichetti, Marzia; Golubeva, Anna V.; Fitzgerald, Rachel S.; Claesson, Marcus J.; Cotter, Paul D.; O'Leary, Olivia F.; Dinan, Timothy G.; Cryan, John F. (August 2021). "Microbiota from young mice counteracts selective age-associated behavioral deficits" . Nature Aging . 1 (8): 666– 676. doi : 10.1038/s43587-021-00093-9 . ISSN 2662-8465 . PMID 37117767 . ^ Lee, Juneyoung; Venna, Venugopal R.; Durgan, David J.; Shi, Huanan; Hudobenko, Jacob; Putluri, Nagireddy; Petrosino, Joseph; McCullough, Louise D.; Bryan, Robert M. (9 November 2020). "Young versus aged microbiota transplants to germ-free mice: increased short-chain fatty acids and improved cognitive performance" . Gut Microbes . 12 (1) 1814107. doi : 10.1080/19490976.2020.1814107 . ISSN 1949-0976 . PMC 7757789 . PMID 32897773 . ^ "Lingering Symptoms: Researchers Identify Over 50 Long-Term Effects of COVID-19" . SciTechDaily . Houston Methodist. 1 September 2021 . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ Lopez-Leon, Sandra; Wegman-Ostrosky, Talia; Perelman, Carol; Sepulveda, Rosalinda; Rebolledo, Paulina A.; Cuapio, Angelica; Villapol, Sonia (9 August 2021). "More than 50 long-term effects of COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis" . Scientific Reports . 11 (1): 16144. Bibcode : 2021NatSR..1116144L . doi : 10.1038/s41598-021-95565-8 . ISSN 2045-2322 . PMC 8352980 . PMID 34373540 . ^ "Computer scientist warns global internet is not prepared for a large solar storm" . techxplore.com . Retrieved 22 September 2021 . ^ "A Bad Solar Storm Could Cause an 'Internet Apocalypse' " . Wired . Retrieved 22 September 2021 . ^ Jyothi, Sangeetha Abdu (9 August 2021). "Solar superstorms: Planning for an internet apocalypse". Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGCOMM 2021 Conference . Association for Computing Machinery. pp. 692– 704. doi : 10.1145/3452296.3472916 . ISBN 978-1-4503-8383-7 . ^ "Nasa now knows when asteroid Bennu is most likely to crash into Earth" .

The Independent . 12 August 2021. Archived from the original on 12 August 2021. ^ Farnocchia, Davide; Chesley, Steven R.; Takahashi, Yu; Rozitis, Benjamin; Vokrouhlický, David; Rush, Brian P.; Mastrodemos, Nickolaos; Kennedy, Brian M.; Park, Ryan S.; Bellerose, Julie; Lubey, Daniel P.; Velez, Dianna; Davis, Alex B.; Emery, Joshua P.; Leonard, Jason M.; Geeraert, Jeroen; Antreasian, Peter G.; Lauretta, Dante S. (15 November 2021). "Ephemeris and hazard assessment for near-Earth asteroid (101955) Bennu based on OSIRIS-REx data" . Icarus . 369 114594. Bibcode : 2021Icar..36914594F . doi : 10.1016/j.icarus.2021.114594 . ISSN 0019-1035 . S2CID 238647293 . ^ "Blood clotting may be the root cause of long COVID syndrome" . medicalxpress.com . Retrieved 22 September 2021 . ^ Fogarty, Helen; Townsend, Liam; Morrin, Hannah; Ahmad, Azaz; Comerford, Claire; Karampini, Ellie; Englert, Hanna; Byrne, Mary; Bergin, Colm; O'Sullivan, Jamie M.; Martin-Loeches, Ignacio; Nadarajan, Parthiban; Bannan, Ciaran; Mallon, Patrick W.; Curley, Gerard F.; Preston, Roger J. S.; Rehill, Aisling M.; McGonagle, Dennis; Cheallaigh, Cliona Ni; Baker, Ross I.; Renné, Thomas; Ward, Soracha E.; O'Donnell, James S. (2021). "Persistent endotheliopathy in the pathogenesis of long COVID syndrome" . Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis . 19 (10): 2546– 2553. doi : 10.1111/jth.15490 . ISSN 1538-7836 . PMC 8420256 . PMID 34375505 . ^ "Scientists developing contraceptive that stops sperm in its tracks" . ScienceDaily . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ Shrestha, Bhawana; Schaefer, Alison; Zhu, Yong; Saada, Jamal; Jacobs, Timothy M.; Chavez, Elizabeth C.; Omsted, Stuart S.; Cruz-Teran, Carlos A.; Vaca, Gabriela Baldeon; Vincent, Kathleen; Moench, Thomas R.; Lai, Samuel K. (11 August 2021). "Engineering sperm-binding IgG antibodies for the development of an effective nonhormonal female contraception" . Science Translational Medicine . 13 (606) eabd5219. doi : 10.1126/scitranslmed.abd5219 . PMC 8868023 . PMID 34380769 . S2CID 236979903 . ^ "An Indigenous people in the Philippines have the most Denisovan DNA" . Science News . 12 August 2021 . Retrieved 22 September 2021 . ^ Larena, Maximilian; McKenna, James; Sanchez-Quinto, Federico; Bernhardsson, Carolina; Ebeo, Carlo; Reyes, Rebecca; Casel, Ophelia; Huang, Jin-Yuan; Hagada, Kim Pullupul; Guilay, Dennis; Reyes, Jennelyn; Allian, Fatima Pir; Mori, Virgilio; Azarcon, Lahaina Sue; Manera, Alma; Terando, Celito; Jamero, Lucio; Sireg, Gauden; Manginsay-Tremedal, Renefe; Labos, Maria Shiela; Vilar, Richard Dian; Latiph, Acram; Saway, Rodelio Linsahay; Marte, Erwin; Magbanua, Pablito; Morales, Amor; Java, Ismael; Reveche, Rudy; Barrios, Becky; Burton, Erlinda; Salon, Jesus Christopher; Kels, Ma Junaliah Tuazon; Albano, Adrian; Cruz-Angeles, Rose Beatrix; Molanida, Edison; Granehäll, Lena; Vicente, Mário; Edlund, Hanna; Loo, Jun-Hun; Trejaut, Jean; Ho, Simon Y. W.; Reid, Lawrence; Lambeck, Kurt; Malmström, Helena; Schlebusch, Carina; Endicott, Phillip; Jakobsson, Mattias (12 August 2021). "Philippine Ayta possess the highest level of Denisovan ancestry in the world" . Current Biology . 31 (19): 4219–4230.e10. Bibcode : 2021CBio...31E4219L . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2021.07.022 . ISSN 0960-9822 . PMC 8596304 . PMID 34388371 . ^ "Probiotics help lab corals survive deadly heat stress" . Science News . 13 August 2021 . Retrieved 22 September 2021 . ^ Santoro, Erika P.; Borges, Ricardo M.; Espinoza, Josh L.; Freire, Marcelo; Messias, Camila S. M. A.; Villela, Helena D. M.; Pereira, Leandro M.; Vilela, Caren L. S.; Rosado, João G.; Cardoso, Pedro M.; Rosado, Phillipe M.; Assis, Juliana M.; Duarte, Gustavo A. S.; Perna, Gabriela; Rosado, Alexandre S.; Macrae, Andrew; Dupont, Christopher L.; Nelson, Karen E.; Sweet, Michael J.; Voolstra, Christian R.; Peixoto, Raquel S. (August 2021). "Coral microbiome manipulation elicits metabolic and genetic restructuring to mitigate heat stress and evade mortality" . Science Advances . 7 (33) eabg3088. Bibcode : 2021SciA....7.3088S . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.abg3088 . hdl : 10754/670602 . PMC 8363143 . PMID 34389536 . ^ "Analysis | We Need Cap-and-Trade For Individuals As Well As Companies" . Washington Post . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ "Pandemic and digitalization set stage for revival of a cast-off idea: Personal carbon allowances" . phys.org . ^ Fuso Nerini, Francesco; Fawcett, Tina; Parag, Yael; Ekins, Paul (16 August 2021). "Personal carbon allowances revisited" . Nature Sustainability . 4 (12): 1025– 1031. Bibcode : 2021NatSu...4.1025F . doi : 10.1038/s41893-021-00756-w . ISSN 2398-9629 . ^ "Pollinators: First global risk index for species declines and effects on humanity" . phys.org . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ Dicks, Lynn V.; Breeze, Tom D.; Ngo, Hien T.; Senapathi, Deepa; An, Jiandong; Aizen, Marcelo A.; Basu, Parthiba; Buchori, Damayanti ; Galetto, Leonardo; Garibaldi, Lucas A.; Gemmill-Herren, Barbara; Howlett, Brad G.; Imperatriz-Fonseca, Vera L.; Johnson, Steven D.; Kovács-Hostyánszki, Anikó; Kwon, Yong Jung; Lattorff, H. Michael G.; Lungharwo, Thingreipi; Seymour, Colleen L.; Vanbergen, Adam J.; Potts, Simon G. (16 August 2021). "A global-scale expert assessment of drivers and risks associated with pollinator decline" . Nature Ecology & Evolution . 5 (10): 1453– 1461. Bibcode : 2021NatEE...5.1453D . doi : 10.1038/s41559-021-01534-9 . ISSN 2397-334X . PMID 34400826 . S2CID 237148742 . ^ "Brain organoids develop optic cups that respond to light" . medicalxpress.com . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ Gabriel, Elke; Albanna, Walid; Pasquini, Giovanni; Ramani, Anand; Josipovic, Natasa; Mariappan, Aruljothi; Schinzel, Friedrich; Karch, Celeste M.; Bao, Guobin; Gottardo, Marco; Suren, Ata Alp; Hescheler, Jürgen; Nagel-Wolfrum, Kerstin; Persico, Veronica; Rizzoli, Silvio O.; Altmüller, Janine; Riparbelli, Maria Giovanna; Callaini, Giuliano; Goureau, Olivier; Papantonis, Argyris; Busskamp, Volker; Schneider, Toni; Gopalakrishnan, Jay (17 August 2021). "Human brain organoids assemble functionally integrated bilateral optic vesicles" . Cell Stem Cell . 28 (10): 1740–1757.e8. doi : 10.1016/j.stem.2021.07.010 . ISSN 1934-5909 . PMID 34407456 . S2CID 237215870 . ^ "Saving ozone layer has given humans a chance in climate crisis – study" .

The Guardian . 19 August 2021. ^ Young, Paul J.; Harper, Anna B.; Huntingford, Chris; Paul, Nigel D.; Morgenstern, Olaf; Newman, Paul A.; Oman, Luke D.; Madronich, Sasha; Garcia, Rolando R. (August 2021). "The Montreal Protocol protects the terrestrial carbon sink" (PDF) . Nature . 596 (7872): 384– 388. Bibcode : 2021Natur.596..384Y . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03737-3 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 34408332 . S2CID 237215751 . ^ "The hormone irisin is found to confer benefits of exercise on cognitive function" . medicalxpress.com . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ Reynolds, Gretchen (25 August 2021). "How Exercise May Help Keep Our Memory Sharp" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ Islam, Mohammad R.; Valaris, Sophia; Young, Michael F.; Haley, Erin B.; Luo, Renhao; Bond, Sabrina F.; Mazuera, Sofia; Kitchen, Robert R.; Caldarone, Barbara J.; Bettio, Luis E. B.; Christie, Brian R.; Schmider, Angela B.; Soberman, Roy J.; Besnard, Antoine; Jedrychowski, Mark P.; Kim, Hyeonwoo; Tu, Hua; Kim, Eunhee; Choi, Se Hoon; Tanzi, Rudolph E.; Spiegelman, Bruce M.; Wrann, Christiane D. (August 2021). "Exercise hormone irisin is a critical regulator of cognitive function" . Nature Metabolism . 3 (8): 1058– 1070. doi : 10.1038/s42255-021-00438-z . ISSN 2522-5812 . PMC 10317538 . PMID 34417591 . S2CID 237254736 . ^ "Astronomers are still looking for the elusive 'Planet 9' " . NBC News . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ Brown, Michael E.; Batygin, Konstantin (2021). "The orbit of Planet Nine" .

The Astronomical Journal . 162 (5): 219. arXiv : 2108.09868 . Bibcode : 2021AJ....162..219B . doi : 10.3847/1538-3881/ac2056 . S2CID 230196275 . ^ "This massive AI chip has the compute power of a human brain" . PC World . 24 August 2021 . Retrieved 28 August 2021 . ^ "Japanese scientists produce first 3D-bioprinted, marbled Wagyu beef" . New Atlas . 25 August 2021 . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ Kang, Dong-Hee; Louis, Fiona; Liu, Hao; Shimoda, Hiroshi; Nishiyama, Yasutaka; Nozawa, Hajime; Kakitani, Makoto; Takagi, Daisuke; Kasa, Daijiro; Nagamori, Eiji; Irie, Shinji; Kitano, Shiro; Matsusaki, Michiya (24 August 2021). "Engineered whole cut meat-like tissue by the assembly of cell fibers using tendon-gel integrated bioprinting" . Nature Communications . 12 (1): 5059. Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.5059K . doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-25236-9 . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 8385070 . PMID 34429413 . ^ Davis, Nicola (25 August 2021). " 'Mini-Neptunes' beyond solar system may soon yield signs of life - Cambridge astronomers identify new hycean class of habitable exoplanets, which could accelerate search for life" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 27 August 2021 . ^ Madhusudhan, Nikku; Piette, Anjali a. A.; Constantinou, Savvas (26 August 2021). "Habitability and Biosignatures of Hycean Worlds" .

The Astrophysical Journal . 918 (1): 1. arXiv : 2108.10888 . Bibcode : 2021ApJ...918....1M . doi : 10.3847/1538-4357/abfd9c . ISSN 0004-637X . S2CID 237290118 . ^ "New AY lineages and an update to AY.4-AY.12 – Pango Network" . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ Sharma M (14 June 2021). "New 'Delta Plus' variant of SARS-CoV-2 identified; here's what we know so far" . India Today . Archived from the original on 17 June 2021 . Retrieved 16 June 2021 . ^ Linsenmeyer, Katherine; Gupta, Kalpana; Madjarov, Rebecca; Charness, Michael E. (10 August 2021). "Cryptic Transmission of the Delta Variant AY.3 Sublineage of SARS-CoV-2 among Fully Vaccinated Patients on an Inpatient Ward". medRxiv 10.1101/2021.08.05.21261562v1 . ^ "Greenland island is world's northernmost island - scientists" . BBC News . 28 August 2021 . Retrieved 28 August 2021 . ^ "ESC guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention published today" . medicalxpress.com . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ Visseren, Frank L J.; et al. (7 September 2021). "2021 ESC Guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention in clinical practice" . European Heart Journal . 42 (34): 3227– 3337. doi : 10.1093/eurheartj/ehab484 . PMID 34458905 . ^ "New ESC guidelines for diagnosis and treatment of heart failure published" . News-Medical.net . 27 August 2021 . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ McDonagh, Theresa A.; et al. (27 August 2021). "2021 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure" . European Heart Journal . 42 (36): 3599– 3726. doi : 10.1093/eurheartj/ehab368 . PMID 34447992 . ^ "Anti-SARS-CoV-2 immunity induced by Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine may decline after 6 months" . News-Medical.net . 31 August 2021 . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ Goldberg, Yair; Mandel, Micha; Bar-On, Yinon M.; Bodenheimer, Omri; Freedman, Laurence; Haas, Eric J.; Milo, Ron; Alroy-Preis, Sharon; Ash, Nachman; Huppert, Amit (2021). "Waning Immunity after the BNT162b2 Vaccine in Israel" . New England Journal of Medicine . 385 (24): e85. doi : 10.1056/nejmoa2114228 . medRxiv 10.1101/2021.08.24.21262423v1 . PMC 8609604 . PMID 34706170 . ^ " 'Tipping points' in Earth's system triggered rapid climate change 55 million years ago, research shows" . phys.org . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ Kender, Sev; Bogus, Kara; Pedersen, Gunver K.; Dybkjær, Karen; Mather, Tamsin A.; Mariani, Erica; Ridgwell, Andy; Riding, James B.; Wagner, Thomas; Hesselbo, Stephen P.; Leng, Melanie J. (31 August 2021). "Paleocene/Eocene carbon feedbacks triggered by volcanic activity" . Nature Communications . 12 (1): 5186. Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.5186K . doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-25536-0 . hdl : 10871/126942 . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 8408262 . PMID 34465785 . ^ Chang, Kenneth (3 September 2021). "On Mars, NASA's Perseverance Rover Drilled the Rocks It Came For - After an earlier drilling attempt failed to collect anything, the rover appeared to gather its first sample. But mission managers need to take another look before sealing the tube" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 3 September 2021 . ^ Chang, Kenneth (7 September 2021). "NASA's Perseverance Rover Stashes First Mars Rock Sample - The rock, sealed in a tube, is the first of many the robotic explorer will collect to one day send back to Earth for scientists to study" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 8 September 2021 . ^ Fox, Karen; Johnson, Alana; Agle, AG (2 September 2021). "NASA's Perseverance Rover Successfully Cores Its First Rock" . NASA . Retrieved 3 September 2021 . ^ "Strong sunlight powers passive cooling device" . King Abdullah University of Science . Retrieved 20 October 2021 . ^ "Sunlight and salt water join forces in electricity-free cooling system" . New Atlas . 20 September 2021 . Retrieved 20 October 2021 . ^ Wang, Wenbin; Shi, Yusuf; Zhang, Chenlin; Li, Renyuan; Wu, Mengchun; Zhuo, Sifei; Aleid, Sara; Wang, Peng (1 September 2021). "Conversion and storage of solar energy for cooling" . Energy & Environmental Science . 15 : 136– 145. doi : 10.1039/D1EE01688A . hdl : 10754/670903 . ISSN 1754-5706 . S2CID 239698764 . ^ "We have spotted a new kind of supernova triggered by cosmic collisions" . New Scientist . 2 September 2021 . Retrieved 3 September 2021 . ^ "Astronomers may have seen a star gulp down a black hole and explode" . Science News . 2 September 2021 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Dong, D. Z.; Hallinan, G.; Nakar, E.; Ho, A. Y. Q.; Hughes, A. K.; Hotokezaka, K.; Myers, S. T.; De, K.; Mooley, K. P.; Ravi, V.; Horesh, A.; Kasliwal, M. M. ; Kulkarni, S. R. (3 September 2021). "A transient radio source consistent with a merger-triggered core collapse supernova" . Science . 373 (6559): 1125– 1129. arXiv : 2109.01752 . Bibcode : 2021Sci...373.1125D . doi : 10.1126/science.abg6037 . PMID 34516837 . S2CID 237402147 . ^ Hunt, Katie. "Strange radio waves from the heart of the Milky Way stump scientists" . CNN . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Wang, Ziteng; Kaplan, David; Murphy, Tara; Conversation, The. "We found a mysterious flashing radio signal from near the centre of the galaxy" . phys.org . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Wang, Ziteng; Kaplan, David L.; Murphy, Tara; Lenc, Emil; Dai, Shi; Barr, Ewan; Dobie, Dougal; Gaensler, B. M.; Heald, George; Leung, James K.; O'Brien, Andrew; Pintaldi, Sergio; Pritchard, Joshua; Rea, Nanda; Sivakoff, Gregory R.; Stappers, B. W.; Stewart, Adam; Tremou, E.; Wang, Yuanming; Woudt, Patrick A.; Zic, Andrew (1 October 2021). "Discovery of ASKAP J173608.2–321635 as a Highly Polarized Transient Point Source with the Australian SKA Pathfinder" .

The Astrophysical Journal . 920 (1): 45. arXiv : 2109.00652 . Bibcode : 2021ApJ...920...45W . doi : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac2360 . ISSN 0004-637X . S2CID 237386202 . ^ "Human health may be at risk from long-term exposure to air pollution below current air quality standards and guidelines" . British Medical Journal . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Strak, Maciej; Weinmayr, Gudrun; Rodopoulou, Sophia; Chen, Jie; Hoogh, Kees de; Andersen, Zorana J.; Atkinson, Richard; Bauwelinck, Mariska; Bekkevold, Terese; Bellander, Tom; Boutron-Ruault, Marie-Christine; Brandt, Jørgen; Cesaroni, Giulia; Concin, Hans; Fecht, Daniela; Forastiere, Francesco; Gulliver, John; Hertel, Ole; Hoffmann, Barbara; Hvidtfeldt, Ulla Arthur; Janssen, Nicole A. H.; Jöckel, Karl-Heinz; Jørgensen, Jeanette T.; Ketzel, Matthias; Klompmaker, Jochem O.; Lager, Anton; Leander, Karin; Liu, Shuo; Ljungman, Petter; Magnusson, Patrik K. E.; Mehta, Amar J.; Nagel, Gabriele; Oftedal, Bente; Pershagen, Göran; Peters, Annette; Raaschou-Nielsen, Ole; Renzi, Matteo; Rizzuto, Debora; Schouw, Yvonne T. van der; Schramm, Sara; Severi, Gianluca; Sigsgaard, Torben; Sørensen, Mette; Stafoggia, Massimo; Tjønneland, Anne; Verschuren, W. M. Monique; Vienneau, Danielle; Wolf, Kathrin; Katsouyanni, Klea; Brunekreef, Bert; Hoek, Gerard; Samoli, Evangelia (2 September 2021). "Long term exposure to low level air pollution and mortality in eight European cohorts within the ELAPSE project: pooled analysis" . BMJ . 374 n1904. doi : 10.1136/bmj.n1904 . ISSN 1756-1833 . PMC 8409282 . PMID 34470785 . ^ Vaughan, Adam. "WHO calls for lower limits on air pollution to save millions of lives" . New Scientist . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ "WHO Global Air Quality Guidelines" . World Health Organization . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ "Researchers develop an engineered 'mini' CRISPR genome editing system" . phys.org . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Xu, Xiaoshu; Chemparathy, Augustine; Zeng, Leiping; Kempton, Hannah R.; Shang, Stephen; Nakamura, Muneaki; Qi, Lei S. (3 September 2021). "Engineered miniature CRISPR-Cas system for mammalian genome regulation and editing" . Molecular Cell . 81 (20): 4333–4345.e4. doi : 10.1016/j.molcel.2021.08.008 . ISSN 1097-2765 . PMID 34480847 . S2CID 237417317 . ^ Scialo, Filippo; Daniele, Aurora; Amato, Felice; Pastore, Lucio; Matera, Maria Gabriella; Cazzola, Mario; Castaldo, Giuseppe; Bianco, Andrea (December 2020). "ACE2: The Major Cell Entry Receptor for SARS-CoV-2" . Lung . 198 (6): 867– 877. doi : 10.1007/s00408-020-00408-4 . ISSN 1432-1750 . PMC 7653219 . PMID 33170317 . ^ Gadanec, Laura Kate; McSweeney, Kristen Renee; Qaradakhi, Tawar; Ali, Benazir; Zulli, Anthony; Apostolopoulos, Vasso (January 2021). "Can SARS-CoV-2 Virus Use Multiple Receptors to Enter Host Cells?" . International Journal of Molecular Sciences . 22 (3): 992. doi : 10.3390/ijms22030992 . PMC 7863934 . PMID 33498183 . ^ "Research team finds potential cause of COVID-19 'long-haulers' " . University of Arkansas . Retrieved 20 October 2021 . ^ Bendix, Aria. "Scientists are getting closer to classifying long COVID as an autoimmune disease" . Business Insider . Retrieved 20 October 2021 . ^ Arthur, John M.; Forrest, J. Craig; Boehme, Karl W.; Kennedy, Joshua L.; Owens, Shana; Herzog, Christian; Liu, Juan; Harville, Terry O. (3 September 2021). "Development of ACE2 autoantibodies after SARS-CoV-2 infection" . PLOS ONE . 16 (9) e0257016. Bibcode : 2021PLoSO..1657016A . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0257016 . ISSN 1932-6203 . PMC 8415618 . PMID 34478478 . ^ McMillan, Philip; Dexhiemer, Thomas; Neubig, Richard R; Uhal, Bruce D (1 January 2021). "COVID-19-A Theory of Autoimmunity Against ACE-2 Explained" . Frontiers in Immunology . 12 582166. doi : 10.3389/fimmu.2021.582166 . ISSN 1664-3224 . PMC 8021777 . PMID 33833750 . ^ "Climate change: Arctic warming linked to colder winters" . BBC News . 2 September 2021 . Retrieved 20 October 2021 . ^ Cohen, Judah; Agel, Laurie; Barlow, Mathew; Garfinkel, Chaim I.; White, Ian (3 September 2021). "Linking Arctic variability and change with extreme winter weather in the United States". Science . 373 (6559): 1116– 1121. Bibcode : 2021Sci...373.1116C . doi : 10.1126/science.abi9167 . PMID 34516838 . S2CID 237402139 . ^ "New Global Study Finds Unprecedented Shark and Ray Extinction Risk" . IUCN SSC Shark Specialist Group . Retrieved 29 June 2024 . ^ Dulvy, Nicholas; Pacoureau, Nathan; Rigby, Cassandra; Pollom, Riley; Jabado, Rima; Ebert, David; Finucci, Brittany; Pollock, Caroline; Cheok, Jesicca; Derrick, Danielle; Herman, Katelyn; Sherman, Samantha; VanderWright, Wade; Lawson, Julia; Walls, Rachel; Carlson, John; Charvet, Patricia; Bineesh, Kinattumkara; Fernando, Daniel; Ralph, Gina; Matsushiba, Jay; Hilton-Taylor, Craig; Fordham, Sonja; Simpfendorfer, Colin (8 November 2021). "Overfishing drives over one-third of all sharks and rays toward a global extinction crisis" . Current Biology . 31 (21) (published 6 September 2021): 4773–4787.e8. Bibcode : 2021CBio...31E4773D . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2021.08.062 . PMID 34492229 . ^ "Antioxidant drug reverses process responsible for heart attacks and strokes" . University of Reading . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Ahmad, Feroz; Mitchell, Robert D.; Houben, Tom; Palo, Angela; Yadati, Tulasi; Parnell, Andrew J.; Patel, Ketan; Shiri-Sverdlov, Ronit; Leake, David S. (8 September 2021). "Cysteamine Decreases Low-Density Lipoprotein Oxidation, Causes Regression of Atherosclerosis, and Improves Liver and Muscle Function in Low-Density Lipoprotein Receptor–Deficient Mice" . Journal of the American Heart Association . 10 (18) e017524. doi : 10.1161/JAHA.120.017524 . PMC 8649511 . PMID 34493066 . ^ Ramirez, Rachel. "Majority of remaining fossil fuels must stay in the ground to limit climate crisis below critical threshold, study shows" . CNN . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Welsby, Dan; Price, James; Pye, Steve; Ekins, Paul (September 2021). "Unextractable fossil fuels in a 1.5 °C world" . Nature . 597 (7875): 230– 234. Bibcode : 2021Natur.597..230W . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03821-8 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 34497394 . S2CID 237455006 . ^ Gray, Jennifer. "The Earth isn't as bright as it once was" . CNN . Retrieved 19 October 2021 . ^ Goode, P. R.; Pallé, E.; Shoumko, A.; Shoumko, S.; Montañes-Rodriguez, P.; Koonin, S. E. (2021). "Earth's Albedo 1998–2017 as Measured From Earthshine" . Geophysical Research Letters . 48 (17) e2021GL094888. Bibcode : 2021GeoRL..4894888G . doi : 10.1029/2021GL094888 . ISSN 1944-8007 . S2CID 239667126 . ^ Henshilwood, Christopher S.; d'Errico, Francesco; van Niekerk, Karen L.; Dayet, Laure; Queffelec, Alain; Pollarolo, Luca (October 2018). "An abstract drawing from the 73,000-year-old levels at Blombos Cave, South Africa" (PDF) . Nature . 562 (7725): 115– 118. Bibcode : 2018Natur.562..115H . doi : 10.1038/s41586-018-0514-3 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 30209394 . S2CID 52197496 . ^ Lanese, Nicoletta. "Kids' Fossilized Handprints May Be Some of the World's Oldest Art" . Scientific American . Retrieved 17 October 2021 . ^ Davis-Marks, Isis; Davis-Marks, Isis. "These 200,000-Year-Old Hand and Footprints Could Be the World's Earliest Cave Art" . Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved 17 October 2021 . ^ Zhang, David D.; Bennett, Matthew R.; Cheng, Hai; Wang, Leibin; Zhang, Haiwei; Reynolds, Sally C.; Zhang, Shengda; Wang, Xiaoqing; Li, Teng; Urban, Tommy; Pei, Qing; Wu, Zhifeng; Zhang, Pu; Liu, Chunru; Wang, Yafeng; Wang, Cong; Zhang, Dongju; Lawrence Edwards, R. (10 September 2021). "Earliest parietal art: Hominin hand and foot traces from the middle Pleistocene of Tibet" . Science Bulletin . 66 (24): 2506– 2515. Bibcode : 2021SciBu..66.2506Z . doi : 10.1016/j.scib.2021.09.001 . ISSN 2095-9273 . PMID 36654210 . S2CID 239102132 . ^ Dinerstein, E.; Vynne, C.; Sala, E.; Joshi, A. R.; Fernando, S.; Lovejoy, T. E.; Mayorga, J.; Olson, D.; Asner, G. P.; Baillie, J. E. M.; Burgess, N. D.; Burkart, K.; Noss, R. F.; Zhang, Y. P.; Baccini, A.; Birch, T.; Hahn, N.; Joppa, L. N.; Wikramanayake, E. (2019). "A Global Deal For Nature: Guiding principles, milestones, and targets" . Science Advances . 5 (4) eaaw2869. Bibcode : 2019SciA....5.2869D . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aaw2869 . PMC 6474764 . PMID 31016243 . ^ "Improving ocean protection with the first marine protected areas guide" . Institut de Recherche pour le Développement . Retrieved 19 October 2021 . ^ Grorud-Colvert, Kirsten; Sullivan-Stack, Jenna; Roberts, Callum; Constant, Vanessa; Horta e Costa, Barbara; Pike, Elizabeth P.; Kingston, Naomi; Laffoley, Dan; Sala, Enric; Claudet, Joachim; Friedlander, Alan M.; Gill, David A.; Lester, Sarah E.; Day, Jon C.; Gonçalves, Emanuel J.; Ahmadia, Gabby N.; Rand, Matt; Villagomez, Angelo; Ban, Natalie C.; Gurney, Georgina G.; Spalding, Ana K. ; Bennett, Nathan J.; Briggs, Johnny; Morgan, Lance E.; Moffitt, Russell; Deguignet, Marine; Pikitch, Ellen K.; Darling, Emily S.; Jessen, Sabine; Hameed, Sarah O.; Di Carlo, Giuseppe; Guidetti, Paolo; Harris, Jean M.; Torre, Jorge; Kizilkaya, Zafer; Agardy, Tundi; Cury, Philippe; Shah, Nirmal J.; Sack, Karen; Cao, Ling; Fernandez, Miriam; Lubchenco, Jane (2021). "The MPA Guide: A framework to achieve global goals for the ocean" (PDF) . Science . 373 (6560) eabf0861. doi : 10.1126/science.abf0861 . PMID 34516798 . S2CID 237473020 . ^ "Unvaccinated people 11 times more likely to die from COVID-19, CDC study shows" . CBS News . Retrieved 20 October 2021 . ^ Scobie, Heather M.; Johnson, Amelia G.; Suthar, Amitabh B.; Severson, Rachel; Alden, Nisha B.; Balter, Sharon; Bertolino, Daniel; Blythe, David; Brady, Shane; Cadwell, Betsy; Cheng, Iris; Davidson, Sherri; Delgadillo, Janelle; Devinney, Katelynn; Duchin, Jeff; Duwell, Monique; Fisher, Rebecca; Fleischauer, Aaron; Grant, Ashley; Griffin, Jennifer; Haddix, Meredith; Hand, Julie; Hanson, Matt; Hawkins, Eric; Herlihy, Rachel K.; Hicks, Liam; Holtzman, Corinne; Hoskins, Mikhail; Hyun, Judie; Kaur, Ramandeep; Kay, Meagan; Kidrowski, Holly; Kim, Curi; Komatsu, Kenneth; Kugeler, Kiersten; Lewis, Melissa; Lyons, B. Casey; Lyons, Shelby; Lynfield, Ruth; McCaffrey, Keegan; McMullen, Chelsea; Milroy, Lauren; Meyer, Stephanie; Nolen, Leisha; Patel, Monita R.; Pogosjans, Sargis; Reese, Heather E.; Saupe, Amy; Sell, Jessica; Sokol, Theresa; Sosin, Daniel; Stanislawski, Emma; Stevens, Kelly; Vest, Hailey; White, Kelly; Wilson, Erica; MacNeil, Adam; Ritchey, Matthew D.; Silk, Benjamin J. (17 September 2021). "Monitoring Incidence of COVID-19 Cases, Hospitalizations, and Deaths, by Vaccination Status — 13 U.S. Jurisdictions, April 4–July 17, 2021" . MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report . 70 (37): 1284– 1290. doi : 10.15585/mmwr.mm7037e1 . PMC 8445374 . PMID 34529637 . ^ "Physiology: Fasting may mediate the beneficial effects of calorie restriction in mice | Nature Metabolism | Nature Portfolio" . Nature Asia . Archived from the original on 18 October 2021 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Green, Cara L.; Lamming, Dudley W.; Fontana, Luigi (13 September 2021). "Molecular mechanisms of dietary restriction promoting health and longevity" . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology . 23 (1): 56– 73. doi : 10.1038/s41580-021-00411-4 . ISSN 1471-0080 . PMC 8692439 . PMID 34518687 . S2CID 237505615 . ^ "Researchers provide a framework to study precision nutrigeroscience" . Buck Institute for Research on Aging . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Wilson, Kenneth A.; Chamoli, Manish; Hilsabeck, Tyler A.; Pandey, Manish; Bansal, Sakshi; Chawla, Geetanjali; Kapahi, Pankaj (22 September 2021). "Evaluating the beneficial effects of dietary restrictions: A framework for precision nutrigeroscience" . Cell Metabolism . 33 (11): 2142– 2173. doi : 10.1016/j.cmet.2021.08.018 . ISSN 1550-4131 . PMC 8845500 . PMID 34555343 . S2CID 237617416 . ^ O'Keefe, James H.; Torres-Acosta, Noel; O'Keefe, Evan L.; Saeed, Ibrahim M.; Lavie, Carl J.; Smith, Sarah E.; Ros, Emilio (September 2020). "A Pesco-Mediterranean Diet With Intermittent Fasting" . Journal of the American College of Cardiology . 76 (12): 1484– 1493. doi : 10.1016/j.jacc.2020.07.049 . PMID 32943166 . S2CID 221787788 . ^ "Intermittent fasting makes fruit flies live longer—will it work for people?" . Columbia University Irving Medical Center . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Ulgherait, Matt; Midoun, Adil M.; Park, Scarlet J.; Gatto, Jared A.; Tener, Samantha J.; Siewert, Julia; Klickstein, Naomi; Canman, Julie C.; Ja, William W.; Shirasu-Hiza, Mimi (October 2021). "Circadian autophagy drives iTRF-mediated longevity" . Nature . 598 (7880): 353– 358. Bibcode : 2021Natur.598..353U . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03934-0 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMC 9395244 . PMID 34588695 . S2CID 238229699 . ^ "Have we detected dark energy? Scientists say it's a possibility" . University of Cambridge . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Fernandez, Elizabeth. "Signal From The XENON1T Experiment May Be A Hallmark Of Dark Energy" . Forbes . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Vagnozzi, Sunny; Visinelli, Luca; Brax, Philippe; Davis, Anne-Christine; Sakstein, Jeremy (15 September 2021). "Direct detection of dark energy: The XENON1T excess and future prospects". Physical Review D . 104 (6) 063023. arXiv : 2103.15834 . Bibcode : 2021PhRvD.104f3023V . doi : 10.1103/PhysRevD.104.063023 . S2CID 232417159 . ^ "Australian fires in 2019–2020 had even more global reach than previously thought" . Science News . 15 September 2021 . Retrieved 19 October 2021 . ^ Tang, Weiyi; Llort, Joan; Weis, Jakob; Perron, Morgane M. G.; Basart, Sara; Li, Zuchuan; Sathyendranath, Shubha ; Jackson, Thomas; Sanz Rodriguez, Estrella; Proemse, Bernadette C.; Bowie, Andrew R.; Schallenberg, Christina; Strutton, Peter G.; Matear, Richard; Cassar, Nicolas (September 2021). "Widespread phytoplankton blooms triggered by 2019–2020 Australian wildfires" . Nature . 597 (7876): 370– 375. Bibcode : 2021Natur.597..370T . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03805-8 . hdl : 2117/351768 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 34526706 . S2CID 237536378 . ^ "Australian bushfire smoke caused massive phytoplankton bloom in Southern Ocean" .

The Guardian . 15 September 2021 . Retrieved 19 October 2021 . ^ van der Velde, Ivar R.; van der Werf, Guido R.; Houweling, Sander; Maasakkers, Joannes D.; Borsdorff, Tobias; Landgraf, Jochen; Tol, Paul; van Kempen, Tim A.; van Hees, Richard; Hoogeveen, Ruud; Veefkind, J. Pepijn; Aben, Ilse (September 2021). "Vast CO2 release from Australian fires in 2019–2020 constrained by satellite" (PDF) . Nature . 597 (7876): 366– 369. Bibcode : 2021Natur.597..366V . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03712-y . hdl : 1871.1/c4f7bd8b-1e9b-49bb-9604-ba873e5a4d52 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 34526704 . S2CID 237536364 . ^ a b "Eco-friendly, lab-grown coffee is on the way, but it comes with a catch" .

The Guardian . 16 October 2021 . Retrieved 12 February 2022 . ^ "Sustainable coffee grown in Finland" . VttResearch.com . 15 September 2021 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Davis, Nicola (16 September 2021). "Scientists find evidence of humans making clothes 120,000 years ago - Tools and bones in Moroccan cave could be some of earliest evidence of the hallmark human behaviour" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 16 September 2021 . ^ Hallett, Emily Y.; et al. (16 September 2021). "A worked bone assemblage from 120,000–90,000 year old deposits at Contrebandiers Cave, Atlantic Coast, Morocco" . iScience . 24 (9) 102988. Bibcode : 2021iSci...24j2988H . doi : 10.1016/j.isci.2021.102988 . PMC 8478944 . PMID 34622180 . ^ "Animals died in 'toxic soup' during Earth's worst mass extinction: A warning for today" . University of Connecticut . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Mays, Chris; McLoughlin, Stephen; et al. (17 September 2021). "Lethal microbial blooms delayed freshwater ecosystem recovery following the end-Permian extinction" . Nature Communications . 12 (5511): 5511. Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.5511M . doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-25711-3 . PMC 8448769 . PMID 34535650 . ^ a b Mallapaty, Smriti (24 September 2021). "Closest known relatives of virus behind COVID-19 found in Laos" . Nature . 597 (7878): 603. Bibcode : 2021Natur.597..603M . doi : 10.1038/d41586-021-02596-2 . PMID 34561634 . S2CID 237626322 . Retrieved 20 October 2021 . ^ Temmam, Sarah; Vongphayloth, Khamsing; Baquero, Eduard; Munier, Sandie; Bonomi, Massimiliano; Regnault, Béatrice; Douangboubpha, Bounsavane; Karami, Yasaman; Chrétien, Delphine; Sanamxay, Daosavanh; Xayaphet, Vilakhan; Paphaphanh, Phetphoumin; Lacoste, Vincent; Somlor, Somphavanh; Lakeomany, Khaithong; Phommavanh, Nothasin; Pérot, Philippe; Dehan, Océane; Amara, Faustine; Donati, Flora; Bigot, Thomas; Nilges, Michael; Rey, Félix A.; Van Der Werf, Sylvie; Brey, Paul T.; Eloit, Marc (2022). "Bat coronaviruses related to SARS-CoV-2 and infectious for human cells". Nature . 604 (7905): 330– 336. Bibcode : 2022Natur.604..330T . doi : 10.1038/s41586-022-04532-4 . PMID 35172323 . Preprint . ^ Wu, Zhiqiang; Han, Yelin; Wang, Yuyang; Liu, Bo; Zhao, Lamei; Zhang, Junpeng; Su, Hao-Xiang; Zhao, Wenliang; Liu, Liguo; Bai, Shibin; Dong, Jie; Sun, Lilian; Zhu, Yafang; Zhou, Siyu; Song, Yiping; Sui, Hongtao; Yang, Jian; Wang, Jianwei; Zhang, Shuyi; Qian, Zhaohui; Jin, Qi (20 September 2021). "A comprehensive survey of bat sarbecoviruses across China for the origin tracing of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2". doi : 10.21203/rs.3.rs-885194/v1 . S2CID 240599325 . {{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ " 'Superbubble' region of star formation was created by supernovae, study suggests" . Physics World . 11 October 2021 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Bialy, Shmuel; Zucker, Catherine; Goodman, Alyssa; Foley, Michael M.; Alves, João; Semenov, Vadim A.; Benjamin, Robert; Leike, Reimar; Enßlin, Torsten (1 September 2021). "The Per-Tau Shell: A Giant Star-forming Spherical Shell Revealed by 3D Dust Observations" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 23 September 2021 . ^ Bennett, Matthew R.; Bustos, David; Pigati, Jeffrey S.; Springer, Kathleen B.; Urban, Thomas M.; Holliday, Vance T.; Reynolds, Sally C.; Budka, Marcin; Honke, Jeffrey S.; Hudson, Adam M.; Fenerty, Brendan; Connelly, Clare; Martinez, Patrick J.; Santucci, Vincent L.; Odess, Daniel (24 September 2021). "Evidence of humans in North America during the Last Glacial Maximum" (PDF) . Science . 373 (6562): 1528– 1531. Bibcode : 2021Sci...373.1528B . doi : 10.1126/science.abg7586 . PMID 34554787 . S2CID 237616125 . ^ "World-first artificial synthesis of starch from CO2 outperforms nature" . New Atlas . 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Cai, Tao; Sun, Hongbing; Qiao, Jing; Zhu, Leilei; Zhang, Fan; Zhang, Jie; Tang, Zijing; Wei, Xinlei; Yang, Jiangang; Yuan, Qianqian; Wang, Wangyin; Yang, Xue; Chu, Huanyu; Wang, Qian; You, Chun; Ma, Hongwu; Sun, Yuanxia; Li, Yin; Li, Can; Jiang, Huifeng; Wang, Qinhong; Ma, Yanhe (24 September 2021). "Cell-free chemoenzymatic starch synthesis from carbon dioxide" . Science . 373 (6562): 1523– 1527. Bibcode : 2021Sci...373.1523C . doi : 10.1126/science.abh4049 . PMID 34554807 . S2CID 237615280 . ^ "Apple opposes EU plans to make common charger port for all devices" .

The Guardian . 23 September 2021 . Retrieved 19 October 2021 . ^ Peltier, Elian (23 September 2021). "In a setback for Apple, the European Union seeks a common charger for all phones" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 19 October 2021 . ^ "One common charging solution for all" . Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs - European Commission . 5 July 2016 . Retrieved 19 October 2021 . ^ "By 2500 earth could be alien to humans" . Scienmag: Latest Science and Health News . 14 October 2021 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Lyon, Christopher; Saupe, Erin E.; Smith, Christopher J.; Hill, Daniel J.; Beckerman, Andrew P.; Stringer, Lindsay C.; Marchant, Robert; McKay, James; Burke, Ariane; O'Higgins, Paul; Dunhill, Alexander M.; Allen, Bethany J.; Riel-Salvatore, Julien; Aze, Tracy (2021). "Climate change research and action must look beyond 2100" . Global Change Biology . 28 (2): 349– 361. doi : 10.1111/gcb.15871 . ISSN 1365-2486 . PMID 34558764 . S2CID 237616583 . ^ Boonstra, Evert; de Kleijn, Roy; Colzato, Lorenza S.; Alkemade, Anneke; Forstmann, Birte U.; Nieuwenhuis, Sander (6 October 2015). "Neurotransmitters as food supplements: the effects of GABA on brain and behavior" . Frontiers in Psychology . 6 : 1520. doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01520 . PMC 4594160 . PMID 26500584 . ^ "Tomato In Japan Is First CRISPR-Edited Food In The World To Go On Sale" . IFLScience . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Wang, Tian; Zhang, Hongyan; Zhu, Hongliang (15 June 2019). "CRISPR technology is revolutionizing the improvement of tomato and other fruit crops" . Horticulture Research . 6 (1): 77. Bibcode : 2019HorR....6...77W . doi : 10.1038/s41438-019-0159-x . ISSN 2052-7276 . PMC 6570646 . PMID 31240102 . ^ Yirka, Bob. "Reprogramming heart muscle cells to repair damage from heart attacks" . medicalxpress.com . Retrieved 20 October 2021 . ^ Chen, Yanpu; Lüttmann, Felipe F.; Schoger, Eric; Schöler, Hans R.; Zelarayán, Laura C.; Kim, Kee-Pyo; Haigh, Jody J.; Kim, Johnny; Braun, Thomas (24 September 2021). "Reversible reprogramming of cardiomyocytes to a fetal state drives heart regeneration in mice". Science . 373 (6562): 1537– 1540. Bibcode : 2021Sci...373.1537C . doi : 10.1126/science.abg5159 . PMID 34554778 . S2CID 237617229 . ^ Gramling, Carolyn (1 October 2021). "2020 babies may suffer up to seven times as many extreme heat waves as 1960s kids" . Science News . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Thiery, Wim; Lange, Stefan; Rogelj, Joeri ; Schleussner, Carl-Friedrich; Gudmundsson, Lukas; Seneviratne, Sonia I.; Andrijevic, Marina; Frieler, Katja; Emanuel, Kerry; Geiger, Tobias; Bresch, David N.; Zhao, Fang; Willner, Sven N.; Büchner, Matthias; Volkholz, Jan; Bauer, Nico; Chang, Jinfeng; Ciais, Philippe; Dury, Marie; François, Louis; Grillakis, Manolis; Gosling, Simon N.; Hanasaki, Naota; Hickler, Thomas; Huber, Veronika; Ito, Akihiko; Jägermeyr, Jonas; Khabarov, Nikolay; Koutroulis, Aristeidis; Liu, Wenfeng; Lutz, Wolfgang; Mengel, Matthias; Müller, Christoph; Ostberg, Sebastian; Reyer, Christopher P. O.; Stacke, Tobias; Wada, Yoshihide (8 October 2021). "Intergenerational inequities in exposure to climate extremes" . Science . 374 (6564): 158– 160. Bibcode : 2021Sci...374..158T . doi : 10.1126/science.abi7339 . PMID 34565177 . S2CID 237942847 . ^ "Landsat-9: 'Satellite of record' launches to picture Earth" . BBC . 27 September 2021 . Retrieved 27 September 2021 . ^ "NASA Launches New Mission to Monitor Earth's Landscapes" . NASA . 27 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 . ^ Starr, Michelle. "A New Paper Claims Photosynthesis Could Be Possible in The Clouds of Venus" . ScienceAlert . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Mogul, Rakesh; Limaye, Sanjay S.; Lee, Yeon Joo; Pasillas, Michael (1 October 2021). "Potential for Phototrophy in Venus' Clouds" . Astrobiology . 21 (10): 1237– 1249. Bibcode : 2021AsBio..21.1237M . doi : 10.1089/ast.2021.0032 . ISSN 1531-1074 . PMID 34569810 . S2CID 237944209 . ^ Spalding, Katie. "COVID-19 Safety Measures May Have Wiped Out An Entire Flu Lineage" . IFLScience . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ Koutsakos, Marios; Wheatley, Adam K.; Laurie, Karen; Kent, Stephen J.; Rockman, Steve (28 September 2021). "Influenza lineage extinction during the COVID-19 pandemic?" . Nature Reviews Microbiology . 19 (12): 741– 742. doi : 10.1038/s41579-021-00642-4 . ISSN 1740-1534 . PMC 8477979 . PMID 34584246 . ^ "AI may predict the next virus to jump from animals to humans" . Public Library of Science . Retrieved 19 October 2021 . ^ Mollentze, Nardus; Babayan, Simon A.; Streicker, Daniel G. (28 September 2021). "Identifying and prioritizing potential human-infecting viruses from their genome sequences" . PLOS Biology . 19 (9) e3001390. doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001390 . ISSN 1545-7885 . PMC 8478193 . PMID 34582436 . ^ Clinical trial number NCT04575597 for "Efficacy and Safety of Molnupiravir (MK-4482) in Non-Hospitalized Adult Participants With COVID-19 (MK-4482-002)" at ClinicalTrials.gov ^ "Analysis | Why a New Pill to Treat Covid Could Be a Game Changer: QuickTake" . Washington Post . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ "Merck and Ridgeback's Investigational Oral Antiviral Molnupiravir Reduced the Risk of Hospitalization or Death by Approximately 50 Percent Compared to Placebo for Patients with Mild or Moderate COVID-19 in Positive Interim Analysis of Phase 3 Study" . Merck & Co. Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ Mueller, Benjamin; Santora, Marc; Engelbrecht, Cora (4 October 2021). "Nobel Prize Awarded for Research About Temperature and Touch - David Julius and Ardem Patapoutian were honored for their discoveries about how heat, cold and touch can initiate signals in the nervous system" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 6 October 2021 . ^ Snyder, Alison (14 October 2021). "New ideas are struggling to emerge from the sea of science" . Axios . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ Chu, Johan S. G.; Evans, James A. (12 October 2021). "Slowed canonical progress in large fields of science" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 118 (41) e2021636118. Bibcode : 2021PNAS..11821636C . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2021636118 . ISSN 0027-8424 . PMC 8522281 . PMID 34607941 . ^ Metz, Cade; Santora, Marc; Engelbrecht, Cora (5 October 2021). "Nobel Prize in Physics Awarded for Study of Humanity's Role in Changing Climate - The work of Syukuro Manabe, Klaus Hasselmann and Giorgio Parisi "demonstrate that our knowledge about the climate rests on a solid scientific foundation," the committee said" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 6 October 2021 . ^ Santora, Marc; Engelbrecht, Cora (6 October 2021). "Nobel Prize in Chemistry Awarded to Scientists for Creating a Tool to Build Molecules - Benjamin List and David W.C. MacMillan were honored for work that spurred research into new drugs and reduced the effect of chemistry on the environment" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 6 October 2021 . ^ "WHO endorses use of world's first malaria vaccine in Africa" .

The Guardian . 8 October 2021 . Retrieved 14 October 2021 . ^ "Study reveals scale of data-sharing from Android mobile phones" . Trinity College Dublin . Retrieved 16 November 2021 . ^ Liu, Haoyu; Patras, Paul; Leith, Douglas J. (6 October 2021). "Android Mobile OS Snooping By Samsung, Xiaomi, Huawei and Realme Handsets" (PDF) . Retrieved 16 November 2021 . ^ "This is a map of half a billion connections in a tiny bit of mouse brain" . MIT Technology Review . Retrieved 12 February 2022 . ^ "Neuroscientists roll out first comprehensive atlas of brain cells" . University of California-Berkeley . Retrieved 16 November 2021 . ^ Callaway, Edward M.; et al. (October 2021). "A multimodal cell census and atlas of the mammalian primary motor cortex" . Nature . 598 (7879): 86– 102. doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03950-0 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMC 8494634 . PMID 34616075 . ^ Winnubst, Johan; Arber, Silvia (October 2021). "A census of cell types in the brain's motor cortex" . Nature . 598 (7879): 33– 34. Bibcode : 2021Natur.598...33W . doi : 10.1038/d41586-021-02493-8 . PMID 34616052 . S2CID 238422012 . Retrieved 16 November 2021 . ^ "What makes us human?

The Guardian . 25 October 2021 . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ Smith, Shane; Price, Danny C.; Sheikh, Sofia Z.; Czech, Daniel J.; Croft, Steve; DeBoer, David; Gajjar, Vishal; Isaacson, Howard; Lacki, Brian C.; Lebofsky, Matt; MacMahon, David H. E.; Ng, Cherry; Perez, Karen I.; Siemion, Andrew P. V.; Webb, Claire Isabel; Drew, Jamie; Worden, S. Pete; Zic, Andrew (November 2021). "A radio technosignature search towards Proxima Centauri resulting in a signal of interest". Nature Astronomy . 5 (11): 1148– 1152. arXiv : 2111.08007 . Bibcode : 2021NatAs...5.1148S . doi : 10.1038/s41550-021-01479-w . ISSN 2397-3366 . S2CID 239948037 . ^ Sheikh, Sofia Z.; Smith, Shane; Price, Danny C.; DeBoer, David; Lacki, Brian C.; Czech, Daniel J.; Croft, Steve; Gajjar, Vishal; Isaacson, Howard; Lebofsky, Matt; MacMahon, David H. E.; Ng, Cherry; Perez, Karen I.; Siemion, Andrew P. V.; Webb, Claire Isabel; Zic, Andrew; Drew, Jamie; Worden, S. Pete (November 2021). "Analysis of the Breakthrough Listen signal of interest blc1 with a technosignature verification framework". Nature Astronomy . 5 (11): 1153– 1162. arXiv : 2111.06350 . Bibcode : 2021NatAs...5.1153S . doi : 10.1038/s41550-021-01508-8 . ISSN 2397-3366 . S2CID 239906760 . ^ "Quantum advantage takes a giant leap in optical and superconducting systems" . Physics World . 26 October 2021 . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ Yulin Wu; et al. (25 October 2021). "Strong Quantum Computational Advantage Using a Superconducting Quantum Processor". Physical Review Letters . 127 (18) 180501. arXiv : 2106.14734 . Bibcode : 2021PhRvL.127r0501W . doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.180501 . PMID 34767433 . S2CID 235658633 . ^ Zhong, Han-Sen; Deng, Yu-Hao; Qin, Jian; Wang, Hui; Chen, Ming-Cheng; Peng, Li-Chao; Luo, Yi-Han; Wu, Dian; Gong, Si-Qiu; Su, Hao; Hu, Yi; Hu, Peng; Yang, Xiao-Yan; Zhang, Wei-Jun; Li, Hao; Li, Yuxuan; Jiang, Xiao; Gan, Lin; Yang, Guangwen; You, Lixing; Wang, Zhen; Li, Li; Liu, Nai-Le; Renema, Jelmer J.; Lu, Chao-Yang; Pan, Jian-Wei (25 October 2021). "Phase-Programmable Gaussian Boson Sampling Using Stimulated Squeezed Light". Physical Review Letters . 127 (18) 180502. arXiv : 2106.15534 . Bibcode : 2021PhRvL.127r0502Z . doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.180502 . PMID 34767431 . S2CID 235669908 . ^ Qingling Zhu; Sirui Cao; et al. (25 October 2021). "Quantum computational advantage via 60-qubit 24-cycle random circuit sampling". Science Bulletin . 67 (3): 240– 245. arXiv : 2109.03494 . doi : 10.1016/j.scib.2021.10.017 . ISSN 2095-9273 . PMID 36546072 . S2CID 237442167 . ^ Fuge, Lauren (30 October 2021). "NASA proposes playbook for communicating the discovery of alien life - Sensationalising aliens is so 20th century, according to NASA scientists" . Cosmos . Retrieved 1 November 2021 . ^ Green, James; et al. (27 October 2021). "Call for a framework for reporting evidence for life beyond Earth" . Nature . 598 (7882): 575– 579. arXiv : 2107.10975 . Bibcode : 2021Natur.598..575G . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03804-9 . PMID 34707302 . S2CID 236318566 . Retrieved 1 November 2021 . ^ O'Callaghan, Jonathan (6 November 2021). "Star System With Right-Angled Planets Surprises Astronomers - Two planets orbit the poles while another revolves around the star's equator, suggesting a mysterious, undetected force" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 7 November 2021 . ^ Bourrier, V.; et al. (27 October 2021). "The Rossiter–McLaughlin effect revolutions: an ultra-short period planet and a warm mini-Neptune on perpendicular orbits" . Astronomy & Astrophysics . 654 (A152): A152. arXiv : 2110.14214 . Bibcode : 2021A&A...654A.152B . doi : 10.1051/0004-6361/202141527 . S2CID 239087858 . Retrieved 7 November 2021 . ^ "Timing is everything: Researchers reveal why the right sequence of policies is essential to slow deforestation" . Stanford University . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ Furumo, Paul R.; Lambin, Eric F. (27 October 2021). "Policy sequencing to reduce tropical deforestation" . Global Sustainability . 4 e24. Bibcode : 2021GlSus...4E..24F . doi : 10.1017/sus.2021.21 . ISSN 2059-4798 . S2CID 239890357 . ^ Gordon, Rachel. "Self-driving Roboats set sail in Amsterdam canals" . Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ "MIT deploys first full-scale autonomous Roboat on canals of Amsterdam" . New Atlas . 28 October 2021 . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ Yirka, Bob. "Model suggests a billion people could get safe drinking water from hypothetical harvesting device" . Tech Xplore . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ "Solar-powered harvesters could produce clean water for one billion people" . Physics World . 13 November 2021 . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ Lord, Jackson; Thomas, Ashley; Treat, Neil; Forkin, Matthew; Bain, Robert; Dulac, Pierre; Behroozi, Cyrus H.; Mamutov, Tilek; Fongheiser, Jillia; Kobilansky, Nicole; Washburn, Shane; Truesdell, Claudia; Lee, Clare; Schmaelzle, Philipp H. (October 2021). "Global potential for harvesting drinking water from air using solar energy" . Nature . 598 (7882): 611– 617. Bibcode : 2021Natur.598..611L . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03900-w . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMC 8550973 . PMID 34707305 . ^ "Scientists join international push to ban harmful fisheries subsidies" . University of Western Australia . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ Sumaila, U. Rashid; et al. (29 October 2021). "WTO must ban harmful fisheries subsidies" . Science . 374 (6567): 544. Bibcode : 2021Sci...374..544S . doi : 10.1126/science.abm1680 . hdl : 11585/836841 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 34709891 . S2CID 240153044 . ^ "WTO again fails to agree on Covid vaccine patent waiver" . Retrieved 16 November 2021 . ^ a b Feinmann, Jane (28 October 2021). "Covid-19: global vaccine production is a mess and shortages are down to more than just hoarding" . BMJ . 375 n2375. doi : 10.1136/bmj.n2375 . PMID 34711605 . S2CID 240001631 . Retrieved 16 November 2021 . ^ "Canada lacks 'political will' to waive COVID-19 vaccine patents, Bolivian minister says" . Global News . Retrieved 16 November 2021 . ^ "Corals may store a surprising amount of microplastics in their skeletons" . sciencenews.org. 29 November 2021 . Retrieved 1 December 2021 . ^ Reichert, Jessica; Arnold, Angelina L.; Hammer, Nils; Miller, Ingo B.; Rades, Marvin; Schubert, Patrick; Ziegler, Maren; Wilke, Thomas (2022). "Reef-building corals act as long-term sink for microplastic" . Global Change Biology . 28 (1): 33– 45. Bibcode : 2022GCBio..28...33R . doi : 10.1111/gcb.15920 . ISSN 1365-2486 . PMID 34710272 . S2CID 240154145 . ^ Langmaid, Virginia. "Report warns of climate change's 'code red' impact on health" . CNN . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ Romanello, Marina; et al. (30 October 2021). "The 2021 report of the Lancet Countdown on health and climate change: code red for a healthy future" (PDF) .

The Lancet . 398 (10311): 1619– 1662. doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)01787-6 . hdl : 10278/3746207 . ISSN 0140-6736 . PMC 7616807 . PMID 34687662 . S2CID 239046862 . ^ Rabie, Passant (1 November 2021). "Organic Molecules Found On Mars For The First Time - The Curiosity rover demonstrated a useful technique to search for Martian biosignatures" . Inverse . Retrieved 2 November 2021 . ^ Millan, M.; et al. (1 November 2021). "Organic molecules revealed in Mars's Bagnold Dunes by Curiosity's derivatization experiment" . Nature Astronomy . 6 : 129– 140. Bibcode : 2022NatAs...6..129M . doi : 10.1038/s41550-021-01507-9 . S2CID 240490556 . Retrieved 2 November 2021 . ^ a b Nansai, Keisuke; Tohno, Susumu; Chatani, Satoru; Kanemoto, Keiichiro; Kagawa, Shigemi; Kondo, Yasushi; Takayanagi, Wataru; Lenzen, Manfred (2 November 2021). "Consumption in the G20 nations causes particulate air pollution resulting in two million premature deaths annually" . Nature Communications . 12 (1): 6286. Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.6286N . doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-26348-y . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 8563796 . PMID 34728619 . ^ "Air pollution from G20 consumers caused two million deaths in 2010" . New Scientist . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ "ALMA Scientists Detect Signs of Water in a Galaxy Far, Far Away" . National Radio Astronomy Observatory . 3 November 2021 . Retrieved 3 November 2021 . ^ Jarugula, Sreevani; Vieira, Joaquin D.; Weiss, Axel; Spilker, Justin S.; Aravena, Manuel; Archipley, Melanie; Béthermin, Matthieu; C. Chapman, Scott; Dong, Chenxing; Greve, Thomas R.; Harrington, Kevin; Hayward, Christopher C.; Hezaveh, Yashar; Hill, Ryley; Litke, Katrina C.; Malkan, Matthew A.; Marrone, Daniel P.; Narayanan, Desika; Phadke, Kedar A.; Reuter, Cassie; Rotermund, Kaja M. (1 November 2021). "Molecular Line Observations in Two Dusty Star-forming Galaxies at z = 6.9" .

The Astrophysical Journal . 921 (1): 97. arXiv : 2108.11319 . Bibcode : 2021ApJ...921...97J . doi : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac21db . ISSN 0004-637X . S2CID 237291519 . ^ Chandler, Jeffrey C.; Bevins, Sarah N.; Ellis, Jeremy W.; Linder, Timothy J.; Tell, Rachel M.; Jenkins-Moore, Melinda; Root, J. Jeffrey; Lenoch, Julianna B.; Robbe-Austerman, Suelee; DeLiberto, Thomas J.; Gidlewski, Thomas; Torchetti, Mia Kim; Shriner, Susan A. (23 November 2021). "SARS-CoV-2 exposure in wild white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus)" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 118 (47) e2114828118. Bibcode : 2021PNAS..11814828C . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2114828118 . ISSN 0027-8424 . PMC 8617405 . PMID 34732584 . ^ a b Jacobs, Andrew (2 November 2021). "Widespread Coronavirus Infection Found in Iowa Deer, New Study Says" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 12 December 2021 . ^ Kuchipudi, Suresh V.; Surendran-Nair, Meera; Ruden, Rachel M.; Yon, Michelle; Nissly, Ruth H.; Nelli, Rahul K.; Li, Lingling; Jayarao, Bhushan M.; Vandegrift, Kurt J.; Maranas, Costas D.; Levine, Nicole; Willgert, Katriina; Conlan, Andrew J. K.; Olsen, Randall J.; Davis, James J.; Musser, James M.; Hudson, Peter J.; Kapur, Vivek (2022). "Multiple spillovers from humans and onward transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in white-tailed deer" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 119 (6) e2121644119. Bibcode : 2022PNAS..11921644K . bioRxiv 10.1101/2021.10.31.466677 . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2121644119 . PMC 8833191 . PMID 35078920 . ^ "Coronavirus Disease 2019" . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . 3 November 2021 . Retrieved 13 December 2021 . ^ Zimmermann, Petra; Pittet, Laure F.; Finn, Adam; Pollard, Andrew J.; Curtis, Nigel (1 November 2021). "Should children be vaccinated against COVID-19?" . Archives of Disease in Childhood . 107 (3): e1– e7. doi : 10.1136/archdischild-2021-323040 . ISSN 0003-9888 . PMID 34732388 . S2CID 241609697 . ^ Overbye, Dennis (4 November 2021). "A New 10-Year Plan for the Cosmos - On astronomers' wish list for the next decade: two giant telescopes and a space telescope to search for life and habitable worlds beyond Earth" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 5 November 2021 . ^ "New Report Charts Path for Next Decade of Astronomy and Astrophysics; Recommends Future Ground and Space - Telescopes, Scientific Priorities, Investments in Scientific Community" . National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine . 4 November 2021 . Retrieved 5 November 2021 . ^ Watts, Jonathan; Kirk, Ashley; McIntyre, Niamh; Gutiérrez, Pablo; Kommenda, Niko. "Half world's fossil fuel assets could become worthless by 2036 in net zero transition" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ Mercure, J.-F.; Salas, P.; Vercoulen, P.; Semieniuk, G.; Lam, A.; Pollitt, H.; Holden, P. B.; Vakilifard, N.; Chewpreecha, U.; Edwards, N. R.; Vinuales, J. E. (4 November 2021). "Reframing incentives for climate policy action" . Nature Energy . 6 (12): 1133– 1143. Bibcode : 2021NatEn...6.1133M . doi : 10.1038/s41560-021-00934-2 . ISSN 2058-7546 . S2CID 243792305 . ^ "From whole-organ to cellular resolution: synchrotron X-ray images reveal COVID-19 lung damage" . Physics World . 16 November 2021 . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ "Brightest ever X-ray shows lung vessels altered by COVID-19" . University College London . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ Walsh, C. L.; Tafforeau, P.; Wagner, W. L.; Jafree, D. J.; Bellier, A.; Werlein, C.; Kühnel, M. P.; Boller, E.; Walker-Samuel, S.; Robertus, J. L.; Long, D. A.; Jacob, J.; Marussi, S.; Brown, E.; Holroyd, N.; Jonigk, D. D.; Ackermann, M.; Lee, P. D. (December 2021). "Imaging intact human organs with local resolution of cellular structures using hierarchical phase-contrast tomography" . Nature Methods . 18 (12): 1532– 1541. Bibcode : 2021NatMe..18.1532W . doi : 10.1038/s41592-021-01317-x . ISSN 1548-7105 . PMC 8648561 . PMID 34737453 . ^ Sutherland, Stephani. "How the New Antiviral Pills Help Thwart COVID" . Scientific American . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ Mahase, Elisabeth (8 November 2021). "Covid-19: Pfizer's paxlovid is 89% effective in patients at risk of serious illness, company reports" . BMJ . doi : 10.1136/bmj.n2713 . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ L, Esther (8 November 2021). "The Brain Can Recall and Reawaken Past Immune Responses" . Quanta Magazine . Retrieved 12 December 2021 . ^ Koren, Tamar; Yifa, Re'ee; Amer, Mariam; Krot, Maria; Boshnak, Nadia; Ben-Shaanan, Tamar L.; Azulay-Debby, Hilla; Zalayat, Itay; Avishai, Eden; Hajjo, Haitham; Schiller, Maya; Haykin, Hedva; Korin, Ben; Farfara, Dorit; Hakim, Fahed; Kobiler, Oren; Rosenblum, Kobi; Rolls, Asya (24 November 2021). "Insular cortex neurons encode and retrieve specific immune responses" . Cell . 184 (24): 5902–5915.e17. doi : 10.1016/j.cell.2021.10.013 . ISSN 0092-8674 . PMID 34752731 . S2CID 243843719 . ^ "A strange barrier is keeping cosmic rays out of the Milky Way's centre" . New Scientist . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ Huang, Xiaoyuan; Yuan, Qiang; Fan, Yi-Zhong (9 November 2021). "A GeV-TeV particle component and the barrier of cosmic-ray sea in the Central Molecular Zone" . Nature Communications . 12 (1): 6169. arXiv : 2012.05524 . Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.6169H . doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-26436-z . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 8578646 . PMID 34753922 . ^ "Detection of a coronavirus similar to SARS-CoV-2 in Cambodian bats" . News-Medical.net . 15 November 2021 . Retrieved 12 December 2021 . ^ "Scientists find SARS-CoV-2-related coronaviruses in Cambodian bats from 2010" . Wildlife Conservation Society . Retrieved 12 December 2021 . ^ Delaune, Deborah; Hul, Vibol; Karlsson, Erik A.; Hassanin, Alexandre; Ou, Tey Putita; Baidaliuk, Artem; Gámbaro, Fabiana; Prot, Matthieu; Tu, Vuong Tan; Chea, Sokha; Keatts, Lucy; Mazet, Jonna; Johnson, Christine K.; Buchy, Philippe; Dussart, Philippe; Goldstein, Tracey; Simon-Lorière, Etienne; Duong, Veasna (9 November 2021). "A novel SARS-CoV-2 related coronavirus in bats from Cambodia" . Nature Communications . 12 (1): 6563. Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.6563D . doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-26809-4 . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 8578604 . PMID 34753934 . ^ "A chewing gum that could reduce SARS-CoV-2 transmission" . University of Pennsylvania . Retrieved 13 December 2021 . ^ Daniell, Henry; Nair, Smruti K.; Esmaeili, Nardana; Wakade, Geetanjali; Shahid, Naila; Ganesan, Prem Kumar; Islam, Md Reyazul; Shepley-McTaggart, Ariel; Feng, Sheng; Gary, Ebony N.; Ali, Ali R.; Nuth, Manunya; Cruz, Selene Nunez; Graham-Wooten, Jevon; Streatfield, Stephen J.; Montoya-Lopez, Ruben; Kaznica, Paul; Mawson, Margaret; Green, Brian J.; Ricciardi, Robert; Milone, Michael; Harty, Ronald N.; Wang, Ping; Weiner, David B.; Margulies, Kenneth B.; Collman, Ronald G. (10 November 2021). "Debulking SARS-CoV-2 in saliva using angiotensin converting enzyme 2 in chewing gum to decrease oral virus transmission and infection" . Molecular Therapy . 30 (5): 1966– 1978. doi : 10.1016/j.ymthe.2021.11.008 . ISSN 1525-0016 . PMC 8580552 . PMID 34774754 . ^ "Black hole found hiding in star cluster outside our galaxy" . ESO . 11 November 2021 . Retrieved 11 November 2021 . ^ Saracino, S; Kamann, S; Guarcello, M G; Usher, C; Bastian, N; Cabrera-Ziri, I; Gieles, M; Dreizler, S; Da Costa, G S; Husser, T-O; Hénault-Brunet, V (11 November 2021). "A black hole detected in the young massive LMC cluster NGC 1850" . Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society . 511 (2): 2914– 2924. doi : 10.1093/mnras/stab3159 . hdl : 10261/275847 . ^ "Canadian researchers achieve first quantum simulation of baryons" . University of Waterloo . 11 November 2021 . Retrieved 12 November 2021 . ^ Atas, Yasar Y.; Zhang, Jinglei; Lewis, Randy; Jahanpour, Amin; Haase, Jan F.; Muschik, Christine A. (11 November 2021). "SU(2) hadrons on a quantum computer via a variational approach" . Nature Communications . 12 (1): 6499. Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.6499A . doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-26825-4 . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 8586147 . PMID 34764262 . ^ "Astronomers have found the Milky Way's first known 'feather' " . sciencenews.org . 23 November 2021 . Retrieved 27 November 2021 . ^ "Therapy used on mice may transform spinal injury treatments, say scientists" .

The Guardian . 11 November 2021 . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ University. " 'Dancing molecules' successfully repair severe spinal cord injuries in mice" . Northwestern University . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ Álvarez, Z.; Kolberg-Edelbrock, A. N.; Sasselli, I. R.; Ortega, J. A.; Qiu, R.; Syrgiannis, Z.; Mirau, P. A.; Chen, F.; Chin, S. M.; Weigand, S.; Kiskinis, E.; Stupp, S. I. (12 November 2021). "Bioactive scaffolds with enhanced supramolecular motion promote recovery from spinal cord injury" . Science . 374 (6569): 848– 856. Bibcode : 2021Sci...374..848A . doi : 10.1126/science.abh3602 . PMC 8723833 . PMID 34762454 . S2CID 244039388 . ^ Almoghayer, Mohammed A.; Woolf, David K.; Kerr, Sandy; Davies, Gareth (11 November 2021). "Integration of tidal energy into an island energy system – A case study of Orkney islands". Energy . 242 122547. doi : 10.1016/j.energy.2021.122547 . ISSN 0360-5442 . S2CID 244068724 . ^ "Tidal stream power can aid drive for net-zero and generate 11% of UK's electricity demand" . University of Plymouth . Retrieved 12 December 2021 . ^ Coles, Daniel; Angeloudis, Athanasios; Greaves, Deborah; Hastie, Gordon; Lewis, Matthew; Mackie, Lucas; McNaughton, James; Miles, Jon; Neill, Simon; Piggott, Matthew; Risch, Denise; Scott, Beth; Sparling, Carol; Stallard, Tim; Thies, Philipp; Walker, Stuart; White, David; Willden, Richard; Williamson, Benjamin (24 November 2021). "A review of the UK and British Channel Islands practical tidal stream energy resource" . Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences . 477 (2255) 20210469. Bibcode : 2021RSPSA.47710469C . doi : 10.1098/rspa.2021.0469 . PMC 8564615 . PMID 35153596 . S2CID 240424151 . ^ Chawla, Dalmeet Singh. "Researchers spent an estimated 130 million hours peer-reviewing papers in 2020" . Chemistry World . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ Aczel, Balazs; Szaszi, Barnabas; Holcombe, Alex O. (14 November 2021). "A billion-dollar donation: estimating the cost of researchers' time spent on peer review" . Research Integrity and Peer Review . 6 (1): 14. doi : 10.1186/s41073-021-00118-2 . ISSN 2058-8615 . PMC 8591820 . PMID 34776003 . ^ "Rare case of woman's body ridding itself of HIV" . BBC News . 16 November 2021 . Retrieved 12 December 2021 . ^ Turk, Gabriela; Seiger, Kyra; Lian, Xiaodong; Sun, Weiwei; Parsons, Elizabeth M.; Gao, Ce; Rassadkina, Yelizaveta; Polo, Maria Laura; Czernikier, Alejandro; Ghiglione, Yanina; Vellicce, Alejandra; Varriale, Joseph; Lai, Jun; Yuki, Yuko; Martin, Maureen; Rhodes, Ajantha; Lewin, Sharon R.; Walker, Bruce D.; Carrington, Mary; Siliciano, Robert; Siliciano, Janet; Lichterfeld, Mathias; Laufer, Natalia; Yu, Xu G. (16 November 2021). "A Possible Sterilizing Cure of HIV-1 Infection Without Stem Cell Transplantation" . Annals of Internal Medicine . 175 (1): 95– 100. doi : 10.7326/L21-0297 . ISSN 0003-4819 . PMC 9215120 . PMID 34781719 . S2CID 244131565 . ^ "Antibiotic resistance outwitted by supercomputers" . University of Portsmouth . Retrieved 13 December 2021 . ^ König, Gerhard; Sokkar, Pandian; Pryk, Niclas; Heinrich, Sascha; Möller, David; Cimicata, Giuseppe; Matzov, Donna; Dietze, Pascal; Thiel, Walter; Bashan, Anat; Bandow, Julia Elisabeth; Zuegg, Johannes; Yonath, Ada; Schulz, Frank; Sanchez-Garcia, Elsa (16 November 2021). "Rational prioritization strategy allows the design of macrolide derivatives that overcome antibiotic resistance" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 118 (46) e2113632118. Bibcode : 2021PNAS..11813632K . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2113632118 . ISSN 0027-8424 . PMC 8609559 . PMID 34750269 . ^ "Some genes in the brain may make 100 different proteins" . New Scientist . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ Leung, Szi Kay; Jeffries, Aaron R.; Castanho, Isabel; Jordan, Ben T.; Moore, Karen; Davies, Jonathan P.; Dempster, Emma L.; Bray, Nicholas J.; O'Neill, Paul; Tseng, Elizabeth; Ahmed, Zeshan; Collier, David A.; Jeffery, Erin D.; Prabhakar, Shyam; Schalkwyk, Leonard; Jops, Connor; Gandal, Michael J.; Sheynkman, Gloria M.; Hannon, Eilis; Mill, Jonathan (16 November 2021). "Full-length transcript sequencing of human and mouse cerebral cortex identifies widespread isoform diversity and alternative splicing" . Cell Reports . 37 (7) 110022. doi : 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.110022 . ISSN 2211-1247 . PMC 8609283 . PMID 34788620 . ^ "IBM creates largest ever superconducting quantum computer" . New Scientist . Retrieved 12 February 2022 . ^ "IBM Unveils Breakthrough 127-Qubit Quantum Processor" . IBM Newsroom . Retrieved 12 January 2022 . ^ a b c "Classification of Omicron (B.1.1.529): SARS-CoV-2 Variant of Concern" . WHO . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ "Mask-wearing cuts Covid incidence by 53%, says global study" .

The Guardian . 18 November 2021 . Retrieved 18 November 2021 . ^ Talic, Stella; Shah, Shivangi; Wild, Holly; Gasevic, Danijela; Maharaj, Ashika; Ademi, Zanfina; Li, Xue; Xu, Wei; Mesa-Eguiagaray, Ines; Rostron, Jasmin; Theodoratou, Evropi; Zhang, Xiaomeng; Motee, Ashmika; Liew, Danny; Ilic, Dragan (18 November 2021). "Effectiveness of public health measures in reducing the incidence of covid-19, SARS-CoV-2 transmission, and covid-19 mortality: systematic review and meta-analysis" . BMJ . 375 e068302. doi : 10.1136/bmj-2021-068302 . ISSN 1756-1833 . PMC 9423125 . PMID 34789505 . S2CID 244271780 . ^ "This quantum computing startup says it's ready to take on IBM and Google" . Fast Company . 17 November 2021 . Retrieved 20 November 2021 . ^ "Harvard and MIT Scientists Launch QuEra Computing Inc. to Build Quantum Computers for Today's Impossible Problems" . QuEra Computing . 17 November 2021 . Retrieved 20 November 2021 . ^ "200,000 whole genomes made available for biomedical studies by U.K. effort" . Science.org . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ "Whole Genome Sequencing data on 200,000 UK Biobank participants available now" . UkBiobank.ac.uk . 17 November 2021 . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ "Alien organisms: Hitchhikers of the galaxy?" . University of Adelaide . Retrieved 12 December 2021 . ^ Ricciardi, Anthony; Cassey, Phillip; Leuko, Stefan; Woolnough, Andrew P (17 November 2021). "Planetary Biosecurity: Applying Invasion Science to Prevent Biological Contamination from Space Travel" . BioScience . 72 (3): 247– 253. doi : 10.1093/biosci/biab115 . ^ Hathaway, Bill. "Novel Lyme vaccine shows promise" . Yale University . Retrieved 13 December 2021 . Compared to non-immunized guinea pigs, vaccinated animals exposed to infected ticks quickly developed redness at the tick bite site. None of the immunized animals developed Lyme disease if ticks were removed when redness developed.

In contrast, about half of the control group became infected with B. burgdorferi after tick removal.

When a single infected tick was attached to immunized guinea pigs and not removed, none of vaccinated animals were infected compared to 60 percent of control animals. However, protection waned in immunized guinea pigs if three ticks remained attached to the animal. Ticks in immunized animals were unable to feed aggressively and dislodged more quickly than those on guinea pigs in the control group. ^ Sajid, Andaleeb; Matias, Jaqueline; Arora, Gunjan; Kurokawa, Cheyne; DePonte, Kathleen; Tang, Xiaotian; Lynn, Geoffrey; Wu, Ming-Jie; Pal, Utpal; Strank, Norma Olivares; Pardi, Norbert; Narasimhan, Sukanya; Weissman, Drew; Fikrig, Erol (2021). "mRNA vaccination induces tick resistance and prevents transmission of the Lyme disease agent" . Science Translational Medicine . 13 (620) eabj9827. doi : 10.1126/scitranslmed.abj9827 . PMID 34788080 . S2CID 244375227 . ^ Deshayes, Pierre-Henry. "First electric autonomous cargo ship launched in Norway" . techxplore.com . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ "Deforestation in Brazil's Amazon at highest level since 2006" . Reuters/The Guardian . 19 November 2021 . Retrieved 13 December 2021 . ^ "Brazil: Amazon sees worst deforestation levels in 15 years" . BBC News . 19 November 2021 . Retrieved 13 December 2021 . ^ Wipulasena, Aanya; Mashal, Mujib (7 December 2021). "Sri Lanka's Plunge Into Organic Farming Brings Disaster" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 13 December 2021 . ^ "Sri Lanka ends farm chemical ban as organic drive fails" . phys.org . Retrieved 13 December 2021 . ^ "Scientists finally detected a quantum effect that blocks atoms from scattering visible light" . sciencenews.org. 22 November 2021 . Retrieved 27 November 2021 . ^ "Aspirin is linked with increased risk of heart failure" . European Society of Cardiology . Retrieved 13 December 2021 . ^ Mujaj, Blerim; Zhang, Zhen-Yu; Yang, Wen-Yi; Thijs, Lutgarde; Wei, Fang-Fei; Verhamme, Peter; Delles, Christian; Butler, Javed; Sever, Peter; Latini, Roberto; Cleland, John GF; Zannad, Faiez; Staessen, Jan A. (2021). "Aspirin use is associated with increased risk for incident heart failure: a patient-level pooled analysis" . ESC Heart Failure . 9 (1): 685– 694. doi : 10.1002/ehf2.13688 . ISSN 2055-5822 . PMC 8787993 . PMID 34808706 . S2CID 244490558 . ^ "Aspirin use associated with raised risk of heart failure" . News-Medical.net . 23 November 2021 . Retrieved 13 December 2021 . ^ "Nasa Dart asteroid spacecraft: Mission to smack Dimorphos space rock launches" . BBC News . 24 November 2021 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 . ^ "MCC: Quality of life increases when we live, eat and travel energy-efficiently" . idw-online.de . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ Creutzig, Felix; Niamir, Leila; Bai, Xuemei; Callaghan, Max; Cullen, Jonathan; Díaz-José, Julio; Figueroa, Maria; Grubler, Arnulf; Lamb, William F.; Leip, Adrian; Masanet, Eric; Mata, Érika; Mattauch, Linus; Minx, Jan C.; Mirasgedis, Sebastian; Mulugetta, Yacob; Nugroho, Sudarmanto Budi; Pathak, Minal; Perkins, Patricia; Roy, Joyashree; de la Rue du Can, Stephane; Saheb, Yamina; Some, Shreya; Steg, Linda; Steinberger, Julia; Ürge-Vorsatz, Diana (25 November 2021). "Demand-side solutions to climate change mitigation consistent with high levels of well-being" . Nature Climate Change . 12 : 36– 46. doi : 10.1038/s41558-021-01219-y . ISSN 1758-6798 . S2CID 244657251 . ^ "Omicron variant fuelling 'exponential' rise in Covid cases, say South Africa officials" .

The Guardian . 2 December 2021 . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ "Network for Genomic Surveillance in South Africa (NGS-SA) – SARS-CoV-2 Sequencing Update1 December 2021" (PDF) . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ Torjesen, Ingrid (29 November 2021). "Covid-19: Omicron may be more transmissiblbe than other variants and partly resistant to existing vaccines, scientists fear" . BMJ . doi : 10.1136/bmj.n2943 . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ Callaway, Ewen (25 November 2021). "Heavily mutated Omicron variant puts scientists on alert" . Nature . 600 (7887): 21. Bibcode : 2021Natur.600...21C . doi : 10.1038/d41586-021-03552-w . PMID 34824381 . S2CID 244660616 . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . ^ "Team Builds First Living Robots That Can Reproduce" . 29 November 2021 . Retrieved 1 December 2021 . ^ Kriegman, Sam; Blackiston, Douglas; Levin, Michael; Bongard, Josh (7 December 2021). "Kinematic self-replication in reconfigurable organisms" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 118 (49) e2112672118. Bibcode : 2021PNAS..11812672K . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2112672118 . ISSN 0027-8424 . PMC 8670470 . PMID 34845026 . S2CID 244769761 . ^ "Ancient footprints suggest a mysterious hominid lived alongside Lucy's kind" . sciencenews.org . 1 December 2021 . Retrieved 2 December 2021 . ^ McNutt, Ellison J.; Hatala, Kevin G.; Miller, Catherine; Adams, James; Casana, Jesse; Deane, Andrew S.; Dominy, Nathaniel J.; Fabian, Kallisti; Fannin, Luke D.; Gaughan, Stephen; Gill, Simone V.; Gurtu, Josephat; Gustafson, Ellie; Hill, Austin C.; Johnson, Camille; Kallindo, Said; Kilham, Benjamin; Kilham, Phoebe; Kim, Elizabeth; Liutkus-Pierce, Cynthia; Maley, Blaine; Prabhat, Anjali; Reader, John; Rubin, Shirley; Thompson, Nathan E.; Thornburg, Rebeca; Williams-Hatala, Erin Marie; Zimmer, Brian; Musiba, Charles M.; DeSilva, Jeremy M. (December 2021). "Footprint evidence of early hominin locomotor diversity at Laetoli, Tanzania" . Nature . 600 (7889): 468– 471. Bibcode : 2021Natur.600..468M . doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-04187-7 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMC 8674131 . PMID 34853470 . ^ Clifford, Catherine (21 December 2021). "U.S. can get to 100% clean energy with wind, water, solar and zero nuclear, Stanford professor says" . CNBC . Retrieved 16 January 2022 . ^ Jacobson, Mark Z. ; von Krauland, Anna-Katharina; Coughlin, Stephen J.; Palmer, Frances C.; Smith, Miles M. (1 January 2022). "Zero air pollution and zero carbon from all energy at low cost and without blackouts in variable weather throughout the U.S. with 100% wind-water-solar and storage" . Renewable Energy . 184 : 430– 442. Bibcode : 2022REne..184..430J . doi : 10.1016/j.renene.2021.11.067 . ISSN 0960-1481 . S2CID 244820608 . ^ "Scientists claim big advance in using DNA to store data" . bbc.co.uk . 2 December 2021 . Retrieved 3 December 2021 . ^ "Stem cell-based treatment produces insulin in patients with Type 1 diabetes" . news.ubc.ca . 2 December 2021 . Retrieved 6 December 2021 . ^ Ramzy, Adam; Thompson, David M.; Ward-Hartstonge, Kirsten A.; Ivison, Sabine; Cook, Laura; Garcia, Rosa V.; Loyal, Jackson; Kim, Peter T. W.; Warnock, Garth L.; Levings, Megan K.; Kieffer, Timothy J. (2 December 2021). "Implanted pluripotent stem-cell-derived pancreatic endoderm cells secrete glucose-responsive C-peptide in patients with type 1 diabetes" . Cell Stem Cell . 28 (12): 2047–2061.e5. doi : 10.1016/j.stem.2021.10.003 . ISSN 1934-5909 . PMID 34861146 . S2CID 244855649 . ^ Yirka, Bob. "A mass of human brain cells in a petri dish has been taught to play Pong" . medicalxpress.com . Retrieved 16 January 2022 . ^ Kagan, Brett J.; Kitchen, Andy C.; Tran, Nhi T.; Parker, Bradyn J.; Bhat, Anjali; Rollo, Ben; Razi, Adeel; Friston, Karl J. (2022). "In vitro neurons learn and exhibit sentience when embodied in a simulated game-world" . Neuron . 110 (23): 3952–3969.e8. bioRxiv 10.1101/2021.12.02.471005 . doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2022.09.001 . PMC 9747182 . PMID 36228614 . ^ "Solar Eclipses: 2021 - 2030" . NASA. Archived from the original on 30 May 2008 . Retrieved 28 November 2021 . ^ Qureshi, Muhammad Saad; Oasmaa, Anja; Pihkola, Hanna; Deviatkin, Ivan; Tenhunen, Anna; Mannila, Juha; Minkkinen, Hannu; Pohjakallio, Maija; Laine-Ylijoki, Jutta (1 November 2020). "Pyrolysis of plastic waste: Opportunities and challenges". Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis . 152 104804. Bibcode : 2020JAAP..15204804Q . doi : 10.1016/j.jaap.2020.104804 . ISSN 0165-2370 . S2CID 200068035 . ^ "Breakthrough in separating plastic waste: Machines can now distinguish 12 different types of plastic" . Aarhus University . Retrieved 19 January 2022 . ^ Henriksen, Martin L.; Karlsen, Celine B.; Klarskov, Pernille; Hinge, Mogens (1 January 2022). "Plastic classification via in-line hyperspectral camera analysis and unsupervised machine learning" . Vibrational Spectroscopy . 118 103329. Bibcode : 2022VibSp.11803329H . doi : 10.1016/j.vibspec.2021.103329 . ISSN 0924-2031 . S2CID 244913832 . ^ "Grape seed chemical allows mice to live longer by killing aged cells" . New Scientist . Retrieved 19 January 2022 . ^ Xu, Qixia; Fu, Qiang; Li, Zi; Liu, Hanxin; Wang, Ying; Lin, Xu; He, Ruikun; Zhang, Xuguang; Ju, Zhenyu; Campisi, Judith; Kirkland, James L.; Sun, Yu (December 2021). "The flavonoid procyanidin C1 has senotherapeutic activity and increases lifespan in mice" . Nature Metabolism . 3 (12): 1706– 1726. doi : 10.1038/s42255-021-00491-8 . ISSN 2522-5812 . PMC 8688144 . PMID 34873338 . ^ "This map of distant galaxies could help untangle the mystery of dark energy" . Science.org . Retrieved 12 February 2022 . ^ "SDSS Data Release Publications" . Sloan Digital Sky Survey . Archived from the original on 3 February 2022 . Retrieved 1 February 2022 . ^ Bagheri, Gholamhossein; Thiede, Birte; Hejazi, Bardia; Schlenczek, Oliver; Bodenschatz, Eberhard (7 December 2021). "An upper bound on one-to-one exposure to infectious human respiratory particles" . PNAS . 118 (49) e2110117118. Bibcode : 2021PNAS..11810117B . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2110117118 . PMC 8670465 . PMID 34857639 . ^ "Wood burners cause nearly half of urban air pollution cancer risk – study" .

The Guardian . 17 December 2021 . Retrieved 16 January 2022 . ^ Tsiodra, Irini; Grivas, Georgios; Tavernaraki, Kalliopi; Bougiatioti, Aikaterini; Apostolaki, Maria; Paraskevopoulou, Despina; Gogou, Alexandra; Parinos, Constantine; Oikonomou, Konstantina; Tsagkaraki, Maria; Zarmpas, Pavlos; Nenes, Athanasios; Mihalopoulos, Nikolaos (7 December 2021). "Annual exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in urban environments linked to wintertime wood-burning episodes" . Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics . 21 (23): 17865– 17883. Bibcode : 2021ACP....2117865T . doi : 10.5194/acp-21-17865-2021 . ISSN 1680-7316 . S2CID 245103794 . ^ Wang, Rui; Chen, Jiahui; Wei, Guo-Wei (16 December 2021). "Mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 Evolution Revealing Vaccine-Resistant Mutations in Europe and America" (PDF) .

The Independent . Archived from the original on 13 December 2021 . Retrieved 13 December 2021 . ^ Pasham, Dheeraj R.; et al. (13 December 2021). "Evidence for a compact object in the aftermath of the extragalactic transient AT2018cow" . Nature Astronomy . 74 (2): 249– 258. arXiv : 2112.04531 . Bibcode : 2022NatAs...6..249P . doi : 10.1038/s41550-021-01524-8 . S2CID 245131656 . Retrieved 13 December 2021 . ^ "Thwaites: Antarctic glacier heading for dramatic change" . BBC News . 13 December 2021 . Retrieved 14 December 2021 . ^ Kramer, M.; Stairs, I. H.; Manchester, R. N.; Wex, N.; Deller, A. T.; Coles, W. A.; Ali, M.; Burgay, M.; Camilo, F.; Cognard, I.; Damour, T. (13 December 2021). "Strong-Field Gravity Tests with the Double Pulsar" . Physical Review X . 11 (4) 041050. arXiv : 2112.06795 . Bibcode : 2021PhRvX..11d1050K . doi : 10.1103/physrevx.11.041050 . ISSN 2160-3308 . S2CID 245124502 . ^ Deller, Adam; Manchester, Richard (13 December 2021). "We counted 20 billion ticks of an extreme galactic clock to give Einstein's theory of gravity its toughest test yet" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 16 December 2021 . ^ "The Wikipedia of perovskite solar cell research" . Helmholtz Association of German Research Centres . Retrieved 19 January 2022 . ^ T. Jesper Jacobsson; Adam Hultqvist; Alberto García-Fernández; et al. (13 December 2021). "An open-access database and analysis tool for perovskite solar cells based on the FAIR data principles" . Nature Energy . 7 : 107– 115. doi : 10.1038/s41560-021-00941-3 . hdl : 10356/163386 . ISSN 2058-7546 . S2CID 245175279 . ^ "We've seen our galaxy's huge black hole more clearly than ever before" . New Scientist . 14 December 2021 . Retrieved 14 December 2021 . ^ "Watch stars move around the Milky Way's supermassive black hole in deepest images yet" . ESO . 14 December 2021 . Retrieved 14 December 2021 . ^ "The Galactic Center under the magnifying glass" . Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics . 14 December 2021 . Retrieved 14 December 2021 . ^ Morens, David M.; Taubenberger, Jeffery K.; Fauci, Anthony S. (15 December 2021). "Universal Coronavirus Vaccines — An Urgent Need" . New England Journal of Medicine . 386 (4): 297– 299. doi : 10.1056/NEJMp2118468 . PMC 11000439 . PMID 34910863 . S2CID 245219817 . ^ "Uncovered: Key to how exercise protects against consequences of ageing" . Monash University . Retrieved 19 January 2022 . ^ Xirouchaki, Chrysovalantou E.; Jia, Yaoyao; McGrath, Meagan J.; Greatorex, Spencer; Tran, Melanie; Merry, Troy L.; Hong, Dawn; Eramo, Matthew J.; Broome, Sophie C.; Woodhead, Jonathan S. T.; D'souza, Randall F.; Gallagher, Jenny; Salimova, Ekaterina; Huang, Cheng; Schittenhelm, Ralf B.; Sadoshima, Junichi; Watt, Matthew J.; Mitchell, Christina A.; Tiganis, Tony (December 2021). "Skeletal muscle NOX4 is required for adaptive responses that prevent insulin resistance" . Science Advances . 7 (51) eabl4988. Bibcode : 2021SciA....7L4988X . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.abl4988 . PMC 8673768 . PMID 34910515 . ^ "Breakthrough in efficient powering of HTS magnets" . Tokamak Energy . 16 December 2021 . Retrieved 16 December 2021 . ^ "Insekten mit durchschnittlich 16 verschiedenen Pestiziden belastet" . heise online (in German) . Retrieved 17 January 2022 . ^ Brühl, Carsten A.; Bakanov, Nikita; Köthe, Sebastian; Eichler, Lisa; Sorg, Martin; Hörren, Thomas; Mühlethaler, Roland; Meinel, Gotthard; Lehmann, Gerlind U. C. (16 December 2021). "Direct pesticide exposure of insects in nature conservation areas in Germany" . Scientific Reports . 11 (1): 24144. Bibcode : 2021NatSR..1124144B . doi : 10.1038/s41598-021-03366-w . ISSN 2045-2322 . PMC 8677746 . PMID 34916546 . ^ "Perovskite solar cell with ultra-long stability" . Forschungszentrum Juelich . Retrieved 19 January 2022 . ^ Zhao, Yicheng; Heumueller, Thomas; Zhang, Jiyun; Luo, Junsheng; Kasian, Olga; Langner, Stefan; Kupfer, Christian; Liu, Bowen; Zhong, Yu; Elia, Jack; Osvet, Andres; Wu, Jianchang; Liu, Chao; Wan, Zhongquan; Jia, Chunyang; Li, Ning; Hauch, Jens; Brabec, Christoph J. (16 December 2021). "A bilayer conducting polymer structure for planar perovskite solar cells with over 1,400 hours operational stability at elevated temperatures". Nature Energy . 7 (2): 144. Bibcode : 2022NatEn...7..144Z . doi : 10.1038/s41560-021-00953-z . ISSN 2058-7546 . S2CID 245285868 . ^ "New smart-roof coating enables year-round energy savings" . Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory . Retrieved 19 January 2022 . ^ Tang, Kechao; Dong, Kaichen; Li, Jiachen; Gordon, Madeleine P.; Reichertz, Finnegan G.; Kim, Hyungjin; Rho, Yoonsoo; Wang, Qingjun; Lin, Chang-Yu; Grigoropoulos, Costas P.; Javey, Ali; Urban, Jeffrey J.; Yao, Jie; Levinson, Ronnen; Wu, Junqiao (17 December 2021). "Temperature-adaptive radiative coating for all-season household thermal regulation" . Science . 374 (6574): 1504– 1509. Bibcode : 2021Sci...374.1504T . doi : 10.1126/science.abf7136 . OSTI 1875448 . PMID 34914515 . S2CID 245263196 . ^ "Scientists invent energy-saving glass that 'self-adapts' to heating and cooling demand" . Nanyang Technological University . Retrieved 19 January 2022 . ^ Wang, Shancheng; Jiang, Tengyao; Meng, Yun; Yang, Ronggui; Tan, Gang; Long, Yi (17 December 2021). "Scalable thermochromic smart windows with passive radiative cooling regulation". Science . 374 (6574): 1501– 1504. Bibcode : 2021Sci...374.1501W . doi : 10.1126/science.abg0291 . PMID 34914526 . S2CID 245262692 . ^ "Astronomers Detect Signature of Magnetic Field on an Exoplanet" .

The University of Arizona . 20 December 2021 . Retrieved 23 December 2021 . ^ Ben-Jaffel, Lotfi; Ballester, Gilda E.; Muñoz, Antonio García; Lavvas, Panayotis; Sing, David K.; Sanz-Forcada, Jorge; Cohen, Ofer; Kataria, Tiffany; Henry, Gregory W.; Buchhave, Lars; Mikal-Evans, Thomas; Wakeford, Hannah R.; López-Morales, Mercedes (16 December 2021). "Signatures of strong magnetization and a metal-poor atmosphere for a Neptune-sized exoplanet". Nature Astronomy . 6 : 141– 153. arXiv : 2211.05155 . Bibcode : 2022NatAs...6..141B . doi : 10.1038/s41550-021-01505-x . ISSN 2397-3366 . S2CID 245316715 . ^ "Realization of modularized quantum light source toward fault-tolerant large-scale universal optical quantum computers" . Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation . 22 December 2021 . Retrieved 23 December 2021 . ^ Kashiwazaki, Takahiro; Yamashima, Taichi; Takanashi, Naoto; Inoue, Asuka; Umeki, Takeshi; Furusawa, Akira (20 December 2021). "Fabrication of low-loss quasi-single-mode PPLN waveguide and its application to a modularized broadband high-level squeezer". Applied Physics Letters . 119 (25): 251104. arXiv : 2201.01457 . Bibcode : 2021ApPhL.119y1104K . doi : 10.1063/5.0063118 . ISSN 0003-6951 . S2CID 245704341 . ^ "Researchers use electron microscope to turn nanotube into tiny transistor" . Phys.org . 23 December 2021 . Retrieved 24 December 2021 . ^ Tang, Dai-Ming; Erohin, Sergey V.; Kvashnin, Dmitry G.; Demin, Victor A.; Cretu, Ovidiu; Jiang, Song; Zhang, Lili; Hou, Peng-Xiang; Chen, Guohai; Futaba, Don N.; Zheng, Yongjia; Xiang, Rong; Zhou, Xin; Hsia, Feng-Chun; Kawamoto, Naoyuki; Mitome, Masanori; Nemoto, Yoshihiro; Uesugi, Fumihiko; Takeguchi, Masaki; Maruyama, Shigeo; Cheng, Hui-Ming; Bando, Yoshio; Liu, Chang; Sorokin, Pavel B.; Golberg, Dmitri (24 December 2021). "Semiconductor nanochannels in metallic carbon nanotubes by thermomechanical chirality alteration" (PDF) . Science . 374 (6575): 1616– 1620. Bibcode : 2021Sci...374.1616T . doi : 10.1126/science.abi8884 . PMID 34941420 . S2CID 245828327 . ^ Hewitt, John. "Omicron might have come from a mouse, but what kind of mouse?" . medicalxpress.com . Retrieved 16 January 2022 . ^ Wei, Changshuo; Shan, Ke-Jia; Wang, Weiguang; Zhang, Shuya; Huan, Qing; Qian, Wenfeng (24 December 2021). "Evidence for a mouse origin of the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant" . Journal of Genetics and Genomics . 48 (12): 1111– 1121. doi : 10.1016/j.jgg.2021.12.003 . ISSN 1673-8527 . PMC 8702434 . PMID 34954396 . ^ Chan, DM (September 2019). "Most powerful space telescope set for 2021 launch" . Asia Times . Retrieved 10 September 2019 . ^ "James Webb Space Telescope Launch Update" . NASA. 21 December 2021 . Retrieved 22 December 2021 . ^ "Maui Shell is a Beautiful Vision for the Future of Linux" . OMG! Ubuntu! . 27 December 2021 . Retrieved 30 January 2022 . ^ Crume, Jacob (30 December 2021). "Maui Shell is Here, Ushering in a New Era of Desktop Linux" . It's FOSS – News . Retrieved 16 January 2022 . ^ Higuita, Camilo (26 December 2021). "Introducing Maui Shell" . Nitrux . Retrieved 16 January 2022 . ^ Chu, Jennifer. "Could acid-neutralizing life-forms make habitable pockets in Venus' clouds?" . phys.org . Retrieved 16 January 2022 . ^ Bains, William; Petkowski, Janusz J.; Rimmer, Paul B.; Seager, Sara (28 December 2021). "Production of ammonia makes Venusian clouds habitable and explains observed cloud-level chemical anomalies" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 118 (52) e2110889118. arXiv : 2112.10850 . Bibcode : 2021PNAS..11810889B . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2110889118 . ISSN 0027-8424 . PMC 8719887 . PMID 34930842 . S2CID 245353905 . ^ Yirka, Bob. "Chinese tokamak facility achieves 120-million-degree C for 1,056 seconds" . phys.org . Retrieved 19 January 2022 . ^ "1,056 Seconds, another world record for EAST" . Institute Of Plasma Physics Chine Academy Of Sciences. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. ^ "Chemists use DNA to build the world's tiniest antenna" . University of Montreal . Retrieved 19 January 2022 . ^ Harroun, Scott G.; Lauzon, Dominic; Ebert, Maximilian C. C. J. C.; Desrosiers, Arnaud; Wang, Xiaomeng; Vallée-Bélisle, Alexis (January 2022). "Monitoring protein conformational changes using fluorescent nanoantennas" . Nature Methods . 19 (1): 71– 80. doi : 10.1038/s41592-021-01355-5 . ISSN 1548-7105 . PMID 34969985 . S2CID 245593311 . ^ "Japan embraces CRISPR-edited fish" . Nature Biotechnology . 40 (1): 10. 1 January 2022. doi : 10.1038/s41587-021-01197-8 . PMID 34969964 . S2CID 245593283 . Retrieved 17 January 2022 . ^ "Startup Hopes Genome-Edited Pufferfish Will Be a Hit in 2022" .

The Japan Times . 5 January 2022 . Retrieved 17 January 2022 . ^ "Vera C. Rubin Observatory" . AURA Astronomy . Retrieved 16 September 2020 . ^ Wu, Katherine J. "For the First Time, a National U.S. Observatory Has Been Named for a Female Astronomer: Vera Rubin" . Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved 16 September 2020 . ^ "What Does the Future of Astronomy Hold? We'll Find Out Soon" . Discover Magazine . Retrieved 16 September 2020 . ^ "Monthly Updates" . LSST Corporation. 23 March 2021. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. ^ "Monthly Updates" . LSST Corporation . 6 December 2016 . Retrieved 1 February 2022 . ^ "The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 2021" . NobelPrize.org . Retrieved 4 October 2021 . ^ "The Nobel Prize in Physics 2021" . NobelPrize.org . Retrieved 5 October 2021 . ^ "The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2021" . NobelPrize.org . Retrieved 6 October 2021 . ^ McFadden, Robert D. (16 February 2021). "Bernard Lown, Inventive Heart Doctor and Antiwar Activist, Dies at 99" .