The type species is M. lealiae . Palaeoasterolibertia Gen. et sp. nov Bera et al. Neogene Bhutan A member of the family Asterinaceae . Genus includes new species P. siwalika . Palaeomicrothyrium Gen. et sp. nov Kundu et al. Miocene India A microthyriaceous fungus.

The type species is P. miocenicum . Paleoophiocordyceps gerontoformicae Sp. nov Zhuang et al. Cretaceous Kachin amber Myanmar Paleoophiocordyceps ironomyiae Sp. nov Zhuang et al. Cretaceous Kachin amber Myanmar Ramanujamosporites Gen. et sp. nov Valid Lanjewar, Puranik, Sakundarwar & Burghate in Saxena, Kirk & Lanjewar Late Cretaceous Deccan Intertrappean Beds India A fungus of uncertain affinities.

The type species is R. mohgaoensis . Reymanomyces Gen. et sp. nov Worobiec in Worobiec et al. Middle Jurassic (Bathonian) Poland Genus includes new species R. ctenidis . Rugososporomyces Gen. et sp. nov Strullu-Derrien & Schornack in Strullu-Derrien et al. Devonian Windyfield chert United Kingdom A member of Glomeromycetes .

The type species is R. lavoisierae . Trichomerium palaeoindicum Sp. nov Kundu & Khan Miocene India A member of Chaetothyriales belonging to the family Trichomeriaceae . Trichomerium palaeostauroconidium Sp. nov Kundu & Khan Miocene India A member of Chaetothyriales belonging to the family Trichomeriaceae. Trichopeltinites zabierzowiensis Sp. nov Worobiec in Worobiec et al. Middle Jurassic (Bathonian) Poland Veterisphaera Gen. et sp. nov Valid Moore & Krings Devonian Rhynie chert United Kingdom A fungal reproductive unit.

The type species is V. dumosa . Zygosporium palaeomasonii Sp. nov Kundu & Khan Miocene India A member of Xylariales belonging to the family Zygosporiaceae . Mycological research Szánthó et al. (2025) develop time-calibrated phylogeny of fungi on the basis of fossil and molecular data, providing new information on the age of the crown group of fungi and on the timing of their interactions with algal ancestors of embryophytes . Evidence from the study of fossil material of Spongiophyton nanum from the Devonian ( Pragian - Emsian ) Ponta Grossa Formation ( Brazil ), indicating that Spongiophyton is one of the earliest known lichenized macroscopic fungi, is presented by Becker-Kerber et al. (2025). Han et al. (2025) identify microtubes in bones of specimens of Keichousaurus from the Middle Triassic strata in China , preserved with geometric features typical of fungal hyphae , and identify the studied specimens as the earliest record of fungal-induced biomineralization in fossil bones reported to date. Tian et al. (2025) describe remains of fungi colonizing an insect-infested conifer wood from the Jurassic Tiaojishan Formation ( China ), interpreted as the oldest record of blue stain fungi reported to date. Tian et al. (2025) describe parasitic fungi infecting a podocarpaceous wood specimen from the Lower Cretaceous Yixian Formation (China), representing the first documented occurrence of fossil fungi in the Jehol Biota . Hodgson et al. (2025) present a global dataset of Cenozoic fungi records. Cnidarians Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Arenactinia Gen. et sp. nov Barroso et al. Silurian Ipu Formation Brazil A sea anemone .

The type species is A. ipuensis . Cladochonus isaacmariai Sp. nov Valid Ernst & May Devonian ( Lochkovian ) Birdsong Shale United States ( Tennessee ) A tabulate coral belonging to the family Pyrgiidae . Dendrophyllia mokiensis Sp. nov Valid Tokuda, Yamada, Endo, Sentoku & Ezaki in Tokuda et al. Miocene Omori Formation Japan A species of Dendrophyllia . Dibunophylloides colligatus Sp. nov Valid Fedorowski & Chwieduk Carboniferous Gaptank Formation United States ( Texas ) A rugose coral belonging to the group Stauriida and the family Aulophyllidae. Dibunophylloides complexus Sp. nov Valid Fedorowski & Chwieduk Carboniferous Gaptank Formation United States ( Texas ) A rugose coral belonging to the group Stauriida and the family Aulophyllidae. Dibunophylloides differentialis Sp. nov Valid Fedorowski & Chwieduk Carboniferous Gaptank Formation United States ( Texas ) A rugose coral belonging to the group Stauriida and the family Aulophyllidae. Dibunophylloides infirmis Sp. nov Valid Fedorowski & Chwieduk Carboniferous Gaptank Formation United States ( Texas ) A rugose coral belonging to the group Stauriida and the family Aulophyllidae. Dibunophylloides parcus Sp. nov Valid Fedorowski & Chwieduk Carboniferous Gaptank Formation United States ( Texas ) A rugose coral belonging to the group Stauriida and the family Aulophyllidae. Dibunophylloides similis Sp. nov Valid Fedorowski & Chwieduk Carboniferous Gaptank Formation United States ( Texas ) A rugose coral belonging to the group Stauriida and the family Aulophyllidae. ?Diploctenium chilensis Sp. nov Valid Collado & Galleguillos Paleocene Trihueco Formation Chile A member of the family Meandrinidae . Favosites? herbigi Sp. nov Pohler, Hubmann & Kammerhofer Devonian Hunsrück Slate Germany A tabulate coral. Flabellum philippii Nom. nov Valid Collado, Galleguillos & Hoeksema Miocene Chile A species of Flabellum ; a replacement name for Flabellum costatum Philippi (1887). Flabellum pirii Nom. nov Valid Collado, Galleguillos & Hoeksema Miocene Chile A species of Flabellum ; a replacement name for Flabellum striatum Philippi (1887). Flabellum rachelis Nom. nov Valid Collado, Galleguillos & Hoeksema Eocene United States ( Alabama ) A species of Flabellum ; a replacement name for Flabellum striatum Gabb & Horn (1860). Flabellum taveri Nom. nov Valid Collado, Galleguillos & Hoeksema Miocene Chile A species of Flabellum ; a replacement name for Flabellum solidum Tavera Jerez (1979). Grypophyllum aubertae Sp. nov Valid Denayer & Aretz Devonian ( Emsian ) France A rugose coral belonging to the family Ptenophyllidae . Lepidophyllia (Heterastraea) microcalix Sp. nov Valid Boivin, Lathuilière & Martini Early Jurassic ( Sinemurian and Pliensbachian , possibly also Hettangian ) Morocco A stony coral belonging to the family Stylophyllidae . Macgeea tourneuri Sp. nov Valid Denayer & Aretz Devonian (Emsian) France A rugose coral belonging to the family Phillipsastreidae . Marejellia Gen. et sp. nov Valid Žalohar, Gašparič & Hitij Miocene Slovenia A member of Rhizostomeae of uncertain affinities.

The type species is M. nereis . Marennophyllum kaufmanni Sp. nov Valid Coen-Aubert Devonian ( Eifelian ) Morocco A rugose coral belonging to the family Cystiphyllidae . Mespiluphyllia Gen. et comb. nov Valid Löser, Cruz-Palma & Chesnel Late Cretaceous ( Maastrichtian ) Costa Rica A coral belonging to the superfamily Misistelloidea .

The type species is "Euphyllia" donatoi Aguilar & Denyer (2001). Michelinia rara Sp. nov Valid Krutykh, Mirantsev & Rozhnov Carboniferous ( Gzhelian ) Russia A tabulate coral. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as December 2025. Michelinia umbogmaensis Sp. nov El-Desouky & Kora Carboniferous ( Viséan ) Um Bogma Formation Egypt A tabulate coral. Paraconularia balkhashensis Sp. nov Valid Ohar & Dernov Carboniferous ( Bashkirian ) Kalmakemel' Formation Kazakhstan A member of Conulariida . Paracuifia castellum Sp. nov Valid Boivin, Lathuilière & Martini Early Jurassic (Sinemurian or Pliensbachian) Morocco A stony coral belonging to the family Cuifiidae . Pleurodictyum nerydelgadoi Sp. nov Valid Domingos, Callapez & Legoinha Devonian Portugal A tabulate coral . Richtereola guangxiensis Sp. nov Wright in Wright, Zhen & Lee Devonian ( Emsian ) Yukiang Formation China A rugose coral. Sericonularia Gen. et sp. nov Min, Zong & Wang Silurian Fentou Formation China A member of Conulariida.

The type species is S. gemmata . Sinkiangopora yokoyamai Sp. nov Valid Niko Permian Taishaku Limestone Group Japan A tabulate coral. Sinoceola Gen. et sp. nov Wright in Wright, Zhen & Lee Devonian (Emsian) Yukiang Formation China A rugose coral. Genus includes new species S. gracile . Siphonophrentis subaequalis Sp. nov Valid Coen-Aubert Devonian ( Givetian ) Morocco A rugose coral belonging to the family Siphonophrentidae . Sterictopathes seira Sp. nov Valid Hao, Han, Baliński, Brugler & Song in Hao et al. Ordovician Xiliangsi Formation China A black coral . Stringophyllum pedderi Sp. nov Valid Coen-Aubert Devonian (Givetian) Morocco A rugose coral belonging to the family Stringophyllidae . Sutherlandia gzheliensis Sp. nov Valid Krutykh, Mirantsev & Rozhnov Carboniferous ( Gzhelian ) Moscow Syneclise Russia A favositid coral. Published online in 2025, but the issue date is listed as December 2024. Tavsenicoralla Gen. et sp. nov Valid Peel Cambrian ( Wuliuan ) Henson Gletscher Formation Greenland A coralomorph cnidarian.

The type species is "Lepralia" undata Reuss (1872). Cellaria daniana Sp. nov Valid López-Gappa et al. Paleocene (Danian) Roca Formation Argentina A species of Cellaria . Chenquepora Gen. et sp. nov Valid Iturra, López-Gappa & Pérez Miocene (Langhian) Chenque Formation Argentina A member of Cheilostomatida belonging to the family Dysnoetoporidae . Genus includes new species C. miocenica . Dionella asynithisti Sp. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan. Distansescharella rancocasi Sp. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan. Euritina laterospinata Sp. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan. Fougaropora Gen. et comb. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan.

The type species is "Stomatopora" temnichorda Ulrich & Bassler (1907). Gabbhornia Gen. et comb. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan.

The type species is "Flustrella" capistrata Gabb & Horn (1862). Haplocephalopora foraminata Nom. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan. Hemistylus rostratum Sp. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan. Hemitrypa lui Sp. nov Valid Ernst, Königshof & Wyse Jackson Devonian (Famennian) Samnuuruul Formation China Mongolia A member of the family Fenestellidae . Iraidina dendroidea Sp. nov Ernst Permian (Sakmarian and Artinskian) Callytharra Formation Australia A trepostome bryozoan belonging to the family Dyscritellidae . Iraidina multicava Sp. nov Ernst Permian (Artinskian) Callytharra Formation Australia A trepostome bryozoan belonging to the family Dyscritellidae. Leiosellina pakhia Sp. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan. Megaloramfozoon Gen. et comb. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan.

The type species is "Membranipora" nematoporoides Ulrich & Bassler (1907). Nakremella Gen. et sp. nov Valid Ernst & May Devonian (Lochkovian) Birdsong Shale United States ( Tennessee ) A trepostome bryozoan belonging to the group Amplexoporina , possibly a member of the family Dyscritellidae .

The type species is N. symbiotica . Nikiforopora haigi Sp. nov Ernst Permian (Artinskian) Callytharra Formation Australia A trepostome bryozoan belonging to the family Stenoporidae . Obsitacella Gen. et comb. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan.

The type species is "Membranipora" jerseyensis Ulrich & Bassler (1907). Paraptylopora gondwanica Sp. nov Valid Taboada, Pagani & Carrera Carboniferous Pampa de Tepuel Formation Argentina Poricellaria karinae Sp. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan. Quadrilateralia Gen. et comb. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan.

The type species is "Membranipora" nellioides Canu & Bassler (1933). Stavrozoon Gen. et comb. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan.

The type species is "Lepralia" interposita Reuss (1872). Stephanollona ricoae Sp. nov Valid Iturra, López-Gappa & Pérez Miocene Chenque Formation Argentina A member of the family Phidoloporidae . "Taractopora" klausbreitenbachi Nom. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan. Temachia canubassleri Nom. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan. Vincentownia Gen. et comb. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan.

The type species is "Vincularia" acutirostris Canu & Bassler (1933). Xenikipora Gen. et comb. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan.

The type species is "Kleidionella" trabeculifera Canu & Bassler (1933). Yadayadapora Gen. et comb. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan.

The type species is "Beisselina" mortoni Canu & Bassler (1933). Zachosella Gen. et comb. nov Valid Martha et al. Paleocene Vincentown Limesand United States ( New Jersey ) A cheilostome bryozoan.

The type species is "Stichocados" mucronatus Canu & Bassler (1933). Bryozoan research Fossil material of large-bodied trepostome bryozoans belonging to the genus Tabulipora is described from the Permian Arizaro Formation (Argentina) by Carrera et al. (2025). Saulsbury et al. (2025) study the evolution of skeletal mineralogy in cheilostome bryozoans, and report evidence indicating that cheilostomes with partly or fully aragonitic skeletons evolved independently at least 50 times from calcitic ancestors. A new assemblage of Ordovician ( Hirnantian ) bryozoans, including taxa previously reported only from the Baltic region, is described from the Halevikdere Formation ( Turkey ) by Ernst, Hoşgör & Vinn (2025). Evidence of decreasing zooid size throughouth the evolutionary history of cyclostome bryozoans from the " Berenicea " lineage is presented by Ma, Liow & Taylor (2025). Brachiopods Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Apheoorthis talenti Sp. nov Brock, Zhang & Smith Cambrian Stage 10 Ninmaroo Formation Australia A member of Orthida belonging to the family Eoorthidae . Aseptella tse Sp. nov Sour-Tovar, Quiroz-Barroso & Castillo Espinosa Carboniferous (Viséan) Santiago Formation Mexico A member of Productida belonging to the family Productellidae . Askepasma blysmochlidon Sp. nov Valid Castle-Jones et al. Cambrian Stage 2 Sellick Hill Formation Australia A member of Paterinata belonging to the group Paterinoidea . Bokotorthis tarimensis Sp. nov Valid Zhang et al. Ordovician China Brachiosvalbardia archboldi Sp. nov Calle Salcedo, Cisterna & Halpern Carboniferous (Pennsylvanian) Quebrada Larga Formation Argentina A member of Productida. Bronnothyris attilavorosi Sp. nov Valid Dulai Miocene Lajta Limestone Formation Hungary A member of Terebratulida belonging to the family Megathyrididae . Carinatina connorsi Sp. nov Valid Baranov, Blodgett & Santucci Devonian (Emsian) Shellabarger Limestone United States ( Alaska ) A member of Atrypida belonging to the superfamily Davidsonioidea and the family Carinatinidae . Cathaysia plana Sp. nov Zhou et al. Permian (Changhsingian) China A member of Productida . Cathaysia striata Sp. nov Zhou et al. Permian (Changhsingian) China A member of Productida. Cathaysia xiaojiangensis Sp. nov Zhou et al. Permian (Changhsingian) China A member of Productida. Conotreta canningensis Sp. nov Valid Percival in Zhen et al. Ordovician Australia A member of the family Acrotretidae . Coronalosia vergelae Sp. nov Calle Salcedo, Cisterna & Halpern Carboniferous (Pennsylvanian) Quebrada Larga Formation Argentina A member of Productida. Cyrtina koenigshofi Sp. nov Valid Jansen Devonian (Emsian) Hohenrhein Formation Germany A member of Spiriferinida belonging to the family Cyrtinidae . Cyrtospirifer akimicus Sp. nov Valid Oleneva & Sokiran Devonian (Famennian) Pozhnya Formation Russia Dayia minuscula Sp. nov Valid Mergl & Frýda Silurian Kopanina Formation Czech Republic A member of Athyridida belonging to the family Dayiidae . Drabovia? madmonensis Sp. nov Valid Kim et al. Ordovician (Katian) Uzbekistan Dubatolovispirifer Gen. et sp. nov Valid Baranov & Nikolaev Devonian (Pragian) Russia A member of Spiriferida.

The type species is D. ribbed . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as December 2025. Golestania Gen. et sp. nov Valid Baranov, Kebrie-ee Zade & Blodgett Devonian (Famennian) Khoshyeilagh Formation Iran A member of Spiriferida belonging to the family Ambocoelidae .

The type species is G. shahrudus . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as December 2025. Howellella gonensis Sp. nov Valid Baranov & Nikolaev Devonian (Pragian) Russia A member of Spiriferida . Howellella nelyudimica Sp. nov Valid Baranov & Nikolaev Devonian (Pragian) Russia A member of Spiriferida. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as December 2025. Howellella septentrionalis Sp. nov Valid Baranov & Nikolaev Devonian (Pragian) Russia A member of Spiriferida. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as December 2025. Iridistrophia maecuruensis Sp. nov Rezende et al. Devonian Maecuru Formation Brazil Jakutoproductus allaraensis Sp. nov Valid Makoshin & Kutygin Carboniferous–Permian transition Russia Jakutoproductus budnikovi Sp. nov Valid Makoshin & Kutygin Carboniferous–Permian transition Russia Jakutoproductus rimmae Sp. nov Valid Makoshin & Kutygin Carboniferous–Permian transition Russia Katzeria Gen. et comb. nov Junior homonym Rezende et al. Devonian Brazil A new genus for "Strophomena" hoeferi Katzer.

The generic name is preoccupied by Katzeria Mendes (1966). Kirichkovia Gen. et sp. nov Valid Baranov & Nikolaev Devonian (Emsian) Russia ( Sakha Republic ) A member of Spiriferida belonging to the family Delthyrididae .

The type species is K. sibirica . Kitaborthis Gen. et comb. nov Valid Kim et al. Ordovician Austria Italy Uzbekistan A member of the family Hesperorthidae .

The type species is "Reuschella" asiatica Rozman (1978); genus also includes "Multicostella" schoenlaubi Havlíček in Havlíček, Kříž & Serpagli (1987). Lambdarina vangyrika Sp. nov Valid Pakhnevich & Sobolev Carboniferous (Tournaisian) Russia ( Komi Republic ) A member of Rhynchonellida belonging to the superfamily Lambdarinoidea. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as December 2025. Linipalus andacolloensis Pardo et sp. nov Pardo et al. Carboniferous Huaraco Formation Argentina Nalivkinathyris Gen. et sp. nov Valid Baranov, Kebrie-ee Zade & Blodgett Devonian ( Famennian ) Khoshyeilagh Formation Iran A member of the family Athyrididae .

The type species is N. damganensis . Published online in 2025, but the issue date is listed as December 2024. Paryphella yangshanensis Sp. nov Zhou et al. Permian (Changhsingian) China A member of Productida. Pseudopholidops ingriana Sp. nov Valid Popov et al. Ordovician Russia A member of Craniopsida . Rakhmonomena Gen. et sp. nov Valid Kim et al. Ordovician (Katian) Uzbekistan Genus includes new species R. nataliae . Rugia stenius Sp. nov Valid Surlyk Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) Denmark A member of the family Chlidonophoridae . Spinatrypina mimsae Sp. nov Valid Baranov, Blodgett & Santucci Devonian (Emsian) Shellabarger Limestone United States ( Alaska ) A member of Atrypida belonging to the family Atrypidae . Stricklandia lens nesensis Ssp. nov Baarli & Jin Ordovician ( Hirnantian ) Solvik Formation Norway A member of Pentamerida . Taphrodonta maralikhaensis Sp. nov Valid Shcherbanenko & Sennikov Ordovician (Darriwilian) Russia A member of Strophomenida . Terrakea koragoi Sp. nov Valid Biakov et al. Permian Russia A member of Productida . Torynelasma holmeri Sp. nov Valid Percival in Zhen et al. Ordovician Nambeet Formation Australia A member of Acrotretida belonging to the family Torynelasmatidae . Trushelevia Gen. et sp. nov Valid Baranov & Nikolaev Devonian (Emsian) Russia ( Sakha Republic ) A member of Spiriferida belonging to the family Delthyrididae.

The type species is T. yania . Wimanigma Gen. et sp. nov Valid Betts et al. Cambrian Stage 4 Probably File Haidar Formation Europe (Baltic Sea region) A stem -brachiopod belonging to the family Mickwitziidae . Genus includes new species W. soderarmensis . Xystostrophia agassizi Comb. nov (Rathbun) Devonian Ererê Formation Brazil Moved from Streptorhynchus agassizi Rathbun (1874). Zygospira idahoensis Sp. nov Valid Vilela-Andrade in Vilela-Andrade et al. Ordovician Saturday Mountain Formation United States ( Idaho Missouri ) A member of Atrypida belonging to the family Anazygidae . Brachiopod research Chen et al. (2025) report the discovery of new soft-bodied specimens of Lingulellotreta from the Cambrian Yuanshan Formation (China), providing evidence of presenec of a mosaic of ancestral and modified anatomical features, and interpret the anatomy of Lingulellotreta as transitional between those of soft-bodied stem-brachiopods such as Yuganotheca and those of members of Lingulida . Evidence of preservation of epithelial cell impressions and moulds on the shell surface of Eohadrotreta zhenbaensis from the Cambrian Shuijingtuo Formation (China) is presented by Zhang et al. (2025). A study on the diversity dynamics of members of Plectambonitoidea throughout their evolutionary history is published by Candela, Guo & Harper (2025). Wright & Wagner (2025) argue that evolutionary histories of strophomenoid brachiopods implied by phylogenetic models that assume punctuated change are more probable than those implied by models that assume continuous change. Hennessey & Stigall (2025) link diversification trends of brachiopods from the Simpson Group ( Oklahoma , United States) to global trends, reporting evidence of a rapid increase in shell volume of the studied brachiopods at the time of the main pulse of diversification during the Great Ordovician Biodiversification Event . Jin & Harper (2025) study the Darriwilian to Hirnantian brachiopod faunas from Laurentia, and link the vulnerability of brachiopods to extinction during the Late Ordovician mass extinction to endemism of the studied faunas, adaptations of the studied brachiopods to inland sea environment and loss of ability to disperse out of this habitat. A study on diversification of brachiopods after the Late Ordovician mass extinction is published by Huang, Chen & Shi (2025). Huang & Rong (2025) report evidence of preservation of setae in Nucleospira calypta from the Silurian (Telychian) strata in China, interpreted by the authors as used in active spacing regulation between members of the studied assemblage. Baarli & Mergl (2025) study the phylogenetic affinities of Karbous and Trigonatrypa , placing the former genus in the family Karpinskiidae and the latter one in the family Glassiidae . Shi et al. (2025) report the first discovery of silicified brachiopod fossils from the Permian (Kungurian−Roadian) strata of the Wandrawandian Siltstone (Australia), and reconstruct the taphonomic history of these fossils. Evidence of morphological adaptations of lingulid brachiopods to environmental changes during the Early Triassic is presented by Wu et al. (2025). Carlson et al. (2025) evaluate the impact of use of different phylogenetic methods on reconstructions of relationships and evolution of morphological characters in Athyridida . A study on the taxonomic diversity of Mediterranean brachiopods throughout the Jurassic and Early Cretaceous, providing evidence of faunal losses coinciding with oceanic anoxic events , is published by Vörös & Szives (2025). A study on the diversity dynamics of brachiopods throughout the Paleogene is published by Ruban (2025), who finds possible evidence of impact of climate changes on brachiopod diversity during the Paleocene but not during the Eocene-Oligocene. Molluscs Main article: 2025 in paleomalacology Echinoderms Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Afanasievocrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous ( Kasimovian ) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species A. pentagonalis . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Allosocrinus moscoviensis Sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Angioblastus omanensis Sp. nov Valid Webster et al. Permian (Kungurian) Oman A blastoid belonging to the family Codasteridae . Angioblastus qararii Sp. nov Valid Webster et al. Permian (Kungurian) Oman A blastoid belonging to the family Codasteridae. Anticosticrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Cole, Wright & Hopkins Ordovician–Silurian transition (most likely Hirnantian ) Ellis Bay Formation or Becscie Formation Canada ( Quebec ) A cladid crinoid belonging to the order Sagenocrinida and the family Anisocrinidae .

The type species is A. natiscotecensis . Apographiocrinus convexus Sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Astropecten erectus Sp. nov Valid Gale Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Kristianstad Basin Sweden A possible species of Astropecten . Atlascystis Gen. et sp. nov Valid Woodgate et al. Cambrian Stage 4 – Wuliuan Jbel Wawrmast Formation Morocco A member of Ctenocystoidea .

The type species is A. acantha . Autaveniaster Gen. et sp. nov Delemar & Villier Eocene (Lutetian) France A starfish belonging to the family Goniasteridae .

The type species is A. wozniaki . Baltocrinus semenovi Sp. nov Valid Rozhnov & Terentyev Ordovician Russia ( Leningrad Oblast ) A crinoid belonging to the family Iocrinidae . Bartelsaster Gen. et sp. nov Blake & Lintz Devonian Hunsrück Slate Germany A member of Asterozoa belonging to the group Stenuroidea and the family Erinaceasteridae .

The type species is B. lineatus . Borszczia Gen. et sp. et comb. nov Valid Pauly & Villier Middle Jurassic (Callovian) to Early Cretaceous (Hauterivian) Ornatenton Formation France Germany United Kingdom A starfish belonging to the order Paxillosida and the suborder Cribellina .

The type species is B. wallueckensis ; genus also includes "Chrispaulia" jurassica Gale (2011) and "Chrispaulia" spinosa Gale & Jagt (2021). Brabeocrinus costatus Sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Brechincycloides Gen. et sp. nov Valid Kolata et al. Ordovician (Katian) Canada ( Ontario ) A member of Cyclocystoidea , the type genus of the new family Brechincycloididae .

The type species is B. stanhynei . Brightonicystis salmoensis Comb. nov Valid (Sheffield, Ausich & Sumrall) Ordovician (Hirnantian) Ellis Bay Formation Canada ( Quebec ) A blastozoan belonging to the group Diploporita and the family Holocystitidae ; moved from Holocystites salmoensis Sheffield, Ausich & Sumrall. Brissus jonesi Sp. nov Valid Osborn, Portell & Mooi Eocene Ocala Limestone United States ( Florida ) A species of Brissus . Castaneametra Gen. et sp. nov Valid Saulsbury, Baumiller & Sprinkle Early Cretaceous (Albian) Glen Rose Formation United States ( Texas ) A crinoid belonging to the group Comatulida and the family Notocrinidae .

The type species is C. hodgesi . Cemgiganticrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species C. popovorum . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Cherbonniericrinus pliocenicus Sp. nov Valid Roux, Thuy & Gale Pliocene Indian Ocean (Rodrigues Ridge) A crinoid belonging to the family Rhizocrinidae . ?Chlidonocrinus medvedkaensis Sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Coenholectypus sulcatus Sp. nov Schlüter et al. Late Cretaceous (Coniacian) Algeria A sea urchin. Coronataster Gen. et comb. nov Valid Gale & Cottard Late Cretaceous (Cenomanian) Probably Zig Zag Chalk Formation United Kingdom A starfish belonging to the family Stauranderasteridae .

The type species is "Oreaster" coronatus Forbes (1848). Coulonia fournoui Sp. nov Valid Gale & Cottard Late Cretaceous (Turonian) France A starfish belonging to the family Astropectinidae . Covidaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Smith et al. Carboniferous (Serpukhovian) Big Clifty Formation United States ( Indiana ) A brittle star.

The type species is C. medicus . Crassicoma suedica Sp. nov Valid Gale & Stevenson Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Kristianstad Basin Sweden A crinoid belonging to the group Roveacrinida and the family Saccocomidae . Crielaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Gale & Cottard Late Cretaceous (Turonian to Campanian) France United Kingdom A starfish belonging to the family Chaetasteridae .

The type species is C. annae . Deltoblastus sevastopuloi Sp. nov Valid Webster et al. Permian (Kungurian) Oman A blastoid belonging to the group Granatocrinida . Diademopsis wallueckensis Sp. nov Valid Pauly Middle Jurassic (Callovian) Ornatenton Formation Germany A sea urchin belonging to the family Pedinidae . Disgregacrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Webster et al. Permian (Kungurian) Oman A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida and the family Staphylocrinidae .

The type species is D. aridus . Durhamella tetrapora Sp. nov Valid Osborn, Portell & Mooi Eocene Ocala Limestone United States ( Florida ) A sea urchin belonging to the family Neolaganidae. Elibatocrinus gracilis Sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Eoindocrinus ageri Sp. nov Valid Webster et al. Permian (Kungurian) Oman A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida and the family Indocrinidae . Eoindocrinus spinosus Sp. nov Valid Webster et al. Permian (Kungurian) Oman A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida and the family Indocrinidae. Eupatagus dumonti Sp. nov Valid Osborn, Portell & Mooi Oligocene Suwannee Limestone United States ( Florida ) A sea urchin belonging to the family Eupatagidae . Exoriocrinus pseudorugosus Sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Furcaster coulombeae Sp. nov Valid Smith et al. Carboniferous (Serpukhovian) Big Clifty Formation United States ( Indiana ) A brittle star. Furcaster mccantae Sp. nov Valid Smith et al. Carboniferous (Serpukhovian) Big Clifty Formation United States ( Indiana ) A brittle star. Furcaster wardi Sp. nov Valid Smith et al. Carboniferous (Serpukhovian) Big Clifty Formation United States ( Indiana ) A brittle star. Gasterocoma americana Comb. nov Valid ( Hall ) Devonian United States ( New York ) A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida ; moved from Myrtillocrinus americanus Hall. Gasterocoma briareus Comb. nov Valid (Schultze) Devonian Germany A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida; moved from Taxocrinus briareus Schultze. Gasterocoma curta Comb. nov Valid (Schmidt) Devonian Germany A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida; moved from Myrtillocrinus curtus Schmidt. Gasterocoma eifeliana Comb. nov Valid (Müller) Devonian Germany A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida; moved from Lecythocrinus eifelianus Müller. Gasterocoma eifeliense Comb. nov Valid (Müller) Devonian Germany A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida; moved from Ceramocrinus eifeliensis Müller. Gasterocoma elongata Comb. nov Valid (Sandberger & Sandberger) Devonian Germany A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida; moved from Myrtillocrinus elongatus Sandberger & Sandberger. Gasterocoma extensa Comb. nov Valid (Wachsmuth & Springer) Devonian United States ( Ohio ) A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida; moved from Arachnocrinus extensus Wachsmuth & Springer. Gasterocoma ignota Comb. nov Valid (Stauffer) Devonian Canada ( Ontario ) A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida; moved from Arachnocrinus ignotus Stauffer. Gasterocoma knappi Comb. nov Valid (Wachsmuth & Springer) Devonian United States ( Indiana ) A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida; moved from Arachnocrinus knappi Wachsmuth & Springer. Gasterocoma onondagensis Nom. nov Valid Bohatý, Ausich & Ebert Devonian United States ( New York ) A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida; a replacement name for Schultzicrinus (?) elongatus Springer. Gasterocoma orbiculata Comb. nov Valid (Dubatolova) Devonian Russia A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida; moved from Myrtillocrinus orbiculatus Dubatolova. Gasterocoma (?) robusta Comb. nov Valid ( Goldring ) Devonian United States ( New York ) A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida; moved from Mictocrinus robustus Goldring. Gracilicrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species G. chertanovoensis . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Granulasterias Gen. et sp. nov Valid Gale Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Kristianstad Basin Sweden A starfish belonging to the family Asteriidae .

The type species is G. ivoensis . Haccourtaster berryensis Sp. nov Valid Gale & Jagt Late Cretaceous (Turonian) United Kingdom A member of the family Goniasteridae . Haccourtaster liticola Sp. nov Valid Gale & Jagt Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Sweden A member of the family Goniasteridae. Haccourtaster nattestadae Sp. nov Valid Gale & Jagt Late Cretaceous (Coniacian) Denmark A member of the family Goniasteridae. Halogetocrinus yakovlevi Sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Ivoaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Gale Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Kristianstad Basin Sweden A starfish belonging to the family Goniasteridae .

The type species is I. soerensenae . Jaramahcrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Webster et al. Permian (Kungurian) Oman A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida and the family Erisocrinidae .

The type species is J. warlichi . Kukrusecrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Rozhnov Ordovician ( Darriwilian and Sandbian ) Estonia A crinoid belonging to group Camerata and to the family Colpodecrinidae .

The type species is K. stellatus . Published online in 2025, but the issue date is listed as December 2024. Lavacystis Gen. et sp. nov Valid Rozhnov Ordovician (Floian) Russia A member of Rhombifera belonging to the family Pleurocystitidae . Genus includes new species L. sagittalis . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as December 2025. Manfredaster graveseni Sp. nov Valid Gale Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Kristianstad Basin Sweden A starfish belonging to the family Stauranderasteridae . Maxaster Nom. nov Blake & Lintz Devonian Hunsrück Slate Germany A member of Asterozoa belonging to the group Stenuroidea and the family Erinaceasteridae.

The type species is "Erinaceaster" giganteus Lehmann (1957). Metopaster asgaardae Sp. nov Valid Gale Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Kristianstad Basin Sweden Moyacystis Gen. et comb. nov Valid Paul Silurian Lewisburg Formation United States ( Indiana ) A blastozoan belonging to the group Diploporita and the family Holocystitidae.

The type species is "Osgoodicystis" cooperi Frest & Strimple in Frest et al. (2011). Neoholaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Borghi et al. Miocene Italy A sea urchin. Genus includes new species N. albensis . Neverovocrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species N. decadoramosus . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Nipponicrinus Gen. et 2 sp. nov Valid Keyes, Wright & Ausich Carboniferous (Moscovian) Akiyoshi Limestone Group Japan A camerate crinoid belonging to the group Monobathrida and the family Paragaricocrinidae .

The type species is N. hashimotoi ; genus also includes N. akiyoshiensis . Nymphaster macrogranularis Sp. nov Valid Gale Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Kristianstad Basin Sweden A species of Nymphaster . Nymphaster minigranularis Sp. nov Valid Gale Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Kristianstad Basin Sweden A species of Nymphaster . Orthopsis metliliae Sp. nov Schlüter et al. Late Cretaceous (Coniacian) Algeria A sea urchin. Palenciacrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Keyes, Wright & Ausich Carboniferous (Moscovian) Spain A camerate crinoid belonging to the group Monobathrida and the family Paragaricocrinidae.

The type species is P. mudaensis . Paraconocrinus rodriguesensis Sp. nov Valid Roux, Thuy & Gale Pliocene Indian Ocean (Rodrigues Ridge) A crinoid belonging to the family Rhizocrinidae. Paranacystis? kernevodezensis Sp. nov Valid Lefebvre et al. Devonian (Givetian) Kerbelec Formation France A mitrate belonging to the family Paranacystidae . Persoonaster Gen. et comb. nov Valid Thuy, Numberger-Thuy & Gale Early Jurassic (Hettangian) Belgium A brittle star , a member of the stem group of Euryalida related to the Triassic genus Aspiduriella .

The type species is "Mesophiomusium" kianiae Thuy (2005). Plagiobrissus cassadyi Sp. nov Valid Osborn, Portell & Mooi Oligocene Marianna Limestone United States ( Florida ) A species of Plagiobrissus . Pleurocrinus omanensis Comb. nov Valid (Webster & Sevastopulo) Permian Oman A camerate crinoid belonging to the group Monobathrida and the family Platycrinitidae ; moved from Platycrinites omanensis Webster & Sevastopulo (2007) Plumaster echinoides Sp. nov Valid Pauly & Villier Middle Jurassic (Callovian) Ornatenton Formation Germany A starfish belonging to the family Plumasteridae . Polycidaris vadeti Sp. nov Valid Pauly Middle Jurassic (Callovian) Ornatenton Formation Germany A sea urchin belonging to the group Cidaroida and the family Polycidaridae . Prionocidaris robertsi Sp. nov Valid Osborn, Portell & Mooi Eocene Ocala Limestone United States ( Florida ) A species of Prionocidaris . Procidaris relicta Sp. nov Valid Pauly Middle Jurassic (Callovian) Ornatenton Formation Germany A sea urchin belonging to the group Cidaroida and the family Miocidaridae . Proindocrinus riesae Sp. nov Valid Webster et al. Permian (Kungurian) Oman A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida and the family Indocrinidae. Pulcheracrinus Gen. et comb. nov Valid Keyes, Wright & Ausich Carboniferous (Bashkirian) Brentwood Limestone United States ( Oklahoma ) A camerate crinoid belonging to the group Monobathrida and the family Paragaricocrinidae.

The type species is "Megaliocrinus" exotericus Strimple (1951). Pycinaster christenseni Sp. nov Valid Gale Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Kristianstad Basin Sweden A starfish belonging to the family Pycinasteridae . Qararicrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Webster et al. Permian (Kungurian) Oman A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida and the family Erisocrinidae.

The type species is Q. batainensis . Remaster cretaceus Sp. nov Valid Gale Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Kristianstad Basin Sweden A starfish belonging to the family Korethrasteridae . Rhyncholampas bao Sp. nov Valid Osborn, Portell & Mooi Eocene Ocala Limestone United States ( Florida ) A species of Rhyncholampas . Rhyncholampas mariannaensis Sp. nov Valid Osborn, Portell & Mooi Eocene Ocala Limestone United States ( Florida ) A species of Rhyncholampas . Roemerocrinus? aridus Sp. nov Valid Webster et al. Permian (Kungurian) Oman A crinoid belonging to the group Eucladida and the family Scytalocrinidae . Rugametopaster Gen. et comb. nov Valid Gale Late Cretaceous (Santonian to Campanian) Kristianstad Basin Sweden A starfish belonging to the family Goniasteridae.

The type species is "Metopaster" rugissimus Gale (1987). Scaniasterina Gen. et sp. nov Valid Gale Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Kristianstad Basin Sweden A starfish belonging to the family Asterinidae .

The type species is S. surlyki . Schizaster carlsoni Sp. nov Valid Osborn, Portell & Mooi Oligocene Suwannee Limestone United States ( Florida ) A species of Schizaster . Schoenaster limbeckae Sp. nov Valid Smith et al. Carboniferous (Serpukhovian) Big Clifty Formation United States ( Indiana ) A brittle star. Semiometra alveoradiata Sp. nov Valid Saulsbury, Baumiller & Sprinkle Early Cretaceous (Albian) Glen Rose Formation United States ( Texas ) A crinoid belonging to the group Comatulida and the family Notocrinidae. Sprinkleoglobus spencensis Comb. nov Valid (Wen et al.) Cambrian (Wuliuan) Spence Shale United States ( Idaho Utah ) A member of Edrioasteroidea ; moved from Totiglobus spencensis Wen et al. (2019). Squamataster Gen. et comb. nov Valid Gale & Cottard Late Cretaceous Probably Seaford Chalk Formation Denmark Germany United Kingdom A starfish belonging to the family Stauranderasteridae.

The type species is "Oreaster" squamatus Forbes (1848); genus also includes "Stauranderaster" doreckae Schulz & Weitschat (1971) and "Stauranderaster" speculum Nielsen (1943). Stauranderaster pustulosus Sp. nov Valid Gale & Cottard Late Cretaceous (Turonian) France A starfish belonging to the family Stauranderasteridae. Strataster lisae Sp. nov Valid Smith et al. Carboniferous (Serpukhovian) Big Clifty Formation United States ( Indiana ) A brittle star. Suchaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Smith et al. Carboniferous (Serpukhovian) Big Clifty Formation United States ( Indiana ) A brittle star.

The type species is S. granulosus . Sukhanovocrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species S. parvus . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Sulcatocrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species S. sinusoides . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Sulphaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Smith et al. Carboniferous (Serpukhovian) Big Clifty Formation United States ( Indiana ) A brittle star.

The type species is S. odellettorum . Synbathocrinus shackletoni Sp. nov Valid Webster et al. Permian (Kungurian) Oman A crinoid belonging to the group Disparida and the family Synbathocrinidae . Syzigobrachiocrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species S. ramulosus . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Tenuibrachiocrinus Gen. et 2 sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species T. domodedovoensis and T. erlangeri . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Triboporus Gen. et sp. nov Schlüter et al. Late Cretaceous (Coniacian) Algeria A sea urchin belonging to the family Phymosomatidae . Genus includes new species T. luluatus . Tuscumbiacrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Keyes, Wright & Ausich Carboniferous (Viséan) Tuscumbia Limestone United States ( Alabama ) A camerate crinoid belonging to the group Monobathrida and the family Paragaricocrinidae.

The type species is T. madisonensis . Umerophiura daki Sp. nov Valid Smith et al. Carboniferous (Serpukhovian) Big Clifty Formation United States ( Indiana ) A brittle star. Vandelooaster douglasi Sp. nov Valid Smith et al. Carboniferous (Serpukhovian) Big Clifty Formation United States ( Indiana ) A brittle star. Vectisaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Gale Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Culver Chalk Formation Sweden United Kingdom A starfish belonging to the family Podosphaerasteridae .

The type species is V. enigmaticus . Voskresenskicrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species V. medvedkensis . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Weisbordella inglisensis Sp. nov Valid Osborn, Portell & Mooi Eocene Ocala Limestone United States ( Florida ) A sea urchin belonging to the family Neolaganidae. Weisbordella libum Sp. nov Valid Osborn, Portell & Mooi Eocene Ocala Limestone United States ( Florida ) A sea urchin belonging to the family Neolaganidae. Echinoderm research Evidence from the study of outgrowths on disarticulated echinoderm fragments from the Cambrian ( Wuliuan ) rocks of the Burke River Structural Belt ( Australia ), interpreted as reaction to parasitic epibionts and the oldest evidence of parasitic symbiotic interactions on deuterostome hosts reported to date, is presented by Goñi et al. (2025). Guenser et al. (2025) report evidence of concentration of research on the fossil record of stylophorans in the higher-income countries, regardless of the origin of the studied fossil material, throughout the history of the study of this group, including evidence that the majority of studies on fossils from the Global South published between 1925 and 1999 did not include local collaborators, and evidence of transfer of fossil material from countries of the Global South to countries of the Global North. A new echinoderm Lagerstätte dominated by specimens of the solutan species Dendrocystites barrandei is described from the Ordovician (Sandbian) strata of the Letná Formation ( Czech Republic ) by Fatka et al. (2025). Evidence from the study of the echinoderm assemblage from the Ordovician Bromide Formation ( Oklahoma , United States), indicating that paracrinoids and other pelmatozoans likely occupied different regions of niche space and did not compete for food, is presented by Higdon & Cole (2025). New fossil material of Wellerocystis and Implicaticystis , providing new information on the morphology of the studied paracrinoids , is described from the Ordovician Kimmswick Limestone (Missouri, United States) by Paul, Guensburg & Darrough (2025). New fossil material of cupressocrinine cupressocrinitid crinoids, providing new information on their morphology and ontogeny, is described from the Devonian strata of the Bergisch Gladbach-Paffrath Syncline and the Eifel Synclines ( Germany ) by Bohatý & Ausich (2025). A study on the microstructure of the stalk of Seirocrinus , indicative of presence of adaptations that reduced weight of the studied crinoid and enabled it to live attached to a raft system such as drifting wood without significantly contributing to its sinking, is presented by Gorzelak et al. (2025). An indeterminate solanocrinitid representing the first known opalized comatulid crinoid reported to date is described from the Cretaceous strata in South Australia by Salamon, Kapitany & Płachno (2025). Salamon et al. (2025) describe fossils of members of the genus Isselicrinus from the Transylvanian Basin ( Romania ), representing the first reported Eocene shallow-water occurrence of the studied stalked crinoids from the Northern Hemisphere. Evidence from the study of the fossil record of Paleozoic echinoids, indicating that inclusion of unpublished museum specimens can strongly affect the results of the studies of biogeography and evolution of groups known from fossils, is presented by Dean & Thompson (2025). A study on the preservation of fossils of Paleozoic echinoids and on factors influencing the quality of preservation of the studied specimens is published by Thompson et al. (2025). Yakouya-Moubamba et al. (2025) describe fossil material of Mecaster fourneli from the Turonian strata in Gabon , and report evidence of strong morphological similarity of the studied fossils to specimens from Algeria and Peru . Blake & Lefebvre (2025) revise the asterozoan class Somasteroidea , and name a new chinianasterid subfamily Ophioxenikosinae . Hemichordates Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Paradiversograptus lucianae Sp. nov Valid Lopez et al. Silurian (Llandovery) Argentina A graptolite . Pristiograptus eberi Sp. nov Valid Lopez et al. Silurian (Llandovery) Argentina A graptolite. Yunotubus Gen. et sp. nov Yang et al. Cambrian Stage 3 Hongjingshao Formation China A graptolite.

The type species is Y. gemmatus . Hemichordate research A study on the evolution of body symmetry in extant and fossil pterobranchs is published by Maletz (2025). Mitchell et al. (2025) report evidence of impact of changes of oceanographic and climatic conditions resulting from the Hirnantian glaciation on the diversity structure of graptolites, ultimately resulting in extinction of Diplograptina and adaptive radiation of Neograptina. Gao, Tan & Wang (2025) study hydrodynamic properties of a model of Calyxdendrum (a graptolite with a morphology intermediate between benthic dendroids and planktic graptoloids), and argue that planktic lifestyle might have evolved independently in multiple graptolite lineages.

The conclusions of the study of Saulsbury et al. (2023), which found that the survivorship of the Ordovician and Silurian graptoloids is consistent with the neutral theory of biodiversity and that this theory can be used to formulate hypotheses on changes in ancient ecosystems, are contested by Johnson (2025) and reaffirmed by Saulsbury et al. (2025). Maletz & Gutiérrez-Marco (2025) revise the graptolite genus Ptilograptus and transfer it from the family Callograptidae to the family Dendrograptidae . Gao, Tan & Wang (2025) consider the double-helical rotating locomotion as most likely for Dicellograptus , and argue that evolution from Jiangxigraptus to Dicellograptus involved selection for improvement in hydrodynamic characteristics. Evidence indicating that the decline of graptolite diversity in the Prague Basin during the Lundgreni Event was related to increased oxygenation of offshore environments is presented by Frýda & Frýdová (2025). A study on the construction of the tubarium of retiolitine graptolites pre- and post-Lundgreni Event and on their evolutionary relationships is published by Maletz (2025). Reich & Krümmer (2025) describe rhabdopleurid stolon systems overgrowing other organisms from the Cretaceous Chalk Sea floor, discovered in the Maastrichtian strata from Rügen (Germany). Conodonts Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Acanthodistacodus Gen. et comb. nov Valid Tolmacheva, Dronov & Lykov Ordovician Russia The type species is "Scolopodus" consimilis Moskalenko, (1973); genus also includes A. compositus (Moskalenko, 1973). Published online in 2025, but the issue date is listed as December 2024. Aloxoconus acutus Sp. nov Valid Zhen in Zhen et al. Ordovician Australia Amadeognathus Gen. et comb. nov Valid Zhen in Zhen et al. Ordovician Australia The type species is "Acodus" buetefueri Cooper (1981). Ancyrogondolella castillionensis Sp. nov Orchard, Friedman & Mihalynuk Late Triassic (Norian) Selish Formation Canada ( British Columbia ) Ancyrogondolella ferrata Sp. nov Orchard, Friedman & Mihalynuk Late Triassic (Norian) Selish Formation Canada ( British Columbia ) Boardmanites Gen. et comb. nov Valid Barrick & Nestell Carboniferous–Permian United States The type species is B. conflexa (Ellison, 1941). Borinella dibucoensis Sp. nov Li et al. Early Triassic (Olenekian) China Borinella? prima Sp. nov Leu & Goudemand in Leu et al. Early Triassic (Olenekian) Khunamuh Formation Canada ( British Columbia ) India Oman A member of the family Gondolellidae . Coelocerodontus lindsayae Sp. nov Valid Zhen in Zhen et al. Ordovician Australia Cooperignathus? pincallyensis Sp. nov Valid Zhen in Zhen et al. Ordovician Tabita Formation Australia Drepanoistodus barnesi Sp. nov Valid Zhen in Zhen et al. Ordovician Australia Drepanoistodus decisus Sp. nov Valid Zhen in Zhen et al. Ordovician Australia Icriodus aqua Sp. nov Valid Soboleva & Nazarova Devonian (Frasnian) Ust'-Yarega Formation Russia Icriodus lacrima Sp. nov Valid Soboleva & Nazarova Devonian (Frasnian) Ust'-Yarega Formation Russia Idiognathodus anteparallelus Sp. nov Valid Hu, Qi & Wei Carboniferous (Moscovian) China Idiognathodus prosonimius Sp. nov Valid Hu, Qi & Wei Carboniferous (Moscovian) China Idiognathodus zhuotingi Sp. nov Valid Hu, Qi & Wei Carboniferous (Moscovian) China Lissoepikodus ethingtoni Sp. nov Valid Zhen in Zhen et al. Ordovician Australia Neospathodus aristatus Sp. nov Leu & Goudemand in Leu et al. Early Triassic Khunamuh Formation China India Japan Neospathodus diminutus Sp. nov Han et al. Early Triassic Pakistan Neospathodus guryulensis Sp. nov Leu & Goudemand in Leu et al. Early Triassic Khunamuh Formation India Neospathodus prolixus Sp. nov Han et al. Early Triassic Pakistan Oistodus panderi Sp. nov Valid Zhen in Zhen et al. Ordovician Australia Pachycladina shiquania Sp. nov Wu, Ji & Lash Triassic China Paltodus simplex Sp. nov Valid Zhen et al. Cambrian–Ordovician transition Australia Pelekysgnathus crispus Sp. nov Valid Corriga, Ferretti & Corradini Silurian Italy A member of Prioniodontida belonging to the family Icriodontidae . Pelekysgnathus pazukhini Sp. nov Plotitsyn et al. Devonian (Famennian) Russia Plectodina maloneyensis Sp. nov Valid Zhen in Zhen et al. Ordovician Australia Polygnathus ovaliformis Sp. nov Valid Izokh Devonian Russia Resinodus Gen. et sp. nov Mango & Albanesi Ordovician (Dapingian) San Juan Formation Argentina Genus includes new species R. nalamamacatus . Scalpellodus crespinae Sp. nov Valid Zhen in Zhen et al. Ordovician Australia Subsequently transferred to the genus Kirkupodus . Trapezognathus morenensis Sp. nov Rueda, Albanesi & Ortega Ordovician ( Floian ) Acoite Formation Argentina Triangulodus obesus Sp. nov Valid Zhen in Zhen et al. Ordovician Australia Tripodus precolaevis Sp. nov Mango & Albanesi Ordovician (Dapingian) San Juan Formation Argentina Variabiloconus australis Sp. nov Valid Zhen in Zhen et al. Ordovician Australia Variabiloconus delicatus Sp. nov Valid Zhen et al. Cambrian–Ordovician transition Australia Wurmiella arcuata Sp. nov Valid Corriga, Ferretti & Corradini Silurian Italy A member of Ozarkodinida belonging to the family Spathognathodontidae . Wurmiella lucae Sp. nov Valid Corriga, Ferretti & Corradini Silurian Italy A member of Ozarkodinida belonging to the family Spathognathodontidae. Wurmiella pulchra Sp. nov Valid Corriga, Ferretti & Corradini Silurian Italy A member of Ozarkodinida belonging to the family Spathognathodontidae. Wurmiella silurica Sp. nov Valid Corriga, Ferretti & Corradini Silurian Italy A member of Ozarkodinida belonging to the family Spathognathodontidae. Conodont research Paiste et al. (2025) revise the conodont biostratigraphy in the Ordovician (Sandbian–lower Katian) strata in Lithuania, Ukraine, Estonia and Sweden. Taxonomic revision of Acodus longibasis and A. triangularis is published by Zhen (2025), who also revises the generic diagnosis of Acodus and supports the interpretation of this genus as valid. A study on the fossil record of Eifelian to Frasnian conodonts from the Spanish Pyrenees, providing evidence of regional variations in the impact of major Givetian Global Events on conodont diversity dynamics, is published by Liao & Valenzuela-Ríos (2025). A study on the morphological variation of oral elements of members of the genus Polygnathus from the Devonian/Carboniferous transition is published by Nesme et al. (2025), who find evidence of reduced morphological variation in larger elements than in smaller ones, interpreted as indicative of increase in functional constraints on large-sized Polygnathus elements. A study on P 1 elements of members of the genus Polygnathus from Montagne Noire (France) living in the aftermath of the Hangenberg event , providing evidence consistent with changes of change of diet of the studied conodonts during their ontogeny as well as evidence indicating that small specimens were more susceptible to environmental influences than large ones, is published by Nesme et al. (2025). A study on the phylogenetic relationships, biogeography and biostratigraphy of members of the genus Gnathodus is published by Wang, Hu & Wang (2025). A study on factors influencing the spatial distribution of conodonts in the aftermath of the Permian–Triassic extinction event is published by Guenser et al. (2025). Wu et al. (2025) study the morphological variation of oral elements of members of the genus Chiosella , and argue that the majority of specimens of Chiosella gondolelloides could be juvenile forms of Chiosella timorensis . Fish Main article: 2025 in paleoichthyology Amphibians Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Ariekanerpeton kuedensis Sp. nov Valid Bulanov Permian (Kungurian-Roadian) Russia ( Perm Krai ) A discosauriscid seymouriamorph . A species of Ariekanerpeton . Buxierophus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Werneburg, Logghe & Steyer Permian France A dissorophid temnospondyl .

The type species is B. pouilloni . Duffaudiella Gen. et sp. nov Macaluso et al. Eocene France A salamander belonging to the family Salamandridae .

The type species is D. paleogenica . Dynamognathus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Gunnin et al. Pliocene Gray Fossil Site United States ( Tennessee ) A salamander belonging to the family Plethodontidae .

The type species is D. robertsoni . Eotriton Gen. et comb. nov Macaluso et al. Eocene Germany A salamander belonging to the family Salamandridae.

The type species is E. weigelti (Herre, 1935). Huangfuchuansuchus Gen. et sp. nov Chen & Liu Early Triassic Heshanggou Formation China A temnospondyl belonging to the clade Capitosauria .

The type species is H. haojiamaoensis. Latonia dimenticata Sp. nov Valid Sorbelli et al. Pleistocene Italy A species of Latonia . Litoria tylerantiqua Sp. nov Farman, Archer & Hand Eocene Australia A species of Litoria . Martintriton Gen. et sp. nov Valid Skutschas et al. Early Cretaceous (Barremian–Aptian) Germany A salamandroid salamander. Genus includes new species M. septatus . Morovius Gen. et sp. nov Valid Novikov & Shishkin Early Triassic (Induan) Russia A lonchorhynchid temnospondyl. Genus includes new species M. juliaromanorum . Philoria godthelpi Sp. nov Valid Farman, Archer & Hand Miocene Riversleigh World Heritage Area Australia A species of Philoria . Rhineceps karibaensis Sp. nov Valid Steyer & Sidor Permian (Lopingian) Madumabisa Mudstone Formation Zambia A rhinesuchid temnospondyl. A species of Rhineceps . Sclerocephalus megalorhinus Sp. nov Valid Schoch Permian (Asselian) Meisenheim Formation Germany Sclerocephalus odernheimensis Sp. nov Valid Schoch Permian (Asselian) Meisenheim Formation Germany Venczelibatrachus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Vasilyan & Macaluso Paleocene Germany A frog belonging to the family Alytidae .

The type species is V. palaeocenicus . Xerocephalella Gen. et comb. nov Valid Muzzopappa, Bargo & Vizcaíno Paleocene and Eocene Salamanca Formation Argentina A new genus for "Calyptocephalella" sabrosa Muzzopappa et al. (2020); genus also includes "Calyptocephalella" pichileufensis Gómez, Báez & Muzzopappa (2011). Amphibian research New information on the anatomy of the braincases of Ventastega curonica and Acanthostega gunnari is published by Ahlberg et al. (2025). A study on the body plan of Ichthyostega is published by Strong et al. (2025), who provide evidence of the presence of a mixture of fish- and tetrapod-like body proportions, and interpret forelimbs of Ichthyostega as bearing a higher fraction of body weight than its hindlimbs when the animal moved on land. Marshall et al. (2025) use palynological assemblages from the Carboniferous Ballagan Formation ( Scotland , United Kingdom ) to place early tetrapods from different localities from this formation within a Tournaisian timeframe. Redescription and a study on the affinities of Carboniferous baphetids from the Czech Republic is published by Barták, Ivanov & Ekrt (2025), who identify rediscovered part of the type material of Loxomma bohemicum as remains of temnospondyl species Capetus palustris .

The maximum depositional age of the Carboniferous fossils from the East Kirkton Quarry ( Scotland , United Kingdom ), including fossils of Balanerpeton woodi , Eucritta melanolimnetes , Kirktonecta milnerae , Ophiderpeton kirktonense , Silvanerpeton miripedes and Westlothiana lizziae , is reinterpreted as more likely to be middle-lower Viséan rather than upper Viséan by Garza et al. (2025). Redescription of the anatomy of Calligenethlon watsoni is published by Adams et al. (2025). Ruta et al. (2025) study the evolution of skull length in temnospondyls. A study on the body size, morphological diversity, biogeography and feeding ecology of temnospondyls throughout the Triassic is published by Mehmood et al. (2025). Werneburg (2025) redescribes the morphology of Glanochthon lellbachae on the basis of data from previously unpublished specimens from the Permian Meisenheim Formation ( Saar–Nahe Basin ; Germany). Feng et al. (2025) describe a probable stereospondyl tooth from the strata of the Longtan Formation in Chongqing , representing the first record of a Permian tetrapod from southern China reported to date and supporting the existence of a land connection between northern and southern China during the Permian. Revision of the skeletal morphology of Plagiosternum granulosum and a study on its ontogeny and probable ecology is published by Schoch et al. (2025). A study on the parasphenoids of Early Triassic trematosauroids and capitosaurs from the European part of Russia, providing evidence of differences of the levator scapulae muscles of the studied temnospondyls that were likely related to differences of their lifestyles, is published by Morkovin (2025). A study on the morphological variation, phylogenetic relationships and evolutionary history of members of the genus Cyclotosaurus is published by Schoch et al. (2025). Kufner et al. (2025) report the discovery of a probable mass mortality assemblage of Buettnererpeton bakeri from the Upper Triassic strata from the Nobby Knob site ( Popo Agie Formation ; Wyoming , United States). A study on the structure of tissue of the dermal pectoral bones of Metoposaurus krasiejowensis is published by Kalita, Teschner & Konietzko-Meier (2025). A study on the histology of the ilium and the ischium of Metoposaurus krasiejowensis , providing possible evidence of a reduced role of the pelvic girdle and hindlimbs in locomotion of members of the studied species, is published by Konietzko-Meier, Prino & Teschner (2025). A study on pathologies in cervical vertebrae of specimens of Metoposaurus krasiejowensis is published by Antczak et al. (2025), who identify the oldest block joint between the atlas and the axis reported in a tetrapod, as well as the first record of spinal arthropathy in a non-amniote. New information on the morphology of the lower jaw of Trimerorhachis is provided by Ruta, Bolt & Barber (2025). Gee, Mann & Sues (2025) describe a new specimen of Aspidosaurus chiton from the Permian (Cisuralian) strata in Texas , and designate it as the neotype of the species. Skutschas, Kolchanov & Syromyatnikova (2025) report evidence of presence of pedicellate teeth in karaurids , interpreted as confirming the neotenic nature of the studied specimens. Noda et al. (2025) identify giant salamander remains from the Shikimizu bed (Ehime Prefecture, Shikoku, Japan ) as belonging to the Japanese giant salamander , providing evidence of broader geographical range of the species in the past. A study on the fossil record of Quaternary mole salamanders from Hall's Cave ( Texas , United States) is published by Ledesma, Moxley & Kemp (2025), who link the disappearance of mole salamanders from the Edwards Plateau to landscape changes and shift to hotter and drier climate in the middle Holocene. Evidence from the study of melanosomes of extant and fossil anurans, indicative of conserved geometries (likely related to conserved function) of melanosomes in the eyes and internal tissues of the studied specimens, as well as of diffences in the geometry of skin melanosomes of extant and fossil anurans, is presented by Falk et al. (2025). Redescription of the anatomy of Vieraella herbstii is published by Báez & Nicoli (2025). Fossil material representing the northernmost record of frogs from the Upper Cretaceous Bauru Group is described from the Adamantina and Serra da Galga formations ( Brazil ) by Muniz et al. (2025), who report the discovery of a possible calyptocephalellid representing the first member of the group reported from the northern part of South America. New fossil material of Bakonybatrachus fedori is described from the Santonian strata from the Iharkút vertebrate locality ( Hungary ) by Szentesi (2025). Lemierre et al. (2025) describe new fossil material of members of Pipimorpha from the Upper Cretaceous (Coniacian-Santonian) strata from the Becetèn site ( Niger ), providing evidence of presence of at least four pipimorph taxa at the studied site. Lin et al. (2025) describe a vertebra of Duttaphrynus melanostictus representing the first record of an amphibian fossil from Taiwan , probably originating from the Middle Pleistocene Chiting Formation. Bravo et al. (2025) report the discovery of fossil material of a member of the genus Ceratophrys from the Miocene Palo Pintado Formation , representing one of the westernmost records of the genus in northern Argentina reported to date, and claimed by the authors to be the first record of this genus from the studied formation; however, Zimicz et al. (2025) cite previous records of Ceratophrys from the Palo Pintado Formation, and argue that the fossil material described by Bravo et al. is more likely Pliocene in age. Lemierre et al. (2025) describe new fossil material of frogs from the Miocene strata from the Chamtwara locality ( Kenya ), including the first fossil occurrence of a member of the family Arthroleptidae . Nicoli et al. (2025) reinterpret Neoprocoela edentata as a species belonging to the extant genus Nannophryne . An external mould of a true toad , preserving details of its soft anatomy, is described from the Miocene strata from the Böttingen Fossillagerstätte ( Germany ) by Maisch & Stöhr (2025). Lemierre & Orliac (2025) describe fossil material of Paleogene amphibians from the locality of Dams ( Quercy Phosphorites Formation , France ), reporting evidence of a faunal turnover at the Eocene-Oligocene transition. Logghe et al. (2025) report evidence of preservation of soft tissues including skin and intestinal casts in new specimens of Discosauriscus from the Permian Lagerstätte of Franchesse ( France ), providing evidence of reptile-like epidermal scalation in juvenile discosauriscids seymouriamorphs. Reisz & Modesto (2025) revise Asaphestera platyris , and interpret it as nomen dubium and as a recumbirostran "microsaur" rather than a synapsid. Byrnes, Bolt & Mann (2025) report the first discovery of fossil material of Ctenerpeton remex from the Mazon Creek fossil beds ( Illinois , United States), expanding known diversity of nectrideans from the studied assemblage. Jenkins et al. (2025) redescribe the skull of Hapsidopareion lepton , consider Llistrofus pricei to represent a junior synonym of this species, and reevaluate the affinities of recumbirostrans , recovering them as a clade of stem - amniotes . Reptiles Main articles: 2025 in reptile paleontology and 2025 in archosaur paleontology Synapsids Non-mammalian synapsids Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Arboroharamiya fuscus Sp. nov Valid Li et al. Jurassic Tiaojishan Formation China Arctops umulunshi Sp. nov Valid Mann & Sidor Permian ( Lopingian ) Madumabisa Mudstone Formation Zambia A gorgonopsian . A species of Arctops . Aulacephalodon kapoliwacela Sp. nov Valid Thomas, Angielczyk & Peecook Permian (Lopingian) Madumabisa Mudstone Formation Zambia A geikiid dicynodont . A species of Aulacephalodon . Bienotheroides wucaiensis Sp. nov Liu et al. Late Jurassic Shishugou Formation China A tritylodontid cynodont . Camurocondylus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mao et al. Early Jurassic (Hettangian-Pliensbachian) Lufeng Formation China A member of Morganucodonta .

The type species is C. lufengensis . Cradognathus Gen. et comb. nov Valid Lloyd & Durand Permian (Changhsingian) Balfour Formation South Africa A therocephalian belonging to the family Akidnognathidae .

The type species is "Hewittia" albanensis Brink (1959). Dicynodontoides kubwa Sp. nov Valid Shipps, Sidor & Angielczyk Permian (Lopingian) Usili Formation Tanzania A kingoriid dicynodont. A species of Dicynodontoides . Dinanomodon guoi Sp. nov Valid Shi & Liu Late Permian Probably Sunan Formation China A dicynodont. Euptychognathus kingae Sp. nov Valid Kammerer, Angielczyk & Fröbisch Permian (Lopingian) Madumabisa Mudstone Formation Zambia A lystrosaurid dicynodont. A species of Euptychognathus . Lystrosauravus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Kammerer, Angielczyk & Fröbisch Permian (Lopingian) Cistecephalus Assemblage Zone ( Beaufort Group ) South Africa A lystrosaurid dicynodont.

The type species is L. bothae . Madumabisa Gen. et sp. nov Valid Kammerer, Angielczyk & Fröbisch Permian (Lopingian) Madumabisa Mudstone Formation Zambia A lystrosaurid dicynodont.

The type species is M. opainion . Mdomowabata Gen. et sp. nov Valid Angielczyk & Otoo Permian (Lopingian) Usili Formation Tanzania A cryptodontian dicynodont.

The type species M. trilobops . Nujalikodon Gen. et sp. nov Patrocínio et al. Early Jurassic ( Hettangian ) Rhætelv Formation Greenland A member or a close relative of Docodonta .

The type species is N. cassiopeiae . Pontognathus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Gaetano et al. Late Triassic (Carnian) Chañares Formation Argentina A cynodont belonging to the family Traversodontidae .

The type species is P. ignotus . Synapsid research Review of studies on the morphology and evolution of brains of synapsids, their sense organs, endothermy and behavior from the preceding years is published by Bolton, Mangera & Benoit (2025). Evidence from a comparative study of skull anatomy of non-mammalian synapsids and extant chameleons, interpreted as consistent with the presence a mandibular middle ear in early synapsids, is presented by Olroyd & Kopperud (2025). A study on changes in humerus and femur of synapsids throughout their evolutionary history is published by Bishop & Pierce (2025). A study on changes of shape of the humerus and changes of posture of synapsids throughout their evolutionary history is published by Brocklehurst et al. (2025), who interpret ancestral synapsids as sprawling but morphologically distinct from extant sprawling animals, and interpret the evolution of posture of modern therian mammals as resulting from successive synapsid radiations with varied postures rather than from a direct progression from sprawling to therian-like posture. A study on the diversity of varanopids throughout their evolutionary history is published by Laurin & Didier (2025), who find no evidence for an end- Kungurian extinction event, and interpret the extinction of varanopids as likely related to the Capitanian mass extinction event . New information on the anatomy of the appendicular skeleton of Mesenosaurus efremovi is provided by Rowe et al. (2025). Marchetti et al. (2025) describe sphenacodontid body impressions (probably produced by a group of four individuals) from the Permian ( Sakmarian ) Tambach Formation ( Germany ), providing evidence of presence of epidermal scales in sphenacodontids, and name a new ichnotaxon Bromackerichnus requiescens . A study on the anatomy of skull and teeth of Moschognathus whaitsi is published by Lafferty et al. (2025), who report evidence of multiple replacements of incisiform teeth and their alternating replacement pattern, resulting in similarities of tooth replacement in the studied taxon and in the dental batteries in sauropod dinosaurs. Nieke, Fröbisch & Canoville (2025) study the histology of limb bones of Suminia getmanovi , interpreted as consistent with an arboreal lifestyle. A study on the impact of use of continuous traits on results of analyses of phylogenetic relationships of dicynodonts is published by Wynd et al. (2025). Benoit & Jodder (2025) describe new fossil material of Kombuisia frerensis from the Anisian Burgersdorp Formation ( South Africa ), confirming the absence of the parietal foramen in members of this species. Description of the anatomy of the postcranial skeleton of Kembawacela kitchingi is published by Abbott et al. (2025). A study on the skeletal anatomy and phylogenetic affinities of Rastodon procurvidens is published by Silva et al. (2025), who recover the studied dicynodont as the first known South American member of the family Kingoriidae . De Souza et al. (2025) identify the dicynodont skull from the Triassic strata of the Dinodontosaurus Assemblage Zone of the Santa Maria Supersequence described by Araújo (1981) as a skull of Dinodontosaurus brevirostris , providing evidence of presence of this species in Brazil . Matamales-Andreu et al. (2025) describe probable gorgonopsian footprints from the Permian strata of the Port des Canonge Formation ( Spain ), and name a new ichnotaxon Algarpes ferus . A study on the bone histology of an indeterminate gorgonopsian specimen from the Permian strata of the upper Madumabisa Mudstone Formation ( Zambia ), providing evidence of slower growth than in gorgonopsians from the Karoo Basin, is published by Kulik (2025). Macungo, Benoit & Araújo (2025) describe fossil material of Inostrancevia africana from the Permian strata of the K6a2 Member of the Metangula graben ( Mozambique ), supporting its correlation with the Daptocephalus Assemblage Zone in South Africa . Cookson and Mann (2025) re-examine two historic skulls of Lycaenops assigned to L. angusticeps and L. cf. L. angusticeps and reassess their taxonomy. Liu & Abdala (2025) describe new specimens of Jiucaiyuangnathus confusus from the Lower Triassic Jiucaiyuan Formation (China), interpret known specimens as early juveniles, as revise the diagnostic features of the studied taxon. Evidence indicating that Thrinaxodon liorhinus was capable of and reliant on tympanic hearing similar to hearing of extant mammals is presented by Wilken et al. (2025). Filippini, Abdala & Cassini (2025) provide new estimates of body mass for Andescynodon , Pascualgnathus , Massetognathus , Cynognathus and Exaeretodon . Kerber et al. (2025) describe traversodontid postcranial material from the Pinheiros-Chiniquá Sequence at the Linha Várzea 1 site (Brazil), representing a morphotype distinct from other traversodontid postcranial remains from this locality. A study on the bone histology of Luangwa drysdalli and Scalenodon angustifrons , providing evidence of different life histories of the studied cynodonts, is published by Kulik (2025). A study on the anatomy of the postcranial skeleton of Luangwa sudamericana is published by Souza et al. (2025). Medina et al. (2025) provide new information on the anatomy of the cranial endocast of Massetognathus pascuali , and describe the maxillary canal of the studied cynodont. A study on changes in the skull anatomy of Siriusgnathus niemeyerorum during its ontogeny is published by Roese-Miron & Kerber (2025). A study on the skull anatomy of Siriusgnathus niemeyerorum , including the first reconstruction of its cranial nerves and the first description of its inner ear, is published by Roese-Miron et al. (2025). New specimen of Exaeretodon riograndensis , providing new information on the postcranial anatomy of members of this species, is described by Kerber et al. (2025). A specimen of Exaeretodon riograndensis affected by traumatic fracture of ribs that limited its locomotion capabilities, and possibly surviving with help of other members of its group, is described from the Upper Triassic strata of the Santa Maria Supersequence (Brazil) by Doneda, Roese–Miron & Kerber (2025). New information on the skull anatomy of Trucidocynodon riograndensis is provided by Kerber et al. (2025). Dotto et al. (2025) describe fossil material of a prozostrodontian cynodont from the Upper Triassic strata from the Buriol site ( Hyperodapedon Assemblage Zone , Brazil), providing new information on the morphological diversity of teeth of Carnian probainognathians . New information on the anatomy of Yuanotherium minor is provided by Liu, Ren & Mao (2025). Description of the endocranial anatomy of Bienotheroides is published by Ren et al. (2025). Description of new fossil material of Bienotheroides zigongensis from the Upper Jurassic Shishugou Formation (China) and a study on the phylogenetic relationships of tritylodontids is published by Ren et al. (2025). Averianov et al. (2025) report evidence of a dentary– squamosal jaw articulation in Xenocretosuchus sibiricus , providing evidence of development of such jaw articulation in a tritylodontid independently from those observed in tritheledontids and mammaliaforms. Wang et al. (2025) describe a new mandible of Fossiomanus sinensis from the Lower Cretaceous Jiufotang Formation (China), providing new information on the mandible shape and tooth morphology of members of this species. A study on bite force capabilities and on mandible resistance to stress, bending and torsion in Brasilodon quadrangularis is published by Salcido et al. (2025). Hai et al. (2025) describe a mandible of a juvenile specimen of Sinoconodon rigneyi from the Lower Jurassic Lufeng Formation (China), providing new information on tooth replacement in members of this species. Tumelty & Lautenschlager (2025) study the skull anatomy of Hadrocodium wui , and interpret the studied mammaliaform as not fully fossorial. Mammals Main article: 2025 in paleomammalogy Other animals Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Amblysiphonella ingens Sp. nov Valid Malysheva Permian Russia ( Primorsky Krai ) A sponge. Aninoides Gen. et sp. nov Rosse‐Guillevic et al. Ediacaran Fermeuse Formation Canada ( Newfoundland and Labrador ) A rangeomorph petalonamid.

The type species is A. coombsorum . Archaeaphorme Gen. et sp. nov Botting et al. Ordovician ( Hirnantian ) Anji Biota China A hexactinellid sponge.

The type species is A. conica . Aulacera arbuscula Sp. nov Jeon in Jeon et al. Ordovician (Katian) Koumenzi Formation China A member of Stromatoporoidea . Bakiribu Gen. et sp. nov Disputed Pêgas et al. Early Cretaceous (Aptian-Albian) Romualdo Formation Brazil A vertebrate of uncertain affinities. Originally described as a pterosaur belonging to the family Ctenochasmatidae ; subsequently considered to be an indeterminate ray-finned fish (possibly an amiid) by Unwin et al. (2026), who considered it to be a nomen dubium .

The type species is B. waridza . Blastulospongia bouliaensis Sp. nov Valid Sheng & Aitchison Cambrian (Drumian–Guzhangian) Devoncourt Limestone Australia A demosponge belonging to the group Agelasida and the family Sebargasiidae . Bruckneria Nom. nov Valid Hsu & Hsiao Late Cretaceous (Coniacian) Denmark A hexactinellid sponge belonging to the family Euplectellidae ; a replacement name for Walteriella Brückner (2006). Calathites macrocalyx Sp. nov Valid Parry et al. Cambrian (Drumian) Marjum Formation United States ( Utah ) A member of the family Dinomischidae , possibly belonging to the total group of Ctenophora . Cassitella malinkyi Sp. nov Valid Peel Cambrian Series 2 Bastion Formation Greenland A member of Hyolitha . Charnia brasieri Sp. nov McIlroy et al. Ediacaran Canada ( Newfoundland and Labrador ) Charnia ewinoni Sp. nov Valid Pasinetti et al. Ediacaran Canada ( Newfoundland and Labrador ) Chiastoclonella globula Sp. nov Valid Rhebergen & Van Keulen Ordovician Germany A demosponge belonging to the group Orchocladina and the family Chiastoclonellidae . Chiastoclonella incrustans Sp. nov Valid Rhebergen & Van Keulen Ordovician Germany Netherlands A demosponge belonging to the group Orchocladina and the family Chiastoclonellidae. Chiastodiscus Gen. et 2 sp. nov Valid Rhebergen & Van Keulen Ordovician Estonia Germany Netherlands Russia Sweden A demosponge belonging to the group Orchocladina and the family Chiastoclonellidae.

The type species is C. verrucosus ; genus also includes C. regularis . Chimeraspongia Gen. et sp. nov Zou et al. Cambrian Stage 4 Wulongqing Formation China A sponge belonging to the group Ascospongiae .

The type species is C. lii . Choia qingjiangensis Sp. nov Valid Wu et al. Cambrian Stage 3 China A demosponge. Choia textura Sp. nov Valid Wu et al. Cambrian Stage 3 China A demosponge. Crateromorpha? (Neopsacas?) macrospicula Sp. nov Botting et al. Ordovician (Hirnantian) Anji Biota China A hexactinellid sponge. Crestjahitus groenlandicus Sp. nov Valid Peel Cambrian (Wuliuan) Henson Gletscher Formation Greenland A member of Hyolithida . Cryptosiphon oboloides Sp. nov Valid Vinn in Vinn et al. Cambrian (Furongian) Tsitre Formation Estonia A possible polychaete . Cryptothelion sujkowskii Sp. nov Valid Świerczewska-Gładysz & Jurkowska Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Poland A demosponge . Cystostroma inconstans Sp. nov Jeon in Jeon et al. Ordovician (Katian) Koumenzi Formation China A member of Stromatoporoidea. Dinomischus nudus Sp. nov Valid Parry et al. Cambrian (Drumian) Marjum Formation United States ( Utah ) A member of the family Dinomischidae. Elegantilites custos Sp. nov Valent, Fatka & Budil Ordovician Dobrotivá Formation Czech Republic A member of Hyolitha. Eorosselloides Gen. et sp. nov Botting et al. Ordovician (Hirnantian) Anji Biota China A hexactinellid sponge.

The type species is E. antiquus . Fimbulispina Gen. et sp. nov Valid Peel Cambrian ( Drumian ) Fimbuldal Formation China Greenland A relative of gnathiferans , particularly resembling Dakorhachis .

The type species is F. laurentica . Juracanthocephalus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Luo et al. Middle Jurassic Jiulongshan Formation China A member of Acanthocephala .

The type species is J. daohugouensis . Kraytdraco Gen. et sp. nov Mussini et al. Cambrian Bright Angel Shale United States ( Arizona ) A member of Priapulida .

The type species is K. spectatus . Longgangia Gen. et sp. nov Wang et al. Cambrian ( Wuliuan ) Mantou Formation China A probable annelid .

The type species is L. bilamellata . Lophiostroma leizunia Sp. nov Jeon et al. Ordovician China A member of Stromatoporoidea. Lophiostroma leptolamellatum Sp. nov Jeon in Jeon et al. Ordovician (Katian) Koumenzi Formation China A member of Stromatoporoidea. Lotispongia Gen. et sp. nov Luo in Luo et al. Cambrian Stage 4 Wulongqing Formation China A sponge belonging to the family Leptomitidae .

The type species is L. helicolumna . Macromyzon Gen. et sp. nov Valid De Carle et al. Silurian (Telychian) Brandon Bridge Formation United States ( Wisconsin ) A leech .

The type species is M. siluricus . Nektognathus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Vinther et al. Cambrian Sirius Passet Lagerstätte Greenland A member of the family Nectocarididae .

The type species is N. evasmithae . Niquivilispongia Gen. et sp. nov Valid Carrera, Botting & Cañas Ordovician ( Dapingian ) San Juan Formation Argentina A sponge belonging to the group Heteractinida , possibly a member of the family Astraeospongiidae .

The type species is N. asteria . Olgunia Gen. et sp. nov Valid Luzhnaya Ediacaran Russia An animal with colonial organization, possibly a sponge or a coelenterate - grade animal. Genus includes new species O. bondarenkoae . Paraleptomitella reticula Sp. nov Valid Zhang et al. Cambrian Series 2 Niutitang Formation China A sponge (possibly a hexactinellid ) belonging to the family Leptomitidae . Paraleptomitella zunyiensis Sp. nov Valid Zhang et al. Cambrian Series 2 Niutitang Formation China A sponge (possibly a hexactinellid) belonging to the family Leptomitidae. Pentaditrupa nickcavei Sp. nov Valid Kočí et al. Paleocene (Selandian) Kerteminde Marl Formation Denmark A polychaete belonging to the family Serpulidae . Plexodictyon qilianense Sp. nov Jeon in Jeon et al. Ordovician (Katian) Koumenzi Formation China A member of Stromatoporoidea. Primocyathus Gen. et sp. nov Wang & Xiao in Wang et al. Cambrian (Fortunian) Kuanchuanpu Formation China A member of Archaeocyatha belonging to the group Ajacicyathida .

The type species is P. uniseriatus . Propomatoceros lathahypossiae Sp. nov Valid Beschin et al. Eocene Italy A serpulid annelid. Protooncosclera Gen. et sp. nov Valid Manconi et al. Oligocene–Miocene Foulden Maar Lagerstätte New Zealand A sponge belonging to the family Potamolepidae . Genus includes new species P. zealandiae . Pseudanoxycalyx Gen. et sp. nov Botting et al. Ordovician (Hirnantian) Anji Biota China A hexactinellid sponge.

The type species is P. verrucosus . Radiostroma astroqilianus Sp. nov Jeon & Zhan in Jeon et al. Ordovician (Katian) Koumenzi Formation China A member of Stromatoporoidea. Rosenella hosholmia Sp. nov Valid Jeon & Toom Ordovician ( Katian ) Adila Formation Estonia A member of Stromatoporoidea. Scalidodendron Gen. et sp. nov Mussini & Butterfield Cambrian Hess River Formation Canada Northwest Territories A scalidophoran .

The type species is S. crypticum . Simplexodictyon uniplexum Sp. nov Jeon in Jeon et al. Ordovician (Katian) Koumenzi Formation China A member of Stromatoporoidea. Sinabeatricea crassicentra Sp. nov Jeon in Jeon et al. Ordovician (Katian) Koumenzi Formation China A member of Stromatoporoidea. Sinocyathus Gen. et sp. nov Wang & Xiao in Wang et al. Cambrian (Fortunian) Kuanchuanpu Formation China A member of Archaeocyatha belonging to the group Ajacicyathida.

The type species is S. biseriatus . Spiraserpula iverseni Sp. nov Valid Kočí & Goedert Oligocene Pysht Formation United States ( Washington ) A serpulid annelid. Stylostroma absurdum Sp. nov Valid Antropova & Silantiev Devonian (Famennian) Russia A member of Stromatoporoidea. Tentalus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Kimmig et al. Cambrian (Wuliuan) Langston Formation United States ( Utah ) An animal of problematic affiliation.

The type species is T. spencensis . Theiokylixia Gen. et sp. nov Valid Parry et al. Cambrian (Drumian) Marjum Formation United States ( Utah ) A member of the family Dinomischidae.

The type species is T. cartwrightae . Tulaneia Gen. et sp. nov Valid Runnegar & Horodyski in Runnegar et al. Probably latest Ediacaran Wood Canyon Formation United States ( Nevada ) An erniettomorph .

The type species is T. amabilia . Usaspongia Gen. et sp. et comb. nov Valid Kolesnikov et al. Permian (Asselian and Sakmarian) Sezym Formation Russia ( Komi Republic ) A demosponge belonging to the family Anthaspidellidae .

The type species is U. tchernyshevi ; genus also includes "Stuckenbergia" artiensis Tchernychev (1898). Wilsumispongia Gen. et 3 sp. nov Valid Rhebergen & Van Keulen Ordovician Germany Netherlands A demosponge belonging to the group Orchocladina and the family Chiastoclonellidae.

The type species is W. cylindrica ; genus also includes W. cratera and W. conica . Yanchangparapandorina Gen. et sp. nov Gan & Liu in Gan et al. Triassic Yanchang Formation China A probable animal embryo, possibly an embryo of an aquatic arthropod at the cleavage stage.

The type species is Y. inornata . Other animal research Mitchell & Dhungana (2025) calculate the lifespans and relative evolutionary rates for Dickinsonia , Kimberella , Trepassia , Tribrachidium , Charnia , Ernietta , Avalofractus , Primocandelabrum , Charniodiscus and Fractofusus . Evidence from the study of extant invertebrates, indicating that coprostane is not a gut biomarker for Ediacaran animals, is presented by Mulligan & Gold (2025), who propose that the coprostane signal in the fossils of Dickinsonia is a result of feeding on the microbial mats by the studied animal. Possible dickinsoniomorph fossils, which if confirmed would provide evidence of survival the group into the latest Ediacaran, are described from the Nama Group ( Namibia ) by Gibson et al. (2025). Surprenant & Droser (2025) develop a growth model for Funisia dorothea , providing evidence of a growth pattern different from that of Wutubus annularis . Elias et al. (2025) describe superficially coral-like fossils from the Cambrian Mural Formation (Alberta and British Columbia, Canada), assigned to the species Rosellatana jamesi and interpreted as indicative of affinities with hypercalcified sponges. Evidence of similarity of growth and mortality dynamics of Parvancorina minchami and extant small marine invertebrates is presented by Ivantsov et al. (2025). Zhao et al. (2025) describe disc-like fossils from the Ediacaran Dengying Formation (China), preserving possibly remnants of the perioral musculature and innervation, and interpreted as probable fossils of eumetazoan - grade organisms. Dunn, Donoghue & Liu (2025) describe a population of Fractofusus andersoni from the Mistaken Point Ecological Reserve (Newfoundland, Canada ), and present a model of growth in the studied taxon. Stephenson et al. (2025) report evidence from the study of fossils from the Ediacaran strata in Newfoundland (Canada) indicating that fragmentation of full specimens Fractofusus andersoni during disturbance events resulted in recolonization of the substrate on the basis reproductively active fragments, but find no evidence that survival of exceptionally large specimens of frondose taxa during the disturbance events resulted in a significant local recolonization afterwards, and argue that these differences are consistent with capacity of Avalon taxa to exhibit both local recolonization and long-distance dispersal. Wu et al. (2025) describe fossil material of Charnia masoni and C. gracilis from the Ediacaran Zhoujieshan Formation (China), extending known geographic distribution of Charnia and demonstrating that it likely persisted into the latest Ediacaran. Evidence from the study of extant demosponges, supporting the interpretation of C 31 steranes in Neoproterozoic rocks as linked to the emergence of early sponges, is presented by Shawar et al. (2025). Jia et al. (2025) study the composition of the assemblage of sponge spicules from the Cambrian Qingxi Formation in the Sanjiang area (Guangxi, China), reporting evidence of presence of complex forms such as pentactines and orthotetraenes. Zhang et al. (2025) describe sponge spicule tufts from the Cambrian (Fortunian) lower Yanjiahe Formation (China), representing some of the oldest fossils of biomineralized sponges reported to date. Olivier et al. (2025) identify probable chaetetid fossil material from the Triassic ( Olenekian ) strata in Rock Canyon ( Arizona , United States), representing the oldest Mesozoic record of chaetetids reported to date. Becker-Kerber et al. (2025) reevaluate skeletal organization of Corumbella on the basis of the study of new specimens from the Ediacaran Tamengo Formation ( Brazil ), interpreted as inconsistent with close affinities with scyphozoan cnidarians. Kershaw & Li (2025) review the evolutionary history of hypercalcified sponges. A study on possible causes of decline of stromatoporoid diversity during the early Devonian is published by Stock et al. (2025). Huang, Sendino & Kershaw (2025) revise the fossil material of Devonian stromatoporoids from collections of the Natural History Museum, London , and revise the biogeography of Devonian stromatoporoids. Wistort et al. (2025) identify cylindrical chert concretions from the Phosphoria Rock Complex as cryptic body fossils of Permian sponges rather than trace fossils, and interpret the studied sponges as likely partially growing above the sediment-water interface and partially buried within the substrate during their life, similar to modern sponges living within loose or unconsolidated sediments. Purported early mollusc Shishania aculeata is reinterpreted as a chancelloriid by Yang et al. (2025). Hu et al. (2025) report evidence of exceptional preservation of organic templates in chancelloriid sclerites from the Cambrian Houjiashan Formation (China), interpret their arrangement as indicating that the biomineralization of chancelloriid sclerites was controlled by epithelial cells , and interpret the biomineralization mode of chancelloriids as suggestive of their affinities with eumetazoans. Yun et al. (2025) report evidence of preservation of integument microstructures in chancelloriid fossils from the Cambrian Yu'anshan Formation (China) and study the phylogenetic affinities of chancelloriids, recovering them as epitheliozoans most likely sharing a more recent common ancestor with eumetazoans than with placozoans . A study on locomotory trace fossils from 12 formations from the Ediacaran-Cambrian transition, providing evidence of presence of probable bilateral eumetazoans with slender bodies with anterior-posterior body axes around 545 million years ago, is published by Wang & Miguez-Salas (2025). Knaust & Duarte (2025) report the preservation of nemertean , polychaete and nematode fossils from the limestone and marlstone succession of the Pliensbachian Vale das Fontes and Lemede formations at the Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point at Peniche ( Portugal ), and study the taphonomy of the described fossils. Evidence from the study of Cambrian scalidophoran fossils, interpreted as indicating that the ventral nerve cord was ancestrally unpaired in scalidophorans, priapulids and possibly ecdysozoans in general, is presented by Wang et al. (2025). Knaust (2025) identifies early Paleozoic trace fossils assigned to the ichnotaxon Skolithos linearis as most likely to be priapulid burrows. Liu & Liu (2025) identify morphological differences between Corynetis brevis and C. fortis interpreted as likely related to different anchoring strategies, and report evidence of presence of two rows encircling the mouth of Corynetis , interpreted as likely having a sensory function. Kovář & Fatka (2025) describe new lobopodian fossil material from the Cambrian Jince Formation ( Czech Republic ), extending known record of Cambrian hallucigeniid/luolishaniid lobopodians into the Drumian . Knecht et al. (2025) redescribe Palaeocampa anthrax , interpret it as the youngest known "xenusiid" lobopodian, and report evidence of sclerite architecture distinct from those of other lobopodians, possibly related to the ability to secrete defensive chemicals. Monge-Nájera & Añino (2025) argue that timing of diversification of extant onychophoran taxa from published DNA phylogenies indicates that indicative of survival of multiple onychophoran lineages through the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event in the areas affected by the Chicxulub impact. Slater (2025) describes Cambrian protoconodonts preserved as small carbonaceous fossils from the Lontova Formation ( Estonia ) and from the Borgholm Formation ( Sweden ), and interprets the studied fossils as indicating that bilaterians with chaetognath -like grasping spines diverged by the latest Ediacaran. Nanglu et al. (2025) identify borings in shells of the bivalve Babinka from the Ordovician Fezouata Formation ( Morocco ) interpreted as produced by parasitic polychaetes and possibly representing the oldest known fossil evidence of spionids. Gómez, di Pasquo & Silvestri (2025) study two assemblages of Ordovician scolecodonts from the La Pola and Don Braulio formations (Argentina), and report evidence of differences in composition of the two studied assemblages, interpreted as related to tectonic activity, sea level changes, glacial events and extinctions across the Katian-Hirnantian. Gao et al. (2025) describe new scolecodonts from the Silurian Miaogao Formation (Yunnan, China), extending known geographical range of members of the genus Langeites . Shcherbakov et al. (2025) identify oligochaete cocoons in the Permian (Lopingian) strata of the Karaungir Lagerstätte ( Kazakhstan ), representing the oldest undoubted record of members of Clitellata reported to date. Jamison-Todd et al. (2025) study trace fossils in marine reptile bones from the Upper Cretaceous Chalk Group ( United Kingdom ), produced by bone-eating worms and interpreted as likely indicative of high species diversity of Osedax during the early Late Cretaceous, and name new ichnotaxa Osspecus eunicefootia , O. morsus , O. campanicum , O. arboreum , O. automedon , O. frumentum and O. panatlanticum . Jamison-Todd, Mannion & Upchurch (2025) identify boring produced by bone-eating worms in cetacean specimens from the Cenozoic strata from the Netherlands and the United States , including a specimen of Zyghorhiza kochii from the Eocene Yazoo Formation ( Alabama ) representing the oldest cetacean specimen with such borings reported to date, report evidence of high morphological diversity of the studied borings, and name a new ichnotaxon Osspecus pollardium described on the basis of borings from two teeth from the Neogene strata in the Netherlands. Kiel et al. (2025) report evidence of presence of trace fossils produced by Osedax -like worms in a tympanic bulla of an Oligocene baleen whale from the Lincoln Creek Formation ( Washington , United States), in spite of the bone of the studied bulla being as dense as those of extant whales, and identify collagen-bearing body parts of marine animals as possible sources of nutrients for Osedax . Collareta et al. (2025) identify trace fossils preserved in shark teeth from the Pliocene offshore deposits of Tuscany ( Italy ) providing the first fossil evidence that Osedax -like worms fed on shark tooth dentine.

The type species is F. sirhanensis . Frondicularia arctica Sp. nov Valid Yadrenkin Triassic Russia Gavelinella praestelligera Sp. nov Jarvis, Dubicka & Chroustová Late Cretaceous (Santonian) Seaford Chalk Formation Ukraine United Kingdom Gavelinella praethalmanni Sp. nov Jarvis, Dubicka & Chroustová Late Cretaceous (Coniacian) Seaford Chalk Formation United Kingdom Gavelinella praetumida Sp. nov Jarvis, Dubicka & Chroustová Late Cretaceous (Coniacian) Lewes Nodular Chalk Formation United Kingdom Glomomidiellopsis? okayi Sp. nov Altıner et al. Permian (Capitanian to Changhsingian) Cambodia Turkey A member of Miliolata belonging to the family Hemigordiopsidae . Globoomphalotis vachardi Nom. nov Valid Le Coze et al. Carboniferous (Viséan) Russia ( Perm Krai ) A replacement name for Endothyra magna Grozdilova & Lebedeva (1954). Glomospira kaminskii Sp. nov Valid Hikmahtiar Paleocene (Danian) Scaglia Rossa Formation Italy A member of the family Ammodiscidae . Gusicella complexa Sp. nov Valid Schlagintweit & Rashidi in Schlagintweit et al. Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) Tarbur Formation Iran A member of the family Orbitolinidae . Hereceina Gen. et sp. nov Acar & Bozkurt Eocene (Priabonian) Turkey A calcarinid.

The type species is H. spinigera . Ichthyofrondina vachardi Nom. nov Valid Le Coze et al. Permian (Changhsingian) Nikitin Formation Russia A replacement name for Frondicularia ornata Miklukho-Maklay (1954). Kristanita Gen. et comb. nov Falzoni, Rettori & Gale in Falzoni et al. Late Triassic and Early Jurassic Australia Austria Gibraltar Greece Italy Japan Myanmar Slovakia Slovenia Thailand Timor-Leste A member of Ammodiscana belonging to the order Ataxophragmiida and the family Duotaxidae.

The type species is "Tetrataxis" humilis Kristan (1957); genus also includes "Tetrataxis" inflata Kristan (1957). Laxoendothyra parakosvensis gracilis Ssp. nov Okuyucu et al. Devonian-Carboniferous transition Yılanlı Formation Turkey Loftusia tarburica Sp. nov Ghanbarloo, Safari & Görmüş Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) Tarbur Formation Iran A member of the family Loftusiidae . Mediocris vachardi Nom. nov Valid Le Coze et al. Carboniferous (Viséan) Russia ( Komi Republic ) A replacement name for Eostaffella mediocris var. minima Durkina (1959). Nestellorella vachardi Nom. nov Valid Le Coze et al. Permian (Artinskian) Russia ( Bashkortostan ) A replacement name for Nodosaria parva Lipina (1949). Nigrispiroides Gen. et comb. nov Krainer, Lucas & Vachard Carboniferous Brazil Canada ( Yukon ) Iran Peru United States ( Arkansas Idaho New Mexico Oklahoma Texas ) The type species is "Monotaxinoides" melanogaster Yarahmadzahi & Vachard (2019). Omphalocyclus tarburensis Sp. nov Ghanbarloo, Safari & Görmüş Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) Tarbur Formation Iran A member of the family Orbitoididae . Paraglobivalvulina? intermedia Sp. nov Altıner et al. Permian (Capitanian to Changhsingian) Turkey A member of Fusulinata belonging to the family Globivalvulinidae . Planogloboendothyra arcuata vachardi Nom. nov Valid Le Coze et al. Carboniferous (Viséan) Russia A replacement name for Endothyra arcuata var. evoluta Lebedeva (1954). Plectorobuloides Gen. et sp. nov Altıner et al. Permian (Changhsingian) Turkey A member of Nodosariata belonging to the family Robuloididae.

The type species is P. taurica . Pojarkovella nibelis vachardi Nom. nov Valid Le Coze et al. Carboniferous (Viséan) Uzbekistan A replacement name for Eostaffella (?) nibelis subsp. lata Mikhno in Mikhno & Balakin (1975). Protostensioeina ukrainica Sp. nov Jarvis, Dubicka & Chroustová Late Cretaceous (Santonian) Seaford Chalk Formation Ukraine United Kingdom Pseudobiseriella Gen. et sp. et comb. nov Valid Sheng & Brenckle Carboniferous (Serpukhovian) Menard Limestone Kazakhstan United States ( Alabama Georgia (U.S. state) Illinois ) Canada ? ( Nova Scotia ) A member of Fusulinata belonging to the family Globivalvulinidae.

The type species is P. menardensis ; genus also includes "Dzhamansorina" kipshakensis Marfenkova (1991). Pseudocryptomorphina Gen. et sp. nov Altıner et al. Permian (Changhsingian) Turkey A member of Nodosariata, possibly belonging to the family Robuloididae.

The type species is P. amplimuralis . Pseudolangella vachardi Nom. nov Valid Le Coze et al. Permian Russia ( Bashkortostan ) A replacement name for Nodosaria elegantissima Suleymanov (1949). Pseudomidiella sahini Sp. nov Altıner et al. Permian (Changhsingian) Turkey A member of Miliolata belonging to the family Midiellidae . Pseudorobuloides Gen. et sp. nov Altıner et al. Permian (Lopingian) Iran Turkey A member of Nodosariata belonging to the family Robuloididae.

The type species is P. reicheli . Pualacana Gen. et 2 sp. et comb. nov Valid Barros, Haig & McCartain Middle and Late Triassic Aitutu Group China Italy Timor-Leste United States ( Alaska ) A member of the family Variostomatidae .

The type species is P. hortai ; genus also includes new species P. xananai , as well as P. bilimbata (Hu in He & Hu, 1977), P. acutoangulata (Kristan-Tollmann, 1973), P. catilliforme (Kristan-Tollmann, 1960), P. cochlea (Kristan-Tollmann, 1960), P. crassum (Kristan-Tollmann, 1960), P. exile (Kristan-Tollmann, 1960), P. falcata (Kristan-Tollmann, 1973), P. hadrolimbata (Hu in He & Hu, 1977), P. helicta (Tappan, 1951), P. oberhauseri (Vettorel, 1988) and P. pralongense (Kristan-Tollmann, 1960). Robuloides lata Sp. nov Altıner et al. Permian (Changhsingian) Turkey A member of Nodosariata belonging to the family Robuloididae. Robuloides? rettorii Sp. nov Altıner et al. Permian (Changhsingian) Turkey A member of Nodosariata belonging to the family Robuloididae. Robustopachyphloia farinacciae Sp. nov Altıner et al. Permian (Changhsingian) Turkey A member of Nodosariata belonging to the family Pachyphloiidae . Semiendothyra vachardi Nom. nov Valid Le Coze et al. Carboniferous ( Moscovian ) Russia A replacement name for Endothyra bradyi var. simplex Reitlinger (1950). Siderolites persica Sp. nov Ghanbarloo, Safari & Görmüş Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) Tarbur Formation Iran A member of the family Siderolitidae. Solakiana Gen. et comb. nov Schlagintweit Late Cretaceous (Turonian) Turkey A probable member of the family Charentiidae .

The type species is "Fleuryana" gediki Solak, Taslı & Koç (2020). Solimanina Gen. et comb. nov Shreif et al. Eocene Egypt A nummulitid.

The type species is "Operculina" canalifera d'Archiac & Haime (1853). Stensioeina praeexsculpta Sp. nov Jarvis, Dubicka & Chroustová Late Cretaceous (Coniacian) Seaford Chalk Formation United Kingdom Foraminiferal research A study on the impact of ocean chemistry changes on evolution of foraminiferal wall types throughout the Phanerozoic is published by Faulkner et al. (2025), who find that changes of foraminiferal wall types were mostly driven by short-term ocean chemistry changes.

The first fossil material of Devonian foraminifera from northern Gondwana reported to date is described from the Mader Basin (Morocco) by Dubicka & Rakociński (2025). Zhang et al. (2025) study the fossil record of Carboniferous and Permian fusuline forams, and report evidence indicating that warming events resulted in diversity losses in the studied group, while long-term cooling promoted its diversification. Evidence from the study of Carnian foraminiferal assemblages from the Erguan section in Guizhou and Quxia section in South Tibet (China), interpreted as indicating that there were no significant extinctions of foraminifera during the Carnian pluvial episode in the studied regions, is presented by Li et al. (2025). Evidence from the study of foraminifera from the Cretaceous-Paleogene section from Bidart ( France ), indicating that the calcification stress related to Deccan volcanism affected planktic foraminifera but did not significantly affect benthic foraminifera, is presented by Patra et al. (2025). A study on changes of composition of benthic foraminiferal assemblages from the Scaglia Rossa Formation ( Italy ), providing evidence of shifts in the type of organic matter available to benthic organisms rather than a complete collapse of flux of organic carbon to the seafloor during the Cretaceous-Paleogene transition, is published by Kaminski, Hikmahtiar & Cetean (2025). A study on the composition of planktic foraminiferal assemblages from the Atlantic Ocean during the Eocene, providing evidence that they lacked resilience during the Middle Eocene Climatic Optimum , is published by Sigismondi et al. (2025).

The type species is C. jiangchuanensis . Dorsennidium iranense Sp. nov Ghavidel-Syooki Ordovician Ghelli Formation Iran An acritarch. Eotylotopalla inflata Sp. nov Valid Ouyang et al. Ediacaran Doushantuo Formation China An acanthomorph acritarch. Excultibrachium jahandidehii Sp. nov Ghavidel-Syooki Ordovician Ghelli Formation Iran An acritarch. Hensonidendra Gen. et 2 sp. nov Valid Peel Cambrian (Wuliuan) Henson Gletscher Formation Greenland An organism of uncertain affinities, with similarities to cyanobacteria from the family Epiphytaceae.

The type species is H. tavsenica ; genus also includes H. hensoniensis . Hercochitina andresenae Sp. nov Valid Esteves et al. Ordovician (Katian) Kope Formation United States ( Kentucky ) A chitinozoan. Hercochitina anningae Sp. nov Valid Esteves et al. Ordovician (Katian) Kope Formation United States ( Kentucky ) A chitinozoan. Hercochitina edingerae Sp. nov Valid Esteves et al. Ordovician (Katian) Point Pleasant Formation United States ( Kentucky ) A chitinozoan. Hercochitina krafftae Sp. nov Valid Esteves et al. Ordovician (Katian) Kope Formation United States ( Kentucky ) A chitinozoan. Hercochitina polygonia Sp. nov Valid Esteves et al. Ordovician (Katian) Bull Fork Formation United States ( Kentucky ) A chitinozoan. Hercochitina tharpae Sp. nov Valid Esteves et al. Ordovician (Katian) Kope Formation United States ( Kentucky ) A chitinozoan. Lagenochitina postpirum Sp. nov Camina et al. Devonian Los Monos Formation Argentina A chitinozoan. Laugephakos Gen. et sp. nov Valid Peel Cambrian (Wuliuan) Henson Gletscher Formation Greenland Tubes of an organism of uncertain affinities.

The type species is L. groenlandicus . Lydonia Gen. et sp. nov Valid Pasinetti et al. Ediacaran Trepassey Formation Canada ( Newfoundland and Labrador ) An organism of uncertain affinities, with similarities to sponges.

The type species is L. jiggamintia . Minimarmilla Gen. et sp. nov Valid Rodriguez Dzul et al. Neoproterozoic Diabaig Formation United Kingdom An organic-walled microfossil, representing either a large cyanobacterial aggregate or a microalga.

The type species is M. multicatenaria . Navifusa caspiansis Sp. nov Ghavidel-Syooki Ordovician Ghelli Formation Iran An acritarch. Nevadachitina soufianei Sp. nov Valid Esteves et al. Ordovician (Katian) Bull Fork Formation United States ( Kentucky ) A chitinozoan. Nyfrieslandia kelimoli Sp. nov Wu et al. Ordovician (Darriwilian) Kelimoli Formation China A radiolarian . Oppilatala persianense Sp. nov Ghavidel-Syooki Ordovician Ghelli Formation Iran An acritarch. Pachytibia Gen. nov Valid Xiao et al. Cambrian China A cyanobacterium . Pirea shahroudensis Sp. nov Ghavidel-Syooki Ordovician Ghelli Formation Iran An acritarch. Pistillachitina alborzensis Sp. nov Ghavidel-Syooki Ordovician Ghelli Formation Iran A chitinozoan. Pistillachitina iranense Sp. nov Ghavidel-Syooki Ordovician Ghelli Formation Iran A chitinozoan. Plectochitina anulata Sp. nov Valid Jonckheere et al. Silurian Menier Formation Canada ( Quebec ) A chitinozoan. Plectochitina triplesiensis Sp. nov Valid Jonckheere et al. Silurian Menier Formation Canada ( Quebec ) A chitinozoan. Pyramidinium Gen. et sp. nov Valid Razumkova Cretaceous (Albian–Cenomanian) Russia An acritarch. Genus includes new species P. annulatum . Ramochitina durandi Sp. nov Camina et al. Devonian Los Monos Formation Argentina A chitinozoan. Spinicapsa Gen. et sp. nov Valid Vishnevskaya Cretaceous Upper Bazhenov Formation Russia A radiolarian of family Echinocampidae .

The type species is S. gatovskii . Stellechinatum khoshyeilaghensis Sp. nov Ghavidel-Syooki Ordovician Ghelli Formation Iran An acritarch. Streptubularia Gen. nov Valid Xiao et al. Cambrian China A cyanobacterium. Tanuchitina hooksae Sp. nov Valid Esteves et al. Ordovician (Katian) Bull Fork Formation United States ( Kentucky ) A chitinozoan. Trilobatina Gen. et sp. nov Valid Razumkova Late Cretaceous (Cenomanian) Uvat Formation Russia An acritarch. Genus includes new species T. angusta . Verrucosphaera? undulata Sp. nov Valid Ouyang et al. Ediacaran Doushantuo Formation China An acanthomorph acritarch. Research on other organisms Evidence from the study of microbial DNA from mammoth remains spanning over 1 million years, indicative of presence of host-associated microbes related to extant members of the genera Actinobacillus , Erysipelothrix , Streptococcus and Pasteurella (including relatives of extant bacteria linked to the deaths of African elephants), is presented by Guinet et al. (2025). Review of the fossil record of the late Paleoproterozoic to the latest Tonian eukaryotes and a study on their diversity patterns is published by Porter et al. (2025), who find the fossil evidence insufficient to conclude whether the Tonian radiation of eukaryotes was a real event or an artifact of sampling of the fossil record. Evidence from the study of microfossils from the 1.78–1.73 billion years old McDermott Formation (Australia), indicative of diversity of morphologies, feeding strategies and behavior of early eukaryotes, is presented by Javaux (2025). Saint Martin et al. (2025) identify body fossils of Palaeopascichnus in the Neoproterozoic Histria Formation ( Romania ), providing evidence of the Ediacaran age of the studied formation. A new assemblage of probable tubular microfossils of silicified soft-bodied organisms, with a preservation mode different from other known Neoproterozoic fossils, is described from the Dzhetym Group ( Kyrgyzstan ) by Moore et al. (2025). Chen et al. (2025) describe vendotaenid fossils from the Ediacaran Tabia Member of the Adoudou Formation ( Morocco ) and study the temporal distribution of Lanceoforma , Tyrasotaenia and Vendotaenia , reporting that the three taxa appeared before the Ediacaran. Kolesnikov, Pan'kova & Pan'kov (2025) report the discovery of a new assemblage of soft-bodied organisms from the Ediacaran Chernyi Kamen Formation ( Russia ), including fossils of Palaeopascichnus , Mawsonites , Hiemalora and putative rangeomorphs. Lonsdale et al. (2025) describe ribbon-like fossils from the Ediacaran Deep Spring Formation ( Nevada , United States), interpreted as probable fossil material of vendotaenids and extending their known geographical range during the late Ediacaran. Evidence of sustained shift in morphology of organic-walled microfossils during the Ediacaran-Cambrian transition, interpreted as likely linked to nutrient limitation resulting from environmental perturbations, is presented by Tingle et al. (2025). Xiao et al. (2025) study the fossil record of radiolarians from the middle Permian to Middle Triassic, and find evidence of different trends of evolution of body size in members of four radiolarian orders and in radiolarians from different latitudes during the Permian–Triassic extinction event. Fossil evidence of survival of albaillellarian radiolarians into the Triassic is reported from the Nanpihe bridge section of the Changning-Menglian belt (Yunnan, China) by Zheng et al. (2025). Erba et al. (2025) identify calcareous nannofossils in the Lower and Middle Triassic marine successions from South China, extending known fossil record of coccolithophores to the Early Triassic. Slater, Demangel & Richoz (2025) identify impressions of calcium carbonate skeletons of coccolithophores in the Ladinian strata from Austria and Switzerland, and interpret this finding as suggestive of a diversification of marine calcifying organisms after the Permian–Triassic extinction event , resulting in the first appearance (or reappearance of Lazarus taxa after this extinction event) of several unrelated marine calcifiers coinciding with the first appearance of coccolithophores. Evidence from the study of new calcareous nannofossil assemblage data from the Campbell Plateau ( Pacific Ocean ), indicative of changes in the composition of nannoplankton approximately 200,000 years before the onset of the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum , is presented by Jones et al. (2025), who interpret the reported changes as related to a previously unrecognized precursor event evidenced by decrease in bulk sediment δ 13 C and likely associated with warming and unstable surface ocean environments. Vodička et al. (2025) report the discovery of an assemblage of Margachitina margaritana from the Silurian strata of the Builth Mudstones Formation (United Kingdom), interpreted as resulting from egg laying and as evidence supporting the animal affinities of chitinozoans. History of life in general Wong et al. (2025) use supervised machine learning to identify biogenic molecular assemblages in Paleoarchean rocks and evidence of photosynthesizing organisms in Neoarchean rocks. A study on rare Earth element data from greenstone belts of the northwest Superior Craton (Canada), interpreted as evidence of the origin of oxygenic photosynthesis in the Mesoarchaean or earlier, is published by Patry et al. (2025). Trail-like features, including one resembling fossil/trace fossil Bunyerichnus and possibly of biogenic origin, are described from the Tonian strata from the Sirbu Shale Member of the Upper Vindhyan Group ( India ) by Choudhuri et al. (2025). Evidence from experiments with algal-derived particulate matter in conditions similar to those of the late Neoproterozoic water column, interpreted as indicating that the appearance of algal particulate matter at the seafloor during the Neoproterozoic rise of the algae likely stimulated growth and activity of phagotrophs living in the anoxic conditions, is presented by Mills et al. (2025). Evidence from the study of two Ediacaran communities from the Mistaken Point Formation ( Canada ), indicative of similar composition but different ecological dynamics of the studied communities, is presented by Mitchell et al. (2025). Azizi et al. (2025) describe trace and body fossils from the Ediacaran Tabia Member of the Adoudou Formation (Morocco), providing evidence of stratigraphic overlap of soft-bodied Ediacaran biota and animal trace fossils. Evidence from the study of trace fossils from the Ediacaran Dengying Formation (China), indicative of emergence of complex bioturbation behaviors before the Cambrian explosion and coinciding with the first major extinction pulse of Ediacara-type organisms, is presented by Chen & Liu (2025), who name a new ichnotaxon Treptichnus streptosus . A new Ediacaran Lagerstätte (the Tongshan Lagerstätte), preserving fossils of typical Ediacaran rangeomorph fronds with Burgess Shale-type preservation, is reported from the Dengying Formation by Hou et al. (2025). Majeed et al. (2025) study the composition of the Ediacaran and Cambrian fossil assemblages from the Sirban Formation ( Pakistan ), expanding known biogeographic range of Dickinsonia , Kimberella and a suite of Cambrian trilobite taxa. Hammarlund et al. (2025) argue that expansion of sunlit benthic habitats with severe daily oxygen fluctuations during the Neoproterozoic-Paleozoic transition might have promoted the radiation of organisms tolerant to oxygen variability. Review of changes of organismal and community ecology during the Ediacaran-Cambrian transition is published by Mitchell & Pates (2025). Evidence of changes of composition of fossil assemblages from chert Lagerstätten from the Yangtze craton (China) during the Ediacaran-Cambrian transition is presented by Luo & Zhu (2025). Wang et al. (2025) study the smoothness of trace fossils from the Ediacaran–Cambrian transition, and link the appearance of smooth trace fossils during the latest Ediacaran with the rise of slender mobile bilaterians to dominance. Wood & Droser (2025) review evidence of evolution of animal reproductive styles throughout Ediacaran and Cambrian. Reijenga & Close (2025) study the fossil record of Phanerozoic marine animals, and argue that purported evidence of a relationship between the duration of studied clades and their rates of origination and extinction can be explained by incomplete fossil sampling. Benson et al. (2025) study the fossil record of marine invertebrates and attempt to determine latitudinal biodiversity distributions of marine invertebrates throughout the Phanerozoic. Evidence from the study of the fossil record of marine organisms, interpreted as indicative of coupling of variations of biomass and marine biodiversity trends throughout the Phanerozoic, is presented by Singh et al. (2025). A study aiming to determine drivers of changes of marine biodiversity patterns during the Phanerozoic on the basis of a macroecological model combined with global climate simulations is published by Balembois et al. (2025). Evidence from the study of the fossil record of marine animals, indicating that marine biodiversity in reef-supporting regions was disproportionately high compared to non-reef-supporting regions throughout the Phanerozoic, is presented by Close et al. (2025). Review of the ecology and evolution of endobionts associated with corals throughout the Phanerozoic is published by Vinn, Zapalski & Wilson (2025). Maletz et al. (2025) revise Paleozoic fossils with similarities to feathers, and interpret the studied fossil material as including remains of macroalgae, hydrozoan cnidarians and graptolites. White, Jensen & Barr (2025) interpret the unusual disparity of trace fossils from the High Head Member of the Cambrian Church Point Formation ( Nova Scotia , Canada) as preserved because of a favourable combination of sedimentology and modern-day exposure, and argue that the studied assemblage might represent a more faithful record of deep-marine trace fossil disparity during the early Cambrian than observed in the majority of assemblages from other places. Evidence of the impact of the appearance and subsequent extinction of archaeocyath reefs on the abundance of Cambrian animals is presented by Pruss (2025). Revision of the Cambrian fauna from the Sæterdal Formation ( Greenland ), including fossils of trilobites, brachiopods and a hyolith, is published by Peel (2025). Mussini & Butterfield (2025) report the discovery of a new assemblage of small carbonaceous fossils from the Cambrian Hess River Formation (Northwest Territories, Canada), including remains of wiwaxiids, annelids, brachiopods, chaetognaths, scalidophorans, arthropods and pterobranchs. Murphy et al. (2025) study patterns of taxonomic and functional diversity of skeletal animals from the Siberian Platform from 529 to 508 million years ago, and report evidence of selective survival and extinction in the aftermath of the Sinsk event, including extinction of reef-associated groups with massive, heavily calcified skeletons, and diversification of groups of motile animals with diverse feeding strategies and habitat associations. A study on the composition of the Cambrian ( Wuliuan ) Kaili Biota from the Sanwan section in eastern Guizhou (China), and on ecospace occupation by members of this biota, is published by Zhang et al. (2025). Mussini et al. (2025) describe a middle Cambrian marine shelf biota, including priapulids, crustaceans and molluscs, on the basis of fossils from the Bright Angel Shale (Arizona, United States), and interpret the studied biota and Cambrian biotas with small carbonaceous fossils from other localities as consistent with emergence of phylogenetically derived and functionally sophisticated animals in habitable shallow marine environments (resulting in exclusion of earlier pioneer taxa), and with their protracted spillover into less habitable settings. Yang et al. (2025) report the discovery of fossil material of the Guanshan Biota from the strata of the Wulongqing Formation from new localities from the Malong-Yiliang area (Yunnan, China), providing evidence that geographical distribution of the Guanshan Biota was not restricted by the Xiaojiang Fault. A Burgess-Shale-type fauna occupying a peritidal habitat near the outer margin of a sea is described from the Cambrian ( Guzhangian ) Pika Formation (Alberta, Canada) by Mussini, Veenma & Butterfield (2025), providing new information ecological tolerances of Cambrian marine animals. A diverse fauna including agnostids , trilobites and small shelly fossils of various affinities is described from the Cambrian strata of the Thorntonia Limestone (Australia) by Betts et al. (2025). Mussini & Butterfield (2025) describe diverse assemblages of small carbonaceous fossils from the late Cambrian—early Ordovician Deadwood Formation and from the middle—late Ordovician Winnipeg Formation ( North Dakota , United States), interpreted as fossil record of two invertebrate assemblages including taxa and morphologies unrecorded by contemporary macrofossils, and argue that exceptional Ordovician macrofossil sites may be unrepresentative of most of animal life in the Ordovician biosphere. Jeon, Li & Lee (2025) argue that the apparent sudden rise of diverse reef-building animals during the Great Ordovician Biodiversification Event is more likely an artifact of improved preservation conditions resulting from a global sea-level fall rather than a genuine evolutionary burst. A study on changes in composition of the Ordovician assemblages from the Makgol and Duwibong formations ( South Korea ), interpreted as indicative of regional variability of the Great Ordovician Biodiversification Event, is published by Seo, Cho & Choh (2025). Elicki (2025) describes new fossil material of bivalves, brachiopods and trilobites from the Ordovician strata in southern Jordan , and revises known Ordovician skeletal fauna from Jordan. Early evidence of colonization of gastropod shells by corals is reported from the Ordovician strata in Estonia by Vinn et al. (2025). Vinn et al. (2025) identify bumps on the surface of the pygidium of a specimen of Illaenus sp. from the Darriwilian strata from Estonia, interpreted as likely evidence of a parasitic infestation during the life of the trilobite. Liu et al. (2025) report the discovery of the first Ordovician (Katian) Konservat- Lagerstätte from the North China Craton , preserving fossils a new deep-water fauna (the Fuping Fauna). Evidence from the study of the trace fossil record ranging from the Ediacaran to the Devonian , interpreted as indicative of establishment of modern-style deep-marine benthic ecosystem during the Ordovician after 100 million years of protracted evolution, is presented by Buatois et al. (2025). Vinn et al. (2025) report new evidence of symbiotic associations between worms and tabulate corals from the Ordovician and Silurian strata in Estonia , including evidence of symbiotic relationships between tabulates and cornulitids spanning from the late Katian to the Ludfordian . Zhu et al. (2025) describe fossil remains of reefs constructed by sphinctozoans belonging to the group Colospongiinae and by binding organism Archaeolithoporella from the Ordovician strata of the Lianglitag Formation (China), providing evidence of presence of reefs with similarities to Permian sphinctozoan-dominated reefs as early as Katian . A study on changes of composition of marine invertebrate assemblages in the Cincinnati region during the Katian , as indicated by redefined stratigraphic framework, is published by Little & Brett (2025). Evidence from the study of the fossil record of microconchids and early land plants, indicating that evolution of land plants might have facilitated the dispersal of microconchids (and possibly other marine animals) that used plant remains as rafts, is presented by Yuan et al. (2025). Zhang et al. (2025) determine the timing and tempo of two phases of the Late Ordovician mass extinction on the basis of geochronological study of Ordovician-Silurian sections from the Yangtze Block (China), and link tempo of the extinction to rate of temperature change. Evidence indicating that biotic recovery in the aftermath of the Late Ordovician mass extinction was driven by increase of oceanic oxygenation initiated from surface in early Silurian ( Rhuddanian ) is presented by Zhang et al. (2025). Browning et al. (2025) describe trace fossils found within beds of the Soom Shale ( South Africa ) bearing fossilized marine snow , and interpret this finding as evidence of presence of a meiofaunal benthic community in the aftermath of the end-Ordovician extinction that fed on episodic concentrations of phytoplankton. Zong et al. (2025) report the discovery of a new assemblage of well-preserved fossils (the Huangshi Fauna) in the Silurian (Rhuddanian) strata in south China, including fossils of sponges, cephalopods, arthropods and carbon film fossils of uncertain identity. Strossová, Corradini & Corriga (2025) report the discovery of conodont elements in the facies of black graptolite shales from the Silurian (Telychian) Litohlavy Formation ( Czech Republic ), and argue that preservation of conodont elements close to the apertures of graptolite thecae might be evidence of a predatory or parasitic relationship between conodonts and graptolites. Zatoń et al. (2025) report evidence of widespread infestation of Devonian (Pragian) crinoid stems from the Hamar Laghdad locality (Morocco) by sclerobionts , and identify the stromatoporoid encrusting one of the stems as the oldest known record of the genus Ferestromatopora .

In Jure Žalohar; Rok Gašparič; Tomaž Hitij (eds.). Photo Atlas of the Tunjice Konservat-Lagerstätte: Fossil Biota of the Middle Miocene Coprolitic Horizon . pp. 97– 116. ISBN 978-961-97014-2-3 . ^ a b c Coen-Aubert, M. (2025). "Description of some Middle Devonian rugose corals from the Ma'der (eastern Anti-Atlas, Morocco)". Geologica Belgica . 28 ( 1– 2): 47– 71. Bibcode : 2025GeolB..28...47C . doi : 10.20341/gb.2025.003 . ^ Löser, H.; Cruz-Palma, J. M.; Chesnel, V. (2025). "A Maastrichtian coral fauna from Costa Rica". Palaeontographica Abteilung A . 331 ( 4– 6): 123– 149. Bibcode : 2025PalAA.331..123L . doi : 10.1127/pala/0170 . ^ Krutykh, A. A.; Mirantsev, G. V.; Rozhnov, S. V. (2025). "Astogeny, Ontogeny, and Microstructure of Michelinia rara sp. n. (Tabulata) from the Gzhelian of the Moscow Region". Paleontological Journal . 59 (10): 1400– 1410. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59.1400K . doi : 10.1134/S0031030125601136 . ^ El-Desouky, H.; Kora, M. (2025). "Mississippian tabulate corals in focus: reconsideration of a Viséan assemblage from West-Central Sinai, Egypt". Zeitschrift der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Geowissenschaften . 176 (3): 533– 556. Bibcode : 2025ZDGG..176..533E . doi : 10.1127/zdgg/2025/0493 . ^ Ohar, V.; Dernov, V. (2025). " Paraconularia balkhashensis sp. nov., a new species of Pennsylvanian conulariid (Cnidaria: ?Scyphozoa) from Kazakhstan". Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie - Abhandlungen . 314 (3): 253– 263. Bibcode : 2025NJGPA.314..253O . doi : 10.1127/njgpa/1252 . ^ Domingos, R.; Callapez, P. M.; Legoinha, P. (2025). "A new species of Early Devonian Pleurodictyum Goldfuss, 1829 (Anthozoa, Tabulata) from the historical fossil site of Rates (NW Portugal): palaeoecological and palaeoenvironmental considerations". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology . 37 (12): 2621– 2630. Bibcode : 2025HBio...37.2621D . doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2462952 . ^ a b Wright, A. J.; Zhen, Y. Y.; Lee, S. (2025). "Early Devonian operculate rugose corals from South China and Australia". Palaeoworld . 35 (2) 201050. doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2025.201050 . ^ Min, H.; Zong, R.-W.; Wang, X.-L. (2025). "Clonal budding and a sessile stalk in conulariids suggested by a new genus from China". Palaeoworld . 34 (6) 200982. Bibcode : 2025Palae..3400982M . doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2025.200982 . ^ Niko, S. (2025). " Sinkiangopora yokoyamai , a new early Permian tabulate coral from the Taishaku Limestone Group in Hiroshima Prefecture, Southwest Japan". Bulletin of the Akiyoshi-dai Museum of Natural History . 60 : 19– 22. ^ Hao, W.; Han, J.; Baliński, A.; Brugler, M. R.; Wang, D.; Wang, X.; Ruthensteiner, B.; Komiya, T.; Sun, J.; Yong, Y.; Song, X. (2025). "Unveiling the early evolution of black corals" . Communications Biology . 8 (1). 579. doi : 10.1038/s42003-025-08022-x . PMC 11976913 . PMID 40195544 . ^ Krutykh, A. A.; Mirantsev, G. V.; Rozhnov, S. V. (2025). " Sutherlandia gzheliensis sp. nov.—a New Species of Favositid Coral from the Gzhelian Stage of the Moscow Syneclise". Paleontological Journal . 58 (11): 1208– 1215. doi : 10.1134/S0031030124601075 . ^ a b c d Peel, J. S. (2025). "Middle Cambrian (Wuliuan Stage) Small Shelly Fossils from North Greenland (Laurentia)" . Bulletin of Geosciences . 100 (1): 1– 56. doi : 10.3140/bull.geosci.1912 . ^ Löser, H.; Wilmsen, M. (2025). "Lower Cenomanian (Cretaceous) corals from Cóbreces (Cantabria, northern Spain). Part 5: superfamily Heterocoenioidea". Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie - Abhandlungen . 316 (1): 103– 120. Bibcode : 2025NJGPA.316..103L . doi : 10.1127/njgpa/1288 . ^ Vayda, P. J.; Xiao, S.; Keller, N. D.; Hagen, A. P. I.; Strauss, J. V.; Hagadorn, J. W.; Lonsdale, M. C.; Selly, T.; Schiffbauer, J. D. (2025). "A Cnidarian affinity for Salterella and Volborthella : implications for the evolution of shells" . Journal of Paleontology . 99 (5): 1162– 1185. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10164 . ^ Van Iten, H.; Birolini, E.; Dupichaud, C.; Lefebvre, B. (2025). "Cnidarians of the Cabrières Lagerstätte (Lower Ordovician, France): diversity, taphonomy, palaeoecology and palaeobiogeography" . Lethaia . 59 (2): 1– 12. Bibcode : 2025Letha..59....1V . doi : 10.18261/let.59.1.2 . ^ Vinn, O.; Madison, A. (2025). "Discovery of a phosphatic helical-looking microstructure in Sphenothallus (Cnidaria) from the Late Ordovician of Estonia: Implications for phosphatic biomineralization". Proceedings of the Geologists' Association . 136 (4) 101096. Bibcode : 2025PrGA..13601096V . doi : 10.1016/j.pgeola.2025.101096 . ^ Ivantsov, A. Yu.; Zakrevskaya, M. A. (2025). "The last jellyfish of the Precambrian" . Invertebrate Zoology . 22 (1): 56– 67. doi : 10.15298/invertzool.22.1.05 . ^ Wang, G.; Cui, Y. (2025). "Systematics and evolution of agetolitid tabulate corals" . Australasian Palaeontological Memoirs . 57 : 273– 361. ^ Zaika, Y. (2025). "On the genus Sarcinula Lamarck (Anthozoa, Tabulata) in the Ordovician of the Baltic region" . New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin . 101 : 531– 535. ^ Król, J. J. (2025). "The significance of corallite spacing in heliolitid corals" . Spanish Journal of Palaeontology . 40 (2): 183– 194. doi : 10.7203/sjp.31744 . ^ Kiel, S.; Goedert, J. L. (2025). "Eocene and Oligocene ceriantharian tubes" . Journal of Paleontology . 99 (2): 308– 312. Bibcode : 2025JPal...99..308K . doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10108 . ^ Reuter, M.; D'Olivo, J. P.; Brachert, T. C.; Spreter, P. M.; Mertz-Kraus, R.; Wrozyna, C. (2025). "Mid-Miocene warmth pushed fossil coral calcification to physiological limits in high-latitude reefs" . Communications Earth & Environment . 6 (1) 569. Bibcode : 2025ComEE...6..569R . doi : 10.1038/s43247-025-02559-9 . PMC 12274133 . PMID 40687943 . ^ Clay, C. G.; Dunhill, A.; Beger, M. (2025). "Trait networks reveal turnover in Caribbean corals and changes in community resilience through the Cenozoic" . Paleobiology . 51 (3): 432– 451. Bibcode : 2025Pbio...51..432C . doi : 10.1017/pab.2025.10062 . ^ Bosellini, F. R.; Mariani, L.; Benedetti, A. (2025). "Trajectories of reef coral morphological traits during the early Paleogene hothouse reveal the predictive limits of fossil analogues in a rapidly changing climate" . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 683 113472. doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113472 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t Martha, S. O.; Sanner, J.; Cheetham, A. H.; Scholz, J. (2025). "The cheilostome bryozoan fauna of the Vincentown Limesand from the Thanetian of New Jersey and Delaware, USA: countdown to the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM)". Palaeontographica Abteilung A . 330 ( 1– 6): 23– 176. Bibcode : 2025PalAA.330...23M . doi : 10.1127/pala/2025/0159 . ^ López-Gappa, J.; Iturra, D.; Pérez, L. M.; Pérez Pincheira, E.; Garrido, A. C. (2025). "A new species of Cellaria (Bryozoa, Cheilostomatida) from the late Danian (Paleocene) of Patagonia (Argentina)" . Publicación Electrónica de la Asociación Paleontológica Argentina . 25 (2): 183– 190. doi : 10.5710/PEAPA/30.09.2025.550 . ^ Iturra, D.; López-Gappa, J.; Pérez, L. M. (2025). "The family Dysnoetoporidae (Bryozoa: Cheilostomatida) did not become extinct in the Late Cretaceous: a new genus from the Miocene of Patagonia (Argentina)". Journal of Paleontology . 98 (6): 973– 980. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2024.63 . ^ Ernst, A.; Königshof, P.; Wyse Jackson, P. N. (2025). "Bryozoan fauna from the Samnuuruul Formation (Upper Devonian, Famennian) of the Hushoot Shiveetiin gol section, southwestern Mongolia" . Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments . 106 (1): 131– 152. Bibcode : 2026PdPe..106..131E . doi : 10.1007/s12549-025-00688-9 . ^ a b c Ernst, A. (2025). "New Species of Trepostomata (Bryozoa) From the Lower Permian Callytharra Formation, Western Australia". Journal of the Royal Society of Western Australia . 108 : 1– 12. doi : 10.70880/001c.147514 . ^ Taboada, C. A.; Pagani, M. A.; Carrera, M. G. (2025). "Carboniferous (upper Serpukhovian–Bashkirian) fenestrate bryozoans from the Pampa de Tepuel Formation, central-western Patagonia, Argentina". Journal of Paleontology . 99 (1): 55– 85. Bibcode : 2025JPal...99...55T . doi : 10.1017/jpa.2024.74 . ^ Iturra, D.; López-Gappa, J.; Pérez, L. M. (2025). "First fossil record of Stephanollona (Bryozoa: Cheilostomatida) in the Miocene of Patagonia (Argentina)". Ameghiniana . 62 (3): 197– 204. Bibcode : 2025Amegh..62.3626I . doi : 10.5710/AMGH.08.07.2025.3626 . ^ Carrera, M. G.; Sterren, A. F.; Cisterna, G. A.; Benedetto, J. L. (2025). "The giant bryozoan genus Tabulipora from the Permian of North-Western Argentina: a new component of the bryozoan Andean Province" . Spanish Journal of Palaeontology . 40 (2): 211– 224. doi : 10.7203/sjp.31838 . ^ Saulsbury, J. G.; Piwoni-Piórewicz, A.; Kukliński, P.; Di Martino, E.; Liow, L. H. (2025). "Evolution of skeletal mineralogy in cheilostome bryozoans from calcite to aragonite seas". Geology . 53 (11): 914– 918. Bibcode : 2025Geo....53..914S . doi : 10.1130/G53795.1 . ^ Ernst, A.; Hoşgör, İ.; Vinn, O. (2025). "First report of Hirnantian (Late Ordovician) palaeostomate bryozoans and associated biota of the northern Arabian Plate in southeastern Türkiye". Palaeoworld . 35 201026. doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2025.201026 . ^ Ma, J.; Liow, L. H.; Taylor, P. D. (2025). "Zooid size reduction in cyclostome bryozoans from the Late Triassic to the present-day". Palaeontology . 68 (5) e70027. Bibcode : 2025Palgy..6870027M . doi : 10.1111/pala.70027 . ^ Brock, G. A.; Zhang, Z.-L.; Smith, P. M. (2025). "A new silicified plectorthoid brachiopod from the upper Furongian (Stage 10) Ninmaroo Formation at Black Mountain, western Queensland, Australia". Palaeoworld . 35 200989. doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2025.200989 . ^ Sour-Tovar, F.; Quiroz-Barroso, S. A.; Castillo Espinosa, K. M. (2025). "Occurrence of Aseptella tse nov. sp. (Brachiopoda, Productida) in the Viséan (Middle Mississippian) of Mexico: first record of the genus in North America" (PDF) . Boletín de la Sociedad Geológica Mexicana . 77 (2) A010325. doi : 10.18268/BSGM2025v77n2a010325 . ^ Castle-Jones, J.; Betts, M. J.; Jacquet, S. M.; Chen, F.; Zhang, Z.; Hall, P. A.; Klaebe, R. M.; Brock, G. A. (2025). "A new integrated lower Cambrian chronostratigraphy for the Normanville Group, eastern Stansbury Basin, with definition of the oldest small shelly fossil zones in South Australia" . Australasian Palaeontological Memoirs . 57 : 465– 489. ^ Zhang, Y.; Sproat, C. D.; Zhan, R.; Harper, D. A. T.; Rong, J. (2025). Late Ordovician Shallow-water Brachiopod Faunas from South China and Tarim . Palaeontologia Sinica. Vol. 205. pp. 1– 281. ISBN 9787030840066 . ^ a b Calle Salcedo, A. A.; Cisterna, G. A.; Halpern, K. (2025). "New Taxa of Pennsylvanian productide brachiopods from West Central Argentina: Implications for biostratigraphy and palaeobiogeography in the Tivertonia jachalensis - Streptorhynchus inaequiornatus Zone". Journal of South American Earth Sciences . 166 105727. Bibcode : 2025JSAES.16605727C . doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2025.105727 . ^ Dulai, A. (2025). "Seagrass-associated Middle Miocene brachiopods from the Central Paratethys, with description of a new species of Bronnothyris " . Acta Palaeontologica Polonica . 70 (4): 649– 660. doi : 10.4202/app.01272.2025 . ^ Baranov, V. V.; Blodgett, R. B.; Santucci, V. L. (2025). "The atrypoid brachiopod genus Carinatina in late Emsian (latest early Devonian) strata of the Shellabarger Limestone, Denali National Park and Preserve, south-central Alaska" . New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin . 100 : 1– 7. ^ a b c d Zhou, Y.; He, W.; Yang, B.; Weldon, E. A.; Luo, M.; Huang, Y. (2025). "Quantitative review of the systematic taxonomy, distribution and palaeoenvironmental preferences of Cathaysia and Paryphella (Brachiopoda, Productida)". Papers in Palaeontology . 11 (6) e70046. Bibcode : 2025PPal...1170046Z . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70046 . ^ a b Zhen, Y. Y.; Percival, I. G.; Normore, L. S.; Dent, L. M. (2025). "Early Ordovician conodonts and microbrachiopods from the subsurface Nambeet and lower Willara formations of the Canning Basin, Western Australia" . Australasian Palaeontological Memoirs . 56 : 161– 220. ^ Jansen, U. (2025). "A new species of Cyrtina from the upper Emsian (Brachiopoda, Lower Devonian) of the Rhenish Massif (Germany)" . Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments . 105 (1): 217– 227. Bibcode : 2025PdPe..105..217J . doi : 10.1007/s12549-025-00646-5 . ^ Oleneva, N. V.; Sokiran, E. V. (2025). " Cyrtospirifer akimicus –a new cyrtospiriferid species (Brachiopoda, Spiriferida) from the lower Famennian of South Timan". Paleontological Journal . 59 (4): 381– 387. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59..381O . doi : 10.1134/S0031030125600428 . ^ Mergl, M.; Frýda, J. (2025). "Late Silurian brachiopods Dayia and Shaleria as indicators of environmental changes during the 'Lau/Kozlowskii Bioevent' on both sides of the Rheic Ocean". Bulletin of Geosciences . 100 (4): 685– 738. doi : 10.3140/bull.geosci.1952 . ^ a b c Kim, I. A.; Popov, L. E.; Ghobadi Pour, M.; Davlatov, N. H.; Abdiyev, N. H.; Klishevich, I. (2025). "Reassessment of Late Ordovician brachiopods from the Kitab Nature Park, Zeravshan Range, Uzbekistan" . Australasian Palaeontological Memoirs . 57 : 187– 219. ^ a b c Baranov, V. V.; Nikolaev, A. I. (2025). "New Taxa of Spiriferids from the Pragian Deposits (Lower Devonian) of Northeast Eurasia". Paleontological Journal . 59 (10): 1360– 1371. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59.1360B . doi : 10.1134/S0031030125601094 . ^ Baranov, V. V.; Kebrie-ee Zade, M. R.; Blodgett, R. B. (2025). " Golestania —A New Ambocoelid Brachiopod Genus (Order Spiriferida) from the Khoshyeilagh Formation of the Northeast Alborz (Northern Iran)". Paleontological Journal . 59 (7): 788– 795. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59..788B . doi : 10.1134/S0031030125600295 . ^ Baranov, V. V.; Nikolaev, A. I. (2025). " Howellella gonensis —a New Spiriferid Species (Brachiopoda) from the Lower Devonian of Northeast Asia". Paleontological Journal . 59 (1): 17– 23. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59...17B . doi : 10.1134/S0031030124601464 . ^ a b c Rezende, J. M. P.; Fonseca, V. M. M.; Gallo, V.; Ponciano, L. C. M. O. (2025). " Katzeria and Iridistrophia maecuruensis : New brachiopod taxa from the Middle Devonian of the Amazonas Basin, Pará state, North Brazil". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology . 38 (2): 344– 360. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2484310 . ^ a b c Makoshin, V. I.; Kutygin, R. V. (2025). "Revision of the Zonal Brachiopod Species Jakutoproductus protoverkhoyanicus Kashirtsev from the Carboniferous–Permian Boundary Deposits of Verkhoyanie, North-Eastern Russia". Stratigraphy and Geological Correlation . 33 (6): 649– 675. Bibcode : 2025SGC....33..649M . doi : 10.1134/S0869593825700303 . ^ a b Baranov, V. V.; Nikolaev, A. I. (2025). "New Taxa of Spiriferids (Brachiopoda) from the Emsian (Lower Devonian) of North-East Eurasia" . Paleontological Journal . 59 (6): 629– 639. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59...17B . doi : 10.1134/S0031030125600994 . ^ Pakhnevich, A. V.; Sobolev, D. B. (2025). "New Finds of Brachiopods of the Superfamily Lambdarinoidea (Order Rhynchonellida) from the Upper Tournaisian of the Chernyshev Ridge (Russia, Komi Republic)". Paleontological Journal . 59 (10): 1372– 1378. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59.1372P . doi : 10.1134/S0031030125601100 . ^ Pardo, C. A.; Taboada, A. C.; Pagani, M. A.; Limarino, C. O. (2025). "The brachiopod faunas from the Huaraco Formation (Andacollo Embayment): the transition of warm to cold sea currents along southwestern Gondwana". Journal of South American Earth Sciences . 165 105695. Bibcode : 2025JSAES.16505695P . doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2025.105695 . ^ Baranov, V. V.; Kebrie-ee Zade, M. R.; Blodgett, R. B. (2025). "New Late Devonian (Upper Famennian) Athyridids from the Khoshyeilagh Formation of Eastern Alborz Mountains, North-East Iran". Paleontological Journal . 58 (11): 1232– 1241. doi : 10.1134/S0031030124601105 . ^ Popov, L. E.; Holmer, L. E.; Hints, L.; Ghobadi Pour, M.; Zuykov, M. (2025). " Pseudopholidops – the earliest craniopside (Brachiopoda, Craniiformea): an extinction survivor" . Australasian Palaeontological Memoirs . 57 : 1– 20. ^ Surlyk, F. (2025). "Maastrichtian brachiopods from the chalk of Denmark" . Bulletin of the Geological Society of Denmark . 74 : 49– 118. Bibcode : 2025BuGSD..74...49S . doi : 10.37570/bgsd-2025-74-05 . ^ Baranov, V. V.; Blodgett, R. B.; Santucci, V. L. (2025). "The atrypoid brachiopod genera Spinatrypa and Spinatrypina in late Emsian (latest early Devonian) strata of the Shellabarger Limestone, Denali National Park & Preserve, south-central Alaska" . New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin . 100 : 9– 17. ^ Baarli, B. G.; Jin, J. (2025). "Hirnantian progenitor of the early Silurian pentameride brachiopod Stricklandia lineage". Palaeoworld . 35 (2) 201038. doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2025.201038 . ^ Shcherbanenko, T. A.; Sennikov, N. V. (2025). "A new Middle Ordovician strophomenid species (Brachiopoda, Strophomenata) from the western part of the Gorny Altai". Paleontological Journal . 59 (2): 150– 153. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59..150S . doi : 10.1134/S0031030125600052 . ^ Biakov, A. S.; Ganelin, V. G.; Kutygin, R. V.; Karavaeva, N. I.; Brynko, I. V.; Polzunenkov, G. O.; Vedernikov, I. L. (2025). "Lower–Middle Permian Boundary Deposits of the Omolon Massif and Its Southeastern Framing (Northeast Russia): U–Th–Pb SIMS Dating of Zircons, Paleontological and Isotopic (δ 13 C) Characteristics". Stratigraphy and Geological Correlation . 33 (3): 344– 367. Bibcode : 2025SGC....33..344B . doi : 10.1134/S0869593825700029 . ^ Betts, M. J.; Liang, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Holmer, L. E. (2025). "A new mickwitziid (stem group Brachiopoda) from the early Cambrian (Series 2, Stage 4) of the Baltic Sea" . Australasian Palaeontological Memoirs . 57 : 177– 185. ^ Vilela-Andrade, M.; Sproat, C. D.; Wright, D. F.; Stigall, A. L. (2025). "Fossil tip-dating reveals novelties on evolutionary and diversification trends in three Late Ordovician brachiopod genera (Atrypida, Anazygidae)" . Journal of Paleontology . 99 (2): 313– 332. Bibcode : 2025JPal...99..313V . doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10118 . ^ Chen, F.; Zhang, Z.; Holmer, L. E.; Li, G.; Topper, T. P.; Song, B.; Zhang, Z. (2025). "Combining soft-bodied and three-dimensional fossils to reveal evolutionary modifications in early lingulellotretid brachiopods" . Communications Biology . 8 (1) 1729. doi : 10.1038/s42003-025-09051-2 . PMC 12669706 . PMID 41326655 . ^ Zhang, C.; Hu, Y.; Liang, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Qiu, H.; Strotz, L. C.; Holmer, L. E.; Zhang, Z. (2025). "First report of epithelial cell moulds with nuclei impressions preserved in lower Cambrian (Stage 3) brachiopods from South China" . Lethaia . 58 (4): 1– 15. doi : 10.18261/let.58.4.1 . ^ Candela, Y.; Guo, Z.; Harper, D. A. T. (2025). "Diversification and disparity in a major Palaeozoic clade of Brachiopoda: the rise and fall of the Plectambonitoidea". Palaeontology . 68 (3). e70010. Bibcode : 2025Palgy..6870010C . doi : 10.1111/pala.70010 . ^ Wright, A. M.; Wagner, P. J. (2025). "Distinguishing punctuated and continuous-time models of character evolution for discrete characters and the implications for macroevolutionary theory" . Paleobiology . 51 (4): 699– 709. Bibcode : 2025Pbio...51..699W . doi : 10.1017/pab.2025.10063 . ^ Hennessey, S. A.; Stigall, A. L. (2025). "Global factors constrain body-size trends across the Great Ordovician Biodiversification Event at a regional scale: a case study from the Arbuckle Mountains of Oklahoma" . Paleobiology . 51 (3): 507– 519. Bibcode : 2025Pbio...51..507H . doi : 10.1017/pab.2025.10054 . ^ Jin, J.; Harper, D. A. T. (2025). "Extreme faunal endemism, super-island faunas, and the late Ordovician mass extinction" . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 677 113222. Bibcode : 2025PPP...67713222J . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113222 . ^ Huang, B.; Chen, D.; Shi, K. (2025). "Characterizing the biogeographic and taxonomic patterns of post-LOME (early Silurian) diversification of brachiopods". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 675 113105. Bibcode : 2025PPP...67513105H . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113105 . ^ Huang, B.; Rong, J. (2025). "Ancient seabed checkerboard: How setae shaped spatial distributions of Silurian brachiopods" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (30) e2509354122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12209354H . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2509354122 . PMC 12318173 . PMID 40690671 . ^ Baarli, B. G.; Mergl, M. (2025). "The Devonian brachiopods Karbous and Trigonatrypa and their taxonomic placement". Journal of Paleontology . 99 (5): 1060– 1068. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10157 . ^ Shi, G. R.; Lee, S.; Jones, B. G.; Runnegar, B.; Carr, P. F. (2025). "Silicified brachiopod and bivalve fossils from the mid-Permian (Kungurian−Roadian) Wandrawandian Siltstone of the southern Sydney Basin, southeastern Australia: implications for taphonomy and silicification" . Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal of Palaeontology . 50 : 374– 403. doi : 10.1080/03115518.2025.2562324 . ^ Wu, H.; Stubbs, T. L.; Chen, A.; Wu, X.; Zhang, Y. (2025). "Morphological evolution of lingulids (Brachiopoda): How did ecological opportunist adapt to harsh marine environments in the Early Triassic?". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 677 113182. Bibcode : 2025PPP...67713182W . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113182 . ^ Carlson, S. J.; Dievert, R. K. V.; Mendonca, S. E.; Sclafani, J. A. (2025). "Phylogeny of Athyridida (Brachiopoda): a comparison of methods of inference" . Journal of Paleontology . 99 (5): 1029– 1059. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10159 . ^ Vörös, A.; Szives, O. (2025). "Role of oceanic anoxic events in regulating the Jurassic–Early Cretaceous taxonomic diversity of Mediterranean brachiopods" . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 663 112788. Bibcode : 2025PPP...66312788V . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.112788 . ^ Ruban, D. A. (2025). "Brachiopod Diversity and Paleoenvironmental Changes in the Paleogene: Comparing the Available Long-Term Patterns" . Diversity . 17 (8) 505. Bibcode : 2025Diver..17..505R . doi : 10.3390/d17080505 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Mirantsev, G. V. (2025). "The Upper Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Crinoids from the Neverovo Formation of the Moscow Basin. Part II. Systematic Paleontology". Paleontological Journal . 59 (11): 1455– 1545. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59.1455M . doi : 10.1134/S0031030126600034 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Webster, G. D.; Ausich, W. I.; Waters, J. A.; Heward, A. P. (2025). "New Permian echinoderms from northeastern Oman have connections with Tethyan echinoderm faunas from West Timor, Western Australia, and Russia" . Rivista Italiana di Paleontologia e Stratigrafia . 131 (3): 631– 676. Bibcode : 2025RIPS..13128160W . doi : 10.54103/2039-4942/28160 . ^ Cole, S. R.; Wright, D. F.; Hopkins, M. J. (2025). "Phylogenetic position and stratigraphic uncertainty of a new flexible crinoid from the Ordovician–Silurian boundary of Anticosti Island (Québec, Canada)" . Journal of Paleontology . 99 (2): 358– 368. Bibcode : 2025JPal...99..358C . doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10110 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Gale, A. S. (2025). "Asteroids (Echinodermata) from the Campanian (Upper Cretaceous) rocky shore at Ivö Klack, southern Sweden" . Acta Geologica Polonica . 75 (2). e47. doi : 10.24425/agp.2024.152669 . ^ Woodgate, S. C.; Dunn, F. S.; Thompson, J. R.; Formery, L.; Zamora, S.; Rahman, I. A. (2025). "A new Cambrian stem-group echinoderm reveals the evolution of the anteroposterior axis" . Current Biology . 35 (14): 3488–3495.e3. Bibcode : 2025CBio...35.3488W . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2025.05.065 . PMID 40570850 . ^ Delemar, T.; Villier, L. (2025). " Autaveniaster wozniaki gen. et sp. nov. a new fossil goniasterid (Asteroidea, Echinodermata), and insight on the hidden sea star diversity in the Lutetian of the Paris Basin (France)". Annales de Paléontologie . 111 (4) 102889. Bibcode : 2025AnPal.11102889D . doi : 10.1016/j.annpal.2025.102889 . ^ Rozhnov, S. V.; Terentyev, S. S. (2025). "New Data on the Genus Baltocrinus (Crinoidea, Iocrinidae) from the Ordovician of Leningrad Region". Paleontological Journal . 59 (5): 519– 528. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59..519R . doi : 10.1134/S0031030125600660 . ^ a b Blake, D. B.; Lintz, H. (2025). "The Erinaceasteridae (Stenuroidea; Asterozoa) of the Early Devonian Hunsrück Slate, Germany" . PalZ . Bibcode : 2025PalZ..tmp...75B . doi : 10.1007/s12542-025-00750-z . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: bibcode ( link ) ^ a b Pauly, L.; Villier, L. (2025). "Sea stars (Echinodermata, Asteroidea) from the Wallücke echinoderm Lagerstätte (Callovian, W Germany)" . PalZ . 99 (3): 221– 242. Bibcode : 2025PalZ...99..221P . doi : 10.1007/s12542-025-00731-2 . ^ Kolata, D. R.; Mooi, R.; Guensburg, T.; Koniecki, J. M. (2025). "Cyclocystoids (Echinodermata) from the Upper Ordovician (early Katian) Kirkfield and Verulam formations of Ontario, Canada: implications for cyclocystoid skeletal homologies, anatomy, functional morphology, life mode, and systematics" . Journal of Paleontology : 1– 29. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10116 . ^ a b Paul, C. R. C. (2025). "Generic revision of holocystitid blastozoans" . Acta Palaeontologica Polonica . 70 (1): 125– 141. doi : 10.4202/app.01212.2024 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j Osborn, A. S.; Portell, R. W.; Mooi, R. (2025). "Paleogene Echinoids of Florida" . Bulletin of the Florida Museum of Natural History . 61 (1): 1– 314. doi : 10.58782/flmnh.xqds7462 . ^ a b Saulsbury, J. G.; Baumiller, T. K.; Sprinkle, J. T. (2025). "New comatulid crinoids from the Early Cretaceous Glen Rose Formation (Texas, USA): paleobiology and evolutionary relationships of an endemic, ephemeral giant" . Journal of Paleontology . 98 (6): 1053– 1065. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2024.37 . ^ a b Roux, M.; Thuy, B.; Gale, A. S. (2025). "Plio-Pleistocene deep-sea crinoid (Echinodermata) diversity from the western Rodrigues Ridge, Indian Ocean, revealed by microfossil evidence" . Zootaxa . 5583 (3): 509– 525. doi : 10.11646/zootaxa.5583.3.5 . PMID 40174100 . ^ a b c Schlüter, N.; Slami, R.; Benyoucef, M.; Garah, A.; Kennedy, W. J.; Walaszczyk, I. (2025). "Coniacian (Late Cretaceous) echinoids from the southern Tethyan shelf (NE Algeria) with remarks on their palaeobiology and palaeobiogeography". Cretaceous Research . 179 106261. doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2025.106261 . ^ a b c d e Gale, A. S.; Cottard, N. (2025). "New starfish (Echinodermata, Asteroidea) from the Cenomanian and Turonian (Upper Cretaceous) of Seine-Maritime (France) and a revision of Cretaceous stauranderasterid genera" . Acta Geologica Polonica . 75 (4) e65. doi : 10.24425/agp.2025.157030 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j Smith, N. S.; Thuy, B.; Sain, C.; Sumrall, C. D. (2025). "A diverse brittle star (Ophiuroidea: Echinodermata) fauna from the Upper Mississippian (Serpukhovian) of Sulphur, Indiana, USA, and its implications for late Paleozoic brittle star biodiversity" . Journal of Paleontology . 99 (5): 1142– 1161. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10096 . ^ Gale, A. S.; Stevenson, A. (2025). "Crinoids (Echinodermata, Articulata) from the Campanian (Upper Cretaceous) rocky shore at Ivö Klack, southern Sweden" . Acta Geologica Polonica . 75 (2). e45. doi : 10.24425/agp.2024.152667 . ^ a b c Pauly, L. (2025). "Echinoids from the Callovian of Wallücke (Wiehen Hills, W Germany): convergent adaptations to challenging conditions" . PalZ . 99 (3): 243– 273. Bibcode : 2025PalZ...99..243P . doi : 10.1007/s12542-025-00738-9 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Bohatý, J.; Ausich, W. I.; Ebert, L. M. (2025). "Revision of " Myrtillocrinus " (Crinoidea, Eucladida) and related Devonian genera as an example of the importance of reassessing historical fossil collections vs. mere study of flawed literature". Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie – Abhandlungen . 313 (3): 303– 326. Bibcode : 2025NJGPA.313..303B . doi : 10.1127/njgpa/2025/1234 . ^ a b c Gale, A. S.; Jagt, J. W. M. (2025). "New species of the asteroid genus Haccourtaster Jagt, 2000 (Echinodermata, Goniasteridae) from the Upper Cretaceous of Denmark, Sweden and the United Kingdom". Zootaxa . 5632 (2): 325– 336. doi : 10.11646/zootaxa.5632.2.6 . PMID 41118841 . ^ Rozhnov, S. V. (2025). " Kukrusecrinus stellatus gen. et sp. nov.—the First Representative of the Family, Colpodecrinidae (Crinoidea, Camerata) in the Baltic Ordovician, Its Paleobiogeographic Significance and the Family Phylogenetic Position". Paleontological Journal . 58 (11): 1266– 1280. doi : 10.1134/S0031030124601129 . ^ Rozhnov, S. V. (2025). " Lavacystis sagittalis gen. et sp. nov. from the Lower Ordovician of the Leningrad Region—the Earliest Known Pleurocystitid (Echinodermata, Rhombifera) and the First Record of the Family from the Baltic Paleobasin". Paleontological Journal . 59 (12): 1568– 1579. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59.1568R . doi : 10.1134/S003103012660006X . ^ Borghi, E.; Garilli, V.; Morra, L. E.; Repetto, G.; Lozar, F.; Violanti, D. (2025). "The Miocene deep-water echinoids Toxopatagus italicus and Neoholaster albensis gen. and sp. nov., implications for holasteroid phylogeny and palaeoecology". Journal of Systematic Palaeontology . 23 (1). 2472851. Bibcode : 2025JSPal..2372851B . doi : 10.1080/14772019.2025.2472851 . ^ a b c d Keyes, R. G.; Wright, D. F.; Ausich, W. I. (2025). "Phylogeny and macroevolution of a "dead clade walking": a systematic revision of the Paragaricocrinidae (Crinoidea)" . Journal of Paleontology . 99 (1): 144– 162. Bibcode : 2025JPal...99..144K . doi : 10.1017/jpa.2024.70 . ^ Lefebvre, B.; Noirit, F.; De Oliveira Santos, V.; Nohejlová, M. (2025). "Mitrates paranacystidés (Echinodermata, Stylophora) dans le Dévonien moyen de la rade de Brest (Finistère): affinités et implications paléobiogéographiques" . Bulletin de la Société Géologique et Minéralogique de Bretagne . 23 : 19– 34. ^ Thuy, B.; Numberger-Thuy, L. D.; Gale, A. S. (2025). "A Jurassic relict of the Triassic stem euryalid brittle star Aspiduriella (Echinodermata, Ophiuroidea)". Zootaxa . 5620 (3): 470– 476. doi : 10.11646/zootaxa.5620.3.6 . PMID 41119396 . ^ Zamora, S.; Guensburg, T. E.; Sprinkle, J. (2025). "Redescription of the Cambrian edrioasteroid Sprinkleoglobus spencensis n. comb. (Wen et al., 2019) from the Spence Shale (Utah, USA)" . Journal of Paleontology . 98 (6): 952– 958. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2024.44 . ^ Goñi, I.; Monnet, C.; De Baets, K.; Topper, T. P.; Régnier, S.; Schröer, L.; Cnudde, V.; Jell, P. A.; Clausen, S. (2025). "Symbiotic interactions on middle Cambrian echinoderms reveal the oldest parasitism on deuterostomes" . Scientific Reports . 15 (1). 14257. Bibcode : 2025NatSR..1514257G . doi : 10.1038/s41598-025-97932-1 . PMC 12022240 . PMID 40274934 . ^ Guenser, P.; El Hariri, K.; Jalil, N.-E.; Lefebvre, B. (2025). "Historical bias in palaeontological collections: Stylophora (Echinodermata) as a case study" . Swiss Journal of Palaeontology . 144 6. doi : 10.1186/s13358-024-00345-2 . ^ Fatka, O.; Nardin, É.; Budil, P.; Nohejlová, M.; Zicha, O.; Pittet, B.; Mikuláš, R.; Aubrechtová, M.; Polechová, M.; Vodička, J.; Christophoul, F.; Saleh, F.; Lefebvre, B. (2025). "A new Late Ordovician echinoderm Lagerstätte in the Prague Basin (Barrandian area, Czech Republic)" . Bulletin of Geosciences . 100 (2): 95– 122. doi : 10.3140/bull.geosci.1908 . ^ Higdon, C. R.; Cole, S. R. (2025). "Competition or coexistence? Ecology and niche partitioning of pelmatozoan echinoderms from the Late Ordovician Bromide Formation (Oklahoma, USA)" . Journal of Paleontology . 99 (5): 1186– 1208. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10137 . ^ Paul, C. R. C.; Guensburg, T.; Darrough, G. (2025). "New morphological details revealed in well-preserved paracrinoids from reef facies in the Kimmswick Limestone (Upper Ordovician) of Missouri". Journal of Paleontology . 99 (4): 948– 957. Bibcode : 2025JPal...99..948P . doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10147 . ^ Bohatý, J.; Ausich, W. I. (2025). "First record of cystidean and determinable pentacrinoid stages in fossil Crinoidea ‒ with new insights into the oral and anal endoskeletal anatomy of the Devonian subfamily Cupressocrininae (Eucladida)" . Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie – Abhandlungen . 315 (3): 231– 266. Bibcode : 2025NJGPA.315..231B . doi : 10.1127/njgpa/1274 . ^ Gorzelak, P.; Janiszewska, K.; Hoşgör, İ.; Salamon, M. A. (2025). "Microstructural design of the stalk in the crinoid Seirocrinus supports its pseudoplanktonic lifestyle" . Scientific Reports . 15 (1) 31418. doi : 10.1038/s41598-025-16412-8 . PMC 12381209 . PMID 40858656 . ^ Salamon, M. A.; Kapitany, T.; Płachno, B. J. (2025). "First report of a nearly complete comatulid crinoid (Comatulida, Echinodermata) from the Cretaceous of Australia" . Scientific Reports . 15 (1). 8610. Bibcode : 2025NatSR..15.8610S . doi : 10.1038/s41598-025-90111-2 . PMC 11903946 . PMID 40075114 . ^ Salamon, M. A.; Trif, N.; Krajewski, M.; Wilk, A.; Rubilar-Rodríguez, A.; Poatskievick-Pierezan, B.; Płachno, B. J.; Jain, S. (2025). "An Eocene shallow water isselicrinid sea lilies from the Northern Hemisphere" . Scientific Reports . 15 (1) 32400. Bibcode : 2025NatSR..1532400S . doi : 10.1038/s41598-025-13136-7 . PMC 12423305 . PMID 40931010 . ^ Dean, C. D.; Thompson, J. R. (2025). "Museum 'dark data' show variable impacts on deep-time biogeographic and evolutionary history" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 292 (2041). 20242481. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2024.2481 . PMC 11858742 . PMID 39999885 . ^ Thompson, J. R.; Dean, C. D.; Ford, M.; Ewin, T. A. M. (2025). "Taphonomic controls on a multi-element marine skeletal fossil record" . Palaeontology . 68 (3). e70008. Bibcode : 2025Palgy..6870008T . doi : 10.1111/pala.70008 . ^ Yakouya-Moubamba, U. G.; Saucède, T.; Mougola, W. L.-B.; Musavu Moussavou, B. (2025). " Mecaster fourneli (Deshayes, 1847) (Echinodermata: Echinoidea) from the Turonian (Late Cretaceous) of the Gabonese Coastal Basin: systematics and palaeobiogeographical implications". Annales de Paléontologie . 111 (3) 102888. Bibcode : 2025AnPal.11102888Y . doi : 10.1016/j.annpal.2025.102888 . ^ Blake, D. B.; Lefebvre, B. (2025). "The class Somasteroidea and its significance among early Asterozoa (Echinodermata)" . Comptes Rendus Palevol . 24 (23): 449– 487. doi : 10.5852/cr-palevol2025v24a23 . ^ a b Lopez, F. E.; Kaufmann, C.; Drovandi, J. M.; Conde, O. A.; Alarcón, C. M.; Pedernera, F. A. (2025). "New graptolite faunas from the upper Aeronian-lower Telychian (Llandovery, Silurian) of Argentina: new insights on the graptolite biostratigraphy during the post-Hirnantian transgression in the Precordillera". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology . 38 (5): 1283– 1307. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2535020 . ^ Yang, J.; Guo, Q.; Vannier, J.; Ou, Q.; Aria, C.; Lan, T.; Yang, X.; Zou, L.; Wang, Y.; Li, C.; Zhang, X. (2025). "A new graptolite (Pterobranchia) from the early Cambrian Xiaoshiba Lagerstätte of China" . Swiss Journal of Palaeontology . 144 (1) 69. Bibcode : 2025SwJP..144...69Y . doi : 10.1186/s13358-025-00406-0 . ^ Maletz, J. (2025). "The evolution of symmetry in the Pterobranchia (Hemichordata)". Zootaxa . 5683 (3): 360– 376. doi : 10.11646/zootaxa.5683.3.2 . PMID 41119548 . ^ Mitchell, C. E.; Sheets, H. D.; Melchin, M. J.; Holmden, C. (2025). What Does Graptolite Origination and Extinction Reveal about the Cause of the Late Ordovician Mass Extinction? . Elements of Paleontology. pp. 1– 79. doi : 10.1017/9781009684064 . ISBN 9781009684064 . ^ Gao, S.; Tan, J.; Wang, W. (2025). "Tracing the changes of life strategy from Ordovician dendroids to graptoloids" . Lethaia . 59 (1): 1– 15. Bibcode : 2025Letha..59..2.2G . doi : 10.18261/let.59.2.2 . ^ Saulsbury, J. G.; Parins-Fukuchi, C. T.; Wilson, C. J.; Reitan, T.; Liow, L. H. (2023). "Age-dependent extinction and the neutral theory of biodiversity" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 121 (1) e2307629121. Bibcode : 2023PNAS..12107629S . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2307629121 . PMC 10769858 . PMID 38150497 . ^ Johnson, E. C. (2025). "Curve-fitting alone cannot validate neutral theory" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (10) e2412160122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12212160J . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2412160122 . PMC 11912361 . PMID 40030020 . ^ Saulsbury, J. G.; Parins-Fukuchi, C. T.; Wilson, C. J.; Reitan, T.; Liow, L. H. (2025). "Reply to Johnson: Holistic evaluation of ecological models in paleobiology" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (10) e2415303122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12215303S . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2415303122 . PMC 11912387 . PMID 40030032 . ^ Maletz, J.; Gutiérrez-Marco, J. C. (2025). "The Ordovician and Silurian benthic graptolite Ptilograptus Hall, 1865 (Graptolithina, Dendroidea)" . Bulletin of Geosciences . 100 (4): 645– 660. doi : 10.3140/bull.geosci.1928 . ^ Gao, S.; Tan, J.; Wang, W. (2025). "Double-helical macrostructure aids the passive movement of extinctive graptolites ( Dicellograptus ) revealed by CFD simulation" . Swiss Journal of Palaeontology . 144 13. doi : 10.1186/s13358-025-00356-7 . ^ Frýda, J.; Frýdová, B. (2025). "High-resolution records of the mid-Homerian (Silurian) marine chemistry evolution and graptolite biodiversity across the Lundgreni Event reveal what nearly killed the graptolites". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 668 112866. Bibcode : 2025PPP...66812866F . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.112866 . ^ Maletz, J. (2025). "Evolutionary implications from the tubarium construction of the Retiolitinae (Graptolithina) across the Silurian Cyrtograptus lundgreni extinction event" . PalZ . 99 (3): 201– 219. Bibcode : 2025PalZ...99..201M . doi : 10.1007/s12542-025-00733-0 . ^ Reich, M.; Krümmer, H. (2025). "First in-situ rhabdopleurids (Hemichordata) from the early Maastrichtian Rügen Chalk, Germany". PalZ . Bibcode : 2025PalZ..tmp...41R . doi : 10.1007/s12542-025-00742-z . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: bibcode ( link ) ^ Tolmacheva, T. Yu.; Dronov, A. V.; Lykov, N. A. (2025). "Multielement Conodonts from the Upper Ordovician of the Siberian Platform". Paleontological Journal . 58 (11): 1242– 1265. doi : 10.1134/S0031030124601117 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Zhen, Y. Y.; Laurie, J. R.; Percival, I. G.; Nicoll, R. S.; Cooper, B. J. (2025). "Ordovician conodonts from the Horn Valley Siltstone of the Amadeus Basin, central Australia" . Australasian Palaeontological Memoirs . 56 : 1– 159. ^ a b Orchard, M. J.; Friedman, R. M.; Mihalynuk, M. G. (2025). "Conodonts identify the lower–middle Norian boundary in association with ∼224 Ma U-Pb dates from the Nicola Group, southern British Columbia, Canada". Journal of the Geological Society . 182 (5) jgs2024-299. Bibcode : 2025JGSoc.182..299O . doi : 10.1144/jgs2024-299 . ^ Barrick, J. E.; Nestell, M. K. (2025). " Ellisonia Müller 1956 (conodont) does not occur in the Pennsylvanian or Early Permian: A reconstruction of the apparatus of Boardmanites n. gen. conflexa (Ellison 1941)" . Micropaleontology . 71 (3): 295– 304. doi : 10.47894/mpal.71.3.06 . ^ Li, Y.; Ji, Z.; Wu, G.; Wignall, P. B.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Zhang, S.; Lai, X. (2025). "Early to late Triassic conodont biostratigraphy in the Lhasa Terrane". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 669 112927. Bibcode : 2025PPP...66912927L . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.112927 . ^ a b c Leu, M.; Brosse, M.; Baud, A.; Bhat, G.; Vennemann, T.; Bucher, H.; Goudemand, N. (2025). "Conodont diversity, biostratigraphy, and environmental dynamics: Unravelling the Smithian-Spathian transition at Guryul Ravine, Kashmir" . Gondwana Research . 142 : 152– 184. Bibcode : 2025GondR.142..152L . doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2025.02.028 . ^ a b Soboleva, M. A.; Nazarova, V. M. (2025). "New Early Frasnian conodonts, Icriodus aqua sp. nov. and I. lacrima sp. nov. from the Ust'-Yarega Formation of the Southern Timan, Russia". Paleontological Journal . 59 (2): 175– 184. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59..175S . doi : 10.1134/S0031030125600088 . ^ a b c Hu, K.; Qi, Y.; Wei, S. (2025). "New Moscovian Idiognathodus (conodont, Pennsylvanian) species from the Naqing section, Guizhou, South China" . Acta Micropalaeontologica Sinica . 42 (1): 30– 41. doi : 10.16087/j.cnki.1000-0674.20250124.001 . ^ a b Han, C.; Golding, M. L.; Zhao, L.; Wu, S.; Zhao, H.; Lyu, Z.; Chen, Z.-Q.; Jan, I. U.; Khan, A. (2025). "Lower Triassic conodont succession and carbon isotope profile from Zaluch, Salt Range, Pakistan". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 678 113229. Bibcode : 2025PPP...67813229H . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113229 . ^ Wu, G.C.; Ji, Z.S.; Lash, G. G. (2025). "Newly discovered early to Middle Triassic Conodont faunas in the Shiquanhe area, western Lhasa Block, Xizang (Tibet) and their biostratigraphic and paleobiogeographic implications". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 677 113209. Bibcode : 2025PPP...67713209W . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113209 . ^ a b Zhen, Y. Y.; Percival, I. G.; Smith, P. M.; Webby, B. D. (2025). "Latest Cambrian–earliest Ordovician conodonts from far western New South Wales and their biostratigraphical significance". Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal of Palaeontology . 49 (3): 499– 547. Bibcode : 2025Alch...49..499Z . doi : 10.1080/03115518.2025.2463062 . ^ a b c d e Corriga, M. G.; Ferretti, A.; Corradini, C. (2025). "Upper Silurian conodonts from the Ockerkalk limestone of southeastern Sardinia (Italy)" . Bulletin of Geosciences . 100 (4): 445– 487. doi : 10.3140/bull.geosci.1930 . ^ Plotitsyn, A. N.; Zhuravlev, A. V.; Gatovsky, Yu. A.; Nazarova, V. M. (2025). "Famennian (Late Devonian) conodonts of the genus Pelekysgnathus ". PalZ . 99 (4): 529– 548. Bibcode : 2025PalZ...99..529P . doi : 10.1007/s12542-025-00741-0 . ^ Izokh, N. G. (2025). "New Late Devonian Conodont Species from the South of West Siberia". Paleontological Journal . 59 (1): 61– 66. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59...61I . doi : 10.1134/S0031030124601518 . ^ a b Mango, M. J.; Albanesi, G. L. (2025). "New conodont taxa and correlation of the upper San Juan Formation, Dapingian (Ordovician), at Potrerillos Creek, Argentine Precordillera". Palaeoworld . 34 (6) 200994. Bibcode : 2025Palae..3400994M . doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2025.200994 . ^ Zhen, Y. Y. (2026). "Origin and evolution of the Ordovician conodont genus Kirkupodus and its significance in palaeobiogeography". Marine Micropaleontology . 205 102592. Bibcode : 2026MarMP.20502592Z . doi : 10.1016/j.marmicro.2026.102592 . ^ Rueda, E. K.; Albanesi, G. L.; Ortega, G. (2025). "New conodont fauna and associated graptolites from the Floian (Lower Ordovician) of the Cordillera Oriental, Argentina". Palaeoworld 200967. doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2025.200967 . ^ Paiste, T.; Männik, P.; Stouge, S.; Ainsaar, L.; Meidla, T. (2025). "Redefinition of the Sandbian–lower Katian conodont biozonation of Baltoscandia" . Geological Magazine . 162 e39. Bibcode : 2025GeoM..162E..39P . doi : 10.1017/S0016756825100241 . ^ Zhen, Y.-Y. (2025). "Resolving a long-standing controversy in conodont taxonomy: Acodus Pander, 1856". Palaeoworld . 35 (2) 201035. doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2025.201035 . ^ Liao, J.-C.; Valenzuela-Ríos, J. I. (2025). "Eifelian (Middle Devonian) to early Frasnian (late Devonian) conodonts and strata in the Spanish Central Pyrenees: Global correlations and effects of climatic fluctuations in the biota". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 681 113378. doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113378 . ^ Nesme, F.; Girard, C.; Corradini, C.; Renaud, S. (2025). "Convergent allometric trajectories in Devonian– Carboniferous unornamented Polygnathus conodonts" . Acta Palaeontologica Polonica . 70 (1): 25– 41. doi : 10.4202/app.01198.2024 . ^ Nesme, F.; Girard, C.; Joachimski, M. M.; Corradini, C.; Cornée, J.-J.; Renaud, S. (2025). "Geometric morphometrics suggests different environmental pressures on small and large Polygnathus conodonts during the recovery after the Hangenberg crisis (latest Devonian – earliest Carboniferous)". Palaeontology . 68 (6) e70033. Bibcode : 2025Palgy..6870033N . doi : 10.1111/pala.70033 . ^ Wang, W.; Hu, K.; Wang, X. (2025). "Temporal and spatial evolution of Mississippian conodont: A case study". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 661 112701. Bibcode : 2025PPP...66112701W . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2024.112701 . ^ Guenser, P.; Leu, M.; Nicollet, N.; Zacaï, A.; Brayard, A.; Goudemand, N.; Escarguel, G. (2025). "Biogeography after Permian/Triassic boundary crisis resulted from a complex combination of functional and dispersal mechanisms" . Lethaia . 58 (3): 1– 24. Bibcode : 2025Letha..58....1G . doi : 10.18261/let.58.3.2 . ^ Wu, S.; Golding, M. L.; Han, C.; Lyu, Z.; Zhao, L. (2025). "Morphometric analysis of the conodont Chiosella timorensis (Nogami) from the early Anisian of Romania and China, and its significance for the definition of the Olenekian–Anisian Boundary". Palaeontology . 68 (5) e70021. Bibcode : 2025Palgy..6870021W . doi : 10.1111/pala.70021 . ^ Bulanov, V. V. (2025). "Discovery of discosauriscid seymouriamorphs (Tetrapoda) in the middle Permian of Eastern Europe". Paleontological Journal . 59 (2): 202– 214. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59..202B . doi : 10.1134/S0031030125600118 . ^ Werneburg, R.; Logghe, A.; Steyer, J.-S. (2025). " Buxierophus pouilloni n. gen. n. sp., a new dissorophid temnospondyl from the Lower Permian of France (Allier)" . Journal of Paleontology . 99 (2): 382– 402. Bibcode : 2025JPal...99..382W . doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10112 . ^ a b Macaluso, L.; Villa, A.; Rozzi, R.; Fabre, A.-C.; Mennecart, B. (2025). "Time to grow up: the PETM climatic event favoured metamorphosing salamanders (Urodela, Salamandridae)". Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 292 (2052). 20251333. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2025.1333 . PMC 12343131. PMID 40795970 . ^ Gunnin, D.; Schubert, B. W.; Samuels, J. X.; Bredehoeft, K. E.; Maden, S. (2025). "A new plethodontid salamander from the Early Pliocene of northeastern Tennessee, U.S.A., and its bearing on desmognathan evolution". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology . 38 (4): 1084– 1108. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2501332 . ^ Chen, Jian-Ye; Liu, Jun (2025-07-08). "A basal member of Capitosauria from the Lower Triassic Heshanggou Formation, China" . Palaeoworld . 34 (6) 200988. Bibcode : 2025Palae..3400988C . doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2025.200988 . ISSN 1871-174X . ^ Sorbelli, L.; Azzarà, B.; Cherin, M.; Delfino, M.; Roček, Z.; Villa, A. (2025). "Why extant, why not extinct? A new extinct Latonia species (Anura: Discoglossidae) from the Early Pleistocene of the Apennine Peninsula provides clues on the survival of the genus in Eurasia". Journal of Systematic Palaeontology . 23 (1) 2554727. Bibcode : 2025JSPal..2354727S . doi : 10.1080/14772019.2025.2554727 . ^ Farman, R. M.; Archer, M.; Hand, S. J. (2025). "Early Eocene pelodryadid from the Tingamarra Local Fauna, Murgon, southeastern Queensland, Australia, and a new fossil calibration for molecular phylogenies of frogs" . Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 44 (5). e2477815. doi : 10.1080/02724634.2025.2477815 . ^ Skutschas, P. P.; Kolchanov, V. V.; Lang, A.; Schultz, J. A.; Schwermann, A. H. (2025). "Lissamphibian remains from the Lower Cretaceous of Germany with implications for the evolution of Late Jurassic–Early Cretaceous European faunas". Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments . 105 (4): 831– 846. Bibcode : 2025PdPe..105..831S . doi : 10.1007/s12549-025-00675-0 . ^ Novikov, M. A.; Shishkin, E. V. (2025). "New data on lonchorhynchid trematosauroids (Amphibia, Temnospondyli) from the Early Triassic of Eastern Europe". Paleontological Journal . 59 (4): 421– 432. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59..421N . doi : 10.1134/S0031030125600416 . ^ Farman, R. M.; Archer, M.; Hand, S. J. (2025). "New Miocene frogs from the Riversleigh World Heritage Area, north-western Queensland, and their palaeoecological implications" . Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology . 38 (2): 417– 444. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2501328 . ^ Steyer, J.-Sébastien; Sidor, Christian A. (2025-08-07). "The first Paleozoic temnospondyl from Zambia: a new species of Rhineceps from the Permian Madumabisa Mudstone Formation, Mid-Zambezi Basin" . Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (sup1) 2451312. Bibcode : 2025JVPal..4551312S . doi : 10.1080/02724634.2025.2451312 . ISSN 0272-4634 . ^ a b Schoch, R. R. (2025). "Morphological disparity, stratigraphic distribution and evolutionary history of the temnospondyl Sclerocephalus from the late Palaeozoic of Germany". Palaeodiversity . 18 : 151– 196. doi : 10.18476/pale.v18.a7 . ^ Vasilyan, D.; Macaluso, L. (2025). "Palaeocene herpetofauna of Walbeck (Sachsen-Anhalt, Germany) with a focus on lissamphibians" . Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments . 105 (2): 343– 375. Bibcode : 2025PdPe..105..343V . doi : 10.1007/s12549-025-00664-3 . ^ Muzzopappa, P.; Bargo, M. S.; Vizcaíno, S. F. (2025). "Anurans from the Early–Middle Miocene Santa Cruz Formation at Río Chalía (Patagonia, Argentina), and a revision of the fossil Calyptocephalellidae (Anura: Australobatrachia)". Journal of Systematic Palaeontology . 23 (1). 2456622. Bibcode : 2025JSPal..2356622M . doi : 10.1080/14772019.2025.2456622 . ^ Ahlberg, P. E.; Luks̆evic̆s, E.; Porro, L. B.; Alksnītis, V.; Robinson, J. (2025). "New light on the braincases of Ventastega curonica and Acanthostega gunnari " . Earth and Environmental Science Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh . 115 ( 3– 4): 154– 163. doi : 10.1017/S1755691024000082 . ^ Strong, C. R. C; Bishop, P. J.; Hutchinson, J. R.; Pierce, S. E. (2025). "Digital volumetric modeling reveals unique body plan experimentation in the Devonian tetrapod Ichthyostega " . iScience . 28 (6). 112486. Bibcode : 2025iSci...28k2486S . doi : 10.1016/j.isci.2025.112486 . PMC 12225901 . PMID 40612899 . ^ Marshall, J. E. A.; Reeves, E. J.; Bennett, C. E.; Davies, S. J.; Kearsey, T. I.; Millward, D. (2025). "Placing the Scottish Romer's Gap tetrapods within a Tournaisian time frame" . Earth and Environmental Science Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh . 115 ( 3– 4): 99– 112. doi : 10.1017/S1755691024000100 . ^ Barták, P.; Ivanov, M.; Ekrt, B. (2025). "The revision of baphetids from the Middle Pennsylvanian of the Czech Republic: Morphology, ontogeny, palaeoecology, and the reassessment of the phylogeny of Baphetoidea" .

The Anatomical Record . 309 (7) ar.70054. doi : 10.1002/ar.70054 . PMC 13251752 . PMID 40970424 . ^ Garza, H. K.; Catlos, E. J.; Lapen, T. J.; Clarke, J. A.; Brookfield, M. E. (2025). "New U-Pb constraints and geochemistry of the East Kirkton Quarry, Scotland: Implications for early tetrapod evolution in the Carboniferous" . PLOS ONE . 20 (4). e0321714. Bibcode : 2025PLoSO..2021714G . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0321714 . PMC 12002438 . PMID 40238738 . ^ Adams, G. R.; Otoo, B. K. A.; Bohus, C. P. W.; Micucci, L. M.; Maddin, H. C. (2025). "Anatomy and revised diagnosis of the embolomere Calligenethlon watsoni from Joggins, Nova Scotia, based on micro-computed tomography". Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 203 (2). zlae178. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlae178 . ^ Ruta, M.; Witzmann, F.; Klembara, J.; Fröbisch, N. (2025). "Tempo and mode of skull size evolution in Temnospondyli (Tetrapoda: Amphibia) and lineage diversification in the largest group of early tetrapods". Earth and Environmental Science Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh . 115 ( 3– 4): 212– 234. doi : 10.1017/S175569102400015X . ^ Mehmood, A.; Singh, S. A.; Elsler, A.; Benton, M. J. (2025). "The ecology and geography of temnospondyl recovery after the Permian–Triassic mass extinction" . Royal Society Open Science . 12 (3). 241200. Bibcode : 2025RSOS...1241200M . doi : 10.1098/rsos.241200 . PMC 11879622 . PMID 40046664 . ^ Werneburg, R. (2025). "Morphology of the stereospondylomorph Glanochthon lellbachae from the early Permian (Rotliegend) of the Saar-Nahe Basin, Germany" . Semana. Naturwissenschaftliche Veröffentlichungen des Naturhistorischen Museums Schloss Bertholdsburg Schleusingen . 40 : 61– 96. ^ Feng, J.; Zhou, Z.; Zhang, R.; Liu, J. (2025). "A fossil tooth from the upper Permian Longtan Formation of Chongqing and its significance" . Acta Palaeontologica Sinica . 64 (3): 295– 308. doi : 10.19800/j.cnki.aps.2024043 . ^ Schoch, R. R.; Gastou, S.; Steyer, J.-S.; Mujal, E.; Moreno, R.; Witzmann, F. (2025). "Morphology and ontogeny of the plagiosaurid temnospondyl Plagiosternum granulosum from the Middle Triassic of Germany" . PalZ . Bibcode : 2025PalZ..tmp...68S . doi : 10.1007/s12542-025-00748-7 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: bibcode ( link ) ^ Morkovin, B. I. (2025). "Structural Features of the Muscular Crests of the Parasphenoid in Early Triassic Capitosauromorphs (Amphibia: Capitosauromorpha) of the East European Platform as a Reflection of Adaptive Differences". Paleontological Journal . 58 (11): 1291– 1300. doi : 10.1134/S0031030124601130 . ^ Schoch, R. R.; Witzmann, F.; Werneburg, I.; Werneburg, R.; Mujal, E.; Moreno, R. (2025). "The morphology and evolutionary history of the temnospondyl genus Cyclotosaurus with a focus on material from Germany" . PalZ . 99 (3): 319– 337. Bibcode : 2025PalZ...99..319S . doi : 10.1007/s12542-025-00729-w . ^ Kufner, A. M.; Deckman, M. E.; Miller, H. R.; So, C.; Price, B. R.; Lovelace, D. M. (2025). "A new metoposaurid (Temnospondyli) bonebed from the lower Popo Agie Formation (Carnian, Triassic) and an assessment of skeletal sorting" . PLOS ONE . 20 (4). e0317325. Bibcode : 2025PLoSO..2017325K . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0317325 . PMC 11964259 . PMID 40173156 . ^ Kalita, S.; Teschner, E. M.; Konietzko-Meier, D. (2025). "Illuminating the dark mess of fibers: Application of circular cross polarized light in unravelling the bone tissue structure of the dermal pectoral girdle of Metoposaurus krasiejowensis " . Journal of Anatomy . 247 ( 3– 4) joa.14197. doi : 10.1111/joa.14197 . PMC 12397061 . PMID 39823289 . ^ Konietzko-Meier, D.; Prino, A.; Teschner, E. M. (2025). "Hips do not lie… histology of the pelvic girdle elements of Metoposaurus from the Late Triassic of Poland" . Fossil Record . 28 (1): 165– 178. Bibcode : 2025FossR..28..165K . doi : 10.3897/fr.28.e153929 . ^ Antczak, M.; Kowalski, J.; Janecki, P.; Mazurek, D.; Kaszczyszyn, K. (2025). "First evidence of spinal arthropathy and congenital block of the cervical vertebrae in Temnospondyli" . Scientific Reports . 15 (1). 19592. Bibcode : 2025NatSR..1519592A . doi : 10.1038/s41598-025-05373-7 . PMC 12137740 . PMID 40467964 . ^ Ruta, M.; Bolt, J. R.; Barber, L. J. (2025). "Novel features and morphological variation in the lower jaw of the Permian temnospondyl amphibian Trimerorhachis ". Earth and Environmental Science Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh . 115 ( 3– 4): 185– 211. doi : 10.1017/S1755691024000124 . ^ Gee, B. M.; Mann, A.; Sues, H.-D. (2025). "A reassessment of Aspidosaurus chiton Broili, 1904 (Temnospondyli: Dissorophoidea) based on a new skeleton from the early Permian of Texas". Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 204 (3) zlaf046. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlaf046 . ^ Skutschas, P. P.; Kolchanov, V. V.; Syromyatnikova, E. V. (2025). "Pedicellate Teeth in Archaic Salamanders (Lissamphibia, Caudata)". Doklady Biological Sciences . 520 (1): 28– 33. doi : 10.1134/S0012496624600532 . PMID 39899238 . ^ Noda, M.; Kishida, T.; Kitagawa, H.; Fukuyama, I.; Nishikawa, K. (2025). "Ancient DNA integrates fossil and modern giant salamander taxonomy" . Scientific Reports . 15 (1) 18642. Bibcode : 2025NatSR..1518642N . doi : 10.1038/s41598-025-03496-5 . PMC 12149308 . PMID 40490443 . ^ Ledesma, D. T.; Moxley, K. J.; Kemp, M. E. (2025). "The late Quaternary fossil record of mole salamanders in central Texas reveals range shifts and responses to environmental change" . Quaternary Research . 130 : 121– 132. doi : 10.1017/qua.2025.10029 . ^ Falk, D.; Quigley, A.; Carazo del Hoyo, B.; Rossi, V.; Webb, S. M.; Wings, O.; McNamara, M. E. (2025). "Evolutionary constraints on anuran melanin for 45 million years" . iScience . 29 (1) 114220. doi : 10.1016/j.isci.2025.114220 . PMC 12834107 . PMID 41602913 . ^ Báez, A. M.; Nicoli, L. (2025). "Re-examination of the oldest known frog from South America: New data prompt new evolutionary interpretations".

The Anatomical Record . 309 (1) ar.25654. doi : 10.1002/ar.25654 . PMID 40091807 . ^ Muniz, F.; Giaretta, A.; Fachini, T. S.; Marinho, T. S.; Buck, P.; Rodrigues, S.; Martinelli, A. G. (2025). "New records of frogs (Anura, Lissamphibia) from the Late Cretaceous Bauru Group of Brazil and its paleobiogeographic implications". Cretaceous Research . 175 106150. Bibcode : 2025CrRes.17506150M . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2025.106150 . ^ Szentesi, Z. (2025). "New material of the frog Bakonybatrachus fedori Szentesi and Venczel, 2012 from the Santonian of Hungary". Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments . 105 (2): 429– 437. Bibcode : 2025PdPe..105..429S . doi : 10.1007/s12549-025-00655-4 . ^ Lemierre, A.; Bailon, S.; Folie, A.; Laurin, M. (2025). "New pipimorphs from the Late Cretaceous of Niger" . Annales de Paléontologie . 111 (2). 102751. Bibcode : 2025AnPal.11102751L . doi : 10.1016/j.annpal.2024.102751 . ^ Lin, C.-H.; Lin, S.-M.; Chien, C.-W.; Lin, T.-E.; Nazir, H.; Singh, N. P. (2025). "First fossil frog and snake assemblage from southern Taiwan: a window into Pleistocene herpetofauna and palaeoenvironments in subtropical East Asia" . Fossil Record . 28 (2): 293– 308. Bibcode : 2025FossR..28..293L . doi : 10.3897/fr.28.164568 . ^ Bravo, G. G.; Duport-Bru, A. S.; Alonso-Muruaga, P. J.; Armella, M. A.; García-López, D. A. (2025). "The first record of Ceratophrys (Anura: Ceratophryidae) for the Upper Miocene of northwest Argentina and its paleoecological implications". Journal of South American Earth Sciences . 164 105618. Bibcode : 2025JSAES.16405618B . doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2025.105618 . ^ Zimicz, N.; Fabrezi, M.; Aramayo, A.; Bianchi, C.; Hongn, F.; Montero-López, C. (2025). "Comments on "The first record of Ceratophrys (Anura: Ceratophryidae) for the Upper Miocene of northwest Argentina and its paleoecological implications" by Gonzalo G. Bravo et al. (2025)". Journal of South American Earth Sciences . 165 105729. Bibcode : 2025JSAES.16505729Z . doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2025.105729 . ^ Lemierre, A.; Pickford, M.; Senut, B.; Gommery, D. (2025). "Anurans from the Early Miocene of Chamtwara (western Kenya), and the first fossil record for Arthroleptidae (Afrobatrachia, Ranoidea)". Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments . 105 (2): 439– 457. Bibcode : 2025PdPe..105..439L . doi : 10.1007/s12549-025-00659-0 . ^ Nicoli, L.; Pereyra, M. O.; Elias-Costa, A. J.; Barrionuevo, J. S.; Faivovich, J. (2025). "New evidence for an old acquaintance: Neoprocoela edentata from the Oligocene of central Patagonia is the oldest species of Nannophryne (Anura: Bufonidae)". Cladistics . 41 (6) cla.70007. doi : 10.1111/cla.70007 . PMID 41123374 . ^ Maisch, M. W.; Stöhr, H. (2025). "A well-preserved external mould of a bufonid (Amphibia: Anura) from the Middle Miocene of Böttingen (Baden-Württemberg, Germany)". Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie – Abhandlungen . 315 (1): 25– 37. Bibcode : 2025NJGPA.315...25M . doi : 10.1127/njgpa/1262 . ^ Lemierre, A.; Orliac, M. J. (2025). "Lissamphibians from Dams (Quercy, SW France): Taxonomic identification and evolution across the Eocene-Oligocene transition" . Palæovertebrata . 48 (1). e3. doi : 10.18563/pv.48.1.e3 . ^ Logghe, A.; Rebillard, A.; Houée, G.; Sánchez Gimeno, A.; Courville, E.; Elbaz, L.; Taraba, P.-M.; Paso, R.; Herde, M.; Štamberg, S.; Pouillon, J.-M.; Steyer, J.-S. (2025). "Palaeoecology and palaeoenvironment of Discosauriscus Kuhn, 1933 with exceptional preservation of skin and intestine molds from the early Permian of Franchesse (Allier, France)" . Comptes Rendus Palevol . 24 (24): 489– 504. doi : 10.5852/cr-palevol2025v24a24 . ^ Reisz, R. R.; Modesto, S. P. (2025). "Re-evaluation of the Carboniferous tetrapod Asaphestera platyris with comments on the amniote fauna of the Joggins Formation, Canada" . Papers in Palaeontology . 11 (6) e70044. Bibcode : 2025PPal...1170044R . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70044 . ^ Byrnes, B. M.; Bolt, J. R.; Mann, A. (2025). "First occurrence of the urocordylid Ctenerpeton remex from the Mazon Creek Lagerstätte, Illinois, USA" . Vertebrate Anatomy Morphology Palaeontology . 13 : 76– 80. doi : 10.18435/vamp29411 . ^ Jenkins, X. A.; Sues, H.-D.; Webb, S.; Schepis, Z.; Peecook, B. R.; Mann, A. (2025). "The recumbirostran Hapsidopareion lepton from the early Permian (Cisuralian: Artinskian) of Oklahoma reassessed using HRμCT, and the placement of Recumbirostra on the amniote stem". Papers in Palaeontology . 11 (1). e1610. Bibcode : 2025PPal...11E1610J . doi : 10.1002/spp2.1610 . ^ Li, R.; D'Alba, L.; Debruyn, G.; Dobson, J. L.; Zhou, C.-F.; Clarke, J. A.; Vinther, J.; Li, Q.; Shawkey, M. D. (2025). "Mesozoic mammaliaforms illuminate the origins of pelage coloration" . Science . 387 (6739): 1193– 1198. Bibcode : 2025Sci...387.1193L . doi : 10.1126/science.ads9734 . PMID 40080594 . ^ Mann, Arjan; Sidor, Christian A. (2025-08-07). " Arctops umulunshi , sp. nov. (Therapsida: Gorgonopsia) from the upper Madumabisa Mudstone Formation of Zambia, with new information on gorgonopsian postcranial anatomy". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (sup1) 2444405. Bibcode : 2025JVPal..4544405M . doi : 10.1080/02724634.2024.2444405 . ISSN 0272-4634 . ^ Thomas, Henry N.; Angielczyk, Kenneth D.; Peecook, Brandon R. (2025-08-07). "The first geikiid dicynodont, Aulacephalodon kapoliwacela , sp. nov. (Therapsida, Anomodontia), from the upper Madumabisa Mudstone Formation, Zambia". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (sup1) e2446603. Bibcode : 2025JVPal..4546603T . doi : 10.1080/02724634.2024.2446603 . ISSN 0272-4634 . ^ Liu, J.; Xu, X.; Clark, J. M.; Bi, S. (2025). " Bienotheroides wucaiensis sp. nov., a new tritylodontid (Cynodontia, Mammaliamorpha) from the Late Jurassic Shishugou Formation of Xinjiang, China".

The Anatomical Record . 308 (10) ar.25631. doi : 10.1002/ar.25631 . PMID 39905961 . ^ Mao, F.; Jiang, S.; Liu, J.; Ren, J.; Ye, Y.; Liu, Y.; Shen, X.; Wang, T.; Wang, G.; Wang, P.; Chen, J.; Meng, J. (2025). "Convergent evolution of diverse jaw joints in mammaliamorphs". Nature . 647 (8089): 403– 410. Bibcode : 2025Natur.647..403M . doi : 10.1038/s41586-025-09572-0 . PMID 40993382 . ^ Lloyd, J. K.; Durand, F. (2025). "A new akidnognathid synapsid specimen from the Permian of Cradock, South Africa and the revision of Hewittia albanensis " . Acta Palaeontologica Polonica . 70 (2): 339– 355. doi : 10.4202/app.01187.2024 . ^ Shipps, Brenlee K.; Sidor, Christian A.; Angielczyk, Kenneth D. (2025-08-07). " Dicynodontoides kubwa , sp. nov. (Synapsida: Anomodontia), a new large emydopoid from the base of the Usili Formation (Ruhuhu Basin, Tanzania)". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (sup1) 2440112. Bibcode : 2025JVPal..4540112S . doi : 10.1080/02724634.2024.2440112 . ISSN 0272-4634 . ^ Shi, Y.-T.; Liu, J. (2025). "A new Chinese dicynodont and the frequent dispersal of tetrapods between Northern and Southern Pangaea during the late Permian". Cladistics . 42 (2) cla.70019. doi : 10.1111/cla.70019 . PMID 41395825 . ^ a b c Kammerer, Christian F.; Angielczyk, Kenneth D.; Fröbisch, Jörg (2025-08-07). "Permian origins of the Lystrosauridae (Therapsida: Dicynodontia)". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (sup1) e2451813. Bibcode : 2025JVPal..4551813K . doi : 10.1080/02724634.2025.2451813 . ISSN 0272-4634 . ^ Angielczyk, Kenneth D.; Otoo, Benjamin K. A. (2025-08-07). "A new cryptodont dicynodont (Therapsida, Anomodontia) from the Lopingian Usili Formation, Ruhuhu Basin, Tanzania". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (sup1) 2441898. Bibcode : 2025JVPal..4541898A . doi : 10.1080/02724634.2024.2441898 . ISSN 0272-4634 . ^ Patrocínio, S.; Panciroli, E.; Rotatori, F. M.; Mateus, O.; Milàn, J.; Clemmensen, L. B.; Crespo, V. D. (2025). "The oldest definitive docodontan from central East Greenland sheds light on the origin of the clade". Papers in Palaeontology . 11 (3). e70022. Bibcode : 2025PPal...1170022P . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70022 . ^ Gaetano, L. C.; Abdala, F.; Mancuso, A. C.; Vega, N. (2025). "New traversodontid cynodont from the Late Triassic Chañares Formation" . Publicación Electrónica de la Asociación Paleontológica Argentina . 25 (2): 49– 67. doi : 10.5710/PEAPA.01.08.2025.540 . ^ Bolton, A. D.; Mangera, T.; Benoit, J. (2025). "150 years of synapsid paleoneurology: the origins of the mammalian brain, behavior, sense organs and physiology" . Journal of Paleontology : 1– 29. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10121 . ^ Olroyd, S. L.; Kopperud, B. T. (2025). "Allometry of sound reception structures and evidence for a mandibular middle ear in non-mammalian synapsids". Evolution . 79 (6): 905– 921. doi : 10.1093/evolut/qpaf041 . PMID 39989013 . ^ Bishop, P. J.; Pierce, S. E. (2025). "Locomotor shifts, stylopod proportions, and the evolution of allometry in Synapsida".

The Anatomical Record . 309 (3) ar.70006. doi : 10.1002/ar.70006 . PMID 40525501 . ^ Brocklehurst, R. J.; Mercado, M.; Angielczyk, K. D.; Pierce, S. E. (2025). "Adaptive landscapes unveil the complex evolutionary path from sprawling to upright forelimb function and posture in mammals" . PLOS Biology . 23 (6). e3003188. doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.3003188 . PMC 12186895 . PMID 40554496 . ^ Laurin, M.; Didier, G. (2025). "The rise and fall of Varanopidae† (Amniota, Synapsida)" . Frontiers in Earth Science . 13 1544451. Bibcode : 2025FrEaS..1344451L . doi : 10.3389/feart.2025.1544451 . ^ Rowe, D. C. T.; Young, J. M.; Boyd, B. P.; Bevitt, J. J.; Reisz, R. R. (2025). "Appendicular morphology of Mesenosaurus efremovi and the earliest occurrence of a calcaneal tuberosity". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 15. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2586223 . ^ Marchetti, L.; Logghe, A.; Buchwitz, M.; Fröbisch, J. (2025). "Early Permian synapsid impressions illuminate the origin of epidermal scales and aggregation behavior" . Current Biology . 35 (11): 2752–2759.e2. Bibcode : 2025CBio...35.2752M . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2025.04.077 . PMID 40412378 . ^ Lafferty, T.; Norton, L. A.; Duhamel, A.; Benoit, J. (2025). "Description of the skull, braincase, and dentition of Moschognathus whaitsi (Dinocephalia, Tapinocephalia), and its palaeobiological and behavioral implications" .

The Anatomical Record . 309 (7) ar.70038. doi : 10.1002/ar.70038 . PMC 13251753 . PMID 40922509 . ^ Nieke, S.; Fröbisch, J.; Canoville, A. (2025). "Bone microstructure of the basal anomodont Suminia getmanovi supports its arboreal lifestyle" . Scientific Reports . 15 (1). 10294. Bibcode : 2025NatSR..1510294N . doi : 10.1038/s41598-025-92727-w . PMC 11937274 . PMID 40133441 . ^ Wynd, B. M.; Khakurel, B.; Kammerer, C. F.; Wagner, P. J.; Wright, A. M. (2025). "Incorporating continuous characters in joint estimation of dicynodont phylogeny". Systematic Biology . 75 (4) syaf078. doi : 10.1093/sysbio/syaf078 . PMID 41217258 . ^ Benoit, J.; Jodder, J. (2025). "The palaeoneurology of a new specimen of the Middle Triassic dicynodont synapsid Kombuisia frerensis " . Acta Palaeontologica Polonica . 70 (2): 369– 374. doi : 10.4202/app.01247.2025 . ^ Abbott, C. P.; Martinez, S. A.; Lungmus, J. K.; Magallanes, I.; Angielczyk, K. D. (2025). "The postcranial anatomy of Kembawacela kitchingi (Therapsida, Anomodontia) and the functional diversity of cistecephalid forelimbs". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (sup1) e2486068. Bibcode : 2025JVPal..4586068A . doi : 10.1080/02724634.2025.2486068 . ^ Silva, J. L.; Neto, V. D. P.; Kammerer, C. F.; Souza, J. L. R.; Bulak, B. A.; Soares, M. B.; Simões, T. R.; Pinheiro, F. L. (2025). "Osteology and ontogeny of the Permian dicynodont Rastodon procurvidens (Synapsida, Therapsida) based on micro-CT scanning and its phylogenetic and biogeographical implications". Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 204 (4) zlaf083. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlaf083 . ^ D. C. Araújo (1981). "Sobre a presença de Chanaria na Formação Santa Maria (Triássico do Brasil)". Anais do 2° Congresso Latino-Americano de Paleontologia . pp. 307– 319. ^ de Souza, J. L. R.; Da Silva, J. L.; Neto, V. D. P.; Machado, A. F.; Escobar, J. A.; Pinheiro, F. L. (2025). "Revisiting a long-overlooked skull: Implications for the distribution of Dinodontosaurus brevirostris (Kannemeyeriiformes) in the Brazilian Triassic" .

The Anatomical Record . 309 (7) ar.70056. doi : 10.1002/ar.70056 . PMC 13251750 . PMID 41017743 . ^ Matamales-Andreu, R.; Mujal, E.; Galobart, À.; Fortuny, J. (2025). "Track-trackmaker correlation of co-occurring gorgonopsian bones and footprints from the early–?Middle Permian of equatorial Pangaea" . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 677 113174. Bibcode : 2025PPP...67713174M . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113174 . ^ Kulik, Z. T. (2025). "Bone histology of a gorgonopsian skeleton from the upper Madumabisa Mudstone Formation, Zambia". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (sup1) 2490799. Bibcode : 2025JVPal..4590799K . doi : 10.1080/02724634.2025.2490799 . ^ Macungo, Z.; Benoit, J.; Araújo, R. (2025). " Inostrancevia africana , the first diagnosable gorgonopsian (Therapsida, Synapsida) from the Metangula graben (Mozambique): new anatomical observations and biostratigraphic implications" . Swiss Journal of Palaeontology . 144 12. doi : 10.1186/s13358-025-00348-7 . ^ Cookson, N. I.; Mann, A. (2025). "Cranial osteology and reassessment of the historically collected South African gorgonopsians FMNH UC 1513 ( Lycaenops cf. L. angusticeps ) and AMNH FARB 5537 ( Lycaenops angusticeps )". Vertebrate Anatomy Morphology Palaeontology . 13 : 48– 66. doi : 10.18435/vamp29406 . ISSN 2292-1389 . ^ Liu, J.; Abdala, F. (2025). "Additional material of Jiucaiyuangnathus confusus (Therocephalia) from the Lower Triassic Jiucaiyuan Formation, Xinjiang, China".

The Anatomical Record . 309 (6) ar.70039. doi : 10.1002/ar.70039 . PMID 40884058 . ^ Wilken, A. T.; Snipes, C. C. G.; Ross, C. F.; Luo, Z.-X. (2025). "Biomechanics of the mandibular middle ear of the cynodont Thrinaxodon and the evolution of mammal hearing" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (51) e2516082122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12216082W . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2516082122 . PMC 12745777 . PMID 41359832 . ^ Filippini, F. S.; Abdala, F.; Cassini, G. H. (2025). "Body mass estimation in Triassic Cynognathia (Therapsida, Cynodontia) from South America based on 3d craniomandibular landmarks". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology . 38 (5): 1439– 1457. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2527804 . ^ Kerber, L.; Michelotti, I. M.; Martins, J. H. A.; Müller, R. T. (2025). "New postcranial remains of a non-mammaliaform cynodont from the Pinheiros-Chiniquá Sequence (Middle-Upper Triassic) of Brazil". Journal of South American Earth Sciences . 158 105487. Bibcode : 2025JSAES.15805487K . doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2025.105487 . ^ Kulik, Z. T. (2025). "Disparate life histories in coeval Triassic cynodonts and their implications for the evolution of mammalian life histories". Paleobiology . 51 (2): 281– 299. Bibcode : 2025Pbio...51..281K . doi : 10.1017/pab.2024.58 . ^ Souza, N. L.; Abdala, F.; Battista, F.; Ribeiro, A. M. (2025). "The postcranial skeleton of Luangwa sudamericana (Traversodontidae: Cynodontia) from the Middle-Late Triassic of southern Brazil". Journal of South American Earth Sciences . 160 105546. Bibcode : 2025JSAES.16005546S . doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2025.105546 . ^ Medina, T. G. M.; Martinelli, A. G.; Gaetano, L. C.; Roese-Miron, L.; Tartaglione, A.; Backs, A.; Novas, F. E.; Kerber, L. (2025). "Revisiting the neuroanatomy of Massetognathus pascuali (Eucynodontia: Cynognathia) from the early Late Triassic of South America using Neutron Tomography".

The Science of Nature . 112 (1). 7. Bibcode : 2025SciNa.112....7M . doi : 10.1007/s00114-024-01955-z . hdl : 11336/271562 . PMID 39821074 . ^ Roese-Miron, L.; Kerber, L. (2025). "Ontogeny of a Brazilian Late Triassic Traversodontid (Cynodontia, Cynognathia): Anatomical and Paleoecological Implications" . Journal of Morphology . 286 (4). e70047. Bibcode : 2025JMorp.286E0047R . doi : 10.1002/jmor.70047 . PMC 12007396 . PMID 40249030 . ^ Roese-Miron, L.; Abdala, F.; Pretto, F. A.; Müller, R. T.; Michelotti da Costa, I.; Sánchez-Villagra, M. R.; Kerber, L. (2025). "Skull anatomy and endocranial casts of Siriusgnathus niemeyerorum (Cynodontia: Cynognathia) from the Late Triassic of Brazil: implications for the evolution of traversodontids". Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 205 (1) zlaf107. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlaf107 . ^ Kerber, L.; Montoya-Sanhueza, G.; Roese-Miron, L.; Damke, L. V. S.; Rezende, L.; Soares, M. B.; Müller, R. T.; Pretto, F. A. (2025). "New insights into the postcranial anatomy of Exaeretodon riograndensis (Eucynodontia: Traversodontidae): phylogenetic implications, body mass, and lifestyle". Journal of Mammalian Evolution . 32 (1). 2. doi : 10.1007/s10914-024-09741-4 . ^ Doneda, A. L.; Roese–Miron, L.; Kerber, L. (2025). "Bony injuries in a Late Triassic forerunner of mammals from Brazil".

The Science of Nature . 112 (3). 36. Bibcode : 2025SciNa.112...36D . doi : 10.1007/s00114-025-01984-2 . PMID 40327109 . ^ Kerber, L.; Müller, R. T.; Simão-Oliveira, D.; Pretto, F. A.; Martinelli, A. G.; Michelotti, I. M.; Benoit, J.; Fonseca, P. H.; David, R.; Fernandez, V.; Angielczyk, K. D.; Araújo, R. (2025). "Synchrotron X-ray micro-computed tomography enhances our knowledge of the skull anatomy of a Late Triassic ecteniniid cynodont with hypercanines" .

The Anatomical Record . 308 (11): 2877– 2895. doi : 10.1002/ar.25616 . PMID 39801379 . ^ Dotto, P. H.; Roese-Miron, L.; Cabreira, S. F.; Roberto-da-Silva, L.; Pretto, F. A.; Kerber, L. (2025). "Mandibular anatomy of a new specimen of a prozostrodontian cynodont (Eucynodontia: Probainognathia) from the Upper Triassic of Brazil".

The Science of Nature . 112 (1). 6. Bibcode : 2025SciNa.112....6D . doi : 10.1007/s00114-024-01953-1 . PMID 39808199 . ^ Liu, L.; Ren, J.-C.; Mao, F.-Y. (2025). "Reinvestigation of Yuanotherium minor and its implications for the cuspal homology and maxillary-palatal evolution of tritylodontids". Vertebrata PalAsiatica . 63 (2): 81– 101. doi : 10.19615/j.cnki.2096-9899.250331 . ^ Ren, J.; Wang, P.; Wei, Z.; Liu, L.; Meng, J.; Mao, F. (2025). "The cranial endocast of tritylodontid Bienotheroides (Cynodontia, Mammaliamorpha) and its relevance to mammalian neurosensory evolution". Papers in Palaeontology . 11 (3). e70021. Bibcode : 2025PPal...1170021R . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70021 . ^ Ren, J.; Liu, L.; Han, F.; Xu, X.; Clark, J. M.; Liu, J.; Meng, J.; Mao, F. (2025). "A new specimen of the tritylodontid Bienotheroides zigongensis (Cynodontia, Mammaliamorpha) from the Wucaiwan area of Xinjiang, China, and phylogeny of Tritylodontidae". Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History . 2025 (477): 0003– 0090. Bibcode : 2025BAMNH20257.1.1R . doi : 10.1206/0003-0090.477.1.1 . hdl : 2246/7524 . ^ Averianov, A. O.; Lopatin, A. V.; Slobodin, D. A.; Skutschas, P. P.; Vladimirova, O. N. (2025). "Dentary–squamosal jaw articulation in a late surviving tritylodontid synapsid from the Early Cretaceous of Western Siberia, Russia". Journal of Mammalian Evolution . 32 (3) 32. doi : 10.1007/s10914-025-09775-2 . ^ Wang, H.; Xie, J.; Yu, Z.; Hai, L.; Zhu, Z.; Zheng, W.; Wang, Y. (2025). "Lower jaw morphology of the last surviving tritylodontid Fossiomanus sinensis from the Early Cretaceous Jehol Biota, Liaoning Province, China" . Acta Palaeontologica Polonica . 70 (2): 285– 289. doi : 10.4202/app.01232.2024 . ^ Salcido, C. J.; Gill, P. G.; Martinelli, A. G.; Rawson, J. R. G.; Corfe, I. J.; Soares, M. B.; Francischini, H.; Schultz, C. L.; Rayfield, E. J. (2025). "Functional morphology and biomechanics of an ontogenetic series of the Triassic cynodont Brasilodon quadrangularis and bite performance in the sister taxon of Mammaliformes" . Palaeontology . 68 (5) e70026. Bibcode : 2025Palgy..6870026S . doi : 10.1111/pala.70026 . ^ Hai, L.; Wang, Y.; Wang, H.; Gao, Y.; Zhu, Z.; You, H.; Wang, Y. (2025). "A juvenile specimen of Sinoconodon rigneyi with new information on pattern of tooth replacement". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 44 (4). e2442473. doi : 10.1080/02724634.2024.2442473 . ^ Tumelty, M.; Lautenschlager, S. (2025). "Is cranial anatomy indicative of fossoriality? A case study of the mammaliaform Hadrocodium wui " .

The Anatomical Record . 308 (9) ar.25630. doi : 10.1002/ar.25630 . PMC 12329393 . PMID 39853864 . ^ Malysheva, E. N. (2025). " Amblysiphonella ingens sp. nov. (Sphinctozoa; Porifera) a New Species from the Permian of the Nakhodka Reef (Southern Primorye)". Paleontological Journal . 59 (5): 473– 479. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59..473M . doi : 10.1134/S003103012560060X . ^ Rosse-Guillevic, Simon; Muirhead-Hunt, Heléna; McIlroy, Duncan (November 2025). "Aninoides : a new rangeomorph genus from the upper Ediacaran of Newfoundland". Papers in Palaeontology . 11 (6) e70061. Bibcode : 2025PPal...1170061R . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70061 . ^ a b c d Botting, J. P.; Janussen, D.; Dohrmann, M.; Muir, L. A.; Zhang, Y.; Ma, J. (2025). "Advanced crown-group Rossellidae (Porifera: Hexactinellida) resembling extant taxa from the Hirnantian (Late Ordovician) Anji Biota". Papers in Palaeontology . 11 (1). e70000. Bibcode : 2025PPal...11E0000B . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70000 . ^ a b c d e f g Jeon, J.; Zhang, Y.-C.; Kershaw, S.; Zhan, R.-B. (2025). "Stromatoporoids from the Upper Ordovician (Katian) Koumenzi Formation of North Qilian Mountains, China". Palaeoworld . 35 (2) 201051. doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2025.201051 . ^ Pêgas, R. V.; Aureliano, T.; Holgado, B.; Almeida, W. B. S.; Santos, C. L. A.; Ghilardi, A. M. (2025). "A regurgitalite reveals a new filter-feeding pterosaur from the Santana Group" . Scientific Reports . 15 (1) 37336. Bibcode : 2025NatSR..1537336P . doi : 10.1038/s41598-025-22983-3 . PMC 12603321 . PMID 41214057 . ^ Unwin, D. M.; Smith, R. E.; Cooper, S. L. A.; Martill, D. M. (2026). "Reinterpretation of Bakiribu waridza from the Romualdo Formation (Lower Cretaceous) of Brazil: a fish not a pterosaur" . Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciências . 98 (2). e20251374. doi : 10.1590/0001-3765202620251374 . PMID 41983856 . ^ Sheng, J.; Aitchison, J. (2025). "Resolution of taxonomic ambiguities among siliceous Cambrian microfossils: poriferan affinity of Blastulospongia and phylogeny of archaeospicularians (Radiolaria)" . Journal of Paleontology . 99 (4): 784– 797. Bibcode : 2025JPal...99..784S . doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10131 . ^ Hsu, C.-H.; Hsiao, Y. (2025). " Bruckneria Nom. Nov., a New Replacement Name for Walteriella Brückner, 2006 (Hexactinellida: Euplectellidae), a Junior Homonym of Walteriella Kazantsev, 2001 (Insecta: Cantharidae)" . Paleontological Research . 29 (1): 122– 123. Bibcode : 2025PalRe..29..122H . doi : 10.2517/prpsj.250007 . ^ a b c Parry, L. A.; Lerosey-Aubril, R.; Coleman, R.; Del Mouro, L.; Gaines, R. R.; Skabelund, J.; Weaver, J. C.; Ortega-Hernández, J. (2025). "The oldest diverse jellyfish fauna reinterpreted as sessile polypoid dinomischids (stem-group Ctenophora)" . Journal of Systematic Palaeontology . 23 (1) 2545834. Bibcode : 2025JSPal..2345834P . doi : 10.1080/14772019.2025.2545834 . ^ Peel, J. S. (2025). "Shell tubules in Cassitella (Hyolitha) from the Cambrian (Series 2) of Greenland (Laurentia)" . Bulletin of Geosciences . 100 (3): 213– 228. doi : 10.3140/bull.geosci.1951 . ^ McIlroy, D.; Pérez-Pinedo, D.; Rosse-Guillevic, S.; Muirhead-Hunt, H.; Taylor, R. S.; Dufour, S. C. (2025). "Growth and disparity of form in the Ediacaran genus Charnia , with description of Charnia brasieri sp. nov. from the Ediacaran of Avalonia" . Precambrian Research . 431 107947. Bibcode : 2025PreR..43107947M . doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2025.107947 . ^ Pasinetti, G.; Fitzgerald, H. G.; Pérez-Pinedo, D.; McIlroy, D. (2025). "A new species of Charnia from the Ediacaran of Newfoundland reveals novel insights on the taxonomy, palaeobiology and palaeoecology of the Charnida (Rangeomorpha)". Journal of Systematic Palaeontology . 23 (1). 2468193. Bibcode : 2025JSPal..2368193P . doi : 10.1080/14772019.2025.2468193 . ^ a b c d Rhebergen, F.; Van Keulen, P. (2025). Revision of the Family Chiastoclonellidae Rauff, 1895 (Porifera, Orchocladina) . Fossils and Strata Series. Vol. 71. pp. 1– 49. doi : 10.18261/9788215074894-2025-01 . ISBN 978-82-15-07490-0 . ^ Zou, L.-J.; Botting, J. P.; Yang, J.; Yang, X.-Y.; Li, W.; Guo, Q.-H.; Wang, Y.; Li, C.-L.; Zhang, X.-G.; Chen, A.-L. (2025). "A new sponge (Ascospongiae) from the early Cambrian Guanshan Biota". Palaeoworld . 35 201032. doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2025.201032 . ^ a b Wu, L.; Yun, H.; Wang, Q.; Zhang, X. (2025). "Morphology and taxonomy of Choia from the Qingjiang Biota" . Acta Palaeontologica Sinica . 64 (1): 23– 38. doi : 10.19800/j.cnki.aps.2024013 . ^ Vinn, O.; Isakar, M.; El Hedeny, M.; Almansour, M. I.; Alfarraj, S. (2025). "First record of agglutinated worm tubes from the uppermost Cambrian of Estonia" . Acta Geologica Polonica . 75 (2). e41. doi : 10.24425/agp.2024.152663 . ^ Świerczewska-Gładysz, E.; Jurkowska, A. (2025). "Late Cretaceous (Campanian) rhizomorine sponges (lithistid Demospongiae) from the Miechów and Mogilno-Łódź Synclinoria (southern and central Poland)" . Annales Societatis Geologorum Poloniae . 94 (4): 345– 398. doi : 10.14241/asgp.2024.18 . ^ Valent, M.; Fatka, O.; Budil, P. (2025). "New Ordovician hyolith Elegantilites custos sp. n. and the palaeogeographic and stratigraphic distribution of the genus Elegantilites Marek, 1966" . PalZ . 99 (1): 1– 11. Bibcode : 2025PalZ...99....1V . doi : 10.1007/s12542-024-00708-7 . ^ Peel, J. S. (2025). "Extending the diversity of grasping spines in middle Cambrian stem-group Chaetognathifera" . Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal of Palaeontology . 49 (1): 17– 29. Bibcode : 2025Alch...49...17P . doi : 10.1080/03115518.2025.2455702 . ^ Luo, C.; Parry, L. A.; Boudinot, B. E.; Wang, S.; Jarzembowski, E. A.; Zhang, H.; Wang, B. (2025). "A Jurassic acanthocephalan illuminates the origin of thorny-headed worms". Nature . 641 (8063): 674– 680. Bibcode : 2025Natur.641..674L . doi : 10.1038/s41586-025-08830-5 . PMID 40205043 . ^ a b Mussini, G.; Hagadorn, J. W.; Miller, A. E.; Karlstrom, K. E.; Evans, R.; Dehler, C. E.; Bastien, S.; Butterfield, N. J. (2025). "Evolutionary escalation in an exceptionally preserved Cambrian biota from the Grand Canyon (Arizona, USA)" . Science Advances . 11 (30) eadv6383. Bibcode : 2025SciA...11.6383M . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adv6383 . PMC 12285723 . PMID 40700497 . ^ Wang, Y.; Steiner, M.; Wang, P.; Yang, X.; Yang, R. (2025). "New Miaolingian tubicolous fossils from North China and the persistence of the Ediacaran "worm-world" ". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 670 112959. Bibcode : 2025PPP...67012959W . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.112959 . ^ Jeon, J.; Simonet Roda, M.; Chen, Z.-Y.; Luo, C.; Kershaw, S.; Kim, D.; Ma, J.-Y.; Lee, J.-H.; Zhang, Y.-D. (2025). "Phosphatic stromatoporoid sponges formed reefs ~480 Mya" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (15). e2426105122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12226105J . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2426105122 . PMC 12012458 . PMID 40163761 . ^ Luo, C.; Hong, Y.; Sun, Z.; Sun, H.; Lim, S. C.; Wang, T.; Zhang, L.; Zhao, F. (2025). "Advanced adaptive strategies in an ancestral body plan: insights from a 510-Ma-old leptomitid sponge" . Royal Society Open Science . 12 (10). 251072. Bibcode : 2025RSOS...1251072L . doi : 10.1098/rsos.251072 . PMC 12567092 . PMID 41164336 . ^ de Carle, D.; Iwama, R. E.; Wendruff, A. J.; Babcock, L. E.; Nanglu, K. (2025). "The first leech body fossil predates estimated hirudinidan origins by 200 million years" . PeerJ . 13 e19962. doi : 10.7717/peerj.19962 . PMC 12495953 . PMID 41048386 . ^ Vinther, J.; Parry, L. A.; Lee, M.; Nielsen, M. L.; Oh, Y.; Park, C.; Kihm, J.-H.; DeVivo, G.; Harper, D. A. T.; Nielsen, A. T.; Park, T.-Y. S. (2025). "A fossilized ventral ganglion reveals a chaetognath affinity for Cambrian nectocaridids" . Science Advances . 11 (30) eadu6990. Bibcode : 2025SciA...11.6990V . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adu6990 . PMC 12285702 . PMID 40700488 . ^ Carrera, M. G.; Botting, J. P.; Cañas, F. L. (2025). "Heteractinid, hexactinellid and sphaeroclonid sponges as rare components of anthaspidellid-dominated reefs from the Ordovician of the Precordillera, western Argentina" . Palaeontologia Electronica . 28 (1). 28.1.a17. doi : 10.26879/1351 . ^ Luzhnaya, E. A. (2025). "New Vendian Metazoa with colonial organization". Paleontological Journal . 59 (2): 113– 118. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59..113L . doi : 10.1134/S0031030125600027 . ^ a b Zhang, J.; Yang, X.; Yu, R.; Hu, Y. (2025). "New material of Leptomitidae from the Cambrian Niutitang Formation of Zunyi, Guizhou" . Acta Palaeontologica Sinica . 64 (3): 261– 275. doi : 10.19800/j.cnki.aps.2024032 . ^ Kočí, T.; Milàn, J.; Jakobsen, S. L.; Schnetler, K. I.; Jäger, M.; Váchová, L.; Kočová Veselská, M. (2025). " Pentaditrupa nickcavei sp. nov. and 'revived' Pentaditrupa interjuncta (Jessen & Ødum, 1923) (Polychaeta, Serpulidae) from the Paleocene of Denmark, with some remarks on the middle Paleocene mesofauna" . Bulletin of the Geological Society of Denmark . 74 : 145– 174. Bibcode : 2025BuGSD..74..145K . doi : 10.37570/bgsd-2025-74-08 . ^ a b Wang, Q.; Dai, Q.; Vayda, P.; Luo, J.; Shao, T.; Liu, Y.; Hua, H.; Xiao, S. (2025). "Fortunian archaeocyath sponges acquired biomineralization in the beginning of the Cambrian explosion" . Geology . 53 (6): 540– 544. Bibcode : 2025Geo....53..540W . doi : 10.1130/G53249.1 . ^ Beschin, C.; Busulini, A.; Tessier, C.; Sanfilippo, R. (2025). "Skeletobiont serpulids on the xanthid crab Lathahypossia aculeata from the middle Eocene of the Chiampo Valley, Vicenza (Northeast Italy)". Journal of Paleontology . 99 (3): 690– 700. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2024.81 . ^ Manconi, R.; Cubeddu, T.; Lee, D.; Pronzato, R.; Kaulfuss, U. (2025). "Latest Oligocene–earliest Miocene Australasian freshwater sponges (Demospongiae: Spongillida) from a maar paleolake in southern New Zealand". Journal of Paleontology . 99 (5): 997– 1010. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10128 . ^ Jeon, J.; Toom, U. (2025). "The appearance of Rosenella (stromatoporoid sponge) in Baltica: new species from the Pirgu Stage (Katian, Upper Ordovician) of Estonia" . Estonian Journal of Earth Sciences . 74 (2): 145– 159. Bibcode : 2025EsJES..74..145J . doi : 10.3176/earth.2025.10 . ^ Mussini, G.; Butterfield, N. J. (2025). "Exotic cuticular specializations in a Cambrian scalidophoran" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 292 (2040). 20242806. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2024.2806 . PMC 11793982 . PMID 39904395 . ^ Kočí, T.; Goedert, J. L. (2025). "A new species of the polychaete Spiraserpula from late Oligocene rocks of western Washington State, USA". Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie – Abhandlungen . 315 (2): 157– 173. Bibcode : 2025NJGPA.315..157K . doi : 10.1127/njgpa/1271 . ^ Antropova, E. V.; Silantiev, V. V. (2025). "A New Stromatoporoid Species from the Late Famennian of the South Tatar Arch in the Volga–Urals Oil and Gas Province". Paleontological Journal . 59 (5): 480– 486. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59..480A . doi : 10.1134/S0031030125600611 . ^ Kimmig, Julien; Nanglu, Karma; Jamison, Paul G. (2025-09-18). "A problematic soft-bodied fossil from the Cambrian (Miaolingian, Wuliuan) of Utah" . Geological Magazine . 162 e37. Bibcode : 2025GeoM..162E..37K . doi : 10.1017/S0016756825100265 . ^ Runnegar, B.; Horodyski, R. J.; Gehling, J. G.; Jensen, S.; Bengtson, S.; Peterson, K. J.; Saltzman, M. R.; Vendrasco, M. J. (2025). " Tulaneia amabilia n. gen. n. sp.: a new erniettomorph from the Wood Canyon Formation, Nevada and the age of the Ediacaran–Cambrian transition in the Great Basin" . Journal of Paleontology . 98 (6): 929– 951. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2024.45 . ^ Kolesnikov, K. A.; Inkina, N. S.; Shuvalova, J. V.; Zhuravlev, A. Yu. (2025). "A new Early Permian "lithistid" sponge (Porifera: Demospongiae: Anthaspidellidae) from the Polar Urals" . Invertebrate Zoology . 22 (4): 545– 552. doi : 10.15298/invertzool.22.4.02 . ^ Gan, D.; Dong, J.; Yang, W.; Liu, W.; Gao, T.; Wang, J.; Bian, C.; Xie, L.; Li, Y.; Liu, J.; Hua, H.; Liu, L. (2025). "Phosphatized Embryo-like fossils from the Chang 7 3 Sub-Member, Middle-Upper Triassic Yanchang Formation, Ordos Basin, Northwest China: Affinity, Preservation and Paleoecological Implications" . Marine and Petroleum Geology . 181 107531. Bibcode : 2025MarPG.18107531G . doi : 10.1016/j.marpetgeo.2025.107531 . ^ Mitchell, E. G.; Dhungana, A. (2025). "Constraining the lifespans of early animals of the Ediacaran" . Biology Letters . 21 (8) 20250348. doi : 10.1098/rsbl.2025.0348 . PMC 12364566 . PMID 40829646 . ^ Mulligan, C.; Gold, D. A. (2025). "A Reassessment of the Coprostane Biomarker in the Ediacaran With Implications for Dickinsonia " . Geobiology . 23 (4) e70029. Bibcode : 2025Gbio...2371614M . doi : 10.1111/gbi.70029 . PMC 12362056 . PMID 40827090 . ^ Gibson, B. M.; Davies, J. H. F. L.; Darroch, S. A. F.; Bissick, A.; Boscaini, A.; Halverson, G. P.; Hilgen, F. J.; Liberty, P. R.; Sorrentino, J. A.; Spiering, B. R.; Vickers-Rich, P.; Laflamme, M. (2025). "Possible dickinsoniomorphs from the latest Ediacaran Nama Group, southern Namibia" . Precambrian Research . 433 107981. doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2025.107981 . ^ Surprenant, R. L.; Droser, M. L. (2025). "A growth model for the highly abundant Ediacaran tubular organism Funisia dorothea " . Journal of Paleontology . 99 (2): 262– 274. Bibcode : 2025JPal...99..262S . doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10095 . ^ Elias, R. J.; Lee, D.-J.; Pratt, B. R.; Park, H. (2025). "Modular skeletons from the Mural Formation (late early Cambrian), Canadian Rocky Mountains: possible hypercalcified sponges" . Journal of Paleontology . 99 (2): 283– 307. Bibcode : 2025JPal...99..283E . doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10106 . ^ Ivantsov, A.; Knoll, A. H.; Zakrevskaya, M.; Fedonkin, M.; Pauly, D. (2025). "Growth of the enigmatic Ediacaran Parvancorina minchami " . Paleobiology . 51 (2): 356– 363. Bibcode : 2025Pbio...51..356I . doi : 10.1017/pab.2024.55 . ^ Zhao, M.; Zhang, Y.; Tang, F.; Li, Y.; Li, M.; Zhong, L.; Ren, L. (2025). "Enigmatic discoidal macrofossils with central ring from the Ediacaran Jiangchuan biota, Southwest China". Papers in Palaeontology . 11 (2). e70005. Bibcode : 2025PPal...11E0005Z . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70005 . ^ Dunn, F. S.; Donoghue, P. C. J.; Liu, A. G. (2025). "Morphogenesis of Fractofusus andersoni and the nature of early animal development" . Nature Communications . 16 (1). 3439. Bibcode : 2025NatCo..16.3439D . doi : 10.1038/s41467-025-58605-9 . PMC 11985926 . PMID 40210650 . ^ Stephenson, N. P.; Delahooke, K. M.; Buma-at, P. A.; Rideout, B. W. T.; Barnes, N.; Kenchington, C.; Manica, A.; Mitchell, E. G. (2025). "Recolonization strategies of early animals in the Avalon (Ediacaran 574–560 Ma)" . Paleobiology . 52 (1): 57– 68. doi : 10.1017/pab.2025.10074 . ^ Wu, C.; Liu, A. G.; Lio, Y.; Wang, X.; Li, G.; Qu, H.; Huang, R.; Qiu, M.; Zheng, W.; Sun, Y.; Shi, H.; Ouyang, Q.; Wan, B.; Chen, Z.; Zhou, C.; Yuan, X.; Pang, K. (2025). "The Quanjishan Charnia assemblage from the northern Qaidam Basin, Tibetan Plateau, and implications for palaeoecology and taphonomy of Ediacaran fronds". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 665 112816. Bibcode : 2025PPP...66512816W . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.112816 . ^ Shawar, L.; Love, G. D.; Uveges, B. T.; Zumberge, J. A.; Cárdenas, P.; Giner, J.-L.; Summons, R. E. (2025). "Chemical characterization of C 31 sterols from sponges and Neoproterozoic fossil sterane counterparts" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (41) e2503009122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12203009S . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2503009122 . PMC 12541326 . PMID 41021825 . ^ Jia, Q.; Shen, Y.; Li, Y.; Sun, L.; Jing, X.; Yu, Z.; Zhang, M.; Liu, T.; Tang, H. (2025). "Sponge spicule fossils from Member 3 of the Cambrian Qingxi Formation in the Sanjiang area, Guangxi" . Acta Palaeontologica Sinica . 64 (2): 199– 210. doi : 10.19800/j.cnki.aps.2025017 . ^ Zhang, L.; Wu, Y.; Zhai, F.; Duan, C.-Z.; Fu, S.-S.; Chang, S.; Ye, Y.; Chen, C.; Wang, X.; Lang, X.-G.; Feng, Q.-L.; Forel, M.-B. (2025). "The earliest sponge spicule tufts from the Cambrian Lower Yanjiahe Formation, Three Gorges area, South China". Palaeoworld . 34 (6) 200995. Bibcode : 2025Palae..3400995Z . doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2025.200995 . ^ Olivier, N.; Brayard, A.; Lathuiliere, B.; Jenks, J. F.; Bylund, K. G.; Stephen, D. A.; Escarguel, G.; Fara, E. (2025). "Presumed chaetetids in Smithian (early Olenekian, Early Triassic) microbial-sponge limestones, Rock Canyon, Arizona, USA" . Lethaia . 58 (2): 1– 23. Bibcode : 2025Letha..58..2.6O . doi : 10.18261/let.58.2.6 . ^ Becker-Kerber, B.; Ortega-Hernández, J.; Schiffbauer, J. D.; Lerosey-Aubril, R.; Wang, D.; Warren, L. V.; Simões, M. G.; del Mouro, L.; Rodella, C. B.; Basei, M. A. S.; Archilha, N. L. (2025). "Rebuilding Earth's first skeletal animals: the original morphology of Corumbella (Ediacaran, Brazil)" . Royal Society Open Science . 12 (5). 250206. Bibcode : 2025RSOS...1250206B . doi : 10.1098/rsos.250206 . PMC 12092125 . PMID 40400519 . ^ Kershaw, S.; Li, Q.-J. (2025). "Fossil hypercalcified sponges; types, relationships and geological history" . Journal of Palaeogeography . 14 (4) 100289. Bibcode : 2025JPalG..1400289K . doi : 10.1016/j.jop.2025.100289 . ^ Stock, C. W.; May, A.; Ebert, J. R.; Scotese, C. R.; Hagadorn, J. W. (2025). "Early Devonian (Pragian) decrease in global generic diversity of stromatoporoids, and their extreme decrease in paleogeographic distribution in North America". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 663 112719. Bibcode : 2025PPP...66312719S . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.112719 . ^ Huang, J.; Sendino, C.; Kershaw, S. (2025). "Devonian stromatoporoid historical collections in the Natural History Museum, London (UK): redescription, taxonomic revision and implications for stromatoporoid global paleobiogeography". Journal of Paleontology . 99 (Supplement S99): 1– 47. Bibcode : 2025JPal...99....1H . doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10098 . ^ Wistort, Z.; Tapanila, L.; Moynihan, W.; Ritterbush, K. (2025). "Glass factory found: Basinwide (600 km) preservation of sponges on the Phosphoria glass ramp, Permian, USA" . PLOS ONE . 20 (11) e0333211. Bibcode : 2025PLoSO..2033211W . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0333211 . PMC 12611142 . PMID 41223169 . ^ Yang, J.; Li, W.; Chen, A.-L.; Du, K.-S.; Peng, X.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, X.-H.; Smith, M. R. (2025). " Shishania is a chancelloriid and not a Cambrian mollusk". Science . 388 (6747): 662– 664. Bibcode : 2025Sci...388..662Y . doi : 10.1126/science.adv4635 . PMID 40339003 . ^ Hu, Y.; Topper, T. P.; Strotz, L. C.; Pan, B.; Wang, Z.; Fu, R.; Liu, F.; Liang, Y.; Wang, J.; Li, G.; Zhang, Z. (2025). "Exceptionally preserved epithelial cell−controlled organic templates in Cambrian chancelloriid sclerites" . Geology . 53 (10): 842– 846. Bibcode : 2025Geo....53..842H . doi : 10.1130/G53623.1 . ^ Yun, H.; Zhang, X.; Brock, G. A.; Han, J.; Li, L.; Pan, B.; Li, G.; Reitner, J. (2025). "An extinct clade of the basal Epitheliozoa: phylogenetic position and implication of the enigmatic Cambrian chancelloriids" . Communications Biology . 8 (1) 1198. doi : 10.1038/s42003-025-08655-y . PMC 12344151 . PMID 40797096 . ^ Wang, Z.K.; Miguez-Salas, O. (2025). "Quantitative decoding of Ediacaran locomotory trace fossil morphologies: Evidence for the emergence of slender anterior-posterior body profiles" . Geology . 53 (9): 732– 736. doi : 10.1130/G53332.1 . ^ Knaust, D.; Duarte, L. V. (2025). "The Pliensbachian at the Peniche Global Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP, Portugal) – a section full of remarkably preserved worms" . Geological Magazine . 162 e23. Bibcode : 2025GeoM..162E..23K . doi : 10.1017/S0016756825100113 . ^ Wang, D.; Vannier, J.; Martín-Durán, J. M.; Herranz, M.; Yu, C. (2025). "Preservation and early evolution of scalidophoran ventral nerve cord" . Science Advances . 11 (2). eadr0896. Bibcode : 2025SciA...11R.896W . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adr0896 . PMC 11721716 . PMID 39792685 . ^ Knaust, D. (2025). " Skolithos linearis from the early Palaeozoic: The burrow of a priapulid?". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 676 113151. Bibcode : 2025PPP...67613151K . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113151 . ^ Liu, C.; Liu, J. (2025). "New observation on Corynetis from the early Cambrian Guanshan Biota reflect burrowing life" . Royal Society Open Science . 12 (10) 251357. Bibcode : 2025RSOS...1251357L . doi : 10.1098/rsos.251357 . PMC 12503955 . PMID 41063726 . ^ Kovář, V.; Fatka, O. (2025). "The first record of Hallucigenia -like lobopodians from the lower Jince Formation (Cambrian, Miaolingian) of the Příbram–Jince Basin" . Swiss Journal of Palaeontology . 144 (1) 38. Bibcode : 2025SwJP..144...38K . doi : 10.1186/s13358-025-00381-6 . ^ Knecht, R. J.; McCall, C. R. A.; Tsai, C.-C.; Rabideau Childers, R. A.; Yu, N. (2025). " Palaeocampa anthrax , an armored freshwater lobopodian with chemical defenses from the Carboniferous" . Communications Biology . 8 (1) 1080. doi : 10.1038/s42003-025-08483-0 . PMC 12287526 . PMID 40702124 . ^ Monge-Nájera, J.; Añino, Y. (2025). "A Review of Onychophoran Phylogenic Studies Reveals Resilience of Soil Ecosystems to the Chicxulub Impact Event" . Fossil Studies . 3 (4) 14. doi : 10.3390/fossils3040014 . ^ Slater, B. J. (2025). "Cambrian carbonaceous protoconodonts and the early fossil record of the Chaetognatha" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 292 (2041) 20242386. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2024.2386 . PMC 11836706 . PMID 39968616 . ^ Nanglu, K.; Waskom, M. E.; Losso, S. R.; Ortega-Hernández, J. (2025). "A 480 million year old parasitic spionid annelid" . iScience . 28 (11) 113721. Bibcode : 2025iSci...28k3721N . doi : 10.1016/j.isci.2025.113721 . PMC 12613029 . PMID 41244579 . ^ Gómez, J. C.; di Pasquo, M.; Silvestri, L. (2025). "Late Ordovician scolecodonts from the La Pola and Don Braulio formations, Villicum Range, Argentine Precordillera" . Ameghiniana . 63 (1): 3636. Bibcode : 2025Amegh..63.3636G . doi : 10.5710/AMGH.29.10.2025.3636 . ^ Gao, D.; Shen, C.; Huang, L.; Chen, L.; Zhang, S.; Tian, Y.; Li, Y. (2025). "New scolecodonts (Polychaeta, Annelida) from the Late Silurian of Yunnan, South China" . Swiss Journal of Palaeontology . 144 (1). 22. Bibcode : 2025SwJP..144...22G . doi : 10.1186/s13358-025-00362-9 . ^ Shcherbakov, D. E.; Timm, T.; Dantes, O. V.; Zhuravlev, A. Yu. (2025). "The oldest oligochaete cocoons (former cladocerans) from the upper Permian (Lopingian) freshwater Karaungir Lagerstätte of eastern Kazakhstan". Journal of Paleontology : 1– 16. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10161 . ^ Jamison-Todd, S.; Witts, J. D.; Jones, M. E. H.; Tangunan, D.; Chandler, K.; Bown, P.; Twitchett, R. J. (2025). "The evolution of bone-eating worm diversity in the Upper Cretaceous Chalk Group of the United Kingdom" . PLOS ONE . 20 (4). e0320945. Bibcode : 2025PLoSO..2020945J . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0320945 . PMC 11967938 . PMID 40179110 . ^ Jamison-Todd, S.; Mannion, P. D.; Upchurch, P. (2025). "The earliest fossil cetacean with Osedax borings: narrowing the spatiotemporal gap between Cretaceous marine reptiles and late Cenozoic whales" . Royal Society Open Science . 12 (6). 250446. Bibcode : 2025RSOS...1250446J . doi : 10.1098/rsos.250446 . PMC 12151596 . PMID 40503252 . ^ Kiel, S.; Götz, P.; Goedert, J. L.; Kahl, W.-A. (2025). "Fossil traces of Osedax in dense whale ear bones and thoughts on potential further food sources" . PalZ . 100 (1): 45– 52. Bibcode : 2026PalZ..100...45K . doi : 10.1007/s12542-025-00759-4 . ^ Collareta, A.; Mezzasalma, O.; Agresti, J.; Barucci, A.; Bosio, G.; Mulè, F.; Casati, S.; Di Cencio, A.; Bianucci, G.; Pieri, A.; Nobile, F. (2025). "Trace fossil evidence for Osedax Rouse et al., 2004 exploiting shark tooth dentine on a Pliocene seafloor: broadening our understanding of a major taphonomic agent" . Fossil Record . 28 (2): 359– 375. Bibcode : 2025FossR..28..359C . doi : 10.3897/fr.28.167615 . ^ Kočí, T.; Goedert, J. L.; Rich, M. A. (2025). "Fossil pectinariid tubes (Polychaeta, Terebellida) from Cenozoic strata of Washington and Oregon". Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie – Abhandlungen . 315 (2): 209– 229. Bibcode : 2025NJGPA.315..209K . doi : 10.1127/njgpa/1275 . ^ Dzik, J. (2025). "Early ontogeny and other possible molluscan traits in hyolith biology and anatomy" . Lethaia . 58 (2): 1– 16. Bibcode : 2025Letha..58..2.1D . doi : 10.18261/let.58.2.2 . ^ Bicknell, R. D. C.; Campione, N. E.; Brock, G. A.; Paterson, J. R. (2025). "Adaptive responses in Cambrian predator and prey highlight the arms race during the rise of animals". Current Biology . 35 (4): 882–888.e2. Bibcode : 2025CBio...35..882B . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2024.12.007 . hdl : 1959.11/64367 . PMID 39755119 . ^ Vinn, O.; Hambardzumyan, T.; Wilson, M. A.; Serobyan, V. (2025). "Palaeobiological and phylogenetic implications of preserved muscle scars in Devonian tentaculitids from Armenia". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology . 37 (12): 2612– 2620. Bibcode : 2025HBio...37.2612V . doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2458115 . ^ Opitek, K.; Zatoń, M.; Hu, M.; Schiffbauer, J. D.; Selly, T.; Myrow, P. (2025). "Morphology and mode of life of a peculiar Devonian microconchid tubeworm Aculeiconchus from Wyoming, USA" . Lethaia . 57 (4): 1– 13. doi : 10.18261/let.57.4.8 . ^ Pante, E. (2016). "Nomenclatural note on the homonymy between the octocoral genus Dendrobrachia Brook 1889 and the entoproct phylum Dendrobrachia Xian-Guan, Bergström, Xio-Ya and Jie 2006" . Zootaxa . 4107 (4): 598. doi : 10.11646/zootaxa.4107.4.8 . PMID 27394843 . ^ Hou, X.-G.; Bergström, G.; Ma, X.-Y.; Zhao, J. (2006). "The Lower Cambrian Phlogites Luo & Hu re-considered". GFF . 128 (1): 47– 51. Bibcode : 2006GFF...128...47X . doi : 10.1080/11035890601281047 . ^ Pérez, C. D.; Gomes, F. F. (2025). "Resurrection of phylum name Dendrobrachia Xian-Guan, Bergström, Xio-Ya and Jie 2006 (Lower Cambrian Phlogites ) invalided for an inexistent homonymy". Zootaxa . 5717 (3): 449– 450. doi : 10.11646/zootaxa.5717.3.10 . ^ Ma, S.; Kimmig, J.; Schiffbauer, J. D.; Li, R.; Peng, S.; Yang, X. (2025). "Deep water vetulicolians from the lower Cambrian of China" . PeerJ . 13 e18864. doi : 10.7717/peerj.18864 . PMC 11760202 . PMID 39866560 . ^ Tian, Q.; Zhao, F.; Zeng, H.; Zhu, M.; Jiang, B. (2022). "Ultrastructure reveals ancestral vertebrate pharyngeal skeleton in yunnanozoans" . Science . 377 (6602): 218– 222. Bibcode : 2022Sci...377..218T . doi : 10.1126/science.abm2708 . PMID 35857544 . S2CID 250380981 . ^ He, K.; Han, J.; Liu, J.; Ou, Q.; Mussini, G.; Reich, M.; Shu, D. (2025). "Thermal taphonomy experiments challenge ultrastructural preservation in the Chengjiang yunnanozoans" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 292 (2047). 20250567. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2025.0567 . PMC 12115822 . PMID 40425157 . ^ Consorti, L.; Caus, E.; Le Coze, F. (2025). " Alexnoguesina nomen novum pro Alexina Hottinger and Caus 2009 preoccupied" . Micropaleontology . 71 (3): 305. doi : 10.47894/mpal.71.3.07 . ^ Ismail, A. A.; Boukhary, M.; Sharabi, S. A.; Kotb, O. A. (2025). "The new genus Bolivilongella (Family Bolivinoididae) from the Miocene of the Mango-2 well, Mediterranean Sea, Egypt". Micropaleontology . 71 (2): 191– 196. Bibcode : 2025MiPal..71..191I . doi : 10.47894/mpal.71.2.05 . ^ a b c Acar, S.; Bozkurt, A. (2025). "New larger foraminiferal taxa ( Hereceina n. gen. and new Borelis species) from upper Priabonian of eastern Türkiye (Turkey): Biostratigraphic and paleoecological implications". Palaeoworld . 34 (6) 200970. Bibcode : 2025Palae..3400970A . doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2025.200970 . ^ Jalloh, C. M.; Hikmahtiar, S.; Korin, A.; Prayudi, S. D.; Fheed, A.; Kaminsky, M. A. (2025). " Bulbobaculites attashensis sp. nov., a new agglutinated foraminifera from the Middle Jurassic D7 Attash Member of the Dhruma Formation, Central Saudi Arabia" . Annales Societatis Geologorum Poloniae . 94 (4): 399– 408. doi : 10.14241/asgp.2024.16 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Altıner, D.; Payne, J. L.; Lehrmann, D. J.; Atasoy, S. G.; Özkan-Altıner, S. (2025). "New foraminifera from the Changhsingian (Upper Permian) of the Taurides (southern Turkey) with remarks on their evolutionary origins" . Journal of Paleontology . 98 (5): 745– 772. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2024.21 . ^ a b c d Ghanbarloo, H.; Safari, A.; Görmüş, M. (2025). "New species of larger benthic foraminifera from the Maastrichtian deposits of the southern margin of the Neotethys (Zagros Foreland Basin)" . Journal of Palaeogeography . 14 (2): 535– 558. Bibcode : 2025JPalG..14..535G . doi : 10.1016/j.jop.2024.10.003 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j Le Coze, F.; Altiner, D.; Arefifard, S.; Aretz, M.; Bucur, I. I.; Cózar, P.; Fassihi, S.; Gaillot, J.; Ghazzay-Souli, W.; Haig, D. W.; Hance, L.; Izart, A.; Krainer, K.; Kulagina, E.; Lucas, S. G.; Martini, R.; Rettori, R.; Somerville, I. I.; Yarahmadzahi, H.; Zandkarimi, K.; Zaninetti, L. (2025). "New replacement names for Paleozoic foraminiferan homonyms: A tribute to Daniel Vachard (1947-2024)" . New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin . 101 : 35– 39. ^ Kaminski, M. A.; Korin, A. (2025). " Flabellogaudryina n.gen, a new agglutinated foraminiferal genus from the Eocene of Saudi Arabia". Micropaleontology . 71 (1): 93– 100. Bibcode : 2025MiPal..71...93K . doi : 10.47894/mpal.71.1.04 . ^ Yadrenkin, A. V. (2025). " Frondicularia (Foraminifera) from Triassic deposits of north Siberia and the Kotelny Island (New Siberian Islands)". Paleontological Journal . 59 (3): 221– 233. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59..221Y . doi : 10.1134/S0031030125600180 . ^ a b c d e Jarvis, I.; Dubicka, Z.; Chroustová, M. (2025). "Foraminifera and ostracod biostratigraphy of the English Coniacian – Campanian (Upper Cretaceous) Chalk: new results from Seaford Head and correlation to eastern Europe" . Cretaceous Research . 178 106215. doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2025.106215 . ^ Hikmahtiar, S. (2025). " Glomospira kaminskii sp. nov., a new agglutinated Foraminifera from the Paleocene of the Scaglia Rossa Formation, Contessa, Italy". Annales Societatis Geologorum Poloniae . 95 (2): 153– 159. doi : 10.14241/asgp.2025.06 . ^ Schlagintweit, F.; Vicedo, V.; Rashidi, K.; Frijia, G.; Consorti, L. (2025). " Gusicella Schlagintweit & Rashidi, 2021 (type species Dictyoconella minima Henson, 1948), Upper Cretaceous Larger Benthic Foraminifer and its species" . Carnets Geol . 25 (14): 283– 305. Bibcode : 2025CarGe..25..283S . doi : 10.2110/carnets.2025.2514 . ^ Falzoni, F.; Rettori, R.; Gale, L.; Mikhalevich, V. I.; Weinmann, A. E.; Parente, M. (2025). "Taxonomy and palaeoecology of the Mesozoic family Duotaxidae Mikhalevich (Foraminifera)" . Papers in Palaeontology . 11 (5) e70032. Bibcode : 2025PPal...1170032F . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70032 . ^ Okuyucu, C.; Boncheva, I.; Sachanski, V.; Saydam-Demiray, D. G.; Göncüoğlu, M. C. (2025). "Development of the Middle Devonian-Mississippian carbonate platform in Zonguldak Terrane (NW Anatolia, Türkiye) with special emphasis on the Devonian-Carboniferous Boundary". Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments . 105 (1): 147– 178. Bibcode : 2025PdPe..105..147O . doi : 10.1007/s12549-025-00650-9 . hdl : 11511/114264 . ^ Krainer, K.; Lucas, S. G.; Vachard, D. (2025). "Mississippian-Lower Pennsylvanian foraminifers from the Sierra Nacimiento and San Pedro Mountains, North-Central New Mexico, USA" . Geobios . 91 : 43– 60. Bibcode : 2025Geobi..91...43K . doi : 10.1016/j.geobios.2024.11.009 . ^ Sheng, Q.; Brenckle, P. L. (2025). " Pseudobiseriella menardensis , a new genus and species of globivalvulinid foraminifer from the Serpukhovian stage (upper Mississippian) of southern Illinois, U.S.A." Journal of Foraminiferal Research . 55 (3): 336– 340. Bibcode : 2025JForR..55..336S . doi : 10.61551/gsjfr.55.3.336 . ^ Barros, I. S.; Haig, D. W.; McCartain, E. (2025). "Upper Triassic (Norian-Rhaetian) variostomatids (Foraminifera), Timor-Leste: systematics, paleoenvironmental, and biostratigraphic implications" . Journal of Foraminiferal Research . 55 (2): 188– 217. doi : 10.61551/gsjfr.55.2.188 . ^ Schlagintweit, F. (2025). " Moncharmontia De Castro, 1967, Fleuryana De Castro et al., 1994 and Solakiana gen. nov.: a special group of benthic foraminifera from Upper Cretaceous shallow-water carbonates". Acta Palaeontologica Romaniae . 21 (2): 29– 33. doi : 10.35463/j.apr.2025.02.04 . ^ Shreif, A.; Obaidalla, N. A.; El-Dawy, M. H.; Boukhary, M. (2025). "Nummulitids from Lower Eocene section at Darb Gaga, Baris Oasis, Western Desert, Egypt: New calibration of Eocene larger foraminiferal biostratigraphic zonation". Journal of African Earth Sciences . 232 105794. Bibcode : 2025JAfES.23205794S . doi : 10.1016/j.jafrearsci.2025.105794 . ^ Faulkner, K.; Lowery, C.; Martindale, R. C.; Simpson, C.; Fraass, A. J. (2025). "Record of Foraminifera test composition throughout the Phanerozoic" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 292 (2044). 20250221. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2025.0221 . PMC 11979970 . PMID 40202068 . ^ Dubicka, Z.; Rakociński, M. (2025). "The first record of Devonian foraminifera from northern Gondwana". Gondwana Research . 151 : 58– 63. doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2025.10.014 . ^ Zhang, S.-H.; Zhao, Y.-Y.; Shi, Y.-K.; Fang, Q.; Wang, X.-D.; Fan, J.-X.; Zhang, Y.-C.; Yuan, D.-X.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, F.-F.; Wu, H.-C.; Erwin, D. H.; Marshall, C. R.; Shen, S.-Z. (2025). "Global cooling drove diversification and warming caused extinction among Carboniferous-Permian fusuline foraminifera" . Science Advances . 11 (25). eadv2549. Bibcode : 2025SciA...11.2549Z . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adv2549 . PMC 12180502 . PMID 40540564 . ^ Li, Z.; Yang, X.; Dal Corso, J.; Wang, F.; Jia, E.; Dai, X.; Yuan, Z.; Chen, X.; Lai, J.; Li, X.; Liu, X.; Jiang, S.; Wang, B.; Wu, K.; Chu, D.; Song, H.; Tian, L.; Song, H. (2025). "No extinction in foraminifera during the Carnian Pluvial Episode (Late Triassic)". Global and Planetary Change . 251 104817. Bibcode : 2025GPC...25104817L . doi : 10.1016/j.gloplacha.2025.104817 . ^ Patra, S.; Kesen, K.; Keller, G.; Adatte, T.; Punekar, J. (2025). "Ecological stability of late Maastrichtian benthic foraminifera amidst Deccan volcanism" . Journal of Palaeogeography . 15 100317. doi : 10.1016/j.jop.2025.100317 . ^ Kaminski, M. A.; Hikmahtiar, S.; Cetean, C. G. (2025). "Post Cretaceous/Paleogene boundary recovery of the deep marine ecosystem recorded by benthic foraminiferal morphogroups" . Acta Palaeontologica Polonica . 70 (4): 641– 648. doi : 10.4202/app.01227.2024 . ^ Sigismondi, S.; Luciani, V.; Alegret, L.; Westerhold, T. (2025). "Evaluating planktic foraminiferal resilience during the Middle Eocene Climatic Optimum (MECO) in the Atlantic Ocean". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 667 112867. Bibcode : 2025PPP...66712867S . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.112867 . ^ Korin, A.; Allam, S.; Prayudi, S.; Zalmout, I. S.; Memesh, A.; Alnajjar, M. I.; Bahameem, A. A.; Kaminski, M. A. (2025). "A systematic review of Paleogene agglutinated foraminifera with internal structures (subfamily Pavonitininae) from the Eocene of northwestern Saudi Arabia" . Annales Societatis Geologorum Poloniae . 95 (2): 141– 152. doi : 10.14241/asgp.2025.10 . ^ Koorapati, R. K.; Moon, B. C.; Cotton, L. J. (2025). "Morphological trends in reticulate Nummulites across the Eocene–Oligocene transition" . Palaeontology . 68 (2). e70003. Bibcode : 2025Palgy..6870003K . doi : 10.1111/pala.70003 . ^ Dowsett, H.; Robinson, M.; Foley, K.; Spivey, W. (2025). "The conundrum of taxonomic uniformitarianism in planktic foraminifera" . Palaeontology . 68 (4) e70018. Bibcode : 2025Palgy..6870018D . doi : 10.1111/pala.70018 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Esteves, C. J. P.; McLaughlin, P.; Velleman, J.; De Backer, T.; De Weirdt, J.; Miller, M.; Vandenbroucke, T. (2025). "A diverse chitinozoan record from the Upper Ordovician (Katian) of the Cincinnati region (Kentucky, USA)" . Journal of Paleontology : 1– 37. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10133 . ^ Wu, S.; Liang, Y.; Lu, J. (2025). "Early Devonian chitinozoans from the Nahkaoling Formation in Lingli, Guangxi, South China" . Acta Micropalaeontologica Sinica . 42 (2): 99– 117. doi : 10.16087/j.cnki.1000-0674.20250407.001 . ^ a b c d e Jonckheere, F. M. R.; Klock, C.; Desrochers, A.; Daoust, P.; Vandenbroucke, T. R. A. (2025). "Refining chitinozoan biostratigraphy through the early and late Aeronian biogeochemical events on Anticosti Island, Quebec, eastern Canada" . Journal of Micropalaeontology . 44 (2): 319– 344. Bibcode : 2025JMicP..44..319J . doi : 10.5194/jm-44-319-2025 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Ghavidel-Syooki, M. (2025). "The biostratigraphy and palaeogeography of acritarchs, chitinozoans, and cryptospores from the Upper Ordovician Ghelli Formation, Khoshyeilagh region, southern Caspian Sea, Alborz Mountains, northern Iran". Palynology . 49 (3) 2475253. Bibcode : 2025Paly...4975253G . doi : 10.1080/01916122.2025.2475253 . ^ a b c Ouyang, Q.; Zhou, C.; Xiao, S.; Wu, C.; Chen, Z.; Lang, X.; Shi, H.; Sun, Y. (2025). "Silicified microfossils from the Ediacaran Doushantuo Formation along a shelf margin-slope-basin transect in Hunan Province, South China, with stratigraphical implications" . Journal of Paleontology . 98 (Supplement S95): 1– 79. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2023.92 . ^ Green, T.; Pedder, B. E.; Williams, M.; Wong Hearing, T. W.; Olschewski, P.; Lunt, D. J.; Servais, T.; Harvey, T. H. P. (2025). " Corollasphaeridium : A cryptic record of Cambrian loricate protists". Palynology . 49 (4) 2494808. Bibcode : 2025Paly...4994808G . doi : 10.1080/01916122.2025.2494808 . ^ Zhao, Mingsheng; Zhang, Yupeng; Tang, Feng; Li, Yulan; Li, Ming; Zhong, Ling; Ren, Liudong (2025). "Enigmatic discoidal macrofossils with central ring from the Ediacaran Jiangchuan biota, Southwest China" . Papers in Palaeontology . 11 (2) e70005. Bibcode : 2025PPal...11E0005Z . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70005 . ISSN 2056-2802 . ^ a b Camina, S. C.; Rubinstein, C. V.; Butcher, A.; García Muro, V. J.; Vergani, G.; Pereira, M. (2025). "Middle Devonian chitinozoan assemblages of northwestern Argentina and southern Bolivia: New biostratigraphic and palaeogeographical insights". Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology . 343 105413. Bibcode : 2025RPaPa.34305413C . doi : 10.1016/j.revpalbo.2025.105413 . ^ Pasinetti, G.; Menon, L.; Chida, N.; Olschewski, P.; McKean, C.; Pérez-Pinedo, D.; Taylor, R. S.; McIlroy, D. (2025). "The macrofossil Lydonia jiggamintia gen. et sp. nov. from the Ediacaran of Newfoundland (Canada): From pseudofossil to metazoan-grade organism" . Palaeontologia Electronica . 28 (3) 28.3.a39. doi : 10.26879/1386 . ^ Rodriguez Dzul, E.; Loron, C. C.; Agić, H.; Donaldson, S.; Knoll, P.; McMahon, S. (2025). "Diversity of organic-walled microfossils in the phosphates of the ca. 1-Ga Diabaig Formation, Torridon Group, NW Scotland" . Journal of Paleontology . 99 (4): 761– 783. Bibcode : 2025JPal...99..761R . doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10119 . ^ Wu, X.-J.; Song, J.-Q.; Luo, J.; Liu, Y.; Aitchison, J. C.; Wang, Y.-J.; Yan, K.; Chen, Z.-Y.; Chen, D.; Zhang, Y.-D. (2025). "Darriwilian radiolarians from slope facies sediments, Ordos Basin, North China and their paleoecological and paleogeographical implications". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 665 112818. Bibcode : 2025PPP...66512818W . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.112818 . ^ a b Xiao, S.; Liu, L.; Zheng, J.; Wang, R. (2025). "The calcified cyanobacteria from the Cambrian Series 2–Miaolingian, North China Plate" . Acta Micropalaeontologica Sinica . 42 (3): 234– 257. doi : 10.16087/j.cnki.1000-0674.20250924.001 . ^ a b Razumkova, E. S. (2025). "Two new genera and species of acritarchs from the Albian–Cenomanian of southwest Western Siberia". Russian Geology and Geophysics . 66 (8): 965– 972. doi : 10.2113/RGG20254841 . ^ Vishnevskaya, V. S. (2025). "A New Genus and New Species of Early Cretaceous Radiolarian of the Family Echinocampidae from Western Siberia and the Volga River Basin". Paleontological Journal . 59 (3): 260– 270. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59..260V . doi : 10.1134/s0031030125600210 . ^ Guinet, B.; Oskolkov, N.; Moreland, K.; Dehasque, M.; Chacón-Duque, J. C.; Angerbjörn, A.; Arsuaga, J. L.; Danilov, G.; Kanellidou, F.; Kitchener, A. C.; Muller, H.; Plotnikov, V.; Protopopov, A.; Tikhonov, A.; Termes, L.; Zazula, G.; Mortensen, P.; Grigorieva, L.; Richards, M.; Shapiro, B.; Lister, A. M.; Vartanyan, S.; Díez-del-Molino, D.; Götherström, A.; Pečnerová, P.; Nikolskiy, P.; Dalén, L.; van der Valk, T. (2025). "Ancient host-associated microbes obtained from mammoth remains". Cell . 188 (23): 6606–6619.e24. doi : 10.1016/j.cell.2025.08.003 . PMID 40902595 . ^ Porter, S. M.; Riedman, L. A.; Woltz, C. R.; Gold, D. A.; Kellogg, J. B. (2025). "Early eukaryote diversity: a review and a reinterpretation" . Paleobiology . 51 (1): 132– 149. Bibcode : 2025Pbio...51..132P . doi : 10.1017/pab.2024.33 . ^ Javaux, E. J. (2025). "A diverse Palaeoproterozoic microbial ecosystem implies early eukaryogenesis" . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 380 (1931) 20240092. doi : 10.1098/rstb.2024.0092 . PMC 12329461 . PMID 40770989 . ^ Saint Martin, J.-P.; Charbonnier, S.; Saint Martin, S.; Cazes, L.; André, J.-P. (2025). "New records of Palaeopaschichnus Palij, 1976 from the Ediacaran of Romania" . Geodiversitas . 47 (1): 1– 16. doi : 10.5252/geodiversitas2025v47a1 . ^ Moore, K. R.; Dawson, J.; Nelson, L. L.; Smith, E. F.; Pruss, S. B. (2025). "Tubular microfossils from Neoproterozoic cap limestone of the Dzhetym Group, Kyrgyzstan". Precambrian Research . 427 107873. Bibcode : 2025PreR..42707873K . doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2025.107873 . ^ Chen, K.; Yang, A.; Bouougri, E. H.; Zhao, F.; Hu, C.; Pan, B.; Yang, C.; Chen, B.; He, T.; Sun, X.; Xiong, Y.; Zhu, M. (2025). "Late Ediacaran vendotaenid fossils from North Gondwana margin (Anti-Atlas, Morocco): Spatiotemporal distribution and stratigraphic significance". Precambrian Research . 427 107882. Bibcode : 2025PreR..42707882C . doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2025.107882 . ^ Kolesnikov, A. V.; Pan'kova, V. A.; Pan'kov, V. N. (2025). "A new occurrence of Ediacara soft-bodied biota in the Central Urals, Russia". Gondwana Research . 145 : 71– 78. Bibcode : 2025GondR.145...71K . doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2025.05.008 . ^ Lonsdale, M. C.; Moore, K. R.; Webb, L. C.; Schildbach, M.; Livi, K. J. T.; Smith, E. F. (2025). "Ribbon-like compression fossils from the late Ediacaran Esmeralda Member of the Deep Spring Formation at Mount Dunfee, Nevada, USA". PALAIOS . 40 (5): 131– 140. Bibcode : 2025Palai..40..131L . doi : 10.2110/palo.2024.027 . ^ Tingle, K. E.; Anderson, R. P.; Kelley, N. P.; Darroch, S. A. F. (2025). "Sustained shift in the morphology of organic-walled microfossils over the Ediacaran–Cambrian transition" . Royal Society Open Science . 12 (6). 241966. Bibcode : 2025RSOS...1241966T . doi : 10.1098/rsos.241966 . PMC 12151609 . PMID 40503259 . ^ Xiao, Y.; Wang, K.; He, W.; Suzuki, N.; Yang, T.; Stubbs, T. L.; Benton, M. J.; Song, H. (2025). "No consistent size responses in radiolarians to the climatic changes and mass extinctions during the Paleozoic-Mesozoic transition" . Current Biology . 35 (15): 3710–3722.e3. Bibcode : 2025CBio...35.3710X . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2025.06.057 . PMID 40706595 . ^ Zheng, J.; Jin, X.; Huang, H.; Yan, Z. (2025). "Died out at the end of Permian or extended into the Triassic? – The tale of the albaillellarians (radiolarians) and detrital zircons of the Nanpihe bridge section in the Changning-Menglian belt, Western Yunnan, China". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 673 112988. Bibcode : 2025PPP...67312988Z . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.112988 . ^ Erba, E.; Bottini, C.; Jiang, D. Y.; Motani, R.; Tintori, A.; Faucher, G. (2025). "Early Triassic origin of coccolithogenesis" . Rivista Italiana di Paleontologia e Stratigrafia . 131 (2): 441– 455. Bibcode : 2025RIPS..13129160B . doi : 10.54103/2039-4942/29160 . ^ Slater, S. M.; Demangel, I.; Richoz, S. (2025). " 'Ghost' fossils of early coccolithophores point to a Triassic diversification of marine calcifying organisms" . Nature Communications . 16 (1) 9283. Bibcode : 2025NatCo..16.9283S . doi : 10.1038/s41467-025-65116-0 . PMC 12537907 . PMID 41115954 . ^ Jones, H. L.; Niederbockstruck, B.; Westerhold, T.; Röhl, U. (2025). "Palaeoecological change preceded the Palaeocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum by 200 kyr in the high latitude south-west Pacific Ocean" . Communications Earth & Environment . 6 (1) 746. Bibcode : 2025ComEE...6..746J . doi : 10.1038/s43247-025-02749-5 . ^ Vodička, J.; Botting, J. P.; Muir, L. A.; Fatka, O. (2025). " In situ chains of Margachitina margaritana (Eisenack, 1938): a third chitinozoan egg-laying strategy". Bulletin of Geosciences . 100 (4): 677– 684. doi : 10.3140/bull.geosci.1944 . ^ Wong, M. L.; Prabhu, A.; Alexander, C. O'D.; Cleaves, H. J.; Cody, G. D.; Hystad, G.; Bermanec, M.; Bleeker, W.; Boyce, C. K.; Corpolongo, A.; Czaja, A. D.; Das, S.; Gaines, R. R.; Gregory, D. D.; Jaszczak, J. A.; Javaux, E. J.; Jodder, J.; Knoll, A. H.; Van Kranendonk, M.; Maloney, K. M.; Noffke, N.; Rainbird, R.; Slaughter, E.; Stüeken, E. E.; Summons, R. E.; Westall, F.; Wiemann, J.; Xiao, S.; Hazen, R. M. (2025). "Organic geochemical evidence for life in Archean rocks identified by pyrolysis–GC–MS and supervised machine learning" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (47) e2514534122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12214534W . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2514534122 . PMC 12663951 . PMID 41248278 . ^ Patry, L. A.; Bonnand, P.; Boyet, M.; Afroz, M.; Wilmeth, D. T.; Ramsay, B.; Nonnotte, P.; Homann, M.; Sansjofre, P.; Fralick, P. W.; Lalonde, S. V. (2025). "Dating the evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis using La-Ce geochronology" . Nature . 642 (8066): 99– 104. Bibcode : 2025Natur.642...99P . doi : 10.1038/s41586-025-09009-8 . PMID 40437084 . ^ Choudhuri, A.; Plummer, P. S.; Ghnahalla, M.; El Albani, A.; Sarkar, S.; Bouougri, E. H.; Reisberg, L.; Kumar, A.; Bose, T. (2025). "New trail-like features associated with microbial mats from the early Neoproterozoic Sirbu Shale Member (Upper Vindhyan Group), Vindhyan Basin, central India". Australian Journal of Earth Sciences . 73 : 132– 153. doi : 10.1080/08120099.2025.2586733 . ^ Mills, D. B.; Vuillemin, A.; Muschler, K.; Coskun, Ö. K.; Orsi, W. D. (2025). "The Rise of Algae promoted eukaryote predation in the Neoproterozoic benthos" . Science Advances . 11 (8). eadt2147. Bibcode : 2025SciA...11.2147M . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adt2147 . PMC 11838005 . PMID 39970204 . ^ Mitchell, E. G.; Stephenson, N. P.; Buma-at, P. A.; Roberts, L.; Dennis, S.; Kenchington, C. G. (2025). "Variation of population and community ecology over large spatial scales in Ediacaran early animal communities" . Global and Planetary Change . 251 104818. Bibcode : 2025GPC...25104818M . doi : 10.1016/j.gloplacha.2025.104818 . ^ Azizi, A.; Vinn, O.; El Bakhouch, A.; Kirsimäe, K.; Hafid, A.; El Hariri, K. (2025). "The Adoudou Biota: A new window on the Ediacaran-Cambrian transition from the western Anti-Atlas, Morocco". Precambrian Research . 427 107885. Bibcode : 2025PreR..42707885A . doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2025.107885 . ^ Chen, Z.; Liu, Y. (2025). "Advent of three-dimensional sediment exploration reveals Ediacaran-Cambrian ecosystem transition" . Science Advances . 11 (44) eadx9449. Bibcode : 2025SciA...11.9449C . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adx9449 . PMC 12571085 . PMID 41160697 . ^ Hou, J.; Wang, X.; Hou, Z.; Ramezani, J.; Tang, Q.; Shen, S. (2025). "The terminal Ediacaran Tongshan Lagerstätte from South China" . Nature Communications . 16 (1) 10161. Bibcode : 2025NatCo..1610161H . doi : 10.1038/s41467-025-65176-2 . PMC 12630636 . PMID 41258088 . ^ Majeed, K. U.; Mughal, M. S.; Tan, X.-J.; Criniti, S.; Civitelli, M.; Siddique, K.; Tirmazi, S. Z. S.; Baig, M. S.; Critelli, S. (2025). "Petrological and stratigraphical investigations of newly discovered phosphatic microfossils from the Sirban Formation, Hazara Basin, North Pakistan: Unveiling the Late Sinian to Middle Cambrian ecosystem" . Journal of Palaeogeography . 14 (4) 100288. Bibcode : 2025JPalG..1400288M . doi : 10.1016/j.jop.2025.100288 . ^ Hammarlund, E. U.; Bukkuri, A.; Norling, M. D.; Islam, M.; Posth, N. R.; Baratchart, E.; Carroll, C.; Amend, S. R.; Gatenby, R. A.; Pienta, K. J.; Brown, J. S.; Peters, S. E.; Hancke, K. (2025). "Benthic diel oxygen variability and stress as potential drivers for animal diversification in the Neoproterozoic-Palaeozoic" . Nature Communications . 16 (1). 2223. Bibcode : 2025NatCo..16.2223H . doi : 10.1038/s41467-025-57345-0 . PMC 11928486 . PMID 40118825 . ^ Mitchell, E. G.; Pates, S. (2025). "From organisms to biodiversity: the ecology of the Ediacaran/Cambrian transition" . Paleobiology . 51 (1): 150– 173. Bibcode : 2025Pbio...51..150M . doi : 10.1017/pab.2024.21 . ^ Luo, C.; Zhu, M. (2025). "Chert Lagerstätten as a new window to the biological revolution across the Ediacaran−Cambrian boundary". Geology . 53 (5): 467– 472. Bibcode : 2025Geo....53..467L . doi : 10.1130/G52956.1 . ^ Wang, Z.; Mangano, M. G.; Buatois, L. A.; Hang, N. (2025). "Smoothness analyses of trace fossils: expanding quantitative toolkits to unravel bilaterian movement ecology during the Ediacaran–Cambrian transition" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 292 (2050) 20250889. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2025.0889 . PMC 12308321 . PMID 40628487 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: PMC embargo expired ( link ) ^ Wood, R. A.; Droser, M. L. (2025). "The evolution of reproduction in Ediacaran–Cambrian metazoans" . Biological Reviews . 100 (5) brv.70036. doi : 10.1111/brv.70036 . PMC 12407042 . PMID 40374304 . ^ Reijenga, B. R.; Close, R. A. (2025). "Apparent timescaling of fossil diversification rates is caused by sampling bias" . Current Biology . 35 (4): 905–910.e3. Bibcode : 2025CBio...35..905R . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2024.12.038 . PMID 39855206 . ^ Benson, R. B. J.; Close, R. A.; Antell, G. T.; Whittaker, R. J.; Valdes, P.; Farnsworth, A.; Lunt, D. J.; Shen, S.; Fan, J.; Saupe, E. E. (2025). "Marine animal diversity across latitudinal and temperature gradients during the Phanerozoic" . Palaeontology . 68 (3). e70006. Bibcode : 2025Palgy..6870006B . doi : 10.1111/pala.70006 . ^ Singh, P.; Ferré, J.; Thrasher, B.; Monarrez, P. M.; Al-Ramadan, K.; Cantrell, D. L.; Lehrmann, D. J.; Morsilli, M.; Payne, J. L. (2025). "Macroevolutionary coupling of marine biomass and biodiversity across the Phanerozoic". Current Biology . 35 (15): 3543–3555.e3. Bibcode : 2025CBio...35.3543S . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2025.06.006 . PMID 40570849 . ^ Balembois, A.; Pohl, A.; Lefebvre, B.; Servais, T.; Lunt, D. J.; Valdes, P. J.; Beaugrand, G. (2025). "Unravelling the drivers of marine biodiversity across the Phanerozoic" . Nature Communications . 16 (1) 8498. Bibcode : 2025NatCo..16.8498B . doi : 10.1038/s41467-025-63428-9 . PMC 12475154 . PMID 41006242 . ^ Close, R. A.; Benson, R. B. J.; Kiessling, W.; Saupe, E. E. (2025). "Reefal regions were biodiversity hotspots throughout the Phanerozoic" . Science Advances . 11 (45) eadv9793. Bibcode : 2025SciA...11v9793C . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adv9793 . PMC 12588287 . PMID 41191763 . ^ Vinn, O.; Zapalski, M. K.; Wilson, M. A. (2025). "Evolutionary paleoecology of macroscopic symbiotic endobionts in Phanerozoic corals". Earth-Science Reviews . 263 105071. Bibcode : 2025ESRv..26305071V . doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2025.105071 . ^ Maletz, J.; Zhu, X.-J.; Zhang, Y.-D.; Gutiérrez-Marco, J. C. (2025). "The identification of 'feather-like' fossils in the Palaeozoic: Algae, hydroids, or graptolites?" . Palaeoworld . 34 (4) 200909. Bibcode : 2025Palae..3400909M . doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2025.200909 . ^ White, C. E.; Jensen, S.; Barr, S. M. (2025). "The High Head Member (Church Point Formation, Goldenville Group, Meguma terrane, Nova Scotia) revisited: new information on relevance for early deep-water colonization" . Journal of Iberian Geology . 51 (3): 463– 480. Bibcode : 2025JIbG...51..463W . doi : 10.1007/s41513-025-00314-9 . ^ Pruss, S. B.; Smith, E. F.; Zhuravlev, A. Yu.; Nolan, R. Z.; McGann, T. C. (2025). "Rise and fall of archaeocyath reefs shaped early Cambrian skeletal animal abundance". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 667 112852. Bibcode : 2025PPP...66712852P . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.112852 . ^ Peel, J. S. (2025). "Fauna of the Sæterdal Formation (Cambrian Series 2, Stage 4) of North Greenland (Laurentia)" . Bulletin of the Geological Society of Denmark . 74 : 1– 13. Bibcode : 2025BuGSD..74....1P . doi : 10.37570/bgsd-2025-74-01 . ^ Mussini, G.; Butterfield, N. J. (2025). "A microscopic Burgess Shale: small carbonaceous fossils from a deeper water biota and the distribution of Cambrian non-mineralized faunas" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 292 (2041). 20242948. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2024.2948 . PMC 11836709 . PMID 39968618 . ^ Murphy, A.; Penny, A.; Zhuravlev, A.; Wood, R. (2025). "Changes in metazoan functional diversity across the Cambrian Radiation and the first Phanerozoic mass extinction: the Cambrian Sinsk Event" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 292 (2053) 20250968. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2025.0968 . PMC 12364573 . PMID 40829661 . ^ Zhang, P.; Ma, W.; Liu, J.; Ou, X.; Su, Z.; Yang, Y. (2025). "Community composition and ecospace occupation of the Cambrian Kaili Biota in Danzhai County, Guizhou Province" . Acta Palaeontologica Sinica . 64 (2): 211– 225. doi : 10.19800/j.cnki.aps.2025004 . ^ Yang, B.; Zong, R.; Xia, H.; Zhang, X.; Li, W.; Sun, S. (2025). "New occurrence of the Guanshan Biota (Cambrian, Stage 4) in the Malong-Yiliang area, eastern Yunnan, South China". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology . 38 (4): 932– 942. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2539302 . ^ Mussini, G.; Veenma, Y. P.; Butterfield, N. J. (2025). "A peritidal Burgess-Shale-type fauna from the middle Cambrian of western Canada" . Palaeontology . 68 (1). e70001. Bibcode : 2025Palgy..6870001M . doi : 10.1111/pala.70001 . ^ Betts, M. J.; Smith, P. M.; Paterson, J. R.; Mervine, E. M.; Stirling, D. A.; Holmes, J. D. (2025). "Biostratigraphy and correlation of the Cambrian Series 2 (Stage 4) to Miaolingian (Wuliuan) Thorntonia Limestone, south-eastern Georgina Basin (Queensland, Australia)" . Papers in Palaeontology . 11 (5) e70028. Bibcode : 2025PPal...1170028B . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70028 . ^ Mussini, G.; Butterfield, N. J. (2025). "Two exceptionally preserved biotas from North Dakota reveal cryptic Ordovician shelf ecologies" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (46) e2520246122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12220246M . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2520246122 . PMC 12646318 . PMID 41183220 . ^ Jeon, J.; Li, Q.-J.; Lee, J.-H. (2025). "Preservation bias obscures gradual Ordovician reef evolution" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (27). e2511406122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12211406J . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2511406122 . PMC 12260552 . PMID 40587789 . ^ Seo, M.-J.; Cho, S. H.; Choh, S.-J. (2025). "Delayed onset of the Great Ordovician Biodiversification Event: insights from Middle Ordovician carbonate succession in South Korea". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 681 113339. doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113339 . ^ Elicki, O. (2025). "New Ordovician fossils (bivalves, trilobites, brachiopods) from southern Jordan and re-evaluation of the regional Ordovician body fossil record" . Bulletin of Geosciences . 100 (4): 383– 406. doi : 10.3140/bull.geosci.1933 . ^ Vinn, O.; Liang, K.; Isakar, M.; Alkahtane, A. A.; Al Farraj, S.; El Hedeny, M. (2025). "The evolutionary innovation of coral colonization on motile gastropod shells arose shortly after the Great Ordovician Biodiversification Event in Baltica". PALAIOS . 40 (2): 62– 69. Bibcode : 2025Palai..40...62V . doi : 10.2110/palo.2024.010 . ^ Vinn, O.; Wilson, M. A.; De Baets, K.; Bicknell, R.; Toom, U. (2025). "Parasitic infestation in a Middle Ordovician Illaenus (Trilobita)" . Journal of Paleontology . 99 (6): 1363– 1368. Bibcode : 2025JPal...99.1363V . doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10190 . ^ Liu, Y.; Tu, D.; Fan, R.; Xu, Q.; Hu, X.; Zong, R.; Gong, Y. (2025). "Fuping Fauna: A deep-water fauna in the prime of the Great Ordovician Biodiversification Event". Geology . 53 (9): 795– 800. doi : 10.1130/G53475.1 . ^ Buatois, L. A.; Mángano, M. G.; Paz, M.; Minter, N. J.; Zhou, K. (2025). "Early colonization of the deep-sea bottom—The protracted build-up of an ecosystem" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (8). e2414752122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12214752B . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2414752122 . PMC 11874251 . PMID 39928853 . ^ Vinn, O.; Almansour, M. I.; Al Farraj, S.; El Hedeny, M. (2025). "Symbiotic endobionts in tabulate corals from the Late Ordovician and Silurian of Estonia". GFF . 146 ( 1– 2): 15– 20. doi : 10.1080/11035897.2024.2391283 . ^ Zhu, M.; Liu, L.; Wu, Y.; Jia, L. (2025). "Insights into reef evolution: the first sphinctozoan-dominated reef facies from the lower Katian (Upper Ordovician) of the Tarim Basin, China". Papers in Palaeontology . 11 (5) e70040. Bibcode : 2025PPal...1170040Z . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70040 . ^ Little, S. A.; Brett, C. E. (2025). "A detailed view of Late Ordovician (Richmondian) invader and incumbent faunas within the Cincinnati Arch". PALAIOS . 40 (9): 258– 271. Bibcode : 2025Palai..40..258L . doi : 10.2110/palo.2024.008 . ^ Yuan, Z.; Wang, J.; Wang, H.; Liu, L.; Qie, W.; Huang, P. (2025). "Early land plant evolution facilitated marine animal dispersal: Insights from the Late Ordovician–Early Devonian microconchids". Earth-Science Reviews . 272 105325. doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2025.105325 . ^ Zhang, Z.; Yang, C.; Sahy, D.; Zhan, R.-B.; Wu, R.-C.; Li, Y.; Deng, Y.; Huang, B.; Condon, D. J.; Rong, J.; Li, X.-H. (2025). "Tempo of the Late Ordovician mass extinction controlled by the rate of climate change" . Science Advances . 11 (22). eadv6788. Bibcode : 2025SciA...11.6788Z . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adv6788 . PMC 12124363 . PMID 40446039 . ^ Zhang, Y.; He, Z.; Lu, S.; Xiao, D.; Chen, G. (2025). "Rapid biotic recovery coupling with progressive oceanic oxygenation following Late Ordovician mass extinction". Global and Planetary Change . 257 105199. doi : 10.1016/j.gloplacha.2025.105199 . ^ Browning, C.; Gabbott, S. E.; Mángano, M. G.; Buatois, L. A.; El Albani, A.; Mazurier, A.; Bordy, E. M. (2025). "Marine snow fuels an opportunistic small food web in the Late Ordovician Soom Shale Lagerstätte". Nature Ecology & Evolution . 10 (1): 34– 43. doi : 10.1038/s41559-025-02923-0 . PMID 41429957 . ^ Zong, R.; Liu, Y.; Liu, Q.; Ma, J.; Liu, S. (2025). "A new exceptionally preserved fauna from a lowest Silurian black shale: Insights into the recovery of deep-water ecosystems after the Late Ordovician mass extinction" . Geology . 53 (4): 291– 295. Bibcode : 2025Geo....53..291Z . doi : 10.1130/G53042.1 . ^ Strossová, Z.; Corradini, C.; Corriga, M. G. (2025). "The first documented co-occurrence of conodonts and graptolites in Silurian (Telychian) black shales of the Prague Synform, Czech Republic, and its stratigraphical and palaeoecological significance" . Swiss Journal of Palaeontology . 144 (1) 79. Bibcode : 2025SwJP..144...79S . doi : 10.1186/s13358-025-00416-y . ^ Zatoń, M.; Gorzelak, P.; Berkowski, B.; Zapalski, M. K.; Jakubowicz, M.; Salamon, M. A.; Kershaw, S.; Król, J. J.; Majchrzyk, A. (2025). "Lower Devonian crinoid pluricolumnals from Morocco are severely infested by sclerobionts: Evidence for a parasitic outbreak on the shelf of northern Gondwana" . Gondwana Research . 148 : 13– 26. Bibcode : 2025GondR.148...13Z . doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2025.06.024 . ^ Zapalski, M. K.; Berkowski, B.; Skompski, S.; Pickett, J. W.; Young, G. C. (2025). "Ancient depths: Unprecedented completeness of mesophotic fish-coral ecosystem from the Devonian of Eastern Gondwana" . Gondwana Research . doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2025.03.006 . ^ Brett, C. E.; Ivany, L. C.; Zambito, J. J.; Welych-Flanagan, M.; Baird, G. C. (2025). "Stasis and faunal overturn in ancient marine communities: punctuation and evolution on the periphery" . Paleobiology . 51 (4): 777– 798. Bibcode : 2025Pbio...51..777B . doi : 10.1017/pab.2025.10052 . ^ Kondas, M.; Camina, S. C.; Filipiak, P.; Tonarová, P. (2025). "Non-pollen palynomorphs from the Devonian (Givetian/Frasnian) of south-central Poland" . Comptes Rendus Palevol . 24 (22): 425– 447. doi : 10.5852/cr-palevol2025v24a22 . ^ Dworczak, P. G.; Szrek, P.; Wilk, O. (2025). "Bioerosion in the Late Devonian placoderm remains from the Holy Cross Mountains, Poland" . Acta Palaeontologica Polonica . 70 (4): 629– 639. doi : 10.4202/app.01220.2024 . ^ Newman, K. M.; Bush, A. M. (2025). "Potential commensalism between a crinoid and hexactinellid sponge from the Upper Devonian of Pennsylvania, U.S.A.". PALAIOS . 40 (11): 303– 310. Bibcode : 2025Palai..40..303N . doi : 10.2110/palo.2025.022 . ^ Zhang, X.; Li, T.; Yin, J.; Huang, J.; Sun, Y.; Qie, W. (2025). "How microbes replaced metazoans in reef ecosystem during the Late Devonian mass extinction: new insights from platform facies in South China" . Lethaia . 58 (4): 1– 22. doi : 10.18261/let.58.4.3 . ^ Otoo, B. K. A. (2025). "Prospects for studying continentalization and the origin of terrestrial ecosystems during the late Paleozoic" . Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution . 13 1606225. Bibcode : 2025FrEEv..1306225O . doi : 10.3389/fevo.2025.1606225 . ^ Berks, H. O.; Milla Carmona, P. S.; Donoghue, P. C. J.; Rayfield, E. J. (2025). "The evolution of herbivory, not terrestrialisation, drove morphological change in the mandibles of Palaeozoic tetrapods" . Evolutionary Journal of the Linnean Society . 4 kzaf004. doi : 10.1093/evolinnean/kzaf004 . ^ Anderson, P. S. L.; Friedman, M.; Ruta, M. (2013). "Late to the Table: Diversification of Tetrapod Mandibular Biomechanics Lagged Behind the Evolution of Terrestriality". Integrative and Comparative Biology . 53 (2): 197– 208. doi : 10.1093/icb/ict006 . PMID 23526337 . ^ Ponstein, J.; MacDougall, M. J.; Schaeffer, J.; Kammerer, C. F.; Fröbisch, J. (2025). "Mandibular form and function is more disparate in amniotes than in non-amniote tetrapods from the late Palaeozoic" . PeerJ . 13 e20243. doi : 10.7717/peerj.20243 . PMC 12664332 . PMID 41321945 . ^ Davydov, V. I.; Lucas, S. G.; Karasev, E. V.; Mamadzhanov, Y.; Schmitz, M. D. (2025). "Late Paleozoic tetrapods in eastern Pangaea: when and how did they get there?". Earth-Science Reviews . 273 105344. doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2025.105344 . ^ Lucas, S. G.; Mansky, C. F. (2025). "Early Mississippian ichnofossils from Blue Beach (Nova Scotia, Canada), and the origin and early evolution of tetrapods" . New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin . 99 : 1– 221. ^ Bronson, A.; Pradel, A.; Gueriau, P.; Landman, N.; Mapes, R.; Otoo, B.; Maisey, J. G. (2025). "Vertebrate assemblage and depositional environment of the Fayetteville Shale (Upper Mississippian, middle Chesterian)" . Geobios . 94 : 1– 18. doi : 10.1016/j.geobios.2025.11.002 . ^ Voight, S.; Moisan, P.; Sánchez, G.; Vargas, E.; Olivares, H. (2025). "Tetrapod tracks and other trace fossils from the Chinches Formation (Andean Precordillera, northern Chile): indication for Pennsylvanian age and glacial influence". Journal of South American Earth Sciences . 167 105804. Bibcode : 2025JSAES.16705804V . doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2025.105804 . ^ Wang, Y.; Hu, K.; Ye, X.; Wang, X. (2025). "The Middle–Late Pennsylvanian event: Timing and mechanisms". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 667 112893. Bibcode : 2025PPP...66712893W . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.112893 . ^ Bicknell, R. D. C.; Kimmig, J.; Young, A.; Lauer, B.; Lauer, R.; McCoy, V. E. (2025). "Mazon Creek bromalites evidence a specialized, xiphosurid-rich diet for Pennsylvanian predators". PALAIOS . 40 (8): 215– 221. Bibcode : 2025Palai..40..215B . doi : 10.2110/palo.2025.013 . ^ de Barros, G. E. B.; do Carmo, D. A.; de Andrade, L. S.; Assine, M. L.; Sedorko, D. (2025). "Expanding the ichnological record of the Late Paleozoic Ice Age: Evidence from the Santa Fé Group, São Francisco Basin (Brazil)". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 680 113337. Bibcode : 2025PPP...68013337D . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113337 . ^ Rossignol, C.; Logghe, A.; Luccisano, V.; Shi, X.; Cogné, N.; Poujol, M.; Pradel, A.; Bourquin, S.; Pillola, G. L.; Botella, H.; Cocco, F.; Loi, A.; Fois, D.; Stara, P.; Sanciu, L. (2025). "New age constraints for the Perdasdefogu Basin, Italy: implications for vertebrate paleobiogeography during the early Permian" . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 675 113085. Bibcode : 2025PPP...67513085R . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113085 . ^ Sadlok, G. (2025). "Tetrapod origins of small burrows from the Permian of Southwest Poland?" . Lethaia . 58 (1): 1– 15. Bibcode : 2025Letha..58..1.5S . doi : 10.18261/let.58.1.5 . ^ Andrade-Silva, M.; Francischini, H. (2025). "Revisiting the tetrapod ichnofauna of the Rio do Rasto Formation (middle-upper Permian), southern Brazil". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 17. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2557942 . ^ Catafesta, L. P.; Dentzien-Dias, P.; Calaça, F. J. S.; Dias, E. V.; Łaska, W.; De Baets, K.; Francischini, H. (2025). "Paleoecological insights from coprolites and their inclusions from the Permian Rio do Rasto Formation, Brazil". Palaeoworld . 35 (2) 201060. doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2025.201060 . ^ Wang, F.; Finnegan, S.; Dal Corso, J.; Ye, F.; Wu, Y.; Chen, J.; Jiang, S.; Tian, L.; Dai, X.; Chu, D.; Song, H.; Tong, J.; Song, H. (2025). "Brachiopods and forams reduced calcification costs through morphological simplification during mass extinction events". Nature Ecology & Evolution . 9 (8): 1456– 1468. Bibcode : 2025NatEE...9.1456W . doi : 10.1038/s41559-025-02749-w . PMID 40537546 . ^ Qiao, D.; Shi, Z.; Wang, J.; Wu, K.; Peng, S.; Benton, M. J. (2025). "Earliest Triassic microbial mounds indicate an 'oasis' for recovery of life following the end-Permian extinction" . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 677 113216. Bibcode : 2025PPP...67713216Q . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113216 . ^ Guo, W.; Tian, L.; Chu, D.; Shu, W.; Benton, M. J.; Liu, J.; Tong, J. (2025). "Rapid riparian ecosystem recovery in low-latitudinal North China following the end-Permian mass extinction" . eLife . 14 RP104205. doi : 10.7554/eLife.104205 . PMC 13183373 . PMID 42148728 . ^ Scharling, T. H.; Roberts, A. J.; Foffa, D.; Engelschiøn, V. S.; Hurum, J. H. (2025). "Dental and Dietary Disparity Among Marine Vertebrates from the Early Triassic (Spathian) of Svalbard – Life Bites the Dust, or A New Hope?". Norwegian Journal of Geology . 105 (1) 202504. doi : 10.17850/njg105-1-4 . ^ Roberts, A. J.; Rucinski, M.; Kear, B. P.; Hammer, Ø.; Engelschiøn, V. S.; Scharling, T. H.; Larsen, R. B.; Hurum, J. H. (2025). "Earliest oceanic tetrapod ecosystem reveals rapid complexification of Triassic marine communities" . Science . 390 (6774): 722– 727. Bibcode : 2025Sci...390..722R . doi : 10.1126/science.adx7390 . PMID 41232005 . ^ Mujal, E.; Sues, H.-D.; Moreno, R.; Schaeffer, J.; Sobral, G.; Chakravorti, S.; Spiekman, S. N. F.; Schoch, R. R. (2025). "Triassic terrestrial tetrapod faunas of the Central European Basin, their stratigraphical distribution, and their palaeoenvironments" . Earth-Science Reviews . 264 105085. Bibcode : 2025ESRv..26405085M . doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2025.105085 . ^ Riccetto, M.; Mujal, E.; Bolet, A.; De Jaime-Soguero, C.; De Esteban-Trivigno, S.; Fortuny, J. (2025). "Tooth morphotypes shed light on the paleobiodiversity of Middle Triassic terrestrial vertebrate ecosystems from NE Iberian Peninsula (southwestern Europe)" . Rivista Italiana di Paleontologia e Stratigrafia . 131 (1): 39– 62. Bibcode : 2025RIPS..13122340R . doi : 10.54103/2039-4942/22340 . ^ Aba alkhayl, S. S. (2025). "New paleontological findings from the Triassic, Qassim, Saudi Arabia". Arabian Journal of Geosciences . 18 (10) 187. Bibcode : 2025ArJG...18..187A . doi : 10.1007/s12517-025-12338-7 . ^ Araujo, C. S.; Battista, F.; Martinelli, A. G.; Neto, V. D. P.; Schultz, C. L.; Pinheiro, F. L.; Soares, M. B. (2025). "Refinement of the Brazilian Hyperodapedon Assemblage Zone (Late Triassic) and its biostratigraphic correlation with the Argentine biozones of the Ischigualasto Formation". Journal of South American Earth Sciences . 164 105641. Bibcode : 2025JSAES.16405641S . doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2025.105641 . ^ Doering, M.; Garcia, M. S.; Schiefelbein, J. S.; Kerber, L.; Müller, R. T. (2025). "New tetrapod remains help constrain the age of a peculiar assemblage, including early dinosaurs and pterosaur precursors, from the Upper Triassic of southern Brazil". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (3) e2552552. Bibcode : 2025JVPal..4552552D . doi : 10.1080/02724634.2025.2552552 . ^ Godbold, A.; James, C. C.; Kiessling, W.; Hohmann, N.; Jarochowska, E.; Corsetti, F. A.; Bottjer, D. J. (2025). "Ancient frameworks as modern templates: exploring reef rubble consolidation in an ancient reef system" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 292 (2040). 20242123. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2024.2123 . PMC 11793968 . PMID 39904386 . ^ Volosky, D.; Moisan, P.; Lara, M. B.; Schneider, J. W.; Scholze, F.; Espinoza, M.; Schmitz, O.; Aguilar, M.; Morales, D.; Flores, M.; Contreras, J.; Frenzel, P. (2025). "A Late Triassic biota from a rift-lake system in southwestern Gondwana (Atacama Desert, Northern Chile)" . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 679 113328. Bibcode : 2025PPP...67913328V . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113328 . ^ Jésus, V. J. P.; Mateus, O.; Milàn, J.; Clemmensen, L. B. (2025). "Late Triassic small and medium-sized vertebrates from the Fleming Fjord Group of the Jameson Land Basin, central East Greenland" . Palaeontologia Electronica . 28 (1). 28.1.a18. doi : 10.26879/1423 . ^ Alarcón, C. M.; Colombi, C. E.; Gallego, O. F.; Drovandi, J. M.; Monferran, M. D.; Limarino, O.; Ezcurra, M. D.; Giordano, P. G.; Diaz, J. S.; Gómez-Coronado, J. S. (2025). "Lacustrine and paleontological records from the middle Norian of the Eastern Cordillera of Colombia: Paleoenvironmental and paleobiogeographic implications of western paleo-equatorial Pangea". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 675 113058. Bibcode : 2025PPP...67513058A . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113058 . ^ Kligman, B. T.; Whatley, R. L.; Ramezani, J.; Marsh, A. D.; Lyson, T. R.; Fitch, A. J.; Parker, W. G.; Behrensmeyer, A. K. (2025). "Unusual bone bed reveals a vertebrate community with pterosaurs and turtles in equatorial Pangaea before the end-Triassic extinction" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (29). e2505513122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12205513K . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2505513122 . PMC 12304912 . PMID 40623204 . ^ Numberger-Thuy, L. D.; Delsate, D.; Poschmann, M. J.; Schindler, T.; Thuy, B. (2025). "A new phytosaur-dominated vertebrate assemblage from the Late Triassic of the South Eifel region (Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany)". Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie – Abhandlungen . 315 (2): 187– 208. Bibcode : 2025NJGPA.315..187N . doi : 10.1127/njgpa/1273 . ^ Iijima, M.; Blob, R. W.; Hutchinson, J. R. (2025). "Biomechanical simulations of hindlimb function in Alligator provide insights into postural shifts and body size evolution" . Science Advances . 11 (43) eadx3811. doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adx3811 . PMC 12542966 . PMID 41124268 . ^ Gordon, C. M.; Freisem, L. S.; Griffin, C. T.; Gauthier, J. A.; Bhullar, B.-A. S. (2025). "Limb proportions predict aquatic habits and soft-tissue flippers in extinct amniotes". Current Biology . 35 (24): 5982–5998.e7. Bibcode : 2025CBio...35.5982G . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2025.10.068 . PMID 41270751 . ^ Stone, T.; Martindale, R.; Bodin, S.; Lathuilière, B.; Krencker, F.-N.; Fonville, T.; Kabiri, L. (2025). "Ecological Differences in Upper Pliensbachian (Early Jurassic) Reef Communities Determined by Environmental Conditions in Carbonate Settings". Journal of African Earth Sciences . 224 105547. Bibcode : 2025JAfES.22405547S . doi : 10.1016/j.jafrearsci.2025.105547 . ^ Reddin, C. J.; Landwehrs, J. P.; Mathes, G. H.; Ullmann, C. V.; Feulner, G.; Aberhan, M. (2025). "Marine species and assemblage change foreshadowed by their thermal bias over Early Jurassic warming" . Nature Communications . 16 (1). 1370. Bibcode : 2025NatCo..16.1370R . doi : 10.1038/s41467-025-56589-0 . PMC 11799210 . PMID 39910097 . ^ Guo, S.; Ma, W.; Chen, L.; Tang, Y.; Li, M.; Zhao, Y.; Deng, X.; Zhuang, J.; Qiao, Y.; Fang, H.; Shih, C.; Guo, Z.; Labandeira, C. C.; Ren, D. (2025). "The effects of sensitive environmental indicators in interpreting faunas of the past: a case study from the Jurassic of China". Palaeontology . 68 (5) e70023. Bibcode : 2025Palgy..6870023G . doi : 10.1111/pala.70023 . ^ Forel, M.-B.; Charbonnier, S.; Gaspard, D.; Bergue, C. T. (2025). "Ostracods, brachiopods ( Peregrinella ) and scolecodonts from the Early Cretaceous cold seeps of Curnier, France" . BSGF - Earth Sciences Bulletin . 196 17. Bibcode : 2025BSGF..196...17F . doi : 10.1051/bsgf/2025015 . ^ Kubota, A.; Taniguchi, R.; Hikida, Y.; Iba, Y. (2025). "A new amber Lagerstätte from the Lower Cretaceous of Japan". Cretaceous Research . 178 106236. doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2025.106236 . ^ Delclòs, X.; Peñalver, E.; Jaramillo, C.; Cadena, E.; Menor-Salván, C.; Román, J. L.; Castaño-Cardona, R. F.; Peris, D.; Carvalho, M.; Quiroz-Cabascango, D.; Carvalho, M. R.; Blomenkemper, P.; Herrera, F.; Santamarina, P.; Santer, M.; Carrera, G.; Solórzano-Kraemer, M. M. (2025). "Cretaceous amber of Ecuador unveils new insights into South America's Gondwanan forests" . Communications Earth & Environment . 6 (1) 745. Bibcode : 2025ComEE...6..745D . doi : 10.1038/s43247-025-02625-2 . ^ Salvino, A. M.; Schmiedeler, J. W.; Shimada, K. (2025). "Fossil Vertebrates from the Middle of the Graneros Shale (Upper Cretaceous: Middle Cenomanian), Russell County, Kansas, USA". Transactions of the Kansas Academy of Science . 128 ( 1– 2): 109– 124. doi : 10.1660/062.128.0110 . ^ Shimada, K.; Gonzales, P. B.; Everhart, M. J.; Liggett, G. A.; Martin, D. J.; Schumacher, B. A. (2025). "A New Marine Vertebrate Assemblage from the Upper Cretaceous Lincoln Limestone, Comanche National Grassland, Southeastern Colorado, USA, with Comments on the Vertebrate Assemblages at or Near the Contact between the Graneros Shale and Greenhorn Limestone in Colorado, Kansas, and Nebraska". Transactions of the Kansas Academy of Science . 128 ( 3– 4): 180– 200. doi : 10.1660/062.128.0302 . ^ Johnson, A. E.; Polcyn, M. J.; Shimada, K. (2025). "Late Cretaceous vertebrate assemblage of the Tarrant Formation (middle Cenomanian) of the Eagle Ford Group in Texas, USA". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 20. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2580946 . ^ Petrizzo, M. R.; Parente, M.; Falzoni, F.; Bottini, C.; Frijia, G.; Steuber, T.; Erba, E. (2025). "Calcareous plankton and shallow-water benthic biocalcifiers: Resilience and extinction across the Cenomanian-Turonian Oceanic Anoxic Event 2" . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 668 112891. Bibcode : 2025PPP...66812891P . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.112891 . ^ Perea, D.; Verde, M.; Mesa, V.; Soto, M.; Montenegro, F. (2025). "Bioerosion Structures on Dinosaur Bones Probably Made by Multituberculate Mammals and Dermestid Beetles (Guichón Formation, Late Cretaceous of Uruguay)" . Fossil Studies . 3 (1). 2. doi : 10.3390/fossils3010002 . ^ Nikolov, V.; Pavlishina, P.; Dochev, D.; Brusatte, S. L. (2025). "The paleoecology and taphonomy of a Santonian-Campanian (Upper Cretaceous) dinosaur-bearing vertebrate locality from Bulgaria: a window into an underexplored part of the Late Cretaceous European Archipelago" . Swiss Journal of Palaeontology . 144 (1) 41. Bibcode : 2025SwJP..144...41N . doi : 10.1186/s13358-025-00388-z . PMC 12307524 . PMID 40746911 . ^ Cardia, F. M. S.; Bernardi, J. V. E.; Oliveira, C. E. M.; Andrade, M. B.; Langer, M. C.; Tavares, S. A. S.; Iori, F. V.; Nava, W. R.; Marinho, T. S.; Ribeiro, L. C. B.; Souza, J. R.; Santucci, R. M. (2025). "Mercury concentration: A new window into ancient diets and trophic levels in vertebrate paleontology". Chemical Geology . 702 123218. doi : 10.1016/j.chemgeo.2025.123218 . ^ Trif, N.; Pirnea, R.; Čerňanský, A.; Schwarzhans, W.; Bălc, R.; Jain, S.; Kaim, A.; Bakayeva, S.; Hryniewicz, K. (2025). "A diverse Campanian biota from the Bozeș Formation (Petrești, Romania): Insights into the paleontology and paleoecology of a transitional sequence" (PDF) . Palaeontologia Electronica . 28 (2) 28.2.a32. doi : 10.26879/1536 . ^ Dalla Vecchia, F. M.; Amalfitano, J.; Kustatscher, E.; Simonetto, L. (2025). " "Locality 84", a new Cretaceous Konservat- Lagerstätte in the Julian Prealps (Ne Italy)" . Rivista Italiana di Paleontologia e Stratigrafia . 131 (2): 383– 413. Bibcode : 2025RIPS..13127672D . doi : 10.54103/2039-4942/27672 . ^ Khan, T. M.; Whittle, R. J.; Witts, J. D.; Griffiths, H. J.; Manica, A.; Mitchell, E. G. (2025). "Metacommunity structural changes of Antarctic benthic invertebrates over the late Maastrichtian". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 683 113495. doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113495 . ^ Talevi, M.; Brezina, S.; Lazo, D. G. (2025). "Successional Stages of a Maastrichtian Plesiosaur Fall Community from Antarctica". Cretaceous Research . 181 106306. doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2025.106306 . ^ Michael J. Polcyn; Alvadus B. McPherson; Connor D. White; Kelly J. Irwin; James E. Martin; Jennifer E. Hargrave; Ronald S. Tykoski; Gary L. Kinsland; Louis L. Jacobs (2025). "Louisiana's Cretaceous sea monsters, its Paleocene mammal fossil, and the ghost-maker megaripples".

In Suyin Ting; Lorene E. Smith; Connor D. White; Irene Martí Gil (eds.). Vertebrate fossils of Louisiana . Special Publication of the Museum of Natural Science. Louisiana State University Museum of Natural Science. pp. 109– 134. ISBN 979-8-3507-2321-2 . ^ Close, R. A.; Reijenga, B. R. (2025). "Tetrapod species–area relationships across the Cretaceous–Paleogene mass extinction" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (13) e2419052122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12219052C . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2419052122 . PMC 12002258 . PMID 40131953 . ^ Guo, Q.; Qian, H.; Zhang, J. (2025). "Body size variation of world's living terrestrial vertebrates in the Cenozoic". Journal of Systematics and Evolution . 64 (3) jse.70038. doi : 10.1111/jse.70038 . ^ Agnihotri, P.; Singh, V. P.; Singh, H.; Grimaldi, D.; Thakkar, M. K.; Priya, T.; Subramanian, K. A.; Dutta, S.; Mishra, S. (2025). "Eocene amber fossils reveal how complex trophic interactions shaped tropical rainforest biodiversity" . iScience . 28 (9) 113430. Bibcode : 2025iSci...28k3430A . doi : 10.1016/j.isci.2025.113430 . PMC 12496201 . PMID 41054511 . ^ Zonneveld, J.-P.; Adani, N.; Aswan; Bloch, J. I.; Briguglio, A.; Ciochon, R. L.; Cotton, L. J.; Hascaryo, A. T.; Head, J.; Luque, J.; Rizal, Y.; Santodomingo, N.; Smith, T.; Todd, J.; Wilf, P.; Zaim, Y. (2025). "Stratigraphy, paleontology, and depositional setting of the Late Eocene (Priabonian) lower Pagat Member, Tanjung Formation, in the Asem Asem Basin, South Kalimantan, Indonesia" . Journal of Paleontology . 98 (Supplement S96): 1– 37. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2024.11 . ^ Bennett, C. J.; Famoso, N. A.; Hembree, D. I. (2025). "Following their footsteps: Report of vertebrate fossil tracks from John Day Fossil Beds National Monument, Oregon, USA" . Palaeontologia Electronica . 28 (1). 28.1.a11. doi : 10.26879/1413 . ^ Brachaniec, T.; Środek, D.; Salamon, M.; Bugajski, M.; Duda, P.; Danielak, A.; Janiszewska, M.; Sadlok, S.; Kuśnierczyk, W. (2025). "From trace to trace maker: Oligocene–Miocene coprolites of southern Poland and their potential producers" . PeerJ . 13 e20242. doi : 10.7717/peerj.20242 . PMC 12591054 . PMID 41211326 . ^ Perthuis, A.; Mennecart, B.; Barrier, P.; Chenot, É.; Falconnet, J.; Gagnaison, J.-C.; Georgalis, G. L.; Gilbert, C.; Guevel, B.; Langevin, D.; Lapparent de Broin, F.; Lemierre, A.; Maubert, F.; Ossó, À.; Potel, S.; Thivaiou, D.; Tissier, J.; Toullec, R.; Xerri, S. F. B.; Gagnaison, C. (2025). "Revision of sedimentological and biostratigraphic data from vertebrate deposits in the "Orléanais sands", at Beaugency, Tavers and Le Bardon (Middle Miocene; Loiret, France)" . Geodiversitas (in French). 47 (12): 501– 576. doi : 10.5252/geodiversitas2025v47a12 . ^ Piñero, P.; Agustí, J.; Blain, H.-A.; Blanco-Lapaz, Á.; Tesón, E.; Teixell, A.; Furió, M. (2025). "A new Late Miocene small vertebrate assemblage from the Ouarzazate Basin (High Atlas, Morocco) and its biochronological and paleoenvironmental significance" . Fossil Record . 28 (2): 377– 395. Bibcode : 2025FossR..28..377P . doi : 10.3897/fr.28.175508 . ^ Pazonyi, P.; Mészáros, L.; Trembeczki, M.; Szentesi, Z.; Segesdi, M.; Horáček, I.; Maul, L. C.; Hír, J. (2025). "A new, extraordinarily diverse, earliest Late Miocene (early Turolian, MN 11) small vertebrate "reference" assemblage from the Csodabogyós Cave (Keszthely Hills, Western Hungary)" . Fossil Imprint . 81 ( 1– 2): 114– 153. doi : 10.37520/fi.2025.009 . ^ Sánchez-Marco, A.; Amiot, R.; Angst, D.; Bailon, S.; Betancort, J. F.; Buffetaut, E.; García-Castellano, E.; Guillén-Vargas, L.; Lazzerini, N.; Lécuyer, C.; Lomoschitz, A.; López-Jurado, L. F.; Luján, À. H.; Perera-Betancort, M. A.; Salesa, M. J.; Sellés, A. G.; Siliceo, G. (2025). "Unraveling the Strange Case of the First Canarian Land Fauna (Lower Pliocene)" . Fossil Studies . 3 (3) 13. doi : 10.3390/fossils3030013 . ^ Geraads, D.; Bobe, R.; Püschel, T. A.; Ward, C. V.; Plavcan, J. M.; Manthi, F. K. (2025). "The Late Pliocene to Early Pleistocene Lomekwi faunas, West Turkana, Kenya: systematics, paleoecology, and biochronology". Quaternary International . 754 110078. doi : 10.1016/j.quaint.2025.110078 . ^ Eshelman, R. E.; Bell, C. J.; Graham, R. W.; Semken, H. A.; Withnell, C. B.; Scarpetta, S. G.; James, H. F.; Godfrey, S. J.; Mead, J. I.; Hodnett, J.-P.; Grady, F. V. (2025). "Middle Pleistocene Cumberland Bone Cave Local Fauna, Allegany County, Maryland: A Systematic Revision and Paleoecological Interpretation of the Irvingtonian, Middle Appalachians, USA" . Smithsonian Contributions to Paleobiology . 108 : 1– 305. doi : 10.5479/si.28597193 . ^ Berghuis, H. W. K.; van den Bergh, G.; van Kolfschoten, T.; Wibowo, U. P.; Kurniawan, I.; Adhityatama, S.; Sutisna, I.; Verheijen, I.; Pop, E.; Veldkamp, A.; Joordens, J. C. A. (2025). "First vertebrate faunal record from submerged Sundaland: The late Middle Pleistocene, hominin-bearing fauna of the Madura Strait" . Quaternary Environments and Humans . 3 (2) 100047. Bibcode : 2025QuEH....300047B . doi : 10.1016/j.qeh.2024.100047 . ^ Berghuis, H. W. K.; Veldkamp, A.; Adhityatama, S.; Reimann, T.; Versendaal, A.; Kurniawan, I.; Pop, E.; van Kolfschoten, T.; Joordens, J. C. A. (2025). "A late Middle Pleistocene lowstand valley of the Solo River on the Madura Strait seabed, geology and age of the first hominin locality of submerged Sundaland" . Quaternary Environments and Humans . 3 (2) 100042. Bibcode : 2025QuEH....300042B . doi : 10.1016/j.qeh.2024.100042 . ^ Berghuis, H. W. K.; van Kolfschoten, T.; Wibowo, U. P.; Kurniawan, I.; Adhityatama, S.; Sutisna, I.; Pop, E.; Veldkamp, A.; Joordens, J. C. A. (2025). "The taphonomy of the Madura Strait fossil assemblage, a record of selective hunting and marrow processing by late Middle Pleistocene Sundaland hominins" . Quaternary Environments and Humans . 3 (2) 100055. Bibcode : 2025QuEH....300055B . doi : 10.1016/j.qeh.2024.100055 . ^ Walker, S. J.; Boilard, A.; Henriksen, M.; Lord, E.; Robu, M.; Buylaert, J.-P.; Takken Beijersbergen, L. M.; Synnøve Halvorsen, L.; Cintrón-Santiago, A. M.; Onshuus, E. K.; Cockerill, C. A.; Ujvari, G.; Palcsu, L.; Temovski, M.; Maccali, J.; Linge, H.; Olsen, J.; Aksnes, S.; Bertheussen, A.; Lygre, O.; Alsos, I. G.; Dalén, L.; Star, B.; Hufthammer, A. K.; van Kolfschoten, T.; Lauritzen, S.-E.; Lødøen, T. K.; Boessenkool, S. (2025). "A 75,000-y-old Scandinavian Arctic cave deposit reveals past faunal diversity and paleoenvironment" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (32). e2415008122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12215008W . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2415008122 . PMC 12358836 . PMID 40758875 . ^ Cocker, H.; Tirlea, D.; Francis, E.; Kuzmina, S.; Zazula, G. D.; Froese, D. G. (2025). "Latest Pleistocene (17,500–13,500 cal yr BP) Arctic ground squirrel (Sciuridae: Urocitellus parryii ) middens record late persistence of steppe-tundra in central Yukon Territory" . Quaternary Research . 130 : 81– 99. doi : 10.1017/qua.2025.10032 . ^ Viñola-Lopez, L. W.; Rigler, M.; Vallejo-Pareja, M. C.; Marks, K. W.; Aufmuth, J. (2025). "Colonization and defaunation on a small island: evidence from Quaternary fossils of Sombrero Island" . Journal of Paleontology . 99 (2): 458– 469. Bibcode : 2025JPal...99..458V . doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10104 . ^ Fernández-Palacios, J. M.; Fructuoso, M.; Illera, J. C.; Rando, J. C.; de Nascimento, L.; Fernández-Palacios, E.; Patiño, J.; Otto, R.; Castilla-Beltrán, Á.; Martín González, E.; Orihuela-Rivero, R.; Alcover, J. A.; Whittaker, R. J. (2025). "A synthesis of terrestrial species extinctions in the Macaronesian Islands and their correspondence with human occupancy" . PNAS Nexus . 4 (8) pgaf215. doi : 10.1093/pnasnexus/pgaf215 . PMC 12343113 . PMID 40799346 . ^ Nogué, S.; Morueta-Holme, N.; Fernández-Palacios, J. M.; Alsos, I. G.; Brown, A.; Roberts, P.; Peñuelas, J. (2025). "Human transformation of past terrestrial ecosystems". Nature Reviews Biodiversity . 1 (10): 644– 656. doi : 10.1038/s44358-025-00081-6 . ^ Lallensack, J.N.; Leonardi, G.; Falkingham, P.L. (2025). "Glossary of fossil tetrapod tracks" . Palaeontologia Electronica . 28 (1). 28.1.a8. doi : 10.26879/1389 . ^ Maisch, M. W. (2025). "Justice for Protobatrachus Piveteau, 1936 (Lissamphibia: Anura) – the fossil vertebrate replacement names coined by Oskar Kuhn critically re-evaluated". Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie – Abhandlungen . 315 (1): 1– 24. Bibcode : 2025NJGPA.315....1M . doi : 10.1127/njgpa/1261 . ^ Anderson, B. M.; Allmon, W. D. (2025). "Punctuated equilibria remains the dominant pattern of morphospecies origin in the fossil record: an analysis using the "persistence of ancestor" criterion" . Paleobiology . 51 (4): 662– 676. Bibcode : 2025Pbio...51..662A . doi : 10.1017/pab.2025.10051 . ^ Hagen, O.; Flück, B.; Fopp, F.; Cabral, J. S.; Hartig, F.; Pontarp, M.; Rangel, T. F.; Pellissier, L. (2021). "gen3sis: A general engine for eco-evolutionary simulations of the processes that shape Earth's biodiversity" . PLOS Biology . 19 (7) e3001340. doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001340 . PMC 8384074 . PMID 34252071 . ^ Lorcery, M.; Husson, L.; Salles, T.; Lavergne, S.; Hagen, O.; Skeels, A. (2025). "Deep time evolution of the Latitudinal Diversity Gradient: Insights from mechanistic models" . PLOS ONE . 20 (9) e0332766. Bibcode : 2025PLoSO..2032766L . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0332766 . PMC 12463215 . PMID 40997053 . ^ Quintero, I.; Andréoletti, J.; Silvestro, D.; Morlon, H. (2025). "Loss of macroevolutionary species fitness explains the rise and fall of clades" . Nature Ecology & Evolution . 9 (12): 2346– 2357. Bibcode : 2025NatEE...9.2346Q . doi : 10.1038/s41559-025-02873-7 . PMID 41107475 . ^ Wang, H.; Li, C.; Peng, Y.; Zhang, J.; Cheng, M.; Cao, X.; Qie, W.; Zhang, Z.; Dodd, M. S.; Hou, M.; Wallace, M.; Hood, A. v. S.; Lyons, T. W.; Bao, H. (2025). "Two-billion-year transitional oxygenation of the Earth's surface". Nature . 645 (8081): 665– 671. Bibcode : 2025Natur.645..665W . doi : 10.1038/s41586-025-09471-4 . PMID 40866706 . ^ Galili, N.; Bernasconi, S. M.; Nissan, A.; Alcolombri, U.; Aquila, G.; Di Bella, M.; Blattmann, T. M.; Haghipour, N.; Italiano, F.; Jaggi, M.; Kaplan-Ashiri, I.; Lee, K. S.; Lechte, M. A.; Magnabosco, C.; Porter, S. M.; Rudmin, M.; Spencer, R. G. M.; Stocker, R.; Wang, Z.; Wohlwend, S.; Hemingway, J. D. (2025). "The geologic history of marine dissolved organic carbon from iron oxides" . Nature . 644 (8078): 945– 951. Bibcode : 2025Natur.644..945G . doi : 10.1038/s41586-025-09383-3 . PMC 12390840 . PMID 40804515 . ^ Mukherjee, I.; Corkrey, R.; Gregory, D.; Large, R.; Poole, A. M. (2025). "A billion years of geological drama – Boring or brilliant?" . Gondwana Research . 142 : 1– 19. Bibcode : 2025GondR.142....1M . doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2025.02.018 . ^ Park, J. G.; Hudgins, M. N.; Fralick, P.; Shelley, J. T.; Schaller, M. F. (2025). "Breathing life into the boring billion: Direct constraints from 1.4 Ga fluid inclusions reveal a fair climate and oxygenated atmosphere" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (52) e2513030122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12213030P . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2513030122 . PMC 12772171 . PMID 41428867 . ^ Mayo de la Iglesia, R.; Saleh, F.; Antcliffe, J. B.; Gueriau, P.; Daley, A. C. (2025). "Experimental taphonomy of marine algae and cyanobacteria reveals the decoupling of morphological and chemical decay patterns" . iScience . 28 (11) 113728. Bibcode : 2025iSci...28k3728M . doi : 10.1016/j.isci.2025.113728 . PMC 12597004 . PMID 41216592 . ^ Ma, Q.; Zhou, Y.; Stüeken, E. E.; Cao, M. (2025). "Eukaryotes expansion into non-marine habitats prohibited by nitrogen limitation during the mid-Proterozoic" . iScience . 28 (8) 113047. Bibcode : 2025iSci...28k3047M . doi : 10.1016/j.isci.2025.113047 . PMC 12303009 . PMID 40727934 . ^ Liu, J.; Hardisty, D. S.; Kasting, J. F.; Fakhraee, M.; Planavsky, N. J. (2025). "Evolution of the iodine cycle and the late stabilization of the Earth's ozone layer" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (2). e2412898121. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12212898L . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2412898121 . PMC 11745384 . PMID 39761407 . ^ Lotem, N.; Rasmussen, B.; Zi, J.-W.; Zeichner, S. S.; Present, T. M.; Bar-On, Y. M.; Fischer, W. W. (2025). "Reconciling Archean organic-rich mudrocks with low primary productivity before the Great Oxygenation Event" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (2). e2417673121. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12217673L . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2417673121 . PMC 11745403 . PMID 39761395 . ^ Lee, S.; Xu, H.; Xiao, S. (2025). "The role of amorphous silica coating on apatite nanocrystals in the exceptional preservation of phosphatized embryo-like microfossils from the Ediacaran Doushantuo Formation" . Geology . 53 (11): 899– 903. Bibcode : 2025Geo....53..899L . doi : 10.1130/G53415.1 . ^ Tarhan, L. G.; Boag, T. H.; Kalderon-Asael, B. (2025). "Authigenic clays shaped Ediacara-style exceptional fossilization". Geology . 54 (3): 210– 214. doi : 10.1130/G53967.1 . ^ Gougeon, R.; Mángano, M. G.; Buatois, L. A.; Narbonne, G. M.; Laing, B. A.; Paz, M. (2025). Ichnology of the Ediacaran–Cambrian Chapel Island Formation of Newfoundland, Canada: unraveling bioturbation at the onset of the Cambrian Explosion . Fossils and Strata Series. Vol. 72. pp. 1– 222. doi : 10.18261/9788294167128-2025 . ISBN 978-82-94-16712-8 . ^ Tarhan, L. G.; Pippenger, K. H.; Cribb, A. T.; Zill, M.; Phelps, W.; Droser, M. L.; Bottjer, D. J.; Clapham, M. E. (2025). "Tracking bioturbation through time: The evolution of the marine sedimentary mixed and transition layers" . Science Advances . 11 (31) eadu7719. Bibcode : 2025SciA...11.7719T . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adu7719 . PMC 12309666 . PMID 40737398 . ^ Boulila, S.; Peters, S. E.; Müller, R. D.; Zaffos, A.; Farkaš, J.; Haq, B. U. (2025). "A tectonically driven 60 million-year biogeochemical redox cycle paces marine biodiversity" . Communications Earth & Environment . 6 (1). 440. Bibcode : 2025ComEE...6..440B . doi : 10.1038/s43247-025-02370-6 . ^ Zhao, Z.; Hougård, I. W.; Zou, C.; Dickson, A. J.; Dai, S.; Jing, Z.; Nielsen, A. T.; Ju, P.; Guo, Z.; Basu, A.; Schovsbo, N. H.; Dahl, T. W. (2025). "Sub-millimeter molybdenum and uranium isotopes track millennial redox events in the Cambrian ocean" . Communications Earth & Environment . 6 (1) 766. Bibcode : 2025ComEE...6..766Z . doi : 10.1038/s43247-025-02722-2 . ^ Liu, W.; Gao, P.; Lash, G. G.; Xiao, X. (2025). "Co-evolution of life and environment during the early Cambrian of South China: Implications for organic matter enrichment". Earth-Science Reviews . 271 105294. Bibcode : 2025ESRv..27105294L . doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2025.105294 . ^ Farrell, T. P.; Cothren, H. R.; Sundberg, F. A.; Schmitz, M. D.; Dehler, C. M.; Landing, E.; Karlstrom, K. E.; Crossey, L. J.; Hagadorn, J. W. (2025). "Revising the late Cambrian time scale and the duration of the SPICE event using a novel Bayesian age modeling approach". GSA Bulletin . 137 ( 7– 8): 3093– 3118. Bibcode : 2025GSAB..137.3093F . doi : 10.1130/B37919.1 . ^ Retallack, G. J. (2025). "Western Australian Tumblagooda Sandstone record of early Paleozoic life on land". Gondwana Research . 153 : 218– 235. doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2025.11.023 . ^ Xu, H.; Ran, B.; Isson, T. T.; Chen, X.; Luo, C.; Li, Y.; Zhu, Y.; Sun, T.; Han, Y. (2025). "Recovery of siliceous ecosystems promoted Early Silurian climatic cooling". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 677 113206. Bibcode : 2025PPP...67713206X . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113206 . ^ Ferretti, A.; Cavalazzi, B.; Corriga, M. G.; Desogus, S.; Franchini, C.; Malferrari, D.; Ongari, C.; Zocchi, C.; Corradini, C. (2025). "Unique fossil preservation in ferruginous Silurian deposits from the Carnic Alps, Italy" . Bulletin of Geosciences . 100 (4): 661– 676. doi : 10.3140/bull.geosci.1926 . ^ Cowen, M. B.; de Rafélis, M.; Ségalen, L.; Kear, B. P.; Dumont, M.; Žigaitė, Ž. (2025). "Visualizing and quantifying biomineral preservation in fossil vertebrate dental remains" . PeerJ . 13 e18763. doi : 10.7717/peerj.18763 . PMC 11700492 . PMID 39763693 . ^ Bubphamanee, K.; Kipp, M. A.; Meixnerová, J.; Stüeken, E. E.; Ivany, L. C.; Bartholomew, A. J.; Algeo, T. J.; Brocks, J. J.; Dahl, T. W.; Kinsley, J.; Tissot, F. L. H.; Buick, R. (2025). "Mid-Devonian ocean oxygenation enabled the expansion of animals into deeper-water habitats" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (35) e2501342122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12201342B . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2501342122 . PMC 12415217 . PMID 40854138 . ^ Wang, X.; Grasby, S. E.; Cawood, P. A.; Zhao, H.; Chen, Z.-Q.; Hedhli, M.; Lyu, Z.; Sun, G.; Hao, F. (2025). "Photic-zone euxinia had a major role in the Devonian-Carboniferous boundary mass extinction" . Communications Earth & Environment . 6 (1). 283. Bibcode : 2025ComEE...6..283W . doi : 10.1038/s43247-025-02260-x . ^ Zhang, F.; Pohl, A.; Elrick, M.; Wei, G.-Y.; Cheng, K.; Crockford, P.; Fakhraee, M.; Lin, Y.-B.; Li, N.; Wang, X.-D.; Shen, S.-Z. (2025). "Enhanced marine biological pump as a trigger for the onset of the late Paleozoic ice age" . Science Advances . 11 (27). eadv2756. Bibcode : 2025SciA...11.2756Z . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adv2756 . PMC 12219544 . PMID 40601752 . ^ Schiffbauer, J.; Baird, G. C.; Huntley, J. W.; Selly, T.; Shabica, C. W.; Laflamme, M.; Muscente, A. D. (2025). "283,821 concretions, how do you measure the Mazon Creek? Assessing the paleoenvironmental and taphonomic nature of the Braidwood and Essex assemblages" . Paleobiology . 51 (3): 488– 506. Bibcode : 2025Pbio...51..488S . doi : 10.1017/pab.2025.10045 . ^ Mann, A.; Nelson, W. J.; Hook, R. W.; Elrick, S. D. (2025). "The lost Permo-Carboniferous vertebrate deposit of Horseshoe Bend near Danville, Vermilion County, Illinois" . Journal of Paleontology . 98 (5): 838– 854. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2024.30 . ^ Liu, S.-A.; Xiong, Z.; Wu, T.; Zhao, M. (2025). "Plume-induced emissions of deep methane linked to the end-Guadalupian mass extinction" . Nature Communications . 16 (1) 5865. Bibcode : 2025NatCo..16.5865L . doi : 10.1038/s41467-025-61147-9 . PMC 12217733 . PMID 40593845 . ^ Chen, J.; Lu, B.; Du, L.; Lin, M.; Shen, S.; Montañez, I. P.; Feng, Z. (2025). "Regional postdeforestation weathering feedback drove diachronous C–S cycle perturbations during the end-Permian crisis" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (44) e2504841122. doi : 10.1073/pnas.2504841122 . PMC 12595461 . PMID 41144674 . ^ Beaty, B.; Foster, W. J.; Zuchuat, V.; Moller, S. R.; Buchwald, S. Z.; Brooks, H.; Rauzi, S.; Isson, T.; Planke, S.; Rodríguez-Tovar, F. J.; Senger, K.; Planavsky, N.; Tarhan, L. (2025). "Bioturbation Shapes Marine Biogeochemical Cycling Following the End-Permian Mass Extinction in Northern Pangea". Geobiology . 23 (5) e70032. Bibcode : 2025Gbio...2367300B . doi : 10.1111/gbi.70032 . PMID 40968765 . ^ Dai, X.; Ovtcharova, M.; Davies, J. H. F. L.; Song, H.; Liu, X.; Yuan, Z.; Cao, Y.; Bai, R.; Chu, D.; Dal Corso, J.; Brayard, A.; Jiang, S.; Miao, L.; Du, Y.; Song, H. (2025). "Geochronology of the Early Triassic based on coupled Bayesian zircon eruption age and Bayesian age–depth models" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (44) e2509247122. doi : 10.1073/pnas.2509247122 . PMC 12595414 . PMID 41144668 . ^ Smith, C. P. A.; Gueriau, P.; Lapen, T. J.; Thoury, M.; Fara, E.; Brayard, A. (2025). "Clade-specific elemental signatures across an Early Triassic marine fauna pave the way for deciphering the affinities of unidentifiable fossils" . PLOS ONE . 20 (8) e0329498. Bibcode : 2025PLoSO..2029498S . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0329498 . PMC 12349085 . PMID 40802660 . ^ Blattmann, F. R.; Ragon, C.; Vennemann, T. W.; Schneebeli-Hermann, E.; Vérard, C.; Kasparian, J.; Brunetti, M.; Bucher, H. F. R.; Adatte, T.; Magill, C. R. (2025). "Wildfire, ecosystem, and climate interactions in the Early Triassic" . Communications Earth & Environment . 6 (1) 830. Bibcode : 2025ComEE...6..830B . doi : 10.1038/s43247-025-02789-x . PMC 12540185 . PMID 41132411 . ^ Haldar, A.; Ray, S.; Bandyopadhyay, S. (2025). "First report of desmatosuchin aetosaurs (Diapsida, Archosauria) from the lower part of Dharmaram Formation and a biostratigraphic re-evaluation of the upper Triassic horizons of India". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 30. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2569748 . ^ Trudgill, M.; Rae, J. W. B.; Whiteford, R.; Adloff, M.; Crumpton-Banks, J.; Van Mourik, M.; Burke, A.; Cuperus, M.; Corsetti, F.; Doherty, D.; Gray, W.; Greenop, R.; Hong, W.-L.; Lepland, A.; McIntyre, A.; Neiroukh, N.; Rose, C. V.; Ruhl, M.; Saunders, D.; Siri, M. M. F. R.; Steele, R. C. J.; Stüeken, E. E.; West, A. J.; Ziegler, M.; Greene, S. R. (2025). "Pulses of ocean acidification at the Triassic–Jurassic boundary" . Nature Communications . 16 (1) 6471. Bibcode : 2025NatCo..16.6471T . doi : 10.1038/s41467-025-61344-6 . PMC 12260068 . PMID 40659602 . ^ Numberger-Thuy, L. D.; Aiglstorfer, A.; Delsate, D.; Feist-Burkhardt, S.; Gräbenstein, S.; Havlik, P.; Régnier, S.; Servais, T.; Thuy, B. (2025). "An exceptional window into the Triassic-Jurassic boundary on the margins of the Ardenno-Rhenish Massif: stratigraphy and palaeontology of the Irrel section (Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany)" . Swiss Journal of Palaeontology . 144 (1) 33. Bibcode : 2025SwJP..144...33N . doi : 10.1186/s13358-025-00384-3 . ^ Kawabata, K.; Ikeda, M.; Kano, A.; Fujibayashi, M.; Senda, R.; Saito, R. (2025). "Increase in marine productivity during the recovery phase of carbon isotope excursion from the Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event at the Northwest of the Panthalassa Ocean". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 681 113392. doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113392 . ^ Chaumeil Rodríguez, M.; Pérez Panera, J. P.; Talevi, M.; Mattioli, E. (2025). "Calcareous nannofossils associated with the Chacaico Sur marine reptiles in the Los Molles Formation, Neuquén Basin: age and paleoenvironmental insights". Ameghiniana . 62 (4): 229– 239. Bibcode : 2025Amegh..62.3649R . doi : 10.5710/AMGH.19.08.2025.3649 . ^ Varejão, F. G.; Warren, L. V.; Assine, M. L.; Rodrigues, M. G.; Fürsich, F. T.; Fauth, G.; Matos, S. A.; Ribeiro, A. C.; Simões, M. G. (2025). "Fossil wonders of anoxic worlds: Linking marine ingressions to Early Cretaceous Konservat-Lagerstätten from Brazil". Global and Planetary Change . 253 104959. Bibcode : 2025GPC...25304959V . doi : 10.1016/j.gloplacha.2025.104959 . ^ Zhong, Y.-T.; Huyskens, M. H.; Chu, R.-J.; Yang, H.-Q.; Hu, J.-F.; Wang, Y.-Q.; Cai, S.-X.; Wu, Q.; Ma, Q.; Wu, H.-C.; Yin, Q.-Z.; Xu, Y.-G. (2025). "High-precision geochronology of the Early Cretaceous Jiufotang Formation: Temporal constraints on the late phase of the Jehol Biota" . Earth and Planetary Science Letters . 671 119688. Bibcode : 2025E&PSL.67119688Z . doi : 10.1016/j.epsl.2025.119688 . ^ Matsumoto, H.; Shirai, K.; Ishikawa, A.; Ohkouchi, N.; Ogawa, N. O.; Tejada, M. L. G.; Ando, A.; Kuroda, J.; Suzuki, K. (2025). "Multidisciplinary evidence for synchroneity between Ontong Java Nui volcanism and early Aptian oceanic anoxic event 1a" . Science Advances . 11 (9). eadt0204. Bibcode : 2025SciA...11..204M . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adt0204 . PMC 11864177 . PMID 40009661 . ^ Harrison, R. J.; Neethirajan, J.; Pei, Z.; Xue, P.; Marcano, L.; Abrudan, R.; Ringe, E.; Tung, P.-Y.; Kuppili, V. S. C.; Kaulich, B.; Daurer, B. J.; Colocho Hurtarte, L. C.; Kazemian, M.; Chang, L.; Donnelly, C.; Valencia, S. (2025). "Magnetic vector tomography reveals giant magnetofossils are optimised for magnetointensity reception" . Communications Earth & Environment . 6 (1) 810. Bibcode : 2025ComEE...6..810H . doi : 10.1038/s43247-025-02721-3 . PMC 12537488 . PMID 41127646 . ^ Tucker, R. T.; Venter, K. E.; Lana, C.; Roberts, E. M.; Chinzorig, T.; Tsogtbaatar, K.; Zanno, L. E. (2025). "U-Pb calcite age dating of fossil eggshell as an accurate deep time geochronometer" . Communications Earth & Environment . 6 (1) 872. Bibcode : 2025ComEE...6..872T . doi : 10.1038/s43247-025-02895-w . ^ Tucker, R. T.; King, M. R.; Delgerzaya, P.; Freimuth, W. J.; Chinzorig, T.; Tsogtbaatar, K.; Takasaki, R.; Saneyoshi, M.; Chiarenza, A. A.; Zanno, L. E. (2025). "Protracted intercontinental aridification preserved within the early Late Cretaceous strata of the Eastern Gobi Basin, Mongolia" . Sedimentology . 73 sed.70054. doi : 10.1111/sed.70054 . ^ Albert, G.; Budai, S.; Csiki-Sava, Z.; Makádi, L.; Ţabără, D.; Árvai, V.; Bălc, R.; Bindiu-Haitonic, R.; Ducea, M. N.; Botfalvai, G. (2025). "Age and palaeoenvironmental constraints on the earliest dinosaur-bearing strata of the Densuș-Ciula Formation (Hațeg Basin, Romania): evidence of their late Campanian-early Maastrichtian syntectonic deposition" . Cretaceous Research . 170 106095. Bibcode : 2025CrRes.17006095A . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2025.106095 . ^ Botfalvai, G.; Csiki-Sava, Z.; Magyar, J.; Páll-Gergely, B.; Koczó, L.; Ţabără, D.; Konecsni, G.; Budai, S. (2025). "Paleontological and paleoecological significance of the oldest highly productive Upper Cretaceous (lowermost Maastrichtian) bonebed of Haţeg Basin (western Romania; Densuş-Ciula Formation)" . PLOS ONE . 20 (11) e0335893. Bibcode : 2025PLoSO..2035893B . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0335893 . PMC 12599975 . PMID 41212913 . ^ Goonetilleke, M.; Silva, R. L.; Durkin, P. R. (2025). "A continental record of the late Campanian negative carbon isotopic excursion (LCE, Late Campanian Event) in the Dinosaur Park Formation, Alberta, Canada" . Cretaceous Research . 179 106263. doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2025.106263 . ^ Westerhold, T.; Dallanave, E.; Penman, D.; Schoene, B.; Röhl, U.; Gussone, N.; Kuroda, J. (2025). "Earth orbital rhythms links timing of Deccan trap volcanism phases and global climate change" . Science Advances . 11 (10). eadr8584. Bibcode : 2025SciA...11R8584W . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adr8584 . PMC 11887795 . PMID 40053583 . ^ Kale, V. S.; Upasani, D.; Rajput, M.; Dole, G.; Patil Pillai, S. (2025). "Spatio-temporal volume recalibration shows Deccan volcanism caused Terminal Cretaceous Mass Extinction" . GSA Bulletin . 138 ( 3– 4): 1749– 1758. doi : 10.1130/B38412.1 . ^ Rodiouchkina, K.; Goderis, S.; Senel, C. B.; Kaskes, P.; Karatekin, Ö.; Böttcher, M. E.; Rodushkin, I.; Vellekoop, J.; Claeys, P.; Vanhaecke, F. (2025). "Reduced contribution of sulfur to the mass extinction associated with the Chicxulub impact event" . Nature Communications . 16 (1). 620. Bibcode : 2025NatCo..16..620R . doi : 10.1038/s41467-024-55145-6 . PMC 11739411 . PMID 39819896 . ^ Weaver, L. N.; Tobin, T. S.; Sprain, C. J.; Wilson Deibel, P. K.; Korasidis, V. A.; Carvalho, M. R.; Kaskes, P.; Fendley, I. M. (2025). "Dinosaur extinction can explain continental facies shifts at the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary" . Communications Earth & Environment . 6 (1) 712. Bibcode : 2025ComEE...6..712W . doi : 10.1038/s43247-025-02673-8 . ^ Bai, B.; Li, Q.; Zhou, X.-Y.; Wang, X.-Y.; Xu, R.-C.; Zhang, X.-Y.; Quan, S.-S.; Meng, J.; Wang, Y.-Q. (2025). "Litho- and biostratigraphy of the East Mesa in Shara Murun region of the Erlian Basin, Inner Mongolia, China, and the subdivision of the Ulangochuian Asian Land Mammal Age" . American Museum Novitates (4034): 1– 32. doi : 10.1206/4034.1 . hdl : 2246/7431 . ^ Thomas S. Lechner; Madelaine Böhme (2025).

The early Late Miocene hominid locality Hammerschmiede (Bavaria, Southern Germany) - excavation, stratigraphy, and taphonomic insights . Senckenberg Monographs. pp. 1– 97. ISBN 978-3-510-61430-1 . ^ Tholt, A.; Başoğlu, O.; Bektaş, Y.; Bernor, R.; Carlson, J. P.; Dağ, Ö.; Doğan, U.; Erkman, A. C.; Kaya, F.; Kaymakçı, N.; Gözlük Kırmızıoğlu, P.; Meijers, M. J. M.; Kahya Parıldar, Ö.; Pehlevan, C.; Şimşek, E.; White, T.; Renne, P. (2025). "Building better biochronology: New fossils and 40 Ar/ 39 Ar radioisotopic dates from Central Anatolia" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (12). e2424428122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12224428T . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2424428122 . PMC 11962512 . PMID 40096598 . ^ Djokic, T.; Smith, P. M.; Havig, J.; Frese, M.; Vasconcelos, P.; Brocks, J.; Ellwood, M.; Cantrill, D. J.; McGeeney, D.; Pogson, R.; Ryan, C.; Wang, Y.; Nguyen, A.; Rosas, M. L.; McCurry, M. R. (2025). "Taphonomy of soft-tissue preservation in ferricrete at the McGraths Flat Lagerstätte" . Gondwana Research . 149 : 429– 444. doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2025.08.012 . ^ Freitas-Oliveira, R.; Lima-Ribeiro, M. S.; Mendoza-Rodriguez, V. H.; Terribile, L. C. (2025). "Reviewing the Great American Biotic Interchange: climate change as a trigger for biodiversity dispersal" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 292 (2058) 20251745. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2025.1745 . PMC 12606168 . PMID 41218781 . ^ Duval, M.; Fujioka, T.; Haddoumi, H.; Parés, J. M.; Aouraghe, H.; Churruca Clemente, A.; Lachner, J.; Rugel, G.; Stübner, K.; del Val, M.; Pla-Pueyo, S.; Mhamdi, H.; Souhir, M.; Farkouch, M.; Van der Made, J.; Piñero, P.; Agustí, J.; Rodríguez-Hidalgo, A.; Chacón, M. G.; Sala-Ramos, R. (2025). "New chronological constraints for the Plio-Pleistocene section of Dhar Iroumyane (Morocco) and the associated fossil locality of Guefaït-4". Quaternary Science Reviews . 369 109610. Bibcode : 2025QSRv..36909610D . doi : 10.1016/j.quascirev.2025.109610 . ^ Luján, À. H.; Paclík, V.; Demirci, E.; Villa, A.; Neubauer, T. A.; Tuncer, A.; Ivanov, M.; Blanco-Lapaz, À.; Vega-Pagán, K. A.; Sanjuan, J. (2025). "An Integrated Paleoenvironmental Reconstruction of the Early Pleistocene Hominin-Bearing Site of Dursunlu (Türkiye)" . Diversity . 17 (9) 631. Bibcode : 2025Diver..17..631L . doi : 10.3390/d17090631 . ^ Samim, S.; Dalton, H.; Phillips, D.; Hergt, J. (2025). "High-resolution tephrochronology resolves stratigraphic complexities in archaeologically significant Nariokotome tuffs, Turkana Basin" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (38) e2424142122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12224142S . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2424142122 . PMC 12478154 . PMID 40953269 . ^ Stewart, M.; Peters, C.; Ziegler, M. J.; Carleton, W. C.; Roberts, P.; Boivin, N.; Groucutt, H. S. (2025). "The state of the late Quaternary megafauna extinction debate: a systematic review and analysis" . Frontiers in Mammal Science . 4 1678231. doi : 10.3389/fmamm.2025.1678231 . ^ Phillipi, D. B.; Czekanski-Moir, J.; Ivany, L. C. (2025). "Global Phanerozoic biodiversity—can variation be explained by spatial sampling intensity?" . Paleobiology . 50 (4): 661– 672. doi : 10.1017/pab.2024.26 . ^ Tyler, C. L.; Kowalewski, M. (2025). "Fossil samples archive functional diversity in marine ecosystems: An empirical test from a present-day coastal environment" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (31) e2405727122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12205727T . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2405727122 . PMC 12337277 . PMID 40720644 . ^ Matamala-Pagès, M.; Hagen, O.; Castro-Insua, A.; Oliver, A.; Méndez-Quintas, E.; Sotelo, G.; Rey-Rodríguez, I.; Gamboa, S.; Galván, S.; Varela, S. (2025). "Silent past: Biogeographic gaps in the Cenozoic fossil archive". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 679 113296. Bibcode : 2025PPP...67913296M . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113296 . ^ Richter, A. J.; Meade, A.; Pickles, B. J. (2025). "Identifying fragmented fossils and recent remains belonging to underrepresented taxa using geometric morphometrics" . Quaternary Research . 130 : 70– 80. doi : 10.1017/qua.2025.10050 . ^ Oses, G. L.; Belatto, S. L.; Limeira Junior, S. C. M.; dos Santos, T. P.; Rodrigues, C. L.; Prado, G. M. E. M.; Dias, J.; Carvalho, I. S.; da Silva, T. F.; Rizzutto, M. A. (2025). "Imaging and spectroscopy techniques applied to characterise fossilisation processes and biomineralisation" . Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution . 13 1669055. Bibcode : 2025FrEEv..1369055O . doi : 10.3389/fevo.2025.1669055 . ^ Lindahl, A.; Epp, L. S.; Boessenkool, S.; Pedersen, M. W.; Brace, S.; Heintzman, P. D.; Dalén, L.; Díez del Molino, D. (2025). "Palaeogenomic inference of biodiversity dynamics across Quaternary timescales". Nature Reviews Biodiversity . 1 (4): 233– 247. doi : 10.1038/s44358-025-00033-0 . ^ Fagernäs, Z.; Sieling, S.; Troché, G.; Bakker, J. K.; Olsen, J. V.; Welker, F. (2025). "Identification and removal of contamination in palaeoproteomic analysis of dental enamel" . Scientific Reports . 16 (1) 1853. doi : 10.1038/s41598-025-31472-6 . PMC 12804880 . PMID 41387947 . ^ Oertle, A.; Peters, C.; Summerhayes, G. ; O'Connor, S.; Gillespie, R.; Douka, K. (2025). "New collagen peptide markers from New Guinea fauna: identifying archaeological bone in the tropics" . Royal Society Open Science . 12 (12) 251172. doi : 10.1098/rsos.251172 . ^ Bromage, T. G.; Denys, C.; De Jesus, C. L.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Kullmer, O.; Sandrock, O.; Schrenk, F.; McKee, M. D.; Reznikov, N.; Ashley, G. M.; Hu, B.; Poudel, S. B.; Souron, A.; Buss, D. J.; Ittah, E.; Kubat, J.; Rabieh, S.; Yakar, S.; Neubert, T. A. (2025). "Palaeometabolomes yield biological and ecological profiles at early human sites" . Nature . 649 (8099): 1197– 1205. doi : 10.1038/s41586-025-09843-w . PMC 12851940 . PMID 41407854 . ^ Doiron, K. E.; Colcord, D. E.; Shilling, A. M.; Njau, J. K.; Stanistreet, I. G.; Stollhofen, H.; Schick, K. D.; Toth, N. P.; Brassell, S. C. (2025). "Biomarker δ 13 C values record consistent savanna vegetation and variable alkalinity of Lake Olduvai during Pleistocene wet/dry cycles" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 123 (1) e2508896122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12308896D . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2508896122 . PMC 12773765 . PMID 41461031 . ^ Catalano, S. A.; Escapa, I.; Pugh, K. D.; Hammond, A. S.; Goloboff, P.; Almécija, S. (2025). "PlaceMyFossils: An Integrative Approach to Analyze and Visualize the Phylogenetic Placement of Fossils Using Backbone Trees" . Systematic Biology . 74 (4) syaf025. doi : 10.1093/sysbio/syaf025 . PMC 12640080 . PMID 40244059 . ^ Mulvey, L. P. A.; Nikolic, M. C.; Allen, B. J.; Heath, T. A.; Warnock, R. C. M. (2025). "From fossils to phylogenies: exploring the integration of paleontological data into Bayesian phylogenetic inference" . Paleobiology . 51 (1): 214– 236. Bibcode : 2025Pbio...51..214M . doi : 10.1017/pab.2024.47 . ^ Nikolic, M. C.; Warnock, R. C. M.; Hopkins, M. J. (2025). "Combining fossil taxa with and without morphological data improves dated phylogenetic analyses" . Biology Letters . 21 (8) 20250205. doi : 10.1098/rsbl.2025.0205 . PMC 12343125 . PMID 40795980 . ^ Wright, D. F.; Hopkins, M. J. (2025). "Assessing the impact of character evolution models on phylogenetic and macroevolutionary inferences from fossil data" . Palaeontology . 68 (5) e70031. Bibcode : 2025Palgy..6870031W . doi : 10.1111/pala.70031 . ^ Parins-Fukuchi, C. T. (2025). "Sorting of ancestral polymorphism and its impact on morphological phylogenetics and macroevolution" . Evolution . 79 (11) qpaf177. doi : 10.1093/evolut/qpaf177 . PMID 40911295 . ^ Andres, B. (2021). "Phylogenetic systematics of Quetzalcoatlus Lawson 1975 (Pterodactyloidea: Azhdarchoidea)". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 41 (sup1): 203– 217. Bibcode : 2021JVPal..41S.203A . doi : 10.1080/02724634.2020.1801703 . ^ Ni, X.; Ji, Q.; Wu, W.; Shao, Q.; Ji, Y.; Zhang, C.; Liang, L.; Ge, J.; Guo, Z.; Li, J.; Li, Q.; Grün, R.; Stringer, C. (2021). "Massive cranium from Harbin in northeastern China establishes a new Middle Pleistocene human lineage" .

The Innovation . 2 (3) 100130. Bibcode : 2021Innov...200130N . doi : 10.1016/j.xinn.2021.100130 . PMC 8454562 . PMID 34557770 . ^ Wang, Z.; Zhang, C. (2025). "An implementation of the Brownian motion model for Bayesian phylogenetic inference using continuous traits with missing states" . Paleobiology . 52 (2): 163– 171. doi : 10.1017/pab.2025.10088 . ^ Jenkins, K. M.; Meyer, D. L.; Bhullar, B.-A. S. (2025). "Phylogenetic paradigm shifts in early amniote evolution". Systematic Biology syaf087. doi : 10.1093/sysbio/syaf087 . PMID 41388913 . ^ Howard, A. F. C.; Hurtado-Materon, M. A.; Rivera, J. A.; Zúñiga-Vega, J. J.; Martins, E. P.; Lawing, A. M. (2025). "ppgm: an R package for integrating neontological, palaeontological, and climate data in a phylogenetic comparative framework" . Palaeontology . 68 (8) e70034. Bibcode : 2025Palgy..6870034H . doi : 10.1111/pala.70034 . ^ Dempsey, M.; Allison, K.; Cross, S. R. R.; Maidment, S. C. R.; Campione, N. E.; Bates, K. T. (2025). "Limb bone robusticity is coupled with mass distribution in terrestrial tetrapods" . Royal Society Open Science . 12 (9) 251103. Bibcode : 2025RSOS...1251103D . doi : 10.1098/rsos.251103 . PMC 12419900 . PMID 40933546 . ^ Wang, A.; Zhang, Z.; Liu, H.; Yang, Y. (2025). "Application of blender modeling techniques in the restoration of 3D morphology of fossil insects reconstructed via micro-computed tomography" . Swiss Journal of Palaeontology . 144 (1) 74. Bibcode : 2025SwJP..144...74W . doi : 10.1186/s13358-025-00412-2 . ^ Smith, J. A.; et al. (2024). "Identifying the Big Questions in paleontology: a community-driven project" . Paleobiology . 51 (3): 408– 431. doi : 10.1017/pab.2025.10042 . ^ Castillo Brache, L. A. (2025). "Parachute Science in Paleontology as Distributive Epistemic Injustice". Philosophy of Science . 92 (5): 1076– 1085. doi : 10.1017/psa.2025.10149 . ^ Macário, M. A.; Ghilardi, A. M.; Santana, E. M. G.; Santos, E. S.; Dal Molin, A.; Haertel, L. M.; Aureliano, T.; Pinheiro, A. P.; Lima, D.; Salú, A. T. O.; Cisneros, J. C.; Saraiva, A. Á. F. (2025). "The study of fossil macroinvertebrates from the Santana Group, Brazil: Legal and ethical challenges and neocolonial legacies in paleontology" . Palaeontologia Electronica . 28 (3) 28.3.a51. doi : 10.26879/1563 . ^ Rich, M. M.; Santucci, V. L.; Tweet, J. S. (2025). "The intersection of New Deal public works programs and National Park Service paleontology" . New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin . 101 : 409– 423. ^ Zhao, H.; Zhang, L.; Algeo, T. J.; Lyu, Z.; Wang, X.; Hao, F. (2025). "Volcanism and basalt weathering drove Ordovician climatic cooling" . Nature Communications . 16 (1) 11475. Bibcode : 2025NatCo..1611475Z . doi : 10.1038/s41467-025-66316-4 . PMC 12749037 . PMID 41387411 . ^ Jurikova, H.; Garbelli, C.; Whiteford, R.; Reeves, T.; Laker, G. M.; Liebetrau, V.; Gutjahr, M.; Eisenhauer, A.; Savickaite, K.; Leng, M. J.; Iurino, D. A.; Viaretti, M.; Tomašových, A.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, W.; Shi, G. R.; Shen, S.; Rae, J. W. B.; Angiolini, L. (2025). "Rapid rise in atmospheric CO 2 marked the end of the Late Palaeozoic Ice Age" . Nature Geoscience . 18 (1): 91– 97. Bibcode : 2025NatGe..18...91J . doi : 10.1038/s41561-024-01610-2 . PMC 11732749 . PMID 39822309 . ^ Wu, Y.; Song, H.; Chu, D.; Cui, Y.; Dal Corso, J.; Luo, G.; Song, H.; Tian, L.; Song, H.; Jia, E.; Tong, J. (2025). "Microbial metabolism amplified warming in three Phanerozoic hyperthermal events" . Nature Communications . 16 (1) 11372. Bibcode : 2025NatCo..1611372W . doi : 10.1038/s41467-025-66388-2 . PMC 12727716 . PMID 41387648 . ^ Xu, Z.; Yu, J.; Yin, H.; Merdith, A. S.; Hilton, J.; Allen, B. J.; Gurung, K.; Wignall, P. B.; Dunhill, A. M.; Shen, J.; Schwartzman, D.; Goddéris, Y.; Donnadieu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Poulton, S. W.; Mills, B. J. W. (2025). "Early Triassic super-greenhouse climate driven by vegetation collapse" . Nature Communications . 16 (1) 5400. Bibcode : 2025NatCo..16.5400X . doi : 10.1038/s41467-025-60396-y . PMC 12222451 . PMID 40603845 . ^ Zhang, P.; Yang, M.; Lu, J.; Dal Corso, J.; Jiang, Z.; Dai, S.; Wang, L.; Zhou, K.; Xu, X.; Guo, Y.; Chen, H.; Shao, L.; Greene, S. E.; Hilton, J. (2025). "Repeated pulses of volcanism drove the Late Triassic Carnian Pluvial episode" . Global and Planetary Change . 255 105112. Bibcode : 2025GPC...25505112Z . doi : 10.1016/j.gloplacha.2025.105112 . ^ Parrish, J. T.; Gillis, R. J.; Fairley, J. P. (2025). "Climate of the Chinle Formation-evidence from growth rings in and distribution of the fossil logs of Petrified Forest National Park, Arizona, USA". PALAIOS . 40 (12): 361– 378. Bibcode : 2025Palai..40..361P . doi : 10.2110/palo.2025.010 . ^ Qiu, R.; Yu, Z.; Mills, B. J. W.; Huang, R.; Zhang, W.; Isson, T.; Wan, B.; Zhang, R.; Zhao, M.; Jin, Z. (2025). "Pulsed biogenic methane emissions coupled with episodic warming during the Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (36) e2423598122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12223598Q . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2423598122 . PMC 12435313 . PMID 40892919 . ^ Hao, W.; Yang, J.; Wang, H.; Mitchell, R. N.; Zhang, C.; Qiu, R.; Guo, J.; Zhang, W.; Bao, X.; Deng, C.; Wang, X.; Hu, Y.; Yang, J.-H.; Zhu, G.; Zhou, Z.; Zhu, R. (2025). "Climate change enhanced habitat diversification for the Middle Jurassic Yanliao Biota in East Asia" . National Science Review . 12 (7) nwaf194. doi : 10.1093/nsr/nwaf194 . PMC 12258141 . PMID 40661121 . ^ Lu, C.; Lin, M.-Q.; Shen, J.; Ji, X.-K.; Yang, C.-M.; Zhang, Z.-H.; He, Q.; Sun, M.-D.; Xu, Y.-G. (2025). "A continental record of Early Cretaceous (Aptian) vegetation and climate change based on palynology and clay mineralogy from the North China Craton". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 662 112750. Bibcode : 2025PPP...66212750L . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.112750 . ^ Feng, D.; Tütken, T.; Griebeler, E. M.; Herwartz, D.; Pack, A. (2025). "Mesozoic atmospheric CO 2 concentrations reconstructed from dinosaur tooth enamel" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (33). e2504324122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12204324F . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2504324122 . PMC 12377722 . PMID 40758865 . ^ Rodríguez-López, J. P.; Fernández-Mendiola, P. Á.; de Gea, G. A.; Arz, J. A.; Arenillas, I.; Gilabert, V.; Arlegui, L.; Soria, A. R.; Fernández, V.; Amidon, W.; Kylander-Clark, A.; Frigola, J.; Cerdà-Domènech, M.; Garber, J.; López-Martínez, J.; Murton, J. B.; Liesa, C. L. (2025). "Low-latitude glaciation in the Cretaceous greenhouse: reviewing the cryosphere reach during an archetypal hothouse Earth" . Earth-Science Reviews . 274 105351. doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2025.105351 . ^ Smith, K. T.; Bruch, A. A. (2025). "Persistent greenhouse conditions in Eocene North America point to lower climate sensitivity" . Communications Earth & Environment . 6 (1). 352. Bibcode : 2025ComEE...6..352S . doi : 10.1038/s43247-025-02288-z . ^ Werner, N.; Wang, Z.; Werdelin, L.; Zhang, Q. (2025). "East African uplift as a catalyst for Middle Miocene faunal transitions" . Science Advances . 11 (42) eadx6569. Bibcode : 2025SciA...11.6569W . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adx6569 . PMC 12524987 . PMID 41091858 . ^ Zhang, R.; Guo, J.; Bradshaw, C. D.; Xu, X.; Shen, T.; Li, S.; Nie, J.; Zhang, C.; Li, X.; Liu, Z.; Zhang, J.; Jiang, D.; Hu, Y.; Sun, J. (2025). "Vegetation feedbacks accelerated the late Miocene climate transition" . Science Advances . 11 (18). eads4268. Bibcode : 2025SciA...11S4268Z . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.ads4268 . PMC 12047422 . PMID 40315310 . ^ Markowska, M.; Vonhof, H. B.; Groucutt, H. S.; Breeze, P. S.; Drake, N.; Stewart, M.; Albert, R.; Andrieux, E.; Blinkhorn, J.; Boivin, N.; Budsky, A.; Clark-Wilson, R.; Fleitmann, D.; Gerdes, A.; Martin, A. N.; Martínez-García, A.; Nicholson, S. L.; Price, G. J.; Scerri, E. M. L.; Scholz, D.; Vanwezer, N.; Weber, M.; Alsharekh, A. M.; Al Omari, A. A.; Al-Mufarreh, Y. S. A.; Al-Jibreen, F.; Alqahtani, M.; Al-Shanti, M.; Zalmout, I.; Petraglia, M. D.; Haug, G. H. (2025). "Recurrent humid phases in Arabia over the past 8 million years" . Nature . 640 (8060): 954– 961. Bibcode : 2025Natur.640..954M . doi : 10.1038/s41586-025-08859-6 . PMC 12018461 . PMID 40205061 . ^ Hua, J.; Ma, J.; Zhou, X.; Yang, J.; Wang, S.; Xiao, G.; Zhao, K.; Wang, J.; Hu, Y.; Zheng, Y.; Liu, J.; Chen, G.; Li, S.; Gao, F.; Li, X. (2025). "Climate reconstruction and mammalian faunal turnover in northern China since the late Pliocene". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 680 113320. Bibcode : 2025PPP...68013320H . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2025.113320 . ^ Linchamps, P.; Hanon, R.; Stoetzel, E.; Steininger, C.; Brandenburg, J.-T.; Zipfel, B.; Prat, S.; Stratford, D.; Cornette, R.; Latouche, P. (2025). "Reconstructing the palaeoclimate of the Cradle of Humankind in South Africa over the last 3.5 million years using machine learning and mammalian fossil assemblages" . Quaternary Science Reviews . 370 109655. Bibcode : 2025QSRv..37009655L . doi : 10.1016/j.quascirev.2025.109655 . ^ Sánchez-Bandera, H.; Fagoaga, A.; Blain, H.-A.; López-García, J. M.; Núñez-Lahuerta, C.; Blanco-Lapaz, À.; Galán, J.; Moya-Costa, R.; Cuenca-Bescós, G.; Rodríguez-Álvarez, X. P.; Huguet, R. (2025). "Paleoecological context of Homo aff. erectus (ATE7-1) at Sima del Elefante (late Early Pleistocene, Atapuerca, Spain) inferred from the herpetofaunal assemblage" . Journal of Human Evolution . 209 103772. Bibcode : 2025JHumE.20903772S . doi : 10.1016/j.jhevol.2025.103772 . PMID 41202556 . ^ Riddell-Young, B.; Lee, J. E.; Brook, E. J.; Schmitt, J.; Fischer, H.; Bauska, T. K.; Menking, J. A.; Iseli, R.; Clark, J. R. (2025). "Abrupt changes in biomass burning during the last glacial period". Nature . 637 (8044): 91– 96. Bibcode : 2025Natur.637...91R . doi : 10.1038/s41586-024-08363-3 . PMID 39743610 . ^ Matthews, I. P.; Palmer, A. P.; Candy, I.; Francis, C.; Abrook, A. M.; Lincoln, P. C.; Blockley, S. P. E.; Engels, S.; MacLeod, A.; Staff, R. A.; Hoek, W. Z.; Burton, J. (2025). "Summer warmth between 15,500 and 15,000 years ago enabled human repopulation of the northwest European margin" . Nature Ecology & Evolution . 9 (7): 1179– 1192. Bibcode : 2025NatEE...9.1179M . doi : 10.1038/s41559-025-02712-9 . PMC 12240825 . PMID 40604175 . ^ Warken, S. F.; Schmitt, A. K.; Scholz, D.; Hertwig, A.; Weber, M.; Mertz-Kraus, R.; Reinig, F.; Esper, J.; Sigl, M. (2025). "Discovery of Laacher See eruption in speleothem record synchronizes Greenland and central European Late Glacial climate change" . Science Advances . 11 (3). eadt4057. Bibcode : 2025SciA...11.4057W . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adt4057 . PMC 11734736 . PMID 39813351 .