The ceasefire has been holding, with resumed commercial flights and normalcy reported from both countries. Flight restrictions by both countries on each others aircraft has continued for over a year. Background Further information: 2025 Pahalgam attack and 2025 India–Pakistan crisis The Kashmir conflict , ongoing since 1947, has fuelled multiple wars and skirmishes between India and Pakistan over the disputed region.

On 22 April 2025, a terrorist attack by five armed terrorists near Pahalgam in Indian-administered Jammu and Kashmir killed 26 civilians, mostly Hindu tourists.

The Resistance Front , a militant faction of the Pakistan-based, UN-designated terrorist group Lashkar-e-Taiba , operating in Indian-administered Kashmir , initially claimed responsibility for the attack, but later denied responsibility, saying that the earlier claim was the result of a coordinated hacking, and attributed the breach to Indian authorities. Pakistan alleged that the Pahalgam attack was a " false flag operation " orchestrated by India. India announced a series of retaliatory measures against Pakistan, including the suspension of the Indus Waters Treaty , prompting responsive measures and leading to a diplomatic crisis and border skirmishes . According to military aviation magazine AirForces Monthly , on 29 April, four Indian Air Force (IAF) Rafale aircraft departed from Ambala Air Force Station on a mission to bomb terrorist targets in the north but aborted and diverted to Srinagar Air Force Station due to an electronic warfare jamming claimed by PAF .

As described by the magazine, following this failed attack, and before 6 May, the IAF redeployed up to 20 Rafale aircraft from Hasimara Air Force Station (home of No. 101 Squadron IAF in the Eastern Command ) to Gwalior , Ambala , Srinagar , and Nal Air Force Station in Rajasthan . Several S-400 missile system surface-to-air missile batteries were also repositioned to Adampur , Bhuj , and Bikaner .

During late April and early May, the IAF mobilised around 400 aircraft, with its transport fleet conducting more than 500 sorties.

On 30 April, Pakistan said that a military strike by India was imminent.

In response to India's actions, Pakistan closed its airspace to all Indian carriers (eg. Air India , Indigo , etc.) and suspended trade, considering their suspension of the Indus water treaty as an "act of war". Timeline 7 May India announced that it had launched missile and air strikes, codenamed Operation Sindoor , targeting nine sites across Pakistani-administered Azad Kashmir and Pakistan's Punjab province . Indian military spokespeople said that the missile strikes targeted infrastructure linked to the terrorist groups Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) and Hizbul Mujahideen (HuM), and that no Pakistani military facilities were targeted, with the locations selected to avoid damage to civilian infrastructure.

The Indian government described the strikes as "focused, measured, and non-escalatory".

The Indian air strikes triggered an aerial battle in which more than 114 aircraft, 72 from the IAF and 42 from the PAF, were involved in what was described as the largest beyond visual range engagement on the India–Pakistan border . Neither Pakistani nor Indian aircraft crossed the border, engaging instead in a "stand-off" conflict at a distance of more than 100 km at times. According to a senior PAF officer, the engagement lasted approximately 52 minutes. Pakistan claimed that three Dassault Rafales , one MiG-29 , one Su-30MKI fighter jet, and one Israeli-manufactured IAI Heron UAV belonging to the Indian Air Force were shot down.

The Pakistani government condemned the Indian strikes as an "act of war" that resulted in civilian casualties. Shehbaz Sharif convened a meeting of the National Security Council to coordinate retaliatory strikes.

The NSC declared that Pakistan "reserves the right to respond, in self-defence, at a time, place, and manner of its choosing." Sharif gave the Pakistani army, under Asim Munir , the right to respond in any way needed.

On 7 May 2025, Pakistan closed its airspace to all air carriers including its own Pakistan International Airlines . Many international carriers like British Airways and Air France had their flights to and from South Asia and Australia planned to avoid Pakistani airspace. Pakistan re-opened their airspace to non-Indian air carriers on 8 May, the day after it had been closed. According to India, Pakistani cross-border artillery shelling and small arms firing increased following the Indian attacks, including in the regions of Poonch , Rajouri , Kupwara , Baramulla , Uri and Akhnoor , located in Indian-administered Jammu and Kashmir. Pakistani shelling of Poonch town and its vicinity killed at least 11 people and damaged an Islamic school along with numerous homes. According to The News Minute , the casualties included a Sikh ragi . Pakistan said that the Neelum–Jhelum Hydropower Plant had been damaged by Indian shelling following the initial Indian strikes. 8 May On 8 May, India said that Pakistan had launched drone and missile strikes on several Indian cities, including Amritsar , and that India negated these strikes by the S-400 missile system at Adampur Air Force Station , marking India's first combat use of the missile system. Pakistan denied launching drone and missile strikes on India. Pakistani Foreign Minister Ishaq Dar claimed that the Indian Army had intentionally carried out a false flag attack on the Indian city of Amritsar, blaming it on Pakistan in order to generate domestic support.

The Pakistani military spokesperson also claimed that Indian drones headed towards Nankana Sahib were brought down.

The claim was denied by India and described as false by Indian media. Indian foreign secretary Vikram Misri dismissed these as a "deranged fantasy" and an attempt by Pakistan to hide its own actions.

The Indian Armed Forces said that in response to the Pakistani attack, they had carried out SEAD/DEAD operations, neutralizing Pakistani air defence systems in Lahore . Pakistani authorities said that several Indian drones intruded in Pakistani airspace, and 12 Indian drones were shot down.

As per Pakistan, these drones were sent into nine different locations including the cities of Karachi and Lahore, and one of the drones struck a Pakistani military facility near Lahore.

The Pakistani military later claimed to have shot down 25 Israeli-made Harop loitering munitions in its territory. India admitted to one being taken down. A drone also landed near the Rawalpindi Cricket Stadium complex before the start of a Pakistan Super League match, prompting the Pakistan Cricket Board to postpone the game.

Later that day, India said that Pakistan had launched airstrikes directed in and around Jammu district including the airport and the university . All of the eight Pakistani missiles were claimed to have been intercepted by the S-400 missile system. Reportedly, multiple explosions were heard in Jammu along with an explosion in Jaisalmer , where drones and fighter jets were also reported. India later said that, these attacks involved 300–400 Turkish-Asisguard Songar drones targeting 36 sites, including civilian and military infrastructure. India also reported cross border firing by heavy calibre artillery guns along the Line of Control (LoC). Reports termed this conflict as the "first drone war" between the "nuclear-armed neighbours" of South Asia. 9 May The Pakistan Army claimed to have neutralised 77 Indian drones since 6 May. Exchanges of fire had stopped in the early morning. However, clashes restarted after "13 hours of relative calm". Exchanges of artillery fire began in Kashmir, including in, Kupwara , Poonch , Uri , and Samba along the LoC . According to the Indian Army, drones were reportedly sighted in 26 locations across a wide area from Baramulla in the north to Bhuj in the south, with at least one armed drone in Punjab ; however, Pakistani officials dismissed the Indian accusations as "baseless and misleading", denying any offensive actions. India claimed that a Pakistani army post along the LoC was destroyed.

During a press briefing, Pakistan once again denied carrying out missile and drone strikes on Indian military installations and proposed a neutral third-party investigation into the 2025 Pahalgam attack , which it claimed was ignored by India.

On 9 May, reports indicated that India had repositioned its Western Fleet , including an aircraft carrier, destroyers, frigates and anti-submarine warfare ships, in the northern Arabian Sea .

The Indian government claimed that Pakistan let civilian aircraft through Pakistan as a distraction to let in 300-400 drones into Northern India . According to an Indian defence source cited by The Daily Telegraph , the fleet was brought within operational range of Karachi , Pakistan's largest port city and the headquarters of the Pakistan Navy . 10 May On 10 May, India accused Pakistan of launching missile attacks on air bases in Punjab in the early hours, including the Pathankot military airfield . According to The Indian Express , a Fatah-II long-range missile was intercepted near the Sirsa Air Force Station shortly after midnight.

At 2:09 am, Pakistan's Nur Khan airbase in Rawalpindi was struck by Indian missiles. India said the next morning that it had launched attacks on Pakistan's air bases in response to the drone and missile attacks along India's western border . It described them as precision attacks on identified military targets. It said Pakistan Air Force bases at Rafiqui , Murid , Chaklala , and Rahim Yar Khan Airport as having been targeted.

The strikes also targeted military sites in Sukkur and Chunian , a radar installation in Pasrur , the Sialkot aviation base , and other air bases at Skardu , Sargodha , Jacobabad , and Bholari . Around 3:20 am, Pakistan denied initiating hostilities, instead alleging that India had first fired air-to-surface missiles from fighter jets at the military bases of Nur Khan, Rafiqui, and Murid, and added that India had also targeted Afghanistan with missile and drone strikes. Shortly after the Indian missile strikes, Pakistan launched a retaliatory operation, codenamed Operation Bunyan-um-Marsoos . It claimed to have struck and caused major damage to 26 military targets, including 15 air bases of Suratgarh , Sirsa, Naliya , Adampur , Bhatinda , Barnala , Halwara , Awantipur , Srinagar , Jammu , Udhampur , Mamoon , Ambala and Pathankot. It further said that the BrahMos storage facilities at Beas and Nagrota were destroyed, and that two S-400 systems at Adampur and Bhuj were neutralised by the Pakistan Air Force. Pakistan said that military logistics and support sites such as the Field Supply Depot in Uri and Radar Station in Poonch were targeted, and command headquarters such as 10 Brigade and 80 Brigade at KG Top and Nowshera , as well as proxy training and intelligence fusion facilities in Rajouri and Nowshera, were destroyed. Pakistan further said that Indian military elements across the LoC, including headquarters, logistic bases, artillery positions, and posts, were heavily damaged. It said that its drones flew over major Indian cities and sensitive political and military sites, including New Delhi. Pakistan's military said it launched a cyberattack as part of Operation Bunyun Marsoos, targeting Indian military satellites, government websites, and critical digital infrastructure. Indian authorities recorded over 1.5 million attempted cyber intrusions. According to reports by Pakistani media, affected entities included the official website of India's ruling party, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), the Crime Research Investigation Agency, Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited , Bharat Earth Movers Limited , and the All India Naval Technical Supervisory Staff Association. Those reports said that large volumes of data were erased from these websites, and sensitive information was leaked from key institutions such as Hindustan Aeronautics Limited , the Border Security Force , and the Unique Identification Authority of India .

The cyberattack was also reported in Pakistani media to have compromised databases belonging to the Indian Air Force, the Maharashtra Election Commission , and the takeover of more than 2,500 surveillance cameras across India. India denied Pakistan's claims that its BrahMos missile base, airfields in Sirsa, Jammu, Pathankot, Bhatinda, Nalia and Bhuj, and ammunition depots in Chandigarh and Beas had been damaged. It also rejected Pakistan's claims that the S-400 defence system and airfield at Suratgarh had been destroyed, calling these allegations part of a "malicious misinformation campaign". Indian officials acknowledged limited damage at four of its air bases — Udhampur, Pathankot, Adampur, and Bhuj — and the family of one Indian soldier confirmed his death at Udhampur.

The Prime Minister of Pakistan Shehbaz Sharif later said in his speech on the Independence Day of Azerbaijan that the operation had already been initially planned for 4:30 am but India attacked before that time.

In an earlier speech, he had said that the Army Chief called him at 2:30 am to inform him about the Indian airstrikes and sought permission to strike back.

The Army Chief is said to have called back later in the night informing him about "befitting response" and adding, "we are being requested for a ceasefire". PM Sharif said he told him to go ahead and accept the offer. Intense firing and shelling were reported along the Line of Control , including in Sialkot and Rajouri . Local officials in India reported that at least five people were killed in Pakistani shelling in Rajouri, Poonch, and Jammu districts. Analyst Michael Kugelman posited that the two countries were now "effectively at war". State media PTV News reported that Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif had convened a meeting of the National Command Authority , the body responsible for Pakistan's nuclear weapons programme, although Defence Minister Khawaja Asif said that no such meeting had taken place. A ceasefire began at 17:00 ( IST )/16:30 ( PKT ). It was first announced by US President Donald Trump on social media, and the Indian and Pakistani foreign ministers subsequently confirmed the agreement. Both sides claimed victory after the ceasefire. Pakistani prime minister Shehbaz Sharif designated 16 May to be celebrated as Youm-e-Tashakur ('Day of Gratitude') in honour of its armed forces. Ceasefire A fragile ceasefire was achieved around midday on Saturday, 10 May, with the intervention of the United States.

The US administration grew concerned with the possibility of nuclear weapon involvement, and the Secretary of State Marco Rubio started making calls from 4:00 PKT . He spoke to Pakistan's Army chief Asim Munir , National Security Advisor Asim Malik and prime minister Shehbaz Sharif . United States Vice President JD Vance was in touch with the Indian authorities, including prime minister Narendra Modi . Interventions were also made by Saudi Arabia, Iran, the UAE and the UK.

The Indian and Pakistani heads of military operations spoke on phone at 2:30 pm for the first time since the conflict broke out. Agreement Foreign Secretary of India Vikram Misri and the Pakistani Foreign Minister Ishaq Dar stated that both militaries agreed to a full ceasefire and that hostilities would end as of 5:00 p.m. IST /4:30 pm PKT (11:30 GMT ). Dar stated that 36 countries helped broker the truce. However, an Indian official told Agence France Presse that the ceasefire was negotiated bilaterally in the sense that "stoppage of firing and military action between India and Pakistan was worked out directly between the two countries". United States Secretary of State Marco Rubio declared that both nations would discuss "a broad set of issues at a neutral site" and that he and Vice President JD Vance had extensively corresponded with senior officials on both sides. Hours later, following ceasefire violations, Indian officials had not yet voiced readiness for talks. US president Donald Trump made a post on social media about the ceasefire soon after it came into effect, prior to the official announcements by the Indian and Pakistani foreign ministers. Pakistani Prime Minister Sharif stated that Trump had played a "pivotal and paramount role" in facilitating the truce along with representatives of Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Qatar, the UK, UN, and China, while India's foreign secretary later said that ceasefire talks were held "directly between India and Pakistan under the existing channels established between both militaries." Thanking the heads of India and Pakistan, President Trump vowed to enhance trade "substantially" with both nations.

On 29 July, Indian Defence Minister Rajnath Singh rejected Trump's claim that he had ended the conflict, describing it as "baseless".

Following the agreement, Pakistan reopened its airspace to commercial flights. Military hotlines between the two states were activated. Accusations of violations 10 May: Minutes after the ceasefire announcement, loud explosions were heard and projectiles were seen in the sky over the cities of Srinagar and Jammu in Indian-administered Jammu and Kashmir. Late on 10 May, Misri stated that there had been violations of the ceasefire agreement, citing cross-border firing and sightings of Pakistani drones over Srinagar and Punjab, and called on Pakistani authorities to "address violations". Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Omar Abdullah also reported explosions in Srinagar, expressing concern over the apparent collapse of the ceasefire. Pakistani Information Minister Atta Tarar denied Indian claims that Pakistan had violated the ceasefire, calling reports by the Indian media as "baseless". Pakistan later also accused India of committing ceasefire violations in Pakistan-administered Kashmir .

By 11 May, reports suggested that "serious violations" of the truce had ceased, and that the situation had stabilized in many cities on the Indian side of the LoC. Businesses reopened in Srinagar as calm returned.

In India, Gujarat Minister of State Harsh Sanghavi announced that a blackout would be implemented in the Kutch district after drones were spotted in the sky.

In Pakistan, civilians in Peshawar heard anti-aircraft gunfire after drones were spotted in the sky. 12 May: Indian media claimed that "suspected Pakistani drones" were detected and engaged in the Samba district of Indian-administered Jammu and Kashmir. Blackouts were imposed in several border towns including Amritsar as a precautionary measure.

After midnight, the Indian Army said, "no drone activity has been detected recently, and the ceasefire situation prevails." Aerial strikes and skirmishes Operation Sindoor Initial strikes On 7 May 2025, India launched missile and air strikes on nine alleged "militant camps" in both Pakistan and Pakistan-administered Kashmir.

The strikes, lasted just 25 minutes between 01:05 and 01:30 India time (19:35 and 20:00 GMT on Tuesday). Seven targets, including some in Pakistan-administered Kashmir, were struck by the Indian Army's artillery regiment using precision long-range M982 Excalibur rounds and loitering munitions , while air defence was jointly provided by the Army and the Indian Air Force.

The Israeli press mentioned Indo-Israeli SkyStriker loitering munitions.

The attacks on targets in Pakistani Punjab were carried out by the Indian Air Force. According to sources cited by India Today , Rafale jets were employed, equipped with SCALP missiles and AASM Hammer bombs.

In press releases by Press Information Bureau , the Indian government claimed that during the first strikes on terror camps the Indian Air Force had "bypassed and jammed Pakistan's Chinese-supplied air defence systems" and the operation was conducted without the loss of any Indian asset.

The missile strikes targeted locations including Subhan Allah Mosque in Bahawalpur (near Ahmedpur East ) and Markaz-e-Taiba in Muridke , part of the headquarters of JeM and the headquarters of LeT respectively and alleged by India to be their terrorist training camps. Other sites claimed to have been targeted by India included Abbas Mosque (associated with the JeM) in Kotli District , Shawai Nala camp (associated with the LeT) and Syedna Bilal Mosque (associated with the JeM) in Muzaffarabad , a site in Gulpur , Kotli District (alleged by the Indian government to be a LeT and HuM camp); Markaz Ahl-e-Hadith in Barnala , Bhimber District (alleged by the Indian government to be associated with the LeT); a site in Mehmona Joya, Kotli Loharan West , Sialkot District (alleged by the Indian government to be a HuM camp); and a site in Tera Katlan in Sarjal, Shakargarh Tehsil , Sialkot District (alleged by the Indian government to be a JeM camp). Satellite images released after launching the strikes showed the extent of damage in Pakistan. According to CNN , Indian jets have previously bombed Pakistani territory following militant attacks on its soil but "Wednesday's operation is the deepest India has struck inside its neighbor since the Indo-Pakistan war of 1971 , the biggest of several wars between the two countries." Pakistan confirmed strikes on six of the sites targeted by India, denying the strikes at Barnala and Gulpur in Pakistan-administered Azad Kashmir, but said these were civilian areas including mosques and residential areas and were not terrorist facilities. Aerial skirmishes The Indian air strikes triggered an aerial battle in which more than 114 aircraft, 72 from the IAF and 42 from the PAF, were involved in what was described as the largest beyond visual range engagement on the India–Pakistan border , with the engagement described as one of the largest air battles since the end of World War II . According to independent assessments, at least four Indian fighter aircraft were downed, though Pakistan claimed five, including three Rafales , one MiG-29 , one SU-30MKI and a Heron unmanned aerial vehicle . If true, it would be first time that a French-origin Dassault Rafale has been lost in combat, reportedly having been shot down by the Chinese-origin Chengdu J-10 . Pakistan's response also included the use of Chinese-produced PL-15 long-range air-to-air missiles fired from Chengdu J-10 fighter jets, marking the first combat use of the missile.

The presence of air-launched PL-15 debris at multiple sites within India was indicative that some of the downings were caused by the PAF. Chief of Staff of the French Air and Space Force Général d'armée aérienne Jérôme Bellanger stated that he had "seen evidence" of three aircraft being downed including a Rafale, a Mirage 2000 and a Russian Sukhoi. Reuters reported that unnamed Indian government sources said that three fighter jets had crashed in India due to unknown causes.

On 8 May, an unnamed US official told Reuters that he assessed with "high confidence" that Pakistani J-10 aircraft had shot down at least two Indian fighter jets; a second official assessed one of the downed jets to be a Dassault Rafale .

The Washington Post later said that it had identified 3 crash sites in India from 7 May, identifying two of them as belonging to an Indian Dassault Rafale and Dassault Mirage 2000 at Akalia Kalan in Bathinda and Wuyan in Pampore respectively and another site at Akhnoor (likely an Indian MiG-29).

The Rafale crash in Bathinda also reportedly killed two bystanders.

On 9 May, local government sources in Indian-administered Jammu and Kashmir told Reuters that three fighter jets crashed in India on 7 May with three pilots being hospitalized.

On 11 May, the Indian Air Force said that "losses are a part of combat" but declined to provide further details, adding that all pilots were back home. According to France 24 , India's refusal to confirm or deny the loss of the jets gave further credence to the downing claims. Defence analyst Michael Clarke told Al Jazeera that if India had lost a Rafale jet, "that would certainly be embarrassing." He added that if the aircraft had come down within Indian territory, India would likely try to keep it as an unconfirmed rumour for as long as possible, and that its general statement on "inevitable losses" might be the closest it comes to confirmation.

On 15 May, Pakistani prime minister Shehbaz Sharif claimed that Pakistan shot down six Indian fighter jets, the sixth being a Mirage 2000.

On 28 May, he again said that six Indian fighter jets were downed but said that four of these were Rafale, one MiG-29 and one "another plane".

The PAF provided the tail numbers BS001, BS021, BS022, and BS027 of four Rafale aircraft it claimed to have shot down to Dassault so the manufacturer could confirm whether the aircraft were still operational. One of the Rafale aircraft, identified by the callsign Godzilla 4 , was destroyed over Akalia Kalan, a village in Bathinda in Punjab, India , approximately 70 km from the India–Pakistan border , while returning to Ambala Air Force Station , home to a major wing of the IAF's Western Air Command.

The downed jet was identified as Rafale EH BS001.

On 6 June, the PAF said that No. 15 Squadron , also known as the Cobras , was responsible for shooting down IAF fighter jets.

The unit operated out of PAF Base Minhas in Kamra with J-10C multirole fighters equipped with PL-15 beyond-visual-range missiles. According to Dawn , the Cobras deployed 18 out of the 20 aircraft assigned to the squadron for the intercept operation on 7 May.

On 31 May 2025, India's Chief of Defence Staff General Anil Chauhan admitted that India lost jets, but dismissed Pakistan's claim of downing six fighter jets.

On 18 July 2025, President of the United States Donald Trump said that he believed five aircraft had been shot down during the conflict. According to The Washington Quarterly , India confirmed the loss of at least three aircraft during the conflict, although the types were not specified. It is likely that India lost at least four aircraft, possibly a fifth, including at least one Rafale and a MiG-29; and that Pakistan also likely lost aircraft. Indian strikes on Pakistani air bases On 8 May 2025, in response to a series of drone incursions and missile attacks, which India attributed to Pakistan despite its denials of involvement, India carried out strikes and claimed to have damaged air defence radars and systems at multiple locations in Pakistan. Pakistan reported drone incursions or intercepts at 11 sites that morning, and officially acknowledged that four soldiers were injured and military equipment was partially damaged.

The strikes destroyed an air defence radar in Lahore . Local media in India reported a barrage of drone and missile strikes on the night of 9 May. Hours later, on the night of 9 and 10 May, the Indian Armed Forces conducted multiple airstrike operations targeting Pakistani military installations.

As per Indian media reports, the air strikes were planned by India's Chief of the Air Staff Amar Preet Singh while National Security Advisor Ajit Doval granted the final clearance. A wave of one-way loitering munitions, including Israeli-made IAI Harop and Polish Warmate 5.0 drones, was deployed. These drones served dual purposes, probing and assessing the reaction parameters of HQ-9 BE short-range SAM systems and neutralising or degrading the target acquisition and illumination radars of HQ-16 FE medium-range SAM systems. This preparatory tactic weakened the defensive envelope of the targeted sites, thereby facilitating the success of the subsequent cruise missile strikes. According to Pakistan, the PAF intercepted and destroyed 84 Israeli-made Harop drones sent by India.

The drone strikes were followed by Su-30MKI aircraft of the IAF launching between fifteen and eighteen supersonic BrahMos missiles, typically one per aircraft, caused considerable damage. Simultaneously, Rafale EH aircraft from No. 17 Squadron employed at least ten SCALP-EG missiles. These precision strikes were focused on degrading Pakistan's air defense capabilities and operational infrastructure.

The targets included four early warning radar installations, seven PAF air bases, and one forward operating base. PAF Base Nur Khan came under both missile and drone attacks. A missile strike hit the operations room of the 35 Composite Transport Wing, destroying two fuel trucks, with collateral damage to at least one C-130 Hercules medium-lift tactical transport aircraft.The barrage took out two roofs and hit the hangar of a refueling plane, according to one of the officials, who visited the base the next day. According to William Goodhind, a geospatial analyst at Contested Ground, two mobile control centers at the Nur Khan airbase were damaged. An apparent missile strike created a 60 ft (18 m)-wide hole in an aircraft hangar at PAF Base Bholari . Debris was scattered across the pavement around the hangar, and the wall appeared to have collapsed onto a nearby building. This strike damaged a Saab 2000 Erieye AEW&CS , which the PAF said was later repaired. PAF Base Shahbaz was also attacked, resulting in a 100 ft (30 m)-wide hole in an aircraft hangar as well as damage to its air traffic control tower.

At PAF Base Mushaf , the Indian military claimed to have used precision weapons to strike two sections of the runway.

Later satellite imagery showed a crater on the runway.

The runway was made operational within a few hours.

At PAF Base Murid and PAF Base Rafiqui , BrahMos missiles targeted an Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) command shelter and the operations room of the 34 Tactical Air Wing, respectively.

At PAF Base Sukkur, a hangar and an electronic warfare (EW) radar installation were destroyed by missile strikes. Satellite imagery taken after the Indian strike showed a crater on the Rahim Yar Khan Airport runway that was not present in earlier images.

The airport's Royal Lounge was damaged in the attack and a 10 ft (3.0 m)-wide crater was created in the apron area.

The air strikes were also executed against early warning radar installations of the Pakistan Army Air Defence Corps (PAADC), including one located in Gujranwala. Pakistan Army spokesman said that India fired ballistic missiles from Adampur that fell into its own territory, and added that India had targeted Afghanistan with missile and drone strikes. PAF spokesperson displayed radar signatures of the BrahMos on screen and said the missiles had missed their targets and flown into Afghanistan. India denied the allegations, calling the claims "ludicrous" and "frivolous".

The Taliban government of Afghanistan also denied Pakistani claims of Indian attacks on Afghanistan. It was termed a "bizarre and unsubstantiated claim" by Christopher Clary. Pakistan said that all Pakistan Air Force (PAF) assets at targeted bases remained safe. Pakistani media reported that Sheikh Zayed International Airport in Rahim Yar Khan was targeted and suffered structural damage.

The airport was named after Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan and is regarded as a symbol of Pak-UAE friendship .

Although commercial flights have been suspended since 2023, the airport was occasionally used by members of the House of Nahyan via the Royal Lounge, which was among the facilities destroyed in the attack.

The Pakistan military later confirmed that six of its airmen were killed during the Indian air strikes including 5 deaths at Bholari and one at Sargodha; Chief Minister of Sindh , Murad Ali Shah , also later said that nine personnel were injured in Indian attacks. Operation Bunyan-um-Marsoos In retaliation for Indian strikes, the PAF carried out a coordinated retaliatory air campaign.

The primary objective of the operation was to disrupt IAF infrastructure and operational readiness, particularly by targeting airbases and logistical nodes near the Indo-Pakistani border . JF-17 multirole fighter aircraft launched stand-off munitions, including air-launched cruise missiles, against several Indian military installations, including Udhampur , Adampur , and Pathankot air force stations, as well as weapon storage facilities in Uri , Nagrota , and Beas .

The PAF struck and destroyed the Integrated Air Command and Control System (IACCS) at Barnala , effectively stopping communications between the IAF leadership and its fighters. JF-17C Thunder Block 3 aircraft from No. 14 Squadron , and operating from PAF Base Rafiqui , conducted a Destruction of Enemy Air Defence (DEAD) mission to destroy the S-400 system at Adampur.

The aircraft employed electronic countermeasures, decoys, and evasive manoeuvres to approach the S-400 system and fired CM-400AKG missiles at low-altitude and early-warning radar installations. Pakistan said that a mobile 91N6E (NATO name "Big Bird") acquisition radar was destroyed by a CM-400AKG, and that a 96L6E (NATO name "Cheese Board") 3D early-warning and acquisition radar was also successfully targeted. According to AirForces Monthly , independent analysis of low-resolution satellite images revealed evidence of burn marks and disturbed ground at the suspected S-400 site, suggesting that key components of the battery may have been struck or degraded.

In another report, AirForces Monthly said that one thing is certain that without on-site photographs, authenticated radar recordings, and parametric analysis, what truly occurred between these two systems remains, for the time being, a matter of speculation and personal interpretation. PAF also deployed domestically developed unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), described as "killer drones" over multiple locations in India.

The drones flew over airbases carrying up to 20 kg of explosives. Over several hours, the PAF struck 34 targets across different Indian bases, with approximately half targeted by manned aircraft and the remainder by UAVs. India said that its air defence systems successfully intercepted and shot down hundreds of drones and loitering munitions launched by Pakistan.

The Indian Army released images of what it said were debris of Pakistani YIHA-III kamikaze drones destroyed by air defence units. It said multiple armed drones were spotted flying over Khasa Cantonment in Amritsar at approximately 5 am and that the attempt had endangered residential areas. According to The New York Times , satellite images of the sites Pakistan claimed to have struck, did not clearly show damage caused by Pakistani strikes, even at bases where there was corroborating evidence of some military action. According to The Washington Quarterly , Pakistan was largely unable to suppress Indian air defences or cause significant physical damage with its drone attacks. Nuclear concerns The New York Times reported that explosions at the Nur Khan air base heightened U.S. concern that the conflict could "quickly go nuclear." The base lies close to the headquarters of Pakistan's Strategic Plans Division , which oversees the country's nuclear arsenal .

The majority of the deaths and injuries were from mortar shelling by Pakistan in the Jammu region of Indian-administered Jammu and Kashmir particularly its Poonch district , where Indian media sources said that a gurudwara , a school and several houses were damaged in the attacks, leaving 14 civilians and 2 Indian soldiers dead. Pakistani shelling hit in and near the Christ School compound, a Carmelites of Mary Immaculate congregation Catholic school in Poonch, killing two students and damaging the nearby convent of the Congregation of Mother of Carmel . A Pakistani loitering munition resulted in the death of a civilian in the Firozpur district of Punjab , the only Indian death outside Indian-administered Jammu and Kashmir. An Indian Air Force soldier was killed following Pakistan's airstrike on Udhampur Air Force Station , and a deputy commissioner was killed during Pakistani shelling in Rajouri . Pakistan claimed that around 25–50 Indian soldiers were killed. Pakistan Pakistan said that 40 civilians and 13 military personnel were killed during the conflict from Indian air strikes and cross-border shelling (the latter in Pakistan-administered Azad Kashmir). Pakistan said that the initial Indian airstrikes on 7 May killed at least 21 civilians and denied presence of militants at any of the targeted locations. Indian loitering munitions killed a civilian near the Rawalpindi Cricket Stadium , two others in Daharki and Jabbi Kasran and a Pakistan Army soldier in Lahore.

The Pakistan military confirmed that six of its airmen were killed during Indian air strikes on 10 May, including 5 deaths at PAF Base Bholari and one at PAF Base Mushaf . India claimed that at least 100 militants had been killed in the missile strikes, and that Pakistan lost 35 to 40 personnel in the conflict. Masjid Syedna Bilal in Muzaffarabad and Masjid-e-Abbas in Kotli (identified by India as Markaz Abbas) both in Pakistan-administered Azad Kashmir were damaged in the Indian strikes and killed 5 civilians according to Pakistan.

The Markaz-e-Taiba , a complex which includes a school, a college and a medical clinic, was hit in Muridke . It was established by Lashkar-e-Taiba's co-founder Hafiz Saeed and serves as its headquarters, and that of its front organisation the Jamaat-ud-Dawa . Al-Jazeera noted this site as the most significant among the others hit by India. Dawn reported that that at least 3 civilians were killed in the Indian strike. Bahawalpur 's Jamia Masjid Subhan Allah, the headquarters of Jaish-e-Mohammed , was also one of the targets in the Indian strikes. Indian media reports claimed that Jaish leader Abdul Rauf Azhar was killed in the strike, though this remains unconfirmed and his brother Masood did not name him among the deceased family members. Analysis According to The New York Times , India's role was "assertive" and "aggressive", and possibly established a new level of deterrence with Pakistan.

The Times noted that in its initial strikes, India struck targets deeper inside enemy territory than it had struck in previous decades and had hit close enough to locations affiliated with "terrorist activities" that India could claim victory against these groups.

At the end of the conflict, it published high-resolution before and after satellite images, which showed India's edge in targeting of Pakistan's military facilities and airfields. It reported that India felt frustrated after Donald Trump's public claims of mediating a cease-fire, presenting both countries as equals and downplaying the terrorist attack that triggered the conflict, and that India had hoped any US involvement would remain discreet, and Trump's portrayal of both countries on equal terms was seen by Indian officials as politically sensitive and diplomatically frustrating. According to the paper, the result of the conflict was "little more than a draw". Noting that despite India damaging sensitive Pakistani airbases, hangars and runways, it lost aircraft in aerial duels. It opined that the conflict had been a strategic setback for India, which found itself equated with Pakistan, a smaller, weaker country that Indian officials call a rogue sponsor of terrorism. It added that diplomatically, India appeared powerless to resolve the conflict and that the spectre of nuclear war limited what India could achieve militarily. According to The Washington Post , Pakistan's celebration that "ceasefire with India reestablished deterrence", "may be clouding a clearheaded assessment" and the "regional status quo had been upended" with more aggressive strikes by India, including a strike at Pakistan's military headquarters.

The Post said that, according to analysts, the alleged losses of Indian aircraft would constitute a humiliation of the Indian military. According to the French newspaper Le Monde , this military operation against Pakistan revealed weaknesses in the Indian Air Force, and that the success of the Pakistan Air Force had to do with the superior training and combat experience of most of the pilots as they had been fighting continuous counterterrorism air campaigns in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas , whereas India had largely remained at peace. It said that the major military confrontation "produced no winners." According to Al Jazeera, analysts contend that neither side emerged with a definite upper hand, and both nations made certain strategic gains even as they each also suffered losses. Al Jazeera further reported that analysts noted that Pakistan's gains included internationalising the Kashmir issue and the downing of aircraft, while India's gains involved highlighting alleged Pakistan-based terrorism and demonstrating further military reach across the border.

The Financial Times , noting that both India and Pakistan claimed victory, said the ceasefire gave Islamabad the "diplomatic upper hand", as US intervention bracketed India, the "fifth-biggest economy", with what it sees as a "terrorism-backing rogue state". According to Manal Fatima of the Atlantic Council , the war appeared to unify fractured Pakistani political forces domestically and resulted in Pakistan having a diplomatic advantage over India regarding Trump's involvement in ceasefire talks. According to Srujan Palkar—global fellow at the Council—Operation Sindoor "exposed an imbalance in US policy toward South Asia".

The expert noted that if the United States was to continue building trust with India, it must put "the onus on the Pakistani establishment to play its part in counterterrorism" as well as consider revoking Pakistan's Major Non-NATO Ally (MNNA) status. According to the Swiss newspaper Neue Zürcher Zeitung , the reported downing of an Indian Rafale jet (made in France) by a Pakistani air-defense system (made in China) raises concerns for Western military technologies. It mentioned that Operation Sindoor by India appeared to have turned into a disaster. It failed to take out the targets quickly and without detection.

The Indian pilots encountered strong resistance, with the operation resulting in heavy losses. According to The Diplomat magazine's Pakistan correspondent Umair Jamal, Pakistan came out "emboldened" after clashes with India. He said that the conflict unified the country, that the Pakistani military has emerged more popular than earlier, and that the political leadership now see the need to strengthen the armed forces. He believed that Pakistan scored a diplomatic win by acting with "restraint" and found the US intervention to have favoured Pakistan more than India. Christopher Clary, a University at Albany professor and expert on India–Pakistan relations , stated to The Washington Post that satellite evidence supports the claim that the Indian military inflicted significant, though not devastating, damage on Pakistan's air force at several eastern bases. According to John Spencer and Vincent Viola, writing in the Small Wars Journal , Operation Sindoor was more than just a rapid military reaction — it marked a significant strategic turning point.

In just four days, India carried out accurate strikes on fortified positions across the border using only domestically developed or assembled systems such as BrahMos missiles, Akashteer air defense units, and loitering munitions, without relying on US platforms or foreign logistics. India didn't just achieve victory — it demonstrated a clear military advantage over a Chinese-supported opponent.

The operation highlighted a shift in national defense doctrine toward self-reliance and indigenous capability.

As the journal notes, Pakistan, aligned with China in arms and strategy, was unable to counter India's precision offensive, with its Chinese-made air defenses proving ineffective. American geopolitical analyst Brandon Weichert writing for The National Interest described the aerial duel between both countries as an unambiguous victory for Pakistan, insofar as western observers had not expected Chinese-made equipment to be able to shoot down the Rafales.

In a June 2025 report, AirForces Monthly described Operation Sindoor as a strategic success for the Indian Armed Forces in their counter-terrorism campaign against Pakistan-based militant groups, despite the loss of three combat aircraft during the operation.

In an October 2025 report, the magazine described India's August 2025 claim, made three months after the conflict had concluded, that it had shot down five Pakistani fighter aircraft and an AEW&C Erieye using S-400 surface-to-air missiles at a range of 300 kilometres, "prompted ripples of disbelief," as the claim made by the air chief lacked supporting evidence and appeared to be an attempt to placate the Modi government , which was under pressure over the extent of the IAF's losses. According to a 2025 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission report, both countries struck targets deeper into each other's territories than at any time in fifty years.

The report stated that Pakistan's forces achieved military success over India, marking the first active combat use of China's modern weapons systems, including the HQ-9 , PL-15 and Chengdu J-10 platforms. It added that Pakistan's use of these systems to shoot down Indian aircraft became a selling point in China's post-conflict defence diplomacy. Impact Pakistani airspace was closed for 48 hours and all flights were cancelled.

In Pakistani Punjab , schools and colleges were closed, and CIE examinations were cancelled in most of Pakistan.

In India, at least 25 airports in the north and west were shut down until 10 May.

The Indian Air Force took control of Srinagar Airport and civil operations were stopped for an indefinite period.

The 2025 Indian Premier League transferred a match between Punjab Kings and the Mumbai Indians scheduled at Dharamsala on 11 May to Ahmedabad , citing the closure of Kangra Airport and other logistical issues caused by the ongoing tensions. Similarly, during the 2025 Pakistan Super League , a match between Karachi Kings and Peshawar Zalmi could not be played.

On 9 May, both the tournaments were postponed because of worsening of the situation. More than 8,000 Twitter accounts were blocked in India.

The Indian government also blocked several Pakistani YouTube channels along with YouTube accounts of six Bangladeshi channels under the Section 69(A) of the Information Technology Act, 2000 citing a "threat to the national security or public discipline". This measure received protests from Bangladeshi government . X accounts of Chinese state-run media Xinhua News Agency and Global Times , and Turkish public broadcaster TRT World were also blocked in India.

The Pakistan Telecommunication Authority blocked 79 Indian YouTube channels and websites citing "anti-Pakistan propaganda" which undermined "national unity". Stock markets in India and Pakistan experienced significant volatility through the week due to escalating geopolitical tensions, but rebounded sharply on 12 May following the ceasefire agreement. Reports that a Rafale had been downed were followed by a dip in the share price of Dassault Aviation , the manufacturer of the aircraft. Indonesia , which had placed outstanding orders for Rafales, announced that it was reconsidering its procurement plans and was evaluating China's J-10C fighter as an alternative.

In China, a viral parody video mocking India over the reported downing of Rafale jets by Pakistani J-10C aircraft attracted significant attention, amassing millions of likes on Douyin and being reposted by Pakistan's Defence Ministry .

The video was widely criticized as "racist and nationalistic", with commentators linking its popularity to rising Chinese nationalist sentiment.

While the Chinese public embraced the incident as a win for domestic military tech, the Chinese government maintained diplomatic caution, urging both sides to exercise restraint amid regional tensions.

The Indian strikes on 7 May sparked protests against it in Pakistan. Protests and rallies took place in Peshawar and Islamabad , while political rallies were taken out in Karachi , Lahore (by the Pakistan Markazi Muslim League , a front of the Lashkar-e-Taiba), Muzaffarabad (by the Pasban-e-Hurriyat Jammu and Kashmir ), and Mirpur . British Pakistani protestors demonstrated outside the Indian Embassy in London on 7 and 8 May. Members of the Indian diaspora in France gathered in front of the Eiffel Tower to hold a protest against Pakistan after the strikes. Calls for a boycott of Turkey and Azerbaijan were raised on India social media due to their public support for Pakistan during the conflict.

In Hyderabad, India , the protestors demanded to change the name of the Karachi Bakery , while in Hyderabad, Pakistan , the Bombay Bakery (named after Bombay, now Mumbai ) was celebrated. Ali Khan Mahmudabad , a professor from Ashoka University in India was arrested on 11 May on charges under laws concerning incitement of communal disharmony, subversive activity, and religious insult, following social media posts about India's Operation Sindoor.

In his posts, he questioned the use of Muslim women officer Sofiya Qureshi for optics and highlighted issues like mob lynching on Muslims in India during the conflict.

The incident sparked condemnation from over 1,200 academics and civil society members, who called it a crackdown on free speech and academic freedom. He was later granted interim bail by the Supreme Court of India .

The legal case reached India's highest court, which granted Ali bail but restrained him from further commenting on the 2025 Pahalgam attack as well as Operation Sindoor. A three-member Special Investigation Team (SIT) has also been setup to look at the charges against him.

The National Cyber Crimes Investigation Agency of Pakistan arrested a senior National Database and Registration Authority official for allegedly sharing anti-army remarks on a WhatsApp work group. Misinformation There were a number of misinformation campaigns in both countries during the conflict, particularly on social media platform X . A rise in online hate speech on social media described as misogynistic, sexist, and promoting gender-related violence against women also saw a surge in both countries during the conflict. Sumitra Badrinathan, an assistant political science professor at the American University , stated that misinformation about the rivalry between India and Pakistan often originated from anonymous online accounts, but during the ongoing conflict, misinformations at least on the Indian side had been put out by "previously credible journalists and major media outlets." South Asia analyst Michael Kugelman also noted a "very high volume of particularly egregious fake news" in Indian media outlets aligned with the government. Several Indian broadcast outlets reported unverified claims, including supposed strikes on a Pakistani nuclear base, downing two Pakistani fighter jets based on AI generated deepfakes , the Indian Army crossing the international border, Pakistan's Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif fleeing to a bunker, Pakistan's Army Chief Asim Munir being deposed in a coup and arrested, capture of Pakistani capital Islamabad , and had also circulated stories such as the Indian Navy attacking Karachi Port , all of which were discredited. According to the UK Defence Journal and the Washington Examiner , footage from a video game Arma 3 was shared by the official X (Twitter) handle of the Government of Pakistan, with Information Minister Attaullah Tarar praising the military's "timely and nerve-wracking response", as the video showing a jet being targeted went viral on social media during the conflict. A Daily Telegraph frontpage showing Pakistani aerial victory in the conflict, shared by Deputy Prime Minister Ishaq Dar in the Senate and by Ikhtiar Wali Khan online, was found to have been AI-generated by fact checkers. A CNN infographic purportedly verifying Pakistan's official claims of gains and losses in the conflict was similarly found to have been fabricated. False reports of Pakistan capturing Indian pilot Shivangi Singh were also widely circulated on Pakistani social media and were later deemed false by the Pakistan Army's media wing, the ISPR . Deutsche Welle fact-checked several false claims on social media during the conflict. A video with over 5 million views, allegedly showing Indian missile strikes, was in fact footage of Iranian missiles hitting Israel published by DD India in October 2024. Another claim by a pro-Pakistan user that a French-made Rafale fighter, used by the Indian Air Force, was shot down in Pakistan, near Bahawalpur.

The picture, in fact, was not a Rafale but a Pakistani Mirage 5 that crashed on a training mission in southeastern Pakistan three weeks before the conflict. Another viral video from a June 2024 crash of a Sukhoi Su-30MKI of the Indian Air Force in Nashik, Maharashtra was falsely shared as that of a Rafale jet shot down by Pakistan near the Line of Control.

Following social media rumours, India denied that it had struck the Kirana Hills Site (part of PAF Base Mushaf ).

The International Atomic Energy Agency also affirmed after investigations that there had been no radiation leak or release from any nuclear facility in Pakistan. False reports of a radiation leak notice by the Indian Atomic Energy Regulatory Board , after Pakistan claimed to have destroyed BrahMos storage facilities at Beas , were also shared on social media. Airspace closures Many Indian air carriers like Air India and IndiGo have been drastically affected on their international routes. IndiGo has had flight time to Central Asian destinations increase by 3 hours or more. Air India has had to divert most North American -bound flights to Vienna or Copenhagen in order to refuel their aircraft so that they can continue their flight. Air India expects to face about $600 million in additional costs if a ban from Pakistan’s airspace lasts for a year and has asked the Indian government to compensate it for the hit.

On 24 June 2025, Pakistan extended its airspace closure for Indian aircraft and airlines until 24 July 2025, issuing a fresh Notice to Airmen (NOTAM) through its Civil Aviation Authority.

The Pakistan Airports Authority extended its airspace ban on Indian aircraft until 23 January 2026, as per a newly issued NOTAM.

In The Hindu , legal journalist Aaratrika Bhaumik argued that for military self-defence to be legal under Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations , military actions have to "immediately" be reported to the UN Security Council (UNSC). Bhaumik interpreted the Indian foreign minister's 8 May briefing of 13 of the 15 UNSC member states to be "apparent adherence" to the Article 51 requirement and stated that the International Court of Justice (ICJ) interpreted Article 51 to only be valid in the case of defence against attacks by non-state actors if a state were responsible for the attacks. O. P. Jindal Global University legal scholar Prabhash Ranjan interpreted the foreign minister to have avoided references to international law and to have attributed the attack to Pakistan as a state. He viewed the foreign minister's legal argument to be based on a contested Indian view of the right to defence against non-state actors presented at a February 2021 Arria formula meeting . Ranjan viewed the Indian military strikes of 7 May 2025 to have satisfied the principles of military necessity and proportionality . Reactions India The Indian government claimed that the operation was a necessary response to terrorism and the Pahalgam attack . Left parties in India urged Pakistan to dismantle terror networks operating from its soil. Addressing the nation on 11 May, Prime Minister Narendra Modi claimed another military victory over Pakistan and warned that further terrorist attacks would elicit a military response. Opposition leader Rahul Gandhi criticised Modi's acceptance of the ceasefire, alleging that it amounted to a surrender under pressure from Trump.

On 9 June, Director General Military Operations (DGMO), Lieutenant General Rajiv Ghai was promoted to the additional post of Deputy Chief of Army Staff (Strategy), following his role in the operation. Pakistan Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif called the Indian strikes a "cowardly" attack that killed innocent civilians, Pakistan termed them an "act of war", and the military vowed to respond at a time, place, and by means of its choosing.

On 12 May, the National Assembly of Pakistan celebrated what was regarded as a Pakistani victory.

The government of Pakistan promoted Chief of Army Staff Asim Munir to the rank of Field Marshal on 20 May 2025 for his leadership during the conflict.

The tenure of Air Chief Marshal Zaheer Ahmad Babar was also extended.

The Indian Express . 22 April 2025 . Retrieved 20 May 2025 . ^ "2025 Worldwide Threat Assessment (Defense Intelligence Agency)" (PDF) . United States House Committee on Armed Services . Retrieved 25 May 2025 . ^ a b "India launches attack on 9 sites in Pakistan and Pakistan-occupied Jammu and Kashmir" . Reuters . 6 May 2025. ^ a b "Twins, 12, among those dead in Pakistani shelling in Poonch: 'Paying with our blood' " .

The Independent . 8 May 2025 . Retrieved 25 May 2025 . ^ Wani, Fayaz (24 May 2025). "31 schools damaged in Pak shelling in Poonch, Rajouri" .

The New Indian Express . Retrieved 25 May 2025 . ^ a b "India and Pakistan: The first drone war between nuclear-armed neighbours" . BBC . 9 May 2025 . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ a b c d e f g h Ellis-Petersen, Hannah; Baloch, Shah Meer (10 May 2025). "India and Pakistan accuse each other of cross-border attacks on military bases" .

The Guardian . ^ a b Bhatia, Varinder (11 May 2025). "Panic in the skies, rumour on the ground: When a missile was intercepted over Sirsa" .

The Indian Express . Retrieved 19 December 2025 . ^ "Pakistan rattles India with firm response as patience runs out" . Dawn . Pakistan launched strikes early Saturday morning targeting military installations in India and India-held Kashmir.

The strikes were launched under operation Bunyan-um-Marsoos at 5:16am. ^ a b Iyer, Aishwarya S.; Saifi, Sophia; Mogul, Rhea; Regan, Helen; Yeung, Jessie; Tanno, Sophie; Hammond, Elise; Sangal, Aditi (9 May 2025). "May 9, 2025 – India-Pakistan news" . CNN . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ "India and Pakistan agree ceasefire: What does it mean?" . Al Jazeera . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 20 May 2025 . ^ "Bunyan-un-Marsoos: Name came from mosque destroyed in Indian attack" . Aaj TV . 12 May 2025. ^ "Marka-i-Haq': Pakistan Army names period of conflict with India since April 22" . 10 May 2025. Dawn . ^ Hussain, Abid (10 May 2025). "Pakistan launches Operation Bunyan Marsoos: What we know so far" . Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ a b c "India, Pakistan agree to ceasefire, says Foreign Secretary Vikram Misri" .

The Hindu . 10 May 2025. ISSN 0971-751X . Wikidata Q134428349 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ a b c d e "India and Pakistan accuse each other of 'violations' after ceasefire deal" . BBC News . 8 May 2025 . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ "India and Pakistan Swap Detained Soldiers as Cease-Fire Holds" .

The New York Times . 14 May 2025 . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ "Kashmir: Four days that took India and Pakistan to the brink" . www.bbc.com . 18 May 2025. ^ Sharma, Sukalp (21 April 2026). "Pakistan continues to hit Indian airlines with airspace closure, extends ban on Indian aircraft by another month" .

The Indian Express . Retrieved 16 May 2026 . ^ "Kashmir: Why India and Pakistan fight over it" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 24 December 2018 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Bhat, Danish Manzoor (23 April 2025). "Kashmir Massacre: Trump, Putin, Iran, Israel Condemn Jihadist Attack on Hindu Tourists" . Newsweek . Archived from the original on 1 May 2025 . Retrieved 7 May 2025 . Witnesses reported the assailants shouted Islamic slogans and specifically targeted people who appeared to be Hindu. ^ "Indian survivors of Kashmir attack say gunmen asked if they were Hindus and opened fire" . AP News . 30 April 2025. Archived from the original on 4 May 2025 . Retrieved 7 May 2025 . Indian survivors of Kashmir attack say gunmen asked if they were Hindus and opened fire ^ Chesterton & Bacon 2025 . ^ Koren, Ganguly & Khanna 2021 . ^ Sen, Sudhi Ranjan (18 July 2025). "US Declares Group Accused of Kashmir Attacks a Terror Outfit" . Bloomberg News . Retrieved 18 July 2025 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "Who are the armed groups India accuses Pakistan of backing?" . Al Jazeera . 9 May 2025 . Retrieved 26 August 2025 . ^ Ranjan, Mukesh (26 April 2025). "Lashkar proxy, The Resistance Front, now denies its role in Pahalgam terror attack" .

The New Indian Express . Retrieved 26 August 2025 . ^ "Briefing: Indian media link TRF's Kashmir attack denial to Pakistani pressure" . BBC Monitoring . 28 April 2025 . Retrieved 26 August 2025 . ^ Kestler‑D'Amours, Jillian (24 April 2025). "Kashmir updates: Pakistan claims Pahalgam attack 'false flag operation' " . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 11 June 2025 . ^ "Shehbaz hails Trump as 'man of peace' " .

The Express Tribune . 5 June 2025 . Retrieved 12 June 2025 . ^ Mogul, Rhea; Saifi, Sophia (24 April 2025). "A tourist massacre in Kashmir is escalating tensions between India and Pakistan. Here's what we know" . CNN . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ Peshimam, Gibran Naiyyar; Greenfield, Charlotte (5 May 2025). "Pakistan tests missile, India orders drills amid Kashmir standoff" . Reuters . Retrieved 6 May 2025 . ^ "Live: J&K Govt Officer Killed in Rajouri Shelling, Indian Army Says Pakistan's 'Blatant Escalation' Continues" .

The Wire . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Warnes, Alan (October 2025). "Exclusive: Full article – Understanding the Rafale kills" . Air Forces Monthly . Key Publishing . Retrieved 1 October 2025 . ^ "Pakistan claims 'credible intelligence' India is planning an imminent military strike" . www.bbc.com . 30 April 2025 . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ Mogul, Rhea; Saifi, Sophia (30 April 2025). "Pakistan claims it has 'credible intelligence' India will strike within 36 hours" . CNN . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ "What is The Resistance Front, the group that said it attacked tourists in Indian Kashmir's Pahalgam?" . Reuters . 23 April 2025. Archived from the original on 23 April 2025 . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ "India and Pakistan face conflict again - how did they de-escalate in the past?" . www.bbc.com . 3 May 2025 . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ "India to stop water flowing across international borders, Modi says" . www.bbc.com . 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ "India, Pakistan extend airspace closures for each other's airlines in tit-for-tat moves" . Reuters . 23 May 2025 . Retrieved 30 June 2025 . ^ "India to stop water flowing across international borders, Modi says" . www.bbc.com . 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ Laskar, Rezaul H (24 April 2025). " 'Act of war': Pakistan closes airspace to Indian airlines, suspends all trade" . Hindustan Times . p. 1 . Retrieved 16 May 2025 . ^ a b "India says it has launched strikes on Pakistan and Pakistan-administered Kashmir" . BBC News . 6 May 2025. A dramatic overnight operation on Tuesday, in which India said it launched missile and air strikes on nine sites across Pakistan and Pakistan-administered Kashmir. Pakistan said only six locations were hit and claimed to have shot down five Indian fighter jets and a drone – a claim India has not confirmed. ^ "Operation Sindoor targets 9 locations: Links to LeT and JeM, how they've attacked India in the past" .

The Indian Express . 7 May 2025. ^ "Ooeration Sindoor: Media Brief DGMO" (PDF) . Director General of Military Operations (India) . Consulate General of India, Istanbul. ^ a b c Shahid, Kunwar Khuldune (31 May 2025). "Pakistan and the Latest Reincarnation of Lashkar-e-Taiba" .

The Diplomat . Retrieved 1 June 2025 . However, mosques and madrassas associated with the LeT, JeM, and HM, openly function, which include some of the buildings hit by Indian strikes this month. Masjid Abbas in Kotli and Masjid Bilal in Muzaffarabad are both affiliated with the JeM, while the LeT-linked Shawai Nalla camp was also targeted. ...

The LeT's Shawai Nalla camp was one of the few sites dedicated to militant training in the region. ^ "Operation Sindoor: Indian strikes on Pakistan, PoK hit headquarters of Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaish-e-Muhammad" .

The Indian Express . 7 May 2025. ^ a b c "Transcript of Special Briefing on OPERATION SINDOOR (May 07, 2025)" . Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India . Archived from the original on 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 4 June 2025 . ^ a b Hadid, Diaa (7 May 2025). "Tensions escalate as Pakistan calls India's operation 'an act of war' " . NPR . ^ Barker, Memphis (8 May 2025). "China helped Pakistan shoot down Indian planes, report says" .

The Daily Telegraph – via Yahoo News . ^ "Pakistan Shows Evidence of Indian Su-30MKI and Rafale Takedown in Dogfight" . Defense Express . 10 May 2025. ^ a b Saifi, Sophia; Taylor, Jerome; Adkin, Ross; Mogul, Rhea; Regan, Helen (6 May 2025). "India strikes deep inside Pakistan, Pakistan claims 5 Indian jets shot down, in major escalation" . CNN . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ Guliyev, Aghakazim (16 May 2025). "PM Sharif: Pakistan downed six Indian jets in recent stand-off" . Caliber.Az . Retrieved 24 May 2025 . ^ Mogul, Rhea; Saifi, Sophia; Iyer, Aishwarya S.; Sangal, Aditi; Hammond, Elise; Powell, Tori B.; Yeung, Jessie; Harvey, Lex; Radford, Antoinette (6 May 2025). "May 7, 2025 India launches attacks on Pakistan after Kashmir massacre" . CNN . ^ Ellis-Petersen, Hannah; Baloch, Shah Meer (10 May 2025). "Who is Gen Asim Munir, the army chief leading Pakistan's military amid India crisis?" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . ^ a b "Pakistan Shuts Down Airspace, Plans To Hit Back After India's Precision Strikes" . NDTV . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ Asghar, Mohammad (8 May 2025). "Pakistan reopens airspace; India closes 21 airports" . DAWN.COM . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ Marsi, Federica; Quillen, Stephen (6 May 2025). "Heavy cross-border shelling as Pakistan says India attack 'ignited inferno' " . Al Jazeera . Archived from the original on 6 May 2025. ^ "Shelling by Pakistani troops in J&K's Kupwara, Baramulla, Uri and Akhnoor areas" .

The Hindu . 7 May 2025. ISSN 0971-751X . ^ a b "Poonch: 12 killed after schools, gurudwara and houses targeted by Pakistan Army" .

The Financial Express . 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ Nidhi Suresh, Anmol Pritam, Poonch's forgotten victims: Apathy after India-Pak ceasefire , The News Minute, 20 May 2025. ^ Naqash, Tariq (9 May 2025). "Wapda takes stock of damage to Neelum-Jhelum dam" . DAWN.COM . ^ "IAF's S-400 Sudarshan Chakra: Missile shield that foiled Pak's escalatory bid" . India Today . 8 May 2025 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ a b c d e Mashal, Mujib (11 May 2025). "What We Know About How the 4-Day India-Pakistan Clashes Unfolded" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 12 May 2025 . ^ a b "Pakistan reserves right to respond to Indian aggression: DPM" . Radio Pakistan . Archived from the original on 13 May 2025 . Retrieved 6 June 2025 . ^ "India dropped projectiles in Amritsar: Dar" . DAWN.COM . 8 May 2025 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ "Pakistan's doublespeak: It targets Poonch gurdwara, but falsely claims Indian attack on Nankana Sahib" . Firstpost . 9 May 2025 . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ "Pakistan's Claim That India Would Attack Its Own Cities a 'Deranged Fantasy': FS" .

The Wire . 10 May 2025. ^ Alex Nitzberg; Greg Norman (8 May 2025). "Pakistan shoots down more than two dozen drones launched by India" . Fox News . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ "Pakistan says it shot down Indian drones" . Al Jazeera . 8 May 2025. Archived from the original on 8 May 2025 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ Rickett, Oscar (8 May 2025). "Pakistan shoots down Israeli-made drones launched by India" . Middle East Eye . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ "Pakistan military says it shot down 25 Israeli-made drones launched by India" . Times of Israel . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ a b Naimat Khan (8 May 2025). "Pakistan postpones PSL match after Indian drone shot down near Rawalpindi Cricket Stadium" . Arab News . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ Mike Peter; Matthew Henry (9 May 2025). "PSL 2025: Plan to stage rest of season in UAE is abandoned" . BBC Sport . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ Khan, Haq Nawaz; Noack, Rick; Irfan, Shams (8 May 2025). "Pakistan says it downed Indian drones as India claims to strike Lahore" .

The Washington Post . ^ "8 missiles targeted at Jammu intercepted, blackouts from Punjab to Rajasthan" .

The Indian Express . 8 May 2025 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ "Pakistan Air Force pilot captured in Jaisalmer after ejecting from fighter jet" .

The Tribune . Archived from the original on 8 May 2025 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ "Pak targeted 36 places with 300–400 'Turkish' drones: India on May 8 attack" . India Today . 9 May 2025 . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ "FACT CHECK: Was Qari Mohammad Iqbal, who was killed in Pakistan shelling in Poonch, an LeT 'terrorist'?" .

The Week (India) . 9 May 2025. ^ Ibrahim, Muhammad (9 May 2025). "Pakistan says India sending drones to detect location of weapons system, 77 shot down" . Arab News . Retrieved 2 June 2025 . ^ Das, Anupreeta (9 May 2025). "Here is the latest" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ Uras, Umut; Adler, Nils (9 May 2025). "Pakistan says 'no de-escalation' with India as sides trade attacks" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ Ahmed, Aftab; Greenfield, Charlotte; Patel, Shivam (9 May 2025). "Blasts rock Indian Kashmir, Amritsar as Pakistan conflict escalates" . Reuters . Retrieved 3 June 2025 . ^ "Fitting reply: Army shares 1st visual of destroying Pak military post along LoC" . India Today . 9 May 2025 . Retrieved 30 May 2025 . ^ "Tri Services Joint Press Conference – 9 May 2025 | ISPR" (video) . YouTube . ISPR Official. 9 May 2025. ^ "DG ISPR challenges Delhi to produce evidence of Pakistan's missile, drone attacks in India" .

The Express Tribune . 9 May 2025 . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ Ellis-Petersen, Hannah; Hassan, Aakash (9 May 2025). "Pakistan accused of launching fresh wave of drone strikes on India" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ Lateef, Samaan (9 May 2025). "Pakistan and India slide towards all-out war after new wave of strikes" .

The Telegraph . ISSN 0307-1235 . Retrieved 25 May 2025 . ^ a b c d e Shah, Saeed; Shahzad, Asif; Patel, Shivam; Peshimam, Gibran Naiyyer (14 May 2025). "How India and Pakistan pulled back from the brink with US-brokered ceasefire" . Reuters . ^ Bose, Saikat Kumar. " "Swift, Calibrated Response": Indian Fighter Jets Bomb Pak Air Force Bases" . NDTV . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ "Transcript of Special briefing by MOD on OPERATION SINDOOR (May 10, 2025)" . Ministry of External Affairs of India . ^ a b "India has fired missiles at Afghanistan and used drones: DG ISPR (03:21am)" . DAWN.COM . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 7 June 2025 . ^ a b Yousaf, Kamran (10 May 2025). "India goes ballistic, hits own people" .

The Express Tribune . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ "Nur Khan, Murid and Shorkot bases targeted with air-launched missiles" .

The News International . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 4 June 2025 . ^ a b c d e f g Clary, Christopher (28 May 2025). Four Days in May: The India-Pakistan Crisis of 2025 . Stimson Center. ^ "Pakistan never requested ceasefire: DG ISPR briefs nation on military response to Indian aggression" .

The Express Tribune . 11 May 2025 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ a b c d "26 Indian military targets hit during "Operation Bunyan-un-Marsoos": Pakistan" . Azerbaijan State News Agency . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ a b c "Pakistan Army announces conclusion of Operation Bunyanum Marsoos: ISPR" .

The Express Tribune . 12 May 2025 . Retrieved 20 June 2025 . ^ a b "Major websites hacked as Pakistan launches cyber strike against Indian digital assets" . Dunya News . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 7 July 2025 . ^ "Pakistan army claims Indian counterparts hit by cyber attack" . Al Jazeera . 10 May 2025. ^ a b Dilawar, Ismail (16 May 2025). "Pakistan's financial regulator alerts firms to cyber risks after conflict with India" . Arab News . Retrieved 8 July 2025 . ^ "Pakistan launches 'Operation Bunyan ul Marsoos' against India after multiple provocations" .

The Nation . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 14 July 2025 . ^ "India shuts down Pakistan's false claims in press conference after ceasefire agreement" .

The Indian Express . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "MEA rejects Pakistan's claim of damage to S-400 defense system: 'Malicious misinformation campaign' " . Hindustan Times . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ a b c d e f Chang, Agnes; Robles, Pablo; Mashal, Mujib (14 May 2025). "India and Pakistan Talked Big, but Satellite Imagery Shows Limited Damage" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ a b Zeynalova, Laman (28 May 2025). "Presidents of Azerbaijan and Türkiye, Prime Minister of Pakistan attend concert dedicated to Independence Day in Lachin" . Trend.az . Retrieved 31 May 2025 . Ladies and gentlemen, we had to respond in defence of Pakistan and within no time our formidable Air Force downed six Indian planes, four Rafale French-made planes, one MiG-29 and another plane and then a drone and we conveyed a message to India that Pakistan is a very peace-loving country, wants to promote peace and prosperity in the region but if come to the point of attacking Pakistan then we will respond with fullest might. ^ Umar Bacha, Imtiaz Ali We won the war but seek peace: PM Shehbaz invites India to live as 'peaceful neighbour' , Dawn , 16 May 2025. ^ "Chief minister of India-administered Kashmir reports death of district official" . Al Jazeera . 10 May 2025. ^ "Five killed by Pakistani shelling in Jammu region: Reports" . Al Jazeera . 10 May 2025. ^ Esha Mitra; Aditi Sangal; Rhea Mogul; Sophia Saifi (10 May 2025). "India's military says Hindu temple targeted by Pakistan's strikes" . CNN . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ "India and Pakistan have not declared war, but 'effectively at war': Analyst" . Al Jazeera . 10 May 2025. ^ "No meeting of National Command Authority scheduled: defence minister" . Business Recorder . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 9 June 2025 . ^ Vernon, Hayden; Fulton, Adam (10 May 2025). "Pakistan and India agree 'immediate ceasefire' – Kashmir crisis live" .

The Guardian . ^ Ellis-Petersen, Hannah; Baloch, Shah Meer; Hassan, Aakash (11 May 2025). "India and Pakistan both claim victory after ceasefire declared" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 27 May 2025 . ^ "Govt denies May 16 holiday rumours over Youm-e-Tashakur" .

The Express Tribune . 15 May 2025 . Retrieved 27 May 2025 . ^ Baloch, Shah Meer; Ellis-Petersen, Hannah (12 May 2025). "From missiles to ceasefire: how India and Pakistan pulled back from the brink" .

The Guardian . ^ "India, Pakistan welcome ceasefire" . Dawn . 10 May 2025. ISSN 1563-9444 . Wikidata Q134428303 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "Military leaders agree to stop all fighting between India and Pakistan" . Al Jazeera . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ "Ceasefire agreement with India not partial: Pakistani foreign minister" . Al Jazeera . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ Namita Singh (10 May 2025). "Ceasefire reached after India and Pakistan trade missile strikes on air bases" .

The Independent . ISSN 1741-9743 . Wikidata Q134428688 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "India and Pakistan agree to ceasefire" . CNA . 10 May 2025. Wikidata Q134428571 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "US's Rubio says India, Pakistan agreed 'to start talks at a neutral site' " . Al Jazeera . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ "Still unclear if India has agreed to talks with Pakistan" . Al Jazeera . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ "Trump says India, Pakistan agree to 'full and immediate ceasefire' " . Al Jazeera . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ "PM Sharif says Kashmir dispute with India will be resolved" . Al Jazeera . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ Sebastian, Meryl (18 June 2025). "Kashmir: Modi tells Trump India won't accept 'third-party mediation' " . BBC . Retrieved 30 June 2025 . ^ "Trump promises to increase trade with India, Pakistan" . Al Jazeera . 11 May 2025 . Retrieved 11 May 2025 . ^ " 'Baseless': India rejects Trump's claim he ended Pakistan conflict" . South China Morning Post . 28 July 2025 . Retrieved 29 July 2025 . ^ "Pakistan opens airspace to all flights" . Al Jazeera . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ "Foreign Secy Says 'Criticising Govt Hallmark of Democracy', But BJP Handles Have Missed the Memo" .

The Wire . ^ Gibran Naiyyar Peshimam; Shivam Patel; Charlotte Greenfield; Aftab Ahmed (10 May 2025). "Violations reported after India and Pakistan agree to ceasefire" . Reuters . Wikidata Q134435918 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Magee, Caolán; Stepansky, Joseph. "Explosions heard, drones spotted after India, Pakistan agree to ceasefire" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ a b Peshimam, Gibran Naiyyar; Patel, Shivam; Greenfield, Charlotte; Ahmed, Aftab (10 May 2025). "Explosions reported after India and Pakistan agree to ceasefire" . Reuters . Islamabad/New Delhi . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ "India and Pakistan accuse each other of violating ceasefire hours after reaching deal" . AP News . 9 May 2025 . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ Das, Anupreeta; Mashal, Mujib; Nauman, Qasim (10 May 2025). "Trump Announces Cease-Fire Between India and Pakistan: Live Updates" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ a b "India-Pakistan live: Pakistan and India accuse each other of violating ceasefire deal – as Trump talks of trade boost for both countries" . Sky News . Retrieved 11 May 2025 . ^ Ahmad, Mukhtar (10 May 2025). "Live updates: Blasts heard in India-administered Kashmir hours after ceasefire announcement" . CNN . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ Yang, Maya; Vernon, Hayden; Fulton, Adam (10 May 2025). "India says it will respond to 'violations' of Kashmir ceasefire by Pakistan – live" . the Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ " 'Serious, complicated' discussions ahead as truce holds" . Al Jazeera . 11 May 2025 . Retrieved 11 May 2025 . ^ "Calm returns to cities in Indian-administered Kashmir: Reports" . Al Jazeera . 11 May 2025 . Retrieved 11 May 2025 . ^ "Shops in Srinagar reopen amid a cautious calm" . Al Jazeera . 11 May 2025 . Retrieved 11 May 2025 . ^ Sangal, Aditi; Mogul, Rhea; Saifi, Sophia; Mitra, Esha; Stambaugh, Alex; Legge, James; Tanno, Sophie; Edwards, Christian; Vogt, Adrienne (10 May 2025). "India-Pakistan truce appears to hold despite accusations of violations" . CNN . ^ "Blackout in India's Kutch district after drones spotted" . Al Jazeera . 10 May 2025. ^ "Anti-aircraft gunfire after drone spotted over Pakistan's Peshawar: Report" . Al Jazeera . 10 May 2025. ^ "Pakistan violates ceasefire again: Drones shot down near J&K's Samba" . timesofindia.indiatimes.com . 12 May 2025 . Retrieved 12 May 2025 . ^ Arun Sharma, Amrita Nayak Dutta, Blackout in Jammu's Samba, 'small number of suspected drones being engaged' , The Indian Express, 12 May 2025. ^ "Ceasefire prevails, situation calm: Army sources after drones spotted over J&K" . India Today . Retrieved 12 May 2025 . ^ "Indian air strikes – how will Pakistan respond? Four key questions" . BBC . Retrieved 7 May 2025 . ^ "Can India and Pakistan control a new cycle of escalation?" .

The Economist . Retrieved 7 May 2025 . ^ Peri, Dinakar (24 May 2025). "Artillery's firepower reverberates during Operation Sindoor" .

The Hindu . ^ Amit, Hagai (10 May 2025). "Israeli Kamikaze Drones Take Center Stage in India-Pakistan Conflict" . Haaretz . ^ Samanta, Pranab Dhal (10 July 2025). "India looks to US for urgent weapons after Operation Sindoor strikes" .

The Economic Times . ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 12 July 2025 . ^ "Rafale jets hit Pak terror camps with Scalp missiles, Hammer bombs: Sources" . India Today . 7 May 2025. Archived from the original on 7 May 2025. ^ "Operation SINDOOR: The Rise of Aatmanirbhar Innovation in National Security" . Press Information Bureau . 14 May 2025. Archived from the original on 16 May 2025 . Retrieved 16 May 2025 . ^ a b c d e "انڈیا نے چھ مئی کی شب پاکستان اور اس کے زیرِ انتظام کشمیر میں کن مقامات کو نشانہ بنایا؟" . BBC Urdu (in Urdu). 7 May 2025. ^ a b Roy-Chaudhury, Rahul (15 May 2025). "India–Pakistan drone and missile conflict: differing and disputed narratives" . International Institute for Strategic Studies . Archived from the original on 15 May 2025. ^ Gillani, Waqar (11 May 2025). "On ground" .

The strikes, described by Islamabad as unwarranted, unprovoked and a blatant violation of international boundaries without any evidence and intimation, mainly hit mosques and seminaries associated with the accused groups. ...

The deadliest attacks targeted mosques and seminaries linked to Jaish-i-Muhammad once led by Masood Azhar, Jamaat-ud-Dawah once led by Hafiz Saeed and the Harkat-ul Mujahdeen. ^ a b c "Operation Sindoor: India Avenges Pahalgam Attack" . Kashmir Observer . Press Trust of India . 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 11 June 2025 . ^ a b c d Anand, Akriti (7 May 2025). "Operation Sindoor: Not just 9, but there are 21 'well-known' terror camps in Pakistan, PoK; govt shares full list" . mint . Archived from the original on 15 May 2025 . Retrieved 11 June 2025 . ^ a b c d Gupta, Shishir (7 May 2025). "Why India attacked 9 terror camps under Operation Sindoor? Significance explained" . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 11 June 2025 . ^ "Satellite images show impact on mosques and buildings in Pakistan after Indian strikes" .

The Independent . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ "India-Pakistan jets clash in one of the largest dogfights in recent history" . Newsweek . 8 May 2025 . Retrieved 13 November 2025 . ^ a b c d e Ganguly, Sumit; Warren, Spenser A. (29 September 2025). "Escalation Risks Rising? Airpower in Kargil and Pahalgam" (PDF) .

The Washington Quarterly . 48 (3): 127– 143. doi : 10.1080/0163660X.2025.2558282 . ^ Sampson, Eve (7 May 2025). "The Indian Aircraft Pakistan Says It Shot Down" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . Pakistan, for its part, claims it shot down five planes and at least one drone: three Rafale fighter jets, one MIG-29 fighter aircraft, one Su-30 fighter jet and one Heron drone. ^ Mogul, Rhea; Saifi, Sophia; Iyer, Aishwarya S.; Sangal, Aditi; Hammond, Elise; Powell, Tori B.; Yeung, Jessie; Harvey, Lex; Radford, Antoinette (6 May 2025). "May 7, 2025 India launches attacks on Pakistan after Kashmir massacre" . CNN . ^ a b Shah, Saeed; Ali, Idrees (8 May 2025). "Exclusive: Pakistan's Chinese-made jet brought down two Indian fighter aircraft, US officials say" . Reuters . Islamabad/ Washington . ^ "French intelligence claims China trying to foil global sale of Rafale jets" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 7 July 2025 . French air force chief General Jerome Bellanger said he has seen evidence pointing to just three aircraft losses – a Rafale, a Russian-made Sukhoi and a Mirage 2000, which is an earlier generation French-made jet. ^ "Three fighter jets crashed in India's Jammu and Kashmir, local govt sources say" . Reuters . 7 May 2025. ^ "At least two Indian jets appear to have crashed during Pakistan strikes, visuals show" .

The Washington Post . 9 May 2025. ^ Taghvaee, Babak (July 2025). "A Close Call" . Air Forces Monthly . p. 33. ^ "How did Pakistan shoot down India's fighter jets?" .

The Economist . ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 11 August 2025 . ^ Brar, Kamaldeep Singh (23 July 2025). "Kin of Dalit man who died following aircraft crash in Bathinda seek govt compensation" .

The Indian Express . Retrieved 11 August 2025 . ^ "What has happened in India and Pakistan as they fight over Kashmir killings" . Reuters . 7 May 2025. ^ "Indian air force says losses are part of combat but all pilots back home" . Reuters . 13 May 2025. ^ "Chinese weapons pass combat test in India-Pakistan clash – with flying colours" . France 24 . 14 May 2025 . Retrieved 14 May 2025 . ^ a b Siddiqui, Usaid. "Did Pakistan shoot down five Indian fighter jets? What we know" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ Ehrlich, Richard S. (21 May 2025). "China the biggest winner of India-Pakistan air fight" . Asia Times . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ "India can't block our water, we're taking measures, says Shehbaz" .

The News International . Associated Press of Pakistan . 29 May 2025 . Retrieved 1 June 2025 . He detailed Pakistan's military response, describing the downing of six Indian fighter jets, including four Rafales, and significant damage to Indian military installations. ^ Latif, Aamir (28 May 2025). "Pakistan shot down 6 Indian jets, including 4 French-made Rafale during conflict: Premier Sharif" . Anadolu Agency . Retrieved 31 May 2025 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k "A close call" . AirForces Monthly . Key Publishing . Retrieved 9 October 2025 . {{ cite magazine }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Sajjad Syed, Baqir (6 June 2025). "Air force credits Cobras with 'six IAF kills' " . Dawn . Retrieved 11 June 2025 . ^ "India finally admits it lost fighter jets in clash with Pakistan" .

The Independent . 31 May 2025 . Retrieved 31 May 2025 . ^ Sen, Sudhi Ranjan; Tandon, Naman (31 May 2025). "India Confirms It Lost Fighter Jets in Recent Pakistan Conflict" . Bloomberg . Archived from the original on 1 June 2025 . Retrieved 1 June 2025 . ^ "Trump says he thinks 5 jets were shot down in India-Pakistan hostilities" . Reuters . 19 July 2025 . Retrieved 19 July 2025 . ^ Frances Mao, India reports strikes on military bases, Pakistan denies any role , BBC News, 8 May 2025. ^ Multiple explosions, blackout in Indian-administered Kashmir's Jammu city , Al Jazeera, 8 May 2025. ^ Bashaarat Masood, Amrita Nayak Dutta, Baramulla to Barmer, India blocks second wave of drone attacks , The Indian Express, 10 May 2025. ^ "Inside India's Air Blitz: NSA Doval Cleared It, IAF Chief AP Singh Delivered It" . Times Now . 13 May 2025 . Retrieved 14 May 2025 . ^ " 'We should go for the kill': IAF chief Amar Preet Singh led India's bold mission to strike Pakistan's Nur Khan base" . Moneycontrol . 13 May 2025 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 . ^ "Number of Indian drones downed by Pakistan reaches 77: security sources" .

The Express Tribune . 9 May 2025 . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ a b c d e f Piper, Imogen; Hill, Evan; Javaid, Maham; Noack, Rick (14 May 2025). "Indian strikes on Pakistan damaged six airfields, Post analysis finds" . Washington Post . Archived from the original on 15 May 2025. ^ "Following India's airstrike, Pakistan declares Rahim Yar Khan airbase's sole runway non-operational for a week" .

The Indian Express . 12 May 2025 . Retrieved 14 May 2025 . ^ "Rahim Yar Khan's Sheikh Zayed airport damaged by Indian strike" . DAWN.COM . 11 May 2025 . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ Pakistan Army's spokesman claims India fired ballistic missiles that fell into Indian territory , Reuters, 9 May 2025 ^ "Nur Khan, Murid and Shorkot bases targeted with air-launched missiles" .

The News International . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 4 June 2025 . ^ "Transcript of Special briefing on OPERATION SINDOOR (May 10, 2025)" . Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ Kant, Rishi (10 May 2025). "India-Pak conflict: Foreign Secy Vikram Misri tears into Pak's lies, says India responded with restraint and resolve" . Fortune India . Retrieved 6 June 2025 . ^ a b "Ministry Rejects Pakistan Claims of Indian Attacks on Afghan Soil" . Tolo News . 22 May 2025. ^ "Pakistan accuses India of drone strikes in Afghanistan" . Amu TV . 22 May 2025. ^ "India targets Sheikh Zayed International airport in Rahim Yar Khan" .

The Express Tribune . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 16 May 2025 . ^ "Rahim Yar Khan's Sheikh Zayed airport damaged by Indian strike" . Dawn . 11 May 2025 . Retrieved 12 June 2025 . ^ a b c "CM Sindh announces compensation for martyrs, injured in Indian attacks" . DAWN.COM . 15 May 2025 . Retrieved 30 May 2025 . ^ a b c Mihajlovic, Mike (15 September 2025). "The S-400 quandary" . AirForces Monthly . Key Aero . Retrieved 20 October 2025 . ^ "Operation SINDOOR: India's Strategic Clarity and Calculated Force" . Press Information Bureau . Retrieved 14 May 2025 . ^ "Operation SINDOOR: Forging One Force" . Press Information Bureau . Retrieved 18 May 2025 . ^ "Army releases photos of Pakistani drone debris after neutralizing threat over Amritsar" . India Today . 10 May 2025 . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ a b Sanger, David E.; Barnes, Julian E.; Haberman, Maggie (10 May 2025). "Reluctant at First, Trump Officials Intervened in South Asia as Nuclear Fears Grew" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 13 May 2025 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 . ^ Gopalakrishnan, Raju; Kok, Xinghui; Kok, Xinghui (31 May 2025). "India says changed tactics worked well in conflict with Pakistan" . Reuters . Retrieved 31 May 2025 . ^ "India-Pakistan ceasefire appears to hold after accusations of violations" . BBC . 13 May 2025 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 . while India's army reported at least 21 civilians deaths from Pakistani shelling. ^ "We lost 5 soldiers in Operation Sindoor,' says DGMO" .

The Times of India . 13 May 2025 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 . ^ Palnitkar, Vaibhav (14 May 2025). "Sunil martyred responding to Pakistani attack: 5 soldiers fired in turns, 'war was inevitable this time,' says brother" . Dainik Bhaskar . Retrieved 30 May 2025 . ^ "BSF constable Deepak Chingakham's mortal remains to reach Imphal on Tuesday" . Hindustan Times . 12 May 2025. Archived from the original on 14 May 2025 . Retrieved 30 May 2025 . ^ "Indian army says 3 civilians killed in shelling by Pakistani troops in Indian-controlled Kashmir" . CTV News . Associated Press . 7 May 2025. Archived from the original on 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 7 May 2025 . ^ "Pakistan shelling kills 15 civilians, injures 43 in J&K after Indian military strikes" .

The Economic Times . 7 May 2025. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ "Operation Sindoor highlights: 12 civilians and one soldier killed in Pak shelling in J&K's Poonch; Govt calls all-party meet today" .

The Hindu . 6 May 2025. ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ Wani, Fayaz (7 May 2025). "J&K's Poonch witnesses heaviest shelling after 1971 War; CM asks officials to prepare evacuation plan" .

The New Indian Express . Retrieved 25 May 2025 . ^ "Pakistan hits Christian Convent, kills students in Poonch Shelling" . Daiji World . 9 May 2025 . Retrieved 30 May 2025 . ^ "3 students killed in Pakistan shelling, Poonch school opens with tears — and a prayer" .

The Indian Express . 20 May 2025 . Retrieved 30 May 2025 . ^ Akkara, Anto (12 May 2025). "Catholic School Hit, 3 Students Killed in India-Pakistan Conflict; Pope Hails Ceasefire" . National Catholic Register . Retrieved 13 May 2025 . ^ Bhaskar, Gaurav Sagar (13 May 2025). "Pakistan drone attack victim from Punjab's Ferozepur succumbs to injuries" . Hindustan Times . ^ " 'I love you': IAF martyr Sergeant Surendra Moga's wife clutches his uniform as family bids final goodbye" . Times of India . 12 May 2025. ^ "J&K CM Omar Abdullah condoles the death of Rajouri officer by Pakistan shelling" .

The Hindu . 10 May 2025. ^ "Pakistan army contradicts govt numbers on Indian soldiers killed" . BBC . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ "Number of personnel martyred in response to Indian aggression rises to 13: ISPR" .

The Express Tribune . 14 May 2025. Archived from the original on 15 May 2025 . Retrieved 30 May 2025 . ^ "Pakistan says over 50 killed in last week's India clashes" . DW. 13 May 2025 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 . ^ "40 civilians, 11 troops martyred in Indian aggression: ISPR" .

The Express Tribune . 13 May 2025 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 . ^ Asghar, Mohammad (9 May 2025). "Poor vendor from Lahore falls victim to Indian drone" . DAWN . Retrieved 30 May 2025 . ^ "Indian 'kamikaze drones' intercepted" . DAWN . 9 May 2025 . Retrieved 7 June 2025 . ^ "Minister Visits Martyred Soldiers Residence" . UrduPoint . Archived from the original on 15 May 2025 . Retrieved 30 May 2025 . ^ "Operation Sindoor LIVE: At least 100 terrorists killed in strikes, says Rajnath Singh" .

The Hindu . 8 May 2025. ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 8 May 2025 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ "Pakistan downs five Indian fighter jets in retaliation for India's missile attack: security sources" .

The Express Tribune . 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 30 May 2025 . ^ "India strikes Pakistan over Kashmir tourist killings" . Reuters . 6 May 2025. ^ "Devastation among locals after India strikes Pakistan and Pakistan-administered Kashmir" . BBC News . 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 7 May 2025 . ^ a b " 'It felt like the sky turned red', says witness to India strike in Pakistan" . www.bbc.com . 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 11 May 2025 . ^ Hussain, Abid (8 May 2025). "Inside Muridke: Did India hit a 'terror base' or a mosque?" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 11 May 2025 . ^ "Deaths and destruction in Bahawalpur, Muridke after Indian strikes" . DAWN.COM . 8 May 2025 . Retrieved 30 May 2025 . ^ "India Claims Strike on Terror Leader Behind Daniel Pearl's Killing in Major Anti-Terror Operation" .

The Media Line . 8 May 2025 . Retrieved 11 May 2025 . ^ Mashal, Mujib (11 May 2025). "India-Pakistan conflict ends with fragile truce" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 11 May 2025 . ^ Mashal, Mujib (13 May 2025). "As Trump Crows Over Ending a Conflict, India's Leaders Feel Betrayed" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ Mashal, Mujib; Travelli, Alex (18 May 2025). "Why There's No Battlefield Solution to India's Perpetual Pakistan Problem" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 18 May 2025 . ^ "India-Pakistan ceasefire holds. But the battle lines have changed" .

The Washington Post . 12 May 2025 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 . ^ a b c d e Masih, Niha; Noack, Rick; Mehrotra, Karishma; Irfan, Shams (9 May 2025). "Fog of war thickens as India and Pakistan trade blame and accusations" .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 18 May 2025 . ^ "Military operation in Pakistan reveals weaknesses of India's air force" . Le Monde . 8 May 2025. ^ "After the ceasefire, lessons from the worst India-Pakistan clash in 20 years" . Le Monde . 12 May 2025. ^ a b "What did India and Pakistan gained in latest clash" . Al Jazeera . However, analysts say neither side can truly claim to have emerged from the post-April 22 crisis with a definite upper hand. Instead, they say, both India and Pakistan can claim strategic gains even as they each also suffered losses. ^ Schipani, Andres; Jilani, Humza; Reed, John (13 May 2025). " "How India and Pakistan pulled back from brink of war" " . Financial Times . Retrieved 24 May 2025 . ^ Hansberry, Cate (11 May 2025). "Experts react: India and Pakistan have agreed to a shaky cease-fire. Where does the region go from here?" . Atlantic Council . Retrieved 12 May 2025 . ^ a b Häsler, Georg (16 May 2025). "Downing of Indian fighter jet offers lessons for West" . Neue Zürcher Zeitung (in Swiss High German). ISSN 0376-6829 . Retrieved 16 May 2025 . ^ Häsler, Georg (15 May 2025). "Chinesisches Kampfflugzeug schiesst einen Rafale-Jet ab – Europa muss daraus lernen" . Neue Zürcher Zeitung (in Swiss High German). ISSN 0376-6829 . Retrieved 29 May 2025 . Für Indien wirkt die Operation «Sindoor» wie ein einziges Desaster. ^ Jamal, Umair (13 May 2025). "Pakistan Comes Out Emboldened After Clashes With India" .

The Diplomat . ProQuest 3203309053 . ^ "India's Wake-Up Call: Why US Defense Reform Must Match the Speed of Modern War" . Small Wars Journal . 22 May 2025 . Retrieved 22 May 2025 . ^ Weichert, Brandon J. (8 May 2025). "How Chinese Missiles Routed India's Air Force Over Pakistan" .

The National Interest . Retrieved 10 May 2025 . ^ J. Weichert, Brandon (9 May 2025). "Why Has India's Military Performed So Poorly Against Pakistan?" .

The National Interest . Retrieved 12 May 2025 . ^ 2025 Report to Congress (PDF) (Report). U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission . 18 November 2025. pp. 108– 109 . Retrieved 23 November 2025 . ^ "Flight operations resume at major airports after 8-hour shutdown" .

The News International . Retrieved 7 May 2025 . ^ "Educational Institutions Closed, BISE (Inter) Exam Postponed For 7th May" . Urdu Point . Retrieved 7 May 2025 . ^ "PM session exams cancelled for CIE students in Lahore" . Pakistan Today . 8 May 2025 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ "O/A Level exams suspended in Punjab, AJK for May 9" .

The Express Tribune . 8 May 2025 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ "Operation Sindoor: India closes 25 airports, cancels 300+ flights after missile strikes on terror camps – CNBC TV18" . CNBC TV18 . 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ "IAF Control Srinagar Airport: Civilian Flights Suspended Amid Operation Sindoor" . Deccan Herald . 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ "Punjab-Mumbai IPL game shifted to Ahmedabad because of India-Pakistan tensions" . AP News . 9 May 2025 . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ Amlan Chakraborty (20 May 2025). "India suspends IPL for a week, Pakistan postpones games amid conflict" . Reuters . Retrieved 20 May 2025 . ^ "Over 8,000 X accounts blocked in India; The Wire says will challenge site blocking" .

The Hindu . 13 May 2025 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 . ^ "ভারতে ৬ টিভির ইউটিউব চ্যানেল বন্ধ: ব্যাখ্যা না পেলে পাল্টা পদক্ষেপ নেবে সরকার" . Ittefaq (in Bengali). 10 May 2025. ^ Kapoor, Mahima (15 May 2025). "India blocks Chinese, Turkish news agencies from X" . DW News . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ "Pakistan Blocks Dozens of Indian YouTube Channels, Websites Over 'Anti-Pakistan Propaganda' " . Digital Rights Foundation . 8 May 2025. ^ "PTA blocks 79 Indian digital platforms for spreading anti Pakistan propaganda" . Business Recorder . 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 25 May 2025 . ^ "Stock market today: Nifty50 ends above 24,900; BSE Sensex rallies 3,000 points to cross 82,400 – top 5 reasons for rally" .

The Times of India . 12 May 2025. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 12 May 2025 . ^ "Pakistan stock market KSE 100 surges over 9% on India-Pakistan ceasefire; trading halted for an hour" .

The Times of India . 12 May 2025. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 12 May 2025 . ^ Shah, Saeed; Patel, Shivam (2 August 2025). "How Pakistan shot down India's cutting-edge fighter using Chinese gear" . Reuters . Retrieved 1 October 2025 . ^ "Chinese J-10C combat claims draw sharp contrast between social media and Beijing" . South China Morning Post . 9 May 2025 . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ "Nationalist Chinese parody sparks outrage online" . ABC News . 16 May 2025 . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ "India-Pakistan: Chinese influencer goes viral with mockery of India's fighter jets" . table.media.com . 12 May 2025. ^ India's Deadly Strikes On Pakistan Spark Protests (News). Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ Bashir, Ahtesham (8 May 2025). "Peshawar unites against Indian aggression" .

The Express Tribune . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ "World leaders express concern over tensions between India and Pakistan" . euronews . 8 May 2025 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ "Pakistani parties rally in Karachi to protest India's missile strikes" . Arab News . 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ "Political offshoot of Hafiz Saeed's banned JuD holds anti-India rally in Lahore" .

The Economic Times . PTI. 5 May 2025. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ "Anti-India Rally Lahore: Hafiz Saeed's JuD Political Wing PMML Demands His Release" . Deccan Herald . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ Naqash, Tariq (26 April 2025). "Anti-India rally in Muzaffarabad condemns Pahalgam incident, calls for UN probe" . DAWN.COM . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ "Fear and uncertainty after strikes: BBC in Muzaffarabad" . www.bbc.com . 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ ur-Rehman, Zia; Mughal, Jalaluddin (6 May 2025). "On Pakistan's Side of Kashmir, Locals Fear They'll Be the First to Face India's Ire" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ Akbar, Naveed (8 May 2025). "Protests erupt in AJK against Indian aggression" . Aaj English TV . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ "Protest demonstrations held in Azad Kashmir against Indian aggression – Kashmir Media Service" . 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ Burleigh, Charlie Bradley (7 May 2025). "Protestors descend on Indian Embassy in London as Pakistan hit by missiles" . Express.co.uk . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ Carroll, Michael D. (8 May 2025). "MP warns British streets could erupt amid escalating India-Pakistan conflict" . Daily Mirror . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ " 'We Stand With...': France's STRONG Stand On India After 'Op Sindoor'; Sends Clear Message To Pak?" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 8 May 2025 . ^ Arikatla, Venkat (9 May 2025). "Boycott Call On Turkish Airlines And Travel" . greatandhra.com . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ "Here's Why 'Boycott Turkish Airlines' Is Trending On Social Media: 'A Call To Every Proud Indian' " . News18 . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ " 'Turkey should be banned from tourist lists': Ankara faces backlash for anti-India stance post Op Sindoor" . Business Today . 8 May 2025 . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ Nikhila Henry (12 May 2025). "Hyderabad's Karachi Bakery vandalised as protesters demand a name change" .

The Indian Express . Retrieved 18 May 2025 . ^ "After India's Karachi Bakery vandalised, Pakistanis are showing love for Hyderabad's Bombay Bakery" . Dawn Images . 14 May 2025 . Retrieved 18 May 2025 . ^ a b "Outrage after Indian professor arrested over remarks on military operation" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 19 May 2025 . ^ a b "Indian professor arrested over social media post about military operation in Pakistan" .

The Independent . 18 May 2025 . Retrieved 19 May 2025 . ^ "Terminate 'unwarranted' investigation and release Professor Ali Khan Mahmudabad" . Amnesty International . 19 May 2025 . Retrieved 19 May 2025 . ^ "Ashoka University professor case hearing updates: Supreme Court grants interim bail to Ali Khan Mahmudabad" .

The Hindu . 21 May 2025. ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 27 May 2025 . ^ "Ali Khan Mahmudabad versus State of Haryana" (PDF) . Supreme Court of India . 21 May 2025 . Retrieved 1 June 2025 . ^ "Senior NADRA Official Arrested for Alleged Anti-Army Remarks in WhatsApp Group Under PECA" . Digital Rights Foundation . 8 May 2025. ^ Siddiqui, Usaid (7 May 2025). "Information war: Are India and Pakistan telling the truth about attacks?" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 26 May 2025 . ^ "Misleading posts obtaining millions of views on X" . BBC News . 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 7 May 2025 . ^ "Kashmir: What's the way out of the India and Pakistan crisis?" . BBC . 9 May 2025 . Retrieved 11 May 2025 . ^ "Misinformation floods Indian and Pakistani social media as officials keep quiet" .

The Independent . 8 May 2025 . Retrieved 22 May 2025 . ^ a b Imran, Sara; Khan, Seerat; Nazar, Maria (May 2025). Dad, Nighat (ed.). "Digital Battlegrounds: Gendered Disinformation, TFGBV, and Hate Speech in the Indo-Pak Escalations" (PDF) . Digital Rights Foundation . ^ "Misinformation warfare intensifies in India and Pakistan as conflict rages on" . South China Morning Post . 16 May 2025 . Retrieved 22 May 2025 . ^ a b c d Das, Anupreeta; K.B., Pragati (17 May 2025). "How the Indian Media Amplified Falsehoods in the Drumbeat of War" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 18 May 2025 . Retrieved 18 May 2025 . ^ Kugelman, Michael (22 May 2025). "Why Disinformation Surged During the India-Pakistan Crisis" . Foreign Policy . Retrieved 22 May 2025 . ^ a b c d e "India's broadcast media wage war on their audience" .

The War Zone . Retrieved 13 May 2025 . ^ " 'Didn't know what is there, didn't hit': Air Marshal denies rumours of action at Pakistan's Kirana Hills – 'Didn't know what is there, didn't hit': Air Marshal denies rumours of action at Pakistan's Kirana Hills BusinessToday" . Business Today . 12 May 2025 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 . ^ "No radiation leak from Pakistan's nuclear facility after India standoff: UN watchdog" .

The Independent . 15 May 2025 . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ Varma, Aishwarya (16 May 2025). "No, Indian Govt Didn't Issue Notice About Radiation at BrahMos Facility in Beas" .

The Quint . Retrieved 25 June 2025 . ^ Rana, Aayushi (15 May 2025). "Fake news of blast, radiation leak at Beas BrahMos depot" . Digital Forensics, Research and Analytics Center . Retrieved 25 June 2025 . ^ a b Lomas, Chris (7 May 2025). "Costly diversions and delays continue to hit airlines around Indian and Pakistani airspace" . Flightradar24 Blog . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ Maszczynski, Mateusz (28 April 2025). "Air India Turns Vienna Into a Gas Station Amid Pakistan Airspace Shutdown" . PYOK . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ Pitrelli, Monica (28 April 2025). "Indian airlines can't fly over Pakistan. Here's how that is affecting flights" . CNBC . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ "Pakistan airspace ban could cost Air India $591m over 12 months" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ "India extends airspace ban for Pakistani airlines till August 23" .

The Economic Times . 23 July 2025. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 24 July 2025 . ^ "Reciprocal airspace closure to enter 11th month as Pakistan extends ban on Indian airlines, aircraft till March 24" .

The Indian Express . 18 February 2026 . Retrieved 25 February 2026 . ^ "Call for protection of civilians, de-escalation" . Dawn . 9 May 2025. ISSN 1563-9444 . Wikidata Q134434236 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ a b Aaratrika Bhaumik (10 May 2025). "How will India's military response be assessed under international law?" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Wikidata Q134429389 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Masood, Salman; Mashal, Mujib; Kumar, Hari (6 May 2025). "India Strikes Pakistan Two Weeks After Kashmir Terrorist Attack" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 7 May 2025 . ^ Sultan, Parvez (7 May 2025). "India's left parties back Operation Sindoor, urge Pakistan to dismantle terror network from within" .

The New Indian Express . Retrieved 7 May 2025 . ^ "Operation SINDOOR: India's Strategic Clarity and Calculated Force" . Press Information Bureau . Retrieved 14 May 2025 . ^ "Rahul Gandhi accuses PM Modi of 'surrendering' to U.S. pressure over Indo-Pak ceasefire" .

The Hindu . 3 June 2025 . Retrieved 8 December 2025 . ^ "Lt General Ghai gets reward for Operation Sindoor, promoted as Deputy Chief of Army" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 9 June 2025 . ^ Yerushalmy, Jonathan; Yang, Maya; Chao-Fong, Leonie (7 May 2025). "Pakistan PM says India must 'suffer the consequences' for 'cowardly' attack – as it happened" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 5 August 2025 . ^ "NA stands united in support of armed forces after Operation Bunyan-um-Marsoos" . Pakistan State Time . 12 May 2025 . Retrieved 11 June 2025 . ^ "Govt elevates COAS Asim Munir as Field Marshal" . Dunya News . 20 May 2025 . Retrieved 20 May 2025 . ^ "Air Chief Marshal gets extension after Operation Bunyanum Mursoos success" .