The type species is C. kandutschi . Crocodylus lucivenator Sp. nov Valid Brochu et al. Pliocene Hadar Formation Ethiopia A crocodile , a species of Crocodylus . Eosphorosuchus Gen. et sp. nov Margulis-Ohnuma et al. Late Triassic ( Rhaetian ) Chinle Formation United States ( New Mexico ) An early member of Crocodylomorpha .

The type species is E. lacrimosa. Galahadosuchus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Bodenham et al. Late Triassic ( Carnian – Rhaetian ) Cromhall Quarry United Kingdom A member of Crocodylomorpha belonging to the family Saltoposuchidae .

The type species is G. jonesi . Indosinosuchus peninsularensis Sp. nov Valid Lauprasert et al. Middle-Late Jurassic Khlong Min Formation Thailand A member of the family Teleosauridae . Labrujasuchus Gen. et sp. nov Turner et al. Late Triassic ( Norian ) Chinle Formation United States ( New Mexico ) A member of Poposauroidea belonging to the family Shuvosauridae .

The type species is L. expectatus . Shakajlura Gen. et sp. nov Valid Cardillo et al. Triassic (Ladinian-Carnian) Chañares Formation Argentina Probably an early-diverging member of Paracrocodylomorpha .

The type species is S. riojanensis . Sonselasuchus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Smith & Sidor Late Triassic ( Norian ) Chinle Formation United States ( Arizona ) A member of Poposauroidea belonging to the family Shuvosauridae.

The type species is S. cedrus . General pseudosuchian research Evidence from the study of the histology of appendicular elements of Saurosuchus galilei , Sillosuchus longicervix , Aetobarbakinoides brasiliensis , Aetosauroides scagliai , Gracilisuchus stipanicicorum , Tarjadia ruthae and Riojasuchus tenuisceps , indicative of diversity of growth rates of the studied pseudosuchians, is presented by Ponce, Cerda & Desojo (2026). Terras et al. (2026) compare the cranial morphology of Triassic pseudosuchians and other reptiles (including dinosaurs), and argue that cranial similarities among pseudosuchians and other reptiles do not necessarily reflect functional similarities. Evidence from the study of the histology of long bones of the holotype specimen of Dynamosuchus collisensis , interpreted as indicative of a sustained rapid growth, is presented by Farias et al. (2026). Ulloa-Guaiquin et al. (2026) study the neurovascular anatomy of the snout of Riojasuchus tenuisceps , interpreted as consistent with presence of sensory system similar to those seen in extant crocodilians and birds, and supporting a wading-foraging behavior of the studied ornithosuchid. A new specimen of Postosuchus cf. kirkpatricki , comparable in size to the holotype of this species, is described from the strata of the Chinle Formation from the Petrified Forest National Park (Arizona, United States) by Marsh et al. (2026). Hutchinson et al. (2026) study the locomotor biomechanics of Postosuchus kirkpatricki , reporting conflicting evidence for its possible stance and gait. Crocodylomorph research Paixão et al. (2026) describe isolated eggshells and egg clutches from the Upper Cretaceous Adamantina Formation (Brazil) with the egg arrangement similar to those seen in extant crocodilians, including an assemblage of at least 47 eggs representing the largest Mesozoic crocodyliform egg clutch reported to date. Tan et al. (2026) describe new fossil material of Edentosuchus tienshanensis from the Lower Cretaceous Lianmuqin Formation (Xinjiang, China), providing new information on the morphology of members of this species. Soni et al. (2026) study the sensory evolution in thalattosuchians on the basis of data from digital endocranial reconstructions, reporting evidence of proportional scaling of visual structures with skull size of members of the group, and interpret metriorhynchids as maintaining visual reliance. Barrientos-Lara & Alvarado-Ortega (2026) report the first discovery of geosaurine fossil material from marine deposits of the Upper Jurassic (Kimmeridgian) Sabinal Formation (Oaxaca, Mexico). Herrera, Spindler & Bronzati (2026) redescribe the anatomy and study the phylogenetic affinities of Dakosaurus maximus on the basis of data from a new specimen from the Kimmeridgian Torleite Formation (Germany), and report evidence of preservation of cartilaginous fish (likely hybodontiform ) remains within the abdominal cavity of the studied individual. Paiva et al. (2026) provide new estimates of body length of 40 notosuchian species, and report discrepancies between estimates based on skull length and those based on femoral length. Candeiro et al. (2026) describe a tooth of one of the largest sphagesaurian specimens reported to date from the Upper Cretaceous Adamantina Formation in the Goiás state, representing the first notosuchian record from mid-west Brazil . Navarro et al. (2026) study the bone histology of Yacarerani boliviensis , and interpret it as consistent with fast growth dynamics with periods of decline. Carneiro et al. (2026) identify probable sebecid tooth marks on a dentary of Didelphopsis sp. from the Eocene strata from the Itaboraí Basin (Brazil), interpreted as produced during head-shaking and defleshing of the carcass by the predator, and interpret sebecids as likely killing small mammals in a manner similar to extant monitor lizards.

The first formal description of crocodyliform fossil material from the Upper Jurassic-Lower Cretaceous Missão Velha Formation (Brazil), interpreted as belonging to indeterminate neosuchians , is published by Albuquerque et al. (2026). Castillo-Visa et al. (2026) report evidence of preservation of cartilaginous and epidermal tissues in a specimen of Montsecosuchus depereti from the Barremian strata from Spain. Jouve et al. (2026) provide phylogenetic definitions for Tethysuchia and its subgroups that are valid under the PhyloCode , and coin a new name Stenorhynchosuchia for the putative clade including Tethysuchia and Thalattosuchia. Barbini et al. (2026) provide new information on the internal cranial anatomy of Pholidosaurus purbeckensis , reporting evidence of greater similarity of the endocranial anatomy to that of goniopholidids than dyrosaurids, and evidence of presence of possible osteological correlates of nasal salt glands. A study on the histology of teeth of Guarinisuchus munizi , providing evidence of variable rates of dentine deposition, is published by Izidio et al. (2026). Szegszárdi, Ősi & Rabi (2026) describe a new partial skull of Doratodon carcharidens from the Santonian Csehbánya Formation (Hungary), reinterpret this species as a paralligatorid , and reinterpret Ogresuchus furatus as a neosuchian likely to be an atoposaurid . Redescription of the anatomy and a study on the phylogenetic affinities of Koumpiodontosuchus aprosdokiti is published by Barker et al. (2026), who support the placement of the studied species within Bernissartiidae . Prondvai et al. (2026) report evidence of Hunter-Schreger band -like patterns in the tooth enamel of Iharkutosuchus (interpreted as differing in structural origin from Hunter-Schreger bands of mammals), as well as evidence of wavy enamel in the studied crocodyliform (a feature also known in ornithopod dinosaurs), interpreted as likely adaptations to a herbivorous diet and high-efficiency chewing. Redescription and a study on the affinities of Thoracosaurus isorhynchus is published by Boerman et al. (2026). Donzé et al. (2026) describe the morphology of endocranial structures of Leidyosuchus canadensis and Stangerochampsa mccabei . Bateman, Demers-Potvin & Larsson (2026) compare reconstructed jaw adductor musculature and feeding performances of Leidyosuchus canadensis and Champsosaurus lindoei , interpreted as suggestive of dietary resource partitioning between the two taxa. Lindblad et al. (2026) describe two new crocodyliform specimens from the Paleocene strata of the Ravenscrag Formation (Saskatchewan, Canada), including the first member of the genus Boverisuchus from the middle-late Paleocene of Saskatchewan and a specimen with probable alligatorid affinities. Redescription of the anatomy of the postcranial skeleton of Boverisuchus vorax is published by Iijima & Tomiya (2026). Taxonomic revision of the genus Diplocynodon is published by Walter et al. (2026). Burke & Mannion (2026) study the diversity of endocranial anatomy in extant and extinct crocodylians and basal eusuchians, reporting evidence of anatomical differences facilitating the identification of members of distinct lineages. Cidade et al. (2026) revise the phylogenetic nomenclature of Caimaninae, defining new clades Bottosauria, Caimanini, Purussauria and Purussauridae. Agne et al. (2026) identify the extinct crocodile population from Seychelles as representing the westernmost known population of saltwater crocodiles on the basis of analysis of mitochondrial genomes. Review of the fossil record of late Quaternary crocodilians from Australasia is published by Ristevski et al. (2026). Fernandez Blanco & Bona (2026) report evidence from the study of extant and extinct crocodyliforms indicative of similarities of embryonic development of skulls of extant caimans to changes in palate and skull roof during the evolutionary history of crocodyliforms. Non-avian dinosaurs New dinosaur taxa Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Bicharracosaurus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Reutter et al. Late Jurassic (Oxfordian-Kimmeridgian) Cañadón Calcáreo Formation Argentina A macronarian sauropod .

The type species is B. dionidei . Ceratocaudia Gen. et sp. nov Valid Natarajan et al. Jurassic (Pliensbachian to Bajocian) Kaladongar Formation India A macronarian sauropod.

The type species is C. antiqua . Changzhousaurus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Xu Early Cretaceous (Aptian) Jiufotang Formation China A pennaraptoran theropod with an unusual mosaic of features; possibly an early-diverging deinonychosaurian .

The type species is C. sinensis . Cryptarcus Gen. et comb. nov Holmes et al. Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Dinosaur Park Formation Canada ( Alberta ) A chasmosaurine ceratopsid ; a new genus for " Chasmosaurus " russelli Sternberg (1940). Dasosaurus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mayer et al. Early Cretaceous (Aptian) Itapecuru Formation Brazil A sauropod belonging to the group Somphospondyli .

The type species is D. tocantinensis . Doolysaurus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Jung et al. Cretaceous (Albian–Cenomanian) Ilseongsan Formation South Korea A thescelosaurid ornithischian .

The type species is D. huhmini . Eopinacosaurus Gen. et comb. nov Valid Penkalski Late Cretaceous Bayan Mandahu Formation China Mongolia An ankylosaurid ; a new genus for " Pinacosaurus " mephistocephalus Godefroit et al. (1999). Ferenceratops Gen. et comb. nov Valid Maidment et al. Late Cretaceous ( Maastrichtian ) Sânpetru and Densuș-Ciula formations Romania A ceratopsian .

The type species is the ' rhabdodontid ' " Zalmoxes " shqiperorum Weishampel et al. (2003). Foskeia Gen. et sp. nov Valid Dieudonné et al. Early Cretaceous ( Barremian – Aptian ) Castrillo de la Reina Formation Spain A rhabdodontomorph ornithopod .

The type species is F. pelendonum . Gongshuilong Gen. et sp. nov Valid Yao et al. Late Cretaceous Lianhe Formation China A saurolophine hadrosaurid .

The type species is G. fanwei . Haolong Gen. et sp. nov Valid Huang et al. Early Cretaceous (Barremian) Yixian Formation China An iguanodontian ornithopod.

The type species is H. dongi . Jian Gen. et sp. nov Valid Zhou et al. Early Cretaceous (Aptian) Xiagou Formation China A microraptorine dromaeosaurid .

The type species is J. changmaensis . Kank Gen. et sp. nov Motta et al. Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) Chorrillo Formation Argentina A unenlagiid theropod.

The type species is K. australis . Kryptohadros Gen. et sp. nov Valid Magyar et al. Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) Densuș-Ciula Formation Romania A hadrosauroid ornithopod.

The type species is K. kallaiae . Mesetasaurus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Soto Núñez, Montenegro & Perea Late Cretaceous Guichón Formation Uruguay A titanosaur belonging to the group Aeolosaurini .

The type species is M. protector . Nagatitan Gen. et sp. nov Valid Sethapanichsakul et al. Early Cretaceous (Aptian–Albian) Khok Kruat Formation Thailand A euhelopodid macronarian sauropod.

The type species is N. chaiyaphumensis . Phosphatotitan Gen. et sp. nov Longrich et al. Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) Ouled Abdoun Basin Morocco A titanosaur sauropod.

The type species is P. khouribgaensis . Pinacosaurus hilwitnorum Sp. nov Valid Penkalski Late Cretaceous Djadochta Formation Mongolia An ankylosaurid; a species of Pinacosaurus . Plesiolophus Gen. et sp. nov Valid McFeeters et al. Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Oldman Formation Canada ( Alberta ) A lambeosaurine hadrosaurid belonging to the tribe Parasaurolophini.

The type species is P. warnerensis . Ptychotherates Gen. et sp. nov Valid Srivastava & Nesbitt Late Triassic (Norian or Rhaetian) Chinle Formation United States ( New Mexico ) A saurischian in the novel clade Morphoraptora .

The type species is P. bucculentus . Spinosaurus mirabilis Sp. nov Valid Sereno et al. Late Cretaceous (Cenomanian) Farak Formation Niger A spinosaurid theropod; a species of Spinosaurus . Uragasaurus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Nilpanapan et al. Late Jurassic Phu Kradung Formation Thailand A mamenchisaurid sauropod.

The type species is U. kalasinensis . Xenovenator Gen. et sp. nov Valid Rivera-Sylva et al. Late Cretaceous ( Campanian ) Cerro del Pueblo Formation Mexico A troodontid theropod.

The type species is X. espinosai ; genus may also contain " Saurornitholestes " robustus Sullivan (2006). Xiangyunloong Gen. et sp. nov Valid Hu et al. Early Jurassic Fengjiahe Formation China A massopodan sauropodomorph .

The type species is X. fengming . Yantaloong Gen. et sp. nov Valid Zhang et al. Middle Jurassic Zhanghe Formation China A eusauropod with possible turiasaur affinities.

The type species is Y. lini . Yeneen Gen. et sp. nov Valid Filippi et al. Late Cretaceous (Santonian) Bajo de la Carpa Formation Argentina A titanosaur sauropod.

The type species is Y. houssayi . General non-avian dinosaur research Henderson (2026) determines rates of discovery of new dinosaur taxa and changes geographical origin of new discoveries throughout the history of the study of the group. Brownstein & Griffin (2026) reconstruct early evolutionary history of dinosaurs, placing the emergence of the group between 251.2 and 230 million years ago, and reporting evidence of a burst of rapid morphological evolution in the Middle to early Late Triassic that coincided with emergence of major dinosaurian subgroups (Ornithischia, Sauropodomorpha and Theropoda). Aureliano et al. (2026) compare the microstructure of appendicular bones in non-avian dinosaurs and large-bodied mammals, and interpret it as indicating that gigantism was achieved through divergent evolutionary pathways in the two groups. Wilson et al. (2026) study the evolution of the body size of Mesozoic dinosaurs, finding no evidence of a correlation between body size and climatic conditions before or after shifts in preferred climatic niches. Saitta (2026) argues that models of growth in dinosaurs used in studies from preceding years may be underfit, failing to account for possible causes variation between specimens other than ontogeny. Review of factors influencing the formation of dinosaur tracks is published by Falkingham & Gatesy (2026). Hartmann et al. (2026) provide a method for recognizing patterns of shape variation differentiating dinosaur tracks with the use of unsupervised machine learning, and use it to study affinities of controversial dinosaur tracks, reporting evidence of small, three-toed, bird-like footprints from the Triassic and Early Jurassic falling within the bird-dominated region of morphospace, and evidence of some Middle Jurassic tridactyl tracks from the Isle of Skye (Scotland, United Kingdom) grouping with ornithopods rather than with theropods. Ha & Kim (2026) present a new automated system for detection of dinosaur tracks across diverse tracksites and preservation conditions. Peng & Xing (2026) review the utility of new analytical tools for reevaluation of long-standing hypotheses in dinosaur ichnology, and argue that not all tridactyl tracks can be assigned to either theropod or ornithopod trackmakers solely on the basis of footprint shape, that parallel trackways increase the probability of group movement of sauropods but do not concusively prove it, and that Triassic and Early Jurassic tracks with bird-like morphology do not conclusively prove an early origin of birds. Granata et al. (2026) report evidence of impact of erosion on preservation of dinosaur tracks from the Carnian strata of the Lerici ichnosite in Italy (the type locality of Evazoum sirigui ). Ait Haddou et al. (2026) report the discovery of new tracksites preserving theropod and quadrupedal dinosaur (possibly stegosaur or sauropod) tracks from the strata of the Jurassic Tilougguit and Guettioua formations (Morocco). Evidence indicating that theropod and ornithopod tracks from the Middle Jurassic strata in the Tizi N'Talghemt area (Morocco) were originally left on tidal flats during low tide points is presented by El Ouali et al. (2026). Ornithischian and theropod (possibly including large dromaeosaurid) tracks are described from the Lower Cretaceous strata of the Serra do Tucano Formation (Brazil) by Barros et al. (2026). A new assemblage of ornithopod (representing two distinct ichnotaxa), sauropod and theropod tracks is described from the Aptian-Albian strata of the Matoushan Formation at the Huashiban tracksite (Yunnan, China) by Xu et al. (2026). Choi et al. (2026) identify dinosaur eggs assigned to at least two distinct oogenera ( Macroelongatoolithus and Mosaicoolithus ) from the Cenomanian strata of the Dadaepo Formation (South Korea). Evidence indicating that dinosaur eggs from the Upper Cretaceous strata of the Wido Volcanics (Wi Island, South Korea) assigned to the ootaxon Propagoolithus widoensis were laid in nests established before the igneous intrusion rather than in a rock that was already metamorphosed as a result of volcanic activity is presented by Kim et al. (2026). Cardozo et al. (2026) report the discovery of faveoloolithid eggshells from the late Maastrichtian strata of the Lago Colhué Huapí Formation (Argentina), originating from strata with abundant hadrosaurid remains and no sauropod remains reported to date, and expanding known geographic distribution of Faveoloolithidae in South America. Pantelides et al. (2026) present a new mechanistic energetic model for the studies of the capability of terrestrial vertebrates for transoceanic dispersal, apply it to extant vertebrates, Lambeosaurus and Rapetosaurus , and interpret their findings as suggestive of feasibility of dispersal of hadrosaurs and titanosaurs between Africa and Europe through the oceanic corridor separating Iberia from Morocco during the Cretaceous. Dai et al. (2026) study the stratigraphy and palaeoenvironmental features of the strata of the Zhengyang Formation (Chongqing, China) preserving fossils of Late Cretaceous dinosaurs, interpreted as living in a restricted intermountain basin. Roberts et al. (2026) study the stratigraphy and age of the strata of the Hell Creek Formation from the excavation site of the " Dueling Dinosaurs ", from other locations on the Murray Ranch and from the McGinnis Butte section (Montana, United States), and determine the age of the "Dueling Dinosaurs" locality to be approximately 66.895 million years. Wyenberg-Henzler & Scannella (2026) study a skull of Edmontosaurus from the Hell Creek Formation (Montana, United States) with a tyrannosaurid tooth embedded in the nasal around the time of death of the hadrosaurid, interpreted as likely resulting from a bite to the snout of Edmontosaurus during a predation attempt. Han et al. (2026) study the hydrodynamic evolution of the Shanyang Basin (China) during the latest Cretaceous, reporting evidence of reduction of suitable nesting habitats of dinosaurs before the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event . Saurischian research Pawlak et al. (2026) identify lungfish aestivation burrows in the Triassic strata of the Ørsted Dal Formation (Greenland), interpreted as indicative of a seasonally dry climate in the studied area during the late Norian , and indicating that aridity was not a barrier for dispersal of theropods and sauropodomorphs living in the studied area at the time. A new assemblage of sauropod and theropod tracks is described from the Lower Cretaceous (Barremian–Aptian) strata of the Shinekhudag Formation (Mongolia) by Mainbayar et al. (2026). Theropod research Boisvert et al. (2026) compare the median size classes of ceratosaurians, megalosauroids, allosauroids, megaraptorans and tyrannosauroids throughout the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods, and report evidence of higher median number of missing size classes in tyrannosauroid-dominated ecosystems compared to allosauroid/megalosauroid-dominated ones. A study on the skull biomechanics and likely feeding behaviors of members of diverse theropod subgroups, with a focus on tyrannosauroids , is published by Johnson-Ransom et al. (2026). Hendrickx (2026) explores the evolution of the dentition in non- coelurosaur theropods (e.g., Ceratosauria , Megalosauroidea , and Allosauroidea ). Evidence from the study of teeth of Allosaurus fragilis , Ceratosaurus dentisulcatus , Irritator challengeri and Tyrannosaurus rex , indicating that tooth position is one of the factors affecting microwear texture in theropod teeth, is presented by Morrison et al. (2026). Pereyra (2026) compares the evolution of maxillary shape and size in medium-sized and large abelisaurids, carcharodontosaurs and coelurosaurs, reporting evidence of different adaptive responses to ecological and environmental pressures in the studied groups. Scherer, Steell & Upchurch (2026) report evidence of different patterns of forelimb reduction in at least five distinct theropod lineages, as well as evidence of correlation of forelimb reduction with cranial robusticity and gigantism (itself likely linked to the increased size of prey animals), and interpret forelimb reduction in theropods as likely linked to redundancy of forelimbs in prey capture. Evidence from elliptic Fourier analysis of pedal phalanx bones of North American tyrannosaurids, ornithomimids, caenagnathids and troodontids, indicating that theropod pedal phalanges can be identified down to the family level on the basis of the study of their morphology, is presented by Warnock-Juteau, Smith & Cullen (2026). Drzewiecki et al. (2026) interpret theropod tracks from the Lower Jurassic East Berlin Formation (Connecticut, United States) as produced in an area with an ephemeral lake system rather than at the margin of a perennial lake. Xing et al. (2026) report the discovery of new theropod fossil material from the Lower Jurassic Fengjiahe Formation (Yunnan, China), including a tooth of a theropod distinct from Sinosaurus and two morphotypes of theropod tracks. Lallensack et al. (2026) reevaluate factors influencing shapes of theropod tracks from the Middle Jurassic of El Mers Group ( Morocco ) and from the Lower Cretaceous Cameros Basin ( Spain ), and interpret the type ichnospecies of the ichnogenera Saurexallopus , Magnoavipes , Theroplantigrada , Ordexallopus and Archaeornithipus as nomina dubia . Dridi (2026) reports the discovery of new theropod tracks from the Callovian strata of the El Miit Member of the Foum Tataouine Formation (Tunisia), providing evidence of more persistent presence of theropods in the studied area throughout the Jurassic than indicated by earlier discoveries. Grallatorid tracks representing two morphotypes, associated with microbial mats that might have contributed to the formation and preservation of the tracks, are identified in the strata of the Tuchengzi Formation from the Jurassic-Cretaceous transition (Hebei, China) by Xing et al. (2026). Evidence from the study of theropod footprints from the Lower Cretaceous Enciso Group (Spain), indicating that differences in morphology of the studied footprints reflect distinct phases of running involving different foot postures and load distributions, is presented by Díaz-Martínez et al. (2026). Charles, Polet & Hutchinson (2026) reconstruct the optimal jumping performance of Coelophysis bauri as overall similar to that of extant elegant crested tinamou , but achieved through different joint kinematics and muscle work throughout the hindlimbs, and report evidence of potential impact of the long, mobile tail on jumping performance. Redescription of the skeletal anatomy and a study on the affinities of Panguraptor lufengensis is published by Zhang et al. (2026). A new non- averostran theropod specimen distinct from Sinosaurus , preserved with evidence of presence of tetanuran -like skeletal characters, is described from the Lower Jurassic Lufeng Formation (Yunnan, China) by Wang et al. (2026), who also name the new clade Averostriformes that includes all neotheropods more closely related to Allosaurus fragilis than to Coelophysis bauri . Oswald & Curtice (2026) report evidence of similarities between the morphometrics of teeth of Ceratosaurus and upper canines of machairodontines , and argue that the dentition of the former might have been an adaptation to quick-killing middle-sized prey. Rowe, Cerroni & Rayfield (2026) study mechanical performance of skulls of Ceratosaurus , Masiakasaurus , Carnotaurus and Majungasaurus , and report evidence of adaptations of skulls of large abelisaurs to resist feeding-induced loads, suggestive of similarity of ecological roles of abelisaurs and tyrannosaurs, as well as possible evidence of adaptation of Masiakasaurus to capture of small prey. Seculi Pereyra et al. (2026) review the history of studies on abelisaurid phylogeny, and provide recommendations for future studies. Seculi Pereyra (2026) studies the evolution of abelisaurid orbit shape, interpreted as more likely influenced by selective pressures such as those related to specialized predation than by phylogenetic constraints. Seculi Pereyra, Soto & Perez (2026) study the evolution of skull ornamentation in abelisaurids, interpreted as following directional patterns and possibly driven by sexual selection. Probable teeth of majungasaurine abelisaurids from the Cenomanian strata of the Algora site (Province of Guadalajara, Spain) are identified by López-Miguel et al. (2026). Boschetto et al. (2026) describe an abelisaurid tooth from the Upper Cretaceous (Campanian-Maastrichtian) Argiles et Grès à Reptiles Formation (France), preserved with a bite mark interpreted as most likely self-inflicted during carcass consumption. Valdéz et al. (2026) report evidence of polycamerate internal structure and an advanced degree of pneumaticity in the fifth cervical vertebra of Viavenator exxoni . Pradelli et al. (2026) describe the anatomy of the axial skeleton of Piatnitzkysaurus floresi . Li et al. (2026) report the discovery of an isolated theropod tooth from the Lower Cretaceous Lianmuqin Formation (China), interpreted as evidence indicating that, in addition to Kelmayisaurus petrolicus and small coelurosaurs, the theropod assemblage from the studied formation also included a medium-sized tetanuran . A study on the skull anatomy of spinosaurids, providing evidence of presence of osteological correlates of supraorbitally placed salt glands similar to but evolved independently from salt glands seen in birds, is published by Cau et al. (2026). Evidence from the study of the neurovascular system in spinosaurid premaxillae, interpreted as consistent with sensitivity of spinosaurid snouts and high rate of tooth replacement in members of the group, is presented by Pittet (2026). An isolated theropod tooth with possible metriacanthosaurid affinities is reported from the Upper Jurassic–Lower Cretaceous strata of the Phu Kradung Formation ( Thailand ) by Samathi, Suteethorn & Suteethorn (2026). Malafaia, Maggia & Rauhut (2026) describe a maxilla of a hatchling Allosaurus from the Upper Jurassic strata from the Guimarota coal mine (Portugal) with a corrosion pattern interpreted as caused by digestion, most likely resulting from a consumption by a non-avian theropod. Two partial braincases of Siamraptor suwati , providing new information on the cranial anatomy of the species, are described from the Lower Cretaceous Khok Kruat Formation (Thailand) by Hattori et al. (2026). Seculi Pereyra & Ibiricu (2026) report evidence of coupled evolution of shape and size of manual claws of megaraptorids, and interpret the studied theropods as likely utilizing forelimbs in a specialized predation strategy. Nielsen et al. (2026) identify tooth marks on a tyrannosaurid metatarsal BDM 124 from the Judith River Formation (Montana, United States) as produced by a small-bodied, likely juvenile tyrannosaurid scavenging on a larger individual. Evidence of preservation of micro- and nanoscale histological features (including Haversian canal and lacunocanalicular network permineralization) in bones of Albertosaurus sarcophagus from the Horseshoe Canyon Formation (Alberta, Canada) is presented by Williams et al. (2026). A natural mold of a partial rostrum of a juvenile specimen of Gorgosaurus libratus is described from the Campanian strata of the Wapiti Formation (British Columbia, Canada) by Coppock, Larsson & Currie (2026), extending known geographical range of the species. Longrich et al. (2026) report the discovery of a tibia of a large-bodied tyrannosaurid from the Campanian strata of the Kirtland Formation (New Mexico, United States), interpreted as likely to be a bone of an early representative of Tyrannosaurini . Yun (2026) studies the affinities of the tyrannosaurid maxilla TMM 41436-1 from the Javelina Formation (Texas, United States), and interprets the available evidence as insufficient for placement of the studied specimen in a tyrannosaurid taxon distinct from Tyrannosaurus rex . Raun et al. (2026) revise proposed diagnostic characters of Asiatyrannus xui and Raptorex kriegsteini , and interpret the type material of both taxa as likely to be juvenile specimens of Tarbosaurus bataar . Woodward , Myhrvold & Horner (2026) reconstruct the life history of Tyrannosaurus on the basis of bone histology, reporting evidence of a more gradual annual growth rate slope than indicated by earlier studies and evidence of a protracted subadult stage, and find that growth trajectories of the tyrannosaur specimens BMRP 2002.4.1 (the holotype of Nanotyrannus lethaeus ) and BMRP 2006.4.4 did not fit the T. rex growth curve model. A study on the locomotion of Tyrannosaurus , indicative of similarity of foot-strike patterns to those of the ostrich, is published by Boeye et al. (2026). Longrich et al. (2026) identify fossil material of hatchlings and young juveniles of Gorgosaurus libratus and Tyrannosaurus rex from the Upper Cretaceous formations in United States and Canada, interpreted as indicative of small body size of tyrannosaurid hatchlings and their precociality; the authors also interpret tooth wear of hatchlings as indicating that they fed on relatively large vertebrates, and estimate that tyrannosaurids were capable of producing large clutches of eggs. New theropod vertebrae, including fossil material of a troodontid and a probable ornithomimosaurian, are described from the Upper Cretaceous Iren Dabasu Formation (China) by Xu et al. (2026), expanding known morphological diversity of theropod vertebrae from this formation. Arbour , Bullard & Evans (2026) report the discovery of an ornithomimosaur caudal vertebra from the Campanian Cedar District Formation , representing the first confirmed dinosaur record from outcrops of the Nanaimo Group in Canada and the second confirmed record of dinosaur fossil material from the Nanaimo Group overall. Calvo-Pérez & Cuesta (2026) study the neuroanatomy of the endocranial cavity of Pelecanimimus polyodon , and report evidence of similarity of endocranial morphology to those of other ornithomimosaurs. Libke et al. (2026) support the interpretation of isolated dentaries from the Upper Cretaceous Judith River Formation ( Montana , United States) described by Chinzorig et al. (2025) as belonging to an aberrantly large ornithomimosaur, but argue that the studied fossils cannot be confidently assigned to a member of the family Deinocheiridae . Makovicky et al. (2026) report the discovery of a new specimen of Alnashetri cerropoliciensis from the Candeleros Formation (Argentina), providing new information on the anatomy of members of this species; the authors also interpret the Late Jurassic theropod vertebra described by Makovicky (1997), the theropod astragalus YPM 9163 from Como Bluff ( Morrison Formation , Wyoming, United States; formerly referred to Coelurus fragilis ) and Calamosaurus foxi as alvarezsauroids , and study the phylogenetic relationships and evolutionary history of members of this group, interpreting it as having Pangaean ancestral distribution. A study on the functional capacity of forelimbs of alvarezsauroids, supporting their adaptations for digging, is published by Leedham et al. (2026). Meso et al. (2026) redescribe the anatomy of the holotype specimen of Bonapartenykus ultimus . Wang et al. (2026) report the first discovery of a maniraptoran egg from the Cenomanian Quantou Formation (Jilin, China), and name a new ootaxon Jilinoolithus lamellotestus .

The first clutch of non-avian dinosaur eggs from the Cretaceous Dengta Basin (Guangdong, China), assigned to the ootaxon Elongatoolithus elongatus , is described by Wang et al. (2026). A study on the biomechanics of the forelimbs of Falcarius is published by Smith (2026). Description of the inner ear anatomy of Epichirostenotes curriei and two caenagnathid specimens from the Judith River and Hell Creek formations (Montana, United States) is published by Bazzana-Adams, Funston & Evans (2026). Su et al. (2026) determine heat transfer during the incubation of a clutch of oviraptorid eggs on the basis of incubation experiments, and find that oviraptorid parents transferred heat to their eggs less efficiently than extant birds and depended in part on environmental heat sources for incubation. Hao & Xu (2026) report the discovery of a new nest-associated oviraptorid specimen from the Upper Cretaceous strata from Jiangxi (China), and interpret Huanansaurus ganzhouensis , Corythoraptor jacobsi and the new specimen as likely representing a single species. Hefler et al. (2026) study the aerodynamics of Microraptor during flight, reporting evidence of beneficial impact of forewing–hindwing interactions on flow dynamics.

The first deinonychosaurian (probably troodontid) track from Japan is described from the Lower Cretaceous Kitadani Formation by Tsukiji, Hattori & Azuma (2026). A probable troodontid tooth with similarities to Troodon is described from the Upper Cretaceous strata of the Kallamedu Formation (India) by Dhiman et al. (2026). Yin et al. (2026) study the external and internal anatomy of two troodontid teeth from the Maastrichtian Yuliangzi Formation (Heilongjiang, China), including a new specimen with similarities to Troodon . Serio et al. (2026) present a reconstruction of the forelimb of Troodon formosus , and reconstruct its range of motion. Review of evidence of troodontid dietary habits is published by Fan, Miller & Pittman (2026). García-Gil et al. (2026) identify isolated theropod teeth from the Upper Cretaceous El Gallo Formation ( Mexico ) as belonging to dromaeosaurids, troodontids, maniraptorans of uncertain affinities and indeterminate theropods. Sauropodomorph research Schuurman, Bruner & Knoll (2026) reconstruct the topology of skulls of 14 sauropodomorph species spanning the entire evolutionary history of the group, and report probable evidence of limitation of morphological changes of individual bones by spatial constraints. A study on the evolution of the humeral morphology of sauropodomorphs, providing evidence of different pattern of evolution of sauropod-like traits in the proximal and distal half of the humerus, is published by Lefebvre et al. (2026). Evidence from the study of the fossil record of sauropodomorph tracks, indicative of changes through time related to increase of body size in the morphology of the sauropodomorph manus (but not in the morphology of the pes ), is presented by Yamaguchi, Kubo & Kubo (2026). A footprint and an associated tail trace that were probably produced by a bipedal sauropodomorph, representing the oldest dinosaur trace fossil from Australia reported to date, are described from the Carnian strata of the Aspley Formation in Queensland by Romilio & Runnegar (2026). D'Orazi Porchetti et al. (2026) assign tetradactyl footprints from the Carnian strata of the Hassberge Formation (Germany) to the ichnogenus Evazoum , and interpret the studied footprints as likely produced by bipedal sauropodomorphs. Campos et al. (2026) describe the fossil material and study the bone histology of a small-bodied, juvenile sauropodomorph from the Upper Triassic strata from the Cerro da Alemoa site ( Santa Maria Formation , Brazil ), representing the smallest well-preserved skeletal remains of a sauropodomorph from Brazil reported to date. Description of the anatomy of the axial skeleton and a study on the affinities of Macrocollum itaquii is published by Fonseca et al. (2026). Xing et al. (2026) report the discovery of probable sauropodomorph tracks from a new tracksite from the Upper Triassic Xujiahe Formation ( Sichuan , China ). Chen et al. (2026) determine the oldest sauropodomorph fossils from the Kunming Basin (Yunnan, China) to be 200.17-million-years-old, and interpret this result as evidence of colonization of low palaeolatitude area of southwest China by medium- to large-bodied dinosaurs in the aftermath of the Triassic–Jurassic extinction . Evidence from the study of tooth morphology and replacement patterns, indicative of diverse feeding ecologies of Early Jurassic sauropods from the Cañadón Asfalto Basin (Argentina), is presented by Gomez, Carballido & Pol (2026). Saleiro et al. (2026) present the workflow behind the creation of a large dataset of surface texture measurements of teeth of Late Jurassic sauropods.

The largest sauropod tracksite from the Lower Cretaceous Madongshan Formation (Ningxia, China), preserving tracks with a morphology intermediate between those typical of Brontopodus and Parabrontopodus tracks, is described by Yang et al. (2026). Sauropod tracks produced in wet aeolian environmental, possibly while the trackmakers travelled towards a habitat with greater resource availability, are described from the Lower Cretaceous Três Barras Formation (Brazil) by Nascimento et al. (2026). Kubo et al. (2026) study tooth wear of a specimen of Omeisaurus maoianus , finding no evidence of significant differences of microwear texture in the same individual based on tooth position, and report evidence of tooth wear differences between Yunnanosaurus and derived sauropods that were likely related to dietary differences. Shui, Shao & Yin (2026) present the first three-dimensional reconstruction of a mamenchisaurid tooth based on data from a new specimen from the Upper Jurassic Qigu Formation (China), interpreted as likely representing a taxon distinct from the specimen reported by Maisch & Matzke (2019). A study on the bone histology of cervical ribs of a juvenile mamenchisaurid specimen from the Jurassic Shaximiao Formation (Sichuan, China) is published by Zhou et al. (2026). Ghosh et al. (2026) describe a probable turiasaur tooth from the Bathonian strata of the Jaisalmer Basin ( India ), interpreted as the oldest record of group from the Indian Subcontinent reported to date. Casts of sauropod teeth from a private quarry near Skull Creek in northwestern Colorado (United States) interpreted as the first record of a member of Turiasauria from the Upper Jurassic Morrison Formation are described by Foster , Woodruff & Royo-Torres (2026). A study on the caudal vertebrae of Cetiosaurus sp., "Cetiosaurus" glymptonensis , Wamweracaudia keranjei , Dicraeosaurus sattleri , Tornieria africana and Giraffatitan brancai , providing evidence of at least five independent origins and/or reversals of pneumaticity of anterior caudal vertebrae in Neosauropoda, is published by Beeston et al. (2026). Foster et al. (2026) review the history of excavation and study of the fossil material of Dystrophaeus viaemalae , review the geological setting of the fossil material, and interpret the morphology of the fossil material of D. viaemalae (including additional material collected since 2014) as unlikely to be a member of Diplodocoidea. Lerzo (2026) reevaluates Nopcsaspondylus alarconensis and considers it to be a nomen dubium .

The sauropod specimen MMCh-PV 47 from the Candeleros Formation (Argentina), originally described as a titanosaur by Otero et al. (2011), is interpreted as a rebbachisaurid by Lerzo (2026), providing new information on the tail musculature of members of this group. Garderes, Lerzo & Knoll (2026) study the endocranial morphology of Sidersaura marae , and report evidence indicating that rebbachisaurids might have differed from other sauropods in the variation in hearing capabilities relative to body size. Pal & Deshmukh (2026) described an ulna and radius of two titanosaur specimens discovered from Lameta Formation ( India ), with the first osteohistological description of a juvenile specimen from the country. Garderes et al. (2026) present a reconstruction of the cranial musculature of Bajadasaurus pronuspinax . Hullinger et al. (2026) describe apatosaurine remains from Arches National Park ( Utah , United States), representing a medium-sized yet geologically young member of the group. A vertebra interpreted as the northernmost record of Barosaurus lentus from the Morrison Formation reported to date is described from the Pryor Mountains (Montana, United States) by Woodruff et al. (2026). van der Linden et al. (2026) report on a specimen of Barosaurus with a pathology in the "whip" part of the tail. Carpenter , Ikejiri & Wilson (2026) study the anatomy of postcranial skeleton of two immature specimens of Camarasaurus lentus from the strata of the Morrison Formation from Dinosaur National Monument (Utah, United States), interpreted as representing sequential stages in the ontogeny of the species and providing new information on its morphological variability. Yoshida, Carpenter & Kobayashi (2026) report the discovery of fossil material of members of Somphospondyli from the Cedar Mountain Formation (Utah, United States), providing evidence of coexistence of members of this group and brachiosaurids in North America during the Aptian . A new dinosaur tracksite dominated by tracks of sauropods (probably non-titanosaurian members of Somphospondyli) is described from the Lower Cretaceous strata of the Wawukuang Formation (Shandong, China) by Ren et al. (2026). Averianov et al. (2026) describe a partial fibula of a probable member of Euhelopodidae from the Lower Cretaceous Ilek Formation (Kemerovo Oblast, Russia), interpreted as evidence of presence of two sauropod taxa at the Shestakovo 3 locality. Redescription of the anatomy and a study on the affinities of Triunfosaurus leonardii is published by Mannion & Carvalho (2026), who interpret the studied species as a member of Somphospondyli belonging or closely related to Titanosauria. Averianov et al. (2026) describe the first cervical vertebra referable to Tengrisaurus starkovi , and recover it as a basal member of Colossosauria in an updated phylogenetic study including this new material. Fossil material of a non-saltasaurine titanosaur (possibly a member of Colossosauria), representing the first dinosaur record from the Oriente Basin at the Upper Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) Tena Formation (Ecuador), is described by Balcázar-Loaiza et al. (2026). Pérez Moreno et al. (2026) revise the fossil material attributed to Muyelensaurus pecheni , interpret it as belonging to sauropods from more than one taxon, and restrict M. pecheni to the holotype specimen only. Navarro et al. (2026) describe a titanosaur axis with possible lognkosaurian affinities from the Upper Cretaceous São José do Rio Preto Formation (Brazil), providing evidence of presence of a sauropod with body dimensions comparable to those of Futalognkosaurus in the Bauru Group prior to the Campanian, and report evidence of presence of phylogenetically informative character in the sauropod axis vertebrae. A caudal vertebra of a small-bodied titanosaur (probably a non-saltasaurid member of Eutitanosauria ) is described from the Upper Cretaceous (Campanian) strata of the Santa Marta Formation (James Ross Island, Antarctica) by Barrett et al. (2026). A study on changes in the skeleton of Neuquensaurus australis , based on data from the skeleton of a juvenile individual, is published by Zurriaguz et al. (2026), who also study the bone histology of the new individual, reporting evidence of an overall rapid growth, but also evidence of at least one cyclical growth mark in the cortex. Alessandretti et al. (2026) describe sauropod undertracks from the Upper Cretaceous Capacete Formation (Brazil), determine the environmental conditions that resulted in their formation and preservation, and interpret the sedimentological and paleontological data from the Sanfranciscana Basin coupled with reconstructions of Late Cretaceous climate as suggestive of sauropod migrations from the Bauru Basin to the Sanfranciscana Basin. Ornithischian research A study on the life history of Changchunsaurus parvus , providing evidence of one of the slowest growth rates reported in dinosaurs, is published by Wang et al. (2026). Thyreophoran research Sánchez-Fenollosa, Cobos & Suñer (2026) describe new stegosaurian fossil material from the Villar del Arzobispo Formation (Spain), and revise the fossil record of Stegosauria from the eastern part of the Iberian Peninsula. Hunt-Foster et al. (2026) describe portions of forelimbs of an indeterminate stegosaurid from the Brushy Basin Member of the Morrison Formation (Utah, United States), estimated to be the largest stegosaurid specimen from the Morrison Formation reported to date. Costa (2026) identifies five additional occurrences of dacentrurine stegosaur fossils (besides the holotype of Alcovasaurus / Miragaia longispinus ) in the Upper Jurassic strata of the Morrison Formation (United States). A juvenile specimen representing the smallest individual of Stegosaurus stenops reported to date is described from the strata of the Morrison Formation in Wyoming (United States) by Carpenter (2026). New thyreophoran fossil material with probable stegosaurian affinities is described from the Lower Cretaceous (Berriasian–Valanginian) Bajada Colorada Formation (Argentina) by Riguetti et al. (2026). Agnolín et al. (2026) report the discovery of new fossil material of Patagopelta cristata , providing new information on the anatomy of members of this species and supporting its placement within Parankylosauria. Cross et al. (2026) modify and develop new tooth characters for ankylosaur systematics, and study the phylogenetic relationships of members of this group. New information on the internal anatomy of the skull of Panoplosaurus mirus is provided by Livius et al. (2026). Yoon et al. (2026) identify probable ankylosaurid tracks, referred to as cf. Ruopodosaurus , from the Cenomanian Jindong Formation ( South Korea ). Zhu et al. (2026) describe new fossil material of Pinacosaurus grangeri from the Upper Cretaceous Wulansuhai Formation (China), refine the diagnosis of this species, study changes in its skull morphology during its life history, and report possible evidence of sexual dimorphism. Cerapod research Kim, Lee & Gihm (2026) report the discovery of a trackway of a running ornithopod from the Lower Cretaceous (Aptian–Albian) strata of the Hasandong Formation (South Korea). Rotatori et al. (2026) study the phylogenetic relationships of iguanodontian ornithopods and reconstruct the evolutionary history of the group, name a new clade Ouranosauria , and trace the major radiation of Iguanodontia to the Early Jurassic (Pliensbachian–Toarcian). Description of new fossil material of Muttaburrasaurus langdoni and a study on its craniodental anatomy, palaeoneurology and sensory palaeobiology is published by Herne et al. (2026). Three iguanodontian specimens with a morphology distinct from those of members of the genera Dryosaurus and Camptosaurus are described from the strata of the Morrison Formation from the Simon Quarry (Wyoming, United States) by Krumenacker et al. (2026). Rocchi et al. (2026) provide new information on the anatomy of Dysalotosaurus lettowvorbecki and changes in its skeleton during its ontogeny on the basis of the study of an immature individual from the Tendaguru Formation (Tanzania). Galton & Carpenter (2026) redescribe the anatomy of the holotype and paratypes of Camptosaurus dispar and the holotype of C. medius , and support the interpretation of C. medius , C. nanus and C. browni as junior synonyms of C. dispar . Gônet, Allain & Houssaye (2026) determine probable locomotor preferences of Iguanodon bernissartensis , Ouranosaurus nigeriensis and Lurdusaurus arenatus , interpreting the studied taxa as likely obligate quadrupeds, and interpreting Lurdusaurus as the first known graviportal ornithopod. Kondo et al. (2026) identify a sternal plate of an indeterminate member of Iguanodontia (possibly a hadrosauroid) from the Upper Cretaceous (Turonian-Coniacian) Ashizawa Formation (Futaba Group), belonging to an individual that was smaller than other iguanodontians reported from the Upper Cretaceous marine strata from Japan. Ma et al. (2026) report the discovery of a new skull of Qianjiangsaurus changshengi from the Upper Cretaceous Zhengyang Formation (China), preserving evidence of presence of a hollow crest on the skull of the studied dinosaur that was structurally non- homologous with crests of lambeosaurine hadrosaurids. Ma et al. (2026) study the taphonomy and age profile of the assemblage dominated by specimens of Bactrosaurus johnsoni from the Upper Cretaceous Iren Dabasu Formation (China) collected during fieldwork conducted in 2014 and 2015, report that the assemblage is dominated by nestling and juvenile individuals (interpreted as consistent with population segregation between juveniles and adults and with herding behavior of B. johnsoni ), and interpret the studied fossil assemblage as likely affected by an attritional mortality pattern. Yu et al. (2026) report the first discovery of lambeosaurine hadrosaurid fossil material from the Campanian Nenjiang Formation (China), interpreted by the authors as supporting Asian origin of the group. Sharpe & Brown (2026) describe fossil material of Hypacrosaurus altispinus from the Horseshoe Canyon Formation (Alberta, Canada), representing the northernmost record of the species reported to date; the authors also provide evidence of morphological separation between H. altispinus and "Hypacrosaurus" stebingeri , and propose a new combination Corythosaurus stebingeri for the latter species. Dudgeon, Brown & Evans (2026) describe the internal crest anatomy of mature individuals of Corythosaurus casuarius , C. intermedius and Lambeosaurus lambei . Hunter & Janis (2026) compare tooth wear in juvenile and adult individuals of Maiasaura peeblesorum , and report evidence of differences interpreted as consistent with a shift from feeding on nutritious, low-fiber plants to feeding on nutritionally poor, high-fiber plants during the life of the studied dinosaur. Duarte-Bigurra et al. (2026) describe partial hadrosaurid specimens from the Campanian strata of the Fronteras section of the Cabullona Group from Arroyo del Alamito and Puerto Viejo localities (Sonora, Mexico), providing evidence of presence in southern Laramidia of members of the tribe Kritosaurini related to "secernosaurs" from Patagonia (Argentina). Bateman & Larsson (2026) compare the cranial musculature and likely feeding performance of Stegoceras validum and other ornithischians, providing evidence of greater similarity of the feeding performance of S. validum to those of basal ornithischians and ornithopods than to that of Psittacosaurus lujiatunensis , and interpret their findings as indicating that evolution of cranial domes of pachycephalosaurs constrained the evolution of their jaw musculature and their feeding performance. Moore et al. (2026) describe postcranial remains of an indeterminate, early juvenile pachycephalosaur specimen from the Maastrichtian Frenchman Formation (Saskatchewan, Canada), representing the ontogenetically youngest pachycephalosaur postcranium reported to date. Maidment et al. (2026) use new remains of Ajkaceratops kozmai from the Late Cretaceous Csehbánya Formation ( Hungary ) to conclude that this species is confidently a ceratopsian , " Mochlodon " vorosi is a junior synonym of this species, and Late Cretaceous Europe preserves a previously unrecognized diversity of horned dinosaurs represented by taxa otherwise accepted as ' rhabdodontids ' , despite previous records having suggested the contrary. Reconstruction of the nasal soft tissues of ceratopsids is presented by Tada et al. (2026). Birds New bird taxa Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Coracias chauvireae Sp. nov Zelenkov Pleistocene Crimea A roller, a species of Coracias . Corvus venustus Sp. nov Valid Zelenkov Pleistocene Crimea A species of Corvus . Eopavo Gen. et sp. nov Valid Yu et al. Miocene Liushu Formation China A peafowl.

The type species is E. hezhengensis . Eschatornis Gen. et sp. nov Valid Machado et al. Pleistocene Brazil A member of the family Phorusrhacidae .

The type species is E. aterradora . Gorgonavis Gen. et sp. nov Valid Nebreda et al. Early Cretaceous (Barremian) La Huérguina Formation Spain A member of Enantiornithes belonging or related to the family Longipterygidae .

The type species is G. alcyone . Jamninkaornis Gen. et sp. nov Valid Bochenski et al. Oligocene Poland A passerine in the suborder Tyranni .

The type species is J. kencampbelli . Kunpengornis Gen. et sp. nov Valid Huang et al. Early Cretaceous Jiufotang Formation China A euornithean .

The type species is K. anhuimusei. Announced in 2025, the final article version was published in 2026. Meterchen Gen. et sp. nov Valid Tennyson et al. Miocene Bannockburn Formation New Zealand A probable goose.

The type species is M. luti . Pavo miejue Sp. nov Valid Lan, Mayr & Tsai Pleistocene Chiting Formation Taiwan A species of Pavo . Plumadraco Gen. et sp. nov Valid Clark et al. Early Cretaceous (Aptian) Jiufotang Formation China A member of Enantiornithes .

The type species is P. bankoorum . Porphyrio claytongreenei Sp. nov Valid Worthy et al. Pleistocene New Zealand A swamphen . Pujatopouli Gen. et sp. nov Valid Irazoqui et al. Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) López de Bertodano Formation Antarctica A probable member of Neoaves with affinities with the group Aequornithes .

The type species is P. soberana . Announced in 2025, the final article version was published in 2026. Rhynchaeites mcfaddeni Sp. nov Valid Ksepka et al. Eocene Green River Formation United States ( Wyoming ) A stem -ibis. Shargaotis Gen. et sp. nov Valid Zelenkov Miocene Mongolia A bustard .

The type species is S. ignipes . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as December 2025. Strigops insulaborealis Sp. nov Valid Worthy et al. Pleistocene New Zealand A parrot related to the kākāpō . Urmiornis shargensis Sp. nov Valid Zelenkov Miocene Mongolia A member of Ergilornithidae . Vegavis geitononesos Sp. nov Valid Irazoqui et al. Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) López de Bertodano Formation Antarctica A neornithine ; a species of Vegavis . Vegavis notopothousa Sp. nov Valid Irazoqui et al. Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) López de Bertodano Formation Antarctica A neornithine; a species of Vegavis . V. notopothousa (d, i, k, o) Zhengheornis Gen. et sp. nov Wang et al. Late Jurassic (Tithonian) Nanyuan Formation China An early member of Avialae .

The type species is Z. buyu . Avian research Benito et al. (2026) contest the conclusions of the study of Wilken et al. (2025) about the evolution of the ability of birds to move parts of the skull independently, arguing that these conclusions were based on inadequate taxon sampling and morphological misinterpretations; in response Wilken et al. (2026) agree that the bone interpreted in the 2025 study as a coracoid of Janavis is more likely to be a pterygoid, but question the affinities of this bone among Mesozoic birds, and overall reaffirm their original conclusion that powered prokinesis is most likely an autapomorphy of neognath birds. Lechki & Benson (2026) compare the reproductive output of extant and extinct amniotes, and link the increase of size of eggs and offspring (relative to adult size) in birds compared to other dinosaurs to the evolution of larger brain, likely also related to increased parental care. Jo et al. (2026) report the first discovery of Mesozoic avialan -type eggs from Korea, discovered in the mid-Cretaceous strata of the Ilseongsan Formation (South Korea), and name a new ootaxon Onggwanoolithus aphaedoensis . O'Connor & Marugán-Lobón (2026) revise the fossil record of avialans from the Upper Jurassic Solnhofen Limestones (Germany), consider purported diagnostic characters of Ostromia crassipes and Alcmonavis poeschli to be equivocal, and interpret the studied fossils as most likely representing a single taxon ( Archaeopteryx ). Zhou et al. (2026) interpret the evolution of teeth of Mesozoic birds as random and mainly influenced by phylogeny and evolution time, with no evidence of a consistent trend towards tooth loss. Wu et al. (2026) study the evolution of the triosseal canal of birds on the basis of data from Archaeorhynchus and a new enantiornithean specimen from the Jiufotang Formation (Liaoning, China), interpreting the triosseal canal as resulting from evolution of the coracoscapular joint into synchondrosis in members of Ornithothoraces , and from subsequent closing of the canal in members of Ornithuromorpha as a result of the appearance of the acrocoracoclavicular joint between their coracoid and furcula. Holdaway et al. (2026) study the variation within the moa genus Euryapteryx , and find that their phylogenetic relationships indicated by the study of ancient mitochondrial DNA do not match patterns recovered in morphometric analysis. Evidence from the study of ostrich eggshells from Middle Pleistocene to late Holocene sites in Israel, indicative of shift from eggshells with pore patterns similar to those seen in extant Somali ostrich to eggshells with pore patterns similar to those seen in Arabian ostrich which might related to a species turnover in the studied area between 100,000 and 70,000 years ago, is presented by Tsahar et al. (2026). Niespolo et al. (2026) determine the youngest known eggshells of Genyornis to be approximately 46-44,000 years old. Sosa & Acosta Hospitaleche (2026) describe a synsacrum of an indeterminate member of Neognathae from the Ypresian strata of the La Meseta Formation from the Seymour Island , interpreted as evidence of presence of a small shorebird or marine bird in Antarctica during the Eocene. Somogyi et al. (2026) interpret cases of apparent morphological convergence in members of major lineages of Neoaves that lack consistent functional drivers as likely linked to high levels of incomplete lineage sorting during the early radiation of the group in the aftermath of the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event, resulting in difficulty of phylogenetic placement of early Cenozoic members of the group. Hellyer-Price, Venditti & Humphries (2026) calculate the drag on the bill of Pelagornis while skimming, and argue that the studied bird was likely unable to skim-feed. Goedert et al. (2026) report the discovery of a braincase of Pelagornis orri from the Miocene Astoria Formation (Oregon, United States), providing new information on the anatomy of the species, as well as discovery of isolated vertebra and phalanx bone of Pelagornis sp. from the Eocene Keasey Formation (Oregon), representing one of the oldest pelagornithid records reported to date. Degrange et al. (2026) study the anatomy of the brain endocast of Conflicto antarcticus , reporting the absence of Wulsts , lack of adaptations to filter-feeding seen in extant anatids , and presence of large olfactory bulbs. Zelenkov (2026) describes fossil material of Pleistocene bustards from the Taurida Cave (Crimea), confirms the validity and distinctiveness of Otis lambrechti and "Otis" kalmani , and assigns the latter species to the genus Tetrax . De los Reyes, Acosta Hospitaleche & Sosa (2026) report the discovery of a tarsometatarsus of the grey-cowled wood rail from the strata of the La Esperanza Formation (Buenos Aires Province, Argentina), interpreted as suggestive of presence of seasonal wetlands and/or humid scrublands in the studied area during the early Pleistocene. Lenser, Reed & Worthy (2026) interpret the fossil record of shorebirds from the Blanche Cave (South Australia) as indicative of mostly terrestrial environment in the studied area in the Pleistocene, including open forest and woodland but also with wetland elements, and interpret changes of composition of the studied assemblage as indicative of decrease in available wetlands at the end of the Last Glacial Maximum. Mayr & Richter (2026) describe new fossil material of Hassiavis laticauda from the Eocene Messel Formation (Germany), providing new information on the anatomy of members of this species, and reevaluate the phylogenetic affinities of Archaeotrogonidae . New fossil material of the Cuban pauraque and the Antillean nighthawk is described from the Pleistocene and Holocene strata from the El Abrón Cave (Cuba) by Gorbatcheva & Zelenkov (2026). Hunt, Lucas & Smith (2026) describe bromalites from the Eocene Willwood Formation (Wyoming, United States) interpreted as owl regurgitalites containing bones of glyptosaurid lizards, and name a new ichnotaxon Sauresus osteodermus . Fossil material of members of two honeyguide species, representing the earliest record of members of this group reported to date, is described from the Pliocene strata of the Varswater Formation from the Langebaanweg site (South Africa) by Louchart, Manegold & Pavia (2026). A study on the bone histology of Andrewsornis abbotti and Physornis fortis , providing evidence of uninterrupted growth strategy in phorusrhacids , is published by Dreyer, Cooper & O'Connor (2026). Mayr (2026) studies the phylogenetic relationships of Parapsittacopes and Psittacomimus , assigning them to the new family Psittacomimidae interpreted as likely sister group of Parapasseres (the clade formed by the Zygodactylidae and Passeriformes ). A study on the phylogenetic relationships of the Hawaiian honeyeaters , indicative of a relationships with the clade including the families Hypocoliidae and Hylocitreidae rather than a sister relationship with Hypocoliidae alone, is published by Zhao, Kimball & Braun (2026). A study on the morphological diversity of Cretaceous to Pleistocene avian tracks from continents that were parts of Gondwana is published by Farina et al. (2026). Review of the composition of the Eocene bird assemblage from the Walton Member of the London Clay (United Kingdom) is published by Mayr (2026). Mayr & Collinson (2026) revise the fossil record of stomach contents of Eocene birds from the Messel Pit (Germany), reporting evidence of ingested seeds in representatives of ten species belonging to different bird groups, and interpret the studied fossil record as indicative of Eocene frugivorous birds exploiting existing diversity of flowering plants with edible fruits (whose origin predated those of the studied birds) rather than indicative of coevolution of flowering plants and early frugivorous birds. Farina, Krapovickas & Marsicano (2026) study the composition of the bird track assemblage from the Miocene Vinchina Formation (Argentina), including the oldest rheiform track in southern South America reported to date and probable phorusrhacid track. Serrano et al. (2026) describe Early Pleistocene bird remains from the Venta Micena site (Spain), interpreted as indicative of presence of wetland environment. Zelenkov et al. (2026) report the discovery of fossil material of a new late Pleistocene bird fauna from the Khondu locality (Sakha Republic, Russia), including at least 25 taxa. Oros Sršen et al. (2026) study the composition of the late Pleistocene bird assemblages from the Marlera site (Croatia), reporting evidence of presence of taxa associated by open and dry environments, as well as aquatic taxa. A new, diverse Late Pleistocene bird assemblage is reported from the Taguatagua 3 site in the Tagua Tagua Lake area (Chile) by Alarcón-Muñoz et al. (2026). Evidence from the study of ancient environmental DNA indicative of changes of composition of bird communities in high-latitude areas of Eurasia and Alaska from the Last Glacial Maximum to the Holocene is presented by Sander et al. (2026). Peralta et al. (2026) report the discovery of a new avian assemblage from the early Holocene strata from the Molino Doll locality (Entre Ríos Province, Argentina). A study on the composition on the middle Holocene avian assemblage from the Cueva del Llano site (Fuerteventura, Canary Islands), providing evidence of presence of taxa typical of forest environments and the edges of bodies of water, is published by Sánchez-Marco, Sánchez-Sastre & Castillo (2026). Pterosaurs New pterosaur taxa Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Laueropterus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Hone Late Jurassic Mörnsheim Formation Germany An early member of Monofenestrata .

The Anatomical Record . doi : 10.1002/ar.70233 . PMID 42168082 . ^ Farias, D. B. M.; Müller, R. T.; Bem, F. P.; Baczko, M. B.; Desojo, J. B.; Soares, M. B. (2026). "Filling a key gap in growth patterns of Pseudosuchia through the osteohistology of Dynamosuchus collisensis (Ornithosuchidae: Archosauria)" . Royal Society Open Science . 13 (2) 252042. Bibcode : 2026RSOS...1352042F . doi : 10.1098/rsos.252042 . ^ Ulloa-Guaiquin, K.; von Baczko, M. B.; Desojo, J. B.; Paulina-Carabajal, A. (2026). "Complex rostral neurovascular anatomy of Riojasuchus tenuisceps (Archosauria: Pseudosuchia) and implications for trophic hypotheses in ornithosuchids".

The Anatomical Record ar.70186. doi : 10.1002/ar.70186 . PMID 41919653 . ^ Marsh, A. D.; Schubul, A. N.; Dalton, A. S.; Burch, H. E.; Wagner, D. E. (2026). " Postosuchus Supernova: A New Specimen of Postosuchus Cf. P. Kirkpatricki ". Lithodendron . 3 : 101– 120. doi : 10.69575/SBEP1712 . ^ Hutchinson, J. R.; Faughey, E.; Humpage, M.; Dupuis, T.; Demuth, O. E.; Pintore, R.; Clarac, F. (2026). "Functional morphology and biomechanics of the locomotor apparatus in the large Late Triassic carnivore Postosuchus kirkpatricki (Archosauria: Rauisuchidae)" . Journal of Anatomy . doi : 10.1111/joa.70189 . ^ Paixão, G. M. X.; Martinelli, A. G.; Marsola, J. C. A.; Hechenleitner, E. M.; Nava, W. R.; Chiappe, L. M.; Jussiani, E. I.; Rozadilla, S.; Kaluza, J.; Pinheiro, F. L. (2026). "Fossil evidence of exceptionally large egg-clutches sheds light on reproductive diversity in Late Cretaceous crocodyliforms from Brazil". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (4) e2596997. doi : 10.1080/02724634.2025.2596997 . ^ Tan, Y.; Jiang, S.; Xu, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, X. (2026). "New material of Edentosuchus tienshanensis Young, 1973 (Crocodyliformes, Protosuchidae) from the Lower Cretaceous Tugulu Group, northwestern China". Cretaceous Research . 184 106367. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.18406367T . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106367 . ^ Soni, A.; Young, M. T.; Bowman, C. I. W.; Erb, A.; Schwab, J. A.; Herrera, Y.; Brusatte, S. L. (2026). "Neurosensory evolution in thalattosuchian crocodylomorphs – integrating somatosensory and visual adaptations across ecological transitions" . Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 13. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2026.2650482 . ^ Barrientos-Lara, J. I.; Alvarado-Ortega, J. (2026). "A marine geosaurine crocodylomorph from the Kimmeridgian Sabinal Formation of Oaxaca, southern Mexico". Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal of Palaeontology . doi : 10.1080/03115518.2026.2671704 . ^ Herrera, Y.; Spindler, F.; Bronzati, M. (2026). "A complete morphological description of Dakosaurus maximus (Crocodyliformes: Thalattosuchia) with further insights into their palaeoecology" . Palaeontologia Electronica . 29 (1) 29.1.a4. doi : 10.26879/1577 . ^ Paiva, A. L. S.; Godoy, P. L.; dos Santos, D. M.; Langer, M. C.; Mannion, P. D. (2026). "Phylogenetically-informed estimates of notosuchian (Archosauria, Crocodylomorpha) body size and the challenges of inferring macroevolutionary patterns in extinct groups" . Palaeontology . 69 (3) e70061. doi : 10.1111/pala.70061 . ^ Candeiro, C. R. A.; Brusatte, S. L.; Ribeiro, T. B.; Pol, D.; Vidal, L. S.; Arruda de Paula, T. A. D.; Ferreira, B. M.; Lima, C. V.; Pereira, P. V. L. G. C. (2026). "A large notosuchian (Mesoeucrocodylia) tooth from the Adamantina Formation of Goiás state, Brazil". Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal of Palaeontology : 1– 7. doi : 10.1080/03115518.2025.2598344 . ^ Navarro, T. G.; Cerda, I.; Leardi, J. M.; Pol, D.; Suarez Riglos, M.; Novas, F. (2026). "Growth dynamics of the small-bodied notosuchian Yacarerani boliviensis Novas et al., 2009 (Crocodyliformes; Notosuchia; Sphagesauridae) inferred from long bone histology". Cretaceous Research . 185 106390. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.18506390N . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106390 . ^ Carneiro, L. M.; Andrade, L. C.; Arêas, M. R.; da Silva, R. C. (2026). "New records of mesoeucrocodylian tooth marks from the Paleogene of South America, Brazil: paleoecological implications". Journal of South American Earth Sciences . 176 106044. Bibcode : 2026JSAES.17606044C . doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2026.106044 . ^ Albuquerque, A. S.; Pereira, P. V. L. G. C.; Ribeiro, T. B.; Mayrinck, D.; Brito, P. M.; Cupello, C. (2026). "First record of neosuchian crocodyliforms from Missão Velha Formation (Upper Jurassic-Lower Cretaceous), Araripe Basin". Cretaceous Research . 186 106414. doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106414 . ^ Castillo-Visa, O.; Bell, P. R.; Galobart, À.; Sellés, A. (2026). "Soft tissue preservation in the Barremian Montsecosuchus depereti (Neosuchia: Atoposauridae)". Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 207 (2) zlag076. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlag076 . ^ Jouve, S.; Young, M. T.; Hastings, M. K.; Salih, K. (2026). "The systematics and nomenclature of Tethysuchia (Archosauria: Crocodylomorpha) under the International Code of Phylogenetic Nomenclature". Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 206 (4) zlag045. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlag045 . ^ Barbini, L.; Burke, P. M. J.; Caddeo, I.; Romano, M.; Mannion, P. D. (2026). "Endocranial anatomy of the earliest Cretaceous European neosuchian crocodyliform Pholidosaurus purbeckensis provides new evidence for the ecological evolution of Pholidosauridae" . Journal of Anatomy joa.70125. doi : 10.1111/joa.70125 . PMID 41721195 . ^ Izidio, M. E.; Araújo, E. V.; Haase, M. V.; Sayão, J. M.; Oliveira, G. R. (2026). "Dental histology of Guarinisuchus munizi (Crocodylomorpha, Dyrosauridae)". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 13. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2026.2643940 . ^ Szegszárdi, M.; Ősi, A.; Rabi, M. (2026). "Cretaceous crocodyliform reconciles conflicting evidence on the Mesozoic paleogeography of Europe during the Gondwana-Laurasia split" . Scientific Reports . 16 (1) 2842. Bibcode : 2026NatSR..16.2842S . doi : 10.1038/s41598-025-28504-6 . PMC 12827392 . PMID 41571693 . ^ Barker, C. T.; Tulloch, E.; Young, M. T.; Naish, D.; Leung, L.-C.; Rankin, K.; Gostling, N. J. (2026). "Re-evaluation of the Wealden crocodyliform Koumpiodontosuchus Sweetman et al., 2015: new osteological and neuroanatomical data from micro-computed tomography resolves a phylogenetic dispute" . Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 206 (4) zlag035. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlag035 . ^ Prondvai, E.; Horváth, K.; Price, S. W. T.; Gutowski, O.; Beale, A. (2026). "United by chewing: Hunter-Schreger band-like pattern and wavy enamel in a fossil crocodile suggest functional convergence with mammals and dinosaurs" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 293 (2064) 20251992. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2025.1992 . PMID 41636257 . ^ Boerman, S. A. C. M.; Vellekoop, J.; Jouve, S.; Rabi, M.; Vallée-Gillette, N.; Oudoire, T.; Smith, T. (2026). "Revision of the longirostrine crocodylian Thoracosaurus isorhynchus from the Maastrichtian–Danian of northwestern Europe". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (5) e2604600. doi : 10.1080/02724634.2025.2604600 . ^ Donzé, G.; Perrichon, G.; Vincent, P.; Therrien, F.; Martin, J. E. (2026). "Comparative endocranial anatomy in the crocodylians Leidyosuchus canadensis and Stangerochampsa mccabei from the upper Cretaceous of Alberta, Canada" . Journal of Anatomy joa.70096. doi : 10.1111/joa.70096 . PMID 41527962 . ^ Bateman, L.-P.; Demers-Potvin, A. V.; Larsson, H. C. E. (2026). "Champsosaurs, gharials, and the functional ecomorphology of resource partitioning" . Biological Journal of the Linnean Society . 148 (2) blag027. doi : 10.1093/biolinnean/blag027 . ^ Lindblad, K. T.; Bamforth, E.; Milligan, J.; Gilbert, M. M. (2026). "Significant crocodyliform specimens from the Paleocene Estevan Coalfield of south-east Saskatchewan, Canada". Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences cjes-2026-0009. doi : 10.1139/cjes-2026-0009 . ^ Iijima, M.; Tomiya, S. (2026). "Postcranial osteology of Boverisuchus vorax from the middle Eocene of Wyoming, USA: Implications for terrestrial adaptation in eusuchian crocodyliforms". Journal of Anatomy . doi : 10.1111/joa.70206 . ^ Walter, J. D.; Macaluso, L.; Martin, J. E.; Grohrock, T.; Rabi, M.; Delfino, M. (2026). "Taxonomic and quantitative reassessment of Diplocynodon , the most common crocodyliform in the Cenozoic of Europe". Palaeontology . 69 (3) e70058. doi : 10.1111/pala.70058 . ^ Burke, P. M. J.; Mannion, P. D. (2026). "Computed tomography reveals the endocranial anatomy of Crocodylia: Implications for phylogenetic relationships and ecomorphological convergence across Crocodylomorpha" . Journal of Anatomy . doi : 10.1111/joa.70182 . ^ Cidade, G. M.; Godoy, P. L.; Amavet, P.; Cossette, A.; Solórzano, A.; Bona, P.; Angulo-Bedoya, M.; Balaguera-Reina, S. A.; Rabi, M.; Pires-Farias, I.; Figueiredo, R. G.; Ezcurra, M. D.; Bittencourt, P. S.; Brochu, C. A.; Roberto, I. J. (2026). "The phylogenetic nomenclature of Caimaninae (Crocodylia: Alligatoroidea)". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 24. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2026.2614968 . ^ Agne, S.; Arnold, P.; Belle, B.; Straube, N.; Hofreiter, M.; Glaw, F. (2026). "Mitogenomic Crocodylia phylogeny and population structure of Crocodylus porosus including the extinct Seychelles" . Royal Society Open Science . 13 (1) 251546. doi : 10.1098/rsos.251546 . ^ Ristevski, J.; Louys, J.; O'Connor, S.; Yates, A. M.; Husdell, M.; Price, G. J.; Ulm, S.; McNiven, I. J.; Salisbury, S. W.; Boivin, N. (2026). "The late Quaternary crocodylian record from Australasia" . Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 207 (1) zlag065. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlag065 . ^ Fernandez Blanco, M. V.; Bona, P. (2026). "Disassembling the crocodylian skull: embryonic development and configuration of the Caiman skull and their macroevolutionary implications". Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 207 (3) zlag114. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlag114 . ^ Reutter, A.; Carballido, J. L.; Windholz, G. J.; Pol, D.; Rauhut, O. W. M. (2026). " Bicharracosaurus dionidei , gen. et sp. nov., a new macronarian (Dinosauria, Sauropoda) from the Late Jurassic Cañadón Calcáreo Formation of Argentina and the problematic early evolution of macronarians" . PeerJ . 14 e20945. doi : 10.7717/peerj.20945 . PMC 13092234 . PMID 42011359 . ^ Natarajan, A.; Bhosale, S.; Rakshit, N.; Dasgupta, S. (2026). "A new diminutive Jurassic neosauropod from the Kaladongar Formation (Khadir Uplift) of the Kachchh Basin, western India". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology e2677749. doi : 10.1080/02724634.2026.2677749 . ^ Xu, Xing (2026-06-16). "A new feathered dinosaur from Early Cretaceous of northern China highlighting the complexity of early pennaraptoran evolution and comments on several relevant conceptual and methodological issues" . Vertebrata Palasiatica : 1– 37. doi : 10.19615/j.cnki.2096-9899.260616 . ^ Holmes, R. B.; Mallon, J. C.; Ryan, M. J.; Evans, D. C. (2026). "New information on the holotype of "Chasmosaurus" russelli (Ornithischia: Ceratopsidae) necessitates the establishment of a new genus to receive the species". Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences . 63 : 0031. Bibcode : 2026CaJES..63.0031H . doi : 10.1139/cjes-2025-0031 . ^ Mayer, E. L.; Silva Junior, J. C. G.; Kerber, L.; Navarro, B. A.; Bandeira, K. L. N.; Cisneros, J. C.; Sousa, E. P.; Pereira, A. A.; Medeiros, M. A.; Lindoso, R. M.; Cavalcanti Neto, F. P.; Ghilardi, A. M.; Aureliano, T.; Godoy, P. L.; Ferreira, G. S.; Langer, M. C. (2026). "A new titanosauriform with European affinities in the Early Cretaceous of Brazil: insights on Somphospondyli phylogeny, histology and biogeography" . Journal of Systematic Palaeontology . 24 2601579. Bibcode : 2026JSPal..2401579M . doi : 10.1080/14772019.2025.2601579 . ^ Jung, Jongyun; Kim, Minguk; Jo, Hyemin; Clarke, Julia A. (2026-03-19). "A new dinosaur species from Korea and its implications for early-diverging neornithischian diversity" . Fossil Record . 29 (1): 87– 113. Bibcode : 2026FossR..29...87J . doi : 10.3897/fr.29.178152 . ISSN 2193-0074 . ^ a b Penkalski, P. (2026). "The morphology and systematics of Pinacosaurus ". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 42. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2026.2633178 . ^ a b Maidment, Susannah C. R. ; Butler, Richard J. ; Brusatte, Stephen L. ; Meade, Luke E.; Augustin, Felix J.; Csiki-Sava, Zoltán; Ősi, Attila (2026-10-07). "A hidden diversity of ceratopsian dinosaurs in Late Cretaceous Europe" . Nature . 651 (8105): 397– 403. Bibcode : 2026Natur.651..397M . doi : 10.1038/s41586-025-09897-w . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 41501448 . ^ Dieudonné, Paul-Emile; Becerra, Marcos Gabriel; Zanesco, Tábata; Tortosa, Thierry; Cruzado-Caballero, Penélope; Stein, Koen; Torcida Fernández-Baldor, Fidel (2026-02-01). " Foskeia pelendonum , a new rhabdodontomorph from the Lower Cretaceous of Salas de los Infantes (Burgos Province, Spain), and a new phylogeny of ornithischian dinosaurs". Papers in Palaeontology . 12 (1) e70057. Bibcode : 2026PPal...1270057D . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70057 . ISSN 2056-2799 . ^ Yao, H.; Qiu, W.; Yu, J.; Yang, L.; Wang, H.; Cao, S.; Zhao, K.; Xu, M.; Shi, G.; Lou, F.; Zeng, C.; Lu, P.; Wu, R.; Xu, X.; Han, F.; Xing, H. (2026). "A new saurolophine hadrosaurid (Dinosauria: Ornithopoda) from the Upper Cretaceous of South China, providing further support for the possible Asian origin of Brachylophosaurini". Journal of Systematic Palaeontology . 24 2635569. Bibcode : 2026JSPal..2435569Y . doi : 10.1080/14772019.2026.2635569 . ^ Huang, J.; Wu, W.; Mao, L.; Bertozzo, F.; Dhouailly, D.; Robin, N.; Pittman, M.; Kaye, T. G.; Manucci, F.; He, X.; Wang, X.; Godefroit, P. (2026). "Cellular-level preservation of cutaneous spikes in an Early Cretaceous iguanodontian dinosaur". Nature Ecology & Evolution . 10 (2): 203– 210. Bibcode : 2026NatEE..10..203H . doi : 10.1038/s41559-025-02960-9 . PMID 41652002 . ^ Zhou, Ling-Qi; Lamanna, Matthew C.; Poust, Ashley W.; Li, Da-Qing; You, Hai-Lu; O'Connor, Jingmai K. (2026-06-04). "First non-avian theropod (Dromaeosauridae, Microraptorinae) from the bird-bearing Lower Cretaceous Xiagou Formation of the Changma Basin, Gansu Province, northwestern China" (PDF) . Annals of Carnegie Museum . 92 (2): 89– 110. doi : 10.2992/007.092.0201 . ^ Motta, Matías J.; Aranciaga Rolando, Alexis M.; Rozadilla, Sebastián; Agnolín, Federico L.; Brissón Egli, Federico; Álvarez Herrera, Gerardo P.; Chimento, Nicolás R.; Lo Coco, Gastón; Tsuihiji, Takanobu; Manabe, Makoto; Pol, Diego; Novas, Fernando E. (2026-05-28). "New unenlagiid from the Chorrillo Formation (Late Cretaceous, Maastrichtian), SW Patagonia, Argentina". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology e2656456. doi : 10.1080/02724634.2026.2656456 . ^ Magyar, J.; Ősi, A.; Csiki-Sava, Z.; Budai, S.; Botfalvai, G. (2026). "New early Maastrichtian 'duck-billed' dinosaur from Hațeg Basin (Densuș-Ciula Formation, Romania) documents an endemic clade of non-hadrosaurid hadrosauroids in the south-eastern Late Cretaceous European Archipelago". Journal of Systematic Palaeontology . 24 2607800. Bibcode : 2026JSPal..2407800M . doi : 10.1080/14772019.2025.2607800 . ^ Soto Núñez, M.; Montenegro, F.; Perea, D. (2026). "A new Aeolosaurini (Sauropoda, Titanosauria) from the Upper Cretaceous of Uruguay" . Ameghiniana . doi : 10.5710/AMGH.19.06.2026.3689 . ^ Sethapanichsakul, Thitiwoot; Khansubha, Sasa-On; Manitkoon, Sita; Hanta, Rattanaphorn; Mannion, Philip D.; Upchurch, Paul (2026-05-14). "The first sauropod dinosaur from the Lower Cretaceous Khok Kruat Formation of Thailand enriches the diversity of somphospondylan titanosauriforms in southeast Asia" . Scientific Reports . 16 (1) 12467. doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-47482-x . ISSN 2045-2322 . PMC 13176339 . PMID 42135317 . ^ Longrich, Nicholas R.; Pérez-Moreno, Agustín; Díez Díaz, Verónica; Pereda-Suberbiola, Xabier; Bardet, Nathalie; Jalil, Nour-Eddine (2026-04-22). "A titanosaurian sauropod with South American affinities (Lognkosauria: Argentinosauridae) from the Late Maastrichtian of Morocco and evidence for dinosaur endemism in Africa" . Diversity . 18 (5): 241. doi : 10.3390/d18050241 . ISSN 1424-2818 . ^ McFeeters, Bradley D.; Evans, David C.; Ryan, Michael J.; Maddin, Hillary C. (July 2026). "A new parasaurolophin dinosaur (Hadrosauridae: Lambeosaurinae) from the Oldman Formation of southern Alberta". Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences . 63 : 1– 23. doi : 10.1139/cjes-2026-0013 . ^ Srivastava, Simba; Nesbitt, Sterling J. (2026-04-14). "A new taxon of saurischian dinosaur from the Coelophysis Quarry of New Mexico, USA (Triassic: latest Norian or Rhaetian) highlights herrerasaurian diversity in the latest Triassic". Papers in Palaeontology . 12 (2) e70069. Bibcode : 2026PPal...1270069S . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70069 . ISSN 2056-2799 . ^ Sereno, Paul C. ; Vidal, Daniel; Myhrvold, Nathan P. ; Johnson-Ransom, Evan; Ciudad Real, María; Baumgart, Stephanie L.; Sánchez Fontela, Noelia; Green, Todd L.; Saitta, Evan T.; Adamou, Boubé; et al. (2026). "Scimitar-crested Spinosaurus species from the Sahara caps stepwise spinosaurid radiation". Science . 391 (6787) eadx5486: 1– 10. Bibcode : 2026Sci...391x5486S . doi : 10.1126/science.adx5486 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 41712711 . ^ Nilpanapan, Apirut; Manitkoon, Sita; Suteethorn, Varavudh; Lauprasert, Komsorn (2026-07-08). "A new mamenchisaurid sauropod from the Lower Phu Kradung Formation, Upper Jurassic of northeastern Thailand" . Scientific Reports . 16 (1). doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-49822-3 . ISSN 2045-2322 . ^ Rivera-Sylva, Hector E.; Aguillón-Martinez, Martha C.; Flores-Ventura, Jose; Sánchez-Uribe, Ivan E.; Guzman-Gutierrez, Jose Ruben; Longrich, Nicholas R. (January 9, 2026). "A thick-skulled troodontid theropod from the Late Cretaceous of Mexico" . Diversity . 18 (1): 38. Bibcode : 2026Diver..18...38R . doi : 10.3390/d18010038 . ISSN 1424-2818 . ^ Hu, S.-B.; Wang, Y.-C.; Mo, X.; Zhang, X.-Q.; Zeng, W.-T; Wang, T.; Sun, Z.-B; Dong, Q.-X.; Guan, Q.; Liu, Y.-H; Zhang, Y.-S.; Bing, Y.; Wang, Y.-M; You, H.-L (2026). "A new sauropodomorph dinosaur from the Lower Jurassic Fengjiahe Formation of Dali of Yunnan Province, China" . Royal Society Open Science . 13 (3) 252219. Bibcode : 2026RSOS...1352219H . doi : 10.1098/rsos.252219 . ^ Zhang, X.-Q.; Wang, Y.-M.; Wang, Z.-J.; Wang, Y.-C.; Wang, T.; Wang, G.-F.; Zou, Y.; Dong, Q.-X.; Su, X.; Jiang, H.; Wang, Y.-J.; You, H.-L. (2026). "The first turiasaurian sauropod (Dinosauria: Eusauropoda) from East Asia". Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 206 (2) zlaf201. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlaf201 . ^ Filippi, L. S.; Bellardini, F.; Carballido, J. I.; Méndez, A. H.; Garrido, A. C. (2026). " Yeneen houssayi gen. et sp. nov. and an overview of the sauropod titanosaurian diversity from Cerro Overo – La Invernada area (Bajo de la Carpa Formation, Santonian), North Patagonia, Argentina". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 37. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2584707 . ^ Henderson, D. M. (2026). "200 years of dinosaur discoveries –a visual portrayal of their geographic and historical origins" . PeerJ . 14 e21351. doi : 10.7717/peerj.21351 . ^ Brownstein, C. D.; Griffin, C. T. (2026). "An early burst of skeletal evolution at the origin of dinosaurs" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 293 (2069) 20260102. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2026.0102 . PMID 42014084 . ^ Aureliano, T.; Maciel, V.; Costa, V. P. G.; de Paiva, A. C. F.; Santos, C. L. A.; Ghilardi, A. M. (January 2026). "Bone structure and the evolution of different pathways to gigantism in dinosaurs and megamammals". Journal of South American Earth Sciences . 169 105855. Bibcode : 2026JSAES.16905855A . doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2025.105855 . ^ Wilson, L. N.; Gardner, J. D.; Wilson, J. P.; Farnsworth, A.; Valdes, P.; Perry, Z. R.; Druckenmiller, P. S.; Erickson, G. M.; Organ, C. L. (2026). "Body size evolution through shifting climatic conditions in Mesozoic dinosaurs" . Palaeontology . 69 (3) e70068. doi : 10.1111/pala.70068 . ^ Saitta, E. T. (2026). "Are we underfitting dinosaur growth models? Accounting for intra- & inter-specific variation". Cretaceous Research 106426. doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106426 . ^ Falkingham, P. L.; Gatesy, S. M. (2026). "Formation, preservation, and interpretation of dinosaur tracks" . Palaeontology . 69 (1) e70040. Bibcode : 2026Palgy..6970040F . doi : 10.1111/pala.70040 . ^ Hartmann, G.; Blakesley, T.; dePolo, P. E.; Brusatte, S. L. (2026). "Identifying variation in dinosaur footprints and classifying problematic specimens via unbiased unsupervised machine learning" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 123 (5) e2527222122. Bibcode : 2026PNAS..12327222H . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2527222122 . PMC 12867633 . PMID 41587308 . ^ Ha, Y.; Kim, S.-S. (2026). "Deep learning enables automated detection of dinosaur footprints with high accuracy" . Scientific Reports . doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-56031-5 . ^ Peng, A.; Xing, L. (2026). "Classical Hypotheses and New Tools in Dinosaur Ichnology: A Review of Footprints with Geometric Morphometrics, Machine Learning and Biomechanics" . Fossil Studies . 4 (3) 18. doi : 10.3390/fossils4030018 . ^ Granata, V.; Belvedere, M.; Collareta, A.; Molli, G.; Landini, W.; Marchetti, L. (2026). "Estimating the impact of erosion on a Carnian dinosaur footprint-bearing surface (Lerici, Northern Apennines, Italy)" . Palaeontologia Electronica . 29 (1) 29.1.a3. doi : 10.26879/1530 . ^ Ait Haddou, O.; Hminna, A.; Lagnaoui, A.; Klein, H.; Arouch, M.; Fergougui, M.; Rmich, A.; Bel Haouz, W. (2026). "New dinosaur tracksites from the Middle-?Late Jurassic of Msemrir (Central High Atlas, Morocco)". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 18. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2596117 . ^ El Ouali, M.; Essafraoui, B.; Kabiri, L.; El-Ouali, L.; Abioui, M.; Vinn, O. (2026). "Invertebrate ichnofossils and dinosaur undertracks from the Middle Jurassic of Tizi N'Talghemt area, Central High Atlas, Morocco". Palaeoworld 201139. doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2026.201139 . ^ Barros, L. S.; Souza, V.; Vieira, C. E. L.; Zaranza, G. S.; Pinheiro, F. L. (2026). "Tracking Dinosaurs in the Tacutu Basin: First Ichnological Evidence from the Lower Cretaceous of Northern Brazil". Cretaceous Research 106335. doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106335 . ^ Xu, H.; Yuan, T.; Wu, Z.; Wang, T.; Wang, J.; Mo, X.; You, H.; Xu, X. (2026). "Lower Cretaceous sauropod, theropod, and ornithopod dinosaur track assemblages from Yunnan Province, southwestern China: ichnotaxonomy and paleoecology". Cretaceous Research 106456. doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106456 . ^ Choi, S.; Paik, I.; Kim, H.; Kim, Y.; Zhang, S.; Park, Y.; Lee, S. (2026). "Preservation and palaeobiogeography of dinosaur eggs from the Dadaepo Formation (Upper Cretaceous: Cenomanian), Korea" . Papers in Palaeontology . 12 (3) e70084. doi : 10.1002/spp2.70084 . ^ Kim, S.; Lee, Y.-N.; Kim, N.-H.; Gihm, Y. S. (2026). "Volcanic taphonomy of dinosaur eggs on Wi Island, South Korea: A reassessment of nesting chronology and cross-cutting relationships". Cretaceous Research . 183 106347. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.18306347K . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106347 . ^ Cardozo, N. V.; Fernández, M. S.; Casal, G. A.; Alvarez, B. N.; Caglianone, J. L.; Campano, L. J.; Luna, M.; Ibiricu, L. M. (2026). "First record of Faveoloolithidae eggshells from the late Maastrichtian of the Lago Colhué Huapi Formation, Golfo San Jorge Basin, Argentina". Ameghiniana . doi : 10.5710/AMGH.22.04.2026.3661 . ^ Pantelides, A.; Upchurch, P.; Mannion, P. D.; Gravanis, E.; Henderson, D. M.; Kyriakidis, P. (2026). "ENHYDROSS: A New Mechanistic Model Supports the Trans-Oceanic Dispersal Capability of Terrestrial Vertebrates" . Ecology and Evolution . 16 (4) e73280. Bibcode : 2026EcoEv..1673280P . doi : 10.1002/ece3.73280 . PMID 42040855 . ^ Dai, H.; Wang, J.; Luo, L.-D.; Wen, Q.-R.; Chang, S.-C.; Lin, Y.; Xiao, M.; Xing, H. (2026). "Stratigraphy, sedimentology, and palaeoenvironment of dinosaur-bearing Upper Cretaceous Zhengyang Formation in Zhengyang Basin, Chongqing, Southwest China". Palaeoworld 201158. doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2026.201158 . ^ Roberts, E. M.; Hendrix, M. S.; Ramezani, J.; Clyde, W. C.; Zippi, P.; Hodgson, S.; Yuleridge, V.; Zanno, L. E. (2026). "High precision CA-ID-TIMS U-Pb zircon age for the "Dueling Dinosaurs" locality, with implications for regional correlation, basal age and duration of the Hell Creek Formation, Montana" . PLOS ONE . 21 (5) e0328861. doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0328861 . ^ Wyenberg-Henzler, T. C. A.; Scannella, J. B. (2026). "Behavioral implications of an embedded tyrannosaurid tooth and associated tooth marks on an articulated skull of Edmontosaurus from the Hell Creek Formation, Montana" . PeerJ . 14 e20796. doi : 10.7717/peerj.20796 . PMC 12922588 . PMID 41727239 . ^ Han, Y.; Han, F.; Wen, C.; Qin, H.; Wang, H.; Wang, Q.; Zhou, X.; Deng, C. (2026). "Anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility in the Late Cretaceous Shanyang Basin, Central China: Implications for hydrological variability and dinosaur habitat stability". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 114002. doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.114002 . ^ Pawlak, W.; Tałanda, M.; Sulej, T.; Qvarnström, M.; Niedźwiedzki, G. (2026). "High-latitude dipnoan aestivation burrows suggest seasonal aridity for early dinosaur ecosystems in the Late Triassic of East Greenland". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 689 113624. Bibcode : 2026PPP...68913624P . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113624 . ^ Mainbayar, B.; Fujita, M.; Takasaki, R.; Tsogtbaatar, K.; Badamkhatan, Z.; Odgerel, N.; Ishigaki, S. (2026). "A dinosaur ichnofauna from the Lower Cretaceous Shinekhudag Formation, Mongolia". Ichnos . 33 (2): 193– 208. doi : 10.1080/10420940.2026.2645024 . ^ Boisvert, C.; Perkins, J.; Morrison, C.; Gascoigne, S. J. L.; Holtz, T. R.; Curtice, B. (2026). "Obligate faunivorous megatheropod size class patterns across the Jurassic-Cretaceous Periods" . PeerJ . 14 e21007. doi : 10.7717/peerj.21007 . ^ Johnson-Ransom, E.; Gignac, P.; Barta, D. E.; Felice, R. N.; Snively, E. (2026). "Comparative cranial biomechanics reveal macroevolutionary trends in theropod dinosaurs, with emphasis on Tyrannosauroidea" .

The Anatomical Record ar.70126. doi : 10.1002/ar.70126 . PMID 41589510 . ^ Hendrickx, C. (2026). "Dental evolution in non-coelurosaur theropods" . Italian Journal of Geosciences . 145 (2): 1– 34. doi : 10.3301/IJG.2026.14 . ^ Morrison, C.; Gregory, J.; Jackson, C.; Bestwick, J.; Schroeder, K.; Gascoigne, S. J. L.; Bills, P.; Porro, L. B.; Mannion, P. D.; Barrett, P. M. (2026). "Inter- and intraspecific variation in theropod dinosaur dental microwear and its palaeoecological implications" .

The Anatomical Record ar.70170. doi : 10.1002/ar.70170 . PMID 41800651 . ^ Pereyra, E. E. S. (2026). "Evolutionary decoupling between cranial shape and size underlies divergent evolutionary pathways in Cretaceous apex and meso-predator theropods" . Communications Biology . doi : 10.1038/s42003-026-10145-8 . PMID 42049914 . ^ Scherer, C. R.; Steell, E.; Upchurch, P. (2026). "Drivers and mechanisms of convergent forelimb reduction in non-avian theropod dinosaurs" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 293 (2071) 20260528. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2026.0528 . ^ Warnock-Juteau, T. M.; Smith, S. M.; Cullen, T. M. (2026). "Elliptic Fourier analysis as a tool for the taxonomic identification of isolated theropod pedal phalanges" .

The Anatomical Record ar.70210. doi : 10.1002/ar.70210 . PMID 42057355 . ^ Drzewiecki, P. A.; Steinen, R.; Bora, E.; Milardo, J. S. (2026). "Constraining dinosaur behavior from paleoenvironmental interpretations: Early Jurassic East Berlin Formation, Dinosaur State Park, Rocky Hill, Connecticut, USA". PALAIOS . 41 (1): 1– 23. Bibcode : 2026Palai..41....1D . doi : 10.2110/palo.2025.026 . ^ Xing, L.; Lallensack, J. N.; Yang, Z.; Wang, D.; Chen, Q.; Wang, X.; Zhuang, S.; Hu, S.; Qi, Q. (2026). "New theropod remains from the Lower Jurassic Fengjiahe Formation of Yunnan, China". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology . doi : 10.1080/08912963.2026.2676032 . ^ Lallensack, J. N.; Pérez-Lorente, F.; Amzil, M.; Oukassou, M.; Meyer, C.; Saber, H.; Klein, H.; Charriére, A.; Zafaty, O.; Falkingham, P. L. (2026). "The abundance and diversity of penetrative tracks: a critical re-evaluation of theropod ichnotaxa" . Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 19. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2610322 . ^ Dridi, J. (2026). "New theropod tracks from the Callovian of Tunisia: implications for Middle Jurassic theropod diversity along the northern margin of Gondwana". Proceedings of the Geologists' Association 101189. doi : 10.1016/j.pgeola.2026.101189 . ^ Xing, L. D.; Chen, Q. Y.; Yun, J.; Lallensack, J. N.; Zhang, Y. G.; Romilio, A.; Wang, Z. Y.; Liu, L.; Gu, Z. F.; Zhao, K. X. (2026). "Well-Preserved Grallator Tracks Associated with Microbial Mats from the Jurassic–Cretaceous Boundary of the Tuchengzi Formation, Hebei Province, China". Paleontological Journal . 59 (12): 1580– 1598. doi : 10.1134/S0031030125601070 . ^ Díaz-Martínez, I.; Navarro-Lorbés, P.; Isasmendi, E.; Páramo, A.; Gascó-Lluna, F.; Torices, A.; Ruiz, J.; Viera, L. I.; Sáez-Benito, P.; Farlow, J.; Leonardi, G.; Pereda-Suberbiola, X.; Citton, P. (2026). "Footprint morphology sheds light on running strategies in non-avian theropods" . Scientific Reports . 15 (1) 44217. doi : 10.1038/s41598-025-31361-y . PMC 12780217 . PMID 41501252 . ^ Charles, J. P.; Polet, D. T.; Hutchinson, J. R. (2026). "Form–function relationships determining optimal jumping performance in an early bipedal dinosaur" . Journal of the Royal Society Interface . 23 (235) 20250918. doi : 10.1098/rsif.2025.0918 . PMID 41759191 . ^ Zhang, Z.; Dong, Q.; Wang, T.; You, H.; Wang, X. (2026). "Redescription of the osteology and the systematics of Panguraptor lufengensis (Neotheropoda, Coelophysoidea)" . Swiss Journal of Palaeontology . 145 : 723– 750. doi : 10.3897/sjp.145.185485 . ^ Wang, R.; Xing, L.; Nikolov, V.; Wang, T.; Xu, X. (2026). "A new non-averostran neotheropod specimen from the Early Jurassic of Southwestern China and its implications for early theropod evolution". Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 207 (1) zlag062. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlag062 . ^ Oswald, T.; Curtice, B. (2026). "A Morrison "saber-tooth"? - comparison of Ceratosaurus dentition to other theropods and Machairodontinae and its implications for Ceratosaurus predatory ecology" . New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin . 102 : 185– 200. ^ Rowe, A. J.; Cerroni, M. A.; Rayfield, E. J. (2026). "Southern hemisphere ceratosaurs evolved feeding mechanics paralleling those of Northern hemisphere tyrannosaurids" . Scientific Reports . 16 (1) 2804. Bibcode : 2026NatSR..16.2804R . doi : 10.1038/s41598-025-32686-4 . PMC 12824262 . PMID 41565728 . ^ Seculi Pereyra, E. E.; Pérez, D. E.; Gonzales Dionis, J. D.; Ezcurra, M. D. (2026). "The phylogenetic data matrices of Abelisauridae through time and methods (with recommendations)". Ameghiniana . 62 (6): 380– 395. doi : 10.5710/AMGH.27.12.2025.3650 . ^ Seculi Pereyra, E. E. (May 2026). "Orbit Shape Evolution in Abelisauridae: Macroevolutionary Trends and Functional Implications". Cretaceous Research . 181 106272. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.18106272S . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2025.106272 . ^ Seculi Pereyra, E. E.; Soto, I. M.; Perez, D. E. (2026). "Beyond species recognition hypothesis: evolutionary trends in Abelisauridae cranial ornamentation" . Paleobiology : 1– 14. doi : 10.1017/pab.2026.10099 . ^ López-Miguel, M.; Torices, A.; Malafaia, E.; Ortega, F.; Pérez-García, A. (2026). "Cenomanian theropod teeth from Algora (central Spain), new evidence for majungasaurine abelisaurids in Europe" . Scientific Reports . doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-53271-3 . ^ Boschetto, A.; Maggia, B.; de Brito, L.; Borgese, J.; Clavel, D.; Chenet, J.-P.; Roques, T.; Sèbe, S.; Veyssières, J.-M.; Goedert, J. (2026). "Unusual Abelisauridae tooth mark on an Abelisauridae tooth from the Upper Cretaceous of Cruzy (Hérault, France): implications for feeding behaviours" . Geodiversitas . 48 (4): 69– 85. Bibcode : 2026Geodv..48v48a5B . doi : 10.5252/geodiversitas2026v48a5 . ^ Valdéz, H.; Fernández, M.; Zurriaguz, V.; Gianechini, F.; Filippi, L. S.; Méndez, A. H. (2026). "Pneumatic structures in a cervical vertebra of Viavenator exxoni (Dinosauria: Theropoda)". Ameghiniana . doi : 10.5710/AMGH.04.05.2026.3690 . ^ Pradelli, L. A.; Pol, D.; Vega, N. A.; Ezcurra, M. D. (2026). "The axial osteology of the theropod dinosaur Piatnitzkysaurus floresi from the Early Jurassic of Patagonia, Argentina" . Royal Society Open Science . 13 (1) 251876. Bibcode : 2026RSOS...1351876P . doi : 10.1098/rsos.251876 . ^ Li, A.; Jiang, S.-X.; Qiu, R.; Wang, X.-L. (2026). "An isolated theropod tooth from the Lower Cretaceous Lianmuqin Formation of Wuerho, Xinjiang, China". Vertebrata PalAsiatica . doi : 10.19615/j.cnki.2096-9899.260409 . ^ Cau, A.; Gostling, N. J.; Lacerda, M. B. S.; Falasca, M.; Paterna, A. (2026). "Avian-like salt glands in Spinosauridae". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology . doi : 10.1080/08912963.2026.2669954 . ^ Pittet, F. (2026). "Neurovascular system and dental renewal in the rostrum of Spinosauridae: new descriptions and implications on non-olfactive snout sensitivity of dinosaurs" . Geodiversitas . 48 (12): 227– 272. doi : 10.5252/geodiversitas2026v48a12 . ^ Samathi, A.; Suteethorn, S.; Suteethorn, V. (2026). "A Metriacanthosaurid Tooth (Dinosauria: Theropoda) from the Phu Kradung Formation (Upper Jurassic–Lower Cretaceous) of Mukdahan, Thailand". Paleontological Journal . 59 (7): 776– 787. doi : 10.1134/S0031030124601385 . ^ Malafaia, E.; Maggia, B.; Rauhut, O. W. M. (2026). "Digestion corrosion marks on a hatchling Allosaurus (Dinosauria, Theropoda) maxilla from the Upper Jurassic of Guimarota (Leiria, Portugal)". Papers in Palaeontology . 12 (3) e70100. doi : 10.1002/spp2.70100 . ^ Hattori, S.; Chokchaloemwong, D.; Kawabe, S.; Cuesta, E.; Shibata, M.; Miyata, K.; Azuma, Y. (2026). "Braincase of Siamraptor suwati and insights into the cranial anatomy of Carcharodontosauria" . PLOS ONE . 21 (4) e0345155. Bibcode : 2026PLoSO..2145155H . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0345155 . ^ Seculi Pereyra, E. E.; Ibiricu, L. M. (2026). "The Last Weaponized Arm: Macroevolutionary Trends of Megaraptorid Manual Claw I and Forelimb Integration in medium- to large-bodied non-avian theropods". Journal of Evolutionary Biology voag061. doi : 10.1093/jeb/voag061 . PMID 42454988 . ^ Nielsen, J.; Fowler, D.; Wyenberg-Henzler, T.; Jacobsen, A. R.; Pearce, C. (2026). "Investigating size-asymmetric feeding among tyrannosaurids using tooth marks on a metatarsal from the Judith River Formation, Montana, USA" . Evolving Earth . 4 100107. doi : 10.1016/j.eve.2026.100107 . ^ Williams, A.; Schumann, D.; Mallon, J. C.; Phaneuf, M. W.; Bassim, N.; Grandfield, K. (2026). "Electron and focused ion beam microscopy of fossilized Albertosaurus sarcophagus (Dinosauria: Theropoda) bone reveals nano to microscale features" . Scientific Reports . 16 (1) 8521. Bibcode : 2026NatSR..16.8521W . doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-39588-z . PMC 12976069 . PMID 41680264 . ^ Coppock, C. C.; Larsson, H. C. E.; Currie, P. J. (2026). "A juvenile specimen of Gorgosaurus libratus from the Wapiti Formation of northeastern British Columbia, Canada sheds light on the palaeoecology of Upper Campanian tyrannosaurids". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 114007. doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.114007 . ^ Longrich, N. R.; Dalman, S.; Lucas, S. G.; Fiorillo, A. R. (2026). "A large tyrannosaurid from the Late Cretaceous (Campanian) of North America" . Scientific Reports . 16 (1) 8371. Bibcode : 2026NatSR..16.8371L . doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-38600-w . PMC 12982495 . PMID 41820411 . ^ Yun, C.-G. (2026). "Geometric and linear morphometric approaches to establish taxonomic identity of a controversial tyrannosaurid maxilla specimen" . Lethaia . 60 (2): 1– 10. doi : 10.18261/let.60.2.2 . ^ Raun, G. S.; Coppock, C. C.; Badamgarav, D.; Tsogtbaatar, K.; Currie, P. J. (2026). "Taxonomic reassessment of juvenile tyrannosaurine specimens from Asia reveal large biogeographic ranges in tyrannosaurids" . Cretaceous Research . 186 106412. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.18606412R . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106412 . ^ Woodward, H. N.; Myhrvold, N. P.; Horner, J. R. (2026). "Prolonged growth and extended subadult development in the Tyrannosaurus rex species complex revealed by expanded histological sampling and statistical modeling" . PeerJ . 14 e20469. doi : 10.7717/peerj.20469 . PMC 12811967 . PMID 41551440 . ^ Boeye, A. T.; Atkins-Weltman, K. L.; King, J. L.; Swann, S. (2026). "Evidence of bird-like foot function in Tyrannosaurus " . Royal Society Open Science . 13 (2) 252139. Bibcode : 2026RSOS...1352139B . doi : 10.1098/rsos.252139 . ^ Longrich, N. R.; Makovicky, P. J.; Tokaryk, T.; Cooper, D. M. L.; Saitta, E. T.; Erickson, G. M.; Szekely, T.; Snively, E. (2026). "Hatchlings of Tyrannosaurus rex and the Evolution of Dinosaur Reproductive Strategies" . Biology . 15 (13) 1090. doi : 10.3390/biology15131090 . ^ Xu, B.; Ding, N.; Zhang, Y.; Wei, P.; Wang, S. (2026). "New Theropod Vertebral Materials from the Upper Cretaceous Iren Dabasu Formation, Inner Mongolia, China". Cretaceous Research 106428. doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106428 . ^ Arbour, V. M.; Bullard, T. S.; Evans, D. C. (2026). "An ornithomimosaur from the Campanian Cedar District Formation (Nanaimo Group) of Denman Island, British Columbia, Canada" . FACETS . 11 : 0079. Bibcode : 2026Facet..11.0079A . doi : 10.1139/facets-2023-0079 . ^ Calvo-Pérez, X.; Cuesta, E. (2026). "Inside the head of Pelecanimimus polyodon (Ornithomimosauria, Dinosauria): Occipital palaeoneuroanatomy of the early branching ornithomimosaur from Las Hoyas fossil site (Early Cretaceous, Cuenca, Spain)" . Spanish Journal of Palaeontology . doi : 10.7203/sjp.33856 . ^ Chinzorig, T.; Takasaki, R.; Chiba, K.; Fiorillo, A. R.; Kobayashi, Y.; Saneyoshi, M.; Ishigaki, S. (2025). "A potential deinocheirid ornithomimosaur from the Judith River Formation (Upper Cretaceous: Montana, U.S.A.) and its paleobiogeographic implications". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (2) e2536844. Bibcode : 2025JVPal..4536844C . doi : 10.1080/02724634.2025.2536844 . ^ Libke, C.; Zambonin, G.; En Pan, S.; Mallon, J. C. (2026). "No compelling evidence for deinocheirids in the Judith River Formation: a comment on Chinzorig et al. (2025)". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology e2669278. doi : 10.1080/02724634.2026.2669278 . ^ Makovicky, P. J. (1997). "A new small theropod from the Morrison Formation of Como Bluff, Wyoming". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 17 (4): 755– 757. Bibcode : 1997JVPal..17..755M . doi : 10.1080/02724634.1997.10011024 . ^ Makovicky, P. J.; Mitchell, J. S.; Meso, J. G.; Gianechini, F. A.; Cerda, I.; Apesteguía, S. (2026). "Argentine fossil rewrites evolutionary history of a baffling dinosaur clade". Nature . 652 (8112): 1240– 1244. Bibcode : 2026Natur.652.1240M . doi : 10.1038/s41586-026-10194-3 . PMID 41741643 . ^ Leedham, S.; Qin, Z.; Griffin, B. W.; Ballell, A.; Yu, Y.; Xu, X.; Rayfield, E. (2026). "Range of motion and myology support a digging function for the forelimbs of alvarezsauroid dinosaurs" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 293 (2070) 20260565. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2026.0565 . PMID 42120036 . ^ Meso, J. G.; Makovicky, P.; Pol, D.; Canale, J. I.; Salgado, L.; Garrido, A. (2026). "New anatomical observations on the anatomy and disparity of Bonapartenykus ultimus (Coelurosauria, Alvarezsauria, Patagonykinae) from the Late Cretaceous of Patagonia". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 28. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2026.2630866 . ^ Wang, L.; Chen, J.; Li, X.; Wu, W.; Reisz, R. (2026). "First Discovery of Maniraptoran Egg from the Upper Cretaceous Quantou Formation (Cenomanian), Songliao Basin, Northeast China". Cretaceous Research . 185 106389. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.18506389W . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106389 . ^ Wang, Q.; Du, Y.-L.; Huang, Z.-Q.; Yan, C.-W.; Jiang, A.-C.; Zhu, X.-F.; Fang, K.-Y.; Yang, X.-L. (2026). "First egg fossil record ( Elongatoolithus elongatus ) from the Dengta Basin of Heyuan, Guangdong". Vertebrata PalAsiatica . doi : 10.19615/j.cnki.2096-9899.260407 . ^ Smith, D. K. (2026). "Biomechanics of the plesiomorphic forelimb of the basal therizinosaur Falcarius ".

The Anatomical Record . doi : 10.1002/ar.70223 . ^ Bazzana-Adams, K. D.; Funston, G. F.; Evans, D. C. (2026). "Inner Ear Anatomy of Caenagnathidae (Theropoda: Oviraptorosauria) Emphasizes Mosaic Evolution of the Avian Neurosensory System" . Journal of Comparative Neurology . 534 (7) e70180. doi : 10.1002/cne.70180 . PMID 42403367 . ^ Su, C.-Y.; Liao, J.-Y.; Wu, H.-J.; Chou, K.-Y.; Chen, C.; Lee, M.-T.; Yang, T.-R. (2026). "Heat transfer in a realistic clutch reveals a lower efficiency in incubation of oviraptorid dinosaurs than of modern birds" . Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution . 14 1351288. Bibcode : 2026FrEEv..1451288S . doi : 10.3389/fevo.2026.1351288 . ^ Hao, M.; Xu, X. (2026). "A new oviraptorid theropod fossil from the Upper Cretaceous of Southern China with implications for oviraptorosaurian systematics and palaeobiogeography". Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 206 (4) zlag049. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlag049 . ^ Hefler, C.; Wang, Y.; Wang, X.; Zheng, X.; Kaye, T. G.; Grosmougin, M.; Chotard, M.; Barlow, L.; Qiu, H.; Dececchi, T. A.; Habib, M. B.; Shyy, W.; Pittman, M. (2026). " Microraptor reveals specialized gliding capabilities in multiwinged early paravians" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 123 (6) e2518106123. Bibcode : 2026PNAS..12318106H . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2518106123 . PMC 12890880 . PMID 41587330 . ^ Tsukiji, Y.; Hattori, S.; Azuma, Y. (February 2026). "First didactyl theropod track from the Lower Cretaceous Kitadani Formation, Tetori Group, Fukui, Japan". Cretaceous Research . 179 106249. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.17906249T . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2025.106249 . ^ Dhiman, H.; Parvez, F.; Goswami, A.; Prasad, G. V. R. (2026). "A second theropod tooth from the Cauvery Basin reaffirms the presence of troodontid dinosaurs in the Cretaceous of India".

The Anatomical Record . doi : 10.1002/ar.70280 . ^ Yin, Y.-L.; Wu, B.-Y.; Pei, R.; Zhang, H.-G.; Zhang, X.; Shen, F.-B.; Xu, X. (2026). "The anatomy of two troodontid teeth from the Upper Cretaceous of Jiayin, Heilongjiang Province, China" . Swiss Journal of Palaeontology . 145 : 823– 837. doi : 10.3897/sjp.145.195625 . ^ Serio, M.; Heers, A.; Varricchio, D.; Hu, H. (2026). "First forelimb reconstruction and range of motion assessment of the Late Cretaceous dinosaur Troodon formosus " . PeerJ . 14 e20987. doi : 10.7717/peerj.20987 . ^ Fan, Y. C.; Miller, C. V.; Pittman, M. (2026). "Diet of bird-like troodontid dinosaurs: synthesis of a contentious clade" . Biological Reviews brv.70145. doi : 10.1002/brv.70145 . PMID 41689181 . ^ García-Gil, V. A.; Torices, A.; Lòpez-Miguel, M.; Montellano-Ballesteros, M. (May 2026). "Isolated teeth of small theropods from the El Gallo Formation, Baja California, Mexico" . Cretaceous Research . 181 106292. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.18106292G . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2025.106292 . ^ Schuurman, T.; Bruner, E.; Knoll, F. (2026). "Anatomical network analysis of sauropodomorph cranial topology" . Palaeontology . 69 (4) e70079. doi : 10.1111/pala.70079 . ^ Lefebvre, R.; Partout, L.; Mallison, H.; Houssaye, A. (2026). "Partial analyses of humeral shape in sauropodomorph dinosaurs highlight a hidden modularity and the differential evolution of sauropod bauplan-related traits". Palaeontology . 69 (2) e70048. Bibcode : 2026Palgy..6970048L . doi : 10.1111/pala.70048 . ^ Yamaguchi, K.; Kubo, T.; Kubo, M. O. (2026). "Temporal changes in sauropodomorph foot morphology and graviportal adaptations under gigantism inferred from trackways" . Paleobiology : 1– 11. doi : 10.1017/pab.2026.10098 . ^ Romilio, A.; Runnegar, B. (2026). "Earliest Australian dinosaur: ichnofossils from the Carnian Aspley Formation of Brisbane, Queensland, Australia" . Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal of Palaeontology : 1– 12. doi : 10.1080/03115518.2025.2607630 . ^ D'Orazi Porchetti, S.; Knoch, U.; Claus, W.; Pechtold, T.; Wulf, M.; Wagensommer, A. (2026). "The tetradactyl archosaur footprint ichnogenus Evazoum from the Coburger Sandstein (Hassberge Formation, Upper Triassic, Carnian) of Northern Bavaria, Germany". Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie - Abhandlungen . 317 (2): 121– 145. doi : 10.1127/njgpa/1309 . ^ Campos, L. S.; Leal, L. A.; Da-Rosa, Á. A. S.; Sayão, J. M. (2026). "A new tiny basal Sauropodomorpha (Dinosauria: Saurischia) from the Santa Maria Supersequence, Upper Triassic of southern Brazil". Palaeoworld . 35 (2) 201064. Bibcode : 2026Palae..3501064C . doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2025.201064 . ^ Fonseca, A. O.; de Bem, F. P.; Dalle-Laste, V. Z.; Garcia, M. S.; Müller, R. T. (2026). "Osteology of the axial skeleton of Macrocollum itaquii (Dinosauria: Sauropodomorpha) and its implications for early sauropodomorph cervicalization". Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 206 (4) zlag034. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlag034 . ^ Xing, L.; Liu, L.; Zhang, T.; Lallensack, J. N.; Popa, M. E.; Zeng, J.; Klein, H.; Peng, G.; Ye, Y.; Liu, Y.; Shen, X.; Chen, Q. (2026). "Tracks of a large archosaur from the Late Triassic Xujiahe Formation in Guangyuan, Sichuan, China". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 17. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2605163 . ^ Chen, J.; Niu, Y.-N.; Ma, R.; Zhou, Y.-L.; Liu, W.-J.; Wang, Y.-M.; You, H.-L.; Xu, X.; Shen, S.-Z.; Feng, Z. (2026). "Triassic–Jurassic environmental instability on the subtropical eastern Tethyan margin linked to low-latitude dinosaur dispersal" . Communications Earth & Environment . 7 (1) 91. Bibcode : 2026ComEE...7...91C . doi : 10.1038/s43247-025-03083-6 . ^ Gomez, K. L.; Carballido, J. L.; Pol, D. (2026). "Dental replacement patterns and morphological diversity in Lower Jurassic sauropods from the Cañadón Asfalto Basin, Patagonia, Argentina". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (5) e2588133. doi : 10.1080/02724634.2025.2588133 . ^ Saleiro, A.; Tschopp, E.; Daasch, A.; Kaiser, T. M.; Wiesinger, R.; Winkler, D. E. (2026). "Acquisition of and quality assessment in a dataset for dental microwear texture analysis (DMTA) of sauropod teeth" . Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 12. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2026.2627437 . ^ Yang, Q.; Xing, L.; Lallensack, J. N.; Liu, L.; Chen, Q.; Romilio, A.; Qi, Q.; Qi, J.; Zhao, M.; Chen, X.; Zhao, Y.; Wei, L.; Wan, Y. (2026). "A new sauropod tracksite from the Lower Cretaceous of Ningxia, Northwestern China, with implications for overtrack preservation" . Scientific Reports . 16 (1) 7531. Bibcode : 2026NatSR..16.7531Y . doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-37987-w . PMC 12932846 . PMID 41644602 . ^ Nascimento, D. L.; Mescolotti, P. C.; Varejão, F. G.; Ladeira, F. S. B.; Assine, M. L. (2026). "Aptian sauropod undertracks in damp interdunes: indicators of water table fluctuations in southeast Brazil". Cretaceous Research . 184 106345. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.18406345N . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106345 . ^ Kubo, T.; Sakaki, H.; Ortega, F.; Zheng, W.; Jin, X.; Sekiya, T.; Takakuwa, Y.; Kubo, M. O. (2026). "Testing intra-individual variation in dental microwear texture of Omeisaurus maoianus and preliminary interspecific comparisons of sauropodomorphs" . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 692 113768. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69213768K . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113768 . ^ Maisch, M. W.; Matzke, A. T. (2019). "First record of a eusauropod (Dinosauria: Sauropoda) from the Upper Jurassic Qigu-Formation (southern Junggar Basin, China), and a reconsideration of Late Jurassic sauropod diversity in Xinjiang". Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie - Abhandlungen . 291 (1): 109– 117. Bibcode : 2019NJGPA.291..109M . doi : 10.1127/njgpa/2019/0792 . S2CID 135213577 . ^ Sui, Z.-X.; Shao, S.; Yin, Y.-L. (2026). "The anatomy of a mamenchisaurid tooth informed by digital reconstruction" . Swiss Journal of Palaeontology . 145 : 475– 486. Bibcode : 2026SwJP..145..475Z . doi : 10.3897/sjp.145.187923 . ^ Zhou, C.-C.; Ouyang, H.; Gao, J.-X.; Tang, M.-Y.; Zhao, Q. (2026). "Chondroid bone in the cervical ribs of a new juvenile mamenchisaurid" . Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology e2655673. doi : 10.1080/02724634.2026.2655673 . ^ Ghosh, T.; Carrano, M. T.; Jukar, A. M.; Stanley, E. L.; Kumar, K.; Bajpai, S. (2026). "A new turiasaur (Dinosauria, Eusauropoda) specimen from the Middle Jurassic of India". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 46 (1) e2618183. doi : 10.1080/02724634.2026.2618183 . ^ Foster, J. R.; Woodruff, D. C.; Royo-Torres, R. (2026). "The first evidence of Turiasauria (Sauropoda) in the Upper Jurassic Morrison Formation" . New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin . 102 : 267– 282. ^ Beeston, S. L.; Schwarz, D.; Upchurch, P.; Poropat, S. F.; Asbach, P.; Mannion, P. D. (2026). "Computed tomography reveals multiple origins of extreme caudal vertebral pneumaticity in sauropod dinosaurs" . Journal of Anatomy . doi : 10.1111/joa.70177 . ^ Foster, J. R.; Trujillo, K. C.; Irmis, R. B.; Wedel, M. J.; Chamberlain, K. R.; Gillette, D. D.; McMullen, S. K. (2026). "History, age, and stratigraphy of the type locality of Dystrophaeus viaemalae (Sauropoda) in the lower Morrison Formation of southeastern Utah" . New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin . 102 : 201– 213. ^ Lerzo, L. N. (2026). "The lost fossil of the first discovered rebbachisaurid: reassessment of Nopcsaspondylus alarconensis (Diplodocoidea, Sauropoda)". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 8. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2594006 . ^ Otero, A.; Canale, J. I.; Haluza, A.; Calvo, J. O. (2011). "New titanosaur with unusual haemal arches from the Upper Cretaceous of Neuquén Province, Argentina" . Ameghiniana . 48 (4): 655– 661. Bibcode : 2011Amegh..48..655O . doi : 10.5710/AMGH.v48i4(482) . ^ Lerzo, L. N. (2026). "Revision of the specimen MMCh-PV 47 (Rebbachisauridae, Sauropoda) from the Candeleros Formation (Lower Cenomanian) with comments about the musculature of the caudal region". Cretaceous Research . 182 106307. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.18206307L . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2025.106307 . ^ Garderes, J. P.; Lerzo, L. N.; Knoll, F. (2026). "Neuroanatomy and auditory adaptations of Sidersaura marae : insights into the palaeoecology of rebbachisaurid sauropods". Cretaceous Research . 184 106364. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.18406364G . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106364 . ^ Pal, Saurabh; Deshmukh, S. N. (2026). "Morphometric Analysis of the Distal Epiphyses of the Radius and Ulna of Titanosaurs: A Case from Central India". Paleontological Journal . 59 (7): 747– 767. doi : 10.1134/S0031030125600015 . ^ Garderes, J. P.; Toledo, N.; Whitlock, J. A.; Militello, M.; Gallina, P. A. (2026). "Head, skull–neck and extrinsic eye musculature of the dicraeosaurid sauropod Bajadasaurus pronuspinax " . Publicación Electrónica de la Asociación Paleontológica Argentina . 26 (1): 80– 112. doi : 10.5710/PEAPA.11.11.2025.553 . ^ Hullinger, April; Boisvert, Colin; Bivens, Gunnar T.; Curtice, Brian; Wilhite, Ray; Foster, John R. (2026). "Redescription of Apatosaurine Remains From Arches National Park, Utah, Usa (Upper Jurassic, Morrison Formation)". New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin . 102 : 215– 231. ^ Woodruff, D. C.; Walker, S.; Hunt, K.; Schein, J. P. (2026). "The first specimen of Barosaurus (Sauropoda: Diplodocidae) from Montana: the northernmost occurrence of the genus" . New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin . 102 : 233– 245. ^ van der Linden, Tom T.P.; Wilhite, D. Ray; Bivens, Gunnar T.; Woodruff, D. Cary; Hunter, Rick J.; Stecko, Tim; Curtice, Brian D. (2026). "A case report of a pathology in the 'whip' of a flagellicaudatan sauropod" .

The Science of Nature . 113 (23) 23. Bibcode : 2026SciNa.113...23V . doi : 10.1007/s00114-026-02068-5 . PMC 12904970 . PMID 41686227 . ^ Carpenter, K.; Ikejiri, T.; Wilson, Y. (2026). "Postcranial anatomy of immature Camarasaurus specimens from Dinosaur National Monument, Utah, compared to the holotype of Camarasaurus lentus (Marsh, 1889)" . New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin . 102 : 247– 265. ^ Yoshida, J.; Carpenter, K.; Kobayashi, y. (2026). "First record of somphospondylan sauropods from the Cedar Mountain Formation (Lower Cretaceous) of Utah, USA, and spatiotemporal implications for the Cretaceous sauropods in North America". Cretaceous Research 106395. doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106395 . ^ Ren, X.; Wang, X.; Wang, Y.; Ren, T.; Zhang, Z.; Liu, Y. (2026). "Sauropod tracks from the Lower Cretaceous in Shandong, China: implications for the dominating of non-titanosaurians in East Asia". Cretaceous Research 106432. doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106432 . ^ Averianov, A. O.; Slobodin, D. A.; Skutschas, P. P.; Vladimirova, O. N. (2026). "A sauropod fibula (Dinosauria, Sauropoda) from the Lower Cretaceous of the Kuzbass Region, Russia". Paleontological Journal . 60 (1): 69– 74. Bibcode : 2026PalJ...60...69A . doi : 10.1134/S0031030125601276 . ^ Mannion, P. D.; Carvalho, I. S. (2026). "Re-evaluation of the Early Cretaceous titanosauriform sauropod dinosaur Triunfosaurus leonardii from the Triunfo Basin, Brazil: implications for the initial radiations of Somphospondyli and Titanosauria" . Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 207 (1) zlag073. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlag073 . ^ Averianov, A. O.; Sizov, A. V.; Grigoriev, D. V.; Kolchanov, V. V.; Skutschas, P. P. (May 2026). "A sauropod Tengrisaurus starkovi from the Lower Cretaceous of Transbaikalia, Russia, and Asiatic origin of Titanosauria". Cretaceous Research . 181 106271. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.18106271A . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2025.106271 . ^ Balcázar-Loaiza, S.; Apesteguía, S.; Gallina, P. A.; Guzmán, O.; Campos, C. (2026). "First record of a dinosaur for the Oriente Basin at the Tena Formation (Upper Cretaceous) of Ecuador". Cretaceous Research . 186 106413. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.18606413B . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106413 . ^ Pérez Moreno, A.; Carballido, J. L.; Otero, A.; Salgado, L. (2026). "Osteological reassessment of Muyelensaurus pecheni (Dinosauria: Sauropoda): Systematics and its phylogenetic implications for the clade Rinconsauria". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 59. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2585363 . ^ Navarro, B. A.; Wilson Mantilla, J. A.; Martins, J. H. A.; Iori, F. V.; Paschoa, L. S.; Carvalho, A. B.; Piranha, J. M.; Zaher, H. (2026). "An unusual titanosaur axis from the Upper Cretaceous of Brazil and its significance for sauropod anatomy and systematics" .

The Anatomical Record ar.70118. doi : 10.1002/ar.70118 . PMID 41495919 . ^ Barrett, P. M.; Mannion, P. D.; Beeston, S. L.; Lamanna, M. C.; Clark, B.; Otero, A.; O'gorman, J. P.; Evans, M. (2026). "A titanosaurian sauropod dinosaur from the Upper Cretaceous of Antarctica". Acta Palaeontologica Polonica . 71 (2): 349– 362. doi : 10.4202/app.01315.2025 . ^ Zurriaguz, V. L.; Cerda, I. A.; Citton, P.; Martinelli, A.; Caratelli, M.; Kaluza, J.; Aravena, J.; Guzmán, F.; Pereira, L. N.; Schenardi, M. (2026). "A juvenile specimen of Neuquensaurus australis (Dinosauria: Titanosauria) from the Upper Cretaceous of Argentina: implications for sauropod ontogeny and growth dynamics". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 25. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2026.2663156 . ^ Alessandretti, L.; Warren, L. V.; Francischini, H.; Rangel, C. C.; Christofoletti, B.; Albino, L. G. S.; Moura, L. C.; Sedorko, D. (2026). "Late Cretaceous sauropod dinosaur undertracks in floodplain deposits of Sanfranciscana Basin, Brazil, and their paleoecological significance". Palaeoworld . 35 (3) 201078. Bibcode : 2026Palae..3501078A . doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2026.201078 . ^ Wang, L.; Maho, T.; Chen, J.; Young, J. M.; Reisz, R. R. (2026). "Exceptionally slow growth rates and life history of Changchunsaurus parvus from the Upper Cretaceous Quantou Formation, Songliao Basin, Northeast China". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 113931. doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113931 . ^ Sánchez-Fenollosa, S.; Cobos, A.; Suñer, M. (2026). "The plated dinosaurs (Ornithischia, Stegosauria) of eastern Iberia (Spain): Taxonomy, diversity, and ecology" . Palaeontologia Electronica . 29 (1) 29.1.a13. doi : 10.26879/1637 . ^ Hunt-Foster, R. K.; Woodruff, D. C.; Sroka, S. D.; Foster, J. R. (2026). "The largest reported stegosaurid from the Morrison Formation (Upper Jurassic)" . New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin . 102 : 287– 292. ^ Costa, F. (2026). "Dacentrurine Stegosaurs in North America: New Occurrences from the Upper Jurassic of USA (Morrison Formation)" . Diversity . 18 (3) 143. Bibcode : 2026Diver..18..143C . doi : 10.3390/d18030143 . ^ Carpenter, K. (2026). "The smallest known Stegosaurus " . New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin . 102 : 283– 285. ^ Riguetti, F. J.; Apesteguía, S.; Canale, J. I.; Gallina, P. A. (2026). "New thyreophoran remains with stegosaurian affinities from the Lower Cretaceous of Argentina" . Publicación Electrónica de la Asociación Paleontológica Argentina . 26 (1): 56– 79. doi : 10.5710/PEAPA.25.11.2025.551 . ^ Agnolín, F. L.; Rozadilla, S.; García Marsà, J.; Álvarez Nogueira, R.; Miner, S.; Álvarez-Herrera, G.; Novas, F. E.; Pol, D. (2026). "New remains of the armored dinosaur Patagopelta cristata Riguetti et al. 2022 (Ornithischia, Parankylosauria) from the Late Cretaceous of Patagonia, Argentina". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 64. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2583504 . ^ Cross, E. G.; Fraass, A. J.; Gates, T. A.; Arbour, V. M. (2026). "Reclassification of ankylosaurs with ambiguous taxonomy using tooth morphometrics" . Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 206 (4) zlag068. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlag068 . ^ Livius, M. C. H.; Witmer, L. M.; Ryan, M. J.; Maddin, H. C.; Mallon, J. C. (2026). "Redescription of the Panoplosaurus mirus (Ankylosauria: Nodosauridae) holotype skull using computed tomography, and a new comparative scheme for panoplosaurin cranial ornamentation" . Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 46 (1) e2636589. doi : 10.1080/02724634.2026.2636589 . ^ Yoon, H. S.; Kim, H. W.; Park, J.-Y.; Jung, S.-H.; Kong, D.-Y.; Lee, Y.-N. (February 2026). "First reports of a probable ankylosaurian (Thyreophora) trackway from the Jindong Formation (Cenomanian) of Goseong County, South Korea". Cretaceous Research . 178 106240. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.17806240Y . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2025.106240 . ^ Zhu, Z.; Yao, X.; Zheng, W.; Xu, X. (2026). "Cranial osteology and ontogenetic variation of the Late Cretaceous ankylosaurid dinosaur Pinacosaurus grangeri ". Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 207 (2) zlag060. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlag060 . ^ Kim, S.; Lee, Y.-N.; Gihm, Y. S. (2026). "A running ornithopod trackway from the Hasandong Formation (Lower Cretaceous, Korea): Evidence of a 'Goldilocks' substrate window and rapid avulsion burial". Palaeoworld 201155. doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2026.201155 . ^ Rotatori, F. M.; Chiarenza, A. A.; Fanti, F.; Moreno-Azanza, M. (2026). "The early origin of Iguanodontia: new insights into the macroevolution, diversity and biogeography of the clade". Palaeontology . 69 (2) e70057. Bibcode : 2026Palgy..6970057R . doi : 10.1111/pala.70057 . ^ Herne, M. C.; Bevitt, J. J.; Milan, L.; Hocknull, S. A.; Tait, A. M.; Allen, C. M.; Rozefelds, A. C.; Molnar, R. E.; Weisbecker, V.; Bell, P. R. (2026). "Cranial anatomy, palaeoneurology, palaeobiology and stratigraphic age of the large-bodied ornithopod, Muttaburrasaurus langdoni Bartholomai and Molnar, 1981, from the mid-Cretaceous of Australia" . PeerJ . 14 e20794. doi : 10.7717/peerj.20794 . PMID 41978879 . ^ Krumenacker, L. J.; Gay, R. J.; Peterson, J. E.; Scheetz, R.; Simon, R. (2026). "Enigmatic ornithopod specimens from the Simon Quarry of the Late Jurassic Morrison Formation, Bignorn Basin, Wyoming" . New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin . 102 : 319– 329. ^ Rocchi, R.; Rotatori, F. M.; Ferreira, G. S.; Fanti, F. (2026). "An exquisitely preserved young iguanodontian from the Upper Jurassic of Tanzania sheds light on skeletal fusion patterns within Archosauria" . Papers in Palaeontology . 12 (3) e70085. doi : 10.1002/spp2.70085 . ^ Galton, P. M.; Carpenter, K. (2026). "Osteology atlas of the type materials in the Yale Peabody Museum of the ornithopod dinosaurian Camptosaurus dispar (Marsh, 1877) from the Upper Jurassic of Wyoming" . New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin . 102 : 293– 318. ^ Gônet, J.; Allain, R.; Houssaye, A. (2026). "Locomotor reassessment of Iguanodon , Ouranosaurus and Lurdusaurus (Dinosauria, Ornithopoda) using osteological correlates" . Fossil Record . 29 (1): 71– 86. Bibcode : 2026FossR..29...71G . doi : 10.3897/fr.29.173614 . ^ Kondo, M.; Tanaka, K.; Utagawa, F.; Yoshida, J.; Zelenitsky, D. K. (2026). "An iguanodontian sternal plate from the Upper Cretaceous Ashizawa Formation (Futaba Group) of Fukushima Prefecture, Japan" . Paleontological Research . 30 : 122– 134. doi : 10.2517/prpsj.250042 . ^ Ma, Q.; Ma, Y.; Tan, C.; Chen, J.; Lin, Y.; Xiao, M.; Dai, H.; Wei, G.; Mallon, J. C.; Wang, J.; Yao, H.; Zou, Z.; Xing, H. (2026). "First Report of a Hollow Cranial Crest in an Early-Diverging Duck-Billed Dinosaur, with Implications for Convergent Evolution of Acoustic Signaling" . Biology . 15 (8) 615. doi : 10.3390/biology15080615 . PMC 13113714 . PMID 42041893 . ^ Ma, F.; Zhang, C.; Liu, J.; Zang, H.; Yao, H.; Xing, H. (2026). "Taphonomic characteristics of an Upper Cretaceous dinosaur fossil-rich layer along the west bank of the Erlian Salt Lake, Inner Mongolia, and their paleoecological implications" . Acta Palaeontologica Sinica (in Chinese). 64 (4): 430– 443. doi : 10.19800/j.cnki.aps.2025039 . ^ Yu, K.; Wu, W.; Yu, X.; Godefroit, P. (2026). "First occurrence of hadrosaurid (Dinosauria: Ornithopoda) remains from the Nenjiang Formation (early Campanian) in the Songliao Basin, Northeast China". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 16. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2605518 . ^ Sharpe, H.; Brown, C. M. (2026). "A northern occurrence of Hypacrosaurus altispinus (Dinosauria: Hadrosauridae), with discussions on generic monophyly and hypodigm construction". Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences . doi : 10.1139/cjes-2025-0094 . ^ Dudgeon, T. W.; Brown, C.; Evans, D. C. (2026). "The internal crest anatomy of Lambeosaurini (Hadrosauridae: Lambeosaurinae)" .

The Anatomical Record ar.70125. doi : 10.1002/ar.70125 . PMID 41542804 . ^ Hunter, J. P.; Janis, C. M. (2026). "Tooth wear in juvenile and adult hadrosaurs: implications for parental care in Maiasaura " . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 690 113707. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69013707H . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113707 . ^ Duarte-Bigurra, R.; Vicente, A.; Gutiérrez-Blando, C.; Serrano-Brañas, C. I.; Wagner, J. R.; Prieto-Márquez, A. (2026). "New hadrosaurid dinosaurs from the middle Campanian (Upper Cretaceous) of Sonora (Mexico) extend the South American kritosaurin lineage to southern Laramidia". Journal of Systematic Palaeontology . 24 2656218. doi : 10.1080/14772019.2026.2656218 . ^ Bateman, L.-P.; Larsson, H. C. E. (2026). "On pachycephalosaurs, trade-offs, and the historical genesis of sociosexual display structures".

The American Naturalist 740811. doi : 10.1086/740811 . ^ Moore, B. R. S.; Evans, D. C.; Ryan, M. J.; Patterson, R. T.; Mallon, J. C. (2026). "The ontogenetically youngest known pachycephalosaur (Dinosauria: Ornithischia) postcranium" . Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (6) e2616325. doi : 10.1080/02724634.2026.2616325 . ^ Tada, S.; Tsuihiji, T.; Ishikawa, H.; Wakimizu, N.; Kawabe, S.; Sakane, K. (2026). "Nasal soft-tissue anatomy of Triceratops and other horned dinosaurs" .

The Anatomical Record ar.70150. doi : 10.1002/ar.70150 . PMID 41652936 . ^ Zelenkov, N. V. (2026). "A New Fossil Species of Roller (Aves: Coraciidae) from the Lower Pleistocene of Crimea". Doklady Biological Sciences . doi : 10.1134/S0012496626600119 . PMID 42165993 . ^ Zelenkov, N. V. (2026). "A Fossil Thick-billed Raven (Aves, Passeriformes: Corvidae) from the Lower Pleistocene of the Crimea" . Paleontological Journal . 60 (2): 87– 96. ^ Yu, T.; Li, Z.; Stidham, T.; Zhou, Z. (2026). "A small Miocene peafowl (Galliformes, Phasianidae) from the high-elevation Linxia Basin of China illuminates the evolution of the clade and its paleobiology". Journal of Paleontology : 1– 13. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2026.10229 . ^ Machado, V. H. M.; de Vasconcelos, M. F.; Santos, L. V.; Dutra, L. P.; Cartelle, C.; Câmara, B. G. O.; Dantas, M. A. T.; Degrange, F. J. (2026). "A new terror bird (Cariamiformes, Phorusrhacidae) from the Late Pleistocene of Brazil: insights into the last representatives of the family". Papers in Palaeontology . 12 (2) e70080. Bibcode : 2026PPal...1270080M . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70080 . ^ Nebreda, S. M.; Chiappe, L. M.; Navalón, G.; Terol, J. C.; Serrano, F. J.; Buscalioni, Á. D.; Marugán-Lobón, J. (2026). "An isolated skull from Las Hoyas (Early Cretaceous, Spain) informs the early evolution towards elongated rostra in enantiornithine birds (Aves, Ornithothoraces)" . Swiss Journal of Palaeontology . 145 : 251– 265. Bibcode : 2026SwJP..145..251N . doi : 10.3897/sjp.145.182813 . ^ Bochenski, Zbigniew M.; Tomek, Teresa; Szybiak, Robert; Wertz, Krysztof (June 2026). "A new passerine (Aves: Passeriformes) and three other specimens of Late Oligocene birds from Poland, with a review of all Paleogene birds from the northern part of the Carpathian Arc" . Palaeontologia Electronica . 29 (2) 29.2.a26. doi : 10.26879/1712 . ^ Huang, Jiandong; Wang, Xuri; Cau, Andrea; Mao, Lei; Liu, Yichuan; Wang, Yang (February 2026). "A new euornithine from the Lower Cretaceous (Aptian) of China reveals the first radiation of fish-eating birds" . Cretaceous Research . 179 106244. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.17906244H . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2025.106244 . ISSN 0195-6671 . ^ Tennyson, A. J. D.; Steell, E. M.; Lubbe, P.; Adams, A. L.; Greer, L.; Brown, A. H.; Wilson, L. J. E.; Campbell, T. C.; Dale, T. C.; Rawlence, N. J. (2026). "A review of fossil goose (Aves: Anserinae) records from the Miocene St Bathans deposits, New Zealand, with the description of a new species". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 21. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2601236 . ^ Lan, Y.-J.; Mayr, G.; Tsai, C.-H. (2026). "A new Pleistocene peafowl from Taiwan reveals the extinction of a large galliform bird in East Asia" . Royal Society Open Science . 13 (5) 260347. doi : 10.1098/rsos.260347 . ^ Clark, A. D.; O'Connor, J. K.; Wang, X.; Wang, Y.; Pruett-Jones, S.; Zhang, X.; Wang, X.; Zheng, X.; Zhou, Z. (2026). "Hyperelongate ornamental tail feathers in a new early Cretaceous enantiornithine bird" . PLOS ONE . 21 (5) e0347641. doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0347641 . ^ a b Worthy, T. H.; Scofield, R. P.; Suresh, S.; Barker, S. J.; Wilson, C. J. N.; Williams, P. W.; Baker, J. A. (2026). "The first Early Pleistocene ( ca 1 Ma) fossil terrestrial vertebrate fauna from a cave in New Zealand reveals substantial avifaunal turnover in the last million years". Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal of Palaeontology : 1– 40. doi : 10.1080/03115518.2025.2605684 . ^ Irazoqui, F.; Acosta Hospitaleche, C.; Gelfo, J. N.; Paulina Carabajal, A.; Bona, P.; Acosta Burlaille, L. (February 2026). "Diving in the Maastrichtian of Marambio (Seymour) Island: A new member of the Neoaves in the Cretaceous Antarctic avifauna". Cretaceous Research . 179 106259. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.17906259I . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2025.106259 . ^ Ksepka, D. T.; Mayr, G.; Clark, A. D.; Grande, L. (2026). "A sharp-billed stem ibis from the Fossil Butte Member of the Green River Formation". Journal of Paleontology . 99 (6): 1438– 1445. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10196 . ^ Zelenkov, N. V. (2026). "Bustards (Aves: Otididae) from the Middle Miocene of Mongolia". Paleontological Journal . 59 (6): 683– 691. doi : 10.1134/S0031030125601045 . ^ Zelenkov, N. V. (2026). "New Data on Ergilornithids (Aves: Ergilornithidae) from Central Asia". Paleontological Journal . 60 (1): 75– 84. Bibcode : 2026PalJ...60...75Z . doi : 10.1134/S0031030125601288 . ^ a b Irazoqui, Facundo; Acosta Hospitaleche, Carolina; Paulina-Carabajal, Ariana; Bona, Paula; Vega, Nahuel (January 30, 2026). "New species of Vegavis (Neornithes) from Antarctica highlights unexpected Cretaceous Antarctic diversity" . Diversity . 18 (2): 82. Bibcode : 2026Diver..18...82I . doi : 10.3390/d18020082 . ISSN 1424-2818 . ^ Wang, M.; Tang, J.; Deng, K.; Dong, L.; Xu, L.; Xu, X.; Lin, M.; Du, H.; Lin, G.; Chen, R.; Zhang, C.; Zhou, Z. (2026). "Jurassic avialan reveals stepwise evolution of bony tail in birds" . Science Advances . 12 (27) eaeb5202. doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aeb5202 . PMC 13322236 . PMID 42384792 . ^ Wilken, A. T.; Sellers, K. C.; Cost, I. N.; David, J.; Middleton, K. M.; Witmer, L. M.; Holliday, C. M. (2025). "Avian cranial kinesis is the result of increased encephalization during the origin of birds" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (13). e2411138122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12211138W . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2411138122 . PMC 12002250 . PMID 40096621 . ^ Benito, J.; Kuo, P.-C.; Torres, C. R.; Navalón, G.; Plateau, O.; Clark, A. D.; Steell, E. M.; Field, D. J. (2026). "Shouldering the challenge of deciphering avian palate evolution" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 123 (1) e2514111123. Bibcode : 2026PNAS..12314111B . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2514111123 . PMC 12773698 . PMID 41481437 . ^ Wilken, A. T.; Sellers, K. C.; David, J. L.; Witmer, L. M.; Holliday, C. M. (2026). "Reply to Benito et al.: Problems in the Cretaceous evolution of the avian palatobasal joint" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 123 (1) e2520865123. Bibcode : 2026PNAS..12320865W . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2520865123 . PMC 12773701 . PMID 41481457 . ^ Lechki, S. C.; Benson, R. B. J. (2026). "Evolutionary drivers of reproductive output variation among amniotes, and the origins of large offspring in birds" . Royal Society Open Science . 13 (6) 251708. doi : 10.1098/rsos.251708 . ^ Jo, H.; Jung, J.; Kim, M.; Huh, M.; Clarke, J. A. (2026). "Description of the first Mesozoic bird eggs from Korea and a new mid-Cretaceous theropod-dominated egg locality". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 689 113653. Bibcode : 2026PPP...68913653J . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113653 . ^ O'Connor, J.; Marugán-Lobón, J. (2026). "Evaluating variation in Solnhofen avialans" . Biology Letters . 22 (3) 20250601. doi : 10.1098/rsbl.2025.0601 . PMID 41875983 . ^ Zhou, Y.; Zhao, Y.; Guo, Y.; Wei, X.; Zhang, F. (2026). "Evolution of tooth number and size reveals random evolution and weak directional selection of dentition toward independent tooth loss in Mesozoic birds" . Avian Research 100397. doi : 10.1016/j.avrs.2026.100397 . ^ Wu, Q.; Stidham, T. A.; O'Connor, J. K.; Bailleul, A. M.; Zhou, Z.; Li, Z. (2026). "Critical innovations in the assembly of the modern flight apparatus in Early Cretaceous birds" . iScience . 29 (4) 115506. Bibcode : 2026iSci...2915506W . doi : 10.1016/j.isci.2026.115506 . PMC 13091450 . PMID 42006300 . ^ Holdaway, R. N.; Allentoft, M. E.; Rayner, M. J.; Cabrera, A. A.; Rey-Iglesia, A.; Lorenzen, E. D.; Westbury, M. V. (2026). "Multiproxy analysis of the extinct moa genus Euryapteryx reveals new phylogenetic structure and disparity with morphometrics". Biological Journal of the Linnean Society . 147 (4) blag018. doi : 10.1093/biolinnean/blag018 . ^ Tsahar, E.; Bar-Oz, G.; Izhaki, I.; Avner, U.; Barzilai, O.; Belfer-Cohen, A.; Edeltin, L.; Goder-Goldberger, M.; Hovers, E.; Oron, M.; Rosen, S. A.; Shafir, R.; Vardi, J.; Weinstein-Evron, M.; Weissbrod, L.; Yeshurun, R.; Wolkowski, U.; Zaidner, Y.; Kolska Horwitz, L.; Marom, N. (2026). "Archaeological ostrich eggshell structure as a taxonomic and paleoenvironmental indicator". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 691 113723. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69113723T . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113723 . ^ Niespolo, E. M.; Kim, N.-H.; Southon, J.; Tissot, F. L. H.; Miller, G. H. (2026). "Improved 14 C and novel 230 Th/U burial dating of Australian megafaunal avian eggshells: implications for the extinction of Genyornis and early human arrival to Sahul" . Quaternary Science Reviews . 385 110038. doi : 10.1016/j.quascirev.2026.110038 . ^ Sosa, M. A.; Acosta Hospitaleche, C. (2026). "A small synsacrum of an enigmatic bird from the Eocene of Marambio (Seymour) Island: Insights into the Antarctic avifauna" . Publicación Electrónica de la Asociación Paleontológica Argentina . 26 (1): 178– 186. doi : 10.5710/PEAPA.10.02.2026.565 . ^ Somogyi, S.; Lee, J. Y. J.; Chen, A.; Liang, W.; Bever, G. S.; Field, D. J. (2026). "Hemiplasy helps explain high rates of apparent morphological convergence in neoavian birds" . Current Biology . 36 (9): 2424–2433.e3. Bibcode : 2026CBio...36.2424S . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2026.03.050 . PMID 41990744 . ^ Hellyer-Price, O.; Venditti, C.; Humphries, S. (2026). "The largest extinct volant bird Pelagornis could not meet the energetic demands of skimming" . Royal Society Open Science . 13 (2) 251840. Bibcode : 2026RSOS...1351840H . doi : 10.1098/rsos.251840 . ^ Goedert, J. L.; Gibson, K.; Rich, M. A.; Mayr, G. (2026). "A Miocene pelagornithid skull from the Astoria Formation and other bones of bony-toothed birds from the late Eocene Keasey Formation, western Oregon (USA)" . Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 46 (1) e2645078. doi : 10.1080/02724634.2026.2645078 . ^ Degrange, F. J.; De Mendoza, R. S.; Torres Etchegorry, M.; Demmel Ferreira, M. M.; Witmer, L.; Tambussi, C. P. (2026). "Unlocking the early evolution of brain and feeding strategies in Anseriformes: the case of Conflicto antarcticus " . Royal Society Open Science . 13 (7) 252544. doi : 10.1098/rsos.252544 . ^ Zelenkov, N. (2026). "An Exceptional Collection of Early Pleistocene Bustards (Aves: Otididae) and a Review of Fossil Pre-Middle Pleistocene Eurasian Otididae" . Fossil Studies . 4 (2) 15. doi : 10.3390/fossils4020015 . ^ De los Reyes, M.; Acosta Hospitaleche, C.; Sosa, M. A. (2026). "A Rallidae (Aves, Gruiformes) from the Pleistocene La Esperanza Formation of Olavarría (Argentina)" . Publicación Electrónica de la Asociación Paleontológica Argentina . 26 (1): 47– 55. doi : 10.5710/PEAPA.24.10.2025.554 . ^ Lenser, K. M.; Reed, E. H.; Worthy, T. H. (2026). "Fossil shorebirds (Aves: Charadriiformes) reveal trends in Pleistocene wetlands at Naracoorte Caves, South Australia" . Palaeontologia Electronica . 29 (1) 29.1.2a. doi : 10.26879/1608 . ^ Mayr, G.; Richter, A. (2026). "Further Hassiavis specimens from the Eocene of Messel (Germany) and the phylogenetic affinities of the Archaeotrogonidae (Aves, Strisores)" . Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 17. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2598021 . ^ Gorbatcheva, V. O.; Zelenkov, N. (2026). "Late Quaternary nightjars (Aves: Caprimulgidae) from Western Cuba". Zootaxa . 5785 (3): 569– 580. doi : 10.11646/zootaxa.5785.3.9 . ^ Hunt, A. P.; Lucas, S. G.; Smith, K. T. (2026). "A New Regurgitalite from the Early Eocene of Wyoming (USA) Provides Evidence for Predation on "Armored" Glyptosaurid Lizards and Diurnal Behavior of Early Owls" . Fossil Studies . 4 (2) 12. doi : 10.3390/fossils4020012 . ^ Louchart, A.; Manegold, A.; Pavia, M. (2026). "The earliest record for honeyguides (Aves: Indicatoridae), from the Early Pliocene of South Africa" . Rivista Italiana di Paleontologia e Stratigrafia . 132 (1): 87– 99. Bibcode : 2026RIPS..13228693L . doi : 10.54103/2039-4942/28693 . ^ Dreyer, L.; Cooper, C.; O'Connor, J. (2026). "Osteohistology of two phorusrhacids reveals uninterrupted growth strategy" .

The Anatomical Record ar.70135. doi : 10.1002/ar.70135 . PMID 41552969 . ^ Mayr, G. (2026). "On the interrelationships of early Eocene "parrot-like" and "near-passerine" zygodactyl birds (Aves: Psittacomimidae fam. nov.)" . Vertebrate Zoology . 76 : 121– 134. Bibcode : 2026VerZ...76..121M . doi : 10.3897/vz.76.e182505 . ^ Zhao, M.; Kimball, R. T.; Braun, E. L. (2026). "The Phylogenetic Position of the Extinct Hawaiian Honeyeaters: Overcoming the Limitations of Historical DNA". Zoologica Scripta . 55 (3) zsc.70047. doi : 10.1111/zsc.70047 . ^ Farina, M. E.; Mángano, M. G.; Buatois, L. A.; Marsicano, C. A.; Krapovickas, V. (2026). "Macroevolutionary trends of avian ichnodisparity in Gondwana" . Scientific Reports . doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-56695-z . ^ Mayr, G. (2026). "An overview of the oldest and most comprehensive avifauna of the early Eocene British London Clay" . Papers in Palaeontology . 12 (3) e70093. doi : 10.1002/spp2.70093 . ^ Mayr, G.; Collinson, M. E. (2026). "A survey of Eocene stomach contents illuminates the origins of frugivory and seed dispersal in neornithine (crown group) birds" .

The Science of Nature . 113 (4) 81. doi : 10.1007/s00114-026-02130-2 . PMID 42406123 . ^ Farina, M. E.; Krapovickas, V.; Marsicano, C. A. (2026). "Ichnotaxonomy and paleobiology of a bird track assemblage from the Miocene Vinchina Formation of La Rioja Province, Argentina". Acta Palaeontologica Polonica . 71 (1): 29– 50. doi : 10.4202/app.01284.2025 . ^ Serrano, F. J.; Espigares, M. P.; Rodríguez-Gómez, G.; Martínez-Navarro, B.; Ros-Montoya, S.; Terol, J. C.; Sanisidro, Ó.; Guerra-Merchán, A.; García-Aguilar, J. M.; Campaña, I.; Granados, A.; Palmqvist, P. (2026). "Avian remains from Venta Micena (Baza Basin, Granada Geopark) shed light on the Early Pleistocene wetland environments and trophic dynamics of the Southern Iberian Peninsula" . Swiss Journal of Palaeontology . 145 : 597– 623. doi : 10.3897/sjp.145.182523 . ^ Zelenkov, N. V.; Maslintsyna, M. P.; Lavrov, A. V.; Gimranov, D. O.; Pavlov, I. S.; Kandyba, A. V.; Protopopov, A. V. (2026). "A New Late Pleistocene Avifauna from Yakutia (Eastern Siberia)". Doklady Biological Sciences . 525 (1): 372– 378. doi : 10.1134/S0012496625600642 . PMID 41526791 . ^ Oros Sršen, A.; Novak, V.; Petrović, M.; Tilby, E.; Mauch Lenardić, J.; Miracle, P. T. (2026). "Paleoecology of the late Pleistocene avifauna from Marlera (Istria, Croatia) with notes on the voles record". Quaternary International . 775 110377. doi : 10.1016/j.quaint.2026.110377 . ^ Alarcón-Muñoz, J.; Labarca, R.; Frugone-Álvarez, M.; Calás, E.; Lizama-Catalán, Á.; Oyarzo, C. (2026). "An exceptionally rich bird assemblage from Late Pleistocene of the ancient Tagua Tagua Lake, central Chile, and its paleoenvironmental implications" . Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 27. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2026.2663148 . ^ Sander, M. M.; Stoof-Leichsenring, K. R.; Liu, S.; Shen, W.; Lisovski, S.; Herzschuh, U. (2026). "Sedimentary Metagenomics Reveal Avian Community Transitions From the Last Glacial Maximum to the Holocene" . Ecology and Evolution . 16 (4) e72064. Bibcode : 2026EcoEv..1672064S . doi : 10.1002/ece3.72064 . PMC 13107265 . PMID 42040837 . ^ Peralta, M. J.; Noriega, J. I.; Ferrero, B. S.; Brunetto, E. (2026). "New avian fossil records from Molino Doll locality (Entre Ríos): a first insight of the bird diversity during the Early Holocene in northeastern Argentina". Journal of South American Earth Sciences 106116. doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2026.106116 . ^ Sánchez-Marco, A.; Sánchez-Sastre, R.; Castillo, C. (2026). "Unexpected Climate Revealed by a Middle Holocene Avian Assemblage from Fuerteventura (Canary Islands)" . Quaternary . 9 (2) 20. Bibcode : 2026Quat....9...20S . doi : 10.3390/quat9020020 . ^ Hone, David W. E. (2026-05-11). "A new early monofenestratan pterosaur from the Mörnsheim Formation of southern Germany" . PeerJ . 14 e21204. doi : 10.7717/peerj.21204 . ISSN 2167-8359 . PMC 13175063 . PMID 42145958 . ^ Thomas, E; McDavid, S (2026). "The earliest European Azhdarchoid: reappraisal of "Palaeornis" cliftii Mantell, 1844 from the Wealden of Cuckfield, U.K." Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . doi : 10.1080/02724634.2026.2664783 . | ^ Pêgas, R. V.; Holgado, B. (2026). "A taxonomic note on a coloborhynchine pterosaur from the Early Cretaceous Wessex Formation: Tylodorhynchus rodriguesae gen. et comb. nov". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 10. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2026.2650487 . ^ Walters, B.; Rayfield, E. J.; Donoghue, P. C. J. (2026). "Exploring the limits of wing design in pterosaurs" . Paleobiology : 1– 12. doi : 10.1017/pab.2026.10103 . ^ Cerqueira, G. M.; Silva, J. L.; Werneburg, I.; Bronzati, M.; Aires, A. S. S.; Pinheiro, F. L.; Müller, R. T. (2026). "Allometric patterns in Rhamphorhynchus muensteri and their role in the paleoecology, life habits, and taxonomic framework of pterosaurs" . Journal of Anatomy joa.70146. doi : 10.1111/joa.70146 . PMID 42093201 . ^ Tong, S.-D.; Jiang, S.-X.; Cheng, X.; Wang, X.-L. (2026). "Two anurognathid pterosaur specimens from the Yanliao Biota and a new interpretation of anurognathid skulls". Vertebrata PalAsiatica . 64 (2): 191– 220. doi : 10.19615/j.cnki.2096-9899.260411 . ^ Averianov, A. O.; Lopatin, A. V. (2026). "Pterodactyloid radius from the Middle Jurassic of England". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 9. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2026.2625205 . ^ Grice, K.; Poropat, S. F.; Schwark, L.; Diaz Mateus, M. A.; Greenwood, P. F.; Brosnan, L. M.; Tripp, M.; Elson, A. L.; Jian, A. J. Y.; Saraiva, A. A. F.; Bantim, R. A. M.; Demore, J.; Holman, A. I.; Böttcher, M. E.; Pentland, A. H.; Madden, R. H. C.; Hopper, P.; Sun, X.; Dodd, A.; de Oliveira, A. V.; Visscher, P. T.; Rickard, W. D. A.; Sayão, J. M.; Rahimpour-Bonab, H.; Schmiedinger, I.; Leshyk, V. O.; Kellner, A. W. A. (2026). "Multi-staged mineralization and biomarker preservation in a 113-million-year-old pterosaur bone via redox shifts in diagenesis" . iScience 116199. doi : 10.1016/j.isci.2026.116199 . ^ Unwin, D. M.; Smith, R. E.; Cooper, S. L. A.; Martill, D. M. (2026). "Reinterpretation of Bakiribu waridza from the Romualdo Formation (Lower Cretaceous) of Brazil: a fish not a pterosaur" . Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciências . 98 (2). e20251374. doi : 10.1590/0001-3765202620251374 . PMID 41983856 . ^ Averianov, A. O.; Gubarev, D. I. (2026). "A pterosaur cervical vertebra from the Cenomanian of Russia: first diagnostic postcranial material for Targaryendraconia". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 7. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2026.2619532 . ^ Salem, B. S.; O'connor, P. M.; Lamanna, M. C.; Thabet, W. A.; El-Sayed, S.; Sallam, H. M. (2026). "The first pterosaur fossil from Egypt" . Acta Palaeontologica Polonica . 71 (2): 383– 397. doi : 10.4202/app.01344.2026 . ^ Jung, J.; Kim, K. S.; Xing, L.; Choi, B.-D. (2026). "New large pterosaur tracks from Korea and their implications on terrestrial behavior" . Scientific Reports . 16 (1) 12363. Bibcode : 2026NatSR..1612363J . doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-48019-y . PMC 13087150 . PMID 41991982 . ^ McDavid, S.; Marchant, C.; Reid, I. (2026-02-02). " Alickmeron Sen & Ray, 2025 is an objective junior synonym of Alwalkeria Chatterjee & Creisler, 1994". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (5) e2604088. doi : 10.1080/02724634.2025.2604088 . ^ Damke, L. V. S.; Kerber, L.; Bronzati, M.; Garcia, M. S.; Ezcurra, M. D.; Nesbitt, S. J.; Müller, R. T. (2026). "Braincase anatomy and palaeoneurology of Venetoraptor gassenae , a lagerpetid pterosauromorph from the Late Triassic of southern Brazil" . Palaeontology . 69 (2) e70047. Bibcode : 2026Palgy..6970047D . doi : 10.1111/pala.70047 . ^ Müller, R. T. (2026). "Widespread distribution of large silesaurids evidenced by a new record from the Middle Triassic of southwest Gondwana" .

The Anatomical Record ar.70190. doi : 10.1002/ar.70190 . PMID 41844340 . ^ Napoli, J. G. (2026). "Resolving the "ontogeny problem" in vertebrate paleontology" . Paleobiology : 1– 30. doi : 10.1017/pab.2026.10105 . ^ Liard, T.; Liard, R.; Buffetaut, E. (2026). "A Review of Vertebrate Footprints from the Mesozoic of Thailand and Their Palaeobiogeographical Significance" . Fossil Studies . 4 (2) 10. doi : 10.3390/fossils4020010 . ^ Terras, R.; Borger, J.; Almeida, M. O. P.; Bettin, S.; Higgins, O. A.; Marciani, G.; Benazzi, S.; Müller, R. T.; Kerber, L.; Carbonera, M. (2026). "Inferred presence of extraoral tissues in Triassic archosauromorphs and the evolutionary implications for the clade Sauropsida" . Palaeontology . 69 (3) e70066. doi : 10.1111/pala.70066 . ^ Marchetti, L.; Collareta, A.; Granata, V.; Belvedere, M. (2026). "The earliest dinosaur-dominated fauna? A reappraisal of the Carnian Lerici tracksite and the first global radiation of Sauropodomorpha". Gondwana Research . 157 : 72– 89. doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2026.04.010 . ^ García-Cobeña, J.; Sánchez-Fenollosa, S.; Cabrera-Argudo, P.; Cobos, A. (2026). "The oldest dinosaurs and other vertebrates from the Cretaceous of the southwestern Maestrazgo Basin (Teruel, Spain)". Cretaceous Research . 184 106362. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.18406362G . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106362 . ^ Egan, B.; Cullen, T. M.; Velez, M. I.; Samaei, S. H.-A.; Xue, J.; McKellar, R. C. (2026). "A Campanian ecosystem reconstruction through the geochemistry of enamel and amber" . Cretaceous Research 106427. doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106427 . ^ Fanti, F.; Consorti, L.; Muscioni, M.; Baldassari, L.; Dinelli, E.; Polentarutti, M.; Bais, G.; Farnsworth, A.; Kustatscher, E.; Spina, A.; Chiarenza, A. A. (2026). "Climate-extreme-driven genesis of a Cretaceous dinosaur Lagerstätte " . Global and Planetary Change 105589. doi : 10.1016/j.gloplacha.2026.105589 . ^ Soto-Acuña, S.; Otero, R. A.; Ugalde, R.; Ortiz, H.; Brito, J. L. (2026). "Beyond marine reptiles: ornithopod and avian remains from the Upper Cretaceous of Algarrobo, central Chile". Cretaceous Research . 185 106404. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.18506404S . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106404 . ^ Hack, J.; Nau, D.; Schwermann, A.H.; Sander, P.M. (2026). "Two ornithodiran unguals from the Rhaetian bonebed of Warburg-Bonenburg (Germany): Possible evidence for dinosaurs and pterosaurs" . Geologie und Paläontologie in Westfalen . 99 : 1– 21.