The type species is "Neoceriaster" rarisepta He (1980). Macgeea myallensis Sp. nov Wright & McLean Devonian Cara Formation Australia A rugose coral belonging to the family Phillipsastreidae . Michelinia rara Sp. nov Valid Krutykh, Mirantsev & Rozhnov Carboniferous ( Gzhelian ) Russia A tabulate coral. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as December 2025. Paleocanna Gen. et sp. nov Valid Ramirez-Guerrero et al. Ordovician Neuville Formation Canada ( Quebec ) A medusozoan belonging to the stem group of Acraspeda .

The type species is P. tentaculum . Yuina Gen. et comb. nov Valid Wang Silurian (Aeronian) Leijiatun Formation China A rugose coral belonging to the family Stauriidae.

The type species is "Ceriaster" columellatus Ge & Yu (1974); genus also includes "Ceriaster (Eostauria)" agglomorata He & Li (1974) and "Ceriaster" qiaogouensis He (1980). Cnidarian research Bernad, Echevarría & Ros-Franch (2026) study the diversity dynamics of Conulariida throughout their evolutionary history, reporting evidence of decline of origination rates by the Late Ordovician.

The oldest post-Ordovician coral reef in South China known to date is reported from the Silurian (Aeronian) strata of the Xiangshuyuan Formation by Yu et al. (2026). Wei et al. (2026) compare the diversification dynamics of photosymbiotic and nonphotosymbiotic corals throughout their evolutionary history, and find that photosymbiotic corals did not have a consistent evolutionary advantage over other corals throughout the Phanerozoic. Specimens of Montlivaltia with regular growth bands, interpreted as likely evidence of growth periodicities corresponding to lunar cycles nested within annual growth rhythms, are described from the Middle Jurassic strata from Lorraine (France) by Lathuilière (2026). Löser (2026) studies the composition of the assemblage of Hauterivian corals from the Yokonuma Formation (Japan), extending known temporal range of the genera Calamophylliopsis , ? Eohydnophora , Siderohelia and Palaeosiderofungia . Moclán et al. (2026) study the biometric parameters and orientations of specimens of Cordubia gigantea from the Cambrian strata from the Constantina site ( Torreárboles Formation ; Spain), identify additional specimens at the studied site, and interpret the specimens from the studied aggregation as likely to have died during a mass mortality event. New fossil material of Octapyrgites elongatus , including the first known embryos of the species, is described from the Cambrian strata of the Yanjiahe Formation (Hubei, China) by Peng et al. (2026). Moreau et al. (2026) report the discovery of fossil material of Medusina atava from the strata of the Cham-el-Houa Siltstone Formation (Morocco), extending known geographical range of Permian freshwater medusoids into the equatorial zone. Arthropods Main articles: 2026 in arthropod paleontology and 2026 in paleoentomology Brachiopods Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Amphithyris butleri Sp. nov Robinson Eocene New Zealand A species of Amphithyris . Amphithyris thomsoni Sp. nov Robinson Eocene to Oligocene New Zealand A species of Amphithyris . Angustothyris aszofoensis Sp. nov Valid Guo et al. Middle Triassic (Anisian) Felsőörs Formation Hungary Balatonithyris Gen. et comb. nov Valid Guo et al. Middle Triassic (Anisian) Felsőörs Formation Hungary Genus includes "Waldheimia" angustaeformis Böckh (1872). Chonostrophia raquelae Sp. nov Valid Videira-Santos & Scheffler Devonian (Pragian–Emsian) Ponta Grossa Formation Brazil A member of Productida belonging to the family Chonostrophiidae . Dubatolovispirifer Gen. et sp. nov Valid Baranov & Nikolaev Devonian (Pragian) Russia A member of Spiriferida.

The type species is D. ribbed . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as December 2025. Glosshypothyridina theophili Sp. nov Valid Halamski, Baliński & Racki Devonian Laskowa Góra Beds Poland Golestania Gen. et sp. nov Valid Baranov, Kebrie-ee Zade & Blodgett Devonian (Famennian) Khoshyeilagh Formation Iran A member of Spiriferida belonging to the family Ambocoelidae .

The type species is G. shahrudus . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as December 2025. Howellella nelyudimica Sp. nov Valid Baranov & Nikolaev Devonian (Pragian) Russia A member of Spiriferida. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as December 2025. Howellella septentrionalis Sp. nov Valid Baranov & Nikolaev Devonian (Pragian) Russia A member of Spiriferida. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as December 2025. Isocrania multicostata Sp. nov Poddar et al. Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) Kallankurichchi Formation India Jilinmartinia hovsugolensis Sp. nov Valid Sun et al. Permian (Cisuralian) Kharnuden Formation Mongolia Johndearia isbelli dorsofurcata Ssp. nov Valid Waterhouse Permian Australia A member of the family Ingelarellidae . Kallirhynchia oranensis roussellei Ssp. nov Benzaggagh Middle Jurassic (Bathonian) Morocco Kosoplasia Gen. et comb. nov Mergl Silurian (Ludfordian) Czech Republic A member of the family Ambocoeliidae . Genus includes "Metaplasia" hemicona Havlíček in Havlíček & Štorch (1990). Kyrtatrypa stanislai Sp. nov Valid Halamski, Baliński & Racki Devonian Laskowa Góra Beds Poland Lambdarina vangyrika Sp. nov Valid Pakhnevich & Sobolev Carboniferous (Tournaisian) Russia ( Komi Republic ) A member of Rhynchonellida belonging to the superfamily Lambdarinoidea. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as December 2025. Linoproductus planiconvexus Sp. nov Valid Sun et al. Permian (Cisuralian) Kharnuden Formation Mongolia Orbiculoidea matogrossensis Sp. nov Ribeiro et al. Devonian Ponta Grossa Formation Brazil A member of Lingulata belonging to the family Discinidae. Paramarginifera pentagona Sp. nov Valid Sun et al. Permian (Cisuralian) Kharnuden Formation Mongolia Pocillocrania Gen. et sp. nov Madison et al. Ordovician (Hirnantian) Estonia A craniiform brachiopod belonging to the family Craniidae .

The type species is P. rubeli . Praeoehlertella convexa Sp. nov Valentine, Mathieson & Simpson Devonian Australia A discinoid brachiopod. Qianothyris Gen. et comb. nov Valid Guo et al. Middle Triassic (Anisian) Qingyan Formation China Genus includes "Angustothyris" qingyanensis Guo, Chen & Harper (2019). Septothyris sulcata Sp. nov Valid Benedetto, Rustan & Lopez Devonian (Lochkovian) Los Espejos Formation Argentina A member of Terebratulida . Tritoechia cheongpungensis Sp. nov Oh et al. Ordovician South Korea Urbicrania Gen. et 2 sp. nov Valid Mergl & Sazimová Silurian and Devonian Praha Formation Czech Republic A member of Craniida .

The type species is U. limbata ; genus also includes U. egressa . Brachiopod research Esteve, González-Cloquells & Arriola (2026) compare the columnar microstructure of Iberotreta sampelayoi and Genetreta trilix from the Láncara Formation (Spain), providing evidence of differences interpreted as related to distinct biomechanical characteristics, and link the diversification of Cambrian brachiopods to the variation of their skeletal architecture. A study on the composition of the brachiopod assemblage from the Ordovician Cabrières Biota ( Landeyran Formation , France) is published by Harper et al. (2026). Zhang et al. (2026) publish a revision of the species Salairella latecostellata and a systematic revision of the genus Salairella , providing evidence of distinctiveness of late Ordovician brachiopods assemblages from the Altai Mountains, Siberia and Mongolia compared to the ones from China and Kazakhstan. A new brachiopod assemblage, providing evidence of recovery of brachiopod communities in the aftermath of the Late Ordovician mass extinction , is described from the Wulipo Bed (Guizhou, China) by Shi et al. (2026). Huang et al. (2026) study changes of composition of Telychian brachiopod assemblages from the Ningqiang Formation (Sichuan, China), providing evidence of a shift from a deep-water fauna to one from shallower environment, interpreted as a response to regional uplift. Naamdhew, Penn-Clarke & Harper (2026) reconstruct changes of composition of Devonian brachiopod communities from Gondwana and their biogeography , finding evidence of reduced faunal exchange to high-latitude parts of Gondwana compared to assemblages from lower latitudes. A study on changes of diversity and distribution of Productida throughout the evolutionary history of the group is published by Chen et al. (2026). Fu et al. (2026) describe fossil material of Pseudolingula quadrata from the Ordovician Pingliang Formation (China), preserved with impressions of the musculature and the vascular system, and representing the first record of Pseudolingulidae from the North China Platform. Popov et al. (2026) report the discovery of a specimen of Mergliella aff. bechei from the Ludfordian Cae'r mynach Formation (Wales, United Kingdom) with a well-preserved pedicle , representing the first case of soft tissue preservation in a Silurian linguliform brachiopod. Müller et al. (2026) report a mass occurrence of specimens of Halorella amphitoma in the Upper Triassic strata of the Dachstein Formation (Hungary), interpreted as preserved in a palaeokarst cavity filled by seawater as a result of sea-level rise, and expanding known range of habitats of the studied species. New records of fossils of brachiopods from the orders Athyridida, Rhynchonellida and Spiriferinida from the Triassic and Jurassic strata in New Zealand and New Caledonia are reported by MacFarlan (2026). Bryozoans Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Amphiblestrella magna Sp. nov Valid Koromyslova & Holroyd Paleocene (Thanetian) Kazakhstan A member of the family Onychocellidae . Brydonella favorskayae Sp. nov Valid Koromyslova & Holroyd Paleocene (Thanetian) Kazakhstan A member of Flustrina belonging to the family Brydonellidae . Cellaria comodorensis Sp. nov Valid Iturra, López-Gappa & Pérez in Iturra et al. Miocene Chenque Formation Argentina A species of Cellaria . Cellaria fallax Sp. nov Valid Iturra, López-Gappa & Pérez in Iturra et al. Oligocene San Julián Formation Argentina A species of Cellaria . Cellaria roborata Sp. nov Valid Iturra, López-Gappa & Pérez in Iturra et al. Miocene Gaiman Formation Argentina A species of Cellaria . Dayingomelission Gen. et sp. nov Valid Song, Zhang & Ernst in Song et al. Cambrian Stage 3 Xiannüdong Formation China An early member of Stenolaemata .

The type species is D. hexaclitia . Distansescharella levinae Sp. nov Valid Koromyslova & Holroyd Paleocene (Thanetian) Kazakhstan A member of the family Cribrilinidae . Gramipora Gen. et sp. nov Valid Håkansson et al. Miocene Gram Formation Denmark A cheilostome bryozoan of uncertain affinities.

The type species is G. laxevincta . Hexacanthopora turgayensis Sp. nov Valid Koromyslova & Holroyd Paleocene (Thanetian) Kazakhstan A member of the family Cribrilinidae. Juanopora Gen. et sp. nov Valid Ernst, Racki & Wyse Jackson Devonian (Givetian) Wietrznia Beds Poland A member of the family Fenestellidae .

The type species is J. elegans . Reussirella germinatio Sp. nov Valid Håkansson et al. Miocene Gram Formation Denmark A cheilostome bryozoan belonging to the family Cupuladriidae . Voigtopora naidini Sp. nov Valid Koromyslova & Holroyd Paleocene (Thanetian) Kazakhstan A member of the family Stomatoporidae . Bryozoan research Song et al. (2026) report the discovery of new fossil material of Protomelission gatehousei from the Cambrian Xiannüdong Formation (China), and interpret its anatomy as supporting its classification as an early bryozoan. Molluscs Main article: 2026 in paleomalacology Echinoderms Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Acruxaster Gen. et comb. nov Valid Jell Silurian and Devonian Australia A new genus for "Petraster" richi Withers & Keble. Afanasievocrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous ( Kasimovian ) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species A. pentagonalis . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Allosocrinus moscoviensis Sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Apographiocrinus convexus Sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Austrophiaulax Gen. et comb. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A new genus for "Crepidosoma" kinglakensis Withers & Keble. Batainacrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Webster, Ausich & Heward Permian (Kungurian) Batain Group Oman A crinoid belonging to the family Sycocrinitidae .

The type species is B. sulcus . Brabeocrinus costatus Sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Catinogalerus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Neumann & Kutscher Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Germany A sea urchin belonging to the family Galeritidae .

The type species is C. alexanderi . Cemgiganticrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species C. popovorum . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. ?Chlidonocrinus medvedkaensis Sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Coenocystis akros Sp. nov Valid Webster, Ausich & Heward Permian (Kungurian) Batain Group Oman A crinoid belonging to the family Streblocrinidae . Cretacaudina Gen. et sp. nov Valid Reich, Kutscher & Stegemann Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) Rügen Chalk Germany A caudinid sea cucumber .

The type species is C. rugia . Cruciformaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Travers & Fau in Travers et al. Miocene Calcaire de Ménerbes Formation France A starfish belonging to the family Oreasteridae .

The type species is C. pedicellarius . Cryptoblastus canadensis Sp. nov Valid Macurda & Sprinkle Carboniferous Canada A blastoid. Curtobesaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A starfish. Genus includes new species C. brachiatus . Cyclaster pectiformis Sp. nov Valid Neumann & Jagt Late Cretaceous (Campanian) Germany A sea urchin belonging to the family Micrasteridae . Degeneraster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Blake & Lefebvre Ordovician (Katian) Morocco A starfish. Genus includes new species D. spenceri . Dichostreblocrinus aequalis Sp. nov Valid Webster, Ausich & Heward Permian (Kungurian) Batain Group Oman A crinoid belonging to the family Streblocrinidae. Eckardtaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A brittle star. Genus includes new species E. superbus . Elibatocrinus gracilis Sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Enakosphalma Gen. et sp. nov Valid Ishida et al. Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) Futakawa Formation Japan A brittle star belonging to the family Ophiosphalmidae .

The type species is E. nagashimai . Enidaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A brittle star. Genus includes new species E. holmesae . Eugasterella australiana Sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A brittle star. Eugasterella edmundgilli Sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A brittle star. Exoriocrinus pseudorugosus Sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Faorina mizoramensis Sp. nov Valid Hsu & Lin in Hsu et al. Miocene Bhuban Formation India A heart urchin belonging to the family Pericosmidae . Ferroaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A starfish. Genus includes new species F. gravidus . Fhcaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A brittle star. Genus includes new species F. hotchkissi . Fonsaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A starfish. Genus includes new species F. vandenbergi . Furcaster chrisahyeei Sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A brittle star. Gennaeocrinus wenningi Sp. nov Valid Bohatý, Ausich & Bialas Devonian (Famennian) Etroeungt Formation Germany A periechocrinid crinoid. Globoblastus bamberi Sp. nov Valid Macurda & Sprinkle Carboniferous Canada A blastoid. Gracilicrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species G. chertanovoensis . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Halogetocrinus yakovlevi Sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Hemistreptacron concavus Sp. nov Valid Webster, Ausich & Heward Permian (Kungurian) Batain Group Oman A crinoid belonging to the family Streblocrinidae. Kswaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A starfish. Genus includes new species K. campbelli . Lapworthura nnetteae Sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A brittle star. Lavacystis Gen. et sp. nov Valid Rozhnov Ordovician (Floian) Australia ( Leningrad Oblast ) A member of Rhombifera belonging to the family Pleurocystitidae . Genus includes new species L. sagittalis . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as December 2025. Litocrinus delicatulus Sp. nov Valid Webster, Ausich & Heward Permian (Kungurian) Batain Group Oman A crinoid belonging to the family Allagecrinidae . Litocrinus lanei Sp. nov Valid Webster, Ausich & Heward Permian (Kungurian) Batain Group Oman A crinoid belonging to the family Allagecrinidae. Litocrinus ornatus Sp. nov Valid Webster, Ausich & Heward Permian (Kungurian) Batain Group Oman A crinoid belonging to the family Allagecrinidae. Litocrinus sevastopuloi Sp. nov Valid Webster, Ausich & Heward Permian (Kungurian) Batain Group Oman A crinoid belonging to the family Allagecrinidae. Menerbesaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Travers & Fau in Travers et al. Miocene Calcaire de Ménerbes Formation France A starfish belonging to the family Echinasteridae .

The type species is M. bongrainae . Metallagecrinus blothros Sp. nov Valid Webster, Ausich & Heward Permian (Kungurian) Batain Group Oman A crinoid belonging to the family Allagecrinidae. Metallagecrinus granulosus Sp. nov Valid Webster, Ausich & Heward Permian (Kungurian) Batain Group Oman A crinoid belonging to the family Allagecrinidae. Metallagecrinus omanensis Sp. nov Valid Webster, Ausich & Heward Permian (Kungurian) Batain Group Oman A crinoid belonging to the family Allagecrinidae. Metopaster boudinus Sp. nov Valid Villier et al. Late Cretaceous France A starfish. Metopaster boutillieri Sp. nov Valid Villier et al. Late Cretaceous France A starfish. Metopaster brebis Sp. nov Valid Villier et al. Late Cretaceous France A starfish. Metopaster fa Sp. nov Valid Villier et al. Late Cretaceous France A starfish. Metopaster glarea Sp. nov Valid Villier et al. Late Cretaceous France A starfish. Metopaster sandalina Sp. nov Valid Villier et al. Late Cretaceous France A starfish. Mitrocystella incipiens pustulosa Ssp. nov Valid Vidal-Marty et al. Ordovician (Darriwilian) Guindo Shale Spain A mitrate belonging to the family Mitrocystitidae . Monobrachiocrinus trochos Sp. nov Valid Webster, Ausich & Heward Permian (Kungurian) Batain Group Oman A crinoid belonging to the family Sycocrinitidae. Neverovocrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species N. decadoramosus . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Ophiurina ripariensis Sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A brittle star. Patenaster Gen. et 2 sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A brittle star. Genus includes new species P. knoxensis and P. secundus . Pentremites jasperensis Sp. nov Valid Macurda & Sprinkle Carboniferous Canada A blastoid. Phurioina Gen. et comb. et sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A brittle star. A new genus for "Taeniactis" yeringae Withers & Keble; genus also includes new species P. lilydalensis . Pseudogibbaster herkstroeteri Sp. nov Valid Neumann Paleocene (Danian) Denmark A heart urchin belonging to the family Micrasteridae . Quarreriaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A starfish. Genus includes new species Q. madelynae . Quebecocystites Gen. et comb. nov Valid Deline et al. Ordovician Canada ( Quebec ) A paracrinoid; a new genus for "Amygdalocystites" gorgo Sinclair (1948). Rolfaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A brittle star. Genus includes new species R. schmidti . Strongyloblastus recurvatus Sp. nov Valid Macurda & Sprinkle Carboniferous Canada A blastoid. Subcystaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia An asterozoan belonging to the group Stenurida. Genus includes new species S. magnadamus . Sukhanovocrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species S. parvus . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Sulcatocrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species S. sinusoides . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Syzigobrachiocrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species S. ramulosus . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Talentaster Gen. et comb. nov Valid Jell Silurian and Devonian Australia A new genus for "Salteraster" biradialis Withers & Keble. Tanyakanthaster Gen. et sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia An asterozoan belonging to the group Stenurida. Genus includes new species T. plerus . Tenuibrachiocrinus Gen. et 2 sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species T. domodedovoensis and T. erlangeri . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Tholoblastus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Macurda & Sprinkle Carboniferous Canada A blastoid. Genus includes new species T. raaschi . Voskresenskicrinus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mirantsev Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Neverovo Formation Russia A crinoid. Genus includes new species V. medvedkensis . Published online in 2026, but the issue date is listed as November 2025. Xenaster profusus Sp. nov Valid Jell Devonian Australia A starfish. Echinoderm research Nohejlová, Dupichaud & Lefebvre (2026) report the discovery of fossil material of Dehmicystis aff. ariasi from the strata of the Nantglyn Flags Formation (Wales, United Kingdom), representing the second record of Silurian Soluta worldwide reported to date. Sheffield et al. (2026) compare rates of evolution of traits of members of Diploporita , Eublastoidea and Paracrinoidea and study their phylogenetic relationships, reporting evidence of overall similar rates among the three groups, but also evidence of elevated rates of evolution of the attachment, thecal, reproductive and respiratory characters in paracrinoids. Paul (2026) revises the ambulacral structure of members of accepted genera within the diploporite family Gomphocystitidae , and tentatively assigns the species "Protocrinus" sparsiporus from the Ordovician of Myanmar to the genus Gomphocystites . Waters & Macurda (2026) reevaluate the affinities of blastoids and propose a new classification of members of the group, reorganizing them into three superorders on the basis of differences in their respiratory structures.

The oldest known crinoid specimen comparable in size and developmental stage to an early pentacrinoid larva of living crinoids is described from the Ordovician (Katian) Verulam Formation (Ontario, Canada) by Ausich, Hetrick & Leslie (2026).

The oldest evidence of crinoid tube feet preservation known to date is reported in specimens of Dendrocrinus simcoensis from the Ordovician (Katian) Neuville Formation ( Trenton Group ; Quebec, Canada) by Cole et al. (2026). Accumulation of crinoid fossils representing the first confirmed crinoid Konzentrat- Lagerstätte from the Middle Jurassic of Africa reported to date, dominated by Phyllocrinus stellaris , is described from the Bathonian strata of the Djara Formation (Algeria) by Salamon et al. (2026). Salamon et al. (2026) describe new cyrtocrinid crinoid fossil material from the Jurassic (Callovian and Oxfordian) strata of the Argiles de Saïda Formation (Algeria), including fossils of members of the genera Apsidocrinus and Tetracrinus older than the oldest reported European occurrences, and review the fossil record of cyrtocrinids from Gondwana , interpreted as indicative of diversification of members of this group in areas other than the European part of the Tethys Ocean , as well as indicative of complex dispersal patterns along northern and southern Tethyan margins. New information on the internal structures of Sergipecrinus reticulatus , including the first record of presence of sub-basal balls in the cup of members of this species (previously reported in other roveacrinids), is provided by Poatskievick-Pierezan et al. (2026). Poatskievick-Pierezan et al. (2026) report the first discovery of confirmed stalked crinoid remains from the Maastrichtian López de Bertodano Formation , providing evidence of presence of stalked crinoids in predator-dominated continental shelf ecosystems of Antarctica until the latest Cretaceous, filling the gap between Antarctic crinoid fossil record from the Early Cretaceous and from the Paleogene. Salamon et al. (2026) report the discovery of fossil material of stalked crinoids living in a nearshore setting from the Eocene Popiele Beds (Poland), interpreted as possible evidence of local persistence of shallow-water refugia for stalked crinoids after the ecological restructuring associated with the Mesozoic marine revolution . Stöhr, Jagt & Thuy (2026) report the discovery of fossil material of "Ophiolepis" falsa from the Upper Cretaceous (Campanian) strata in the Münsterland Basin (Germany), and transfer this species to the extant brittle star genus Actinozonella . Hemichordates Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Saetograptus rinconadensis Sp. nov Valid Lopez et al. Silurian Rinconada Formation Argentina A graptolite belonging to the family Monograptidae . Sigmagraptus introversus Sp. nov Valid Maletz Ordovician (Dapingian) Cow Head Group Canada ( Newfoundland and Labrador ) Norway A graptolite belonging to the family Sigmagraptidae . Sigmagraptus sombrero Sp. nov Valid Maletz Ordovician (Dapingian) Cow Head Group Canada ( Newfoundland and Labrador ) A graptolite belonging to the family Sigmagraptidae. Hemichordate research A study on the composition of the graptolite assemblage from the Ordovician Cabrières Biota (France) is published by Harper et al. (2026). Fossil material of Acanthograptus sp. and Dendrograptus sp., providing new information on the anatomy of callograptid graptolites, is described from a glacial erratic boulder of Ordovician (Sandbian) age from Germany by Maletz & Klafack (2026). Qiu et al. (2026) link the decline of graptolites belonging to the group Diplograptina during the Late Ordovician mass extinction and subsequent diversification of Neograptina to dynamic marine euxinia and enhanced sedimentary phosphorus recycling during the Ordovician-Silurian transition. A study on the morphology of members the graptolite genus Pseudoretiolites , on the composition of the genus and on the evolution of this lineage is published by Maletz et al. (2026). Crampton et al. (2026) reconstruct extinction dynamics throughout the evolutionary history of graptoloids, and find that the majority of graptoloid extinctions happened outside periods of significant extinction events, which were distinguished from time intervals of background extinction mainly by more frequent and prolonged pulses of high extinction rate. Conodonts Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Icriodella serpaglii Sp. nov Valid Ferretti, Cioni & Gibellini Ordovician Italy Kirkupodus extentus Sp. nov Zhen Ordovician Australia A member of Protopanderodontida . Kirkupodus gracilentus Sp. nov Zhen Ordovician Australia A member of Protopanderodontida. Polygnathus talenti Sp. nov Tagarieva Devonian (Famennian) Russia ( Bashkortostan ) Quadralella globosa Sp. nov Han & Zhao in Han et al. Late Triassic (Carnian) Maantang Formation China Quadralella praedeflecta Sp. nov Han et al. Late Triassic (Carnian) China Tropodus repetskii Sp. nov Zhen Ordovician Emanuel Formation Australia Conodont research Goudemez et al. (2026) report evidence of covariation between the increase of sharpness of the blade and the reduction of the platform in the P 1 element of the feeding apparatus of members of the genus Palmatolepis throughout the Famennian, likely related to increase in food processing abilities, and report possible evidence of trophic partitioning between juvenile and adult individuals of P. gracilis . Świś et al. (2026) report evidence of different strontium isotopic composition of bioapatite of conodonts from the Famennian strata from the Kowala Quarry (Poland) belonging to different genera, interpreted as likely resulting from trophic niche differentiation and/or different digestive physiology. Casas-Peña, Gutiérrez-Reyes & Navas-Parejo (2026) study the conodont biostratigraphy of the Rancho Nuevo Formation (Mexico), interpreted as indicative of late Moscovian–Kasimovian age of the studied formation. León-Caffroni et al. (2026) describe fossil material of Idioprioniodus conjunctus from the Carboniferous strata of the Itaituba Formation (Brazil) indicating that the species was not strictly confined to deep waters but also present in shallow epicontinental sea environment, and link its abundance in the studied area to the maximum flooding interval of the Amazonas Basin during the Bashkirian-Moscovian interval. Rojas Mantilla et al. (2026) report evidence of affinities of Carboniferous conodont assemblages from the Río Nevado Formation (Colombia) with conodonts from the North American Midcontinent. Xu et al. (2026) reconstruct the architecture of the multielement apparatus of Triassospathodus symmetricus . Qin et al. (2026) provide a biostratigraphic framework for the Middle Triassic strata of the Nanpenghe and the Xuanlai sections of the Baoshan Block (Yunnan, China) on the basis of the study of the local conodont fauna. Fish Main article: 2026 in paleoichthyology Amphibians Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Ambystoma quetzalcoatli Sp. nov Valid Herrera-Flores & Velasco-de León late Pliocene Atotonilco el Grande Formation Mexico An ambystomatid salamander; a species of Ambystoma . Limnospondylus Gen. et sp. nov Valid Noda, Matsui & Nishikawa Pliocene Tsubusagawa Formation Japan A giant salamander .

The type species is L. ajimuensis . Melanerpeton kuselense Sp. nov Valid Schoch, Werneburg & Voigt Carboniferous-Permian transition Remigiusberg Formation Germany A dissorophoid temnospondyl. Nabia Gen. et sp. nov Valid Guillaume et al. Late Jurassic Lourinha Formation , Alcobaça Formation Portugal A member of the family Albanerpetontidae .

The type species is N. civiscientrix . Tanyka Gen. et sp. nov Valid Pardo et al. Early Permian Pedra de Fogo Formation Brazil An early tetrapodomorph .

The type species is T. amnicola . Tyrannoroter Gen. et sp. nov Valid Mann et al. Carboniferous Sydney Mines Formation Canada ( Nova Scotia ) A pantylid " microsaur ".

The type species is T. heberti . Amphibian research Molnar, Hutchinson & Pierce (2026) compare limb functions of musculoskeletal models of Acanthostega and Pederpes and an extant salamander and lizard, and report that hip and shoulder mobility of the studied early tetrapods was not compatible with movement patterns of the studied extant tetrapods, but find no evidence that limbs of Acanthostega and Pederpes were less adapted for weight support or hindlimb-based propulsion compared to the studied salamander and lizard. Pardo & Mann (2026) report evidence from the study of fossils of stem -tetrapod ( megalichthyid , aistopod and embolomere ) hatchlings from the Mazon Creek fossil beds (Illinois, United States) indicative of direct development of the studied animals, with no evidence of a larval stage similar to those seen in extant amphibians. Evidence from the study of skull bones of temnospondyls, indicative of higher measures of morphological disparity and rates of evolution of bones that were lost in lissamphibians compared to bones that were retained, is presented by Kean et al. (2026). Evidence of variability in number and sequence of growth marks between different bones of a single individual of Sclerocephalus nobilis is presented by Klein & Konietzko-Meier (2026). Description of the morphology of the postcranial skeleton of Gerrothorax pulcherrimus and its changes during the ontogeny of the animal is published by Witzmann & Schoch (2026). Kear et al. (2026) revise the fossil material attributed to Erythrobatrachus noonkanbahensis , interpreting it as a valid species on the basis of the study of the holotype , and interpreting the referred material as belonging to cf. Aphaneramma sp. Spinal cord supports, previously known only in extant and extinct salamanders, are identified in the vertebrae of caecilians by Santos, Wilkinson & Zaher (2026), who also identify shallow grooves on the inner walls of the neural canals as homologues of spinal cord supports, and identify such grooves in Wesserpeton evansae . Jansen et al. (2026) report the discovery of a new assemblage of amphibian fossils from the Campanian strata of the Villeveyrac-Mèze basin (France), including the oldest European members of the families Albanerpetontidae and Batrachosauroididae reported to date. Description of the skull anatomy of Eoscapherpeton asiaticum is published by Kolchanov & Skutschas (2026). Syromyatnikova (2026) describes the anatomy of the skull of Mioproteus wezei on the basis of new fossil material from the Pliocene strata from North Caucasus (Russia). Isolated salamandrid (including Koalliella sp.) vertebrae are described from the Late Cretaceous (Campanian and Maastrichtian) localities in France by Macaluso et al. (2026), representing the oldest record of the group reported to date. Lemierre, Heinrich & Blackburn (2026) describe fossil material of members of Salientia from the Upper Jurassic Tendaguru Formation (Tanzania), including two humeri representing the oldest fossil record of members of frog crown group from Jurassic outcrops of Gondwana reported to date. A study on the composition of the Late Cretaceous (Coniacian or Santonian) frog assemblage from the In Becetèn locality (Niger), including the oldest known member of Ranoidea and a large indeterminate neobatrachian known from ornamented cranial material, is published by Lemierre et al. (2026). New fossil material of Gobiates sp. (the first confirmed record of a member of this genus from the Maastrichtian of Asia) and a large discoglossid-like anuran is reported from the Upper Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) strata of the Nemegt Formation (Mongolia) by Syromyatnikova, Skutschas & Kolchanov (2026).

The first fossil material of tree frogs from the Pleistocene of the Urals is reported from the Makhnevskaya Ledyanaya Cave (Russia) by Tarasova et al. (2026). A skeleton of a member of the genus Pelophylax , most closely resembling extant marsh frogs in limb bone proportions and sacral angulation, is described from the Oligocene strata of the Apt-Manosque-Forcalquier Basin (France) by Ponstein et al. (2026). Hiotis, Reed & Sherratt (2026) identify Late Pleistocene frog fossils from the Naracoorte Caves World Heritage Area (Australia) on the basis of the study of their ilial morphology. Ikeda, Takahashi & Hasegawa (2026) study the composition of the Pleistocene frog assemblage from the Minatogawa man site (Okinawa, Japan), reporting evidence of presence of taxa that are presently endemic to Okinawa, and evidence of presence of Fejervarya kawamurai , interpreted as indicative of natural dispersal of the species to Okinawa and refuting the possibility of its introduction by humans in the Holocene. A study on the composition of the Pleistocene frog assemblage from the Room 2 excavation at Cathedral Cave (Nevada, United States) is published by Salinas et al. (2026). A study on anuran fossils in the vertebrate assemblage from the Ravina das Araras (Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil), interpreted as consistent with presence of temporary bodies of water in a landscape dominated by open habitats during the late Quaternary, is published by Costa et al. (2026). Yu, Xu & Benson (2026) compare body size, cranial proportions, neck length and respiratory traits of Devonian to Permian land vertebrates, and find evidence of stronger constraints on body size evolution in the stem group of Lissamphibia compared to the stem group of Amniota, interpreted as likely linked to divergence of respiratory adaptations of the two groups. Reptiles Main articles: 2026 in reptile paleontology and 2026 in archosaur paleontology Synapsids Non-mammalian synapsids Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Jirahgorgon Gen. et sp. nov Valid Macungo et al. Permian Abrahamskraal Formation South Africa A gorgonopsian in the family Phorcyidae .

The type species is J. ceto . Njalila Gen. et comb. nov Valid Gebauer & Maisch Permian Usili Formation Tanzania A gorgonopsian ; a new genus for " Dixeya " nasuta Huene (1950). Parasilvia Gen. et sp. nov Valid Bulanov, Shaymardanov & Papernyi Permian Russia ( Orenburg Oblast ) A " dromasaur " anomodont with possible affinities with Galechirus . Genus includes new species P. alexandrae . Synapsid research Warshaw, Singh & Benton (2026) evaluate possible factors influencing cranial shape evolution in carnivorous Permian synapsids, and identify adaptation for trophic functions as the primary driver influencing the cranial shape. Benoit et al. (2026) study endocasts of Permian and Triassic synapsids, and report evidence of a steady increase in encephalization that stalled after the Capitanian mass extinction event and did not resume until the Triassic, with no evidence of changes coinciding with environmental upheavals of the Permian–Triassic extinction event . A synapsid (likely caseid ) tail impression preserving probable traces of epidermal scales and cloacal opening is reported from the Permian (Asselian) strata of the Tambach Formation (Germany) by Marchetti et al. (2026). Probable ophiacodontid tracks assigned to the ichnospecies Dimetropus osageorum , preserving imprints of epidermal scales from the pes , are described from the Permian (Artinskian) Rabéjac Formation (Lodève Basin; France) by Logghe, Buffa & Marchetti (2026). Angielczyk et al. (2026) describe a natural mold of a vertebra of a synapsid and a natural mold of a partial maxilla of a synapsid with sphenacodont affinities from the Permian (Cisuralian) Pedra de Fogo Formation (Brazil), representing the first definitive pelycosaur - grade synapsids reported from South America. A study on the dynamics of diversification and extinction of ophiacodontids, edaphosaurids and sphenacodontids , based on an updated dataset from the study of Didier & Laurin (2024), is published by Laurin et al. (2026), who find evidence that the slowdown in diversification of the studied synapsids began at the Carboniferous/Permian transition (earlier than indicated by the 2024 study), coinciding with a moderate extinction event, as well as evidence of a more severe extinction event in the mid- Kungurian . Snyder, Snively & Brink (2026) study the biomechanical properties of teeth of Dimetrodon , interpreted as consistent with adaptations of teeth of the studied synapsid to processing of large prey. Evidence from the study of bone histology, indicative of different growth strategies of Dimetrodon teutonis and diminutive North American members of the genus Dimetrodon , is provided by Canoville et al. (2026). A study on the phylogenetic relationships of therapsids is published by Duhamel et al. (2026). Evidence of stable morphospace occupation by dicynodont beaks throughout the Permian-Triassic transition, as well as evidence of different function of beaks of contemporary dicynodonts, turtles and archosauromorphs that were likely linked to different feeding behaviors, is presented by Landi et al. (2026). Benoit, Fernandez & Botha (2026) identify a curled perinate specimen of Lystrosaurus from the Lower Triassic strata of the Balfour or Katberg Formation (South Africa) as likely to be an embryo originally preserved within an egg, and interpret Lystrosaurus as a precocial animal unlikely to feed on milk. Suchkova, Bulanov & Masyutin (2026) report evidence of preservation of remains of a specimen of Emeroleter levis within the abdominal cavity of a specimen of Viatkosuchus sumini from the Permian (Capitanian) strata from the Kotel'nich locality (Kirov Oblast, Russia). Redescription and a study on the affinities of Cistecynodon parvus is published by Lund et al. (2026). Michelotti et al. (2026) describe new fossil material of Prozostrodon brasiliensis from the Triassic strata of the Santa Maria Supersequence (Brazil), providing new information on the postcranial anatomy and bone histology of members of this species. Guo, Zhou & Zhao (2026) study the histology of a fibula of an indeterminate docodontan from the Jurassic Tiaojishan Formation (China), reporting evidence of a cyclical growth during early life and possible adapations to fossoriality. Averianov & Sues (2026) report the discovery of an isolated ulna of Docodon from the Upper Jurassic Morrison Formation (Wyoming, United States), and find no evidence of fossorial or aquatic adaptations. Mammals Main article: 2026 in paleomammalogy Other animals Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Anabarites yuanbaoshanensis Sp. nov Chen et al. Ediacaran Dengying Formation China Arborea elegans Sp. nov Valid Rosse-Guillevic, Olschewski & McIlroy Ediacaran Mistaken Point Formation Canada ( Newfoundland and Labrador ) A species of Arborea . 3D reconstruction of Arborea elegans in its environment. Biplicatella Gen. et comb. et sp. nov Valid Peel Cambrian Qiaonzhusi (Chiungchussu) Formation China Greenland A member of Hyolitha .

The type species is "Linevitus" opimus Yu (1974); genus also includes new species B. skovstedi . Botomospongia Gen. et sp. nov Valid Kolesnikov Cambrian Sinsk Formation Russia A stem - hexactinellid . Genus includes new species B. sphaeroides . Cloudina? petala Sp. nov Chen et al. Ediacaran Dengying Formation China Cornulites hemistriatus Sp. nov Valid Jin & Vinn Ordovician Canada ( Quebec ) Cystostroma dongkaense Sp. nov Jeon et al. Silurian (Aeronian) Dongka Group China A member of Stromatoporoidea belonging to the family Rosenellidae . Cystostroma satunense Sp. nov Jeon et al. Ordovician (Darriwilian) Thailand Dictyotubulus Gen. et sp. nov Chen et al. Ediacaran Dengying Formation China A skeletal fossil that might represent a morphologically complex animal. Genus includes new species D. circularis . Ecclimadictyon gejingae Sp. nov Jeon et al. Silurian (Aeronian) Dongka Group China A member of Stromatoporoidea belonging to the family Actinodictyidae . Filogranula mogenstrupensis Sp. nov Valid Kočí et al. Oligocene Brejning Formation Denmark A serpulid tubeworm. Guanduscolex hexagonus Sp. nov Valid Shi et al. Cambrian Wulongqing Formation China A palaeoscolecid . Hydroides engi Sp. nov Valid Goedert, Rich & Kočí Eocene Cowlitz Formation United States ( Washington ) A polychaete, a species of Hydroides . Kuanchuanpivermis Gen. et sp. nov Valid Xian et al. Cambrian (Fortunian) Kuanchuanpu Formation China A polychaete.

The type species is K. brevicruris . Labyrintholites cassus Sp. nov Valid Pervushov Late Cretaceous (Santonian) Russia ( Saratov Oblast ) A hexactinellid sponge belonging to the family Euretidae . Labyrintholites conoides Sp. nov Valid Pervushov Late Cretaceous (Santonian) Russia ( Saratov Oblast ) A hexactinellid sponge belonging to the family Euretidae. Labyrintholites crassidiscus Sp. nov Valid Pervushov Late Cretaceous (Santonian) Russia ( Saratov Oblast ) A hexactinellid sponge belonging to the family Euretidae. Labyrintholites globosus Sp. nov Valid Pervushov Late Cretaceous (Santonian) Russia ( Saratov Oblast ) A hexactinellid sponge belonging to the family Euretidae. Labyrintholites ollae Sp. nov Valid Pervushov Late Cretaceous (Santonian) Russia ( Saratov Oblast ) A hexactinellid sponge belonging to the family Euretidae. Labyrintholites planifructectum Sp. nov Valid Pervushov Late Cretaceous (Santonian) Russia ( Saratov Oblast ) A hexactinellid sponge belonging to the family Euretidae. Labyrintholites urnule Sp. nov Valid Pervushov Late Cretaceous (Santonian) Russia ( Saratov Oblast ) A hexactinellid sponge belonging to the family Euretidae. Mazovermes Gen. et sp. nov Nanglu, Wittry & McCoy Carboniferous Mazon Creek fossil beds United States ( Illinois ) A polychaete.

The type species is M. magnaterminus . Placostegus vilsundensis Sp. nov Valid Kočí et al. Oligocene Brejning Formation Denmark A serpulid tubeworm. Protarabellites luztejadae Sp. nov Valid Carlorosi et al. Ordovician (Darriwilian) San José Formation Peru A polychaete belonging to the family Ramphoprionidae . Thamnobeatricea kanchanaburiensis Sp. nov Jeon et al. Ordovician (Darriwilian) Thailand A member of Stromatoporoidea. Tubuloreticulaspongia Gen. et sp. nov Hang et al. Ordovician and Silurian (Hirnantian to Rhuddanian) China A protospongiid sponge. Genus includes new species T. sinensis . Vosgesochaeta Gen. et et sp. nov Valid Tzetlin et al. Middle Triassic (Anisian) Grès à Voltzia France A polychaete belonging to the family Nereididae .

The type species is V. grauvogeli . Zhangjiagoivermis Gen. et sp. nov Valid Xian et al. Cambrian (Fortunian) Kuanchuanpu Formation China A polychaete.

The type species is Z. longicruris . Other animal research Boan & Droser (2026) interpret cases of contant of margins of specimens of Aspidella from the Ediacara Member of the Rawnsley Quartzite (Australia) as more likely representing competitive interactions (overgrowth) than reproductive process. Rossi et al. (2026) reconstruct the evolutionary history of sponges on the basis of a phylogeny recovered from phylogenomic analyses and molecular clock analyses constraining the age of 12 major sponge clades on the basis of the fossil record, and interpret their findings as indicative of an Ediacaran origin of sponges, as well as indicating that the ancestral sponges were not biomineralized and lacked spicules, and that biosilicification and biocalcification evolved independently in multiple sponge lineages. Qureshi et al. (2026) study probable functions of the thorny corolla and T-shaped ridges in the spines of Yukonensis yukonensis , interpreting the latter structures as unlikely to improve structural reinforcement. A study on the composition of the assemblage of hexactinellid sponges from the Ordovician Cabrières Biota (France), identifying features of the studied biota shared with and distinct from sponges from the Fezouata and Klabava biotas, is published by Li & Reitner (2026). Evidence of motility and behavioral handedness of specimens of Spriggina floundersi is reported by Evans et al. (2026). Wu et al. (2026) describe fossil material of Kimberella from the Ediacaran Shibantan Member of the Dengying Formation (China), representing one of the youngest known records of this genus and extending its known spatial distribution. A study on the composition of the assemblage of worm-like animals from the Cabrières Biota is published by Vannier et al. (2026), who report evidence of presence of both scalidophorans and possible lophotrochozoan worms. Possible evidence of systematic, rhythmic behavioral changes in a population of Silurian worm-like animals is reported on the basis of study of trace fossils from the Llandovery Qingshui Formation (Hubei, China) by Liu et al. (2026). Evidence of reduction in body size of scolecodonts across the Frasnian/Famennian Kellwasser Events , possibly linked to oxygen stress, is presented by Chilcoat & Cohen (2026). Vinn et al. (2026) report the discovery of possible remains of a lophophore in specimens of Cornulites from the Silurian Kaochiapien Formation (Hubei, China), supporting the classification of cornulitids as lophophorates . A study on the structure of sclerites of early Cambrian eccentrothecimorph tommotiids from Australia, including description of the newly discovered scleritome of Kulparina rostrata , is published by Fjeld et al. (2026). New information on the anatomy of "Pelagiella" subangulata , based on the study of new, well-preserved fossil material from the Cambrian strata from Flinders Ranges (Australia), is presented by Richter Stretton et al. (2026). Xiao et al. (2026) report the discovery of a probable specimen of Wronascolex sp. from the Cambrian (Wuliuan) Tianpeng Formation (Yunnan, China), preserved with taphonomical features interpreted as broadly consistent with Burgess Shale -type preservation.

The youngest fossil material of a selkirkiid scalidophoran reported to date is described from the Devonian (Pragian) strata of the La Roche Formation (Belgium) by Van Roy et al. (2026).

The first fossils of members of the genus Quadratapora found outside of South China and Siberia are reported from the Cambrian strata from South Australia and Kazakhstan by Beidatsch et al. (2026). Evidence supporting the interpretation of luolishaniid lobopodians as epibenthic suspension feeders is presented by Richards & Ortega-Hernández (2026). Tian et al. (2026) identify vessels with protein and iron signatures in yunnanozoans specimens from the Cambrian strata of the Maotianshan Shale Member of the Yu'anshan Formation (China), interpreted as ventral and dorsal aortae. Foraminifera Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Ammobaculites oieensis Sp. nov Matting & Reich Eocene (Ypresian) Germany A member of Lituolida belonging to the family Lituolidae . Davanella Gen. et 2 sp. nov Valid Okuyucu & Akba Permian (Capitanian) Turkey A member of Cornuspiroidea belonging to the family Neodiscidae .

The type species is D. ankaraensis ; genus also includes D. acuminata . Earlandia giga Sp. nov Vinn et al. Silurian Estonia Kaganella Gen. et sp. nov Valid Okuyucu & Akba Permian (Capitanian) Turkey A member of Cornuspiroidea belonging to the family Neodiscidae.

The type species is K. tekini . Orbitolinopsis bilottei Sp. nov Valid Schlagintweit & Doubrawa Late Cretaceous (Campanian) France Rectogordiopsis Gen. et 2 sp. nov Valid Okuyucu & Akba Permian (Capitanian) Turkey A member of Cornuspiroidea belonging to the family Neodiscidae.

The type species is R. kamuranaeformis ; genus also includes R. ovaliformis . Foraminiferal research Cózar, Somerville & Hounslow (2026) revise the phylogenetic relationships and evolutionary history of earliest members of Fusulinida , and consider fusulinids to be more likely a polyphyletic group than a monophyletic one. Evidence of gradual changes of composition of the foraminiferal assemblage from the Pieniny Klippen Belt (Ukraine) in response to environmental changes during the Sinemurian-Pliensbachian transition is presented by Józsa et al. (2026). Golfinopoulos et al. (2026) report the first discovery of benthic foraminifera from the Lower Jurassic strata exposed in Greece. Lowery et al. (2026) constrain the duration of the interval between the extinction of the Cretaceous species and the first appearance of Parvularugoglobigerina eugubina to between 3,500 and 11,100 years, and report evidence of appearance of as many as 10 new species of planktic foraminifera in this interval, with the first appearing less than 2,000 years after the Chicxulub impact initiating the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event. A study on the phylogenetic relationships of Cenozoic planktonic foraminiferal taxa is published by Lamyman et al. (2026). Lu et al. (2026) study changes of foraminiferal species richness during the Eocene-Oligocene transition, reporting evidence of distinct evolutionary histories of marine foraminifera living in different habitats. Other organisms Name Novelty Status Authors Age Type locality Country Notes Images Angochitina tuojiangensis Sp. nov Wu et al. Devonian China A chitinozoan . Archaeocenosphaera plankei Sp. nov Ozsvárt et al. Early Triassic Norway A radiolarian. Archeoentactinia heptactinia Sp. nov Sheng et al. Cambrian (Miaolingian) Inca Formation Australia A polycystine radiolarian belonging to the group Archaeospicularia and the family Echidninidae . Archeoentactinia pentactinia Sp. nov Sheng et al. Cambrian (Miaolingian) Inca Formation Australia A polycystine radiolarian belonging to the group Archaeospicularia and the family Echidninidae. Avannacystis Gen. et sp. nov Willman & Peel Cambrian (Wuliuan) Henson Gletscher Formation Greenland A colonizing microbe of uncertain affinities (possibly chytrid-like fungus) described on the basis of vesicular fossils attached to, or embedded within, shells of the tommotiid Tesella . Genus includes new species A. polaris . Conochitina clavatus Sp. nov Valid Liang et al. Ordovician Dawan Formation China A chitinozoan. Conochitina tenellensis Sp. nov Valid Liang et al. Ordovician Dawan Formation China A chitinozoan. ?Entactinia meishanensis smyraksikorae Ssp. nov Ozsvárt et al. Early Triassic Norway A radiolarian. ?Entactinia sengeri Sp. nov Ozsvárt et al. Early Triassic Norway A radiolarian. Grandetortura nipponica stepheni Ssp. nov Ozsvárt et al. Early Triassic Norway A radiolarian. Haplotaeniatum wufengensis Sp. nov Sheng, Aitchison & Kachovich in Sheng et al. Ordovician (Katian) Wufeng Formation China A radiolarian belonging to the group Spumellaria and the family Haplotaeniatidae . Kamounia Gen. et sp. nov Strullu-Derrien in Strullu-Derrien et al. Carboniferous France A possible member of Peronosporomycetes .

The type species is K. striata . Lagenochitina yangtzensis Sp. nov Valid Liang et al. Ordovician Dawan Formation China A chitinozoan. Pachycingula alta Sp. nov Valid Vishnevskaya Late Jurassic Bazhenov Formation Russia ( Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug ) A radiolarian. Pachycingula capitata Sp. nov Valid Vishnevskaya Late Jurassic Bazhenov Formation Russia ( Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug ) A radiolarian. Pachycingula laevigata Sp. nov Valid Vishnevskaya Late Jurassic Bazhenov Formation Russia ( Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug ) A radiolarian. Pachycingula praebiporata Sp. nov Valid Vishnevskaya Late Jurassic Bazhenov Formation Russia ( Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug ) A radiolarian. Thaisphaera ullarinmanae Sp. nov Ozsvárt et al. Early Triassic Norway A radiolarian. Research on other organisms Hagen et al. (2026) determine the processes responsible for silicification of organic tissues of Cambrian cyanobacteria from the Harkless Formation (Nevada, United States). Liu et al. (2026) study the cellular structure of branches of Kordephyton from the Cambrian (Miaolingian) Mantou Formation (China), interpreted as iron-mineralized coccoid cyanobacterial colonies. Cyanobacteria with morphological similarities to Chroococcidiopsis and Gloeocapsopsis , colonized by parasitic chytrid fungi or chytrid-like organisms or associated with fungal hyphae and mycelia of uncertain affinities, are described from the Devonian strata of the Rhynie chert (United Kingdom) by Krings & Kaštovský (2026). Lechte et al. (2026) reconstruct the habitats of the oldest known (approximately 1.75–1.4 billion years old) eukaryotes, find them to be almost entirely restricted to settings with oxygenated bottom waters, interpret early eukaryotes as aerobic organisms that likely had mitochondria, and argue that eukaryotes might have expanded from oxygenated benthic habitats into planktonic habitats later in their evolutionary history, possibly during the Neoproterozoic. Vase-shaped microfossils of possible testate amoebae are reported from the 1.56-billion-years-old strata of the Gaoyuzhuang Formation (China) by Liu et al. (2026). Evidence from the study of spatial distribution of minerals and organic matter in embryo-like microfossils from the Ediacaran Weng'an phosphorite ( Doushantuo Formation , South China), interpreted as consistent with a microbial origin of the studied microfossils, is presented by Lu et al. (2026). Flett et al. (2026) study the developmental biology of Megaclonophycus from the Ediacaran Doushantuo Formation, support the interpretation of Megaclonophycus , Parapandorina and Megasphaera as likely to be the same organism, find no evidence supporting animal affinities of the studied organism, and interpret it as a possible non- choanozoan holozoan . Shang, Liu & Zhang (2026) report the discovery of a new acritarch assemblage from the Ediacaran strata of the Kheseen Formation (Mongolia), providing evidence of presence of Doushantuo - Pertatataka –type acritarchs (otherwise predominantly known from pre-Shuram strata) in the horizon recording the Shuram excursion . Yang et al. (2026) study the composition of large acanthomorphic acritarchs from the Ediacaran strata of the Shuurgat Formation (Mongolia), reporting evidence of affinities of the studied assemblage with acritarchs from the Yangtze block (China) and Lesser Himalaya (India). Qiu et al. (2026) report the discovery of a new assemblage of compression fossils from the Tonian Changlingzi Formation (Liaoning, China), including fossils of members of the genera Chuaria , Tawuia and Protoarenicola . Loron et al. (2026) report evidence indicating that fossils of Prototaxites from the Rhynie chert were chemically and structurally distinct from contemporaneous and extant fungi, and interpret Prototaxites as a representative of an extinct eukaryotic lineage distinct from fungi. Evidence from the study of Eocene dinoflagellate cyst assemblages from the Ivory Coast–Ghana marginal ridge (equatorial Atlantic Ocean), indicating that the studied assemblages did not undergo significant changes of composition during those early Eocene hyperthermals that did not result in sea surface temperatures rising more than approximately 1.5 °C, is presented by Fokkema et al. (2026) . Zhao et al. (2026) link the displacement of green eukaryotic algae by phytoplankton groups whose plastids are derived from rhodophytes as the dominant marine phytoplankton in the early Mesozoic to structural characteristics of red lineage phytoplankton that enhanced their resistance to environmental reactive oxygen species . Ying et al. (2026) reconstruct extinction patterns in plankton communities during the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event, and interpret the reconstructed extinction patterns as primarily driven by darkness after the Chicxulub impact and by extinction thresholds influenced by body size.

The first record of Plumalina sp. (an organism of uncertain affinities, possibly related to hydroids or macroalgae) from eastern Europe known to date is reported from the Devonian (Famennian) strata of the Maf-Khaia Formation in the southern Donets Basin by Dernov & Yefimenko (2026). History of life in general Zhang (2026) presents a new hypothesis on causes of the rise of organismal complexity that made the Cambrian radiation possible in favorable environmental conditions, linking it to predator–prey interactions among unicellular holozoans that drove genomic novelty, and to motility acting as an evolutionary filter, with high-motility forms retaining unicellularity and low-motility ones ultimately evolving multicellularity. Wang et al. (2026) report the discovery of a new assemblage of late Ediacaran organisms (the Dongpo biota) from the Dongpo Formation (China), expanding known geographic distribution of the Ediacaran macrofossils. Kolesnikov et al. (2026) determine precise minimum age of the Ediacaran biota from the Chernyi Kamen Formation in Central Urals (Russia). Becker-Kerber et al. (2026) describe new filamentous fossils from the Ediacaran strata of the Tamengo Formation (Brazil), compare their structure to those of purported trace fossils produced by animals from the Ediacaran–Cambrian Corumbá Group reported by Parry et al. (2017), and interpret the studied structures as more likely representing microbial consortia composed of filamentous algae and bacteria rather than animal burrows. McIlroy et al. (2026) report the discovery of a new fossil site at Inner Meadow (Newfoundland, Canada) determined to be approximately 550.78-million years old and including most the Avalon assemblage biota, and interpret this finding as indicating that the Avalon assemblage and the White Sea assemblage were contemporaneous, and that both were affected by the first pulse of the End-Ediacaran extinction (the Kotlin Crisis). Mitchell & Manica (2026) interpret stoloniferous reproduction of members of the Avalon assemblage as a likely cause of low levels of within-species competition seen in the studied communities. Evans et al. (2026) report the discovery of a new assemblage of Ediacaran fossils from the Blueflower Formation (Northwest Territories, Canada), representing the first confirmed record of representatives of the White Sea assemblage in Laurentia . Li et al. (2026) report the discovery of a new assemblage of late Ediacaran organisms from the strata of the Dengying Formation from the Qingshuigou and Shanglijiao localities (Yunnan, China), preserving remains of Ediacaran macrobionts as well as vermiform animals and the oldest deuterostomes ( stem-group ambulacrarians ) reported to date. Evidence from the study of Ediacaran–Cambrian trace fossils indicative of exponential expansion of sensory ranges of early motile animals by the terminal Ediacaran is presented by Wang & Shi (2026). Zhuravlev & Wood (2026) report evidence from the study of the fossil record of Cloudina and earliest Cambrian archaeocyaths indicating that early animals were ecological generalists that were not preferentially associated with reefs, and link the distribution of reefs throughout the evolutionary history of reef-building animals to the presence of suitable environmental conditions and availability of substrates. Malanoski et al. (2026) report evidence from the study of the fossil record of shallow-marine taxa, indicating that throughout the Phanerozoic taxa with geographical distribution allowing easier access to north-south dispersal pathways were more resilient compared to taxa living along east-west–oriented coastlines, islands or inland seaways. Evidence of long-term northward shifts in marine biodiversity centers throughout the Phanerozoic, interpreted as linked to northward drift of major continental plates, is presented by Zhang & Shen (2026). Dantes & Nagovitsin (2026) provide a general morphological classification of Cambrian cone-shaped microfossils. A study on the composition and age of the Serkinskaya faunal complex from the lower Cambrian Kessyusa Formation (Russia), including gnathobase fragments representing some of the oldest known evidence of adaptation of animals to durophagy , is published by Dantes, Nagovitsin & Korsakov (2026). Song et al. (2026) study the composition of the small shelly fauna associated with archaeocyath reefs from the Cambrian Xiannüdong Formation (Shaanxi, China), interpreted as indicative of presence of a diverse benthic assemblage with reef-dwelling organisms distinct from those in other reef environments. Zeng et al. (2026) report a diverse biota dominated by arthropods, sponges and cnidarians and including soft-bodied forms preserved with cellular tissues (the Huayuan biota) from a Cambrian Stage 4 Burgess Shale-type Lagerstätte from the Yangtze Block (Hunan, China). Gass & Noffke (2026) describe new trace fossils from the Cambrian strata from the Blackberry Hill site (Wisconsin, United States), including trace fossil evidence of an animal feeding on a scyphozoan , and name new ichnotaxa Seilacherichnus and Climactichnites blackberriensis . Shi et al. (2026) reconstruct high-resolution patterns of changes of marine biodiversity from Miaolingian to Furongian , reporting evidence of three significant biodiversity pulses and evidence of declines of biodiversity coinciding with carbon isotope excursions. Evidence from the study of the invertebrate fossil material from the Cincinnati Arch (United States), indicating that the appearance of invasive species during the Late Ordovician (the Richmondian Invasion) resulted in composition of the benthic invertebrate assemblage from the studied area but did not significantly change its functional diversity, is presented by Ess et al. (2026). Kundladi & Stigall (2026) study diversification and interaction dynamics of marine invertebrates from the Nashville Basin across the Richmondian Invasion, providing evidence of changes of community structure that negatively impacted some of the native taxa but overall resulted in the emergence of a more stable and complex ecosystem. Cyanobacterial, fungal and algal remains interpreted as record of a Devonian biota inhabiting a highly saline, sulphate lake and associated playa mudflat are described from the Lower Old Red Sandstone) deposits of the Northern Highlands (Scotland, United Kingdom) by Wellman (2026). A new Devonian biota, including clam shrimps, scorpions, juvenile eurypterids and possible euthycarcinoids and velvet worms, is reported from a new site in Luxembourg (the Consthum Lagerstätte ) by Poschmann et al. (2026). Cyrino et al. (2026) identify bilaterian trace fossils purportedly originating from the Ediacaran–Cambrian Bambuí Group as actually originating from the late Paleozoic Floresta Formation (Santa Fé Group, Brazil). Calábková, Březina & Nádaskay (2026) study the composition of a diverse assemblage of tetrapod trace fossils from the Carboniferous ( Gzhelian ) Semily Formation (Czech Republic). Henderson, Angiolini & Beauchamp (2026) study the composition of the Permian ( Asselian ) fauna from the Strathearn Formation (Nevada, United States) dominated by brachiopods and bryozoans, interpreted as benefiting from intermittent nutrient supply brought in by upwelling, and interpreted as repeatedly recovering after disruptions caused by storm events. Marchetti et al. (2026) determine the Permian biota from the Bromacker locality ( Tambach Formation , Germany) to be latest Asselian in age. A regurgitalite produced by a predator (possibly Dimetrodon teutonis or Tambacarnifex unguifalcatus ), preserving remains of Thuringothyris mahlendorffae , Eudibamus cursoris and an unidentified diadectid , is described from the Permian Tambach Formation (Germany) by Rebillard et al. (2026). Tooth marks produced by large carnivores, as well as boring likely produced by arthropod larvae, are identified in skeletons of juvenile specimens of Diadectes sp. from the Permian strata of the Vale Formation (Texas, United States) by Young, Maho & Reisz (2026). Craig, Davies & Marchetti (2026) describe fossil plants and animal traces from the Permian Cap-aux-Meules Formation (Quebec, Canada), including fossil material of dryland vegetation, tetrapod trackways resembling ichnotaxa characteristic of the late Artinskian-Kungurian Erpetopus biochron, and the earliest vertebrate burrows from aeolian strata reported to date. Gastaldo et al. (2026) reevalute evidence of replacement of Permian terrestrial vertebrate assemblages from the Karoo Basin by taxa from the Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage Zone during the Permian-Triassic transition on the basis of data from localities in and around Wapadsberg Pass (South Africa), and interpret the stratigraphic record from the Wapadsberg Pass area as inconsistent with the model of turnover of vertebrate assemblages that was coeval with the end-Permian marine extinction. Marquez et al. (2026) link extinction selectivity during the Permian–Triassic extinction event to differences in physiological tolerances of various organism to climate warming. Liu et al. (2026) compare the recovery of ostracods, brachiopods and ammonites in the aftermath of the Permian–Triassic extinction event, and find that brachiopods and ammonites refilled the vacated morphospace with limited innovation, while ostracods underwent a adaptive radiation, expanding morphospace and ecological niches. A study on the diverse coprolite assemblage from the Lower Triassic Vikinghøgda Formation (Svalbard, Triassic), providing the first evidence of presence of invertebrates (cephalopods and sponges) in the Grippa bonebed and evidence of the coprolite producers feeding on ray-finned fishes and juvenile ichthyopterygians , is published by Simonsen et al. (2026). Trace fossil evidence of predation of horseshoe crabs on polychaetes is reported from the Lower Triassic Daye Formation (China) by Feng et al. (2026), who also report evidence indicative of enhanced infaunalization coinciding with diversification of marine predators during the Early Triassic. Woolley et al. (2026) describe the first vertebrate assemblage from the middle member of the Fremouw Formation (Antarctica), including capitosaurian, therocephalian, procolophonid and archosauromorph fossil material and interpreted as likely to be Early Triassic in age. Casts of burrows likely produced by ground-dwelling crayfish, as well as casts of burrows produced by tetrapods (possibly procolophonids, trirachodontids or bauriids) that might have been feeding on crayfish, are reported from the Middle Triassic Burgersdorp Formation (South Africa) by Wolvaardt et al. (2026). Zhang et al. (2026) determine the age and duration of the Ladinian Xingyi Fauna on the basis of the study of astrochronology and cyclostratigraphy of the Nimaigu Section of the Falang Formation (China), and interpret the environment of the studied fauna as driven by a combination of orbital forcing and volcanic activity. Trinidad et al. (2026) study the bone histology of Late Triassic vertebrates from the Pebbly Arkose Formation (Zimbabwe), reporting evidence of frequent interrupted growth in rhynchosaurs and suchians as well as evidence of faster and more continuous growth in cynodonts and dinosaurs, and interpret the studied vertebrates as likely living in a more arid resource-poor environment with less seasonal variation compared to their contemporaries from assemblages from Argentina, Brazil and India. Numberger-Thuy et al. (2026) describe fossil material of late-surviving plagiosaurs and a diverse reptile assemblage from the Rhaetian strata of the Exter Formation (Germany). Rosin et al. (2026) study the composition of the palynomorph assemblages from the Westbury, Lilstock and Redcar Mudstone formations in the Cheshire Basin (United Kingdom), recording changes of composition of vegetation and aquatic microorganism assemblages in response to environmental changes during the latest Triassic and Early Jurassic. Stone et al. (2026) reconstruct timing and phases of reef recovery in the High Atlas Basin of Morocco in the aftermath of the Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event , interpreted as determined by tolerances of different framework builders to environmental conditions at the time. A Bajocian fauna with similarities to faunas of the northern Tethyan margin, dominated by ammonites and including sponges, crinoids, brachiopods, bivalves and belemnites is described from the strata of the Komló Calcareous Marl Formation (Hungary) by Bujtor, Henn & Kanizsai (2026), who link the presence of the fauna in the studied area to the sea level rise during the latest Bajocian. Evidence of a host-regulated symbiosis between Protulophila gestroi and the serpulid Propomatoceros lumbricalis from the Middle Jurassic strata from the Polish Basin is presented by Słowiński et al. (2026). Butt et al. (2026) review the composition of the Jurassic–Cretaceous (Tithonian–Berriasian) tetrapod fauna from the Purbeck Group (United Kingdom). A study on the composition of the Early Cretaceous (Valanginian) microvertebrate fauna from the Cliff End Bone Bed ( Ashdown Formation ; United Kingdom) is published by Clavo Yamahuchi et al. (2026). García-Cobeña et al. (2026) report the discovery of new fossil material of cartilaginous fishes, turtles, crocodylomorphs and dinosaurs from the Lower Cretaceous El Castellar Formation (Spain), expanding known vertebrate diversity from the studied formation. Cortés & Larsson (2026) interpret high diversity and complex structure of the Early Cretaceous marine assemblage from the Paja Formation (Colombia) as likely influenced by both abiotic and biotic drivers. Evidence of presence of taxa belonging to middle as well as late Jehol Biota is reported from the Lower Cretaceous strata from the Qinling orogenic belt (China) by Song et al. (2026). Vršanský et al. (2026) report the discovery of a new assemblage of Early Cretaceous organisms preserved in amber from the Nimnica Formation (Slovakia), and classify ambers from hundreds sites worldwide ranging in age from Triassic to present as formed within 7 globally distributed forest types. Fiorelli et al. (2026) report discovery of well-preserved fossil material of diverse Late Cretaceous microorganisms encrusted in microbialites from paleogeysers and hot springs from the Sanagasta GeoPark (La Rioja, Argentina). Evidence from the study of the fossil record of reef-building corals and of the evolutionary history of reef-associated fishes inferred from molecular phylogenies, indicating that formation of the Great Indo-Australian Miocene Reef System in the Miocene coincided with and likely influenced diversification of corals and reef-associated fish lineages, is presented by Siqueira et al. (2026). Moretti & Young (2026) describe new fossil material of mammals and tortoises from Bender's Cave (Texas, United States), including the first records of Hesperotestudo sp. and Holmesina septentrionalis from the Late Pleistocene of the Edwards Plateau , and argue that the assemblage from Bender's Cave might include animals dating to interglacial intervals of the Late Pleistocene. Pillay et al. (2026) conduct a survey of ancient DNA from subfossil remains from Nuku Hiva ( French Polynesia ), identify a wide range of vertebrate taxa on the basis of bulk bone metabarcoding, and report the identification of remains of three seabird taxa new to the archaeological record of the Marquesas Islands . Evidence from the study of approximately 7,000-year-old corals and fish otoliths from coral reef deposits from Panama and the Dominican Republic and from the study of the trophic structure of nearby modern reefs, indicative of reduction of length and complexity of food webs in the Caribbean reef ecosystems throughouth the Holocene, is presented by Lueders-Dumont et al. (2026). Evidence from the study of the Neogene to Holocene record of marine anthozoans, bivalves, gastropods, sea urchins, cartilaginous fishes and mammals, indicating that neither absolute range nor range change in isolation is sufficient to predict extinction of members of the studied groups, is presented by Straube et al. (2026). Other research Liu et al. (2026) reconstruct marine biogeochemical cycles during the Proterozoic, and find that dense phytoplankton at the surface of the ocean resulting from lack of predators would have prevented sunlight from reaching subsurface layers of the ocean, causing reduction of subsurface net primary productivity. Huang & Shen (2026) interpret the redox condition of the Earth surface during the Proterozoic as influenced by the biological pump structure and by changes in the structure of eukaryotic phytoplankton . El Khoury et al. (2026) report geochemical data from the Franceville basin (Gabon) indicating that during Paleoproterozoic seawater in the studied area episodically reached nutrient and oxygen levels comparable to those observed in Cambrian oceans. Fernandes et al. (2026) study the chromium, cadmium and strontium isotope composition of carbonate rocks from the Corumbá Group (Brazil) to reconstruct local environmental conditions during the late Ediacaran , and interpret the extent of habitats suitable for early animals as limited by the extent of oxygenated shallow waters, which in turn was influenced by an intricate interplay of water circulation, redox and productivity. Pas et al. (2026) study the stratigraphy, geochemistry and astrochronology of the lower Cambrian succession at the Tiout section (Morocco), providing a high-resolution chronostratigraphic framework for the late Terreneuvian –early Cambrian Series 2 interval. Jamart et al. (2026) determine the locations of the Wuliuan–Drumian and Drumian–Guzhangian stage boundaries and the duration of the Drumian Carbon Isotope Excursion on the basis of the study of Albjära-1 core from the Alum Shale Formation (Sweden). Evidence from the study of zinc isotope data from the Chattanooga Shale (Tennessee, United States), linking marine euxinia during the Late Devonian mass extinctions to increased marine productivity, is presented by Li et al. (2026). Evidence from the Chattanooga Shale in the southeastern United States indicating that massive wildfires did not trigger marine anoxia during the Late Devonian mass extinctions but rather were its consequence is presented by Lu et al. (2026). Edwards, Hibner & Smith (2026) study the extent of marine anoxia during the Frasnian-Famennian transition on the basis of data from strata from the Great Basin region of western United States, and argue that, although marine anoxia expanded during the Late Devonian, it might not have been as significant factor in the decline of biodiversity during the Late Devonian mass extinctions as suggested by earlier studies. Review of evidence supporting the interpretation of cataclysmic volcanism as the most likely primary cause of the Late Devonian mass extinctions is published by Racki & Pisarzowska (2026). Evidence linking two stages of the Capitanian mass extinction event to two pulses of eruptive activity of the Emeishan Traps is presented by Wei, Zhang & Qiu (2026). Bagherpour et al. (2026) report evidence from the study of the Abadeh and Baghuk sections of the Hambast Formation (Iran) indicative of presence of oxygenated shallow water environment (but with episodes of anoxic conditions) in the central Tethys Ocean during the Permian-Triassic transition. Ruciński et al. (2026) study the taphonomy of the Grippia Bonebed from the Lower Triassic Vikinghøgda Formation (Norway), identifying processes resulting in a concentrated accumulation of vertebrate remains in the studied area. Barrenechea et al. (2026) report evidence of higher content of aluminium phosphate–sulphate minerals in the Lower Triassic strata from the equatorial areas compared to strata from higher latitudes, indicative of prolonged or recurrent acidic episodes continental basins near the equator during the Early Triassic, and interpret the acidity conditions in continental environments as contributing to the Smithian–Spathian boundary event and moderated the recovery after the Permian–Triassic extinction event. Shen et al. (2026) provide a high-resolution astronomical time scale for environmental changes and biotic recovery in the northwestern margin of subtropical Pangaea during the Early Triassic on the basis of cyclostratigraphic analysis of the Montney Formation (British Columbia, Canada). Sun et al. (2026) provide a comprehensive marine carbonate δ 13 C dataset for the Triassic, and link the eventual stabilization of the global carbon cycle to biogeochemical feedbacks resulting from the establishment of modern-style ecosystems. Evidence linking major episodes of marine large igneous provinces to at least four extinctions of marine biota during the Triassic is presented by Fan et al. (2026). Ruciński et al. (2026) provide new information on the sedimentology, stratigraphy and taphonomy of the Upper Triassic Silves Marl-Carbonate Evaporitic Complex in the upper portion of the Silves Group (Portugal), and report the identification of new fossil-bearing layers yielding vertebrate fossil material. Chai et al. (2026) reconstruct major processes of tectonic evolution in the northern part of the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau (China) during the Late Triassic, providing evidence of high volcanic viscosity approximately 220 million years ago that might have been caused by multiple tectonic events, and report evidence of coeval climate changes, and discuss possible links between the studied tectonic events and environmental changes and extinctions in the Norian . Evidence from the study of the geochemical records of the McCarthy Formation from the Grotto Creek site (Alaska, United States), indicative of progressive deoxygenation in eastern Panthalassa that began approximately 8 million years before Central Atlantic magmatic province emplacement and Triassic–Jurassic extinction and coincided by pattern of regional decline of biodiversity of ammonites and global decline of biodiversity of benthic organisms, is presented by McCabe et al. (2026). Fang et al. (2026) report evidence of acid rains coinciding with the Central Atlantic magmatic province volcanism during the Triassic-Jurassic transition, as well as evidence of critical destruction of plant biomass in terrestrial basins during the Triassic–Jurassic extinction that was likely linked to acid rains. Chen et al. (2026) report evidence from chemostratigraphic and astrochronological analysis of a drill core from the Kunming Basin (Yunnan, China) indicative of negative carbon isotope excursions mirroring disturbances in the global carbon cycle during the Triassic-Jurassic transition, and indicative impact of both Central Atlantic magmatic province and regional factors on environmental disruption on the studied area at the Triassic-Jurassic boundary; the authors also determine the oldest sauropodomorph dinosaur fossils from the Kunming Basin to be 200.17-million-years-old, and interpret this result as evidence of colonization of low palaeolatitude area of southwest China by medium- to large-bodied dinosaurs in the aftermath of the Triassic–Jurassic extinction . A study on the sedimentology and geochemistry of the strata of the Moltrasio Formation at the Osteno Lagerstätte (Italy) preserving fossils of a diverse Sinemurian marine assemblage assemblage, as well as on the taphonomy of these fossils and on the composition of the assemblage, is published by Franceschi et al. (2026). Wang et al. (2026) report evidence of high elevations and complex topography in northeastern Asia resulting from mid–Late Jurassic plate convergence and promoting the emergence of Yanliao Biota , as well as evidence of topographic ruggedness during the Early Cretaceous that expanded the surface area, amplified the available ecological niche space and resulted in diversification of the Jehol Biota . Rey et al. (2026) study the elemental variability of vertebrate coprolites from the Angeac-Charente bonebed (France), providing evidence that the chemical composition of the studied coprolites was affected by burial environment to a greater degree than by diets of the producers. Evidence from the study of sediments and trace fossils from the Lower Cretaceous Três Barras Formation (Sanfranciscana Basin, Brazil), indicative of marine incursions during the Early Cretaceous that were long enough to support benthic colonization of the substrate in probable estuarine setting, is presented by Sedorko (2026). Lu et al. (2026) report evidence of asynchronous carbon isotope excursions associated with Oceanic Anoxic Event 1a in terrestrial and marine systems, and question the proposal to place the boundary between Barremian and Aptian at the base of the studied oceanic anoxic event. Antonietto et al. (2026) identify the strata of the Lower Cretaceous Romualdo Formation (Brazil) as deposited in estuarine bay environments identifiable as mangrove forest -analogues, and interpret the presence of marine fishes in the strata of the studied formation as related to presence of their seasonal breeding grounds in the studied area. Buryak et al. (2026) study two exploration drill cores from the Wombat pipe locality in the Lac de Gras kimberlite field (Northwest Territories, Canada), providing information on the climate and environment in the subarctic Canada during the Late Cretaceous, and interpret the sedimentary organic matter from the studied drill cores as derived from C 3 land plants and, to a lesser degree, algae. Fanti et al. (2026) identify the Late Cretaceous (Campanian) fossil assemblage from the Villaggio del Pescatore site (Italy) as living in a tidal flat ecosystem repeatedly affected by tropical cyclones and flood events. Landman et al. (2026) reconstruct the environment of deposition of the Pierre Shale on the Cedar Creek Anticline (Montana, United States) spanning the Campanian-Maastrichtian boundary on the basis of the study of geochemical and sedimentological evidence and on the basis of the composition of the fauna. Roberts et al. (2026) study the stratigraphy and age of the strata of the Hell Creek Formation from the excavation site of the " Dueling Dinosaurs ", from other locations on the Murray Ranch and from the McGinnis Butte section (Montana, United States), determine the minimum age of approximately 67.102 million years for the base of the Hell Creek Formation in the study area, and determine the age of the "Dueling Dinosaurs" locality to be approximately 66.895 million years. Liu et al. (2026) present sedimentological and geophysical evidence indicative of multilayered oceanic circulation and high productivity in the Arctic Ocean during the Late Cretaceous. Evidence of earthquakes and seismically-induced deformations triggered by the Chicxulub impact is reported from the strata from the Cretaceous-Paleogene transition from Colombia and Mexico by Bermúdez et al. (2026).

The first record of soft-sediment deformation structures from Cuba that were caused by the Chicxulub impact, affecting deep marine deposits and causing sediment remobilization, is reported from the Peñas Formation by Rojas Consuegra et al. (2026). Bartali et al. (2026) report evidence of preservation of a high-resolution record of the Chicxulub impact in the strata from the Cretaceous-Paleogene transition from the Rayon reef boundary section from the Valles-San Luis Potosi platform across the Gulf of Mexico. Kaiho et al. (2026) report evidence from the study of marine sedimentary rocks from Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary sections in Haiti and Spain indicative of two peaks of mercury enrichments of the studied sediments (the first one likely linked to Deccan Traps volcanism shortly before the Chicxulub impact, the second one linked to the impact itself), and indicating that extinction of Cretaceous planktonic foraminifera coincided with the Chicxulub impact. Ota et al. (2026) identify changes in osmium concentrations and osmium isotope ratio of sediments from the Kawaruppu section of the Nemuro Group (Hokkaido, Japan), and interpret the observed variation as likely linked to the supply of meteoritic osmium from the Chicxulub impact. Evidence from the study of spores, pollen and microcharcoal abundances from Paleogene sediments from a hydrothermal vent crater in the North Atlantic Igneous Province on the Norwegian Margin and from other mid- and high latitude continental margins, indicative of rapid vegetation and soil disturbances in response to environmental changes at the onset of the Paleocene–Eocene thermal maximum resulting in widespread appearance of fern-dominated pioneer vegetation across mid- and high-latitude regions of the world, is presented by Nelissen et al. (2026). Evidence of Priabonian age of Baltic amber from the Sambia Peninsula (Kaliningrad Oblast, Russia) is presented by Ross, Bojarski & Szwedo (2026). Munyaka et al. (2026) refine the age of the Miocene Nyakach Formation (Kenya) and reconstruct the environment of Victoriapithecus macinnesi and associated vertebrate faunas from the studied formation as a seasonally wet forest-dominated ecosystem. Öğretmen et al. (2026) provide new information on the age of marine deposits exposed on land in Latakia (Syria) on the basis of foraminiferal, nannofossil and palynological data, providing evidence that the shoreline of the easternmost Mediterranean was approximately 15 km inland during the Early Pleistocene, evidence that the coastal strip of the Levantine Corridor was not available for hominin migrations before 1.28 million years ago, and evidence of Mediterranean climate during the Calabrian . Evidence from the study of pore-ice isotopes, plant and invertebrate remains and sedimentary ancient DNA from the late Pleistocene Mint Gulch site (Yukon, Canada), indicative of local persistence of steppe-tundra in spite of a regional hydroclimate change beginning approximately 14,000 calibrated years before present, is presented by Cocker et al. (2026). Murchie et al. (2026) report evidence of preservation of ancient environmental DNA of diverse Quaternary organisms from eastern Beringia in the Pleistocene and Holocene ground squirrel coprolites from Yukon (Canada).

In E.M. Dowding; D.A.T. Harper; M.J. Betts; T.H. Torsvik (eds.). Geography and Life Before Pangaea: a Volume in Honour of Robin Cocks . Geological Society, London, Special Publications. Vol. 565.

The Geological Society of London. doi : 10.1144/gslspecpub2025-137 . ^ Chen, A.; Zhang, Y.; Shi, X.; Wu, H. (2026). "How icehouse–greenhouse climate transitions drive the diversification, specialisation, and extinction of Productida (Phylum Brachiopoda)". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 689 113650. Bibcode : 2026PPP...68913650C . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113650 . ^ Fu, R.; Ren, J.; Zhang, C.; Li, Z.; Liang, Y.; Hu, Y.; Liu, F.; Song, B.; Luo, M.; Holmer, L. E.; Topper, T. P.; Zhang, Z. (2026). "Morpho-anatomical features of lingulid brachiopods from the Late Ordovician Pingliang Formation and their evolutionary and ecological implications" . Journal of Systematic Palaeontology . 24 2629300. Bibcode : 2026JSPal..2429300F . doi : 10.1080/14772019.2026.2629300 . ^ Popov, L. E.; Bassett, M. G.; Cherns, L.; Holmer, L. E.; Ghobadi Pour, M.; Hillier, R. D.; Channing, A.; Cotterell, T. (2026). "First occurrence of a Silurian linguloid brachiopod with soft tissue preservation in Wales" . Lethaia . 60 (1): 1– 11. Bibcode : 2026Letha..60..1.5P . doi : 10.18261/let.60.1.5 . ^ Müller, T.; Vörös, A.; Haas, J.; Budai, T.; Ullmann, C. V.; Price, G. D.; Pálfy, J. (2026). "Monospecific mass occurrence of the dimerelloid brachiopod Halorella amphitoma in a shallow marine environment of the Late Triassic Dachstein platform (Bakony Mountains, Hungary)" . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 692 113793. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69213793M . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113793 . ^ MacFarlan, D. A. B. (2026). "Observations on Zealandian Triassic and Jurassic Brachiopoda" . Zootaxa . 5799 (2): 259– 289. doi : 10.11646/zootaxa.5799.2.3 . PMID 42408467 . ^ a b c d e Koromyslova, A. V.; Martha, S. O. (2026). "Upper Paleocene (Thanetian) bryozoans from the Turgay Trough in northern Kazakhstan" . Palaeontologia Electronica . 29 (1) 29.1.a15. doi : 10.26879/1643 . ^ a b c Iturra, D.; López-Gappa, J.; Pérez, L. M.; Romero, F. E. O.; Martha, S. O. (2026). "Revision of the Late Oligocene to Middle Miocene Patagonian species of Cellaria (Bryozoa, Cheilostomatida) described by Ferdinand Canu" . Zootaxa . 5792 (3): 519– 545. doi : 10.11646/zootaxa.5792.3.4 . PMID 42408565 . ^ a b Song, B.; Zhang, Z.; Strotz, L. C.; Topper, T. P.; Ernst, A.; Ma, J.; Zhang, Z.; Luo, M.; Holmer, L. E.; Liang, Y.; Hu, Y.; Zhang, C.; Chen, Y.; Brock, G. A. (2026). "High-fidelity modular skeletons authenticate a Cambrian origin for Bryozoa" . Nature : 1– 6. doi : 10.1038/s41586-026-10590-9 . PMID 42236935 . ^ a b Håkansson, E.; Jakobsen, S. L.; Rosso, A.; Thomsen, E. (2026). "On the free-living bryozoan fauna from the Miocene Gram Formation (Denmark), with description of two new species, a new genus and a new suborder of Cheilostomata" . Bulletin of the Geological Society of Denmark . 75 : 11– 32. Bibcode : 2026BuGSD..75...11H . doi : 10.37570/bgsd-2026-75-02 . ^ Ernst, A.; Racki, G.; Wyse Jackson, P. N. (2026). "Middle Devonian and Frasnian bryozoan fauna from the Holy Cross Mountains, Poland". Acta Palaeontologica Polonica . 71 (1): 1– 17. doi : 10.4202/app.01282.2025 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v Jell, P. A. (2026). "Early Devonian stelleroid echinoderms from Central Victoria". Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal of Palaeontology . 50 (1): 236– 341. Bibcode : 2026Alch...50..236J . doi : 10.1080/03115518.2025.2601987 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Mirantsev, G. V. (2026). "The Upper Carboniferous (Kasimovian) Crinoids from the Neverovo Formation of the Moscow Basin. Part II. Systematic Paleontology". Paleontological Journal . 59 (11): 1455– 1545. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59.1455M . doi : 10.1134/S0031030126600034 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Webster, G. D.; Ausich, W. I.; Heward, A. P. (2026). "Allagecrinoidea and Codiacrinoidea: microcrinoids (Echinodermata) from the Upper Kungurian (Lower Permian) of Oman". Rivista Italiana di Paleontologia e Stratigrafia . 132 (2): 331– 352. Bibcode : 2026RIPS..13230643W . doi : 10.54103/2039-4942/30643 . ^ Neumann, C.; Kutscher, M. (2026). "A new genus and species of Galeritidae (Echinoidea, Echinoneoida) from the Upper Campanian (Cretaceous) of N Germany" . PalZ . Bibcode : 2026PalZ..tmp...20N . doi : 10.1007/s12542-026-00774-z . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: bibcode ( link ) ^ Reich, M.; Kutscher, M.; Stegemann, T. R. (2026). "Molpadid holothurian calcareous ring material from the early Maastrichtian Rügen Chalk, Germany" . PalZ . doi : 10.1007/s12542-026-00797-6 . ^ a b Travers, A.; Fau, M.; Roux, M.; Coster, P.; Lefebvre, B. (2026). "An exceptionally well-preserved starfish fauna (Asteroidea, Echinodermata) from the Early Miocene of southeastern France" . Swiss Journal of Palaeontology . 145 : 157– 177. doi : 10.3897/sjp.145.180374 . ^ a b c d e Macurda, D. B.; Sprinkle, J. (2026). "An Early Mississippian blastoid fauna from the Canadian Rockies". Journal of Paleontology : 1– 24. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10177 . ^ Neumann, C.; Jagt, J. W. M. (2026). "A new Late Cretaceous (Campanian) species of the micrasterid echinoid genus Cyclaster with unique buccal feeding structures from the Hannover area, northern Germany" . Palaeodiversity . 19 (1): 43– 50. doi : 10.18476/pale.v19.a2 . ^ Blake, D. B.; Lefebvre, B. (2026). " Degeneraster spenceri n. gen., n. sp. (Asteroidea; Ordovician) and interpretating the early history of the Asterozoa". Comptes Rendus Palevol . 25 (10): 173– 187. doi : 10.5852/cr-palevol2026v25a10 . ^ Ishida, Y.; Numberger-Thuy, L. D.; Thuy, B.; Misaki, A.; Ohara, M.; Mikami, T.; Fujita, T. (2026). "A new brittle star (Echinodermata: Ophiuroidea) from the uppermost Cretaceous of Wakayama Prefecture, Japan provides insights into deep-sea colonization by the extant family Ophiosphalmidae" . Paleontological Research . 30 250009: 109– 121. doi : 10.2517/prpsj.250009 . ^ Hsu, C.-H.; Fanai, L.; Sharma, K. M.; Malsawmtluanga; Malsawma, J.; Lalnuntluanga, P.; Tiwari, R. P.; Patnaik, R.; Senan, A. S.; Lin, J.-P. (2026). "First Fossil Faorina (Echinoidea: Spatangoida) from the Bhuban Formation (Miocene), Northeastern India" . Zoological Studies . 65 21. ^ Bohatý, J.; Ausich, W. I.; Bialas, S. (2026). " Gennaeocrinus wenningi n. sp. (Crinoidea, Eucamerata) – the first verifiable evidence of the periechocrinid genus in the Devonian of Europe". Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie - Abhandlungen . 317 (2): 225– 239. Bibcode : 2026NJGPA.317..225B . doi : 10.1127/njgpa/1312 . ^ Rozhnov, S. V. (2026). " Lavacystis sagittalis gen. et sp. nov. from the Lower Ordovician of the Leningrad Region—the Earliest Known Pleurocystitid (Echinodermata, Rhombifera) and the First Record of the Family from the Baltic Paleobasin". Paleontological Journal . 59 (12): 1568– 1579. Bibcode : 2025PalJ...59.1568R . doi : 10.1134/S003103012660006X . ^ a b c d e f Villier, L.; Bardin, J.; Fau, M.; Salone, A.; Veysseyre, A. (2026). "Morphometric study and taxonomic revision of Metopaster species (Asteroidea, Echinodermata) from the Coniacian-Campanian of Northern Aquitaine". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 44. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2025.2597516 . ^ Vidal-Marty, C.; Lefebvre, B.; Gendry, D.; Gutiérrez-Marco, J. C.; Nohejlová, M.; Renaud, S. (2026). "Morphological variability within the mitrate Mitrocystella incipiens (Echinodermata, Stylophora) from the Darriwilian (Middle Ordovician) of high-latitude peri-Gondwanan regions" . Bulletin of Geosciences . 101 (1): 93– 109. ^ Neumann, C. (2026). "A new Pseudogibbaster Moskvin, 1983 (Echinoidea, Spatangoida) from the mid Danian (Paleocene) deep-shelf chalk of Denmark" . Acta Geologica Polonica . 76 (2) e82. Bibcode : 2026AcGlP..76..e82N . doi : 10.24425/agp.2026.158196 . ^ Deline, B.; Limbeck, M. R.; Baldwin, J.; Bauer, J.; Cournoyer, M. E. (2026). "Ecology and systematics of a new exceptionally preserved paracrinoid (Echinodermata) from the Neuville Formation of Québec, Canada". Journal of Paleontology : 1– 13. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2026.10241 . ^ Nohejlová, M.; Dupichaud, C.; Lefebvre, B. (2026). "Filling the Silurian knowledge gap: A new occurrence of solutans in the Wenlock of Wales" . Bulletin of Geosciences . 101 (1): 111– 121. ^ Sheffield, S. L.; Limbeck, M. R.; Bauer, J. E.; Wright, A. M.; Wagner, P. J. (2026). "Exploring rates of change and modes of evolution in blastozoan echinoderms" . Paleobiology . 52 (2): 172– 187. Bibcode : 2026Pbio...52..172S . doi : 10.1017/pab.2025.10089 . ^ Paul, C. R. C. (2026). "The family Gomphocystitidae (Echinodermata, Diploporita) and the functional morphology of spiral ambulacra". Journal of Paleontology : 1– 17. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2026.10219 . ^ Waters, J.; Macurda, D. B. (2026). "Respiratory systems as a key to a new superorder division of the class Blastoidea (Echinodermata)" . Journal of Paleontology . 99 (6): 1239– 1247. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2025.10203 . ^ Ausich, W. I.; Hetrick, S. W.; Leslie, S. A. (2026). "The oldest larval crinoid: pentacrinoid stage crinoid from the Cannifton Quarry Lagerstätte (Ordovician, Katian) of Ontario, Canada". Journal of Paleontology : 1– 5. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2026.10222 . ^ Cole, S. R.; Wright, D. F.; Ausich, W. I.; Cournoyer, M. E. (2026). "Exceptional soft-tissue preservation reveals the oldest evidence for tube feet and their ecological significance in crinoids" . Royal Society Open Science . 13 (6) 260101. doi : 10.1098/rsos.260101 . ^ Salamon, M. A.; Benyoucef, M.; Krajewski, M. A.; Bouchemla, I.; Mekki, F.; Salhi, A.; Adaci, M. (2026). "A Jurassic crinoid hotspot: Exceptional Phyllocrinus Lagerstätten of northern Africa". Gondwana Research . 156 : 341– 353. Bibcode : 2026GondR.156..341S . doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2026.03.012 . ^ Salamon, M. A.; Benyoucef, M.; Zaidi, M. A.; Ciesielczuk, J.; Bouchemla, I.; Płachno, B. J. (2026). "Gondwanan cyrtocrinids uncover hidden diversity and crinoid dispersal pathways" . Scientific Reports . 16 (1) 7267. Bibcode : 2026NatSR..16.7267S . doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-36892-6 . PMC 12923608 . PMID 41639196 . ^ Poatskievick-Pierezan, B.; Gale, A. S.; Moreira, A. C.; Vazquez-Garcia, B.; Del Mouro, L.; Batista Dos Santos Filho, M. A.; Baecker-Fauth, S.; Fauth, G. (2026). "X-ray computed microtomography as a fundamental piece in the study of microcrinoids". Acta Palaeontologica Polonica . 71 (2): 247– 254. doi : 10.4202/app.01328.2026 . ^ Poatskievick-Pierezan, B.; Salamon, M. A.; Manríquez Márquez, L.; Schneider, B. C.; Bom, M. H. H.; do Monte Guerra, R.; Horodyski, R. S.; Kochhann, K. G. D.; Fauth, G.; Gorzelak, P. (2026). "Linking the Cretaceous and the Paleogene: Shallow-water stalked crinoids from Seymour Island reveal continuous Antarctic fossil record". Gondwana Research . 154 : 363– 370. Bibcode : 2026GondR.154..363P . doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2026.01.010 . ^ Salamon, M. A.; Gedl, P.; Worobiec, E.; Krajewski, M.; Bugajski, M.; Płachno, B. J. (2026). "A unique occurrence of stalked crinoids in the Eocene Popiele Beds (Outer Carpathians, Poland)" . Scientific Reports . doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-53006-4 . PMID 42230853 . ^ Stöhr, S.; Jagt, J. W.; Thuy, B. (2026). "Unusually well-preserved fossil material dates the extant brittle star genus Actinozonella (Echinodermata: Ophiuroidea) to at least the Late Cretaceous" . Zootaxa . 5796 (2): 332– 342. doi : 10.11646/zootaxa.5796.2.6 . PMID 42408509 . ^ Lopez, F. E.; Alarcón, C. M.; Conde, O. A.; Drovandi, J. M.; Aballay, J. D.; Pedernera, F. A.; Correa, G. A. (2026). "New Gorstian (Ludlow, upper Silurian) graptolite faunas from the olistostromic Rinconada Formation, Argentine Precordillera: new insights on the Silurian graptolite biostratigraphy" . Ameghiniana . 63 (2): 113– 131. doi : 10.5710/AMGH.23.02.2026.3683 . ^ a b Maletz, J. (2026). "Graptolites (Graptolithina) from the Dapingian Arienigraptus hastatus Biozone of Newfoundland" . PalZ . Bibcode : 2026PalZ..tmp...14M . doi : 10.1007/s12542-025-00768-3 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: bibcode ( link ) ^ Gutiérrez-Marco, J. C.; Maletz, J.; Vizcaïno, D.; Lefebvre, B.; Saleh, F. (2026). "Lower Ordovician graptolites from the Cabrières region, Montagne Noire, France" . Lethaia . 59 (2): 1– 14. doi : 10.18261/let.59.2.9 . ^ Maletz, J.; Klafack, R. (2026). "A home on the sea floor: Benthic graptolites from North German glacial erratic boulders and beyond" . Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments . Bibcode : 2026PdPe..tmp...29M . doi : 10.1007/s12549-026-00710-8 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: bibcode ( link ) ^ Qiu, Z.; Zou, C.; Zhang, J.; Dong, A.; Kong, W.; Xiong, Y.; Wignall, P. B.; Li, M.; Wang, Z.; Zhu, X.; Poulton, S. W. (2026). "Dynamic redox–promoted iron and nutrient cycling drove graptolite evolution across the Ordovician-Silurian transition" . Science Advances . 12 (4) eaea1423. Bibcode : 2026SciA...12a1423Q . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aea1423 . PMC 12822635 . PMID 41564180 . ^ Maletz, J.; Wang, C.; Strosssova, Z.; Wang, X. (2026). "The graptolite Pseudoretiolites Bouček & Münch, 1944 and the early evolution of the Retiolitinae" . Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 26. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2026.2650481 . ^ Crampton, J. S.; Foote, M.; Sadler, P. M.; Cooper, R. A. (2026). "The spectrum of extinction rate magnitude" . Paleobiology : 1– 22. doi : 10.1017/pab.2026.10107 . ^ Ferretti, A.; Cioni, A.; Gibellini, L. (2026). "Late Ordovician conodont faunas from the Carnic Alps: new data from old collections". Micropaleontology . 72 (3): 255– 268. Bibcode : 2026MiPal..72..255F . doi : 10.47894/mpal.72.3.03 . hdl : 11380/1409708 . ^ a b Zhen, Y. Y. (2026). "Origin and evolution of the Ordovician conodont genus Kirkupodus and its significance in palaeobiogeography". Marine Micropaleontology . 205 102592. Bibcode : 2026MarMP.20502592Z . doi : 10.1016/j.marmicro.2026.102592 . ^ Tagarieva, R. Ch. (2026). "The lower Famennian conodont biodiversity and zonation at the Ryauzyak Section (western slope of the South Urals)". Palaeoworld . 35 (3) 201086. Bibcode : 2026Palae..3501086T . doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2026.201086 . ^ a b Han, C.; Wu, S.; Lyu, Z.; Mei, Q.; Zhao, L. (2026). "Carnian (lower Upper Triassic) conodont biostratigraphy and carbon isotope records of the Hanzeng section, western Sichuan Basin, South China". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 690 113700. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69013700H . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113700 . ^ Zhen, Y. Y. (2026). "Taxonomy, evolution and biostratigraphy of the Ordovician conodont genera Triangulodus and Tropodus ". Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal of Palaeontology . 50 (1): 200– 235. Bibcode : 2026Alch...50..200Z . doi : 10.1080/03115518.2026.2615101 . ^ Goudemez, C.; Assemat, A.; Thiery, G.; Girard, C. (2026). "3D topography as an indicator of change in food processing ability in elements of the conodont genus Palmatolepis " . Lethaia . 59 (3): 1– 16. Bibcode : 2026Letha..59..3.2G . doi : 10.18261/let.59.3.2 . ^ Świś, P. L.; Ferretti, A.; Rigo, M.; Letulle, T.; Cipriani, A.; Medici, L.; Malferrari, D.; Lugli, F. (2026). "Stable strontium isotopes of Late Devonian conodonts from Kowala (Poland) reveal genus-level signatures" . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 692 113755. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69213755S . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113755 . ^ Casas-Peña, J. M.; Gutiérrez-Reyes, S.; Navas-Parejo, P. (2026). "Pennsylvanian conodont biostratigraphy and petrography from the Rancho Nuevo Formation, Sonora allochthon: Paleogeographic significance". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 693 113806. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69313806C . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113806 . ^ León-Caffroni, M. A.; Scomazzon, A. K.; Traslaviña-Bueno, M. D.; Nascimento, S.; Souza, P. A. (2026). "Ecological expansion of Idioprioniodus (Conodonta) controlled by paleoenvironmental changes in Bashkirian-Moscovian epicontinental sea in Western Gondwana: Evidence from the Amazonas Basin". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 691 113750. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69113750L . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113750 . ^ Rojas Mantilla, A. F.; Scomazzon, A. K.; Nogueira, A. C. R.; Erthal, F.; Obregón Cubillos, L. A.; Souza, P. A.; Nascimento, S.; Viccari, J. M. (2026). "Paleoecological patterns and Panthalassic paleobiogeographic affinity of Pennsylvanian conodont faunas from the Chibcha Terrane (Colombia)". Marine Micropaleontology . 205 102590. Bibcode : 2026MarMP.20502590R . doi : 10.1016/j.marmicro.2026.102590 . ^ Xu, W.; Sun, Z.; Liu, S.; Ji, C.; Lu, H.; Ma, Z.; Wu, F.; Chen, S.; Huang, J. (2026). "Multielement apparatus architecture of the Early Triassic conodont Triassospathodus symmetricus (Gondolelloidea, Ozarkodinina), elucidated by high-resolution x-ray microtomography". Papers in Palaeontology . 12 (4) e70108. doi : 10.1002/spp2.70108 . ^ Qin, B.; Jiang, H.; Golding, M. L.; Chen, Y.; Chen, H. (2026). "Middle Triassic conodont fauna from the Baoshan Block, western Yunnan, southwestern China, and their implications". Journal of Asian Earth Sciences . 305 107075. Bibcode : 2026JAESc.30507075Q . doi : 10.1016/j.jseaes.2026.107075 . ^ Herrera-Flores, Jorge A.; Velasco-de León, María Patricia (May 2026). " Ambystoma quetzalcoatli sp. nov., a new species of fossil axolotl (Caudata: Ambystomatidae) from the Pliocene of Santa María Amajac, Hidalgo, Mexico" . Palaeontologia Electronica . 29 (2) a19. doi : 10.26879/1644 . ^ Noda, M.; Matsui, M.; Nishikawa, K. (2026). "A new genus of giant salamander (Urodela, Cryptobranchidae) from the Pliocene of Japan" . PeerJ . 14 e21362. Bibcode : 2026PeerJ..1421362N . doi : 10.7717/peerj.21362 . PMC 13242194 . PMID 42254664 . ^ Schoch, R. R.; Werneburg, R.; Voigt, S. (2026). "A new diminutive temnospondyl from the Carboniferous-Permian boundary of Germany". Journal of Paleontology : 1– 11. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2026.10246 . ^ Guillaume, A. R. D.; Evans, S. E.; Jones, M. E. H.; Puértolas-Pascual, E.; Moreno-Azanza, M. (2026). "New albanerpetontid species (Lissamphibia) from the Late Jurassic of Portugal". Journal of Systematic Palaeontology . 24 2580623. Bibcode : 2026JSPal..2480623G . doi : 10.1080/14772019.2025.2580623 . ^ Pardo, Jason D.; Marsicano, Claudia A.; Smith, Roger; Cisneros, Juan Carlos; Angielczyk, Kenneth D.; Fröbisch, Jörg; Kemmerer, Christian F.; Richter, Martha (2026-03-04). "An aberrant stem tetrapod from the early Permian of Brazil" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B . 293 (2066) 20252106. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2025.2106 . PMID 41784409 . ^ Mann, A.; Xiong, Z.; Calthorpe, A. S.; Sues, H.-D.; Maddin, H. C. (2026). "Carboniferous recumbirostran elucidates the origins of terrestrial herbivory". Nature Ecology & Evolution . 10 (2): 193– 202. Bibcode : 2026NatEE..10..193M . doi : 10.1038/s41559-025-02929-8 . PMID 41667672 . ^ Molnar, J. L.; Hutchinson, J. R.; Pierce, S. E. (2026). "Musculoskeletal function of stem tetrapod limbs". Palaeontology . 69 (2) e70049. Bibcode : 2026Palgy..6970049M . doi : 10.1111/pala.70049 . ^ Pardo, J. D.; Mann, A. (2026). "Direct development of stem tetrapods across the fin-to-limb transition". Science . 392 (6804): 1292– 1296. Bibcode : 2026Sci...392.1292P . doi : 10.1126/science.aeb7635 . PMID 42313963 . ^ Kean, K. J.; Pérez-Ben, C. M.; Danto, M.; Fröbisch, N. B. (2026). "What is driving the differential loss of skull bones throughout tetrapod evolution? Evidence from Temnospondyli" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 293 (2071) 20253276. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2025.3276 . PMID 42191155 . ^ Klein, N.; Konietzko-Meier, D. (2026). "Intraskeletal variability in osteohistology and growth record in a single individual of Sclerocephalus nobilis (Temnospondyli; Early Permian)" . Royal Society Open Science . 13 (5) 252244. Bibcode : 2026RSOS...1352244K . doi : 10.1098/rsos.252244 . ^ Witzmann, F.; Schoch, R. R. (2026). "Postcranial morphology and ontogeny of the Middle Triassic plagiosaurid temnospondyl Gerrothorax pulcherrimus and the increased body-flattening of bottom-dwelling plagiosaurs". Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 206 (1) zlaf195. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlaf195 . ^ Kear, B. P.; Campione, N. E.; Siversson, M.; Bazzi, M.; Hart, L. J. (2026). "Revision of the trematosaurid Erythrobatrachus noonkanbahensis confirms a cryptic marine temnospondyl community from the Lower Triassic of Western Australia" . Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (4) e2601224. doi : 10.1080/02724634.2025.2601224 . ^ Santos, R. O.; Wilkinson, M.; Zaher, H. (2026). "Spinal Cord Supports in Caecilian Vertebrae and Their Significance for Amphibian Systematics". Journal of Morphology . 287 (6) e70137. Bibcode : 2026JMorp.28770137S . doi : 10.1002/jmor.70137 . PMID 42252752 . ^ Jansen, O.; Garcia, G.; Otero, O.; Augé, M.; Gomez, B.; Valentin, X. (2026). "Freshwater amphibians and squamates from Villeveyrac (lower Campanian; Hérault, France): palaeodiversity, palaeoenvironment and implications for the Late Cretaceous palaeobiogeography of the European herpetofauna" . Papers in Palaeontology . 12 (1) e70055. Bibcode : 2026PPal...1270055J . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70055 . ^ Kolchanov, V. V.; Skutschas, P. P. (2026). "Skull anatomy of the Late Cretaceous salamander Eoscapherpeton asiaticum (Caudata: Cryptobranchidae) based on computed tomography, and implications for cryptobranchid cranial evolution". Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 206 (4) zlag042. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlag042 . ^ Syromyatnikova, E. (2026). "The skull morphology of Mioproteus wezei (Caudata: Proteidae): first complete cranial material on fossil proteid salamanders".

The Anatomical Record ar.70112. doi : 10.1002/ar.70112 . PMID 41498574 . ^ Macaluso, L.; Jansen, O.; Valentin, X.; Walter, J. D.; Otero, O.; Amiot, R.; Garcia, G. (2026). "New fossil evidence from the Late Cretaceous of Europe (southern France) deepens the origin of Salamandridae (Urodela) and refines the biogeography of the family" . Scientific Reports . 16 (1) 16567. Bibcode : 2026NatSR..1616567M . doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-44690-3 . PMC 13247274 . PMID 42259814 . ^ Lemierre, A. J. A.; Heinrich, W.-D.; Blackburn, D. C. (2026). "The oldest Jurassic anurans from continental Africa (Tendaguru Hill, Tanzania)" . Fossil Record . 29 (1): 115– 133. Bibcode : 2026FossR..29..115L . doi : 10.3897/fr.29.175525 . ^ Lemierre, A.; Folie, A.; Bailon, S.; Laurin, M. (2026). "Anurans of In Becetèn (Republic of Niger): the most diverse site for amphibians in Mesozoic Africa" . Geodiversitas . 48 (4): 51– 67. Bibcode : 2026Geodv..48v48a4L . doi : 10.5252/geodiversitas2026v48a4 . ^ Syromyatnikova, E.; Skutschas, P.; Kolchanov, V. (2026). "Anurans from the Upper Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) Nemegt Formation of Mongolia". Palaeoworld 201156. doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2026.201156 . ^ Tarasova, M. S.; Syromyatnikova, E. V.; Kosintsev, P. A.; Gimranov, D. O.; Fadeeva, T. V. (2026). "The First Record of a Tree Frog (Anura, Hylidae) from the Late Pleistocene of the Urals". Paleontological Journal . 59 (6): 673– 682. doi : 10.1134/S0031030125601033 . ^ Ponstein, J.; Blain, H.-A.; Steur, H.; Wallaard, J. J. W. (2026). "New early Oligocene water frog (Anura, Ranidae, Pelophylax ) occurrence from south-eastern France" . Fossil Record . 29 (1): 227– 247. Bibcode : 2026FossR..29..227P . doi : 10.3897/fr.29.188906 . ^ Hiotis, N. L.; Reed, E. H.; Sherratt, E. (2026). "Integrating allometry for accurate identification of Anura fossils from the Naracoorte Caves World Heritage Area". Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 206 (1) zlaf183. doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlaf183 . ^ Ikeda, T.; Takahashi, A.; Hasegawa, Y. (2026). "Taxonomic reassessment of anuran fossils from the Pleistocene Minatogawa man site, southern Okinawa Island, Ryukyu Archipelago, Japan" (PDF) . Bulletin of Gunma Museum of Natural History (in Japanese). 30 : 27– 44. ^ Salinas, M. B.; Olori, J. C.; Jass, C. N.; Bell, C. J.; Mead, J. I. (2026). "Pleistocene anurans from Cathedral Cave, Nevada: Implications of morphological variation for the identification of isolated and underutilized skeletal elements".

The Anatomical Record ar.70230. doi : 10.1002/ar.70230 . PMID 42206926 . ^ Costa, J. P.; Peralta, M. J.; Dantas, M. A. T.; Nascimento, L. C.; Barcelos, L. A.; Porpino, K. O.; Araújo-Júnior, H. I. (2026). "Quaternary crocodilians, testudines, and amphibians from the Lajedo de Soledade site, northeastern Brazil, and their paleoenvironmental implications" . Journal of South American Earth Sciences . 180 106100. Bibcode : 2026JSAES.18006100C . doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2026.106100 . ^ Yu, Y.; Xu, X.; Benson, R. B. J. (2026). "Decoupled phenotypic constraints framed by respiratory adaptation in the rise of land vertebrates" . Science Advances . 12 (14) eaeb0801. Bibcode : 2026SciA...12b0801Y . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aeb0801 . PMC 13041750 . PMID 41921005 . ^ Macungo, Zanildo; Araújo, Ricardo; Rubidge, Bruce S.; Day, Michael O.; Dollman, Kathleen N.; Benoit, Julien (2026-03-12). "Evolutionary radiation of large-bodied gorgonopsians from the lower Abrahamskraal formation of South Africa" .

The Anatomical Record ar.70181. doi : 10.1002/ar.70181 . ISSN 1932-8486 . PMID 41819826 . ^ Gebauer, E. V. I.; Maisch, M. W. (2026). " Njalila gen. nov. (Therapsida. Gorgonopsia): a new genus for Dixeya nasuta v. Huene, 1950 from the Late Permian Usili Formation of the Ruhuhu Basin, SW Tanzania". Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie - Abhandlungen . 316 (3): 295– 316. Bibcode : 2026NJGPA.316..295G . doi : 10.1127/njgpa/1296 . ^ Bulanov, V. V.; Shaymardanov, F. F.; Papernyi, M. L. (2026). "A New Dromasaur (Therapsida, Anomodontia) from the Upper Permian of the South Cis-Ural Region" . Paleontological Journal . 60 (2): 67– 86. ^ Warshaw, E. A.; Singh, S. A.; Benton, M. J. (2026). "Trophic ecology outweighed intrinsic constraints in shaping skull evolution of carnivorous Permian synapsids" . Communications Biology . 9 (1) 588. doi : 10.1038/s42003-026-09824-3 . PMC 13125638 . PMID 41820599 . ^ Benoit, J.; Legendre, L. J.; Araújo, R.; Fernandez, V.; Midzuk, A.; Browning, C.; Abdala, F.; Botha, J.; Angielczyk, K. D. (2026). "Evolutionary stasis in synapsid encephalization during the end-Permian mass extinction" . Scientific Reports . doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-53133-y . PMID 42141026 . ^ Marchetti, L.; Logghe, A.; Rebillard, A.; MacDougall, M. J.; Fröbisch, J. (2026). "The evolutionary significance of the earliest cloacal opening in Synapsida" . iScience . 29 (8) 116752. doi : 10.1016/j.isci.2026.116752 . ^ Logghe, A.; Buffa, V.; Marchetti, L. (2026). "An exceptional Dimetropus pes imprint with scalation pattern from the lower Permian of Lodève and its broader implications for early synapsid palaeobiogeography and skin evolution". Acta Palaeontologica Polonica . 71 (2): 363– 382. doi : 10.4202/app.01338.2026 . ^ Angielczyk, K. D.; Fröbisch, J.; Kammerer, C. F.; Smith, R. M. H.; Marsicano, C. A.; Pardo, J. D.; Richter, M.; Cisneros, J. C. (2026). "Early synapsids from the Cisuralian (lower Permian) Pedra de Fogo Formation, Parnaíba Basin, Brazil: the first definitive South American "pelycosaurs" ". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (6) e2621685. doi : 10.1080/02724634.2026.2621685 . ^ Didier, G.; Laurin, M. (2024). "Testing extinction events and temporal shifts in diversification and fossilization rates through the skyline Fossilized Birth-Death (FBD) model: The example of some mid-Permian synapsid extinctions" . Cladistics . 40 (3): 282– 306. doi : 10.1111/cla.12577 . PMID 38651531 . ^ Laurin, M.; Didier, G.; Richoz, S.; Montagna, M.; Kustatscher, E. (2026). "Kungurian extinctions in eupelycosaurs: a press–pulse event?" . Paleobiology : 1– 15. doi : 10.1017/pab.2026.10102 . ^ Snyder, A. J.; Snively, E.; Brink, K. S. (2026). "Tooth biomechanics of the non-mammalian synapsid Dimetrodon using two and three-dimensional finite element analysis". Journal of Experimental Biology . 229 (12) jeb.251898. doi : 10.1242/jeb.251898 . PMID 42099259 . ^ Canoville, A.; Knaus, P. L.; Marchetti, L.; Fröbisch, J. (2026). "Contrasting life history in the diminutive Dimetrodon species from North America and Germany" . Scientific Reports . 16 (1) 16279. Bibcode : 2026NatSR..1616279C . doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-52199-y . PMC 13272913 . PMID 42303692 . ^ Duhamel, A.; Wynd, B.; Wright, A. M.; Moopen, A.; Benoit, J.; Rubidge, B. (2026). "Rethinking therapsid phylogeny through Bayesian and cladistic approaches" . Scientific Reports . 16 (1) 13171. Bibcode : 2026NatSR..1613171D . doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-38195-2 . PMC 13103076 . PMID 41813723 . ^ Landi, D.; King, J. L.; Singh, S. A.; Rayfield, E. J.; Benton, M. J. (2026). "Beaks of the Permo-Triassic: a morpho-functional analysis at the dawn of a novel structure in tetrapod evolution" . Palaeontology . 69 (3) e70075. Bibcode : 2026Palgy..6970075L . doi : 10.1111/pala.70075 . ^ Benoit, J.; Fernandez, V.; Botha, J. (2026). "The first non-mammalian synapsid embryo from the Triassic of South Africa" . PLOS ONE . 21 (4) e0345016. Bibcode : 2026PLoSO..2145016B . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0345016 . PMC 13065020 . PMID 41955224 . ^ Suchkova, Yu. A.; Bulanov, V. V.; Masyutin, V. V. (2026). "The parareptile Emeroleter levis found in the abdominal cavity of the Late Permian therocephalian Viatkosuchus sumini (Kotel'nich locality, European Russia)". Historical Biology: An International Journal of Paleobiology : 1– 9. doi : 10.1080/08912963.2026.2623124 . ^ Lund, E. S.; Wolvaardt, F. P.; Smith, R. M. H.; Jodder, J.; Benoit, J. (2026). "Redescription of the Triassic cynodont Cistecynodon parvus and reassessment of its phylogeny".

The Anatomical Record ar.70179. doi : 10.1002/ar.70179 . PMID 41858077 . ^ Michelotti, I. M.; Roese-Miron, L.; Farias, B. D. M.; Soares, M. B.; Kerber, L. (2026). "Postcranial anatomy and osteohistology of an early prozostrodont cynodont from the Upper Triassic of Brazil" .

The Anatomical Record ar.70245. doi : 10.1002/ar.70245 . PMID 42298815 . ^ Guo, T.; Zhou, C.; Zhao, Q. (2026). "An osteohistological study of a Late Jurassic docodontan (Mammaliaformes) reveals its growth pattern and fossorial ecological habits" . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 699 114010. doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.114010 . ^ Averianov, A. O.; Sues, H.-D. (2026). "A docodont ulna from the Upper Jurassic in North America and its implications for the forelimb morphology in Docodonta (Mammaliaformes)".

The Anatomical Record ar.70192. doi : 10.1002/ar.70192 . PMID 41839620 . ^ a b c Chen, W.; Cai, Y.; Wang, X.; Xiao, S.; Hua, H. (2026). "Systematic description of new phosphatized skeletal fossils from the upper Dengying Formation in southern Shaanxi Province of South China and their implications for the evolution of terminal Ediacaran biomineralizers". Precambrian Research . 441 108132. Bibcode : 2026PreR..44108132C . doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2026.108132 . ^ Rosse-Guillevic, S.; Olschewski, P.; McIlroy, D. (2026). " Arborea elegans : a novel arboreomorph species from the late Ediacaran of Newfoundland" . Geological Magazine . 163 e14. Bibcode : 2026GeoM..163..e14R . doi : 10.1017/S0016756826100570 . ^ Peel, J. S. (2026). "Diversity of Triplicatella and related hyoliths in Cambrian Series 2 of Greenland (Laurentia)". Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal of Palaeontology . 50 (2): 553– 568. Bibcode : 2026Alch...50..553P . doi : 10.1080/03115518.2026.2643599 . ^ Kolesnikov, K. A. (2026). "A late-stem-group early hexactinellid from the lower Cambrian of the Siberian Platform". Papers in Palaeontology . 12 (3) e70091. Bibcode : 2026PPal...1270091K . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70091 . ^ Jin, J.; Vinn, O. (2026). "Late Ordovician cornulitids from Anticosti Island, eastern Canada, and their evolutionary implications". Journal of Paleontology . 99 (6): 1268– 1284. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2026.10214 . ^ a b Jeon, J.; Chen, Z.-Y.; Wang, G.-X.; Zhang, Y.-D. (2026). "Middle Llandovery (Silurian) stromatoporoids from Baingoin, Xizang (Tibet), China" . Journal of Palaeogeography . 15 (2) 100336. Bibcode : 2026JPalG..1500336J . doi : 10.1016/j.jop.2026.100336 . ^ a b Jeon, J.; Chen, Z.-Y.; Trakunweerayut, K.; Fang, X.; Li, Q.-J.; Kershaw, S.; Choh, S.-J.; Udchachon, M. (2026). "Sibumasu terrane as a dispersal bridge for Middle Ordovician stromatoporoids in peri -Gondwana". Gondwana Research . doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2026.06.011 . ^ a b Kočí, T.; Schnetler, K. I.; Madsen, H.; Jäger, M.; Váchová, L.; Kočová Veselská, M. (2026). "Serpulid tubeworms (Annelida, Polychaeta) and a vermetid gastropod from the Late Oligocene of Denmark". Bulletin of the Geological Society of Denmark . 75 : 151– 185. Bibcode : 2026BuGSD..75..151K . doi : 10.37570/bgsd-2026-75-07 . ^ Shi, X.; Howard, R. J.; Zhang, G.; Ma, X. (2026). "Palaeoscolecids from the early Cambrian Guanshan biota, Yunnan Province, China" . Papers in Palaeontology . 12 (1) e70058. Bibcode : 2026PPal...1270058S . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70058 . ^ Goedert, J. L.; Rich, M. A.; Kočí, T. (2026). "A new Eocene species of Hydroides (Polychaeta, Serpulidae) from the Cowlitz Formation, Lewis County, Washington State, USA" . Zitteliana . 100 : 81– 91. doi : 10.3897/zitteliana.100.191011 . ^ a b Xian, X.; Zhang, H.; Xiao, S.; Waloszek, D.; Maas, A.; Duan, B. (2026). "Polychaete annelids from the earliest Cambrian Period" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 123 (18) e2538071123. Bibcode : 2026PNAS..12338071X . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2538071123 . PMC 13143024 . PMID 42008710 . ^ a b c d e f g Pervushov, E. M. (2026). "Genus Labyrintholites Sinzov, 1879 (Porifera, Hexactinellida)". Izvestiya of Saratov University. Earth Sciences (in Russian). 26 (1): 56– 72. doi : 10.18500/1819-7663-2026-26-1-56-72 . ^ Nanglu, K.; Wittry, J.; McCoy, V. (2026). "The first new polychaete from the Mazon Creek fossil site in 20 years suggests cryptic annelid diversity in the Late Paleozoic" . Geological Magazine . 163 e34. Bibcode : 2026GeoM..163..e34N . doi : 10.1017/S0016756826100582 . ^ Carlorosi, J.; Tonarová, P.; Gutiérrez-Marco, J. C.; Hints, O. (2026). "Discovery of Ordovician scolecodonts from Peru, with a review of Palaeozoic jawed polychaete records from South America" . Geologica Acta . 24 24.3. doi : 10.1344/GeologicaActa2026.24.3 . ^ Hang, X.-P.; Botting, J. P.; Muir, L. A.; Shao, X.-H.; Zhang, Y.-D.; Ma, J.-Y. (2026). "A new tubular protospongiid (Hexactinellida, Porifera) from the Ordovician–Silurian boundary interval of South China and its implications". Palaeoworld . 35 (4) 201101. Bibcode : 2026Palae..3501101H . doi : 10.1016/j.palwor.2026.201101 . ^ Tzetlin, A. B.; Shcherbakov, D. E.; Geyer, G.; Zhuravlev, A. Yu. (2026). "The earliest known freshwater bristle worms (Annelida: Polychaeta) from the Middle Triassic Grès à Voltzia Lagerstätte, Vosges, France" . Invertebrate Zoology . 23 (2): 287– 303. doi : 10.15298/invertzool.23.2.06 . ^ Boan, P. C.; Droser, M. L. (2026). "Earliest evidence for overgrowth among Ediacaran fronds at Nilpena Ediacara National Park, South Australia". PALAIOS . 41 (2): 109– 120. Bibcode : 2026Palai..41..109B . doi : 10.2110/palo.2025.049 . ^ Rossi, M. E.; Keating, J. N.; Kenny, N. J.; Giacomelli, M.; Álvarez-Carretero, S.; Schuster, A.; Cárdenas, P.; Taboada, S.; Koutsouveli, V.; Donoghue, P. C. J.; Riesgo, A.; Pisani, D. (2026). "Independent origins of spicules reconcile paleontological and molecular evidence of sponge evolutionary history" . Science Advances . 12 (2) eadx1754. Bibcode : 2026SciA...12x1754R . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adx1754 . PMC 12778063 . PMID 41499514 . ^ Qureshi, Z. A.; Gibson, B. M.; Darroch, S. A. F.; Laflamme, M. (2026). "Functional morphology of the Cambrian archaeocyath sponge Yukonensis " . PLOS ONE . 21 (5) e0347476. Bibcode : 2026PLoSO..2147476Q . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0347476 . PMC 13160350 . PMID 42113828 . ^ Li, L.; Reitner, J. (2026). "Hexactinellid sponges from the Early Ordovician Cabrières Biota, France: insights into Early Palaeozoic polar ecosystems" . Lethaia . 59 (2): 1– 9. doi : 10.18261/let.59.2.13 . ^ Evans, S. D.; Webb, J.; Hughes, I. V.; Parker, W.; Droser, M. L. (2026). "Earliest evidence of behavioural handedness in the Ediacaran motile bilaterian Spriggina floundersi " . Scientific Reports . 16 (1) 19924. doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-53857-x . PMID 42426104 . ^ Wu, C.; Pang, K.; Wang, X.; Liu, Y.; Boan, P. C.; Zhou, C.; Chen, Z.; Xiao, S.; Yuan, X. (2026). " Kimberella from the terminal Ediacaran Shibantan limestone, South China: The persistence of bilaterians during the White Sea-Nama transition". Precambrian Research . 443 108164. Bibcode : 2026PreR..44308164W . doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2026.108164 . ^ Vannier, J.; Wang, D.; Han, J.; Birolini, E.; Monceret, S.; Monceret, E.; Kundura, M.-H.; Kundura, J.-P.; Lefebvre, B. (2026). "Worms from the Early Ordovician (Floian) Cabrières Biota, Montagne-Noire, southern France" . Lethaia . 59 (2): 1– 16. doi : 10.18261/let.59.2.11 . ^ Liu, Y.; Xu, Q.; Liu, Y.; Zhang, L.-J.; Fan, R.; Gong, Y. (2026). "Using compound trace fossils to unravel complex behavioral strategies of worm-like tracemakers traversing transitional environments in the early Paleozoic". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 697 113885. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69713885L . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113885 . ^ Chilcoat, G.; Cohen, P. (2026). "Another worm bites the dust: the Lilliput Effect in scolecodonts from the Late Devonian Biodiversity Crisis" . Paleobiology . 52 (2): 233– 242. Bibcode : 2026Pbio...52..233C . doi : 10.1017/pab.2026.10093 . ^ Vinn, O.; Zong, R.; Wilson, M. A.; Liu, Y.; Zatoń, M. (2026). "Partially preserved cornulitid feeding apparatuses from the lowest Silurian of South China support the lophophorate affinities of this enigmatic group" . Lethaia . 59 (3): 1– 11. Bibcode : 2026Letha..59..3.7V . doi : 10.18261/let.59.3.7 . ^ Fjeld, A. K.; Zhang, Z.; Betts, M. J.; Holmes, J. D.; Paterson, J. R.; Brock, G. A. (2026). "Sclerite fusion, ultrastructure, micro-ornament and homology in early Cambrian eccentrothecimorph tommotiids". Palaeontology . 69 (3) e70060. Bibcode : 2026Palgy..6970060F . doi : 10.1111/pala.70060 . ^ Richter Stretton, S. A.; Jacquet, S. M.; Brock, G. A.; Zhang, Z.; Paterson, J. R.; Betts, M. J. (2026). "Phosphatized soft tissue preservation in ' Pelagiella ' subangulata from the early Cambrian of the Flinders Ranges, South Australia" . Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal of Palaeontology . 50 (1): 89– 108. Bibcode : 2026Alch...50...89R . doi : 10.1080/03115518.2026.2622520 . ^ Xiao, S.-Y.-Z.; Chen, L.-R.-X.; Zhang, S.-T.; Zhang, D.; Chen, X.-C.; Hu, Y.-K.; Song, Q.-Y.; Yang, X.-Q.; Zuo, R.-H.; Zhang, G.-X. (2026). "First Occurrence of Wronascolex sp. (Palaeoscolecida, Priapulida) in the Cambrian Tianpeng Formation (Wuliuan Stage), Southeastern Yunnan, South China: Implications for a New Burgess Shale-Type Lagerstätte" . Life . 16 (4) 640. Bibcode : 2026Life...16..640X . doi : 10.3390/life16040640 . PMC 13118089 . PMID 42073450 . ^ Van Roy, P.; Cincotta, A.; Mottequin, B.; Buyse, F.; Schröer, L.; Cnudde, V.; Goolaerts, S.; Schöder, S.; Gueriau, P.; Vandenbroucke, T. R. A.; Olive, S. (2026). "A selkirkiid scalidophoran from the Lower Devonian of Belgium and the dubious merit of the concept of 'Burgess Shale-type' organisms" . Geological Magazine . 163 e36. doi : 10.1017/S0016756826100752 . ^ Beidatsch, E. V. Y.; Campione, N. E.; Steiner, M.; Castle-Jones, J.; Brock, G. A.; Herbert, E. B.; Betts, M. J. (2026). "First occurrences of the early Cambrian armoured lobopodian Quadratapora from South Australia and Kazakhstan" . Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal of Palaeontology . 50 (1): 73– 88. Bibcode : 2026Alch...50...73B . doi : 10.1080/03115518.2026.2648613 . ^ Richards, J. C.; Ortega-Hernández, J. (2026). "Predator–prey scaling laws support a suspension-feeding lifestyle in Cambrian luolishaniid lobopodians" . Biology Letters . 22 (4) 20250650. doi : 10.1098/rsbl.2025.0650 . PMID 42050928 . ^ Tian, Q.; Zhao, F.; Mallatt, J.; Zeng, H.; Zhu, M.; Jiang, B. (2026). "Evidence for aorta and other blood vessels in fossil yunnanozoans from the Cambrian period" . Royal Society Open Science . 13 (6) 260043. doi : 10.1098/rsos.260043 . ^ Matting, S.; Reich, M. (2026). "A new species of agglutinated foraminifera from early Eocene sediments of the southern Baltic Sea" . PalZ . Bibcode : 2026PalZ..tmp...16M . doi : 10.1007/s12542-025-00764-7 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: bibcode ( link ) ^ a b c Okuyucu, C.; Akbaş, M. (2026). "Systematic revision and phylogenetic assessment of the family Neodiscidae (Foraminifera) and new Capitanian foraminiferal genera from the Ankara region, central Türkiye" . European Journal of Taxonomy (1043): 33– 61. Bibcode : 2026EJTax1043.3207O . doi : 10.5852/ejt.2026.1043.3207 . ^ Vinn, O.; Tinn, O.; Lang, L.; Isakar, M.; Toom, U. (2026). "Earliest encrusting calcareous Foraminifera from the Sheinwoodian (lower Silurian) of Saaremaa Island, Estonia". Marine Micropaleontology . 205 102589. Bibcode : 2026MarMP.20502589V . doi : 10.1016/j.marmicro.2026.102589 . ^ Schlagintweit, F.; Doubrawa, M. (2026). " Orbitolinopsis senonicus Gendrot, 1968 (larger benthic foraminifera) from the Coniacian of southern France: reinstatement of the taxonomic identity and description of the new species Orbitolinopsis bilottei ". Micropaleontology . 72 (2): 199– 205. Bibcode : 2026MiPal..72..199S . doi : 10.47894/mpal.72.2.06 . ^ Cózar, P.; Somerville, I. D.; Hounslow, M. W. (2026). "On The Origin of The Fusulinids" . Journal of Foraminiferal Research . 56 (1): 1– 12. Bibcode : 2026JForR..56....1C . doi : 10.61551/gsjfr.56.1.1 . ^ Józsa, Š.; Tomašových, A.; Schlögl, J.; Meister, C.; Šimo, V. (2026). "Gradual turnover in the composition of benthic foraminiferal assemblages across the Sinemurian/Pliensbachian boundary in the Transcarpathian Ukraine (Pieniny Klippen Belt, Eastern Carpathians)". Marine Micropaleontology . 203 102551. Bibcode : 2026MarMP.20302551J . doi : 10.1016/j.marmicro.2026.102551 . ^ Golfinopoulos, V.; Papadopoulou, P.; Zelilidis, A.; Iliopoulos, G. (2026). "Paleoenvironmental interpretation of the Lower Jurassic formations in the Ionian Basin: First record of benthic foraminifera and ostracods assemblages from Greece". Revue de Micropaléontologie . 90 100906. Bibcode : 2026RvMic..9000906G . doi : 10.1016/j.revmic.2026.100906 . ^ Lowery, C. M.; Bralower, T. J.; Farley, K.; Leckie, R. M. (2026). "New species evolved within a few thousand years of the Chicxulub Impact". Geology . 54 (3): 285– 288. Bibcode : 2026Geo....54..285L . doi : 10.1130/G53313.1 . ^ Lamyman, G. S.; Fordham, B. G.; Pearson, P. N.; Wade, B. S.; Woodhouse, A.; Young, J. R.; Aze, T. (2026). "Phylogeny of the Cenozoic planktonic foraminifera". Journal of Systematic Palaeontology . 24 (2) 2669255. Bibcode : 2026JSPal..2469255L . doi : 10.1080/14772019.2026.2669255 . ^ Lu, Z.; Xue, K.; Deng, Y.; Fan, J.; Fang, P.; Wade, B. S.; Alegret, L.; Benton, M. J.; Wu, Y.; Qian, C.; Hou, X.; Shi, Y.; Sadler, P. M.; Xu, H.; Zhou, Z.-H.; Shen, S. (2026). "Complex marine ecological response during the Eocene-Oligocene revealed by global foraminiferal record" . Nature Communications . 17 (1) 3954. Bibcode : 2026NatCo..17.3954L . doi : 10.1038/s41467-026-70541-w . PMC 13133226 . PMID 41832140 . ^ Wu, S.-H.; Liang, Y.; Lu, J.-F.; Camina, S. C. (2026). "Early Devonian chitinozoans from central Guangxi, South China". Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology . 352 105641. Bibcode : 2026RPaPa.35205641W . doi : 10.1016/j.revpalbo.2026.105641 . ^ a b c d e Ozsvárt, P.; Foster, W. J.; Asatryan, G.; Buchwald, S. Z.; Gómez Correa, M. A.; Mosociova, T.; Galasso, F.; Zajzon, N. (2026). "Exceptional preservation and unexpected diversity of radiolarians in the aftermath of the Permian–Triassic mass extinction". Papers in Palaeontology . 12 (3) e70090. Bibcode : 2026PPal...1270090O . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70090 . ^ a b Sheng, J.; Aitchison, J. C.; Arhatari, B. D.; Stevenson, A. W.; Kachovich, S. (2026). "Phylogenetic affinity between Archeoentactinia and the Entactinaria: evidence from the middle Cambrian Inca Formation, Georgina Basin, Australia, and Lower Ordovician Cow Head Group, Newfoundland" . Journal of Paleontology : 1– 24. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2026.10215 . ^ Willman, S.; Peel, J. S. (2026). "Vesicular microfossils on middle Cambrian shells: insights into early substrate colonization in North Greenland (Laurentia)" . Palaeontology . 69 (1) e70045. Bibcode : 2026Palgy..6970045W . doi : 10.1111/pala.70045 . ^ a b c Liang, Y.; Wu, S.; Luan, X.; Zhan, R. (2026). "Early–Middle Ordovician chitinozoans from the Dawan Formation, Yichang area, Central China" . Journal of Micropalaeontology . 45 (1): 73– 93. Bibcode : 2026JMicP..45...73L . doi : 10.5194/jm-45-73-2026 . ^ Sheng, J.; Aitchison, J. C.; Kachovich, S.; Arhatari, B. D.; Stevenson, A. W.; Ye, Y.; Liu, S. (2026). "Unlocking a hidden fossil archive: synchrotron micro-computed tomography illuminates 'ghost' radiolarians linked to Late Ordovician oceanic anoxic events" . Royal Society Open Science . 13 (4) 252091. Bibcode : 2026RSOS...1352091S . doi : 10.1098/rsos.252091 . ^ Strullu-Derrien, C.; Spencer, A. R. T.; Gèze, M.; Martos, F.; De Franceschi, D.; Kenrick, P.; McLoughlin, S.; Selosse, M.-A. (2026). "A new occurrence of saprotrophic oomycetes from the ca 307–303 million-years-old Grand'Croix Chert (Massif Central, France)" . iScience . 29 (2) 114634. Bibcode : 2026iSci...2914634S . doi : 10.1016/j.isci.2026.114634 . PMC 12874453 . PMID 41660263 . ^ a b c d Vishnevskaya, V. S. (2026). "New Radiolarian Species of the Genus Pachycingula (Radiolaria) from the Upper Jurassic of Western Siberia (Yamal Peninsula)". Paleontological Journal . 60 (1): 13– 22. Bibcode : 2026PalJ...60...13V . doi : 10.1134/S0031030125601215 . ^ Hagen, A. P. I.; Moore, K. R.; Pruss, S. B.; Xiao, S.; Vayda, P. J.; Gill, B. C. (2026). "Taphonomy and paleoenvironmental significance of silicified cyanobacterial fossils in the early Cambrian Harkless Formation, Nevada, USA". PALAIOS . 41 (2): 59– 73. Bibcode : 2026Palai..41...59H . doi : 10.2110/palo.2025.035 . ^ Liu, X.; Qi, Y.; Dai, M.; Du, Y.; Chen, S.; He, W. (2026). "Coccoid cyanobacteria Kordephyton from Cambrian ferruginous stromatolites: the cellular structure and iron biomineralization" . Frontiers in Earth Science . 14 1862192. Bibcode : 2026FrEaS..1462192L . doi : 10.3389/feart.2026.1862192 . ^ Krings, M.; Kaštovský, J. (2026). "Fungal colonizers of cyanobacteria from the Lower Devonian Rhynie cherts of Scotland". Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology . 352 105604. Bibcode : 2026RPaPa.35205604K . doi : 10.1016/j.revpalbo.2026.105604 . ^ Lechte, M. A.; Riedman, L. A.; Porter, S. M.; Halverson, G. P.; Whelan, M. (2026). "Early fossil eukaryotes were benthic aerobes". Nature . 655 (8123): 670– 675. doi : 10.1038/s41586-026-10533-4 . PMID 42162429 . ^ Liu, J.; Zhang, Y.; Shi, X.; Chen, A.; Tang, D. (2026). "Vase-Shaped Microfossils From North China Suggest an Earlier Origin of Protozoa at ~1.56 Ga". Geological Journal gj.70394. doi : 10.1002/gj.70394 . ^ Lu, L.; Duda, J.-P.; Schönig, J.; Reitner, J. (2026). "Unravelling the nature of enigmatic fossils in the Ediacaran Weng'an phosphorite: a geobiological approach" . Lethaia . 60 (1): 1– 13. Bibcode : 2026Letha..60..1.1L . doi : 10.18261/let.60.1.1 . ^ Flett, K. E.; Cracknell, K.; Clavo Yamahuchi, J. S.; Cunningham, J. A.; Zhu, M.; Yin, Z.; Donoghue, P. C. J. (2026). "Developmental biology of the Ediacaran Megaclonophycus from the Weng'an Biota" . Biology Letters . 22 (3) 20250592. doi : 10.1098/rsbl.2025.0592 . PMID 41818797 . ^ Shang, X.; Liu, P.; Zhang, D. (2026). "Long-lived Doushantuo-Pertatataka acritarchs during the Ediacaran Shuram carbon isotope excursion: Evidence from the Kheseen Formation in northwest Mongolia". Geology . doi : 10.1130/B38498.1 . ^ Yang, B.; Shang, X.; Steiner, M.; Liu, P.; Hohl, S.; Chen, S.; Xiao, S. (2026). "Ediacaran large acanthomorphic acritarchs from the Zavkhan terrane of Mongolia reveal a close paleogeographic affinity with Yangtze block and Lesser Himalaya (India)". Geology . doi : 10.1130/G54463.1 . ^ Qiu, M.; Li, G.; Wang, J.; Yan, X.; Qu, H.; Wu, C.; Cui, W.; Xian, X.; Zhang, H.; Tang, Q.; Pang, K. (2026). "An assemblage of carbonaceous compression macrofossils from the Tonian Changlingzi Formation, Liaonan region, North China". Journal of the Geological Society . 183 (3) jgs2025-197. doi : 10.1144/jgs2025-197 . ^ Loron, C. C.; Cooper, L. M.; McMahon, S.; Jordan, S. F.; Gromov, A. V.; Humpage, M.; Rodgers, N.; Pichevin, L.; Vondracek, H.; Alexander, R.; Rodriguez Dzul, E.; Brasier, A. T.; Krings, M.; Hetherington, A. J. (2026). " Prototaxites fossils are structurally and chemically distinct from extinct and extant Fungi" . Science Advances . 12 (4) eaec6277. Bibcode : 2026SciA...12c6277L . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aec6277 . PMC 12822639 . PMID 41564173 . ^ Fokkema, C. D.; Agterhuis, T.; Gerritsma, D.; Bijl, P. K.; Cramwinckel, M. J.; Sluijs, A. (2026). "Resilient tropical marine ecosystems during early Eocene global warming events" . Geology . 54 (5): 471– 475. Bibcode : 2026Geo....54..471F . doi : 10.1130/G54281.1 . ^ Zhao, Y.; Tong, M.; Tian, L.; Luo, G.; Li, P.; Song, H.; Chen, Z.; Xie, S.; Kappler, A.; Yuan, S. (2026). "Reactive oxygen species drove red lineage phytoplankton to displace green lineage phytoplankton during the Mesozoic" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 123 (2) e2521306123. Bibcode : 2026PNAS..12321306Z . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2521306123 . PMC 12799162 . PMID 41512038 . ^ Ying, R.; Monteiro, F. M.; Witts, J. D.; Schmidt, D. N. (2026). "Darkness and body size shaped end-Cretaceous marine extinction patterns" . Nature : 1– 6. doi : 10.1038/s41586-026-10541-4 . PMID 42203866 . ^ Dernov, V.; Yefimenko, V. I. (2026). "First record of a Palaeozoic enigmatic genus Plumalina Hall, 1858 in Eastern Europe" . Spanish Journal of Palaeontology . 41 (1): 77– 84. doi : 10.7203/sjp.32757 . ^ Zhang, L. (2026). "Cellular predation and motility as drivers of animal origins and the Cambrian radiation" . Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution . 13 1736160. Bibcode : 2026FrEEv..1336160Z . doi : 10.3389/fevo.2025.1736160 . ^ Wang, X.; Zhang, X.; Dai, T.; Liu, W.; Zhang, Y.; Li, L. (2026). "New occurrence of a postglacial Ediacaran macrofossil assemblage from North China and its evolutionary implication". Precambrian Research . 434 107992. Bibcode : 2026PreR..43407992W . doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2025.107992 . ^ Kolesnikov, A.; Latysheva, I.; Ovtcharova, M.; Bowyer, F.; Pankova, V.; Pankov, V.; Kuznetsov, N.; Shatsillo, A.; Nagovitsin, A.; Romanyuk, T. (2026). "High-precision U-Pb data constrain the age of Ediacara biota in the Central Urals, Russia". Gondwana Research . 155 : 137– 143. Bibcode : 2026GondR.155..137K . doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2026.01.021 . ^ Parry, L. A.; Boggiani, P. C.; Condon, D. J.; Garwood, R. J.; Leme, J. M.; McIlroy, D.; Brasier, M. D.; Trindade, R.; Campanha, G. A. C.; M. L. A. F., B.; Diniz, C. Q. C.; Liu, A. G. (2017). "Ichnological evidence for meiofaunal bilaterians from the terminal Ediacaran and earliest Cambrian of Brazil" (PDF) . Nature Ecology & Evolution . 1 (10): 1455– 1464. Bibcode : 2017NatEE...1.1455P . doi : 10.1038/s41559-017-0301-9 . PMID 29185521 . S2CID 40497407 . ^ Becker-Kerber, B.; Lopes Archilha, N.; Knoll, A.; Basei, M. A. G.; Warren, L. V.; Del Mouro, L.; Kerber, G.; Ahmed, S.; Ortega-Hernández, J. (2026). "Proposed Ediacaran meiofaunal burrows from Brazil are pyritized algal/microbial consortia". Gondwana Research . 154 : 335– 347. Bibcode : 2026GondR.154..335B . doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2026.01.011 . ^ McIlroy, D.; Denyszyn, S.; Olschewski, P.; Rosse-Guillevic, S.; Muirhead-Hunt, H.; Pérez-Pinedo, D.; McKean, C.; Pasinetti, G.; Rideout, B.; Steele, M. P.; Menon, L. R.; Neville, J. M.; Chida, N.; Taylor, R. S. (2026). "Ediacaran endlings from the Avalon Assemblage and the severity of the Kotlin Crisis: First documentation of the Inner Meadow Lagerstätte, Newfoundland, Canada". Geology . 54 (4): 342– 347. Bibcode : 2026Geo....54..342M . doi : 10.1130/G54217.1 . ^ Mitchell, E. G.; Manica, A. (2026). "The influence of reproductive mode on resource competition and diversity patterns in Ediacaran early animal communities" . Nature Ecology & Evolution . 10 (7): 1234– 1244. doi : 10.1038/s41559-026-03094-2 . PMC 13345964 . PMID 42265234 . ^ Evans, S. D.; Sperling, E. A.; Lau, K. V.; Strauss, J. V. (2026). "Discovery of White Sea assemblage fossils from Laurentia" . Science Advances . 12 (21) eaed9916. Bibcode : 2026SciA...12d9916E . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aed9916 . PMC 13189134 . PMID 42160426 . ^ Li, G.; Wei, F.; Wen, W.; Wang, X.; Lei, X.; Anderson, R. P.; Zhao, Y.; Dunn, F. S.; Parry, L. A.; Cong, P. (2026). "The dawn of the Phanerozoic: A transitional fauna from the late Ediacaran of Southwest China". Science . 392 (6793): 63– 68. Bibcode : 2026Sci...392...63L . doi : 10.1126/science.adu2291 . PMID 41926596 . ^ Wang, Z.; Shi, T. (2026). "Trace fossils constrain the perceptual ranges of the earliest motile animals". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 123 (23) e2609730123. Bibcode : 2026PNAS..12309730W . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2609730123 . PMC 13250593. PMID 42224586 . ^ Zhuravlev, A. Y.; Wood, R. (2026). "On the origin of metazoan reefs" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 293 (2068) 20252760. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2025.2760 . PMID 41946490 . ^ Malanoski, C. M.; Finnegan, S.; Huang, E. C.; Blake, L.; Mac Niocaill, C.; Saupe, E. E. (2026). "Paleogeography modulates marine extinction risk throughout the Phanerozoic" . Science . 391 (6782): 285– 289. Bibcode : 2026Sci...391..285M . doi : 10.1126/science.adv2627 . PMID 41538453 . ^ Zhang, S.-H.; Shen, S.-Z. (2026). "Latitudinal taxonomic shifts over the past 500 million years and their relationship to continental configuration". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 692 113790. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69213790Z . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113790 . ^ Dantes, O.; Nagovitsin, K. E. (2026). "Taxonomic composition of Cambrian cone-shaped microfossils: morphotypes and growth patterns". PalZ . Bibcode : 2026PalZ..tmp...12D . doi : 10.1007/s12542-025-00763-8 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: bibcode ( link ) ^ Dantes, O.; Nagovitsin, K. E.; Korsakov, A. V. (2026). "The organic faunal complex of the lower Cambrian Kessyusa Formation of Siberia". Journal of Paleontology : 1– 12. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2026.10226 . ^ Song, B.; Liu, F.; Wang, J.; Luo, M.; Liang, Y.; Hu, Y.; Zhao, J.; Holmer, L. E.; Strotz, L. C.; Zhang, Z. (2026). "Small skeletal fossils associated with archaeocyath reefs from the Xiannüdong Formation (Cambrian Series 2), southern Shaanxi, China" . Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments . 106 (2): 261– 289. Bibcode : 2026PdPe..106..261S . doi : 10.1007/s12549-025-00677-y . ^ Zeng, H.; Liu, Q.; Zhao, F.; Luo, C.; Wang, D.; Zhu, Y.; Liu, Y.; Chen, K.; Sun, Z.; Hong, Y.; Miao, L.; Hu, C.; Sun, H.; Pan, B.; Zhao, J.; Yin, Z.; Li, G.; Yang, X.; Yang, A.; Hu, S.; Zhu, M. (2026). "A Cambrian soft-bodied biota after the first Phanerozoic mass extinction" . Nature . 651 (8106): 679– 687. Bibcode : 2026Natur.651..679Z . doi : 10.1038/s41586-025-10030-0 . PMID 41606341 . ^ Gass, K. C.; Noffke, N. (2026). "New ichnotaxa from the tidal flat facies of the Cambrian Elk Mound Group, Wisconsin, USA". Journal of Paleontology : 1– 15. doi : 10.1017/jpa.2026.10225 . ^ Shi, Y.; Shi, Y.; Yang, A.; Huang, H.; Deng, Y.; Lu, Z.; Zhou, X.; Cui, Y.; Yuan, J.; Fan, J. (2026). "Miaolingian-Furongian (Cambrian) high-resolution marine species richness patterns of the North China Block". Global and Planetary Change . 259 105346. Bibcode : 2026GPC...25905346S . doi : 10.1016/j.gloplacha.2026.105346 . ^ Ess, M. P.; Banker, R. M. W.; Maciech, S. A.; Dineen, A. A.; Roopnarine, P. D.; Tyler, C. L. (2026). "The effects of the Richmondian invasion on benthic invertebrate functional diversity during the Late Ordovician" . Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution . 13 1706877. Bibcode : 2026FrEEv..1306877E . doi : 10.3389/fevo.2025.1706877 . ^ Kundladi, S. B.; Stigall, A. L. (2026). "Invasion and interaction: diversity shifts in the Nashville Basin during the Late Ordovician Richmondian Invasion". Lethaia . 59 (4): 1– 16. Bibcode : 2026Letha..59..4.1K . doi : 10.18261/let.59.4.1 . ^ Wellman, C. H. (2026). "Unusual biota and palynofacies of a Lower Devonian intermontane basin saline lake–playa mudflat ecosystem" . Papers in Palaeontology . 12 (1) e70065. Bibcode : 2026PPal...1270065W . doi : 10.1002/spp2.70065 . ^ Poschmann, M. J.; Thuy, B.; Franke, C.; Hegna, T. A.; Hellemond, A.; Olive, S.; Numberger-Thuy, L. D.; Servais, T. (2026). "The Consthum Lagerstätte (Luxembourg) – a window into the palaeoecology of Early Devonian marine-terrestrial transitional facies" . Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments . Bibcode : 2026PdPe..tmp...22P . doi : 10.1007/s12549-026-00697-2 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: bibcode ( link ) ^ Cyrino, L. M.; Varejão, F. G.; Barros, G. E. B.; Rodrigues, M. G.; Mello, J. B.; Rudnitzki, I. D.; Lana, C. C.; Brito, D. C.; Garcindo, L. B. (2026). "Ediacaran or late Paleozoic? Integrating trace fossils and U–Pb geochronology to resolve paleoenvironmental and stratigraphic ambiguities" . Geological Magazine . 163 e28. Bibcode : 2026GeoM..163..e28C . doi : 10.1017/S0016756826100739 . ^ Calábková, G.; Březina, J.; Nádaskay, R. (2026). "A highly diverse Pennsylvanian tetrapod ichnoassemblage from the Semily Formation (Krkonoše Piedmont Basin, Czechia)" . PeerJ . 14 e20437. Bibcode : 2026PeerJ..1420437C . doi : 10.7717/peerj.20437 . PMC 12794637 . PMID 41531824 . ^ Henderson, C. M.; Angiolini, L.; Beauchamp, B. (2026). "Palaeoecology of a conodont age-calibrated and spectacularly preserved bryozoan-brachiopod biostromal palaeocommunity from the Asselian of Carlin Canyon, Nevada, USA" . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 692 113769. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69213769H . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113769 . ^ Marchetti, L.; Stubenrauch, J.; Käßner, A.; Tichomirowa, M.; König, S.; Pint, A.; Voigt, T. (2026). "First high-precision radioisotopic age from the Permian Bromacker lagerstätte (Tambach Formation, Germany) and implications for biochronology and biota evolution". Gondwana Research . 155 : 283– 299. Bibcode : 2026GondR.155..283M . doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2026.02.005 . ^ Rebillard, A.; Jannel, A.; Marchetti, L.; MacDougall, M. J.; Hamann, C.; Steyer, J.-S.; Fröbisch, J. (2026). "Early Permian terrestrial apex predator regurgitalite indicates opportunistic feeding behaviour" . Scientific Reports . 16 (1) 1087. Bibcode : 2026NatSR..16.1087R . doi : 10.1038/s41598-025-33381-0 . PMC 12859032 . PMID 41617749 . ^ Young, J. M.; Maho, T.; Reisz, R. R. (2026). "Earliest direct evidence of trophic interactions between terrestrial apex predators and large herbivores" . Scientific Reports . 16 (1) 6977. Bibcode : 2026NatSR..16.6977Y . doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-38183-6 . PMC 12946255 . PMID 41748708 . ^ Craig, J. A.; Davies, N. S.; Marchetti, L. (2026). "Life in a Permian dryland: Evidence from plant and trace fossils of the fluvio-aeolian Cap-aux-Meules Formation (Îles-de-la-Madeleine, Québec)" . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 698 113961. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69813961C . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113961 . ^ Gastaldo, R. A.; Neveling, J.; Kamo, S. L.; Akatakpo, S. O.; Geissman, J. W.; Rochín-Bañaga, H.; Tabor, N. (2026). "Conundrums of Wapadsberg Pass and other locales in the Karoo Basin, South Africa: The death knell of the end-Permian vertebrate-extinction model". GSA Bulletin . doi : 10.1130/B38563.1 . ^ Marquez, J. A.; Penn, J. L.; Stockey, R. G.; Boag, T. H.; Duncan, M. I.; McClure, K. N.; Matsumoto, K.; Ashing-Giwa, K. F.; Noll, C. P.; Deutsch, C.; Payne, J. L.; Sperling, E. A. (2026). "Differences in physiological tolerance to global warming caused the Permian–Triassic transition between the Paleozoic and Modern faunas". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 123 (28) e2533086123. doi : 10.1073/pnas.2533086123 . PMID 42406958 . ^ Liu, X.; Song, H.; Chu, D.; Dai, X.; Tian, L.; Wu, Y.; Wang, F.; Silvestro, D. (2026). "Multiple paths to recovery after the Permian-Triassic mass extinction". Current Biology . 36 (3): 576–588.e3. Bibcode : 2026CBio...36..576L . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2025.11.065 . PMID 41512851 . ^ Simonsen, V.; Roberts, A. J.; Engelschiøn, V. S.; Hammer, Ø.; Hurum, J. H. (2026). "Digesting an ancient ecosystem: coprolites from the Grippia bonebed, Lower Triassic, Svalbard" . PeerJ . 14 e20746. Bibcode : 2026PeerJ..1420746S . doi : 10.7717/peerj.20746 . PMC 12922587 . PMID 41727223 . ^ Feng, X.; Chen, Z.-Q.; Benton, M. J.; Bottjer, D. J.; Cribb, A. T.; Su, L.; Zhao, L.; Jiang, Y.; Zhao, H.; Yan, P.; Huang, Y. (2026). "Predator-prey interactions in the Early Triassic ocean". GSA Bulletin . doi : 10.1130/B38121.1 . ^ Woolley, C. H.; McIntosh, J. A.; Smith, R. M. H.; Sidor, C. A. (2026). "First vertebrate assemblage from the middle member of the Fremouw Formation (Lower Triassic) of Antarctica" . Antarctic Science . 38 (3): 278– 297. Bibcode : 2026AntSc..38..278W . doi : 10.1017/S0954102026100613 . ^ Wolvaardt, F. P.; Smith, R. M. H.; Hancox, P. J.; Browning, C.; Strong, M. (2026). "Palaeoenvironmental significance of vertebrate and invertebrate burrow casts in the Middle Triassic Burgersdorp Formation of the main Karoo Basin". Journal of African Earth Sciences . 237 106048. Bibcode : 2026JAfES.23706048W . doi : 10.1016/j.jafrearsci.2026.106048 . ^ Zhang, Y.; Jiang, D.; Motani, R.; Tintori, A.; Sun, Z.; Zhou, M.; Su, C. X.; Wang, Y.; Yao, M. (2026). "Astronomical age calibration and duration of the Ladinian (Middle Triassic) Xingyi Fauna, southwestern Guizhou Province, China". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 689 113652. Bibcode : 2026PPP...68913652Z . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113652 . ^ Trinidad, V.; Munyikwa, D.; Zondo, M.; Broderick, T. J.; Nesbitt, S. J.; Tolan, S.; Griffin, C. (2026). "Comparative histological analysis of vertebrates reveals Triassic climate variability across southern Pangea" . Journal of Anatomy joa.70159. doi : 10.1111/joa.70159 . PMID 42056719 . ^ Numberger-Thuy, L. D.; Delsate, D.; Hanker, P.; Kronfeld, A.; Brockmann, M. A.; Thuy, B. (2026). "An unusual tetrapod assemblage from the latest Triassic of the South Eifel region (Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany)" . Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie - Abhandlungen . 317 (1): 77– 102. Bibcode : 2026NJGPA.317...77N . doi : 10.1127/njgpa/1307 . ^ Rosin, J. C. F.; van de Schootbrugge, B.; Hesselbo, S. P.; Vandenbroucke, T. R. A. (2026). "Organic-walled microphytoplankton from the West Midlands, England, following the end-Triassic mass extinction: palynological evidence from the Prees 2 borehole, Cheshire Basin" . Geological Magazine . 163 e1. Bibcode : 2026GeoM..163...e1R . doi : 10.1017/S0016756825100459 . ^ Stone, T. N.; Martindale, R. C.; Lathuilière, B.; Krencker, F.-N.; Fonville, T.; Sinha, S.; Kabiri, L.; Bodin, S. (2026). "Multi-staged reef recovery following the Pliensbachian/Toarcian boundary event (Early Jurassic) in the Moroccan Central High Atlas" . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 688 113638. Bibcode : 2026PPP...68813638S . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113638 . ^ Bujtor, L.; Henn, T.; Kanizsai, L. (2026). "Small-sized, cephalopod-dominated fauna witnessing the late Bajocian transgression event and its bathyal palaeoenvironment from Komló, Mecsek Mountains (South Hungary)" . Palaeobiodiversity and Palaeoenvironments . Bibcode : 2026PdPe..tmp...27B . doi : 10.1007/s12549-026-00701-9 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: bibcode ( link ) ^ Słowiński, J.; Duda, P.; Nawrot, R.; Zatoń, M. (2026). "Micro-CT reveals host-controlled symbiosis of the Jurassic serpulid–hydroid association". Palaeontology . 69 (3) e70070. Bibcode : 2026Palgy..6970070S . doi : 10.1111/pala.70070 . ^ Butt, R.; Edgar, K. M.; Maidment, S. C. R.; Meade, L. E.; Reedman, C.; Butler, R. J. (2026). "A comprehensive review of the tetrapod fauna of the Purbeck Limestone Group (Tithonian–Berriasian) of Dorset, southern England" . Journal of the Geological Society . 183 (4) jgs2025-232. Bibcode : 2026JGSoc.183..232B . doi : 10.1144/jgs2025-232 . ^ Clavo Yamahuchi, J.; Cook, E.; Duffin, C. J.; Austen, P. A.; Sweetman, S. C.; Gill, P. G.; Hildebrandt, C.; Tomkinson, T.; Benton, M. J. (2026). "Microvertebrates from the Cliff End Bone Bed (Wealden, Lower Cretaceous), East Sussex, UK" . Proceedings of the Geologists' Association . 137 (3) 101187. Bibcode : 2026PrGA..13701187C . doi : 10.1016/j.pgeola.2026.101187 . ^ García-Cobeña, J.; Sánchez-Fenollosa, S.; Cabrera-Argudo, P.; Cobos, A. (2026). "The oldest dinosaurs and other vertebrates from the Cretaceous of the southwestern Maestrazgo Basin (Teruel, Spain)". Cretaceous Research . 184 106362. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.18406362G . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106362 . ^ Cortés, D.; Larsson, H. C. E. (2026). "The Paja Formation of Colombia records uniquely high biodiversity during a biotic inflection in an Early Cretaceous Gondwanan marine ecosystem" . Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution . 14 1848892. doi : 10.3389/fevo.2026.1848892 . ^ Song, S.; Zhang, X.; Teng, X.; Li, T.; Yu, T.; Li, J.; Xue, Y.; Liu, P.; Fang, R.; Zhao, X.; Zheng, D. (2026). "Early Cretaceous Jehol Biota in the Qinling Orogenic Belt: palaeobiogeographical and palaeoecological implications". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 698 113939. doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113939 . ^ Vršanský, P.; Kotulová, J.; Pálková, H.; Starek, D.; Antolíková, S.; Jósza, Š.; Havelcová, M.; Vršanská, L.; Hain, M.; Peyrot, D.; Hinkelman, J.; Garrouste, R.; Hulvák, M.; Biroň, A.; Golej, M.; Števko, M.; Fekete, K.; Sendi, H.; Šmídová, L.; Néraudeau, D.; Poinar, G.; Azar, D.; Káčerová, J.; Nagy, Š.; Bezerra, F. I.; Mikuš, T.; Mlynský, T. (2026). "All known and a new dino-age amber classified within seven global forests". Gondwana Research . 158 : 1– 12. Bibcode : 2026GondR.158....1V . doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2026.04.016 . ^ Fiorelli, L. E.; Wunderlin, C. A.; Torréns, J.; Amelotti, I.; Rothen, C.; Vazquez Sano, M.; Perez Loinaze, V. S.; Vera, E. I.; Cafieri, J.; Hechenleitner, E. M.; Grellet-Tinner, G. (2026). "The discovery and description of an extremophile microcosmos in a Cretaceous paleogeothermal field" . Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution . 13 1678418. Bibcode : 2026FrEEv..1378418F . doi : 10.3389/fevo.2025.1678418 . ^ Siqueira, A. C.; Kiessling, W.; Raja, N. B.; Bellwood, D. R. (2026). "The rise and fall of the world's greatest marine biodiversity hotspot" . Science Advances . 12 (18) eaec7264. Bibcode : 2026SciA...12c7264S . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aec7264 . PMC 13127564 . PMID 42054460 . ^ Moretti, J. A.; Young, J. (2026). "Novel occurrences of Late Pleistocene megafauna from Bender's Cave on the Edwards Plateau of Texas may include evidence of the last interglacial" . Quaternary Research . 131 : 134– 160. Bibcode : 2026QuRes.131..134M . doi : 10.1017/qua.2025.10071 . ^ Pillay, P.; dos Remedios, N.; Pearman, W. S.; Santure, A. W.; Allen, M. S. (2026). "Bones, barcodes, and biodiversity: Optimising bulk bone metabarcoding analysis for tropical subfossil collections from Polynesia". Quaternary International . 758 110099. Bibcode : 2026QuInt.75810099P . doi : 10.1016/j.quaint.2025.110099 . ^ Lueders-Dumont, J. A.; O'Dea, A.; Dillon, E. M.; de Gracia, B.; Lin, C.-H.; Oleynik, S.; Finnegan, S.; Sigman, D. M.; Wang, X. T. (2026). "Fossil isotope evidence for trophic simplification on modern Caribbean reefs" . Nature . 651 (8107): 967– 973. Bibcode : 2026Natur.651..967L . doi : 10.1038/s41586-025-10077-z . PMC 13017509 . PMID 41673163 . ^ Straube, E.; Steinbauer, M. J.; Finnegan, S.; Mathes, G. H. (2026). "The Extinction Risk–Range Change Relationship: Evidence From the Fossil Record" . Global Ecology and Biogeography . 35 (3) e70226. Bibcode : 2026GloEB..3570226S . doi : 10.1111/geb.70226 . ^ Liu, P.; Liu, Y.; Dong, L.; Zhang, J.; Li, S.; Chen, Y. (2026). "Earth system simulations suggest that the Proterozoic ocean was greener but less productive" . Nature Communications . 17 (1) 2854. Bibcode : 2026NatCo..17.2854L . doi : 10.1038/s41467-026-69654-z . PMC 13022481 . PMID 41702928 . ^ Huang, T.; Shen, B. (2026). "Proterozoic coevolution of phytoplankton and the surface Earth redox landscape" . Communications Earth & Environment . 7 (1) 562. Bibcode : 2026ComEE...7..562H . doi : 10.1038/s43247-026-03531-x . ^ El Khoury, A.; Chi Fru, E.; Chraiki, I.; Harzhauser, M.; Aupissy, C.; Fontaine, C.; Somogyi, A.; El Albani, A. (2026). "Reevaluating the nutrient timeline: Francevillian basin geochemistry reveals early permissive conditions for eukaryotic life" . Precambrian Research . 438 108064. Bibcode : 2026PreR..43808064E . doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2026.108064 . ^ Fernandes, H. A.; Boggiani, P. C.; Frederiksen, J. A.; Pescarini, T.; Cardoso-Lucas, V.; Paula-Santos, G.; Elias, E.; Babinski, M.; Leme, J.; Rose, C. V.; Trindade, R. I. F.; Frei, R. (2026). "Water circulation, redox, and productivity dynamics shaped late Ediacaran ecosystems: Insights from trace elements and combined Sr–Cr–Cd isotopes in the Corumbá Group, Brazil" . Gondwana Research . 154 : 236– 257. doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2026.01.006 . ^ Pas, D.; Sinnesael, M.; Mghazli, K.; Jamart, V.; Geyer, G.; Landing, E.; Youbi, N.; Ounar, J.; Omar, H.; Boumehdi, M. A.; Arts, M.; Huygh, J. J. C.; Da Silva, A.-C.; Daley, A. C. (2026). "A new chronostratigraphic anchor for the early Cambrian: Integrating δ 13 C chemostratigraphy and Bayesian astrochronology in West Gondwana (Anti-Atlas, Morocco)" . Earth-Science Reviews . 280 105557. Bibcode : 2026ESRv..28005557P . doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2026.105557 . ^ Jamart, V.; Pas, D.; Hinnov, L. A.; Spangenberg, J. E.; Adatte, T.; Nielsen, A. T.; Schovsbo, N. H.; Thibault, N.; Arts, M.; Daley, A. C. (2026). "Astronomical calibration of the middle Cambrian in Baltica: global carbon cycle synchronization and climate dynamics" . Nature Communications . 17 (1) 3912. Bibcode : 2026NatCo..17.3912J . doi : 10.1038/s41467-026-70651-5 . PMC 13129069 . PMID 41826306 . ^ Li, Z.; Qiu, R.; Algeo, T. J.; Zhao, M.; Chen, T.; Song, Y.; Gilleaudeau, G. J.; Xing, Y.; Huang, F.; Luo, G.; Xie, S. (2026). "Rising productivity drove marine euxinia during the Late Devonian mass extinctions". Geology . 54 (3): 280– 284. Bibcode : 2026Geo....54..280L . doi : 10.1130/G54182.1 . ^ Lu, M.; Sun, Y.; Duan, G.; Ikejiri, T.; Liu, N.; Luo, Q.; Lv, D.; Carroll, R.; Lu, Y. (2026). "Massive wildfires followed oceanic anoxic events during the Late Devonian Frasnian-Famennian mass extinction" . Science Advances . 12 (14) eady4534. Bibcode : 2026SciA...12y4534L . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.ady4534 . PMC 13041755 . PMID 41920995 . ^ Edwards, C. T.; Hibner, B. M.; Smith, C. (2026). "Re-thinking anoxia as a cause of the Late Devonian mass extinction: Carbon, sulfur, and iodine proxies for anoxia across the Frasnian-Famennian Boundary in the Great Basin region, USA". GSA Bulletin . doi : 10.1130/B38993.1 . ^ Racki, G.; Pisarzowska, A. (2026). "Volcanic cataclysm and the late Devonian mass extinctions: Wishful speculation or a reliable hypothesis?". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 697 113832. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69713832R . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113832 . ^ Wei, H.; Zhang, X.; Qiu, Z. (2026). "Pulsed volcanism of the Emeishan large igneous province caused the Guadalupian (Middle Permian) mass extinction". GSA Bulletin . 138 ( 7– 8): 3233– 3246. Bibcode : 2026GSAB..138.3233W . doi : 10.1130/B38771.1 . ^ Bagherpour, B.; Ardakani, O. H.; Herwartz, D.; Grasby, S. E. (2026). "Habitability at the edge of the redox boundary during the Permian–Triassic mass extinction" . Scientific Reports . 16 (1) 12469. Bibcode : 2026NatSR..1612469B . doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-47893-w . PMC 13087033 . PMID 41986571 . ^ Ruciński, M.; Roberts, A.; Hammer, Ø.; Kear, B. P.; Hurum, J. (2026). "Taphonomy of the Lower Triassic (Spathian) Grippia Bonebed from Central Spitsbergen (Svalbard): Biostratinomic, palaeoenvironmental and palaeoecological perspectives" . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 695 113844. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69513844R . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113844 . ^ Barrenechea, J. F.; Borruel-Abadía, V.; Galán-Abellán, A. B.; López-Gómez, J.; Esterle, J.; McCann, T.; de la Horra, R.; Ronchi, A.; Gianolla, P.; Luque, F. J.; Rossi, V. M.; Paterson, N.; Smith, R. M. H.; Wolvaardt, D.; Brookfield, M. E.; Bourquin, S.; Ubide, T. (2026). "Latitude affects continental acidity in the Smithian–Spathian boundary biotic crisis" . Geological Magazine . 163 e2. Bibcode : 2026GeoM..163...e2B . doi : 10.1017/S0016756825100472 . ^ Shen, C.; Schoepfer, S. D.; Henderson, C. M.; Brar, R. S.; Chong, Q.; Moslow, T. F. (2026). "A new astronomical time scale for the early Triassic: Timing of biotic recovery in NW Pangaea". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 697 113915. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69713915S . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113915 . ^ Sun, Y.; Ma, L.; Joachimski, M. M.; Richoz, S.; Zhang, Z.; Huang, E.; Wang, T.; Krystyn, L.; Lai, X. (2026). "The Triassic carbon cycle in turmoil: A 50-m.y. journey from extinction to renewal" . Geology . doi : 10.1130/G54560.1 . ^ Fan, J.-J.; Sun, S.-L.; Zhou, J.-B.; Wilde, S. A.; Wang, Y.; Lv, J.-P. (2026). "Marine large igneous provinces: Key drivers of Triassic recurrent extinction". Geology . 54 (4): 301– 305. Bibcode : 2026Geo....54..301F . doi : 10.1130/G53406.1 . ^ Ruciński, M.; Ezquerro Ruiz, L.; Campos, H.; Mateus, O.; Fernandes, P.; Vilas-Boas, M.; El Atfy, H.; Werneburg, I. (2026). "Palaeoenvironments, stratigraphy and taphonomy of an Upper Triassic vertebrate-bearing unit, Silves Group, central Algarve, southern Portugal" . Lethaia . 59 (3): 1– 31. Bibcode : 2026Letha..59..3.3R . doi : 10.18261/let.59.3.3 . ^ Chai, R.; Zhou, Y.; Wang, T.; Fu, Q.; Teng, X.; Yang, X.; Jiang, N.; Chen, Q.; Chen, Z.; Bian, Z.; Cheng, X.; Zhang, J.; Wu, H. (2026). "Late Triassic tectonic evolution and regional climate response in the northern Tibetan Plateau: Insights into the Triassic–Jurassic mass extinction". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 695 113834. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69513834C . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113834 . ^ McCabe, K. E.; Marroquín, S. M.; Caruthers, A. H.; Owens, J. D.; Golding, M. L.; Reid, R. E. B.; Them, T. R.; Trabucho-Alexandre, J. P.; Veenma, Y. P.; Gill, B. C. (2026). "Deoxygenation in the equatorial Panthalassan Ocean predated the end-Triassic mass extinction" . Communications Earth & Environment . 7 (1) 460. Bibcode : 2026ComEE...7..460M . doi : 10.1038/s43247-026-03362-w . ^ Fang, L.; Newton, R. J.; Zhang, X.; Li, H.; Wang, G.; Deng, S.; Wignall, P. B.; Lu, Y.; Zhang, C.; Li, M.; Wu, H.; He, T.; Xian, B.; Shi, S.; Zhu, L.; Bottrell, S. H.; Hesselbo, S. P. (2026). "Pulsed volcanic sulfur emissions linked to the end-Triassic terrestrial crisis" . Science Advances . 12 (20) eadz6570. Bibcode : 2026SciA...12z6570F . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adz6570 . PMC 13170647 . PMID 42127170 . ^ Chen, J.; Niu, Y.-N.; Ma, R.; Zhou, Y.-L.; Liu, W.-J.; Wang, Y.-M.; You, H.-L.; Xu, X.; Shen, S.-Z.; Feng, Z. (2026). "Triassic–Jurassic environmental instability on the subtropical eastern Tethyan margin linked to low-latitude dinosaur dispersal" . Communications Earth & Environment . 7 (1) 91. Bibcode : 2026ComEE...7...91C . doi : 10.1038/s43247-025-03083-6 . ^ Franceschi, F.; Pellegrino, L.; Martire, L.; Marramà, G.; Carnevale, G. (2026). "The Osteno Konservat-Lagerstätte (Como, NW Italy): exceptional preservation in the Sinemurian (Jurassic)" (PDF) . Bollettino della Società Paleontologica Italiana . 65 (1): 17– 73. ^ Wang, N.; Zhang, Z.; Luffi, P.; Li, Z.; Spicer, R. A.; Yu, Z.; Wan, B.; Zhu, J.-J.; Zhang, J.; Ao, S.; Song, D.; Xiang, D.; Guo, C.; Xiao, W. (2026). "Orogeny and topography influenced Jurassic–Cretaceous terrestrial ecosystem evolution in northeastern Asia" . National Science Review . 13 (6) nwag100. doi : 10.1093/nsr/nwag100 . PMC 13017735 . PMID 41908311 . ^ Rey, K.; Robin, N.; Kaskes, P.; Rozada, L.; Allain, R.; Baele, J.-M.; Stamataki, E.; Snoeck, C.; Claeys, P. (2026). "How Do Vertebrate Droppings Fossilise? Biogenic Versus Diagenetic Signals in Coprolites Evidenced by Elemental Mappings". Geological Journal gj.70253. doi : 10.1002/gj.70253 . ^ Sedorko, D. (2026). "Marine incursion in the Lower Cretaceous Sanfranciscana Basin evidenced by ichnological data" . Cretaceous Research . 181 106312. Bibcode : 2026CrRes.18106312S . doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106312 . ^ Lu, G.-M.; Shen, Z.-S.; Deng, C.-L.; Ogg, J. G.; Sun, M.-D.; Li, M.-S.; Qin, H.-F.; Zhu, R.-X.; Zhou, Z.-H.; Xu, Y.-G. (2026). "Refined chronologies of magnetochron M0r reveal asynchronous terrestrial and marine carbon isotope responses to Oceanic Anoxic Event 1a" . Science Advances . 12 (10) eaea8374. Bibcode : 2026SciA...12a8374L . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aea8374 . PMC 12959394 . PMID 41779858 . ^ Antonietto, L. S.; Alvim, A. M. V.; Batista, M. E. P.; Giorgioni, M.; Santos, R. V.; Queiroz Neto, J. V.; Alencar, D. R.; Saraiva, A. Á. F.; Do Carmo, D. A. (2026). " "Paleo-mangrove forest" biomes of the lower Cretaceous Romualdo Formation, northeastern Brazil: A multi-proxy analysis" . Gondwana Research . 156 : 372– 382. Bibcode : 2026GondR.156..372A . doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2026.03.016 . ^ Buryak, S. D.; Reyes, A.; Siver, P. A.; Li, L.; Jensen, B. J. L.; Furlong, C. M.; Mckeown, N. K. (2026). "Paleoenvironmental analysis of the Late Cretaceous Wombat kimberlite maar sediments, subarctic Canada: implications from geochemical and microfossil data". Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences . 63 : 0075. Bibcode : 2026CaJES..63.0075B . doi : 10.1139/cjes-2025-0075 . ^ Fanti, F.; Consorti, L.; Muscioni, M.; Baldassari, L.; Dinelli, E.; Polentarutti, M.; Bais, G.; Farnsworth, A.; Kustatscher, E.; Spina, A.; Chiarenza, A. A. (2026). "Climate-extreme-driven genesis of a Cretaceous dinosaur Lagerstätte " . Global and Planetary Change . 265 105589. doi : 10.1016/j.gloplacha.2026.105589 . ^ Landman, N. H.; Grier, D. G.; Cochran, J. K.; Tackett, L. S.; Grier, J. C.; Linn, T.; Garb, M. P.; Grier, K. F.; Jicha, B. R.; Grier, J. W. (2026). "The Campanian-Maastrichtian boundary in the Pierre Shale, Cedar Creek Anticline, Montana: environment of deposition based on geochemical, sedimentological, and paleontological evidence". American Museum Novitates (4052): 1– 53. hdl : 2246/7543 . ^ Roberts, E. M.; Hendrix, M. S.; Ramezani, J.; Clyde, W. C.; Zippi, P.; Hodgson, S.; Yuleridge, V.; Zanno, L. E. (2026). "High precision CA-ID-TIMS U-Pb zircon age for the "Dueling Dinosaurs" locality, with implications for regional correlation, basal age and duration of the Hell Creek Formation, Montana" . PLOS ONE . 21 (5) e0328861. Bibcode : 2026PLoSO..2128861R . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0328861 . PMC 13189327 . PMID 42160301 . ^ Liu, S.; Van Rooij, D.; Chen, M.; Fan, H.; Li, G.; Shi, Y.; Liu, Y.; Ng, Z. L.; Luo, K.; Lin, L.; Zhuo, H. (2026). "High productivity and multilayered circulation in the Late Cretaceous Arctic Ocean" . Science Advances . 12 (10) eaec4895. Bibcode : 2026SciA...12c4895L . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aec4895 . PMC 13267304 . PMID 41790888 . ^ Bermúdez, H. D.; Martini, M.; Vega, F. J.; Bolívar, L.; Vajda, V.; Vega-Sandoval, F. A.; Bermúdez, D.; Cui, Y. (2026). "The Chicxulub Mega-earthquake: Stratigraphic evidence from the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary of Colombian Pacific and northeastern Mexico". Journal of South American Earth Sciences . 176 106058. Bibcode : 2026JSAES.17606058B . doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2026.106058 . ^ Rojas Consuegra, R.; Cruz Gámez, E. M.; Pérez Gil, W.; Blanco Bustamante, S. T.; Griñán Ferrer, I. B.; Torres La Rosa, M.; Agüero López, R.; Banzo Morales, S.; Cáceres Govea, D.; Núñez Cambra, K. E.; Bermúdez, H. D. (2026). "Record of seismites linked to the Chicxulub impact in deep-water deposits: Evidence from western Cuba". Journal of South American Earth Sciences . 177 106077. Bibcode : 2026JSAES.17706077R . doi : 10.1016/j.jsames.2026.106077 . ^ Bartali, R.; Urrutia-Fucugauchi, J.; Torres-Hernandez, J. R.; Perez-Cruz, L.; Tovar-Tovar, R. L. (2026). "Unraveling the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary event across the Gulf of Mexico—High-resolution Rayon reef section, Valles-San Luis Potosi platform, Mexico" . PLOS ONE . 21 (4) e0345692. Bibcode : 2026PLoSO..2145692B . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0345692 . PMC 13102201 . PMID 42018519 . ^ Kaiho, K.; Sonke, J. E.; Grasby, S. E.; Yamakawa, A.; Takahashi, S.; Laffont, L. (2026). "Dual Hg peaks and isotopic convergence reveal sequential Deccan volcanism and Chicxulub impact at the K–Pg boundary". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 695 113831. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69513831K . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113831 . ^ Ota, H.; Kuroda, J.; Hayashi, K.; Hoshi, H.; Sawada, K.; Hosogaya, K.; Nishi, H.; Ishikawa, A.; Suzuki, K.; Ikeda, M. A.; Orihashi, Y.; Schmitz, M.; Gyawali, B. R.; Matsumoto, H.; Takashima, R. (2026). "The Chicxulub impact signature in East Asia" . Communications Earth & Environment . 7 (1) 434. Bibcode : 2026ComEE...7..434O . doi : 10.1038/s43247-026-03602-z . ^ Nelissen, M.; Willard, D. A.; van Konijnenburg-van Cittert, H.; Bowen, G. J.; Hollaar, T.; Sluijs, A.; Frieling, J.; Brinkhuis, H. (2026). "Widespread terrestrial ecosystem disruption at the onset of the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 123 (4) e2509231122. Bibcode : 2026PNAS..12309231N . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2509231122 . PMC 12849702 . PMID 41557811 . ^ Ross, A. J.; Bojarski, B.; Szwedo, J. (2026). "A critical review of the age of Baltic amber from the Samland Peninsula, Russia" . Earth and Environmental Science Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh : 1– 14. doi : 10.1017/S1755691025100960 . ^ Munyaka, V. N.; Peppe, D. J.; Deino, A. L.; Lukens, W. E.; Strömberg, C. A. E.; McNulty, K. P.; Muteti, S. N. (2026). "Revisiting the paleoclimate, paleoecology, and age of the middle Miocene Nyakach Formation, Western Kenya". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 697 113887. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69713887M . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113887 . ^ Öğretmen, N.; Bylinskaya, M.; Biltekin, D.; Golovina, L.; Sarı, S.; El Zaatari, S.; McLin, S.; Nader, F. (2026). "Coastal strip of the Levantine Corridor for the Calabrian (late early Pleistocene) hominin migration" . Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 693 113811. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69313811O . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113811 . ^ Cocker, S. L.; Francis, E.; Wanket, C.; Monteath, A. J.; Kuzmina, S.; Tirlea, D.; Jensen, B. J. L.; Heintzman, P. D.; Shapiro, B.; Froese, D. G. (2026). "Latest Pleistocene shrub expansion and steppe-tundra persistence in easternmost Beringia" . Quaternary Science Reviews . 388 110081. Bibcode : 2026QSRv..38810081C . doi : 10.1016/j.quascirev.2026.110081 . ^ Murchie, T. J.; Cocker, S. L.; Baleka, S.; Vogel, N. A.; Natola, L.; Karpinski, E.; Tirlea, D.; Barrera, M. A.; Grant, D. M.; Morien, E.; Long, G. S.; Rutledge, L. Y.; Zazula, G. D.; Jensen, B. J.; Froese, D. G.; Poinar, H. N. (2026). "Ground squirrel coprolites preserve complex archives of ancient environmental DNA over 700,000 years" . Nature Communications . 17 (1) 4868. Bibcode : 2026NatCo..17.4868M . doi : 10.1038/s41467-026-72977-6 . PMC 13250104 . PMID 42265123 . ^ Yazigi, J. B.; Cyrino, C. O.; Peter, C. M.; Ferreira, R. C.; Maricato, J. T.; Janini, L. M.; Briones, M. R. S. (2026). "Oncogenic HPV types identified in Paleolithic and Chalcolithic human genome sequencing data from Ust'-Ishim and Ötzi" . Scientific Reports . 16 (1) 18045. Bibcode : 2026NatSR..1618045Y . doi : 10.1038/s41598-026-49280-x . PMC 13254242 . PMID 42000811 . ^ Stewart, E. M.; Diamond, M. S.; Allman, L. J. (2026). "Metamorphic sulfur release as a driver of sustained cooling and mass extinction" . Science Advanves . 12 (28) eaee2277. doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aee2277 . PMC 13344362 . PMID 42418598 . ^ Parins-Fukuchi, T. (2026). " "Super-progenitor" species and the distribution of sampled descendants" . Paleobiology . 52 (2): 221– 232. Bibcode : 2026Pbio...52..221P . doi : 10.1017/pab.2025.10083 . ^ Chiappone, M.; Guala, M.; Rogers, R.; Makovicky, P. (2026). "When the levee breaks: experimentally testing dinosaur and mammal bone transport in unsteady flows" . Paleobiology . 52 (2): 299– 314. Bibcode : 2026Pbio...52..299C . doi : 10.1017/pab.2025.10087 . ^ Siviero, B. C. T.; Rega, E.; Nick, K. E.; Chadwick, A. V. (2026). "Analysis of pseudopathologies in Edmontosaurus annectens bones: taphonomic implications from biogenetic and diagenetic bone alterations from a Cretaceous bonebed in the Lance Formation, Wyoming" . Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 45 (4) e2600392. doi : 10.1080/02724634.2025.2600392 . ^ Lowes, R. J.; Jannel, A.; Griffin, B. W.; Prescott, T. L.; Falkingham, P. L. (2026). "Digital range of motion analysis is sensitive to subjective steps in joint model construction" . Journal of Anatomy joa.70179. doi : 10.1111/joa.70179 . PMID 42231846 . ^ Du, M.; Wang, W.; Tan, J.; Barido-Sottani, J. (2026). "Deep learning for mass extinction detection on fossilized phylogenies: power, limitations and lessons for simulation-based birth–death inference" . Royal Society Open Science . 13 (6) 252096. doi : 10.1098/rsos.252096 . This article incorporates text from this source, which is available under the CC BY 4.0 license. ^ van Hinsbergen, D. J. J.; Vaes, B.; Boschman, L. M.; Lom, N.; van de Lagemaat, S. H. A.; Advokaat, E. L.; de Baar, S.; Fraters, M. R. T.; Paridaens, J.; Jarochowska, E. B. (2026). "Paleolatitude.org 3.0: A calculator for paleoclimate and paleobiology studies based on a new global paleogeography model" . PLOS ONE . 21 (4) e0346817. Bibcode : 2026PLoSO..2146817V . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0346817 . PMC 13127928 . PMID 42054303 . ^ Zheng, D.; Lipp, A. G.; Farnsworth, A.; Li, S.; Merdith, A. S.; Gurung, K.; Hou, M.; Chen, A.; Hou, Z.; Lunt, D. J.; Sperling, E. A.; Valdes, P. J.; Mills, B. J. W. (2026). "Tight regulation of Earth's long-term temperature over Phanerozoic time" . Nature Communications . 17 (1) 5995. doi : 10.1038/s41467-026-72672-6 . PMC 13347045 . PMID 42082499 . ^ Myrow, P. M.; Hu, M.; Lamb, M. P. (2026). "Paleohydraulics of cyclonic storm deposits suggest that the equatorial climate of Earth in the Pennsylvanian was not cold" . Geology . 54 (4): 291– 295. Bibcode : 2026Geo....54..291M . doi : 10.1130/G53927.1 . ^ Shen, J.; Zhang, Y. G.; Yuan, D.-X.; Xu, Y.-G. (2026). "Atmospheric CO 2 drawdown during the Emeishan flood basalt volcanism" . Nature Communications . 17 (1) 1657. Bibcode : 2026NatCo..17.1657S . doi : 10.1038/s41467-026-69600-z . PMC 12946269 . PMID 41748594 . ^ Leonard, J.; Zahirovic, S.; Salles, T.; Dimitrijević, D.; Merdith, A.; Dowding, E. M. (2026). "Coral thermal tolerances constrain extreme Mesozoic–Cenozoic hothouse reconstructions". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 699 113957. doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113957 . ^ Yi, Z.; Huang, Z.; Yang, S.; Wang, F.; Meert, J. G.; Zhao, Q.; Li, C.; Wang, Q. (2026). "Testing the Pangean mega-monsoon hypothesis: New insights from a Late Triassic climatic record from the Zigui Basin, South China". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . 693 113807. Bibcode : 2026PPP...69313807Y . doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2026.113807 . ^ Mao, Q.; Zhang, M.; Chen, Z.-Q.; Benton, M. J.; Xiang, D.; Chen, C.; Hu, J.; Qiao, Q.; Ao, S.; Song, D.; Li, R.; Wang, H.; Sang, M.; Tan, Z.; Huang, Y.; Guo, Z.; Li, Z.; Qiu, X.; Xiao, W. (2026). "Altaid Plateau forced Late Triassic Earth's freezing state" . Communications Earth & Environment . 7 (1) 497. Bibcode : 2026ComEE...7..497M . doi : 10.1038/s43247-026-03432-z . ^ Price, G. D.; Davies, M.; Cox, J. (2026). "Climate, CO 2 and correlation: a Middle to Late Jurassic–Early Cretaceous carbon and oxygen isotope record" . Cretaceous Research . 188 106444. doi : 10.1016/j.cretres.2026.106444 . ^ Fang, X.; Izumi, K.; Jiang, S.; Zhu, J.; Su, T.; Li, S. (2026). "Terrestrial carbon stock vulnerability during the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum" . Communications Earth & Environment . doi : 10.1038/s43247-026-03682-x . ^ Han, W.; Zhang, T.; Zhang, J.; Ao, H.; Kemp, D. B.; Wang, T.; Sun, J.; Yan, X.; Wang, S.; Jiangzuo, Q.; Tian, Q.; Fan, Y.; Mai, L.; Meijer, N.; Fang, X. (2026). "Late Miocene Asian monsoon intensification and turnover of Asian mammal communities" . Communications Earth & Environment . 7 (1) 332. Bibcode : 2026ComEE...7..332H . doi : 10.1038/s43247-026-03354-w . ^ Burgener, L.; Griffith, E.; Hyland, E. (2026). "An illusion of equability: Paleoclimate proxies, environmental variability, and temperature seasonality in greenhouse worlds" . GSA Bulletin . doi : 10.1130/B38825.1 . ^ Dolman, A. M.; McPartland, M. Y.; Felis, T.; Laepple, T. (2026). "Strontium to calcium ratio and oxygen isotopic coral records can exaggerate past decadal tropical climate variability" . Communications Earth & Environment . 7 (1) 308. Bibcode : 2026ComEE...7..308D . doi : 10.1038/s43247-026-03465-4 .