The strikes were launched amid ongoing US–Iran negotiations regarding Iran's nuclear program .

The war is part of a Middle Eastern crisis sparked by the Gaza war and follows the Twelve-Day War and was preceded by the largest US military buildup in the region since the 2003 invasion of Iraq . US justifications for initiating the war included a response to the crackdown on anti-government protests in Iran, preventing Iran from developing a nuclear weapon, regime change , and taking Iran's oil and gas resources . Critics have rejected these justifications, maintaining that the attack initiated a war of aggression , in violation of international law .

Following a decentralized strategy , Iranian units responded with a series of missile and drone attacks against Israel, US-aligned Arab countries , and US military bases across the region , and by blocking the Strait of Hormuz in late March. Two days after Khamenei's assassination, fighting resumed between Hezbollah and Israel, sparking the 2026 Lebanon war .

Following Iranian strikes on their territory, the United Arab Emirates , Saudi Arabia , and Kuwait have also attacked Iran and skirmished with its Iraqi non-state allies .

The war has resulted in thousands of civilian and military casualties .

The economic impact of the war included the largest ever supply disruption of the global oil market , disruptions of the natural gas, fertilizer, aviation, and tourism industries, and volatility in financial markets.

As of June 2026 , the cost of the war to US taxpayers was estimated at $113.3 billion.

The secretary-general of the United Nations and several countries condemned the US–Israeli strikes, while the United Nations Security Council passed a resolution condemning Iran's retaliatory strikes on Gulf states. A two-week ceasefire beginning on 8 April came under strain after Israeli attacks on Lebanon and subsequent Iranian closure of the Strait of Hormuz.

After the failure of the Islamabad Talks on 12–13 April, the US imposed a naval blockade . A memorandum to end the war was signed on 17 June by the presidents of the US and Iran, lifting the dual blockade. Tensions again escalated, but on 28 June, the US and Iran agreed to cease their exchange of attacks.

On 8 July, the ceasefire deal between the US and Iran collapsed after attacks by both sides.

During the Iran–Iraq War , the US supported Iraq .

In 1988, a US warship struck an Iranian mine , and the US responded by attacking Iran's navy . A few months later, the US mistakenly shot down a civilian Iranian flight . Iran started a ballistic missile program to deter Iraqi missile attacks on Iranian cities during the 1980–88 Iran–Iraq War and to compensate for its lack of a modern air force due to sanctions. Starting in the 1985, Iran began engaging in proxy conflicts throughout the Middle East. These proxy groups became part of the informal ' Axis of Resistance ' committed primarily to countering American , Israeli , Saudi , Emirati, and sometimes Turkish influence in the region.

In 2002, Iran's covert nuclear program was first revealed, and Iran denied seeking a weapon.

In 2003, Iran's AMAD Project was suspended following Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei's fatwa against nuclear weapons .

In 2005, the US began imposing sanctions targeting Iran's nuclear program , and in 2006 the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) imposed a series of sanctions against Iran .

The US and Israel conducted a campaign of cyberwarfare against Iranian nuclear facilities to disrupt their operations, while Israel assassinated several top Iranian nuclear scientists .

The UNSC concerns about Iran's nuclear program from 2006 led to the multilateral Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) between Iran and the P5+1 and the EU in 2015.

In January 2020, US president Donald Trump ordered the assassination of Qasem Soleimani , the commander of the Iranian Quds Force . Afterwards, there have been multiple alleged Iranian attempts to assassinate Trump .

Following the October 7 attacks on Israel and the start of the Gaza war , tensions further escalated with Israel fighting Iran-backed militias across the Middle East, including Hamas , Hezbollah , and the Houthis . Israeli strikes on the Iranian consulate in Damascus and the assassination of Ismail Haniyeh in 2024 were met with Iranian strikes on Israel in April and October .

In June 2025, Israel launched the Twelve-Day War by attacking Iranian military and nuclear facilities, provoking Iranian counter-strikes.

The US also struck Iranian nuclear facilities during the Twelve-Day War, which ended in a ceasefire .

In early 2026, Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu lobbied President Donald Trump for a joint military strike on Iran, specifically targeting its leadership.

The Biden administration kept most of these sanctions, further damaging Iran's economy. Trump continued the "maximum pressure" approach in his second term.

In September 2025, the UN reimposed sanctions on Iran using the "snapback" mechanism , causing the currency to weaken, resulting in price increases for food supplies such as meat, rice, and other staples, freezing Iranian assets abroad, suspending arms transactions, and imposing penalties related to the country's ballistic-missile programme . Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent labelled the collapse of the Iranian currency in December 2025 as the strategy's "grand culmination".

At his State of the Union Address in February 2026, Trump claimed Iran had restarted its nuclear program and was developing missiles capable of striking the US. Trump's claims contradicted his previous claims that Iran's nuclear program was "obliterated" and US intelligence reports that Iran did not pose any threat towards the US, and needed until 2035 to build such missiles to do so.

On 12 June 2025, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) found Iran non-compliant with its NPT safeguards agreement for the first time since 2005. A few days later, it was reported that Iran had stored highly enriched uranium in an underground facility that was undamaged by US bombings in 2025 . Subsequently, Iran denied the IAEA access to nuclear facilities that had been bombed, but did provide access to all unaffected facilities. Mohammad Eslami , the head of the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran , said Iran would not permit inspections of facilities struck by the US until the IAEA established rules for the post-war situation, insisting on codified protocols for internationally protected facilities subjected to military attacks, and that the IAEA condemn the attacks.

In February 2026, Iran informed the IAEA that normal safeguards were "legally untenable and materially impracticable," as a result of threats and "acts of aggression," leaving the IAEA unable to verify whether Iran had suspended enrichment or confirm the status of its stockpile, though it found no evidence Iran was weaponizing. Analysts in the UK and US characterized Iran's strategy as nuclear hedging , developing the technical infrastructure to assemble a weapon on short notice while stopping short of production.

The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists said that Iran was using its enrichment program and uranium stockpiles for leverage in international negotiations, and was willing to dilute or export its higher-level enriched uranium in exchange for sanctions relief and prevention of attacks. Israel nuclear issue Further information: Israel and nuclear weapons and Middle East nuclear weapon free zone Israel is widely believed to possess nuclear weapons , with a stockpile estimated between 90 and 400 nuclear warheads. Israel is the only nuclear-armed country that does not officially acknowledge its nuclear weapons capability. Some scholars have argued that Israel's nuclear weapons have incentivized Iran to develop its own nuclear program, seen as maintaining a balance of nuclear deterrence , or causing a regional nuclear arms race . Citing security threats, Israel rejects international calls to accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons or to participate in negotiations of a Middle East nuclear weapon free zone . This has frustrated both US and UK diplomatic efforts on such a zone. Scholars also suggest US tacit acceptance of the Israeli nuclear weapons capability is seen as a double standard that undermines its diplomatic credibility in Middle East nonproliferation negotiations. Prelude Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu successfully lobbied the Trump administration for military intervention.

The US began its greatest buildup of military assets in the region since the Iraq War in 2003 .

The US accused Iran of building up its nuclear and missile programs to threaten the United States and its allies. Iran accused the US of disinformation . Gulf states like Qatar predicted that escalations could severely harm the region . Negotiations regarding the Iranian nuclear program were held in February until the US and Israel commenced military strikes in Iran on 28 February 2026. Hostilities Further information: Timeline of the 2026 Iran war and List of attacks during the 2026 Iran war First week (28 February – 6 March) Further information: Assassination of Ali Khamenei , 2026 Lebanon war , 2026 Minab school attack , and 2026 Lamerd sports hall attack 27 February: US aircraft sit on the flight deck of USS Abraham Lincoln 28 February: Trump addresses the nation about the strikes.

On 27 February at 3:38 p.m. EST (11:08 p.m. IRST ), Trump, traveling on Air Force One to Texas , authorized Operation Epic Fury. US missiles, drones, and Israeli fighter jets began striking Iran the next day, around 9:45 a.m. IRST (1:15 a.m. EST).

The strikes took place during negotiations over Iran's nuclear program, and coincided with the holy month of Ramadan . F-16 fighter jets of the IAF over Deir ez-Zor , Syria during Operation Roaring Lion.

The operation was codenamed Operation Roaring Lion by Israel.

The Israeli Air Force (IAF) said it struck 500 military targets in Iran in the largest combat sortie in its history. Iranian naval vessels were also targeted. Israel said it used over 1,200 bombs in 24 hours. US strikes were carried out by planes based around the Middle East and from aircraft carriers. Iran's supreme leader Ali Khamenei and thousands of Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) personnel, were killed as military bases were attacked. Strikes hit Tehran's Pasteur Street district, where the presidential palace is, and the Supreme National Security Council (SNSC).

The strikes were coupled with cyberattacks on Iranian infrastructure, media, and phone apps, with messages calling on Iranians to rise up against their government.

The cyberattacks resulted in a near-total internet blackout in Iran, lasting over 60 hours with connectivity dropping to as low as 1% of normal levels, disrupting government communications, state media, and public services. Iran restricted internet access , allowing access only to government-approved users until 26 May. Israeli officials said months-long planning preceded the strikes, allowing them to pinpoint targets, attain "tactical surprise", and gain US support. Attacking during the morning, rather than at night when most of Israel's previous attacks on Iran took place, added to the element of surprise. Israel declared a state of emergency, citing expectation of Iranian retaliation, and warned its citizens to remain in protected areas. Israel called up 20,000 reservists in addition to the 50,000 on duty.

The Israeli Ministry of Health moved its hospital operations underground.

On 28 February, Trump released a statement saying the purpose of the strikes was regime change . Trump said Iran's "menacing activities" endangered the US and its allies. He cited the Iran hostage crisis , support for non-state actors such as Hamas and Hezbollah , and its killings of protesters . Trump cited Iran calling " Death to America " and its alleged history of attacking US civilians and soldiers as evidence of Iran's intent against the US. Trump and Benjamin Netanyahu warned of the potential threat of nuclear weapons in Iran and called on Iranians to overthrow their government. Israeli defense minister Israel Katz labeled the strikes a "pre-emptive attack" intended to "remove threats to...Israel". Iran rejected claims that it intended to attack the US, citing the aggressive posture of the US military as evidence. Major US military bases and installations in the Middle East, including bases used during the strikes Iran reacted within hours by launching missiles and drones. Iran codenamed its response Operation True Promise IV , and state media dubbed the events the Ramadan War. Iran struck Israeli targets in Tel Aviv and Haifa as well as countries throughout the Persian Gulf. Targets included Bahrain's capital Manama , Kuwait International Airport , the United Arab Emirates' capital Abu Dhabi , Riyadh and Eastern Province in Saudi Arabia, and Erbil International Airport and the US Consulate General in Erbil in Iraq. Iran reported striking the US bases of Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar, Ali Al Salem Air Base in Kuwait, Al Dhafra Air Base in the UAE, and the US Fifth Fleet headquarters in Bahrain.

On 1 or 2 March, Iran struck the radar bases for US THAAD missile defense systems in Jordan, the UAE and Saudi Arabia, destroying at least one.

On 1 March, Iran launched more strikes, including missiles and drones on Bahrain, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the UAE.

The UK reported "missiles fired in the direction of Cyprus", but "don't believe they were targeted at Cyprus". However, the presidents of Cyprus and Northern Cyprus contradicted the claims that any missiles were fired at Cyprus.

The Palau -flagged Skylight and Marshall Islands -flagged MKD VYOM tankers were targeted off Oman's coast. Shipping through the Strait of Hormuz slowed to a standstill, with 150 freight ships, including oil tankers, stalled. To avert further Iranian strikes, the E3 -the UK, France, and Germany- resolved to back "proportionate military defensive measures" against drones and ballistic missiles, signaling the potential for direct involvement. British prime minister Keir Starmer said the US could use British bases for "defensive" strikes on Iran and disclosed that Ukrainian and other specialists would aid Gulf efforts to foil Iranian drone strikes. Saudi Crown Prince Salman, with US backing, vowed to employ military force against Iranian incursions, calling Iranian strikes "cowardly" due to Saudi airspace being closed to US and Israeli attackers. Trump announced that the US had accepted an Iranian proposal to negotiations. However, Ali Larijani ruled out talks. Trump issued letters to Congress leaders according to the 1973 War Powers Resolution . 2 March: Montage of US Central Command strikes On 2 March, the US embassy in Kuwait was struck and closed indefinitely.

The US-flagged tanker Stena Imperative and the Honduras-flagged tanker Athe Nova were struck. An advisor to an IRGC commander said he would set fire to any ship coming through the Strait of Hormuz, and added that no oil will leave the area. Qatar claimed that it had shot down two Iranian Su-24 bombers .

The Qatari Ministry of Defense announced that Ras Laffan Industrial City , the main Qatari gas facility, and Mesaieed Industrial Area were struck by Iranian drones. According to satellite imagery analysis by the Energy Economics and Society Research Institute, Ras Laffan appeared to not have been damaged before the "unprecedented shutdown" which sent fuel prices higher. 2 March: Damage to residential buildings in Sanandaj , Iranian Kurdistan The US and Israel attacked the Natanz Nuclear Facility and the Iranian media reported damage to the Khatam-al-Anbia and Gandhi hospitals.

In a friendly fire incident, the pilot of an F/A-18 of the Kuwait Air Force shot down three US F-15E fighters. Israel and Hezbollah exchanged strikes. Hezbollah began firing rockets and missiles on Israel in retaliation for the killing of Khamenei. Hezbollah claimed that the attack was a "defensive act" after more than a year of Israeli attacks despite a 2024 truce . It added that it restarted fighting to force Israel to stop its aggression and evacuate from seized Lebanese territories , emphasizing that the move was unrelated to the war. Lebanon banned military activities by Hezbollah after the attacks. An IDF spokesperson stated the attack was "an official declaration of war by Hezbollah", vowing to "neutralize" the threat. Israel struck southern Lebanon , Beirut, and the Beqaa Valley , with the IDF saying it had killed the head of Hezbollah's intelligence Hussein Makled and Adham Adnan al-Othman, the head of Palestinian Islamic Jihad 's armed wing, the Al-Quds Brigades .

The Royal Air Force station at Akrotiri , Cyprus, was targeted by a drone strike causing damage to a runway. Another strike on Cyprus led to Greece announcing that it would deploy frigates and F-16s to defend Cyprus from strikes by Iran.

The pro-Iran militant group Iraqi Guardians of Blood Brigades claimed responsibility for attacks on the US Victory Base near Baghdad International Airport and Erbil in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq.

The Islamic Resistance in Iraq claimed responsibility for 23 drone strikes on US assets in Erbil. 3 March: Enghelab Square , Tehran On 3 March, US and Israeli strikes destroyed the SNSC headquarters, the Expediency Discernment Council building in Tehran, and what Israeli officials described as an alleged underground nuclear weapons facility called Min Zadai.

The proximity of these strikes to the Bushehr Nuclear Power Plant (about 12 km (7.5 mi) away) prompted the Russian agency Rosatom to suspend construction on new units and evacuate non-essential staff. US officials said its forces had severely damaged Iran's naval capabilities, mainly in the Gulf of Oman , where several Iranian warships were destroyed and key bases hit. Debris from an airstrike damaged Golestan Palace , a UNESCO World Heritage Site , causing UNESCO to issue a statement that damaging UNESCO sites is against international law. Israel Katz authorized a ground invasion of Lebanon on 3 March. This incursion in southern Lebanon was with forces from the 91st Division with the goal to establish a "security layer" for the Israeli residents of northern settlements against Hezbollah, expecting to destroy their infrastructure in the Israel-Lebanon border .

The Lebanese government reported that such Israeli preventive attacks reached Kfarkela and Qouzah , leading the Lebanese army to redeploy from newly established border posts amid escalating Israeli activity in violation of the 2024 Israel–Lebanon ceasefire agreement . Israel reported that it killed Daoud Alizadeh , the commander of the Quds Force's Lebanon branch, in Tehran. 4 March: Buildings in Tehran damaged by US–Israeli strikes Western diplomats said Qatar had struck Iran after Iran had attempted to strike Doha's airport and Qatar shot down two Iranian Su-24 bombers. Qatar denied the accusation that it had joined the "campaign targeting Iran". Iran warned it would hit all economic hubs in the Middle East, and any defensive European military involvement would be considered an act of war.

On 4 March, US secretary of state Marco Rubio announced that the US-Israeli attacks on Iran would increase in intensity. Israel attacks hit the Basij headquarters. Mojtaba Khamenei survived an airstrike.

The IDF announced that an F-35I "Adir" shot down a Russian-made Iranian Yak-130 fighter jet over Tehran, the first time that an F-35 has shot down a crewed fighter jet in air-to-air combat, and the first time the IAF shot down an aircraft since 1985. Iran launched strikes against the Al Udeid Air Base , and Aramco's Ras Tanura oil refining facility.

The US ordered the evacuation of non-essential workers in Cyprus in anticipation of Iranian strikes. A ballistic missile launched from Iran was intercepted by NATO air defense systems as it entered Turkish airspace, marking an escalation in the conflict. Turkey asserted its right to self-defense after the missile landed in Dörtyol , Hatay Province , and NATO secretary general Mark Rutte stated that the alliance was committed to defending Turkey. 4 March: USS Charlotte torpedoed IRIS Dena An Iranian frigate, IRIS Dena , was sunk in the Indian Ocean by United States Navy submarine USS Charlotte , about 40 nautical miles (74 km; 46 mi) south of Galle , Sri Lanka.

The vessel was returning to Iran following its participation in the International Fleet Review 2026 and the multilateral Exercise MILAN at Visakhapatnam , India.

The exercise required ships not to carry ammunition, and the US likely knew the Dena was defenseless, since it sent a maritime patrol aircraft to participate. It was the first ship sunk by a submarine in active combat since the Falklands War , and the first by an American submarine since World War II. 104 Iranians were killed.

The government of Azerbaijan said on 5 March that drones from Iran struck Azerbaijan's Nakhchivan exclave damaging an airport and injuring two civilians. Keir Starmer confirmed UK's bases on Cyprus would be used to defend the airspace of Jordan from Iranian drones, while Italy , the Netherlands and Spain confirmed they would send warships to defend Cyprus. Ireland stated it was willing to protect Cyprus and join the European defense coalition mobilized around the island if requested.

The IDF killed Hamas official Wassim Attallah al-Ali in Beddawi , Lebanon. Trump said on 6 March that there are "no time limits" for how long the war will continue.

The Iranian tanker IRIS Bushehr was interned by the Sri Lanka Navy , marking the first instance of a warship being interned in a neutral country since World War II. Second week (7–13 March) Further information: 2026 Qeshm Island desalination plant attack and 2026 Iranian supreme leader election On 7 March, the US sent a third aircraft carrier, USS George H. W. Bush , to the Middle East.

The British aircraft carrier HMS Prince of Wales was placed on advanced readiness to defend British interests in the region.

On 7 March, Iranian president Masoud Pezeshkian apologized for strikes on neighboring countries, citing "miscommunication in the ranks. He stated those countries would not be targeted unless the US launched attacks from them; however, Iranian attacks continued, highlighting limited control over the IRGC chief Ahmad Vahidi .

On 8 March, Khamenei's second son, Mojtaba , was designated as Iran's new supreme leader. US Central Command posted a message on X which urged "civilians in Iran to stay at home" and alleged that "he Iranian regime is knowingly endangering innocent lives by using heavily populated civilian areas to conduct military operations, including launching one-way attack drones and ballistic missiles". Six dead US soldiers from the 2026 Port Shuaiba drone attack are transferred to the US on 7 March 2026. Israeli airstrikes hit Iranian oil storage facilities, killing four people. Strikes on fuel depots near Tehran caused a "river of fire" to pour out along the streets, and the city became engulfed in thick black smoke, causing toxic acidic rain to fall in the surrounding area. Residents were advised by Iranian authorities to stay indoors, wear masks when outside, and conserve food and fuel. Kuwait reported that two of its officers were killed.

The Saudi Civil Defense agency said that a strike on a compound in Al-Kharj killed two people. US Central Command announced the death of a seventh US service member from an Iranian attack.

The UK confirmed its forces had intercepted an Iranian drone headed towards Iraq, and declared its intention to send a Merlin helicopter to the region to detect aerial threats. According to the Iranian Red Crescent Society , 65 schools and 32 medical facilities had been targeted, and more than 10,000 civilian sites damaged.

On 9 March, NATO confirmed the interception of a second ballistic missile in Turkish airspace. Turkey deployed six F-16s and air defence systems to Northern Cyprus . Trump claimed that "the war is very complete, pretty much", after speaking with Russian president Putin, and said "we already won the war in many ways." He claimed that the Strait of Hormuz was open and expressed interest in taking it over from Iran. Trump went back on some comments during a press conference later that day, supporting Defense Secretary Hegseth in stating that the war was just the "beginning of building a new country" and it would end "soon".

Following Syrian president Ahmed al-Sharaa's support for the Lebanon's objective to disarm Hezbollah, the group targeted the city of Inkhil in Syria. About a dozen B-1B bombers arrived at bases in Europe. Strait of Hormuz transits dropped significantly since the start of the war. GPS jamming of uncertain origin disrupted navigation of ships near the Strait of Hormuz.

The United States Department of State designated the Muslim Brotherhood branch in Sudan as a terrorist organization .

On 10 March, an IRGC commander stated that Iran was only firing missiles with payloads of 1,000 kg or more. AFP reported that Iran's attacks were the "most intense and heaviest" since the start of the war. This showed a shift in tactics from saturating air defences to high-impact penetration strikes. American general Dan Caine acknowledged that Iran was fighting back, but not harder than the US expected.

Following the Syrian presidency's support for the disarmament of Hezbollah and a campaign of mobilization by the Syrian army on the Lebanese border, shells from Lebanon landed in Serghaya , 20 km (12 mi) from Damascus where the Syrian Armed Forces forces presided. Israel issued an urgent evacuation notice to southern suburbs of Beirut. Defense analyst AJ Jaff reported that Iran's ballistic missile launch rate fell 92% from day one of the war (480 to 40) and the drone launch rate fell 92% (720 to 60).

On 11 March 14 US bombers were deployed to RAF Fairford in the UK, where bombs were being prepared for loading. This followed US war secretary Hegseth's statement that it was the "most intense day of strikes inside Iran". Israel reportedly struck the Parchin military complex. A branch of Bank Sepah in Tehran was hit by a strike, prompting the IRGC to warn that they could retaliate by striking US or Israeli banks in the region. Iran hit Stryker , a US-based medical supply company with a cyberattack.

On 12 March, UNICEF reported that 300 children had been killed, thousands injured, hundreds of thousands displaced, and millions unable to attend schools due to the war. Iranian deputy intelligence minister Akbar Ghaffari was killed in an airstrike. An Iranian attack set two tankers on fire off the Iraqi coast, killing one person.

The historical Safavid -era building of Rashk-e Jenan , was destroyed by US-Israeli strikes. Other buildings damaged included the Chehel Sotoun pavilion, Rakib Khaneh Mansion , Timurid Hall , Ashraf Hall and the Ali Qapu palace. Many affected buildings and monuments were legally protected by the Blue Shield International , which called damaging them a war crime. French soldiers were injured in a drone strike at a base in Iraqi Kurdistan. French president Emmanuel Macron announced on 13 March that a soldier was killed in the attack. Satellite imagery of black smoke rising from the Port of Salalah on 13 March during the 2026 Iranian strikes on Oman On 13 March, to help deal with the economic costs of the war, the US temporarily lifted restrictions on the sale of Russian oil. Iran announced a coordinated offensive by its navy, army, and Hezbollah against Israel and US bases. Israel reported that 58 people have been hospitalized due to injuries following a missile strike. Kuwait authorities stated that defense equipment and the country's main airport were attacked, and power lines gone out of service. Missiles entered Turkish air space and were intercepted, with explosions heard near Adana . Israel struck IRGC checkpoints after receiving tip-offs by on the ground informants. Reuters reported Israel had struck positions of the Basij used to suppress Iranian protests. Third week (14–20 March) Further information: 2026 Kharg Island attack , Assassination of Ali Larijani , and 2026 South Pars field attack Kharg Island in 2015; the fires on the towers are a normal part of oil refining.

As of the third week, analysts found little evidence of significant defections in the Iranian military, which have been considered a necessary condition for regime change .

The US conducted an attack on Kharg Island , a key oil export hub home to 90 percent of Iran's oil exports. Over 90 military sites were targeted while the oil infrastructure was not targeted "for reasons of decency", according to Trump.

On 14 March, Kata'ib Hezbollah security commander Abu Ali al-Askari was killed in an airstrike in Baghdad.

The Royal Tulip Al Rasheed Hotel in Baghdad's Green Zone was hit by a drone whilst hosting an EU and Saudi Arabian delegation.

The attack was not claimed by anyone; however, due to the proximity of a similar attack 48 hours earlier on the US embassy in Baghdad, there were suspicions it was an Iranian attack. An Iranian missile hit Haifa oil refineries in Haifa Bay , 19 March On 16 March, China and US-aligned NATO nations in Europe rejected Trump's call to provide military support to reopen the Strait of Hormuz. Trump rebuked his NATO allies, calling their decision a "very foolish mistake".

On the same day, White House Press Secretary Karoline Leavitt stated that the Trump administration will not rule out a military draft for the war.

While doing so, she clarified that a draft is not "part of the current plan," but that the president is open to any suggestions.

On 17 March, Trump made a statement on Truth Social renouncing NATO's assistance, and unexpectedly, US allies in the Indo-Pacific, namely Japan, South Korea, and Australia , for refusing to join US-led attacks on Iran during the war. Trump declared that the United States " not need the help of anyone" regarding the war.

In the morning of 17 March, senior Iranian officials, including Ali Larijani and Basij chief Gholamreza Soleimani were targeted by Israeli airstrikes . Both their deaths were later confirmed by Iranian state media.

In response, Iran launched a missile barrage that killed two Israeli civilians in Ramat Gan .

The same day, Israel launched a ground invasion of southern Lebanon .

On 18 March, Israel struck the South Pars natural gas field in the Persian Gulf and its neighboring refineries in Iran with US coordination.

In retaliation, Iran attacked the world's largest LNG production facility in Qatar. Trump claimed he was unaware of the South Pars attack, promised that there would be no more Israeli attacks on Iranian oil infrastructure, and threatened Iran not to continue attacking Qatari energy infrastructure. Israel said it had killed Iranian intelligence minister Esmaeil Khatib in an overnight airstrike. Pezeshkian confirmed Khatib's killing. A hair salon in Beit Awwa was struck by a projectile , killing four women, with Israeli authorities stating that it was most likely cluster munitions and Palestinian authorities saying it was an errant Israeli interceptor. Video of suspected Iranian strike on a USAF F-35, released by Tasnim News Agency , 19 March 2026, the first case of a damaged stealth fighter in combat On 19 March, a US F-35 made an emergency landing after a suspected hit by Iranian forces. A BAZAN Group refinery in Haifa was hit during a broader Iranian missile attack on the area as a retaliation for Israeli attacks on South Pars gas facilities. Netanyahu insisted that "You can't make a revolution from the air" and that "there must be a ground component—I won't share with you all the options", implying that there was a potential for limited assault operations involving soldiers on the ground in Iran.

The US began an aerial campaign against Iranian vessels and drones in the Strait of Hormuz in an effort to reopen it to international shipping. Fourth week (21–27 March) Further information: 2026 Strait of Hormuz campaign Admiral Brad Cooper said that the US military had so far struck more than 8,000 Iranian military targets, including 130 vessels.

On 21 March, the US conducted strikes on the Natanz Nuclear Facility using bunker buster bombs to target the site. Russia condemned the strikes on Natanz as a "blatant violation of international law," while the IAEA urged military restraint "to avoid any risk of a nuclear accident".

In response, Iran struck the southern Israeli town of Dimona , injuring at least 78 people. Iran said that it targeted the Shimon Peres Negev Nuclear Research Center . Citing unnamed US officials, CNN and The Wall Street Journal reported that Iran unsuccessfully attempted to strike the joint US–UK military base at Diego Garcia on the Chagos Islands in the British Indian Ocean Territory .

The report said one of the missiles broke apart mid-flight, while another was intercepted by a SM-3 air defence missile launched by a US warship. Israel said that Iran used a two-stage intercontinental ballistic missile to target the island. Iran denied launching missiles towards Diego Garcia, saying that it was an Israeli false flag attack.

In response the UK Foreign Secretary confirmed and denounced the Iranian attack on their end, and additionally expanded permission for the United States to bomb certain targets using their bases. No evidence has been presented that the alleged Iranian missiles neared Diego Garcia or that one was intercepted. Israeli troops near the Lebanese border on 21 March 2026 The Houthi movement in Yemen warned that it would respond to any escalation against Iran, including efforts to reopen the Strait of Hormuz . It specifically warned the two Arab countries offering to join the Strait of Hormuz campaign—Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates—that they "will be the first to lose in this battle".

The Houthis further threatened to join the war in the event that US allies joined the attack on Iran or if the US and Israel used the Red Sea to carry out operations. Lebanon's government expelled the Iranian ambassador. Trump issued an ultimatum to Iran, threatening to strike its power plants unless it opened the Strait of Hormuz within 48 hours. Iran doubled down, threatening to "completely" close the Strait of Hormuz and strike vital infrastructure across the region such as energy and desalination facilities critical for drinking water. Iranian opposition figure and former crown prince Reza Pahlavi called on Trump and Netanyahu to target the military while sparing civilian infrastructure which "Iranians will need to rebuild our country." Halfway through the deadline, Trump announced that he was postponing strikes against Iranian power plants for five days, and said the US was negotiating with Iran to end the war. Iran denied the talks ever took place or were taking place and called the president "deceitful". Iran rejected the 15-point peace plan presented by the US. Iran asserted that Lebanon must be included as part of a ceasefire deal, thereby making a ceasefire conditional on an end to the 2026 Lebanon war against Hezbollah.

On 24 March, Israel or its allies shot down an Iranian missile crossing above Lebanon at high altitude, according to the Lebanese army, which also confirmed that the missile was not targeting Lebanon. This was the first time during the current conflict when a shootdown of an Iranian missile took place over Lebanese territory. A US strike on the Habbaniya military base—which hosts units from the Popular Mobilization Forces —in Al Anbar Governorate killed seven members of the Iraqi Armed Forces and injured 13 others.

In response, Iraqi prime minister Mohammed Shia' al-Sudani summoned the US embassy's chargé d'affaires in Baghdad. Iranian state media threatened that Iran could seize Bahraini and Emirati territory if the US "makes any mistakes", while signaling its readiness to open a new front in Yemen by closing the Bab al-Mandab Strait together with the Houthis . Israel said it killed Iran's top naval commander, Alireza Tangsiri , purportedly as part of an effort to reopen the Strait of Hormuz, which Katz said Tangsiri was "directly responsible" for the closure of.

On 27 March, a day after Trump and Hegseth announced the "neutralization" of Iran's military, an Iranian missile and drone strike on Prince Sultan Air Base damaged several US refueling aircraft and injured at least 15 US soldiers. An E-3 Sentry was also damaged by the strike. Military analyst Cedric Leighton described the attack as a "a serious blow to surveillance capabilities".

The same day, Iran blocked two Chinese ships from entering the strait and sought to formalize fees for ships passing through it. Despite pushes for talks, Israeli defense minister Israel Katz publicly vowed to "intensify and expand" Israeli attacks in Iran.

The same day, the Shahid Khondab Heavy Water Complex in Arak—which has in the past been used to test uranium enrichment—and the Ardakan yellowcake production plant in Yazd Province were confirmed to have been damaged in Israeli airstrikes. Fifth week (28 March – 3 April) Further information: 2026 Houthi strikes on Israel and Karaj B1 bridge attack The Houthis joined the war on 28 March launching a ballistic missile towards Israel.

The Houthis said that they had launched ballistic missiles targeting "sensitive" military sites in Israel, and vowed to continue the attacks "until the aggression on all resistance fronts stops".

The missile was intercepted and no casualties were reported.

The Houthis subsequently launched a second missile at Eilat .

In response, the internationally recognized Yemeni government condemned Iran's "frequent attempts to drag Yemen" into conflict "through its terrorist militias".

On the same day, 2,500 US marines from the 31st Marine Expeditionary Unit arrived in the Middle East, expected to be part of US efforts to open the Strait of Hormuz. US Central Command (CENTCOM) stated that it had struck over 11,000 targets in Iran since the beginning of the war.

On 28 March, joint US–Israeli airstrikes severely damaged several residential and civilian facilities, including the Iran University of Science and Technology .

In response, Iran threatened to attack Israeli and American colleges across the Middle East. Airstrikes also struck a 10,000-cubic-metre (350,000 cu ft) water reservoir in Haftkel , in Khuzestan province . An Iranian missile struck a chemical plant in the Ne'ot Hovav industrial zone, injuring one person and causing fears of a hazardous leak. A convoy of the Iraqi Popular Mobilization Forces was seen entering Khorramshahr in southwestern Iran. Eleven-year-old child soldier Alireza Jafari was killed in an Israeli drone strike "while serving" at a checkpoint on a Tehran highway; Amnesty International called the organized Iranian recruitment of children as young as Jafari a war crime .

On 29 March, Trump stated that he would prefer to "take the oil in Iran ". He proposed taking Iran's oil export center, Kharg Island , claiming that the United States could capture the territory "very easily", and implying that the US could occupy it for some time.

On 30 March, Trump said that if a deal were not reached soon and the Strait of Hormuz reopened, the US would strike all of Iran's power plants, oil wells, Kharg Island, and possibly all its desalinization plants, although the feasibility and strategic value of some of Trump's threats were contested.

On the same day Turkey and NATO intercepted the fourth missile directed towards Turkish territory. Iran denied firing a missile at Turkey, claiming that it was a false flag attack.

The US began flying B-52 bombers over Iranian territory for the first time, indicating its confidence of air supremacy over Iran.

The US used bombers to target an ammunition depot and air base in Isfahan , causing large explosions. U.S-allied Gulf states such as Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Kuwait, and Bahrain reportedly pushed Trump to continue the war until there are significant changes in Iran's leadership. American journalist Shelly Kittleson was kidnapped in Baghdad by Kata'ib Hezbollah —the strongest faction within the PMF—who demanded that the Iraqi government release several detained members of the group.

On 1 April, Mehr News Agency , a semi-official Iranian government news outlet, reported that policy expert and former foreign minister Kamal Kharazi was seriously injured and his wife was killed in an airstrike which hit his home. Iranian officials described the attack as an attempt to derail diplomacy, noting that Kharazi was overseeing a possible meeting between Iranian officials and US vice president JD Vance . Airstrikes on the strategically important Hengam Island in the Strait of Hormuz caused seven injuries. Netanyahu asserted that the US–Israeli strikes have eliminated Iran's ability to produce nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles, thereby removing "two existential threats" to Israel. Late in the day on 1 April, Trump made a speech addressing the nation, in which he said that the strikes have "dramatically curtailed" Iranian missile and drone systems, and added that the attacks on Iran will escalate over the next two to three weeks to "bring them back to the Stone Ages , where they belong".

On 2 April, two US strikes on the B1 bridge between Tehran and Karaj , which was described as the highest bridge in the Middle East, reportedly killed eight people and wounded 95 others, causing it to collapse. Experts assessed the attack as a possible war crime ; it was celebrated by Trump.

At the time of the attack, many Iranian families had been gathered in the parks below the bridge to celebrate Sizdah Be-dar . Iran revealed major damage to the century-old medical center Pasteur Institute of Iran . US defense secretary Hegseth boasted of "death and destruction from the sky all day long".

The IDF also announced that one of its strikes in the Kermanshah area of Iran killed Iranian ballistics missile chief Makram Atimi and several battalion commanders from Atimi's central Iranian ballistic missile unit. An Iranian ballistic missile strike damaged an Israeli drone factory in Petah Tikva .

On the same day, Iran's army chief, Amir Hatami , stated that if US forces invade the country, "not a single person" among the invaders will survive.

On 3 April, Iranian forces shot down a US Air Force F-15E Strike Eagle fighter jet over the country, with the wreckage falling in the Kohgiluyeh and Boyer-Ahmad province of Iran, prompting a search and rescue mission by US helicopters.

The pilot was rescued that same day, but the WSO remained missing and was rescued alive 48 hours later . A US A-10 "Warthog" aircraft was downed and its single crew member ejected near the Strait of Hormuz and was rescued. Iran released a video showing shooting down the aircraft using surface-to-air missile.

On the same day, Tehran's Shahid Beheshti University was hit by airstrikes, making the total number of universities hit to more than 30, according to the Iranian Minister of Science. Sixth week (4–7 April) Further information: 2026 United States F-15E rescue operation in Iran and Destruction of the Rafi'-Nia synagogue 7 April: Truth Social post in which Trump threatened, "A whole civilization will die tonight, never to be brought back again." On 4 April, explosions were reported at an auxiliary building of the Bushehr Nuclear Power Plant as well as the Mahshahr Special Petrochemical Zone in Mahshahr , Iran.

The airstrikes in Mahshahr killed at least five and injured 170 others. An Iranian missile strike hit in the vicinity of the IDF's HaKirya headquarters in Tel Aviv.

On 5 April, after heavy fighting, the second stranded crew member from the F-15E downed on 3 April was recovered by US forces in a rescue operation , which resulted in damage to helicopters, the shooting down of an A-10 Thunderbolt II , and the destruction of two C-130 Hercules , three IRGC members killed, and several American service members injured.

On 6 April, the IRGC announced that the head of the IRGC's intelligence organisation, Major General Majid Khademi , had been killed in a joint US-Israeli airstrike. Their statement claimed that Khademi had "played a major role in Iran's intelligence and security apparatus over nearly five decades". Israel said that Yazdan Mir , a high-ranking commander of the IRGC Quds Force , had also been killed in the attacks.

On the same day, before Trump's deadline for targeting Iranian infrastructure, Israel carried out strikes on the South Pars Petrochemical facility in Asaluyeh , Iran.

The IAF said that "85% of Iran's petrochemical exports" had been taken offline by now.

At least 34 people, including six children, were killed in US-Israeli airstrikes across Iran, including against Sharif University of Technology and residential areas. Iranian vice president and reformist politician Mohammad Reza Aref , who is also an alumnus of the university, described the alleged use of a bunker-buster bomb as a "symbol of Trump's madness and ignorance". Members of the Tehran Jewish community navigating the site where the Rafi'-Nia synagogue was destroyed On 7 April, The Rafi'-Nia synagogue in central Tehran was destroyed in an airstrike . Israel said that the building was destroyed due to collateral damage and that it was never meant to be the direct target of the airstrike.

The same day, US forces began strikes on Kharg Island .

In response, Iran said its restraint in targeting oil infrastructure in the region would no longer apply. Trump posted to Truth Social that " a whole civilization will die tonight, never to be brought back again", causing international concern that Trump would use nuclear weapons.

The Secretary General of Amnesty International said that Trump's statement "may constitute a threat to commit genocide ". Multiple right-wing commentators and many Democrats condemned the post, and some called for him to be removed through the 25th Amendment .

The White House denied considering using nuclear weapons.

The White House later said that "only the president knows" what he would do on Iran. Ceasefire, dual blockade and Islamabad Memorandum (8 April – 19 June) Main articles: 2026 Iran war ceasefire , 8 April 2026 Israeli attacks on Lebanon , Islamabad Talks , Islamabad Memorandum , 2026 United States naval blockade of Iran , and Operation Project Freedom On 7 April Trump announced that the US and Iran had reached an agreement based on the 10-point proposal mediated by Pakistani prime minister Shehbaz Sharif and Field Marshal Asim Munir .

The US, Israel, and Iran agreed to a two-week ceasefire, under which Iran would re-open the Strait of Hormuz.

After the announcement, Iran's Lavan Island oil refinery and Sirri Island crude export facilities were struck ; no party claimed responsibility.

In response, Iran continued missile and drone strikes on Gulf Arab states.

The refinery attack was later revealed to have been done secretly by the UAE. Aftermath of 8 April 2026 Israeli attacks on Beirut, Lebanon Israel and the US asserted that the ceasefire did not include Lebanon, contradicting the Pakistani mediators and Iran. Hezbollah said it had halted attacks on Israel and on Israeli soldiers in Lebanon. Despite the ceasefire, Israel launched " Operation Eternal Darkness ", which included targeting all Hezbollah's command and control centers in southern Lebanon, Beirut and the Beqaa Valley . These were the largest attacks since the start of the war, killing at least 357 people and injuring more than 1,200.

In Beirut alone, 92 people were killed and at least 740 injured.

In response, Iran threatened to attack Israel "if the aggressions against dear Lebanon are not brought to an immediate end". Iran paused Hormuz traffic over Israeli attacks in Lebanon. Hezbollah claimed responsibility for launching rockets towards northern Israel as a response to "ceasefire violations".

On 11 April, Trump said that American forces had started " clearing " the Strait of Hormuz. Iran claimed that an American ship on its way to the strait turned back after being warned.

The Wall Street Journal reported US Navy destroyers entered the strait for the first time since the war began.

The Iranian government reportedly threatened to attack the ships, accusing the US of a ceasefire violation. US Central Command said the ships were minesweeping .

On the same day, the talks between the US and Iran —the highest-level discussions between the two since the 1979 Islamic Revolution —were held in Islamabad , Pakistan, lasting 21 hours. JD Vance announced no agreement was reached and Iran had refused "to accept our terms". Trump stated he no longer cared about negotiations. Trump declared that the US Navy would begin its blockade of "all Ships trying to enter, or leave, the Strait of Hormuz" from 13 April. He said the US Navy would stop any ships that paid tolls to Iran. However, United States Central Command clarified that the blockade would only be enforced on ships travelling to or from Iranian ports.

The IRGC Navy said any military vessel approaching the strait would be considered a ceasefire violation and meet a "severe response." Trump threatened to strike fast-attack ships of the IRGC Navy, similar to US strikes on drug traffickers during Operation Southern Spear . Iran had 13 days of oil storage capacity, forcing it to shut down its oil fields and potentially damaging them. An analyst estimated loss of import and export capacity would be US$435 million per day.

On 16 April, Trump announced that Israel and Lebanon agreed to a ten-day truce . Iran announced that passage of commercial vessels through the strait would be allowed during the truce. Despite this, Trump said that the blockade would continue, so Iran announced it would reimpose restrictions on the strait.

The US stated that its blockade had intercepted 23 ships. Despite Iran's seizure of two cargo ships, Trump claimed total control over the strait.

The Guardian described the situation as a "dual blockade", saying that while the US Navy could blockade Iranian ports, it had been unable to stop Iran's blockade and open the strait to allies. Israel and Lebanon agreed a three-week extension of their ceasefire.

On 8 June, the IDF announced that it struck military sites in Iran, with explosions reported in Tehran, Isfahan, and Tabriz. This triggered an exchange between the two countries. Two Iranian soldiers were killed in an Israeli attack. Iran afterwards said it had ceased military actions against Israel. Israel stopped strikes at Trump's request.

On 9 June, The New York Times reported that American crew was rescued after a helicopter went down near the strait. CENTCOM said they were rescued by a US Navy drone boat for the first time. Trump said Iranians had shot down the helicopter and pledged to respond. A US official said a Shahed one-way attack drone downed the helicopter. Iran said it did not deliberately target the helicopter. CENTCOM later said that it launched "self-defense" strikes in retaliation. One attack damaged water reservoir tanks in Sirik ; Iran stated that 20,000 people had lost access to drinking water.

On 14 June, Iran said that the draft US deal included Tehran agreeing not to produce or acquire nuclear weapons, and the US agreeing to allow Tehran to dilute its highly enriched uranium stockpile in Iran. Trump and Iran announced they had reached an agreement to end the war and reopen the strait. Trump said he had authorized the lifting of the US blockade.

On 15 June, US vice president JD Vance announced that the memorandum was digitally signed by both countries the previous day.

On 17 June, Trump and Iranian president Masoud Pezeshkian signed the memorandum of understanding to end the war, with Trump signing it during dinner with French president Emmanuel Macron at the Palace of Versailles after the G7 summit .

On 18 June, Pakistan stated that the signing of the memorandum implies Tehran will reopen the Hormuz "instantly" and the American blockade will end "immediately." CENTCOM announced that it had removed the naval blockade.

On 19 June, Trump announced a renewed ceasefire between Israel and Hezbollah in the 2026 Lebanon war , facilitated by the US, Qatar, and Iran. Hezbollah announced an attack on Israeli forces trying to capture Ali al-Taher in Nabatieh . Israel continued to strike southern Lebanon numerous times. Renewed hostilities (8 July – present) On 8 July, Trump declared the MOU was "over", adding that he lacked further desire to deal with Iran's leadership, after Iran allegedly struck more targets in the Strait of Hormuz. Trump later stated that US negotiators could continue negotiations, although he expressed pessimism about the outcome. Iranian state media announced that eight soldiers were killed in American attacks in ⁠ Bandar Abbas and Bushehr . Trump added that the war would not resume, but if it did, it would be short, that he might be assassinated by Iran, and he was the top target on Iran's hit list. Mehr News Agency reported that the US attacks killed two Iranian fishermen. CENTCOM announced that it hit roughly 90 Iranian military targets, including air defense systems, coastal surveillance assets, missile and drone storage facilities, naval capabilities, and military logistics infrastructure along the country's coastline. IRNA reported that a US attack hit an airport in southeastern Iran, killing a fireman.

On 10 July, The Wall Street Journal reported that Israel provided intelligence with the US on a new conspiracy by the Iranian regime to assassinate Trump. Trump refuted the claim, stating, "I've left instructions—if anything happens, to literally bomb them at levels that they've never seen before." The IMO's administrative council agreed that member states should reject Iranian efforts to ‌impose sovereignty over the Hormuz and Tehran's "unilateral decision" to form a body to control traffic on the waterway.

The IRGC's navy said it closed the strait until further notice after firing a warning shot at a vessel trying to transit through an unapproved route.

On 13 July, Trump announced that the US will reinstate the "Iranian blockade in the Strait" and impose a 20% toll on cargo shipping through it.

The Yemeni government and Saudi Arabia struck the Sanaa International Airport controlled by the Houthis, allegedly to prevent an Iranian plane from landing.

The Houthis retaliated by launching missiles and drones against Saudi Arabia’s Abha International Airport .

The Combined Maritime Forces ' Joint Maritime Information Centre (JMIC), led by America, announced that the US blockade on Iran would start the following day.

The US announced that it hit military targets throughout Iran including Bushehr, Chabahar , Jask , Konarak , Abu Musa , and Bandar Abbas. Two Emirati tankers were reportedly struck by Iranian cruise missiles in the strait in Oman's territorial waters, killing one Indian crew member and injuring two critically.

On 14 July, Trump cancelled plans to impose fees in the strait.

The IMO said that the death toll from Hormuz ship attacks on that day increased to two.

On 15 July, CENTCOM commander Admiral Brad Cooper said that Iran had deliberately attacked seven commercial vessels in the last week resulting in "nearly a dozen" civilian crews being killed, wounded or going missing. CENTCOM said that the US reinstated a naval blockade on Iran ports. Iran said that it targeted US sites in Jordan, Kuwait and Bahrain. CENTCOM stated that the US conducted more strikes on coastal defense systems and cruise missile sites on Greater Tunb Island . Iran said that over 30 civilians were included in those killed in recent American attacks in the country's south.

On 16 July, the Islamic Republic of Iran Army said that it aimed at American military targets in Jordan, Kuwait and Bahrain.

The IRGC stated that it aimed at an American airbase in Jordan.

The White House maintained that Iran is still in talks with the US and hopes to negotiate an agreement. CENTCOM said it had expanded strikes into northern Iran on targets including military logistics infrastructure to "further degrade Iranian military capabilities". Explosions were reported on Qeshm Island, in Bushehr, Ahvaz , Bandar Abbas, and on a bridge in Bandar Khamir , where a reportedly targeted truck strike killed its driver. Tasnim News Agency reported that U.S. fighter jets struck Iranshahr Airport in Sistan and Baluchestan province . Iran also accused the United States of striking near a children's cancer hospital in Ahvaz, forcing the evacuation of 211 pediatric cancer patients. That same day, the Iranian regime's judiciary dismissed Trump's claim that an American prisoner arrested during the Biden administration in 2024 was released or exchanged.

On 17 July, Qatar stated that a child was wounded by shrapnel resulting from downing operations against an Iranian missile attack on the country.

The Iran Army said that it aimed at American force deployment and logistical support centers in Kuwait. Iranian state media reported that American attacks on infrastructure in southern and western Iran killed eight Iranians, and causing injury to 20 others.

The IRGC claimed that it aimed at an American command center in al-Tanf despite departure of US soldiers in the military base to Jordan in early that year. This was denied by Syria. Iran said that it targeted an American maritime surveillance radar in Oman. US-led coalition forces in Iraq intercepted several drones above Erbil .

The British military stated that a tanker was struck by an unknown projectile near Oman. Iranian Health Ministry stated that American attacks on Iran since the beginning of that month killed at least 38 people and injured more than 100 other. Iran stated that it aimed at American fighter jets in Jordan. Kuwait stated that Iran's attack caused damage to one of its electricity generation and water desalination ⁠stations. Iran claimed that it hit American Al Udeid Air Base . Komala Party of Iranian Kurdistan stated that nine Iranian Kurdish rebels were killed in attacks on a camp in the vicinity of Sulaymaniyah , blaming it on Iranian leadership. Two more drones aimed at Iranian Kurdish rebel camp in Iraq. Kuwait army stated that several soldiers from its land forces were injured in one of those Iranian attacks. Tasnim News Agency reported, citing informed source that a Thai-flagged ship was targeted in the ‌Hormuz by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Navy , accusing it of ignoring warnings and trying to pass ⁠without approval from the navy.

The U.S. stated that it struck Iran's infrastructure for seventh consecutive night.

The U.S. stated that it struck Iran's infrastructure including subterranean arsenals for seventh consecutive night. Iran claimed that its strikes destroyed main AI center in Bahrain and a US drone storage site. Iran media reported, citing a local official that American attacks in Hormozgan province killed three people and injured eight others.

The IRGC stated it had detained four tankers in the Hormuz, accusing them of breaching regulations while trying to pass through the strait. Iran state television claimed that Iran military struck American bases in Kuwait and Jordan.

On 18 July, power facilities and desalination water pumps in Jask , Iran were struck, cutting of water supply to 10,000 people on the coastal area, according to Iranian officials.

The IRGC stated that two oil tankers stated that two tankers exploded in mined route in the vicinity of Hormuz. CENTCOM denied the claim. An American official told Axios that Iran aimed at a US military base in Saudi Arabia. Kuwait Ministry of Electricity and Kuwaiti fire service stated that an Iranian attack caused a fire in a power generation and water desalination plant in the country, causing injuries to several firemen. Kuwait Petroleum Corporation stated that "repeated Iranian attacks" hit one of its oil facilities, causing significant material damage and wounding some people. Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister Kazem Gharibabadi states that Iran suspended implementation of MoU commitments as part of the interim deal with the US, accusing the latter of breaching its own obligations. Iranian government stated that at least 50 people were killed and over 500 others were injured in American attacks in Iran since its renewal. CENTCOM stated that two American soldiers were killed, one went missing, four others were injured and some others were slightly wounded while defending against Iranian ballistic missile and drone attacks in Jordan the day before.

The night of the initial strike he and IDF Chief of Staff Lieutenant General Eyal Zamir took their official cars home from IDF Headquarters . They came back without them so that satellite imagery would show that their base did not appear full nor warplanes appear armed and ready. Three separate gatherings of Iranian officials were hit within half a minute of each other in the opening strike. Assassination of Ali Khamenei Main article: Assassination of Ali Khamenei Khamenei on 12 February 2026, 16 days before his assassination On 28 February 2026, Ali Khamenei , the supreme leader of Iran , was assassinated in an Israeli air attack.

On 1 March, Iranian state media announced Khamenei's death.

The IRGC-controlled Fars News Agency announced that Khamenei's daughter, son-in-law, grandchild, and daughter-in-law Zahra Haddad-Adel had also been killed.

The Iranian government declared 40 days of mourning. Military and officials Main article: List of Iranian officials killed during the 2026 Iran war The initial dead included Iranian defense minister Aziz Nasirzadeh , and four top Ministry of Intelligence officials. Additional senior officials included Salah Asadi , head of intelligence for Iran's emergency command, Mohammad Shirazi , head of Khamenei's military office, head of the Organization of Defensive Innovation and Research (SPND) Hossein Jabal Amelian , former SPND head Reza Mozaffari Nia , and chief of staff Abdolrahim Mousavi , among 40 official as reported by intelligence and military sources.

On 13 March, IDF estimated that between 3,000 and 4,000 Iranian soldiers and commanders had been killed.

On 17 March, Israel assassinated Ali Larijani , secretary of Iran's SNSC. IRGC commander Mohammad Pakpour and Defence Council secretary Ali Shamkhani were reported dead in late March.

On 18 March, the Hengaw Organization for Human Rights estimated that 5,300+ members of the Iranian military had been killed.

On 31 March, Iran International reported that at least 4,700 security forces had been killed.

On 6 April, the head of IRGC intelligence, Major General Majid Khademi, was assassinated in a joint US-Israeli airstrike.

As of 7 April, Human Rights Activists in Iran (HRANA), a US-based non-governmental organization , reported 3,636 documented war deaths, including 1,701 civilians, 1,221 military personnel, and 714 unclassified. According to HRANA, "t is believed that military casualties are significantly higher than the figures reported in reports" as confirmations depend largely on government data. Its count largely reflects reports of military personnel present in urban areas. Civilians Further information: 2026 Minab school attack , 2026 Lamerd sports hall attack , and 2026 Karaj B1 bridge attack Rescuers and residents searching through the rubble of the Minab girls' elementary school , destroyed by the United States On the first day of the war, Iran reported that the Shajareh Tayyebeh girls' elementary school in Minab had been hit by an American attack .

The school was located near the Sayyid al-Shuhada military complex, of which it had once been a part.

While the number killed was not independently confirmed, Iranian state media reported that more than 175 people, mostly children, were killed while 95 were wounded. Video showed a Tomahawk missile hitting a building adjacent to the school; preliminary findings from an American military investigation indicated that the strike resulted from outdated targeting data.

At least 20 civilians, mostly families who gathered after breaking their fast at Ramadan, were killed in Tehran's Niloofar Square on 1 or 2 March, according to Iranian-state media.

On 3 March, the Iranian Red Crescent Society said that over 600 civilians had been killed while HRANA reported 1,097 civilian deaths.

On 7 March, the Red Crescent reported that over 6,668 civilian "units" had been targeted by US-Israeli strikes, including 5,535 residential units, 1,041 commercial units, 14 medical centers, 65 schools, and 13 centers affiliated with the Red Crescent.

The Middle East Eye, an anti-Israel news outlet, reported that the US used double tap airstrikes, although the US denies this.

As of 23 March, HRANA estimated that at least 15% of the casualties were under age 18. An Israeli airstrike on 9 March in Resalat neighbourhood of Tehran destroyed a Basij -affiliated building as well as three residential buildings, killing 40 to 50. According to a BBC analysis, Israel used Mark 82 bombs in the attack.

As of 27 March, Iran has reported damage to at least 120 historical sites .

The deadly attack on residential buildings and a sports hall in the town of Lamerd killed 21 including 4 children and injured 100. Institutions The initial attack targeted Leadership House.

On 2 March, video footage released by Iran International showed the destroyed IRGC Malek-Ashtar building in Tehran following a joint US-Israel missile strike.

On 3 March, the complex of Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting (IRIB), the state broadcaster's headquarters, was hit in an Israeli air operation. Iranian state-linked media indicated that Iran's parliament building was targeted.

On 3 March, Israeli forces bombed the Assembly of Experts office building in Qom . Infrastructure By 5 March, the World Health Organization had identified 13 Iranian health sites hit, as well as one in Lebanon.

The Iranian Foreign Minister said that the US had struck a desalination plant on Qeshm Island , disrupting water supply to 30 villages, but both the US and Israel denied an attack.

The Russian consulate in Isfahan was damaged.

After US strikes on 9 June, Iran said that damage to water storage units in Hormozgan province had left 20,000 people without water.

On 18 July, Iranian media reported that U.S. strikes hit power facilities and desalination pumps at the Bonji desalination plant in Jask, Hormozgan Province. Reuters reported that several missiles struck the facilities, citing a local official, and said the attack disrupted water supplies to 20 villages, affecting around 10,000 people. American losses Analysis of satellite images by The Washington Post revealed damage to at least 228 structures or pieces of equipment at US bases across the Persian Gulf, far more than the Trump administration has admitted to.

On 1 March, six US soldiers were killed amid more than 30 injured in an Iranian drone attack near Camp Arifjan in Port Shuaiba, Kuwait . Those killed were soldiers of the United States Army Reserve assigned to the 103rd Expeditionary Sustainment Command , headquartered in Des Moines, Iowa .

On 4 March, US Marine Corps Lance Corporal Kevin Melendez died in Saudi Arabia in a non-hostile incident.

On 8 March, CENTCOM reported that a National Guard soldier died during a medical emergency. Sgt. Benjamin N. Pennington, a soldier of the 1st Space Brigade wounded in an attack against Prince Sultan Air Base in Saudi Arabia on 1 March, died from his injuries on 9 March. Six American airmen were killed on 12 March when their KC-135 aerial refueling aircraft crashed in western Iraq. CENTCOM said that the crash was not the result of hostile action, but had resulted during an incident involving another US aircraft.

By 13 March, the US military publicly announced that about 140 American servicemen had been injured. A 27 March attack on Prince Sultan Air Base damaged "multiple" refueling aircraft and destroyed a Boeing E-3 Sentry , as well as wounding at least 15 US soldiers.

The USS Gerald R. Ford , the largest aircraft carrier in theatre, was damaged by a fire that broke out 12 March.

The US Navy said the fire had injured multiple sailors, started in a laundry area and was not combat-related.

The carrier had been dealing with other mechanical issues, including a malfunctioning sewage treatment system, since before it arrived in the Middle East. According to multiple reports on 17–18 March, Gerald R. Ford paused launching airstrikes and sailed toward the Crete Naval Base for repairs. Many US military bases near Iran were rendered "all but uninhabitable" due to Iranian strikes. Within the first two weeks, Iran's attacks had caused $800 million in damage. Affected bases include Al-Sader and Al-Ruwais in the UAE, the naval base in Bahrain , Ali Al-Salem in Kuwait, Al-Udeid in Qatar, and Prince Sultan in Saudi Arabia. According to unnamed officials, the damage degraded the US's military ability in the war. Many US servicemembers relocated to "hotels and office spaces", which raised concerns of the US using civilians as human shields . An attack on a hotel in Bahrain injured two Pentagon employees. Based on numbers given by members of the United States Congress, by May 2026 the United States military had lost 39 aircraft in "Operation Epic Fury". Israeli losses Main article: 2026 Iranian strikes on Israel Left: Civilians sheltering in a converted light rail station in Tel Aviv on 6 March Right: Homes in Nesher damaged by shrapnel from Iranian cluster munitions on 24 March Civil defense siren and missile explosions sounds in central Israel, 5 March 2026 Magen David Adom reported that Iran's initial attacks had left 89 injured, with three directly wounded and the rest indirectly, most of them civilians.

On 28 February, a direct hit in Tel Aviv killed a woman and injured 22 others, one seriously.

On 1 March, a strike hit a synagogue and residential buildings in Beit Shemesh , killing nine civilians in a shelter and injuring 49 others.

On 9 March, two workers were killed in Yehud , outside of Tel Aviv, after they were struck by submunitions from an Iranian missile equipped with a cluster bomb warhead.

On 17 March, a cluster munition from an Iranian warhead hit an apartment building in Ramat Gan and killed two residents. A statement from the IRGC called the missile barrage "revenge for the blood of martyr Dr. Ali Larijani and his companions", who had been killed the day before in a targeted attack. According to CNN , the use of cluster munitions violates international law. N.R. Jenzen-Jones of Armament Research Services stated that this type of warhead is being used "primarily to sow terror amongst a civilian population".

The executive director of the Arms Control Association called the use of cluster munitions against residential sections of Israel deliberate, saying "Iran appears to be launching them into relatively populated areas, probably with the goal of producing potential civilian harm." Neither Iran nor Israel is party to the Convention on Cluster Munitions , and both are among 17 countries that either produce cluster munitions, or reserve the right to do so.

On 4 April, an Iranian missile strike hit in the vicinity of the IDF's Kirya headquarters in Tel Aviv . Lebanese losses This section is an excerpt from 2026 Lebanon war .

Since 2 March 2026, there has been an ongoing war in Lebanon between Israel and the militant group Hezbollah , with Israel invading parts of Lebanon. It is a resumption of major fighting in the Hezbollah–Israel conflict , and part of the wider conflict in the Middle East .

The war has precipitated a humanitarian crisis, resulted in the deaths of more than 4,000 people from Israeli strikes in Lebanon, and seen the forced displacement of over 1 million. Iraq Main articles: Iraq in the 2026 Iran war and 2026 Iranian strikes on the Kurdistan Region In Iraq, two members of the Iran-backed Popular Mobilization Forces (PMF) were killed and three injured in a US-Israeli attack on 28 February. A later report estimated three dead.

On 1 and 2 March, the United States and Israel conducted several attacks on Iranian-backed Iraqi militias to degrade their military capabilities. Iranian attacks on US-allied Arab countries Further information: 2026 Iranian strikes on Arab countries Drone attacks and strikes in the UAE An emergency alert sent to UAE residents shortly before Dubai International Airport was struck at around 12:30 A.M. local time, 28 February In addition to Israel, Iran launched strikes against multiple US-allied Arab countries. Iranian strikes against Bahrain killed three. Strikes against Kuwait killed four soldiers and four civilians. Strikes against Oman killed nine. Strikes against Saudi Arabia killed two. Strikes against the United Arab Emirates killed two soldiers and six civilians. Installations in the UAE were disproportionately often targeted by Iranian missile and drone strikes during the conflict, partially because the UAE has the closest ties to Israel of all Gulf states and the UAE launched secret attacks on targets in Iran in addition to the Israeli-American campaign itself. Iran also struck Qatar , Azerbaijan , and the Akrotiri and Dhekelia British Overseas Territory on Cyprus .

In late March, the NYT described Iran's leadership as paralyzed with severely disrupted decision-making process. It also reported that the damage to communications infrastructure caused paranoia and internal power struggles.

As of 21 May, Khamenei remains in hiding and the de facto ruler is uncertain.

As the US and Israel executed joint strikes targeting Iranian military and institutional targets, Iran's capital reportedly became a ghost town , as civilians feared going outside or to their daily jobs. Reports have emerged that prisoners in Evin Prison have been receiving limited bread and water since the onset of the war.

After the strikes, schools were ordered closed while banks and government offices remained in operation at reduced capacity. Local media reported that subway and bus services would remain operational.

During the "near total" internet blackout in Iran , NetBlocks reported that internet connectivity dropped to 4% of ordinary levels.

As the internet blackout exceeded 240 hours, making it the second longest ever, the government started handing out "white sim cards", which bypass filters, to government supporters, in order to allow them to promote its messaging.

As news of Khamenei's death broke, security forces were deployed to prevent an uprising, with footage showing them opening fire on celebrants in the streets and shooting at people chanting behind the windows of their homes.

During the first two weeks of March 2026, over 70,000 Afghan refugees returned to Afghanistan, frequently under forced circumstances, exacerbating the country's severe humanitarian crisis . Arafat Jamal, the UNHCR Representative in Afghanistan, noted that they faced limited options amid the military confrontations between Afghanistan and Pakistan . According to The Guardian , the war has overshadowed the executions of political prisoners in Iran, including those involved in the mass protests of January 2026, allowing Iran to continue carrying out death sentences and other severe punishments with little international scrutiny. According to several Iran-focused human rights groups, the rate of sentencing and executions by hanging surged amidst the war.

The groups state that in most of these cases, executed prisoners did not receive due process. Military On 26 March, it was reported that children as young as 12 years of age may join Iran's war support, leading to concerns of the use of child soldiers . Days later, rights groups stated an 11-year-old was killed while on duty at a Tehran checkpoint.

On 29 March, footage showed Iraq's Popular Mobilization Forces deployed in Iran. A leaked US intelligence report concluded in May that Iran retained 70% of missile and launchers relative to pre-war status. Kurdish–Iranian crisis Further information: 2026 Kurdish–Iranian crisis According to The Wall Street Journal , Trump had been open to supporting armed militias, particularly Kurds in Iran that have been in armed conflict with Tehran for decades and have historically been a regional ally of the United States. However, Trump later said he had ruled out sending the Kurds to Iran. Cultural heritage sites Main article: Destruction of cultural heritage sites during the 2026 Iran War Multiple historic and cultural sites, including UNESCO World Heritage Sites , were damaged.

The most affected was Chehel Sotoun and its rich ayeneh-kari .

On 2 March, a strike on Arg Square damaged nearby Golestan Palace , prompting UNESCO to issue a statement of concern.

On 5 March, the Azadi Sport Complex was bombed. An 8 March strike on Falak-ol-Aflak , which was marked with a blue shield emblem , damaged several sections of the site. Strikes on Isfahan on 9 March damaged Naqsh-e Jahan Square , Chehel Sotoun, Ali Qapu , the Shah Mosque , Jameh Mosque , and Teymouri Hall .

On 11 March, UNESCO urged protection for Iran's heritage sites and World Heritage Sites that have been damaged or are under high risk due to the war, alongside other historic sites in Israel, Lebanon, and the rest of West Asia.

On 17 March, blast waves and shrapnel damaged multiple palaces at Sa'dabad Complex in northern Tehran. Russia's Ministry of Foreign Affairs reported that strikes in Tehran on 1 April damaged the St. Nicholas Orthodox Church and its auxiliary buildings.

On 7 April, the Rafi'-Nia synagogue was fully destroyed by the IAF. Israel Israel declared a nationwide state of emergency , saying that the strikes on Iran were the largest that it had ever launched. Israeli schools and workspaces were closed and public gatherings were canceled.

In the 40 days from the start of the war through the 8 April ceasefire , there were a total of 650 missile attacks from Iran to Israel, the majority of which carried cluster munitions. About 16 of the missiles that made it past Israeli missile defenses carried conventional warheads, while 50 had cluster munitions.

The renewed blocking of West Bank roads in the context of the 2026 Lebanon war has delayed medics from assisting injured Palestinians.

The EU stated on 10 March that the Israeli actions were unacceptable and urged the Israeli authorities to make immediate efforts to prevent the violence against Palestinian civilians under international law , warning that "impunity for such acts risks provoking further violence". Lebanese displacements Lebanon stated in March that over one million people, 1/6th of the population, had been displaced. Gulf Arab states The Arab states of the Persian Gulf started a campaign of prosecution against civilians and foreign citizens that shared or reposted rumours from unverified sources about the Iranian attacks, with the stated main goal to curb misinformation that could harm public order. Bahrain's Cyber Crime Directorate also started a campaign of arresting civilians in the country, which has a large Shiite minority , who allegedly expressed "their support for the Iranian shelling targeting the Kingdom of Bahrain", describing such activities as treason and as promotion of hostile acts against the state. Trump said "Even if we knew Gulf countries would be hit, big deal we did what we have to do". Saudi Arabia invoked its Strategic Mutual Defence Agreement with Pakistan. Pakistan deployed some 8,000 troops, a squadron of 16 aircraft, and two squadrons of drones. There was a pledge to send more if required.

On 28 May, the US president Donald Trump threatened to "blow up" Oman if it failed to "behave" in a casual aside during a cabinet meeting after reports of talks between Iran and Oman about jointly charging a toll for ships passing through the Strait of Hormuz . Economic impacts Main articles: Economic impact of the 2026 Iran war , 2026 Iran war regional mobilizations , and Evacuations during the 2026 Iran war A map of emergency evacuation of persons to Europe The war had global economic consequences: oil and gas prices surged, aviation and tourism were disrupted, and financial markets shuddered. International Energy Agency (IEA) head Fatih Birol described the situation as the "greatest global energy security challenge in history". Energy The price of oil has been affected internationally at the times of the COVID-19 pandemic , the 2022- Russo-Ukrainian war and the 2026 Iran war.

The US consumer price index (CPI) increased at the outbreak of the Iran war.

The retail price of gasoline in the US increased at the outbreak of wars in Ukraine and Iran. Oil and natural gas prices rose in direct response to Iranian threats to attack tankers and other ships and to Iranian strikes on oil facilities in Gulf producing countries. 20% of global oil and gas production normally transit the Strait of Hormuz.

As the war continued, oil and gas prices ebbed and flowed as markets attempted to assess the likelihood of an end to the conflict. Prices ranged from below $70 before the war to as high as $139 on 7 March. Gas prices also rose.

Following the start of the war, multiple oil producers such as Shell , TotalEnergies , Britain's BP and others announced increased profits in their first quarter. Toward the end of March significant shortages of domestic petroleum products emerged in southeast Asia as reserves ran out.

The guided-missile destroyer USS Bainbridge passes through the Suez Canal during Operation Epic Fury, March 2026 Stock markets initially fell, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average falling over 400 points (one percent) on 2 March alone, although by mid-April had recovered and reached record highs.

The UN World Food Programme and various economic analysts warned that the war is driving significant, long-term increases in global food prices . An analysis performed by The New York Times , comparing the quantities and value of oil and other fuels shipped between the start of the war and 8 May 2026, and those from the same period a year earlier showed that the biggest beneficiaries of the market changes were the United States (which saw an increase in exports and a revenue increase of about $50 billion) and Russia (which had steady exports and an increase of more than $15 billion in revenue), while other major non-Persian Gulf exporters also benefitted to lesser degrees. All Persian Gulf nations showed declines in exports, though those that were able to avoid shipping bottlenecks through the Strait of Hormuz (Saudi Arabia through pipelines to the Red Sea, and Oman via geography) saw increases in revenue, while those that could not avoid the strait (Iraq, Kuwait, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates) saw declines in revenue. Iran, which had access to the strait, had an increase in revenues. Commodities Disruption in the supply of essential fertilizers due to the closure of the Strait threatened food production in many countries.

The Fertilizer Institute stated that nearly 50% of global urea and sulfur exports annually transited through the Strait of Hormuz, made worse by the natural gas shortage, which is a key feedstock for nitrogen fertilizers . Air travel Airliners of Qatar Airways , Kuwait Airways and Emirates grounded at Manchester Airport , 28 February 2026. Iran's airspace emptied of civilian aircraft during the conflict, as Bahrain, Iraq, Israel, Kuwait, Qatar, Syria and the UAE closed their respective airspaces. Some carriers suspended service to the Middle East.

The disruption in global oil supply, caused by the closure of the Strait of Hormuz during the conflict, led to higher jet fuel prices, which increased operating costs for airlines and pushed up airfares on both domestic and international routes. Airlines responded by raising ticket prices and adjusting some flight schedules to cope with higher fuel costs. This impact was also visible in Europe, where continued disruptions in energy supply routes contributed to higher fuel prices and additional pressure on airlines.

As a result, some carriers reduced capacity or cut flights, while others passed increased costs directly on to passengers. Spirit Airlines , an American low-cost airline , ceased operations on 2 May 2026, after increased fuel costs from the war exacerbated its existing financial difficulties. Strait of Hormuz This section is an excerpt from 2026 Strait of Hormuz crisis . Shipping traffic through the Strait of Hormuz , a major maritime choke point for world energy trade , has been largely blocked by Iran since 28 February 2026, when the United States and Israel launched an air war against Iran.

In retaliation, the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) issued warnings forbidding passage through the strait, boarded and attacked merchant ships, and laid sea mines in the strait.

From 13 April to 29 May 2026, the US simultaneously blockaded Iranian ports . Until the war's start, about 25% of the world's seaborne oil trade and 20% of the world's liquefied natural gas (LNG) passed through the strait. Soon after the start of the conflict, tanker traffic dropped to almost nothing.

On 27 March, the IRGC announced that the strait was closed to any vessel going "to and from" the ports of the US, Israel, and their allies.

The International Maritime Organization reported on 21 April that about 20,000 mariners and 2,000 ships were stranded in the Persian Gulf due to the closure. Amid fears of prolonged supply shortages, oil prices rose faster than during any other conflict in recent history; Brent crude oil prices surpassed US$100 per barrel on 8 March for the first time in four years, rising to US$126 per barrel at their peak.

The largest-ever monthly increase in oil prices occurred in March 2026.

The closure of the strait became the largest disruption to world energy supply since the 1970s energy crisis as well as the largest in the history of the world oil market. Other commodity markets to suffer supply disruption and price increases due to the crisis include aluminum, fertilizer, and helium.

In late March and early April, US president Donald Trump repeatedly threatened to destroy Iran's infrastructure if it did not reopen the strait.

On 8 April a temporary ceasefire between Iran and the US was agreed and was to involve the reopening of the strait. However, following the failure of the Islamabad Talks , the US Navy itself began to blockade Iranian ports from 13 April.

The situation was described by The Guardian as a "dual blockade", with the US Navy blockading Iran and Iran blockading the Gulf.

On 17 April, Iran announced that due to an Israel–Lebanon ceasefire agreement , it would allow commercial shipping, but the US continued its blockade of Iran, and Iran reimposed restrictions.

On 4 May, Trump launched Operation Project Freedom , a US Navy mission to escort merchant ships out of the Gulf.

The Iranian military warned that this would be a ceasefire violation, and on 6 May, Trump paused Project Freedom because of "great progress" toward a possible agreement.

On 17 June, Trump and Iranian president Masoud Pezeshkian signed a memorandum of understanding to end the war and the blockades of the strait.

On 19 June, Trump announced a renewed ceasefire between Israel and Hezbollah , facilitated by the US, Qatar, and Iran. However, Israel continued strikes in southern Lebanon, and the following day, Iran said that it closed the strait again, citing the Israeli actions as a violation of the agreement, a claim denied by the US military.

On 27 June, the Joint Maritime Information Center (JMIC) overseen by the US Navy announced a widened route through the Strait of Hormuz near Oman, allowing increased naval traffic in both directions and indicating a challenge to Iran's control over the waterway.

On 15 March, the Associated Press reported that the weapons stockpile of the Houthis was running low from repeated attacks on Israel, while Iran had not been able to resupply them, because of the war. Internet infrastructure Further information: Cyberwarfare during the 2026 Iran war Three Amazon Web Services data centers in the United Arab Emirates were struck and damaged as a result of drone strikes , leading to outages of web infrastructure within the Middle East, causing "sparks and fire" as well as "major structural damage" for 2 of the centers, with internal water levels reaching up to 4 cm , worsened by the failure of cooling and air systems. Fundamental web infrastructure including S3 storage , EC2 compute and DynamoDB databases suffered complete outages in early March. Iran shut down Internet access for its people throughout the war. Military costs According to a new report by the Center for International Policy , the US spent nearly $72 billion on the war ($1.2 billion per day on average).

The figure is nearly three times the amount of the Pentagon's official estimate. US military costs were estimated at $25–35 billion as of early April. Israeli costs were estimated at $11 billion. Costs to the Iranian economy were estimated at $40–50 billion, around 10% of GDP .

The monetary costs of Iranian attacks were much lower than the costs of neutralizing them: PATRIOT and THAAD interceptors are $4 million and $12 million, respectively, as opposed to $50,000 for a Shahed drone .

The war has also increased indirect military costs due to the rapid depletion of US munitions stockpiles. According to reports, the United States has used large quantities of high-cost interceptors such as Patriot and THAAD missiles, further increasing replacement expenses and strain on defense budgets.

The depletion of stockpiles has also affected US arms transfers and procurement decisions, including reports that Washington is reconsidering or delaying the transfer of Tomahawk cruise missiles to Germany and reviewing Germany's request for Typhon launchers due to limited availability. Reports also indicate delays in missile deliveries to Japan and new procurement efforts, including an $842 million agreement for JASSM-ER cruise missiles from Denmark. US officials have raised concerns that existing stockpiles may be insufficient for sustained operations in multiple theaters, including in the event of a future conflict in Asia.

The Pentagon has also expanded efforts to increase production capacity through programs aimed at scaling lower-cost "affordable mass" munitions and involving non-traditional defense contractors.

The US defence industry saw record stock surges during the war. Environmental impacts Main article: Environmental impact of war Airstrikes on industrial and fuel hubs have released a chronic toxic cocktail of benzene, heavy metals, and persistent 'forever chemicals' ( PFAS ), triggering 'black rain' in major cities and causing long-term health degradation for civilians.

The high oil prices driven by wars in the Middle East, including Iran, created a surge in profits of oil companies, pushing them to increase production as opposed to targets set by the Paris climate agreement .

The planned expansion is projected to exceed the International Energy Agency ’s regular scenario - a 5.9% increase in oil and gas production in the 2020s, leading to a 2.9 °C (5.2 °F) global temperature increase. Reactions Main article: Reactions to the 2026 Iran war Further information: Protests against the 2026 Iran war Reactions to the 2026 Iran war: United States and Israel Countries that supported the U.S.–Israeli attacks. Countries that condemned the Iranian attacks Iran Countries that condemned the U.S.–Israeli attacks Countries that condemned attacks from both sides Countries that expressed mixed reactions or made calls for peace No reaction Internationally, The war elicited reactions from nation-states, faith leaders, and global governance bodies, as well as protests, unrest, and coverage from global media. Some US allies and partners supported the attack, while others expressed hesitation. Opinion in the Global South was less favorable to the attacks. Most countries did not take a definitive side in the conflict but called for peace.

In the Middle East, Saudi Arabia , Egypt and the Gulf states criticized the Iranian attacks.

In Asia, many condemned the attacks or called for peace.

In Europe, the majority condemned the Iranian retaliatory strikes, many called for peace without taking sides, and some condemned the US and Israel.

In Oceania , most countries supported the strikes.

The Americas exhibited a mix of reactions, while most African countries did not make official remarks.

The war provoked protests against it, as well as others in support of the Iranian opposition . Opinion on the attacks was divided within Iran, with many Iranians mourning casualties and attending large public rallies in support of the government. Others celebrated the attacks and expressed hope for regime change , particularly those within or affiliated with the exiled opposition. An anti-government uprising hoped for by the United States and Israel did not materialize, with some analysts saying that the attacks had bolstered the government's domestic popularity.

After the deadline passed without an agreement in June 2025, Israel launched airstrikes against Iran, starting the Twelve-Day War .

As of June 28, 2026 , there were three rounds of talks before the Islamabad talks that led to the Islamabad Memorandum , and two rounds of technical talks.

The first round was held in Oman on April 12, 2025, led by US special envoy Steve Witkoff and Iranian foreign minister Abbas Araghchi . A second round of Omani-mediated talks took place in Rome on April 19, 2025, again between Witkoff and Araghchi. This was followed by a third round in Muscat around a week later; an expert-level meeting to develop a framework for a possible nuclear agreement was led by Michael Anton for the US and by Majid Takht-Ravanchi for Iran. June 2026 Memorandum of Understanding The signing followed an earlier, digital signing of the MOU by the foreign ministers of the two principal belligerents.

In the MOU, the United States and Iran agreed to suspend hostilities for 60 days and to establish a framework for a permanent peace under which the US would make major financial and political concessions to the Islamic Republic of Iran. Trump characterized the MOU as representing the "unconditional surrender" of Iran. Iran declared the document as an enduring "record of US failure".

The Foreign Policy , and The Atlantic described the outcome of the war as a "defeat" for the United States and Israel.

The Independent said that America had lost the war, and called Iran's now-proven ability to close of the Strait of Hormuz a "weapon of mass economic destruction of unique power" and "far more useful option than any nuclear device." Jeremy Brown, international editor for the BBC , remarked that "the US and Israeli air forces scored a series of tactical victories. But they were not enough to avoid a strategic defeat." Robert Kagan , a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution , said the deal was "a total victory for Iran and a total defeat for the United States," citing major US concessions. He called the increased Iranian control of the Strait of Hormuz "a major blow to the United States' position in the region, and it's also a major blow to Israel's security". American diplomat Richard Haas described the deal as "a massive victory for Iran," pointing to the failure of the United States to topple the Iranian government, Iran's retention of its drone and missile arsenal, deferral of issues regarding its nuclear program, continued ability to support its network of non-state allies in the Middle East , sanctions relief and future reconstruction fund, and a commitment from the United States not to interfere in Iran's internal affairs. He also said US-Israel relations were badly damaged, and that Israel's "freedom of action has been significantly curtailed." Paul Musgrave , an associate professor of government at Georgetown University in Qatar , said the deal indicated that "the Iranians had greater strategic patience, greater strategic leverage and the ability to shape a deal that was always going to be more favorable to them relative to the Americans." Susan Rice described the MOU as "a jaw-dropping, horrific surrender document complete with hundreds of billions in reparations." Writing for The Indian Express , journalist Mashkoora Khan said that the outcome depended on who is being asked: for Trump, a decisive victory; for Iran, a defeat of Washington because it survived, adding that "Independent analysts are similarly divided, and many conclude that nearly everyone lost something." Iranian chief negotiator Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf stated Iran would unilaterally begin imposing permanent tolls on ships passing the Strait of Hormuz 60 days after the withdrawal of the US Navy.

The war helped entrench the power of the IRGC within Iranian politics and society, and, according to Robert Pape , began the process of transforming Iran into a major power. Analysis This section is an excerpt from Analysis of the 2026 Iran war . A number of analysts have argued that, despite massive military and economic damage to Iran and the killing of large portions of the country's leadership, on a strategic level the war has been a success for Iran and a failure for the United States.

The war demonstrated to Iranian leadership that the country could survive a full-scale military assault by the United States, with the result that Iran "has lost its fear of war" with the US.

In turn, Iran demonstrated that it could threaten US bases, undermining a widespread image of American military invulnerability. Most importantly, the war demonstrated to both Iranian and US leadership that attacking ships passing through the Strait of Hormuz was an extremely effective Iranian strategic option—and one that, unlike the Iranian nuclear program , could be pursued at relatively low cost using asymmetric military tactics. Many experts argue that the war is illegal under US law because launching a war requires congressional authorization. They are also considered to be in violation of the UN Charter's prohibition on the use of force, because the attacks fail to meet the criteria for self-defense and lack authorization from the United Nations Security Council.

In response, the Trump administration claimed that previous presidents have also launched unauthorized military actions, and dismissed international law.

In international criminal law , experts have identified the attacks as a crime of aggression , specifically as a war of aggression .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 23 May 2026 . ^ Naar, Ismaeel (12 May 2026). "Kuwait Accuses Iran of Trying to Infiltrate Its Territory" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 23 May 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (28 March 2026). "Joining war, Yemen's Houthis launch ballistic missile attack on southern Israel" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Involvement of the Amal Movement in the Fighting Against Israel Alongside Hezbollah" . Alma Research and Education Center . 5 April 2026 . Retrieved 9 April 2026 . ^ Jawad Al-Tamimi, Aymenn (9 April 2026). "The Amal Movement and the New War in Lebanon: Interview" . Middle East Forum . Retrieved 22 April 2026 . ^ Younes, Lylla (16 March 2026). "Israel Killed Over a Dozen Lebanese Paramedics in Three Days, Now Claiming That Ambulances Are "Hezbollah" Targets" . Drop Site . Archived from the original on 12 April 2026 . Retrieved 19 March 2026 . ^ "US embassy in Baghdad attacked as US-Israel war on Iran escalates" . Al Jazeera English . 7 March 2026 . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ Toomey, Bridget (1 March 2026). "Iraqi Shiite militias join the war between Israel, the US, and Iran with drone attacks" . FDD's Long War Journal . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ Sancha, Natalia (27 March 2026). "Iraq mourns its dead after worst strike against its army since the start of the war: 'Why did the Americans attack us?' " . EL PAÍS English . Archived from the original on 7 April 2026 . Retrieved 14 April 2026 . ^ Seth J. Frantzman (4 March 2026). "Lebanon Islamic Group claims headquarters targeted by IDF strikes" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Israel strikes Beirut, Hamas official reportedly killed" . Al Arabiya English . 5 March 2026. Archived from the original on 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ "Palestinian Islamic Jihad armed wing says Lebanon commander killed in Israeli strikes" . L'Orient Today . 2 March 2026. Archived from the original on 11 April 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ Smith, Helena (11 March 2026). "Mojtaba Khamenei was hurt in strike that killed his father, Iran's Cyprus ambassador confirms" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ Pannell, Ian; Savir, Dana; Gardiner, Charlotte; Miller, Jordana; Malekian, Somayeh. "Who is running Iran right now? Trump, security officials offer different accounts" . ABC News . Archived from the original on 8 May 2026 . Retrieved 18 May 2026 . ^ Fassihi, Farnaz (23 April 2026). "A New Era and New Leadership: The Generals Who Are Running Iran" .

The New York Times . ^ Fassihi, Farnaz (20 March 2026). " "A Diary of War From an Unlikely Author: the Son of Iran's President" " .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 30 April 2026 . Retrieved 3 July 2026 . ^ McQue, Katie (5 April 2026). "Worker for US defense contractor killed in Iraq as colleagues say they are pressured to stay" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 5 July 2026 . ^ "Two killed, 12 injured after projectile fell on residential location in Saudi Arabia" . Reuters. 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ "4 injured from missile shrapnel in Riyadh as fragment falls near refinery" . ^ "Saudi Arabia says operational activities halted at several energy sites" . Archived from the original on 10 April 2026. ^ "Fatalities in the UAE" . Khaleej Times . 17 March 2026 . Retrieved 17 March 2026 . ^ "UAE defense ministry says civilian contractor killed in Bahrain" . Al Arabiya English . 24 March 2026. ^ Naar, Ismaeel (26 March 2026). "Two Killed in Abu Dhabi as Gulf States Face Fresh Attacks" . NYTimes.com . Dubai, United Arab Emirates. ^ "UAE intercepts 17 ballistic missiles, 35 drones after US-Iran ceasefire" . Khaleej Times . Archived from the original on 9 April 2026. ^ "Three injured in drone attack at Fujairah oil zone" . Archived from the original on 5 May 2026 . Retrieved 4 May 2026 . ^ "PJAK Confirms Four Fighters Killed by IRGC" . iranwire.com . Archived from the original on 2 July 2026 . Retrieved 5 July 2026 . ^ "KHRN: Ten Kurdish fighters killed in clashes with IRGC" . KHRN . 2 July 2026. Archived from the original on 2 July 2026 . Retrieved 5 July 2026 . ^ "Iran hits at least 12 US, allied radar systems since start of war" . DeshKal News . 23 March 2026. ^ "Iran attacked military base in Abu Dhabi, satellite images reveal" . ^ Amoah, Macdonald; Bazilian, Morgan; Matlsek, Jahara. "The First 36 Hours of War Consumed Over 3,000 U.S.-Israeli Munitions" . Foreign Policy . Retrieved 6 March 2026 .

The destruction of two advanced U.S. radars, the AN/FPS-132 in Qatar and the AN/TPS-59 in Bahrain, highlights a problem where the total weight of the "mineral bill" is less of a concern than the extreme fragility of the supply chain and the extensive timelines for replacement. ^ "Iranian Drone Strike Destroys Key U.S. Air Defence Radar in Saudi Arabia" . ^ "FPV Drones Hit U.S. Black Hawk, Sentinel Radar in Iraq, No Sign of Defense as iran Invasion Looms" . Defense Express . ^ "Iran Ballistic Missile Strike Hits U.S. Early Warning Radar in Bahrain, Raising Fears of Wider Gulf War" . ^ "a recent Iranian missile/drone strike destroyed an ASR-1000L tactical air surveillance radar" . ^ Beaule, Victoria; Charalambous, Peter; Inal, Kerem (18 March 2026). "US and allied radar sites in the Middle East struck at least 10 times: Visual analysis" . ABC News . ^ "US radars damaged in Bahrain - Satellite images" . caliber.az . 27 March 2026. ^ Bordeaux, Thomas; Mezzofiore, Gianluca (5 March 2026). "Radar bases housing key US missile interceptor hit in Jordan and UAE, satellite images show" . CNN . Retrieved 6 March 2026 .

The Jerusalem Post. Archived from the original on 15 March 2026 . Retrieved 15 March 2026 . ^ "בכיר צבאי: "האמריקנים לא האמינו שנצליח בעריפה; איראן סופרת מעל 10,000 נפגעים" " (in Hebrew) . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ "Epic Fury strikes on Iran were fueled by 2 million energy drinks, about a million gallons of coffee, and nicotine, top general says" . ^ "Iranian army says at least 104 killed in US attack on Iranian warship last week" . Reuters . 8 March 2026. ^ "IDF says 'nearly a third' of Hezbollah's forces killed during years-long multi-front war" . ^ "Iran War Cost Tracker — Final Total: $113.3 Billion" . Iran War Cost Tracker . 16 June 2026 . Retrieved 3 July 2026 . ^ "$25bn or $1 Trillion: How Much Has Iran War Really Cost the US?" . Al Jazeera English . 30 March 2026 . Retrieved 24 May 2026 . ^ Hancock, Alice; John, Jamie; Harris, Lee (8 April 2026). "Shipping Stalls as Tehran Dictates Terms in Strait of Hormuz" . Financial Times . ^ a b "Pentagon Names Iran Mission 'Operation Epic Fury' " . Iran International . 28 February 2026. Archived from the original on 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ a b "Inside the Plan to Kill Ali Khamenei" . Financial Times . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Operation Epic Fury and International Law" . United States Department of State. 21 April 2026 . Retrieved 8 June 2026 . ^ a b Shalev, Tal (28 February 2026). "Israel Names Operation Against Iran "Roaring Lion" " . CNN . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ a b Munitz, Shmuel (6 March 2026). "From Ancient Israel to Modern Iran: The Enduring Symbolism of the Lion" . Ynet . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ "Advanced Arms Production Never Halted During Imposed War" . Mehr News Agency . 16 June 2026 . Retrieved 18 June 2026 . ^ "Gulf War III Or Cold War II: Iran Truth And Consequences" . Hoover.org . Hoover Institution. Archived from the original on 11 March 2026 . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ Shelter-Jones, Phillip. "Gulf War III Is a Warning About the Effects of a 'Taiwan Straits War I' " . RUSI.org . Royal United Services Institute . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ Citations for Third Gulf War: "The third Gulf war will scar energy markets for a long time yet" .

The Economist . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 1 June 2026 . Hopton, Nicholas (23 March 2026). "What next in the Third Gulf War?" . New Statesman . Retrieved 1 June 2026 . Stein, Aaron; Salisbury, Emma; Lair, Sam; Petersen, Michael B.; Plopsky, Guy (5 March 2026). "Understanding the Third Gulf War" . Foreign Policy Research Institute . Retrieved 1 June 2026 . Kacowicz, Arie M. (11 March 2026). "When and how will the third Gulf War end?" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 1 June 2026 . Mohamed Nour, Mohamed Al-Hassan (6 March 2026). "Third Gulf War – Has BRICS shaped the landscape of a new conflict?" . Sudan Tribune . Retrieved 1 June 2026 . Hopper, Timothy (16 April 2026). "The "Third Gulf War" and the collapse of the oil-for-security bargain" . Middle East Monitor . Retrieved 1 June 2026 . Quilliam, Neil; Vakil, Sanam (6 April 2026). "Avoiding the Next Gulf War" . Foreign Affairs . Retrieved 1 June 2026 . Wintour, Patrick (8 March 2026). "From Bush Sr to Trump: the risks, lessons and legacy of US interference in the Middle East" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 1 June 2026 . ^ Alhaei, Rasol (7 June 2026). "From Online Class to Revolution Square: A Tehran Teacher's Routine Amid War" . Al Jazeera English . Archived from the original on 8 June 2026 . Retrieved 8 June 2026 .

The "Ramadan War", as the US-Israel war on Iran is popularly known ^ "Intact but Unreformed: Iran After the Ramadan War" .

The Geopolitical Desk . 22 May 2026. Archived from the original on 8 June 2026 . Retrieved 8 June 2026 . ^ a b "Iran to Mark Eid Al-Fitr On Saturday: State TV" . Arab News . Agence France-Presse . 20 March 2026 . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ "Ramadan War Inflicts $160 Million Blow to Iran's Tourism Sector" . Tehran Times . 13 May 2026 . Retrieved 8 June 2026 . ^ "Iranian Defense: Development of New Technologies Enabled Us to Target 210 Enemy Aircraft During Ramadan War" . Saba News Agency . 26 May 2026. Archived from the original on 8 June 2026 . Retrieved 8 June 2026 . ^ Hourcade, Bernard (March 2026). "What Prospects for a New Iran?" . Le Monde diplomatique . Retrieved 15 April 2026 . ^ Afary, Janet (13 April 2026). "Iranian Revolution" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived from the original on 15 December 2025 . Retrieved 2 May 2026 . ^ a b "From 1953 Coup To 2026 Strikes: The Long Road To US-Iran War" . News18 . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ a b Al-Marashi, Ibrahim (2 March 2026). "Iran and the US Have Been at War for Decades – and There's No End in Sight" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ a b MacFarquhar, Neil (15 March 2026). "A Timeline of the Tensions Between the Islamic Republic of Iran and the U.S." The New York Times . Retrieved 19 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Unveils New Solid-Fueled Ballistic Missile, State TV Reports" . Associated Press . 4 May 2025 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Israel leaves front lines in south Lebanon" . UPI . Archived from the original on 23 October 2020 . Retrieved 7 July 2026 . ^ Hubbard, Ben; Rubin, Alissa J. (30 September 2024). "Facing a Big Test, Iran's 'Axis of Resistance' Flails" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 9 October 2024 . Retrieved 7 July 2026 . ^ Al-Kassab, Fatima (26 October 2023). "What is the 'axis of resistance' of Iran-backed groups in the Middle East?" . NPR . Archived from the original on 29 October 2023 . Retrieved 7 July 2026 . ^ "The shape-shifting 'axis of resistance' " . Chatham House . 11 June 2025. Archived from the original on 24 February 2026 . Retrieved 7 July 2026 . ^ "The Evolving Middle Eastern Regional Order: Türkiye-Iraq Relations in Context" . Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . 18 February 2026 . Retrieved 7 July 2026 . ^ Ali-Khan, Veena (19 March 2025). "Down but Not Out: Reassessing the Axis of Resistance" .

The Century Foundation . Retrieved 7 July 2026 . ^ Khalaji, Mehdi; Collier, Robert (September 2011). "2. Shiite Jurisprudence, Political Expediency, and Nuclear Weapons" (PDF) . Nuclear Fatwa; Religion and Politics in Iran's Proliferation Strategy . Washington Institute for Near East Policy . pp. 13– 14, 25. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 June 2019. Khamenei's Nuclear Fatwa Khamenei's statements on the religious prohibition against the production and use of WMD "in any form" were apparently first recorded in October 2003 ^ Gritten, David (18 June 2025). "Was Iran Months Away from Producing a Nuclear Bomb?" . BBC News . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . the US intelligence community "continues to assess that Iran is not building a nuclear weapon and Supreme Leader Khamenei has not authorised the nuclear weapons programme that he suspended in 2003". – What do we know about Iran's nuclear programme? a decade-long investigation by the IAEA found evidence that Iran conducted "a range of activities relevant to the development of a nuclear explosive device" from the late 1980s until 2003 ^ Imbert, Louis; Golshiri, Ghazal; Mas, Liselotte (8 July 2025). "How Israel Tracked Down and Assassinated Scientists Involved in Iran's Nuclear Program" . lemonde.fr . Le Monde. Archived from the original on 2 May 2026 . Retrieved 21 April 2026 . ^ UN Security Council (31 July 2006). "S/Res/1696 (2006)" . United Nations . Expresses concern at the intentions of Iran's nuclear programme and demands that Iran halt its uranium enrichment programme ^ UN Security Council . "Resolution 1696 (2006)" . United Nations . p. 2. 2. Demands , in this context, that Iran shall suspend all enrichment-related and reprocessing activities, including research and development, to be verified by the IAEA ^ UN Security Council . "Resolution 1737 (2006)" . United Nations . p. 2. 2. Decides , in this context, that Iran shall without further delay suspend the following proliferation sensitive nuclear activities: (a) all enrichment-related and reprocessing activities, including research and development, to be verified by the IAEA; and (b) work on all heavy water-related projects, including the construction of a research reactor moderated by heavy water, also to be verified by the IAEA; ^ UN Security Council . "Resolution 2231 (2015) on Iran Nuclear Issue" . United Nations . resolutions 1696 (2006), 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008), 1835 (2008) and 1929 (2010) – Background Diplomatic efforts to reach a comprehensive, long-term and proper solution to the Iranian nuclear issue culminated in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) concluded on 14 July 2015 ^ "Flexible Resistance: How Hezbollah and Hamas Are Mending Ties" . Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . 11 July 2018 . Retrieved 8 February 2026 . ^ "What Links Hamas to the 'Axis of Resistance' and Iran as Its Patron?" .

The Irish Times . 10 October 2023 . Retrieved 8 February 2026 . ^ "Evolution Under Fire: Iran's 'Axis of Resistance' in a Post-War Era" . Al Jazeera English . 30 June 2026. ^ "Iran's Conflict With Israel and the United States" . Council on Foreign Relations . ^ Swan, Jonathan; Haberman, Maggie (7 April 2026). "How Trump Took the U.S. To War With Iran" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . ^ Banco, Erin; Slattery, Gram; Lubell, Maayan (24 March 2026). "Exclusive: Trump Approved Iran Operation After Netanyahu Argued for Joint Killing of Khamenei, Sources Say" . Reuters . ^ "Iran Reaffirms Right to Enrich Uranium Ahead of Key Talks in Turkiye" . Al Jazeera English . 24 July 2025 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . Western powers, led by the US and backed by Israel, have long accused Tehran of secretly seeking nuclear weapons. Iran has repeatedly denied this, insisting its nuclear programme is solely for civilian purposes such as energy production. ^ "IAEA Report Confirms Iran's Compliance with the JCPOA" . Arms Control Association . 8 June 2018. Archived from the original on 20 April 2026 . Retrieved 14 April 2026 . ^ "Trump Tightens the Screws on Iran's Oil" . Brookings Institution . 29 June 2018 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Shamim, Sarah (13 January 2026). "How US Sanctions Crippled Lives of Iranians Trump Says He Wants to 'Help' " . Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Trump Reimposes 'Maximum Pressure' on Iran, Aims to Drive Oil Exports to Zero" . Reuters . 4 February 2025 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Protests Erupt in Iran over Currency's Plunge to Record Low" . Associated Press News . 29 December 2025. Archived from the original on 30 December 2025 . Retrieved 23 April 2025 . ^ "European Powers Warn Iran Against 'Escalatory' Acts As Snapback Sanctions Take Force" . Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . 28 September 2025. ^ Sharma, Yashraj (3 February 2026). "US Says It Caused Dollar Shortage to Trigger Iran Protests: What That Means" . Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 3 March 2026 .

In a stunning admission, US Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent said Washington engineered a dollar shortage to send the Iranian rial into freefall that culminated with protesters taking to the streets. ^ Northam, Jackie (23 February 2026). "Trump's Sanctions on Iran Have Dramatically Affected Its Economy and Led to Protests" . NPR . Retrieved 14 March 2026 . ^ "Trump Lays out Case for Possible Attack on Iran in State of the Union Speech" .

The Straits Times . 25 February 2026. ISSN 0585-3923 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . He accused Iran of restarting its nuclear programme, working to build missiles that 'soon' would be capable of reaching the US – Iranian state media have claimed that Tehran is developing a missile capable of reaching North America. ^ Roth, Andrew (27 February 2026). "Trump Advisers Scramble to Justify Possible US Military Intervention in Iran" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 17 April 2026 . ^ Murphy, Francois (12 June 2025). "IAEA Board Declares Iran in Breach of Non-Proliferation Obligations" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 22 April 2026 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ Bozorgmehr, Najmeh (25 June 2025). "Iran's Parliament Votes to Halt Co-Operation With Nuclear Watchdog" . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 25 June 2025 . Retrieved 25 June 2025 . ^ Murphy, Francois (27 February 2026). "IAEA Report Says Iran Must Allow Inspections, Points at Isfahan" . Reuters . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ a b Liechtenstein, Stephanie (27 February 2026). "UN Nuclear Watchdog Says It's Unable to Verify Whether Iran Has Suspended All Uranium Enrichment" . Associated Press News . Archived from the original on 16 April 2026 . Retrieved 16 April 2026 . ^ "Iran Rejects Inspections of Bombed Nuclear Sites Without IAEA Framework" . Al Jazeera English . 24 December 2025 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "IAEA Says No Evidence Iran Is Building a Nuclear Bomb" . middleeastmonitor.com . Middle East Monitor. 4 March 2026. Archived from the original on 19 April 2026 . Retrieved 16 April 2026 . ^ Bowen, Wyn; Moran, Matthew (7 March 2014). "Iran's Nuclear Programme: A Case Study in Hedging?" . Contemporary Security Policy . 35 (1). King's College London : Taylor & Francis : 26– 52. doi : 10.1080/13523260.2014.884338 . ISSN 1743-8764 . this assessment is further complicated by Iran's domestic political context, which has engendered an approach that is as much 'hedging by default' as it is 'hedging by design'. This approach allows Tehran to reconcile restraint with domestic consensus on nuclear advancement. Bowen, Wyn; Moran, Matthew (2015). "Living with nuclear hedging: the implications of Iran's nuclear strategy" (PDF) . International Affairs . 91 (4).

The Royal Institute of International Affairs : John Wiley & Sons : 688-paragraph 2. doi : 10.1111/1468-2346.12337 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . There is much evidence to suggest Iran is engaged in a more nuanced strategy based on nuclear hedging, rather than outright pursuit of the bomb. Eisenstadt, Michael (29 November 2022). "Iran's Nuclear Hedging Strategy: Shaping the Islamic Republic's Proliferation Calculus" .

The Washington Institute for Near East Policy . Gettel, Christopher (December 2024). "Why Iran is Choosing Nuclear Hedging" . Panoply Journal . 5 . George Mason University: Center for International Relations and International Security Inc. doi : 10.71166/2x5v5824 . ISSN 2766-2594 . Archived from the original on 19 April 2026 . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . Volpe, Tristan (23 February 2023). "Chapter 6: Iran: Abstract" . Leveraging Latency: How the Weak Compel the Strong with Nuclear Technology . Naval Postgraduate School : Oxford University Press . doi : 10.1093/oso/9780197669532.003.0006 . Iran developed its nuclear program from 1953 to 2002 and then botched a deception campaign before reconfiguring around a safer hedge posture. ^ "Give Negotiations a Chance: How to Turn Iran's Claimed Right to Enrich Uranium into a New Deal—and Avoid a War" . Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists . 26 February 2026 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . Iran has used its enrichment program for leverage in international negotiations. ^ Kristensen, Hans M.; Norris, Robert S. (2014). "Israeli Nuclear Weapons, 2014" . Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists . 70 (6): 97– 115. Bibcode : 2014BuAtS..70f..97K . doi : 10.1177/0096340214555409 . ^ Hirsch, Yoni (14 April 2014). "Carter Says Israel Has Stockpile of over 300 Nuclear Bombs" . Israel Hayom . Archived from the original on 16 April 2014 . Retrieved 19 June 2024 . ^ Revesz, Rachael (16 September 2016). "Colin Powell Leaked Emails: Israel Has '200 Nukes All Pointed at Iran', Former US Secretary of State Says" .

The Independent . Retrieved 10 May 2018 . ^ Brower, Kenneth S (February 1997). "A Propensity for Conflict: Potential Scenarios and Outcomes of War in the Middle East". Jane's Intelligence Review (special report) (14): 14– 15. ^ "Nuclear Weapons: Who Has What at a Glance" . Arms Control Association . Retrieved 24 September 2017 . ^ Cohen, Avner (1998). Israel and the Bomb . New York: Columbia University Press . p. 349. ISBN 978-0-231-10482-1 . ^ ElBaradei, Mohamed (27 July 2004). "Transcript of the Director General's Interview with Al-Ahram News" . International Atomic Energy Agency . Retrieved 3 June 2007 . ^ My Promised Land , by Ari Shavit , (London 2014), page 188 ^ "Nuclear Weapons" . FAS . Archived from the original on 7 December 2010 . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ "Status of World Nuclear Forces" . Federation Of American Scientists . ^ There are a wide range of estimates as to the size of the Israeli nuclear arsenal. For a compiled list of estimates, see Avner Cohen (2010).

The Worst-Kept Secret: Israel's bargain with the Bomb . Columbia University Press. Table 1, p. xxvii and p. 82. ^ a b c Kristensen, Hans M.; Korda, Matt (2 January 2022). "Israeli Nuclear Weapons, 2021" . Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists . 78 (1): 38– 50. Bibcode : 2022BuAtS..78a..38K . doi : 10.1080/00963402.2021.2014239 . ISSN 0096-3402 . ^ Cordesman, Anthony H. (9 March 2015). "Judging a P5+1 Agreement with Iran: The Key Technical and Strategic Issues" . Center for Strategic and International Studies . ^ Maher, Nora (14 March 2020). "Balancing Deterrence: Iran-Israel Relations in a Turbulent Middle East". Review of Economics and Political Science . 8 (3): 226– 245. doi : 10.1108/reps-06-2019-0085 . hdl : 10419/316081 . ISSN 2356-9980 . ^ Sariolghalam, Mahmood (2001). "Israeli-Turkish Military Cooperation: Iranian Perceptions and Responses". Journal of Political & Military Sociology . 29 (2): 293– 304. ISSN 0047-2697 . JSTOR 45293807 . ^ "An Israel-Iran Balance of Nuclear Deterrence: Seeds of Instability" . INSS . July 2008 . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ Sabet, Farzan (2023). Narratives of the Middle East WMD-Free Zone: Drivers, Themes, And Historical Accounts (Report). UNIDIR. doi : 10.37559/mewmdfz/2023/narratives . ^ "The Middle Eastern WMD-Free Zone and the NPT" . Arms Control Association . July 2022. Archived from the original on 20 June 2025 . Retrieved 30 October 2025 . ^ "Israel Rejects Call to Join Anti-Nuclear Treaty" . Reuters . 29 May 2010 . Retrieved 30 October 2025 . ^ Curtis, Mark (23 March 2026). "UK Saw Israel as 'Chief Problem' to Curb Iran's Nuclear Ambitions" . Declassified UK . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ "Nuclear Weapons and Non-Proliferation In the Middle East" . Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . 22 February 2024 . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ Epstein, Jake (28 February 2026). "Here Are the Weapons America Used to Strike Iran — and Shield Against Retaliation" . Business Insider . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Bozorgmehr, Najmeh; Ghaffari, Bita (28 February 2026). "Tehran Started Its Working Week. Then Came the Explosions" . Financial Times . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Live Updates: U.S. And Israel Attack Iran" . PBS News . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 17 March 2026 .

The strikes opened a stunning new chapter in U.S. intervention in Iran, marking the second time in eight months that the Trump administration has attacked the country during talks over its nuclear program. ^ "Iran's Foreign Minister Says He's Unsure Why U.S. Attacked During Nuclear Talks" . NBC News . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 17 March 2026 . ^ "Iran: Angriff Mitten Im Ramadan – War Das Absicht? Das Sagt Ein Experte" . Stern (in German). 5 March 2026. Archived from the original on 5 March 2026 . Retrieved 14 March 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (28 February 2026). "IDF Says 200 Jets Involved in Air Force's Largest-Ever Attack Sortie" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Satellite Images Show Iranian Warship Burning After US Israel Strikes" . Business Insider . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Israel Claims to Have Dropped over 1,200 Bombs on Iran in One Day" . Al Jazeera English . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Update from Eric Schmitt" .

The New York Times . 28 February 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Salem, Mostafa; Pourahmadi, Adam (28 February 2026). "Explosions Were Heard Near Iran's Supreme Leader's Residence and Office" . CNN . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Hackers Hit Iranian Apps, Websites After US-Israeli Strikes" . Reuters . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ a b Gal, Itai (28 February 2026). "Israel Plunges Iran into Darkness with Largest Cyberattack in History During Attack Against Iran" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Israel Hacked Popular Iranian Prayer App to Urge Defections, Resistance" .

The Wall Street Journal . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "The Digital Front: Iran's Internet Down for Second Day Amid Reports of U.S.-Israel Cyberattacks" . CNBC . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Behrooz, Parin (18 March 2026). "Iran Maintains Near-Total Internet Blackout Amid U.S.-Israeli Strikes" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . Some government-approved officials are also assigned "white SIM cards," which can bypass all filtering and connect directly to the global internet without any workarounds. But this weekend, cybersecurity experts observed disruptions even within this state-approved connection system when some white SIM cards stopped working. ^ a b "Iran's 'Chosen Users' Get 'Privileged Access' Despite Internet Blackout for Masses" .

The Register . 17 March 2026. ^ "Israel Says Months of Planning Led to Surprise Iran Strikes" . Iran International . Volant Media UK Ltd. 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Halbfinger, David M.; Bergman, Ronen (1 March 2026). "How the Assault on Iran Unfolded" .

The New York Times . Jerusalem, Tel Aviv. ^ a b c Liebermann, Oren (28 February 2026). "Israel Launches Strike Against Iran, Declares State of Emergency Across Country" . CNN . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Mohamed, Edna; Marsi, Federica (28 February 2026). "Israel Attacks Iran" . Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (28 February 2026). "Israel Calls up 20,000 Reservists, In Addition to the 50,000 Reservists Currently on Duty" .

The Times of Israel . ^ Yosef, Eugenia (28 February 2026). "Israeli Hospitals Shift Underground as Health Ministry Orders Highest Readiness Level" . CNN . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ a b "Trump Announces "Major Combat Operations" in Iran. Watch the Full Video and Read His Statement" . CBS News . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Read Trump's Full Statement on Iran Attacks" . PBS News . Associated Press . 28 February 2026. ^ "Trump's Bet on Iranian Regime Change Could Be His Biggest Gamble Yet" . BBC News . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ "Netanyahu Says Israel, US Launched Strikes to 'Remove the Existential Threat' Posed by Iran" .

The Times of Israel . 28 February 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Scahill, Jeremy (3 March 2026). "Exclusive: Iran's Deputy Foreign Minister Rejects Trump's 'Big Lie' About Why He Went to War" . Drop Site News . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . 'They claim that Iran posed an imminent threat to the United States,' Baghaei added. 'Did we come to the Gulf of Mexico to target Los Angeles and other U.S. cities? Or did they come 6,500 miles away to Iranian shores?' ^ جنگ آمریکا و اسرائیل با ایران؛ چرا واکنش تهران این‌بار تنها چند ساعت طول کشید؟ . BBC News Persian (in Persian). 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Targets US Bases Across Persian Gulf States, IRGC-Aligned Outlet Says" . Iran International . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Lehmann, Noam (28 February 2026). "Bahrain: Sirens Activated as Iran Targets US Bases" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Yee, Isaac; Rebane, Teele (28 February 2026). "Videos Show Smoke Rising Near US Navy Facility in Bahrain" . CNN . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Explosions Reported in Kuwait and UAE" . Armenia News . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Drone Attacks Targets Kuwait International Airport" . Iran International . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Update from Ismaeel Naar" .

The New York Times . 28 February 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Drones Shot Down Over Erbil Near U.S. Consulate as Iran-Israel Conflict Expands to Iraqi Kurdistan" . Kurdistan24 . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Iran Targets US Military Bases in the Middle East with Retaliatory Strikes" . France 24 . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ Salem, Mostafa (28 February 2026). "Iran's IRGC Targeted Four US Bases in the Middle East, Iranian Media Reports" . CNN . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Bordeaux, Thomas; Mezzofiore, Gianluca (5 March 2026). "Radar Bases Housing Key US Missile Interceptor Hit in Jordan and UAE, Satellite Images Show" . CNN . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ a b "More Strikes Aimed at Iran After Khamenei's Death, Trump Issues New Warning" . Reuters . 1 March 2026. ^ Gambrell, Jon; Lidman, Melanie; Boak, Josh; Tucker, Eric (1 March 2026). "Iran Fires Missiles at Israel and Gulf States After US-Israeli Strike Kills Khamenei" . Associated Press . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Christou, William; Giuffrida, Angela (1 March 2026). "Explosions Rock Dubai, Bahrain, Jordan and Kuwait as War Spreads Across Middle East" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ "Two Iranian Missiles Fired in Direction of Cyprus: British Defence Secretary" . Al Jazeera English . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Launched Missiles at Cyprus, Threatening Thousands of British Troops Stationed There" .

The Jerusalem Post . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Maddox, David (1 March 2026). "Iran Missiles Fired Towards UK Military Bases in Cyprus, Defence Minister Says" .

The Independent . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Hand, Marcus (1 March 2026). "Ships Avoid the Strait of Hormuz, Tanker Hit off Oman" . SeatradeMaritime . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Saba, Yousef (1 March 2026). "Three Tankers Damaged in Gulf and One Seafarer Killed as US-Iran Conflict Escalates" . Reuters . ^ "Seafarer Death Confirmed Aboard Product Tanker Struck off Oman" . Ship Management International . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ Wells, Peter; Thomas, Nathalie; Wheatley, Jonathan; Ralph, Oliver; Munir, Zehra; Meixler, Eli; Cash, Kieran; Ryan, Orla; Vickers, Julian (1 March 2026). "Middle East War Day 2 as It Happened: Oil Flows Through Strait of Hormuz Dry Up, Opec+ Plans to Raise Output" . Financial Times . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "Nahost-Liveblog: ++ Mehrere Tote Bei Raketeneinschlag in Israel ++" . Tagesschau (in German). 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "E3 Say They May Back Defensive Steps to Destroy Iran's Launch Capability" . Iran International . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "US Can Use UK Bases for Missile Strikes on Iran: Starmer" . Euractiv . Agence France-Presse . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Guardian staff (2 March 2026). "Ukraine War Briefing: Starmer Says Ukrainian Experts Will Help Shoot Down Iranian Drone Attacks in Gulf" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . And we will also bring experts from Ukraine, together with our own experts, to help Gulf partners shoot down Iranian drones attacking them. ^ "Saudi Arabia Authorizes Retaliation Against Iran, CNN" . Iran International . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Scherer, Michael (1 March 2026). " 'I Have Agreed to Talk' " .

The New York Times . ^ Salem, Mostafa; Kent, Lauren (2 March 2026). "Qatar Says It Shot Down Two Iranian Bomber Aircraft" . CNN . Retrieved 14 March 2026 . ^ a b Stapczynski, Stephen; Liao, Ruth; El Wardany, Salma (4 March 2026). "Qatar's Hard-Won Reputation as Safest Gas Supplier Lost in Days" . Bloomberg News . ^ Liao, Ruth; Stapczynski, Stephen (7 March 2026). "Qatar's Main LNG Equipment Intact, Satellite Analysis Shows" . Bloomberg News . ^ "Iran Says Natanz Nuclear Site Hit in US-Israeli Strikes" . Reuters . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ حملات گسترده هوایی به پایتخت ایران؛ آسیب‌ به بیمارستان‌های گاندی و خاتم‌الانبیاء در تهران . BBC News Persian (in Persian). 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Kuwait Shoots Down US Jets: All About F/A-18 Hornet That Accidentally Shot Down F-15s Amid Iran Tensions" . Hindustan Times . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ Seligman, Lara; Weisgerber, Marcus; Holliday, Shelby (4 March 2026). "Exclusive: Kuwaiti Jet Fighter Mistakenly Downed U.S. F-15s, Initial Reports Say" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ سنتکام: سقوط سه اف-۱۵اشتباه پدافند کویت بود؛ قرارگاه خاتم‌الانبیاء: ما زدیم . BBC News Persian (in Persian). 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ a b c Kleinbaum, Yair (1 March 2026). "Breaking: Hezbollah Officially Declared War on Israel" . JFeed . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Israel Strikes Beirut, Lebanon State Media Says Hamas Official Killed" . France 24 . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ "Hezbollah Claims Attack on Israel Was 'Defensive Act' After Year of Israeli Strikes" .

The Times of Israel . Agence France-Presse . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 25 April 2026 . ^ "Hezbollah Leader: Resumed Fighting with Israel Not Linked to War on Iran" . United Press International . 5 March 2026. ^ "Lebanon's Ban on Hezbollah 'Activities': Bold but Difficult to Implement" . Al Jazeera English . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ Kraus, Yair; Glikman, Eitan; Shashua, Itamar (1 March 2026). "Israel Strikes Southern Lebanon and Tehran as Hezbollah Joins Iran War" . Ynet . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ Stepansky, Joseph; Sabah, Zaid (2 March 2026). "US, Israel Attack Iran Live: Trump Vows to Avenge 3 American Soldiers" . Al Jazeera English . Archived from the original on 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Iran, Le News Dalla Guerra. Missili Di Hezbollah Dal Libano Verso Haifa, Israele Risponde. Teheran Sotto Attacco dell'Idf" . la Repubblica (in Italian). 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (2 March 2026). "IDF Says It Killed Hezbollah Intelligence Chief in Overnight Strike" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ Sabbagh, Dan (2 March 2026). "Hezbollah Said to Have Launched Drone That Struck UK RAF Airbase in Cyprus" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Greece Deploys Frigates and F-16s To Cyprus Amid Rising Security Tensions" . Kathimerini . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ Stepansky, Joseph; Sabah, Zaid (2 March 2026). "US, Israel attack Iran live: Trump vows to avenge 3 American soldiers" . Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Explosions Rock Iraq's Erbil" . Al Jazeera English . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Iranian Attack Sets off Fire Near Bahrain's Mina Salman Port" . Al Jazeera English . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Iran-Aligned Group Claims 23 Drone Attacks on US Sites in Erbil" . Al Jazeera English . 2 March 2026. ^ "Israel Strikes Iran Leadership Compound in Central Tehran" . Iran International . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Video Shows Ruins of Iran's Expediency Council Building After Strikes" . Iran International . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "IDF Destroys Secret Nuclear Site, Thousands of Missile Pads" .

The Jerusalem Post . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Civilian Iran Air Passenger Jet Destroyed at Bushehr Airport, Rosatom Nuclear Plant Suspended" .

The Sunday Guardian . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ Ozberk, Tayfun (2 March 2026). "US Strikes Destroy Iran's Main Naval Assets" . Naval News . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Trevithick, Joseph; Rogoway, Tyler (2 March 2026). "Iran's Key Naval Base On Strait Of Hormuz Set Ablaze From Strikes" .

The War Zone . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "UNESCO Shares Concerns over Protection of Cultural Heritage Sites" . Euronews . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Purwar, Krati (3 March 2026). "How Iran Conflict Damaged Golestan Palace, Once Home Of Peacock Throne Looted From Delhi" . NDTV . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ McShane, Asher (3 March 2026). "Israel Launches Ground Invasion of Lebanon and Trump Warns 'Hardest Hits Were yet to Come' " . LBC . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Israel Orders Troops to Seize New Positions in Lebanon" . France 24 . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Israel Launches Ground Incursion in Lebanon as Hezbollah Targets Military Bases" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ a b "Trump Open to Supporting Armed Militias in Iran, U.S. Officials Say" .

The Wall Street Journal . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Freiberg, Nava (3 March 2026). "Qatar Carried out Strikes in Iran, Saudi Arabia to Soon Follow — Israeli Reports" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Qatar Denies Israeli Media Report That It's Carrying out Retaliatory Strikes in Iran" .

The Times of Israel . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Says Will Hit All Mideast Economic Hubs If US-Israeli Attacks Persist" .

The Economic Times . 3 March 2026. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Says Will Hit All Mideast Economic Hubs If US-Israeli Attacks Persist" . LBCIV7 . 3 March 2026. Archived from the original on 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Crisi Medio Oriente, L'Iran Minaccia l'Europa: Scatta L'allerta Militare E I Paesi Si Mobilitano" . TGLA7 (in Italian). 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Fouda, Malek (3 March 2026). "Tehran Vows to Strike European Countries If They Join Iran War" . Euronews . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Live Updates: US Embassies 'Under Direct Attack,' Rubio Says" . ABC News . 3 March 2026. ^ "Israel Says It Hits Security Headquarters Across Tehran, As Iran Attacks US Sites in Dubai and Qatar" . BBC News . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ Hafezi, Parisa (4 March 2026). "Mojtaba Khamenei, Seen as Possible Next Supreme Leader, Has Survived Attacks on Iran, Sources Say" . Reuters . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Israel F-35 Downs Iranian Fighter Jet in First War Dogfight" .

The Jerusalem Post . 5 March 2026. ^ "Qatar Says Al Udeid Air Base Hit by Ballistic Missile" . ABC News . 3 March 2026. ^ "Saudi Aramco's Ras Tanura Struck Again by Unknown Projectile, Four Sources Say" . Reuters . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ Papadopoulos, Kosta (4 March 2026). "America Evacuates Non-Essential Workers from Cyprus Greek City Times" . Greek City Times . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ Chen, Eve (4 March 2026). "Reconsider Visiting This European Country, State Department Says" . USA Today . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Turkey Says NATO Defences Destroyed Missile Fired from Iran over Mediterranean" . Reuters . 4 March 2026. ^ "Turkey Says Iranian Ballistic Missile Entered Its Airspace, Shot Down by NATO" .

The Times of Israel . 4 March 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Secretary General Mark Rutte Condemns Violation of Turkish Airspace" . NATO . 5 March 2026. ^ "Sri Lanka Rescues 32 Sailors from Sunk Iranian Warship" .

The Hindu . Agence France-Presse. 4 March 2026. ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Sri Lanka Sends Jets over Iran Naval Ship's Distress Call, Denies 'Submarine Attack' Reports" . Hindustan Times . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "The Most Chilling Detail in the U.S. Attack on an Iranian Naval Ship" .

The New Republic . 5 March 2026. ISSN 0028-6583 . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ "External Impact Likely Cause of Ship Sinking" .

The Korea Times . 15 April 2010 . Retrieved 16 April 2010 . ^ "North Korea Rebuffs South Korea's Evidence on Cheonan Attack" .

The Christian Science Monitor . 20 May 2010 . Retrieved 1 June 2012 . ^ Altman, Howard; Trevithick, Joseph (4 March 2026). "U.S. Navy Submarine Torpedoes Iranian Frigate In Indian Ocean" .

The Indian Express . 7 March 2026. Archived from the original on 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 7 March 2026 . ^ a b "Iran to Halt Strikes on Neighbours Unless Attacks from There: Pezeshkian" . Al Jazeera English . 7 March 2026. Archived from the original on 10 March 2026 . Retrieved 7 March 2026 . "The IRGC is now in charge fully, and they will decide whether to attack or not," Serdar said, adding that IRGC chief, Ahmad Vahidi, is considered one of the "most radical commanders" of the group since its foundation. "I don't think Pezeshkian or other politicians will have any influence when it comes to security politics," he added. ^ "Israel Renews Assault on Lebanon After Netanyahu Promises 'Many Surprises' in Next Phase of War" . Associated Press . 7 March 2026. Archived from the original on 12 March 2026 . Retrieved 8 March 2026 .

The message, seemingly filmed in a hurry, underlined the limited powers exercised by the theocracy's leaders over the paramilitary Revolutionary Guard. It answered only to Khamenei and now appears to be picking its own targets. ^ "Strikes Continue Despite Iranian President's Apology" . Eurasia Review . 8 March 2026. ^ Treisman, Rachel (9 March 2026). "What to Know About Mojtaba Khamenei, Iran's New Supreme Leader" . NPR . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ Ismay, John (8 March 2026). "U.S. Military Warns Civilians in Iran to Stay Home Amid Continuing Airstrikes" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 15 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Oil Facilities Hit for First Time as War with US-Israel Enters Day 9" . Al Jazeera English . 9 March 2026 . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ Bagchi, Rounak (9 March 2026). " 'River of Fire' in Tehran: Videos Show Israeli Strikes Hit Iran Fuel Depots, Trigger Black Rain" . Times Now . ^ a b Schneid, Rebecca; Serjoie, Kay Armin; Jamalpour, Fatemeh (8 March 2026). " 'The Air Is Unbreathable': Tehran Shrouded in Toxic Cloud After Israel Strikes Fuel Depots" . Time . Archived from the original on 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . Both Israel and the U.S. military denied carrying out the attack. ^ Parent, Deepa (8 March 2026). " 'Dark, Like Our Future': Iranians Describe Scenes of Catastrophe After Tehran's Oil Depots Bombed" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ "Kuwait City Tower Erupts in Flames as Iran Launches New Wave of Strikes in the Gulf" .

The Independent . 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ Din, Menna; Muhammad, Al Gebaly; Baum, Bernadette (8 March 2026). "Two Kuwaiti Interior Ministry Officers Killed 'While Performing Duties' " . Reuters . ^ "2 Killed, 12 Wounded After Projectile Hits Building in Saudi Arabia" . Al Jazeera English . 8 March 2026. ^ "US Troop Dies from Wounds Sustained in Iran Attack" . Al Jazeera English . 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ Kelliher, Fiona; Magee, Caolán (8 March 2026). " 'Projectile' Kills 2 in Saudi Arabia as Iran Attacks on the Gulf Continue" . Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ "More on Civilian Sites Attacked in Iran: Red Crescent" . Al Jazeera English . 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ "NATO Intercepts Second Iranian Ballistic Missile Fired Toward Turkey" .

The Straits Times . 9 March 2026. ISSN 0585-3923 . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ "NATO Intercepts Iranian Ballistic Missile in Turkish Airspace, Türkiye's Defense Ministry Says" . Kurdistan24 . 9 March 2026 . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ "MSB: 6 Türk F-16'sı KKTC'ye Konuşlandırıldı" . TRT Haber (in Turkish). 9 March 2026 . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ Mangan, Dan (9 March 2026). "Trump Says Iran 'War Is Very Complete', Talks to Putin: Reports" . CNBC . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ Trew, Bel (9 March 2026). "Iran-US War Latest: Israel Launches Widespread New Strikes as Iranian Ballistic Missile Shot Down in Nato Airspace" .

The Independent . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ Jiang, Weijia (9 March 2026). "Trump Says "The War Is Very Complete," And He's Considering Taking over Strait of Hormuz" . CBS News . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ Patil, Anushka (9 March 2026). "Here's What Happened in the Conflict on Monday" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ a b "Syrian President Backs Lebanon's Position on Disarming Hezbollah" . Middle East Eye . 9 March 2026 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ "Israeli Army Intercepts Iranian Drone over Southern Syria: Report" . Al Jazeera English . 10 March 2026 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ South, Todd (9 March 2026). "B-1s And B-52s Bombers Pour into Europe for Ops Against Iran" . Air & Space Forces Magazine . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ "Trade Disruptions in the Strait of Hormuz Due to Attacks on Commercial Ships" . PortWatch . International Monetary Fund . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 14 March 2026 . ^ Baraniuk, Chris (10 March 2026). "GPS Jamming: The Invisible Battle in the Middle East" . BBC News . ^ "Saudi Arabia Welcomes US Designation of Sudanese Muslim Brotherhood as Terrorist Organization" . Arab News . 11 March 2026 . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ "U.S. Designates Sudanese Islamic Movement and Its Armed Wing as Terrorist Entity" . Sudan Tribune . 9 March 2026 . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ Hendawi, Hamza (11 March 2026). "US Says Iran's IRGC-Trained Sudanese Muslim Brotherhood Members Fighting Alongside Army" .

The National . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ a b c Srinivasan, Chandrashekar (10 March 2026). "With Missiles Carrying 1,000 kg Explosives, A New Tactical Phase For Iran" . NDTV . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ Trew, Bel (10 March 2026). "Iran-US War Latest: Trump Threatens Heavy Escalation After Iran 'Begins Laying Mines in Strait of Hormuz' " .

The Independent . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Fighting Back but Not Stronger Than U.S. Thought, Top U.S. General Says" . Reuters . 10 March 2026 . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ Chbaro, Asrar (6 March 2026). "What's Going on the Lebanon–Syria Border?" . Alhurra . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ "Shells Fired From Lebanon Land West of Syrian Capital, Country's Military Says" .

The New York Times . 10 March 2026 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ "Urgent Israeli Warning for Residents of Southern Suburbs of Beirut: Evacuate Immediately" . LBCIV7 . 10 March 2026. Archived from the original on 20 April 2026 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ a b c d e f "Iran's Missile Fire Rate Has Collapsed by 92%: What's Next?" .

The Jerusalem Post . 10 March 2026 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ Ambrose, Tom; Ho, Vivian; Corlett, Eva (11 March 2026). "Middle East Crisis Live: Three Ships Hit in Strait of Hormuz as Iran Calls Vessels Belonging to US or Allies 'Legitimate Targets' " .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ "Israel Says Strike Hit Iranian Nuclear-Linked Site Outside Tehran" .

The Media Line . 12 March 2026. ^ "Post-Attack Assessment of Precision Strikes on the Bunkered Taleghan 2 Facility" . Institute for Science and International Security . 12 March 2026. ^ "Iran Update Morning Special Report, March 12, 2026" . Institute for the Study of War . 12 March 2026. ^ "Missile Strike Hits Bank Sepah Branch in Tehran, IRGC Warns of Retaliation" . iranwire . 11 March 2026 . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Appears to Have Conducted a Significant Cyberattack Against a U.S. Company, A First Since the War Started" . NBC News . 12 March 2026 . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ Rowlands, Lyndal; Sabah, Zaid (12 March 2026). "Iran Sets Three Conditions for Peace; Oil Tankers in Iraqi Port Attacked" . Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Deputy Intelligence Minister Killed in Strikes on Tehran" . Iran International . 12 March 2026 . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ Yoon, John; Solomon, Erika (12 March 2026). "Deadly Attack on Oil Tankers Prompts Iraq to Close Oil Terminals" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ "Day 13 of the U.S.-Israeli War on Iran: More Than Three Million Displaced" . HRANA . 12 March 2026 . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ "آسیب به چند بنای تاریخی در حمله اسرائیل به اصفهان" . iranwire (in Persian). 12 March 2026 . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ Sinaiee, Maryam (13 March 2026). "War Leaves Its Mark on Iran's Cultural Heritage" . Iran International . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ "Blue Shield Warns of Potential 'War Crimes' Against Iran's Cultural Sites" . Museums Association . 10 March 2026 . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ "French Soldier Killed and Several Wounded in Attack in Iraq's Kurdistan Region, Confirms Macron" . Le Monde . 13 March 2026 . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ a b Cooper, Helene; Barnes, Julian E.; Ward, Euan; Torbati, Yeganeh; Reiss, Johnatan (12 March 2026). "Iran War Live Updates: U.S. Refueling Plane Crashes in Iraq, Military Says" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ سنتکام: بمب‌افکن‌های بی‌۲ برای انجام عملیات در ایران به پرواز درآمدند . BBC News Persian (in Persian). 14 March 2026. ^ "Iran Targets Gulf Nations with Missiles, Drones as Oil Prices Soar" . Al Jazeera English . 13 March 2026 . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ "Nato Shoots Down Iranian Missile as Explosions Heard at Turkish Air Base" .

The Independent . 13 March 2026 . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ "Israel Targets Iranian Checkpoints Using Tip-Offs From Informants, Source Says" . Reuters . 13 March 2026. ^ Graham-Harrison, Emma (12 March 2026). "We Attacked Iran with No Clear Plan for Regime Change, Israeli Security Sources Say" .

The Guardian . There have been no signs of Iranians taking to the streets or significant defections from security forces ^ " 'Odsečete Jednu Glavu, Izraste Nova': Kako Su Vladari Irana Stvorili Sistem Koji Ih Održava Na Vlasti" . BBC Serbian (in Serbo-Croatian). 12 March 2026. we hardly see any defections ^ "Iran War Becomes Contest of Who Can Take Most Pain" .

The Pioneer . 12 March 2026. So far, the Islamic Republic has been able to keep its leadership and military cohesive and in control ^ "Is the Stability of the Iranian Regime in Danger?" . Institute for National Security Studies . 12 March 2026. However, it seems that at this stage, these strikes are not sufficient to undermine the internal cohesion among the security forces, their ability to function ^ "US Intelligence Says Iran Government Is Not at Risk of Collapse, Say Sources" . Reuters . 11 March 2026.

The intelligence reporting underscores the cohesion of Iran's clerical leadership ^ Karlin, Mara (11 March 2026). "Can Iran's Regime Survive the War?" . Brookings Institution . is anyone defecting? Is anyone pulling away from the military, pulling away from the security services, and either taking their weapons and staying home or taking their weapons and acting against the regime? I haven't seen much on that front whatsoever. ^ "The Six Pillars Keeping Iran's Regime Standing" .

The Beiruter . 11 March 2026. Second, elite cohesion remains relatively strong. ^ "A Long Road to the End: The Death Throes of Iran's Regime Could Last for Years" .

The Times of Israel . 10 March 2026. for now, there have been no significant defections from the army or other security forces ^ "U.S. Intelligence Says Iran's Regime Is Consolidating Power" .

The Washington Post . 16 March 2026. Nonetheless, officials and analysts say, there are no overt signs of cracks or defections within Iran's power structure. ^ Jansen, Michael (28 February 2026). "Regime Change in Iran Unlikely Without Mass Defections from Military" .

The Irish Times . ^ Broadwater, Luke; Schmitt, Eric; Cooper, Helene; Pérez-Peña, Richard (13 March 2026). "Iran War Live Updates: U.S. Military Attacks Kharg Island, Iran's Oil Export Hub, Trump Says" .

The Daily Telegraph . 18 March 2026. ^ Peled, Anat; Abdel-Baqui, Omar (16 March 2026). "Israel Invades Lebanon, Opening New Front Against Iran" . Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 17 March 2026 . ^ a b Jones, Callum (19 March 2026). "Trump Threatens to 'Blow Up' All of Iran's South Pars Gasfield If Tehran Strikes Qatar" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 19 March 2026 . ^ Orr, Robert; Kelly, Maxine; Wells, Peter; Provan, Sarah; Cash, Kieran (18 March 2026). "Middle East War Live: Oil Jumps After Iran Says Energy Industry Attacked" . Financial Times . ^ "Iran War: Netanyahu Denies Israel 'Dragged' US into Conflict" . Deutsche Welle . 19 March 2026. ^ "Israel Says It Killed Iran's Intelligence Chief After a Deadly Strike Near Tel Aviv" . NPR . 18 March 2026 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ "Iran President Confirms Intelligence Minister Khatib Killed in Strike" . Iran International . 18 March 2026 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ "Death Toll in Iranian Missile Strike That Hit West Bank Palestinian Town Rises to Four" .

The Times of Israel . 18 March 2026 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ Romm, Tony; Kershner, Isabel; Sanger, David E.; Hernández, Javier C.; Reiss, Johnatan (19 March 2026). "Iran War Live Updates: As Oil and Gas Prices Soar, Trump Seeks to Reassure Americans" .

The New York Times . ^ "Three Palestinian Women Killed in Iranian Missile Attack in the West Bank, Red Crescent Says" .

The Straits Times . 19 March 2026. ISSN 0585-3923 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ Timotija, Filip (19 March 2026). "US F-35 Makes Emergency Landing After Flying over Iran" .

The Hill . Retrieved 19 March 2026 . ^ "US F-35 Damaged by Suspected Iranian Fire Makes Emergency Landing, Sources Say" . CNN . 19 March 2026. ^ "Israeli Refinery Owner Says Essential Infrastructure Damaged in Iranian Strike" . Reuters . 20 March 2026 . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ "Damage at Haifa Oil Refineries After Iranian Missile Attack" . Ynet . 19 March 2026 . Retrieved 19 March 2026 . ^ "Netanyahu: 'You Can't Make a Revolution from the Air, There Are Ground Options' " . Ynet . 19 March 2026 . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ Cloud, David S.; Seligman, Lara; Gordon, Michael R. (20 March 2026). "U.S. War Planes and Helicopters Kick Off Battle to Reopen Hormuz" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ "Update from Eric Schmitt" .

The New York Times . 21 March 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ "US Strikes Iran's Natanz Nuclear Site with Bunker-Buster Bombs" .

The Daily Telegraph . 21 March 2026 . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Says US and Israel Attacked Natanz Nuclear Facility" . Al Jazeera English . 21 March 2026 . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ "Iran War: Missiles Injure 160 in Towns Near Israeli Nuclear Site" . BBC News . 21 March 2026 . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . ^ "Iranian Strike on Dimona Likely Targeted Israeli Nuclear Facility" . BBC News . 21 March 2026 . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Targets Dimona Nuclear Facility as Response to Strike on Natanz" . İlke Haber Ajansı . 21 March 2026 . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ "Foreign Secretary Denounces 'Reckless Iran Threats' After Missiles Fired at Diego Garcia" . BBC News . 21 March 2026 . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Targeted but Did Not Hit Diego Garcia Base with Missiles, WSJ Reports" . Reuters . 20 March 2026 . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Launched Missiles at US-UK Military Base in the Indian Ocean. Here's What That Says About Its Capabilities" . CNN . 21 March 2026 . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . Sam Lair, research associate at the James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies, told CNN that Iran's "space launch vehicles, including the (Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps') solid-propellant Ghaem-100, could clearly reach longer ranges than their regional missile force if they were used ballistically rather than as a space launch vehicle." ^ "Iran's Missiles Are a Threat to London, Israel Warns After Attack on Diego Garcia" .

The Independent . 21 March 2026 . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . ^ " 'False Flag Attack': Iran Denies Claims It Fired Missiles at Diego Garcia" . Al Jazeera English . 23 March 2026 . Retrieved 23 March 2026 . ^ Badshah, Nadeem; Ofori, Morgan (21 March 2026). "UK Foreign Secretary Condemns Iran's 'Reckless Threats' After Strike Towards US-UK Base" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 14 May 2026 . ^ Mason, Rowena; Stewart, Heather; Topham, Gwyn; Elgot, Jessica (21 March 2026). "Anger Grows Among UK Ministers Amid Fears Iran War Could Jeopardise Britain's Fragile Finances" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 14 May 2026 . ^ Vine, David (25 March 2026). "Did Iran Attack Diego Garcia?" . fpif.org . Foreign Policy in Focus . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ Magdy, Samy (21 March 2026). "Houthi Rebels Say They Will Respond to Any Escalation Against Iran" . Associated Press . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ "Update from James C. McKinley Jr" .

The New York Times . 27 March 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ "How Long Will Israel Stay in Lebanon?" .

The Economist . 26 March 2026. ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ "Update from David E. Sanger" .

The New York Times . 22 March 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Threatens to 'Completely' Close Strait of Hormuz and Hit Power Plants After Trump's Ultimatum" . Associated Press . 22 March 2026 . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . ^ "Exiled Prince Pahlavi Urges US, Israel to Spare Iran Civilian Infrastructure" . Iran International . 22 March 2026 . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . ^ "Trump Says He's Postponing Power Plant Strikes After US-Iran Talks - But Tehran Denies Talks Took Place" . BBC News . 23 March 2026 . Retrieved 23 March 2026 . ^ "Iran War: Trump Claims US Has Held Talks with Iran" . Deutsche Welle . 23 March 2026 . Retrieved 23 March 2026 . ^ "No Talks Are Underway Between Tehran and Washington, Iran Says" . Iran International . 23 March 2026 . Retrieved 23 March 2026 . ^ Sanger, David E. (25 March 2026). "U.S. Circulates Iran Peace Plan While Sending Troops to the Middle East" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ Sharp, Alexandra (26 March 2026). "Iran Rejects Trump's 15-Point Peace Plan" . Foreign Policy . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ Nakhoul, Samia; Bassam, Laila; Gebeily, Maya (25 March 2026). "Iran Wants Lebanon Included in Any Ceasefire, Sources Say" . Reuters . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ @araReuters (24 March 2026). "2036480692641534409" ( Tweet ) – via X (formerly Twitter) . ^ Berman, Lazar (25 March 2026). "Lebanon Says It Was Not the Target of Iranian Missile That Blew up over Its Territory" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ Naar, Ismaeel (25 March 2026). "Iraq Summons U.S. Diplomat After Attack on Military Base" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ Berman, Lazar (25 March 2026). "Iran State Media Threatens Seizure of UAE and Bahrain Coastlines" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 25 March 2026 . ^ Holcman, Tobias (25 March 2026). "Iran Warns Its Ready to Open New Front in Yemen, Close Bab al-Mandab Strait with Houthis - Report" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ "Israel Says It Has Killed Iran's Navy Chief Overseeing Strait of Hormuz Blockade" . BBC News . 26 March 2026 . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ "US AWACS Aircraft Hit in Iran Strike: Damage to E-3 Sentry Raises Alarm over Airpower Blind Spots" . Moneycontrol . 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ "12 US Troops Wounded in Iranian Strike on Saudi Base" . Free Malaysia Today . Agence France-Presse . 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ a b "Yemen's Houthis Claim Responsibility for Missile Attack on Israel, Their First Since War Started" . Associated Press . 27 March 2026 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . More than two dozen U.S. troops have been wounded in Iranian attacks on a Saudi air base in the past week, according two people who have been briefed on the matter. Iran fired six ballistic missiles and 29 drones at Saudi Arabia's Prince Sultan air base in a Friday attack that injured at least 15 troops, including five seriously, according to the people who were not authorized to comment publicly and spoke on the condition of anonymity.

The base had come under come attack twice earlier this week, including an incident that injured 14 U.S. troops, according to the people who had been briefed on the matter. Located about 96 kilometers (60 miles) from the Saudi capital of Riyadh, the base is run by the Royal Saudi Air Force, but also used by U.S. troops. ^ Lendon, Brad; Yee, Isaac; Bordeaux, Thomas (30 March 2026). "Destruction of Vital US Radar Aircraft Could Hamper Ability to Spot Iran Threats, Analysts Say" . CNN . ^ "Iran Blocks Two Chinese Ships From Hormuz in Rare Move" .

The Wall Street Journal . 27 March 2026 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ Ward, Euan (27 March 2026). "Iran Moves to Formalize Toll Plan in Strait of Hormuz" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ "Live Updates: Israel Vows to 'Intensify and Expand' Iran Attacks; Trump Delays Strait of Hormuz Deadline" . NBC News . 27 March 2026 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ Gambrell, Jon; Amiri, Farnoush (27 March 2026). "Iran Says It Will 'Facilitate and Expedite' Humanitarian Aid Through the Strait of Hormuz" . Associated Press . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ "Iran War: Israel Hits Iranian Heavy Water Nuclear Reactor" . Deutsche Welle . 27 March 2026 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ "Yemen's Houthis Claim First Missile Attack on Israel Since War Began" . PBS News Hour . Associated Press . 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 April 2026 . ^ Dahir, Abdi Latif; Sampson, Eve (28 March 2026). "Yemen's Houthis Fire at Israel and Vow Further Attacks" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Houthis Fired Second Missile at Israel, Security Official Says" .

The Wall Street Journal . 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Yemen's Internationally-Recognised Government Accuses Iran of Dragging Country into Conflict" . BBC News . 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Update from Helene Cooper" .

The New York Times . 28 March 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ Baskar, Pranav; Hakim, Shirin (28 March 2026). "Airstrikes Batter a University and Residential Zones in Tehran" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Update from Sanam Mahoozi" .

The New York Times . 29 March 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ "Update from Shirin Hakim" .

The New York Times . 28 March 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ Pietromarchi, Virginia; Magee, Caolán (29 March 2026). "Israeli Chemical Factory Attacked by Iranian Missile" . Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ a b "Video: Tehran-Backed Militia Convoy Seen Moving from Iraq Toward Iran" . Iran International . 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ Habibiazad, Ghoncheh. "Iran using children in security roles in war, reports and witnesses say" , BBC News Persian , 31 March 2026. Accessed 5 July 2026. "The death of an 11-year-old Iranian boy reportedly in an air strike while manning a security checkpoint alongside his father in Tehran has thrown focus on a new initiative to recruit children into the security services. Alireza Jafari's mother Sadaf Monfared told the municipality-run newspaper Hamshahri that the pair had been helping Basij volunteer militia patrols and checkpoints to 'maintain the security of Tehran and its people' when they were killed on 11 March." ^ جذب کودکان ۱۲ ساله در ساختارهای امنیتی ایران و گزارش‌ها از کشته شدن یک کودک در تهران . Euronews (in Persian). 30 March 2026 . Retrieved 31 March 2026 . ^ "Iran: Recruitment of child soldiers as young as 12 amounts to a war crime" , 2 April 2026. Accessed 5 July 2026. "Iranian authorities are trampling upon children's rights and committing a grave violation of international humanitarian law amounting to a war crime by recruiting and mobilizing children as young as 12 into a military campaign led by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), Amnesty International said today....

On 29 March, 11-year-old boy, Alireza Jafari, was killed, while accompanying his father, a member of the IRGC's Basij, at a checkpoint in Tehran, laying bare the devastating consequences of the presence of children at military objectives. Authorities have confirmed that the child was killed 'while serving' at a checkpoint following an Israeli drone attack." ^ "Donald Trump Says US Could 'Take the Oil in Iran' " . Financial Times . 30 March 2026 . Retrieved 30 March 2026 . ^ Bohner, Athina; Berry, Alex; Oelofse, Louise (30 March 2026). "Trump Again Threatens to 'Obliterate' Iranian Power Plants, Oil Wells and Kharg Island" . Deutsche Welle . AP, AFP, dpa, Reuters, EFE . Retrieved 30 March 2026 . ^ Bush, Daniel (7 April 2026). "What the US Military Could Do If Iran Fails to Meet Trump's Ultimatum" . BBC News . Retrieved 11 April 2026 . ^ Hacaoglu, Selcan; Kozok, Firat (30 March 2026). "NATO Downs New Iranian Missile in Escalating Turkey Threat" . Bloomberg News . Retrieved 31 March 2026 . ^ "Reports of Iranian Missile Launch Toward Turkey Are Completely Baseless" . WANA News Agency . 31 March 2026 . Retrieved 31 March 2026 . ^ Jaffe, Greg; Ismay, John; Cooper, Helene; Fuller, Thomas (31 March 2026). "Confident of Air Supremacy, U.S. Sends B-52 Bombers Over Iran" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ Varghese, Sanjana; Boxerman, Aaron (31 March 2026). "Trump Shares Video of Bombing in Iranian City of Isfahan" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 31 March 2026 . ^ Madhani, Aamer; Magdy, Samy; Lee, Matthew; Mednick, Sam (30 March 2026). "Gulf Allies Privately Make the Case to Trump to Keep Fighting Until Iran Is Decisively Defeated" . Associated Press . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ Solomon, Erika; Hassan, Falih (1 April 2026). "Iraqi Kidnappers of Journalist Shelly Kittleson Offer to Negotiate" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ "Former Iran FM 'Seriously Injured', Wife Killed in Tehran Strike" . Al Arabiya English . 1 April 2026 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ "Update from Farnaz Fassihi and Shirin Hakim" .

The New York Times . 1 April 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ "Update from Shirin Hakim" .

The New York Times . 1 April 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ Rasgon, Adam (1 April 2026). "Netanyahu Makes the Case That Wars on Iran Have Succeeded" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ Broadwater, Luke; Pager, Tyler (2 April 2026). "5 Takeaways From Trump's Speech on Iran" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ "Trump Announces Destruction of Iran's Tallest Bridge" . Al-Monitor . Agence France Presse. 2 April 2026 . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ a b "Trump Gloats on Possible War Crimes in Iran, But Punishment Distant" . France 24 . 2 April 2026. ^ واکنش‌ها یه حمله هوایی به «بلندترین پل خاورمیانه» در کرج؛ از نگرانی از بازگشت به «عصر حجر» تا «بهترش را می‌سازیم» . BBC News Persian (in Persian). 3 April 2026. ^ Siegel, Tobias; Halperin, Sam (2 April 2026). "IDF Kills Iranian Ballistic Missile Chief, US Strike Targets Key Supply Bridge in Tehran" .

The Jerusalem Post . 3 April 2026 . Retrieved 3 April 2026 . ^ "Iran Army Chief Warns Against US Invasion" . Press Trust of India . Associated Press. 2 April 2026 . Retrieved 3 July 2026 . ^ "Another US Jet Shot Down as Iran War Escalates" . Dawn . 4 April 2026. ^ Schmitt, Eric; Cooper, Helene; Bergman, Ronen (3 April 2026). "U.S. Searches for Crew After Fighter Jet Shot Down Over Iran, U.S. Officials Say" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 3 April 2026 . ^ a b Kim, Seung Min (5 April 2026). "A Mountain Hideout and Aircraft Under Fire: US Carries out Daring Rescue of Service Member in Iran" . Associated Press . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ Schmitt, Eric; Cooper, Helene; Torbati, Yeganeh; Rasgon, Adam; Bergman, Ronen (3 April 2026). "Iran War Live Updates: Downed U.S. Jet and Missing Crew Member Raise Stakes in War" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 3 April 2026 . ^ Schneid, Rebecca (4 April 2026). "Trump Claimed Total Control of Iran's Airspace. Then Two Warplanes Were Downed" . Time . ^ "Iranian Minister of Science: U.S.-Israeli Strikes Targeted 30 Universities Since Start of War" . Hawar News . 4 April 2026 . Retrieved 4 April 2026 . ^ Jaffe, Greg; Schmitt, Eric; Cooper, Helene (4 April 2026). "U.S. Rescues Downed Air Force Officer Deep Inside Iran, Trump Says" .

The New York Times . ^ "Update from Shirin Hakim" .

The New York Times . 4 April 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 4 April 2026 . ^ a b "WATCH: IDF Confirms Iranian Missile Fragments Hit Near Kirya, Multiple Cars Ablaze in Ramat Gan" .

The Jerusalem Post . 4 April 2026 . Retrieved 4 April 2026 . ^ Stewart, Phil; Ali, Idrees (5 April 2026). "High-Stakes US Special Forces Mission Rescues Airman from Iran After F-15 Crash" . Reuters . Retrieved 5 April 2026 . ^ a b "IRGC Intelligence Chief Killed in Attack, Guards Say" . Iran International . 6 April 2026 . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (6 April 2026). "IDF Confirms Death of IRGC Intel Chief, Additional High-Ranking Officer in Overnight Strikes" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ ترامپ: تمام ایران را می‌توان در یک شب نابود کرد و آن ممکن است فردا شب باشد . BBC News Persian (in Persian). 6 April 2026. ^ "Israel Hits Iran's South Pars Petrochemical Plant as Mediators Float New Ceasefire Proposal" .

The Washington Post . 6 April 2026. ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (6 April 2026). "Israel Says It Struck Iran's Largest Petrochemical Site" .

The Independent . Retrieved 11 April 2026 . ^ Svirnovskiy, Gregory (7 April 2026). "Trump Threatens 'Whole Civilization Will Die Tonight' Ahead of Iran Deadline" . Politico . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ "Iran: President Trump's Apocalyptic Threats of Large-Scale Civilian Devastation Demand Urgent Global Action to Prevent Atrocity Crimes" . Amnesty International . 7 April 2026 . Retrieved 11 April 2026 . ^ Ferguson, Malcolm (7 April 2026). "Trump's Former Allies Beg Someone to Learn the Nuke Codes to Stop Him" .

The New Republic . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ "Trump Says 'A Whole Civilization Will Die Tonight' Ahead of Deadline for Iran" . NBC News . 7 April 2026 . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ "Iran War Latest: We'll Destroy Iran — but We Won't Use Nuclear Weapons, US Says" .

The Times . 7 April 2026 . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ "White House Rules out Nuclear Weapons in Iran Amid Uncertainty over Peace Talks" . Hindustan Times . 7 April 2026 . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ "Live Updates: Trump Agrees to Two-Week Ceasefire After Threatening Massive Attacks" . NBC News . 7 April 2026 . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ "What We Know About the US and Iran's Ceasefire Deal" . BBC News . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ "Iranian Oil Refining Company Confirms Attack on Lavan Refinery, Shana Reports" . Reuters . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ "S Arabia, UAE, Kuwait, Qatar, Bahrain Report Attacks After Iran-US Truce" . Al Jazeera English . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ Croft, Alex. 'UAE has secretly been carrying out military strikes on Iran, report says" , The Independent , 12 May 2026. Accessed 12 May 2026. ^ White, Robert; Kelly, Kieran. "UAE and Saudi Arabia 'carried out secret attacks on Iran'" , The Daily Telegraph , 12 May 2026. Accessed 12 May 2026. ^ "Trump Says Lebanon Not Included in US-Iran Ceasefire Amid Israeli Assault" . Al Jazeera English . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ Brennan, David; Haworth, Jon; El-Bawab, Nadine (9 April 2026). "Iran Live Updates: Iran Says Hormuz Is Open to All Ships That Coordinate with Tehran" . ABC . Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said there is not a ceasefire in Lebanon in a recorded statement Thursday, saying strikes on Lebanon will resume. ^ "Netanyahu Says US-Iran Ceasefire 'Does Not Include Lebanon' " . Al Jazeera English . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ "Hezbollah Pauses Attacks Under US-Iran Ceasefire, Sources Close to Group Say" . Reuters . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ Krisi, Ron (8 April 2026). "IDF: We Launched Operation 'Eternal Darkness' in Lebanon; Working Assumption - Fighting with Iran Will Resume" . Ynet . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ "Israel Pounds Lebanon with Heaviest Airstrikes of the War as Hezbollah Pauses Attacks" . Reuters . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ "Lebanon Says Death Toll from Israeli Strikes on Wednesday Rises to 357" . Arab News . 10 April 2026 . Retrieved 14 April 2026 . ^ "Israeli Attacks Across Lebanon Kill at Least 254 After Iran-US Ceasefire" . Al Jazeera English . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ "Large-Scale Israeli Strikes Hit Beirut, Lebanese Areas Despite U.S.-Iran Truce" . United Press International . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ "Iran's IRGC Warns of 'Regret-Inducing Response' If Attacks on Lebanon Continue - State Media" . BBC News . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ Alvarez, Artur (8 April 2026). "Irã Ameaça Romper Cessar-Fogo Se Israel Continuar Atacando O Líbano" . G1 (in Brazilian Portuguese). ^ "Hezbollah: Rockets Fired at Northern Israel in Response to 'Cease-Fire Violations' " . Haaretz . 9 April 2026 . Retrieved 9 April 2026 . ^ "Trump Says U.S. Forces Are 'Clearing' Strait of Hormuz" .

The Hindu . Reuters . 11 April 2026. ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 11 April 2026 . ^ Alam, Majid (11 April 2026). "US Military Ship Turns Back from Hormuz Route After Iran's 30-Min Warning" . Hindustan Times . ^ "U.S. Warships Transit Hormuz as U.S.-Iran Meet Face-To-Face For Peace Talks" .

The Wall Street Journal . 11 April 2026. ^ Ravid, Barak (11 April 2026). "U.S. Warships Cross Strait of Hormuz for First Time Since Iran War Began" . Axios . ^ "US Military 'Setting Conditions' to Clear Mines from Strait of Hormuz" . Reuters . 11 April 2026. ^ "No Deal: U.S.-Iran Peace Talks in Islamabad Collapse" . NPR News . 12 April 2026. ^ "Trump Says He 'Doesn't Care' If Iran Returns to Peace Talks After Islamabad Negotiations Collapse" .

The Independent . 13 April 2026. ^ "Trump Says U.S. Will Blockade Strait of Hormuz and Intercept Ships That Paid Tolls to Iran" . CBS News . 12 April 2026 . Retrieved 12 April 2026 . ^ "Trump Announces Naval Blockade of Iran After Islamabad Talks Yield No Deal" .

The Washington Post . 12 April 2026. ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 13 April 2026 . ^ "Update by Parin Behrooz" .

The New York Times . 12 April 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 12 April 2026 . ^ De Avila, Joseph (13 April 2026). "Trump Threatens Iranian Ships with Drug-Boat-Style Strikes" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 13 April 2026 . ^ a b Sleiman, Nadia (14 April 2026). "Iran Update Special Report, April 13, 2026" . Institute for the Study of War . Retrieved 14 April 2026 . ^ "Trump Says Israel and Lebanon Agree to Temporary Ceasefire" . Al Jazeera English . 16 April 2026 . Retrieved 16 April 2026 . ^ "Iran's Foreign Minister Says Passage of Vessels via Hormuz Strait Is Open During Ceasefire" . Reuters . 17 April 2026 . Retrieved 17 April 2026 . ^ "Trump Says Blockade on Iran 'In Full Force' Until Deal Is Reached" . Reuters . 17 April 2026. ^ Loria, Michael; Cann, Christopher; Riquier, Andrea (17 April 2026). "Strait of Hormuz Won't Reopen, Iranian Leader Tells Trump" . USA Today . Retrieved 18 April 2026 . ^ Kendall, Spencer (17 April 2026). "Video Shows Ships Turning Away from the Strait of Hormuz as Confusion Persists over Whether Sea Lane Is Really Open" . CNBC . Retrieved 18 April 2026 . ^ "Iran Reimposes Restrictions on Hormuz, Accuses US of Violating Deal" . Business Standard . Associated Press . 18 April 2026 . Retrieved 18 April 2026 . ^ @CENTCOM (18 April 2026). "Littoral Combat Ship USS Canberra (LCS 30) Patrols the Arabian Sea During the U.S. Blockade" ( Tweet ) – via X (formerly Twitter) . ^ a b "Trump Claims US Has Total Control over Strait of Hormuz After Iran Seizes Two Container Ships" .

The Guardian . 24 April 2026. ^ "Trump Says He Is Keeping Strait of Hormuz Closed, Not Iran" . Al Jazeera English . 23 April 2026. ^ "Iran War Updates: Trump Announces Three-Week Lebanon Ceasefire Extension" . Al Jazeera English . 23 April 2026 . Retrieved 24 April 2026 . ^ "Israel Hits Iran with New Strikes Despite Trump Admonition" . Reuters . 8 June 2026. ^ "Israel and Iran Trade Strikes, Threatening to Drag the Region Back into Full-Scale War" . Springfield News-Sun . Associated Press. 8 June 2026. ^ "At Least 2 Iranian Military Members Killed in Israeli Attack on Iran" . Millenniumpost . 9 June 2026. ^ "West Asia War LIVE: Iran Ends Military Operations Against Israel, Warns of Harsher Attacks If Strikes on Lebanon Persist" .

The Hindu . 8 June 2026. ^ "Iran and Israel Halt Exchanges of Fire" .

The Wall Street Journal . 8 June 2026. ^ "Trump Says Pilots Safe After US Army Apache Goes Down Near Hormuz" . Reuters . 9 June 2026. ^ "Drone Boat Rescues Crew of Downed U.S. Apache Helicopter Near Hormuz" .

The Wall Street Journal . 9 June 2026. ^ a b "US Military Launches New Strikes on Iran After Apache Downing" . Reuters . 9 June 2026. ^ "Trump Says Iran Shot Down US Helicopter over Hormuz, Vows to Respond" . Al Jazeera English . 9 June 2026. ^ "Iran War Live" .

The New York Times . 9 June 2026. A one-way Iranian Shahed attack drone downed the Apache helicopter gunship on Monday, a U.S. official said on Tuesday, confirming an earlier report by Axios. President Trump had announced earlier on social media that Iran had shot down the helicopter as it patrolled near the Strait of Hormuz, but he did not provide details. ^ "Iran's Deputy FM Says Country Did Not Deliberately Target US Helicopter" . Al Jazeera English . 9 June 2026. ^ a b Ghaffari, Bita (9 June 2026). "Iran Says 20,000 People Left Without Water After US Hits Reservoir Tanks" .

The Financial Times . Archived from the original on 10 June 2026. ^ "US Destroys Iran Reservoirs, Leaving Thousands Without Water in Searing Heat" . South China Morning Post . Agence France-Presse. 10 June 2026. ^ "Iran Says Draft US Deal Includes Oil Sanctions Waiver, Nuclear Limits and Asset Release" .

The Straits Times . Reuters. 14 June 2026. ^ "A Tentative Deal Is Reached to End the Iran War and Trump Orders a Stop to the US Naval Blockade" . Standard Democrat . Associated Press. 14 June 2026. Archived from the original on 17 June 2026. ^ "Vance Says US-Iran MoU Was Signed Digitally Before Planned Switzerland Meeting" . Wion . 15 June 2026. ^ "Trump, Iran's President Sign Deal To End West Asia War" . Deccan Chronicle . Agence France Presse. 17 June 2026. ^ "Iran To "Instantly" Reopen Hormuz, US To "Immediately" Lift Blockade: Pak PM" . NDTV . Agence France Presse. 18 June 2026. ^ "US Military Says It Has Lifted Naval Blockade of Iranian Ports" . Al Jazeera English . 18 June 2026. ^ "Trump Envoy Heads To Switzerland For Potential US-Iran Talks After Lebanon Ceasefire: What To Expect?" . NDTV Profit . 20 June 2026. ^ "Israel and Hezbollah agree to ceasefire starting Friday after latest flare-up, says report citing US official" . Wion . 19 June 2026. ^ " 'Devastating Day': Ceasefire in Lebanon Is One in Name Only" . Al Jazeera English . 20 June 2026. ^ "Southern Lebanon Hit by at Least 12 Israeli Strikes Since Ceasefire" . Al Jazeera English . 19 June 2026. ^ "Trump says Iran deal 'is over' after Gulf strikes, calls Tehran 'sick people' " . Ynet . 8 July 2026. ^ "Trump Warns Iran That US Is Preparing for More Strikes After Saying Ceasefire Is Over" . Asharq Al-Awsat . 8 July 2026. ^ "Eight Iranian soldiers killed in U.S. strikes, state media says" . Haaretz . Reuters . 8 July 2026. ^ "Trump: War with Iran not starting up again, but if it does, it'll be quick" .

The Times of Israel . 8 July 2026. ^ "Trump: Qatari-gifted Air Force One to be brought to US bases in Europe so troops can marvel at it" .

The Times of Israel . 8 July 2026. ^ "Two Iranian fishermen killed in U.S. strikes, Mehr News Agency says" . Haaretz . Reuters . 8 July 2026. ^ "CENTCOM: U.S. forces attacked 90 targets in Iran, including air defenses and missile and drone sites" . Haaretz . 9 July 2026. ^ "Fireman killed after attack on airport in southeastern Iran, IRNA reports" . Haaretz . Reuters . 8 July 2026. ^ "Iran Hatched Fresh Plot to Kill Trump, Israel Told U.S." The Wall Street Journal . 10 July 2026. ^ "Trump denies that Israel passed on intel about Iranian plot to assassinate him" .

The Times of Israel . 10 July 2026. ^ "Countries must reject Iran efforts to control Hormuz, UN agency document says" . Reuters . 10 July 2026. ^ "Iran says Strait of Hormuz is closed, claims it struck vessel using 'unauthorized route' " . Haaretz . Reuters . 11 July 2026. ^ "Trump: U.S. 'reinstating the Iranian blockade' in Strait of Hormuz" . Haaretz . 13 July 2026. ^ "Tension rising as Yemen gov't attacks Sanaa airport, Houthis fire missiles" . Al Jazeera English . 13 July 2026. ^ "Houthis fire missiles at Saudi Arabia, breaking years of calm" . Internazionale . 13 July 2026. ^ "Saudi Arabian airstrikes hit Sanaa International Airport, Iran-backed Houthi rebels in Yemen say" . NBC News . 13 July 2026. ^ Mostafa, Amr (13 July 2026). "Houthis fire missiles at Saudi Arabia after blast at Sanaa airport" .

The National . ^ "Houthis claim to target Saudi Arabia's Abha airport" . Al Jazeera English . 13 July 2026. ^ "U.S. naval blockade of Iran to begin Tuesday, maritime security information center says" . Haaretz . Reuters . 13 July 2026. ^ "Abu Musa and The Tumbs: The Dispute That Won't Go Away, Part Two" .

The Estimate . Vol. XIII, no. 13. 24 July 2001. Archived from the original on 15 December 2007 . Retrieved 14 July 2026 . ^ Henderson, Simon (7 December 2007). "Unwanted Guest: The Gulf Summit and Iran" . Archived from the original on 23 January 2021 . Retrieved 14 July 2026 . ^ "U.S. says it has completed latest wave of strikes on Iran" . Haaretz . Reuters . 14 July 2026. ^ "UAE says two tankers hit by Iranian cruise missiles in Strait of Hormuz; one crew member killed" . Haaretz . Reuters . 14 July 2026. ^ "India protests to Iran over killing of seafarer in Hormuz" . Reuters . 14 July 2026. ^ "Trump backs away from plans to charge fees in the Strait of Hormuz as attacks intensify" . Associated Press . 14 July 2026. ^ "London, July 14, 2026 (AFP) - Death toll in latest Hormuz vessel strikes rises to two: maritime group" . Namibia Press Agency . Agence France Press. 15 July 2026. ^ "CENTCOM says Iran intentionally targeted civilians across the region by attacking seven commercial ships" . Haaretz . 15 July 2026. ^ "U.S. renews naval blockade on Iranian ports, strikes dozens of Iranian military sites near Hormuz, CENTCOM says" . Haaretz . 15 July 2026. ^ "Iran's Revolutionary Guards warn Hormuz will stay closed 'until US ends its acts of aggression' " .

The Times of Israel . Agencies. 15 July 2026. ^ "U.S. military commences new wave of strikes on Iran, CENTCOM says" . Haaretz . 15 July 2026. ^ "U.S. military says it completed fresh round of strikes targeting Iranian defense systems, cruise missile storage and launch sites" . Haaretz . 15 July 2026. ^ "Iran says U.S. strikes in recent days killed more than 30 civilians, state media reports" . Haaretz . Reuters . 15 July 2026. ^ "Iran targeted U.S. military base in Jordan, state media says" . Haaretz . 16 July 2026. ^ "Iranian army says it launched drone attack on US military sites in Jordan" .

The Times of Israel . Agence France Presse. 16 July 2026. ^ "Iran army says struck US targets in Kuwait, Bahrain with drones" . Vanguard . Agence France Presse. 16 July 2026. ^ "Iran says it struck a US base in Jordan after claiming US hit area near children's cancer hospital" . TheJournal.ie . Agence France Presse. 16 July 2026. ^ "Iran remains in contact with U.S., seeks deal, White House says" . Haaretz . Reuters . 16 July 2026. ^ "U.S. begins fifth wave of Iran strikes, CENTCOM says" . Haaretz . Reuters . 16 July 2026. ^ "U.S. military says it completed latest strikes on Iran, marking sixth night of attacks" . Haaretz . Reuters . 17 July 2026. ^ "Explosions hit Qeshm, Bushehr, Bandar Abbas as US opens sixth night of Iran strikes" . Turkiye Today . 16 July 2026. ^ "Tasnim News Agency: Three powerful explosions were heard near Iranshahr Airport in Iran's southeastern Sistan and Baluchestan province" . MTV Lebanon . 16 July 2026. ^ "Iran slams 'barbaric' US attack after hospital evacuated due to nearby strike" . Arab News . 16 July 2026. ^ "Iran judiciary denies Trump statement that American prisoner was freed" . Haaretz . Reuters . 16 July 2026. ^ "Qatar says Iranian missile attack thwarted, child injured" . Haaretz . Reuters . 17 July 2026. ^ "Iranian army says it targeted U.S. force deployment and logistical support centers in Kuwait with drones" . Haaretz . Reuters . 17 July 2026. ^ "Overnight US attacks killed 8 Iranians, injured 20: state media" . Bangladesh Sangbad Sangstha . Agence France-Presse . 17 July 2026. ^ "Iran's Revolutionary Guards say it targeted U.S. Command Center at Syria's al-Tanf" . Haaretz . Reuters . 17 July 2026. ^ "Syria Military Source Denies Iran Bombed Al-Tanf Base" . Asharq Al-Awsat . Agence France-Presse . 17 July 2026. ^ "Iran claims attack on U.S. maritime surveillance radar in Oman" . Haaretz . Reuters . 17 July 2026. ^ "US coalition downs drones over Iraq's Erbil, Kurdish forces say" .

The Times of Israel . Agence France Presse. 17 June 2026. ^ "Tanker hit by unknown projectile off Oman, crew safe, UK says" .

The Times of Israel . Reuters. 17 June 2026. ^ "At least 38 killed, 400 wounded in U.S. strikes on Iran this month, Iran Health Ministry says" . Haaretz . Deutsche Presse-Agentur . 17 June 2026. ^ "Iran's IRGC says it targeted U.S. fighter jets in Jordan" . Haaretz . Reuters . 17 July 2026. ^ "Kuwait says Iranian attack damages power generation, water desalination station" . Haaretz . Reuters . 17 July 2026. ^ "Iran's IRGC say they struck U.S. Al Udeid base in Qatar" . Haaretz . Reuters . 17 July 2026. ^ "Strikes kill eight Iranian Kurdish rebels in Iraq: opposition group" . Bangladesh Sangbad Sangstha . Agence France-Presse . 17 July 2026. ^ "Nine Kurdish opposition members killed in suspected Iranian strike, sources say" . Haaretz . Deutsche Presse-Agentur . 17 June 2026. ^ "Two drones target Iranian Kurdish opposition camp in Iraq, security sources say" . Haaretz . Reuters . 17 July 2026. ^ "Kuwait Says Army Personnel Injured In Iranian Drone Attack" . NDTV . Agence France Presse. 17 July 2026. ^ "Iran's Tasnim says IRGC navy targeted vessel in Strait of Hormuz" . Haaretz . Reuters . 17 July 2026. ^ a b Samuels, Ben (17 July 2026). "U.S. says it has launched strikes on Iranian infrastructure for seventh night in a row" . Haaretz . ^ a b c "Iran renews attacks on Gulf states after another night of US strikes" . Reuters . 18 July 2026. ^ "Iran says it destroyed Bahrain AI center, U.S. drone depot in strikes" . Haaretz . 17 July 2026. ^ "Iran says three killed in U.S. strikes; IRGC detains four tankers in Strait of Hormuz" . Haaretz . 17 July 2026. ^ "Iranian state TV: Military struck U.S. bases in Kuwait and Jordan" . Haaretz . 17 July 2026. ^ "Power and desalination facilities reportedly hit in southern Iran" . Haaretz . 18 July 2026. ^ "U.S. attacks on Iran cut off water supply to 10,000 along coast, officials say" . Haaretz . Deutsche Presse-Agentur . 18 July 2026. ^ "CENTCOM denies Iranian claim that 2 tankers exploded after hitting mines" . Times of Israel . 18 July 2026. ^ "Saudi Arabia gives the all clear after warning of 'potential danger' amid reported Iranian missile attack" . Times of Israel . Reuters . 18 July 2026. ^ "Kuwait reports fire at power plant after Iranian attack; Bahrain says it intercepted aerial attacks" . Haaretz . Reuters . 18 July 2026. ^ "Iran attack sparks two fires in Kuwait, firefighters injured" .

The Peninsula . Agence France Presse . 18 July 2026. ^ "Iran strikes Kuwait oil facility, causes major damage, injuries" . Haaretz . Reuters . 18 July 2026. ^ "Kuwaiti oil firm says facility damaged, some wounded by 'repeated Iranian attacks' " .

The Times of Israel . Reuters . 18 July 2026. ^ "Report: Iran suspends implementation of MoU commitments, senior official says" . Haaretz . 18 July 2026. ^ "At least 50 killed and 500 wounded in Iran since renewal of U.S. strikes, Iranian government says" . Haaretz . Deutsche Presse-Agentur . 18 July 2026. ^ "Two U.S. soldiers killed in Jordan during Iranian strikes, another missing in action, U.S. military says" . Haaretz . 18 July 2026. ^ "CENTCOM: U.S. strikes Iran in response to IRGC attack on U.S. soldiers in Jordan" . Haaretz . 18 July 2026. ^ "US says it targeted IRGC forces who attacked troops in Jordan" .

The Times of Israel . 19 July 2026. ^ "US strikes Iran's Revolutionary Guard over attack that killed troops in Jordan" . Associated Press . 18 July 2026. ^ "U.S. military bases in Kuwait in response to U.S. strikes" . Haaretz . Reuters. 18 July 2026. ^ a b Estrin, Daniel (11 March 2026). "Old-School Tricks and AI Tech Are Weapons in the Iran War" . NPR . Retrieved 13 April 2026 . ^ a b c d Avraham, Yaron; Davori, Nir; Segal, Amit (28 February 2026). "30 Bekirim Iranim Hutakfu Bechtzi Dka, Halkam Hutakfu Bemekum Hamistor" 30 בכירים איראנים הותקפו בחצי דקה, חלקם הותקפו במקום המסתור . N12 (in Hebrew) . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Eichner, Itamar (28 February 2026). "How Israel Pulled off a Second Surprise Against Iran" . Ynet . Retrieved 9 April 2026 . ^ Levin, Hani (28 February 2026). "כך הורדמה טהרן: מבצע ההטעיה המתוחכם שסלל את הדרך לתקיפה - בחדרי חרדים" . Bhol (in Hebrew) . Retrieved 12 April 2026 . ^ Mendelson, Allegra (4 March 2026). "Israel's jet-launched ballistic missile that took Khamenei by surprise" .

The Telegraph . Retrieved 18 July 2026 . ^ اطلاعیه شهادت حضرت آیت‌الله العظمی سیدعلی حسینی خامنه‌ای رهبر انقلاب اسلامی . Supreme National Security Council (Press release) (in Persian). 1 March 2026. Archived from the original on 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 – via KHAMENEI.ir. ^ Habibiazad, Ghoncheh (1 March 2026). "Khamenei's Daughter and Grandchild Killed in Attacks, State Media Says" . BBC News . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Khamenei's Relatives Killed in the Attacks Too" . BBC News . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Magdy, Sam (1 March 2026). "Khamenei Family Members Killed in Attacks, Fars News Agency Reports" . Associated Press . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei Is Dead, State Media Says" . BBC News . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Four Senior Intelligence Ministry Officials Killed in Airstrikes on Iran" . Iran International . Volant Media UK Ltd. 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ LaPorta, James (28 February 2026). "About 40 Iranian Officials Killed in Strikes, Sources Say" . CBS News . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Israeli Military Says 4,000–5,000 Iranian Forces Killed in Strikes so Far" . Iran International . 13 March 2026 . Retrieved 15 March 2026 . ^ " 'Decimated'?

The Iranian Leaders Killed in Israeli-US War" . France 24 . Agence France-Presse . 20 March 2026 . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ "5,900 Killed in 21 Days of War, Including 595 Civilians: Hengaw's Sixth Report" . Hengaw . 20 March 2026 . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ "Over 4,700 Security Forces Killed in US-Israeli Strikes on Iran" . Iran International . 31 March 2026 . Retrieved 31 March 2026 . ^ "Day 39 of U.S. And Israeli Attacks on Iran: Extensive Damage to the Rail Network and Roads" . HRANA . 7 April 2026 . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ "Over 50 Killed in Strike on Girls' Elementary School in Iran" . Al Jazeera English . 28 February 2026. Archived from the original on 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Habibiazad, Ghoncheh; Greenall, Robert (1 March 2026). "At Least 153 Dead After Reported Strike on School, Iran Says" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Brumfiel, Geoff; Hurt, Alyson (4 March 2026). "Satellite Images Show Iran School Strike Hit More Buildings Than Earlier Reported" . NPR . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ a b Browne, Malachy; Livni, Ephrat; Mahoozi, Sanam (1 March 2026). "Strike on Girls' School Kills at Least 175, Iranian State Media Says" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Al Jazeera Investigation: Iran Girls' School Targeting Likely 'Deliberate' " . Al Jazeera English . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Angelovski, Ivan; Szeto, Eric; Bilhete, Britnei (4 March 2026). "Who Bombed a Girls' School in Iran? A Visual Investigation" . CBC News . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ a b "US and Israel Launch Attack on Iran, As Trump Says 'Major Combat Operations' Under Way" . BBC News . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Copp, Tara; Mekhennet, Souad ; Kelly, Meg; Horton, Alex; Geroge, Susannah (11 March 2026). "Iranian School Was on U.S. Target List, May Have Been Mistaken as Military Site" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 14 March 2026 . ^ McClure, Tess (9 March 2026). "Video Shows US Tomahawk Missile Hit Base Next to Bombed Iranian School" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ "United States Was "Likely" Responsible for Bombing of Girls' School in Iran, Per Early U.S. Assessment" . CBS News . 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ a b Al-Maghafi, Nawal; Akgun, Ruzgar; Jhaveri, Ishaan; Costard, Emile (27 March 2026). "Iran War: Inside Tehran as the Civilian Toll of US-Israeli Strikes Rises" . BBC . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Iranian Media Say 20 Killed in Attack on Tehran's Niloofar Square" . Al Jazeera English . 2 March 2026. ^ "Iran Death Toll Reaches 555 as US, Israel Escalate Attacks" . Al Jazeera English . 2 March 2026. ^ "The Fourth Day of the U.S.–Israel War on Iran: Strikes Continue in Western Regions of the Country" . HRANA . 4 March 2026. ^ "US-Israeli Strikes Targeted at Least 6,668 Civilian Units: Red Crescent" . Al Jazeera English . 7 March 2026. ^ "Exclusive: Iranian Girls Killed by 'Double-Tap' Strikes on Minab School" . Middle East Eye . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ "Double-Tap Missile Attack Kills 20 in Iran's Najafabad: Report" . Middle East Eye . 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ "Day 23 of U.S. And Israeli Attacks on Iran: More Than 15% of the Total Fatalities Are Children" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 22 March 2026. ^ "Iran Says US, Israeli Strikes Damage 120 Museums, Historic Buildings" . Asharq Al-Awsat . 27 March 2026 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Video Shows US Missile Likely Used in Deadly Strike on Iranian Town, Experts Say" . BBC . 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ "Video Shows US-Israel Strike Destroys IRGC's Malek-Ashtar Building" . Iran International . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Israel Bombs Iran's State TV After Threatening It Would 'Disappear' " . Al Jazeera English . 16 June 2025. ^ "IRIB Struck by Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu Hijacks Transmission" .

The Jerusalem Post . 2 March 2026. ^ "Iran's Parliament Building Likely Targeted in Airstrikes – IRGC Outlet" . Iran International . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Ravid, Barak (3 March 2026). "Israel Bombs Council Choosing Iran's Next Supreme Leader, Official Says" . Axios . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Clerical Body in Charge of Choosing Iran's Next Leader Hit in Qom and Tehran" . Iran International . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "WHO Says It Has Verified 13 Attacks on Health Sites in Iran" . Reuters . 5 March 2026. ^ "US Hit Desalination Plant on Qeshm Island, Iran FM Says" . Iran International . 7 March 2026 . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ "Russian Consulate in Iran's Isfahan Damaged in Strikes, Moscow Says" . TRT World . 11 March 2026 . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ "تهاجم دشمن به آب‌شیرین‌کن بونجی جاسک/ ۲۰ روستا بی‌آب شدند" . www.irna.ir (in Persian). 18 July 2026 . Retrieved 18 July 2026 . ^ Hill, Evan; Ley, Jarrett; Horton, Alex; Copp, Tara; Lamothe, Dan (6 May 2026). "Iran Has Hit Far More U.S. Military Assets Than Reported, Satellite Images Show" .

The Washington Post . ^ Kelly, Meg; Horton, Alex; Ley, Jarrett (4 March 2026). "U.S. Troops Had Little Protection from Drone Strike That Killed 6, Imagery Shows" .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Archived from the original on 25 March 2026 . Retrieved 11 March 2026 – via MSN . ^ "A Dignified Transfer of the Remains of U.S. Marine Corps Lance Corporal Kevin Melendez, In Dover" . Reuters Connect . 4 March 2026. ^ Mitchell, Ellen (9 March 2026). "US Military Reviewing National Guard Member's Death in Kuwait in Health-Related Incident" .

The War Zone . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ Bath, Alison (16 March 2026). "Third Injured Sailor Flown off USS Gerald R. Ford After Fire Unrelated to Combat" . Stars and Stripes . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ a b Shelbourne, Mallory; Lagrone, Sam (17 March 2026). "USS Gerald R. Ford Headed to Souda Bay for Repairs After Fire" . USNI . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ Zakir-Hussain, Maryam (19 March 2026). "Trump's Biggest Warship USS Gerald R Ford Limps to Crete for Repairs After Huge Fire" .

The Independent . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ Saunokonoko, Mark (18 March 2026). "Fire Damage, Clogged Toilets, And Sinking Morale: USS Gerald R Ford to Set Sail for Repairs in Crete" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ "Statement of USS Gerald R. Ford" . U.S. Navy . 12 March 2026 . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ Walsh, Steve (17 March 2026). "USS Ford Has Seen War, Fire and Plumbing Woes as It Nears a Record Long Deployment" . NPR . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ Zhang, Sharon (26 March 2026). "As Trump Strikes Victorious Tone, Report Says Iran Rendered Many US Bases "All But Uninhabitable" " . Truthout . ^ "US Congressman Admits 39 Aircraft Losses in Iran War: F-35, AWACS and Reaper Attrition Sparks Questions Over America's Airpower Strategy" . defencesecurityasia.com . 14 May 2026. ^ "Five Pupils Reported Killed in Iran, Man Injured in Israel as War Starts" . Premium Times . 28 February 2026. ISSN 2360-7688 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (28 February 2026). "Medics Treat 89 People During Iranian Strikes, Most Lightly Hurt Running for Shelter" .

The Times of Israel . ^ "Woman Killed, 22 Injured in Direct Strike in Tel Aviv After Siren Sounded Late" . Ynet . 28 February 2026. ^ Levine, Heidi; Soroka, Lior; Chason, Rachel (2 March 2026). "From the Scene Where Nine People Were Killed in Central Israel" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Iranian Missile Strike Near Tel Aviv Kills 1, Injures 2" . Xinhuanet . 9 March 2026 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (10 March 2026). "Second Victim Dies After Monday's Iranian Cluster Missile Strike in Central Israel" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Launches 'Revenge' Missile Attack on Israel After Assassinations" . Al Jazeera English . 18 March 2026 . Retrieved 11 April 2026 . Iran has fired deadly cluster missiles at central Israel in what it says is 'revenge' for Israel's assassination of its security chief Ali Larijani, as the war the United States and Israel triggered against Iran rages towards a third week.

The attack overnight on Tuesday used multiple-warhead missiles that can better evade defence systems, killing two people in Israel's Ramat Gan area near Tel Aviv....

In a statement, Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) said the attack exacted 'revenge for the blood of martyr Dr. Ali Larijani and his companions' ^ Diamond, Jeremy; Mezzofiore, Gianluca; Saifi, Zeena (12 March 2026). "How Iran's Use of Cluster Munitions Is Challenging Israel's Air Defenses" . CNN . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ Willians, Dan (14 March 2026). "Israel Says Iran Is Firing Cluster Warheads Aimed at Civilians" . Bloomberg News . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . 'Iran appears to be launching them into relatively populated areas, probably with the goal of producing potential civilian harm,' said Daryl G. Kimball, executive director of the Arms Control Association. ^ "6. Convention on Cluster Munitions" . United Nations Treaty Collection . 30 May 2008. Archived from the original on 22 March 2022 . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ "Cluster Munition Monitor 2025" .

The Monitor . 15 September 2025 . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ "Two Killed in Israeli Strike on PMF Base in Iraq" . Shafaq News . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Solomon, Erika (28 February 2026). "U.S. Attacks Iran as Trump Calls for Overthrow of Government" .

The New York Times . ^ Sleiman, Nadia (3 March 2026). "Iran Update Evening Special Report, March 2, 2026" . Institute for the Study of War . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ Rains, Taylor; Tangalakis-Lippert, Katherine (28 February 2026). "Suspected Airstrikes Force Evacuation at Dubai Airport as Drone Debris Kills 1 at Second UAE Hub" . Business Insider . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ Al Lawati, Abbas; Sharman, Laura (1 March 2026). "Passengers Flee Smoke-Filled Dubai Airport as Iran Attacks Major Gulf Travel Hubs" . CNN . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Drone Attack Causes Damage, Panic at Kuwait Airport" .

The Wall Street Journal . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ El Omla, Salma (13 March 2026). "2 Expats Die, Some Injured in Oman After Two Drones Crash in Sohar" . Khaleej Times . Retrieved 5 June 2026 . ^ "Another Oil Tanker Hit by Drone Boat as Strait of Hormuz Tensions Rise" . euronews . Archived from the original on 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 June 2026 . ^ "Salvage Tug Reported Attacked Near Straits of Hormuz with Crew Feared Dead" .

The Maritime Executive . Archived from the original on 7 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 June 2026 . ^ Dwivedi, Vinay (3 March 2026). "Iran War Live Updates: U.S. Embassy in Riyadh Hit by Drones, Trump Promises Response 'Soon' " . CNBC . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Day 18 of War: One Dead as Shrapnel Falls in UAE; Distance Learning to Continue for 2 Weeks" . Khaleej Times . 17 March 2026 . Retrieved 19 March 2026 . ^ Wintour, Patrick (17 May 2026). "UAE's Secret Attack on Iran Risks Drawing Gulf States into the War" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 17 May 2026 . ^ "Hundreds of Indians Stranded in Dubai, Other Hub Airports After Military Escalation in West Asia" .

The Hindu . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Live RAF Base in Cyprus Hit by Suspected Drone Strike, Says MoD" .

The Daily Telegraph . 2 March 2026. ^ Varner, Joe (11 March 2026). "Iran Just Tested NATO's Perimeter" . RealClearWorld . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ "Dr Gargash Says UAE Has 'Triumphed in War It Sought to Avoid' " .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 22 April 2026 . ^ Tondo, Lorenzo (8 March 2026). "Ali Khamenei's Son Mojtaba Chosen as Iran's New Supreme Leader" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ Sabah, Zaid (9 March 2026). "Iran Names Mojtaba Khamenei to Replace His Father as Supreme Leader" . Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ Kelliher, Fiona (8 March 2026). " 'Act of Defiance': Iran Picks Khamenei's Son to Lead as US-Israel Attack" . Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ "Iran's Leadership Is Struggling to Function and Facing Mounting Internal Disarray - Report" . i24NEWS . 31 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ GAMBRELL, JON (21 May 2026). "This Hard-Line Iranian General Is a Major Player in Talks with US over War" . Associated Press . ^ "U.S. Think Tank: Ahmad Vahidi, Key Figure Behind Iran's Hardline Stance in Negotiations" . IranWire . 21 May 2026. ^ "Irans General Ahmad Vahidi Ist Der Neue Starke Mann Im Mullah-Regime - Und Ein Problem Für Trump" . Frankfurter Rundschau (in German). 3 May 2026. ^ "Ahmed Vahidi: Der De-Facto-Herrscher Des Iranischen Regimes" . Mena-Watch (in German). 23 May 2026. ^ Kerl, Christian (21 May 2026). "Geheimplan Für Den Machtwechsel Im Iran Gescheitert – Nun Hat Trump Ein Problem" . Berliner Morgenpost (in German). ^ "Associated Press: This Hard-Line Iranian General Is a Major Player in Talks with US over War" . Institute for the Study of War . 21 May 2026. ^ "Civilians Bear Brunt of Reckless War in the Middle East, Says Türk" . OHCHR . 19 March 2026. ^ Ramazanian, Ali (24 April 2026). بازسازی ویرانه‌های جنگ در ایران چگونه پیش می‌رود؟ . BBC News Persian (in Persian) . Retrieved 26 April 2026 . ^ "Bombardment Unleashes Terror in Tehran with No Sign of Protests" . Reuters . 3 March 2026. ^ "Families Say Food Distribution Disrupted in Evin Wards After Strikes in Tehran" . Iran International . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "Streets Empty and Shops Close as US Strikes Confirm Iranian Fears" . France 24 . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 17 March 2026 . ^ "NetBlocks (@netblocks@mastodon.social)" . Mastodon . 28 February 2026. ^ نت‌بلاکس از خاموشی اینترنت در ایران خبر داد . Iran International (in Persian). 28 February 2026. ^ "Iran Keeps Loyal Voices Online as Public Faces Record Internet Blackout" . Iran International . 10 March 2026 . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ حضور نیروهای یگان ویژه در جنت‌آباد تهران . Iran International (in Persian). 28 February 2026. ^ تیراندازی و جولان سرکوبگران در سبزوار؛ شادی مردم پس از انتشار خبر مرگ علی خامنه‌ای . Independent Persian (in Persian) . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Sinaiee, Maryam (1 March 2026). "Iranians React with Joy and Disbelief to Khamenei's Death" . Iran International . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Security Forces Shoot at People Chanting Behind Windows" . Iran International . 4 March 2026. ^ Peltier, Elian (23 March 2026). "Caught Between Two Conflicts, Afghans Flee Iran" .

The New York Times . ^ "UN: Thousands of Afghan Migrants Return Daily Amid Rising Conflict in Iran" .

The Kabul Tribune . 10 March 2026. ^ Johnson, Sarah; Foumani, Maryam (2 April 2026). " 'Everyone Is Thinking About Oil Prices': Is Iran Using the War to Hide a Surge in Executions?" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ Mahoozi, Sanam; Solomon, Erika (15 May 2026). "Executions Surge in Iran Since Cease-Fire, Rights Groups Say" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 18 July 2026 . ^ "CIA Working to Arm Kurdish Forces to Spark Uprising in Iran, Sources Say" . CNN . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Trump Rules out Sending Kurds into Iran" .

The Daily Telegraph . 7 March 2026. ^ Babaie, Sussan (1 April 2026). "In a Month of War, Iran's Cultural Heritage Has Suffered Huge Damage" .

The Art Newspaper - International art news and events . ^ Charles, Starr (5 March 2026). "US-Israeli Airstrike Damages UNESCO-Listed Palace in Tehran" . Dezeen . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ Geranpayeh, Sarvy (3 March 2026). "Tehran's Unesco-Listed Golestan Palace Reportedly Damaged by US-Israeli Strikes" .

The Art Newspaper . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ Zirin, Dave (11 March 2026). "The Bombing of Iran's Azadi Stadium Is Straight Out of Israel's Gaza Script" .

The Nation . ISSN 0027-8378 . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ a b Geranpayeh, Sarvy (10 March 2026). "Unesco Sites in Iranian City of Isfahan Damaged by US-Israel Strikes" .

The Art Newspaper . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ Fassihi, Farnaz (11 March 2026). "World Heritage Sites Hit in Airstrikes on Iran" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ "UNESCO Raises Concern over Damage to Iran's Heritage Sites Amid War, Urges Protection" . TRT World . 11 March 2026 . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ "Targerting Iran's Historical Sites Reflects Fear of Its Proud History" . WANA . 22 March 2026. ^ "Comment by Foreign Ministry Spokeswoman Maria Zakharova Regarding the Damage of the St Nicholas Church in Tehran in a Missile Strike" (Press release). Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation . 3 April 2026 . Retrieved 18 April 2026 . ^ "Russian Orthodox Church Suffers 'Serious Damage' in US-Israeli Strikes on Iran — What We Know" .

The Palestine Chronicle . 3 April 2026 . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ "Israeli Army Says Air Raids on Iran Largest Ever in Air Forces History" . LBCIV7 . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Boxerman, Aaron; Pager, Tyler; Fassihi, Farnaz; Bergman, Ronen (28 February 2026). "U.S.-Led Strike on Iran: Live Updates as Trump Calls for Government Overthrow" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (10 April 2026). "The War in Numbers: 650 Iranian Missiles Fired; 24 Killed in Israel, West Bank; 10,800 Israeli Strikes" .

The Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 10 April 2026 . Retrieved 29 April 2026 . With a ceasefire in Iran taking effect early Wednesday morning, the full scope of the Israeli-American 40-day campaign against the Islamic Republic began to emerge.... Iran, during the fighting, launched some 650 ballistic missiles at Israel. According to the military, more than half of the missiles carried cluster bomb warheads, which spread bomblets indiscriminately over wide areas.

The missile attacks killed 20 Israeli civilians and foreign nationals in Israel, along with four Palestinians in the West Bank....

In all, at least 16 missiles carrying conventional warheads — with hundreds of kilograms of explosives — struck populated areas in Israel, causing extensive damage. There were also some 50 incidents of missiles carrying cluster bomb warheads hitting populated areas, with hundreds of separate impact sites.... All 24 fatalities from Iran's missile attacks were civilians, and all but two were not inside bomb shelters. Cluster munitions killed 10, and conventional missiles killed 14. ^ "Israel Closes Gaza's Rafah Crossing Amid Attacks on Iran" . Al Jazeera English . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Today's Top News: Middle East, Occupied Palestinian Territory, Sudan" . United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Israeli Settler Violence Rises in West Bank Under Iran War Curbs" . Asharq Al-Awsat . 11 March 2026. ^ "EU Urges Israel to Stop 'Unacceptable' Violence by Illegal Settlers in Occupied West Bank" . TRT World . 11 March 2026 . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ "UN Warns of Widening Crisis as Israeli Attacks Displace 816,000 In Lebanon" . Al Jazeera English . 11 March 2026 . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ "Live Updates: Iran's President Says Nation 'Will Not Bow' to Pressure from US and Israel" . Associated Press . 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ "UAE Warns People Against Sharing Unverified Information on Iranian Strikes" .

The New Arab . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Bahrain Cracks Down on People Allegedly Celebrating Iran Strikes on Kingdom" .

The New Arab . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Uras, Umut; Haider, Sarah; Everett, Mariamne; Gjevori, Elis (16 March 2026). "Trump Rips Allies for Lack of 'Enthusiasm'; Attack Sets UAE Oilfield Ablaze" . Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 16 March 2026 . ^ "Exclusive: Pakistan Deploys Jet Squadron, Thousands of Troops to Saudi Arabia During Iran War" . Reuters . 18 May 2026. ^ Campbell, Lucy (28 May 2026). "Trump Threatens to 'Blow Up' US Ally Oman Amid Talks over Strait of Hormuz" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 28 May 2026 . ^ "The 2026 Iran War, An Initial Take and Implications" . Oxford Economics . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Conflict Poses New Risk to US Economic Resilience" . Reuters . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "IEA Chief: World Faces 'Greatest Global Energy Security Challenge in History' " . Middle East Eye . 20 March 2026 . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ "Petroleum & Other Liquids / Data ▼ / Download Series History" . U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). Archived from the original on 5 June 2026. ^ Dale, Daniel (11 December 2025). "Analysis: How the White House Is Using Misleading Comparisons to Make Inflation Sound Better" . CNN. Archived from the original on 17 December 2025. ● Data from BLS: "12-month percentage change, Consumer Price Index, selected categories" . US Bureau of Labor Statistics. Archived from the original on 17 December 2025. ● Higher-precision data from Federal Reserve: "Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: All Items in U.S. City Average (CPIAUCSL)" . US Federal Reserve, St. Louis office. Archived from the original on 17 December 2025. ^ Data from "Petroleum & Other Liquids / Data / Weekly U.S. All Grades All Formulations Retail Gasoline Prices" . U.S. Energy Information Administration . 2026. Archived from the original on 8 May 2026. ^ DePillis, Lydia (20 April 2026). "Why Gas Prices Go Up Fast and Take So Long to Fall" .

The New York Times . Source: AAA for national average unleaded retail gasoline prices. ^ "Middle East Crisis Pushes up Oil Prices – and Could Drive Inflation Rises Too" .

The Guardian . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ a b Buchanan, Naomi (11 March 2026). "There's a Major Inflation Risk Lurking for the Economy as the Iran War Drags On, And It's Not Oil" . Business Insider . ^ "Brent Crude Oil Prices (1987-2026)" . Macrotrends . Retrieved 16 April 2026 . ^ Zhang, Qi; Hu, Yi; Jiao, Jianbin; Wang, Shouyang (2 January 2024). "The Impact of Russia–Ukraine War on Crude Oil Prices: An EMC Framework" . Humanities and Social Sciences Communications . 11 (1): 8. doi : 10.1057/s41599-023-02526-9 . ISSN 2662-9992 . ^ Schmidt, Gregory; Elliott, Rebecca F. (7 May 2026). "Shell Reports Nearly $7 Billion Profit After Oil Prices Surged Amid U.S.-Iran War" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 7 May 2026 . ^ Ewe, ByKoh; Drury, Flora (24 March 2026). "Everyday Life in Asia Is Being Upended by Iran War Fuel Crisis" . BBC News . Retrieved 25 March 2026 . ^ "Oil Prices Surge and Stocks Fall Amid Fears over Iran War" . NPR . 2 March 2026. Archived from the original on 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Stock Market Data – US Markets, World Markets, And Stock Quotes" . CNN . Retrieved 16 April 2026 . ^ Del Valle, Magdalena (10 March 2026). "Hormuz Disruptions Will Hit Food Prices as Well as Oil, UN Warns" . Bloomberg News . ^ "WFP Warns Rising Food and Fuel Prices Risk Pushing Global Hunger Higher as Humanitarian Needs Grow" . World Food Programme . 8 March 2026. ^ Fan, Amy; Elliott, Rebecca F. "The Countries Profiting From the War Oil Shock, as Others Lose Out" , The New York Times , 16 May 20206, updated 22 May 2026 Accessed 24 May 2026. "But inside the Persian Gulf, the story is much more complicated.

The effective closing of the Strait of Hormuz, a choke point between the Gulf and the rest of the world, has forced the United Arab Emirates, Iraq and other countries to slash production and exports. Some are hurting worse than others. Those that can use pipelines to reroute their oil to ports away from the strait have fared a lot better than countries without such options." ^ "Farmers See Fertiliser Price Surge as Iran War Blocks Exports, Threatening Losses" . Reuters . 5 March 2026. ^ "Iran's Skies Empty After Strikes as Regional States Close Airspace" . Iran International . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Yosef, Eugenia (28 February 2026). "Israel Closes Airspace After Strikes on Iran" . CNN . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Lehmann, Noam (28 February 2026). "Iraq Shuttering Airspace After US, Israel Strike Iran" .

The Times of Israel . ^ "Syria Shutters Airspace" .

The Times of Israel . 28 February 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Maccioni, Frederico; Plucinska, Joanna (28 February 2026). "Travel in Chaos as Airlines Cancel Flights After US, Israel Strikes on Iran" . Reuters . ^ Iacurci, Greg (2 May 2026). "Airfare Amid Iran War: Buy Now or Wait out the Conflict? Experts Weigh the Risks" . CNBC . Retrieved 7 May 2026 . ^ "How the Iran War Is Hurting Travelers, Airline Industry" . dw.com . 2 May 2026 . Retrieved 7 May 2026 . ^ "Iran War, Jet Fuel Concerns Cloud Airlines' Summer Holiday Plans" . Reuters . 29 April 2026. ^ Rose, Joel (24 April 2026). "Airlines Face Headwinds as Iran War Leads to Rising Fuel Costs" . NPR . Retrieved 7 May 2026 . ^ Valle, Sabrina; Shepardson, David; Singh, Rajesh Kumar; Oladipo, Doyinsola (2 May 2026). "Spirit Airlines Shuts Down, Industry's First Iran War Casualty" . Reuters . Retrieved 2 May 2026 . ^ "Iran says Hormuz closed for shipping to and from 'enemy' ports" . Agence France Press via South China Morning Post . 27 March 2026 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ "UN maritime agency urges help for seafarers stranded in Gulf" . Al Jazeera . 21 April 2026 . Retrieved 21 April 2026 . ^ "Iran's blatant violations of international maritime laws" . Arab News . 25 July 2019 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ Lipsky, Josh; Piasecki, Bart; Yin, Jessie (18 March 2026). "The Iran oil shock may be diffrent from other price spikes" . Atlantic Council . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ "Oil prices rise as Iran war threatens shipping through strait of Hormuz" .

The Guardian . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Oil jumps 10% on Iran conflict and could spike to $100 a barrel, analysts say" . Reuters . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Oil surges and stock futures sink after war in Iran disrupts crude supply" . CNN. 1 March 2026. Archived from the original on 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ Kimball, Spencer (8 March 2026). "Oil surges above $100 a barrel; Trump says 'small price to pay' for defeating Iran" . CNBC . Archived from the original on 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ Sheen, Mike; Shan, Lee Ying (14 April 2026). "Oil falls as IEA predicts 'demand destruction will spread' and hopes for fresh Iran talks grow" . CNBC . Retrieved 14 April 2026 . ^ Burke, Jason (11 March 2026). "Iran escalates attacks on infrastructure and transport networks across the Gulf" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ Karma, Rogé (13 March 2026). " 'We Would Be Entering a Completely Different World' " .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ Burton, Mark (15 March 2026). "Bahrain starts output cuts at world's top aluminum smelter" . Fortune . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ Gomez Horta, Eduardo; Mohseni-Cheraghlou, Amin (27 March 2026). "The Iran war's economic fallout won't stop at oil—agriculture and aluminum are next" . Atlantic Council . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ Lotz, Avery (7 April 2026). "Iran war deflates critical helium production supplies" . Axios . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ Buchanan, Naomi (21 March 2026). "It's not just oil: 3 critical supply chains being upended by the war in Iran" . Business Insider . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ "Oil, strait of Hormuz and empty threats: a timeline of Trump's flip-flopping on the Iran war" .

The Guardian . 4 April 2026. Archived from the original on 4 April 2026. ^ "Trump says U.S. will blockade Strait of Hormuz and intercept ships that paid tolls to Iran" . CBS News . 12 April 2026. Archived from the original on 12 April 2026 . Retrieved 12 April 2026 . ^ "U.S. to Blockade Ships Entering or Exiting Iranian Ports" , press release, 12 April 2026, U. S. Central Command. Accessed 14 April 2026. ^ "Trump claims US has total control over strait of Hormuz after Iran seizes two container ships" .

The Guardian . 24 April 2026. Archived from the original on 23 April 2026. ^ "Iran declares Strait of Hormuz 'completely open'; Trump says U.S. blockade 'will remain in full force' until peace deal" . NBC News . 18 April 2026 . Retrieved 25 April 2026 . ^ Loria, Michael; Cann, Christopher; Riquier, Andrea (17 April 2026). "Strait of Hormuz won't reopen, Iranian leader tells Trump" . USA Today . Archived from the original on 17 April 2026 . Retrieved 18 April 2026 . ^ Kendall, Spencer (17 April 2026). "Video shows ships turning away from the Strait of Hormuz as confusion persists over whether sea lane is really open" . CNBC . Archived from the original on 18 April 2026 . Retrieved 18 April 2026 . ^ "Iran Shuts Hormuz Again, Accuses US Of Violating Deal To Reopen It" . NDTV . 18 April 2026 . Retrieved 25 April 2026 . ^ Borger, Julian (4 May 2026). "Donald Trump sends warships to break Iran's strait of Hormuz blockade" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 7 May 2026 . ^ Adler, Nils; Varshalomidze, Tamila; Mohamed, Edna; Sabah, Zaid; Habib, Heba; Kupemba, Danai Nesta. "Iran war updates: Trump announces plan to escort ships in Hormuz Strait" . Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 7 May 2026 . ^ "Trump says the U.S. will 'guide' stranded ships from the Strait of Hormuz" . NPR .

The Associated Press. 3 May 2026 . Retrieved 7 May 2026 . ^ "U.A.E. says Iran has resumed attacks as U.S. moves to reopen Strait of Hormuz" . ^ "Live updates" . CNN . 4 May 2026 . Retrieved 4 May 2026 . ^ "Iran war live: Trump says Hormuz operation paused amid US, Tehran talks" . Al Jazeera English . 6 May 2026 . Retrieved 6 May 2026 . ^ "Trump, Iran's President sign deal to end West Asia war" .

The Hindu . 17 June 2026. ^ "Iran to 'instantly' reopen Hormuz, US to 'immediately' lift blockade: Pakistan PM" . TRT World . 18 June 2026. ^ "With Lebanon ceasefire set, Trump envoy heads to Switzerland for U.S.-Iran talks" . Reuters . 19 June 2026. ^ "Israel, Hezbollah agree to ceasefire starting on Friday" . Reuters . 19 June 2026. ^ "Southern Lebanon hit by at least 12 Israeli strikes since ceasefire" . Al Jazeera English . 19 June 2026. ^ "Iran Closes Strait Of Hormuz Again Over Israel's Attacks On Lebanon" . NDTV . Reuters. 20 June 2026. ^ "US forces monitoring Strait of Hormuz to ensure it stays open" . Reuters . 20 June 2026. ^ "U.S. military says it struck multiple targets in Iran as ceasefire is strained by 2nd day of attacks" . PBS News . 27 June 2026. ^ "Trump says Iran deal 'is over' after Gulf strikes, calls Tehran 'sick people' " . Ynet . 8 July 2026. Archived from the original on 8 July 2026. ^ "Houthis Threaten to 'Escalate Attacks' on Red Sea-Linked Bab el-Mandeb Strait: 4 Ways This Could Hurt the Indian Economy" .

The Financial Express . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Potential Houthi Threat to Red Sea Shipping Could Further Damage Global Economy" . BBC News . 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 16 April 2026 . ^ Khaled, Fatma (15 March 2026). "As Other Iran-Allied Groups Are Engaging in the Mideast War, Yemen's Houthis Hold Back" . Associated Press . Retrieved 19 March 2026 . ^ Khaled, Fatma (15 March 2026). "As Iran's Other Proxy Groups Join War, Houthi Rebels in Yemen Hold Back, For Now" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 19 March 2026 . ^ Gault, Matthew (2 March 2026). "Amazon Data Centers on Fire After Iranian Missile Strikes on Dubai" . 404 Media . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Kim, Eugene; Ming, Lee Chong (3 March 2026). "Amazon Says 3 Data Centers Were Damaged by Drone Strikes in the Middle East" . Business Insider . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Down, Aisha (6 April 2026). "Iran's Internet Blackout Is Longest National Shutdown Since Arab Spring" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 16 April 2026 . ^ "Trump Abandons "Project Freedom" After Saudi Arabia and Kuwait Suspend Access to Bases and Airspace" . Democracy Now! . 7 May 2026 . Retrieved 9 May 2026 . ^ Judah, Jacob; Mackinnon, Amy (7 April 2026). " 'Hundreds of Millions of Dollars a Day': US Counts Cost of War on Iran" .

The Irish Times . Retrieved 16 April 2026 . ^ "Iran War Has Cost Israel $11.5 billion in Budgetary Expenses, Ministry Says" . Al Arabiya English . 12 April 2026 . Retrieved 16 April 2026 . ^ Shearing, Neal (17 March 2026). "How Will the Iran War Affect the Global Economy?" . Chatham House . Retrieved 16 April 2026 . ^ a b "The Pentagon Has No New Munitions Contracts Amid Concerns About a Weapons Shortage" . NBC News . 14 May 2026 . Retrieved 10 June 2026 . ^ Cohen, Zachary; Bertrand, Natasha (21 April 2026). "US at Risk of Running out of Missiles If Another War Breaks out After Depleting Stockpile in Iran Operations | CNN Politics" . CNN . Retrieved 10 June 2026 . ^ "Pentagon Says US Has Spent $29 Billion on Iran War so Far, Amid Concerns over Weapons Stockpiles" . www.euronews.com . 13 May 2026 . Retrieved 10 June 2026 . ^ "Pentagon Likely to Cancel Missile Deal with Germany over Fears of Russia" . POLITICO . 4 June 2026 . Retrieved 10 June 2026 . ^ "U.S. State Department Approves Potential $842 Million Danish Purchase of AGM-158 JASSM-ER Cruise Missiles" . Defence Industry . 6 June 2026 . Retrieved 10 June 2026 . ^ Radzius, Darius (13 May 2026). "Pentagon Rushes to Buy 10,000 Missiles as Iran Has Depleted Stockpiles" . Military.com . Retrieved 10 June 2026 . ^ "U.S. Military Industrial Complex: The Real Winner of the Iran War" . India Today . 18 April 2026 . Retrieved 22 June 2026 . ^ Poynting, Mark; Murray, Alex; Kayleen, Devlinand; Metzler, Barbara (10 March 2026). "Why Air Strikes on Tehran Oil Facilities Are Causing Black Rain" . BBC . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ Watts, Jonathan (7 July 2026). "Fuel on the fire: why oil companies are profiting as the world gets dangerously hot" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 12 July 2026 . ^ a b c d e Roth, Andrew (17 June 2026). "Trump Signs Iran Peace Plan, Claiming Deal Averts 'Worldwide Depression' " .

The Guardian . Retrieved 18 June 2026 . ^ Freiberg, Nava (18 June 2026). "US, Iran Said Weighing Second Electronic Signing of MOU Today Rather Than In-Person Ceremony Friday" . Times of Israel . Retrieved 18 June 2026 . ^ a b Bao, Anniek (18 June 2026). "Trump Claims Iran Deal Is 'Unconditional Surrender,' Says His Power Has 'No Limits': Axios" . CNBC . Retrieved 18 June 2026 . ^ "MoU's $300bn Iran Reconstruction Fund Becomes US Political Flashpoint" . Al Jazeera English . 18 June 2026 . Retrieved 18 June 2026 . ^ Musgrave, Paul (18 June 2026). "Iran Is a Bigger Defeat Than Vietnam" . Foreign Policy . Retrieved 18 June 2026 . ^ Wood, Graeme (18 June 2026). "Iran Has Humiliated Trump" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 18 June 2026 . ^ "America Has Lost Its War with Iran" .

The Independent . 15 June 2026 . Retrieved 19 June 2026 . ^ Bowen, Jeremy (18 June 2026). "US-Iran Deal Raises Inescapable Question of What the War Was For" . BBC News . Retrieved 18 June 2026 . ^ "Has the U.S. Lost the War in Iran?" . NPR . 24 May 2026 . Retrieved 19 June 2026 . ^ Fadel, Leila (19 June 2026). "Who Won and Who Lost? Assessing the Fallout of the Iran War" . npr.org . NPR . Retrieved 19 June 2026 . ^ Koziol, Michael (20 June 2026). "What Was It All For?

The Winners and Losers of Trump's Deal with Iran" . Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 19 June 2026 . ^ "Who Won the Iran-US War — Trump or Tehran? And Who Lost?" .

The Indian Express . 15 June 2026 . Retrieved 18 June 2026 . ^ "Gulf States Hesitant to Fund $300b. Iran Reconstruction, Worried of Reinforcing Regional Rival" . Jerusalem Post . 18 June 2026 . Retrieved 18 June 2026 . ^ Pape, Robert (6 April 2026). "The War Is Turning Iran Into a Major World Power" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 18 June 2026 . ^ a b Tannehill, Brynn (23 June 2026). "America's Big Mistake in Iran" .

The Atlantic . ^ a b Editorial Board (15 June 2026). "President Trump Lost This War" .

The New York Times . ^ a b Pirzadeh, Reza (2 April 2026). "War in Iran: Triple Failure and Strategic Deadlock" . Institut Montaigne . ^ a b Este, Jonathan (7 May 2026). "Iran war has shown the limits of US power" .

The Conversation . ^ a b Bowen, Jeremy (15 June 2026). "Iran deal ends Trump's war that revealed limit of US dominance" . BBC. ^ "Iran has lost its fear of war" .

The Economist . 11 June 2026. ^ Seth, Anika Anora; Holliday, Shelby; Blostein, Denise; Czerny, Milàn. "We Investigated Damage From Iran to a U.S. Naval Base. Here's What We Found" .

The Wall Street Journal. ^ Sankey, Evan (21 April 2026). "Iran War Shows Vulnerability of US Forward Bases" .

The Cato Institute. ^ a b Bagchi, Aysha (5 March 2026). " 'Might makes right'? Why experts have fears for rule of law" . USA Today . Retrieved 17 March 2026 . ^ Dannenbaum, Tom ; Hamilton, Rebecca; Haque, Adil Ahmad ; Hathaway, Oona A. ; Rona, Gabor (2 April 2026). "Over 100 International Law Experts Warn: U.S. Strikes on Iran Violate UN Charter and May Be War Crimes" . Just Security . Reiss Center on Law and Security, New York University School of Law . ^ Siddique, Haroon (2 March 2026). "What is the legality of the US and Israeli attacks on Iran?" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ Bateman, Tom; James, Imogen (3 April 2026). "Iran war: International law experts allege violations in Iran war" . BBC . ^ "What You Need to Know about The U.S. War on Iran" . American Friends Service Committee . 9 March 2026. ^ "UN Experts Denounce Aggression on Iran and Lebanon, Warn of Devastating Regional Escalation" . Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights . 12 March 2026. ^ Chaisse, Julien (9 March 2026). "What crises in Iran, Panama, Venezuela and Greenland have in common" . South China Morning Post . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ Chellaney, Brahma (3 April 2026). "The MissOil Strike: The World Pays for One Man's Expansionist Follies" . Open . ^ Tait, Robert (1 March 2026). "Trump's current war on Iran picks up where a longstanding enmity left off" .