The term Advaita (अद्वैत) literally means "not-two" or "one without a second", which means that only Brahman , 'the one', is ultimately real while prapanca , 'the second', 'the world' or the multiplicity of thought-constructs, is not fully real. It is commonly rendered as " nonduality ", and popularly interpreted as meaning that Atman is non-different from Brahman, and often equated with monism . Advaita Vedanta is a Hindu sādhanā , a path of spiritual discipline and experience. It states that moksha ('liberation', freedom) is attained when knowledge of Brahman is attained, recognising the illusoriness of the phenomenal world and disidentifying from body-mind and the notion of 'doership', acquiring vidyā (knowledge) of one's true identity as Atman/Brahman , self-luminous ( svayam prakāśa ) awareness or Witness-consciousness . This knowledge is acquired through Upanishadic statements such as tat tvam asi , "that you are", which destroy the ignorance ( avidyā ) regarding one's true identity by revealing that (jiv)Ātman is non-different from immortal Brahman .

The Advaita vedanta tradition modifies the Samkhya -dualism between Purusha (pure awareness or consciousness) and Prakriti ('nature', which includes matter but also cognition and emotion) as the two equal basic principles of existence. It proposes instead that Atman/Brahman (awareness, purusha ) alone is ultimately real and, though unchanging, is the cause and origin of the transient phenomenal world ( prakriti ).

In this view, the jivatman or individual self is a mere reflection or limitation of singular Ātman in a multitude of apparent individual bodies. It regards the material world as an illusory appearance ( maya ) or "an unreal manifestation ( vivarta ) of Brahman", the latter as proposed by the 13th-century scholar Prakasatman of the Vivarana school. Advaita Vedanta is often presented as an elite scholarly tradition belonging to the orthodox Hindu Vedānta tradition, emphasising scholarly works written in Sanskrit; as such, it is an "iconic representation of Hindu religion and culture." Yet contemporary Advaita Vedanta is yogic Advaita, a medieval and modern syncretic tradition incorporating Yoga and other traditions, and producing works in vernacular.

The earliest Advaita writings are the Sannyasa Upanishads (first centuries CE), the Vākyapadīya , written by Bhartṛhari (second half 5th century, ) and the Māndūkya-kārikā written by Gauḍapāda (7th century). Gaudapada adapted philosophical concepts from Buddhism , giving them a Vedantic basis and interpretation.

The Buddhist concepts were further Vedanticised by Adi Shankara (8th c. CE), who is generally regarded as the most prominent exponent of the Advaita Vedānta tradition, though some of the most prominent Advaita-propositions come from other Advaitins, and his early influence has been questioned. Adi Shankara emphasized that, since Brahman is ever-present, Brahman-knowledge is immediate and requires no 'action' or 'doership', that is, striving (to attain) and effort. Nevertheless, the Advaita tradition, as represented by Mandana Misra and the Bhamati school, also prescribes elaborate preparatory practice, including contemplation of mahavakyas , presenting a tension between sudden and gradual approaches which is also recognized in other spiritual disciplines and traditions. Shankaracharya's prominence as the exemplary defender of traditional Hindu-values and spirituality started to take shape only centuries later, in the 14th century, with the ascent of Sringeri matha and its jagadguru Vidyaranya (Madhava, 14th cent.) in the Vijayanagara Empire , While Adi Shankara did not embrace Yoga , the Advaita-tradition by then had accepted yogic samadhi as a means to still the mind and attain knowledge, explicitly incorporating elements from the yogic tradition and texts like the Yoga Vasistha and the Bhagavata Purana , culminating in Swami Vivekananda 's full embrace and propagation of Yogic samadhi as an Advaita means of knowledge and liberation.

In the 19th century, due to the influence of Vidyaranya 's Sarvadarśanasaṅgraha , the importance of Advaita Vedānta was overemphasized by Western scholarship , and Advaita Vedānta came to be regarded as the paradigmatic example of Hindu spirituality, despite the numerical dominance of theistic Bhakti -oriented religiosity.

In modern times, Advaita views appear in various Neo-Vedānta movements.

The word Advaita is a composite of two Sanskrit words: Prefix "a-" (अ), meaning "non-" "Dvaita" (द्वैत), which means 'duality' or 'dualism'. Advaita is often translated as "non-duality", but a more apt translation is "non-secondness". Fabian Volker, following Paul Hacker explains that dvaita does not mean "duality", but "the state in which a second is present", synonymous with prapanca , "conceptual proliferation", and with jagat , "the world". Advaita thus means that only Brahman , 'the one', is ultimately real, while the world with its multiplicity, 'the second', is not fully real.

As Gaudapada states, when the unreal is taken as real, people grasp to the unreal, which is samsara .

By realizing one's true identity as Brahman , there is no more grasping, and the mind comes to rest.

In a popular sense, advaita is often expressed as the famous diction that Atman is Brahman, meaning that jivatman , the individual experiencing self, is ultimately pure awareness mistakenly identified with body and the senses, and non-different ("na aparah") from Ātman / Brahman , the highest Self or Reality ; ; the knowledge of this true identity is liberating.

The word Vedānta is a composition of two Sanskrit words: The word Veda refers to the whole corpus of vedic texts, and the word "anta" means 'end'.

From this, one meaning of Vedānta is "the end of the Vedas" or "the ultimate knowledge of the Vedas".

As all the vedas are divided into four parts i.e Samhita, Brahmana, Aranyaka and Upanishads, Upanishads are the ultimate and final part of vedas, Vedanta is called as Upanishads. Veda can also mean "knowledge" in general, so Vedānta can be taken to mean "the end, conclusion or finality of knowledge". Vedānta is one of six orthodox schools of Hindu philosophy . Advaita Vedanta While "a preferred terminology" for Upanisadic philosophy "in the early periods, before the time of Shankara" was Puruṣavāda , the Advaita Vedānta school has historically been referred to by various names, such as Advaita-vada (speaker of Advaita), Abheda-darshana (view of non-difference), Dvaita-vada-pratisedha (denial of dual distinctions), and Kevala-dvaita (non-dualism of the isolated). It is also called māyāvāda by Vaishnava opponents, akin to Madhyamaka Buddhism , due to their insistence that phenomena ultimately lack an inherent essence or reality. "Advaita" (अद्वैत) is from Sanskrit roots a , not; dvaita , "customarily translated as dual".

As Advaita , it is usually translated as "not-two" or "one without a second", and most commonly as "nondualism", "nonduality" or "nondual", invoking the notion of a dichotomy. Fabian Volker, following Paul Hacker explains that dvaita does not mean "duality", but "the state in which a second is present", the second here being synonymous with prapanca , "conceptual proliferation", and with jagat , "the world". Advaita thus means that only Brahman , 'the one', is ultimately real, while the phenomenal world, or the conceptual multiplicity , 'the second', is not fully real.

The term thus does not emphasize two instances, but the notion that the second instance is not fully real, and advaita is better translated as "that which has no second beside it" instead of "nonduality", denying multiplicity and the proliferation of concepts "that tend to obscure the true state of affairs." According to Richard King, a professor of Buddhist and Asian studies, the term Advaita first occurs in a recognizably Vedantic context in the prose of Mandukya Upanishad . According to Frits Staal , a professor of philosophy specializing in Sanskrit and Vedic studies, the word Advaita itself is from the Vedic era, and the Vedic sage Yajnavalkya (8th or 7th-century BCE ) is credited to be the one who coined it. Stephen Phillips, a professor of philosophy and Asian studies, translates the Advaita containing verse excerpt in Brihadaranyaka Upanishad , as "An ocean, a single seer without duality becomes he whose world is Brahman." Advaita tradition While the term "Advaita Vedanta" in a strict sense may refer to the scholastic tradition of textual exegesis established by Shankara and the monastic institutions , "advaita" in a broader sense may refer to a broad current of advaitic thought, which incorporates advaitic elements with yogic thought and practice and other strands of Indian religiosity, such as Kashmir Shaivism and the Nath tradition.

As Swami Vivekananda stated: The Vedas cannot show you Brahman, you are That already. They can only help to take away the veil that hides truth from our eyes.

The cessation of ignorance can only come when I know that God and I are one; in other words, identify yourself with Atman, not with human limitations.

The idea that we are bound is only an illusion . Freedom is inseparable from the nature of the Atman. This is ever pure, ever perfect, ever unchangeable. — Adi Shankara's commentary on Fourth Vyasa Sutra , Swami Vivekananda According to Shankara, taking a subitist position, moksha is attained at once when the mahavakyas , articulating the identity of Atman and Brahman , are understood. Yet, the Advaita-tradition also emphasizes human effort, a path of Jnana Yoga with a progression of study and training to realize one's true identity as Atman/Brahman and attain moksha . According to the contemporary Advaita tradition, knowledge of Atman/Brahman is obtained gradually, by svādhyāya , study of the self and of the Vedic texts, which consists of four stages of samanyasa : virāga ('renunciation'), sravana ('listening to the teachings of the sages'), manana ('reflection on the teachings') and nididhyāsana , introspection and profound and repeated meditation on the mahavakyas , selected Upanishadic statements such as tat tvam asi ('that art thou' or 'you are That') which are taken literal, and form the srutic evidence for the identity of jivanatman and Atman/Brahman. This meditation negates the misconceptions, false knowledge, and false ego-identity , rooted in maya , which obfuscate the ultimate truth of the oneness of Brahman, and one's true identity as Atman/Brahman. This culminates in what Adi Shankara refers to as anubhava , immediate intuition, a direct awareness which is construction-free, and not construction-filled. It is not an awareness of Brahman, but instead an awareness that is Brahman.

Although the threefold practice is broadly accepted in the Advaita tradition, and affirmed by Mandana Misra , it is at odds with Shankara, who took a subitist position. Sruti (scriptures), proper reasoning and meditation are the main sources of knowledge ( vidya ) for the Advaita Vedānta tradition. It teaches that correct knowledge of Atman and Brahman is achievable by svādhyāya , study of the self and of the Vedic texts, and three stages of practice: sravana (perception, hearing), manana (thinking) and nididhyasana (meditation), a three-step methodology that is rooted in the teachings of chapter 4 of the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad . According to critics of neo-Advaita , which also emphasizes direct insight, traditional Advaita Vedanta entails more than self-inquiry or bare insight into one's real nature, but also includes self-restraint, textual studies and ethical perfection. It is described in classical Advaita books like Shankara's Upadesasahasri and the Vivekachudamani , which is also attributed to Shankara. Preparation: the fourfold qualities The Advaita student has to develop the fourfold qualities, or behavioral qualifications ( Samanyasa , Sampattis , sādhana-catustaya ): A student in Advaita Vedānta tradition is required to develop these four qualities: Nityānitya vastu viveka (नित्यानित्यवस्तुविवेकः) – Viveka is the ability to correctly discriminate between the real and eternal ( nitya ) and the substance that is apparently real, illusory, changing and transitory ( anitya ). Ihāmutrārtha phala bhoga virāga (इहाऽमुत्रार्थफलभोगविरागः) – The renunciation ( virāga ) of all desires of the mind (bhoga) for sense pleasures, in this world (iha) and other worlds. Willing to give up everything that is an obstacle to the pursuit of truth and self-knowledge. Śamādi ṣatka sampatti (शमादिषट्कसम्पत्तिः) – the sixfold virtues or qualities: Śama – mental tranquility, ability to focus the mind. Dama – self-restraint, the virtue of temperance. restraining the senses. Uparati – dispassion, lack of desire for worldly pleasures, ability to be quiet and disassociated from everything; discontinuation of all religious duties and ceremonies Titikṣa – endurance, perseverance, putting up with pairs of opposites (like heat and cold, pleasure and pain), ability to be patient during demanding circumstances Śraddhā – having faith in teacher and the Sruti scriptural texts Samādhāna – contentedness, satisfaction of mind in all conditions, attention, intentness of mind Mumukṣutva (मुमुक्षुत्वम्) – An intense longing for freedom, liberation and wisdom, driven to the quest of knowledge and understanding. Having moksha as the primary goal of life The threefold practice: sravana (hearing), manana (thinking) and nididhyasana (meditation) The Advaita tradition teaches that correct knowledge, which destroys avidya , psychological and perceptual errors related to Atman and Brahman, is obtained in jnanayoga through three stages of practice, sravana (hearing), manana (thinking) and nididhyasana (meditation). This three-step methodology is rooted in the teachings of chapter 4 of the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad : Sravana , which literally means hearing.

The student listens and discusses the ideas, concepts, questions and answers. of the sages on the Upanishads and Advaita Vedānta, studying the Vedantic texts, such as the Brahma Sutras , aided by discussions with the guru (teacher, counsellor). Manana refers to thinking on these discussions and contemplating over the various ideas based on svadhyaya and sravana . It is the stage of reflection on the teachings ; Nididhyāsana , the stage of meditation and introspection. This stage of practice aims at realization and consequent conviction of the truths, non-duality and a state where there is a fusion of thought and action, knowing and being.

Although the threefold practice is broadly accepted in the Advaita tradition, Shankara's works show an ambivalence toward it: while accepting its authenticity and merits, as it is based in the scriptures, he also takes a subitist position, arguing that moksha is attained at once when the mahavakyas , articulating the identity of Atman and Brahman , are understood. According to Rambachan, "it is not possible to reconcile Sankara's views with this seemingly well-ordered system." Mandana Misra , on the other hand, explicitly affirms the threefold practice as the means to acquire knowledge of Brahman, referring to meditation as dhyana . He states that these practices, though conceptual, 'can eliminate both ignorance and coneptuality at the same time, leaving only the "pure, transparent nature" of self-awareness'. Bilimoria states that these three stages of Advaita practice can be viewed as sadhana practice that unifies Yoga and Karma ("action", referring here to ritual) ideas, and was most likely derived from these older traditions. Guru Main article: Guru Advaita Vedānta school has traditionally had a high reverence for a Guru (teacher), and recommends that a competent Guru be sought in one's pursuit of spirituality, though this is not mandatory. Reading of Vedic literature and reflection is the most essential practice. Adi Shankara, states Comans, regularly employed compound words "such as Sastracaryopadesa (instruction by way of the scriptures and the teacher) and Vedāntacaryopadesa (instruction by way of the Upanishads and the teacher) to emphasize the importance of Guru". According to Comans, this reflects the Advaita tradition which holds a competent teacher as important and essential to gaining correct knowledge, freeing oneself from false knowledge, and to self-realization. Nevertheless, in the Bhamati-school the guru has a less essential role, as he can explain the teachings, but the student has to venture its further study. A guru is someone more than a teacher, traditionally a reverential figure to the student, with the guru serving as a "counselor, who helps mold values, shares experiential knowledge as much as literal knowledge, an exemplar in life, an inspirational source and who helps in the spiritual evolution of a student.

The guru, states Joel Mlecko, is more than someone who teaches specific type of knowledge, and includes in its scope someone who is also a "counselor, a sort of parent of mind and soul, who helps mold values and experiential knowledge as much as specific knowledge, an exemplar in life, an inspirational source and who reveals the meaning of life." Pramana (means of knowledge) Main article: Epistemology in Advaita Vedanta In classical Indian thought, pramana ( means of knowledge ) concerns questions like how correct knowledge can be acquired; how one knows, how one does not; and to what extent knowledge pertinent about someone or something can be acquired.

In contrast to other schools of Indian philosophy, early Vedanta paid little attention to pramana .

The Brahmasutras are not concerned with pramana , and pratyaksa (sense-perception) and anumana (inference) refer there to sruti and smriti respectively. Shankara recognized the means of knowledge, but his thematic focus was upon metaphysics and soteriology , and he took for granted the pramanas . For Shankara, sabda is the only means of knowledge for attaining Brahman-jnana . According to Sengaku Mayeda, "in no place in his works does he give any systematic account of them", taking Atman/Brahman to be self-evident ( svapramanaka ) and self-established ( svatahsiddha ), and "an investigation of the means of knowledge is of no use for the attainment of final release." Nevertheless, the Advaita tradition accepts altogether six kinds of pramāṇas .

While Adi Shankara emphasized Śabda (शब्द), relying on word, testimony of past or present reliable experts with regard to religious insights, and also accepted pratyakṣam (प्रत्यक्षम्), perception; and anumāṇam (अनुमानम्), inference; classical Advaita Vedānta, just like the Bhatta Purvamimamsaka school , also accepts upamāṇam (उपमानम्), comparison, analogy; arthāpattih (अर्थापत्तिः), postulation, derivation from circumstances; and anupalabdhih (अनुपलब्धिः), non-perception, negative/cognitive proof. Samadhi According to Dubois, Shankara's Advaita emphasizes that, since Brahman is ever-present, Brahman-knowledge is immediate and requires no 'action', that is, striving and effort; yet, the contemporary Advaita tradition, which is a yogic Advaita synthesis which developed in the late mediaeval period, also prescribes elaborate preparatory practice, including yogic samadhi, posing a paradox which is also recognized in other spiritual disciplines and traditions. Shankara regarded the srutis as the means of knowledge of Brahman, and he was ambivalent about yogic practices and meditation, which at best may prepare one for Brahma-jnana . According to Rambachan, criticising Vivekananda, Shankara states that the knowledge of Brahman can only be obtained from inquiry of the Shruti , and not by Yoga or samadhi, which at best can only silence the mind.

The Bhamati school and the Vivarana school differed on the role of contemplation, but they both "deny the possibility of perceiving supersensuous knowledge through popular yoga techniques." Later Advaita texts like the Dṛg-Dṛśya-Viveka (14th century) and Vedāntasara (of Sadananda) (15th century) added samādhi as a means to liberation, a theme that was also emphasized by Swami Vivekananda.

The Vivekachudamani , traditionally attributed to Shankara but post-dating him, "conceives of nirvikalpa samadhi as the premier method of Self-realization over and above the well-known vedantic discipline of listening, reflection and deep contemplation." Koller states that yogic concentration is an aid to gaining knowledge in Advaita. Anubhava ('experience') The role of anubhava , anubhuti ("experience", "intuition" ) as "experience" in gaining Brahman-jnana is contested.

In this method, which was highly estimated by Satchidanandendra Saraswati , a property is imposed ( adhyaropa ) on Atman to convince one of its existence, whereafter the imposition is removed ( apavada ) to reveal the true nature of Atman as nondual and undefinable.

In this method, "That which cannot be expressed is expressed through false attribution and subsequent denial." As Shankara writes, "First let me bring them on the right path, and then I will gradually be able to bring them round to the final truth afterwards." For example, Atman, the real "I", is described as witness , giving "it" an attribute to separate it from non-self.

Since this implies a duality between observer and observed, next the notion of "witness" is dropped, by showing that the Self cannot be seen and is beyond qualifications, and only that what is remains, without using any words: After one separates oneself i.e. 'I' or Atman from the sense objects, the qualities superimposed on Self are also negated by saying that which not being and not non-being, cannot be described by words, without beginning and end (BG 13.32) or as in Satyam Jnanam Anantam Brahman, beyond words, beyond mind and speech, etc. Here there is an attempt to negate the earlier attribute like being witness, bliss, most subtlest, etc.

After this negation of false superimposition, Self Alone shines. One enters into the state of Nirvikalp Samadhi, where there is no second, no one to experience and hence this state cannot be described in words.

The Mahavakyas – recognising one's true identity Moksha , liberation from suffering and rebirth and attaining immortality, is attained by disidentification from the body-mind complex and gaining self-knowledge as being in essence Atman , and attaining knowledge of the identity of Atman and Brahman . According to Shankara, the individual Ātman and Brahman seem different at the empirical level of reality, but this difference is only an illusion, and at the highest level of reality they are really identical.

The real self is Sat , "the Existent", that is, Atman/Brahman . Whereas the difference between Atman and non-Atman is deemed self-evident, knowledge of the identity of Atman and Brahman is revealed by the shruti , especially the Upanishadic statement tat tvam asi . Mahavakyas According to Shankara, a large number of Upanishadic statements reveal the identity of Atman and Brahman .

In the Advaita Vedanta tradition, four of those statements, the Mahavakyas , which are taken literal, in contrast to other statements, have a special importance in revealing this identity. They are: तत्त्वमसि, tat tvam asi , Chandogya VI.8.7 . Traditionally rendered as "That Thou Art" (that you are), with tat in Ch.U.6.8.7 referring to sat , "the Existent" ); correctly translated as "That's how you are," with tat in Ch.U.6.12.3, its original location from where it was copied to other verses, referring to "the very nature of all existence as permeated by " अहं ब्रह्मास्मि, aham brahmāsmi , Brhadāranyaka I.4.10 , "I am Brahman," or "I am Divine." प्रज्ञानं ब्रह्म, prajñānam brahma , Aitareya V.3 , " Prajñānam is Brahman ." अयमात्मा ब्रह्म, ayamātmā brahma , Mandukya II , "This Atman is Brahman." That you are The longest chapter of Shankara's Upadesasahasri , chapter 18, "That Art Thou", is devoted to considerations on the insight "I am ever-free, the existent" ( sat ), and the identity expressed in Chandogya Upanishad 6.8.7 in the mahavakya (great sentence) " tat tvam asi ", "that thou art".

In this statement, according to Shankara, tat refers to ' Sat , "the Existent" Existence, Being, or Brahman, the Real, the "Root of the world", the true essence or root or origin of everything that exists. "Tvam" refers to one's real I, pratyagatman or inner Self, the "direct Witness within everything", "free from caste, family, and purifying ceremonies", the essence, Atman , which the individual at the core is.

As Shankara states in the Upadesasahasri : Up.I.174: "Through such sentences as "Thou art That" one knows one's own Atman , the Witness of all the internal organs." Up.I.18.190: "Through such sentences as " the Existent" right knowledge concerning the inner Atman will become clearer." Up.I.18.193-194: "In the sentence "Thou art That" he word "That" means inner Atman ." The statement "tat tvam asi" sheds the false notion that Atman is different from Brahman . According to Nakamura, the non-duality of atman and Brahman "is a famous characteristic of Sankara's thought, but it was already taught by Sundarapandya" (c.600 CE or earlier). Shankara cites Sundarapandya in his comments to Brahma Sutra verse I.1.4: When the metaphorical or false atman is non-existent, child, body are sublated. Therefore, when it is realized that 'I am the existent Brahman, atman' , how can anyduty exist?

From this, and a large number of other accordances, Nakamura concludes that Shankar was not an original thinker, but "a synthesizer of existing Advaita and the rejuvenator, as well as a defender, of ancient learning." Direct perception versus contemplation of the Mahavakyas In the Upadesasahasri Shankara , Shankara is ambivalent on the need for meditation on the Upanishadic mahavakya . He states that "right knowledge arises at the moment of hearing", and rejects prasamcaksa or prasamkhyana meditation, that is, meditation on the meaning of the sentences, and in Up.II.3 recommends parisamkhyana , separating Atman from everything that is not Atman , that is, the sense-objects and sense-organs, and the pleasant and unpleasant things and merit and demerit connected with them. Yet, Shankara then concludes with declaring that only Atman exists, stating that "all the sentences of the Upanishads concerning non-duality of Atman should be fully contemplated, should be contemplated." As Mayeda states, "how they differ from each other in not known." Prasamkhyana was advocated by Mandana Misra, the older contemporary of Shankara who was the most influential Advaitin until the 10th century. "According to Mandana, the mahavakyas are incapable, by themselves, of bringing about brahmajnana .

The Vedanta-vakyas convey an indirect knowledge which is made direct only by deep meditation ( prasamkhyana ).

The latter is a continuous contemplation of the purport of the mahavakyas . Vācaspati Miśra, a student of Mandana Misra, agreed with Mandana Misra, and their stance is defended by the Bhamati-school, founded by Vācaspati Miśra.

In contrast, the Vivarana school founded by Prakasatman (c. 1200–1300) follows Shankara closely, arguing that the mahavakyas are the direct cause of gaining knowledge. Shankara's insistence on direct knowledge as liberating also differs from the asparsa yoga described in Gaudapada's Mandukyakarika III.39-46.

In this practice of 'non-contact' ( a- sparśa ), the mind is controlled and brought to rest, and does not create "things" (appearances) after which it grasps; it becomes non-dual, free from the subject--object dualism. Knowing that only Atman/Brahman is real, the creations of the mind are seen as false appearances (MK III.31-33).

When the mind is brought to rest, it becomes or is Brahman (MK III.46). Renouncement of ritualism In the Upadesasahasri Shankara discourages ritual worship such as oblations to Deva (God), because that assumes the Self within is different from Brahman .

The "doctrine of difference" is wrong, asserts Shankara, because, "he who knows the Brahman is one and he is another, does not know Brahman".

The false notion that Atman is different from Brahman is connected with the novice's conviction that ( Upadesasaharsi II.1.25 ) ...I am one He is another; I am ignorant, experience pleasure and pain, am bound and a transmigrator he is essentially different from me, the god not subject to transmigration.

By worshipping Him with oblation, offerings, homage and the like through the the actions prescribed for class and stage of life, I wish to get out of the ocean of transmigratory existence. How am I he? Recognizing oneself as "the Existent- Brahman ", which is mediated by scriptural teachings, is contrasted with the notion of "I act", which is mediated by relying on sense-perception and the like. According to Shankara, the statement "Thou art That" "remove the delusion of a hearer", "so through sentences as "Thou art That" one knows one's own Atman , the witness of all internal organs", and not from any actions. With this realization, the performance of rituals is prohibited, "since rituals and their requisites is contradictory to the realization of the identity with the highest Atman ." Philosophy: Reality/truth (Brahman, sat) and the world The swan is an important motif in Advaita.

The white colour of swan symbolises Sattva guṇa and the ability to discern Satya (Real, Eternal) from Mithya (Unreal, Changing), just as the mythical swan Paramahamsa discerns milk from water. Classical Advaita Vedānta states that all reality and everything in the experienced world has its root in Brahman, which is unchanging intelligent Consciousness. To Advaitins, there is no duality between a Creator and the created universe. All objects, all experiences, all matter, all consciousness, all awareness are somehow also this one fundamental reality Brahman. Yet, the knowing self has various experiences of reality during the waking, dream and dreamless states, and Advaita Vedānta acknowledges and admits that from the empirical perspective there are numerous distinctions. Advaita explains this by postulating different levels of reality, and by its theory of errors ( anirvacaniya khyati ). Darśana (view) – central concerns The ripple, Jivatman , is non-different from the water, Brahman . Further information: Hindu philosophy Vedānta is one of the six classical Hindu darśanas , the Indian traditions of religious philosophy and practice which accept the authority of the Vedas.

The various schools of Vedanta aim to harmonise the diverging views presented in the Prasthantrayi , the Principal Upanishads, along with the Brahma Sutras and the Bhagavad Gitā , offering an integrated body of textual interpretations and religious practices which aim at the attainment of moksha , release or liberation from transmigratory existence. Rejection of samkhya-dualism The Brahma Sutras, the constituting text of the Vedanta-tradition, rejects the purusha - prakriti dualism of the samkhya-tradition, and "much of the Brahmasutra appears to have been written to refute the perspective of the Samkhya school." Samkhya postulates two independent primal principles, purusha (primal consciousness) and prakriti (nature, which includes both matter and cognition and emotions).

In samkhya, prakriti consists of three qualities ( Guṇas ), which are in balance, until they come in contact with purusha and the equilibrium is disturbed.

From this pradhana then evolves the material universe, distinct from purusha , thereby postulating purusha as the efficient cause of all existence, and prakriti as its material cause or origin.

While closely related to Samkhya , the Advaita Vedānta tradition rejects this dualism, instead stating that reality cannot evolve from an inert, consciousness- and intelligence-less principle or essence. Brahman, which is intelligent and consciousness, is the sole reality, "that from which the origination, subsistence, and dissolution of this universe proceed", as stated in the second verse of the Brahman Sutras.

In Samkhya, purusha is the efficient cause, and prakriti is the material cause: purusha causes prakriti to manifest as the natural world. Advaita, like all Vedanta schools, states that Brahman, consciousness, is both the efficient and the material cause, that from which the material universe evolves. Yet, in the Brahmasutras Brahma is a dynamic force, while the Advaita-tradition regards Brahman as an "essentially unchanging and static reality", since Brahman changing into something else would mean that Brahman would not exist anymore, while a partial change would leave Brahman divided. Theoretical difficulties By accepting that Brahman is the sole, unchanging reality, various theoretical difficulties arise which are not answered by the Brahmasutras, which asserts that the Upanishadic views have to be accepted due to their scriptural authority, "regardless of logical problems and philosophical inconsistencies". Advaita and other Vedānta traditions face several problems, for which they offer different solutions. According to Deutsch and Dalvi, "The basic problem of Vedanta the relation between the plural, complex, changing phenomenal world and the Brahman in which it substantially subsists." According to Mayeda, following the post-Shankara predicate sat-cit-ananda , three problems emerge. First, how did Brahman, which is sat ('existence'), without any distinction, become manifold material universe? Second, how did Brahman, which is cit ('consciousness'), create the material world? Third, if Brahman is ananda ('bliss'), why did the empirical world of sufferings arise?

The Brahma Sutras do not answer these philosophical queries, and later Vedantins including Shankara had to resolve them. To solve these questions, Shankara introduced the concept of "Unevolved Name-and-Form", or primal matter corresponding to Prakriti , from which the world evolves, coming close to Samkhya dualism. Shankara's notion of "Unevolved Name-and-Form" was not adopted by the later Advaita tradition; instead, the later tradition turned avidya into a metaphysical principle, namely mulavidya or "root ignorance", a metaphysical substance which is the "primal material cause of the universe ( upadana )".

In this view, Brahman alone is real, and the phenomenal world is an appearance ( maya ) or "an unreal manifestation ( vivarta ) of Brahman". Prakasatmans (13th c.) defense of vivarta to explain the origin of the world, which declared phenomenal reality to be an illusion , became the dominant explanation, with which the primacy of Atman/Brahman can be maintained. Relation between jivatman and Atman/Brahman A main question in all schools of Vedanta is the relation between the individual self ( jiva ) and Atman / Brahman .

From the sun's perspective, it neither rises nor sets, there is no darkness, and "all is light".

From the perspective of a person on earth, sun does rise and set, there is both light and darkness, not "all is light", there are relative shades of light and darkness. Both are valid realities and truths, given their perspectives. Yet, they are contradictory. What is true from one point of view, states Grimes, is not from another. To Advaita Vedānta, this does not mean there are two truths and two realities, but it only means that the same one Reality and one Truth is explained or experienced from two different perspectives.

The jivatman or individual self is a mere reflection of singular Atman in a multitude of apparent individual bodies. It is "not an individual subject of consciousness", but the same in each person and identical to the universal eternal Brahman , a term used interchangeably with Atman. Atman is often translated as soul , though the two concepts differ significantly, since "soul" includes mental activities, whereas "Atman" solely refers to detached witness-consciousness. Three states of consciousness and Turiya Advaita posits three states of consciousness, namely waking (jagrat), dreaming (svapna), deep sleep (suṣupti), which are empirically experienced by human beings, and correspond to the Three Bodies Doctrine : The first state is the waking state, in which we are aware of our daily world. This is the gross body.

The second state is the dreaming mind. This is the subtle body .

The third state is the state of deep sleep. This is the causal body . Advaita also posits "the fourth", Turiya , which some describe as pure consciousness, the background that underlies and transcends these three common states of consciousness. Turiya is the state of liberation, where states Advaita school, one experiences the infinite ( ananta ) and non-different ( advaita/abheda ), that is free from the dualistic experience, the state in which ajativada , non-origination, is apprehended. According to Candradhara Sarma, Turiya state is where the foundational Self is realized, it is measureless, neither cause nor effect, all pervading, without suffering, blissful, changeless, self-luminous, real, immanent in all things and transcendent. Those who have experienced the Turiya stage of self-consciousness have reached the pure awareness of their own non-dual Self as one with everyone and everything, for them the knowledge, the knower, the known becomes one, they are the Jivanmukta . Advaita traces the foundation of this ontological theory in more ancient Sanskrit texts. For example, chapters 8.7 through 8.12 of Chandogya Upanishad discuss the "four states of consciousness" as awake, dream-filled sleep, deep sleep, and beyond deep sleep. One of the earliest mentions of Turiya , in the Hindu scriptures, occurs in verse 5.14.3 of the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad .

The self should not be confused with the contents and states which it enjoys and manipulates. If we have to give an account of it, we can describe it only as what it is not, for any positive description of it would be possible only if it could be made an object of observation, which from the nature of the case it is not. We "know" it only as we withdraw ourselves from the body with which we happen to be identified, in this transition. According to Jonardon Ganeri, the concept was introduced by the Buddhist philosopher Dignāga (c.480–c.540 CE), and accepted by the Vedanta tradition; according to Zhihua Yao, the concept has older roots in the Mahasanghika school. Brahman Main articles: Brahman and Satcitananda According to Advaita Vedānta, Brahman is the true Self, consciousness, awareness, intelligent, possessed with will, and the only Reality ( Sat ). Brahman is Paramarthika Satyam , "Absolute Truth" or absolute Real. It is That which is unborn and unchanging, and immortal. Other than Brahman , everything else, including the universe, material objects and individuals, are ever-changing and therefore maya . Brahman is "not sublatable", which means it cannot be superseded by a still higher reality: the true Self, pure consciousness the only Reality ( sat ), since It is untinged by difference, the mark of ignorance, and since It is the one thing that is not sublatable".

In Advaita, Brahman is the substrate and cause of all changes. Refuting samkhya, which considers pradhana or prakriti the material cause (primal matter) and purusha the efficient cause, in Advaita Vedanta Brahman is considered to be the material cause and the efficient cause of all that exists.

The Brahma Sutras I.1.2 state that Brahman is: ...that from which the origination, subsistence, and dissolution of this universe proceed. Advaita's Upanishadic roots state Brahman's qualities to be Sat-cit-ānanda , "true being-consciousness-bliss", or "Eternal Bliss Consciousness". A distinction is made between nirguna Brahman , formless Brahman, and saguna Brahman , Brahman with form, that is, Ishvara , God. Nirguna Brahman is undescribable, and the Upanishadic neti neti ('not this, not that' or 'neither this, nor that') negates all conceptualizations of Brahman. Vyāvahārika (conventional reality) – Avidya and Māyā Avidyā (ignorance) Avidyā is a central tenet of Shankara's Advaita, and became the main target of Ramanuja's criticism of Shankara.

In Shankara's view, avidyā is adhyasa , "the superimposition of the qualities of one thing upon another".

As Shankara explains in the Adhyasa-bhasya , the introduction to the Brahmasutrabhasya : Owing to an absence of discrimination, there continues a natural human behaviour in the form of 'I am this' or 'This is mine'; this is avidya. It is a superimposition of the attributes of one thing on another.

The ascertainment of the nature of the real entity by separating the superimposed thing from it is vidya (knowledge, illumination). Due to avidya , we are steeped in loka drsti , the empirical view.

From the beginning we only perceive the empirical world of multiplicity, taking it to be the only and true reality. Due to avidyā there is ignorance, or nescience, of the real Self, Atman/Brahman , mistakenly identifying the Self with the body-mind complex. With parmartha drsti ignorance is removed and vidya is acquired, and the Real, distinctionless Brahman is perceived as the True reality.

The notion of avidyā and its relationship to Brahman creates a crucial philosophical issue within Advaita Vedānta thought: how can avidyā appear in Brahman, since Brahman is pure consciousness? For Shankara, avidya is a perceptual or psychological error. According to Satchidanandendra Saraswati, for Shankara " avidya is only a technical name to denote the natural tendency of the human mind that is engaged in the act of superimposition." The later tradition diverged from Shankara by turning avidya into a metaphysical principle, namely mulavidya or "root ignorance", a metaphysical substance which is the "primal material cause of the universe ( upadana )", thereby setting aside Shankara's 'Unevolved Name-and-Form' as the explanation for the existence of materiality. According to Mayeda, "n order to save monism, they characterized avidya as indefinable as real or unreal ( sadasadbhyam anirvacanya ), belonging neither to the category of being nor to that of non-being." In the 20th century, this theory of mulavidya became a point of strong contention among Advaita Vedantins, with Satchidanandendra Saraswati arguing that Padmapada and Prakasatman had misconstrued Shanakara's stance. Shankara did not give a 'location' of avidya , giving precedence to the removal of ignorance. Sengaku Mayeda writes, in his commentary and translation of Adi Shankara 's Upadesasahasri: Certainly the most crucial problem which Sankara left for his followers is that of avidyā. If the concept is logically analysed, it would lead the Vedanta philosophy toward dualism or nihilism and uproot its fundamental position.

The later Advaita-tradition diverged from Shankara, trying to determinate a locus of avidya , with the Bhamati-school locating avidya in the jiva c.q. prakriti , while the Vivarana-school locates it in Brahman. Māyā (appearance) In Advaita Vedanta, the perceived empirical world, "including people and other existence", is Māyā, "appearance". Jiva, conditioned by the human mind, is subjected to experiences of a subjective nature, and misunderstands and interprets the physical, changing world as the sole and final reality. Due to avidya , we take the phenomenal world to be the final reality, while in Reality only Sat ( True Reality, Brahman) is Real and unchanging.

While Shankara took a realistic stance, and his explanations are "remote from any connotation of illusion", the 13th-century scholar Prakasatman , founder of the influential Vivarana school, introduced the notion that the world is illusory. According to Hacker, maya is not a prominent theme for Shankara, in contrast to the later Advaita tradition, and "the word maya has for hardly any terminological weight." Five koshas (sheaths) Due to avidya, atman is covered by koshas (sheaths or bodies), which hide man's true nature. According to the Taittiriya Upanishad , the Atman is covered by five koshas, usually rendered "sheath". They are often visualized like the layers of an onion.

The myriad of beings are unreal manifestation, as the only real being is Brahman, that ultimate reality which is unborn, unchanging, and entirely without parts. 20th verse of Brahmajnanavalimala , attributed to Shankara: ब्रह्म सत्यं जगन्मिथ्या जीवो ब्रह्मैव नापरः Brahman is real, the world is an illusion Brahman and Jiva are not different. Brahmajnanavalimala 1.20 The Brahma Sutras , the ancient Vedantins, most sub-schools of Vedānta, as well as Samkhya argue for parinamavada .

The "most visible advocates of Vivartavada", states Nicholson, are the Advaitins, the followers of Shankara. "Although the world can be described as conventionally real", adds Nicholson, "the Advaitins claim that all of Brahman's effects must ultimately be acknowledged as unreal before the individual self can be liberated". Yet, Adi Shankara himself most likely explained causality through parinamavada .

In Shankara's works " Brahman constitutes the basic essence ( svabhava ) of the universe (BS Bh 3.2.21) and as such the universe cannot be thought of as distinct from it (BS Bh 2.1.14)." In Shankara's view, then, "The world is real, but only in so far as its existence is seen as totally dependent upon Brahman ." Shankara introduced the concept of "Unevolved Name-and-Form", or primal matter corresponding to Prakriti , from which the world evolves, but this concept was not adopted by the later Advaita tradition. Vivartavada became the dominant explanation, with which the primacy of Atman/Brahman can be maintained. Scholars such as Hajime Nakamura and Paul Hacker already noted that Adi Shankara did not advocate Vivartavada , and his explanations are "remote from any connotation of illusion". Manisha Panchakam , attributed to Adi Shankara: 2. I am Brahman (pure consciousness). It is pure consciousness that appears as this universe. It was the 13th-century scholar Prakasatman, who founded the influential Vivarana school, who gave a definition to vivarta , introducing the notion that the world is illusory. It is Prakasatman's theory that is sometimes misunderstood as Adi Shankara's position. Andrew Nicholson concurs with Hacker and other scholars, adding that the vivarta-vada is not Shankara's theory, that Shankara's ideas appear closer to parinama-vada , and the vivarta explanation likely emerged gradually in Advaita subschool later. Ethics Some claim, states Deutsch, "that Advaita turns its back on all theoretical and practical considerations of morality and, if not unethical, is at least 'a-ethical' in character". However, Deutsch adds, ethics does have a firm place in this philosophy. Its ideology is permeated with ethics and value questions enter into every metaphysical and epistemological analysis, and it considers "an independent, separate treatment of ethics are unnecessary". According to Advaita Vedānta, states Deutsch, there cannot be "any absolute moral laws, principles or duties", instead in its axiological view Atman is "beyond good and evil", and all values result from self-knowledge of the reality of "distinctionless Oneness" of one's real self, every other being and all manifestations of Brahman. Advaitin ethics includes lack of craving, lack of dual distinctions between one's own Self and another being's, good and just Karma .

The values and ethics in Advaita Vedānta emanate from what it views as inherent in the state of liberating self-knowledge. This state, according to Rambachan, includes and leads to the understanding that "the self is the self of all, the knower of self sees the self in all beings and all beings in the self." Such knowledge and understanding of the indivisibility of one's and other's Atman, Advaitins believe leads to "a deeper identity and affinity with all". It does not alienate or separate an Advaitin from his or her community, rather awakens "the truth of life's unity and interrelatedness". These ideas are exemplified in the Isha Upanishad – a sruti for Advaita, as follows: One who sees all beings in the self alone, and the self of all beings, feels no hatred by virtue of that understanding. For the seer of oneness, who knows all beings to be the self, where is delusion and sorrow? — Isha Upanishad 6–7 , Translated by A Rambachan Adi Shankara, in verse 1.25 to 1.26 of his Upadeśasāhasrī , asserts that the Self-knowledge is understood and realized when one's mind is purified by the observation of Yamas (ethical precepts) such as Ahimsa (non-violence, abstinence from injuring others in body, mind and thoughts), Satya (truth, abstinence from falsehood), Asteya (abstinence from theft), Aparigraha (abstinence from possessiveness and craving) and a simple life of meditation and reflection. Rituals and rites can help focus and prepare the mind for the journey to Self-knowledge, but can be abandoned when moving on to "hearing, reflection, and meditation on the Upanishads". Elsewhere, in verses 1.26–1.28, the Advaita text Upadesasahasri states the ethical premise of equality of all beings. Any Bheda (discrimination), states Shankara, based on class or caste or parentage is a mark of inner error and lack of liberating knowledge. This text states that the fully liberated person understands and practices the ethics of non-difference. One, who is eager to realize this highest truth spoken of in the Sruti, should rise above the fivefold form of desire: for a son, for wealth, for this world and the next, and are the outcome of a false reference to the Self of Varna (castes, colors, classes) and orders of life. These references are contradictory to right knowledge, and reasons are given by the Srutis regarding the prohibition of the acceptance of difference. For when the knowledge that the one non-dual Atman (Self) is beyond phenomenal existence is generated by the scriptures and reasoning, there cannot exist a knowledge side by side that is contradictory or contrary to it. — Adi Shankara, Upadesha Sahasri 1.44, Texts The Upanishads , the Bhagavad Gitā and Brahma Sutras are the central texts of the Advaita Vedānta tradition, lending authority to the doctrines about the identity of Atman and Brahman and their changeless nature. Adi Shankara gave a nondualist interpretation of these texts in his commentaries. Adi Shankara 's Bhashya (commentaries) have become central texts in the Advaita Vedānta philosophy, but are one among many ancient and medieval manuscripts available or accepted in this tradition.

The subsequent Advaita tradition has further elaborated on these sruti and commentaries. Adi Shankara is also credited for the famous text Nirvana Shatakam . Prasthanatrayi The Vedānta tradition provides exegeses of the Upanishads , the Brahma Sutras , and the Bhagavadgita , collectively called the Prasthanatrayi , literally, three sources .

The Upanishads , or Śruti prasthāna ; considered the Śruti (Vedic scriptures) foundation of Vedānta . Most scholars, states Eliot Deutsch , are convinced that the Śruti in general, and the Upanishads in particular, express "a very rich diversity" of ideas, with the early Upanishads such as Brihadaranyaka Upanishad and Chandogya Upanishad being more readily amenable to Advaita Vedānta school's interpretation than the middle or later Upanishads .

In addition to the oldest Upanishads , states Williams, the Sannyasa Upanishads group composed in pre- Shankara times "express a decidedly Advaita outlook".

The Brahma Sutras , or Nyaya prasthana / Yukti prasthana ; considered the reason-based foundation of Vedānta .

The Brahma Sutras attempted to synthesize the teachings of the Upanishads .

The diversity in the teachings of the Upanishads necessitated the systematization of these teachings.

The only extant version of this synthesis is the Brahma Sutras of Badarayana . Like the Upanishads , Brahma Sutras is also an aphoristic text, and can be interpreted as a non-theistic Advaita Vedānta text or as a theistic Dvaita Vedānta text. This has led, states Stephen Phillips, to its varying interpretations by scholars of various sub-schools of Vedānta .

The Brahmasutra is considered by the Advaita school as the Nyaya Prasthana (canonical base for reasoning).

The Bhagavad Gitā , or Smriti prasthāna ; considered the Smriti (remembered tradition) foundation of Vedānta . It has been widely studied by Advaita scholars, including a commentary by Adi Shankara . Textual authority The Advaita Vedānta tradition considers the knowledge claims in the Vedas to be the crucial part of the Vedas, not its karma-kanda (ritual injunctions).

The knowledge claims about self being identical to the nature of Atman/Brahman are found in the Upanishads , which Advaita Vedānta has regarded as "errorless revealed truth". Nevertheless, states Koller, Advaita Vedantins did not entirely rely on revelation, but critically examined their teachings using reason and experience, and this led them to investigate and critique competing theories. Advaita Vedānta, like all orthodox schools of Hindu philosophy, accepts as an epistemic premise that Śruti (Vedic literature) is a reliable source of knowledge.

The Śruti includes the four Vedas including its four layers of embedded texts – the Samhitas, the Brahmanas, the Aranyakas and the early Upanishads. Of these, the Upanishads are the most referred to texts in the Advaita school.

The possibility of different interpretations of the Vedic literature, states Arvind Sharma, was recognized by ancient Indian scholars.

The Brahmasutra (also called Vedānta Sutra, composed in 1st millennium BCE) accepted this in verse 1.1.4 and asserts the need for the Upanishadic teachings to be understood not in piecemeal cherrypicked basis, rather in a unified way wherein the ideas in the Vedic texts are harmonized with other means of knowledge such as perception, inference and remaining pramanas . This theme has been central to the Advaita school, making the Brahmasutra as a common reference and a consolidated textual authority for Advaita.

After 1386, the timespans become much shorter. According to Hacker, these mathas may have originated as late as the 14th century, to propagate Shankara's view of Advaita. According to another tradition in Kerala, after Sankara's samadhi at Vadakkunnathan Temple, his disciples founded four mathas in Thrissur, namely Naduvil Madhom , Thekke Madhom, Idayil Madhom and Vadakke Madhom. Monks of these ten orders differ in part in their beliefs and practices, and a section of them is not considered to be restricted to specific changes attributed to Shankara.

While the dasanāmis associated with the Sankara maths follow the procedures attributed to Adi Śankara, some of these orders remained partly or fully independent in their belief and practices; and outside the official control of the Sankara maths.

The advaita sampradaya is not a Saiva sect, despite the historical links with Shaivism. Nevertheless, contemporary Sankaracaryas have more influence among Saiva communities than among Vaisnava communities. Smarta Tradition Main article: Smarta Tradition The Smarta tradition of Hinduism is a synthesis of various strands of Indian religious thought and practice, which developed with the Hindu synthesis , dating back to the early first century CE. It is particularly found in south and west India, and reveres all Hindu divinities as a step in their spiritual pursuit. Their worship practice is called Panchayatana puja .

The worship symbolically consists of five deities: Shiva , Vishnu , Devi or Durga , Surya and an Ishta Devata or any personal god of devotee's preference.

In the Smarta tradition, Advaita Vedānta ideas combined with bhakti are its foundation. Adi Shankara is regarded as the greatest teacher and reformer of the Smarta. According to Alf Hiltebeitel , Shankara's Advaita Vedānta and practices became the doctrinal unifier of previously conflicting practices with the smarta tradition. Philosophically, the Smarta tradition emphasizes that all images and statues ( murti ), or just five marks or any anicons on the ground, are visibly convenient icons of spirituality saguna Brahman .

The multiple icons are seen as multiple representations of the same idea, rather than as distinct beings. These serve as a step and means to realizing the abstract Ultimate Reality called nirguna Brahman.

The ultimate goal in this practice is to transition past the use of icons, then follow a philosophical and meditative path to understanding the oneness of Atman (Self) and Brahman – as "That art Thou". Buddhist influences on Advaita Vedānta Main article: Buddhist philosophy Further information: Buddhist influences on Advaita Vedanta Similarities with Buddhism Advaita Vedānta and other schools of Hindu philosophy share numerous terminology, doctrines, and dialectical techniques with Buddhism . According to a 1918 paper by the Buddhist scholar O. Rozenberg, "a precise differentiation between Brahmanism and Buddhism is impossible to draw." T. R. V. Murti notices that "the ultimate goal" of Vedānta , Sāṃkhya , and Mahāyāna Buddhism is "remarkably similar"; while Advaita Vedānta postulates a "foundational self", according to Murti "Mahāyāna Buddhism implicitly affirms the existence of a deep underlying reality behind all empirical manifestations in its conception of śūnyatā (the indeterminate, the void), or vijñapti-mātra (consciousness only), or tathātā (thatness), or dhārmata (noumenal reality)." According to Frank Whaling, the similarities between Advaita Vedānta and Buddhism are not limited to the terminology and some doctrines, but also includes practice.

The monastic practices and monk tradition in Advaita Vedānta are similar to those found in Buddhism. Mahāyāna philosophy The influence of Mahāyāna Buddhism on Advaita Vedānta has been significant. Sharma points out that the early commentators on the Brahma Sūtras were all realists , or pantheist realists. He states that they were influenced by Buddhism, particularly during the 5th–6th centuries CE with the development of the Yogācāra school of Buddhist philosophy . Von Glasenapp states that there was a mutual influence between Vedānta and Buddhism. S. N. Dasgupta and Mohanta suggest that Buddhism and Advaita Vedānta represent "different phases of development of the same non-dualistic metaphysics from the Upanishadic period to the time of Śaṅkara ." The influence of Buddhist doctrines on Gauḍapāda has been a vexed question. Modern scholarship generally accepts that Gauḍapāda was influenced by Buddhism, at least in terms of using Buddhist terminology to explain his ideas, but adds that Gauḍapāda was a Vedantin and not a Buddhist. Ādi Śaṅkara , states Natalia Isaeva, incorporated "into his own system a Buddhist notion of māyā which had not been minutely elaborated in the Upanishads". According to Mudgal, Śaṅkara's Advaita view and Nāgārjuna 's Mādhyamaka view of ultimate reality are compatible because they are both transcendental, indescribable, non-dual and only arrived at through a via negativa or neti neti . Mudgal concludes therefore that "the difference between Śūnyavāda philosophy of Buddhism and Advaita philosophy of Hinduism may be a matter of emphasis, not of kind". Similarly, there are many points of contact between the Buddhist Yogācāra school and Śaṅkara's Advaita tradition. According to S. N. Dasgupta, Śaṅkara and his followers borrowed much of their dialectic form of criticism from the Buddhists. His Brahman was very much like the śūnya of Nāgārjuna The debts of Śaṅkara to the self-luminosity of the Vijñānavāda Buddhism can hardly be overestimated. There seems to be much truth in the accusations against Śaṅkara by Vijñāna Bhikṣu and others that he was a hidden Buddhist himself. I am led to think that Śaṅkara's philosophy is largely a compound of Vijñānavāda and Śūnyavāda Buddhism with the Upanishadic notion of the permanence of self superadded. Differences from Buddhism The Advaita Vedānta tradition has historically rejected accusations of crypto-Buddhism highlighting their respective views on Ātman , Anattā , and Brahman . Yet, some early Buddhist texts (1st millennium CE), such as the Mahāyāna Buddhist scriptures Tathāgatagarbha Sūtras suggest "self-like" concepts , variously called Tathāgatagarbha or " Buddha nature ".

In modern era studies, scholars such as Wayman state that these "self-like" concepts are neither self nor sentient being, nor individual soul, nor personality. Some scholars posit that the Tathāgatagarbha Sūtras were written to promote Buddhism to non-Buddhists .

The epistemological foundations of Buddhism and Advaita Vedānta are different. Buddhism accepts two valid means to reliable and correct knowledge—perception and inference, while Advaita Vedānta accepts six (described elsewhere in this article). However, some Buddhists in history, have argued that Buddhist scriptures are a reliable source of spiritual knowledge, corresponding to Advaita's Śabda pramana, however Buddhists have treated their scriptures as a form of inference method. Advaita Vedānta posits a substance ontology , an ontology which holds that underlying the change and impermanence of empirical reality is an unchanging and permanent absolute reality, like an eternal substance it calls Ātman/Brahman .

In its substance ontology, as like other philosophies, there exist a universal, particulars, and specific properties, and it is the interaction of particulars that create events and processes.

In contrast, Buddhism posits a process ontology , also called as "event ontology". According to Buddhist philosophy , particularly after the rise of ancient Mahāyāna Buddhist scholarship , the concept of impermanence ( anicca ) is understood as one of the three marks of existence ( trilakṣaṇa ): there is neither empirical nor absolute permanent reality, because all phenomena are characterized by their lack of a solid and independent existence ( svabhāva ), and ontology can be explained as a process.

In Buddhist ontology, there is a system of dependent origination and interdependent phenomena ( pratītya-samutpāda ) but no stable persistent identities, neither eternal universals nor particulars.

In Buddhism, thoughts and memories are mental constructions and fluid processes ( skandhā ) without a real observer, personal agent, or cognizer ( anattā ).

By contrast, in Advaita Vedānta and the other orthodox schools of Hinduism , the eternal, unchanging ultimate self ( ātman ) identical with Brahman is understood as the real observer, personal agent, and cognizer. However, the historical Buddha considered this Brahmanical belief to be one of the six wrong views about the self; in fact, Buddha held that attachment to the appearance of a permanent self in this world of change is the cause of suffering ( duḥkha ), and the main obstacle to the attainment of spiritual liberation ( mokṣa ). Criticisms of concurring Hindu schools Some Hindu scholars have criticized Advaita Vedānta for its notion of māyā and non-theistic doctrinal similarities with Buddhism , sometimes referring to the Advaita tradition as Māyāvāda . Bhāskara , a Hindu philosopher of the Bhedabheda Vedānta school (9th century CE), accused Śaṅkara's Advaita tradition as "this despicable broken down Māyāvāda that has been chanted by the Mahāyāna Buddhists ", characterizing it as a school that is undermining the ritual duties set in Vedic orthodoxy . Rāmāṉuja , a Hindu saint and founder of the Vishishtadvaita Vedānta school (12th century CE), similarly accused Ādi Śaṅkara of being a Prachanna Bauddha , that is, a "crypto-Buddhist", and someone who was undermining the theistic Bhakti -oriented devotionalism. Relationship with other traditions The Advaita Vedānta ideas, particularly of 8th century Adi Shankara, were challenged by theistic Vedānta philosophies that emerged centuries later, such as the 11th-century Vishishtadvaita (qualified nondualism ) of Ramanuja , and the 14th-century Dvaita (theistic dualism) of Madhvacharya . Their application of Vedanta philosophy to ground their faith turned Vedanta into a major factor in India's religious landscape. Vishishtadvaita Main article: Vishishtadvaita Ramanuja's Vishishtadvaita school and Shankara 's Advaita school are both nondualism Vedānta schools, both are premised on the assumption that all Selfs can hope for and achieve the state of blissful liberation; in contrast, Madhvacharya and his Dvaita subschool of Vedānta believed that some Selfs are eternally doomed and damned. Shankara's theory posits that only Brahman and causes are metaphysical unchanging reality, while the empirical world ( Maya ) and observed effects are changing, illusive and of relative existence. Spiritual liberation to Shankara is the full comprehension and realization of oneness of one's unchanging Atman (Self) as the same as Atman in everyone else as well as being identical to the nirguna Brahman.

In contrast, Ramanuja's theory posits both Brahman and the world of matter are two different absolutes, both metaphysically real, neither should be called false or illusive, and saguna Brahman with attributes is also real. God, like man, states Ramanuja, has both soul and body, and all of the world of matter is the glory of God's body.

The path to Brahman (Vishnu), asserted Ramanuja, is devotion to godliness and constant remembrance of the beauty and love of personal god ( saguna Brahman, Vishnu), one which ultimately leads one to the oneness with nirguna Brahman. Shuddhadvaita Main article: Shuddhadvaita Vallabhacharya (1479–1531 CE), the proponent of the philosophy of Shuddhadvaita Brahmvad enunciates that Ishvara has created the world without connection with any external agency such as Maya (which itself is his power) and manifests Himself through the world. That is why shuddhadvaita is known as 'Unmodified transformation' or 'Avikṛta Pariṇāmavāda'. Brahman or Ishvara desired to become many, and he became the multitude of individual Selfs and the world. Vallabha recognises Brahman as the whole and the individual as a 'part' (but devoid of bliss). Dvaita Main article: Dvaita Madhvacharya was also a critic of Advaita Vedānta. Advaita's nondualism asserted that Atman (Self) and Brahman are identical (both in bondage and liberation ), there is interconnected oneness of all Selfs and Brahman, and there are no pluralities. Madhva in contrast asserted that Atman (Self) and Brahman are different (both in bondage and liberation ), only Vishnu is the Lord (Brahman), individual Selfs are also different and depend on Vishnu, and there are pluralities. Madhvacharya stated that both Advaita Vedānta and Mahayana Buddhism were a nihilistic school of thought. Madhvacharya wrote four major texts, including Upadhikhandana and Tattvadyota , primarily dedicated to criticizing Advaita. Followers of ISKCON are highly critical of Advaita Vedānta, regarding it as māyāvāda , identical to Mahayana Buddhism. Influence on other traditions Within the ancient and medieval texts of Hindu traditions, such as Vaishnavism , Shaivism and Shaktism , the ideas of Advaita Vedānta have had a major influence. Advaita Vedānta influenced Krishna Vaishnavism in the different parts of India. One of its most popular text, the Bhagavata Purana , adopts and integrates in Advaita Vedānta philosophy.

The Bhagavata Purana is generally accepted by scholars to have been composed in the second half of 1st millennium CE.

In the ancient and medieval literature of Shaivism , called the Āgamas , the influence of Advaita Vedānta is once again prominent. Of the 92 Āgamas , ten are Dvaita texts, eighteen are Bhedabheda , and sixty-four are Advaita texts. According to Natalia Isaeva, there is an evident and natural link between 6th-century Gaudapada's Advaita Vedānta ideas and Kashmir Shaivism . Shaktism , the Hindu tradition where a goddess is considered identical to Brahman, has similarly flowered from a syncretism of the monist premises of Advaita Vedānta and dualism premises of Samkhya–Yoga school of Hindu philosophy, sometimes referred to as Shaktadavaitavada (literally, the path of nondualistic Shakti ). Other influential ancient and medieval classical texts of Hinduism such as the Yoga Yajnavalkya , Yoga Vashishta , Avadhuta Gitā , Markandeya Purana and Sannyasa Upanishads predominantly incorporate premises and ideas of Advaita Vedānta. History of Advaita Vedānta Gaudapada , one of the most important pre-Śaṅkara philosophers in Advaita tradition Main article: History of Advaita Vedanta Historiography The historiography of Advaita Vedanta is coloured by Orientalist notions, while modern formulations of Advaita Vedānta , which developed as a reaction to western Orientalism and Perennialism have "become a dominant force in Indian intellectual thought." According to Michael S. Allen and Anand Venkatkrishnan, "scholars have yet to provide even a rudimentary, let alone comprehensive account of the history of Advaita Vedānta in the centuries leading up to the colonial period." Early Vedānta The Upanishads form the basic texts, of which Vedānta gives an interpretation.

The Upanishads do not contain "a rigorous philosophical inquiry identifying the doctrines and formulating the supporting arguments". This philosophical inquiry was performed by the darsanas , the various philosophical schools.

The Brahma Sutras of Bādarāyana, also called the Vedānta Sutra , were compiled in its present form around 400–450 CE, but "the great part of the Sutra must have been in existence much earlier than that". Estimates of the date of Bādarāyana's lifetime differ between 200 BCE and 200 CE.

The Brahma Sutra is a critical study of the teachings of the Upanishads, possibly "written from a Bhedābheda Vedāntic viewpoint". Bādarāyana was not the first person to systematise the teachings of the Upanishads. He refers to seven Vedantic teachers before him. Early Advaita Vedānta Two Advaita writings predating Maṇḍana Miśra and Shankara were known to scholars such as Nakamura in the first half of 20th-century, namely the Vākyapadīya , written by Bhartṛhari (second half 5th century ), and the Māndūkya-kārikā written by Gauḍapāda (7th century).

Later scholarship added the Sannyasa Upanishads (first centuries CE ) to the earliest known corpus, some of which are of a sectarian nature, and have a strong Advaita Vedānta outlook. According to Nakamura, "there must have been an enormous number of other writings turned out in this period , but unfortunately all of them have been scattered or lost and have not come down to us today".

In his commentaries, Shankara mentions 99 different predecessors of his Sampradaya.

In the beginning of his commentary on the Brhadaranyaka Upanishad Shankara salutes the teachers of the Brahmavidya Sampradaya. Pre-Shankara doctrines and sayings can be traced in the works of the later schools, which does give insight into the development of early Vedānta philosophy. Gauḍapāda and Māṇḍukya Kārikā Main article: Gaudapada According to tradition, Gauḍapāda (6th century) was the teacher of Govinda Bhagavatpada and the grandteacher of Shankara. Gauḍapāda wrote or compiled the Māṇḍukya Kārikā , also known as the Gauḍapāda Kārikā or the Āgama Śāstra .

The Māṇḍukya Kārikā is a commentary in verse form on the Māṇḍūkya Upanishad , one of the shortest Upanishads consisting of just 13 prose sentences. Of the ancient literature related to Advaita Vedānta, the oldest surviving complete text is the Māṇḍukya Kārikā .

The Māṇḍūkya Upanishad was considered to be a Śruti before the era of Adi Shankara, but not treated as particularly important.

In later post-Shankara period its value became far more important, and regarded as expressing the essence of the Upanishad philosophy.

The entire Karika became a key text for the Advaita school in this later era. Gaudapada took over the Yogachara teaching of vijñapti-mātra , "representation-only", which states that the empirical reality that we experience is a fabrication of the mind, experienced by consciousness-an-sich, and the four-cornered negation, which negates any positive predicates of 'the Absolute'. Gaudapada "wove into the philosophy of Mandukaya Upanisad , which was further developed by Shankara".

In this view, the ultimate ontological reality is the pure consciousness, which is bereft of attributes and intentionality.

The world of duality is nothing but a vibration of the mind (manodṛśya or manaspandita).

The pluralistic world is imagined by the mind (saṁkalpa) and this false projection is sponsored by the illusory factor called māyā. Gauḍapāda uses the concepts of Ajātivāda to explain that 'the Absolute' is not subject to birth, change and death .

The Absolute is aja , the unborn eternal.

The authenticity of Shankara being the author of Vivekacūḍāmaṇi has been questioned, and "modern scholars tend to reject its authenticity as a work by Shankara." Influence of Shankara While Shankara has an unparalleled status in the history of Advaita Vedanta, scholars have questioned the traditional narrative of Shankara's early influence in India. Until the 10th century Shankara was overshadowed by his older contemporary Maṇḍana Miśra , who was considered to be the major representative of Advaita. Only when Vacaspati Misra, an influential student of Maṇḍana Miśra, harmonised the teachings of Shankara with those of Maṇḍana Miśra, Shankara's teachings gained prominence. Some modern Advaitins argue that most of post-Shankara Advaita Vedanta actually deviates from Shankara, and that only his student Suresvara, who's had little influence, represents Shankara correctly.

In this view, Shankara's influential student Padmapada misunderstood Shankara, while his views were maintained by the Suresvara school. According to Satchidanandendra Sarasvati , "almost all the later Advaitins were influenced by Mandana Misra and Bhaskara ." Until the 11th century, Vedanta itself was a peripheral school of thought; Vedanta became a major influence when Vedanta philosophy was utilized by various sects of Hinduism to ground their doctrines, such as Ramanuja (11th c.), who aligned bhakti , "the major force in the religions of Hinduism", with philosophical thought, meanwhile rejecting Shankara's views.

The cultural influence of Shankara and Advaita Vedanta started only centuries later, in the Vijayanagara Empire in the 14th century, when Sringeri matha started to receive patronage from the kings of the Vijayanagara Empire and became a powerful institution. Vidyaranya , also known as Madhava, who was the Jagadguru of the Śringeri Śarada Pītham from c. 1374–1380 to 1386 played a central role in this growing influence of Advaita Vedanta, and the deification of Shankara as a ruler - renunciate .

From 1346 onwards Sringeri matha received patronage from the Vijayanagara kings, and its importance and influence grew rapidly in the second half of the 14th century. Vidyaranya and the Sringeri matha competed for royal patronage and converts with Srivaisnava Visistadvaita , which was dominant in territories conquered by the Vijayanagara Empire, and Madhava (the pre-ordination name of Vidyaranya) presented Shankara's teachings as the summit of all darsanas , portraying the other darsanas as partial truths which converged in Shankara's teachings.

The subsequent Shankara Digvijayam genre, following the example of the earlier Madhva Digvijayam , presented Shankara as a ruler - renunciate , conquering the four quarters of India and bringing harmony.

The genre created legends to turn Shankara into a "divine folk-hero who spread his teaching through his digvijaya ("universal conquest") all over India like a victorious conqueror." Shankara's position was further established in the 19th and 20th century, when neo-Vedantins and western Orientalists, following Vidyaranya, elevated Advaita Vedanta "as the connecting theological thread that united Hinduism into a single religious tradition." Shankara became "an iconic representation of Hindu religion and culture", despite the fact that most Hindus do not adhere to Advaita Vedanta. Advaita Vedanta sub-schools Two defunct schools are the Pancapadika and Istasiddhi , which were replaced by Prakasatman's Vivarana school.

The still existing Bhāmatī and Vivarana developed in the 11th-14th century. These schools worked out the logical implications of various Advaita doctrines. Two of the problems they encountered were the further interpretations of the concepts of māyā and avidya . Padmapada (c. 800 CE), the founder of the defunct Pancapadika school, was a direct disciple of Shankara. He wrote the Pancapadika , a commentary on the Sankara-bhaya . Padmapada diverged from Shankara in his description of avidya , designating prakrti as avidya or ajnana . Sureśvara (fl. 800–900 CE) was a contemporary of Shankara, and often (incorrectly) identified with Maṇḍana Miśra. Sureśvara has also been credited as the founder of a pre-Shankara branch of Advaita Vedānta. Mandana Mishra's student Vachaspati Miśra (9th/10th century CE), who is believed to have been an incarnation of Shankara to popularize the Advaita view, wrote the Bhamati , a commentary on Shankara's Brahma Sutra Bhashya , and the Brahmatattva-samiksa , a commentary on Mandana Mishra's Brahma-siddhi . His thought was mainly inspired by Mandana Miśra, and harmonises Shankara's thought with that of Mandana Miśra.

The Bhamati school takes an ontological approach. It sees the Jiva as the source of avidya. It sees contemplation as the main factor in the acquirement of liberation, while the study of the Vedas and reflection are additional factors. Vimuktatman (c. 1200 CE) wrote the Ista-siddhi . It is one of the four traditional siddhi , together with Mandana's Brahma-siddhi , Suresvara's Naiskarmya-siddhi , and Madusudana's Advaita-siddhi . According to Vimuktatman, absolute Reality is "pure intuitive consciousness". His school of thought was eventually replaced by Prakasatman's Vivarana school. Prakasatman (c. 1200–1300) wrote the Pancapadika-Vivarana , a commentary on the Pancapadika by Padmapadacharya .

The Vivarana lends its name to the subsequent school. According to Roodurmun, "is line of thought became the leitmotif of all subsequent developments in the evolution of the Advaita tradition." The Vivarana school takes an epistemological approach. It is distinguished from the Bhamati school by its rejection of action and favouring Vedic study and "a direct apprehension of Brahma". Prakasatman was the first to propound the theory of mulavidya or maya as being of "positive beginningless nature", and sees Brahman as the source of avidya. Critics object that Brahman is pure consciousness, so it cannot be the source of avidya. Another problem is that contradictory qualities, namely knowledge and ignorance, are attributed to Brahman. Another late figure which is widely associated with Advaita and was influential on late Advaita thought was Śrīharṣa . Late medieval India – yogic Advaita Michael S. Allen and Anand Venkatkrishnan note that Shankara is very well-studied, but "scholars have yet to provide even a rudimentary, let alone comprehensive account of the history of Advaita Vedānta in the centuries leading up to the colonial period." While indologists like Paul Hacker and Wilhelm Halbfass took Shankara's system as the measure for an "orthodox" Advaita Vedānta, the living Advaita Vedānta tradition in medieval times was influenced by, and incorporated elements from, the yogic tradition and texts like the Yoga Vasistha and the Bhagavata Purana . Yoga and samkhya had become minor schools of thought since the time of Shankara, and no longer posed a thread for the sectarian identity of Advaita, in contrast to the Vaishnava traditions.

The Yoga Vasistha became an authoritative source text in the Advaita vedānta tradition in the 14th century, and the "yogic Advaita" of Vidyāraņya's Jivanmuktiviveka (14th century) was influenced by the (Laghu-)Yoga-Vasistha , which in turn was influenced by Kashmir Shaivism . Vivekananda's 19th century emphasis on nirvikalpa samadhi was preceded by medieval yogic influences on Advaita Vedānta.

In the 16th and 17th centuries, some Nath and hatha yoga texts also came within the scope of the developing Advaita Vedānta tradition. According to Andrew Nicholson , it was with the arrival of Islamic rule, first in the form of Delhi Sultanate and later the Mughal Empire , and the subsequent persecution of Indian religions, that Hindu scholars began a self-conscious attempts to define an identity and unity . Between the twelfth and the fourteenth century, this effort emerged with the "astika and nastika" schema of classifying Indian philosophy. Vidyāraṇya It is only during this period that the historical fame and cultural influence of Shankara and Advaita Vedanta was established. Advaita Vedanta's position as most influential Hindu darsana took shape as Advaitins in the Vijayanagara Empire competed for patronage from the royal court, and tried to convert others to their sect. Sringeri matha started to receive patronage from the kings of the Vijayanagara Empire who shifted their allegiance from Advaitic Agamic Shaivism to Brahmanical Advaita orthodoxy. Central in this repositioning was Vidyāraṇya , also known as Madhava, who was the Jagadguru of the Śringeri Śarada Pītham from 1380 to 1386 and a minister in the Vijayanagara Empire. He inspired the re-creation of the Hindu Vijayanagara Empire of South India, in response to the devastation caused by the Islamic Delhi Sultanate , but his efforts were also targeted at Srivaisnava groups, especially Visistadvaita , which was dominant in territories conquered by the Vijayanagara Empire. Sects competed for patronage from the royal court, and tried to convert others to their own sectarian system, and Vidyaranya efforts were aimed at promoting Advaita Vedanta. Most of Shankara's biographies were created and published from the 14th to the 17th century, such as the widely cited Śankara-vijaya , in which legends were created to turn Shankara into a "divine folk-hero who spread his teaching through his digvijaya ("universal conquest") all over India like a victorious conqueror." Vidyaranya and his brothers wrote extensive Advaitic commentaries on the Vedas and Dharma to make "the authoritative literature of the Aryan religion" more accessible.

In his doxography Sarvadarśanasaṅgraha ("Summary of all views") Vidyaranya presented Shankara's teachings as the summit of all darsanas , presenting the other darsanas as partial truths which converged in Shankara's teachings, which was regarded to be the most inclusive system.

The Vaishanava traditions of Dvaita and Visitadvaita were not classified as Vedanta, and placed just above Buddhism and Jainism, reflecting the threat they posed for Vidyaranya's Advaita allegiance. Bhedabheda was not mentioned at all, "literally written out of the history of Indian philosophy." Vidyaranya became head of Sringeri matha , proclaiming that it was established by Shankara himself. Vidyaranya enjoyed royal support, and his sponsorship and methodical efforts helped establish Shankara as a rallying symbol of values, spread historical and cultural influence of Shankara's Vedānta philosophies, and establish monasteries ( mathas ) to expand the cultural influence of Shankara and Advaita Vedānta. Modern Advaita Niścaldās and "Greater" Advaita Michael S. Allen has written on the influence and popularity of Advaita Vedanta in early modern north India, especially on the work of the Advaita Dādū-panthī monk Niścaldās (c. 1791–1863), author of The Ocean of Inquiry (Hindi: Vichāra-sāgara), a vernacular compendium of Advaita. According to Allen, the work of Niścaldās "was quite popular in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries: it was translated into over eight languages and was once referred to by Vivekananda as having 'more influence in India than any that has been written in any language within the last three centuries. ' " Allen highlights the widespread prominence in early modern India of what he calls "Greater Advaita Vedānta" which refers to popular Advaita works, including "narratives and dramas, 'eclectic' works blending Vedānta with other traditions, and vernacular works such as The Ocean of Inquiry ." Allen refers to several popular late figures and texts which draw on Advaita Vedanta, such as the Maharashtrian sant Eknāth (16th c.), the popular Adhyātma-rāmāyaṇa (c. late 15th c.), which synthesizes Rama bhakti and advaita metaphysics and the Tripurā-rahasya (a tantric text that adopts an advaita metaphysics). Other important vernacular Advaita figures include the Hindu authors Manohardās and Māṇakdās (who wrote the Ātma-bodh). Advaita literature was also written in Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam, Kannada, Marathi, Gujarati, Hindi, Punjabi, Bengali, and Oriya. Neo-Vedanta Mahatma Gandhi stated "I am an advaitist". Main articles: Neo-Vedanta and Hindu nationalism According to King, with the consolidation of the British imperialist rule the new rulers started to view Indians through the "colonially crafted lenses" of Orientalism .

The jiva is Brahman itself and not different." Translation by S. N. Sastri Sivananda 1993 , p. 219: "Brahman (the Absolute) is alone real; this world is unreal; and the Jiva or individual soul is non-different from Brahman." Menon 2012 : "The experiencing self (jīva) and the transcendental self of the Universe (ātman) are in reality identical (both are Brahman), though the individual self seems different as space within a container seems different from space as such. These cardinal doctrines are represented in the anonymous verse "brahma satyam jagan mithya; jīvo brahmaiva na aparah" (Brahman is alone True, and this world of plurality is an error; the individual self is not different from Brahman)." Deutsch 1973 , p. 54: " essential status is that of unqualified reality, of identity with the Absolute the self ( jiva ) is only misperceived: the self is really Brahman." Koller 2013 , pp. 100–101: "Atman, which is identical to Brahman, is ultimately the only reality and the appearance of plurality is entirely the work of ignorance the self is ultimately of the nature of Atman/Brahman Brahman alone is ultimately real." Bowker 2000a , "Advaita Vedanta": "There is only Brahman, which is necessarily undifferentiated. It follows that there cannot even be a difference, or duality, between the human subject, or self, and Brahman, for Brahman must be that very self (since Brahman is the reality underlying all appearance).

The goal of human life and wisdom must, therefore, be the realization that the self (ātman) is Brahman." Hacker (1995 , p. 88) notes that Shankara uses two groups of words to denote 'atman': "One group - principally jiva , vijnanatman , and sarira - expresses the illusory aspect of the soul But in addition there are the two expressions atman and pratyagatman . These also designate the individual soul, but in its real aspect." Mayeda (1992 , pp. 11, 14) uses the word pratyagatman ; Sivananda1993 , p. 219), Deutsch (1973 , p. 54), and Menon (2012) use the term jiva when referring to the identity of atman and Brahman . ^ a b Form of monism: Malkovsky 2000 , p. 71: "The interpretation of advaita that is the most common equates non-duality with monism and acosmic illusionism. Only the Absolute, or the paraa brahma, is said to exist; everything else is but an illusory appearance." Menon 2012 : "The essential philosophy of Advaita is an idealist monism, and is considered to be presented first in the Upaniṣads and consolidated in the Brahma Sūtra by this tradition." King 1995 , p. 65: "The prevailing monism of the Upanishads was developed by the Advaita Vedanta to its ultimate extreme." Mohanty 1980 , p. 205: "Nyaya-Vaiseshika is realistic; Advaita Vedanta is idealistic.

The Sruti , it believes is a collection of experience and meditative insights about liberating knowledge, ^ Sharma 1993 , pp. 72–83: "According to Advaita, the pure subject is our true self whose knowledge is liberative, (...) If the subject could be realised in its purity then all misery would cease: this is called self-knowledge" ^ Timalsina 2008 , p. xvii: "Advaita can be approached from various angles. Not only are there multiple interpretations of Advaita, there are different starting points from which one can arrive at the conclusion of non-duality". ^ Atman , Oxford Dictionaries, Oxford University Press (2012), Quote : "1. real self of the individual; 2. a person's soul" ^ a b Payne 2005 , pp. 199–200 with p. 215 notes 5, 6: "A fourth metaphor is the monistic equation of the true or absolute self (atman) with absolute being (Brahman).

In general, then, the conception of the self that emerges is one in which the self is in some way permanent, eternal, absolute or unchanging. It is also simultaneously universal and individual.

The view is that there is an essence and that it can be known." ^ Soul: Atman , Oxford Dictionaries, Oxford University Press (2012), Quote : "1. real self of the individual; 2. a person's soul" David Lorenzen (2004), The Hindu World (Editors: Sushil Mittal and Gene Thursby), Routledge, The Oxford Handbook of Religious Diversity, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0195340136 , p. 63; Quote : "Even though Buddhism explicitly rejected the Hindu ideas of Atman (soul) and Brahman, Hinduism treats Sakyamuni Buddha as one of the ten avatars of Vishnu." ^ Olivelle (1998 , p. 77); Sanskrit ( Wikisource ): प्राणोऽपानो व्यान इत्यष्टावक्षराणि अष्टाक्षर ह वा एकं गायत्र्यै पदम् एतदु हैवास्या एतत् स यावदिदं प्राणि तावद्ध जयति योऽस्या एतदेवं पदं वेद अथास्या एतदेव तुरीयं दर्शतं पदं परोरजा य एष तपति यद्वै चतुर्थं तत्तुरीयम् दर्शतं पदमिति ददृश इव ह्येष परोरजा इति सर्वमु ह्येवैष रज उपर्युपरि तपत्य् एव हैव श्रिया यशसा तपति योऽस्या एतदेवं पदं वेद ॥ ३ ॥ ^ Compare Fasching 2021 : For Advaita Vedānta, consciousness is to be distinguished from all contents of consciousness that might be introspectively detectable: It is precisely consciousness of whatever contents it is conscious of and not itself one of these contents. Its only nature is, Advaita holds, prakāśa (manifestation); in itself it is devoid of any content or structure and can never become an object. ^ Brahman is also defined as: The unchanging, infinite , immanent , and transcendent reality which is all matter , energy , time , space , being , and everything beyond in this Universe ; that is the one supreme, universal spirit without a second.( Brodd (2003) ; Vachatimanont (2005 , pp. 47–48)) Bowker 2003 , "Brahman": "(Skt., literally, 'growth' or 'expansion').

The one supreme, all pervading Spirit that is the origin and support of the phenomenal universe." Puligandla 1997 , p. 222 The supreme self. Puligandla states it as "the unchanging reality amidst and beyond the world." The Self-existent, the Absolute and the Imperishable. Brahman is indescribable. Fowler 2005 , p. 30: " Upanisadic thought is anything but consistent; nevertheless, there is a common focus on the acceptance of a totally transcendent Absolute, a trend which arose in the Vedic period. This indescribable Absolute is called Brahman ." ^ It provides the "stuff" from which everything is made ^ It sets everything into working, into existence ^ Gambhirananda: "That (is Brahman) from which (are derived) the birth etc. of this (universe)." ^ Svarupalakshana , qualities, definition based on essence ^ The Advaitin scholar Madhusudana Sarasvati explained Brahman as the Reality that is simultaneously an absence of falsity (sat), absence of ignorance (cit), and absence of sorrow/self-limitation (ananda). ^ Compare Parable of the Poisoned Arrow ^ These concepts are discussed in ancient and medieval texts of Hinduism , and other Indian religions, using synonymous terms. Cause is referred to as kāraṇa (कारण), nidana (निदान), hetu (हेतु) or mulam (मूलम्), while effect is referred to as kārya (कार्य), phala (फल), parinam (परिणाम) or Shungam (शुङ्ग). ^ Advaita furthermore states that effect ( kārya ) is non-different from cause ( kāraṇa ), but the cause is different from the effect. This principle is called kārya-kāraṇa ananyatva .

When the cause is destroyed, the effect will no longer exist. For example, cotton cloth is the effect of the cotton threads, which is the material cause. Without threads there will be no cotton cloth. Without cotton there will be no thread. According to Swami Sivananda, in his comments on the Brahmasūtra-Bhāṣya 2.1.9, Adi Shankara describes this as follows: ananyatve'pi kāryakāraṇayoḥ kāryasya kāraṇātmatvaṃ na tu kāraṇasya kāryātmatvaṃ Despite the non-difference of cause and effect, the effect has its self in the cause but not the cause in the effect.

The effect is of the nature of the cause and not the cause the nature of the effect. Therefore the qualities of the effect cannot touch the cause. ^ According to Eliot Deutsch, Advaita Vedānta states that from "the standpoint of Brahman-experience and Brahman itself, there is no creation " in the absolute sense, all empirically observed creation is relative and mere transformation of one state into another, all states are provisional and a cause-effect driven modification. ^ According to Hugh Nicholson, "the definitive study on the development of the concept of vivarta in Indian philosophy, and in Advaita Vedanta in particular, remains Hacker's Vivarta . According to Hacker, "the word maya has for hardly any terminological weight." ^ Compare the misunderstanding of Yogacharas concept of vijñapti-mātra , 'representation-only', as 'consciousness-only'. ^ Śaṅkarācārya 1949 , p. 32; Sanskrit : तच् चैतत् परमार्थदर्शनं प्रतिपत्तुमिच्छता वर्णाश्रमाद्यभिमान-कृतपाञ्क्तरूपपुत्रवित्तलोकैषणादिभ्यो व्युत्थानं कर्तव्यम् । सम्यक्प्रत्ययविरोधात् तदभिमानस्य भेददर्शनप्रतिषेधार्थोपपत्तिश्चोपपद्यते । न ह्येकस्मिन्नात्मन्यसंसारित्वबुद्धौ शास्त्रन्यायोत्पादितायां तद्विपरीता बुद्धिर्भवति । न ह्य् अग्नौ शितत्वबुद्धिः, शरीरे वाजरामरणबुद्धिः । तस्मादविद्याकार्यत्वात् सर्वकर्मणां तत्साधनानां च यज्ञोपवीतादीनां परमार्थदर्शनिष्टेन त्यागः कर्तव्यः ॥ ४४॥ ^ Many in number, the Upanishads developed in different schools at various times and places, some in the Vedic period and others in the medieval or modern era (the names of up to 112 Upanishads have been recorded). All major commentators have considered the twelve to thirteen oldest of these texts as the principal Upanishads and as the foundation of Vedanta. ^ The Śruti includes the four Vedas including its four layers of embedded texts – the Samhitas , the Brahmanas , the Aranyakas , and the early Upanishads . ^ Sanskrit : श्री संस्थान गौडपदाचार्य मठ , Śrī Sansthāna Gauḍapadācārya Maṭha ^ Nakamura also recognized the influence of these mathas, which he argues contributed to the influence of Shankara, which was "due to institutional factors".

The mathas which he established remain active today, and preserve the teachings and influence of Shankara, "while the writings of other scholars before him came to be forgotten with the passage of time". ^ According to Pandey, these Mathas were not established by Shankara himself, but were originally ashrams established by Vibhāņdaka and his son Ŗșyaśŗnga . Shankara inherited the ashrams at Dvārakā and Sringeri, and shifted the ashram at Śŗngaverapura to Badarikāśrama, and the ashram at Angadeśa to Jagannātha Purī. ^ Sanskrit.org: "Advaitins are non-sectarian, and they advocate worship of Siva and Visnu equally with that of the other deities of Hinduism, like Sakti, Ganapati and others." ^ Archeological evidence suggest that the Smarta tradition in India dates back to at least 3rd-century CE. ^ Practically, Shankara fostered a rapprochement between Advaita and smarta orthodoxy, which by his time had not only continued to defend the varnasramadharma theory as defining the path of karman , but had developed the practice of pancayatanapuja ("five-shrine worship") as a solution to varied and conflicting devotional practices. Thus one could worship any one of five deities (Vishnu, Siva, Durga, Surya, Ganesa) as one's istadevata ("deity of choice"). ^ Helmuth von Glasenapp (1995), Vedanta & Buddhism: A comparative study, Buddhist Publication Society, pages 2-3, Quote: " Vedānta and Buddhism have lived side by side for such a long time that obviously they must have influenced each other.

In this view, "the genuine achievements of Indian civilization" were recovered during the British colonial rule of India, due to the efforts of western Indologists, who viewed Advaita Vedanta as the authentic philosophy of the Upanishads, and Shankara as its greatest exponent.

While this view has been criticised by postcolonial studies and critiques of Orientalism, "in some corners of the academy, the Orientalists' understanding of premodern Indian history has so far escaped thorough reexamination." ^ Nevertheless, Balasubramanian argues that since the basic ideas of the Vedanta systems are derived from the Vedas, the Vedantic philosophy is as old as the Vedas. ^ Deutsch and Dalvi point out that, in the Indian context, texts "are only part of a tradition which is preserved in its purest form in the oral transmission as it has been going on." ^ Nakamura notes that there are contradictions in doctrine between the four chapters. ^ It is often used interchangeably with the term citta-mātra , but they have different meanings.

The standard translation of both terms is "consciousness-only" or "mind-only." Several modern researchers object this translation, and the accompanying label of "absolute idealism" or "idealistic monism". A better translation for vijñapti-mātra is representation-only . ^ 1. Something is. 2. It is not. 3. It both is and is not. 4. It neither is nor is not.

The four Vedas began as collections (Samhitas)...

In time, other types of scriptures were added... Brahmanas were added first, then Aranyakas, and finally Upanishads. ^ Sadananda, Yogindra (2008). Vedantasara . Nagpur: Rāmakṛṣṇa Maṭha. p. 1. वेदान्तो नाम उपनिषत्प्रमाणम्। (Vedānto nāma upaniṣat-pramāṇam.) ^ Timalsina 2017 . ^ a b King 1995 , p. 268 with note 2. ^ Hacker 1995 , p. 78. ^ Lorenzen 2015 . ^ Baird 1986 . ^ Goswami Abhay Charan Bhaktivedanta 1956 . ^ Sydnor 2023 , p. 4. ^ Scharfstein 1998 , p. 9–11. ^ Olivelle 1998 , p. xxxvi with footnote 20. ^ Staal 2008 , p. 365 note 159. ^ Phillips 2009 , p. 295 note 24. ^ a b c d Madaio 2017 , p. 5. ^ King 1995 , p. 9. ^ a b Sharma 1993 , p. xiv. ^ Madaio 2017 , pp. 2, note 6. ^ a b Milne 1997 , p. 168. ^ Deutsch 1988 , pp. 3, 10, 13–14 with footnotes. ^ Suthren Hirst 2005 , p. 79. ^ Nicholson 2010 , p. 68. ^ a b Rambachan 2006 , p. 26. ^ Śaṅkarācārya (1992). "Metrical Part, Chapter 11, Verse 7".

In Mayeda, Sengaku (ed.). A Thousand Teachings: The Upadeśasāhasrī of Śaṅkara . State University of New York Press. p. 111. ISBN 978-0-7914-0944-2 . ^ Lochtefeld 2002 , p. 320. ^ Comans 2000 , pp. 183–184. ^ Deussen 1980 . ^ a b c d Potter 2008 , pp. 6–7. ^ a b Rambachan 2006 , pp. 7, 99–103. ^ a b Sharma 2007 , pp. 9–13, 29–30, 45–47, 79–86. ^ a b c Rambachan 2006 , pp. 109–111. ^ Vivekananda (1947) , pp. 63–65. ^ a b c Fiordalis 2021 , p. 6. ^ a b Fiordalis 2021 , p. 9. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Deutsch 1980 , p. 105-108. ^ a b Derrida 1992 , p. 203. ^ a b c Long 2020 , p. 245. ^ Davis 2010 , p. 34–35. ^ Fiordalis 2021 , p. 18-19. ^ a b Rambachan 1991 , p. 97. ^ Rambachan 1984 . ^ a b Dalal 2009 , p. 22. ^ Sivananda 1977 , p. viii. ^ a b c d e f Rao & Paranjpe 2015 , p. 6–7, 177–178, 215. ^ a b Grimes 1996 , pp. 98–99 ^ Mayeda 2006 . ^ a b Maharaj (2014) , pp. 88, context: pp. 82–108. ^ a b c Puligandla 1997 , pp. 251–254. ^ a b Davis 2010 , pp. 38–39. ^ Deutsch 1980 , p. 105–108. ^ a b c d e f Thibaut (1890) , p. 12 with footnote 1. ^ Heim (2005) , pp. 341–354. ^ Lochtefeld (2001) , p. 777. ^ Rao (1926) . ^ a b c d Deutsch 1973 , pp. 106–110. ^ Robert P. Waxler; Maureen P. Hall (2011). Transforming Literacy: Changing Lives Through Reading and Writing . Emerald. pp. 105– 106. ISBN 978-0-85724-628-8 . ^ Dalal 2009 , p. 16. ^ Fiordalis 2021 , p. 18. ^ Fiordalis 2021 , p. 19. ^ P.P. Bilimoria (2012). Śabdapramāṇa: Word and Knowledge . Springer. pp. 299– 301. ISBN 978-94-009-2911-1 . ^ a b c Comans 2000 , p. 182. ^ Comans 2000 , pp. 182–183. ^ a b c Roodurmun 2002 , p. . ^ a b Joel Mlecko (1982), The Guru in Hindu Tradition Archived 6 September 2023 at the Wayback Machine Numen, Volume 29, Fasc. 1, pp. 33–61 ^ Potter, Karl (2002). Presuppositions of India's Philosophies . Motilal Banarsidass. pp. 25– 26. ISBN 81-208-0779-0 . ^ a b c Bhawuk, DPS (2011). Anthony J. Marsella (ed.). Spirituality and Indian Psychology . Springer. p. 172. ISBN 978-1-4419-8109-7 . ^ a b Mayeda 1992 , p. 46. ^ Mayeda 2006 , pp. 46. ^ Mayeda 2006 , pp. 46–47. ^ Bādarāyaṇa (1936) , p. 35. ^ Śaṅkarācārya 1949 , Verse 2.8.133, p. 258. ^ Potter 2014 , p. 249. ^ a b c Mayeda 2006 , pp. 47. ^ a b Suthren Hirst 2005 , p. 49-50. ^ a b c d Grimes 1996 , p. 238. ^ Datta 1932 , pp. 221–253. ^ Puligandla 1997 , p. 228. ^ a b Deutsch 2000 , p. 245-248. ^ King 1999 , p. 14. ^ Flood1996 , p. 225. ^ Barua 2015 . ^ Rambachan 1994 , pp. 124–125. ^ Cenkner 1995 , p. 96. ^ Grimes 2004 , p. 23. ^ a b c Koller 2013 , p. 101. ^ a b Bowker 2000b , "Anubhava". ^ Halbfass 2017 , p. 387. ^ Suthren Hirst 2005 , p. 68. ^ Sharma 2000 , p. 177. ^ a b c d Rambachan 1991 , pp. xii–xiii. ^ Rambachan 1991 , pp. 1–14. ^ Nikhalananda 1931 , p. viii. ^ Nikhalananda 1931 , pp. viii–ix. ^ a b Nelson 1996 , p. 29. ^ a b c Raju 1971 , p. 177. ^ a b Sarma 2007 , pp. 126, 143–144. ^ a b Garfield & Priest 2003 . ^ Murthi 2009 , pp. 158–159. ^ a b Shah-Kazemi 2006 , p. 5. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 14. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 12, 172. ^ Deutsch 1973 , p. 49. ^ Braue 1984 , p. 81. ^ a b c Brereton 1986 . ^ Olivelle 2008 , p. 349 note 8.7-16.3. ^ a b c Black 2012 , p. 36. ^ a b Lipner 2000 , pp. 55 note 9, 57. ^ Olivelle 2008 , p. 151-152; p.349 note 8.7-16.3. ^ Olivelle 1998 , p. 152. ^ Bhatawadekar 2013 , p. 203, note 14. ^ Brereton 1986 , p. 107. ^ a b Braue 1984 , p. 80. ^ a b Grimes 1996 , p. 234. ^ Sivaraman 1973 , p. 146. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 50, 172. ^ a b c Lipner 2000 , p. 57. ^ a b Olivelle 2008 , p. 151-152. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 172, Up.18.3, 18.6, 18.7. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 172, Up.18.6. ^ Lipner 2000 , pp. 60, 62. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 218 (up.II.1.24). ^ Muller (1879) , pp. 92-109 with footnotes. ^ Goodall 1996 , pp. 136–137. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 190-192. ^ a b Mayeda 1992 , p. 91; 219 (Up.II.1.28). ^ Nakamura 1999 , p. 675. ^ Nakamura 1999 , p. 176. ^ Nakamura 1999 , p. 178. ^ Nakamura 1999 , p. 679. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 173-174 (Up.I.18.9-19); p.196 note 13. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 251-253 (Up.II.3). ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 253 (Up.II.3). ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 196 note 13. ^ Rambachan 1991 , p. 155. ^ a b c d e Roodurmun 2002 , pp. 33–34. ^ Rambachan 1991 , pp. 155–156. ^ Rambachan 1991 , p. 156. ^ a b c d e f Roodurmun 2002 , p. 40. ^ Cenkner 1995 , p. 95. ^ a b Nakamura 2004 , p. 367. ^ Nakamura 2004 , pp. 365–366. ^ Potter 2008 , p. 16. ^ Karl Potter on p. 220; ^ Shankara's Bhasya on Brihadaranyaka Upanishad . Translated by S Madhavananda. 1950. pp. 348–350, 754–757 . ^ Potter 1998 , p. 610 (note 17). ^ Śaṅkarācārya 1949 , pp. 16–17. ^ Potter 2008 , pp. 219–221. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 91, 218. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 172-173 (Up.I.18.3-8). ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 183 (Up.I.18.99-100). ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 190 (Up.I.18.174). ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 192 (Up.I.18.196-197); p.195 (Up.I.18.2019). ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 195 (Up.I.18.2019). ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 85, 220 (Up.II.1.30). ^ Sharma 2008 , p. 5–14. ^ a b c Nicholson, Hugh 2011 , pp. 171–172, 191. ^ a b c d Grimes 2004 , pp. 31–33. ^ a b c Puligandla 1997 , p. 232. ^ a b Sharma 1995 , pp. 174–178. ^ a b c Fowler 2002 , pp. 246–247. ^ Thrasher 1993 , p. 1–7. ^ Isaeva 1993 , p. 237. ^ Dalal 2009 , pp. 16, 26–27. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 73. ^ a b c Klostermaier 2007 , p. 26. ^ Milne 1997 , p. 166. ^ Larson 2014 , p. xi. ^ a b Mayeda 1992 , p. 19. ^ Scheepers 2010 , p. 126, 128. ^ a b c d e f Koller 2006 . ^ a b c d e Koller 2013 . ^ Mayeda 1992 , pp. 18–20. ^ a b Mayeda 1992 , pp. 20–22. ^ a b Mayeda 1992 , p. 20. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 22. ^ a b c d Mayeda 1992 , p. 78. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 25. ^ Koller 2006 , p. xii. ^ Koller 2013 , pp. 99–106. ^ a b c Sharma 1995 , pp. 176–178. ^ a b Betty, Stafford (1 July 2010). "Dvaita, Advaita, and Viśiṣṭādvaita: Contrasting Views of Mokṣa" . Asian Philosophy . 20 (2): 216. doi : 10.1080/09552367.2010.484955 . ISSN 0955-2367 . ^ Renard 2010 , p. 131. ^ Malkovsky 2001 , p. 42–44. ^ Hiriyanna 1993 , p. 359–363. ^ Sharma 1997 , p. 1–16. ^ Murti 1996 , p. 294–296, 194–195. ^ Grimes (1994) , pp. 35–38. ^ Sinha (2013) , pp. 306–314. ^ Ram-Prasad (2013a) , pp. 190–194. ^ Dalal (2011) , p. 38. ^ Johnson (2009) , p. entry "Atman (self)". ^ Bowker 2000c , "Atman". ^ a b Timalsina 2014 , pp. 3–23. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 103 (verse 1), p.105 (note 1). ^ a b Ram-Prasad 2013 , p. 235. ^ Deutsch 1973 , pp. 48–51. ^ Ram-Prasad 2013 , p. 237. ^ a b Shankara, Adhyasa-bhasya (pre-amble to Brahma Sutra Bhashya I.1.1) ^ Sharma 2007 , p. 44–45, 90. ^ Deutsch 1973 , pp. 50–51, 101–107. ^ Fowler 2002 , pp. 256–258, 261–263. ^ Raju 1985 , pp. 448 –449. ^ Mayeda 1992 . ^ Sharma 2004 , p. 3. ^ Indich 2000 , pp. 57–60. ^ Wilber 2000 , p. 132. ^ a b c Sharma 2004 , pp. 15–40, 49–72. ^ King 1995 , p. 300 note 140. ^ Sarma 1996 , pp. 122, 137. ^ Sarma 1996 , pp. 126, 146. ^ Comans 2000 , pp. 128–131, 5–8, 30–37. ^ Indich 2000 , pp. 106–108. ^ Sullivan (1997) , pp. 59–60. ^ Gupta (1998) , pp. 26–30. ^ a b Raju 1985 , pp. 32–33. ^ Hume (1921) , p. Chandogya Upanishad – Eighth Prathapaka, Seventh through Twelfth Khanda, pp. 268–273 . ^ Indich 2000 , pp. 58–67, 106–108. ^ Indich 2000 , p. 24, 28. ^ a b Ganeri 2019 , p. 103. ^ Dasgupta 1975 , p. 148-149. ^ a b Murti 1983 , p. 339. ^ Yao (2005) , p. 2. ^ a b c Lochtefeld 2002a , p. 122. ^ Raju 2006 , p. 426; Conclusion chapter part XII. ^ Venkatramaiah 2000 , p. xxxii. ^ Padiyath 2014 , p. 177. ^ a b Brodd 2009 , p. 43–47. ^ Puligandla 1997 , p. 231. ^ Vireswarananda 2019 , p. xix, xxii. ^ Raju 2006 , p. 426 and Conclusion chapter part XII. ^ Dhavamony (2002) , pp. 43–44. ^ Martinez-Bedard (2006) , pp. 18–35. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 18-19. ^ Gambhirananda 2021 , p. 13. ^ Raju 1992 , p. 228. ^ Deutsch 1980 , p. 9. ^ a b c Arapura (1986) , pp. 12, 13–18. ^ Deutsch 1980 , p. 9–10 with footnote 2. ^ Werner 1994 . ^ Pradhan (2014) , p. 19. ^ Murthi 2009 , p. 152. ^ Grimes 1990 , p. . ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 77. ^ a b c Murthi 2009 , p. 157. ^ Rambachan 2006 , pp. 114–122. ^ Kaplan (2007) . ^ Murthi 2009 , p. 160. ^ Murthi 2009 , p. 149. ^ Murthi 2009 , p. 150. ^ Doherty 2005 , p. 209-210. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. 82. ^ a b Potter 2006 , p. 7-8. ^ Murthi 2009 , pp. 155–156. ^ a b Vroom (1989) , pp. 122–123. ^ Shastri 1911 , pp. 5 and ix. ^ Shastri 1911 , pp. 58–73. ^ Nicholson, Hugh 2011 , p. 266, note 21. ^ Roeser (2005) , p. 15. ^ Belling (2006) . ^ Nagao (1991) , pp. 127–128. ^ Lipner (1996) , pp. 109–126. ^ Deutsch 1973 , pp. 40–43. ^ a b King 1999 , p. 221. ^ Nicholson, Hugh 2011 , pp. 266 note 20, 167–170. ^ Nicholson, Hugh 2011 , p. 266 note 21. ^ a b Deutsch 1973 , p. 99. ^ Bauer, Nancy F. (1987). "Advaita Vedanta and Contemporary Western Ethics". Philosophy East and West . 37 (1). University of Hawaii Press: 36– 50. doi : 10.2307/1399082 . JSTOR 1399082 . ^ Deutsch 1973 , p. 100. ^ Deutsch 1973 , pp. 101–102 with footnotes. ^ Rambachan 2006 , p. 109 . ^ Mayeda 2006 , pp. 88–89. ^ Mayeda 2006 , p. 92. ^ Nicholson 2010 , p. 33. ^ a b Śaṅkarācārya 1949 , pp. 17–19. ^ Sankara 2006 , pp. 226–227. ^ a b Isaeva 1993 , p. 35. ^ Grimes 1990 , pp. 6–7. ^ Dasgupta 1955 , p. 28. ^ Wendy Doniger O'Flaherty (1988), Textual Sources for the Study of Hinduism , Manchester University Press, ISBN 0-7190-1867-6 , pp. 2–3 ^ a b Coburn 1984 , p. 439. ^ a b Deutsch 2000 , p. 245–248. ^ Deutsch 1988 , pp. 4–6 with footnote 4. ^ Sharma 2007 , pp. 18–19. ^ Stephen Phillips (1998), Classical Indian Metaphysics , Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120814899 , p. 332 note 68 ^ Stephen Phillips (1998), Classical Indian Metaphysics , Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120814899 , p. 332 note 69 ^ a b c Isaeva 1993 , pp. 35–36. ^ a b c Isaeva 1993 , pp. 35–36, 77, 210–212. ^ Wendy Doniger O'Flaherty (1988), Textual Sources for the Study of Hinduism, Manchester University Press, ISBN 0-7190-1867-6 , pp. 2–3 ^ a b c Sharma 2007 , p. 17–19, 22–34. ^ a b c Mayeda 2006 , pp. 6–7. ^ Shri Gowdapadacharya & Shri Kavale Math (A Commemoration volume) . p. 10. ^ Karigoudar Ishwaran, Ascetic Culture ^ Wendy Sinclair-Brull, Female Ascetics ^ H.A. Rose, Ibbetson, Denzil Ibbetson Sir, and Maclagan, Glossary of the Tribes and Castes of the Punjab and North West Frontier Province , p. 857 ^ Hacker 1995 , p. 28. ^ Hacker 1995 , p. 28-29. ^ a b c d e f g h Hacker 1995 , p. 29. ^ Nakamura 2004 , pp. 680–681. ^ Pandey 2000 , pp. 4–5. ^ Pandey 2000 , p. 5. ^ Nakamura 2004 , pp. 782–783. ^ Frederick Asher (1981). Joanna Gottfried Williams (ed.). Kalādarśana: American Studies in the Art of India . BRILL Academic. pp. 1– 4. ISBN 90-04-06498-2 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 9 February 2017 . ^ a b c James C. Harle (1994).

The Art and Architecture of the Indian Subcontinent . Yale University Press. pp. 140 –142, 191, 201– 203. ISBN 978-0-300-06217-5 . ^ a b Flood 1996 , p. 17 ^ a b Doniger 1999 , p. 1017. ^ a b Gudrun Bühnemann (2003). Mandalas and Yantras in the Hindu Traditions . BRILL Academic. pp. 60– 61. ISBN 978-9004129023 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 9 February 2017 . ^ Diana L. Eck (1998). Darśan: Seeing the Divine Image in India . Columbia University Press. p. 49. ISBN 978-0-231-11265-9 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 9 February 2017 . ^ Rosen 2006 , p. 166. ^ Hiltebeitel 2013 . ^ a b The Four Denominations of Hinduism Archived 18 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine , Basics of Hinduism, Kauai Hindu Monastery ^ Falk Reitz (1997), Pancayatana-Komplexe in Nordindien: Entstehung, Entwicklung und regionale Besonderheiten einer indischen Architekturform Archived 9 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine , PhD Thesis (in German), Awarded by Freie Universität Berlin ^ a b c Isaeva 1993 , p. 172. ^ Deutsch & Dalvi 2004 , pp. 126, 157. ^ a b c d e Whaling 1979 , pp. 1–42. ^ Grimes 1998 , pp. 684–686. ^ Sharma, B.N. 2000 , p. 60–63. ^ Dasgupta & Mohanta 1998 , p. 362. ^ a b Muller-Ortega 2010 , p. 25. ^ Muller-Ortega 2010 , p. 26. ^ a b Potter 1981 , p. 105. ^ Comans 2000 , p. 2. ^ Mudgal 1975 , p. 4. ^ Isaeva 1993 , p. 174. ^ Dasgupta 1997 , p. 494. ^ Isaeva 1993 , pp. 60, 145–154. ^ Williams 2008 , pp. 104, 125–127. ^ Hookham 1991 , pp. 100–104. ^ Williams 2008 , pp. 107, 112. ^ Hookham 1991 , p. 96 . ^ Williams 2008 , pp. 104–105, 108–109: "(...) it refers to the Buddha using the term "Self" in order to win over non-Buddhist ascetics." ^ Merv Fowler (1999). Buddhism: Beliefs and Practices . Sussex Academic Press. pp. 101– 102. ISBN 978-1-898723-66-0 . ^ John W. Pettit (1999). Mipham's Beacon of Certainty: Illuminating the View of Dzogchen, the Great Perfection . Simon and Schuster. pp. 48– 49. ISBN 978-0-86171-157-4 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 2 February 2017 . ^ D Sharma (1966). "Epistemological negative dialectics of Indian logic — Abhāva versus Anupalabdhi". Indo-Iranian Journal . 9 (4): 291– 300. doi : 10.1163/000000066790086530 . ^ John Clayton (2010), Religions, Reasons and Gods: Essays in Cross-cultural Philosophy of Religion, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0521126274 , p. 54 ^ Alex Wayman (1999), A Millennium of Buddhist Logic, Volume 1, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120816466 , pp. xix–xx ^ Puligandla 1997 , pp. 49–50, 60–62. ^ a b Christopher Bartley (2011). An Introduction to Indian Philosophy . Bloomsbury Academic. pp. 90– 91. ISBN 978-1-84706-449-3 . ^ a b Williams, Tribe & Wynne 2000 , p. 92. ^ a b c d Siderits, Mark (Spring 2015). "Buddha: Non-Self" .

In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

The Metaphysics Research Lab, Center for the Study of Language and Information , Stanford University . ISSN 1095-5054 . OCLC 643092515 . Archived from the original on 27 April 2023 . Retrieved 24 June 2023 .

The Buddha's "middle path" strategy can be seen as one of first arguing that there is nothing that the word " I " genuinely denotes, and then explaining that our erroneous sense of an "I" stems from our employment of the useful fiction represented by the concept of the person.

While the second part of this strategy only receives its full articulation in the later development of the theory of two truths , the first part can be found in the Buddha's own teachings, in the form of several philosophical arguments for non-self . Best known among these is the argument from impermanence (S III.66–8) . It is the fact that this argument does not contain a premise explicitly asserting that the five skandhas (classes of psychophysical element) are exhaustive of the constituents of persons, plus the fact that these are all said to be empirically observable, that leads some to claim that the Buddha did not intend to deny the existence of a self tout court . There is, however, evidence that the Buddha was generally hostile toward attempts to establish the existence of unobservable entities.

In the Poṭṭhapāda Sutta (D I.178–203), for instance, the Buddha compares someone who posits an unseen seer in order to explain our introspective awareness of cognitions, to a man who has conceived a longing for the most beautiful woman in the world based solely on the thought that such a woman must surely exist. And in the Tevijja Sutta (D I.235–52), the Buddha rejects the claim of certain Brahmins to know the path to oneness with Brahman , on the grounds that no one has actually observed this Brahman. This makes more plausible the assumption that the argument has as an implicit premise the claim that there is no more to the person than the five skandhas . ^ Puligandla 1997 , pp. 40–50, 60–62, 97. ^ Kalupahana 1994 . ^ Christopher Bartley (2011). An Introduction to Indian Philosophy . Bloomsbury Academic. pp. 90– 91, 96, 204– 208. ISBN 978-1-84706-449-3 . ^ Julius Lipner (1986), The Face of Truth: A Study of Meaning and Metaphysics in the Vedantic Theology of Rāmānuja, State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0887060397 , pp. 120–123 ^ Hacker 1995 , p. 78; Lorenzen 2015 ; Baird 1986 ; Goswami Abhay Charan Bhaktivedanta 1956 ^ Biderman 1978 , pp. 405–413. ^ Fowler 2002 , pp. 238–243, 288–294, 340–342. ^ a b Nakamura 2004 , pp. 691–693. ^ a b c J.A.B. van Buitenen (2008), Ramanuja – Hindu theologian and Philosopher Archived 21 June 2022 at the Wayback Machine , Encyclopædia Britannica ^ a b Christopher Etter (2006). A Study of Qualitative Non-Pluralism . iUniverse. pp. 57– 60, 63– 65. ISBN 978-0-595-39312-1 . ^ Sarma 1994 , pp. 374–375. ^ Bryant, Edwin (2007). Krishna : A Sourcebook (Chapter 15 by Deepak Sarma) . Oxford University Press. pp. 361– 362. ISBN 978-0195148923 . ^ a b Jon Paul Sydnor (2012). Ramanuja and Schleiermacher: Toward a Constructive Comparative Theology . Casemate. pp. 84– 87. ISBN 978-0227680247 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 21 September 2016 . ^ a b c Joseph P. Schultz (1981). Judaism and the Gentile Faiths: Comparative Studies in Religion . Fairleigh Dickinson University Press. pp. 81– 84. ISBN 978-0-8386-1707-6 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 21 September 2016 . ^ Indich 2000 , pp. 1–2, 97–102. ^ Deutsch 2013 , p. 247–248. ^ Devarshi Ramanath Shastri, "Shuddhadvaita Darshan (Vol.2)", Published by Mota Mandir, Bhoiwada, Mumbai, India, 1917. ^ "Brahmavād Saṅgraha", Pub. Vaishnava Mitra Mandal Sarvajanik Nyasa, Indore, India, 2014. ^ a b Tapasyananda, Swami. Bhakti Schools of Vedanta pg. 180-181 ^ a b Stoker, Valerie (2011). "Madhva (1238–1317)" . Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Archived from the original on 12 October 2016 . Retrieved 2 February 2016 . ^ a b Stafford Betty (2010), Dvaita, Advaita, and Viśiṣṭādvaita: Contrasting Views of Mokṣa, Asian Philosophy: An International Journal of the Philosophical Traditions of the East, Volume 20, Issue 2, pp. 215–224 ^ a b SMS Chari (1999), Advaita and Visistadvaita, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120815353 , pp. 5–7 ^ Neog 1980 , pp. 243–244. ^ Kumar Das 2006 , pp. 172–173. ^ Brown 1983 , pp. 553–557. ^ Sheridan 1986 , pp. 1–2, 17–25. ^ Sheridan 1986 , p. 6. ^ van Buitenen, J. A. B (1966). "The Archaism of the Bhagavata Purana".

In Milton Singer (ed.). Krishna: Myths, Rites, and Attitudes . pp. 23– 40. ^ Smith 2003 , pp. 126–128. ^ Flood 1996 , pp. 162–167. ^ Klostermaier 1984 , pp. 177–178. ^ Davis 2014 , p. 167 note 21. ^ Dyczkowski 1989 , pp. 43–44. ^ Isaeva 1995 , pp. 134–135. ^ McDaniel 2004 , pp. 89–91. ^ Brooks 1990 , pp. 35–39. ^ Mahony 1997 , p. 274 with note 73. ^ Chapple 1984 , pp. ix–x with footnote 3; Rosen 2001 , p. 149 . ^ White, David Gordon (2014).

The "Yoga Sutra of Patanjali": A Biography . Princeton University Press. pp. xvi– xvii, 50– 52. ISBN 978-0691143774 . ^ Rigopoulos 1998 , pp. 37, 57, 62–63, 195–207; Sahasrabudhe 1968 , pp. 113–114; Olivelle 1992 , pp. 17–18 ^ a b Nicholson 2010 , p. 24-25. ^ Nicholson 2010 , p. 24. ^ a b King 2002 , pp. 136–138, 141–142. ^ a b King 2002 , p. 135. ^ a b Allen & Venkatkrishnan 2017 . ^ Deutsch & Dalvi 2004 , pp. 95–96. ^ Balasubramanian 2000 , p. xxx. ^ Balasubramanian 2000 , p. xxix. ^ Balasubramanian 2000 , pp. xxx–xxxi. ^ Deutsch & Dalvi 2004 , p. 95. ^ Balasubramanian 2000 , p. xxxii. ^ a b Nakamura 1990 , p. 436. ^ Pandey 2000 , p. 4. ^ a b Balasubramanian 2000 , p. xxxiii. ^ Olivelle 1992 , p. 10. ^ Olivelle 1992 , pp. 3–4. ^ Olivelle 1992 , pp. 17–18. ^ Stephen H Phillips (1995), Classical Indian Metaphysics, Columbia University Press, ISBN 978-0812692983 , p. 332 with note 68 ^ Antonio Rigopoulos (1998), Dattatreya: The Immortal Guru, Yogin, and Avatara, State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0791436967 , pp. 62–63 ^ Raju 1992 , p. 177. ^ a b Nakamura 2004 , p. 308. ^ a b Nakamura 2004 , p. 280. ^ Sarma 1997 , p. 239. ^ Nakamura 2004 , pp. 280–281. ^ Kochumuttom 1999 , p. 1. ^ Kochumuttom 1999 , p. 5. ^ Raju 1971 , p. 177-178. ^ Kalupahana 1994 , p. 206. ^ a b Sarma 1996 , p. 127. ^ a b c Roodurmun 2002 , p. 29. ^ Roodurmun 2002 , p. 31. ^ Thrasher 1993 , p. vii–x. ^ Roodurmun 2002 , p. 32. ^ a b c Nakamura 2004 , p. 678. ^ a b Mayeda 2006 , p. 13. ^ Nakamura 2004 , p. 679. ^ a b John Koller (2007), in Chad Meister and Paul Copan (Editors): The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion , Routledge, ISBN 978-1-134-18001-1 , pp. 98–106 ^ a b Mayeda 1992 , p. XV. ^ Mayeda 1992 , p. XVIII, note 3. ^ Lipner 2000 , p. 56, incl. note 12. ^ Hacker 1995 , p. 30–31. ^ Wilhelm Halbfass (1990), Tradition and Reflection: Explorations in Indian Thought , State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0-7914-0362-4 , pp. 205–208 ^ Adi Shankaracharya, Vivekacūḍāmaṇi S Madhavananda (Translator), Advaita Ashrama (1921) ^ John Grimes (2004), The Vivekacudamani of Sankaracarya Bhagavatpada: An Introduction and Translation , Ashgate, ISBN 978-0-7546-3395-2 , p.23 ^ King 1999 , p. 55. ^ a b Potter 2006 , p. 6-7. ^ Satchidanandendra Sarasvati 1997 , p. 6. ^ Nicholson 2010 , p. 157; 229 note 57. ^ a b c d e f Blake Michael 1992 , p. 60–62 with notes 6, 7 and 8. ^ a b c d Nicholson 2010 , pp. 178–183. ^ a b c d Goodding 2013 , p. 89. ^ a b Nowicka 2016 , p. 147. ^ a b Bader 2001 , p. vii. ^ a b c d Kulke & Rothermund 1998 , p. 177. ^ a b c Stoker 2016 , p. 55-56. ^ Clark 2006 , p. 157. ^ King 2002 , p. 129. ^ King 2002 , pp. 129–130. ^ a b Roodurmun 2002 , p. 38. ^ Roodurmun 2002 , p. 39. ^ a b Roodurmun 2002 , p. 30. ^ Fowler 2002 , p. 129. ^ Isaeva 1993 , p. 85-86. ^ Larson & Bhattacharya 1987 , p. 301-312. ^ Roodurmun 2002 , p. 34. ^ Roodurmun 2002 , p. 35. ^ a b King 1999 , p. 56. ^ Roodurmun 2002 , p. 37. ^ a b Dasgupta 1955 , p. 198. ^ Dasgupta 1955 , pp. 198–199. ^ Dasgupta 1955 , p. 199. ^ Roodurmun 2002 , p. 41. ^ Fort 1996 , p. 136. ^ Fort 1998 , p. 97. ^ Madaio 2017 , p. 4. ^ a b Nicholson 2010 , pp. 190–194, 200–201. ^ a b Gaborieau, Marc (June 1985). "From Al-Beruni to Jinnah: Idiom, Ritual and Ideology of the Hindu-Muslim Confrontation in South Asia". Anthropology Today . 1 (3). Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland: 7– 14. doi : 10.2307/3033123 . JSTOR 3033123 . ^ Clark 2006 , p. 215, 221-222. ^ Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Mādhava Āchārya". Encyclopædia Britannica. ^ a b c Talbot 2001 , p. 185–187, 199–201. ^ Stoker 2016 , p. 55. ^ Goodding 2013 , p. 90. ^ Nicholson 2010 , pp. 160–162. ^ Nicholson 2010 , pp. 161. ^ J. Jordens (1998). Gandhi's Religion: A Homespun Shawl . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 116. ISBN 978-0-230-37389-1 . ^ Jeffrey D. Long (2008). Rita Sherma and Arvind Sharma (ed.). Hermeneutics and Hindu Thought: Toward a Fusion of Horizons . Springer. p. 194. ISBN 978-1-4020-8192-7 . Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2017 . ^ King 2002 , pp. 107–109. ^ Anshuman A Mondal (2004). Nationalism and Post-Colonial Identity: Culture and Ideology in India and Egypt . Routledge. pp. 85, 256. ISBN 978-1-134-49417-0 . ^ King 2002 , pp. 136–138. ^ King 2002 , pp. 107–109, 128. ^ Brian Morris (2006). Religion and Anthropology: A Critical Introduction . Cambridge University Press. pp. 112, 141– 144. ISBN 978-0-521-85241-8 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 29 January 2017 . ^ Thomas Blom Hansen (1999).

The Saffron Wave: Democracy and Hindu Nationalism in Modern India . Princeton University Press. pp. 76– 77, 91– 92, 179– 181, 44– 47, 69– 70. ISBN 978-0691006710 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 29 January 2017 . ^ King 2002 , pp. 132–133, 172. ^ Rambachan 1994 , pp. 91–92. ^ Rabindra Kumar Dasgupta (1996). Swami Vivekananda on Indian philosophy and literature . Ramakrishna Mission Institute of Culture. pp. 145– 146, 284– 285. ISBN 978-81-85843-81-0 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 29 January 2017 . ^ Comans, Michael (1993). "The Question of the Importance of Samadhi in Modern and Classical Advaita Vedanta". Philosophy East and West . 43 (1). University of Hawai'i Press: 19– 38. doi : 10.2307/1399467 . JSTOR 1399467 . S2CID 170870115 . ^ Gier, Nicholas F. (2012). "Overreaching to be different: A critique of Rajiv Malhotra's Being Different". International Journal of Hindu Studies . 16 (3): 259– 285. doi : 10.1007/s11407-012-9127-x . S2CID 144711827 . ^ Gier, Nicholas F. (2004).

The Virtue of Nonviolence: From Gautama to Gandhi . State University of New York Press. pp. 40– 42. ISBN 978-0-7914-5949-2 . Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2017 . ^ a b c Lucas 2011 . ^ Caplan 2009 , pp. 16–17. ^ Lucas 2011 , pp. 102–105. ^ Gleig 2011 , p. 10. Sources Printed sources The Case of Niścaldās". International Journal of Hindu Studies . 21 (3): 275– 297. doi : 10.1007/s11407-017-9214-0 . S2CID 171944554 . Allen, Michael S.; Venkatkrishnan, Anand (25 September 2017). "Introduction to Special Issue: New Directions in the Study of Advaita Vedānta" . International Journal of Hindu Studies . 21 (3): 271– 274. doi : 10.1007/s11407-017-9218-9 . Arapura, John (1986). Hermeneutical Essays on Vedāntic Topics . Motilal Banarsidass. ISBN 978-8120801837 . Bādarāyaṇa (1936). Brahmasutra-bhasya 1.1.4 (PDF) . Translated by S. Vireswarananda. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 September 2021 . Retrieved 30 December 2021 . Bader, Jonathan (2001), Conquest of the Four Quarters. TYraditional Accounts of the Life of Shankara , Australian National University Baird, Robert D. (1986), "Swami Bhativedanta and the Bhagavd Gita As It Is", in Minor, Robert Neil (ed.), Modern Indian Interpreters of the Bhagavad Gita , SUNY Press Balasubramanian, R. (2000). "Introduction".

In Chattopadhyana (ed.). History of Science, Philosophy and Culture in Indian Civilization. Volume II Part 2: Advaita Vedanta . Delhi: Centre for Studies in Civilizations. Barua, Ankur (2015), "Ideas of Liberation in Medieval Advaita Vedānta", Religion Compass , 9 (8): 262– 271, doi : 10.1111/rec3.12160 Belling, Noa (2006). Yoga for ideal weight and shape . Sydney, Australia: New Holland Publishers (Australia) P/L. ISBN 978-1-74110-298-7 . Bhatawadekar, Sai (2013), "The Tvat Tam Asi Formula and Schopenhauer's "Deductive Leap" ", in Fuechtner, Veronika; Rhiel, Mary (eds.), Imagining Germany Imagining Asia: Essays in Asian-German Studies , Boydell & Brewer Bhattacharya, Vidhushekhara (1943). Gauḍapādakārikā . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. Biderman, Shlomo (1978). "Śankara and the Buddhists". Journal of Indian Philosophy . 6 (4). doi : 10.1007/BF00218430 . S2CID 170754201 . Black, Brian (2012), The Character of the Self in Ancient India: Priests, Kings, and Women in the Early Upanisads , SUNY, ISBN 9780791480526 , archived from the original on 16 January 2024 , retrieved 3 January 2022 Blake Michael, R. (1992), The Origins of Vīraśaiva Sects , Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-81-208-0776-1 Bowker, John (2000a), "Advaita Vedanta" , The Concise Oxford Dictionary of World Religions , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-280094-7 , archived from the original on 5 January 2022 , retrieved 1 August 2020 Bowker, John (2000b), "Anubhava" , The Concise Oxford Dictionary of World Religions , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-280094-7 , archived from the original on 2 January 2022 , retrieved 12 January 2022 Bowker, John (2000c), "Atman", The Concise Oxford Dictionary of World Religions , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-280094-7 Bowker, John (2003), "Brahman" , The Oxford Dictionary of World Religions , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-280094-7 , archived from the original on 4 January 2022 , retrieved 13 December 2015 Brannigan, Michael (2009), Striking a Balance: A Primer in Traditional Asian Values, Rowman & Littlefield , Rowman & Littlefield, ISBN 978-0739138465 Braue, Donald A. (1984), Māyā in Radhakrishnanʾs Thought: Six Meanings Other Than Illusion , Motilall Banarsidass Brereton, Joel P. (1986), " "Tat Tvam Ast" in Context", Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft , 136 (1): 98– 109 Brodd, Jeffrey (2003). World Religions . Winona, MN: Saint Mary's Press. ISBN 978-0-88489-725-5 . Brodd, Jeffrey (2009), World Religions: A Voyage of Discovery , Saint Mary's Press, ISBN 978-0884899976 Brooks, Douglas Renfrew (1990).

The Secret of the Three Cities: An Introduction to Hindu Shakta Tantrism . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press . ISBN 978-0-226-07569-3 . Brown, C. Mackenzie (1983). "The Origin and Transmission of the Two "Bhāgavata Purāṇas": A Canonical and Theological Dilemma". Journal of the American Academy of Religion . 51 (4). Oxford University Press: 551– 567. doi : 10.1093/jaarel/li.4.551 . JSTOR 1462581 . Caplan, Mariana (2009), Eyes Wide Open: Cultivating Discernment on the Spiritual Path , Sounds True Cenkner, William (1995), A Tradition of Teachers: Śaṅkara and the Jagadgurus Today , Motilall Banarsidas Chapple, Christopher (1984). "Introduction".

The Concise Yoga Vāsiṣṭha . Translated by S Venkatesananda. State University of New York Press. ISBN 0-87395-955-8 . OCLC 11044869 . Archived from the original on 16 March 2023 . Retrieved 29 January 2017 . Chatterjea, Tara (2003), Knowledge and Freedom in Indian Philosophy , Lexington Books Clark, Matthew (2006), The Daśanāmī-Saṃnyāsīs: The Integration of Ascetic Lineages into an Order , BRILL Coburn, Thomas B. (1984). " 'Scripture' in India: Towards a Typology of the Word in Hindu Life". Journal of the American Academy of Religion . 52 (3): 435– 459. doi : 10.1093/jaarel/52.3.435 . Comans, Michael (2000), The Method of Early Advaita Vedānta: A Study of Gauḍapāda, Śaṅkara, Sureśvara, and Padmapāda , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Dalal, Neil (2009). "Contemplative Practice and Textual Agency in Advaita Vedanta". Method and Theory in the Study of Religion . 21 : 15– 27. doi : 10.1163/157006809X416788 . Dalal, Neil (2014). "Contemplative Grammars: Śaṅkara's Distinction of Upāsana and Nididhyāsana". Journal of Indian Philosophy . 44 : 179– 206. doi : 10.1007/s10781-014-9258-z . S2CID 170638191 . Dalal, R. (2011).

The Religions of India: A Concise Guide to Nine Major Faiths . Penguin. ISBN 978-0143415176 . Dandekar, R.N. (2005), "Vedanta", in Jones, Lindsay (ed.), MacMillan Encyclopedia of Religion , MacMillan Dasgupta, Surendranath (1955), A history of Indian philosophy. 5. Southern schools of ́Saivism, Volume 5 , CUP Archive Dasgupta, Surendranath (1975), A history of Indian philosophy. Volume 2 , Motilal Banarsidass Publ. Dasgupta, S.N. (1997). History of Indian Philosophy, Volume 1 . Dasgupta, Sanghamitra; Mohanta, Dilip Kumar (1998), Indian Philosophical Quarterly , vol. XXV Datta, D.M. (1992) , The Six Ways of Knowing: A Critical study of the Advaita theory of knowledge, University of Calcutta , Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited, pp. 221– 253, ISBN 978-8120835269 Davis, Leesa S. (2010), Advaita Vedānta and Zen Buddhism: Deconstructive Modes of Spiritual Inquiry , Continuum International Publishing Group Davis, Richard (2014), Ritual in an Oscillating Universe: Worshipping Siva in Medieval India , Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0691603087 Dense, Christian D. Von (1999), Philosophers and Religious Leaders , Greenwood Publishing Group Derrida, Jacques (25 August 1992). Derrida and Negative Theology . SUNY Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-0964-0 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 3 January 2022 . Deussen, Paul (1980). Sixty Upaniṣads of the Veda, Volume 1 . Motilal Banarsidass. Deutsch, Eliot (1969). Advaita Vedanta: A Philosophical Reconstruction . Honolulu: East-West Center Press. Deutsch, Eliot (1973), Advaita Vedanta: A Philosophical Reconstruction , University of Hawaii Press, ISBN 978-0-8248-0271-4 , archived from the original on 16 January 2024 , retrieved 21 September 2016 Deutsch, Eliot (1980), Advaita Vedanta: A Philosophical Reconstruction , University of Hawaii Press, ISBN 978-0824802714 Deutsch, Eliot (1988), Advaita Vedanta: A Philosophical Reconstruction , University of Hawaii Press, ISBN 0-88706-662-3 Deutsch, Eliott (2000), "Karma as a "Convenient Fiction" in the Advaita Vedanta", in Perrett, Roy (ed.), Indian Philosophy Vol. 4: Philosophy of Religion , Routledge, ISBN 978-0815336112 Deutsch, Eliott (2013), "Karma as a "Convenient Fiction" in the Advaita Vedanta", in Perrett, Roy (ed.), Indian Philosophy Vol. 4: Philosophy of Religion , Routledge Deutsch, Eliot; Dalvi, Rohit (2004), The Essential Vedanta: A New Source Book of Advaita Vedanta , World Wisdom, Inc., ISBN 9780941532525 , archived from the original on 16 January 2024 , retrieved 8 November 2020 Dhavamony, Mariasusai (2002). Hindu-Christian Dialogue: Theological Soundings and Perspectives . Rodopi Press. ISBN 978-9042015104 . Doherty, Martha (2005), "A Contemporary Debate Among Advaita Vedantins on the Nature of Avidya", Journal of Indian Philosophy , 33 (2): 209– 241, doi : 10.1007/s10781-004-2599-2 , S2CID 143714018 Doniger, Wendy (1999), Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia of World Religions , Merriam-Webster, ISBN 9780877790440 , archived from the original on 2 July 2023 , retrieved 21 September 2016 Dubois, Joel Andre-Michel (2013), The Hidden Lives of Brahman , SUNY Dyczkowski, Mark (1989), The Canon of the Śaivāgama , Motilal Banarsidass Pvt. Ltd., ISBN 978-8120805958 Fasching, Wolfgang (2011), " 'I Am of the Nature of Seeing': Phenomenological Reflections on the Indian Notion of Witness-Consciousness", in Siderits, M.; Thompson, E.; Zahavi, D. (eds.), Self, No Self? Perspectives from Analytical, Phenomenological, and Indian Traditions , Oxford: Oxford University Press Fasching, Wolfgang (2021), "Prakāśa. A few reflections on the Advaitic understanding of consciousness as presence and its relevance for philosophy of mind", Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences , 20 (4), Springer: 679– 701, doi : 10.1007/s11097-020-09690-2 , S2CID 225385862 Fiordalis, David Vincent (2021), "One or None? Truth and Self-Transformation for Śaṅkara and Kamalaśīla", Religions , 12 (12): 1043, doi : 10.3390/rel12121043 Flood, Gavin (1996), An Introduction to Hinduism , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-43878-0 Flood, Gavin; Olivelle, Patrick (2003).

The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism . Blackwell. Fort, Andrew (1996), "Liberation While Living in the Jivanmuktiviveka : Vidrayana's "Yogic Advaita", in Fort, Andrew O.; Mumme, Patricia Y. (eds.), Living Liberation in Hindu Thought , SUNY Fort, Andrew (1998), Jivanmukti in Transformation: Embodied Liberation in Advaita and Neo-Vedanta , State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0791439043 Fost, Frederic F. (1998). "Playful Illusion: The Making of Worlds in Advaita Vedanta". Philosophy East and West . 48 (3). University of Hawai'i Press: 387– 405. doi : 10.2307/1400333 . JSTOR 1400333 . Fowler, Jeaneane D. (2002), Perspectives of Reality: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Hinduism , Sussex Academic Press, ISBN 978-1898723936 Fowler, Merv (2005), Zen Buddhism: Beliefs and Practices , Sussex Academic Press Gambhirananda, Swami (2021) , Brahma Sutra Bhasya of Sankaracarya , Advaita Ashrama Publication Department Ganeri, Jonardon (2019), Indian Philosophy: A Reader , Routledge, ISBN 9781000728033 , archived from the original on 16 January 2024 , retrieved 8 December 2021 Garfield, Jay L.; Priest, Graham (2003), Nagarjuna and the Limits of Thought, Philosophy East & West Volume 53, Number 1 January 2003 1–21 (PDF) , archived (PDF) from the original on 26 November 2018 , retrieved 3 January 2019 Gleig, Ann Louise (2011), Enlightenment After the Enlightenment: American Transformations of Asian Contemplative Traditions , ProQuest 885589248 Goodall, Dominic (1996), Hindu Scriptures, University of California Press , University of California Press, ISBN 978-0520207783 Goodding, Robert A. (2013), "A Theologian in a South Indian Kingdom: The Historical Context of the Jivanmuktiviveka of Vidyaranya", in Lindquist, Steven E. (ed.), Religion and Identity in South Asia and Beyond: Essays in Honor of Patrick Olivelle , Anthem Press Goswami Abhay Charan Bhaktivedanta (1956), Shri Krishna The Supreme 'Vedantist' , archived from the original on 4 January 2022 , retrieved 1 August 2020 Grimes, John A. (1990), The Seven Great Untenables: Sapta-vidhā Anupapatti , Motilall Banarsidass Grimes, John (1994). Problems and Perspectives in Religious Discourse: Advaita Vedanta Implications . State University of New York Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-1791-1 . Grimes, John A. (1996), A Concise Dictionary of Indian Philosophy: Sanskrit Terms Defined in English , SUNY Press, ISBN 978-0-7914-3067-5 Grimes, John (1998), "Book reviews: Early Advaita Vedanta and Buddhism: The Mahayana Context of the Gaudapadiya-karika, by Richard King. SUNY Press (1995)" , Journal of the American Academy of Religion , 66 (3): 684, doi : 10.1093/jaarel/66.3.684 , retrieved 29 November 2011 {{ citation }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) Grimes, John (2004).

The Vivekacūḍāmaṇi of Śaṅkarācārya Bhagavatpāda: An Introduction and Translation . Motilal Banarsidass. ISBN 978-81-208-2039-5 . Gupta, Bina (1995). Perceiving in Advaita Vedānta: Epistemological Analysis and Interpretation . Motilal Banarsidass. ISBN 978-81-208-1296-3 . Gupta, Bina (1998).

The Disinterested Witness: A Fragment of Advaita Vedānta Phenomenology . Northwestern University Press. ISBN 978-0-8101-1565-1 . Hacker, Paul (1995), Philology and Confrontation: Paul Hacker on Traditional and Modern Vedanta , SUNY Press, ISBN 978-0-7914-2582-4 Halbfass, Wilhelm (2017), India and Europe: An Essay in Philosophical Understanding , Motilal Banarsidass Heim, M. (2005). "Chapter 35, Differentiations in Hindu ethics".

The Blackwell companion to religious ethics . Wiley. ISBN 0-631-21634-0 . Hiltebeitel, Alf (2013). "Hinduism" .

The Religious Traditions of Asia: Religion, History, and Culture . Routledge. ISBN 9781136875977 . Archived from the original on 11 January 2023 . Retrieved 5 August 2021 . Hiriyanna, M. (1993). Outlines of Indian Philosophy . Motilal Banarsidass. pp. 359– 363. ISBN 978-81-208-1086-0 . Hookham, S. K. (1991).

The Buddha Within: Tathagatagarbha Doctrine According to the Shentong Interpretation of the Ratnagotravibhaga . State University of New York Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-0357-0 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 2 February 2017 . Hume, Robert (1921). "Chandogya Upanishad".

The Thirteen Principal Upanishads . Oxford University Press. Indich, William (2000), Consciousness in Advaita Vedanta , Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120812512 , archived from the original on 16 January 2024 , retrieved 21 September 2016 Ingalls, Daniel H. (1954), "Śaṁkara's arguments against the buddhists" , Philosophy East and West , 3 (4): 291– 306, doi : 10.2307/1397287 , JSTOR 1397287 , archived from the original on 28 June 2011 , retrieved 5 February 2017 Isaeva, N.V. (1993), Shankara and Indian Philosophy , SUNY Press Isaeva, N.V. (1995), From Early Vedanta to Kashmir Shaivism: Gaudapada, Bhartrhari, and Abhinavagupta , SUNY Press Jacobs, Alan (2004), "Advaita and Western Neo-Advaita" , The Mountain Path Journal , Ramanasramam: 81– 88, archived from the original on 18 May 2015 Jayatilleke, K.N. (1963), Early Buddhist Theory of Knowledge (PDF) (1st ed.), London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd., archived from the original (PDF) on 11 September 2015 Johnson, W.J. (2009). "Atman (self)". A Dictionary of Hinduism . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0198610250 . Jones, Constance; Ryan, James D. (2006). Encyclopedia of Hinduism . Infobase Publishing. Jones, Richard H. (2004). "Shankara's Advaita". Mysticism and Morality: A New Look at Old Questions . Lanham: Lexington Books. pp. 95– 114. Kalupahana, David J. (1994), A history of Buddhist philosophy , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Kaplan, Stephen (April 2007). "Vidyā and Avidyā: Simultaneous and Coterminous?: A Holographic Model to Illuminate the Advaita Debate". Philosophy East and West . 2. 57 (2): 178– 203. doi : 10.1353/pew.2007.0019 . JSTOR 4488090 . S2CID 144344856 . Katz, Jerry (2007), One: Essential Writings on Nonduality , Sentient Publications, archived from the original on 29 November 2021 , retrieved 5 August 2021 King, Richard (1995), Early Advaita Vedānta and Buddhism: The Mahāyāna Context of the Gauḍapādīya-kārikā , SUNY Press King, Richard (1999). "Orientalism and the Modern Myth of "Hinduism" ". NUMEN . 46 (2). BRILL: 146– 185. doi : 10.1163/1568527991517950 . S2CID 45954597 . King, Richard (2002), Orientalism and Religion: Post-Colonial Theory, India and "The Mystic East" , Routledge King, Richard (2013). Orientalism and Religion: Post-Colonial Theory, India and "The Mystic East" . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-63234-3 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 26 January 2017 . Klostermaier, Klaus K. (1984), Mythologies and Philosophies of Salvation in the Theistic Traditions of India , Wilfrid Laurier University Press, ISBN 978-0-88920-158-3 , archived from the original on 16 January 2024 , retrieved 28 January 2017 Klostermaier, Klaus k. (2007), Hinduism: A Beginner's Guide , Oneworld Publications, ISBN 978-1851685387 Kochumuttom, Thomas A. (1999), A buddhist Doctrine of Experience. A New Translation and Interpretation of the Works of Vasubandhu the Yogacarin , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Koller, John M. (2006), "Foreword", A thousand teachings: the Upadeśasāhasrī of Śaṅkara , Motilall Banarsidass Koller, John M. (2013), "Shankara", in Meister, Chad; Copan, Paul (eds.), Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion , Routledge Kulke, Hermann; Rothermund, Dietmar (1998), A History of India , Routledge Kumar Das, Sisir (2006). A history of Indian literature, 500–1399 . Sahitya Akademi. ISBN 978-81-260-2171-0 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 3 June 2020 . Larson, Gerald James; Bhattacharya, Ram Shankar (1987), The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Volume 4 , Princeton University Press Larson, G.J. (2014), "Introduction to the Philosophy of Samkhya", in Larson, G.J.; Bhattacharya, R.S. (eds.), The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Volume 4 , Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0691604411 Lipner, Julius J. (1996). "Ancient Banyan: an Inquiry into the Meaning of 'Hinduness' ". Religious Studies . 32 (1). Cambridge University Press: 109– 126. doi : 10.1017/s0034412500024100 . S2CID 170138813 . Lipner, Julius (2000), "The Self of Being and the Being of Self: Samkara on "That You Are" (Tat Tvam Asi)", in Malkovsky, Bradley J. (ed.), New Perspectives on Advaita Vedānta , BRILL Lochtefeld, James G. (2001).

The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism . New York: Rosen Publishing. ISBN 0-8239-2287-1 . Lochtefeld, James G. (2002), The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism. Volume One: A-M , The Rosen Publishing Group Lochtefeld, James (2002a), "Brahman", The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism, Vol. 1: A–M , Rosen Publishing, ISBN 978-0823931798 Long, Jeffery D. (15 April 2020). Historical Dictionary of Hinduism . Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-5381-2294-5 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 3 January 2022 . Lorenzen, David N. (2006). Who Invented Hinduism: Essays on Religion in History . Yoda Press. ISBN 9788190227261 . Archived from the original on 23 December 2023 . Retrieved 21 September 2016 . Lorenzen, David N., ed. (2015), A dialogue between a Christian and a Hindu about religion , El Colegio de Mexico AC Loy, David (1988). Nonduality : a study in comparative philosophy . New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 9780300038989 . Lucas, Phillip Charles (2011), "When a Movement Is Not a Movement", Nova Religio , 15 (2): 93– 114, doi : 10.1525/nr.2011.15.2.93 , JSTOR 10.1525/nr.2011.15.2.93 Mackenzie, Matthew (2012), "Luminosity, Subjectivity, and Temporality: An Examination of Buddhist and Advaita views of Consciousness", in Kuznetsova, Irina; Ganeri, Jonardon; Ram-Prasad, Chakravarthi (eds.), Hindu and Buddhist Ideas in Dialogue: Self and No-Self , Routledge Madaio, James (24 May 2017). "Rethinking Neo-Vedānta: Swami Vivekananda and the Selective Historiography of Advaita Vedānta1" . Religions . 8 (6): 101. doi : 10.3390/rel8060101 . Mahony, William (1997).

The Artful Universe: An Introduction to the Vedic Religious Imagination . State University of New York Press. ISBN 978-0791435809 . Maharaj, A (2014). "Śrī Harṣa contra Hegel: Monism, Skeptical Method, and the Limits of Reason" . Philosophy East and West . 64 (1). Johns Hopkins University Press: 88, context: pp. 82–108. doi : 10.1353/pew.2014.0010 . S2CID 170532752 . Malkovsky, Bradley J. (2000), "Samkara on Divine Grace", in Malkovsky, Bradley J. (ed.), New Perspectives on Advaita Vedānta: Essays in Commemoration of Professor Richard De Smet, S.J. , BRILL Malkovsky, Bradley J. (2001).

The Role of Divine Grace in the Soteriology of Śaṃkarācārya . BRILL Academic. ISBN 90-04-12044-0 . Marek, David (2008), Dualität – Nondualität. Konzeptuelles und nichtkonzeptuelles Erkennen in Psychologie und buddhistischer Praxis (PDF) , archived (PDF) from the original on 1 March 2020 , retrieved 26 January 2013 Martinez-Bedard, B. (2006). Types of Causes in Aristotle and Sankara (Thesis). Department of Religious Studies, Georgia State University. Mayeda, Sengaku (1992), "An Introduction to the Life and Thought of Sankara" , in Mayeda, Sengaku (ed.), A Thousand Teachings: The Upadeśasāhasrī of Śaṅkara , State University of New York City Press, ISBN 0-7914-0944-9 Mayeda, Sengaku (2006), "An Introduction to the Life and Thought of Sankara", in Mayeda, Sengaku (ed.), A Thousand Teachings: The Upadeśasāhasrī of Śaṅkara , Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120827714 McDaniel, June (2004), Offering Flowers, Feeding Skulls , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-534713-5 , archived from the original on 16 January 2024 , retrieved 28 January 2017 Menezes, Walter (2017), Exploring Ātman from the Perspective of the Vivekacūḍāmaṇi , Springer Menon, Sangeetha (2012), Advaita Vedanta , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, archived from the original on 10 June 2019 , retrieved 1 August 2020 Michaels, Axel (2004), Hinduism. Past and present , Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press Milne, Joseph (April 1997), "Advaita Vedanta and typologies of multiplicity and unity: An interpretation of nindual knowledge", International Journal of Hindu Studies , 1 (1): 165– 188, doi : 10.1007/s11407-997-0017-6 , S2CID 143690641 Mohanty, JN (1980), "Understanding some Ontological Differences in Indian Philosophy", Journal of Indian Philosophy , 8 (3): 205– 217, doi : 10.1007/BF00166295 , S2CID 145752220 Mookerji, R. (2011) , Ancient Indian Education: Brahmanical and Buddhist , Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, ISBN 978-81-208-0423-4 Morris, Brian (2006), Religion and Anthropology: A Critical Introduction , Cambridge University Press Mudgal, S.G. (1975). Advaita of Shankara: A Reappraisal . New Delhi: Motilal Banarasidass. Murti, T.R.V. (1983), "The World and the Individual in Indian Religious Thought", Studies in Indian Thought: Collected Papers of Prof. T.R.V. Murti , Motilal Banarsidass Publ. Muller, Max (1879). "Chandogya Upanishad 6.1-6.16" . Sacred Books of the East.

The Upanishads, Part I . Oxford University Press. Muller-Ortega, Paul E. (2010), Triadic Heart of Siva: Kaula Tantricism of Abhinavagupta in the Non-Dual Shaivism of Kashmir , SUNY press Murthi, S.K. Arun (2009), "The Mulavidya Controversy Among Advaita Vedantins: Was Sankara Himself responsible?", Journal of Indian Philosophy , 37 (2): 149– 177, doi : 10.1007/s10781-008-9053-9 , S2CID 169267710 Murti, T.R.V. (15 February 2008) .

The Advaita Tradition in Indian Philosophy . Motilal Banarsidass. ISBN 978-81-208-1312-0 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 30 January 2017 . Sarma, Candradhara (1997), A Critical Survey of Indian Philosophy , Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 81-208-0365-5 Sarma, Candradhara (2007), The Advaita Tradition in Indian Philosophy , Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120813120 Satchidanandendra Sarasvati (1997), The Method of the Vedanta. A Critical Account of the Advaita Tradition , Motilall Banarsidass Scharfstein, Ben-Ami (1998), A comparative history of world philosophy: from the Upanishads to Kant , Albany: State University of New York Press Scheepers, Alfred (2010), De wortels van hett Indiase denken , Olive Press Shah-Kazemi, Reza (2006), Paths to Transcendence: According to Shankara, Ibn Arabi, and Meister Eckhart , World Wisdom Shastri, Prabhu Dutt (1911).

The doctrine of Maya in the philosophy of the Vedanta . London: Luzac & Co. Sharma, Arvind (1993), The Experiential Dimension of Advaita Vedanta , Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Sharma, Arvind (1995), The Philosophy of Religion and Advaita Vedanta , Penn State University Press, ISBN 978-0271028323 Sharma, Arvind (1997).

The Rope and the Snake: A Metaphorical Exploration of Advaita Vedānta . Manohar Publishers. pp. 1– 16. ISBN 978-81-7304-179-2 . Sharma, Arvind (2000), "Sacred Scriptures and the Mysticism of Advaita Vedanta", in Katz, Steven T. (ed.), Mysticism and Sacred Scripture , Oxford University Press Sharma, Arvind (2004). Sleep as a State of Consciousness in Advaita Vedånta . State University of New York Press. Sharma, Arvind (2006). A Guide to Hindu Spirituality . World Wisdom. ISBN 978-1-933316-17-8 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 26 January 2017 . Sharma, Arvind (2007), Advaita Vedānta: An Introduction , Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120820272 Sharma, Arvind (2008).

The Philosophy of Religion and Advaita Vedanta: A Comparative Study in Religion and Reason . Pennsylvania State University Press. ISBN 978-0-271-03946-6 . Sharma, B.N., B. N. Krishnamurti (2000), A History of the Dvaita School of Vedānta and Its Literature, 3rd Edition , Motilal Banarsidass Pvt. Ltd.(2008 Reprint), ISBN 978-8120815759 Sheridan, Daniel (1986).

The Advaitic Theism of the Bhāgavata Purāṇa . Columbia: South Asia Books. ISBN 81-208-0179-2 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 28 January 2017 . Sheridan, Daniel (1991). Texts in Context: Traditional Hermeneutics in South Asia (Editor: Jeffrey Timm) . State University of New York Press. ISBN 978-0791407967 . Sinha, Jadunath (2016), Indian Philosophy Volume 2 , Motilal Banarsidass Sinha, Jadunath (2013). Indian Psychology Perception . Routledge. pp. 306– 314. ISBN 978-1-136-34605-7 . Sivananda (1977), Brahma Sutras , Motilal Banarsidass Sivananda, Swami (1993), All About Hinduism , The Divine Life Society Sivaraman, K. (1973), Śaivism in Philosophical Perspective: A Study of the Formative Concepts, Problems, and Methods of Śaiva Siddhānta , Motilall Banarsidass Smith, David (2003), The Dance of Siva: Religion, Art and Poetry in South India , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-52865-8 , archived from the original on 16 January 2024 , retrieved 28 January 2017 Staal, Frits (2008). Discovering the Vedas: Origins, Mantras, Rituals, Insights . Penguin Books. p. 365 note 159. ISBN 978-0-14-309986-4 . Stoker, Valerie (2016), Polemics and Patronage in the City of Victory: Vyasatirtha, Hindu Sectarianism, and the Sixteenth-Century Vijayanagara Court , University of California Press Sullivan, Bruce M. (1997). Historical Dictionary of Hinduism . Scarecrow. ISBN 978-0-8108-3327-2 . Suthren Hirst, J. G. (2005), Śaṃkara's Advaita Vedānta: A Way of Teaching , Routledge, ISBN 978-1-134-25441-5 Sydnor, Jon Paul (2023). "Introduction".

In Sydnor, Jon Paul; Watson, Anthony J. (eds.). Nondualism: An Interreligious Exploration . Bloomsbury Publishing. Talbot, Cynthia (2001), Precolonial India in Practice: Society, Region, and Identity in Medieval Andhra , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-513661-6 Thibaut, George (1890). Muller, Max (ed.).

The Sacred Books of the East: The Vedanta-Sutras, Part 1 . Oxford University Press. Timalsina, Sthaneshwar (2008). Consciousness in Indian Philosophy: The Advaita Doctrine of 'Awareness Only' . Routledge. pp. 137 –138. ISBN 978-1-135-97092-5 . Timalsina, Sthaneshwar (2014). Consciousness in Indian Philosophy: The Advaita Doctrine of 'Awareness Only' . Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-76223-6 . Timalsina, Sthaneshwar (November 2017). "Puruṣavāda: A Pre-Śaṅkara Monistic Philosophy as Critiqued by Mallavādin" . Journal of Indian Philosophy . 45 (5): 939– 959. doi : 10.1007/s10781-017-9329-z . S2CID 171790006 . Archived from the original on 4 January 2022 . Retrieved 26 November 2017 . Thrasher, Allen Wright (1993).

The Advaita Vedānta of Brahma-siddhi . Motilal Banarsidass. ISBN 978-81-208-0982-6 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2024 . Retrieved 29 January 2017 . Vachatimanont, Sakkapohl (2005), "On why the traditional Advaic resolution of jivanmukti is superior to the neo-Vedantic resolution", Macalester Journal of Philosophy , 14 (1): 47– 48 Venkatramaiah, Munagala (2000), Talks With Sri Ramana Maharshi: On Realizing Abiding Peace and Happiness , Inner Directions, ISBN 1-878019-00-7 Vireshwarananda, Swami (1936), Adhyasa or Superimposition , archived from the original on 9 December 2021 , retrieved 3 July 2020 Vireswarananda, Swami (2019) . Brahma Sutras. According to Sri Sankara . Advaita Ashrama. Vivekananda, Swami (1947).

The Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda, Volume 7 . Volker, Fabian (2023). "The Plurality of Nonduality: Toward a Tripartite Typology".

In Sydnor, Jon Paul; Watson, Anthony J. (eds.). Nondualism: An Interreligious Exploration . Bloomsbury Publishing. Vroom, H.M. (1989). Religions and the Truth: Philosophical Reflections and Perspectives . Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 978-0802805027 . Werner, Karel (1994), The Yogi and the Mystic , Routledge Whaling, Frank (1979). "Shankara and Buddhism". Journal of Indian Philosophy . 7 (1): 1– 42. doi : 10.1007/BF02561251 . S2CID 170613052 . Wilber, Ken (2000), Integral Psychology , Shambhala Publications Williams, Paul; Tribe, Anthony; Wynne, Alexander (2000). Buddhist Thought: A Complete Introduction to the Indian Tradition . Routledge. ISBN 0-415-20701-0 . Williams, Paul (2008). Mahayana Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-25056-1 . Archived from the original on 11 January 2023 . Retrieved 2 February 2017 . Wood, Thomas E. (1992), The Māṇḍūkya Upaniṣad and the Āgama Śāstra: An Investigation Into the Meaning of the Vedānta Yao, Zhihua (2005).

The Advaita Worldview: God, World, and Humanity . State University of New York Press. ISBN 978-0791468524 . Sarma, Candradhara (2007), The Advaita Tradition in Indian Philosophy , Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120813120 History Nakamura, Hajime (1950), A History of Early Vedanta Philosophy. Part One (1990 Reprint) , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Nakamura, Hajime (1950), A History of Early Vedanta Philosophy. Part Two (2004 Reprint) , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Potter, Karl H. (1981), Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, vol. 3: Advaita Vedanta up to Sankara and his Pupils , Princeton: Princeton University Press Potter, Karl H. (2006), Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies vol. 11: Advaita Vedānta from 800 to 1200 , Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Isaeva, N.V. (1995), From Early Vedanta to Kashmir Shaivism: Gaudapada, Bhartrhari, and Abhinavagupta , SUNY Press Clark, Matthew (2006), The Daśanāmī-saṃnyāsīs.

The Integration Of Ascetic Lineages Into An Order , BRILL Topical studies Arvind Sharma (1995), The Philosophy of Religion and Advaita Vedānta: A Comparative Study in Religion and Reason , Pennsylvania State University Press Satyapal Verma (1992), Role of Reason in Sankara Vedānta , Parimal Publication, Delhi Sangam Lal Pandey (1989), The Advaita view of God , Darshana Peeth, Allahabad Kapil N. Tiwari (1977), Dimensions of renunciation in Advaita Vedānta , Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi Jacqueline G. Suthren Hirst (2005), Samkara's Advaita Vedānta: A Way of Teaching, Routledge, ISBN 978-0415406017 Leesa Davis (2010), Advaita Vedānta and Zen Buddhism: Deconstructive Modes of Spiritual Inquiry, Bloomsbury Academic Dalal, Neil (March 2019). Jain, Andrea R. (ed.). "Embodying Texts and Tradition: Ethnographic Film in a South Indian Advaita Vedānta Gurukulam ". Journal of the American Academy of Religion . 87 (1). Oxford : Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Academy of Religion : 81– 121. doi : 10.1093/jaarel/lfy027 . eISSN 1477-4585 . ISSN 0002-7189 . LCCN sc76000837 . OCLC 1479270 . Gaudapada King, Richard (1995), Early Advaita Vedānta and Buddhism: the Mahāyāna context of the Gauḍapādīya-kārikā , State University of New York Press, ISBN 9780791425138 Shankara Natalia V. Isayeva (1993), Shankara and Indian philosophy , SUNY, New York Elayath. K. N. Neelakantan (1990), The Ethics of Sankara , University of Calicut Raghunath D. Karmarkar (1966), Sankara's Advaita , Karnatak University, Dharwar Paul Deussen (Translated by Charles Johnston), The System of the Vedanta with Shankara commentaries at Google Books , Open Court Charles Johnston, The Vedanta Philosophy of Sankaracharya at Google Books , Theosophical Society Neo-Vedānta King, Richard (2002), Orientalism and Religion: Post-Colonial Theory, India and "The Mystic East" , Routledge Rambachan, Anantanand (1994).