The Taj City ( Taj Nagari ) The Taj Mahal and the Agra Fort are UNESCO World Heritage Sites .

The city features mild winters, hot and dry summers and a monsoon season, and is famous for its Mughlai cuisine . Agra is part of the Golden Triangle tourist circuit, along with Delhi and Jaipur ; and the Uttar Pradesh Heritage Arc , a tourist circuit of Uttar Pradesh , along with Lucknow and Varanasi . Name There are several proposed derivations for the name Agra, none of which is very satisfactory.

The most accepted etymon is the Hindi word agar (salt pan), a name given to it due to the region's brackish soil; salt was once made in the area by evaporation. Others derive it from Hindu mythology, claiming that the Sanskrit word agra ( अग्र ) (literally 'front') means in this case the first of the many small forests where Krishna frolicked with the gopis of Vrindavan .

The term Agravana hence means grove forest.

In the Mughal era, Agra was also known as Akbarabad, a name coined by emperor Shah Jahan in honour of his grandfather Akbar. History Pre-Mughal era Agra has two histories: one of the ancient city on the east, or left, bank of the river Yamuna , going back so far as to be lost in the legends of Krishna and Mahabharata and reestablished by Sikandar Khan Lodi in 1504–1505; the other of the modern city, founded by Akbar in 1558, on the right bank of the river which is associated with the Mughals , and known throughout the world as the city of the Taj. Of ancient Agra little now remains except few traces of the foundations. It was a place of importance under various Hindu dynasties previous to the Muslim invasions of India , but its history is unclear, and possess little historical interest.

The 17th century chronicler named Abdullah said it was a village before the reign of Sikandar Lodi.

The king of Mathura had used the Agra fort as a jail.

The degradation in the status of the site was a result of the destruction brought upon it by Mahmud of Ghazni . Masud Sa'd Salman claims to have been there when Mahmud assaulted Agra, claiming the Raja Japal surrendered after seeing a nightmare. Mahmud however proceeds to pillage the city.

The Tomb of Mariam-uz-Zamani in Sikandra was originally built as a Baradari by Sultan Sikandar Khan Lodi in 1495. Agra's period of historical importance began during Sikandar Lodi's reign.

In 1504–1505, Sultan Sikandar Lodi (reigned 1489–1517 ), the Afghan ruler of the Delhi Sultanate , rebuilt Agra and made it the seat of government. Sikandar Lodi appointed a commission which inspected and surveyed both sides of the Yamuna from Delhi to Etawah and finally chose a place on the left bank, or the east side of the Yamuna, as the site for the city. Agra on the left bank of the Yamuna grew into a large flourishing town with royal presence, officials, merchants, scholars, theologians and artists.

The city became one of the most important centres of Islamic learning in India.

The sultan founded the village of Sikandra in the northern suburbs of the city and built there a Baradari of red sandstone in 1495, which was converted into a tomb by Jahangir, and now stands as the Tomb of Mariam-uz-Zamani , Akbar's empress.

After the Sultan's death in 1517, the city passed on to his son, Sultan Ibrahim Lodi (reigned 1517–26 ). He ruled his sultanate from Agra until he was defeated and killed by Mughal Emperor Babur in the First battle of Panipat , fought in 1526. Mughal era The Town and Fort of Agra, an engraving The golden age of the city began with the Mughals . Agra was the foremost city of the subcontinent and the capital of the Mughal Empire until 1658, when Aurangzeb shifted the entire court to Delhi. Babur (reigned 1526–30 ), the founder of the Mughal dynasty, acquired Agra after defeating the Lodis and the Tomaras of Gwalior in the First Battle of Panipat in 1526. Babur's connection with Agra began immediately after the battle of Panipat. He sent forward his son Humayun , who occupied the town without opposition.

The Raja of Gwalior, slain at Panipat, had left his family and the heads of his clan at Agra.

In gratitude to Humayun, who treated them magnanimously, and protected them from plunder, they presented to him a quantity of jewels and precious stones as a token of homage. Among these was the famous diamond Koh-i-nur . Babur went on to lay out the first formal Mughal garden in India, the Aram Bagh (or Garden of Relaxation) on the banks of the river Yamuna. Babur was determined to establish the seat of his government at Agra, but was almost dissuaded by the desolate appearance of the region, as clear from this quote from his memoir Baburnama : The whole was so ugly and detestable that I repassed the river quite repulsed and disgusted.

In consequence of the want of beauty and of the disagreeable aspect of the country, I gave up my intention of making a charbagh (garden house); but as no better situation presented itself near Agra, I was finally compelled to make the best of this same spot....

In every corner I planted suitable gardens, in every garden I sowed roses and narcissus regularly, and in beds corresponding to each other. We were annoyed by three things in Hindustan; one was its heat, another the strong winds, and the third its dust. Baths were the means of removing all three inconveniences. — Babur, Baburnama Very few vestiges remain of Babur's city, of his fruit and flower gardens, palaces, baths, tanks, wells and watercourses.

The remnants of Babur's Charbagh can be seen today at Aram Bagh , on the east side of Yamuna. Babur was followed by his son Humayun (reigned 1530–40 and 1555–56 ), but he was completely defeated at Kanauj in 1539, just nine years after his ascension, by Sher Shah Suri , an Afghan nobleman, who had submitted to Babur, but revolted against his son.

In this brief interruption in Mughal rule between 1540 and 1556, Sher Shah Suri , established the short lived Sur Empire , and the region was eventually reconquered by Akbar in the Second Battle of Panipat in 1556. Under Akbar (reigned 1556–1605 ), and followed by his grandson Shah Jahan , Agra was immortalised in the history of the world. Akbar built the modern city of Agra on the right bank of Yamuna, where the majority of its part still lies. He converted the city into a great centre of political, cultural and economic importance, connecting it with the various parts of his vast empire. Akbar raised the towering ramparts of the Agra Fort, besides making Agra a centre for learning, arts, commerce, and religion. Akbar also built a new capital city of Fatehpur Sikri , around 35 km from Agra.

The new capital city was later abandoned.

Before his death, Agra had become probably one of the biggest cities in the east, with huge amounts of trade and commerce happening through its bazaars .

The English traveller Ralph Fitch who visited Agra in September 1585 in the life-time of Akbar, writes about the town: Agra is a very great city, and populous, built with stone, having fair and large streets with a fair river running by it . . . . Agra and Fatehpur Sikri are two very great cities, either of them much greater than London, and very populous. Between Agra and Fatehpur are twelve miles ( kos in reality) and all the way is a market of victuals and other things as full as though a man were still in a town, and so many people as if a man were in a market. These impressions of Fitch are corroborated by another European traveller, William Finch , who remarked about Agra: It is spacious, large, populous beyond measure, that you can hardly pass the street . . . . Agra continued to expand and flourish during Akbar's successor Jahangir's reign as he wrote in his autobiography Tuzuk-e-Jahangiri : The habitable part of Agra extends on both sides of the river.

On its west side, which has the greater population, its circumference is seven kos, and its breadth is one kos.

The circumference of the inhabited part on the other side of the river, the side towards the east, is 2 The mass of the people is so great that moving about in the lanes and bazars is difficult. Akbar's successor Jahangir (reigned 1605–27 ) had a love of flora and fauna and laid many gardens inside the Red Fort. Akbar's mausoleum at Sikandra was completed during Jahangir's reign.

The Jahangiri Mahal in Agra fort and the tomb of Itmad-ud-daulah were also constructed during the reign of Jahangir. Jahangir loved Lahore and Kashmir more than Agra, but the latter continued to be the first city of the realm. It was, however, Shah Jahan (reigned 1628–58 ) whose building activity raised Agra to the pinnacle of its glory. Shah Jahan, known for his keen interest in architecture, gave Agra its most prized monument, the Taj Mahal . Built in loving memory of his wife Mumtaz Mahal , the mausoleum was completed in 1653.

The Jama Masjid and several other notable buildings like the Diwan-i-Am , the Diwan-i-Khas , the Moti Masjid , etc., inside the fort were planned and executed under his orders. Shah Jahan later shifted the capital to Shahjahanabad (now known as Delhi ) in the year 1648, followed by his son Aurangzeb (reigned 1658–1707 ) moving the entire court to Delhi in 1658. With this Agra began rapidly declining. Nevertheless, the cultural and strategic importance of Agra remained unaffected and in official correspondence it continued to be referred to as the second capital of the empire.

The Hindu Jats of Bharatpur waged many wars against the Mughal Empire and in the 17th and 18th century carried out numerous campaigns in Mughal territories.

The Jats under Maharaja Suraj Mal conquered Agra on 12 June 1761, after a month-long siege culminating in the Mughals surrendering to the Jat army.

In the years 1834–1836, Agra was the capital of the short-lived Presidency of Agra , administered by a Governor . It was then the capital of the North-Western Province from 1836 to 1858, governed by a Lieutenant-Governor. Agra was one of the centres of the Indian rebellion of 1857 .

During the Indian rebellion of 1857, when East India Company rule across many parts of India was threatened, the news of the mutiny at Meerut reached Agra on 14 May.

On 30 May some companies of the 44th and 67th Native Infantry sent to Mathura to bring in the treasury mutinied and carried off the treasury to the rebels in Delhi. With the fear of the rebellion spreading to Agra as well, the rest of these native infantry battalions, which were part of the garrison at Agra, were successfully disarmed by the British on 31 May. However, when the Gwalior contingent mutinied on 15 June, all other native units followed.

On 2 July the rebel force of the Nimach and Nasirabad contingents reached Fatehpur Sikri . Fearing advance of the mutineers to Agra, some 6000 Europeans and associated people moved into the Agra Fort for safety on 3 July.

On 5 July, the British force stationed there attempted to attack an approaching force of Mutineers, but was defeated, and the British retreated back into the fort.

The Lieutenant-Governor, J.R. Colvin , died there, and was later buried in front of the Diwan-i-am .

The mutineers, however, moved over to Delhi , it being a more important attraction for the rebels. Despite an uprising by a mob and extreme disorder in the city, the British managed to restore partial order by 8 July. Delhi, in turn, fell to the British in September, following which an infantry brigade led by Brigadier Edward Greathed arrived in Agra on 11 October without any opposition from rebels. But shortly after their arrival another force of mutineers attacked the brigade by surprise, but was defeated and routed. This minor victory for the British was named the Battle of Agra . It is to be said that, the uprising in Agra was relatively minor compared to Delhi , Jhansi , Meerut and other major rebellious cities and regions.

After this British rule was again secured, and the British Raj ruled the city till the independence of India in 1947.

The capital of the North Western Provinces was shifted from Agra to Allahabad in 1858. Gradually, Agra declined to the position of a mere provincial town, and its prosperity declined: But in the economy of the administration of British India Agra is nothing more than a district town; its size, proportions and manifold activities have come down to its present requirements, and continued life in this city does not come above the average of that monotonous muffasil life in India which has been so often and so vividly described by many gifted Anglo-Indian writers. Agra has become of late years a large railway centre, and its commercial prosperity seems to be reviving. — Agra by 1892, as described by S.C. Mukerji, Traveller's Guide to Agra, pp 55-56 Agra's role in the Indian Independence movement is not well documented. However, in the years between the mutiny and independence Agra was a major centre of Hindi and Urdu journalism. Paliwal park (formerly Hewitt park) in Agra is named after S.K.D Paliwal , who brought out the Hindi daily Sainik . Post Independence and Mughal legacy Post India's independence, Agra has been a part of Uttar Pradesh and has gradually developed into an industrial city, with a significant contribution to Uttar Pradesh's economy.

The city is now a popular tourist destination and hosts tourists from across the world.

The Taj Mahal and Agra Fort received UNESCO World Heritage Sites status in 1983.

The Taj Mahal witnesses tourists, photographers, historians and archaeologists in massive numbers all around the year.

The Taj Mahal has become a symbol of India. Post Independence, Taj Mahal has been visited by world leaders like US Presidents Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959), Bill Clinton (2000), and Donald Trump (2020). Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom had visited Taj Mahal in 1961 on her India visit. Taj Mahal has also been visited by Russian President Vladimir Putin (1999), Chinese President Hu Jintao (2006), Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu (2018) and Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau (2018). Agra is the birthplace of the now extinct religion known as Din-i-Ilahi , which was founded by Akbar and also of the Radhaswami Faith , which has around two million followers worldwide. Agra is included on both the Golden Triangle tourist circuit, along with Delhi and Jaipur , as well as the Uttar Pradesh Heritage Arc, a tourist circuit of Uttar Pradesh, along with Lucknow and Varanasi . Geography and climate Geography The region around Agra consists almost entirely of a level plain, with hills in the extreme southwest.

The rivers in the region include Yamuna and Chambal .

The region is also watered by the Agra Canal . Millet, barley, wheat, and cotton are among the crops grown in the surrounding countryside. Both Rabi and Kharif crops are cultivated.

The deserted city of Fatehpur Sikri is about 40 km southwest of Agra.

The sandstone hills near Fatehpur Sikri and on the south-eastern borders of the district are offshoots from the Vindhya range of Central India . Agra is about 210 km away from the National capital of New Delhi (via Yamuna Expressway ), about 336 km from state capital Lucknow (via Agra-Lucknow Expressway ), and about 227 km from Kanpur (via Agra-Lucknow Expressway).

The city has an average elevation of 170 metres above sea level. Climate Main article: Climate of Agra Broadly speaking, the climate of Agra is classified as BSh by the Köppen-Geiger climate classification system . This is the tropical and subtropical steppe climate , a major climate type of the Köppen classification that occurs primarily on the periphery of the true deserts in low-latitude regions, forming a transition between the desert climate ( BW ), and the more humid subtropical and tropical climates .

The city features warm winters, sweltering and dry summers and a monsoon season.

The Agra district, from its proximity to the sandy Thar Desert to the west, is relatively dry, and has greater extremes of temperature than districts further east.

The hot west wind, Loo blows mainly during April, May, and June with great force and can cause fatal heatstrokes.

The highest temperature ever registered in Agra was 48.6 °C, on 28 May 2024.

The monsoon rains usually begin in the first week in July; and generally end in mid-September. However, the monsoons , though substantial in Agra, are not quite as heavy as the monsoon in other parts of India.

The weather moderates by the middle of October.

The region around Agra, the northwest Indo-Gangetic plain is prone to extreme fog in the winter months, which is caused due to natural factors like low winds, low temperatures, availability of moisture apart from air pollution. This phenomenon often leads to big delays and sometimes cancellation of trains due to poor visibility. Agra has high levels of air pollution and one of the worst AQIs in India.

The white-marble Taj Mahal is turning yellow and green because of filthy air in the world's eighth-most polluted city.

The Taj Mahal flanks the garbage-strewn Yamuna river and is often enveloped by dust and smog from smokestacks and vehicles.

The Yamuna River is one of the most polluted rivers in the world. Agra is the second largest contributor to River Yamuna's pollution, after Delhi.

The river's pollution has caused several problems for the Taj Mahal such as 'Attacks by Bugs and their Green Slime', foul stench and corrosion of Taj Mahal's foundation.

The river has as many as 90 nalas or drains opening into it. Though the municipality has claimed to stop 40 of these drains, the bigger ones, Bhairon , Mantola , Balkeshwar nalas continue to discharge huge quantities of untreated waste water without any check. Activists say that the Yamuna river bed between Itmad-ud-Daula and the Taj Mahal has become a dumping ground for pollutants. Polythene, plastic waste, leather cuttings from shoe factories, construction material, are all thrown into the river. Less than 7% of the Agra district is under forest cover.

The only major wildlife sanctuary near Agra is Keetham Lake , also known as Sur Sarovar Bird Sanctuary.

The average literacy rate of Agra city is 73.11% of which male and female literacy rates are 77.81% and 67.74% respectively. Religion in Agra city (2011) Religion Percent Hinduism 80.68% Islam 15.37% Jainism 1.04% Sikhism 0.62% Christianity 0.42% Other or not stated 1.87% Distribution of religions Hinduism is the most followed religion in Agra city with 80.68% of its population adhering to it. Islam is second most followed religion in the city of Agra with 15.37% of the population following it. These are followed by Jainism, Sikhism, Christianity and Buddhism at 1.04%, 0.62%, 0.42% and 0.19% respectively. Approximately 1.66% stated 'No Particular Religion'.

The district police is headed by a senior superintendent of police (SSP), who is an IPS officer, and is assisted by six superintendents of police or additional superintendents of police for city, east, west, crime, traffic, and protocol, either from the IPS or the Provincial Police Service . Each of the several police circles is headed by a circle officer in the rank of deputy superintendent of police . Infrastructure and civic administration Agra Municipal Corporation or Agra Nagar Nigam (AMC or ANN) is the Municipal Corporation responsible for the civic infrastructure and administration of the city of Agra. This civic administrative body administers the city's public services.

The mayor and municipal councillors are elected to five-year terms.

The Agra Municipal Corporation oversees four zones (Hariparvat, Lohamandi, Tajganj and Chhata) which are further subdivided into 100 wards.

The AMC boundary encompasses an area of 121 square km.

The Agra Development Authority (ADA), is develops new housing, infrastructure and colonies in the city.

As per the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs , the Agra Municipal Corporation reported a revenue of ₹ 518.37 crore (US$54 million) and an expenditure of ₹ 466.27 crore (US$49 million) in 2022–23. Taxes contributed to 23.0% of the revenue, with 77.0% of the income coming from other sources. Politics Vote share of Parties in 2019 Agra Lok Sabha. BJP (57.0%) BSP (38.0%) INC (4.00%) Others (1.00%) Incumbent MP Satyapal Singh Baghel of BJP won the Agra Lok Sabha constituency with a margin of 2,11,546 votes by defeating Manoj Kumar Soni of BSP. Satyapal Singh Baghel secured 6,46,875 votes. Agra district has two Lok Sabha constituencies, Agra and Fatehpur Sikri , and nine Uttar Pradesh Vidhan Sabha ( Uttar Pradesh Legislative Assembly ) constituencies.

The MP for Agra constituency is SP Singh Baghel , from Bharatiya Janata Party . Ahead of the election the for 2022 Uttar Pradesh Legislative Assembly, it was announced that two more districts, including Agra, could become a police commissionerate before the elections. Utilities The electricity power distribution and bill collection in Agra is the responsibility of Torrent Power , a private sector company as well as DVVNL (Dakshinanchal Vidhyut Vitran Nigam Limited), a state owned entity of UPPCL.

The control of power distribution in Agra was handed over to Torrent Power from the state-owned UP Power Corporation Ltd in 2010, in an effort to move towards power reforms and cutting the massive distribution losses in the state. This was the first time power distribution was privatised in Uttar Pradesh, except for Noida-Greater Noida falling under the NCR . Agra has three primary sources for municipal water supply: water treatment plants at Sikandra and Jeoni Mandi, and groundwater using tubewells.

Since a large portion of the water demand is fulfilled from the Yamuna river, which is a highly polluted river, water quality in Agra is usually poor, with unhealthy levels of chlorine required for purification.

The city's groundwater is also unfit for drinking, and is saline and high in fluoride content. Both sources breach CPCB standards. To provide the city with adequate water supply, the Gangajal pipeline project has been initiated. It includes a 130 km long pipeline laid to bring Ganga water from Bulandshahr's Upper Ganga canal to Agra.

The project has been launched, but has faced criticism due to frequent pipeline leakages. Though most of the city uses cylinders for cooking gas, piped natural gas is also available in many localities, including Kamla Nagar , Sikandra and others.

The service is provided by Green Gas Limited. Economy Due to the presence of the Taj Mahal and other historic monuments, Agra has a booming tourism industry as well as royal crafts like Pietra Dura , marble inlay and carpets. 40% of the population depends largely on agriculture, and others on the leather and footwear business and iron foundries. Agra was the second most self-employed in India in 2007, behind Varanasi, followed by Bhopal, Indore and Patna. According to the National Sample Survey Organization, in 1999–2000, 431 of every 1,000 employed males were self-employed in the city, which grew to 603 per 1,000 in 2004–05. Tourism has a significant role in the economy of Agra, with upwards of 9.5 million tourists visiting Agra and surrounding monuments in 2019.

The city is home to Asia's largest spa called Kaya Kalp – The Royal Spa, at the ITC Hotel Mughal in Agra. Other hotels include Taj Hotel and Convention Centre. Sanjay Place is the trade centre of Agra. There are about 12 major and medium scale industries, producing electrical goods, pipes, leather goods etc. There are about 7,200 small scale industrial units. Above 1.5 lakh pairs of shoes per day are manufactured in Agra by the various footwear units. Agra city is also known for its leather goods, the oldest and famous leather firm Taj Leather World is in Sadar bazar .

The carpets, handicrafts, zari and zardozi (embroidery work), marble and stone carving and inlay work. Agra amassed a GDP of 40.21 billions / 40,210 crores as per the data released by UP Government for the year 2018–19, thus the 3rd rank in the state.

In the Swachh Survekshan 2020, Agra ranked 16th nation-wide, and 2nd in the state after Lucknow , which was a big jump after 86th in 2019, 102nd in 2018, and 263rd in 2017.

In the Smart city Rankings , which are pan-India rankings for 100 cities which is released by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs based on the progress/completion rate of Smart City projects, Agra ranked 1st, based on the rankings released based on work done by department concerned under the Smart City project from 1 October 2019, to 1 March 2020.

As of August 2020, Industrial activity in Agra has been affected as a result of the restrictions imposed due to the COVID-19 pandemic that has forced people to remain confined to their homes.

The sectors worst-hit are the iron foundries, tourism, leather shoe industry in Agra. It is estimated that the loss in the tourism industry due to COVID-19 restrictions is approximately ₹ 22 billions / 2,200 crores. Tajview hotel, the first five-star hotel in Agra, operated by the IHCL group A marble table top in pietra dura , a craft practised since the Mughal era in Agra The Sadar Bazar market An Agra craftsman working with marble stone inlays.

The marble is coloured red to give contrast while working. Monuments and architecture The Taj Mahal rises above the banks of the river like a solitary tear suspended on the cheek of time. — Rabindranath Tagore , (translated by Kshitish Roy) from One Hundred and One Poems by Rabindranath Tagore (pp. 95–96) Taj Mahal is a mausoleum complex in Agra, built by the Mughal emperor Shah Jahan as a tomb for his wife Mumtaz Mahal ("Chosen One of the Palace"), who died in childbirth in 1631, having been the emperor's inseparable companion since their marriage in 1612. India's most famed building, it is situated in the eastern part of the city on the southern (right) bank of the Yamuna River, about 1.6 km east of the Agra Fort, also on the right bank of the Yamuna.

The Taj Mahal is distinguished as the finest example of Mughal architecture, a blend of Indian, Persian, and Islamic styles. Other attractions include twin mosque buildings (placed symmetrically on either side of the mausoleum), pleasant gardens, and a museum.

The complex was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1983, and is one of the New Seven Wonders of the world.

The Taj Mahal is the most visited tourist spot in the India, attracting nearly 6.9 million visitors in 2018–19.

The chief architect was probably the Persian architect Ustad Ahmad Lahori. Designed as a unified entity according to the principles of Mughal architecture, the five principal elements of the complex were the main gateway, garden, mosque, jawab (literally 'answer', a building mirroring the mosque), and the mausoleum, with its four minarets.

The construction commenced in 1632 with upwards of twenty thousand workers from India, Persia, the Ottoman Empire, and Europe working to complete the mausoleum itself by 1639, the adjunct buildings by 1643, with decoration work continuing until at least 1647.

In total, construction of the 42 acre (17 hectare) complex spanned 22 years. It can be observed from Agra Fort from where Emperor Shah Jahan gazed at it for the last eight years of his life, a prisoner of his son Aurangzeb . Verses of the Quran are inscribed on it and at the top of the gate are 22 small domes, signifying the number of years the monument took to build.

The Taj Mahal was built on a marble platform that stands above a sandstone one.

The most elegant and largest dome of the Taj Mahal has a diameter of 60 feet (18 m), and has a height of 80 feet (24 m); directly under this dome is the tomb of Mumtaz Mahal. Shah Jahan's tomb was erected next to hers by his son Aurangzeb.

The interiors are decorated with fine pietra dura inlay work, incorporating semi-precious stones. However, air pollution caused by emissions from foundries and other nearby factories and exhaust from motor vehicles has damaged the Taj, notably its marble facade. A number of measures have been taken to reduce the threat to the monument, among them the closing of some foundries and the installation of pollution-control equipment at others, the creation of a parkland buffer zone around the complex, and the banning of nearby vehicular traffic, and more recently, use of 'mud pack' therapy. Perhaps most importantly, the 10,400 km 2 (4,000 sq mi) Taj Trapezium Zone has been created around the Taj Mahal and other nearby monuments where strict pollution restrictions are in place on industries, following a 1996 Supreme Court of India ruling. Some antique views were published in the Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Books, namely Tâj-Mahal, Agra . by Samuel Prout from a mid-distant angle (1832) and Ruins about the Taj Mahal . by S. Austin from those said ruins (1836). Both are accompanied by poetical illustrations by Letitia Elizabeth Landon .

The most common front view of the Taj Mahal Taj Mahal and outlying buildings as seen from across the Yamuna River (northern view) Tombs of Shah Jahan and his beloved wife, Mumtaz Mahal Taj Mahal from Agra fort Agra Fort Main article: Agra Fort The Agra Fort is a large 16th-century fortress of red sandstone located by the Yamuna River in Agra. It was first established by the Mughal Emperor Akbar and served as the seat of royal government when Agra was the capital of the Mughal empire in addition to being a military base and a royal residence. Built on the site of earlier fortifications by Islam Shah Suri (son of Sher Shah Suri ), the Agra Fort lies on the right bank of the Yamuna River and is connected to the Taj Mahal (downstream, around a bend in the Yamuna), by a stretch of parkland.

The fort was commissioned by Akbar in 1565, taking around eight years to build. Though much of the structure of the fort was founded by Akbar, both the interior and exterior underwent considerable changes under his son Jahangir and grandson Shah Jahan , who added many new structures, often of marble.

The red sandstone walls of the roughly semi-circular structure have a perimeter of about 2.5 km, rise 21 metres high, and are surrounded by a moat. There are two entrances in the walls: the Delhi Gate facing west, the original entrance, situated nearly opposite to the Agra Fort railway station and Jama Masjid, and decorated with intricate marble inlays; and the Amar Singh Gate(also known as Hathi Pol , or Elephant Gate) facing south, presently the only means in or out of the fort complex).

The complex of buildings in the fort—reminiscent of Persian and Timurid architecture, with great inspiration from Jain and Hindu architecture —forms a city within a city. Among the major attractions in the fort is Jahangiri Mahal , the largest residence in the complex, built by Akbar as a private palace for his Rajput wives .

In the Diwan-i-Am (Hall of Public Audience), the emperor would listen to public petitions and meet state officials.

The Diwan-i-Khas (Hall of Private Audience) was used for receiving distinguished visitors.

The famous Peacock Throne was once kept there, before Aurangzeb took it to Delhi. Near the Diwan-i-Khas stands the Musamman Burj , an octagonal Tower which was the residence of Shah Jahan's favourite empress, Mumtaz Maḥal .

The Moti Masjid (Pearl Mosque), constructed by Shah Jahan, is a structure made entirely of white marble.

The emperor's private residence was the Khas Mahal, whose marble walls were once adorned with flowers depicted by precious gems. Located to its northeast is the Sheesh Mahal (Palace of Mirrors), its walls and ceilings inlaid with thousands of small mirrors. Numerous other structures are there in the complex, including the Anguri Bagh , the Mina Bazaar etc.

In addition to its other functions, the fort also served as a prison for Shah Jahan when Aurangzeb, his son and successor as emperor, had him confined there from 1658 until his death in 1666.

The Jahangiri Mahal , the largest residence in the complex Musamman Burj , an octagonal Tower which was the residence of Shah Jahan's favourite empress, Mumtaz Maḥal The Moti Masjid or the Pearl Mosque Amar Singh Gate , one of two entrances into Agra's Red Fort I'timād-ud-Daulah's tomb Main article: Tomb of I'timād-ud-Daulah The I'timād-ud-Daulah's tomb Nur Jahan commissioned I'timād-ud-Daulah's tomb , sometimes called the "Baby Taj", for her father, Mirza Ghiyas Beg , the Chief Minister of the Emperor Jahangir . Located on the left bank of the Yamuna river, the mausoleum is set in a large cruciform garden, crisscrossed by water courses and walkways.

The area of the mausoleum itself is about 23 m 2 (250 ft 2 ), and is built on a base that is about 50 m 2 (540 ft 2 ) and about one metre (3.3 feet) high.

On each corner are hexagonal towers, about thirteen metres (43 feet) tall. Small in comparison to many other Mughal-era tombs, it is sometimes described as a jewel box. Its garden layout and use of white marble, pietra dura , inlay designs, and latticework presage many elements of the Taj Mahal .

The walls are white marble from Rajasthan encrusted with semi-precious stone decorations – cornelian , jasper , lapis lazuli , onyx , and topaz in images of cypress trees and wine bottles or more elaborate decorations like cut fruit or vases containing bouquets. Light penetrates the interior through delicate Jali screens of intricately carved white marble. Akbar's Tomb, Sikandra Main article: Tomb of Akbar the Great Tomb of Akbar the Great Sikandra , the last resting place of the Mughal Emperor Akbar the Great , is on the Delhi-Agra Highway, about 13 kilometres (8.1 miles) from the Agra Fort .

The four-storied tomb combines both marble and sandstone in its exterior.

The construction of Sikandra was commenced in Akbar's reign and was completed by his heir and son Jahangir in 1613.

The tomb is set amidst a large garden and is enclosed by four battlemented walls, each with a large gateway.

The 99 names of Allah have been inscribed on the tomb.

The tomb has seen some damage to its minarets and other aspects, which was inflicted in 1688 by the Jats under Rajaram Jat , to avenge his uncle Gokula Jat , who was executed by the Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb .

The Jats plundered the tomb's gold, jewels, silver, and carpets, and also burned Akbar's bones.

The vast gardens around Sikandra are inhabited by several Blackbucks , which are in the process of being shifted to the Etawah Safari Park . Next to Akbar's tomb, stands the Tomb of Mariam-uz-Zamani , the favourite wife of Akbar. Tomb of Mariam-uz-Zamani Other places of Interest Agra also has several other places of interest, most of them from its Mughal past. They include the Battis Khamba , Jama Masjid, Chini Ka Rauza, Aram Bagh, Mariam's Tomb, and Mehtab Bagh among others.

The Jama Masjid is a large mosque attributed to Shah Jahan's daughter Jahanara Begum , built-in 1648, notable for its unusual dome and absence of minarets.

The Chini Ka Rauza , notable for its Persian influenced dome of blue glazed tiles, is dedicated to the prime minister of Shah Jahan, Afzal Khan.

The Aram Bagh , commonly known as Ram Bagh today, is one of the oldest Mughal garden in India, and was built by the Mughal emperor Babur in 1528 on the bank of the Yamuna. It lies about 2.3 km (1 mi) north of the Taj Mahal.

The original name of the gardens was Aram Bagh, or 'Garden of Relaxation', and this was where Babur used to spend his leisure time. Tomb of Mariam-uz-Zamani is the tomb of Mariam, the favourite wife of Emperor Akbar .

The tomb is within the compound of the Christian Missionary Society.

The Mehtab Bagh , or 'Moonlight Garden', is on the opposite bank of the River Yamuna from the Taj Mahal. Agra also has a nearby bird sanctuary, Keetham Lake . Also known as Sur Sarovar Bird Sanctuary, it is situated within the Surdas Reserved Forest.

The lake has nearly two dozen varieties of migratory and resident birds. City The sweet dish petha from Agra Agra falls under Braj region and its local language is Braj Bhakha . Agra is known for its Braj cuisine and shares common culinary heritage with twin cities of Mathura and Vrindavan . Among Muslims of Agra, non vegetarian food is popular. Petha , a sweet made using ash gourd , is one of the famous dishes of Agra, and is available in many varieties. Another dish that is endemic to Agra is dalmoth , which is a dry snack made with spicy fried dal (lentils), nuts and raisins.

The breakfast specialties include Bedai , which is a puffy kachori (made with all purpose flour, which is deep fried) with spicy filling inside and is generally served with spicy aloo bhaaji and dahi (curd). Equally popular as a snack is chaat , a collective term which includes snacks like dahi bhalla , raj kachori , samosas , and gol gappa , among others. Paratha , a pan fried flat wheat bread which is stuffed with potatoes, cauliflower, carrots or chhena , is also popular, and eaten accompanied with curd, pickle and chutney . Beyond the famed Petha, Agra's cuisine is a blend of Mughal richness and local flavours. Unique street foods like: Bhalla (Dahi Aloo Tikki) from Sadar Bazaar, Bedai with Jalebi in the mornings, and Tandoori Chai in clay cups are popular among locals. Taj Mahotsav Taj Mahotsav is a cultural festival and craft fair that was started in the year 1992 and has grown since then.

The year 2019 was the 28th year of this Mahotsav.

The fair is held in a big field in Shilpgram, near the eastern gate of the Taj Mahal. This festival also figures in the calendar of events of the Department of Tourism, Government of India. A large number of Indian and foreign tourists coming to Agra join this festivity. One of the objectives of this craft fair is to provide encouragement to the artisans. It also makes available works of art and craft at reasonable prices that are not inflated by high maintenance cost.

The Mahotsav is hosted from 18 to 27 February every year.

The theme for the 2020 Taj Mahotsav was Sanskriti ke Rang, Taj ke Sang. For the first time since 1992, Taj Mahotsav 2021 has been cancelled, because of tourism restrictions during the COVID-19 pandemic . Transport This section needs more citations . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( April 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Air As of April 2021, Indigo operates regular flights between Agra Airport and Mumbai , Ahmedabad , Bhopal , and Bangalore .

The Agra Airport at Kheria is controlled by the Indian Air Force. For international and expanded domestic travel, the city is served by major hubs in the National Capital Region : Indira Gandhi International Airport (Delhi): Located approximately 200 kilometres (120 mi) away, it remains the primary international gateway for Agra via the Yamuna Expressway . Noida International Airport (Jewar): Inaugurated on 28 March 2026, this airport is located significantly closer to Agra (approximately 140 kilometres (87 mi)). It is expected to become a major secondary hub for the region, with commercial flight operations scheduled to commence in April 2026. Rail Main article: Railways in Agra Agra Cantt Railway Station Railway Map of Agra (the line to Jaipur has meanwhile been converted to broad gauge) The city of Agra is served by 7 railway stations, viz., Agra Cantonment (major station for Delhi - Mumbai line), Raja-Ki-Mandi , Agra Fort (Major station for Jodhpur - Howrah Line), Idgah , Agra City , Jamuna Bridge, and Billochpura. It comes under the jurisdiction of the Agra Division of North Central Railways Zone of the Indian Railways.

The city is served by multiple mail/express trains, as well as Rajdhani , Shatabdi , and Gatiman express.

The Gatiman express is India's first semi-high train speed service, and has cut travel time between Agra and Delhi to 100 minutes. Being a major tourist destination, Agra is also served by the luxury train Maharajas' Express . Agra Cantonment railway station Road Inner Ring Road link Yamuna Expressway to Lucknow expressway, Fatehabad Road, Shamshabad Road, NH-3, NH-11 Agra Inter-State Bus Terminal (I.S.B.T.), Idgah Bus Stand , Taj Depot and Fort Depot are the major bus stands in Agra, connecting Agra to most of the bigger cities in northern India. It is a major junction of highways with three national highways and two expressways ( Yamuna Expressway and Agra Lucknow Expressway ) originating from Agra.

From Delhi : NH 19 (old number: NH 2), a modern divided highway, connects the 200 km (124 mi) distance from Delhi to Agra.

From Delhi / Noida : Yamuna Expressway , a modern access controlled highway connects the 200 km (124 mi) distance from Delhi to Agra. Yamuna Expressway (formerly Taj Expressway) is a six lane, 165 km (103 mi) long, controlled-access expressway, that connects New Delhi with Agra via Greater Noida and Mathura in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh. NH 509 (old number: NH 93) connects Agra to Moradabad via Aligarh . Section of NH 44 (old number: NH 3 Agra Mumbai national highway) connects Agra to Gwalior via Dholpur . NH 21 (old number: NH 11 Agra Jaipur Highway) connects Jaipur to Bareilly via Agra. Agra Lucknow Expressway is a six lane, 302 km (188 mi) long, controlled-access expressway, that connects Lucknow with Agra via Kannauj and Etawah in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh. Bus services are run by the UPSRTC . Other para-transit modes include rickshaws. Polluting vehicles are not allowed near the Taj Mahal . Within the city, Mahatma Gandhi Marg is the main artery. Agra Metro Main article: Agra Metro Rail India Technical and Economic Service ( RITES ) had proposed 30 stations, 11 underground and 19 elevated, for two corridors of the Metro Rail in the city.

The two lines are Sikandra to the Taj Mahal's east gate via Agra Fort and Agra Cantt to Kalindi Vihar.

On 24 March 2017, State Chief Minister Yogi Aditya Nath approved the project.

In December 2017, the cabinet of the UP Government approved the DPR as per New Metro Policy. Prime Minister Narendra Modi laid the foundation stone of Agra Metro on 8 March 2019.

As of January 2025, the Agra Metro project has made significant progress:The Priority Corridor, a 6 km stretch from Taj East Gate to Jama Masjid with 6 stations, began operations on 6 March 2024. This section includes 3 elevated stations (Taj East Gate, Basai, and Fatehabad Road) and 3 underground stations ( Taj Mahal , Agra Fort , and Jama Masjid). Construction is ongoing for the remaining sections of Phase 1, which consists of two lines: Yellow Line (Line 1) Total length: 14.25 km (6.569 km elevated, 7.681 km underground) 14 stations (6 elevated, 7 underground) Current status: 6 km operational, remaining under construction Expected completion: 2026 Blue Line (Line 2) Total length: 15.40 km (fully elevated) 15 stations (all elevated) Current status: Under construction Expected completion: December 2025 Recent developments Tunnelling progress: As of January 2025, 16 breakthroughs have been achieved for the Agra Metro Phase 1 project.

The final breakthrough on a 2.2 km upline tunnel was recently completed by a 6.61-m diameter Earth Pressure Balance Tunnel Boring Machine (EPBM). Civil works: Construction is progressing on the elevated viaduct and stations for both lines. For example, the AGCC-05 package, which includes a 3.725 km elevated section connecting RBS Ramp in Khandari to Sikandra, is currently underway. Contracts: Larsen & Toubro (L&T) was awarded a Rs. 1,242.79 crore contract in September 2024 for the civil construction of Line-2, which will be executed under package AGCC-07. Funding: The project is partially financed by a €450 million loan from the European Investment Bank (EIB). Environmental certification: All stations on the priority corridor have received the Platinum Rating from the Indian Green Building Council (IGBC), making Agra Metro a Green Mass Rapid Transit System (GMRTS).

The entire Phase 1 project, estimated to cost ₹8,379.62 crore (approx. $930 million USD), is expected to be completed by 2026. Education Agra University St John College St Peter's College This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( April 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Universities and colleges Agra College Agra University was established on 1 July 1927 and catered to colleges spread across the United Provinces, the Rajputana, the Central Provinces and almost to entire northern India. There are 10 institutes comprising various departments and around 700 Colleges are affiliated to this university.

The historic Agra University was later rechristened as Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar University by the then Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh, Mayawati .

The Institute of Mental Health and Hospital , formerly known as Agra Lunatic Asylum, was established in September 1859 governed by the State of Uttar Pradesh. It is spread over an extensive ground of 172.8 acres (69.9 ha) land and is well-known centre for the treatment, training, and research on mental disorders in Northern India.

The institute was renamed as Mental Hospital, Agra in 1925. Presently all admissions and discharges are being done under the provisions of Mental Health Act, 1987. Central Institute of Hindi (also known as Kendriya Hindi Sansthan) is an autonomous institute under Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India engaged in teaching Hindi as a foreign and second language. Apart from running residential Hindi language courses for foreign students, the institute also conducts regular training programmes for teachers of Hindi belonging to non-Hindi states of India.

The institute is situated at an 11 acres (4.5 ha) campus on the outskirts of Agra city. Headquartered in Agra the institute has eight regional centres in Delhi, Hyderabad, Mysore, Shillong, Dimapur, Guwahati, Ahmedabad and Bhubneshwar.

The institute is the only government-run institution in India established solely for research and teaching of Hindi as a foreign and second language. Sarojini Naidu Medical College is one of the three oldest medical colleges of India. It is located in Agra, Uttar Pradesh state. It is named after the first lady Governess of Uttar Pradesh, poet and freedom fighter, Bharat Kokila Smt. Sarojini Naidu. Agra College is one of the oldest institutions in India. Pandit Gangadhar Shastri, a noted Sanskrit scholar, founded the college in 1823. Till 1883 the institute was a government college and after that, a board of trustees and a Committee of Management managed the college. Agra College produced the first graduate in Uttar Pradesh and the first Law graduate to Northern India. St. John's College, Agra , is a college established in 1850, now part of the Dr. Bhim Rao Ambedkar University, earlier known as Agra University. It is amongst the oldest Christian colleges in India.

The college runs a study centre of Indira Gandhi National Open University , a central university. Schools St. George's College, Agra , is one of the oldest convent schools in India. It is a Minority Anglo-Indian Christian Institution granted Minority Rights under Article 30 of the Indian Constitution . It is located near Mall Road and near to Targhar. St. Peter's College, Agra , founded in the year 1846, is one of the oldest convent schools in India. It is a Roman Catholic Institution granted Minority Rights under Article 30 of the Indian Constitution . Media This section needs more citations . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( April 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Agra is home to the Dainik Jagran newspaper, the most read Hindi newspaper in India. Other widely read papers include Amar Ujala , Rajasthan Patrika , Aaj , Hindustan , The Sea Express , daily Amar Bharti , Deepsheel Bharat , and DLA .

The English dailies published are The Times of India , Hindustan Times , Economic Times , and The Pioneer .

The traveller's guide to Agra, containing an account of the past history, the antiquities, and the principal sights of Agra, together with some information about Agra as it is . University of California Libraries. Delhi, Sen & Co. p. 3. ^ a b c d e f g Agra Vol Xiv . 1944. p. 22. ^ Bosworth, Clifford Edmund (2008). Historic cities of the Islamic world . Brill. p. 2. ISBN 978-90-04-15388-2 . OCLC 231801473 . ^ Koch, Ebba (1 January 2008), "Mughal Agra: A Riverfront Garden City" , The City in the Islamic World (2 Vols.) , BRILL, pp. 555– 588, doi : 10.1163/ej.9789004162402.i-1500.148 , ISBN 978-90-474-4265-3 , retrieved 4 July 2021 ^ a b "Part One: Babar" . www.columbia.edu . Archived from the original on 8 February 2007 . Retrieved 3 April 2021 . ^ Abraham Eraly, The Age of Wrath: A History of the Delhi Sultanate ^ Sunil Sharma, Persian Poetry at the Indian Frontier: Masʻŝud Saʻd Salmân of Lahore ^ a b "Lodī dynasty | Indian history" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 10 April 2021 . ^ Bhanu, Dharma (1979).

The Province of Agra: Its History and Administration . Concept Publishing Company. ^ Bhanu, Dharma (1979).

The Province of Agra: Its History and Administration . Concept Publishing Company. pp. 2– 3. ^ "Part Fourteen: Sikandra" . www.columbia.edu . Archived from the original on 4 March 2007 . Retrieved 4 April 2021 . ^ "01babur" . www.columbia.edu . Retrieved 3 April 2021 . ^ a b c d Bhanu, Dharma (1979).

The Province of Agra: Its History and Administration . Concept Publishing Company. p. 1. ^ a b c d e f g "Mughal dynasty | History, Map, Rulers, & Facts" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 10 April 2021 . ^ a b c d "Historical Introduction, Part One: Babar - Babar's connection with Agra" . www.columbia.edu . Retrieved 3 April 2021 . ^ Bhanu, Dharma (1979).

The Province of Agra: Its History and Administration . Concept Publishing Company. p. 4. ^ "Part Sixteen: Fatehpur Sikri" . www.columbia.edu . Archived from the original on 8 February 2007 . Retrieved 14 September 2020 . ^ a b c d Bhanu, Dharma (1979).

The Province of Agra: Its History and Administration . Concept Publishing Company. pp. 4– 5. ^ a b Mukerji, Satya Chandra (1892).

The traveller's guide to Agra, containing an account of the past history, the antiquities, and the principal sights of Agra, together with some information about Agra as it is . University of California Libraries. Delhi, Sen & Co. pp. 20– 21. ^ Siddiqi, Zeba (2006). "City of Agra under the Mughal from 1526-1707" (PDF) . Centre of Advance Study Department of History Augarh Muslim University Aligarh (India) : 10, 11. ^ Richards, John F. (1995).

The Mughal Empire . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521566032 . ^ a b "Agra | India" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 16 September 2020 . ^ The Gazetteer of India: History and culture . Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, India. 1973. p. 348. OCLC 186583361 . ^ Sarkar, Sir Jadunath (1950). Fall of the Mughal Empire: 1754-1771. (Panipat) 2d ed., rev. 1950 . M.C. Sarkar. ^ Gaur, Albertin (June 1991). "George Michell: The Penguin guide to the monuments of India, I: Buddhist, Jain, Hindu. 519 pp. New York and London: Viking, 1989. £30. - Philip Da Vies: The Penguin guide to the monuments of India, II: Islamic, Rajput, European. 604 pp. New York and London: Viking, 1989. £30" . Bulletin of SOAS . 54 (2): 396– 397. doi : 10.1017/S0041977X00015184 . ISSN 1474-0699 . ^ "The history of architecture in India : from the dawn of civilization to the end of the Raj | WorldCat.org" . search.worldcat.org . Retrieved 2 December 2025 . ^ Bhanu, Dharma (1979).

The Province of Agra: Its History and Administration . Concept Publishing Company. ^ Verma, Amrit (1985). Forts of India . New Delhi: The Director of Publication Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. pp. 78– 80. ISBN 81-230-1002-8 . ^ Imperial Gazetteer of India vol. V . 1908. pp. 72, 158. ^ a b Mukerji, Satya Chandra (1892).

The traveller's guide to Agra, containing an account of the past history, the antiquities, and the principal sights of Agra, together with some information about Agra as it is . University of California Libraries. Delhi, Sen & Co. pp. 51, 55– 56. ^ Pletcher, Kenneth (15 August 2010).

The Geography of India: Sacred and Historic Places .

The Rosen Publishing Group, Inc. p. 95. ISBN 978-1-61530-142-3 . ^ Mukerji, Satya Chandra (1892).

The traveller's guide to Agra, containing an account of the past history, the antiquities, and the principal sights of Agra, together with some information about Agra as it is . University of California Libraries. Delhi, Sen & Co. p. 45. ^ a b "Part Seven: Agra and the Later Mogul Emperors" . www.columbia.edu . Archived from the original on 29 February 2008 . Retrieved 13 September 2020 . ^ Edwardes, Michael (1963). Battles of the Indian mutiny . pp. 50– 53. ^ "Agra City" (GIF) . Imperial Gazetteer of India (Digital South Asia Library of University of Chicago) . 5 : 83– 84. Archived from the original on 22 May 2010 . Retrieved 8 November 2009 . ^ "Agra's crucial role in freedom movement not documented: Historians" . Business Standard India . 14 August 2015 . Retrieved 2 October 2020 . ^ "The heritage of British period statues" .

The Statesman . 13 June 2019 . Retrieved 2 October 2020 . ^ "History of Hindi Journalism" . www.indianfaculty.com . Retrieved 2 October 2020 . ^ "Agra | India" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 14 April 2021 . ^ "Taj Mahal" . UNESCO World Heritage Centre . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . ^ "Agra Fort" . UNESCO World Heritage Centre . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . ^ "India has an edge over China in soft power, divisive politics must not harm it" . www.dailyo.in . Retrieved 12 September 2020 . ^ "Distinguished Lectures Details" . www.mea.gov.in . Retrieved 12 September 2020 . ^ S, Deepika (25 February 2020). "Top world leaders who visited the iconic Taj Mahal" . OneIndia . Retrieved 12 September 2020 . ^ "Dīn-i Ilāhī | Indian religion" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 12 September 2020 . ^ "Exploring UNESCO World Heritage sites on India's Golden Triangle tour" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 14 April 2021 . ^ "The Heritage Arc" . Department of Tourism, Government of Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 10 September 2015 . Retrieved 14 April 2021 . ^ Pletcher, Kenneth (15 August 2010).

The Geography of India: Sacred and Historic Places .

The Rosen Publishing Group, Inc. p. 95. ISBN 978-1-61530-142-3 . ^ Mukerji, Satya Chandra (1892).

The traveller's guide to Agra, containing an account of the past history, the antiquities, and the principal sights of Agra, together with some information about Agra as it is . University of California Libraries. Delhi, Sen & Co. p. 152. ^ "Agra to New Delhi" . Agra to New Delhi . Retrieved 24 September 2020 . ^ "Agra to Lucknow" . Agra to Lucknow . Retrieved 24 September 2020 . ^ "Agra to Kanpur" . Agra to Kanpur . Retrieved 24 September 2020 . ^ "Agra climate: Average Temperature, weather by month, Agra weather averages - Climate-Data.org" . en.climate-data.org . Retrieved 25 September 2020 . ^ Strahler, Alan H. (10 December 2008). Modern Physical Geography, 4Th Ed . Wiley India Pvt. Limited. ISBN 978-81-265-1924-8 . ^ "Tropical and subtropical steppe climate" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 25 September 2020 . ^ S.V.S. Rana (2007), Essentials of Ecology and Environmental Science , Prentice Hall of India, ISBN 978-81-203-3300-0 , ...

In the plains of northern India and Pakistan, sometimes a very hot and dry wind blows from the west in the months of May and June, usually in the afternoons. It is known as loo. Its temperature invariably ranges above 45 °C .. People, when exposed to loo ... ^ "Profile of the study area (Agra and Khajuraho)" (PDF) . shodhganga.inflibnet.ac.in . Retrieved 5 March 2022 . ^ "A pollution link to why Delhi gets heavy winter fog" . Hindustan Times . 30 December 2020 . Retrieved 24 September 2020 . ^ Choudhary, Srishti (30 December 2019). "Delhi records its coldest day in December since 1901" . mint . Retrieved 24 September 2020 . ^ "Air Pollution: India tops world in bad air quality: Kanpur, Delhi among top 15, Mumbai 4th most polluted megacity" .

The Economic Times . Retrieved 29 September 2020 . ^ Rawat, Virendra Singh (2 April 2010). "Torrent Power begins power distribution in Agra" . Business Standard India . Retrieved 29 September 2020 . ^ "Assessment of Non-Revenue Water & Developing Strategies and Implementation Action Plan for Reduction of Non Revenue Water in Agra" (PDF) . Nagar Nigam Agra . Retrieved 29 September 2020 . ^ "Agra's water woes" . www.downtoearth.org.in . Retrieved 29 September 2020 . ^ "Gangajal pipeline ready for use, city to get Ganga water by month end" .

The Times of India . 7 December 2018 . Retrieved 30 September 2020 . ^ "PM Narendra Modi launches projects worth Rs 2,980 cr in Agra" .

The Economic Times . Retrieved 30 September 2020 . ^ Lavania, Deepak (1 February 2020). "On opening day, leaks detected in Gangajal treatment facility" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 30 September 2020 . ^ "Taps run dry in 15 wards due to pipeline leaks" .

The Times of India . 29 December 2019 . Retrieved 30 September 2020 . ^ "शहर में प्रतिदिन हो रही हजारों लीटर गंगाजल की बर्बादी" . Hindustan (in Hindi). 29 September 2020 . Retrieved 30 September 2020 . ^ Lavania, Deepak (24 May 2018). "UP cabinet approves proposal for piped gas supply in state" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 29 September 2020 . ^ Chauhan, Arvind (28 April 2015). "Agra residents to get PNG" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 29 September 2020 . ^ "The Splendid Radhasoami Satsangs Temple at Agra" . Outlook . 7 March 2020 . Retrieved 7 September 2020 . ^ "India's new Entrepreneurs" . Mint . 16 May 2007. Archived from the original on 18 August 2007 . Retrieved 25 March 2011 . ^ "Year-wise Tourist Statistics" . www.uptourism.gov.in . Archived from the original on 26 June 2020 . Retrieved 15 September 2020 . ^ "ITC unveils Asia's largest spa in Agra" .

The Economic Times . 9 March 2008. Archived from the original on 26 December 2008 . Retrieved 8 November 2009 . ^ "ITC Hotels, Welcomhotel present Ollie's Virtual Summer Camp" . Business World . 20 August 2020 . Retrieved 7 September 2020 . ^ Chaudhuri, Sharmistha (31 October 2019). "A Moment In Time: The Taj Hotel and Convention Centre Agra" . Outlook . Retrieved 7 September 2020 . ^ "Economy | District Agra, Government Of Uttar Pradesh" . Retrieved 7 September 2020 . ^ "Cultural extravaganza: Taj Mahotsav" . Deccan Herald . 25 February 2020 . Retrieved 7 September 2020 . ^ "Beyond the Taj Mahal" . Tribuneindia News Service . 1 March 2020 . Retrieved 7 September 2020 . ^ "Noida tops Uttar Pradesh GDP & per capita income again, Lucknow is second" .

The Times of India . 13 March 2020 . Retrieved 6 September 2020 . ^ "Swachh Survekshan 2020: स्वच्छता में आगरा की लंबी छलांग, देश में पाया 16वां स्थान" . Amar Ujala (in Hindi) . Retrieved 6 September 2020 . ^ "Swachh Survekshan 2020: Top 20 cleanest cities in India" . www.timesnownews.com . 20 August 2020 . Retrieved 6 September 2020 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh: Agra tops smart cities chart with 2 other cities - ET Government" . ETGovernment.com . Retrieved 6 September 2020 . ^ Qureshi, Siraj (15 March 2020). "Agra residents surprised as city ranks No. 1 in list of smart cities" . India Today . Retrieved 6 September 2020 . ^ "Agra's industrial growth takes a hit from COVID-19" . National Herald . 14 August 2020 . Retrieved 7 September 2020 . ^ Qureshi, Siraj (9 September 2020). "Agra tourism industry lost Rs 2,200 crores in past 6 months due to Taj closure in lockdown" . India Today . Retrieved 15 September 2020 . ^ "UNESCO - World Heritage Site" . www.tajmahal.gov.in . Retrieved 15 September 2020 . ^ "New Seven Wonders of the World" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 15 September 2020 . ^ Sharma, Aman. "Tourists up at Taj Mahal and Red Fort but Qutub Minar loses its No.2 Spot" .

The Economic Times . Retrieved 15 September 2020 . ^ a b "Taj Mahal" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 7 April 2021 . ^ "Taj Mahal" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 15 September 2020 . ^ Jaiswal, Anuja (22 February 2020). "Shah Jahan, Mumtaz graves undergo 'mud pack' therapy" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 12 September 2020 . ^ "Why is the Taj Trapezium Zone and why is it called so?" .

The Times of India . 4 May 2008 . Retrieved 12 September 2020 . ^ Landon, Letitia Elizabeth (1831). "poetical illustration". Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1832 . Fisher, Son & Co. p. 20. Landon, Letitia Elizabeth (1831). "picture". Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1832 . Fisher, Son & Co. ^ Landon, Letitia Elizabeth (1835). "picture". Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1836 . Fisher, Son & Co. Landon, Letitia Elizabeth (1835). "poetical illustration". Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1836 . Fisher, Son & Co. ^ a b c d "Part Eight: The Fort" . www.columbia.edu . Archived from the original on 10 February 2007 . Retrieved 6 April 2021 . ^ a b c d e f g "Agra Fort" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 6 April 2021 . ^ Mukerji, Satya Chandra (1892).

The traveller's guide to Agra, containing an account of the history, the antiquities, and the principal sights of Agra, together with some information about Agra as it is . University of California Libraries. Delhi, Sen & Co. p. 83. ^ "Incredible India | Agra Fort" . www.incredibleindia.org . Retrieved 7 April 2021 . ^ "Agra Fort to Sikandra" . Agra Fort to Sikandra . Retrieved 16 September 2020 . ^ Hansen, Waldemar (1 January 1986).

The Peacock Throne: The Drama of Mogul India . Motilal Banarsidass Publishing House. ISBN 978-81-208-0225-4 . ^ The Cambridge History of India . CUP Archive. 1955. ^ "Part Fourteen: Sikandra" . www.columbia.edu . Archived from the original on 4 March 2007 . Retrieved 16 September 2020 . ^ "About 80 Blackbucks Inhabiting Grounds Around Akbar's Tomb in Sikandra to Get a New Home" . News18 . 18 November 2019 . Retrieved 16 September 2020 . ^ Hindu Shah, Muhammad Qasim (1595–1612). Gulshan-I-Ibrahimi . Vol. 2. p. 223. Akbur, after this conquest, made pilgrimage to Khwaja Moyin-ood-Deen Chishty at Ajmere and returned to Agra; from whence he proceeded to visit the venerable Sheikh Sulim Chishty, in the village of Seekry.

As all the king's children had hitherto died, he solicited the Sheikh's prayers, who consoled him, by assuring him he would soon have a son, who would live to a good old age. Shortly after, his favourite sooltana, being then pregnant, on Wednesday the 17th of Rubbee-ool-Awul, in the year 997 was delivered of a son, who was called Sulim. ^ "Part Twelve: The Chînî-ka-Rauza" . www.columbia.edu . Archived from the original on 1 March 2008 . Retrieved 16 September 2020 . ^ "Part Thirteen: The Ram Bagh" . www.columbia.edu . Archived from the original on 1 March 2008 . Retrieved 16 September 2020 . ^ "Part Fourteen: Sikandra – Mariam Zamâni's Tomb" . www.columbia.edu . Archived from the original on 4 March 2007 . Retrieved 16 September 2020 . ^ a b Sharma, Sudhirendar (12 October 2019). "Name, place, confection, thing" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 12 September 2020 . ^ Chaturvedi, Hemendra (6 February 2017). "Braj, the harbinger of UP polls" . Hindustan Times . Retrieved 23 August 2024 .

The Braj region comprises of seven districts -- Agra, Mathura and Firozabad in Agra division and Aligarh, Etah, Hathras and Kasganj in Aligarh division. ^ Experts, Disha (1 July 2020). Amazing Uttar Pradesh - General Knowledge for UPPSC, UPSSSC & other Competitive Exams . Disha Publications. ISBN 978-93-90486-72-4 . Agra is a colorful display of the Arts, crafts, culture and cuisine of the Braj area. ^ a b "About Agra" . www.tajmahal.gov.in . Retrieved 5 April 2021 . ^ "Shahi Paneer – Indianlife Foods Inc" . Archived from the original on 9 March 2023 . Retrieved 5 April 2021 . ^ "Agra Street Food: Ultimate Guide To The 'Khao-Galis' Of The City" . NDTV Food . 30 January 2020 . Retrieved 17 September 2020 . ^ "Agra News: Read latest Agra news in hindi, Agra Breaking News" . Prabhat Khabar . ^ "Taj Mahotsav ::Taj Mahotsav, a 10 days festival is organized from 18th to 27 February.

In this carnival you can see India's rich arts, crafts, cultures, cuisine, dance, music and many more things of incredible India" . www.tajmahotsav.org . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . ^ "Taj Mahotsav 2020 continues to woo tourists from across the globe" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . ^ "Pandemic forces Taj Mahotsav cancellation for the first time since 1992" . Hindustan Times . 9 January 2021 . Retrieved 7 April 2021 . ^ Lavania, Deepak (29 March 2021). "Agra gets air connectivity with Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Bhopal & Bengaluru" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 15 April 2021 . ^ "North Central Railways / Indian Railways Portal" . ncr.indianrailways.gov.in . Retrieved 14 April 2021 . ^ "Delhi-Agra semi-high speed train to be named Gatimaan Express" . Zee News . 12 October 2014 . Retrieved 14 April 2021 . ^ "IRCTC Maharaja Express: Experience royalty with the Indian Panorama tour across heritage sites" . Scroll.in . 10 September 2019 . Retrieved 14 April 2021 . ^ : old site as of March 2026 ^ "कानपुर से पीएम मोदी ने किया आगरा मेट्रो का शिलान्यास, ताजनगरी में हुआ सीधा प्रसारण" . Amar Ujala (in Hindi). 8 March 2019. Archived from the original on 9 March 2019 . Retrieved 20 March 2019 . ^ "IRS 2019 Q4: Dainik Jagran & Times of India top most-read Hindi and English newspaper list - Exchange4media" . Indian Advertising Media & Marketing News – exchange4media . 8 May 2020 . Retrieved 11 September 2020 . ^ "Radio City 91.1 FM Agra – Top 10 Songs of the Week" . www.radiocity.in . Archived from the original on 18 June 2017 . Retrieved 11 November 2017 . ^ "Huzur Maharaj" . www.radhasoami-faith.info . Archived from the original on 10 December 2017 . Retrieved 11 November 2017 . ^ "Soamiji Maharaj" . www.radhasoami-faith.info . Archived from the original on 27 January 2018 . Retrieved 11 November 2017 . ^ Lavania, Deepak (23 December 2016). "Agra, Chengdu of China are now sister cities" .