On the more subtle end, it consists of expressions of hatred or discrimination against individual Jews and may or may not be accompanied by violence.

At the extreme, it consists of pogroms or genocide , which may or may not be state-sponsored.

Although the term antisemitism did not come into common usage until the 19th century, it is also applied to previous and later anti-Jewish incidents. Historically, most of the world's violent antisemitic events have taken place in Europe, where modern antisemitism began to emerge from antisemitism in Christian communities during the Middle Ages.

Since the early 20th century, there has been a sharp rise in antisemitic incidents across the Arab world , largely due to the advent of Arab antisemitic conspiracy theories , which were influenced by European antisemitic conspiracy theories . Beginning in 1879, the compound word Antisemitismus was first used in print in Germany as a "scientific-sounding term" for Judenhass ( lit. ' Jew-hatred ' ), and it has since been used to refer to anti-Jewish sentiment alone.

In the 21st century, the idea that there is a variation of antisemitism known as " new antisemitism " has been discussed. According to this view, since Israel is a Jewish state , expressions of anti-Zionist positions could harbour antisemitic sentiments, and criticism of Israel can serve as a vehicle for attacks against Jews in general.

The origin of "antisemitic" terminologies is found in the responses of Orientalist Moritz Steinschneider to the views of Orientalist Ernest Renan . Historian Alex Bein writes: "The compound anti-Semitism appears to have been used first by Steinschneider, who challenged Renan on account of his 'anti-Semitic prejudices' ." Psychologist Avner Falk similarly writes: "The German word antisemitisch was first used in 1860 by the Austrian Jewish scholar Moritz Steinschneider (1816–1907) in the phrase antisemitische Vorurteile ( ' antisemitic prejudices ' ). Steinschneider used this phrase to characterise the French philosopher Ernest Renan's false ideas about how ' Semitic races ' were inferior to ' Aryan races ' ". Pseudoscientific theories concerning race , civilization, and "progress" had become quite widespread in Europe in the second half of the 19th century, especially as Prussian nationalistic historian Heinrich von Treitschke did much to promote this form of racism. He coined the phrase "the Jews are our misfortune", which would later be widely used by Nazis . According to Falk, Treitschke uses the term "Semitic" almost synonymously with "Jewish", in contrast to Renan's use of it to refer to a whole range of peoples, based generally on linguistic criteria. According to philologist Jonathan M. Hess , the term was originally used by its authors to "stress the radical difference between their own 'antisemitism' and earlier forms of antagonism toward Jews and Judaism". Cover page of Marr's The Way to Victory of Germanicism over Judaism , 1880 edition In 1879, German journalist Wilhelm Marr published a pamphlet, Der Sieg des Judenthums über das Germanenthum. Vom nicht confessionellen Standpunkt aus betrachtet ( The Victory of the Jewish Spirit over the Germanic Spirit. Observed from a non-religious perspective ), in which he used the word Semitismus interchangeably with the word Judentum to denote both "Jewry" (the Jews as a collective) and "Jewishness" (the quality of being Jewish, or the Jewish spirit). He accused the Jews of a worldwide conspiracy against non-Jews, called for resistance against "this foreign power", and claimed that "there will not be a single office in the land, including the highest, which will not have been usurped by the Jews". This followed his 1862 book Der Judenspiegel ( A Mirror to the Jews ), in which he argued that "Judaism must cease to exist if humanity is to commence", demanding that Judaism be both dissolved as a "religious-denominational sect" and subject to criticism "as a race, a civil and social entity".

In the introductions to the first through fourth editions of " Der Judenspiegel ", Marr denied that he intended to preach Jew-hatred and claimed he instead intended to help "the Jews reach their full human potential", which he said could happen only "through the downfall of Judaism, a phenomenon that negates everything purely human and noble". This use of Semitismus was followed by a coining of Antisemitismus , which was used to indicate opposition to the Jews as a people and opposition to the Jewish spirit, which Marr interpreted as infiltrating German culture.

The pamphlet became very popular, and in the same year Marr founded the Antisemiten-Liga ('League of Antisemites'), apparently named to follow the Anti-Kanzler-Liga ('Anti-Chancellor League').

The league was the first German organisation committed specifically to combating the alleged threat to Germany and German culture posed by the Jews and their influence and advocating their forced removal from the country. So far as can be ascertained, the word was first widely printed in 1881, when Marr published Zwanglose Antisemitische Hefte , and Wilhelm Scherer used the term Antisemiten in the January issue of Neue Freie Presse .

The Jewish Encyclopedia reports, "In February 1881, a correspondent of the Allgemeine Zeitung des Judentums speaks of 'Anti-Semitism' as a designation which recently came into use ('Allg. Zeit. d. Jud.' 1881, p. 138).

On 19 July 1882, the editor says, 'This quite recent Anti-Semitism is hardly three years old. ' " The word antisemitism was borrowed into English from German in 1881. Oxford English Dictionary editor James Murray wrote that it was not included in the first edition because " Anti-Semite and its family were then probably very new in English use, and not thought likely to be more than passing nonce-words... Would that anti-Semitism had had no more than a fleeting interest!" The related term philosemitism was used by 1881. Usage From the outset the term anti-Semitism bore special racial connotations and meant specifically prejudice against Jews .

The word Semitic was coined for use in linguistics by German Orientalist August Ludwig von Schlözer in 1781 to designate the Semitic group of languages — Aramaic , Arabic , Hebrew and others—allegedly spoken by the descendants of the Biblical figure Shem , son of Noah . Definition Though the general definition of antisemitism is 'hostility or prejudice against Jews', and, according to Olaf Blaschke , the word has become an "umbrella term for negative stereotypes about Jews", a number of authorities have developed more formal definitions. Writing in 1987, Holocaust scholar and City University of New York professor Helen Fein defined it as "a persisting latent structure of hostile beliefs towards Jews as a collective manifested in individuals as attitudes, and in culture as myth, ideology, folklore and imagery, and in actions—social or legal discrimination, political mobilization against the Jews, and collective or state violence—which results in and/or is designed to distance, displace, or destroy Jews as Jews." Elaborating on Fein's definition, Dietz Bering of the University of Cologne writes that, to antisemites, "Jews are not only partially but totally bad by nature, that is, their bad traits are incorrigible. Because of this bad nature: (1) Jews have to be seen not as individuals but as a collective. (2) Jews remain essentially alien in the surrounding societies. (3) Jews bring disaster on their 'host societies' or on the whole world, they are doing it secretly, therefore the anti-Semites feel obliged to unmask the conspiratorial, bad Jewish character." For Swiss historian Sonja Weinberg, as distinct from economic and religious anti-Judaism , antisemitism in its specifically modern form shows conceptual innovation, a resort to "science" to defend itself, new functional forms, and organisational differences. It was anti-liberal, racialist and nationalist. It promoted the myth that Jews conspired to 'judaise' the world ; it served to consolidate social identity; it channeled dissatisfactions among victims of the capitalist system; and it was used as a conservative cultural code to fight emancipation and liberalism. A caricature by Charles Lucien Léandre (France, 1898) showing Rothschild with the world in his hands In 2003, Israeli politician Natan Sharansky developed what he called the "three D" test to distinguish antisemitism from criticism of Israel, giving Delegitimization , Demonization, and Double standards as a litmus test for the former. British-American historian Bernard Lewis , writing in 2006, defined antisemitism as a special case of prejudice, hatred, or persecution directed against people who are in some way different from the rest. According to Lewis, antisemitism is marked by two distinct features: Jews are judged according to a standard different from that applied to others, and they are accused of "cosmic evil". Thus, "it is perfectly possible to hate and even to persecute Jews without necessarily being anti-Semitic" unless this hatred or persecution displays one of the two features specific to antisemitism. There have been a number of efforts by international and governmental bodies to define antisemitism formally.

In 2016, the working definition was adopted by the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance . IHRA's Working definition of antisemitism is among the most controversial documents related to opposition to antisemitism, and critics argue that it has been used to censor criticism of Israel.

In response to the perceived lack of clarity in the IHRA definition, two new definitions of antisemitism were published in 2021, the Nexus Document in February 2021 and the Jerusalem Declaration on Antisemitism in March 2021. Evolution of usage In 1879, Wilhelm Marr founded the Antisemiten-Liga (Anti-Semitic League). Identification with antisemitism and as an antisemite was politically advantageous in Europe during the late 19th century. For example, Karl Lueger , the popular mayor of fin de siècle Vienna , skillfully exploited antisemitism as a way of channeling public discontent to his political advantage.

In its 1910 obituary of Lueger, The New York Times notes that Lueger was "Chairman of the Christian Social Union of the Parliament and of the Anti-Semitic Union of the Diet of Lower Austria.

In 1895, A. C. Cuza organized the Alianța Antisemită and the Liga Antisemită Universală in Bucharest.

In the period before World War II , when animosity towards Jews was far more commonplace, it was not uncommon for a person, an organization, or a political party to self-identify as an antisemite or antisemitic.

The early Zionist pioneer Leon Pinsker , a professional physician, preferred the clinical-sounding term Judeophobia (also Judaeophobia ) to antisemitism, which he regarded as a misnomer.

The word Judeophobia first appeared in his pamphlet Auto-Emancipation , published anonymously in German in September 1882, where it was described as an irrational fear or hatred of Jews. According to Pinsker, this irrational fear was an inherited predisposition.

The German people is anti-Semitic. It has no desire to have its rights restricted or to be provoked in the future by parasites of the Jewish race." After 1945 victory of the Allies over Nazi Germany , and particularly after the full extent of the Nazi genocide against the Jews became known, the term antisemitism acquired pejorative connotations. This marked a full circle shift in usage, from an era just decades earlier when "Jew" was used as a pejorative term. Yehuda Bauer wrote in 1984: "There are no anti-Semites in the world ... Nobody says, 'I am anti-Semitic.' You cannot, after Hitler.

The word has gone out of fashion." The term has been described as confusing, for in modern usage Semitic designates a language group, not a race.

In this sense, the term is a misnomer, since there are many speakers of Semitic languages (e.g., Arabs , Ethiopians , and Assyrians ) who are not the objects of antisemitic prejudices, while there are many Jews who do not speak Hebrew , a Semitic language. Though antisemitism could be construed as prejudice against people who speak Semitic languages, this is not how the term is commonly used. Characterizations of "Semite" as having little to no value on the socially constructed racial spectrum combined with its overuse due to popularization stemming from pro-Caucasian racism, as identification with antisemitism and as an antisemite was politically advantageous in Europe at least during the late 19th century, as previously discussed, thereby diluting anti-Judaism , have been made since at least the 1930s.

In 1973, Bernard Lewis wrote that "the Semite strictly linguistic in origin and use" and the idea that anything could be intuited beyond hatred of Jews through the use of the root word Semite , such as by The Economist and acclaimed biographer Isaac Deutscher , was an effective etymological fallacy , arguing "on the contrary he Nazis, who may be accepted as the most authoritative exponents of anti-Semitism, hostility was limited to Jews only, and did not include the other so-called Semitic peoples found and still find no difficulty in simultaneously hating Jews and courting Arabs ." The term may be spelled with or without a hyphen ( antisemitism or anti-Semitism ). Many scholars and institutions favor the unhyphenated form. Identifying the operative referent in the original usage of antisemitism , referring to an action, state, condition, or doctrine and using the noun-creating suffix -ism , to be Semite , and without addressing the scientific value of said term, in 1989, Shmuel Almog argued, "If you use the hyphenated form, you consider the words 'Semitism', 'Semite', 'Semitic' as meaningful ... n antisemitic parlance, 'Semites' really stands for Jews, just that." In 2002, Padraic O'Hare, professor of Religious and Theological Studies and Director of the Center for the Study of Jewish–Christian–Muslim Relations at Merrimack College ; and historians Yehuda Bauer and James Carroll . According to Carroll, who first cites O'Hare and Bauer on "the existence of something called 'Semitism ' ", "the hyphenated word thus reflects the bipolarity that is at the heart of the problem of antisemitism".

In 2003, Emil Fackenheim supported the unhyphenated spelling, in order to " the notion that there is an entity 'Semitism' which 'anti-Semitism' opposes." Others endorsing an unhyphenated term for the same reason include the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance ; historian Deborah Lipstadt ; Conversely, in 2000, philologist Jonathan M. Hess identified the operative referent in the original usage to have been "antisemit".

The Associated Press and its accompanying AP Stylebook adopted the unhyphenated spelling in 2021. Style guides for the New York Times and Wall Street Journal later adopted this spelling as well. It has also been adopted by many Holocaust museums , such as the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum and Yad Vashem . Eternalism–contextualism debate The study of antisemitism has become politically controversial because of differing interpretations of the Holocaust and the Israeli–Palestinian conflict . There are two competing views of antisemitism—eternalism and contextualism.

The eternalist view sees antisemitism as separate from other forms of racism and prejudice and an exceptionalist, transhistorical force teleologically culminating in the Holocaust. Hannah Arendt criticized this approach, writing that it provoked "the uncomfortable question: 'Why the Jews of all people?' ... with the question begging reply: Eternal hostility." Zionist thinkers and antisemites draw different conclusions from what they perceive as the eternal hatred of Jews; according to antisemites, it proves the inferiority of Jews, while for Zionists it means that Jews need their own state as a refuge. Most Zionists do not believe that antisemitism can be combatted with education or other means.

The contextual approach treats antisemitism as a type of racism and focuses on the historical context in which hatred of Jews emerges. Some contextualists restrict the use of "antisemitism" to refer exclusively to the era of modern racism, treating anti-Judaism as a separate phenomenon. Historian David Engel has challenged the project to define antisemitism, arguing that it essentializes Jewish history as one of persecution and discrimination. Engel argues that the term "antisemitism" is not useful in historical analysis because it implies that there are links between anti-Jewish prejudices expressed in different contexts, without evidence of such a connection. Manifestations Jews (identified by the mandatory Jewish badge and Jewish hat ) being burned Antisemitism manifests itself in a variety of ways. René König mentions social antisemitism, economic antisemitism, religious antisemitism, and political antisemitism as examples. König points out that these different forms demonstrate that the "origins of anti-Semitic prejudices are rooted in different historical periods." König asserts that differences in the chronology of different antisemitic prejudices and the irregular distribution of such prejudices over different segments of the population create "serious difficulties in the definition of the different kinds of anti-Semitism." These difficulties may contribute to the existence of different taxonomies that have been developed to categorize the forms of antisemitism.

The forms identified are substantially the same; it is primarily the number of forms and their definitions that differ. Bernard Lazare , writing in the 1890s, identified three forms of antisemitism: Christian antisemitism , economic antisemitism, and ethnologic antisemitism. William Brustein names four categories: religious, racial, economic, and political.

The Roman Catholic historian Edward Flannery distinguished four varieties of antisemitism: Political and economic antisemitism, giving as examples Cicero and Charles Lindbergh ; Theological or religious antisemitism , also called "traditional antisemitism" and sometimes known as anti-Judaism ; Nationalistic antisemitism, citing Voltaire and other Enlightenment thinkers, who attacked Jews for supposedly having certain characteristics, such as greed and arrogance, and for observing customs such as kashrut and Shabbat ; Racial antisemitism , with its extreme form resulting in the Holocaust by the Nazis .

The Church blamed the Jews for killing Jesus ; Voltaire blamed the Jews for inventing Christianity .

In theory, antisemitism and attacks against individual Jews would stop if Jews stopped practicing Judaism or changed their public faith, especially by conversion to the official or right religion. However, in some cases, discrimination continues after conversion, as in the case of marranos (Christianized Jews in Spain and Portugal) in the late 15th century and 16th century, who were suspected of secretly practising Judaism or Jewish customs.

Although the origins of antisemitism are rooted in the Judeo-Christian conflict, other forms of antisemitism have developed in modern times. Frederick Schweitzer asserts that "most scholars ignore the Christian foundation on which the modern antisemitic edifice rests and invoke political antisemitism, cultural antisemitism, racism or racial antisemitism, economic antisemitism, and the like." William Nicholls draws a distinction between religious antisemitism and modern antisemitism based on racial or ethnic grounds: "The dividing line was the possibility of effective conversion a Jew ceased to be a Jew upon baptism ." From the perspective of racial antisemitism, however, "the assimilated Jew was still a Jew, even after baptism.

From the Enlightenment onward, it is no longer possible to draw clear lines of distinction between religious and racial forms of hostility towards Jews Once Jews have been emancipated and secular thinking makes its appearance, without leaving behind the old Christian hostility towards Jews, the new term antisemitism becomes almost unavoidable, even before explicitly racist doctrines appear." Some Christians such as the Catholic priest Ernest Jouin , who published the first French translation of the Protocols , combined religious and racial antisemitism, as in his statement that "From the triple viewpoint of race, of nationality, and of religion, the Jew has become the enemy of humanity." The virulent antisemitism of Édouard Drumont , one of the most widely read Catholic writers in France during the Dreyfus Affair, likewise combined religious and racial antisemitism. Drumont founded the Antisemitic League of France . Economic antisemitism Main article: Economic antisemitism A World War II-era Slovak propaganda poster exhorts readers not to "be a servant to the Jew".

The underlying premise of economic antisemitism is that Jews perform harmful economic activities or that economic activities become harmful when they are performed by Jews. Linking Jews and money underpins the most damaging and lasting antisemitic canards . Antisemites claim that Jews control the world finances, a theory promoted in the fraudulent The Protocols of the Elders of Zion and later repeated by Henry Ford and his The Dearborn Independent .

In the modern era, such myths continue to be spread in books such as The Secret Relationship Between Blacks and Jews published by the Nation of Islam and on the internet. Derek Penslar writes that there are two components to the financial canards: a) Jews are savages that "are temperamentally incapable of performing honest labor" b) Jews are "leaders of a financial cabal seeking world domination" Abraham Foxman describes six facets of the financial canards: All Jews are wealthy Jews are stingy and greedy Powerful Jews control the business world Jewish religion emphasizes profit and materialism It is okay for Jews to cheat non-Jews Jews use their power to benefit "their own kind" Gerald Krefetz summarizes the myth as " control the banks, the money supply, the economy, and businesses—of the community, of the country, of the world". Krefetz gives, as illustrations, many slurs and proverbs (in several different languages) which suggest that Jews are stingy, or greedy, or miserly, or aggressive bargainers.

During the nineteenth century, Jews were described as "scurrilous, stupid, and tight-fisted", but after the Jewish Emancipation and the rise of Jews to the middle- or upper-class in Europe were portrayed as "clever, devious, and manipulative financiers out to dominate ". Léon Poliakov asserts that economic antisemitism is not a distinct form of antisemitism, but merely a manifestation of theologic antisemitism (because, without the theological causes of economic antisemitism, there would be no economic antisemitism).

In opposition to this view, Derek Penslar contends that in the modern era, economic antisemitism is "distinct and nearly constant" but theological antisemitism is "often subdued". An academic study by Francesco D'Acunto, Marcel Prokopczuk, and Michael Weber showed that people who live in areas of Germany that contain the most brutal history of antisemitic persecution are more likely to be distrustful of finance in general. Therefore, they tended to invest less money in the stock market and make poor financial decisions.

The study concluded, "that the persecution of minorities reduces not only the long-term wealth of the persecuted but of the persecutors as well." Racial antisemitism Main article: Racial antisemitism A Jewish Soviet soldier taken prisoner by the German Army, August 1941.

At least 50,000 Jewish soldiers were shot after selection. Racial antisemitism is prejudice against Jews as a racial/ethnic group, rather than Judaism as a religion. Racial antisemitism is the idea that the Jews are a distinct and inferior race compared to their host nations.

In the late 19th century and early 20th century, it gained mainstream acceptance as part of the eugenics movement, which categorized non-Europeans as inferior. It more specifically claimed that Northern Europeans, or "Aryans", were superior. Racial antisemites saw the Jews as part of a Semitic race and emphasized their non-European origins and culture. They saw Jews as beyond redemption even if they converted to the majority religion. Racial antisemitism replaced the hatred of Judaism with the hatred of Jews as a group.

In the context of the Industrial Revolution , following the Jewish Emancipation , Jews rapidly urbanized and experienced a period of greater social mobility. With the decreasing role of religion in public life tempering religious antisemitism, a combination of growing nationalism , the rise of eugenics, and resentment at the socio-economic success of the Jews led to the newer, and more virulent, racist antisemitism.

In the early 19th century, a number of laws enabling the emancipation of the Jews were enacted in Western European countries.

The old laws restricting them to ghettos , as well as the many laws that limited their property rights, rights of worship and occupation, were rescinded. Despite this, traditional discrimination and hostility to Jews on religious grounds persisted and was supplemented by racial antisemitism , encouraged by the work of racial theorists such as Joseph Arthur de Gobineau and particularly his Essay on the Inequality of the Human Race of 1853–1855. Nationalist agendas based on ethnicity , known as ethnonationalism , usually excluded the Jews from the national community as an alien race. Allied to this were theories of Social Darwinism , which stressed a putative conflict between higher and lower races of human beings. Such theories, usually posited by northern Europeans, advocated the superiority of white Aryans to Semitic Jews. Political antisemitism The whole problem of the Jews exists only in nation states, for here their energy and higher intelligence, their accumulated capital of spirit and will, gathered from generation to generation through a long schooling in suffering, must become so preponderant as to arouse mass envy and hatred.

In this view, the proponents of the new concept believe that criticisms of Israel and Zionism are often disproportionate in degree and unique in kind, and they attribute this to antisemitism. Jewish scholar Gustavo Perednik posited in 2004 that anti-Zionism in itself represents a form of discrimination against Jews, in that it singles out Jewish national aspirations as an illegitimate and racist endeavor, and "proposes actions that would result in the death of millions of Jews". Proponents of this theory assert that the new antisemitism deploys traditional antisemitic motifs, including older motifs such as the blood libel . Critics of the concept view it as trivializing the meaning of antisemitism, and as exploiting antisemitism in order to silence debate and to deflect attention from legitimate criticism of the State of Israel, and, by associating anti-Zionism with antisemitism, misusing it to taint anyone opposed to Israeli actions and policies. History Main article: History of antisemitism For a chronological guide, see Timeline of antisemitism . Part of a series on Jews and Judaism Etymology Who is a Jew? Jewish studies Religion God in Judaism ( names ) Principles of faith Mitzvot ( 613 ) Halakha Shabbat Holidays Prayer Tzedakah Land of Israel Brit Bar and bat mitzvah Marriage Bereavement Baal teshuva Philosophy Ethics Kabbalah Messiah Claimants Customs Rites Synagogue Rabbi Texts Tanakh Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Talmud Mishnah Gemara Rabbinic Midrash Tosefta Targum Beit Yosef Mishneh Torah Tur Shulchan Aruch Zohar History General Timeline Land of Israel Name "Judea" Historical population History of Israel Modern historiography Leaders Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Persecution Ancient Israel and Judah Twelve Tribes of Israel Israelites Kingdom of Judah Kingdom of Israel Jerusalem ( in Judaism timeline ) Temple in Jerusalem ( First Second ) Assyrian captivity Babylonian captivity Second Temple period Yehud Maccabean Revolt Hasmonean dynasty Sanhedrin Schisms ( Pharisees , Sadducees , Essenes , Zealots , Sicarii ) Second Temple Judaism ( Hellenistic Judaism ) Jewish–Roman wars Great Revolt Provisional government Diaspora Revolt Bar Kokhba Revolt Rabbinic period and Middle Ages Rabbinic Judaism History of the Jews in the Byzantine Empire Christianity and Judaism ( Jews and Christmas ) Hinduism and Judaism Islamic–Jewish relations Middle Ages Golden Age Expulsion from Spain Modern era Haskalah Sabbateans Hasidism Jewish atheism Emancipation Old Yishuv Zionism Soviet Union The Holocaust State of Israel History Arab–Israeli conflict Communities Ashkenazim Galician Litvak Mizrahim Sephardim Teimanim (Yemenite Jews) Beta Israel Gruzinim (Georgian Jews) Juhurim (Mountain Jews) Bukharim Italkim Romanyotim Cochinim Bene Israel Berber Crimean Karaites Krymchaks Kaifeng Jews Related groups Bnei Anusim Lemba Igbo Jews Samaritans Crypto-Jews Anusim Dönmeh Marranos Neofiti Xueta Mosaic Arabs Subbotniks Noahides Population Judaism by country Lists of Jews Diaspora Historical population by country Population by city Genetic studies Peoplehood Israel and Palestine Old Yishuv New Yishuv Israeli Jews Palestinian Jews Africa Algeria Angola Botswana Cameroon Cape Verde Benin Democratic Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Ethiopia Beta Israel Eritrea Eswatini Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nigeria Igbo Republic of the Congo São Tomé and Príncipe Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa Sudan Tanzania Tunisia Uganda Abayudaya West Africa Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Cambodia China Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kurdistan Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lebanon Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia South Korea Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Taiwan Thailand Turkey United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Romaniote Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Italkim Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Moldova Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia Soviet Union Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sephardic Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Scotland Wales Northern America Canada Greenland United States Latin America and Caribbean Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Puerto Rico Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Oceania Australia Fiji Guam New Zealand Palau Denominations Orthodox Modern Haredi Hasidic Reform Conservative Karaite Reconstructionist Renewal Science Haymanot Humanistic Culture Customs Minyan Wedding Clothing Niddah Pidyon haben Kashrut Shidduch Zeved habat Conversion to Judaism Aliyah Hiloni Music Religious Secular Art Ancient Yiddish theatre Dance Humour Cuisine American Ashkenazi Bukharan Ethiopian Israeli Israelite Mizrahi Sephardic Literature Israeli Yiddish Judeo-Tat American Surnames Ashkenazi Mizrahi Sephardic Languages Hebrew Biblical Mishnaic Medieval Modern Bukharian Ghardaïa Sign Jewish Koine Greek Judeo-Arabic Judeo-Aramaic Judeo-Berber Judeo-Gascon Judaeo-Georgian Judaeo-Iranian Judeo-Italian Judeo-Malayalam Judaeo-Spanish Judeo-Tat Knaanic Shassi Yeshivish Yevanic Yiddish Zarphatic Politics Jewish political movements Autonomism Bundism Feminism Leftism Secularism Territorialism World Agudath Israel Zionism General Green Labor Kahanism Maximalism Neo-Zionism Religious Revisionist Post-Zionism Category Portal v t e Many authors see the roots of modern antisemitism in both pagan antiquity and early Christianity. Jerome Chanes identifies six stages in the historical development of antisemitism: Pre-Christian anti-Judaism in ancient Greece and Rome, which was primarily ethnic in nature Christian antisemitism in antiquity and the Middle Ages, which was religious in nature and has extended into modern times Traditional Muslim antisemitism, which was—at least, in its classical form—nuanced in that Jews were a protected class Political, social and economic antisemitism of Enlightenment and post-Enlightenment Europe, which laid the groundwork for racial antisemitism Racial antisemitism that arose in the 19th century and culminated in Nazism in the 20th century Contemporary antisemitism, which has been labeled by some as the New Antisemitism Chanes suggests that these six stages could be merged into three categories: "ancient antisemitism, which was primarily ethnic in nature; Christian antisemitism , which was religious; and the racial antisemitism of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries." Ancient world The first clear examples of anti-Jewish sentiment can be traced to the 3rd century BCE to Alexandria , the home to the largest Jewish diaspora community in the world at the time and where the Septuagint , a Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible , was produced. Manetho , an Egyptian priest and historian of that era, wrote scathingly of the Jews. His themes are repeated in the works of Chaeremon , Lysimachus , Poseidonius , Apollonius Molon , and in Apion and Tacitus . Agatharchides of Cnidus ridiculed the practices of the Jews and the "absurdity of their Law ", making a mocking reference to how Ptolemy Lagus was able to invade Jerusalem in 320 BCE because its inhabitants were observing the Shabbat . One of the earliest anti-Jewish edicts , promulgated by Antiochus IV Epiphanes in about 170–167 BCE, sparked a revolt of the Maccabees in Judea .

In view of Manetho's anti-Jewish writings, antisemitism may have originated in Egypt and been spread by "the Greek retelling of Ancient Egyptian prejudices".

The ancient Jewish philosopher Philo of Alexandria describes an attack on Jews in Alexandria in 38 CE in which thousands of Jews died.

The violence in Alexandria may have been caused by the Jews being portrayed as misanthropes . Tcherikover argues that the reason for hatred of Jews in the Hellenistic period was their separateness in the Greek cities, the poleis . Bohak has argued, however, that early animosity against the Jews cannot be regarded as being anti-Judaic or antisemitic unless it arose from attitudes that were held against the Jews alone, and that many Greeks showed animosity toward any group they regarded as barbarians. Statements exhibiting prejudice against Jews and their religion can be found in the works of many pagan Greek and Roman writers. Edward Flannery writes that it was the Jews' refusal to accept Greek religious and social standards that marked them out. Hecataetus of Abdera, a Greek historian of the early third century BCE, wrote that Moses "in remembrance of the exile of his people, instituted for them a misanthropic and inhospitable way of life." Manetho wrote that the Jews were expelled Egyptian lepers who had been taught by Moses "not to adore the gods." Edward Flannery describes antisemitism in ancient times as essentially "cultural, taking the shape of a national xenophobia played out in political settings." There are examples of Hellenistic rulers desecrating the Temple and banning Jewish religious practices, including Antiochus IV Epiphanes , who in 167 BCE erected an altar to Zeus in the temple directed the sacrifice of pigs to at the altar. He also banned Jewish practices such as circumcision, Shabbat observance, and the study of Torah scrolls, sparking the Maccabean Revolt.

The Jewish diaspora on the Nile island Elephantine , which was founded by mercenaries, experienced the destruction of its temple in 410 BCE. Relationships between the Jewish people and the occupying Roman Empire were at times antagonistic and resulted in several rebellions , most notably the First Jewish–Roman War and the Bar Kokhba revolt . According to Suetonius , the emperor Tiberius took measures against Jews in Rome in 19 CE, expelling and relocating some Jewish‑affiliated groups in response to unrest and alleged religious‑moral offenses.

The 18th-century English historian Edward Gibbon identified a more tolerant period in Roman–Jewish relations beginning in about 160 CE. However, with the rise of Christianity as the dominant religion, increasingly restrictive legislation and rhetoric was directed against Jews. James Carroll asserted: "Jews accounted for 10% of the total population of the Roman Empire.

By that ratio, if other factors such as pogroms and conversions had not intervened, there would be 200 million Jews in the world today, instead of something like 13 million." Persecutions during the Middle Ages Main articles: History of European Jews in the Middle Ages and Antisemitism in Islam § Pre-modern Islam The massacre of the Banu Qurayza , a Jewish tribe in Medina , 627 In the late 6th century CE, the newly Catholicised Visigothic kingdom in Hispania issued a series of anti-Jewish edicts which forbade Jews from marrying Christians, practicing circumcision, and observing Jewish holy days. Continuing throughout the 7th century, both Visigothic kings and the Church were active in creating social aggression and towards Jews with "civic and ecclesiastic punishments", ranging between forced conversion, slavery, exile and death.

From the 9th century, the medieval Islamic world classified Jews and Christians as dhimmis and allowed Jews to practice their religion more freely than they could do in medieval Christian Europe . Under Islamic rule , there was a Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain that lasted until at least the 11th century. It ended when several Muslim pogroms against Jews took place on the Iberian Peninsula , including those that occurred in Córdoba in 1011 and in Granada in 1066 . Several decrees ordering the destruction of synagogues were also enacted in Egypt, Syria, Iraq and Yemen from the 11th century.

In addition, Jews were forced to convert to Islam or face death in some parts of Yemen, Morocco and Baghdad several times between the 12th and 18th centuries.

The Almohads , who had taken control of the Almoravids ' Maghribi and Andalusian territories by 1147, were far more fundamentalist in outlook compared to their predecessors, and they treated the dhimmis harshly. Faced with the choice of either death or conversion, many Jews and Christians emigrated. Some, such as the family of Maimonides , fled east to more tolerant Muslim lands, while some others went northward to settle in the growing Christian kingdoms. Expulsions of Jews in Europe from 1100 to 1600 In medieval Europe, Jews were persecuted with blood libels , expulsions, forced conversions and massacres . These persecutions were often justified on religious grounds and reached a first peak during the Crusades .

In 1096, hundreds or thousands of Jews were killed during the First Crusade . This was the first major outbreak of anti-Jewish violence in Christian Europe outside Spain and was cited by Zionists in the 19th century as indicating the need for a state of Israel.

In 1147, there were several massacres of Jews during the Second Crusade .

The Shepherds' Crusades of 1251 and 1320 both involved attacks, as did the Rintfleisch massacres in 1298. Expulsions followed, such as the 1290 banishment of Jews from England, the expulsion of 100,000 Jews from France in 1394, and the 1421 expulsion of thousands of Jews from Austria. Many of the expelled Jews fled to Poland.

In medieval and Renaissance Europe, a major contributor to the deepening of antisemitic sentiment and legal action among the Christian populations was the popular preaching of the zealous reform religious orders, the Franciscans (especially Bernardino of Feltre ) and Dominicans (especially Vincent Ferrer ), who combed Europe and promoted antisemitism through their often fiery, emotional appeals.

As the Black Death epidemics devastated Europe in the mid-14th century, causing the death of a large part of the population, Jews were used as scapegoats . Rumors spread that they caused the disease by deliberately poisoning wells. Hundreds of Jewish communities were destroyed in numerous persecutions .

Although Pope Clement VI tried to protect them by issuing two papal bulls in 1348, the first on 6 July and an additional one several months later, 900 Jews were burned alive in Strasbourg , where the plague had not yet affected the city. Reformation Main article: Martin Luther and antisemitism Martin Luther , an ecclesiastical reformer whose teachings inspired the Reformation , wrote antagonistically about Jews in his pamphlet On the Jews and their Lies , written in 1543. He portrays the Jews in extremely harsh terms, excoriates them and provides detailed recommendations for a pogrom against them, calling for their permanent oppression and expulsion.

At one point he writes: "...we are at fault in not slaying them...", a passage that, according to historian Paul Johnson , "may be termed the first work of modern antisemitism, and a giant step forward on the road to the Holocaust ." 17th century Etching of the expulsion of the Jews from Frankfurt in 1614 During the mid-to-late 17th century the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth was devastated by several conflicts, in which the Commonwealth lost over a third of its population (over 3 million people), and Jewish losses were counted in the hundreds of thousands.

The first of these conflicts was the Khmelnytsky Uprising , when Bohdan Khmelnytsky 's supporters massacred tens of thousands of Jews in the eastern and southern areas he controlled (today's Ukraine ).

The precise number of dead may never be known, but the decrease of the Jewish population during that period is estimated at 100,000 to 200,000, which also includes emigration, deaths from diseases, and captivity in the Ottoman Empire , called jasyr . European immigrants to the United States brought antisemitism to the country as early as the 17th century. Peter Stuyvesant , the Dutch governor of New Amsterdam , implemented plans to prevent Jews from settling in the city.

During the Colonial Era, the American government limited the political and economic rights of Jews. It was not until the American Revolutionary War that Jews gained legal rights, including the right to vote. However, even at their peak, the restrictions on Jews in the United States were never as stringent as they had been in Europe.

In the Zaydi imamate of Yemen , Jews were also singled out for discrimination in the 17th century, which culminated in the general expulsion of all Jews from places in Yemen to the arid coastal plain of Tihamah and which became known as the Mawza Exile . Enlightenment In 1744, Archduchess of Austria Maria Theresa ordered Jews out of Bohemia but soon reversed her position, on the condition that Jews pay for their readmission every ten years. This extortion was known among the Jews as malke-geld ("queen's money" in Yiddish).

In 1752, she introduced the law limiting each Jewish family to one son.

In 1782, Joseph II abolished most of these persecution practices in his Toleranzpatent , on the condition that Yiddish and Hebrew were eliminated from public records and that judicial autonomy was annulled. Moses Mendelssohn wrote that "Such a tolerance... is even more dangerous play in tolerance than open persecution." Voltaire According to Arnold Ages , Voltaire 's "Lettres philosophiques, Dictionnaire philosophique, and Candide, to name but a few of his better known works, are saturated with comments on Jews and Judaism and the vast majority are negative". Paul H. Meyer adds: "There is no question but that Voltaire, particularly in his latter years, nursed a violent hatred of the Jews and it is equally certain that his animosity...did have a considerable impact on public opinion in France." Thirty of the 118 articles in Voltaire's Dictionnaire Philosophique concerned Jews and described them in consistently negative ways. Louis de Bonald and the Catholic Counter-Revolution The counter-revolutionary Catholic royalist Louis de Bonald stands out among the earliest figures to explicitly call for the reversal of Jewish emancipation in the wake of the French Revolution . Bonald's attacks on the Jews are likely to have influenced Napoleon 's decision to limit the civil rights of Alsatian Jews. Bonald's article Sur les juifs (1806) was one of the most venomous screeds of its era and furnished a paradigm which combined anti-liberalism, a defense of a rural society, traditional Christian antisemitism, and the identification of Jews with bankers and finance capital, which would in turn influence many subsequent right-wing reactionaries such as Roger Gougenot des Mousseaux , Charles Maurras , and Édouard Drumont , nationalists such as Maurice Barrès and Paolo Orano , and antisemitic socialists such as Alphonse Toussenel . Bonald furthermore declared that the Jews were an "alien" people, a "state within a state", and should be forced to wear a distinctive mark to more easily identify and discriminate against them. Under the French Second Empire, the popular counter-revolutionary Catholic journalist Louis Veuillot propagated Bonald's arguments against the Jewish "financial aristocracy" along with vicious attacks against the Talmud and the Jews as a "deicidal people" driven by hatred to "enslave" Christians. Between 1882 and 1886 alone, French priests published twenty antisemitic books blaming France's ills on the Jews and urging the government to consign them back to the ghettos, expel them, or hang them from the gallows. Gougenot des Mousseaux's Le Juif, le judaïsme et la judaïsation des peuples chrétiens (1869) has been called a "Bible of modern antisemitism" and was translated into German by Nazi ideologue Alfred Rosenberg . Imperial Russia The victims of a 1905 pogrom in Yekaterinoslav , Russian Empire (modern-day Ukraine) Thousands of Jews were slaughtered by Cossack Haidamaks in the 1768 massacre of Uman , in the Kingdom of Poland .

In 1772, the empress of Russia, Catherine II , forced the Jews into the Pale of Settlement —which was located primarily in present-day Poland, Ukraine, and Belarus—and to stay in their shtetls and forbade them from returning to the towns that they occupied before the partition of Poland .

From 1804, Jews were banned from their villages and began to stream into the towns. A decree by emperor Nicholas I of Russia in 1827 conscripted Jews under 18 years of age into the cantonist schools for a 25-year military service in order to promote baptism. Policy towards Jews was liberalised somewhat under Czar Alexander II ( r. 1855–1881 ). However, his assassination in 1881 served as a pretext for further repression, such as the May Laws of 1882. Konstantin Pobedonostsev , nicknamed the "black czar" and tutor to the czarevitch , later crowned Czar Nicholas II , declared that "One-third of the Jews must die, one-third must emigrate, and one third be converted to Christianity". Islamic antisemitism in the 19th century Historian Martin Gilbert writes that it was in the 19th century that the position of Jews worsened in Muslim countries. Benny Morris writes that one symbol of Jewish degradation was the phenomenon of stone-throwing at Jews by Muslim children. Morris quotes a 19th-century traveler: "I have seen a little fellow of six years old, with a troop of fat toddlers of only three and four, teaching to throw stones at a Jew, and one little urchin would, with the greatest coolness, waddle up to the man and literally spit upon his Jewish gaberdine . To all this the Jew is obliged to submit; it would be more than his life was worth to offer to strike a Mahommedan." In the middle of the 19th century, J. J. Benjamin wrote about the life of Persian Jews , describing conditions and beliefs that went back to the 16th century: "…they are obliged to live in a separate part of town… Under the pretext of their being unclean, they are treated with the greatest severity and should they enter a street, inhabited by Mussulmans, they are pelted by the boys and mobs with stones and dirt…." In Jerusalem at least, conditions for some Jews improved. Moses Montefiore , on his seventh visit in 1875, noted that fine new buildings had sprung up and, "surely we're approaching the time to witness God's hallowed promise unto Zion." Muslim and Christian Arabs participated in Purim and Passover ; Arabs called the Sephardis 'Jews, sons of Arabs'; the Ulema and the Rabbis offered joint prayers for rain in time of drought.

At the time of the Dreyfus trial in France, "Muslim comments usually favoured the persecuted Jew against his Christian persecutors". Secular or racial antisemitism Title page of the second edition of Das Judenthum in der Musik , published in 1869 Antisemitic agitators in Paris burn an effigy of Mathieu Dreyfus during the Dreyfus affair In 1850, the German composer Richard Wagner —who has been called "the inventor of modern antisemitism" —published Das Judenthum in der Musik (roughly "Jewishness in Music") under a pseudonym in the Neue Zeitschrift für Musik .

The essay began as an attack on Jewish composers, particularly Wagner's contemporaries, and rivals, Felix Mendelssohn and Giacomo Meyerbeer , but expanded to accuse Jews of being a harmful and alien element in German culture , who corrupted morals and were, in fact, parasites incapable of creating truly "German" art.

The crux was the manipulation and control by the Jews of the money economy: According to the present constitution of this world, the Jew in truth is already more than emancipated: he rules, and will rule, so long as Money remains the power before which all our doings and our dealings lose their force.

Although originally published anonymously, when the essay was republished 19 years later, in 1869, the concept of the corrupting Jew had become so widely held that Wagner's name was affixed to it. Antisemitism can also be found in many of the Grimms' Fairy Tales by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm , published from 1812 to 1857. It is mainly characterized by Jews being the villain of a story, such as in "The Good Bargain" (" Der gute Handel ") and " The Jew Among Thorns " (" Der Jude im Dorn ").

The middle 19th century saw continued official harassment of the Jews, especially in Eastern Europe under Czarist influence. For example, in 1846, 80 Jews approached the governor in Warsaw to retain the right to wear their traditional dress but were immediately rebuffed by having their hair and beards forcefully cut, at their own expense. Even such influential figures as Walt Whitman tolerated bigotry toward the Jews in America.

During his time as editor of the Brooklyn Eagle (1846–1848), the newspaper published historical sketches casting Jews in a bad light.

The Dreyfus Affair was an infamous antisemitic event of the late 19th century and early 20th century. Alfred Dreyfus , a Jewish artillery captain in the French Army , was accused in 1894 of passing secrets to the Germans.

As a result of these charges, Dreyfus was convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment on Devil's Island .

The actual spy, Marie Charles Esterhazy, was acquitted.

In the first half of the 20th century, in the US, Jews were discriminated against in employment, access to residential and resort areas, membership in clubs and organizations, and in tightened quotas on Jewish enrolment and teaching positions in colleges and universities.

The lynching of Leo Frank by a mob of prominent citizens in Marietta, Georgia , in 1915 turned the spotlight on antisemitism in the United States.

The case was also used to build support for the renewal of the Ku Klux Klan which had been inactive since 1870.

At the beginning of the 20th century, the Beilis Trial in Russia represented modern incidents of blood-libels in Europe.

During the Russian Civil War , close to 50,000 Jews were killed in pogroms . Antisemitism in America reached its peak during the interwar period .

The pioneer automobile manufacturer Henry Ford propagated antisemitic ideas in his newspaper The Dearborn Independent (published by Ford from 1919 to 1927).

The radio speeches of Father Coughlin in the late 1930s attacked Franklin D. Roosevelt 's New Deal and promoted the notion of a Jewish financial conspiracy. Some prominent politicians shared such views: Louis T. McFadden , Chairman of the United States House Committee on Banking and Currency , blamed Jews for Roosevelt's decision to abandon the gold standard , and claimed that "in the United States today, the Gentiles have the slips of paper while the Jews have the lawful money". A wagon piled high with corpses outside the crematorium at the recently liberated Buchenwald concentration camp , 1945 In Germany, shortly after Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party came to power in 1933, the government instituted repressive legislation which denied Jews basic civil rights.

In September 1935, the Nuremberg Laws prohibited sexual relations and marriages between "Aryans" and Jews as Rassenschande ("race defilement") and stripped all German Jews, including many quarter- and half-Jews (Mischlinge), of full citizenship, reclassifying them as "protected subjects of the state" (Staatsangehörige). These laws culminated in a state-sponsored pogrom on the night of 9–10 November 1938, known as Kristallnacht ("Night of Broken Glass"), during which at least 91 Jews were killed, thousands arrested, over 7,500 Jewish businesses destroyed, and about 1,400 synagogues burned or damaged. Antisemitic legislation, agitation, and propaganda were subsequently extended to German-occupied Europe following the onset of war in 1939, frequently adapting or amplifying local antisemitic traditions (e.g., in Vichy France and occupied Poland).

In 1940, the famous aviator Charles Lindbergh and many prominent Americans led the America First Committee in opposing any involvement in a European war. Lindbergh alleged that Jews were pushing America to go to war against Germany. Lindbergh adamantly denied being antisemitic, and yet he refers numerous times in his private writings—his letters and diary—to Jewish control of the media being used to pressure the U.S. to get involved in the European war.

In one diary entry in November 1938, he responded to Kristallnacht by writing "I do not understand these riots on the part of the Germans. ... They have undoubtedly had a difficult Jewish problem, but why is it necessary to handle it so unreasonably?", acknowledgement on Lindbergh's part that he agreed with the Nazis that Germany had a "Jewish problem". An article by Jonathan Marwil in Antisemitism, A Historical Encyclopedia of Prejudice and Persecution claims that "no one who ever knew Lindbergh thought him antisemitic" and that claims of his antisemitism were solely tied to the remarks he made in that one speech.

In the east the Third Reich forced Jews into ghettos in Warsaw , in Kraków , in Lvov , in Lublin and in Radom .

In the Soviet Union , antisemitism was even used as an instrument for settling personal conflicts, starting with the conflict between Joseph Stalin and Leon Trotsky and continuing through numerous conspiracy theories spread by official propaganda. Antisemitism in the USSR reached new heights after 1948 during the campaign against the " rootless cosmopolitan " (euphemism for "Jew") in which numerous Yiddish-language poets, writers, painters, and sculptors were killed or arrested. This culminated in the antisemitic conspiracy theory of the ' Doctors' Plot ' in 1952.

In the 20th century, Soviet and Russian antisemitism underwent significant transformations, shaped by political, social, and ideological shifts.

During the early Soviet period, the Bolsheviks initially condemned antisemitism, seeing it as incompatible with Marxist ideology. However, under Joseph Stalin 's regime, antisemitism reemerged, often cloaked in 'anti-Zionist' rhetoric.

As early as 1943, Stalin and his propagandists intensified attacks against Jews as " rootless cosmopolitans ".

The Party issued confidential directives to fire Jews from positions of power, but state-controlled media did not openly attack Jews until the late 1940s.

The Doctors' plot of 1952, a fabricated conspiracy accusing predominantly Jewish doctors of attempting to assassinate Soviet leaders, exemplified this resurgence. This campaign fostered widespread antisemitic sentiments and resulted in the arrest and execution of numerous Jewish professionals.

In that same year, the antisemitic Slánský show trial alleged the existence of an 'international Zionist conspiracy' to destroy Socialism. Izabella Tabarovsky, a scholar of the history of antisemitism, argues that, "Manufactured by the Soviet secret services, the trial tied together Zionism, Israel, Jewish leaders, and American imperialism, turning 'Zionism' and 'Zionist' into dangerous labels that could be used against one's political enemies." In the post-Stalin era, state-sanctioned antisemitism persisted and intensified.

In February 1953, the Soviet Union severed diplomatic relations with the State of Israel and "soon the state media was saturated with anti-Zionist propaganda, depicting bloated, hook-nosed Jewish bankers and all-consuming serpents embossed with the Star of David." The 1963 publication of the antisemitic book Judaism Without Embellishment , written under orders from the central Soviet government, echoed Nazi propaganda , alleging a global Jewish conspiracy to subvert the Soviet Union.

The Six-Day War in 1967 led to an intensification in Soviet anti-Zionist propaganda as the Soviets had backed the defeated Arab states. This propaganda often blurred the lines with antisemitism, leading to discriminatory policies against Jews and restricting their emigration.

By the end of the war, "the "corporate Jew", whether "cosmopolitan" or "Zionist", became identified as the enemy. Popular anti-Semitic stereotyping had been absorbed into official channels, generated by chauvinist needs and totalitarian requirements." The Anti-Zionist Committee of the Soviet Public shut down and expropriated synagogues , yeshivas , and Jewish civil organisations and prohibited the learning of Hebrew . It also engaged in a wide-scale propaganda campaign between 1967 and 1988 overseen by the KGB and published pamphlets featuring antisemitic conspiracy theories, for example falsely claiming that Zionist Jews collaborated with the Nazi regime in the Holocaust and of inflating the significance and scale of anti-Jewish persecution. Their propaganda frequently borrowed directly from the forged Protocols of the Elders of Zion and sometimes relied upon Adolf Hitler 's Mein Kampf as a source of information about Zionism. Antizionism helped Moscow "bond both with its Arab allies and the Western hard left of all shades. Having appointed Zionism as a scapegoat for humanity's greatest evils, Soviet propaganda could score points by equating it with racism in African radio broadcasts and with Ukrainian nationalism on Kyiv TV." The still-extant Novosti Press Agency , a key element in the Soviet propaganda machine, also participated in the spreading of antisemitic anti-Zionism. Its chairman, Ivan Udaltsov, published a memorandum on 27 January 1971, to the CPSU in which he claimed that "Zionists, by provoking antisemitism, recruit volunteers for the Israeli army", blaming Jews for antisemitism, and falsely alleged that Zionists were responsible for "subversive activities" during the 1968 Prague Spring . According to historian William Korey , "Judaism was singled out for condemnation as prescribing 'racial exclusivism' and as justifying 'crimes against 'Gentiles.'" Similar antisemitic propaganda in Poland resulted in the flight of Polish Jewish survivors from the country.

After the war, the Kielce pogrom and the " March 1968 events " in communist Poland represented further incidents of antisemitism in Europe.

The anti-Jewish violence in postwar Poland had a common theme of blood libel rumours. Contemporary antisemitism The contemporary far-right Antisemitism is still prevalent in contemporary far-right politics across much of the globe, whether as overt claims or covert dog-whistles. Antisemitism has been a key factor for multiple perpetrators of far-right violence and terrorism in recent years, including the Pittsburgh synagogue shooting , the 2018 United States mail bombing attempts , and the Poway synagogue shooting .

While many far-right parties that express antisemitism have seen increasing electoral success, especially in Europe, a noted development in the rhetoric and positions of these parties from their far-right predecessors has been their increasing support of Zionism, while maintaining antisemitic views of diaspora Jews. Judith Butler , Masha Gessen , and others have identified a mainstreaming of Zionist antisemitism from the far-right under the Trump administrations in the US, with the Zionist Organization of America honouring Steve Bannon in 2017. Holocaust denial Main article: Holocaust denial Holocaust denial, the claim that the Nazi genocide of European Jews during the Second World War either never happened or is substantially exaggerated by historical accounts, is a form of antisemitism and conspiracy theory. Political movements seeking to revive the ideologies of the Nazis and other states that participated in the Holocaust, like neo-Nazism and neofascism , practice Holocaust denial. Rehabilitation of Nazism can also be accomplished on an individual scale. For example, in October 2015, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu caused commotion for saying the Palestinian Grand Mufti of Jerusalem, Haj Amin al-Husseini gave Adolf Hitler , the dictator of Germany during the Nazi era , the idea of exterminating Jews rather than expelling them during the Second World War . Academic Moshe Zimmermann stated that "any attempt to deflect the burden from Hitler to others is a form of Holocaust denial." There is significant debate about whether analogies between Israel's treatment of Palestinians and the Nazis' treatment of Jews or comparisons to Anti-Palestinianism are antisemitic. Those who say they are antisemitic have termed such analogies "Holocaust inversion"—a form of Holocaust trivialisation , in which the Holocaust is compared with other events in a way that downplays its severity. Deborah Lipstadt describes Holocaust inversion as a type of Holocaust denial. 21st-century European antisemitism Further information: Antisemitism in Europe § 21st century Physical assaults against Jews in Europe have included beatings, stabbings, and other violence, which increased markedly, sometimes resulting in serious injury and death. A 2015 report by the US State Department on religious freedom declared that "European anti-Israel sentiment crossed the line into anti-Semitism." This rise in antisemitic attacks is associated with both Muslim antisemitism and the rise of far-right political parties as a result of the economic crisis of 2008. This rise in the support for far-right ideas in western and eastern Europe has resulted in the increase of antisemitic acts, mostly attacks on Jewish memorials, synagogues and cemeteries but also a number of physical attacks against Jews.

In Eastern Europe the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the instability of the new states brought the rise of nationalist movements and the accusation against Jews for the economic crisis, taking over the local economy and bribing the government, along with traditional and religious motives for antisemitism such as blood libels . Writing on the rhetoric surrounding the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine , Jason Stanley relates these perceptions to broader historical narratives: "the dominant version of antisemitism alive in parts of eastern Europe today is that Jews employ the Holocaust to seize the victimhood narrative from the 'real' victims of the Nazis, who are Russian Christians (or other non-Jewish eastern Europeans)". He calls out the "myths of contemporary eastern European antisemitism—that a global cabal of Jews were (and are) the real agents of violence against Russian Christians and the real victims of the Nazis were not the Jews, but rather this group." Most of the antisemitic incidents in Eastern Europe are against Jewish cemeteries and buildings (community centers and synagogues). Nevertheless, there were several violent attacks against Jews in Moscow in 2006 when a neo-Nazi stabbed 9 people at the Bolshaya Bronnaya Synagogue, the failed bomb attack on the same synagogue in 1999, the threats against Jewish pilgrims in Uman, Ukraine and the attack against a menorah by extremist Christian organization in Moldova in 2009. According to Paul Johnson, antisemitic policies are a sign of a state which is poorly governed.

While no European state currently has such policies, the Economist Intelligence Unit notes the rise in political uncertainty, notably populism and nationalism, as something that is particularly alarming for Jews. 21st-century Arab antisemitism Main article: Antisemitism in the Arab world Graffiti of a swastika on a building in the Palestinian city of Nablus , 2022 A boy holding a paper stating "we are the killers of the Jews" in the mourning ceremony for Qasem Soleimani at Mosalla of Tehran , 6 January 2020 Robert Bernstein , founder of Human Rights Watch , says that antisemitism is "deeply ingrained and institutionalized" in "Arab nations in modern times".

In a 2011 survey by the Pew Research Center , all of the Muslim-majority Middle Eastern countries polled held significantly negative opinions of Jews.

In the questionnaire, only 2% of Egyptians , 3% of Lebanese Muslims, and 2% of Jordanians reported having a positive view of Jews. Muslim-majority countries outside the Middle East similarly held markedly negative views of Jews, with 4% of Turks and 9% of Indonesians viewing Jews favorably. According to a 2011 exhibition at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, United States, some of the dialogue from Middle East media and commentators about Jews bear a striking resemblance to Nazi propaganda . According to Josef Joffe of Newsweek , "anti-Semitism—the real stuff, not just bad-mouthing particular Israeli policies—is as much part of Arab life today as the hijab or the hookah. Whereas this darkest of creeds is no longer tolerated in polite society in the West, in the Arab world, Jew hatred remains culturally endemic." Muslim clerics in the Middle East have frequently referred to Jews as descendants of apes and pigs, which are conventional epithets for Jews and Christians. According to professor Robert Wistrich , director of the Vidal Sassoon International Center for the Study of Antisemitism (SICSA), the calls for the destruction of Israel by Iran or by Hamas , Hezbollah , Islamic Jihad , or the Muslim Brotherhood , represent a contemporary mode of genocidal antisemitism. 21st-century antisemitism at universities Main article: Universities and antisemitism After the 2023 Hamas-led attack on Israel on 7 October and Israel's subsequent invasion of the Gaza strip, antisemitism and anti-Jewish hate crimes around the world increased significantly. Multiple universities and university officials have been accused of systemic antisemitism.

On 1 May 2024, the United States House of Representatives voted 320–91 in favour of adopting a bill enshrining the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance definition of antisemitism into law.

The bill was opposed by some who claimed it conflated criticism of Israel with antisemitism, while Jewish advocacy groups like the American Jewish Committee and World Jewish Congress generally supported it in response to the increase in antisemitic incidents on university campuses. An open letter by 1,200 Jewish professors opposed the proposal. Black Hebrew Israelite antisemitism Further information: Black Hebrew Israelites 4% of African-Americans self-identified as Black Hebrew Israelites in 2019. Between 2019 and 2022, individuals motivated by Black Hebrew Israelitism committed five religiously motivated murders. Extremist groups of Black Hebrew Israelites believe that Jewish people are "imposters", who have "stolen" Black Americans' true racial and religious identity. Some of these groups also promote the unsupported Khazar hypothesis of Ashkenazi ancestry .

In 2022, the American Jewish Committee stated that the Black Hebrew Israelite claim that "we are the real Jews" is a "troubling antisemitic trope with dangerous potential," arguing that such rhetoric perpetuates antisemitism by denying Jewish people's legitimacy as Jews.

The perpetrators of several antisemitic attacks in the United States have expressed interest in the Black Hebrew Israelites. Between 2019 and 2022, individuals motivated by Black Hebrew Israelites committed five religiously motivated murders.

In September 2022, the Program on Extremism at George Washington University published a report which said the largest threat came from "individuals loosely affiliated with or inspired by the movement", rather than from formal members of Black Hebrew Israelite organizations. Causes The latter position is exemplified by Theodor W. Adorno , who wrote that "Anti-Semitism is the rumour about the Jews"; in other words, "a conspiratorial mentality that sees Jewish people as invisible and yet ubiquitous, as capable of pulling the strings of power from behind the scenes." As an example of the correspondence theory, an 1894 book by Bernard Lazare questions whether Jews themselves were to blame for some antisemitic stereotypes, for instance arguing that Jews traditionally keeping strictly to their own communities, with their own practices and laws, led to a perception of Jews as anti-social; he later abandoned this belief and the book is considered antisemitic today.

As another example, Walter Laqueur suggested that the antisemitic perception of Jewish people as greedy (as often used in stereotypes of Jews ) probably evolved in Europe during medieval times where a large portion of money lending was operated by Jews. Among factors thought to contribute to this situation include that Jews were restricted from other professions, while the Christian Church declared for their followers that money lending constituted immoral " usury ", although recent scholarship, such as that of historian Julie Mell shows that Jews were not overrepresented in the sector and that the stereotype was founded in Christian projection of taboo behaviour on to the minority.

In Anti-Judaism: The Western Tradition (2013), historian David Nirenberg traces the history of antisemitism, arguing that antisemitism should be understood not as a product of isolated historical events or cultural biases but is instead embedded within the very fabric of Western thought and society. Its foundation lies in the early claim of Jewish deicide and depictions of Jews as 'Christ-killers'. Throughout Western history, Jews have since been used as a symbolic ' other ' to define and articulate the values and boundaries of various cultures and intellectual traditions.

In philosophy, literature, and politics, Jewishness has often been constructed as a counterpoint to what is considered normative or ideal. One of the key insights from Nirenberg's work is that antisemitism has proven to be remarkably adaptable. It changes form and adapts to different contexts and times, whether in medieval religious disputes, Enlightenment critiques, or modern racial theories. Philosophers and intellectuals have often used 'Jewishness' as a foil to explore and define their ideas. For instance, in the Enlightenment , figures like Voltaire critiqued Judaism as backward and superstitious to promote their visions of reason and progress. Similarly, the Soviet Union frequently portrayed Judaism as linked with capitalism and mercantilism, standing in opposition to the ideals of proletarian solidarity and communism .

In each case, Judaism or the Jews are portrayed as standing in tension with prevailing moral norms. Author and scholar Dara Horn published an article in The Atlantic reflecting on the rising antisemitism in the wake of the Hamas-led October 7 attacks in Israel and her previous published doubts about the effectiveness of Holocaust education pedagogy , specifically citing a personal interaction with a Holocaust educator in which an "anti-Semitic myth comparable to Holocaust denial" was communicated to her, due to what she felt was insufficient contextualization of the Holocaust in the history of antisemitism .

In it, Horn argues that antisemitism functions by appropriating what has happened to Jews and recasting their experience as part of a broader, universal struggle, which always ends in ultimately redefining Jewish identity as incompatible with these ideals. She concludes that the attacks on Jews, often under the guise of anti-Zionism, follow the same ancient pattern of marginalization and vilification. This is the permission structure for anti-Semitism: claim whatever has happened to the Jews as one's own experience, announce a "universal" ideal that all good people must accept, and then redefine Jewish collective identity as lying beyond it. Hating Jews thus becomes a demonstration of righteousness.

The key is to define, and redefine, and redefine again, the shiny new moral reasoning for why the Jews have failed the universal test of humanity. Prevention through education Education plays an important role in addressing and overcoming prejudice and countering social discrimination . However, education is not only about challenging the conditions of intolerance and ignorance in which antisemitism manifests itself; it is also about building a sense of global citizenship and solidarity, respect for, and enjoyment of diversity and the ability to live peacefully together as active, democratic citizens. Education equips learners with the knowledge to identify antisemitism and biased or prejudiced messages and raises awareness about the forms, manifestations, and impact of antisemitism faced by Jews and Jewish communities. Some Jewish writers have argued that public education about antisemitism through the prism of the Holocaust is unhelpful at best or actively deepening antisemitism at worst. Dara Horn wrote in The Atlantic that "Auschwitz is not a metaphor", arguing "That the Holocaust drives home the importance of love is an idea, like the idea that Holocaust education prevents anti-Semitism, that seems entirely unobjectionable. It is entirely objectionable.

The Holocaust didn't happen because of a lack of love. It happened because entire societies abdicated responsibility for their own problems, and instead blamed them on the people who represented—have always represented, since they first introduced the idea of commandedness to the world—the thing they were most afraid of: responsibility." Instead, she argues that perhaps "a more effective way to address anti-Semitism might lie in cultivating a completely different quality, one that happens to be the key to education itself: curiosity. Why use Jews as a means to teach people that we're all the same, when the demand that Jews be just like their neighbors is exactly what embedded the mental virus of anti-Semitism in the Western mind in the first place? Why not instead encourage inquiry about the diversity, to borrow a de rigueur word, of the human experience?" Geographical variation Main article: Geography of antisemitism A March 2008 report by the U.S. State Department found that there was an increase in antisemitism across the world, and that both old and new expressions of antisemitism persist. A 2012 report by the U.S. Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor also noted a continued global increase in antisemitism, and found that Holocaust denial and opposition to Israeli policy at times was used to promote or justify blatant antisemitism.

In 2014, the Anti-Defamation League conducted a study titled ADL Global 100: An Index of Anti-Semitism , which also reported high antisemitism figures around the world and, among other findings, that as many as "27% of people who have never met a Jew nevertheless harbor strong prejudices against him".

In August 2024, the Israeli Ministry of Diaspora Affairs announced a new antisemitism monitoring project.

The goal of the project is to measure levels of antisemitism in various countries, as well as identify instigators and trends.

The American Scholar . Vol. 75, no. 1. pp. 25– 36. Archived from the original on 8 September 2011. ^ "Measures to combat contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance" (PDF) . United Nations . 1 March 1999. p. 4. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 August 2023 . Retrieved 27 August 2023 . ^ Nathan, Julie (9 November 2014). "2014 Report on Antisemitism in Australia" (PDF) . Executive Council of Australian Jewry . p. 9. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 April 2015 . Retrieved 27 October 2018 . ^ "Antisemitism in History: Racial Antisemitism, 1875–1945" . United States Holocaust Memorial Museum . Archived from the original on 31 March 2020 . Retrieved 20 September 2023 . These new 'antisemites,' as they called themselves, drew upon older stereotypes to maintain that the Jews behaved the way they did—and would not change—because of innate racial qualities inherited from the dawn of time. Drawing as well upon the pseudoscience of racial eugenics , they argued that the Jews spread their so-called pernicious influence to weaken nations in Central Europe not only by political, economic, and media methods, but also literally by 'polluting' so-called pure Aryan blood by intermarriage and sexual relations with non-Jews. They argued that Jewish 'racial intermixing,' by 'contaminating' and weakening the host nations, served as part of a conscious Jewish plan for world domination . ^ Novak, David (February 2019). "Supersessionism hard and soft" . firstthings.com . Archived from the original on 29 September 2023 . Retrieved 24 September 2023 . ^ Keating, Sandra Toenies (2014). "Revisiting the Charge of Taḥrīf: The Question of Supersessionism in Early Islam and the Qurʾān" . Nicholas of Cusa and Islam . Brill . pp. 202– 217. doi : 10.1163/9789004274761_014 . ISBN 978-90-04-27476-1 . S2CID 170395646 . Archived from the original on 29 November 2018 . Retrieved 24 September 2023 . ^ "From Religious Prejudice to Antisemitism" . Facing History and Ourselves . 1 August 2017. Archived from the original on 22 September 2023 . Retrieved 20 September 2023 . ^ Zauzmer Weil, Julie (22 August 2019). "How anti-Semitic beliefs have taken hold among some evangelical Christians" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 19 May 2021 . Retrieved 20 September 2023 . ^ Freidenreich, David M. (18 November 2022). "How Christians Have Used Anti-Jewish and Anti-Muslim Rhetoric for Their Own Ends" . University of California Press . Archived from the original on 25 September 2023 . Retrieved 20 September 2023 . ^ Herf, Jeffrey (December 2009). "Nazi Germany's Propaganda Aimed at Arabs and Muslims During World War II and the Holocaust: Old Themes, New Archival Findings". Central European History . 42 (4). Cambridge University Press : 709– 736. doi : 10.1017/S000893890999104X . ISSN 0008-9389 . JSTOR 40600977 . S2CID 145568807 . ^ Spoerl, Joseph S. (January 2020). "Parallels between Nazi and Islamist Anti-Semitism" . Jewish Political Studies Review . 31 (1/2). Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs : 210– 244. ISSN 0792-335X . JSTOR 26870795 . Archived from the original on 9 June 2020 . Retrieved 14 October 2020 . ^ Bein (1990) , p. 595. ^ Lipstadt (2019) , pp. 22–25 Chanes (2004) , p. 150 Rattansi (2007) , pp. 4–5 Johnston (1983) , p. 27 Laqueur (2006) , p. 21 ^ a b c Lipstadt (2019) , pp. 22–25. ^ Johnson (1987) , p. 133. ^ a b c Lewis, Bernard . "Semites and Anti-Semites" . Archived from the original on 14 May 2011 . Retrieved 27 October 2018 . . Extract from Islam in History: Ideas, Men and Events in the Middle East , The Library Press, 1973. Lewis, Bernard (Winter 2006). "The New Anti-Semitism" .

The American Scholar . Vol. 75, no. 1. pp. 25– 36. Archived from the original on 8 November 2017. ^ "What's the difference between anti-Semitism and anti-Zionism?" . BBC News . 28 April 2016. Archived from the original on 25 December 2024 . Retrieved 20 February 2024 . ^ Malik, Kenan (24 February 2019). "Antisemites use the language of anti-Zionism.

The Observer . ISSN 0029-7712 . Archived from the original on 25 December 2024 . Retrieved 20 February 2024 . ^ a b c "Antiglobalism's Jewish Problem" in Rosenbaum, Ron (ed.). Those who forget the past: The Question of Anti-Semitism , Random House 2004, p. 272. ^ Baasten (2003) , pp. 57–73. ^ Bein (1990) , p. 594 . ^ Falk (2008) , p. 21. ^ Poliakov, Léon (2003).

The History of Anti-Semitism . Vol. 3: From Voltaire to Wagner. University of Pennsylvania Press . p. 404. ISBN 978-0-8122-1865-7 . ^ Falk (2008) , p. 21 . ^ Brustein, William I. (2003). Roots of Hate: Anti-Semitism in Europe before the Holocaust . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . p. 118. ISBN 978-0-521-77478-9 . Retrieved 27 October 2018 . ^ a b Hess, Jonathan M. (Winter 2000). "Johann David Michaelis and the Colonial Imaginary: Orientalism and the Emergence of Racial Antisemitism in Eighteenth-Century Germany". Jewish Social Studies . 6 (2): 56– 101. doi : 10.1353/jss.2000.0003 . S2CID 153434303 .

When the term "antisemitism" was first introduced in Germany in the late 1870s, those who used it did so in order to stress the radical difference between their own "antisemitism" and earlier forms of antagonism toward Jews and Judaism. ^ Jaspal, Rusi (2014). "Antisemitism: Conceptual Issues" . Antisemitism and Anti-Zionism: Representation, Cognition and Everyday Talk . Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate Publishing . ISBN 978-1-4724-0725-2 . Archived from the original on 29 December 2023 . Retrieved 27 October 2018 . Jaspal erroneously gives the date of publication as 1873. ^ Marr, Wilhelm (1879). Der Sieg des Judenthums über das Germanenthum. Vom nicht confessionellen Standpunkt aus betrachtet (in German) (8th ed.). Rudolph Costenoble – via Internet Archive . Marr uses the word " Semitismus " (Semitism) on pages 7, 11, 14, 30, 32, and 46; for example, one finds in the conclusion the following passage: " Ja, ich bin überzeugt, ich habe ausgesprochen, was Millionen Juden im Stillen denken: Dem Semitismus gehört die Weltherrschaft! " (Yes, I am convinced that I have articulated what millions of Jews are quietly thinking: World domination belongs to Semitism!) (p. 46). ^ a b c Levy (2010) , pp. 123–129. ^ Marr, Wilhelm (2009). Der Sieg des Judenthums über das Germanenthum. Vom nicht confessionellen Standpunkt aus betrachtet . Translated by Rohringer, Gerhard. p. 22 – via Internet Archive . ^ a b Bergmann, Werner. "Wilhelm Marr's A Mirror to the Jews" . Key Documents of German-Jewish History . Archived from the original on 29 September 2024 . Retrieved 29 July 2024 . ^ Levy, Richard S. (1 April 1987). "Wilhelm Marr: The Patriarch of Anti-Semitism, by Moshe Zimmermann" . Commentary Magazine . Archived from the original on 4 January 2025 . Retrieved 29 July 2024 . ^ Benz, Wolfgang (2004). Was ist Antisemitismus? (in German). C. H. Beck . ISBN 978-3-406-52212-3 . Archived from the original on 29 December 2023 . Retrieved 29 October 2023 . ^ Williams (2024) , p. 286. ^ Zimmermann (1987) , p. 71 . ^ Troy (2024) , p. 391. ^ a b Zimmermann (1987) , p. 112 : "The term "anti-Semitism" was unsuitable from the beginning for the real essence of Jew-hatred, which remained anchored, more or less, in the Christian tradition even when it moved, via the natural sciences, into racism. It is doubtful whether the term which was first publicized in an institutional context (the Anti-Semitic League) would have appeared at all if the "Anti-Chancellor League," which fought Bismarck's policy, had not been in existence since 1875.

The founders of the new Organization adopted the elements of "anti" and "league," and searched for the proper term: Marr exchanged the term "Jew" for "Semite" which he already favored. It is possible that the shortened form "Sem" is used with such frequency and ease by Marr (and in his writings) due to its literary advantage and because it reminded Marr of Sem Biedermann, his Jewish employer from the Vienna period." ^ Botsch, Gideon ; Treß, Werner (2020). "Moderner Antisemitismus und Sattelzeit: Das Beispiel Paul de Lagarde" .

In Behlmer, Heike ; Gertzen, Thomas L.; Witthuhn, Orell (eds.). Der Nachlass Paul de Lagarde: Orientalistische Netzwerke und Antisemitische Verflechtungen . Europäisch-jüdische Studien Beiträge (in German). Vol. 46. Oldenburg: De Gruyter . p. 122. ISBN 978-3-11-061546-3 . ^ Deutsch, Gotthard (1901). "Anti-Semitism" .

The Jewish Encyclopedia . Vol. 1. Funk & Wagnalls . p. 641 . Retrieved 21 August 2023 – via Internet Archive . ^ Rothbart, Zack (4 May 2020). "Why 'Anti-Semitism' Was Not in the Original Oxford English Dictionary" . blog.nli.org.il . Archived from the original on 17 May 2020 . Retrieved 9 October 2025 . ^ Oster, Marcy (4 May 2020). " 'Anti-Semite,' thought to be a short-lived term, was omitted from original Oxford English Dictionary" . Jewish Telegraphic Agency . Retrieved 4 November 2025 . ^ "The Jews in Germany".

The Eclectic Magazine of Foreign Literature, Science, and Art . Vol. XXXIII. Leavitt, Trow & Company . March 1881. p. 350. ...the position of German Liberals in this matter of philo-Semitism. ^ Vermeulen, H. F. (2015).

Before Boas: The Genesis of Ethnography and Ethnology in the German Enlightenment . Critical Studies in the History of Anthropology Series. University of Nebraska Press . ISBN 978-0-8032-7738-0 . Retrieved 7 October 2022 . Schlözer 1781: p.161 "From the Mediterranean to the Euphrates, from Mesopotamia to Arabia ruled one language, as is well known. Thus Syrians, Babylonians, Hebrews, and Arabs were one people (ein Volk). Phoenicians (Hamites) also spoke this language, which I would like to call the Semitic (die Semitische). To the north and east of this Semitic language and national district (Semitische Sprach- und VölkerBezirke) begins a second one: With Moses and Leibniz I would like to call it the Japhetic." ^ Kiraz (2001) , p. 25; Baasten (2003) , p. 67 ^ Weinberg (2010) , p. 18 . ^ a b Report on Global Anti-Semitism (Report). U.S. State Department . 5 January 2005. Archived from the original on 25 January 2021. ^ Fine, Helen, ed. (1987).

The persisting question: sociological perspectives and social contexts of modern antisemitism . Berlin: De Gruyter . p. 67. ISBN 978-3-11-010170-6 . ^ Falk (2008) , p. 5 . ^ Weinberg (2010) , pp. 18–19 . ^ Judaken, Jonathan (2008). "So what's new? Rethinking the 'new antisemitism' in a global age" (PDF) . Patterns of Prejudice . 42 ( 4– 5): 531– 560. doi : 10.1080/00313220802377453 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 June 2010. Younes, Anna-Esther (1 October 2020). "Fighting Anti-Semitism in Contemporary Germany" . Islamophobia Studies Journal . 5 (2). doi : 10.13169/islastudj.5.2.0249 . ISSN 2325-8381 . "The Louis D. Brandeis Center FAQs About Defining Anti-Semitism" . Brandeis Center—Advance the civil and human rights of the Jewish people and promote justice for all . 14 March 2022. Archived from the original on 6 January 2025 . Retrieved 16 September 2024 . ^ Lindemann & Levy (2010) , p. 8. ^ Lewis, Bernard (Winter 2006). "The New Anti-Semitism" .

The American Scholar . Vol. 75, no. 1. pp. 25– 36. Archived from the original on 8 September 2011. ^ a b c "Working Definition of Antisemitism" (PDF) . European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2011 . Retrieved 24 July 2010 . ^ Maizels (2023) , pp. 14–15. ^ "EUMC Working Definition of Antisemitism" . antisem.eu . Archived from the original on 1 July 2016 . Retrieved 23 August 2016 . ^ Maizels (2023) , pp. 15–16. ^ "Defining Anti-Semitism" . Archived from the original on 10 February 2017 . Retrieved 5 August 2018 . ^ "Hate crime" . app.college.police.uk . Archived from the original on 11 September 2016 . Retrieved 23 August 2016 . ^ "Definition of antisemitism" . 13 July 2015. Archived from the original on 24 September 2016 . Retrieved 23 August 2016 . ^ Maizels (2023) , pp. 15–17. ^ "Working Definition of Antisemitism" (PDF) . IHRA . Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 August 2018 . Retrieved 23 August 2016 . ^ "US House of Representatives votes to condemn antisemitism after Ilhan Omar's 'Israel loyalty' remarks" .

The Jewish Chronicle . Archived from the original on 3 December 2020 . Retrieved 10 March 2019 . Accusing Jewish citizens of being more loyal to Israel than to their interests of their own nation is listed by the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance as an example of contemporary antisemitism in public life ^ Ruth Gould, Rebecca (2020). "The IHRA Definition of Antisemitism: Defining Antisemitism by Erasing Palestinians" .

The Political Quarterly . 91 (4): 825– 831. doi : 10.1111/1467-923X.12883 . S2CID 225366096 . ^ Maizels (2023) , p. 17 Shamir, Jonathan (18 April 2021). "Two Jews, Three Definitions: New Documents Challenge Mainstream View of Antisemitism" . Haaretz . Retrieved 20 January 2023 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) Starr, Michael (22 April 2021). "War of the words: The conflict between definitions of antisemitism" .

The Jerusalem Post . Archived from the original on 26 December 2024 . Retrieved 19 January 2023 . Kampeas, Ron (17 March 2021). "A liberal definition of antisemitism that allows for Israel criticism" .

The Jerusalem Post . Archived from the original on 5 June 2021 . Retrieved 22 January 2023 . Kampeas, Ron (17 March 2021). "US Jewish scholars push anti-Semitism definition allowing more Israel criticism" .

The Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 28 June 2021 . Retrieved 19 January 2023 . McGreal, Chris (24 April 2023). "UN urged to reject antisemitism definition over 'misuse' to shield Israel" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 22 October 2023 . Retrieved 5 February 2024 . Hofmann, Sarah Judith (17 June 2021). "A new definition for antisemitism?" . Deutsche Welle . Archived from the original on 26 December 2024 . Retrieved 5 February 2024 . ^ Richard S. Levy, "Marr, Wilhelm (1819–1904)" in Levy (2005) , pp. 445–446, vol. 2 ^ a b Geehr, Richard S. (1990). Karl Lueger, Mayor of Fin-de-Siècle Vienna . Detroit: Wayne State University Press . pp. 172– 173, 197– 199. ISBN 0-8143-2077-5 . ^ "Dr. Karl Lueger Dead; Anti-Semitic Leader and Mayor of Vienna Was 66 Years Old" .

The New York Times . 11 March 1910. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. ^ Volovici, Leon. "Antisemitic Parties and Movements" .

The YIVO Encyclopedia of Jews in Eastern Europe . Translated by Mircea, Anca. Archived from the original on 21 January 2025 . Retrieved 6 February 2025 . ^ Brustein, William I.; King, Ryan D. (January 2004). "Anti-Semitism in Europe before the Holocaust" . International Political Science Review . 25 (1): 35–53 . doi : 10.1177/0192512104038166 . Retrieved 10 April 2026 . It is commonly accepted that the years 1899–1939 are a highpoint in anti-Semitism in western societies (Weinberg, 1986; Bernstein, 1996). ^ "Were the Nazis the only antisemites in pre-war Europe?" . Facts About The Holocaust . World Jewish Congress , UNESCO . Retrieved 10 April 2026 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ Leicht, Johannes (2015). "Antisemitische Parteien" . German Historical Museum (in German) . Retrieved 10 April 2026 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ Brustein, William I (2003). "Introduction: Anti-Semitism in Europe before the Holocaust". Roots of Hate: Anti-Semitism in Europe before the Holocaust . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-0-521-77308-9 . ^ Schoeps, Julius H. (2013). "Auto-emancipation and self-help". Pioneers of Zionism: Hess, Pinsker, Rülf . De Gruyter . pp. 34– 39. doi : 10.1515/9783110314724.34 . ISBN 978-3-11-031472-4 . Archived from the original on 12 December 2024. ^ Bartlett, Steven J. (2005).

The Pathology of Man: A Study of Human Evil . Charles C. Thomas Publisher. p. 30. ISBN 978-0-398-07557-6 . ^ Pinsker, Leon (1906). Auto-Emancipation . Zionist publications. Translated by Blondheim, D. S. New York: The Maccabaean Publishing Company. pp. 3, 4. Archived from the original on 20 February 2021 . Retrieved 30 March 2018 . English and Hebrew translations. ^ Daily Telegraph , 12 November 1938. Cited in Gilbert, Martin (2006). Kristallnacht: Prelude to Destruction . HarperCollins . p. 142. ^ Marcus, Jacob Rader (1989). United States Jewry, 1776–1985 . Wayne State University Press . p. 286. ISBN 0-8143-2186-0 . ^ Bein (1990) , p. 580. ^ Bauer, Yehuda (1984). "The Most Ancient Group Prejudice".

The Anti-Semitism of Our Time . Oslo: Nansen Committee. p. 14. , cited in: Hellig, Jocelyn (2003).

The Holocaust and Antisemitism: A Short History . Oneworld Publications. p. 73. ISBN 1-85168-313-5 . ^ Lewis (1999) , p. 117 Isaac, Benjamin (2004).

The Invention of Racism in Classical Antiquity . Princeton University Press . p. 442. ISBN 978-1-4008-4956-7 . Archived from the original on 29 December 2023 . Retrieved 27 October 2018 . Matas, David (2005). Aftershock: Anti-Zionism and Antisemitism . Dundurn Press. p. 34. ISBN 978-1-55002-553-8 . Archived from the original on 29 December 2023 . Retrieved 27 October 2018 . "Memo on Spelling of Antisemitism" (PDF) . International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance . April 2015. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 October 2020 . Retrieved 24 May 2019 . ... the hyphenated spelling allows for the possibility of something called 'Semitism', which not only legitimizes a form of pseudo-scientific racial classification that was thoroughly discredited by association with Nazi ideology, but also divides the term, stripping it from its meaning of opposition and hatred toward Jews. ^ Using Population Descriptors in Genetics and Genomics Research: A New Framework for an Evolving Field (Consensus Study Report) . National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine . 2023. doi : 10.17226/26902 . ISBN 978-0-309-70065-8 . PMID 36989389 .

In humans, race is a socially constructed designation, a misleading and harmful surrogate for population genetic differences, and has a long history of being incorrectly identified as the major genetic reason for phenotypic differences between groups. ^ Amutah, C.; Greenidge, K.; Mante, A.; Munyikwa, M.; Surya, S. L.; Higginbotham, E.; Jones, D. S.; Lavizzo-Mourey, R.; Roberts, D.; Tsai, J.; Aysola, J. (March 2021). Malina, D. (ed.). "Misrepresenting Race—The Role of Medical Schools in Propagating Physician Bias" .

The New England Journal of Medicine . 384 (9). Massachusetts Medical Society : 872– 878. doi : 10.1056/NEJMms2025768 . ISSN 1533-4406 . PMID 33406326 . S2CID 230820421 . ^ Gannon, Megan (5 February 2016). "Race Is a Social Construct, Scientists Argue" . Scientific American . ISSN 0036-8733 . Archived from the original on 14 February 2023 . Retrieved 1 March 2023 . ^ Sevenster, Jan Nicolaas (1975).

The Roots of Pagan Anti-Semitism in the Ancient World . Brill Archive. pp. 1– 2. ISBN 978-90-04-04193-6 . It has long been realised that there are objections to the term anti-Semitism and therefore an endeavour has been made to find a word which better interprets the meaning intended. Already in 1936 Bolkestein, for example, wrote an article on Het "antisemietisme" in de oudheid (Anti-Semitism in the ancient world) in which the word was placed between quotation marks and a preference was expressed for the term hatred of the Jews… Nowadays the term anti-Judaism is often preferred. It certainly expresses better than anti-Semitism the fact that it concerns the attitude to the Jews and avoids any suggestion of racial distinction, which was not or hardly, a factor of any significance in ancient times. For this reason Leipoldt preferred to speak of anti-Judaism when writing his Antisemitsmus in der alten Welt (1933). Bonsirven also preferred this word to Anti-Semitism, "mot moderne qui implique une théorie des races". ^ "The Power of Myth" (PDF) . Facing History . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2009 . Retrieved 27 October 2018 . Bauer, Yehuda . "Problems of Contemporary Antisemitism" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 March 2008 . Retrieved 27 October 2018 . Bauer, Yehuda (1982). A History of the Holocaust . Franklin Watts. p. 52 . ISBN 978-0-531-05641-7 . ^ Almog, Shmuel (Summer 1989). "What's in a Hyphen?" . SICSA Report . Jerusalem: Vidal Sassoon International Center for the Study of Antisemitism . Archived from the original on 28 April 1999 . Retrieved 3 April 2024 . Republished in 2014 by Alabama Holocaust Education Center: ahecinfo.org/wp-content/uploads/Why-antisemitism-with-no-hyphen.pdf ^ Carroll, James (2002). Constantine's Sword: The Church and the Jews . New York: Mariner. pp. 628– 629. ISBN 978-0-618-21908-7 . Archived from the original on 29 December 2023 . Retrieved 27 October 2018 . ^ Prager & Telushkin (2003) , p. 199 . ^ Bandler, Aaron (27 April 2021). "AP Changes Spelling of "Anti-Semitism" to "Antisemitism" " . Jewish Journal . Archived from the original on 30 November 2024 . Retrieved 18 July 2023 . ^ Hanau, Shira (8 December 2021). "The New York Times updates style guide to 'antisemitism,' losing the hyphen" . Jewish Telegraphic Agency . Archived from the original on 19 July 2023 . Retrieved 18 July 2023 . ^ "Vol. 35, No. 11: Antisemitism" .

The Wall Street Journal . 15 December 2022. ISSN 0099-9660 . Archived from the original on 19 July 2023 . Retrieved 19 July 2023 . ^ Jo Zerivitz, Marcia (1 February 2021). "In a word, it's antisemitism" . Jewish Press of Tampa Bay . Archived from the original on 19 July 2023 . Retrieved 18 July 2023 . ^ Judaken (2018) , pp. 1123–1124. ^ a b Consonni (2022) , p. 25. ^ Judaken (2018) , pp. 1123, 1130. ^ a b Judaken (2018) , p. 1130. ^ a b Judaken (2018) , p. 1135. ^ Ury (2018) , p. 1151. ^ Consonni (2022) , p. 27. ^ Judaken (2018) , p. 1132. ^ Consonni (2022) , p. 26. ^ König, René (2004). Materialien zur Kriminalsoziologie (in German). VS Verlag . p. 231. ISBN 978-3-8100-3306-2 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 . ^ Lazare, Bernard (2006). Anti-Semitism: Its History and Causes . Cosimo, Inc. p. 224. ISBN 978-1-59605-601-5 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 . ^ Brustein, William (2003). Roots of hate: anti-semitism in Europe before the Holocaust . Cambridge University Press . p. 46. ISBN 978-0-521-77478-9 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 . ^ Flannery (1985) , p. . ^ Flannery (1985) , p. 16. ^ Flannery (1985) , p. 260. ^ Sherwood, Harriet (11 April 2018). "Traditional antisemitism is back, global study finds" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 17 October 2023 . Retrieved 17 October 2023 . ^ Flannery (1985) , p. 289. ^ Flannery (1985) , p. 176. ^ Flannery (1985) , p. 179. ^ Goldberg, Jeffrey (April 2015). "Is It Time for the Jews to Leave Europe?" .

The New Yorker . Archived from the original on 21 April 2023 . Retrieved 21 April 2023 . ^ Harap, Louis (1987). Creative awakening: the Jewish presence in twentieth-century American literature, 1900-1940s . Greenwood Publishing Group . p. 24. ISBN 978-0-313-25386-7 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 . ^ Flannery (1985) , pp. 135–141. ^ Michael, Robert (2005). A concise history of American antisemitism . Rowman & Littlefield . p. vii. ISBN 978-0-7425-4313-3 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 . ^ Nicholls, William (1993). Christian Antisemitism: A History of Hate . Lanham, Maryland : Jason Aronson / Rowman & Littlefield . p. 314. ISBN 0-87668-398-7 . ^ Michael (2008) , p. 171. ^ Arnal, Oscar L. (1985). Ambivalent Alliance: The Catholic Church and the Action Française, 1899–1939 . University of Pittsburgh Press . p. 32. ISBN 978-0-8229-8563-1 . ^ Rubenstein, Richard L. (2003). Approaches to Auschwitz: The Holocaust and Its Legacy . Westminster John Knox Press . p. 81. ISBN 978-0-664-22353-3 . ^ Brustein, William (2003). Roots of Hate: Anti-Semitism in Europe Before the Holocaust . Cambridge University Press . p. 60. ISBN 978-0-521-77478-9 . ^ Meyer, Michael; Brenner, Michael (1998). German-Jewish History in Modern Times: Integration in dispute, 1871–1918 . Columbia University Press . p. 220. ISBN 978-0-231-07476-6 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 . ^ "Jews & Money—The story of a stereotype" . Anti-Defamation League . Archived from the original on 28 February 2011 . Retrieved 18 April 2011 . ^ Penslar (2001) , p. 5. ^ Foxman (2010) , p. 84. ^ Foxman (2010) , p. 89. ^ Foxman (2010) , p. 93. ^ Foxman (2010) , p. 98. ^ Foxman (2010) , p. 102. ^ Foxman (2010) , p. 105. ^ Krefetz (1982) , p. 45. ^ Krefetz (1982) , pp. 6–7. ^ Krefetz (1982) , p. 47. ^ Penslar (2001) , p. 12. ^ D'Acunto, Francesco; Prokopczuk, Marcel; Weber, Michael (2015). "Distrust in Finance Lingers: Jewish Persecution and Households' Investments" (PDF) . Meeting Papers, Society for Economic Dynamics (26). Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 November 2014 . Retrieved 20 October 2014 – via Haas School of Business . ^ Lewy, Guenter (2017). Perpetrators: The World of the Holocaust Killers . Oxford University Press . p. 42. ISBN 978-0-19-066113-7 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 14 October 2020 . ^ "Anti-Semitism" . Jewish Encyclopedia . Archived from the original on 21 September 2011. ^ "Jesus—The Jewish religion in the 1st century" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on 11 December 2020 . Retrieved 31 August 2022 . ^ "Antisemitism in History: Racial Antisemitism, 1875–1945" . United States Holocaust Memorial Museum . Archived from the original on 23 August 2017 . Retrieved 15 September 2017 . ^ Webster, Paul (2001). Petain's Crime: The Full Story of French Collaboration . London: Pan Books . pp. 13, 15. ISBN 978-0-330-48785-6 . ^ Cohn-Sherbok, Dan (2006).

The Paradox of Anti-Semitism . Continuum . pp. 44– 46. ISBN 978-0-8264-8896-1 . ^ Beller (2007) , p. 64. ^ Beller (2007) , pp. 57–59. ^ Baeumler, Alfred (1931). Nietzsche, der Philosoph und Politiker (in German). Reclam . pp. 8, 63, et passim . ASIN B002803IJK . ^ Genocide, critical issues of the Holocaust: a companion to the film, Genocide . Behrman House, Inc. 1983. p. 100. ISBN 978-0-940646-04-9 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 . ^ Penslar, Derek J. (2005). "Introduction".

In Penslar, Derek J.; Marrus, Michael R.; Stein, Janice Gross (eds.). Contemporary Antisemitism: Canada and the World . University of Toronto Press . pp. 3– 12. doi : 10.3138/9781442673342 . ISBN 978-1-4426-7334-2 . ^ Karády, Viktor (2004).

The Jews of Europe in the modern era: a socio-historical outline . Central European University Press . p. 348. ISBN 978-963-9241-52-7 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 . ^ Harap, Louis (1987). Creative awakening: the Jewish presence in twentieth-century American literature . Greenwood Publishing Group . p. 76. ISBN 978-0-313-25386-7 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 . ^ Kandel, Eric R. (2007).

In search of memory: the emergence of a new science of mind . W. W. Norton & Company . p. 30. ISBN 978-0-393-32937-7 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 . ^ Niewyk, Donald L.; Nicosia, Francis R. (2003).

The Columbia Guide to the Holocaust . Columbia University Press . p. 215. ISBN 978-0-231-11201-7 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 . ^ Kandel, Eric R. (2007).

In search of memory: the emergence of a new science of mind . W. W. Norton & Company . pp. 30– 31. ISBN 978-0-393-32937-7 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 . ^ Mathis, Andrew E. (2 July 2004). "Holocaust Denial, a Definition" .

The Holocaust History Project . Archived from the original on 13 February 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2016 . Shermer, Michael; Grobman, Alex (2000). Denying History: who Says the Holocaust Never Happened and why Do They Say It? . University of California Press . p. 106. ISBN 0-520-23469-3 . "Antisemitism and Racism Country Reports: United States" . Stephen Roth Institute . 2000. Archived from the original on 28 June 2011 . Retrieved 17 May 2007 . Lipstadt (1994) , p. 27 "Introduction: Denial as Anti-Semitism" . Anti-Defamation League . Holocaust Denial: An Online Guide to Exposing and Combating Anti-Semitic Propaganda. 2001. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011 . Retrieved 12 June 2007 . Powell, Lawrence N. (2000). Troubled Memory: Anne Levy, the Holocaust, and David Duke's Louisiana . University of North Carolina Press . p. 445. ISBN 0-8078-5374-7 . ^ Tait, Robert (10 December 2012). " 'Vulture spying for Israel' caught in Sudan" .

The Daily Telegraph . Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 11 January 2014 . ^ a b Chesler, Phyllis (2003).

The New Antisemitism: The Current Crisis and What We Must Do About It . Jossey-Bass. pp. 158– 159, 181. Kinsella, Warren . "The New antisemitism" . Archived from the original on 29 July 2012 . Retrieved 5 March 2006 . Doward, Jamie (8 August 2004). "Jews predict record level of hate attacks: Militant Islamic media accused of stirring up new wave of antisemitism" .

The Observer . Archived from the original on 15 January 2008. Endelman, Todd M. (2005). "Antisemitism in Western Europe Today" . Contemporary Antisemitism: Canada and the World . University of Toronto Press . pp. 65– 79. ISBN 978-0-8020-3931-6 . Archived from the original on 17 November 2022. Matas, David (2005). Aftershock: Anti-Zionism and Antisemitism . Dundurn Press. pp. 30– 31. ISBN 978-1-55002-553-8 . Archived from the original on 17 November 2022. Wistrich, Robert S. (2012).

From Ambivalence to Betrayal: The Left, the Jews, and Israel . Studies in Antisemitism. University of Nebraska Press . ^ Klug, Brian (15 January 2004). "The Myth of the New Anti-Semitism" .

The Nation . Archived from the original on 1 July 2009 . Retrieved 9 January 2006 . ^ Lerner, Michael (5 February 2007). "There Is No New Anti-Semitism" . Archived from the original on 26 January 2011 . Retrieved 6 February 2007 . ^ Chanes (2004) . ^ Chanes (2004) , pp. 5–6. ^ Flannery (1985) , p. 11. ^ a b Flannery (2004) , p. 12. ^ Gruen, Erich S. (1993). "Hellenism and Persecution: Antiochus IV and the Jews".

In Green, Peter (ed.). Hellenistic History and Culture . University of California Press . pp. 250–252 . ^ Schäfer, Peter. Judeophobia , Harvard University Press , 1997, p. 208. Peter Schäfer ^ Barclay, John M. G. (1999). Jews in the Mediterranean Diaspora: From Alexander to Trajan (323 BCE–117 CE) . University of California . pp. 78– 79. ^ Philo of Alexandria . Flaccus . Archived from the original on 4 August 2007. ^ Van Der Horst, Pieter Willem (2003). Philo's Flaccus: The First Pogrom . Philo of Alexandria Commentary Series. Brill . ^ Tcherikover, Victor (1975). Hellenistic Civilization and the Jews . New York: Atheneum. ^ Bohak, Gideon (2003). "The Ibis and the Jewish Question: Ancient 'Antisemitism' in Historical Context".

In Mor, Menachem; Pastor, Jack; Oppenheimer, Aharon; Schwartz, Daniel R. (eds.). Jews and Gentiles in the Holy Land in the Days of the Second Temple, the Mishna and the Talmud . Yad Ben-Zvi Press. pp. 27– 43. ISBN 965-217-205-7 . ^ Daniels, J. L. (1979). "Anti-Semitism in the Hellenistic-Roman Period". Journal of Biblical Literature . 98 (1): 45– 65. doi : 10.2307/3265911 . JSTOR 3265911 . ^ Flannery (1985) , pp. 11–12. ^ Flannery (1985) , pp. 24–26. ^ "Temple of Jerusalem" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived from the original on 25 March 2026 . Retrieved 10 April 2026 . ^ a b Gruen, Erich S. "Hellenism and Persecution: Antiochus IV and the Jews" . Hellenistic History and Culture . Retrieved 10 April 2026 – via publishing.cdlib.org. ^ Colpe, Carsten (2008). "Anti-Semitism".

In Cancik, Hubert; Schneider, Helmuth (eds.). Brill's New Pauly Online . Brill . ^ Woods, David (2008). "Tiberius, Tacfarinas, and the Jews" . Arctos . 42 : 267– 284 . Retrieved 10 April 2026 . ^ "Tiberius, Tacfarinas, and the Jews" . History of the Ancient World . 29 September 2012 . Retrieved 10 April 2026 . ^ Gibbon, Edward . "Fall In The West".

The Decline And Fall Of The Roman Empire . Retrieved 10 April 2026 – via www.ccel.org. {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ Carroll, James (2001). Constantine's Sword . Houghton Mifflin . p. 26. ISBN 0-395-77927-8 . ^ Lowney, Chris (1999). A Vanished World: Muslims, Christians, and Jews in Medieval Spain . Brill . pp. 124– 125. ISBN 978-90-04-11206-3 . ^ Gonzalez Salinero, Raul (1996). Ferreiro, Alberto (ed.).

The Visigoths: Studies in Culture and Society . Oxford University Press . pp. 29– 31. ISBN 978-0-19-531191-4 . ^ Gorsky, Jeffrey (2015). Exiles in Sepharad: The Jewish Millennium in Spain . University of Nebraska Press . ISBN 978-0-8276-1241-9 . Retrieved 28 August 2016 . ^ Menocal, María Rosa (April 2003).

The Ornament of the World: How Muslims, Jews and Christians Created a Culture of Tolerance in Medieval Spain . Back Bay Books. ISBN 978-0-316-16871-7 . ^ Perry & Schweitzer (2002) , pp. 267–268. ^ Gottheil, Richard; Kayserling, Meyer (1906). "Granada" . Jewish Encyclopedia . Archived from the original on 24 December 2010. ^ Harzig, Hoerder & Shubert (2003) , p. 42. ^ Ye'or, Bat (1985).

The Dhimmi: Jews and Christians Under Islam . Madison, New Jersey: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press . p. 61. ISBN 978-0-8386-3262-8 . ^ "Islamic world" . Encyclopædia Britannica . 2007. Archived from the original on 13 December 2007 . Retrieved 2 September 2007 . ^ a b c Frank & Leaman (2003) , pp. 137–138. ^ "The Almohads" . Myjewishlearning.com . Archived from the original on 13 February 2009 . Retrieved 2 June 2012 . ^ "Historical Timeline" . Archived from the original on 28 July 2007 . Retrieved 27 October 2018 . .

The Forgotten Refugees ^ Chazan, Robert (1996). "In the Year 1096: The First Crusade and the Jews" . Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. ^ Slack, Corliss K. (2013). Historical Dictionary of the Crusades . Scarecrow Press . pp. 108– 109. ISBN 978-0-8108-7831-0 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 13 August 2015 . ^ History of the reign of Charles VI, titled Chronique de Religieux de Saint-Denys , encompasses the king's full reign in six volumes. Originally written in Latin, the work was translated to French in six volumes by L. Bellaguet between 1839 and 1852. ^ "Why the Jews?—Black Death" . Archived from the original on 11 December 2003 . Retrieved 22 November 2011 . ^ Mormando, Franco (1999). "2".

The Preacher's Demons: Bernardino of Siena and the Social Underworld of Early Renaissance Italy . Chicago: University of Chicago Press . ^ Barry, Stéphane; Gualde, Norbert (June 2006). "La plus grande épidémie de l'histoire" . L'Histoire (in French). No. 310. p. 47. ^ Johnson (1987) , p. 242. ^ "Judaism Timeline 1618–1770" . CBS News . Archived from the original on 20 October 2012 . Retrieved 13 May 2007 . Bogdan Chmelnitzki leads Cossack uprising against Polish rule; 100,000 Jews are killed and hundreds of Jewish communities are destroyed. ^ Gilbert, Martin (1999). Holocaust Journey: Traveling in Search of the Past . Columbia University Press . p. 219. ISBN 0-231-10965-2 . ... as many as 100,000 Jews were murdered throughout the Ukraine by Bogdan Chmielnicki's soldiers on the rampage. ^ Boyer, Paul S., ed. (2006).

The Oxford companion to United States history . Oxford: Oxford University Press . p. 42 . ISBN 978-0-19-508209-8 . ^ Yosef Qafiḥ, Ketavim ( Collected Papers ), Vol. 2, Jerusalem 1989, pp. 714–716 (Hebrew) ^ Büchler, Alexander (1904). "Hungary".

The Jewish Encyclopedia . Vol. 6. New York and London: Funk and Wagnalls . pp. 494–503 . ^ O'Brien (1969) , p. 29. ^ Ingrao, W. Charles (1994).

The Habsburg Monarchy 1618-1815 . Cambridge University Press . p. 199. ^ O'Brien (1969) , p. 30. ^ Ages Arnold. "Tainted Greatness: The Case of Voltaire's Anti-Semitism: The Testimony of the Correspondence." Neohelicon 21.2 (Sept. 1994): 361. ^ Meyer, Paul H. "The Attitude of the Enlightenment Toward the Jew." Studies on Voltaire and the Eighteenth Century, 26 (1963): 1177. ^ Poliakov, L.

The History of Anti-Semitism: From Voltaire to Wagner . Routledge & Kegan Paul, Ltd., 1975 (translated). page 88-89. ^ a b c Battini, Michele (2016). Socialism of Fools: Capitalism and Modern Anti-Semitism . Columbia University Press . pp. 2–7 and 30–37. ^ Katz, Jacob (1980).

From Prejudice to Destruction: Anti-Semitism, 1700–1933 . Harvard University Press . pp. 112–115 . ISBN 978-0-674-32505-0 . ^ Joskowicz, Ari (2013).

The Modernity of Others: Jewish Anti-Catholicism in Germany and France . Stanford University Press . p. 99. Michael, Robert; Rosen, Philip (2007). Dictionary of Antisemitism from the Earliest Times to the Present . Scarecrow Press . p. 67. ^ Sanos, Sandrine (2012).

The Aesthetics of Hate: Far-Right Intellectuals, Antisemitism, and Gender in 1930s France . Stanford University Press . p. 47. ^ Laqueur, Walter ; Baumel, Judith Tydor (2001).

The Holocaust Encyclopedia . Yale University Press . p. 20. ^ a b c d Michael (2008) , pp. 128–129. ^ Graetz, Michael (1996).

The Jews in Nineteenth-century France: From the French Revolution to the Alliance Israélite Universelle . Stanford University Press . p. 208. ^ Johnson (1987) , p. 358. ^ Petrovsky-Shtern, Yohanan (8 June 2017). "Military Service in Russia" . YIVO Encyclopedia of Jews in Eastern Europe . Archived from the original on 7 February 2021 . Retrieved 20 October 2017 . ^ Johnson (1987) , p. 359. ^ Van der Kriste, John (1998).

The Romanovs 1818–1959 . Sutton. p. 104. ^ Morris, Benny (2001). Righteous Victims: A History of the Zionist-Arab Conflict, 1881–2001 . Vintage Books . pp. 10– 11. ^ Lewis, Bernard (1984).

The Jews of Islam . Princeton: Princeton University Press . pp. 181– 183. ISBN 978-0-691-00807-3 . ^ Montefiore, Simon Sebag (2011). Jerusalem . Phoenix. pp. 429– 432. ^ Lewis, Bernard (2002). What Went Wrong? . Phoenix. p. 172. ^ a b c d e Steinberg, Jonathan (2011). Bismarck: A Life . New York: Oxford University Press . pp. 388– 390. ISBN 978-0-19-997539-6 . ^ a b White, Dan (12 December 2025). "Uncovering the troubling legacy of racism in fairy tales" . News . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ a b Helfer, Martha B. (2021). "Fairy Tales and the Transmission of Prejudice" . Die Unterrichtspraxis / Teaching German . 54 (1): 74– 87. ISSN 0042-062X . ^ "The Despot of Russia..." Brooklyn Daily Eagle . Brooklyn, NY . 22 December 1846. p. 2. ^ "Anecdotes of Jews, and their peculiar traits" . Brooklyn Daily Eagle . Brooklyn, NY . 8 January 1847. p. 2. ^ Rapport, Michael. (2005) Nineteenth Century Europe. New York: Palgrave MacMillan ISBN 0333652460 . ^ Green, Harold M. (2003). "Adolf Stoecker: Portrait of a Demagogue". Politics and Policy . 31 (1): 106– 129. doi : 10.1111/j.1747-1346.2003.tb00889.x . ^ Telman, D. A. Jeremy (1995). "Adolf Stoecker: Anti-Semite with a Christian Mission". Jewish History . 9 (2): 93– 112. doi : 10.1007/BF01668991 . JSTOR 20101235 . S2CID 162391831 . ^ Flannery (2004) , p. 168. ^ Jacobs, Jack (2005). "Marx, Karl (1818–1883)".

In Levy, Richard S. (ed.). Antisemitism: A Historical Encyclopedia of Prejudice and Persecution . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO . pp. 446– 447. ISBN 978-1-85109-439-4 . ^ Lewis (1999) , p. 112. ^ Perry & Schweitzer (2005) , pp. 154–157. ^ Stav, Arieh (2003). "Israeli Anti-Semitism".

In Sharan, Shlomo (ed.). Israel and the Post-Zionists: A Nation at Risk . Brighton: Sussex Academic Press . p. 171. ISBN 978-1-903900-52-9 . Hitler simply copied Marx's own anti-Semitism. ^ According to Joshua Muravchik Marx's aspiration for "the emancipation of society from Judaism" because "the practical Jewish spirit" of "huckstering" had taken over the Christian nations is not that far from the Nazi program's twenty-four-point: "combat the Jewish-materialist spirit within us and without us" in order "that our nation can achieve permanent health." See Muravchik, Joshua (2003). Heaven on Earth: The Rise and Fall of Socialism . San Francisco: Encounter Books . p. 164. ISBN 978-1-893554-45-0 . ^ Lindemann, Albert S. (2000). Modern Anti-Semitism and the Rise of the Jews . Cambridge University Press . p. 166. ISBN 978-0-521-79538-8 . ^ Maccoby, Hyam (2006). Antisemitism and Modernity: Innovation and Continuity . London: Routledge . pp. 64– 66. ISBN 978-0-415-31173-1 . ^ McLellan (1980) , pp. 141–142. ^ Peled, Y. (1992). "From theology to sociology: Bruno Bauer and Karl Marx on the question of Jewish emancipation" . History of Political Thought . 13 (3): 463– 485. Archived from the original on 20 February 2021 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 . Brown, Wendy (1995). "Rights and Identity in Late Modernity: Revisiting the 'Jewish Question' ".

In Sarat, Austin; Kearns, Thomas (eds.). Identities, Politics, and Rights . University of Michigan Press . pp. 85– 130. Fine, Robert (May 2006). "Karl Marx and the Radical Critique of Anti-Semitism" . Engage (2). Archived from the original on 24 February 2012. ^ Hampsher-Monk, Iain (1992). A History of Modern Political Thought . Blackwell Publishing . p. 496. ^ Wheen, Francis (1999). Karl Marx . Fourth Estate. p. 56. ^ McLellan (1980) , p. 142. ^ "The American Jewish Experience in the Twentieth Century: Antisemitism and Assimilation, The Twentieth Century, Divining America: Religion in American History, TeacherServe, National Humanities Center" . nationalhumanitiescenter.org . Retrieved 9 April 2026 . ^ "A People at Risk | Polish/Russian | Immigration and Relocation in U.S. History | Classroom Materials at the Library of Congress | Library of Congress" . Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 20540 USA . Retrieved 9 April 2026 . ^ Chanes (2004) , p. 72 . ^ Levy (2005) , vol. 1, p. 72 . ^ Abramson, Henry. "Russian Civil War" . YIVO Encyclopedia of Jews in Eastern Europe . Archived from the original on 15 January 2021 . Retrieved 6 February 2019 . ^ Arad, Gulie Ne'eman (2000). America, Its Jews, and the Rise of Nazism . Indianapolis: Indiana University Press . p. 174 . ISBN 978-0-253-33809-9 . ^ Majer (2014) , p. 60. ^ see also Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service (7 April 1933) ^ "The Nuremberg Race Laws" . Holocaust Encyclopedia . United States Holocaust Memorial Museum . Retrieved 10 April 2026 . ^ "The Nuremberg Race Laws" . National WWII Museum. 5 January 2025 . Retrieved 10 April 2026 . ^ Kershaw, Ian (2008). Fateful Choices . pp. 441– 444. ^ a b "Antisemitic Legislation 1933–1939" . Holocaust Encyclopedia . United States Holocaust Memorial Museum . Retrieved 10 April 2026 . ^ "Antisemitic laws" .

The Holocaust Explained . Retrieved 10 April 2026 . ^ Bennett, Brian (20 January 2017). " 'America First,' a phrase with a loaded anti-Semitic and isolationist history" . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on 7 November 2019 . Retrieved 23 November 2018 . ^ Calamur, Krishnadev (21 January 2017). "A Short History of 'America First' " .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on 3 December 2019 . Retrieved 23 November 2018 . ^ Dunn, Susan (4 June 2013). 1940: FDR, Willkie, Lindbergh, Hitler-the Election amid the Storm . Yale University Press . p. 66. ISBN 978-0-300-19513-2 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 26 November 2020 . ^ Cole, Wayne S. (1974). Charles Lindbergh and the Battle Against American Intervention in World War II . New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. pp. 171– 174. ISBN 0-15-118168-3 . ^ Levy, Richard S. "Lindbergh, Charles (1902–1974)" in Levy (2005) , vol. 1, pp.423–424 ^ Kitchen, Martin (2007).

The Third Reich: A Concise History . Tempus. ISBN 978-0-7524-4354-6 . ^ a b Saul Friedländer (2008): The Years of Extermination: Nazi Germany and the Jews . London, Phoenix ^ Benz, Wolfgang (1 October 1995) . Gutman, Israel (ed.). Dimension des Volksmords: Die Zahl der Jüdischen Opfer des Nationalsozialismus . Encyclopedia of the Holocaust (in German) (Reference ed.). Munich: Macmillan Reference Books: Deutscher Taschebuch Verlag. ^ Dawidowicz, Lucy (1975).

The War Against The Jews, 1933–1945 . New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. ^ Azadovskii, Konstantin; Egorov, Boris (2002). "From Anti-Westernism to Anti-Semitism" . Journal of Cold War Studies . 4 (1): 66– 80. doi : 10.1162/152039702753344834 . Archived from the original on 20 February 2021 . Retrieved 1 December 2008 . ^ a b Patai, Raphael; Patai, Jennifer (1989).

The Myth of the Jewish Race . Wayne State University Press . p. 178. ISBN 978-0-8143-1948-2 . ^ "Doctors' Plot | Encyclopedia.com" . www.encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 10 April 2026 . ^ "The YIVO Encyclopedia of Jews in Eastern Europe" . encyclopedia.yivo.org . Retrieved 10 April 2026 . ^ a b "More than a Century of Antisemitism: How Successive Occupants of the Kremlin Have Used Antisemitism" . United States Department of State . 25 January 2024. Archived from the original on 28 December 2024 . Retrieved 29 July 2024 . ^ a b c d e f Tabarovsky, Izabella (1 May 2019). "Soviet Anti-Zionism and Contemporary Left Antisemitism" . Fathom Journal . Archived from the original on 24 December 2024 . Retrieved 29 July 2024 . ^ Ryvchin, Alex (10 September 2019). "Red Terror: How the Soviet Union Shaped the Modern Anti-Zionist Discourse" . Australian Institute of International Affairs . Archived from the original on 26 December 2024 . Retrieved 29 July 2024 . ^ a b Korey, William (1972). "The Origins and Development of Soviet Anti-Semitism: An Analysis" . Slavic Review . 31 (1): 111– 135. doi : 10.2307/2494148 . ISSN 0037-6779 . JSTOR 2494148 . Archived from the original on 21 January 2025. ^ a b Tabarovsky, Izabella (1 March 2022). "Demonization Blueprints: Soviet Conspiracist Antizionism in Contemporary Left-Wing Discourse" . Journal of Contemporary Antisemitism . 5 (1): 1– 20. doi : 10.26613/jca/5.1.97 . ISSN 2472-9906 . ^ Zimmerman, Joshua D. (2003). Contested memories: Poles and Jews during the Holocaust and its aftermath . Rutgers University Press . ISBN 978-0-8135-3158-8 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 . ^ Spector, Robert Melvin (2005). World without civilization: Mass murder and the Holocaust, history and analysis . University Press of America. ISBN 978-0-7618-2963-8 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 . ^ Subotic 2022 , p. 459. ^ Simonsen 2020 , pp. 640–641; Kahn 2022 , pp. 164–165; Beirich 2021 , pp. 1–2; Feinberg & Stewart 2019 , p. 192; Barna & Knap 2018 , pp. 78–79; Perlinger 2024 , p. 91 ^ Byington 2019 , p. 10. ^ Beirich 2021 , p. 1; Glanville 2021 , pp. 90, 101–104; Paul & Mettler 2019 ; Perlinger 2024 , p. 89 ^ Feinberg & Stewart 2019 , pp. 192–193. ^ Schut 2025 . ^ Henley 2024 . ^ Subotic 2022 , p. 460. ^ Butler 2017 , pp. 182–183. ^ Gessen 2019 . ^ Stephens 2017 . ^ Baroud & Rubeo 2018 . ^ Schweitzer, Frederick M.; Perry, Marvin (2002). Anti-Semitism: myth and hate from antiquity to the present . Palgrave Macmillan . p. 3. ISBN 0-312-16561-7 . This books treats several of the myths that have made antisemitism so lethal....

In addition to these historic myths, we also treat the new, maliciously manufactured myth of Holocaust denial, another groundless belief that is used to stir up Jew-hatred. ^ "Introduction: Denial as Anti-Semitism" . Anti-Defamation League . Holocaust Denial: An Online Guide to Exposing and Combating Anti-Semitic Propaganda. 2001. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011 . Retrieved 12 June 2007 .

While appearing on the surface as a rather arcane pseudo-scholarly challenge to the well-established record of Nazi genocide during the Second World War, Holocaust denial serves as a powerful conspiracy theory uniting otherwise disparate fringe groups.... ^ Atkins, Stephen E. (2009). Holocaust Denial as an International Movement . ABC-CLIO . ISBN 978-0-313-34538-8 . Holocaust denial has played an important role in the revitalization of the Neo-Nazi movement. There was a smaller but nonetheless vocal number of supporters in other Western European countries and the United States. These neo-Nazis realized that a Hitlerite regime was impossible, but a reasonable facsimile was possible in the future. These neo-Nazis and their allies realized that any rehabilitation of Nazism could be accomplished only by discrediting the Holocaust. ^ Bland, Benjamin (2019). "Holocaust inversion, anti-Zionism and British neo-fascism: the Israel–Palestine conflict and the extreme right in post-war Britain" . Patterns of Prejudice . 53 (1): 86– 97. doi : 10.1080/0031322X.2018.1536347 . ISSN 0031-322X . Archived from the original on 11 May 2024 . Retrieved 11 May 2024 . ^ "PM Netanyahu at the 37th Zionist World Congress" . YouTube . IsraeliPM. 20 October 2015. Archived from the original on 21 March 2022 . Retrieved 21 March 2022 . ^ Rudoren, Jodi (21 October 2015). "Netanyahu, Saying Palestinian Mufti Inspired Holocaust, Draws Broad Criticism" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 21 October 2015 . Retrieved 21 October 2015 . ^ Tate, Emily (22 October 2015). "Under-fire Netanyahu criticised over 'a form of Holocaust denial' " . Irish Independent . Archived from the original on 2 January 2016 . Retrieved 23 October 2015 . ^ Hurwitz, Deena R; White Jr, Walter H (25 November 2024). "Recognizing Islamophobia, Anti-Palestinian Racism, and Antisemitism" . American Bar Association . Archived from the original on 1 December 2025 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . Beinart, Peter (16 July 2021). "It's Time to Name Anti-Palestinian Bigotry" . Jewish Currents . Archived from the original on 8 February 2026 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . Gutman, Abraham (27 May 2021). "Supporting Palestinian rights is antisemitic because Israel wants it to be" . NBC News . Archived from the original on 1 January 2026 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ Rosenfeld (2019) , pp. 175–178, 186. ^ Marcus, Kenneth L. (2010). Jewish Identity and Civil Rights in America . Cambridge University Press . p. 56. ISBN 978-1-139-49119-8 . ^ Klein, Amy (19 April 2009). "Denying the deniers: Q & A with Deborah Lipstadt" . Jewish Telegraphic Agency . Archived from the original on 3 December 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 . ^ Urban, Susanne (2004). "Anti-Semitism in Germany Today: Its Roots and Tendencies" . Jewish Political Studies Review . 16 ( 3– 4): 119. Archived from the original on 20 February 2021 . Retrieved 1 December 2008 . ^ "Anti-Semitism up 30% in Belgium" . Ynetnews . 27 February 2013. Archived from the original on 27 March 2015 . Retrieved 17 June 2015 . ^ "Washington: European anti-Israel sentiment crossed the line into anti-Semitism" .

The Jerusalem Post . 15 October 2015. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 16 April 2017 . ^ "Special report: The rise of the right in Europe" . SBS News . 24 February 2015. Archived from the original on 20 February 2021 . Retrieved 17 June 2015 . ^ First International Resources (March 2012). "Attitudes Toward Jews in Ten European Countries" (PDF) . Anti-Defamation League . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 May 2013 . Retrieved 20 April 2013 . ^ "Anti-Semitism, Tolerance and Historical Memory in the Post-Soviet Space" . Institute for Euro-Asian Jewish Studies. 2020 . Retrieved 10 April 2026 . ^ "Anti-Semitism in the Post-Soviet States" . Jerusalem Center for Security and Foreign Affairs . Retrieved 10 April 2026 . ^ a b Stanley, Jason (26 February 2022). "The antisemitism animating Putin's claim to 'denazify' Ukraine" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 17 April 2022 . Retrieved 6 March 2022 . ^ "Rabbi's son foils bombing attempt at Moscow shul—j. the Jewish news weekly of Northern California" . J . 30 July 1999. Archived from the original on 6 July 2015 . Retrieved 17 June 2015 . ^ "World Briefing: Asia, Europe, Americas and Africa" .

The New York Times . 12 January 2006. ^ "Rise of Anti-Semitism in the Ukraine threatens Jewish pilgrimages to Uman" . 2 October 2011 . Retrieved 26 May 2013 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "Video: Priest Attacks Menorah—Jewish World" . Arutz Sheva . 14 December 2009. Archived from the original on 17 June 2015 . Retrieved 17 June 2015 . ^ Johnson, Paul (1 June 2005). "The Anti-Semitic Disease" . Commentary Magazine . Archived from the original on 17 August 2015 . Retrieved 26 January 2015 . ^ Ben, Cohen (26 January 2015). "Europe's Jews Tied to a Declining Political Class" . Algemeiner . Archived from the original on 17 August 2020. ^ "Why do human rights groups ignore Palestinians' war of words?" .

The Washington Post . 26 September 2011. Archived from the original on 11 February 2021 . Retrieved 2 June 2012 . ^ "Muslim-Western Tensions Persist" . PEW Global Attitudes Report . 21 July 2011. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 19 September 2013 . ^ United States Holocaust Memorial Museum (23 February 2009). "Nazis' 'Terrible Weapon,' Aimed at Minds and Hearts" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 25 January 2021 . Retrieved 24 November 2010 . ^ Joffe, Josef (28 February 2009). "Anti-Semitism In Araby" . Newsweek . Archived from the original on 28 March 2010 . Retrieved 24 November 2010 . ^ Lewis, Bernard (1984).

The Jews of Islam . Princeton: Princeton University Press . p. 33. ISBN 0-691-00807-8 . ^ Solnick, Aluma (1 November 2002). "Based on Koranic Verses, Interpretations, and Traditions, Muslim Clerics State: The Jews Are the Descendants of Apes, Pigs, And Other Animals" . MEMRI Special Report—No. 11 . Archived from the original on 5 September 2009. ^ Kressel, Neil J. (12 March 2004). "The Urgent Need to Study Islamic Anti-Semitism" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education, The Chronicle Review . Archived from the original on 10 July 2009. ^ "Holocaust Remembrance Day—a somber anniversary" .

The Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 30 January 2013 . Retrieved 27 January 2013 . ^ Abboud, Leila; Klasa, Adrienne; Chazan, Guy (15 October 2023). "Israel-Hamas war unleashes wave of antisemitism in Europe" . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 18 October 2023 . Retrieved 19 October 2023 . ^ Chrisafis, Angelique; Kassam, Ashifa; Connolly, Kate; Giuffrida, Angela (20 October 2023). " 'A lot of pain': Europe's Jews fear rising antisemitism after Hamas attack" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 21 October 2023 . Retrieved 21 October 2023 . ^ Sforza, Lauren (6 May 2024). "Antisemitism surging worldwide since Oct. 7 attack: Report" .

The Hill . Archived from the original on 17 July 2024 . Retrieved 17 July 2024 . ^ Saul, Stephanie (11 January 2024). "Students sue Harvard, calling it a bastion of antisemitism" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 4 April 2024 . Retrieved 23 January 2024 . ^ "Harvard president keeps her job after antisemitism backlash" . CBC . 12 December 2023. Archived from the original on 24 January 2025 . Retrieved 23 January 2024 . ^ Cancel, Daniel; Lorin, Janet; Carson, Biz; Bloomberg. "Stanford is the latest elite university to be slammed for its lack of 'moral resolve' in its response to Hamas' attack on Israel" . Fortune . Archived from the original on 24 December 2024 . Retrieved 31 October 2023 . ^ Amiri, Farnoush (1 May 2024). "House passes bill to expand definition of antisemitism amid growing campus protests over Gaza war" . AP News . Archived from the original on 27 January 2025 . Retrieved 17 July 2024 . ^ "Confronting Campus Antisemitism: An Action Plan for University Students" . American Jewish Committee . 15 October 2023. Archived from the original on 1 May 2024 . Retrieved 17 July 2024 . ^ "Year in Review 2023: Jewish Unity Amid Challenges" . World Jewish Congress . 23 December 2023 . Retrieved 17 July 2024 . ^ Shimron, Yonat (14 May 2024). "1,200 Jewish professors call on Senate to reject controversial antisemitism definition" . Religion News Service . Archived from the original on 23 December 2024. ^ a b c Esensten, Andrew (26 November 2022). "How many Hebrew Israelites are there, and how worried should Jews be?" .

The Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 3 January 2023 . Retrieved 3 January 2023 . ^ a b c d "Simon Wiesenthal Center Special Report: Extreme Black Hebrew Israelites" (PDF) .

The Simon Wiesenthal Center . Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 January 2023 . Retrieved 4 January 2023 . ^ a b Contemporary Violent Extremism and the Black Hebrew Israelite Movement (PDF) (Report). Washington D. C.: Program on Extremism. George Washington University . September 2022. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2026 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ Woods, Amanda; Lungariello, Mark (25 November 2022). "Black Hebrew Israelites chant 'we are the real Jews' at pro-Kyrie Irving NYC march" .

The New York Post . Archived from the original on 26 November 2022 . Retrieved 26 November 2022 . ^ " 'We are the real Jews:' 100s of Black Hebrews march in New York City" .

The Jerusalem Post . 24 November 2022 . Retrieved 10 April 2026 . ^ Hawkins, Derek (15 December 2019). "Probe of Jersey City shooting leads FBI to arrest pawn shop owner on weapons charge" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 27 September 2022 . Retrieved 26 November 2022 . ^ Jacobs, Shayna; Paul, Deanna; Sacchetti, Maria; Knowles, Hannah (30 December 2019). "Hanukkah stabbing suspect searched 'why did Hitler hate the Jews,' prosecutors say" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 30 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 November 2022 . ^ Brown, Julie S. (30 December 2019). "Grafton Thomas Complaint" . U.S. Department of Justice . Archived from the original on 3 March 2025 . Retrieved 3 March 2025 . ^ Bell, Dean Phillip (2008). Jews in the early modern world . Rowman & Littlefield . p. 212. ISBN 978-0-7425-4518-2 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 . ^ a b Fischer, Lars (27 April 2020). " "The word 'Jew' has several meanings in relation to commerce, but almost all negative": on the evolution of a projection" . Jewish Historical Studies . 51 (1). doi : 10.14324/111.444.jhs.2020v51.032 . ISSN 2397-1290 . ^ schalomlibertad (23 July 2009). "Antisemitism and the (modern) critique of capitalism" . libcom.org . Archived from the original on 7 December 2023 . Retrieved 5 December 2023 . Adorno, T. (1951), Minima Moralia. Reflexionen aus dem beschädigten Leben, Suhrkamp, Frankfurt, p. 141. ^ Trivellato, Francesca (28 January 2020). "The rumour about the Jews" . Aeon . Archived from the original on 7 December 2023 . Retrieved 5 December 2023 . Theodor Adorno in 1951 called 'the rumour about Jews'... ^ Lazare, Bernard (2006). Anti-Semitism: Its History and Causes . Cosimo, Inc. p. 9 . ISBN 978-1-59605-601-5 . ^ Brustein, William L.; Roberts, Louisa (2015).

The Socialism of Fools: Leftist Origins of Modern Anti-Semitism . Cambridge University Press . p. 55. Lazare argued in his book that Jews, because of their exclusiveness, arrogance, and unsociability, were themselves responsible for anti-Semitism. Lazare blames the Jewish religion and laws for these negative traits. His book was widely reviewed and is by many accounts a seminal anti-Semitic text. Lazare's authorship of such an anti-Semitic work is ironic, given the role he would soon play in the Dreyfus Affair. ^ Swanson, Joel (21 October 2018). "We Spring from that History: Bernard Lazare, between Universalism and Particularism" . Religions . 9 (10): 322. doi : 10.3390/rel9100322 . ISSN 2077-1444 . ^ a b Laqueur (2006) , p. 154. ^ Young, Philip (1984). "Hawthorne's secret: an un-told tale".

The Georgia Review . 38 (3): 664– 666. JSTOR 41398742 . ^ Cassen, Flora (2020). "Jews and Money: Time for a New Story?".

The Jewish Quarterly Review . 110 (2): 373– 382. doi : 10.1353/jqr.2020.0007 . ISSN 1553-0604 . ^ Mell, Julie L. (2014). "Cultural Meanings of Money in Medieval Ashkenaz: On Gift, Profit, and Value in Medieval Judaism and Christianity". Jewish History . 28 (2). Springer: 125– 158. doi : 10.1007/s10835-014-9212-3 . ISSN 0334-701X . JSTOR 24709715 . ^ a b Nirenberg, David (2014). Anti-Judaism: The Western Tradition . New York: Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-34791-3 . ^ a b Horn, Dara (7 October 2024). "October 7 Created a Permission Structure for Anti-Semitism" .

The Atlantic . ISSN 2151-9463 . Retrieved 15 October 2024 . {{ cite magazine }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ a b Addressing anti-semitism through education: guidelines for policymakers . UNESCO . 2018. ISBN 978-92-3-100274-8 . Archived from the original on 17 January 2021 . Retrieved 9 March 2020 . ^ Horn, Dara (6 June 2019). "Auschwitz Is Not a Metaphor" .

The Atlantic . ISSN 2151-9463 . Archived from the original on 8 June 2019 . Retrieved 29 July 2024 . ^ Horn, Dara (3 April 2023). "Is Holocaust Education Making Anti-Semitism Worse?" .

The Atlantic . ISSN 2151-9463 . Archived from the original on 10 May 2024 . Retrieved 29 July 2024 . ^ "Report: Anti-Semitism on the rise globally" . CNN . 14 March 2008. Archived from the original on 15 March 2008 . Retrieved 24 November 2010 . ^ "International Religious Freedom Report for 2012" . Archived from the original on 7 February 2017 . Retrieved 21 December 2013 . ^ "ADL Global 100: A Survey of Attitudes Toward Jews in Over 100 Countries Around the World" (PDF) . Anti-Defamation League /Global 100 . Archived from the original on 1 June 2016 . Retrieved 14 January 2024 . ^ Gur, Haviv Rettig (18 May 2014). "Hating the Jew you've never met" .

The Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 1 June 2019 . Retrieved 26 August 2018 . ^ a b c Starr, Michael (19 August 2024). "Can Diaspora Ministry's new monitoring system help better understand antisemitism?" .

The Jerusalem Post . Archived from the original on 25 December 2024 . Retrieved 20 August 2024 . ^ "Diaspora Ministry unveils system for monitoring antisemitic discourse online" .

The Jerusalem Post . 18 August 2024. Archived from the original on 27 December 2024 . Retrieved 20 August 2024 . Sources The Jewish Question: Biography of a World Problem . Translated by Zohn, Harry. Rutherford, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press . ISBN 978-0-8386-3252-9 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 13 August 2015 . Beirich, Heidi (21 January 2021). Antisemitism Rising Among American Right-Wing Extremists (PDF) (Report). Institute for National Security Studies . Beller, Steven (2007). Antisemitism: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-289277-5 . Butler, Judith (2017). "Why Is Bannon's Antisemitism Considered Alright?" . Jewish Social Studies . 22 (3): 182– 185. doi : 10.2979/jewisocistud.22.3.10 . ISSN 0021-6704 . JSTOR 10.2979/jewisocistud.22.3.10 . S2CID 165074332 . Byington, Bradley (2019). "Antisemitic Conspiracy Theories and Violent Extremism on the Far Right: a Public Health Approach to Counter-Radicalization". Journal of Contemporary Antisemitism . 2 (1): 1– 18. doi : 10.26613/jca/2.1.19 . Consonni, Manuela (2022). " 'Upping the Antis': Addressing the Conceptual Ambiguities Surrounding 'Antisemitism' ". Society . 59 (1): 25– 33. doi : 10.1007/s12115-022-00665-4 . S2CID 247172627 . Chanes, Jerome A. (2004). Antisemitism: a Reference Handbook . ABC-CLIO . ISBN 978-1-57607-209-7 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 13 August 2015 . Falk, Avner (2008). Anti-Semitism: a History and Psychoanalysis of Contemporary Hatred . Westport, CT: Praeger. ISBN 978-0-313-35384-0 . Feinberg, Ayal; Stewart, Brandon (June 2019). "Holocaust History, Far-Right Parties, and Antisemitic Incidents". Contemporary Jewry . 39 (2): 191– 209. JSTOR 45217158 . Flannery, Edward H. (1985).

The Anguish of the Jews: Twenty-three Centuries of Antisemitism . Paulist Press. ISBN 978-0-8091-4324-5 . Flannery, Edward H. (2004).

The Anguish of the Jews: Twenty-Three Centuries of Antisemitism (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NY: Paulist Press. ISBN 978-0-8091-4324-5 . Foxman, Abraham (2010). Jews and Money: The Story of a Stereotype . New York: St. Martin's Press . ISBN 978-0-230-11225-4 . Frank, Daniel H.; Leaman, Oliver (2003).

The Cambridge companion to medieval Jewish philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . ISBN 0-521-65574-9 . Gessen, Masha (12 December 2019). "The Real Purpose of Trump's Executive Order on Anti-Semitism" .

The New Yorker . Archived from the original on 1 December 2025 . Retrieved 19 February 2026 . Glanville, Jo (2021). "Bloody Jews".

In Glanville, Jo (ed.). Looking for an Enemy: 8 Essays on Antisemitism . Short Books. ISBN 978-1-78-072466-9 . Harzig, Christiane; Hoerder, Dirk; Shubert, Adrian (2003).

The historical practice of diversity: transcultural interactions from the early modern Mediterranean to the postcolonial world . New York: Berghahn Books . ISBN 1-57181-377-2 . Henley, Jon (30 September 2024). "Victory in Austria is another step in far right's march across Europe" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 8 August 2025 . Retrieved 19 February 2026 . Johnson, Paul (1987). A History of the Jews . New York, NY: HarperCollins Publishers . ISBN 978-0-06-091533-9 . Johnston, William (1983).

The Austrian Mind: An Intellectual and Social History, 1848–1938 . University of California Press . ISBN 978-0-520-04955-0 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 13 August 2015 . Judaken, Jonathan (2018). "Introduction".

The American Historical Review . 123 (4): 1122– 1138. doi : 10.1093/ahr/rhy024 . Kahn, Michelle Lynn (2022). "Antisemitism, Holocaust Denial, and Germany's Far Right: How the AfD Tiptoes around Nazism". Journal of Holocaust Research . 36 ( 2– 3): 164– 185. doi : 10.1080/25785648.2022.2069337 . Kiraz, George Anton (2001). Computational Nonlinear Morphology: With Emphasis on Semitic Languages . Cambridge University Press . p. 25. ISBN 978-0-521-63196-9 .

The term "Semitic" is borrowed from the Bible (Gene. x.21 and xi.10–26). It was first used by the Orientalist A. L. Schlözer in 1781 to designate the languages spoken by the Aramæans, Hebrews, Arabs, and other peoples of the Near East (Moscati et al., 1969, Sect. 1.2).

Before Schlözer, these languages and dialects were known as Oriental languages . Krefetz, Gerald (1982). Jews and Money: The Myths and the Reality . Ticknor & Fields. ISBN 978-0-89919-129-4 . Laqueur, Walter (2006).

The Changing Face of Antisemitism: From Ancient Times to the Present Day (1st ed.). Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-530429-9 . Levy, Richard S. , ed. (2005). Antisemitism: a Historical Encyclopedia of Prejudice and Persecution . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO . ISBN 978-1-85109-439-4 . Levy, Richard S. (2010). "Political Antisemitism in Germany and Austria, 1848–1914".

In Lindemann, Albert S. ; Levy, Richard S. (eds.). Antisemitism: A History . Oxford University Press . pp. 121– 135. ISBN 978-0-19-923502-5 . Lewis, Bernard (1999). Semites and Anti-Semites: an Inquiry into Conflict and Prejudice . W. W. Norton & Company . ISBN 978-0-393-31839-5 . Lindemann, Albert S. ; Levy, Richard S. (2010). "Introduction".

In Lindemann, Albert S. ; Levy, Richard S. (eds.). Antisemitism: A History . Oxford University Press . pp. 1– 16. ISBN 978-0-19-923502-5 . Lipstadt, Deborah (2019). Antisemitism: Here and Now . Schocken Books . ISBN 978-0-80524337-6 . Lipstadt, Deborah (1994). Denying the Holocaust: the Growing Assault on Truth and Memory . Penguin Books . ISBN 978-0-452-27274-3 . Maizels, Linda (2023). What is Antisemitism?: A Contemporary Introduction . Routledge . ISBN 978-1-003-02182-7 . Majer, Diemut (2014). "Non-Germans" Under The Third Reich: The Nazi Judicial and Administrative System in Germany and Occupied Eastern Europe, with Special Regard to Occupied Poland, 1939–1945 . Texas Tech University Press . ISBN 978-0-89672-837-0 . McLellan, David (1980). Marx before Marxism (PDF) (2d ed.). London: Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-333-27883-3 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Michael, Robert (2008). A History of Catholic Antisemitism: The Dark Side of the Church . Springer. ISBN 978-0-230-61117-7 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 15 March 2021 . O'Brien, Charles H. (1969). "Ideas of Religious Toleration at the time of Joseph II". Transactions of the American Philosophical Society . 59 (7). doi : 10.2307/1006062 . JSTOR 1006062 . Paul, Deanna; Mettler, Katie (27 April 2019). "Authorities identify suspect in 'hate crime' synagogue shooting that left 1 dead, 3 injured" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 13 February 2023 . Retrieved 27 April 2019 . Penslar, Derek Jonathan (July 2001). Shylock's Children: Economics and Jewish Identity in Modern Europe . University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-92584-7 . Perlinger, Arie (July 2024). "Far Right Domestic Terrorism in the US and Europe: A Comparative Perspective" (PDF) .

In Stockhammer, Nicolas (ed.). EICTP Vienna Research Papers on Transnational Terrorism and Counter-Terrorism: Recent Manifestations of Anti-Government Extremism and Transnational Terrorism in Europe, Africa and Beyond . Vol. VI. European Institute for Counter Terrorism and Conflict Prevention. pp. 89– 98. Perry, Marvin; Schweitzer, Frederick M. (2002). Antisemitism: Myth and Hate from Antiquity to the Present . Palgrave Macmillan . ISBN 978-0-312-16561-1 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 13 August 2015 . Perry, Marvin; Schweitzer, Frederick M. (2005). Antisemitism: Myth and Hate from Antiquity to the Present . New York, NY: Palgrave . ISBN 978-0-312-16561-1 . Prager, Dennis ; Telushkin, Joseph (2003) . Why the Jews?

The Reason for Antisemitism (reprint ed.). Touchstone. ISBN 978-0-7432-4620-0 . Rattansi, Ali (2007). Racism: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford, England: Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-280590-4 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 13 August 2015 . Rosenfeld, Alvin H. (9 January 2019). Anti-Zionism and Antisemitism: The Dynamics of Delegitimization . Indiana University Press . ISBN 978-0-253-03872-2 . Rubenstein, Richard L. ; Roth, John K. (2003). Approaches to Auschwitz: The Holocaust and Its Legacy . Westminster John Knox Press . ISBN 978-0-664-22353-3 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 13 August 2015 . Sachar, Howard Morley (1961). Aliyah: The People of Israel . World Publishing Company. Schut, Bart (23 February 2025). "Germany's rising far-right AfD is split over Israel. Jews call party 'a danger' either way" . Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 21 March 2025 . Retrieved 19 February 2026 . Simonsen, Kjetil Braut (2020). "Antisemitism on the Norwegian Far-Right, 1967–2018". Scandinavian Journal of History . 45 (5): 640– 662. doi : 10.1080/03468755.2020.1726809 . Stephens, Bret (16 November 2017). "Opinion: Steve Bannon Is Bad for the Jews" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 19 February 2026 . Subotic, Jelena (2022). "Antisemitism in the global populist international". British Journal of Politics and International Relations . 24 (3): 458– 474. doi : 10.1177/13691481211066970 . Troy, Gil (2024). "Zionism: A Response to Antisemitism?".

In Weitzman, Mark; Williams, Robert J.; Wald, James (eds.).

The Routledge History of Antisemitism . Routledge . pp. 390– 398. ISBN 978-1-138-36944-3 . Ury, Scott (2018). "Strange Bedfellows? Anti-Semitism, Zionism, and the Fate of "the Jews" ".

The American Historical Review . 123 (4): 1151– 1171. doi : 10.1093/ahr/rhy030 . Weinberg, Sonja (2010). Pogroms and Riots: German Press Responses to Anti-Jewish Violence in Germany and Russia (1881–1882) . Peter Lang. ISBN 978-3-631-60214-0 . Archived from the original on 29 December 2023 . Retrieved 27 October 2018 . Williams, Robert J. (2024). "Antisemitism and Diseases, Pandemics, and Public Health Crises".

In Weitzman, Mark; Williams, Robert J.; Wald, James (eds.).

The History of an Obsession: German Judeophobia and the Holocaust . Continuum Publishing Company . Freudmann, Lillian C. (1994). Antisemitism in the New Testament . University Press of America . Gerber, Jane S. (1986). "Anti-Semitism and the Muslim World".

In Berger, David (ed.). History and Hate: The Dimensions of Anti-Semitism . Jewish Publications Society. ISBN 0-8276-0267-7 . Goldberg, Sol; Ury, Scott; Weiser, Kalman, eds. (2021). Key Concepts in the Study of Antisemitism . Palgrave Macmillan . online review Archived 5 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine Gyurgyák, János: The Jewish Question in Hungary. A History of Political Ideas, Budapest, 2001 Hanebrink, Paul (2018). A Specter Haunting Europe: The Myth of Judeo-Bolshevism . Harvard University Press . ISBN 978-0-674-04768-6 . Hilberg, Raul (1985).

The Destruction of the European Jews . Holmes & Meier. . 3 volumes. Huber, Lipót: Judaism and Christianity in the Past and Present I–II., Kalocsa, 1933–1936 Isser, Natalie (1991). Antisemitism during the French Second Empire . Kertzer, David I. (2014).

The Pope and Mussolini: The Secret History of Pius XI and the Rise of Fascism in Europe . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-871616-7 . Archived from the original on 12 January 2023 . Retrieved 21 August 2017 . Laurens, Henry (2002). La Question de Palestine (in French). Vol. II. Fayard. "Judeophobia: The scourge of antisemitism" . New Internationalist . No. 372. October 2004. Archived from the original on 2 November 2023. MacDonald, Kevin: Cultural insurrections : essays on Western civilization, Jewish influence, and anti-semitism, 2007 Cultural insurrections : essays on Western civilization, Jewish influence, and anti-semitism McKain, Mark (8 April 2005). Anti-Semitism: At Issue . Greenhaven Press . ISBN 978-0-7377-2357-1 . Marcus, Ivan G. (2024). How the West Became Antisemitic: Jews and the Formation of Europe, 800–1500 . Princeton University Press . online review of this book Marcus, Kenneth L. (2015).

The Definition of Anti-Semitism . Oxford University Press . Michael, Robert; Rosen, Philip (2007). Dictionary of Antisemitism . Scarecrow Press . Archived from the original on 20 February 2021. Michael, Robert (2006). Holy Hatred: Christianity, Antisemitism, and the Holocaust . Palgrave Macmillan . ISBN 978-1-4039-7472-3 . Nirenberg, David . Anti-Judaism: The Western Tradition (New York: W. W. Norton & Company , 2013) 610 pp. ISBN 978-0-393-05824-6 Poliakov, Léon .

The History of Anti-Semitism, Volume 1: From the Time of Christ to the Court Jews , University of Pennsylvania Press : 2003 Poliakov, Léon .

The History of Anti-Semitism, Volume 2: From Mohammad to the Marranos , University of Pennsylvania Press : 2003 Poliakov, Léon .

The History of Anti-Semitism, Volume 4: Suicidal Europe 1870–1933 , University of Pennsylvania Press : 2003 Poliakov, Léon (1997). "Anti-Semitism". Encyclopaedia Judaica (CD-ROM Edition Version 1.0). Ed. Cecil Roth . Keter Publishing House. ISBN 965-07-0665-8 Poncins, Leon: Les Forces secrètes de la Révolution (The Secret Powers Behind Revolution: Freemasonry and Judaism), 1928 Porat, Dina. "What makes an anti-Semite?" , Haaretz , 27 January 2007. Retrieved 24 November 2010. Richardson, Peter (1986). Anti-Judaism in Early Christianity . Wilfrid Laurier University Press . ISBN 978-0-88920-167-5 . Sacks, John: An Eye for an Eye , 1993 Selzer, Michael, ed. (1972). "Kike!": A Documentary History of Anti-Semitism in America . New York: World Publishing Company . ISBN 978-0-529-04471-6 . Small, Charles Asher ed.

The Yale Papers: Antisemitism In Comparative Perspective (Institute For the Study of Global Antisemitism and Policy, 2015). online Archived 3 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine , scholarly studies. Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr: Two Hundred Years Together , 2002 Stav, Arieh (1999). Peace: The Arabian Caricature—A Study of Anti-semitic Imagery . Gefen Publishing House. ISBN 965-229-215-X . Steinweis, Alan E. Studying the Jew: Scholarly Antisemitism in Nazi Germany . Harvard University Press , 2006. ISBN 0-674-02205-X . Stillman, Norman .