The region is described as one of the frontiers of the Gupta Empire in fourth century CE . It was ruled by Varmanas (c. 350–650 CE), Mlechchhas (c.655–900 CE) and Kamarupa-Palas (c. 900–1100 CE) later.

The Ahom kingdom was established in the 13th century CE, and ruled till the early 19th century CE.

The period saw various conflicts with the Mughals .

After the Moamoria rebellion and Burmese invasions weakened the Ahom kingdom, the British started establishing tea estates in the region in the 19th century CE.

The region became part of the Bengal Presidency , and the Assam Province was established in 1912.

The Assam Legislative Assembly was formed in 1937.

The province became part of Independent India on 15 August 1947, and was recognised as a state after India became a republic on 26 January 1950.

The state is organised into 35 districts across five divisions . Assamese and Bodo are the official languages of the state with Meitei recognised as an additional official language in three districts of the Barak Valley and Hojai district , and Bengali in the Barak Valley.

The state is known for its namesake Assam silk and Assam tea , recognised as Geographical Indications in India. Oil was discovered in the region in 1867, and oil drilling started in 1889. Wildlife tourism is a major contributor to the economy of the state, aided by the presence of various protected areas including the Kaziranga and Manas National Parks , which are World Heritage Sites . More than half of the extant wild population of the one-horned Indian rhinoceros occurs in the state.

The state is a rich biodiversity zone consisting of various ecosystems including tropical rainforests , deciduous forests , riverine grasslands , orchards , and wetlands . It receives copious amount of rainfall, which feeds the Brahmaputra River system, whose tributaries and oxbow lakes form a distinctive hydro- geomorphic environment. Etymology Main article: Etymology of Assam The first dated mention of the region comes from Periplus of the Erythraean Sea (1st century) and Ptolemy 's Geographia (2nd century), which calls the region Kirrhadia , apparently after the Kirata population.

In the classical period and up to the 12th century, the region east of the Karatoya River , largely congruent to present-day Assam, was called Kamarupa , and alternatively, Pragjyotisha . Though a western portion of Assam as a region continued to be called Kamrup , the Ahom kingdom that emerged in the east, and which came to dominate the entire Brahmaputra Valley , was called Assam (e.g. Mughals used Asham ); and the British province too was called Assam. Though the precise etymology of Assam is not clear, the name Assam, first used by the British in the Treaty of Yandabo in 1826, is associated with the Ahom people , originally called Shyam ( Shan ). History Main article: History of Assam Pre-history Further information: People of Assam Assam and adjoining regions have evidences of human settlement from the beginning of the Stone Age .

The hills at the height of 1,500 to 2,000 feet (460–615 m) were popular habitats probably due to availability of exposed dolerite basalt, useful for tool-making. Ambari site in Guwahati has revealed Shunga - Kushana era artefacts including flight of stairs and a water tank which may date from 1st century BCE and may be 2,000 years old. Experts speculate that another significant find at Ambari is Roman era Roman roulette pottery from the 2nd century BCE. Gupta explains that while Guwahati, formerly known as Pragjyotishpur in ancient times, is mentioned in epics like the Mahabharata and the Puranas, there is a lack of substantial archaeological evidence regarding its ancient history, especially before the 7th century AD. Legend Further information: Danava dynasty , Bhauma dynasty , and Asura kingdom According to a late text, Kalika Purana (c. 9th–10th century CE ), the earliest ruler of Assam was Mahiranga Danava of the Danava dynasty , which was removed by Narakasura of Mithila and established the Bhauma dynasty .

The last of these rulers, also Narakasura, was slain by Krishna . Naraksura's son Bhagadatta became the king, who (it is mentioned in the Mahabharata) fought for the Kauravas in the battle of Kurukshetra with an army of kiratas , chinas and dwellers of the eastern coast.

At the same time towards the east in central Assam, Asura kingdom was ruled by another line of kings. Ancient era Further information: Kamarupa Kamarupa kingdom at its height Deopahar ruins Evidence indicates presence of civilisation in Assam around 2nd century BCE, a rock cut stupa at Sri Surya Pahar has been dated to 200 BCE contemporary with rock cut Karle and Bhaja caves of Maharashtra.

The site is located in a hilly terrain where several rock-cut shivalingas , votive stupas and the deities of Hindu , Buddhist and Jain pantheon are scattered. Samudragupta 's 4th-century-CE Allahabad pillar inscription mentions Kamarupa and Davaka (Central Assam) as frontier kingdoms of the Gupta Empire . Davaka was later absorbed by Kamarupa, which grew into a large kingdom that spanned from Karatoya River to near present Sadiya and covered the entire Brahmaputra Valley, North Bengal , parts of Bangladesh and, at times Purnea and parts of West Bengal .

The kingdom was ruled by three dynasties who traced their lineage from a mleccha or Kirata Naraka; the Varmanas (c. 350–650 CE), the Mlechchha dynasty (c.655–900 CE) and the Kamarupa-Palas (c. 900–1100 CE), from their capitals in present-day Guwahati ( Pragjyotishpura ), Tezpur ( Haruppeswara ) and North Gauhati ( Durjaya ) respectively. All three dynasties claimed descent from Narakasura .

In the reign of the Varman king, Bhaskaravarman (c. 600–650 CE), the Chinese traveller Xuanzang visited the region and recorded his travels. Later, after weakening and disintegration (after the Kamarupa-Palas), the Kamarupa tradition was extended to c. 1255 CE by the Lunar I (c. 1120–1185 CE) and Lunar II (c. 1155–1255 CE) dynasties. Medieval era Further information: Kamata kingdom , Koch dynasty , Ahom kingdom , Chutia kingdom , Kachari kingdom , and Baro-Bhuyan The Medieval Assam history may have started with the advent of Ahoms in the early part of the 13th century and covers their entire rule of 600 years till 1826.

After the Bengal-Kamata War , the Khen dynasty ended, and Alauddin Hussain Shah issued coins in his name to be "Conqueror of Kamarup and Kamata".

The medieval history of Assam is especially known for its conflict with Muslim powers under Turko-Afghan and Mughals , finally resulting in Assamese victory, however, this military glory was shattered in the early 19th century when it failed to resist the Burmese invasions , which led to its annexation. Chutia kingdom Chutia , a Bodo-Kachari group by origin, held the regions on both the banks of Brahmaputra with its domain in the area eastwards from Vishwanath (north bank) and Buridihing (south bank), in Upper Assam and in the state of Arunachal Pradesh . It was annexed by the Ahoms in the year 1524.

The rivalry between the Chutias and Ahoms for the supremacy of eastern Assam led to a series of conflicts between them from the early 16th century. Kachari kingdom Main article: Kachari kingdom The Dimasa , a Bodo-Kachari dynasty that ruled from the 13th century until 1854, controlled territories stretching from the Dikhow River to central and southern Assam, with their capital at Dimapur.

By the early 16th century, with the expansion of the Ahom kingdom, the Chutia regions were annexed, and by around 1536, the Kacharis were confined to the areas of Hojai , North Cachar , and parts of Karbi Anglong , later expanding to Cachar .

At this point, they became more of an ally to the Ahoms than a rival force. Ahom kingdom Early period Main article: Sukaphaa The Ahoms , a Tai group, ruled Upper Assam for almost 600 years.

In the year 1228 the Tai-Ahoms came to the Brahmaputra Valley under the leadership of Sukapha along with 9,000 men from Mong Mao , a Tai state, situated in South-Western Yunnan of China, and established his kingdom in Upper Assam .

In 1253, he founded the capital city in a hillock and named it Charaideo .

At the time of his advent, the area was inhabited by Morans and Borahis. To the north and west was the Chutia kingdom , to the south was the Kachari kingdom and to the south-west were the Baro-Bhuyans . For the first three centuries, Sukapha and his descendants were primarily focused on administering and consolidating the kingdom.

During this period, the Ahoms remained largely confined to the southeastern part of Upper Assam. Expansion Main articles: Suhungmung and Dimasa kingdom Charaideo Maidams - UNESCO World Heritage Site, Assam Assamese kingdoms in their greatest territorial heights. Kachari kingdom (1230) in red dotted lines, Koch dynasty (1560) in blue lines, Ahom kingdom (1700) in red lines.

The reign of Suhungmung marked the first massive expansion of the Ahom kingdom . Besides sending punitive expeditions against the Nagas, they fought numerous battles with the Chutias, Kacharis, Bhuyans, Turko-Afghans, and the Naras.

In 1522–24 the Chutia kingdom was annexed, and the capital region was placed under the administration of Sadiya-Khowa-Gohain.

After securing the eastern tract, Suhungmung then expanded his kingdom westwards through conquest and extended it till Marangi to the west of the Dhansiri River.

When the Kacharis tried to regain the lost territory, they were defeated, and their capital Dimapur was sacked. Over the remaining part of the Kachari kingdom, a new king Detsung, was placed as a tributary, but Detsung proved disloyal and revolted against the Ahoms. He was subsequently executed. A new dependent king was set up on the Kachari throne with the name of Nirbhaynarayan.

Since then, the Kachari kings were regarded as 'thapita sanchita', meaning established and maintained by the Ahom rulers. Suhungmung's reign also witnessed the first Muslim invasions of the kingdom.

After a series of battles, the invaders were roundly defeated and were chased up to the Karatoya River .

The Sultan of Bengal made peace with the king.

The rising Koch king Biswa Singha also offered his submission, and the Ahom general Ton-Kham granted him all the territories that were received as dowry from the Sultan of Bengal on the condition of annual tribute.

The successors of Suhungmung, Suklenmung and Sukhaamphaa , sent many expeditions against the Bhuyans and Nagas, and there were significant wars with the Koch.

During the reign of Sukhaamphaa , the Ahoms lost to a Koch army led by Chilarai , and the Ahoms had to accept Koch supremacy and had to give up the tracts north of the Brahmaputra. However, the lost tract was soon recovered with further military expeditions.

Later Period War with Mughals Main articles: Ahom kingdom , Bengal Subah , Koch dynasty , and Ahom–Mughal conflicts Battle of Mogul Mir Jumla with Assam, 1661. Cannon captured from the Mughals Soon after the death of Nara Narayan , his kingdom was divided between the sons of Nara Narayan and Chilarai as Koch Hajo and Koch Bihar .

In 1609, Laxmi Narayan, king of Cooch Behar , accepted the vassalage of Mughals , and the Koch Hajo king Raghudev, and later his son Parikshit, sought assistance from the Ahoms.

In 1612, the Mughals attacked Koch Hajo , and his territory up to Barnadi River was annexed into the Mughal domain. This brought the Mughals into direct contact with the Ahoms. Meanwhile, Parikshit was trying to renew his friendship with the Ahoms, but was captured and died on his way to his kingdom. Later, Balinarayan , a brother of Parikshit who had taken refuge with the Ahoms, was made the king of Darrang in 1615 by the Ahom king Pratap Singha .

From 1616 onwards, many battles were fought with the Mughal without any tangible result, starting with the Battle of Samdhara .

After the last battle, the treaty was established in 1639, which fixed the Asurar ali on the south bank and the Barnadi on the north bank of the Brahmaputra as the boundary between the two. Pratap Singha also enacted the Paik system and created several army and civil administration posts, such as the Borbarua and Borphukan . Jayadhwaj Singha took advantage of a war of succession between the sons of Shah Jahan , and occupied the imperial territories up to Dhaka . Aurangzeb , after becoming the emperor, appointed Mir Jumla II , to recover the lost territory.

After failed negotiations in November 1661, Mir Jumla proceeded with a huge army and fleet to invade the Ahom kingdom.

The Ahoms lost at several places, and then captured the Ahom capital Garhgaon .

During the rainy season, Mir Jumla and his army suffered immeasurable hardship due to the climatic conditions of the valley, in addition to the guerrilla fighting against the invaders.

After no noticeable gain, negotiation started, and in January 1663, the Treaty of Ghilajharighat was established. According to the treaty, the Ahoms acknowledged Mughal supremacy, ceding the territory west of the Bharali on the north bank and the Kalang on the south bank, along with a huge amount of war indemnity, and handing over the sons of the Gohains as hostages, and two Ahom princesses to the Mughal harem. Soon after the departure of Mir Jumla , Jayadhwaj Singha died, and the new king Chakradhwaj Singha began preparations to overthrow Mughal supremacy and to recover the lost territory.

After numerous battles, and finally the Battle of Saraighat , the Mughals were forced to retreat. Garchuk Lachit Garh a 17th-century mud fort ruins The period after 1671 was very unstable due to the rivalry among the nobles, who wanted to establish their political power and influence by placing their own choice of prince on the throne.

In 1679, Laluksola Borphukan , in hopes of becoming king with the help of the Mughals, surrendered Guwahati without any battle. But after the accession of Gadadhar Singha , at the final Battle of Itakhuli , the Mughals were badly defeated.

After Rudra Singha , the Ahoms achieved no notable military achievements.

During this period from Siva Singha to Rajeswar Singha , the kingdom witnessed peace and prosperity and was significant for constructive activities and other development.

In the field of religion also, Ekasarana Dharma spread all over the kingdom and started to influence all aspects of people's lives.

The religious heads of the Vaisnavite monastery exerted great influence with royal patronage and established numerous Satras , and most of the people became their disciples. So got the Ahom court greatly came under the influence of Sakta Brahman priests and astrologers.

The religious policies concluded by Phuleshwari and the persecutions of unfavored Satras embroiled the situation further, along with the pressure of Paik system in the 18th century. This finally resulted in the Moamoria rebellion (1769–1805), which greatly weakened the Ahom kingdom , where the country was greatly depopulated and unorganised.

The political rivalry between the nobles made a pathway for a devastating set of invasions by the Burmese, weakening it more and finally leading to its annexation. Antique Assamese 'Thuria' Earrings courtesy the Wovensouls Collection, Singapore Colonial era Further information: Colonial Assam and Assam Province Map of Eastern Bengal and Assam under British rule, 1907–1909. A map of the British Indian Empire in 1909 during the partition of Bengal (1905–1911), showing British India in two shades of pink ( coral and pale) and the princely states in yellow.

The Assam Province (initially as the Province of Eastern Bengal and Assam) can be seen towards the north-eastern side of India.

In the later part of the 18th century, religious tensions and atrocities by the nobles led to the Moamoria rebellion (1769–1805), resulting in tremendous casualties of lives and property.

The rebellion was suppressed but the kingdom was severely weakened by the civil war. Political rivalry between Prime Minister Purnananda Burhagohain and Badan Chandra Borphukan , the Ahom Viceroy of Western Assam, led to an invitation to the Burmese by the latter, in turn leading to three successive Burmese invasions of Assam .

The reigning monarch Chandrakanta Singha tried to check the Burmese invaders but he was defeated after fierce resistance, which led to the Burmese occupation of Assam. A reign of terror was unleashed by the Burmese on the Assamese people, who fled to neighbouring kingdoms and British-ruled Bengal .

The Burmese reached the East India Company 's borders, and the First Anglo-Burmese War ensued in 1824.

The war ended under the Treaty of Yandabo in 1826, with the Company taking control of Western Assam and installing Purandar Singha as king of Upper Assam in 1833.

The arrangement lasted until 1838 and thereafter the British gradually annexed the entire region. Thereafter the court language and medium of instruction in educational institutions of Assam was made Bengali , instead of Assamese. Starting from 1836 until 1873, this imposition of a foreign tongue created greater unemployment among the People of Assam and Assamese literature naturally suffered in its growth. Showing a historical incident at Kanaklata Udyan, Tezpur The discovery of Camellia sinensis in 1834 in Assam was followed by testing in 1836–37 in London.

The British allowed companies to rent land from 1839 onwards. Thereafter tea plantations proliferated in Eastern Assam, where the soil and the climate were most suitable. Problems with the imported Han Chinese labourers from China and hostility from native Assamese resulted in the migration of forced labourers from central and eastern parts of India.

After initial trial and error with planting the Chinese and the Assamese-Chinese hybrid varieties, the planters later accepted the local Camellia assamica as the most suitable variety for Assam.

By the 1850s, the industry started seeing some profits.

The industry saw initial growth, when in 1861, investors were allowed to own land in Assam and it saw substantial progress with the invention of new technologies and machinery for preparing processed tea during the 1870s. Despite the commercial success, tea labourers continued to be exploited, working and living under poor conditions. Fearful of greater government interference, the tea growers formed the Indian Tea Association in 1888 to lobby to retain the status quo.

The organisation was successful in this, but even after India's independence, conditions of the labourers have improved very little.

The Assam Postage Circle was established by 1873 under the headship of the Deputy Post Master General. Initially, Assam was made a part of the Bengal Presidency , then in 1906 it was made a part of Eastern Bengal and Assam province, and in 1912 it was reconstituted into a chief commissioners' province.

In 1913, a legislative council and, in 1937, the Assam Legislative Assembly, were formed in Shillong, the erstwhile capital of the region.

The British tea planters imported labour from central India adding to the demographic canvas.

The Assam territory was first separated from Bengal in 1874 as the 'North-East Frontier' non-regulation province , also known as the Assam Chief-Commissionership. It was incorporated into the new province of Eastern Bengal and Assam in 1905 after the partition of Bengal (1905–1911) and re-established in 1912 as Assam Province .

At the turn of the 20th century, British India consisted of eight provinces that were administered either by a governor or a lieutenant-governor. Assam Province was one among the major eight provinces of British India.

After a few initially unsuccessful attempts to gain independence for Assam during the 1850s, anti-colonial Assamese joined and actively supported the Indian National Congress against the British from the early 20th century, with Gopinath Bordoloi emerging as the preeminent nationalist leader in the Assam Congress. Bordoloi's major political rival in this time was Sir Saidullah, who was representing the Muslim League , and had the backing of the influential Muslim cleric Maulana Bhasani . With the partition of India in 1947, Assam became a constituent state of India.

The capital of Assam was shifted to Dispur, a suburb of Guwahati.

After the Indo-China war in 1962, Arunachal Pradesh was also separated out. Separatist groups began forming along ethnic lines, and demands for autonomy and sovereignty grew, resulting in the fragmentation of Assam.

In 1961, the government of Assam passed legislation making use of the Assamese language compulsory. It was withdrawn later under pressure from Bengali speaking people in Cachar .

The government of India, which has the unilateral powers to change the borders of a state, divided Assam into several states within the borders of what was then Assam.

In 1963, the Naga Hills district became the 16th state of India under the name of Nagaland . Part of Tuensang was added to Nagaland.

In 1970, in response to the demands of the Khasi, Jaintia and Garo people of the Meghalaya Plateau , the districts containing the Khasi Hills, Jaintia Hills, and Garo Hills were formed into an autonomous state within Assam; in 1972 this became a separate state under the name of Meghalaya.

In 1972, Arunachal Pradesh (the North East Frontier Agency ) and Mizoram (from the Mizo Hills in the south) were separated from Assam as union territories; both became states in 1986.

Since the restructuring of Assam after independence, communal tensions and violence remain.

In the 1980s the Brahmaputra Valley saw a six-year Assam Agitation triggered by the discovery of a sudden rise in registered voters on electoral rolls. It tried to force the government to identify and deport foreigners illegally migrating from neighbouring Bangladesh and to provide constitutional, legislative, administrative and cultural safeguards for the indigenous Assamese majority, which they felt was under threat due to the increase of migration from Bangladesh.

The agitation ended after an accord (Assam Accord 1985) between its leaders and the Union Government, which remained unimplemented, causing simmering discontent.

The post 1970s experienced the growth of armed separatist groups such as the United Liberation Front of Asom (ULFA) and the National Democratic Front of Bodoland (NDFB).

In November 1990, the Government of India deployed the Indian army , after which low-intensity military conflicts and political homicides have been continuing for more than a decade.

In recent times, ethnically based militant groups have grown.

As the Brahmaputra flows in Assam the climate here is cold and there is rainfall most of the month. Geomorphic studies conclude that the Brahmaputra, the life-line of Assam, is an antecedent river older than the Himalayas, which has entrenched itself since they started rising.

The river with steep gorges and rapids in Arunachal Pradesh entering Assam, becomes a braided river (at times 10 mi/16 km wide) and with tributaries, creates a flood plain (Brahmaputra Valley: 50–60 mi/80–100 km wide, 600 mi/1000 km long).

The hills of Karbi Anglong , North Cachar and those in and close to Guwahati (also Khasi-Garo Hills) now eroded and dissected are originally parts of the South Indian Plateau system.

In the south, the Barak River originating in the Barail Range (Assam-Nagaland border) flows through the Cachar district with a 25–30 miles (40–50 km) wide valley and enters Bangladesh with the name Surma River . Urban centres include Guwahati , one of the 100 fastest growing cities in the world. Guwahati is also referred to as the "Gateway to North-East India". Silchar (in the Barak valley) is the second most populous city in Assam and an important centre of business. Other large cities include Dibrugarh , an oil and natural gas industry centre. Climate With the tropical monsoon climate , Assam is temperate (summer max. at 95–100 °F or 35–38 °C and winter min. at 43–46 °F or 6–8 °C) and experiences heavy rainfall and high humidity.

The Kaziranga is a refuge for the fast-disappearing Indian one-horned rhinoceros.

The state is the last refuge for numerous other endangered and threatened species including the white-winged wood duck or deohanh , Bengal florican , black-breasted parrotbill , red-headed vulture , white-rumped vulture , greater adjutant , Jerdon's babbler , rufous-necked hornbill , Bengal tiger , Asian elephant , pygmy hog , gaur , wild water buffalo , Indian hog deer , hoolock gibbon , golden langur , capped langur , barasingha , Ganges river dolphin , Barca snakehead , Ganges shark , Burmese python , Brahminy river turtle , black pond turtle , Asian forest tortoise , and Assam roofed turtle . Threatened species that are extinct in Assam include the gharial , a critically endangered fish-eating crocodilian, and the pink-headed duck (which may be extinct worldwide). For the state bird, the white-winged wood duck, Assam is a globally important area.

In addition to the above, there are three other National Parks in Assam namely Dibru Saikhowa National Park, Nameri National Park and the Orang National Park. Assam has conserved the one-horned Indian rhinoceros from near extinction, along with the pygmy hog , tiger and numerous species of birds, and it provides one of the last wild habitats for the Asian elephant . Kaziranga and Manas are both World Heritage Sites .

The state contains Sal tree forests and forest products, much depleted from earlier times. A land of high rainfall, Assam displays greenery.

The Brahmaputra River tributaries and oxbow lakes provide the region with hydro- geomorphic environment.

The state has the largest population of the wild water buffalo in the world.

The state has the highest diversity of birds in India with around 820 species. With subspecies the number is as high as 946.

The mammal diversity in the state is around 190 species. Flora Blooming of Kopou Orchid marks the beginning of the festive season of Bihu in Assam. Assam is remarkably rich in Orchid species and the Foxtail orchid is the state flower of Assam.

The recently established Kaziranga National Orchid and Biodiversity Park boasts more than 500 of the estimated 1,314 orchid species found in India. Geology Assam has petroleum , natural gas, coal, limestone and other minor minerals such as magnetic quartzite , kaolin , sillimanites , clay and feldspar . A small quantity of iron ore is available in western districts. Discovered in 1867, a USGS estimate shows 399 million barrels (63,400,000 m 3 ) of oil, 1,178 billion cubic feet (3.34 × 10 10 m 3 ) of gas and 67 million barrels (10,700,000 m 3 ) of natural gas liquids in the Assam Geologic Province.

The region is prone to natural disasters like annual floods and frequent mild earthquakes. Strong earthquakes were recorded in 1869, 1897 , and 1950 . Demographics Main articles: Demography of Assam , Assamese people , Assamese Manipuri people , and People of Assam Population The total population of Assam was 26.66 million with 4.91 million households in 2001. Higher population concentration was recorded in the districts of Kamrup , Nagaon , Sonitpur , Barpeta , Dhubri , Darrang , and Cachar . Assam's population was estimated at 28.67 million in 2006 and at 30.57 million in 2011 and is expected to reach 34.18 million by 2021 and 35.60 million by 2026.

As per the 2011 census, the total population of Assam was 31,169,272.

The total population of the state has increased from 26,638,407 to 31,169,272 in the last ten years with a growth rate of 16.93%. Of the 33 districts, Dhubri , Goalpara , Barpeta , Morigaon , Nagaon , and Hailakandi , recorded growth rates ranging from 20 per cent to 24 per cent during the last decade, whereas Sivasagar and Jorhat , registered around 9 per cent population growth. These districts do not have any international border. District-wise Demographic Characteristics in 2001 In 2011, the literacy rate in the state was 73.18%.

The male literacy rate was 78.81% and the female literacy rate was 67.27%.

In 2001, the census had recorded literacy in Assam at 63.3% with male literacy at 71.3% and female at 54.6%.

The urbanisation rate was recorded at 12.9%.

The growth of population in Assam has increased since the middle decades of the 20th century.

The population grew from 3.29 million in 1901 to 6.70 million in 1941. It increased to 14.63 million in 1971 and 22.41 million in 1991.

The growth in the Western districts and Southern districts was high primarily due to the influx of large number of illegal immigrants from East Pakistan , now Bangladesh.

The mistrust and clashes between indigenous Assamese people and Bengali Muslims started as early as 1952, but is rooted in anti Bengali sentiments of the 1940s.

At least 77 people died and 400,000 people were displaced in the 2012 Assam violence between indigenous Bodos and Bengali Muslims .

The People of India project has studied 115 of the ethnic groups in Assam. 79 (69%) identify themselves regionally, 22 (19%) locally, and 3 trans-nationally.

Although Bengali is reported as the most spoken in the census, the most common spoken language is Sylheti , a language that is generally grouped with Bengali as a dialect. Meitei (also called Manipuri ) is the associate official language of the region with 126,498 speakers. Hindi , Bishnupriya and Dimasa are the other most widely spoken languages with 362,459, 50,019 and 21,747 native speakers, respectively. Tripuri , Khasi , Odia , Nepali and Marwari are also spoken by a considerable minority, while 1.84% of the total population speaks other tribal languages. Traditionally, Assamese was the language of the common folk in the ancient Kamarupa kingdom and in the medieval kingdoms of Dimasa Kachari , Chutiya Kachari , Borahi Kachari, Ahom and Kamata kingdoms. Traces of the language are found in many poems by Luipa, Sarahapa, and others, in Charyapada (c. 7th–8th century CE). Modern dialects such as Kamrupi and Goalpariya are remnants of this language, which blend into the Rajbanshi and Rangpuri lects spoken in North Bengal which have the same origin. Moreover, Assamese in its traditional form was used by the ethno-cultural groups in the region as lingua-franca, which spread during the stronger kingdoms and was required for economic integration. Localised forms of the language still exist in Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh. Linguistically modern Assamese traces its roots to the version developed by the American Missionaries based on the local form used near Sivasagar (Xiwôxagôr) district. Assamese ( Ôxômiya ) is a rich language due to its hybrid nature and unique characteristics of pronunciation and softness.

The presence of Voiceless velar fricative in Assamese makes it a unique among other similar Indo-Aryan languages . Bodo is spoken largely in Western Assam . It is official language of the Bodoland territorial region and co-official language of the state of Assam. It is also one of twenty-two languages listed in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of India . Spatial distribution patterns of the ethno-cultural groups, cultural traits and the phenomenon of naming all the major rivers in the North East Region with Bodo-Kachari words (e.g. Dihing , Dibru, Dihong , D/ Tista , and Dikrai) reveal that it was more widely-spoken in ancient times. Other languages of Tibeto-Burman origin and related to Bodo-Kachari are Deori , Mising , Karbi , Rabha , and Tiwa . There are approximately 590,000 Nepali speakers spread all over the state forming about 1.98% of Assam's total population according to 2011 census. There are speakers of Tai languages in Assam. A total of six Tai languages were spoken in Assam. Two are now extinct. Tai Phake Tai Aiton Khamti Khamyang (critically endangered) Ahom (extinct) Turung (extinct) There are also speakers of Dravidian Kurukh and Austroasiatic Khasi speakers scattered across Assam. Government and politics Main articles: Government of Assam and Politics of Assam Dispur , located in the Guwahati metropolitan region, is the capital of the state. Dibrugarh was announced as the second capital, and would start functioning in 2027. Assam has a unicameral legislature consisting of 126 members.

The government is de jure headed by the governor and de facto led by the Chief Minister of Assam . Administrative divisions For a more comprehensive list, see List of districts of Assam . 1. Tinsukia 2. Dibrugarh 3. Dhemaji 4. Charaideo 5. Sivasagar 6. Lakhimpur 7. Majuli 8. Jorhat 9. Biswanath (merged with Sonitpur district) 10. Golaghat 11. Karbi Anglong 12. Sonitpur 13. Nagaon 14. Hojai (merged with Nagaon district)15. Karbi Anglong West 16. Dima Hasao 17. Cachar 18. Hailakandi 19. Karimganj 20. Morigaon 21. Udalguri 22. Darrang 23. Kamrup Metro 24. Baksa 25. Nalbari 26. Kamrup 27. Barpeta 28. Chirang 29. Bongaigaon 30. Goalpara 31. Kokrajhar 32. Dhubri 33. South Salmara Mankachar 34. Bajali (merged with Barpeta district) The state is divided into five regional divisions , further divided into 35 administrative districts , delineated based on geographic features.

On 15 August 2015, five new districts were formed: Part of Sonitpur became the Biswanath district (9 in the nearby map) Part of Sivasagar became the Charaideo district (4) Part of Nagaon became the Hojai district (14) Part of Dhubri became the South Salmara-Mankachar district (33) The Karbi Anglong district was divided into East (11) and West (15) districts On 27 June 2016, an island in the Brahmaputra River was bifurcated from the Jorhat district and declared the Majuli district , India's first district that is a river island.

On 12 January 2021, Bajali was carved out from Barpeta district and formally declared as a district. With the announcement made by Governor Jagdish Mukhi , it has become the 34th district of Assam.

On 31 December 2022, existing four districts Bajali (with Barpeta), Tamulpur(with Udalguri), Biswanath (with Sonitpur) and Hojai(with Nagaon) and number of district came down to 31. However, after the delimitation exercise was carried out in Assam, the Assam Cabinet reconstituted the 4 new districts (Bajali, Tamulpur, Biswanath and Hojai), taking the number of districts to 35 again. Subdivisions The administrative districts are further subdivided into 54 "Subdivisions" or Mahakuma . Every district is administered from a district headquarters with the office of the Deputy Commissioner , District Magistrate, Office of the District Panchayat and usually with a district court .

The local governance system is organised under the jila-parishad (District Panchayat) for a district, panchayat for group of or individual rural areas and under the urban local bodies for the towns and cities. There are now 2489 village panchayats covering 26247 villages in Assam.

The 'town-committee' or nagar-somiti for small towns, 'municipal board' or pouro-sobha for medium towns and municipal corporation or pouro-nigom for the cities consist of the urban local bodies. For revenue purposes, the districts are divided into revenue circles and mouza s; for the development projects, the districts are divided into 219 'development-blocks' and for law and order these are divided into 206 police stations or thana . Guwahati is the largest metropolitan area and urban conglomeration administered under the highest form of urban local body – Guwahati Municipal Corporation in Assam.

The Corporation administers an area of 216.79 km 2 (83.70 sq mi). Apart from Guwahati Municipal Corporation and Dibrugarh Municipal Corporation All other urban centres are managed under Municipal Boards . A list of 9 oldest, classified and prominent, and constantly inhabited, recognised urban centres based on the earliest years of formation of the civic bodies, before the Indian independence of 1947 is tabulated below: Oldest recognised urban centres of Assam Urban Centres Civic Body Year Airport Railway Station Railway Junction Road Networks Category † Notes Guwahati Guwahati Town Committee 1853 Yes Yes Yes Yes Tier – III The state has three autonomous councils under the sixth schedule of the Indian Constitution. Bodoland Autonomous Territorial Council Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council . Dima Hasao Autonomous Council .

The state has further statutory autonomous councils constituted under State Act- Tiwa Autonomous Council for ethnic Tiwa people (Lalung) Rabha Hasong Autonomous Council Mising Autonomous Council for Mising people Deori Autonomous Council Sonowal Kachari Autonomous Council for Sonowal Kachari people Thengal Kachari Autonomous Council Moran Autonomous Council for Moran people Dudhnoi for ethnic Rabha Kachari Mising Autonomous Council for Mising people Matak Autonomous Council for Matak people Kamatapur Autonomous Council for Rajbongshi people Bodo Kachari Welfare Autonomous Council for Bodo-Kachari people living outside the Bodoland Territorial Region In March 2024, the Assam cabinet had given green signal for 'Kiran Sheikh' development council for the 'Kiran Sheikh' community in Barak Valley . Politics The state was ruled by Indian National Congress led governments since its inception in 1950 till 2016.

On 19 May 2016, the Bharatiya Janata Party under the leadership of Sarbananda Sonowal won the assembly elections, thus forming the first BJP-led government in Assam.

The BJP government was re-elected in 2021 under the leadership of Himanta Biswa Sarma . Disputes and social issues Inter-state dispute According to Assam Government, Assam has border dispute with four states namely Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh. Assam-Mizoram dispute Mizoram used to be a district of Assam as Lushai hills before being carved out as a separate union territory and later, becoming another state in 1987. Because of the history, the district's borders did not really matter for locals for a long time. Mizoram shares a border with the districts Cachar , Hailakandi and Karimganj which comes under Barak valley region of Assam. Over time, the two states started having different perceptions about where the demarcation should be.

While Mizoram wants it to be along an Inner Line Permit notified in 1875 to protect tribals from outside influence, which Mizos feel is part of their historical homeland, Assam wants it to be demarcated according to district boundaries drawn up much later. Assam-Meghalaya dispute Meghalaya has identified close to a dozen areas on which it has a dispute with Assam about the state's borders.

The chief ministers of the two states, Himanta Biswa Sarma and Megahalya's Conrad Sangma , recently held the first-ever meeting on inter-state border dispute. Both the states have agreed to individually assess the claims for all 12 areas flagged by Meghalaya in the past. A second round of discussion between the two state CMs will be held next month of August.

On the question of the role the Union Government is playing in redressing the inter-State border dispute in the country, minister of state for home affairs Nityanand Rai said, "The approach of the Central Government has consistently been that inter-state disputes can be resolved only with the cooperation of the State Governments concerned and that the Central Government acts only as a facilitator for amicable settlement of the dispute in the spirit of mutual understanding." Assam-Nagaland dispute The border dispute between the two states has been going on since the formation of Nagaland in 1963.

The two states lay claim to Merapani, a small village next to the plains of Assam's Golaghat district. There have been reports of violent clashes in the region since the 1960s. Assam-Arunachal Pradesh dispute Assam shares an 804.10 km inter-state boundary with Arunachal Pradesh .

The state of Arunachal Pradesh, created in 1987, claims some land that traditionally belonged to its residents has been given to Assam. A tripartite committee had recommended that certain territories be transferred from Assam to Arunachal.

The two states have since been battling it out in the Supreme court of India over the issue. Some incidents of local violence have been reported from the borders. Separate statehood demand within Assam Ahomland Upper Assam 's various Tai-Ahom organisations like "Ahom Tai Mangoliya Rajya Parishad" (ATMRP), has been demanding a separate Ahomland state since 1967, comprising erstwhile Un-divided Sivasagar and Lakhimpur districts (today's Upper Assam and North Assam divisions) respectively.

On 2023, "Tai Ahom Yuba Parishad, Assam" (TAYPA) have organised a protest at Chachal and have demanded separate Ahomland state. Barak state Main article: Barak state movement Barak Valley The Barak Valley of Assam comprising the present districts of Cachar , Karimganj and Hailakandi is contiguous to Sylhet (Bengal plains), where the Bengalis, according to historian J.B. Bhattacharjee, had settled well before the colonial period, influencing the culture of Dimasa Kacaharis . Bhattacharjee describes that the Dimasa kings spoke Bengali, the inscriptions and coins were written in Bengali script and the official language of the court was also Bengali . Migrations to Cachar increased after the British annexation of the region.

The native Bengali people of Southern Assam demanded separate state for themselves within the Bengali majority areas of Assam particularly Bengali majority Barak valley comprising three districts: Cachar , Hailakandi , Karimganj along with Dima Hasao and parts of Hojai was also demanded to meet the criteria for creating a separate state for themselves by carving out from Assam's Assamese majority Brahmaputra Valley post NRC . Silchar is the proposed capital of Barak state. Barak valley is the most neglected part of Assam in terms of its infrastructure development, tourism sector, educational institutions, hospitals, IT industries, G.D.P, H.D.I etc. which is still lagging behind in comparison to the Assam's mainland Brahmaputra Valley which have access to all of those facilities mentioned above.

The British Indian government had never included this area under their government's jurisdiction. Thereby, no government development work or activity were done, nor any tax levied from the hills including Karbi Anglong.

The first memorandum for a Karbi homeland was presented to Governor Reid on 28 October 1940 by Semsonsing Ingti and Khorsing Terang at Mohongdijua.

The Karbi leaders were then, a part of the All Party Hill Leaders' Conference (APHLC) which was formed on 6 July 1960.

The movement again gained momentum when the Karbi Anglong District Council passed a resolution demanding a Separate State in 1981. Then again from 1986 through the leadership of Autonomous State Demand Committee (ASDC), demanded Autonomous statehood of Karbi Anglong and Dima Hasao under Article 244(A).

In 2002, the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council passed another resolution to press for the demand of statehood. Several other memoranda were submitted at different times by several organisations.

The demand for a separate state turned violent on 31 July 2013 when student demonstrators set government buildings on fire.

Following the incident, the elected leaders of Karbi Anglong jointly submitted a memorandum to the Prime Minister of India demanding a separate State. Demographic wise, more than half of the Karbi Anglong population is made up of Indigenous Karbi tribe with significant migrants from other parts of India. Migration from Bangladesh Assam has been a major site of migration since the Partition of the subcontinent, with the first wave being composed largely of Bengali Hindu refugees arriving during and shortly after the establishment of India and Pakistan (current-day Bangladesh was originally part of Pakistan, known as East Pakistan ) in 1947–1951. Between the period of first patches (1946–1951), around 274,455 Bengali Hindu refugees arrived from what is now called Bangladesh (former East Pakistan ) in various locations of Assam as permanent settlers; in the second patches between 1952 and 1958, around 212,545 Bengali Hindus from Bangladesh took shelter in various parts of the state permanently.

After the 1964 East Pakistan riots many Bengali Hindus poured into Assam as refugees, and the number of Hindu migrants in the state rose to 1,068,455 in 1968 (sharply after 4 years of the riot).

The fourth patches, numbering around 347,555, arrived after the Bangladesh liberation war of 1971 as refugees; most of them, being Bengali-speaking Hindus, decided to stay in Assam permanently afterwards. Though the governments of India and Bangladesh made agreements for the repatriation of certain groups of refugees after the second and third waves, a large presence of refugees and other migrants and their descendants remained in the state. Nevertheless, still people of Bangladesh have been immigrating to Assam on a regular basis.

As per reports, about 635 of Bangladeshi people, mostly Hindus,immigrate to Assam daily. Besides migration caused by displacement, there is also a large and continual unregulated movement between Assam and neighbouring regions of Bangladesh with an exceptionally porous border.

The situation is called a risk to Assam's as well as India's security.

The continual illegal entry of people into Assam, mostly from Bangladesh , has caused economic upheaval and social and political unrest.

During the Assam Movement (1979–1985), the All Assam Students Union (AASU) and others demanded that government stop the influx of immigrants and deport those who had already settled.

During this period, 855 people (the AASU says 860) died in various conflicts with migrants and police.

The 1983 Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunal) Act, applied only to Assam, decreed that any person who entered the Assam after Bangladesh declared independence from Pakistan in 1971 and without authorisation or travel documents is to be considered a foreigner, with the decision on foreigner status to be carried out by designated tribunals.

In 1985, the Indian Government and leaders of the agitation signed the Assam accord to settle the conflict.

The 1991 census made the changing demographics of border districts more visible.

Since 2010, the Indian Government has undertaken the updating of the National Register of Citizens for Assam , and in 2018 the 32.2 million residents of Assam were subject to a review of their citizenship.

In August 2019, India released the names of the 2 million residents of Assam that had been determined to be non-citizens and whose names had therefore been struck off the Register of Citizens, depriving them of rights and making them subject to action, and potentially leaving some of them stateless, and the government has begun deporting non-citizens, while detaining 1,000 others that same year.

In January 2019, the Assam's peasant organisation Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti (KMSS) claimed that there are around 20 lakh Hindu Bangladeshis in Assam who would become Indian citizens if the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill is passed. BJP , however claimed that only eight lakh Hindu Bangladeshis will get citizenship. According to various sources, the total number of illegal Hindu Bangladeshis is hard to ascertain. According to the census data , the number of Hindu immigrants have been largely exaggerated.

In February 2020, the Assam Minority Development Board announced plans to segregate illegal Bangladeshi Muslim immigrants from the indigenous Muslims of the state, though some have expressed problems in identifying an indigenous Muslim person. According to the board, there are 1.4 crore Muslims in the state, of which 1 crore are of Bangladeshi origin. A report reveals that out of total 33 districts in Assam, Bangladeshis dominate almost 15 districts of Assam. Floods Main article: Brahmaputra floods In the rainy season every year, the Brahmaputra and other rivers overflow their banks and flood adjacent land. Flood waters wash away property including houses and livestock. Damage to crops and fields harms the agricultural sector. Bridges, railway tracks, and roads are also damaged, harming transportation and communication, and in some years requiring food to be air-dropped to isolated towns. Some deaths are attributed to the floods. Unemployment Unemployment is a chronic problem in Assam. It is variously blamed on poor infrastructure , limited connectivity, and government policy; on a "poor work culture"; on failure to advertise vacancies; and on government hiring candidates from outside Assam.

The Assam-Arakan basin holds about a quarter of the country's oil reserves, and produces about 12% of its total petroleum. According to the recent estimates, Assam's per capita GDP is ₹ 6,157 at constant prices (1993–94) and ₹ 10,198 at current prices; almost 40% lower than that in India. According to the recent estimates, per capita income in Assam has reached ₹ 6756 (1993–94 constant prices) in 2004–05, which is still much lower than India's. Macro-economy Between 1951 and 1979, Assam registered an average level of real gross domestic product growth compared to the national average. However, the state's real GDP growth lagged behind the national average after 1979 due to socio-political instability. Between 1981 and 2001, Assam's GSDP increased 3.3 per cent annually compared to the national average of 6 per cent.

Since the 2000s, Assam has registered higher levels of real gross domestic product growth. GSDP at constant (1999-2000) prices increased 5.33 per cent annually between 2002 and 2007. Real GSDP increased 6.78 per cent annually between 2007 and 2012. Real GSDP at constant (2011-12) prices increased approximately 7.6 per cent annually between 2012 and 2016. Real GSDP at constant (2011-12) prices increased approximately 7.0 per cent annually between 2016 and 2025. Tea plantations Main article: Assam tea A tea garden in Assam: tea is grown at elevations near sea level, giving it a malty sweetness and an earthy flavor, as opposed to the more floral aroma of highland (e.g. Darjeeling , Taiwanese ) teas This 1850 engraving shows the different stages in the process of making tea in Assam Employment Unemployment is one of the major problems in Assam. This problem can be attributed to overpopulation and a faulty education system. Every year, large numbers of students obtain higher academic degrees but because of non-availability of proportional vacancies, most of these students remain unemployed. A number of employers hire over-qualified or efficient, but under-certified, candidates, or candidates with narrowly defined qualifications.

The problem is exacerbated by the growth in the number of technical institutes in Assam which increases the unemployed community of the State.

The reluctance on the part of the departments concerned to advertise vacancies in vernacular language has also made matters worse for local unemployed youths particularly for the job-seekers of Grade C and D vacancies. Reduction of the unemployed has been threatened by illegal immigration from Bangladesh. This has increased the workforce without a commensurate increase in jobs. Immigrants compete with local workers for jobs at lower wages, particularly in construction, domestics, Rickshaw-pullers, and vegetable sellers.

The government has been identifying (via NRC ) and deporting illegal immigrants. Continued immigration is exceeding deportation. Agriculture Assamese women busy planting paddy seedlings in their agricultural field in Pahukata village in the Nagaon district of Assam A paddy field in Assam In Assam among all the productive sectors, agriculture makes the highest contribution to its domestic sectors, accounting for more than a third of Assam's income and employs 69% of workforce. Assam's biggest contribution to the world is Assam tea . It has its own variety, Camellia sinensis var. assamica .

The state produces rice, rapeseed , mustard seed , jute , potato, sweet potato, banana, papaya , areca nut , sugarcane and turmeric . Assam's agriculture is yet to experience modernisation in a real sense. With implications for food security, per capita food grain production has declined in the past five decades. Productivity has increased marginally, but is still low compared to highly productive regions. For instance, the yield of rice (a staple food of Assam) was just 1531 kg per hectare against India's 1927 kg per hectare in 2000–01 (which itself is much lower than Egypt 's 9283, US's 7279, South Korea's 6838, Japan's 6635 and China's 6131 kg per hectare in 2001 ).

On the other hand, after having strong domestic demand, and with 1.5 million hectares of inland water bodies, numerous rivers and 165 varieties of fishes, fishing is still in its traditional form and production is not self-sufficient. Floods in Assam greatly affect the farmers and the families dependent on agriculture because of large-scale damage of agricultural fields and crops by flood water. Every year, flooding from the Brahmaputra and other rivers deluges places in Assam.

The flyover is Assam's longest flyover, spanning 2.63 kilometres and connecting Maligaon Chariali to Kamakhya Gate in Guwahati. Industry Handlooms and handicrafts are traditional industries that continue to survive, especially among rural women, in the state. Assam's proximity to some neighbouring countries such as Bangladesh, Nepal and Bhutan, benefits its trade.

The major Border checkpoints through which border trade flows to Bangladesh from Assam are : Sutarkandi (Karimganj), Dhubri, Mankachar (Dhubri) and Golokanj. To facilitate border trade with Bangladesh, Border Trade Centres have been developed at Sutarkandi and Mankachar . It has been proposed in the 11th five-year plan to set up two more Border Trade Center, one at Ledo connecting China and other at Darrang connecting Bhutan. There are several Land Custom Stations (LCS) in the state bordering Bangladesh and Bhutan to facilitate border trade.

The government of India has identified some thrust areas for industrial development of Assam: The Lokpriya Gopinath Bordoloi International Airport at Guwahati, with international flights to Bangkok and Singapore offered by Druk Air of Bhutan , was the 12th busiest airport of India in 2012.

The major milestones in the evolution of Assamese culture are: Dakhinpat Satra of Majuli Assimilation in the Kamarupa kingdom for almost 800 years ( Varman dynasty for 300 years, Mlechchha dynasty for 250 years and the Pala dynasty for 200 years. Establishment of the Chutia kingdom in the 12th century in eastern Assam and assimilation for next 400 years. Establishment of the Ahom kingdom in the 13th century CE and assimilation for next 600 years. Assimilation in the Koch kingdom (15th–16th century CE) of western Assam and Kachari kingdom (12th–18th century CE) of central and southern Assam. Neo-Vaishanavite (Ekasarana Dharma) Movement led by Srimanta Shankardeva ( Xongkordeu ) made an enormous impact on the socio-cultural and religious sphere of Assam. This 15th century religio-cultural movement under the leadership of Srimanta Sankardeva (Xonkordeu) and his disciples have provided another dimension to Assamese culture. A renewed Hinduisation in local forms took place, which was initially greatly supported by the Koch and later by the Ahom kingdoms.

The resultant social institutions such as namghar and sattra (the Vaishnav Monasteries) have become an integral part of the Assamese way of life.

The Tamulpan-tradition is an ancient one and is being followed since time-immemorial with roots in the aboriginal Austric culture. Xorai is a traditionally manufactured bell-metal article of great respect and is used as a container-medium while performing respectful offers. Moreover, symbolically many ethno-cultural groups use specific clothes to portray respect and pride. Singhasan of manikut in a Namghar There were many other symbolic elements and designs, but are now only found in literature, art, sculpture, architecture, etc. or in use today for only religious purposes.

The typical designs of Assamese-lion , dragon (ngi-ngao-kham), and flying-lion (Naam-singho) are used for symbolising various purposes and occasions.

The day before the each bihu is known as the day of Uruka .

The first day of 'Rongali bihu' is called 'Goru bihu' (the bihu of the cows), when the cows are taken to the nearby rivers or ponds to be bathed with special care.

In recent times the form and nature of celebration has changed with the growth of urban centres. Traditional Bwisagu dance Bwisagu is one of the most popular seasonal festivals of the Bodos . Baisagu is a Boro word which originated from the word "Baisa" which means year or age, and "Agu" meaning starting or beginning. Bwisagu marks the beginning of the new year. It is celebrated at the beginning of the first month of the Boro year, around mid-April in the Gregorian Calendar. It has remarkable similarities to the festival of Rongali Bihu, also celebrated at the same time in Assam.

The worship of Bathow is done on the second day of the festival. Mising girls dancing during Ali Ai Ligang (Spring Festival) to the tunes of Oi:Nitom Ali-Aye-Ligang or Ali-Ai-Ligang is a spring festivital associated with agriculture celebrated by the indigenous Mising of Assam and other Northeast Indian states. It marks the beginning of the Ahu paddy cultivation in the farms.

The term "Ali" denotes legumes, "Aye" means seed and "Ligang" is 'to sow'.

The festival is celebrated on a Wednesday of the month of Fagun of the Assamese calendar and in the month of February in English calendar.

The gumrag dance is associated with this festival. Dimasa women performing Baidima, the traditional dance of the Dimasa people. Bushu Dima or simply Bushu is a major harvest festival of the Dimasa people . This festival is celebrated during the end of January. Officially 27 January has been declared as the day of Bushu Dima festival.

The Dimasa people celebrate by playing musical instruments- khram (a type of drum), muri (a kind of huge long flute).

The people dance to the different tunes of "murithai" and each dance has its own unique name, the most prominent being the "Baidima" There are three types of Bushu celebrated by the Dimasas- Jidap, Surem and Hangsou. Me-Dam-Me-Phi is the day of the veneration of the dead ancestors for the Tai-Ahom community. It bears striking similarity in the concept of ancestor worship that the Tai-Ahoms share with other peoples originating from the Tai stock.

The word ‘Me’ means offerings, ‘Dam’ means ancestors and ‘Phi’ means gods. According to the Buranjis, Lengdon (God of thunder), the king of Mong Phi ( The heavenly kingdom ), sent two of his grandsons Khunlung and Khunlai to Mong Ri Mong Ram (present day Xishuangbanna , China) and at that moment Ye-Cheng-Pha, the God of knowledge, advised them to perform Umpha, Phuralong, Mae Dam Mae Phi and Rik-khwan rituals in different months of the year on different occasions to pay respect to the Phi-Dam (Ancestral Spirit) and Khwan elements.

Since that day till now Mae Dam Mae Phi has been observed by the Tai-Ahoms. It is celebrated on 31 January every year according to the Gregorian calendar. Rongker is celebrated every year by the Karbi people Rongker also called Dehal is an annual winter festival of merriment celebrated by the Karbi people of Assam. It is observed in order to appease the local deities associated with the welfare of the village and the harvest of crops and also to get rid of all evil spirits.

Although the festival does have a specific time it is usually observed at the beginning of the Karbi New year (Thang thang) which falls on February of the Gregorian calendar. Doul Mohutsav (Holi) in Barpeta Satra Doul Mohutsav , also called Fakuwa or Doul Utsav is a festival of colours and happiness popular in Lower Assam and especially in Barpeta . It is synonymous with the festival of Holi celebrated in Northern India. Holigeets of Barpeta are sung which is incredibly popular and enthralls the heart of every Assamese. These holigeets are the exquisite compositions in praise of Lord Krishna . People from different parts of the state visit Barpeta Satra to experience this colourful and joyful festival. Chavang Kut is a post harvesting festival of the Kuki people .

The festival is celebrated on the first day of November every year. Hence, this particular day has been officially declared as a Restricted Holiday by the Assam government.

In the past, the celebration was primarily important in the religio-cultural sense.

The rhythmic movements of the dances in the festival were inspired by animals, agricultural techniques and showed their relationship with ecology. Today, the celebration witnesses the shifting of stages and is revamped to suit new contexts and interpretations.

The traditional dances which form the core of the festival is now performed in out-of-village settings and are staged in a secular public sphere.

In Assam, the Kukis mainly reside in the two autonomous districts of Dima Hasao and Karbi Anglong. Beshoma is a festival of Deshi people (one of the indigenous Muslim groups of Assam). It is a celebration of sowing crop.

The tradition of modern moving theatres is typical of Assam with immense popularity of many Mobile theatre groups such as Kohinoor , Brindabon , etc. . Satriya Dance The indigenous folk music has influenced the growth of a modern idiom, that finds expression in the music of artists like Jyoti Prasad Agarwala , Bishnuprasad Rabha , Parvati Prasad Baruwa , Bhupen Hazarika , Pratima Barua Pandey , Anima Choudhury , Luit Konwar Rudra Baruah , Jayanta Hazarika , Khagen Mahanta , Dipali Barthakur , among many others. Among the new generation, Zubeen Garg , Angaraag Mahanta and Joi Barua . There is an award given in the honour of Bishnu Prasad Rabha for achievements in the cultural/music world of Assam by the state government. Contemporary Assamese music also saw the rise of Zubeen Garg , one of the most popular modern singers of the region. His Assamese song "Mayabini Raatir Bukut" has achieved iconic status and is widely regarded as an anthem in Assam. Cuisine Main article: Assamese cuisine Assamese Thali Typically, an Assamese meal consists of many things such as bhat ( rice ) with dayl/ daly ( lentils ), masor jool ( fish stew), mangxô ( meat stew ) and stir fried greens or herbs and vegetables . Bhut jolokia (ghost pepper) is used in preparation of traditional meat stews The two main characteristics of a traditional meal in Assam are khar (an Alkali, named after its main ingredient) and tenga (preparations bearing a characteristically rich and tangy flavour). Khorika is the smoked or fire grilled meat eaten with meals. Pitika (mash) is another delicacy of Assam. It includes alu pitika (mashed potatoes), bilahi (tomatoes), bengena (brinjals) or even masor pitika (fish). Commonly consumed varieties of meat include Mutton , fowl , duck / goose , fish , pigeon , pork and beef (among Muslim and Christian indigenous Assamese ethnic groups). Grasshoppers , locusts , silkworms , snails , eels , bat wild fowl , squab and other birds, and venison are also eaten, albeit in moderation. A Mising girl roasting fish and pork in bamboo tubes ( bahor sungha ) in an ethnic festival Khorisa (fermented bamboo shoots ) are used at times to flavour curries while they can also be preserved and made into pickles. Koldil ( banana flower ) and squash are also used in popular culinary preparations. Rice beer is consumed on festivals by the various indigenous ethnic communities of Assam A variety of different rice cultivars are grown and consumed in different ways, viz., roasted, ground, boiled or just soaked. Fish curries made of free range wild fish as well as Bôralí , rôu , illish , or sitôl are the most popular. Another favourite combination is luchi (fried flatbread), a curry which can be vegetarian or non-vegetarian. Many indigenous Assamese communities households still continue to brew their traditional alcoholic beverages ; examples include: Laupani, Xaaj, Paniyo, Jou, Joumai, Hor, Apong , Sujen etc. Such beverages are served during traditional festivities. Declining them is considered socially offensive. Assamese food is generally served in traditional bell metal dishes and platters like Kanhi , Maihang and so on. Fish cooked in banana leaves Narikol Pitha is a very popular dish especially during Bihu Literature Main article: Assamese literature Lakshminath Bezbaroa , one of the foremost figures of Assamese literature Imaginary portrait of Srimanta Sankardeva by Bishnu Prasad Rabha Assamese literature dates back to the composition of Charyapada , and later on works like Saptakanda Ramayana by Madhava Kandali , which is the first translation of the Ramayana into an Indo-Aryan language , contributed to Assamese literature. Sankardeva 's Borgeet , Ankia Naat , Bhaona and Satra tradition backed the 15th-16th century Assamese literature. Written during the Reign of Ahoms , the Buranjis are notable literary works which are prominently historical manuscripts. Most literary works are written in Assamese although other local language such as Bodo and Dimasa are also represented.

In the 19th and 20th century, Assamese and other literature was modernised by authors including Lakshminath Bezbaroa , Birinchi Kumar Barua , Hem Barua , Dr. Mamoni Raisom Goswami , Bhabendra Nath Saikia , Birendra Kumar Bhattacharya , Hiren Bhattacharyya , Homen Borgohain , Bhabananda Deka , Rebati Mohan Dutta Choudhury , Mahim Bora , Lil Bahadur Chettri , Syed Abdul Malik , Surendranath Medhi , Hiren Gohain etc. Fine arts Main article: Painting of Assam The archaic Mauryan Stupas discovered in and around Goalpara district are the earliest examples (c. 300 BCE to c. 100 CE) of ancient art and architectural works.

The large drape illustrates the childhood activities of Lord Krishna in Vrindavan. Media Print media include Assamese dailies Amar Asom , Asomiya Khabar , Asomiya Pratidin , Dainik Agradoot , Dainik Janambhumi , Dainik Asam , Gana Adhikar , Janasadharan and Niyomiya Barta . Asom Bani , Sadin and Janambhumi are Assamese weekly newspapers.

The English dailies of Assam include The Assam Tribune , The Sentinel , The Telegraph , The Times of India , The North East Times , Eastern Chronicle and The Hills Times . Thekar , in the Karbi language has the largest circulation of any daily from Karbi Anglong district. Bodosa has the highest circulation of any Bodo daily from BTR. Dainik Jugasankha is a Bengali daily with editions from Dibrugarh, Guwahati, Silchar and Kolkata. Dainik Samayik Prasanga , Dainik Prantojyoti , Dainik Janakantha and Nababarta Prasanga are other prominent Bengali dailies published in the Barak Valley towns of Karimganj and Silchar. Hindi dailies include Purvanchal Prahari , Pratah Khabar and Dainik Purvoday . Broadcasting stations of All India Radio have been established in 22 cities across the state. Local news and music are the main priority for those stations. Assam has three public service broadcasting service stations of state-owned Doordarshan at Dibrugarh, Guwahati and Silchar.

The Guwahati-based satellite news channels include Assam Talks , DY 365 , News Live , News18 Assam North East , North East Live , Prag News and Pratidin Time . Geographical indications Boka Chaul Boka Chaul was awarded the Geographical Indication (GI) status tag from the Geographical Indications Registry , under the Union Government of India , on 30 July 2018 and is valid until 24 July 2026. Lotus Progressive Centre (LPC) and Centre for Environment Education (CEE) from Guwahati, proposed the GI registration of Boka Chaul.

After filing the application in July 2018, the rice was granted the GI tag in 2023 by the Geographical Indication Registry in Chennai , making the name "Boka Chaul" exclusive to the rice grown in the region. It thus became the second rice variety from Assam after Joha rice and the 7th type of goods from Assam to earn the GI tag.

The Hindu . 27 July 2024 . Retrieved 28 July 2024 . ^ "Report of the Commissioner for linguistic minorities: 52nd report (July 2014 to June 2015)" (PDF) . Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities, Ministry of Minority Affairs, Government of India . pp. 58– 59. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 December 2017 . Retrieved 16 February 2016 . ^ "Assam Assembly Accords Associate Official Language Status To Bodo" . NDTV . 30 December 2020 . Retrieved 21 February 2022 . ^ a b "Govt withdraws Assamese as official language from Barak valley" . Business Standard India . Press Trust of India. 9 September 2014. Archived from the original on 29 January 2018 . Retrieved 29 January 2018 . ^ Purkayastha, Biswa Kalyan (24 February 2024). "Assam recognises Manipuri as associate official language in four districts" .

The Hindustan Times . Retrieved 17 May 2024 . ^ "Assam Budget Analysis 2025-26" . PRS Legislative Research . Retrieved 29 April 2026 . ^ "India: Subnational HDI" . Global Data Labs . Retrieved 8 June 2025 . ^ "Appendix-A: Detailed tables, Table (7): Literacy rate (in per cent) of persons of different age groups for each State/UT (persons, age-group (years): 7 & above, rural+urban (column 6))". Annual Report, Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) (July 2023 – June 2024) (PDF) (Report). National Sample Survey Office, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government of India . 23 September 2024. pp. A-10. ^ "Assam Legislative Assembly - History" . Archived from the original on 13 September 2016 . Retrieved 14 September 2016 . ^ https://www.britannica.com/place/Siliguri-Corridor ^ Lahkar, Digjyoti (31 January 2026). " 'Dibrugarh Steps Into History': Amit Shah Lays Foundation For Assam's Second Capital, Unveils Major Governance, Sports & Conservation Projects" . Free Press Journal . Retrieved 31 January 2026 . ^ "Assam tea gets GI halo" .

The Telegraph . Retrieved 30 April 2026 . ^ Besatia in the Schoff translation and also sometimes used by Ptolemy, they are a people similar to Kirradai and they lived in the region between "Assam and Sichuan" ( Casson 1989 , pp. 241–243) ^ "The Periplus of the Erythraen Sea (last quarter of the first century A.D) and Ptolemy's Geography (middle of the second century A.D) appear to call the land including Assam Kirrhadia after its Kirata population." ( Sircar 1990 :60–61) ^ "Prior to the thirteenth century the present region was called Kāmarūpa or, alternatively, Prāgjyotiṣapur", Lahiri, Nayanjot., Pre-Ahom Assam (Delhi 1991) p. 14 ^ "Ahoms also gave Assam and its language their name ( Ahom and the modern ɒχɒm 'Assam' come from an attested earlier form asam , acam , probably from a Burmese corruption of the word Shan/Shyam , cf. Siam : Kakati 1962; 1-4)." ( Masica 1993 , p. 50) ^ "Protected Archaeological Sites and Monuments | Directorate of Archaeology | Government Of Assam, India" . archaeology.assam.gov.in . Archived from the original on 29 March 2025 . Retrieved 29 March 2025 . ^ a b c d e f Sircar, D C (1990), "Pragjyotisha-Kamarupa", in Barpujari, H K (ed.), The Comprehensive History of Assam , vol. I, Guwahati: Publication Board, Assam, pp. 59– 78 ^ "The Assam Tribune Online" . www.assamtribune.com . Archived from the original on 27 January 2016 . Retrieved 3 January 2019 . ^ "Relics hold clue to missing history – Sunga-Kushana era terracotta artefacts may say if Guwahati existed before 7th century AD" . www.telegraphindia.com . Archived from the original on 4 January 2019 . Retrieved 3 January 2019 . ^ India History Association. Session (2001), Proceedings of North East India History Association North East he came under the 'bad' influence of Banasura, ruler of Sonitapura (identified with Tezpur now under Sonitpur district in central Assam), and ended up sidelining Kamakhya in favour of Siva. Thereafter Naraka forsook the guidance ^ Barman, Bratatee (January 2020). "Archaeology of BCE 200 -CE 1200 Assam (Northeast India): Pre-literary to Historical and Early Medieval Periods" . Archaeology in Northeast India Recent Trends and Future Prospects Essays Celebrating 150 Years of Research . Archived from the original on 27 April 2022 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Tej Ram Sharma,1978, "Personal and geographical names in the Gupta inscriptions. (1.publ.)", Page 254, Kamarupa consisted of the Western districts of the Brahmaputra valley which being the most powerful state. ^ Suresh Kant Sharma, Usha Sharma – 2005,"Discovery of North-East India: Geography, History, Culture, ... – Volume 3", Page 248, Davaka (Nowgong) and Kamarupa as separate and submissive friendly kingdoms. ^ The eastern border of Kamarupa is given by the temple of the goddess Tamreshvari (Pūrvāte Kāmarūpasya devī Dikkaravasini in Kalika Purana ) near present-day Sadiya. "...the temple of the goddess Tameshwari (Dikkaravasini) is now located at modern Sadiya about 100 miles to the northeast of Sibsagar" ( Sircar 1990 , pp. 63–68). ^ Sircar, D. C. (2008). Studies in Indian Coins . Motilal Banarsidass Publishers. ISBN 978-81-208-2973-2 . Archived from the original on 5 July 2021 . Retrieved 20 September 2021 . ^ "Husayn Shah Ala al-Din" . Encyclopædia Britannica . 22 July 2025. ^ ( Baruah 1986 :36) ^ Banikanta Kakati, Assamese:Its formation and development ^ ( Baruah 1986 :220–224) ^ Guha, Amalendu (June 1984). "Pre-Ahom Roots and the Medieval State in Assam: A Reply". Social Scientist . 12 (6): 72. doi : 10.2307/3517005 . JSTOR 3517005 .

In my paper, I avoided generalizations on the basis of speculative reasoning and examined the problem of retardation only in the context of 'the southeastern part of Upper Assam', where the Ahoms had remained contained for the initial three centllries and for which area we have historical evidence. ^ ( Baruah 1986 :224–234) ^ ( Gogoi 2017 :1–17) ^ "In the Battle of Itakhuli in September 1682, the Ahom forces chased the defeated Mughals nearly one hundred kilometres back to the Manas river.

The Manas then became the Ahom-Mughal boundary until the British occupation." Richards, John F. (1995).

The Mughal Empire . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 247. ISBN 0521566037 . Archived from the original on 1 February 2023 . Retrieved 26 January 2013 . ^ ( Gogoi 2017 :17–20) ^ ( Gogoi 2017 :20–26) ^ Gait E.A. A History of Assam 1926 Calcutta and Shimla Thacker & Co page 225 ^ Bhuyan Dr. S.K. Tunkhungia Buranji or A History of Assam (1681–1826) 1968 page 199 ^ Barbaruah Hiteswar Ahomar-Din or A History of Assam under the Ahoms 1981 page 299 ^ Barua Gunaviram Assam Buranji or A History of Assam 2008 page 108 ^ Gait E.A. A History of Assam 1926 Calcutta and Shimla Thacker & Co page 230 ^ Bhuyan Dr. S.K. Tunkhungia Buranji or A History of Assam (1681–1826) 1968 page 206 ^ Barbaruah Hiteswar Ahomar-Din or A History of Assam under the Ahoms 1981 page 320 ^ Gait E.A. A History of Assam 1926 Calcutta and Shimla Thacker & Co page 231 ^ Bhuyan Dr. S.K. Tunkhungia Buranji or A History of Assam (1681–1826) 1968 page 207 ^ Barbaruah Hiteswar Ahomar-Din or A History of Assam under the Ahoms 1981 page 318 ^ Barua Gunaviram Assam Buranji or A History of Assam 2008 page 116-117 ^ Gait E.A. A History of Assam 1926 Calcutta and Shimla Thacker & Co page 232 ^ Barua Gunaviram Assam Buranji or A History of Assam 2008 page117 ^ Aitchison, C. U., ed. (1931), The Treaty of Yandaboo, (A Collection of Treaties, Engagements and Sanads: Relating to India and Neighbouring Countries. Vol. XII.) , Calcutta: Projectsouthasia.sdstate.edu, pp. 230– 233, archived from the original on 2 December 2008 ^ Barpujari, H.K. (1998). North-East India, Problem Prospect and Politics . Guwahati: Spectrum Publishers. p. 41. ^ Bose, M.L. (1989). Social History of Assam . New Delhi: Ashok Kumar Mittal Concept Publishing Company. p. 91. ^ "Bruce Brothers and Assam Tea" . INDIAN CULTURE . Archived from the original on 2 March 2023 . Retrieved 29 March 2025 . ^ Roy, Tirthankar (2012). India in the World Economy: From Antiquity to the Present . Cambridge University Press. p. 202. ISBN 978-1-107-00910-3 . ^ MacFarlane, Alan; MacFarlane, Iris (2003), Green Gold, The Empire of Tea, Ch. 6–11 , Random House, London ^ Indian Philatelists Forum (4 June 2011). "Glimpses of Modern Indian Philately: INDIAN POSTAL CIRCLES" . Modernindianphilately.blogspot.in. Archived from the original on 8 May 2014 . Retrieved 11 June 2014 . ^ William Cooke Taylor , A Popular History of British India. p. 505 ^ Nath, Sunil (2001). "The Secessionist Insurgency and the Freedom of Minds" . www.satp.org . Institute for Conflict Management. Archived from the original on 17 April 2018 . Retrieved 24 January 2014 . ^ Bhubaneswar Bhattacharyya (1995).

The troubled border: some facts about boundary disputes between Assam-Nagaland, Assam-Arunachal Pradesh, Assam-Meghalaya, and Assam-Mizoram . Lawyer's Book Stall. ISBN 9788173310997 . ^ a b Hazarika, Sanjoy (2003), Strangers of the Mist , Penguin Books Australia Ltd., ISBN 0-14-024052-7 ^ a b Governor of Assam (8 November 1998). "Report on Illegal Migration into Assam" . Archived from the original on 9 June 2007 . Retrieved 26 May 2007 . ^ "Floods kill 25 in India's Assam, displace thousands" . Reuters . 24 May 2022. Archived from the original on 3 June 2022 . Retrieved 3 June 2022 . ^ a b c Singh, R. L. (1993), India, A Regional Geography , Varanasi, India: National Geographical Society of India ^ "Guwahati's landscape to change with satellite towns, BRT systems" .

The Assam Tribune . Archived from the original on 3 November 2013 . Retrieved 4 August 2013 . ^ "Dibrugarh – Roing – Mayudia – Anini Tourist Circuit" . Arunachal Tourism. Archived from the original on 6 April 2013 . Retrieved 4 August 2013 . ^ Purdue University. "The Köppen Classification of Climates" . Archived from the original on 5 June 2007 . Retrieved 25 May 2007 . ^ a b "Assam Flood Toll Rises to 13" . NDTV. 23 August 2015. Archived from the original on 24 August 2015 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . ^ a b "Flood situation in Assam worsens" . Hindustan Times . 23 August 2015. Archived from the original on 21 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . ^ Borthakur, Ahir Bhairab (15 January 2002), "Call of the wild" , Down to Earth , 419 (6905): 340, Bibcode : 2002Natur.419..340H , doi : 10.1038/419340a , archived from the original on 28 September 2007 ^ Birdlife International, UK. "Indo-Gangetic Grasslands" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 June 2007 . Retrieved 31 May 2007 . ^ National Mission on Bamboo Applications 2004 ^ Sharma, Pradip (April–June 2003), "An Overview on Wetlands in Assam" (PDF) , ENVIS Assam, Assam Science Technology and Environment Council , 2 : 7, archived from the original (PDF) on 20 May 2006. ^ World Heritage Centre, UNESCO. "World Heritage List" . Archived from the original on 6 June 2007 . Retrieved 30 May 2007 . ^ Choudhury, A.U.(1996) Survey of the white-winged wood duck and the Bengal florican in Tinsukia district and adjacent areas of Assam and Arunachal Pradesh.

The Rhino Foundation for Nature in North East India, Guwahati, India. 82pp+ ^ Choudhury, A.U. (2010)The vanishing herds : the wild water buffalo. Gibbon Books, Rhino Foundation, CEPF & COA, Taiwan, Guwahati, India ^ Choudhury, A.U. (2000)The birds of Assam. Gibbon Books & WWF-India, Guwahati, India ^ Choudhury, A.U. (1990). Checklist of the birds of Assam. Sofia Press & Publishers Pvt. Ltd., Guwahati, India. 72 pp+ ^ Choudhury, A.U. (1997)The check list of the mammals of Assam. Gibbon Books & ASTEC, Guwahati, India ^ ENVIS Assam (April–June 2003). "Endemic Orchids of Assam" (PDF) . ENVIS Assam, Assam Science Technology and Environment Council . 2 : 8. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 May 2006. ^ a b NEDFi & NIC-Assam. "North East India Databank" . Archived from the original on 18 April 2007. ^ a b "Here is India's oil story" .

The Financial Express . 3 May 2018. Archived from the original on 21 July 2019 . Retrieved 21 July 2019 . ^ Wandrey 2004, p. 17 ^ "A - 2 DECADAL VARIATION IN POPULATION SINCE 1901" . Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India. Archived from the original on 8 August 2019 . Retrieved 12 January 2020 . ^ a b "Statistics of Assam 2002-03" . Archived from the original on 7 June 2007 . Retrieved 3 June 2007 . ^ National Commission on Population, Census of India (2006). "Population Projections for India and States 2001–2026" . Archived from the original on 14 May 2007 . Retrieved 15 May 2007 . ^ a b "Government of Assam Census 2011" . onlineassam . Archived from the original on 21 June 2012 . Retrieved 6 June 2012 . ^ cdpsindia. "centre for development and peace studies" . Archived from the original on 21 October 2012 . Retrieved 6 June 2012 . ^ Director of Census Operations, Census of India 2001 ^ "Muslim-Bodo mistrust exists for many decades" .

The Times of India . 24 July 2012. Archived from the original on 17 October 2015 . Retrieved 11 June 2014 . ^ "Assam govt mulls arming Muslims in Bodo areas" .

The Times of India . 5 May 2014. Archived from the original on 5 May 2014 . Retrieved 11 June 2014 . ^ Andre, Aletta; Kumar, Abhimanyu (23 December 2016). "Protest poetry: Assam's Bengali Muslims take a stand" . Aljazeera . Aljazeera . Archived from the original on 2 February 2017 . Retrieved 26 January 2017 . ^ "Assam violence: Four more bodies found, toll rises to 77" . IBN . 8 August 2012 . Retrieved 2 November 2013 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Harris, Gardiner (28 July 2012). "As Tensions in India Turn Deadly, Some Say Officials Ignored Warning Signs" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 1 March 2017 . Retrieved 26 February 2017 . ^ Taher, Mohammad (1993) The Peopling of Assam and contemporary social structure in Ahmad, Aijazuddin (ed) Social Structure and Regional Development, Rawat Publications, New Delhi ^ "Delhi is most polluted city globally; 13 of world's 20 most polluted cities in India: report" .

The Hindu . PTI. 11 March 2025. ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 16 March 2025 . ^ "Census of India 2001, Religion Data" . Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India. ^ "Census of India 2011, Religion Data" . Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India. ^ a b "Population by religion community – 2011" . Census of India, 2012 .

The Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India. Archived from the original on 25 August 2015. ^ "Census 2011 data rekindles 'demographic invasion' fear in Assam" . 26 August 2015. Archived from the original on 5 September 2015 . Retrieved 26 August 2015 . ^ "India's religions by numbers" .

The Hindu . 26 August 2015. Archived from the original on 10 January 2016 . Retrieved 5 August 2016 . ^ Deka, Kaustubh (12 May 2014). "Bodos and their rights" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 1 December 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2015 . ^ a b "Census of India Website : Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India" . Archived from the original on 3 June 2020 . Retrieved 11 October 2020 . ^ "Muslim majority districts in Assam up" .

The Times of India . 26 August 2015. Archived from the original on 4 January 2016 . Retrieved 23 December 2015 . ^ "Assam Muslim growth is higher in districts away from border" . 31 August 2015. Archived from the original on 23 December 2015 . Retrieved 23 December 2015 . ^ "Census 2011 data rekindles 'demographic invasion' fear in Assam" . Hindustan Times . 26 August 2015. Archived from the original on 4 January 2016 . Retrieved 23 December 2015 . ^ "Distribution of the 22 scheduled languages-India/States/Union Territories - 2011 census" (PDF) . Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India . Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 October 2021 . Retrieved 23 August 2021 . ^ PTI (30 December 2020). "Assam Assembly Accords Associate Official Language Status To Bodo" . NDTV . Archived from the original on 21 February 2022 . Retrieved 21 February 2022 . ^ Purkayastha, Biswa Kalyan (24 February 2024). "Assam recognises Manipuri as associate official language in four districts" . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 25 February 2024 . Retrieved 26 February 2024 . ^ "Sylheti" . Ethnologue. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018 . Retrieved 12 March 2018 . ^ a b Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs. "C-17 POPULATION BY BILINGUALISM AND TRILINGUALISM" . Archived from the original on 13 November 2019 . Retrieved 23 August 2021 . ^ "Axomiya is the major language spoken in Assam, and serves almost as a lingua franca among the different speech communities in the whole area." ( Goswami 2003 :394) ^ "Scheduled Languages in descending order of speaker's strength - 2011" (PDF) . Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India . Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 November 2018 . Retrieved 23 August 2021 . ^ "Assamese" . Archived from the original on 24 December 2018 . Retrieved 22 August 2021 . ^ "Assam Assembly Elections 2016: Assamese are minority, Muslims are largest electoral group in this poll battle!" . 8 April 2016. Archived from the original on 27 June 2021 . Retrieved 19 July 2021 . ^ "Assamese speakers in Assam: An insecure future?" . 10 April 2021. Archived from the original on 29 June 2021 . Retrieved 20 July 2021 . ^ "Assamese language: Asam Sahitya Sabha gives government two-month ultimatum on use of Assamese | Guwahati News" .

The Times of India . 24 July 2018. Archived from the original on 20 July 2021 . Retrieved 20 July 2021 . ^ "Sabha, Ajmal prod on Assamese" . Archived from the original on 20 July 2021 . Retrieved 20 July 2021 . ^ "Take action against 'Chalo Paltai' propagators, Sabha tells government | Guwahati News" .

The Times of India . 6 June 2019. Archived from the original on 20 July 2021 . Retrieved 20 July 2021 . ^ " "Indigenous Muslims Agreed on Checking Population": Assam Chief Minister" . Archived from the original on 19 July 2021 . Retrieved 19 July 2021 . ^ "Declare Assamese our mother tongue | Guwahati News" .

The Times of India . 6 February 2011. Archived from the original on 1 February 2023 . Retrieved 19 July 2021 . ^ Saikia, Arunabh (2 April 2021). "A new generation of 'Miya' Muslims in Assam may vote for Congress-AIUDF – but only out of compulsion" . Scroll.in . Archived from the original on 11 June 2021 . Retrieved 16 July 2021 . ^ X, Samrat (8 January 2018). "National Register of Citizens: Identity issue haunts Assam, again" . Newslaundry . Archived from the original on 11 June 2021 . Retrieved 16 July 2021 . ^ "The Economic Basis of Assam's Linguistic Politics and Anti-Immigrant Movements" . Archived from the original on 22 June 2021 . Retrieved 19 July 2021 . ^ Choudhury, Sumedha (September 2022). "Denationalisation and discrimination in postcolonial India" . International Journal of Discrimination and the Law . 22 (3): 326– 342. doi : 10.1177/13582291221113517 . ISSN 1358-2291 . S2CID 250544870 . ^ Chakrabarti, Angana (27 September 2022). "Sylhetis were separated by Partition. Now, Indo-Bangladesh festival aims to bring them together" . ThePrint . Retrieved 5 January 2024 . ^ a b c d "Reference at censusindia.gov.in" . Archived from the original on 20 October 2020 . Retrieved 11 October 2020 . ^ "Battleground Assam a tale of two valleys and the CAA quandary Assam bengal polls 2021 | Opinion News – India TV" . 18 February 2021. Archived from the original on 17 October 2021 . Retrieved 17 October 2021 . ^ a b c "C-16 Population By Mother Tongue" . census.gov.in . Retrieved 3 September 2020 . ^ "Govt withdraws Assamese as official language from Barak valley" . Business Standard India . Press Trust of India. 9 September 2014 . Retrieved 1 August 2019 . ^ Gope, Amalesh (2018). "The phoneme inventory of Sylheti: Acoustic evidences" . Journal of Advanced Linguistic Studies . 7 . ^ Mahanta, Sakuntala; Gope, Amalesh (2018). "Tonal polarity in Sylheti in the context of noun faithfulness". Language Sciences . 69 : 81. doi : 10.1016/j.langsci.2018.06.010 . S2CID 149759441 . Along the linguistic continuum of eastern Indic languages, Sylheti occupies an ambiguous position, where it is considered a distinct language by many and also as a dialect of Bengali or Bangla by some others ^ "At the geographical extremes, Chittagonian, Sylheti, Mal Paharia, and Rohingya are so unintelligible to speakers of other dialects that they are almost universally considered by linguists to be separate languages on their own." ( Khan 2018 ) ^ Purkayastha, Biswa Kalyan (24 February 2024). "Assam recognises Manipuri as associate official language in four districts" . Hindustan Times . Retrieved 26 February 2024 . ^ Das, Ankur; Deka, Tusmita. "The Allophonic Variation of the Assamese voiceless velar fricative /x/" . 13th Annual Conference of South Asian Languages (ICOSAL13) . Archived from the original on 16 April 2022 . Retrieved 21 July 2019 . ^ "Assamese" . www.languagesgulper.com . Archived from the original on 6 December 2019 . Retrieved 21 July 2019 . ^ Morey, Stephen. 2005.

The Tai languages of Assam: a grammar and texts . Canberra: Pacific Linguistics. ^ "A Brief Note on Kurukh | Modern Endangered Archives Program" . meap.library.ucla.edu . ^ Lahkar, Digjyoti (31 January 2026). " 'Dibrugarh Steps Into History': Amit Shah Lays Foundation For Assam's Second Capital, Unveils Major Governance, Sports & Conservation Projects" . Free Press Journal . Retrieved 31 January 2026 . ^ "Govt announces 5 new districts" . Assam Times . 15 August 2015. Archived from the original on 17 August 2015 . Retrieved 16 August 2015 . ^ a b Revenue Department, Government of Assam ^ "Assam: Majuli becomes 1st river island district of India" . Hindustan Times . Guwahati. 27 June 2016. Archived from the original on 29 August 2016 . Retrieved 28 June 2016 . ^ " 'Bajali' Becomes the 34th Full-Fledged District of Assam" . Sentinel Digital Desk. www.sentinelassam.com . 13 January 2021. Archived from the original on 13 January 2021 . Retrieved 16 January 2021 . ^ Directorate of Information and Public Relations, Government of Assam. "Area of the National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries in Assam, 2002" . Archived from the original on 6 October 2007 . Retrieved 29 May 2006 . ^ "GMC Portal" . Archived from the original on 5 August 2016 . Retrieved 5 August 2016 . ^ Sharma, Anil Kumar (1 January 2007). Quit India Movement in Assam . Mittal Publications. ISBN 9788183242424 . Archived from the original on 24 March 2017 . Retrieved 5 August 2016 – via Google Books. ^ Saikia, Dr Jugal (8 April 2016). Economics of Informal Milk Producing Units in Assam . Notion Press. ISBN 9789352069385 . Archived from the original on 24 March 2017 . Retrieved 5 August 2016 – via Google Books. ^ "History – GMC Portal" . Archived from the original on 29 June 2016 . Retrieved 5 August 2016 . ^ "Municipal Board" . Archived from the original on 11 June 2016 . Retrieved 5 August 2016 . ^ "Municipal Board-About Us" . Archived from the original on 25 June 2016 . Retrieved 5 August 2016 . ^ "Dhubri Municipal Board" . Archived from the original on 7 April 2017 . Retrieved 14 April 2017 . ^ "Nagaon – History" . Archived from the original on 18 April 2018 . Retrieved 24 May 2016 . ^ "Municipal Board History" . Archived from the original on 24 June 2016 . Retrieved 24 May 2016 . ^ "Jorhat Municipal Board(JBM), Jorhat, Assam" . Archived from the original on 27 March 2016 . Retrieved 5 August 2016 . ^ "AGP lists civic poll candidates" . Archived from the original on 30 June 2016 . Retrieved 5 August 2016 . ^ "Silchar Municipal Board (Silchar Municipality) Assam – Silchar Karimganj Hailakandi" . Archived from the original on 28 July 2016 . Retrieved 5 August 2016 . ^ Singh, Bikash (11 March 2024). "Assam Cabinet greenlights 'Kiran Sheikh' development council" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 20 March 2024 . Retrieved 20 March 2024 . ^ "North by Northeast: What explains BJP's stunning win in Assam?" . 22 May 2016. Archived from the original on 8 August 2016 . Retrieved 5 August 2016 . ^ Karmakar, Rahul (9 May 2021). "Himanta Biswa Sarma to take over as Assam CM today" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 14 November 2025 . ^ a b c d e "Total seven inter-state border disputes in country; Assam has dispute with four states: Govt" .

The Times of India . 29 July 2021. Archived from the original on 1 February 2023 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Deb, Debraj (5 August 2021). "Explained: Why did a 150-year-old Assam-Mizoram dispute get violent now?" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 3 April 2022 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ "Assam Nagaland border dispute: Assam signs agreement with Nagaland to diffuse stand-off on eastern front" .

The Times of India . August 2021. Archived from the original on 1 February 2023 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ "Border dispute with Arunachal at 1,200 places: Himanta Biswa Sarma" .

The Hindu . 13 August 2021. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ Sharma, Rittick (20 July 2023). "Assam: Ahomland movement revives over delimitation draft" . EastMojo . Archived from the original on 29 September 2023 . Retrieved 23 September 2023 . ^ "TAYPA organized protest in Guwahati; demand ST status and an Ahom land - Sentinelassam" .

The Sentinel . 4 April 2023. Archived from the original on 29 September 2023 . Retrieved 23 September 2023 . ^ "TAYPA Demands Separate Ahom Land, ST Status For Community - The Hills Times" .

The Hills Time . 20 July 2023. Archived from the original on 29 September 2023 . Retrieved 23 September 2023 . ^ "Home | Karimganj District | Government Of Assam, India" . Archived from the original on 23 July 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ a b c Baruah, Professor of Political Studies Sanjib; Baruah, Sanjib (29 June 1999). India Against Itself: Assam and the Politics of Nationality . University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 103. ISBN 978-0-8122-3491-6 . Archived from the original on 1 February 2023 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ "Assam NRC LIVE: Not Hindus or Muslims, But Bengalis Being Targeted, Says Mamata" . News18 . 30 July 2018. Archived from the original on 12 July 2022 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ "Exclusion of Hindu Bengalis from Assam NRC changing political" . Business Standard . PTI. 22 September 2019. Archived from the original on 30 April 2022 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ "What the NRC reveals about the challenges of being Bengali in Assam" . Hindustan Times . 7 September 2018. Archived from the original on 3 April 2022 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ Daniyal, Shoaib (31 July 2018). " 'An expel Bengalis campaign': Opposing NRC in Assam, Mamata makes her strongest identity pitch yet" . Scroll.in . Archived from the original on 7 April 2022 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ "Silchar" . Archived from the original on 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Mazumder, Prasanta (12 July 2018). "Statehood demand grows louder in Assam's Barak Valley" . New Indian Express . Archived from the original on 4 April 2022 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ "Barak organization demands creation of separate state - Sentinelassam" .

The Sentinel . 27 December 2016. Archived from the original on 18 May 2022 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ "Give up separate Barak state demand: Sonowal to Dutta Roy" . Northeast Now . 26 July 2018. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ Saikia, Arunabh (29 December 2017). "A tale of two valleys: What's behind the demand for a separate Union Territory in southern Assam?" . Scroll.in . Archived from the original on 28 June 2022 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ "Statehood sought for Assam's Barak Valley" .

The Hindu . 30 October 2018. Archived from the original on 12 April 2022 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ Saha, Abhishek; Agarwala, Tora (25 August 2019). "Deadline approaching: What it is to be a name on NRC list — or off it" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 1 February 2023 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ "The Hindu : Assam: accord and discord" . Hinduonnet.com . Retrieved 4 March 2012 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "Memorandum of Settlement on Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC)" . Satp.org. 10 February 2003. Archived from the original on 8 November 2014 . Retrieved 4 March 2012 . ^ "Mahillary sworn in Bodoland council chief" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 4 June 2005. Archived from the original on 15 June 2005. ^ Dharamsing Teron, "Opium Curse – A Forgotten Chapter", unpublished. ^ J. I. Kathar (IAS Retd), "1971 Aningkan Kilik Kehai Un:e....", Thekar (5 February 2013); available from "Reference at thekararnivang.com" . Archived from the original on 16 May 2018 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ India (1951). "Annual Arrival of Refugees in Assam in 1946–1951". Census of India. XII, Part I (I-A): 353 – via web.archive.org. ^ "iussp2005" . Archived from the original on 29 June 2021 . Retrieved 12 July 2021 . › ...PDF The Brahmaputra valley of India can be compared only with the Indus ... ^ "iussp2005" . iussp2005.princeton.edu . Archived from the original on 22 April 2021 . Retrieved 22 April 2021 . ^ "Adelaide Research & Scholarship: Home" . digital.library.adelaide.edu.au . Archived from the original on 19 April 2021 . Retrieved 22 April 2021 . ^ "Bangladeshi people come to Assam regularly: National Hindu Mahasabha - Pratidin Time" . Archived from the original on 19 July 2021 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ "No Hindus will be left in Bangladesh after 30 years: professor" .

The Hindu . PTI. 22 November 2016. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ "Illegal immigration from Bangladesh a national problem" . India Today . 4 June 2014. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . ^ "Soon blueprint to deport illegal Bangladeshis in Assam" . Hindustan Times . 10 December 2014. Archived from the original on 10 December 2014 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . ^ "Illegal Migration into Assam" . www.satp.org . Archived from the original on 7 February 2012 . Retrieved 9 September 2019 . ^ a b c "Illegal Migration into Assam" . www.satp.org . Archived from the original on 7 February 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2019 . ^ "Martyrs of Assam Agitation | Implementation of Assam Accord | Government of Assam, India" . assamaccord.assam.gov.in . Archived from the original on 25 January 2021 . Retrieved 18 August 2019 . ^ "Assam: Prafulla Mahanta not to campaign for AGP to protest alliance with BJP" . www.telegraphindia.com . Archived from the original on 5 July 2019 . Retrieved 18 August 2019 . ^ "1. Population Explosion in West Bengal: A Survey" . 20 March 2012. Archived from the original on 20 March 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2019 . ^ "The National Register of Citizens and India's commitment deficit to international law" . LSE Human Rights . 10 August 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021 . Retrieved 4 December 2020 . ^ "Leave in 15 days, BJP MPs tell illegal immigrants in Assam" . Firstpost . 2 June 2014. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . ^ "Assam NRC: What next for 1.9 million 'stateless' Indians?" . BBC News . 31 August 2019. Archived from the original on 15 November 2020 . Retrieved 4 December 2020 . ^ "India leaves nearly two million people off citizens' list, fate..." Reuters . 31 August 2019. Archived from the original on 1 September 2019 . Retrieved 2 September 2019 . ^ "20 lakh Bangladeshi Hindus to become Indians if Citizenship Bill is passed: Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti" .

The Economic Times . 17 January 2019. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020 . Retrieved 3 November 2020 . ^ Saikia, Arunabh (30 August 2020). "Bengali Hindus in this Assam village live the anxious life of 'NRC rejects' " . Scroll.in . Archived from the original on 27 October 2020 . Retrieved 3 November 2020 . ^ Tewari, Ruhi (5 September 2019). "Bengali Hindus in Assam look at Citizenship Bill to get out of NRC mess" . ThePrint . Archived from the original on 25 October 2020 . Retrieved 3 November 2020 . ^ "Confusion, hope run high among Assam's Hindu Bengalis" . Deccan Herald . 17 December 2019. Archived from the original on 25 October 2021 . Retrieved 3 November 2020 . ^ a b "Citizenship Amendment Act: BJP chasing ghosts in Assam; Census data shows number of Hindu immigrants may have been exaggerated" . Firstpost . 18 December 2019. Archived from the original on 25 July 2020 . Retrieved 3 November 2020 . ^ Hazarika, Mytithili (12 February 2020). "BJP wants to segregate Assamese Muslims from Bangladeshi Muslims, but some ask how" .

The Print . Archived from the original on 27 February 2021 . Retrieved 4 November 2020 . ^ PTI (10 February 2020). "Assam plans survey to identify indigenous Muslim population" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 16 April 2021 . Retrieved 4 November 2020 . ^ "Online census of Assamese Muslims launched" .

The Hindu . 15 April 2021. Archived from the original on 16 May 2021 . Retrieved 17 July 2021 . ^ "Hari Shankar Brahma report reveals illegal Bangladeshis dominates 15 out of 33 Assam districts, massive threats to indigenous people | Indiablooms - First Portal on Digital News Management" . 20 September 2017. Archived from the original on 24 May 2021 . Retrieved 17 July 2021 . ^ "Muslim majority districts in Assam up | India News" .

The Times of India . 26 August 2015. Archived from the original on 2 September 2021 . Retrieved 17 July 2021 . ^ "Assam Elections 2021 | How Muslims of the State, One-third of Electorate, Voted in 2016 and 2019" . 31 March 2021. Archived from the original on 24 May 2021 . Retrieved 17 July 2021 . ^ "Assam Flood Toll Rises to 13" . NDTV. 23 August 2015. Archived from the original on 24 August 2015 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . ^ "Flood situation in Assam worsens" . Hindustan Times . 23 August 2015 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . ^ "Poor infrastructure, stringent policies bottleneck for Assam's growth" .

The Economic Times . 9 July 2015. Archived from the original on 26 August 2016 . Retrieved 17 November 2019 . ^ "Panel for study of unemployment problem in Assam" . Zee News. 26 October 2012. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015 . Retrieved 17 November 2019 . ^ Thakur, Shivasish (17 October 2013). "Govt inaction deprives local aspirants" .

The Assam Tribune. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 17 November 2019 . ^ "80% of Central jobs occupied by outsiders" .

The Assam Tribune. 21 January 2014. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 17 November 2019 . ^ "Don Bosco University – Azara – Guwahati – Welcome to Don Bosco University" . Dbuniversity.ac.in. Archived from the original on 7 August 2011 . Retrieved 22 September 2012 . ^ "Assam Down Town University" . adtu.in. Archived from the original on 13 September 2011 . Retrieved 22 September 2012 . ^ "Assam Science and Technology University - Home" . Archived from the original on 23 April 2018 . Retrieved 23 April 2018 . ^ "Assam Women's University" . Assam Women's University. Archived from the original on 20 December 2015 . Retrieved 7 August 2015 . ^ "Bodoland University website" . bodolanduniversity.org.in. Archived from the original on 19 April 2012 . Retrieved 22 September 2012 . ^ "Dibrugarh University" . Dibrugarh University. Archived from the original on 10 August 2015 . Retrieved 7 August 2015 . ^ "Gauhati University" . Gauhati University. Archived from the original on 10 August 2015 . Retrieved 7 August 2015 . ^ "Kaziranga University" . kazirangauniversity.in. Archived from the original on 3 January 2014 . Retrieved 22 September 2012 . ^ "National Law University and Judicial Academy, Assam" . National Law University and Judicial Academy, Assam. Archived from the original on 11 May 2019 . Retrieved 11 May 2019 . ^ "Tezpur University" . Tezpur University. Archived from the original on 10 August 2015 . Retrieved 7 August 2015 . ^ "Indian Institute of Technology" . Archived from the original on 20 October 2021 . Retrieved 20 October 2021 . ^ "National Institute of Technology, Silchar" . Archived from the original on 21 August 2015 . Retrieved 17 August 2015 . ^ "Assam Engineering College" . Archived from the original on 20 October 2021 . Retrieved 20 October 2021 . ^ "Central Institute of Technology" . Archived from the original on 20 October 2021 . Retrieved 20 October 2021 . ^ "Jorhat Engineering College" . Archived from the original on 20 October 2021 . Retrieved 20 October 2021 . ^ "National Research Centre on Pig, (ICAR) in Guwahati" . Archived from the original on 19 October 2014 . Retrieved 16 October 2014 . ^ Indian Tea Association. "Tea Scenario" . Archived from the original on 1 March 2015 . Retrieved 19 April 2015 . ^ U.S. Energy Information Administration. "India – Analysis" . Archived from the original on 12 April 2015 . Retrieved 19 April 2015 . ^ a b Government of Assam. "Economic Survey of Assam 2005–2006 in NEDFi, Assam Profile, NER Databank" . Archived from the original on 31 December 2008 . Retrieved 6 June 2007 . ^ Government of Assam. "2, Income, Employment and Poverty" . Economic Survey of Assam 2001–2002 in Assam Human Development Report, 2003 . p. 25. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 February 2007 . Retrieved 6 June 2007 . ^ a b Ahmed, Baruah & Bhuyan 2006 , pp. 22. ^ Ahmed, Baruah & Bhuyan 2006 , pp. 19. ^ Talukdar, Sushanta (3 December 2010). "New direction" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 6 February 2026 . ^ a b Reporter, Staff (16 October 2013). "ADB aid opens new avenues" .

The Telegraph (India) . Retrieved 6 February 2026 . ^ a b "Economy of Assam" . statisticstimes.com . Archived from the original on 6 February 2026 . Retrieved 6 February 2026 . ^ "Poor infrastructure, stringent policies bottleneck for Assam's growth" .

The Economic Times . 9 July 2015. Archived from the original on 26 August 2016 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . ^ "Panel for study of unemployment problem in Assam" . Zee News. 26 October 2012. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . ^ "The Assam Tribune" .

The Assam Tribune. 17 October 2013. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . ^ "The Assam Tribune" .

The Assam Tribune. 21 January 2014. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . ^ "Centre taking steps to check illegal immigration into Assam" .

The Economic Times . 5 August 2015. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . ^ "Soon blueprint to deport illegal Bangladeshis in Assam" . Hindustan Times . 10 December 2014 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "Illegal immigration from Bangladesh a national problem" . India Today . 4 June 2014. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . ^ "Leave in 15 days, BJP MPs tell illegal immigrants in Assam" . Firstpost . 2 June 2014. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . ^ Government of Assam. "Economic Survey of Assam 2001–2002 in Assam Human Development Report, 2003" . p. 32. Archived from the original on 20 February 2007 . Retrieved 6 June 2007 . ^ a b UNDP 2004, p. 33 ^ "core production data" . faostat . Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2007. Archived from the original on 11 February 2007 . Retrieved 5 June 2006 . ^ "Fish Species of Assam" (PDF) . Assam Small Farmers' Agri-business Consortium . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 May 2006 . Retrieved 5 June 2006 . ^ UNDP 2004, p. 37 ^ "Assam Flood Toll Rises to 13" . NDTV. 23 August 2015. Archived from the original on 24 August 2015 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . ^ "Flood situation in Assam worsens" . Hindustan Times . 23 August 2015 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . ^ "Assam To Build 1,000 New Bridges By 2026: Himanta Biswa Sarma" . NDTV . PTI. 30 August 2023. Archived from the original on 4 September 2023 . Retrieved 4 September 2023 . ^ "National Handloom Day 2022: How self-help groups sustain Indian handicrafts and handlooms" .

The Indian Express . 7 August 2022. Archived from the original on 27 December 2022 . Retrieved 27 December 2022 . ^ "Indian state: Assam" . Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India. Archived from the original on 24 January 2013 . Retrieved 1 August 2013 . ^ "Indian state: Assam, Thrust Areas" . Ministry of External Affairs, Govt. of India. Archived from the original on 7 April 2013 . Retrieved 1 August 2013 . ^ List of busiest airports in India by passenger traffic ^ "GMC" . Guwahati Municipal Corporation. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013. ^ "Guwahati" . IndiaUnveiled. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013 . Retrieved 1 August 2013 . ^ "Dibrugarh Municipality" . Dibrugarh Municipal Board. Archived from the original on 1 September 2014. ^ "Dibrugarh" . IndiaUnveiled. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013 . Retrieved 1 August 2013 . ^ "New Delhi Dibrugarh Trains" . Indiarailinfo. Archived from the original on 22 May 2013 . Retrieved 1 August 2013 . ^ "Trains from Dibrugarh" . Indiarailinfo. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013 . Retrieved 1 August 2013 . ^ "ADB $200 Million Loan to Upgrade Services in Key Cities of India's Assam State" . Asian Development Bank. 3 October 2011. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014 . Retrieved 2 August 2013 . ^ "$81-million ADB loan for State urban infrastructure" .

The Assam Tribune . Archived from the original on 3 November 2013 . Retrieved 1 August 2013 . ^ Government of Assam (18 February 2007). "Available Resources in Assam" . Government of Assam. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011 . Retrieved 18 July 2010 . ^ "Assamco" . assamco.com. Archived from the original on 3 September 2011 . Retrieved 22 September 2012 . ^ "Government of Assam | Department of Industries and Commerce" . Investinassam.com. Archived from the original on 16 March 2012 . Retrieved 22 September 2012 . ^ "Assam Economy – Economy of Assam, Business & Economy of Assam India" . iloveindia.com. Archived from the original on 10 July 2010 . Retrieved 18 July 2010 . ^ Kakati, Banikanta (1962), Assamese, Its Formation and Development, 2nd edition , Guwahati, India: Lawyer's Book Stall ^ "Bihu – Its Myriad Colours" . NORTHEAST NOW . 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 21 September 2019 . Retrieved 8 September 2019 . ^ "Beshoma: The 'Rongali Bihu' of Deshi Muslims | The Thumb Print - A magazine from the East" . Archived from the original on 8 September 2019 . Retrieved 8 September 2019 . ^ "Dances of Assam – Folk Dances of Assam, Traditional Dances of Assam" . www.bharatonline.com . Archived from the original on 20 June 2018 . Retrieved 20 June 2018 . ^ Das, Yudhajit Shankar (22 September 2025). "A phenomenon called Zubeen Garg and how Mayabini became an anthem" . India Today . Retrieved 23 September 2025 . ^ Bonia, Didrikshya; Das, Mamoni; Deka, Nivedita; Neog, Borsha; Bordoloi, Premila L.; Nath, Priyanka (2025). "Nutritional analysis of Assamese thali" (PDF) . International Journal of Agriculture and Food Science . 7 (11): 198– 202. doi : 10.33545/2664844X.2025.v7.i11c.959 . ISSN 2664-8458 . ^ "khorisa turns natural preservative" . Archived from the original on 11 April 2019. ^ "Portrait of a poet as an artist" .

The Telegraph . 13 October 2003. Archived from the original on 26 June 2019 . Retrieved 26 June 2019 . ^ Paniker, K. Ayyappa (1997). Medieval Indian Literature: Surveys and selections . Sahitya Akademi. ISBN 9788126003655 . Archived from the original on 1 February 2023 . Retrieved 1 October 2020 . ^ Mukherjee, Prabhat (1981).

The History of Medieval Vaishnavism in Orissa . Asian Educational Services. ISBN 9788120602298 . Archived from the original on 1 February 2023 . Retrieved 3 May 2020 . ^ "Madhava Kandali Ramayana : Composed in Assamese by Sage Madhava Kandali, the great son of the soil in the Fourteenth Century CE/Translated into English by Shanti Lal Nagar Translated into English by Shanti Lal Nagar Vedams Books 9788121509350" . www.vedamsbooks.in . Archived from the original on 3 September 2019 . Retrieved 3 September 2019 . ^ "Bordowa Than – Bordowa Than" . Archived from the original on 3 September 2019 . Retrieved 3 September 2019 . ^ Neog, Maheswar (1980). Early history of the Vaiṣṇava faith and movement in Assam : Śaṅkaradeva and his times . Motilal Banarsidass. ISBN 8120800079 . OCLC 15304755 . ^ Stewart, Tony K.; Neog, Maheswar (April 1988). "Early History of the Vaiṣṇava Faith and Movement in Assam: Śaṅkaradeva and His Times". Journal of the American Oriental Society . 108 (2): 334. doi : 10.2307/603683 . ISSN 0003-0279 . JSTOR 603683 . ^ Sociology, Dibrugarh University Department of; Region, Dibrugarh University Centre for Sociological Study of Frontier; Association, North East India Sociological (1978). North East India: A Sociological Study . Concept Publishing Company. Archived from the original on 1 February 2023 . Retrieved 3 May 2020 . ^ Kakati, Banikanta Ed (1953). Aspects of Early Assamese Literature . ^ "Arts and Crafts of Assam in About Assam" . Assam Tourism . Government of Assam. 2002. Archived from the original on 7 April 2007 . Retrieved 3 June 2007 . ^ Ranjan, M.P.; Iyer, Nilam; Pandya, Ghanshyam, Bamboo and Cane Crafts of Northeast India , National Institute of Design ^ Nath, T.K., Bamboo Cane and Assam , Guwahati, India: Industrial Development Bank of India, Small Industries Development Bank of India ^ "Boka Chaul" . Intellectual Property India . Retrieved 12 December 2024 . ^ Borthakur, Anwesha; Singh, Pardeep (2024). Addressing the Climate Crisis in the Indian Himalayas: Can Traditional Ecological Knowledge Help? . Springer Nature. ISBN 978-3-031-50097-8 . Retrieved 11 December 2024 . ^ "Geographical Indication tag sought for Boka Chaul" .

The Times of India . 19 September 2016 . Retrieved 11 December 2024 . ^ "APEDA launches gluten-free millet products for all age groups at affordable prices" . Press Information Bureau . Retrieved 11 December 2024 . Sources The Pre-Ahom Roots of Medieval Assam" . Social Scientist . 12 (6): 60– 69. doi : 10.2307/3517004 . ISSN 0970-0293 . JSTOR 3517004 . Archived from the original on 9 July 2021 . Retrieved 1 July 2021 . Saikia, Yasmin (2004). Fragmented Memories: Struggling to be Tai-Ahom in India . Duke University Press. ISBN 082238616X . Archived from the original on 1 February 2023 . Retrieved 30 May 2020 . Shin, Jae-Eun (2018), "Region Formed and Imagined: Reconsidering temporal, spatial and social context of Kamarupa", in Dzüvichü, Lipokmar; Baruah, Manjeet (eds.), Modern Practices in North East India: History, Culture, Representation , London & New York: Routledge Directorate of Information and Public Relations, Government of Assam, Assam at a Glance , archived from the original on 6 October 2007 , retrieved 25 May 2007 Goswami, G. C.; Tamuli, Jyotiprakash (2003). "Asamiya".

In Cardona, George; Jain, Dhanesh (eds.).

The Indo-Aryan Languages . Routledge. pp. 391– 443. National Commission for Women (2004), Situational Analysis of Women in Assam (PDF) , archived from the original (PDF) on 15 June 2007 , retrieved 5 July 2006 . Masica, Colin P. (1993), Indo-Aryan Languages , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 9780521299442 , archived from the original on 1 February 2023 , retrieved 24 April 2020 National Mission on Bamboo Applications, Assam, State Profile , archived from the original on 29 September 2007 Revenue Department, Government of Assam, Revenue Administration – Districts and Subdivisions , archived from the original on 24 July 2007 , retrieved 25 May 2007 Singh, K. S (ed) (2003) People of India: Assam Vol XV Parts I and II , Anthropological Survey of India, Seagull Books, Calcutta Das, Paromita (2005). "The Naraka Legends, Aryanisation and the "varnasramadharma" in the Brahmaputra Valley". Proceedings of the Indian History Congress . 66 . Indian History Congress: 224– 230. JSTOR 44145840 . UNDP (2004), Chapter 2, Income, Employment and Poverty in Assam Human Development Report, 2003 , Government of Assam, archived from the original on 20 February 2007 Wandrey, C. J. (2004), "Sylhet-Kopili/Barail-Tipam Composite Total Petroleum System, Assam Geologic Province, India" (PDF) , US Geological Survey Bulletin , 2208-D: 5, Bibcode : 2004usgs.rept....5W , doi : 10.3133/b2208D , archived (PDF) from the original on 5 June 2007 , retrieved 30 May 2007 Casson, Lionel (1989).