The Bengaluru metropolitan area had a population of around 8.5 million, making it the fifth most populous urban agglomeration in the country. It is located towards the southern end of the Deccan Plateau , at an altitude of 900 m (3,000 ft) above sea level.

The city is known as India's "Garden City", due to its parks and greenery. Archaeological artefacts indicate that the human settlement in the region happened as early as 4000 BCE .

The first mention of the name "Bengaluru" is from an old Kannada stone inscription from 890 CE found at the Nageshwara Temple in Begur .

The region was ruled by the Western Ganga dynasty since 350 CE, and became part of the Chola Empire in the early eleventh century CE.

In the late Middle Ages , it formed a part of the Hoysala kingdom and then the Vijayanagara Empire .

In 1537 CE, Kempe Gowda I , a feudal ruler under the Vijayanagara Empire, established a mud fort which is considered the foundation of the modern city of Bengaluru with the earlier established areas ( petes ) still in existence.

After the fall of the Vijayanagara Empire, Kempe Gowda declared independence, and the city was expanded by his successors.

In 1638 CE, an Adil Shahi army defeated Kempe Gowda III, and the city became a jagir (feudal estate) of Shahaji .

The Mughals later captured the city and sold it to Chikka Devaraja Wodeyar , the Maharaja of the Kingdom of Mysore .

After the death of Krishnaraja Wodeyar II in 1759 CE, Hyder Ali seized control of the kingdom and with it, the administration of Bengaluru, which passed subsequently to his son, Tipu Sultan .

The city was captured by the British East India Company during the Anglo-Mysore Wars , and became part of the princely state of Mysore.

The administrative control of the city was returned to Krishnaraja Wodeyar III , then Maharaja of Mysore, and the old city re-developed under the dominion of the Mysore kingdom.

In 1809 CE, the British formed a military garrison in the city and established the cantonment outside the old city.

In the late 19th century CE, the city was composed of two distinct urban settlements, the old Pete and the new Cantonment.

Following India's independence in 1947, Bengaluru became the capital of Mysore State , and remained the capital when the state was enlarged and unified in 1956 and subsequently renamed as Karnataka in 1973.

The two urban settlements which had developed as independent entities, merged under a single urban administration in 1949. Bengaluru is one of the fastest-growing metropolises in India.

As of 2023 , the metropolitan area had an estimated GDP of $359.9 billion, and is one of the most productive metro areas of India.

The city is a major centre for information technology (IT), and is consistently ranked amongst the world's fastest growing technology hubs.

As the largest hub and exporter of IT services in the country, it is regarded as the " Silicon Valley of India". Manufacturing is a major contributor to the economy with the city home to several state-owned units .

The city also hosts several prominent institutes of higher education and of national importance . Etymology The earliest known reference to the name "Bengaluru" was on a ninth-century hero stone or vīra gallu found in Begur .

The Old Kannada inscription belonging to the Western Ganga dynasty mentions the place in a battle in 890 CE . However, Kempe Gowda I used the name of a village near Kodigehalli , to name the city as Bengaluru during its foundation in 1537 CE. Bangalore is an anglicised version of the city's Kannada name.

The city was also referred to as "Kalyānapura" or "Kalyānapuri" ("Auspicious City") and "Dēvarāyapattana" during the later Vijayanagara Empire period in 16th century CE. An apocryphal story states that the twelfth-century Hoysala king Veera Ballala II , while on a hunting expedition, lost his way in the forest. Tired and hungry, he came across a poor old woman who served him boiled beans.

The grateful king named the place "Benda-Kaal-uru" (literally, "town of boiled beans"), which eventually evolved into "Bengalūru". Suryanath Kamath has hypothesised that the name was derived from benga , the Kannada term for Pterocarpus marsupium (also known as the Indian Kino Tree), a species of dry and moist deciduous trees that grows abundantly in the region. Other theories include that the city was called as "Venkaturu" because of the Venkataramana temples built by Kempe Gowda, and "Benacha kalluru" because of the abundance of quartz stones ("benacha kal" in Kannada) in the region.

On 11 December 2005, the Government of Karnataka accepted a proposal by U. R. Ananthamurthy to officially rename the city from Bangalore to Bengaluru.

On 27 September 2006, the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike passed a resolution to implement the name change, and the government of Karnataka officially implemented the name change from 1 November 2014 after the Union government approved the request. History Main article: History of Bengaluru Early and Middle Ages Stone Age artefacts discovered at Jalahalli , Sidhapura and Jadigenahalli on Bengaluru's outskirts indicate human settlement around 4000 BCE. Iron Age tools and burial mounds from around 800 BCE, have been found in Koramangala and Chikkajala . Coins of the Roman emperors Augustus , Tiberius , Claudius , and Caligula found at Yeswanthpur and HAL indicate the involvement of the region in trans-oceanic trade with the Romans and other civilisations in the first century CE. Begur Nageshwara Temple was built around c. 860 , during the reign of the Western Ganga dynasty .

The region of modern-day Bengaluru was part of several successive South Indian kingdoms. Between the fourth and tenth centuries CE, the region was ruled by the Western Ganga dynasty , the first dynasty to set up effective control over the region. According to Edgar Thurston , twenty-eight kings ruled Gangavadi from the start of the Common Era until its conquest by the Cholas in the early eleventh century CE.

The Western Gangas ruled as a sovereign power from 350 to 550 CE, and as feudatories of the Chalukyas of Badami , and later the Rashtrakutas until the tenth century.

The Begur Nageshwara Temple was commissioned around 860 CE, during the reign of the Western Ganga King Ereganga Nitimarga I, and extended by his successor Nitimarga II. Around 1004 CE, during the reign of Raja Raja Chola I , the Cholas defeated the Western Gangas under the command of the crown prince Rajendra Chola I , and captured the region.

During this period, the region witnessed the migration of many groups—warriors, administrators, traders, artisans, pastorals, cultivators, and religious personnel from the Southern Tamil speaking regions and other Kannada-speaking parts of the region.

The Cholas built many temples in the region including the Chokkanathaswamy temple , Mukthi Natheshwara Temple , Choleshwara Temple , and Someshwara Temple .

In 1117, the Hoysala king Vishnuvardhana defeated the Cholas in the Battle of Talakad in south Karnataka, and extended his rule over the region.

In the later part of the 13th century CE, Bengaluru was a source of contention between two warring cousins, the Hoysala ruler Veera Ballala III of Halebidu and Ramanatha, who administered the Hoysala held territory in the southern Tamil speaking regions. Veera Ballala appointed a civic head at Hudi (suburb of the city) to administer the region, and promoted the village to the status of a town.

After Veera Ballala's death in 1343, the region came under Vijayanagara empire , which saw the rule of four consecutive dynasties – Sangamas (1336–1485), Saluvas (1485–1491), Tuluvas (1491–1565), and Aravidu (1565–1646).

In the early 16th century CE, Achyuta Deva Raya built a dam across the Arkavati river near Hesaraghatta , whose reservoir was used to supply water to the region. Foundation and early modern history Bangalore Fort in 1860 CE showing fortifications and barracks.

The fort was originally built by Kempe Gowda I as a mud fort in 1537 CE.

The city proper was established in 1537 CE by Kempe Gowda I , a local governor and chieftain aligned with the Vijayanagara Empire under emperor Achyuta Deva Raya . He led a campaign against Gangaraja, whom he defeated and expelled to Kanchi , and built a mud-brick fort at the site, which later became the central part of the modern city of Bengaluru. Kempe Gowda referred to the new town as his "Gandubhūmi" ("Land of Heroes"). Within the fort, the town was divided into smaller divisions, each called a pētē ( The town had two main streets Chickpet and Doddapete, which intersected to form the Doddapete Square in the heart of the town. Kempe Gowda also built the temple at Basavanagudi , and expanded other temples. He also constructed various tanks such as Kempambudhi, Dharmambudhi, and Sampangi for water storage. Vijayanagara literature refers to the city by various names such as "Devarāyanagara" and "Kalyānapura" or "Kalyānapuri" ("auspicious city").

After the fall of the Vijayanagara Empire in 1565 CE in the Battle of Talikota , Kempe Gowda declared independence. His successor, Kempe Gowda II, built four towers to mark the boundary of the town.

In 1638 CE, a Adil Shahi army led by Ranadulla Khan and Shahaji Bhonsle (father of Shivaji ) defeated Kempe Gowda III, and the region became a jagir (feudal estate) of Shahaji.

In 1639 CE, Shahaji ordered the reconstruction of the town and built large fortifications, and new reservoirs to solve the water shortage in the region.

In 1687 CE, Mughal general Kasim Khan, under orders from Aurangzeb , defeated Ekoji I , the son of Shahaji, and leased the town to Chikkadevaraja Wodeyar (1673–1704 CE), the then ruler of the Kingdom of Mysore .

The kingdom later passed to Hyder Ali's son Tipu Sultan , and the Lal Bagh garden was established around 1760 CE.

During the period, the city developed into a commercial and military centre of strategic importance. Bengaluru Palace , built in 1887 in Tudor architectural style was modelled on Windsor Castle in England.

The Bengaluru fort was captured by British forces under Charles Cornwallis on 21 March 1791 during the Third Anglo-Mysore War and became the centre for British resistance against Tipu.

Following Tipu's death in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War (1799 CE), the Bengaluru Pete was incorporated into the Princely State of Mysore , whose administrative control remained with the Maharaja of Mysore .

The city was further developed by the Maharaja of Mysore.

The Residency of Mysore State , established in Mysore in 1799 was shifted to Bengaluru in 1804. It was abolished in 1843 before being revived in 1881 and served till the Indian independence in 1947.

The British found the city as an appropriate place to station its garrison and therefore it was moved in 1809 from Seringapatam to Ulsoor , about 6 km (4 mi) northeast of the original Pete. A town grew up around the surroundings by absorbing several villages in the area, and came to be known as Bengaluru cantonment.

The new centre had its own municipal and administrative apparatus, though technically it was a British enclave within the territory of the princely state of Mysore . Further developments such as the introduction of telegraph connections to other major Indian cities in 1853 and a rail connection to Madras in 1864, contributed to the economic growth of the city.

Later modern and contemporary history A view of Bengaluru Pete during the 1890s A view of Bangalore Cantonment , c. 1895 In the late 19th century CE, Bengaluru was essentially composed of two cities, with the Pete, whose residents were predominantly Kannadigas and the Cantonment created by the British, whose residents were predominantly Tamils and English people . Throughout the 19th century, the Cantonment, which was known as the Civil and Military Station of Bangalore, gradually expanded and acquired a distinct cultural and political salience. It had a large military presence and a cosmopolitan civilian population that came from outside the state of Mysore.

The British developed the infrastructure of the city, widened roads, and established new settlements.

The city was divided into eight wards in 1862, and was expanding.

The first exclusive residential area was established in Chamarajpet in 1892, and a new wholesale market was established in Tharagupet in 1895.

The city was hit by a plague epidemic in 1898 that claimed nearly 3,500 lives.

The crisis caused by the outbreak led to the improvement in sanitation facilities, and establishment of new communication lines to co-ordinate anti-plague operations. Regulations for building new houses with proper sanitation facilities came into effect, a health officer was appointed, and the city was divided into four wards for better co-ordination. New extensions in Malleshwaram and Basavanagudi were developed in the north and south of the Pete. Map of the city and environs, c. 1914 In 1906, Bengaluru became one of the first cities in India to have electricity.

In 1912, the Bangalore torpedo , an explosive weapon used in World War I and World War II , was devised in Bengaluru by British army officer Captain McClintock of the Madras Sappers and Miners . Bengaluru's reputation as the "Garden City of India" began in 1927 with the silver jubilee celebrations of the rule of Krishnaraja Wodeyar IV . Several projects such as the construction of parks, public buildings and hospitals were instituted to improve the city. Bengaluru played an important role during the Indian independence movement . Mahatma Gandhi visited the city in 1927 and 1934 and addressed public meetings here.

In 1926, the labour unrest in Binny Mills due to demand by textile workers for payment of bonus resulted in a baton charge and police firing, resulting in the death of four workers, and several injuries.

In July 1928, there were notable communal disturbances in Bengaluru, like when a Ganesh idol was removed from a school compound in the Sultanpet area of Bengaluru.

In 1940, the first flight between Bengaluru and Mumbai took off, which placed the city on India's urban map.

After India's independence in August 1947, Bengaluru remained in the newly carved Mysore State of which the Maharaja of Mysore was the Rajapramukh (appointed governor).

The "City Improvement Trust" was formed in 1945, and in 1949, the "City" and the "Cantonment" merged to form the Bengaluru City Corporation .

The Government of Karnataka later constituted the Bangalore Development Authority in 1976 to coordinate the activities of these two bodies. Public sector employment and education provided opportunities for Kannadigas from the rest of the state to migrate to the city. Bengaluru experienced rapid growth in the decades 1941–51 and 1971–81, which saw the arrival of many immigrants from northern Karnataka.

By 1961, Bengaluru had become the sixth-largest city in India, with a population of 1,207,000.

In the following decades, Bengaluru's manufacturing base continued to expand with the establishment of various public and private companies.| UB City , a business district, in 2019 By the 1980s, urbanisation had spilled over the current boundaries, and in 1986, the Bangalore Metropolitan Region Development Authority , was established to co-ordinate the development of the entire region as a single unit.

On 8 February 1981, a major fire broke out at Venus Circus in Bengaluru, where more than 92 people died, the majority of them children. Bengaluru experienced a growth in its real estate market in the 1980s and 1990s, spurred by capital investors from other parts of the country who converted Bengaluru's large plots and colonial bungalows into multi-storied apartments.

Since the late 1980s, many information technology companies were set up in the city and by the end of the 20th century, Bengaluru had established itself as the " Silicon Valley of India".

The population has increased significantly due to migration from other parts for work, and the city has become the third most populous city in 2011.

During the 21st century, Bengaluru has had major terrorist attacks in 2008 , 2010 , and 2013 . Geography Main article: Bengaluru geography and environment Bengaluru lies in the southeast of the South Indian state of Karnataka in the heart of the Mysore Plateau (a region of the larger Deccan Plateau ) at an average elevation of 900 m (2,953 ft). : 8 The city covers an area of 741 km 2 (286 sq mi).

The Bengaluru metropolitan region covers an area of 7,005 km 2 (2,705 sq mi) across three districts– Bengaluru urban , Bengaluru rural and Ramanagara .

The Bangalore Metropolitan Region Development Authority , established in 1985, is responsible for the planning of the metropolitan region.

The topography is generally flat, with the highest point at Doddabettahalli , located 962 m (3,156 ft) above sea level on a ridge on the western part of the city. Towards the south, the terrain is uneven, with small hills and rocks made of granite and gneiss .

The soil in the city consist of red laterite and red, fine loamy to clayey soils.

The vegetation in the eastern and northern parts consists of scrubs interspersed with various water bodies, and the southern hilly region consists of scrubs and forests.

The city had a forest cover of 68.3% in the early 1970s, which reduced to less than 15% in the 2010s. Trees are frequently felled to pave way for infrastructure development. Though the city has been classified as a part of the seismic zone II (a stable zone), it has experienced earthquakes of magnitude as high as 4.5 on the Richter scale . Hydrography Hesaraghatta Lake in north Bengaluru There are no major rivers run in the city, though six rivers arise at the Nandi Hills , about 60 km (37 mi) to the north.

The Vrishabhavathi , a tributary of Arkavathi flows through the city. Arkavathi, Dakshina Pinakini and its tributary Chinnar, and Suvarnamukhi rivers water the fringes of the city. Most of these rivers are polluted, and depleted due to sewage from the city. Kaveri runs towards the southwest of the city, the water from which is used to cater to majority of the water requirements of the city.

The city has a considerable number of freshwater lakes and water tanks , most of which are seasonal and rain-fed.

The city had 265 lakes in the 1960s, which shrunk to 98 by the late 2010s, and most of the city's lakes are polluted.

The government began revival and conservation efforts in 2020. Groundwater occurs in silty to sandy layers of the alluvial sediments, and are extracted through open wells. Climate Bengaluru has a tropical savanna climate ( Köppen climate classification Aw ) with distinct wet and dry seasons. Due to its high elevation, Bengaluru usually enjoys a more moderate climate throughout the year, although occasional heat waves can make summer somewhat uncomfortable.

The dry season extends from December to February followed by the summer season from March to May.

The monsoon brings most of the rainfall from June to September, followed by a post-monsoon season in October and November. April is the hottest month with an average high of 34.1 °C (93.4 °F), and January is the coolest month with an average low temperature of 15.1 °C (59.2 °F).

The highest temperature ever recorded in Bengaluru was 39.2 °C (103 °F), recorded 24 April 2016, corresponding with the strong El Niño in that year.

The lowest ever recorded is 7.8 °C (46 °F) in January 1884. Winter temperatures rarely drop below 14 °C (57 °F), and summer temperatures seldom exceed 36 °C (97 °F). Bengaluru receives rainfall from both the northeast and the southwest monsoons , and the wettest months is September, followed by October and August.

The summer heat is moderated by fairly frequent thunderstorms , which occasionally cause power outages and local flooding, such as in 2022. Most of the rainfall occurs during the late afternoon or evening and rain before noon is infrequent.

As per a 2016 estimate, the urban agglomeration had a population of about 10.45 million.

The city was amongst the fastest growing cities in the last two decades, with the population increasing substantially due to migration from rest of the country. About 13.2% of the population belonged to scheduled castes , and scheduled tribes . Residents of Bengaluru are referred to as Bengaloorinavaru in Kannada and "Bengalureans" in English . There are about 597 slums in the city, housing roughly 16% of the city's population.

The city had a Gini coefficient of 0.64, indicating significant inequality . Various studies have also indicated various inequalities in the infrastructure development across different parts of the city, and other urbanisation problems such as mass displacements, proliferation of slums, and public health crisis due to water shortage and sewage problems in poor and working-class neighbourhoods.

In the Ease of Living Index 2020 published by the Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs , the city was ranked the most livable Indian city with a population of over a million.

In the 2023 Quality of Living survey by Mercer , which evaluated living conditions for expatriates, Bengaluru was ranked 156th globally and third in India, after Hyderabad and Pune . Ethnicity and religion Religion in Bengaluru (2011) Religion Percent Hinduism 78.87% Islam 13.90% Christianity 5.61% Jainism 0.97% Sikhism 0.15% Buddhism 0.06% Others 0.44% According to the 2011 census, Hinduism is the major religion with 78.9% of adherents. Muslims comprisd 13.9% of the population, with Christians and Jains accounting for 5.6% and 1.0% of the population, respectively. Muslims in the city consist of Dakhini and Urdu-speaking Muslims, Kutchi Memons , Labbay , and Mappilas . Christians in Bengaluru include Roman Catholics including Tamil Christians , Mangalorean Catholics , Kannadiga Christians, Malayali Syrian Christians , Protestants , and Northeast Indian Christians . Apart from the Kannadigas native to the region, Tamils , Telugus and Deccanis , form a significant population of the city.

In the 16th century, Tamil speakers, who also spoke Kannada, settled in the region for business. Telugus came to the city on invitation of the Mysore royalty.

Since the late 20th century, there has been a steady migration of people from other states for study and work. About 90% of the migrants came from the South Indian states, with the number of migrants from other parts of India increasing over the last few decades of the 20th century. Majority of the migration from non-South Indians states included Maharashtrians , Punjabis , Rajasthanis , Gujaratis , Bengalis , and from Uttar Pradesh . Migrant communities from within the state include Tuluvas and Konkanis of coastal Karnataka, and Kodavas from the state's Kodagu district .

The city also had an Anglo-Indian population of about 10,000 people in 2006. Languages Pop. by mother tongue in Bengaluru (2011) Language Percent Kannada 42.05% Tamil 16.34% Telugu 13.73% Urdu 13.00% Hindi 4.64% Others 10.24% As per the 2011 census, Kannada is the mother tongue of 42.1% of the city's population with 3,574,226 speakers, which is the official language of the state – followed by Tamil (1,388,305) Telugu (1,166,338), Urdu (1,104,124), Hindi (476,673), Malayalam (268,780), and Marathi (174,451). Other languages with a sizeable numbers of speakers include Konkani , Bengali , Marwari , Tulu , Odia , Gujarati , Kodagu , Punjabi , Lambadi , Sindhi and Nepali . Bengaluru Kannada is the local dialect of Kannada spoken in the region. English is widely spoken by white-collar workers and is the principal business language. With a diverse population speaking multiple languages, the city has often seen controversies and issues with respect to the usage of English and other vernacular languages.

In 2023, the government mandated the usage of Kannada in the sign boards of all businesses, which led to protests. There have also been court cases, protests, and diverse public opinion on the usage of different languages in the city. Administration and politics Administration The Municipal office building in the early 20th century The Bangalore Municipal Board was established on 27 March 1862, with a separate board formed later to manage the cantonment area of the city.

In 1881, these were organised into Bangalore city municipality and Bangalore civil and military station municipality respectively.

The two municipalities were merged in 1949, into a single municipal corporation with 70 members.

In 2007, the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike was established by merging the Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (Bangalore municipal corporation), with seven neighbouring city municipal councils, one town municipal council and 111 village panchayats around the city.

In July 2025, The Greater Bengaluru Governance Bill, 2024 provided for the division of BBMP into up to seven city corporations.

In July 2025, the state government notified the creation of five corporation– Bengaluru Central City Corporation , Bengaluru North City Corporation , Bengaluru South City Corporation , Bengaluru East City Corporation , and Bengaluru West City Corporation .

The Greater Bengaluru Authority (GBA), was established as the apex body responsible for the co-ordination and supervision of the five city corporations, and is responsible for the planning and management of the city and its suburbs, covering an area of 1,400 km 2 (540 sq mi).

The erstwhile Bengaluru corporation covered an area 741 km 2 (286 sq mi), divided into ten zones covering 223 wards . It was headed by a mayor , elected by the councillors , who were elected through a popular vote by the residents.

The municipal commissioner is responsible for daily administration.

As per the new structure proposed by the 2024 legislation, each of the five city corporations will have an independent mayor and council.

As the last elections to the BBMP council were held in 2015, and its term ended in 2020, the administration has since been managed by a state-appointed administrator until elections are held as per the new structure.

As per the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs , the BBMP had a revenue of ₹ 55.87 billion (US$590 million) and an expenditure of ₹ 64.65 billion (US$680 million) in 2021–22.

The Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) was established in 1976, and is the nodal agency responsible for the planning and development of the city.

The BDA works in conjunction with local government and the Agenda for Bangalore's Infrastructure and Development Task Force (ABIDe) to design and implement civic and infrastructural projects in the city.

The Bangalore Metropolitan Region Development Authority , established in 1985, is responsible for the planning of the metropolitan region.

As the capital of the state of Karntaka, the city houses the state executive and legislative headquarters in the Vidhana Soudha , state ministries at Vikasa Soudha , and the residence of the Governor at Raj Bhavan . Law and order Karnataka High Court in Bengaluru is the highest judicial body in the state Karnataka High Court in Bengaluru is the highest judicial authority in the state, and manages a series of sub-ordinate civil and criminal courts.

The Bengaluru City Police is the primary law enforcement agency in the city and is headed by a commissioner of police .

The city is divided into eleven zones, each of which is headed by an deputy commissioner .

The zones are further divided into sub-divisions headed by assistant commissioners , who are in control of several police stations in their respective jurisdition, each of which is headed by an inspector . There are separate crime, intelligence, and administration wings of the police.

The police also operate special and armed units.

As of February 2024 , the city police consisted of 18,308 civilian police working across 113 police stations, and 6,999 armed reserve personnel.

The city had 191 cops per hundred thousand people, well below the standard of 673 set by the United Nations . Bengaluru City Traffic Police is responsible for the traffic management in the city.

The traffic police operates 48 stations across three zones, each of which is headed by a joint commissioner.

As of 2021 , the crime rate in the city was 27.2 per hundred thousand people.

The Bangalore Central Prison located at Parappana Agrahara, was established in 1997, and is the major prison in the city. Politics The Vikasa Soudha houses multiple state ministries The major part of the city falls under four parliamentary constituencies– Bangalore Rural , Bangalore Central , Bangalore North , and Bangalore South .

The city elects 28 MLAs to the Karnataka Legislative Assembly .

The politics of the city and the state have been dominated by the two national parties– the Indian National Congress , and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). Contrary to other major South Indian cities, there are no major regional parties with a considerable influence in the region, with only the Janata Dal (Secular) (JDS) having some influence.

In the 2023 Karnataka Legislative Assembly election , the BJP won 15 seats, and the Congress won 13 seats in the city.

In the 2024 Indian general elections , the BJP won all the four Lok Sabha seats in the city.

The last elections to the BBMP was held in 2015 , in which the BJP won 100 seats, and the Congress won 76 seats.

The Congress held the mayor post with the support of the JDS till 2019, after which the BJP captured power when the JDS switched its allegiance.

In 2020, the term of the council ended, and with no elections had since been conducted till 2024, the BBMP is managed by a government appointed administrator. Culture Main article: Culture of Bengaluru Arts Yakshagana , a theatre art of coastal Karnataka , played in the city Bengaluru is a major centre of Indian classical music and dance.

The cultural scene features a diverse set of music concerts, dance performances and plays. Performances of Carnatic and Hindustani music, and dance forms like Bharat Natyam , Kuchipudi , Kathakali , Kathak , and Odissi are popular in the city. Yakshagana , a theatre art indigenous to coastal Karnataka is often played in town halls.

The two main music seasons include April–May during Ram Navami , and September–October during Dusshera , when majority of the music activities are organised by various cultural organisations. Rock music is popular in the urban parts of the city, and the city has its own subgenre of rock, "Bangalore Rock", an amalgamation of classic rock , hard rock and heavy metal , and some jazz and blues .

The city is home to several Indian bands, and is referred to as " Pub Capital of India" and the "Rock/Metal Capital of India" because of its underground music scene. National Gallery of Modern Art in Bengaluru Several art galleries including the government-established National Gallery of Modern Art emerged in the 1990s.

The Karnataka Chitrakala Parishath showcases a collection of painting, sculptures, and various other forms of art.

The Indian Cartoon Gallery organised by the Indian Institute of Cartoonists , conducts periodic cartoon exhibitions. "Art Bangalore" is an international art festival , held annually in the city since 2010. Kannada Sahitya Parishat is a nonprofit organisation headquartered in Bengaluru that promotes the Kannada language and literature.

The "Bangalore Literature Festival" is an annual literary event organised since 2012. Karnataka Rajyotsava , which marks the formation of Karnataka state on 1 November 1956, is celebrated on the same day annually and is a public holiday in the city. Bengaluru is a major centre of the Kannada film industry , which released 224 Kannada feature films in 2018. Art theatres that stages English and Kannada language plays in the city include Chowdiah Memorial Hall , Ranga Shankara , and Ravindra Kalakshetra . British Council , Alliance Française de Bangalore, and Max Müller Bhavan also organise foreign language plays including those of drama companies that tour India. Cuisine Bengaluru has diverse food options including South Indian, North Indian, Chinese , and western fast food. Popular vegetarian dishes include masala dosa , paneer biryani, and paneer butter masala . Udupi cuisine restaurants are popular and serve predominantly vegetarian , regional cuisine. Mavalli Tiffin Room , known for its Karnataka-style vegetarian food, was opened in 1924 and vegetarian tiffin restaurant Vidyarthi Bhavan opened in 1943.

Since the late 1980s, many vegetarian self-service darshinis operate in the city.

The city also has multiple vegan restaurants, and vegan advocacy groups, and has been named as India's most vegan-friendly city by PETA India. Festivals Bangalore Karaga or "Karaga Shaktyotsava" is a festival dedicated to the Hindu goddess Draupadi , and celebrated annually by the Thigala community over a period of nine days in March or April.

The Someshwara Car festival is held annually in April, when the idol of the Halasuru Someshwara Temple is taken for a procession on a flower chariot. Other popular festivals include Ugadi , Ram Navami , Eid ul-Fitr , Ganesh Chaturthi , St. Mary's feast , Dasara , Deepawali and Christmas . Economy Main article: Economy of Bengaluru UB Tower in the Bengaluru Central Business District Bengaluru is one of the fastest-growing metropolises in India.

As of 2023 , Bengaluru metropolitan area had an estimated GDP of $359.9 billion, ranking it among the most productive metro areas in India. According to the Globalization and World Cities Research Network , Bengaluru is amongst the most integrated with the global economy, classified as an alpha-city .

The city contributes to nearly one-third of the state GSDP, and has a diversified industrial base dependent on services (39.5% contribution to GDP), manufacturing (36%), and agriculture (2.3%). Bengaluru has the country's fourth largest fast-moving consumer goods market.

The city also has the third highest number of high-net-worth individuals in India. Major industrial sectors include information technology , automobiles , aerospace , textiles , heavy machinery , biotechnology , electronics , and communication , agriculture , and food processing .

The industrial clusters are spread across the city and its suburbs.

As of 2016 , the city had more than 75,000 industries including more than 2,000 information technology companies. It hosted 87 Fortune 500 companies, the fifth highest number amongst the cities in India. World Trade Center at Bengaluru Bengaluru is a major centre for information technology (IT), and is consistently ranked amongst the world's fastest growing technology hubs. It is widely regarded as the " Silicon Valley of India", as the largest IT hub of the country.

The IT export from the city is estimated to be valued at $64 billion in 2024, and the city contributes to more than one third of India's total IT exports.

The IT industry in the city is divided into various business clusters and special economic zones such as Electronic City , International Tech Park , Software Technology Park , Bagmane Tech Park , Global Village Tech Park , World Trade Center , and Manyata Embassy Business Park amongst others.

The growth of IT industry has resulted in the migration of people from all over the country, which has resulted in the demand for improvement in the city's infrastructure and presented the city with other challenges.

The industry has been blamed for not favouring local employment development, increased land values, and closure of small enterprises.

The resistance from the city for further investments required to develop infrastructure, has forced some of the new and expanding businesses elsewhere. A train set manufactured at BEML Bengaluru is also a major hub for Indian biotechnology-related industry, which was valued at nearly $25 billion in 2021–22.

The city is home to more than 40 biotech companies, and is termed as the "Biotech capital of India".

The city is a major export centre for agricultural produce including fruits , and poultry . Major crops include rice , maize , ragi , horse gram , oil seeds , coconuts , and fruits such as mango , papaya , banana , grapes , and pomegranate . Flowers such as roses are grown commercially.

The Rail Wheel Factory at Yelahanka is a major supplier of wheels and axles for Indian Railways . State owned corporations BEML and Bharat Electronics are headquartered in the city, and manufacture aerospace components, power equipment, trainsets, armored vehicles, and electronics for both civilian and defence requirements. Infrastructure Main article: Infrastructure in Bengaluru Water supply The city draws majority of the water requirement from the Kaveri River Water supply is provided by the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB), which was established in 1964.

The city receives an average of 800 million litres (180 million imperial gallons; 210 million US gallons) of water per day from rainfall.

In the 16th century, Kempe Gowda constructed lakes such as the Kempambudhi Kere to store the rain water.

As of 2021 , the city had a daily water demand of 2,100 million litres (460 million imperial gallons; 550 million US gallons), of which 1,450 million litres (320 million imperial gallons; 380 million US gallons) is catered to by the corporation.

While the city drew water from the Arkavathy River earlier, the increasing demands led to the establishment of the Cauvery water supply scheme in 1964. Majority of the water supply to the city is drawn from the Kaveri , with the amount of water drawn increasing from 135 million litres (30 million imperial gallons; 36 million US gallons) in 1974 to 1,450 million litres (320 million imperial gallons; 380 million US gallons) per day in 2014. A 2015 report indicated that one-third of the slum clearance projects lacked basic water service connections, 60% of slum dwellers lacked complete water supply lines and used a shared water supply.

The city does face water shortages, especially during summer and in years with low rainfall.

In early 2024, Bengaluru faced a water crisis due to depleted water reservoirs in the Kaveri basin as a consequence of a weak monsoon, and low groundwater levels. Borewells, which contribute a sufficient share to the city's water consumption, ran dry, and the government was forced to operate water tankers from outside the city and impose restrictions on non-essential water usage. Waste management and pollution Waste collection and management is done by the city corporation. Pollution regulation and issuance of waste management guidelines is carried out by the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB), which comes under the aegis of Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), and is headquartered in the city.

As of 2022, Bengaluru produced around 6,000 tonnes (5,900 long tons; 6,600 short tons) of solid waste per day.

The wastes are segregated, compacted, and transported to any of the three garbage processing plants in Bingipura, Mavallipura , or Kudlu .

As per a 2024 study, the three garbage processing plants were found to be violating environmental regulations, and emitted high levels of particulate matter , causing damage to the local environment and increasing the pollution levels of the city.

As of 2024 , the corporation operated seven wet waste processing plants, 13 bio methane generation plants, and a land fill.

The corporation earlier operated three more landfill sites at Mavallipura , Mandur , and Doddaballapura , which were closed after complaints from local residents, and reports of diseases due to unsanitary conditions.

In 2024, the government identified four new locations for the construction of new landfill sites.

As part of the waste management guidelines, the government of Karnataka has authorised specific companies to manage biomedical and e-wastes in the city. However, a report in October 2024 indicated that some of these companies were not disposing of the wastes in the prescribed manner, and are involved in re-selling.

The city has considerable pollution due to vehicle and industrial exhausts, and unscientific waste disposal.

The pollution level varies across localities, with higher concentrations of particulate matter reported in industrial and high traffic zones. A random sampling of the air quality index (AQI) of twenty stations within the city suggested heavy to severe air pollution around areas of high traffic.

While the average air quality was at acceptable levels, the PM 2.5 levels exceeded the 60 μg/m 3 threshold set by the CPCB in certain areas. A evaluation of Bengaluru's physical, biological and socioeconomic parameters indicated that the city's air quality and noise pollution were poor. Power In 1905, Bengaluru was among the first cities to have electric power.

The city was powered by hydro power generated by the hydroelectric plant in Shivanasamudra . Electricity in the city is regulated through the Bangalore Electricity Supply Company (BESCOM).

The power consumption has steadily increased over the last decade and in 2022–23, the city had a peak demand of 3,632 MW .

As of March 2024 , the city had a daily power requirement of about 157 million kWh , and consumed nearly 40% of the power in the state.

The city draws power from the state grid, which receives power from a mixture of fossil fuels and renewable sources.

In 2024, BESCOM initiated the process of moving overhead lines to underground in the city. Health and sanitation Victoria Hospital was opened in 1900 In the early 19th century, healthcare services were provided by local physicians.

In 1834, English doctors were appointed, to take care of vaccination , and control the spread of epidemics .

The first public clinic was established in Bangalore Fort in 1835, and a small hospital was added in 1839 in the Pete area.

In 1846, a large hospital was opened, with a leper colony added in 1845, and a mental hospital in 1850.

The Victoria Hospital was inaugurated in 1900.

As of 2024 , the Bengaluru corporation managed one major general hospital, six referral hospitals, 26 maternity homes, and 230 outpatient clinics. There are many private clinics, and tertiary care hospitals in the city.

The city has been growing as a centre of medical tourism due to the availability of more than 50 tertiary care hospitals. Vaccination such as polio vaccine is administered by the corporation on behalf of the government. Sanitation facilities are provided by the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board.

The underground drainage and sewerage disposal system was introduced in 1922.

As of 2024 , about 1,400 million litres (310 million imperial gallons; 370 million US gallons) of waste water is generated daily, which flows through a network of nearly 8,387 km (5,211 mi) of sewage pipes to any of the 33 sewage treatment plants. Encroachment, and damages to the sewerage system, has resulted in wastewater entering the lakes, and polluting the water sources.

As of 2024 , the corporation operated 401 public toilets and 17 community toilets across the city. Communication Bengaluru General Post Office was established in 1800 The first post office in the city was established in 1800. Postal services are provided by the government owned India Post , which operated 247 post offices across four zones in 2024.

In 1853, telegraph was introduced for long-distance communication and about 538 km (334 mi) of telegraph lines existed in the city by 1856. Telephone services were introduced in 1928.

In the early 1990s, STPI provided wired internet services for offices, and VSNL started providing dial up connections for individual homes in the city. Bengaluru has a high internet usage and is amongst the top cities in India in terms of internet penetration. Bengaluru was the first city in India to have access to fourth generation cellular services.

As of 2023 , four mobile phone service companies operate GSM networks including Bharti Airtel , BSNL , Vodafone Idea and Reliance Jio offered fourth and fifth generation mobile services. Wired broadband services are offered by five major operators and smaller local operators. Namma Wifi is a free municipal wireless network launched on 24 January 2014 by the Government of Karnataka, and is available in select areas in the city. Media The first printing press in Bengaluru was established in 1840 by the Wesleyan Christian Mission. Around 1860, the English newspaper Bangalore Herald and Kannada newspaper Mysore Vrittanta Bodhini started circulation in Bengaluru. P. R. Ramayya established the Bangalore Press in 1927 and launched the Kannada newspaper Tayi Nadu and English newspaper Daily News later. Bengaluru has several newspapers and magazines published in various languages including Kannada, English, Urdu, and Tamil.

As of 2022 , the major dailies with a circulation of more than 100,000 copies per day include The Times of India , Vijaya Karnataka , Prajavani , and Vijayavani . Several local newspapers, and periodicals also bring out editions from the city. Local online news sites like Explocity provide local news updates.

The 140 m (460 ft) high television tower, which was commissioned in 1985 All India Radio started AM broadcasting from its Bengaluru station on 2 November 1955.

In 2001, Radio City became the first private FM radio channel in the city.

As of 2020 , major FM radio stations included BIG FM , Radio Mirchi , Radio City, and Red FM .

The Bangalore Amateur Radio Club, an amateur radio club was established in 1959.

The government run Doordarshan broadcasts terrestrial and satellite television channels from its Bengaluru centre set up on 1 November 1981. A production centre was established in the Doordarshan's Bengaluru office in 1983, thereby allowing the introduction of a news programme in Kannada on 19 November 1983. A 140 m (460 ft) high television tower was commissioned on 1 March 1985 for the broadcast of television programmes. Doordarshan launched DD Chandana , a Kannada satellite channel, on 15 August 1990.

In September 1991, Star TV was the first private satellite channel to be launched in the city.

Since the late 2000s, Direct To Home (DTH) services became available in Bengaluru. Fire and rescue Fire services are handled by the Karnataka Fire and Emergency Services , which operates 50 fire stations, five fire protection squads, and three special units. Transport Main article: Transport in Bengaluru Air Kempegowda International Airport at Devanahalli During World War II , Walchand Hirachand sought to build and repair planes in India, and partnered with American businessman William Pawley to set up an airfield in Bengaluru.

The HAL Airport began operations in 1941 as a part of Hindustan Aircraft Limited .

The HAL airport was the major airport of the city till 2008, when the new Bengaluru International Airport came into existence.

The Kempegowda International Airport, located at Devanahalli , about 31 km (19 mi) from the city, started operations on 24 May 2008. It is the third-busiest airport in India in terms of passenger traffic. Air-conditioned buses operated by Bengaluru Metropolitan Transport Corporation connect the airport with the city.

The Training Command of the Indian Air Force is headquartered in Bengaluru.

The Air Force operates an air base at Yelahanka .

The city hosts Aero India , a biennial air show at the Yelahanka air force station. Rail Sir M. Visvesvaraya Terminal railway station at Baiyappanahalli The first railway line opened for traffic between Bengaluru Cantonment and Jolarpettai on 1 August 1864.

The Madras-Bangalore Mail was launched later the same year. Further railway connectivity to Renigunta was established in 1862, and to Raichur in 1871.

The Yeshwantapur station was established in 1892, when a metre-gauge railway line was established to Doddaballapur .

The city was part of the Mysore State Railway , which became part of the Southern Railway zone of the Indian Railways in April 1951.

The Bangalore railway division was established in 1971.

The city became part of the South Western Railway zone was formed with headquarters in Hubballi in 2003. There are 18 railway stations in the city managed by the Indian Railways, and the major railway stations include Bengaluru City , Yesvantpur, Cantonment, Krishnarajapuram and Baiyappanahalli . Namma Metro serves the city. Namma Metro is a rapid transit rail system in the city that was opened in 2011, and was the first operational metro in South India .

As of 2025 , the metro system consists three operational lines stretching 96.1 km (59.7 mi), and is the second-longest operational metro network in India. Five more lines are under construction as a part of expansion.

As of 2026 , Bengaluru does not have a suburban railway network .

The Bengaluru Suburban Railway is under construction and the first line is expected to be operational by 2030, though it was originally planned to be completed by October 2026. Road Outer Ring Road , one of the peripheral ring roads in the city Bengaluru has an extensive road network with about 14,000 km (8,700 mi) of roads as of 2024.

The 10 km (6.2 mi) long Inner Ring Road connects Koramangala with Indira Nagar .

The Outer Ring Road is a 60 km (37 mi) long peripheral road, developed between 1996 and 2002.

The Peripheral Ring Road is a proposed 74 km (46 mi) semi-circular road, connecting major arterial roads.

The M G Road is the major arterial road in the central business district . Bengaluru is part of the Golden Quadrilateral highway network, and lies on the Chennai–Mumbai line.

The National Highways that connect to the city include: NH-44 , NH-48 , NH-275 , NH-75 , NH-648 , and NH-948 .

The Bengaluru–Mysuru Expressway , operational since March 2023, connects the city with Mysuru.

The Bengaluru–Chennai Expressway is under construction since August 2019. Two other expressways— Pune–Bengaluru Expressway and Nagpur–Hyderabad–Bengaluru Expressway —have been proposed. Air-conditioned buses were introduced by the BMTC in 2005 Intra-city bus services is handled by the Bengaluru Metropolitan Transport Corporation (BMTC), which was established in 1997.

As of 2024 , BMTC operates 57,667 daily trips on 5,766 routes with a fleet of 6,340 buses. There are 48 bus stations, and 50 depots for intra-city bus services. BMTC introduced air-conditioned buses in 2005, which operate on major routes and as shuttle services from various parts of the city to airport. It also operates a fleet of more than 1,100 electric vehicles. Apart from single journey tickets, BMTC issues various passes for frequent users. Inter-city bus transport is handled by the Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC), owned by the Government of Karnataka. KSRTC operates various classes of services connecting other major cities in Karnataka, and other neighboring states.

The major bus stations in the city include Kempegowda Bus Station , Shantinagar Bus Station , and Mysuru Road Bus Station .

The other means of road transport in the city include vans, auto rickshaws , on-call metered taxis and tourist taxis. Motor vehicles were introduced in Bengaluru in 1903.

As of March 2022 , an average of 1,530 vehicles were registered daily in Regional Transport Offices (RTOs) in the city.

As of 2023 , the city had nearly ten million vehicles including 7.5 million two-wheelers.

The rapid growth of vehicles and unplanned nature of growth has created several administrative problems relating to traffic congestion and infrastructure, resulting in massive traffic gridlocks .

The flyovers and one-way traffic systems introduced to address the concerns, were only moderately successful.

The city also has considerable air pollution due to vehicle exhaust, and a 2016 study found that over 36% of diesel vehicles operating in the city exceeded the standard limit for emissions. Education Main article: Education in Bengaluru Further information: List of schools in Bengaluru and List of institutions of higher education in Bengaluru An English school established by London mission in 1869 Bengaluru is a major educational hub and home to some of the premium educational institutions in the country.

The city has a 90.33% literacy rate and ranks second among the major Indian metropolitan city centres.

As per the 2011 national census , Bengaluru urban had a literacy rate of around 87.7%. Until the early 19th century, education in Bengaluru was mainly run by religious leaders and restricted to students of that religion.

In 1841, two native language schools were established by a London mission, and in 1842, Mummadi Krishnaraja Wodeyar established the first English School under the Wesleyan mission, which expanded to five schools by 1954.

In 1857, a public education department was established, and the education was formulated as per the Indian educational policy at the time.

The Bangalore Military School was established in 1945. Bengaluru has a mix of public and private schools with the public school system managed by the school education department of Government of Karnataka. Public schools run by the Bengaluru Corporation are all affiliated with the Karnataka Board of Secondary Education, while private schools may be affiliated with either of Karnataka Board of Secondary Education, Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE), Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations (ICSE) or National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS).

As of 2024 , there are 142 public schools run by the Bengaluru Corporation.

The city also has a significant number of international schools due to cater to expats and people employed in the technology sector. School education starts with two years of Kindergarten from age three onwards and then follows the Indian 10+2 plan , ten years of school and two years of pre-university course or higher secondary education.

After completing their secondary education, students either attend a pre-university course or continue an equivalent high school course in one of three streams – arts , commerce or science – in various combinations. Alternatively, students can enrol in diploma courses and upon completing the required coursework, students enroll in general or professional degrees in universities through lateral entry. Indian Institute of Science (left) and Indian Institute of Management Bangalore are amongst the premier institutes of higher learning The oldest institution of higher learning in the city, the Central College , was established as a high school affiliated to Madras University in 1858.

The Indian Institute of Science was established in 1909.

The Government Engineering College was established as an engineering school in 1913 by M. Visvesvaraya , and was became the first engineering college in the region in 1917, affiliated to Mysore University .

As of 2016 , the city had six public universities , four deemed universities , eight private universities , 26 medical and dental colleges , 84 engineering colleges , 67 polytechnics , and 64 other institutes of higher learning.

The Bangalore University was established in 1964, and had more than 600 affiliated colleges, before being trifurcated into Bengaluru City University and Bengaluru North University in 2017. IIM Bangalore was established as the third Indian Institute of Management in 1972.

The National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences was established after the amalgamation of the All India Institute of Mental Health and hospital in 1974.

The National Law School of India University was the first Indian law university to be established in 1986. Other prominent research institutes in Bengaluru include Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research , National Centre for Biological Sciences , and National Institute of Advanced Studies . There are 205 public libraries maintained by the department of public libraries.

In May 2012, Lonely Planet listed the city as one of the world's top ten cities to visit.

As of 2024, Bengaluru has 1,288 public parks maintained by the corporation.

The Lal Bagh was established in the 1760s, and was later expanded into a 97 ha (240 acres) botanical garden in the 19th century. It incorporates a hillock made of gneiss , formed billions of years ago, and is a declared national geological monument.

The garden has a watch tower built in the 16th century by Kempe Gowda, a glass house built in 1889 on the model of The Crystal Palace in London, old hero stones , and houses many exotic species of plants. A biannual flowershow is held at the gardens during the weeks of India's Republic Day and Independence Day .

The Cubbon Park is a large park spanning 120 ha (300 acres) in the heart of the city, and was established in 1870. It hosts the Bangalore Aquarium , and the Bangalore central library . Bannerghatta National Park is a 260.51 km 2 (100.58 sq mi) national park and protected area , located south of the city.

The old central prison was decommissioned in 2000 and was redeveloped in to Freedom Park . Elgin Talkies, built in 1896, was the first theatre in Bengaluru.

In the later half of the 20th century, the city had 149 single screens, most of them situated along the Kempegowda Road near the Kempegowda Bus Station .

In the 21st century, large multiplexes with multiple screens began replacing the single screen theatres, and the city is now home to a large number of multiplexes. Stage plays and dramas of different genres and languages are enacted in theatres across the city. Sports Chinnaswamy Stadium in 2017 Cricket is the most popular sport in the city and the parks in the city serve as venues for impromptu games. M. Chinnaswamy Stadium , established in 1969, is a major international cricketing venue , and has hosted matches during multiple ICC Cricket World Cups .

The Karnataka State Cricket Association , located in the stadium premises, is responsible for managing organised cricket in the state.

The National Cricket Academy , operated by the Board of Control for Cricket in India , is based out of the city.

The city is home to the Indian Premier League (IPL) franchise Royal Challengers Bengaluru . Notable international cricketers born in the city include Erapalli Prasanna , Roger Binny , Anil Kumble , Venkatesh Prasad , Lokesh Rahul , Mayank Agarwal , and Stuart Binny . Sree Kanteerava Stadium Sree Kanteerava Stadium is a multi-purpose venue which hosts football and athletics . Association football also has a significant following in the city, and Bangalore Football Stadium hosts football matches along with the Kanteerva stadium in the city.

The city is home to football clubs Bengaluru FC , FC Bengaluru United , Ozone FC , South United FC , and SC Bengaluru . Prominent international footballers from the city include Sattar Basheer , and Arumainayagam .

The Kanteerava Indoor Stadium and Koramangala Indoor Stadium are indoor arenas used to host indoor sports, and other events.

The Kanteerva arena hosted the South Asian Basketball Championship in 2015 and 2016 .

The city is home to Bengaluru Beast of the UBA Pro Basketball League , and Bengaluru Bulls of the Pro Kabaddi League , who also play their home matches at the stadium. Bangalore Football Stadium Bengaluru hosts the WTA Indian Open , and Bengaluru Open tennis tournaments annually. Prominent international sports people from the city include tennis grand slam champion Rohan Bopanna , former All England Open badminton champion Prakash Padukone , and former national swimming champion Nisha Millet . Other notable sportsmen who reside in the city include former Indian cricket captain Rahul Dravid , world snooker champion Pankaj Advani , and multiple tennis grand slam champion Mahesh Bhupathi .

The Hindu . 30 April 2025. Archived from the original on 1 May 2025 . Retrieved 1 May 2025 . ^ "History of BBMP" . Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike . Archived from the original on 2 November 2020 . Retrieved 20 May 2021 . ^ "Introduction - BMRDA" . Bangalore Metropolitan Region Development Authority . Archived from the original on 20 May 2021 . Retrieved 20 May 2021 . ^ H.S. Sudhira; T.V. Ramachandra; M.H. Bala Subrahmanya (2007). "City Profile — Bangalore" (PDF) . Cities . 24 (5). Bangalore: 382. doi : 10.1016/j.cities.2007.04.003 . ISSN 0264-2751 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 December 2012 . Retrieved 13 October 2013 . ^ a b "Bangalore Population Sex Ratio in Bangalore Literacy rate Bangalore" . 2011 Census of India . Archived from the original on 26 January 2017. ^ "India Stats: Million plus cities in India as per Census 2011" . Press Information Bureau . Archived from the original on 30 June 2015 . Retrieved 20 August 2015 . ^ a b "Bengaluru" . C40 . Archived from the original on 25 September 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Deep Dive City Bangalore, India" (PDF) . Transformative Urban Mobility Initiative. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 January 2024 . Retrieved 12 January 2024 . ^ "50th Report of the Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities in India (July 2012 to June 2013)" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 July 2016 . Retrieved 14 January 2015 . ^ "Inscription reveals Bengaluru is over 1,000 years old" .

The Hindu . 20 August 2004. Archived from the original on 13 February 2012 . Retrieved 10 June 2012 . ^ a b c d Chandramouli, K (25 July 2002). "The city of boiled beans" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 5 May 2012 . Retrieved 10 June 2012 . ^ Vijesh Kamath (30 October 2006). "Many miles to go from Bangalore to Bengalūru" . Deccan Herald . Archived from the original on 16 September 2012 . Retrieved 10 June 2012 . ^ a b Aditi 2008 , p. 6 ^ "Bangalore to be renamed Bengaluru" .

The Times of India . 11 December 2005. Archived from the original on 29 September 2012 . Retrieved 19 April 2009 . ^ "It will be 'Bengaluru', resolves BMP" .

The Hindu . 28 September 2006. Archived from the original on 1 October 2007 . Retrieved 16 May 2007 . ^ "It'll be 'Bengaluru' from November 1" . Deccan Herald . 8 October 2006. Archived from the original on 6 April 2012 . Retrieved 10 June 2012 . ^ "Centre nod for Karnataka's proposal on renaming cities" .

The Hindu . 18 October 2014. Archived from the original on 18 October 2014 . Retrieved 18 October 2014 . ^ a b Ranganna, T.S. (27 October 2001). "Bangalore had human habitation in 4000 B.C." The Hindu . Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 7 September 2013 . ^ "Bangalore dates from 4,000 BC" .

The Times of India . 11 October 2001. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 7 September 2013 . ^ a b Srinivas 2004 , p. 69 ^ a b c d e Aditi 2008 , p. 7 ^ Sarma 1992 , p. 78 ^ B. L. Rice. Mysore: A Gazetteer Compiled for Government . p. 224. ^ "The Digital South Asia Library-Imperial gazetteer of India" . uchicago.edu . 1908–1931. Archived from the original on 16 December 2008 . Retrieved 16 February 2006 . ^ Aditi 2008 , p. 8 ^ Aditi 2008 , p. 9 ^ Misra, Hemant; Jayaraman, Pavitra (22 May 2010). "Bangalore bhath: first city edifices" . Mint . Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 11 June 2012 . ^ Aruni, S. K. (2 January 2013). "A city that fell to the lure of trade" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 27 June 2022 . Retrieved 27 June 2022 . ^ "Earlier known as Doddapete, Avenue Road could be as old as Bengaluru" .

The Economic Times . 26 March 2015. Archived from the original on 30 May 2022 . Retrieved 30 May 2022 . ^ a b c d Srinivas, S (22 February 2005). "The bean city" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 13 February 2012 . Retrieved 2 July 2007 . ^ a b c d e Vagale, Uday Kumar (2004). "5: Bangalore: mud fort to sprawling metropolis" . Bangalore—future trends in public open space usage. Case study: Mahatma Gandhi Road, Bangalore (Thesis). Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University . pp. 34– 35. hdl : 10919/9941 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 June 2012 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . ^ Shekhar, Divya (27 October 2016). "To secure a budding Bengaluru, Kempe Gowda built 4 towers" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 23 May 2022 . Retrieved 23 May 2022 . ^ Pinto & Srivastava 2008 , p. 8 ^ Sandes, E. W. C. (September 2001) .

The Military Engineer in India . Vol. I. Naval & Military Press. pp. 163– 165. ISBN 9781843420422 . ^ a b "The Resident arose with Tipu's fall" .

The Times of India . 26 March 2011 . Retrieved 24 May 2022 . ^ "Raj Bhavan, Karnataka" . Raj Bhavan, Government of Karnataka . Archived from the original on 6 February 2012 . Retrieved 24 August 2012 . ^ Srinivas 2004 , p. 3 ^ Ghosh, Jyotirmoy (2012). Entrepreneurship in tourism and allied activities: a study of Bangalore city in the post-liberalization period (PDF) . Pondicherry University . p. 86. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 8 September 2013 . ^ a b Emily Stevenson (2023). British Indian Picture Postcards in Bengaluru: Ephemeral Entanglements . Taylor & Francis . p. 23. ISBN 978-1-00380-959-3 . ^ Vagale, Uday Kumar (2004). "8: Public domain—contested spaces and lack of imageability" . Bangalore—future trends in public open space usage. Case study: Mahatma Gandhi Road, Bangalore (Thesis). Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University . p. 49. hdl : 10919/9941 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 June 2012 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . ^ Punekar 1974 , p. 50. ^ Punekar 1974 , p. 51. ^ a b "1898 plague revisited" .

The Times of India . 17 November 2012. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 8 September 2013 . ^ Jaypal, Maya (26 March 2012). "Malleswaram, Basavanagudi, the new extensions" . Deccan Herald . Archived from the original on 14 October 2013 . Retrieved 8 September 2013 . ^ a b Srinivasaraju, Sugata (10 April 2006). "ElectriCity" . Outlook India . Archived from the original on 21 January 2011 . Retrieved 15 November 2011 . ^ Mudur, Nirad; Hemanth CS (7 June 2013). "Bangalore torpedo gave them their D-Day, 69 years ago" . Daily News and Analysis . Archived from the original on 4 October 2013 . Retrieved 1 October 2013 . ^ Basavaraja, Kadati Reddera (1984). History and Culture of Karnataka: Early Times to Unification . Chalukya Publications. p. 332. Archived from the original on 27 December 2017 . Retrieved 27 December 2017 . ^ Nair 2005 , p. 70 ^ S., Chandrasekhar (1985). Dimensions of Socio-Political Change in Mysore, 1918–40 . APH Publishing. p. 135. ISBN 978-0-8364-1471-4 . ^ a b Pinto & Srivastava 2008 , p. 10 ^ Boland-Crewe, Tara; Lea, David (2004).

The Territories and States of India . Psychology Press. p. 135 . ISBN 978-0-203-40290-0 .

When the new, extended Mysore was created on 1 November 1956 (by the addition of coastal, central and northern territories), Wodeyar became Governor of the whole state, which was renamed Karnataka in 1973. ^ "Civic bodies of yore didn't digress from progress" . Deccan Herald . 28 March 2012. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022 . Retrieved 26 May 2022 . ^ a b Srinivas 2004 , p. 4 ^ Punekar 1974 , p. 53. ^ "Death Toll Raised to 66 in Fire at Circus in India" .

The New York Times . 9 February 1981. Archived from the original on 18 November 2016 . Retrieved 31 January 2017 . ^ Benjamin, Solomon (April 2000). "Governance, economic settings and poverty in Bangalore" (PDF) . Environment & Urbanization . 12 (1): 35– 36. Bibcode : 2000EnUrb..12...35B . doi : 10.1177/095624780001200104 . S2CID 14335580 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 July 2012 . Retrieved 11 June 2012 . ^ a b c d A-04 : Towns and urban agglomerations classified by population size class in 2011 with variation between 1901 and 2011 - Class I (population of 100,000 and above) . 2011 Census of India (Report). Archived from the original on 5 March 2023 . Retrieved 4 July 2023 . ^ a b Vijaya B. Punekar (1974). Assimilation: A Study of North Indians in Bangalore . Popular Prakashan. p. 54. ISBN 978-8-17154-012-9 . Archived from the original on 12 September 2025 . Retrieved 4 October 2007 . ^ "8 blasts rock Bangalore" .

The Times of India . 25 July 2008. Archived from the original on 18 July 2022 . Retrieved 18 July 2022 . ^ "Ten wounded in Bangalore cricket stadium blast" . Reuters . 17 April 2010. Archived from the original on 18 July 2022 . Retrieved 18 July 2022 . ^ "Bangalore blast a terror attack, confirms Home Ministry" . India Today . 17 April 2013. Archived from the original on 18 July 2022 . Retrieved 18 July 2022 . ^ a b c d e f g h "Study area: Bangalore" . Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science . Archived from the original on 16 July 2012 . Retrieved 11 June 2012 . ^ "Ground water information booklet" (PDF) . Central Ground Water Board, Ministry of Water Resources, Government of India . December 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 May 2012 . Retrieved 16 June 2012 . ^ "Finance budget for 2007–08" (PDF) . Government of Karnataka . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2007 . Retrieved 28 June 2007 . ^ "Local planning areas" . Government of Karnataka . Archived from the original on 15 April 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "District census handbook- Bangalore rural" (PDF) . Directorate of census operations Karnataka. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 November 2016 . Retrieved 26 October 2017 . ^ "Environmental impact analysis" (PDF) . Government of Karnataka . 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 March 2006 . Retrieved 11 June 2012 . ^ a b "Trees in Bengaluru" . Indian Institute of Science . Archived from the original on 13 December 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Green space in Bengaluru" . Indian Institute of Science . Archived from the original on 13 December 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Over 1 lakh trees cut to build roads in Karnataka in 4 years" .

The Times of India . April 2022. Archived from the original on 8 June 2022 . Retrieved 8 June 2022 . ^ "3,559 trees to be cut down in city for road, metro" . Deccan Herald . 28 December 2019. Archived from the original on 8 June 2022 . Retrieved 8 June 2022 . ^ Singh, Onkar (30 January 2000). "The Rediff interview. Dr S K Srivastav, additional director general, Indian Meteorological Department" . Rediff . Archived from the original on 14 February 2012 . Retrieved 2 July 2007 . ^ "Saving six rivers" .

The Hindu . 28 November 2014. Archived from the original on 22 July 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Lost rivers of Bengaluru" . Bangalore Mirror . 25 April 2022. Archived from the original on 9 September 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Chethan Kumar (15 December 2021). "K'taka Dumps 1,746m Litres Sewage Into Rivers Each Day" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 31 May 2022 . Retrieved 31 May 2022 . ^ Kulkarni, Chiranjeevi (11 March 2022). "Can Vrishabhavathi be Bengaluru's Thames?" . Deccan Herald . Archived from the original on 31 May 2022 . Retrieved 31 May 2022 . ^ "Here's how Cauvery water reaches homes in Bengaluru" .

The New Indian Express . 7 November 2016. Archived from the original on 5 June 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "More than 90% of Bengaluru's lakes are polluted or encroached" . Scroll.in . 14 March 2016. Archived from the original on 24 May 2022 . Retrieved 17 June 2022 . ^ Menezes, Naveen (10 April 2021). "Bengaluru's lakes: The good, the bad, the very dirty" . Bangalore Mirror . Archived from the original on 24 January 2022 . Retrieved 24 January 2022 . ^ "Lakes of Bengaluru: Industrial effluents, raw sewage; stinky tale of Chandapura lake" .

The Indian Express . 17 December 2021. Archived from the original on 24 January 2022 . Retrieved 24 January 2022 . ^ "Bengaluru plans revival of its old charm, to revive 25 lakes" . OnManorama . Archived from the original on 24 January 2022 . Retrieved 24 January 2022 . ^ "Rise in temperature 'unusual' for Bangalore" .

The Hindu . 18 May 2005. Archived from the original on 8 February 2012 . Retrieved 2 July 2007 . ^ a b "Bangalore" . India Meteorological Department . Archived from the original on 8 July 2007 . Retrieved 7 February 2007 . ^ "Bengaluru records highest temperature since 1931" .

The Hindu . 24 April 2016. Archived from the original on 10 June 2024 . Retrieved 5 September 2017 . ^ Amaresh, Vidyashree (10 May 2006). "Set up rain gauges in areas prone to flooding" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 16 December 2007 . Retrieved 22 December 2007 . ^ Ashwini Y.S. (17 December 2006). "Bangalore weather back again" . Deccan Herald . Archived from the original on 4 December 2007 . Retrieved 22 December 2007 . ^ Bhattacharjee, Nivedita; Mandayam, Nandan (6 September 2022). "India's Bengaluru hit by flooding, traffic snarls after heavy rain" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 9 September 2022 . Retrieved 12 September 2022 . ^ "Bengaluru floods: How families struggled to find help as India's IT capital drowned" . BBC News . 12 September 2022 . Retrieved 12 September 2022 . ^ "Heavy rain brings Bengaluru to its knees" .

The Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 November 2011 . Retrieved 17 October 2011 . ^ "The World's Cities in 2016" (PDF) . United Nations . October 2016. p. 4. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 January 2017 . Retrieved 4 March 2017 . ^ Punekar 1974 , p. 60. ^ a b "Study reveals caste based segregation in Bengaluru" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Deepika, K.C. (9 February 2019). "Silicon binaries: language, culture and identity" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 2 December 2024 . Retrieved 3 December 2024 . ^ "Silicon valley of India" . Isha yoga . Archived from the original on 8 December 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "What makes you a Bengalurean?" .

The Hindu . 15 June 2015. ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 2 June 2026 . ^ "Details of slumbs" . Government of Karnataka . Archived from the original on 25 February 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Slums in the Bengaluru still stuck in a vicious circle of poverty" .

The Times of India . 10 November 2021. Archived from the original on 26 June 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Study tracks how Bengaluru slums follow caste patterns" . Deccan Herald . 15 May 2023. Archived from the original on 13 December 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Roy, Ananya; Ong, Aihwa (2011). "Speculating on the Next World City". Worlding Cities: Asian Experiments and the Art of Being Global . Vol. 42 (illustrated ed.). John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-4443-4678-7 . ^ Sen, Meghna (4 March 2021). "Ease of Living Index: Bengaluru is the best city to live in India, Pune next" . live Mint . Archived from the original on 4 March 2021 . Retrieved 15 March 2021 . ^ "Hyderabad pips Bengaluru and Chennai in Mercer's quality of living index" . News Minute . 12 December 2023 . Retrieved 19 September 2025 . ^ a b "Table C-01 Population By Religion - Karnataka" . census.gov.in . Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India . Archived from the original on 22 June 2022 . Retrieved 7 August 2022 . ^ Gayer, Laurent; Jaffrelot, Christophe (2012). Muslims in Indian Cities: Trajectories of Marginalisation (illustrated ed.). Hurst Publishers. p. 290. ISBN 978-1-84904-176-8 . ^ Crossette, Barbara (20 January 1990). "Bangalore Journal; Christians Revel in Conversion Back to Indianness" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 5 June 2020 . Retrieved 5 June 2020 . ^ Hefner, Robert W. (2013). Global Pentecostalism in the 21st Century . Indiana University Press . pp. 194– 222. ISBN 978-0-253-01094-0 . ^ Christopher, Joseph (31 March 2014). "In the Indian rector's murder, the 'why' matters as much as the 'who' " . UCA News . Archived from the original on 9 April 2014 . Retrieved 1 May 2014 . ^ a b Prashanth, G N. "A melting pot that welcomes all" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 2 May 2014 . Retrieved 9 September 2013 . ^ Sarma, Deepika (4 October 2012). "Building blocks of one of the city's largest communities" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 9 September 2013 . ^ Srinivas 2004 , pp. 100–102, The Settlement of Tamil-Speaking Groups in Bangalore ^ Srinivas 2004 , p. 5 ^ Srivatsa, Sharath S. (31 October 2007). "Bangalore calling: it all goes way back..." The Hindu . Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 9 September 2013 . ^ "Kannadigas assured of all support" .

The Hindu . 23 July 2004. Archived from the original on 30 June 2011 . Retrieved 10 May 2010 . ^ M. V. Chandrasekhar; Sahana Charan (23 December 2006). "They are now part of city's unique social mix" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 9 September 2013 . ^ a b "Table C-16 Population by Mother Tongue (Urban): Karnataka" . Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India . Archived from the original on 22 June 2022 . Retrieved 7 August 2022 . ^ a b "Bangalore languages" . Summalinguae . Archived from the original on 24 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Kannada language variation" . Central Institute of Indian Languages . Archived from the original on 13 December 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Brown, Keith; Ogilvie, Sarah (2010). Concise Encyclopedia of Languages of the World (revised ed.). Elsevier . p. 577. ISBN 978-0-080-87775-4 . ^ Lindsay, Jennifer (2006). Between Tongues: Translation And/of/in Performance in Asia (illustrated, reprint, annotated ed.). NUS Press. p. 52. ISBN 978-9-971-69339-8 . ^ "Bengaluru: Why English is dividing people in India's Silicon Valley" . BBC News . 12 January 2024. Archived from the original on 5 June 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "What Is Behind The 60 Per Cent Kannada Signboard Controversy In Bengaluru?" . India Times . 28 December 2023. Archived from the original on 22 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Signs of Bengaluru's language conundrum" .

The Hindu . 8 August 2024. Archived from the original on 27 May 2024 . Retrieved 10 August 2024 . ^ "Karnataka High Court dismisses PIL seeking direction to use Kannada" .

The Times of India . 5 July 2024. Archived from the original on 24 August 2024 . Retrieved 1 August 2024 . ^ a b c "About BBMP" . Government of Karnataka . Retrieved 28 December 2022 . ^ "Greater Bengaluru Bill proposes up to 7 corporations" .

The Hindu . 12 March 2025 . Retrieved 16 May 2025 . ^ "BBMP Restructure: Bengaluru Set for 5 New Civic Bodies by July 15" . Deccan Herald . 19 July 2025 . Retrieved 1 June 2026 . ^ Bharadwaj, K. V. Aditya (19 July 2025). "Karnataka govt. notifies draft on setting up five corporations in Bengaluru" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 20 July 2025 . ^ "BBMP's era ends, Greater Bengaluru Authority to begin from May 15" .

The News Minute . 14 May 2025 . Retrieved 18 May 2025 . ^ "What is changing with the Greater Bengaluru Governance Act 2024?" . Citizen Matters . 16 September 2025 . Retrieved 19 September 2025 . ^ "BBMP ward delimitation maps posted on website" .

The Times of India . 2 October 2023. ISSN 0971-8257 . Archived from the original on 28 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2024 . ^ "BBMP election result by 2 pm" . Deccan Herald . 4 April 2010. Archived from the original on 9 April 2010 . Retrieved 5 May 2010 . ^ "New BBMP chief commissioner inspects infrastructure projects" . Deccan Herald . 9 May 2022. Archived from the original on 7 June 2022 . Retrieved 20 June 2022 . ^ "Greater Bengaluru Governance Bill passed amidst protest and walkout by Opposition" .

The Hindu . 10 March 2025 . Retrieved 19 September 2025 . ^ "Term of BBMP council ends; govt appoints Gaurav Gupta as administrator" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 4 April 2022 . Retrieved 22 October 2020 . ^ "Bengaluru city finance" . Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, Government of India . Archived from the original on 11 October 2025 . Retrieved 5 December 2024 . ^ "Assembly re-adopts Bill on BDA Act" .

The Hindu . 19 July 2006. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011 . Retrieved 1 June 2007 . ^ "The Bruhat Journey" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 14 September 2013 . ^ "Local planning areas" . Government of Karnataka . Archived from the original on 15 April 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ B., Madhumitha (31 October 2010). "Soudha: A tale of sweat and toil" . Deccan Chronicle . Archived from the original on 5 November 2010 . Retrieved 11 November 2010 . ^ "13-yr-old Vikasa Soudha gets into 'heritage list' " . Bangalore Mirror . 30 November 2017. Archived from the original on 4 February 2022 . Retrieved 4 February 2022 . ^ "15 years on, netas still see Vikasa as the lesser Soudha, insist on Vidhana office" .

The New Indian Express . Archived from the original on 4 February 2022 . Retrieved 4 February 2022 . ^ "Raj Bhavan" . Karnataka Tourism . Archived from the original on 21 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Karnataka High Court" . Archived from the original on 8 December 2024 . Retrieved 1 January 2023 . ^ "About Karnataka High Court" . Karnataka High Court . Archived from the original on 4 December 2022 . Retrieved 1 January 2023 . ^ "Karnataka: Pratap Reddy appointed new Bengaluru city police commissioner, replaces Kamal Pant" .

The Indian Express . 16 May 2022. Archived from the original on 20 June 2022 . Retrieved 20 June 2022 . ^ "Bangalore city police" . Bengaluru City Police . Archived from the original on 22 December 2023 . Retrieved 17 December 2023 . ^ a b "Organization chart, Bangalore city police" . Bengaluru City Police . Archived from the original on 16 December 2023 . Retrieved 17 December 2023 . ^ "City armed reserve" . Bengaluru City Police . Archived from the original on 16 December 2023 . Retrieved 17 December 2023 . ^ "Bengaluru: Staff shortage acute in city, says top cop" .

The New Indian Express . 18 February 2024. Archived from the original on 19 February 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Fasten your seat belts from Feb 1" .

The Times of India . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "Aout us, Bangalore City Traffic Police" . Bengaluru City Traffic Police . Archived from the original on 22 March 2023 . Retrieved 15 March 2023 . ^ "With 2nd rank, Chennai at Delhi's heels in crime rate among major Indian metro cities, reveals NCRB data" . Times Now . 16 September 2021. Archived from the original on 8 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 September 2023 . ^ Sarangi, Debi Prasad (8 August 2010). "Bangalore jail: An island of the unwanted" . Deccan Herald . Archived from the original on 3 November 2016 . Retrieved 1 November 2016 . ^ "Parappana Agrahara jail: Jailbreak waiting to happen" .

The Hindu . 28 September 2017. Archived from the original on 29 September 2017 . Retrieved 25 December 2017 . ^ "BJP's Gowtham Kumar becomes Bengaluru Mayor" .

The Hindu . 1 October 2019. Archived from the original on 8 December 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Term of BBMP council ends; govt appoints Gaurav Gupta as administrator" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 4 April 2022 . Retrieved 22 October 2020 . ^ "BBMP marks longest period without elected council" . Deccan Herald . 9 September 2024. Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 1 October 2024 . ^ Ravindran, Nirmala (27 August 2008). "Dance and Music is part of our culture" . India Today . Archived from the original on 29 May 2012 . Retrieved 17 June 2012 . ^ a b Raman 1994 , pp. 34–35 ^ Sharma, Sharath M. (22 August 2010). "It's Yakshagana season" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 13 September 2013 . ^ "You know music is in Bangalore's DNA, bands tell why" . DNA . 24 December 2011. Archived from the original on 25 September 2013 . Retrieved 21 September 2013 . ^ Plunkett 2001 , p. 124. ^ Narayan, Shobha (14 May 2012). "Bangalore rebooted" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 1 October 2013 . Retrieved 12 September 2013 . ^ Nathan, Archana (12 May 2016). "Chitrakala Parishath: An art haven like no other" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 22 March 2022 . Retrieved 22 March 2022 . ^ "Covid threat gone, Crowds return to Bengaluru's Chitrakala Parishath" . Deccan Herald . 22 September 2021. Archived from the original on 22 September 2021 . Retrieved 22 March 2022 . ^ "Doodle-Do Listing" . Bangalore Mirror . 31 December 2016. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017 . Retrieved 1 June 2017 . ^ "Bangalore has a heart for art" .

The Times of India . 17 August 2013. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 12 September 2013 . ^ Chandramouli, K. (26 September 2002). "Lyrical land" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 8 November 2012 . Retrieved 13 September 2013 . ^ "History, they wrote at Bangalore Literature fest" . Deccan Chronicle . 12 August 2012. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 7 September 2013 . ^ "Kannadigas celebrate Kannada Rajyotsava on Nov 1" . One India . 1 November 2010. Archived from the original on 3 November 2014 . Retrieved 1 June 2012 . ^ "Rajyotsava Day" . Festivals of India . Archived from the original on 2 July 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Khajane, Muralidhara (9 December 2018). "Kannada films set new record with 224 releases, but that's where the good news ends" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 1 July 2022 . Retrieved 1 July 2022 . ^ Murali, Janaki (10 September 2007). "An experience called 'Ranga Shankara' " . Deccan Herald . Archived from the original on 29 October 2013 . Retrieved 16 June 2012 . ^ "Ravindra Kalakshetra" . Bangalore Orbit . Archived from the original on 13 March 2012 . Retrieved 16 June 2012 . ^ Raman 1994 , p. 37 ^ "Our Mission" . Alliance française de Bangalore . Archived from the original on 17 January 2022 . Retrieved 17 January 2022 . ^ "Explore the continent" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 11 June 2007. Archived from the original on 26 February 2013 . Retrieved 16 June 2012 . ^ Anand, Swati (8 January 2008). "International cuisine pushes retailers' margins" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 17 May 2013 . Retrieved 16 June 2012 . ^ "Bengaluru bites: How city is embracing vegetarian and plant-based foods" .

The Times of India . 7 September 2024. ISSN 0971-8257 . Archived from the original on 15 September 2025 . Retrieved 27 March 2025 . ^ Malhotra, Samil (16 June 2012). "Breakfast in Bangalore" . Business Standard . Archived from the original on 17 June 2012 . Retrieved 16 June 2012 . ^ a b "Is Bengaluru India's most exciting city for vegetarians?" . National Geographic Travel . 27 March 2023. Archived from the original on 28 December 2024 . Retrieved 27 March 2025 . ^ Govind, Ranjani (31 May 2018). "Bengaluru's iconic Vidyarthi Bhavan turns 75" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 1 November 2020 . Retrieved 27 March 2025 . ^ "Bangalore most 'vegan-friendly' city" .

The Hindu . 29 September 2014. Archived from the original on 5 February 2016 . Retrieved 30 September 2014 . ^ "Bangalore most vegan-friendly city in India" .

The Times of India . 30 September 2014. Archived from the original on 20 August 2015 . Retrieved 30 September 2014 . ^ "Bangalore Karaga" .

The Hindu . 2 April 2007. Archived from the original on 27 October 2008 . Retrieved 1 May 2009 . ^ "Woman power at Karaga" . Bangalore Mirror . 21 April 2009. Archived from the original on 7 July 2011 . Retrieved 14 July 2009 . ^ "Ulsoor's 'Poo Pallaki' begins on Saturday" .

The Hindu . 21 May 2016. Archived from the original on 13 December 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Raman 1994 , pp. 42–45 ^ Kotkin, Joel (10 July 2010). "The World's Fastest-Growing Cities" . Forbes . Archived from the original on 9 March 2012 . Retrieved 21 February 2012 . ^ "Bengaluru to be world's fastest growing city: Report" .

The Deccan Herald . 23 January 2020. Archived from the original on 27 June 2022 . Retrieved 27 June 2022 . ^ Husain, Mudassir (12 May 2019). "Bengaluru's growth story" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 26 June 2022 . Retrieved 27 June 2022 . ^ "Global city GDP 2014" . Brookings Institution . 22 January 2015. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017 . Retrieved 4 March 2017 . ^ Broder, Jonathan (5 October 2018). "India Today: Can it maintain strong economic growth?" . CQ Researcher . Sage Publications. doi : 10.4135/cqresrre20181005 . S2CID 267331042 . cqresrre2018100500. Archived from the original on 5 October 2018 . Retrieved 4 October 2018 . ^ "The World According to GaWC 2020" . Globalization and World Cities Research Network . Archived from the original on 12 June 2022 . Retrieved 31 July 2022 . ^ "Manufacturing cities: the planning, building, and governing of industrial infrastructure in the Bangalore metropolitan region" . Peak-urban . Archived from the original on 27 January 2022 . Retrieved 27 January 2022 . ^ a b c d e f District profile, Bengaluru urban (PDF) . Government of Karnataka (Report). Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 June 2022 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Bangalore most affluent market" . Rediffdate =23 August 2006 . Archived from the original on 7 March 2008 . Retrieved 1 June 2007 . ^ "Bangalore third richest city in country" .

The Times of India . 1 April 2007. Archived from the original on 30 April 2007 . Retrieved 1 June 2007 . ^ "Bengaluru: Economy, Industries, and Infrastructure" . India Briefing News . 22 March 2019. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021 . Retrieved 24 August 2021 . ^ "Brief Industrial Profile of Bangalore Rural District" (PDF) . Government of Karnataka . Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 August 2021 . Retrieved 24 August 2021 . ^ "Brief Industrial Profile of Bangalore District" (PDF) . Government of Karnataka . Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 October 2021 . Retrieved 24 August 2021 . ^ "Bengaluru has become the hotspot for Fortune 500 giants, global companies to set up innovation centres" . Business Insider . Retrieved 16 August 2021 . ^ a b "Bengaluru world's fastest growing tech hub, London second: Report" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 16 August 2021 . Retrieved 16 August 2021 . ^ "Bangalore keeps its crown as India's high-growth tech hub" . Financial Times . 7 April 2022. Archived from the original on 27 June 2022 . Retrieved 27 June 2022 . ^ Canton, Naomi (6 December 2012). "How the 'Silicon Valley of India' is bridging the digital divide" . CNN . Archived from the original on 18 December 2012 . Retrieved 6 December 2012 . ^ Rai, Saritha (20 March 2006). "Is the Next Silicon Valley Taking Root in Bangalore?" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 13 October 2011 . Retrieved 20 March 2006 . ^ Vaidyanathan, Rajini (5 November 2012). "Can the 'American Dream' be reversed in India?" . BBC World News . Archived from the original on 5 November 2012 . Retrieved 5 November 2012 . ^ "Bengaluru is the undisputed Silicon Valley of India: What led to its status?" . South First . 10 October 2024. Archived from the original on 10 October 2024 . Retrieved 1 November 2024 . ^ "Bangalore will become the world's largest IT cluster by 2020" . Business Line . 12 November 2014. Archived from the original on 26 July 2021 . Retrieved 16 August 2021 . ^ "10 Amazing Software Technological Parks in Bengaluru" . 4 August 2017. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021 . Retrieved 16 August 2021 . ^ Shrinag (20 August 2019). "Top Reasons Why Bengaluru Is A Bustling IT Hub" . MetroSaga . Archived from the original on 16 August 2021 . Retrieved 16 August 2021 . ^ "Opportunity and exploitation in urban labour markets" (PDF) . Overseas Development Institute. November 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 March 2009 . Retrieved 10 May 2010 . ^ "India's Tech Hubs: Bengaluru vs Hyderabad" . India Briefing News . 19 July 2019. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021 . Retrieved 16 August 2021 . ^ "Karnataka hopes to double its bio-economy to $50-bn in 5 yrs" . Bangalore Mirror . Archived from the original on 27 June 2022 . Retrieved 27 June 2022 . ^ Pulakkat, Hari. "How Bengaluru became the biotech capital of India" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 27 June 2022 . Retrieved 27 June 2022 . ^ "Bangalore Helix to be a reality soon" . ] . 23 April 2005. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007 . Retrieved 4 October 2007 . ^ Chatterjee, Sumeet (4 October 2007). "Biocon in drug development talks with Bayer" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 22 December 2007 . Retrieved 4 October 2007 . ^ "Bengaluru airport tops in perishable exports from India for fourth year" .

The Economic Times . 4 July 2024. Archived from the original on 4 July 2024 . Retrieved 1 November 2024 . ^ "Rail Wheel Factory to supply axles for India's fastest train - Vande Bharat Express" .

The New Indian Express . 28 April 2022. Archived from the original on 24 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Bharat Electronics Limited" . Government of India . Archived from the original on 6 May 2021 . Retrieved 2 August 2020 . ^ a b "BWSSB Mission Statement" . Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board . Archived from the original on 20 October 2012 . Retrieved 13 October 2012 . ^ "Thirsty Bangalore invokes god" .

The Hindustan Times . 9 June 2003. Archived from the original on 3 March 2012 . Retrieved 11 June 2012 . ^ "Sensation of Kempabudhi Kare" .

The Hindustan Times . 7 May 2024. Archived from the original on 10 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ a b c "About BWSSB" . Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board . Archived from the original on 24 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "60 per cent of water sources go dry in Ch'nagar" .

The Deccan Herald . 31 March 2015. Archived from the original on 27 June 2022 . Retrieved 27 June 2022 . ^ "water shortage: Water crisis: Is Bengaluru heading for Day Zero?" .

The Times of India . 13 February 2018. Archived from the original on 10 June 2024 . Retrieved 27 May 2022 . ^ "Thirsty Bengaluru: Water scarcity amid rapid urbanisation and climate change" . India Today . 14 March 2024 . Retrieved 19 September 2025 . ^ "6. Why Bengaluru is facing acute water shortage" .

The Times of India . 6 March 2024 . Retrieved 19 September 2025 . ^ "Karnataka State Pollution Control Board" . Government of Karnataka . Archived from the original on 6 September 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Central Pollution Control Board brings strict norms to curb red mud in Karnataka" . Deccan Herald . 30 November 2024. Archived from the original on 2 December 2024 . Retrieved 1 December 2024 . ^ "BBMP chief commissioner calls for decentralised waste management system" .

The Indian Express . 6 April 2022. Archived from the original on 20 June 2022 . Retrieved 20 June 2022 . ^ "Bangalore: Pollution levels at all time high" . Rediff . Archived from the original on 19 October 2012 . Retrieved 6 September 2012 . ^ "Bengaluru's waste processing plants polluters of high magnitude: Study" . Deccan Herald . 25 October 2024. Archived from the original on 1 April 2025 . Retrieved 1 December 2024 . ^ a b "Swachh Bharat Mission" . Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "War over waste" . Down to Earth . Archived from the original on 6 October 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "BBMP identifies 4 places to process city's waste" .

The Deccan Herald . 11 March 2024. Archived from the original on 12 March 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Biomedical Waste Management | Karnataka State Pollution Control Board" . Karnataka State Pollution Control Board . Archived from the original on 18 January 2022 . Retrieved 17 January 2022 . ^ "Despite ban, e-waste management firms in Bengaluru reselling mobile phones and laptops" .

The Hindu . 9 October 2024. Archived from the original on 3 December 2024 . Retrieved 1 December 2024 . ^ a b "Exclusive! 50% of Bangalore's air pollution caused due to dust" . Daily News and Analysis . 28 November 2011. Archived from the original on 31 October 2012 . Retrieved 6 September 2012 . ^ "C40: 35 Cities Unite to Clean the Air Their Citizens Breathe, Protecting the Health of Millions" . C40 group . Archived from the original on 7 December 2019 . Retrieved 15 December 2019 . ^ "Environmental impact analysis" (PDF) . Bangalore Metropolitan Rapid Transport Corporation Limited, Government of Karnataka. 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 March 2006 . Retrieved 11 June 2012 . ^ "Bengaluru's air quality good but Peenya, Silk Board choke" .

The New Indian Express . 7 December 2024. Archived from the original on 9 December 2024 . Retrieved 7 December 2024 . ^ "Environmental Impact Analysis" (PDF) . BMRTL . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 March 2006 . Retrieved 20 March 2006 . ^ a b c d e Punekar 1974 , p. 54. ^ "About Us" . Bangalore Electricity Supply Company . Archived from the original on 31 July 2008 . Retrieved 5 May 2010 . ^ "Power-hungry Bengaluru triples Bescom's revenue demand in 10 years" . Deccan Herald . 5 July 2024. Archived from the original on 19 July 2024 . Retrieved 1 August 2024 . ^ "Rising mercury levels send energy demand soaring in Bengaluru" .

The Times of India . 19 October 2023. Archived from the original on 21 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 August 2024 . ^ "Bengaluru's power demand hits unprecedented highs" . Bangalore Mirror . 20 March 2024. Archived from the original on 20 March 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Bescom power sources" . Citizen matters . 5 November 2012. Archived from the original on 30 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "BESCOM power supply upgrades in Bengaluru" . Bangalore Mirror . 11 October 2024. Archived from the original on 7 December 2024 . Retrieved 1 November 2024 . ^ a b c d e Modern Mysore (PDF) . Government of Karnataka . pp. 498– 503. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 September 2023 . Retrieved 4 December 2024 . ^ Punekar 1974 , p. 55. ^ "Palike Hospitals" . Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike . Archived from the original on 18 June 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "BBMP's Namma Clinics are fully functional" . Bangalore Mirror . 3 December 2024. Archived from the original on 7 December 2024 . Retrieved 5 December 2024 . ^ "Public Utility Hospitals" . Government of Karnataka . Archived from the original on 20 April 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Health Department working on promoting medical tourism: Health Minister" .

The Hindu . 20 October 2024. Archived from the original on 7 December 2024 . Retrieved 1 November 2024 . ^ "BBMP achieves 94.33% polio vaccine coverage in Bengaluru" . Deccan Herald . 4 March 2024. Archived from the original on 19 April 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Foaming in Bengaluru's Bellandur lake caused by continuous entry of untreated sewage: IISc" .

The Indian Express . 6 June 2023. Archived from the original on 6 October 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Postal system during British era, 1727-1854" (PDF) . India Post . p. 2. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 April 2024 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ List of post offices (PDF) . India Post (Report). pp. 1– 8. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 December 2024 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ "List of SPOs" (PDF) . Government of Karnataka . Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 February 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Rakesh Basant. Bangalore Cluster: Evolution, Growth and Challengers (PDF) (Report). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 October 2007 . Retrieved 8 October 2007 . ^ "A short recap on Internet developments in India" . Rediff . Archived from the original on 16 October 2007 . Retrieved 8 October 2007 . ^ "A highly net-savvy city" .

The Hindu . 29 December 2006. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007 . Retrieved 8 October 2007 . ^ Julka, Harsimran. "Bharti Airtel offers 4G services on mobiles in Bangalore" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 25 May 2022 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ TRAI report, August 2023 (PDF) (Report). Telecom Regulatory Authority of India . Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ "Free wifi on M.G. Road and Brigade Road from Friday" .

The Hindu . 23 January 2014. Archived from the original on 3 July 2014 . Retrieved 6 October 2014 . ^ D. E. Rhodes (1970). "Printing at Bangalore, 1840-1850".

The British Museum Quarterly . 34 (3/4). British Museum : 83– 86. JSTOR 4423049 . ^ "Wesleyan methodists promoted language, education" .

The New Indian Express . 16 May 2012. Archived from the original on 28 May 2022 . Retrieved 28 May 2022 . ^ "Bengaluru and English newspapers" . Bangalore Mirror . 14 February 2015. Archived from the original on 17 December 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Press in India 2021-22, Chapter 9 (PDF) (Report). Government of India . p. 32. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Press in India 2021-22, Chapter 6 (PDF) (Report). Government of India . p. 8. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Press in India 2021-22, Chapter 7 (PDF) (Report). Government of India . p. 5. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Satyamurty, K. (22 November 2000). "Exploring Bangalore, a mouse click away" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 17 September 2013 . ^ "Idhu Akashvani, Bengalooru!" . Deccan Herald . 23 January 2006. Archived from the original on 4 December 2007 . Retrieved 7 October 2007 . ^ "Radio City goes on air in Mumbai" . Business Line . 23 May 2002. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007 . Retrieved 7 October 2007 . ^ Gilbert, Sean, ed. (2006). World Radio TV Handbook 2007: The Directory of International Broadcasting . London: WRTH Publications. pp. 237– 242. ISBN 978-0-82305-997-3 . ^ IRS survey, 2019 (PDF) (Report). MRUC. p. 46. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 September 2020 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ "The unsung lives of Ham radio operators from Bengaluru" . Deccan Herald . 17 August 2023. Archived from the original on 9 September 2025 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Bangalore Amateur Radio Club : Fifty Golden Years 1959–2009" . BARC . Archived from the original on 8 January 2010 . Retrieved 29 March 2010 . ^ a b "How DD brought Indian homes entertainment" .

The New Indian Express . 15 May 2012. Archived from the original on 24 May 2022 . Retrieved 24 May 2022 . ^ "DD OTT to have a towering presence" . Bangalore Mirror . 8 April 2019. Archived from the original on 9 April 2019 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Doordarshan, Bangalore" . Press Information Bureau (Press release). Archived from the original on 11 October 2007 . Retrieved 7 October 2007 . ^ Sevanti Ninan (29 July 2001). "Tune in to quality" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 12 October 2007 . Retrieved 8 October 2007 . ^ "Going for the action" . Business Line . 8 May 2007 . Retrieved 25 January 2012 . ^ "List of fire stations" (PDF) . Karnataka Fire and Emergency Services . Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 June 2022 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Ramnath, Aparajith (2020). "International Networks and Aircraft Manufacture in Colonial and Postcolonial India: States, Entrepreneurs and Educational Institutions, 1940-64" (PDF) . History of Global Arms Transfer (9): 41– 59. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 July 2021. ^ "Hindustan Aircraft" (PDF) . Flight Global . 27 August 1954. p. 296. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 May 2013. ^ "Traffic statistics – Passengers (Intl+Domestic), Annexure IIIC" . Airports Authority of India . April 2006. Archived from the original on 20 January 2013 . Retrieved 25 January 2012 . ^ R. Krishnakumar. "Expressway for airport drive" . Deccan Herald . India. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007 . Retrieved 2 July 2007 . ^ "Bengaluru could get a second airport in no time. But after these hurdles are removed" .

The Print . 6 October 2020. Archived from the original on 18 August 2022 . Retrieved 9 June 2022 . ^ Nanjappa, Vicky (24 May 2008). "Bangalore airport takes wings" . Rediff . Archived from the original on 28 October 2020 . Retrieved 10 July 2021 . ^ Airports by Passenger Traffic, 2022-23 (PDF) (Report). Airports Authority of India . Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 February 2024 . Retrieved 24 April 2023 . ^ "Passenger traffic tops 9.3m at Bangalore airport" .

The Times of India . 14 December 2009. Archived from the original on 12 June 2013 . Retrieved 29 June 2013 . ^ "BMTC Announces Additional Volvo AC Bus Service Connecting Bengaluru Airport and City" . News18 . 27 April 2021. Archived from the original on 20 January 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2022 . ^ "Training Command" . Bharat Rakshak . Archived from the original on 25 May 2025 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Indian Air Force Commands" . Indian Air Force: Touch the Sky with Glory . Indian Air Force . Archived from the original on 28 May 2022 . Retrieved 29 June 2010 . ^ "Aero India 2021: India's military aviation expo underway at Yelahanka Air Force station" .

The Indian Express . 3 February 2021. Archived from the original on 9 November 2021 . Retrieved 9 November 2021 . ^ "Aero India Show" . Aero India 2021 . 3 February 2021. Archived from the original on 9 November 2021 . Retrieved 9 November 2021 . ^ a b "Bangalore's rail connectivity turns 150 years" .

The Economic Times . 3 August 2017. Archived from the original on 5 November 2020 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Indian railway zones" (PDF) . Indian Railways . Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Category of Indian railways stations (PDF) . Indian Railways (Report) . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Sir M Visvesvaraya Terminal station upgraded to Non Suburban Group -2 category" .

The New Indian Express . 12 September 2024. Archived from the original on 23 September 2024 . Retrieved 1 November 2024 . ^ "Bangalore Metro misses deadline for 4th time, minister sets Sept 26 as next date" . India Today . 16 September 2011. Archived from the original on 9 September 2014 . Retrieved 8 September 2014 . ^ Sastry, Anil Kumar (20 October 2011). "South India's first metro flagged off" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 24 January 2018 . Retrieved 24 January 2018 . ^ "India's second longest metro network is here" . Bangalore Mirror . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Metro finally comes to Whitefield, take a ride on March 26 from 7 am!" . Deccan Herald . Archived from the original on 28 March 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "State Cabinet approves phase-II of metro" . Business Standard . 4 January 2012 . Retrieved 6 March 2012 . ^ "Metro Phase 2 will be bigger, better, says BMRCL chief" . Deccan Herald . 23 December 2016. Archived from the original on 25 December 2016 . Retrieved 13 January 2017 . ^ Mathew Philip, Christin (13 March 2026). "Bengaluru suburban rail project cost escalates from Rs 15,767 crore to Rs 23,342 crore due to delays, rolling stock procurement" . Moneycontrol . Retrieved 15 March 2026 .

The 148-km suburban rail network, approved in 2020, was originally scheduled for completion by October 2026 but the deadline recently extended to March 2030 ^ "Bengaluru's first suburban rail section to be operational by 2025-end" . Deccan Herald . 12 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Dual approach: BBMP plans for sustainable, efficient roads" . Bangalore Mirror . 2 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "City still has rain hangover" .

The Hindu . 24 February 2012 . Retrieved 1 June 2013 . ^ Poovanna, Sharan (1 July 2016). "Can the metro solve Bengaluru's traffic problem?" . Live Mint . Retrieved 17 February 2017 . ^ "BDA may split 74-km Peripheral Ring Road into 3c parts to attract bidders" . Deccan Herald . 8 July 2024. Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 1 August 2024 . ^ "Gandhi Road in Bangalore" .

The Indian Express . 26 February 1948 . Retrieved 13 December 2010 . ^ "Bengaluru's M G Road through the years" .

The Indian Express . 26 July 2024. Archived from the original on 10 June 2024 . Retrieved 10 June 2024 . ^ "Chennai-Mumbai" . NHAI . Archived from the original on 5 January 2010 . Retrieved 1 June 2011 . ^ Rationalisation of Numbering Systems of National Highways (PDF) (Report). Department of Road Transport and Highways . 28 April 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 August 2016 . Retrieved 8 July 2016 . ^ Rationalisation of Numbering Systems of National Highways (PDF) (Report). Department of Road Transport and Highways . Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 February 2016 . Retrieved 3 April 2012 . ^ "Prime Minister Narendra Modi inaugurates 118-km Bangalore-Mysore Expressway" .

The Telegraph . 12 March 2023 . Retrieved 13 March 2023 . ^ Shivakumar, C. (2 February 2020). "Chennai-Bangalore Expressway work to start in six months: Nirmala Sitharaman" .

The New Indian Express . Retrieved 16 March 2023 . ^ Shivakumar, C. (26 January 2023). "Chennai-Bengaluru expressway: 14km road work complete" .

The New Indian Express . Archived from the original on 19 September 2024 . Retrieved 26 January 2023 . ^ "Bharatmala 2.0 to focus on expressways, add 4000 km greenfield roads" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 1 July 2020 . Retrieved 5 November 2022 . ^ Anparthi, Anjaya (28 August 2017). "Now, drive from Nagpur to Bengaluru in just 12 hrs" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 31 May 2018 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 . ^ Annual Report, 2016-17 (PDF) (Report). Government of Karnataka . p. 6. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 June 2022 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ a b "BMTC at a glance" . Bengaluru Metropolitan Transport Corporation . Archived from the original on 24 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Sharmada Shastry (28 April 2010). "Bangaloreans begin to bond with the sleek Swedish behemoths" . Deccan Herald . Archived from the original on 2 May 2010 . Retrieved 30 April 2010 . ^ S Praveen Dhaneshkar (20 June 2007). "Loyalty may pay for Volvo commuters!" . Deccan Herald . Archived from the original on 19 August 2007 . Retrieved 10 April 2007 . ^ Annual Report, 2022-23 (PDF) (Report). Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Satellite bus stations fail to take off" .

The Hindu . 28 September 2016 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "KSRTC's Tamil Nadu-bound buses to ply from Shantinagar" . Jagran . 17 March 2011. Archived from the original on 2 October 2013 . Retrieved 10 June 2013 . ^ "After auto-rickshaws, metered taxis to start operating in Bengaluru roads as pilot programme begins" .

The Indian Express . 15 November 2024. Archived from the original on 21 November 2024 . Retrieved 1 December 2024 . ^ "Stir leaves hundreds stranded" .

The Hindu . 15 December 2006. Archived from the original on 13 August 2011 . Retrieved 17 June 2012 . ^ Karnataka State Gazetteer: Bangalore District , p. 91 ^ Vehicle registration in Bengaluru (PDF) (Report). Government of Karnataka. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Bengaluru's vehicle population crosses 80 lakh" .

The Hindu . 1 April 2019. ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 30 May 2022 . Retrieved 7 June 2022 . ^ "No of private vehicles to cross 1 crore mark" .

The Times of India . 23 October 2023. Archived from the original on 28 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Ramachandra, T. V.; Pradeep P. Mujumdar. Urban Floods: Case Study of Bangalore (Report). Indian Institute of Science . Archived from the original on 8 September 2013 . Retrieved 14 September 2013 . ^ "36% diesel vehicles exceed national limit for emissions: Study" .

The Times of India . 25 August 2016. Archived from the original on 25 August 2016 . Retrieved 30 August 2016 . ^ Overall rankings (Report). National Institutional Ranking Framework . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Indian metro cities with the highest literacy rates" . Yahoo . 23 October 2012. Archived from the original on 29 November 2020 . Retrieved 6 April 2014 . ^ "Bengaluru Urban, demography" . Government of Karnataka . Archived from the original on 20 April 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "State's literacy rate lagging" . Deccan Herald . 8 April 2011. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2022 . ^ Rao 1929 , p. 494 ^ Rao 1929 , p. 497 ^ "Trimester system in all Karnataka schools from 1 June" .

The Times of India . 18 May 2004. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 16 October 2007 . ^ Bageshree, S. (9 May 2012). "What will happen to government schools now?" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 14 September 2013 . ^ "Broad choice of Class X boards" . Deccan Herald . 1 July 2004. Archived from the original on 6 November 2007 . Retrieved 16 October 2007 . ^ "Education" . Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike . Archived from the original on 10 June 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Ullas, Sruthy Susan (2 July 2013). "IT crowd, elite prefer international schools" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 20 June 2015 . Retrieved 1 December 2015 . ^ "Students, parents throng PU colleges in city" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 16 May 2006. Archived from the original on 21 September 2007 . Retrieved 16 October 2007 . ^ "Diploma students have a chance in government engineering colleges" .

The Indian Express . 29 August 2013. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 14 September 2013 . ^ Khongwir, Darinia (6 May 2009). "PUC is not the only option" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 2 December 2013 . Retrieved 14 September 2013 . ^ "Holds a century old legacy" .

The Hindu . 11 October 2018. Archived from the original on 22 August 2022 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Old and damp but standing tall" .

The New Indian Express . 28 April 2016. Archived from the original on 8 June 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Govt issues order on trifurcation of Bangalore University" . Deccan Herald . 1 July 2017. Archived from the original on 29 November 2021 . Retrieved 19 February 2019 . ^ "Bengaluru University" .

The Telegraph . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "BU overloaded, wants to split" .

The Times of India . 9 January 2007. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 16 October 2007 . ^ R.C. Bhargava; Ajit Balakrishnan; Anusua Basu; Ram S. Tarneja; Ashok Thakur (25 September 2008). Report of IIM Review Committee (PDF) . Government of India (Report). Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 December 2010 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 . ^ "70 years of mental health" . Deccan Herald . 31 January 2024. Archived from the original on 4 February 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "National Law School of India University" . INET economics . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Bangalore, the education hub" .

The Times of India . 27 June 2011. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 14 September 2013 . ^ "Public libraries in Bengaluru: Where is their story going?" . Deccan Herald . 27 January 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Evolution of Bangalore: From Garden City to Silicon Valley, how immigrants made the city their own" . Firstpost . 26 July 2019. Archived from the original on 6 November 2022 . Retrieved 6 November 2022 . ^ Abram, David; Edwards, Nick (2003). South India (illustrated ed.). Rough Guides. p. 204. ISBN 978-1-84353-103-6 . ^ Richard I'Anson. "Lonely Planet's Best in Travel: top 10 cities for 2012 – travel tips and articles" . Lonely Planet . Archived from the original on 12 September 2012 . Retrieved 6 September 2012 . ^ "Parks in Bengaluru" (PDF) . Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Beyond Botanical gardens, history of Bengaluru's lalbagh" . News minute . 23 April 2021 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Bengaluru's Lalbagh Republic day flower show postponed due to pandemic" .

The Indian Express . 22 January 2021. Archived from the original on 9 June 2022 . Retrieved 9 June 2022 . ^ "Lal Bagh Botanical Gardens" . Karnataka Tourism . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Cubbon Park" . Karnataka Tourism . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Cubbon Park" . Government of Karnataka . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries in India (PDF) . Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change , Government of India (Report). November 2021 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ David, Stephen (18 November 2008). "Old jail in Bangalore turned into Freedom Park" . India Today . Retrieved 1 November 2016 . ^ "Final fade Elgin" . Deccan Chronicle . 7 February 2012 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Remembering Bengaluru's old theatres" . Deccan Chronicle . 1 March 2020 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "The death of single-screen theatres in India: Over 20,000 shut down in 3 decades, last 5,500 fight for survival" .

The Indian Express . 5 June 2024 . Retrieved 1 July 2024 . ^ "PVR Inox announces launch of Bengaluru's largest cinema" .

The Hindu . 11 April 2024 . Retrieved 1 July 2024 . ^ "Ranga Shankara Theatre Festival to celebrate milestone year with 20 plays over 20 days" .

The Hindu . 4 October 2024 . Retrieved 1 December 2024 . ^ "Bangalore Little Theatre succeeded in bridging the city-cantonment divide, says Vijay Padaki" .

The Hindu . 2 July 2024 . Retrieved 1 December 2024 . ^ "Price is no problem for these cricket enthusiasts" . 13 June 2007. Archived from the original on 13 June 2007 . Retrieved 21 March 2022 . ^ "Various popular sports played in the state of Karnataka" . Karnataka online . Archived from the original on 4 April 2022 . Retrieved 21 March 2022 . ^ Bangalore — Mysore , pp. 29 ^ "Chinnaswamy Stadium" . ESPNcricinfo . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . ^ "History of KSCA" . Cricket Karnataka . Archived from the original on 19 April 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "NCA Inaugurated" .

The Hindu . 2 May 2000 . Retrieved 9 May 2007 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ a b "Royal Challengers Bengaluru Cricket Team" . ESPNcricinfo . Retrieved 27 November 2024 . ^ "Erapalli Prasanna" . ESPNcricinfo . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Roger Binny" . ESPNcricinfo . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Anil Kumble" . ESPNcricinfo . Archived from the original on 28 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Venkatesh Prasad" . ESPNcricinfo . Archived from the original on 6 July 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "KL Rahul" . ESPNcricinfo . Archived from the original on 21 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Mayank Agarwal" . ESPNcricinfo . Archived from the original on 22 November 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Stuart Binny" . ESPNcricinfo . Archived from the original on 21 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Karnataka Mini Olympics starts today" .

The Indian Express . 14 November 2024 . Retrieved 24 November 2024 . ^ a b "Sree Kanteerava Stadium - Bengaluru" .

The Hindustan Times . 16 November 2017. Archived from the original on 30 December 2017 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Bangalore Football Stadium lies in a state of despair" . Deccan Herald . 9 July 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ a b c "Bengaluru Football Club" . All India Football Federation . Archived from the original on 13 May 2023 . Retrieved 13 May 2023 . ^ "Primus, Opoku to lead FCBU's challenge" .

The Times of India . 5 September 2020. Archived from the original on 5 September 2020 . Retrieved 18 July 2022 . ^ a b "Ozone releases just one player for Santosh Trophy" . Deccan Herald . 8 March 2018. Archived from the original on 18 July 2022 . Retrieved 18 July 2022 . ^ a b "Bangalore gets new pro football club" .

The Times Of India . 3 January 2013 . Retrieved 18 July 2022 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ a b "Dempo SC, SC Bengaluru share spoils" .

The Navhind Times . 27 December 2023. Archived from the original on 28 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Bengaluru home to great football heroes" . Deccan Herald . 17 June 2018. Archived from the original on 21 March 2022 . Retrieved 21 March 2022 . ^ Kushala, S. (22 May 2002). "Do we need one more stadium?" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 10 March 2023 . Retrieved 27 June 2020 . ^ "Stadiums up their floor price" . Bangalore Mirror . 12 February 2019 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "South Asian basketball in Bengaluru" .

The Hindu . 9 June 2015. Archived from the original on 27 February 2020 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "India three-peat as SABA Champs and qualify to the FIBA Asia Challenge" . Ekalavyas . 9 July 2016. Archived from the original on 6 September 2016 . Retrieved 12 July 2017 . ^ a b "Bengaluru and Punjab in semifinals" .

The Hindu . 1 March 2017. ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 11 July 2022 . ^ a b "Bengaluru Bulls gear up for Pro Kabbadi League" .

The New Indian Express . 21 July 2014. Archived from the original on 18 July 2022 . Retrieved 18 July 2022 . ^ "PKL Season 8 to start on December 22 in Bengaluru" . Sportstar . December 2021. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022 . Retrieved 17 January 2022 . ^ "Bangalore Open" . Association of Tennis Professionals . Archived from the original on 30 November 2002 . Retrieved 10 March 2019 . ^ "Bangalore replaces Mumbai on ATP Tour circuit" . CBSSportsline . Retrieved 1 June 2013 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "Davis Cup – Player profile – Rohan Bopanna" . International Tennis Federation . Archived from the original on 2 March 2011 . Retrieved 7 December 2010 . ^ "Prakash Padukone" . Britannica . Retrieved 10 June 2023 . ^ "Nisha Millet" . London Speaker Bureau . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "A glimpse of Rahul Dravid's house" . Lokmat Times . 15 January 2022 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Pankaj Advani beats Myanmar's Nay Thway to defend World Billiards title" . Scroll.in . 15 November 2018 . Retrieved 18 February 2026 . ^ "Mahesh Bhupathi" . CBSSports . Archived from the original on 16 November 2007 . Retrieved 1 June 2007 . ^ Shekhar, Divya. "Bangalore Club: How Bangalore Club wrote off the Rs 13 Winston Churchill owed it as 'irrecoverable debt' " .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 11 July 2022 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 . ^ "House panel asks govt. to take over golf course and turf club and develop them as lung spaces" .

The Hindu . 16 February 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Somnath Sengupta (15 February 2011). "Institutional Sides In Indian Football: The Story Of ONGC FC, Air India FC And HAL SC" .

The Hard Tackle . Archived from the original on 26 September 2021 . Retrieved 23 January 2021 . ^ "A great entertainer" . Sportstar .

The Hindu Group . 2 February 2008 . Retrieved 24 December 2016 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "Kicking up a storm" .

The Hindu . 25 May 2009. Archived from the original on 29 June 2009 . Retrieved 8 October 2012 . ^ "Sher-e-Punjab enter final of WSH" .

The Indian Express . 2 April 2012 . Retrieved 26 May 2012 . ^ "American Football: Hyderabad's Skykings trump visiting Warhawks" .

The Hindu . 23 July 2013 . Retrieved 26 January 2024 . ^ "Champions Tennis League: It will be 'Bangalore Raptors' " .

The Hindu . 16 November 2021 . Retrieved 18 February 2026 . ^ "Champions Tennis League: It will be 'Bangalore Raptors' " .

The Hindu . 22 October 2014 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Prime Volleyball League: Bengaluru Torpedoes building perfect team environment, says coach" . Sportstar . 31 January 2022 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Nos coordonnées" . Consulat général de France à Bangalore . Archived from the original on 28 June 2012 . Retrieved 25 June 2012 . ^ "German consulate in Bangalore formally inaugurated" . Deccan Herald . 21 November 2008. Archived from the original on 11 December 2013 . Retrieved 25 June 2012 . ^ Bose, Praveen (27 June 2012). "Israel to open consulate in Bangalore" . Business Standard . Retrieved 27 June 2012 . ^ "Consulate of Japan, Bangalore" . Embassy of Japan, New Delhi . Archived from the original on 8 July 2012 . Retrieved 25 June 2012 . ^ "United States Virtual Consulate Bangalore, India" . Consulate General of the United States, Chennai . Archived from the original on 25 November 2011 . Retrieved 25 June 2012 . ^ "British Deputy High Commission, Bangalore" . Government of UK . Archived from the original on 13 April 2013 . Retrieved 7 May 2013 . ^ "Contact Information: Finland's Honorary Consulate, Bangalore (India) – Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Finland: Diplomatic missions: Bangalore (Honorary Consulate)" . Formin.fi. 3 March 2010. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011 . Retrieved 25 November 2010 . ^ "Department of Foreign Affairs" . Embassy of Ireland, New Delhi . Archived from the original on 26 June 2012 . Retrieved 25 June 2012 . ^ "Maldives Honorary Consuls in India" . Maldives High Commission, New Delhi . Archived from the original on 1 October 2011 . Retrieved 25 June 2012 . ^ "Embassy of Peru in India and Honorary Consulates" . Government of Peru . Archived from the original on 20 October 2012 . Retrieved 22 August 2012 . ^ "Missions List" . Meaprotocol . Archived from the original on 15 November 2010 . Retrieved 25 November 2010 . ^ "Trade Office of Canada in Bangalore" . Government of Canada . Archived from the original on 30 July 2012 . Retrieved 25 June 2012 . ^ "No lessons learnt from 'Sister City' " . Deccan Herald . 8 August 2013 . Retrieved 10 July 2022 . ^ "Cleveland's Sister Cities" . City of Cleveland . Archived from the original on 29 March 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2022 . ^ "San Francisco chooses Bangalore as its Indian sister" .

The Times of India . 1 December 2009 . Retrieved 20 January 2022 . ^ "Bangalore's Chinese twin comes calling" .

The New Cambridge History of India . Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. ISBN 978-0-521-26693-2 . Hasan, Fazlul (1970). Bangalore Through The Centuries . Bangalore: Historical Publications. Vagale, Uday Kumar (6 May 2004). Public Space in Bangalore: Present and Future Projections (Thesis). Virginia Tech. hdl : 10919/9941 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 June 2012 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . (792 kB) . Digital Libraries and Archives. 2006. Virginia Tech. 27 April 2004. Meyer, William Stevenson; Burn, Richard; Cotton, James Sutherland; Risley, Herbert Hope (2006) .