The territory was subsequently claimed and settled by Portugal , which founded the country's first city, São Vicente , in 1532 and imported enslaved Africans to work on plantations . Brazil remained a colony until 1815, when it was elevated to a united kingdom with Portugal after the transfer of the Portuguese court to Rio de Janeiro . Prince Pedro of Braganza declared Brazilian independence in 1822 and, after waging a war against Portugal , established the Empire of Brazil .

The country's first constitution in 1824 established a bicameral legislature and enshrined principles such as freedom of religion and the press; slavery was gradually abolished until its final abolition in 1888 . Brazil became a presidential republic following a military coup d'état in 1889. An armed revolution in 1930 ended the First Republic and brought Getúlio Vargas to power. Vargas' self-coup in 1937 ushered the authoritarian Estado Novo , in which he oversaw Brazil's involvement in World War II . Democracy was restored after Vargas' ousting in 1945 . An authoritarian military dictatorship emerged in 1964 with support from the United States and ruled until 1985, after which civilian governance resumed. Brazil's current constitution , enacted in 1988, defines it as a democratic federal republic . Brazil is a regional and middle power , and has been described as a rising global power . It is an emerging , upper-middle income economy and newly industrialized country , with one of the 10 largest economies in the world in both nominal and PPP terms, the largest economy in Latin America and the Southern Hemisphere , and the largest share of wealth in South America. With a complex and highly diversified economy , Brazil is one of the world's major or primary exporters of various agricultural goods , mineral resources , and manufactured products .

The country ranks thirteenth in the world by number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites . Brazil is a founding member of the United Nations , the G20 , BRICS , G4 , Mercosur , Organization of American States , Organization of Ibero-American States , and the Community of Portuguese Language Countries ; it is also an observer state of the Arab League and a major non-NATO ally of the United States. Etymology Main article: Name of Brazil The word Brazil probably comes from the Portuguese word for brazilwood , a tree that once grew plentifully along the Brazilian coast.

In Portuguese, brazilwood is called pau-brasil , with the word brasil commonly given the etymology 'red like an ember ', formed from brasa ('ember') and the suffix -il (from -iculum or -ilium ). It has alternatively been suggested that this is a folk etymology for a word for the plant related to an Arabic or Asian word for a red plant.

As brazilwood produces a deep red dye, it was highly valued by the European textile industry and was the earliest commercially exploited product from Brazil. Throughout the 16th century, massive amounts of brazilwood were harvested by indigenous peoples (mostly Tupi ) along the Brazilian coast, who sold the timber to European traders in return for assorted European consumer goods.

The official Portuguese name of the land, in original Portuguese records, was the 'Land of the Holy Cross' ( Terra da Santa Cruz ), but European sailors and merchants commonly called it the 'Land of Brazil' ( Terra do Brasil ) because of the brazilwood trade. Popular usage eclipsed and eventually supplanted the official Portuguese name. Some early sailors called it the 'Land of Parrots'.

The earliest pottery ever found in the Western Hemisphere was excavated in the Amazon basin of Brazil and radiocarbon dated to over 8,000 years ago (6000 BC).

The pottery was found near Santarém and provides evidence that the region supported a complex prehistoric culture.

The Marajoara culture flourished on Marajó in the Amazon delta from AD 400 to 1400, developing sophisticated pottery, social stratification , large populations, mound building , and complex social formations such as chiefdoms . Around the time of the Portuguese arrival, the territory of present day Brazil had an estimated Indigenous population of 7 million people, mostly semi-nomadic, who subsisted on hunting, fishing, gathering, and migrant agriculture.

The population comprised several large Indigenous ethnic groups (e.g., the Tupis, Guaranis , and Gês .

The Tupi people were subdivided into the Tupiniquins and Tupinambás .

Before the arrival of the Europeans, the boundaries between these groups and their subgroups were marked by wars that arose from differences in culture, language and moral beliefs. These wars also involved large-scale military actions on land and water, with cannibalistic rituals on prisoners of war.

The founding of São Vicente , in what is now the state of São Paulo , marks the effective beginning of colonization in Brazil, in 1532. However, the decentralized and unorganized captaincy system proved unsuccessful, and in 1549 the Portuguese king restructured them into the Governorate General of Brazil in the city of Salvador , which became the capital of a single and centralized Portuguese colony in South America.

In the first two centuries of colonization, Indigenous and European groups lived in constant war, establishing opportunistic alliances in order to gain advantages against each other. Execution of the Punishment of the Whip by Jean-Baptiste Debret . Nearly 5 million enslaved Africans were imported to Brazil during the Atlantic slave trade , more than any other country.

By the mid-16th century, cane sugar had become Brazil's most important export , while slaves purchased in Sub-Saharan Africa in the slave market of Western Africa (not only those from Portuguese allies of their colonies in Angola and Mozambique ), had become its largest import, to cope with sugarcane plantations , due to increasing international demand for Brazilian sugar. Brazil received more than 2.8 million slaves from Africa between the years 1500 and 1800.

By the end of the 17th century, sugar exports began to decline and the discovery of gold by bandeirantes in the 1690s would become the new backbone of the colony's economy, fostering a gold rush which attracted thousands of new settlers to Brazil from Portugal and all Portuguese colonies around the world. This increased level of immigration in turn caused some conflicts between newcomers and old settlers. Portuguese expeditions known as bandeiras gradually expanded Brazil's original colonial frontiers in South America to its approximately current borders.

In this era, other European powers tried to colonize parts of Brazil, in incursions that the Portuguese had to fight, notably the French in Rio during the 1560s , in Maranhão during the 1610s , and the Dutch in Bahia and Pernambuco , during the Dutch–Portuguese War , after the end of Iberian Union .

In 1809, in retaliation for being forced into exile, the Prince Regent ordered the conquest of French Guiana . With the end of the Peninsular War in 1814, the courts of Europe demanded that Queen Maria I and Prince Regent John return to Portugal, deeming it unfit for the head of an ancient European monarchy to reside in a colony.

In 1815, to justify continuing to live in Brazil, where the royal court had thrived for six years, the Crown established the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves , thus creating a pluricontinental transatlantic monarchic state. However, the leadership in Portugal, resentful of the new status of its larger colony, continued to demand the return of the court to Lisbon (see Liberal Revolution of 1820 ).

In 1821, acceding to the demands of revolutionaries who had taken the city of Porto , John VI departed for Lisbon. There he swore an oath to the new constitution, leaving his son, Prince Pedro de Alcântara , as Regent of the Kingdom of Brazil . Empire of Brazil Main articles: Independence of Brazil and Empire of Brazil Declaration of the Brazilian independence by Pedro I on 7 September 1822 Tensions between Portuguese and Brazilians increased and the Portuguese Cortes , guided by the new political regime imposed by the Liberal Revolution, tried to re-establish Brazil as a colony.

The Brazilians refused to yield, and Prince Pedro decided to side with them, declaring the country's independence from Portugal on 7 September 1822. A month later, Prince Pedro was proclaimed the first Emperor of Brazil , with the royal title of Dom Pedro I , resulting in the founding of the Empire of Brazil .

The Brazilian War of Independence , which had already begun along this process, spread through the northern, northeastern regions and in the Cisplatina province.

The last Portuguese soldiers surrendered on 8 March 1824; Portugal officially recognized Brazilian independence on 29 August 1825.

On 7 April 1831, worn down by years of administrative turmoil and political dissent with both liberals and conservatives, including an attempt of republican secession and unreconciled to the way that absolutists in Portugal had given in the succession of King John VI, Pedro I departed for Portugal to reclaim his daughter's crown after abdicating the Brazilian throne in favor of his five-year-old son and heir (Dom Pedro II ). Pedro II , Emperor of Brazil between 1831 and 1889 As the new Emperor could not exert his constitutional powers until he came of age, a regency was set up by the General Assembly .

In the absence of a charismatic figure who could represent a moderate face of power, a series of localized rebellions took place, such as the Cabanagem in Grão-Pará , the Malê Revolt in Salvador, the Balaiada ( Maranhão ), the Sabinada ( Bahia ), and the Ragamuffin War , which began in Rio Grande do Sul and was supported by Giuseppe Garibaldi . These emerged from the provinces' dissatisfaction with the central power, coupled with old and latent social tensions peculiar to a vast, slaveholding and newly independent nation state. This period of internal political and social upheaval, which included the Praieira revolt in Pernambuco , was overcome only at the end of the 1840s, years after the end of the regency, which occurred with the premature coronation of Pedro II in 1841.

During the last phase of the monarchy, internal political debate centered on the issue of slavery.

The Atlantic slave trade was outlawed in 1850, as a result of the British Aberdeen Act and the Eusébio de Queirós Law , but only in May 1888, after a long process of internal mobilization and debate for an ethical and legal dismantling of slavery in the country , was the institution formally abolished with the approval of the Golden Law .

The foreign-affairs policies of the monarchy dealt with issues pertaining Brazil's neighboring countries in the Southern Cone . Long after the Cisplatine War that resulted in the independence of Uruguay , Brazil won three international wars during the 58-year reign of Pedro II: the Platine War , the Uruguayan War and the devastating Paraguayan War , the largest war effort in Brazilian history.

Although there was no desire among the majority of Brazilians to change the country's form of government, on 15 November 1889, in disagreement with the majority of the Imperial Army officers, as well as with rural and financial elites, the monarchy was overthrown by a military coup . A few days later, the national flag was replaced with a new design that included the national motto " Ordem e Progresso ", influenced by positivism . 15 November is now Republic Day , a national holiday. Early Republic Main articles: First Brazilian Republic , Vargas Era , and Fourth Brazilian Republic Proclamation of the Republic , 1893, oil on canvas by Benedito Calixto Construction of the National Congress building in Brasília, 1959, during the JK administration The early republican government was a military dictatorship, with the army dominating affairs both in Rio de Janeiro and in the states. Freedom of the press disappeared and elections were controlled by those in power. Not until 1894, following an economic crisis and a military one , did civilians take power, remaining there until October 1930.

In this first republican period, Brazil maintained a relative balance characterized by a success in resolving border disputes with neighboring countries, only broken by the Acre War (1899–1902) and its involvement in World War I (1914–1918), followed by a failed attempt to exert a prominent role in the League of Nations ; Internally, from the crisis of Encilhamento and the Navy Revolts , a prolonged cycle of financial, political and social instability began until the 1920s, keeping the country besieged by various rebellions, both civilian and military. Little by little, a cycle of general instability sparked by these crises undermined the regime to such an extent that in the wake of the murder of his running mate, the defeated opposition presidential candidate Getúlio Vargas , supported by most of the military, successfully led the Revolution of 1930 . Vargas and the military were supposed to assume power temporarily, but instead closed down Congress, extinguished the Constitution, ruled with emergency powers and replaced the states' governors with his own supporters.

In the 1930s, three attempts to remove Vargas and his supporters from power failed.

The first was the Constitutionalist Revolution in 1932, led by São Paulo's oligarchy.

The second was a communist uprising in November 1935, and the third a putsch attempt by local fascists in May 1938.

The 1935 uprising created a security crisis in which Congress transferred more power to the executive branch.

The 1937 coup d'état resulted in the cancellation of the 1938 election and formalized Vargas as dictator, beginning the Estado Novo era.

During this period, government brutality and censorship of the press increased.

During World War II , Brazil remained neutral until August 1942, when the country suffered retaliation by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy in a strategic dispute over the South Atlantic, and, therefore, entered the war on the allied side .

In addition to its participation in the battle of the Atlantic , Brazil also sent an expeditionary force to fight in the Italian campaign . With the Allied victory in 1945 and the end of the fascist regimes in Europe, Vargas' position became untenable, and he was swiftly overthrown in another military coup, with democracy reinstated by the same army that had ended it 15 years earlier. Vargas committed suicide in August 1954 amid a political crisis, after having returned to power by election in 1950. Several brief interim governments followed Vargas' suicide. Juscelino Kubitschek became president in 1956 and assumed a conciliatory stance towards the political opposition that allowed him to govern without major crises.

The economy and industrial sector grew remarkably, but his greatest achievement was the construction of the new capital city of Brasília , inaugurated in 1960. Kubitschek's successor, Jânio Quadros , resigned in 1961 less than a year after taking office. His vice-president, João Goulart , assumed the presidency, but aroused strong political opposition and was deposed in April 1964 by a coup that resulted in a military dictatorship . Military dictatorship Main article: Military dictatorship in Brazil M41s along the Avenida Presidente Vargas , Rio de Janeiro , in April 1968, during the military dictatorship The new regime was intended to be transitory, but gradually closed in on itself and became a full dictatorship with the promulgation of the Fifth Institutional Act in 1968. Oppression was not limited to those who resorted to guerrilla tactics to fight the regime , but also reached institutional opponents, artists, journalists and other members of civil society, inside and outside the country through " Operation Condor ". Like other authoritarian regimes , due to an economic boom, known as the " economic miracle ", the Brazilian military dictatorship reached a peak in popularity in the early 1970s. Slowly, however, the wear and tear of years of dictatorial power had not slowed the repression, even after the defeat of the leftist guerrillas.

The inability to deal with the economic crises of the period and popular pressure made a redemocratization policy inevitable, which from the regime side was led by Generals Ernesto Geisel and Golbery do Couto e Silva . With the enactment of the Amnesty Law in 1979, Brazil began a slow return to democracy , which was completed during the 1980s. Contemporary era Main article: History of Brazil (1985–present) Ulysses Guimarães holding the Constitution of 1988 Civilians returned to power in 1985 when José Sarney assumed the presidency. He became unpopular during his tenure through failure to control the economic crisis and hyperinflation he inherited from the military regime. Sarney's unsuccessful government led to the election in 1989 of the almost-unknown Fernando Collor , who was subsequently impeached by the National Congress in 1992. Collor was succeeded by his vice-president, Itamar Franco , who appointed Fernando Henrique Cardoso as Minister of Finance.

In 1994, Cardoso devised a highly successful Plano Real that, after decades of failed economic plans made by previous governments attempting to curb hyperinflation, finally stabilized the Brazilian economy. Cardoso won the 1994 election , and again in 1998 .

The peaceful transition of power from Cardoso to his main opposition leader, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva ( elected in 2002 and re-elected in 2006 ), was seen as proof that Brazil had achieved a long-sought political stability. However, sparked by discontent accumulated over decades from corruption, police brutality , inefficiencies of the political establishment and public service , numerous peaceful protests erupted in Brazil in the middle of the first term of Dilma Rousseff , who had succeeded Lula after winning election in 2010 and again in 2014 by narrow margins. Rousseff was impeached by the Brazilian Congress in 2016, halfway into her second term, and replaced by her vice-president Michel Temer , who assumed full presidential powers after Rousseff's impeachment was accepted on 31 August. Large street protests for and against her took place during the impeachment process.

The charges against her were fueled by political and economic crises along with evidence of involvement with politicians from all the primary political parties.

In 2017, the Supreme Court requested the investigation of 71 Brazilian lawmakers and nine ministers of President Michel Temer's cabinet who were allegedly linked to the Petrobras corruption scandal . President Temer himself was also accused of corruption .

In the fiercely contested 2018 elections , the controversial conservative candidate Jair Bolsonaro of the Social Liberal Party (PSL) was elected president, winning in the second round against Fernando Haddad , of the Workers Party (PT), with the support of 55.13% of the valid votes.

In the early 2020s, Brazil became one of the hardest hit countries during the COVID-19 pandemic , receiving the second-highest death toll worldwide after the United States.

In May 2021, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva stated that he would run for a third term in the 2022 Brazilian general election against Bolsonaro.

In October 2022, Lula was in first place in the first round, with 48.43% of the support from the electorate, and received 50.90% of the votes in the second round.

On 8 January 2023, a week after Lula's inauguration, a mob of Bolsonaro's supporters attacked Brazil's federal government buildings in the capital, Brasília , after several weeks of unrest. Geography Main article: Geography of Brazil A topographic map of Brazil Brazil occupies nearly half of the land area of South America (47.7%), including a large area along its eastern coast and much of the continent's interior. It borders Uruguay to the south; Argentina and Paraguay to the southwest; Bolivia and Peru to the west; Colombia to the northwest; and Venezuela , Guyana , Suriname , and France (French overseas region of French Guiana ) to the north. It shares a border with every South American country except Ecuador and Chile .

The Brazilian territory also encompasses a number of oceanic archipelagos, such as Fernando de Noronha , Rocas Atoll , Saint Peter and Saint Paul Archipelago , and the islands of Trindade and Martim Vaz . Its size, relief, climate, and natural resources make Brazil geographically diverse. Including its Atlantic islands, Brazil lies between latitudes 6°N and 34°S , and longitudes 28° and 74°W . Brazil is the fifth largest country in the world, and third largest in the Americas, with a total area of 8,515,767.049 km 2 (3,287,956 sq mi), including 55,455 km 2 (21,411 sq mi) of water. Brazil is the only country in the world that has the equator and the Tropic of Capricorn running through it. It spans four time zones ; from UTC−5 comprising the state of Acre and the westernmost portion of Amazonas , to UTC−4 in the western states, to UTC−3 in the eastern states (the national time ) and UTC−2 in the Atlantic islands . Climate Main article: Climate of Brazil Brazil map of Köppen climate classification zones The climate of Brazil comprises a wide range of weather conditions across a large area and varied topography, but most of the country is tropical. According to the Köppen system , Brazil hosts six major climatic subtypes: desert , equatorial , tropical , semiarid , oceanic and subtropical .

The different climatic conditions produce environments ranging from equatorial rainforests in the north and semiarid deserts in the northeast, to temperate coniferous forests in the south and tropical savannas in central Brazil.

In Brazil, forest cover is around 59% of the total land area, equivalent to 496,619,600 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 588,898,000 hectares (ha) in 1990.

In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 485,396,000 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 11,223,600 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest, 44% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 30% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For 2015, 56% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership and 44% private ownership . Many regions have starkly different microclimates . An equatorial climate characterizes much of northern Brazil. There is no real dry season , but there are some variations in the period of the year when most rain falls. Temperatures average 25 °C (77 °F), with more significant temperature variation between night and day than between seasons. Over central Brazil, rainfall is more seasonal, characteristic of a savanna climate. This region is as extensive as the Amazon basin but has a very different climate as it lies farther south at a higher altitude.

In the interior northeast, seasonal rainfall is even more extreme. South of Bahia, near the coasts, and more southerly most of the state of São Paulo, the distribution of rainfall changes, with rain falling throughout the year.

The south enjoys subtropical conditions, with cool winters and average annual temperatures not exceeding 18 °C (64.4 °F); winter frosts and snowfall are not rare in the highest areas.

The semiarid climatic region generally receives less than 800 millimeters (31.5 in) of rain, most of which generally falls in a period of three to five months of the year and occasionally less than this, creating long periods of drought. Brazil's 1877–78 Grande Seca (Great Drought), the worst in Brazil's history, caused approximately half a million deaths. A similarly devastating drought occurred in 1915.

In 2024, for the first time, "a drought has covered all the way from the North to the country's Southeast". It is the strongest drought in Brazil since the beginning of measurement in the 1950s, covering almost 60% of the country's territory.

The drought is linked to deforestation and climate change.

Since 1850, Brazil has cumulatively contributed an amount of CO 2 placing it among the top greenhouse gas emitters in the world, mainly due to its land use and forestry practices. Climate change in Brazil is causing higher temperatures and longer-lasting heatwaves, changing precipitation patterns, more intense wildfires and heightened fire risk. Brazil's hydropower, agriculture and urban water supplies will be affected. Brazil's rainforests, and the Amazon, are particularly at risk to climate change.

At worst, large areas of the Amazon River basin could turn into savannah, with severe consequences for global climate and local livelihoods. Extreme weather events like droughts and flash floods are causing annual losses of around R$13 billion (US$2.6 billion), equivalent to 0.1% of the country's 2022 GDP. Climate impacts could exacerbate poverty. Brazil's greenhouse gas emissions per person are higher than the global average , and Brazil is among the top 10 highest emitting countries . Greenhouse gas emissions by Brazil are over 4% of the annual world total.

The main upland area occupies most of the southern half of the country.

The northwestern parts of the plateau consist of broad, rolling terrain broken by low, rounded hills.

The southeastern section is more rugged, with a complex mass of ridges and mountain ranges reaching elevations of up to 1,200 meters (3,900 ft). These ranges include the Mantiqueira and Espinhaço mountains and the Serra do Mar .

In the north, the Guiana Highlands form a major drainage divide, separating rivers that flow south into the Amazon Basin from rivers that empty into the Orinoco River system, in Venezuela, to the north.

The highest point in Brazil is the Pico da Neblina at 2,994 meters (9,823 ft), and the lowest is the Atlantic Ocean. Brazil has a dense and complex system of rivers, one of the world's most extensive, with eight major drainage basins, all of which drain into the Atlantic. Major rivers include the Amazon (the world's largest in terms of water volume), the Paraná and its major tributary the Iguaçu (which includes the Iguazu Falls ), the Negro , São Francisco , Xingu , Madeira and Tapajós rivers. Biodiversity and conservation Main articles: Environment of Brazil , Wildlife of Brazil , and Conservation in Brazil Further information: Environmental issues in Brazil and Protected areas of Brazil The toco toucan is an animal typical of the Brazilian savannas .

The wildlife of Brazil comprises all naturally occurring animals, plants, and fungi in the South American country. Home to 60% of the Amazon rainforest, which accounts for approximately one-tenth of all species in the world, Brazil is considered to have the greatest biodiversity of any country on the planet, containing over 70% of all animal and plant species catalogued. Brazil has the most known species of plants (55,000), freshwater fish (3,000) and mammals (over 689). It also ranks third on the list of countries with the most bird species (1,832) and second with the most reptile species (744).

The number of fungal species is unknown but is large. Brazil is second only to Indonesia as the country with the most endemic species. Brazil's large territory comprises different ecosystems, such as the Amazon rainforest, recognized as having the greatest biological diversity in the world, with the Atlantic Forest and the Cerrado sustaining the greatest biodiversity.

In the south, the Araucaria moist forests grow under temperate conditions.

The rich wildlife of Brazil reflects the variety of natural habitats. Scientists estimate that the total number of plant and animal species in Brazil could approach four million, mostly invertebrates. Larger mammals include carnivores pumas , jaguars , ocelots , rare bush dogs , and South American foxes , and herbivores peccaries , tapirs , anteaters , sloths , opossums and armadillos . Deer are plentiful in the south, and many species of New World monkeys are found in the northern rainforests. Cumulatively, Brazil has the highest percentage of deforested and highly degraded rainforest of any Amazonia nation. More than one-fifth of the Amazon rainforest in Brazil has been completely destroyed, and more than 70 mammals are endangered.

The threat of extinction comes from several sources, including deforestation and poaching . Extinction is even more problematic in the Atlantic Forest, where nearly 93% of the forest has been cleared. Of the 202 endangered animals in Brazil, 171 are in the Atlantic Forest.

The Amazon rainforest has been under direct threat of deforestation since the 1970s because of rapid economic and demographic expansion. Extensive legal and illegal logging destroy forests the size of a small country per year, and with it a diverse series of species through habitat destruction and habitat fragmentation .

Since 1970, over 600,000 square kilometers (230,000 sq mi) of the Amazon rainforest have been cleared by logging.

In 2017, preserved native vegetation occupied 61% of the Brazilian territory. Agriculture occupied only 8% of the national territory and pastures 19.7%. For comparison, in 2019, although 43% of the entire European continent has forests, only 3% of the total forest area in Europe is of native forest. Brazil has a strong interest in conservation, as its agriculture sector directly depends on its forests. Government and politics Main articles: Politics of Brazil , Federal government of Brazil , and Elections in Brazil The form of government is a democratic federative republic , with a presidential system , as decided in a 1993 referendum .

The president is both head of state and head of government of the Union and is elected for a four-year term, with the possibility of re-election for a second successive term.

The current president is Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva .

The president appoints the Ministers of State , who form the cabinet and assist in government. National Congress , seat of the legislative branch Palácio do Planalto , the official workplace of the President of Brazil The Supreme Federal Court , Brazil's highest court Legislative houses in each political entity are the main source of law in Brazil.

The National Congress is the federation's bicameral legislature, consisting of the Chamber of Deputies and the Federal Senate .

The Senate represents the 26 states and the Federal District . Each state and the Federal District has a representation of three senators, who are elected by popular ballot for a term of eight years.

The Chamber of Deputies represents the people of each state, and its members are elected for a four-year term by a system of proportional representation . Judiciary authorities exercise jurisdictional duties almost exclusively. According to International IDEA 's Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Brazil performs in the mid to high range on overall democratic measures, with particular strengths in inclusive suffrage, freedom of religion, and civic engagement.

In 2021, the Economist Intelligence Unit 's Democracy Index categorized Brazil as a " flawed democracy ", ranking 46th in the report, and Freedom House classified it as a free country at Freedom in the World report. According to the Regimes of the World classification Brazil was an electoral democracy in year 2024.

The political-administrative organization of the Federative Republic of Brazil comprises the Union, the states, the Federal District, and the municipalities.

The Union, the states, the Federal District, and the municipalities, are the "spheres of government".

The federation is set on five fundamental principles: sovereignty, citizenship, dignity of human beings, the social values of labor and freedom of enterprise, and political pluralism .

The classic tripartite branches of government (executive, legislative and judicial under a checks and balances system) are formally established by the constitution.

The executive and legislative are organized independently in all three spheres of government , while the judiciary is organized only at the federal and state and Federal District spheres. All members of the executive and legislative branches are directly elected. For most of its democratic history, Brazil has had a multi-party system , with proportional representation . Voting is compulsory for the literate between 18 and 70 years old and optional for illiterates and those between 16 and 18 or beyond 70.

The country has around 30 registered political parties . Twenty political parties are represented in Congress. It is common for politicians to switch parties, and thus the proportion of congressional seats held by particular parties changes regularly. Law Main article: Law of Brazil Brazilian law is based on the civil law legal system and civil law concepts prevail over common law practice. Most of Brazilian law is codified, although non-codified statutes also represent a substantial part, playing a complementary role. Court decisions set out interpretive guidelines; however, they are seldom binding on other specific cases. Doctrinal works and the works of academic jurists have strong influence in law creation and in law cases. Judges and other judicial officials are appointed after passing entry exams.

The legal system is based on the Federal Constitution , promulgated on 5 October 1988, and the fundamental law of Brazil. All other legislation and court decisions must conform to its rules.

As of July 2022 , there have been 124 amendments.

The highest court is the Supreme Federal Court . States have their own constitutions, which must not contradict the Federal Constitution. Municipalities and the Federal District have "organic laws" ( leis orgânicas ), which act in a similar way to constitutions. Legislative entities are the main source of statutes, although in certain matters judiciary and executive bodies may enact legal norms. Jurisdiction is administered by the judiciary entities, although in rare situations the Federal Constitution allows the Federal Senate to pass on legal judgments. There are also specialized military, labor and electoral courts . Political subdivisions Main article: Subdivisions of Brazil Further information: Municipalities of Brazil , States of Brazil , and Regions of Brazil Brazil is a federation composed of 26 states , one federal district , and the 5,571 municipalities . States have autonomous administrations, collect their own taxes and receive a share of taxes collected by the Federal government. They have a governor and a unicameral legislative body elected directly by their voters. They also have independent Courts of Law for common justice. States have the ability to create their own laws and establish their own constitutions but criminal and civil laws can be voted by only the federal bicameral Congress and are uniform throughout the country. Atlantic Ocean Pacific Ocean North Northeast Central-West Southeast South Acre Amazonas Pará Roraima Amapá Rondônia Tocantins Maranhão Bahia Piauí Ceará Rio Grande do Norte Paraíba Pernambuco Alagoas Sergipe Mato Grosso Mato Grosso do Sul Federal District Goiás Minas Gerais São Paulo Rio de Janeiro Espírito Santo Paraná Santa Catarina Rio Grande do Sul Argentina Bolivia Chile Colombia French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Municipalities, as the states, have autonomous administrations, collect their own taxes and receive a share of taxes collected by the federal and state government. Each has an elected mayor and legislative body, but no separate Court of Law. Indeed, a Court of Law organized by the state can encompass many municipalities in a single justice administrative division called comarca . Brazil's constitution also provides for the creation of federal territories , which are administrative divisions directly controlled by the federal government. However, there are currently no federal territories in the country, as the 1988 constitution abolished the last three: Amapá and Roraima (which gained statehood) and Fernando de Noronha, which became a state district of Pernambuco . Foreign relations Main article: Foreign relations of Brazil Itamaraty Palace , the seat of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Brazil's international relations are based on Article 4 of the Federal Constitution, which establishes non-intervention , self-determination , international cooperation and the peaceful settlement of conflicts as the guiding principles of Brazil's relationship with other countries and multilateral organizations. According to the constitution, the president has ultimate authority over foreign policy, while Congress is tasked with reviewing and considering all diplomatic nominations and international treaties , as well as legislation relating to Brazilian foreign policy. Brazil's foreign policy is a by-product of the country's position as a regional power in Latin America, a leader among developing countries , and an emerging world power . Brazilian foreign policy has generally been based on the principles of multilateralism , peaceful dispute settlement, and non-intervention in the affairs of other countries. Brazil is a founding member state of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP), also known as the Lusophone Commonwealth, an international organization and political association of Lusophone nations. An increasingly well-developed tool of Brazil's foreign policy is providing aid as a donor to other developing countries. Brazil does not just use its growing economic strength to provide financial aid, but it also provides high levels of expertise and most importantly of all, a quiet non-confrontational diplomacy to improve governance levels. Total aid is estimated to be around $1 billion per year.

In addition, Brazil already managed a peacekeeping mission in Haiti ($350 million) and makes in-kind contributions to the World Food Programme ($300 million).

The scale of this aid places it on par with China and India.

The Brazilian South-South aid has been described as a "global model in waiting". Military Main article: Brazilian Armed Forces Brazilian Navy's flagship PHM Atlântico and frigate Liberal (F-43) (background) The armed forces of Brazil are the largest in Latin America by active personnel and the largest in terms of military equipment. It consists of the Brazilian Army (including the Army Aviation Command ), the Brazilian Navy (including the Marine Corps and Naval Aviation ) and the Brazilian Air Force . Brazil's conscription policy gives it one of the world's largest military forces, estimated at more than 1.6 million reservists annually.

The Air Force is the largest in Latin America and has about 700 crewed aircraft in service and effective about 67,000 personnel. Numbering close to 236,000 active personnel, the Brazilian Army has the largest number of armored vehicles in South America, including armored transports and tanks .

The states' Military Police and the Military Firefighters Corps are designated as auxiliary forces of the army by the constitution, but are under the control of each state's governor. Brazil's navy once operated some of the most powerful warships in the world with the two Minas Geraes -class dreadnoughts , sparking a naval arms race between Argentina, Brazil, and Chile . Today, it is a green water force and has a group of specialized elite in retaking ships and naval facilities, GRUMEC , unit specially trained to protect Brazilian oil platforms along its coast.

As of 2022 , it is the only navy in Latin America that operates a helicopter carrier , NAM Atlântico and one of twelve navies in the world to operate or have one under construction. Law enforcement and crime Main articles: Law enforcement in Brazil and Crime in Brazil Headquarters of the Federal Police of Brazil in Brasília In Brazil, the constitution establishes six different police agencies for law enforcement: Federal Police Department , Federal Highway Police , Federal Railroad Police , Federal, District and State Penal Police (included by the Constitutional Amendment No. 104, of 2019), Military Police and Civil Police . Of these, the former three are affiliated with federal authorities, the latter two are subordinate to state governments and the Penal Police can be subordinated to the federal or state/district government. All police forces are overseen by the executive branch of the federal or state governments.

The National Public Security Force also can act in public disorder situations arising anywhere in the country.

The country has high levels of violent crime, such as gun violence and homicides.

In 2022, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) estimated an intentional homicide rate of 21.1 per 100,000 inhabitants.

The number considered acceptable by the World Health Organization (WHO) is about 10 homicides per 100,000 inhabitants.

In 2025, Brazil recorded 34,086 homicides, down from 38,374 in 2024, and from a record 63,880 in 2017. Homicide rates vary regionally.

While in São Paulo the homicide rate registered in 2025 was 5.4 per 100,000 inhabitants, in Ceará it was 32.6 per 100,000 inhabitants.

The national homicide rate for 2025 was 16 per 100,000 inhabitants, the lowest in over a decade. Brazil also has high levels of incarceration. It had the third largest prison population in the world of approximately 909,067 prisoners in 2024, which put it only behind the United States (1,808,100) and China (1,690,000).

The nation ratified the American Convention on Human Rights .

After rapid growth in preceding decades, Brazil entered a recession in 2014 amid a political corruption scandal and nationwide protests; in 2024, the economy began showing consistent significant growth. Brazil has a labor force of roughly 100 million, which is the world's fifth largest . Its foreign exchange reserves are the tenth-highest in the world.

The B3 in São Paulo is the largest stock exchange of Latin America by market capitalization . Roughly one-fifth of Brazilians live in poverty: about 3.8% of the total population lives at $3.00 a day, while about 23% live at $8.30 a day. Brazil's economy suffers from endemic corruption and high income inequality .

The Brazilian real is the national currency. Brazil's diversified economy includes agriculture, industry and a wide range of services.

The large service sector accounts for about 72.7% of total GDP, followed by the industrial sector (20.7%), while the agriculture sector is by far the smallest, making up 6.6% of total GDP. Brazil is one of the largest producers of various agricultural commodities , and also has a large cooperative sector that provides 50% of the food in the country. It has been the world's largest producer of coffee for the last 150 years and is the world's largest producer of sugarcane, soy, coffee and oranges; is one of the top five producers of maize, cotton, lemon, tobacco, pineapple, banana, beans, coconut, watermelon and papaya; and is one of the top 10 world producers of cocoa, cashew, mango, rice, tomato, sorghum, tangerine, avocado, persimmon, and guava, among others. Regarding livestock, it is one of the five largest producers of chicken meat, beef, pork and cow's milk in the world.

In the mining sector , Brazil is among the largest producers of iron ore, copper, gold, bauxite, manganese, tin, niobium , and nickel.

In terms of precious stones, Brazil is the world's largest producer of amethyst , topaz , agate and one of the main producers of tourmaline , emerald , aquamarine , garnet and opal .

The country is a major exporter of soy, iron ore, pulp (cellulose), maize, beef, chicken meat, soybean meal, sugar, coffee, tobacco, cotton, orange juice, footwear, airplanes, cars, vehicle parts, gold, ethanol and semi-finished iron, among other products. Brazil is the world's 24th-largest exporter and 26th-largest importer as of 2021 . China is its largest trading partner, accounting for 32% of the total trade. Other large trading partners include the United States, Argentina, the Netherlands and Canada. Its automotive industry is the eighth-largest in the world.

In the food industry , Brazil was the second-largest exporter of processed foods in the world in 2019.

The country was the second-largest producer of pulp in the world and the eighth-largest producer of paper in 2016.

In the footwear industry , Brazil was the fourth-largest producer in 2019. It was also the ninth-largest producer of steel in the world.

In 2018, the chemical industry of Brazil was the eighth-largest in the world.

Although it was among the five largest world producers in 2013, Brazil's textile industry is very little integrated into world trade.

The tertiary sector (trade and services) represented 75.8% of the country's GDP in 2018, according to the IBGE.

The service sector was responsible for 60% of GDP and trade for 13%. It covers commerce, transport, education, social and health services, research and development, sports activities, etc. Micro and small businesses represent 30% of the country's GDP.

In the commercial sector they represent 53% of the GDP within the activities of the sector. Tourism Main article: Tourism in Brazil Iguaçu National Park in Paraná Tourism in Brazil is a growing sector and key to the economy of several regions of the country.

The country had 9.28 million visitors in 2025, an increase of 32% compared to 2024, ranking in terms of the international tourist arrivals as the second main destination in Latin America after Mexico . Revenues from international tourists reached US$7.9 billion (R$41.5 billion), an increase of 7.1% over 2024, according to data from the foreign sector statistics report released by the Central Bank (Bacen). Natural areas are its most popular tourism product, a combination of ecotourism with leisure and recreation, mainly sun and beach, and adventure travel, as well as cultural tourism. Among the most popular destinations are the Amazon Rainforest, beaches and dunes in the Northeast Region , the Pantanal in the Center-West Region , beaches at Rio de Janeiro and Santa Catarina , cultural tourism in Minas Gerais and business trips to São Paulo .

In terms of the 2024 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index (TTCI), which is a measurement of the factors that make it attractive to develop business in the travel and tourism industry of individual countries, Brazil ranked in the 26th place at the world's level, third in the Americas, after Canada and United States. Domestic tourism is a key market segment for the tourism industry in Brazil.

In 2005, 51 million Brazilian nationals made ten times more trips than foreign tourists and spent five times more money than their international counterparts.

The main destination states in 2023 were São Paulo , Rio de Janeiro , and Rio Grande do Sul .

The main source of tourists for the entire country is São Paulo state.

In terms of tourism revenues, the top earners by state were São Paulo and Bahia . For 2005, the three main trip purposes were visiting friends and family (53.1%), sun and beach (40.8%), and cultural tourism (12.5%). Science and technology Main article: Science and technology in Brazil VLS-1 at the Alcântara Launch Center of the Brazilian Space Agency, in Alcântara, Maranhão Sirius , a diffraction-limited storage ring synchrotron light source at the Laboratório Nacional de Luz Síncrotron , in Campinas , São Paulo Technological research in Brazil is largely carried out in public universities and research institutes, with the majority of funding for basic research coming from various government agencies. Brazil's most esteemed technological hubs are the Oswaldo Cruz Institute , the Butantan Institute , the Air Force's Aerospace Technical Center , the Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation and the National Institute for Space Research .

The Brazilian Space Agency has the most developed space program in Latin America, with significant capabilities in launch vehicles, launch sites, and satellite manufacturing. Brazil is the only country in the Southern Hemisphere involved in the International Space Station (ISS).

The country also develops submarines and is the world's third largest aircraft producer, primarily through Embraer .

The country is also a pioneer in the search for oil in deep water, from where it extracts 73% of its reserves. Uranium is enriched at the Resende Nuclear Fuel Factory , mostly for research purposes (as Brazil obtains 88% of its electricity from hydroelectricity ), and the country's first nuclear submarine is expected to launch in 2029. Brazil is one of the three countries in Latin America with an operational Synchrotron Laboratory (a research facility on physics, chemistry, material science and life sciences), and the only Latin American country with a domestic fabrication plant , the CEITEC . According to the Global Information Technology Report 2009–2010 of the World Economic Forum, Brazil is the world's 61st largest developer of information technology. Brazil ranked 52nd in the Global Innovation Index in 2025, up from 66th in 2019. Among the most renowned Brazilian inventors are priests Bartolomeu de Gusmão , Landell de Moura and Francisco João de Azevedo, besides Alberto Santos-Dumont , Evaristo Conrado Engelberg , Manuel Dias de Abreu , Andreas Pavel and Nélio José Nicolai. Brazilian science is represented by the likes of César Lattes (Brazilian physicist Pathfinder of Pi Meson ), Mário Schenberg (considered the greatest theoretical physicist of Brazil), José Leite Lopes (the only Brazilian physicist holder of the UNESCO Science Prize ), Artur Avila (the first Latin American winner of the Fields Medal ), and Fritz Müller (pioneer in factual support of the theory of evolution by Charles Darwin ). Energy Main article: Energy in Brazil The Itaipu Dam on the Paraná River , the second largest of the world. Brazilian energy matrix is one of the cleanest in the world Wind farm in Parnaíba , Piauí . Brazil is one of the 5 largest producers of wind energy in the world Brazil is the world's eleventh-largest energy consumer. Much of its energy comes from renewable sources , particularly hydroelectricity and ethanol ; the Itaipu Dam is the world's largest hydroelectric plant by energy generation, and the country has other large plants such as Belo Monte and Tucuruí .

The first car with an ethanol engine was produced in 1978 and the first airplane engine running on ethanol in 2005.

At the end of 2021, Brazil ranked second in the world by installed hydroelectric power (109.4 GW) and biomass (15.8 GW), seventh in installed wind power (21.1 GW) and 14th in installed solar power (13.0 GW)—on track to also become one of the top 10 in the world in solar energy.

At the end of 2024, Brazil was the fourth largest producer of wind energy in the world (107.8 TWh), behind only China, the United States and Germany, and the world's fifth largest producer of solar energy (74.7 TWh). Overall, Brazil ranks third globally in renewable electricity production , after China and the United States, accounting for 7% of the global total.

The Brazilian energy matrix is characterized by a higher degree of renewable energy than the global average; in 2022, the world energy matrix was only 14% renewable energy, compared to 45% in Brazil. Petroleum and oil products made up 34.3% of the country's matrix; sugar cane derivatives, 18%; hydraulic energy, 12.4%; natural gas, 12.2%; firewood and charcoal, 8.8%; varied renewable energies, 7%; mineral coal, 5.3%; nuclear, 1.4%, and other non-renewable energies, 0.6%. Similarly, the vast majority of Brazilian electricity is derived from renewable sources: 83% compared to 25% worldwide.

The leading sources are hydraulic energy at 64.9%; biomass, 8.4%; wind, 8.6%; solar, 1%; natural gas, 9.3%; oil products, 2%; nuclear, 2.5%; and coal and derivatives, 3.3%. Brazil has the largest electricity sector in Latin America; its capacity at the end of 2021 was 181,532 MW.

The Brazilian government has embarked on a program over the decades to reduce dependence on imported oil, which previously accounted for more than 70% of the country's oil needs. Brazil became self-sufficient in oil in 2006–2007.

By the end of 2021, the country was the seventh largest oil producer in the world, with an average of nearly three million barrels per day, and became an exporter of the product. Transportation Main article: Transport in Brazil Terminal 3 of the São Paulo–Guarulhos International Airport , the busiest airport in Latin America BR-116 in São José dos Campos , São Paulo , the longest highway in the country, with 4,542 km (2,822 mi) of extension Brazilian roads are the primary carriers of freight and passenger traffic.

The road system totaled 2,000,000 km (1,242,742 mi) in 2023, ranking fourth largest by size globally.

The total of paved roads increased from 35,496 km (22,056 mi) in 1967 to 215,000 km (133,595 mi) in 2018. Brazil's railway system has been declining since 1945, when emphasis shifted to highway construction.

The country's total railway track length was 30,576 km (18,999 mi) in 2015, as compared with 31,848 km (19,789 mi) in 1970, making it the ninth largest network in the world. Most of the railway system belonged to the Federal Railroad Network Corporation (RFFSA), which was privatized in 2007.

The São Paulo Metro began operating on 14 September 1974 as the first underground transit system in Brazil. There are over 4,900 airports and airfields in Brazil, second only to the United States. São Paulo–Guarulhos International Airport , near São Paulo, is the largest and busiest airport with nearly 43 million passengers annually, while handling the vast majority of commercial traffic for the country. For freight transport, waterways are of importance.

The industrial zones of Manaus can be reached only by means of the Solimões–Amazonas waterway (3,250 kilometers or 2,020 miles in length, with a minimum depth of six meters or 20 feet).

The population of Brazil, as recorded by the 2008 PNAD, was approximately 190 million (22.31 inhabitants per square kilometer or 57.8/sq mi), with a ratio of men to women of 0.95:1 and 83.75% of the population defined as urban.

The population is heavily concentrated in the Southeast (89 million inhabitants) and Northeast (54.6 million inhabitants), while the two most extensive regions, the Center-West and the North, which together make up 64.12% of Brazilian territory, have a total of only 33.8 million inhabitants.

The first census in Brazil was carried out in 1872 and recorded a population of 9,930,478.

From 1880 to 1930, four million Europeans arrived. Brazil's population increased significantly between 1940 and 1970, because of a decline in the mortality rate , even though the birth rate underwent a slight decline.

In the 1940s the annual population growth rate was 2.4%, rising to 3.0% in the 1950s and remaining at 2.9% in the 1960s, as life expectancy rose from 44 to 54 years and to 72.6 years in 2007. It has been steadily falling since the 1960s, from 3.04% per year between 1950 and 1960 to 1.05% in 2008 and is expected to fall to a negative value of –0.29% by 2050 thus completing the demographic transition .

In 2022, the illiteracy rate was roughly 7%, a significant decline from 11.48% in 2008.

By comparison, in 1940, more than half the population (54%) was illiterate. Urbanization Main article: List of cities in Brazil by population According to IBGE (Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics) urban areas already concentrate 84.35% of the population, while the Southeast region remains the most populated one, with over 80 million inhabitants.

The largest urban agglomerations in Brazil are São Paulo , Rio de Janeiro , and Belo Horizonte —all in the Southeastern Region—with 21.1, 12.3, and 5.1 million inhabitants respectively.

The majority of state capitals are the largest cities in their states, except for Vitória , the capital of Espírito Santo , and Florianópolis , the capital of Santa Catarina.

The brown population (officially called pardo in Portuguese) is a broad category that includes caboclos (assimilated Amerindians in general, and descendants of Whites and Natives), mulatos (descendants of primarily Whites and Afro-Brazilians) and cafuzos (descendants of Afro-Brazilians and Natives). Higher percents of Blacks, mulattoes and tri-racials can be found in the eastern coast of the Northeastern region from Bahia to Paraíba and also in northern Maranhão, southern Minas Gerais and eastern Rio de Janeiro. People of considerable Amerindian ancestry form the majority of the population in the Northern, Northeastern and Center-Western regions.

In 2007, the National Indian Foundation estimated that Brazil has 67 different uncontacted tribes, up from their estimate of 40 in 2005. Brazil is believed to have the largest number of uncontacted peoples in the world. Language Main articles: Languages of Brazil , Portuguese language , Brazilian Portuguese , and List of endangered languages in Brazil Alto Rio Negro Indigenous Territory , in São Gabriel da Cachoeira , Amazonas , where Nhengatu , Tucano and Baniwa are co-official languages Pomerode , Santa Catarina , where the East Pomeranian is the second language (see Brazilian German ) The official language of Brazil is Portuguese (Article 13 of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Brazil), which almost all of the population speaks and is virtually the only language used in newspapers, radio, television, and for business and administrative purposes. Brazil is the only Portuguese-speaking nation in the Americas, making the language an important part of Brazilian national identity and giving it a national culture distinct from those of its Spanish-speaking neighbors. Brazilian Portuguese has had its own development, mostly similar to 16th-century Central and Southern dialects of European Portuguese (despite a very substantial number of Portuguese colonial settlers, and more recent immigrants , coming from Northern regions , and in minor degree Portuguese Macaronesia ), with a few influences from the Amerindian and African languages , especially West African and Bantu restricted to the vocabulary only.

As a result, the language is somewhat different, mostly in phonology, from the language of Portugal and other Portuguese-speaking countries (the dialects of the other countries, partly because of the more recent end of Portuguese colonialism in these regions, have a closer connection to contemporary European Portuguese ). These differences are comparable to those between American and British English .

The 2002 sign language law requires government authorities and public agencies to accept and provide information in Língua Brasileira dos Sinais or "LIBRAS", the Brazilian Sign Language , while a 2005 presidential edict extends this to require teaching of the language as a part of the education and speech and language pathology curricula. LIBRAS teachers, instructors and translators are recognized professionals. Schools and health services must provide access (" inclusion ") to deaf people. Minority languages are spoken throughout the nation. One hundred and eighty Amerindian languages are spoken in remote areas and a significant number of other languages are spoken by immigrants and their descendants.

In the municipality of São Gabriel da Cachoeira , Nheengatu (a currently endangered creole language that, together with its southern relative língua geral paulista , once was a major lingua franca in Brazil), Baniwa and Tucano languages had been granted co-official status with Portuguese. There are significant communities of German (mostly the Brazilian Hunsrückisch , a High German language dialect) and Italian (mostly the Talian , a Venetian dialect) origins in the Southern and Southeastern regions, whose ancestors' native languages were carried along to Brazil, and which, still alive there, are influenced by the Portuguese language. Talian is officially a historic heritage of Rio Grande do Sul , and two German dialects possess co-official status in a few municipalities. Italian is also recognized as "ethnic language" in Santa Teresa and Vila Velha , in the state of Espírito Santo . Religion Main article: Religion in Brazil Further information: Catholic Church in Brazil and Protestantism in Brazil Religion in Brazil (2022 Census) Catholicism (56.8%) Protestantism (26.9%) No religion (9.28%) Spiritism (1.84%) Other religions (5.06%) Not stated (0.17%) Christianity is the country's predominant faith, with Catholicism being its largest denomination. Brazil has the world's largest Catholic population . According to the 2022 demographic census (the PNAD survey does not inquire about religion), 56.75% of the population followed Catholicism; 26.85% Protestantism ; 1.84% Kardecist spiritism; 5.06% other religions, undeclared or undetermined; while 9.28% had no religion. Religious diversity in Brazil developed from the meeting of the Catholic Church with the religious traditions of enslaved African peoples and indigenous peoples. This confluence of faiths during the Portuguese colonization of Brazil led to the development of a diverse array of syncretistic practices within the overarching umbrella of Brazilian Catholic Church, characterized by traditional Portuguese festivities. Religious pluralism increased during the 20th century, and the Protestant community had grown to include over 22% of the population by 2010—partly due to a mixture of American missionary and US government influence.

The most common Protestant denominations are Evangelical Pentecostal ones. Other Protestant branches with a notable presence in the country include the Baptists , Seventh-day Adventists , Lutherans and the Reformed tradition .

In recent decades, Protestantism, particularly in forms of Pentecostalism and Evangelicalism, has spread in Brazil, while the proportion of Catholics had dropped significantly during the 2010s.

As they have spread throughout Brazil, many have even been deeply involved in Brazilian and international politics, and Evangelical Protestant influence has been implicated in the 2022 Brazilian coup plot .

Since 2022, Evangelicals and Catholics have begun reconsidering religion as a political factor; however as of 2025, several Evangelical denominations have continued considering its influence in politics.

The Cristo Redentor statue towers over Rio de Janeiro.

After Protestantism, individuals professing no religion are also a significant group, having exceeded 8% of the population according to the 2010 census.

The cities of Boa Vista , Salvador , and Porto Velho have the greatest proportion of Irreligious residents in Brazil. Teresina , Fortaleza , and Florianópolis were the most Roman Catholic in the country. Greater Rio de Janeiro , not including the city proper, is the most irreligious and least Roman Catholic Brazilian periphery, while Greater Porto Alegre and Greater Fortaleza are on the opposite sides of the lists, respectively.

In October 2009, the Brazilian Senate approved, and enacted by the President of Brazil in February 2010, an agreement with the Vatican , in which the Legal Statute of the Catholic Church in Brazil is recognized. Education Main article: Education in Brazil Historical building of the Federal University of Paraná , one of the oldest universities in Brazil, located in Curitiba The Federal Constitution and the Law of Guidelines and Bases of National Education determine that the union, the states, the Federal District and the municipalities must manage and organize their respective education systems. Each of these public educational systems is responsible for its own maintenance, which manages funds as well as the mechanisms and funding sources.

The constitution reserves 25% of the state budget and 18% of federal taxes and municipal taxes for education. According to the IBGE , the literacy rate was 93.4% in 2019, meaning that 11.3 million (6.6% of population) people are still illiterate in the country, with some states such as Rio de Janeiro and Santa Catarina reaching around 97% of literacy rate; functional illiteracy has reached 21.6% of the population. Illiteracy is higher in the Northeast , where 13.87% of the population is illiterate, while the South , has 3.3% illiteracy. Brazil's private institutions tend to be more exclusive and offer better quality education, so many high-income families send their children there.

The result is a segregated educational system that reflects extreme income disparities and reinforces social inequality. However, efforts to change this are making impacts.

On the other hand, private healthcare systems play a complementary role. Public health services are universal and offered to all citizens of the country for free. However, the construction and maintenance of health centers and hospitals are financed by taxes, and the country spends about 9% of its GDP on expenditures in the area.

In 2021, Brazil had 2.1 doctors and 2.5 hospital beds for every 1,000 inhabitants. Despite all the progress made since the creation of the universal health care system in 1988, there are still several public health issues in Brazil.

In 2023, infant (2.51%) and maternal mortality rates (197.3 deaths per 100,000 births) were still high.

The number of deaths from noncommunicable diseases, such as cardiovascular diseases (151.7 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants) and cancer (72.7 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants), also has a considerable impact on the health of the Brazilian population. Finally, external but preventable factors such as car accidents, violence and suicide caused 14.9% of all deaths in the country.

The Brazilian health system was ranked 125th among the 191 countries evaluated by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2000. Culture Main article: Culture of Brazil Parade of Portela samba school at the Rio Carnival , the largest carnival in the world The core culture of Brazil is derived from Portuguese culture , due to its strong colonial ties with the Portuguese Empire. Among other influences, the Portuguese introduced the Portuguese language, Roman Catholicism and colonial architectural styles. Brazilian culture was also strongly influenced by African, indigenous and non-Portuguese European cultures and traditions. Some aspects of Brazilian culture were influenced by the contributions of Italian, German and other European as well as Japanese, Jewish and Arab immigrants who arrived in large numbers in the South and Southeast of Brazil during the 19th and 20th centuries.

The indigenous Amerindians influenced Brazil's language and cuisine ; and the Africans influenced language, cuisine, music , dance and religion. Brazilian art has developed since the 16th century into different styles that range from Baroque (the dominant style in Brazil until the early 19th century) to Romanticism , Modernism , Expressionism , Cubism , Surrealism and Abstractionism . Brazilian cinema dates back to the birth of the medium in the late 19th century and has gained a new level of international acclaim since the 1960s. Architecture Main article: Architecture of Brazil The Cathedral of Brasília , designed by Brazilian architect Oscar Niemeyer for the federal capital, an example of Modern architecture The architecture of Brazil is influenced by Europe, especially Portugal. It has a history that goes back 500 years to the time, when Pedro Álvares Cabral landed in Brazil in 1500. Portuguese colonial architecture was the first wave of architecture to go to Brazil. It is the basis for all Brazilian architecture of later centuries.

In the 19th century, during the time of the Empire of Brazil, the country followed European trends and adopted Neoclassical and Gothic Revival architecture . Then, in the 20th century, especially in Brasília, Brazil experimented with modernist architecture .

The colonial architecture of Brazil dates to the early 16th century, when Brazil was first explored, conquered and settled by the Portuguese.

The Portuguese built architecture familiar to them in Europe in their aim to colonize Brazil. They built Portuguese colonial architecture, which included churches and civic architecture, including houses and forts, in Brazilian cities and the countryside.

During the 19th century, Brazilian architecture saw the introduction of more European styles to Brazil, such as Neoclassical and Gothic Revival architecture. This was usually mixed with Brazilian influences from their own heritage.

In the 1950s modernist architecture was introduced when Brasília was built as a new federal capital in the interior of Brazil to help develop the interior.

The architect Oscar Niemeyer idealized and built government buildings, churches and civic buildings in the modernist style. Visual arts Main article: Brazilian painting Entry in the Forest mural at the Thomas Jefferson Building by Candido Portinari, one of the most important Brazilian painters Brazilian painting emerged in the late 16th century, influenced by Baroque , Rococo , Neoclassicism , Romanticism , Realism , Modernism , Expressionism , Surrealism , Cubism and Abstracionism making it a major art style called Brazilian academic art .

The French Artistic Mission arrived in Brazil in 1816 proposing the creation of an art academy modeled after the respected Académie des Beaux-Arts, with graduation courses both for artists and craftsmen for activities such as modeling, decorating, carpentry and others and bringing artists such as Jean-Baptiste Debret . Upon the creation of the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts , new artistic movements spread across the country during the 19th century and later the event called Modern Art Week broke with academic tradition in 1922 and started a nationalist trend which was influenced by modernist arts. Among the best-known Brazilian painters are Ricardo do Pilar and Manoel da Costa Ataíde (baroque and rococo), Victor Meirelles , Pedro Américo and Almeida Júnior (romanticism and realism), Anita Malfatti , Ismael Nery , Lasar Segall , Emiliano Di Cavalcanti , Vicente do Rego Monteiro , and Tarsila do Amaral (expressionism, surrealism and cubism), Aldo Bonadei , José Pancetti and Candido Portinari (modernism). Music Main article: Music of Brazil Tom Jobim , one of the creators of bossa nova , and Chico Buarque , one of the leading names of MPB The music of Brazil was formed mainly from the fusion of European, Native Indigenous, and African elements. Until the nineteenth century, Portugal was the gateway to most of the influences that built Brazilian music, although many of these elements were not of Portuguese origin, but generally European.

The first was José Maurício Nunes Garcia , author of sacred pieces with an influence of Viennese classicism.

The major contribution of the African element was the rhythmic diversity and some dances and instruments. Popular music since the late eighteenth century, samba was considered the most typical and on the UNESCO cultural heritage list. Samba-reggae , Axé , Maracatu , Frevo and Afoxê are four music traditions that have been popularized by their appearance in the annual Brazilian Carnivals . Capoeira is usually played with its own music referred to as capoeira music , which is usually considered to be a call-and-response type of folk music. Forró is a type of folk music prominent during the Festa Junina in northeastern Brazil . Jack A. Draper III, a professor of Portuguese at the University of Missouri , argues that Forró was used as a way to subdue feelings of nostalgia for a rural lifestyle. Choro is a popular musical instrumental style. Its origins are in 19th-century Rio de Janeiro.

The style often has a fast and happy rhythm, characterized by subtle modulations and full of syncopation and counterpoint . lambada and Carimbó achieved success in Latin music, originating from Pará. Bossa nova is also a well-known style of Brazilian music developed and popularized in the 1950s and 1960s.

The phrase "bossa nova" means literally 'new trend'. A lyrical fusion of samba and jazz , bossa nova acquired a large following starting in the 1960s. Literature Main article: Brazilian literature Machado de Assis (1839–1908), poet and novelist, founder of the Brazilian Academy of Letters , is associated with romanticism and literary realism Clarice Lispector (1920–1977), novelist and short story writer, whose work engages themes of intimacy and introspection Brazilian literature dates back to the 16th century, to the writings of the first Portuguese explorers in Brazil, such as Pero Vaz de Caminha , filled with descriptions of fauna, flora and commentary about the indigenous population that fascinated European readers. Brazil produced significant works in Romanticism —novelists such as Joaquim Manuel de Macedo and José de Alencar wrote novels about love and pain. Alencar, in his long career, also treated indigenous people as heroes in the Indigenist novels O Guarani , Iracema and Ubirajara . Machado de Assis , one of his contemporaries, wrote in virtually all genres and continues to gain international prestige from critics worldwide. Brazilian Modernism , evidenced by the Modern Art Week in 1922, was concerned with a nationalist avant-garde literature, while Post-Modernism brought a generation of distinct poets such as João Cabral de Melo Neto , Carlos Drummond de Andrade , Vinicius de Moraes , Cora Coralina , Graciliano Ramos , Cecília Meireles , and internationally known writers dealing with universal and regional subjects such as Jorge Amado , João Guimarães Rosa , Clarice Lispector and Manuel Bandeira . Brazil's most significant literary award is the Camões Prize , which it shares with the rest of the Portuguese-speaking world.

As of 2016, Brazil has eleven recipients of the prize. Brazil also holds its own literary academy, the Brazilian Academy of Letters , a non-profit cultural organization aimed at perpetuating the care of the national language and literature. Theatre Augusto Boal presenting a workshop on the Theatre of the Oppressed at Riverside Church in New York City in 2008 The theatre in Brazil has its origins in the period of Jesuit expansion, when theater was used for the dissemination of Catholic doctrine in the 16th century.

In the 17th and 18th centuries, dramatists on the scene of European derivation were for court or private performances.

During the 19th century, the playwrights Antônio Gonçalves Dias and Luís Carlos Martins Pena were known for their performance. There were also numerous operas and orchestras.

The Brazilian conductor Antônio Carlos Gomes became internationally known with operas such as Il Guarany .

At the end of the 19th century, orchestrated dramaturgias were accompanied with songs of famous artists such as the conductress Chiquinha Gonzaga . Already in the early 20th century there was the presence of theaters, entrepreneurs and actor companies.

In 1940, Paschoal Carlos Magno and his student's theater, the comedians group and the Italian actors Adolfo Celi , Ruggero Jacobbi and Aldo Calvo, founders of the Teatro Brasileiro de Comédia , renewed the Brazilian theater.

From the 1960s, it was attended by a theater dedicated to social and religious issues.

The most prominent authors at this stage were Jorge Andrade and Ariano Suassuna . Cinema Main article: Cinema of Brazil Gramado Film Festival , the biggest film festival in the country The Brazilian film industry began in the late 19th century, during the early days of the Belle Époque .

While there were national film productions during the early 20th century, American films such as Rio the Magnificent were made in Rio de Janeiro to promote tourism in the city.

The films Limite (1931) and Ganga Bruta (1933), the latter being produced by Adhemar Gonzaga through the prolific studio Cinédia, were poorly received at release and failed at the box office, but are acclaimed nowadays and placed among the finest Brazilian films of all time.

The 1941 unfinished film It's All True was divided into four segments, two of which were filmed in Brazil and directed by Orson Welles ; it was originally produced as part of the United States' Good Neighbor Policy during Getúlio Vargas' Estado Novo.

During the 1960s, the Cinema Novo movement rose to prominence with directors such as Glauber Rocha , Nelson Pereira dos Santos , Paulo César Saraceni and Arnaldo Jabor . Glauber Rocha's films Black God, White Devil (1964) and Entranced Earth (1967) are considered to be some of the greatest and most influential in Brazilian film history. Rocha won the Best Director Award at the 1969 Cannes Film Festival for Antonio das Mortes and the 1977 Special Jury Prize for Best Short Film for Di .

During the 1990s, Brazil saw a surge of critical and commercial success with films such as O Quatrilho ( Fábio Barreto , 1995), O Que É Isso, Companheiro? ( Bruno Barreto , 1997) and Central do Brasil ( Walter Salles , 1998), all of which were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film , the latter receiving a Best Actress nomination for Fernanda Montenegro .

The 2002 crime film City of God , directed by Fernando Meirelles , was critically acclaimed, scoring 90% on Rotten Tomatoes , being placed in Roger Ebert 's Best Films of the Decade list and receiving four Academy Award nominations in 2004, including Best Director . Notable film festivals in Brazil include the São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro International Film Festivals and the Gramado Festival .

The film I'm Still Here , directed by Walter Salles, was nominated for Best Actress (Torres) and Best Picture at the 97th Academy Awards , and won Best International Feature Film , becoming the first-ever Brazilian produced film to win an Academy Award.

The Brazilian press was officially born in Rio de Janeiro on 13 May 1808 with the creation of the Royal Printing National Press by the Prince Regent John.

The Gazeta do Rio de Janeiro , the first newspaper published in the country, began to circulate on 10 September 1808.

The largest newspapers nowadays are Folha de S.Paulo , O Globo , and O Estado de S. Paulo . Radio broadcasting began on 7 September 1922, with a speech by then President Epitácio Pessoa , and was formalized on 20 April 1923 with the creation of the "Radio Society of Rio de Janeiro". Television in Brazil began officially on 18 September 1950, with the founding of TV Tupi by Assis Chateaubriand .

Since then, television has grown in the country, creating large commercial broadcast networks such as Globo , SBT , RecordTV , Bandeirantes and RedeTV .

By the mid-1960s, Brazilian universities had installed mainframe computers from IBM and Burroughs Large Systems .

In the 1970s and 1980s, the Brazilian government restricted foreign imports to protect the local manufacturing of computers.

In the 1980s, Brazil produced half of the computers sold in the country.

By 2009, the mobile phone and Internet use in Brazil was the fifth largest in the world.

As of early 2025, internet penetration in Brazil stood at 86.2% of the total population (183 million individuals), and the ratio of cellular mobile connections to the total population was 102% (217 million active connections).

The Brazilian men's national team is ranked among the best in the world according to the FIFA World Rankings , and has won the World Cup tournament a record five times. Volleyball , basketball , auto racing and martial arts also has large audiences.

The Brazil men's national volleyball team currently holds the titles of the World League , World Grand Champions Cup , World Championship and the World Cup .

In auto racing, three Brazilian drivers have won the Formula One world championship eight times.

The country has also produced significant achievements in other sports such as sailing , swimming , tennis , surfing , skateboarding , MMA , gymnastics , boxing , judo , athletics and table tennis . Some sport variations have their origins in Brazil: beach football , futsal (indoor football) and footvolley emerged in Brazil as variations of football.

In martial arts, Brazilians developed Capoeira , Vale tudo and Brazilian jiu-jitsu . Brazil has hosted several high-profile international sporting events, such as the 1950 FIFA World Cup , and recently has hosted the 2014 FIFA World Cup , 2019 Copa América and 2021 Copa América .

The São Paulo circuit, Autódromo José Carlos Pace , hosts the annual Grand Prix of Brazil . São Paulo organized the IV Pan American Games in 1963, and Rio de Janeiro hosted the XV Pan American Games in 2007.

On 2 October 2009, Rio de Janeiro was selected to host the 2016 Olympic Games and 2016 Paralympic Games , making it the first South American city to host the games and second in Latin America, after Mexico City . Furthermore, the country hosted the FIBA Basketball World Cups in 1954 and 1963 .

The list can be seen at Languages of Brazil . ^ The Brazilian census uses the term amarela (or yellow in English) as a racial category to describe people of East Asian background. This category therefore excludes those of other Asian origins, such as West Asians/ Arabs and South Asians. ^ Portuguese : Brasil , The World Factbook (2018 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency . Retrieved 4 May 2018 . ^ a b "Brazil – Land" . Permanent Missions . United Nations. Geography. Archived from the original on 23 October 2014. ^ Andreatta, Margarida Davina (30 May 1995). "Engenho São Jorge dos Erasmos: prospecção arqueológica, histórica e industrial" . Revista USP (in Brazilian Portuguese). 0 (41): 28. doi : 10.11606/issn.2316-9036.v0i41p28-47 . ISSN 2316-9036 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q "Brazilian Federal Constitution" (in Portuguese). Presidency of the Republic. 1988. Archived from the original on 13 December 2007 . Retrieved 3 June 2008 . "Brazilian Federal Constitution" . v-brazil.com. 2007. Archived from the original on 28 September 2018 . Retrieved 3 June 2008 . Unofficial translate ^ M. Schaefer; J. Poffenbarger (2014).

The Formation of the BRICS and its Implication for the United States: Emerging Together . Springer. p. 32. ISBN 978-1-137-38794-3 . Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 17 November 2018 . ^ Sean W. Burges (2016). Latin America and the Shifting Sands of Globalization . Routledge. pp. 114– 15. ISBN 978-1-317-69658-2 . Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 2 May 2018 . ^ Gardini, Gian Luca (2016). "Brazil: What Rise of What Power?" . Bulletin of Latin American Research . 35 : 5– 19. doi : 10.1111/blar.12417 . ISSN 0261-3050 . ^ Gratius, Susanne (April 2008). "The international arena and emerging powers: stabilising or destabilising forces?" (PDF) . FRIDE . Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 June 2016. ^ Peter Collecott (29 October 2011). "Brazil's Quest for Superpower Status" .

The Diplomatic Courier. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019 . Retrieved 10 August 2014 . ^ Clendenning, Alan (17 April 2008). "Booming Brazil could be world power soon" . USA Today .

The Associated Press. p. 2. Archived from the original on 20 August 2011 . Retrieved 12 December 2008 . ^ Jorge Dominguez; Byung Kook Kim (2013). Between Compliance and Conflict: East Asia Latin America and the New Pax Americana . Center for International Affairs, Harvard University. pp. 98– 99. ISBN 978-1-136-76983-2 . ^ "FTSE Country Classification" (PDF) . FTSE Group . September 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 November 2018 . Retrieved 20 November 2018 . ^ "Country and Lending Groups" . World Bank. Archived from the original on 18 March 2011 . Retrieved 5 March 2011 . Uppermiddle Income defined as a per capita income between $3,976 – $12,275 ^ "World Economic Outlook Database, April 2019" . IMF.org . International Monetary Fund . Archived from the original on 17 June 2019 . Retrieved 29 September 2019 . ^ "CIA – The World Factbook – Country Comparisons – GDP (purchasing power parity)" . Central Intelligence Agency . Archived from the original on 4 June 2011 . Retrieved 25 January 2011 . ^ a b Jeff Neilson; Bill Pritchard (2011). Value Chain Struggles . John Wiley & Sons. p. 102. ISBN 978-1-4443-5544-4 . Archived from the original on 25 October 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2015 . ^ "UNESCO World Heritage Centre — World Heritage List" . UNESCO. Archived from the original on 14 March 2021 . Retrieved 25 May 2012 . ^ Vandiver, John (9 May 2019). "Trump bumps up Brazil to 'major non-NATO' ally" . Stars and Stripes . Archived from the original on 13 October 2019 . Retrieved 2 April 2023 . ^ "Brazil must be a 'facilitator' in the Middle East, says VP" . 14 August 2019. Archived from the original on 26 May 2023 . Retrieved 26 May 2023 . ^ Fausto, Boris (1999). A Concise History of Brazil . Cambridge University Press. p. 9 . ISBN 978-0-521-56526-4 . ^ Jon S. Vincent. (2003). Culture and Customs of Brazil . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 36 . ISBN 978-0-313-30495-8 . ^ "Brazil | Etymology of the name Brazil by etymonline" . Archived from the original on 24 March 2024 . Retrieved 24 March 2024 . ^ Richard P. Tucker (2007). Insatiable Appetite: The Ecological Degradation of the Tropical World . University of Michigan. p. 186. ISBN 978-0-7425-5365-1 . Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2015 . ^ Wayne E. Lee (2011). Empires and Indigenes: Intercultural Alliance, Imperial Expansion, and Warfare in the Early Modern World . NYU Press. p. 196. ISBN 978-0-8147-6527-2 . Archived from the original on 15 February 2024 . Retrieved 16 June 2015 . ^ Daly, Charles P. (1880). "Maps and Map-making Before Mercator" .

The Popular Science Monthly . Bonnier Corporation. 473–495, see page 493. ISSN 0161-7370 . Archived from the original on 15 February 2024 . Retrieved 16 June 2015 . ^ Jean de Léry (1990). History of a Voyage to the Land of Brazil, Otherwise Called America . University of California Press. p. 242. ISBN 978-0-520-91380-6 . Archived from the original on 15 February 2024 . Retrieved 16 June 2015 . ^ Jayme A. Sokolow. (2003).

The Great Encounter: Native Peoples and European Settlers in the Americas, 1492–1800 . M.E. Sharpe. p. 84. ISBN 978-0-7656-0982-3 . Archived from the original on 15 February 2024 . Retrieved 16 June 2015 . ^ Maria Herrera-Sobek (2012). Celebrating Latino Folklore . ABC-CLIO. p. 155. ISBN 978-0-313-34340-7 . Archived from the original on 15 February 2024 . Retrieved 16 June 2015 . ^ Romero, Simon (27 March 2014). "Discoveries Challenge Beliefs on Humans' Arrival in the Americas" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 1 January 2022 . Retrieved 31 May 2014 . ^ Robert M. Levine; John J. Crocitti (1999).

The Brazil Reader: History, Culture, Politics . Duke University Press. pp. 11–. ISBN 978-0-8223-2290-0 . Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 12 December 2012 . ^ Roosevelt AC , Housley RA, Imazio da Silveira M, Maranca S, Johnson RI (13 December 1991). "Eighth Millennium Pottery from a Prehistoric Shell Midden in the Brazilian Amazon" . Science . 254 (5038): 1621– 1624. Bibcode : 1991Sci...254.1621R . doi : 10.1126/science.254.5038.1621 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 17782213 . S2CID 34969614 . Archived from the original on 16 October 2023 . Retrieved 4 July 2023 . ^ Mann, Charles C. (2006) . 1491: New Revelations of the Americas Before Columbus . Vintage Books. pp. 326–33 . ISBN 978-1-4000-3205-1 . ^ Levine, Robert M. (2003).

The History of Brazil . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 32. ISBN 978-1-4039-6255-3 . ^ Levine (2003) , p. 31. ^ a b Fausto, Carlos (2000). Zahar, Jorge (ed.). Os Índios antes do Brasil (in Portuguese). Jorge Zahar Editor. pp. 45– 46, 55. ISBN 978-85-7110-543-0 . ^ Gomes, Mercio P.

The Indians and Brazil University Press of Florida 2000 ISBN 0-8130-1720-3 pp. 28–29 ^ Fausto (2000) , pp. 78–80. ^ Fausto (2000) , p. 50. ^ Boxer, p. 98. ^ a b Boxer, p. 100. ^ Boxer, pp. 100–101. ^ a b Skidmore, p. 27. ^ Boxer, p. 101. ^ Meuwese, Mark "Brothers in Arms, Partners in Trade: Dutch-Indigenous Alliances in the Atlantic World, 1595–1674" Koninklijke Brill NV 2012 ISBN 978-90-04-21083-7 Chapter III ^ Metcalf, Alida C. "Go-betweens And the Colonization of Brazil: 1500–1600" University of Texas Press 2005, pp. 70, 79, 202 View on Google Books Archived 29 November 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ Crocitti & Vallance (2012) . ^ Minahan, James B. "Ethnic Groups of the Americas" ABC-CLIO 2013 ISBN 978-1-61069-163-5 p. 300, View on Google Books Archived 29 November 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ Terrence McCoy (17 January 2022). "More enslaved Africans came to the Americas through this port than anywhere else. Why have so few heard of it?" . Washington Post . Archived from the original on 10 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 January 2023 . ^ Skidmore, p. 36. ^ Richard Middleton and Anne Lombard "Colonial America: A History to 1763" Wiley-Blackwell Publishing 1st edition 1992 ISBN 978-1-4443-9628-7 Chapter 2, Section 4 (final, last page and half of previous one) View on Google Books Archived 29 November 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ Boxer, p. 110 ^ Skidmore, p. 34. ^ Boxer, p. 102. ^ Skidmore, pp. 32–33. ^ Murray, Stuart A. P. (2009).

The Library An Illustrated History . New York: Skyhorse Publishing. p. 101. ISBN 978-1-60239-706-4 . ^ Boxer, p. 164. ^ Boxer, pp. 168, 170. ^ Boxer, p. 169. ^ Kohn, George C. (1986). Dictionary of Wars (1st ed.). Facts on File, Inc. p. 174. ISBN 978-1-4381-2916-7 . Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 16 October 2015 . ^ George Richard Potter; Henry Clifford Darby; Harold Fullard (1957).

The New Cambridge Modern History . Vol. 3 (1st ed.). CUP Archive. p. 498. Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 16 October 2015 . ^ Corrado, Jacopo "The Creole Elite and the Rise of Angolan Protonationalism" Cambria Press 2008 ISBN 978-1-60497-529-1 pp. 95 (Brazil) and 145, note 5 View on Google Books Archived 2 May 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ Bethell, Leslie "Colonial Brazil" Cambridge University Press 1987 pp. 19, 74, 86, 169–70 ^ Schwartz, Stuart B. "Slaves, Peasants, and Rebels" Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois 1992 ISBN 0-252-06549-2 Chapter 4 View on Google Books Archived 29 November 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ MacLachlan, Colin M. "A History of Modern Brazil: The Past Against the Future"; Scholarly Resources Inc. 2003 p. 3 View on Google Books Archived 29 November 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ Boxer, p. 213 ^ Marta Barcellos & Simone Azevedo; Histórias do Mercado de Capitais no Brasil ("Financial Markets' Histories in Brazil") (Portuguese) Campus Elsevier 2011 ISBN 85-352-3994-4 Introduction (by Ney Carvalho), Intro. p. xiv ^ Bueno, p. 145. ^ Jeffrey C. Mosher (2008). Political Struggle, Ideology, and State Building: Pernambuco and the Construction of Brazil, 1817–1850 . U of Nebraska Press. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-8032-3247-1 . Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2015 . ^ Jeremy Adelman (2006). Sovereignty and Revolution in the Iberian Atlantic . Princeton University Press. pp. 334–. ISBN 978-0-691-12664-7 . Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2015 . ^ Lustosa, pp. 109–110 ^ Lustosa, pp. 117–19 ^ Lustosa, pp. 150–153 ^ Vianna, p. 418 ^ Diégues 2004, pp. 168, 164, 178 ^ Diégues 2004, pp. 179–80 ^ Lustosa, p. 208 ^ Fausto (1999) , pp. 82–83. ^ Lyra (v. 1), p. 17 ^ Carvalho 2007, p. 21 ^ Fausto (1999) , Chapter 2, 2.1 to 2.3. ^ a b Fausto (1999) . ^ Bethell, Leslie "The Abolition of the Brazilian Slave Trade: Britain, Brazil and the Slave Trade" Cambridge University Press 1970, "Cambridge Latin American Studides" , Chapters 9 to 12. View on Google Books Archived 29 November 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ Scott, Rebecca and others, The Abolition of Slavery and the Aftermath of Emancipation in Brazil , Duke University Press 1988 ISBN 0-8223-0888-6 Seymour Drescher , Chap. 2: "Brazilian Abolition in Comparative Perspective" ^ Levine, Robert M. "The history of Brazil" Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc. 1999, p. 62, View on Google Books Archived 29 November 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ Lyra (v.1), pp. 164, 225, 272 ^ Fausto (1999) , Chapter 2, p. 83, and 2.6 "The Paraguayan War". ^ Ermakoff 2006 , p. 189. ^ Smallman, Shawn C. (2002). "The Overthrow of the Empire". Fear in Memory in the Brazilian Army and Society . University of North Carolina Press. pp. 16– 18. ISBN 978-0-8078-5359-7 . ^ "Brazil's Proclamation of the Republic through the press" .

The Brazilian Report . 15 November 2017. Archived from the original on 13 April 2021 . Retrieved 13 November 2018 . ^ Smallman (2002) , end of Chapter 1, from p. 18 "Military rule". ^ Smallman (2002) , pp. 21–26. ^ Triner, Gail D. "Banking and Economic Development: Brazil, 1889–1930" Palgrave 2000, pp. 69–74 ISBN 0-312-23399-X ^ Needell, Jeffrey D. "A Tropical Belle Epoque: Elite Culture and Society in Turn-of-the-Century Rio de Janeiro" Cambridge University Press 2010, pp. 10, 12 ^ David R. Mares; "Violent peace: militarized interstate bargaining in Latin America" Columbia University Press 2001 Chapter 5 p. 125 ^ Bradford Burns 1993, p. 305 ^ M.Sharp, I. Westwell & J.Westwood; "History of World War I, Volume 1" Marshall Cavendish Corporation 2002, p. 97 ^ Uma história diplomática do Brasil, 1531–1945 , pp. 265– 69 ^ Charles Howard Ellis; "The origin, structure & working of the League of Nations" The LawBook Exchange Ltd 2003 pp. 105, 145 ^ Viscount of Taunay (1893), O encilhamento: scenas contemporaneas da bolsa em 1890, 1891 e 1892 , Melhoramentos ^ Nassif, Luís (2007), Os cabeças-de-planilha , Ediouro, pp. 69– 107, ISBN 978-85-00-02094-0 ^ de Carvalho, Ney O. Ribeiro (2004), O Encilhamento: anatomia de uma bolha brasileira , Bovespa, ISBN 978-85-904019-1-9 ^ Martins, Hélio L (1997), A Revolta da Armada , BibliEx ^ Moniz, Edmundo (1984), Canudos: a luta pela terra , Global ^ Sevcenko, Nicolau (2010), A Revolta da Vacina , Cosac Naify, ISBN 978-85-7503-868-0 ^ de Moura, Aureliano P (2003), Contestado: a guerra cabocla , Biblioteca do Exército ^ Thompson, Arthur (1934), Guerra civil do Brazil de 1893–1895 , Ravaro ^ Roland, Maria Inês (2000), A Revolta da Chibata , Saraiva, ISBN 978-85-02-03095-4 ^ Forjaz, Maria CS (1977), Tenentismo e politica , Paz e Terra ^ Levine; Robert M. & Crocitti; John J.

The Brazil Reader: History, Culture, Politics , Duke University Press 1999, IV – The Vargas Era ^ Keen, Benjamin / Haynes, Kate A History of Latin America; Volume 2 , Waldsworth Cengage Learning 2004, pp. 356–57 ^ McCann; Frank D. Soldiers of the Patria: A History of the Brazilian Army, 1889–1937 , Stanford University Press 2004, p. 303 ISBN 0-8047-3222-1 ^ Ibidem Williams 2001 ^ E. Bradford Burns; A History of Brazil Columbia University Press 1993 p. 352 ISBN 978-0-231-07955-6 ^ Dulles, John W.F. Anarchists and Communists in Brazil, 1900–1935 University of Texas Press 2012 ISBN 0-292-74076-X ^ Frank M. Colby, Allen L. Churchill, Herbert T. Wade & Frank H. Vizetelly; The New international year book Dodd, Mead & Co. 1989, p. 102 "The Fascist Revolt" ^ Bourne, Richard Getulio Vargas of Brazil, 1883–1954 C. Knight 1974, p. 77 ^ Scheina, Robert L. Latin America's Wars Vol.II: The Age of the Professional Soldier, 1900–2001 . Potomac Books, 2003 ISBN 1-57488-452-2 Part 9; Ch. 17 – World War II, Brazil, and Mexico, 1942–45 ^ Thomas M. Leonard & John F. Bratzel; Latin America during World War II Rowman & Littlefield Publishers Inc. 2007 p. 150 ^ Mónica Hirst & Andrew Hurrell ; The United States and Brazil: A Long Road of Unmet Expectations , Taylor & Francis Books 2005 ISBN 0-415-95066-X pp. 4–5 ^ Castro, Celso; Izecksohn, Vitor; Kraay, Hendrik (2004), Nova história militar brasileira , Fundação Getúlio Vargas, pp. 13– 14, ISBN 978-85-225-0496-1 ^ McCann 2004, p. 441 ^ Roett; Riordan Brazil: Politics in a Patrimonial Society , GreenWood Publishing Group 1999, pp. 106–08 ISBN 0-275-95899-X ^ Keen & Haynes 2004, pp. 361–62 ^ Skidmore, p. 201 ^ Skidmore, pp. 202–203 ^ Skidmore, p. 204 ^ Skidmore, pp. 204–205 ^ Skidmore, pp. 209–210 ^ Skidmore, p. 210 ^ Fausto (2005), p. 397 ^ Gaspari, A Ditadura Envergonhada , pp. 141–42. ^ Gaspari, A Ditadura Envergonhada , p. 35. ^ Crocitti & Vallance (2012) , p. 395 , last paragraph. ^ Richard Young, Odile Cisneros "Historical Dictionary of Latin American Literature and Theater" Scare Crow Press 2011, p. 224, 2nd § View on Google Books Archived 29 November 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ Laurence Burgorgue-Larsen & Amaya Úbeda de Torres "The Inter-American Court of Human Rights: Case Law and Commentary" Oxford University Press 2011 ISBN 978-0-19-958878-7 p. 299 View on Google Books Archived 29 November 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ Crocitti & Vallance (2012) , p. 396 . ^ Crocitti & Vallance (2012) , p. 395–97 . ^ Bradford Burns 1993, p. 457 ^ Fausto (1999) , Chapter 6 "The military government and the transition to democracy (1964–1984)". ^ Fausto (2005), pp. 464–65. ^ Fausto (2005), pp. 465, 475. ^ Skidmore, p. 311. ^ Fausto (1999) , Epilogue. ^ Fausto (2005), p. 482. ^ Fausto (2005), p. 474. ^ Fausto (2005), p. 502. ^ Zirin, 2014. Chapter 3 ^ "Global protest grows as citizens lose faith in politics and the State" Archived 8 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine article on "the Guardian" ^ Zirin, 2014. Chapter 7 & Conclusion. ^ Jonathan Watts & Donna Bowater. "Dilma Rousseff impeached by Brazilian senate" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 31 August 2016 . Retrieved 31 August 2016 . ^ Taub, Amanda (1 September 2016). "All Impeachments Are Political. But Was Brazil's Something More Sinister?" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 13 February 2025 . Retrieved 3 May 2025 . ^ Article Archived 24 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine in Financial Times (18 April 2016) about the political ambiance in Brazil on the day vote for the Deputies chamber decision about open an impeachment procedure against President Dilma. 2nd to 4th paragraph. ^ "Brazil supreme court judge orders probe into nine ministers – paper" Archived 16 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine . Reuters. 11 April 2017. ^ "President Michel Temer of Brazil Is Charged With Corruption" Archived 14 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 8 January 2023. ^ Rocha, Lucas (8 January 2023). "Manifestantes furam bloqueio, entram na Esplanada e invadem o Congresso Nacional" . CNN Brazil . Archived from the original on 8 January 2023 . Retrieved 8 January 2023 . ^ a b "Land and Resources" . Encarta . MSN. Archived from the original on 28 October 2009 . Retrieved 11 June 2008 . ^ Official Area (In Portuguese) Archived 6 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine IBGE: Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística. Retrieved 8 January 2010. ^ "Hora Legal Brasileira" . Observatório Nacional. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011 . Retrieved 28 December 2014 . ^ a b c d e "Brazil" . Country Guide . BBC Weather. Archived from the original on 8 February 2011 . Retrieved 11 June 2008 . ^ Terms and Definitions FRA 2025 Forest Resources Assessment, Working Paper 194 . Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2023. ^ "Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020, Brazil" . Food Agriculture Organization of the United Nations . ^ a b c d e "Natural Regions" . Encarta . MSN. Archived from the original on 29 October 2009 . Retrieved 11 June 2008 . ^ a b c "Temperature in Brazil" . Brazil Travel. Archived from the original on 12 June 2008 . Retrieved 11 June 2008 . ^ a b Embrapa . "Annual averages of Mandacaru Agro-meteorological station" (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 20 August 2007 . Retrieved 21 October 2008 . ^ "CPD: South America, Site SA19, Caatinga of North-eastern Brazil, Brazil" . Botany.si.edu. Archived from the original on 6 June 2009 . Retrieved 29 October 2009 . ^ "Drought, Smallpox, and Emergence of Leishmania braziliensis in Northeastern Brazil" Archived 29 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). ^ "Ó Gráda, C.: Famine: A Short History" Archived 12 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine . Princeton University Press. ^ "Inland fishery enhancements" Archived 6 March 2014 at the Wayback Machine . FAO. ^ Maisonnave, Fabiano (10 September 2024). "Brazil faces its worst drought as wildfires rage and Amazon River falls to record low" . Associated Press. PBS News . Retrieved 16 September 2024 . ^ McCoy, Terrence (12 September 2024). "More than half of Brazil is racked by drought. Blame deforestation" . Washington Post . Retrieved 16 September 2024 . ^ "Brazil Endures Worst Drought on Record, Affecting 58% of the Country" . Folha de S.Paulo. 5 September 2024 . Retrieved 16 September 2024 . ^ Evans, Simon (5 October 2021). "Analysis: Which countries are historically responsible for climate change? / Historical responsibility for climate change is at the heart of debates over climate justice" . CarbonBrief.org . Carbon Brief. Archived from the original on 26 October 2021. Source: Carbon Brief analysis of figures from the Global Carbon Project, CDIAC, Our World in Data, Carbon Monitor, Houghton and Nassikas (2017) and Hansis et al (2015). ^ "Brazil" . G20 Climate Risk Atlas . 19 October 2021 . Retrieved 26 February 2025 . ^ a b "Brazil" . World Bank . Retrieved 26 February 2025 . ^ UNDP Climate Change Adaptation (13 August 2012). "Brazil" . www.adaptation-undp.org . Retrieved 26 February 2025 . ^ Jones, Matthew W.; Peters, Glen P.; Gasser, Thomas; Andrew, Robbie M.; Schwingshackl, Clemens; Gütschow, Johannes; Houghton, Richard A.; Friedlingstein, Pierre; Pongratz, Julia (13 November 2024), National contributions to climate change due to historical emissions of carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide , doi : 10.5281/zenodo.14054503 , retrieved 26 February 2025 ^ "Brazil's climate change targets 59-67% cut in GHG emissions by 2035 from 2005" . Enerdata . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . ^ "Information for COP 30 participants (A-Z) | UNFCCC" . unfccc.int . Archived from the original on 9 October 2025 . Retrieved 10 November 2025 . ^ "Global carbon market coalition proposed by Brazil has gained membership in eleven countries" . COP 30 Brazil Amazonia Belem 2025 . Retrieved 12 November 2025 . ^ "Building a Climate Coalition: Aligning Carbon Pricing, Trade, and Development" .

The Salata Institute . 16 September 2025 . Retrieved 7 October 2025 . ^ a b c d e "Natural Regions" . Encarta . MSN. Archived from the original on 28 October 2009 . Retrieved 11 June 2008 . ^ a b "Rivers and Lakes" . Encarta . MSN. Archived from the original on 28 October 2009 . Retrieved 11 June 2008 . ^ "Amazon – World's largest tropical rain forest and river basin" . World Wide Fund for Nature . Archived from the original on 5 August 2012 . Retrieved 3 June 2010 . ^ "Brazil" . IUCN Green List . Archived from the original on 19 November 2022 . Retrieved 19 November 2022 . ^ a b c Palmerlee, Danny (2007). South America on a Shoestring . Lonely Planet Publications. p. 275. ISBN 978-1-74104-443-0 . OCLC 76936293 . ^ Da Silva, M. and D.W. Minter. 1995. Fungi from Brazil recorded by Batista and Co-workers . Mycological Papers 169. CABI, Wallingford, UK. 585 pp. ^ Chapman, A.D (September 2005). "Numbers of Living Species in Australia and the World: A Report for the Department of the Environment and Heritage" . Australian Biological Resources Study . Australian Biodiversity Information Services. Archived from the original on 1 November 2007 . Retrieved 26 November 2007 . ^ "One fifth of the world's freshwater" . Amazon . World Wide Fund for Nature. 6 August 2007. Archived from the original on 1 March 2011 . Retrieved 12 June 2008 . ^ a b c d "Plant and Animal Life" . Encarta . MSN. Archived from the original on 29 October 2009 . Retrieved 12 June 2008 . ^ "Atlantic Forest, Brazil" . Map: Biodiversity hotspots . BBC News. 1 October 2004. Archived from the original on 19 July 2008 . Retrieved 12 June 2008 . ^ "Amazon Against the Clock: A Regional Assessment on Where and How to Protect 80% by 2025" (PDF) . Amazon Watch . September 2022. p. 8. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 September 2022. Graphic 2: Current State of the Amazon by country, by percentage / Source: RAISG (Red Amazónica de Información Socioambiental Georreferenciada) Elaborated by authors. ^ "Places We Work: The Atlantic Forest of Brazil" .

The Nature Conservancy . 2007. Archived from the original on 2 July 2010 . Retrieved 5 December 2007 . ^ Capobianco, João Paulo. "Biodiversity in the Atlantic Forest" . Brazil on CD-ROM and Internet . Ministry of External Relations. Archived from the original on 15 December 2007 . Retrieved 5 December 2007 . ^ USDA Forest Service website, Forest Service International Programs: Brazil Archived 6 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine , retrieved February 2007. ^ Butler, Rhett A. (28 March 2006). "Brazil to Protect Amazon Rainforest" . MongaBay.com. Archived from the original on 5 April 2020 . Retrieved 28 November 2007 . ^ "Preserved native vegetation occupies 61% of Brazil's area, says Embrapa" . 27 January 2017. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ "How Europe has multiplied its forests and why this can be a problem" . BBC News Brasil . Archived from the original on 14 August 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Ruiz, Sarah (12 November 2021). "Climate change is pushing Brazil's farmland out of agricultural suitability range" . Woodwell climate research center . Nature Climate Change. Archived from the original on 22 September 2022 . Retrieved 22 September 2022 . ^ Pimentel, Mauro. "Lula returns for third term as Brazil president" . CNN . Archived from the original on 1 January 2023 . Retrieved 1 January 2022 . ^ Bruns, Axel; Enli, Gunn; Skogerbo, Eli; Larsson, Anders Olof; Christensen, Christian (22 December 2015).

The 26 federate states have powers to adopt their own Constitutions and laws; their autonomy, however, is limited by the principles established in the Federal Constitution. ^ Celina Souza. "Federal Republic of Brazil" (PDF) . Forum of Federations . Second, the Federal Supreme Court systematically requires the state constitutions and laws to reflect the federal Constitution, thereby imposing a hierarchical interpretation of constitutional norms even though the Constitution does not state this explicitly. ^ Neil Montgomery (13 January 2023). "Legal Systems in Brazil: Overview" . montgomery.adv.br. Laws are created at federal, state and municipal levels.

The Federal Constitution provides for matters that must be the subject of federal laws, those which may be the subject of either federal or state laws, and those which should be regulated by municipal laws. ^ "Brazil 1988 (rev. 2017)" . constituteproject.org .

The Union has exclusive power to legislate with respect to: I. civil, commercial, penal, procedural, electoral, agrarian, maritime, aeronautical, space and labor law; ^ da Cunha Melo, Leopoldo (January 1948). "Conceituação de "Território Federal" como unidade política" (PDF) . Boletim Geográfico (in Brazilian Portuguese). 5 (58): 1128– 1133. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 October 2023 . Retrieved 26 October 2023 . ^ Porto, Jadson Luís Rebelo (March 1999). "Os territórios federais e a sua evolução no Brasil" (PDF) . Revista de Educação, Cultura e meio ambiente (in Brazilian Portuguese). III (15). Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 November 2023 . Retrieved 26 October 2023 . ^ Article 4 of the Federal Constitution of Brazil Archived 28 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine V-Brazil. Retrieved on 20 September 2011. ^ Article 84 of the Federal Constitution of Brazil Archived 19 September 2019 at the Wayback Machine V-Brazil. Retrieved on 20 September 2011. ^ U.S. Congressional Report on Brazil United States Congress . Retrieved on 23 June 2009. ^ Georges D. Landau, "The Decision-making Process in Foreign Policy: The Case of Brazil", Center for Strategic and International Studies: Washington DC: March 2003 ^ a b c d e Cabral and Weinstock 2010. Brazil: an emerging aid player ( Archived 13 January 2011 at the Wayback Machine ). London: Overseas Development Institute ^ Cabral, Lidia 2010. Brazil's development cooperation with the South: a global model in waiting ( Archived 30 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine ). London: Overseas Development Institute ^ Uma Nova Agenda Militar Archived 25 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine Revista Época. Retrieved on 19 February 2009. ^ The World Factbook , Central Intelligence Agency , archived from the original on 12 August 2021 , retrieved 26 March 2010 ^ "Sala de imprensa – FAB em números" (in Portuguese). Força Aérea Brasileira. Archived from the original on 17 June 2008 . Retrieved 12 December 2007 . ^ "Decreto Nº 5.670 de 10 de Janeiro de 2006" (in Portuguese). Presidência da República. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 2 October 2010 . ^ "Military Power" . Brasil. Archived from the original on 11 February 2021 . Retrieved 27 June 2010 . ^ Scheina (1987), p. 81. ^ "Grupamento de Mergulhadores de Combate – GruMeC" . tropaselite.t35.com . Archived from the original on 27 March 2010 . Retrieved 27 June 2010 . ^ "Porta-Helicópteros Atlântico agora é Navio-Aeródromo Multipropósito" (in Brazilian Portuguese). Poder Naval. 26 November 2020. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020 . Retrieved 12 May 2022 . ^ "Ordem pública é prioridade da Força Nacional de Segurança" . Portal Brasil. 29 April 2012. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 8 February 2015 . ^ "dp-intentional-homicide-victims | dataUNODC" . dataunodc.un.org . Retrieved 20 November 2025 . ^ "Taxa de delito por 100 mil habitantes" . Secretaria de Segurança Pública do Estado de São Paulo. 31 January 2011. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 14 February 2011 . ^ a b c "Brasil tem queda de assassinatos em 2025: veja mortes por estado" . G1 (in Brazilian Portuguese). 22 January 2026 . Retrieved 9 February 2026 . ^ "A Year of Violence Sees Brazil's Murder Rate Hit Record High" .

The New York Times . 10 August 2018. Archived from the original on 1 January 2022. ^ "Highest to Lowest - Prison Population Total | World Prison Brief" . www.prisonstudies.org . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ "Brasil tem hoje deficit de 200 mil vagas no sistema prisional" . G1. 15 January 2014. Archived from the original on 13 April 2021 . Retrieved 21 March 2014 . ^ "Multilateral Treaties - AMERICAN CONVENTION ON HUMAN RIGHTS "PACT OF SAN JOSE, COSTA RICA" (B-32)" . Organization of American States . Retrieved 11 July 2017 . ^ "Brazil - Freedom in the World 2017" . Freedom House . Archived from the original on 8 July 2019 . Retrieved 4 May 2021 . ^ "Human Rights in Brazil" . UNESCO . United Nations . Retrieved 11 July 2017 . ^ Brocchetto, Marilia (15 May 2013). "Brazilian judicial council orders notaries to recognize same-sex marriage" . CNN . Retrieved 11 July 2017 . ^ "21 Largest Stock Exchanges in the World" . Yahoo Finance . 27 March 2023. Archived from the original on 13 September 2023 . Retrieved 20 June 2023 . ^ "Brasil será maior exportador agrícola mundial em 2024" (in Portuguese). EXAME. 1 July 2015. Archived from the original on 9 May 2018 . Retrieved 9 May 2018 . ^ "Embraer vê clientes mais dispostos à compra de aviões" . Exame Magazine. 10 October 2010. Archived from the original on 28 July 2011 . Retrieved 8 February 2014 . ^ "6. Brazil" . Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Archived from the original on 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 . Brazil is rich in a variety of natural resources and is the world's leading producer of tin, iron ore and phosphate. It has large deposits of diamonds, manganese, chromium, copper, bauxite and many other minerals. ^ "WEO Database, April 2025. Report for Selected Countries and Subjects: World, European Union" . IMF.org . International Monetary Fund . 22 April 2025. ^ "Brazil Economy Beats Forecasts Again as Consumers Spend Big" . Archived from the original on 7 December 2024 . Retrieved 22 December 2024 . ^ "Labor force, total – Brazil" . World Bank . Archived from the original on 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 . ^ "Banco Central do Brasil – SDDS" . www.bcb.gov.br . Central Bank of Brazil . Archived from the original on 21 July 2021 . Retrieved 21 July 2022 . ^ "Poverty headcount ratio at $2.15 a day (2017 PPP) (% of population) – Brazil" . World Bank . Archived from the original on 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 . ^ "Poverty headcount ratio at $6.85 a day (2017 PPP) (% of population) – Brazil" . World Bank . Archived from the original on 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 . ^ France, Guilherme (29 January 2019). "Brazil: Overview of corruption and anti-corruption" (PDF) . Transparency International . Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 . Corruption remains one of the biggest impediments to economic development in Brazil. ^ Alok Bansal; Yogeshwari Phatak; I C Gupta; Rajendra Jain (2009). Transcending Horizons Through Innovative Global Practices . Excel Books. p. 29. ISBN 978-81-7446-708-9 . Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2015 . ^ "GDP – composition, by sector of origin" .

The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency . Archived from the original on 19 April 2023 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 . ^ "FAOSTAT" . www.fao.org . Archived from the original on 12 November 2016 . Retrieved 11 January 2021 . ^ "How are agricultural co-operatives making a difference in Brazil? | ICA" . ica.coop . Archived from the original on 13 April 2021 . Retrieved 1 February 2019 . ^ "Production of Brazil, by FAO" . Archived from the original on 12 November 2016 . Retrieved 4 October 2022 . ^ "Brasil extrai cerca de 2 gramas de ouro por habitante em 5 anos" . R7.com . 29 June 2019. Archived from the original on 12 July 2020 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 . ^ "Nióbio: G1 visita em MG complexo industrial do maior produtor do mundo" . G1 . 12 December 2019. Archived from the original on 12 December 2019 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 . ^ "Serviço Geológico do Brasil" . cprm.gov.br . Archived from the original on 6 September 2019 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 . ^ "Rio Grande do Sul: o maior exportador de pedras preciosas do Brasil" . Band.com.br . Archived from the original on 2 May 2018 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 . ^ "Fazcomex Tecnologia para Comércio Exterior – Soluções para Comex" . Fazcomex | Tecnologia para Comércio Exterior . Archived from the original on 29 June 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 . ^ "Agronegócio tem oito entre os dez produtos líderes das exportações brasileiras em 2019" . Avicultura Industrial . 2 January 2020. Archived from the original on 13 April 2021 . Retrieved 11 January 2021 . ^ "List of importing markets for the product exported by Brazil in 2021" . International Trade Centre . Archived from the original on 12 April 2023 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 . ^ "List of supplying markets for the product imported by Brazil in 2021" . International Trade Centre . Archived from the original on 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 . ^ "Brazil Trade" . World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS). Archived from the original on 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 . ^ "Official History of Automobile Industry in Brazil" . National Association of Vehicles Industries. 23 January 2022. Archived from the original on 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 . ^ "Alimentos Processados | A indústria de alimentos e bebidas na sociedade brasileira atual" . alimentosprocessados.com.br . Archived from the original on 25 March 2018 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 . ^ "Produção nacional de celulose cai 6,6% em 2019, aponta Ibá" . Valor Econômico . 21 February 2020. Archived from the original on 21 February 2020 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 . ^ "Indústrias calçadistas em Franca, SP registram queda de 40% nas vagas de trabalho em 6 anos" . G1 . 14 July 2019. Archived from the original on 14 July 2019 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 . ^ Comércio, Diário do (24 January 2020). "Minas Gerais produz 32,3% do aço nacional em 2019" . Archived from the original on 14 June 2020 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 . ^ "O novo mapa das montadoras, que agora rumam para o interior do País" . 8 March 2019. Archived from the original on 8 March 2019 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 . ^ "Indústria automobilística do Sul do Rio impulsiona superavit na economia" . G1 . 12 July 2017. Archived from the original on 19 July 2017 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 . ^ "Indústria Química no Brasil" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. ^ "Estudo de 2018" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. ^ "Produção nacional da indústria de químicos cai 5,7% em 2019, diz Abiquim" . economia.uol.com.br . Archived from the original on 14 June 2020 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 . ^ "Industria Textil no Brasil" . Archived from the original on 19 June 2020 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 . ^ "Setor de serviços sustenta o crescimento do PIB de 2018" . VEJA . Archived from the original on 13 April 2021 . Retrieved 6 January 2021 . ^ "Produtividade e Comércio Exterior" . SECINT e SEPEC . Archived from the original on 13 April 2021 . Retrieved 1 April 2021 . ^ "Pequenos negócios já representam 30% do Produto Interno Bruto do país" . 7 November 2022. Archived from the original on 13 April 2021 . Retrieved 6 January 2021 . ^ "2025 Tourism Statistics: The "Brazil Effect" in Numbers" . Brazilian Finance . 30 April 2026 . Retrieved 8 June 2026 . ^ "UN Tourism Data Dashboard" . UN Tourism . Archived from the original on 2 December 2025 . Retrieved 15 May 2026 . ^ Gusen, Fernando (28 January 2026). "Record international tourism in Brazil boosts Festuris's international profile" . Retrieved 8 May 2026 . ^ Guilherme Lohmann Palhares (2012). Tourism in Brazil: Environment, Management and Segments . Routledge. p. 126. ISBN 978-0-415-67432-4 . Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2015 . ^ "Travel & Tourism Development Index 2024" . ^ Fundação Instituto de Pesquisas Econômicas (2007). "Caracterização e Dimensionamento do Turismo Domêstico no Brasil 2002 e 2006" (PDF) (in Portuguese). Ministério do Turismo. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 October 2008 . Retrieved 21 June 2008 . ^ "Veja ranking dos Estados brasileiros que atraem mais turistas estrangeiros" . Estadão (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 25 June 2024 . Retrieved 19 June 2024 . ^ Redação, Da (18 January 2024). "Brasil recebe 5,9 milhões de estrangeiros em 2023" . Portal PANROTAS (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 28 June 2024 . Retrieved 19 June 2024 . ^ Cedeño, Karina (12 June 2024). "Turismo é grande negócio e São Paulo seguirá investindo nele, diz Lucena" . Portal PANROTAS (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 28 June 2024 . Retrieved 19 June 2024 . ^ "Movimentação do turismo bate recorde em vários estados e aquece economia" . Agência Gov (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 19 June 2024 . Retrieved 19 June 2024 . ^ Fundação Instituto de Pesquisas Econômicas e EMBRATUR (2006). "Caracterização e Dimensionamento do Turismo Domêstico no Brasil 2002 e 2006: Metodologia e Desenvolvimento" (PDF) (in Portuguese). Ministério do Turismo. Archived from the original on 30 November 2006 . Retrieved 22 June 2008 . ^ Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development Staff (2006). OECD Economic Surveys: Brazil 2006 . OECD Publishing. p. 94. ISBN 978-92-64-02999-6 . ^ United Nations Educational, Scientific (2010). UNESCO Science Report 2010: The Current Status of Science Around the World . UNESCO. pp. 110– 18. ISBN 978-92-3-104132-7 . Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2015 . ^ Brian Harvey; Henk H.F. Smid; Thâeo Pirard (2010). Emerging Space Powers: The New Space Programs of Asia, the Middle East and South-America . Springer. p. 324. ISBN 978-1-4419-0874-2 . Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2015 . ^ Crocitti & Vallance (2012) , p. 628 . ^ NASA Signs International Space Station Agreement With Brazil Archived 27 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine NASA . ^ O.C. Ferreira. "O Sistema Elétrico Brasileiro" . Archived from the original on 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 21 March 2013 . ^ "Previsão de lançamento" . Marinha do Brasil (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 . ^ "Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität" . Elsa.physik.uni-bonn.de. 18 August 2008. Archived from the original on 4 August 2008 . Retrieved 30 October 2010 . ^ "CEITEC" . Portal Brasil . Brasil.gov.br. Archived from the original on 17 November 2011 . Retrieved 8 August 2011 . ^ "Brasil cai duas posições em ranking mundial" , Folha de S.Paulo , 26 March 2010, archived from the original on 26 September 2013 , retrieved 26 March 2010 ^ "GII Innovation Ecosystems & Data Explorer 2025" . WIPO . Retrieved 16 October 2025 . ^ Dutta, Soumitra; Lanvin, Bruno (2025). Global Innovation Index 2025: Innovation at a Crossroads . World Intellectual Property Organization . p. 19. doi : 10.34667/tind.58864 . ISBN 978-92-805-3797-0 . Retrieved 17 October 2025 . ^ "Global Innovation Index 2019" . www.wipo.int . Archived from the original on 2 September 2021 . Retrieved 2 September 2021 . ^ "M. Santos Dumont Rounds Eiffel Tower" (PDF) .

The New York Times . 20 October 1901. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 29 December 2010 . ^ "Engelberg, Inc" . Vintage Machinery. 2011. Archived from the original on 21 March 2012 . Retrieved 17 July 2011 . ^ Abreu, Manuel de, pag. 17 – Grande Enciclopédia Universal – edição de 1980 – Ed.Amazonas ^ "Portable stereo's creator got his due, eventually" . Archived from the original on 9 March 2009 . Retrieved 16 December 2015 . ^ Exposição destaca centenário do CEFET-MG Sítio do Cefet-MG, acessado em 13 de novembro de 2010 Archived 13 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine ^ "50 anos do Méson-Pi" . Archived from the original on 26 May 2011 . Retrieved 29 December 2010 . ^ "Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Físicas – Coleção Galileo: Textos de Física" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 March 2013 . Retrieved 21 October 2014 . ^ "Atta-Ur-Rahman, José Leite Lopes and Juan Martín Maldacena receive UNESCO science prizes" . UNESCOPRESS. Archived from the original on 19 June 2002 . Retrieved 21 October 2014 . ^ Brasileiro ganha a Medalha Fields, considerada o "Nobel da Matemática" Archived 13 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine . ^ West, David A. 2003. Fritz Müller: a naturalist in Brazil. Blacksburg: Pocahontas Press ^ "International – U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA)" . www.eia.gov . Archived from the original on 26 October 2023 . Retrieved 23 October 2023 . ^ Michael Schmidt; Vincent Onyango; Dmytro Palekhov (2011). Implementing Environmental and Resource Management . Springer. p. 42. ISBN 978-3-540-77568-3 . Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2015 . ^ OECD; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development Staff (2001). OECD Economic Surveys: Brazil 2001 . OECD Publishing. p. 193. ISBN 978-92-64-19141-9 . Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2015 . ^ "Renewable Capacity Statistics 2022" (PDF) . IRENA . Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 19 May 2022 . ^ "Yearly electricity data" . ember-climate.org . 2024 . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ "Yearly Electricity Data" . Ember . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ a b "Matriz Energética e Elétrica" . Empresa de Pesquisa Energética (in Portuguese). ^ National Agency of Energy ^ Nakagawa, Fernando (23 March 2022). "Brasil anuncia aumento da produção de petróleo em 10% para ajudar a estabilizar preços" . CNN Brasil . ^ "Produção de petróleo e gás no Brasil ultrapassa 4 milhões de boe/d pela primeira vez" . Agência Nacional do Petróleo, Gás Natural e Biocombustíveis . 19 February 2020. Archived from the original on 20 February 2020 . Retrieved 16 August 2020 . ^ "Qual é a maior rodovia do Brasil?" (in Brazilian Portuguese). O Estado de S.Paulo . 9 March 2022 . Retrieved 22 November 2022 . ^ "BR-116" (in Brazilian Portuguese). Banco de Informações e Mapas de Transportes/ Ministry of Transport (Brazil) . 2018. Archived from the original on 27 January 2013 . Retrieved 22 November 2022 . ^ "Brazilian road network in 2019" . anuariodotransporte.cnt.org.br . ^ "Anuário CNT do Transporte" . anuariodotransporte.cnt.org.br . ^ "Extensão da Malha Ferroviária – 2015" . ANTT. Archived from the original on 8 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 October 2023 . ^ "OPrincipais ferrovias" . Ministerio dos Transportes (in Portuguese) Archived 29 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ Arquitetura, INBEC Pós-Graduação- Engenharia (4 February 2020). "Conheça a história da construção do Metrô de São Paulo" . INBEC Pós-Graduação (in Brazilian Portuguese) . Retrieved 23 October 2023 . ^ Guilherme Lohmann Palhares (2012). Tourism in Brazil: Environment, Management and Segments . Routledge. p. 48. ISBN 978-0-415-67432-4 . ^ "Relatorio Operacional 2018" (PDF) . Aeroporto Internacional de São Paulo . Retrieved 19 June 2024 . ^ Country Comparison to the World: Gini Index – Brazil Archived 13 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine The World Factbook . Retrieved on 3 April 2012. ^ "Mercado Brasileiro Terminais de Contêineres" , Santos Brasil. (in Portuguese) ^ Amato, Fábio (24 March 2013). "Navios esperam até 16 dias para atracar em porto do país, diz MDIC" . Economia . ^ "Estimativas da população residente para os municípios e para as unidades da federação | IBGE" . www.ibge.gov.br . Retrieved 5 September 2025 . ^ "Brazilian population likely to start shrinking in 2042" . Agência Brasil . 23 August 2024 . Retrieved 24 August 2024 . ^ 2008 PNAD, IBGE. "População residente por situação, sexo e grupos de idade" ^ 2008 PNAD, IBGE. "População residente por situação, sexo e grupos de idade" ^ 2008 PNAD, IBGE. "População residente por situação, sexo e grupos de idade" . ^ "Brazil population reaches 190.8 million" Archived 9 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine . Brasil.gov.br. ^ "Shaping Brazil: The Role of International Migration" . Migration Policy Institute. ^ José Alberto Magno de Carvalho, "Crescimento populacional e estrutura demográfica no Brasil" Archived 19 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine Belo Horizonte: UFMG/Cedeplar, 2004 (PDF file), p. 5. ^ "Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística" . IBGE. 29 November 1999 . Retrieved 25 January 2010 . ^ "Projeção da População do Brasil – Brazil's populational projection" . IBGE . Retrieved 25 January 2010 . ^ Magno de Carvalho, "Crescimento populacional e estrutura demográfica no Brasil" , pp. 7–8. ^ a b "2022 Census: Illiteracy rate falls from 9.6% to 7.0% in 12 years, though inequalities persist | News Agency" . Agência de Notícias - IBGE . 17 May 2024 . Retrieved 14 May 2025 . ^ PNAD 2008, IBGE. "Pessoas de 5 anos ou mais de idade por situação, sexo, alfabetização e grupos de idade e grupos de idade" . ^ "IDBGE" (in Portuguese). IBGE. 2011 . Retrieved 8 October 2011 . ^ "Mais da metade da população vive em 294 arranjos formados por contiguidade urbana e por deslocamentos para trabalho e estudo" (in Portuguese). Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics . Retrieved 16 March 2017 . ^ "Arranjos Populacionais e Concentrações Urbanas do Brasil" (PDF) (in Portuguese). Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics. p. 148. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 16 March 2017 . ^ "Estimativas da população residente no Brasil e Unidades da Federação com data de referência em 1º de julho de 2016" (PDF) . Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics ( FTP ) (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 16 March 2017 . (To view documents see Help:FTP ) ^ "Principal Cities" . Encarta . MSN. Archived from the original on 29 October 2009 . Retrieved 10 June 2008 . ^ "Panorama do Censo 2022" (in Portuguese). IBGE . ^ "Panorama do Censo 2022" . Panorama do Censo 2022 . Retrieved 20 November 2025 . ^ 2008 PNAD, IBGE. . ^ De Assis Poiares, Lilian; De Sá Osorio, Paulo; Spanhol, Fábio Alexandre; Coltre, Sidnei César; Rodenbusch, Rodrigo; Gusmão, Leonor; Largura, Alvaro; Sandrini, Fabiano; Da Silva, Cláudia Maria Dornelles (2010). "Allele frequencies of 15 STRs in a representative sample of the Brazilian population" (PDF) . Forensic Science International: Genetics . 4 (2): e61–63. doi : 10.1016/j.fsigen.2009.05.006 . PMID 20129458 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 April 2011. ^ Brazilian DNA is nearly 80% European, indicates study . ^ a b NMO Godinho O impacto das migrações na constituição genética de populações latino-americanas Archived 6 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine . PhD Thesis, Universidade de Brasília (2008). ^ Pena, Sérgio D. J.; Di Pietro, Giuliano; Fuchshuber-Moraes, Mateus; Genro, Julia Pasqualini; Hutz, Mara H.; Kehdy Fde, Fernanda de Souza Gomes; Kohlrausch, Fabiana; Magno, Luiz Alexandre Viana; Montenegro, Raquel Carvalho; et al. (2011). Harpending, Henry (ed.). "The Genomic Ancestry of Individuals from Different Geographical Regions of Brazil Is More Uniform Than Expected" . PLOS ONE . 6 (2) e17063. Bibcode : 2011PLoSO...617063P . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0017063 . PMC 3040205 . PMID 21359226 . ^ a b Lins, T. C.; Vieira, R. G.; Abreu, B. S.; Grattapaglia, D.; Pereira, R. W. (March–April 2009). "Genetic composition of Brazilian population samples based on a set of twenty-eight ancestry informative SNPs" . American Journal of Human Biology . 22 (2): 187– 192. doi : 10.1002/ajhb.20976 . PMID 19639555 . S2CID 205301927 . ^ Pena, Sérgio D. J.; Bortolini, Maria Cátira (1 April 2004). "Pode a genética definir quem deve se beneficiar das cotas universitárias e demais ações afirmativas?" . Estudos Avançados . 18 (50): 31– 50. doi : 10.1590/S0103-40142004000100004 . hdl : 10183/19857 . ^ "Allele frequencies of 15 STRs in a representative sample of the Brazilian population" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 April 2011 . Retrieved 8 April 2011 . ^ Godinho, Neide Maria de Oliveira (2008). "O impacto das migrações na constituição genética de populações latino-americanas" . Universidade de Brasília. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2011. ^ Pena, Sérgio D. J.; Pietro, Giuliano Di; Fuchshuber-Moraes, Mateus; Genro, Julia Pasqualini; Hutz, Mara H.; Kehdy, Fernanda de Souza Gomes; Kohlrausch, Fabiana; Magno, Luiz Alexandre Viana; Montenegro, Raquel Carvalho; Moraes, Manoel Odorico; Moraes, Maria Elisabete Amaral de; Moraes, Milene Raiol de; Ojopi, Élida B.; Perini, Jamila A.; Racciopi, Clarice; Ribeiro-dos-Santos, Ândrea Kely Campos; Rios-Santos, Fabrício; Romano-Silva, Marco A.; Sortica, Vinicius A.; Suarez-Kurtz, Guilherme (16 February 2011). "The Genomic Ancestry of Individuals from Different Geographical Regions of Brazil Is More Uniform Than Expected" . PLOS ONE . 6 (2) e17063. Bibcode : 2011PLoSO...617063P . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0017063 . PMC 3040205 . PMID 21359226 . ^ "SIDIA M. CALLEGARI-JACQUES et al., Historical Genetics: Spatiotemporal Analysis of the Formation" (PDF) . Hereditas.com.br . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2011 . Retrieved 21 August 2017 . ^ Callegari-Jacques, S. M.; Grattapaglia, D.; Salzano, F. M.; Salamoni, S. P.; Crossetti, S. G.; Ferreira, M. R. E.; Hutz, M. H. (November–December 2003). "Historical genetics: Spatiotemporal analysis of the formation of the Brazilian population" (PDF) . American Journal of Human Biology . 15 (6): 824– 834. doi : 10.1002/ajhb.10217 . PMID 14595874 . S2CID 34610130 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2011. ^ "Retrato molecular do Brasil" . Publicacoes.gene.com.br . Archived from the original on 6 March 2008 . Retrieved 21 August 2017 . ^ Maria Stella Ferreira-Levy (1974). "O papel da migração internacional na evolução da população brasileira (1872 a 1972)" . Revista de Saúde Pública . 8 (supl): 49– 90. doi : 10.1590/S0034-89101974000500003 . , Table 2, p. 74. (in Portuguese) ^ Zirin, 2014. Chapter 2, Section "The Beginning of the 'Mosaic' ". ^ Grün, Roberto (July 1996). "The Armenian Renaissance in Brazil" .

The Americas . 53 (1): 113– 151. doi : 10.2307/1007476 . ISSN 0003-1615 . JSTOR 1007476 . S2CID 143656550 . ^ "The Jewish Community in Brazil" . Beit Hatfutsot . ^ Silvia Ferabolli (25 September 2014). Arab Regionalism: A Post-Structural Perspective . Routledge. p. 151. ISBN 978-1-317-65803-0 . According to estimates by the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE), countersigned by the League of Arab States, Brazil has the largest Arab colony outside their countries of origin. There are estimated 15 million Arabs living in Brazil today, with some researchers suggesting numbers around 20 million. ^ Paul Amar (15 July 2014).

The Middle East and Brazil: Perspectives on the New Global South . Indiana University Press. p. 40. ISBN 978-0-253-01496-2 . there are, according to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, more than sixteen million Arabs and descendants of Arabs in Brazil, constituting the largest community of Arabs descent outside the Middle East. ^ Bercito, Diogo (8 June 2021). "From Beirut to Brazil" . CCAS . Retrieved 7 November 2023 . ^ a b Coelho (1996), p. 268. ^ a b Vesentini (1988), p. 117. ^ Adas, Melhem Panorama geográfico do Brasil , 4th ed (São Paulo: Moderna, 2004), p. 268 ISBN 85-16-04336-3 ^ Azevedo (1971), pp. 2–3. ^ a b c Moreira (1981), p. 108. ^ Azevedo (1971), pp. 74–75. ^ Enciclopédia Barsa , vol. 10 (Rio de Janeiro: Encyclopædia Britannica do Brasil, 1987), p. 355. ^ Azevedo (1971), p. 74. ^ a b Azevedo (1971), p. 161. ^ Enciclopédia Barsa , vol. 4, pp. 254–55, 258, 265. ^ "In Amazonia, Defending the Hidden Tribes" , The Washington Post (8 July 2007). ^ "Brazil – Language" . countrystudies.us . ^ "Learn About Portuguese Language" . Sibila.com.br. 25 April 2009. Archived from the original on 20 April 2012 . Retrieved 7 April 2012 . ^ a b c "Languages of Brazil" . Ethnologue . Retrieved 9 June 2008 . ^ LEI Nº 10.436, DE 24 DE ABRIL DE 2002 . Presidência da República, Casa Civil, Subchefia para Assuntos Jurídicos. Retrieved on 19 May 2012. ^ Brazilian decree nº 5626, 22 December 2005 . Planalto.gov.br (23 December 2005). Retrieved on 19 May 2012. ^ Charles J. Russo (2011).

The Legal Rights of Students with Disabilities: International Perspectives . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 45. ISBN 978-1-4422-1085-1 . ^ Campbell, Lyle; Grondona, Verónica; Muysken, Peter (2012). "Contacts between indigenous languages in South America".

The Indigenous Languages of South America: A Comprehensive Guide . Walter de Gruyter. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-11-025803-5 . Nheengatú (also called língua geral of Amazonia, or lingua Brasilica) originated in the 17th century in what are now the states of Pará Maranhão, as lingua franca on the basis of Tupinambá lexicon but with strong grammatical influence from Portuguese, also due to intervention by Jesuit missionaries Around 1700 it was spoken in a large area in Brazil, as a contact language between whites and indians, but it lost some support with the expulsion of the Jesuits in 1758 Its sister language in the colonial period was Língua Geral Paulista (in the state of São Paulo) a lingua franca which is now extinct. ^ Rohter, Larry (28 August 2005). "Language Born of Colonialism Thrives Again in Amazon" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 14 July 2008 . ^ "O alemão lusitano do Sul do Brasil" . DW-World.de. ^ "ELB" . labeurb.unicamp.br . ^ "Approvato il progetto che dichiara il 'Talian' come patrimonio del Rio Grande del Sud – Brasile" . Sitoveneto. Archived from the original on 4 March 2012 . Retrieved 9 March 2012 . ^ Patrick Stevenson (1997).

The German Language and the Real World: Sociolinguistic, Cultural, and Pragmatic Perspectives on Contemporary German . Oxford University Press. p. 39. ISBN 978-0-19-823738-9 . ^ Angelini, Andrea (6 September 2018). "Not just Dante: Italian speaking countries in the world – part two" . Italics Magazine . Retrieved 26 August 2025 . ^ "The Global Catholic Population" . Pew Research Center . 13 February 2013 . Retrieved 10 June 2020 . ^ "Brazil" . International Religious Freedom Report . U.S. Department of State. 8 November 2005 . Retrieved 8 June 2008 . ^ "Worldwide Catholic population hits 1.4 billion" . Catholic News Agency . Retrieved 3 April 2025 . ^ Kevin Boyle; Juliet Sheen (2013). Freedom of Religion and Belief: A World Report . Routledge. p. 211. ISBN 978-1-134-72229-7 . ^ "Brazil" . Berkley Center for Religion, Peace, and World Affairs . Archived from the original on 25 August 2011 . Retrieved 7 December 2011 . ^ Brian Morris (2006). Religion and Anthropology: A Critical Introduction . Cambridge University Press. p. 223. ISBN 978-0-521-85241-8 . ^ William Jeynes; David W. Robinson (2012). International Handbook of Protestant Education . Springer. p. 405. ISBN 978-94-007-2386-3 . ^ Tautz, Carlos (7 April 2025). "Como os EUA usaram a religião para combater o comunismo no Brasil" . Intercept Brasil (in Brazilian Portuguese) . Retrieved 16 April 2025 . ^ Nascimento, Gilberto (9 October 2025). "Pregadores evangélicos dos EUA invadem o Brasil com a receita que elegeu Trump" . Intercept Brasil (in Brazilian Portuguese) . Retrieved 2 December 2025 . ^ "2010 census results" (PDF) . FTP server ( FTP ). (To view documents see Help:FTP ) ^ "Brazil" . Berkley Center for Religion, Peace, and World Affairs . Archived from the original on 25 August 2011 . Retrieved 7 December 2011 . See drop-down essay on "The Growth of Religious Pluralism" ^ "Conservative evangelicals use social media to sway Brazil election" . Rest of World . 8 July 2024 . Retrieved 4 December 2024 . ^ Iacomini, Franco (5 March 2024). "Brazilian Evangelicals Bring Their Political Playbook to Portugal" . Christianity Today . Retrieved 4 December 2024 . ^ "The shared religious roots of twin insurrections in the US and Brazil" .

The Washington Post . 18 January 2023 . Retrieved 4 December 2024 . ^ " "Religião como fator político está diminuindo", diz especialista à CNN" . CNN Brasil (in Brazilian Portuguese). 14 February 2025 . Retrieved 3 April 2025 . ^ Nascimento, Gilberto (9 July 2025). "Universal e Assembleia de Deus já miram eleição de 2026 de olho na herança de Bolsonaro e em mais poder no Congresso" . Intercept Brasil (in Brazilian Portuguese) . Retrieved 2 December 2025 . ^ a b "G1 – País tem menor nível de adeptos do catolicismo desde 1872, diz estudo" . G1.globo.com. 23 August 2011 . Retrieved 7 April 2012 . ^ "Senado aprova acordo com o Vaticano" . O Globo . 2009 . Retrieved 28 June 2020 . ^ "Decreto nº 7.107, de 11 de fevereiro de 2010" . Casa Civil da Presidência da República . Retrieved 28 June 2020 . ^ Usa Ibp Usa (2005). Brazil: Tax Guide . Int'l Business Publications. p. 42. ISBN 978-0-7397-3279-3 . ^ a b "IBGE: Analfabetismo cai no país, mas fica estagnado no Nordeste" . Globo.com (in Portuguese). 15 July 2020. ^ The Central Intelligence Agency (2010).

The World Factbook 2010 (CIA 2009 ed.). Potomac Books, Inc. p. 143. ISBN 978-1-59797-541-4 . ^ World Bank (2001). Rural Poverty Alleviation in Brazil: Towards an Integrated Strategy . World Bank Publications. p. 40. ISBN 978-0-8213-5206-9 . ^ Laplane, Mario (14 May 2019). "Efforts towards inclusion" . D + C, Development and cooperation . ^ "QS World University Rankings 2024" . Top Universities . Archived from the original on 4 January 2024 . Retrieved 6 December 2023 . ^ "ShanghaiRanking's Academic Ranking of World Universities" . www.shanghairanking.com . Archived from the original on 29 September 2023 . Retrieved 6 December 2023 . ^ "QS University Rankings Latin America" . QS World University Rankings . Retrieved 11 November 2018 . ^ Gerard Martin La Forgia; Bernard F. Couttolenc (2008). Hospital Performance in Brazil: The Search for Excellence . World Bank Publications. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-8213-7359-0 . ^ "20 Anos do SUS" . Conselho Nacional de Saúde . Retrieved 13 April 2012 . ^ Lawrence F. Wolper (2004). Health Care Administration: Planning, Implementing, and Managing Organized Delivery Systems . Jones & Bartlett Learning. p. 33. ISBN 978-0-7637-3144-1 . ^ "Physicians (per 1,000 people)" . World Health Organization's Global Health Workforce Statistics . ^ "Hospital beds (per 1,000 people)" . World Health Organization The World Bank . ^ a b "Saúde" (PDF) . Radar social . Ministério do Planejamento. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 December 2008 . Retrieved 10 June 2008 . ^ Ajay Tandon, Christopher JL Murray, Jeremy A Lauer, David B Evans. "Measuring overall health system performance for 191 countries" (PDF) . World Health Organization. p. 20. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 March 2026 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Largest Carnival Guinness World Records . ^ Teresa A. Meade (2009). A Brief History of Brazil . Infobase Publishing. p. 146. ISBN 978-0-8160-7788-5 . ^ David Levinson (1998). Ethnic Groups Worldwide: A Ready Reference Handbook . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 325. ISBN 978-1-57356-019-1 . ^ Jeffrey Lesser (2013). Immigration, Ethnicity, and National Identity in Brazil, 1808 to the Present . Cambridge University Press. pp. 150– 55. ISBN 978-0-521-19362-7 . ^ Freyre, Gilberto (1986). "The Afro-Brazilian experiment: African influence on Brazilian culture" . UNESCO . Retrieved 8 June 2008 . ^ Leandro Karnal, Teatro da fé: Formas de representação religiosa no Brasil e no México do século XVI , São Paulo, Editora Hucitec, 1998; available on fflch.usp.br Archived 24 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ "The Brazilian Baroque" , Encyclopaedia Itaú Cultural Archived 30 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ Leslie Marsh (2012). Brazilian Women's Filmmaking: From Dictatorship to Democracy . University of Illinois Press. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-252-09437-8 . ^ Hue, Jorge de Souza (1999). Uma visão da arquitectura colonial no Brasil (in Portuguese). Rio de Janeiro. ^ Boxer, Charles Ralph (1962).

The Golden Age of Brazil, 1695–1750: Growing Pains of a Colonial Society. University of California Press. ^ a b Guimaraens, Cêça de. Arquitetura Archived 8 September 2003 at the Wayback Machine . Portal do Ministério das Relações Exteriores. ^ Claro, Mauro. "Ambientes modernos. A casa modernista da Rua Santa Cruz, de Gregori Warchavchik, e outras casas da modernidade" . In: Drops , 2008; 09 (025.03) ^ Louzada, Maria Alice & Louzada, Julio. Os Primeiros Momentos da Arte Brasileira Archived 6 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Júlio Louzada Artes Plásticas Brasil. Acesso 5 out 2010 ^ Leite, José Roberto Teixeira & Lemos, Carlos A.C. Os Primeiros Cem Anos , in Civita, Victor. Arte no Brasil . São Paulo: Abril Cultural, 1979 ^ a b Biscardi & Rocha 2006 ^ Amaral, Aracy; Kim Mrazek Hastings (1995). "Stages in the Formation of Brazil's Cultural Profile". Journal of Decorative and Propaganda Arts . 21 : 9– 25. doi : 10.2307/1504129 . JSTOR 1504129 . ^ Sevcenko, Nicolau. Pindorama revisitada: cultura e sociedade em tempos de virada. Série Brasil cidadão. Editora Peirópolis, 2000. pp. 39–47 ^ a b Duduka Da Fonseca; Bob Weiner (1991). Brazilian Rhythms for Drumset . Alfred Music Publishing. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-7692-0987-6 . ^ Donna M. Di Grazia (2013). Nineteenth-Century Choral Music . Routledge. p. 457. ISBN 978-1-136-29409-9 . ^ "UNESCO Culture Sector – Intangible Heritage – 2003 Convention" . Unesco.org . Retrieved 4 June 2013 . ^ Larry Crook (2009). Focus: Music of Northeast Brazil . Taylor & Francis. p. 78. ISBN 978-0-415-96066-3 . ^ Peter Fryer (2000). Rhythms of Resistance: African Musical Heritage in Brazil . Pluto Press. p. 39 . ISBN 978-0-7453-0731-2 . ^ "Brazil From A TO Z: FORRÓ" . Brazilian Experience . 25 December 2015. ^ "Jack A. Draper III" . Romance Languages and Literatures: University of Missouri . ^ Draper, Jack A. III (2010). Forró and redemptive regionalism from the Brazilian northeast: popular music in a culture of migration . New York: Lang. ISBN 978-1-4331-1076-4 . OCLC 643568832 . ^ MacGowan, Chris; Pessanha, Ricardo (1998).

The Brazilian Sound: Samba, Bossa Nova, and the Popular Music of Brazil . Temple University Press. pp. 159 –61. ISBN 978-1-56639-545-8 . ^ "Our Patron's History: Awards" . American Lambada Organization. ^ MacGowan & Pessanha (1998) , p. 6 . ^ Gayle Kassing (2007). History of Dance: An Interactive Arts Approach . Human Kinetics 10%. p. 236 . ISBN 978-0-7360-6035-6 . ^ Michael Campbell (2011). Popular Music in America: The Beat Goes on . Cengage Learning. p. 299. ISBN 978-0-8400-2976-8 . ^ Crocitti & Vallance (2012) , p. 360 . ^ "Brazilian Literature: An Introduction" . Embassy of Brasil – Ottawa . Visited on 2 November 2009. ^ Candido; Antonio . (1970) Vários escritos . São Paulo: Duas Cidades. p. 18 ^ Caldwell, Helen (1970) Machado de Assis: The Brazilian Master and his Novels . Berkeley, Los Angeles and London, University of California Press. ^ Fernandez, Oscar Machado de Assis: The Brazilian Master and His Novels The Modern Language Journal , Vol. 55, No. 4 (Apr. 1971), pp. 255–56 ^ Beatriz Mugayar Kühl, Arquitetura do ferro e arquitetura ferroviária em São Paulo: reflexões sobre a sua preservação , p. 202. Atelie Editorial, 1998. ^ Daniel Balderston and Mike Gonzalez, Encyclopedia of Latin American and Caribbean Literature, 1900–2003 , p. 288. Routledge, 2004. ^ Sayers, Portugal and Brazil in Transitn , "Literature". U of Minnesota Press, 1 January 1999. ^ Marshall C. Eakin and Paulo Roberto de Almeida, Envisioning Brazil: A Guide to Brazilian Studies in the United States : "Literature, Culture and Civilization". University of Wisconsin Press, 31 October 2005. ^ "Prêmio Camões de Literatura | Biblioteca Nacional" . Bn.br (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 16 March 2016 . Retrieved 26 January 2017 . ^ "Quem somos | Academia Brasileira de Letras" . Academia.org.br (in Portuguese). 3 August 2014 . Retrieved 26 January 2017 . ^ Padre Anchieta Brasil Escola . ^ a b "Brazilian Theatre: An Introduction" . Ambasciata brasiliana a Ottawa. Archived from the original on 5 February 2012. ^ O Teatro no Brasil Archived 24 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine Secretaria da Educação do Paraná . ^ "Rio the Magnificent (1932)" . YouTube . 18 April 2008. Archived from the original on 7 November 2015 . Retrieved 19 October 2015 . ^ Larry, Rohter (9 November 2010). "Brazil's Best, Restored and Ready for a 21st-Century Audience" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 1 January 2022 . Retrieved 3 November 2010 . ^ Tose, Juliano. "Editorial" . Contracampo – revista de cinema . Revista Contracampo . Retrieved 19 October 2015 . ^ "Cidade de Deus (City of God) (2003) – Rotten Tomatoes" . Rotten Tomatoes . Flixster . 17 January 2003 . Retrieved 19 October 2015 . ^ Ebert, Roger (14 December 2012). "The best films of the decade" . RogerEbert.com . Retrieved 19 October 2015 . ^ " 'I'm Still Here' makes history as first Brazilian film nominated for Best Picture at 2025 Oscars" .

The Express Tribune . 23 January 2025 . Retrieved 23 January 2025 . ^ Leite, Marcelo (23 January 2025). "Oscars 2025: I'm Still Here's Best Picture Nomination Explained (& When You Can Watch It)" . Screen Rant . Retrieved 23 January 2025 . ^ Davis, Clayton (3 March 2025). " 'I'm Still Here' Makes Oscar History as First Brazilian Film to Win International Feature Category" . Variety . ^ Barnes, Barnes (2 March 2025). "Kieran Culkin Wins Best Supporting Actor for 'A Real Pain' " .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2 March 2025 . ^ Berkani, Mohamed (19 May 2025). "Festival de Cannes 2025: "O agente secreto", extraordinaire plongée dans le Brésil de la dictature militaire des années 1970 dans un passionnant thriller" . France Info (in French). Treize minutes de standing ovation pour Kleber Mendonça Filho et son équipe après la projection de son dernier opus, O agente secreto (L'Agent secret) ^ "Rede Globo se torna a 2ª maior emissora do mundo" (in Portuguese). O Fuxico. Archived from the original on 14 May 2012 . Retrieved 22 May 2012 . ^ Roberto Gonzalez Echevarría; Enrique Pupo-Walker (1996).

The Cambridge History of Latin American Literature . Cambridge University Press. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-521-41035-9 . ^ Donald H. Johnston (2003). Encyclopedia of international media and communications . Vol. 3. Academic Press. p. 130. ISBN 978-0-12-387671-3 . ^ Jon S. Vincent (2003). Culture and Customs of Brazil . Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 97 –100. ISBN 978-0-313-30495-8 . ^ Bryan McCann (2004). Hello, Hello Brazil: Popular Music in the Making of Modern Brazil . Duke University Press. p. 22 . ISBN 978-0-8223-3273-2 . ^ David Ward (2007). Television and Public Policy: Change and Continuity in an Era of Global Liberalization . Routledge. p. 28. ISBN 978-0-203-87728-9 . ^ Martin Campbell-Kelly; William F. Aspray; Jeffrey R. Yost; Honghong Tinn; Gerardo Con Díaz (2023). Computer: A History of the Information Machine . Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-00-087875-2 . ^ "Digital 2025: Brazil" . DataReportal – Global Digital Insights . 3 March 2025 . Retrieved 12 November 2025 . ^ "Brazil launches international TV station for Africa" . BBC News . 25 May 2010 . Retrieved 30 October 2010 . ^ "Way of Life" . Encarta . MSN. Archived from the original on 29 October 2009 . Retrieved 8 June 2008 . ^ Roger, "Feijoada: The Brazilian national dish" Archived 29 November 2009 at the Wayback Machine braziltravelguide.com. ^ Cascudo, Luis da Câmara. História da Alimentação no Brasil. São Paulo/Belo Horizonte: Editora USP/Itatiaia, 1983. ^ Bayor, Ronald H. (2011). Multicultural America: An Encyclopedia of the Newest Americans . Georgia Institute of Technology. p. 181. ISBN 978-0-313-35786-2 . ^ Barbosa, Lívia (2007). "Feijão com arroz e arroz com feijão: o Brasil no prato dos brasileiros" . Horizontes Antropológicos . 13 (28): 87– 116. doi : 10.1590/S0104-71832007000200005 . ^ Ferraccioli, Patrícia; Silveira, Eliane Augusta da (2010). "Cultural feeding influence on palative memories in the usual brazilian cuisine" . Rev. Enferm. UERJ . 18 (2): 198– 203. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021 . Retrieved 19 November 2018 . ^ Freyre, Gilberto. Açúcar. Uma Sociologia do Doce, com Receitas de Bolos e Doces do Nordeste do Brasil. São Paulo, Companhia das Letras, 1997. ^ "Futebol, o esporte mais popular do Brasil, é destaque no Via Legal" . Jusbrasil.com.br. Archived from the original on 30 March 2012 . Retrieved 16 April 2011 . ^ "Football in Brazil" . Goal Programme . International Federation of Association Football. 15 April 2008. Archived from the original on 4 June 2007 . Retrieved 6 June 2008 . ^ Zirin, 2014. Chapter 4 "Futebol: The Journey from Daring to Fear" ^ Donaldson, Gerald. "Emerson Fittipaldi" . Hall of Fame .

The Official Formula 1 Website . Retrieved 6 June 2008 . ^ Donaldson, Gerald. "Nelson Piquet" . Hall of Fame .

The Official Formula 1 Website . Retrieved 6 June 2008 . ^ Donaldson, Gerald. "Ayrton Senna" . Hall of Fame .

The Latin American Republics; A History . New York: D. Appleton, 1942. Peres, Damião (1949) O Descobrimento do Brasil por Pedro Álvares Cabral: antecedentes e intencionalidade Porto: Portucalense. Scheina, Robert L. Latin America: A Naval History, 1810–1987 . Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1987. ISBN 0-87021-295-8 Lilia Moritz Schwarcz (30 November 1998).

As barbas do imperador: D. Pedro II, um monarca nos trópicos (in Portuguese). São Paulo: Companhia das Letras . ISBN 978-85-7164-837-1 . LCCN 99885599 . OL 142027M . Wikidata Q18238040 . Stuart B. Schwartz Sovereignty and Society in Colonial Brazil (1973) Early Latin America (1983) Sugar Plantations in the Formation of Brazilian Society (1985) Skidmore, Thomas E . Brazil: Five Centuries of Change (Oxford University Press, 1999) Uma História do Brasil . 4th ed. São Paulo: Paz e Terra, 2003. ISBN 85-219-0313-8 Souza, Adriana Barreto de. Duque de Caxias: o homem por trás do monumento . Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, 2008. ISBN 978-85-200-0864-5 .

The Trade in the Living: The Formation of Brazil in the South Atlantic, Sixteenth to Seventeenth Centuries (SUNY Press, 2019) Alves, Maria Helena Moreira (1985). State and Opposition in Military Brazil . Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. Amann, Edmund (1990).

The Illusion of Stability: The Brazilian Economy under Cardoso . World Development (pp. 1805–19). "Background Note: Brazil" . US Department of State . Retrieved 16 June 2011 . Bellos, Alex (2003). Futebol: The Brazilian Way of Life . London: Bloomsbury Publishing plc. Bethell, Leslie (1991). Colonial Brazil . Cambridge: CUP. Costa, João Cruz (1964). A History of Ideas in Brazil . Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press. Fausto, Boris (1999). A Concise History of Brazil . Cambridge: CUP. Fischer, Brodwyn; Grinberg, Keila, eds. (2023).

The Boundaries of Freedom: Slavery, Abolition, and the Making of Modern Brazil . Afro-Latin America. Cambridge University Press . doi : 10.1017/9781108917537 . ISBN 978-1-009-28796-8 . Lamoureux, Andrew Jackson; and three others (1911). "Brazil" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 4 (11th ed.). pp. 438– 463. Leal, Victor Nunes (1977). Coronelismo: The Municipality and Representative Government in Brazil . Cambridge: CUP. Levine, Robert M. Historical Dictionary of Brazil (2019) Malathronas, John (2003). Brazil: Life, Blood, Soul . Chichester: Summersdale. Martinez-Lara, Javier (1995). Building Democracy in Brazil: The Politics of Constitutional Change . Macmillan. Prado Júnior, Caio (1967).