The relationship between the People's Republic of China (PRC) and the United States (US) has been complex and at times tense since the establishment of the PRC on 1 October 1949 and subsequent retreat of the government of the Republic of China to Taiwan .

After the normalization of relations in the 1970s, the US–China relationship has been marked by persistent disputes including China's economic policies, the political status of Taiwan and territorial disputes in the South China Sea . Despite these tensions, the two nations have significant economic ties and are deeply interconnected, while also engaging in strategic competition on the global stage.

As of 2025, the US and China are the world's largest and second-largest economies by nominal GDP . Collectively, they account for 44.2% of the global nominal GDP.

The proclamation of the PRC in Beijing by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) chairman Mao Zedong created a new central government on the mainland in October 1949. Relations between the US and the new Chinese government quickly soured, culminating in direct conflict during the Korean War .

The US-led United Nations intervention was met with Chinese military involvement , as China sent millions of soldiers to prevent a US-aligned presence on its border. For decades, the US did not formally recognize the PRC, instead maintaining diplomatic relations with the Republic of China (ROC) based in Taiwan, and as such blocked the PRC's entry into the United Nations. However, shifting geopolitical dynamics, including the Sino-Soviet split , the winding down of the Vietnam War , as well as of the Cultural Revolution , paved the way for US president Richard Nixon's 1972 visit to China , ultimately marking a sea change in US–China relations.

On 1 January 1979, the US formally established diplomatic relations with the PRC and recognized it as the sole legitimate government of China , while maintaining unofficial ties with Taiwan via the Taiwan Relations Act , which endures as a major point of contention. Every US president since Nixon has toured China during his term in office, with the exception of Jimmy Carter and Joe Biden .

The two countries cooperated with each other against the Soviet Union.

Following China's reform and opening up , the trade between the two countries significantly increased starting from the 1980s, and the US gave China the most favored nation designation in 2001.

The Obama administration signed a record number of bilateral agreements with China, particularly regarding climate change, though its Pivot to Asia created diplomatic friction. Relations worsened during the 2010s over concerns including China's militarization of the South China Sea and Chinese espionage in the United States , leading observers to speculate a Second Cold War between the two powers.

In 2018, President Donald Trump launched a trade war with China .

The relationship further deteriorated during the COVID-19 pandemic .

In January 2021, the US officially classified the Chinese government's treatment of the Uyghurs in Xinjiang as a genocide . Tensions remained high during the presidency of Joe Biden from 2021. His foreign policy prioritized strategic competition with China, imposed export controls on semiconductors to China , boosted regional alliances against China, and expanded support for Taiwan. However, the administration also emphasized that the US sought "competition, not conflict".

The second Trump administration 's relations with China has been marked by inconsistency.

In response, the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 82 , which authorized military action against North Korea.

Although the Soviet Union had veto power, at the time it was boycotting the UN Security Council over the UN's recognition of the ROC instead of the PRC as the representative of China. Initially, the US government saw Chinese intervention as unlikely.

The People's Republic was barely a year old and it appeared that, if China was going to engage in warfare, it would be in the Kuomintang -controlled Taiwan, not Korea.

The US was opposed to the PRC's interests in Taiwan and, within two days of North Korea invading the South, US forces were deployed to the Taiwan Strait .

After their defeat in the Chinese Civil War , parts of the ROC army had retreated to Burma .

The US supported these ROC forces with the hope that they would harass the PRC from the southwest , thereby diverting Chinese resources from the Korean War. It seemed to the new Chinese leadership that stopping American encroachment into Asia was an important issue.

In a speech to the Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party in August 1950, Chairman Mao Zedong stated, "if the American imperialists are victorious, they will become dizzy with success, and then be in a position to threaten us." PRC premier and foreign minister Zhou Enlai echoed this sentiment in a speech in September: "the Chinese people can never tolerate foreign invasion, nor allow the imperialist to invade our neighbour at will without response". Chinese leadership could not tolerate an American-occupied state directly on its border: Zhou Enlai warned that China would intervene in the war on national security grounds; this warning was dismissed by US president Harry S. Truman .

On 30 September 1950, the UN offensive under the direction of the US crossed the 38th parallel into North Korea. Kim Il-Sung held an emergency meeting with Chinese officials, appealing for their urgent entry into the conflict.

The UN authorized the reunification of Korea, meaning that the entire peninsula could fall into US control.

On 19 October 1950, Chinese forces crossed into North Korea.

In response to the PRC's entry into the conflict, the US froze all Chinese assets in America and banned American citizens from traveling to the PRC.

The PRC seized all American assets and properties and began efforts to remove American cultural influence from China, including by nationalizing cultural institutions affiliated with the US.

In late October 1950, China began its intervention with the Battle of Onjong .

During the Battle of the Ch'ongch'on River , the People's Volunteer Army outflanked the UN forces , leading to the defeat of the US Eighth Army . A ceasefire presented by the UN to the PRC shortly after Ch'ongch'on River, on 11 December it was rejected by the Chinese, who were now convinced of their ability to defeat the UN forces, and wanted to demonstrate China's military power by driving them out of Korea altogether.

The Chinese achieved further victory at the Third Battle of Seoul and the Battle of Hoengsong , but UN forces recovered, pushing the front back to lands around the 38th parallel by July. A stalemate followed. Even though the US Air Force would spend the entire war with total air supremacy, the strategic impasse ultimately lasted until the Korean Armistice Agreement that ended the fighting was signed on 27 July 1953.

Since then, a divided Korea has continued to feature in US–China relations, with large American forces still stationed in the South.

In 1952, in the midst of the Korean War, the American army surveyed Chinese prisoners of war (POWs) asking them why they believed the PRC was involved in the conflict. Of 238 respondents, 60% agreed it was for the defense of China against the US, while only 17% said it was to defend North Korea. Vietnam War Main article: Vietnam War The People's Republic of China dispatched advisers and military aid to the communist Viet Minh from 1950 during the First Indochina War , viewing this as part of its national defense strategy against the United States and the West. China continued to provide weapons and training to North Vietnam during the Second Indochina War, and in the summer of 1962, Mao agreed to supply Hanoi with 90,000 rifles and guns free of charge.

After the launch of America's Operation Rolling Thunder in 1965, China sent anti-aircraft units and engineering battalions to North Vietnam to repair the damage caused by American bombing, rebuild roads and railroads, and perform other engineering work, freeing additional hundreds of thousands North Vietnamese Army units for combat against American and South Vietnamese forces.

The Chinese presence in North Vietnam was well known to US officials, which contributed to President Lyndon B. Johnson and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara 's decision not to invade North Vietnam, favoring a strategy of supporting South Vietnam in defending itself instead.

At the 1954 Geneva Conference , US Secretary of State John Foster Dulles forbade any contact with the Chinese delegation, refusing to shake hands with Zhou Enlai, the lead Chinese negotiator. Relations deteriorated further under President John F. Kennedy (1961–1963).

Before the Cuban Missile Crisis , policymakers in Washington were uncertain whether or not China would break with the Soviet Union on the basis of ideology, national ambitions, and readiness for a role in guiding communist activities in many countries. New insight came with the Sino-Indian border war in November 1962 and Beijing's response to the Cuban Missile Crisis. Kennedy administration officials concluded that China was more militant and more dangerous than the Soviet Union, making better relations with Moscow desirable, with both nations trying to contain Chinese ambitions. Diplomatic recognition of China remained out of the question, as a crucial veto power on the UN Security Council was held by America's ally on Taiwan.

The US continued to work to prevent the PRC from taking China's seat in the United Nations and encouraged its allies not to deal with the PRC.

The United States placed an embargo on trading with the PRC, and encouraged allies to follow it.

The PRC developed nuclear weapons in 1964 and, as later declassified documents revealed, President Johnson considered preemptive attacks to halt its nuclear program. He ultimately decided the measure carried too much risk, and it was abandoned. Instead, Johnson looked for ways to improve relations.

The American public seemed more open to the idea of expanding contacts with China, such as the relaxation of the trade embargo. But the War in Vietnam was raging, with China aiding North Vietnam. Mao's Great Leap Forward had failed in its goal to properly industrialize China and sparked a famine , and his Cultural Revolution exercised hostility to the US.

In the end, Johnson made no move to change the standoff. Despite official non-recognition, the United States and the People's Republic of China held 136 meetings at the ambassadorial level beginning in 1954 and continuing until 1970, first in Geneva and in 1958–1970 in Warsaw .

The PRC was diplomatically isolated and the leadership came to believe that improved relations with the US would be a useful counterbalance to the Soviet threat. Zhou Enlai , the Premier of China , was at the forefront of this effort with the committed backing of Mao Zedong, Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).

In 1969, the US initiated measures to relax trade restrictions and other impediments to bilateral contact, to which China responded. However, this rapprochement process was stalled by the Vietnam War, where China was supporting the enemies of the US. Communication between Chinese and American leaders, however, was conducted through Romania , Pakistan and Poland as intermediaries. : 36 The warming US–Soviet and US-China relationships in 1972 due to the triangular diplomacy coincided with crucial periods in the Paris Peace Talks . Because of Nixon's diplomatic groundwork, neither Moscow nor Beijing intervened in the US Christmas bombing campaign against Hanoi in late 1972. They offered verbal protests but prioritized their new relationships with Washington over their alliance with Hanoi. This isolated North Vietnam and forced them back to the negotiating table within 11 days. Many historians argue that the shifting dynamics of the strategic triangle played a critical role in changing the North Vietnamese's negotiating strategy and ultimately led to the signing of the Paris Peace Accords in January 1973. Henry Kissinger, Zhou Enlai and Mao Zedong. Kissinger made two secret trips to the PRC in 1971 before Nixon's groundbreaking visit in 1972.

In the US, academics such as John K. Fairbank and A. Doak Barnett pointed to the need to deal realistically with the Beijing government, while organizations such as the National Committee on United States–China Relations sponsored debates to promote public awareness. : 36–37 Many saw the specter of Communist China behind communist movements in Vietnam , Cambodia , and Laos , but a growing number concluded that if the PRC would align with the US it would mean a major redistribution of global power against the Soviets. Mainland China's market of nearly one billion consumers appealed to American businesses. Senator J. William Fulbright , Chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , held a series of hearings on the matter. Richard M. Nixon mentioned in his inaugural address that the two countries were entering an era of negotiation after an era of confrontation.

Although Nixon, during his 1960 presidential campaign, had vociferously supported Chiang Kai-Shek, by the second half of the decade, he increasingly began to speak of there "being no reason to leave China angry and isolated". Nixon's election as president in 1968 was initially met with hostility by Beijing—an editorial in the People's Daily denounced him as "a chieftain whom the capitalist world had turned to out of desperation". Nixon believed it was in the American national interest to forge a relationship with China, even though there were enormous differences between the two countries. He was assisted in this by his National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger . : 3 Both Nixon and Kissinger believed that relations with China would help the US exit the Vietnam War and obtain long-term strategic benefits in confrontations with the Soviet Union. : 3 In 1971, an unexpectedly friendly encounter between the American and Chinese ping-pong athletes called Glenn Cowan and Zhuang Zedong in Japan opened the way for a visit to China, which Chairman Mao personally approved.

In April 1971, the athletes became the first Americans to officially visit China since the communist takeover.

The smooth acceptance of this created the term ping-pong diplomacy and gave confidence to both sides. Ping-pong diplomacy became one of the most prominent examples of people's diplomacy in China–US relations. : 9 The ping-pong diplomacy allowed reporters into the country as well, opening up communication to both sides and breaking a barrier that had been there previously. This smoothed out the start of the trade partnership that was going to happen later. China's approach to keeping these early exchanges unofficial and conduct them through non-governmental agencies was generally well received by US civil society groups and academics.

In July 1971, Henry Kissinger feigned illness while on a trip to Pakistan and did not appear in public for a day. He was actually on a top-secret mission to Beijing to negotiate with Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai. Kissinger and his aides did not receive a warm welcome in Beijing, and the hotel they stayed in was equipped with pamphlets excoriating US imperialism. However, the meeting with Zhou Enlai was productive, and the Chinese premier expressed his hope for improved China–US relations. He commented that the US had intentionally isolated China, not vice versa, and any initiative to restore diplomatic ties had to come from the American side. Zhou spoke of the late President Kennedy's plans to restore relations with China and told Kissinger, "We are willing to wait as long as we need to. If these negotiations fail, in time another Kennedy or another Nixon will come along." On 15 July 1971, President Richard Nixon revealed the mission to the world and that he had accepted an invitation to visit the PRC. This announcement caused immediate shock around the world.

In the US, some hard-line anti-communists (most notably libertarian Republican Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater ) denounced the decision, but most public opinions supported the move and Nixon saw the jump in the polls he had been hoping for.

Since Nixon had sterling anti-communist credentials he was all but immune to being called "soft on communism". Nixon and his aides wanted to ensure that press coverage offered dramatic imagery. Nixon was particularly eager for strong news coverage. President Nixon and First Lady Pat Nixon walk with the American delegation and their Chinese hosts on the Great Wall of China . President Nixon and Premier Zhou Enlai toast during Nixon's 1972 visit to China Within the PRC there was also opposition from left-wing elements. This effort was allegedly led by Lin Biao , head of the military, who died in a mysterious plane crash over Mongolia while trying to defect to the Soviet Union. His death silenced most internal dissent over the visit. Internationally, reactions varied.

In the communist world, the Soviets were very concerned that two major enemies seemed to have resolved their differences, and the new world alignment contributed significantly to the policy of détente . America's NATO allies were pleased by the initiative, especially since many of them had already recognized the PRC. Throughout the Asia-Pacific, the reaction was far more mixed. Japan was annoyed that it had not been told of the announcement until fifteen minutes before it had been made, and feared that the Americans were abandoning them in favor of the PRC. A short time later, Japan also recognized the PRC and committed to substantial trade with the continental power. South Korea and South Vietnam were both concerned that peace between the US and the PRC could mean an end to American support for them against their communist enemies. Throughout the period of rapprochement, both countries had to be regularly assured that they would not be abandoned. Taiwan's Chiang Kai-Shek criticized the move, saying: "Today any international appease movement to evil power to seek for political power balance would never helpful for the world peace, instead it elongated the hardship of our 700 million people, and expand the disaster of the world." From 21 to 28 February 1972, President Nixon traveled to Beijing , Hangzhou , and Shanghai .

At the conclusion of his trip, the US and the PRC issued the Shanghai Communiqué , a statement of their respective foreign policy views.

In the Communiqué, both nations pledged to work toward the full normalization of diplomatic relations. This did not lead to immediate recognition of the People's Republic of China but 'liaison offices' were established in Beijing and Washington.

The US acknowledged the PRC position that all Chinese on both sides of the Taiwan Strait maintain that there is only one China and that Taiwan is part of China.

The statement enabled the US and PRC to temporarily set aside the issue of Taiwan and open trade and communication. Also, the US and China both agreed to take action against "any country" that is to establish "hegemony" in the Asia-Pacific.

On several issues, such as the ongoing conflicts in Korea, Vietnam, and Israel, the US and China were unable to reach a common understanding.

The rapprochement with the US benefited the PRC immensely and greatly increased its security for the rest of the Cold War . It has been argued that the US, on the other hand, saw fewer benefits than it had hoped for, inasmuch as China continued to back America's enemies in Hanoi and Pyongyang. Eventually, however, the PRC's suspicion of Vietnam's motives led to a break in China-Vietnamese cooperation and, upon the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia in 1979, the Sino-Vietnamese War . Both China and the US backed combatants in Africa against Soviet and Cuban -supported movements.

The economic benefits of normalization were slow as it would take decades for American products to penetrate the vast Chinese market.

While Nixon's China policy is regarded by many as the highlight of his presidency, others such as William Bundy have argued that it provided very little benefit to the US. Liaison Office (1973–1978) President Gerald Ford makes remarks at a Reciprocal Dinner in Beijing on 4 December 1975.

In May 1973, in an effort to build toward formal diplomatic relations, the US and the PRC established the United States Liaison Office (USLO) in Beijing and a counterpart PRC office in Washington, D.C. : 153 From 1973 to 1978, such distinguished Americans as David K. E. Bruce , George H. W. Bush , Thomas S. Gates, Jr. , and Leonard Woodcock served as chiefs of the USLO with the personal rank of ambassador. China made clear that it considered the Soviet Union its chief adversary and urged the US to be powerful, thereby distracting Moscow. Liaison officer George Bush concluded, "China keeps wanting us to be strong, wanting us to defend Europe, wanting us to increase our defense budgets, etc." Bush concluded that American engagement was essential to support markets, allies, and stability throughout the Asia Pacific and around the world. President Gerald Ford visited the PRC in 1975 and reaffirmed American interest in normalizing relations with Beijing. Shortly after taking office in 1977, President Jimmy Carter again reaffirmed the goals of the Shanghai Communiqué. Secretary of State Cyrus Vance , Carter's National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski , and senior staff member of the National Security Council Michel Oksenberg encouraged Carter to seek full diplomatic and trade relations with China.

Although Brzezinski sought to quickly establish a security relationship with Beijing to counter the Soviet Union, Carter sided with Vance in believing that such a deal would threaten existing US-Soviet relations, including the SALT II negotiations. Thus, the administration decided to cautiously pursue political normalization and not military relations. Vance, Brzezinski, and Oksenberg traveled to Beijing in early 1978 to work with Leonard Woodcock, then head of the liaison office, to lay the groundwork to do so.

In the Joint Communiqué on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations , dated 1 January 1979, the United States transferred diplomatic recognition from Taipei to Beijing.

The US reiterated the Shanghai Communiqué's acknowledgment of the Chinese position that there is only one China , and that Taiwan is a part of China; Beijing acknowledged that the American people would continue to carry on commercial, cultural, and other unofficial contacts with the people of Taiwan. Taiwan, although fully expecting this step, nonetheless expressed disappointment at having not been consulted first.

The reaction of the communist world was similar to 1972, with the Soviet Union and its allies in Eastern Europe mostly being noncommittal, Romania welcoming the move, and Cuba and Albania being strongly against it. North Korea issued a statement congratulating "our brotherly neighbors for ending long-hostile relations with the US". Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping's January 1979 visit to Washington initiated a series of important, high-level exchanges which continued until the spring of 1989. This resulted in many bilateral agreements, including the 31 January 1979 Agreement on Cooperation in Science and Technology. Scientific cooperation greatly increased thereafter. : 86–87 Since early 1979, the US and the PRC have initiated hundreds of joint research projects and cooperative programs under the Agreement on Cooperation in Science and Technology, the largest bilateral program.

On 1 March 1979, the two countries formally established embassies in each other's capitals.

In 1979, outstanding private claims were resolved and a bilateral trade agreement was completed. Vice President Walter Mondale reciprocated Vice Premier Deng's visit with an August 1979 trip to China. This visit led to agreements in September 1980 on maritime affairs, civil aviation links, and textile matters, as well as a bilateral consular convention.

The threats of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia were major factors that brought Washington and Beijing closer than ever before.

In June 1979, US Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare Joseph A. Califano Jr. led an American delegation to China; the trip resulted in the long-term institutionalization of health and education links between the two countries. US–China military cooperation increased over the course of 1979 and 1980. : 139 In 1980, China allowed the United States to establish electronic listening stations in Xinjiang so the US could monitor Soviet rocket launches in Central Asia.

In exchange, the US authorized the sale of dual-use civilian and military technology and nonlethal military equipment to China. Chinese demands for advanced technology from the US were not always met, in part due to opposition from Congressmen who either distrusted technology transfer to a communist nation out of principle or concern that there was no guarantee that such technology would not end up in the hands of unfriendly third parties.

In 1983, the US State Department changed its classification of China to "a friendly, developing nation", thereby increasing the amount of technology and armaments that could be sold.

The skepticism of some US congressmen was not entirely unmerited as China, during the 1980s, continued to sell arms to Iran and other states that were openly hostile to American interests. Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping with US President Jimmy Carter As a consequence of high-level and working-level contacts initiated in 1980, US dialogue with the PRC broadened to cover a wide range of issues, including global and regional strategic problems, political-military questions, including arms control, UN, and other multilateral organization affairs, and international narcotics matters. New York City and Beijing became sister cities. High-level exchanges continued to be a significant means for developing US–PRC relations in the 1980s. President Ronald Reagan and Premier Zhao Ziyang made reciprocal visits in 1984. Reagan's visit to Beijing went well, however, a speech he made criticizing the Soviet Union and praising capitalism, democracy, and freedom of religion was not aired on Chinese state television.

In July 1985, Chinese President Li Xiannian traveled to the US, the first such visit by a PRC head of state. Vice President Bush visited the PRC in October 1985 and opened the US Consulate General in Chengdu , the US's fourth consular post in the PRC. Further exchanges of cabinet-level officials occurred between 1985 and 1989, capped by President Bush's visit to Beijing in February 1989. President Ronald Reagan walking with Premier Zhao Ziyang during his visit to the White House on 10 January 1984 Shortly after being elected president in 1980, Ronald Reagan made a speech criticizing the PRC and welcoming restoration of ties with Taiwan. These remarks aroused initial concern in Beijing, but Reagan's advisers quickly apologized for his comments, and the president-elect soon retracted them. Reagan's first two years in office saw some deterioration in US–China relations due to the president's vociferous anti-communism, as well as the inability of the two nations to come to a common understanding over the Korean conflict , the Israel–Palestine conflict , or the Falklands War .

In 1982, Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping, in a reiteration of Mao Zedong's "Three Worlds" theory, criticized both the US and Soviet Union for imperialism.

In 1983, there were quarrels over a Chinese tennis player, Hu Na , who defected to the US, and over an incident where an Olympic parade float in New York City displayed the flag of Taiwan rather than the PRC's flag. Relations in the early part of 1984 were strained over the issue of US arms sales to Taiwan, but later improved.

By the late 1980s, China was the US's largest partner for science and technology, which had become the largest type of government-to-government exchange between the two countries. : 88 In the period before the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre , a growing number of cultural exchange activities gave the American and Chinese peoples broad exposure to each other's cultural, artistic, and educational achievements. Numerous mainland Chinese professionals and official delegations visited the US each month. Many of these exchanges continued after the suppression of the Tiananmen protests.

In the first decade after normalization, the US's policy towards China was largely driven by the Executive Branch of the United States, with the notable exception of the Taiwan Relations Act .

As a result of the Executive-branch driven approach during this period, China concluded that US Presidents primarily raised Congressional issues as a negotiating tool and that Congress was not itself a significant force in China–US relations. Consequently, China was slow to develop its Congressional liaison capacity. Contemporary relations George H. W. Bush administration (1989–1993) Main article: Foreign policy of the George H. W. Bush administration Americans who had been optimistic about the emergence of democratic characteristics in response to the rapid economic growth and China were stunned and disappointed by the brutal crackdown of the pro-democratic Tiananmen Square protests in 1989.

The US and other governments enacted a number of measures against China's violation of human rights .

The US suspended high-level official exchanges with the PRC and weapons exports from the US to the PRC.

The US also imposed a number of economic sanctions .

In the summer of 1990, at the G7 Houston summit , the West called for renewed political and economic reforms in mainland China, particularly in the field of human rights.

The Tiananmen event disrupted the US–China trade relationship, and US investors' interest in mainland China dropped dramatically. Tourist traffic fell off sharply.

The Bush administration denounced the repression and suspended certain trade and investment programs on 5 and 20 June 1989, however Congress was responsible for imposing many of these actions, and the White House itself took a far less critical attitude of Beijing, repeatedly expressing hope that the two countries could maintain normalized relations. Generally, Bush's preference was for sanctions which were not formalized in law in order to provide flexibility for altering or removing them. Some sanctions were legislated while others were executive actions. Examples include: The US Trade and Development Agency (TDA): new activities in mainland China were suspended from June 1989 until January 2001, when President Bill Clinton lifted this suspension. Overseas Private Insurance Corporation (OPIC): new activities have been suspended since June 1989. Development Bank Lending/ International Monetary Fund (IMF) Credits: the US does not support development bank lending and will not support IMF credits to the PRC except for projects that address basic human needs. Munitions List Exports: subject to certain exceptions, no licenses may be issued for the export of any defense article on the US Munitions List. This restriction may be waived upon a presidential national interest determination. Arms Imports – import of defense articles from the PRC was banned after the imposition of the ban on arms exports to the PRC.

The import ban was subsequently waived by the administration and reimposed on 26 May 1994. It covers all items on the BATFE 's Munitions Import List.

During this critical period, J. Stapleton Roy , a career US Foreign Service officer, served as ambassador to Beijing. Debate within the United States also began on whether China should continue to receive the annual presidential waiver for most favored nation trading status under the Jackson-Vanik Amendment . US–China military ties and arms sales were terminated in 1989 and as of 2024 have never been restored. Chinese public opinion became more hostile to the United States after 1989, as typified by the 1996 manifesto China Can Say No .

The authors called for Beijing to take more aggressive actions against the US and Japan in order to build a stronger international position.

The Chinese government at first endorsed the manifesto, then repudiated it as irresponsible.

The end of the Cold War and dissolution of the Soviet Union removed the original motives underlying rapprochement between China and the US. Motivated by concerns that the United States might curtail support for China's modernization, Deng adopted a low-profile foreign policy to live with the fact of United States hegemony and focus primarily on domestic development. Clinton administration (1993–2001) Main article: Foreign policy of the Clinton administration Running for president in 1992, Bill Clinton sharply criticized his predecessor George H. W. Bush for prioritizing profitable trade relationships over human rights issues in China. Clinton's 28 May 1993 Executive Order 128950 linked future extension of China's most favored nation trading status to China's progress on US-defined human rights measures. China made virtually no effort to comply with the US conditions and in mid-1994 Clinton changed his position, de-linking the China's most favored nation status from human rights issues. Congressional pressure, especially from the Republican Party , prompted Clinton to approve arms sales to Taiwan, despite the strong displeasure voiced by Beijing.

In July 1993, a symbolic United States Congressional resolution opposed China's efforts to be selected as the host country for the 2000 Summer Olympics. : 153 The resolution became a major grievance among the Chinese public, which generally viewed the Resolution as an effort to humiliate China. : 153–154 thuimb In July 1993, the US Navy stopped the Yinhe , a Chinese container ship , en route to Kuwait in international waters, cut off its GPS so that it lost direction and was forced to anchor, and held it in place for twenty-four days.

The United States incorrectly alleged that the Yinhe was carrying precursors of chemical weapons for Iran. It eventually forced an inspection of the ship in Saudi Arabia , but found no chemical precursors.

The United States refused China's request for a formal apology and refused to pay compensation. This incident was viewed in China as international bullying by the United States. Nonetheless, Chinese leader Jiang Zemin adopted a diplomatic posture of goodwill and a "sixteen-characters formula" to working with the United States: "enhancing confidence, avoiding troubles, expanding cooperation, and avoiding confrontation". Anti-American protests in Nanjing following the United States bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade , 1999 In 1996, the People's Liberation Army conducted military exercises in the Taiwan Strait in an apparent effort to intimidate the Republic of China electorate before the pending presidential elections , triggering the Third Taiwan Strait Crisis .

The United States dispatched two aircraft carrier battle groups to the region. Subsequently, tensions in the Taiwan Strait diminished and relations between the US and the PRC improved, with increased high-level exchanges and progress on numerous bilateral issues, including human rights, nuclear proliferation , and trade. China's leader Jiang Zemin visited the United States in the fall of 1997, the first state visit to the US by a paramount leader since 1979.

In connection with that visit, the two sides came to a consensus on implementation of their 1985 agreement on Peaceful Nuclear Cooperation, as well as a number of other issues. President Clinton visited the PRC in June 1998. He traveled extensively in mainland China, and had direct interaction with the Chinese people, including live speeches and a radio show which allowed the president to convey a sense of American ideals and values.

In a speech at Peking University , he referred to the 21st century as "your century", and expressed his view that technology, including the internet, would help ease any tensions China's economic growth might cause. President Clinton was criticized by some, however, for failing to pay adequate attention to human rights abuses in mainland China.

When Clinton visited Shanghai, he declared the "three nos" for United States foreign policy towards China: (1) not recognizing two Chinas, (2) not supporting Taiwanese independence, and (3) not supporting Taiwanese efforts to join international organizations for which sovereignty is a membership requirement. Relations were damaged for a time by the United States bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade on 7 May 1999, which was stated by the White House to be miscoordination between intelligence and the military.

The bombing created outrage among Chinese people, who did not accept the United States claim that the bombing was accidental. For several days, Beijing was rocked by massive anti-US demonstrations. Deeming the importance of the bilateral relationship too great to be harmed by the embassy bombing, Chinese leader Jiang Zemin sought to calm the Chinese public outrage.

By the end of 1999, relations began to gradually improve.

In October 1999, the two countries reached an agreement on compensation for families of those who were victims, as well as payments for damages to respective diplomatic properties in Belgrade and China. US–China relations in 1999 were also damaged by accusations that a Chinese-American scientist at the Los Alamos National Laboratory had given US nuclear secrets to Beijing. George W. Bush administration (2001–2009) American President George W. Bush and Chinese leader Hu Jintao with first ladies Laura Bush and Liu Yongqing wave from the White House in April 2006. Main article: Foreign policy of the George W. Bush administration As a presidential candidate in 2000, George W. Bush repeatedly criticized the Clinton-Gore administration for being too friendly with China, which he warned was a strategic competitor.

In the Hainan Island incident of 1 April 2001, a US EP-3 surveillance aircraft collided mid-air with a Chinese Shenyang J-8 jet fighter over the South China Sea. China sought a formal apology, and accepted United States Secretary of State Colin Powell 's expression of "very sorry" as sufficient.

The incident nonetheless created negative feelings towards the United States by the Chinese public and increased public feelings of Chinese nationalism . Early on as President Bush increased arms sales to Taiwan, including 8 submarines. Bush's hostile position toward China was suddenly reversed after the 11 September terrorist attacks , and his friendly attitude toward Taiwan became a casualty. Soon he was calling China a strategic partner in the war on terror and postponing deals with Taiwan. Two PRC citizens died in the attacks on the World Trade Center . Chinese leader Jiang Zemin sent a telegram to Bush within hours of the attack expressing China's condolences and opposition to terror; Bush responded with a phone call the next day stating that he looked forward to working with Jiang and other world leaders to oppose terrorism. Chinese companies and individuals also sent expressions of condolences to their American counterparts.

The PRC, itself troubled by Muslim separatists in Xinjiang, offered strong public support for the war on terror in APEC China 2001 .

The PRC voted in favor of UNSCR 1373 , publicly supported the coalition campaign in Afghanistan , and contributed $150 million of bilateral assistance to Afghan reconstruction following the defeat of the Taliban . Shortly after the 11 September terrorist attacks, the US and PRC also commenced a counterterrorism dialogue.

In a March 2002 trip to Beijing, Bush articulated his desire for a "constructive, cooperative, and candid" relationship with China.

The third round of that dialogue was held in Beijing in February 2003.

In the United States, the threat of terrorist attacks by al-Qaeda greatly changed the nature of its security concerns. It was no longer plausible to argue, as the Blue Team had earlier asserted, that the PRC was the primary security threat to the United States, and the need to focus on the Middle East and the war on terror made the avoidance of potential distractions in East Asia a priority for the United States. There were initial fears among the PRC leadership that the war on terrorism would lead to an anti-PRC effort by the US, especially as the US began establishing bases in Central Asian countries like Uzbekistan and Tajikistan and renewed efforts against Iraq .

The Chinese government was relieved after the United States tied up major national resources with its 2003 invasion of Iraq . China believed that the United States' Middle East meant that the United States would need China's help on issues such as counterterrorism, Middle Eastern stability, and nuclear non-proliferation and viewed the United States' focus as conducive to China's emphasis on stability and domestic development. China and the United States worked closely on regional issues, including those pertaining to North Korea and its nuclear weapons program . China has stressed its opposition to North Korea's decision to withdraw from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons , its concerns over North Korea's nuclear capabilities, and its desire for a non-nuclear Korean Peninsula . It also voted to refer North Korea's noncompliance with its International Atomic Energy Agency obligations to the UN Security Council.

In 2001, a presidential plane built in the United States for Chinese leader Jiang Zemin was found to have listening devices installed. : 53 Chinese authorities located at least 20 devices, including one in the headboard of the presidential bed.

The listening devices were capable of being operated via satellite.

In the mid-2000s, the United States focused relatively less on China issues. : 158 This approach was reinforced by the economic benefits to the United States from its relations with China, including cheaper consumer products like clothing and electronics. : 158 During this period, the United States also issued significant debt to fund its military interventions and China became the largest foreign purchaser of US government debt. : 158 Taiwan remained a volatile issue, but one that remained under control.

The United States policy toward Taiwan involved emphasizing the Four Noes and One Without .

On occasion the United States rebuked Republic of China (Taiwan) President Chen Shui-bian for provocative pro-independence rhetoric.

As Bush made his opposition to Taiwan independence clear, the PRC saw the United States as playing a positive role in restraining the separatist movement.

In 2005, the PRC passed the Anti-Secession Law which stated that the PRC would be prepared to resort to "non-peaceful means" if Taiwan declared formal independence. Many critics of the PRC, such as the Blue Team, argue that the PRC was trying to take advantage of the US war in Iraq to assert its claims on Republic of China's territory.

In 2008, Taiwan voters elected Ma Ying-jeou. Ma, representing the Kuomintang, campaigned on a platform that included rapprochement with mainland China. His election has significant implications for the future of cross-strait relations.

The 2003 United States invasion of Iraq and the failure of the United States to find evidence of weapons of mass destruction decreased China's respect for America's power and realism. China's paramount leader Hu Jintao visited the United States in April 2006. Bush visited Beijing in August for four days to attend the 2008 Summer Olympics .

The president and his wife Laura were accompanied by Bush's father, the former president, and his mother Barbara. Obama administration (2009–2017) Main article: Foreign policy of the Obama administration Vice Premier Wang Qishan holds the autographed basketball given to him by President Obama following their Washington meeting 28 July 2009, to discuss the outcomes of the first US–China Strategic and Economic Dialogue . Looking on at left is State Councilor Dai Bingguo .

The 2008 US presidential election centered on issues of war and economic recession, but candidates Barack Obama and John McCain also spoke extensively regarding US policy toward China. Both favored cooperation with China on major issues, but they differed with regard to trade policy. Obama expressed concern that the value of China's currency was being deliberately set low to benefit China's exporters. McCain argued that free trade was crucial and was having a transformative effect in China. Still, McCain noted that while China might have shared interests with the US, it did not share American values.

The election of Barack Obama in 2008 generated positive reactions from most locals and state-run media outlets in China. His presidency fostered hopes for increased co-operation and heightened levels of friendship between the two nations.

On 8 November 2008, Chinese leader Hu Jintao and Obama shared a phone conversation in which Hu congratulated Obama on his election victory.

During the conversation both parties agreed that the development of Sino-American relations is not only in the interest of both nations, but also in the interests of the international community.

During the Obama administration, the US signed more bilateral agreements with China than it had during any other US administration, particularly with regard to addressing climate change. : 2 The two countries signed seven clean energy agreements on 17 November 2009, during Obama's visit to China, including an agreement establishing the US–China Clean Energy Research Center (CERC). : 122–123 CERC was the most ambitious clean energy technology cooperation mechanism between the two. : 117 The many technical exchanges on climate issues during the Obama era helped both sides of the relationship to better understand each other's emissions models and data, leading to increased mutual trust. : 105 Obama meets with Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao and members of the Chinese delegation after a bilateral meeting at the United Nations in New York City in September 2010.

Following the 2008 financial crisis , both US and Chinese governments addressed the economic downturn with massive stimulus initiatives.

The Chinese expressed concern that "Buy American" components of the US plan discriminate against foreign producers, including those in China.

As the two most influential and powerful countries in the world, there have been increasingly strong suggestions within American political circles of creating a G-2 (Chimerica) relationship for the United States and China to work out solutions to global problems together.

The Strategic Economic Dialogue initiated by then-US President Bush and Hu and led by US Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson and Chinese Vice Premier Wu Yi in 2006 was broadened by the Obama administration into the US–China Strategic and Economic Dialogue . : 288 It was then led by US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and US Secretary of the Treasury Timothy Geithner for the United States and Vice Premier Wang Qishan and Chinese State Councilor Dai Bingguo for China.

The focus of the first set of meetings in July 2009 was in response to the economic crisis, finding ways to cooperate to stem global warming and addressing issues such as the proliferation of nuclear weapons and humanitarian crises. Obama meets with Chinese leader Hu Jintao in January 2011. Obama visited China on 15–18 November 2009 to discuss economic worries, concerns over nuclear weapon proliferation, and the need for action against climate change.

In January 2010, the US proposed a $6.4 billion arms sale to the Republic of China (Taiwan).

In response, the PRC threatened to impose sanctions on US companies supplying arms to Taiwan and suspend cooperation on certain regional and international issues.

On 19 February 2010, Obama met with the Dalai Lama , accused by China of "fomenting unrest in Tibet ." After the meeting, China summoned the US ambassador to China, Jon Huntsman , but Time has described the Chinese reaction as "muted", speculating that it could be because "the meeting came during the Chinese New Year ... when most officials are on leave". Some activists criticized Obama for the relatively low profile of the visit. US Secretary of State John Kerry speaks with Chinese Premier Li Keqiang , 9 October 2013.

In 2012, the PRC criticized Obama's new defense strategy, which it said was aimed at isolating China in East Asia. Obama is looking to increase US military influence in the area with a rotating presence of forces in friendly countries.

In March 2012, China suddenly began cutting back its purchases of oil from Iran, which along with some signs on sensitive security issues like Syria and North Korea, showed some coordination with the Obama administration.

In March 2013, the US and China agreed to impose stricter sanctions on North Korea for conducting nuclear tests, which sets the stage for UN Security Council vote. Such accord might signal a new level of cooperation between the US and China. US Secretary of State John Kerry and Vice President Joe Biden with Chinese leader Xi Jinping, 25 September 2015 In an effort to build a "new model" of relations, Obama met Chinese leader Xi Jinping for two days of meetings, between 6 and 8 June 2013, at the Sunnylands estate in Rancho Mirage , California.

The summit was considered "the most important meeting between an American president and a Chinese Communist leader in 40 years, since President Nixon and Chairman Mao ," according to Joseph Nye , a political scientist at Harvard University.

The leaders concretely agreed to combat climate change and also found strong mutual interest in curtailing North Korea's nuclear program . However, the leaders remained sharply divided over cyber espionage and US arms sales to Taiwan. Xi was dismissive of American complaints about cyber security. Tom Donilon , the outgoing US National Security Adviser , stated that cyber security "is now at the center of the relationship", adding that if China's leaders were unaware of this fact, they know now. US President Barack Obama and Chinese leader Xi Jinping in September 2015 Obama supported the One-China policy .

During his presidential campaign, Donald Trump promised an assertive stance towards China.

The presidency of Trump led to a negative shift in US relations with China. President-elect Trump's telephone conversation with the president of Taiwan Tsai Ing-wen on 2 December 2016 was the first such contact with Taiwan by an American president-elect or president since 1979. It provoked Beijing to lodge a diplomatic protest ("stern representations"). Trump went on to clarify his move: "I fully understand the 'one China' policy , but I don't know why we have to be bound by a 'one China' policy unless we make a deal with China having to do with other things, including trade." On President Trump's inauguration day, an official from the China's People's Liberation Army wrote on the official website that the American military build-up in East Asia and the Asia Pacific, and its push to arm South Korea with the THAAD missile-defense system were provocative "hot spots getting closer to ignition" and that the chances of war had become "more real." On taking office, the Trump administration stopped negotiations on a bilateral investment treaty with China which had begun in 2008. : 312 According to Michael Froman , the lead negotiator during the preceding four years, the effort to reach an agreement was "more than 90 percent complete." : 312 On 23 January, speaking about China's claims to sovereignty over the Spratly Islands in the South China Sea , White House spokesman Sean Spicer said, "It's a question of if those islands are in fact in international waters and not part of China proper, then yeah, we're going to make sure that we defend international territories from being taken over by one country." President Trump arrives in China in November 2017.

On 4 February, on a visit to Japan, US Defense Secretary James Mattis reaffirmed Washington's commitment under the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan to defending Japan, including the Senkaku Islands (the East China Sea ) that are claimed by China.

On 9 February, Trump spoke with China's leader Xi Jinping over the phone discussing a wide range of issues; Trump was said to have re-iterated the United States' commitment to the status quo 'one-China' policy.

In a 3 July 2017 telephone conversation with Trump, Xi stated, "China–US relations have made great progress in recent days, but they have also been affected by some negative factors." By "negative factors", Geng Shuang , a Chinese government spokesmen, explained in a televised briefing: "Under the pretext of navigational freedom, the American side once again sent military vessels into the Chinese territorial waters of Xisha ( Paracel ) Islands. It has violated Chinese and international law, infringed upon Chinese sovereignty, and disrupted order, peace and security of the relevant waters and put in jeopardy facilities and personnel on the relevant Chinese islands. It is a serious political and military provocation.

The Chinese side is strongly dissatisfied with and firmly opposed to the relevant actions by the US." In 2017, the Trump administration terminated the Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade (JCCT) between China and the United States. : 287–288 The JCCT had met annually from 1983 to 2016 and had been a generally effective mechanism to address various trade issues between the two countries. : 287–288 The Trump administration also terminated the Strategic and Economic Dialogue after holding the June 2017 meeting under the name "Comprehensive Economic Dialogue." : 288 According to Chaos Under Heaven , a book by Josh Rogin , a group of officials including Peter Navarro , Stephen Miller and Steve Bannon that wanted Trump to "speed the downfall" of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and that "believed in economic nationalism, the return of manufacturing from abroad, and the protection of domestic industries, even at the expense of free trade" emerged during the early stage of the Trump administration.

The Trump administration labelled China a "strategic competitor" in 2017. Chinese leader Xi Jinping with US President Donald Trump at the G20 summit in Buenos Aires , December 2018 China enforced punitive tariffs on 128 categories of American goods on 1 April 2018 in retaliation for the first Trump administration 's national-security levies on steel and aluminum imports the previous month.

The Chinese Government's response is measured, affecting $3 billion in annual trade or about 2% of US goods exports to China.

By late September 2018, the Trump administration had placed tariffs (25% tax increase) on $250 billion worth of Chinese goods, in an attempt to offset the trade imbalance between the two major economic world powers.

In what put additional strain on US–China relations, Huawei 's vice-chair and CFO Meng Wanzhou was arrested in Canada on 1 December 2018 at the behest of US authorities. US Senator Ben Sasse accused China of undermining US national security interests , often "using private sector entities" to by-pass US sanctions against the sale of telecom equipment to Iran. According to political analyst, Andrew Leung, "China is perceived as the antagonist and rival of the United States," and that China's economic growth is seen as a "threat to the world order underpinned by American dominance or American values." He claimed, moreover, that the arrest of the CFO of Huawei on 1 December 2018 corresponded with the suspicious death on that same day of a leading Chinese national quantum physicist and venture capitalist at Stanford University , Shoucheng Zhang , who was on a H-1B visa , giving rise to conspiracy theories.

The often positive and optimistic forces, interests, and beliefs that sustained bilateral ties for decades are giving way to undue pessimism, hostility, and a zero-sum mindset in almost every area of engagement. According to two experts on US–China relations, Rosemary Foot and Amy King, the consensus of experts is that: The relationship began to deteriorate in the second decade of the 21st century, and that the Trump administration has accelerated the deterioration. Explanations...have ranged over a large number of factors, all of which have played some role. Some relate to changes in official personnel in both the United States and China, others to the shifts and relative power between the two countries after the 2008 financial crisis , and yet others to China's greater determination to reform global governance institutions and to play more of a global leadership role. Foot and King emphasize China's aggressive efforts in developing cutting-edge technologies with significant military and commercial implications, while the United States sees the need to defend itself aggressively against technological theft. US academics have made various policy prescriptions for the United States within the context of its deteriorating relationship with China. According to Lawrence J. Lau , a major cause of the deterioration is the growing battle between China and the United States for global economic and technological dominance. More generally, he argues, "It is also a reflection of the rise of populism, isolationism, nationalism and protectionism almost everywhere in the world, including in the US." According to Ian Bremmer, the US and China are in a technology cold war and Trump's technology war against the PRC has been his administration's biggest foreign policy win, saying, "on the issue of tech decoupling that it was America out front with most allies on board." According to Greg Autry , an academic at the University of Southern California, Trump's China policy was working, pointing to increased revenue intakes by the Treasury Department and offshoring by US manufacturing supply chains from China, and crediting the administration for being the first to fully recognize that globalization had not delivered for Americans and that China was an existential threat. Former Obama administration officials Samantha Power and Susan Rice have criticized China's actions on trade, over the Meng Wenzhou affair and in Hong Kong while simultaneously criticizing the Trump administration for inadequate pushback.

In 2018, the US Department of Justice initiated a " China Initiative " to "combat economic espionage". DOJ ended the program on 23 February 2023. No one was charged or convicted of spying in any China Initiative case.

The Director of Policy Planning at the United States Department of State , Kiron Skinner drew international attention in April 2019 for stating at a foreign policy forum that the US competition with China would be especially bitter, because unlike the Cold War with the Soviet Union which is "a fight within the Western family", "it's the first time that we will have a great-power competitor that is not Caucasian".

In 2019, prominent Americans, including some with ties to the administration, formed the Committee on the Present Danger: China (CPDC) to advocate for a more hawkish foreign policy against China.

On 29 January 2020, the Interior Department's fleet of more than 800 Chinese-made drones, including those by DJI, were grounded, citing security concerns.

On 18 February 2020, the US government announced five Chinese state media firms would be designated "foreign missions", requiring them to be legally registered with the US government as a foreign government entity.

On the following day, China took action against three American journalists with The Wall Street Journal by revoking their press credentials over a coronavirus opinion column which their paper had run. According to China, the column was racist and libelous; the CEO of the company that published the WSJ defended the article, as did the State department. A March 2020 article by Reuters said that Washington slashed the number of journalists allowed to work at US offices of major Chinese media outlets to 100 from 160 due to Beijing's "long-standing intimidation and harassment of journalists".

In response, China expelled about a dozen American correspondents with The New York Times , News Corp's Wall Street Journal and the Washington Post, which prompted criticism from the State Department.

On 8 May, the US moved Chinese citizens at non-American news outlets from open-ended work visas to extendable 90-day work visas and in June the State Department designated a further four Chinese media outlets as foreign embassies.

In August 2020, Joe Biden 's foreign policy adviser Tony Blinken described China as a "strategic competitor".

By May 2020 relations had deteriorated as both sides were accusing the other of guilt for the worldwide coronavirus pandemic . Washington has mobilized a campaign of investigations, prosecutions and export restrictions. Beijing, meanwhile, has stepped up military activities in the contested South China Sea, and launched denunciations of American Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, and publicly speculating that the American military deliberately unleashed the virus in China.

In the growing aspersion, on 15 May 2020, the US blocked shipments of semi-conductors to Huawei, while China, for its part, has threatened to place Apple , Boeing , and other US firms on "unreliable entities" lists, and has blamed the US government of using state power under the excuse of national security, and of abusing export control measures to continuously oppress and contain specific enterprises of other countries. Orville Schell , the director of the Center on US–China Relations at the Asia Society , summed up the situation as follows: "The consequences of the breakdown in US–China relations is going to be very grave for the world and for the global economy because the ability of the US and China to work together was the keystone of the whole arch of globalization and global trade. With that pulled out, there's going to be a tremendous amount of disturbance", often compared to the Cold War .

However Tony Blair noted there is "an interconnectedness, economically and in trade terms between the US and China that just wasn't there in the US-Soviet Cold War" that makes it an imperfect analogy. He further felt the China–US relations would be the "determining geopolitical relationship of the 21st century." In June 2020, US Ambassador to the United Nations Kelly Craft sent a letter to the U.N. secretary general explaining the US position on China's "excessive maritime claims".

On 17 June 2020, President Trump signed the Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act , which authorizes the imposition of US sanctions against Chinese government officials responsible for detention camps holding more than 1 million members of the country's Uyghur Muslim minority.

On 9 July 2020, the Trump administration imposed sanctions and visa restrictions against senior Chinese officials, including Chen Quanguo , a member of CCP's powerful Politburo. A research paper by the Begin–Sadat Center for Strategic Studies said that Chinese state-controlled media enthusiastically covered the protests and rioting attending the Murder of George Floyd , comparing the American protests to the protests in Hong Kong and used the rioting and violence in the United States as evidence that the democratic system was hypocritical and morally bankrupt. A report by the Australian Strategic Policy Institute said that racial tensions in the United States was a key area of focus for "a campaign of cross-platform inauthentic activity, conducted by Chinese-speaking actors and broadly in alignment with the political goal of the People's Republic of China (PRC) to denigrate the standing of the US." In July 2020, the Trump administration ordered the closure of the Chinese consulate in Houston .

In response, the Chinese government ordered the closure of the US consulate in Chengdu .

On 20 July 2020, the United States sanctioned 11 Chinese companies, restricting any trade deal with America for what the US government said was their involvement in human rights violations in Xinjiang, accusing them specifically of using Uyghurs and other Muslim minorities in forced labor.

On 23 July 2020, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo announced the end of what he called "blind engagement" with the Chinese government. He also criticized CCP general secretary Xi Jinping as "a true believer in a bankrupt totalitarian ideology".

In August 2020, Washington imposed sanctions on 11 Hong Kong and Chinese officials over what it said was their role in curtailing political freedoms in Hong Kong through the imposition of the Hong Kong national security law ; China retaliated by sanctioning 6 Republican lawmakers and 5 individuals at non-profit and rights groups.

In September 2020 the United States had under a 29 May presidential proclamation revoked more than 1,000 visas for PRC students and researchers visas who the US government said had ties to the Chinese military in order to prevent them from stealing and otherwise appropriating sensitive research.

On 26 September 2020, the US Commerce Department put restrictions on Chinese chip maker, Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corporation (SMIC), following which the suppliers were required to have an export license for exporting the chip.

The restrictions were imposed after the US concluded that an "unacceptable risk" equipment supplied to SMIC could potentially be used for military purposes.

On 6 October 2020, Germany's ambassador to the UN, on behalf of the group of 39 countries including Germany, the U.K. and the US, made a statement to denounce China for its treatment of ethnic minorities and for curtailing freedoms in Hong Kong. Call for boycott of products from China's Xinjiang province, New York, 2020.

The US officially recognized the Chinese government's treatment of the Uyghurs in Xinjiang as a genocide .

On 9 October 2020, the Department of Justice disallowed the use of its fund to purchase DJI drones, which the DoJ classified as a "Covered Foreign Entity".

On 21 October 2020, the US approved arms sales of $1.8 billion to Taiwan. It involved three packages that included high technology weapons such as SLAM-ER missiles, HIMARS M142 Launchers and Recce Pods.

On 26 October 2020, China announced its intentions to impose sanctions on US businesses and individuals, including Boeing , Raytheon and Lockheed Martin . Taiwan welcomed the arms sales and disapproved of the sanctions. Taiwan also said it would continue buying arms from America.

In a December 2020 report, US intelligence officials claimed that China had supervised a bounty program that paid Afghan militants to kill US soldiers deployed in the country.

On 5 December 2020, the US State Department ended five cultural exchange programs with China, which are—"the Policymakers Educational China Trip Program, the US–China Friendship Program, the US–China Leadership Exchange Program, the US–China Transpacific Exchange Program and the Hong Kong Educational and Cultural Program." They described these programs as soft power propaganda tools of Chinese government. Espionage In July 2020, FBI Director Christopher Wray called China the "greatest long-term threat" to the United States. He said that "the FBI is now opening a new China-related counterintelligence case every 10 hours. Of the nearly 5,000 active counterintelligence cases currently under way across the country, almost half are related to China." In December 2020, an investigation by Axios was published that detailed the suspected activities of Christine Fang, a Chinese national who has been suspected by US officials of having conducted political espionage for the Chinese Ministry of State Security (MSS) while she was in the United States from 2011 to 2015.

While Fang's suspected activities prior to the Axios investigation had already drawn scrutiny from federal law enforcement agencies, the subsequent reactions to its publication drew further scrutiny from politicians and the media. Xu Zewei and Zhang Yu, Chinese hackers working under the direction of China's Ministry of State Security (MSS), conducted cyber intrusions between February 2020 and June 2021, including the large-scale " HAFNIUM " campaign exploiting Microsoft Exchange Server vulnerabilities. Targeting US universities, virologists, and law firms, they stole COVID-19 research and sensitive communications while operating through the MSS-linked company Shanghai Powerock Network Co. Ltd.

In addition international tensions regarding control of the South China Sea remained high.

The Biden administration largely continued the China policies of his predecessor Donald Trump, : 148 and endorsed Mike Pompeo 's report about China committing genocide against Uyghurs . However, the Biden and Xi administrations agreed to collaborate on long-term projects regarding climate change, nuclear proliferation, and the global COVID-19 pandemic. President Biden, in his first foreign policy address, labeled China as "the most serious competitor" to the US.

During his first visit to the Pentagon on 9 February 2021, Biden urged the United States Department of Defense to review its national security policy concerning China.

In 2021, the Biden administration tightened technology restrictions on China, including designating Huawei , ZTE , Hytera , Hikvision , and Dahua Technology as security threats, adding supercomputing entities to the US Entity List, expanding limits on American investment in Chinese companies tied to the military, and finalizing rules allowing the delisting of non-compliant Chinese firms from US stock exchanges.

The Americans unleashed heated attacks on China's policies regarding human rights, cyberattacks, Taiwan, and its crackdown in Xinjiang and Hong Kong.

The Chinese side countered by attacking the US's standing in the world and defending China's sovereign rights and model of development.

In the week ahead of the talks, the administration met with US allies in Asia and imposed sanctions on senior Chinese officials amidst Beijing's contemporaneous crackdown on Hong Kong .

On March 22, 2021, in conjunction with the European Union , United Kingdom and Canada, the United States imposed sanctions against Chinese officials in relation to the human rights violations in Xinjiang.

The sanctions marked the first time the Biden administration took such coordinated action against Beijing.

In June 2021, leaders of the G7 and NATO , encouraged by the United States, issued rare unanimous statements condemning China over human rights abuses, threats to Taiwan, unfair trade practices, and lack of transparency on COVID-19.

In August 2021, China tested a nuclear-capable hypersonic missile , highlighting advances in its strategic weapons program and raising concerns in Washington.

On August 18, 2021, Biden compared US commitments in Afghanistan and Taiwan, saying that the United States was bound to defend Taiwan, though officials later clarified that policy had not changed.

On September 15, 2021, the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia formed AUKUS , a security pact under which Australia will acquire nuclear-powered submarines with US and British support, a move China denounced as "extremely irresponsible". Biden held his first virtual meeting with Xi on 15 November 2021.

On November 24, 2021, the Biden administration invited Taiwan to attend the ' Summit for Democracy '—to be held in December 2021. China's Foreign Ministry reacted by saying it was "firmly opposed" to the invitation.

Later that year, Biden signed a defense bill strengthening support for Taiwan.

In late 2021, the Biden administration announced a diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Olympics and signed the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act , further highlighting US criticism of China's human rights record.

On February 27, 2022, the White House urged China to condemn Russia's invasion of Ukraine . China accused the United States of being responsible for the war in Ukraine. ROC President Tsai Ing-wen with US House Speaker Nancy Pelosi on August 3, 2022 On 18 March 2022, Joe Biden and Xi Jinping directly communicated with each other for the first time since Russia's invasion of Ukraine.

In May 2022, Chinese officials ordered government agencies and state-backed companies to remove personal computers produced by American corporations and replace them with equipment from domestic companies. Bloomberg said the decision was one of China's most aggressive moves to eliminate the usage of foreign technology from the most sensitive parts of its government and spur its campaign to substitute foreign technology with domestic ones.

In late May 2022, the State Department restored a line on its fact sheet on US–Taiwan relations which it removed earlier in the month and stated it did not support Taiwanese independence. However, another line which was also removed in the earlier fact sheet that acknowledged China's sovereignty claims over Taiwan was not restored while a line that stated the US would maintain its capacity to resist any efforts by China to undermine the security, sovereignty and prosperity of Taiwan in a manner that was consistent with the Taiwan Relations Act was added to the updated fact sheet.

On June 11, 2022, US Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin condemned China's "provocative, destabilizing" military activity near Taiwan, a day after China's Defense Minister Wei Fenghe warned Austin that "if anyone dares to split Taiwan from China, the Chinese army will definitely not hesitate to start a war no matter the cost." In July 2022, speaker of the house Nancy Pelosi announced that she would be leading a congressional delegation to the Indo-Pacific region. She has planned to visit Singapore, Malaysia, South Korea and Japan, as well as the island of Taiwan. China has responded to this by saying "it would constitute a gross interference in China's internal affairs", and continued military exercises within Chinese territories.

When Pelosi visited the island the following month , the act was strongly condemned by China.

As a result, China severed ties in all cooperation activities with the United States in several areas, including military matters, global climate cooperation, and drug trafficking enforcement.

Later the State Department summoned Chinese ambassadors to complain about Chinese aggression. China claimed that the Pelosi visit served no other purpose than to provoke China and to deteriorate Sino-American relations while the United States, pointing to past precedent, said that Pelosi had the right to visit Taiwan and attacked the Chinese response as disproportionate.

After Pelosi's departure, the PRC began military exercises encircling Taiwan .

On 7 October 2022, the US implemented new export controls targeting China's ability to access and develop advanced computing and semiconductor manufacturing items.

The new export controls reflect the United States' ambition to counter the accelerating advancement of China's high-tech capabilities in these spaces to address foreign policy and national security concerns. Chinese leader Xi Jinping with US President Joe Biden at the G20 summit in Bali , November 2022 On 14 November 2022, Joe Biden and Xi Jinping met on the sidelines of the G20 summit in Bali for their first in-person encounter since Biden became president.

The meeting lasted for more than 3 hours and they discussed a range of issues which included tensions over Taiwan and North Korea, and the war in Ukraine. US Secretary of State Antony Blinken (right) with Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi on 9 July 2022. Blinken dismissed China's claims to be neutral in the Russo-Ukrainian War and accused China of supporting Russia. Some geoeconomics experts see an acceleration of the US–China rivalry as "inevitable" given the tensions manifested openly in the last months of 2022 and early 2023.

In a series of interviews with BBC News and Asharq News , Nicolas Firzli, director, EU ASEAN Centre , argued that "Cold War 2 with China part of the Biden Doctrine, and the only remaining point of convergence between Biden and a Republic dominated Congress January 2023 is the moment when things crystalized irreversibly".

On 2 February 2023, a Chinese reconnaissance balloon was spotted flying over US airspace in the state of Montana, potentially to collect information related to nuclear silos in the area. Two days later, the United States shot it down over the Atlantic Ocean, citing national security concerns.

The balloon incident followed previous Chinese government actions targeting the US, including the Chinese theft of the designs for the F-35 about fifteen years earlier and successful Chinese government-sponsored cyberattacks targeting the Office of Personnel Management security clearance files (2015), the healthcare company Anthem (2015), and the Marriott International system (2018).

In 2022, the US and its allies imposed stringent additional export controls on the sale of "foundational technologies" (including advanced semiconductor chips and related technology) to China, with the aim of inhibiting any Chinese military buildup.

The Biden administration has also sought to maintain critical-sector supply chains independent from China.

The Beijing government expressed strong dissatisfaction and protest against the US's use of force, calling it a violation of international practice.

The US claimed the balloon was a violation of its sovereignty. A US Air Force U-2 pilot takes a picture somewhere over the Central Continental US; the Chinese balloon is in the background.

On 11 February 2023, the US Commerce Department prohibited six Chinese companies connected to the aerospace programs of the Chinese army from acquiring US technology without authorization from the government. These six businesses include Nanjiang Aerospace Technology of Beijing; The 48th Research Institute of China Electronics Technology Group Corporation; Technology for Dongguan Lingkong Remote Sensing; Aviation Science and Technology Group of the Eagles Men; Tian-Hai-Xiang Aviation Technology in Guangzhou; together with the Shanxi Eagles Men Aviation Science and Technology Group.

In April 2023, China sanctioned US Representative Michael McCaul in response to a legislative trip for Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-wen .

In May 2023, an American citizen living in Hong Kong named John Shing-Wan Leung was sentenced to life in prison on charges of espionage. Leung was arrested in 2021 by China's counterintelligence agency.

On September 23, 2024, the Biden administration banned Chinese software from US internet-connected vehicles, citing national security risks. This move builds on previous actions against Chinese tech, deepening the digital divide between the two nations. Attempts to fix relationship (2023–2024) In mid-2023, both countries started to increase meetings between high-level officials in the hope of stabilizing the relationship; on 11 May, US national security adviser Jake Sullivan met with Wang Yi , director of the CCP Office of the Central Foreign Affairs Commission , with the topics including Taiwan and Russia's invasion of Ukraine.

On 21 May, Biden commented during the G7 summit in Hiroshima that he expected a thaw in relations with China soon, commenting that the two countries were moving towards more dialogue but "this silly balloon that was carrying two freight cars worth of spy equipment was flying over the United States and it got shot down and everything changed in terms of talking to one another".

On 26 May, Chinese minister of commerce Wang Wentao met with US secretary of commerce Gina Raimondo , where Raimondo raised concerns about treatment of US companies by China. US officials also announced in June that Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) director William J. Burns travelled to China in May. However, a meeting in the Shangri-La Dialogue between Chinese minister of national defense Li Shangfu and US secretary of defense Lloyd Austin failed to take place, after China rebuffed US requests to meet.

In late June 2023, Blinken traveled to China and met with Xi; subsequent public statements by both countries were largely positive, with Xi and Blinken emphasizing that both sides have a responsibility to manage relations. However, relations became more contentious after Biden called Xi a " dictator ". US Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen meeting with Vice Premier He Lifeng during Yellen's trip to Beijing, 8 July 2023 The trips further continued as between 6–9 July, United States secretary of treasury Janet Yellen visited China, her first trip to the country during her tenure as well as the first trip to the country by a US Treasury secretary in four years.

During the visit, she met with various Chinese officials, including former vice premier Liu He , governor of the People's Bank of China (PBC) Yi Gang , minister of finance Liu Kun , CCP secretary of PBC Pan Gongsheng , vice premier He Lifeng , and premier Li Qiang .

During her visit to, Yellen criticized China's treatment of American companies with foreign connections, stating to Li Qiang: "We seek healthy economic competition that is not winner-take-all but that, with a fair set of rules, can benefit both countries over time." She also said that the US national security restrictions on investment in China were intended to be narrowly focused and not have broad effects on the Chinese economy. Antony Blinken with Chinese Foreign Minister Qin Gang in Beijing, 18 June 2023 On 13 July 2023, Secretary of State Antony Blinken met the Director of the Office of the Central Commission for Foreign Affairs Wang Yi in Jakarta at the ASEAN Post-Ministerial Conference at the request of Blinken to discuss the removal of obstacles that complicate US–China relations, such as the Taiwan question and sanctions the US is imposing against China's high-technology sector, as well as to promote the pragmatic approach with regard to regional cooperation. Former Minister of Foreign Affairs of China Qin Gang had just been replaced by his predecessor Wang Yi due to an extramarital affair of Gang in July of the same year. This meeting also paved the way for a further encounter of China's top diplomat Wang Yi before year's end when he will be invited to meet Blinken in Washington DC.

Later on the sidelines of the U.N General Assembly (UNGA) in NY on 26 September, Vice-president Han Zheng met with US Secretary of State Antony Blinken to further nurture the strained bilateral ties of both superpowers.

The absence of Xi Jinping at the 2023 G20 New Delhi summit in India on 9 and 10 September was regretful, according to a statement by US President Joe Biden, however, recent news reports indicate that both CCP General Secretary Xi as well as CCP Foreign Affairs Commission Office Director Wang Yi will meet Biden and Blinken before year's end to hopefully ease the strained relations between the two nations. Yellen's visit was followed by a visit by United States secretary of commerce Gina Raimondo between 27 and 30 August, where she met minister of culture and tourism Hu Heping , minister of commerce Wang Wentao , vice premier He Lifeng, and premier Li Qiang. Raimondo also visited Shanghai, where she met with Shanghai Communist Party secretary Chen Jining , and visited Shanghai Disneyland .

During the meeting, the two sides announced a working group on commercial issues and an export control enforcement "information exchange" dialogue.

The working group, upon its launch on 22 September 2023, was divided into two segments: one economic subgroup and one financial subgroup. Biden's National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan with CCP Foreign Affairs Commission Office director Wang Yi , 28 October 2023 On November 2, 2023, a report from The Wall Street Journal was released saying that the US and China would hold nuclear arms talks, a rarity, ahead of Xi Jinping's visit to the United States.

At the beginning of November 2023, insiders cautiously expressed hope for a climate agreement between China and United States ahead of the 2023 United Nations Climate Change Conference , similar to the agreement of 2014 which paved the way for the Paris Agreement . One contentious topic is a plan for reduction of methane emissions in China. According to China's climate envoy Xie Zhenhua "progress on a plan reflected the state of US–China relations." Another is a reduction in coal use in China . China says it expands coal use for improving energy security , even though many think there are better ways to improve it. Talks between Janet Yellen and He Lifeng yielded a decision to enhance cooperation between China and the United States in several domains, including climate , debt relief . Much is expected from the meeting between Joe Biden and Xi Jinping. According to Kate Logan from the Asia Society Policy Institute , cooperation between the two countries, can "set the stage for a successful outcome at the COP28".

On 15 November 2023, President Joe Biden met with Xi Jinping at the 2023 APEC Summit in San Francisco. This was speculated to be their last meeting of 2023 before Biden's 2024 reelection campaign .

The US and China resumed semi-official nuclear arms talks in March 2024, with China reassuring the US it would not use nuclear weapons over Taiwan and reaffirming its no-first-use policy. Despite broader tensions, both sides plan to continue discussions in 2025.

In October 2024 American drone maker Skydio was sanctioned by China after its products were approved for use by fire departments in Taiwan.

The Chinese government forbade components suppliers and other businesses in China from doing business with Skydio.

In November 2024, John Moolenaar , chairman of the United States House Select Committee on Strategic Competition between the United States and the Chinese Communist Party , introduced legislation to revoke PNTR status for the People's Republic of China.

The same month, the United States–China Economic and Security Review Commission unanimously recommended revocation of China's PNTR status. Chinese leader Xi Jinping with US President Joe Biden at the APEC summit in Lima , November 2024 On 16 November 2024, Xi Jinping and Joe Biden met on the sidelines of the APEC summit in Lima . They discussed stabilizing US–China relations at APEC summit in Lima , as Trump's return raises concerns over potential trade and Taiwan tensions. Beijing seeks dialogue but braces for challenges.

On December 1, 2024, China condemned a US arms sale to Taiwan, valued at $385 million, which included F-16 jet parts and radar support.

The sale was approved by the US just before Lai Ching-te began a Pacific tour with stops in Hawaii and Guam. China criticized the sale for encouraging Taiwan's independence and damaging US–China relations, and objected to Lai's US transit, calling him a "separatist." Despite the lack of formal diplomatic ties, the US is required by law to assist Taiwan in defending itself, which continues to provoke Beijing. Taiwan rejects China's claims of sovereignty.

After Washington announced more military aid and sales to Taiwan, China called it "playing with fire" and said such actions by the United States contradict the solemn commitments of its leaders not to support Taiwan independence.

On 2024, China began an extensive ocean-mapping effort across the Pacific, Indian, and Arctic Oceans using research vessels.

While described as scientific surveys, experts note the data could also support submarine operations, raising concerns about strategic and security implications for other countries in key maritime regions. Second Trump administration (2025–present) Main articles: Foreign policy of the second Trump administration § China, Taiwan, and the South China Sea ; Tariffs in the second Trump administration ; China–United States trade war ; and 2026 state visit by Donald Trump to China Chinese leader Xi Jinping with US president Donald Trump at the Busan Summit in Busan , October 2025 Following his second election victory as President of the United States in November 2024, Donald Trump nominated Florida Senator Marco Rubio as Secretary of State and Representative Mike Waltz as National Security Advisor in his second administration. According to Neil Thomas, a fellow in Chinese politics at the Asia Society Policy Institute's Center for China Analysis, the selection of Rubio and Waltz—both known as hardliners on China—signals that Trump's foreign policy will prioritize China above all else. Just before Trump's second inauguration in January 2025, Vice President JD Vance and ally Elon Musk each held separate meetings with China's vice president Han Zheng , who was in Washington attending the event as China's paramount leader Xi Jinping 's special representative. Han's presence at the capitol was seen by commentators as representative of Xi's interest in strengthening the two countries' relationship under Trump's tenure.

In March 2025, China denounced G7 statements accusing it of destabilizing maritime security, highlighting ongoing diplomatic friction.

On 23 March 2025, Chinese Premier Li Qiang met with US Senator Steve Daines , a Trump ally, in Beijing. Li emphasized the need for dialogue over confrontation, while Daines carried Trump's " America First " agenda, particularly on trade and fentanyl issues.

The US imposed 20% tariffs on Chinese imports, prompting Beijing to retaliate with 15% duties on American farm goods. China maintained that economic cooperation was vital and opposed US pressure over fentanyl controls. Trump blamed China for the opioid crisis in the United States . He said the tariffs are intended to pressure China to do more to stop the flow of fentanyl into the US. Opioids , predominantly fentanyl, have killed over 500,000 Americans since 2012.

On 18 April 2025, the US State Department accused China's Chang Guang Satellite Technology of providing satellite imagery to Iran-backed Houthi forces , allegedly aiding attacks on US and international vessels in the Red Sea . Officials described the support as ongoing and "unacceptable", despite prior US diplomatic engagement with Beijing. Under the directive published by the US State Department in 2025, the Chinese leader should be referred to as " General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party ", rather than " President of China " reflecting the supremacy of the party over the state .

In June 2025, a majority of US senators supported secondary sanctions against Russia over Vladimir Putin 's unwillingness to agree to a ceasefire in Ukraine, which would impose 500% tariffs on countries that buy Russian oil , natural gas , uranium and other exports. China is one of the major consumers of Russian energy. Liu Jianchao , head of the International Department of the Chinese Communist Party , criticized US Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth during an address at the 13th World Peace Forum in Beijing , accusing him of promoting "hegemonic thinking" and inciting confrontation. Liu's comments followed Hegseth's call for US allies to strengthen their militaries to counter China and his warning that Beijing was preparing to use military force to alter the balance of power in Asia. Liu rejected these remarks, emphasized China's commitment to "peaceful reunification" with Taiwan, and stated that China would firmly oppose any moves toward Taiwanese independence.

The exchange highlighted ongoing tensions between China and the United States over Taiwan, regional security, and broader geopolitical disputes.

In October 2025, Trump cited proximity to China's nuclear facilities for demanding Afghanistan the access to Bagram Airfield which was vacated in 2021.

In an interview, he also claimed that China, among other countries, was secretly testing nuclear weapons and that "they don't have reporters" to write about it.

While Trump stated that the US would resume nuclear tests, China denied any clandestine nuclear testing.

In December 2025, the second Trump administration released its National Security Strategy . Regarding China, the document calls to "rebalance America's economic relationship with China, prioritizing reciprocity and fairness to restore American economic independence" but also states "trade with China should be balanced and focused on non-sensitive factors" and favors "maintaining a genuinely mutually advantageous economic relationship with Beijing". It states the US wants to prevent war in the Indo-Pacific, and states the US "will build a military capable of denying aggression anywhere in the First Island Chain ". Regarding Taiwan, the document states that "deterring a conflict over Taiwan, ideally by preserving military overmatch, is a priority" and that the US "does not support any unilateral change to the status quo in the Taiwan Strait".

During the 2026 Iran war , Trump warned China not to ship weapons to Iran, warning them that they will have 'big problems' if they do. China rejected the reports that it was sending weapons to Iran. Trump later stated that China agreed not to send weapons to Iran. Espionage cases During the second Trump administration, the United States saw a series of high-profile espionage and cyber espionage cases linked to the Chinese government. These cases, from the perspective of the United States, illustrate ongoing concerns over the activities of China's Ministry of State Security (MSS), including efforts to infiltrate US institutions and conduct state-sponsored cyber operations.

In March 2025, the US intelligence community's Annual Threat Assessment identified China as the top military and cyber threat, citing its growing capabilities to seize Taiwan, conduct cyberattacks, and challenge US dominance in AI and space. Director of National Intelligence Tulsi Gabbard called China the "most capable strategic competitor", while Beijing released a counter-report accusing the US of long-term cyber espionage.

In 2026, US authorities convicted Lu Jianwang and Arcadia Mayor Eileen Wang for acting as unauthorized agents of the Chinese government, following investigations into overseas Chinese "police stations" and propaganda activities. This shows China's efforts to monitor dissidents and influence Chinese communities abroad, reflecting broader concerns over Beijing's global surveillance, suppression of critics, and coercive tactics against perceived opponents. Cyber espionage In 2025, US charged at least 12 hackers in the month of March alone.

The hackers reportedly sold data of US-based dissidents to the Chinese government.

In early March 2025, for example, the United States Department of Justice indicted Chinese nationals Yin Kecheng (尹可成) and Zhou Shuai (周帅) for cyberattacks linked to APT27 (also known as Silk Typhoon). Between 2011 and 2024, they allegedly hacked US defense contractors, tech firms, and government agencies to steal data for profit and on behalf of China's Ministry of State Security (MSS) and Ministry of Public Security (MPS). Zhou also collected data on telecommunications, border activity, and individuals in media, civil service, and religion under MSS guidance.

The case highlighted China's state-backed hacking-for-hire model. US authorities seized related infrastructure and sanctioned Zhou, his company Shanghai Heiying, and previously Yin.

In July 2025, the United States Department of Justice charged two Chinese nationals, Yuance Chen and Liren "Ryan" Lai, with attempting to recruit US military personnel and gather naval intelligence on behalf of China's Ministry of State Security (MSS). According to the FBI, Lai cultivated Chen as an asset due to his contacts within the US military, and both men met with MSS agents abroad to coordinate their activities.

In 2022, they conducted a dead drop by leaving a backpack containing $10,000 in cash in a California locker as payment for intelligence.

The charges, filed under the Foreign Agent Registration Act (FARA), highlight growing US concerns over Chinese efforts to infiltrate military institutions and expand naval capabilities.

The move came after two rounds of US tariffs; each 10%; were implemented in February and March, citing China's alleged role in the fentanyl crisis.

In retaliation, China also restricted exports of rare-earth elements , filed a complaint with the World Trade Organization , and blacklisted several US firms. Additional measures included suspending imports from American agricultural and food producers and launching an anti-monopoly probe into DuPont China . Analysts noted this marked a significant escalation in the ongoing trade tensions, reducing prospects for near-term diplomatic resolution. Trump threatened to impose an additional 50% tariff on Chinese goods on 9 April if China did not withdraw its retaliatory measure of a 34% tariff on all US goods by 8 April. This would boost the effective 54% tariffs on China on 9 April to 104%. China responded with retaliatory tariffs of 84% on US goods.

In response, Trump increased tariffs on Chinese goods to 125% on the same day. However, the White House clarified the next day that the tariff rate had risen to 145%. China, in retaliation, announced an increase in tariffs on all American imports from the previous 84% to 125%, set to take effect on 12 April.

The US later announced reciprocal tariffs will exclude consumer electronics from tariffs from most countries, but retained a 20% tariff on electronics from China.

On May 10, 2025, Trump declared a "total reset" in US–China trade relations after tariff talks in Geneva . According to transcripts, witnesses saw both delegations returning after a lunch break to an UN ambassador's villa in Cologny.

On 12 May 2025, the United States and China agreed to for a period of 90 days, reduce their tariff rates from 145% to 30% and 125% to 10% respectively by 14 May, while further negotiations take place. Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent stated that the "somewhat stalled" US–China trade talks necessitate direct communication between the leaders of both countries, especially as the US implements technology restrictions on China.

In July 2025, Bloomberg News reported that US President Donald Trump has softened his hardline tone on China to ensure a summit with General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Xi Jinping , aiming to push for a trade agreement between America and China.

In December 2025, the US government announced that it would delay the implementation of new tariffs on imports of certain Chinese chips and semiconductor products until 2027. These tariffs were approved as part of a US trade investigation into China's industrial and subsidy policies. However, Washington cited diplomatic considerations as the reason for the delay, aiming to avoid sudden disruptions to global supply chains and to give companies more time to adjust. China opposed the decision, calling it a destabilizing factor in the global technology market. This issue is viewed as part of the broader trade and technology tensions between the two countries in the 2020s. Taiwan Arms Tensions In December 2025, the Trump administration authorized an $11 billion arms sales package to Taiwan despite opposition from China.

The arms package included a range of armaments, including "advanced rocket launchers, self-propelled howitzers and a variety of missiles." In May 2026, following a summit with Chinese President Xi Jinping, Trump described a $14 billion arms package to Taiwan that was on the table as a "very good negotiating chip." The Chinese Embassy in Washington responded, saying “China’s opposition to the US’s arms sales to Taiwan is consistent, clear and rock-firm." In July 2026, US President Donald Trump deployed the Navy-Marine Expeditionary Ship Interdiction System and Marine Air Defence Integrated System in the Luzon Strait and southern Japanese islands as part of the US military's regional war plan to defend Taiwan and deter a future Chinese invasion. Economic relations As part of China's foreign-exchange reserves , China has a preference for dollar-denominated assets, including United States treasury securities . : 44–45 In turn, the United States benefits because it lacks the domestic savings to fund its budget deficit . : 44 After the 2008 financial crisis , Chinese policymakers and the general public viewed China's holdings of US debt as unwisely overexposing China to volatility. : 61–62 China remains a major holder of United States treasury securities, although the amount has decreased as of at least 2022. Imports and exports between the United States and China. US census.gov data Foreign holders of US Treasury securities (2009) In trade matters, the United States has benefitted from China's demand for United States export products, which grew rapidly from 2000 to at least 2021. : 44 As of 2021, China was the third largest market for United States export merchandise. : 44 Inexpensive Chinese exports to the United States increase the purchasing power of American consumers and American business profits. : 44 Both countries are benefitted by the demand for their respective exports to the other. : 44–45 In 1991, China only accounted for 1% of total imports to the United States. For many years, China was the most important country which required an annual waiver to maintain free trade status.

The waiver for the PRC had been in effect since 1980. Every year between 1989 and 1999, legislation was introduced in Congress to disapprove the President's waiver.

The legislation had sought to tie free trade with China to meeting certain human rights conditions that go beyond freedom of emigration. All such attempted legislation failed to pass.

The requirement of an annual waiver was inconsistent with the rules of the World Trade Organization (WTO), and for the PRC to join the WTO, congressional action was needed to grant permanent normal trade relations (PNTR) to China. This was accomplished in 2000 ( United States–China Relations Act of 2000 ), allowing China to join WTO in 2001. China's most favoured nation (MFN) status was made permanent on 27 December 2001.

Since the entry of China into the WTO in December 2001 , the decline in US manufacturing jobs has accelerated (the China shock ).

The Economic Policy Institute estimated that the trade deficit with China cost about 2.7 million jobs between 2001 and 2011, including manufacturing and other industries.

At the same time, China's WTO accession significantly accelerated its economic growth, export expansion, and integration into global markets. Increased access to foreign investment and international trade contributed to rapid industrialization, rising incomes, and China's emergence as a major global manufacturing and trading power.

The PRC and the US resumed trade relations in 1972 and 1973. Direct investment by the US in mainland China covers a wide range of manufacturing sectors, several large hotel projects, restaurant chains, and petrochemicals . US companies have entered agreements establishing more than 20,000 equity joint ventures , contractual joint ventures, and wholly foreign-owned enterprises in mainland China. More than 100 US-based multinationals have projects in mainland China, some with multiple investments. Cumulative US investment in mainland China is valued at $48 billion.

The US trade deficit with mainland China exceeded $350 billion in 2006 and was the United States' largest bilateral trade deficit. Some of the factors that influence the US trade deficit with mainland China include: a shift of low-end assembly industries from newly industrialized countries in East Asia and the Asia-Pacific to mainland China. Mainland China has increasingly become the last link in a long chain of value-added production . Because US trade data attributes the full value of a product to the final assembler, mainland Chinese value added is overcounted. Using a statistical model that eliminates these global value chain-related distortions, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and WTO researchers have concluded that the United States' measures may overstate the value of Chinese exports by as much as 35%. : 39 According to Pascal Lamy : "The statistical bias created by attributing commercial value to the last country of origin perverts the true economic dimension of the bilateral trade imbalances. This affects the political debate, and leads to misguided perceptions. Take the bilateral deficit between China and the US. A series of estimates based on true domestic content can cut the overall deficit – which was $252bn in November 2010 – by half, if not more." US demand for labor-intensive goods exceeds domestic output: the PRC has restrictive trade practices in mainland China, which include a wide array of barriers to foreign goods and services, often aimed at protecting state-owned enterprises . These practices include high tariffs , lack of transparency, requiring firms to obtain special permission to import goods, inconsistent application of laws and regulations, and leveraging technology from foreign firms in return for market access. Mainland China's accession to the WTO is meant to help address these barriers. the undervaluation of the Renminbi relative to the United States dollar . Beginning in 2009, the US and China agreed to hold regular high-level talks about economic issues and other mutual concerns by establishing the Strategic Economic Dialogue , which meets biannually. Five meetings have been held, the most recent in December 2008. Economic nationalism seems to be rising in both countries, a point the leaders of the two delegations noted in their opening presentations.

The United States and China have also established the high-level US–China Senior Dialogue to discuss international political issues and work out resolutions. United States trade deficit In September 2009 a trade dispute emerged between the United States and China, which came after the US imposed tariffs of 35 percent on Chinese tire imports.

The Chinese commerce minister accused the United States of a "grave act of trade protectionism ", while an USTR spokesperson said the tariff "was taken precisely in accordance with the law and our international trade agreements". Additional issues were raised by both sides in subsequent months.

When a country joins the World Trade Organization it commits to keep its tariffs below the bound rate , which is generally around 39 percent. China's reaction was attributed to the fact that nations usually keep their tariffs at an average of 9 percent, but when the US raised its tariff on Chinese imported tires to 35 percent it was still below the average bound rate.

The first round of the US–China Strategic and Economic Dialogue was held in Washington, D.C., from 27 to 28 July 2009 Countries by total wealth (trillions USD), Credit Suisse In early 2012, a dispute over rare earth minerals was brought into the light between the two countries. President Obama made an announcement that the United States would be one of a few countries to file a trade dispute with China. Amongst the United States, Japan and other Western European countries would also be filing disputes as well. This is simply just one of few disputes between the United States and China. It is believed by many experts, including Chris Isidore, a writer for CNN Money, that "any one of the disputes could damage the economies of both countries as well as the relationship between them".

The dispute was filed, and China was charged with putting unfair restrictions on the exportation of rare earth minerals. These minerals were crucial and in high demand by all countries. President Obama believed the United States should have those minerals in the United States whereas China disagreed. China denied all of the said charges brought forth "saying its rules are defensible on grounds of environmental and economic sustainability, and suggests there would be consequences if the United States presses the case." It is important to understand the relationship between the United States and China, especially economically. There is not one without the other. China's state news agency commented that "past experiences have shown that policymakers in Washington should treat such issues with more prudence, because maintaining sound Sino-American trade relations is in the fundamental interests of both sides" China was the biggest trading partner of the United States until 2019, when it dropped to the third place because of the ongoing trade war .

In November 2021, US producer Venture Global LNG signed a twenty-year contract with China's state-owned Sinopec to supply liquefied natural gas (LNG). China's imports of US natural gas will more than double. US exports of liquefied natural gas to China and other Continental Asian countries surged in 2021 , with Continental Asian buyers willing to pay higher prices than European importers.

On 25 March 2023, Apple CEO Tim Cook made an official visit to Beijing to attend the China Development Forum . Cook praised China's innovation, and long history of cooperation with Apple Inc .

During the COVID-19 pandemic , Apple supplier Foxconn was heavily disrupted by workers protesting China's zero-COVID policies. Cook also presented an expanded rural education program for 100 million yuan to further improve the skill-set of Chinese workers. Between 2020 and 2023, 70% of all rare earth compounds and metals imported into the United States came from China. China produces 90% of the world's rare-earth elements .

In this context, in July 2025, Raja Krishnamoorthi, the top Democrat on the US House Select Committee on the Chinese Communist Party, stated that China could "so much as flick a switch and cause major damage" to the American economy.

The committee expressed concerns about the United States' economic dependence on China, particularly in relation to critical mineral exports such as rare earths used in modern technology.

On 13 September 2024, the Biden administration finalized the increases of tariffs on Chinese exports . Tariffs increased to 100% on electric vehicles , 50% on solar cells and 25% on electric vehicle batteries , critical minerals, steel, and aluminum.

In February 2025, Donald Trump signed an executive order that directed the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) to restrict Chinese investment in strategic economic areas. Premier Li Qiang emphasized the need for open markets and fair competition, while the US accused China of unfair trade practices and inadequate fentanyl control efforts. According to Bloomberg Opinion, the United States is still dependent on China for essential inputs used in pharmaceutical manufacturing, including key starting materials (KSMs) and active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs). Decades of industry consolidation have left many countries, including the United States and India, dependent on Chinese chemical components. Estimates cited in the analysis suggest that China is the sole supplier of at least one ingredient used in roughly 700 essential medicines, and even India's generic drug industry relies extensively on Chinese materials.

The US–China Economic and Security Review Commission has warned that this dependence represents a strategic vulnerability for the United States. China declined President Trump's request to help reopen the Strait of Hormuz amid the ongoing US- Iran conflict, highlighting its reluctant to assist in a crisis largely of the US's making.

The delay of Trump's trip to Beijing is seen as a resut of mounting tensions, with China signalling readiness to reschedule the visit. Beijing also engaged in deplomatically with Middle Eastern nations, emphasizing its role in easing regional tensions.

On 24 March 2026, after Panama's Supreme Court canceled contracts letting a Hong Kong company run two major ports, China detained nearly 70 Panamanian-flagged ships.

The US and several Latin American countries criticized this as economic retaliation, showing how China can use trade to pressure other nations.

On 24 April 2026, the US sanctioned the Chinese refinery Hengli Petrochemical for buying Iranian oil linked to the Revolutionary Guards and criticized China for continuing such purchases, warning they funded terrorism.

On April 25, 2026, Bloomberg News reported that China planned to restrict US investment in certain technology companies, including AI startups and major firms like ByteDance , without prior government approval.

The measures, directed by regulators such as the National Development and Reform Commission , aim to prevent foreign stakes in sensitive technologies linked to national security.

The move follows increased scrutiny of foreign investment in Chinese tech, including transactions by US firms, and comes amid broader controls over technology and capital flows. Currency dispute Main articles: Renminbi currency value and Internationalization of the renminbi China engaged in currency manipulation from 2003 to 2014. Economist C. Fred Bergsten , writing for the Peterson Institute for International Economics , said that, during this period, "China bought more than $300 billion annually to resist upward movement of its currency by artificially keeping the exchange rate of the dollar strong and the renminbi's exchange rate weak. China's competitive position was thus strengthened by as much as 30 to 40 percent at the peak of the intervention. Currency manipulation explained most of China's large trade surpluses, which reached a staggering 10 percent of its entire GDP in 2007." China's currency manipulation was a point of conflict with the United States. Domestic leaders within the United States pressured the Obama administration to take a hardline stance against China and compel China to raise the value of its currency, and legislation was introduced to the United States Congress calling on the president to impose tariffs on Chinese imports until China properly values its currency. Nonetheless, the United States was not willing to label China as a "currency manipulator" at that time, on the theory that doing so would risk China's cooperation on other issues.

In 2014, China stopped manipulating its currency, as the growth in the Chinese economy slowed and Chinese investors made more investments outside the country, leading to a drop in the yuan's value in relation to the dollar, as well as a decline in China's reserves.

In August 2019, five years after China had stopped manipulating its currency, the US Treasury designated China as a currency manipulator. Some US analysts characterized the belated designation as "embarrassing", "without factual basis", or "a stretch".

On 12 October 2025, China's Ministry of Commerce responded to the Trump administration's new tariffs by calling them "hypocritical" and defending Beijing's decision to restrict exports of rare earth elements.

The ministry stated that China's export controls were a response to a series of measures by Washington, including adding Chinese companies to a trade blacklist and imposing port fees on Chinese ships. This incident is the latest example of escalating tensions in economic and trade relations between China and the United States. Trump issued a warning regarding the possibility of canceling a forthcoming meeting with Xi Jinping in South Korea later that month, which was scheduled to take place during the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit.

In a telephone conversation that occurred in October 2025 between Vice Premier He Lifeng and US Treasury Secretary Scott Besant, both parties reached an agreement to initiate a new series of trade discussions "at the earliest opportunity." Important issues Relations between the two world powers have historically been stable, punctuated by several periods of open conflict, most notably during the Korean War and the Vietnam War .

The United States and China have mutual environmental, political, economic, and security interests, such as climate change and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons , but there remain perennial concerns, such as cross-strait relations and the US's attitude towards the One China policy . China is the second largest foreign creditor of the United States, after Japan . China's expansion in the Indo-Pacific has triggered pushback from the US and its partners in the region.

The two countries remain in dispute over territorial issues in the South China Sea ; China claims sovereignty over large swaths of the South China Sea ; the United States instead sees much of this ocean as international waters , and as such claims the right of its warships and aircraft to conduct military operations within them. Military issues China's military expenditure and planning Main articles: Military budget of China , Military budget of the United States , and United States–China security cooperation This section needs to be updated . Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. ( May 2023 ) China's investment in its military is growing rapidly; the United States remains convinced that the PRC conceals the real extent of this expansion, a view shared by many independent analysts. China claims it spent a total of $45 billion over the course of 2007, an average of $123 million per day. That same year, the US military spent $548.8 billion, or an average $1.66 billion per day. US estimates of Chinese military expenditure range between $85 billion and $125 billion. General Xu Caihou of the People's Liberation Army and US Defense Secretary Robert Gates at the Pentagon Concerns over the Chinese military budget may come from US worries that the PRC is attempting to threaten its neighbors or to challenge the United States. Concerns have been raised that China is developing a large naval base near the South China Sea and has diverted resources from the People's Liberation Army Ground Force to the People's Liberation Army Navy and to air force and missile development.

On 27 October 2009, US Defense Secretary Robert Gates praised the steps China has taken to increase transparency of defense spending.

In June 2010, however, he said that the Chinese military was resisting efforts to improve military-to-military relations with the United States. Gates also said that the United States would "assert freedom of navigation" in response to Chinese complaints about US Navy deployments in international waters near China. Admiral Michael Mullen said that the United States sought closer military ties to China but would continue to operate in the western Pacific . Territorial claims in the South China Sea James R. Holmes, a specialist on China at the US Naval War College , has said that China's investments towards a potential future conflict are closer to those of the United States than may first appear because the Chinese understate their spending, the internal price structures of the two countries are different, and the Chinese need to concentrate only on projecting military force a short distance from their own shores.

The balance may shift to the advantage of the Chinese very quickly if they continue double-digit annual growth, and the US and its allies cut back.

In line with power transition theory , the idea that "wars tend to break out... when the upward trajectory of a rising power comes close to intersecting the downward trajectory of a declining power ," some political scientists and international relations scholars have argued that a potential conflict between China, an emerging power , and the United States, the current superpower , is all but inevitable. Many academics disagree with applying power transition theory to the China–US relationship. : 29 Robert Art states that these perspectives generally ignore China's peaceful rise strategy. : 29 Steve Chan concludes that the China–US power transition will be more similar to the U.K.-US power transition than the Anglo-German power transition in which World War I arose. : 29 In 2026, China expanded land reclamation and military facilities at Antelope Reef in the Paracel Islands , aiming to enhance surveillance, anti-access/area denial capabilities, and consolidate maritime claims.

The expansion, occurring amid a reduced US naval presence in the South China Sea, contributed to increasing militarization and prompted neighbouring countries, including Vietnam, to strengthen their own holdings in the region.

On 9 April 2026, Panama's President José Raúl Mulino noted rising detentions and inspections of Panama-flagged ships in China amid a US–China dispute over control of the Panama Canal's entrance ports.

The tensions followed a January 2026 Panama Supreme Court ruling ending port concessions held by Hong Kong's CK Hutchison, with operations temporarily transferred to other companies while CK Hutchison challenged the decision through international arbitration. Technological transfers and associated issues On 29 March 2024, the Biden administration revised rules aimed at restricting China's access to US artificial intelligence (AI) chips and chipmaking tools, including those from Nvidia , as part of efforts to address national security concerns over Beijing's tech advancements potentially aiding its military.

In August 2025, Chinese regulators informally directed domestic tech companies to halt or reduce purchases of Nvidia's H20 AI chips after US Commerce Secretary Howard Lutnick made remarks perceived as insulting, stating that the US deliberately sold China only downgraded technology. A US report claims China supplied Iran with offensive drones, satellite navigation system, and rocket fuel chemicals amid escalating Middle East tensions.

The report also revealed China was close to finalizing a deal for anti-ship cruise missile with Iran China's alleged access to US tech China has reportedly gained access to classified US military technology on multiple occasions, according to US media and intelligence sources.

In the early 1990s, US officials alleged that China obtained American-made Stinger missiles through Pakistan, which had originally received them for distribution to Afghan Mujahideen during the Soviet–Afghan War .

The acquisition was believed to have enabled China to reverse-engineer the technology or develop electronic countermeasures.

In 2011, following the US raid that killed Osama bin Laden, China was suspected of examining the wreckage of a stealth-modified Black Hawk helicopter that crashed during the operation.

While US forces attempted to destroy the aircraft with explosives, the tail section—featuring an unusually advanced design—remained largely intact, having landed on a wall surrounding the compound. Pakistan reportedly removed the tail and, amid heightened diplomatic tensions, allowed China to study it before returning it to the United States after several weeks. Reports citing US sources suggested that Chinese officials had "probably" examined the remains. Analysts noted the incident highlighted China's close defense ties with Pakistan. Former US counter-terrorism advisor Richard Clarke stated that any US stealth technology shared by Pakistan to China would have been perceived as a "welcome gift" by Beijing.

In 2021, a stealth variant of China's Z-20 helicopter, described by observers as a "Black Hawk clone", was revealed in concept form. A 2020 report by the US Office of Special Investigations detailed how Chinese cyber-espionage targeted US military aircraft between 2008 and 2014. Su Bin, a Chinese national linked to the People's Liberation Army, facilitated hackers in stealing over 630,000 files from Boeing related to the C-17 Globemaster cargo aircraft, as well as data on the F-22 and F-35 fighter jets. Using his industry contacts, Su Bin directed the hackers toward specific individuals, companies, and technologies, translating stolen information and coordinating its delivery to the PLA's General Staff.

The stolen data, much of which was unclassified but sensitive, enabled China to potentially reverse-engineer aircraft components and accelerate development, resulting in significant losses valued by US prosecutors.

On 10 July 2026, reports showed that OpenAI and Google had been providing AI services to the Singapore-based subsidiaries of Alibaba , Baidu , and Tencent . Even though the parent companies are on a U.S. Defense Department blacklist over alleged military links, they were still able to access advanced AI models through their overseas subsidiaries.

The reports said this was possible because of a loophole in U.S. export rules. They also warned that the companies could use these models to improve their own AI technology by studying how they worked and creating similar systems.

After the story came out, OpenAI blocked some Alibaba-linked accounts for suspected policy violations. Taiwan issue Main articles: Taiwan independence movement and Political status of Taiwan Since the renewal of US–China relations in early 1979, the Taiwan issue remained a major source of contention.

After the announcement of the intention to establish diplomatic relations with Mainland China (PRC) on 15 December 1978, the Republic of China (Taiwan) immediately condemned the United States, leading to rampant protests in both Taiwan and in the US.

In April 1979, the US Congress passed the Taiwan Relations Act , permitting unofficial relations with Taiwan to flourish and granting the right to provide Taiwan with arms of a defensive character . Its passage prompted Deng to begin to view the United States as an insincere partner willing to abandon its prior commitments to China.

The expanding relationship that followed normalization was threatened in 1981 by PRC objections to the level of US arms sales to the Republic of China on Taiwan. Secretary of State Alexander Haig visited China in June 1981 in an effort to resolve Chinese concerns about America's unofficial relations with Taiwan. Vice President Bush visited the PRC in May 1982. Eight months of negotiations produced the US-PRC Joint Communiqué of 17 August 1982.

In this third communiqué, the US stated its intention to gradually reduce the level of arms sales to the Republic of China, and the PRC described as a fundamental policy their effort to strive for a peaceful resolution to the Taiwan question .

When Donald Trump won the 2016 presidential election , contention over the Taiwan issue intensified; President Trump became the first sitting US president since Jimmy Carter in 1979 to have any formal political or diplomatic contacts with Taiwan when he decided to receive a phone call from president Tsai Ing-Wen . Trump expanded the duties of the US' de facto embassy in Taipei - the American Institute in Taiwan - by adding more security personnel, and oversaw increasing non-diplomatic visits of Tsai Ing-Wen and Congressmen to each other's countries/regions.

In addition, American warships reportedly crossed the Taiwan strait and increased military drills with Taiwan, which mainland China views as a direct threat to its sovereignty. Chinese leader Xi Jinping told European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen in April 2023 that the United States was trying to trick China into attacking Taiwan, but he would not take the bait. Tensions persist over Taiwan, with China conducting military drills in March 2025 following US statements on Taiwanese sovereignty.

In February 2026, CCP general secretary Xi Jinping warned US president Donald Trump to be "prudent" about supplying arms to Taiwan emphasizing that the subject remained the most important issue between US and China.

In July 2026, US President Donald Trump deploys the Navy-Marine Expeditionary Ship Interdiction System and Marine Air Defence Integrated System in the Luzon Strait and southern Japanese islands as part of the US military's regional war plan to defend Taiwan and deter a future Chinese invasion. Human rights Civil rights activist Chen Guangcheng (left) with former US ambassador to China Gary Locke (center) and former Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Kurt M. Campbell (right) at the US Embassy in Beijing on 1 May 2012 Pro- Tibetan protesters clash with pro-Chinese protesters in San Francisco in 2008. Main articles: Human rights in China , Human rights in the United States , Human Rights Record of the United States , and Chinese censorship abroad In 2003, the United States declared that despite some positive momentum that year and despite greater signs which showed that the People's Republic of China was willing to engage in discussions about human rights with the US and other nations, there was still serious backsliding .

In principle, China has acknowledged the importance of the protection of human rights and it has claimed that it has taken steps to bring its own human rights practices into conformity with international norms. Among those steps are China's signing of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in October 1997, which was ratified in March 2001, and China's signing of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in October 1998, which has not been ratified yet.

In 2002, China released a significant number of political and religious prisoners and it also agreed to hold discussions about torture, arbitrary detention, and religion with UN experts. However, international human rights groups assert that there has been virtually no movement with regard to those promises, with more people having been arrested for similar offences since then. Those groups maintain that China still has a long way to go in instituting the kind of fundamental systemic change that will protect the rights and liberties of all its citizens in mainland China.

The US State Department publishes an annual report on human rights around the world, which includes an evaluation of China's human rights record.

In a decision that was criticized by human rights groups, the United States State Department did not list China as one of the world's worst human rights violators in its 2007 report of human rights practices in countries and regions outside the United States . However, the assistant secretary of the State Department's Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor Jonathan D. Farrar stated that China's overall human rights record in 2007 remained poor.

Since 1998, China has annually published a White Paper detailing the human rights abuses by the United States and since 2005 has also published a White Paper on its own political system and democratic progress.

On 27 February 2014, the United States released its China report on human rights practices for 2013 , which, according to its executive summary, described the PRC as an authoritarian state and a place in which repression and coercion were routine.

On 28 February 2014, China published a report on human rights in the United States that cited surveillance on its own citizens , mistreatment of inmates , gun violence, and homelessness, despite having a vibrant economy, as important issues.

In July 2019, Vice President Mike Pence accused China of persecuting Christians , Muslims and Buddhists .

On 4 October 2019, the Houston Rockets ' general manager, Daryl Morey , issued a tweet that supported the 2019–20 Hong Kong protests . Morey's tweet resulted in the Chinese Basketball Association 's suspension of its relationship with the Houston Rockets and the issuance of a statement of dissatisfaction from the consulate office of China in Houston .

On 6 October, both Morey and the NBA issued separate statements addressing the original tweet. Morey said that he never intended his tweet to cause any offense, and the NBA said the tweet was "regrettable".

The statements were criticized by US politicians and third-party observers for the perceived exercise of economic statecraft by the PRC and insufficiency of the NBA's defense of Morey's tweet. Critics also contrasted the league's disparate response to Morey's tweet with its history of political activism The statements also drew criticism from PRC state-run media for their perceived insufficiency, as Morey did not apologize. Many American companies, including Delta Air Lines , Coach New York , Marriott International , Calvin Klein and Tiffany & Co. have apologized to China after "offending" the country and China's ruling Communist Party. Xinjiang internment camps .

The United States officially recognized the Chinese government's treatment of the Uyghurs in Xinjiang as a genocide.

In 2020, Chinese diplomats increasingly adopted " wolf warrior diplomacy " to deny all accusations of human rights abuses. Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian tweeted that as long as the US had problems itself, it "had no right" to criticize China on human rights abuses.

The second administration of Donald Trump has downplayed concerns about human rights in relations between the US and China.

On 8 July 2026, the U.S. State Department said that it supports Tibetans in protecting their culture, language, and religion after a Tibetan man died following a self-immolation protest near the United Nations headquarters on 2 July. It said it would continue urging China to restart talks with the Dalai Lama .

The protest emphasized on concerns over China's policies in Tibet.

In March 2019, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo indirectly compared China to the Nazi Germany by saying that the roundup of Muslim minorities to into camps had not been seen "since the 1930s".

In May 2019, the United States government accused China of putting Uyghurs in " concentration camps ".

The US government has also considered sanctioning Chinese officials involved in the camps, including Chen Quanguo , the Chinese Communist Party Committee Secretary of Xinjiang and a member of the 19th Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party although no CCP Politburo member has ever been sanctioned by the US government.

On 9 July 2020, the United States announced sanctions against Chinese politicians, who as per its record were responsible for human rights violations against Muslim minorities in Xinjiang .

On 20 July 2020, US government sanctioned 11 new Chinese companies from purchasing American technology and products over human rights violations in China targeting Uyghurs in the Xinjiang region.

On 15 September 2020, the US government decided to take steps to block some exports from Xinjiang, over the country's alleged human rights abuses directed mostly against Uyghurs of the region.

On 19 January 2021, Mike Pompeo officially declared that China is committing a genocide against Uyghurs in the Xinjiang region. Pompeo called for "all appropriate multilateral and relevant juridical bodies, to join the United States in our effort to promote accountability for those responsible for these atrocities". Salih Hudayar , the prime minister of the East Turkistan Government-in-Exile (who claim to be the legitimate government of Xinjiang), has said, "We hope that this designation will lead to real strong actions to hold China accountable and bring an end to China's genocide." On 20 January 2021, China imposed sanctions against outgoing US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo , former secretary of health and human services Alex Azar , former under secretary of state Keith J. Krach , outgoing US ambassador to the United Nations Kelly Craft , and 24 other former Trump officials. Biden's National Security Council called the sanctions "unproductive and cynical".

In his nomination hearing, Blinken endorsed Pompeo's report that China is committing a genocide against Uyghurs, reaffirming Biden's campaign stance.

On 31 October 2022, the United States, on behalf of 50 countries, delivered a joint statement to the UN General Assembly Third Committee expressing concern over human rights violations against Uyghurs and other Muslim minorities in Xinjiang, citing UN findings of arbitrary and discriminatory detention and urging China to meet its international obligations.

Since 2024, Xinjiang has featured less prominently in relations between the US and China.

In 2015, China led the creation of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank with the goal of financing projects that would spur the development of the lower-tier Asian economies, thus facilitating improved economic ties across the region. It has been suggested that the United States considered the AIIB to be a challenge to the US-backed Asian Development Bank and the World Bank and saw the Chinese effort as an attempt to set the global economic agenda on terms that would be formulated by the Chinese government.

The Obama administration led an effort to enact the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement , a multilateral trade pact between a number of Pacific Rim countries, which excluded China. According to the US Trade Representative , the agreement was designed to "promote economic growth; support the creation and retention of jobs; enhance innovation, productivity and competitiveness; raise living standards; reduce poverty in the signatories' countries; and promote transparency, good governance, and enhanced labor and environmental protections." The Partnership was anticipated to impose costs on businesses dependent on regional markets.

The deal was placed on hold after the US withdrew from the agreement on 23 January 2017.

The efforts are among the attempts by both the US and China to increase their influence over the Asia-Pacific by strengthening their economic ties within the region.

In 2009, the United States requested China to open the Wakhjir Pass on the Sino-Afghan border as an alternative supply route for the US and NATO during their operations in Afghanistan . China refused the request. ASEAN and the various Southeast Asian states have responded to Chinese claims for sea areas by seeking closer relations with the United States. American Defense Secretary Leon Panetta said that in spite of budget pressures, the United States would expand its influence in the region to counter China's military buildup. Shared concerns in the face of China have prompted the United States to step up cooperation with China's geopolitical rivals such as India , drawing greater opposition from China.

The Chinese embassy in Washington, D.C. , was used to co-ordinate contributions to the DNC.

In 2014, Chinese hackers hacked the computer system of the US Office of Personnel Management , resulting in the theft of approximately 22 million personnel records that were handled by the office. Former FBI Director James Comey stated, "It is a very big deal from a national security perspective and from a counterintelligence perspective. It's a treasure trove of information about everybody who has worked for, tried to work for, or works for the United States government." In October 2018, the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee held a hearing on the threat to the US posed by China.

Before the hearing, Bloomberg released an article that stated that China is embedding technology in microchips that are sent to America that collect data on American consumers. However, both FBI Director Christopher Wray and Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen declined to confirm that statement. Nielsen said that China has become a major threat to the US and also confirmed, in an answer to a question from a senator, that China is trying to influence US elections.

In 2019, two Chinese nationals were indicted for the Anthem medical data breach . About 80 million company records were hacked, stoking fears that the stolen data could be used for identity theft .

In February 2020, the United States government indicted members of China's PLA for hacking into Equifax and plundering sensitive data as part of a massive heist that also included stealing trade secrets. Private records of more than 145 million Americans were compromised in the 2017 Equifax data breach . According to a report by Reuters , in 2019 the United States CIA began a clandestine campaign on Chinese social media to spread negative narratives about the Xi Jinping administration in an effort to influence Chinese public opinion against the government.

The CIA promoted narratives that CCP leaders were hiding money overseas and that the Belt and Road Initiative was corrupt and wasteful.

As part of the campaign, the CIA also targeted foreign countries where the United States and China compete for influence. Voice of America reported in April 2020 that "Internet security researchers say there have already been signs that China-allied hackers have engaged in so-called "spear-phishing" attacks on American political targets" ahead of the 2020 United States elections .

As of 7 July 2020, the US government was "looking at" banning Chinese video streaming application, TikTok due to national security concerns. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said the Trump administration had been aware of the potential threat and has "worked on this issue for a long time".

On 19 September 2020, a complaint was filed in Washington by TikTok and its parent company, ByteDance , challenging the recent moves made by the Trump administration to prevent the application from operating in the US.

The court documents argued that the US government took the step for political reasons rather than to stop an "unusual and extraordinary threat".

In April 2024, the House of Representatives passed a bill requiring TikTok to divest from ByteDance within 9–12 months or face a potential ban, Biden signed the bill into law soon afterwards.

In December 2024, Chinese state-sponsored hackers reportedly breached the US Treasury Department's security systems, exploiting vulnerabilities in the cybersecurity services of third-party provider BeyondTrust . Using a compromised digital key, the attackers accessed a cloud-based service that provided technical support for Treasury end users, enabling them to override security measures and retrieve certain unclassified documents. Treasury officials, alerted to the breach by BeyondTrust on 8 December 2024, collaborated with the FBI and CISA to investigate the incident, which was attributed to a China-linked Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) group. Nuclear security The field of nuclear security (preventing nuclear material from being used to make illicit weapons) is a well-established area of successful US–China cooperation. Precipitated by a 2010 Nuclear Security Summit convened by the Obama administration, China and the United States launched a number of initiatives to secure potentially dangerous, Chinese-supplied, nuclear material in countries such as Ghana or Nigeria. Through these initiatives, China and the US have converted Chinese-origin Miniature Neutron Source Reactors (MNSRs) from using highly enriched uranium to using low-enriched uranium fuel (which is not directly usable in weapons, thereby making reactors more proliferation resistant). China and the United States collaborated to build the China Center of Excellence on Nuclear Security, which opened in 2015. : 209 The center is a forum for nuclear security exchange, training, and demonstration in the Asia Pacific region. : 209 In May 2023, Chinese Defense Spokesperson Tan Kefei urged the United States to fulfill its commitments and adhere to the Chemical Weapons Convention by taking "concrete actions".

In October 2025, following the US President's announcement to resume nuclear testing, the Chinese Foreign Ministry urged Washington to uphold its commitment to suspending such tests. A Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman stated that Beijing expects the US to “take practical measures” to help maintain international strategic stability and strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime. China also warned that the US withdrawal from the test moratorium could undermine the global norm of a nuclear test ban and escalate strategic tensions between the two countries. Opioid epidemic Main article: China and the opioid epidemic in the United States Opioids were involved in 80,411 overdose deaths in 2021, up from around 10,000 in 1999. According to the United States Drug Enforcement Agency in 2023, China continued to be the primary source of fentanyl being imported into the US, killing over 100 Americans every day. Over a two-year period, close to $800 million worth of fentanyl pills were illegally sold online to the US by Chinese distributors.

The drug is usually manufactured in China, then shipped to Mexico, where it is processed and packaged, which is then smuggled into the US by Mexican drug cartels . A large amount is also purchased online and shipped through the US Postal Service. It can also be purchased directly from China, which has become a major manufacturer of various synthetic drugs illegal in the US. According to Assistant US Attorney, Matt Cronin: It is a fact that the People's Republic of China is the source for the vast majority of synthetic opioids that are flooding the streets of the United States and Western democracies. It is a fact that these synthetic opioids are responsible for the overwhelming increase in overdose deaths in the United States. It is a fact that if the People's Republic of China wanted to shut down the synthetic opioids industry, they could do so in a day.

In June 2023, US federal prosecutors announced criminal indictments of fentanyl precursor producers in China.

In October 2023, OFAC sanctioned a China-based network of fentanyl manufacturers and distributors.

In July 2025, tensions between the US and China escalated as President Donald Trump maintained a 20% tariff on all Chinese imports, citing Beijing's alleged role in sustaining the flow of fentanyl into the US The Chinese government rejected the accusation, stating it had already taken significant measures to address the issue and denounced the tariffs as coercive. Despite broader efforts to de-escalate trade disputes, the fentanyl-related duties remained in place, with China signaling frustration over what it viewed as a lack of recognition for its cooperation. Despite enforcement challenges in a vast and complex chemical sector, observers argue that China could take stronger measures to curb the export of fentanyl precursors. These include tightening regulations, imposing stricter penalties for violations, and ensuring consistent enforcement by local authorities. David Luckey of the RAND Corporation noted that while scheduling substances is a positive step, preventing Chinese companies from supplying precursor chemicals to criminal organizations—particularly in Mexico—would be more effective. He emphasized that as a command economy, China has the capacity to exercise greater control if the Chinese Communist Party chooses to do so. COVID-19 Main article: Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on politics In relation to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on politics , the Trump administration referred to the coronavirus as the "Wuhan virus", terms which have been criticized for being racist and "distract from the Trump administration's failure to contain the disease".

In return, some Chinese officials, including Zhao Lijian , rejected an earlier acknowledgement of the coronavirus outbreak starting in Wuhan , in favor of conspiracy theories that the virus originated in the US The Daily Beast obtained a US government cable outlining a communications strategy with apparent origins in the National Security Council , quoted as "Everything is about China. We're being told to try and get this messaging out in any way possible". Multiple US intelligence agencies have reportedly been pressured by the Trump administration to find intelligence supporting conspiracy theories regarding the origins of the virus in China. According to a New York Times report in April 2020, the US intelligence community says China intentionally under-reported its number of coronavirus cases. Some outlets such as Politico and Foreign Policy have said China's efforts to send aid to virus-stricken countries is part of a propaganda push for global influence. EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell warned there is "a geo-political component including a struggle for influence through spinning and the 'politics of generosity'". Borrell also said "China is aggressively pushing the message that, unlike the US, it is a responsible and reliable partner." China has also called for the US to lift its sanctions from Syria, Venezuela and Iran, while reportedly sending aid to the latter two countries. Donations of 100,000 masks to Cuba made by Chinese businessman Jack Ma was blocked by US sanctions on 3 April. Trade in medical supplies between the United States and China has also become politically complicated. Exports of face masks and other medical equipment to China from the United States (and many other countries) spiked in February, according to statistics from Trade Data Monitor , prompting criticism from The Washington Post that the United States government failed to anticipate the domestic needs for that equipment. Similarly, The Wall Street Journal , citing Trade Data Monitor to show that China is the leading source of many key medical supplies, raised concerns that US tariffs on imports from China threaten imports of medical supplies into the US.

By May 2020, the relationship had deteriorated to the lowest point as both sides were recruiting allies to attack the other regarding guilt for the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic .

In September 2020, the trade war between China and the US alongside Beijing's behavior during the COVID-19 crisis combined to worsen American public opinion about China. This also affected American perceptions of China-Taiwan tensions as a serious national security concern.

On 22 September 2020, President Donald Trump called on the United Nations to "hold China accountable for their actions", in a speech to the world body's General Assembly. President Trump blamed the Chinese government for the global spread of COVID-19 , which had infected 31 million people worldwide and killed more than 965,000, by then.

On 26 May 2021, Joe Biden tasked the US intelligence community with investigating the origins of the pandemic.

By August 2021, the intelligence probe assessed that the Chinese government did not have foreknowledge of the outbreak, yet the investigation did not render conclusive results on the origins. Of eight assembled teams , one (the Federal Bureau of Investigation ) leaned towards a lab leak theory , four others (and the National Intelligence Council ) were inclined to uphold a zoonotic origin, and three were unable to reach a conclusion.

In February 2023, the US Department of Energy revised its previous estimate of the origin from "undecided" to "low confidence" in favor of a laboratory leak.

Following the Energy Department's revised conclusion, the Chinese foreign ministry called on the US to "stop defaming China" with the lab leak theory, adding that the US was politicizing a scientific issue.

The campaign was described as "payback" for COVID-19 disinformation by China directed against the US The campaign primarily targeted people in the Philippines and used a social media hashtag for "China is the virus" in Tagalog .

The campaign ran from the spring of 2020 to mid-2021. Clean energy and climate change The United States and China are the highest greenhouse gas emitters among developed countries and developing countries, respectively. : 82 Clean energy and climate cooperation were generally viewed by both China and the US as a relative safe harbor for cooperation, even during many of the most contentious periods in the bilateral relationship. : 81–82 A record number of bilateral cooperation agreements, including related to climate issues, were signed during the tenure of US President Barack Obama. : 2 However, cooperation on clean energy and climate change issues were also limited by lack of consistent funding and lack of dialogue at high political levels, : 94 and ended almost entirely after US President Donald Trump de-prioritized environmental issues during his term. : 108 The subsequent Joseph Biden administration ended the US–China Clean Energy Research Center (CERC) established under Obama. : 98 CERC had been the most ambitious clean energy cooperation platform between the two countries, : 117 and one of the few cooperation mechanisms to have survived the Trump administration. : 98 In the US and China's Sunnylands Summit on 8 June 2013, President Obama and President Xi Jinping worked in accordance for the first time, formulating a landmark agreement to reduce both production and consumption of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs). This agreement had the unofficial goal of decreasing roughly 90 gigatons of CO 2 by 2050 and implementation was to be led by the institutions created under the Montreal Protocol , while progress was tracked using the reported emissions that were mandated under the Kyoto Protocol .

The Obama administration viewed HFCs as a "serious climate mitigation concern." On 18 July 2023, US climate envoy John Kerry emphasized the goal of redefining the China–US relationship through climate cooperation.

The subsequent day's discussions centered on climate financing, coal consumption, and methane reduction. Kerry's visit signifies the renewed focus on high-level climate diplomacy between the two nations. Iran war During the 2026 Iran war, Donald Trump warned that the United States could impose tariffs of up to 50 percent on countries supplying military weapons to Iran, including China. He stated that he doubted China would engage in such actions, but added that any confirmed transfers would trigger punitive trade measures. Chinese officials denied any involvement in such activities and warned of countermeasures if additional tariffs were imposed.

The United States imposed sanctions on 24–25 April 2026 against a China-based independent oil refinery and approximately 40 shipping companies and vessels for their involvement in purchasing and transporting Iranian crude oil.

The measures are part of the US policy of secondary sanctions, aimed at restricting Iran's oil exports by targeting third-country buyers and shipping intermediaries. China criticised the sanctions, describing them as unilateral and inconsistent with principles of free international trade.

In May 2026, amid the ongoing Iran war and its broader economic and geopolitical effects, the United States further expanded its sanctions targeting Chinese entities linked to Iran's energy export and supply networks.

The move coincided with heightened tensions between Washington and Beijing and came ahead of President Donald Trump's planned visit to China, contributing to further strain in bilateral relations.

In response, China issued directives instructing domestic firms to disregard US sanctions on Iranian oil purchases and invoked its anti-foreign sanctions law.

In the 2024 Olympics, the two countries tied at 40 gold medals. Education Chinese students constitute about one-quarter of international students in the US, second largest after Indians, contributing significantly to university funding.

While many return to China after graduation, science and engineering doctorate holders often remain in the US The number of Chinese students in the US peaked in 2019–2020 at 372,532, and has been declining significantly since.

In May 2025, United States Secretary of State Marco Rubio announced the US government would "aggressively revoke visas for Chinese students, including those with connections to the Chinese Communist Party or studying in critical fields". He also announced the US would increase scrutiny of all future visa applications from China and Hong Kong. Public perceptions California 's Governor Gavin Newsom with Chinese leader Xi Jinping on 25 October 2023. Newsom called for better relations between the US and China. Despite tensions during Barack Obama's presidency, the Chinese population's favorability of the US stood at 51% in Obama's last year of 2016, only to fall during the Trump administration . According to a 2021 poll published in the Journal of Current Chinese Affairs, over 70% of Chinese people had "unfavourable feelings" towards the US. According to a 2023 research, younger Chinese were less likely to express favorable views of the US compared to older respondents, as well as nationalist responders and members of the Chinese Communist Party. According to a 2025 poll by the Chicago Council on Global Affairs and the Carter Center , 17% of Chinese people consider the US to be a friend of China, while 83% do not. According to a 2026 feeling thermometer poll by the Carter Center and Emory University , 73% of Chinese considered the United States to be a national security threat to China. American public opinion of China and of Chinese leader Xi Jinping has deteriorated sharply since the start of the China–United States trade war and during the COVID-19 pandemic , with many expressing economic, human-rights, and environmental concerns. However, American public opinion towards China has improved since 2025 during the second term of Donald Trump.

In 2023, a Gallup survey showed above 50% Americans are most likely to mention China as the United States' greatest enemy in the world since 2021.

In 2024, that percentage dropped to 41 percent, yet China remained the biggest enemy. A 2025 poll by the Chicago Council on Global Affairs found that Americans' perceptions of China improved after several years of decline.

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 13 October 2023 . Retrieved 11 March 2023 . ^ a b Lau, Stuart (13 June 2021). "US and Europe converge on historic rebuke of China" . Politico . Archived from the original on 7 October 2021 . Retrieved 29 March 2022 . ^ Bush, Richard C. ; Hass, Ryan (1 December 2021). "The Biden administration is right to include Taiwan in the Summit for Democracy" . Brookings . Retrieved 28 April 2023 . ^ Wong, Tessa (14 November 2022). "Xi Biden meeting: US leader promises 'no new Cold War' with China" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 4 October 2023 . Retrieved 11 March 2023 . ^ a b Chen, Jian (1992). "China's Changing Aims during the Korean War, 1950—1951" .

The Journal of American-East Asian Relations . 1 (1): 8– 41. ISSN 1058-3947 . JSTOR 23613365 . Archived from the original on 9 January 2024. ^ "United Nations Security Council – Cold War, Peacekeeping, Veto Power" . Britannica . Archived from the original on 12 May 2021 . Retrieved 29 September 2023 . ^ a b c Rawnsley, Gary D. (2009). " 'The Great Movement to Resist America and Assist Korea': how Beijing sold the Korean War" . Media, War & Conflict . 2 (3): 285– 315. doi : 10.1177/1750635209345186 . ISSN 1750-6352 . JSTOR 26000394 . S2CID 143193818 . Archived from the original on 28 January 2024. ^ Kim, Yun-sik (21 June 2011). "Chinese intervention in Korean War" . Korea Times . Archived from the original on 26 January 2024 . Retrieved 26 January 2024 . ^ a b Han, Enze (2024).

The Ripple Effect: China's Complex Presence in Southeast Asia . New York, NY: Oxford University Press . p. 65. ISBN 978-0-19-769659-0 . ^ Morris-Suzuki, Tessa (2015). "Prisoner Number 600,001: Rethinking Japan, China, and the Korean War 1950–1953" .

The Journal of Asian Studies . 74 (2): 411– 432. doi : 10.1017/S0021911814002253 . ISSN 0021-9118 . JSTOR 43553591 . Archived from the original on 26 January 2024. ^ Yufan, Hao; Zhihai, Zhai (1990). "China's Decision to Enter the Korean War: History Revisited" .

The China Quarterly . 121 : 94– 115. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.695.5440 . doi : 10.1017/S0305741000013527 . Archived from the original on 10 December 2021. ^ Stokesbury, James L. (1990). A Short History of the Korean War . New York: Harper Perennial. p. 83. ISBN 978-0688095130 . ^ Offner, Arnold A. (2002). Another Such Victory: President Truman and the Cold War, 1945–1953 . Stanford University Press. p. 390. ISBN 978-0804747745 . ^ Lee, Michael; Cho, Jung-woo (14 September 2023). "Incheon landing was turning point for war, nation and world" . Korea JoongAng Daily . Retrieved 26 January 2024 . ^ Matray, James I. (1979). "Truman's Plan for Victory: National Self-Determination and the Thirty-Eighth Parallel Decision in Korea" .

The Journal of American History . 66 (2): 314– 333. doi : 10.2307/1900879 . JSTOR 1900879 . ^ Lendon, Brad (25 June 2020). "The U.S. Army once ruled Pyongyang and 5 other things you might not know about the Korean War" . CNN . Archived from the original on 26 January 2024 . Retrieved 26 January 2024 . ^ Li 2024a , p. 50. ^ Redick, Charles Ford (1973). "The Jurisprudence of the Foreign Claims Settlement Commission: Chinese Claims". American Journal of International Law . 67 (4): 728– 740. doi : 10.2307/2198570 . JSTOR 2198570 . ^ Li 2024a , p. 3. ^ Cohen, Eliot A. ; Gooch, John (2005). Military Misfortunes: The Anatomy of Failure in War . Free Press. pp. 165– 195. ISBN 978-0-7432-8082-2 . ^ Zhang, Shu Guang (1995), Mao's Military Romanticism: China and the Korean War, 1950–1953 , Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas , pp. 119– 126, ISBN 0-7006-0723-4 ^ Alexander, Bevin R. (1986), Korea: The First War We Lost , New York: Hippocrene Books, Inc, pp. 371– 376, ISBN 978-0-87052-135-5 ^ Birtle, Andrew James (2000).

The Korean War: Years of Stalemate, July 1951–July 1953 . US Army Center for Military History. ^ Matray, James I. (2011). "Beijing and the Paper Tiger: The Impact of the Korean War on Sino-American Relations" (PDF) . International Journal of Korean Studies . 15 (1): 155– 186. ^ "Beliefs of Enemy Soldiers about the Korean War". International Public Opinion Research Inc. and Operations Research Office at Johns Hopkins University (1952) p. 53. ^ Li, Xiaobing (2019). Building Ho's Army: Chinese Military Assistance to North Vietnam . University Press of Kentucky. pp. 4– 5. ISBN 9780813177946 . ^ Han, Xiaorong (2009). "Spoiled guests or dedicated patriots?

The Chinese in North Vietnam, 1954–1978". International Journal of Asian Studies . 6 (1): 1– 36. doi : 10.1017/S1479591409000011 . ^ Chen Jian (1995). "China's Involvement in the Vietnam War, 1964–69".

The China Quarterly . 142 : 356– 387. doi : 10.1017/S0305741000034974 . S2CID 154489963 . ^ Yim, Kwan Ha (1975). China & the US: 1964–72 . Facts on File . pp. 57– 82. ISBN 978-0-87196-207-2 . ^ Rogers, Frank E. (1976). "Sino-American Relations and the Vietnam War, 1964–66" (PDF) .

The China Quarterly . 66 : 293– 314. doi : 10.1017/S0305741000033695 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 December 2022. ^ Immerman, Richard H. (1990). "The United States and the Geneva Conference of 1954: A New Look" . Diplomatic History . 14 (1): 43– 66. doi : 10.1111/j.1467-7709.1990.tb00075.x . ^ Autiello, Nicholas Anthony (2019). "Taming the Wild Dragon: John F. Kennedy and the Republic of China, 1961–63". Cold War History . 21 (1): 71– 89. doi : 10.1080/14682745.2018.1550077 . Online review . Archived 3 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine . ^ Kochavi, Noam (1998). "Kennedy, China, and the Tragedy of No Chance" . Journal of American-East Asian Relations . 7 ( 1– 2): 107– 116. doi : 10.1163/187656198X00072 . JSTOR 23613311 . ^ Turner, Sean M. (2011). " 'A Rather Climactic Period': The Sino–Soviet Dispute and Perceptions of the China Threat in the Kennedy Administration". Diplomacy & Statecraft . 22 (2): 261– 280. doi : 10.1080/09592296.2011.576538 . ^ Kaufman, Victor S. (1998). "A Response to Chaos: The United States, the Great Leap Forward, and the Cultural Revolution, 1961–1968" . Journal of American-East Asian Relations . 7 ( 1– 2): 73– 92. doi : 10.1163/187656198x00045 . JSTOR 23613308 . Archived from the original on 3 June 2020. . ^ Goldstein, Steven M. (2001). "Dialogue of the Deaf?: The Sino-American Ambassadorial-Level Talks, 1955–1970".

In Robert S. Ross ; Changbin Jiang, eds. (2001). Re-examining the Cold War: U.S.-China Diplomacy, 1954–1973 . Harvard University Asia Center. pp. 200– 237. ISBN 9780674005266 . ^ Hollie, Pamela G. (1 October 1979). "Thaw in China-U.S. Ties May Unfreeze '49 Assets".

The New York Times . p. D1. ^ Goh, Evelyn (2005). "Nixon, Kissinger, and the 'Soviet Card' in the U.S. Opening to China, 1971–1974". Diplomatic History 29.3: 475–502. online Archived 2 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine ^ "The Week that Chenged the World" . Richard Nixon Foundation . 18 January 2017. Archived from the original on 27 September 2018 . Retrieved 2 November 2018 . ^ a b c d e Minami, Kazushi (2024). People's Diplomacy: How Americans and Chinese Transformed US-China Relations during the Cold War . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press . ISBN 9781501774157 . ^ "Office of the Historian" . Historical Documents . 27 September 1969 . Retrieved 19 February 2026 . ^ Goh, Evelyn, Constructing the US Rapprochement with China, 1961–1974: From 'Red Menace' to 'Tacit Ally' , Cambridge University Press, 2005 ^ Leffler, Melvyn P.; Westad, Odd Arne, eds. (2010).

The Cambridge history of the Cold War (1. publ. ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. p. 373. ISBN 978-0-521-83720-0 . ^ Dube, Clayton. "Getting to Beijing: Kissinger's Secret 1971 Trip" . USC US-China Institute. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013 . Retrieved 24 July 2011 . ^ a b c Li, Xiaobing (2018).

The Cold War in East Asia . Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge . ISBN 978-1-138-65179-1 . ^ Dube, Clayton. "Sports diplomacy and back-channel negotiations" . Talking Points, July 22 – August 3, 2011 . USC US-China Institute. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013 . Retrieved 24 July 2011 . ^ "Timeline: U.S. Relations With China 1949–2020" . Council on Foreign Relations . Archived from the original on 16 August 2022 . Retrieved 9 March 2021 . ^ Li 2024a , p. 310. ^ "2011 American Business in China White Paper by American Chamber of Commerce in China / KissLibrary: Affordable Ebooks" . kisslibrary.com . Retrieved 6 December 2018 . ^ Margaret MacMillan , Nixon and Mao: The Week That Changed The World (2008) ^ Nixon, Richard. "Announcement of the President's Trip to China" . US-China documents collection . USC US-China Institute. Archived from the original on 11 November 2013 . Retrieved 24 July 2011 . ^ See "Getting to know you: The US and China shake the world" Archived 11 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine and "The Week that Changed the World" Archived 21 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine for recordings, documents, and interviews. ^ Kai-Shek, Chiang (20 February 1972). "對國民大會第五次會議開幕典禮致詞" . 中正文教基金會 (Chungcheng Cultural and Educational Foundation) (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 3 June 2021 . Retrieved 3 June 2021 . 所以今天國際間任何與惡勢力謀求政治權力均衡的姑息舉動，絕不會有助於世界和平，而適以延長我七億人民的苦難，增大全世界的災禍！ ^ a b Dunbabin, J.P.D. (1996). International relations since 1945 (. ed.). London : Longman. p. 258. ISBN 978-0-582-49365-0 . ^ Engel, Jeffrey A., ed. (2011).

The China Diary of George H. W. Bush: The Making of a Global President . Princeton UP. p. 356. ISBN 978-1400829613 . ^ Meacham, Jon (2015). Destiny and Power: The American Odyssey of George Herbert Walker Bush . Random House Publishing. p. 219. ISBN 9780812998207 . ^ Vance, Cyrus (1983). Hard Choices . Simon and Schuster. pp. 78 –79. ISBN 9780671443399 . ^ Lampton 2024 , p. 86. ^ Jim Mann, About face: A history of America's curious relationship with China, from Nixon to Clinton (1999). ^ Lampton 2024 , pp. 90–91. ^ "US-China Institute :: news & features :: china in u.s. campaign politics: part 6 of election '08 and the challenge of china" . China.usc.edu. 16 October 1964. Archived from the original on 5 March 2014 . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ Starr, Frederick S. (2004). Xinjiang: China's Muslim Borderland . M.E. Sharpe. pp. 157– 158. ISBN 978-0-7656-3192-3 . Archived from the original on 11 February 2024 . Retrieved 8 December 2018 . ^ Lampton 2024 , p. 103. ^ a b c d e f Crean, Jeffrey (2024).

The Fear of Chinese Power: an International History . New Approaches to International History series. London, UK: Bloomsbury Academic . ISBN 978-1-350-23394-2 . ^ a b c Zhao 2022 , p. 54. ^ Oksenberg, Michel (1982). "Reconsiderations: A Decade of Sino-American Relations". Foreign Affairs 61.1: 190. ^ Lampton 2024 , p. 142. ^ Robert Suettinger, Beyond Tiananmen: The Politics of US-China Relations, 1989–2000 (Brookings Institution Press, 2004). ^ Lampton 2024 , p. 207. ^ a b Lampton 2024 , p. 208. ^ Eric A. Hyer, "Values Versus Interests: The U.S. Response to the Tiananmen Square Massacre" (Georgetown Institute for the Study of Diplomacy, 1996. online ^ "The Dui Hua Foundation-Dialogue – Issue 38: Tiananmen Sanctions: 20 Years & Counting" .

The Dui Hua Foundation . 29 January 2010 . Retrieved 24 July 2025 . ^ Robert Suettinger, Beyond Tiananmen: The Politics of U.S.-China Relations, 1989–2000 ( Brookings Institution Press , 2004.) ^ Roehl, Wesley S. (1990). "Travel agent attitudes toward China after Tiananmen Square". Journal of Travel Research 29.2: 16–22. ^ Skidmore, David; Gates, William (1997). "After Tiananmen: The struggle over U.S. policy toward China in the Bush administration". Presidential Studies Quarterly : 514–539. in JSTOR Archived 19 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ Lampton 2024 , p. 210. ^ "The Future of U.S.–China Relations" . USC Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism . Archived from the original on 5 March 2014 . Retrieved 31 August 2008 . ^ Lampton 2024 , p. 211. ^ Yuwu Song, ed., Encyclopedia of Chinese-American Relations (2009) pp. 56–57. ^ a b Zhao 2022 , p. 51. ^ Kerry Dumbaugh, and Richard C. Bush, Making China Policy: Lessons from the Bush and Clinton Administrations (Rowman & Littlefield, 2001). ^ Lampton 2024 , p. 222. ^ Lampton 2024 , p. 223. ^ a b c d e f g Zhao 2022 , p. 63. ^ Yuwu Song, ed., Encyclopedia of Chinese-American Relations ( McFarland Publishing , 2009) p 63. ^ John W. Dietrich, "Interest groups and foreign policy: Clinton and the China MFN debates." Presidential Studies Quarterly 29.2 (1999): 280-296. ^ Jean A. Garrison, Making China Policy: From Nixon to GW Bush (Lynne Rienner, 2005) ^ After Hainan: Next Steps for US–China Relations: Hearing Before the Subcommittee on East Asia and the Pacific of the Committee on International Relations, House of Representatives, One Hundred Seventh Congress, First Session, April 25, 2001 (PDF) . Washington: United States Government Publishing Office. p. 45. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 August 2008. ^ Lucian W. Pye, "The United States and Asia in 1997: nothing dramatic, just incremental progress." Asian Survey 38.1 (1998): 99–106 online . ^ "President Clinton's Beijing University speech, 1998 US-China Institute" . china.usc.edu . Archived from the original on 16 April 2023 . Retrieved 16 April 2023 . ^ Moore, Scott (2022). China's next act : how sustainability and technology are reshaping China's rise and the world's future . New York, NY. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-19-760401-4 . OCLC 1316703008 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ President Clinton at Peking University (1998) , 9 July 2013 , retrieved 16 April 2023 ^ Eckholm ^ a b c Zhao 2022 , pp. 63–64. ^ a b c d e f Zhao 2022 , p. 64. ^ Roberts, Guy (2011). "Circling the Middle Kingdom: George W. Bush and China 1999 – 2003". Australasian Journal of American Studies 30#1 pp. 57–71. ^ Chi Wang (2008). George W. Bush and China: Policies, Problems, and Partnerships . Lexington Books. ISBN 9780739131640 . ^ "U.S. State Department – China (03/03)" . state.gov. Archived from the original on 25 May 2019 . Retrieved 6 June 2011 . ^ a b c d Zhao 2022 , p. 65. ^ Brown, Kerry (2023). China Incorporated: The Politics of a World Where China is Number One . London: Bloomsbury Academic . ISBN 978-1-350-26724-4 . ^ a b "Jiang's U.S.-Built Plane Is Reportedly Bugged" . Los Angeles Times . 19 January 2002. Archived from the original on 3 November 2023 . Retrieved 3 November 2023 . ^ "US-China Institute :: USCI Symposium Explores The Taiwan Vote" . USC Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism . 31 March 2008. Archived from the original on 5 March 2014 . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ Lampton 2024 , p. 334. ^ "Text of Pres. Bush's welcome" . China.usc.edu. Archived from the original on 11 February 2009 . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ Jean Edward Smith, Bush (2016) pp 646-649. ^ "Details and video from the meeting" . China.usc.edu. Archived from the original on 1 March 2014 . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ Video and documents: Obama and China Archived 30 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine ; McCain and China Archived 5 March 2014 at the Wayback Machine . ^ The Economist 8 June 2013 ^ Moore, Malcolm (November 2008). "Chinese entrepreneurs get Obama-mania" .

The Daily Telegraph . Archived from the original on 12 January 2022 . Retrieved 23 November 2020 . ^ "POLITICS-US: Online Poll Shows Obama a Hit in China" . Inter Press Service . October 2008. Archived from the original on 7 November 2020 . Retrieved 23 November 2020 . ^ "Obama's international image remains strong in Europe and Asia" . Pew Research Center . 29 June 2016. Archived from the original on 24 November 2020 . Retrieved 23 November 2020 . ^ "President Hu Jintao and US President-elect Barack Obama Discuss over Telephone – Hunan Government" . Enghunan.gov.cn. 9 November 2008. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ "No call from Obama seen as slight to India" . Asiaone.com , The Statesman (India) . 11 November 2008. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ "Asia News Network – Xchange Tool" . Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Lewis, Joanna I. (2023). Cooperating for the Climate: Learning from International Partnerships in China's Clean Energy Sector . Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press . ISBN 978-0-262-54482-5 . ^ "US-China Institute :: news & features :: making american policy toward china – scholars and policy makers on economics, security, and climate change" . China.usc.edu . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Boston Study Group on Middle East Peace. "Foreign Policy Association: Resource Library: Viewpoints: Moving the G-2 Forward" . Fpa.org. Archived from the original on 9 September 2021 . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Roach, Stephen (2022). Accidental Conflict: America, China, and the Clash of False Narratives . Yale University Press . doi : 10.2307/j.ctv2z0vv2v . ISBN 978-0-300-26901-7 . JSTOR j.ctv2z0vv2v . S2CID 252800309 . ^ "Economic Crisis, Looming Environmental Threats, and Growing Nuclear Weapons Worries -- All in a Day's Work at the Strategic and Economic Dialogue 中美战略与经济对话" . China.usc.edu. Archived from the original on 1 March 2014 . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ The aims and challenges of the trip were summarized by the USC US-China Institute: Archived 5 March 2014 at the Wayback Machine , Archived 5 March 2014 at the Wayback Machine . ^ "Instant Analysis: Reporting on U.S. Presidents in China" . China.usc.edu. Archived from the original on 28 May 2010 . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ "China hits back at U.S. over Taiwan weapons sale" . BBC News . 30 January 2010. Archived from the original on 18 November 2010 . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ Macartney, Jane (19 February 2010). "China summons US Ambassador over Dalai Lama's meeting with Obama" .

The Times . London . Retrieved 12 July 2010 . ^ Ramzy, Austin (19 February 2010). "In China, Muted Reaction to Dalai Lama's Visit" . Time magazine . Archived from the original on 20 February 2010 . Retrieved 12 July 2010 . ^ Lee, Mj. "China fires at new U.S. defense plan." Politico , 9 January 2012. ^ Whitlock, Craig. "Philippines may allow greater U.S. military presence in reaction to China's rise." Archived 15 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine The Washington Post , 25 January 2012. ^ Landler, Mark and Myers, Steven Lee (26 April 2012). "U.S. Sees Positive Signs From China on Security Issues" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 12 May 2012 . Retrieved 9 November 2012 . ^ "China-U.S. Accord Sets UN Vote on North Korea Sanctions" . Bloomberg . Archived from the original on 5 September 2014 . Retrieved 6 March 2017 . ^ Calmes, Jackie and Myers, Steven Lee (8 June 2013). "U.S. and China Move Closer on North Korea, but Not on Cyberespionage" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 10 June 2013 . Retrieved 11 June 2013 . ^ a b Sanger, David E. (9 June 2013). "Obama and Xi Try to Avoid a Cold War Mentality" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 24 December 2016 . Retrieved 6 February 2017 . ^ a b McGregor, Richard (10 June 2013). "Obama-Xi summit presented as a walk in the park" . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 10 December 2022 . Retrieved 11 June 2013 . ^ " White House: no change to 'one China' policy after Trump call with Taiwan Archived 11 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine ". Reuters. 2 December 2016. ^ " Remarks by President Obama and President Xi Jinping in Joint Press Conference Archived 22 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine ". 23 November 2014. ^ a b c Li, Xiaobing (2024). "Beijing's Military Power and East Asian-Pacific Hot Spots".

In Fang, Qiang; Li, Xiaobing (eds.). China under Xi Jinping: A New Assessment . Leiden University Press . ISBN 9789087284411 . ^ " Defense secretary's warning to China: U.S. military won't change operations Archived 30 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine ".

The Washington Post . 27 May 2015. ^ "Statement by the Press Secretary on Bilateral Meeting with President Xi Jinping of the People's Republic of China" . whitehouse.gov . 24 March 2016. Archived from the original on 10 March 2021 . Retrieved 1 March 2021 – via National Archives . ^ Allen-Ebrahimian, Bethany (19 January 2021). "Special report: Trump's U.S.-China transformation" . Axios . Archived from the original on 29 January 2021 . Retrieved 31 January 2021 . ^ "China lodges protest after Trump call with Taiwan president" . Reuters . 4 December 2016. Archived from the original on 17 November 2017 . Retrieved 17 November 2017 . ^ a b "Trump says U.S. not necessarily bound by 'one China' policy" . Reuters . 12 December 2016. Archived from the original on 14 November 2017 . Retrieved 17 November 2017 . ^ "Chinese military official warns that war with U.S. under Trump is becoming a 'practical reality' " . Business Insider . Archived from the original on 8 February 2017 . Retrieved 7 February 2017 . ^ "China 'steps up preparedness for possible military conflict with US' " . 26 January 2017. Archived from the original on 27 February 2019 . Retrieved 31 January 2017 . ^ "China says will protect South China Sea sovereignty" . Reuters . 24 January 2017. Archived from the original on 17 November 2017 . Retrieved 17 November 2017 . ^ Lendon, Brad (4 February 2017). "Mattis: U.S. will defend Japanese islands claimed by China" . CNN . Archived from the original on 13 August 2018 . Retrieved 7 February 2017 . ^ "Trump climbdown on 'One China' threats" . BBC News . 10 February 2017. Archived from the original on 28 May 2018 . Retrieved 22 June 2018 . ^ a b Bodeen, Christopher (3 July 2017). "China's Xi warns Trump of 'negative factors' hurting US ties" . Associated Press. Archived from the original on 19 July 2017 . Retrieved 5 July 2017 . ^ Rogin, Josh (2021). Chaos Under Heaven: Trump, Xi, and the Battle for the Twenty-First Century . Mariner Books . pp. 27– 28. ISBN 9780358393245 . ^ Long, Qiao (21 May 2020). "U.S. Signals Change in China Strategy to 'Defensive' And 'Competitive' Approach" . Radio Free Asia . Archived from the original on 21 May 2020 . Retrieved 21 May 2020 . ^ "A New National Security Strategy for a New Era" . whitehouse.gov . 18 December 2017. Archived from the original on 20 January 2021 . Retrieved 22 May 2020 – via National Archives . ^ Churchill, Owen (25 July 2020). "US officials now call Xi Jinping 'general secretary' instead of China's 'president' – but why?" . South China Morning Post . Archived from the original on 24 July 2020 . Retrieved 25 July 2020 . ^ Horowitz, Julia (5 December 2018). "Huawei CFO Meng Wanzhou arrested in Canada" . CNN . Archived from the original on 4 March 2020 . Retrieved 25 October 2019 . ^ "Huawei finance chief Meng Wanzhou arrested in Canada" . BBC News . 6 November 2018. Archived from the original on 6 December 2018 . Retrieved 6 December 2018 . ^ Al Jazeera Inside Story , 8 December 2018, Why is China's biggest technology company being targeted? , Minutes 12:55; 14:10-ff. ^ Ren, Shuli (9 December 2018). "Beyond Huawei, Scientist's Death Hurts China's Technology Quest" . Bloomberg . Archived from the original on 10 December 2018 . Retrieved 8 January 2019 . ^ Donnan, Shawn; Wingrove, Josh; Mohsin, Saleha (15 January 2020). "U.S. and China Sign Phase One of Trade Deal" . Bloomberg.com . Archived from the original on 19 January 2020 . Retrieved 20 January 2020 . ^ Davis, Bob (16 January 2020). "U.S.-China Deal Could Upend the Way Nations Settle Disputes" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 21 January 2020 . ^ Lawder, David (15 January 2020). "In U.S.-China Phase 1 trade deal, enforcement may end in 'We quit' " . Reuters . Retrieved 21 January 2020 . ^ a b Swaine, Michael D. (16 January 2019). "A Relationship Under Extreme Duress: U.S.-China Relations at a Crossroads" . Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . ^ Foot, Rosemary; King, Amy (1 June 2019). "Assessing the deterioration in China–U.S. relations: U.S. governmental perspectives on the economic-security nexus" . China International Strategy Review . 1 (1): 39– 50. doi : 10.1007/s42533-019-00005-y . ISSN 2524-5635 . ^ Foot and King, "Assessing the deterioration in China–US relations: US governmental perspectives on the economic-security nexus." (2019) ^ Walt, Stephen M (29 July 2019). "Yesterday's Cold War Shows How to Beat China Today" . Foreign Policy . Archived from the original on 22 September 2020 . Retrieved 9 September 2020 . ^ Dobriansky, Paula J. (30 April 2020). "An Allied Plan to Depend Less on China" .

The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 9 September 2020 . Washington and its partners in Asia should set up new supply chains, restructure trade relations, and start to create an international economic order that is less dependent on China. A multilateral "coalition of the willing" approach would better align trading ties with political and security relationships. It would also help India and nations in Southeast Asia develop more rapidly, becoming stronger U.S. partners. ^ Friedberg, Aaron L. (September–October 2020). "An Answer to Aggression" . Foreign Affairs . Archived from the original on 10 September 2020 . Retrieved 9 September 2020 .

The aims of this approach should be twofold: first, to deny Beijing its immediate objectives, imposing costs, slowing the growth of China's power and influence, and reducing the threat it can pose to democracies and to an open international system; and second, by demonstrating the futility of China's current strategy, to change the calculations of its ruling elite, forcing them to eventually rethink both their foreign and their domestic policies. This will take time, and given Xi's obvious predispositions and commitments, success may well depend on changes in the top leadership of the CCP. ^ Lawrence J. Lau, "The China–US Trade War and Future Economic Relations." China and the World (Lau Chor Tak Institute of Global Economics and Finance, 2019): 1–32. quote p. 3 online Archived 24 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine ^ Swaminathan, Aarthi (28 May 2020). "US and China heading towards a cold war: Ian Bremmer" . Yahoo News. Archived from the original on 17 July 2020 . Retrieved 9 September 2020 . ^ "Trump's Biggest Foreign Policy Win So Far" . Time . 20 July 2020. Archived from the original on 9 September 2020 . Retrieved 9 September 2020 . ^ "Opinion: President Trump's China policy is working, but you'd never know that from media reports" . Los Angeles Times . 20 September 2019. Archived from the original on 26 September 2020 . Retrieved 9 September 2020 . ^ Galloway, Anthony (24 November 2019). " 'I fear something worse': Obama adviser on the danger of China and the need to stick by the US" . Sydney Morning Herald . Archived from the original on 28 August 2020 . Retrieved 9 September 2020 . ^ "Susan Rice on Trump, impeachment and why Canada shouldn't back down to China" . CBC News . 3 November 2019. Archived from the original on 28 August 2020 . Retrieved 9 September 2020 . ^ "Team Biden's Policies on China and Taiwan" .

The Diplomat . 16 July 2020. Archived from the original on 7 September 2020 . Retrieved 9 September 2020 . ^ "China's leadership is 'not scared of Donald Trump' on trade: Susan Rice" . Yahoo Finance. 18 October 2019. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021 . Retrieved 9 September 2020 . ^ Demers, John (11 February 2020). "Report on the China Initiative, 2018-2019" . USC U.S.-China Institute . Archived from the original on 30 November 2021 . Retrieved 10 August 2020 . ^ Gerstein, Josh (23 February 2022). "DOJ shuts down China-focused anti-espionage program" . Politico . Archived from the original on 15 June 2022 . Retrieved 8 April 2023 . ^ "China Initiative Set Out to Catch Spies. It Didn't Find Many" . Bloomberg . 14 December 2021. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021 . Retrieved 8 April 2023 . ^ Musgrave, Paul (2 May 2019). "The Slip That Revealed the Real Trump Doctrine" . Foreign Policy . Archived from the original on 7 August 2019 . Retrieved 1 July 2021 . ^ Ward, Steven (4 May 2019). "Because China isn't 'Caucasian,' the U.S. is planning for a 'clash of civilizations.' That could be dangerous" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 25 May 2021 . Retrieved 1 July 2021 . ^ Swanson, Ana (20 July 2019). "A New Red Scare Is Reshaping Washington" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 20 July 2019 . Retrieved 21 July 2019 . ^ Rogin, Josh (10 April 2019). "China hawks call on America to fight a new Cold War" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 17 June 2020 . Retrieved 12 July 2020 . ^ Wu, Wendy (26 March 2019). "Cold War is back: Bannon helps revive U.S. committee to target 'aggressive totalitarian foe' China" . Politico . Archived from the original on 12 July 2020 . Retrieved 12 July 2020 . ^ Chappell, Bill (29 January 2020). "Interior Department Grounds Chinese-Made Drones, Months After It Approved Them" . NPR . Archived from the original on 28 October 2020 . Retrieved 17 November 2020 . ^ Friedman, Lisa; McCabe, David (29 January 2020). "Interior Dept. Grounds Its Drones Over Chinese Spying Fears" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 29 January 2020 . Retrieved 17 November 2020 . ^ Naranjo, Jesse (18 February 2020). "U.S. to treat 5 Chinese media firms as 'foreign missions' " . Politico . Archived from the original on 5 July 2020 . Retrieved 20 February 2020 . ^ a b Hjelmgaard, Kim (19 February 2020). "China expels Wall Street Journal reporters over 'racist' headline on coronavirus op-ed" . USA Today . Archived from the original on 20 February 2020 . Retrieved 20 February 2020 . ^ "China to restrict US journalists from three major newspapers" . BBC. 18 March 2020. Archived from the original on 24 November 2021 . Retrieved 11 August 2020 . ^ a b "U.S. designates four major Chinese media outlets as foreign missions" . Reuters . 22 June 2020. Archived from the original on 17 August 2020 . Retrieved 11 August 2020 . ^ Wang, Vivian and Wong, Edward (9 May 2020). "U.S. Hits Back at China With New Visa Restrictions on Journalists" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 10 May 2020 . Retrieved 10 May 2020 . ^ "Former Obama Advisor on Iran: 'We're in a Much Worse Place' " . PBS . 1 August 2020. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. ^ Vallejo, Justin (15 May 2020). "US cuts off semiconductor shipments to Huawei, China vows to retaliate" .

The Independent . Archived from the original on 21 June 2020 . Retrieved 17 May 2020 . ^ Evans, Zachary (15 May 2020). "China Threatens to Place Apple, Boeing, and Other U.S. Firms on 'Unreliable Entities' List" . National Review . Archived from the original on 17 May 2020 . Retrieved 17 May 2020 . ^ "China warns US of 'all necessary measures' over Huawei rules" . Associated Press . 17 May 2020. Archived from the original on 19 June 2020 . Retrieved 17 May 2020 . ^ Lamarque, Kevin; Haltiwanger, John (13 May 2020). "The U.S. and China are on the brink of a new Cold War that could devastate the global economy" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 19 June 2020 . Retrieved 14 May 2020 – via Business Insider . ^ Wong, Edward and Crowley, Michael (13 July 2020). "U.S. Says Most of China's Claims in South China Sea Are Illegal" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 17 June 2021 . Retrieved 25 June 2021 . ^ "Trump signed a law to punish China for its oppression of the Uighur Muslims. Uighurs say much more needs to be done" . Business Insider . 30 June 2020. Archived from the original on 14 December 2020 . Retrieved 5 July 2020 . ^ "U.S. Congress urges Trump administration to get tougher on China's Xinjiang crackdown" . Reuters . 2 July 2020. Archived from the original on 3 November 2020 . Retrieved 5 July 2020 . ^ "US sanctions Chinese officials over Xinjiang 'violations' " . bbc.com . 9 July 2020. Archived from the original on 10 July 2020 . Retrieved 10 July 2020 . ^ Yellinek, Roie (14 July 2020). "The Chinese Media's Take on US Unrest" . Begin-Sadat Center for Strategic Studies . Archived from the original on 15 July 2020 . Retrieved 21 July 2020 . ^ "Covid-19 Disinformation & Social Media Manipulation" . ASPI . Archived from the original on 27 August 2020 . Retrieved 4 August 2020 . ^ "US sanctions 11 Chinese companies over human rights abuses in Xinjiang" . CNN International . 21 July 2020. Archived from the original on 21 July 2020 . Retrieved 21 July 2020 . ^ Re, Gregg (23 July 2020). "Pompeo announces end of 'blind engagement' with communist China: 'Distrust but verify' " . Fox News . Archived from the original on 23 July 2020 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 . ^ a b "China imposes sanctions on US officials in retaliation for Hong Kong measures" . Financial Times . 10 August 2020. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. ^ "U.S. imposes sanctions on Hong Kong's Lam, other officials over crackdown" . Reuters . 7 August 2020. Archived from the original on 10 August 2020 . Retrieved 11 August 2020 . ^ "China imposes sanctions on Republican U.S. lawmakers over Hong Kong" . Reuters . 10 August 2020. Archived from the original on 11 August 2020 . Retrieved 11 August 2020 . ^ "US revokes visas for 1,000 Chinese under Trump order" . AFP. 10 September 2020. Archived from the original on 11 January 2021 . Retrieved 10 September 2020 . ^ Pamuk, Humeyra (9 September 2020). "U.S. says revoked more than 1,000 visas of Chinese nationals over military links" . Reuters . Retrieved 10 September 2020 – via Yahoo finance. ^ "US tightens trade restrictions on Chinese chipmaker SMIC" .

The Verge . 26 September 2020. Archived from the original on 10 November 2021 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . ^ "U.S. tightens exports to China's chipmaker SMIC, citing risk of military use" . Reuters . 26 September 2020. Archived from the original on 26 September 2020 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . ^ Wainer, David (6 October 2020). "Western Allies Rebuke China at UN Over Xinjiang, Hong Kong" . Bloomberg . Archived from the original on 7 October 2020 . Retrieved 6 October 2020 . ^ McNabb, Miriam (9 October 2020). "No Department of Justice Funds for DJI Drones: DOJ Makes the Ban Official, but Some Federal Agencies May Suffer" . DRONELIFE . Archived from the original on 17 November 2020 . Retrieved 17 November 2020 . ^ a b c "Taiwan welcomes latest U.S. arms sales" . Focus Taiwan . Archived from the original on 26 October 2020 . Retrieved 26 October 2020 . ^ "China to impose sanctions on U.S. firms over Taiwan arms sales" . Reuters . 26 October 2020. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020 . Retrieved 26 October 2020 . ^ a b "Taiwan 'deeply regrets' China's threat against U.S. arms suppliers" . Focus Taiwan . Archived from the original on 30 October 2020 . Retrieved 26 October 2020 . ^ "China offered Afghan militants bounties to attack US soldiers: reports" . Deutsche Welle . 31 December 2020. Archived from the original on 26 October 2021 . Retrieved 31 January 2021 . ^ Satter, Raphael (5 December 2020). "U.S. ends exchange programs with China, calling them 'propaganda' " . Reuters . Archived from the original on 5 December 2020 . Retrieved 5 December 2020 . ^ "FBI director: China is 'greatest threat' to US" . BBC News . 8 July 2020. Archived from the original on 12 February 2021 . Retrieved 12 July 2020 . ^ Allen-Ebrahimian, Bethany; Dorfman, Zach (8 December 2020). "Exclusive: Suspected Chinese spy targeted California politicians" . Axios . Archived from the original on 10 December 2020 . Retrieved 22 December 2020 . ^ "Eric Swalwell Report Fits Bill of China Spy Pattern Identified By FBI" . Newsweek. 11 December 2020. Archived from the original on 22 December 2020 . Retrieved 22 December 2020 . ^ "17 House GOP members send letter to Pelosi urging Swalwell's removal from Intel Committee" . Fox News . 17 December 2020. Archived from the original on 22 December 2020 . Retrieved 22 December 2020 . ^ Murray, Paul (13 December 2020). "There are 'many ways' in which China 'gets what it wants' " . Sky News Australia. Archived from the original on 14 December 2020 . Retrieved 22 December 2020 . ^ "EDITORIAL: Chinese infiltration: Taiwan can help" . Taipei Times . 18 December 2020. Archived from the original on 12 January 2021 . Retrieved 22 December 2020 . ^ "Office of Public Affairs | Justice Department Announces Arrest of Prolific Chinese State-Sponsored Contract Hacker" . United States Department of Justice . 8 July 2025 . Retrieved 14 July 2025 . ^ "Chinese state-sponsored contract hacker arrested in Italy at U.S. request, DOJ says" . NBC News . 9 July 2025 . Retrieved 14 July 2025 . ^ Singh, Kanishka; Ward, Jasper; Singh, Kanishka; Ward, Jasper (10 July 2025). "Chinese state-sponsored contract hacker arrested in Italy at US request, DOJ says" . Reuters . Retrieved 14 July 2025 . ^ Sha Hua and Andrew Jeang, "U.S. and China Discuss Enhancing Beijing's Climate Commitments Climate envoy John Kerry says meetings with counterparts in Shanghai were productive" Wall Street Journal , April, 19, 2021 Archived 22 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine ^ Churchill, Owen (5 February 2021). "In first foreign policy address, President Biden calls China the 'most serious competitor' to the US" . South China Morning Post . Archived from the original on 6 February 2021 . Retrieved 7 February 2021 – via Yahoo! Finance). ^ Burns, Robert; Baldor, Lolita C.; Madhani, Aamer (10 February 2021). "Biden calls for China review during first Pentagon visit" . Associated Press. Archived from the original on 17 September 2021 . Retrieved 21 September 2021 . ^ Shepardson, David (12 March 2021). "Five Chinese companies pose threat to U.S. national security -FCC" . Reuters . ^ "U.S. FCC adds Russia's Kaspersky, China telecom firms to national security threat list" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 27 July 2022 . Retrieved 28 July 2022 . ^ "US blacklists seven Chinese supercomputer groups" . BBC. Archived from the original on 28 July 2022 . Retrieved 28 July 2022 . ^ "Executive Order on Addressing the Threat from Securities Investments that Finance Certain Companies of the People's Republic of China" .

The White House . 3 June 2021. Archived from the original on 7 June 2021 . Retrieved 5 June 2021 . ^ "U.S. SEC mandates Chinese companies detail ownership structure, audits" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 28 July 2022 . Retrieved 28 July 2022 . ^ "How it happened: Transcript of the US-China opening remarks in Alaska" . Nikkei Asia . ^ a b Mauldin, William (19 March 2021). "Bitter Alaska Meeting Complicates Already Shaky U.S.-China Ties" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 4 October 2021 . Retrieved 20 March 2021 . ^ "US and China trade angry words at high-level Alaska talks" . BBC News . 19 March 2021. Archived from the original on 11 October 2021 . Retrieved 20 March 2021 . ^ "West sanctions China over Xinjiang abuses, Beijing hits back at EU" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 28 July 2022 . Retrieved 28 July 2022 . ^ James T. Areddy, "Back-to-Back Rebukes of China Mark a Turning Point: Criticism from G-7 and NATO members represent a shift toward collective action to confront Beijing" Wall Street Journal June 15, 2021 Archived 21 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine ^ Sabine Siebold, Steve Holland and Robin Emmott, "NATO adopts tough line on China at Biden's debut summit with alliance" Reuters June 14, 2021 Archived 15 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine ^ Karla Adam et al., "G-7 takes stronger stand against China, at U.S. urging" The Washington Post June 13, 2021 Archived 3 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine . ^ "Biden airs hypersonic missile fears as probable ambassador labels China 'untrustworthy' " . Deutsche Welle . 20 October 2021. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021 . Retrieved 24 October 2021 . ^ Wall, Mike (17 October 2021). "China successfully tested hypersonic weapon in August: report" . Space.com . Archived from the original on 24 October 2021 . Retrieved 24 October 2021 . ^ "Did Biden's Taiwan Remarks Represent a U.S. Policy Change?" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 4 August 2023 . Retrieved 16 August 2023 . ^ "Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act" . U.S. Customs and Border Protection . Archived from the original on 7 August 2023 . Retrieved 7 February 2023 . ^ Chang, Richard; Chiacu, Doina (27 February 2022). "White House calls on China to condemn Russia's invasion of Ukraine" . Reuters . Reuters . Retrieved 27 February 2022 . ^ "China hammers home its message of U.S. blame for Ukraine war to domestic audience" . South China Morning Post . 29 March 2022. Archived from the original on 2 September 2024 . Retrieved 14 August 2022 . ^ "China says the US is the 'main instigator' of the war in Ukraine" . Al Jazeera . 10 August 2022. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022 . Retrieved 14 August 2022 . ^ "US, China discuss Russia as Biden and Xi hold call" . Al Jazeera . 18 March 2022. Archived from the original on 19 March 2022 . Retrieved 20 March 2022 . ^ Li, Yanping; Gao, Yuan (6 May 2022). "China Orders Government, State Firms to Dump Foreign PCs" . Bloomberg News . Archived from the original on 6 May 2022 . Retrieved 6 May 2022 . ^ "U.S. puts back 'no support of Taiwan independence' statement on fact sheet" . CNA. Focus Taiwan. Archived from the original on 14 November 2022 . Retrieved 14 November 2022 . ^ "US blasts China's 'destabilising' military activity near Taiwan" . France 24 . 11 June 2022. Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 14 August 2022 . - The France 24 article uses the British English "destabilising" while the press release uses the American "destabilizing". ^ " 'Smash to smithereens': China threatens all-out war over Taiwan" . Al-Jazeera . 10 June 2022. Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 14 August 2022 . ^ a b "Pelosi to Lead Congressional Delegation to Indo-Pacific Region" . Congresswoman Nancy Pelosi . 31 July 2022. Archived from the original on 2 August 2022 . Retrieved 2 August 2022 . ^ "Taiwan and China step up military rhetoric as expected Pelosi visit looms" .

The Guardian . 2 August 2022. Archived from the original on 2 September 2024 . Retrieved 2 August 2022 . ^ "US House Speaker Nancy Pelosi lands in Taiwan amid threats of Chinese retaliation" . 2 August 2022. Archived from the original on 4 August 2022 . Retrieved 6 August 2022 . ^ "China cuts off vital US contacts over Pelosi Taiwan visit" Archived 5 August 2022 at the Wayback Machine APnews.com. Retrieved 6 August 2022. ^ Abutaleb, Yasmeen; Lee, Michelle Ye Hee; and Nakashima, Ellen (5 August 2022). "White House summons Chinese ambassador as crisis escalates" .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Archived from the original on 6 August 2022 . Retrieved 31 May 2026 . ^ "White House decries China rhetoric over Pelosi Taiwan visit" . AP News . Archived from the original on 8 November 2023 . Retrieved 14 November 2022 . ^ "China to launch 'targeted military operations' due to Pelosi visit" . Reuters . 2 August 2022. Archived from the original on 2 August 2022. ^ "Commerce Implements New Export Controls on Advanced Computing and Semiconductor Manufacturing Items to the People's Republic of China (PRC)" . U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security . 7 October 2022. Archived from the original on 10 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 October 2022 . ^ "New US Semiconductor Export Controls Signify Dramatic Shift in Tech Relations With China" . Just Security . 24 October 2022. Archived from the original on 8 December 2022 . Retrieved 29 October 2022 . ^ "Factbox: Top takeaways from the Biden-Xi meeting in Bali" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 16 November 2022 . Retrieved 17 November 2022 . ^ "November 14, 2022 Biden, Xi meet during G20 summit" . CNN. Archived from the original on 17 November 2022 . Retrieved 17 November 2022 . ^ "US's Blinken raises China's 'alignment with Russia' on Ukraine" . Al Jazeera . 9 July 2022. Archived from the original on 20 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 February 2023 . ^ Nicolas Firzli: "Interview of Nicolas Firzli & Joseph A. Bosco: China and Tech Supremacy" Archived 18 February 2023 at the Wayback Machine , Asharq News with Bloomberg , 12 January 2023 ^ "U.S. Detects Suspected China Spy Balloon Hovering over Northwest" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 4 February 2023 . Retrieved 2 February 2023 . ^ Capoot, Ashley (4 February 2023). "U.S. military shoots down suspected Chinese surveillance balloon" . CNBC . Archived from the original on 4 February 2023 . Retrieved 4 February 2023 . ^ Sanger, David E. (5 February 2023). "Balloon Incident Reveals More Than Spying as Competition With China Intensifies" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 10 February 2023 . Retrieved 10 February 2023 . ^ a b Wong, Edward and Barnes, Julian E. (9 February 2023). "Chinese Balloon Had Tools to Collect Electronic Communications, U.S. Says" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 9 February 2023 . Retrieved 9 February 2023 . ^ "China blasts US for shooting down balloon" . dawn.com . AFP. 6 February 2023. Archived from the original on 6 February 2023 . Retrieved 6 February 2023 . ^ Rokus, Brian (11 February 2023). "US restricts 6 Chinese companies tied to airships and balloons" . CNN . Archived from the original on 2 September 2024 . Retrieved 14 February 2023 . ^ "China sanctions U.S. Congress member for Taiwan visit" . cnbc.com . CNBC. 14 April 2023. Archived from the original on 14 April 2023 . Retrieved 14 April 2023 . ^ Evans, Gareth (15 May 2023). "China sentences 78-year-old US citizen to life in prison for spying" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 15 May 2023 . Retrieved 15 May 2023 . ^ "US for ban on Chinese-developed software in Internet-connected cars in country" .

The Telegraph Online . 24 September 2024 . Retrieved 25 September 2024 . ^ Hutzler, Charles; Youssef, Nancy A. (11 May 2023). "U.S., China Senior Officials Meet in Tentative Effort to Restart Ties" .

The Wall Street Journal . ISSN 0099-9660 . Archived from the original on 20 June 2023 . Retrieved 8 June 2023 . ^ Thomas, Ken; Linskey, Annie (21 May 2023). "Biden Sees Potential Thaw With China After Tough G-7 Statement" .

The Wall Street Journal . ISSN 0099-9660 . Archived from the original on 8 June 2023 . Retrieved 8 June 2023 . ^ Politi, James; Leahy, Joe (26 May 2023). "US and China address trade tensions in rare high-level Washington meeting" . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 8 June 2023 . Retrieved 8 June 2023 . ^ Martina, Michael; Hunnicutt, Trevor (2 June 2023). "CIA chief Burns visited China in May" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 9 June 2023 . Retrieved 8 June 2023 . ^ Lin, Chen; Kapoor, Kanupriya (4 June 2023). "China says clash with US would be 'unbearable disaster' " . Reuters . Archived from the original on 7 June 2023 . Retrieved 8 June 2023 . ^ Sim, Dewey; Wang, Orange (19 June 2023). "Xi and Blinken Cap China Trip With Vow to Steady Ties to Ward off Conflict" . South China Morning Post . Archived from the original on 21 June 2023 . Retrieved 21 June 2023 . ^ Hawkins, Amy (23 June 2023). "China reportedly rebukes US ambassador after Biden called Xi a 'dictator' " .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 2 September 2024 . Retrieved 25 June 2023 . ^ Cash, Joe (7 July 2023). "Yellen holds talks with China central bank governor, ex-economy tsar" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 15 July 2023 . Retrieved 9 July 2023 . ^ a b Rappeport, Alan; Bradsher, Keith (9 July 2023). "China and the U.S., Still Adversaries, Are Talking. That's a Start" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 1 September 2023 . Retrieved 9 July 2023 . ^ Dendrinou, Viktoria (9 July 2023). "Yellen Says U.S.-China Ties on 'Surer Footing' After Critical Trip" . Bloomberg News . Archived from the original on 10 July 2023 . Retrieved 9 July 2023 . ^ Rappeport, Alan; Bradsher, Keith (7 July 2023). "Yellen, in Beijing, Criticizes China's Treatment of U.S. Companies" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 9 July 2023 . Retrieved 8 July 2023 . ^ Shalal, Andrea; Cash, Joe; Cash, Joe (7 July 2023). "Yellen criticizes China's 'punitive' actions against US companies, urges market reforms" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 9 July 2023 . Retrieved 8 July 2023 . ^ "US expects Blinken will host China's top diplomat Wang Yi before year-end" . Reuters (12 September 2023). Accessed 1 October 2023. ^ Wong, Kandy; Jennings, Ralph; Nulimaimaiti, Mia (29 August 2023). "As Gina Raimondo wraps up Beijing leg of China trip with high-level meetings, will it be a litmus test for relations?" . South China Morning Post . Retrieved 3 September 2023 . ^ Shepardson, David (30 August 2023). "US Commerce chief leaves China on upbeat note after 'uninvestible' remark" . Reuters . Retrieved 3 September 2023 . ^ Bade, Gavin (31 August 2023). "Raimondo's 'bold move' in China" . Politico . Retrieved 3 September 2023 . ^ Hussein, Fatima (22 September 2023). "United States and China launch economic and financial working groups with aim of easing tensions" . AP News. Archived from the original on 22 September 2023 . Retrieved 26 September 2023 . ^ "U.S. and China to Hold Rare Nuclear Arms Talks Before Biden-Xi Meeting" . Time . Bloomberg News . 2 November 2023 . Retrieved 2 November 2023 . ^ Hawkins, Amy (8 November 2023). "China releases methane plan as hopes rise for new climate agreement with US" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 8 November 2023 . ^ "US, China agree to cooperate on climate change, global debt relief" . Carbon Brief . Retrieved 14 November 2023 . ^ Hunnicutt, Trevor; Mason, Jeff; Holland, Steve; Mason, Jeff (16 November 2023). "Biden, Xi's 'blunt' talks yield deals on military, fentanyl" . Reuters . Retrieved 16 November 2023 . ^ Cheng, Evelyn (15 November 2023). "Earth is 'big enough' for U.S. and China to succeed, Xi says as he meets Biden" . CNBC . Retrieved 17 November 2023 . ^ Torode, Greg; Doyle, Gerry; Chen, Laurie (21 June 2024). "U.S. and China hold first informal nuclear talks in five years" . Reuters . Retrieved 23 June 2024 . ^ Irwin, Kate (31 October 2024). "China Sanctions US Drone Maker Skydio Over Taiwan Deal" . PC Magazine . Retrieved 31 October 2024 . ^ Kelly, Laura (14 November 2024). "Republican introduces bill to revoke normal trade relations with China" .

The Hill . Retrieved 16 November 2024 . ^ Cadell, Cate (19 November 2024). "Congressional committee advises revoking China's trade status" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 19 November 2024 . ^ Frances, Mao (17 November 2024). "Xi says he will work with Trump in last meeting with Biden" . BBC . Retrieved 17 November 2024 . ^ "China blasts U.S. arms sale to Taiwan, President Lai's U.S. transit" . NBC News . 1 December 2024 . Retrieved 1 December 2024 . ^ "China says US 'playing with fire' by giving Taiwan more military aid" . Al-Jazeera . 22 December 2024. ^ Tai, Catherine (24 March 2026). "China is mapping the ocean floor as it prepares for submarine warfare with the US" . Reuters . ^ Wang, Selina (13 November 2024). "Rubio and Waltz picks put China back at the center of US foreign policy" . ABC News . Retrieved 14 November 2024 . ^ Wang, Orange (20 January 2025). "Han and Vance strike positive tone for US-China ties ahead of Trump inauguration" . South China Morning Post . Archived from the original on 20 January 2025 . Retrieved 20 January 2025 . ^ McCarthy, Simone (20 January 2025). "Who is Han Zheng, the senior Chinese official attending Trump's inauguration?" . CNN . Retrieved 20 January 2025 . ^ Bodeen, Christopher (20 January 2025). "Vice President Han Zheng, China's representative at Trump's inauguration, is a trusted adviser to Xi" . Associated Press . Retrieved 20 January 2025 . ^ a b "China conducts air and sea drills near Taiwan in response to U.S. and Taiwanese statements" . Associated Press . 18 March 2025 . Retrieved 25 March 2025 . ^ Krolicki, Kevin; Li, Qiaoyi (2 January 2025). "China denounces Trump tariff: 'Fentanyl is America's problem' " . Reuters . Retrieved 2 February 2025 . ^ "How does fentanyl get into the US?" . BBC News . 4 March 2025. ^ "Can Trump's tariffs break China's grip on manufacturing?" . BBC News . 5 March 2025. ^ Felbab-Brown, Vanda (17 February 2025). "The New War on Drugs" . Foreign Affairs . Archived from the original on 26 February 2025 . Retrieved 7 March 2025 . ^ "US says Chinese satellite firm is supporting Houthi attacks on US interests" . South China Morning Post . 18 April 2025 . Retrieved 9 June 2025 . ^ Marco Rubio & Hugh Hewitt (19 March 2025). "Secretary of State Marco Rubio with Hugh Hewitt Interview" . United States Department of State . Yesterday, The Wall Street Journal reported that General Secretary Xi is upset about the deal you made in Panama about the canal... ^ Ching, Nike (3 March 2025). "State Department guidance distinguishes CCP from Chinese people" . Voice of America . Retrieved 5 December 2025 . ^ "US Senate may work on Russia sanctions bill this month" . Reuters . 2 June 2025. ^ "Top China Official Says US Defence Chief 'Inciting Conflict' " . Ground News . 3 July 2025 . Retrieved 4 July 2025 . ^ "Top China official accuses US defence chief of 'inciting conflict' " . Hong Kong Free Press . AFP. 3 July 2025 . Retrieved 4 July 2025 . ^ "Top China official says US defence chief 'inciting conflict' " . France 24 . 3 July 2025 . Retrieved 4 July 2025 . ^ Quillen, Stephen. "Regional powers signal objection to US reclaiming Afghanistan's Bagram base" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 13 October 2025 . ^ "Read the full transcript of Norah O'Donnell's interview with President Trump here" . CBS News . 2 November 2025 . Retrieved 6 November 2025 . ^ "China denies Trump's claim to 60 Minutes about nuclear weapons tests, calls on U.S. to ensure global stability" . CBS News . 3 November 2025 . Retrieved 6 November 2025 . ^ "Lots of pressure on allies, no mention of North Korea in White House national security strategy document" . Korea JoongAng Daily . 5 December 2025 . Retrieved 5 December 2025 . ^ Toosi, Nahal (5 December 2025). "Trump reveals what he wants for the world" . Politico . Retrieved 5 December 2025 . ^ "Trump warns China of 'big problems' if it ships arms to Iran" . Iran International . 11 April 2026 . Retrieved 12 April 2026 . ^ "China rejects reports of arms supply to Iran as unfounded" . Iran International . 14 April 2026 . Retrieved 14 April 2026 . ^ "Trump says China agreed not to send weapons to Iran" . Iran International . 15 April 2026 . Retrieved 16 April 2026 . ^ "China remains top military and cyber threat to US, intelligence report says" .

The Guardian . Accessed 10 May 2025. ^ Gan, Nectar; Bacon, Auzinea; Liu, Juliana (12 May 2025). "US and China agree to drastically roll back tariffs" . CNN . Retrieved 12 May 2025 . ^ cheng, Evelyne (30 May 2025). "U.S.-China talks 'a bit stalled' and need Trump and Xi to weigh in, Treasury Secretary Bessent says" . cnbc . ^ "Trump Softens Tone on China to Secure Xi Summit, Trade Deal" . Bloomberg . 16 July 2025 . Retrieved 16 July 2025 . ^ "US delays announcement of China chip tariffs until 2027" . Reuters . 24 December 2025 . Retrieved 27 December 2025 . ^ "US announces $11bn weapons sale to Taiwan" . bbc.com . 18 December 2025 . Retrieved 22 May 2026 . ^ Wong, Joyu Wang and Chun Han (20 May 2026). "Taiwan Presses Its Case After Trump Puts Arms Sales in Question" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 22 May 2026 . ^ Shelter, Thomas (21 May 2026). "Exclusive: China Warns US Over Taiwan Arms Sales as $14 Billion Package Hangs in Balance" . CONGRESS.NET . Retrieved 22 May 2026 . ^ a b "US is already deploying weapons in western Pacific to defend Taiwan" . 1 July 2026 . Retrieved 3 July 2026 . ^ Liu, Zongyuan Zoe (2023). Sovereign Funds: How the Communist Party of China Finances its Global Ambitions .

The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press . doi : 10.2307/jj.2915805 . ISBN 9780674271913 . JSTOR jj.2915805 . S2CID 259402050 . ^ Cox, Jeff (18 July 2022). "China holdings of U.S. debt fall below $1 trillion for the first time since 2010" . CNBC . Retrieved 13 February 2023 . ^ Feenstra, Robert; Ma, Hong; Sasahara, Akira; Xu, Yuan (18 January 2018). "Reconsidering the 'China shock' in trade" . VoxEU.org . ^ "Waking the Sleeping Dragon" . Slate . 28 September 2016. ^ "Was Letting China Into the WTO a Mistake?" . Foreign Affairs . 2 April 2018. ^ "Normalizing Trade Relations With China Was a Mistake" .

The Atlantic . 8 June 2018. ^ "President Grants Permanent Trade Status to China" . whitehouse.gov . 27 December 2001 – via National Archives . ^ Autor, David H.; Dorn, David; Hanson, Gordon H. (2016). "The China Shock: Learning from Labor Market Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade" (PDF) . Annual Review of Economics . 8 (1): 205– 240. doi : 10.1146/annurev-economics-080315-015041 . S2CID 1415485 . ^ Bartash, Jeffry (14 May 2018). "China really is to blame for millions of lost U.S. manufacturing jobs, new study finds" . Market Watch . ^ "The China toll: Growing U.S. trade deficit with China cost more than 2.7 million jobs between 2001 and 2011, with job losses in every state" . Economic Policy Institute . ^ Graph showing U.S.-China trade Archived 13 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine ; source ^ Lamy, Pascal (24 January 2011). " 'Made in China' tells us little about global trade" . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 10 December 2022 . Retrieved 7 July 2012 . ^ "World Economic Outlook Database, April 2007" . Imf.org. 14 September 2006 . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ "Wu Yi opens the Third China-US Strategic Economic Dialogue, 2007 | US-China Institute" . china.usc.edu . ^ "U.S. Treasury Sec. Henry Paulson opens Strategic Economic Dialogue, Dec. 2007 | US-China Institute" . china.usc.edu . ^ "Tensions over Trade: Part 2 of Election '08 and the Challenge of China | US-China Institute" . china.usc.edu . ^ a b c "Obama's Tire Tariff Draws Beijing's Ire" . Bloomberg Businessweek . 13 September 2010. Archived from the original on 22 September 2009. ^ "Statistics on world trade, list of U.S.-China WTO complaints" . China.usc.edu . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ China slaps deposits/tariffs on US steel exports; US politicians rant about China ^ "Trade and Tariffs" (PDF) . World Trade Organization. 2015. ^ a b Isidore, Chris (13 March 2012). "U.S. vs. China: The trade battles" . CNN Money . Archived from the original on 15 March 2012. ^ Kiernan, Paul and DeBarros, Anthony (2 August 2019). "Tariff Fight Knocks Off China as Top U.S. Trading Partner" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 6 August 2019 . ^ "Sinopec signs China's largest long-term LNG contract with U.S. firm" . Reuters . 4 November 2021. ^ "Sinopec signs huge LNG deals with US producer Venture Global" . Financial Times . 20 October 2021. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. ^ "Asian buyers outbid Europe for spot supplies of American-produced natural gas" . Financial Times . 21 September 2021. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. ^ "Apple CEO praises China's innovation, long history of cooperation on Beijing visit" . Reuters . Accessed 25 March 2023. ^ "China has a powerful card to play in its fight against Trump's trade war" . CNN . 15 April 2025. ^ "China's dominance leaves US vulnerable, as critical minerals become political" . ABC . 25 April 2025. ^ "Beijing punished Australia's loyalty to US, Scott Morrison tells Congress" . ABC News . 23 July 2025 . Retrieved 24 July 2025 . ^ Lobosco, Katie (13 September 2024). "Biden finalizes increases to China tariffs" . CNN . Archived from the original on 12 December 2024 . Retrieved 11 December 2024 . ^ Holland, Steve (22 February 2025). "Trump orders use of CFIUS to restrict Chinese investments in strategic areas" . Reuters . Retrieved 22 February 2025 . ^ "China's premier says US relations at 'an important juncture' during meeting with pro-Trump senator" . AP News . 23 March 2025 . Retrieved 25 March 2025 . ^ Liu, Juliana (25 November 2025). "China Holds All the Cards in Global Pharmaceuticals" . Bloomberg News . Retrieved 30 November 2025 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "China ignores Trump's Hormuz request as the Iran war deepens and his Beijing trip slips" . Arab News . 18 March 2026 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ Hale, Erin. "US, Latin America countries criticise China's retaliation over Panama Canal" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 30 April 2026 . ^ Rappeport, Alan (4 May 2026). "U.S. Warns China Over Iranian Oil as Sanctions Fight Intensifies" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 6 May 2026 . ^ "US official says China is 'funding' Iran, urges Beijing to help open Hormuz" . Al Jazeera . 4 May 2026 . Retrieved 6 May 2026 . ^ "China to curb US investment in tech companies, Bloomberg News reports" . Reuters . 24 April 2026. ^ "China to curb US investment in tech companies" . Bloomberg News . 24 April 2026. ^ Skaff, Rebecca; Lincoln, Webb (March 2018). "Understanding China's Currency Manipulation" .

The Mosbacher Institute for Trade, Economics, and Public Policy at Texas A&M University Bush School of Government and Public Service . hdl : 1969.1/166316 – via OAKTrust. ^ a b c d Bergsten, C. Fred (2022).

The United States vs. China : the quest for global economic leadership . Cambridge. ISBN 978-1-5095-4735-7 . OCLC 1255691875 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b C. Fred Bergsten, China is No Longer Manipulating its Currency , Peterson Institute for International Economics (18 November 2016). ^ "House panel cranks up pressure on China currency" . Reuters . 24 September 2010. ^ a b Paul Wiseman, Fact check: Does China manipulate its currency? , Associated Press (29 December 2016). ^ "U.S. designates China as currency manipulator for first time in..." Reuters . 5 August 2019 . Retrieved 6 August 2019 . ^ "The irony of calling China a currency manipulator" . Yahoo . 6 August 2019 . Retrieved 17 June 2022 . ^ "Phase One" . United States Trade Representative . Retrieved 17 June 2022 . ^ Rappeport, Alan (13 January 2020). "U.S. Says China Is No Longer a Currency Manipulator" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 20 January 2020 . ^ "Trump ratchets up US-China trade war, promising new tariffs" . Reuters . Retrieved 11 October 2025 . ^ "Beijing blames US for raising trade tensions, defends rare earth curbs" . Reuters . Retrieved 12 October 2025 . ^ "China vows to stand firm against Trump's 100% tariff threat" . AP News . 12 October 2025 . Retrieved 12 October 2025 . ^ "China and US agree to fresh trade talks" . france24 . 18 October 2025. ^ "Japan surpasses China as the biggest creditor to the US government" . South China Morning Post . 16 August 2019 . Retrieved 18 August 2019 . ^ Fisher, Max (14 July 2016). "The South China Sea: Explaining the Dispute" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 11 March 2017 . ^ Page, Jeremy; Moss, Trefor (30 November 1999). "China's Claims in the South China Sea – The Short Answer" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 30 July 2021 . ^ "China, US argue over naval activity in South China Sea" . Associated Press . 20 May 2021 . Retrieved 30 July 2021 . ^ "Defense Secretary Rumsfeld's Remarks at the International Institute for Strategic Studies, Singapore, 6/6/2004" . hongkong.usconsulate.gov . Archived from the original on 6 December 2004. ^ "Rumsfeld questions China spending" . BBC News . 18 October 2005 . Retrieved 7 April 2010 . ^ a b "china's military spends hundreds of millions of dollars" . China.usc.edu . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ "china's military spends hundreds of millions of dollars" . China.usc.edu. Archived from the original on 2 February 2009 . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ Harding, Thomas (1 May 2008). "Chinese nuclear submarine base" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 4 May 2008 . Retrieved 7 April 2010 . ^ "SIPRI military expenditure database" . Archived from the original on 29 November 2006. ^ Luce, Dan De (26 October 2009). "Time to end 'on-again-off-again' US-China ties: Pentagon" . Archived from the original on 1 February 2013 . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ Entous, Adam (3 June 2010). "Gates says China's PLA may be trying to thwart ties" . Reuters . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ Pessin, Al. "US Wants Better Military Ties to China, But Will Continue Pacific Operations." Voice of America , 1 December 2010. ^ Holmes, James R. "What to Make of China's Defense Spending Increase" .

The World America Made . New York: Knopf. p. 90. ^ a b c Ma, Xinru; Kang, David C. (2024). Beyond Power Transitions: The Lessons of East Asian History and the Future of U.S.-China Relations . Columbia Studies in International Order and Politics. New York: Columbia University Press . ISBN 978-0-231-55597-5 . ^ Honrada, Gabriel (4 April 2026). "China cranks South China Sea buildup while Iran consumes US" . Asia Times . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ Moreno, Elida (1 May 2026). "Panama president says port caught in US-China dispute" . ^ "U.S. updates export curbs on AI chips and tools to China" . Reuters . 29 March 2024. Archived from the original on 1 April 2024 . Retrieved 31 March 2024 . ^ "China turns against Nvidia's AI chip after 'insulting' Howard Lutnick remarks" . Financial Times . Retrieved 25 August 2025 . ^ "China supplied deadly drones, satellite navigation systems, missile fuel chemicals to Iran: US report" . India TV News . 18 March 2026 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ Mann, Jim (8 May 1992). "Pakistan Sent Stingers to China, U.S. Aides Say : Arms: The report shows another leak, adding to fears that the potent antiaircraft missiles could end up in terrorist hands" . Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 25 August 2025 . ^ "Pakistan Likely Allowed China Access to Secret U.S. Helicopter: Reports" . ABC News . 15 August 2011 . Retrieved 25 August 2025 . ^ Rogoway, Tyler (30 May 2021). "Stealthy Variant Of China's Z-20 Black Hawk Clone Emerges In Concept Model Form" .

The War Zone . Retrieved 25 August 2025 . ^ "Cyber espionage for the Chinese government" . Office of Special Investigations . Archived from the original on 6 July 2025 . Retrieved 25 August 2025 . ^ "OpenAI, Google are selling AI to Chinese firms blacklisted by Pentagon, says report: The battleground of AI export controls" . Wion . Retrieved 15 July 2026 . ^ "OpenAI and Google sell AI models to blacklisted China groups" . www.ft.com . Archived from the original on 12 July 2026 . Retrieved 15 July 2026 . ^ Goldstein, Steven M.; Schriver, Randall (2001). "An Uncertain Relationship: The United States, Taiwan and the Taiwan Relations Act" (PDF) .

The China Quarterly . 165 : 147– 172. doi : 10.1017/S0009443901000080 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 November 2015. ^ "Taiwan Relations Act, 1979 | US-China Institute" . USC Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism . 10 April 1979. ^ "US Navy warship challenges Chinese claims in the South China Sea" . CNN . ^ "In Beijing rebuke, Taiwan signals closer defense ties with U.S. and Japan" . Nikkei Asia . ^ Sevastopulo, Demetri (15 June 2024). "Xi Jinping claimed U.S. wants China to attack Taiwan" . Financial Times. ^ "Be 'prudent' about supplying arms to Taiwan, Xi tells Trump in call" .

The Guardian . 5 February 2026. ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 9 February 2026 . ^ "U.S. Department of State, 2007 Human Rights in China, March 11, 2008" . Archived from the original on 19 October 2014 . Retrieved 31 August 2008 . ^ "U.S. Department of State, 2008 Human Rights in China, February 25, 2009" . Archived from the original on 11 October 2014 . Retrieved 26 December 2009 . ^ a b Cooper, Helene (12 March 2008). "U.S. Drops China From List of Top 10 Violators of Rights" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 31 May 2026 . ^ "2002 PRC White Paper on US Human Rights Abuses" . china.org.cn. 11 March 2002 . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ "PRC State Council, Human Rights Record of the United States in 2007, March 13, 2008" . Archived from the original on 2 March 2014 . Retrieved 31 August 2008 . ^ "PRC State Council, Human Rights Record of the United States in 2008, February 27, 2009" . Archived from the original on 11 October 2014 . Retrieved 26 December 2009 . ^ "China issues 1st white paper on democracy" . China-embassy.org. 19 October 2005 . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ "White Paper on China's Political System, 2007" . China.usc.edu . Retrieved 2 December 2010 . ^ a b "China issues report on U.S. human rights - Xinhua - English.news.cn" . Archived from the original on 1 March 2014. ^ "Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2013: China (includes Tibet, Hong Kong, and Macau)" . U.S. Department of State. ^ "Remarks by Vice President Pence at the 2nd Annual Religious Freedom Ministerial" . whitehouse.gov . Retrieved 22 August 2019 – via National Archives . ^ "Rockets working to mend ties with China after executive's Hong Kong tweet" . AP . 6 October 2019. ^ "Rockets' general manager's Hong Kong comments anger China" . Associated Press . 7 October 2019. ^ Chang, Joy (7 October 2019). "Houston Rockets GM's Hong Kong tweet outrages Chinese fans" . SCMP . ^ Victor, Daniel (7 October 2019). "Hong Kong Protests Put N.B.A. on Edge in China" . NYT . ^ Some relevant sources include: "Rockets' general manager's Hong Kong comments anger China" . Associated Press . 7 October 2019. "China's vise grip on corporate America" . Axios. Axios. 8 October 2019. "The NBA Should Call China's Bluff" . Bloomberg. Bloomberg. 8 October 2019. "Sixers have a chance to show some guts about the NBA and China. They're passing it up. | Mike Sielski" .

The Philadelphia Inquirer. Philadelphia Inquirer. 7 October 2019. "CNN's Kate Bolduan Rips NBA for Silencing Exec Who Criticized China: 'This is Shocking' " . Mediaite . "Opinion: The NBA was staring down a China problem with or without Daryl Morey's tweet" . LAT. LAT. 7 October 2019. "The day the NBA fluttered before China" .

The Washington Post . Chron. 7 October 2019. "Daryl Morey's tweet on Hong Kong shows how China is calling the shots in the NBA" . NBC News . 8 October 2019. "NBA Defends 'Freedom Of Speech' For Employees As China Moves To Block Games Facebook Twitter Flipboard Email" . NPR . Critics in the U.S. are accusing the NBA of prioritizing profits over principles. And critics in China also cried foul, saying the league is being insensitive in handling a politically divisive issue. ^ Some relevant sources include: "China's heavy-handed reaction to the NBA is just the wake-up call the world needed" . CNBC . 8 October 2019.

The NBA is not likely to face a debilitating series of protests from U.S. fans who may be angered by the league's agonizingly cautious and wavering responses to Morey's tweet. But the extreme attention the story has garnered does weaken the NBA's efforts to cast itself as a force for positive social change. Commissioner Adam Silver's public declaration of his "personal outrage" over the racist comments made by former L.A. Clippers owner Donald Sterling in 2014, and his pushback against the passing of the controversial transgender bathroom law in North Carolina in 2016 seem inconsistent now with a league that remains silent about China's many human rights abuses. "Sixers have a chance to show some guts about the NBA and China. They're passing it up. | Mike Sielski" .

The Philadelphia Inquirer . 7 October 2019. "The World's Wokest Sports League Bows to China" . NYT. NYT. 7 October 2019. "Opinion: The NBA was staring down a China problem with or without Daryl Morey's tweet" . Los Angeles Times . 7 October 2019. "Opinion: It's time for LeBron James to speak out on China, regardless of Nike ties" . USAToday. USAToday. "The day the NBA fluttered before China" .

The Washington Post . Chron. 7 October 2019. ^ 陈远丁; 黄钰; 席莉莉 (7 October 2019). "莫雷、NBA声明均未道歉 网友：这是对中国的无视和挑衅" . 人民网 (in Chinese) . Retrieved 8 October 2019 . ^ "央视快评：莫雷必须道歉" . CCTV (in Chinese). 7 October 2019 . Retrieved 8 October 2019 . ^ "The NBA landed in hot water after the Houston Rockets GM supported the Hong Kong protests. Here are other times Western brands caved to China after offending the Communist Party" . Business Insider . 8 October 2019. ^ Ward, Alex (21 December 2020). "How China's 'wolf warrior' diplomats use Twitter to troll Beijing's enemies" . Vox . Archived from the original on 29 July 2021 . Retrieved 28 July 2021 . ^ a b Westcott, Ben; Jiang, Steven (29 May 2020). "China is embracing a new brand of wolf warrior diplomacy" . CNN . Retrieved 8 October 2021 . ^ "The Trump Administration Talks Tough on China, But Enables the CCP's Repressive Behaviors" .

The Diplomat . Retrieved 5 December 2025 . ^ Singh, Kanishka (9 July 2026). "U.S. reiterates backing Tibet in preserving culture after man set himself on fire" .

The Japan Times . Retrieved 10 July 2026 . ^ Singh, Kanishka (7 July 2026). "US reiterates backing for Tibetan aspirations to preserve culture" . ^ "US criticises treatment of Uighurs in latest China row" .

The Straits Times . Agence France Presse . 23 September 2018 . Retrieved 22 August 2019 . ^ Sanger, David E. (13 March 2019). "State Dept. Accuses China of Rights Abuses Not Seen 'Since the 1930s' " .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 22 August 2019 . ^ "State Department compares China to Nazi Germany in human rights briefing" . Washington Examiner . 13 March 2019 . Retrieved 22 August 2019 . ^ "China putting minority Muslims in 'concentration camps,' U.S. says" . Reuters . 4 May 2019 . Retrieved 22 August 2019 . ^ "Top Xinjiang official Chen Quanguo should face sanctions – US lawmakers" . South China Morning Post . 4 April 2019 . Retrieved 22 August 2019 . ^ "Rights group urges U.S. to sanction China over Xinjiang camps" . Reuters . 29 May 2019 . Retrieved 22 August 2019 . ^ "Xinjiang: US sanctions on Chinese officials over 'abuse' of Muslims" . BBC News . 9 July 2020 . Retrieved 9 July 2020 . ^ Swanson, Ana (20 July 2020). "U.S. Imposes Sanctions on 11 Chinese Companies Over Human Rights" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 20 July 2020 . ^ "Xinjiang: US to block some exports citing China's human rights abuses" . BBC News . 15 September 2020 . Retrieved 15 September 2020 . ^ "EXPLAINER: Why US accused China of genocide and what's next" .

The Independent . 20 January 2021 . Retrieved 20 January 2021 . ^ "Mike Pompeo declares China's treatment of Uighurs 'genocide' " .

The Guardian . 19 January 2021 . Retrieved 21 January 2021 . ^ "U.S. Says China Is Committing Genocide Against Uighur Muslims" .

The Wall Street Journal . 20 January 2021 . Retrieved 22 January 2021 . ^ Ramzy, Austin (24 January 2021). "China Sends Warplanes to Taiwan Strait in a Show of Force to Biden" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 17 June 2021 . Retrieved 7 June 2021 . ^ Martina, Michael (21 January 2021). "Biden administration calls China sanctions on Trump officials 'unproductive and cynical' " . Reuters . Archived from the original on 9 October 2021 . Retrieved 21 January 2021 . ^ "Joint Statement on Behalf of 50 countries in the UN General Assembly Third Committee on the Human Rights Situation in Xinjiang, China" . US Mission to the UN . 31 October 2022 . Retrieved 9 June 2025 . ^ "Blinken says genocide in Xinjiang is ongoing in report ahead of China visit" . Reuters . 22 April 2024. ^ Qin, Amy (13 May 2026). "Uyghurs Hope Trump Returns to First-Term Toughness at Xi Meeting" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 14 May 2026 . ^ Wong, Edward (22 September 2010). "U.S. Influence in Asia Revives Amid China's Disputes" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 25 October 2019 . ^ "China's influence in Southeast Asia is growing — and the U.S. Has some catching up to do" . CNBC . 12 June 2020. ^ "Russia, China Vie for Influence in Central Asia as U.S. Plans Afghan Exit" .

The Wall Street Journal . 18 June 2019. ^ Pomfret, John. "U.S. steps up pressure on China to rein in North Korea." The Washington Post , 6 December 2010. ^ Lam, Willy Wo-Lap . "Beijing's Alarm Over New 'US Encirclement Conspiracy'." Archived 7 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine Jamestown Foundation , 12 April 2005 ^ Perlez, Jane (4 December 2015). "China Creates a World Bank of Its Own, and the U.S. Balks" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 11 May 2017 . ^ "Summary of the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement" . USTR. 4 October 2015 . Retrieved 16 October 2015 . ^ Gulotty, Robert; Li, Xiaojun (30 July 2019). "Anticipating exclusion: Global supply chains and Chinese business responses to the Trans-Pacific Partnership" . Business and Politics . 22 (2): 253– 278. doi : 10.1017/bap.2019.8 . S2CID 201359183 . ^ "Trump executive order pulls out of TPP trade deal" . BBC News . 23 January 2017 . Retrieved 23 January 2017 . Mr Trump's executive order on TPP is seen as mainly symbolic since the deal was never ratified by a divided US Congress. ^ Malik, Hasan Yaser (2014). "Geo-political Significance of the Wakhan Corridor for China" . Fudan Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences . 7 (2): 307– 323. doi : 10.1007/s40647-014-0017-z . S2CID 140705773 . ^ Kendrick Foster (5 December 2019). "The New Road to Conflict: Geopolitics of the Wakhan Corridor" . Harvard International Review . ^ VINAY KAURA (July 2021). "The Pakistan Factor in China's Afghanistan Policy: Emerging Regional Faultlines amid US Withdrawal" (PDF) . Middle East Institute . ^ Slavin, Erik. "China's claim on sea leads Asian neighbors to strengthen ties with U.S." Stars and Stripes , 27 June 2011. ^ Entous, Adam. "Pentagon Will Add to Asia Operations." The Wall Street Journal , 26 October 2011. ^ Rappeport, Alan and Swanson, Ana (11 November 2022). "U.S. Seeks Closer Ties With India as Tension With China and Russia Builds" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 11 November 2022 . ^ Woodward, Bob and Duffy, Brian, "Chinese Embassy Role In Contributions Probed" , The Washington Post , 13 February 1997 ^ "Findings Link Clinton Allies to Chinese Intelligence" .

The Washington Post . 11 February 1998. ^ Perez, Evan (24 August 2017). "FBI arrests Chinese national connected to malware used in OPM data breach" . CNN . ^ a b " Hacks of OPM databases compromised 22.1 million people, federal authorities say ".

The Washington Post. 9 July 2015. ^ Roberts, Ed (10 October 2018). "Threats posed by China focus of Senate Homeland Security hearing" . Homeland Preparedness News . Retrieved 25 October 2018 . ^ Geller, Eric (9 May 2019). "Chinese nationals charged for Anthem hack, 'one of the worst data breaches in history' " . Politico . ^ Abelson, Reed and Goldstein, Matthew (5 February 2015). "Anthem Hacking Points to Security Vulnerability of Health Care Industry" .

The New York Times . ^ "Data from Equifax credit hack could 'end up on the black market', expert warns" . CBS News . 11 February 2020. ^ "Four Members of China's Military Indicted Over Massive Equifax Breach" .

The Wall Street Journal . 11 February 2020. ^ "FBI Director Wray warns of Chinese hacking, espionage threats against American companies" .

The Hill . 7 July 2020. ^ a b c Bing, Christopher; Schectman, Joel (14 March 2024). "Exclusive: Trump Launched CIA Covert Influence Operation against China" . Reuters . Retrieved 14 June 2024 . ^ "China, Caught Meddling in Past Two US Elections, Claims 'Not Interested' in 2020 Vote" . Voice of America . 30 April 2020. ^ "The United States is 'looking at' banning TikTok and other Chinese social media apps, Pompeo says" . CNN International . 7 July 2020 . Retrieved 7 July 2020 . ^ "TikTok files complaint against Trump administration to try to block U.S. ban" . CNBC . 19 September 2020 . Retrieved 19 September 2020 . ^ Allyn, Bobby (20 April 2024). "House approves sell-or-be-banned TikTok measure, attaching it to foreign aid bill" . NPR . ^ Satter, Raphael; Vicens, A.J. (31 December 2024). "US Treasury says Chinese hackers stole documents in 'major incident' " . Reuters . Retrieved 2 January 2025 . ^ a b Moore, Scott (2022). China's next act : how sustainability and technology are reshaping China's rise and the world's future . New York, NY. p. 210. ISBN 978-0-19-760401-4 . OCLC 1316703008 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "The Little Known Success Story of U.S.-China Nuclear Security Cooperation" .

The Nuclear Threat Initiative . 26 July 2022. Archived from the original on 26 July 2022 . Retrieved 26 July 2022 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ a b Massot, Pascale (2024). China's Vulnerability Paradox: How the World's Largest Consumer Transformed Global Commodity Markets . New York, NY, United States of America: Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-777140-2 . ^ "Chinese Defense Spokesperson Accuses US of Failing to Comply with Chemical Weapons Convention" .

The Southport Sentinel . 30 May 2023. Archived from the original on 2 June 2023 . Retrieved 2 June 2023 . ^ "China Reacts to Trump's Nuclear Weapons Tests Order" . 30 October 2025 . Retrieved 2 November 2025 . ^ "Trump tells Pentagon to resume testing US nuclear weapons" . 31 October 2025 . Retrieved 2 November 2025 . ^ "Opioid Deaths Could Hit 165,000 Annually Without Intervention, Biden Official Warns" . Forbes . 7 June 2023. ^ Gillespie, Brandon (12 January 2023). "Trump UN ambassador vows 'full court press' to combat China's fentanyl 'abuses' in this state if elected gov" . Fox News . ^ "U.S. Presses China to Stop Flow of Fentanyl" .

The New York Times . 15 November 2023. ^ "Online Sales of Illegal Opioids from China Surge in U.S." , The New York Times , 24 January 2018 ^ "Americans spent nearly $800M in 2 years on illegal fentanyl from China: 5 things to know" , Becker's Hospital Review , 25 January 2018 ^ Linthicum, Kate (24 April 2020). "Coronavirus chokes the drug trade — from Wuhan, through Mexico and onto U.S. streets" . Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 1 April 2022 . ^ "Deadly synthetic opioids coming to US via 'dark web' and the postal service" , Becker's Hospital Review , 28 December 2016 ^ "In China, Illegal Drugs Are Sold Online in an Unbridled Market" , The New York Times , 21 June 2015 ^ "Deadly fentanyl bought online from China being shipped through the mail" , "60 Minutes", CBS , April 28, 2019 ^ Lynch, Sarah N.; Cohen, Luc; Lynch, Sarah N.; Cohen, Luc (23 June 2023). "US files first-ever charges against Chinese fentanyl manufacturers" . Reuters . ^ Goudsward, Andrew; Psaledakis, Daphne (3 October 2023). "US takes action against Chinese companies, people tied to fentanyl" . Reuters . ^ "Treasury Targets Large Chinese Network of Illicit Drug Producers" . US Department of the Treasury . 28 August 2023. ^ a b McCarthy, Simone (13 July 2025). "The deadly drug that's complicating US-China trade" . CNN . Retrieved 16 July 2025 . ^ Rogers, Katie; Jakes, Lara; and Swanson, Anna (18 March 2020). "Trump Defends Using 'Chinese Virus' Label, Ignoring Growing Criticism" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 20 March 2020 . Retrieved 20 March 2020 . ^ Haltiwanger, John (19 March 2020). "Republicans are using racism against China to try to distract from Trump's disastrous coronavirus response" . Business Insider . ^ "Relations between China and America are infected with coronavirus" .

The Economist . ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 30 March 2020 . ^ "Chinese diplomat promotes conspiracy theory that US military brought coronavirus to Wuhan" . CNN International . 14 March 2020. ^ Myers, Steven Lee (13 March 2020). "China spins tale that the U.S. Army started the coronavirus epidemic" .

The New York Times . ^ Banco, Erin (21 March 2020). "White House Pushes U.S. Officials to Criticize China For Coronavirus 'Cover-Up' " .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved 3 April 2020 . ^ Mazzetti, Mark ; Barnes, Julian E.; Wong, Edward; and Goldman, Adam (30 April 2020). "Trump Officials Are Said to Press Spies to Link Virus and Wuhan Labs" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 6 May 2020 . ^ "C.I.A. Hunts for Authentic Virus Totals in China, Dismissing Government Tallies" .

The New York Times . 2 April 2020. ^ "China is winning the coronavirus propaganda war" . Politico . 18 March 2020. ^ "China Is Fighting the Coronavirus Propaganda War to Win" . Foreign Policy . 20 March 2020. ^ Lau, Stuart (24 March 2020). "EU fires warning shot at China in coronavirus battle of the narratives" . South China Morning Post . ^ "Governments reject Chinese-made equipment" . BBC News . 30 March 2020. ^ "China hints Venezuela aid, IMF pans request: Update" . Argus Media . 18 March 2020 . Retrieved 4 April 2020 . ^ "China urges U.S. to lift sanctions on Iran amid coronavirus response" . Reuters . 16 March 2020 . Retrieved 4 April 2020 . ^ Flores, Leonardo (25 March 2020). "Venezuela's Coronavirus Response Might Surprise You" . Common Dreams . Retrieved 4 April 2020 . ^ "U.S. continues sanctions against Iran and Venezuela during coronavirus pandemic" . Salon . 18 March 2020 . Retrieved 4 April 2020 . ^ "Cuba: US embargo blocks coronavirus aid shipment from Asia" . AP News . 3 April 2020 . Retrieved 4 April 2020 . ^ Eilperin, Juliet; Stein, Jeff; Butler, Desmond; and Hamburger, Tom (18 April 2020). "U.S. sent millions of face masks to China early this year, ignoring pandemic warning signs" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 24 June 2020 . ^ Ferek, Katy Stech; Zumbrun, Josh (12 April 2020). "U.S. Tariffs Hamper Imports of Sanitizer, Disinfectants, Some Companies Say" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 24 June 2020 . ^ Kate O'Keeffe, Michael C. Bender and Chun Han Wong, "Coronavirus Casts Deep Chill Over U.S.-China Relations: Pandemic has brought relations between the two to a modern-day nadir as they try to outmaneuver one another to shape the world order" The Wall Street Journal May 6, 2020 ^ Yellinek, Roie (31 August 2020). "US Attitudes Toward China in the Wake of the Coronavirus" . Begin-Sadat Center for Strategic Studies . Retrieved 7 September 2020 . ^ Pan, Hsin-Hsin (2023). "US public opinion on cross-strait relations: the effect of China threat on the China–Taiwan tension" . Japanese Journal of Political Science . 24 (2): 190– 207. doi : 10.1017/S1468109923000038 . ISSN 1468-1099 . ^ Gladstone, Rick (22 September 2020). "Trump Demands U.N. Hold China to Account for Coronavirus Pandemic" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 22 September 2020 . ^ Shear, Michael D. ; Barnes, Julian; Zimmer, Carl; and Mueller, Benjamin (26 May 2021). "Biden Orders Intelligence Inquiry Into Origins of Virus" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 27 May 2021 . Retrieved 31 May 2026 . ^ Nakashima, Ellen and Achenbach, Joel (27 August 2021). "U.S. spy agencies rule out possibility the coronavirus was created as a bioweapon, say origin will stay unknown without China's help" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 29 August 2021 . Retrieved 29 August 2021 . ^ a b c d Merchant, Nomaan (27 August 2021). "US intelligence still divided on origins of coronavirus" . Associated Press . Archived from the original on 29 August 2021 . Retrieved 29 August 2021 . ^ a b c d Cohen, Jon (27 August 2021). "COVID-19's origins still uncertain, U.S. intelligence agencies conclude" . Science . doi : 10.1126/science.abm1388 . S2CID 240981726 . Archived from the original on 31 August 2021.

The first, and most important, takeaway is that the IC is 'divided on the most likely origin' of the pandemic coronavirus and that both hypotheses are 'plausible.' ^ a b c d Barnes, Julian E. (29 October 2021). "Origin of Virus May Remain Murky, U.S. Intelligence Agencies Say" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 17 December 2021 . Retrieved 17 December 2021 . ^ a b Mueller, Julia (26 February 2023). "National security adviser: No 'definitive answer' on COVID lab leak" .

The Hill . Retrieved 26 February 2023 . ^ Barnes, Julian E. (26 February 2023). "Lab Leak Most Likely Caused Pandemic, Energy Dept. Says" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 27 February 2023 . ^ Pierson, David (27 February 2023). "China Dismisses Latest Claim That Lab Leak Likely Caused Covid" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 1 March 2023 . ^ a b Barnes, Julian E. (25 January 2025). "C.I.A. Now Favors Lab Leak Theory to Explain Covid's Origins" .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 10 May 2026 . ^ "U.S. Adds to Sanctions List in Effort to Halt Iran Oil Exports to China" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 10 May 2026 . ^ Phillips, Morgan (6 May 2026). "China orders firms to ignore US Iran sanctions, daring US to enforce crackdown" . Fox News . Retrieved 17 May 2026 . ^ Peter, Zsombor (3 May 2026). "China blocks US sanctions against five 'teapot' refineries" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 17 May 2026 . ^ "China invokes anti-sanctions law to counter US blacklisting of refiners" . ^ Kuo, Lily (25 May 2024). "The United States used to have cachet in China. Not anymore" .

The Washington Post . ^ "Gold Medal Rivalry: For China and the US, the Olympics Are Than Just Sport" .

The Diplomat . Retrieved 16 November 2024 . ^ "China calls for protections for students in US after congressional panel demands data from colleges" . AP News . 20 March 2025 . Retrieved 25 March 2025 . ^ Han, Bochen (18 November 2024). "As number of Chinese students in U.S. keeps falling, Indians move to top of list" . South China Morning Post . Retrieved 20 March 2025 . ^ Chazan, Guy; Sevastopulo, Demetri; Stacey, Stephanie; Fedor, Lauren; Pooler, Michael (29 May 2025). "US to 'aggressively' revoke visas of Chinese students" . Financial Times . Retrieved 30 May 2025 . ^ Toh, Michelle; Lilieholm, Lucas (26 October 2023). " 'Divorce is not an option' for US and China, Newsom says after Xi meeting" . CNN . ^ "Global Indicators Database" . Pew Research Center . 17 November 2010. ^ "BBC World Service poll (page 8)" (PDF) . GlobeScan . BBC. 30 June 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 June 2021 . Retrieved 6 July 2018 . ^ Cai, Jane; Dang, Yuanyue (3 July 2026). "Why young Chinese are turning away from the American dream" . South China Morning Post . Retrieved 10 July 2026 . ^ Dina Smeltz, Sam Dong (2 September 2025). "Friends with Benefits: Chinese See Russia and North Korea as Beijing's Closest Comrades" . Chicago Council on Global Affairs . Retrieved 22 October 2025 . ^ Zeller, Nick; Sexton, Renard; Liu, Yawei (9 March 2026). "Threat and Opportunity: Chinese Public Views on the United States" . U.S.-China Perception Monitor . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . ^ "Americans take an ever more negative view of China" .

The Economist . April 2020 . Retrieved 23 April 2020 . ^ "Amid Coronavirus Outbreak, Americans' Views of China Increasingly Negative" . Pew Research Center's Global Attitudes Project . 21 April 2020 . Retrieved 23 April 2020 . ^ a b c Jones, Jeffrey M. (12 March 2026). "Americans' Views of Canada, Great Britain Drop to New Lows" . Gallup, Inc. Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ a b Silver, Laura; Clancy, Laura (14 April 2026). "Americans' views of China more positive again in 2026" . Pew Research Center . Retrieved 15 April 2026 . ^ "Americans Continue to View China as the U.S.'s Greatest Enemy" . Gallup.com . 6 March 2023 . Retrieved 21 March 2023 . ^ "Americans Still See China as Nation's Top Foe, Russia Second" . news.gallup.com . 18 March 2024. ^ Kafura, Craig (28 October 2025). "Americans Reverse Course on US-China Competition" . Chicago Council on Global Affairs . Retrieved 29 October 2025 . ^ "The State of U.S.-China Relations" (PDF) . Morning Consult . April 2022 . Retrieved 29 August 2022 . ^ "Navigating U.S.-China Relations: What American and Chinese Multinationals Need to Know" . Morning Consult . 18 April 2022 . Retrieved 29 August 2022 . ^ a b Echols, Connor (6 February 2023). "Americans far less hawkish on North Korea and China than policy elites: poll" . Responsible Statecraft . Retrieved 24 February 2023 . ^ "Younger Americans are friendlier to China" .