The Prime Minister of India , Narendra Modi meeting the Chinese leader , Xi Jinping , in Wuhan , China during a Shanghai Cooperation Organisation summit on 31 August 2025 China and India maintained peaceful relations for thousands of years, but their relationship has varied since the Chinese Communist Party (CCP)'s victory in the Chinese Civil War in 1949 and the annexation of Tibet by the People's Republic of China .

The two nations have sought economic cooperation with each other, while frequent border disputes and economic nationalism in both countries are major points of contention. Cultural and economic relations between China and India date back to ancient times.

The Silk Road not only served as a major trade route between India and China, but is also credited for facilitating the spread of Buddhism from India to East Asia.

During the 19th century, the British East India Company increasingly exported opium , grown in India, leading to the Opium Wars .

During World War II , both British India and the Republic of China (ROC) played a crucial role in halting the progress of Imperial Japan .

After India became independent in 1947, it established relations with the ROC.

The modern Sino-Indian diplomatic relationship began in 1950, when India was among the first noncommunist countries to end formal relations with the Republic of China and recognise the PRC as the legitimate government of both Mainland China and Taiwan . China and India are two of the major regional powers in Asia, and are the two most populous countries and among the fastest growing major economies in the world. Growth in diplomatic and economic influence has increased the significance of their bilateral relationship. Between 2008 and 2021, China was India's largest trading partner, and the two countries have extended their strategic and military relations. India has a large trade deficit that is favoured towards China.

The Sino-Indian border dispute , manifested by the Line of Actual Control (LAC), remains a central issue, resulting in the 1962 Sino-Indian War , the clashes in 1967 , and the a standoff in 1987 .

Since the late 1980s, both countries have rebuilt diplomatic and economic ties; a 1996 agreement forbids firearms and explosives near the LAC. Border deconfliction mechanisms emerged, beginning with the 2003 Special Representatives . Renewed conflicts included standoffs in 2013 , and in 2017 ; major skirmishes in 2020-2021 resulted in dozens of deaths on both sides; military infrastructure near the LAC continues to grow. India's concerns include China's close relations with Pakistan , and with separatist groups in Northeast India . China's concerns include Indian military and economic activities in the disputed South China Sea and hosting of Tibetan exiles . Today, South Asia is the primary site of great power competition between China and India. Geopolitical overview Eastern and Southern Asia. (The border between the People's Republic of China and the India over Arunachal Pradesh / South Tibet reflects actual control, without dotted line showing claims.) The China–India border straddles the Himalayas , with Nepal and Bhutan acting as buffer states . Parts of the disputed Kashmir region claimed by India ( J&K and Ladakh ) are claimed and administered by either Pakistan ( Azad Kashmir and Gilgit Baltistan ) or by the PRC ( Aksai Chin ).

The Government of Pakistan, on its maps, shows the Aksai Chin area as mostly within China and labels the boundary "Frontier Undefined", while India holds that Aksai Chin is illegally occupied by the PRC. China and India also dispute most of Arunachal Pradesh . Not only is China's India policy shaped by greater competition with the United States , but there are also real structural issues in India-China relations that exacerbate discord. These stem largely from China's attempts to keep India at arm's length in the Indo-Pacific region. There are clear differences in the regional order in Asia that the two countries desire—India seeks a multipolar order, of which India is one of the main poles, while China seeks a single pole, of which India is not a pole at all.

As India strengthens its security ties with the United States and takes a leading role in organizing the Global South , tensions with China persist. China's engagement with India's neighbors and growing military cooperation with Pakistan further strain India's geopolitical landscape.

The Indian epic Mahabharata (c. 5th century BCE) contains references to " China ", which may have been referring to the Qin state which later became the Qin dynasty . Chanakya (c. 350–283 BCE), the prime minister of the Maurya Empire , refers to Chinese silk as "cinamsuka" (Chinese silk dress) and "cinapatta" (Chinese silk bundle) in his Arthashastra . Buddhism was transmitted from India to China in the 1st century CE. Trade relations via the Silk Road acted as economic contact between the two regions. Middle Ages Ambassador from Central India (中天竺 Zhong Tianzhu ) to the court of the Tang dynasty . Wanghuitu (王会图) circa 650 CE.

In 649, the Chinese general Wang Xuance , along with thousands of recruited Tibetan and Nepalese troops, briefly invaded North India and won the Battle of Chabuheluo .

During the 8th century, the astronomical table of sines by the Indian astronomer and mathematician , Aryabhatta (476–550), were translated into the Chinese astronomical and mathematical book of the Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era ( Kaiyuan Zhanjing ), compiled in 718 CE during the Tang dynasty.

The Kaiyuan Zhanjing was compiled by Gautama Siddha , an astronomer and astrologer born in Chang'an, and whose family was originally from India. He was also notable for his translation of the Navagraha calendar into Chinese. Yuan dynasty Tamil Hindu Indian merchants traded in Quanzhou during the Yuan dynasty. Hindu statues were found in Quanzhou dating to this period. According to Badauni and Ferishta , the Delhi Sultanate under Muhammad bin Tughluq had ambitions to invade China. There existed a direct trade relationship between China and the Delhi Sultanate. Ibn Battuta mentions that the Yuan Emperor had sent an embassy to Muhammad for reconstruction of a sacked temple at Sambhal . Ming dynasty Stele installed in Calicut by Zheng He (modern replica) Between 1405 and 1433, Ming dynasty China sponsored a series of seven naval expeditions led by Admiral Zheng He . Zheng He visited numerous Indian kingdoms and ports, including the Malabar coast , Bengal , and Ceylon , the Persian Gulf , Arabia , and later expeditions ventured down as far as Malindi in what is now Kenya . Throughout his travels, Zheng He liberally dispensed Chinese gifts of silk, porcelain , and other goods.

In return, he received rich and unusual presents, including African zebras and giraffes.

After the Ming treasure voyages, private Chinese traders continued operating in the eastern Indian Ocean. Chinese junks could frequently be seen in the ports of the Vijayanagara Empire, carrying silks and other products. Qing dynasty The Bhois of Orissa maintained minor maritime trade links with China. Many of the gosains entering Tibet from China passed through the territory of Birakisore Deva I of Khurda (1736–1793) who styled himself as Gajapati, the ruler of Utkala, when visiting the Jagannath temple at Puri.

The reign of Tipu Sultan in Mysore saw Chinese technology used for sugar production, and sandalwood was exported to China. Tipu's and Mysore's tryst with silk began in the early 1780s when he received a silk cloth from an ambassador from the Qing dynasty-ruled China at his court. Tipu was said to be enchanted by the item to such an extent that he resolved to introduce its production in his kingdom. He sent a return journey to China, which returned after twelve years.

After the Qing expansion into the Himalayas, there was increased contact with South Asia, which often manifested in the form of tributary relations.

The Qing were obliged to defend their subservient state, Badakhshan , against the Afghans and Marathas , though no major clash with the Marathas ever took place.

The Afghans gained the initiative and defeated the Marathas at Panipat in 1761.

In 1841, they had some conflicts with Chinese forces; neither side wished to continue the conflict, as the Sikhs were embroiled in tensions with the British that would lead up to the First Anglo-Sikh War , while the Chinese were in the midst of the First Opium War .

The two parties signed a treaty in September 1842, which stipulated no transgressions or interference in the other country's frontiers. British Raj Epitaph of Major Hsiao Chu Ching at Jairampur cemetery Indian soldiers, known as " sepoys ", who were in British service participated in the First and Second Opium Wars against Qing China . Indian sepoys were also involved in the suppression of the Boxer Rebellion in 1900, in addition to serving as guards in the British colony of Hong Kong and foreign concessions such as the Shanghai International Settlement .

The Chinese slur " Yindu A San " (印度阿三 - Indian number three) was used to describe Indian soldiers in British service, with some of the popular sentiment rejecting the possibility for Sino-Indian fraternity. Republic of China In 1924, on his major tour of several major Chinese cities, giving lectures about using their shared Asian values and traditional spirituality to help together promote world peace, Rabindranath Tagore was invited to Canton by Sun Yat-sen, an invitation which he declined. There was considerably mixed reception to Tagore from the Chinese students and intellectuals. Bilateral relations China–India relations China India Hu Shih , the Chinese ambassador to the United States from 1938 to 1942, commented, albeit critically, on India's Buddhism almost completely subsuming Chinese society upon its introduction. ASIA is one.

The Himalayas divide, only to accentuate, two mighty civilizations, the Chinese with its communism of Confucius , and the Indian with its individualism of the Vedas . But not even the snowy barriers can interrupt for one moment that broad expanse of love for the Ultimate and Universal , which is the common thought-inheritance of every Asiatic race, enabling them to produce all the great religions of the world and distinguishing them from those maritime peoples of the Mediterranean and the Baltic , who love to dwell on the Particular , and to search out the means, not the end, of life. Chiang Kai-shek and his wife Song Meiling with Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru While never having actually visited India in his lifetime, Sun Yat-sen , founder of the Republic of China, occasionally spoke and wrote of India as a fellow Asian nation that was likewise subject to harsh Western exploitation, and frequently called for a Pan-Asian united front against all unjust imperialism. Similarly, believing that then- Republican China and British India were "sister nations from the dawn of history" who needed to transform their "ancient friendship into a new camaraderie of two freedom-loving nations", Jawaharlal Nehru visited China in 1939 as an honored guest of the government. Highly praising both Chiang Kai-shek and his wife Song Meiling , Nehru referred to Chiang as "not only a great Chinese, but a great Asiatic and world figure...one of the top most leaders of the world...a successful general and captain in war", and Song as "full of vitality and charm...a star hope for the Chinese people...a symbol of China's invincibility". Chiang recorded a favorable impression of Nehru in his diary, and the Chiangs also regularly wrote Nehru during his time in prison and even after their 1942 visit to India.

The Chiangs with Mahatma Gandhi in Calcutta in 1942 Partially to enlist India's aid against both Japanese and Western imperialism in exchange for China's support for Indian independence , the Chiangs visited British India in 1942 and met with Nehru, Mahatma Gandhi , and Muhammad Ali Jinnah .

The Chiangs also sought to present their nation as a potential third option for the Indian people to ally themselves with, with public sympathies at the time sharply split between the British and the Japanese, who actively tried to sway India's population with pledges to liberate Asia if they would help their efforts against the British.

While the public reception to the Chiangs was mostly positive, some reacted less favorably to the Chiangs' presence in India, with Jinnah believing that Chiang Kai-shek lacked proper understanding of Indian society and feeling he was biased in favor of Nehru and Gandhi while neglecting the demands of other religious communities. For his part, Chiang apparently believed none of the major Indian leaders could help his government meaningfully. Nevertheless, the Chiangs continued to commit themselves to supporting the Indian independence movement from afar, mostly via diplomacy, with Song Meiling writing to Nehru encouragingly: "We shall leave nothing undone in assisting you to gain freedom and independence." In 1942, a division of the Kuomintang 's armies entered India as the Chinese Army in India in their struggle against Japanese expansion in Southeast Asia . Post independence On 15 August 1947, India gained independence from the United Kingdom.

The newly independent India established diplomatic relations with the ROC.

From the Chinese side, strategists were concerned about the possibility of India continuing to spread its dominance in Asia and the Indian Ocean in the manner of British India. China viewed Tibet as a part of its territory.

The preceding government of the Republic of China under Chiang Kai-shek also claimed Tibet as Chinese territory . However, he was unable to re-assert control. Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party Mao Zedong saw Indian concern over Tibet as a manifestation of interference in the internal affairs of the PRC.

The PRC reasserted control over Tibet and to end Tibetan Buddhism and feudalism , which it did by force of arms in 1950. To avoid antagonizing the PRC, Nehru informed Chinese leaders that India had no political ambitions or territorial ambitions and did not seek special privileges in Tibet, but that traditional trading rights must continue. With Indian support, Tibetan delegates signed an agreement in May 1951 recognizing PRC sovereignty but guaranteeing that the existing political and social system of Tibet would continue. Chairman Mao Zedong of the Chinese Communist Party and Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru.

In April 1954, India and the PRC signed an eight-year agreement on Tibet that became the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence (or Panchsheel ). Jawaharlal Nehru of India, during the latter's state visit to China , October 1954.

In October 1954, China and India signed an agreement regarding Tibet, whereby India recognised Tibet as part of China, with China accepting the continuance of the previous trade arrangements. Observers noted the agreement heavily favored China. It is the popular perception that the catchphrase of India's diplomacy with China in the 1950s was Hindi-Chini bhai-bhai , which means, in Hindi , "Indians and Chinese are brothers". Nehru sought to initiate a more direct dialogue between the peoples of China and India in culture and literature. Around then, the Indian artist (painter) Beohar Rammanohar Sinha , who had earlier decorated the pages of the original Constitution of India , was sent to China in 1957 on a Government of India fellowship to establish a direct cross-cultural and inter-civilization bridge. Noted Indian scholar Rahul Sankrityayan and diplomat Natwar Singh were also there, and Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan paid a visit to the PRC.

After signing the 1954 agreement, India published new maps showing defined borders, as it became apprehensive that China might make claims on Indian territory. Two major territorial disputes existed between China and India, which remained dormant until 1959.

In the northeast, Indian territory included the Assam Himalayan region up to the McMahon Line, which China did not recognise as a legal boundary.

In the western sector, Indian territory inherited from the British Raj included the Aksai Chin plateau, which Chinese maps started showing as Chinese territory in the 1940s, if not earlier.

When India discovered that China built a road through the region, border clashes and Indian protests became more frequent.

In January 1959, PRC premier Zhou Enlai wrote to Nehru, pointing out that no government in China had accepted as legal the McMahon Line , which the 1914 Simla Convention defined as the eastern section of the border between India and Tibet.

In March 1959, the Dalai Lama , spiritual and temporal head of the Tibet , sought sanctuary in Dharmsala , Himachal Pradesh, where he established the Tibetan government-in-exile . Thousands of Tibetan refugees settled in northwestern India. Relations between India and China deteriorated after India provided the Dalai Lama sanctuary. 1960s Main articles: Sino-Indian War , 1967 Nathu La and Cho La clashes , and 1987 Sino-Indian skirmish Disputed territories of India Border disputes resulted in a short border war between the People's Republic of China and India on 20 October 1962.

The border clash resulted in an overall defeat of India as the PRC pushed the Indian forces to within 48 km of the Assam plains in the northeast. It also occupied strategic points in the Aksai Chin and Demchok regions of Ladakh , before declaring a unilateral ceasefire on 21 November. It claimed that it withdrew to 20 km behind its contended line of control. India disagreed with the claim. "I don't want to know what happened in the past. All I want to know is who are my commanders, where are the Chinese, how much ammunition have I got…" — Field Marshal Sam Manekshaw recalling 1962 when he was appointed to take charge of NEFA following the resignation of Kaul and Menon in the aftermath of the China India war.

During the Sino-Indian border conflict , India's Communist Party was accused by the Indian government of being pro-PRC, and many of its political leaders were jailed. Subsequently, the Communist Party of India (CPI) split with the leftist section, forming the Communist Party of India (Marxist) in 1964. Relations between the PRC and India deteriorated during the rest of the 1960s and the early 1970s, while China–Pakistan relations improved and Sino-Soviet relations worsened .

The PRC backed Pakistan in its 1965 war with India , and issued "ultimatums" threatening military action at its own border.

The threats only served to damage Pakistan's relations with the western powers.

In late 1967, there were two more conflicts between Indian and Chinese forces at their contested border, in Sikkim , known as the Nathu La and Cho La clashes . Both sides suffered heavy casualties, but India came out in a better position than the PRC. Chinese demonstrations against Indian " reactionary factions" in Beijing in 1967.

The PRC continued an active propaganda campaign against India and supplied ideological, financial, and other assistance to dissident groups, especially to tribes in northeastern India.

The PRC accused India of assisting the Khampa rebels in Tibet. Sri Lanka played the role of chief negotiator for the withdrawal of Chinese troops from the Indian territory. Both countries agreed to Colombo's proposals. 1970s In August 1971, India signed a Treaty of Peace, Friendship, and Co-operation with the Soviet Union .

The PRC sided with Pakistan in its December 1971 war with India .

Although China strongly condemned India, it did not carry out its veiled threat to intervene on Pakistan's behalf.

By this time, the PRC had replaced the Republic of China in the UN , where its representatives denounced India as being a "tool of Soviet expansionism." India and the PRC renewed efforts to improve relations after Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi 's Congress party lost the 1977 elections to Morarji Desai 's Janata Party .

In 1978, the Indian Minister of External Affairs Atal Bihari Vajpayee made a landmark visit to Beijing, an impetus to both countries to officially re-establish diplomatic relations in 1979.

The PRC modified its pro-Pakistan stand on Kashmir and appeared willing to remain silent on India's absorption of Sikkim and its special advisory relationship with Bhutan .

The PRC's leaders agreed to discuss the boundary issue, India's priority, as the first step to a broadening of relations.

The two countries hosted each other's news agencies, and Mount Kailash and Mansarowar Lake in Tibet, the home of the Hindu pantheon , were opened to annual pilgrimages . 1980s In 1981, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China, Huang Hua , made a landmark visit to New Delhi. PRC Premier Zhao Ziyang concurrently toured Pakistan , Nepal , and Bangladesh .

In 1980, Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi approved a plan to upgrade the deployment of forces around the Line of Actual Control. India also undertook infrastructural development in disputed areas.

In 1984, squads of Indian soldiers began actively patrolling the Sumdorong Chu Valley in Arunachal Pradesh .

In the winter of 1986, the Chinese deployed their troops to the Sumdorong Chu before the Indian team could arrive and built a helipad at Wandung. Surprised by the Chinese occupation, India's then Chief of Army Staff, General K.Sundarji , airlifted a brigade to the region. Chinese troops could not move any further into the valley and were forced to move away from the valley.

By 1987, Beijing's reaction was similar to that in 1962 and this prompted many Western diplomats to predict war. However, Indian foreign minister N.D. Tiwari and Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi travelled to Beijing to negotiate a mutual de-escalation. India and the PRC held eight rounds of border negotiations between December 1981 and November 1987.

In 1985, the PRC insisted on mutual concessions without defining the exact terms of its "package proposal" or where the actual line of control lay.

In 1986 and 1987, the negotiations achieved nothing, given the charges exchanged between the two countries of military encroachment in the Sumdorung Chu Valley . China's construction of a military post and helicopter pad in the area in 1986 and India's grant of statehood to Arunachal Pradesh (formerly the North-East Frontier Agency ) in February 1987 caused both sides to deploy troops to the area.

The PRC relayed warnings that it would "teach India a lesson" if it did not cease "nibbling" at Chinese territory.

By the summer of 1987, however, both sides had backed away from conflict and denied military clashes had taken place. A warming trend in relations was facilitated by Rajiv Gandhi 's visit to China in December 1988.

The two sides issued a joint communiqué that stressed the need to restore friendly relations on the basis of the Panchsheel. India and the People's Republic of China agreed to achieve a "fair and reasonable settlement while seeking a mutually acceptable solution" to the border dispute.

The communiqué also expressed China's concern about agitation by Tibetan separatists in India and reiterated that anti-China political activities by expatriate Tibetans would not be tolerated. Rajiv Gandhi signed bilateral agreements on science and technology co-operation, established direct air links, and on cultural exchanges.

The two sides also agreed to hold annual diplomatic consultations between foreign ministers, set up a joint committee on economic and scientific co-operation, and a joint working group on the boundary issue.

The latter group was to be led by the Indian foreign secretary and the Chinese vice minister of foreign affairs. 1990s Top-level dialogue continued with the December 1991 visit of PRC premier Li Peng to India and the May 1992 visit to China of Indian president R. Venkataraman . Six rounds of talks of the Indian-Chinese Joint Working Group on the Border Issue were held between December 1988 and June 1993. Progress was also made in reducing tensions on the border via mutual troop reductions, regular meetings of local military commanders, and advance notification about military exercises.

In July 1992, Sharad Pawar visited Beijing, the first Indian Minister of Defence to do so. Consulates reopened in Bombay (Mumbai) and Shanghai in December 1992.

In 1993, the sixth-round of the joint working group talks was held in New Delhi but resulted in only minor developments. Prime Minister Narasimha Rao and Premier Li Peng signed a border agreement dealing with cross-border trade, cooperation on environmental issues (e.g. Pollution, Animal extinction , Global warming , etc.), and radio and television broadcasting. A senior-level Chinese military delegation made a goodwill visit to India in December 1993 aimed at "fostering confidence-building measures between the defence forces of the two countries." The visit, however, came at a time when China was providing greater military support to Burma.

The presence of Chinese radar technicians in Burma's Coco Islands , which border India's Andaman and Nicobar Islands , caused concern in India.

In January 1994, Beijing announced that it not only favored a negotiated solution on Kashmir, but also opposed any form of independence for the region. Talks were held in New Delhi in February aimed at confirming established "confidence-building measures", discussing clarification of the "line of actual control", reduction of armed forces along the line, and prior information about forthcoming military exercises. China's hope for settlement of the boundary issue was reiterated.

In 1995, talks by the India-China Expert Group led to an agreement to set up two additional points of contact along the 4,000 km border to facilitate meetings between military personnel.

The two sides were reportedly "seriously engaged" in defining the McMahon Line and the line of actual control vis-à-vis military exercises and prevention of air intrusion. Talks were held in Beijing in July and in New Delhi in August to improve border security, combat cross-border crimes, and on additional troop withdrawals from the border. These talks further reduced tensions. There was little notice taken in Beijing of the April 1995 announcement of the opening of the Taipei Economic and Cultural Centre in New Delhi.

The centre serves as the representative office of the Republic of China (Taiwan) and is the counterpart of the India-Taipei Association located in Taiwan. Both institutions share the goal of improving India-ROC relations, which have been strained since New Delhi's recognition of Beijing in 1950. China-Indian relations hit a low point in 1998 following India's nuclear tests . Indian Defence Minister George Fernandes declared that "“in my perception of national security, China is enemy No 1....and any person who is concerned about India's security must agree with that fact", hinting that India developed nuclear weapons in defence against China's nuclear arsenal .

During the 1999 Kargil War , China voiced support for Pakistan, but also counseled Pakistan to withdraw its forces. 2000s Indian and Chinese officers at Nathu La . Nathu La was re-opened in 2006 following numerous bilateral trade agreements.

The opening of the pass is expected to bolster the economy of the region and play a key role in the growing China-Indian trade.

In a major embarrassment for China, the 17th Karmapa , Urgyen Trinley Dorje , who was proclaimed by China, made a dramatic escape from Tibet to the Rumtek Monastery in Sikkim. Chinese officials were in a quandary on this issue as any protest to India on the issue would mean an explicit endorsement on India's governance of Sikkim, which the Chinese still hadn't recognised.

In 2003, China officially recognised Indian sovereignty over Sikkim as the two countries moved towards resolving their border disputes.

In 2004, the two countries proposed opening up the Nathula and Jelepla Passes in Sikkim. 2004 was a milestone in China-Indian bilateral trade, surpassing the US$10 billion mark for the first time.

In April 2005, Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao visited Bangalore to push for increased China-Indian cooperation in high-tech industries. Wen stated that the 21st century will be "the Asian century of the IT industry." Regarding the issue of India gaining a permanent seat on the UN Security Council , Wen Jiabao initially seemed to support the idea, but had returned to a neutral position.

In the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Summit in 2005, China was granted observer status.

While other countries in the region are ready to consider China for permanent membership in the SAARC, India seemed reluctant.

In 2005, China and India signed the ' Strategic and Cooperative Partnership for Peace and Prosperity'. However, there has been very little, if any, strategic convergence between the two countries. Issues surrounding energy have risen in significance. Both countries have growing energy demand to support economic growth. Both countries signed an agreement in 2006 to envisage ONGC Videsh Ltd (OVL) and the China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) placing joint bids for promising projects.

In 2006, China and India re-opened the Nathula pass for trading; Nathula had been closed for 44 years prior to 2006.

The re-opening of border trade helps to ease the economic isolation of the region.

In November 2006, China and India had a verbal spat over the claim of the north-east Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh . India claimed that China was occupying 38,000 square kilometres of its territory in Kashmir , while China claimed the whole of Arunachal Pradesh as its own.

In 2007, China denied the application for visa from an Indian Administrative Service officer in Arunachal Pradesh. According to China, since Arunachal Pradesh is a territory of China, he would not need a visa to visit his own country.

Later in December 2007, China reversed its policy by granting a visa to Marpe Sora, an Arunachal-born professor in computer science.

In January 2008, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh visited China to discuss trade, commerce, defence, military, and various other issues. Hundreds of Tibetans protested against the Chinese government in New Delhi, 2008. Until 2008, the British Government's position remained the same as it had been since the Simla Accord of 1913: that China held suzerainty over Tibet but not sovereignty . Britain revised this view on 29 October 2008, when it recognized Chinese sovereignty over Tibet through its website.

The Economist stated that although the British Foreign Office's website does not use the word sovereignty, officials at the Foreign Office said "it means that, as far as Britain is concerned, 'Tibet is part of China. Full stop.'" This change in Britain's position affects India's claim to its North Eastern territories, which rely on the same Simla Accord that Britain's prior position on Tibet's sovereignty was based upon.

During this visit, Premier Wen Jiabao said "India and China are two very populous countries with ancient civilisations, friendship between the two countries has a time-honoured history, which can be dated back 2,000 years".

In April 2011, during the BRICS summit in Sanya , Hainan, China, the two countries agreed to restore defence cooperation and China had hinted that it may reverse its policy of administering stapled visas to residents of Jammu and Kashmir . This practice was later stopped, and as a result, defence ties were resumed between the two countries and joint military drills were expected.

In the March 2012 BRICS summit in New Delhi, CCP General Secretary and Chinese leader Hu Jintao told Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh that "it is China's unswerving policy to develop China-Indian friendship, deepen strategic cooperation, and seek common development". Other topics were discussed, including border dispute problems and a unified BRICS central bank.

In April 2012, in response to India's test of an Agni-V missile capable of carrying a nuclear warhead to Beijing, the PRC called for the two countries to "cherish the hard-earned momentum of co-operation".

The BRICS leaders in the 2019 G20 Osaka summit .

The 2013 Depsang standoff lasted for three weeks, before being defused on 5 May 2013. Days before a trip by Indian Foreign Minister Salman Khurshid to China, Khurshid said that both countries had a shared interest in not having the border issue exacerbate or "destroy" long-term progress in relations.

The Chinese agreed to withdraw their troops in exchange for an Indian agreement to demolish several "live-in bunkers" 250 km to the south, in the disputed Chumar sector. Chinese Premier Li Keqiang made his first foreign visit to India on 18 May 2013. Indian President Pranab Mukherjee's visit to Arunachal Pradesh in late November 2013 and mentioning in his speech that the area was an "integral and important part of India" angered Beijing, and retaliatory statements followed. General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Xi Jinping was one of the top world leaders to visit New Delhi after Narendra Modi took over as Prime Minister of India in 2014. India's insistence to raise the South China Sea in various multilateral forums subsequently did not help that beginning once again, the relationship facing suspicion from Indian administration and media alike.

In September 2014, the relationship took a sting as troops of the People's Liberation Army reportedly entered two kilometres inside the Line of Actual Control in the Chumar sector.

The next month, V. K. Singh said that China and India had come to a "convergence of views" on the threat of terrorism emanating from Pakistan.

The Chinese leader and Indian Prime Minister witnessing the signing of a memorandum of understanding between the Chinese and Indian foreign affairs ministers on opening a new route for Indian pilgrimage (Kailash Mansarovar Yatra) to the Tibet Autonomous Region of the People's Republic of China , in New Delhi in 2014 China and India have been working together to produce films together, such as Kung Fu Yoga starring Jackie Chan . However, disruptions have risen again due to China building trade routes, the China–Pakistan Economic Corridor , with Pakistan on disputed Kashmir territory.

On 16 June 2017, Chinese troops with construction vehicles and road-building equipment began extending an existing road southward in Doklam , a territory which is claimed by both China as well as India's ally Bhutan .

On 18 June 2017, around 270 Indian troops, with weapons and two bulldozers, entered Doklam to stop the Chinese troops from constructing the road. Among other charges, China accused India of illegal intrusion into its territory—what it called the mutually agreed China-India boundary, and violation of its territorial sovereignty and UN Charter. India accused China of changing the status quo in violation of a 2012 understanding between the two governments regarding the tri-junction boundary points and causing "security concerns", which were widely understood as its concerns with the strategic Siliguri Corridor . India media reported that on 28 June, Bhutan issued a demarche, demanding that China cease road-building in Doklam and leave the area as is.

The Minister of External Affairs of India at the time, Sushma Swaraj , asserted that if China unilaterally altered the status-quo of the tri-junction point between China-India and Bhutan, the nation would be posing a challenge to India's security. China repeatedly stated that India's withdrawal was a prerequisite for meaningful dialogue.

On 21 July 2017, the Minister of External Affairs of India Sushma Swaraj said that for dialogue, both India and China must withdraw their troops.

On 2 August 2017, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China published a document claiming that Indian border forces had illegally crossed the border between China and India and detailed China's position on the matter.

The document said that China notified India regarding its plan to construct a road in advance, "in full reflection of China's goodwill".

The Indian Foreign Ministry replied by referring towards their earlier press release on this matter, as opposed to a point-by-point rebuttal.

On 28 August 2017, China and India reached a consensus to end the border stand-off.

In May 2018, the two countries agreed to coordinate their development programmes in Afghanistan in the areas of health, education, and food security.

In 2019, India reiterated that it would not join China's Belt and Road Initiative , stating that it cannot accept a project that ignores concerns about its territorial integrity.

On 11 October 2019, Chinese leader Xi Jinping met with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi at Mahabalipuram , Tamil Nadu, India, for a second informal meeting between India and China. Modi and Xi Jinping met 18 times between 2014 and 2019. China offered public health and economic assistance to India in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, although India refused per the United States' request. : 14 2020s Main articles: 2020–2021 China–India skirmishes and 2022 Yangtse clash The disputed territory of Kashmir is administered by Pakistan (green and lime), India (blue and turquoise) and China (yellow).

On 10 May 2020, Chinese and Indian troops clashed in Nathu La, Sikkim, leaving 11 soldiers injured.

Following the skirmishes in Sikkim, tensions between the two countries grew in Ladakh, with a buildup of troops at multiple locations. There were 20 Indian soldiers and an unknown number of PLA soldiers killed on the night of 15/16 June. China reinforced troops near the Indian border with Tibet , Chinese state media reported. Bilateral agreements between India and China prevent the use of guns along the line of actual control . However, these skirmishes saw the first shots, warning shots, being fired in decades.

Following the deaths, Prime Minister Modi addressed the nation about the incident, saying that "the sacrifice made by our soldiers will not go in vain", while the Indian foreign minister told the Chinese foreign minister that Chinese actions in Galwan were "pre-meditated".

Following the Galwan Valley clash on 15 June 2020, there were renewed calls across India to boycott Chinese goods . However, numerous Indian government officials said that border tensions would have little impact on trade.

On 29 June 2020, the Indian government banned 59 widely used Chinese mobile phone and desktop applications in response to rising tensions and escalating diplomatic dispute between the two nations.

On 19 August, The Times of India reported that the ministry of external affairs of India has been told that visas for Chinese businessmen, academics, industry experts, and advocacy groups will need prior security clearance, and the measures are similar to those that have long been employed with Pakistan.

On 19 September, India police arrested a freelance journalist for passing sensitive information to Chinese intelligence .

On 27 October 2020, the United States and India signed the Basic Exchange and Cooperation Agreement, enabling greater information-sharing and further defense cooperation, to counter China's growing military power in the region.

The BRICS leaders in 2023, including Xi Jinping and Narendra Modi After the 2022 visit by Nancy Pelosi to Taiwan , the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of India responded, "Like many other countries, India, too, is concerned at recent developments. We urge the exercise of restraint, avoidance of unilateral actions to change status quo, de-escalation of tensions, and efforts to maintain peace and stability in the region." India stopped reiterating the so-called " One China " policy as early as 2010.

In September 2022, India and China pulled back soldiers from a friction point along the line of actual control. However, according to India's Ministry for External Affairs, the situation on the Line of Actual Control is "still not normal".

The Diplomat has reported that normalcy around the border between the countries seems unlikely and may not develop further.

On 6 October 2022, India abstained on a draft resolution in the UNHRC on "holding a debate on the situation of human rights in the Xinjiang Autonomous Region of China" In June 2023, China placed a technical hold on a proposal moved by the U.S. and co-designated by India to sanction accused Pakistani terrorist Sajid Mir under the 12/67 Al Qaeda Sanctions Committee of the UN Security Council. Mir had previously orchestrated bombings in Mumbai, killing some 175 people. India heavily criticized the Chinese decision. Narendra Modi meeting Xi Jinping at the 16th BRICS summit in Kazan , Russia, 23 October 2024 On 25 August 2023 during the 15th BRICS summit in Johannesburg, South Africa , Modi and Xi spoke on the summit's sidelines where they agreed to deescalate tensions at the border.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China said both leaders "had a candid and in-depth exchange of views on current China-India relations” and Xi stated that "improving China-India relations serves the common interests of the two countries and peoples”, while the Ministry of External Affairs of India stated that during the meeting Modi "underlined that the maintenance of peace and tranquility in the border areas, and observing and respecting the LAC are essential for the normalization of the India-China relationship." The meeting was seen as a step toward mending the bilateral relations between the two countries.

In October 2024, India announced that it had reached an agreement over patrolling arrangements along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) in the border area, which would lead to disengagement and resolution of the long-running conflict that began in 2020.

In January 2025, China and India agreed to resume direct flights between the two countries after nearly 5 years.

In April 2025, India launched its biggest-ever joint naval exercise with African nations as part of a push to boost its influence on the continent.

The military exercises were perceived as a show of force to China, whose influence in Africa is significant. India also announced the resumption of the Kailash Mansarovar Yatra in April 2025, after a period of five years, in a bid to normalise relations between the two nations.

On 26 June 2025, Indian Defence Minister Rajnath Singh met his Chinese counterpart Dong Jun on the sidelines of the SCO defence ministers’ meeting in Qingdao, where he called for a permanent resolution to the border dispute through a “structured roadmap of permanent engagement and de-escalation.” Singh emphasised the need to “rejuvenate the established mechanism” for border demarcation and urged both sides to maintain “positive momentum” while avoiding new complications. He also stressed the importance of “bridging the trust deficit” created after the 2020 standoff by “taking action on ground.” Additionally, Singh briefed the Chinese side on 22 April Pahalgam attack and India's Operation Sindoor, launched to dismantle cross-border terrorist networks.

On 22 July 2025, India announced that it would resume issuing tourist visas for Chinese citizens, ending a five-year suspension imposed following the 2020 border skirmishes. Modi with Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin at the SCO summit in Tianjin , China, 1 September 2025 In a sign of growing diplomatic engagement and economic cooperation, China has reportedly agreed to address India's concerns over export curbs on key commodities such as fertilisers, rare earth magnets and minerals, and tunnel boring machines.

The understanding followed high-level discussions between China's Director of the Office of the Central Foreign Affairs Commission Wang Yi and Indian External Affairs Minister S.Jaishankar during Wang's two-day visit to India in July 2025. According to Reports, Chinese authorities have begun responding to India's requests on these critical goods.

The move is viewed as part of broader efforts to improve bilateral ties, reflecting the two nations’ long-shared history and mutual interest in regional stability.

In September 2025, Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi met General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Xi Jinping in Tianjin , calling for India and China to act as partners rather than rivals. They agreed to resume direct flights, tourist visas, and the Kailash Mansarovar Yatra , suspended during the COVID-19 pandemic , and emphasized strategic autonomy while expanding cooperation on regional and global issues. Triangular relations The United States and Russia (previously Soviet Union) have been a consistent part of developments in Chinese and Indian relations.

As a major power, Japan has also been part of China–India relations, with initiatives such as the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue . Pakistan and China share warm relations that drive Chinese infrastructure projects in the disputed territory of northern Kashmir.

The Middle East, Latin America, and Africa are places where both India and China engage and compete.

The Middle East is important to both countries in terms of their energy security.

In Africa, China and India seem most engaged across a wide variety of issues, from development to peacekeeping.

In South Asia and South-East Asia, a power balance struggle between China and India is seen in triangular relations. Nepal Nepal 's geostrategic situation during periods of heightened tensions between China and India, such as during the 1962 war, resulted in varying shades of cautionary neutrality when making statements. Nepal's Permanent Representative stated, "we do not want to pass judgement on the merits of Sino-Indian border dispute.

As a country friendly to both...". Tulsi Giri , then the Nepalese foreign minister, stated, "Nepal's relations with India will remain close Yet, Nepal has a 600-mile boundary with China, China has now emerged as a great power. Friendly relations with our northern neighbour (China) should be the natural aim of the country's foreign policy." During the time Tibet was independent, Nepal played the role as an important buffer state and was central to influence between the regions.

The China-Nepal-India Economic Corridor (CNIEC) was proposed by China in April 2018. It is an extension of the agreed upon China-Nepal Trans-Himalayan Multi-dimensional Connectivity Network into India.

While China and Nepal have shown favourable reactions towards CNIEC, India is "indifferent". This indifference is postulated to stem from CNIEC being a part of BRI , China's growing influence over Nepal, and an end to "India's monopoly over Nepal's transit points and Nepal's attempt to end its dependency on India". United States On 11 November 1950, Sri Aurobindo wrote in Mother India , The gesture that can save is to take a firm line with China, denounce openly her nefarious intentions, stand without reservations by the USA Militarily, China is almost ten times as strong as we are, but India as the spearhead of an American defence of democracy can easily halt Mao’s mechanised millions." On 28 March 1963, Sudhir Ghosh recorded the President of the United States John F Kennedy 's reaction on reading Sri Aurobindo 's words, "One great Indian, Nehru, showed you the path of non-alignment between China and America, and another great Indian Aurobindo, showed you another way of survival.

The choice is up to the people of India." Earlier in the meeting, Ghosh recorded Kennedy's reaction to a letter from Nehru, "He indignantly said that only a few months earlier when Mr Nehru was overwhelmed by the power of Communist China, he made desperate appeal to him for air protection, and non-alignment or no non-alignment, the President had to respond. He added sarcastically that Mr Nehru's conversion lasted only a few days". Unlike the left-wing diplomatic leanings of the Indian Congress Party, the BJP administration has strengthened its strategic partnership with the United States. China faces combined challenges to its influence with its neighbors, and because it sees a growing threat from India and the United States' cooperation, it has exaggerated the discord between the two countries to divide and conquer its rivals. India participated in the restart of Quadrilateral Security Dialogue, and has strengthened the military, diplomatic, and economic cooperation with the United States, Japan, and Australia. More recently, after the deadly Chinese-initiated clash at Galwan Valley in June 2020, preceded by the 2017 Doklam standoff, the U.S.-based think tank, the Center for Foreign Relations, explained that there was a significant ramp-up in QUAD activity.

At the time, he suggested routes to the Indian Ocean through Myanmar.

In the same vein of invigorating relationships with geopolitical allies, India has also strengthened their Look East Policy , transforming it into the Act East Policy under the Modi administration.

The rebranded Act East Policy has an increased focus on infrastructure projects, such as the Agartala-Akhaura Rail Project and the Asian Trilateral Highway. Such geopolitical connectivity measures improved India's alliances with the Philippines, Malaysia, and Vietnam to check Chinese dominance. These soft power measures also enhance Indian border security. Western Indian Ocean The Western Indian Ocean has been characterised as an emerging "geopolitical theatre" marked by interstate conflict between India, China and the US.

The regions holds key geostrategic importance to all three states. Roughly 40 percent of world trade passes through the region as well as two thirds of global oil and gas supplies. It is a main gateway for global energy supply and two of the world's most important maritime chokepoints, the Bab-el Mandeb and Hormuz strait, are both located in the Western Indian Ocean region. India and China are both dependent on access and free passage in the Western Indian Ocean as it is crucial to secure the increasing energy demand by the two growing economies/ The US is also dependent on the free passage of oil from the Middle East to the trans-Atlantic world through the region. India and China are both motivated by defensive interests in securing their supplies of energy and trade in the region. Beyond this both states are attempting to increase their relative power positions, economically as well as militarily and naval. This is commonly understood through the terms String of Pearls regarding China and India's Act East Policy . This could potentially align the two countries against the US, but this does not seem to be the case. India and China continue to strive for similar power positions and power rivalry between the two states continue. Beijing is refusing to see India as a regional power and from an Indian perspective the Indian Ocean is largely seen as “India’s Ocean”. Any Chinese encroachment on India's sphere of interest is seen as a potential threat. To counter increased Chinese naval and economic presence India has joined the Quad-alliance between the US, Japan and Australia and is carrying out naval missions with the US, China's core strategic rival.

As such Sino-Indian relations in the Western Indian Ocean can be understood in terms of a triangular relationship of continuous counterbalancing between the three states. Both India and China have interests in containing the influence of the other, yet none of them has the capacity to fully do this. India's aspirations to become a great regional power are constrained for several reasons. New Delhi's focus has traditionally been directed towards the continent and its naval development is lagging behind both China and the US. Scholars also point towards the lack of a coherent maritime strategy despite increased political attention to the issue, for example through its Act East policy . Political protectionist tendencies have allowed China to increase its relative economic influence overtaking India's position as main trading partner in various countries in the region.

In 2005 China surpassed India and became Bangladesh's main trading partner. Despite these constraints China does not have the capacity to fully contain India. India continues to hold a special position in the region due to its dominating geographical position, history and interstate relations. Furthermore, it is in US interests to counterbalance China's increased naval strength through cooperation with India.

The first Sino-India border war broke out in 1962 at the Aksai Chin region, escalating into a month-long military conflict. Initiating the conflict, China took advantage of global concern about the ongoing Cuban missile crisis to time their regional invasion in hopes of building a military road in India's Ladakh region.

During the Narendra Modi administration, bloody clashes erupted again on the Sino-Indian border.

The strategic alliance between China and Pakistan, and the vigorous arming of the Pakistani forces , make India face the threat of a two-front war. Indian officials said the huge differences between the two sides on the border issue "eroded the entire basis" of their relationship. Maritime concerns According to Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), since 2020, Chinese research vessels with dual-use capabilities have expanded operations in the Indian Ocean Region, raising concerns.

While framed as scientific missions, these surveys—conducted by ships linked to state and military institutions—collect oceanographic data critical for submarine operations and undersea warfare. Vessels such as Xiang Yang Hong 06 and Shiyan 06 have mapped the seafloor, deployed sensors, and operated near Indian waters, sometimes while concealing their presence by disabling identification systems. Despite the evidence presented in a 2024 study conducted by the CSIS, Chinese state-media Global Times dismissed the concerns as a "China Threat Narrative". Chinese vessels have operated near sensitive maritime zones and within the EEZs of regional countries, prompting India to increase naval surveillance and diplomatic engagement.

In early 2024, Sri Lanka, imposed a temporary moratorium on Chinese research vessels docking at its ports, reflecting growing regional resistance to Beijing's opaque maritime activities.

In July 2025, a Chinese research vessel was caught operating covertly in the Bay of Bengal near Indian waters, according to a French maritime intelligence firm.

The ship had switched off its Automatic Identification System (AIS) but was tracked via radio frequency signals. It was likely conducting strategic activities such as seafloor mapping, acoustic analysis, and identifying submarine transit routes—operations linked to surveillance and anti-submarine warfare. Military exercises INS Kora (P61) escorting PLA Navy Ship Weifang off Visakhapatnam, India, in May 2014, during their visit to the Indian Navy's Eastern Naval Command. China and India conduct a joint military exercise called 'Exercise Hand–in–Hand'.

The exercise began in 2007, with the second edition taking place in 2008.

The third, fifth, and seventh editions of Hand-in-Hand were conducted in China in 2013, 2015, and 2018, respectively, while the fourth edition and sixth editions were held in India in 2014 and 2016.

The eighth edition was held in India in 2019.

In 2025, while India expressed significant concerns over China's construction of the Motuo Hydropower Station on the Yarlung Tsangpo River in Tibet, citing potential threats to water security, environmental stability, and regional livelihoods, Indian officials and experts warned that the project could enable China to control or divert river flows into India, affecting the Siang and Brahmaputra rivers, which are vital for millions in the northeastern states. Arunachal Pradesh Chief Minister Pema Khandu described the dam as an "existential threat" to indigenous communities such as the Adi tribe , highlighting risks of water scarcity or catastrophic flooding due to sudden water releases.

The Indian government formally urged China to ensure transparency, consult downstream countries, and safeguard the interests of riparian states, framing the issue as a matter of regional cooperation and stability. Some experts, observers, and individuals from journalistic fraternity from India have also expressed concerns. Dr. Jogendranath Sharma, an eminent geologist and retired professor from Dibrugarh University , cautioned that China's proposed 60,000 MW Medog Hydropower Project, located in a seismically active and ecologically sensitive region, could trigger severe natural disasters in downstream Assam. He cited potential risks including erosion from “hungry water,” disruption of groundwater systems, altered monsoon patterns, and threats to biodiversity and livelihoods, and advocated for a joint Indo-China environmental impact assessment.

On 19 July 2025, the Yarlung Zangbo hydropower project of China officially commenced construction. India and Bangladesh have raised concerns about the impact in their countries when the dam becomes operational after 2030.

In August 2025, India reiterated its concerns over China's Medog Hydropower Station, citing risks to regional water security, ecology, and downstream livelihoods.

The Ministry of External Affairs stated that the project was being closely monitored and that India had repeatedly urged Beijing to ensure transparency and consult downstream countries. External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar raised the issue during his July 2025 visit to China for the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation Foreign Ministers’ Meeting, also calling for the resumption of suspended hydrological data sharing. Indian observers have raised concerns about the legality of China's unilateral actions in asserting upstream control over transboundary rivers. Aravind Yelery, associate professor at Jawaharlal Nehru University , described China's approach as neglecting its responsibility to preserve river flows, suggesting it is driven by geopolitical ambitions and poses environmental and diplomatic risks. He noted similar patterns in China's management of the Mekong River, where multiple dams have been built without formal riparian agreements. Atul Kumar, a fellow at the Observer Research Foundation , highlighted that China has not entered into water-sharing treaties with its neighbors and often withholds hydrological data during periods of strained relations. Economic relations India-China economic relations have been institutionalized through the Joint Economic Group and Business Council, as well as more focused efforts such as the "Agreement on the Avoidance of Double Taxation". China and India have developed their own complementary skills following a period in which they had cut themselves off from each other.

By 2007, while China excelled at cost-effective manufacturing, India was skilled in cost effective designing and development.

In 2007, Tarun Khanna wrote in Harvard Business Review that "The simplest, and most powerful, way of combining China and India is to focus on hardware in China and on software in India." In the 2009 book "Getting China and India Right", the authors suggest a China plus India strategy so as to strategically benefit from both India's and China's scale, complementary strengths, and reducing the risk of being unilaterally present. There are cases when Indian companies have gone to China and done well, such as Mahindra and Mahindra , while Chinese companies such as Huawei have done well in India. Huawei set up its Indian unit in 1999 and by 2007, had 1500 engineers. Huawei's Bangalore unit, already one of Huawei's most important research and development centres, was Capability Maturity Model Level 5 certified in 2003.

In the oil sector, there is competition and engagement — China's Sinopec and China National Petroleum Corporation and India's Oil and Natural Gas Corporation fight over oil assets in some regions, while winning bids as joint ventures in others such as Syria, Colombia, Angola, and Venezuela.

Since the deterioration of relations between the two countries in the 2010s, India has banned a large number of Chinese technology companies and software, including Huawei, TikTok , WeChat , etc., from entering the Indian market.

In order to reduce Western countries' previous dependence on Chinese products, India plays an integral role in boosting supply chain resilience through friendshoring .

On 18 January 2024, at the World Economic Forum 2024 in Davos , Switzerland, top Indian industrial policy bureaucrat Rajesh Kumar Singh told Reuters that due to easing of border tensions between India and China in 2023, India could reduce its heightened scrutiny of Chinese investments in India although timeframe for it was not given.

In July 2025, China reportedly recalled over 300 engineers from Foxconn's iPhone plant in India. India responded by partnering with Taiwan, the US, South Korea, and Japan to secure engineers and critical manufacturing equipment.

In December 2025, India imposed anti-dumping duties on rolled Chinese steel. China's growing economic and political ties with India are reshaping regional dynamics. India's trade with China has reached $155 billion, significantly surpassing trade between China and its other partners.

As India's economy expands rapidly, stalled infrastructure projects and investment risks weaken the strategic alliance with China. This shift highlights a changing power balance and growing economic dependence. Bilateral trade China is India's second largest trading partner .

In June 2012, China asserted that "Sino-Indian ties" could be the most "important bilateral partnership of the century", seemingly substantiated by current Prime Minister Narendra Modi's historic visit to China in May 2015.

At that pivotal visit, Wen Jiabao , the Premier of China , and Manmohan Singh , the Prime Minister of India set a goal to increase Indo-Chinese bilateral trade to US$100 billion by 2015.

At the India-China Business Forum in Shanghai, Modi claimed that China and India would pool together their manufacturing capabilities, citing initiative examples, such as building “50 million houses by 2022”, "develop smart cities and mega industrial corridors”, and refining FDI policy and modernizing railway systems together. Bilateral trade between India and China. India's imports from China — 2010 to 2019.

Following that conference, bilateral trade between China and India touched US$89.6 billion in 2017–18, with the trade deficit widening to US$62.9 billion in China's favor.

In 2017, the volume of bilateral trade between India & China stood at US$84.5 billion. This figure excludes bilateral trade between India and Hong Kong, which stands at another US$34 billion. Chinese imports from India amounted to $16.4 billion, or 0.8% of its overall imports, and 4.2% of India's overall exports in 2014. Major commodities exported from India to China were: cotton; gems, precious metals, coins; copper; ores, slag, ash; organic chemicals; salt, sulphur, stone, cement; machines, engines, and pumps. Chinese exports to India amounted to $58.4 billion or 2.3% of its overall exports, which made up approximately 12.6% of India's overall imports in 2014. Major commodities exported from China to India were: electronic equipment; machines, engines, pumps; organic chemicals; fertilizers; iron and steel; plastics; iron or steel products; gems, precious metals, coins; ships, boats; medical, and technical equipment.

In 2018, a Standing Committee on Commerce chaired by Naresh Gujral submitted a report on the 'Impact of Chinese Goods on Indian Industry.' The report pointed out insufficient implementation of existing anti-dumping laws , reliance on Chinese raw materials in sectors such as pharmaceuticals, reliance on Chinese imports in India's National Solar Mission , Goods and Services Tax on certain products resulting in increased imports from China, and Indian smart city administrations preferring Chinese bicycles over Indian ones. India imported $65.3 billion worth of goods from China in the fiscal year ended March 2020, and exported $16.6 billion, according to the commerce ministry.

In 2020, in a departure from the previous pledges of collaboration, Modi instituted bans on Chinese products, including both intangible apps (TikTok) and tangible goods (toys and furniture). Furthermore, the Modi administration created the Phased Manufacturing Program to encourage India-based cellphone assembly and manufacturing. Under guidance from this legislation and the accompanying task force to reduce import dependence, India raised import duties on electronic items produced in China, as well as a laundry list of ancillary goods. According to a 2021 survey published in ThePrint , 43% of Indians did not buy ‘Made in China’ products since the Galwan clash the previous year. Modi also took notice of Swadeshi Jagran Manch's (SJM) campaigns, launching or reviving 220 out of 370 anti-dumping suits against Chinese items ranging from steels, pharmaceuticals, and chemicals. Due to the international sanctions against Russia following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine , Indian oil refiners started using Chinese yuan for payments of Russian oil imports as an alternative to the US dollar.

The Indian government also does not welcome the use of yuan for payments by its companies. Indian automakers have faced shortages due to export restrictions of China's rare earth metals . Due to rising trade tensions with the US such as the imposition of 50% tariffs over India's trade with Russia on the majority of Indian goods by President Donald Trump , which took effect in August 2025, India had a diplomatic shift strengthening its ties with China.

By September 2025, visa issuances have resumed, and India had begun considering Chinese firms to hold 20% to 25% stakes in its manufacturing, renewable energy, and auto parts sectors.

In December 2025, China filed a case against India with the World Trade Organization over tariffs.

The author argues that expectations of India emerging as a global power comparable to China have faded over the past decade. Despite early optimism after economic liberalisation, India did not industrialise or grow at a pace similar to China and remains relatively poor on a per-capita basis.

As a result, India is no longer seen internationally as China's peer, and domestic political ambition has shifted toward regional rather than global competition. A second shift, the author says, is the erosion of India's democratic character.

While elections remain largely competitive, civil liberties have declined, affecting free expression, religion, academia, civil society, and the rule of law. International assessments have downgraded India from a full democracy to a flawed or partly free system.

The author concludes that both diminished economic ambition and democratic backsliding have become widely accepted realities in India. India has eased restriction on Chinese investments, aiming to attract foreign capital to support its economy, which is under pressure due to rising energy prices.

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 9 February 2011. ^ "Why Indo-China ties will be more favourable than Sino-Pak" . Theworldreporter.com. 7 July 2010. Archived from the original on 19 October 2010. ^ India-China trade surpasses target Archived 10 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine , The Hindu , 2 January 2010. ^ "US Becomes India's Biggest Trading Partner, Surpasses China" . NDTV . 29 May 2022. Archived from the original on 29 May 2022 . Retrieved 29 May 2022 . ^ ^ "India-China dispute: The border row explained in 400 words" . BBC News . 16 June 2020 . Retrieved 29 May 2026 . ^ Jeff M. Smith today's Wall Street Journal Asia (24 June 2009). "The China-India Border Brawl" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 10 July 2015 . Retrieved 16 May 2016 . ^ AK Antony admits China incursion Archived 30 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine , DNA, 28 September 2011. ^ "China-Pakistan military links upset India" . Financial Times . 27 November 2009 . Retrieved 16 May 2016 . ^ Lintner, Bertil (30 October 2020). "Behind China's threat to support insurgency in India" . Asia Times . Archived from the original on 31 October 2020 . Retrieved 31 October 2020 . ^ China warns India on South China Sea exploration projects Archived 24 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine , The Hindu , 15 September 2011. ^ Aamir Peerzada (16 October 2020). "The Tibetans serving in 'secretive' Indian force" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 19 October 2020 . Retrieved 28 May 2022 . ^ Geeta Mohan (1 January 2022). "China protests Indian MPs' attending Tibetan reception, Tibet govt-in-exile fires back" . India Today . Archived from the original on 1 January 2022 . Retrieved 28 May 2022 . ^ "Major Power Rivalry in South Asia" . Council on Foreign Relations . Archived from the original on 24 April 2023 . Retrieved 24 April 2023 . ^ a b Shreya, Upadhyay. "India and China: Trading With the Enemy" .

The Diplomat . Retrieved 16 May 2024 . ^ a b "Analysing China's threat perception of India-United States relations" . Firstpost . 8 April 2023. Archived from the original on 8 April 2023 . Retrieved 8 April 2023 . ^ Chanhudaro, Ernest J. Mackay, American Oriental Society, 2090 ^ Zhao, Deyun (2014). "Study on the etched carnelian beads unearthed in China" (PDF) . Chinese Archaeology . 14 : 176– 181. doi : 10.1515/char-2014-0019 . S2CID 132040238 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 December 2021 . Retrieved 28 February 2021 – via The Institute of Archaeology (CASS). ^ Henry Davidson, A Short History of Chess , p. 6. ^ Colless, Brian (December 1980). "Han and Shen-tu China's Ancient Relations with South Asia". East and West . 30 (1/4): 157– 177. JSTOR 29756564 . Interpretations of the term differ, but there is evidence from Roman sources of Chinese goods from a place called This travelling from Central Asia to the port of Barygaza and thence to South India. ^ Indian Embassy, Beijing. India-China Bilateral Relations – Historical Ties . Archived 21 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ Joseph Needham , Volume 3, p. 109 ^ Ananth Krishnan (19 July 2013). "Behind China's Hindu temples, a forgotten history" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 21 June 2014 . Retrieved 16 May 2016 . ^ China's Hindu temples: A forgotten history .

The Hindu . 18 July 2013 . Retrieved 28 December 2024 – via YouTube. ^ "Multimedia" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 19 January 2016. ^ "What to do in Quanzhou: China's forgotten historic port – CNN Travel" . Archived from the original on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 16 May 2016 . ^ Chatterjee, Garga (14 May 2017). "OBOR: As Mamata seeks Chinese investment for Bengal, why is Delhi bent on playing spoilsport?" . Scroll Media. Archived from the original on 7 September 2018 . Retrieved 6 September 2018 . ^ Nilakanta Sastri 2002 , pp. 304–305. ^ Cheng, Anne ; Kumar, Sanchit (2020). Indian Mendicants in Ming and Qing China: A Preliminary Study by Matthew W. Mosca in India-China: Intersecting Universalities . Collège de France. p. 19. ISBN 9782722605367 . Archived from the original on 10 May 2022 . Retrieved 10 May 2022 . ^ Kamath (2001), p235-236 ^ Kamath (2001), p236-237 ^ "A sultan's silken dreams" . www.downtoearth.org.in . 18 November 2015. Archived from the original on 21 August 2022 . Retrieved 21 August 2022 . ^ Mosca, Matthew W. (31 July 2015).

From frontier policy to foreign policy : the question of India and the transformation of geopolitics in Qing China . Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-9729-0 . OCLC 1027518281 . ^ The Sino-Indian Border Disputes, by Alfred P. Rubin, The International and Comparative Law Quarterly, Vol. 9, No. 1. (January 1960), pp. 96–125. ^ "When Indian, Chinese soldiers fought together" .

The Times of India . 15 September 2020. Archived from the original on 12 July 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Choudhuri, Atonu (29 January 2008). "Monumental neglect of war graves – Discovered in 1997, Jairampur cemetery gets entangled in red tape" . Telegraph India . Archived from the original on 11 July 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Sen, Tansen; Tsui, Brian (1 November 2020). Beyond Pan-Asianism: Connecting China and India, 1840s–1960s . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-099212-5 . ^ Hogel, Bernhard (2005). India and China in the Colonial World . Berghahn Books. ISBN 9788187358206 . Archived from the original on 24 April 2023 . Retrieved 18 March 2023 . ^ "Religion in Chinese Life" . Archived from the original on 14 April 2008 . Retrieved 11 January 2014 . ^ Okakura, Tenshin (1904) Ideal of the East Archived 10 August 2022 at the Wayback Machine ^ Sun Yat-sen's speech on Pan-Asianism ^ "In the Footsteps of Xuanzang: Tan Yun-Shan and India" . Archived from the original on 16 March 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 . ^ "Transforming India-Taiwan Relations" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 May 2022 . Retrieved 17 June 2022 . ^ Playing with Fire: Taiwan and India's Long Courtship Archived 8 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine Global Asia ^ Deepak, B. R. (2005). India and Taiwan: From Benign Neglect to Pragmatism . VIJ Books (India) PVT Limited. ISBN 9789384464912 . Archived from the original on 24 April 2023 . Retrieved 18 March 2023 . ^ Pakula, Hannah (2009).

The Last Empress Madame Chiang Kai-shek and the Birth of Modern China . Simon and Schuster. ISBN 9781439154236 . Archived from the original on 8 April 2023 . Retrieved 18 March 2023 . ^ Why is India's Dr Kotnis revered in China? Archived 1 September 2022 at the Wayback Machine BBC ^ "蒋介石曾以"元首身份"访印度 与甘地谈6小时" . Archived from the original on 27 December 2013 . Retrieved 11 January 2014 . ^ Mohanty, Sachidananda (August 2020). "The Chinese Betrayal, Early Warnings Unheeded: Lessons from Sardar Patel and Sri Aurobindo" (PDF) . Friends of Tibet . pp. 21– 27. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 January 2021 . Retrieved 30 January 2021 . ^ "Xi to Kovind: China-India relations are at a new starting point" .

The Week . 1 April 2020. Archived from the original on 10 May 2020 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 . ^ "Asia Times Online :: China News, China Business News, Taiwan and Hong Kong News and Business" . 22 February 2006. Archived from the original on 22 February 2006. ^ "Agreement on Trade and Intercourse with Tibet Region" . www.mea.gov.in . Archived from the original on 23 July 2021 . Retrieved 23 July 2021 . ^ a b LL Mehrotra (2000). India's Tibet Policy: An Appraisal And Options Archived 8 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine . pp 25, 26. Tibetan Parliamentary and Policy Research Centre. Third edition. New Delhi. ^ "GMF – The New Great Game: Why the Bush administration has embraced India" . 16 December 2008. Archived from the original on 16 December 2008 . Retrieved 18 February 2025 . ^ "China, quid without a quo: 1954 India-China trade agreement was one-sided affair" .

The Financial Express . 9 July 2020. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020 . Retrieved 8 August 2020 . ^ "Don't believe in Hindi-Chini bhai-bhai, Nehru told envoy" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 5 March 2011. ^ Raghavan, Srinath (2010), War and Peace in Modern India , Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 978-1-137-00737-7 , pp. 241-242. ^ Hudson, G. F. (1963), "Aksai Chin" , Far Eastern Affairs , St. Antony's Papers, vol. 14, London: Chatto & Windus, archived from the original on 22 October 2021 , retrieved 3 March 2021 , pp.17–18 ^ a b Fingar, Thomas (2016). "China's Goals in South Asia".

The new great game : China and South and Central Asia in the era of reform . Thomas Fingar. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press . p. 31. ISBN 978-0-8047-9764-1 . OCLC 939553543 . ^ "The MAN In Sam Manekshaw" . Brut . Parzor Foundation. 3 July 2020 . Archived from the original on 1 March 2021 . Retrieved 8 March 2021 .

The life and career of Sam Hormusji Framji Jamshedji Manekshaw... Back in 2002, interviewed by his own grandson for a documentary, this is how he recounted his days Thanks to Parzor Foundation for the footage. ^ Bajwa, Farooq Naseem. (30 September 2013).

From Kutch to Tashkent : the Indo-Pakistan war of 1965 . London. ISBN 978-1-84904-230-7 . OCLC 809939368 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ The Foreign Policy of Sirimavo Bandaranaike – The Colombo and the Sino-Indian War of 1962 ^ "Rapprochement Across the Himalayas: Emerging India-China Relations Post Cold" Mishra, Keshav (2004). Rapprochement Across the Himalayas: Emerging India-China Relations Post Cold War Period (1947–2003) . Gyan Publishing House. ISBN 9788178352947 . Archived from the original on 6 January 2016 . Retrieved 15 November 2015 . p. 40 ^ Ananth Krishnan (25 November 2010). "Huang Hua, diplomat who helped thaw ties with India, passes away" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 9 January 2016 . Retrieved 16 May 2016 . ^ "Military common sense" . Archived from the original on 17 March 2009 . Retrieved 16 May 2016 . ^ a b c "indiatodaygroup.com" . Archived from the original on 2 June 2008. ^ India's Land of the Rising Sun Archived 31 December 2005 at the Wayback Machine Deccan Herald ^ "Obituary: Warrior as Scholar: Gen (retd) K Sundarji (1928–1999)" . Archived from the original on 24 September 2009 . Retrieved 16 May 2016 . ^ "Need to strengthen border with China" . Deccan Herald . Archived from the original on 23 February 2005. ^ Lin Liangguang Ye Zhengjia and Han Hua, Contemporary China's Relations with South Asia Countries, Beijing: Social Sciences Documentation Publishing House 2001. ^ "Why is China alienating half a billion young Indians?" . South China Morning Post . 25 July 2017. Archived from the original on 25 July 2017 . Retrieved 27 July 2017 . ^ "China, India agree on "strategic partnership" " . Chinese Embassy in India . 12 April 2005. Archived from the original on 17 February 2020 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 . ^ "The reality of the India-China strategic dialogue" . Livemint . 24 February 2017. Archived from the original on 27 July 2020 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 . ^ "India-China trade link to reopen" Archived 21 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine , BBC News, 19 June 2006. Retrieved 31 January 2007. ^ "India and China row over border" Archived 15 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine , BBC News, 14 November 2006. Retrieved 31 January 2007. ^ "China denies visa to IAS officer" . CNN-IBN. 25 May 2007. Archived from the original on 21 August 2007 . Retrieved 31 August 2007 . ^ "South Asia – Chinese 'border gesture' to India" . 7 December 2007. Archived from the original on 18 July 2016 . Retrieved 16 May 2016 . ^ "A thaw? China lets Arunachalee visit" .

The Times of India . 9 December 2007. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013 . Retrieved 16 May 2016 . ^ David Miliband , Written Ministerial Statement on Tibet (29/10/2008) Archived 2 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine , Foreign Office website. Retrieved 25 November 2008. ^ Richard Spencer, UK recognises China's direct rule over Tibet Archived 3 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine , The Daily Telegraph , 5 November 2008 ^ Shai Oster, U.K. Policy Angers Tibet Ahead of Beijing Talks Archived 5 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine , The Wall Street Journal , 1 November 2008 ^ Britain's suzerain remedy Archived 10 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine , The Economist , 6 November 2008 ^ Robert Barnett, Did Britain Just Sell Tibet? Archived 5 January 2015 at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times , 24 November 2008 ^ "Project Records | Asian Development Bank" . Adb.org. 11 September 2008. Archived from the original on 24 April 2012 . Retrieved 3 August 2012 . ^ "China objected to ADB loan to India" .

The New Indian Express . 9 July 2009. Archived from the original on 6 November 2013 . Retrieved 3 August 2012 . ^ "China objected to ADB loan to India for Arunachal project: Krishna (Lead) – Thaindian News" . Thaindian.com. 9 July 2009. Archived from the original on 7 October 2012 . Retrieved 3 August 2012 . ^ "Chinese premier urges closer cultural, youth links with India – People's Daily Online" . People's Daily . 17 December 2010. Archived from the original on 15 October 2012 . Retrieved 3 August 2012 . ^ "Chinese PM Wen Jiabao begins bumper Indian trade trip" . BBC News . 15 December 2010. Archived from the original on 26 January 2011. ^ "The Tribune, Chandigarh, India – Main News" .

The Tribune . Archived from the original on 2 November 2012 . Retrieved 3 August 2012 . ^ "Indian PM Manmohan Singh heads to China for talks" . BBC News . 11 April 2011. Archived from the original on 12 April 2011. ^ "Nri" .

The Times of India . 13 April 2011. Archived from the original on 18 April 2011. ^ "India, China to restore defence co-operation : Neighbours, News" . India Today . 13 April 2011. Archived from the original on 1 August 2011 . Retrieved 3 August 2012 . ^ "2011: India, China solve stapled visa issue; put off border talks" .

The Times of India . 23 December 2011. Archived from the original on 14 March 2017. ^ "China wants to deepen strategic cooperation with India: Hu Jintao" .

The Times of India . 30 March 2012. Archived from the original on 14 March 2017. ^ Nelson, Dean. "China warns India of arrogance over missile launch." Archived 20 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine The Telegraph . 20 April 2012. ^ "India says China agrees retreat to de facto border in faceoff deal" . Reuters Editorial. 6 May 2013. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 16 May 2016 . ^ "India Destroyed Bunkers in Chumar to Resolve Ladakh Row" Archived 24 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine . Defence News . 8 May 2013. Retrieved 11 May 2013. ^ "Chinese premier visits India" . Archived from the original on 14 March 2016 . Retrieved 16 May 2016 . ^ "Joint Statement on the State Visit of Chinese Premier Li Keqiang to India" . Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India . Ministry of External Affairs (India) . 20 May 2013. Archived from the original on 9 January 2016 . Retrieved 14 October 2015 . ^ Aakriti Bachhawat. "China's Arunachal Pradesh Fixation" .

The Diplomat . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 16 May 2016 . ^ "China reiterates claim on Arunachal Pradesh through mouthpiece" .

The Times of India . 30 November 2013. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. ^ Goswami, Ranjit (13 May 2015). "Make China India's natural ally for development" . Observer Research Foundation. Archived from the original on 14 February 2017 . Retrieved 14 February 2017 . ^ Goswami, Ranjit (11 May 2015). "Can Modi Make China India's Natural Ally for Development?" . HuffPost . Archived from the original on 14 February 2017 . Retrieved 14 February 2017 . ^ "Chinese troops said to be 2 km inside LAC, build-up on the rise" .

The Indian Express . 23 September 2014. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 16 May 2016 . ^ Krishnan, Ananth (31 October 2014). "Delhi, Kabul warn China: Pak maybe your ally but it exports terror" . India Today . Living Media India Limited. Archived from the original on 1 November 2014 . Retrieved 1 November 2014 . ^ Patrick Frater (4 November 2015). "AFM: Golden Network Kicks Off With Jackie Chan Movie Pair" . Variety . Archived from the original on 2 February 2017 . Retrieved 1 November 2016 . ^ "India to boycott China summit amid Kashmir concerns" . Channel NewsAsia . Archived from the original on 16 May 2017 . Retrieved 27 July 2017 . ^ "Press Release – Ministry of Foreign Affairs" . mfa.gov.bt . Archived from the original on 30 June 2017 . Retrieved 20 August 2017 . ^ China Foreign Ministry 2017 , p. 6. ^ a b Barry, Steven Lee Myers, Ellen; Fisher, Max (26 July 2017). "How India and China Have Come to the Brink Over a Remote Mountain Pass" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 27 August 2017 . Retrieved 16 August 2017 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b "China says India violates 1890 agreement in border stand-off" . Reuters . 3 July 2017. Archived from the original on 15 August 2017 . Retrieved 16 August 2017 . ^ Safi, Michael (5 July 2017). "Chinese and Indian troops face off in Bhutan border dispute" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 10 August 2017 . Retrieved 10 August 2017 . ^ "Doklam standoff: China sends a warning to India over border dispute" . Los Angeles Times . Associated Press. 24 July 2017. Archived from the original on 11 August 2017 . Retrieved 11 August 2017 . ^ Heydarian, Richard (24 June 2019). "Beijing's Inchoate Hegemony: The Brewing Backlash in Asia to China's Resurgence" . Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . Archived from the original on 18 May 2023 . Retrieved 8 April 2023 . ^ Safi, Michael (5 July 2017). "Chinese and Indian troops face off in Bhutan border dispute" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 10 August 2017 . Retrieved 10 August 2017 . ^ "China warns Indian troops to get out of contested region" . AccessWDUN . Archived from the original on 10 August 2017 . Retrieved 10 August 2017 . ^ a b China Foreign Ministry (2 August 2017). "The Facts and China's Position Concerning the Indian Border Troops' Crossing of the China-India Boundary in the Sikkim Sector into the Chinese Territory (2017-08-02)" (PDF) . fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/wjdt_665385/2649_665393/ . Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 August 2017 . Retrieved 15 August 2017 . ^ "Recent Developments in Doklam Area" . mea.gov.in . Archived from the original on 16 August 2017 . Retrieved 17 August 2017 . ^ Panda, Ankit. "What's Driving the India-China Standoff at Doklam?" .

The Diplomat . Archived from the original on 19 July 2017 . Retrieved 17 August 2017 . ^ "Bhutan issues demarche to China over its army's road construction" . 28 June 2017. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017 . Retrieved 28 July 2017 . ^ "If China unilaterally changes status-quo in Doklam, it's a challenge to our security: Sushma Swaraj" .

The Indian Express . 20 July 2017. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017 . Retrieved 27 July 2017 . ^ "Doklam stand-off: China wants India to retreat for meaningful dialogue" . Business Standard . 10 July 2017. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017 . Retrieved 27 July 2017 . ^ "China said India's withdrawal a prerequisite for meaningful dialogue" . 20 July 2017. Archived from the original on 2 March 2019 . Retrieved 27 July 2017 – via YouTube. ^ Chaudhury, Dipanjan Roy (21 July 2017). "For dialogue, both India and China must withdraw troops, says Sushma Swaraj" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 29 July 2017 . Retrieved 27 July 2017 . ^ "印度边防部队在中印边界锡金段越界 进入中国领土的事实和中国的立场" (PDF) (in Chinese). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 August 2017. ^ "The Facts and China's Position Concerning the Indian Border Troops' Crossing of the China-India Boundary in the Sikkim Sector into the Chinese Territory (2017-08-02)" (PDF) . fmprc.gov.cn . 2 August 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 August 2017 . Retrieved 12 August 2017 . ^ "China issues position document on Indian border troop trespass – Xinhua | English.news.cn" . Xinhua News Agency. Archived from the original on 21 August 2019 . Retrieved 21 August 2019 . ^ Blanchard, Ben (4 August 2017). "China says India building up troops amid border stand-off" . Reuters. Archived from the original on 5 August 2017 . Retrieved 5 August 2017 . ^ Ministry of External Affairs, India (4 August 2017), Weekly Media Briefing by Official Spokesperson (August 4, 2017) , archived from the original on 2 March 2019 , retrieved 16 August 2017 ^ "With the Release of an Official Document, China Ups the Ante Again on Doklam" .

The Wire . 2 August 2017. Archived from the original on 26 June 2018 . Retrieved 26 June 2018 . ^ Chaudhury, Dipanjan Roy (29 August 2017). "Doklam: There won't be a war at Doklam as India and China agree to disengage" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 11 November 2020 . Retrieved 3 October 2020 . ^ India, China likely to jointly undertake projects in Afghanistan Archived 7 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine , The Economic Times , 7 May 2018. ^ "India won't join BRI, its concept won't apply to us: Jaishankar" . Asian News International . 4 October 2019. Archived from the original on 6 October 2019 . Retrieved 5 October 2019 . ^ Mehta, Ashok K. (10 October 2020). "PM Modi, Xi Jinping Spend "Quality Time", Talk Trade, Terror: 10 Points" . NDTV . Archived from the original on 18 October 2020 . Retrieved 10 October 2020 . ^ Mehta, Ashok K. (10 October 2020). "Where Does the India-China Border Dispute Stand Now, and What Can We Expect?" .

The Wire . Archived from the original on 15 October 2020 . Retrieved 10 October 2020 . ^ Korolev, Alexander S. (2023). "Political and Economic Security in Multipolar Eurasia". China and Eurasian Powers in a Multipolar World Order 2.0: Security, Diplomacy, Economy and Cyberspace . Mher Sahakyan. New York: Routledge . ISBN 978-1-003-35258-7 . OCLC 1353290533 . ^ Janjua, Haroon (10 May 2020). "Chinese and Indian troops injured in border brawl" .

The Times . ISSN 0140-0460 . Archived from the original on 12 May 2020 . Retrieved 12 May 2020 . ^ "Indian and Chinese soldiers injured in cross-border fistfight, says Delhi" .

The Guardian . Agence France-Presse. 11 May 2020. ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 12 May 2020 . Retrieved 12 May 2020 . ^ Vedika Sud; Ben Westcott (11 May 2020). "Chinese and Indian soldiers engage in 'aggressive' cross-border skirmish" . CNN . Archived from the original on 12 May 2020 . Retrieved 12 May 2020 . ^ Sushant Singh, Chinese intrusions at 3 places in Ladakh, Army chief takes stock Archived 30 May 2020 at the Wayback Machine , The Indian Express, 24 May 2020. ^ Pubby, Manu (17 June 2020). "Over 20 soldiers, including Commanding Officer killed at Galwan border clash with China" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 17 June 2020 . Retrieved 17 June 2020 . ^ "China sent martial artists to LAC before deadly clash: Report" . Aljazeera. 28 June 2020. Archived from the original on 3 July 2020 . Retrieved 4 July 2020 . ^ Patranobis, Sutirtho (28 June 2020). "China deployed martial art trainers along Tibet during border tension with India: Reports" . Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 5 July 2020 . Retrieved 4 July 2020 . ^ Singh, Vijaita (11 September 2020). "LAC standoff | Officials confirm two incidents of firing at south bank of Pangong Tso" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 4 November 2020 . Retrieved 11 September 2020 . ^ Laskar, Rezaul H; Singh, Rahul; Patranobis, Sutirtho (18 June 2020). "India warns China of serious impact on ties, Modi talks of 'befitting' reply" . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 17 June 2020 . Retrieved 18 June 2020 . ^ Suneja, Kirtika; Agarwal, Surabhi (17 June 2020). "Is This Hindi-Chini Bye Bye on Trade Front? Maybe Not: No immediate impact likely on business relations, say govt officials" (print version) .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 17 June 2020 . Retrieved 18 June 2020 . ^ P, Neelam; ey (16 June 2020). "Traders' body calls for boycott of 3,000 Chinese products over 'continued' border clashes" . ThePrint . Archived from the original on 18 June 2020 . Retrieved 17 June 2020 . ^ "Tik Tok ban in India: Centre bans 59 mobile apps including Tik Tok. This action was taken by the Indian government after a border conflict with China that left over twenty Indian soldiers dead. UC Browser, others" .

The Times of India . 29 June 2020. Archived from the original on 29 June 2020 . Retrieved 29 June 2020 . ^ Bloomberg (21 August 2020). "India slaps new curbs on visas, schools to stem China's influence" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 22 August 2020 . Retrieved 21 August 2020 . ^ The Time of India. "Chinese spy ring busted in Delhi, 3 held" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 20 September 2020 . Retrieved 19 September 2020 . ^ Griffiths, James (27 October 2020). "India signs defensive agreement with US following Himalayan standoff with China" . CNN . Archived from the original on 28 October 2020 . Retrieved 27 October 2020 . ^ Laskar, Rezaul H (12 August 2022). "In 1st remarks on Nancy Pelosi's Taiwan trip, India doesn't mention 'one-China' policy" . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 12 August 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 . ^ "Explained: The 'One China' policy on Taiwan and India's stance on it" . First post . 4 August 2022. Archived from the original on 27 May 2023 . Retrieved 4 August 2022 . ^ "India-China Situation "Still Not Normal", Says Government" . NDTV. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022 . Retrieved 7 October 2022 . ^ Rajeswari Pillai Rajagopalan. "China-India Relations in a State of Limbo" . Diplomat Media. Archived from the original on 23 October 2022 . Retrieved 23 October 2022 . ^ Ramachandran, Sudha. "India Abstains on Xinjiang Resolution at UNHRC" .

The Diplomat . Retrieved 17 November 2024 . ^ "India slams China at UN for blocking move to designate 2611 accused Sajid Mir as 'global terrorist' " .

The Hindu . 21 June 2023. ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 24 June 2023 . Retrieved 24 June 2023 . ^ Moghul, Rhea; McCarthy, Simone (25 August 2023). "India's Modi and China's Xi agree to 'intensify efforts' to deescalate border issue following rare meeting" . CNN . Archived from the original on 26 August 2023 . Retrieved 26 August 2023 . ^ Sen, Amiti (21 October 2024). "LAC breakthrough: India, China agree on patrolling arrangements in border area" . BusinessLine . Retrieved 22 October 2024 . ^ "India and China agree to resume air travel after nearly five years" . Reuters . 27 January 2025 . Retrieved 27 January 2025 . ^ Schipani, Andres; Reed, John (13 April 2025). "India launches biggest-ever joint naval exercises in Africa" . Financial Times . Retrieved 14 April 2025 . ^ "India, China move to normalise ties, Kailash Mansarovar Yatra to resume in June after 5 years" .

The Indian Express . 27 April 2025 . Retrieved 28 April 2025 . ^ "India calls for 'permanent solution' in China border dispute – DW – 06/27/2025" . dw.com . Retrieved 30 June 2025 . ^ "Raksha Mantri meets his Chinese counterpart on the sidelines of SCO Defence Ministers' meeting in Qingdao" . ^ "India seeks 'permanent solution' to border dispute with China" . CNA . Retrieved 30 June 2025 . ^ Mogul, Rhea; Iyer, Aishwarya S. (24 July 2025). "Indian and Chinese travelers hail end of visa freeze between world's two most populous nations as diplomatic tensions thaw" . CNN . Retrieved 9 August 2025 . ^ "India gets relief as China moves to lift curbs on rare earths, fertilisers" . ^ "PM, Xi Boost India-China Ties with Direct Flights, Trade, Optics: 10 Points" . NDTV . ^ Bajpai, Kanti; Ho, Selina; Miller, Manjari Chatterjee (25 February 2020). "Introduction: Taking stock—a multi–disciplinary view of China–India relations.

The impact of triangular relations.". Routledge Handbook of China–India Relations . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-351-00154-0 . ^ Upadhyaya, Priyankar (1987). "2". Nonaligned States and India's International Conflicts (Thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy of the Jawaharlal Nehru University thesis) . Centre For International Politics Organization And Disarmament School Of International Studies New Delhi. pp. 75– 80. hdl : 10603/16265 . ^ Upadhya, Sanjay (27 February 2012). Nepal and the Geo-Strategic Rivalry between China and India . Routledge. p. 1. ISBN 978-1-136-33550-1 . ^ PTI (18 April 2018). "India China Nepal economic corridor: China moots India-Nepal-China economic corridor through Himalayas" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 25 June 2021 . Retrieved 16 June 2021 . ^ a b Behera, Anshuman; Mayilvaganan, M. (4 March 2021). "The China–Nepal–India Economic Corridor: wishful thinking or regional aspiration beyond rhetoric?" .

The Round Table . 110 (2): 250– 263. doi : 10.1080/00358533.2021.1904586 . ISSN 0035-8533 . S2CID 233464054 . ^ a b Mohanty, Sachidananda (August 2020). "The Chinese Betrayal, Early Warnings Unheeded: Lessons from Sardar Patel and Sri Aurobindo" (PDF) . Friends of Tibet . pp. 16– 19. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 January 2021 . Retrieved 30 January 2021 . ^ Šumit, Ganguly (2022). "Obama, Trump and Indian foreign policy under Modi" . Nature Public Health Emergency Collection . 59 (1): 9– 23. doi : 10.1057/s41311-021-00294-4 . PMC 7980102 . PMID 40477437 . ^ a b c Smith, Sheila. "The Quad in the Indo-Pacific: What to Know" . Council on Foreign Relations . Archived from the original on 3 May 2023 . Retrieved 27 April 2023 . ^ a b "Galwan Valley: China and India clash on freezing and inhospitable battlefield" . BBC News . 17 June 2020. Archived from the original on 31 May 2022 . Retrieved 27 April 2023 . ^ a b Karackattu, Joe Thomas (26 May 2020). "The Corrosive Compromise of the Sino-Indian Border Management Framework: From Doklam to Galwan" . Asian Affairs . 51 (3): 590– 604. doi : 10.1080/03068374.2020.1804726 . ISSN 0306-8374 . S2CID 222093756 . ^ "Geopolitics Africa: Modi Critiques China's Debt-Trap, Highlights India's Empowerment Model" . Deccan Herald . Retrieved 4 July 2025 . ^ Lintner, Bertil (15 April 2019). "Introduction".

The Costliest Pearl: China's Struggle for India's Ocean . Oxford University Press. p. 3. ISBN 978-1-78738-240-4 . ^ a b Hall, Ian; Ganguly, Šumit (1 February 2022). "Introduction: Narendra Modi and India's foreign policy" . International Politics . 59 (1): 1– 8. doi : 10.1057/s41311-021-00363-8 . ISSN 1740-3898 . PMC 8556799 . PMID 40477367 . ^ a b Banerjee, Anamitra (25 April 2022). "Comparing India's Look East and Act East Policies" . JK Policy Institute . Archived from the original on 1 May 2023 . Retrieved 7 May 2023 . ^ "Comparing India's Look East and Act East Policies" . JK Policy Institute . 25 April 2022. Archived from the original on 1 May 2023 . Retrieved 27 April 2023 . ^ a b Jha, Prem Shankar (May 2017). "China–India Relations under Modi: Playing with Fire" . China Report . 53 (2): 158– 171. doi : 10.1177/0009445517696630 . ISSN 0009-4455 . S2CID 157801747 . Archived from the original on 1 May 2023 . Retrieved 12 May 2023 . ^ a b c Bueger, Christian; Stockbruegger, Jan (3 April 2022). "Maritime security and the Western Indian Ocean's militarisation dilemma" . African Security Review . 31 (2): 195– 210. doi : 10.1080/10246029.2022.2053556 . ISSN 1024-6029 . ^ a b c Lieberherr, Boas (May 2021). "Geostrategic Storm in the Indian Ocean" . CSS Analyses in Security Policy . 284 . doi : 10.3929/ethz-b-000480516 . ISSN 2296-0244 . ^ a b c d e Gurjar, Sankalp (3 September 2019). "Geopolitics of Western Indian Ocean: Unravelling China's Multi-dimensional Presence" . Strategic Analysis . 43 (5): 385– 401. doi : 10.1080/09700161.2019.1647657 . ISSN 0970-0161 . ^ a b c Bo, Hu (2020), "China in a multipolar world" , Navies in Multipolar Worlds , Routledge, pp. 216– 234, doi : 10.4324/9780367855406-13 , ISBN 978-0-367-85540-6 , retrieved 25 May 2024 ^ a b c d Hornat, Jan (2 April 2016). "The power triangle in the Indian Ocean: China, India and the United States" . Cambridge Review of International Affairs . 29 (2): 425– 443. doi : 10.1080/09557571.2014.974507 . ISSN 0955-7571 . ^ a b c Pant, Harsh V. "India and China Slug It Out in South Asia" . thediplomat.com . Retrieved 25 May 2024 . ^ a b c Gill, Don McLain (4 May 2021). "Between the Elephant and the Dragon: examining the Sino-Indian competition in the Indian Ocean" . Journal of the Indian Ocean Region . 17 (2): 235– 254. doi : 10.1080/19480881.2020.1824393 . ISSN 1948-0881 . ^ Mohan, Surinder; Abraham, Josukutty C. (2 January 2020). "Shaping the regional and maritime battlefield?

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 15 May 2023 . Retrieved 15 May 2023 . ^ a b Powers-Riggs, Matthew P. Funaiole, Brian Hart, Aidan. "Surveying the Seas: China's Dual-Use Research Operations in the Indian Ocean" . features.csis.org . Retrieved 14 July 2025 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Torode, Greg (12 January 2024). "China media warns against taking China's Indian Ocean research as threats" . Reuters . Retrieved 14 July 2025 . ^ "Sri Lanka declares moratorium on research ships for a year amid Indian concerns over Chinese vessels" . AP News . 5 January 2024 . Retrieved 14 July 2025 . ^ "Chinese ship caught hiding presence in Bay of Bengal: Report cites French maritime intel" . Firstpost . 11 July 2025 . Retrieved 14 July 2025 . ^ Pubby, Manu (10 July 2025). " 'Hidden' Chinese research vessel in Bay of Bengal" .

The Economic Times . ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 14 July 2025 . ^ "Military Exercises" . PIB . 4 March 2020. Archived from the original on 3 June 2022 . Retrieved 7 November 2020 . ^ Bhattacharyya, Rajeev (27 December 2019). "Hand-in-Hand 2019: Indian and Chinese Armies Come Together for Joint Military Exercise" .

The Diplomat . Archived from the original on 27 November 2020 . Retrieved 7 November 2020 . ^ Kishore Kumar Khera (2017). International Military Exercises: An Indian Perspective Archived 24 December 2020 at the Wayback Machine , Journal of Defence Studies, Vol. 11, No. 3 July–September 2017, pp. 17–40 ^ "Exercise Hand-in-Hand 2019: Troops from India, China to conduct joint drill this week" .

The Financial Express . 2 December 2019. Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 7 November 2020 . ^ "Does China-Russia Cooperation Hurt India's National Interests?" . thediplomat.com . Archived from the original on 25 April 2023 . Retrieved 25 April 2023 . ^ a b Bhattacharji, Romesh (4 December 2009). "Where is the dam?" .

The Hindu . Frontline. Archived from the original on 21 October 2020 . Retrieved 4 November 2020 . ^ Chellaney, Brahma (2011). Water: Asia's New Battleground . Georgetown University Press. p. 177. ISBN 978-1-58901-798-6 . ^ Ho, Selina (3 September 2018). "Power Asymmetry and the China–India Water Dispute".

The China-India Rivalry in the Globalization Era . Georgetown University Press. pp. Chapter 7. ISBN 978-1-62616-600-4 . ^ "More power than Britain: China kick-starts mega dam to bolster economy" . Australian Financial Review . 22 July 2025 . Retrieved 22 July 2025 . ^ "China starts building world's largest dam, fuelling fears in India" . www.bbc.com . 21 July 2025 . Retrieved 22 July 2025 . ^ "Mega dam threat: Expert warns of catastrophic impact on Assam from China's Medog Project" . Hubnews . 30 June 2025. ^ 刘小卓. "Premier announces construction of Yarlung Zangbo hydropower project" . www.chinadaily.com.cn . Retrieved 20 July 2025 . ^ Amy Stockdale with Reuters. (21 July 2025). "China begins construction on world's largest dam in Tibet". DW website Retrieved 21 July 2025. ^ "India voices concern over China's mega dam project on Yarlung Tsangpo in Tibet" . Firstpost . 11 August 2025 . Retrieved 11 August 2025 . ^ "India seeks transparency from China over construction of mega dam on River Brahmaputra" .

The Times of India . 10 August 2025. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 11 August 2025 . ^ "Should India worry about China's massive dam? – DW – 07/30/2025" . dw.com . Retrieved 11 August 2025 . ^ "Report of the India-China Joint Study Group on Comprehensive Trade and Economic Cooperation" (PDF) . Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India . 2005. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2021 . Retrieved 4 July 2021 . ^ a b c Khanna, Tarun (December 2007). "China + India: The Power of Two" . Harvard Business Review . Archived from the original on 18 October 2020 . Retrieved 18 October 2020 . ^ Gupta, Anil K.; Wang, Haiyan (30 March 2009). Getting China and India Right: Strategies for Leveraging the World's Fastest Growing Economies for Global Advantage . John Wiley & Sons. pp. Preface. ISBN 978-0-470-44109-1 . ^ "Ban on Chinese apps, including TikTok, surprises India content makers" . BBC. 30 June 2020 . Retrieved 9 January 2024 . ^ "India plays an integral role in boosting supply chain resilience through friendshoring: Yellen" .

The Economic Times . 17 July 2023. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 9 January 2024 . ^ Galani, Una; Larsen, Peter Thal (18 January 2024). "Exclusive: India could ease China investment curbs if border stays calm" . Reuters . Retrieved 19 January 2024 . ^ Bhattacharjee, Yudhijit (27 June 2024). "Why Do India and China Keep Fighting Over This Desolate Terrain?" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 30 June 2024 . ^ "China pushback on India's GVC ascent" .

The Financial Express . 14 July 2025 . Retrieved 14 July 2025 . ^ "India imposes anti-dumping duty on some steel imports from China" . Reuters . 18 December 2025 . Retrieved 19 December 2025 . ^ Chopra, Sanjeev (17 February 2026). "India's improved ties with China expose cracks in the Beijing-Islamabad relationship" . ThePrint . Retrieved 17 February 2026 . ^ "India Gripes Over Border, Trade Woes on Li's First Foreign Trip" . CNBC . Reuters. 19 May 2013. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013 . Retrieved 20 May 2013 . ^ "India to reach US$100 billion dollar trade with China by 2015" .

The Economic Times . 9 February 2012. ^ "Trademap" . Archived from the original on 10 November 2020 . Retrieved 18 October 2020 . ^ "US, China woo India for control over Asia-Pacific" .

The Times of India . 31 May 2013. Archived from the original on 31 May 2013 . Retrieved 7 May 2023 . ^ a b "Full Text of Prime Minister Narendra Modi's Speech at the India-China Business Forum in Shanghai" . NDTV.com . Archived from the original on 1 May 2023 . Retrieved 27 April 2023 . ^ "India-China bilateral trade set to hit $100 billion by 2015" .

The Times of India . 22 June 2012. ISSN 0971-8257 . Archived from the original on 11 May 2023 . Retrieved 7 May 2023 . ^ "With US trade under a cloud, China opens to Indian pharma".

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 2 August 2018. Retrieved 13 July 2018. ^ Sen, Amiti (12 July 2018). "India tells China: $63-b trade deficit untenable". @businessline . ^ "India-China bilateral trade hits historic high of USD 84.44 bln in 2017".

The Economic Times . 7 March 2018. Archived from the original on 3 May 2018. Retrieved 2 May 2018. ^ "Top China Imports". Archived from the original on 16 May 2016. Retrieved 16 May 2016. ^ a b c "Top China Exports". Archived from the original on 21 May 2016. Retrieved 16 May 2016. ^ a b "Top India Imports". Archived from the original on 3 May 2016. Retrieved 16 May 2016. ^ a b "Impact of Chinese Goods on Indian Industry". PRS Legislative Research . Retrieved 20 October 2020. ^ "Trade Statistics, India Department of Commerce" . Mcommerce . Archived from the original on 9 February 2021. ^ a b c Aiyar, Swaminathan. "India's New Protectionism Threatens Gains from Economic Reform" . www.cato.org . Archived from the original on 3 May 2023 . Retrieved 27 April 2023 . ^ Echeverri-Gent, John; Sinha, Aseema; Wyatt, Andrew (8 August 2021). "Economic distress amidst political success: India's economic policy under Modi, 2014-2019" . India Review . 20 (4): 402– 435. doi : 10.1080/14736489.2021.1958582 . hdl : 1983/0d7aad21-198e-4b47-a9ce-1937e8fa7578 . ISSN 1473-6489 . S2CID 224897363 . ^ a b c "PM Modi backtracks on free-trade vow with import curbs in India" .

The Times of India . 19 February 2020. ISSN 0971-8257 . Archived from the original on 1 May 2023 . Retrieved 27 April 2023 . ^ Krishnankutty, Pia (15 June 2021). "43% Indians did not buy 'Made in China' products since Galwan clash last year, survey says" . ThePrint . Archived from the original on 25 June 2021 . Retrieved 7 May 2023 . ^ Sharma, Rakesh (3 July 2023). "India State Refiners Consider Paying in Yuan for Russian Crude" . Bloomberg . Archived from the original on 6 July 2023 . Retrieved 5 July 2023 . ^ Nidhi, Verma; Aftab, Ahmed (16 October 2023). "As India frowns on paying for Russian oil with yuan, some payments held up" . Reuters . ^ Sachdev, Alisha; Ranjan Sen, Sudhi; Srivastava, Shruti (6 June 2025). "China Rare Earth Curbs Choke India Automakers, Add to Tensions" . Bloomberg News . Retrieved 7 June 2025 . ^ "Donald Trump's 50% tariff on India kicks in as PM Modi urges self-reliance" . www.bbc.com . 27 August 2025 . Retrieved 12 September 2025 . ^ a b "India has narrow path to victory in US-China trade war" . Reuters . 11 September 2025 . Retrieved 12 September 2025 . ^ "China files WTO case against Indian tariffs, subsidies" . Reuters . 19 December 2025 . Retrieved 19 December 2025 . ^ "Why India no longer competes with China – 21 January 2026 | O Heraldo" . 21 January 2026 . Retrieved 21 January 2026 . ^ "India relaxes rules on Chinese investment" . www.ft.com . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ Sheel, Kamal (1 August 2014). "Hu Shih and 'The Indianisation of China': Some Comments on Modern Chinese Discourses on India" . China Report . 50 (3): 177– 188. doi : 10.1177/0009445514534119 . ISSN 0009-4455 . ^ 2014 World Service Poll Archived 10 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine BBC ^ "Chapter 2: China's Image" . Pew Research Center's Global Attitudes Project . 14 July 2014 . Retrieved 18 February 2024 . ^ "Chapter 4: How Asians View Each Other" . Pew Research Center . 14 July 2014. Archived from the original on 15 October 2015 . Retrieved 10 October 2015 . ^ Silver, Laura; Schulman, Jonathan; Clancy, Laura; Miner, William (15 July 2026). "Views of China and Xi Are Improving Globally" . Pew Research Center . Retrieved 15 July 2026 . ^ "China most distrusted nation, says a survey of Indian youth" .

The Times of India . 15 August 2021. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 18 February 2024 . ^ Huang, Christine; Fagan, Moira; Gubbala, Sneha (29 August 2023). "Indians' views of other countries" . Pew Research Center's Global Attitudes Project . Retrieved 18 February 2024 . ^ The 2008 Pew Global Attitudes Survey in China (22 July 2008) p 5. online Archived 29 September 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ Bajaj, Vikas (31 August 2011). "India Measures Itself Against a China That Doesn't Notice" .

The New York Times . ^ Brar, Aadil (29 May 2023). "More Chinese now regard India as a security threat. Only 8% consider it favourable" . ThePrint . Archived from the original on 30 June 2023 . Retrieved 30 June 2023 . ^ Olander, Eric (1 June 2023). "Only 8% of Chinese Have a Favorable View of India, Says New Tsinghua University Poll" .

The Buddhist tradition in India, China & Japan . New York: Vintage Books. Deepak, B.R. & Tripathi, D.P.

The Future of India China Relations Archived 2 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine "India China Relations – Future Perspectives", Vij Books, July 2012 Forbes, Andrew; Henley, David (2011). "Past, present and future commercial Sino-Indian links via Sikkim," in: China's Ancient Tea Horse Road . Chiang Mai: Cognoscenti Books. ASIN: B005DQV7Q2 Frankel, Francine R., and Harry Harding.

The India-China Relationship: What the United States Needs to Know . Columbia University Press: 2004. ISBN 0-231-13237-9 . Garver, John W. China's Quest: The History of the Foreign Relations of the People's Republic (2015), pp 146–62, 435–44, 734–57. Garver, John W. Protracted Contest: Sino-Indian Rivalry in the Twentieth Century . University of Washington Press : 2002. ISBN 0-295-98074-5 . Gokhale, Vijay. "The road from Galwan: the future of India-China Relations." Carnegie India 10 (2021) online Archived 22 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine . Harris, Tina (2013). Geographical Diversions: Tibetan Trade, Global Transactions . University of Georgia Press, United States. ISBN 0820345733 . pp. 208. Hongyu Wang, ‘Sino-Indian Relations: Present and Future’, Asian Survey 35:6, June 1995. Jain, Sandhya, & Jain, Meenakshi (2011).

The India they saw: Foreign accounts . New Delhi: Ocean Books. Contains material about Chinese Buddhist pilgrims and explorers to India. Kondapalli, Srikanth, eds. China's Military and India (2012) Kondapalli, Srikanth. "India-China Relations." in Forging New Partnerships, Breaching New Frontiers: India's Diplomacy during the UPA Rule 2004–14 (2022): 86+. Ling Zhu, ’China-Pakistan Alliance against India’, UPI Asia.com, 9 September 2008, in Jagannath P. Panda, Dragon Looks South: Current Drives in China's South Asian Neighbourhood Policy , in China and its neighbours (ed. Srikant Kondapalli, Emi Mifune), Pentagon Press, New Delhi 2010. Lintner, Bertil. Great game east: India, China, and the struggle for Asia's most volatile frontier (Yale University Press, 2015) Liping Xia, ‘The Evolution of Chinese Views Toward Cbms’, in Michael Krepon, Dominique M. McCoy, and Matthew C.J. Rudolp (Eds.), A Handbook of Confidence-Building Measures for Regional Security, Washington, DC: Henry L. Stimson Center, 1993. Lu, Chih H..

The Sino-Indian Border Dispute: A Legal Study . Greenwood Press: 1986. ISBN 0-313-25024-3 . Malone, David M., C. Raja Mohan, and Srinath Raghavan, eds.

The Oxford handbook of Indian foreign policy (2015) excerpt Archived 15 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine pp 356–369. Nilakanta Sastri, K. A. (2002) . A history of South India from prehistoric times to the fall of Vijayanagar . New Delhi: Indian Branch, Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-560686-7 . K. M. Panikkar (1957). India and China. A study of cultural relations. Asia Pub. House: Bombay. Paul, T.V. et al. eds.

The China-India Rivalry in the Globalization Era (2018) excerpt Archived 10 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine Sen, Tansen. Buddhism, Diplomacy, and Trade: The Realignment of Sino-Indian Relations, 600–1400 . University of Hawaii Press: 2003. ISBN 0-8248-2593-4 . Shabbir, Muhammad Omer, Rabia Bashir, and Sara Saleem. "Geo-Strategic importance of Indian Ocean: clash of interests between China and India." Journal of Indian Studies 5.1 (2019): 47–60. online Sidhu, Waheguru Pal Singh, and Jing Dong Yuan. China and India: Cooperation or Conflict? Lynne Rienner Publishers: 2003. ISBN 1-58826-169-7 . Talone, Andrew J. How the United States Can Reinforce India as a Counterbalance to China in the Indian Ocean Region from a Military Standpoint (US Army Command and General Staff College, 2019) online Archived 13 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine Varadarajan, S. India, China and the Asian Axis of Oil , January 2006 Yutang, Lin . 1942.