The "beans" are roasted and then ground into fine particles. Coffee is brewed from the ground roasted beans, which are typically steeped in hot water before being filtered out. It is usually served hot, although chilled or iced coffee is common. Coffee can be prepared and presented in a variety of ways , e.g., espresso , French press , caffè latte , or already-brewed canned coffee . Sugar, sugar substitutes, milk, and cream are often added to mask the bitter taste or enhance the flavor. Though coffee has become a global commodity, it has a history tied to food traditions around the Red Sea .

The earliest reports of coffee drinking pertain to the plant's use among the Sufis of Yemen in southern Arabia in the middle of the 15th century. Up to the end of the 17th century, most of the world's coffee was imported from Yemen.

As it gained in popularity, coffee started to be cultivated in Java in the 17th century and the Americas from the 18th century.

The two most commonly grown coffee bean types are C. arabica and C. robusta . Coffee plants are cultivated in over 70 countries , primarily in the equatorial regions of the Americas, Southeast Asia, the Indian subcontinent, and Africa. Green, unroasted coffee is traded as an agricultural commodity.

The global coffee industry was worth $495.50 billion in 2023.

In 2023, Brazil was the leading grower of coffee beans, producing 31% of the world's total, followed by Vietnam.

While coffee sales reach billions of dollars annually worldwide, coffee farmers disproportionately live in poverty. Critics of the coffee industry have pointed to its negative impact on the environment, including clearing of land for coffee growing and water use. Etymology Green coffee describes the beans before roasting.

The word coffee entered the English language in 1582 via the Dutch koffie , borrowed from the Ottoman Turkish kahve ( قهوه ), borrowed from the Arabic qahwah ( قَهْوَة ). Medieval Arabic lexicons traditionally held that the etymology of qahwah meant 'wine', given its distinctly dark color, and was derived from the verb qahiya ( قَهِيَ ), ' to have no appetite '.

The word qahwah most likely meant 'the dark one', referring to the brew or the bean. qahwah is not the name of the bean, which are known in Arabic as bunn and in Cushitic languages as būn . Semitic languages have the root qhh , 'dark color', which became a natural designation for the beverage. Its cognates include the Hebrew qehe(h) 'dulling' and the Aramaic qahey ('give acrid taste to').

Although etymologists have connected it with a word meaning ' wine ' , it is also thought to be from the Kaffa region of Ethiopia.

The terms coffee pot and coffee break originated in 1705 and 1952, respectively. History Main article: History of coffee Legendary accounts and myths There are multiple anecdotal origin stories which lack evidence. Ralph S. Hattox records traditions in which the Islamic prophet Muhammad is said to have been introduced to a stimulating beverage by the Angel Gabriel , who recommended it for its restorative qualities.

In another commonly repeated legend, Kaldi , a 9th-century Ethiopian or Arab goatherd, first observed the coffee plant after seeing his flock energized by chewing on the plant. This legend does not appear before 1671, indicating the story is likely apocryphal, first being related by Antoine Faustus Nairon, a Maronite professor of Oriental languages and author of one of the first printed treatises devoted to coffee, De Saluberrima potione Cahue seu Cafe nuncupata Discurscus (Rome, 1671), which describes a camel or goat herder in the Kingdom of Ayaman, Arabia Felix.

The herder is unnamed in the earliest account and the name Kaldi appears to be a later invention the twentieth century. Another legend attributes the discovery of coffee to a Sheikh Omar. Starving after being exiled from Mokha, Omar found berries.

After attempting to chew and roast them, Omar boiled them, which yielded a liquid that revitalized and sustained him. Historical transmission A 1652 handbill advertising coffee for sale in St. Michael's Alley, London The earliest possible references to the coffee bean and its qualities appear in al-Razi 's 10th-century al-Hawi and in Avicenna 's 11th-century The Canon of Medicine both which describe a plant component called bunchum as hot and dry —with al-Razi reporting beneficial effects for the stomach and Ibn Sina also adding claims for the skin and body odor. According to later accounts, bunchum was made from a root rather than from coffee beans. There is no confirmed evidence, either historical or archaeological, of coffee as a drink being consumed before the 15th century.

The drink appears to be a relatively recent development.

By the late 15th century, coffee drinking was well established among Sufi communities in Yemen. An early writer on coffee was Abd al-Qadir al-Jaziri of Ottoman Iraq , who in 1587 compiled a work tracing the history and legal controversies of coffee in his ʿUmdat al-ṣafwa fī ḥill al-qahwa ( عمدة الصفوة في حل القهوة ), in which he claims that the coffee bean originated in the "land of Sa'ad ad-Din , and the country of Abyssinia , and of the Jabart , and other places of the land of ‘ Ajam , but the time of its first use is unknown, nor do we know the reason." Al-Jazīrī asserts that coffee was introduced to Cairo at the start of the 16th century by Sufi devotees. Coffee appears to have been likely collected from wild, with some indications that its use expanded from the 14th century among certain Islamized groups in southeastern Ethiopia, though direct evidence for early consumption remains scarce.

The use of coffee is believed to have spread across the Red Sea to the Rasulid sultanate of Yemen, who maintained cultural and commercial ties with the Adal Sultanate . Its consumption first appears in Yemen, particularly in regions such as Aden , Mocha and Zabid during the 15th century.

The 16th-century scholar Ibn Hajar al-Haytami writes about the plant's development from a tree in the Zeila region .

In 1542, a Portuguese crew met with a ship from Zeila transporting clarified butter and coffee to Al-Shihr in Yemen. Coffee is an important part of Bosnian culture , and was a major part of its economy in the past. Other sources of coffee drinking or knowledge of the coffee tree appear in the middle of the 15th century in the accounts of Ahmed al-Ghaffar in Yemen, where coffee seeds were first roasted and brewed in a similar way to how it is prepared now. Coffee was used by Sufi circles to stay awake for their religious rituals. Accounts differ on the origin of the coffee plant before its appearance in Yemen. Coffee may have been introduced to Yemen from Ethiopia via the Red Sea trade. One account credits Muhammad Ibn Sa'd al-Dhabḥani for bringing coffee to Aden from the Somali coast, other early accounts say Ali ben Omar of the Shadhili Sufi order was the first to introduce coffee to Arabia.

By the 16th century, coffee had reached the rest of the Middle East and North Africa.

In 1583, Leonhard Rauwolf , a German physician, gave this description of coffee after returning from a ten-year trip to the Near East: The first European coffeehouse outside of the Ottoman Empire opened in Venice in 1647.

As a colonial import The inventor George Washington developed methods for large scale commercial manufacture of instant coffee.

The Dutch East India Company was the first to import coffee on a large scale.

The Dutch later grew the crop in Java and Ceylon.

The first exports of Indonesian coffee from Java to the Netherlands occurred in 1711. Through the efforts of the British East India Company , coffee became popular in England.

In a diary entry of May 1637, John Evelyn records tasting the drink at Oxford , where it had been brought by a student of Balliol College from Crete named Nathaniel Conopios of Crete. Oxford's Queen's Lane Coffee House , established in 1654, is still in existence today. Coffee was introduced in France in 1657 and in Austria and Poland after the 1683 Battle of Vienna , when coffee was captured from supplies of the defeated Turks.

When coffee reached North America during the Colonial period, it was initially not as successful as in Europe, as alcoholic beverages remained more popular.

During the Revolutionary War, the demand for coffee increased so much that dealers had to hoard their scarce supplies and raise prices dramatically; this was also due to the reduced availability of tea from British merchants, and a general resolution among many Americans to avoid drinking tea following the 1773 Boston Tea Party .

During the 18th century, coffee consumption declined in Britain, giving way to tea drinking . Tea was simpler to make and had become cheaper with the British conquest of India and the tea industry there.

During the Age of Sail , seamen aboard ships of the British Royal Navy made substitute coffee by dissolving burnt bread in hot water. According to Captain Haines, who was the colonial administrator of Aden (1839–1854), Mokha historically imported up to two-thirds of its coffee from Berbera-based merchants before the coffee trade of Mokha was captured by British-controlled Aden in the 19th century.

After that, much of the Ethiopian coffee was exported to Aden via Berbera. Frenchman Gabriel de Clieu took a coffee plant to the French territory of Martinique in the Caribbean in the 1720s, from which much of the world's cultivated arabica coffee is descended. Coffee thrived in the climate and was conveyed across the Americas. Coffee was cultivated in Saint-Domingue , now Haiti, from 1734, and by 1788 it supplied half the world's coffee.

The conditions that the enslaved people worked in on coffee plantations were a factor in the Haitian Revolution , and the coffee industry never fully recovered there. Mass production The port city Mocha in Yemen 1692.

In the late 16th century, Yemen developed a booming coffee economy. Farmers grew coffee on mountain terraces above the Tihamah plain, and trade routes linked its ports to Jeddah and Cairo.

By the 17th century, coffee had surpassed the global spice trade . Up to the end of the 17th century, Yemen was the world's main producer for coffee, and Mocha was the world's largest shipping port for coffee. A coffee can from the first half of the 20th century.

From the Museo del Objeto del Objeto collection. Coffee was introduced to Brazil in 1727, but its cultivation did not gather momentum until independence in 1822.

After this time, massive tracts of rainforest were cleared for coffee plantations, first around Rio de Janeiro and later São Paulo . Brazil went from having essentially no coffee exports in 1800 to being a significant regional producer in 1830, to being the largest producer in the world by 1852. Between 1910 and 1920, Brazil exported around 70% of the world's coffee; Colombia, Guatemala, and Venezuela exported 15%; and Old World production accounted for less than 5% of world exports. Many countries in Central America took up cultivation in the latter half of the 19th century, and almost all were involved in the large-scale displacement and exploitation of indigenous people. Harsh conditions led to many uprisings, coups, and bloody suppression of peasants.

The notable exception was Costa Rica, where a lack of ready labor prevented the formation of large farms. Smaller farms and more egalitarian conditions ameliorated unrest over the 19th and 20th centuries. Rapid growth in coffee production in South America during the second half of the 19th century was matched by an increase in consumption in developed countries. Nowhere was this growth been as pronounced as in the United States, where a high rate of population growth was compounded by doubling of per capita consumption between 1860 and 1920. Though the United States was not the heaviest coffee-drinking nation at the time (Belgium, the Netherlands and Nordic countries all had comparable or higher levels of per capita consumption), due to its sheer size, the US was already the largest consumer of coffee in the world by 1860.

By 1920, around half of all coffee produced worldwide was consumed in the US. Coffee has become a vital cash crop for many developing countries. Over 100 million people in developing countries have become dependent on coffee as their primary source of income. It has become the primary export and economic backbone for African countries like Uganda, Burundi, Rwanda, and Ethiopia, as well as many Central American countries. Coffee bean production, 2023 Biology Further information: List of coffee varieties Several species of shrub of the genus Coffea produce the berries from which coffee is extracted.

The two main species commercially cultivated are C. canephora (predominantly a form known as 'robusta') and C. arabica . C. arabica , the most highly regarded species, is native to the southwestern highlands of Ethiopia, the Boma Plateau in southeastern Sudan, and Mount Marsabit in northern Kenya. C. canephora is native to western and central Subsaharan Africa, from Guinea to Uganda and southern Sudan. Less popular species are C. liberica , C. stenophylla , C. mauritiana , and C. racemosa . All coffee plants are classified in the family Rubiaceae . They are evergreen shrubs or trees that may grow 5 m (15 ft) tall when unpruned.

The leaves are dark green and glossy, usually 10–15 cm (4–6 in) long and 6 cm (2.4 in) wide, simple, entire, and opposite. Petioles of opposite leaves fuse at the base to form interpetiolar stipules , characteristic of Rubiaceae.

The flowers are axillary , and clusters of fragrant white flowers bloom simultaneously. Gynoecium consists of an inferior ovary, also characteristic of Rubiaceae.

The flowers are followed by oval berries of about 1.5 cm (0.6 in).

When immature, they are green, and they ripen to yellow, then crimson, before turning black on drying. Each berry usually contains two seeds, but 5–10% of the berries have only one; these are called peaberries . Arabica berries ripen in six to eight months, while robusta takes nine to eleven months. C. arabica is predominantly self-pollinating, and as a result the seedlings are generally uniform and vary little from their parents.

In contrast, C. canephora and C. liberica are self-incompatible and require outcrossing . This means that useful forms and hybrids must be propagated vegetatively . Cuttings, grafting, and budding are the usual methods of vegetative propagation.

On the other hand, there is great scope for experimentation in search of potential new strains. Illustration of C. arabica plant and seeds C. robusta flowers A flowering C. arabica tree C. arabica berries on the bush Cultivation and production Further information: Coffee production and List of countries by coffee production A map of global coffee cultivation: The traditional method of planting coffee is to place 20 seeds in each hole at the beginning of the rainy season . This method loses about 50% of the seeds' potential, as about half fail to sprout. A more effective process of growing coffee, used in Brazil, is to raise seedlings in nurseries that are then planted outside after six to twelve months. Coffee is often intercropped with food crops, such as corn, beans, or rice during the first few years of cultivation as farmers become familiar with its requirements. Coffee plants grow within a defined area between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn, termed the bean belt or coffee belt.

In 2020, the world production of green coffee beans was 175,647,000 60 kg bags, led by Brazil with 39% of the total, followed by Vietnam, Colombia, and Indonesia. Brazil is the largest coffee exporting nation, accounting for 15% of all world exports in 2019.

As of 2021, no synthetic coffee products are publicly available but multiple bioeconomy companies have reportedly produced first batches that are highly similar on the molecular level and are close to commercialization. Species variations Of the two main species grown, arabica coffee (from C. arabica ) is generally more highly regarded than robusta coffee (from C. canephora ). Robusta coffee tends to be bitter and has less flavor but a better body than arabica. For these reasons, about three-quarters of the coffee cultivated worldwide is C. arabica . Robusta strains contain about 40–50% more caffeine than arabica. Consequently, this species is used as an inexpensive substitute for arabica in many commercial coffee blends. Good quality robusta beans are used in traditional Italian espresso blends to provide a full-bodied taste and a better foam head (known as crema ). Coffee leaf rust has forced the cultivation of resistant robusta coffee in many countries. Robusta is less susceptible to disease than arabica and can be cultivated in lower altitudes and warmer climates where arabica does not thrive.

The robusta strain was first collected in 1890 from the Lomani River , a tributary of the Congo River, and was conveyed from the Congo Free State (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo) to Brussels to Java around 1900.

From Java, further breeding resulted in the establishment of robusta plantations in many countries.

In particular, the spread of the devastating coffee leaf rust, caused by the fungal pathogen Hemileia vastatrix , hastened the uptake of the resistant robusta.

The pathogen results in light, rust-colored spots on the undersides of coffee plant leaves. It grows exclusively on the leaves of coffee plants. Coffee leaf rust is found in virtually all countries that produce coffee. Beans from different countries or regions can usually be distinguished by differences in flavor, aroma, body, and acidity. These taste characteristics are dependent on the coffee's growing region, genetic subspecies ( varietals ), and processing. Varietals are generally known by the region in which they are grown, such as Colombian , Java , and Kona . Arabica coffee beans are cultivated mainly in Latin America, eastern Africa or Asia, while robusta beans are grown in central Africa, southeast Asia, and Brazil. Pests and treatments Fungi A Robusta coffee tree infected by coffee wilt disease Coffee wilt disease or tracheomycosis is a common vascular wilt found in Eastern and Central Africa that can kill coffee trees it infects. It is induced by the fungal pathogen Gibberella xylarioides . It can affect several Coffea species and could potentially threaten production worldwide. Mycena citricolor , American leaf spot, is a fungus that can affect the entire coffee plant. It grows on leaves, resulting in leaves with holes that often fall from the plant. It is a threat primarily in Latin America. Animals The coffee borer beetle is a major insect pest of the world's coffee industry. Over 900 species of insect have been recorded as pests of coffee crops worldwide. Of these, over a third are beetles , and over a quarter are bugs . Some 20 species of nematodes , 9 species of mites, and several snails and slugs also attack the crop. Birds and rodents sometimes eat coffee berries, but their impact is minor compared to invertebrates.

In general, C. arabica is the more sensitive species to invertebrate predation overall. Each part of the coffee plant is assailed by different animals. Nematodes attack the roots, coffee borer beetles burrow into stems and woody material, and the foliage is attacked by over 100 species of larvae of butterflies and moths. Mass spraying of insecticides has often proven disastrous, as predators of the pests are more sensitive than the pests themselves. Instead, integrated pest management has been developed, using techniques such as targeted treatment of pest outbreaks and managing crop environment away from conditions favoring pests. Branches infested with scale are often cut and left on the ground, which causes scale parasites to attack the scale on the fallen branches as well as in the plant.

The 2-mm-long coffee borer beetle ( Hypothenemus hampei ) is the most damaging insect pest of the world's coffee industry, destroying up to 50 percent or more of the coffee berries on plantations in most coffee-producing countries.

The adult female beetle nibbles a single tiny hole in a coffee berry and lays 35 to 50 eggs. Inside, the offspring grow, mate, and then emerge from the commercially ruined berry to disperse, repeating the cycle. Pesticides are mostly ineffective because the beetle juveniles are protected inside the berry nurseries, but they are vulnerable to predation by birds when they emerge.

While traditional coffee production causes berries to ripen more slowly and produce lower yields, the quality of the coffee is allegedly superior. According to The International Coffee Organization factors such as drought, unfavourable temperature and climate change greatly affect coffee quality .

In addition, the traditional shaded method provides living space for many wildlife species. Proponents of shade cultivation say environmental problems such as deforestation, pesticide pollution, habitat destruction, and soil and water degradation are the side effects of the practices employed in sun cultivation.

The American Birding Association , Smithsonian Migratory Bird Center , National Arbor Day Foundation , and the Rainforest Alliance have led a campaign for 'shade-grown' and organic coffees , which can be sustainably harvested. Shaded coffee cultivation systems show greater biodiversity than full-sun systems, and those more distant from continuous forest compare rather poorly to undisturbed native forest in terms of habitat value for some bird species. Coffee production uses a large volume of water.

On average it takes about 140 liters (37 U.S. gal ) of water to grow the coffee beans needed to produce one cup of coffee. Growing the plants needed to produce 1 kg (2.2 lb) of roasted coffee in Africa, South America or Asia requires 26,400 liters (7,000 U.S. gal ) of water.

As with many other forms of agriculture, often much of this is rainwater, much of which would otherwise run off into rivers or coastlines, while much water actually absorbed by the plants is transpired back into the local environment through the plants' leaves (especially for cooling effects); broad estimates aside, consequential margins vary considerably based on details of local geography and horticultural practice. Coffee is often grown in countries where there is a water shortage, such as Ethiopia. Used coffee grounds may be used for composting or as a mulch. They are especially appreciated by worms and acid-loving plants such as blueberries. Climate change may significantly impact coffee yields during the 21st century, such as in Nicaragua and Ethiopia which could lose more than half of the farming land suitable for growing (Arabica) coffee.

As of 2016, at least 34% of global coffee production was compliant with voluntary sustainability standards such as Fairtrade , UTZ , and 4C (The Common Code for the Coffee Community). Preprocessing Coffee berries are traditionally selectively picked by hand, which is labor-intensive as it involves the selection of only the berries at the peak of ripeness. More commonly, crops are strip picked, where all berries are harvested simultaneously regardless of ripeness by person or machine.

After picking, green coffee is processed by one of two types of method—a dry process method which is often simpler and less labor-intensive, and a wet process method, which incorporates batch fermentation, uses larger amounts of water in the process, and often yields a milder coffee. Then they are sorted by ripeness and color, and most often the flesh of the berry is removed, usually by machine, and the seeds are fermented to remove the slimy layer of mucilage still present on the seed.

When the fermentation is finished, the seeds are washed with large quantities of fresh water to remove the fermentation residue, which generates massive amounts of coffee wastewater . Finally, the seeds are dried. Using drying tables produces the most uniform effect with less fermentation.

In this method, the pulped and fermented coffee is spread thinly on raised beds, which allows the air to pass on all sides of the coffee, and then the coffee is mixed by hand. It is not done very often; most African coffee is dried in this manner, and in the early 20th century a few coffee farms around the world were starting to use this method. Next, the coffee is sorted, and labeled as green coffee. Some companies use cylinders to pump in heated air to dry the coffee seeds, though this is generally in places where the humidity is very high. Kopi luwak , coffee berries that have been preprocessed by passing through the Asian palm civet 's digestive tract An Asian coffee known as kopi luwak undergoes a peculiar process made from coffee berries eaten by the Asian palm civet , passing through its digestive tract, with the beans harvested from feces . Coffee brewed from this process is among the most expensive in the world, with bean prices reaching $160 per pound or $30 per brewed cup. Kopi luwak coffee is said to have a uniquely rich, slightly smoky aroma and flavor with hints of chocolate, resulting from the action of digestive enzymes breaking down bean proteins to facilitate partial fermentation.

In Thailand, black ivory coffee beans are fed to elephants whose digestive enzymes reduce the bitter taste of beans collected from dung. These beans sell for up to $1,100 a kilogram ($500 per lb), achieving the world's most expensive coffee, three times costlier than palm civet coffee beans. Processing Roasting Main article: Coffee roasting Roasted coffee beans The next step in the process is the roasting of the green coffee. Coffee is usually sold in a roasted state, and with rare exceptions, such as infusions from green coffee beans, coffee is roasted before it is consumed. It can be sold roasted by the supplier, or it can be home roasted .

The roasting process influences the taste by changing the coffee bean physically and chemically.

The bean decreases in weight as moisture is lost and increases in volume, causing it to become less dense.

The density of the bean also influences the strength of the coffee and the requirements for packaging.

The actual roasting begins when the temperature inside the bean reaches approximately 200 °C (392 °F), though different varieties of seeds differ in moisture and density and therefore roast at different rates.

During roasting, caramelization occurs as intense heat breaks down starches , changing them to simple sugars that begin to brown, which darkens the color of the bean. Sucrose is rapidly lost during the roasting process and may disappear entirely in darker roasts.

During roasting, aromatic oils and acids weaken, changing the flavor; at 205 °C (401 °F), other oils start to develop. One of these oils, caffeol, is created at about 200 °C (392 °F), and is largely responsible for coffee's aroma and flavor.

The color of the coffee after brewing is also affected by the degree of roasting. Darker roasts are generally bolder because they have less fiber content and a more sugary flavor. Lighter roasts have a more complex and therefore perceived stronger flavor from aromatic oils and acids otherwise destroyed by longer roasting times. Roasting does not alter the amount of caffeine in the bean but does give less caffeine when the beans are measured by volume because the beans expand during roasting. A small amount of chaff is produced during roasting from the skin left on the seed after processing. Chaff is usually removed from the seeds by air movement, though a small amount is added to dark roast coffees to soak up oils on the seeds. Decaffeination Decaffeination of coffee seeds is done while the seeds are still green. Many methods can remove caffeine from coffee, but all involve either soaking the green seeds in hot water (often called the "Swiss water process") or steaming them, then using a solvent to dissolve the caffeine-containing oils. Decaffeination is often done by processing companies, and the extracted caffeine is usually sold to the pharmaceutical industry. Storage Main article: Coffee bean storage Coffee is best stored in an airtight container made of ceramic, glass or non-reactive metal. Higher quality prepackaged coffee usually has a one-way valve that prevents air from entering while allowing the coffee to release gases. Coffee freshness and flavor is preserved when it is stored away from moisture, heat, and light.

The tendency of coffee to absorb strong smells from food means that it should be kept away from such smells. Storage of coffee in refrigerators is not recommended due to the presence of moisture which can cause deterioration. Exterior walls of buildings that face the sun may heat the interior of a home, and this heat may damage coffee stored near such a wall. Heat from nearby ovens also harms stored coffee.

In 1931, a method of packing coffee in a sealed vacuum in cans was introduced.

The roasted coffee was packed and then 99% of the air was removed, allowing the coffee to be stored indefinitely until the can was opened. Today this method is in mass use for coffee in a large part of the world. Preparation Brewing Main article: Coffee preparation A contemporary electric automatic drip-coffee maker Espresso is one of the most popular coffee-brewing methods.

The term espresso , substituting s for most x letters in Latin -root words, with the term deriving from the past participle of the Italian verb esprimere , itself derived from the Latin exprimere , means 'to express', and refers to the process by which hot water is forced under pressure through ground coffee. Coffee beans must be ground and brewed to create a beverage.

The criteria for choosing a method include flavor and economy. Almost all methods of preparing coffee require that the beans be ground and then mixed with hot water long enough to allow the flavor to emerge but not so long as to draw out bitter compounds.

The liquid can be consumed after the spent grounds are removed. Brewing considerations include the fineness of the grind, how the water is used to extract the flavor, the ratio of coffee grounds to water (the brew ratio), additional flavorings such as sugar, milk, and spices, and the technique to be used to separate spent grounds. Optimal coffee extraction occurs between 91 and 96 °C (196 and 205 °F). Ideal holding temperatures range from 85 to 88 °C (185 to 190 °F) to as high as 93 °C (199 °F), and the ideal serving temperature is 68 to 79 °C (154 to 174 °F). Coffee beans may be ground with a burr grinder , which uses revolving elements to shear the seed; a blade grinder cuts the seeds with blades moving at high speed; or a mortar and pestle crushes the seeds. For most brewing methods a burr grinder is deemed superior because the grind is more even, and the grind size can be adjusted.

The type of grind is often named after the brewing method for which it is generally used, Turkish grind being the finest, while coffee percolator or French press are the coarsest.

The most common grinds are between these extremes: a medium grind is used in most home coffee-brewing machines. Coffee may be brewed by several methods. It may be boiled, steeped, or pressurized. Brewing coffee by boiling is the earliest method, and Turkish coffee is an example of this method. It is prepared by grinding or pounding the seeds to a fine powder, then adding it to water and bringing it to a boil very briefly in a pot called a cezve or, in Greek, a μπρίκι : bríki (from Turkish ibrik ). This produces a strong coffee with a layer of foam on the surface and sediment (which is not meant for drinking) settling at the bottom of the cup. Drip brewers and automatic coffeemakers brew coffee using gravity.

In an automatic coffeemaker, hot water drips onto coffee grounds that are held in a paper, plastic, or perforated metal coffee filter , allowing the water to seep through the ground coffee while extracting its oils and essences.

The liquid drips through the coffee and the filter into a carafe or pot, and the spent coffee grounds are retained in the filter.

In a coffee percolator, water is pulled under a pipe by gravity, which is then forced into a chamber above a filter by steam pressure created by boiling.

The water then seeps through the grounds, and the process is repeated until terminated by removing it from the heat, by an internal timer, or by a thermostat that turns off the heater when the entire pot reaches a certain temperature.

The espresso method forces hot pressurized water through finely-ground coffee.

As a result of brewing under high pressure (typically 9 bar ), the espresso beverage is more concentrated (as much as 10 to 15 times the quantity of coffee to water as gravity-brewing methods can produce) and has a more complex physical and chemical constitution. A well-prepared espresso has a reddish-brown foam called crema that floats on the surface. Other pressurized water methods include the moka pot and vacuum coffee maker .

When served cold, it is called iced coffee . Popular iced coffee options include frappés , iced lattes, or stronger brewed coffee served with ice. Espresso-based coffee has a variety of possible presentations.

In its most basic form, an espresso is served alone as a shot or short black , or with hot water added, when it is known as caffè americano . A long black is made by pouring a double espresso into an equal portion of water, retaining the crema, unlike caffè americano. Milk is added in various forms to an espresso: steamed milk makes a caffè latte , equal parts steamed milk and milk froth make a cappuccino , and a dollop of hot foamed milk on top creates a caffè macchiato . A flat white is prepared by adding steamed hot milk ( microfoam ) to two espresso shots; it has less milk than a latte, but both are varieties of coffee to which the milk can be added in such a way as to create a decorative surface pattern. Such effects are known as latte art . Coffee can be incorporated with alcohol to produce a variety of beverages: it is combined with whiskey in Irish coffee , and it forms the base of alcoholic coffee liqueurs such as Kahlúa and Tia Maria . Some craft beers have coffee or coffee extracts added to the beer, although porter and stout beers may have a coffee-like taste solely due to roasted grains. "Functional coffee" Coffee can also be blended with ingredients claimed to improve health in a form described as a "functional coffee" drink. Additions used include mushrooms, of which some of the most frequently used include lion's mane , chaga , Cordyceps , and reishi . Mushroom coffee has about half the caffeine of standard coffee. However, drinking mushroom coffee can result in digestive issues, and high amounts can result in liver toxicity. There is little clinical evidence for the benefits of mushroom coffee. "Functional" additions also include protein powder , collagen , and ashwagandha . Instant coffee Main article: Instant coffee Instant coffee Many products are sold for the convenience of consumers who do not want to prepare their coffee or who do not have access to coffeemaking equipment. Instant coffee is dried into soluble powder or freeze-dried into granules that can be quickly dissolved in hot water. A New Zealand invention and staple, instant coffee was originally invented in Invercargill in 1890 by food chemist David Strang. It rapidly gained in popularity in many countries in the post-war period, with Nescafé being the most popular product. Many consumers determined that the convenience of preparing a cup of instant coffee more than made up for a perceived inferior taste, although, since the late 1970s, instant coffee has been produced differently in such a way that is similar to the taste of freshly brewed coffee. Paralleling (and complementing) the rapid rise of instant coffee was the coffee vending machine invented in 1947 and widely distributed since the 1950s. Economics Main article: Economics of coffee Green coffee production 2023, millions of tonnes Brazil 3.41 Vietnam 1.96 Indonesia 0.76 Colombia 0.68 Ethiopia 0.56 World 11.06 Source: FAOSTAT of the United Nations World production In 2023, world production of green coffee beans was 11 million tonnes , led by Brazil with 31% of the total and Vietnam as a secondary producer (table). Commodity market Coffee prices 1973–2022 Coffee retailing A bag of coffee beans Bag with ziplock and one-way valve to prevent mold Coffee is bought and sold as green coffee beans by roasters, investors, and price speculators as a tradable commodity in commodity markets and exchange-traded funds. Coffee futures contracts for Grade 3 washed arabicas are traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange under ticker symbol KC, with contract deliveries occurring every year in March, May, July, September, and December. Higher and lower grade arabica coffees are sold through other channels. Futures contracts for robusta coffee are traded on the London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange and, since 2007, on the New York Intercontinental Exchange . Dating to the 1970s, coffee has been incorrectly described by many, including historian Mark Pendergrast , as the world's "second most legally traded commodity". Instead, "coffee was the second most valuable commodity exported by developing countries," from 1970 to circa 2000. This fact was derived from the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development Commodity Yearbooks which show "Third World" commodity exports by value in the period 1970–1998 with crude oil in first place, coffee in second, followed by sugar, cotton, and others. Coffee continues to be an important commodity export for developing countries, but more recent figures are not readily available due to the shifting and politicized nature of the category "developing country". Coffee is one of seven commodities included in the EU Regulation on Deforestation-free products , which aims to guarantee that the products European Union citizens consume do not contribute to deforestation or forest degradation worldwide. International Coffee Day , which is claimed to have originated in Japan in 1983 with an event organized by the All Japan Coffee Association, takes place on 29 September in several countries. There are numerous trade associations and lobbying and other organizations representing the coffee industry. Consumption Coffee consumption, kilograms per capita, 2007 Nordic countries are the highest coffee-consuming nations when measured per capita per year, with consumption in Finland as the world's highest. Finland – 26.45 lb (12.00 kg) Norway – 21.82 lb (9.90 kg) Iceland – 19.84 lb (9.00 kg) Denmark – 19.18 lb (8.70 kg) Netherlands – 18.52 lb (8.40 kg) Sweden – 18.00 lb (8.16 kg) Switzerland – 17.42 lb (7.90 kg) Belgium – 15.00 lb (6.80 kg) Luxembourg – 14.33 lb (6.50 kg) Canada – 14.33 lb (6.50 kg) An April 2024, National Coffee Association survey indicated that coffee consumption in the U.S. reached a 20-year high, with 67% of U.S. adults reporting drinking coffee in the past day. This is a significant increase compared to 2004 when fewer than half of U.S. adults reported coffee consumption in the past day. Drip coffee remains the most popular brewing method, but espresso-based beverages, particularly lattes, espresso shots, and cappuccinos, gained popularity. Economic impacts Further information: List of countries by coffee production A map of coffee growing areas in Brazil In 1830, market volatility and thus increased returns, encouraged Brazilian entrepreneurs to shift their attention from gold to coffee, a crop hitherto reserved for local consumption. Concurrent with this shift was the commissioning of vital infrastructures, including approximately 7,000 km (4,300 mi) of railroads between 1860 and 1885.

The creation of these railways enabled the importation of workers, to meet the enormous need for labor. This development primarily affected the State of Rio de Janeiro , as well as the southern states of Brazil, most notably São Paulo , due to its favorable climate, soils, and terrain. Coffee production attracted immigrants in search of better economic opportunities in the early 20th century. Mainly, these were Portuguese, Italian, Spanish, German, and Japanese nationals. For instance, São Paulo received approximately 733,000 immigrants in the 1890s, while only receiving approximately 201,000 immigrants in the six years before 1890.

The production yield of coffee increased.

In 1880, São Paulo produced 1.2 million bags (25% of total production), in 1888 2.6 million (40%), and in 1902 8 million bags (60%). Coffee is then 63% of Brazil's exports.

The gains made by this trade allow sustained economic growth in the country.

The four years between planting a coffee and the first harvest extend seasonal variations in the price of coffee.

In 2004, 24,222 metric tons (of 7,050,000 produced worldwide) were fair trade; in 2005, 33,991 metric tons out of 6,685,000 were fair trade, an increase from 0.34% to 0.51%. A number of fair trade impact studies have shown that fair trade coffee produces a mixed impact on the communities that grow it. Many studies are skeptical about fair trade, reporting that it often worsens the bargaining power of those who are not part of it.

The first fair-trade coffee was an effort to import Guatemalan coffee into Europe as "Indio Solidarity Coffee".

Since the founding of organizations such as the European Fair Trade Association (1987), the production and consumption of fair trade coffee has grown as some local and national coffee chains started to offer fair trade alternatives. For example, in April 2000, after a year-long campaign by the human rights organization Global Exchange , Starbucks decided to carry fair-trade coffee in its stores.

Since September 2009 all Starbucks espresso beverages in UK and Ireland are made with Fairtrade and Shared Planet certified coffee. A 2005 study in Belgium concluded that consumers' buying behavior is not consistent with their positive attitude toward ethical products.

On average 46% of European consumers claimed to be willing to pay substantially more for ethical products, including fair-trade products such as coffee.

The study found that the majority of respondents were unwilling to pay the actual price premium of 27% for fair trade coffee. Specialty coffee and new trading relationships Specialty coffee has driven a desire for more traceable coffee, and as such businesses are offering coffees that may come from a single origin, or a single lot from a single farm. This can give rise to the roaster developing a relationship with the producer, to discuss and collaborate on coffee.

The roaster may also choose to cut out the importers and exporters to directly trade with the producer, or they may "fairly trade", where any third-parties involved in the transaction are thought to have added value, and there is a high level of transparency around the price, although often there is no certification to back it up. This process tends to only be done for high-quality products since keeping the coffee separate from other coffees adds costs, and so only coffee that roasters believe can command a higher price will be kept separate. Some coffee is sold through internet auction – much of it is sold through a competition, with coffees passing through local and international jurors, and then the best coffees being selected to be bid on. Some estates known for high-quality coffee also sell their coffee through an online auction. This can lead to increased price transparency since the final price paid is usually published. Composition Brewed coffee made from typical grounds and tap water is 99.4% water and contains 40 mg of caffeine per 100 ml with no essential nutrients in significant content. Restaurant-brewed espresso is 97.8% water and contains some dietary minerals , B vitamins , and 212 mg of caffeine per 100 ml.

Although polyphenols , particularly chlorogenic acid , are present in coffee, there is no evidence that the polyphenols impart a health benefit or have antioxidant value following ingestion. Overall, coffee components do not pose risks to health and do not provide health effects for adults consuming about 3–4 cups per day, which would supply 300–400 mg of caffeine per day. Pharmacology Main articles: List of chemical compounds in coffee and Health effects of coffee Skeletal formula of a caffeine molecule A psychoactive chemical in coffee is caffeine , an adenosine receptor antagonist that is known for its stimulant effects. Coffee also contains the monoamine oxidase inhibitors β-carboline and harmane , which may contribute to its psychoactivity.

In a healthy liver , caffeine is mostly metabolized by liver enzymes.

The excreted metabolites are mostly paraxanthines — theobromine and theophylline —and a small amount of unchanged caffeine. Therefore, the metabolism of caffeine depends on the state of this enzymatic system of the liver. Coffee has laxative effects, inducing defecation in some people within minutes of consumption.

The caffeine content of a cup of coffee varies depending mainly on the brewing method, and also on the coffee variety, such as 40 mg per 100 ml in regular coffee and 212 mg per 100 ml in espresso. According to a 1979 analysis, coffee has the following caffeine content, depending on how it is prepared: Serving size Caffeine content Brewed 200 mL (7 US fl oz) 80–135 mg Drip 200 mL (7 US fl oz) 115–175 mg Espresso The first coffeehouse in Constantinople was opened in 1475 by traders arriving from Damascus and Aleppo. A contemporary term for a person who makes coffee beverages, often a coffeehouse employee, is a barista .

The Specialty Coffee Association of Europe and the Specialty Coffee Association of America have been influential in setting standards and providing training. Break The coffee break in the United States and elsewhere is a short mid-morning rest period granted to employees. It originated in the late 19th century in Stoughton, Wisconsin , with the wives of Norwegian immigrants.

The city celebrates this every year with the Stoughton Coffee Break Festival.

In 1951, Time noted that "since the war, the coffee break has been written into union contracts".

In 1952, the term became common through a Pan-American Coffee Bureau ad campaign which urged consumers, "Give yourself a Coffee-Break – and Get What Coffee Gives to You." John B. Watson , a behavioral psychologist who worked with Maxwell House later in his career, helped to popularize coffee breaks within American culture. Prohibition and condemnation The Coffee Bearer , Cairo , an Orientalist painting by John Frederick Lewis (1857) Historically, several religious groups have prohibited or condemned the consumption of coffee.

The permissibility of coffee was debated in the Islamic world during the early 16th century, variously being permitted or prohibited until it was ultimately accepted by the 1550s. Contention existed among Ashkenazi Jews as to whether coffee was acceptable for Passover until it was certified kosher in 1923. Some Christian groups, such as Mormons and Seventh-day Adventists, discourage the consumption of coffee. Because of coffee's association with Muslims , Ethiopian Orthodox Christians avoided it until the end of the 19th century. Some Rastafarians also generally avoid coffee. Coffee has been prohibited for political and economic reasons. King Charles II of England briefly outlawed coffeehouses to quell perceived rebellion. King Frederick the Great banned it in Prussia, concerned about the price of importing of coffee without production colonies. Sweden prohibited coffee in the 18th century for the same reasons. Coffee has seldom been prohibited based on its intoxicating effect. Folklore and culture "Cup of joe" redirects here. For other uses, see Cup of Joe (disambiguation) . There are many stories about coffee and its impact on people and society.

The Oromo people would customarily plant a coffee tree on the graves of powerful sorcerers. They believed that the first coffee bush sprang up from the tears that the god of heaven shed over the corpse of a dead sorcerer. Johann Sebastian Bach was inspired to compose the humorous Coffee Cantata about coffee addiction , which was controversial in the early 18th century.

In the United States, coffee is sometimes called a "cup of Joe".

The Tale of Tea: A Comprehensive History of Tea from Prehistoric Times to the Present Day (PDF) . Brill. p. 39 . Retrieved 10 January 2026 .

In Ukers' book, a young Arabian goatherd named Kaldi, afflicted with melancholy, followed the example of his frolicking goats and ate the coffee berries from the trees. ^ Kanarek, Robin B. (29 July 2014). Nutrition and Behavior: New Perspectives . Springer. ISBN 978-1-4684-6596-9 . Kaldi , an Arabian goatherd . Kaldi's goats would occasionally wander away to the mountains ^ Myhrvold, Nathan (2 December 2025). "coffee" . Encyclopaedia Britannica . Retrieved 10 January 2026 . One of many legends about the discovery of coffee is that of Kaldi, an Arab goatherd who was puzzled by the strange antics of his flock. ^ Ukers, William H. (1935). All About Coffee . Vol. 1. New York: The Tea and Coffee Trade Journal Company. p. 3. A certain person who took care of camels, or as others say, of goats, according to the common tradition of the Orientals, complained to the monks of a certain monastery in the Kingdom of Ayaman, that is Arabia Felix. ^ Noted by H. F. Nicolai, Der Kaffee und seine Ersatzmittel: Volkshygienische Studie , (Brunswick, 1901) ch. 1 "Geschichtliches über den Kaffee" p. 4 note 1. ^ Banesio, Fausto Naironio (1671). De saluberrima potione cahue, seu cafe nuncupata discursus Fausti Naironi Banesii Maronitae, linguae Chaldaicae, seu Syriacae in almo vrbis archigymnasio lectoris ad eminentiss. ... D. Io. Nicolaum S.R.E. card. . (in Latin). Typis Michaelis Herculis. ^ Driem, George L. van (14 January 2019).

The Tale of Tea: A Comprehensive History of Tea from Prehistoric Times to the Present Day . BRILL. p. 484. ISBN 978-90-04-39360-8 . Of current relevance today is that there is no mention of any goatherd named 'Kaldi' in any historical source on coffee. This spurious name was propagated by Ukers in his 1922 book on coffee, published by the Tea and Coffee Trading Journal Company in New York. ^ Ibn Sīnā. "92 De buncho". Canon medicinae (in Latin). Vol. 5. Bunchum quid est? Est res delata de Iemen. Quidam autem dixerunt quod est de radicibus anigailen; cum antiquatur cadit: melius est citrinum et leve et boni odoris; album et vero grave est, malum. Est calidum et siccum in primo; secundum quosdam est frigidum in primo. Confortat membra mundificat autem et exsiccat humiditates quae sunt sub ea, et facit odorem corporis bonum; abscindit odorem psilothri. Est bonum stomacho. ^ a b Sweetser, Heather Marie (2012). A Chapter in the History of Coffee: A Critical Edition and Translation of Murtaḍā az-Zabı̄dı̄'s Epistle on Coffee (Master's thesis).

The Ohio State University. p. 8. ^ Dufour, Traitez nouveaux et curieux du café, du thé et du chocolat (Lyon, 1684, etc.). ^ Quickel, Anthony T. (2021). "Cairo and Coffee in the Transottoman Trade Network" . Transottoman Matters : 84– 85. doi : 10.14220/9783737011686.83 . ISBN 978-3-8471-1168-9 . Thus, Hattox argues that it is possible to conclude,on the basis of no earlier references in the historical sources, that coffee was first introduced into the Islamicate lands from Yemen in the mid-fifteenth century. ^ Quickel, Anthony T. (2022). "Cairo and Coffee in the Transottoman Trade Network".

In Arkadiusz Christoph Blaszczyk; Robert Born (eds.). Transottoman Matters . Brill. pp. 84– 85. , the beans made their way to Yemen, a fact realized by al-Jazı¯rı¯(c. 1558), who was an important sixteenth-century writer on the topic of coffee. ^ Clarence-Smith, William Gervase; Topik, Steven (16 June 2003).

The Global Coffee Economy in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, 1500–1989 . Cambridge University Press. p. 51. ISBN 978-1-139-43839-1 . Ethiopian forests, especially to the west of the Great Rift Valley, abound in wild arabica coffee, but we know very little about the origins of consumption there.¹ Coffee was probably long picked from the wild, and it was used to an increasing extent from the fourteenth century by the Islamized peoples of southeastern Ethiopia.

The coffee habit diffused to the Rasulid sultanate in Yemen, which had strong commercial and cultural connections with Muslim kingdoms in Ethiopia.

The consumption of coffee spread first around Aden, Mocha, and Zabid during the first half of the fifteenth century. ^ Yemen Update: Bulletin of the American Institute for Yemeni Studies .

The Institute. 2002. p. 39. ^ Waines, David (November 2010). Food Culture and Health in Pre-Modern Muslim Societies . BRILL. p. 144. ISBN 978-90-04-21662-4 . ^ Altinbas, Nihan; Hashim, Yousef Rahath and Rsnani; Islam, Tazul; O'Brien, Peter; al-Azami, Usaama; Johnston, David L.; Rufai, Saheed Ahmad; Ebrahimian, Mojtaba; Piela, Anna (11 June 2013). American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences 30:3 . International Institute of Islamic Thought (IIIT). pp. 121– 122. ^ Cohen, Brad (16 July 2014). "The complicated culture of Bosnian coffee" . BBC . Archived from the original on 10 February 2020 . Retrieved 4 February 2020 . ^ a b Houtsma, M. Th.; Wensinck, A. J.; Arnold, T. W.; Heffening, W.; Lévi-Provençal, E., eds. (1993). "Ḳawah" . First Encyclopedia of Islam . Vol. IV. E.J. Brill . p. 631. ISBN 978-90-04-09790-2 . Archived from the original on 27 March 2022 . Retrieved 11 January 2016 . ^ Souza 2008 , p. 3. ^ a b Hattox, Ralph S. (1985). Coffee and coffeehouses: The origins of a social beverage in the medieval Near East . University of Washington Press. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-295-96231-3 . Archived from the original on 27 March 2022 . Retrieved 6 October 2020 . ^ Burton, Richard F. (1856). First footsteps in East Africa . London: Longman. p. 78 . ali omar coffee yemen. ^ Wild, Antony (2004). Coffee: A Dark History . Fourth Estate. pp. 52– 53. ISBN 978-1-84115-649-1 . ^ Aslı, Tokman (2001). Negotiating tradition, modernity and identity in consumer space : a study of a shopping mall and revived coffeehouse (Thesis). Bilkent University. hdl : 11693/14808 . ^ Attokaran, Mathew (2011). Natural Food Flavors and Colorants . John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-470-95911-4 . ^ "History of Viennese coffee house culture" . www.wien.gv.at . ^ a b c d Dobelis, Inge N., ed. (1986). Magic and medicine of plants . Pleasantville, NY: Reader's Digest . pp. 370– 71. ISBN 978-0-89577-221-3 . ^ Fischer, Dieter. "History of Indonesian coffee" . Specialty Coffee Association of Indonesia . Archived from the original on 5 August 2009 . Retrieved 12 February 2010 . ^ "Caffeine and plants prototype page" . Archived from the original on 7 April 2022 . Retrieved 23 February 2022 . ^ Diary of John Evelyn (various editions) ^ Pendergrast 2001 , p. 9. ^ Pendergrast 2001 , p. 39. ^ (1) Adams, John (6 July 1774). "John Adams to Abigail Adams" .

The Adams Papers: Digital Editions: Adams Family Correspondence, Volume 1 . Massachusetts Historical Society . Archived from the original on 26 February 2014 . Retrieved 25 February 2014 . I believe I forgot to tell you one Anecdote: When I first came to this House it was late in the Afternoon, and I had ridden 35 miles at least. "Madam" said I to Mrs. Huston, "is it lawful for a weary Traveller to refresh himself with a Dish of Tea provided it has been honestly smuggled or paid no Duties?" "No sir, said she, we have renounced all Tea in this Place. I can't make Tea, but I'll make you Coffee." Accordingly, I have drunk Coffee every Afternoon since and have borne it very well. Tea must be universally renounced. I must be weaned, and the sooner, the better. (2) Stone, William L. (1867). "Continuation of Mrs. General Riedesel's Adventures" . Mrs. General Riedesel: Letters and Journals relating to the War of Independence and the Capture of the Troops at Saratoga (Translated from the Original German) . Albany: Joel Munsell. p. 147. Archived from the original on 28 September 2015 . Retrieved 27 June 2015 . She then became more gentle, and offered me bread and milk. I made tea for ourselves.

The woman eyed us longingly, for the Americans love it very much; but they had resolved to drink it no longer, as the famous duty on the tea had occasioned the war.

At Google Books . Note: Fredricka Charlotte Riedesel was the wife of General Friedrich Adolf Riedesel , commander of all German and Indian troops in General John Burgoyne's Saratoga campaign and American prisoner of war during the American Revolution . (3) Heiss, Mary Lou; Heiss, Robert J. (2007). "A History of Tea: The Boston Tea Party" .

The Story of Tea: A Cultural History and Drinking Guide . Clarkson Potter/Ten Speed. pp. 21– 24. ISBN 978-1-60774-172-5 . Archived from the original on 3 October 2015 . Retrieved 18 November 2015 .

At Google Books . (4) Zuraw, Lydia (24 April 2013). "How Coffee Influenced The Course of History" . NPR . Archived from the original on 26 February 2014 . Retrieved 25 February 2014 . (5) DeRupo, Joseph (3 July 2013). "American Revolution: Stars, Stripes—and Beans" . NCA News . National Coffee Association . Archived from the original on 26 February 2014 . Retrieved 25 February 2014 . (6) Luttinger, Nina; Dicum, Gregory (2006).

The coffee book: anatomy of an industry from crop to the last drop .

The New Press . p. 33. ISBN 978-1-59558-724-4 . Archived from the original on 31 August 2022 . Retrieved 18 November 2015 – via Google Books . ^ a b Pendergrast 2001 , p. 13. ^ Fremont-Barnes, Gregory (2005). Nelson's Sailors . Osprey Publishing . p. 24. ISBN 978-1-84176-906-6 . Archived from the original on 26 October 2015 . Retrieved 18 November 2015 . ^ R. J., Gavin (1975). Aden Under British Rule, 1839–1967 . C. Hurst & Co. Publishers. p. 53. ^ Lacour, Auguste (1855). Histoire de la Guadeloupe 1635–1789 (in French). Vol. 1. Basse-Terre, Guadeloupe: E. Kolodziej. p. 235 ff . Archived from the original on 26 July 2020 – via Google Books . ^ Pendergrast 2001 , p. 14. ^ Pendergrast, Mark (2010). Uncommon Grounds: The History of Coffee and How It Transformed Our World . Basic Books . p. 17. ISBN 978-0-465-02404-9 . Archived from the original on 25 October 2015 . Retrieved 18 November 2015 . ^ Pendergrast 2001 , p. 16. ^ "Coffee in the Red Sea Area from the Sixteenth to the Nineteenth Century" . ResearchGate . Archived from the original on 4 March 2021 . Retrieved 7 October 2025 . ^ Friis, I. (April 2015). "Coffee and qat on the Royal Danish expedition to Arabia – botanical, ethnobotanical and commercial observations made in Yemen 1762–1763". Archives of Natural History . 42 (1): 101– 112. doi : 10.3366/anh.2015.0283 . Mocha was still the world's major shipping port for coffee (Chaudhuri 1978) ^ Pendergrast 2001 , p. 19. ^ Pendergrast 2001 , pp. 20–24. ^ a b "The production and consumption of coffee" . Archived from the original on 12 September 2015 . Retrieved 26 September 2015 . ^ Pendergrast 2001 , pp. 33–34. ^ Pendergrast 2001 , pp. 35–36. ^ Cousin, Tracey L. (June 1997). "Ethiopia Coffee and Trade" . American University . Archived from the original on 11 May 2015 . Retrieved 18 February 2016 . ^ a b c "Botanical Aspects" . London: International Coffee Organization . Archived from the original on 24 March 2009 . Retrieved 4 January 2010 . ^ Anthony, F.; Berthaud, J.; Guillaumet, J.L.; Lourd, M. "Collecting wild Coffea species in Kenya and Tanzania". Plant Genetic Resources Newsletter . 69 (1987): 23– 29. ^ van der Vossen, H. A. M. in Clifford & Wilson 1985 , p. 53 ^ a b Duke, James A. (1983). "Coffea arabica L" . Purdue University . Archived from the original on 21 February 2010 . Retrieved 4 January 2010 . ^ "Feature Article: Peaberry Coffee" . Acorns. 2004. Archived from the original on 7 May 2010 . Retrieved 4 January 2010 . ^ Hamon, S.; Noirot, M.; Anthony, F. (1995). "Developing a coffee core collection using the principal components score strategy with quantitative data" (PDF) . Core Collections of Plant Genetic Resources . Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 September 2009 . Retrieved 4 January 2010 . ^ Pradeepkumar, T.; Kumar, Pradeep (2008). Management of Horticultural Crops: Vol.11 Horticulture Science Series: In 2 Parts . New India Publishing. pp. 601–. ISBN 978-81-89422-49-3 . Archived from the original on 3 December 2015 . Retrieved 27 June 2015 . ^ a b Wilson, K. C. in Clifford & Wilson 1985 , p. 158. ^ Wilson, K. C. in Clifford & Wilson 1985 , pp. 161–62. ^ "Major coffee producers" . National Geographic . 2015. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 25 September 2015 . ^ Coffee production by exporting countries (PDF) . International Coffee Organization . February 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 May 2021 . Retrieved 23 April 2021 . ^ Workman, Daniel (28 April 2020). "Coffee exports by country" . World's Top Exports. Archived from the original on 27 June 2020 . Retrieved 24 June 2020 . ^ Lavars, Nick (20 September 2021). "Lab-grown coffee cuts out the beans and deforestation" . New Atlas . Archived from the original on 18 October 2021 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ "Sustainable coffee grown in Finland – | VTT News" . vttresearch.com . 15 September 2021. Archived from the original on 18 October 2021 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 . ^ "Eco-friendly, lab-grown coffee is on the way, but it comes with a catch" .

The Guardian . 16 October 2021. Archived from the original on 25 October 2021 . Retrieved 26 October 2021 . ^ Belachew, Mekete (2003). "Coffee".

In Uhlig, Siegbert (ed.). Encyclopaedia Aethiopica . Vol. 1. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. p. 763. ^ a b van der Vossen, H. A. M. in Clifford & Wilson 1985 , p. 55 ^ Daviron, Benoit; Ponte, Stefano (2005).

The Coffee Paradox: Global Markets, Commodity Trade and the Elusive Promise of Development . Zed Books . p. 51. ISBN 978-1-84277-457-1 . Archived from the original on 7 January 2016 . Retrieved 18 November 2015 . ^ Levetin, Estelle; McMchon, Karen (2012). Plants & Society . New York: McGraw-Hill . pp. 263– 67. ISBN 978-0-07-352422-1 . ^ Waller, J. M. (1972). "Coffee Rust in Latin America". PANS Pest Articles & News Summaries . 18 (4): 402– 08. doi : 10.1080/09670877209412699 . ^ Waller, J.M.; Bigger, M.; Hillocks, R.J. (2007). Coffee pests, diseases and their management . Wallingford, Oxfordshire: CABI. p. 171. ISBN 978-1-84593-129-2 . ^ Davids, Kenneth (2001). Coffee: A Guide to Buying, Brewing, and Enjoying (5th ed.). New York: St. Martin's Griffin. ISBN 978-0-312-24665-5 . ^ Castle, Timothy James (1991).

The Perfect Cup: A Coffee Lover's Guide to Buying, Brewing, and Tasting . Reading, MA: Aris Books. p. 158. ISBN 978-0-201-57048-9 . ^ Hindorf, Holger; Omondi, Chrispine O. (1 April 2011). "A review of three major fungal diseases of Coffea arabica L. in the rainforests of Ethiopia and progress in breeding for resistance in Kenya" . Journal of Advanced Research . 2 (2): 109– 120. Bibcode : 2011JAdR....2..109H . doi : 10.1016/j.jare.2010.08.006 . ^ Krishnan, Sarada (28 June 2017). "Sustainable Coffee Production" . Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Environmental Science . Vol. 1. pp. 1– 34. doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199389414.013.224 . ISBN 9780199389414 . Archived from the original on 20 September 2018 . Retrieved 15 April 2018 . ^ a b Graham, Rex (5 September 2013). "Insect-eating birds reduce worst coffee plantation pest by 50 percent" . birdsnews.com . Archived from the original on 31 October 2013 . Retrieved 20 September 2013 . ^ Bardner, R. in Clifford & Wilson 1985 , pp. 208–209. ^ Bardner, R. in Clifford & Wilson 1985 , p. 210. ^ Bardner, R. in Clifford & Wilson 1985 , p. 211. ^ Bardner, R. in Clifford & Wilson 1985 , p. 213. ^ Bardner, R. in Clifford & Wilson 1985 , p. 214. ^ a b Janzen, Daniel H., ed. (1983). Costa Rican natural history . Chicago: University of Chicago Press . ISBN 978-0-226-39334-6 . ^ Wilson, K.C. in Clifford & Wilson 1985 , p. 166. ^ Salvesen, David (1996). "The Grind Over Sun Coffee" . Zoogoer . 25 (4). Archived from the original on 22 September 2009 . Retrieved 5 January 2010 . ^ Wilson, K. C. in Clifford & Wilson 1985 , p. 165. ^ "Measuring Consumer Interest in Mexican Shade-grown Coffee" (PDF) . Montréal: Commission for Environmental Cooperation . October 1999. p. 5. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 August 2009 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 . ^ "THE FUTUREOF COFFEE : Investing in youth for a resilient and sustainable coffee sector" (PDF) . www.ico.org . 21 March 2026. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 August 2025 . Retrieved 31 March 2026 . ^ "The Problems with Sun Coffee" . Coffee & Conservation. 10 January 2013. Archived from the original on 26 February 2014 . Retrieved 19 February 2014 . ^ "Shade-Grown Coffee Plantations" . Smithsonian Zoolongical Park website – Migratory Bird Center . Smithsonian Institution . Archived from the original on 25 October 2009 . Retrieved 8 January 2010 . ^ "Rain Forest- Saving Arbor Day Coffee" . Arbor Day Foundation. Archived from the original on 1 January 2010 . Retrieved 8 January 2010 . ^ "Rainforest Alliance Certified Coffee" . 24 September 2016. Archived from the original on 16 October 2019 . Retrieved 16 October 2019 . ^ Wong, Kate (27 September 2000). "Is Shade-Grown Coffee for the Birds?" . Scientific American . Archived from the original on 27 October 2009 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 . ^ Rickert, Eve (15 December 2005). Environmental effects of the coffee crisis: a case study of land use and avian communities in Agua Buena, Costa Rica (MES).

The Evergreen State College . Retrieved 11 January 2010 . ^ Arthus-Bertrand, Yann. "On Water" . European Investment Bank . Archived from the original on 14 October 2020 . Retrieved 13 October 2020 . ^ Pearce, Fred (25 February 2006). "Earth: The parched planet" . New Scientist . Archived from the original on 5 September 2009 . Retrieved 5 January 2010 . ^ Martin, Deborah L.; Gershuny, Grace, eds. (1992). "Coffee wastes" .

The Rodale book of composting . Emmaus, PA: Rodale Press. p. 86. ISBN 978-0-87857-991-4 . Retrieved 5 January 2010 . ^ Läderach, Peter; Ramirez-Villegas, Julian; Navarro-Racines, Carlos; Zelaya, Carlos; Martinez-Valle, Armando; Jarvis, Andy (26 October 2016). "Climate change adaptation of coffee production in space and time" . Climatic Change . 141 (1): 47– 62. doi : 10.1007/s10584-016-1788-9 . hdl : 10568/77563 . ^ Moat, Justin; Williams, Jenny; Baena, Susana; Wilkinson, Timothy; Gole, Tadesse W.; Challa, Zeleke K.; Demissew, Sebsebe; Davis, Aaron P. (19 June 2017). "Resilience potential of the Ethiopian coffee sector under climate change". Nature Plants . 3 (7): 17081. Bibcode : 2017NatPl...317081M . doi : 10.1038/nplants.2017.81 . PMID 28628132 . ^ Worland, Justin (21 June 2018). "Your Morning Cup of Coffee Is in Danger. Can the Industry Adapt in Time?" . Time . Archived from the original on 4 August 2019 . Retrieved 13 October 2019 . ^ Voora, Vivek; Bermúdez, Steffany; Larrea, Cristina; Baliño, Sofia (2019). "Global Market Report: Coffee" (PDF) .

The International Institute for Sustainable Development . Retrieved 2 September 2022 . ^ Vincent, J.-C. in Clarke & Macrae 1987 , p. 1. ^ a b c Kummer 2003 , p. 38 ^ a b c Marcone, Massimo F. (2004). "Composition and properties of Indonesian palm civet coffee (Kopi Luwak) and Ethiopian civet coffee". Food Research International . 37 (9): 901– 12. Bibcode : 2004FdRI...37..901M . doi : 10.1016/j.foodres.2004.05.008 . ^ a b c Thuot, Buon Me (15 January 2012). "Coffee in Vietnam: it's the shit" .

The Economist . Archived from the original on 16 November 2015 . Retrieved 25 November 2015 . ^ a b Topper, Rachel (15 October 2012). "Elephant Dung Coffee: World's Most Expensive Brew Is Made With Pooped-Out Beans" . HuffPost . Archived from the original on 21 October 2012 . Retrieved 10 December 2012 . ^ Macheiner, Lukas; Schmidt, Anatol; Schreiner, Matthias; Mayer, Helmut K. (2019). "Green coffee infusion as a source of caffeine and chlorogenic acid". Journal of Food Composition and Analysis . 84 103307. doi : 10.1016/j.jfca.2019.103307 . ^ Kummer 2003 , p. 37 ^ a b c Ball, Trent; Guenther, Sara; Labrousse, Ken; Wilson, Nikki. "Coffee Roasting" . Washington State University . Archived from the original on 1 July 2007 . Retrieved 18 July 2007 . ^ Kummer 2003 , p. 261 ^ Steiman, Shawn (15 December 2015).

The Little Coffee Know-It-All: A Miscellany for Growing, Roasting, and Brewing, Uncompromising and Unapologetic . Quarry Books. p. 57. ISBN 978-1-63159-053-5 . ^ Hoffmann, James (2018).

The World Atlas of Coffee 2nd Edition . Great Britain: Mitchell Beazley. p. 40. ISBN 978-1-78472-429-0 . ^ Yeager, Sara E.; Batali, Mackenzie E.; Lim, Lik Xian; Liang, Jiexin; Han, Juliet; Thompson, Ashley N.; Guinard, Jean-Xavier; Ristenpart, William D. (2022). "Roast level and brew temperature significantly affect the color of brewed coffee" . Journal of Food Science . 87 (4): 1837– 1850. doi : 10.1111/1750-3841.16089 . PMC 9311422 . PMID 35347719 . ^ Cipolla, Mauro. "Educational Primer: Degrees of Roast" . Bellissimo Info Group. Archived from the original on 7 May 2010 . Retrieved 11 January 2010 . ^ "Which Has More Caffeine: Light or Dark Roast Coffee?" . Scribblers Coffee. Archived from the original on 17 June 2013 . Retrieved 2 April 2013 . ^ "Coffee Roasting Operations" . Permit Handbook . Bay Area Air Quality Management District. 15 May 1998. Archived from the original on 3 March 2009 . Retrieved 11 January 2010 . ^ "Swiss Water Process" . Swisswater.com. Archived from the original on 19 October 2011 . Retrieved 26 October 2011 . ^ a b "Top Coffee Ratings – Coffee Buying Guide" . Consumer Reports . May 2013. Storing coffee. Archived from the original on 27 February 2014 . Retrieved 27 February 2014 . ^ Brown, Alton . "True Brew" . Food Network . Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2024 . ^ New Process Keep Coffee Fresh in High Vacuum Cans . Popular Science. October 1931. Archived from the original on 19 June 2013 . Retrieved 26 October 2011 . ^ "Qual è il caffè espresso perfetto e come va bevuto?" . Philips (in Italian) . Retrieved 13 June 2022 . ^ "Is it espresso or expresso? Yes" . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 18 July 2023 . ^ "How to Brew Coffee: The NCA Guide to Brewing Essentials" . NCA: National Coffee Association of USA . Archived from the original on 19 August 2020 . Retrieved 16 August 2020 . ^ Borchgrevink, Carl P.; Susskind, Alex M.; Tarras, John M. (1999). "Consumer preferred hot beverage temperatures" . Food Quality and Preference . 10 (2): 117– 21. doi : 10.1016/S0950-3293(98)00053-6 . hdl : 1813/72021 . Archived from the original on 15 January 2020 . Retrieved 24 July 2019 . ^ Cadwalader, Zac (9 July 2021). "How To Get The Most Out Of Your Blade Grinder" . Sprudge . Retrieved 19 September 2022 . ^ a b c Rothstein, Scott. "Brewing Techniques" .

The Coffee FAQ . Archived from the original on 10 January 2010 . Retrieved 11 January 2010 . ^ Levy, Joel (2002). Really Useful: The Origins of Everyday Things . Firefly Books. p. 1948. ISBN 978-1-55297-622-7 . Archived from the original on 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 11 January 2010 . ^ "Coffee Percolators" . Fante's Kitchen . 20 February 2016. Archived from the original on 19 September 2022 . Retrieved 19 September 2022 . ^ Vittori, Sauro; Caprioli, Giovanni; Cortese, Manuela; Sagratini, Gianni (2015). "Espresso Machine and Coffee Composition". Coffee in Health and Disease Prevention . pp. 255– 263. doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-409517-5.00028-0 . ISBN 978-0-12-409517-5 . ^ Salvaggio, A.; Periti, M.; Miano, L.; Quaglia, G.; Marzorati, D. (1991). "Coffee and cholesterol, an Italian study". American Journal of Epidemiology . 134 (2): 149– 56. doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a116067 . PMID 1862798 . ^ Bonné, Jon (20 August 2004). "My coffee is cold: A brewing system without heat proves it's a contender when it comes to taste" . Today.com . Archived from the original on 3 February 2017 . Retrieved 11 January 2010 . ^ "The Ultimate Iced Coffee Taste Test" . HuffPost . 5 August 2013 . Retrieved 19 September 2022 . ^ a b Castle, Timothy; Nielsen, Joan (1999).

The Great Coffee Book . Ten Speed Press. p. 94. ISBN 978-1-58008-122-1 . Archived from the original on 31 August 2022 . Retrieved 11 January 2010 . ^ Fried, Eunice (November 1993). "The lowdown on caffè latte" . Black Enterprise. Archived from the original on 16 February 2017 . Retrieved 11 January 2010 . ^ Miller, Emily Wise (May 2003).

The Food Lover's Guide to Florence: With Culinary Excursions in Tuscany . Ten Speed Press. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-58008-435-2 . Archived from the original on 31 August 2022 . Retrieved 11 January 2010 . ^ "Hipster Drink of Choice Gets Co-Opted By Starbucks" . Time . Retrieved 3 September 2022 . ^ Bonné, Jon (29 October 2003). "Meet espresso's exacting master" . NBC News . Retrieved 3 September 2022 . e may be best known for introducing U.S. customers to "latte art," intricate ribbon patterns in the foam atop his cappuccinos, macchiatos and lattes that result from carefully manipulating the cup and milk pitcher. ^ "The Art of Brewing Coffee Beers" . All About Beer . Archived from the original on 25 November 2015 . Retrieved 24 November 2015 . ^ The Oxford Companion to Beer . Oxford University Press . 2011. p. 182. ISBN 978-0-19-991210-0 . Retrieved 24 November 2015 . ^ a b Dean, Grace (23 November 2025). "Do mushroom and protein 'functional' coffees have health benefits?" . BBC News. ^ Lewis, Samantha (16 August 2023). "Best mushroom coffee brands reviewed and why everyone's drinking it" . Evening Standard . Retrieved 12 March 2024 . ^ a b Wilson, Jillian. "Mushroom Coffee Has Become A Viral Craze. But Is It Just B.S.?" . Huffpost . Retrieved 12 March 2024 . ^ Seal, Rebecca (19 January 2024). "Make mine a mushroom macchiato: are the new boosted coffees worth the hype?" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 12 March 2024 . ^ Hobhouse, Henry (2005). Seeds of Wealth: Five Plants That Made Men Rich . Shoemaker & Hoard. p. 294. ISBN 978-1-59376-089-2 . Retrieved 11 January 2010 . ^ "AtoJsOnline" . atojs.natlib.govt.nz . Retrieved 2 August 2023 . ^ Pendergrast 2001 , p. 195. ^ Pendergrast 2001 , p. 196. ^ Beckerman, Jim. "What on earth ever happened to instant coffee?" . North Jersey Media Group . Archived from the original on 2 August 2022 . Retrieved 28 April 2022 . ^ Pendergrast 2001 , p. 197. ^ "Green coffee production in 2023, Crops/Regions/World list/Production Quantity/Year (pick lists)" . UN Food and Agriculture Organization, Corporate Statistical Database (FAOSTAT). 2025 . Retrieved 19 March 2025 . ^ "Coffee" . WikiInvest . Archived from the original on 11 September 2018. ^ "Coffee Futures" . WikiInvest . Archived from the original on 18 September 2018. ^ Ellis, Blake (10 September 2010). "Coffee prices on the rise" . CNN Money . CNN. Archived from the original on 16 January 2012 . Retrieved 3 April 2012 . ^ Galatola, Thomas (14 February 2012). "Coffee Futures Fall to Lowest in 14 Months: Commodities at Close" . Bloomberg News . Archived from the original on 27 April 2012 . Retrieved 3 April 2012 . ^ "Historical Coffee Intraday Data KCA" . PortaraCQG . Retrieved 21 April 2022 . ^ a b Pendergrast, Mark (April 2009). "Coffee: Second to Oil?" . Tea & Coffee Trade Journal : 38– 41. Archived from the original on 10 July 2014 . Retrieved 27 May 2014 . ^ Pendergrast 2001 . ^ Talbot, John M. (2004). Grounds for Agreement: The Political Economy of the Coffee Commodity Chain . Rowman & Littlefield . p. 50. ISBN 9780742526297 . So many people who have written about coffee have gotten it wrong. Coffee is not the second most valuable primary commodity in world trade, as is often stated. It is not the second most traded commodity, a nebulous formulation that repeatedly occurs in the media. Coffee is the second most valuable commodity exported by developing countries. ^ "Regulation on Deforestation-free products" . European Union . Retrieved 24 July 2024 . ^ Ismail, Izwan (29 September 2014). "Let's drink to coffee!" . New Straits Times . Archived from the original on 18 January 2015 . Retrieved 23 February 2022 . ^ Golob, Peter; Farrell, Graham; Orchard, John E. (15 April 2008). Crop Post-Harvest: Science and Technology, Volume 1: Principles and Practice . John Wiley & Sons . p. 471. ISBN 978-1-4051-7210-3 . ^ Luttinger, Nina; Dicum, Gregory (1 May 2012). "The Rise of the International Coffee Trade" .

The Coffee Book: Anatomy of an Industry from Crop to the Last Drop . New Press, The. p. 120. ISBN 978-1-59558-724-4 . ^ "The Top Coffee-Consuming Countries" . World Atlas. 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2023 . ^ "Daily coffee consumption at 20-year high, up nearly 40%" . National Coffee Association of U.S.A., Inc . Retrieved 22 April 2024 . ^ Mattoon, Robert H. Jr. (2 May 1977). "Railroads, Coffee, and the Growth of Big Business in São Paulo, Brazil".

The Hispanic American Historical Review . 57 (2): 273– 95. doi : 10.2307/2513775 . JSTOR 2513775 . ^ Hudson, Rex A., ed. (1997). "The Coffee Economy, 1840–1930" . Brazil: A Country Study . Washington: GPO for the Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 27 December 2021 . Retrieved 23 February 2022 . ^ "Total Production of Exporting Countries, 2003 to 2008" . International Coffee Organization . Archived from the original on 6 July 2010 . Retrieved 13 January 2010 . ^ "Coffee" . Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International . Archived from the original on 20 April 2009 . Retrieved 13 January 2010 . ^ Rice, Robert A. (March 2001). "Noble Goals and Challenging Terrain: Organic and Fair Trade Coffee Movements". Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics . 14 (1): 39– 66. doi : 10.1023/A:1011367008474 . ^ "European Fair Trade Association" . EFTA . 2009. Archived from the original on 10 May 2010 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 . ^ a b De Pelsmacker, Patrick; Driesen, Liesbeth; Rayp, Glenn (2005). "Do Consumers Care about Ethics? Willingness to Pay for Fair-Trade Coffee" . Journal of Consumer Affairs . 39 (2): 363– 85. doi : 10.1111/j.1745-6606.2005.00019.x . ^ "Starbucks Serves up its First Fairtrade Lattes and Cappuccinos Across the UK and Ireland" . London: Fairtrade Foundation . 2 September 2009. Archived from the original on 15 February 2010 . Retrieved 22 January 2010 . ^ a b Hoffmann, James (2018).

The World Atlas of Coffee (2nd ed.). Mitchell Beazley. pp. 44– 45. ISBN 9781784724290 . ^ A Beginner's Guide To Buying Great Coffee , 20 May 2021 , retrieved 11 September 2022 ^ a b "Coffee, brewed from grounds, prepared with tap water" . FoodData Central, US Department of Agriculture. 1 April 2019 . Retrieved 19 March 2025 . ^ a b "Coffee, brewed, espresso, restaurant-prepared" . FoodData Central, US Department of Agriculture. 1 April 2019 . Retrieved 19 March 2025 . ^ Bakalar, Nicholas (15 August 2006). "Coffee as a Health Drink? Studies Find Some Benefits" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 23 April 2009 . Retrieved 26 January 2010 . ^ a b c d "Coffee" . Micronutrient Information Center, Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University. April 2017 . Retrieved 19 March 2025 . ^ Williams, Robert J.; Spencer, Jeremy P. E ; Rice-Evans, Catherine (2004). "Flavonoids: Antioxidants or signalling". Free Radical Biology and Medicine . 36 (7): 838– 49. doi : 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2004.01.001 . PMID 15019969 . ^ Cappelletti, S.; Daria, P.; Sani, G.; Aromatario, M. (2015). "Caffeine: Cognitive and Physical Performance Enhancer or Psychoactive Drug?" . Current Neuropharmacology . 13 (1): 71– 88. doi : 10.2174/1570159X13666141210215655 . PMC 4462044 . PMID 26074744 . ^ Herraiz, Tomas; Chaparro, Carolina (2006). "Human monoamine oxidase enzyme inhibition by coffee and β-carbolines norharman and harman isolated from coffee". Life Sciences . 78 (8): 795– 802. doi : 10.1016/j.lfs.2005.05.074 . PMID 16139309 . ^ Zivković, R. (2000). "Coffee and health in the elderly". Acta Medica Croatica . 54 (1): 33– 36. PMID 10914439 . ^ Brown, Steven R.; Cann, P. A.; Read, Nicholas W. (1990). "Effect of coffee on distal colon function" . Gut . 31 (4): 450– 453. doi : 10.1136/gut.31.4.450 . PMC 1378422 . PMID 2338272 . ^ Eamudomkarn, Nuntasiri; Kietpeerakool, Chumnan; Kaewrudee, Srinaree; Jampathong, Nampet; Ngamjarus, Chetta; Lumbiganon, Pisake (2018). "Effect of postoperative coffee consumption on gastrointestinal function after abdominal surgery: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials" . Scientific Reports . 8 (1). 17349. Bibcode : 2018NatSR...817349E . doi : 10.1038/s41598-018-35752-2 . PMC 6255780 . PMID 30478433 . ^ Sloots, Cornelius E.J.; Felt-Bersma, Richelle J.F.; West, Rachel L.; Kuipers, Ernst J. (2005). "Stimulation of defecation: Effects of coffee use and nicotine on rectal tone and visceral sensitivity". Scandinavian Journal of Gastroenterology . 40 (7): 808– 813. doi : 10.1080/00365520510015872 . PMID 16109656 . ^ Nehlig, Astrid (2022). "Effects of Coffee on the Gastro-Intestinal Tract: A Narrative Review and Literature Update" . Nutrients . 14 (2): 399. doi : 10.3390/nu14020399 . PMC 8778943 . PMID 35057580 . ^ Callahan, Alice (30 November 2021). "Why Does Coffee Make Me Poop?" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 29 June 2024 . ^ Poole, Robin; Kennedy, Oliver J.; Roderick, Paul; Fallowfield, Jonathan A.; Hayes, Peter C; Parkes, Julie (November 2017). "Coffee consumption and health: umbrella review of meta-analyses of multiple health outcomes" (PDF) . BMJ . 359 j5024. doi : 10.1136/bmj.j5024 . PMC 5696634 . PMID 29167102 . ^ "Need Fiber? Have Some Coffee" . Scientific American . ^ Díaz-Rubio, M Elena & Saura-Calixto, Fulgencio. (2007) Dietary fiber in brewed coffee. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry , 55 (5), 1999–2003. ^ Gniechwitz, Diana; Reichardt, Nicole; Blaut, Michael; Steinhart, Hans; Bunzel, Mirko. 2007. Dietary fiber from coffee beverage: Degradation by human fecal microbiota. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry , 55 (17). ^ Gniechwitz, Diana; Brueckel, Birgit; Reichardt, Nicole; Blaut, Michael; Steinhart, Hans; Bunzel, Mirko. 2007. Coffee dietary fiber contents and structural characteristics as influenced by coffee type and technological and brewing procedures. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry , 55 (26). ^ Silván, José Manuel; Morales, Francisco J; Saura-Calixto, Fulgencio. 2010. Conceptual study on maillardized dietary fiber in coffee. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry , 58 (23). ^ Moreira, Ana S. P.; Nunes, Fernando M.; Domingues, M. Rosário; Coimbra, Manuel A. (2012). "Coffee melanoidins: structures, mechanisms of formation and potential health impacts". Food & Function . 3 (9): 903– 915. doi : 10.1039/c2fo30048f . PMID 22584883 . ^ Machado, Fernanda; Coimbra, Manuel A; Coreta-Gomes, Filipe. 2024. Coffee dietary fiber: Features and hypocholesterolemic effects.

In Coffee in health and disease prevention, (2nd ed, Chap 25, pp 277–285). Academic Press. ^ a b Bunker, M. L.; McWilliams, M. (1979). "Caffeine content of common beverages". Journal of the American Dietetic Association . 74 (1): 28– 32. doi : 10.1016/S0002-8223(21)39775-9 . PMID 762339 . ^ "Caffeine content for coffee, tea, soda and more" . Mayo Clinic . 5 February 2025 . Retrieved 19 March 2025 . ^ "How much caffeine is in your coffee?". Consumer Reports . Vol. 91, no. 3. June 2026. p. 20. ^ Wang, Rui; Xue, Jingjing; Meng, Lei; Lee, Jin-Wook; Zhao, Zipeng; Sun, Pengyu; Cai, Le; Huang, Tianyi; Wang, Zhengxu; Wang, Zhao-Kui; Duan, Yu (June 2019). "Caffeine Improves the Performance and Thermal Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells" . Joule . 3 (6): 1464– 1477. Bibcode : 2019Joule...3.1464W . doi : 10.1016/j.joule.2019.04.005 . ^ Wahyuni, N L E; Rispiandi, R; Hariyadi, T (19 May 2020). "Effect of bean maturity and roasting temperature on chemical content of robusta coffee" . IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering . 830 (2) 022019. Bibcode : 2020MS&E..830b2019W . doi : 10.1088/1757-899X/830/2/022019 . ^ "The Food Timeline: popular American decade foods, menus, products & party planning tips" . foodtimeline.org . Archived from the original on 18 April 2022 . Retrieved 28 April 2022 . ^ La Dolce Vita . 1999. Coffee. London, UK: New Holland Books ^ "Barista Training Standards – A Global Perspective" . Cafe Culture . 29 November 2012. Archived from the original on 10 June 2015 . Retrieved 10 June 2015 . ^ "Stoughton, WI – Where the Coffee Break Originated" . stoughtonwi.com . Stoughton, Wisconsin Chamber of Commerce. Archived from the original on 20 May 2009 . Retrieved 11 June 2009 . Mr. Osmund Gunderson decided to ask the Norwegian wives, who lived just up the hill from his warehouse, if they would come and help him sort the tobacco.

The women agreed, as long as they could have a break in the morning and another in the afternoon, to go home and tend to their chores. Of course, this also meant they were free to have a cup of coffee from the pot that was always hot on the stove. Mr. Gunderson agreed and with this simple habit, the coffee break was born. ^ "Time – March 1951". Time . 5 March 1951. ^ "The Coffee break" . NPR . 2 December 2002. Archived from the original on 28 May 2009 . Retrieved 10 June 2009 . Wherever the coffee break originated, Stamberg says, it may not actually have been called a coffee break until 1952. That year, a Pan-American Coffee Bureau ad campaign urged consumers, 'Give yourself a Coffee-Break – and Get What Coffee Gives to You.' ^ Hunt, Morton M. (1993).

The story of psychology (1st ed.). New York: Doubleday. p. 260. ISBN 978-0-385-24762-7 . for Maxwell House that helped make the 'coffee break' an American custom in offices, factories, and homes. ^ Brown, Daniel W. (2004). A new introduction to Islam . Chichester, West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell . pp. 149– 151. ISBN 978-1-4051-5807-7 . ^ "A few new Passover haggadahs, and a facelift for an old favorite" . Jewish Telegraphic Agency . Archived from the original on 24 March 2011. ^ "Who Are the Mormons?" . Beliefnet . Archived from the original on 5 October 2008 . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . ^ "Coffee consumption and mortality in Seventh-Day Adventists" . Nutrition Research Newsletter . Frost & Sullivan . September 1992 . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Insoll, Timothy (3 July 2003).

The Archaeology of Islam in Sub-Saharan Africa . Cambridge University Press. p. 73. ISBN 978-0-521-65702-0 . ^ "Worship and customs" . BBC. 10 October 2009 . Retrieved 3 February 2025 . ^ Pendergrast 2001 , p. 11. ^ Bersten 1999 , p. 53. ^ Knutsson, Anna; Hodacs, Hanna (2021). "When coffee was banned: strategies of labour and leisure among Stockholm's poor women, 1794–1796 and 1799–1802" . Scandinavian Economic History Review . 71 (2): 1– 23. doi : 10.1080/03585522.2021.2000489 . ^ Topik, Steven (2009). "Coffee as a Social Drug". Cultural Critique . 71 (71): 81– 106. doi : 10.1353/cul.0.0027 . JSTOR 25475502 . ^ Allen 1999 , p. 27. ^ Pendergrast 2001 , p. 10. ^ "Why Is Coffee Called a Cup of Joe?" . 9 July 2019. ^ "Why We Call Coffee a "Cup of Joe" " . Allrecipes . ^ "World Wide Words: Joe" . Works cited Allen, Stewart Lee (1999).

The Devil's Cup: Coffee, the Driving Force in History . Soho: Random House . ISBN 978-1-56947-174-6 . OCLC 41961356 . Bersten, Ian (1999). Coffee, Sex & Health: A History of Anti-coffee Crusaders and Sexual Hysteria . Sydney: Helian Books. ISBN 978-0-9577581-0-0 . OCLC 222519244 . Clarke, Ronald James; Macrae, R., eds. (1987). Coffee . Vol. 2: Technology. Barking, Essex: Elsevier Applied Science. ISBN 978-1-85166-034-6 . Clifford, M. N.; Wilson, K.C., eds. (1985). Coffee: Botany, Biochemistry and Production of Beans and Beverage . Westport, Connecticut: AVI Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7099-0787-9 . OCLC 11444112 . Kummer, Corby (2003).

The Joy of Coffee: The Essential guide to Buying, Brewing, and Enjoying . Boston: Houghton Mifflin . ISBN 978-0-618-30240-6 . OCLC 51969208 . Pendergrast, Mark (2001). Uncommon Grounds: The History of Coffee and How It Transformed Our World . London: Texere. ISBN 978-1-58799-088-5 . OCLC 48931999 . Souza, Ricardo M. (2008). Plant-Parasitic Nematodes of Coffee . Dordrecht: シュプリンガー・ジャパン株式会社. ISBN 978-1-4020-8719-6 . OCLC 288603555 . Weinberg, Bennett Alan; Bealer, Bonnie K. (2001).

The New York Times . Retrieved 4 December 2013 . Ganchy, Sally (2009). Islam and Science, Medicine, and Technology .

The Rosen Publishing Group . ISBN 978-1-4358-5066-8 . Von Hünersdorff, Richard; Hasenkamp, Holger G. (2002). Coffee : a bibliography : a guide to the literature on coffee . London: Hünersdorff. ISBN 978-0-9527121-0-7 . OCLC 52041916 . Jacob, Heinrich Eduard (1998). Coffee: The Epic of a Commodity . Short Hills, NJ: Burford Books. ISBN 978-1-58080-070-9 . Retrieved 18 November 2015 . Joffe-Walt, Benjamin; Burkeman, Oliver (16 September 2005). "Coffee trail—from the Ethiopian village of Choche to a London coffee shop" .

The Guardian . Kingston, Lani (2015). How to Make Coffee: The Science Behind the Bean (1st ed.). Lewes: Ivy Press. ISBN 978-1782405184 . OCLC 898155710 . Mahamid, Hatim; Nissim, Chaim (5 December 2018). "Sufis and Coffee Consumption: Religio-Legal and Historical Aspects of a Controversy in the Late Mamluk and Early Ottoman Periods". Journal of Sufi Studies . 7 ( 1– 2): 140– 164. doi : 10.1163/22105956-12341311 . Metcalf, Allan A. (1999).

The World in So Many Words: A Country-by-country Tour of Words that have Shaped our Language . Houghton Mifflin . p. 123. ISBN 978-0-395-95920-6 . Retrieved 18 November 2015 . Rao, Scott (2008).