The importance of water to safeguard an abundant and stable food supply, due to favourable conditions for hunting, fishing and gathering resources including cereals, provided an initial wide spectrum economy that triggered the creation of permanent villages.

The earliest proto-urban settlements with several thousand inhabitants emerged in the Neolithic which began in Western Asia in 10,000 BC.

The first cities to house several tens of thousands were Uruk , Ur , Kish and Eridu in Mesopotamia , followed by Susa in Elam and Memphis in Egypt, all by the 31st century BC (see Historical urban community sizes ). Historic times are marked apart from prehistoric times when "records of the past begin to be kept for the benefit of future generations" —in written or oral form. If the rise of civilization is taken to coincide with the development of writing out of proto-writing , then the Near Eastern Chalcolithic (the transitional period between the Neolithic and the Bronze Age during the 4th millennium BC) and the development of proto-writing in Harappa in the Indus Valley of South Asia around 3,300 BC are the earliest instances, followed by Chinese proto-writing evolving into the oracle bone script , and again by the emergence of Mesoamerican writing systems from about 900 BC.

In the absence of written documents, most aspects of the rise of early civilizations are contained in archaeological assessments that document the development of formal institutions and the material culture. A "civilized" way of life is ultimately linked to conditions coming almost exclusively from agriculture . Gordon Childe defined the development of civilization as the result of two successive revolutions: the Neolithic Revolution of Western Asia, triggering the development of settled communities, and the urban revolution which also first emerged in Western Asia, which enhanced tendencies towards dense settlements, specialized occupational groups, social classes, exploitation of surpluses, monumental public buildings and writing. Few of those conditions, however, are unchallenged by the records: dense cities were not attested in Egypt's Old Kingdom (unlike Mesopotamia) and cities had a dispersed population in the Maya area; the Incas lacked writing although they could keep records with Quipus which might also have had literary uses; and often monumental architecture preceded any indication of village settlement. For instance, in present-day Louisiana, researchers have determined that cultures that were primarily nomadic organized over generations to build earthwork mounds at seasonal settlements as early as 3400 BC. Rather than a succession of events and preconditions, the rise of civilization could equally be hypothesized as an accelerated process that started with incipient agriculture and culminated in the Oriental Bronze Age. Single or multiple cradles Scholars once thought that civilization began in the Fertile Crescent and spread out from there by influence. Scholars now believe that civilizations arose independently at several locations in both hemispheres. They have observed that sociocultural developments occurred along different timeframes. "Sedentary" and " nomadic " communities continued to interact considerably; they were not strictly divided among widely different cultural groups.

The red squares designate farming villages.

The Fertile Crescent comprises a crescent-shaped region of elevated terrain in West Asia, encompassing regions of modern-day Egypt , Palestine , Israel , Lebanon , Syria , Jordan , Turkey , and Iraq , extending to the Zagros Mountains in Iran . It stands as one of the earliest regions globally where agricultural practices emerged, marking the advent of sedentary farming communities.

By 10,200 BC, fully developed Neolithic cultures, characterized by the Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA) and Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (7600 to 6000 BC) phases, emerged within the Fertile Crescent. These cultures diffused eastward into South Asia and westward into Europe and North Africa. Among the notable PPNA settlements is Jericho , located in the Jordan Valley , believed to be the world's earliest established city, with initial settlement dating back to around 9600 BC and fortification occurring around 6800 BC. Current theories and findings identify the Fertile Crescent as the first and oldest cradle of civilization. Examples of sites in this area are the early Neolithic site of Göbekli Tepe (9500–8000 BC) and Çatalhöyük (7500–5700 BC). Mesopotamia Main articles: History of Mesopotamia , History of Sumer , and Mesopotamia Major Sumerian cities during the Ubaid period In Mesopotamia (a region encompassing modern Iraq and bordering regions of Southeast Turkey , Northeast Syria and Northwest Iran ), the convergence of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers produced rich fertile soil and a supply of water for irrigation. Neolithic cultures emerged in the region from 8000 BC onwards.

The civilizations that emerged around these rivers are the earliest known non-nomadic agrarian societies . It is because of this that the Fertile Crescent region, and Mesopotamia in particular, are often referred to as the cradle of civilization.

The period known as the Ubaid period (c. 6500 to 3800 BC) is the earliest known period on the alluvial plain , although it is likely earlier periods exist obscured under the alluvium . It was during the Ubaid period that the movement toward urbanization began. Agriculture and animal husbandry were widely practiced in sedentary communities, particularly in Northern Mesopotamia (later Assyria ), and intensive irrigated hydraulic agriculture began to be practiced in the south. Around 6000 BC, Neolithic settlements began to appear all over Egypt. Studies based on morphological , genetic , and archaeological data have attributed these settlements to migrants from the Fertile Crescent in the Near East arriving in Egypt and North Africa during the Egyptian and North African Neolithic Revolution and bringing agriculture to the region. Tell el-'Oueili is the oldest Sumerian site settled during this period, around 5400 BC, and the city of Ur also first dates to the end of this period.

In the south, the Ubaid period lasted from around 6500 to 3800 BC. Sumerian civilization coalesced in the subsequent Uruk period (4000 to 3100 BC). Named after the Sumerian city of Uruk , this period saw the emergence of urban life in Mesopotamia and, during its later phase, the gradual emergence of the cuneiform script . Proto-writing in the region dates to around 3800 BC, with the earliest texts dating to 3300 BC; early cuneiform writing emerged in 3000 BC. It was also during this period that pottery painting declined as copper started to become popular, along with cylinder seals . Sumerian cities during the Uruk period were probably theocratic and were most likely headed by a priest-king ( ensi ), assisted by a council of elders, including both men and women. It is quite possible that the later Sumerian pantheon was modeled upon this political structure.

The Jemdet Nasr period , which is generally dated from 3100 to 2900 BC and succeeds the Uruk period, is known as one of the formative stages in the development of the cuneiform script.

The oldest clay tablets come from Uruk and date to the late fourth millennium BC, slightly earlier than the Jemdet Nasr Period.

By the time of the Jemdet Nasr Period, the script had already undergone a number of significant changes. It originally consisted of pictographs , but by the time of the Jemdet Nasr Period it was already adopting simpler and more abstract designs. It is also during this period that the script acquired its iconic wedge-shaped appearance. Uruk trade networks started to expand to other parts of Mesopotamia and as far as North Caucasus , and strong signs of governmental organization and social stratification began to emerge, leading to the Early Dynastic Period (c. 2900 BC).

After the Early Dynastic period began, there was a shift in control of the city-states from the temple establishment headed by council of elders led by a priestly "En" (a male figure when it was a temple for a goddess, or a female figure when headed by a male god) towards a more secular Lugal (Lu = man, Gal = great).

The Lugals included such legendary patriarchal figures as Enmerkar , Lugalbanda and Gilgamesh , who supposedly reigned shortly before the historic record opens around 2700 BC, when syllabic writing started to develop from the early pictograms.

The center of Sumerian culture remained in southern Mesopotamia, even though rulers soon began expanding into neighboring areas. Neighboring Semitic groups, including the Akkadian speaking Semites (Assyrians, Babylonians) who lived alongside the Sumerians in Mesopotamia, adopted much of Sumerian culture for their own.

The earliest ziggurats began near the end of the Early Dynastic Period, although architectural precursors in the form of raised platforms date back to the Ubaid period.

The Sumerian King List dates to the early second millennium BC. It consists of a succession of royal dynasties from different Sumerian cities, ranging back into the Early Dynastic Period. Each dynasty rises to prominence and dominates the region, only to be replaced by the next.

The document was used by later Mesopotamian kings to legitimize their rule.

While some of the information in the list can be checked against other texts such as economic documents, much of it is probably purely fictional, and its use as a historical document is limited. Eannatum , the Sumerian king of Lagash , established the first verifiable empire in history in 2500 BC.

The neighboring Elam, in modern Iran , was also part of the early urbanization during the Chalcolithic period. Elamite states were among the leading political forces of the Ancient Near East .

The emergence of Elamite written records from around 3200 BC also parallels Sumerian history, where slightly earlier records have been found.

During the 3rd millennium BC, there developed a very intimate cultural symbiosis between the Sumerians and the Akkadians . Akkadian language gradually replaced Sumerian as a spoken language somewhere between the 3rd and the 2nd millennia BC.

The Semitic-speaking Akkadian Empire emerged around 2350 BC under Sargon the Great .

The Akkadian Empire reached its political peak between the 24th and 22nd centuries BC. Under Sargon and his successors, the Akkadian language was briefly imposed on neighboring conquered states such as Elam and Gutium .

After the fall of the Akkadian Empire and the overthrow of the Gutians , there was a brief reassertion of Sumerian dominance in Mesopotamia under the Third Dynasty of Ur .

After the final collapse of Sumerian hegemony in Mesopotamia around 2004 BC, the Semitic Akkadian people of Mesopotamia eventually coalesced into two major Akkadian-speaking nations: Assyria in the north (whose earliest kings date to the 25th century BC), and, a few centuries later, Babylonia in the south, both of which (Assyria in particular) would go on to form powerful empires between the 20th and 6th centuries BC.

The Sumerians were eventually absorbed into the Semitic Assyrian-Babylonian population. Northeastern Africa Main articles: Classical African civilization , Aethiopia , Land of Punt , and Early Dynastic Egypt The region is intermediate between North Africa and East Africa , and encompasses the Horn of Africa ( Djibouti , Eritrea , Ethiopia , and Somalia ), as well as Sudan , South Sudan , Libya , and Egypt .

The region has a very long history of habitation with fossil finds from the early hominids to modern human and is one of the most culturally and linguistically diverse regions of the world, being the home to many civilizations and located on an important trade route that connects multiple continents. A range of linguistic , biological anthropological , archaeological and genetic data have identified shared affinities between early Egypt and northeastern African populations. Genetic evidence has identified the Horn of Africa as a source of a genetic marker " M35 / 215 " Y-chromosome lineage for a significant population component which moved north from that region into Egypt and the Levant. This genetic distribution paralleled the spread of the Afrasian language family with the movement of people from the Horn of Africa into Egypt and added a new demic component to the existing population of Egypt 17,000 years ago. Mainstream scholars have situated the ethnicity and the origins of predynastic, southern Egypt as a foundational community primarily in northeast Africa which included the Sudan , tropical Africa and the Sahara whilst recognising the population variability that became characteristic of the pharaonic period. Pharaonic Egypt featured a physical gradation across the regional populations, with Upper Egyptians having shared more biological affinities with Sudanese and southernly African populations , whereas Lower Egyptians had closer genetic links with Levantine and Mediterranean populations. Archaeological evidence has suggested that the Ancient Egyptian counting system had origins in Sub-Saharan Africa . Also, fractal geometry designs which are widespread among Sub-Saharan African cultures are also found in Egyptian architecture and cosmological signs.

The Ishango bone , according to scholar Alexander Marshack , may have influenced the later development of mathematics in Egypt as, like some entries on the Ishango bone, Egyptian arithmetic also made use of multiplication by 2; this however, is disputed. Megalithic structures located in Nabta Playa , Upper Egypt featured astronomy , calendar arrangements in alignment with the heliacal rising of Sirius and supported calibration the yearly calendar for the annual Nile flood. These practices have been linked with the emergence of cosmology in Old Kingdom Egypt. Ancient Nubians pioneered early antibiotics and established a system of geometrics which served as the basis for initial sunclocks . Nubians also exercised a trigonometric methodology comparable to their Egyptian counterparts.

The area comprising Somaliland , Somalia , Djibouti , the Red Sea coast of Eritrea and Sudan is considered the most likely location of the land known to the ancient Egyptians as Punt (or "Ta Netjeru", meaning god's land), whose first mention dates to the 25th century BC.

The Puntites traded myrrh , spices, gold, ebony , short-horned cattle, ivory and frankincense with the Ancient Egyptians, Phoenicians, Babylonians, Indians, Chinese and Romans through their commercial ports. An Ancient Egyptian expedition sent to Punt by the 18th dynasty Queen Hatshepsut is recorded on the temple reliefs at Deir el-Bahari , during the reign of the Puntite King Parahu and Queen Ati. According to Christiane Noblecourt, these expeditions were further facilitated by the existence of a common language between Egypt and Punt. Ancient Egypt Main articles: History of ancient Egypt , Northeast Africa , African humid period , and Ancient Egypt Map of ancient Egypt, showing major cities and sites of the Dynastic period (c. 3150 BC to 30 BC) The developed Neolithic cultures belonging to the phases Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (10,200 BC) and Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (7600 to 6000 BC) appeared in the Fertile Crescent and from there spread eastwards and westwards. Contemporaneously, a grain-grinding culture using the earliest type of sickle blades had replaced the culture of hunters, fishers, and gathering people using stone tools along the Nile. Geological evidence and computer climate modeling studies also suggest that natural climate changes around 8000 BC began to desiccate the extensive pastoral lands of northern Africa, eventually forming the Sahara . Continued desiccation forced the early ancestors of the Egyptians to settle around the Nile more permanently and to adopt a more sedentary lifestyle.

The oldest fully developed neolithic culture in Egypt is Fayum A culture that began around 5500 BC.

By about 5500 BC, small tribes living in the Nile valley had developed into a series of inter-related cultures as far south as Sudan, demonstrating firm control of agriculture and animal husbandry , and identifiable by their pottery and personal items, such as combs, bracelets, and beads.

The largest of these early cultures in northern Upper Egypt was the Badari , which probably originated in the Western Desert; it was known for its high quality ceramics, stone tools , and use of copper.

The oldest known domesticated bovine in Africa are from Fayum dating to around 4400 BC.

The Badari cultures was followed by the Naqada culture , which brought a number of technological improvements.

As early as the first Naqada Period, Amratia , Egyptians imported obsidian from Ethiopia , used to shape blades and other objects from flakes .

By 3300 BC, just before the first Egyptian dynasty, Egypt was divided into two kingdoms, known as Upper Egypt to the south, and Lower Egypt to the north. Egyptian civilization begins during the second phase of the Naqada culture, known as the Gerzeh period , around 3500 BC and coalesces with the unification of Upper and Lower Egypt around 3150 BC. Farming produced the vast majority of food; with increased food supplies, the populace adopted a much more sedentary lifestyle, and the larger settlements grew to cities of about 5,000 residents. It was in this time that the city dwellers started using mud brick to build their cities, and the use of the arch and recessed walls for decorative effect became popular. Copper instead of stone was increasingly used to make tools and weaponry. Symbols on Gerzean pottery also resemble nascent Egyptian hieroglyphs. Early evidence also exists of contact with the Near East , particularly Canaan and the Byblos coast, during this time. Concurrent with these cultural advances, a process of unification of the societies and towns of the upper Nile River, or Upper Egypt, occurred.

At the same time the societies of the Nile Delta, or Lower Egypt, also underwent a unification process.

During his reign in Upper Egypt, King Narmer defeated his enemies on the Delta and merged both the Kingdom of Upper and Lower Egypt under his single rule.

The Early Dynastic Period of Egypt immediately followed the unification of Upper and Lower Egypt. It is generally taken to include the First and Second Dynasties , lasting from the Naqada III archaeological period until about the beginning of the Old Kingdom , c. 2686 BC. With the First Dynasty, the capital moved from Thinis to Memphis with a unified Egypt ruled by a god-king .

The hallmarks of ancient Egyptian civilization, such as art , architecture and many aspects of religion , took shape during the Early Dynastic period.

The strong institution of kingship developed by the pharaohs served to legitimize state control over the land, labor, and resources that were essential to the survival and growth of ancient Egyptian civilization. Major advances in architecture, art, and technology were made during the subsequent Old Kingdom , fueled by the increased agricultural productivity and resulting population, made possible by a well-developed central administration. Some of ancient Egypt's crowning achievements, the Giza pyramids and Great Sphinx , were constructed during the Old Kingdom. Under the direction of the vizier , state officials collected taxes, coordinated irrigation projects to improve crop yield and have senatorial essence over a justice system to maintain peace and order. Along with the rising importance of a central administration there arose a new class of educated scribes and officials who were granted estates by the pharaoh in payment for their services. Pharaohs also made land grants to their mortuary cults and local temples, to ensure that these institutions had the resources to worship the pharaoh after his death. Scholars believe that five centuries of these practices slowly eroded the economic power of the pharaoh, and that the economy could no longer afford to support a large centralized administration.

As the power of the pharaoh diminished, regional governors called nomarchs began to challenge the supremacy of the pharaoh. This, coupled with severe droughts between 2200 and 2150 BC, is assumed to have caused the country to enter the 140-year period of famine and strife known as the First Intermediate Period . Ancient India Main articles: History of India , Meluhha , Indus Valley Civilisation , List of Indus Valley Civilisation sites , and History of Pakistan The Indus Valley Civilization at its greatest extent The earliest reliably-dated Neolithic site in South Asia is Mehrgarh in the Kacchi Plain of present-day Pakistan dating from 7000 BC.

The aceramic Neolithic at Mehrgarh in present-day Pakistan lasts from 7000 to 5500 BC, with the ceramic Neolithic at Mehrgarh lasting up to 3300 BC; blending into the Early Bronze Age. Mehrgarh is one of the earliest sites with evidence of farming and herding in the Indian subcontinent. It is likely that the culture centered around Mehrgarh migrated into the Indus Valley in present-day Pakistan and became the Indus Valley Civilisation .

The earliest fortified town in the region is found at Rehman Dheri , dated 4000 BC in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa close to River Zhob Valley in present-day Pakistan. Other fortified towns found to date are at Amri (3600–3300 BC), Kot Diji in Sindh , and at Kalibangan (3000 BC) at the Hakra River.

The Indus Valley Civilization starts around 3300 BC with what is referred to as the Early Harappan Phase (3300 to 2600 BC), although at the start this was still a village-based culture, leaving mostly pottery for archaeologists.

The earliest examples of the Indus script date to this period, as well as the emergence of citadels representing centralised authority and an increasingly urban quality of life. Trade networks linked this culture with related regional cultures and distant sources of raw materials, including lapis lazuli and other materials for bead-making.

By around 2600 BC, villagers had domesticated numerous crops, including peas , sesame seeds , dates , and cotton, as well as animals, including the water buffalo . 2600 to 1900 BC marks the Mature Harappan Phase during which Early Harappan communities turned into large urban centers including Harappa , Dholavira , Mohenjo-daro , Lothal , Rupar , and Rakhigarhi , and more than 1,000 towns and villages, often of relatively small size. Mature Harappans evolved new techniques in metallurgy and produced copper, bronze , lead, and tin and displayed advanced levels of engineering.

As seen in Harappa, Mohenjo-daro and the recently partially excavated Rakhigarhi, this urban plan included the world's first known urban sanitation systems: see hydraulic engineering of the Indus Valley civilization . Within the city, individual homes or groups of homes obtained water from wells .

From a room that appears to have been set aside for bathing, waste water was directed to covered drains, which lined the major streets. Houses opened only to inner courtyards and smaller lanes.

The housebuilding in some villages in the region still resembles in some respects the housebuilding of the Harappans.

The advanced architecture of the Harappans is shown by their impressive dockyards, granaries , warehouses, brick platforms, and protective walls.

The massive walls of Indus cities most likely protected the Harappans from floods and may have dissuaded military conflicts.

The people of the Indus Civilization achieved great accuracy in measuring length, mass, and time. They were among the first to develop a system of uniform weights and measures. A comparison of available objects indicates large scale variation across the Indus territories. Their smallest division, which is marked on an ivory scale found in Lothal in Gujarat, was approximately 1.704 mm, the smallest division ever recorded on a scale of the Bronze Age . Harappan engineers followed the decimal division of measurement for all practical purposes, including the measurement of mass as revealed by their hexahedron weights. These chert weights were in a ratio of 5:2:1 with weights of 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, and 500 units, with each unit weighing approximately 28 grams, similar to the English Imperial ounce or Greek uncia, and smaller objects were weighed in similar ratios with the units of 0.871. However, as in other cultures, actual weights were not uniform throughout the area.

The weights and measures later used in Kautilya 's Arthashastra (4th century BC) are the same as those used in Lothal. Around 1800 BC, signs of a gradual decline began to emerge, and by around 1700 BC most of the cities had been abandoned. Suggested contributory causes for the localisation of the IVC include changes in the course of the river, and climate change that is also signaled for the neighbouring areas of the Middle East.

As of 2016 many scholars believe that drought led to a decline in trade with Egypt and Mesopotamia contributing to the collapse of the Indus Civilization.

The Ghaggar-Hakra system was rain-fed, and water-supply depended on the monsoons.

The Indus Valley climate grew significantly cooler and drier from about 1800 BC, linked to a general weakening of the monsoon at that time.

The Indian monsoon declined and aridity increased, with the Ghaggar-Hakra retracting its reach towards the foothills of the Himalaya, leading to erratic and less extensive floods that made inundation agriculture less sustainable. Aridification reduced the water supply enough to cause the civilization's demise, and to scatter its population eastward.

As the monsoons kept shifting south, the floods grew too erratic for sustainable agricultural activities.

The residents then migrated away into smaller communities.

However trade with the old cities did not flourish.

The small surplus produced in these small communities did not allow development of trade, and the cities died out. According to the Aryan Migration Theory , the Indo-Aryan peoples migrated into the Indus River Valley during this period and began the Vedic age of India.

The specific cultural regions that developed Chinese civilization were the Yellow River civilization , the Yangtze civilization , and Liao civilization . Early evidence for Chinese millet agriculture is dated to around 7000 BC, with the earliest evidence of cultivated rice found at Chengtoushan near the Yangtze River, dated to 6500 BC. Chengtoushan may also be the site of the first walled city in China.

By the beginning of the Neolithic Revolution , the Yellow River valley began to establish itself as a center of the Peiligang culture , which flourished from 7000 to 5000 BC, with evidence of agriculture, constructed buildings, pottery, and burial of the dead. With agriculture came increased population, the ability to store and redistribute crops, and the potential to support specialist craftsmen and administrators. Its most prominent site is Jiahu . Some scholars have suggested that the Jiahu symbols (6600 BC) are the earliest form of proto-writing in China. However, it is likely that they should not be understood as writing itself, but as features of a lengthy period of sign-use, which led eventually to a fully-fledged system of writing. Archaeologists believe that the Peiligang culture was egalitarian, with little political organization. It eventually evolved into the Yangshao culture (5000 to 3000 BC), and their stone tools were polished and highly specialized. They may also have practiced an early form of silkworm cultivation .

The main food of the Yangshao people was millet , with some sites using foxtail millet and others broomcorn millet , though some evidence of rice has been found.

The exact nature of Yangshao agriculture, small-scale slash-and-burn cultivation versus intensive agriculture in permanent fields, is currently a matter of debate. Once the soil was exhausted, residents picked up their belongings, moved to new lands, and constructed new villages. However, Middle Yangshao settlements such as Jiangzhi contain raised-floor buildings that may have been used for the storage of surplus grains. Grinding stones for making flour were also found. Later, Yangshao culture was superseded by the Longshan culture , which was also centered on the Yellow River from about 3000 to 1900 BC, its most prominent site being Taosi .

The population expanded dramatically during the 3rd millennium BC, with many settlements having rammed earth walls. It decreased in most areas around 2000 BC until the central area evolved into the Bronze Age Erlitou culture .

The earliest bronze artifacts have been found in the Majiayao culture site (3100 to 2700 BC). Contemporary Chinese civilization begins during the second phase of the Erlitou period (1900 to 1500 BC), with Erlitou considered the first state level society of East Asia . There is considerable debate whether Erlitou sites correlate to the semi-legendary Xia dynasty .

The Xia dynasty (2070 to 1600 BC) is the first dynasty to be described in ancient Chinese historical records such as the Bamboo Annals , first published more than a millennium later during the Western Zhou period.

Although Xia is an important element in Chinese historiography, there is to date no contemporary written evidence to corroborate the dynasty. Erlitou saw an increase in bronze metallurgy and urbanization and was a rapidly growing regional center with palatial complexes that provide evidence for social stratification.

The Erlitou civilization is divided into four phases, each of roughly 50 years.

During Phase I, covering 100 hectares (250 acres), Erlitou was a rapidly growing regional center with estimated population of several thousand but not yet an urban civilization or capital. Urbanization began in Phase II, expanding to 300 ha (740 acres) with a population around 11,000. A palace area of 12 ha (30 acres) was demarcated by four roads. It contained the 150x50 m Palace 3, composed of three courtyards along a 150-meter axis, and Palace 5. A bronze foundry was established to the south of the palatial complex that was controlled by the elite who lived in palaces.

The city reached its peak in Phase III, and may have had a population of around 24,000.

The palatial complex was surrounded by a two-meter-thick rammed-earth wall, and Palaces 1, 7, 8, 9 were built.

The earthwork volume of rammed earth for the base of largest Palace 1 is 20,000 m 3 at least. Palaces 3 and 5 were abandoned and replaced by 4,200-square-meter (45,000 sq ft) Palace 2 and Palace 4.

In Phase IV, the population decreased to around 20,000, but building continued. Palace 6 was built as an extension of Palace 2, and Palaces 10 and 11 were built. Phase IV overlaps with the Lower phase of the Erligang culture (1600–1450 BC). Around 1600 to 1560 BC, about 6 km northeast of Erlitou, a culturally Erligang walled city was built at Yanshi , which coincides with an increase in production of arrowheads at Erlitou. This situation might indicate that the Yanshi city was competing for power and dominance with Erlitou. Production of bronzes and other elite goods ceased at the end of Phase IV, at the same time as the Erligang city of Zhengzhou was established 85 km (53 mi) to the east. There is no evidence of destruction by fire or war, but, during the Upper Erligang phase (1450–1300 BC), all the palaces were abandoned, and Erlitou was reduced to a village of 30 ha (74 acres).

The earliest traditional Chinese dynasty for which there is both archeological and written evidence is the Shang dynasty (1600 to 1046 BC). Shang sites have yielded the earliest known body of Chinese writing , the oracle bone script , mostly divinations inscribed on bones. These inscriptions provide critical insight into many topics from the politics, economy, and religious practices to the art and medicine of this early stage of Chinese civilization. Some historians argue that Erlitou should be considered an early phase of the Shang dynasty.

The U.S. National Gallery of Art defines the Chinese Bronze Age as the period between about 2000 and 771 BC; a period that begins with the Erlitou culture and ends abruptly with the disintegration of Western Zhou rule.

The Sanxingdui culture is another Chinese Bronze Age society, contemporaneous to the Shang dynasty, however they developed a different method of bronze-making from the Shang. Ancient Peru Main article: Caral–Supe civilization Map of Caral–Supe sites The earliest evidence of agriculture in the Andean region dates to around 9000 BC in Ecuador at sites of the Las Vegas culture .

The bottle gourd may have been the first plant cultivated.

The oldest evidence of canal irrigation in South America dates to 4700 to 2500 BC in the Zaña Valley of northern Peru .

The earliest urban settlements of the Andes, as well as North and South America, are dated to 3500 BC at Huaricanga , in the Fortaleza area, and Sechin Bajo near the Sechin River . Both sites are in Peru.

The Caral–Supe or Norte Chico civilization is understood to have emerged around 3200 BC, as it is at that point that large-scale human settlement and communal construction across multiple sites becomes clearly apparent.

In the early 21st century, Peruvian archaeologist Ruth Shady established Caral–Supe as the oldest known civilization in the Americas .

The civilization flourished near the Pacific coast in the valleys of three small rivers, the Fortaleza, the Pativilca, and the Supe. These river valleys each have large clusters of sites. Further south, there are several associated sites along the Huaura River. Notable settlements include the cities of Caral , the largest and most complex Preceramic site, and Aspero . Norte Chico is distinguished by its density of large sites with immense architecture. Haas argues that the density of sites in such a small area is globally unique for a nascent civilization.

During the third millennium BC, Norte Chico may have been the most densely populated area of the world (excepting, possibly, northern China ).

The Supe, Pativilca, Fortaleza, and Huaura River valleys each have several related sites. Norte Chico is unusual in that it completely lacked ceramics and apparently had almost no visual art. Nevertheless, the civilization exhibited impressive architectural feats, including large earthwork platform mounds and sunken circular plazas, and an advanced textile industry.

The platform mounds, as well as large stone warehouses, provide evidence for a stratified society and a centralized authority necessary to distribute resources such as cotton. However, there is no evidence of warfare or defensive structures during this period. Originally, it was theorized that, unlike other early civilizations, Norte Chico developed by relying on maritime food sources in place of a staple cereal. This hypothesis, the Maritime Foundation of Andean Civilization , is still hotly debated; however, most researches now agree that agriculture played a central role in the civilization's development while still acknowledging a strong supplemental reliance on maritime proteins.

The Norte Chico chiefdoms were "...almost certainly theocratic , though not brutally so," according to Mann. Construction areas show possible evidence of feasting, which would have included music and likely alcohol, suggesting an elite able to both mobilize and reward the population.

The degree of centralized authority is difficult to ascertain, but architectural construction patterns are indicative of an elite that, at least in certain places at certain times, wielded considerable power: while some of the monumental architecture was constructed incrementally, other buildings, such as the two main platform mounds at Caral, appear to have been constructed in one or two intense construction phases.

As further evidence of centralized control, Haas points to remains of large stone warehouses found at Upaca, on the Pativilca, as emblematic of authorities able to control vital resources such as cotton. Economic authority would have rested on the control of cotton and edible plants and associated trade relationships, with power centered on the inland sites. Haas tentatively suggests that the scope of this economic power base may have extended widely: there are only two confirmed shore sites in the Norte Chico (Aspero and Bandurria) and possibly two more, but cotton fishing nets and domesticated plants have been found up and down the Peruvian coast. It is possible that the major inland centers of Norte Chico were at the center of a broad regional trade network centered on these resources. Discover magazine, citing Shady, suggests a rich and varied trade life: " exported its own products and those of Aspero to distant communities in exchange for exotic imports: Spondylus shells from the coast of Ecuador , rich dyes from the Andean highlands , hallucinogenic snuff from the Amazon ." (Given the still limited extent of Norte Chico research, such claims should be treated circumspectly.) Other reports on Shady's work indicate Caral traded with communities in the Andes and in the jungles of the Amazon basin on the opposite side of the Andes. Leaders' ideological power was based on apparent access to deities and the supernatural . Evidence regarding Norte Chico religion is limited: an image of the Staff God , a leering figure with a hood and fangs, has been found on a gourd dated to 2250 BC.

The Staff God is a major deity of later Andean cultures, and Winifred Creamer suggests the find points to worship of common symbols of gods.

As with much other research at Norte Chico, the nature and significance of the find has been disputed by other researchers.

The act of architectural construction and maintenance may also have been a spiritual or religious experience: a process of communal exaltation and ceremony. Shady has called Caral "the sacred city" ( la ciudad sagrada ): socio-economic and political focus was on the temples, which were periodically remodeled, with major burnt offerings associated with the remodeling. Bundles of strings uncovered at Norte Chico sites have been identified as quipu , a type of pre-writing recording device. Quipu are thought to encode numeric information, but some have conjectured that quipu have been used to encode other forms of data, possibly including literary or musical applications. However, the exact use of quipu by the Norte Chico and later Andean cultures has been widely debated.

The presence of quipu and the commonality of religious symbols suggests a cultural link between Norte Chico and later Andean cultures. Circa 1800 BC, the Norte Chico civilization began to decline, with more powerful centers appearing to the south and north along the coast and to the east inside the belt of the Andes. Pottery eventually developed in the Amazon Basin and spread to the Andean culture region around 2000 BC.

The next major civilization to arise in the Andes would be the Chavín culture at Chavín de Huantar , located in the Andean highlands of the present-day Department of Ancash . It is believed to have been built around 900 BC and was the religious and political center of the Chavín people. Mesoamerica Main articles: Mesoamerican chronology and Olmecs The Olmec heartland, where the Olmec reigned Maize is believed to have been first domesticated in southern Mexico about 7000 BC.

The Coxcatlan Caves in the Valley of Tehuacán provide evidence for agriculture in components dated between 5000 and 3400 BC. Similarly, sites such as Sipacate in Guatemala provide maize pollen samples dating to 3500 BC. Around 1900 BC, the Mokaya domesticated one of the dozen species of cacao . A Mokaya archaeological site provides evidence of cacao beverages dating to this time.

The Mokaya are also thought to have been among the first cultures in Mesoamerica to develop a hierarchical society. What would become the Olmec civilization had its roots in early farming cultures of Tabasco , which began around 5100 to 4600 BC.

The emergence of the Olmec civilization has traditionally been dated to around 1600 to 1500 BC. Olmec features first emerged in the city of San Lorenzo Tenochtitlán , fully coalescing around 1400 BC.

The rise of civilization was assisted by the local ecology of well-watered alluvial soil, as well as by the transportation network provided by the Coatzacoalcos River basin. This environment encouraged a densely concentrated population, which in turn triggered the rise of an elite class and an associated demand for the production of the symbolic and sophisticated luxury artifacts that define Olmec culture. Many of these luxury artifacts were made from materials such as jade , obsidian , and magnetite , which came from distant locations and suggest that early Olmec elites had access to an extensive trading network in Mesoamerica.

The aspect of Olmec culture perhaps most familiar today is their artwork, particularly the Olmec colossal heads . San Lorenzo was situated in the midst of a large agricultural area. San Lorenzo seems to have been largely a ceremonial site, a town without city walls, centered in the midst of a widespread medium-to-large agricultural population.

The ceremonial center and attendant buildings could have housed 5,500 while the entire area, including hinterlands, could have reached 13,000. It is thought that while San Lorenzo controlled much or all of the Coatzacoalcos basin, areas to the east (such as the area where La Venta would rise to prominence) and north-northwest (such as the Tuxtla Mountains ) were home to independent polities. San Lorenzo was all but abandoned around 900 BC at about the same time that La Venta rose to prominence. A wholesale destruction of many San Lorenzo monuments also occurred circa 950 BC, which may indicate an internal uprising or, less likely, an invasion.

The latest thinking, however, is that environmental changes may have been responsible for this shift in Olmec centers, with certain important rivers changing course. La Venta became the cultural capital of the Olmec concentration in the region until its abandonment around 400 BC, constructing monumental architectural achievements such as the Great Pyramid of La Venta . It contained a "concentration of power", as reflected by the sheer enormity of the architecture and the extreme value of the artifacts uncovered. La Venta is perhaps the largest Olmec city and it was controlled and expanded by an extremely complex hierarchical system, with a king as the ruler and the elites below him. Priests had power and influence over life and death and likely great political sway as well. Unfortunately, not much is known about the political or social structure of the Olmec, though new dating techniques might, at some point, reveal more information about this elusive culture. It is possible that the signs of status exist in the artifacts recovered at the site such as depictions of feathered headdresses or of individuals wearing a mirror on their chest or forehead. "High-status objects were a significant source of power in the La Venta polity political power, economic power, and ideological power. They were tools used by the elite to enhance and maintain rights to rulership". It has been estimated that La Venta would need to be supported by a population of at least 18,000 people during its principal occupation. To add to the mystique of La Venta, the alluvial soil did not preserve skeletal remains, so it is difficult to observe differences in burials. However, colossal heads provide proof that the elite had some control over the lower classes, as their construction would have been extremely labor-intensive. "Other features similarly indicate that many laborers were involved".

In addition, excavations over the years have discovered that different parts of the site were likely reserved for elites and other parts for non-elites. This segregation of the city indicates that there must have been social classes and therefore social inequality.

The exact cause of the decline of the Olmec culture is uncertain. Between 400 and 350 BC, the population in the eastern half of the Olmec heartland dropped precipitously. This depopulation was probably the result of serious environmental changes that rendered the region unsuited for large groups of farmers, in particular changes to the riverine environment that the Olmec depended upon for agriculture, hunting and gathering, and transportation. These changes may have been triggered by tectonic upheavals or subsidence, or the silting up of rivers due to agricultural practices. Within a few hundred years of the abandonment of the last Olmec cities, successor cultures became firmly established.

The Tres Zapotes site, on the western edge of the Olmec heartland, continued to be occupied well past 400 BC, but without the hallmarks of the Olmec culture. This post-Olmec culture, often labeled Epi-Olmec , has features similar to those found at Izapa , some 550 km (330 miles) to the southeast.

The Olmecs are sometimes referred to as the mother culture of Mesoamerica, as they were the first Mesoamerican civilization and laid many of the foundations for the civilizations that followed. However, the causes and degree of Olmec influences on Mesoamerican cultures has been a subject of debate over many decades. Practices introduced by the Olmec include ritual bloodletting and the Mesoamerican ballgame , hallmarks of subsequent Mesoamerican societies such as the Maya and Aztec .

Although the Mesoamerican writing system would fully develop later, early Olmec ceramics show representations that may be interpreted as codices. Cradle of Western civilization The Colosseum and the Acropolis , symbols of the Greco-Roman world . Via the Roman Empire , Greek culture spread throughout Europe Main articles: Minoan civilization , Old Europe (archaeology) , Mycenaean Greece , Ancient Greece , Ancient Rome , Classical antiquity , and Christendom There is academic consensus that Classical Greece was a major culture that provided the foundation of modern Western culture , democracy, art, theatre, philosophy, and science. For this reason, it is known as the cradle of Western Civilization. Along with Greece, Rome has sometimes been described as a birthplace or as the cradle of Western Civilization because of the role the city had in politics, republicanism , law, architecture, warfare and Western Christianity . Other uses Because the word civilization can be defined widely, the term "cradle of civilization" has also been used to describe the origin-point of a particular cultural group , or as the basis for a national mysticism or the origin myth of a nation . This is separate from the use of the term in the study of human prehistory and the development of complex, sedentary societies. "Cradle of civilization" has been used in Indian nationalism ( In Search of the Cradle of Civilization 1995) and Taiwanese nationalism ( Taiwan;— The Cradle of Civilization 2002).

The Bronze Age village and urban societies of the Indus Valley are some-thing of an anomaly, in that archaeologists have found little indication of local defense and regional warfare. It would seem that the bountiful monsoon rainfall of the Early to Mid-Holocene had forged a condition of plenty for all, and that competitive energies were channeled into commerce rather than conflict. Scholars have long argued that these rains shaped the origins of the urban Harappan societies, which emerged from Neolithic villages around 2600 BC. It now appears that this rainfall began to slowly taper off in the third millennium, at just the point that the Harappan cities began to develop. Thus it seems that this "first urbanisation" in South Asia was the initial response of the Indus Valley peoples to the beginning of Late Holocene aridification. These cities were maintained for 300 to 400 years and then gradually abandoned as the Harappan peoples resettled in scattered villages in the eastern range of their territories, into the Punjab and the Ganges Valley....' 17 (footnote): a)Liviu Giosan et al., "Fluvial Landscapes of the Harappan Civilization," PNAS, 102 (2012), E1688—E1694; (b) Camilo Ponton, "Holocene Aridification of India," GRL 39 (2012), L03704; (c) Harunur Rashid et al., "Late Glacial to Holocene Indian Summer Monsoon Variability Based upon Sediment Records Taken from the Bay of Bengal," Terrestrial, Atmospheric, and Oceanic Sciences 22 (2011), 215–28; (d) Marco Madella and Dorian Q. Fuller, "Paleoecology and the Harappan Civilization of South Asia: A Reconsideration," Quaternary Science Reviews 25 (2006), 1283–301. Compare with the very different interpretations in The Indus Civilization: A Contemporary Perspective , Rowman Altamira, pp. 237– 245, ISBN 978-0-7591-0172-2 , and Michael Staubwasser et al., "Climate Change at the 4.2 ka BP Termination of the Indus Valley Civilization and Holocene South Asian Monsoon Variability," GRL 30 (2003), 1425. Bar-Matthews and Avner Ayalon, "Mid-Holocene Climate Variations." ^ Krysztof Makowski, as reported by Mann (1491), suggests there is little evidence that Andean civilizations worshipped an overarching deity.

The Biology of Civilisation . UNSW Press. pp. 7– 8. ISBN 978-0-86840-766-1 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2016 . Retrieved 20 June 2015 . ^ Solms-Laubach, Franz (2007). Nietzsche and Early German and Austrian Sociology . Walter de Gruyter. pp. 115, 117, 212. ISBN 978-3-11-018109-8 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2016 . Retrieved 20 June 2015 . ^ AbdelRahim, Layla (2015). Children's literature, domestication and social foundation: Narratives of civilization and wilderness . New York: Routledge. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-415-66110-2 . OCLC 897810261 . ^ Charles Keith Maisels (1993).

The Ancient Maya (6th (fully revised) ed.). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press . p. 71. ISBN 0-8047-4817-9 . OCLC 57577446 . ^ Britannica 15th edition, 26:62–63. ^ "The Rise of Civilization in the Middle East And Africa" . History-world.org. Archived from the original on 7 March 2009 . Retrieved 18 April 2009 . ^ a b c d e f g Mann, Charles C. (2005). 1491 . New York: Knopf. ISBN 978-1-4000-4006-3 . ^ Wright, Henry T. (1990). "Rise of Civilizations: Mesopotamia to Mesoamerica". Archaeology . 42 (1): 46– 48, 96– 100. ^ The Columbia Encyclopedia . Retrieved 28 July 2008 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) Edwin, Eric (27 February 2015). "city" . Britannica.com . Archived from the original on 7 January 2016 . Retrieved 4 January 2016 . "Africanafrican.com" (PDF) . Africanafrican.com . Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 4 January 2016 . Hommon, Robert J. (2013).

The Ancient Hawaiian State: Origins of a Political Society . Oxford University Press . Kennett, Douglas J.; Winterhalder, Bruce (2006). Behavioral Ecology and the Transition to Agriculture . University of California Press . p. 121. ISBN 978-0-520-24647-8 . ^ Riehl, Simone (27 August 2014). Agriculture in the Ancient Near East . Springer. pp. 1– 15. ISBN 978-94-007-3934-5 . Retrieved 20 June 2022 . {{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ a b Bellwood, Peter. First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies . 2004. Wiley-Blackwell. ^ Akhilesh Pillalamarri (18 April 2015). "Exploring the Indus Valley's Secrets" .

The diplomat. Archived from the original on 20 April 2015 . Retrieved 18 April 2015 . ^ "Jericho – Facts & History" . Archived from the original on 26 July 2008 . Retrieved 2 June 2022 . ^ "Ubaid Civilization" . Ancientneareast.tripod.com. Archived from the original on 2 April 2017 . Retrieved 18 April 2009 . ^ Adams, Robert M.C.C. and Wright, Henry T. 1989. 'Concluding Remarks' in Henrickson, Elizabeth and Thuesen, Ingolf (eds.) Upon This Foundation – The 'Ubaid Reconsidered . Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press. pp. 451–456. ^ Carter, Robert A. and Philip, Graham Beyond the Ubaid: Transformation and Integration in the Late Prehistoric Societies of the Middle East (Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization, Number 63) The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago (2010) ISBN 978-1-885923-66-0 p. 2, at http://oi.uchicago.edu/research/pubs/catalog/saoc/saoc63.html Archived 15 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine ; "Radiometric data suggest that the whole Southern Mesopotamian Ubaid period, including Ubaid 0 and 5, is of immense duration, spanning nearly three millennia from about 6500 to 3800 B.C.". ^ Pollock, Susan (1999). Ancient Mesopotamia: The Eden that Never Was . New York: Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-0-521-57334-4 . ^ Redford, Donald B. (1992). Egypt, Canaan, and Israel in Ancient Times . Princeton: University Press. p. 6 . ISBN 978-0-691-03606-9 . ^ Brace, C. Loring; Seguchi, Noriko; Quintyn, Conrad B.; Fox, Sherry C.; Nelson, A. Russell; Manolis, Sotiris K.; Qifeng, Pan (2006). "The questionable contribution of the Neolithic and the Bronze Age to European craniofacial form" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 103 (1): 242– 247. Bibcode : 2006PNAS..103..242B . doi : 10.1073/pnas.0509801102 . PMC 1325007 . PMID 16371462 . ^ Chicki, L; Nichols, RA; Barbujani, G; Beaumont, MA (2002). "Y genetic data support the Neolithic demic diffusion model" . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA . 99 (17): 11008– 11013. Bibcode : 2002PNAS...9911008C . doi : 10.1073/pnas.162158799 . PMC 123201 . PMID 12167671 . ^ "Estimating the Impact of Prehistoric Admixture on the Genome of Europeans, Dupanloup et al., 2004" . Mbe.oxfordjournals.org. Archived from the original on 11 March 2007 . Retrieved 1 May 2012 . ^ Semino, O; Magri, C; Benuzzi, G; et al. (May 2004). "Origin, Diffusion, and Differentiation of Y-Chromosome Haplogroups E and J: Inferences on the Neolithization of Europe and Later Migratory Events in the Mediterranean Area, 2004" . Am. J. Hum. Genet . 74 (5): 1023– 34. doi : 10.1086/386295 . PMC 1181965 . PMID 15069642 . ^ Cavalli-Sforza (1997). "Paleolithic and Neolithic lineages in the European mitochondrial gene pool" (PDF) . Am J Hum Genet . 61 (1): 247– 54. doi : 10.1016/S0002-9297(07)64303-1 . PMC 1715849 . PMID 9246011 . Archived from the original on 17 May 2020 . Retrieved 1 May 2012 . ^ Chikhi (21 July 1998). "Clines of nuclear DNA markers suggest a largely Neolithic ancestry of the European gene" . PNAS . 95 (15): 9053– 9058. Bibcode : 1998PNAS...95.9053C . doi : 10.1073/pnas.95.15.9053 . PMC 21201 . PMID 9671803 . ^ Zvelebil, M. (1986). Hunters in Transition: Mesolithic Societies and the Transition to Farming . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp. 5– 15, 167– 188. ^ Bellwood, P. (2005). First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies . Malden, MA: Blackwell. ^ Dokládal, M.; Brožek, J. (1961). "Physical Anthropology in Czechoslovakia: Recent Developments". Current Anthropology . 2 (5): 455– 477. doi : 10.1086/200228 . S2CID 161324951 . ^ Zvelebil, M. (1989). "On the transition to farming in Europe, or what was spreading with the Neolithic: a reply to Ammerman (1989)". Antiquity . 63 (239): 379– 383. doi : 10.1017/S0003598X00076110 . S2CID 162882505 . ^ Leick, Gwendolyn (2002), "Mesopotamia: The Invention of the City" (Penguin). ^ Carter, Robert A. and Philip, Graham. 2010. 'Deconstructing the Ubaid' in Carter, Robert A. and Philip, Graham (eds.) Beyond the Ubaid: Transformation and Integration in the Late Prehistoric Societies of the Middle East . Chicago: The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago. p. 2. ^ Crawford, Harriet E. W. Sumer and the Sumerians . Cambridge University Press. 2nd ed. 2004. ^ An Encyclopedia of World History . Langer, William L. ed. Houghton Mifflin Company. Boston, MA. 1972. ^ Jacobsen, Thorkild (Ed.) (1939), "The Sumerian King List" (Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago; Assyriological Studies, No. 11, 1939). ^ Woods 2010 , pp. 36–37. ^ Martin (1988), pp. 20–23. ^ a b Pruß, Alexander (2004), "Remarks on the Chronological Periods", in Lebeau, Marc; Sauvage, Martin (eds.), Atlas of Preclassical Upper Mesopotamia , Subartu, vol. 13, pp. 7– 21, ISBN 978-2-503-99120-7 . ^ Postgate, J.N. (1992), Early Mesopotamia. Society and Economy at the Dawn of History , London: Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-11032-7 . ^ a b van de Mieroop, M. (2007), A History of the Ancient Near East, ca. 3000–323 BC , Malden: Blackwell, ISBN 978-0-631-22552-2 . ^ Jacobsen, Thorkild (1976), "The Harps that Once...; Sumerian Poetry in Translation" and "Treasures of Darkness: a history of Mesopotamian Religion". ^ Crawford, pp. 73–74. ^ Kleiner, Fred S.; Mamiya, Christin J. (2006). Gardner's Art Through the Ages: The Western Perspective — Volume 1 (12th ed.). Belmont, California, USA: Thomson Wadsworth. pp. 22–23 . ISBN 978-0-495-00479-0 . ^ The Archaeology of Elam: Formation and Transformation of an Ancient Iranian State – by D. T. Potts, Cambridge University Press, 29 July 1999 – p. 46 – ISBN 0521563585 hardback. ^ Elam: surveys of political history and archaeology, Elizabeth Carter and Matthew W. Stolper, University of California Press, 1984, p. 3. ^ Hock, Hans Heinrich (2009). Language History, Language Change, and Language Relationship: An Introduction to Historical and Comparative Linguistics (2nd ed.). Mouton de Gruyter. p. 69. ISBN 978-3-11-021429-1 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 10 November 2020 . ^ Gnanadesikan, Amalia (2008).

The Writing Revolution: Cuneiform to the Internet . Blackwell. p. 25. ISBN 978-1-4443-0468-8 . ^ Deutscher, Guy (2007). Syntactic Change in Akkadian: The Evolution of Sentential Complementation . Oxford University Press US . pp. 20– 21. ISBN 978-0-19-953222-3 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 27 August 2020 . ^ Woods, C. (2006). "Bilingualism, Scribal Learning, and the Death of Sumerian" (PDF) . S.L. Sanders (ed) Margins of Writing, Origins of Culture: 91–120 . Chicago. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 April 2013 . Retrieved 12 July 2016 . ^ Samuel Noah Kramer (17 September 2010).

The Sumerians: Their History, Culture, and Character . University of Chicago Press . ISBN 978-0-226-45238-8 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 10 November 2020 . ^ J. M. Munn-Rankin (1975). "Assyrian Military Power, 1300–1200 B.C.".

In I. E. S. Edwards (ed.). Cambridge Ancient History, Volume 2, Part 2, History of the Middle East and the Aegean Region, c. 1380–1000 BCE . Cambridge University Press. pp. 287– 288, 298. ^ Christopher Morgan (2006). Mark William Chavalas (ed.).

The ancient Near East: historical sources in translation . Blackwell Publishing. pp. 145– 152. ^ White, Donald; White, Arthur P. (1996). "Coastal Sites of Northeast Africa: The Case Against Bronze Age Ports" . Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt . 33 : 11– 30. doi : 10.2307/40000602 . ISSN 0065-9991 . JSTOR 40000602 . ^ Swain, Ashok (December 1997). "Ethiopia, the Sudan, and Egypt: The Nile River Dispute" .

The Journal of Modern African Studies . 35 (4): 675– 694. doi : 10.1017/S0022278X97002577 . ISSN 1469-7777 . S2CID 154735027 . ^ Sadr, Karim (30 January 2017).

The Development of Nomadism in Ancient Northeast Africa . University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 978-1-5128-1854-3 . ^ Schandelmeier, Heinz; Thorweihe, Ulf (14 December 2017). Geoscientific Research in Northeast Africa . CRC Press. ISBN 978-1-351-44524-5 . ^ "Northeast Africa is neither geographically or climatically uniform. Internally it varies widely in altitude, rainfall patterns, river systems, soil types and vegetation cover.

In most historical studies the region is also further divided according to strict cultural and political boundaries. It is unusual, for instance, to compare the Sudan with the countries of East Africa, or Ethiopia with anything but itself. Yet the study of the history of ecological relationships makes possible, at the same time that it requires, a recognition of a broader outline to the region which not only acknowledges, but knits together its diverse range of societies". Johnson, Douglas H.; Anderson, David M. (26 June 2019).

The Ecology Of Survival: Case Studies From Northeast African History . Routledge. pp. 1– 15. ISBN 978-1-000-31615-5 . ^ Reid, Richard J. (24 March 2011). Frontiers of Violence in North-East Africa: Genealogies of Conflict Since C.1800 . Oxford University Press. pp. 1– 25. ISBN 978-0-19-921188-3 . ^ Kendie, Daniel (1988). "Northeast Africa and the World Economic Order" . Northeast African Studies . 10 (1): 69– 82. ISSN 0740-9133 . JSTOR 43661171 . ^ Mitchell, Peter; Lane, Paul (4 July 2013).

The Oxford Handbook of African Archaeology . OUP Oxford. ISBN 978-0-19-162615-9 . ^ Klees, Frank; Kuper, Rudolph (1 January 1992). New light on the Northeast African past : current prehistoric research: Contributions to a symposium, Cologne 1990 . Heinrich-Barth-Institut. ^ Hepburn, H. Randall; Radloff, Sarah E. (14 March 2013). Honeybees of Africa . Springer Science & Business Media. ISBN 978-3-662-03604-4 . ^ Daniel, Kendie (1988). NORTHEAST AFRICA AND THE WORLD ECONOMIC ORDER . Michigan, US. pp. 69– 82. {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Project MUSE. (2020). Northeast African Studies . Retrieved March 22, 2020. "This distinguished journal is devoted to the scholarly analysis of Ethiopia, Eritrea, Djibouti, Somalia, and Sudan, as well as the Nile Valley, the Red Sea, and the lands adjacent to both." ^ Ehret, Christopher (20 June 2023). Ancient Africa: A Global History, to 300 CE . Princeton: Princeton University Press. pp. 82– 85. ISBN 978-0-691-24409-9 . ^ Zakrzewski, Sonia R. (April 2007). "Population continuity or population change: Formation of the ancient Egyptian state" . American Journal of Physical Anthropology . 132 (4): 501– 509. Bibcode : 2007AJPA..132..501Z . doi : 10.1002/ajpa.20569 . PMID 17295300 . ^ Godde, Kane (3 December 2020). A biological perspective of the relationship between Egypt, Nubia, and the Near East during the Predynastic period (2020) . Peeters. ISBN 978-90-429-4066-6 . Retrieved 16 March 2022 . ^ "There is no evidence, no archaeological signal, for a mass migration (settler colonization)" into Egypt from southwest Asia at the time of the writing. Core Egyptian culture was well established. A total peopling of Egypt at this time from the Near East would have meant the mass migration of Semitic speakers.

The ancient Egyptian language - using the usual academic language taxonomy - is a branch within Afroasiatic with one member (not counting place of origin/urheimat is within Africa, using standard linguistic criteria based on the locale of greatest diversity, deepest branches, and least moves accounting for its five or six branches or seven, if Ongota is counted". Keita, S. O. Y. (September 2022). "Ideas about "Race" in Nile Valley Histories: A Consideration of "Racial" Paradigms in Recent Presentations on Nile Valley Africa, from "Black Pharaohs" to Mummy Genomest" . Journal of Ancient Egyptian Interconnections . ^ Wengrow, David; Dee, Michael; Foster, Sarah; Stevenson, Alice; Ramsey, Christopher Bronk (March 2014). "Cultural convergence in the Neolithic of the Nile Valley: a prehistoric perspective on Egypt's place in Africa" . Antiquity . 88 (339): 95– 111. doi : 10.1017/S0003598X00050249 . ISSN 0003-598X . S2CID 49229774 . ^ Redford, Donald (2001). Smith Tyson Stuart.The Oxford encyclopedia of ancient Egypt . Oxford University Press. pp. 27– 29. ISBN 978-0-19-510234-5 . ^ Trombetta, B.; Cruciani, F.; Sellitto, D.; Scozzari, R. (2011). "Trombetta B, Cruciani F, Sellitto D, Scozzari R. A new topology of the human Y chromosome haplogroup E1b1 (E-P2) revealed through the use of newly characterized binary polymorphisms" . PLOS ONE . 6 (1) e16073. doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0016073 . PMC 3017091 . PMID 21253605 . ^ Cruciani, Fulvio; La Fratta, Roberta; Trombetta, Beniamino; Santolamazza, Piero; Sellitto, Daniele; Colomb, Eliane Beraud; Dugoujon, Jean-Michel; Crivellaro, Federica; Benincasa, Tamara; Pascone, Roberto; Moral, Pedro; Watson, Elizabeth; Melegh, Bela; Barbujani, Guido; Fuselli, Silvia; Vona, Giuseppe; Zagradisnik, Boris; Assum, Guenter; Brdicka, Radim; Kozlov, Andrey I.; Efremov, Georgi D.; Coppa, Alfredo; Novelletto, Andrea; Scozzari, Rosaria (June 2007). "Tracing Past Human Male Movements in Northern/Eastern Africa and Western Eurasia: New Clues from Y-Chromosomal Haplogroups E-M78 and J-M12" . Molecular Biology and Evolution . pp. 1300– 1311. doi : 10.1093/molbev/msm049 . PMID 17351267 . ^ " P2 (PN2) marker, within the E haplogroup , connects the predominant Y chromosome lineage found in Africa overall after the modern human left Africa. P2/M215-55 is found from the Horn of Africa up through the Nile Valley and west to the Maghreb, and P2/V38/M2 is predominant in most of infra-Saharan tropical Africa". Keita Shomarka. (2022). "Ancient Egyptian "Origins and "Identity" In Ancient Egyptian society: challenging assumptions, exploring approaches . Abingdon, Oxon. pp. 111– 122. ISBN 978-0-367-43463-2 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Anselin, Alain H. Stiebing (2011). Egypt in its African context: proceedings of the conference held at the Manchester Museum, University of Manchester, 2-4 October 2009 . Oxford: Archaeopress. pp. 43– 54. ISBN 978-1-4073-0760-2 . ^ Holl, Augustin. General history of Africa, IX: General history of Africa revisited . pp. 355– 375. ^ a b Ehret, Christopher (20 June 2023). Ancient Africa: A Global History, to 300 CE . Princeton University Press. pp. 97, 167. ISBN 978-0-691-24410-5 . ^ "There is now a sufficient body of evidence from modern studies of skeletal remains to indicate that the ancient Egyptians, especially southern Egyptians, exhibited physical characteristics that are within the range of variation for ancient and modern indigenous peoples of the Sahara and tropical Africa.

The distribution of population characteristics seems to follow a clinal pattern from south to north, which may be explained by natural selection as well as gene flow between neighboring populations.

In general, the inhabitants of Upper Egypt and Nubia had the greatest biological affinity to people of the Sahara and more southerly areas.” Lovell, Nancy C. (1999). "Egyptians, physical anthropology of".

In Bard, Kathryn A. ; Shubert, Steven Blake (eds.). Encyclopedia of the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt . London: Routledge. pp. 328– 331. ISBN 0415185890 . ^ “The data clearly suggests that the population in southern Egypt became more diverse as the society more complex (Keita 1992). Egyptian society seems never to have been “closed”, and it is hard to believe that the modal phenotype could have remain unchanged, especially if social and sexual collection were operating. However, it is important to emphasize that, while the biology changed with increasing local social complexity, the ethnicity of Niloto-Saharo-Sudanese origins did not change.

The cultural morays, ritual formulae, and symbols used in writing, as far as can be ascertained, remained true to their southern origins”. Keita, S. O. Y. (1993). "Studies and Comments on Ancient Egyptian Biological Relationships" . History in Africa . 20 : 129– 154. doi : 10.2307/3171969 . ISSN 0361-5413 . JSTOR 3171969 . S2CID 162330365 . ^ p. 85: “The physical anthropological findings from the major burial sites of those founding locales of ancient Egypt in the millennium BCE, notably El-Badari as well as Naqada, show no demographic indebtedness to the Levant. They reveal instead a population with cranial and dental features with closest parallels of those of other longtime populations of the surrounding areas of northeastern Africa, such as Nubia and the northern Horn of Africa. Members of this population did not come from somewhere else but were descendants of the long-term inhabitants of these portions of Africa going back many millennia.” Ehret, Christopher (20 June 2023). Ancient Africa: A Global History, to 300 CE . Princeton: Princeton University Press. pp. 83– 86, 97, 167– 169. ISBN 978-0-691-24409-9 . Archived from the original on 22 March 2023 . Retrieved 20 March 2023 . ^ p. 355 ― “The importance of iconographic sources was emphasized in the main. Säve-Söderbergh and Leclant stressed that the links indicated by cave paintings between the vast expanses of the Sahara and the banks of the Nile nodded to a migration of peoples of the Sahara and groups from the South to the valley – something confirmed by research over the last thirty years. Diop set out to return Egypt to its southern African hinterland by systematically using Pharaonic statues and art to support his point of view.

Although a debate on the north-south orientation of a ‘civilizing’ wave of peoples in the valley had prevailed up to that point, the avalanche of new data now made this idea redundant, suggesting instead the image of a growing and unifying political movement in the valley from south to north that repositioned its starting point back in time: in Upper Egypt, digs at the Uj tomb of King Scorpion at the Abydos necropolis push back the origin of the first Horus back to circa 3250 BCE, and the resumption of excavations at Nekhen led to the exhumation of the famous ‘Elephant Kings’ of Hierakonpolis (Nekhen) which have no inscriptions and date back even further to circa 3700 BCE.” p. 356 ― “It quantified the key impact of sub-Saharan populations and found a clear link between the Siwi and the peoples of North-East Africa. We could continue with work by Zakrzewski on the predynastic population of Nekhen, investigations by Crubezy which traced the boundaries of the ancient Khoisan settlement to Upper Egypt, where its faint traces remain identifiable, and Keita’s work, as the most groundbreaking.”' p. 356 ― “Hence the work by Cerny’s team highlighting the close links between the peoples of Upper Egypt, North Cameroon and Ethiopia – the Cameroon people living in the Mandara mountains speaking Chadic languages, and the Ethiopians speaking Kushitic languages, prior to Ge’ez being spread throughout the region during the Aksumite period. This broadens the linguistic debate to include language families that had been little studied or used in comparisons that have long focused on the East.” Anselin, Alain. "Review of Ancient Civilizations of Africa: General History of Africa Volume II " in (General history of Africa, IX: General history of Africa revisited . pp. 355– 75. ^ Zakrzewski, Sonia R. (April 2007). "Population continuity or population change: Formation of the ancient Egyptian state" . American Journal of Physical Anthropology . 132 (4): 501– 509. Bibcode : 2007AJPA..132..501Z . doi : 10.1002/ajpa.20569 . PMID 17295300 .

When Mahalanobis D2 was used, the Naqadan and Badarian Predynastic samples exhibited more similarity to Nubian, Tigrean, and some more southern series than to some mid- to late Dynasticseries from northern Egypt (Mukherjee et al., 1955).

The Badarian have been found to be very similar to a Kerma sample (Kushite Sudanese), using both the Penrose statistic (Nutter, 1958) and DFA of males alone (Keita,1990). Furthermore, Keita considered that Badarian males had a southern modal phenotype, and that together with a Naqada sample, they formed a southern Egyptian cluster as tropical variants together with a sample from Kerma. ^ "Southern Egypt and Nubia are geographically co-extensive, with populations grading into each other.

The absorption of Qustul’s people would have reinforced this. There is biological overlap of these populations in origin, but ongoing admixture is also apparent." Keita, S. O. Y. (September 2022). "Ideas about "Race" in Nile Valley Histories: A Consideration of "Racial" Paradigms in Recent Presentations on Nile Valley Africa, from "Black Pharaohs" to Mummy Genomest" . Journal of Ancient Egyptian Interconnections . ^ Hassan, Fekri (20 May 2021). "The African Dimension of Egyptian Origins (May 2021)" . ^ Eglash, Ron (1999). African fractals : modern computing and indigenous design . New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press. pp. 89, 141. ISBN 0813526140 . ^ Eglash, R. (1995). "Fractal Geometry in African Material Culture". Symmetry: Culture and Science . 6– 1 : 174– 177. ^ Marshack, A. (1972).

The Roots of Civilization: the Cognitive Beginning of Man's First Art, Symbol and Notation . New York: McGraw-Hill. ^ Ehret, Christopher (20 June 2023). Ancient Africa: A Global History, to 300 CE . Princeton University Press. pp. 107– 110. ISBN 978-0-691-24410-5 . ^ Ehret, Christopher (20 June 2023). Ancient Africa: A Global History, to 300 CE . Princeton University Press. pp. 107– 110. ISBN 978-0-691-24410-5 . ^ Armelagos, George (2000). "Take Two Beers and Call Me in 1,600 Years: Use of Tetracycline by Nubians and Ancient Egyptians" . Natural History . 109 (5): 50– 3. S2CID 89542474 . ^ Depuydt, Leo (1 January 1998). "Gnomons at Meroë and Early Trigonometry".

The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology . 84 : 171– 180. doi : 10.2307/3822211 . JSTOR 3822211 . ^ Slayman, Andrew (27 May 1998). "Neolithic Skywatchers" . Archaeology Magazine Archive . Archived from the original on 5 June 2011 . Retrieved 17 April 2011 . ^ Neugebauer, O. (17 September 2004). A History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy . Springer Science & Business Media. ISBN 978-3-540-06995-9 . ^ Simson Najovits, Egypt, trunk of the tree, Volume 2 , (Algora Publishing: 2004), p. 258. ^ Njoku, Raphael Chijioke (2013).

The History of Somalia . ABC-CLIO. pp. 29– 31. ISBN 978-0-313-37857-7 . ^ Dalal, Roshen (2011).

The Illustrated Timeline of the History of the World .

The Rosen Publishing Group. p. 131. ISBN 978-1-4488-4797-6 . ^ Desroches-Noblecourt, Christiane (2002). La reine mystérieuse: Hatshepsout . Paris: Pygmalion. pp. 203– 463. ISBN 978-2-85704-748-3 . ^ Barich et al. (1984) Ecological and Cultural Relevance of the Recent New Radiocabon dates from Libyan Sahara. In: L. Krzyzaniak and M. Kobusiewicz , Origin and Early Development of Food-Producing Cultures in Northeastern Africa, Poznan, Poznan Archaeological Museum, pp. 411–17. ^ Hayes, W. C. (October 1964). "Most Ancient Egypt: Chapter III.

The Neolithic and Chalcolithic Communities of Northern Egypt". JNES (No. 4 ed.) 23 (4): 217–272. ^ Barich, B. E. (1998) People, Water and Grain: The Beginnings of Domestication in the Sahara and the Nile Valley. Roma: L' Erma di Bretschneider (Studia archaeologica 98). ^ Childe, V. Gordon (1953), New Light on the Most Ancient Near East , (Praeger Publications). ^ Barbara G. Aston, James A. Harrell, Ian Shaw (2000). Paul T. Nicholson and Ian Shaw editors. "Stone," in Ancient Egyptian Materials and Technology, Cambridge, 5–77, pp. 46–47. Also note: Barbara G. Aston (1994). "Ancient Egyptian Stone Vessels," Studien zur Archäologie und Geschichte Altägyptens 5, Heidelberg, pp. 23–26. (See on-line posts: Archived 1 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine and Archived 29 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine ). ^ Adkins, L. and Adkins, R. (2001) The Little Book of Egyptian Hieroglyphics , p. 155. London: Hodder and Stoughton. ^ Shaw, Ian, ed. (2000).

The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt . Oxford University Press. p. 479 . ISBN 0-19-815034-2 . ^ a b Redford, Donald B. Egypt, Canaan, and Israel in Ancient Times. (Princeton: University Press, 1992). ^ Gardiner, Alan H. Egypt of the Pharaohs: An Introduction . Oxford University Press. 1964. ^ Adkins, L.; Adkins, R. (2001).

The Little Book of Egyptian Hieroglyphics. London: Hodder and Stoughton. ^ Patai, Raphael (1998), Children of Noah: Jewish Seafaring in Ancient Times (Princeton Uni Press). ^ Roebuck, Carl (1966).

The World of Ancient Times . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons . p. 53. ^ Shaw, Ian (2003).

The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. ^ "Early Dynastic Egypt" . Digital Egypt for Universities, University College London. Archived from the original on 4 March 2008 . Retrieved 9 March 2008 . ^ James (2005) p. 40. ^ Fekri Hassan. "The Fall of the Old Kingdom" . British Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 13 October 2007 . Retrieved 10 March 2008 . ^ Clayton, Peter A. (1994). Chronicle of the Pharaohs. London, England: Thames and Hudson. ^ Coningham, Robin; Young, Ruth (2015).

The Archaeology of South Asia: From the Indus to Asoka, c. 6500 BCE–200 CE . Cambridge University Press. p. 111. ISBN 978-1-316-41898-7 . ^ "Haryana's Bhirrana oldest Harappan site, Rakhigarhi Asia's largest: ASI" .

The Times of India . 15 April 2015. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016 . Retrieved 16 April 2015 . ^ a b Fuller, Dorian (2006). "Agricultural Origins and Frontiers in South Asia: A Working Synthesis" (PDF) . Journal of World Prehistory . 20 : 42. doi : 10.1007/s10963-006-9006-8 . S2CID 189952275 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 May 2011 . Retrieved 11 July 2016 . ^ Tewari, Rakesh et al. 2006. "Second Preliminary Report of the excavations at Lahuradewa, District Sant Kabir Nagar, UP 2002-2003-2004 & 2005–06" in Pragdhara No. 16 "Electronic Version p.28" Archived 28 November 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ Habib, Irfan (2020). "Book review: Tony Joseph, The Early Indians: The Story of Our Ancestors and Where They Came From". Studies in People's History . 7 (1): 91– 93. doi : 10.1177/2348448920908515 . ISSN 2348-4489 . ^ UNESCO World Heritage. 2004. " Archived 3 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine . Archaeological Site of Mehrgarh. ^ Parpol, Asko. 2015.

The Roots of Hinduism: The Early Aryans and the Indus Civilisation . Oxford University Press. ^ Charles Keith Maisels, Early Civilizations of the Old World: The Formative Histories of Egypt, The Levant, Mesopotamia, India and China. Archived 1 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine Routledge, 2003 ISBN 1134837305 . ^ Higham, Charles (1 January 2009). Encyclopedia of Ancient Asian Civilizations . Infobase Publishing. pp. 9–. ISBN 978-1-4381-0996-1 . ^ Sigfried J. de Laet, Ahmad Hasan Dani, eds. History of Humanity: From the third millennium to the seventh century B.C. UNESCO, 1996 ISBN 9231028111 p. 674. ^ Garge, Tejas (2010). "Sothi-Siswal Ceramic Assemblage: A Reappraisal" . Ancient Asia . 2 : 15. doi : 10.5334/aa.10203 . Archived from the original on 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 4 September 2019 . ^ Peter T. Daniels.

The World's Writing Systems . Oxford University. p. 372. ^ Parpola, Asko (1994). Deciphering the Indus Script . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-43079-1 . ^ Thapar, B. K. (1975). "Kalibangan: A Harappan Metropolis Beyond the Indus Valley". Expedition . 17 (2): 19– 32. ^ Valentine, Benjamin; Kamenov, George D.; Kenoyer, Jonathan Mark; Shinde, Vasant; Mushrif-Tripathy, Veena; Otarola-Castillo, Erik; Krigbaum, John (2015). "Evidence for Patterns of Selective Urban Migration in the Greater Indus Valley (2600–1900 BC): A Lead and Strontium Isotope Mortuary Analysis" . PLOS ONE . 10 (4) e0123103. Bibcode : 2015PLoSO..1023103V . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0123103 . PMC 4414352 . PMID 25923705 . ^ "Indus Valley people migrated from villages to cities: New study" .

The Times of India . 30 April 2015. Archived from the original on 25 July 2019 . Retrieved 11 July 2016 . ^ "Indus re-enters India after two centuries, feeds Little Rann, Nal Sarovar" . India Today . 7 November 2011. Archived from the original on 9 January 2018 . Retrieved 7 November 2011 . ^ Pruthi, Raj (2004). Prehistory and Harappan Civilization . APH Publishing. p. 260. ISBN 978-81-7648-581-4 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 10 November 2020 . ^ It has been noted that the courtyard pattern and techniques of flooring of Harappan houses has similarities to the way house-building is still done in some villages of the region. Lal 2002 , pp. 93–95. ^ Morris, A.E.J. (1994). History of Urban Form: Before the Industrial Revolutions (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Routledge. p. 31. ISBN 978-0-582-30154-2 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 20 May 2015 . ^ Feuerstein, Georg; Kak, Subhash; Frawley, David (2001).

In Search of the Cradle of Civilization:New Light on Ancient India . Quest Books. p. 73. ISBN 978-0-8356-0741-4 . ^ Sergent, Bernard (1997). Genèse de l'Inde (in French). Paris: Payot. p. 113. ISBN 978-2-228-89116-5 . ^ Knipe, David (1991). Hinduism . San Francisco: Harper. ISBN 978-0-06-064780-3 . ^ "Decline of Bronze Age 'megacities' linked to climate change" . Archived from the original on 22 June 2018 . Retrieved 4 February 2018 . ^ Emma Maris (2014), Two-hundred-year drought doomed Indus Valley Civilization Archived 10 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine , nature. ^ "Indus Collapse: The End or the Beginning of an Asian Culture?". Science Magazine . 320 : 1282– 3. 6 June 2008. ^ a b c Giosan, L.; et al. (2012). "Fluvial landscapes of the Harappan Civilization" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA . 109 (26): E1688–94. Bibcode : 2012PNAS..109E1688G . doi : 10.1073/pnas.1112743109 . PMC 3387054 . PMID 22645375 . ^ a b Clift et al., 2011, U-Pb zircon dating evidence for a Pleistocene Sarasvati River and capture of the Yamuna River, Geology , 40, 211–214 (2011). Archived 2 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Tripathi, Jayant K.; Tripathi, K.; Bock, Barbara; Rajamani, V.; Eisenhauer, A. (25 October 2004). "Is River Ghaggar, Saraswati? Geochemical Constraints" (PDF) . Current Science . 87 (8). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 December 2004. ^ Rachel Nuwer (28 May 2012). "An Ancient Civilization, Upended by Climate Change" . LiveScience. Archived from the original on 7 October 2019 . Retrieved 29 May 2012 . ^ Charles Choi (29 May 2012). "Huge Ancient Civilization's Collapse Explained" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 1 May 2020 . Retrieved 18 May 2016 . ^ Madella, Marco; Fuller, Dorian (2006). "Palaeoecology and the Harappan Civilisation of South Asia: a reconsideration". Quaternary Science Reviews . 25 ( 11– 12): 1283– 1301. Bibcode : 2006QSRv...25.1283M . doi : 10.1016/j.quascirev.2005.10.012 . ^ MacDonald, Glen (2011). "Potential influence of the Pacific Ocean on the Indian summer monsoon and Harappan decline". Quaternary International . 229 ( 1– 2): 140– 148. Bibcode : 2011QuInt.229..140M . doi : 10.1016/j.quaint.2009.11.012 . ^ a b Brooke, John L. (2014), Climate Change and the Course of Global History: A Rough Journey , Cambridge University Press, p. 296, Bibcode : 2014cccg.book.....B , ISBN 978-0-521-87164-8 , archived from the original on 18 April 2023 , retrieved 4 February 2018 . ^ Thomas H. Maugh II (28 May 2012). "Migration of monsoons created, then killed Harappan civilization" . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on 19 November 2012 . Retrieved 29 May 2012 . ^ Edwin Bryant (2001).

The Quest for the Origins of Vedic Culture. pp. 159–60. ^ White, David Gordon (2003). Kiss of the Yogini . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 28. ISBN 978-0-226-89483-6 . ^ Ebrey, Patricia (2006).

The Cambridge Illustrated History of China . Cambridge University Press. pp. 12 –18. ISBN 978-0-521-43519-2 . ^ "Rice and Early Agriculture in China" . Legacy of Human Civilizations . Mesa Community College. Archived from the original on 27 August 2009 . Retrieved 10 February 2008 . ^ Longshan-Era Urbanism: The Role of Cities in Predynastic China Archived 14 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine . ^ "Peiligang Site" . Ministry of Culture of the People's Republic of China . 2003. Archived from the original on 7 August 2007 . Retrieved 10 February 2008 . ^ a b Pringle, Heather (1998). "The Slow Birth of Agriculture" . Science . 282 (5393): 1446. doi : 10.1126/science.282.5393.1446 . S2CID 128522781 . Archived from the original on 1 January 2011. ^ Rincon, Paul (17 April 2003). " 'Earliest writing' found in China" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 20 March 2012 . Retrieved 12 July 2016 . ^ Li, X; Harbottle, Garman; Zhang Juzhong; Wang Changsui (2003). "The earliest writing? Sign use in the seventh millennium BCE at Jiahu, Henan Province, China". Antiquity . 77 (295): 31– 44. doi : 10.1017/s0003598x00061329 . S2CID 162602307 . ^ Chang (1986) , p. 113. ^ Pollard, Elizabeth (2015). Worlds Together Worlds Apart . W.W. Norton & Company. pp. 69– 70. ISBN 978-0-393-91847-2 . ^ Chang (1986) , p. 112. ^ Wertz, Richard R. (2007). "Neolithic and Bronze Age Cultures" . Exploring Chinese History . ibiblio . Retrieved 10 February 2008 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Martini, I. Peter (2010). Landscapes and Societies: Selected Cases . Springer . p. 310. ISBN 978-90-481-9412-4 . ^ Higham, Charles (2004). Encyclopedia of ancient Asian civilizations . Infobase Publishing . p. 200. ISBN 978-0-8160-4640-9 . ^ "Erlitou culture | Chinese history | Britannica" . www.britannica.com . Archived from the original on 21 June 2015. ^ Liu, L. & Xiu, H., "Rethinking Erlitou: legend, history and Chinese archaeology", Antiquity , 81:314 (2007). ^ a b c d Liu 2006 , p. 184. ^ a b Liu 2004 , p. 229. ^ Li 2003 . ^ Liu 2004 , pp. 230–231. ^ "二里头：华夏王朝文明的开端". 寻根 . 3 . ^ a b c Liu & Xu 2007 . ^ Howells, William (1983). "Origins of the Chinese People: Interpretations of recent evidence".

The Origins of Chinese Civilization . University of California Press. pp. 297– 319. ISBN 978-0-520-04229-2 . ^ "Teaching Chinese Archaeology, Part Two — NGA" . Nga.gov. Archived from the original on 5 February 2013 . Retrieved 17 January 2010 . ^ Sanxingdui Museum (2006). ^ Zarrillo, S.; Pearsall, D. M.; Raymond, J. S.; Tisdale, M. A.; Quon, D. J. (2008). "Directly dated starch residues document early formative maize (Zea mays L.) in tropical Ecuador" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 105 (13): 5006– 5011. Bibcode : 2008PNAS..105.5006Z . doi : 10.1073/pnas.0800894105 . PMC 2278185 . PMID 18362336 . ^ Dillehay, Tom D.; Eling Jr., Herbert H.; Rossen, Jack (2005). "Preceramic Irrigation Canals in the Peruvian Andes" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 102 (47): 17241– 44. Bibcode : 2005PNAS..10217241D . doi : 10.1073/pnas.0508583102 . ISSN 0027-8424 . PMC 1288011 . PMID 16284247 . ^ "Oldest Urban Site in the Americas Found, Experts Claim", National Geographic News , 26 February 2008, Archived 6 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine , accessed 20 January 2016. ^ "Ancient ceremonial plaza found in Peru" ANDREW WHALEN, Associated Press Writer, Archived 13 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine . ^ Haas, Jonathan; Winifred Creamer; Alvaro Ruiz (23 December 2004). "Dating the Late Archaic occupation of the Norte Chico region in Peru". Nature . 432 (7020): 1020– 1023. Bibcode : 2004Natur.432.1020H . doi : 10.1038/nature03146 . PMID 15616561 . S2CID 4426545 . ^ See a map of Norte Chico sites at https://diggingperu.wordpress.com/context/the-norte-chico Archived 7 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine . ^ a b Mann, Charles C. (7 January 2005). "Oldest Civilization in the Americas Revealed". Science . 307 (5706): 34– 35. doi : 10.1126/science.307.5706.34 . PMID 15637250 . S2CID 161589785 . ^ Braswell, Geoffrey (16 April 2014).

The Maya and Their Central American Neighbors: Settlement Patterns, Architecture, Hieroglyphic Texts and Ceramics . Routledge. p. 408. ISBN 978-1-317-75608-8 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 10 November 2020 . ^ a b c d e Haas, Jonathan; Winifred Creamer; Alvaro Ruiz (2005). "Power and the Emergence of Complex Polities in the Peruvian Preceramic". Archeological Papers of the American Anthropological Association . 14 (1): 37– 52. doi : 10.1525/ap3a.2004.14.037 . ^ "Oldest city in the Americas" . BBC News . 26 April 2001. Archived from the original on 22 May 2006 . Retrieved 16 February 2007 . ^ Sandweiss, Daniel H.; Michael E. Moseley (2001). "Amplifying Importance of New Research in Peru". Science . 294 (5547): 1651– 1653. doi : 10.1126/science.294.5547.1651d . PMID 11724063 . S2CID 9301114 . ^ Moseley, Michael. "The Maritime Foundations of Andean Civilization: An Evolving Hypothesis" .

The Hall of Ma'at. Archived from the original on 18 August 2015 . Retrieved 13 June 2008 . ^ Moseley, Michael (1975).

The Maritime Foundations of Andean Civilization . Menlo Park: Cummings. ISBN 978-0-8465-4800-3 . ^ Miller, Kenneth (September 2005). "Showdown at the O.K. Caral" . Discover . 26 (9). Archived from the original on 8 January 2010 . Retrieved 22 October 2009 . ^ Belsie, Laurent (January 2002). "Civilization lost?" .

The Christian Science Monitor . Archived from the original on 19 June 2015 . Retrieved 8 March 2007 . ^ a b Hoag, Hanna (15 April 2003). "Oldest evidence of Andean religion found". Nature News (online). doi : 10.1038/news030414-4 . ^ a b Hecht, Jeff (14 April 2003). "America's oldest religious icon revealed" . New Scientist (online). Archived from the original on 23 February 2012 . Retrieved 13 February 2007 . ^ From summary three Archived 15 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine , Shady (1997). ^ Mann, Charles C. (12 August 2005). "Unraveling Khipu's Secrets". Science . 309 (5737): 1008– 1009. doi : 10.1126/science.309.5737.1008 . PMID 16099962 . S2CID 161448364 . ^ Beynon-Davies, P. (2009). "Significant threads: the nature of data". International Journal of Information Management . 29 (3): 170– 188. doi : 10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2008.12.003 . ^ "Archaeologists shed new light on Americas' earliest known civilization" (Press release). Northern Illinois University. 22 December 2004. Archived from the original on 9 February 2007 . Retrieved 1 February 2007 . ^ Burger (1992), Chavin and the Origins of Andean Civilization. ^ Matsuoka, Y.; Vigouroux, Y.; Goodman, M. M.; et al. (2002). "A single domestication for maize shown by multilocus microsatellite genotyping" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 99 (9): 6080– 4. Bibcode : 2002PNAS...99.6080M . doi : 10.1073/pnas.052125199 . PMC 122905 . PMID 11983901 . ^ Matsuoka, Yoshihiro (22 January 2003). "Earliest Directional Evolution for Microsatellite Size in Maize" (PDF) . Science . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 January 2017 . Retrieved 3 March 2014 . ^ Nichols, Deborah L., and Christopher A. Pool.

The Oxford Handbook of Mesoamerican Archaeology. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2012. Print. ^ Roush, Wade (9 May 1997). "Archaeobiology: Squash Seeds Yield New View of Early American Farming". Science . 276 (5314): 894– 895. doi : 10.1126/science.276.5314.894 . S2CID 158673509 . ^ Watson, Traci (22 January 2013). "Earliest Evidence of Chocolate in North America" . Science . Archived from the original on 6 March 2014 . Retrieved 3 March 2014 . ^ Borevitz, Justin O.; Motamayor, Juan C.; Lachenaud, Philippe; da Silva e Mota, Jay Wallace; Loor, Rey; Kuhn, David N.; Brown, J. Steven; Schnell, Raymond J. (2008). "Geographic and Genetic Population Differentiation of the Amazonian Chocolate Tree (Theobroma cacao L)" . PLOS ONE . 3 (10) e3311. Bibcode : 2008PLoSO...3.3311M . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0003311 . ISSN 1932-6203 . PMC 2551746 . PMID 18827930 . ^ Powis, Terry G.; Hurst, W. Jeffrey; del Carmen Rodríguez, María; Ortíz C., Ponciano; Blake, Michael; Cheetham, David; Coe, Michael D.; Hodgson, John G. (2007). "Oldest chocolate in the New World" . Antiquity . 81 (314). Archived from the original on 28 June 2011 . Retrieved 10 February 2018 . ^ a b c d e Diehl, Richard A. (2004).

The Olmecs: America's First Civilization. London: Thames and Hudson. ^ Beck, Roger B.; Linda Black; Larry S. Krieger; Phillip C. Naylor; Dahia Ibo Shabaka (1999). World History: Patterns of Interaction . Evanston, IL: McDougal Littell. ISBN 978-0-395-87274-1 . ^ a b c Pool, Christopher A. (2007). Olmec Archaeology and Early Mesoamerica. Cambridge World Archaeology. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. ^ Coe, p. 44. ^ Lawler, p. 23. ^ Pool, p. 193. ^ Coe (1967), p. 72. Alternatively, the mutilation of these monuments may be unrelated to the decline and abandonment of San Lorenzo. Some researchers believe that the mutilation had ritualistic aspects, particularly since most mutilated monuments were reburied in a row. ^ Pool, p. 135. Diehl, pp. 58–59, 82. ^ Gonzalez Lauck 1996, p. 80. ^ a b Colman 2010. ^ Pohl 2005, p. 10. ^ Heizer 1968. ^ Drucker 1961, p. 1. ^ Nagy, Christopher (1997). "The Geoarchaeology of Settlement in the Grijalva Delta".

In Barbara L. Stark; Philip J. Arnold III. Olmec to Aztec: Settlement Patterns in the Ancient Gulf Lowlands. Tucson: University of Arizona Press. pp. 253–277. ^ Coe, Michael D. (1968). America's First Civilization: Discovering the Olmec. New York: The Smithsonian Library. ^ a b Coe, Michael D.; Rex Koontz (2002). Mexico: from the Olmecs to the Aztecs (5th edition, revised and enlarged ed.). London and New York: Thames & Hudson. ^ Wilford, John Noble; "Mother Culture, or Only a Sister?", The New York Times, 15 March 2005. ^ Maura Ellyn; Maura McGinnis (2004). Greece: A Primary Source Cultural Guide .

The Rosen Publishing Group. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-8239-3999-2 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 . John E. Findling; Kimberly D. Pelle (2004). Encyclopedia of the Modern Olympic Movement . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-313-32278-5 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 . Wayne C. Thompson; Mark H. Mullin (1983). Western Europe, 1983 . Stryker-Post Publications. p. 337. ISBN 9780943448114 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 . for ancient Greece was the cradle of Western culture... Frederick Copleston (1 June 2003). History of Philosophy Volume 1: Greece and Rome . A&C Black. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-8264-6895-6 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 . PART I PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHY CHAPTER II THE CRADLE OF WESTERN THOUGHT: Mario Iozzo (2001). Art and History of Greece: And Mount Athos . Casa Editrice Bonechi. p. 7. ISBN 978-88-8029-435-1 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 .

The capital of Greece, one of the world's most glorious cities and the cradle of Western culture. Marxiano Melotti (25 May 2011).

The Plastic Venuses: Archaeological Tourism in Post-Modern Society . Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 188. ISBN 978-1-4438-3028-7 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 .

In short, Greece, despite having been the cradle of Western culture, was then an "other" space separate from the West. Library Journal . Vol. 97. Bowker. April 1972. p. 1588. Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 . Ancient Greece: Cradle of Western Culture (Series), disc. 6 strips with 3 discs, range: 44–60 fr., 17–18 min. Stanley Mayer Burstein (2002). Current Issues and the Study of Ancient History . Regina Books. p. 15. ISBN 978-1-930053-10-6 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 . and making Egypt play the same role in African education and culture that Athens and Greece do in Western culture. Murray Milner Jr. (8 January 2015). Elites: A General Model . John Wiley & Sons. p. 62. ISBN 978-0-7456-8950-0 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 . Greece has long been considered the seedbed or cradle of Western civilization. Slavica viterbiensia 003: Periodico di letterature e culture slave della Facoltà di Lingue e Letterature Straniere Moderne dell'Università della Tuscia . Gangemi Editore spa. 10 November 2011. p. 148. ISBN 978-88-492-6909-3 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 .

The Special Case of Greece The ancient Greece was a cradle of the Western culture, Kim Covert (1 July 2011). Ancient Greece: Birthplace of Democracy . Capstone. p. 5. ISBN 978-1-4296-6831-6 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 . Ancient Greece is often called the cradle of western civilization. ... Ideas from literature and science also have their roots in ancient Greece. ^ Henry Turner Inman (August 2010). Rome: the cradle of western civilisation as illustrated by existing monuments . BiblioBazaar. ISBN 9781177738538 . Michael Ed. Grant (1964).

The Birth Of Western Civilisation, Greece & Rome . Thames & Hudson. Huxley, George; et al. (1969).

The Birth of Western Civilization: Greece and Rome . Thames and Hudson. ISBN 9780500040034 . ^ Lin (林), Shengyi (勝義); He (何), Xianrong (顯榮) (2001). 臺灣–人類文明原鄉 . Taiwan gu wen ming yan jiu cong shu (臺灣古文明研究叢書) (in Chinese). Taipei: Taiwan fei die xue yan jiu hui (台灣飛碟學硏究會). ISBN 978-957-30188-0-3 . OCLC 52945170 . Sources The Archaeology of Ancient China (4th ed.). Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-03782-1 . Georg Feuerstein (2001).

In Search of the Cradle of Civilization . Quest Books. ISBN 978-0-8356-0741-4 . Ethel Hofflund (2001).

The Cradle of Civilization (Lifepac History & Geography Grade 6) . Alpha Omega Publications. ISBN 978-0-86717-552-3 . Samuel Noah Kramer (1959). Anchor Paperback . Doubleday Anchor Books. Samuel Noah Kramer (1969). Cradle of Civilization . Little Brown & Co. ISBN 978-0-316-32617-9 . Lal, B.B. (2002).

The Sarasvati flows on . Li, Jinhui (10 November 2003). "Stunning Capital of Xia Dynasty Unearthed" . China Through a Lens . Archived from the original on 21 March 2015 . Retrieved 3 February 2009 . Liu, Li (2004).

The Chinese Neolithic: trajectories to early states . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-81184-2 . ——— (2006). "Urbanization in China: Erlitou and its hinterland".