The approximate ratio of the total number of public schools to private schools in India is 10:3. Education in India covers different levels and types of learning, such as early childhood education , primary education , secondary education , higher education , and vocational education . Educational access and quality vary significantly based on factors such as location (urban or rural), gender, caste, language, and socioeconomic status. Education in India faces several challenges, including lack of access, quality, and learning outcomes, high dropout rates, and poor employability. It is shaped by national and state-level policies and programmes such as the National Education Policy 2020 , Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan , Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan , Midday Meal Scheme , and Beti Bachao Beti Padhao . Various national and international stakeholders, including UNICEF , UNESCO , the World Bank , civil society organisations, academic institutions, and the private sector contribute to the development of the education system. Education in India is plagued by issues such as grade inflation, corruption, unaccredited institutions offering fraudulent credentials and lack of employment prospects for graduates. Half of all graduates in India are considered unemployable. It has also been argued that this system has been associated with an emphasis on rote learning and external perspectives. India continues to use English as a major medium of instruction in higher education and professional domains, partly due to its linguistic diversity and integration with global academia and industry. However, the lack of quality schools and proficient English-speaking teachers, especially in rural areas, places underprivileged students at a severe disadvantage in higher education and professional environments where English proficiency is heavily emphasized. With 22 officially recognized languages, linguistic changes to current systems tend to become politically sensitive, and English often serves as a neutral link language. Education system This section may be too long to read and navigate comfortably . Consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding subheadings . Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page . ( February 2026 ) Until 1976, under the Indian constitution, each state was responsible for the schools that fell under its governance; states possessed full (Unless and otherwise a Conflict between Union govt.

The state government had jurisdiction over creating and implementing education policies.

After the 42nd Amendment of the Constitution of India was passed in 1976, education fell under the concurrent list, which allowed the federal government (also known as the central government) to recommend education policies and programmes, even if state governments continued to wield extensive autonomy in implementing these programmes .

In a country as large as India, with 28 states and eight union territories, this has created vast differences between states' policies, plans, programmes, and initiatives relating to school education. Periodically, national policy frameworks are created to guide states in creating state-level programmes and policies. State governments and local government bodies manage the majority of primary and upper primary schools and the number of government-managed elementary schools is growing. Simultaneously, the number and proportion managed by private bodies is growing.

In 2005–2006, 83.13% of schools offering elementary education (Grades 1–8) were managed by government, and 16.86% of schools were under private management (excluding children in unrecognised schools, schools established under the Education Guarantee Scheme and in alternative learning centres). Of those schools managed privately, one third are 'aided' and two thirds are 'unaided'. Enrolment in Grades 1–8 is shared between government and privately managed schools in the ratio 73:27. However, in rural areas this ratio is higher (80:20), and in urban areas much lower (36:66).

At the school level, data on enrolment, infrastructure, and teacher availability is collected through the Unified District Information System for Education (UDISE+).

In the 2011 Census, about 73% of the population was reported to be literate, with 81% for males and 65% for females. National Statistical Commission surveyed literacy to be 77.7% in 2017–18, 84.7% for males and 70.3% for females. This compares to 1981 when the respective rates were 41%, 53%, and 29%.

In 1951 the rates were 18%, 27% and 9%. India's improved education system is often cited as one of the main contributors to its economic development . Much of the progress, especially in higher education and scientific research, has been credited to various public institutions.

While enrolment in higher education has increased steadily over the past decade, reaching a Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) of 26.3% in 2019, there still remains a significant distance to catch up with tertiary education enrolment levels of developed nations, a challenge that will be necessary to overcome in order to continue to reap a demographic dividend from India's comparatively young population. Demand for private schools has been growing over the years.

While a consensus over what is the most significant driver of this growth in private schooling has not yet emerged, some authors have attributed this to a higher demand for English-medium education , a dissatisfaction with the quality of public schools, greater affordability of private schools, and non-availability of the preferred field of study in government schools .

After the adoption of the Right to Education (RTE) Act 2009, private schools were required to be 'government-recognized'. A private school would be eligible for government recognition when it met certain conditions.

At the primary and secondary level, India has a large private school system complementing the government-run schools, with 29% of students receiving private education in the 6 to 14 age group. Certain post-secondary technical schools are also private.

The private education market in India had a revenue of US$450 million in 2008, but is projected to be a US$40 billion market.

As per the Annual Status of Education Report (ASER) 2012, 96.5% of all rural children between the ages of 6–14 were enrolled in school. This trend of high enrollment has continued consistently since the mid-2000s. Between 2007 and 2014, India maintained an average school enrolment rate of 95% for children aged 6–14, according to ASER reports.

As an outcome, the number of students in the age group 6–14 who are not enrolled in school has come down to 2.8% in the academic year 2018 (ASER 2018). Another report from 2013 stated that there were 229 million students enrolled in different accredited urban and rural schools of India, from Class I to XII, indicating a steady growth, including a 19% increase in enrollment of girls since 2002.

While India is moving toward universal enrollment, concerns remain about the quality of education, especially in government-run schools.

While more than 95 percent of children attend primary school, just 40 percent of Indian adolescents attend secondary school (Grades 9–12).

Since 2000, the World Bank has committed over $2 billion to support India's efforts in improving educational infrastructure and learning outcomes. Teacher absenteeism remains a significant challenge, with studies indicating that nearly 25% of teachers may be absent on any given day. States of India have introduced tests and education assessment system to identify and improve such schools.

The Human Rights Measurement Initiative finds that India is achieving only 79.0% of what should be possible at its level of income for the right to education.

Although there are private schools in India, they are highly regulated in terms of what they can teach, in what form they can operate (they must be a non-profit to run any accredited educational institution), and all the other aspects of the operation. Hence, the differentiation between government schools and private schools can be misleading. However, in a report by Geeta Gandhi Kingdon entitled: The Emptying of Public Schools and Growth of Private Schools in India , it is said that for sensible education-policy making, it is vital to take account of the various changing trends in the size of the private and public schooling sectors in India. Ignoring these trends involves the risk of poor policies/legislation, with adverse effects on children's education.

In January 2019, India had over 900 universities and 40,000 colleges.

In India's higher education system, a significant number of seats are reserved under affirmative action policies for the historically disadvantaged Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes .

In universities, colleges, and similar institutions affiliated with the central government, there is a maximum of 50% of reservations applicable to these disadvantaged groups, at the state level it can vary. Maharashtra had 73% reservations in 2014, which is the highest percentage of reservations in India. History Main article: History of education in India A child learning alphabets, showing the first letters of the Brahmi alphabet, 2nd century BCE. Early education in India commenced under the supervision of a guru or preceptor after initiation.

The education was delivered through Gurukula .

The relationship between the Guru and his Shishya (students /disciples) was a very important part of education. Taxila is an example of an ancient higher learning institute in ancient India, possibly dating as far back as the 8th century BCE. However, it is debatable whether or not this can be regarded as a university in modern-day terms, since the teachers living there may not have had official membership of particular colleges, and there did not seem to have existed purpose-built lecture halls and residential quarters in Taxila, in contrast to the later Nalanda university in eastern India. Nalanda was the oldest university-system of education in the world in the modern sense of university, and all subjects there were taught in the Pali language . Secular institutions cropped up along Buddhist monasteries. These institutions imparted practical education such as medical studies. A number of urban learning centres became increasingly visible from the period between 500 BCE to 400 CE.

The important urban centres of learning were Nalanda (in modern-day Bihar ), Vikramashila , and Odantapuri among others. These institutions systematically imparted knowledge and attracted a number of foreign students to study topics such as Buddhist Páli literature , logic, and páli grammar . Chanakya , a Brahmin teacher, was among the most famous teachers, associated with the founding of the Mauryan Empire . Shramanas and Brahmanas historically offered education by means of donations, rather than charging fees or the procurement of funds from students or their guardians. Later, stupas and temples also became centres of education; religious education was compulsory, but secular subjects were also taught. Students were required to be brahmacharis or celibate.

The knowledge in these orders was often related to the tasks a section of the society had to perform. Arts, crafts, Ayurveda, architecture, etc., were taught. With the advent of Islam in India the traditional methods of education increasingly came under Islamic influence. Pre-Mughal rulers such as Qutb-ud-din Aybak and other Muslim rulers initiated institutions which imparted religious knowledge. Scholars such as Nizamuddin Auliya and Moinuddin Chishti became prominent educators and established Islamic monasteries. Students from Bukhara and Afghanistan visited India to study humanities and science. Islamic institution of education in India included traditional madrassas and maktabs which taught grammar, philosophy, mathematics, and law influenced by the Greek traditions inherited by Persia and the Middle East before Islam spread from these regions into India. A feature of traditional Islamic education was its emphasis on the connection between science and humanities. British rule and the subsequent establishment of educational institutions saw the introduction of English as a medium of instruction. Some schools taught the curriculum through vernacular languages with English as a second language.

The term "pre-modern" was used for three kinds of schools – the Arabic and Sanskrit schools which taught Muslim or Hindu sacred literature and the Persian schools which taught Persian literature.

The vernacular schools across India taught reading and writing the vernacular language and arithmetic. British education became solidified into India as missionary schools were established during the 1820s. 18th century Main article: Dharampal § Relevance Dharampal was instrumental in changing the understanding of pre-colonial education in India. Dharampal's primary works are based on documentation by the colonial government on Indian education, agriculture, technology, and arts during the period of colonial rule in India. His pioneering historical research, conducted intensively over a decade, provides evidence from extensive early British administrators’ reports of the widespread prevalence of indigenous educational institutions in Bombay, Bengal and Madras Presidencies as well as in the Punjab, teaching a sophisticated curriculum, with daily school attendance by about 30% of children aged 6–15.

In 1818, the fall of Maratha Empire lead to large parts of India coming under British rule.

During the decade of 1820–30, detailed surveys of the indigenous education system that were prevalent in their provinces were conducted by the British. G.L. Prendergast, a member of the Governor's Council in Bombay Presidency, recorded the following about indigenous schools on 27 June 1821: The Union government established the University Education Commission (1948–1949), the Secondary Education Commission (1952–1953), University Grants Commission and the Kothari Commission (1964–66) to develop proposals to modernise India's education system.

The Resolution on Scientific Policy was adopted by the government of Jawaharlal Nehru , India's first Prime Minister.

The Nehru government sponsored the development of high-quality scientific education institutions such as the Indian Institutes of Technology .

In 1961, the Union government formed the National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) as an autonomous organisation that would advise both the Union and state governments on formulating and implementing education policies.

In 2015, the Swach Vidyalaya had finished which was an initiative to put a functional toilet in every school. 2020 Main article: National Education Policy 2020 In 2019, the Indian Ministry of Education released a draft of a new education policy, which was followed by a number of public consultations. It discusses reducing curriculum content to enhance essential learning, critical thinking, and promoting more holistic, experiential, discussion-based and analysis-based learning. It also talks about a revision of the curriculum and pedagogical structure from a 10+2 system to a 5+3+3+4 system design in an effort to optimise learning for students based on cognitive development of children.

On 29 July 2020, the cabinet approved a new National Education Policy with an aim to introduce several changes to the existing Indian education system.

The Policy aims to make pre-primary education universal and places special emphasis on achieving foundational literacy/numeracy in primary school and beyond for all by 2025. Educational stages The National Education Policy 2020 introduced the 5+3+3+4 education structure in India, where students will spend 5 years in the foundational stage, 3 years in the preparatory stage, 3 years in the middle stage, and 4 years in the secondary stage, with a focus on holistic development and critical thinking. However, educational practices can vary across different states and education boards in India. Pre-Primary / Elementary Education This stage is optional and includes pre-school and kindergarten education for children aged 3 to 6 years. It focuses on early childhood development and prepares children for formal schooling. Nursery / Anganwadi Nursery education in India refers to pre-primary schooling designed for children typically between the ages of 2.5 and 5 years. It serves as the foundational stage before kindergarten or formal primary education begins. Kindergarten Kindergarten is mainly attended by children between 3–5 years of age, and is an important basic building block that prepares kids for primary education. Children study in lower kindergarten (LKG) for one year and then in upper kindergarten (UKG) for one year. Primary Education Primary education typically starts at the age of 6 and continues for 5 years, from Classes I to V .

The main subjects taught during this stage include: mathematics , science , social science , languages (usually English and a regional language or a foreign language), physical education and training , value education . High School Education Secondary / Lower Secondary / Matriculation Education Secondary education covers Classes VIII, IX and X (Grades 8–10), usually from ages 13 to 16. Students are exposed to a wider range of subjects, including additional languages , arts , and vocational subjects in addition to the usual English, math, science, social science, computer science physical ed., value education.

At the end of class X, students often appear for a standardised board examination like the Secondary School Leaving Certificate Examination / Secondary School Certificate ( SSLC / SSC ) conducted by the respective state education boards or All India Secondary School Examination ( AISSE ) conducted by the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) or the Indian Certificate of Secondary Education ( ICSE ) examination conducted by the Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations (CISCE). Secondary school education in India is commonly known as "high school" or "secondary school". These terms are widely used across the country to refer to the stage of education that follows primary education and precedes higher secondary education. Senior Secondary / Higher Secondary / Intermediate Education After completing secondary education, students move on to higher secondary education, which includes classes XI and XII (Grades 11–12). They typically specialise in one of three streams: Science , Commerce , or Humanities/Arts .

The curriculum becomes more focused on specific subjects related to the chosen stream with a few subjects in common and compulsory such as physical education , work experience , value education and art or related.

At the end of class XII, students generally appear for board examinations such as the Higher Secondary Certificate Examination conducted by the respective state boards or All India Senior School Certificate Examination (AISSCE) conducted by CBSE or the Indian School Certificate (ISC) examination conducted by CISCE .

The terminology used to describe higher secondary education varies between states in India. Some commonly used terms include intermediate education in Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Bihar, Uttarakhand, and Uttar Pradesh; higher secondary education (HSE) in Assam, Maharashtra, Kerala, and Tamil Nadu; senior secondary education (SSE) in Haryana, Punjab, and Rajasthan; and pre-university education (PUC) in Karnataka. These terms represent the educational stage following secondary education and indicate the diverse terminology used in different states across the country.

The curriculum for these streams may vary based on the board of education or state education board.

After completing the 12th grade, students can also pursue higher education in universities or specialised institutions depending on their chosen stream and career aspirations. Pre-university course or intermediate education In certain states in India, such as Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh , the education system includes a two-year pre-university course (PUC) after the completion of secondary education (10th grade).

The PUC is commonly referred to as junior college. Students typically enroll in pre-university colleges to pursue their intermediate education, which acts as a bridge between high school and university.

The pre-university system allows students to choose from three major streams of study: Science: This stream focuses on subjects such as Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Mathematics, and Computer Science. Commerce: This stream includes subjects like Accountancy, Economics, Business Studies, and Mathematics. Arts/Humanities: Students in this stream study subjects like History, Political Science, Sociology, Economics, and Languages. Upon completing their pre-university education, students can choose to pursue higher education at universities, professional colleges, or other specialised institutions.

In the rest of the states in India, including the central education boards like CBSE (Central Board of Secondary Education) and CISCE (Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations), the education system follows a 10+2 format. It consists of ten years of primary and secondary education (up to the 10th grade) followed by two years of higher secondary education (11th and 12th grade). Vocational education In addition to the regular academic curriculum, vocational education is offered at various stages to provide specific skills and training in fields such as engineering, information technology, hospitality, healthcare, and more. Vocational courses are available at both the secondary and higher secondary levels. Educational practices, syllabus, and examinations may vary depending on the education board, such as CBSE , CISCE , state boards, or international boards. Additionally, there are alternative education systems in India, such as the International Baccalaureate (IB) and Cambridge International Examinations (CIE) , which follow different curricula and assessment methods. Higher Education After completing higher secondary or intermediate education, students can pursue higher education in colleges and universities. Higher education options include undergraduate programmes (bachelor's degrees), postgraduate programmes (master's degrees), and doctoral programmes (Ph.D. degrees). Pre-primary education in India Anganwadi centre at Velhe, Pune district, 2019 The pre-primary stage is the foundation of children's knowledge, skills and behaviour.

On completion of pre-primary education, the children are sent to the primary stage, but pre-primary education in India is not a fundamental right.

In rural India, pre-primary schools are rarely available in small villages. But in cities and big towns, there are many established players in the pre-primary education sector.

The demand for the preschools is growing considerably in the smaller towns and cities but still, only 1% of the population under age 6 is enrolled in preschool education. Play group (pre-nursery) : At playschools, children are exposed to a lot of basic learning activities that help them to get independent faster and develop their self-help qualities like eating food themselves, dressing up, and maintaining cleanliness.

The age limit for admission into pre-nursery is 2 to 3 years. Anganwadi is government-funded free rural childcare & Mothercare nutrition and learning programme also incorporating the free Midday Meal Scheme . Nursery : Nursery level activities help children reach crucial developmental milestones , thus enabling them to sharpen their mental and physical abilities.

The age range for admission in nursery is 3 to 4 years. Lower Kindergarten (LKG) : Also known as the junior kindergarten (jr. kg) stage.

The age range for admission in LKG is 4 to 5 years. Upper Kindergarten (UKG) : It is also called the senior kindergarten (Sr. kg) stage.

The age range for admission in UKG is 5 to 6 years. LKG and UKG stages prepare and help children emotionally, mentally, socially and physically to grasp knowledge easily in the later stages of school and college life. A systematic process of preschool education is followed in India to impart knowledge in the best possible way for a better understanding of the young children.

By following an easy and interesting curriculum, teachers strive hard to make the entire learning process enjoyable for the children. Primary education in India Indian school-children at a school in Jodhpur , Rajasthan Primary education in India is divided into two parts: Lower Primary (Class I-V) and Upper Primary (Class VI-VIII).

The Indian government places emphasis on primary education, intended for children between 6 and 14 years of age.

Since education laws are governed by individual states, the duration of primary school can vary between Indian states.

The Indian government has also banned child labour in order to ensure that the children do not enter unsafe working conditions. However, both free education and the ban on child labour are difficult to enforce due to economic disparity and social conditions. 80% of all recognised schools at the elementary stage are government run or supported, making it the largest provider of education in the country. Figures released by the Indian government in 2011 show that there were 5,816,673 elementary school teachers in India.

As of March 2012 there were 2,127,000 secondary school teachers in India. Education has also been made free for children for 6 to 14 years of age or up to class VIII under the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act 2009.

While school enrollment rates have increased, many children leave school with poor literacy and numeracy skills. ASER reported in 2019 that only 50% of fifth standard students in rural India could read a Standard II-level text, and only 29% of them could do basic division. However, due to a shortage of resources and lack of political will, this system suffers from massive gaps including high pupil to teacher ratios, shortage of infrastructure and poor levels of teacher training. Some scholars have used the concept of "visibility" to explain why successive governments have underprioritised investments directed at raising the quality of teaching and education in India relative to investments in building more schools. Building schools is more "visible" to the voting public and easily attributable to the government; training teachers to teach better and raising the quality of education is a more uncertain venture, the success of which is determined by factors outside the control of any one government. This incentivises governments to focus their resources on "visible" areas of intervention . There have been several efforts to enhance quality made by the government.

The District Education Revitalisation Programme (DERP) was launched in 1994 with an aim to universalise primary education in India by reforming and vitalising the existing primary education system. 85% of the DERP was funded by the central government and the remaining 15% was funded by the states.

The DERP, which had opened 160,000 new schools including 84,000 alternative education schools delivering alternative education to approximately 3.5 million children, was also supported by UNICEF and other international programmes. "Corruption hurts the poor disproportionately – by diverting funds intended for development, undermining a government's ability to provide basic services, feeding inequality and injustice, and discouraging foreign investment and aid" (Kofi Annan, in his statement on the adoption of the United Nations Convention against Corruption by the General Assembly, NY, November 2003).

In January 2016, Kerala became the 1st Indian state to achieve 100% primary education through its literacy programme Athulyam. This primary education scheme has also shown a high gross enrolment ratio of 93–95% for the last three years in some states. Significant improvement in staffing and enrolment of girls has also been made as a part of this scheme.

The scheme for universalisation of Education for All is the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan which is one of the largest education initiatives in the world.

While school enrolment rates have increased, the quality of education received by students remains low.

The literature suggests that one of the biggest reasons for quality deficiencies in primary and secondary education is teacher absence and negligence.

In one popular study, the researchers made unannounced visits to 3700 schools in 20 major Indian states, where they found that, on average, 25% of government primary school teachers absent every day.

In another study, although it was found that three-quarters of the teachers were in attendance in the government primary schools that were inspected, only half of them were found teaching. Secondary education in India Secondary school students in a chemistry lab at a school in Odisha Independence Day celebration at a school in Baranagar Secondary education covers children aged 14 to 18, a group comprising 88.5 million children according to the 2001 Census of India .

The final two years of secondary is often called Higher Secondary (HS), Senior Secondary, Intermediate or simply the "+2" stage.

In India, Students may opt for vocational education or university education. Vocational education India's All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE) reported, in 2013, that there are more than 4,599 vocational institutions that offer degrees, diploma and post-diploma in architecture, engineering, hotel management, infrastructure, pharmacy, technology, town services and others. There were 1,740,000 students enrolled in these schools. Total annual intake capacity for technical diplomas and degrees exceeded 3.4 million in 2012. According to the University Grants Commission (UGC) total enrolment in Science, Medicine, Agriculture and Engineering crossed 65 lakh in 2010.

The number of women choosing engineering has more than doubled since 2001. Tertiary education Main articles: List of Indian institutions of higher education , Institutes of National Importance , and Autonomous institutes Indian Institute of Management Calcutta , Kolkata Indian Institute of Technology Bombay , Mumbai Forest Research Institute After passing the Higher Secondary Examination (the Standard 12 examination), students may enroll in general degree programmes such as bachelor's degree ( graduation ) in arts, commerce or science, or professional degree programme such as engineering, medicine, nursing, pharmacy, and law graduates . India's higher education system is the third largest in the world, after China and the United States.

The main governing body at the tertiary level is the University Grants Commission (India) (UGC), which enforces its standards, advises the government, and helps co-ordinate between the centre and the state up to Post graduation and Doctorate (PhD). Accreditation for higher learning is overseen by 12 autonomous institutions established by the University Grants Commission .

The Accreditation is seen by the National Assessment and Accreditation Council .

The Management & Accreditation of Technical Education like Engineering, Management and Similar Education course are overseen by the All India Council for Technical Education . All India Institute of Medical Sciences Delhi As of 2012 , India has 152 central universities, 316 state universities, and 191 private universities. Other institutions include 33,623 colleges, including 1,800 exclusive women's colleges, functioning under these universities and institutions, and 12,748 Institutions offering Diploma Courses.

The emphasis in the tertiary level of education lies on science and technology. Indian educational institutions by 2004 consisted of a large number of technology institutes. Distance learning is also a feature of the Indian higher education system.

The Government has launched Rashtriya Uchchattar Shiksha Abhiyan to provide strategic funding to State higher and technical institutions. A total of 316 state public universities and 13,024 colleges will be covered under it. Some institutions of India, such as the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) and National Institutes of Technology (NITs) have been globally acclaimed for their standard of under-graduate education in engineering. Several other institutes of fundamental research such as the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science (IACS), Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), Harish-Chandra Research Institute (HRI), Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR), Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) are also acclaimed for their standard of research in basic sciences and mathematics. However, India has failed to produce world class universities both in the private sector or the public sector. Gujarat National Law University , Gandhinagar Three Indian universities were listed in the Times Higher Education list of the world's top 200 universities – Indian Institutes of Technology , Indian Institutes of Management , and Jawaharlal Nehru University in 2005 and 2006. Six Indian Institutes of Technology and the Birla Institute of Technology and Science —Pilani were listed among the top 20 science and technology schools in Asia by Asiaweek .

The Indian School of Business situated in Hyderabad was ranked number 12 in global MBA rankings by the Financial Times of London in 2010 while the All India Institute of Medical Sciences has been recognised as a global leader in medical research and treatment.

The University of Mumbai was ranked 41 among the Top 50 Engineering Schools of the world by America's news broadcasting firm Business Insider in 2012 and was the only university in the list from the five emerging BRICS nations viz Brazil , Russia , India , China and South Africa . It was ranked at 62 in the QS BRICS University rankings for 2013 and was India's 3rd best Multi-Disciplinary University in the QS University ranking of Indian Universities after University of Calcutta and Delhi University .

In April 2015, IIT Bombay, Mumbai launched the first U.S.-India joint EMBA programme alongside Washington University in St. Louis . Technical education Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli From the first Five-year Plan onwards, India's emphasis was to develop a talent pool driven by strong scientific ability. India's National Policy on Education (NPE) provisioned for an apex body for regulation and development of higher technical education, which came into being as the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) in 1987 through an act of the Indian parliament.

At the central level, the Indian Institutes of Technology , the Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology , the National Institutes of Technology and the Indian Institutes of Information Technology are deemed of national importance.

The Indian Institutes of Technology ( IITs ) and National Institutes of Technology ( NITs ) are among the nation's premier education facilities. Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee <The UGC has inter-university centers at a number of locations throughout India to promote common research, e.g. the Nuclear Science Centre at the Jawaharlal Nehru University , New Delhi. Besides there are some British established colleges such as Harcourt Butler Technological Institute situated in Kanpur and King George Medical University situated in Lucknow which are important centre of higher education.

In addition to above institutes, efforts towards the enhancement of technical education are supplemented by a number of recognised Professional Engineering Societies such as: Institution of Engineers (India) Institution of Civil Engineers (India) Institution of Mechanical Engineers (India) Institution of Chemical Engineering (India) Institution of Electronics and Tele-Communication Engineers (India) Indian Institute of Metals Institution of Industrial Engineers (India) Institute of Town Planners (India) Indian Institute of Architects that conduct Engineering/Technical Examinations at different levels (Degree and diploma) for working professionals desirous of improving their technical qualifications.

The number of graduates from technical colleges increased to over 700,000 in 2011, compared to 550,000 in FY 2010. However, according to one study, 75% of technical graduates and more than 85% of general graduates lack the skills needed in India's most demanding and high-growth global industries such as Information Technology (IT).

The central board and most of the state boards uniformly follow the " 10+2 " pattern of education. : 3 In this pattern, the first 10 years of a student's education is spent in schools, and the latter two years are in junior colleges (as they are known in the state of Maharashtra) or higher secondary schools (in most other states). : 44 Students wishing to pursue further education undergo 3 years of study for a bachelor's degree.

The first 10 years is further subdivided into 8 years of elementary education (5 years Primary School and 3 years Middle School), 2 years of Secondary education followed by 2 years of Higher Secondary Schools or Junior colleges. : 5 This pattern originated from the recommendation of the Education Commission of 1964–66. There are two types of educational institutions in India, 1) Recognised institutions – primary school, secondary school, special schools, intermediate schools, colleges and universities who follow courses as prescribed by universities or boards and are also open for inspection by these authorities, 2) Unrecognised Institutions, which do not fulfil conditions as stated for the recognised ones. Administration Policy Education policy is prepared by the Central Government and State Governments at national and state levels respectively.

The National Policy on Education (NPE) , 1986, provided for environment awareness, science and technology education, and introduction of traditional elements such as Yoga into the Indian secondary school system. A significant feature of India's secondary school system is the emphasis on inclusion of the disadvantaged sections of the society. Professionals from established institutes are often called to support in vocational training. Another feature of India's secondary school system is its emphasis on profession based vocational training to help students attain skills for finding a vocation of his/her choosing. A significant new feature has been the extension of SSA to secondary education in the form of the Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan . Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) which is the most recent initiative of Government of India to achieve the goal of universalisation of secondary education (USE). It is aimed at expanding and improving the standards of secondary education up to class X. Curriculum and school education boards National Skill Development Agency (NSDA)'s National Skills Qualification Framework (NSQF), is a quality assurance framework which grades and recognises levels of skill based on the learning outcomes acquired through both formal or informal means. School boards set the curriculum, conduct standardised exams mostly at 10th and 12th level to award the school diplomas. Exams at the remaining levels (also called standard, grade or class, denoting the years of schooling) are conducted by the schools. National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT): The NCERT is the apex body located in New Delhi , India's capital city.

The council oversees the curriculums for school education across India.

The NCERT provides support, guidance and technical assistance to a number of schools in India and oversees many aspects of enforcement of education policies. Curriculum bodies that govern state specific curriculum are known as SCERTs. State Government Boards of Education: Most state governments have at least one state board that oversees secondary school education. However, some states, like Andhra Pradesh have more than one, while the union territories, such as Chandigarh , Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu , Lakshadweep , and Puducherry , do not have a board, and instead share services with a larger state.

The boards set curriculum from Grades 1 to 12 for affiliated schools.

The curriculum varies from state to state and has more local appeal with examinations conducted in regional languages in addition to English – often considered less rigorous than national curricula such as CBSE or ICSE/ISC. Most of these conduct exams at 10th and 12th level, but some even at the 5th and 8th level. Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE): The CBSE sets curriculum from Grades 9 to 12 for affiliated schools and conducts examinations at the 10th and 12th levels. Students studying the CBSE Curriculum take the All India Secondary School Examination (AISSE) at the end of grade 10 and All India Senior School Certificate Examination (AISSCE) at the end of grade 12. Examinations are offered in Hindi and English. Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations (CISCE): CISCE sets curriculum from Grades 1 to 12 for affiliated schools and conducts three examinations, namely, the Indian Certificate of Secondary Education (ICSE – Class/Grade 10); The Indian School Certificate (ISC – Class/Grade 12) and the Certificate in Vocational Education (CVE – Class/Grade 12). CISCE English level has been compared to UK's A-Levels; this board offers more choices of subjects. CBSE exams at grade 10 and 12 have often been compared with ICSE and ISC examinations respectively. ICSE is generally considered to be more rigorous than the CBSE AISSE (grade 10) but the CBSE AISSCE and ISC examinations are almost on par with each other in most subjects with ISC including a slightly more rigorous English examination than the CBSE 12th grade examination.

The CBSE and ISC are recognised internationally and most universities abroad accept the final results of CBSE and ISC exams for admissions purposes and as proof of completion of secondary school. National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS): The NIOS conducts two examinations; the secondary examination and senior secondary examination (All India), and also some courses in Vocational Education.

The National Board of Education is run by Government of India's Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) to provide education in rural areas and challenged groups in open and distance education mode. A pilot project started by the CBSE, designed to provide quality, affordable education, educates students up until the 12th grade.

The administrative and logistical responsibilities of this scheme are enormous, and, therefore, offering food stamps or income transfer to targeted recipients is considered as an alternative.

The government started the Kendriya Vidyalaya project in 1965 to provide uniform education in institutions following the same syllabus at the same pace regardless of the location to which the employee's family has been transferred. Government Model Higher Secondary School , Thiruvananthapuram , One of the oldest schools in Thiruvananthapuram run by the state government Government aided private schools Nutan Marathi Vidyalaya , One of the oldest schools in Pune run by a government aided charitable trust These are usually charitable trust run schools that receive partial funding from the government.

The largest system of aided schools is run by D.A.V. College Managing Committee . Private schools (unaided) Delhi Public School, Azaad Nagar , Kanpur The Doon School According to a survey an estimate, 29% of Indian children were privately educated in 2014. With more than 50% children enrolling in private schools in urban areas, the balance has already tilted towards private schooling in cities; and, even in rural areas, nearly 20% of the children in 2004-5 were enrolled in private schools. La Martiniere Calcutta , a private school in Kolkata Most middle-class families send their children to private schools, mostly in their own city, but also at boarding schools. Private schools have been established since the British Rule in India and St George's School, Chennai is the oldest private school in India.

At such schools, the medium of education is often English, but Hindi or the state's official language is also taught as a compulsory subject. Pre-school education is mostly limited to organised neighbourhood nursery schools with some organised chains. Montessori education is also popular, due to Maria Montessori 's stay in India during World War II .

In 2014, four of the top ten pre-schools in Chennai were Montessori. Many privately owned and managed schools carry the appellation "Public", such as the Delhi Public Schools , or Frank Anthony Public Schools . These are modelled after British public schools , which are a group of older, expensive and exclusive fee-paying private independent schools in England. Some studies claim private schools produce better academic results at lower costs per student compared to government schools, often due to different management practices and accountability structures. This is often attributed to factors such as better infrastructure, teacher accountability, and parental involvement. However, critics argue that private schools often exclude the poorest families, represent only a small portion of total schools, and have sometimes failed to comply with regulatory requirements. Research with children from the same family, in which one child attends private school and the other receives a government education, has found barely any difference in their attainment. Analysts suggest that the higher test scores in private schools largely reflect socioeconomic advantages, as these students often come from wealthier families. Such advantages often include access to educational resources, supportive home environments, and additional tutoring opportunities.

In their favour, it has been pointed out that private schools cover the entire curriculum and offer extra-curricular activities such as science fairs, general knowledge, sports, music and drama.

The pupil teacher ratios are much better in private schools (1:31 to 1:37 for government schools) and more teachers in private schools are female. There is some disagreement over which system has better educated teachers. According to the latest DISE survey, the percentage of untrained teachers (para-teachers) is 54.91% in private, compared to 44.88% in government schools and only 2.32% teachers in unaided schools receive in-service training compared to 43.44% for government schools.

The competition in the school market is intense, yet most schools make profit. However, the number of private schools in India is still low – the share of private institutions is 7% (with upper primary being 21% secondary 32% – source: fortress team research ). Even the poorest often go to private schools despite the fact that government schools are free. A study found that 65% school-children in Hyderabad's slums attend private schools. National schools Baranagore Ramakrishna Mission Ashrama High School Atomic Energy Central School (established in 1969) Bal Bharati Public School (established in 1944) Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan (established in 1938) Chinmaya Vidyalaya (established in 1965) DAV Public School (established in 1886) Delhi Public School (established in 1949) Indian Army Public Schools (established in 1983) Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya (established in 1986) Kendriya Vidyalaya (established in 1963) Padma Seshadri Bala Bhavan (established in 1958) Railway Schools in India (established in 1873) Ramakrishna Mission Schools (established in 1922) Ryan International Schools (established in 1976) Sainik School (established in 1960) Saraswati Shishu Mandir (established in 1952) Seth M.R. Jaipuria Schools (established in 1992) Vivekananda Vidyalaya (established in 1972) Vivekananda Kendra Vidyalaya (established in 1977) Waldorf Schools (India) (established in 2002) International schools As of January 2015 , the International Schools Consultancy (ISC) listed India as having 410 international schools. ISC defines an 'international school' in the following terms "ISC includes an international school if the school delivers a curriculum to any combination of pre-school, primary or secondary students, wholly or partly in English outside an English-speaking country, or if a school in a country where English is one of the official languages, offers an English-medium curriculum other than the country's national curriculum and is international in its orientation." This definition is used by publications including The Economist . Home-schooling Home-schooling in India is legal , though it is the less explored option, and often debated by educators.

The Indian Government's stance on the issue is that parents are free to teach their children at home, if they wish to and have the means.

The then MHRD Minister Kapil Sibal has stated that despite the RTE Act of 2009, if someone decides not to send his/her children to school, the government would not interfere. Non-governmental work in education NGO work in Indian education broadly spans four areas – piloting approaches to multigrade teaching, making improvements to learning environments, teacher training and support, and creating stronger school-community links. NGO involvement in education has been crucial in delivering targeted action to under resourced communities, such as Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes , the urban poor, children engaged in child labor, children with disabilities, etc.

The Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) recognised the role played by NGOs in ensuring access to education, particularly for students with disabilities. NGOs contributed to SSA by either leading advocacy movements for persons with disabilities or providing various types of assistance in rural settings for children with disabilities. Under the SSA, NGOs also engaged in collaboration with the state to reach children excluded from mainstream education, including migrant children, child laborers, dropouts, children living in areas with civil instability and girls. There are 79,960 registered NGOs working in the areas of education and literacy. Partnerships under the SSA can occur through funding by Central and State governments, funding activities by identified National and State Resource Institutions or through participation in community activities of various Village Education Committees. Grassroots education NGOs often deliver services via local governing institutions such as the Panchayati Raj and emphasise community participation in ensuring quality.

The Mamidipudi Venkatarangaiya Foundation (MVF), established in 1991 to address literacy among child laborers utilised Parent Teacher Associations to disburse seed money for the programme under the supervision of the village Panchayat, which then took issues of staffing shortage and insufficient infrastructure to the State Government.

The Pratham Educational Initiative in Delhi and Mumbai works with the Integrated Child Development Scheme to set up and provide support to community-run pre-school centres or balwadis. Under the Namma Shaale project in Karnataka, the Azim Premji Foundation identified seven key stakeholders (children, teachers, parents, School Development and Monitoring Committees, Community Based Organizations, Gram Panchayats, and education managers) in their work to establish a framework of school-community leadership. NGOs also work with the State to enable teacher training. There have been a number of NGO partnerships with local District Institute of Educational Training.

The Rishi Valley Institute for Educational Resources (RIVER) has worked with school districts in many Indian states to provide multi-grade, multi-level training approaches catering to the needs of remote one-room schools.

The Eklavya Foundation in Madhya Pradesh has been working with the State Council for Education Research and Training since 1987 to train teachers in making learning a joyful experience by emphasising skill development and practical learning in the sciences. NGOs have historically been associated with non-formal education (NFE) programmes, both in providing alternative pedagogical approaches as well as substitutes to mainstream education.

The Bharat Gyan Vigyan Samiti, for instance, emphasises "science and literacy for national integration and self-reliance" and uses approaches such as the Gyan Vigyan Vidyalayas to encourage long-term engagement in literacy. Studies in NGO involvement in education have criticised the adoption of NGO models into formal schooling as low-cost options that require institutional mechanisms to avoid undermining the State's financial responsibility in providing elementary education.

The cost‐effectiveness of NGO programmes has yet to be determined.

In studies that demonstrate that NGOs are more cost-effective in the Global South, there have been concerns raised that this is accomplished by cutting ethical corners, such as underpayment of NGO workers. Open and distance learning in India Open schooling refers to a system of education that allows individuals to pursue their education through flexible and extensible learning methods. It is primarily targeted towards students who are unable to attend regular schools due to various reasons, such as work commitments, financial constraints, or other personal circumstances.

The National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS) is the largest open schooling system in India, operating under the aegis of the Indian Ministry of Education . NIOS offers various academic and vocational courses at the secondary (10th grade) and senior secondary (12th grade) levels. It follows a learner-centric approach and provides education through open and distance learning methods. Apart from NIOS, some states like Kerala have their own open schooling boards that provide similar opportunities for flexible learning and certification.

The certificates and qualifications offered by NIOS or state open education boards are recognised by various educational institutions, colleges, and universities in India and abroad, and hold the same value as certificates obtained through regular schooling. 1.4 million students are enrolled at the secondary and higher secondary level through open and distance learning.

At the school level, the Board of Open Schooling and Skill Education, Sikkim (BOSSE), NIOS provides opportunities for continuing education to those who missed completing school education.

In 2012, various state governments also introduced the State Open School program to provide distance education. Massive open online courses are made available for free by the MHRD and various educational institutes. Further information: List of distance education universities in India Online education This section needs expansion . You can help by adding missing information . ( March 2021 ) Online education in India started during the COVID-19 pandemic . However, only a small proportion of the Indian population has access to online education.

The MHRD recently launched the ' Bharat Padhe Online ' program.

The Indian government has imposed one of the longest school closures globally as it suffered through multiple waves of the COVID-19 pandemic. These school closures have revealed the inequities between urban and rural populations, as well as between girls and boys, in adapting to online learning tools.

On 4 July 2018, in a landmark reform in the field of Higher Education, University Grants Commission has notified UGC (Online Courses or Programmes) Regulations, 2018. Distance Education Bureau started giving approvals to Higher Educational Institutions to offer Certificate, Diploma and Degree Programmes in full-fledged online mode. Evolution When COVID-19 shut down schools and colleges all over India, online education became really popular, helping lots of people keep up with their studies. Deaf education in India History of education in India for the DHH population India is very diverse with eight main religions, hundreds of ethnic groups, and 21 languages with hundreds of dialects. This diversity has made it difficult to educate deaf or hard of hearing (DHH) people in India for generations. There is a history of educating the deaf in India, however, there is no single clear approach to their education. This stems from conditions, some similar to those faced around the world, and others unique to India. For example, prior to independence of India, there were not clear laws and protections for the disabled.

Since independence, advancements have been made for rights of the disabled, but this has not fully tackled the issue. Pre-independence there were only 24 schools for the deaf in India, and all of these used an oral approach.

The belief was that using sign language would hinder advancements of hearing and speaking in deaf children. Additionally, there was no single Indian sign language, so signs would differ depending on where the school was located. Post-independence, there are more services and resources available for DHH people, however, challenges with education remain. There are organisations around the country that work to advance the spread and quality of education for the deaf. Education for DHH children Oralism and the use of sign language are two competing approaches to education for DHH people.

While oralism dominates in India, which is an approach that encourages speaking and hearing, it is usually not realistic for DHH children. There is an Indian Sign Language, however, it is not formally recognised by the government and it is not complete or comprehensive. It varies around the country and is not encouraged by professionals and educators. Beliefs of the past that the use of sign language will hinder the potential advancements of hearing and speaking in DHH children remain.

In recent years, there has been a notion to encourage the use of sign language in India and teach it in schools.

In 2017, the first ISL dictionary was released. Due to these challenges and beliefs associated with sign language, education for DHH people in India often focuses on teaching children to hear, speak, and read lips, this is known as an oral approach.

In India there are regular schools and special schools. Special schools provide education for children with different disabilities. Special schools can be beneficial to DHH children, and provide a better education than they would receive in a regular school. However, these schools are not available for every deaf child. Sometimes they are located too far from a child's home. Another reason a child may have to attend a regular school is if they receive hearing technology.

Since India focuses on hearing and speaking for the deaf, hearing technology is encouraged. Once a child receives hearing technology it is believed that they can attend regular schools. Even with hearing technology, DHH children still need special education in order to succeed. This puts them at a significant disadvantage in regular school and can cause them to fall behind academically, linguistically, and developmentally. For these reasons, many deaf children receive poor education or no education at all, causing the illiteracy rate of deaf children to rise. Education in India in regular schools and deaf schools has problems. Even in deaf schools, sign language is not usually taught and used. Some use a small amount of sign language but all of the deaf schools in India use or claim to use an oral approach. Some deaf schools secretly teach sign language due to the stigma and beliefs surrounding the use of sign language, and disability in general, in India. Children in deaf schools have to try to learn by hearing or reading lips and writing.

In hearing schools, the children have to do the same. There are no special accommodations. Additionally, there are not any teachers that use sign language in regular schools (maybe a few in deaf schools), and there aren't any interpreters. There are a couple of hundred deaf schools in India and vocational training is becoming more common for DHH people. Higher education There are no deaf colleges or universities in India. A person's education ends with grade school- where they likely were not able to learn. With lack of education, DHH people then have a very difficult time finding a job. There is one interpreter in one college in India, Delhi University. Quality Literacy Main article: Literacy in India Literacy in India grew very slowly until independence in 1947. An acceleration in the rate of literacy growth occurred in the 1991–2001 period. According to the Census of 2011, "every person above the age of 7 years who can read and write with understanding in any language is said to be literate". According to this criterion, the 2011 survey holds the national literacy rate to be 74.04%.

The youth literacy rate, measured within the age group of 15 to 24, is 81.1% (84.4% among males and 74.4% among females), while 86% of boys and 72% of girls are literate in the 10–19 age group. Within the Indian states, Kerala has the highest literacy rate of 93.91% whereas Bihar averaged 61.8% literacy.

The 2001 statistics indicated that the total number of 'absolute non-literates' in the country was 304 million. Gender gap in literacy rate is high, for example in Rajasthan , the state with the lowest female literacy rate in India, average female literacy rate is 52.66% and average male literacy rate is 80.51%, making a gender gap of 27.85%. Attainment As of 2011 , enrolment rates are 58% for pre-primary, 93% for primary, 69% for secondary, and 25% for tertiary education. Despite the high overall enrolment rate for primary education among rural children of age 10, half of them could not read at a basic level, over 60% were unable to do division, and half dropped out by the age of 14.

In 2009, two states in India, Tamil Nadu and Himachal Pradesh , participated in the international PISA exams which is administered once every three years to 15-year-old's. Both states ranked at the bottom of the table, beating out only Kyrgyzstan in score, and falling 200 points (two standard deviations) below the average for OECD countries.

While in the immediate aftermath there was a short-lived controversy over the quality of primary education in India, ultimately India decided to not participate in PISA for 2012, and again not to for 2015 and 2018.

While the quality of free, public education is in crisis, a majority of the urban poor have turned to private schools .

In some urban cities, it is estimated as high as two-thirds of all students attend private institutions, many of which charge a modest US$2 per month. Public school workforce Officially, the pupil to teacher ratio within the public school system for primary education is 35:1. However, teacher absenteeism in India is exorbitant, with 25% never showing up for work.

The World Bank estimates the cost in salaries alone paid to no-show teachers who have never attended work is US$2 billion per year. A study on teachers by Kremer etc. found out that 25% of private sector teachers and 40% of public sector medical workers were absent during the survey. Among teachers who were paid to teach, absence rates ranged from 14.6% in Maharashtra to 41.9% in Jharkhand . Only 1 in nearly 3,000 public school head teachers had ever dismissed a teacher for repeated absence.

The same study found "only about half were teaching, during unannounced visits to a nationally representative sample of government primary schools in India." Higher education As per "Report of the Higher education in India, Issues Related to Expansion, Inclusiveness, Quality and Finance", the access to higher education measured in term of gross enrolment ratio increased from 0.7% in 1950/51 to 1.4% in 1960–61.

By 2006/7 the GER increased to about 11%. Notably, by 2012, it had crossed 20% (as mentioned in an earlier section). According to a survey by All India Survey on Higher Education (AISHE) released by the ministry of human resource development, Tamil Nadu which has the highest gross enrolment ratio (GER) in higher education in the country has registered an increase of 2.6% to take GER to 46.9 per cent in 2016–17. Vocational education An optimistic estimate from 2008 was that only one in five job-seekers in India ever had any sort of vocational training . However, it is expected to grow as the CBSE has brought changes in its education system which emphasises inclusion of certain number and types of vocational subjects in classes 9th and 11th.

Although it is not mandatory for schools to go for it but a good number of schools have voluntarily accepted the suggestion and incorporated the change in their curriculum. Problems and Issues Facilities As per the 2016 Annual Survey of Education Report (ASER), 3.5% schools in India had no toilet facility while only 68.7% schools had usable toilet facility. 75.5% of the schools surveyed had a library in 2016, a decrease from 78.1% in 2014.

The 2009 Hindi movie 3 Idiots specifically highlighted these issues, which led to major debates, especially in higher education.

The British "essentialist" view of knowledge of the nineteenth century emphasised the individual, scientific, universal, and moral aims of education ahead of the social and cultural. This, combined with the colonial construction of Indian society, designed to preserve the ideological lead of the Empire post-1857, it helped shape the official nineteenth-century school curriculum.

The rejection of nationalist Gopal Krishna Gokhale 's Bill (1911) to make primary education free and compulsory by the colonial administration and English-educated and often upper-caste elite further helped sustain a curriculum that focused on colonial objectives. Holmes and McLean (1989, 151) argue that despite tensions between the colonial view of education and the nationalist postcolonial aims of education, British essentialism grew unassailable roots in India partly because "colonial values coincided with those of indigenous traditions." Since India's independence, there has been a long history of biases of current ruling parties appearing in the NCERT syllabus dictating India's education program. It is scrutinized for saffronising school textbooks by aligning their content with Hindutva views and engaging in historical revisionism, an aspect that is subject to constant controversies . Policies drafted such as National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 that have broad reach also involving higher education, are also criticized for not advocating for equitable and just educational foundation rather to a privileged few. For example, the draft curriculum for undergraduate mathematics released by UGC as part of NEP, contained Kala Ganpana (traditional Indian time calculation), Bharatiya Bijganit (Indian algebra), Shulba Sutra (maxims of fire-altar measurements), among others while providing limited coverage of core subjects and applied math, as well as poorly designed elective courses. Indian-origin Field medalist , Manjul Bhargava claimed that "We must own ours (Indian contribution to mathematics) and be proud of them. It acts as an inspiration to the current generation” while critics questioned the meaningful impact of these subjects to an Indian mathematician's career while noting a general trend of nationalist and revivalist agendas overshadowing historical accuracy and academic rigor. Rural education A primary school in a village in Madhya Pradesh Indian school children in Mizoram Following independence, India viewed education as an effective tool for bringing social change through community development.

The administrative control was effectively initiated in the 1950s, when, in 1952, the government grouped villages under a Community Development Block —an authority under a national programme which could control education in up to 100 villages. A Block Development Officer oversaw a geographical area of 150 square miles (390 km 2 ) which could contain a population of as many as 70,000 people. Setty and Ross elaborate on the role of such programmes, themselves divided further into individual-based , community based , or the Individual-cum-community-based , in which microscopic levels of development are overseen at village level by an appointed worker: The community development programmes comprise agriculture, animal husbandry, cooperation, rural industries, rural engineering (consisting of minor irrigation, roads, buildings), health and sanitation including family welfare, family planning, women welfare, child care and nutrition, education including adult education, social education and literacy, youth welfare and community organisation.

In each of these areas of development there are several programmes, schemes and activities which are additive, expanding and tapering off covering the total community, some segments, or specific target populations such as small and marginal farmers, artisans, women and in general people below the poverty line. Despite some setbacks the rural education programmes continued throughout the 1950s, with support from private institutions. A sizeable network of rural education had been established by the time the Gandhigram Rural Institute was established and 5,200 Community Development Blocks were established in India. Nursery schools, elementary schools, secondary school, and schools for adult education for women were set up.

The government continued to view rural education as an agenda that could be relatively free from bureaucratic backlog and general stagnation. However, in some cases lack of financing balanced the gains made by rural education institutes of India. Some ideas failed to find acceptability among India's poor and investments made by the government sometimes yielded little results. Today, government rural schools remain poorly funded and understaffed. Several foundations, such as the Rural Development Foundation (Hyderabad), actively build high-quality rural schools, but the number of students served is small. Education in rural India is valued differently from in an urban setting, with lower rates of completion. An imbalanced sex ratio exists within schools with 18% of males earning a high school diploma compared with only 10% of females.

In the patriarchal setting of the Indian family, girls have lower status and fewer privileges than boys. Conservative cultural attitudes prevent some girls from attending school. Furthermore, educated women belonging to the upper middle clas are less likely to enter the workforce compared to uneducated women of lower castes. They opt to stay at home due to traditional, cultural and religious norms.

The number of literate women among the female population of India was between 2–6% from the British Raj onward to the formation of the Republic of India in 1947. Concerted efforts led to improvement from 15.3% in 1961 to 28.5% in 1981.

By 2001 literacy for women had exceeded 50% of the overall female population, though these statistics were still very low compared to world standards and even male literacy within India. Recently the Indian government has launched Saakshar Bharat Mission for Female Literacy . This mission aims to bring down female illiteracy by half of its present level. Sita Anantha Raman outlines the progress of women's education in India: Since 1947 the Indian government has tried to provide incentives for girls' school attendance through programmes for midday meals, free books, and uniforms. This welfare thrust raised primary enrollment between 1951 and 1981.

In 1986 the National Policy on Education decided to restructure education in tune with the social framework of each state, and with larger national goals. It emphasised that education was necessary for democracy, and central to the improvement of women's condition.

The new policy aimed at social change through revised texts, curricula, increased funding for schools, expansion in the numbers of schools, and policy improvements. Emphasis was placed on expanding girls' occupational centres and primary education; secondary and higher education; and rural and urban institutions.

The report tried to connect problems like low school attendance with poverty, and the dependence on girls for housework and sibling day care.

The National Literacy Mission also worked through female tutors in villages.

Although the minimum marriage age is now eighteen for girls, many continue to be married much earlier. Therefore, at the secondary level, female drop-out rates are high. Sita Anantha Raman also mentions that while the educated Indian women workforce maintains professionalism, the men outnumber them in most fields and, in some cases, receive higher income for the same positions.

The education of women in India plays a significant role in improving livings standards in the country. A higher female literacy rate improves the quality of life both at home and outside the home, by encouraging and promoting education of children, especially female children, and in reducing the infant mortality rate. Several studies have shown that a lower level of women literacy rates results in higher levels of fertility and infant mortality, poorer nutrition, lower earning potential and the lack of an ability to make decisions within a household. Women's lower educational levels is also shown to adversely affect the health and living conditions of children. A survey that was conducted in India showed results which support the fact that infant mortality rate was inversely related to female literacy rate and educational level.

The survey also suggests a correlation between education and economic growth.

In India, there is a large disparity between female literacy rates in different states.

The state of Kerala has the highest female literacy rate of 91.98% while Rajasthan has the lowest female literacy rate of 52.66. This correlates to the health levels of states, Kerala has average life expectancy at birth of 74.9 while Rajasthan's average life expectancy at birth is 67.7 years.

In India, higher education is defined as the education of an age group between 18 and 24, and is largely funded by the government. Despite women making up 24–50% of higher education enrolment, there is still a gender imbalance within higher education. Only one third of science students and 7% of engineering students, are women.

In comparison, however, over half the students studying Education are women. Accreditation In 2018, 277 fake engineering colleges were identified.

In January 2010, the Government of India decided to withdraw Deemed university status from as many as 44 institutions.

The Government claimed in its affidavit that academic considerations were not being kept in mind by the management of these institutions and that "they were being run as family fiefdoms".

In February 2009, the University Grant Commission found 39 fake institutions operating in India. Employer training Only 16% of manufacturers in India offer in-service training to their employees, compared with over 90% in China. Teacher careers Nuchhungi English Medium School Hnahthial Lunglei Mizoram on Teachers' Day In the Indian education system, a teacher's success is loosely defined. It is either based on a student's success or based on the years of teaching experience, both of which do not necessarily correlate to a teacher's skill set or competencies.

The management of an institution could thereby be forced to promote teachers based on the grade level they teach or their seniority, both of which are often not an indicator of a good teacher. This means that either a primary school teacher is promoted to a higher grade, or a teacher is promoted to take up other roles within the institution such as Head of Department, coordinator, Vice Principal or Principal. However, the skills and competencies that are required for each of them vary and a great teacher may not be a great manager.

Since teachers do not see their own growth and success in their own hands, they often do not take up any professional development. Thus, there is a need to identify a framework to help a teacher chart a career path based on his/her own competency and help them understand their own development. Coaching Institutes Increased competition to get admission in reputed colleges has given rise to private coaching institutes in India. They prepare students for engineering, medical, MBA, banking jobs' entrance tests as well as American SAT and GRE . There are also coaching institutes that teach subjects like English for employment in India and abroad. Private coaching institutes are of two types: offline coaching and online coaching. There are many online coaching centres and apps available in the market and their usage is growing, especially in tier 2 metro cities. A 2013 survey by ASSOCHAM predicted the size of private coaching industry to grow to $40 billion, or Rs 2.39 trillion ( short scale ) by 2015. Kota in Rajasthan is the called the "Coaching Capital Of India " as it prepares students for engineering and medical entrance exams like IIT-JEE and NEET-UG In Punjab , English language is taught by coaching institutes for foreign visa aspirants to get the right IELTS score for their applications. Mukherjee Nagar and Old Rajinder Nagar in Delhi are considered a hub for UPSC Civil Services Examination coaching. To compete in these exams, Center and some state governments also provide free coaching to students, especially to students from minority communities. Coaching classes have been blamed for the neglect of school education by students. Educationists such as Anandakrishnan have criticised the increasing importance being given to coaching classes as they put students under mental stress and the coaching fees add to the financial burden on parents. These educationists opine that if a good schooling system is put in place, children should not need additional coaching to take any competitive examination.

The Indian education system has faced criticism for its emphasis on rote learning and intense examination pressure. This pressure has been linked to cases of mental health issues and student suicides especially in the city of Kota, Rajasthan , amongst those preparing for competitive exams such as JEE and NEET-UG .

In 2023, India witnessed a rise in the number of student suicides with Kota, Rajasthan witnessing a record breaking 26 suicide cases in a single year. Initiatives like the National Level Common Entrance Examination (NLCEE) provide students with exposure to various career paths and institutions, guiding them to make informed decisions about their future.

By reducing uncertainty and regret in their choices, such initiatives aim to alleviate stress and help students avoid extreme responses to academic challenges.

The Ministry of Education has implemented a new law regulating private coaching institutes to control growing student suicides. Corruption in education Further information: Capitation fee Corruption in Indian education system has been eroding the quality of education and has been creating long-term negative consequences for the society. Educational corruption in India is considered one of the major contributors to domestic black money.

In 2021, Manav Bharti University , a private university, was accused of selling tens of thousands of degrees for money over a decade. Grade inflation Grade inflation has become an issue in Indian secondary education.

In CBSE , a 95 per cent aggregate is 21 times as prevalent today as it was in 2004, and a 90 per cent close to nine times as prevalent.

In the ISC Board , a 95 per cent is almost twice as prevalent today as it was in 2012. CBSE called a meeting of all 40 school boards early in 2017 to urge them to discontinue "artificial spiking of marks". CBSE decided to lead by example and promised not to inflate its results. But although the 2017 results have seen a small correction, the board has clearly not discarded the practice completely. Almost 6.5 per cent of mathematics examinees in 2017 scored 95 or more – 10 times higher than in 2004 – and almost 6 per cent of physics examinees scored 95 or more, 35 times more than in 2004. Overflow of Certain Fields Across the nation, it has often been observed that majority of Indian parents want their children to pursue only engineering or medical fields. This is due to a belief of guaranteed employment, financial security, survival mentality, societal status, and cultural conditioning.

As a result of this, along with an obsession for getting into prestigious IITs , many students in their high school are forced to sit and study for entrance exams other than their field of preferrence, like the JEE-Advanced for engineering and NEET for medical. This has led to development of coaching centers that tutor students for such exams, and with packed schedules issued, it has caused extreme pressure for the students, gradually affecting their mental health and no time for extra-curricular activities like arts or sports.

The IITs, despite being premier institutions, do not accept SAT scores for entrance and admission, which have been noted to be comparatively easier than the JEE.

In 2012, it was noted that India had an overflow of engineering colleges/institutions, and that NASSCOM , non-governmental trade association and advocacy group, revealed in a report that only 15% of engineering graduates are employable.

Following India's independence, a number of rules were formulated for the backward Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes of India.

In 1960, a list identifying 405 Scheduled Castes and 225 Scheduled Tribes was published by the central government. An amendment was made to the list in 1975, which identified 841 Scheduled Castes and 510 Scheduled Tribes.

The total percentage of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes combined was found to be 22.5% with the Scheduled Castes accounting for 17% and the Scheduled Tribes accounting for the remaining 7.5%.

Following the report many Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes increasingly referred to themselves as Dalit , a Marathi language terminology used by B R Ambedkar which literally means "oppressed".

The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are provided for in many of India's educational programmes. Special reservations are also provided for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in India, e.g. a reservation of 15% in Kendriya Vidyalaya for Scheduled Castes and another reservation of 7.5% in Kendriya Vidyalaya for Scheduled Tribes. Similar reservations are held by the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in many schemes and educational facilities in India.

The remote and far-flung regions of North-East India are provided for under the Non-Lapsible Central pool of Resources (NLCPR) since 1998–1999.

The NLCPR aims to provide funds for infrastructure development in these remote areas. Women from remote, underdeveloped areas or from weaker social groups in Andhra Pradesh , Assam , Bihar , Jharkhand , Karnataka , Kerala , Gujarat , Uttar Pradesh , and Uttarakhand , fall under the Mahila Samakhya Scheme , initiated in 1989. Apart from provisions for education this programme also aims to raise awareness by holding meetings and seminars at rural levels.

The government allowed ₹ 340 million (US$3.6 million) during 2007–08 to carry out this scheme over 83 districts including more than 21,000 villages. There are 68 Bal Bhavans and 10 Bal Kendra affiliated to the National Bal Bhavan .

The scheme involves educational and social activities and recognising children with a marked talent for a particular educational stream. A number of programmes and activities are held under this scheme, which also involves cultural exchanges and participation in several international forums. India's minorities, especially the ones considered 'educationally backward' by the government, are provided for in the 1992 amendment of the Indian National Policy on Education (NPE).

The government initiated the Scheme of Area Intensive Programme for Educationally Backward Minorities and Scheme of Financial Assistance or Modernisation of Madarsa Education as part of its revised Programme of Action (1992). Both these schemes were started nationwide by 1994.

In 2004 the Indian parliament passed an act which enabled minority education establishments to seek university affiliations if they passed the required norms. Ministry of Human Resource and Development, Government of India in collaboration with Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology has also launched a National Scholarship Portal to provide students of India access to National and State Level Scholarships provided by various government authorities.

As a Mission Mode Project under the National e-Governance Plan (NeGP), the online service enlists more than 50 scholarship programmes every year including the renowned Ministry of Minority Affairs (MOMA) Scholarships for Post-Matric and Pre-Matric studies.

In the academic year 2017–18 the MOMA Scholarships facilitated the studies of 116,452 students with scholarships worth ₹3165.7 million.

The National Scholarship continues to enlist scholarship programmes managed by AICTE (All India Council for Technical Education), UGC (University Grants Commission) and respective state governments. Legislative framework Article 45, of the Constitution of India originally stated: The State shall endeavour to provide, within a period of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution, for free and compulsory education for all children until they complete the age of fourteen years. This article was a directive principle of state policy within India, effectively meaning that it was within a set of rules that were meant to be followed in spirit and the government could not be held to court if the actual letter was not followed. However, the enforcement of this directive principle became a matter of debate since this principle held obvious emotive and practical value, and was legally the only directive principle within the Indian constitution to have a time limit.

Following initiatives by the Supreme Court of India during the 1990s the 93rd amendment bill suggested three separate amendments to the Indian constitution: The constitution of India was amended to include a new article, 21A, which read: The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years in a such manner as the State may, by law, determine. Article 45 was proposed to be substituted by the article which read: Provision for early childhood care and education to children below the age of six years: The State shall endeavour to provide early childhood care and education for all children until they complete the age of sixteen years. Another article, 51A, was to additionally have the clause: ...a parent or guardian provide opportunities for education to his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six to fourteen years.

The bill was passed unanimously in the Lok Sabha , the lower house of the Indian parliament , on 28 November 2001. It was later passed by the upper house—the Rajya Sabha —on 14 May 2002.

After being signed by the President of India the Indian constitution was amended formally for the eighty sixth time and the bill came into effect.

Since then those between the age of 6–14 have a fundamental right to education . Article 46 of the Constitution of India holds that: The State shall promote, with special care, the education and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and in particular of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes , and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of social exploitation'. Other provisions for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes can be found in Articles 330, 332, 335, 338–342. Both the 5th and the 6th Schedules of the Constitution also make special provisions for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Central government expenditure on education As a part of the tenth Five-year Plan (2002–2007), the central government of India outlined an expenditure of 65.6% of its total education budget of ₹ 438 billion (US$4.6 billion) i.e. ₹ 288 billion (US$3.0 billion) on elementary education; 9.9% i.e. ₹ 43.25 billion (US$450 million) on secondary education; 2.9% i.e. ₹ 12.5 billion (US$130 million) on adult education; 9.5% i.e. ₹ 41.77 billion (US$440 million) on higher education; 10.7% i.e. ₹ 47 billion (US$490 million) on technical education; and the remaining 1.4% i.e. ₹ 6.24 billion (US$65 million) on miscellaneous education schemes.

During the Financial Year 2011–12, the Central Government of India has allocated ₹ 38,957 crore for the Department of School Education and Literacy which is the main department dealing with primary education in India. Within this allocation, a major share of ₹ 21,000 crore, is for the flagship programme 'Sarva Siksha Abhiyan'. However, budgetary allocation of ₹ 210,000 million is considered very low in view of the officially appointed Anil Bordia Committee recommendation of ₹ 356.59 billion for the year 2011–12. This higher allocation was required to implement the recent legislation, the 'Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009'.

In recent times, several major announcements have been made for developing the poor state of affairs in the education sector in India, the most notable ones being those of the National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) of the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) government. These announcements were: (a) To progressively increase expenditure on education to around 6% of GDP. (b) To support this increase in expenditure on education, and to increase the quality of education, there would be an imposition of an education cess over all central government taxes. (c) To ensure that no one is denied of education due to economic backwardness and poverty. (d) To make right to education a fundamental right for all children in the age group 6–14 years. (e) To universalise education through its flagship programmes such as Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan and Midday Meal Scheme . However, even after five years of the implementation of NCMP, not much progress has been seen on this front.

Although the country has targeted devoting a 6% share of its GDP towards the educational sector, India's performance has definitely fallen short of expectations. Expenditure on education has steadily risen from 0.64% of GDP in 1951–52 to 2.31% in 1970–71 and thereafter reached the peak of 4.26% in 2000–01. However, it declined to 3.49% in 2004–05. There is a definite need to step up again.

As a proportion of total government expenditure, it has declined from around 11.1% in 2000–2001 to around 9.98% during the UPA's rule, even though ideally it should be around 20% of the total budget. A policy brief issued by titled "" provides a significant revelation of this fact. Due to a declining priority of education in the public policy paradigm in India, there has been an exponential growth in the private expenditure on education also. . National Education Policy 2020 The central government of India introduced the National Education Policy 2020 (NEP 2020) which is expected to bring profound changes to education in India.

The policy, approved by the Cabinet of India on 27 July 2020, outlines the vision of India's new education system.

The new policy replaces the 1986 National Policy on Education .

The policy is a comprehensive framework for elementary education to higher education as well as vocational training in both rural and urban India. It aims to transform India's education system by 2021.

The National Education Policy 2020 has 'emphasised' on the use of mother tongue or local language as the medium of instruction till Class 5 while, recommending its continuance till Class 8 and beyond. It also states that no language will be imposed on the students.

The language policy in NEP is a broad guideline and advisory in nature; and it is up to the states, institutions, and schools to decide on the implementation. Education in India is a Concurrent List subject. NEP 2020 outlines the vision of India's School education system.

The new policy replaces the previous National Policy on Education, 1986 .

The policy is a comprehensive framework for elementary education to higher education as well as vocational training in both rural and urban India.

The policy aims to transform India's education system by 2021.

As per NEP2020, the " 10 + 2 " structure is replaced with " 5+3+3+4 " model. 5+3+3+4 refers to 5 foundational years, whether in an anganwadi , pre-school or balvatika . This is followed by 3 years of preparatory learning from classes 3 to 5. This is followed by a middle stage that is of 3 years in length and finally a 4-year secondary stage till class 12 or 18 years of age. This model will be implemented as follows: Instead of exams being held every academic year, school students attend three exams, in classes 2, 5 and 8. Board exams are held for classes 10 and 12. Standards for Board exams is established by an assessment body, PARAKH (Performance Assessment, Review and Analysis of Knowledge for Holistic Development). To make them easier, these exams would be conducted twice a year, with students being offered up to two attempts.

The exam itself would have two parts, namely the objective and the descriptive. NEP's higher education policy proposes a 4-year multi-disciplinary bachelor's degree in an undergraduate programme with multiple exit options. These will include professional and vocational areas and will be implemented A certificate after completing 1 year of study (vocational) A diploma after completing 2 years of study (vocational) A Bachelor's degree after completion of a 3-year programme (professional) A 4-year multidisciplinary bachelor's degree (the preferred option) (professional) Category Grade Ages Comments Compulsory education (India) Foundational Stage Preschool (Urban) / Anganwadi (Rural) Pre-kindergarten 3–4 This will cover children of ages 3–8 years.

The focus of studies will be in activity-based learning. Kindergarten 4–6 Primary School 1st grade 6–7 2nd grade 7–8 Preparatory Stage 3rd grade 8–9 It will gradually introduce subjects like speaking, reading, writing, physical education, languages, art, science and mathematics. 4th grade 9–10 5th grade 10–11 Middle Stage Middle School 6th grade 11–12 It will introduce students to the more abstract concepts in subjects of mathematics, sciences, social sciences, arts and humanities. 7th grade 12–13 8th grade 13–14 Secondary Stage Junior High school 9th grade 14–15 These 4 years of study are intended to inculcate multidisciplinary study, coupled with depth and critical thinking. Multiple options of subjects will be provided. 10th grade 15–16 Senior High school 11th grade 16–17 12th grade 17–18 Higher education (India) College ( University ) Undergraduate school First year 18–19 1-year Vocational Certificate Second year 19–20 2-years Vocational Diploma Third year 20–21 3-years bachelor's degree (Optional and limited) Fourth year 21–22 4-years multidisciplinary bachelor's degree (Preferred) Fifth year 22–23 5-years MBBS , a bachelor's degree in medicine. Graduate school First year 21+ (with various degrees and curricular partitions thereof) Second year 22+ Third year 23+ Doctorate 24+ Research Postdoctoral Continuing education Vocational school 18 and up Adult education Conceptual understanding of inclusive education The new National Education Policy 2020 (NEP 2020) introduced by the Central Government is expected to bring profound changes to education in India.

The policy approved by the Union Cabinet of India on 29 July 2020, outlines the vision of India's new education system.

The new policy replaces the 1986 National Policy on Education .

The policy is a comprehensive framework for elementary education to higher education as well as vocational training in both rural and urban India.

The policy aims to transform India's education system by 2021. Shortly after the release of the policy, the government clarified that no one will be forced to study any particular language and that the medium of instruction will not be shifted from English to any regional language.

The language policy in NEP is a broad guideline and advisory in nature; and it is up to the states, institutions, and schools to decide on the implementation. Education in India is a Concurrent List subject.

Although it may not be appropriate to judge the adoption of a northern concept in the south from a northern perspective, hasty use of such globalised terminology without engaging with the thinking behind it may present no more than empty rhetoric, whatever the context. clearly perceives inclusive education as "...a concept that has been adopted from the international discourse, but has not been engaged with in the Indian scenario." She supports this view of lack of conceptual engagement through data collected in semi-structured interviews for her PhD research, where she found that: Many interviewees concurred with the opinions reflected in government documents that inclusion is about children with special needs, as reflected by a disabling condition. A handful of others argue that inclusive education should not be limited to children with disabilities, as it holds relevance for all marginalised groups. Though they were quick to accept that this thinking has not yet prevailed. Indian understandings of disability and educational needs are demonstrated through the interchangeable use of several English terms which hold different meanings in the north. For example, children with special needs or special educational needs tend to be perceived as children with disabilities in India, as demonstrated by Mukhopadhyay and Mani's (2002) chapter on 'Education of Children with Special Needs' in a NIEPA government-funded research report, which solely pertains to children with disabilities.

In contrast, the intention of Mary Warnock's term 'special educational needs', coined in the UK in 1978, was to imply that any child, with an impairment or not, may have an individual educational need at some point in their school career (e.g. dyslexia, or language of instruction as a second language) which the teacher should adapt to. This further implies that a child with a disability may not have a special educational need while their able-bodied peers could (Giffard-Lindsay, 2006).

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 11 April 2021 . Retrieved 9 April 2021 . ^ a b "World Development Indicators: Participation in education" . World Bank. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018 . Retrieved 21 August 2014 . ^ "Education in India" . World Bank . Archived from the original on 15 June 2021 . Retrieved 9 April 2021 . ^ a b c "Educational Statistics At a Glance – Government of India" (PDF) . education.gov.in . Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 February 2021 . Retrieved 17 March 2021 . ^ "Shaping up of Education in India Post: Independence" . TheDailyGuardian . 6 February 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s380537a945c7aaa788ccfcdf1b99b5d8f/uploads/2024/07/20240716890312078.pdf The Constitution of India ^ https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/19014/1/the_right_of_children_to_free_and_compulsory_education_act_2009.pdf ^ Kingdon, Geeta Gandhi (2 October 2020). "The Private Schooling Phenomenon in India: A Review" .

The Journal of Development Studies . 56 (10): 1795– 1817. doi : 10.1080/00220388.2020.1715943 . hdl : 10419/161235 . ISSN 0022-0388 . S2CID 158006322 . Archived from the original on 6 April 2023 . Retrieved 6 April 2023 . ^ "Access to Quality Education and Governance – School Education" . ^ "Education 4.0 I Insight Report - World Economic Forum" (PDF) . ^ Chopra, Ritika (5 June 2017). "When 90% comes too easy in CBSE exams" .

The Indian Express . Retrieved 11 October 2024 . ^ Joy, Santosh K. (18 January 2010). "44 institutions to lose deemed university status" . mint . Retrieved 11 October 2024 . ^ Mohan, Rohini (1 March 2021). "India's fake degree scandal reflects poor regulation of higher education" .

The Straits Times . Retrieved 11 October 2024 . ^ Pradhan, Bibhudatta; Beniwal, Vrishti (17 April 2023). "Worthless Degrees Are Creating an Unemployable Generation in India" . Bloomberg.com . Retrieved 11 October 2024 . ^ Batra, Poonam. "Voice and Agency of Teachers: Missing Link in National Curriculum Framework 2005." Economic and Political Weekly , Vol. 40, No. 40 (2005), pp. 4347–4356. JSTOR, https://www.jstor.org/stable/4417494 ^ Kumar, Krishna. Political Agenda of Education: A Study of Colonialist and Nationalist Ideas . New Delhi: SAGE Publications, 1991. https://in.sagepub.com/en-in/sas/political-agenda-of-education/book226394 ^ Annamalai, E. "Nation-building in a Globalised World: Language Choice and Education in India." In: Clyne, Michael (ed.) Globalisation and Languages: Building on Our Rich Heritage . Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2005. ^ Mishra, Archana (2022). "Challenges of English language teaching in rural schools of Chhattisgarh" . International Journal of Literacy and Education . 2 (1): 84– 86. doi : 10.22271/27891607.2022.v2.i1a.367 . ^ LaDousa, Chaise. Hindi Is Our Ground, English Is Our Sky: Education, Language, and Social Class in Contemporary India . Berghahn Books, 2014. ^ Ramakrishnan, T. (17 October 2022). "Explained | Hindi imposition and its discontents" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 13 May 2026 . ^ a b Jain, Charu and Narayan Prasad. Quality of Secondary Education in India: Concepts, Indicators, and Measurement . Singapore: Springer Nature, 2018. ^ Little, Angela W.; Lewin, Keith M. (11 July 2011). "The policies, politics and progress of access to basic education" . Journal of Education Policy . 26 (4): 477– 482. doi : 10.1080/02680939.2011.555004 . ISSN 0268-0939 . S2CID 145170025 . ^ "Unified District Information System for Education (UDISE+)" . Ministry of Education, Government of India . Retrieved 14 December 2025 . ^ NSO 2018 , pp. 43. ^ Pathania, Rajni (January 2020). "Literacy in India: Progress and Inequality 17.1 (2020)" (PDF) . Bangladesh e-Journal of Sociology . 17 (1): 57– 64. eISSN 1819-8465 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 July 2020 . Retrieved 30 November 2020 . ^ "India Achieve 27% decline in poverty - Press Trust of India" . Sily . Archived from the original on 21 October 2014. ^ "Poverty in India declines by 27 %: UN" .

The Times of India . 11 September 2008. Archived from the original on 21 August 2022 . Retrieved 21 August 2022 . ^ "All India Survey on Higher Education 2018–19" . Department of Higher Education (India) . Archived from the original on 11 January 2021 . Retrieved 17 January 2021 . ^ "Global Education" . University Analytics. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015 . Retrieved 10 December 2015 . ^ a b c Kingdon, Geeta Gandhi (2 October 2020). "The Private Schooling Phenomenon in India: A Review" .

The Journal of Development Studies . 56 (10): 1795– 1817. doi : 10.1080/00220388.2020.1715943 . hdl : 10419/161235 . ISSN 0022-0388 . S2CID 158006322 . ^ Azam, Mehtabul; Chin, Aimee; Prakash, Nishith (January 2013). "The Returns to English-Language Skills in India" . Economic Development and Cultural Change . 61 (2): 335– 367. doi : 10.1086/668277 . hdl : 11244/321264 . ISSN 0013-0079 . S2CID 8499836 . Archived from the original on 12 May 2023 . Retrieved 13 May 2023 . ^ Desai, Sonalde; Dubey, Amaresh; Vanneman, Reeve; Banerji, Rukmini, "Private Schooling in India: An Educational Landscape" in India Policy Forum 5, ed. Suman Bery, Barry Bosworth, Arvind Panagariya (New Delhi: Sage Publications, 2008). ^ Muralidharan, K., & Kremer, M. (2008). Public and private schools in rural India.

In R. Chakrabarti & P. Petersen (Eds.), School choice international: Exploring public-private partnerships (pp. 91–110). Boston, MA: MIT Press. ^ Jain, Charu; Prasad, Narayan (2018). Quality of Secondary Education in India . doi : 10.1007/978-981-10-4929-3 . ISBN 978-981-10-4928-6 . Archived from the original on 12 May 2023 . Retrieved 13 May 2023 . ^ a b Joshua, Anita (16 January 2014). "Over a quarter of enrollments in rural India are in private schools" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 5 July 2014 . Retrieved 21 August 2014 . ^ "Indian education: Sector outlook" (PDF) . Everonn . CLSA Research. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 23 January 2014 . ^ ASER-2018 RURAL, Annual Status of Education Report (Rural) (PDF) . India: ASER Centre. 2019. p. 47. ISBN 9789385203015 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 January 2020 . Retrieved 27 May 2019 . ^ Dhawan, Himanshi (22 January 2013). "Enrolment in schools rises 14% to 23 crore" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 15 August 2022 . Retrieved 15 August 2022 . ^ Sharath Jeevan & James Townsend, Teachers: A Solution to Education Reform in India Archived 19 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine Stanford Social Innovation Review (17 July 2013) ^ B.P. Khandelwal. "Examinations and test systems at school level in India" (PDF) . UNESCO . pp. 100– 114. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 11 July 2014 . ^ "India – HRMI Rights Tracker" . rightstracker.org . Archived from the original on 29 March 2023 . Retrieved 24 February 2022 . ^ Ramanuj Mukherjee. "Indian Education System: What needs to change?" . Unlawyered . Archived from the original on 29 August 2018 . Retrieved 10 September 2018 . ^ Gandhi, Geeta. "The private schooling phenomenon in India: A review" (PDF) . ^ "HRD to increase nearly 25 pc seats in varsities to implement 10 pc quota for poor in gen category" .

The Economic Times . 15 January 2019. Archived from the original on 16 April 2019 . Retrieved 9 April 2021 . ^ Omar Rashid (5 March 2015). "Maharashtra scraps Muslim quota" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 15 January 2016 . Retrieved 14 June 2015 . ^ "Why supreme court is right in denying unethical pleasure to Maharashtra govt" . Governance Now . 18 December 2014. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 3 September 2015 . ^ Jog, Sanjay (26 June 2014). "Jobs, education quota for Marathas, Muslims cleared" . Business Standard . Archived from the original on 27 June 2014 . Retrieved 26 June 2014 . ^ Gadgil, Makarand (25 June 2014). "Maharashtra govt clears reservation for Marathas, Muslims" . Livemint . Archived from the original on 29 June 2014 . Retrieved 26 June 2014 . ^ Chhabra, B. Ch. (1970). Sugh Terracotta with Brahmi Barakhadi: appears in the Bulletin National Museum No. 2 . New Delhi: National Museum. It is a unique specimen of Sunga terracotta art. A tiny nude boy is shown squatting on the floor deeply engaged in learning barakhadi or alphabets of early Brahmi script on the wooden writing board or takhti which is held in his lap. He is bedecked with various jingling ornaments.

The floor is decorated with floral motifs, consisting traditional symbols of Srivatsa and padma, alternating, both related to Vishnu. ^ Prabhu, Joseph (2006), "Educational Institutions and Philosophies, Traditional and Modern", Encyclopedia of India (vol. 2) edited by Stanley Wolpert, pp. 23–28, Thomson Gale, ISBN 0-684-31351-0 ^ Joshi, Ankur; Gupta, Rajen K. (2017). "Elementary education in Bharat (that is India): insights from a postcolonial ethnographic study of a Gurukul" . International Journal of Indian Culture and Business Management . 15 (1): 100. doi : 10.1504/ijicbm.2017.10006295 . ISSN 1753-0806 . ^ Garten, Jeffrey E. (9 December 2006). "Really Old School" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 5 November 2011 . Retrieved 21 February 2017 . ^ Altekar, Anant Sadashiv (1965). Education in Ancient India , Sixth, Varanasi: Nand Kishore & Bros. ^ "Chanakya's Education" (PDF) . ^ "Socio-Political and Administrative History of Ancient India" (PDF) . ^ a b c d Sen (1988), 22 ^ a b Kumar (2003), 678 ^ "curriculum" . timesofindia.indiatimes . 23 July 2025 . Retrieved 14 October 2025 . ^ Rao, Parimala V. (2016). "Modern education and the revolt of 1857 in India" . Paedagogica Historica . 52 ( 1– 2): 25– 42. doi : 10.1080/00309230.2015.1133668 . ISSN 0030-9230 . S2CID 146864929 . Archived from the original on 19 August 2022 . Retrieved 19 August 2022 . ( via academia ) ^ Blackwell, 92 ^ Kakkar, Ankur (19 February 2019). "Remembering Dharampal's Seminal Contribution" . IndiaFacts . Retrieved 27 December 2020 . ^ a b c Jebaraj, Priscilla (2 August 2020). "The Hindu Explains | What has the National Education Policy 2020 proposed?" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 2 August 2020 . Retrieved 2 August 2020 . ^ "Dharampal's 'The Beautiful Tree: Indigenous Indian Education in the Eighteenth Century" . 22 December 2019. ^ Basu, Aparna (February 1985). "Comparative Education Review Volume 29, Number 1 Feb. 1985" . Comparative Education Review . 29 (1): 137– 140. doi : 10.1086/446501 . ^ The Beautiful Tree: Indigenous Indian Education in the Eighteenth Century . Keerthi Publishing House. 1995. ^ a b The Beautiful Tree: Indigenous Indian Education in the Eighteenth Century . Keerthi Publishing House. 1995. pp. 6– 26. ^ The Beautiful Tree: Indigenous Indian Education in the Eighteenth Century . Keerthi Publishing House. 1995. p. 73. ^ a b Jha, Hetukar (June 2011). "Decay of Village Community and the Decline of Vernacular Education in Bihar and Bengal in the Colonial Era: A Sociological Review" . Indian Historical Review : 119– 137. doi : 10.1177/037698361103800106 . S2CID 144192665 . ^ Masani, Zareer (2 February 2013). Macaulauy: Britains' liberal imperialist . London: The Bodley Head. ISBN 978-1847922717 . ^ "Macaulay's Minute on Indian Education" . University of California, Santa Barbara . ^ Bayly, Susan. Saints, Goddesses and Kings: Muslims and Christians in South Indian Society, 1700–1900. Cambridge University Press, 1989. ^ Laird, M. M. Missionaries and Education in India, 1790–1914. Routledge, 1972. ^ "NCERT" (PDF) . National Council of Educational Research and Training . Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 February 2009 . Retrieved 12 July 2009 . {{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "Swachh Bharat Swachh Vidyalaya | Ministry of Education, GoI" . dsel.education.gov.in . Retrieved 25 May 2026 . ^ "State education boards to be regulated by national body: Draft NEP" .

The Times of India . 30 October 2019. Archived from the original on 27 February 2021 . Retrieved 21 November 2019 . ^ Mattoo, Amitabh (16 November 2019). "Treating education as a public good" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 20 November 2019 . Retrieved 21 November 2019 . ^ "New Education Policy 2020 HIGHLIGHTS: HRD Ministry New National Education Policy Latest News, MHRD NEP Today News Update" . 29 July 2020. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020 . Retrieved 29 July 2020 . ^ "New Education Policy" . Ministry of Education, India . ^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 April 2023 . Retrieved 22 May 2023 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Access to elementary education in India: country analytical review" . ^ "National Education Policy: New 5+3+3+4 structure and 10+2 system explained" . 31 July 2020. Archived from the original on 22 May 2023 . Retrieved 22 May 2023 . ^ "Anganwadi Services Scheme" . Ministry of Women and Child Development . Archived from the original on 2 May 2020 . Retrieved 30 March 2020 . ^ Borwankar, Vinamrata (22 January 2015). "New minimum age rule for entry-level admission stumps parents, schools in Mumbai" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 19 August 2022 . Retrieved 19 August 2022 . ^ a b c d Blackwell, 93–94 ^ "District Information System for Education" . Archived from the original on 31 December 2008 . Retrieved 8 February 2016 . ^ "Elementary Education in India. Flash Statistics. 2009–10" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 January 2022 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 . ^ Ministry of Human Resource Development (March 2012). "Report to the People on Education 2010–11" (PDF) . New Delhi. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 April 2012 . Retrieved 6 December 2016 . ^ Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) (27 August 2009). "The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 September 2009 . Retrieved 8 February 2016 . ^ Annual Status of Education. Annual Status of Education Report (Rural) . New Delhi: ASER Centre, 2019. ^ Mani, Anandi and Sharun Mukand. "Democracy, visibility and public good provision." Journal of Development Economics (2007): 506–529. ^ Banerjee, Abhijit and Rohini Somanathan . "The political economy of public goods: Some evidence from India." Journal of Development Economics (2007): 287–314. ^ Kapur, Devesh and Pratap Bhanu Mehta. "Mortgaging the Future? Indian Higher Education ." Brookings-NCAER India Policy Forum 2007 . New Delhi: Sage Publications, 2008. 101–158. ^ a b c d e India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition) , 215 ^ "Kerala becomes 1st Indian state to achieve 100% primary education" . International Business Times . 14 January 2016. Archived from the original on 21 November 2021 . Retrieved 14 January 2016 . ^ Kremer, Michael; Chaudhury, Nazmul; Rogers, F. Halsey; Muralidharan, Karthik; Hammer, Jeffrey (1 May 2005). "Teacher Absence in India: A Snapshot" . Journal of the European Economic Association . 3 ( 2– 3): 658– 667. doi : 10.1162/jeea.2005.3.2-3.658 . ISSN 1542-4766 . ^ Chaudhury, Nazmul, Jeffrey Hammer, Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan, and F. Halsey Rogers. 2006. "Missing in Action: Teacher and Health Worker Absence in Developing Countries." Journal of Economic Perspectives , 20 (1): 91–116. ^ Growth of Technical Institutes in the Country Archived 14 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine AICTE, Govt of India ^ "Education System in India: Pros and Cons" . ^ Singh, Y.K.; Nath, R. History of Indian education system . APH Publishing. pp. 172– 175. ISBN 978-81-7648-932-4 . Retrieved 11 January 2013 . ^ "India Country Summary of Higher Education" (PDF) . World Bank. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 July 2018 . Retrieved 10 January 2009 . ^ a b India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition) , 237 ^ " Higher Education , National Informatics Centre, Government of India" . Education.nic.in. Archived from the original on 16 December 2009 . Retrieved 1 September 2010 . ^ "No of Universities in India" . Archived from the original on 4 March 2014 . Retrieved 25 February 2014 . ^ "No of Colleges in India – India Education Statistics" . Archived from the original on 4 March 2014 . Retrieved 25 February 2014 . ^ Blackwell, 95–96 ^ a b Blackwell, 96 ^ "Govt launches Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan for bouldering Higher Education" . Biharprabha News . 6 October 2013. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021 . Retrieved 18 March 2021 . ^ Ray, Tirna (17 September 2010). "India doesn't figure in world top-100 universities" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 26 June 2021 . Retrieved 18 March 2021 . ^ "World University Rankings 2006" . Times Higher Education . 6 October 2006. Archived from the original on 31 March 2009 . Retrieved 1 September 2010 . ^ "Asia's Best Science and Technology Schools" . Cgi.cnn.com. 22 June 2000. Archived from the original on 25 March 2012 . Retrieved 1 September 2010 . ^ "MBA global Top 100 rankings – FT" . ft.com. Archived from the original on 29 August 2011 . Retrieved 4 March 2009 . ^ Overdorf, Jason (30 October 2006). "Medical Meccas: An Oasis for India's Poorest" . Newsweek . Archived from the original on 7 August 2009 . Retrieved 3 November 2008 . ^ Matt Lynley (9 July 2012). "The World's Best Engineering Schools" . Business Insider . Archived from the original on 19 November 2018 . Retrieved 18 March 2014 . ^ "QS University Rankings: BRICS 2013" . Top Universities . 12 December 2013. Archived from the original on 17 December 2013 . Retrieved 18 March 2014 . ^ "Top Universities in India" . Top Universities . 16 December 2013. Archived from the original on 4 July 2015 . Retrieved 18 March 2014 . ^ Katherine (23 April 2015). "First U.S.-India joint EMBA program begins" . Global . Archived from the original on 25 January 2020 . Retrieved 25 January 2020 . ^ "Infrastructure: S&T Education", Science and Technology in India , 30 ^ a b c "Infrastructure: S&T Education", Science and Technology in India , 31 ^ "Infrastructure: S&T Education", Science and Technology in India , 32 ^ Nandakumar, Indu (24 November 2011). "Number of tech graduates swells; salaries at IT firms stay stagnant" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 8 May 2013 . Retrieved 19 March 2012 . ^ "Knowledge Professionals" . Indian IT-BPO: Trends & Insights . NASSCOM . Archived from the original on 19 March 2012 . Retrieved 19 March 2012 . ^ Anand, Geeta (5 April 2011). "India Graduates Millions, but Too Few Are Fit to Hire" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 12 December 2014 . Retrieved 19 March 2012 . ^ Information Technology AICTE (2012) Archived 7 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine ^ "India: employment in IT-BPM industry 2023" . Statista . Retrieved 17 September 2024 . ^ Bharucha, Jamshed (2013). "Education in South Asia: Time bomb or silver bullet?" .

In Najam, A.; Yusuf, M. (eds.). South Asia 2060: Envisioning Regional Futures . New York: Anthem Press. ISBN 9780857280749 . ^ Bharucha, Jamshed (25 January 2008). "America can teach Asia a lot about science, technology, and math" . Chronicle of Higher Education, 54(20) . Archived from the original on 7 February 2021 . Retrieved 15 December 2015 . ^ a b c Chopra, Ritika (2 August 2020). "Explained: Reading the new National Education Policy 2020" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 2 August 2020 . ^ a b c "National Policy on Education (with modifications undertaken in 1992)" (PDF) . National Council of Educational Research and Training. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 May 2017 . Retrieved 10 December 2012 . ^ Vyas, Neena (30 June 2012). "10+2+3: A Game of Numbers?" . India Today . Archived from the original on 28 November 2012 . Retrieved 10 December 2012 . ^ Bamzai, Kaveree (24 December 2009). "1977-10+2+3 system of education: The new class structure" . India Today . Archived from the original on 26 December 2012 . Retrieved 10 December 2012 . ^ Silva, Tiara da Costa (2019). Estudo químico e avaliação do potencial biológico das folhas de Cassia bakeriana Craib (Thesis). EDUFU – Editora da Universidade Federal de Uberlandia. doi : 10.14393/ufu.di . ^ India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition) , 231 ^ "National Education Policy 2020" (PDF) . ^ Blackwell, 94–95 ^ Microsoft Word – Framework_Final_RMSA.doc . (PDF). Retrieved on 21 March 2011. Archived 7 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Das, Premendra; Deb, Prasenjit (15 May 2016). "Differences in Perception among Teachers about Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan in West Bengal". International Research Journal of Management, IT & Social Sciences . 3 (3). doi : 10.21744/irjmis.v3i3.97 (inactive 12 July 2025). ISSN 2395-7492 . S2CID 168231354 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ National Skills Qualification Framework of NSDA Archived 9 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine , NSDA , accessed 8 July 2021. ^ NSQF notification Archived 9 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine , The Gazette of India , accessed 8 July 2021. ^ a b India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition) , 233 ^ India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition) , 230–234 ^ Technical regulator asks universities, colleges to recognise & admit students of Vedic board , ThePrint , 22 Sept 2022. ^ a b c Chettiparambil-Rajan, Angelique (July 2007). "India: A Desk Review of the Mid-Day Meals Programme" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 October 2013 . Retrieved 28 July 2013 . ^ "Frequently Asked Questions on Mid Day Meal Scheme" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 October 2013 . Retrieved 24 June 2014 . ^ "About the Mid Day Meal Scheme" . Mdm.nic.in. Archived from the original on 7 August 2013 . Retrieved 28 July 2013 . ^ Oak, SN; Satish Kumar, KV (2007). "Making of a pediatric urologist" . Indian Journal of Urology . 23 (4): 384– 386. doi : 10.4103/0970-1591.36711 . ISSN 0970-1591 . PMC 2721570 . PMID 19718294 . ^ Upadhyay, Aishwarya (5 August 2020). Bhaskar, Sonia (ed.). "How Are The Children In India Receiving Their Mid-Day Meals Amid The COVID-19 Pandemic? | Nutrition" . NDTV . Archived from the original on 2 March 2021 . Retrieved 13 March 2021 . ^ "National University of Educational Planning and Administration" . Nuepa.org. Archived from the original on 3 July 2011 . Retrieved 16 August 2012 . ^ "NCTE: National Council For Teacher Education" . Ncte-india.org. Archived from the original on 8 May 2015 . Retrieved 16 August 2012 . ^ Saha, Devanik (17 April 2017). "In 5 years, private schools gain 17 million students, government schools lose 13 million" . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 22 August 2022 . Retrieved 22 August 2022 . ^ a b Desai, Sonalde, Amaresh Dubey, Reeve Vanneman and Rukmini Banerji. 2009. "Private Schooling in India: A New Landscape," India Policy Forum Vol. 5. Pp. 1–58, Bery, Suman, Barry Bosworth and Arvind Panagariya (Editors). New Delhi: Sage ^ Alexander, Deepa (15 July 2014). "St. George's School Chennai, The Hindu retrieved 2014" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 18 January 2020 . Retrieved 16 October 2019 . ^ Sharma, Kritika (21 September 2019). "No language mandatory, states can choose any 3 languages, HRD ministry says" . ThePrint . Archived from the original on 9 August 2020 . Retrieved 6 July 2020 . ^ Glavin, Chris (6 February 2017). "Education System in India | K12 Academics" . www.k12academics.com . Archived from the original on 23 March 2022 . Retrieved 17 April 2022 . ^ TNN (7 December 2014). "4 Montessori schools make it to top 10 list" . Archived from the original on 12 September 2015 . Retrieved 12 August 2015 . ^ a b "A special report on India: Creaking, groaning: Infrastructure is India's biggest handicap" .

The Economist . 11 December 2008. Archived from the original on 2 February 2009 . Retrieved 2 January 2009 . ^ Kingdon, Geeta Gandhi (March 2007). "The progress of school education in India" (PDF) . Global Poverty Research Group . Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 April 2019. ^ a b Varma, Amit (15 January 2007). "Why India Needs School Vouchers" . Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 14 March 2016 . Retrieved 3 August 2017 . ^ "Beyond the Right to Education lies a school of hard knocks" .

The Hindu . 16 April 2012. ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 27 April 2024 . ^ Gruijters, Rob J.; Alcott, Benjamin; Rose, Pauline (1 November 2021). "Do Private Schools Improve Learning Outcomes? Evidence from Within-Household Comparisons in East Africa and South Asia" . Comparative Education Review . 65 (4): 640– 666. doi : 10.1086/716448 . ISSN 0010-4086 . S2CID 244299789 . Archived from the original on 20 March 2022 . Retrieved 20 March 2022 . ^ a b "Thank you for reading Global Envision" . Mercy Corps . 18 December 2018. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019 . Retrieved 2 August 2019 . ^ "Ramakrishna Mission Ashrama, Baranagar, Kolkata" . Archived from the original on 15 December 2018 . Retrieved 13 June 2018 . ^ "RKMVM, Porbandar &*124; Branches" . www.rkmvm.com . Archived from the original on 17 April 2019 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 . ^ "Other Branch Centres &*124; Ramakrishna math" . Archived from the original on 27 April 2019 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 . ^ "Ramakrishna Order Centers in the West" . www.ramakrishna.org . Archived from the original on 21 May 2019 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 . ^ "Branch Centres – Belur Math – Ramakrishna Math and Ramakrishna Mission" . Archived from the original on 1 January 2018 . Retrieved 13 June 2018 . ^ "International School Consultancy Group > Home" . Archived from the original on 30 January 2016 . Retrieved 19 January 2015 . ^ a b "International School Consultancy Group > Information > ISC News" . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. ^ "The new local" .

The Economist . 17 December 2014. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 26 August 2017 . ^ "RTE: Homeschooling too is fine, says Sibal" .

The Times of India . 2010. Archived from the original on 15 August 2018 . Retrieved 16 April 2019 . ^ Blum, Nicole (1 March 2009). "Small NGO schools in India: implications for access and innovation" . Compare: A Journal of Comparative and International Education . 39 (2): 235– 248. doi : 10.1080/03057920902750491 . ISSN 0305-7925 . S2CID 11182064 . ^ "Inclusive Education for Children with Special Needs" . Samagra Shiksha . Archived from the original on 20 June 2022 . Retrieved 25 April 2022 . ^ Furuta, Hiroko; Thamburaj, Robinson (2014). "Promoting Inclusive Education in India: Roles played by NGOs under the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan scheme in the State of Tamil Nadu" . Journal of Special Education Research . 3 (1): 15– 22. doi : 10.6033/specialeducation.3.15 . ISSN 2187-5014 . Archived from the original on 21 August 2022 . Retrieved 21 August 2022 . ^ "Fig. 1 Non Governmental Organizations' Participation Under Sarva..." ResearchGate . Archived from the original on 8 May 2022 . Retrieved 8 May 2022 . ^ "India, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan: promising EFA practices in the Asia-Pacific region; case study" . unesdoc.unesco.org . Archived from the original on 25 April 2022 . Retrieved 25 April 2022 . ^ "NGO Darpan" . ngodarpan.gov.in . Archived from the original on 18 May 2022 . Retrieved 25 April 2022 . ^ "ROLE OF NGOs" . Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan Manipur . Archived from the original on 22 June 2017 . Retrieved 13 May 2022 . ^ a b c Jagannathan, Shanti. 2001.

The Role of Nongovernmental Organizations in Primary Education : A Study of Six NGOs in India. Policy Research Working Paper;No. 2530. World Bank, Washington, DC. © World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/19714 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO." ^ Aziz, Abdul; Mathew, Babu; Vora, Asha (October 2001). "M.VENKATARANGAIYA FOUNDATION AN IMPACT ASSESSMENT" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 May 2022 . Retrieved 13 May 2022 . ^ Ramavath, P & Ravindraprakash (2011) Community participation and school leadership : illustrations from namma shale initiative in rural Karnataka Archived 21 August 2022 at the Wayback Machine . Learning Curve (16). pp. 77–79. Azim Premji Foundation. ^ "RIVER – Institute for Educational Resources" . RISHI VALLEY EDUCATION CENTRE . Archived from the original on 25 November 2022 . Retrieved 2 May 2022 . ^ Mitra, Amit (2007). "India Non-formal education" . Archived from the original on 2 May 2022 . Retrieved 13 May 2022 . ^ "Education" . bgvs . Archived from the original on 10 May 2022 . Retrieved 2 May 2022 . ^ Rose, Pauline (1 March 2009). "NGO provision of basic education: alternative or complementary service delivery to support access to the excluded?" . Compare: A Journal of Comparative and International Education . 39 (2): 219– 233. doi : 10.1080/03057920902750475 . ISSN 0305-7925 . S2CID 18331184 . ^ "Vision & Mission: The National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS)" . Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 . ^ "India's first virtual school was launched by Centre, not Delhi govt, confirms NIOS" . Archived from the original on 1 September 2022 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 . ^ "Homeschooling & multiple entry-exit points for school students among reforms in UGC's new credit framework" . ThePrint . 12 April 2023. Archived from the original on 28 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 . ^ "SCOLE-Kerala brings out self-learning modules in Malayalam" .

The Hindu . 12 April 2022. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 . ^ Jha, Jyotsna (13 June 2017). "View of Understanding the Profile, Motivations and Current Status of Academic Graduates through Open and Distance Schooling in India" . Journal of Learning for Development . 4 (2). doi : 10.56059/jl4d.v4i2.202 . S2CID 59029026 . Archived from the original on 11 July 2020 . Retrieved 8 February 2020 . ^ "Bihar State open school" . Archived from the original on 5 May 2013 . Retrieved 16 April 2013 . ^ "Overview of Online Education in India" . Sannam S4 . 23 June 2020 . Retrieved 6 March 2021 . ^ "Online vs Offline Classes in India" . Indien.website News Wire . 23 November 2021. Archived from the original on 4 December 2021 . Retrieved 4 December 2021 . ^ "ONLINE LEARNING" . Distance Education Bureau . Retrieved 11 May 2024 . ^ "Challenges and strategies in evolution of online education" . India Today . 24 December 2023 . Retrieved 27 April 2024 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa Mandke, Kalyani; Chandekar, Prerna (21 February 2019), "Deaf Education in India" , Deaf Education Beyond the Western World , Oxford University Press, pp. 261– 284, doi : 10.1093/oso/9780190880514.003.0014 , ISBN 978-0-19-088051-4 , archived from the original on 22 October 2021 , retrieved 22 October 2021 ^ a b c d e f Gavai, Avinash (25 September 2018). "Deaf & Defiant: The Rise of India's Hearing-Impaired" . Ketto Blog . Archived from the original on 22 October 2021 . Retrieved 22 October 2021 . ^ a b c d "Education for the Deaf" . nadindia.org . Archived from the original on 22 October 2021 . Retrieved 22 October 2021 . ^ Petcosky-Kulkarni, Kate (14 January 2018). "A Mom Fights To Get An Education For Her Deaf Daughters" . NPR . Archived from the original on 22 October 2021 . Retrieved 22 October 2021 . ^ a b c Vaidya, Shruti; Hajee, Atiya; Hajee, Mohammed Aqil (20 August 2017). "I was the only deaf student in a classroom – here's how Indian schools are wasting our potential" . Scroll.in . Archived from the original on 22 October 2021 . Retrieved 22 October 2021 . ^ a b c d e f India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition) , 225 ^ "Country Profiles – India" . UNESCO. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015 . Retrieved 22 August 2014 . ^ "National Family Health Survey (NFHS-2)". International Institute for Population Sciences & ORC Macro. 2000. ^ Khushboo Balani (11 January 2017). "Rajasthan: India's seventh largest state, lowest in female literacy" . IndiaSpend.com . Business Standard . Retrieved 1 April 2017 . ^ "Census 2011, Chapter 6 (State of Literacy)" (PDF) . Government of India . Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 July 2015 . Retrieved 1 April 2017 . ^ Vishnoi, Anubhuti (21 December 2011). "Indian schools dwarfed in global ratings programme" . Indian Express. Archived from the original on 27 April 2015 . Retrieved 15 August 2014 . ^ Chhapia, Hemali (3 August 2012). "India backs out of global education test for 15-year-olds" . Times of India . Archived from the original on 27 February 2015 . Retrieved 14 August 2014 . ^ Chhapia, Hemali (1 June 2013). "India chickens out of international students assessment programme again" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 5 January 2017 . Retrieved 14 August 2014 . ^ Chopra, Ritika (22 February 2017). "PISA Tests: India to take part in global teen learning test in 2021" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 15 August 2022 . Retrieved 15 August 2022 . ^ Bajaj, Vikas; Yardley, Jim (30 December 2011). "Many of India's Poor Turn to Private Schools" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 1 April 2012 . Retrieved 15 August 2014 . ^ "World Bank: Pupil-teacher ratio, primary" . World Bank. Archived from the original on 19 July 2014 . Retrieved 15 August 2014 . ^ "Teachers Skipping Work" . World Bank. Archived from the original on 4 September 2014 . Retrieved 14 August 2014 . ^ Patrinos, Harry A. (1 October 2013). "The Hidden Cost of Corruption: Teacher Absenteeism and Loss in Schools" . World Bank Blogs . Archived from the original on 21 October 2014 . Retrieved 15 August 2014 . ^ a b 4–6 p.m. (30 October 2009). "Kremer etc. (2004), "Teacher Absence in India: A Snapshot", Journal of the European Economic Association " (PDF) . Globetrotter.berkeley.edu. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 March 2009 . Retrieved 1 September 2010 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "12. Report of the Higher Education in India Issues Related to Expansion, Inclusiveness, Quality and Finance, May 2008" . Ugc.ac.in. Archived from the original on 22 August 2010 . Retrieved 1 September 2010 . ^ Raman, A. Ragu (6 January 2018). "Tamil Nadu tops in country with 46.9 per cent gross enrollment ratio" . Deccan Chronicle . Archived from the original on 24 May 2019 . Retrieved 24 May 2019 . ^ "A special report on India: An elephant, not a tiger" .

The Economist . 11 December 2008. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018 . Retrieved 10 February 2009 . ^ "Govt Schools Move Up The Learning Curve" .

The Economic Times . 19 January 2017. Archived from the original on 5 April 2017 . Retrieved 5 April 2017 . ^ "Annual Status of Education Report 2016" (PDF) . Pratham . 18 January 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 January 2017 . Retrieved 5 April 2017 . ^ Kripalani, Manjeet; Engardio, Pete (31 May 2004). "India" . BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on 21 August 2009. ^ "Rote system of learning still rules the roost" .

The Indian Express. 21 October 2008. Archived from the original on 22 August 2016 . Retrieved 27 June 2016 . ^ Rajvanshi, Anil K (13 July 2013). "Indian Education: creating Zombies focussed on passing exam" . New Indian Express . Archived from the original on 15 March 2016 . Retrieved 27 June 2016 . ^ "Reality Check for Parents: Preschools in India – Reviews, Top, Compare, List, Good" . Preschool for Child Rights. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013 . Retrieved 23 January 2014 . ^ Vishal, Agnel. Memory, Logic and Creativity in Indian Education system . ^ Hussain, Sajjad; Ahmad, Nasir (28 April 2016). "The impact of the Indian movie, 3 Idiots (2009), on attitudes to education". Research in Drama Education: The Journal of Applied Theatre and Performance . 21 (2): 242– 246. doi : 10.1080/13569783.2016.1155439 . S2CID 156539947 . ^ Batra, Poonam (2015). "1" .

In Pinar, William E. (ed.). Curriculum Studies in India: Intellectual Histories, Present Circumstances . Springer. ISBN 978-1-137-47715-6 . Archived from the original on 24 April 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2022 . ^ "NEP is a threat equitable education, say educationists" .

The Hindu . 28 July 2023. ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ Rajendran, C. P. (28 October 2025). "Math is not a tool for cultural nationalism" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ a b c d Setty and Ross, 120 ^ Setty and Ross, 121 ^ a b c Setty and Ross, 122 ^ a b Setty and Ross, 125 ^ Verma, Suman; Saraswathi, T.S. (2002).

The World's Youth: Adolescence in Eight Regions of the Globe . Cambridge, UK: The Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge. p. 117. ISBN 0-521-00605-8 . ^ De, Anuradha; Drèze, Jean (3 June 1999). Public Report on Basic Education in India . UK: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195648706 . ^ "Human Development Report 1999" (PDF) . United Nations . Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 January 2023 . Retrieved 11 September 2014 . ^ "Human Development Report 2000" (PDF) . United Nations . Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 September 2014 . Retrieved 11 September 2014 . ^ London Missionary Society, ed. (1869). Fruits of Toil in the London Missionary Society . London: John Snow & Co. p. 12 . Retrieved 12 September 2016 . ^ Kalyani Menon-Sen, A. K. Shiva Kumar (2001). "Women in India: How Free? How Equal?" . United Nations. Archived from the original on 11 September 2006 . Retrieved 24 December 2006 . ^ Dube, L. 1988.

On the construction of gender: Hindu girls in patrilineal India.

In Socialization, education, and women: Explorations in gender identity, ed. K. Chanana, New Delhi: Orient Longman. ^ "In India, Can Schools Offer Path Out Of Poverty?" . NPR . 14 May 2010. Archived from the original on 6 September 2010 . Retrieved 23 June 2010 . ^ Patnaik, Prabhat (20 December 2019). "A case to make higher education free" . Frontline . Retrieved 20 April 2021 .

In India, educating daughters is generally accorded a lower priority than educating sons. Even among better-off parents with many children, the tendency is to concentrate resources on educating sons ^ Mukherjee, Sucharita Sinha (1 January 2013). "Women's Empowerment and Gender Bias in the Birth and Survival of Girls in Urban India". Feminist Economics . 19 (1): 1– 28. doi : 10.1080/13545701.2012.752312 . ISSN 1354-5701 . S2CID 155056803 . ^ a b Raman, 235 ^ Raman, 236 ^ a b Raman, 238 ^ "Women's role in education in India" . ^ Saurabh, Suman; Sarkar, Sonali; Pandey, Dhruv K. (2013). "Female Literacy Rate is a Better Predictor of Birth Rate and Infant Mortality Rate in India" . Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care . 2 (4): 349– 353. doi : 10.4103/2249-4863.123889 . ISSN 2249-4863 . PMC 4649870 . PMID 26664840 . ^ S. Chandrasekhar and A. Jayaraman, District Level Analysis of the Total Fertility Rate Using Indian Census Data (viewed on 9 March 2011), "A District Level Analysis of the Total Fertility Rate Using Indian Census Data" . Archived from the original on 20 July 2011 . Retrieved 10 March 2011 . ^ Vir Singh, Dr. Prakash. "Socio-geographical phenomena of women's literacy in India" (PDF) . ^ "Girls' education | UNICEF" . www.unicef.org . Retrieved 25 April 2024 . ^ Women Education in India, (viewed on 9 March 2011), http://www.slideshare.net/siddharth4mba/women-education-in-india Archived 24 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ Literacy Rate and Gender Gap in Sechduled Castes in India, (viewed on 9 March 2011), "Literacy Rate and Gender Gap in Sechduled Castes in India" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 July 2011 . Retrieved 10 March 2011 . ^ Balani, Khushboo (11 January 2017). "Rajasthan: India's seventh largest state, lowest in female literacy" . IndiaSpend.com . Business Standard . Retrieved 12 April 2017 . ^ "Census 2011, Chapter 6 (State of Literacy)" (PDF) . Government of India . Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 July 2015 . Retrieved 12 April 2017 . ^ "Abridged Life Tables – 2010–14" (PDF) . Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India. p. 5. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 January 2017 . Retrieved 12 April 2017 . ^ Saraswathi, T.S. & Verma, Suman. Adolescence in India: ''Street Urchins or Silicon Valley Millionaires?'' pg. 17 from Brown, B. Bradford, Larson, Reed W, & Saraswathi, T.S., The World's Youth: adolescence in eight regions of the globe. Cambridge University Press, 2002. ^ "India has 277 fake engineering colleges, Delhi highest with 66" .

The Indian Express . 31 July 2018. Archived from the original on 15 August 2022 . Retrieved 15 August 2022 . ^ "44 institutions to lose deemed university status" . Livemint. 18 January 2010. Archived from the original on 22 October 2012 . Retrieved 1 September 2010 . ^ "22 universities across India fake: UGC" . ExpressIndia. Archived from the original on 12 October 2012. ^ "Country Strategy for India (CAS) 2009–2012" . World Bank. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022 . Retrieved 14 August 2022 . ^ Venkataraman, Ramya (23 September 2015). "Recognising excellence in the teaching profession" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 5 January 2020 . Retrieved 2 August 2019 – via www.thehindu.com. ^ Haridas, Nalini (31 August 2015). "Framing success in teaching" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 5 January 2020 . Retrieved 2 August 2019 – via www.thehindu.com. ^ "Online coaching platforms see uptick" .

The Times of India . 23 February 2018. Archived from the original on 15 May 2019 . Retrieved 2 April 2019 . ^ a b Pathak, Kalpana; Saraswathy, M (1 December 2015). "Panel proposes to unleash watchdog on private coaching" . Business Standard India . Archived from the original on 28 August 2018 . Retrieved 27 August 2018 . ^ Kapur, Manavi (26 December 2015). "Maple leaf in mustard field" . Business Standard India . Archived from the original on 21 August 2018 . Retrieved 27 August 2018 . ^ M, Kaunain Sheriff (24 August 2014). "The reading room: These libraries provide UPSC aspirants space and comfort during their preparations" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 21 August 2018 . Retrieved 27 August 2018 . ^ Staff Reporter (6 September 2015). "Coaching classes for UPSC exams" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 5 January 2020 . Retrieved 27 August 2018 . ^ Pathak, Kalpana (27 October 2011). "IIT coaching centres play a board game" . Business Standard India . Archived from the original on 3 August 2019 . Retrieved 3 August 2019 . ^ Sujatha, R. (10 June 2018). "I am appalled by the focus on coaching classes" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 5 January 2020 . Retrieved 3 August 2019 . ^ "2023 Year Of Highest Student Suicides In Kota, Many Steps To Prevent Them" . NDTV . 31 December 2023 . Retrieved 31 December 2023 . ^ "India's pressure-cooker education system" . Frontline (The Hindu) . Retrieved 8 January 2025 . ^ "IIT-Guwahati alumnus develops program to prevent student suicides" . India Today . Retrieved 8 January 2025 . ^ "GUIDELINES FOR REGULATION OF COACHING CENTER" . Ministry Of Education India . 18 January 2024 . Retrieved 18 January 2024 . ^ A Study on Widening of Tax Base and Tackling Black Money (PDF) (Report). Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry . February 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 June 2022 . Retrieved 4 March 2022 . ^ Mohan, Rohini (1 March 2021). "India's fake degree scandal reflects poor regulation of higher education" .

The Straits Times . Archived from the original on 3 March 2021 . Retrieved 7 March 2021 . ^ Chopra, Ritika (6 June 2017). "When 90% comes too easy in CBSE exams" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 6 June 2017 . Retrieved 6 June 2017 . ^ Kar, Devi (11 July 2017). "Inflated marks: 100% and still galloping..." Deccan Chronicle . Archived from the original on 12 July 2017 . Retrieved 12 July 2017 . Board examination results have lost their credibility in India. ^ "Why Are Indian Parents So Obsessed with Engineering & Medicine?" . ^ "Imported from India" . CBS News . 19 June 2003. Archived from the original on 29 April 2021 . Retrieved 24 June 2016 . ^ "WITHDRAWN Successful yet Suffering: Understanding the mental health status of IIT aspirants WITHDRAWN" . ^ "SAT vs JEE: Comparing college entrance exams for Indian students" . ^ " 'Only 10% of India's 1.5 mn engineering graduates to secure jobs this year' " . ^ a b c d Elder, 227 ^ a b c India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition) , 226–227 ^ a b India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition) , 236–237 ^ a b c India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition) , 216 ^ a b c India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition) , 218 ^ a b c d India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition) , 239 ^ "Ministry Of Minority Affairs Merit cum Means Scholarship Performance Financial year 2017–18 (as on 31.12.2018)" (PDF) . Ministry of Minority Affairs, Government of India . Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 May 2019 . Retrieved 27 May 2019 . ^ Sripati and Thiruvengadam, 150 ^ a b Sripati and Thiruvengadam, 149–50 ^ Sripati and Thiruvengadam, 152–154 ^ a b c Sripati and Thiruvengadam, 154 ^ a b c Sripati and Thiruvengadam, 156 ^ Sripati and Thiruvengadam, 149 ^ India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition) , 223 ^ "Network for Social Accountability" . NSA. 28 December 2009. Archived from the original on 23 June 2010 . Retrieved 1 September 2010 . ^ "345 NSA Response to Education Sector Interventions in Union Budget-UPA Rule and the Education Sector by Siba Sankar Mohanty" . Nsa.org.in. 21 February 2009 . Retrieved 1 September 2010 . ^ "309: How the Working Class has Performed in the Turbulent Years of Liberalisation – Preliminary Analysis of the main findings of the Working Class Income & Expenditure Survey 1999–2000 page 1" . Nsa.org.in. Archived from the original on 8 December 2009 . Retrieved 1 September 2010 . ^ a b Nandini, ed. (29 July 2020). "New Education Policy 2020 Highlights: School and higher education to see major changes" . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 30 July 2020 . Retrieved 30 July 2020 . ^ "National Education Policy 2020: Cabinet approves new national education policy: Key points" .

The Times of India . 29 July 2020. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ Srinivasan, Chandrashekar, ed. (29 July 2020). "Teaching In Mother Tongue Till Class 5: 10 Points On New National Education Policy" . NDTV.com . Archived from the original on 30 July 2020 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ Srinivasan, Chandrashekar, ed. (29 July 2020). "National Education Policy, NEP 2020: Teaching in Mother Tongue Till Class 5: 10 Points On New Education Policy" . NDTV. Archived from the original on 30 July 2020 . Retrieved 29 July 2020 . ^ a b Kumar, Shuchita (31 July 2020). "New education policy: The shift from 10+2 to 5+3+3+4 system" . Times Now . Archived from the original on 11 August 2020 . Retrieved 11 October 2020 . ^ Khurana, Kanika (30 July 2020). "New National Education Policy 2020: Explained – the breakdown of 10+2 to 5+3+3+4 system of school education" . Times Now . Archived from the original on 31 July 2020 . Retrieved 30 July 2020 . ^ Kulkarni, Sagar (29 July 2020). "New policy offers 5–3–3–4 model of school education" . Deccan Herald . Archived from the original on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 9 August 2020 . ^ Deka, Mridusmita (ed.). "Free Entry- Exit Options Introduced For Students in NEP 2020" . NDTV.com . Archived from the original on 7 May 2021 . Retrieved 21 September 2020 . ^ "KV admissions: Supreme Court upholds 6 years minimum age criteria for Class 1" .

The Indian Express . 28 April 2022. Archived from the original on 27 April 2022 . Retrieved 27 April 2022 . ^ Vishnoi, Anubhuti (31 July 2020). "No switch in instruction medium from English to regional languages with NEP '20: HRD" .

The Beautiful Tree . Indigenous Indian education in the eighteenth century. Vol. 3. Other India Press – via Internet Archive. Elder, Joseph W. (2006). "Caste system" .

In Wolpert, Stanley (ed.). Encyclopedia of India . Vol. 1. Thomson Gale. pp. 223– 229. ISBN 0-684-31350-2 . Ellis, Catriona (2009). "Education for All: Reassessing the Historiography of Education in Colonial India" . History Compass . 7 (2): 363– 375. doi : 10.1111/j.1478-0542.2008.00564.x . India 2009: A Reference Annual (53rd edition) , New Delhi: Additional Director General (ADG), Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India, ISBN 978-81-230-1557-6 . Koul, Rekha, Geeta Verma, and Vanashri Nargund-Joshi. (2019) Science Education in India: Philosophical, Historical, and Contemporary Conversations (Springer Singapore) Kumar, Krishna ed. (2020) The Routledge Handbook of Education in India: Debates, Practices, and Policies (Routledge) NSO (2018). Household Social Consumption on Education in India (PDF) (Report) . Retrieved 30 November 2020 . Passow, A. Harry; et al. (1976).