The Fermi paradox is the apparent inconsistency between the lack of conclusive evidence of extraterrestrial civilizations and the apparently high likelihood of their existence.

In simple terms, the Fermi paradox asks why, given the vast number of stars and potentially habitable planets in our observable universe , there is no clear evidence of extraterrestrial civilizations .

The paradox is named after physicist Enrico Fermi who blurted out the question—remembered by Emil Konopinski as "But where is everybody?"—during lunchtime after the conversation had already moved on to other topics. This happened at Los Alamos in 1950 with colleagues Konopinski, Edward Teller , and Herbert York .

The paradox first appeared in print in a 1963 paper by Carl Sagan , and the paradox has since been fully described by scientists. Early formulations of the paradox have also been identified in writings by Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle (1686) and Jules Verne (1865), and by Soviet rocket scientist Konstantin Tsiolkovsky (1933). There have been many attempts to resolve the Fermi paradox, such as suggesting that intelligent extraterrestrial beings are extremely rare , that the lifetime of such civilizations is short, or that they exist but (for various reasons) humans see no evidence.

The result of his question was general laughter because of the strange fact that, in spite of Fermi's question coming out of the blue, everybody around the table seemed to understand at once that he was talking about extraterrestrial life." The Fermi question first appeared in print in a footnote of a 1963 paper by Carl Sagan . Two years later, Stephen Dole noted the dilemma at a symposium—"If there are so many advanced forms of life around, where is everybody?"—but did not attribute it to Fermi. A chapter of Intelligent Life in the Universe , co-authored by Sagan and Iosif Shklovsky , was headlined with the Fermi-attributed "Where are they?" The Fermi question also appeared in NASA 's 1970 Project Cyclops report, a 1973 book by Sagan, and a 1975 article in JBIS Interstellar Studies by David Viewing that first described it as a paradox.

Later that year, Michael Hart published a detailed examination of the paradox in the Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society . Hart, who concluded that "we are the first civilization in our Galaxy", proposed four broad categories of solutions to the paradox: those that are physical (a space travel limitation), sociological (aliens choose not to visit Earth), temporal (aliens have not had time to travel to Earth), or that extraterrestrials have already visited. His paper sparked significant interest in the paradox among academics and even politicians, with a discussion held in the House of Lords . A seminal response—"Extraterrestrial intelligent beings do not exist"—was written by Frank Tipler, who argued that, if an advanced extraterrestrial civilization existed, their self-replicating spacecraft should have already been detected in the Solar System .

The term "Fermi paradox" was coined in a 1977 article by David Stephenson and was widely adopted.

The popularization of the Fermi paradox damaged search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) efforts, and Senator William Proxmire cited Tipler when he spurred the termination of the federally funded NASA SETI program in 1981. According to Robert Gray , the paradox may contribute to a " de facto prohibition on government support for research in a branch of astrobiology". Criticism Fermi did not publish anything regarding the paradox, with Sagan once suggesting the quote to be apocryphal. Scientists like Robert Gray have criticized its attribution to Fermi, and alternative terms like the "Hart–Tipler argument" or "Tsiolkovsky–Fermi–Viewing–Hart paradox" have been proposed. According to Gray, the current understanding of the paradox misinterprets Fermi's question and subsequent discussion, which was challenging the feasibility of interstellar travel rather than the existence of advanced extraterrestrial life. Basis Enrico Fermi (1901–1954) The Fermi paradox is a conflict between the argument that scale and probability seem to favor intelligent life being common in the universe, and the total lack of evidence of intelligent life having ever arisen anywhere other than on Earth.

The first aspect of the Fermi paradox is a function of the scale or the large numbers involved: there are an estimated 200–400 billion stars in the Milky Way (2–4 × 10 11 ) and 70 sextillion (7×10 22 ) in the observable universe . Even if intelligent life occurs on only a minuscule percentage of planets around these stars, there might still be a great number of extant civilizations, and if the percentage were high enough it would produce a significant number of extant civilizations in the Milky Way. This assumes the mediocrity principle , by which Earth is a typical planet .

The second aspect of the Fermi paradox is the argument of probability: given intelligent life's ability to overcome scarcity, and its tendency to colonize new habitats , it seems possible that at least some civilizations would be technologically advanced, seek out new resources in space, and colonize their star system and, subsequently, surrounding star systems.

Since there is no known evidence on Earth, or elsewhere in the known universe, of other intelligent life after 13.8 billion years of the universe's history, there is a conflict requiring a resolution. Some examples of possible resolutions are that intelligent life is rarer than is thought, that assumptions about the general development or behavior of intelligent species are flawed, or, more radically, that the scientific understanding of the nature of the universe is quite incomplete.

The Fermi paradox can be asked in two ways.

The first is, "Why are no aliens or their artifacts found on Earth, or in the Solar System ?". If interstellar travel is possible, even the "slow" kind nearly within the reach of Earth technology, then it would only take from 5 million to 50 million years to colonize the galaxy. This is relatively brief on a geological scale , let alone a cosmological one .

Since there are many stars older than the Sun, and since intelligent life might have evolved earlier elsewhere, the question then becomes why the galaxy has not been colonized already. Even if colonization is impractical or undesirable to all alien civilizations, large-scale exploration of the galaxy could be possible by probes . These might leave detectable artifacts in the Solar System, such as old probes or evidence of mining activity, but none of these have been observed.

The second form of the question is "Why are there no signs of intelligence elsewhere in the universe?". This version does not assume interstellar travel, but includes other galaxies as well. For distant galaxies, travel times may well explain the lack of alien visits to Earth, but a sufficiently advanced civilization could potentially be observable over a significant fraction of the size of the observable universe . Even if such civilizations are rare, the scale argument indicates they should exist somewhere at some point during the history of the universe, and since they could be detected from far away over a considerable period of time, many more potential sites for their origin are within range of human observation. It is unknown whether the paradox is stronger for the Milky Way galaxy or for the universe as a whole. Drake equation Main article: Drake equation The theories and principles in the Drake equation are closely related to the Fermi paradox.

The equation was formulated by Frank Drake in 1961 in an attempt to find a systematic means to evaluate the numerous probabilities involved in the existence of alien life.

The equation is: N = R ∗ ⋅ f p ⋅ n e ⋅ f l ⋅ f i ⋅ f c ⋅ L , {\displaystyle N=R_{*}\cdot f_{\mathrm {p} }\cdot n_{\mathrm {e} }\cdot f_{\mathrm {l} }\cdot f_{\mathrm {i} }\cdot f_{\mathrm {c} }\cdot L,} where N {\displaystyle N} is the number of technologically advanced civilizations in the Milky Way galaxy, and is asserted to be the product of R ∗ {\displaystyle R_{*}} , the rate of formation of stars in the galaxy; f p {\displaystyle f_{p}} , the fraction of those stars with planetary systems ; n e {\displaystyle n_{e}} , the number of planets, per solar system , with an environment suitable for organic life; f l {\displaystyle f_{l}} , the fraction of those suitable planets whereon organic life appears; f i {\displaystyle f_{i}} , the fraction of life-bearing planets whereon intelligent life appears; f c {\displaystyle f_{c}} , the fraction of civilizations that reach the technological level whereby detectable signals may be dispatched; and L {\displaystyle L} , the length of time that those civilizations dispatch their signals.

The fundamental problem is that the last four terms ( f l {\displaystyle f_{l}} , f i {\displaystyle f_{i}} , f c {\displaystyle f_{c}} , and L {\displaystyle L} ) are entirely unknown, rendering statistical estimates impossible.

The Drake equation has been used by both optimists and pessimists, with wildly differing results.

The first scientific meeting on the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI), which had 10 attendees including Frank Drake and Carl Sagan, speculated that the number of civilizations was roughly between 1,000 and 100,000,000 civilizations in the Milky Way galaxy. Conversely, Frank Tipler and John D. Barrow used pessimistic numbers and speculated that the average number of civilizations in a galaxy is much less than one. Almost all arguments involving the Drake equation suffer from the overconfidence effect , a common error of probabilistic reasoning about low-probability events, by guessing specific numbers for likelihoods of events whose mechanism is not understood, such as the likelihood of abiogenesis on an Earth-like planet, with estimates varying over many hundreds of orders of magnitude . An analysis that takes into account some of the uncertainty associated with this lack of understanding has been carried out by Anders Sandberg , Eric Drexler and Toby Ord . They suggest that there is "a substantial ex ante probability of there being no other intelligent life in our observable universe". Dennis Danielson and Christopher Graney have argued that optimistic interpretations of the Drake equation are an artefact of history rather than of science. They show that, in the 17th and 18th centuries, the presumption that planets suitable for organic life are abundant became established in the absence of scientific evidence to support it, or even despite the scientific evidence then available against it.

The presumption endured into the present day despite evidence for planetary and stellar diversity that has accumulated since the late 19th century. Thus, in their view, what is seen as the Fermi Paradox is simply science overcoming a historical presumption that never adequately recognized the importance of discoveries about, for example, the nature of planets or the origin of life. Great Filter Main article: Great Filter The Great Filter, a concept introduced by Robin Hanson in 1996, represents whatever natural phenomena that would make it unlikely for life to evolve from inanimate matter to an advanced civilization .

The most commonly agreed-upon low probability event is abiogenesis: a gradual process of increasing complexity of the first self-replicating molecules by a randomly occurring chemical process. Other proposed great filters are the emergence of eukaryotic cells or of meiosis or some of the steps involved in the evolution of a brain-like organ capable of complex logical deductions. Astrobiologists Dirk Schulze-Makuch and William Bains, reviewing the history of life on Earth, including convergent evolution , concluded that transitions such as oxygenic photosynthesis , the eukaryotic cell , multicellularity , and tool -using intelligence are likely to occur on any Earth-like planet given enough time. They argue that the Great Filter may be abiogenesis, the rise of technological human-level intelligence, or an inability to settle other worlds because of self-destruction or a lack of resources. Paleobiologist Olev Vinn has suggested that the great filter may have universal biological roots related to evolutionary animal behavior. Grabby Aliens Main article: Quiet and loud aliens In 2021, the concepts of quiet, loud, and grabby aliens were introduced by Hanson et al .

The proposed "loud" aliens expand rapidly in a highly detectable way throughout the universe and endure, while "quiet" aliens are hard or impossible to detect and eventually disappear. "Grabby" aliens prevent the emergence of other civilizations in their sphere of influence , which expands at a rate near the speed of light.

The authors argue that if loud civilizations are rare, as they appear to be, then quiet civilizations are also rare.

The paper suggests that humanity's existing stage of technological development is relatively early in the potential timeline of intelligent life in the universe, as loud aliens would otherwise be observable by astronomers. Earlier in 2013, Anders Sandberg and Stuart Armstrong examined the potential for intelligent life to spread intergalactically throughout the universe and the implications for the Fermi Paradox. Their study suggests that with sufficient energy, intelligent civilizations could potentially colonize the entire Milky Way galaxy within a few million years, and spread to nearby galaxies in a timespan that is cosmologically brief. They conclude that intergalactic colonization appears possible with the resources of a single planetary system and that intergalactic colonization is of comparable difficulty to interstellar colonization, and therefore the Fermi paradox is much sharper than commonly thought. Critics such as David Kipping have contended that the "Grabby Aliens" model is reliant on unproven assumptions, lacking enough scientific rigor to be empirically falsifiable, and suggested other explanations for the proposed earliness of humans such as planets in M-dwarf systems being uninhabitable. Robin Hanson has responded to these criticisms. Anthropics Anthropic reasoning and the question of why we happen to find ourselves as humans creates a number of potential problems for astrobiology. Walter Barta argues that Hanson's grabby aliens model creates an anthropic dilemma. According to Hanson's model, most observers in our reference class should be grabby aliens themselves. This leads to the question of why we do not find ourselves as grabby aliens, but rather as a species confined to a single planet. Empirical evidence Main articles: Search for extraterrestrial intelligence and Technosignature There are two parts of the Fermi paradox that rely on empirical evidence—that there are many potentially habitable planets , and that humans see no evidence of life.

The first point, that many suitable planets exist, was an assumption in Fermi's time, but is since supported by the discovery that exoplanets are common. Existing models predict billions of habitable worlds in the Milky Way.

The second part of the paradox, that humans see no evidence of extraterrestrial life, is also an active field of scientific research. This includes both efforts to find any indication of life, and efforts specifically directed to finding intelligent life. These searches have been made since 1960, and several are ongoing.

Although astronomers do not usually search for extraterrestrials, they have observed phenomena that they could not immediately explain without positing an intelligent civilization as the source. For example, pulsars , when first discovered in 1967, were called little green men (LGM) because of the precise repetition of their pulses.

In all cases, explanations with no need for intelligent life have been found for such observations, but the possibility of discovery remains. Proposed examples include asteroid mining that would change the appearance of debris disks around stars, or spectral lines from nuclear waste disposal in stars. Electromagnetic emissions Further information: Project Phoenix (SETI) , SERENDIP , and Allen Telescope Array Radio telescopes are often used by SETI projects. Radio technology and the ability to construct a radio telescope are presumed to be a natural advance for technological species, theoretically creating effects that might be detected over interstellar distances.

The careful searching for non-natural radio emissions from space may lead to the detection of alien civilizations. Sensitive alien observers of the Solar System, for example, would note unusually intense radio waves for a G2 star due to Earth's television and telecommunication broadcasts.

In the absence of an apparent natural cause, alien observers might infer the existence of a terrestrial civilization. Such signals could be either "accidental" by-products of a civilization, or deliberate attempts to communicate, such as the Arecibo message . It is unclear whether "leakage", as opposed to a deliberate beacon, could be detected by an extraterrestrial civilization.

The most sensitive radio telescopes on Earth, as of 2019 , would not be able to detect non-directional radio signals (such as broadband ) even at a fraction of a light-year away, but other civilizations could hypothetically have much better equipment. A number of astronomers and observatories have attempted and are attempting to detect such evidence, mostly through SETI organizations such as the SETI Institute and Breakthrough Listen . Several decades of SETI analysis have not revealed any unusually bright or meaningfully repetitive radio emissions. Direct planetary observation A composite picture of Earth at night, created using data from the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) Operational Linescan System (OLS). Large-scale artificial lighting produced by human civilization is detectable from space. Exoplanet detection and classification is a very active sub-discipline in astronomy; the first candidate terrestrial planet discovered within a star's habitable zone was found in 2007. New refinements in exoplanet detection methods , and use of existing methods from space (such as the Kepler and TESS missions) have detected and characterized Earth-size planets, and determined whether they are within the habitable zones of their stars. Such observational refinements have allowed better estimates of how common these potentially habitable worlds are, typically in the range of 0.5-1.0 potentially habitable planets per star. Conjectures about interstellar probes Further information: Hart–Tipler conjecture , Von Neumann probe , and Bracewell probe The Hart–Tipler conjecture is a form of contraposition which states that because no interstellar probes have been detected, there likely is no other intelligent life in the universe, as such life should be expected to eventually create and launch such probes. Self-replicating probes could exhaustively explore a galaxy the size of the Milky Way in as little as a million years. If even a single civilization in the Milky Way attempted this, such probes could spread throughout the entire galaxy. Another speculation for contact with an alien probe—one that would be trying to find human beings—is an alien Bracewell probe . Such a hypothetical device would be an autonomous space probe whose purpose is to seek out and communicate with alien civilizations (as opposed to von Neumann probes, which are usually described as purely exploratory). These were proposed as an alternative to carrying a slow speed-of-light dialogue between vastly distant neighbors. Rather than contending with the long delays a radio dialogue would suffer, a probe housing an artificial intelligence would seek out an alien civilization to carry on a close-range communication with the discovered civilization.

The findings of such a probe would still have to be transmitted to the home civilization at light speed, but an information-gathering dialogue could be conducted in real time. Direct exploration of the Solar System has yielded no evidence indicating a visit by aliens or their probes. Detailed exploration of areas of the Solar System where resources would be plentiful may yet produce evidence of alien exploration, though the entirety of the Solar System is relatively vast and difficult to investigate. Attempts to signal, attract, or activate hypothetical Bracewell probes in Earth's vicinity have not succeeded. Searches for stellar-scale artifacts Further information: Dyson sphere , Stellar engine , and Kardashev scale A variant of the speculative Dyson sphere . Such large-scale artifacts would drastically alter the spectrum of a star.

In 1959, Freeman Dyson observed that every developing human civilization constantly increases its energy consumption, and he conjectured that a civilization might try to harness a large part of the energy produced by a star. He proposed a hypothetical "Dyson sphere" as a means: a shell or cloud of objects enclosing a star to absorb and utilize as much radiant energy as possible. Such a feat of astroengineering would drastically alter the observed spectrum of the star involved, changing it at least partly from the normal emission lines of a natural stellar atmosphere to those of black-body radiation , probably with a peak in the infrared . Dyson speculated that advanced alien civilizations might be detected by examining the spectra of stars and searching for such an altered spectrum. There have been attempts to find evidence of Dyson spheres that would alter the spectra of their core stars. Direct observation of thousands of galaxies has shown no explicit evidence of artificial construction or modifications.

In October 2015, there was speculation that a dimming of light from star KIC 8462852 , observed by the Kepler space telescope , could have been a result of such a Dyson sphere under construction. However, in 2018, further observations determined that the amount of dimming varied by the frequency of the light, pointing to dust, rather than an opaque object such as a Dyson sphere, as the cause of the dimming. Hypothetical explanations for the paradox Rarity of intelligent life Extraterrestrial life is rare or non-existent Main articles: Rare Earth hypothesis and Firstborn hypothesis Those who think that intelligent extraterrestrial life is (nearly) impossible argue that the conditions needed for the evolution of life—or at least the evolution of biological complexity —are rare or even unique to Earth. Under this assumption, called the rare Earth hypothesis , a rejection of the mediocrity principle , complex multicellular life is regarded as exceedingly unusual.

The rare Earth hypothesis argues that the evolution of biological complexity requires a host of fortuitous circumstances, such as a galactic habitable zone , a star and planet(s) having the requisite conditions, such as enough of a continuous habitable zone , the advantage of a giant guardian like Jupiter and a large moon , conditions needed to ensure the planet has a magnetosphere and plate tectonics , the chemistry of the lithosphere , atmosphere , and oceans, the role of "evolutionary pumps" such as massive glaciation and rare bolide impacts. Perhaps most importantly, advanced life needs whatever it was that led to the transition of (some) prokaryotic cells to eukaryotic cells , sexual reproduction and the Cambrian explosion .

In his book Wonderful Life (1989), Stephen Jay Gould suggested that if the "tape of life" were rewound to the time of the Cambrian explosion, and one or two tweaks made, human beings probably never would have evolved. Other thinkers such as Fontana, Buss, and Kauffman have written about the self-organizing properties of life.

On the other hand, maybe the filter is further back in time: recently, astrophysicist Matt O'Dowd has identified the eukaryogenesis as a reasonable candidate for such a filter in the past given the increasing difficulties in finding new useful proteins for prokaryotes. Extraterrestrial intelligence is rare or non-existent It is possible that even if complex life is common, intelligence (and consequently civilizations) is not.

While there are remote sensing techniques that could perhaps detect life-bearing planets without relying on the signs of technology, none of them have the ability to determine if any detected life is intelligent. This is sometimes referred to as the "algae vs. alumnae" problem. Charles Lineweaver states that when considering any extreme trait in an animal, intermediate stages do not necessarily produce "inevitable" outcomes. For example, large brains are no more "inevitable", or convergent, than are the long noses of animals such as aardvarks and elephants.

As he points out, "dolphins have had ~20 million years to build a radio telescope and have not done so".

In addition, Rebecca Boyle points out that of all the species that have evolved in the history of life on the planet Earth, only one—human beings and only in the beginning stages—has ever become space-faring. Extraterrestrial intelligence is relatively new Main article: Firstborn hypothesis Given that the expected lifespan of the universe is at least one trillion years and the age of the universe is around 14 billion years, it is possible that humans have emerged at or near the earliest possible opportunity for intelligent life to evolve. Avi Loeb , an astrophysicist and cosmologist, has suggested that Earth may be a very early example of a life-bearing planet and that life-bearing planets may be more likely trillions of years from now. He has put forward the view that the Universe has only recently reached a state in which life is possible and this is the reason humanity has not detected extraterrestrial life.

The astrophysicist Sebastian von Hoerner stated that the progress of science and technology on Earth was driven by two factors—the struggle for domination and the desire for an easy life.

The former potentially leads to complete destruction, while the latter may lead to biological or mental degeneration. Possible means of annihilation via major global issues, where global interconnectedness actually makes humanity more vulnerable than resilient, are many, including war, accidental environmental contamination or damage, the development of biotechnology , synthetic life like mirror life , resource depletion , climate change , or artificial intelligence . This general theme is explored both in fiction and in scientific hypotheses.

In 1966, Sagan and Shklovskii speculated that technological civilizations will either tend to destroy themselves within a century of developing interstellar communicative capability or master their self-destructive tendencies and survive for billion-year timescales. Self-annihilation may also be viewed in terms of thermodynamics : insofar as life is an ordered system that can sustain itself against the tendency to disorder , Stephen Hawking's "external transmission" or interstellar communicative phase, where knowledge production and knowledge management is more important than transmission of information via evolution , may be the point at which the system becomes unstable and self-destructs. Here, Hawking emphasizes self-design of the human genome ( transhumanism ) or enhancement via machines (e.g., brain–computer interface ) to enhance human intelligence and reduce aggression , without which he implies human civilization may be too stupid collectively to survive an increasingly unstable system. For instance, the development of technologies during the "external transmission" phase, such as weaponization of artificial general intelligence or antimatter , may not be met by concomitant increases in human ability to manage its own inventions. Consequently, disorder increases in the system: global governance may become increasingly destabilized, worsening humanity's ability to manage the possible means of annihilation listed above, resulting in global societal collapse . A less theoretical example might be the resource-depletion issue on Polynesian islands, of which Easter Island is only the best known. David Brin points out that during the expansion phase from 1500 BC to 800 AD there were cycles of overpopulation followed by what might be called periodic cullings of adult males through war or ritual. He writes, "There are many stories of islands whose men were almost wiped out—sometimes by internal strife, and sometimes by invading males from other islands." Using extinct civilizations such as Easter Island as models, a study conducted in 2018 by Adam Frank et al. posited that climate change induced by "energy intensive" civilizations may prevent sustainability within such civilizations, thus explaining the paradoxical lack of evidence for intelligent extraterrestrial life. Based on dynamical systems theory , the study examined how technological civilizations (exo-civilizations) consume resources and the feedback effects this consumption has on their planets and its carrying capacity . According to Adam Frank "he point is to recognize that driving climate change may be something generic.

The laws of physics demand that any young population, building an energy-intensive civilization like ours, is going to have feedback on its planet. Seeing climate change in this cosmic context may give us better insight into what's happening to us now and how to deal with it." Generalizing the Anthropocene , their model produces four different outcomes: Possible trajectories of anthropogenic climate change in a model by Frank et al ., 2018 Die-off: A scenario where the population grows quickly, surpassing the planet's carrying capacity, which leads to a peak followed by a rapid decline .

The population eventually stabilizes at a much lower equilibrium level, allowing the planet to partially recover. Sustainability : A scenario where civilizations successfully transition from high-impact resources (like fossil fuels) to sustainable ones (like solar energy) before significant environmental degradation occurs. This allows the civilization and planet to reach a stable equilibrium, avoiding catastrophic effects. Collapse Without Resource Change: In this trajectory, the population and environmental degradation increase rapidly.

In 1981, cosmologist Edward Harrison argued that such behavior would be an act of prudence: an intelligent species that has overcome its own self-destructive tendencies might view any other species bent on galactic expansion as a threat. It has also been suggested that a successful alien species would be a superpredator , as are humans. Another possibility invokes the " tragedy of the commons " and the anthropic principle : the first lifeform to achieve interstellar travel will necessarily (even if unintentionally) prevent competitors from arising, and humans simply happen to be first. Civilizations only broadcast detectable signals for a brief period of time It may be that alien civilizations are detectable through their radio emissions for only a short time, reducing the likelihood of spotting them.

The usual assumption is that civilizations outgrow radio through technological advancement. However, there could be other leakage such as that from microwaves used to transmit power from solar satellites to ground receivers. Regarding the first point, in a 2006 Sky & Telescope article, Seth Shostak wrote, "Moreover, radio leakage from a planet is only likely to get weaker as a civilization advances and its communications technology gets better. Earth itself is increasingly switching from broadcasts to leakage-free cables and fiber optics, and from primitive but obvious carrier-wave broadcasts to subtler, hard-to-recognize spread-spectrum transmissions." More hypothetically, advanced alien civilizations may evolve beyond broadcasting at all in the electromagnetic spectrum and communicate by technologies not developed or used by mankind. Some scientists have hypothesized that advanced civilizations may send neutrino signals. If such signals exist, they could be detectable by neutrino detectors that are as of 2009 under construction for other goals. Alien life may be too incomprehensible Microwave window as seen by a ground-based system.

From NASA report SP-419: SETI – the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence Another possibility is that human theoreticians have underestimated how much alien life might differ from that on Earth. Aliens may be psychologically unwilling to attempt to communicate with human beings. Perhaps human mathematics is parochial to Earth and not shared by other life, though others argue this can only apply to abstract math since the math associated with physics must be similar (in results, if not in methods).

In his 2009 book, SETI scientist Seth Shostak wrote, "Our experiments are still looking for the type of extraterrestrial that would have appealed to Percival Lowell ." Physiology might also be a communication barrier. Carl Sagan speculated that an alien species might have a thought process orders of magnitude slower (or faster) than that of humans. A message broadcast by that species might seem like random background noise to humans, and therefore go undetected. Paul Davies stated that 500 years ago the very idea of a computer doing work merely by manipulating internal data may not have been viewed as a technology at all. He writes, "Might there be a still higher level If so, this 'third level' would never be manifest through observations made at the informational level, still less the matter level. There is no vocabulary to describe the third level, but that doesn't mean it is non-existent, and we need to be open to the possibility that alien technology may operate at the third level, or maybe the fourth, fifth levels." Arthur C. Clarke hypothesized that "our technology must still be laughably primitive; we may well be like jungle savages listening for the throbbing of tom-toms, while the ether around them carries more words per second than they could utter in a lifetime". Another thought is that technological civilizations invariably experience a technological singularity and attain a post-biological character. Sociological explanations Expansionism is not the cosmic norm In response to Tipler's idea of self-replicating probes, Stephen Jay Gould wrote, "I must confess that I simply don't know how to react to such arguments. I have enough trouble predicting the plans and reactions of the people closest to me. I am usually baffled by the thoughts and accomplishments of humans in different cultures. I'll be damned if I can state with certainty what some extraterrestrial source of intelligence might do." Alien species may have only settled part of the galaxy According to a study by Frank et al. , advanced civilizations may not colonize everything in the galaxy due to their potential adoption of steady states of expansion. This hypothesis suggests that civilizations might reach a stable pattern of expansion where they neither collapse nor aggressively spread throughout the galaxy. A February 2019 article in Popular Science states, "Sweeping across the Milky Way and establishing a unified galactic empire might be inevitable for a monolithic super-civilization, but most cultures are neither monolithic nor super—at least if our experience is any guide." Astrophysicist Adam Frank, along with co-authors such as astronomer Jason Wright, ran a variety of simulations in which they varied such factors as settlement lifespans, fractions of suitable planets, and recharge times between launches. They found many of their simulations seemingly resulted in a "third category" in which the Milky Way remains partially settled indefinitely.

The abstract to their 2019 paper states, "These results break the link between Hart's famous 'Fact A' (no interstellar visitors on Earth now) and the conclusion that humans must, therefore, be the only technological civilization in the galaxy. Explicitly, our solutions admit situations where our current circumstances are consistent with an otherwise settled, steady-state galaxy." An alternative scenario is that long-lived civilizations may only choose to colonize stars during closest approach.

While the existing understanding of physics rules out the possibility of faster-than-light travel, it appears that there are no major theoretical barriers to the construction of "slow" interstellar ships, even though the engineering required is considerably beyond existing human capabilities. This idea underlies the concept of the Von Neumann probe and the Bracewell probe as a potential evidence of extraterrestrial intelligence. It is possible, however, that scientific knowledge cannot properly gauge the feasibility and costs of such interstellar colonization. Theoretical barriers may not yet be understood, and the resources needed may be so great as to make it unlikely that any civilization could afford to attempt it. Even if interstellar travel and colonization are possible, they may be difficult, leading to a more gradual pace of colonization based on percolation . Colonization efforts may not occur as an unstoppable hyper-aggressive rush, but rather as an uneven tendency to "percolate" outwards, within an eventual slowing and termination of the effort given the enormous costs involved and the expectation that colonies will inevitably develop a culture and civilization of their own. Colonization may thus occur in "clusters", with large areas remaining uncolonized at any one time, and planets only restarting the colonization process when their populations begin to outstrip their world's carrying capacity. Information is cheaper to transmit than matter is to transfer If a human-capability machine intelligence is possible, and if it is possible to transfer such constructs over vast distances and rebuild them on a remote machine, then it might not make strong economic sense to travel the galaxy by spaceflight. Louis K. Scheffer calculates the cost of radio transmission of information across space to be cheaper than spaceflight by a factor of 10 8 –10 17 . For a machine civilization, the costs of interstellar travel are therefore enormous compared to the more efficient option of sending computational signals across space to already established sites.

After the first civilization has physically explored or colonized the galaxy, as well as sent such machines for easy exploration, then any subsequent civilizations, after having contacted the first, may find it cheaper, faster, and easier to explore the galaxy through intelligent mind transfers to the machines built by the first civilization. However, since a star system needs only one such remote machine, and the communication is most likely highly directed, transmitted at high-frequencies, and at a minimal power to be economical, such signals would be hard to detect from Earth.

By contrast, in economics the counter-intuitive Jevons paradox implies that higher productivity results in higher demand .

In other words, increased economic efficiency results in increased economic growth. For example, increased renewable energy has the risk of not directly resulting in declining fossil fuel use, but rather additional economic growth as fossil fuels instead are directed to alternative uses. Thus, technological innovation makes human civilization more capable of higher levels of consumption , as opposed to its existing consumption being achieved more efficiently at a stable level. Other species' home planets cannot support industrial economies Amedeo Balbi and Adam Frank propose the concept of an " oxygen bottleneck" for the emergence of the industrial production necessary for spaceflight.

The "oxygen bottleneck" refers to the critical level of atmospheric oxygen necessary for fire and combustion . Earth's atmospheric oxygen concentration is about 21%, but has been much lower in the past and may also be on many exoplanets.

The authors argue that while the threshold of oxygen required for the existence of complex life and ecosystems is relatively low, industrial processes which are necessary precursors to spaceflight, particularly metal smelting and many forms of electricity generation , require higher oxygen concentrations of at least some 18%. A planet with oxygen sufficient to support intelligent life but not to develop advanced metallurgy would be technologically gated by its extremely limited industrial capabilities at a level likely incapable of supporting spaceflight. Thus, the presence of high levels of oxygen in a planet's atmosphere is not only a potential biosignature but also a critical factor in the emergence of detectable technological civilizations. Another hypothesis in this category is the "waterworlds hypothesis". According to author and scientist David Brin : "it turns out that our Earth skates the very inner edge of our sun's continuously habitable—or ' Goldilocks '—zone. And Earth may be anomalous. It may be that because we are so close to our sun, we have an anomalously oxygen-rich atmosphere, and we have anomalously little ocean for a water world .

In other words, 32 percent continental mass may be high among water worlds..." Brin continues, "In which case, the evolution of creatures like us, with hands and fire and all that sort of thing, may be rare in the galaxy.

In which case, when we do build starships and head out there, perhaps we'll find lots and lots of life worlds, but they're all like Polynesia. We'll find lots and lots of intelligent lifeforms out there, but they're all dolphins, whales, squids, who could never build their own starships. What a perfect universe for us to be in, because nobody would be able to boss us around, and we'd get to be the voyagers, the Star Trek people, the starship builders, the policemen, and so on." Intelligent alien species have not developed advanced technologies Le Moustier Neanderthals ( Charles R. Knight , 1920) It may be that while alien species with intelligence exist, they are primitive or have not reached the level of technological advancement necessary to communicate. Along with non-intelligent life, such civilizations would also be very difficult to detect from Earth. A trip using conventional rockets would take hundreds of thousands of years to reach the nearest stars. To skeptics, the fact that over the history of life on the Earth, only one species has developed a civilization to the point of being capable of spaceflight , and this only in the early stages, lends credence to the idea that technologically advanced civilizations are rare in the universe. Developing practical spaceflight technology is very difficult or expensive The rapid increase of scientific and technological progress seen in the 18th to 20th centuries (the Industrial Revolution ), compared to earlier eras, led to the common assumption that such progress will continue at exponential rates as time goes by, eventually leading to the progress level required for space exploration.

The "universal limit to technological development" (ULTD) hypothesis proposes that there is a limit to the potential growth of a civilization, and that this limit may be placed well below the point required for space exploration. Such limits may be based on the enormous strain spaceflight may put on a planet's resources, physical limitations (such as faster-than-light travel being impossible), and even limitations based on the species' own biology. Discovering extraterrestrial life is very difficult Humans are not listening properly There are some assumptions that underlie the SETI programs that may cause searchers to miss signals that exist. Extraterrestrials might, for example, transmit signals that have a very high or low data rate, or employ unconventional (in human terms) frequencies , which would make them hard to distinguish from background noise. Signals might be sent from non- main sequence star systems that humans search with lower priority; our programs assume that most alien life will be orbiting Sun-like stars . Radio signals cannot be straightforwardly detected at interstellar distances SETI estimates that with a radio telescope as sensitive as the Arecibo Observatory , Earth's television and radio broadcasts would only be detectable at distances up to 0.3 light-years, less than 1/10 the distance to the nearest star. A signal is much easier to detect if it consists of a deliberate, powerful transmission directed at Earth. Such signals could be detected at ranges of hundreds to tens of thousands of light-years distance. However, this means that detectors must be listening to an appropriate range of frequencies, and be in that region of space to which the beam is being sent. Many SETI searches assume that extraterrestrial civilizations will be broadcasting a deliberate signal, like the Arecibo message, in order to be found. Moreover, as human communication technology has advanced, humans have reduced the use of broadband radio transmissions in favor of more efficient and higher-bandwidth methods such as satellite communication and fibre optics . It may be that alien civilizations, having like us largely moved past high-power radio broadcasting, produce very few, if any, detectable transmissions. Thus, to detect alien civilizations through their radio emissions, Earth observers need very sensitive instruments, and moreover must hope that: Aliens have developed radio technology, and Aliens use radio as a primary means of communication, and For reasons unknown, their transmitters are orders of magnitude more powerful than ours, or they are deliberately broadcasting high-power radio signals towards Earth as part of their own efforts to contact other civilizations, and We are listening at the right frequency, at the right time, and We recognize their transmission as an attempt at communication. Humans have not listened for long enough Humanity's ability to detect intelligent extraterrestrial life has existed for only a very brief period—from 1937 onwards, if the invention of the radio telescope is taken as the dividing line—and Homo sapiens is a geologically recent species.

The whole period of modern human existence to date is a very brief period on a cosmological scale, and radio transmissions have only been propagated since 1895. Thus, it remains possible that human beings have neither existed long enough nor made themselves sufficiently detectable to be found by extraterrestrial intelligence. Intelligent life may be too far away NASA 's conception of the Terrestrial Planet Finder It may be that non-colonizing technologically capable alien civilizations exist, but that they are simply too far apart for meaningful two-way communication. Sebastian von Hoerner estimated the average duration of civilization at 6,500 years and the average distance between civilizations in the Milky Way at 1,000 light years. If two civilizations are separated by several thousand light-years, it is possible that one or both cultures may become extinct before meaningful dialogue can be established. Human searches may be able to detect their existence, but communication will remain impossible because of distance. It has been suggested that this problem might be ameliorated somewhat if contact and communication is made through a Bracewell probe .

In this case at least one partner in the exchange may obtain meaningful information. Alternatively, a civilization may simply broadcast its knowledge, and leave it to the receiver to make what they may of it. This is similar to the transmission of information from ancient civilizations to the present, and humanity has undertaken similar activities like the Arecibo message , which could transfer information about Earth's intelligent species, even if it never yields a response or does not yield a response in time for humanity to receive it. It is possible that observational signatures of self-destroyed civilizations could be detected, depending on the destruction scenario and the timing of human observation relative to it. A related speculation by Sagan and Newman suggests that if other civilizations exist, and are transmitting and exploring, their signals and probes simply have not arrived yet, i.e. that Humans are a relatively early civilization. However, critics have noted that this is unlikely, since it requires that humanity's advancement has occurred at a very special point in time, while the Milky Way is in transition from empty to full. This is a tiny fraction of the lifespan of a galaxy under ordinary assumptions, so the likelihood that humanity is in the midst of this transition is considered low in the paradox.

In 2021, Hanson et al. reconsidered this likelihood and concluded it is indeed plausible when assuming that many civilizations are "grabby", i.e. displace other civilizations. Under this assumption there is a selection effect of the sort that provided we exist and are not (yet) destroyed by grabby aliens, we are very unlikely to observe aliens. Specifically, grabby aliens imply a typical civilizational expansion rate at nearly the speed of light because otherwise many other civilizations would be visible.

The transition time between detection of an alien technosignature and extinction would be vanishingly short in cosmological timeframes, making it likely we are before that time period. Some SETI skeptics may also believe that humanity is at a very special point of time—specifically, a transitional period from no space-faring societies to one space-faring society, namely that of human beings. Intelligent life exists buried below the surfaces of ice planets Planetary scientist Alan Stern put forward the idea that there could be a number of worlds with subsurface oceans (such as Jupiter's Europa or Saturn's Enceladus ).

The surface would provide a large degree of protection from such things as cometary impacts and nearby supernovae, as well as creating a situation in which a much broader range of orbital configurations are capable of supporting life. Life, and potentially intelligence and civilization, could evolve below the surface of such a planet, but be very hard to detect, insofar as it is generally only possible to observe the surface of planets from space. Stern states, "If they have technology, and let's say they're broadcasting, or they have city lights or whatever—we can't see it in any part of the spectrum, except maybe very-low-frequency ." Moreover, such a civilization may have great difficulty getting to space, insofar as even getting to the surface of their world could present a considerable engineering challenge involving tunneling through many kilometres of ice. This may severely hamper their ability to communicate with us. Advanced civilizations may limit their search for life to technological signatures If life is abundant in the universe but the cost of space travel is high, an advanced civilization may choose to focus its search not on signs of life in general, but on those of other advanced civilizations, and specifically on radio signals.

Since humanity has only recently began to use radio communication, its signals may have yet to arrive to other inhabited planets, and if they have, probes from those planets may have yet to arrive on Earth. Willingness to communicate Everyone is listening but no one is transmitting Alien civilizations might be technically capable of contacting Earth, but could be only listening instead of transmitting. If all or most civilizations act in the same way, the galaxy could be full of civilizations eager for contact, but everyone is listening and no one is transmitting. This is the so-called SETI Paradox .

From any one civilization's point of view, it would be unlikely for them to be the first ones to make first contact. According to this reasoning, it is likely that previous civilizations faced fatal problems upon first contact and doing so should be avoided. So perhaps every civilization keeps quiet because of the possibility that there is a real reason for others to do so.

In 1987, science fiction author Greg Bear explored this concept in his novel The Forge of God .

In The Forge of God , humanity is likened to a baby crying in a hostile forest: "There once was an infant lost in the woods, crying its heart out, wondering why no one answered, drawing down the wolves." One of the characters explains, "We've been sitting in our tree chirping like foolish birds for over a century now, wondering why no other birds answered.

The galactic skies are full of hawks, that's why. Planetisms that don't know enough to keep quiet, get eaten." In Liu Cixin 's 2008 novel The Dark Forest , the author proposes a literary explanation for the Fermi paradox in which countless alien civilizations exist, but are both silent and paranoid, destroying any nascent lifeforms loud enough to make themselves known. This is because any other intelligent life may represent a future threat.

As a result, Liu's fictional universe contains a plethora of quiet civilizations which do not reveal themselves, as in a "dark forest"...filled with "armed hunter(s) stalking through the trees like a ghost". This idea has come to be known as the dark forest hypothesis . Earth is deliberately being avoided Main article: Zoo hypothesis The zoo hypothesis states that intelligent extraterrestrial life exists and does not contact life on Earth to allow for its natural evolution and development as a sort of cosmic closed nature reserve . A variation on the zoo hypothesis is the laboratory hypothesis, where humanity has been or is being subject to experiments, with Earth or the Solar System effectively serving as a laboratory.

The zoo hypothesis may break down under the uniformity of motive flaw: all it takes is a single culture or civilization (or even a faction or rogue actor within one) to decide to act contrary to the interplanetary consensus, and the probability of such a violation of hegemony increases with the number of civilizations, tending not towards a galactic league with a single policy towards Earth, but towards multiple competing factions. However, if artificial superintelligences are paramount in galactic politics, and such intelligences tend towards consolidation behind a central authority, then this would at least partially address the uniformity of motive flaw by dissuading rogue behavior. Analysis of the inter-arrival times between civilizations in the galaxy based on common astrobiological assumptions suggests that the initial civilization would have a commanding lead over the later arrivals, inasmuch as it has had time to assert control over resources, and settle the best planets (assuming similar biological needs to competitors).

As such, it may have established what has been termed the zoo hypothesis through force or as a galactic or universal norm and the resultant "paradox" by a cultural founder effect with or without the continued activity of the founder. Some colonization scenarios predict spherical expansion across star systems, with continued expansion coming from the systems just previously settled. It has been suggested that this would cause a strong selection process among colonists, favoring cultural, biological, or political adaptation to living aboard spacecraft or space habitats for long periods of time; as a result, they may only settle a very limited number of the highest-quality planets, or simply stay aboard their ships and forgo planets entirely. This may result in a lack of interest in colonization, instead focusing on planets only as a destructible source of non-renewable resources . Alternatively, they may have an ethic of protection for "nursery worlds", and protect them without intervening. Moreover, having developed spaceborne habitation sufficient to support their needs, they may obtain resources through asteroid mining and mostly ignore terrestrial worlds insofar as they require a much greater expenditure of fuel and resources to make it to land on for mining compared to smaller objects. It is possible that a civilization advanced enough to travel between planetary systems could be actively visiting or observing Earth while remaining undetected or unrecognized.

Following this logic, and building on arguments that other proposed solutions to the Fermi paradox may be implausible, Ian Crawford and Dirk Schulze-Makuch have argued that technological civilisations are either very rare in the Galaxy or are deliberately hiding from us. Earth is deliberately being isolated Main article: Planetarium hypothesis A related idea to the zoo hypothesis is that, beyond a certain distance, the perceived universe is a simulated reality .

The planetarium hypothesis speculates that beings may have created this simulation so that the universe appears to be empty of other life. Conspiracy theories: alien life is already here, unacknowledged and/or deliberately concealed Main article: Extraterrestrial UFO hypothesis Further information: UFO conspiracy theories A significant fraction of the population believes that at least some UFOs (Unidentified Flying Objects) are spacecraft piloted by aliens.

While most of these are unrecognized or mistaken interpretations of mundane phenomena, some occurrences remain puzzling even after investigation.

The New York Times . Archived from the original on September 19, 2019 . Retrieved October 29, 2015 . ^ a b c d e f g Webb 2015 , p. . ^ Urban, Tim (June 17, 2014). "The Fermi Paradox" . Huffington Post . Archived from the original on April 2, 2017 . Retrieved January 6, 2015 . ^ "Star (astronomy)" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on March 1, 2016 . Retrieved February 4, 2016 . "With regard to mass, size, and intrinsic brightness, the Sun is a typical star." Technically, the sun is near the middle of the main sequence of the Hertzsprung–Russell diagram . This sequence contains 80–90% of the stars of the galaxy. Archived July 16, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ Grevesse, N.; Noels, A.; Sauval, A. J. (1996). "Standard abundances". ASP Conference Series . Vol. 99. p. 117. Bibcode : 1996ASPC...99..117G .

The Sun is a normal star, though dispersion exists. ^ Buchhave, Lars A.; Latham, David W.; Johansen, Anders; et al. (2012). "An abundance of small exoplanets around stars with a wide range of metallicities". Nature . 486 (7403): 375– 377. Bibcode : 2012Natur.486..375B . doi : 10.1038/nature11121 . PMID 22722196 . ^ Schilling, Govert (June 13, 2012). "ScienceShot: Alien Earths Have Been Around for a While" . Science . Archived from the original on August 9, 2015 . Retrieved January 6, 2015 . ^ Silva Aguirre, V.; Davies, G. R.; Basu, S.; Christensen-Dalsgaard, J.; Creevey, O.; Metcalfe, T. S.; Bedding, T. R.; Casagrande, L.; Handberg, R.; Lund, M. N.; Nissen, P. E.; Chaplin, W. J.; Huber, D.; Serenelli, A. M.; Stello, D.; Van Eylen, V.; Campante, T. L.; Elsworth, Y.; Gilliland, R. L.; Hekker, S.; Karoff, C.; Kawaler, S. D.; Kjeldsen, H.; Lundkvist, M. S. (2015). "Ages and fundamental properties of Kepler exoplanet host stars from asteroseismology" . Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society . 452 (2): 2127– 2148. arXiv : 1504.07992 . Bibcode : 2015MNRAS.452.2127S . doi : 10.1093/mnras/stv1388 . ^ "Voyager Interstellar Mission" . NASA. March 14, 2024 . Retrieved November 16, 2024 . ^ a b c Hart, Michael H. (1975). "Explanation for the Absence of Extraterrestrials on Earth". Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society . 16 : 128– 135. Bibcode : 1975QJRAS..16..128H . ^ Impe, Chris (2011).

The Living Cosmos: Our Search for Life in the Universe . Cambridge University Press. p. 282. ISBN 978-0-521-84780-3 . ^ Webb 2015 , pp. 10–13. ^ Webb 2015 , p. 12. ^ Jones 1985 , pp. 1–2. ^ Webb 2015 , pp. 21–22. ^ Jones 1985 , pp. 1–3. ^ Jones 1985 , pp. 2–3. ^ a b Jones 1985 , p. 3. ^ Webb 2015 , pp. 3, 10. ^ Marx 1996 , pp. 225–226. ^ Webb 2015 , p. 6. ^ Prantzos 2013 , p. 249. ^ Smith 2021 . ^ Finney, Finney & Lytkin 2000 , pp. 745–747. ^ Finney, Finney & Lytkin 2000 , p. 745. ^ a b c d Webb 2015 , p. 27. ^ Finney, Finney & Lytkin 2000 , p. 747. ^ a b c Gray 2015 , p. 196. ^ a b c Martin 2018 , p. 201. ^ a b Webb 2015 , p. 13. ^ a b c Gray 2015 , p. 195. ^ Webb 2015 , pp. 27–28. ^ Webb 2015 , p. 28. ^ Martin 2018 , p. 200. ^ Gray 2015 , p. 197. ^ Webb 2015 , pp. 26. ^ Gray 2015 , pp. 196–197. ^ Cain, Fraser (June 3, 2013). "How Many Stars are There in the Universe?" . Universe Today . Archived from the original on August 4, 2019 . Retrieved May 25, 2016 . ^ Craig, Andrew (July 22, 2003). "Astronomers count the stars" . BBC News . Archived from the original on April 18, 2018 . Retrieved April 8, 2010 . ^ a b Crawford, I.A., "Where are They? Maybe we are alone in the galaxy after all" Archived December 1, 2011, at the Wayback Machine , Scientific American , July 2000, 38–43, (2000). ^ Shklovskii, Iosif ; Sagan, Carl (1966). Intelligent Life in the Universe . San Francisco: Holden–Day. ISBN 978-1-892803-02-3 . ^ J. Richard Gott, III. "Chapter 19: Cosmological SETI Frequency Standards".

In Zuckerman, Ben; Hart, Michael (eds.). Extraterrestrials; Where Are They? . p. 180. ^ Gowdy, Robert H., VCU Department of Physics SETI: Search for ExtraTerrestrial Intelligence.

The Interstellar Distance Problem Archived December 26, 2018, at the Wayback Machine , 2008 ^ a b Sandberg, Anders; Drexler, Eric; Ord, Toby (June 6, 2018). "Dissolving the Fermi Paradox". arXiv : 1806.02404 . ^ Drake, F.; Sobel, D. (1992). Is Anyone Out There?

The Scientific Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence . Delta. pp. 55– 62. ISBN 978-0-385-31122-9 . ^ Barrow, John D. ; Tipler, Frank J. (1986).

The Anthropic Cosmological Principle (1st ed.). Oxford University Press . p. 588. ISBN 978-0-19-282147-8 . LCCN 87028148 . ^ Graney, Christopher; Danielson, Dennis (March 2026). "Lord Kelvin and Space Seeds". Sky & Telescope : 28– 33. ^ Danielson, Dennis; Graney, Christopher (2026). A Universe of Earths: Our Planet and Other Worlds, from Copernicus to NASA . Oxford University Press. pp. 118– 133, 143– 144. ISBN 9780197803516 . ^ Hanson, Robin (1998). "The Great Filter – Are We Almost Past It?" . Archived from the original on May 7, 2010. ^ a b c Lineweaver, Charles H. (2008). "Paleontological Tests: Human-Like Intelligence is Not a Convergent Feature of Evolution".

From Fossils to Astrobiology . Cellular Origin, Life in Extreme Habitats and Astrobiology. Vol. 12. pp. 353– 368. arXiv : 0711.1751 . doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-8837-7_17 . ISBN 978-1-4020-8836-0 . ^ Schulze-Makuch, Dirk; Bains, William (2017).

The Cosmic Zoo: Complex Life on Many Worlds . Springer. pp. 201– 206. ISBN 978-3-319-62045-9 . ^ Vinn, O. (2024). "Potential incompatibility of inherited behavior patterns with civilization: Implications for Fermi paradox" . Science Progress . 107 (3) 00368504241272491: 1– 6. doi : 10.1177/00368504241272491 . PMC 11307330 . PMID 39105260 . ^ a b Hanson, Robin; Martin, Daniel; McCarter, Calvin; Paulson, Jonathan (November 30, 2021). "If Loud Aliens Explain Human Earliness, Quiet Aliens Are Also Rare" .

The Astrophysical Journal . 922 (2): 182. arXiv : 2102.01522 . Bibcode : 2021ApJ...922..182H . doi : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac2369 . ^ "Grabby Aliens – a simple model by Robin Hanson" . ^ Armstrong, Stuart; Sandberg, Anders (August 2013). "Eternity in six hours: Intergalactic spreading of intelligent life and sharpening the Fermi paradox". Acta Astronautica . 89 : 1– 13. Bibcode : 2013AcAau..89....1A . doi : 10.1016/j.actaastro.2013.04.002 . ^ Hanson, Robin. "Kipping on Grabby Aliens" . ^ Barta, Walter (September 23, 2024).

The Grabby Alien Observer Paradox: An Anthropic Dilemma regarding the Grabby Alien Hypothesis . 2024 Conference for the Society for Social and Conceptual issues in Astrobiology. ^ Behroozi, Peter; Peeples, Molly S. (December 1, 2015). "On The History and Future of Cosmic Planet Formation" . MNRAS . 454 (2): 1811– 1817. arXiv : 1508.01202 . Bibcode : 2015MNRAS.454.1811B . doi : 10.1093/mnras/stv1817 . ^ Jheeta, Sohan (November 2013). "Final frontiers: the hunt for life elsewhere in the Universe". Astrophysics and Space Science . 348 (1): 1– 10. Bibcode : 2013Ap&SS.348....1J . doi : 10.1007/s10509-013-1536-9 . ^ Wade, Nicholas (August 1975). "Discovery of Pulsars: A Graduate Student's Story". Science . 189 (4200): 358– 364. Bibcode : 1975Sci...189..358W . doi : 10.1126/science.189.4200.358 . PMID 17840812 . ^ "NASA/CP2007-214567: Workshop Report on the Future of Intelligence in the Cosmos" (PDF) . NASA. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 11, 2014. ^ Forgan, Duncan H.; Elvis, Martin (October 2011). "Extrasolar asteroid mining as forensic evidence for extraterrestrial intelligence". International Journal of Astrobiology . 10 (4): 307– 313. arXiv : 1103.5369 . Bibcode : 2011IJAsB..10..307F . doi : 10.1017/S1473550411000127 . ^ Whitmire, Daniel P.; David P. Wright. (1980). "Nuclear waste spectrum as evidence of technological extraterrestrial civilizations". Icarus . 42 (1): 149– 156. Bibcode : 1980Icar...42..149W . doi : 10.1016/0019-1035(80)90253-5 . ^ Mullen, Leslie (2002). "Alien Intelligence Depends on Time Needed to Grow Brains" . Astrobiology Magazine . Space.com. Archived from the original on February 12, 2003 . Retrieved April 21, 2006 . ^ Haqq-Misra, Jacob; et al. (February 2013). "The benefits and harm of transmitting into space". Space Policy . 29 (1): 40– 48. arXiv : 1207.5540 . Bibcode : 2013SpPol..29...40H . doi : 10.1016/j.spacepol.2012.11.006 . See table 1. ^ Scheffer, L. (2004). "Aliens can watch 'I Love Lucy' " (PDF) . Contact in Context . 2 (1) . Retrieved February 2, 2024 . ^ von Konsky, Brian (October 23, 2000). "Radio Leakage: Is anybody listening?" . ^ Participants, NASA (2018). "NASA and the Search for Technosignatures: A Report from the NASA Technosignatures Workshop". arXiv : 1812.08681 . ^ Udry, Stéphane; Bonfils, Xavier; Delfosse, Xavier; Forveille, Thierry; Mayor, Michel; Perrier, Christian; Bouchy, François; Lovis, Christophe; Pepe, Francesco; Queloz, Didier; Bertaux, Jean-Loup (2007). "The HARPS search for southern extra-solar planets XI. Super-Earths (5 and 8 M 🜨 ) in a 3-planet system". Astronomy & Astrophysics . 469 (3): L43– L47. arXiv : 0704.3841 . Bibcode : 2007A&A...469L..43U . doi : 10.1051/0004-6361:20077612 . ^ Bryson, Steve; Kunimoto, Michelle; Kopparapu, Ravi K.; et al. (2021). "The Occurrence of Rocky Habitable-zone Planets around Solar-like Stars from Kepler Data" .

The Astronomical Journal . 161 (1): 36. arXiv : 2010.14812 . Bibcode : 2021AJ....161...36B . doi : 10.3847/1538-3881/abc418 . ^ Hsu, Danley C.; Ford, Eric B.; Terrien, Ryan (2020). "Occurrence rates of planets orbiting M Stars: Applying ABC to Kepler DR25, Gaia DR2, and 2MASS data" . Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society . 498 (2): 2249– 2262. arXiv : 2002.02573 . Bibcode : 2020MNRAS.498.2249H . doi : 10.1093/mnras/staa2391 . ^ Lineweaver, Charles H.; Chopra, Aditya (2025). "Other Earths, Gaian bottlenecks and Darwinized Gaias". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B . 380 (1931) 20240438. doi : 10.1098/rstb.2024.0438 . PMC 12329459. PMID 40770977 . ^ Petigura, Erik A.; Howard, Andrew W.; Marcy, Geoffrey W. (2013). "Prevalence of Earth-size planets orbiting Sun-like stars" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 110 (48): 19273– 19278. arXiv : 1311.6806 . Bibcode : 2013PNAS..11019273P . doi : 10.1073/pnas.1319909110 . PMC 3845182 . PMID 24191033 . ^ Tuomi, Mikko; Jones, Hugh R. A.; Barnes, John R.; Anglada-Escudé, Guillem; Jenkins, James S. (2014). "Bayesian search for low-mass planets around nearby M dwarfs – estimates for occurrence rate based on global detectability statistics" . Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society . 441 (2): 1545– 1569. arXiv : 1403.0430 . doi : 10.1093/mnras/stu358 . ^ van der Tak, Floris (2024). "Likelihood and appearance of life beyond the Earth: An astronomical perspective". arXiv : 2405.05115 . ^ Zink, Jon K.; Hansen, Bradley M. S. (2019). "Accounting for multiplicity in calculating eta Earth" . Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society . 487 (1): 246– 252. arXiv : 1905.01032 . doi : 10.1093/mnras/stz1246 . ^ Gray 2015 . ^ Dick, Steven J. (2020). "Bringing Culture to Cosmos: Cultural Evolution, the Postbiological Universe, and SETI". Space, Time, and Aliens . pp. 171– 190. doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-41614-0_12 . ISBN 978-3-030-41613-3 . ^ Bracewell, R. N. (1960). "Communications from Superior Galactic Communities". Nature . 186 (4726): 670– 671. Bibcode : 1960Natur.186..670B . doi : 10.1038/186670a0 . ^ Papagiannis, M. D. (1978). "Are We all Alone, or could They be in the Asteroid Belt?". Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society . 19 : 277– 281. Bibcode : 1978QJRAS..19..277P . ^ Freitas, R. A., Jr. (1983). "Extraterrestrial intelligence in the solar system: Resolving the Fermi paradox". Journal of the British Interplanetary Society . 36 : 496. Bibcode : 1983JBIS...36..496F . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Freitas, Robert A.; Valdes, Francisco (December 1985). "The search for extraterrestrial artifacts (SETA)". Acta Astronautica . 12 (12): 1027– 1034. Bibcode : 1985AcAau..12.1027F . doi : 10.1016/0094-5765(85)90031-1 . ^ Dyson, Freeman J. (June 3, 1960). "Search for Artificial Stellar Sources of Infrared Radiation". Science . 131 (3414): 1667– 1668. Bibcode : 1960Sci...131.1667D . doi : 10.1126/science.131.3414.1667 . PMID 17780673 . ^ a b Wright, J. T.; Mullan, B.; Sigurðsson, S.; Povich, M. S. (2014). "The Ĝ Infrared Search for Extraterrestrial Civilizations with Large Energy Supplies. I. Background and Justification".

The Astrophysical Journal . 792 (1): 27. arXiv : 1408.1134 . Bibcode : 2014ApJ...792...27W . doi : 10.1088/0004-637X/792/1/27 . ^ "Fermilab Dyson Sphere search program" . Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory. Archived from the original on March 6, 2006 . Retrieved February 10, 2008 . ^ Wright, J. T.; Mullan, B; Sigurdsson, S; Povich, M. S (2014). "The Ĝ Infrared Search for Extraterrestrial Civilizations with Large Energy Supplies. III.

The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series . 217 (2): 25. arXiv : 1504.03418 . Bibcode : 2015ApJS..217...25G . doi : 10.1088/0067-0049/217/2/25 . ^ "Alien Supercivilizations Absent from 100,000 Nearby Galaxies" . Scientific American . April 17, 2015. Archived from the original on June 22, 2015 . Retrieved June 29, 2015 . ^ Wright, Jason T.; Cartier, Kimberly M. S.; Zhao, Ming; Jontof-Hutter, Daniel; Ford, Eric B. (2015). "The Ĝ Search for Extraterrestrial Civilizations with Large Energy Supplies. IV.

The Signatures and Information Content of Transiting Megastructures" .

The Astrophysical Journal . 816 (1): 17. arXiv : 1510.04606 . Bibcode : 2016ApJ...816...17W . doi : 10.3847/0004-637X/816/1/17 . ^ Andersen, Ross (October 13, 2015). "The Most Mysterious Star in Our Galaxy" .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on July 20, 2017 . Retrieved October 13, 2015 . ^ Boyajian, Tabetha S.; et al. (2018). "The First Post-Kepler Brightness Dips of KIC 8462852" .

The Astrophysical Journal . 853 (1). L8. arXiv : 1801.00732 . Bibcode : 2018ApJ...853L...8B . doi : 10.3847/2041-8213/aaa405 . ^ Overbye, Dennis (January 10, 2018). "Magnetic Secrets of Mysterious Radio Bursts in a Faraway Galaxy" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on January 11, 2018 . Retrieved April 2, 2019 . ^ Ward, Peter D.; Brownlee, Donald (2000). Rare Earth . p. 368. doi : 10.1007/b97646 . ISBN 978-0-387-95289-5 . ^ Stern, Robert J.; Gerya, Taras V. (April 12, 2024). "The importance of continents, oceans and plate tectonics for the evolution of complex life: implications for finding extraterrestrial civilizations" . Scientific Reports . 14 (1): 8552. Bibcode : 2024NatSR..14.8552S . doi : 10.1038/s41598-024-54700-x . PMC 11015018 . PMID 38609425 . ^ The Nature of Nature: Examining the Role of Naturalism in Science , editors Bruce Gordon and William Dembski, Ch. 20 "The Chain of Accidents and the Rule of Law: The Role of Contingency and Necessity in Evolution" by Michael Shemer, published by Intercollegiate Studies Institute, 2010. ^ Is There A Simple Solution To The Fermi Paradox? . ^ Muro, Enrique M.; Ballesteros, Fernando J.; Luque, Bartolo; Bascompte, Jordi (2025). "The emergence of eukaryotes as an evolutionary algorithmic phase transition" . PNAS . 122 (13) e2422968122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12222968M . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2422968122 . PMC 12002324 . PMID 40146859 . ^ Steven V. W. Beckwith (2008). "Detecting Life-bearing Extrasolar Planets with Space Telescopes".

The Astrophysical Journal . 684 (2): 1404– 1415. arXiv : 0710.1444 . Bibcode : 2008ApJ...684.1404B . doi : 10.1086/590466 . ^ Sparks, W.B.; Hough, J.H.; Kolokolova, L.; Germer, T.A.; Chen, F.; DasSarma, S.; DasSarma, P.; Robb, F.T.; Manset, N.; Reid, I.N.; Macchetto, F.D.; Martin, W. (September 2009). "Circular polarization in scattered light as a possible biomarker". Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy and Radiative Transfer . 110 ( 14– 16): 1771– 1779. Bibcode : 2009JQSRT.110.1771S . doi : 10.1016/j.jqsrt.2009.02.028 . hdl : 2299/5925 . ^ a b Tarter, Jill (2006). "What is SETI?". Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences . 950 (1): 269– 275. Bibcode : 2001NYASA.950..269T . doi : 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2001.tb02144.x . PMID 11797755 . ^ "Galaxy Simulations Offer a New Solution to the Fermi Paradox" , Quanta Magazine "Abstraction Blog," Rebecca Boyle, March 7, 2019. "The sun has been around the center of the Milky Way 50 times," said Jonathan Carroll-Nellenback, astronomer at the University of Rochester. ^ "The Aliens Are Silent Because They Are Extinct" . Australian National University . January 21, 2016. Archived from the original on May 23, 2016 . Retrieved January 22, 2016 . ^ Melott AL, Lieberman BS, Laird CM, Martin LD, Medvedev MV, Thomas BC, Cannizzo JK, Gehrels N, Jackman CH (2004). "Did a gamma-ray burst initiate the late Ordovician mass extinction?" (PDF) . International Journal of Astrobiology . 3 (1): 55– 61. arXiv : astro-ph/0309415 . Bibcode : 2004IJAsB...3...55M . doi : 10.1017/S1473550404001910 . hdl : 1808/9204 . Archived (PDF) from the original on July 25, 2011 . Retrieved August 20, 2010 . ^ Nick Bostrom; Milan M. Ćirković. "12.5: The Fermi Paradox and Mass Extinctions". Global catastrophic risks . ^ Mazrouei, Sara; Ghent, Rebecca R.; Bottke, William F.; Parker, Alex H.; Gernon, Thomas M. (January 18, 2019). "Earth and Moon impact flux increased at the end of the Paleozoic". Science . 363 (6424): 253– 257. Bibcode : 2019Sci...363..253M . doi : 10.1126/science.aar4058 . PMID 30655437 . ^ a b von Hoerner, Sebastian (December 8, 1961). "The Search for Signals from Other Civilizations". Science . 134 (3493): 1839– 1843. Bibcode : 1961Sci...134.1839V . doi : 10.1126/science.134.3493.1839 . PMID 17831111 . ^ Hite, Kristen A.; Seitz, John L. (2020). Global Issues: an introduction . Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-119-53850-9 . OCLC 1127917585 . ^ Sotos, John G. (October 2019). "Biotechnology and the lifetime of technical civilizations". International Journal of Astrobiology . 18 (5): 445– 454. arXiv : 1709.01149 . Bibcode : 2019IJAsB..18..445S . doi : 10.1017/s1473550418000447 . ^ Bohannon, John (November 29, 2010). "Mirror-image cells could transform science – or kill us all" . Wired . Archived from the original on May 13, 2019 . Retrieved March 16, 2019 . ^ Frank, Adam (January 17, 2015). "Is a Climate Disaster Inevitable?" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on March 24, 2017 . Retrieved March 1, 2017 . ^ Bostrom, Nick . "Existential Risks Analyzing Human Extinction Scenarios and Related Hazards" . Archived from the original on April 27, 2011 . Retrieved October 4, 2009 . ^ Sagan, Carl. "Cosmic Search Vol. 1 No. 2" . Cosmic Search Magazine . Archived from the original on August 18, 2006 . Retrieved July 21, 2015 . ^ Hawking, Stephen. "Life in the Universe" . Public Lectures . University of Cambridge. Archived from the original on April 21, 2006 . Retrieved May 11, 2006 . ^ Yudkowsky, Eliezer (2008). "Artificial Intelligence as a Positive and Negative Factor in Global Risk".

Before this interval, radio is beyond the civilization's technical reach, and after this interval radio will be considered obsolete. ^ Stephenson, D. G. (1984). "Solar Power Satellites as Interstellar Beacons". Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society . 25 (1): 80. Bibcode : 1984QJRAS..25...80S . ^ The Future of SETI Archived May 24, 2019, at the Wayback Machine , Sky & Telescope , Seth Shostak, July 19, 2006. This article also discusses strategy for optical SETI. ^ Scharf, Caleb (August 10, 2022). "We Might Already Speak the Same Language As ET" . Nautilus Quarterly . Retrieved August 11, 2022 . ^ "Cosmic Search Vol. 1 No. 3" . Bigear.org. September 21, 2004. Archived from the original on October 27, 2010 . Retrieved July 3, 2010 . ^ Learned, J; Pakvasa, S; Zee, A (2009). "Galactic neutrino communication". Physics Letters B . 671 (1): 15– 19. arXiv : 0805.2429 . Bibcode : 2009PhLB..671...15L . doi : 10.1016/j.physletb.2008.11.057 . ^ Schombert, James. "Fermi's paradox (i.e. Where are they?)" Archived November 7, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Cosmology Lectures , University of Oregon. ^ Hamming, RW (1998). "Mathematics on a distant planet".

The American Mathematical Monthly . 105 (7): 640– 650. doi : 10.2307/2589247 . JSTOR 2589247 . ^ Confessions of an Alien Hunter: A Scientist's Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence , Seth Shostak (Senior Astronomer, SETI Institute), Ch. 7 "Beyond Gray and Hairless," p. 264, published by National Geographic, 2009. ^ Carl Sagan. Contact . Chapter 3, p. 49. ^ The Eerie Silence: Renewing Our Search for Alien Intelligenc e , Paul Davies (Beyond Center for Fundamental Concepts in Science, Arizona State University), Boston, New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2010, pp. 144–145. ^ Living Philosophies The Reflections of Some Eminent Men and Women of Our Time . Doubleday. 1990. p. 50. ^ Istvan, Zoltan (March 16, 2016). "Why Haven't We Met Aliens Yet? Because They've Evolved into AI" . Motherboard . Vice Media . Retrieved December 30, 2017 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Beyond "Fermi's Paradox" II: Questioning the Hart-Tipler Conjecture Archived March 22, 2019, at the Wayback Machine (middle of page), Universe Today , April 8, 2015. ^ If the Universe Is Teeming... , Stephen Webb, p. 28 . ^ a b Carrol-Nellenback, Jonathan; Frank, Adam; Wright, Jason; Scharf, Caleb (2019). "The Fermi Paradox and the Aurora Effect: Exo-civilization Settlement, Expansion, and Steady States" .

The Astronomical Journal . 158 (3) (published August 20, 2019): 117. arXiv : 1902.04450 . Bibcode : 2019AJ....158..117C . doi : 10.3847/1538-3881/ab31a3 . ^ a b Wood, Charlie (February 22, 2019). "Where are all the aliens? Struggling and hustling, just like us" . Popular Science . Archived from the original on February 22, 2019. ^ Haqq-Misra, Jacob; Fauchez, Thomas J. (December 2022). "Galactic Settlement of Low-mass Stars as a Resolution to the Fermi Paradox" .

The Astronomical Journal . 164 (6): 247. arXiv : 2210.10656 . Bibcode : 2022AJ....164..247H . doi : 10.3847/1538-3881/ac9afd . 247. ^ Loeb, Avi (January 5, 2022). "Virtual realities may solve Fermi's paradox about extraterrestrials" .

The Hill . Retrieved June 30, 2024 . ^ Bostrom, Nick (April 22, 2008). "Where Are They?" . MIT Technology Review . Retrieved October 5, 2020 . ^ Williams, Matt (November 28, 2023). "Why Don't We See Robotic Civilizations Rapidly Expanding Across the Universe?" . Universe Today . Retrieved June 30, 2024 . ^ Garrett, Michael A. (June 2024). "Is artificial intelligence the great filter that makes advanced technical civilisations rare in the universe?". Acta Astronautica . 219 : 731– 735. arXiv : 2405.00042 . Bibcode : 2024AcAau.219..731G . doi : 10.1016/j.actaastro.2024.03.052 . ^ a b Landis, Geoffrey (1998). "The Fermi Paradox: An Approach Based on Percolation Theory" . Journal of the British Interplanetary Society . 51 (5): 163– 166. Bibcode : 1998JBIS...51..163L . Archived from the original on September 27, 2006 . Retrieved June 6, 2004 . ^ a b Galera, E.; Galanti, G. R.; Kinouchi, O. (2018). "Invasion Percolation Solves Fermi Paradox but Challenges SETI Projects". International Journal of Astrobiology . * (4): 316– 322. doi : 10.1017/S1473550418000101 . ^ Scheffer, L.K. (1994). "Machine Intelligence, the Cost of Interstellar Travel and Fermi's Paradox". Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society . 35 : 157. Bibcode : 1994QJRAS..35..157S . ^ Fix, Blair (May 18, 2024). "A Tour of the Jevons Paradox: How Energy Efficiency Backfires" . Economics from the Top Down . Retrieved June 29, 2024 . ^ Balbi, Amedeo; Frank, Adam (December 28, 2023). "The oxygen bottleneck for technospheres". Nature Astronomy . 8 (1): 39– 43. doi : 10.1038/s41550-023-02112-8 . ^ a b "Why David Brin Hates Yoda, Loves Radical Transparency" . Wired . August 8, 2012. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. ^ Loeb, Abraham (January 8, 2018). "Are Alien Civilizations Technologically Advanced?" . Scientific American . Archived from the original on January 12, 2018 . Retrieved January 11, 2018 . ^ Johnson, George (August 18, 2014). "The Intelligent-Life Lottery" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on March 24, 2017 . Retrieved March 1, 2017 . ^ Conor Feehly (October 9, 2024). "Why haven't we found intelligent alien civilizations? There may be a 'universal limit to technological development' " . Space.com . Retrieved October 21, 2024 . ^ Turnbull, Margaret C.; Tarter, Jill C. (March 2003). "Target Selection for SETI. I. A Catalog of Nearby Habitable Stellar Systems".

The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series . 145 (1): 181– 198. arXiv : astro-ph/0210675 . Bibcode : 2003ApJS..145..181T . doi : 10.1086/345779 . ^ The Staff at the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center (December 1975). "The Arecibo message of November, 1974". Icarus . 26 (4): 462– 466. Bibcode : 1975Icar...26..462. . doi : 10.1016/0019-1035(75)90116-5 . "A radio telescope in M13 operating at the transmission frequency, and pointed toward the Sun at the time the message arrives at the receiving site will observe a flux density from the message which will exceed the flux density of the Sun itself by a factor of roughly 10 7 . Indeed, at that unique time, the Sun will appear to the receptors to be by far the brightest star of the Milky Way." ^ Baum, Seth D.; Haqq-Misra, Jacob D.; Domagal-Goldman, Shawn D. (June 2011). "Would contact with extraterrestrials benefit or harm humanity? A scenario analysis". Acta Astronautica . 68 ( 11– 12): 2114– 2129. arXiv : 1104.4462 . Bibcode : 2011AcAau..68.2114B . doi : 10.1016/j.actaastro.2010.10.012 . If ETI search for us just as we search for them, i.e. by scanning the sky at radio and optical wavelengths the radiation that has been unintentionally leaking and intentionally transmitted from Earth may have already alerted any nearby ETI to our presence and may eventually alert more distant ETI. Once ETI become alerted to our presence, it will take at least as many years for us to realize that they know. ^ Webb 2015 , pp. 62–71. ^ Vakoch, Douglas (November 15, 2001). "Decoding E.T.: Ancient Tongues Point Way To Learning Alien Languages" . SETI Institute. Archived from the original on May 23, 2009 . Retrieved August 19, 2010 . ^ Adam Stevens; Duncan Forgan; Jack O'Malley James (2015). "Observational Signatures of Self–Destructive Civilisations". International Journal of Astrobiology . 15 (4): 333– 344. arXiv : 1507.08530 . doi : 10.1017/S1473550415000397 . ^ Newman, W.T.; Sagan, C. (1981). "Galactic civilizations: Population. dynamics and interstellar diffusion". Icarus . 46 (3): 293– 327. Bibcode : 1981Icar...46..293N . doi : 10.1016/0019-1035(81)90135-4 . hdl : 2060/19790011801 . ^ Wall, Mike (October 26, 2017). "Where Are All the Intelligent Aliens? Maybe They're Trapped in Buried Oceans" . Space.com . ^ Stern, S. Alan (2017). "An Answer to Fermi's Paradox in the Prevalence of Ocean Worlds?". Aas/Division for Planetary Sciences Meeting Abstracts #49 . 49 . Bibcode : 2017DPS....4920203S . We suggest another—namely that the great majority of worlds with biology and civilizations are interior water ocean worlds (WOWs) ^ Wandel, Amri (December 2022). "The Fermi Paradox Revisited: Technosignatures and the Contact Era" .

The Astrophysical Journal . 941 (2): 184. arXiv : 2211.16505 . Bibcode : 2022ApJ...941..184W . doi : 10.3847/1538-4357/ac9e00 . ^ Alexander Zaitsev (2006). "The SETI paradox". arXiv : physics/0611283 . ^ The Associated Press (February 13, 2015). "Should We Call the Cosmos Seeking ET? Or Is That Risky?" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on September 6, 2015 . Retrieved March 1, 2017 . ^ "Protocols for an ETI Signal Detection: Concerning Activities Following the Detection of Extraterrestrial Intelligence" . SETI Institute. Archived from the original on July 18, 2015 . Retrieved July 12, 2015 . ^ Michaud, M. (2003). "Ten decisions that could shake the world". Space Policy . 19 (2): 131– 950. Bibcode : 2003SpPol..19..131M . doi : 10.1016/S0265-9646(03)00019-5 . ^ Gutting, Gary (October 5, 2011). "Will the Aliens Be Nice? Don't Bet On It" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on October 1, 2019 . Retrieved May 29, 2020 . ^ Carrigan, Richard A. (2006). "Do potential SETI signals need to be decontaminated?". Acta Astronautica . 58 (2): 112– 117. Bibcode : 2006AcAau..58..112C . doi : 10.1016/j.actaastro.2005.05.004 . ^ Marsden, P. (1998). "Memetics and social contagion: Two sides of the same coin" . Journal of Memetics-Evolutionary Models of Information Transmission . 2 (2): 171– 185. Archived from the original on October 12, 2011 . Retrieved October 20, 2011 . ^ A. Vakoch, Douglas (April 3, 2017). "Hawking's fear of an alien invasion may explain the Fermi Paradox". Theology and Science . 15 (2): 134– 138. doi : 10.1080/14746700.2017.1299380 . ^ Cramer, John (1987). "Self-Reproducing Machines From Another Planet: THE FORGE OF GOD by Greg Bear" . Los Angeles Times . ^ "the_dark_forest" . warwick.ac.uk . Retrieved March 25, 2024 . ^ Kun Kun (June 4, 2012). "But Some of Us Are Looking at the Stars" . ChinaFile . Translated by Lucy Johnston . Retrieved October 18, 2022 . ^ Liu, Cixim (2015).

The Dark Forest . Three-Body Problem #2. Translated by Ken Liu (First ed.). New York: Tor Books. p. 484. ISBN 978-0-7653-7708-1 . ^ Hsu, Jeremy (October 31, 2015). "China's 'Dark Forest' Answer to 'Star Wars' Optimism" . Discover Magazine . ^ Evans, Jon (January 20, 2019). "Technology's dark forest" . TechCrunch . ^ Williams, Matt (January 7, 2021). "Beyond 'Fermi's Paradox' XVI: What Is the 'Dark Forest' Hypothesis?" . Universe Today . Retrieved October 18, 2022 . ^ Paradis, Justine (February 18, 2022). "Outside/In: What is the Dark Forest Theory?" . New Hampshire Public Radio . Retrieved October 18, 2022 . ^ Kevra, Derek; Lue, Maurielle; et al. (October 11, 2022). "Dark Forest theory: should we try to contact aliens?" . FOX 2 Detroit . Retrieved October 18, 2022 . ^ a b Ball, J (1973). "The zoo hypothesis". Icarus . 19 (3): 347– 349. Bibcode : 1973Icar...19..347B . doi : 10.1016/0019-1035(73)90111-5 . ^ Forgan, Duncan H. (October 2011). "Spatio-temporal constraints on the zoo hypothesis, and the breakdown of total hegemony". International Journal of Astrobiology . 10 (4): 341– 347. arXiv : 1105.2497 . Bibcode : 2011IJAsB..10..341F . doi : 10.1017/s147355041100019x . ^ Forgan, Duncan H. (October 2017). "The Galactic Club or Galactic Cliques? Exploring the limits of interstellar hegemony and the Zoo Hypothesis". International Journal of Astrobiology . 16 (4): 349– 354. arXiv : 1608.08770 . Bibcode : 2017IJAsB..16..349F . doi : 10.1017/s1473550416000392 . hdl : 10023/10869 . ^ De Visscher, Alex (October 2020). "Artificial versus biological intelligence in the Cosmos: clues from a stochastic analysis of the Drake equation". International Journal of Astrobiology . 19 (5): 353– 359. arXiv : 2001.11644 . Bibcode : 2020IJAsB..19..353D . doi : 10.1017/S1473550420000129 . ^ Hair, Thomas W. (April 2011). "Temporal dispersion of the emergence of intelligence: an inter-arrival time analysis". International Journal of Astrobiology . 10 (2): 131– 135. Bibcode : 2011IJAsB..10..131H . doi : 10.1017/S1473550411000024 . ^ Tough, Allen (1986). "What Role Will Extraterrestrials Play in Humanity's Future?" (PDF) . Journal of the British Interplanetary Society . 39 (11): 492– 498. Bibcode : 1986JBIS...39..491T . Archived (PDF) from the original on June 30, 2015 . Retrieved June 27, 2015 . ^ Crawford, Ian A.; Schulze-Makuch, Dirk (December 28, 2023). "Is the apparent absence of extraterrestrial technological civilizations down to the zoo hypothesis or nothing?" (PDF) . Nature Astronomy . 8 (1): 44– 49. Bibcode : 2024NatAs...8...44C . doi : 10.1038/s41550-023-02134-2 . ^ Baxter, Stephen (2001). "The Planetarium Hypothesis: A Resolution of the Fermi Paradox". Journal of the British Interplanetary Society . 54 (5/6): 210– 216. Bibcode : 2001JBIS...54..210B . ^ Ray Villard (August 10, 2012). "Why Do People Believe in UFOs?" . Discovery News. Archived from the original on March 28, 2016 . Retrieved March 18, 2016 . ^ Paul Speigel (October 18, 2012). "More Believe in Space Aliens Than in God According To U.K. Survey" . Huffington Post . Archived from the original on April 9, 2017 . Retrieved April 8, 2017 . ^ Shermer, Michael (2011). "UFOs, UAPs and CRAPs". Scientific American . 304 (4): 90. Bibcode : 2011SciAm.304d..90S . doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican0411-90 . PMID 21495489 . ^ A. Tough (1990). "A critical examination of factors that might encourage secrecy". Acta Astronautica . 21 (2): 97– 102. Bibcode : 1990AcAau..21...97T . doi : 10.1016/0094-5765(90)90134-7 . ^ Ashlee Vance (July 31, 2006). "SETI urged to fess up over alien signals" .

The Register . Archived from the original on April 2, 2007 . Retrieved August 10, 2017 . ^ Speigel, Lee (December 6, 2011). "UFO Hunters Keep Pressing White House For Answers Through 'We The People' Petitions" .

The Great Silence: Science and Philosophy of Fermi's Paradox . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-255286-0 . Crowe, Michael J. (2008).