From the 18th century, following the union of Denmark and Norway and the establishment of the Nuuk settlement , Greenland gradually became associated with Denmark. Greenland has been inhabited at intervals over at least the last 4,500 years by circumpolar peoples whose forebears migrated there from what is now Canada. Norsemen from Norway settled the uninhabited southern part of Greenland beginning in the 10th century (having previously settled Iceland ), and their descendants lived in Greenland for 400 years until disappearing in the late 15th century.

From the late 15th century, the Portuguese attempted to find the northern route to Asia, which ultimately led to the earliest cartographic depiction of the coastline.

In the 17th century, Dano-Norwegian explorers reached Greenland again, finding their earlier settlement extinct and reestablishing a permanent Scandinavian presence.

When Denmark and Norway separated in 1814, Greenland was transferred from the Norwegian to the Danish crown.

The 1953 Constitution of Denmark ended Greenland's status as a colony, integrating it fully into the Danish state.

In the 1979 Greenlandic home rule referendum , Denmark granted home rule to Greenland.

In the 2008 Greenlandic self-government referendum , Greenlanders voted for the Self-Government Act which transferred more power from the Danish government to the local Naalakkersuisut (Greenlandic government). Under this structure, Greenland gradually assumed responsibility for governmental services and areas of competence.

The Danish government retains control of citizenship, monetary policy, security policies, and foreign affairs. With the melting of the ice due to global warming , its abundance of mineral wealth, and its strategic position between Eurasia , North America, and the Arctic zone, Greenland holds strategic importance for the Kingdom of Denmark, NATO , and the European Union.

Since 2025, the United States has pursued threats to annex Greenland, triggering the Greenland crisis . Most residents of Greenland are Inuit .

The population is concentrated mainly on the southwest coast, strongly influenced by climatic and geographical factors, and the rest of the island is sparsely populated. With a population of 56,583 (2022), Greenland is the least densely populated country in the world. Greenland is socially progressive, like metropolitan Denmark; education and healthcare are free, and LGBTQ rights in Greenland are some of the most extensive in the world. Sixty-seven percent of its electricity production comes from renewable energy, mostly from hydropower . Etymology The early Norse settlers named the island Greenland .

In the Icelandic sagas , the Norwegian Erik the Red was exiled from Iceland with his father, Thorvald Asvaldsson , who had committed manslaughter. With his extended family and his thralls ( slaves or serfs ) , he set out in ships to explore an icy land known to lie to the northwest.

After finding a habitable area and settling there, he named it Grœnland (translated as "Greenland"), supposedly in the hope that the pleasant name would attract settlers.

The Saga of Erik the Red states: "In the summer, Erik left to settle in the country he had found, which he called Greenland, as he said people would be attracted there if it had a favourable name." The name of the territory in the Greenlandic language is Kalaallit Nunaat , ' land of the Kalaallit ' , the Kalaallit being the principal group of Greenlandic Inuit who inhabit the territory's western region.

The Greenlandic Inuit term Nunaat does not include waters and ice. History Main article: History of Greenland For a chronological guide, see Timeline of Greenland . Early Palaeo-Inuit cultures Areas of Independence I and Independence II cultures around Independence Fjord In prehistoric times, Greenland was home to several successive Palaeo-Inuit cultures known primarily through archaeological finds.

The earliest entry of the Palaeo-Inuit into Greenland is thought to have occurred about 2500 BC.

From about 2500 BC to 800 BC, southern and western Greenland was inhabited by the Saqqaq culture . Most finds of remains from that period have been around Disko Bay , including the site of Saqqaq, for which the culture is named.

From 2400 BC to 1300 BC, the Independence I culture existed in northern Greenland. It was a part of the Arctic small-tool tradition . Towns including Deltaterrasserne appeared. About 800 BC the Saqqaq culture disappeared, and the Early Dorset culture emerged in western Greenland and the Independence II culture in northern Greenland. It is unknown whether the Dorset people ever encountered the later Thule people .

The people of the Dorset culture lived mainly by hunting seals and reindeer. Norse settlement Main article: Norse settlements in Greenland From 986, the west coast was settled by Icelanders and Norwegians , through a contingent of 14 boats led by Erik the Red. They formed three settlements – the Eastern Settlement , the Western Settlement , and the Middle Settlement – on fjords near the southwestern tip of the island. They shared the island with the late Dorset culture inhabitants, who occupied the northern and western parts, and later with those of the Thule culture who entered from the north. Norse Greenlanders submitted to Norwegian rule in 1261 under the Kingdom of Norway .

The Kingdom of Norway entered a personal union with Denmark in 1380, and from 1397 was a part of the Kalmar Union . Norse settlements such as Brattahlíð thrived for centuries before disappearing in the 15th century, perhaps at the onset of the Little Ice Age . Except for some runic inscriptions, the only contemporary records or historiography that survive from the Norse settlements are of their contact with Iceland or Norway. Medieval Norwegian sagas and historical works mention Greenland's economy, the bishops of Gardar , and the collection of tithes. A chapter in the Konungs skuggsjá ( The King's Mirror ) describes Norse Greenland's exports, imports, and grain cultivation. Estimated extent of Arctic cultures in Greenland from 900 AD to 1500 AD. Coloured areas on each map indicate the extent and migration patterns over time of the Dorset , Thule , and Norse cultures. Icelandic saga accounts of life in Greenland were composed in the 13th century and later but are not primary sources for the history of early Norse Greenland. Those accounts are closer to primary for more contemporaneous accounts of late Norse Greenland. Modern understanding therefore mostly depends on the physical data from archaeological sites. Interpretation of ice-core and clam-shell data suggests that between AD 800 and 1300 the regions around the fjords of southern Greenland had a relatively mild climate, several degrees Celsius warmer than usual in the North Atlantic with trees and herbaceous plants growing and livestock being farmed. Barley was grown as a crop up to the 70th parallel.

The ice cores show that Greenland has had dramatic temperature shifts many times in the past 100,000 years. Similarly the Icelandic Book of Settlements records famines during the winters, in which "the old and helpless were killed and thrown over cliffs". These Norse settlements vanished during the 14th and early 15th centuries.

The demise of the Western Settlement coincides with a decrease in summer and winter temperatures. A study of North Atlantic seasonal temperature variability during the Little Ice Age showed a significant decrease in maximum summer temperatures beginning about the turn of the 14th century – as much as 6 to 8 °C (11 to 14 °F) lower than modern summer temperatures.

The study also found that the lowest winter temperatures of the last 2,000 years occurred in the late 14th century and early 15th century.

The Eastern Settlement was probably abandoned in the early to mid-15th century, during this cold period.

The last written records of the Norse Greenlanders are from a 1408 marriage at Hvalsey Church , which is now the best-preserved Norse ruin. Theories drawn from archaeological excavations at Herjolfsnes in the 1920s suggest that the condition of human bones from this period indicates that the Norse population was malnourished, possibly because of soil erosion resulting from the Norsemen's destruction of natural vegetation in the course of farming, turf-cutting, and wood-cutting. Malnutrition may also have resulted from widespread deaths from pandemic plague; the decline in temperatures during the Little Ice Age; and armed conflicts with the Skrælings (Norse word for Inuit, meaning "wretches" ).

The Icelandic Annals record that in 1379, the Skrælings killed 18 Norse Greenlanders. Recent archaeological studies somewhat challenge the general assumption that the Norse colonization had a dramatic negative environmental effect on the vegetation. Data support traces of a possible Norse soil amendment strategy. More recent evidence suggests that the Norse, who never numbered more than about 2,500, gradually abandoned the Greenland settlements over the 15th century as walrus ivory , the most valuable export from Greenland, decreased in price because of competition with other sources of higher-quality ivory, and that there was actually little evidence of starvation or difficulties. Other explanations of the disappearance of the Norse settlements have been proposed: Lack of support from the homeland. Ship-borne marauders (such as Basque , English, or German pirates), rather than Skrælings , could have plundered and displaced the Greenlanders. They were "the victims of hidebound thinking and of a hierarchical society dominated by the Church and the biggest land owners.

In their reluctance to see themselves as anything but Europeans, the Greenlanders failed to adopt the kind of apparel that the Inuit employed as protection against the cold and damp or to borrow any of the Eskimo hunting gear." That portion of the Greenlander population willing to adopt Inuit ways and means intermarried with and assimilated into the Inuit community.

The structure of Norse society created a conflict between the short-term interests of those in power, and the long-term interests of the society as a whole. Thule culture The Thule people are the ancestors of the current Greenlandic population. No genes from the Palaeo-Inuit Dorset culture have been found in the present population of Greenland.

The Thule culture migrated eastward from what is now known as Alaska around 1000 AD, reaching Greenland around 1300.

The Paleo-Eskimos had been completely replaced by the Thule people (the ancestors of the Inuit), who were descended from people of the Birnirk culture of Siberia.

The Thule culture was the first to introduce technological innovations such as dog sleds and toggling harpoons to Greenland. There is an account of contact and conflict with the Norse population, as told by the Inuit. It is republished in The Norse Atlantic Sagas , by Gwyn Jones. Jones reports that there is also an account of perhaps the same incident, of more doubtful provenance, told by the Norse side. European interest The Cantino planisphere , completed by an unknown cartographer in 1502, depicts Greenland as a Portuguese territory claimed by King Manuel I Summer Night Off the Greenland Coast Circa Year 1000 , by Carl Rasmussen , 1875 Hans Egede (1686–1758), Lutheran missionary, credited with revitalising Denmark's relationship with Greenland In 1500, King Manuel I of Portugal sent Gaspar Corte-Real to Greenland in search of a Northwest Passage to Asia which, according to the Treaty of Tordesillas , was part of Portugal's sphere of influence.

In 1501, Corte-Real returned with his brother, Miguel Corte-Real .

After finding the sea frozen, they headed south and arrived in Labrador and Newfoundland . Upon the brothers' return to Portugal, the cartographic information supplied by Corte-Real was incorporated into a map of the world which was presented to Ercole I d'Este , Duke of Ferrara , by Alberto Cantino in 1502.

The Cantino planisphere , made in Lisbon, accurately depicts the southern coastline of Greenland.

In 1605–1607, King Christian IV of Denmark and Norway sent a series of expeditions to Greenland and Arctic waterways to locate the lost eastern Norse settlement and assert Danish-Norwegian sovereignty over Greenland.

The expeditions were mostly unsuccessful, partly due to leaders who lacked experience with the difficult Arctic ice and weather conditions, and partly because the expedition leaders were given instructions to search for the Eastern Settlement on the east coast of Greenland just north of Cape Farewell , which is almost inaccessible due to southward drifting ice .

The pilot on all three trips was English explorer James Hall .

After the Norse settlements died off the various Inuit groups prevailed, but the Dano-Norwegian government never forgot or relinquished the claims to Greenland that it had inherited from the Norse.

When it re-established access to Greenland in the early 17th century, Denmark-Norway asserted its sovereignty claims over the island.

In 1721 a joint mercantile and clerical expedition led by Dano-Norwegian missionary Hans Egede was sent to Greenland, not knowing whether a Norse civilization remained there. This expedition was part of the Dano-Norwegian colonization of the Americas .

After 15 years in Greenland, Hans Egede left his son Paul Egede in charge of the mission there and returned to Denmark, where he established a Greenland Seminary.

On 8 April 1941, the United States occupied Greenland to defend it against a possible invasion by Germany.

The United States' occupation of Greenland continued until 1945. Greenland was able to buy goods from the United States and Canada by selling cryolite from the mine at Ivittuut .

The United States military used Bluie as a code name for Greenland, where they kept several bases named "Bluie (East or West) (sequential numeral)".

The major air bases were Bluie West-1 at Narsarsuaq and Bluie West-8 at Søndre Strømfjord (Kangerlussuaq), both of which are still used as international airports. American sailors interacting with Greenlandic locals during World War II During this war, the system of government changed: Governor Eske Brun ruled the island under a law of 1925 that allowed governors to take control under extreme circumstances; Governor Aksel Svane was transferred to the United States to lead the commission to supply Greenland.

The Danish Sirius Patrol guarded the northeastern shores of Greenland in 1942 using dog sleds. They detected several German weather stations and alerted American troops, who destroyed the facilities.

After the collapse of the Third Reich, Albert Speer briefly considered escaping in a small aeroplane to hide out in Greenland but changed his mind and decided to surrender to the United States Armed Forces . Greenland had a protected and very isolated society until 1940. It was a colony, and it was believed that its society would be subject to exploitation or even eradication if the country was opened up.

The Danish government had maintained a strict monopoly of Greenlandic trade , allowing no more than small scale barter trading with British whalers.

In wartime Greenland developed a sense of self-reliance through self-government and independent communication with the outside world. Despite this change, in 1946 a commission including the highest Greenlandic council, the Landsrådene , recommended patience and no radical reform of the system. United States and the Cold War The United States offered to buy Greenland from Denmark for US$100 million in 1946 (equivalent to US$1.7 billion in 2025). Denmark firmly rejected the offer, as the island was seen as an integral part of the Danish kingdom, important to its history and national identity.

In 1951 Denmark and the United States signed the Greenland Defense Agreement, which allowed the United States to keep its military bases in Greenland, and to establish new bases or "defence areas" if Denmark agreed, and if deemed necessary by NATO .

The US military could freely use and move between these defence areas, but was not to infringe upon Danish sovereignty in Greenland.

The United States greatly expanded Thule Air Base between 1951 and 1953 as part of a unified NATO defence strategy.

The local population of three nearby villages was moved more than 100 km (62 miles) away in the winter.

The United States tried to construct a subterranean network of secret nuclear missile launch sites in the Greenlandic ice cap, named Project Iceworm . According to documents declassified in 1996, this project was managed from Camp Century from 1960 to 1966 before abandonment as unworkable.

The missiles were never fielded, and necessary consent from the Danish Government to do so was never sought.

The Danish government was not aware of the programme's mission until 1997, when they discovered it while looking in the declassified documents for records related to the crash of a nuclear-equipped B-52 bomber near the Thule air base in 1968. Home rule and self-rule (1945–present) Queen Margrethe II of Denmark , during whose reign (1972–2024) Greenland received home-rule in 1979 and self-rule in 2009. Queen Margrethe II Land is named after her.

The first step towards a change of government was initiated with the Greenland Commission , which operated from 1948 to 1950. With its final report, the G-50, the first steps toward the modernization of Greenland were taken.

The report recommended that Greenland become a modern welfare state , modelled after Denmark proper and with Denmark's development as sponsor, and the trade monopoly was abolished. With the 1953 Danish constitution, Greenland's colonial status ended, and the island was incorporated into the Danish realm as an amt ( ' county ' ), and thus fully integrated into Denmark like all other Danish counties. Danish citizenship was extended to Greenlanders. Danish policies toward Greenland consisted of a strategy of cultural assimilation, fostered by a campaign of social modernization that included a large expansion of housing and infrastructure in the Danish mold to encourage the populace to move from traditional villages and trading posts into urban centers; the Greenland Provincial Council supported this expansion. One such project, the housing development Blok P in Nuuk, Denmark's largest, came to house nearly 1% of the population before its unsuitability to its many Inuit residents led the government to demolish it in 2012.

The Danish government also allowed the introduction of the Danish custom of drinking alcohol , till then not sold in Greenland.

During this period, the Danish government promoted the exclusive use of the Danish language in official matters, and required Greenlanders to go to Denmark for their post-secondary education. Many Greenlandic children grew up in boarding schools in southern Denmark, and some lost their cultural ties to Greenland.

While the policies "succeeded" in the sense of shifting Greenlanders from being primarily subsistence hunters into being urbanized wage earners, the Greenlandic elite began to reassert a Greenlandic cultural identity. A movement developed in favour of Greenlandic independence , reaching its peak in the 1970s. A spectrum of local political parties, broadly along European rightist-to-leftist lines, has also formed, at least one (the Inuit Ataqatigiit ) asserting independence.

In 1973, an amicable border dispute between Denmark and Canada arose over the ownership of Hans Island , a small island in Nares Strait directly between Greenland and the Canadian Northwest Territories (in present-day Nunavut ).

The island remained in dispute until 2022, when both countries agreed to split the disputed island roughly in half. Due to political complications in relation to Denmark's entry into the European Common Market in 1972, Denmark began to seek a different status for Greenland, resulting in the Home Rule Act of 1979. A referendum was held on 17 January 1979. This gave Greenland limited autonomy, with its own legislature taking control of some internal policies, while the Parliament of Denmark maintained full control of external policies, security, and natural resources.

The Danish monarch remains Greenland's head of state .

In 1985, Greenland left the European Economic Community (EEC), as it did not agree with the EEC 's commercial fishing regulations and an EEC ban on sealskin products.

As in metropolitan Denmark, Greenland has seen significant expansion of the welfare state in the postwar era. Education and healthcare are free, and LGBTQ rights in Greenland are some of the most extensive in the Americas and the world.

In 1987, the University of Greenland was founded to provide Greenlanders with higher education in their own language and country. Premier Jens-Frederik Nielsen at the 2025 opening of the Danish parliament in Copenhagen . Greenland has retained strong ties with Denmark since self-rule. Greenland voters approved a referendum on greater autonomy on 25 November 2008. According to one study, the 2008 vote created what "can be seen as a system between home rule and full independence".

On 21 June 2009, Greenland gained self-rule with provisions for assuming responsibility for self-government of its judicial affairs , policing matters, and natural resources . Also, Greenlanders were recognized as a separate people under international law . Denmark maintains control of the territory's foreign affairs and defence matters, and upholds an annual block grant of 3.2 billion kr.

As Greenland begins to collect revenues from its natural resources, this grant will gradually be diminished; this is generally considered to be a step toward the territory's eventual full independence from Denmark.

In 2009, Greenlandic was declared the sole official language of Greenland at a historic ceremony. Greenland crisis Main article: Greenland crisis Greenlandic leader Jens-Frederik Nielsen announcing "We choose Denmark" at a January 2026 press conference with Mette Frederiksen in response to Trump's threats to invade or annex the country During the second presidency of Donald Trump , the United States has pursued a campaign to annex Greenland by various means. This followed a failed attempt by Trump to purchase Greenland during his first presidency , that was firmly turned down by Danish Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen .

The Danish Defence Intelligence Service included the United States as a potential threat to national security alongside Russia and China in its threat assessment that year.

The nearest countries are Canada, with which it shares a maritime border to the west and southwest across Nares Strait and Baffin Bay, as well as a shared land border on Hans Island ; and Iceland to the southeast. It is the largest constituent country by area in the world and is the fourth largest country subdivision in the world and largest in North America.

The total area is 2,166,086 km 2 (836,330 sq mi) (including other offshore minor islands), of which the Greenland ice sheet covers 1,755,637 km 2 (677,855 sq mi) (81%) and has a volume of approximately 2,850,000 km 3 (680,000 cu mi).

The highest point is Gunnbjørn Fjeld at 3,700 m (12,100 ft) of the Watkins Range ( East Greenland mountain range ).

The majority of Greenland, however, is less than 1,500 m (4,900 ft) in elevation.

The lowest temperature ever recorded in the Northern Hemisphere was recorded near the topographic summit of the Greenland ice sheet, on 22 December 1991, when the temperature reached −69.6 °C (−93.3 °F).

In Nuuk, the average daily temperature varies over the seasons from −5.1 to 9.9 °C (22.8 to 49.8 °F). Below the ice there is a series of canyons, the biggest called Greenland's Grand Canyon which was formed by flowing rivers of water from the repeated cycle of ice melting and new ice forming. Near the coast, elevations rise suddenly and steeply.

The ice flows generally to the coast from the centre of the island. A survey led by French scientist Paul-Emile Victor in 1951 concluded that under the ice sheet Greenland is composed of three large islands. This is disputed, but if it is so, they would be separated by narrow straits, reaching the sea at Ilulissat Icefjord , at Greenland's Grand Canyon and south of Nordostrundingen . All towns and settlements of Greenland are situated along the ice-free coast, with the population being concentrated along the west coast.

The northeastern part of Greenland is not part of any municipality and is the site of the world's largest national park, Northeast Greenland National Park .

The polar explorer and anthropologist Knud Rasmussen (1879–1933), called the "father of Eskimology ", was the first to explore the Greenland ice sheet by dog sled . Ludvig Mylius-Erichsen (1872–1907), who died while commander of the 1906–1908 Denmark expedition , documenting vast areas of unexplored coastlines and fjords At least four scientific expedition stations and camps had been established on the ice sheet in the ice-covered central part of Greenland (indicated as pale blue in the adjacent map): Eismitte , North Ice , North GRIP Camp and Raven Skiway. There is a year-round station Summit Camp on the ice sheet, established in 1989.

The radio station Jørgen Brønlund Fjord was, until 1950, the northernmost permanent outpost in the world.

The extreme north of Greenland, Peary Land , is not covered by an ice sheet because the air there is too dry to produce snow, which is essential in the production and maintenance of an ice sheet. Northernmost land Main article: Northernmost point of land The northernmost point of land on Earth was long thought to be Cape Morris Jesup at the northern tip of mainland Greenland. However, in 1969 a Canadian team surveyed Kaffeklubben Island (latitude 83° 39′ 45″ N), which was first recorded in 1900 and first visited in 1921, and determined that its northernmost point is 750 metres (2,460 ft) north of Cape Morris Jesup. It is thus the northernmost undisputed permanent land. Other points have been claimed to be the northernmost point, with dispute over the title arising from ice sheets, water movement and inundation, and storm activity that may build, shift, or destroy banks of gravelly moraine material.

In 1978 Uffe Petersen, a member of the Danish Geodetic Institute , discovered Oodaaq Island at 83° 40' 32.5" N. Its last confirmed sighting was in 1979.

The Greenland ice sheet continually loses some mass from ice calving at its coasts, but this used to be balanced by the accumulation of snowfall. However, Greenland has been warming since around 1900, and from the 1980s the losses became larger than the gains.

After 1996, Greenland has not had a single year when it did not lose ice mass on average.

In the 2010s, the Greenland ice sheet melted at its fastest rate for at least the past 12,000 years and it is on track to exceed that later in the 21st century.

In 2012, 2019 and 2021, so-called "massive melting events" occurred when practically the entire surface of the ice sheet was melting and no accumulation took place.

During the 2021 event, rain fell at Greenland's highest point for the first time in recorded history, an event so unexpected that the research station at the summit had no rain gauges for the occasion.

As with the ice loss elsewhere in the world, the melting contributed and continues to contribute to sea level rise . Between 2012 and 2017, the Greenland melting added an average of 0.68 millimetres (0.027 in) per year, equal to 37% of sea level rise from land ice sources (excluding thermal expansion of water from the continual increase in the ocean heat content ).

By the end of the 21st century, the melting of Greenland alone is projected to add between ~ The large quantities of meltwater also affect the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation by diluting key currents, slowing it down. Due to this input of fresh meltwater, the circulation may even collapse outright with widespread detrimental effects, although research suggests this is likely only if the highest possible warming is sustained for multiple centuries. Greenland's ice sheet has a volume of ~3,000,000 cubic kilometres (700,000 cu mi). If it were all to melt, global sea level would increase by ~7.5 m (25 ft) from this cause alone. However, research shows that it will take at least 1,000 years for the ice sheet to disappear even with very high rates of global warming, and around 10,000 years under lower rates of warming (which still cross the threshold for the ice sheet's disappearance). This threshold likely lies between 1.7 °C (3.1 °F) and 2.3 °C (4.1 °F). Reducing the warming back to 1.5 °C (2.7 °F) or lower above preindustrial levels (such as through large-scale carbon dioxide removal ) would arrest the losses but still cause greater ultimate sea level rise than if the threshold had never been exceeded. Further, 1.5 °C (2.7 °F) appears to commit the Greenland ice sheet to 1.4 m ( 4 + 1 ⁄ 2 ft) of sea level rise. A study published in January 2025 in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences reports an "abrupt, coherent, climate-driven transformation" in the states of lakes in Greenland from "blue" (more transparent) to "brown" (less transparent) after a season of both record heat and rainfall drove change in these systems, which may have reached a tipping point . These changes are said to alter "numerous physical, chemical, and biological lake features", and are said to be unprecedented.

In 2007, the existence of a new island was announced. Named Uunartoq Qeqertaq ( ' warming island ' ), this land mass was present off the coast of Greenland but was covered by a glacier , and therefore presumed to be a peninsula. This glacier was discovered in 2002 to be shrinking rapidly, and by 2007 it had completely melted away, leaving the exposed island.

The sea is rich in fish and invertebrates, especially in the milder West Greenland Current ; a large part of the Greenland fauna is associated with marine-based food chains, including large colonies of seabirds.

The few native land mammals in Greenland include the polar bear , reindeer (introduced by Europeans), arctic fox , arctic hare , musk ox , collared lemming , ermine , and arctic wolf .

The last four are found naturally only in East Greenland , having immigrated from Ellesmere Island . There are dozens of species of seals and whales along the coast. Land fauna consists predominantly of animals which have spread from North America or, in the case of many birds and insects, from Europe. There are no native or free-living reptiles or amphibians on the island. Phytogeographically , Greenland belongs to the Arctic province of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom .

The island is sparsely populated in vegetation; plant life consists mainly of grassland and small shrubs, which are regularly grazed by livestock.

The most common tree native to Greenland is the European white birch ( Betula pubescens ) along with grey-leaf willow ( Salix glauca ), rowan ( Sorbus aucuparia ), common juniper ( Juniperus communis ) and other smaller trees, mainly willows. Greenland's flora consists of about 500 species of "higher" plants, such as flowering plants , ferns , horsetails and lycopodiophyta . Of the other groups, the lichens are the most diverse, with about 950 species; there are 600–700 species of fungi; mosses and bryophytes are also found. Most of Greenland's higher plants have circumpolar or circumboreal distributions; only a dozen species of saxifrage and hawkweed are endemic . A few plant species were introduced by the Norsemen, such as cow vetch . Humpback whale in Disko Bay near Ilulissat (Jacobshavn ) The terrestrial vertebrates of Greenland include the Greenland dog , which was introduced by the Inuit , as well as European -introduced species such as Greenlandic sheep , goats, cattle, reindeer , horse, chicken and sheepdog , all descendants of animals imported by Europeans. Marine mammals include the hooded seal ( Cystophora cristata ) as well as the grey seal ( Halichoerus grypus ). Whales frequently pass very close to Greenland's shores in the late summer and early autumn. Whale species include the beluga whale , blue whale , Greenland whale , fin whale , humpback whale , minke whale , narwhal , pilot whale , sperm whale .

As of 2009, 269 species of fish from over 80 different families are known from the waters surrounding Greenland. Almost all are marine species with only a few in freshwater, such as Atlantic salmon and charr .

The head of the Greenlandic government is called Naalakkersuisut Siulittaasuat ("Premier"). Any other member of the cabinet is called a Naalakkersuisoq ("Minister").

The Greenlandic parliament is called Inatsisartut ("Legislators").

The parliament currently has 31 members.

In contemporary times, elections are held at municipal, national ( inatsisartut ), and kingdom ( folketing ) levels. Greenland is a self-governing entity within the constitutional monarchy of the Kingdom of Denmark, in which King Frederik X is the head of state.

The monarch officially retains executive power and presides over the Council of State ( privy council ). However, following the introduction of a parliamentary system of government, the duties of the monarch have since become strictly representative and ceremonial, such as the formal appointment and dismissal of the prime minister and other ministers in the executive government.

The monarch is not answerable for their actions, and the monarch's person is sacrosanct.

The special territories of the European Union (pre 31 January 2020) Following World War II, the United Nations mandated that colonies should become independent, enter into free association with another country, or be fully integrated into the metropole (the former colonial power). Denmark opted in 1952 to integrate Greenland into the Danish Realm .

In 1979, the Danish government and parliament introduced home rule for Greenland which meant that Naalakkersuisut could assume control over 17 different areas of government. Further devolution of power from Denmark to Greenland came with the "Greenland Self-Government Act" (GSGA) in 2009, that added 33 new areas of government to the pool, the Naalakkersuisut assume control over.

While the 2009 election saw the unionist Democrats (two MPs) decline greatly, the 2013 election consolidated the power of the two main parties at the expense of the smaller groups, and saw the eco-socialist Inuit Party elected to the Parliament for the first time.

The dominance of the Forward and Inuit Community parties began to wane after the snap 2014 and 2018 elections.

The non-binding 2008 referendum on self-governance favouring increased self-governance and autonomy was passed winning 76.22% of the vote.

In 1985, Greenland left the European Economic Community (EEC), unlike Denmark, which remained a member.

The EEC later became the European Union (EU, renamed and expanded in scope in 1992). Greenland retains some ties through its associated relationship with the EU. However, EU law largely does not apply to Greenland except in the area of trade. Greenland is designated as a member of the Overseas Countries and Territories (OCT) and is thus officially not a part of the EU, though Greenland can and does receive support from the European Development Fund , Multiannual Financial Framework , European Investment Bank and EU programmes. Government Municipalities of Greenland Greenland's head of state is King Frederik X.

The king's government in Denmark appoints a high commissioner ( Rigsombudsmand ) to represent it on the island.

The commissioner is Julie Præst Wilche .

The Greenland constituency elects two MP representatives ( North Atlantic mandates ) to the Kingdom Parliament ( Folketinget ) in Denmark, out of a total of 179.

The current representatives are Aki-Matilda Høegh-Dam of the Naleraq Party and Aaja Chemnitz Larsen of the Inuit Community Party. Greenland has a national Parliament that consists of 31 representatives .

The government is the Naalakkersuisut , whose members are appointed by the premier .

The premier is the head of government , and is usually the leader of the majority party in Parliament. Administrative divisions Main article: Administrative divisions of Greenland Formerly consisting of three counties comprising a total of 18 municipalities, Greenland abolished these in 2009 and has since been divided into large territories known as "municipalities" ( Greenlandic : kommuneqarfiit , Danish : kommuner ): Sermersooq ("Much Ice") around the capital Nuuk and also including all East Coast communities; Kujalleq ("South") around Cape Farewell ; Qeqqata ("Centre") north of the capital along the Davis Strait ; Qeqertalik ("The one with islands") surrounding Disko Bay ; and Avannaata ("Northern") in the northwest; the latter two having come into being as a result of the Qaasuitsup municipality, one of the original four, being partitioned in 2018.

The northeast of the island composes the unincorporated Northeast Greenland National Park . Pituffik Space Base is also unincorporated, an enclave within Avannaata municipality.

As a territorial concession granted to the United States in perpetuity, it is administered by the United States Space Force .

During its construction, there were as many as 12,000 American residents but in recent years the number has been below 1,000. Military Main article: Military in Greenland The United States has operated Pituffik Space Base , originally Thule Air Base, since the 1950s. Greenland does not have its own military.

As a territory of Denmark, the Danish military is responsible for Greenland's defence, and the island is within the area overseen by the NATO military alliance.

The Joint Arctic Command is the Danish military branch responsible for Greenland. It includes several patrol ships, maritime patrol aircraft , helicopters, and the elite Sirius Dog Sled Patrol .

The Danish military has personnel based at Nuuk, Kangerlussuaq , Daneborg , Station Nord , Mestersvig , Grønnedal , and a liaison detachment at Pituffik Space Base . Pituffik is home to the United States Space Force 's global network of sensors providing missile warning, space surveillance and space control to North American Aerospace Defence Command ( NORAD ). Elements of the sensor systems are commanded and controlled variously by Space Deltas 2 , 4 , and 6 . Formerly there had been several US bases in Greenland.

The 1951 Greenland Defense Agreement allowed the United States to keep its military bases there, and to establish new bases with the consent of Greenland and Denmark, if deemed necessary by NATO.

In 1995, a political scandal in Denmark occurred after a report revealed the government had given tacit permission for nuclear weapons to be located in Greenland, in contravention of Denmark's 1957 nuclear-free zone policy.

The United States built a secret nuclear-powered base, called Camp Century , in the Greenland ice sheet.

On 21 January 1968, a B-52G with four nuclear bombs aboard as part of Operation Chrome Dome crashed on the ice of the North Star Bay while attempting an emergency landing.

The resulting fire caused extensive radioactive contamination. One of the H-bombs remains lost. Economy Main article: Economy of Greenland Unloading the supply ship Vestlandia operated by Royal Arctic Line at the port in Upernavik , Greenland (2007) The single most important factor in the economy is financial aid from Denmark, mainly in the form of the bloktilskud ( block grant ).

In 2024, the bloktilskud was 4.3 billion kr, amounting to a third of the public revenue.

On top of this, the Danish state covered the expenses for i.a. judiciary and defence, which together were estimated to amount to over 1 billion kr. For the period from 2019 to 2023 Danish financial aid to Greenland averaged 5.4 billion kr. ( €724 million ) a year, amounting to more than 20% of the territory's GDP, up from 3.6 billion kr. in 2009. GDP in 2023 was DKK 22.9 billion, and GDP per capita was DKK 405,000, equivalent to that of the average economies of Europe.

The economy performed well in the early 2020s, despite the pandemic, energy crisis and war in Europe.

The favourable economic conditions were the result of good conditions for industry and strong infrastructure investments. Sermiligaaq , one of more than 60 settlements ( Danish : bygder ) The economy is highly dependent on fishing. Fishing accounts for more than 90% of exports.

The shrimp and fish industry is by far the largest income earner. Shrimp fishing is quota-regulated based on the Greenland Institute of Natural Resources' ( Pinngortitaleriffik ) assessment of what constitutes a biologically sustainable level of fishing. Greenland is abundant in minerals, but extraction has been limited. A state company, Nunaoil , was created to help develop the hydrocarbon industry. However, in July 2021, Greenland banned all new oil and gas exploration in its territory after government officials said that the environmental "price of oil extraction is too high". 80% of electricity in Greenland is generated supplied by hydropower , which most larger towns have access to, the largest of which is Buksefjord hydroelectric power plant supplying Nuuk. Smaller villages and towns still rely on oil or diesel power plants, which also supply district heating services. There is major potential hydropower potential in Greenland, including plans to build a large aluminium smelter to create an exportable product. It is expected that much of the labour needed would be imported.

The public sector, including publicly owned enterprises and the municipalities, plays a dominant role in the economy. About half the government revenues come from grants from the Danish government, an important supplement to the GDP.

In 2022, the public sector in Greenland incurred expenses of DKK 12.8 billion, while revenue amounted to DKK 13.5 billion. Greenland suffered an economic contraction in the early 1990s.

The Greenland Home Rule Government (GHRG) has pursued a tight fiscal policy since the late 1980s, which has helped create surpluses in the public budget and low inflation.

Since 1990, Greenland has registered a foreign-trade deficit following the closure of the last remaining lead and zinc mine that year. Transport Main articles: Transport in Greenland and List of airports in Greenland Air transport connects Greenland internally and with other nations. There is scheduled boat traffic, but the long distances lead to long travel times and low frequency. There are virtually no roads between cities because the coast has many fjords that would require ferry service to connect a road network.

The only exception is a gravel road of 4.8 km (3 mi) length between Kangilinnguit and the former cryolite mining town of Ivittuut .

The lack of agriculture, forestry and similar countryside activities has meant that very few country roads have been built. Greenland has no passenger railways . A rudimentary dirt road designed primarily for all-terrain vehicles was opened between the towns of Kangerlussuaq and Sisimiut in 2025. There are plans to upgrade the 150km track to a two-lane gravel road, but funding has not been secured. There are 13 registered civil airports and 43 helipads ; most of them are unpaved and located in rural areas. All civil aviation matters are handled by the Danish Transport Authority and operated by Greenland Airports . Most airports have short runways and can only be served by special fairly small aircraft on fairly short flights. Intercontinental flights connect mainly to Copenhagen or Reykjavík-Keflavík . Air Greenland is the flag carrier of Greenland Nuuk Airport (GOH) is the hub and international gateway for international and domestic airline passenger transport, after having undergone a major expansion in 2024. Air Greenland is the flag carrier of Greenland. Icelandair provides year-round services to Greenlandic airports. Seasonal and charter flights are offered by other airlines. Prior to the expansion of Nuuk Airport in 2024, Kangerlussuaq Airport (SFJ) was the main international gateway to Greenland, but it is far from the vicinity of the larger towns. Ilulissat Airport (JAV) and Narsarsuaq Airport (UAK) are domestic airports serving limited international flights to Iceland and are both being reconstructed and expanded to enable larger aircraft to serve the airport by 2026, the latter in a new location closer to Qaqortoq . Sea passenger transport is served by several coastal ferries. Arctic Umiaq Line makes a single round trip per week, taking 80 hours each direction. Cargo freight by sea is handled by the shipping company Royal Arctic Line from, to and across Greenland. It provides trade and transport opportunities between Greenland, Europe, and North America. Tourism Tourism in Greenland increased significantly between 2015 and 2019, with the number of visitors increasing from 77,000 per year to 105,000. One source estimated that in 2019 the revenue from this aspect of the economy was about 450 million kroner (US$67 million). Like many aspects of the economy, this slowed dramatically in 2020 and into 2021, due to restrictions required as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic ; one source describes it as being the "biggest economic victim of the coronavirus" (the overall economy did not suffer too severely as of mid-2020, thanks to the fisheries "and a hefty subsidy from Copenhagen"). Greenland's goal for returning tourism is to develop it "right" and to "build a more sustainable tourism for the long run". Mining Greenland is a very difficult place to extract natural resources for a number of reasons, including extreme weather conditions and a strong environmentalist community.

The New York Times reported in March 2025 that despite dozens of exploratory projects, there are only two active mines.

In January 2025, Danish economics professor Torben M. Andersen assessed that mining would not play a significant role in the economy for at least the next ten years. Despite a legal framework for mining, some ventures and over 30 years of Greenlandic efforts to attract American investment, success has been limited, and the belief in a quick mineral bonanza is increasingly seen as a geopolitical mirage. Greenland is often portrayed as rich in rare-earth minerals, but experts argue this promise is largely illusory, as mining remains limited due to high costs, lack of infrastructure, and minimal local refining capacity.

Although the island does contain resources, similar minerals are more abundant and accessible in other countries like the US, Brazil, Vietnam, and China, making Greenland an uncompetitive option.

The EU has urged Greenland to restrict development by the People's Republic of China of rare-earth mineral projects, as China accounts for 95% of the world's current supply. However, in early 2013 the government said that it had no plans to impose such restrictions. Mining of ruby deposits began in 2007.

In 2017, new sources of ruby have been discovered, promising to enhance the gemstone industry in Greenland . Other mineral prospects include iron, uranium , aluminium, nickel, platinum , tungsten , titanium , and copper.

In terms of ethnicity, the population is estimated to be 89.5% Greenlandic Inuit , 7.5% Danish , 1.1% other Nordic and 1.9% other origins. Greenlanders of European ancestry include people of Danish, Norwegian and to a lesser degree of Faroese , Icelandic , Dutch ( whalers ), German and American descent. Each year, Statistics Greenland publishes the number of Greenlanders living in Denmark . This includes all persons who were born in Greenland.

In 2023, this number amounted to 17,079 people. A 2015 wide genetic study of Greenlanders found modern-day Inuit in Greenland are direct descendants of the first Inuit pioneers of the Thule culture who arrived in the 13th century, with approximately 25% admixture of the European colonizers from the 16th century. Despite previous speculations, no evidence of Viking settlers predecessors has been found.

The majority of the population speak both Danish and West Greenlandic Kalaallisut (the most populous Eskaleut language ). They have been used in public affairs since the establishment of home rule in 1979.

In practice, Danish is still widely used in administration, academia, and skilled trades and other professions.

The orthography of Greenlandic, established in 1851, was revised in 1973.

The literacy rate was 100% in 2007. About 12% of the population speak Danish as their primary language. These are primarily Danish immigrants, many of whom speak Danish as their first and sometimes only language. Monolingual Danish speakers are concentrated in Nuuk and other larger towns. A debate about the roles of Greenlandic and Danish in the country's future is ongoing.

While Greenlandic was dominant in all smaller settlements, most of the multi-ethnic Inuit ancestors spoke Danish as a second language.

In larger towns, especially Nuuk, Danish was more important for social matters. English is growing in importance, and is now taught from the first school year. West Greenland has long been the most populous area of the island, and this has contributed to its variety of Greenlandic, Kalaallisut, becoming the de facto official language of Greenland. Around 3,000 people speak East Greenlandic (Tunumiisut) and nearly 1,000 around northern Qaanaaq speak Inuktun . North Greenlandic is closer to the Inuit languages of Canada than it is to other Greenlandic. Each of these varieties is nearly unintelligible to the speakers of the others and some linguists consider Tunumiisut to be a separate language altogether. A UNESCO report labelled the other varieties as endangered , and measures are now considered to protect the East Greenlandic dialect. Religion Main article: Religion in Greenland The nomadic Inuit were traditionally shamanistic , with a well-developed Inuit religion primarily concerned with appeasing a vengeful and fingerless sea goddess called Sedna who controlled the success of the seal and whale hunts .

The first Norse colonists worshipped the Norse gods , but Leif Erikson was converted to Christianity by King Olaf Trygvesson on a trip to Norway in 999 and sent missionaries back to Greenland. These swiftly established 16 parishes, some monasteries, and a bishopric at Garðar . Rediscovering these colonists and spreading ideas of the Protestant Reformation among them was one of the primary reasons for the Danish recolonization in the 18th century. Under the patronage of the Royal Mission College in Copenhagen, Norwegian and Danish Lutherans and German Moravian missionaries searched for the missing Norse settlements, but no Norse were found, and instead they began preaching to the Inuit.

The principal figures in the Christianization of Greenland were Hans and Poul Egede and Matthias Stach .

The New Testament was translated piecemeal from the time of the first settlement on Kangeq Island, but the first translation of the whole Bible was not completed until 1900. An improved translation using the modern orthography was completed in 2000.

The majority of the population is Protestant Christianity , represented mainly by the Church of Denmark , which is Lutheran in orientation.

The historically important Moravian Brothers ( Herrnhuters ) were a congregation of faith, in a Danish context based in Christiansfeld in South Jutland , and partially of German origin, but their name does not signify they were ethnic Moravians ( Czechs ). There are no official census data on religion in Greenland, but the Bishop of Greenland Sofie Petersen estimates that 85% of the Greenlandic population are members of her congregation.

The Church of Denmark is the established church through the Constitution of Denmark .

In 2025, 91% of Greenland's population are members of the church. This applied to 96% of the population born in Greenland, and to 53% of immigrants. A small Roman Catholic minority is pastorally served by the Roman Catholic Diocese of Copenhagen . There are still Christian missionaries on the island, but mainly from charismatic movements proselytising fellow Christians. A small Muslim community exists in Greenland but has no formal mosque or religious buildings. Education The public school system is, as in Denmark, under the jurisdiction of the municipalities.

The legislature specifies the standards allowed for the content in schools, but the municipal governments decide how the schools under their responsibility are run. Education is free and compulsory for children aged seven to 16.

The financial outlay devoted to education is 11.3% of GDP. Section 1 of the Government Ordinance on Public Schools (amended in 1997) requires Greenlandic as the language of instruction. Education is governed by a regulation adopted in 1990 and amended in 1993 and 1994. Under this legislation, linguistic integration in primary and lower secondary schools became compulsory for all students.

The aim is to place Greenlandic-speaking and Danish-speaking pupils in the same classes, whereas previously they were placed in separate classes according to their mother tongue.

At the same time, the government guarantees that Danish speakers can learn Greenlandic.

In this way, the Greenlandic government wants to give the same linguistic, cultural and social education to all students, both those of Greenlandic and Danish origin. A study, which was carried out during a three-year trial period, concluded that this bilingual had achieved positive results.

The Ilimmarfik ( University of Greenland ) campus is in Nuuk . About 100 schools exist, in which both Greenlandic and Danish are used. Generally, Greenlandic is taught from kindergarten to the end of secondary school, but Danish is compulsory from the first cycle of primary school as a second language.

As in Denmark with Danish, the school system provides for "Greenlandic 1" and "Greenlandic 2" courses. Language tests allow students to move from one level to the other. Based on the teachers' evaluation of their students, a third level of courses has been added: "Greenlandic 3". Secondary education in Greenland is generally vocational and technical.

The system is governed by Regulation No. 16 of 28 October 1993 on Vocational and Technical Education, Scholarships and Career Guidance. Danish remains the main language of instruction. Nuuk has a bilingual teacher training college and a bilingual university.

At the end of their studies, all students must pass a test in the Greenlandic language. Higher education is offered in Greenland: university education, training of journalists, training of primary and lower secondary school teachers, training of social workers, training of social educators and training of nurses and nursing assistants. Greenlandic students can continue their education in Denmark, if they wish and have the financial means to do so. For admission to Danish educational institutions, Greenlandic applicants are placed on an equal footing with Danish applicants. Scholarships are granted to Greenlandic students who are admitted to Danish educational institutions. To be eligible for these scholarships, the applicant must be a Danish citizen and have had permanent residence in Greenland for at least five years.

The total period of residence outside Greenland may not exceed three years. Social issues The rate of suicide in Greenland is very high. According to a 2010 census, Greenland holds the highest suicide rate in the world .

In 2021, a study reported that there were 45 suicides, corresponding to a rate of 81 per 100,000 inhabitants annually. This was approximately eight times higher than in Denmark. Another significant social issue is a high rate of alcoholism.

The rate of alcohol consumption peaked in the 1980s, when it was twice as high as in Denmark; by 2010 it had fallen slightly below that of Denmark. Alcohol prices are far higher in Greenland than in Denmark, meaning that consumption has a large socio-economic impact.

The prevalence of HIV/AIDS has been high, reaching a peak in the 1990s when the number of AIDS-related deaths was also relatively high. Through a number of initiatives, the prevalence (along with the death rate, through efficient treatment) has fallen and is now low, about 0.13% in the 2010s, below that of most other countries .

In recent decades, unemployment has generally been somewhat above that of Denmark; in 2017, the rate was 6.8% in Greenland, compared to 5.6% in Denmark. Compulsory contraception of Inuit women Main article: Spiral case In the 1960s and 1970s, at a time when the population was increasing, 4,500 Greenland Inuit women and girls (roughly half of all fertile females) were fitted with intrauterine devices (IUDs) by Danish doctors. Sometimes girls (as young as 12) were taken directly from school to have these devices inserted, without their parents' permission.

The procedure was also carried out on some Inuit girls at boarding schools in Denmark.

As a result, over eight years' time, from 1966 to 1974, fertility rates in Greenland fell from 7 to 2.3 children per woman, the fastest fertility transition on record in human history.

In 2022 Danish Health Minister Magnus Heunicke announced an investigation into the decisions leading to the practice and its implementation. Greenlandic doctors also carried out the same illegal procedures on several Inuit women after Greenland took control of its health care system in 1991. LGBTQ rights LGBTQ rights in Greenland are some of the most extensive in the world, relatively similar to those in Denmark. Transgender people may change the gender designation on their official identity documents. A law passed in 2016 by decree allows legal gender changes based on self-determination.

Since 2010, Greenland has had laws prohibiting hate speech against LGBTQ+ persons. Parliament passed a Law on Equal Treatment and Anti-Discrimination in 2024, which prohibits all discrimination on the basis of " sexual orientation , gender identity , gender expression , gender characteristics", among other characteristics.

The Kalaallit are known for an art form of figures called tupilak or a "spirit object". Traditional art-making practices thrive in the Ammassalik . Sperm whale ivory remains a valued medium for carving. Fine arts The Inuit have their own arts and crafts tradition; for example, they carve tupilaks, sculptures of figures of avenging monsters practised within shaman traditions. This Kalaallisut word means soul or spirit of a deceased person and describes an artistic figure, usually no more than 20 centimetres (8 in) tall, carved mainly from walrus ivory, with a variety of unusual shapes. This sculpture actually represents a mythical or spiritual being; usually, however, it has become a mere collector's item because of its grotesque appearance for Western visual habits. Modern artisans still use indigenous materials such as musk ox and sheep wool, seal fur, shells, soapstone, reindeer antlers or gemstones.

The history of Greenlandic painting began with Aron von Kangeq, who depicted the old Greenlandic sagas and myths in his drawings and watercolours in the mid-19th century.

In the 20th century, landscape and animal painting developed, as well as printmaking and book illustrations with sometimes expressive colouring. It was mainly through their landscape paintings that Kiistat Lund and Buuti Pedersen became known abroad. Anne-Birthe Hove chose themes from Greenlandic social life. There is a museum of fine arts in Nuuk, the Nuuk Art Museum . Media Kalaallit Nunaata Radioa (KNR) is the public broadcasting company of Greenland. It is an associate member of the Eurovision and Nordvision networks. Nearly a hundred people are directly employed by the company, which is one of the largest in the territory. Nuuk has its own radio and television station.

The television channel Nanoq Media , created in 2002, is the largest local television station in Greenland, reaching more than 4,000 households as receiving members, which corresponds to about 75% of all households in Nuuk. Two newspapers are published in Greenland, both of which are distributed nationally.

The weekly Sermitsiaq is published every Friday, while the online version is updated several times a day. It is named after the mountain Sermitsiaq, located about 15 km (9.5 mi) northeast of Nuuk, and was distributed only in Nuuk until the 1980s.

The bi-weekly Atuagagdliutit/Grønlandsposten is published every Tuesday and Thursday, in Greenlandic as Atuagagdliutit and in Danish as Grønlandsposten , with all articles published in both languages. Music Nive Nielsen in 2016, Greenlandic singer and songwriter Greenlandic filmmaker Inuk Silis Høegh with members of the Greenlandic band Sumé , 2015 Greenland's musical heritage blends traditional Inuit forms with modern genres.

The traditional Inuit drum dance and song, known as qilaatersorneq , is a cornerstone of Greenlandic culture.

The qilaat , a frame drum made from driftwood or walrus ribs and covered with animal stomach or bladder, is played by striking the rim from underneath with a stick. These performances served various purposes, including entertainment, spiritual ceremonies, and conflict resolution through song duels, where participants would satirize each other to settle disputes.

In 2021, UNESCO recognized Inuit drum dancing and singing as part of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity .

The arrival of Christian missionaries in the 18th century led to the suppression of drum dances, deemed pagan . They were replaced by polyphonic choral singing, influenced by German hymns from the Herrnhuter Brüdergemeinde . European whalers introduced instruments like the fiddle and accordion, leading to the development of kalattuut , or Greenlandic polka, characterized by fast-paced dances performed during communal gatherings.

In contemporary times, Greenland has a vibrant music scene.

The band Sumé , active in the 1970s, pioneered Greenlandic rock music with politically charged lyrics advocating for cultural independence. Nanook , formed in 2008, is a pop-rock band known for singing in Greenlandic and rejecting offers to switch to English, emphasizing cultural authenticity. Other notable artists include Chilly Friday (rock), Siissisoq (rock), Nuuk Posse (hip hop), and Rasmus Lyberth (folk), who performed in the Danish national final for the 1979 Eurovision Song Contest in Greenlandic. Simon Lynge stands out as the first Greenlandic solo artist to release an album across the United Kingdom. Cuisine Main article: Greenlandic cuisine The national dish of Greenland is suaasat , a soup made from seal meat . Meat from marine mammals, game, birds, and fish have a large role in the diet. Due to the glacial landscape, most ingredients come from the ocean. Spices are seldom used besides salt and pepper. Greenlandic coffee is a "flaming" dessert coffee (set alight before serving) made with coffee, whiskey, Kahlúa, Grand Marnier, and whipped cream. It is stronger than the familiar Irish dessert coffee. Sport Main article: Sport in Greenland Sport is an important part of Greenlandic culture, as the population is generally quite active. Popular sports include association football , track and field, handball and skiing . Handball is often referred to as the national sport, and the men's national team was ranked among the top 20 in the world in 2001. Greenland has excellent conditions for skiing, fishing, snowboarding , ice climbing and rock climbing , although mountain climbing and hiking are preferred by the general public.

The World Factbook . CIA. Archived from the original on 9 January 2021 . Retrieved 13 January 2021 . ^ "Pressure on Greenland for more Danish aid, U.S. presence" . Financial Mirror . 20 January 2025 . Retrieved 13 January 2026 . ^ a b c Brown, Dale Mackenzie (28 February 2000). "The Fate of Greenland's Vikings" . Archaeology . Archaeological Institute of America . Archived from the original on 11 January 2011 . Retrieved 21 January 2026 . ^ "Saqqaq-kulturen kronologi" . National Museum of Denmark. Archived from the original on 7 December 2013 . Retrieved 2 August 2013 . ^ Saillard J, Forster P, Lynnerup N, Bandelt HJ, Nørby S (2000). "mtDNA variation among Greenland Eskimos: the edge of the Beringian expansion" . American Journal of Human Genetics . 67 (3): 718– 26. doi : 10.1086/303038 . ISSN 0002-9297 . PMC 1287530 . PMID 10924403 . ^ Greenland in Figures 2012 (PDF) . Grønlands Statistik. ISBN 978-87-986787-6-2 . ISSN 1602-5709 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 November 2012 . Retrieved 10 February 2013 . ^ Mcghee, Robert (3 April 2015). "Thule Culture" . Canadian Encyclopedia . Historica Canada. Archived from the original on 20 November 2015 . Retrieved 1 June 2015 . ^ "Population of Greenland" . World Population Review . Archived from the original on 4 August 2023 . Retrieved 12 August 2022 . ^ "Population density (people per sq. km of land area)" .

The World Bank. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013 . Retrieved 3 November 2012 . ^ "Vedvarende energi" . Nukissiorfiit. Archived from the original on 10 June 2024 . Retrieved 28 March 2023 . ^ Eirik the Red's Saga . Gutenberg.org. 8 March 2006. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved 6 September 2010 . ^ "How Greenland got its name" Archived 19 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine .

The Ancient Standard . 17 December 2010. ^ a b Grove, Jonathan (January 2009). "The Place of Greenland in Medieval Icelandic Saga Narrative". Journal of the North Atlantic . 201 : 30– 51. doi : 10.3721/037.002.s206 . ^ Evans, Andrew. "Is Iceland Really Green and Greenland Really Icy?" Archived 4 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine , National Geographic (30 June 2016). ^ Stern , p. 89 ^ "Maps of Inuit Nunangat (Inuit Regions of Canada)" . Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami . 5 September 2008 . Retrieved 20 June 2019 . ^ Grønnow, B. (1988). "Prehistory in permafrost: Investigations at the Saqqaq site, Qeqertasussuk, Disco Bay, West Greenland" . Journal of Danish Archaeology . 7 (1): 24– 39. doi : 10.1080/0108464X.1988.10589995 . ^ Møbjerg, T. (1999). "New adaptive strategies in the Saqqaq culture of Greenland, c. 1600–1400 BC". World Archaeology . 30 (3): 452– 65. doi : 10.1080/00438243.1999.9980423 . JSTOR 124963 . ^ "The history of Greenland – From dog sled to snowmobile" . Greenland.com. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011 . Retrieved 10 September 2011 . ^ "Migration to Greenland – the history of Greenland" . Greenland.com. Archived from the original on 5 September 2011 . Retrieved 10 September 2011 . ^ Rasch, M.; Jensen, J. F. (1997). "Ancient Eskimo dwelling sites and Holocene relative sea-level changes in southern Disko Bugt, central West Greenland" . Polar Research . 16 (2): 101– 15. Bibcode : 1997PolRe..16..101R . doi : 10.3402/polar.v16i2.6629 . ^ Ramsden, P.; Tuck, J. A. (2001). "A Comment on the Pre-Dorset/Dorset Transition in the Eastern Arctic" . Anthropological Papers of the University of Alaska . New Series. 1 : 7– 11. Archived from the original on 8 April 2022. ^ Grønnow, B. (1986). "Recent archaeological investigations of West Greenland caribou hunting". Arctic Anthropology . 23 (1/2): 57– 80. JSTOR 40316103 . ^ Rowley, G. (1940). "The Dorset culture of the eastern Arctic" . American Anthropologist . 42 (3): 490– 99. doi : 10.1525/aa.1940.42.3.02a00080 . ^ Gulløv, H. C.; Appelt, M. (2001). "Social bonding and shamanism among Late Dorset groups in High Arctic Greenland".

The archaeology of shamanism . Routledge. p. 146. ISBN 0-415-25255-5 . ^ Gulløv, H. C. (1996).

In search of the Dorset culture in the Thule culture.

The Paleoo Cultures of Greenland . Copenhagen: Danish Polar Center (Publication No. 1). pp. 201– 14. ^ Kudeba, N. (19 April 2014). Chapter 5, "Norse Explorers from Erik the Red to Leif Erikson", in Canadian Explorers . ^ "Viking Settlers in Greenland" . Encyclopedia.com . Archived from the original on 10 June 2024 . Retrieved 18 December 2023 . ^ Boraas, Tracey (2002). Sweden . Capstone Press. p. 24 . ISBN 0-7368-0939-2 . ^ a b c d Diamond, Jared (2006). Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed . Harmondsworth : Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-303655-5 . ^ a b Arnold C. (June 2010) "Cold Did In the Norse", Earth Magazine . p. 9. ^ Behringer, Wolfgang (9 September 2009). Kulturgeschichte des Klimas: Von der Eiszeit zur globalen Erwärmung (in German). Munich: Dt. Taschenbuch-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-406-52866-8 . Archived from the original on 24 June 2023 . Retrieved 18 September 2022 . ^ Alley, R.; Mayewski, P.; Peel, D.; Stauffer, B. (28 May 1996). "Twin ice cores from greenland reveal history of climate change, more". Eos, Transactions American Geophysical Union . 77 (22): 209– 210. Bibcode : 1996EOSTr..77R.209A . doi : 10.1029/96EO00142 . ^ " Why societies collapse Archived 2 August 2012 at the Wayback Machine ". ABC Science. ^ Patterson, W. P.; Dietrich, K. A.; Holmden, C.; Andrews, J. T. (23 March 2010). "Two millennia of North Atlantic seasonality and implications for Norse colonies" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 107 (12): 5306– 5310. Bibcode : 2010PNAS..107.5306P . doi : 10.1073/pnas.0902522107 . PMC 2851789 . PMID 20212157 . ^ a b Ingstad, Helge; Stine Ingstad, Anne (2000).

The Viking Discovery of America: The Excavation of a Norse Settlement in L'Anse Aux Meadows, Newfoundland . Breakwater Books. pp. 28–. ISBN 1-55081-158-4 . ^ Bishop, Rosie R., et al. "A charcoal-rich horizon at Ø69, Greenland: evidence for vegetation burning during the Norse landnám?." Journal of Archaeological Science 40.11 (2013): 3890–902 ^ Leone, Mark P.; Knauf, Jocelyn E. (2015). Historical Archaeologies of Capitalism . Springer. p. 211. ISBN 978-3-319-12760-6 . ^ Folger, Tim. "Why Did Greenland's Vikings Vanish?" . Archived from the original on 17 March 2017 . Retrieved 13 March 2017 . ^ Trigger, Bruce G.; Washburn, Wilcomb E.; Adams, Richard E. W. (1996).

The Cambridge History of the Native Peoples of the Americas . Cambridge University Press. p. 331. ISBN 0-521-57393-9 . ^ Stefansson, Vilhjalmur (1938). Unsolved Mysteries of the Arctic .

In Danger Undaunted: The Anti-Interventionist Movement of 1940–1941 . Hoover Institution Press. ISBN 0-8179-8841-6 . Archived from the original on 30 June 2023 . Retrieved 18 September 2022 . ^ Morison, Samuel Eliot (1975). History of United States Naval Operations in World War II, Volume 1: The Battle of the Atlantic September 1939 – May 1943 . Boston: Little, Brown and Company. p. 62. ^ Speer, Albert . Inside the Third Reich, 1971. ^ "Eske Brun – det moderne Grønlands ophavsmand?" . Sermitsiaq. 24 November 2010 . Retrieved 19 April 2012 . ^ "Deepfreeze Defense" . Time . 27 January 1947. Archived from the original on 21 February 2009 . Retrieved 14 May 2008 . ^ Miller, John J. (7 May 2001). "Let's Buy Greenland! — A complete missile-defense plan" . National Review . Archived from the original on 7 January 2010. ^ See article 2 of the 1951 Greenland Defence Agreement https://avalon.law.yale.edu/20th_century/den001.asp ^ a b Beukel, Erik (2010). "The Greenland Issue".

In Rytter, Jens Elo (ed.). Phasing Out the Colonial Status of Greenland, 1945–54: A Historical Study . Meddelelser om Grønland. Vol. 37. Museum Tusculanum Press. pp. 56– 57. ISBN 978-87-635-2587-9 . ISSN 0106-1062 . ^ Weiss, Erik D. (2001). "Cold War Under the Ice: The Army's Bid for a Long-Range Nuclear Role, 1959–1963". Journal of Cold War Studies . 3 (3): 31– 58. doi : 10.1162/152039701750419501 . JSTOR 26925134 . ^ Petersen, Nikolaj (March 2008). "THE ICEMAN THAT NEVER CAME: 'Project Iceworm', the search for a NATO deterrent, and Denmark, 1960–1962". Scandinavian Journal of History . 33 (1): 75– 98. doi : 10.1080/03468750701449554 . ^ "A Radioactive Cold War Military Base Will Soon Emerge From Greenland's Melting Ice" . Smithsonian . 5 August 2016. Archived from the original on 20 August 2019 . Retrieved 20 August 2019 . ^ a b "Cataclysmic cargo: The hunt for four missing nuclear bombs after a B-52 crash" .

The Washington Post . 21 January 2018. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020 . Retrieved 20 August 2019 . ^ Grønlands historie danmarkshistorien.dk ^ Doel, Ronald E.; Harper, Kristine C. ; Heymann, Matthias (6 July 2016). Exploring Greenland: Cold War Science and Technology on Ice . Springer. ISBN 978-1-137-59688-8 . ^ Aage, Hans (17 December 2012). "Alcohol in Greenland 1951–2010: consumption, mortality, prices" . International Journal of Circumpolar Health . 71 18444. Co-Action Publishing. doi : 10.3402/ijch.v71i0.18444 . PMC 3525923 . PMID 23256091 . ^ Loukacheva, Natalia (2007).

The Arctic Promise: Legal and Political Autonomy of Greenland and Nunavut . University of Toronto Press. p. 25. ISBN 978-0-8020-9486-5 . Archived from the original on 13 April 2016. ^ "Political Parties in Greenland" . Statistics Greenland . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ Murphy, Matt (14 June 2022). "Whisky Wars: Denmark and Canada strike deal to end 50-year row over Arctic island" . BBC . Retrieved 10 January 2025 . ^ Stern , pp. 55–56 ^ Cowell, Alan (26 November 2008). "Greenland Vote Favors Independence" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 17 April 2009 . Retrieved 4 May 2010 . ^ "Vejledende folkeafstemning om selvstyre ? 25-11-2008" (in Kalaallisut). SermitValg. 26 November 2008. Archived from the original on 8 December 2008 . Retrieved 26 November 2008 . ^ "CIDOB – Secession and Counter-secession. An International Relations Perspective" . CIDOB . p. 70. Archived from the original on 27 January 2018 . Retrieved 19 May 2018 . ^ Description of the Greenlandic Self-Government Act on the webpage of the Danish Ministry of State Archived 22 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine "The Self-Government Act provides for the Self-Government authorities to assume a number of new fields of responsibility, such as administration of justice, including the establishment of courts of law; the prison and probation service; the police; the field relating to company law, accounting and auditing; mineral resource activities; aviation; law of legal capacity, family law and succession law; aliens and border controls; the working environment; as well as financial regulation and supervision, cf. Schedule I and II in the Annex to the Self-Government Act." ^ Greenland takes step toward independence from Denmark Archived 18 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine .

The Daily Telegraph (21 June 2009). Retrieved 29 September 2012. ^ "Nearly independent day" .

The Economist . 20 June 2009. Archived from the original on 25 June 2009 . Retrieved 20 June 2009 . ^ "Greenland set for self-rule" .

The Australian . 19 June 2009. Archived from the original on 24 June 2009 . Retrieved 20 June 2009 . ^ Boswell, Randy (19 June 2009). "Greenland takes big step towards full independence" . Canwest News Services . Canada.com. Archived from the original on 24 June 2009 . Retrieved 20 June 2009 . ^ "Greenland chooses Denmark over US, island's PM Jens-Frederik Nielsen says" . www.bbc.com . 13 January 2026 . Retrieved 21 January 2026 . ^ "Jens-Frederik Nielsen: Vi vælger Kongeriget Danmark" . DR (in Danish). 13 January 2026 . Retrieved 21 January 2026 . ^ a b Bryant, Miranda (6 January 2026). "Why is Donald Trump renewing calls for takeover of Greenland?" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 15 January 2026 . ^ "Danish intelligence classifies Trump's America as a security risk" . Politico . Retrieved 6 January 2026 . ^ "Amid Greenland dust-up, Denmark says US is a national security risk" . USA Today . Retrieved 13 January 2026 . ^ Cook, Lorne (7 January 2026). "Trump threats against Greenland pose new, potentially unprecedented challenge to NATO" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 21 January 2026 . ^ "The Island of Greenland" . Hidden Journeys – explore the world from the air . Archived from the original on 14 July 2014 . Retrieved 8 July 2014 . ^ "Demographic Yearbook – Table 3: Population by sex, rate of population increase, surface area, and density" (PDF) . United Nations Statistics Division . 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 December 2010 . Retrieved 24 September 2010 . ^ "Boundary dispute" . Global Affairs Canada . 14 June 2022. Archived from the original on 16 June 2022 . Retrieved 17 July 2023 . ^ "IPCC Climate Change 2001: Working Group I: The Scientific Basis" . Grida.no. Archived from the original on 16 December 2007 . Retrieved 6 September 2010 . ^ "WMO verifies −69.6°C Greenland temperature as Northern hemisphere record" . World Meteorological Organization . 22 September 2020. Archived from the original on 18 December 2023. ^ "Nuuk, Greenland – Detailed climate information and monthly weather forecast" . Weather Atlas . Yu Media Group. Archived from the original on 17 August 2019 . Retrieved 17 August 2019 . ^ Keisling, Benjamin A.; Nielsen, Lisbeth T.; Hvidberg, Christine S.; Nuterman, Roman; DeConto, Robert M. (July 2020). "Pliocene–Pleistocene megafloods as a mechanism for Greenlandic megacanyon formation". Geology . 48 (7): 737– 741. Bibcode : 2020Geo....48..737K . doi : 10.1130/G47253.1 . ^ Schneider, D. (2003). "American Scientist Online – Greenland or Whiteland?" . Sigma Xi. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011 . Retrieved 3 March 2008 . ^ "Find Greenland Icecap Bridges Three Islands" . No. 97. Ellensburg Daily Record .

The Associated Press . 24 October 1951. p. 6. Archived from the original on 12 April 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2012 . ^ "The National Park" . Greenland.com. Archived from the original on 27 June 2013 . Retrieved 18 June 2013 . ^ "Kaffeklubben Island | Island in Arctic Circle, History" . Britannica . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ Jancik, John (2004). "Jensenland, historical timeline of the search for the northernmost point of land on Earth" . American Alpine Club . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ Burress, Charles (17 June 2004). "BERKELEY / Romancing the north / Berkeley explorer may have stepped on ancient Thule" . SFGATE . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ "The 'Northernmost Island in the World' is actually an iceberg" . LeisterGroup . 25 September 2022. Archived from the original on 15 November 2024 . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ Höning, Dennis; Willeit, Matteo; Calov, Reinhard; Klemann, Volker; Bagge, Meike; Ganopolski, Andrey (27 March 2023). "Multistability and Transient Response of the Greenland Ice Sheet to Anthropogenic CO2 Emissions" . Geophysical Research Letters . 50 (6) e2022GL101827. doi : 10.1029/2022GL101827 . ^ "Ice Sheets – Earth Indicator" . National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). 2026. Archived from the original on 3 January 2026 . Retrieved 7 January 2026 . ^ Noël, B.; van Kampenhout, L.; Lenaerts, J. T. M.; van de Berg, W. J.; van den Broeke, M. R. (19 January 2021). "A 21st Century Warming Threshold for Sustained Greenland Ice Sheet Mass Loss". Geophysical Research Letters . 48 (5) e2020GL090471. Bibcode : 2021GeoRL..4890471N . doi : 10.1029/2020GL090471 . hdl : 2268/301943 . ^ Kjeldsen, Kristian K.; Korsgaard, Niels J.; Bjørk, Anders A.; Khan, Shfaqat A.; Box, Jason E.; Funder, Svend; Larsen, Nicolaj K.; Bamber, Jonathan L.; Colgan, William; van den Broeke, Michiel; Siggaard-Andersen, Marie-Louise; Nuth, Christopher; Schomacker, Anders; Andresen, Camilla S.; Willerslev, Eske; Kjær, Kurt H. (16 December 2015). "Spatial and temporal distribution of mass loss from the Greenland Ice Sheet since AD 1900". Nature . 528 (7582): 396– 400. Bibcode : 2015Natur.528..396K . doi : 10.1038/nature16183 . hdl : 1874/329934 . PMID 26672555 . ^ Mouginot, Jérémie; Rignot, Eric; Bjørk, Anders A.; van den Broeke, Michiel; Millan, Romain; Morlighem, Mathieu; Noël, Brice; Scheuchl, Bernd; Wood, Michael (20 March 2019). "Forty-six years of Greenland Ice Sheet mass balance from 1972 to 2018" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 116 (19): 9239– 9244. Bibcode : 2019PNAS..116.9239M . doi : 10.1073/pnas.1904242116 . PMC 6511040 . PMID 31010924 . ^ Stendel, Martin; Mottram, Ruth (22 September 2022). "Guest post: How the Greenland ice sheet fared in 2022" . Carbon Brief . Archived from the original on 22 October 2022 . Retrieved 22 October 2022 . ^ Briner, Jason P.; Cuzzone, Joshua K.; Badgeley, Jessica A.; Young, Nicolás E.; Steig, Eric J.; Morlighem, Mathieu; Schlegel, Nicole-Jeanne; Hakim, Gregory J.; Schaefer, Joerg M.; Johnson, Jesse V.; Lesnek, Alia J.; Thomas, Elizabeth K.; Allan, Estelle; Bennike, Ole; Cluett, Allison A.; Csatho, Beata; de Vernal, Anne; Downs, Jacob; Larour, Eric; Nowicki, Sophie (30 September 2020). "Rate of mass loss from the Greenland Ice Sheet will exceed Holocene values this century". Nature . 586 (7827): 70– 74. Bibcode : 2020Natur.586...70B . doi : 10.1038/s41586-020-2742-6 . PMID 32999481 . ^ "Greenland enters melt mode" . Science News . 23 September 2013. Archived from the original on 5 August 2012 . Retrieved 14 August 2012 . ^ "Record melt: Greenland lost 586 billion tons of ice in 2019" . phys.org . Archived from the original on 13 September 2020 . Retrieved 6 September 2020 . ^ Barnes, Adam (9 August 2021). " 'Massive melting event' torpedoes billions of tons of ice the whole world depends on" .

The Hill . Archived from the original on 25 August 2021 . Retrieved 24 August 2021 . Ice cores show that these widespread melt events were really rare prior to the 21st century, but since then, we have had several melt seasons. ^ Patel, Kasha (19 August 2021). "Rain falls at the summit of Greenland Ice Sheet for first time on record" . Washington Post . Archived from the original on 19 August 2021 . Retrieved 24 August 2021 . Rain fell on and off for 13 hours at the station, but staff are not certain exactly how much rain fell...there are no rain gauges at the summit because no one expected it to rain at this altitude. ^ Shepherd, Andrew; Ivins, Erik; Rignot, Eric; Smith, Ben; van den Broeke, Michiel; Velicogna, Isabella ; Whitehouse, Pippa; Briggs, Kate; Joughin, Ian; Krinner, Gerhard; Nowicki, Sophie (12 March 2020). "Mass balance of the Greenland Ice Sheet from 1992 to 2018". Nature . 579 (7798): 233– 239. doi : 10.1038/s41586-019-1855-2 . hdl : 2268/242139 . PMID 31822019 . ^ Bamber, Jonathan L; Westaway, Richard M; Marzeion, Ben; Wouters, Bert (1 June 2018). "The land ice contribution to sea level during the satellite era" . Environmental Research Letters . 13 (6): 063008. Bibcode : 2018ERL....13f3008B . doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/aac2f0 . hdl : 1983/58218615-dedd-43a8-a8ea-79fb83130613 . ^ Fox-Kemper, B.; Hewitt, H.T. ; Xiao, C.; Aðalgeirsdóttir, G.; Drijfhout, S.S.; Edwards, T.L.; Golledge, N.R.; Hemer, M.; Kopp, R.E.; Krinner, G.; Mix, A. (2021). "Chapter 9: Ocean, Cryosphere and Sea Level Change" (PDF) .

In Masson-Delmotte, V.; Zhai, P.; Pirani, A.; Connors, S.L.; Péan, C.; Berger, S.; Caud, N.; Chen, Y.; Goldfarb, L. (eds.). Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, US. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 October 2022 . Retrieved 22 October 2022 . ^ a b Aschwanden, Andy; Fahnestock, Mark A.; Truffer, Martin; Brinkerhoff, Douglas J.; Hock, Regine; Khroulev, Constantine; Mottram, Ruth; Khan, S. Abbas (19 June 2019). "Contribution of the Greenland Ice Sheet to sea level over the next millennium" . Science Advances . 5 (6): 218– 222. Bibcode : 2019SciA....5.9396A . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aav9396 . PMC 6584365 . PMID 31223652 . ^ "Melting Greenland ice sheet may affect global ocean circulation, future climate" . Phys.org . 22 January 2016. Archived from the original on 19 August 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2016 . ^ Yang, Qian; Dixon, Timothy H.; Myers, Paul G.; Bonin, Jennifer; Chambers, Don; van den Broeke, M. R.; Ribergaard, Mads H.; Mortensen, John (22 January 2016). "Recent increases in Arctic freshwater flux affects Labrador Sea convection and Atlantic overturning circulation" . Nature Communications . 7 10525. Bibcode : 2016NatCo...710525Y . doi : 10.1038/ncomms10525 . PMC 4736158 . PMID 26796579 . ^ Bakker, P; Schmittner, A; Lenaerts, JT; Abe-Ouchi, A; Bi, D; van den Broeke, MR; Chan, WL; Hu, A; Beadling, RL; Marsland, SJ; Mernild, SH; Saenko, OA; Swingedouw, D; Sullivan, A; Yin, J (11 November 2016). "Fate of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation: Strong decline under continued warming and Greenland melting". Geophysical Research Letters . 43 (23): 12, 252– 12, 260. Bibcode : 2016GeoRL..4312252B . doi : 10.1002/2016GL070457 . hdl : 10150/622754 . ^ Canadell, J.G.; Monteiro, P.M.S.; Costa, M.H.; Cotrim da Cunha, L.; Cox, P.M.; Eliseev, A.V.; Henson, S.; Ishii, M.; Jaccard, S.; Koven, C.; Lohila, A. (2021). "Global Carbon and Other Biogeochemical Cycles and Feedbacks" (PDF) .

In Masson-Delmotte, V.; Zhai, P.; Piran, A.; Connors, S.L.; Péan, C.; Berger, S.; Caud, N.; Chen, Y.; Goldfarb, L. (eds.). Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts. pp. 673– 816. Bibcode : 2021AGUFM.U13B..05K . doi : 10.1017/9781009157896.007 . ISBN 978-1-009-15789-6 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 April 2023 . Retrieved 20 March 2024 . ^ "How Greenland would look without its ice sheet" . BBC News . 14 December 2017. Archived from the original on 7 December 2023 . Retrieved 7 December 2023 . ^ Armstrong McKay, David; Abrams, Jesse; Winkelmann, Ricarda; Sakschewski, Boris; Loriani, Sina; Fetzer, Ingo; Cornell, Sarah; Rockström, Johan; Staal, Arie; Lenton, Timothy (9 September 2022). "Exceeding 1.5°C global warming could trigger multiple climate tipping points". Science . 377 (6611) eabn7950. doi : 10.1126/science.abn7950 . hdl : 10871/131584 . PMID 36074831 . ^ Armstrong McKay, David (9 September 2022). "Exceeding 1.5°C global warming could trigger multiple climate tipping points – paper explainer" . climatetippingpoints.info . Archived from the original on 18 July 2023 . Retrieved 2 October 2022 . ^ Bochow, Nils; Poltronieri, Anna; Robinson, Alexander; Montoya, Marisa; Rypdal, Martin; Boers, Niklas (18 October 2023). "Overshooting the critical threshold for the Greenland ice sheet" . Nature . 622 (7983): 528– 536. Bibcode : 2023Natur.622..528B . doi : 10.1038/s41586-023-06503-9 . PMC 10584691 . PMID 37853149 . ^ Christ, Andrew J.; Rittenour, Tammy M.; Bierman, Paul R.; Keisling, Benjamin A.; Knutz, Paul C.; Thomsen, Tonny B.; Keulen, Nynke; Fosdick, Julie C.; Hemming, Sidney R.; Tison, Jean-Louis; Blard, Pierre-Henri; Steffensen, Jørgen P.; Caffee, Marc W.; Corbett, Lee B.; Dahl-Jensen, Dorthe; Dethier, David P.; Hidy, Alan J.; Perdrial, Nicolas; Peteet, Dorothy M.; Steig, Eric J.; Thomas, Elizabeth K. (20 July 2023). "Deglaciation of northwestern Greenland during Marine Isotope Stage 11". Science . 381 (6655): 330– 335. Bibcode : 2023Sci...381..330C . doi : 10.1126/science.ade4248 . OSTI 1992577 . PMID 37471537 . ^ a b Saros, Jasmine E.; Hazukova, Vaclava; Northington, Robert M.; McGowan, Suzanne (21 January 2025). "Abrupt transformation of West Greenland lakes following compound climate extremes associated with atmospheric rivers" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 122 (4) e2413855122. Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12213855S . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2413855122 . PMC 11789078 . PMID 39835905 . ^ McCarthy, Michael (24 April 2007). "An island made by global warming" .

The Independent . London. Archived from the original on 30 August 2008 . Retrieved 4 May 2010 . ^ "Place of the Year" . Blog.oup.com. 3 December 2007. Archived from the original on 15 October 2009 . Retrieved 6 September 2010 . ^ Publications, Usa Int'L Business. Denmark Company Laws and Regulations Handbook: Strategic Information and Basic Laws. Place of Publication Not Identified: Intl Business Pubns Usa, 2015. 20–21. Print. ^ Revkin, Andrew C. (28 April 2008). "Arctic Explorer Rebuts 'Warming Island' Critique" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 27 September 2010 . Retrieved 6 September 2010 . ^ "Banded iron formation (BIF) deposits" (PDF) . 9 March 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2013 . Retrieved 20 April 2021 . ^ "Mineralienatlas – Fossilienatlas" . www.mineralienatlas.de (in German). Archived from the original on 10 June 2024 . Retrieved 20 April 2021 . ^ Marzola, Marco; Mateus, Octávio; Milàn, Jesper; Clemmensen, Lars B. (3 March 2018). "A review of Palaeozoic and Mesozoic tetrapods from Greenland" . Bulletin of the Geological Society of Denmark . 66 : 21– 46. Bibcode : 2018BuGSD..66...21M . doi : 10.37570/bgsd-2018-66-02 . ISSN 2245-7070 . ^ López-Rojas, Víctor; Clemmensen, Lars B.; Milàn, Jesper; Wings, Oliver; Klein, Nicole; Mateus, Octávio (30 September 2022). "A new phytosaur species (Archosauriformes) from the Upper Triassic of Jameson Land, central East Greenland" . Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology . 42 (3) e2181086. Bibcode : 2022JVPal..42E1086L . doi : 10.1080/02724634.2023.2181086 . ^ Beccari, Victor; Mateus, Octávio; Wings, Oliver; Milàn, Jesper; Clemmensen, Lars B. (November 2021). "Issi saaneq gen. et sp. nov.—A New Sauropodomorph Dinosaur from the Late Triassic (Norian) of Jameson Land, Central East Greenland" . Diversity . 13 (11): 561. Bibcode : 2021Diver..13..561B . doi : 10.3390/d13110561 . hdl : 10362/128951 . ISSN 1424-2818 . ^ Lallensack, Jens; Klein, Hendrik; Milán, Jesper; Wings, Oliver; Mateus, Octávio; Clemmensen, Lars (2017). "Sauropodomorph dinosaur trackways from the Fleming Fjord Formation of East Greenland: evidence for Late Triassic sauropods" . Acta Palaeontologica Polonica . 62 . doi : 10.4202/app.00374.2017 . hdl : 10362/33146 . ^ Dinerstein, Eric; Olson, David; Joshi, Anup; Vynne, Carly; Burgess, Neil D.; Wikramanayake, Eric; Hahn, Nathan; Palminteri, Suzanne; Hedao, Prashant; Noss, Reed; Hansen, Matt; Locke, Harvey; Ellis, Erle C; Jones, Benjamin; Barber, Charles Victor; Hayes, Randy; Kormos, Cyril; Martin, Vance; Crist, Eileen; Sechrest, Wes; Price, Lori; Baillie, Jonathan E. M.; Weeden, Don; Suckling, Kierán; Davis, Crystal; Sizer, Nigel; Moore, Rebecca; Thau, David; Birch, Tanya; Potapov, Peter; Turubanova, Svetlana; Tyukavina, Alexandra; de Souza, Nadia; Pintea, Lilian; Brito, José C.; Llewellyn, Othman A.; Miller, Anthony G.; Patzelt, Annette; Ghazanfar, Shahina A.; Timberlake, Jonathan; Klöser, Heinz; Shennan-Farpón, Yara; Kindt, Roeland; Lillesø, Jens-Peter Barnekow; van Breugel, Paulo; Graudal, Lars; Voge, Maianna; Al-Shammari, Khalaf F.; Saleem, Muhammad (2017). "An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm" . BioScience . 67 (6): 534– 545. doi : 10.1093/biosci/bix014 . ISSN 0006-3568 . PMC 5451287 . PMID 28608869 . ^ a b "Greenland Wildlife" . Redaction .

The Great Danish Encyclopedia. 2014. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016 . Retrieved 8 October 2015 . ^ "Greenland". Encyclopædia Britannica , Eleventh Edition. ^ "Animal life in Greenland – an introduction by the tourist board" . Greenland Guide . Narsaq Tourist Office. n.d. Archived from the original on 27 April 2012 . Retrieved 1 May 2012 . ^ Møller, P. R.; Nielsen, J.; Knudsen, S. W.; Poulsen, J. Y.; Sünksen, K.; Jørgensen, O. A. (2010). "A checklist of the fish fauna of Greenland waters" . Zootaxa . 2378 (1): 1– 84. ISBN 978-1-86977-468-4 . OCLC 551668689 . ^ "Economy and Industry in Greenland – Naalakkersuisut" . naalakkersuisut.gl . Archived from the original on 2 April 2019 . Retrieved 17 August 2019 . ^ Durinck, Jan; Falk, Knud (1996). "The distribution and abundance of seabirds off southwestern Greenland in autumn and winter 1988–1989" . Polar Research . 15 (1): 23– 42. Bibcode : 1996PolRe..15...23D . doi : 10.3402/polar.v15i1.6634 . ^ Mehlum, Fridtjof (April 1989). Summer distribution of seabirds in northern Greenland and Barents Seas . Skrifter. Vol. 191. Norsk Polarinstitutt . ISBN 82-90307-53-5 . ^ "Greenland" . PeakVisor. 9 November 2022. Archived from the original on 12 October 2023 . Retrieved 2 October 2023 . ^ Seabird Harvest in the Arctic – Prepared by the Circumpolar Seabird Group (CBird) (Report). Conservation of Arctic Flora and Fauna. September 2008. Archived from the original on 29 September 2023 . Retrieved 2 October 2023 . ^ "Inatsisartut" (in Kalaallisut). Inatsisartut.gl. Archived from the original on 17 August 2018 . Retrieved 29 December 2020 . ^ "The executive power is vested in the King." The Constitution of Denmark – Section 3. Archived 10 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ "The body of Ministers shall form the Council of State, in which the Successor to the Throne shall have a seat when he is of age.

The Council of State shall be presided over by the King..." The Constitution of Denmark – Section 17. Archived 10 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ The Monarchy today Archived 15 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine – The Danish Monarchy (kongehuset.dk). Access date: 16 June 2012 ^ "The King shall not be answerable for his actions; his person shall be sacrosanct." The Constitution of Denmark – Section 13. Archived 10 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ Jakobsen, Uffe; Larsen, Henrik (2 January 2024). "The development of Greenland's self-government and independence in the shadow of the unitary state" .

The Polar Journal . 14 (1): 9– 10, 20– 21. Bibcode : 2024PolJ...14....9J . doi : 10.1080/2154896X.2024.2342117 . ISSN 2154-896X . ^ Statsministeriet (29 November 1978), Lov om Grønlands hjemmestyre , retrieved 30 January 2025 ^ Statsministeriet (6 December 2009), Lov om Grønlands Selvstyre , retrieved 30 January 2025 ^ Jonatan Robbert, Larsen (7 January 2025). "OVERBLIK: Hvad bestemmer Grønland selv?" . DR . Retrieved 7 January 2025 . ^ Greenland votes for more autonomy , BBC News , 26 November 2008 ^ "EU Relations with Greenland" . European Union. Archived from the original on 9 June 2011 . Retrieved 3 October 2020 . ^ "Overseas Countries and Territories (OCT)" . European Union. Archived from the original on 13 August 2011 . Retrieved 3 October 2020 . ^ Folketinget – Folketinget.dk Archived 28 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine . Ft.dk. Retrieved on 21 June 2016. ^ "Arctic" . Danish Ministry of Defence . 19 February 2021. ^ "Trump reportedly wants to 'buy' Greenland. This is what it's like at the US's Arctic base there" . Business Insider . 16 August 2019. Archived from the original on 19 August 2019 . Retrieved 19 August 2019 . ^ Weber, Joachim, ed. (2020). Handbook on Geopolitics and Security in the Arctic . Springer. p. 79. ^ Hansen, H. C. (16 November 1957). "Danish Prime Minister Gives Tacit Go-Ahead For U.S. Nuclear Weapons in Greenland" .

The Nautilus Institute. Archived from the original on 6 November 2007 . Retrieved 20 March 2009 . ^ "A Top-Secret US Military Base Will Melt Out of the Greenland Ice Sheet" . VICE Magazine . 9 March 2019. Archived from the original on 20 August 2019 . Retrieved 20 August 2019 . ^ "The Cold War's Missing Atom Bombs" . Der Spiegel . 14 November 2008. Archived from the original on 27 June 2019 . Retrieved 20 August 2019 . ^ "US B-52 nuclear bomber crash in Greenland 51 years ago has ill Danes seeking compensation" . Fox News . 3 June 2019. Archived from the original on 8 June 2019 . Retrieved 20 August 2019 . ^ Corera, Gordon (10 November 2008). "Mystery of lost US nuclear bomb" . BBC News. Archived from the original on 23 October 2017 . Retrieved 22 August 2019 . ^ "US left nuclear weapon under ice in Greenland" .

The Daily Telegraph . 11 November 2008. Archived from the original on 20 August 2019 . Retrieved 20 August 2019 . ^ Winther, Bent (6 January 2025). "Selvstændighed? Mette Frederiksen har det stærkeste kort på hånden" . Berlingske . Retrieved 6 January 2025 . ^ "Redegørelse om rigsfællesskabet 2024. Afgivet af statsministeren (Mette Frederiksen) den 28 February 2024. ft.dk" (PDF) . Retrieved 20 November 2025 . ^ "Pressure on Greenland for more Danish aid, U.S. presence" . Financial Mirror. 20 January 2025 . Retrieved 13 January 2026 . ^ Hannestad, Adam (23 January 2014). "13 eksperter skyder Grønlands drøm om selvstændighed i sænk" . Politiken (in Danish). Archived from the original on 24 January 2014 . Retrieved 2 September 2019 . ^ a b c d e Kleemann, Naduk (ed.). Greenland in Figures 2025 (PDF) (22nd ed.). Statistics Greenland. ISBN 978-87-986787-9-3 . ISSN 1604-7397 . {{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ Bjerregaard, Søren (1 November 2023). "Mangel på arbejdskraft øger behovet for stram økonomisk politik i Grønland" . National Bank of Denmark (in Danish) . Retrieved 12 January 2026 . ^ a b Walsh, Maurice (28 January 2017). " 'You can't live in a museum': the battle for Greenland's uranium" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 29 January 2017 . Retrieved 28 January 2017 . ^ a b "Greenland" . CIA World Factbook . Archived from the original on 9 January 2021 . Retrieved 15 May 2007 . ^ COHEN, LI (16 July 2021). "Greenland halts new oil exploration to combat climate change and focus on sustainable development" . CBC. Archived from the original on 19 July 2021 . Retrieved 20 July 2021 . ^ Galimova, Tansu; Satymov, Rasul; Keiner, Dominik; Breyer, Christian (January 2024). "Sustainable energy transition of Greenland and its prospects as a potential Arctic e-fuel and e-chemical export hub for Europe and East Asia". Energy . 286 129605. Bibcode : 2024Ene...28629605G . doi : 10.1016/j.energy.2023.129605 . ^ "Greenland's red hot labour market" . Nordic Labour Journal . 12 October 2011. Archived from the original on 1 February 2013 . Retrieved 10 February 2013 . ^ "Greenland – Transportation" . www.iexplore.com . Archived from the original on 10 October 2018 . Retrieved 10 October 2018 . ^ Andersen, Nina-Vivi Møller (25 September 2021). "ATV-sporet mellem Kangerlussuaq og Sisimiut er færdig" . www.sermitsiaq.ag . ^ "Forslag: Naalakkersuisut bør punge ud til grusvej til omkring 500 mio. kr" (in Danish). Sermitsiaq. 27 March 2023. Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 30 December 2023 . ^ "Nuuk Airport" . www.mit.gl . Archived from the original on 3 September 2019 . Retrieved 21 September 2019 . ^ "tripsta" . Archived from the original on 21 September 2019 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 . ^ "Mittarfeqarfiit, Grønlands Lufthavne, Greenland Airports Today's Flights Airports Kangerlussuaq airport – mit.gl" . www.mit.gl . Archived from the original on 22 September 2019 . Retrieved 21 September 2019 . ^ "City, high-rise apartments, cosy atmosphere, culture, rock, gourmet restaurants, cafés, fashion outlets, art, the national museum and the university – all the ingredients of a capital – Nuuk" . www.airgreenland.gl . Archived from the original on 21 September 2019 . Retrieved 21 September 2019 . ^ " "Delays in Ilulissat Airport Construction Project Push Opening to 2026" | en.365Nyt" . 28 May 2024. Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 14 October 2024 . ^ "Ilulissat Airport" . www.mit.gl . Archived from the original on 17 September 2019 . Retrieved 21 September 2019 . ^ Woodman, Georg (18 October 2017). 2033-The Century After: How the World Would Look/Be If Nazi Germany & Empire Japan Had Won World War II . Strategic Book Publishing & Rights Agency. ISBN 978-1-68181-946-4 . Archived from the original on 20 September 2022 . Retrieved 18 September 2022 . ^ "Tourism Statistics Report 2019, Greenland" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 February 2021 . Retrieved 12 January 2022 . ^ "Greenland's Economy Autumn 2020, Summary" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 27 March 2021 . ^ "Greenland's economy is poised to rebound in 2021, 2 June 2020" . 2 June 2020. Archived from the original on 22 May 2023 . Retrieved 27 March 2021 . ^ Stephanie Vermillion (24 March 2021). "Greenland Is Approaching Tourism Slowly—And Taking Lessons from Iceland, 24 March 2021" . Archived from the original on 16 January 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2022 . ^ a b Gettleman, Jeffrey ; Tekeli, Maya; Buckley, Chris (3 March 2025). "For Greenland's Minerals, the Harsh Reality Behind the Glittering Promise" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 5 March 2025 . ^ Winther, Bent (6 January 2025). "Selvstændighed? Mette Frederiksen har det stærkeste kort på hånden" . Berlingske (in Danish) . Retrieved 12 January 2026 . ^ "Geologist warns prospect of a mineral bonanza in Greenland is a mirage" . Cbs News . Retrieved 19 April 2025 . ^ Chinese Workers—in Greenland? Archived 13 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine 10 February 2013 BusinessWeek . ^ "Greenland Rubies: What We Know At This Point | National Jeweler" . www.nationaljeweler.com . Archived from the original on 17 August 2019 . Retrieved 17 August 2019 . ^ "Greenland" . Stalvik.com. Archived from the original on 23 September 2010 . Retrieved 6 September 2010 . ^ "Grønlændere i Danmark" (PDF) . Statistics Greenland (in Danish). 22 June 2023. ^ Moltke, Ida; Fumagalli, Matteo; Korneliussen, Thorfinn (2015). "Uncovering the Genetic History of the Present-Day Greenlandic Population" . American Journal of Human Genetics . 96 (1): 54– 69. doi : 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.11.012 . PMC 4289681 . PMID 25557782 . ^ "Danish doubts over Greenland vote" . BBC News . 27 November 2008. Archived from the original on 7 December 2012 . Retrieved 10 February 2013 . ^ Kleinschmidt, Samuel 1968 (1851): Grammatik der grønlændischen Sprache : mit teilweisem Einschluss des Labradordialekts. Hildesheim : Olms, 1968. ^ "Travelling in Greenland" . Greenland Representation to the EU, Greenland Home Rule Government. Archived from the original on 16 May 2014. ^ Mennecier, Philippe (1978). Le tunumiisut, dialecte inuit du Groenland oriental: description et analyse , Collection linguistique, 78, Societé de linguistique de Paris. ^ "Atlas of the world's languages in danger" . unesdoc.unesco.org . Archived from the original on 11 November 2020 . Retrieved 21 February 2023 . ^ "Sermersooq will secure Eastern Greenlandic" (in Danish). Kalaallit Nunaata Radioa . 6 January 2010. Archived from the original on 16 May 2016 . Retrieved 19 May 2010 . ^ "Greenland, Religion and Social Profile | National Profiles | International Data" . Thearda.com . 21 June 2009. Archived from the original on 24 September 2017 . Retrieved 18 June 2016 . ^ "Table: Christian Population as Percentages of Total Population by Country | Pew Research Center" . 19 December 2011. Archived from the original on 11 May 2017 . Retrieved 27 September 2017 . ^ Taboo, Personal and Collective Representations: Origin and Positioning Within Cultural Complexes . Taylor & Francis. 2019. ISBN 978-1-351-03988-8 . Archived from the original on 20 September 2022 . Retrieved 18 September 2022 . ^ Sørensen, Leif Kiil (29 November 2000). "Grønlandsk bibel præsenteret | Kristeligt Dagblad" . Kristeligt-dagblad.dk. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved 6 September 2010 . ^ "Bells ring a wake-up call for climate justice" . World Council of Churches . 14 December 2009. Archived from the original on 25 March 2012 . Retrieved 30 August 2010 . ^ "Grønland, Grundloven og Gejstligheden" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 April 2012 . Retrieved 30 April 2012 . ^ "Constitution of Denmark – Section IV" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 March 2016 . Retrieved 22 September 2016 .

The Evangelical Lutheran Church shall be the Established Church of Denmark, and, as such, it shall be supported by the State. ^ "Folkekirken, medlemmer 2012–2025 " . Statistikbanken (in Danish). ^ "The only Muslim in Greenland who fasts for 21 hours" .

The Jazba Blog . 8 August 2011. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 26 January 2020 . ^ "The Suicide Capital of the World" . Slate . 9 October 2009. Archived from the original on 4 March 2013 . Retrieved 13 March 2013 . ^ "Rising suicide rate baffles Greenland" . Archived from the original on 23 March 2013 . Retrieved 13 March 2013 . ^ Thulstrup, Kasper Mosholm (17 September 2023). "Grønland vil gøre op med rekordmange selvmord blandt børn og unge" . Danish Broadcasting Corporation (in Danish) . Retrieved 12 January 2025 . ^ "Greenland profile – Overview" Archived 18 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine . BBC News . ^ Aage, H. (2012). "Alcohol in Greenland 1951–2010: consumption, mortality, prices" . International Journal of Circumpolar Health . 71 18444. doi : 10.3402/ijch.v71i0.18444 . PMC 3525923 . PMID 23256091 . ^ Madsen, M. H.; Grønbæk, M.; Bjerregaard, P.; Becker, U. (2005). "Urbanization, migration and alcohol use in a population of Greenland Inuit" . International Journal of Circumpolar Health . 64 (3): 234– 45. doi : 10.3402/ijch.v64i3.17987 . PMID 16050317 . ^ Bjorn-Mortensen, K.; Ladefoged, K; Obel, N.; Helleberg, M. (2013). "The HIV epidemic in Greenland – a slow spreading infection among adult heterosexual Greenlanders" . Int J Circumpolar Health . 7232 19558. doi : 10.3402/ijch.v72i0.19558 . PMC 3577920 . PMID 23431117 . ^ "Nye tilfælde af HIV blandt unge" . Naalakkersuisut . 13 October 2019. Archived from the original on 23 November 2019 . Retrieved 22 November 2019 . ^ "Arbejde" . europas-lande.dk. Archived from the original on 23 November 2019 . Retrieved 22 November 2019 . ^ "Unemployment rate" . Statistics Greenland. 2017 . Retrieved 22 November 2019 . ^ "Euro area unemployment at 8.7%, December 2017" (PDF) . Eurostat . Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 February 2018 . Retrieved 22 November 2019 . ^ Stone, Lyman (15 October 2019). "A 'New' Normal? An Updated Look at Fertility Trends Across the Globe" . Institute for Family Studies . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ "Inuit Greenlanders demand answers over Danish birth control scandal" . BBC News . 30 September 2022. Archived from the original on 1 October 2022 . Retrieved 1 October 2022 . ^ "Grønland har ansvar for 15 spiralsager" . Sermitsiaq . Retrieved 20 October 2024 . ^ "§2, Imm. 3, Qitiusumik Inunnik Nalunaarsuiffik pillugu inatsisip (CPR pillugu inatsit) allanngortinneqarneranik inatsisit Kalaallit Nunaannut atuutilersinneqarnerannik peqqussut (Greenlandic)" (PDF) . Retrieved 1 September 2020 . ^ "§2, Stk 3., Anordning om ikrafttræden for Grønland af love om ændring af lov om Det Centrale Personregister (Danish)" . Retrieved 1 September 2020 . ^ "Greenland (Denmark)" . database.ilga.org . Retrieved 30 December 2024 . ^ Hessel , p. 20 ^ Hessel , p. 21 ^ "The making of a tupilak and its consequences" . Museon . Archived from the original on 5 January 2022 . Retrieved 5 January 2022 . ^ "Kalaallit Nunaata Radioa | KNR" . knr.gl . Archived from the original on 28 January 2023 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ "Nanoq Media" . nanoqmedia.gl . Archived from the original on 19 April 2021 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ a b "Drum dance and drum song – Trap Greenland" . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ "Qilaat – The Greenlandic frame drum" . greenlandicpopularmusic . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ "Inuit drum dancing and singing – UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage" . ich.unesco.org . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ "UNESCO honours Inuit drum dancing" . United Nations Western Europe . 15 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ "Denmark.dk: Official website – Denmark – Greenland: an Overview" . 12 February 2006. Archived from the original on 12 February 2006 . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ "Kalattuut – Greenlandic style – Trap Greenland" . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ "Kalattuut – Greenlandic polka" . greenlandicpopularmusic . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ "Music in Greenland" . Visit Greenland . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ Bours, Etienne (2000). "Sealskin Hits".

In Broughton, Simon; Ellingham, Mark (eds.). World Music, Vol. 1: Africa, Europe and the Middle East . McConnachie, James and Duane, Orla (Ed.). Rough Guides . p. –145. ISBN 1-85828-636-0 ^ "Roskilde-aktuelle Nanook: et fænomen fra Grønland" . gaffa.dk (in Danish). 7 January 2019 . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ "Elsner bræður og Ísbjarnarguðinn" . RÚV . 25 April 2015 . Retrieved 15 May 2025 . ^ "Interview: Simon Lynge – singer/songwriter" .

The Fate of Greenland: Lessons from Abrupt Climate Change, co-authored with Richard Alley, Wallace Broecker and George Denton, with photographs by Gary Comer, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Hessel, Ingo (2006). Arctic Spirit . Vancouver, BC: Douglas and McIntyre. ISBN 978-1-55365-189-5 . Lund, S. (1959). "The Marine Algae of East Greenland. 1. Taxonomical Part". Meddr Gronland . 156 (1): 1– 245. Lund, S. (1959). "The Marine Algae of East Greenland. 11. Geographic Distribution". Meddr Gronland . 156 : 1– 70. Oldendow, Knud.(1958). "Printing in Greenland". Libri: International Journal of Libraries & Information Services 8 (3/4): 223–62. Sowa, F. (2013). "Indigenous Peoples and the Institutionalization of the Convention on Biological Diversity in Greenland". Arctic Anthropology . 50 (1): 72– 88. doi : 10.3368/aa.50.1.72 . Sowa, F. (2013). Relations of Power & Domination in a World Polity: The Politics of Indigeneity & National Identity in Greenland. In: Heininen, L. Arctic Yearbook 2013.