The Times of India Zee News Related topics Anti-conversion law Ghar Wapsi Godi media Politics of India Liberalism Socialism Communism Religious discrimination Christianophobia Islamophobia Trads Conservatism portal India portal The term took roots in light of the description of Indic religions and the "western preconceptions about the nature of religion", which the Indian intellectuals disagreed with. This attempt to articulate what Hinduism is, coupled with emerging political and cultural beliefs, has evolved and contributed to the various meanings of the term.

The word Hindutva was used in the late 1890s by Chandranath Basu , to merely portray a traditional Hindu cultural view.

The term was given a wider meaning in the later political ideology of Vinayak Damodar Savarkar . Definitions of the term Savarkar For Savarkar, in Essentials of Hindutva , Hindutva is an inclusive term of everything Indic.

The three essentials of Hindutva in Savarkar's definition were the common nation ( rashtra ), common race ( jati ), and common culture or civilisation ( sanskriti ). Savarkar used the words "Hindu" and "Sindhu" interchangeably. Those terms were at the foundation of his Hindutva, as geographic, cultural and ethnic concepts, and "religion did not figure in his ensemble", states Sharma. His elaboration of Hindutva included all Indic religions , i.e. Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, and Sikhism. Savarkar restricted "Hindu nationality" to "Indian religions" in the sense that they shared a common culture and fondness for the land of their origin. Savarkar had made clear distinction between Hinduism and Hindutva, that they are not same things as Hindutva does not concern religion or rituals but the basis of India's national character.

The definition and the use of Hindutva and its relationship with Hinduism has been a part of several court cases in India.

In 1966, chief justice P. B. Gajendragadkar wrote for the Supreme Court of India in Yagnapurushdasji (AIR 1966 SC 1127) , that "Hinduism is impossible to define." The court adopted Radhakrishnan's submission that Hinduism is complex and "the theist and atheist, the sceptic and agnostic, may all be Hindus if they accept the Hindu system of culture and life." The Court judged that Hinduism historically has had an "inclusive nature" and it may "broadly be described as a way of life and nothing more." The 1966 decision has significantly influenced the judicial interpretation of the term Hindutva in subsequent cases, particularly in the seven rulings delivered by the Supreme Court during the 1990s, collectively referred to as the "Hindutva judgments." These judgments broadly characterised Hindutva as a "way of life" or a "state of mind," rather than as a political ideology or a religious doctrine. These judgements have faced widespread criticism.

The Indian lawyer A. G. Noorani states that the Supreme Court in its 1995 ruling gave "Hindutva a benign meaning, calling Hindutva the same as Indianisation, etc." and these were unnecessary digressions from the facts of the case, and in doing so, "the court may have brought down the wall separating religion and politics." Mukul Kesavan , a historian and writer, argues that the judgments lend legitimacy to a sectarian vision of India and undermine the secular pluralism enshrined in the constitution. According to Kesavan, the judgements effectively sanitised the ideological project of the Sangh Parivar and enabled political actors to invoke majoritarian themes without transgressing the legal boundaries of religious appeals under electoral law. If Hindutva is at all understood as a way of life it is understood as a Hindu way of life.

The proposed obliteration of difference and the development of a uniform culture is to be effected by making minorities sacrifice their own identities at the altar of Hindutva, that is, the religious and cultural practice of the majority community, the Hindus. — Mukul Kesavan Following the 2002 Gujarat riots , Shubhra Verma, the daughter of Justice J.S. Verma , who had authored the 1995 judgement, said, "He always had a regret about being misunderstood after 1995 and how for their own purposes, a group of politicians had twisted the spirit of his judgment." In 2016, the Supreme Court declined a plea seeking a review of the "devastating consequences" arising from its 1995 judgment. Ideology and themes In 1923, Savarkar, a radical nationalist and ideologue, wrote Essentials of Hindutva (later retitled Hindutva: Who Is a Hindu? ).

In the book, he outlined his ideology and "the idea of a universal and essential Hindu identity." The term "Hindu identity" is broadly interpreted and distinguished from "ways of life and values of others." The contemporary meaning and usage of Hindutva largely derives from Savarkar's ideas, as does the post-1980s nationalism and mass political activity in India. Unified Hindu identity and religious nationalism The struggles of the colonial era and the formulation of neo-Hinduism by the early 20th century added a sense of "ethnicity" to the original "Hinduness" meaning of Hindutva. Its early formulation incorporated the racism and nationalism concepts prevalent in Europe during the first half of the 20th century, and culture was in part rationalised as a result of "shared blood and race." Savarkar and his Hindutva colleagues adopted the social Darwinism theories prevalent by the 1930s.

In the post-independence period , states Sharma, the concept has suffered from ambiguity and its understanding aligned on "two different axes," one of religion versus culture, another of nation versus state.

In general, the Hindutva thought among many Indians has "tried to align itself with the culture and nation" axes.

From this standpoint, sanctioned by the experience of shrewd old nations, the foreign races in Hindusthan must either adopt the Hindu culture and language, must learn to respect and hold in reverence Hindu religion, must entertain no idea but those of the glorification of the Hindu race and culture, i.e., of the Hindu nation and must lose their separate existence to merge in the Hindu race, or may stay in the country, wholly subordinated to the Hindu Nation, claiming nothing, deserving no privileges, far less any preferential treatment—not even citizen's rights. There is, at least should be, no other course for them to adopt. We are an old nation; let us deal as old nations ought to and do deal, with the foreign races, who have chosen to live in our country. — M. S. Golwalkar Upper casteism When Prime Minister V. P. Singh launched the Mandal Commission to broaden reservations in government and public university jobs to a significant portion of the Shudras who were officially branded the Other Backward Classes (OBC), the mouthpiece of the Hindutva organisation RSS, Organiser magazine, wrote of "an urgent need to build up moral and spiritual forces to counter any fallout from an expected Shudra revolution." According to social scientist and economist Jean Drèze , the Mandal Commission angered the upper castes and threatened to distance the OBCs, but the Babri Masjid's destruction and ensuing events helped to reduce this challenge and reunified Hindus on an anti-Muslim stance. He further claims "The Hindutva project is a lifeboat for the upper castes in so far as it promises to restore the Brahminical social order" and the potential enemies of this ideology is anybody whose acts might hinder the process of restoring the Brahminic social order. Drèze further claims that although Hindutva is known as a majoritarian movement, it can be best expressed as an oppressive minority movement. According to Jaffrelot, the Sangh Parivar organisations with their Hindutva ideology have strived to impose the belief structure of the upper caste Hindus. According to Dalit rights activist and political theorist Kancha Ilaiah , "Hindutva Is Nothing But Brahminism" and that only "Dalitisation can effectively counter the danger of Brahminical fascism disguised as Hindutva." According to sociologist Amritorupa Sen, the privileges of the upper caste and especially Brahmins have become invisible. There has been a cultural norm that Brahmins take care of the lower castes out of a moral responsibility but also out of human kindness. Separatism The Hindutva ideology has also been described as a separatist ideology. Siddharth Varadarajan writes that Hindutva separatism seeks to depart from the "philosophical, cultural and civilisation mores of the country, including Hinduism itself".

The Hindu Mahasabha received funding from various princely states and advocated for their continued independence following India's liberation from British rule. Savarkar, in particular, praised Hindu-majority princely states such as Mysore , Agra and Oudh , and Travancore , describing them as "progressive." He defended their autocratic authority, referring to these states as "citadels of organised Hindu power." Pseudohistory Main article: Hindutva pseudohistory According to Jaffrelot, the Hindutva ideology has roots in an era where the fiction in ancient Indian mythology and Vedic antiquity was presumed to be valid. This fiction was used to "give sustenance to Hindu ethnic consciousness." Its strategy emulated the Muslim identity politics of the Khilafat movement after World War I , and borrowed political concepts from the West—mainly German. Hindutva organisations treat events in Hindu mythology as history. Hindutva organisations have been criticised for their belief in statements or practices that they claim to be both scientific and factual but are incompatible with the scientific method . According to Anthony Parel , a historian and political scientist, Savarkar's Hindutva, Who is a Hindu? published in 1923 is a fundamental text of Hindutva ideology. It asserts, states Parel, India of the past to be "the creation of a racially superior people, the Aryans. They came to be known to the outside world as Hindus, the people beyond the Indus River. Their identity was created by their race ( Jati ) and their culture (Sanskriti). All Hindus claim to have in their veins the blood of the mighty race incorporated with and descended from the Vedic fathers. They created a culture—an ensemble of mythologies, legends, epic stories, philosophy, art and architecture, laws and rites, feasts and festivals. They have a special relationship to India: India is to them both a fatherland and a holy land." Savarkar's text presents the "Hindu culture as a self-sufficient culture, not needing any input from other cultures," which is "an unhistorical, narcissistic and false account of India's past," states Parel.

The premises of early Hindu nationalist thought, states Chetan Bhatt, reflected the colonial era European scholarship and Orientalism of its times.

The ideas of "India as the cradle of civilisation," or "humanity's homeland and primal philosophy," or "humanism in Hindu values," or of Hinduism offering redemption for contemporary humanity, along with the colonial era scholarship of Frederich Muller, Charles Wilkins , William Jones, Alexander Hamilton, and others were a natural intellectual matrix for Savarkar and others to borrow and germinate their Hindu nationalist ideas. Chakravarthi Ram-Prasad , a Fellow of the British Academy and a scholar of Politics and Philosophy of Religion, states that Hindutva is a form of nationalism that is expounded differently by its opponents and its proponents.

The opponents of Hindutva either consider it as a fundamentalist ideology that "aims to regulate the working of civil society with the imperatives of Hindu religious doctrine", or alternatively, as another form of fundamentalism while accepting that Hinduism is a diverse collection of doctrines, is complex and is different from other religions. According to Ram-Prasad, the proponents reject these tags, viewing it to be their right and a desirable value to cherish their religious and cultural traditions. Hindutva, according to Savarkar, is a "geography, race, and culture" based concept. However, the "geography" is not strictly territorial but is an "ancestral homeland of a people", and the "race" is not biogenetic but described as the historic descendants of the intermarriage of Aryans , native Dravidian peoples , and "different peoples" who arrived over time. So, "the ultimate category for Hindutva is culture," and this culture is "not strictly speaking religious, if religion is meant a commitment to certain doctrines of transcendence." Hostility towards academic freedom Hindutva has been associated with threats and intimidation directed at academics and students, both within India and in the United States. A notable instance occurred in 2011, when Hindutva activists successfully campaigned for the removal of an essay discussing the multiple narrative traditions of the Ramayana , an ancient Sanskrit epic, from the history syllabus at the Delhi University , one of India's most prestigious institutions of higher education. Romila Thapar , one of India's most eminent historians, has faced sustained criticism and attacks from Hindutva-affiliated groups.

The Hindu right has also been implicated in efforts to discredit and obstruct scholars of South Asian studies and Hinduism based in North America. Notable figures such as Wendy Doniger and Sheldon Pollock have been targets of such campaigns. Doniger's book ceased publication in India following a legal settlement in which the publisher agreed to withdraw the title over claims that it defamed Hinduism. Pollock, similarly, was accused of misrepresenting the country's cultural heritage and of allegedly showing "disrespect for the unity and integrity of India." Under the leadership of the BJP, the Indian state has faced allegations of monitoring academics and restricting access to research resources for scholars. Audrey Truschke , an American historian of South Asia, remains a frequent target of threats and harassment by those aligned with Hindutva.

In 2021, a collective of scholars of South Asia based in North America published the Hindutva Harassment Field Manual in response to what they characterised as threats to their academic freedom emanating from Hindutva adherents.

The manual documented numerous incidents of harassment, dating back to the 1990s, aimed at academics engaged in critical scholarship on South Asia and Hinduism.

The Association for Asian Studies described Hindutva as a "majoritarian ideological doctrine" distinct from Hinduism and condemned the increasing attacks on scholars, artists, and journalists who engage critically with its political tenets. Several academics and conference participants withdrew from scholarly events due to threats received from ultranationalists and Hindutva-affiliated actors. Fascism Part of a series on Fascism Principles Actual idealism Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-materialism Anti-pacifism Authoritarianism Chauvinism Class collaboration Corporatism Counter-Enlightenment Cult of personality Dictatorship Direct action Dirigisme Heroic realism Machismo Masculinity National syndicalism New Man One-party state Proletarian nation Propaganda Reactionary modernism Social Darwinism Social order State capitalism Statolatry Third Position Totalitarianism Ultranationalism Palingenetic Topics Culture Definitions Economics Heroic capitalism Supercapitalism Ideology Martyrs Movements Mysticism Symbolism Politicians Balbo Bandera Codreanu Doriot Degrelle Engdahl Franco Goga Gömbös Hitler Ljotić Mosley Mussolini Nakano Oviglio O'Duffy Quisling Pavelić Pavolini Preto Primo de Rivera Rodzaevsky Salgado Sima Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Szálasi Valois Van Severen Intellectuals Ahimeir Arthuys Bardèche Brasillach Céline Chamberlain Chesterton Civinini Corradini Crainic Croce Cupcea D'Annunzio Dilling Drieu La Rochelle Evola Gentile Giani Gini Ilyin Ionescu Kita Krannhals de Lapouge Lewis Malaparte Manuilă Marinetti Michels Mosley Ojetti Ōkawa Olivetti Orano Panero Pirandello Pound Ramos Rosenberg Saint-Loup Savarkar Scaligero Schmitt Schwarz Sorel Spirito Streel Thomson Ungaretti Valois Literature Prussianism and Socialism (1919) " Futurist Manifesto " (1919) Fascist Manifesto (1919) Mein Kampf (1925) Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals (1925) My Autobiography (1928) The Myth of the Twentieth Century (1930) " The Doctrine of Fascism " (1932) Twenty-Six Point Program of the Falange (1934) Organizations Arrow Cross Party Blackshirts Brazilian Integralist Action British National Party British Union of Fascists Stewards Canadian Union of Fascists Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Fasci Italiani di Combattimento ' French Popular Party Iron Guard Kokumin Dōmei Lapua Movement Mouvement Franciste National Fascist Party Opera Nazionale Balilla Republican Fascist Party Revolutionary Mexicanist Action Rexist Party Russian Fascist Party School of Fascist Mysticism Silver Legion of America Squadrismo Slovak People's Party Tōhōkai Ustaše Ustaše Youth Verdinaso VFO Vlajka Media Ajan Suunta Der Angriff Critica fascista Fashist Il Popolo d'Italia Je suis partout L'Idea Nazionale Nástup Neues Volk Das Schwarze Korps Völkischer Beobachter History History of fascism March on Rome Beer Hall Putsch Gentile Reform Aventine Secession Second Italo-Senussi War Libyan genocide German election of 1932 Enabling Act Austrian Civil War Exhibition of the Fascist Revolution 1934 Montreux Fascist conference Second Italo-Ethiopian War 1935 Revolution Day Zócalo Battle Spanish Civil War Unification Decree Battle of Cable Street Anti-Comintern Pact Kristallnacht Italian invasion of Albania Pact of Steel Peasant March World War II The Holocaust Genocide of Serbs in Croatia Downfall in Italy Downfall in Germany Downfall in Thailand Downfall in Yugoslavia Surrender of Japan Nuremberg trials International Military Tribunal for the Far East Variants Albanian Arab Argentine Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Austrian Austrian Nazism Brazilian Brazilian integralism British Christian Clerical Crypto- Croat Eco- Falangism Francoism Pétainism Valoisism Hindutva Hungarism Ibañism Ilminism Irish Islamic Italian Intransigent Japanese Emperor-system Statism Restoration Ultra- Techno- Nazism Austrian Hitlerism Strasserism Swedish Neo- Finnish Legionarism Pan-Turkic Rexism Romanian Neo- Romanianism/Stelism Russian Swiss Syndicalist Syrian Third Position National-anarchism National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism Ukrainian Banderism National Shevchenkoism Uruguayan Marzism Revisionism Sosism Taiwan Chiangism By continent Asia Europe Bulgaria Netherlands Russia North America Canada United States South America Peru Uruguay Related topics Anti-fascism Axis powers Criticism of fascism Donald Trump and fascism Extremism of the centre F-scale Fascist as an insult Feudal fascism Futurism Glossary of Fascist Italy Lebensphilosophie Mediterraneanism Para-fascism Paramilitary Post-fascism Proto-fascism Red fascism Social fascism Politics portal v t e The Hindutva ideology has significantly borrowed ideas and concepts from European fascism . Parallels between Hindutva and European fascism are observed in concepts such as repeated mobilisations, appeals to a mythic past, anti-communism, its purist racial elements, among others.

After the 1940s and 1950s, a number of scholars have labelled or compared Hindutva to fascism. Many scholars have pointed out that early Hindutva ideologues were inspired by fascist movements in early 20th-century Italy and Germany. Marzia Casolari is one such scholar who has linked the association and the borrowing of pre-World War II European fascist ideas by early leaders of Hindutva ideology. According to the Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics and International Relations , the term Hindutva has "fascist undertones." The Indian Marxist economist and political commentator Prabhat Patnaik calls Hindutva "almost fascist in the classical sense." He states that the Hindutva movement is based on "class support, methods and programme." According to Patnaik, Hindutva has the following fascist ingredients: "an attempt to create a unified homogeneous majority under the concept of "the Hindus"; a sense of grievance against past injustice; a sense of cultural superiority; an interpretation of history according to this grievance and superiority; a rejection of rational arguments against this interpretation; and an appeal to the majority based on race and masculinity ." According to Jaffrelot, the early Hindutva proponents such as Golwalkar envisioned it as an extreme form of "ethnic nationalism", but the ideology differed from fascism and Nazism in three respects. First, unlike fascism and Nazism, it did not closely associate Hindutva with its leader. Second, while fascism emphasised the primacy of the state, Hindutva considered the state to be a secondary. Third, while Nazism emphasised primacy of the race, the Hindutva ideology emphasised primacy of the society over race. According to Achin Vanaik , several authors have labelled Hindutva as fascist, but such a label requires "establishing a fascist minimum." Hindu nationalism, states Vanaik, is "a specific Indian manifestation of a generic phenomenon but not one that belongs to the genus of fascism." Sociologists Chetan Bhatt and Parita Mukta have described difficulties in identifying Hindutva with fascism or Nazism, because of Hindutva's embrace of cultural rather than racial nationalism, its "distinctively Indian" character, and "the RSS's disavowal of the seizure of state power in preference for long-term cultural labour in civil society ." They describe Hindutva as a form of "revolutionary conservatism" or "ethnic absolutism." According to Thomas Hansen, Hindutva represents a "conservative revolution" in postcolonial India, and its proponents have been combining "paternalistic and xenophobic discourses" with "democratic and universalist discourses on rights and entitlements" based on "desires, anxieties and fractured subjectivities" in India. Hindutva and Nazism An editorial published on 4 February 1948 in the National Herald , the mouthpiece of the Indian National Congress party, stated that "it seems to embody Hinduism in a Nazi form" with the recommendation that it must be ended. Similarly, in 1956, another Congress party leader compared the Bharatiya Jana Sangh to the Nazis in Germany. Savarkar criticised Jawaharlal Nehru for condemning Germany and Italy, asserting that "crores of Hindu Sanghatanists in India cherish no ill-will towards Germany or Italy or Japan." In 1938, Savarkar publicly expressed support for the German occupation of Czechoslovakia . Although, at the outbreak of the Second World War , Savarkar and the Hindu Mahasabha initially advocated a stance of neutrality, his rhetoric became increasingly strident over time. He characterised German Jews as a communal force and endorsed the Nazi persecution of the Jews . Moreover, he drew a parallel between German Jews and Indian Muslims, stating, "The Indian Muslims are on the whole more inclined to identify themselves and their interests with Muslims outside India than Hindus who live next door, like Jews in Germany." As late as 1961, he spoke favourably of Nazi Germany and contrasted it with Nehru's "cowardly democracy." German race pride has now become the topic of the day. To keep up the purity of the Race and its culture, Germany shocked the world by her purging the country of the semitic Races—the Jews. Race pride at its highest has been manifested here. Germany has also shown how wellnigh impossible it is for Races and cultures, having differences going to the root, to be assimilated into one united whole, a good lesson for us in Hindusthan to learn and profit by. — M. S. Golwalkar History Origins According to Prabhu Bapu, a historian and scholar of Oriental Studies, the term and the contextual meaning of Hindutva emerged from the Indian experience in the colonial era, memories of its religious wars as the Mughal Empire decayed, an era of Muslim and Christian proselytisation , a feeling that their traditions and cultures were being insulted, whereby the Hindu intellectuals formulated Hindutva as a "Hindu identity" as a prelude to a national resurgence and a unified Indian nation against the "foreign invaders." The development of "religious nationalism" and the demand by the Muslim leaders on the Indian subcontinent for the partition of British India into Muslim and non-Muslim nations (Pakistan and Bangladesh being Muslim-majority, and India being Hindu-majority) during the middle of the 20th century, confirmed its narrative of geographical and cultural nationalism based on Indian culture and religions. Professor Muqtedar Khan has argued that Hindu nationalism further grew because of the religious divisions between Hindus and Muslims that were fomented by post-1947 Pakistani terrorist attacks in and military conflicts with India. According to Chetan Bhatt, the various forms of Hindu nationalism including the recent "cultural nationalist" form of Hindutva, have roots in the second half of the 19th century. These are a "dense cluster of ideologies" of primordialism , and they emerged from the colonial experiences of the Indian people in conjunction with ideas borrowed from European thinkers but thereafter debated, adapted and negotiated. These ideas included those of a nation, nationalism, race, Aryanism , Orientalism , Romanticism and others. Decades before he wrote his treatise on Hindutva, Savarkar was already famous in colonial India for his version of the Indian Rebellion of 1857 . He studied in London between 1906 and 1910. There he discussed and evolved his ideas of "what constituted a Hindu identity", made friends with Indian student groups as well as non-Indian groups such as the Sinn Féin . He was a part of the underground home rule and liberation movement of Indians, before getting arrested for anti-British activities.

While in prison, Savarkar submitted multiple mercy petitions to the British, seeking clemency and promising loyalty to the crown.

After his release, he moved away from anti-colonial politics and worked to develop Hindutva. His political activities and intellectual journey through European publications, according to Bhatt, influenced him, his future writings, and the 20th-century Hindutva ideology that emerged from his writings. Adoption Savarkar's Hindutva ideology reached K. B. Hedgewar in Nagpur (Maharashtra) in 1925, and he found Savarkar's Hindutva inspirational. He visited Savarkar in Ratnagiri shortly after and discussed with him methods for organising the 'Hindu nation'. Discussions between the two led to Hedgewar founding the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS, lit. "National Volunteer Society"), a far-right Hindutva paramilitary organisation with this mission, in September of that year. This organisation swiftly expanded to become the foremost Hindu nationalist organisation. However, the term Hindutva was not used to describe the ideology of the new organisation; it was Hindu Rashtra (Hindu nation), with one RSS publication stating, "it became evident that Hindus were the nation in Bharat and that Hindutva was Rashtriyatva ." Hedgewar's RSS not only propagated Hindutva ideology, it developed a grassroots organisational structure ( shakhas ) to reform the Hindu society. Village level groups met for morning and evening physical training sessions, martial training and Hindutva ideology lessons. Hedgewar kept RSS an ideologically active but an "apolitical" organisation. This practice of keeping out of national and international politics was retained by his successor M. S. Golwalkar through the 1940s. Philosopher Jason Stanley states "the RSS was explicitly influenced by European fascist movements, its leading politicians regularly praised Hitler and Mussolini in the late 1930s and 1940s." In 1931, B. S. Moonje met with Mussolini and expressed a desire to replicate the fascist youth movement in India. According to Sali Augustine, the core institution of Hindutva has been the RSS.

While the RSS states that Hindutva is different from Hinduism, it has been linked to religion. Therefore "cultural nationalism" is a euphemism, states Augustine, and it is meant to mask the creation of a state with a "Hindu religious identity." According to Jaffrelot, the regional heads of the RSS have included Indians who are Hindus as well as those who belong to other Indian religions such as Jainism .

In parallel to the RSS, Savarkar, after his release from the colonial prison, joined and became the president of Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Mahasabha in 1937. There, he used the terms Hindutva and Hindu Rashtra liberally, according to Graham. Syama Prasad Mukherjee , who served as its president in 1944 and joined the Jawaharlal Nehru Cabinet after independence, was a Hindu traditionalist politician who wanted to uphold Hindu values but not necessarily to the exclusion of other communities. He asked for the membership of Hindu Mahasabha to be thrown open to all communities.

When this was not accepted, he resigned from the party and founded a new political party in collaboration with the RSS. He understood Hinduism as a nationality rather than a community but, realising that this is not the common understanding of the term Hindu , he chose "Bharatiya" instead of "Hindu" to name the new party, which came to be called the Bharatiya Jana Sangh (BJS or JS; often known as the Jan Sangh), a far-right Hindutva-based political party, which served as the political arm of the RSS. Growth The cabinet of the first prime minister of India Jawaharlal Nehru banned the RSS and arrested more than 200,000 RSS volunteers, after Nathuram Godse , a former volunteer of RSS, assassinated Mahatma Gandhi . Nehru also appointed government commissions to investigate the assassination and related circumstances.

The series of investigations by these commissions, states the political science scholar Nandini Deo, later found the RSS leadership and "the RSS innocent of a role in the assassination." The mass arrested RSS volunteers were released by the Indian courts, and the RSS has ever since used this as evidence of "being falsely accused and condemned." According to the historian Robert Frykenberg specialising in South Asian Studies , the RSS membership enormously expanded in independent India .

In this period, while the RSS remained "discretely out of politics", the Jan Sangh entered the Indian political landscape.

The Jan Sangh had limited success in the Indian general elections between 1952 and 1971. This was, in part, because of its poor organisation and leadership; its focus on the Hindutva sentiment did not appeal to the voters, and its campaign lacked adequate social and economic themes. This was also, in part, because Congress party leaders such Indira Gandhi had co-opted some of the key Hindutva ideological themes and fused it with socialist policies and her father's Soviet-style centrally controlled economic model.

The RSS continued its grassroots operations between 1947 and early 1970s, and its volunteers provided humanitarian assistance to Hindu and Sikh refugees from the partition of British India , victims of war and violence, and helped disaster victims to resettle economically.

From 1975 to 1977, Indira Gandhi declared and enforced a national emergency , which saw widespread censorship, mass arrests of dissenters and political opponents, the suspension of the constitution, and the nullification of fundamental rights, alongside a rule by decree and an unprecedented centralisation of power.

The abuses of Emergency triggered a mass resistance and the rapid growth of volunteers and political support to the Hindutva ideology. Indira Gandhi and her party were voted out of power in 1977.

The Hindutva ideology-based Jan Sangh members such as Atal Bihari Vajpayee , Brij Lal Varma , and L. K. Advani gained national prominence, and the Hindutva ideology sympathiser Morarji Desai became the prime minister of a coalition non-Congress government. This coalition did not last past 1980, and from the consequent break-up of coalition parties was the founding of the Bharatiya Janata Party in April 1980. This new national political party relied on the Hindutva ideology-based rural and urban grassroots organisations that had rapidly grown across India from the mid-1970s. Hindutva under Modi (2014–present) Further information: Narendra Modi § Hindutva Since the 2014 Indian general election with the BJP winning, the premiership of Narendra Modi and state based BJP governments have pushed parts of the Hindutva agenda. Abrogation of the special status of Jammu and Kashmir Main articles: Revocation of the special status of Jammu and Kashmir ; Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 ; and 2019–2021 Jammu and Kashmir lockdown On 5 August 2019, the Modi administration revoked the special status, or limited autonomy , granted to Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370 of India's Constitution .

The decision was upheld by the Supreme Court.

The revocation was accompanied by the deployment of thousands of security forces, the detention and arrest of several Kashmiri politicians including a former chief minister, as well as the imposition of a years-long lockdown and communications blackout which saw intense government crackdown and the detention of thousands of Kashmiri civilians.

The ruling included a stipulation that a 5 acres (20,000 m 2 ) of land at an alternative site be provided to the Sunni Waqf Board for the construction of a new mosque. A report made by the Archaeological Survey of India stating that the remains of a "Hindu structure" were found at the disputed Babri Masjid / Ram Janmabhoomi site was considered by the court.

On 5 August 2020, Narendra Modi performed a ground-breaking ceremony (Bhumi-pujan) to open the construction of Ram Mandir at the Ayodhya ; construction was completed in January 2024. Modi gave a speech, declaring, " Ram is the faith of India... Ram is the leader and Ram is the policy." Forced conversion bans Indian states that prohibit forced conversions (2022) Many BJP-ruled states, such as Uttar Pradesh , Madhya Pradesh , Haryana and Karnataka , have considered laws designed to prevent forced conversions from Hinduism to Islam through marriage. Hindutva advocates call this " love jihad ", and it is widely considered to be an Islamophobic conspiracy theory.

In September 2020, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath asked his government to come up with a strategy to prevent "religious conversions in the name of love." On 31 October, he announced that a law to curb "love jihad" would be passed by his government.

The law, which also includes provisions against "unlawful religious conversion", declares a marriage null and void if the sole intention was to "change a girl's religion" and both it and the one in Madhya Pradesh imposed sentences of up to 10 years in prison for those who broke the law.

The ordinance came into effect on 28 November 2020 as the Prohibition of Unlawful Religious Conversion Ordinance .

In December 2020, Madhya Pradesh approved an anti-conversion law similar to the Uttar Pradesh one.

As of 25 November 2020 , Haryana and Karnataka were still in discussion over similar ordinances.

In general, Hindutvavadis (followers of Hindutva) believe that they represent the well-being of Dharmic religions: Hinduism , Sikhism , Buddhism , and Jainism . Most nationalists are organised into political, cultural and social organisations using the concept of Hindutva as a political tool.

The first Hindutva organisation formed was the RSS, founded in 1925. A prominent Indian political party, the BJP, is closely associated with a group of organisations that advocate Hindutva. They collectively refer to themselves as the "Sangh Parivar" or family of associations, and include the RSS, Bajrang Dal and the VHP. Other organisations include: Hindu Swayamsevak Sangh , the overseas branch of the RSS Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh , a workers' union Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad , a students' union Bharatiya Kisan Sangh , a farmers' organisation Political parties that are independent from the Sangh Parivar's influence but that also espouse the Hindutva ideology include the Hindu Mahasabha , Prafull Goradia's Akhil Bharatiya Jana Sangh, and the Marathi nationalist Shiv Sena , Shiv Sena (UBT) and the Maharashtra Navnirman Sena .

The Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) is a Sikh religious party that maintained ties with Hindutva organisations and political parties, as they also represent Sikhism.

By September 2020, SAD left the NDA over the farms bill. Vishva Hindu Parishad and the Bharatiya Janata Party Main articles: Vishva Hindu Parishad and Bharatiya Janata Party The RSS established a number of affiliate organisations after Indian Independence to carry its ideology to various parts of society. Prominent among them is the Vishva Hindu Parishad, which was set up in 1964 with the objective of protecting and promoting the Hindu religion. It subscribed to Hindutva ideology, which came to mean in its hands political Hinduism and Hindu militancy. A number of political developments in the 1980s caused a sense of vulnerability among the Hindus in India. This was much discussed and leveraged by the Hindutva ideology organisations. These developments include the mass killing of the Hindus by the militant Khalistan movement , the influx of undocumented Bangladeshi immigration into Assam coupled with the expulsion of Hindus from Bangladesh, the Congress-led government's pro-Muslim bias in the Shah Bano case as well as the Rushdie affair .

The VHP and the BJP utilised these developments to push forward a militant Hindutva nationalist agenda leading to the Ram Janmabhoomi movement.

The BJP officially adopted Hindutva as its ideology in its 1989 Palampur resolution.

The BJP claims that Hindutva represents "cultural nationalism" and its conception of "Indian nationhood", but not a religious or theocratic concept. It is "India's identity", according to the RSS Chief Mohan Bhagwat . According to the anthropologist and South Asia Politics scholar Thomas Hansen, Hindutva in the post-Independence era has emerged as a political ideology and a populist form of Hindu nationalism. For Indian nationalists, it has subsumed "religious sentiments and public rituals into a larger discourse of national culture (Bharatiya culture) and the Hindu nation, Hindu rashtra", states Hansen. This notion has appealed to the masses in part because it "connects meaningfully with everyday anxieties of security, a sense of disorder" in modern Indian life.

The BJP has deployed the Hindutva theme in its election campaign since early 1991, as well as nominated candidates who are affiliated with organisations that support the Hindutva ideology.

The campaign language of the Congress Party leader Rajiv Gandhi in the 1980s mirrored those of Hindutva proponents.

The political speeches and publications by Indian Muslim leaders have declared their "Islamic religious identity" being greater than any "political ideology or national identity." These developments, states Hansen, have helped Hindu nationalists spread essentialist constructions per contemporary Hindutva ideology. Concepts and issues Uniform Civil Code Main article: Uniform Civil Code The Hindutva leaders have sought a Uniform Civil Code for all the citizens of India , where the same law applies to all its citizens irrespective of the individual's religion. They state that differential laws based on religion violate the Indian Constitution and have sowed the seeds of divisiveness between different religious communities. Under the current laws that were enacted in 1955–56, state John Hutchinson and Anthony D. Smith , the constitutionally directive principle of a Uniform Civil Code covers only non-Muslims.

The supporters of Hindutva sought to protect the native Hindu culture and traditions especially those that symbolised the Hindu culture. They believe that Indian culture is identical with the Hindu culture. These include animals, language, holy structures, rivers and medicine. They opposed the continuation of Urdu being used as a vernacular language as they associated it with Muslims. They felt that Urdu symbolised a foreign culture. For them, Hindi alone was the unifying factor for all the diverse forces in the country. They even wanted to make Hindi as the official language of India and felt that it should be promoted at the expense of English and the other regional languages, with some Hindutva followers describing this with the slogan "Hindi-Hindu- Hindustan ." However, this caused a state of tension and alarm in the non-Hindi regions.

The non-Hindi regions saw it as an attempt by the north to dominate the rest of the country. Eventually, this demand was put down in order to protect the cultural diversity of the country. Hindutva activists have boycotted several Bollywood movies in recent years, claiming that they use too much Urdu and are anti-Hindu; some activists have called for South Indian cinema to be patronised instead, claiming that it is more culturally rooted. Hindutva opposition to Urdu coincides with a desire to spread a Sanskritised Hindi across India. Hindutva violence Further information: Hindu terrorism Since the mid-2010s, there has been a notable increase in violence motivated by Hindutva ideology, particularly towards Muslims, and includes acts of extremist terroristic violence. This has principally been perpetrated by or has implicated members, or alleged members, of Hindu nationalist organisations such as the RSS or Abhinav Bharat .

The violence has also been condoned by the BJP politicians and used as an electoral strategy to garner support from the far-right Hindu population.

The veneration of cows as deities and restrictions on meat consumption have also been used by to justify violence against Muslims , Christians , Dalits , and lower-caste Hindus. Cow vigilantism Main article: Cow vigilante violence in India There has been a rise in the number of incidents of cow vigilantism since the election of a BJP majority in the Parliament of India in 2014.

The frequency and severity of cow vigilante violence has been described as "unprecedented." Human Rights Watch has reported that there has been a surge in such violence since 2015.

The surge is attributed to the recent rise in Hindu nationalism in India. Many vigilante groups say they feel "empowered" by the victory of the Hindu nationalist BJP in the 2014 election. According to a Reuters report, there were 63 attacks in India between 2010 and mid 2017 resulting in 28 deaths, 24 of them Muslim, and 124 injuries. Most attacks occurred after Narendra Modi took office in 2014. Many BJP states have passed laws against cattle slaughter such as Gujarat.

On 6 June 2017, Uttar Pradesh's Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath directed the state police to take action against cow slaughter and cattle smuggling under the National Security Act and the Gangster Act, and in (2021) Assam Assembly passed a bill that prohibits the slaughter or sale of beef within a 5-kilometre (3.1 mi) radius of any temple.

The Muslim League was criticised as well for "its creed of Islamic exclusiveness, its cult of communal hatred and its practice of terrorism and treachery" and called a replica of the German Nazis. ^ Savarkar's early writings and speeches on cultural nationalism contained an embryonic form of a two-nation theory. This embryo took a more detailed form with the Lahore Resolution of 1940 of the Muslim League, which declared, "India's Muslims were a 'separate nation'." Mohammed Ali Jinnah explained the Indian Muslims demand by asserting a cultural distinctiveness of Islam and this "constituted the rationale for a separate nation-state of 'Pakistan'." Jinnah's speech and rationale confirmed Savarkar's beliefs and his early Hindutva's narrative.

The historian Prabhu Bapu quotes and summarises the ideas of the Muslim leaders in British India around 1940: "there were two nations in India, Hindu and Muslim", said Jinnah, British India should be partitioned into "Pakistan and Hindustan." According to Jinnah, "the differences between Hindus and Muslims in India were not merely religious, but entirely different ways of life and thought.

The two communities were distinct peoples, with different religious philosophies, social customs, literatures, and histories. For more than a thousand years, the bulk of Muslims in India had lived in a different world, in a different society, in a different philosophy and a different faith. Muslims must have a state of their own in which they would establish their own constitution and make their own laws." According to Prabhu, such ideas and rationale fuelled the Hindutva narrative for a radical exclusivist Hindu nation, and became "the apologia for the two-nation theory of the 1940s." ^ According to the Political Scientist Christophe Jaffrelot, in the pre-1947 period, the two nationalism and separatist movements in South Asia influenced each other. This history is an example of the Ernest Gellner theory of nationalism, states Jaffrelot.

The Gellner theory states that nationalistic movements arise when there exist two groups, one privileged and other under-privileged.

When the privilege-power equation is threatened by the social forces of history, "culture, skin pigmentation" and such ethnic markers become a basis to presume inferiority of the other and a pretext to manipulate the situation. Using a language of nationalism, one group tries to maintain the status quo, while the other seeks to overthrow it.

In British India, states Jaffrelot, Muslim nationalism and separatism "certainly did not develop" from feelings of having been discriminated against, but their mobilisation came from "the fear of decline and marginalization" of their historic privilege among the Muslim elites in British India. They deployed Islamic cultural symbols and pressed for Perso-Arabic script-based Urdu language for their separatist and nationalist rationale, while Hindu nationalists deployed Hindu cultural symbols and pressed for the use of Indic script-based (Hindi) language – both languages nearly similar when spoken.

The mutual use of identity symbols helped crystallise the other's convictions and fuel each other's fears. These identity symbols and the continued mutual use of such ideological statements fuel the nationalistic discourse in contemporary India and Pakistan. They have been and remain central to organisations such as the BJP and the Sangh Parivar associated with the Hindutva ideology, according to Jean-Luc Racine, a scholar of nationalisms and separatisms with a focus on South Asia. ^ Primordialism is the belief that the deep historical and cultural roots of nations is a quasi‐objective phenomenon, by which outsiders identify individuals of an ethnic group and what contributes to how an individual forms a self-identity. ^ For example, the "writings of Giuseppe Mazzini made a profound impression on Savarkar", states Thomas Hansen. ^ Sources: The New York Times . Archived from the original on 5 August 2019. Farooq, Azhar; Ratcliffe, Rebecca (23 August 2019). "Kashmir city on lockdown after calls for protest march" .

The Dictionary of Human Geography . John Wiley & Sons . pp. 1–. ISBN 978-1-4443-5995-4 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 9 May 2019 . ^ "Hindutva, n." , Oxford English Dictionary Online , Oxford University Press, 2011, archived from the original on 16 October 2015 , retrieved 17 November 2021 ^ Ross, M.H. (2012). Culture and Belonging in Divided Societies: Contestation and Symbolic Landscapes . Book collections on Project MUSE. University of Pennsylvania Press . p. 34. ISBN 978-0-8122-0350-9 . ^ a b Sweetman, W.; Malik, A. (2016). Hinduism in India: Modern and Contemporary Movements . SAGE Publications . p. 109. ISBN 978-93-5150-231-9 . ^ a b "The Hindutva road" . Frontline . 4 December 2004. Archived from the original on 4 June 2023. ^ a b Krishna 2011 , p. 324. ^ a b Sant 1999 , p. 85. ^ a b Krishna & Noorani 2003 , p. 4. ^ a b Leidig, Eviane (17 July 2020). "Hindutva as a variant of right-wing extremism" . Patterns of Prejudice . 54 (3): 215– 237. doi : 10.1080/0031322X.2020.1759861 . hdl : 10852/84144 . ISSN 0031-322X . ^ a b Casolari, Marzia (2000). "Hindutva's Foreign Tie-Up in the 1930s: Archival Evidence". Economic and Political Weekly . 35 (4): 218– 228. JSTOR 4408848 . ^ a b c Prabhat Patnaik (1993). "Fascism of our times". Social Scientist . 21 (3/4): 69– 77. doi : 10.2307/3517631 . JSTOR 3517631 . ^ Frykenberg 2008 , pp. 178–220: "This essay attempts to show how — from an analytical or from an historical perspective — Hindutva is a melding of Hindu fascism and Hindu fundamentalism." ^ a b Chetan Bhatt; Parita Mukta (May 2000). "Hindutva in the West: Mapping the Antinomies of Diaspora Nationalism". Ethnic and Racial Studies . 23 (3): 407– 441. doi : 10.1080/014198700328935 . S2CID 143287533 . Quote: "It is also argued that the distinctively Indian aspects of Hindu nationalism, and the RSS's disavowal of the seizure of state power in preference for long-term cultural labour in civil society, suggests a strong distance from both German Nazism and Italian Fascism. Part of the problem in attempting to classify Golwalkar's or Savarkar's Hindu nationalism within the typology of 'generic fascism', Nazism, racism and ethnic or cultural nationalism is the unavailability of an appropriate theoretical orientation and vocabulary for varieties of revolutionary conservatism and far-right-wing ethnic and religious absolutist movements in 'Third World' countries." ^ a b Parel, Anthony (2000). Gandhi, Freedom, and Self-rule . Lexington Books . p. 133. ISBN 978-0-7391-0137-7 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 30 March 2023 .

The agendas of Hindutva though strong on the issues of self - identity and self - definition, have tended to be separatist. ^ a b Varadarajan, Siddharth (2002). Gujarat, the Making of a Tragedy . Penguin Books . p. 20. ISBN 978-0-14-302901-4 . ^ "Hindutuva vs Hinduism" . 8 April 2017. ^ Julius Lipner (2012). Hindus: Their Religious Beliefs and Practices . Routledge. pp. 11– 12. ISBN 978-1-135-24060-8 . ^ Bhattacharya, Snigdhendu (30 September 2020). "Hindutva and idea that 'Hindus are in danger' were born in Bengal" . ThePrint . Archived from the original on 17 February 2021 . Retrieved 23 December 2020 . Chadra Nath Basu's book Hindutva was published in 1892 by Gurudas Chatterjee.

The first recorded use of the word Hindutva, at least in print, is believed to have been made in this book. ^ NP, Ullekh (28 March 2019). "Will its Hindu revivalist past haunt West Bengal's future?" . Open The Magazine . Archived from the original on 5 November 2020 . Retrieved 29 October 2019 . ^ Gopal, Sangita (1 July 2003). "Hindu Buying/Hindu Being: Hindutva Online and the Commodity Logic of Cultural Nationalism". South Asian Review . 24 (1): 161– 179. doi : 10.1080/02759527.2003.11978304 . ISSN 0275-9527 . S2CID 158146106 . ^ a b Chetan Bhatt (2001). Hindu nationalism: origins, ideologies and modern myths . Berg. pp. 77 (context: Chapter 4). ISBN 978-1-85973-343-1 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 . ^ Sen, Amiya P. (2014). Discourses, Public Addresses, and Informal Talks . Oxford University Press. doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198098966.001.0001 . ISBN 978-0-19-908301-5 . ^ Bhatt, Chetan (2004). " 'Majority ethnic' claims and authoritarian nationalism: the case of Hindutva" .

In Kaufmann, Eric P. (ed.). Rethinking Ethnicity: Majority Groups and Dominant Minorities . London: Routledge. doi : 10.4324/9780203563397 . ISBN 978-0-203-56339-7 . ^ a b c d e f Sharma, Arvind (2002). "On Hindu, Hindustan, Hinduism and Hindutva". Numen . 49 (1): 22– 23, 1– 36. doi : 10.1163/15685270252772759 . JSTOR 3270470 . ^ a b c d e f g Christophe Jaffrelot (2009). Hindu Nationalism: A Reader . Princeton University Press. pp. 14– 15, 86– 93. ISBN 978-1-4008-2803-6 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 2 May 2019 . ^ a b Martha Nussbaum (2009).

The Clash Within: Democracy, Religious Violence, and India's Future . Harvard University Press. pp. 58– 59. ISBN 978-0-674-04156-1 . , Quote: "Savarkar had long lived abroad, and his Hindutva is a European product from its opening words on. Savarkar was not a religious man; for him, traditional religious belief and practice did not lie at the heart of Hindutva. He did, however, consider the religion's cultural traditions to be key markers of Hindutva, along with geographical attachment to the motherland and a sense of oneself as a part of a "race determined by a common origin, possessing a common blood." ^ Purandare, Vaibhav (22 August 2019). "Hindutva is not the same as Hinduism said Savarkar" . Telegraph India . Archived from the original on 20 April 2020 . Retrieved 30 March 2023 . ^ A G Noorani (2000).

The RSS and the BJP: A Division of Labour . Green School Series. LeftWord Books. p. 106. ISBN 978-81-87496-13-7 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 30 March 2023 . ^ "Hinditva - Who Is a Hindu" ^ Vinayak Damodar Savarkar. hindutva-vinayak-damodar-savarkar-pdf . ^ a b Chetan Bhatt (1997). Liberation and Purity: Race, New Religious Movements and the Ethics of Postmodernity . Taylor & Francis. p. 186. ISBN 978-1-85728-423-2 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 . ^ Aparna Devare (2013). History and the Making of a Modern Hindu Self . Routledge. pp. 195– 196. ISBN 978-1-136-19708-6 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 . ^ Jaffrelot 1996 , pp. 12–13. ^ a b c d Ronojoy Sen (2007). Legalizing Religion: The Indian Supreme Court and Secularism . East-West Center, Washington. pp. 29– 31. ISBN 978-1-932728-57-6 . ^ Ronojoy Sen (2006). Defining Religion: The Indian Supreme Court and Hinduism (PDF) . South Asia Institute, Department of Political Science, University of Heidelberg. pp. 15– 16. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 December 2015. ^ Bidyut Chakrabarty (2018). Constitutional Democracy in India . Taylor & Francis. pp. 178– 180. ISBN 978-1-351-37530-6 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 10 June 2019 . ^ Noorani, A.G. (2006). "The Supreme Court on Hindutva1".

The Supreme Court on Hindutva . Oxford University Press. pp. 76– 83. doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195678291.003.0076 . ISBN 978-0-19-567829-1 . ^ a b Kesavan, Mukul (6 May 2001). "Hindutva come to court" .

The Telegraph . ^ Chishti, Seema (3 January 2017). "Why, 22 years on, the SC's 'Hindutva judgment' remains elephant in room" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 3 January 2017. ^ Anand, Utkarsh (26 October 2016). "SC declines to reconsider 1995 order on meaning of Hindutva" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 27 October 2016. ^ a b W. J. Johnson (2010). A Dictionary of Hinduism . Oxford University Press. p. 142. ISBN 978-0-19-861026-7 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 1 May 2019 . , Quote Archived 9 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine : "A term that first surfaces in literary form in the mid 1870s in Bankim Chandra Chatterjee's serialization of his novel Ānandamaṭh in the journal, Bangadarshan. It was subsequently employed by Vinayak Damodar Savarkar in his book Hindutva: Who Is a Hindu? (1923) to convey the idea of a universal and essential Hindu identity.

As used by its author, and other right-wing nationalist ideologues, it is predicated on an assumed consensus about what constitutes Hindu identity and distinguishes it from the ways of life and values of other (implicitly 'foreign') people and traditions, especially Indian Muslims." ^ Christophe Jaffrelot (1999).

The Hindu Nationalist Movement and Indian Politics: 1925 to the 1990s: Strategies of Identity-building, Implantation and Mobilisation (with Special Reference to Central India) . Penguin. pp. 25– 26. ISBN 978-0-14-024602-5 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 5 May 2019 . ^ Thomas Blom Hansen (1999).

The Saffron Wave: Democracy and Hindu Nationalism in Modern India . Princeton University Press. pp. 60– 65, 69– 70, 77– 79. ISBN 1-4008-2305-6 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 . ^ Christophe Jaffrelot (1999).

The Hindu Nationalist Movement and Indian Politics: 1925 to the 1990s: Strategies of Identity-building, Implantation and Mobilisation (with Special Reference to Central India) . Penguin. pp. 25– 30. ISBN 978-0-14-024602-5 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 5 May 2019 . ^ Gavin D. Flood (1996). An Introduction to Hinduism . Cambridge University Press. p. 262. ISBN 978-0-521-43878-0 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 29 January 2020 .

The party's most vociferous leader was Vinayak Damodar Savarkar who made a distinction between 'Hindu Dharma', the religion of the various traditions, and 'Hindutva', the socio-political force to unite all Hindus against foreign influences ^ a b c Klaus Klostermaier (2006). Anna King (ed.). Indian Religions: Renaissance and Renewal - The Spalding Papers on Indic Studies . Equinox. pp. 16– 18, 3– 27, also see comments of Anna King at p. xii. ISBN 978-1-845-53169-0 . ^ Bauman, Chad (2008). "Indian Religions: Renaissance and Renewal". Numen . 55 (2). Brill: 343– 347. doi : 10.1163/156852708X284022 . S2CID 142656106 . ^ a b Sharma, Arvind (2002). "On Hindu, Hindustan, Hinduism and Hindutva". Numen . 49 (1): 20– 24, 26– 29. doi : 10.1163/15685270252772759 . JSTOR 3270470 . ^ a b Thomas Blom Hansen (1999).

The Saffron Wave: Democracy and Hindu Nationalism in Modern India . Princeton University Press. pp. 77– 79. ISBN 1-4008-2305-6 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 . ^ Sharma, Arvind (2002). "On Hindu, Hindustan, Hinduism and Hindutva". Numen . 49 (1): 26– 27. doi : 10.1163/15685270252772759 . JSTOR 3270470 . ^ Jha, Dhirendra K. (2024). Golwalkar: The Myth Behind the Man, The Man Behind the Machine . Simon & Schuster . pp. 78– 79. ISBN 978-81-979492-4-1 . ^ "The farm laws are an assault on Shudra power" .

The Caravan . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 15 March 2021 . ^ a b "Rise of Hindutva has enabled a counter-revolution against Mandal's gains" .

The Indian Express . 10 February 2021. Archived from the original on 10 February 2021 . Retrieved 2 November 2021 . ^ Drèze, Jean (14 February 2020). "The Revolt of the Upper Castes" . Caste: A Global Journal on Social Exclusion . 1 (1). Brandeis University : 229– 236. doi : 10.26812/caste.v1i1.44 . ISSN 2639-4928 . Archived from the original on 26 October 2021 . Retrieved 2 November 2021 . ^ " 'Hindutva Is Nothing But Brahminism' " . Outlookindia . 3 February 2022. Archived from the original on 2 November 2021 . Retrieved 2 November 2021 . ^ Sen, Amritorupa (29 June 2022). "The surviving power of Brahmin privilege" . Current Sociology . 72 (5): 834– 852. doi : 10.1177/00113921221105915 . ISSN 0011-3921 . S2CID 250151238 . Archived from the original on 9 May 2023 . Retrieved 8 May 2023 . ^ Bapu, Prabhu (2013). Hindu Mahasabha in Colonial North India, 1915-1930: Constructing Nation and History (1st ed.). London and New York : Routledge . pp. 32– 33. ISBN 978-0-415-67165-1 . ^ Chhibber, P.K.; Verma, R. (2018). Ideology and Identity: The Changing Party Systems of India . Oxford University Press . p. 248. ISBN 978-0-19-062390-6 . ^ a b c d Christophe Jaffrelot (1996).

The Hindu Nationalist Movement in India . Columbia University Press. p. 77. ISBN 978-0-231-10335-0 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 12 June 2019 . ^ R. Ramachandran (1 February 2019). "Science circus" . Frontline . Archived from the original on 17 February 2021 . Retrieved 2 November 2021 . ^ Ziya Us Salam (20 June 2018). "Age of unreason" . Frontline . Archived from the original on 2 February 2021 . Retrieved 2 November 2021 . ^ Meera Nanda (2 January 2004). "Postmodernism, Hindu nationalism and 'Vedic science' " . Frontline . Archived from the original on 12 August 2020 . Retrieved 29 December 2020 . ^ Truschke, Audrey (15 December 2020). "Hindutva's Dangerous Rewriting of History" . South Asia Multidisciplinary Academic Journal (in French) (24/25). doi : 10.4000/samaj.6636 . ISSN 1960-6060 . Archived from the original on 19 October 2021 . Retrieved 2 November 2021 . ^ Nanda, Meera (16 September 2016), "Hindutva's science envy" , Frontline , archived from the original on 28 December 2019 , retrieved 14 October 2016 ^ Daniyal, Shoaib (21 January 2018). "From dissing Darwin to yogic farming: A short history of the BJP's brush with pseudoscience" . Scroll.in . Archived from the original on 2 November 2021 . Retrieved 2 November 2021 . ^ Anthony J. Parel (2006). Gandhi's Philosophy and the Quest for Harmony . Cambridge University Press. pp. 42– 43. ISBN 978-0-521-86715-3 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 13 June 2019 . ^ a b Chetan Bhatt (2001). Hindu nationalism: origins, ideologies and modern myths . Berg. pp. 11– 12. ISBN 978-1-85973-343-1 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 . ^ a b Ram-Prasad, C. (1993). "Hindutva ideology: Extracting the fundamentals". Contemporary South Asia . 2 (3): 285– 309. doi : 10.1080/09584939308719718 . ^ a b C. Ram-Prasad (2008). Gavin Flood (ed.).

The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism . John Wiley & Sons. pp. 527– 528. ISBN 978-0-470-99868-7 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 13 June 2019 . ^ Venugopal, Arun (21 July 2021). "At Rutgers, and Beyond, Scholars Are Under Attack For Their Critique of India's Far-Right Government" . Gothamist . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 21 July 2021 . ^ a b Venugopal, Arun (19 July 2021). "American Scholars of India Confront a Rise in Threats" . WNYC . Archived from the original on 18 September 2021 . Retrieved 6 September 2021 . ^ N, Vijetha S. (15 October 2011). "Historians protest as Delhi University purges Ramayana essay from syllabus" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 11 July 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ "In the battle over India's history, Hindu nationalists square off against a respected historian" . Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Archived from the original on 9 February 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ "Scholars who study Hinduism and India face hostile climate" . www.insidehighered.com . Archived from the original on 10 July 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Chaturvedi, Vinayak (December 2021). "The Hindu Right and Attacks on Academic Freedom in the US" .

The Nation. Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 5 December 2021 . ^ "For more than five years, I have received hate mail from Hindu nationalists almost every single day - Dr. Audrey Truschke" . 15 September 2021. Archived from the original on 18 November 2022 . Retrieved 1 August 2022 . ^ "Historian Audrey Truschke faces threats, Rutgers University extends support to her" . Scroll . Archived from the original on 24 September 2022 . Retrieved 5 August 2022 . ^ Prakash, Priyali (10 July 2021). " 'Targeted by hate': Audrey Truschke on why she helped write a 'Hindutva Harassment Field Manual' " . Scroll.in . Archived from the original on 2 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 August 2021 . ^ SASAC. "Timeline" . Hindutva Harassment Field Manual . Archived from the original on 5 December 2021 . Retrieved 5 December 2021 . ^ "AAS Statement on the Dismantling Global Hindutva Conference" . Association for Asian Studies . 10 September 2021. Archived from the original on 10 September 2021 . Retrieved 11 September 2021 . ^ "Death threats sent to participants of US conference on Hindu nationalism" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 5 August 2022 . ^ "Under fire from Hindu nationalist groups, U.S.-based scholars of South Asia worry about academic freedom" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 10 August 2022 . Retrieved 1 August 2022 . ^ "US Conference on Hindu Nationalism marred by death threats to participants" .

The Siasat Daily . Archived from the original on 5 August 2022 . Retrieved 5 August 2022 . ^ Economic and Political Weekly, Volume 34 . 1999. p. 712. Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 23 July 2023 . ^ Ellis-Petersen, Hannah (20 September 2022). "What is Hindu nationalism and how does it relate to trouble in Leicester?" .

The Guardian . ^ Sarkar, Sumit (1 January 1993). "The Fascism of the Sangh Parivar". Economic and Political Weekly . 28 (5): 163– 167. JSTOR 4399339 . Ahmad, Aijaz (1993). "Fascism and National Culture: Reading Gramsci in the Days of Hindutva". Social Scientist . 21 (3/4): 32– 68. doi : 10.2307/3517630 . JSTOR 3517630 . ^ Desai, Radhika (5 June 2015). Theoretical Engagements in Geopolitical Economy . Vol. 51. doi : 10.1108/S0161-7230201530A . ISBN 978-1-78560-295-5 . Archived from the original on 18 July 2017 . Retrieved 8 May 2017 . Reddy, Deepa S. (2011). "Hindutva: Formative Assertions". Religion Compass . 5 (8). Wiley: 439– 451. doi : 10.1111/j.1749-8171.2011.00290.x . ^ Sen, Satadru (2 October 2015). "Fascism Without Fascists? A Comparative Look at Hindutva and Zionism". South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies . 38 (4): 690– 711. doi : 10.1080/00856401.2015.1077924 . S2CID 147386523 . ^ South Asia Scholar Activist Collective. "What is Hindutva?" . Hindutva Harassment Field Manual . Archived from the original on 10 July 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Leidig, Eviane (26 May 2020). "Hindutva as a variant of right-wing extremism". Patterns of Prejudice . 54 (3): 215– 237. doi : 10.1080/0031322X.2020.1759861 . hdl : 10852/77740 . ISSN 0031-322X . S2CID 221839031 . ^ Reddy, Deepa (2011). "Capturing Hindutva: Rhetorics and Strategies" . Religion Compass . 5 (8): 427– 438. doi : 10.1111/j.1749-8171.2011.00289.x . ISSN 1749-8171 . Archived from the original on 11 July 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 . ^ Jaffrelot, Christophe (10 January 2009). Hindu Nationalism: A Reader . Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-2803-6 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 2 May 2019 . ^ Achin Vanaik (1994). "Situating Threat of Hindu Nationalism: Problems with Fascist Paradigm". Economic and Political Weekly . 29 (28): 1729– 1748. JSTOR 4401457 . ^ Thomas Blom Hansen (1999).

The Saffron Wave: Democracy and Hindu Nationalism in Modern India . Princeton University Press. pp. 4– 5. ISBN 1-4008-2305-6 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 . ^ Bruce Desmond Graham (2007). Hindu Nationalism and Indian Politics: The Origins and Development of the Bharatiya Jana Sangh . Cambridge University Press. pp. 11– 12. ISBN 978-0-521-05374-7 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 10 May 2019 . ^ Bruce Desmond Graham (2007). Hindu Nationalism and Indian Politics: The Origins and Development of the Bharatiya Jana Sangh . Cambridge University Press. p. 66 with footnotes. ISBN 978-0-521-05374-7 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 10 May 2019 . ^ Bruce Desmond Graham (2007). Hindu Nationalism and Indian Politics: The Origins and Development of the Bharatiya Jana Sangh . Cambridge University Press. pp. 1– 2. ISBN 978-0-521-05374-7 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 10 May 2019 . ^ a b Casolari, Marzia (2000). Hindutva's Foreign Tie-up in the 1930s: Archival Evidence . Economic and Political Weekly . p. 223. ^ Ravishankar, Ra. (20 July 2002). "The real Sarvarkar" . Frontline . Archived from the original on 20 November 2023. ^ Bhatt, Chetan (2001). Hindu Nationalism: Origins, Ideologies and Modern Myths . Routledge. pp. 107– 108. ISBN 978-1-85973-348-6 . ^ Desmond Graham, Bruce (2007). Hindu Nationalism and Indian Politics: The Origins and Development of the Bharatiya Jana Sangh . Cambridge University Press . p. 46. ISBN 978-0-521-05374-7 . ^ Prabhu Bapu (2012). Hindu Mahasabha in Colonial North India, 1915-1930: Constructing Nation and History . Routledge. pp. 62– 67, 70– 71. ISBN 978-1-136-25500-7 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 1 May 2019 . ^ a b c Prabhu Bapu (2013). Hindu Mahasabha in Colonial North India, 1915-1930: Constructing Nation and History . Routledge. p. 77. ISBN 978-0-415-67165-1 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 4 May 2019 . ; For additional context on the two-nation theory history based on Hindu-Muslim cultural conflicts and the partition: Venkat Dhulipala (2015). "Ch. Introduction; Nationalists, Communalists and the 1937 Provincial Elections". Creating a New Medina: State Power, Islam, and the Quest for Pakistan in Late Colonial North India . Cambridge University Press. pp. 1– 24, 25– 28, 360– 367. ISBN 978-1-316-25838-5 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 4 May 2019 . ^ Prabhu Bapu (2013). Hindu Mahasabha in Colonial North India, 1915-1930: Constructing Nation and History . Routledge. pp. 77– 78. ISBN 978-0-415-67165-1 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 4 May 2019 . ^ a b c Christophe Jaffrelot (2002). Pakistan: Nationalism Without A Nation . Zed Books. pp. 10– 11, context: 10–16. ISBN 978-1-84277-117-4 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 5 May 2019 . ^ Jean-Luc Racine (2002). Christophe Jaffrelot (ed.). Pakistan: Nationalism Without A Nation . Zed Books. pp. 205– 211. ISBN 978-1-84277-117-4 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 5 May 2019 . ^ "Muqtedar Khan on Why Religious Nationalism Is Poisoning South Asia" . thediplomat.com . Archived from the original on 27 August 2023 . Retrieved 27 August 2023 . ^ a b c d Chetan Bhatt (2001). Hindu nationalism: origins, ideologies and modern myths . Berg. pp. 3– 5, 8– 14, 77– 86. ISBN 978-1-85973-343-1 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 . ^ Coakley, John (2017). " 'Primordialism' in nationalism studies: theory or ideology?" . Nations and Nationalism . 24 (2). Wiley: 327, context: 328–347. doi : 10.1111/nana.12349 . S2CID 149288553 . Archived from the original on 17 February 2021 . Retrieved 9 May 2020 . ^ Tina Reuter (2012). "Ethnic Conflict" . Encyclopaedia Britannica . Archived from the original on 3 May 2019 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 . ^ Deepa Reddy (2003). "Review: Hindu Nationalism by Chetan Bhatt". American Ethnologist . 30 (1): 170. ^ a b Chetan Bhatt (1997). Liberation and Purity: Race, New Religious Movements and the Ethics of Postmodernity . Taylor & Francis. pp. 185– 186. ISBN 978-1-85728-423-2 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 . ^ Noorani, A. G. (8 April 2005). "Savarkar's mercy petition" . Frontline . Archived from the original on 17 August 2022. ^ Chaudhuri, Pooja (13 October 2021). "Did Savarkar write mercy petitions on Gandhi's advice as claimed by Rajnath Singh?" . Alt News . ^ Andersen & Damle 1987 , p. 34. ^ a b c d Christophe Jaffrelot (2009). Hindu Nationalism: A Reader . Princeton University Press. pp. 15– 17, 96– 97, 179– 183. ISBN 978-1-4008-2803-6 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 2 May 2019 . ^ Kelkar, D. V. (4 February 1950). "The R.S.S." (PDF) . Economic Weekly . Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 November 2014 . Retrieved 26 October 2014 . ^ Davies, Peter; Lynch, Derek (2005).

The Routledge Companion to Fascism and the Far Right . Routledge. p. 123. ISBN 978-1-134-60952-9 . ^ Pal, Felix; Chaudhary, Neha (4 March 2023). "Leaving the Hindu Far Right" . South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies . 46 (2): 425– 444. doi : 10.1080/00856401.2023.2179817 . ISSN 0085-6401 . S2CID 257565310 . ^ Prakashan 1955 , pp. 24–25 quoted in Goyal 1979 , p. 58 ^ Stanley, Jason (2018). How Fascism Works: The Politics of Us and Them . New York: Random House. pp. 14–15. ISBN 978-0-52551183-0 ^ Teltumbde, Anand (2019). Hindutva and Dalits . SAGE. p. 38. ^ Augustine 2009 , pp. 69–70. ^ Christophe Jaffrelot (1999).

The Hindu Nationalist Movement and Indian Politics: 1925 to the 1990s: Strategies of Identity-building, Implantation and Mobilisation (with Special Reference to Central India) . Penguin. pp. 140– 145. ISBN 978-0-14-024602-5 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 5 May 2019 . ^ a b Graham 1968 , pp. 350–352. ^ R. Hertel, Bradley (1971). Rural Patterns of Upward Mobility in Eastern Uttar Pradesh (India) . University of Wisconsin–Madison . p. 31. ^ "Israeli Diplomats Forged Deep Ties With Hindu Right Wing From Early '60s, Documents Reveal" .

The Wire . 11 March 2024 . Retrieved 13 June 2024 . ^ a b c d e f Frykenberg 2008 , pp. 193–196. ^ a b Nandini Deo (2015). Mobilizing Religion and Gender in India: The Role of Activism . Routledge. pp. 54– 55. ISBN 978-1-317-53067-1 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 6 May 2019 . ^ Frykenberg 2008 , pp. 193–196: "After Independence in 1947, the RSS saw an enormous expansion in numbers of new swayamsevaks and a proliferation of disciplined and drilled shakhas. This occurred despite Gandhi's assassination (January 30, 1948) by Nathuram Vinayak Godse, a former sevak and despite being outlawed. (p. 193) Thus, even as the RSS discretely stayed out of open politics, and continued its campaign to convert more and more people to the cause of Hindutva, its new party engaged in political combat. (p. 194) For the next two decades, the Jan Sangh followed a narrowly focused agenda.

In 1971, despite softening its Hindutva voice and joining a grand alliance, it was not successful. (p. 195)" ^ a b Bruce Desmond Graham (2007). "The Jana Sangh in electoral politics, 1951 to 1967". Hindu Nationalism and Indian Politics: The Origins and Development of the Bharatiya Jana Sangh . Cambridge University Press. pp. 196– 198, context: Chapter 7. ISBN 978-0-521-05374-7 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 10 May 2019 . ; Quote: "We have now considered the main factors which worked against the Jana Sangh's attempt to become a major party in Indian politics . It was seriously handicapped in electoral competition by the limitations of its organization and leadership, by its inability to gather support through appeals to Hindu nationalist sentiment, and by its failure to establish a broad base of social and economic interests." ^ a b Vernon Hewitt (2007). Political Mobilisation and Democracy in India: States of Emergency . Routledge. pp. 2– 4. ISBN 978-1-134-09762-3 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 6 May 2019 . , Quote: "The use of socialism, of garibi hatao (Indira Gandhi's populist slogan translated as 'out with poverty') and of Hindutva are in the first instance conceptualized as differing state strategies of co-optation, deployed by elites ..."; From Taylor & Francis summary Archived 6 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine : " demonstrates how the Internal Emergency of 1975 led to increased support of groups such as the BJS and the RSS, accounting for the rise of political movements advocating Hindu nationalism – Hindutva – as a response to rapid political mobilization triggered by the Emergency, and an attempt by political elites to control this to their advantage." ^ Sumit Sarkar (2013). Radhika Desai (ed.). Developmental and Cultural Nationalisms . Routledge. pp. 41– 45. ISBN 978-1-317-96821-4 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 6 May 2019 . ^ Subrata Kumar Mitra; Mike Enskat; Clemens Spiess (2004). Political Parties in South Asia . Greenwood. pp. 57– 58. ISBN 978-0-275-96832-8 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 6 May 2019 . ^ Jaffrelot, Christophe; Anil, Pratinav (2021). India's First Dictatorship: The Emergency, 1975 -1977 . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-757782-0 . ^ Christophe Jaffrelot (2009). Hindu Nationalism: A Reader . Princeton University Press. pp. 329– 330. ISBN 978-1-4008-2803-6 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 2 May 2019 . ; For various sides in the Judiciary versus the Executive authority on Indira Gandhi's government and Hindutva politicians during this period, see Gary J. Jacobsohn (2003).

The Wheel of Law: India's Secularism in Comparative Constitutional Context . Princeton University Press. pp. 189–197 with footnotes, context: Chapter 7. ISBN 0-691-09245-1 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 6 May 2019 . ^ "Parliament approves Resolution to repeal Article 370; paves way to truly integrate J&K with Indian Union" . pib.gov.in . Archived from the original on 10 March 2021 . Retrieved 14 March 2022 . ^ Article 370 rendered toothless, Article 35A ceases to exist Archived 30 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine , The Economic Times, 5 August 2019. ^ Rajagopal, Krishnadas (11 December 2023). "SC upholds abrogation of Article 370, says move was part of 70-year-old exercise to integrate J&K to the Union" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 23 November 2024 . ^ Sebastian, Meryl; Hrishikesh, Sharanya (11 December 2023). "Article 370: India Supreme Court upholds repeal of Kashmir's special status" . BBC Home . Retrieved 23 November 2024 . ^ Vardhan, Anand (13 December 2023). "Article 370 verdict firms up judicial ground for J&K integration, prioritises national sovereignty" . Newslaundry . Retrieved 23 November 2024 . ^ "Inside Kashmir's lockdown: 'Even I will pick up a gun' " . BBC . 10 August 2019. ^ " 'Darkest day': Uproar as India strips Kashmir of special status" . Al Jazeera . 5 August 2019. ^ "Article 370: The Indians celebrating Kashmir's new status" . BBC . 9 August 2019. ^ Filkins, Dexter (2 December 2019). "Blood and Soil in Narendra Modi's India" .

The New Yorker . ^ "Ayodhya: India's top court gives Hindus site claimed by Muslims" . TheGuardian.com . 9 November 2019. Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 14 March 2022 . ^ "India: Court rules in favor of Hindus over Ayodhya temple-mosque dispute | DW | 09.11.2019" . Deutsche Welle . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 14 March 2022 . ^ a b "Ayodhya verdict: Indian top court gives holy site to Hindus" . BBC News . 9 November 2019. Archived from the original on 9 November 2019 . Retrieved 14 March 2022 . ^ "Supreme Court hearing ends in Ayodhya dispute; orders reserved" .

The Hindu Business Line . Press Trust of India . 16 October 2019. Archived from the original on 23 October 2019 . Retrieved 23 April 2021 . ^ "Ram Mandir verdict: Supreme Court verdict on Ram Janmabhoomi-Babri Masjid case: Highlights" .

The Times of India . 9 November 2019. Archived from the original on 9 November 2019 . Retrieved 23 April 2021 . ^ Sharma, Kritika (9 November 2019). "SC verdict refers to ASI report on 'Hindu structure' at Ayodhya site" . ThePrint . Retrieved 23 November 2024 . ^ "Modi becomes first PM to visit Ram Janmabhoomi, Hanumangarhi temple in Ayodhya" .

The Financial Express . 5 August 2020. Archived from the original on 29 January 2021 . Retrieved 23 April 2021 . ^ "Babri mosque to Ram temple: A timeline from 1528 to 2024" . Al Jazeera . Archived from the original on 22 January 2024 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ "Ram Temple inauguration: Advent of a new era, says PM Modi" . Hindustan Times . 22 January 2024. Archived from the original on 24 January 2024 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ Gupta, Charu, "Hindu Women, Muslim Men: Love Jihad and Conversions." Economic and Political Weekly , vol. 44, no. 51, 2009, pp. 13–15. JSTOR Archived 22 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Trivedi, Upmanyu (25 November 2020). "India's Most Populous State Brings Law to Fight 'Love Jihad' " . Bloomberg News . Archived from the original on 25 November 2020 . Retrieved 25 November 2020 . ^ a b "After MP, Haryana Says a Committee Will Draft Anti-'Love Jihad' Law" .

The Wire (India) . 18 November 2020. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020 . Retrieved 25 November 2020 . ^ "Adityanath govt mulls ordinance against 'love jihad' " .

The Economic Times . 18 September 2020. Archived from the original on 27 October 2020 . Retrieved 19 September 2020 . ^ "Adityanath govt. mulls ordinance against 'love jihad' " .

The Hindu . PTI. 18 September 2020. ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 20 September 2020 . Retrieved 19 September 2020 . ^ "Adityanath Cabinet Approves Ordinance Against 'Love Jihad' " .

The Wire (India) . 24 November 2020. Archived from the original on 24 November 2020 . Retrieved 25 November 2020 . ^ " 'Love jihad': Madhya Pradesh proposes 10-year jail term in draft bill" . Scroll.in . 26 November 2020. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020 . Retrieved 27 November 2020 . ^ Seth, Maulshree (26 November 2020). "UP clears 'love jihad' law: 10-year jail, cancelling marriage if for conversion" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 26 November 2020 . Retrieved 27 November 2020 . ^ "Jail term, fine for 'illegal' conversions in Uttar Pradesh" .

The Hindu . 24 November 2020. ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 24 November 2020 . Retrieved 25 November 2020 . ^ "UP Governor Anandiben Patel gives assent to ordinance on 'unlawful conversion' " . mint . 28 November 2020. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020 . Retrieved 1 December 2020 . ^ Siddique, Iram (27 December 2020). "MP 'love jihad' Bill tougher, but limits who can file FIR" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 27 January 2021 . Retrieved 13 February 2021 . ^ "MP approves 'love Jihad' law; up to 10 years of jail, Rs 1 lakh fine for forced conversion" . Press Trust of India . 27 December 2020. Archived from the original on 29 December 2020 . Retrieved 13 February 2021 – via Business Today . ^ "India's Madhya Pradesh state now plans 'love jihad' law" . Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 28 December 2020 . Retrieved 29 December 2020 . ^ "Madhya Pradesh to take ordinance route to enforce anti-conversion law" . Deccan Herald . 28 December 2020. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021 . Retrieved 29 December 2020 . ^ " 'Love jihad': Madhya Pradesh Cabinet approves anti-conversion bill" . Scroll.in . 26 December 2020. Archived from the original on 30 December 2020 . Retrieved 29 December 2020 . ^ "Madhya Pradesh to enforce 'love jihad' ordinance" . Hindustan Times . 27 December 2020. Archived from the original on 28 December 2020 . Retrieved 29 December 2020 . ^ Langa, Mahesh (1 April 2021). "Gujarat Assembly passes 'love jihad' law" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 6 June 2021 . Retrieved 6 June 2021 . ^ "Gujarat passes Bill to stop 'love jihad' " .

The Indian Express . 2 April 2021. Archived from the original on 6 June 2021 . Retrieved 6 June 2021 . ^ "Karnataka state cabinet approves anti-conversion 'love jihad' bill" .

The Siasat Daily . Hyderabad. 20 December 2021. Archived from the original on 24 January 2022 . Retrieved 22 January 2022 . ^ "Like UP law, Karnataka anti-conversion Bill addresses right wing demands on 'love jihad' " .

The Indian Express . Bangalore. 22 December 2021. Archived from the original on 23 January 2022 . Retrieved 22 January 2022 . ^ "Karnataka scraps anti-conversion law; BJP says it is in line with PFI agenda, Archbishop hails decision" .

The Economic Times . 15 June 2023 . Retrieved 23 November 2024 . ^ Jaffrelot, Christophe (10 January 2009). Hindu Nationalism: A Reader . Princeton University Press. pp. 2– 24. ISBN 978-1-4008-2803-6 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 13 July 2020 . ^ "Jana Sangh promises to make India Hindu nation" . Yahoo News India . 21 October 2004. Archived from the original on 5 November 2004. ^ "Shiv Sena for PM with Hindutva view" . Hindustan Times . 27 April 2013. Archived from the original on 28 April 2013. ^ SAD-BJP Alliance helped bridge Hindu Sikh gap Indian Express , 19 January 1999 Archived 29 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Punjab's Akali Dal Quits BJP-Led Alliance Over Controversial Farm Bills" . NDTV.com . Archived from the original on 27 September 2020 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . ^ Katju 2013 , pp. 3–4. ^ Jaffrelot 1996 , pp. 343–345 with footnotes. ^ BJP PHILOSOPHY: HINDUTVA (CULTURAL NATIONALISM) , Bharatiya Janata Party, archived from the original on 31 August 2014 ^ "Hindutva is India's identity: RSS chief" .

The Hindu . 21 July 2013. ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 4 June 2023. ^ a b c d Thomas Blom Hansen (1999).

The Saffron Wave: Democracy and Hindu Nationalism in Modern India . Princeton University Press. pp. 10– 11, 18– 20, 165– 166. ISBN 1-4008-2305-6 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 . ^ Thomas Blom Hansen (1999).

The Saffron Wave: Democracy and Hindu Nationalism in Modern India . Princeton University Press. pp. 148– 152. ISBN 1-4008-2305-6 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 . ^ a b c John Hutchinson; Anthony D. Smith (2000). Nationalism: Critical Concepts in Political Science . Taylor & Francis. pp. 888– 890. ISBN 978-0-415-20112-4 . ^ a b Partha S. Ghosh (2012).

The Politics of Personal Law in South Asia: Identity, Nationalism and the Uniform Civil Code . Routledge. pp. 103– 111. ISBN 978-1-136-70511-3 . ^ "BJP calls for Uniform Civil Code" . expressindia.com. Press Trust of India. 15 April 2006. Archived from the original on 13 January 2012 . Retrieved 25 February 2009 . ^ "Uniform civil code will divide the country on communal lines: Congress" . Rediff on the Net. Archived from the original on 23 May 2010 . Retrieved 26 February 2009 . ^ "Shiv Sena attacks Narendra Modi government on Kashmir, Hindutva issues" . DNA India . Press Trust of India . 16 March 2015. Archived from the original on 18 February 2017 . Retrieved 18 February 2017 . ^ "Government should deport Kashmiri separatists to Pakistan: RSS" .

The Indian Express . Press Trust of India . 24 April 2015. Archived from the original on 18 February 2017 . Retrieved 18 February 2017 . ^ Smith Eugene, Donald (1963). India as a secular state . Princeton University Press. ^ Jaffrelot, Christopher (2010). Religion, Caste & Politics in India . Primus Boks. p. 5. ISBN 978-93-80607-04-7 . ^ "A new kind of discordance" .

The Hindu . 3 February 2010. ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 29 October 2023 . Retrieved 29 October 2023 . ^ a b "A yen for Sanskritised Hindi" .

The Economist . ISSN 0013-0613 . Archived from the original on 27 October 2023 . Retrieved 27 October 2023 . ^ Raj, Kaushik; Gurmat, Sabah (30 September 2022). "Bollywood under siege as rightwing social media boycotts start to bite" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 27 October 2023 . Retrieved 27 October 2023 . ^ "Explained: The #BoycottBollywood trend, and its impact on the industry" .

The Indian Express . 27 August 2022. Archived from the original on 28 August 2022 . Retrieved 27 October 2023 . ^ McCartney, Patrick. "The Sanitising Power of Spoken Sanskrit" Archived 7 October 2024 at the Wayback Machine . Himāl South Asian (2014). ^ "Why does India's Hindu right-wing hate the Urdu language so much?" . Quartz . 26 October 2021. Archived from the original on 29 October 2023 . Retrieved 29 October 2023 . ^ Ramachandran, S. (2020). "Hindutva Violence in India: Trends and Implications". Counter Terrorist Trends and Analyses . 12 (4): 15– 20. JSTOR 26918077 . ^ Gatade, S. (2014). "Pawns In, Patrons Still Out: Understanding the Phenomenon of Hindutva Terror". Economic and Political Weekly . 49 (13): 36– 43. JSTOR 24479356 . ^ Bidwai, P. (2008). "Confronting the Reality of Hindutva Terrorism". Economic and Political Weekly . 43 (47): 10– 13. JSTOR 40278200 . ^ Das, Runa (2006). "Encountering Hindutva, interrogating religious nationalism and (En)gendering a Hindu patriarchy in India's nuclear policies" . International Feminist Journal of Politics . 8 (3): 370– 393. doi : 10.1080/14616740600792988 . S2CID 142800345 . Archived from the original on 4 May 2023 . Retrieved 17 May 2023 . ^ Pubby, Vipin (4 October 2015). "Hindutva terror cases: NIA on the backfoot as apex court questions complicity charges" . Scroll.in . Archived from the original on 26 May 2019 . Retrieved 17 May 2023 . ^ Christophe Jaffrelot (29 January 2009). "A running thread of deep saffron" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 8 July 2019 . Retrieved 17 November 2014 . ^ Subhash Gatade (October 2007). "Saffron terror" . Himal . Archived from the original on 26 May 2019 . Retrieved 16 December 2014 . ^ "Why the BJP Won't – and Can't – Give Up on Hindutva as an Electoral Strategy" .

The Wire . Archived from the original on 27 July 2023 . Retrieved 27 July 2023 . ^ "The politics of Hindutva in India" . IISS . Archived from the original on 27 July 2023 . Retrieved 27 July 2023 . ^ Shakuntala, Banaji (2018). "Vigilante Publics: Orientalism, Modernity and Hindutva Fascism in India" . Javnost - the Public: Journal of the European Institute for Communication and Culture . 25 (4): 333– 350. doi : 10.1080/13183222.2018.1463349 . S2CID 149962714 . ^ a b Radha Sarkar. "Sacred Slaughter: An Analysis of Historical, Communal, and Constitutional Aspects of Beef Bans in India". Politics, Religion & Ideology . 17 (4). ^ "India: 'Cow Protection' Spurs Vigilante Violence" . 27 April 2017. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021 . Retrieved 14 March 2022 . ^ "Cattle trade ban to halt beef exports, lead to job losses" . Reuters . 29 May 2017. Archived from the original on 5 August 2019 . Retrieved 6 July 2019 – via www.reuters.com. ^ Biswas, Soutik. "Why the humble cow is India's most polarising animal" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 31 March 2022 . Retrieved 14 March 2022 . ^ Ian Marlow and Bibhudatta Pradhan. "Cow-Saving Vigilantes Are a Sign of Rising Political Risk in India" . Archived from the original on 20 April 2017 . Retrieved 14 March 2022 . ^ "Protests held across India after attacks against Muslims" . Reuters . 28 June 2017. Archived from the original on 9 October 2020 . Retrieved 29 June 2017 . ^ "Gujarat to punish cow slaughter with 14-year jail – Times of India" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 1 April 2017 . Retrieved 2 April 2017 . ^ "Gujarat: India state approves life term for killing cows" . BBC News . 31 March 2017. Archived from the original on 2 April 2017 . Retrieved 2 April 2017 . ^ Langa, Mahesh. "Gujarat to tighten cow slaughter law" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 3 June 2022 . Retrieved 2 April 2017 . ^ "Life term for killing cows, Chief Minister Vijay Rupani says want 'vegetarian' Gujarat" .

The Indian Express . 1 April 2017. Archived from the original on 1 April 2017 . Retrieved 2 April 2017 . ^ "Cattle smuggling, slaughter in UP now punishable under National Security Act" . Hindustan Times . 6 June 2017. Archived from the original on 8 June 2017 . Retrieved 8 June 2017 . ^ "Assam bans sale of beef within 5 km radius of any temple, passes Cattle Preservation Bill" . Zee News . 14 August 2021. Archived from the original on 14 March 2022 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ "Assam Assembly passes cow protection Bill" .

The Hindu . 14 August 2021. ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 14 March 2022 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ a b Schultz, Kai (10 November 2019). "India's Soundtrack of Hate, With a Pop Sheen" .

In Erich Kolig; Vivienne S. M. Angeles; Sam Wong (eds.). Identity in Crossroad Civilisations . Amsterdam University Press. pp. 65– 83. ISBN 978-90-8964-127-4 . Frykenberg, Robert (2008). "Hindutva as a Political Religion: An Historical Perspective".

In R. Griffin; R. Mallett and J. Tortorice (eds.).

The Sacred in Twentieth-Century Politics: Essays in Honour of Professor Stanley G. Payne . Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 178– 200. ISBN 978-0-230-24163-3 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 6 May 2019 . Goyal, Des Raj (1979). Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh . Delhi: Radha Krishna Prakashan. ISBN 978-0-8364-0566-8 . Graham, B. D. (1968), "Syama Prasad Mookerjee and the communalist alternative", in D. A. Low (ed.), Soundings in Modern South Asian History , University of California Press, ASIN B0000CO7K5 Jaffrelot, Christophe (1996).

The Hindu Nationalist Movement and Indian Politics . C. Hurst & Co. Publishers. ISBN 978-1-85065-301-1 . Katju, Manjari (2013). Vishva Hindu Parishad and Indian Politics . Orient Blackswan. ISBN 978-81-250-2476-7 . Krishna, Ananth V. (2011). India since Independence: Making Sense of Indian Politics . Pearson Education India. ISBN 978-81-317-3465-0 . Krishna, Chaitanya; Noorani, A. G (2003). Fascism in India: Faces, Fangs, and Facts . Manak Publications. ISBN 978-81-7827-067-8 . Pandey, Gyanendra (1993). "Which of Us are Hindus?".