The neutrality of this article is disputed . Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met . ( September 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs more citations . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . Find sources: "History of Zionism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2026 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Democrats Likud New Hope New Right Noam Otzma Yehudit Religious Zionist Party Shas Shinui Yesh Atid Yisrael Beiteinu Defunct Ahdut HaAvoda Ahi Democratic Movement for Change Eretz Yisrael Shelanu General Zionists Gesher Hashomer Hatzair Workers Party Hatnua Hatikva Hatzohar Herut Hetz Independent Liberals Israeli Liberal Party Jewish Communist Party of Austria The Jewish Home Jewish National Party Jewish Party Jewish Party of Romania Kach Kadima Kulanu Mapai Mapam Moledet National Religious Party Poale Zion Progressive Party Religious Zionist Party Tehiya Yisrael BaAliyah Zionist Organization Mizrachi Zionist Socialist Workers Party Alliances Alignment National Union National Unity One Israel Union of Right-Wing Parties United Torah Judaism Yamina Zionist Union Organisations Active Betar Zionist Organization of America Danish Zionist Federation Zionist Federation of Great Britain and Ireland Zionist Federation of Australia Jewish Agency for Israel (formerly Jewish Agency for Palestine ) Jewish National Fund Keren Hayesod Defunct Haganah Irgun Lehi Zionist Federation of Germany Zionist Organization of Canada By region Iraq Morocco United Kingdom (Christian) Related topics Anti-Zionism timeline reform religious Soviet Catholicism and Zionism Haredim and Zionism Israelization Muslim supporters of Israel Zionist as a pejorative Zionism as settler colonialism Zionist antisemitism Zionist political violence Israel portal Politics portal The Zionist movement continues to exist in the form of various organisations working to support Israel, combat antisemitism , assist persecuted Jews , and encourage diaspora Jews to move to Israel. Most Israeli political parties continue to define themselves as Zionist. Background The Return to Zion The concept of the "return" was a powerful symbol within religious Jewish belief, traditionally emphasizing that their return should be determined by Divine Providence rather than human action. This 'return to Zion' is commemorated particularly at prayers at the end of Passover and Yom Kippur by the phrasing "next year in Jerusalem".

The theme of return to is also present in the Babylonian exile , after the Babylonians conquered the Kingdom of Judah in 587 BCE and the Judeans were exiled to Babylon.

In the book of Psalms ( Psalm 137 ), Jews lamented their exile while prophets like Ezekiel foresaw their return.

The Bible recounts how, in 538 BCE Cyrus the Great of Persia conquered Babylon and issued a proclamation granting the people of Judah their freedom. 50,000 Judeans, led by Zerubbabel returned. A second group of 5,000, led by Ezra and Nehemiah , returned to Judea in 456 BCE. Precursors Old Yishuv Jewish yishuv in Rishon LeZion , 1882 Key events Nachmanides Aliya (1263) Alhambra decree (1492) Manuel I decree (1496) Hebron and Safed attacks (1517) Revival of Tiberias (1563) Sack of Tiberias (1660) Plunder of Safed (June 1834) Hebron massacre (August 1834) Safed attack (1838) Jerusalem expansion Moshavot establishment Key figures Nachmanides (d.1270) Joseph Saragossi (d. 1507) Obadiah MiBartenura (d. 1515) Abraham ben Eliezer Halevi (d. 1528) Levi ibn Habib (d. 1545) Jacob Berab (d. 1546) Joseph Nasi (d. 1579) Moses Galante (d. 1689) Moses ibn Habib (d. 1696) Yehuda he-Hasid (d. 1700) Haim Abulafia (d. 1744) Menachem Mendel (d. 1788) Haim Farhi (d. 1820) Aaron Hershler (d. 1873) Jacob Saphir (d. 1886) Haim Aharon Valero (d. 1923) Economy Etrog cultivation Winemaking Banking Printing Soap production Textiles Philanthropy Kollel Halukka Montefiore Judah Touro Communities Musta'arabim Sephardim Perushim Hasidim Jerusalem Mea Shearim Mishkenot Sha'ananim Hebron Safed Tiberias Biriya Jaffa Haifa Peki'in Acco Shechem Gaza Kafr Yasif Shefa-'Amr Petah Tikva Synagogues Great Academy of Paris (1258) Ramban (1267) Abuhav (1490s) Abraham Avinu (1540) Ari (1570s) Johanan ben Zakai (1600s) Hurva (1700) Tifereth Israel (1872) Related articles History of the Jews and Judaism in the Land of Israel History of Israel Four Holy Cities Applicability of religious laws History of Zionism Timeline Pre-Modern Aliyah Return to Zion Three Oaths Haredim and Zionism Edah HaChareidis ShaDaR v t e Main articles: Old Yishuv , Jewish military history , Pre-Modern Aliyah , and Proto-Zionism The 613 Jewish revolt against Heraclius is considered the last serious Jewish attempt to gain autonomy in Palestine in antiquity.

In 1160 David Alroy led a Jewish uprising in Upper Mesopotamia that aimed to reconquer the promised land.

The Jewish expulsion from Spain led to some Jewish refugees fleeing to Ottoman Palestine .

In 1564, Joseph Nasi , with the support of the sultan of the Ottoman Empire, attempted to create a Jewish province in the Galilee, but he died in 1579 before his plans could be completed. However, the community in Safed continued as did small-scale aliyah into the 17th century.

In 1648 Sabbatai Zevi (1626–1676) announced himself as the Messiah and gained many Jews to his side, forming a base in Salonika . He first tried to establish a settlement in Gaza , but moved later to Smyrna .

The biblical prophecy of Kibbutz Galuyot , the ingathering of exiles in the Land of Israel as foretold by the Prophets , became a central idea in Zionism. Aliyah (return to Israel) has always been considered a praiseworthy act for Jews according to Jewish law and some Rabbis consider it one of the core 613 commandments in Judaism.

In 1791, the French Revolution led France to become the first country in Europe to grant Jews legal equality. Britain gave Jews equal rights in 1856, Germany in 1871.

The spread of western liberal ideas among newly emancipated Jews created for the first time a class of secular Jews who absorbed the prevailing ideas of enlightenment, including rationalism , romanticism , and nationalism . However, the formation of modern nations in Europe accompanied changes in the prejudices against Jews. What had previously been religious persecution now became a new phenomenon of racial antisemitism and acquired a new name: antisemitism . Antisemites saw Jews as an alien religious, national and racial group and actively tried to prevent Jews from acquiring equal rights and citizenship.

The Catholic press was at the forefront of these efforts and was quietly encouraged by the Vatican, which saw its own decline in status as linked to the equality granted to Jews.

By the late 19th century, the more extreme nationalist movements in Europe often promoted physical violence against Jews who they regarded as interlopers and exploiters threatening the well-being of their nations.

By the 1870s, Jews had achieved almost complete civic emancipation in all the states of western and central Europe.

By 1914, Jews had moved from the margins to the forefront of European society.

In the urban centers of Europe and America, Jews played an influential role in professional and intellectual life.

During this period, as Jewish assimilation was still progressing most promisingly, some Jewish intellectuals and religious traditionalists framed assimilation as a humiliating negation of Jewish cultural distinctiveness.

The development of Zionism and other Jewish nationalist movements grew out of these sentiments.

In this sense, Zionism can be read as a response to the Haskala and the challenges of modernity and liberalism, rather than purely a response to antisemitism. Emancipation in Eastern Europe progressed more slowly, to the point that Deickoff writes "social conditions were such that they made the idea of individual assimilation pointless". Antisemitism, pogroms and official policies in Tsarist Russia led to the emigration of three million Jews in the years between 1882 and 1914, only 1% of which went to Palestine. Those who went to Palestine were driven primarily by ideas of self-determination and Jewish identity, rather than just in response to pogroms or economic insecurity. Zionism's emergence in the late 19th century was among assimilated Central European Jews who, despite their formal emancipation, still felt excluded from high society. Many of these Jews had moved away from traditional religious observances and were largely secular, mirroring a broader trend of secularisation in Europe. Despite their efforts to integrate, the Jews of Central and Eastern Europe were frustrated by continued lack of acceptance by the local national movements that tended toward intolerance and exclusivity. For the early Zionists, if nationalism posed a challenge to European Jewry, it also proposed a solution. Forerunners Proto-Zionism Main article: Proto-Zionism Auto-Emancipation by J. L. Pinsker, 1882 The first general assembly of the Society for the Support of Jewish Farmers and Artisans in Syria and Palestine , also known as the Odessa Committee , 1890 The forerunners of Zionism, rather than being causally connected to the later development of Zionism, are thinkers and activists who expressed some notion of Jewish national consciousness or advocated for the migration of Jews to Palestine. These attempts were not continuous as national movements typically are.

The most notable proto-Zionists were rabbis such as Judah Alkalai and Zvi Hirsch Kalischer . Their idea of Jews as a collective was strongly tied to religious notions distinct from the secular movement referred to as Zionism that developed at the end of the century.

The Vilna Gaon of Lithuania (1720–1797) promoted a teaching from the Zohar (book of Jewish mysticism) that "the gates of wisdom above and the founts of wisdom below will open" would happen after the start of the 6th century of the 6th millennium i.e. after the year 5600 of the Jewish calendar (1839–1840 AD).

In the nineteenth century, there were a number of initiatives to create Jewish colonies or homelands in various places outside Palestine. Jewish settlements were proposed for establishment in the upper Mississippi region by W.D. Robinson in 1819. Moral but not practical efforts were made in Prague by Abraham Benisch and Moritz Steinschneider to organise a Jewish emigration in 1835.

In the United States, Mordecai Manuel Noah attempted to establish a Jewish refuge opposite Buffalo, New York , on Grand Isle, 1825. These early Jewish nation building efforts failed.

The idea of returning to Palestine was rejected by the conferences of rabbis held in that epoch. Individual efforts supported the emigration of groups of Jews to Palestine, pre-Zionist Aliyah , even before the First Zionist Congress in 1897, the year considered as the start of practical Zionism. Moses Montefiore , who is viewed as a proto-Zionist, established a colony for Jews in Palestine.

In 1854, his friend Judah Touro bequeathed money to fund Jewish residential settlement in Palestine. Laurence Oliphant failed in a like attempt to bring to Palestine the Jewish proletariat of Poland, Lithuania, Romania, and the Turkish Empire (1879 and 1882). Moses Hess , a former associate of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels , is regarded as the first modern Jewish nationalist, advocated for the establishment of an independent Jewish state in pursuit of the economic and social normalization of the Jewish people. Hess believed that emancipation alone was not a sufficient solution to the problems faced by European Jewry.

The Last National Question calling for the Jews to create a socialist state in Palestine as a means of settling the Jewish question . Also in 1862, German Orthodox Rabbi Kalischer published his tractate Derishat Zion , arguing that the salvation of the Jews, promised by the Prophets, can come about only by self-help.

In 1882, after the Odessa pogrom , Judah Leib Pinsker published the pamphlet Auto-Emancipation (self-emancipation), arguing that Jews could only be truly free in their own country and analysing the persistent tendency of Europeans to regard Jews as aliens: "Since the Jew is nowhere at home, nowhere regarded as a native, he remains an alien everywhere. That he himself and his ancestors as well are born in the country does not alter this fact in the least... to the living the Jew is a corpse, to the native a foreigner, to the homesteader a vagrant, to the proprietary a beggar, to the poor an exploiter and a millionaire, to the patriot a man without a country, for all a hated rival." Christian Zionism Main article: Christian Zionism "Memorandum to the Protestant Powers of the North of Europe and America", published in the Colonial Times (Hobart, Tasmania, Australia), in 1841 The Reformation led to the emergence of the belief of a return of the Jews to Palestine due to a specific theological biblical interpretation, among some Protestant Christian thinkers, and originally as an anti-Catholic and anti-Muslim movement. Christian restorationist ideas promoting the migration of Jews to Palestine contributed to the ideological and historical context that gave a sense of credibility to pre-Zionist initiatives. Restorationists believed that the "return" of Jews to Palestine will result in the second coming of Jesus , universal resurrection of the dead , and the conversion of the Jews to Christianity . Restorationist ideas were a prerequisite for the success of Zionism, since although it was created by Jews, Zionism was dependent on support from Christians, although it is unclear how much Christian ideas influenced the early Zionists. Zionism was also dependent on the thinkers of the Haskalah or Jewish enlightenment, such as Peretz Smolenskin in 1872, although it often depicted it as its opponent. Such restorationist ideas in Christian Zionism were criticised by Gershom Gorenberg in his book "The End of Days," where he highlights the troubling aspect of this messianic scenario—the disappearance of Jews. Evangelical figures such as Jerry Falwell believe the establishment of Israel is a pivotal event signaling the Second Coming of Christ and the eventual End times .

As a result, Christian Zionists have significantly contributed politically and financially to Israeli nationalist forces, with the understanding that Israel's role is to facilitate the Second Coming of Christ and the elimination of Judaism. One of the principal Protestant teachers who promoted the biblical doctrine that the Jews would return to their national homeland was John Nelson Darby . His doctrine of dispensationalism is credited with promoting Zionism, following his 11 lectures on the hopes of the church, the Jew and the gentile given in Geneva in 1840. However, others like Charles Spurgeon , both Horatius and Andrew Bonar , Robert Murray M'Chyene , and J C Ryle were among a number of prominent proponents of both the importance and significance of a Jewish return, who were not dispensationalist. Pro-Zionist views were embraced by many evangelicals and also affected international foreign policy. For Herzl, Christians who supported Zionism were allies, whatever their motives. Addressing the Second Zionist Congress in 1898 Herzl commented that there those who criticised Zionism for erecting new dividing lines but also for welcoming the friendship of Christian Zionists. Donald M. Lewis claimed that the first modern Zionists were Christians and that their contribution had been ignored by traditional Zionist historiography. Early British and American support for a Jewish state in Palestine Ideas of the restoration of the Jews in the Land of Israel entered British public discourse in the early 19th century, at about the same time as the British Protestant Revival. Not all such attitudes were favourable towards the Jews; they were shaped in part by a variety of Protestant beliefs, or by a streak of philo-Semitism among the classically educated British elite, or by hopes to extend the Empire (see The Great Game ).

At the urging of Lord Shaftesbury , Britain established a consulate in Jerusalem in 1838, the first diplomatic appointment in the city.

In 1839, the Church of Scotland sent Andrew Bonar and Robert Murray M'Cheyne to report on the condition of the Jews there.

The report was widely published and was followed by Memorandum to Protestant Monarchs of Europe for the restoration of the Jews to Palestine .

In August 1840, The Times reported that the British government was considering Jewish restoration. Correspondence in 1841–42 between Moses Montefiore , the President of the Board of Deputies of British Jews and Charles Henry Churchill , the British consul in Damascus, is seen as the first recorded plan proposed for political Zionism. Lord Lindsay wrote in 1847: "The soil of Palestine still enjoys her sabbaths, and only waits for the return of her banished children, and the application of industry, commensurate with her agricultural capabilities, to burst once more into universal luxuriance, and be all that she ever was in the days of Solomon." In 1851, correspondence between Lord Stanley , whose father became British Prime Minister the following year, and Benjamin Disraeli , who became Chancellor of the Exchequer alongside him, records Disraeli's proto-Zionist views: "He then unfolded a plan of restoring the nation to Palestine—said the country was admirably suited for them—the financiers all over Europe might help—the Porte is weak—the Turks/holders of property could be bought out—this, he said, was the object of his life..." Coningsby was merely a feeler, my views were not fully developed at that time—since then all I have written has been for one purpose.

The man who should restore the Hebrew race to their country would be the Messiah—the real saviour of prophecy!" He did not add formally that he aspired to play this part, but it was evidently implied. He thought very highly of the capabilities of the country, and hinted that his chief object in acquiring power here would be to promote the return". 26 years later, Disraeli wrote in his article entitled "The Jewish Question is the Oriental Quest" (1877) that within fifty years, a nation of one million Jews would reside in Palestine under the guidance of the British. Moses Montefiore , who visited multiple countries to help alleviate the oppression of their local populations of Jews, visited Palestine seven times. He sought to develop the self-reliance of the Jewish community, so there was not a need to rely on support from the diaspora. Through these efforts he helped to establish settlements outside of Old Jerusalem, where the majority of the Jewish community lived.

In 1842, Joseph Smith , founder of the Latter Day Saints movement , sent a representative, Orson Hyde , to dedicate the land of Israel for the return of the Jews. Protestant theologian William Eugene Blackstone submitted a petition to the US president in 1891; the Blackstone Memorial called for the return of Palestine to the Jews. First Aliyah (1881–1903) Main articles: Mikveh Israel Settlement , Bilu (movement) , and Hovevei Zion Part of a series on Aliyah Concepts Promised Land Gathering of Israel Diaspora Negation Palestinian Jews Homeland for the Jewish people Zionism Jewish question Law of Return Pre-Modern Aliyah Return to Zion Old Yishuv Perushim Aliyah in modern times First Second during World War I Third Fourth Fifth Aliyah Bet Bricha from Muslim countries Yemen Iraq Morocco Lebanon from the Soviet Union post-Soviet from Poland 1968 from Ethiopia from Romania from Latin America Absorption Revival of the Hebrew language Hebraization of surnames Hebraization of Palestinian place names Ulpan Kibbutz Youth village One Million Plan Immigrant camps Ma'abarot Development town Austerity Organizations World Zionist Organization Jewish National Fund Jewish Agency for Israel Youth Aliyah Mossad LeAliyah Bet El Al Ministry of Aliyah and Integration Nefesh B'Nefesh Am Yisrael Foundation Related topics Yishuv Sabra Yerida Jewish refugees History of the Jews in the Land of Israel Demographic history of Palestine (region) Historical Jewish population Yom HaAliyah v t e In the late 1870s, Jewish philanthropists such as the Montefiore and the Rothschilds responded to the persecution of Jews in Eastern Europe by sponsoring agricultural settlements for Russian Jews in Palestine.

The Jews who migrated in this period are known as the First Aliyah . Aliyah is a Hebrew word meaning "ascent", referring to the act of spiritually "ascending" to the Holy Land and a basic tenet of Zionism.

The movement of Jews to Palestine was opposed by the Haredi communities who lived in the Four Holy Cities , since they were very poor and lived off charitable donations from Europe, which they feared would be used by the newcomers. However, from 1800 there was a movement of Sephardi businessmen from North Africa and the Balkans to Jaffa and the growing community there perceived modernity and Aliyah as the key to salvation. Unlike the Haredi communities, the Jaffa community did not maintain separate Ashkenazi and Sephardi institutions and functioned as a single unified community. Founded in 1878, Rosh Pinna and Petah Tikva were the first modern Jewish settlements.

The revival of the Hebrew language in Eastern Europe as a secular literary medium marked a significant cultural shift among Jews, who traditionally used Hebrew for religious purposes.

The effort to revive the Hebrew language as a spoken vernacular pre-dated Zionism.

The establishment of Modern Hebrew is most closely associated with the linguist Eliezer Ben-Yehuda and the Committee of the Hebrew Language (later replaced by the Academy of the Hebrew Language ). It was an influential cause in early Jewish agricultural settlements, that was adopted enthusiastically by participants of the Second Aliyah . Having avoided the question previously, the World Zionist Organization came down decisively in favour of the use of Hebrew in 1913, following massive popular agitation in the Yishuv . According to Alain Dieckhoff , the primary motivation for adopting Hebrew as a national language was the desire to establish apparent continuity between ancient and modern Jews to help solidify the legitimacy of Zionism. Zionist leaders such as Ben Gurion also saw the Hebrew language as an essential component of strengthening cultural unity among the Jewish people. These developments are seen in Zionist historiography as a revolt against tradition, with the development of Modern Hebrew providing the basis on which a Jewish cultural renaissance might develop. Rishon LeZion was founded on 31 July 1882 by a group of ten members of Hovevei Zion from Kharkov (today's Ukraine ). Zikhron Ya'akov was founded in December 1882 by Hovevei Zion pioneers from Romania .

In 1887 Neve Tzedek was built just outside Jaffa. Over 50 Jewish settlements were established in this period.

From 1791 they were only allowed to live in the Pale of Settlement .

In response to the Jewish drive for integration and modern education and the movement for emancipation, the Tsars imposed tight quotas on schools, universities and cities to prevent entry by Jews.

From 1827 to 1917 Russian Jewish boys were required to serve 25 years in the Russian army, starting at the age of 12.

The intention was to forcibly destroy their ethnic identity, however the move severely radicalised Russia's Jews and familiarised them with nationalism and socialism.

The Tsar's chief adviser Konstantin Pobedonostsev , was reported as saying that one-third of Russia's Jews were expected to emigrate, one-third to accept baptism, and one-third to starve.

After a new wave of Russian pogroms , the former assimilationist Leon Pinsker concluded that the root of the Jewish problem was that Jews formed a distinctive element that could not be assimilated. For Pinsker, emancipation could not resolve the problems of the Jewish people.

In Pinsker's analysis, antisemitism was primarily driven by Jews' lack of a homeland.

The solution Pinsker proposed in his 1882 pamphlet Autoemancipation was for Jews to become a "normal" nation and acquire a homeland over which they would have sovereignty. Pinsker primarily viewed Jewish emigration a solution for dealing with the "surplus of Jews, the inassimilable residue" from Eastern Europe who had arrived in Germany in response to the pogroms.

The pogroms motivated a small number of Jews to establish groups in the Pale of Settlement (a region in western Russia) and Poland , aimed at supporting Jewish emigration to Palestine.

The publication of Autoemancipation provided these groups with an ideological charter around which they were confederated into Hibbat Zion ("Lovers of Zion") in 1887, where Pinsker took a leading role.

The settlements established by Hibbat Zion lacked sufficient funds and were ultimately not very successful but are seen as the first of several aliyahs, or waves of settlement, that led to the eventual establishment of the state of Israel.

The conditions in Eastern Europe eventually provided Zionism with a base of Jews seeking to overcome the challenges of external ostracism, from the Tsarist regime, and internal changes within the Jewish communities there.

The groups that formed Hibbat Zion included the Bilu group, which established its first settlement in 1882. Anita Shapira describes the Bilu as serving the role of a prototype for the settlement groups that followed.

At the end of the 19th century, Jews remained a small minority in Palestine.

In 1883, Nathan Birnbaum , 19 years old, founded Kadimah , the first Jewish student association in Vienna and printed Pinsker's pamphlet Autoemancipation .

In 1903, a pogrom occurred in the town of Kishinev , in the Russian empire's Bessarabia Governorate , now in Moldova , in which 47 Jews were murdered, and 98 gravely injured, thousands of homes and shops destroyed, and hundreds of young girls and women raped. A local Zionist activist, Jacob Bernstein Kogan , raised money from wealthy Jewish residents and sent telegrams to various world press centres.

The Zionist movement sent a young journalist, Hayim Nahman Bialik , who, along with a reporter sent by US news magnate William Randolph Hearst , spent weeks interviewing the survivors of the Kishinev pogrom and reporting in detail what had happened, leading to a European and American outcry. Bialik wrote an epic poem " In the City of Slaughter ", criticising the Jews for their failure to adequately defend themselves.

The poem became a rallying cry for generations of Zionist activists.

The Tsarist government, as a response to the pogrom, chose to engage in directed repression against the Zionist movement in Russia.

The pogrom occurred due to the active efforts of Pavel Krushevan , a member of the Black Hundreds , who printed a series of articles in the Znamya which became the The Protocols of the Elders of Zion .

In this endeavour Krushevan was aided by the Tsarist Secret Police .

The Protocols of the Elders of Zion went on to achieve global notoriety, in part thanks to the efforts of Henry Ford and The Dearborn Independent .

In 1903, Krushevan claimed that the protocols revealed the menace of Zionism: The Jewish State . A key event that put the modern Zionist movement in motion was the Dreyfus affair , which erupted in France in 1894.

The case had a profound impact on Central and Western European Jews.

The depth of antisemitism in the first country to grant Jews equal rights led many to question their future prospects among Christians. Among those who witnessed the Affair was an Austro-Hungarian Jewish journalist, Theodor Herzl . Herzl was born in Budapest and lived in Vienna (Jews were only allowed to live in Vienna from 1848).

In 1896 he published the manifesto Der Judenstaat ("The Jewish State"), and in 1902 he published Altneuland ("The Old New Land"). He described the Dreyfus Affair as a personal turning point. Seeing Dreyfus's Jewishness used so successfully as a scapegoat by the monarchist propagandists disillusioned Herzl. Dreyfus's guilt was deemed indisputable simply because Jewish stereotypes of nefariousness prevented a fair trial from occurring. Herzl outright denied that any such Jewish stereotypes were rooted in reality in any way. However, he believed that antisemitism was so deeply ingrained in European society that only the creation of a Jewish state, a state where Jews would be the majority and as a result, politically dominant, would enable them to join the family of nations and escape antisemitism. This view aligned Herzl with Pinsker.

The Zionist congress The delegates at the First Zionist Congress, held in Basel , Switzerland (1897) Herzl's efforts, alongside the efforts of Birnbaum, led to the First Zionist Congress at Basel in 1897, which created the Zionist Organization (ZO), renamed in 1960 as World Zionist Organization (WZO), and adopted the Basel Program , which codified the official objective of establishing a legally recognised home for the Jewish people in Palestine.

The Zionist Organization was to be the main administrative body of the movement and would go on to establish the Jewish Colonial Trust , whose objectives were to encourage European Jewish emigration to Palestine and to assist with the economic development of Palestine, via its subsidiary the Anglo-Palestine Bank , now Bank Leumi.

In the Basel program , the draft of the objective of the modern Zionist movement submitted to the First Zionist Congress of the Zionist Organization in 1897 read: "Zionism seeks to establish a home for the Jewish people in Palestine secured by law." One delegate sought to replace "by law" with "by international law", which was opposed by others. A compromise formula was adopted that read: Zionism seeks to establish a home in Palestine for the Jewish people, secured under public law. "Under public law" is generally understood to mean seeking legal permission from the Ottoman rulers for Jewish migration.

In this text the word "home" was substituted for "state" and "public law" for "international law" so as not to alarm the Ottoman Sultan. Further the Basel program outlined that: The Congress contemplates the following means to the attainment of this end: The promotion by appropriate means of the settlement in Palestine of Jewish farmers, artisans, and manufacturers.

The organisation and uniting of the whole of Jewry by means of appropriate institutions, both local and international, in accordance with the laws of each country.

The strengthening and fostering of Jewish national sentiment and national consciousness. Preparatory steps toward obtaining the consent of governments, where necessary, in order to reach the goals of Zionism. Theodor Herzl addresses the Second Zionist Congress in 1898 Early Zionists initially envisioned a limited autonomy within a larger multinational framework.

During the British Mandate , these aspirations evolved into discussions that considered binational federalist models that sought to reconcile Jewish national goals with coexistence and shared governance with the Arab population in Palestine. However, as the political landscape hardened — marked by growing Arab opposition and shifting British policies — a broad consensus favouring the establishment of a fully independent Jewish state gradually emerged. According to historian Walter Laqueur, the bi-national solution was advocated in only a "half-hearted way" by the Zionist movement.

In Laqueur's analysis, the proposal relied on the unrealistic expectation of gaining Arab agreement. Arabs rejected bi-nationalism and parity, feeling no need to compromise on Palestine's Arab identity and were particularly concerned that increased Jewish immigration would threaten their status in Palestine.

In the search for support, Herzl, before his death, had made the most progress with the German Kaiser, joining him on his 1898 trip to Palestine. Territories considered Main articles: Jewish territorialism and Proposals for a Jewish state Front page of The Jewish Chronicle , 17 January 1896, showing an article by Theodor Herzl, a month prior to the publication of his pamphlet Der Judenstaat Throughout the first decade of the Zionist movement, Herzl and other Zionist figures considered locations for a Jewish state outside of the Land of Israel, such as "Uganda" (actually parts of British East Africa that are today in Kenya ), Argentina , Cyprus , Mesopotamia , Mozambique , and the Sinai Peninsula . Herzl was initially content with any Jewish self-governed state.

In 1903, the British Colonial Secretary, Joseph Chamberlain , proposed the Uganda scheme, where he offered 5,000 square miles (13,000 km 2 ) of land to Herzl for a Jewish state in British East Africa. Jewish settlement of Argentina was the project of Maurice de Hirsch . It is unclear if Herzl seriously considered this alternative plan; however, he later affirmed that only Palestine could gain enough Jewish support because of the historic ties of Jews with that area. A major concern and driving reason for considering other territories was the Russian pogroms, in particular the Kishinev massacre, and the resulting need for quick resettlement in a safer place. However, other Zionists emphasised the memory, emotion and tradition linking Jews to the Land of Israel. Palestine only became Herzl's main focus after his Zionist manifesto ' Der Judenstaat ' was published in 1896, but even then he was hesitant to focus efforts solely on resettlement in Palestine when speed was of the essence. A committee was established to investigate the possibility of the Uganda scheme, but after Herzl died in 1904, at the Seventh Zionist Congress in 1905 it was decided to decline the British offer and to "direct all future settlement efforts solely to Palestine." Following the vote, which had been proposed by Max Nordau , Israel Zangwill said to Nordau that he "will be charged before the bar of history," and his supporters blamed the Russian voting bloc of Menachem Ussishkin for the outcome of the vote. Israel Zangwill left the main Zionist movement over this decision and founded the Jewish Territorialist Organization (ITO).

The territorialists were willing to establish a Jewish homeland anywhere, but failed to attract significant support and were dissolved in 1925.

The departure of the ITO from the Zionist Organization had little impact.

The Zionist Socialist Workers Party was also an organisation that favoured the idea of a Jewish territorial autonomy outside of Palestine. According to Elaine Hagopian, in the early decades the World Zionist Organization foresaw the homeland of the Jews as extending not only over the region of Palestine, but into Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, and Egypt. Early Zionist settlement A map of early moshavot , Jewish agricultural settlements established during the first and second waves of Zionist migration to Palestine. May our eyes behold your return in mercy to Zion . Design by Lilien to the Fifth Zionist Congress, Basel, 1901 The 1906 edition of the Jewish Encyclopedia noted the movement's spread: "not only in the number of Jews affiliated with the Zionist organization and congress, but also in the fact that there is hardly a nook or corner of the Jewish world in which Zionistic societies are not to be found." In the early twentieth century, Zionism advanced by establishing towns, colonies, and an independent monetary system in Palestine. Due to the unstable local economy and fluctuating currency values under Ottoman rule, Zionists created their own financial institutions. Despite their small numbers, the Zionists instilled a fear of territorial displacement in the local population, which led to Palestinian resistance and the settlers' eventual use of military force. Initially, the impact on rural Palestinians was minimal, with only a few villages encountering Jewish colonies. However, after World War I and as Zionist land purchases increased, the rural population began to experience dramatic changes.

From almost the beginning of Zionist settlement, Palestinians viewed Zionism as an expansionist endeavour. According to Israeli historian Benny Morris , Zionism was inherently expansionist and always had the goal of turning the entirety of Palestine into a Jewish state.

In addition, Morris describes the Zionists as intent on politically and physically dispossessing the Arabs. Early warnings from local leaders in the 1880s about the destabilising effects of Jewish immigration went largely unheeded until these later developments.

By the early 20th century, there were fourteen Zionist settlements in Palestine, established through land purchases from both local and external landowners.

The Life of the Jews in Palestine , a Russian documentary film by Noah Sokolovsky presented at the 11th Zionist congress in 1913.

From the outset, the Zionist leadership saw land acquisition as essential to achieving their goal of establishing a Jewish state. This acquisition was strategic, aiming to create a continuous area of Jewish land.

The WZO established the Jewish National Fund (JNF) in 1901, with the stated goal "to redeem the land of Palestine as the inalienable possession of the Jewish people." The notion of land "redemption" entailed that the land could not be sold and could not be leased to a non-Jew nor should the land be worked by Arabs, though most Zionists continued to employ fellaheen to perform labour on their lands.

The land purchased was primarily from absentee landlords, and upon purchase of the land, the tenant farmers who traditionally had rights of usufruct were often expelled. Herzl publicly opposed this dispossession, but wrote privately in his diary: "We shall try to spirit the penniless population across the border by procuring employment for it in the transit countries, while denying it any employment in our country... Both the process of expropriation and the removal of the poor must be carried out discreetly and circumspectly." The arrival of Zionist settlers to Palestine in the late 19th century is widely seen as the start of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict . Zionists wanted to create a Jewish state in Palestine with as much land, as many Jews, and as few Palestinian Arabs as possible.

In 1903, 'the Eretz Israel assembly' was held by Menachem Ussishkin . This assembly marked the beginning of a more formalized Zionist colonization effort. Under his leadership, both professional and political organizations were established, paving the way for a sustained Zionist presence in the region. Ussishkin delineated three methods for the Zionist movement to acquire land: by force and conquest, by expropriation via governmental authority, and by purchase.

The only option available to the movement at the moment in his perspective was the last one, "until at some point we become rulers". Second Aliyah Main article: Second Aliyah The second wave of Zionist settlement came with the Second Aliyah starting in 1904.

The settlers of this period laid the foundational elements for the Jewish society in Palestine envisioned by the Zionist movement. They established the first two political parties, the socialist Po'alei Zion and the non-socialist Ha-Po'el Ha-Tza'ir and initiated the first collective agricultural settlements known as kibbutzim , which were fundamental in the formation of the Israeli state. They also formed the first underground military group, Ha-Shomer , which later evolved into the Haganah and eventually became the core of the Israeli army. Many leaders of the Zionist national movement were products of the Second Aliyah.

The Zionists of the second aliyah were also more ideologically motivated than those of the first aliyah.

In particular, they sought the " conquest of labor ", which entailed the exclusion of Arabs from the labour market. Opposition from Orthodox Jews and Reformist Jews Under Herzl's leadership, Zionism relied on Orthodox Jews for religious support, with the main party being the orthodox Mizrachi . However, as the cultural and socialist Zionists increasingly broke with tradition and used language contrary to the outlook of most religious Jewish communities, many orthodox religious organizations began opposing Zionism. Their opposition was based on its secularism and on the grounds that only the Messiah could re-establish Jewish rule in Israel. Prior to the Holocaust , Reform Judaism rejected Zionism as inconsistent with the requirements of Jewish citizenship in the diaspora.

The opposition of Reform Judaism was expressed in the Pittsburgh Platform , adopted by the Central Conference of American Rabbis in 1885: "We consider ourselves no longer a nation but a religious community, and therefore expect neither a return to Palestine, nor a sacrificial worship under the administration of the sons of Aaron, nor the restoration of any of the laws concerning the Jewish state." World War I Main articles: Balfour Declaration , Mandate for Palestine , and Homeland for the Jewish people Palestine as claimed by the World Zionist Organization in 1919 at the Paris Peace Conference United States The Jewish population of the USA increased about ten times between 1880 and 1920, with the immigration of poorer, more liberal and radical, "downtown", Eastern European immigrants fleeing persecution in contrast to the older generations of German, Spanish and Portuguese Jews that were much more conservative and rich. It was not until 1912, when the secular "people's lawyer" Louis Brandeis became involved in Zionism, just before the First World War , that Zionism gained significant support in the US.

By 1917, the American Provisional Executive Committee for General Zionist Affairs, which Brandeis chaired, had increased American Zionist membership ten times to 200,000 members; "American Jewry thenceforth became the financial center for the world Zionist movement".

While the United States was officially neutral in the early years of the First World War, most Russian and German Jews supported the Germans, as did much of the largely anti-British Irish American and German American community. Britain was anxious to win US support for its war effort, and winning over Jewish financial and popular support in the US was considered vital. Europe As in the US, England had experienced a rapid growth in their Jewish minority. About 150,000 Jews migrated there from Russia in the period of 1881 to 1914. With this immigration influx, pressure grew from British voters to halt it; added to the established knowledge in British society of Old Testament scripture, Zionism became an attractive solution for both Britain and the Empire . Like other countries, the British assumed that most Jews were avoiding the draft; these beliefs were groundless, but the Polish Zionist Ze'ev Jabotinsky was able to exploit it to promote a Jewish division in the British army. For the British, the Jewish Legion , was a means of recruiting Russian Jewish immigrants (who were mostly Zionists) to the British war effort.

The legion was dominated by Zionist volunteers.

Before World War I, although led by Austrian and German Jews, Zionism was primarily composed of Russian Jews. Initially, Zionists were a minority, both in Russia and worldwide. Russian Zionism quickly became a major force within the movement, making up about half the delegates at Zionist Congresses. Despite its success in attracting followers, Russian Zionism faced fierce opposition from the Russian intelligentsia across the political spectrum and socioeconomic classes. It was condemned by different groups as reactionary, messianic, and unrealistic, arguing that it would isolate Jews and exacerbate their circumstances rather than integrate them into European societies. Religious Jews such as Rabbi Joel Teitelbaum viewed in Zionism a desecration of their sacred beliefs and a Satanic plot, while others hardly thought it deserved serious attention. For them, Zionism was seen as an attempt to defy the divine order to await the coming of the Messiah. However, many of these religious Jews still believed in the Messiah coming soon. For example, Rabbi Yisrael Meir Kagan "was so convinced of the imminent arrival of the Messiah that he urged his students to study the laws of the priesthood so that the priests would be prepared to carry out their duties when the Temple in Jerusalem was rebuilt." Criticism was not limited to religious Jews. Bundist socialists and liberals of the Voskhod newspaper attacked Zionism for distracting from class struggle and blocking the path to Jewish emancipation in Russia, respectively. Figures like historian Simon Dubnow saw potential value in Zionism promoting Jewish identity but fundamentally rejected a Jewish state as messianic and unfeasible. They provided alternative emancipatory solutions, such as assimilation, emigration, and Diaspora nationalism.

The opposition to Zionism, rooted in the intelligentsia's rationalist worldview, weakened its appeal among potential adherents like the Jewish working class and intelligentsia. Otto Warburg president of the Zionist Organization from 1911 to 1921 At the outbreak of war in 1914, the offices of the German section of the Zionist Organization were located in Berlin and led by Otto Warburg , a German citizen. With different national sections of the movement supporting different sides in the war, Zionist policy was to maintain strict neutrality and "to demonstrate complete loyalty to Turkey", the German ally controlling Palestine.

At the start of World War I, the Zionist leadership attempted to persuade the British government of the benefits of sponsoring a Jewish colony in Palestine. Their main initial success was in establishing a lobbying group centred around the Rothschild family , largely driven by Chaim Weizmann .

In January 1915, two months after the British declaration of war against the Ottomans, Zionist and British cabinet member Herbert Samuel presented a detailed memorandum entitled The Future of Palestine to the British Cabinet on the benefits of a British protectorate over Palestine to support Jewish immigration.

In response to the crisis of not being able to manufacture enough artillery shells for the war effort, David Lloyd George became the minister responsible for armaments, and asked Weizmann to develop his process for the production of acetone for mass production. Lloyd George was an evangelical Christian and pro-Zionist. According to Lloyd George, when he asked Weizmann about payment for his efforts in helpin Britain, Weizmann told him that he wanted no money, just the rights over Palestine. This relationship developed further between Weizmann and Lloyd George, as the latter became prime minister in 1916. Weizmann also became a close associate of First Lord of the Admiralty and foreign secretary, Arthur Balfour .

Although 500,000 Russian Jews were serving in the Russian army, the Russian leadership regarded all Jews as their enemies and assumed that most were avoiding the draft.

The Arab population also suffered greatly during this time.

When the Ottoman Empire entered the war on Germany's side in October 1914, tens of thousands of Russian Jews became enemy citizens, and many opted to leave rather than become Ottoman citizens and be subject to conscription. This gave the Ottomans an opportunity to suppress the Zionist movement.

Meanwhile thousands of Ottoman Jews from across the empire were drafted into the army.

The war also had a negative effect on trade in the Yishuv.

On 17 January 1914, the Ottomans announced, with no prior warning, that all foreign nationals must immediately board a ship in Jaffa to be taken to Alexandria. Then in April 1917, the Ottomans ordered all Jews to leave Jaffa.

In October 1917, after the Ottomans discovered that Nili had been giving intelligence to the British, they arrested people at random and imposed a curfew as collective punishment. Most Zionists came to the conclusion that there was no hope of change under the Ottomans and therefore supported the British conquest of Palestine, and they viewed the British as redeemers.

During the First World War, David Ben-Gurion and Yitzhak Ben-Tzvi both volunteered for the Ottoman army but were rejected and exiled to Egypt. They moved to the US and tried to recruit Jews to set up a Jewish unit in the Ottoman army.

In 1916 Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca (in Arabia ), began an " Arab Revolt " hoping to create an Arab state in the Middle East.

In the McMahon–Hussein Correspondence , British representatives promised they would allow him to create such a state (the boundaries were vague). They also provided him with large sums of money to fund his revolt.

Before 1917, Palestine's Arab population mostly saw themselves as Ottoman subjects. They feared the objectives of the Zionist movement, but they assumed the movement would fail.

After the Young Turk revolution in 1908, Arab Nationalism grew rapidly in the area and most Arab Nationalists regarded Zionism as a threat, although a minority perceived Zionism as providing a path to modernity.

In April 1917, when the Ottomans ordered a general evacuation of Jaffa amid the British advance, Zionists in Britain exaggerated reports, making the evacuation one of Jews specifically, across Palestine, and reporting a fake order from Djemal Pasha that " Armenian policy will now be applied to Jews".

In fact, Jews had received special care: the evacuation was postponed to after the end of Passover, and they were given accommodations denied to Arabs.

The Jaffa myth helped sway the Allies to support a Jewish state as necessary to prevent persecution. Balfour Declaration Main article: Balfour Declaration The original 1917 letter from Arthur Balfour to Lord Walter Rothschild announcing the support of the British government for the establishment of a "national home for the Jewish people" in Palestine .

In August 1917, as the British cabinet discussed the Balfour Declaration , Edwin Samuel Montagu , the only Jew in the British Cabinet and a staunch anti-Zionist, "was passionately opposed to the declaration on the grounds that (a) it was a capitulation to anti-Semitic bigotry, with its suggestion that Palestine was the natural destination of the Jews, and that (b) it would be a grave cause of alarm to the Muslim world". Additional references to the future rights of non-Jews in Palestine and the status of Jews worldwide were thus inserted by the British cabinet, reflecting the opinion of the only Jew within it.

As the draft was finalized, the term "state" was replaced with "home", and comments were sought from Zionists abroad. Louis Brandeis, a member of the US Supreme Court, influenced the style of the text and changed the words "Jewish race" to "Jewish people".

On 2 November, the British Foreign Secretary, Arthur Balfour , made his landmark Balfour Declaration, publicly expressing the government's view in favour of "the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people", and specifically noting that its establishment must not "prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine, or the rights and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other country". However, Rashid Khalidi notes that the Balfour Declaration does not mention political or national rights for non-Jews in Palestine, who constituted 94% of the population.

The declaration was largely motivated by war-time considerations and antisemitic preconceptions about the putative influence Jews had on the Tsarist government and in the shaping of American policy. Though his decision was also motivated by religious convictions, Balfour himself had passed the Aliens Act 1905 , which aimed to keep Eastern European Jews out of Britain. More decisive were Britain's colonial and imperial geopolitical goals in the region, specifically in retaining control over the Suez Canal by establishing a pro-British state in the region. Weizmann's role in obtaining the Balfour Declaration led to his election as the Zionist movement's leader. He remained in that role until 1948, and then was elected as the first President of Israel after the nation gained independence. For Weizmann, Palestine was a Jewish and not an Arab country.

The state he sought at that period would stretch to the east of the Jordan River and extend to the Litani River (a river in Lebanon, then part of the Ottoman Empire). Weizmann's strategy involved incrementally approaching this goal over a long period, in the form of settlement and land acquisition. Weizmann was open to the idea of Arabs and Jews jointly running Palestine through an elected council with equal representation, but he did not view the Arabs as equal partners in negotiations about the country's future.

In particular, he was steadfast in his view of the "moral superiority" of the Jewish claim to Palestine over the Arab claim and believed these negotiations should be conducted solely between Britain and the Jews. According to Zionist Israeli historian Simha Flapan, the essential assumptions of Weizmann's strategy were later adopted by Ben-Gurion and subsequent Zionist leaders.

The declaration was seen by the Bolsheviks of the Russian Provisional Government as confirmation of Zionism being a reactionary ideology supported by British imperialism. It also helped spur the emergence of the modern mass Palestinian nationalist movement, with the founding of the Muslim-Christian Associations in 1918 and first Palestine Arab Congress in 1919. Russian revolutions In February 1917 the tsar was overthrown and Alexander Kerensky became Prime Minister of the Russian Empire. Jews were prominent in the new government and the British hoped that Jewish support would help keep Russia in the war.

In June 1917 the British army, led by Edmund Allenby , invaded Palestine.

The Jewish Legion participated in the invasion and Jabotinsky was awarded for bravery. Arab forces conquered Transjordan and later took over Damascus.

On 7 November, five days after the Balfour declaration, the Bolsheviks led the October Revolution in Russia.

The Bolshevik seizure of power led to civil war and the collapse of the Western part of the Russian Empire.

During the fighting, there were pogroms across Russia perpetrated by fighters from all sides, but especially the counter-revolutionary White Army . Between 1918 and 1921, when the Bolsheviks assumed control of Ukraine, over 50,000 Jews were killed, a further 100,000 were permanently maimed or died of wounds and 200,000 Jewish children became orphans.

At the time of the Russian revolution, the Bund had 30,000 members in Russia, compared to 300,000 members in the Zionist movement, which was the largest of the Jewish political groups. About 10% of the members of in the Zionist movement were Marxist-Zionists. Joseph Stalin was the first People's Commissariat of Nationalities and in this role suppressed the Bund. Bundists supportive of the Bolsheviks formed short-lived Kombund (Communist Bund) parties (such as the Jewish Communist Labour Bund (Ukraine) and Jewish Communist Labour Bund in Poland ) or joined the Yevsektsia , a Jewish section of the Bolshevik organization created by Stalin which worked to end Jewish communal and religious life, while anti-Communist social democrats maintained independent Bund structures, especially in Poland . Members of the Marxist Zionist movement, Poale Zion led by Ber Borochov , returned to Russia (from Palestine) and requested to form Jewish Brigades within the Red Army. Trotsky supported the request but opposition from the Yevsektsiya led to the proposal's failure. Poale Zion eventually split between a pro-Communist "Left", and an anti-Communist "Right". Future Israeli Prime Minister Ben-Gurion was a member of the Israeli branch of the latter, forming Ahdut HaAvoda (the ancestor of the Israeli Labor Party ) in 1919.

In 1921, following a personal request to Stalin by the Soviet author Maxim Gorky , the Hebrew poets Bialik and Shaul Tchernichovsky were allowed to emigrate to Palestine. Bialik became the Israeli national poet. Despite opposition from the Evsektsiya, Stalin also permitted funding of a Hebrew theatre troupe in Moscow, called Habima . Konstantin Stanislavski attended the first night and the group put on a historic play called The Dybbuk , which they were allowed to take on tour in Europe.

The tour terminated in Tel Aviv, and Habima never returned to Moscow, becoming instead the Israel National Theatre.

The Revolution was accompanied by a brief flowering of Yiddish arts before being decimated by censorship and by 1950 a significant number of prominent Yiddish intellectuals had been sent to the Gulag . A Soviet census found that 90% of Belarusian Jews and 76% of Ukrainian Jews gave Yiddish as their mother tongue. Between 1922 and 1928, the Soviets embarked on a plan of moving Ukrainian Jews to agricultural communes, mainly in Crimea .

The plan was encouraged by donations from US Jewish charities trying to protect and help Jews. A number of Zionist agricultural collectives were established in Crimea in preparation for Kibbutz life. Soviet leader Mikhail Kalinin considered creating a Jewish state in Crimea which had a large Karaite population who had been exempt from Tsarist persecution. (Karaites are Jews who reject the authority of the Talmud.) In 1924 Stalin became the ruler of the USSR.

In 1928 a Jewish Autonomous Oblast was created in the Russian Far East with Yiddish as an official language and Hebrew was outlawed: The only language to be outlawed in the USSR. Few Jews were tempted by the Soviet Jewish Republic and as of 2002 Jews constitute only about 1.2% of its population.

The Yevsektsiyas were disbanded in 1927 and many their leaders perished during the Great Purge .

The Bund survived in independent Poland until the Second World War, when its membership was exterminated by the Nazis. King–Crane Commission During the 1919 Paris Peace Conference , an Inter-Allied Commission was sent to Palestine to assess the views of the local population; the report summarized the arguments received from petitioners for and against Zionism.

In 1919, the US-based King–Crane Commission was sent to Palestine with the intention of meeting with the local population and documenting their wishes, in accordance with the goal of self-determination . started with a strongly sympathetic disposition towards Zionism but concluded that: If that principle is to rule, and so the wishes of Palestine's population are to be decisive as to what is to be done with Palestine, then it is to be remembered that the non-Jewish population of Palestine – nearly nine-tenths of the whole – are emphatically against the entire Zionist programme.

The tables show that there was no one thing upon which the population of Palestine were more agreed than upon this. These maximum Zionist demands implied subjection of Palestinians to Jewish rule, with the commission finding that this was a violation of the principle of self-determination, given the anti-Zionist sentiment of the non-Jewish population.

The report stated that "The initial claim, often submitted by Zionist representatives, that they have a 'right' to Palestine based on occupation of two thousand years ago, can barely be seriously considered." Consequently, it recommended a considerably "modified" or "reduced" version of the Zionist programme, with Palestine as a Jewish national home but not a Jewish state. Instead, Palestinian Arabs overwhelmingly desired an independent Arab nation, or, failing that, an American protectorate. However, the Woodrow Wilson administration was hesitant to go against previous agreements between Britain and France, and did not publish the King–Crane report until 1922, after the end of the Paris Peace Conference. Churchill White Paper In June 1922, in response to the 1921 Jaffa riots , the Churchill White Paper was drafted at the request of Winston Churchill , then Secretary of State for the Colonies . Churchill stated that the goal of the white paper was "…to make it clear that the establishment of self-governing institutions in Palestine was to be subordinated to the paramount pledge and obligation of establishing a Jewish National Home in Palestine".

The "British Policy in Palestine", which was included as a part of the white paper, was accepted by the Zionist Organization and rejected by the Palestinians. Shortly thereafter, the House of Lords rejected a Palestine Mandate that incorporated the Balfour Declaration by 60 votes to 25. Beginning of Revisionist Zionism Ze'ev Jabotinsky , the founder and first leader of Betar, shown here in Jewish Legion uniform. Ze'ev Jabotinsky founded the Revisionist Party in 1925, which took on a more militant ethos and openly maximalist agenda than Weizmann and Ben-Gurion. Jabotinsky rejected Weizmann's strategy of incremental state building, instead preferring to immediately declare sovereignty over the entire region, which extended to both the East and West bank of the Jordan river. Like Weizmann and Herzl, Jabotinsky also believed that the support of a Great Power was essential to the success of Zionism.

From early on, Jabotinksy openly rejected the possibility of a "voluntary agreement" with the Arabs of Palestine. He instead believed in building an " iron wall " of Jewish military force to break Arab resistance to Zionism, at which point an agreement could be established. Jabotinsky's "iron wall" strategy would have a lasting effect on the Zionist perspective towards the demographic problem posed by the presence of the local Palestinian population. Both the left and right factions of Zionism would rely on this strategy of leveraging military strength in pursuit of political aspirations. British Mandate and development of the Zionist quasi-state A greater Arab kingdom In the first meeting in June 1918 between Weizmann and the Hashemite Emir Faisal , Weizmann had assured Faisal that: "the Jews did not propose to set up a government of their own but wished to work under British protection, to colonize and develop Palestine without encroaching on any legitimate interests" Emir Faisal I and Chaim Weizmann (left, wearing Arab headdress as a sign of friendship) in 1918 in Transjordan In 1919 Faisal, signed the Faisal–Weizmann Agreement . Faisal met with Felix Frankfurter , president of the Zionist Organization of America , which was followed by T. E. Lawrence drafting of a letter to Frankfurter, on 3 March 1919, signed by Faisal, which stated: "The Arabs, especially the educated among us, look with the deepest sympathy on the Zionist movement. Our deputation here in Paris is fully acquainted with the proposals submitted yesterday by the Zionist Organization to the Peace Conference, and we regard them as moderate and proper." Frankfurter replied on 5 March "..These aims are now before the Peace Conference as definite proposals by the Zionist Organisation. We are happy indeed that you consider these proposals 'moderate and proper,' and that we have in you a staunch supporter for their realisation." After the war, the plan for a greater Arab kingdom under the Hashemite family was abandoned when Emir Faisal was expelled from Damascus by the French in 1920.

In parallel, the Zionist demand for a clear British acknowledgment of the entirety of Palestine as the Jewish national home was rejected. Instead, Britain committed only to establishing a Jewish national home "in Palestine" and promised to facilitate this without prejudicing the rights of existing "non-Jewish communities"—these qualifying statements aroused the concern of Zionist leaders at the time. Initially Palestinian Arabs looked to the Arab-nationalist leaders to create a single Arab state, however Faisal's agreement with Weizmann led Palestinian-Arabs to develop their own brand of nationalism and call for Palestine to become a state governed by the Arab majority, in particular they demanded an elected assembly. Zionist supporters were by now aware of Arab opposition, and this led the movement in 1921 to pass a motion calling on the leadership to "forge a true understanding with the Arab nation".

The British mandate for Palestine Main articles: British Mandate for Palestine and Mandatory Palestine Poster from the Zionist Tarbut schools of Poland in the 1930s. Zionist parties were very active in Polish politics.

In the 1922 Polish parliamentary election , Zionists held 24 seats of a total of 35 Jewish parliament members.

After the defeat and dismantling of the Ottoman Empire by European colonial powers in 1918, the League of Nations endorsed the full text of the Balfour Declaration and established the British Mandate for Palestine in 1922.

The mandate privileged the Jewish minority over the Arab majority.

In addition to declaring British support for the establishment of a "Jewish national home" in Palestine, the mandate included provisions facilitating Jewish immigration, and granting the Zionist movement the status of representing Jewish national interests.

In particular, the Jewish Agency, the embodiment of the Zionist movement in Palestine, was made a partner of the mandatory government, acquiring international diplomatic status and representing Zionist interests before the League of Nations and other international venues.

In late 1921, the 12th Zionist congress was held in Carlsbad, Czechoslovakia; it was the first congress to be held since 1913, because of the First World War. Four hundred-fifty delegates attended, representing 780,000 fee paying Zionist members worldwide. Weizmann was elected its president in recognition of his role in obtaining the Balfour Declaration.

The conference passed a proposal for an "Arab-Jewish Entente", which expressed delegates commitment "to attain a durable understanding which shall enable the Arab and Jewish peoples to live together in Palestine on terms of mutual respect and co-operate in making the common home into a flourishing community, the upbuilding of which will assure to each of these peoples an undisturbed national development". Weizmann led the movement until 1931.

From 1931 to 1935 the WZO was presided by Nahum Sokolow (who had also spent the First World War in Britain). Weizmann resumed presidency of the WZO in 1935 and led it until 1946. Zionist Congresses: 1929 16th Congress, Zurich: 604,000 fee paying members. 1931 17th Congress, Basel: 670,000 fee paying members. 1933 18th Congress, Prague: 828,000 fee paying members.

The British mandate effectively established a Jewish quasi-state in Palestine, lacking only full sovereignty. This lack of sovereignty was crucial for Zionism at this early stage, as the Jewish population was too small to defend itself against the Arabs of Palestine.

The British presence provided a necessary safeguard for Jewish nationalism. To achieve political independence, Jews needed Britain's support, particularly in land purchase and immigration.

Following the Balfour Declaration, Jewish immigration to Palestine grew. According to the Peel Report , 9,149 immigrants arrived in 1921, 33,801 in 1925, dropping to less than 3,000 in 1927 and in 1928, and rising dramatically after Hitler's seizure of control in Germany in 1933 , with 61,854 arriving in 1935.

By the end of the mandate period, the Jewish population in Palestine nearly tripled, eventually reaching one third of the country's population.

In this period the Palestine Jewish Colonization Association , the Jewish National Fund and other Zionist organisations purchased land and started agricultural colonies, with 212,500 acres acquired between 1922 and 1932.

The nucleus of the Jewish quasi-state was the Histadrut , established in 1920 as an independent social, political and economic institution.

The Histadrut also exercised significant control over the Haganah , a Jewish defense force formed in 1920 in reaction to Arab riots. Originally created to defend the community, Haganah evolved into a permanent underground reserve army fully integrated into the Jewish political structure.

Although the British authorities disapproved of the Haganah, particularly its method of stealing arms from British bases, they did not disband it.

The Histadrut operated as a completely independent entity, without interference from the British mandate authorities. Ben-Gurion saw the Histadrut's detachment from socialist ideology to be one of its key strengths; indeed it was the General Organisation of Workers in Israel.

In particular, the Histadrut worked towards national unity and aimed to dominate the capitalist system en route to gaining political power, not to create a socialist utopia.

As secretary general of the Histadrut and leader of the Zionist labour movement, Ben-Gurion adopted similar strategies and objectives as Weizmann during this period, disagreeing primarily on issues of specific tactical moves up until 1939.

The middle class grew dramatically in size with the arrival of the fourth aliyah in 1924, motivating a political shift within the labour movement. It was during this period that the political strategy of the labour movement would solidify.

The founding of the Mapai party unified the labour movement, making it the dominant force.

The party saw economic control as essential to facilitating Zionist settlement and achieving political power: "the economic question is not one of class; it is a national question". For Ben-Gurion, the transformation from "working class to nation" was intertwined with his rejection of diaspora life, as he would declare: the "weak, unproductive, parasitical Jewish masses" must be converted "to productive labor" in service of the nation. Sara Roy argues that the mandatory administration implemented policies that favoured the development of the capitalist sector, predominantly associated with the Jewish community, while disadvantaging the Arab non-capitalist sector. Between 1933 and 1937, government spending was concentrated in two main areas—development and economic services, and defence—with the former focusing on infrastructural improvements (such as railways, roads, bridges, and other public works) that were particularly beneficial for capitalist production.

In contrast to the Jewish population, according to Roy, the Arabs did not benefit from any government protections such as social security, employment benefits, trade union protection, job security and training opportunities. Arab wages were one third of their Jewish counterparts (including when paid by the same employer).

The mandate also included an article describing self-governing institutions intended only for the Jewish population of Palestine. No similar support or recognition was provided to the Arab majority during the time of the mandate.

The Defence ) was the main Zionist paramilitary organisation of the Yishuv in Mandatory Palestine from 1920.

The first head of the Haganah was a 28-year-old named Yosef Hecht , a veteran of the Jewish Legion . Ze'ev Jabotinsky in the company of Betar commanders, Palestine Betar was founded by Ze'ev Jabotinsky at a meeting of Jewish youth in Riga , Latvia , arranged by Aron Propes in 1923. Jabotinsky spoke of the Arab attacks on the settlement of Tel Hai and other Jewish settlements in the Galilee. He believed that these incidents, indicative of serious threats to the Jewish Palestinians, could only be addressed by the recreation of the ancient Jewish state of Israel, extending across the entirety of both Palestine and Jordan. This is the defining philosophy of Revisionist Zionism . Jabotinsky proposed creating Betar to foster a new generation of Jews thoroughly indoctrinated in these nationalist ideals and trained for military action against all enemies of Judaism.

In 1931, Jabotinsky was elected rosh Betar ("head of Betar") at the first world conference in Danzig .

The name Betar ( Hebrew : בית"ר ) refers to both the last Jewish fort to fall in the Bar Kokhba revolt (136 CE) and to the altered abbreviation of the Hebrew name of the organisation, " B erit Tr umpeldor" or " B rit Y osef Tr umpeldor" ( Hebrew : ברית יוסף תרומפלדור ).

Although Trumpeldor's name is properly spelt with tet (ט), it was written with taf (ת) so as to produce the acronym.

In 1934, Poland was home to 40,000 of Betar's 70,000 members. Routine Betar activities in Warsaw included military drilling, instruction in Hebrew, and encouragement to learn English. Militia groups organised by Betar Poland helped to defend against attacks by the anti-Semitic ONR .

The interwar Polish government helped Betar with military training. Some members admired the Polish nationalist camp and imitated some of its aspects. Throughout the 1930s and early 1940s, Betar aided the widespread immigration of Jews to Palestine in violation of the British Mandate's immigration quotas, which had not been increased despite the surge of refugees from the Nazi persecution and murder of Jews .

In total, Betar was responsible for the entrance of over 40,000 Jews into Palestine under such restrictions. An Irgun poster from 1931 showing a map labelled "Land of Israel" covering the borders of both Mandatory Palestine and the Emirate of Transjordan , which the Irgun claimed in their entirety for a future Jewish state.

In 1931, an offshoot of the Haganah was formed, called the Irgun ( Hebrew : ארגון ; full title: Hebrew : הארגון הצבאי הלאומי בארץ ישראל Hā-ʾIrgun Ha-Tzvaʾī Ha-Leūmī b-Ērētz Yiśrāʾel , lit. "The National Military Organisation in the Land of Israel"), or Etzel ( Hebrew : אצ"ל ).

The Irgun has been viewed as a terrorist organisation or organisation which carried out terrorist acts.

The Irgun policy was based on Revisionist Zionism, the ideology of Ze'ev Jabotinsky. According to Howard Sachar , "The policy of the new organisation was based squarely on Jabotinsky's teachings: every Jew had the right to enter Palestine; only active retaliation would deter the Arabs; only Jewish armed force would ensure the Jewish state".

The organisation committed acts of terrorism against the British, whom it regarded as illegal occupiers, and against Arabs.

In particular the Irgun was described as a terrorist organisation by the United Nations , British, and United States governments; in media such as The New York Times newspaper; as well as by the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry , the 1946 Zionist Congress and the Jewish Agency . However, academics such as Bruce Hoffman and Max Abrahms have written that the Irgun went to considerable lengths to avoid harming civilians, such as issuing pre-attack warnings; according to Hoffman, Irgun leadership urged "targeting the physical manifestations of British rule while avoiding the deliberate infliction of bloodshed." Albert Einstein , in a letter to the New York Times in 1948, compared Irgun and its successor Herut party to "Nazi and Fascist parties" and described it as a "terrorist, right wing, chauvinist organization". Irgun's tactics appealed to many Jews who believed that any action taken in the cause of the creation of a Jewish state was justified, including terrorism . Palestinian nationalism and national leadership According to James L. Gelvin, " Palestinian nationalism emerged in the interwar period in response to Zionist immigration and settlement." The first organisational vehicle of htis movement was the Muslim-Christian Associations , political clubs established in the aftermath of the British defeat of the Ottoman army and their establishment of a military government in Palestine in 1918.

The MCO soon formed a national body, the Palestine Arab Congress , which tried to influence the developing British policy in Palestine and counter the influence of the Zionist Commission which visited Palestine in April 1918.

The main platform of these groups were independence, opposition to the Balfour Declaration and the idea of a Jewish National Home in Palestine, as well as opposition to mass Jewish immigration. Amin al-Husseini in 1929 The British had created the role of Grand Mufti of Jerusalem in 1918, expanding the mufti's remit from just the district of Jerusalem, to all Islamic community matters and institutions across Mandatory Palestine.

In 1921, Mohammad Amin al-Husseini was appointed to this role by the Palestine High Commissioner Herbert Samuel . Samuel also created a Supreme Muslim Council in 1921, of which al-Husseini was elected president. Prior to 1936, al-Husseini, while opposed to Zionism, sought a negotiated solution to the level of new Jewish immigration into Mandatory Palestine, believing that the British authorities would protect the rights and interests of non-Jewish Palestinians.

During the following decades, he became the focus of Palestinian opposition to Zionism. Zionist policies and the 1936–1939 Arab Revolt For the Zionist movement, economic development and policies were a mechanism by which political aims could be achieved. A new economic sector exclusively for Jews, controlled by the labour Zionist movement, was established with support from the Jewish National Fund and the agricultural workers' Histadrut. Despite the universalist ideals of Zionist pioneering, this new Jewish economic sector was fundamentally based on exclusionary practices.

The goal of achieving "100 percent of Hebrew labour" was the primary driver of the territorial, economic and social separation between Jews and Arabs.

The Zionist economic platform was partially based on the assumption (eventually demonstrated incorrect) that economic benefits to the Arabs of Palestine would pacify opposition to the movement. For the Zionist leadership, the economic status and development of the Arabs of Palestine should be compared with Arabs of other countries, rather than with the Jews of Palestine. Accordingly, disproportionate gains in Jewish development were acceptable as long as the status of the Arab sector did not worsen.

While British support for Zionist aspirations in Palestine established the parameters within which the Arab economy could develop, Zionist policies reinforced these limitations. Most notable are the exclusion of Arab labour from Jewish enterprise and the expulsion of Arab peasants from Jewish-owned land. Both of these had limited impact in scope but reinforced the structural limitations put in place by British policies. With the rise to power of the Nazis in 1933, the Jewish community was increasingly persecuted and driven out. This "toughened the Zionist position vis-à-vis the Arab and British positions", according to Pappé, with Ben-Gurion writing in his diaries that "settlement and, when circumstances would allow it, the transfer of the indigenous population would ensure the realization of the Zionist dream." Additionally, the discriminatory immigration laws of the US, UK and other countries preferable to German Jews led to more than 60,000 Jews arriving in Palestine in 1935 alone. Ben-Gurion would go on to write in what became known as the 1937 Ben-Gurion letter that a high rate of immigration would allow for the maximalist Zionist goal of a Jewish state in all of Palestine.

The Arab community openly pressured the mandatory government to restrict Jewish immigration and land purchases. Sporadic attacks in the countryside (described by Zionists and the British as "banditry") reflected widespread anger over the Zionist land purchases that displaced local peasants. Meanwhile, in urban areas, protests against British rule and the increasing influence of the Zionist movement intensified and became more militant in the early 1930s.

The outbreak of violence in the course of the 1936 Arab Revolt was a turning point in Jewish-Arab relations, unifying previously divided factions within the Zionist movement and leading them to view the use of force as a necessary means of defense and deterrence.

During the revolt, the Irgun Zvai Leumi engaged in the use of terror attacks against the Arabs of Palestine. Similarly, for the labour Zionist Palmach , the lines delineating what was acceptable and unacceptable while dealing with Arab villagers were "vague and intentionally blurred". These ambiguous limits practically did not differ from those of the self-described "terrorist" group, Irgun. According to Anita Shapira, beginning in this period, labour Zionism's use of violence against Palestinians for political means was essentially the same as that of radical conservative Zionist groups.

The Peel Commission partition proposal Provisional frontiers of the Palestine partition from the Peel Commission In response to the revolt, the British appointed in 1937 a commission of inquiry that eventually recommended the partition of the land.

The proposal included creating a small Jewish state occupying 17 percent of Mandatory Palestine's territory, while Jerusalem and a corridor to the sea would remain under British control, and the remaining 75 percent of the territory would form a Palestinian state connected to Transjordan under King Abdullah's rule.

At this point, Jews owned 5.6% of the land in Palestine; the land allocated to the Jewish state would contain 40 percent of the country's fertile land.

The commission also proposed a population transfer of the Palestinian Arabs from the areas designated for the Jewish state, based on the precedent of the 1923 Greek-Turkish population exchange . For Ben-Gurion, the transfer proposal was the most appealing recommendation put forward by the commission. Indeed, this sentiment was deeply ingrained to the extent that Ben Gurion's acceptance of partition was contingent upon the removal of the Palestinian population.

The Zionist leadership viewed the mass transfer of the Arabs as morally permissible, but were unsure of its political effectiveness. Various Zionist leaders spoke in strong support of the transfer plan, asserting that there is nothing immoral about it. Within the Zionist movement, two perspectives developed with respect to the partition proposal; the first was a complete rejection of partition, the second was acceptance of the idea of partition on the basis that it would eventually allow for expansion to all territories within "the boundaries of Zionist aspirations." It was the right wing of the Zionist movement that put forward the main arguments against transfer, with Jabotinsky strongly objecting it on moral grounds, and others mainly focusing on its impracticality. However, in his last book "The Jewish War Front" published in 1940, after the outbreak of WWII, Jabotinsky no longer ruled out the possibility of voluntary population transfer, though he still didn't view it as a necessary solution. Some leaders, such as Ruppin, Motzkin , and writers such as Israel Zangwill , also referred to transfer as a "voluntary" action that would include some form of compensation. However, "Palestine's Arabs did not wish to evacuate the land of their ancestors...

The matter raised ethical questions that troubled the Yishuv".

The revolt was inflamed by the partition proposal and continued until 1939 when it was forcefully suppressed by the British. Later, Ze'ev Jabotinsky drew inspiration from the Nazi demographic policies that resulted in the expulsion of 1.5 million Poles and Jews, in whose place Germans resettled.

In Jabotinsky's assessment: The world has become accustomed to the idea of mass migrations and has almost become fond of them. Hitler—as odious as he is to us—has given this idea a good name in the world.

By the time of the 1936 Arab revolt, almost all groups within the Zionist movement wanted a Jewish state in Palestine, "whether they declared their intent or preferred to camouflage it, whether or not they perceived it as a political instrument, whether they saw sovereign independence as the prime aim, or accorded priority to the task of social construction".

The main debates within the movement at this time were concerning partition of Palestine and the nature of the relationship with the British.

The intensity of the revolt, Britain's ambiguous support for the movement and the increasing threat against European Jewry during this period motivated the Zionist leadership to prioritise immediate considerations.

The movement ultimately favoured the notion of partition, primarily out of practical considerations and partially out of a belief that establishing a Jewish state over all of Palestine would remain an option.

At the 1937 Zionist congress, the Zionist leadership adopted the stance that the land allocated to the Jewish state by the partition plan was inadequate—effectively rejecting the partition plan that faded away in the face of both Arab and Zionist opposition.

In response to Ben-Gurion's 1938 quote that "politically we are the aggressors and they defend themselves", Israeli historian Benny Morris says, "Ben-Gurion, of course, was right. Zionism was a colonizing and expansionist ideology and movement", and that "Zionist ideology and practice were necessarily and elementally expansionist." Morris describes the Zionist goal of establishing a Jewish state in Palestine as necessarily displacing and dispossessing the Arab population. Nazism, World War II and the Holocaust Rise of the Nazis While Nazi authorities didn't support a Jewish State, they saw Jewish emigration as beneficial to their early attempts for the expulsion of German Jews. This saw Nazis favouring Zionist organisations over other Jewish organisations. Nazis also saw Zionist ideas and rhetoric as justifying Nazi anti-assimilation laws. With the Nazi diplomat Vicco von Bülow-Schwante stating that "there exists no reason to paralyse Zionist tendencies in Germany because Zionism does not contradict the National Socialist goal of gradually eliminating the Jews from Germany." Reinhard Heydrich ordered in 1935 the prohibition of speeches who advised Jews to remain in Germany. Zionism and emigration narratives were promoted by the SS. This was exemplified in how although Jews were excluded from the Nazi film industry, the Zionist Union of Germany was allowed to organise segregated production and distribution outlets, by the German Propaganda Ministry. Even if Nazi attitude towards Zionism were favourable, it was contradictory, as the economic restrictions imposed on Jews prevented the opportunity for many to emigrate. Adolf Eichmann visited Palestine in 1937 for illegal immigration mediations with Haganah Zionists but they were cut off by British authorities. 1939 White Paper and the British rift with Zionism Poster calling for rescue and Jewish immigration to Palestine in 1940 In 1939, a British White Paper recommended limiting Jewish immigration and land purchase with the objective of maintaining the status quo while the threat of war loomed in Europe.

The immigration was to be limited to no more than 75,000 people over the next five years. With Nazi expansionism in Europe, the limits on immigration prompted further militarisation, land takeover and illegal immigration efforts by the Zionist movement. World War II broke out as the Zionists were developing their campaign against the White Paper—unable to accept the White Paper or to side against the British, the Zionist movement would ultimately support the British war effort while working to upend the White Paper.

From the start of the second world war, the Zionists pressured the British to organise and train a Jewish "army", culminating in the establishment of a Jewish Brigade and accompanying blue and white flag.

The development of this force would further train and enable the already substantial Zionist military capacity.

The Haganah was allowed by the British to openly acquire weapons and worked with the British to prepare for a possible Axis invasion. Despite the White Paper, Zionist immigration and settlement efforts continued during the war period.

While immigration had previously been selective, once the details of the Holocaust reached Palestine in 1942, selectivity was abandoned.

The official Zionist movement's war effort focused on the survival and development of the Yishuv; Pappe argues that scarce Zionist energy was deployed in support of European Jews. Many of those fleeing Nazi terror in Europe preferred to leave for the United States, however, strict American immigration policies and Zionist efforts led to 10% of the 3 million Jews leaving Europe to settle in Palestine.

During this time, the British were concerned about maintaining Arab support as Italian Fascist and German Nazi propaganda was targeting the Arab world , and gaining support. Whereas Jewish support in the fight against fascism was guaranteed.

As a result, the British promised the Arabs in British territory independence by 1949 and imposed restrictions on land purchases by Jews. Zionist movement on the eve of World War II In 1938–1939 the Zionist movement had 1,040,540 members in 61 countries, while the total world Jewish population at this time was about 16 million. Members and delegates at the 1939 Zionist congress, per country Country Members Delegates Poland 299,165 109 United States 263,741 114 Palestine 167,562 134 Romania 60,013 28 United Kingdom 23,513 15 South Africa 22,343 14 Canada 15,220 8 Delegates per political party at the 1939 Zionist congress Party Number Percentage Worker's Party 216 41 General Zionists (centre) 143 27 General Zionists (conservative) 28 5 Mizrahi (Orthodox religious) 65 12 Radical Workers 3 2.5 State Party 8 1.5 Others 66 11 Zionism during the Holocaust Poster by the United Palestine Appeal calling for Jewish mobilisation during World War II In the Biltmore Program of 1942, the Zionist movement would openly declare for the first time its goal of establishing a Jewish state in all of Palestine.

At this point, the United States, with its growing economy and unprecedented military force, became a focal point of Zionist political activity that engaged with the American electorate and politicians. American President Truman supported the Biltmore program for the duration of his time in office, largely motivated by humanitarian concerns and the growing influence of the Zionist lobby.

During World War II, there were numerous instances of resistance by Jews against Nazi occupation, including more than a hundred documented armed uprisings. These included the Bielski partisans , a group of 1,213 Jews helped rescue Jews targeted by the Nazis and fought them for over two years in the forests of what is today western Belarus.

The Warsaw Ghetto Uprising of January and April 1943 included the participation of both right- and left-leaning Zionist organisations. Its commander, Mordechai Anielewicz , was a Socialist-Zionist and Zionists of all political spectra played a leading role in the struggle.

As the horrors of the Holocaust became known, the Zionist leadership formulated the One Million Plan , a reduction from Ben-Gurion's previous target of two million immigrants.

Following the end of the war, many stateless refugees , mainly Holocaust survivors , began migrating to Palestine in small boats in defiance of British rules.

The Holocaust united much of the rest of world Jewry behind the Zionist project.

The British either imprisoned these Jews in Cyprus or sent them to the British-controlled Allied Occupation Zones in Germany .

The British, having faced Arab revolts, were now facing opposition by Zionist groups in Palestine for subsequent restrictions on Jewish immigration.

In January 1946 the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry, a joint British and American committee, was tasked to examine political, economic and social conditions in Mandatory Palestine and the well-being of the peoples now living there; to consult representatives of Arabs and Jews, and to make other recommendations 'as necessary' for an interim handling of these problems as well as for their eventual solution.

Following the failure of the 1946–47 London Conference on Palestine , at which the United States refused to support the British, leading to both the Morrison–Grady Plan and the Bevin Plan being rejected by all parties, the British decided to refer the question to the UN on 14 February 1947. Saudi–U.S. correspondence on Arab–Jewish relations in Palestine As the Second World War was drawing to its close, Ibn Saud , the king of Saudi Arabia , expressed his concern in a letter to US President Franklin D. Roosevelt lest the US support for Zionism will infringe on the rights of the Arabs of Palestine.

In Europe former Jewish partisans led by Abba Kovner began to organize escape routes (" Berihah " ) taking Jews from Eastern Europe down to the Mediterranean where the Jewish Agency organized ships (" Aliyah Bet " ) to illegally carry them to Palestine. Two British sergeants hanged by the Irgun in 1947.

From 1944–1948, Zionist paramilitary organizations conducted an insurgency in Mandatory Palestine.

The British government responded by trying to force Jews to return to their places of origin. Holocaust survivors entering the British Zone were denied assistance or forced to live in hostels with former Nazi collaborators (Britain gave asylum to a large number of Belarusian Nazi collaborators after the war).

In American-controlled zones, political pressure from Washington allowed Jews to live in their own quarters and meant the US Army helped Jews trying to escape the centres of genocide. Despite the death of almost a third of the world's Jews during the Second World War, the number of fee paying members of the Zionist movement continued to grow.

The December 1946 Zionist congress in Basle (Switzerland) attracted 375 delegates from 43 countries representing two million fee paying members.

As before the largest parties were the Socialist Zionist parties although these lacked a full majority. Only ten of the delegates were British Jews. End of the Mandate and expulsion of the Palestinians Main articles: 1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine , Israeli Declaration of Independence , 1948 Arab–Israeli War , and 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight The Irgun , the military arm of the revisionist Zionists, and Lehi , who at one point sought an alliance with the Nazis, would lead a series of terrorist attacks against the British starting in 1944. This included the King David Hotel bombing , British immigration and tax offices and police stations. It was only by the war's end that the Haganah joined in the sabotage against the British.

The combined impact of US opinion and the attacks on British presence eventually led the British to refer the situation to the United Nations in 1947.

In response to a United Kingdom government request that the General Assembly "make recommendations under article 10 of the Charter, concerning the future government of Palestine", the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine (UNSCOP) was created on 15 May 1947.

The urgency of the condition of the Jewish refugees in Europe motivated the committee to unanimously vote in favour of terminating the British mandate in Palestine.

The disagreement came with regards to whether Palestine should be partitioned or if it should constitute a federal state. American lobbying efforts, pressuring UN delegates with the threat of withdrawal of US aid, eventually secured the General Assembly votes in favour of the partition of Palestine into separate Jewish and Arab states, which was passed 29 November 1947. Outbursts of violence slowly grew into a wider civil war between the Arabs and Zionist militias .

By mid-December, the Haganah had shifted to a more "aggressive defense", abandoning notions of restraint it had espoused from 1936 to 1939.

The Haganah reprisal raids were often disproportionate to the initial Arab offenses, which led to the spread of violence to previously unaffected areas.

The Zionist militias, employed terror attacks against Arab civilian and militia centres and many Palestinians were evicted from their houses.

In response, Arabs planted bombs in Jewish civilian areas, particularly in Jerusalem.

The first expulsion of Palestinians began 12 days after the adoption of the UN resolution, and the first Palestinian village was eliminated a month later, in retaliation for Palestinian attacks on convoys and Jewish settlements.

In March 1948, Zionist forces began implementing Plan Dalet , an ethnic cleansing operation that involved the expulsion of civilians and the destruction of Arab towns and villages in pursuit of eliminating Palestinians seen as potentially hostile. According to Benny Morris, Zionist forces committed 24 massacres of Palestinians in the ensuing war, in part as a form of psychological warfare, the most notorious of which is the Deir Yassin massacre .

The United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine estimated that between 1948 and 1949, 710,000 Palestinians were driven out of the country and another 40,000 were internally displaced , primarily as a result of these expulsions and massacres.

The British left Palestine (having done little to maintain order) on 14 May as planned.

The British did not facilitate a formal transfer of power; a fully functioning Jewish quasi-state had already been operating under the British for the past several decades.

The same day, Ben-Gurion declared the establishment of the state of Israel.

The Declaration of Independence of Israel described a democracy with equality of social and political rights for all citizens, and extended a peace offering to neighbouring states and their Arab citizens.

As a result, many Zionist institutions became government institutions, and the four Zionist militias were combined to form the Israel Defense Forces . Ben White noted that the declaration states equality on the basis of citizenship but not nationality. Arab offensive at the beginning of the 1948 Arab–Israeli war Following the declaration, the civil war in Mandatory Palestine escalated into the First Arab–Israeli War . Ben-Gurion referred to this war as the "war of sovereignty", while the newly established Israel Defense Forces referred to it as the "war of liberation".

In 1949, Israel signed a series of armistices with the countries that made up the Arab League .

The demarcations set out in these armistices saw Israel taking control of 78% of Mandatory Palestine, instead of the 55% outlined in the UN partition plan, and resulted in the destruction of much of Palestinian society and the Arab landscape. This war, led by the Zionist Yishuv, was framed by its leaders in biblical and messianic terms as a "miraculous clearing of the land", akin to the biblical War of Joshua . Nur Masalha writes that it is not clear who the Yishuv was declaring independence from, as it was neither from the British colonial rule, which facilitated Jewish settlement against Palestinian wishes, nor from the land's indigenous inhabitants, who had long cultivated and owned it.

By the end of the war, 700-800,000 Palestinians – about half of Mandatory Palestine's predominantly Arab population – were displaced in total, and hundreds of villages were destroyed .

The 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight is known in the Palestinian historiography as the Nakba ("the catastrophe").

After the 1949 Armistice Agreements , a series of laws passed by the first Israeli government prevented displaced Palestinians from claiming private property or returning on the state's territories. They and many of their descendants remain refugees supported by UNRWA . Zionist activity after the founding of the State of Israel Further information: History of Israel David Ben-Gurion proclaiming Israel's establishment beneath a large portrait of Theodor Herzl State of Israel Geography Land of Israel Districts Cities Transportation Mediterranean Sea Red Sea Dead Sea Sea of Galilee Jerusalem Tel Aviv Haifa History Jewish history ( timeline ) Zionism Aliyah Theodor Herzl Balfour Declaration British Mandate UN Partition Plan for Palestine Independence Declaration Austerity Conflicts Arab–Israeli conflict Israeli–Palestinian conflict Iran–Israel proxy conflict 1948 War 1949 Armistice Peace proposals Treaties with Egypt Jordan Israeli–Palestinian peace process International law Occupied territories * West Bank barrier Unilateral disengagement Law Politics Basic Laws Law of Return Jerusalem Law Referendums Parties Elections Prime Minister President Knesset Supreme Court Courts Criticism of the government ( comparisons with Nazi Germany ) Foreign relations United Nations United States Arab League France Security forces Defense Forces Intelligence Community National Security Council Police Border Police Prison Service Economy Companies Diamonds Agriculture Israel Aerospace Industries Kibbutz Tourism Wine Science and Technology Start-up Nation Silicon Wadi Demographics Culture Israeli Jews Jewish immigration Jewish exodus from Arab countries Israeli Arabs Religion Islam Christianity Music Archaeology Universities Hebrew Literature Sports Israelis Portal Category WikiProject v t e Zionist politics in the new state A 120-seat parliament, the Knesset , met first in Tel Aviv , then moved to Jerusalem after the 1949 ceasefire.

In January 1949, Israel held its first elections .

The Socialist-Zionist parties Mapai and Mapam won the most seats (46 and 19 respectively). Mapai's leader David Ben-Gurion was appointed prime minister , and formed a coalition that did not include Mapam, who were Stalinist and loyal to the USSR (another Stalinist party, non-Zionist Maki won 4 seats). This was a significant decision because it signaled that Israel would not be in the Soviet bloc.

The Knesset elected Chaim Weizmann as the first (largely ceremonial) president of Israel . Hebrew and Arabic were made the official languages of the new state. All governments have been coalitions—no party has ever won a majority in the Knesset.

From 1948 until 1977 all governments were led by Mapai and the Alignment , predecessors of the Labour Party .

In those years Labour Zionists , initially led by David Ben-Gurion , dominated Israeli politics and the economy was run on primarily socialist lines .

After the founding of the State of Israel, the Zionist Organization of America (ZOA) helped mobilised political support in the United States for Israel, with large scale funding and pressure on Washington and on public opinion. Emanuel Neumann and Abba Hillel Silver were two leaders of the Zionist Organization of America. They felt its massive funding legitimised taking a major role in shaping Israeli government policy and Israeli society, a minority position among members of the ZOA. They opposed the social and economic policies of Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion and his Mapai (Labour) Party, according to historian Zohar Segev. Their interventions were rejected and Israeli politicians agreed that American Zionists had a major role in funding but not in policy guidance.

In 1950 the Knesset passed the Law of Return , which granted to all Jews and those of Jewish ancestry (Jewish grandparent), and their spouses, the right to settle in Israel and gain citizenship. Most liberal Zionists were highly supportive of this new Jewish state, which they believed is a guarantee for liberal values by fulfilling Jewish self-determination . Some, like Judah Leon Magnes and Martin Buber were critical of the methods used, including the expulsions of Palestinians , but accepted the Jewish state as a practical reality on the ground. Chaim Weizmann and Pinchas Rosen were both signatories of the Israeli Declaration of Independence , which proclaimed Israel to be a " Jewish and democratic state ." Liberal Zionists were split between the General Zionists , who opposed David Ben-Gurion 's government , and Pinchas Rosen's new Progressive Party who supported it. Rosen was Israel's first Minister of Justice and repeatedly pushed for an Israeli constitution to no avail.

At the same time, Chaim Weizmann, a stalwart member of the General Zionists, also served as the first President of Israel from independence in 1948 until his death in 1952.

During this time period, the Progressive Party still represented the Yekke German Jews who were part of the Fifth Aliyah while the General Zionists still tended to represent the middle class.

In 1961, Rosen and Peretz Bernstein , leader of the General Zionists and another signatory of the Israeli Declaration of Independence, united their two parties to form the Israeli Liberal Party . However, by 1964, the right-leaning faction of the party was becoming dominant, seeking an alliance with the ardently right-wing Herut .

In 1956, Mizrachi , HaPoel HaMizrachi , and other religious Zionists formed the National Religious Party .

The Irgun wing of the Revisionist Party formed Herut .

In 1965, right-leaning liberal Zionists from the Liberal Party and revisionist Zionists from Herut formed a new party called Gahal , leaving Rosen dismayed and causing him to break away to form a new party, the Independent Liberals .

In 1973 the new Likud Party was formed by a group of parties which were dominated by the Revisionist Herut/Gahal. Middle eastern and north African exodus Yemenite Jews on their way to Israel during Operation Magic Carpet Main article: Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries Between 1948 and 1951, 250,000 Jews immigrated to Israel from Arab countries. This included 49,000 Yemenite Jews as part of Operation Magic Carpet between 16 December 1948 and 24 September 1950 In response, the Israeli government implemented policies to accommodate 600,000 immigrants over four years, doubling the country's Jewish population. Reactions in the Knesset were mixed; in addition to some Israeli officials, there were those within the Jewish Agency who opposed promoting a large-scale emigration movement among Jews whose lives were not in immediate danger. Initially Iraq had banned its Jewish population from emigrating to Israel, but later reversed this decision in 1951. Between 1951 and 1952, the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee and Israel conducted Operation Ezra and Nehemiah between 120,000 and 130,000 Iraqi Jews airlifted to Israel. Morocco, like Iraq, also instituted a ban on migration to the newly established State of Israel, and sought to distinguish between Zionism and their local Jewish communities, but Zionist organisations continued to work clandestinely under the organisation Caisse d'Aide aux Immigrants Marocains with the support of Mossad to facilitate immigration to Israel. Subsequently agents from Mossad in discussions with representatives of Hassan II of Morocco , agreed to facilitate a large public migration operation called Operation Yachin , which ran from 1961 to 1964.

During the operation, 17.9% of the Jewish population of Tangier , 77.2% from Marrakesh , and 54.5% from Casablanca were migrated to Israel, with the operation in total facilitating the migration of 97,000 Jews from Morocco.

By 1972, 600,000 Jews from Arab and Muslim countries had relocated to Israel.

The World Zionist Organization and immigration policy Since the founding of Israel, the World Zionist Organization has functioned mainly as an organisation dedicated to assisting and encouraging Jews to migrate to Israel. It has provided political support for Israel in other countries but plays little role in internal Israeli politics.

The movement's major success since 1948 was in providing logistical support for Jewish migrants and refugees and, most importantly, in assisting Soviet Jews in their struggle with the authorities over the right to leave the USSR and to practice their religion in freedom, and the exodus of 850,000 Jews from the Arab world, mostly to Israel.

In 1944–1945, Ben-Gurion described the One Million Plan to foreign officials as being the "primary goal and top priority of the Zionist movement." The immigration restrictions of the British White Paper of 1939 meant that such a plan could not be put into large scale effect until the Israeli Declaration of Independence in May 1948.

The new country's immigration policy had some opposition within the new Israeli government, such as those who argued that there was "no justification for organizing large-scale emigration among Jews whose lives were not in danger, particularly when the desire and motivation were not their own" as well as those who argued that the absorption process caused "undue hardship". However, the force of Ben-Gurion's influence and insistence ensured that his immigration policy was carried out. Hebraization of names, consolidation of modern Hebrew culture Main article: Hebraization of Palestinian place names As part of the effort to consolidate its new ownership over the land it had taken over in the 1948 war, the Israeli state worked towards "erasing all traces of its former owners".

The project of "Hebraization" of the map, for which the JNF Naming Committee was established, aimed to replace what remained of the Arab towns and villages with newly named Israeli settlements. These names were often based on the Arab names but with a "Hebrew pronunciation" or based on old Hebrew biblical names. This effort also sought to demonstrate continuous Jewish ownership over the land to ancient times. Prior to 1948, the Zionist movement had limited authority over the use of place names in Palestine.

After 1948, the name "Palestine" was removed from Zionist organisations; for example, the Jewish Agency for Palestine , which played a critical role in the founding of the Israeli state in 1948, was renamed the "Jewish Agency for Israel".

The first works of Hebrew literature in Israel were written by immigrant authors rooted in the world and traditions of European Jewry. Yosef Haim Brenner (1881–1921) and Shmuel Yosef Agnon (1888–1970), are considered by many to be the fathers of modern Hebrew literature . Native-born writers who published their work in the 1940s and 1950s, often called the "War of Independence generation," brought a sabra mentality and culture to their writing. S. Yizhar , Moshe Shamir , Hanoch Bartov and Benjamin Tammuz vacillated between individualism and commitment to society and state.

The Jerusalem Program and beyond The Jerusalem Program was the ideological platform of the post-war Zionist movement, initially adopted in 1951 at the 23rd World Zionist Congress to replace the Basel Program.

The Jerusalem Program differed from the original Basel Program in that it shifted the goals of the Zionist Movement once the State of Israel was already established. It emphasised the consolidation of the State of Israel through HeHalutz (pioneering) and Hakhshara (preparation) as well as land acquisition, agriculture and investment; the in gathering of exiles in Eretz Israel , including through Youth Aliyah ; and the fostering of the unity of the Jewish people, including through Hebrew education, democracy and defense of Jewish rights.

The program was amended at the 27th Zionist Congress (Jerusalem, 1968).

The Arab-Israeli conflict and the settler movement After the 1967 Six-Day War , control of the West Bank (referred to by religious Zionism as Judea and Samaria ) and the Gaza Strip (the Occupied Palestinian territories ) placed Israel in the position of control over a large population of Palestinian Arabs. Over the years this has generated conflict between competing core Zionist ideals of an egalitarian democratic state on the one hand, and territorial loyalty to historic Jewish areas, particularly the old city of Jerusalem, on the other.

Following the 1967 Six-Day War , the religious Zionist movement turned right as it integrated revanchist and irredentist forms of nationalism and evolved into what is sometimes known as Neo-Zionism .

In 1968 Moshe Levinger led a group of religious Zionists who created the first Jewish settlement , a town near Hebron called Kiryat Arba .

In the current period, this right-wing form of religious Zionism, powerful within the settlement movement, is represented by Gush Emunim (founded by students of Abraham Kook's son Zvi Yehuda Kook in 1974), Jewish Home (HaBayit HaYehudi, formed in 2009), Tkuma , and Meimad . Additionally following the Six-Day War, several prominent Labor Zionists created the Movement for Greater Israel which subscribed to an ideology of Greater Israel and called upon the Israeli government to keep and populate all areas captured in the war. Prior to the 1973 elections , it joined the Likud and won 39 seats.

In 1976 it merged with the National List and the Independent Centre (a breakaway from the Free Centre) to form La'am , which remained a faction within Likud until its merger into the Herut faction in 1984. Other prominent Labor Zionists, especially those who came to dominate the Israeli Labor Party , became strong advocates for relinquishing the territory won during the Six-Day War.

By the signing of the Oslo Accords in 1993, this became the central policy of the Labor Party under Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Foreign Minister Shimon Peres . What distinguishes Labor Zionism from other Zionist streams today is not economic policy, an analysis of capitalism, or any class analysis or orientation, but its attitude towards the Israeli–Palestinian peace process with modern Labor Zionists tending to support the Israeli peace camp to varying degrees. Anti-Zionism and Soviet Jewry Israeli demonstration in support of Soviet Jewry Through the 1930s, Zionist activism in the Soviet Union had been restricted, with the USSR becoming increasingly anti-Jewish in the late 1940s, with this often occurring under the guise of anti-Zionism .

After 1967 the Soviet bloc (except Romania) broke off relations with Israel. Antisemitic purges encouraged the remnants of Polish Jewry to move to Israel. Increased Soviet antisemitism and enthusiasm generated by the 1967 victory led to a wave of Soviet Jews applying to emigrate to Israel. Most Jews were refused exit visas and persecuted by the authorities. Some were arrested, becoming known as Prisoners of Zion .

In 1975 the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 3379 was passed. It stated that "zionism is a form of racism and racial discrimination." Resolution 3379 was rescinded in 1991 by the Resolution 4686 .

In the East a line close to and West of the Hedjaz Railway terminating in the Gulf of Akaba .

In the South a frontier to be agreed upon with the Egyptian Government.

The details of the delimitations, or any necessary adjustments of detail, shall be settled by a Special Commission on which there shall be Jewish representation." ^ Letter as translated by the Journal of Palestine Studies ^ Various leaders spoke strongly in favour of transfer. Ussishkin said, "We cannot start the Jewish state with ... half the population being Arab ... Such a state cannot survive even half an hour." There was nothing immoral about transferring sixty thousand Arab families: "It is most moral.... I am ready to come and defend ... it before the Almighty." Ruppin said: "I do not believe in the transfer of individuals. I believe in the transfer of entire villages." Berl Katznelson, coleader with Ben-Gurion of Mapai, said the transfer would have to be by agreement with Britain and the Arab states: "But the principle should be that there must be a large agreed transfer." Ben-Gurion summed up: "With compulsory transfer we have a vast area .... I support compulsory transfer. I don't see anything immoral in it." ^ David Ben Gurion famously would say: we shall "fight the White Paper as if there were no Hitler and fight Hitler as if there were no White Paper." ^ The reasons for this decision were explained by Ernest Bevin , then "His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs" in a speech to the House of Commons on February 18, 1947, in which he said: "His Majesty's Government have been faced with an irreconcilable conflict of principles. There are in Palestine about 1,200,000 Arabs and 600,000 Jews. For the Jews the essential point of principle is the creation of a sovereign Jewish State. For the Arabs, the essential point of principle is to resist to the last establishment of Jewish sovereignty in any part of Palestine.

Following two millennia of homelessness and living presumably "outside of history", Jews could once again "enter history" as subjects, as "normal" actors on the world stage by returning to their ancient birth place, Eretz Israel" ^ Russell, Gordon & America 1917 . ^ Golinkin, David. "Rabbi David Golinkin's Lecture for Aliyah Program" . Masorti Olami . Archived from the original on 14 April 2010. ^ Kertzer 2001 , Chapter 6. ^ a b c Shimoni 1995 . ^ Beinin & Stein 2006 , p. 157. ^ Kagarlitsky 2014 , p. 294 . ^ a b c d e f Avineri 2017 , Introduction. ^ Shimoni 1995 : "While assimilation was still progressing most promisingly, and also quite independently of antisemitism when it later arose, not only religious traditionalists but also part of the Jewish intelligentsia decried the humiliating self-negation that assimilation exacted and rose to the defense of Jewish cultural distinctiveness." ^ Shimoni 1995 , Ethnicity and Nationalism. ^ Goldberg 2009 , p. 20. ^ Rabkin 2006 , Orientations. ^ a b Shlaim 2001 , Introduction. ^ Penslar 2023 , p. 25. ^ a b c Shimoni 1995 , Chapter 2. ^ Dieckhoff 2003 , Political Beginnings of Zionism. ^ Isseroff 2006 . ^ Penslar 2023 , pp. 27–29. ^ Morgenstern 2006 , pp. 24–25. ^ American Jewish Historical Society, Vol. 8, p. 80 ^ "Mordecai Noah and St. Paul's Cathedral: An American Proto-Zionist Solution to the 'Jewish Problem' " . Jewish American Society for Historic Preservation . Archived from the original on 11 March 2015 . Retrieved 12 May 2015 . ^ Smith 2001 , pp. 1–12, 33–38. ^ Cesarani 1982 , p. 60. ^ Dudman 1982 , pp. 21–22. ^ a b Sela 2002 , Zionism. ^ Singer & Schloessinger 1906 , p. 422. ^ Pinsker 1882 . ^ Lewis 2021 , p. 5. ^ Pappé 2004 : "Zionism in many ways began as a Christian project, as part of a restorationist movement believing that the 'return' of the Jews to Palestine would precipitate the second coming of the Messiah, the resurrection of the dead and eventually the conversion of the Jews to Christianity. These ideas influenced Jews looking for a haven when it was clear that anti-Semitic Europe will not allow them to be assimilated or integrate." ^ Penslar 2023 , p. 27: "The Zionist movement was created by Jews, but from the start it was dependent on support from the Christian world. Restorationism was therefore a prerequisite for the success of Zionism. It is harder to establish, however, whether Christian ideas influenced the nineteenth-century Jews who championed a return to the Land of Israel. It is difficult indeed to trace any such external influences...it may be that direct influence was scant or nonexistent but that the men were all influenced by the dynamic spirit of the age..." ^ Rabkin 2006 : "The massive support extended to the State of Israel by the millions of Christian supporters of Zionism is overtly motivated by a single consideration: that the return of the Jews to the Holy Land will be a prelude to their acceptance of Christ or, for those who fail to do so, to their physical destruction.

In his book, The End of Days, Gershom Gorenberg, a religious Jewish author, deplores the messianic scenario dear to many Christian Zionists, which includes the conversion to Christianity of great numbers of Jews and the destruction of those who refuse.

In his view, "the evangelical scenario is a drama in five acts, where the Jews disappear in the fourth" (Cypel).For the evangelical preacher Jerry Falwell, the founding of the State of Israel in 1948 has been the most crucial event in history since the ascension of Jesus to heaven, and "proof that the second coming of Jesus Christ is nigh.... Without a State of Israel in the Holy Land, there cannot be the second coming of Jesus Christ, nor can there be a Last Judgement, nor the End of the World" (Tremblay, 118).These groups have provided massive political and financial assistance to the most resolute nationalist forces in Israeli society.

In their view, the principal function of the State of Israel is to prepare for the Second Coming of Christ and to eliminate Judaism and those who profess it. This would explain why Christian Zionists have come to play an increasingly significant role in the financial and political support of the State of Israel." ^ Spector 2009 , p. 15: "The timing was propitious. Liberal theologians in America and Higher Criticism scholars in Europe were challenging the idea that the Bible is the literal word of God, causing great distress to Bible-believing Christians. Embattled American evangelicals welcomed Darby's emphasis on biblical literalism and prophecy. Darby's focus on the Jews' return to Palestine, their centrality in the unfolding of divine history, and their expected final acceptance of their messiah has had a profound impact on generations of devout Protestants, particularly in the United States." ^ Wilkinson 2013 , p. 2: "In a 2003 article for the Internet magazine, the Globalist, Michael Lind introduced readers to John Nelson Darby, claiming that "Mr Darby's peculiar version of Christianity has shaped the American South for generations. And now, through conservative Southern Republicans like George W. Bush, it is shaping the Middle East and the world." Darby has been described by one critic as "the most influential figure in the development of Christian Zionism," and "its greatest apostle and missionary." John Nelson Darby, the founder of Plymouth Brethrenism, did indeed make a pivotal contribution to the development of Christian Zionism, but I will demonstrate how his doctrines have been misrepresented and misused by Brethren and non-Brethren scholars alike." ^ Goldman 2018 , p. 4: "Mearsheimer and Walt join a considerable number of scholars who derive Christian Zionism from the theological movement known as premillennial dispensationalism.

The basic idea of premillennial dispensationalism is that history is composed of stages that culminate in the return of Jesus Christ to establish the millennium—the thousand-year reign of peace described by the Book of Revelation. This idea was systematised in the mid-nineteenth century by the Anglo-Irish theologian John Nelson Darby and promoted in the United States by evangelists including Dwight Moody and Cyrus I. Scofield." ^ Sermon preached in June 1864 to the British Society for the Propagation of the Gospel among the Jews ^ 'The Jew', July 1870, The Quarterly Journal of Prophecy ^ Sermon preached November 17, 1839, after returning from a "Mission of Inquiry into the State of the Jewish People" ^ Sermon preached June 1864 to London Society for promoting Christianity among the Jews ^ Levenson 2002 , p. 188. ^ Herzl 1914 , p. 22. ^ Herzl 1917 , p. 12. ^ Lewis 2021 , p. 9. ^ a b Isseroff 2007 . ^ Cowen, Jamie (13 July 2002). "The Untold Story.

The Role of Christian Zionists in the Establishment of Modern-day Israel" . Leadership U . Archived from the original on 20 March 2007. ^ Green 2005 , p. 645. ^ Schölch 1992 , p. 41. ^ Dingle 2025 , pp. 99–101. ^ Bonar & M'Cheyne 1996 , pp. v–vi. ^ Adler 1997 , pp. 150–156. ^ Wolf 1919 . ^ Crawford 1847 , p. 71. ^ Ković 2010 , p. 52. ^ Disraeli, Gunn & Wiebe 1997 . ^ Green 2005 , pp. 636–637. ^ "Church History" . Latter Day Saints . Archived from the original on 6 April 2003. ^ Scharfstein 1997 , p. 231. ^ Mandel 2005 , pp. 85. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMandel2005 ( help ) ^ Rabkin 2006 : "The political movement of Zionism was preceded in Eastern Europe by a revival of the Hebrew language as a nonreligious, literary medium. Jews always used Hebrew in their prayers and religious writings, but this was a revival of Hebrew as a language of novels and poems, polemical articles, and journalistic feuilletons. This development was an anathema to the rabbis who saw in it a desecration of the Holy Tongue.

The origins of this movement are found in ethnically mixed Lithuania and later in Galicia, where the German Kultursprache of the Austrian rulers contended with both Polish and Ukrainian (Ruthenian) nationalism. Secularized, modern Jews began to ask for the origins of their culture, for the roots of their history; to extol the glories of Jerusalem; to ask whether they should not look into their own past just as members of other groups were doing." ^ Peleg 2025 , pp. 256–257. sfn error: no target: CITEREFPeleg2025 ( help ) ^ Harshav 1993 . sfn error: no target: CITEREFHarshav1993 ( help ) ^ Fellman 2011 , p. 7. sfn error: no target: CITEREFFellman2011 ( help ) ^ Blau 1981 , p. 33. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBlau1981 ( help ) ^ Spolsky 2014 , pp. 8. sfn error: no target: CITEREFSpolsky2014 ( help ) ^ The Languages of the Jews: A Sociolinguistic History (Spolsky 2014), p. 251 ^ Ayturk (2010). "From the First Zionist Congress in 1897 up to 1913, the World Zionist Organization ... displayed a lukewarm attitude towards the revival of Hebrew in particular" ^ Kuzar: Hebrew and Zionism: A Discourse Analytic Cultural Study (2001): "The issue of Hebrew became an item on the official national agenda only at the Tenth Zionist Congress in 1911, when the Zionist leader Menakhem Ussishkin conducted an entire session on Hebrew culture in Hebrew." ^ Aytürk 2010 , pp. 60. sfn error: no target: CITEREFAytürk2010 ( help ) ^ Dieckhoff 2003 , pp. 104: "The tenacity with which the followers of Zionism insisted on Hebrew becoming the national language of the Jews of Palestine, despite these objective difficulties, was due above all to a symbolic desire to establish a semblance of continuity between the Jews of yesterday and today. Was not the fact that Ben Gurion apparently spoke the same language as Moses, the best guarantee of legitimacy of Zionism?

In giving the Jewish community a sort of timeless depth in this way, the Hebrew language seemed to be the ideal vector for fashioning the nation and creating an 'imagined community'..." ^ Johnson, Paul (14 September 1988). A History of the Jews . HarperCollins . p. 442. ISBN 9780060915339 . ^ Rabkin 2006 . ^ "Gems in Israel-Zichron Ya'acov" . Gems in Israel . Archived from the original on 27 August 2008 . Retrieved 26 January 2008 . ^ Rosenthal 1906 , p. 549. ^ Electronic Jewish Encyclopedia 1988 , pp. 75–79. ^ Petrovsky-Shtern 2008 . ^ Kopylovsky, G. S. "K istorii natsional'nogo voprosa v Rossii" К истории национального вопроса в России . Russian Committee in defense of the human rights (in Russian). Archived from the original on 19 August 2025. ^ "AXT: Russia" . Archived from the original on 20 November 2008. ^ Chorbajian & Shirinian 1999 , p. 237. ^ Sela 2002 . ^ a b c Shafir 1996 . ^ Shafir 1996 , pp. 243–244. ^ Morris 1999 , Palestine on the Eve. ^ Gorny 1987 , The Overt Question, 1882–1917. ^ Dieckhoff 2003 , p. 50. ^ Shapira 2012 , p. 29. ^ Shapira 2014 , p. 32-33. ^ Morris 2001 , p. 47. ^ Rosenthal & Rosenthal 1906 , p. 512. ^ Pasachoff & Littman 2005 , pp. 236–237. ^ Zipperstein 2018 , pp. 180–182. ^ a b Zipperstein 2018 , Chapter 5. ^ Pasachoff & Littman 2005 , pp. 237–238. ^ Cohn 2001 , chapter 3. ^ Glock & Quinley 1983 , p. 168. ^ Singerman 1981 , p. 49. ^ Cohn 2001 , p. 74. ^ Vital 1999 , pp. 140–141. ^ Klier & Lambroza 1992 , pp. 224–226. ^ Nedava 1972 , Chapter 3. ^ "Alfred Dreyfus and the "Dreyfus Affair" " . Holocaust Encyclopedia . United States Holocaust Memorial Museum . Archived from the original on 29 September 2025 . Retrieved 27 November 2025 . ^ a b Cohn 1970 , p. 103. ^ Mayorek 1994 , pp. 88–89. ^ Morris 2001 , pp. 20–21. ^ Mayorek 1994 , pp. 86–87. ^ Eylon 2025 , pp. 202–203. ^ " Altneuland - Part One - An Educated, Desperate Young Man" . Archived from the original on 27 October 2007 . Retrieved 21 January 2008 . ^ Engel 2008 , p. 48 . ^ Dieckhoff 2003 , p. 39 . ^ Arendt 1978 , Der Judenstaat 50 years later. ^ a b Masalha 2014 , Introduction. ^ Cleveland & Bunton 2024 , p. 187: "Notwithstanding the growing participation of East European Jewry in Zionist activities, Herzl recognised that the movement would not succeed until it secured the diplomatic support of a Great Power and the financial assistance of members of the Western Jewish community." ^ Morris 1999 , p. 23. ^ Murphy 2005 , p. 275. ^ Sethi 2007 . ^ Masalha 2018 . ^ "Anglo-palestine Bank Takes over Work of Jewish Colonial Trust" . Jewish Telegraphic Agency . Archived from the original on 12 February 2026 . Retrieved 21 April 2026 . ^ Nahon, S. U. (1947).

The Jubilee of the first Zionist Congress, 1897–1947 . Jerusalem: Executive of the Zionist Organization. p. 66. Archived from the original on 11 May 2019. Published simultaneously in Hebrew, French, Spanish and Yiddish. ^ Brenner 2020 , p. 89: "What was a "national home"?

The truth is that nobody really knew. This formula reached back to the First Zionist Congress, when "a publicly and legally assured home in Palestine" became the central demand of Herzl's new movement. Even then it was not clear if this meant an independent state or a cooperative as in Herzl's "Society of the Jews," a spiritual center as envisioned by Ahad Ha'am and his followers or an autonomous region within a multi-national empire based on the Habsburg monarchy." ^ Kedar 2002 , p. 120: "The Zionists argued whether to fight for a sovereign state in Palestine first (as some of the General-Zionists and later the Revisionists demanded) or to concentrate on a Jewish socio economic infrastructure. Others questioned whether a Jewish sovereign state should be Zionism's final goal or an alternative type of polity was preferable.

As opposed to the "statists" who favored of sovereign statehood, some Zionists advocated an autonomous Jewish canton affiliated either with the Ottoman or British Empire, or in alliance within a future Middle-Eastern federation or confederation. Still others endorsed the vague concept of a Jewish "Homeland" or "National Home" that would flourish under the aegis of the British Empire.

In sum, Zionists not only lacked a Hebrew rendering for the terms "state", "commonwealth", "republic" and "polity", but were also divided upon the type of polity they wished to create in Palestine. Only in 1942, at the Biltmore Conference in New York, did the Zionist Movement finally abandon the ambiguous concepts of "National Home" and "Homeland," officially declare Jewish statehood as its ultimate goal, and adopt the word "medinah" as Zionism's formal rendering for "state"." ^ Laqueur 2009 : "Up to the 1930s the Zionist movement had no clear idea about its final aim. Herzl proclaimed that a Jewish state was a world necessity. But later he and his successors mentioned the state only infrequently, partly for tactical reasons, mainly because they had no clear concept as to how a state would come into being. Two generations of Zionist leaders, from Herzl to Weizmann, believed that Palestine would at some fairly distant date become Jewish without the use of violence or guile, as the result of steady immigration and settlement, of quiet and patient work.

The idea that a state was the normal form of existence for a people and that it was an immediate necessity was preached by Jabotinsky in the 1930s. But he was at the time almost alone in voicing this demand. It took the advent of Nazism, the holocaust and total Arab rejection of the national home to convert the Zionist movement to the belief in statehood." ^ Smith 2001 , p. 55. ^ "The Basle Program: Resolutions of the First Zionist Congress" . mideastweb.org . 30 August 1897. Archived from the original on 16 May 2023. ^ Gorny 2006a , pp. 41–42: "The idea of national autonomy within a federative state structure was related to the tradition of political liberalism and, especially, Eastern and Central European social democracy. They were brought to Palestine by members of Po'alei Tsiyyon who settled in the country during the Second Aliya years and found expression in the early writings of Ber (Dov) Borochov. However, the ideas had been publicized first in the Ottoman era, in a "Manifesto" put out by four socialist parties, including Po'alei Tsiyyon, during the first Balkan War (1912)...

Following the traditional attitudes of social democracy on the eve of World War I, the authors expressed staunch opposition to the partitioning of the Ottoman Empire into independent nation-states. Instead, they proposed a federative political structure, based on national autonomy, that would preserve the integrity of the state and satisfy just national aspirations as well." ^ Penslar 2023 , p. 47: "Initially, Statist Zionism did not necessarily demand a sovereign state for Jews in Palestine.

The ZO's Basel Program, affirmed at the First Zionist Congress in 1897, called for a Jewish "national home, secured by public law," not a state. Herzl himself was willing to accept alternate arrangements for Palestine, such as a designated Jewish province of the Ottoman Empire or a Great Power protectorate..." ^ Shumsky 2018 , pp. 79–80: "It is extremely important to realize the fact that Herzl's clear misgivings about the separatist Greek model of a unitary linguistic-cultural nation-state in no way contradicts the contents of The Jewish State or of the term Judenstaat . Indeed, most of the neighboring non-Jewish national movements of the Habsburg imperial space in Herzl's time used the term Staat with explicitly substatist intentions in their national political programs and positions... Herzl clearly states that Altneuland is a district of the Ottoman Empire, just as the Transylvania envisioned by Popovici and the Czech lands envisioned even by the radical Czech nationalists were imagined as districts of the Habsburg Empire." p. 152: "During the imperial period, as we saw in his programmatic 1909 article "The New Turkey and Our Chances," Jabotinsky considered the term "state" to be totally irrelevant to Zionism's political purpose, whose realization he envisioned as part of a wider sovereign-political framework in the form of an autonomous district in a federative Ottoman nationalities state." p. 173: "it is well-known that shortly after immigrating to Palestine (1906), and particularly on the eve of and during World War I, Ben-Gurion, along with his friend and Poalei Zion party comrade Yitzchak Ben-Zvi, clearly espoused the political vision in favor of turning Palestine into a Jewish national district under an Ottoman nationalities state" ^ Brenner 2020 , p. 93: "Even for David Ben- Gurion, the emerging leader of the Yishuv (the Jewish population in Palestine), an independent Jewish state was by no means his only future vision during the 1920s...

In a speech to the Assembly of Representatives of Palestine's Jewish community in 1926, he stressed that there could not be a single legal system in a territory with so many different national and religious groups as Palestine. He demanded far-reaching autonomy for all groups and a decentralized government. Ben-Gurion and other Labor leaders drafted several proposals for a future Jewish society based on autonomous rights for both the Jewish and the Arab communities, and they developed federalist plans for the region as well" pp. 111–112: "Jabotinsky never doubted the necessity of granting Arabs equal rights in a future Jewish state and, throughout almost his entire life, he opposed plans to expel them from their native lands. His agenda called for both individual and collective rights for the Arab population...

In 1918 he wrote an unpublished treatise, over 100 pages in length, suggesting a bi-national administration of Palestine, and in 1922 presented a federalist proposal for a Middle Eastern federation consisting of Muslim (Syrian and Mesopotamian), Muslim- Christian (Lebanese), and Jewish (Palestinian) cantons, each with a high degree of autonomy. A year later he presented another federation plan together with Chaim Weizmann." Gorny 2006a , pp. 51–54 Chaim 2008 , p. 54: "At the beginning of the 1920s, even Ze'ev Jabotinsky, the founder of the right‐wing Revisionist faction within Zionism, still spoke in terms of a binational "Jewish‐Arab federation."" Shumsky 2018 , p. 200: "Ben-Gurion was not the only figure in the Mandate-era Zionist Labor movement who spoke in autonomist terms about the Jewish nation's self-determination in Palestine. Berl Katznelson, the ideological mainstay of the Zionist Labor movement, gave a long political lecture in the Third Mapai Congress, February 5–8, 1931, only days before the MacDonald Letter was published, in which he argued that Zionism must work toward an equitable model of joint binational sovereignty in Palestine, and to do so as a matter of principle." ^ Laqueur 2009 : "The bi-national solution (parity), advocated by the Zionist movement in a half-hearted way in the 1920s and, with more enthusiasm, by some minority groups, would have been in every respect a better solution for the Palestine problem. It would have been a guarantee for the peaceful development of the country. But it was based on the unrealistic assumption that Arab agreement could be obtained. Bi-nationalism and parity were utterly rejected by the Arabs, who saw no good reason for any compromise as far as the Arab character of Palestine was concerned. They were not willing to accept the yishuv as it existed in the 1920s and 1930s, let alone permit more Jewish immigration and settlement. They feared that a further influx of Jews would eventually reduce the Arabs to minority status in Palestine." ^ Stewart 1974 , p. 18. ^ Alroey 2011 , p. 5: " Herzl further sharpened the issue when he tried to make diplomacy precede settlement, precluding any possibility of preemptive and unplanned settlement in the Land of Israel: "Should the powers show themselves willing to grant us sovereignty over a neutral land, then the Society will enter into negotiations for the possession of this land. Here two regions come to mind: Palestine and Argentina. Significant experiments in colonization have been made in both countries, though on the mistaken principle of gradual infiltration of Jews. Infiltration is bound to end badly." Rovner 2014 , p. 45: "European Jews swayed and prayed for Zion for nearly two millennia, and by the end of the nineteenth century their descendants had transformed liturgical longing into a political movement to create a Jewish national entity somewhere in the world. Zionism's prophet, Theodor Herzl, considered Argentina, Cyprus, Mesopotamia, Mozambique, and the Sinai Peninsula as potential Jewish homelands. It took nearly a decade for Zionism to exclusively concentrate its spiritual yearning on the spatial coordinates of Ottoman Palestine." ^ Aviv & Shneer 2005 , p. 10 . ^ Pasachoff & Littman 2005 , pp. 240–241. ^ Hazony 2000 , p. 150: "Recalling his views when he had written "The Jewish State" eight years earlier, he pointed out that at the time, he had openly been willing to consider building on Baron de Hirsch's beginning and establishing the Jewish state in Argentina. But those days were long gone." ^ Friedman 2021 , pp. 239–240. ^ Herzl 1896 , p. 29 (31). ^ Shapira 2012 , p. 23. ^ Hazony 2000 , p. 369: "Herzl decided to explore the East Africa proposal in the wake of the pogrom, writing to Nordau: "We must give an answer to Kishinev, and this is the only one...We must, in a word, play the politics of the hour."" ^ Aviv & Shneer 2005 , p. 10. ^ Weissbrod 2014 , p. 13. ^ Pasachoff & Littman 2005 , p. 242. ^ Rovner 2014 , p. 81: "On the afternoon of the fourth day of the Congress a weary Nordau brought three resolutions before the delegates: (1) that the Zionist Organization direct all future settlement efforts solely to Palestine; (2) that the Zionist Organization thank the British government for its other of an autonomous territory in East Africa; and (3) that only those Jews who declare their allegiance to the Basel Program may become members of the Zionist Organization." Zangwill objected...

When Nordau insisted on the Congress's right to pass the resolutions regardless, Zangwill was outraged. "You will be charged before the bar of history," he challenged Nordau...

From approximately 1:30 p.m. on Sunday, July 30, 1905, a Zionist would henceforth he defined as someone who adhered to the Basel Program and the only "authentic interpretation" of that program restricted settlement activity exclusively to Palestine. Zangwill and his supporters could not accept Nordau's "authentic interpretation" which they believed would lead to an abandonment of the Jewish masses and of Herzl's vision. One territorialist claimed that Ussishkin's voting bloc had in fact "buried political Zionism"." ^ Almagor 2024 , p. 226. ^ Almagor 2024 , p. 229. ^ Almagor 2023 . ^ Pasachoff & Littman 2005 , pp. 240–242. ^ Epstein 2016 , p. 97. ^ Mendes-Flohr & Reinharz 1995 , p. 552. ^ Ėstraĭkh 2005 , p. 30. ^ Hagopian 2016 , pp. 700–701. ^ Gottheil 1906 , p. 684. ^ Pappé 2004 , Chapter 2. ^ Morris 1999 , p. 37: "The fear of territorial displacement and dispossession was to be the chief motor of Arab antagonism to Zionism down to 1948 (and indeed after 1967 as well)." ^ Morris 1999 , Conclusions. ^ a b c Pappé 2004 , The Arrival of Zionism. ^ Quigley 2005 , pp. 4–7. ^ Anderson 2013 , p. 84. ^ Khalidi 2010 , p. 102. ^ Morris 1999 , pp. 20–24. ^ Masalha 2012 , p. 70. ^ Karsh 2009 , p. 12. ^ Morris 2008 , p. 1. ^ Manna 2022 , pp. 2 ("the principal objective of the Zionist leadership to keep as few Arabs as possible in the Jewish state"), 4 ("in the 1948 war, when it became clear that the objective that enjoyed the unanimous support of Zionists of all inclinations was to establish a Jewish state with the smallest possible number of Palestinians"), and 33 ("The Zionists had two cherished objectives: fewer Arabs in the country and more land in the hands of the settlers.") Khalidi 2020 , p. 76: "The Nakba represented a watershed in the history of Palestine and the Middle East. It transformed most of Palestine from what it had been for well over a millennium—a majority Arab country—into a new state that had a substantial Jewish majority. This transformation was the result of two processes: the systematic ethnic cleansing of the Arab-inhabited areas of the country seized during the war; and the theft of Palestinian land and property left behind by the refugees as well as much of that owned by those Arabs who remained in Israel. There would have been no other way to achieve a Jewish majority, the explicit aim of political Zionism from its inception. Nor would it have been possible to dominate the country without the seizures of land." Slater 2020 , pp. 49 ("There were three arguments for the moral acceptability of some form of transfer.

The main one—certainly for the Zionists but not only for them—was the alleged necessity of establishing a secure and stable Jewish state in as much of Palestine as was feasible, which was understood to require a large Jewish majority."), 81 ("From the outset of the Zionist movement all the major leaders wanted as few Arabs as possible in a Jewish state"), 87 ("The Zionist movement in general and David Ben-Gurion in particular had long sought to establish a Jewish state in all of "Palestine," which in their view included the West Bank, Gaza, and parts of Jordan, Lebanon, and Syria."), and 92 ("As Israeli historian Shlomo Sand wrote: 'During every round of the national conflict over Palestine, which is the longest running conflict of its kind in the modern era, Zionism has tried to appropriate additional territory.'") Segev 2019 , p. 418, "the Zionist dream from the start—maximum territory, minimum Arabs" Cohen 2017 , p. 78, "As was suggested by Masalha (1992), Morris (1987), and other scholars, many preferred a state without Arabs or with as small a minority as possible, and plans for population transfers were considered by Zionist leaders and activists for years." Lustick & Berkman 2017 , pp. 47–48, "As Ben-Gurion told one Palestinian leader in the early 1930s, 'Our final goal is the independence of the Jewish people in Palestine, on both sides of the Jordan River, not as a minority, but as a community numbering millions" (Teveth 1985:130). Ipso facto , this meant Zionism's success would produce an Arab minority in Palestine, no matter what its geographical dimensions." Stanislawski 2017 , p. 65, "The upper classes of Palestinian society quickly fled the fight to places of safety within the Arab world and outside of it; the lower classes were caught between the Israeli desire to have as few Arabs as possible remaining in their new state and the Palestinians' desire to remain on the lands they regarded as their ancient national patrimony." Finkelstein 2016 , Ch. 1 ("Justifying the Zionist Enterprise"), "Zionism's claim to the whole of Palestine not only precluded a modus vivendi based on partition with the indigenous Arab population, it called into question any Arab presence in Palestine." Rouhana & Sabbagh-Khoury 2015 , p. 6, "It was obvious to most approaches within the Zionist movement—certainly to the mainstream as represented by Labor Zionism and its leadership headed by Ben Gurion, that a Jewish state would entail getting rid of as many of the Palestinian inhabitants of the land as possible ...

Following Wolfe, we argue that the logic of demographic elimination is an inherent component of the Zionist project as a settler-colonial project, although it has taken different manifestations since the founding of the Zionist movement." ^ Engel 2013 , pp. 96 ("From the outset Zionism had been the activity of a loose coalition of individuals and groups united by a common desire to increase the Jewish population of Palestine ..."), 121 ("... the ZO sought ways to expand the territory a partitioned Jewish state might eventually receive ... Haganah undertook to ensconce small groups of Jews in parts of Palestine formerly beyond their sights ... their leaders had hoped for more expansive borders ..."), and 138 ("The prospect that Israel would have only the barest Jewish majority thus loomed large in the imagination of the state's leaders. To be sure, until the late 1930s most Zionists would have been delighted with any majority, no matter how slim; the thought that Jews in Palestine would ever be more numerous than Arabs appeared a distant vision. But in 1937 the Peel Commission had suggested ... to leave both the Jewish state and Arab Palestine with the smallest possible minorities. That suggestion had fired Zionist imaginations; now it was possible to think of a future state as 'Jewish' not only by international recognition of the right of Jews to dominate its government but by the inclinations of virtually all of its inhabitants. Such was how the bulk of the Zionist leadership understood the optimal 'Jewish state' in 1948: non-Jews (especially Arabs) might live in it and enjoy all rights of citizenship, but their numbers should be small enough compared to the Jewish population that their impact on public life would be minimal. Israel's leaders were thus not sad at all to see so many Arabs leave its borders during the fighting in 1947–48 ... the 150,000 who remained on Israeli territory seemed to many to constitute an unacceptably high proportion relative to the 650,000 Jews in the country when the state came into being. This perception not only dictated Israel's adamant opposition to the return of Arab refugees, it reinforced the imperative to bring as many new Jewish immigrants into the country as possible, as quickly as possible, no matter how great or small their prospects for becoming the sort of 'new Jews' the state esteemed most.") Masalha 2012 , p. 38, "From the late nineteenth century and throughout the Mandatory period the demographic and land policies of the Zionist Yishuv in Palestine continued to evolve. But its demographic and land battles with the indigenous inhabitants of Palestine were always a battle for 'maximum land and minimum Arabs' (Masalha 1992, 1997, 2000)." Lentin 2010 , p. 7, "'the Zionist leadership was always determined to increase the Jewish space ... Both land purchases in and around the villages, and military preparations, were all designed to dispossess the Palestinians from the area of the future Jewish state' (Pappe 2008: 94)." Shlaim 2009 , p. 56, "That most Zionist leaders wanted the largest possible Jewish state in Palestine with as few Arabs inside it as possible is hardly open to question." Ben-Ami 2007 , p. 50, "The ethos of Zionism was twofold; it was about demography–ingathering the exiles in a viable Jewish state with as small an Arab minority as possible–and land." Pappé 2006 , p. 250, "In other words, hitkansut is the core of Zionism in a slightly different garb: to take over as much of Palestine as possible with as few Palestinians as possible." Morris 2004 , p. 588, "But the displacement of Arabs from Palestine or from the areas of Palestine that would become the Jewish State was inherent in Zionist ideology and, in microcosm, in Zionist praxis from the start of the enterprise.

The piecemeal eviction of tenant farmers, albeit in relatively small numbers, during the first five decades of Zionist land purchase and settlement naturally stemmed from, and in a sense hinted at, the underlying thrust of the ideology, which was to turn an Arab-populated land into a State with an overwhelming Jewish majority." Morris 2001 , pp. 676–682, "Zionism was a colonizing and expansionist ideology and movement ... Zionist ideology and practice were necessarily and elementally expansionist ... Zionism was politically expansionist in the sense that from the start, its aim was to turn all of Palestine (and in the movement's pre-1921 maps, the East Bank of the Jordan and the area south of the Litani River as well) into a Jewish state ...

The Zionists were intent on politically, or even physically, dispossessing and supplanting the Arabs; their enterprise, however justified in terms of Jewish suffering and desperation, was tainted by a measure of moral dubiousness ... Zionism had always looked to the day when a Jewish majority would enable the movement to gain control over the country ... Palestine would not be transformed into a Jewish state unless all or much of the Arab population was expelled." ^ Morris 1999 , p. 35-40. ^ Gorny 1987 , p. 3. ^ Shafir 1996 , "Conquest of Labor". ^ Wylen 2000 , p. 356: "Most Orthodox Jews originally rejected Zionism because they believed the Jews must await the Messiah to restore them to nationhood." ^ Wylen 2000 , p. 356: "Reform Jews originally rejected Zionism as inconsistent with the acceptance of Jewish citizenship in the Diaspora." ^ Taylor 1972 , p. 41. ^ a b Fraenkel 2007 . ^ "Louis D. Brandeis and American Zionism" . American Jewish Historical Society . Archived from the original on 18 May 2008 . Retrieved 13 June 2010 . ^ Reinharz 1993 , Chapters 3–4. ^ Roberts 2017 . ^ Stefon 2012 , p. 151. ^ Taylor 1974 , pp. 86–87; Jeffery 1982 , p. 1032; Ellman 2007 , pp. 870–871; Thompson 2019 ; Goldstein 1986 , p. 547 ^ Goldstein 1986 , p. 546. ^ Goldstein 1986 , pp. 553–554. ^ a b Waxman 1987 , p. 190. ^ Shapira 2021 . ^ Goldstein 1986 , pp. 549–550. ^ Britannica Encyclopedia of World Religions . Encyclopædia Britannica . 2006. pp. 305– 306. ISBN 978-1-59339-491-2 . ^ Wiemer 1987 , pp. 175–176. ^ Goldstein 1986 , p. 555. ^ Reinharz 1993 , p. 10. ^ Shlaim 2001 , p. 5. ^ Reinharz 1993 , Chapter 2. ^ Johnson 2015 . ^ a b Katz 2018 , pp. 247–248. ^ Zavadivker 2016 , pp. 91–92. ^ Zavadivker 2016 , p. 92. ^ Levin 1988 , pp. 28–29. ^ a b c Shapira 2012 , p. 67. ^ Shapira 2012 , pp. 67–68. ^ a b Shapira 2012 , p. 68. ^ Shapira 2012 , p. 69. ^ Shapira 2012 , pp. 69–70. ^ Teveth 1985 , pp. 25, 26. ^ Tauber 2014 , pp. 80–81. ^ Kattan 2009 , p. 101. ^ Muslih 1988 , Chapter 3. ^ Porath 2015 , Introduction. ^ a b Anderson 2013 , p. 297. ^ Anderson 2013 , pp. 301–303. ^ Anderson 2013 , p. 304. ^ Montagu 1917 . ^ Hitchens 2004 , p. 327. ^ "100 years of the Balfour Declaration and its impact on the Palestinian People" . Question of Palestine . 2 November 2017. Archived from the original on 2 September 2025 . Retrieved 9 September 2025 . ^ Shapira 2014 , The Balfour Declaration. ^ Pappé 2004 , Palestine in the First World War. ^ Goldman 2009 , p. 133. ^ Masalha 2018 , Chapter 10. ^ Shapira 2014 , pp. 70–71. ^ Roy 2016 , pp. 33–35. ^ Flapan 1979 , p. 18 . ^ Shlaim 2014 , pp. 9–10: "In the period 1918–20 the Zionists put forward their own maximalist interpretation of the Balfour Declaration. They wanted international recognition of the Jewish claim to Palestine, and they wanted the Jewish national home to stretch across both banks of the river Jordan.

When Weizmann was asked at the Paris peace conference what was meant by a Jewish national home, he famously replied, "To make Palestine as Jewish as England is English." He was careful, however, not to speak openly in terms of a state, so as not to give substance to the charge that the Jewish minority planned to make itself master over the Arab majority.

Although a Jewish state with a Jewish majority was his ultimate and unchanging aim, he believed in working toward this goal in a gradual, evolutionary, and nonprovocative fashion." ^ a b c Shlaim 2001 . ^ Flapan 1979 , p. 20 : "The importance of analysing Weizmann's strategy derives from the fact that the assumptions on which they were based were, with slight modifications, adopted by Ben-Gurion and his successors. If one substitutes 'United States' for 'Great Britain' and the 'Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan' for the 'Arab National Movement', Weizmann's basic strategic concepts might be taken as descriptive of Israel's present foreign policy." ^ a b Sharif 1977 , p. 89. ^ Suny, Ronald Grigor (2011).

The Soviet Experiment . Oxford University Press . pp. 63– 67. ^ McGeever 2019 , p. 158. ^ Levin 1988 , p. 43. ^ a b Gitelman 2001 , pp. 60–61, 64. ^ Gitelman 2001 , pp. 72–74. ^ Nedava 1972 , Chapter 7. ^ Kolatt 2006 , p. 19. ^ Schulman 2003 , pp. 5–6. ^ Kolatt 2006 , pp. 32–33. ^ Levin 1988 , p. 103. ^ Levin 1988 , p. 114. ^ Levin 1988 , Chapter 9. ^ Veidlinger 2014 . ^ "Beyond the Pale: Jewish Life Between the Wars II" . www.friends-partners.org . Archived from the original on 22 December 2008 . Retrieved 10 March 2010 . ^ Tolts 2004 , p. 51. ^ a b Anderson 2013 , p. 489. ^ United Nations 1979 , p. 17. ^ Ovendale 2015 , pp. 51– . ^ Quigley 2021 , p. 181. ^ a b Crane & King 1919 , p. 794. ^ United Nations 1979 , p. 17: "… serious modification of the extreme Zionist programme for Palestine of unlimited immigration of Jews, looking finally to making Palestine distinctly a Jewish State…". ^ Costa 2026 . ^ Hill 2005b , p. 472. ^ Mahler & Hadi 2025 . ^ Gilbert 1991 , pp. 431–432. ^ United Nations 1979 , p. 22. ^ Kedourie & Haim 2015 , pp. 22–. ^ Huneidi 2001 , p. 58. ^ Slater 2020 : "In short, the Iron Wall concept—together with the premises, values, and historical myths that underlie it—has been and still is the dominant political and military strategy of Zionism. Summarizing its consequences, Flapan wrote that Jabotinsky "left an indelible mark on the Zionist attitudes towards the Arab question"" ^ Cohen 2017 : "Combined with the justification for using force to impose Zionism's minimum requirements, Jabotinsky's practical proposal for coercive pedagogy quickly filled the void that was Zionism's official policy on the Arab question." ^ Shlaim 2001 : "Jabotinsky never wavered in his conviction that Jewish military power was the key factor in the struggle for a state. It was the Labor Zionists who gradually came around to his point of view without openly admitting it. So in the final analysis the gap was not all that great: Labor leaders, too, came to rely increasingly on the strategy of the iron wall... all Israeli governments, regardless of their political color, have adopted the first stage of the strategy of the iron wall—to impose their presence unilaterally on their neighbors... Despair was expected to promote pragmatism on the other side and thus to prepare the ground for the second stage of the strategy: negotiations with the local Arabs about their status and national rights in Palestine.

In other words, Jewish military strength was to pave the way to a political settlement with the Palestinian national movement..." Gorny 1987 , p. 176: "From the outset, Zionism sought to employ Jewish force in order to realize national aspirations. This force consisted primarily of the collective ability to rebuild a national home in Palestine. It also included the organization and education of the people and recruitment of Jewish funds and military means of defending the Yishuv.

The ha-Shomer organization fulfilled this last task in the Second Aliyah and its continuation was the Hagana set up by Ahdut ha-'Avodah in 1919 and adopted by the Histadrut a year later. Thus, Revisionism's campaign for a Jewish military force in Palestine was innovative only in that it viewed the implementation of Zionism as conditional on the existence of such a force." Morris 2001 : "The Revisionists found support for their belief that Zionism would win through only with military force.

The binationalists saw in the violence "proof" that conciliation had to be achieved quickly, before the Arab majority overwhelmed the Yishuv.

The socialist mainstream—now represented by Mapai (Mifleget Poalei Eretz Yisrael—the Land of Israel Workers Party), established in 1930 with the amalgamation of Achdut HaAvodah and HaPoel HaZair—was obliged at last to admit that there existed a Palestinian-Arab nationalist movement, and that the Yishuv was not merely confronting a group of bloodthirsty fanatics or incited hooligans.42 The natural consequence was the growing appreciation, expounded by Chaim Arlosoroff, the director of the Jewish Agency's Political Department from 1931 until 1933, that Zionism would have to use force to achieve its aims.43 After Arlosoroff was murdered by unknown assailants in Tel Aviv in 1933, Ben-Gurion met repeatedly with Musa al-Alami, a PAE member, and argued that Zionism would develop the country to the benefit of both peoples. Al-Alami replied that he would rather have the country remain desolate for a hundred years than see Zionism succeed.44 These contacts came to naught, and the stage was set for the outbreak of the Arab revolt." Shapira 1992 : "The romanticism of the use of force, a feature that had characterized Zionism in its early period, gave way to a down-to-earth political attitude: Force was conceptualized, coolheadedly and soberly, as one of a gamut of means utilized by a political movement seriously intent on realizing its objectives... Up until World War II, the Zionist leadership had viewed physical power as a tool designed to provide an answer to the challenge of Arab militancy. They regarded it as a means to curb and prevent Arab action but not as a way to advance Jewish initiatives or to create new facts. There was already a certain ambivalence in this matter at the time of the Arab Rebellion.

The ascent to Hanita and its settlement could not have taken place without the threat of force by the Jews.

In other words, in this instance, force also created facts on the ground." Finkelstein 2016 : "The 'defensive ethos' was never the operative ideology of mainstream Zionism.

From beginning to end, Zionism was a conquest movement.

The subtitle of Shapira's study is 'The Zionist Resort to Force'. Yet, Zionism did not 'resort' to force. Force was – to use Shapira's apt phrase in her conclusion – 'inherent in the situation' (p. 357). Gripped by messianism after the issuance of the Balfour Declaration, the Zionist movement sought to conquer Palestine with a Jewish Legion under the slogan 'In blood and fire shall Judea rise again' (pp. 83–98).

When these apocalyptic hopes were dispelled and displaced by the mundane reality of the British Mandate, mainstream Zionism made a virtue of necessity and exalted labor as it proceeded to conquer Palestine 'dunum by dunum, goat by goat'. Force had not been abandoned, however. Shapira falsely counterposes settlement ('by virtue of labor') to force ('by dint of conquest'). Yet, settlement was force by other means. Its purpose, in Shapira's words, was to build a 'Jewish infrastructure in Palestine' so that 'the balance of power between Jews and Arabs had shifted in favor of the former' (pp. 121, 133; cf. p. 211). To the call of a Zionist leader on the morrow of Tel Hai that 'we must be a force in the land', Shapira adds the caveat: 'He was not referring to military might but, rather, to power in the sense of demography and colonization' (p. 113). Yet, Shapira willfully misses the basic point that 'demography and colonization' were equally force. Moreover, without the 'foreign bayonets' of the British Mandate, the Zionist movement could not have established even a toehold, let alone struck deep roots, in Palestine.51 Toward the end of the 1930s and especially after World War II, a concatenation of events – Britain's waning commitment to the Balfour Declaration, the escalation of Arab resistance, the strengthening of the Yishuv, etc. – caused a consensus to crystallize within the Zionist movement that the time was ripe to return to the original strategy of conquering Palestine 'by blood and fire'." ^ Smith 2001 , p. 80. ^ Allawi 2014 , p. 189. ^ Allawi 2014 , pp. 214–215. ^ "Statement of the Zionist Organization regarding Palestine" . Archived from the original on 12 February 2007 . Retrieved 15 November 2011 . , retrieved 14 November 2011 ^ Statement of the Zionist Organization Regarding Palestine , MidEast Web, accessed 17 August 2006. ^ Letter by Emir Feisal to Felix Frankfurter , published in full at amislam.com (collection of correspondence). ^ Seldon 1919 . ^ "Letter of reply from Felix Frankfurter to Emir Feisal" . 5 March 1919. Archived from the original on 23 April 2026 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ Gorny 1987 , p. 81. ^ Porath 1974 , Chapter 2. ^ a b Reinharz 1993 , p. 359. ^ "The Palestine Mandate" . Avalon Project . Yale Law School . Archived from the original on 2 March 2026. ^ Khalidi 2020 , pp. 37–40. ^ Gorny 1987 , p. 82. ^ Gorny 1987 , pp. 81–96. ^ a b c d Khalidi 2020 , Chapter 1. ^ Hadi 2007 , pp. 97–98. ^ Gorny 2006b , pp. 85–86, 95. ^ https://www.bjpa.org/search-results/publication/18204 pages 5 and 6 ^ https://www.bjpa.org/content/upload/bjpa/reso/RESOLUTIONS%20OF%20THE%2018TH%20ZIONIST%20CONGRESS%20PRAGUE%20AUGUST%2021ST%20TO%20SEPT%203RD,%201933.pdf page 6 ^ https://www.bjpa.org/content/upload/bjpa/reso/RESOLUTIONS%20OF%20THE%2018TH%20ZIONIST%20CONGRESS%20PRAGUE%20AUGUST%2021ST%20TO%20SEPT%203RD,%201933.pdf pages 5 and 6 ^ Dieckhoff 2003 , pp. 7–8, 42. ^ Shamir 2000 , p. x. ^ Halamish 2021 , p. 46. ^ Elazari-Volcani 1932 , p. 84. ^ Sternhell 1999 , Introduction. ^ Shimoni 1995 , p. 201: "The Histadrut is not a trade union, not a political party, not a cooperative society, nor is it a mutual aid association, although it does engage in trade union activity, in politics, cooperative organization and mutual aid. But it is much more than that.

The Histadrut is a covenant of builders of a homeland, founders of a state, renewers of a nation, builders of an economy, creators of culture, reformers of a society." ^ Cleveland & Bunton 2024 , p. 252. ^ Sternhell 1999 , Ends and Means: The Labor Ideology and the Histadrut. ^ Flapan 1979 , p. 131. ^ Dieckhoff 2003 , p. 91. ^ Sternhell 1999 , p. 219. ^ a b Sternhell 1999 . ^ Dieckhoff 2003 , pp. 89–95. ^ Roy 2016 , p. 38: "The Mandate administration further exacerbated the problems of the Arab producer by pursuing fiscal policies that, in effect, promoted the development of the Jewish capitalist sector at the expense of the Arab noncapitalist sector. First, government expenditure in the five years between 1933 and 1937 was greatest for two single sectors: development and economic services, and defense.

The former referred to the development of infrastructural services and public works—the improvement and construction of railways, roads, bridges, communications, telegraphs, harbors, and airports—which were far more important for capitalist (as opposed to noncapitalist) production, largely the domain of the Jewish sector." ^ a b Roy 2016 , British Government Policies. ^ Washington Robnett 1976 , p. 169. ^ Van Creveld, Martin (1998).

The Sword And The Olive: A Critical History of the Israeli Defence Force . Public Affairs. p. 21. ISBN 978-1586481551 . ^ Puchalski 2018 , p. 88. ^ Zouplna 2008 , pp. 18–19. ^ Smith 2004 , p. 115. ^ JewishVirtualLibrary, BETAR ^ a b Shavit 1988 , pp. 51–52, 383 n.4. ^ "Youth Movements: Betar" . Centenary of Zionism: 1897-1997 . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . 4 August 1998 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . ^ Shavit 1988 , p. 55. ^ Melzer, Emanuel (1997). No Way Out: The Politics of Polish Jewry, 1935–1939 . Hebrew Union College Press . pp. 7, 169. ^ Shapiro 1991 , p. 36. ^ Reinharz, Jehuda (1987). Living With Antisemitism: Modern Jewish Responses . Brandeis University Press . p. 306. ^ Perl 1983 . ^ Shavit 1988 , p. 97. ^ Schmidt 2008 , p. 254; Bell 1979 , pp. 257–258; Whittaker 2012 , p. 29; Kushner 2002 , p. 181 ^ Smith 2004 , p. 115: " formed youth groups (Betar) whose practices, patterned after the tactics and symbols of fascism, included wearing brown shirts and using special salutes." ^ Sachar 2007 , pp. 265–266. ^ "Irgun Zvai Leumi | Jewish right-wing underground movement" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on 22 March 2024 . Retrieved 2 January 2016 . ^ Pope Brewer 1947 . ^ "Irgun's Hand Seen in Alps Rail Blast; Polish Jew Confesses He Was Lookout for Others Who Bombed British Train" .

The New York Times . 16 August 1947. {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ W. Khalidi, 1971, 'From Haven to Conquest', p. 598 ^ Terry 2008 , p. 20. ^ "Jewish Terrorism and Jewish Resistance".

The Jewish Plan for Palestine—Memoranda and Statements presented by The Jewish Agency for Palestine to the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine .

The Jewish Agency for Palestine, Jerusalem. 1947. pp. 20– 26. ^ "Major Political Developments".

The Jewish Plan for Palestine—Memoranda and Statements presented by The Jewish Agency for Palestine to the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine . Jerusalem: Jewish Agency for Palestine . 1947. p. 32. ^ Abrahms 2018 , pp. 44–45, 118–120. ^ Einstein 2007 , p. 350. ^ a b Cleveland & Bunton 2024 , pp. 202–203. ^ Galvin, James (2007).

The Israel-Palestine conflict: One hundred years of war . Cambridge New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 93. ISBN 978-0-521-85289-0 . ^ Pappé 2002 , p. 175. ^ Cleveland & Bunton 2024 , p. 192. ^ Sela 2002 , p. 360. ^ Mitchell 2013 , p. 134. ^ Kohn 1929 , p. 53. ^ Cleveland & Bunton 2024 , p. 193. ^ Ayyad 1999 , pp. 124–125. ^ Flapan 1979 , The Policy of Economic and Social Separation. ^ Flapan 1979 , pp. 19. ^ Roy 2016 , The Economic Transformation of Palestine: Key British and Zionst Policies. ^ Pappé 2004 , p. 93. ^ a b Roy 2016 , p. 33. ^ Khalidi 2020 , p. 44. ^ Gorny 1987 , pp. 243, 251. ^ Shapira 1992 , pp. 247, 249, 251–252, 350, 365. ^ Khalidi 2006 , p. 45. ^ Bazelon 2024 . ^ Morris 2020 . ^ Robson 2017 , pp. 115–116: "The members cited the Greek-Turkish exchange as a model for population exchange: "The courage of the Greek and Turkish statesmen has been justified by the result.

Before the operation the Greek and Turkish minorities had been a constant irritant. Now Greco-Turkish relations are friendlier than they have ever been before."" ^ Katz 1992 , p. 59: "The Commission, however, believed that a secure peace could not be achieved solely by partition and the establishment of a boundary between the two countries.

In its opinion, the attainment of peace would necessitate the implementation of population exchanges and land transfers between the Jewish and Arab states on the model of the Greco-Turkish precedent" ^ Ben-Ami 2007 , p. 25. ^ Flapan 1979 , p. 261: "Ben-Gurion declared unequivocally that sovereignty of the Jewish state, especially in matters of immigration and transfer of Arabs, were the two conditions sine qua non for his agreement to partition." ^ Gorny 1987 , p. 305: "In any event, the idea of a mass transfer did not strike them as morally deplorable at any time, and their hesitations related only to 'its political effectiveness." ^ Morris 1999 , p. 144. ^ Chomsky 1982 . ^ Rubin 2019 , p. 12: "...Jabotinsky also rejected the plan on moral grounds, fiercely opposing the idea of transferring the Arab population from Palestine. Jabotinsky underscored this point in several letters and speeches from 1937, and expanded on it in an article published in the Revisionist Zionist publication Hayarden... Jabotinsky could not have been more clear about his opposition to transferring a single Arab from Palestine. He also argued that the Peel Commission drew the wrong lesson from the Greek–Turkish case. It was not a 'great precedent', as the commission noted in its report, but a tragedy that involved the expulsion of one million Greeks from Turkey." ^ Flapan 1979 , p. 264. ^ Rubin 2019 , p. 15: "...in early 1940...Jabotinsky for the first time publicly proposed expelling Arabs from Palestine, even as he still noted that population transfers was by no means a necessary solution and repeated his promise for minority rights in the future Jewish state." Schechtman 1956 , p. 326: "In his last book... he fully endorsed the idea of a voluntary Arab transfer from Palestine, though still insisting that it was not mandatory since, objectively, "Palestine, astride the Jordan, has room for the million of Arabs, room for another million of their eventual progeny, for several million Jews, and for peace."" Shilon 2021 : "...in his last book, The Jewish War Front, Jabotinsky did not rule out the possibility of population transfer—that is, expulsion of Arabs.

The book was published in 1940, shortly before his death, and was written in the gloomy context of World War II: 'I see no need for this exodus, and it would be undesirable from many perspectives. But if it becomes clear that the Arabs prefer to emigrate, this may be discussed without a trace of sorrow in the heart.'" Segev 2001 , pp. 406–407 ^ Morris 2009 , pp. 349–360. ^ Morris 2001 , p. 140. ^ a b Finkelstein 2016 . ^ Gorny 1987 , pp. 243–245. ^ Gorny 1987 , p. 323: "In the end, all of them accepted partition, less out of inner conviction than because of international pressure and force of national discipline, and in some cases were comforted by the thought that the path to a greater Palestine was still open." ^ Cleveland & Bunton 2024 , p. 199. ^ Morris 2001 , Conclusions. ^ a b Stackelberg 2009 . ^ Nicosia 1989 , p. 386. ^ a b c Nicosia 1985 , pp. 54–55. ^ Horak 1984 , pp. 53–54. ^ Malul 2017 . ^ Morris 1999 , p. 162. ^ Pappé 2004 , p. 107: "A British White Paper of 1939 tried to make provision for Palestinian sensibilities. It repeated the promises made in 1930 of withdrawal from the Balfour Declaration and limits to Jewish immigration and land purchase.

The objective was to maintain the status quo until the situation in Europe was clear.

The limitation on immigration came at a time when Nazi expansion in Europe was making life for Jews there unbearable and impossible.

The Yishuv now waged its own kind of rebellion, a clandestine operation of illegal immigration, land takeover, and formation of a paramilitary organization, helped by sympathetic British officers such as the legendary Orde Wingate." ^ Cleveland & Bunton 2024 , pp. 200–201. ^ Pappé 2004 , p. 118. ^ a b Morris 1999 , p. 167. ^ Gorny 1987 , p. 277. ^ a b Cleveland & Bunton 2024 , p. 201. ^ Pappé 2004 , Palestine in World War II: "This was selective, in which the physically fit and those with the right ideological bent were given priority and, at times, exclusivity. This mode of selection was abandoned for a while when the horrific news of Nazi exterminations reached Palestine around 1942.

The news even prompted the symbolic act of sending Zionist parachutists into Nazi Europe as a gesture of support to the Jews dying in the death camps rather than as a real attempt to save them. Little Zionist energy was invested in saving Jews, as the priority in those difficult days remained the survival of the Jewish community in Palestine." ^ Pappé 2004 , Palestine in World War II. ^ Williams 2006 . ^ Hilberg 1973 , p. 716. ^ Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry . "Appendix IV" . Avalon Project . Yale Law School . Archived from the original on 23 April 2026. ^ a b c Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry 1946 , p. 907. ^ "The continuing decline of Europe's Jewish population" . Pew Research Center . 9 February 2015. Archived from the original on 6 February 2026. ^ Morris 1999 , p. 169. ^ Shlaim 2001 , p. 23: "With this resolution the Zionist movement for the first time openly staked a claim to the whole of mandatory Palestine." ^ "What is a Jewish Partisan?" . Jewish Partisan Education Foundation . Archived from the original on 26 May 2026 . Retrieved 25 June 2026 . ^ Tec 1993 , pp. 47–48. ^ "The Bielski Partisans" . Holocaust Encyclopedia . United States Holocaust Museum . Archived from the original on 14 January 2009 . Retrieved 15 January 2009 . ^ Wdowiński 1985 , p. 222. ^ Johnson 1998 , pp. 21–28. ^ "Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry – Preface" . Avalon Project . Yale Law School . Archived from the original on 7 August 2018 . Retrieved 10 March 2023 . ^ Ravndal 2010 , p. 417. ^ "PALESTINE CONFERENCE (GOVERNMENT POLICY) (Hansard, 18 February 1947)" . api.parliament.uk . 18 February 1947. Archived from the original on 16 June 2026 . Retrieved 21 April 2026 . ^ "A Decade of American Foreign Policy 1941–1949: Attitude of American Government Toward Palestine" . Avalon Project . Yale Law School . Archived from the original on 8 September 2025. ^ "VI". Survey of Palestine (Report). Vol. I. 1946. p. 141. and Supplement to Survey of Palestine (Report). 1947. p. 10. ^ accessed Nov 2007 Archived 2008-02-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ Flight and Rescue: Brichah , written by Yehuda Bauer, published by Random House; New York, 1970 ^ A. Kochavi, Post-Holocaust Politics: Britain, the United States and Jewish Refugees 1945–1948 (Chapel-Hill: University of North Carolina Press 2001), D. Ofer, Escaping the Holocaust, Illegal Immigration to the Land of Israel, 1939–1944 (New York: Oxford University Press 1990), J & D Kimche, The Secret Roads: The Illegal Migration of a People 1938–1948 (London: Secker & Warburg 1954) ^ Brenner 1965 , p. 26. ^ The Times , "Zionists at Basle" 9/12/1946 p. 3 ^ McConaghy 2021 , p. 482. ^ Morris 1999 , p. 174. ^ "Establishment of UN Special Committee on Palestine (UNSCOP)" . United Nations . 15 May 1947. Archived from the original on 27 May 2024 . Retrieved 18 February 2025 . ^ Cleveland & Bunton 2024 , p. 203. ^ Pappé 2004 , p. 118-119. ^ Morris 1999 , p. 148. ^ a b Morris 1999 , pp. 196–197. ^ Pappé 2004 , p. 127. ^ Pappé 2004 , pp. 118–119. ^ Pappé 2004 , p. 120. ^ Morris 2004 , pp. 592–593: "In early March, the prospect of pan-Arab invasion gave rise to Plan D. It accorded the Haganah brigade and battalion-level commanders carte blanche to completely clear vital areas of Arab population. Many villages served as bases for bands of irregulars; most had militias that periodically assisted the irregulars in attacks on settlements and convoys.

During April–May, Haganah units, usually under orders from HGS, carried out elements of Plan D, each unit interpreting and implementing the plan as it saw fit in light of local circumstances.

The Haganah offensives were in large measure responses to Arab attacks.

In general, the Jewish commanders preferred to completely clear the vital roads and border areas of Arab communities – Allon in Eastern Galilee, Carmel around Haifa and in Western Galilee, Avidan in the south. Most villagers fled before or during the fighting. Those who stayed put were almost invariably expelled." ^ Morris 2008 , pp. 404–406. ^ Morris 2004 , pp. 191–192: "Jewish tactics in the battle were designed to stun and quickly overpower opposition; demoralisation was a primary aim. It was deemed just as important to the outcome as the physical destruction of the Arab units.

The mortar barrages and the psychological warfare broadcasts and announcements, and the tactics employed by the infantry companies, advancing from house to house, were all geared to this goal.

The orders of Carmeli's 22nd Battalion were 'to kill every Arab encountered' and to set alight with firebombs 'all objectives that can be set alight. I am sending you posters in Arabic; disperse on route.'" ^ "A/1367/Rev.1 of 23 October 1950" (OpenDocument) . unispal.un.org . United Nations . Archived from the original on 29 December 2021 . Retrieved 28 January 2026 . ^ Pappé 2004 , pp. 136–138. ^ a b Cleveland & Bunton 2024 , pp. 205–206. ^ Khalidi 2020 , Chapter 1: "When the British left Palestine in 1948, there was no need to create the apparatus of a Jewish state ab novo. That apparatus had in fact been functioning under the British aegis for decades. All that remained to make Herzl's prescient dream a reality was for this existing para-state to flex its military muscle against the weakened Palestinians while obtaining formal sovereignty, which it did in May 1948.

The fate of Palestine had thus been decided thirty years earlier, although the denouement did not come until the very end of the Mandate, when its Arab majority was finally dispossessed by force." ^ a b Hill 2005a , p. 69. ^ Shapira 2012 , p. 12. ^ Shapira 2012 , p. 180. ^ Shpiro 2013 , p. 618. ^ Amidror 2019 , pp. 38–39. ^ Cleveland & Bunton 2024 , p. 269. ^ Shapira 2012 , pp. 94–95: "Ben-Gurion called it "Milkhemet Hakommemiut," a phrase that literally translates as "the War of Sovereignty" but whose actual meaning is somewhat vague and difficult to render.

The closest phrase in English is "the War of Independence," which expresses the most important change that resulted from it—the achievement of Jewish sovereignty.

The fighters of the Palmach—the precursor and spearhead of the new Israeli army—called it "the War of Liberation," as if it were another anticolonial war leading to liberation from the yoke of a foreign ruler, in this case the British. However, the war was not waged against the British, but against the Arabs." ^ "Armistice Agreement between Egypt and Israel" . United States . 23 February 1949. Archived from the original on 25 May 2014. "Armistice Agreement between Lebanon and Israel" . United States . 23 March 1949. Archived from the original on 26 July 2011. "General Armistice Agreement between the Hashemite Jordan Kingdom and Israel" . United States . 3 April 1949. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. "Israel-Syrian General Armistice Agreement" . United States . 20 July 1949. Archived from the original on 26 July 2011. ^ Masalha 2012 , p. 65: "The 'War of Liberation', which led to the creation of the State of Israel on 78 per cent of historic Palestine (not the 55 per cent according to the UN partition resolution), resulted not in 'equality for all citizens' 'as taught by the Hebrew prophets' but in the destruction of much of Palestinian society, and much of the Arab landscape, in the name of the Bible, by the Zionist Yishuv, a European settler community that emigrated to Palestine in the period between 1882 and 1948." ^ Masalha 2012 , Chapter 1. ^ Pappé 2006 , p. Slater 2020 , p. 406: "There is no serious dispute among Israeli, Palestinian, or other historians about the central facts of the Nakba. All of the leading Israeli New Historians—particularly Morris, Shlaim, Pappé, and Flapan—extensively examined the issue and revealed the facts. Other accounts have reached the same conclusions. For example, see Ben-Ami, 'A War to Start All Wars'; Rashid Khalidi, 'The Palestinians and 1948'; Walid Khalidi, 'Why Did the Palestinians Leave, Revisited'; Masalha, Expulsion of the Palestinians; Raz, Bride and the Dowry. Reviewing the evidence marshaled by Morris and others, Tom Segev concluded that 'most of the Arabs in the country, approximately 400,000, were chased out and expelled during the first stage of the war.

In other words, before the Arab armies invaded the country' (Haaretz, 18 July 2010). Other estimates have varied concerning the number of Palestinians who fled or were expelled before the May 1948 Arab state attack; Morris estimated the number to be 250,000–300,000 (The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Problem Revisited, 262); Tessler puts it at 300,000 (A History of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict, 279); Pappé’s estimate is 380,000 (The Making of the Arab-Israeli Conflict, 96).

In another recent review of the evidence, the Israeli historian Daniel Blatman estimates the number to be about 500,000 (Blatman, 'Netanyahu, This Is What Ethnic Cleansing Really Looks Like'). Whatever the exact number, even Israeli 'Old Historians' now admit that during the 1948 war, the Israeli armed forces drove out many of the Palestinians, though they emphasized the action as a military 'necessity.' For example, see Anita Shapira, Israel: A History, 167–68.

In July 2019, the Israeli government sought to cover up the extensive documentary evidence in its state archives that revealed detailed evidence about the extent of the Nakba—even the evidence that had already been published by newspapers and Israeli historians. A Haaretz investigation of the attempted cover-up concluded: 'Since early last decade, Defense Ministry teams have scoured local archives and removed troves of historic documents to conceal proof of the Nakba, including Israeli eyewitness reports at the time' (Shezaf, 'Burying the Nakba: How Israel Systematically Hides Evidence of 1948 Expulsion of Arabs')." BBC News 2018 : "up to 750,000 Palestinians who had lived on that land fled or were expelled from their homes." ^ BBC News 2018 . ^ Kodmani-Darwish, p. 126 ^ Féron, Féron, p. 94. ^ "United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East" . UNRWA . 7 January 2015. Archived from the original on 6 September 2013 . Retrieved 22 January 2016 . ^ Segev 2007 , p. 283. ^ Clark 1980 . ^ Meyer 1997 , pp. 25–26. ^ Segev 2007 , p. 278. ^ Segev 2007 , pp. 279, 287–288. ^ Segev 2007 , pp. 279–280. ^ Kurtzer 2022 . ^ a b c "Pinchas Rosen" . Israel Story . ^ a b c Wechsler 2024 . ^ Safran 2009 . ^ Sagi & Schwartz 2024 , p. 93. ^ Goldstein 2024 , p. 160. ^ Safran 2009 , p. 169. ^ Zeigerman n.d. , pp. 9, 47–49. ^ Rabinovich & Reinharz 2008 , pp. 179, 316. ^ Peretz 1977 . ^ Shindler 2008 , pp. 63–64. ^ Schechtman 1952 , p. 209. ^ a b Hacohen 2003 , p. 46: "After independence, the government presented the Knesset with a plan to double the Jewish population within four years. This meant bringing in 600,000 immigrants in a four-year period, or 150,000 per year. Absorbing 150,000 newcomers annually under the trying conditions facing the new state was a heavy burden indeed. Opponents in the Jewish Agency and the government of mass immigration argued that there was no justification for organizing large-scale emigration among Jews whose lives were not in danger, particularly when the desire and motivation were not their own." ^ Shiblak 1986 , pp. 78–80. ^ Pasachoff & Littman 2005 , p. 301. ^ Patai & Patai 1989 , p. 70. ^ Ben‐Layashi & Maddy‐Weitzman 2010 , pp. 98–99. ^ Wyrtzen 2015 , pp. 213–214. ^ Moreno 2020 , p. 7. ^ Bin-Nun 2013 , p. 51. ^ Laskier 1994 , pp. 211–212. ^ Moreno 2024 . ^ Scott 2025 . ^ Schwartz 2008 . ^ Shulewitz 2001 , pp. 139, 155. ^ Roumani 1975 , p. 15. ^ Laskier 1994 , p. 349: "... the policies adopted by Nasser's Egypt or Syria such as internment in prison camps, sequestration, or even outright confiscation of assets, and large-scale expulsions (as was the case with Egyptian Jews in 1956–57), were never implemented by Muhammad V, Hasan II, Bourguiba, or the FLN.

The freedom of action granted in Algeria, Morocco (since 1961), and Tunisia to Jewish emigration societies... was unparalleled elsewhere in the Arab world. These organizations enjoyed greater legality than government opponents who were Muslims ... albeit managed by foreigners and financed from abroad." ^ Hatimi 2010 ; Laskier 1990 , pp. 491–494; Gottreich 2020 , p. 164 ^ Hacohen 1991 , p. 262 #2: "In meetings with foreign officials at the end of 1944 and during 1945, Ben-Gurion cited the plan to enable one million refugees to enter Palestine immediately as the primary goal and top priority of the Zionist movement. ^ Hacohen 2003 , p. 46: "After independence, the government presented the Knesset with a plan to double the Jewish population within four years. This meant bringing in 600,000 immigrants in a four-year period. or 150,000 per year. Absorbing 150,000 newcomers annually under the trying conditions facing the new state was a heavy burden indeed. Opponents in the Jewish Agency and the government of mass immigration argued that there was no justification for organizing large-scale emigration among Jews whose lives were not in danger, particularly when the desire and motivation were not their own." ^ Hacohen 2003 , pp. 246–247: "Both the immigrants' dependence and the circumstances of their arrival shaped the attitude of the host society.

The great wave of immigration in 1948 did not occur spontaneously: it was the result of a clear-cut foreign policy decision that taxed the country financially and necessitated a major organizational effort. Many absorption activists, Jewish Agency executives, and government officials opposed unlimited, nonselective immigration; they favored a gradual process geared to the country's absorptive capacity. Throughout this period, two charges resurfaced at every public debate: one, that the absorption process caused undue hardship; two, that Israel's immigration policy was misguided." ^ Hacohen 2003 , p. 47: "But as head of the government, entrusted with choosing the cabinet and steering its activities, Ben-Gurion had tremendous power over the country's social development. His prestige soared to new heights after the founding of the state and the impressive victory of the IDF in the War of Independence.

As prime minister and minister of defense in Israel's first administration, as well as the uncontested leader of the country's largest political party, his opinions carried enormous weight. Thus, despite resistance from some of his cabinet members, he remained unflagging in his enthusiasm for unrestricted mass immigration and resolved to put this policy into effect." ^ Hacohen 2003 , p. 247: "On several occasions, resolutions were passed to limit immigration from European and Arab countries alike. However, these limits were never put into practice, mainly due to the opposition of Ben-Gurion.

As a driving force in the emergency of the state, Ben-Gurion—both prime minister and minister of defense—carried enormous weight with his veto. His insistence on the right of every Jew to immigrate proved victorious. He would not allow himself to be swayed by financial or other considerations. It was he who orchestrated the large-scale action that enabled the Jews to leave Eastern Europe and Islamic countries, and it was he who effectively forged Israel's foreign policy. Through a series of clandestine activities carried out overseas by the Foreign Office, the Jewish Agency, the Mossad le-Aliyah, and the Joint Distribution Committee, the road was paved for mass immigration." ^ a b c Shapira 2014 , p. 248. ^ Masalha 2012 , The Zionist Superimposing of Hebrew Toponymy. ^ Masalha 2012 , p. 102. ^ Masalha 2018 , pp. 325–326. ^ "FOCUS on ISRAEL (Language)" . www.focusmm.com . Archived from the original on 19 April 2017 . Retrieved 31 October 2010 . ^ "First Zionist Congress & Basel Program (1897)" . jewishvirtuallibrary.org . Retrieved 14 October 2019 . ^ https://azm.org/the-jerusalem-program-1951/ ^ https://azm.org/the-revised-jerusalem-program-1968/ ^ "The Jerusalem Program" . World Zionist Organization . Archived from the original on 1 November 2003 . Retrieved 6 November 2007 . ^ Del Sarto 2003 , p. 37: "While the concept of Medinat Israel dominated the first decades of statehood in accordance with the aspirations of Labour Zionism, the 1967 conquest of land that was part of 'biblical Israel' provided a material basis for the ascent of the concept of Eretz Israel . Expressing the perception of rightful Jewish claims on 'biblical land', the construction of Jewish settlements in the conquered territories intensified after the 1977 elections, which ended the dominance of the Labour Party ." ^ Hassan 1991 , p. 917. ^ Azadovskii & Egorov 2002 . ^ Patai & Patai 1989 , p. 178. ^ The UNGA Res 3379 was passed at the 2400th plenary meeting on 10 November 1975. (PDF) Archived 2006-10-01 at the Wayback Machine . ^ de Bhal 2025 , p. 335. ^ Rabinovich & Reinharz 2008 , pp. 349–350. ^ The UNGA resolution 4686 was passed at the 74th plenary meeting on 16 December 1991 by a vote of 111–25–13.

The text of the resolution is available here . ^ Lewis 1991 . ^ Rynhold & Waxman 2008 , p. 14: "Revisionist Zionism is the founding ideology of the non-religious right in Israel, represented primarily by the Likud Party." ^ Rabinovich & Reinharz 2008 , p. 462: "It seems that at the end of the 1990s the rule of Revisionist Zionism —which began with the victory of the Likud in the 1977 elections and at the time seemed an alternative to Socialist Zionism —is about to clear its place on the ideological map in favor of haredi Zionism." ^ Greenberg 1998 . ^ Ram 1999 , pp. 331–333. ^ Ram 1999 , p. 333. ^ a b Ram 2005 , pp. 22–23. ^ Ram 1999 , pp. 333–334. Works cited The Science of Victory in Militant History . Oxford University Press . ISBN 9780192539441 . Adler, Joseph (1997). Restoring the Jews to their homeland: nineteen centuries in the quest for Zion . J. Aronson. ISBN 1-56821-978-4 . Retrieved 19 January 2011 . Allawi, Ali A. (2014). Faisal I of Iraq . Yale University Press . ISBN 978-0-300-19936-9 . Almagor, Laura (15 December 2023). "The Movement That Imagined a Jewish Homeland Without the State of Israel" . New Lines Magazine . Archived from the original on 21 February 2026 . Retrieved 27 August 2025 . ——— (8 May 2024). "Jewish Territorialism and 'Other Zions' ". Routledge Handbook on Zionism . London: Routledge . pp. 225– 236. doi : 10.4324/9781003312352-23 . ISBN 978-1-003-31235-2 . Retrieved 27 August 2025 . Alroey, Gur (Fall 2011). " "Zionism without Zion"? Territorialist Ideology and the Zionist Movement, 1882–1956". Jewish Social Studies . 18 (1): 1– 32. doi : 10.2979/jewisocistud.18.1.1 . JSTOR 10.2979/jewisocistud.18.1.1 . Amidror, Yaakov (2019). "The Evolution and Development of the IDF".

In Cohen, Stuart A.; Klieman, Aharon (eds.). Routledge Handbook on Israeli Security . Routledge . pp. 36– 48. ISBN 978-1-315-16519-6 . Anderson, Scott (2013). Lawrence in Arabia: War, Deceit, Imperial Folly, and the Making of the Modern Middle East (First ed.). New York: Doubleday . ISBN 978-0307476418 . A Survey of Palestine: Prepared in December 1945 and January 1946 for the information of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry (PDF) . Vol. II. His Majesty's Stationery Office . April 1946. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 May 2026. Arendt, Hannah (1978) .

The Jew as Pariah: Jewish Identity and Politics in the Modern Age . New York: Grove Press. ISBN 978-0394170428 . Assmann, Jan (2018).

The Invention of Religion: Faith and Covenant in the Book of Exodus . Princeton University Press . ISBN 978-1-4008-8923-5 . Avineri, Shlomo (2017).

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 7 February 2025 . Retrieved 7 January 2025 . "Why Nakba is the Palestinians' most sombre day, in 100 and 300 words" . BBC News . 15 May 2018. {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) Beinin, Joel ; Stein, Rebecca L. (2006).

The Struggle for Sovereignty: Palestine and Israel, 1993-2005 . Stanford University Press . ISBN 978-0-8047-5365-4 . Bell, J. Bowyer (1979). Terror out of Zion: Irgun Zvai Leumi, LEHI, and the Palestine underground, 1929–1949 . Dublin: Academy Press. ISBN 978-0-906187-11-1 . Ben-Ami, Shlomo (2007). Scars of War, Wounds of Peace . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-532542-3 . Archived from the original on 24 June 2024 . Retrieved 23 June 2024 . Ben‐Layashi, Samir; Maddy‐Weitzman, Bruce (2010). "Myth, History and Realpolitik: Morocco and its Jewish Community". Journal of Modern Jewish Studies . 9 (1): 89– 106. doi : 10.1080/14725880903549293 . Berlin, Adele ; Brettler, Marc Zvi ; Fishbane, Michael A. ; Jewish Publication Society , eds. (2004).

The Jewish Study Bible . New York, New York: Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-529751-5 . de Bhal, John (2025). "Pride and the politics of international defiance: Brazil, the United States, and UN General Assembly Resolution 3379". Third World Quarterly . 46 (3): 335– 352. doi : 10.1080/01436597.2025.2471561 . Bin-Nun, Yigal (2013). "The Disputes regarding the Jewish Emigration from Morocco 1956–1961".

In Cooperman, Bernard Dov; Zohar, Zvi (eds.). Jews and Muslims in the Islamic World . CDL Press. pp. 51– 99. ISBN 978-1934309322 . Bonar, Andrew A. ; M'Cheyne, Robert Murray (1996) . A Narrative of a Mission of Inquiry to the Jews from the Church of Scotland in 1839 . Edinburgh: Christian Focus. ISBN 1-85792-258-1 . Boyd, Samuel L. (2019). "Place as Real and Imagined in Exile: Jerusalem at the Center of Ezekiel".

In Greenspoon, Leonard J. (ed.). Next Year in Jerusalem: Exile and Return in Jewish History . Purdue University Press . ISBN 978-1-61249-604-7 . Brenner, Michael (2020).

In Search of Israel: The History of an Idea . Princeton University Press . ISBN 978-0-691-20397-3 . Brenner, Y. S. (October 1965). "The 'Stern Gang' 1940-48". Middle Eastern Studies (2): 2– 30. JSTOR 4282140 . Cesarani, David (1982). "The birth of English Zionism (Books and Writers)" . Jewish Quarterly . 30 (3). Jewish Literary Trust ( Taylor & Francis ): 59– 61. doi : 10.1080/0449010X.1982.10704913 . Chaim, Gans (2008). A Just Zionism: On the Morality of the Jewish State . Oxford Academic. Charvit, Yossef (3 April 2024). "The Sabbatean syndrome, the messianic idea and Zionism" . Journal of Jewish Studies . 75 (1): 137– 159. doi : 10.3828/jjs.2024.75.1.137 . ISSN 0022-2097 . Chomsky, Noam (1 December 1982). "America and Israel" .

The Progressive Magazine . Archived from the original on 17 June 2026 . Retrieved 28 January 2026 . Chorbajian, Levon; Shirinian, George (1999). Studies in Comparative Genocide . Palgrave Macmillan . ISBN 978-0312219338 . Clark, Alfred (27 October 1980). "Dr. Emanuel Neumann, 87, Dies; Was Active in Zionist Movement; Lifelong Work for Zionism" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 12 March 2018. Cleveland, William; Bunton, Martin (2024). A History of the Modern Middle East (7th ed.). Routledge . Cohen, Hillel (2017). "The First Israeli Government (1948–1950) and the Arab Citizens: Equality in Discourse, Exclusion in Practice" .

In Rouhana, Nadim N. ; Huneidi, Sahar S. (eds.). Israel and its Palestinian Citizens: Ethnic Privileges in the Jewish State . Cambridge University Press . pp. 73– 102. ISBN 978-1-107-04483-8 . Cohn, Henry J. (1970). "Theodor Herzl's Conversion to Zionism" . Jewish Social Studies . 32 (2): 101– 110. ISSN 0021-6704 . JSTOR 4466575 . Cohn, Norman (2001). Warrant for Genocide . Serif. Cohn-Sherbok, Dan (2012). Introduction to Zionism and Israel: From Ideology to History . A&C Black. ISBN 978-1-4411-6062-1 . Costa, Daniel (19 June 2026). "white paper" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived from the original on 18 November 2025 . Retrieved 20 June 2026 . Crane, Charles R. ; King, Henry Churchill (28 August 1919). Report of the American Section of the International Commission on Mandates in Turkey (Report). King-Crane Commission . p. 794. Archived from the original on 16 December 2023. Crawford, A. W. C. (1847). Letters on Egypt, Edom and the Holy Land . Vol. II. London: H. Colburn. Del Sarto, Raffaella A. (2003). "Israel's Contested Identity and the Mediterranean". Mediterranean Politics . 8 (1): 27– 58. doi : 10.1080/13629390308010002 . Dieckhoff, Alain (2003).

The Invention of a Nation: Zionist Thought and the Making of Modern Israel . Columbia University Press . ISBN 978-0-231-12766-0 . Dingle, Alison (2025). "Nineteenth Century 'Jewish Restorationism' in the Service of Anti-Catholicism: Lord Shaftesbury and the Christian Zionist Movement in Britain". Journal of Holy Land and Palestine Studies . 24 (1): 99– 119. doi : 10.3366/hlps.2025.0353 . Disraeli, Benjamin ; Gunn, John Alexander Wilson; Wiebe, Melvin George (1997). Benjamin Disraeli Letters: 1852–1856 . University of Toronto Press . ISBN 9780802041371 – via Google Books. Dudman, Helga (1982). Street People (1st ed.).

The Jerusalem Post / Carta . ISBN 978-965-220-039-6 . Edelheit, Hershel (2019). History Of Zionism: A Handbook And Dictionary . Routledge . ISBN 978-0-429-70103-0 . Einstein, Albert (2007). Rowe, David E. (ed.). Einstein on Politics: His Private Thoughts and Public Stands on Nationalism, Zionism, War, Peace, and the Bomb . Princeton University Press . ISBN 978-0691120942 . Elazari-Volcani, J. (1932). "Jewish Colonization in Palestine".

The Annals . 164 . American Academy of Political and Social Science : 84– 94. doi : 10.1177/000271623216400112 . JSTOR 1018961 . "Kantonisty" Kантонисты . Shorter Jewish Encyclopedia (in Russian). Vol. 4. Jerusalem: the Society for Research on Jewish Communities in cooperation with the Hebrew University of Jerusalem . 1988. pp. 75– 79. Archived from the original on 12 November 2025. Ellman, Michael (2007). "Another Forged 'Stalin Document' ". Europe-Asia Studies . 59 (5): 869– 872. doi : 10.1080/09668130701377714 . ISSN 0966-8136 . JSTOR 20451399 . S2CID 154952224 . Engel, David (2008). Zionism . Longman. ISBN 978-1405835565 . ——— (2013) . Zionism . Routledge . ISBN 978-1-317-86548-3 . Epstein, Lawrence J. (2016).

The Dream of Zion: The Story of the First Zionist Congress . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers . ISBN 978-1-4422-5467-1 . Archived from the original on 11 January 2024 . Retrieved 23 November 2020 . Ėstraĭkh, Gennady J. (2005).

In Harness: Yiddish Writers' Romance with Communism . Judaic traditions in literature, music, and art. Syracuse, New York : Syracuse University Press . ISBN 978-0815630524 . Eylon, Dina Ripsman (2025). "The backdrop of Theodor Herzl's political activism".

In Levy, Thomas E. ; Schneider, Thomas ; Propp, William H. C. (eds.). Israel's Exodus in Transdisciplinary Perspective: Text, Archaeology, Culture, and Geoscience . Springer. pp. 55– 64. ISBN 978-3-319-04767-6 . Gilbert, Martin (1991). Churchill: A Life . London: Heinemann. ISBN 978-04-34291-83-0 . Gitelman, Zvi Y. (2001). A Century of Ambivalence: The Jews of Russia and the Soviet Union, 1881 to the Present . Glock, Charles Y. ; Quinley, Harold E. (1983). Anti-Semitism in America . Transaction Publishers . ISBN 0-87855-940-X . Goldberg, David (2009). To the Promised Land: A History of Zionist Thought . Faber & Faber . ISBN 978-0-571-25423-1 . Goldman, Samuel (2018). God's Country: Christian Zionism in America . University of Pennsylvania Press . ISBN 978-0812294941 . JSTOR j.ctv16t6mmg . Goldman, Shalom (2009). Zeal for Zion: Christians, Jews, & the Idea of the Promised Land . University of North Carolina Press . ISBN 978-0-807-83344-5 . Goldstein, J. (October 1986). "The Attitude of the Jewish and the Russian Intelligentsia to Zionism in the Initial Period (1897–1904)".

The Slavonic and East European Review . 64 (4): 546– 556. ISSN 0037-6795 . JSTOR 4209355 . Goldstein, Amir (8 May 2024). "The Zionist Right: From a Centrifugal to a Centripetal Movement, 1925–1965".

In Shindler, Colin (ed.). Routledge Handbook on Zionism . London: Routledge . pp. 148– 164. doi : 10.4324/9781003312352-18 . ISBN 978-1-003-31235-2 . Gorny, Yosef (1987). Zionism and the Arabs, 1882–1948: A Study of Ideology . Clarendon Press . ISBN 978-0-19-822721-2 . Archived from the original on 7 July 2024 . Retrieved 23 June 2024 . ——— (2006).

From Binational Society to Jewish State: Federal Concepts in Zionist Political Thought . Brill . ISBN 978-90-474-1161-1 . ——— (2006) . "Ben-Gurion and Weizmann During World War II".

In Zweig, Ronald W. (ed.). David Ben-Gurion: Politics and Leadership in Israel (2nd ed.). Frank Cass . pp. 85– 98. ISBN 0-7146-3423-9 . Gottheil, Richard (1901–1906). "Zionism" .

The Jewish Encyclopedia . New York: Funk & Wagnalls. pp. 666– 686. Archived from the original on 23 March 2025. Gottreich, Emily (2020). Jewish Morocco: A History from Pre-Islamic to Postcolonial Times . I.B. Tauris . doi : 10.5040/9781838603601.ch-006 . ISBN 978-1-78076-849-6 . Grayzel, Solomon (1968). A History of the Jews: From the Babylonian Exile to the Present . ISBN 978-0999163368 . Green, Abigail (June 2005). "Rethinking Moses Montefiore: Religion, Nationhood, and International Philanthropy in the Nineteenth Century" .

The American Historical Review . 110 (3): 631– 658. Archived from the original on 17 February 2008. Greenberg, Joel (22 November 1998). "The World: Pursuing Peace; Netanyahu and His Party Turn Away from 'Greater Israel' " .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 16 May 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2012 . Hacohen, Dvora (1991). "BenGurion and the Second World War".

In Frankel, Jonathan (ed.). Studies in Contemporary Jewry: Volume VII: Jews and Messianism in the Modern Era: Metaphor and Meaning . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-536198-8 . ——— (2003). Immigrants in Turmoil: Mass Immigration to Israel and Its Repercussions in the 1950s and After . Syracuse University Press . ISBN 978-0-8156-2969-6 . Hadi, Mahdi F. Abdul (December 2007). "Resolution Passed At The 12th Zionist Congress, Proposal For An Arab-jewish Entente, Carlsbad, 4 December 1921". Documents on Palestine (PDF) . Vol. 1 (until 1947). pp. 97– 98. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 July 2024. Hassan, S. Samir (1991). "Zionism, U.S.S.R. and the Partition of Palestine". Proceedings of the Indian History Congress . 52 : 913– 923. JSTOR 44142725 . Hatimi, Mohammed (24 June 2010). "Cadima (Morocco)" .

In Stillman, Norman A. (ed.). Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World Online . Brill . doi : 10.1163/1878-9781_ejiw_sim_0004780 . Retrieved 28 June 2026 . Hagopian, Elaine C. (2016). "The Primacy of Water in the Zionist Project" . Arab Studies Quarterly . 38 (4): 700– 708. doi : 10.13169/arabstudquar.38.4.0700 . ISSN 0271-3519 . JSTOR 10.13169/arabstudquar.38.4.0700 . Halamish, Aviva (July 2008). "Zionist Immigration Policy Put to the Test: Historical analysis of Israel's immigration policy, 1948–1951". Journal of Modern Jewish Studies . 7 (2): 119– 134. doi : 10.1080/14725880802124164 . ——— (2021). "Demography and the Struggle for Palestine, 1917–1947" . Israel Studies . 26 (3): 46– 65. doi : 10.2979/israelstudies.26.3.04 . Retrieved 15 June 2026 . Hazony, Yoram (2000).

The Jewish State: The Struggle for Israel's Soul (1st ed.). New York: Basic Books . ISBN 978-0-465-02902-0 . Herzl, Theodor (1896). "Palästina oder Argentinien?" . Der Judenstaat (in German). sammlungen.ub.uni-frankfurt.de. p. 29 (31). Archived from the original on 25 August 2016 . Retrieved 27 May 2016 . ——— (1914). Sechs Kongressreden (in German). Leipzig: Zionistische Ortsgruppe Leipzig – via Internet Archive . ——— (1917).

The Congress Addresses of Theodor Herzl . Translated from the German by Nellie Straus. New York: Federation of American Zionists – via Internet Archive . Hilberg, Raul (1973) .

The Destruction of the European Jews . New York: New Viewpoints. Hill, Melissa, ed. (2005). Dictionary of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict: Culture, History, and Politics . Vol. 1: A-J. Macmillan Reference . ISBN 0-02-865996-1 . Hill, Melissa, ed. (2005). Dictionary of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict: Culture, History, and Politics . Vol. 2: K-Z. Macmillan Reference . ISBN 0-02-865996-1 . Hitchens, Christopher (2004). Love, Poverty, and War: Journeys and Essays . Horak, Jan-Christopher (January 1984). "Zionist film propaganda in Nazi Germany" . Historical Journal of Film, Radio and Television . 4 (1): 49– 58. doi : 10.1080/01439688400260041 . ISSN 0143-9685 . Huneidi, Sahar (2001). A Broken Trust: Sir Herbert Samuel, Zionism and the Palestinians . I.B. Tauris . ISBN 978-1-86064-172-5 . Isseroff, Ami (2006). "Biographies - Yehuda Alkalai (Akalay)" . Zionism and Israel . Archived from the original on 4 November 2022. ——— (2007). "British Zionism – Support for Jewish Restoration" . mideastweb.org . Archived from the original on 25 March 2025. Jamal, Amal (May 2017). "Neo-Zionism and Palestine: The Unveiling of Settler-Colonial Practices in Mainstream Zionism" . Journal of Holy Land and Palestine Studies . 16 (1). Edinburgh University Press. doi : 10.3366/hlps.2017.0152 . Jeffery, Keith (1982). "Great Power Rivalry in the Middle East".

The Historical Journal . 25 (4): 1029– 1038. doi : 10.1017/S0018246X00021415 . ISSN 0018-246X . JSTOR 2638650 . S2CID 162469637 . Johnson, George E. (16 June 2015). "How The First World War Changed Jewish History" . Moment . Archived from the original on 10 January 2026 . Retrieved 26 June 2026 . ——— (4 April 2022). "Jewish Word | Why We Say 'Next Year in Jerusalem' " . Moment . Archived from the original on 17 June 2026 . Retrieved 19 November 2023 . Johnson, Paul (May 1998). "The Miracle". Commentary . Vol. 105. pp. 21– 28. Kagarlitsky, Boris (27 June 2014).

From Empires to Imperialism: The State and the Rise of Bourgeois Civilisation . Routledge . ISBN 978-1-317-66871-8 . Karsh, Efraim (2009).

The Arab–Israeli Conflict . Rosen Pub. ISBN 978-1-4042-1842-0 . Archived from the original on 7 July 2024 . Retrieved 27 April 2024 . Kattan, Victor (2009).

From Coexistence to Conquest: International Law and the Origins of the Arab-Israeli Conflict, 1891–1949 . Pluto Press . ISBN 978-0-7453-2579-8 . Katz, Steven T. (May 2018). "Review: THE "GREAT WAR" AND THE JEWISH PEOPLE". Modern Judaism . 38 (2): 245– 257. doi : 10.2307/48559586 . JSTOR 48559586 . Katz, Yossi (January 1992). "Transfer of population as a solution to international disputes". Political Geography . 11 (1): 55– 72. doi : 10.1016/0962-6298(92)90019-P . PMID 12343537 . Kedar, Nir (2002). "Ben-Gurion's Mamlakhtiyut: Etymological and Theoretical Roots" . Israel Studies . 7 (3): 117– 133. ISSN 1084-9513 . JSTOR 30245598 . Kedourie, Elie (1969). "Sir Herbert Samuel and the Government of Palestine". Middle Eastern Studies . 5 (1): 44– 68. doi : 10.1080/00263206908700118 . JSTOR 4282274 . Kedourie, Elie ; Haim, Sylvia G. (22 May 2015). Zionism and Arabism in Palestine and Israel . Routledge . ISBN 978-1-317-44273-8 . Kertzer, David (2001).

The Popes against the Jews: The Vatican's Role in the Rise of Modern Anti-Semitism . New York: Alfred A Knopf . ISBN 978-0375406232 . Khalidi, Rashid (2006).

The Iron Cage: The Story of the Palestinian Struggle for Statehood . Simon & Schuster . ISBN 978-0-86154-899-6 . ——— (2010). Palestinian Identity . Columbia University Press . ISBN 978-0-231-15075-0 . ——— (2020).

In Zweig, Ronald W. (ed.). David Ben-Gurion: Politics and Leadership in Israel (2nd ed.). Frank Cass . pp. 15– 37. ISBN 0-7146-3423-9 . Ković, Miloš (2010). Disraeli and the Eastern Question . Oxford University Press . ISBN 9780199574605 – via Google Books. Kurtzer, Yehuda (Fall 2022). "Liberal Zionism & the Idea of the Idea" . Sources Journal. Archived from the original on 7 February 2025. Kushner, Harvey W. (2002). Encyclopedia of Terrorism . Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications . ISBN 145226550X . Laqueur, Walter (2009). A History of Zionism: From the French Revolution to the Establishment of the State of Israel . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group . ISBN 978-0-307-53085-1 . Laskier, Michael M. (1990). "Developments in the Jewish Communities of Morocco 1956-76" . Middle Eastern Studies . 26 (4): 465– 505. doi : 10.1080/00263209008700832 . ISSN 0026-3206 . JSTOR 4283394 . ——— (1994). North African Jewry in the Twentieth Century: The Jews of Morocco, Tunisia, and Algeria . NYU Press . ISBN 978-0-8147-5072-8 . Lentin, Ronit (2010). Co-memory and melancholia: Israelis memorialising the Palestinian Nakba . Manchester University Press . ISBN 978-1-84779-768-1 . Levenson, Alan (2002). "Gentile Reception of Herzlian Zionism, a Reconsideration" . Jewish History . 16 (2): 187– 211. doi : 10.1023/A:1015097330032 . ISSN 0334-701X . JSTOR 20101468 . Levin, Nora (1988).

The Jews in the Soviet Union Since 1917: Paradox of Survival . I.B. Tauris . Lewis, Donald M. (2021). "Introduction". A Short History of Christian Zionism: From the Reformation to the Twenty-First Century (PDF) . InterVarsity Press . pp. 1– 16. ISBN 978-0-8308-4698-6 . Lewis, Paul (17 December 1991). "U.N. Repeals Its '75 Resolution Equating Zionism With Racism" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 11 January 2013 . Retrieved 11 May 2013 . Lind, Dara (5 August 2014). "Why are you supposed to say "next year in Jerusalem"?" . Vox . Archived from the original on 26 June 2026 . Retrieved 19 November 2023 . Lustick, Ian S. ; Berkman, Matthew (2017). "Zionist Theories of Peace in the Pre-state Era: Legacies of Dissimulation and Israel's Arab Minority" .

In Rouhana, Nadim N. ; Huneidi, Sahar S. (eds.). Israel and its Palestinian Citizens: Ethnic Privileges in the Jewish State . Cambridge University Press . pp. 39– 72. ISBN 978-1-107-04483-8 . Mahler, Gregory S. ; Hadi, Mahdi F. Abdul (2025). "The British White Paper ("Churchill White Paper"): British Policy in Palestine, 3 June 1922".

In Mahler, Gregory S.; Hadi, Mahdi F. Abdul (eds.). Palestinian History and Politics: An Introduction and Documentary Reader . Routledge . ISBN 9781003513537 . Malul, Chen (6 November 2017). "Adolf Eichmann's Secret Visit to Palestine" .

The Librarians . Archived from the original on 4 February 2023 . Retrieved 20 October 2023 . Manna, Adel (2022). Nakba and Survival: The Story of Palestinians Who Remained in Haifa and the Galilee, 1948–1956 . doi : 10.1525/luminos.129 . ISBN 978-0-520-38936-6 . Masalha, Nur (2012).

The Palestine Nakba: Decolonising History, Narrating the Subaltern, Reclaiming Memory . Zed Books . ISBN 978-1-84813-970-1 . ——— (2014).

The Zionist Bible . Taylor & Francis . ISBN 978-1-317-54465-4 . ——— (2018). Palestine: A Four Thousand Year History . Zed Books . ISBN 978-1-78699-272-7 . Mayorek, Yoram (March 1994). "Herzl and the Dreyfus affair". Journal of Israeli History . 15 (1): 83– 89. doi : 10.1080/13531049408576028 . McConaghy, Kieran (2021). "19 – Transnational Connections".

The Cambridge history of terrorism . Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-1-108-55624-8 . McGeever, Brendan (26 September 2019). Antisemitism and the Russian Revolution . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-1-107-19599-8 . Mendes-Flohr, Paul R. ; Reinharz, Jehuda (1995).

The Jew in the Modern World: A Documentary History . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-507453-6 . Archived from the original on 11 January 2024 . Retrieved 22 January 2016 . Meyer, Michael A. (1997). "Abba Hillel Silver as Zionist within the Camp of Reform Judaism".

In Raider, Mark A. ; Sarna, Jonathan D. ; Zweig, Ronald W. (eds.). Abba Hillel Silver and American Zionism . Frank Cass . pp. 9– 32. ISBN 0-7146-4377-7 . Mitchell, Thomas G. (2013). Israel/Palestine and the Politics of a Two-State Solution . McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-7597-1 . Montagu, Edwin (August 1917). "The Anti-Zionism of Edwin Montagu and his opposition to the Balfour Declaration" . Zionism and Israel Information Center . Archived from the original on 19 April 2019. Moreno, Aviad (February 2020). "Beyond the Nation-State: A Network Analysis of Jewish Emigration from Northern Morocco to Israel" . International Journal of Middle East Studies . 52 (1): 1– 21. doi : 10.1017/S0020743819000916 . ISSN 0020-7438 . ——— (4 June 2024). "4: Zionism and the Hispanic Moroccan Diaspora". Entwined Homelands, Empowered Diasporas . Indiana University Press . doi : 10.2307/jj.12348162 . ISBN 978-0-253-06968-9 . Morgenstern, Arie (2006). Hastening Redemption: Messianism and the Resettlement of the Land of Israel . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0195305784 . Morris, Benny (1999). Righteous Victims: A History of the Zionist-Arab Conflict, 1881–1999 . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group . ISBN 978-0-679-74475-7 . ——— (2001). Righteous Victims: A History of the Zionist-Arab Conflict, 1881–2001 . Random House . ISBN 978-0-679-74475-7 . ——— (2004) .

The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Problem Revisited (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-0-521-00967-6 . Retrieved 21 January 2024 . ——— (October 2008). 1948: A History of the First Arab–Israeli War . Yale University Press . ISBN 978-0-300-14524-3 . ——— (10 September 2009). "Explaining Transfer: Zionist Thinking and the Creation of the Palestinian Refugee Problem".

In Bessel, Richard; Haake, Claudia B. (eds.). Removing Peoples . Studies of the German Historical Institute London. Oxford: Oxford University Press . pp. 349– 360. ISBN 978-0-19-956195-7 . Retrieved 29 November 2024 . ——— (3 April 2020). "The War on History" . Jewish Review of Books . Archived from the original on 29 December 2024 . Retrieved 7 January 2025 . Moss, Karen Sue (2000).

The Babylonian exile and the revitalization of a people (Thesis). Ohio State University . Murphy, Emma C. (2005). "Zionism and the Palestine Question". A Companion to the History of the Middle East . pp. 269– 290. doi : 10.1002/9780470996423.ch15 . ISBN 978-0-470-99642-3 . Muslih, Mohammed (1988).

The Origins of Palestinian Nationalism . New York: Columbia University Press . ISBN 9780231065092 . Nedava, Joseph (1972). Trotsky and the Jews . Jewish Publication Society of America . ISBN 978-0394486727 . Nicosia, Francis R. (1985).

The Third Reich and the Palestine Question . Transaction Publishers. pp. 54– 55. ISBN 978-1-4128-3934-1 . ——— (1989). "Ein nützlicher Feind. Zionismus im nationalsozialistischen Deutschland 1933–1939" (PDF) . Vierteljahrshefte für Zeitgeschichte (in German). 3 (37): 367– 400. Ovendale, Ritchie (23 October 2015).

The Origins of the Arab Israeli Wars . Routledge . ISBN 978-1-317-86768-5 . Pappé, Ilan (2002).

The Rise and Fall of a Palestinian Dynasty.

The Husaynis 1700–1948 . AL Saqi. ISBN 978-0-86356-460-4 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Pappé, Ilan (2004). A History of Modern Palestine . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-0-521-55632-3 . ——— (2006).

The Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine . Oneworld Publications . ISBN 978-1-78074-056-0 . Pasachoff, Naomi E.; Littman, Robert J. (2005). A Concise History of the Jewish People . Rowman & Littlefield . ISBN 978-0-7425-4366-9 . Archived from the original on 19 February 2017 . Retrieved 19 February 2016 . Patai, Raphael ; Patai, Jennifer (1989).

The Myth of the Jewish Race . Wayne State University Press . ISBN 0-8143-1948-3 . Retrieved 16 October 2016 . Penslar, Derek J. (2023). Zionism: An Emotional State . Rutgers University Press . ISBN 978-0-8135-7611-4 . Peretz, Don (1977). "The Earthquake: Israel's Ninth Knesset Elections". Middle East Journal . 31 (3): 251– 266. JSTOR 4325643 . Perl, William R. (1983). Operation Action – Rescue From The Holocaust . New York: Frederick Ungar Publishing Company . Petrovsky-Shtern, Yohanan (2008). Jews in the Russian Army, 1827–1917: Drafted into Modernity . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-0521515733 . Pinsker, Leon (1882). "Autoemancipation" . www.mideastweb.org . Archived from the original on 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 21 January 2009 . Pope Brewer, Sam (30 December 1947). "Irgun Bomb Kills 11 Arabs, 2 Britons" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 24 October 2021. Porath, Yehoshua (1974).

The Emergence of the Palestinian-Arab National Movement 1918–1929 . London: Frank Cass . ——— (2015).

The Emergence of the Palestinian-Arab National Movement 1918–1929 . Routledge . ISBN 978-1138904170 . Puchalski, P. (2018). "Review: Jabotinsky's Children: Polish Jews and the Rise of Right-Wing Zionism" .

The Polish Review . 63 (3). University of Illinois Press : 88– 91. doi : 10.5406/polishreview.63.3.0088 . JSTOR 10.5406/polishreview.63.3.0088 . Quigley, John B. (2005).

The Case for Palestine . Duke University Press . ISBN 978-0-8223-3539-9 . ——— (2021). "Was the Declaration of a Jewish State Valid?" (PDF) .

The Legality of a Jewish State: A Century of Debate over Rights in Palestine . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . pp. 181– 193. doi : 10.1017/9781009023085.023 . ISBN 978-1-009-02308-5 . Rabinovich, Itamar ; Reinharz, Jehuda (2008). Israel in the Middle East: Documents and Readings on Society, Politics, and Foreign Relations, Pre-1948 to the Present (2nd ed.). Brandeis University Press . ISBN 978-0-87451-962-4 . Rabkin, Yakov M. (2006). A Threat from Within: A Century of Jewish Opposition to Zionism . Fernwood Pub. ISBN 978-1-55266-171-0 . Ram, Uri (1999). "The State of the Nation: Contemporary Challenges to Zionism in Israel". Constellations . 6 (3): 325– 338. Ram, Uri (Winter 2005). "Post-Zionist Studies of Israel: The First Decade". Israel Studies Forum . 20 (2): 22– 45. Ravndal, Ellen Jenny (2010). "Exit Britain: British Withdrawal From the Palestine Mandate in the Early Cold War, 1947–1948". Diplomacy & Statecraft . 21 (3): 416– 433. doi : 10.1080/09592296.2010.508409 . ISSN 0959-2296 . S2CID 153662650 . Reinharz, Jehuda (1993). Chaim Weizmann: The Making of a Statesman . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0195072150 . Roberts, Josie (7 November 2017). "The Great Migration and the Jewish East End" . Jewish Museum London . Archived from the original on 9 September 2023. Robson, Laura (2017). States of Separation: Transfer, Partition, and the Making of the Modern Middle East . University of California Press . ISBN 978-0-520-29215-4 . Rosenthal, Herman (1901–1906). "Cantonists" .

In Singer, Isidore ; et al. (eds.). Jewish Encyclopedia . New York: Funk & Wagnalls. pp. 549– 550. Archived from the original on 20 May 2026. Rosenthal, Herman; Rosenthal, Max (1901–1906). "Kishinef (Kishinev)" .

The Jewish Encyclopedia . New York: Funk & Wagnalls. pp. 512– 514. Archived from the original on 31 March 2026. Rouhana, Nadim N. ; Sabbagh-Khoury, Areej (3 July 2015). "Settler-colonial citizenship: conceptualizing the relationship between Israel and its Palestinian citizens". Settler Colonial Studies . 5 (3): 205– 225. doi : 10.1080/2201473X.2014.947671 . Roumani, Maurice M. (November 1975).

The Case of the Jews from Arab Countries: A Neglected Issue . Vol. 1. World Organization of Jews from Arab Countries. Rovner, Adam (2014).

In the Shadow of Zion: Promised Lands Before Israel . New York University Press . ISBN 978-1-4798-1748-1 . Archived from the original on 17 November 2016 . Retrieved 16 March 2016 . Roy, Sara (2016).

The Gaza Strip: The Political Economy of De-development . Washington, DC: Institute for Palestine Studies USA, Inc. ISBN 978-0-88728-321-5 . Rubin, Gil S. (June 2019). "Vladimir Jabotinsky and Population Transfers between Eastern Europe and Palestine".

The Historical Journal . 62 (2): 12. doi : 10.1017/S0018246X18000419 . Russell, C. T.; Gordon, H. L.; America, P. P. F. O. (1917). "Zionism in Prophecy". Pastor Russell's Sermons . Brooklyn, NY: International Bible Students Association. Rynhold, Jonathan; Waxman, Dov (2008). "Ideological Change and Israel's Disengagement from Gaza". Political Science Quarterly . 123 (1): 11– 37. doi : 10.1002/j.1538-165x.2008.tb00615.x . Sachar, Howard (May 2007). A History of Israel: From the Rise of Zionism to Our Time . Random House . ISBN 978-0375711329 . Safran, Nadav (1 July 2009). Israel, the Embattled Ally: With a New Preface and a Postscript by the Author . Harvard University Press . ISBN 978-0-674-04303-9 . Sagi, Avi; Schwartz, Dov (8 May 2024). "Religious Zionism: Tradition, History and Identity".

In Shindler, Colin (ed.). Routledge Handbook on Zionism . London: Routledge . pp. 90– 104. doi : 10.4324/9781003312352-14 . ISBN 978-1-003-31235-2 . Scharfstein, Sol (1997). Chronicle of Jewish History: From the Patriarchs to the 21st Century . Ktav Publishing House. ISBN 0-88125-545-9 . Schechtman, Joseph B. (July 1952). "The Repatriation of Yemenite Jewry". Jewish Social Studies . 14 (3): 209– 224. JSTOR 4465079 . ——— (1956).

The Vladimir Jabotinsky Story: Fighter and Prophet . Thomas Yoseloff. Schmidt, Yvonne (May 2008). Foundations of Civil and Political Rights in Israel and the Occupied Territories . GRIN Verlag. ISBN 978-3-638-94450-2 . No 33 of 5708-1948 – 23 September 1948 Schölch, Alexander (Autumn 1992). "Britain in Palestine, 1838–1882: The Roots of the Balfour Policy". Journal of Palestine Studies . XXII (1): 39– 56. doi : 10.2307/2537686 . JSTOR 2537686 . Schulman, Jason (2003). "The Life and Death of Socialist Zionism" (PDF) . New Politics . Vol. 9, no. 3. pp. 1– 26. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 May 2026 – via Marxists Internet Archive . Schwartz, Adi (4 January 2008). "All I Wanted was Justice" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 20 March 2016 . Retrieved 14 November 2010 . Scott, Meredith (2025). " "Israel Was a Refuge for Poor Devils": North African Jews and Postwar France". Historical Reflections/Réflexions Historiques . 51 (3): 83– 99. doi : 10.3167/hrrh.2025.510307 . Segev, Tom (2001). One Palestine, complete: Jews and Arabs under the British mandate . New York: Picador. ISBN 978-0-8050-6587-9 . ——— (2019). A State at Any Cost: The Life of David Ben-Gurion . Farrar, Straus and Giroux . ISBN 978-1-4299-5184-5 . Segev, Zohar (2007). "American Zionists' Place in Israel after Statehood: From Involved Partners to Outside Supporters". American Jewish History . 93 (2): 277– 302. JSTOR 23887950 . Sela, Avraham (2002). Continuum Political Encyclopedia of the Middle East . Bloomsbury Academic . ISBN 978-0-8264-1413-7 . Seldon, Charles A. (4 March 1919). "Prince of Hedjaz Welcomes Zionists" (PDF) .

The New York Times . Paris. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . Sethi, Arjun (January 2007). "Zionism & The British In Palestine" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 November 2007 . Retrieved 20 May 2007 . Shafir, Gershon (1996). Land, Labor and the Origins of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict, 1882–1914 . University of California Press . ISBN 978-0-520-91741-5 . Shamir, Ronen (2000).

The colonies of law: colonialism, zionism, and law in early mandate Palestine . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-0-521-63183-9 . Shapira, Anita (1992). Land and Power: The Zionist Resort to Force, 1881–1948 . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-506104-8 . Archived from the original on 7 July 2024 . Retrieved 23 June 2024 . ——— (April 2004). "The Bible and Israeli Identity" . AJS Review . 28 (1): 11– 41. doi : 10.1017/S0364009404000030 . ISSN 1475-4541 . S2CID 161984097 . ——— (2012). Israel: A History . UPNE. ISBN 978-1-61168-353-0 . ——— (2014). Israel: A History . Weidenfeld & Nicolson . ISBN 978-1-780-22739-9 . ——— (25 January 2021). "Herzl Was the New Jew" . Mosaic . Archived from the original on 8 December 2022 . Retrieved 24 November 2023 . Shapiro, Yonathan (1991).

The Road to Power: Herut Party in Israel . Translated by Mandel, Ralph. SUNY Press . ISBN 978-0791406076 . Sharif, Walid (Spring 1977). "Soviet Marxism and Zionism". Journal of Palestine Studies . 6 (3): 77– 97. JSTOR 2535581 . Shavit, Yaakov (1988). Jabotinsky and the Revisionist Movement, 1925–1948: The Right in Zionism and in Israel, 1925–1985 . Frank Cass . ISBN 978-0714633251 . Shiblak, Abbas (1986).

The lure of Zion: the case of the Iraqi Jews . Al Saqi Books. ISBN 9780863560330 . OCLC 16711193 . Shilon, Avi (8 February 2021). "The Jabotinsky Paradox" . Mosaic . Archived from the original on 5 February 2023 . Retrieved 14 February 2025 . Shimoni, Gideon (1995).

The Zionist Ideology . Brandeis University Press . ISBN 0-87451-703-6 . Shindler, Colin (2008). A History of modern Israel . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-1107671775 . Shlaim, Avi (2001).

The Iron Wall: Israel and the Arab World . W. W. Norton & Company . ISBN 978-0-393-32112-8 . ——— (2009). Israel and Palestine: Reappraisals, Revisions, Refutations . Verso Books . ISBN 978-1-78960-165-7 . ——— (2014).

The Iron Wall: Israel and the Arab World (Updated and Expanded ed.). Penguin Books . ISBN 978-0141033228 . Shohat, Ella (2003). "Rupture and Return". Social Text . 21 (2): 49– 74. doi : 10.1215/01642472-21-2_75-49 . Project MUSE 43731 . Shpiro, Shlomo (2013). "The Intellectual Foundations of Jewish National Terrorism: Avraham Stern and the Lehi". Terrorism and Political Violence . 25 (4): 606– 620. doi : 10.1080/09546553.2013.814502 . Shulewitz, Malka Hillel (2001).

The Forgotten Millions: The Modern Jewish Exodus from Arab Lands . Continuum. Shumsky, Dmitry (2018). Beyond the Nation-State . Yale University Press . Singer, Isidore; Schloessinger, Max (1901–1906). "Zvi Hirsch Kalischer" .

The Jewish Encyclopedia . New York: Funk & Wagnalls. pp. 421– 422. Archived from the original on 8 January 2025. Singerman, Robert (September 1981). "The American Career of the Protocols of the Elders of Zion". American Jewish History . 71 (1): 48– 78. JSTOR 23882005 . Slater, Jerome (2020). Mythologies Without End . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-045908-6 . Smith, Charles D. (2001). Palestine and the Arab-Israeli Conflict (4th ed.). Bedford/St. Martin's. ISBN 978-0-312-20828-8 . ——— (2004). Palestine and the Arab-Israeli Conflict (5th ed.). Boston, MA: Bedford/St. Martin's. ISBN 0-312-40408-5 . Spector, Stephen (2009). Evangelicals and Israel: The Story of American Christian Zionism . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0199887941 . Stackelberg, Roderick (May 2009). "Review of Nicosia, Francis R., Zionism and Anti-Semitism in Nazi Germany" . H-German, H-Review. Archived from the original on 17 June 2026 . Retrieved 20 October 2023 . Stanislawski, Michael (2017). Zionism: A Very Short Introduction . Very Short Introductions . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-976604-8 . Stefon, Matt, ed. (2012). Judaism: History, Belief, and Practice (1st ed.). New York: Britannica Educational Publishing. ISBN 978-1-61530-537-7 . Sternhell, Zeev (1999).

The Founding Myths of Israel . Princeton, NJ.: Princeton University Press . ISBN 0-691-00967-8 . Stewart, Desmond (Spring 1974). "Herzl's Journeys in Palestine and Egypt". Journal of Palestine Studies . 3 (3): 18– 38. doi : 10.2307/2535890 . JSTOR 2535890 . Talmon, Shemaryahu (2001). " 'Exile' and 'Restoration' in the Conceptual World of Ancient Judaism" .

In Scott, James (ed.). Restoration: Old Testament, Jewish and Christian Perspectives . Brill . pp. 107– 146. ISBN 978-90-04-49363-6 . Retrieved 19 November 2023 . Tauber, Eliezer (2014).

The Arab Movements in World War I . Routledge . ISBN 978-1135199784 . Taylor, Alan R. (1971). "Vision and Intent in Zionist Thought".

The transformation of Palestine . Evanston, US: Northwestern University Press . ISBN 0-8101-0345-1 . ——— (Winter 1972). "Zionism and Jewish History". Journal of Palestine Studies . 1 (2): 35– 51. doi : 10.2307/2535953 . JSTOR 2535953 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: year ( link ) ——— (1974). "The Isolation of Israel". Journal of Palestine Studies . 4 (1): 82– 93. doi : 10.2307/2535926 . ISSN 0377-919X . JSTOR 2535926 . Tec, Nechama (1993). Defiance: The Bielski Partisans . Oxford University Press . ISBN 0-19-509390-9 . Terry, Janice (2008). Encyclopedia of world history . Vol. 5. Infobase Publishing . Teveth, Shabtai (1985). Ben-Gurion and the Palestinian Arabs: From Peace to War . Oxford University Press . ISBN 0-19-503562-3 . Thompson, Gardner (2019). Legacy of empire: Britain, Zionism and the creation of Israel . London: Saqi Books. ISBN 978-0-86356-386-7 . Tolts, Mark (2004). "The Post-Soviet Jewish Population in Russia and the World" (PDF) . Jews in Russia and Eastern Europe . 1 (52): 37– 63. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 March 2009. "Right of Self-Determination of the Palestinian People" . Question of Palestine . United Nations . 1979. Archived from the original on 25 May 2026 . Retrieved 2 December 2023 . Veidlinger, Jeffrey (4 March 2014). "Before Crimea Was Russian, It Was a Potential Jewish Homeland" . Tablet Magazine . Archived from the original on 17 June 2026. Vital, David (1999). A People Apart: The Jews in Europe, 1789–1939 . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0198219804 . Washington Robnett, George (1976). Zionist Rape of the Holy Land!: How Zionism Turned Palestine Into a Jewish State . Crown City Publishing Company. Wasserstein, Bernard (1976). "Herbert Samuel and the Palestine Problem".

The English Historical Review . 91 (361): 753– 775. doi : 10.1093/ehr/XCI.CCCLXI.753 . JSTOR 565641 . Waxman, Chaim I. (May 1987). "Messianism, Zionism, and the State of Israel". Modern Judaism . 7 (2): 175– 192. doi : 10.1093/mj/7.2.175 . ISSN 0276-1114 . JSTOR 1396238 . Wdowiński, David (1985) . And we are not saved . New York: Philosophical Library. ISBN 0-8022-2486-5 . Weissbrod, Lilly (2014). Israeli Identity: In Search of a Successor to the Pioneer, Tsabar and Settler . Routledge . ISBN 978-1-135-29386-4 . Archived from the original on 11 January 2024 . Retrieved 22 January 2016 . Wechsler, Shoham (2024). " 'He is living Israeli flag': The Right and the Presidency in Israel under Chaim Weizmann, 1948–1952" . Middle Eastern Studies . 60 (2): 308– 319. doi : 10.1080/00263206.2023.2186858 . White, Ben (2012). Palestinians in Israel . London: Pluto Press . ISBN 978-0-7453-3228-4 . OCLC 748328849 . Whittaker, David (2012).

The Terrorism Reader (4th ed.). Routledge . ISBN 978-0415687317 . Wiemer, Reinhard (April 1987). "The Theories of Nationalism and of Zionism in the First Decade of the State of Israel". Middle Eastern Studies . 23 (2): 172– 187. doi : 10.1080/00263208708700698 . ISSN 0026-3206 . JSTOR 4283170 . Wilkinson, Paul R. (2013). Understanding Christian Zionism: Israel's Place in the Purposes of God .

The Berean Call. ISBN 978-1928660859 . Williams, Manuela (2006). Mussolini's Propaganda Abroad: Subversion in the Mediterranean and the Middle East, 1935–1940 . Routledge . ISBN 978-0415650342 . Wolf, Lucien (1919). Notes on the Diplomatic History of the Jewish Question: with texts of protocols, treaty stipulations and other public acts and official documents . Jewish Historical Society of England . Archived from the original on 16 May 2023. Wylen, Stephen M. (2000). Settings of Silver: An Introduction to Judaism . Paulist Press . ISBN 978-1841586816 . Wyrtzen, Jonathan (18 December 2015), "Negotiating Morocco's Jewish Question" , Making Morocco , Cornell University Press , pp. 179– 218, doi : 10.7591/cornell/9781501700231.003.0007 , ISBN 978-1-5017-0023-1 , retrieved 13 September 2024 Zavadivker, Polly (2016). "Fighting "On Our Own Territory": The Relief, Rescue, and Representation of Jews in Russia During World War I".

The Americanization of Zionism, 1897–1948 (2003). essays on specialized topics Hazony, David (2007). "Zion and Moral Vision".

In Hazony, David ; Hazony, Yoram; Oren, Michael B. (eds.). New Essays on Zionism . Shalem Press. pp. 168– 197. ISBN 978-9657052440 . Hertzberg, Arthur.