The growing complexity of human societies necessitated systems of accounting and writing . Early civilizations then emerged in Mesopotamia , Egypt , Peru , the Indus Valley , and China , marking the beginning of the ancient period in the 4th millennium BCE. These civilizations enabled the establishment of regional empires and provided fertile ground for transformative philosophical and religious ideas. Hinduism originated during the late Bronze Age and was followed by the many seminal belief systems of the Axial Age : Buddhism , Confucianism , Greek philosophy , Jainism , Judaism , Taoism , and Zoroastrianism . Christianity began later as an offshoot of Judaism.

The subsequent post-classical period , from about 500 to 1500 CE, included the rise of Islam and the flourishing of China under the Tang and Song dynasties while civilization expanded to new parts of the world and trade between societies increased. Major empires rose and fell, such as the Byzantine Empire , the Islamic caliphates , and the Mongol Empire . This period's invention of gunpowder and the printing press greatly affected later history.

During the early modern period , from approximately 1500 to 1800 CE, European powers explored and colonized regions worldwide, intensifying cultural and economic exchange. This era's intellectual, cultural, and technological changes in Europe included the Renaissance , Reformation , Scientific Revolution , and Enlightenment .

By the 18th century, the accumulation of knowledge and technology had reached a critical mass that brought about the Industrial Revolution , underpinning the Great Divergence and began the modern period starting around 1800 CE.

The rapid growth in productive power further increased international trade and colonization , linking the different civilizations in the process of globalization and cementing European dominance throughout the 19th century. Over the last 250 years, which included two devastating world wars , there has been a great acceleration in many spheres, including human population , agriculture, industry, commerce, scientific knowledge, technology, communications, military capabilities, and environmental degradation .

The study of human history relies on insights from academic disciplines such as history , archaeology , anthropology , linguistics , and genetics . To provide an accessible overview, researchers divide human history by a variety of periodizations. Prehistory Main articles: Prehistory and Timeline of prehistory Human origins Further information: Human evolution and Lower Paleolithic Humans evolved in Africa from great apes through the lineage of hominins , which arose 7–5 million years ago. Unlike other primates, hominins developed bipedalism , the ability to walk on two legs. Hominins began to use rudimentary stone tools c. 3.3 million years ago, marking the advent of the Paleolithic era. Early hominin evolution coincided with climatic changes in Africa that made the continent drier, colder, and less forested. These changes, and especially the cycle of alternating glacial and interglacial periods that began 3.2 million years ago, may have been key drivers of human evolution.

The genus Homo evolved from Australopithecus .

The earliest record of Homo is a 2.8 million-year-old jawbone from Ethiopia, and the earliest named species is Homo habilis which evolved by 2.3 million years ago.

The most important difference between Homo habilis and Australopithecus was a 50% increase in brain size. H. erectus evolved about 2 million years ago and was the first hominin species to leave Africa and disperse across Eurasia. Perhaps as early as 1.5 million years ago, but certainly by 400,000 years ago, hominins began to use fire for heat and cooking. Beginning about 600,000 years ago, Homo diversified into several new species, first H. heidelbergensis in Africa and Europe and then the Neanderthals in Europe and the Denisovans in Siberia . Human evolution was not a simple linear or branched progression but involved interbreeding between related species . Neanderthals, Denisovans, Homo sapiens , and other unidentified hominins all interbred with one another and hybridized . Early humans Main articles: Early modern human and Early human migrations Successive dispersals of The cave paintings suggest a form of spirituality generally interpreted as animism or shamanism .

The earliest known musical instruments besides the human voice are bone flutes from the Swabian Jura in Germany, dated around 40,000 years old. Humans migrated out of Africa in multiple waves beginning 194,000–177,000 years ago.

The dominant view among scholars is that the early waves of migration died out, and all modern non-Africans are descended from a single group that left Africa 70,000–50,000 years ago. H. sapiens proceeded to colonize all the continents and larger islands, arriving in Australia 65,000 years ago, Europe 45,000 years ago, and the Americas 21,000 years ago. These migrations occurred during the most recent Ice Age , when various temperate regions of today were inhospitable. Nevertheless, by the end of the Ice Age some 12,000 years ago, humans had colonized nearly all ice-free parts of the globe. Human expansion coincided with both the Quaternary extinction event and the Neanderthal extinction . These extinctions were probably caused by climate change, human activity, or a combination of the two. Neolithic Main article: Neolithic Beginning around 10,000 BCE, the Neolithic Revolution marked the development of agriculture , which fundamentally changed the human lifestyle. Agriculture began independently in different parts of the globe, and included a diverse range of taxa , in at least 11 separate centers of origin . Cereal crop cultivation and animal domestication had occurred in Mesopotamia by at least 8500 BCE in the form of wheat, barley , sheep, and goats.

The Yangtze River Valley in China domesticated rice around 8000–7000 BCE; the Yellow River Valley may have cultivated millet by 7000 BCE. Pigs were the most important domesticated animal in early China. People in Africa's Sahara cultivated sorghum and several other crops between 8000 and 5000 BCE, while other agricultural centers arose in the Ethiopian Highlands and the West African rainforests.

In the Indus River Valley , crops were cultivated by 7000 BCE and cattle were domesticated by 6500 BCE.

In the Americas, squash was cultivated by at least 8500 BCE in South America, and domesticated arrowroot appeared in Central America by 7800 BCE. Potatoes were first cultivated in the Andes of South America, where the llama was also domesticated. It is likely that women played a central role in plant domestication throughout these developments. A pillar at Neolithic Göbekli Tepe Various explanations of the causes of the Neolithic Revolution have been proposed. Some theories identify population growth as the main factor, leading people to seek out new food sources. Others see population growth not as the cause but as the effect of the associated improvements in food supply. Further suggested factors include climate change, resource scarcity, and ideology.

The transition to agriculture created food surpluses that could support people not directly engaged in food production, permitting far denser populations and the creation of the first cities and states . Cities were centers of trade , manufacturing , and political power . They developed mutually beneficial relationships with the inhabitants of the surrounding countrysides , receiving agricultural products and providing manufactured goods and varying degrees of political control in return. Pastoral societies based on nomadic animal herding also developed, mostly in dry areas unsuited to plant cultivation, such as the Eurasian Steppe and the African Sahel . Conflict between nomadic herders and sedentary agriculturalists was frequent and became a recurring theme in world history. Metalworking was first used in the creation of copper tools and ornaments around 6400 BCE. Gold and silver soon followed, primarily for use in ornaments.

The first signs of bronze , an alloy of copper and tin , date to around 4500 BCE, but the alloy was not widely used until the 3rd millennium BCE. Ancient Main articles: Ancient history and Timeline of ancient history Cradles of civilization Main articles: Cradle of civilization , Bronze Age , and Iron Age Great Pyramids of Giza , Egypt The Bronze Age saw the development of cities and civilizations . Early civilizations arose close to rivers, first in Mesopotamia (3300 BCE) along the Tigris and Euphrates , followed by the Egyptian civilization along the Nile River (3200 BCE), the Norte Chico civilization in coastal Peru (3100 BCE), the Indus Valley civilization in Pakistan and northwestern India (2500 BCE), and the Chinese civilization along the Yangtze and Yellow Rivers (2200 BCE). These societies developed a number of shared characteristics, including a central government, a complex economy and social structure, and systems for keeping records. These cultures variously invented the wheel , mathematics , bronze-working, sailing boats, the potter's wheel , woven cloth, construction of monumental buildings, and writing. Polytheistic religions developed, centered on temples where priests and priestesses performed sacrificial rites. Cuneiform inscription, eastern Turkey Writing facilitated the administration of cities, the expression of ideas, and the preservation of information. It may have independently developed in at least four ancient civilizations: Mesopotamia (3300 BCE), Egypt (around 3250 BCE), China (1200 BCE), and lowland Mesoamerica (by 650 BCE).

The earliest system of writing was the Mesopotamian cuneiform script , which began as a system of pictographs , whose pictorial representations eventually became simplified and more abstract. Other influential early writing systems include Egyptian hieroglyphs and the Indus script .

In China, writing was first used during the Shang dynasty (1766–1045 BCE). Transport was facilitated by waterways, including rivers and seas, which fostered the projection of military power and the exchange of goods, ideas, and inventions.

The Bronze Age also saw new land technologies, such as horse-based cavalry and chariots , that allowed armies to move faster. Trade became increasingly important as urban societies exchanged manufactured goods for raw materials from distant lands, creating vast commercial networks and the beginnings of archaic globalization . Bronze production in Southwest Asia, for example, required the import of tin from as far away as England.

The growth of cities was often followed by the establishment of states and empires.

In Egypt, the initial division into Upper and Lower Egypt was followed by the unification of the whole valley around 3100 BCE. Around 2600 BCE, the Indus Valley civilization built major cities at Harappa and Mohenjo-daro . Mesopotamian history was characterized by frequent wars between city-states, leading to shifts in hegemony from one city to another.

In the 25th–21st centuries BCE, the empires of Akkad and the Neo-Sumerians arose in this area.

In Crete, the Minoan civilization emerged by 2000 BCE and is regarded as the first civilization in Europe. Over the following millennia, civilizations developed across the world.

By 1600 BCE, Mycenaean Greece began to develop. It flourished until the Late Bronze Age collapse that affected many Mediterranean civilizations between 1300 and 1000 BCE.

The foundations of many cultural aspects in India were laid in the Vedic period (1750–600 BCE), including the emergence of Hinduism .

From around 550 BCE, many independent kingdoms and republics known as the Mahajanapadas were established across the subcontinent. Olmec colossal head , now at the Museo de Antropología de Xalapa Speakers of the Bantu languages began expanding across Central, Eastern, and Southern Africa as early as 3000 BCE until 1000 CE. Their expansion and encounters with other groups resulted in the displacement of the Pygmy peoples and the Khoisan , and in the spread of mixed farming and ironworking throughout sub-Saharan Africa, laying the foundations for later states.

The Lapita culture emerged in the Bismarck Archipelago near New Guinea around 1500 BCE and colonized many uninhabited islands of Remote Oceania , reaching as far as Samoa by 700 BCE.

In the Americas, the Norte Chico culture emerged in Peru around 3100 BCE.

The Norte Chico built public monumental architecture at the city of Caral , dated 2627–1977 BCE.

The later Chavín polity is sometimes described as the first Andean state, centered on the religious site at Chavín de Huantar . Other important Andean cultures include the Moche , whose ceramics depict many aspects of daily life, and the Nazca , who created animal-shaped designs in the desert called Nazca lines .

The Olmecs of Mesoamerica developed by about 1200 BCE and are known for the colossal stone heads that they carved from basalt . They also devised the Mesoamerican calendar that was used by later cultures such as the Maya and Teotihuacan . Societies in North America were primarily egalitarian hunter-gatherers, supplementing their diet with the plants of the Eastern Agricultural Complex . They built earthworks such as Watson Brake (4000 BCE) and Poverty Point (3600 BCE), both in Louisiana. Axial Age Main article: Axial Age Standing Buddha from Gandhara , 2nd century CE From 800 to 200 BCE, the Axial Age saw the emergence of transformative philosophical and religious ideas that developed in many different places mostly independently of each other. Chinese Confucianism , Indian Buddhism and Jainism , and Jewish monotheism all arose during this period. Persian Zoroastrianism began earlier, perhaps around 1000 BCE, but was institutionalized by the Achaemenid Empire during the Axial Age. New philosophies took hold in Greece during the 5th century BCE, epitomized by thinkers such as Plato and Aristotle .

The first Olympic Games were held in 776 BCE, marking a period known as " classical antiquity ".

In 508 BCE, the world's first democratic system of government was instituted in Athens . Axial Age ideas shaped subsequent intellectual and religious history. Confucianism was one of the three schools of thought that came to dominate Chinese thinking, along with Taoism and Legalism .

The Confucian tradition, which would become particularly influential, looked for political morality not to the force of law but to the power and example of tradition. Confucianism would later spread to Korea and Japan. Buddhism reached China in about the 1st century CE and spread widely, with 30,000 Buddhist temples in northern China alone by the 7th century CE. Buddhism became the main religion in much of South, Southeast, and East Asia.

The Greek philosophical tradition diffused throughout the Mediterranean world and as far as India, starting in the 4th century BCE after the conquests of Alexander the Great of Macedon . Both Christianity and Islam developed from the beliefs of Judaism . Regional empires The millennium from 500 BCE to 500 CE saw a series of empires of unprecedented size develop. Well-trained professional armies, unifying ideologies, and advanced bureaucracies created the possibility for emperors to rule over large domains whose populations could attain numbers upwards of tens of millions of subjects. International trade also expanded, most notably the massive trade routes in the Mediterranean Sea, the maritime trade web in the Indian Ocean , and the Silk Road . Carving of Persian and Median soldiers, Persepolis , Achaemenid Empire , 5th century BCE The kingdom of the Medes helped to destroy the Assyrian Empire in tandem with the nomadic Scythians and the Babylonians . Nineveh , the capital of Assyria, was sacked by the Medes in 612 BCE.

The Median Empire gave way to successive Iranian states, including the Achaemenid (550–330 BCE), Parthian (247 BCE – 224 CE), and Sasanian Empires (224–651 CE). Two major empires began in modern-day Greece .

In the late 5th century BCE, several Greek city states checked the Achaemenid Persian advance in Europe through the Greco-Persian Wars . These wars were followed by the Golden Age of Athens , the seminal period of ancient Greece that laid many of the foundations of Western civilization , including the first theatrical performances .

The wars led to the creation of the Delian League , founded in 477 BCE, and eventually the Athenian Empire (454–404 BCE), which was defeated by a Spartan-led coalition during the Peloponnesian War . Philip of Macedon unified the Greek city-states into the Hellenic League and his son Alexander the Great (356–323 BCE) founded an empire extending from present-day Greece to India.

The empire divided into several successor states shortly after his death, resulting in the founding of many cities and the spread of Greek culture throughout conquered regions, a process referred to as Hellenization .

The Hellenistic period lasted from the death of Alexander in 323 BCE until 31 BCE, when Ptolemaic Egypt fell to Rome.

The Colosseum in Rome In Europe, the Roman Republic was founded in the 6th century BCE and began expanding its territory in the 3rd century BCE. Prior to this, the Carthaginian Empire had dominated the Mediterranean, however lost three successive wars to the Romans.

The Republic became an empire and by the time of Augustus (63 BCE – 14 CE), it had established dominion over most of the Mediterranean Sea.

The empire continued to grow and reached its peak under Trajan (53–117 CE), controlling much of the land from England to Mesopotamia.

The two centuries that followed are known as the Pax Romana , a period of unprecedented peace, prosperity, and political stability in most of Europe. Christianity was legalized by Constantine I in 313 CE after three centuries of imperial persecution . It became the sole official religion of the empire in 380 CE while the emperor Theodosius outlawed pagan religions in 391–392 CE.

In South Asia, Chandragupta Maurya founded the Maurya Empire (320–185 BCE), which flourished under Ashoka the Great .

From the 4th to 6th centuries CE, the Gupta Empire oversaw the period referred to as ancient India's golden age.

The resulting stability helped usher in a flourishing period for Hindu and Buddhist culture in the 4th and 5th centuries, as well as major advances in science and mathematics.

In South India , three prominent Dravidian kingdoms emerged: the Cheras , Cholas , and Pandyas . Pillar erected by Ashoka , a Mauryan Emperor in India In China, Qin Shi Huang put an end to the chaotic Warring States period by uniting all of China under the Qin dynasty (221–206 BCE). Qin Shi Huang was an adherent of the Legalist school of thought and he displaced the hereditary aristocracy by creating an efficient system of administration staffed by officials appointed according to merit.

The harshness of the Qin dynasty led to rebellions and the dynasty's fall. It was followed by the Han dynasty (202 BCE – 220 CE), which combined the Legalist bureaucratic system with Confucian ideals.

The Han dynasty was comparable in power and influence to the Roman Empire that lay at the other end of the Silk Road.

As economic prosperity fueled their military expansion, the Han conquered parts of Mongolia, Central Asia, Manchuria , Korea, and northern Vietnam.

As with other empires during the classical period, Han China advanced significantly in the areas of government, education, science, and technology.

The Han invented the compass , one of China's Four Great Inventions . Obelisk of Axum , Ethiopia In Africa, the Kingdom of Kush prospered through its interactions with both Egypt and sub-Saharan Africa. It ruled Egypt as the Twenty-fifth Dynasty from 712 to 650 BCE, then continued as an agricultural and trading state based in the city of Meroë until the fourth century CE.

The Kingdom of Aksum , centered in present-day Ethiopia, established itself by the 1st century CE as a major trading empire, dominating its neighbors in South Arabia and Kush and controlling the Red Sea trade. It minted its own currency and carved enormous monolithic stelae to mark its emperors' graves. Successful regional empires were also established in the Americas, arising from cultures established as early as 2500 BCE.

In Mesoamerica, vast pre-Columbian societies were built, the most notable being the Zapotec civilization (700 BCE – 1521 CE), and the Maya civilization, which reached its highest state of development during the Mesoamerican classic period ( c. 250–900 CE ), but continued throughout the post-classic period.

The great Maya city-states slowly rose in number and prominence, and Maya culture spread throughout the Yucatán and surrounding areas.

The Maya developed a writing system and used the concept of zero in their mathematics. West of the Maya area, in central Mexico, the city of Teotihuacan prospered due to its control of the obsidian trade. Its power peaked around 450 CE, when its 125,000–150,000 inhabitants made it one of the world's largest cities. Technology developed sporadically in the ancient world. There were periods of rapid technological progress, such as the Greco-Roman era in the Mediterranean region. Greek science , technology , and mathematics are generally considered to have reached their peak during the Hellenistic period, typified by devices such as the Antikythera mechanism . There were also periods of technological decay, such as the Roman Empire's decline and fall and the ensuing early medieval period. Two of the most important innovations were paper (China, 1st and 2nd centuries CE) and the stirrup (India, 2nd century BCE and Central Asia, 1st century CE), both of which diffused widely throughout the world.

The Chinese learned to make silk and built massive engineering projects such as the Great Wall of China and the Grand Canal .

The Romans were also accomplished builders, inventing concrete , perfecting the use of arches in construction, and creating aqueducts to transport water over long distances to urban centers. Most ancient societies practiced slavery , which was particularly prevalent in Athens and Rome , where slaves made up a large proportion of the population and were foundational to the economy. Patriarchy was also common, with men controlling more political and economic power than women. Declines, falls, and resurgence European migrations by mostly Germanic peoples , 2nd–6th centuries The ancient empires faced common problems associated with maintaining huge armies and supporting a central bureaucracy .

In Rome and Han China, the state began to decline, and barbarian pressure on the frontiers hastened internal dissolution.

The Han dynasty fell into civil war in 220 CE, beginning the Three Kingdoms period, while its Roman counterpart became increasingly decentralized and divided about the same time in what is known as the Crisis of the Third Century .

From the Eurasian steppe, horse-based nomads dominated a large part of the continent.

The development of the stirrup and the use of horse archers made the nomads a constant threat to sedentary civilizations.

In the 4th century CE, the Roman Empire split into western and eastern regions, with usually separate emperors.

The Western Roman Empire fell in 476 CE to German influence under Odoacer in the Migration Period of the Germanic peoples .

The Eastern Roman Empire, known as the Byzantine Empire , was more long-lasting.

In China, dynasties rose and fell, but, in sharp contrast to the Mediterranean-European world, political unity was always eventually restored.

After the fall of the Eastern Han dynasty and the demise of the Three Kingdoms, nomadic tribes from the north began to invade, causing many Chinese people to flee southward. Post-classical Main articles: Post-classical history and Timeline of post-classical history Portrait of Alfraganus in the Compilatio astronomica , 1493. Islamic astronomers began just before the 9th century to collect and translate Indian , Persian and Greek astronomical texts, adding their own astronomy and enabling later, particularly European astronomy to build on. Symbolic for the post-classical period, a period of an increasing trans-regional literary culture, particularly in the sciences, spreading and building on methods of science.

The post-classical period, dated roughly from 500 to 1500 CE, was characterized by the rise and spread of major religions while civilization expanded to new parts of the world and trade between societies intensified.

From the 10th to 13th centuries, the Medieval Warm Period in the northern hemisphere aided agriculture and led to population growth in parts of Europe and Asia. It was followed by the Little Ice Age , which, along with the plagues of the 14th century, put downward pressure on the population of Eurasia. Major inventions of the period were gunpowder , guns, and printing, all of which originated in China.

The post-classical period encompasses the early Muslim conquests , the Islamic Golden Age , and the commencement and expansion of the Arab slave trade , followed by the Mongol invasions and the founding of the Ottoman Empire. South Asia had a series of middle kingdoms , followed by the establishment of Islamic empires in India.

In West Africa, the Mali and Songhai Empires rose.

On the southeast coast of Africa, Arabic ports were established where gold, spices , and other commodities were traded. This allowed Africa to join the Southeast Asia trading system, bringing it contact with Asia; this resulted in the Swahili culture . China experienced the relatively successive Sui, Tang, Song , Yuan , and early Ming dynasties . Middle Eastern trade routes along the Indian Ocean, and the Silk Road through the Gobi Desert , provided limited economic and cultural contact between Asian and European civilizations.

During the same period, civilizations in the Americas, such as the Mississippians , Aztecs , Maya, and Inca reached their zenith. West and Central Asia Main articles: History of the Middle East , History of North Africa , and History of Central Asia Umayyad Mosque in Damascus Before the advent of Islam in the 7th century, the Middle East was dominated by the Byzantine and Sasanian Empires, which frequently fought each other for control of several disputed regions.

The birth of Islam created a new contender that quickly surpassed both of these empires. Muhammad , the founder of Islam, initiated the early Muslim conquests in the 7th century.

The subsequent Abbasid Caliphate oversaw the Islamic Golden Age, an era of learning, science, and invention during which philosophy , art , and literature flourished. Islamic civilization expanded both by conquest and based on its merchant economy. Merchants brought goods and their Islamic faith to China , India , Southeast Asia , and Africa . Arab domination of the Middle East ended in the mid-11th century with the arrival of the Seljuk Turks , migrating south from the Turkic homelands.

The Seljuks were challenged by Europe during the Crusades , a series of religious wars aimed at rolling back Muslim territory and regaining control of the Holy Land .

The Crusades were ultimately unsuccessful and served more to weaken the Byzantine Empire.

The Turks founded the Ottoman Empire in modern-day Turkey around 1299.

From the 10th century, the Abbasid Caliphate's African territory was consumed by the Fatimid Caliphate centered on Egypt, who were supplanted by the Ayyubids in the 12th century, and them later by the Mamluks in the 13th century.

In the Maghreb and Western Sahara , the Almoravids dominated from the 11th century, until it was subsumed by the Almohad Caliphate in the 12th century.

The Almohads' collapse gave rise to the Marinids in Morocco, the Zayyanids in Algeria, and the Hafsids in Tunisia. Steppe nomads from Central Asia, such as the Karluks and Kipchaks , continued to threaten sedentary societies in the post-classical era, but they also faced incursions from the Arabs and Chinese.

In the 8th century, Islam began to penetrate the region and soon became the sole faith of most of the population.

From the 9th to 13th centuries, Central Asia was divided among several powerful states, including the Samanid , Seljuk , and Khwarazmian Empires . These states were succeeded by the Mongols in the 13th century.

In 1370, Timur conquered most of the region and founded the Timurid Empire , which collapsed soon after his death. His descendants retained control of a core area in Central Asia and Iran, overseeing the Timurid Renaissance of art and architecture. Europe Main articles: History of Europe and Middle Ages Notre-Dame de Paris , France Since at least the 4th century, Christianity has played a prominent role in shaping the culture, values, and institutions of Western civilization, primarily through Catholicism and later also Protestantism . Europe during the Early Middle Ages was characterized by depopulation, deurbanization , and barbarian invasions, all of which had begun in late antiquity .

The barbarian invaders formed their own new kingdoms in the remains of the Western Roman Empire. Christianity expanded in Western Europe, and monasteries were founded.

In the 7th and 8th centuries, the Franks under the Carolingian dynasty established an empire covering much of Western Europe; it lasted until the 9th century, when it succumbed to pressure from new invaders—the Vikings , Magyars , and Arabs.

During the Carolingian era, churches developed a form of musical notation called neume which became the basis for the modern notation system. Kievan Rus' expanded from its capital in Kiev to become the largest state in Europe by the 10th century.

In 988, Vladimir the Great adopted Orthodox Christianity as the state religion. 13th-century French historiated initial with the three classes of medieval society: those who prayed (the clergy ), those who fought (the knights ), and those who worked (the peasantry ) During the High Middle Ages , which began after 1000, the population of Europe increased as technological and agricultural innovations allowed trade to flourish and crop yields to increase.

The establishment of the feudal system affected the structure of medieval society. It included manorialism , the organization of peasants into villages that owed rents and labor service to nobles, and vassalage , a political structure whereby knights and lower-status nobles owed military service to their overlords in return for the right to rents from lands and manors. Kingdoms became more centralized after the decentralizing effects of the breakup of the Carolingian Empire .

In 1054, the Great Schism between the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches led to the prominent cultural differences between Western and Eastern Europe.

The Crusades were a series of religious wars waged by Christians to wrest control of the Holy Land from the Muslims and succeeded for long enough to establish some Crusader states in the Levant . Intellectual life was marked by scholasticism and the founding of universities , while the building of Gothic cathedrals and churches was one of the outstanding artistic achievements of the age.

The Caucasus was fought over in a series of wars between the Byzantine and Sasanian Empires. However, the two opposing powers became exhausted due to continuous conflict. Hence, the Rashidun Caliphate was able to freely expand into the region during the early Muslim conquests.

The Seljuk Turks later subjugated Armenia and Georgia in the 11th century.

The Mongols subsequently invaded the Caucasus in the 13th century.

The Mongols reached Europe in 1236 and conquered Kievan Rus' , along with briefly invading Poland and Hungary . Lithuania cooperated with the Mongols but remained independent and in the late 14th century formed a personal union with Poland .

The Late Middle Ages were marked by difficulties and calamities. Famine, plague, and war devastated the population of Western Europe.

The Black Death alone killed approximately 75 to 200 million people between 1347 and 1350. It was one of the deadliest pandemics in human history. Starting in Asia, the disease reached the Mediterranean and Western Europe during the late 1340s, and killed tens of millions of Europeans in six years; between a quarter and a third of the population perished. Africa Main article: History of Africa One of the eleven Rock-hewn Churches of Lalibela constructed during the Zagwe dynasty in Ethiopia Sub-Saharan Africa was home to many different civilizations.

In Nubia , the Kingdom of Kush was succeeded by the Christian kingdoms of Makuria , Alodia , and Nobatia .

In the 7th century, Makuria conquered Nobatia to become the dominant power in the region and resisted Muslim expansion. They later entered a severe decline following civil war and Arab migrations to the Sudan and had disintegrated by the 15th century, giving rise to the Funj Sultanate .

In the Horn of Africa , Islam spread among the Somalis .

In the Sahel region of West Africa, the Ghana Empire formed from between the 2nd and 8th centuries, while from the 7th century the Gao Empire ruled to its east. Almoravid capture of royal Aoudaghost led to Ghana's conversion to Islam in the 11th century, and climatic changes led to Ghana's conquest by its vassal Sosso in the 13th century. Sosso was quickly overthrown by the Mali Empire who conquered Gao and dominated the trans-Saharan trade .

The Mossi Kingdoms were established to its south. To the east, the Kanem–Bornu Empire ruled from the 6th century, and projected power over the Hausa Kingdoms .

The 15th century saw the crumbling of the Mali Empire, with the dominant power in the region becoming the Songhai Empire centered on Gao . Benin Bronze head from Nigeria In the forest regions of West Africa , various kingdoms and empires flourished, such as the Yoruba empires of Ife and Oyo , the Igbo Kingdom of Nri , the Edo Kingdom of Benin (famous for its art ), the Dagomba Kingdom of Dagbon , and the Akan kingdoms of Bonoman and Adanse . They came into contact with the Portuguese in the 15th century which saw the start of the Atlantic slave trade .

In the western Congo Basin by the 13th century there were three main confederations of states: the Seven Kingdoms , Mpemba , and one led by Vungu . : 24–25 In the 14th century the Kingdom of Kongo emerged and dominated the region. Further east, the Luba Empire was founded in the Upemba Depression in the 15th century.

In the northern Great Lakes , the Empire of Kitara rose around the 11th century, famed for its oral traditions . It collapsed in the 15th century following Luo migrations to the region.

On the Swahili coast the Swahili city-states thrived off of the Indian Ocean trade and gradually Islamized, giving rise to the Kilwa Sultanate from the 10th century. Madagascar was settled by Austronesian peoples between the 5th and 7th centuries, as societies organized at the behest of hasina . : 43, 52–53 In Southern Africa, an early kingdom was Mapungubwe , followed by the Kingdom of Great Zimbabwe in the 13th century, and the Mutapa Empire and Kingdom of Butua in the 15th century. South Asia Main article: History of India Chennakesava Temple , Belur , India After the fall of the Gupta Empire in 550 CE, North India was divided into a complex and fluid network of smaller kingdoms. Early Muslim incursions began in the northwest in 711 CE, when the Arab Umayyad Caliphate conquered much of present-day Pakistan.

The Arab military advance was largely halted at that point, but Islam still spread in India, largely due to the influence of Arab merchants along the western coast.

The 9th century saw the Tripartite Struggle for control of North India between the Pratihara , Pala , and Rashtrakuta Empires . Post-classical dynasties in South India included those of the Chalukyas , Hoysalas , and Cholas. Literature, architecture, sculpture, and painting flourished under the patronage of these kings. Some of the other important states that emerged in South India during this time included the Bahmani Sultanate and the Vijayanagara Empire . Northeast Asia Main articles: History of East Asia and History of Siberia After a period of relative disunity, China was reunified by the Sui dynasty in 589, later succeeded by the Tang dynasty in 618. Both dynasties instituted the long-lasting imperial examination system. China later competed with Tibet (618–842) for control of areas in Inner Asia. However, the Tang dynasty eventually splintered.

After half a century of turmoil , the Song dynasty reunified much of China. Pressure from nomadic empires to the north became increasingly urgent.

By 1127, northern China had been lost to the Jurchens in the Jin–Song Wars , and the Mongols conquered all of China in 1279.

After about a century of Mongol Yuan dynasty rule, the ethnic Chinese reasserted control with the founding of the Ming dynasty in 1368. Battle during the 1281 Mongol invasion of Japan In Japan , the imperial lineage was established during the 3rd century CE, and a centralized state developed during the Yamato period ( c. 300 –710). Buddhism was introduced, and there was an emphasis on the adoption of elements of Chinese culture and Confucianism.

The Nara period (710–794) was characterized by the appearance of a nascent literary culture , as well as the development of Buddhist-inspired artwork and architecture .

The Heian period (794–1185) saw the peak of imperial power, followed by the rise of militarized clans and the samurai . It was during the Heian period that Murasaki Shikibu penned The Tale of Genji , sometimes considered the world's first novel.

From 1185 to 1868, Japan was dominated by powerful regional lords ( daimyos ) and the military rule of warlords ( shoguns ) such as the Ashikaga and Tokugawa shogunates .

The emperor remained but did not wield significant influence. Meanwhile, the power of merchants grew. An influential art style known as ukiyo-e arose during the Tokugawa years, consisting of woodblock prints which originally depicted famous courtesans . Post-classical Korea saw the end of the Three Kingdoms era, in which the kingdoms of Goguryeo , Baekje , and Silla had competed for hegemony. This period ended when Silla conquered Baekje in 660 and Goguryeo in 668, marking the beginning of the Northern and Southern States period , with Unified Silla in the south and Balhae , a successor state to Goguryeo, in the north.

In 892 CE, this arrangement reverted to the Later Three Kingdoms , with Goguryeo emerging as dominant, unifying the entire peninsula by 936.

The founding Goryeo dynasty ruled until 1392, succeeded by the Joseon dynasty , which ruled for approximately 500 years.

In Mongolia , Genghis Khan united various Mongol and Turkic tribes under one banner in 1206.

The Mongol Empire expanded from North Asia to comprise all of China and Central Asia, as well as large parts of Russia and the Middle East, to become the largest contiguous empire in history .

After Möngke Khan died in 1259, the Mongol Empire was divided into four successor states : the Yuan Dynasty in China, the Chagatai Khanate in Central Asia, the Golden Horde in Eastern Europe and Russia, and the Ilkhanate in Iran. Southeast Asia Main article: History of Southeast Asia Angkor Wat temple complex, Cambodia, early 12th century The Southeast Asian polity of Funan , which had originated in the 2nd century CE, went into decline in the 6th century as Chinese trade routes shifted away from its ports. It was replaced by the Khmer Empire in 802 CE.

The capital city of the Khmers at Angkor was the most extensive city in the world before the industrial age and contained Angkor Wat , the world's largest religious monument.

The Sukhothai (mid-13th century) and Ayutthaya Kingdoms (1351) were major powers of the Thais , who were influenced by the Khmers. Starting in the 9th century, the Pagan Kingdom rose to prominence in modern Myanmar . Its collapse brought about political fragmentation that ended with the rise of the Toungoo Empire in the 16th century. Other notable kingdoms of the period include Srivijaya and Lavo (both coming into prominence in the 7th century), Champa and Hariphunchai (both about 750), Đại Việt (968), Lan Na (13th century), Majapahit (1293), Lan Xang (1353), and Ava (1365). Hinduism and Buddhism had been spreading in Southeast Asia since the 1st century CE when, beginning in the 13th century, Islam arrived and made its way to regions such as present-day Indonesia. This period also saw the emergence of the Malay states , including Brunei and Malacca .

In the Philippines , several polities were formed such as Tondo , Cebu , and Butuan . Oceania Main article: History of Oceania Moai , Easter Island The Polynesians , descendants of the Lapita peoples , colonized vast reaches of Remote Oceania beginning around 1000 CE. Their voyages resulted in the colonization of hundreds of islands including the Marquesas , Hawaii, Rapa Nui (Easter Island), and New Zealand.

The Tuʻi Tonga Empire was founded in the 10th century CE and expanded between 1250 and 1500. Tongan culture, language, and hegemony spread widely throughout eastern Melanesia , Micronesia , and central Polynesia during this period. They influenced east 'Uvea , Rotuma , Futuna , Samoa , and Niue , as well as specific islands and parts of Micronesia, Vanuatu , and New Caledonia .

In Northern Australia, there is evidence that Aboriginal Australians regularly traded with Makassan trepangers from Indonesia before the arrival of Europeans.

In Aboriginal societies, leadership was based on achievement while the social structure of Polynesian societies was characterized by hereditary chiefdoms . Americas Main article: History of the Americas Maya observatory , Chichen Itza , Mexico Machu Picchu , Inca Empire , Peru In North America, this period saw the rise of the Mississippian culture in the modern-day United States c. 950 CE, marked by the extensive 11th-century urban complex at Cahokia .

The Ancestral Puebloans and their predecessors (9th–13th centuries) built extensive permanent settlements, including stone structures that remained the largest buildings in North America until the 19th century.

In Mesoamerica, the Teotihuacan civilization fell and the classic Maya collapse occurred.

The Aztec Empire came to dominate much of Mesoamerica in the 14th and 15th centuries.

In South America, the 15th century saw the rise of the Inca.

The Inca Empire , with its capital at Cusco , spanned the entire Andes , making it the most extensive pre-Columbian civilization .

The Inca were prosperous and advanced, known for an excellent road system and elegant stonework. Early modern Main articles: Early modern period and Timelines of modern history The early modern period is the era following the European Middle Ages until 1789 or 1800. A common break with the medieval period is placed between 1450 and 1500 which includes a number of significant events: the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire , the spread of printing and European voyages of discovery to America and along the African coast.

The nature of warfare evolved as the size and organization of military forces on land and sea increased, alongside the wider propagation of gunpowder.

The early modern period is significant for the start of proto-globalization , increasingly centralized bureaucratic states and early forms of capitalism . European powers also began colonizing large parts of the world through maritime empires: first the Portuguese and Spanish Empires , then the French , English , and Dutch Empires . Historians still debate the causes of Europe's rise, which is known as the Great Divergence . Japanese depiction of a Portuguese carrack , a result of globalizing maritime trade Capitalist economies emerged, initially in the northern Italian republics and some Asian port cities. European states practiced mercantilism by implementing one-sided trade policies designed to benefit the mother country at the expense of its colonies. Starting at the end of the 15th century, the Portuguese established trading posts across Africa, Asia, and Brazil, for commodities like gold and spices while also practicing slavery .

In the 17th century, private chartered companies were established, such as the English East India Company in 1600 – often described as the first multinational corporation – and the Dutch East India Company in 1602. Meanwhile, in much of the European sphere, serfdom declined and eventually disappeared while the power of the Catholic Church waned.

The Age of Discovery was the first period in which the Old World engaged in substantial cultural, material, and biological exchange with the New World . It began in the late 15th century, when Portugal and Castile sent the first exploratory voyages to the Americas, where Christopher Columbus first arrived in 1492. Global integration continued as European colonization of the Americas initiated the Columbian exchange : the exchange of plants, animals, foods, human populations (including slaves), communicable diseases , and culture between the Eastern and Western Hemispheres . It was one of history's most important global events, involving ecology and agriculture. New crops brought from the Americas by 16th-century European seafarers substantially contributed to world population growth. West and Central Asia The Ottoman Empire quickly came to dominate the Middle East after conquering Constantinople in 1453, which marked the end of the Byzantine Empire. Persia came under the rule of the Safavids in 1501, succeeded by the Afshars in 1736, the Zands in 1751, and the Qajars in 1794.

The Safavids established Shia Islam as Persia's official religion, thus giving Persia a separate identity from its Sunni neighbors. Along with the Mughals in India, the Ottomans and Safavids are known as the gunpowder empires because of their early adoption of firearms. Throughout the 16th century the Ottomans conquered all of North Africa save for Morocco, which came under the rule of the Saadi dynasty at the same time, and then the Alawi dynasty in the 17th century.

The Uzbeks replaced the Timurids as the preeminent power in Central Asia by the 16th century.

The Renaissance – the "rebirth" of classical culture, beginning in Italy in the 14th century and extending into the 16th – comprised the rediscovery of the classical world 's cultural, scientific, and technological achievements, and the economic and social rise of Europe. This period is also celebrated for its artistic and literary attainments. Petrarch 's poetry, Giovanni Boccaccio 's Decameron , and the paintings and sculptures of Leonardo da Vinci and Albrecht Dürer , as part of the Northern Renaissance , are some of the great works of the age.

After the Renaissance came the Reformation , an anti-clerical theological and social movement started in Germany by Martin Luther that resulted in the creation of Protestant Christianity .

The Renaissance also engendered a culture of inquisitiveness which ultimately led to humanism and the Scientific Revolution , an effort to understand the natural world through direct observation and experiment.

The success of the new scientific techniques inspired attempts to apply them to political and social affairs, known as the Enlightenment , by thinkers such as John Locke and Immanuel Kant . This development was accompanied by secularization as a continued decline of the influence of religious beliefs and authorities in the public and private spheres. Johannes Gutenberg 's invention of movable type printing in 1440 helped spread the ideas of the new intellectual movements. Wittenberg , birthplace of Protestantism In addition to changes wrought by incipient capitalism and colonialism, early modern Europeans experienced an increase in the power of the state. Absolute monarchs in France , Russia , the Habsburg lands , and Prussia produced powerful centralized states, with strong armies and efficient bureaucracies, all under the control of the king.

In Russia, Ivan the Terrible was crowned in 1547 as the first tsar of Russia, and by annexing the Turkic khanates in the east, transformed Russia into a regional power, eventually replacing the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth as a major power in Eastern Europe.

At the end of the 18th century, the Russian Empire began its conquest of the Caucasus.

The countries of Western Europe, while expanding prodigiously through technological advances and colonial conquest, competed with each other economically and militarily in a state of almost constant war. Wars of particular note included the Thirty Years' War , the War of the Spanish Succession , the Seven Years' War , and the French Revolutionary Wars .

The French Revolution , starting in 1789, laid the groundwork of liberal democracy by overthrowing monarchy. It led to the rise of Napoleon Bonaparte and the subsequent Napoleonic Wars of the early 19th century. Africa In the Horn of Africa , there was the Oromo expansion in the 16th century, which weakened Ethiopia and caused Adal 's collapse. Ajuran was succeeded by the Geledi Sultanate .

In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Ethiopia rapidly expanded.

In West Africa, the Songhai Empire fell to Moroccan invasion in the late 16th century. They were succeeded by the Bamana Empire .

The Fula jihads beginning in the 18th century led to the establishment of the Sokoto Caliphate , the Massina Empire , and the Tukulor Empire .

In the forest regions, the Asante Empire was established in present-day Ghana. Between 1515 and 1800, 8 million Africans were exported in the Atlantic slave trade .

In the western Congo Basin, Kongo fought three wars against the Portuguese who had begun colonizing Angola , ending in the conquest of Ndongo in the 17th century. Further east, the Lunda Empire rose to dominate the region. It fell to the Chokwe in the 19th century.

In the northern Great Lakes , the kingdoms of Bunyoro-Kitara , Buganda , and Rwanda struggled for hegemony among others. Kilwa was conquered by the Portuguese in the 16th century as they began colonizing Mozambique . They were defeated by the Omani Empire who took control of the Swahili coast .

In Madagascar the 16th century onward saw the emergence of Imerina , the Betsileo kingdoms , and the Sakalava empire ; Imerina conquered most of the island in the 19th century.

In the Zambezi Basin Mutapa was followed by the Rozvi Empire , with Maravi around Lake Malawi to its north. Mthwakazi succeeded Rozvi. Further south, the Dutch began colonizing South Africa in the 16th century, who lost it to the British.

In the 19th century, Dutch settlers formed various Boer Republics while the Mfecane ravaged the region and led to the establishment of various African kingdoms . South Asia Taj Mahal , Mughal Empire , India In the Indian subcontinent , the Mughal Empire was established under Babur in 1526 and lasted for two centuries. Starting in the northwest, it brought the entire subcontinent under Muslim rule by the late 17th century, except for the southernmost Indian provinces, which remained independent. To resist the Muslim rulers, the Hindu Maratha Empire was founded by Shivaji on the western coast in 1674.

The Marathas gradually gained territory from the Mughals over several decades, particularly in the Mughal–Maratha Wars (1680–1707). Sikhism developed at the end of the 15th century from the spiritual teachings of ten gurus .

In 1799, Ranjit Singh established the Sikh Empire in the Punjab . Northeast Asia Ming dynasty section, Great Wall of China In 1644, the Ming were supplanted by the Manchu Qing , the last conquest dynasty , which ruled China until 1912.

By the late 18th century, Russia completed its subjugation of Siberia , with the territory between the Ural Mountains and the Pacific Ocean falling under its control. Japan experienced its Azuchi–Momoyama period (1568–1600), followed by the Edo period (1600–1868).

The Korean Joseon dynasty (1392–1910) ruled throughout this period, repelling invasions from Japan and China in the 16th and 17th centuries. Expanded maritime trade with Europe significantly affected China and Japan during this period, particularly through the Portuguese in Macau and the Dutch in Nagasaki . However, China and Japan later pursued isolationist policies designed to eliminate foreign influences. Southeast Asia In 1511, the Portuguese overthrew the Malacca Sultanate in present-day Malaysia and Indonesian Sumatra .

The Portuguese held this important trading territory (and the valuable associated navigational strait) until overthrown by the Dutch in 1641.

The Johor Sultanate , centered on the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula, became the dominant trading power in the region. European colonization expanded with the Dutch in Indonesia , the Portuguese in Timor , and the Spaniards in the Philippines . Oceania The Pacific Islands of Oceania were also affected by European contact, starting with the circumnavigational voyage of Ferdinand Magellan (1519–1522), who landed in the Marianas and other islands. Abel Tasman (1642–1644) sailed to present-day Australia , New Zealand , and nearby islands. James Cook (1768–1779) made the first recorded European contact with Hawaii .

In 1788, Britain founded its first Australian colony . Americas Several European powers colonized the Americas, largely displacing the native populations and conquering the advanced civilizations of the Aztecs and Inca. Diseases introduced by Europeans devastated American societies, killing 60–90 million people by 1600 and reducing the population by 90–95%.

In some cases, colonial policies included the deliberate genocide of indigenous peoples . Spain, Portugal, Britain, and France all made extensive territorial claims, and undertook large-scale settlement , including the importation of large numbers of African slaves. One side-effect of the slave trade was cultural exchange through which various African traditions found their way to the Americas, including cuisine, music, and dance. Portugal claimed Brazil , while Spain seized the rest of South America, Mesoamerica, and southern North America.

The Spaniards mined and exported prodigious amounts of gold and silver, leading to a surge in inflation known as the Price Revolution in the 16th and 17th centuries in Western Europe.

In North America, Britain colonized the east coast while France settled the central region. Russia made incursions into the northwest coast of North America. France lost its North American territory to England and Spain after the Seven Years' War (1756–1763). Britain's Thirteen Colonies declared independence as the United States in 1776,{{They were led by the Founding Fathers , who included George Washington , Benjamin Franklin , John Adams , and Thomas Jefferson . }} ratified by the Treaty of Paris in 1783, ending the American Revolutionary War .

The long nineteenth century traditionally starts with the French Revolution in 1789, and lasts until the outbreak of World War I in 1914. It saw the global spread of the Industrial Revolution, the greatest transformation of the world economy since the Neolithic Revolution.

The Industrial Revolution began in Great Britain around 1770 and used new modes of production—the factory, mass production , and mechanization —to manufacture a wide array of goods faster while using less labor than previously required.

As a consequence of the tensions between the ruling elite and the working class that had been raised by the Industrial Revolution, this led to massive political upheavals with individuals such as Karl Marx being major figureheads within the movement. Industrialization raised the global standard of living but caused upheaval as factory owners and workers clashed over wages and working conditions. Along with industrialization came modern globalization , the increasing interconnection of world regions in the economic, political, and cultural spheres. Globalization began in the early 19th century and was enabled by improved transportation technologies such as railroads and steamships . European empires lost territories in Latin America , which won independence by the 1820s through military campaigns, but expanded elsewhere as their industrial economies gave them an advantage over the rest of the world. Britain gained control of the Indian subcontinent , Burma , Malaya , North Borneo , Hong Kong , and Aden ; the French took Indochina ; and the Dutch cemented their rule over Indonesia .

The British also colonized Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa with large numbers of British colonists emigrating to these colonies, displacing indigenous peoples in several areas. Russia colonized large pre-agricultural areas of Siberia.

The United States completed its westward expansion , establishing control over the territory from the Atlantic to the Pacific coast.

In the late 19th century to early 20th century, the European powers, driven by the Second Industrial Revolution , rapidly conquered and colonized almost the entirety of Africa . Only Ethiopia and Liberia remained independent. Imperial rule in Africa involved many atrocities such as those in the Congo Free State and the Herero and Nama genocide . Within Europe, economic and military competition fostered the creation and consolidation of nation-states, and other ethno-cultural communities began to identify themselves as distinctive nations with aspirations for their own cultural and political autonomy. This nationalism became important to peoples across the world in the 19th and 20th centuries.

In the first wave of democratization , between 1828 and 1926, democratic institutions were established in 33 countries worldwide. Most of the world abolished slavery and serfdom in the 19th century. Over several decades, beginning in the late 19th century and continuing throughout the 20th, in many countries the women's suffrage movement won women the right to vote, and women began to enjoy greater access to education and to professions beyond domestic employment.

The first airplane, the Wright Flyer , flew on 17 December 1903.

In response to encroachment by European powers, several countries undertook programs of industrialization and political reform along Western lines.

The Meiji Restoration in Japan led to the establishment of a colonial empire , while the tanzimat reforms in the Ottoman Empire did little to slow the Ottoman decline. China achieved some success with its Self-Strengthening Movement but was devastated by the Taiping Rebellion , history's bloodiest civil war, which between 1850 and 1864 killed 20–30 million people.

By the end of the century, the United States became the world's largest economy.

During the Second Industrial Revolution , new technological advances, involving electric power , the internal combustion engine , and assembly-line manufacturing, further increased productivity. Technological innovations also provided new avenues for artistic expression through the media of photography , sound recording , and film . Meanwhile, industrial pollution and environmental degradation accelerated drastically. Balloon flight had been invented in the late 18th century, but it was only at the beginning of the 20th century that powered aircraft were developed .

The 20th century opened with Europe at an apex of wealth and power. Much of the world was under its direct colonial control or its indirect influence through heavily Europeanized nations like the United States and Japan.

As the century unfolded, however, the global system dominated by rival powers experienced severe strains and ultimately yielded to a more fluid structure of independent nation states . World wars Main articles: World War I , Interwar period , and World War II This transformation was catalyzed by wars of unparalleled scope and devastation. World War I was a global conflict from 1914 to 1918 between the Allies , led by France, Russia, and the United Kingdom, and the Central Powers , led by Germany , Austria-Hungary , the Ottoman Empire, and Bulgaria. It had an estimated death toll ranging from 10 to 22.5 million and resulted in the collapse of four empires – the Austro-Hungarian, German, Ottoman, and Russian Empires. Its new emphasis on industrial technology had made traditional military tactics obsolete.

The Armenian , Assyrian , and Greek genocides saw the systematic destruction, mass murder, and expulsion of those populations in the Ottoman Empire.

From 1918 to 1920, the Spanish flu caused the deaths of at least 25 million people. Atomic bombing of Nagasaki , 1945 In the war's aftermath a League of Nations was formed in the hope of averting future international conflicts; and powerful ideologies rose to prominence.

The Russian Revolution of 1917 created the Soviet Union, which would be known as the first communist state , while the 1920s and 1930s saw fascist political parties gain control in Italy and Germany .

The Soviet Union, during Stalinist rule from 1924 to 1953, committed countless atrocities against its own people, including mass purges , forced labor camps , and widespread famine caused by state policies. Ongoing national rivalries, exacerbated by the economic turmoil of the Great Depression , helped precipitate World War II .

In that war, the vast majority of the world's countries, including all the great powers , fought as part of two opposing military alliances : the Allies and the Axis .

The leading Axis powers were Nazi Germany , Imperial Japan , and the Kingdom of Italy ; while the United Kingdom, the United States, the Soviet Union, and the Republic of China were the " Big Four " Allied powers.

The militaristic governments of Germany and Japan pursued imperialist expansionism .

In the course of doing so, Germany killed 6 million Jews and millions of non-Jews under the rule of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi party , while Japan murdered millions of Chinese.

The war also saw the introduction and use of nuclear weapons , which brought unprecedented destruction and ultimately led to Japan's surrender. Estimates of the war's total casualties range from 55 to 80 million. Contemporary history Main article: Contemporary history When World War II ended in 1945, the United Nations was founded in the hope of preventing future wars, as the League of Nations had been formed following World War I.

The United Nations championed the human rights movement , in 1948 adopting the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . Several European countries formed what would later become the European Union . World War II had opened the way for the advance of communism into Eastern and Central Europe, China, North Korea , North Vietnam , and Cuba . To contain this advance, the United States established a global network of alliances.

The largest, NATO , was established in 1949.

In response, in 1955 the Soviet Union and its Eastern European allies formed the Warsaw Pact . Fall of the Berlin Wall , 1989 The United States and the Soviet Union emerged as the primary global powers in the aftermath of World War II. Both nations harbored deep suspicions and fears about the global spread of the other's political-economic system—capitalism for the United States and communism for the Soviet Union. This mutual distrust sparked the Cold War , a 45-year stand-off and arms race between the two nations and their allies. With the development of nuclear weapons during World War II and their subsequent proliferation , all of humanity was put at risk of nuclear war between the two superpowers, as demonstrated by many incidents , most prominently the October 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis . Such war being viewed as impractical , the superpowers instead waged proxy wars in non-nuclear-armed Third World countries.

The Cold War ended peacefully in 1991 after the Soviet Union collapsed , partly due to its inability to compete economically with the United States and Western Europe. Cold War preparations to deter or fight a third world war accelerated advances in technologies that, though conceptualized before World War II, had been implemented for that war's exigencies, such as jet aircraft , rocketry , and computers.

In the decades after World War II, these advances led to jet travel; artificial satellites with innumerable applications, including GPS ; and the Internet , which in the 1990s began to gain traction as a form of communication. These inventions revolutionized the movement of people, ideas, and information. Last Moon landing: Apollo 17 (1972) The second half of the 20th century also saw groundbreaking scientific and technological developments such as the worldwide eradication of smallpox , the Green Revolution in agriculture, the discovery of plate tectonics , the moon landings , crewed and uncrewed exploration of space , advances in energy technologies , and foundational discoveries in physics . These technical innovations had far-reaching effects.

During the 20th century the world's population quadrupled to six billion, while world economic output increased by a factor of 20. Toward the end of the 20th century, the rate of population growth started to decline. Public health measures and advances in medical science contributed to a sharp increase in global life expectancy at birth from about 31 years in 1900 to over 66 years in 2000.

In 1820, 75% of humanity lived on less than one dollar a day, while in 2001 only about 20% did.

At the same time, economic inequality increased both within individual countries and between rich and poor countries.

The importance of public education had already begun to increase in the 18th and 19th centuries, but it was not until the end of the 20th and the beginning of the 21st century that compulsory free education was provided to most children worldwide .

In China, the Maoist government implemented industrialization and collectivization policies as part of the Great Leap Forward , leading to the starvation deaths of 30–40 million people. China later entered a period of economic liberalization and rapid growth.

In the postwar decades, in a process of decolonization , the African , Asian , and Oceanian colonies of European empires won their formal independence. Postcolonial states in Africa struggled to grow their economies.

The Near East experienced numerous conflicts, including the Iran–Iraq War , the first and second Gulf wars , and the Syrian civil war , as well as tensions and conflicts between Israel and Palestine . COVID-19 pandemic , 2020 The early 21st century was marked by growing economic globalization , as well as the Great Recession . Communications expanded, with smartphones and social media becoming ubiquitous worldwide by the mid-2010s.

By the early 2020s, artificial intelligence systems improved to the point of outperforming humans at many circumscribed tasks, initiating the AI boom in the early 2020s.

The influence of religion continued to decline in many Western countries, while some parts of the Muslim world saw the rise of fundamentalist movements .

In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic substantially disrupted global trading, caused recessions in the global economy, and spurred cultural paradigm shifts . Environmental degradation , including multifarious forms of pollution , and global warming became increasingly evident, while mitigation efforts made gradual progress. Academic research The study of human history has a long tradition and early precursors were already practiced in the ancient period as attempts to provide comprehensive accounts of the history of the world. Most research before the 20th century focused on histories of individual communities and societies after the prehistoric period. This changed in the late 20th century, when attempts to integrate the diverse narratives into a common context reaching back to the emergence of the first humans became a central research topic. This transition to a widened perspective was accompanied by questioning Eurocentrism and the Western-focused perspective that had previously dominated academic history. Like in other historical disciplines, the methodology of analyzing textual sources to construct narratives and interpretations of past events plays a central role in the study of human history.

The scope of its topic poses the unique challenge of synthesizing a coherent and comprehensive narrative spanning different cultures, regions, and time periods while taking diverse individual perspectives into account. This is also reflected in its interdisciplinary approach by integrating insights from fields belonging to the humanities and the social , biological, and physical sciences , such as other historical disciplines , archaeology , anthropology , linguistics , genetics , paleontology , and geology .

The interdisciplinary approach is of particular importance to the study of human history before the invention of writing. Periodization To provide an accessible overview, historians divide human history into different periods organized around key themes, events, or developments that have shaped human societies over time.

The number of periods and their time frames depend on the chosen topics, and the transitions between periods are often more fluid than static periodization schemes suggest. A traditionally influential periodization in European scholarship distinguishes between the ancient, medieval, and modern periods organized around historical events responsible for major shifts in political, economic, and cultural structures to mark the transitions between the periods: first the fall of the Western Roman Empire and later the emergence of the Renaissance. Another periodization divides human history into three periods based on the way humans engage with nature to produce goods.

The first transition happened with the emergence of agriculture and husbandry to replace hunting and gathering as the main means of food production.

The Industrial Revolution constitutes the second transition. A further approach uses the relations between societies to divide the history of the world into the periods of Middle Eastern dominance before 500 BCE, Eurasian cultural balance until 1500 CE, and Western dominance afterwards.

The Apidima Cave study has been challenged by other scholars. ^ Other scholars argue in favor of a northern dispersal of humans through Central Asia into China, or a multiple dispersal model with several different routes of migration. ^ This occurred during the African humid period , when the Sahara was much wetter than it is today. ^ This is the traditional date for the founding of the Xia dynasty and has not been confirmed by archaeology. Chinese civilization had its origins in the earlier Yangshao and Longshan cultures (4000–2000 BCE), but the Shang is the first dynasty that can be archeologically verified (1750 BCE). ^ Various forms of proto-writing existed earlier but they did not constitute fully developed writing system. ^ Cuneiform texts were written by using a blunt reed as a stylus to draw symbols upon clay tablets . ^ The Vedas contain the earliest references to India's caste system , which divided society into four hereditary classes: priests, warriors, farmers and traders, and laborers. ^ The exact dates are disputed and some periodizations use 1450 as the end point. ^ Scholars preserved and synthesized knowledge and skills of ancient Greece and Persia, the manufacture of paper from China, and the decimal positional numbering system from India.

At the same time, they made significant original contributions in various fields, such as Al-Khwarizmi 's development of algebra and Avicenna 's comprehensive philosophical system.

The folktales One Thousand and One Nights were also written in this period. ^ Goguryeo was called Taebong at that time and eventually named Goryeo . ^ They traveled the open ocean in double-hulled canoes up to 37 metres (121 ft) long, each canoe carrying as many as 50 people and their livestock. ^ The time span varies depending on the type of history studied: literary studies can define it as short as about 1500–1700 while some general historians extend its span from 1300–1800. ^ Some scholars date the period later, to the 15th and 16th centuries. ^ The Chinese invented movable type centuries earlier, but it was better suited to the alphabetical writing systems of European languages. ^ They are known as haijin in China and sakoku in Japan. ^ Magellan died in 1521.

The voyage was completed by Spanish navigator Juan Sebastián Elcano in 1522. ^ In Brazil, this influence resulted in the development of Capoeira . ^ Some historians use a different periodization, saying that it began as early as 1750 or as late as 1800. ^ Some historians also classify Francoist Spain as a fascist regime. ^ One of the main factors responsible for this was the reduction of infant mortality . ^ The Aztec civilization is an exception, having established compulsory formal education for children as early as the 14th century. ^ According to one estimate, about 90% of the global population aged 15–64 was uneducated in 1870. This number had dropped to 10% by 2010. ^ Some historian use the terms world history and global history to refer to all these attempts while others understand world history and global history in a more narrow sense as one among several competing approaches to study the development of the world on a global scale. Citations ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 1, "Human beings evolved over several million years from primates in Africa." Christian 2011 , p. 150, "But it turned out that humans and chimps differed from each other only by about 10 percent as much as the differences between major groups of mammals, which suggested that they had diverged from each other approximately 5 to 7 million years ago." Dunbar 2016 , p. 8, "Conventionally, taxonomists now refer to the great ape family (including humans) as hominids , while all members of the lineage leading to modern humans that arose after the split with the LCA are referred to as hominins .

The older literature used the terms hominoids and hominids respectively." Wragg-Sykes 2016 , pp. 183–184 ^ Dunbar 2016 , p. 8 Lewton 2017 , pp. 116–117 ^ Harmand 2015 , pp. 310–315 ^ McPherron et al. 2010 , pp. 857–860 ^ Domínguez-Rodrigo & Alcalá 2016 , pp. 46–53 ^ de la Torre 2019 , pp. 11567–11569 Stutz 2018 , pp. 1–9 , "The Paleolithic era encompasses the bulk of the human archaeological record. Its onset is defined by the oldest known stone tools, now dated to 3.3 Ma, found at the Lomekwi site in Kenya." ^ Scarre 2024 , p. 47 ^ Scarre 2024 , p. 78 ^ Strait 2010 , p. 341, "However, Homo is almost certainly descended from an australopith ancestor, so at least one or some australopiths belong directly to the human lineage." ^ Villmoare et al. 2015 , pp. 1352–1355 ^ Spoor et al. 2015 , pp. 83–86 , "The latter is morphologically more derived than OH 7 but 500,000 years older, suggesting that the H. habilis lineage originated before 2.3 million years ago, thus marking deep-rooted species diversity in the genus Homo ." ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 5, "What most distinguished Homo habilis from the australopithecines was a brain that was nearly 50 percent larger." ^ Scarre 2024 , p. 71 ^ Herries et al. 2020 , p. 14 ^ Zhu et al. 2018 , "Fourth, and most importantly, the oldest artefact age of approximately 2.12 Ma at Shangchen implies that hominins had left Africa before the date suggested by the earliest evidence from Dmanisi (about 1.85 Ma). This makes it necessary to reconsider the timing of initial dispersal of early hominins in the Old World." ^ Dunbar 2016 , p. 10 ^ Gowlett 2016 , p. 20150164, "We know that burning evidence occurs on numbers of archaeological sites from about 1.5 Ma onwards (there is evidence of actual hearths from around 0.7 to 0.4 Ma); that more elaborate technologies existed from around half a million years ago, and that these came to employ adhesives that require preparation by fire." Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 19 ^ Scarre 2024 , pp. 71, 83, 86, 112 ^ Hammer 2013 , p. 68 Yong 2011 , p. 35 Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 25 ^ Ackermann, Mackay & Arnold 2015 , p. 2 ^ Hublin et al. 2017 , pp. 289–292 Fagan & Durrani 2021 , 3. Enter Homo Sapiens (c. 300,000 Years Ago and Later) Coolidge & Wynn 2018 , p. 5 ^ Scarre 2024 , p. 103 ^ Christian 2015 , pp. 318–319 Scarre 2024 , pp. 104, 108 ^ Christian 2015 , pp. 344–346 ^ Christian 2015 , p. 22, "Most Paleolithic communities lived by foraging, nomadizing over familiar territories." ^ Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , pp. 40–41 ^ McNeill & McNeill 2003 , pp. 17–18 ^ Christian 2015 , pp. 357–358, 409 ^ Morley 2013 , pp. 42–43 Svard 2023 , p. 23 ^ Weber et al. 2020 , pp. 29, 31 ^ Herschkovitz 2018 , pp. 456–459 ^ Harvati et al. 2019 , pp. 500–504 ^ Rosas & Bastir 2020 , p. 102745 ^ Christian 2015 , p. 283 O'Connell et al. 2018 , pp. 8482–8490 Posth et al. 2016 , pp. 827–833 ^ Li et al. 2020 , pp. 1699–1700 ^ Clarkson et al. 2017 , pp. 306–310 ^ Christian 2015 , p. 283 ^ Bennett 2021 , pp. 1528–1531 ^ Christian 2015 , p. 316, "Dispersal over an unprecedented swath of the globe...coincided with an Ice Age that...spread ice in the northern hemisphere as far south as the present lower courses of the Missouri and Ohio rivers in North America and deep into what are now the British Isles. Ice covered what is today Scandinavia. Most of the rest of what is now Europe was tundra or taiga.

In central Eurasia, tundra reached almost to the present latitudes of the Black Sea. Steppe licked the shores of the Mediterranean.

In the New World, tundra and taiga extended to where Virginia is today." Pollack 2010 , p. 93 ^ Christian 2015 , p. 400, "In any case, by the end of the era of climatic fluctuation, humans occupied almost all the habitats their descendants occupy today, with the exception of relatively remote parts of the Pacific, accessible only by high-seas navigation and unsettled, as far as we know, for many millennia more." ^ Christian 2015 , pp. 321, 406, 440–441 ^ Koch & Barnosky 2006 , pp. 215–250 Christian 2015 , p. 406 ^ Lewin 2009 , p. 247 ^ Stephens et al. 2019 , pp. 897–902 ^ Larson et al. 2014 , pp. 6139–6146 ^ McNeill 1999 , p. 11 ^ Barker & Goucher 2015 , pp. 325, 336, "More recent improvements in archaeobotanical recovery have indicated that rice domestication was underway durin...the Hemudu cultural phase in the lower Yangtze valley...This points to a start of cultivation in this region of c. 10,000–9,000 years ago; in the middle Yangtze valley it could have begun someone earlier but may represent a parallel process to the lower Yangtze...it has been suggested on the basis of phytolith and starch residue evidence that broomcorn and foxtail millet were already in use in northern China prior to 7000 BCE. Nonetheless, the most abundant macrofossil evidence of broomcorn and foxtail millet is found in association with the early Neolithic sites post-7000 BCE." ^ Barker & Goucher 2015 , p. 323 ^ Barker & Goucher 2015 , p. 59 ^ a b c Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 21 ^ Barker & Goucher 2015 , p. 265 ^ Barker & Goucher 2015 , p. 518, "Arrowroot was the earliest domesticate , dating to 7800 BC at the Cueva de los Vampiros site and 5800 BCE at Aguadulce...Plant domestication began before 8500 BCE in southwest coastal Ecuador. Squash phytoliths were recovered from terminal Pleistocene and early Holocene strata at Vegas sites. Phytoliths recovered from the earliest levels are from wild squash, with domesticated size squash phytoliths directly dated to 9840–8555 BCE." ^ Barker & Goucher 2015 , p. 85 Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 202 ^ Adovasio, Soffer & Page 2007 , pp. 243, 257 Graeber & Wengrow 2021 , "Seen this way, the 'origins of farming' start to look less like an economic transition and more like a media revolution, which was also a social revolution, encompassing everything from horticulture to architecture, mathematics to thermodynamics, and from religion to the remodelling of gender roles. And while we can't know exactly who was doing what in this brave new world, it's abundantly clear that women's work and knowledge were central to its creation; that the whole process was a fairly leisurely, even playful one, not forced by any environmental catastrophe or demographic tipping point and unmarked by major violent conflict. What's more, it was all carried out in ways that made radical inequality an extremely unlikely outcome" ^ Barker & Goucher 2015 , p. 218 ^ Barker & Goucher 2015 , p. 95 ^ Barker & Goucher 2015 , pp. 216–218 ^ Roberts & Westad 2013 , pp. 34–35 ^ Lewin 2009 , p. 247 , "The date of 12,000 years before present (BP) is usually given as the beginning of what has been called the Agricultural (or Neolithic) Revolution...The tremendous changes wrought during the Neolithic can be seen as a prelude to the emergence of cities and city states and, of course, to a further rise in population." ^ Yoffee 2015 , pp. 313, 391 ^ Barker & Goucher 2015 , p. 193 Yoffee 2015 , pp. 313–316 ^ Barker & Goucher 2015 , pp. 161–162, 172–173 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 99 ^ Radivojevic et al. 2013 , pp. 1030–1045 ^ Headrick 2009 , pp. 30–31 ^ McClellan & Dorn 2006 , p. 41 Roberts & Westad 2013 , p. 46 ^ Stearns & Langer 2001 , p. 21 Roberts & Westad 2013 , p. 53 ^ Bard 2000 , p. 63 Roberts & Westad 2013 , p. 70 ^ a b Benjamin 2015 , p. 563 ^ Graeber & Wengrow 2021 , p. 314 Chakrabarti 2004 , pp. 10–13 Allchin & Allchin 1997 , pp. 153–168 ^ a b Ropp 2010 , p. 2 ^ Tignor et al. 2014 , p. 71 ^ Ropp 2010 , pp. 2–3 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 23 ^ Headrick 2009 , p. 32 ^ Roberts & Westad 2013 , p. 59 ^ a b Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 35 ^ Roberts & Westad 2013 , p. 91 ^ a b McNeill 1999 , p. 16 ^ McNeill 1999 , p. 18 ^ Johnston 2004 , pp. 13, 19 ^ Roberts & Westad 2013 , pp. 43–46 ^ Yoffee 2015 , p. 118 ^ Regulski 2016 Wengrow 2011 , pp. 99–103, The Invention of Writing in Egypt ^ Boltz 1996 , p. 191 , Early Chinese Writing ^ Fagan & Beck 1996 , p. 762 ^ Trubek 2016 , The Strangely Familiar Very Far Past ^ Roberts & Westad 2013 , pp. 53–54 Tignor et al. 2014 , pp. 49, 52 ^ Headrick 2009 , p. 33 ^ Robinson 2009 , p. 38 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 80 Yoffee 2015 , p. 136 ^ Abulafia 2011 , pp. xvii, passim Benjamin 2015 , p. 89 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 35 Christian 2011 , p. 256 ^ Tignor et al. 2014 , pp. 48–49 ^ Headrick 2009 , p. 31 ^ Graeber & Wengrow 2021 , p. 362, "There is no doubt that, in most of the areas that saw the rise of cities, powerful kingdoms and empires also eventually emerged." ^ Bard 2000 , pp. 57–64 ^ Yoffee 2015 , p. 320 Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 46 ^ Yoffee 2015 , p. 257 ^ McNeill 1999 , pp. 36–37 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 56 ^ McNeill 1999 , pp. 46–47 ^ Price & Thonemann 2010 , p. 25 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 331 ^ Roberts & Westad 2013 , pp. 116–122 ^ Graeber & Wengrow 2021 , p. 317 ^ Singh 2008 , pp. 260–264 ^ Benjamin 2015 , pp. 646–647 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 648 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 617 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 562 Shady Solis, Haas & Creamer 2001 , pp. 723–726 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 564 ^ Graeber & Wengrow 2021 , p. 389 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 565 ^ Nichols & Pool 2012 , p. 118 ^ Brown 2007 , p. 150 ^ Brown 2007 , pp. 150–153 ^ Benjamin 2015 , pp. 539–540 ^ Benjamin 2015 , pp. 540–541 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 101 ^ Baumard, Hyafil & Boyer 2015 , p. e1046657 ^ McNeill & McNeill 2003 , p. 67 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 665 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 115 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 304 ^ McNeill & McNeill 2003 , pp. 73–74 ^ Short 1987 , p. 10 ^ Dunn 1994 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 9 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 439 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 314 ^ Paine 2011 , p. 273 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , pp. 453, 456 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , pp. 467–475 ^ Stearns & Langer 2001 , p. 63 ^ Stearns & Langer 2001 , pp. 70–71 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 63 ^ Burbank 2010 , p. 56 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 229, 233 ^ Benjamin 2015 , pp. 238, 276–277 ^ Roberts & Westad 2013 , p. 110 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 279 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 286 Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 248 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 248 ^ Strauss 2005 , pp. 1–11 Dynneson 2008 , p. 54 Goldhill 1997 , p. 54 ^ Martin 2000 , pp. 106–107 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 353 ^ Tignor et al. 2014 , p. 203 Burstein 2017 , pp. 57–58 ^ Benjamin 2015 , pp. 283–284 ^ Hemingway & Hemingway 2007 ^ Benjamin 2015 , pp. 337–338 ^ Kelly 2007 , pp. 4–6 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 149, 152–153 ^ Beard 2015 , p. 483 ^ McEvedy 1961 ^ Williams & Friell 2005 , p. 105 ^ Kulke & Rothermund 1990 , pp. 61, 71 , "At any rate Chandragupta seems to have usurped the throne of Magadha in 320 BC...the last ruler of the Maurya dynasty, Brihadratha, was assassinated by his general, Pushyamitra Shunga, during a parade of his troops in the year 185 BC." Benjamin 2015 , pp. 488–489 ^ Benjamin 2015 , pp. 502–505 ^ Benjamin 2015 , pp. 503–505 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 187 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 416 Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 160 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 415 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 417 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 417 Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 160 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 143 ^ Gernet 1996 , pp. 119, 121, 126, 130 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 165, 169 Gernet 1996 , p. 138 ^ Merrill & McElhinny 1983 , p. 1 Seow 2022 , p. 351 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 92 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 94–95 ^ Benjamin 2015 , pp. 651–652 ^ Iliffe 2007 , p. 41 ^ Fagan 2005 , pp. 390, 396 ^ Flannery & Marcus 1996 , p. 146 Whitecotton 1977 , pp. 26, LI.1–3 ^ Coe 2011 , p. 91 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 560 ^ Benjamin 2015 , pp. 557–558 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 208 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 555 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 204 ^ a b Benjamin 2015 , p. 122 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 134, "But the impression that no significant technological advances occurred in ancient civilization is misleading.

In fact, between the 8th century BCE and the 5th century CE, the Mediterranean world witnessed a series of innovations that would influence the development of civilization." ^ Kosso & Scott 2009 , p. 51 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 133 ^ Benjamin 2015 , pp. 142–143 ^ Headrick 2009 , p. 59, "Toe stirrups were known in India in the second century BCE, and foot stirrups appeared in northern Afghanistan in the first century CE." ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 145 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 136 Deming 2014 , p. 174 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 80 ^ Benjamin 2015 , pp. 79–80 ^ Kent 2020 , p. 6 , "Ancient societies ruled themselves according to a system known as patriarchy, or the rule of the father, in which male heads of households and states claimed nearly absolute power over women." ^ a b Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 170–172 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 158, 170 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 10 ^ Benjamin 2015 , pp. 248, 264 ^ a b Benjamin 2015 , p. 14 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , pp. 562, 583 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 513 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 165 ^ The language of the stars" . WIRED Middle East . Archived from the original on 2 December 2024 . Retrieved 23 November 2024 . ^ Stearns 2010 , p. 33 ^ Stearns 2010 , p. 33 Stearns 2001 , III.

The Postclassical Period, 500–1500 Benjamin 2015 , p. 348 Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 204 ^ a b Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 334 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 317 Ackermann et al. 2008b , p. xxiv ^ Shaw 1976 , p. 13 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 215 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 379, 393 ^ a b Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 393 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 297, 336, 339 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 214 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 395 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 205 ^ a b Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 397 ^ Hourani 1991 , pp. 5, 11, "In the early seventh century a religious movement appeared on the margins of the great empires, those of the Byzantines and Sasanians, which dominated the western half of the world....The Byzantine and Sasanian empires were engaged in long wars, which lasted with intervals from 540 to 629." ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 385 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , pp. 387–389 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 295 Mirsepassi & Fernée 2014 , p. 182 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 295 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 26 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 149 ^ Tiliouine, Renima & Estes 2016 , pp. 37, 41 ^ Chainey & Winsham 2021 , p. 82 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , pp. 156–157, 393 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , pp. 393–394 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , pp. 373–374 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 292–293 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , pp. 162, 579 ^ Shaw 1976 , p. 13 Kuran 2023 , p. 11 ^ Hrbek, Ivan (1988). "The emergence of the Fatimids". General History of Africa . Vol. 3. UNESCO. Archived from the original on 2 December 2023 . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . ^ Hrbek, Ivan; Devisse, Jean (1988). "The Almovarids". General History of Africa . Vol. 3. UNESCO. Archived from the original on 2 December 2023 . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . ^ Saidi, O. (1984). "The unification of the Maghreb under the Alhomads". General History of Africa . Vol. 4. UNESCO . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Hrbek, Ivan (1984). "The disintegration of the political unity of the Maghreb". General History of Africa . Vol. 4. UNESCO . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , pp. 365–366, 401, 516 ^ Pillalamarri 2017 ^ Tor 2009 , pp. 279–299 ^ Ṭabīb et al. 2001 , pp. 3–4 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 371 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , pp. 247–248 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 248 ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , p. 354, "He maintained jurisdiction principally in Central Asia and Iran." ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , p. 355, "Despite the political infighting and progressively unstable political situation, Shah Rukh in Herat and Ulugh Beg in Samarkand fostered a cultural and artistic renaissance in the Timurid domains." ^ Hayas 1953 , p. 2, "...that certain distinctive features of our Western civilization—the civilization of western Europe and of America—have been shaped chiefly by Judaeo–Christianity, Catholic and Protestant." Woods & Canizares 2012 , p. 1 , "Western civilization owes far more to Catholic Church than most people—Catholic included—often realize.

The Church in fact built Western civilization." McNeill 2010 , p. 204 Faltin & Wright 2007 , p. 83 Spielvogel 2016 , p. 156 Duchesne 2011 , p. 461 ^ Brown 2007 , pp. 128, 136 ^ Benjamin 2015 , pp. 384–385 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 282, 285 ^ Deanesly 2019 , pp. 339–355, The Carolingian Conquests ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 159 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b , p. 205 ^ Bulliet et al. 2011 , p. 250 Brown, Anatolios & Palmer 2009 , p. 66 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 289 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 280–281 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , pp. 496–497 ^ Bideleux & Jeffries 1998 , p. 48 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 293 ^ McNeill & McNeill 2003 , p. 146 ^ Robinson 2010 , p. 236 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 535 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 324 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 335 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , pp. 246–248 ^ Aberth 2001 ^ Dunham 2008 BBC 2001 ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , p. 60, "Then, in the 1340s, Mongol armies attacked the Black Sea port of Caffa in the Crimean region, and from that point on the infection spread into the Mediterranean, and then north into Europe, reaching Scandinavia within two years, and east and south into the Muslim societies of the eastern Mediterranean and North Africa." ^ McNeill & McNeill 2003 , p. 120 ^ Jakobielski, Stefan (1988). "Christian Nubia at the height of its civilization". General History of Africa . Vol. 3. UNESCO. Archived from the original on 2 December 2023 . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . ^ Kropacek, Lubos (1984). "Nubia from the late 12th century to the Funj conquest in the early 15th century". General History of Africa . Vol. 4. UNESCO . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Mekouria, Tekle-Tsadik (1988). "The Horn of Africa". General History of Africa . Vol. 3. UNESCO. Archived from the original on 2 December 2023 . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . ^ Gestrich, Nikolas (26 March 2019). "The Empire of Ghana". Oxford Research Encyclopedia of African History . doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190277734.013.396 . ISBN 978-0-19-027773-4 . ^ Dalziel, Nigel; MacKenzie, John M., eds. (2016). "Gao Empire".

The Encyclopedia of Empire . Wiley. pp. 1– 3. doi : 10.1002/9781118455074.wbeoe312 . ISBN 978-1-118-44064-3 . ^ Conrad, David; Fisher, Humphrey (1983). "The Conquest That Never Was: Ghana and the Almoravids, 1076. I.

The External Arabic Sources" . History in Africa . 10 . doi : 10.2307/3171690 . JSTOR 3171690 . Archived from the original on 8 June 2018 . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . ^ McIntosh, Susan (2008). "Reconceptualizing Early Ghana". Canadian Journal of African Studies . 43 (2). Taylor and Francis: 347– 373. JSTOR 40380172 . ^ Niane, Djibril (1984). "Mali and the second Mandingo expansion". General History of Africa . UNESCO . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Dalziel, Nigel; MacKenzie, John M., eds. (2016). "Mossi Empire".

The Encyclopedia of Empire . Wiley. pp. 1– 2. doi : 10.1002/9781118455074.wbeoe127 . ISBN 978-1-118-44064-3 . ^ Dalziel, Nigel; MacKenzie, John M., eds. (2016). "Kanem-Bornu Empire".

The Encyclopedia of Empire . Wiley. pp. 1– 6. doi : 10.1002/9781118455074.wbeoe014 . ISBN 978-1-118-44064-3 . ^ Mahdi, Adamu (1984). "The Hausa and their neighbours in central Sudan". General History of Africa . Vol. 4. UNESCO . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Ly-Tall, Madina (1984). "The decline of the Mali empire". General History of Africa . Vol. 4. UNESCO . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Akintoye, Stephen Adebanji (2010). A History of the Yoruba People . Amalion. ISBN 978-2-35926-027-4 . ^ Onwuejeogwu, M. Angulu (1980). An Igbo Civilization: Nri Kingdom and Hegemony . ^ Dalziel, Nigel; MacKenzie, John M., eds. (2016). "Benin (Edo city-state)".

The Encyclopedia of Empire . Wiley. pp. 1– 6. doi : 10.1002/9781118455074.wbeoe124 . ISBN 978-1-118-44064-3 . ^ "Dagbon History: Kings, Towns, and Cultural Legacy" . 2024. Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . ^ Hargrove, Jarvis (2024). "Early Asante, Akan, and Mossi States". Oxford Research Encyclopedia of African History . doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190277734.013.1354 . ISBN 978-0-19-027773-4 . ^ a b Thornton, John K., ed. (2020). "The Development of States in West Central Africa to 1540". A History of West Central Africa to 1850 . New Approaches to African History. Cambridge University Press. pp. 16– 55. ISBN 978-1-107-56593-7 . Archived from the original on 8 October 2024 . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . ^ Vansina, Jan (1984). "Equatorial Africa and Angola: Migrations and the emergence of the first states". General History of Africa . Vol. 4. UNESCO . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Buchanan, Carole Ann (1974).

The Kitara Complex: The Historical Tradition of Western Uganda to the 16th Century . Indiana University. ^ Masao, Fidelis (1988). "The East African coast and the Comoro Islands". General History of Africa . Vol. 3. UNESCO. Archived from the original on 2 December 2023 . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . ^ Matveiev, Victor (1984). "The development of Swahili civilization". General History of Africa . Vol. 4. UNESCO . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Randrianja, Solofo (2009). "Transforming the island (1100–1599)" . Madagascar: A short history . University of Chicago Press. ^ Huffman, Thomas N. (2015). "Mapela, Mapungubwe and the Origins of States in Southern Africa".

The South African Archaeological Bulletin . 70 (201): 15– 27. ISSN 0038-1969 . ^ Fagan, Brian (1984). "The Zambezi and Limpopo basins: 1100–1500". General History of Africa . Vol. 4. UNESCO . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 189–190 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 255 ^ Keay 2000 , p. 192 ^ Keay 2000 , pp. 168, 214–215, 251 ^ Keay 2000 , pp. 169, 213, 215 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 169 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 426, "After China was reunified in 589 by the Sui dynasty (581–618) and suddenly became a looming regional superpower, Silla began exploring even more active ties with China." ^ Ning 2023 , pp. 203–204 ^ Lewis 2009 , p. 1 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 453 Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 118 ^ Whitfield 2004 , p. 193 ^ Lorge 2015 , pp. 4–5 ^ a b Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 532 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , pp. 528, 534 ^ Henshall 1999 , pp. 11–12 ^ Benjamin 2015 , pp. 426, 428–430, 454–455 ^ Totman 2002 , pp. 64–79 Henshall 2012 , pp. 24–52 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 316–317 ^ Huffman 2010 , pp. 29, 35 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 346–347 Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 485 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , p. 720, "In Japan the emperor was revered but had no power." ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 222 ^ Huffman 2010 , p. 67 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , pp. 517–518 ^ Ackermann et al. 2008e , p. 464 ^ Naver ^ The Association of Korean History Teachers 2005 , p. 113 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , p. 345 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , p. 550 ^ McNeill & McNeill 2003 , p. 120 Butt 2005 , p. 128 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , pp. 534–535 ^ Stearns & Langer 2001 , p. 153 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 535 O'Brien 2002 , p. 99 ^ Lieberman 2003 , pp. 216–217 ^ Evans et al. 2007 , p. 14279, "The 'boundary' of the urban complex of Angkor, as it can be loosely defined from the infrastructural network, encloses ~900–1,000 km 2 compared with the ~100–150 km 2 of Tikal, the next largest preindustrial low-density city for which we have an overall survey. Mirador, a Pre-Classic Maya urban complex, and Calakmul, a Classic site near Tikal, may be more extensive, but as yet we do not have comprehensive overall surveys for these sites; it is nonetheless clear that no site in the Maya world approaches Angkor in terms of extent." Lieberman 2003 , p. 219 ^ Lieberman 2003 , pp. 244–245 ^ Lieberman 2003 , p. 91 ^ Lieberman 2003 , pp. 149–150 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 240 ^ Lieberman 2003 , p. 350 ^ Lieberman 2003 , p. 235 ^ Taylor 1976 , p. 159 , The Rise of Đại Việt and the Establishment of Thăng-long ^ Lieberman 2003 , p. 243 ^ Anthony 2015 , p. 45 ^ Coedès 1968 , p. 225 , "However that may be, various texts agree that the solemn coronation of Fa Ngum, which marks the founding of the kingdom of Lan Chang, took place in 1353; this date has most probably been transmitted correctly." ^ Lieberman 2003 , p. 125, "In the heart of the dry zone, near the juncture of the Irrawaddy with the famed granary of Kyaukse, Ava was founded in 1365." ^ Ricklefs 2001 , p. 4 , "The first evidence of Indonesian Muslims concerns the northern part of Sumatra.

In the graveyard of Lamreh is found the gravestone of Sultan Suleiman bin Abdullah bin al-Basir, who died in AH 608/AD 1211. This is the first evidence of the existence of an Islamic kingdom in Indonesia." Baumann 2010 , p. 1326 ^ Andaya & Andaya 2015 , pp. 100, 109 ^ Abinales & Amoroso 2017 , p. 36 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 625 Flenley & Bahn 2003 , p. 109, "From the islanders' testimony and other Polynesian ethnography it is virtually certain that the statues represented high-ranking ancestors, often served as their funerary monument, and kept their memory alive–like the simple upright slabs in front of platforms in the Society Islands, which represented clan ancestors, or the statues dominating the terraces of sanctuaries in the Marquesas, which were famous old chiefs or priests." ^ Benjamin 2015 , pp. 621–622 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 406–407 ^ Benjamin 2015 , p. 622 ^ Burley 1998 , pp. 368–369, 375 ^ Kirch & Green 2001 , p. 87 ^ Geraghty 1994 , pp. 236–239, Linguistic Evidence for the Tongan Empire ^ MacKnight 1986 , pp. 69–75 ^ McNiven 2017 , pp. 603–604, 629 ^ Benjamin 2015 , pp. 546–547 ^ Yoffee 2015 , p. 437 ^ Fagan 2005 , p. 35 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 205, 208 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 622 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 638 ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , pp. 644, 658 ^ a b Wiesner-Hanks 2021 , p. 12 ^ Wiesner-Hanks 2021 , § Creating 'Early Modern' ^ Wiesner-Hanks 2021 , p. 12 Ackermann et al. 2008c , pp. xxxv–xxxvi ^ Martell 2010 , pp. 52–53 ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , p. 449 ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , p. 455 Stearns 2010 , pp. 37–38 ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , p. 16 ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , p. 192, "The Italian city-states developed business procedures that have been described as early capitalism, although this was already business as usual in Asian port-cities such as Cambay, Calicut and Zayton." ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , pp. 448, 460, 501 Horn 2016 , pp. 68–69 ^ Kazeroony 2023 , § European Colonialism ^ a b Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , p. 194 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , pp. 448, 460, 501 ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015b , pp. 103–134 ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , p. 38 ^ Christian 2011 , p. 383, "Because such crops flourished where more familiar staples grew less well, American crops effectively increased the area under cultivation and thereby made possible population growth in many parts of Afro-Eurasia from the 16th century onward." ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , p. 417 Ackermann et al. 2008c , p. xv ^ Axworthy 2008 , p. 121 ^ Axworthy 2008 , p. 171 ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , p. 469, "Having determined to build a distinctive Iranian, Shi'a identity for their empire, the Safavids forced the conversion of all Muslims in their territory to Shi'ism." ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , p. 456, "In the Middle East, Central Asia and India, the Ottoman, Safavid and Mughal empires adopted firearms so enthusiastically that they are often referred to as 'gunpowder empires. ' " ^ Vesely, Rudolf (1992). "The Ottoman conquest of Egypt". General History of Africa . Vol. 5. UNESCO. ^ Cherif, Mohammed (1992). "Algeria, Tunisia and Libya: The Ottomans and their heirs". General History of Africa . Vol. 5. UNESCO. ^ El Fasi, Mohammad (1992). "Morocco". General History of Africa . Vol. 5. UNESCO. ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , p. 358, "Political and military instability, succession disputes and conflicts with the Türkmen and Uzbeks vitiated these remarkable economic achievements, weakening the Timurids and making them vulnerable to the previously nomadic Uzbeks, who became the dominant force in Central Asia from the sixteenth to the early nineteenth century." ^ Carter & Butt 2005 , p. 4 , "Historians of different kinds will often make some choice between a long Renaissance (say, 1300–1600), a short one (1453–1527), or somewhere in between (the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, as is commonly adopted in music histories)." ^ Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 363, 368 ^ a b Bulliet et al. 2015a , pp. 365–368 ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015b , pp. 338–339, 345 ^ Tignor et al. 2014 , pp. 426–427 ^ Roberts & Westad 2013 , pp. 683–685 Bulliet et al. 2015b , p. 436 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , p. 444 Bristow 2023 , Lead Section ^ Schulman 2011 , pp. 1–2 ^ Headrick 2009 , p. 85 ^ Headrick 2009 , p. 85 Bulliet et al. 2015b , p. 436 Chrisp 2016 , p. 267 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , p. 452 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , pp. 455, 535, 591, 670 ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , p. 165 Davies 2005 , pp. 313, 386 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , p. 626, "In the region of the Caucasus Mountains, the third area of southward expansion, Russia first took over Christian Georgia (1786), Muslim Azerbaijan (1801), and Christian Armenia (1813) before gobbling up the many small principalities in the heart of the mountains." ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , p. 455, "As a result, the major European nations were nearly always at war somewhere." ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015b , pp. 41, 44, 47, 343 ^ Stearns 2010 , p. 41 Ackermann et al. 2008d , p. xxxi McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , p. 529, "The French Revolution ended in the rule of Napoleon in 1799, and his attempts to conquer Europe began in 1803." ^ Haberland, Eike (1992). "The Horn of Africa". General History of Africa . Vol. 5. UNESCO. ^ Pankhurst, Richard (1989). "Ethiopia and Somalia". General History of Africa . Vol. 6. UNESCO. ^ Abitbol, Michel (1992). "The end of the Songhay empire". General History of Africa . Vol. 5. UNESCO. ^ Batran, Aziz (1989). "The nineteenth-century Islamic revolutions in West Africa". General History of Africa . Vol. 6. UNESCO. ^ Last, Murray (1989). "The Sokoto caliphate and Borno". General History of Africa . Vol. 6. UNESCO. ^ Ly-Tall, Madina (1989). "Massina and Torodbe (Tukuloor) empire until 1878". General History of Africa . Vol. 6. UNESCO. ^ Boahen, Albert (1989). "The states and cultures of the Lower Guinea coast". General History of Africa . Vol. 6. UNESCO. ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , p. 512 ^ Vansina, Jan (1992). "The Kongo kingdom and its neighbours". General History of Africa . Vol. 5. UNESCO. ^ Nzieme, Isidore (1992). "The political system of the Luba and Lunda: its emergence and expansion". General History of Africa . Vol. 5. UNESCO. ^ Vellut, Jean-Luc (1989). "The Congo basin and Angola". General History of Africa . Vol. 6. UNESCO. ^ Webster, James; Ogot, Bethwell; Chretien, Jean-Pierre (1992). "The Great Lakes region: 1500–1800". General History of Africa . Vol. 5. UNESCO. ^ Salim, Ahmed (1992). "East Africa: The coast". General History of Africa . Vol. 5. UNESCO. ^ Kent, Raymond (1992). "Madagascar and the islands of the Indian Ocean". General History of Africa . Vol. 5. UNESCO. ^ Mutibwa, Phares (1989). "Madagascar 1800–80". General History of Africa . Vol. 6. UNESCO. ^ Bhila, Hoyini (1992). "Southern Zambezia". General History of Africa . Vol. 5. UNESCO. ^ Phiri, Kings; Kalinga, Owen; Bhila, Hoyini (1992). "The northern Zambezia-Lake Malawi region". General History of Africa . Vol. 5. UNESCO. ^ Isaacman, Allen (1989). "The countries of the Zambezi basin". General History of Africa . Vol. 6. UNESCO. ^ Denoon, Donald (1992). "Southern Africa". General History of Africa . Vol. 5. UNESCO. ^ Ncgongco, Leonard (1992). "The Mfecane and the rise of the new African states". General History of Africa . Vol. 6. UNESCO. ^ Stein 2010 , p. 159 ^ Lal 2001 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , p. 529 ^ Wolpert 1997 , p. 115 ^ Osborne 2020 , pp. 992, 1005 ^ Singh 2000 , p. 17 Haigh 2009 , p. 30 ^ Keay 2000 , pp. 410–411, 420, "This brought the British into potential conflict with Ranjit Singh, a young Sikh leader who had been prominent in repulsing Afghan attacks by Ahmed Shah Abdali's successors and who, since occupying Lahore in 1799, had been pursuing a policy of conquest and alliance that mirrored that of the British...over the next 30 years the Raja of Lahore, comparatively free of British interference, would blossom into the Maharaja of the Panjab, creator of the most formidable non-colonial state in India...Ranjit had by 1830 created a kingdom, nay an 'empire', rated by one visitor 'the most wonderful object in the whole world'." Grewal 1998 , p. 99 ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , p. 116 ^ McNeill & McNeill 2003 , p. 247 ^ Henshall 1999 , pp. 41, 49, 60, 66 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , pp. 545–546, 550 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , pp. 541, 544 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , pp. 554–555, 704 ^ Yoffee 2015 , p. 74, "When the Portuguese admiral Alfonso de Albuquerque conquered the sultanate of Melaka (Malacca) on August 24, 1511, he brought under Portuguese control a Southeast Asian polity whose reach stretched across the Malay peninsula." ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015b , p. 257, "As of about 1500, the power in this region, and the main enemy of the Estado da Índia , was the sultanate of Johor." ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , pp. 200, 276, 381–382 ^ a b Paine 2013 , pp. 402–403 ^ Serle 1949 ^ Siler 2012 , p. xxii ^ Matsuda 2012 , p. 161 ^ Stearns 2010 , pp. 37–38 Burbank & Cooper 2021 , pp. 163–164 ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , pp. 39, 66 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , p. 430, "That said, and ever since the initial Eastern seaboard settler wars against the Tsenacommacahs and Pequots in the 1620s and early 1630s, systematic genocidal massacre was a core component of native destruction throughout three centuries of largely 'Anglo' expansion across continental North America." Blackhawk et al. 2023 , p. 38, "With these works, a near consensus emerged.

By most scholarly definitions and consistent with the UN Convention, these scholars all asserted that genocide against at least some Indigenous peoples had occurred in North America following colonisation, perpetuated first by colonial empires and then by independent nation-states" Kiernan, Lemos & Taylor 2023 , p. 622, "These mass killings represent turning points in the history of the Spanish Atlantic conquest and share important characteristics. Each targeted Amerindian communities. Each was entirely or partially planned and executed by European actors, namely Spanish military entrepreneurs under the leadership of friar Nicolás de Ovando, Hernán Cortés and Pedro de Alvarado respectively. Each event can be described as a 'genocidal massacre' targeting a specific community because of its membership of a larger group" ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , p. 475 ^ a b Stearns 2010 , p. 137 ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015a , p. 277 ^ Bentley, Subrahmanyam & Wiesner-Hanks 2015b , pp. 216–229 ^ Ackermann et al. 2008c , p. xxi Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , § Colonization, Empires, and Trade Springer 2023 , p. 1157 ^ Wheeler 1971 , p. 441, "This view overlooks the fact that, in the forty years since Shelikhov had founded the first permanent settlement on Kodiak Island in 1784, only eight additional settlements had been established, none of which was south of 57° north latitude." Gilbert 2013 , p. 44 Chapman 2002 , p. 36 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , p. 482, "The peace agreement forced France to yield Canada to the English and cede Louisiana to Spain." Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , § Colonization, Empires, and Trade ^ Bernstein 2009 , pp. xiii–xv, 6 ^ Tindall & Shi 2010 , pp. 219, 254 ^ Tindall & Shi 2010 , p. 352 ^ Stearns 2008 , p. 219 ^ Morys 2020 , p. vii Becker & Platt 2023 , pp. 1–2 ^ Haynes, Hough & Pilbeam 2023 , p. 43 Berger 2008 , p. xvii ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , p. 562, "Manchester's rise as a large, industrial city was a result of what historians call the Industrial Revolution, the most profound transformation in human life since the beginnings of agriculture." ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , p. 137 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , pp. 584–585 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b , p. 490 Babones 2008 , p. 146, Studying Globalization: Methodological Issues ^ O'Rourke & Williamson 2002 , pp. 23–50 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , pp. 529, 532 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , p. 563, "The first countries to industrialize grew rich and powerful, facilitating a second great wave of European imperialism in the 19th century." ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , p. 336 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , pp. 532, 676–678, 692 Stearns 2010 , pp. 40, 95 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , p. 448 ^ Greene 2017 , p. xii ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , p. 562 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , p. 532 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , p. 429 Schoppa 2021 , p. 2 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , pp. 306, 310–311 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , p. 312 Stearns 2010 , pp. 41–44 ^ Huntington 1991 , pp. 15–16 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b , p. 112 Stearns 2010 , p. 42 ^ Schoppa 2021 , p. 35 ^ Schoppa 2021 , p. 95 ^ Christian 2011 , p. 448 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , pp. 390–392 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , pp. 370, 386, 388, 390–391 ^ Meyer-Fong 2013 , p. 1 McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , pp. 390, 623 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , pp. 600, 602 ^ Landes 1969 , p. 235 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b , pp. 210, 249–250, 254 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , p. 80 ^ Ackermann et al. 2008a , p. xxxiii Curley 2011 , p. ix ^ Kedar & Wiesner-Hanks 2015 , p. 206, "The half-century preceding the outbreak of World War I stands out as an era of European economic, political, and cultural dominance never achieved before and impossible to sustain at the end of the war." ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , pp. 313–314 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , p. 306 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b , p. 308 Heyman 1997 , pp. 114–115 Ackermann et al. 2008a , pp. 419 Diener & Hagen 2010 , p. 123 Showalter & Royde-Smith 2024 ^ Schoppa 2021 , p. 25 ^ Suny 2015 , pp. 245, 330 Bozarslan, Duclert & Kévorkian 2015 , p. 187 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , pp. 246–247 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , pp. 296–297, 324 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , p. 450 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , p. 452 ^ Schoppa 2021 , pp. 159–160n ^ Ackermann et al. 2008a , pp. xxxii, xlii, 359 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b , pp. 301–302, 312 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b , p. 312 ^ Sainsbury 1986 , p. 14 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , pp. 423–424 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , pp. 507–508, "Indeed, Japan's China war between 1931 and 1945 exacted the heaviest toll in lives of all colonial wars – between 10 and 30 million Chinese deaths being the best estimates available in the absence of official or authoritative statistics." ^ Ackermann et al. 2008a , p. xlii ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b , p. 319 ^ Fasulo 2015 , pp. 1–3 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , p. 324 ^ Simmons 2009 , p. 41 ^ Dinan 2004 , pp. xiii, 8–9 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , pp. 319, 451 ^ Acheson 1969 ^ Kunertova 2024 , p. 182 ^ Ackermann et al. 2008 , p. xl ^ Kennedy 1987 , p. 357 ^ Bulliet et al. 2015b , p. 817 ^ Allison 2018 , p. 126 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b , pp. 321, 330 ^ Allison 2018 , pp. 127–128 Stevenson 2020 , pp. 41–43 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b , p. 342 ^ Christian 2011 , pp. 456–457, "The collapse of the Soviet Union was, as Mikhail Gorbachev understood, a failure to compete economically and technologically." ^ a b Scranton 2006 , p. 131 ^ Wolfe 2013 , p. 90 ^ Naughton 2016 , p. 7 ^ a b McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b , p. 195 ^ Easton 2013 , p. 2 ^ Naughton 2016 , p. 14 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b , pp. 195–196 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , p. 258 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , p. 91 ^ a b McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b , p. 200 ^ Gleick 2019 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b , p. 198 ^ Ackermann et al. 2008 , p. xxxiv ^ Christian 2011 , p. 442 ^ Christian 2011 , pp. 442, 446 ^ Ivanov 2009 , pp. 249–250 Huhle 2022 , pp. 141–142 ^ Schoppa 2021 , p. 1 DeLaet & DeLaet 2015 , p. 8 Mathew & Bhatia 2010 , p. 8 Getzen 2022 , p. 234 ^ Nohr & Olsen 2007 , p. 637 ^ Vásquez 2001 ^ Christian 2011 , p. 449 ^ Reagan 2005 , p. 108 Murphy 2014 , p. 80 Kte'pi 2013 , p. 63 ^ Barro & Lee 2015 , pp. 13, 55–56 Urata, Kuroda & Tonegawa 2022 , pp. 40–41 Shelley 2022 , p. 2 Scott & Vare 2020 , pp. 54–56 ^ Barro & Lee 2015 , pp. 55–56 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , pp. 459–460 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , p. 629 ^ Abernethy 2000 , p. 133 ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015b , pp. 578–579 ^ Nugent 2021 , p. 347 Ackermann et al. 2008 , p. xlii ^ Friedman 2007 , pp. 137–138, passim ^ McNeill & Pomeranz 2015a , p. 609, "But the crisis beginning in 2007, with the eddying effects of the subprime lending-induced financial crash, demonstrated how vital the health of the American economy remained for global growth and stability. Events and processes outside the United States continued to affect the internal politics and economics, and vice versa.

The United States and the rest of the world were interconnected, and disengagement was impossible." Tozzo 2017 , p. 116 ^ The Economist 2023 Roivainen 2023 ^ Martikainen 2017 , pp. 72–73 Hiro 1989 , § Introduction ^ Casselman 2022 Howe et al. 2020 ^ Armstrong McKay et al. 2022 , p. eabn7950 Kolbert 2023 , "he world's phosphorus problem resembles its carbon-dioxide problem, its plastics problem, its groundwater-use problem, its soil-erosion problem, and its nitrogen problem.

The Great Sea: A Human History of the Mediterranean . Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-7139-9934-1 . Acheson, Dean (1969). Present at the Creation: My Years in the State Department . W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-30412-1 . Ackermann, Marsha E.; et al., eds. (2008e). "Three Kingdoms, Korea". Encyclopedia of world history . Facts on File. ISBN 978-0-8160-6386-4 . Ackermann, Marsha E.; Schroeder, Michael J.; Terry, Janice J.; Upshur, Jiu-Hwa Lo; Whitters, Mark F., eds. (2008b). Encyclopedia of World History 2: The Expanding World 600 c.e. to 1449 . Facts on File. ISBN 978-0-8160-6386-4 . Ackermann, Marsha E.; Schroeder, Michael J.; Terry, Janice J.; Upshur, Jiu-Hwa Lo; Whitters, Mark F., eds. (2008c). Encyclopedia of World History 3: The First Global Age 1450 to 1749 . Facts on File. ISBN 978-0-8160-6386-4 . Ackermann, Marsha E.; Schroeder, Michael J.; Terry, Janice J.; Upshur, Jiu-Hwa Lo; Whitters, Mark F., eds. (2008d). Encyclopedia of World History 4: Age of Revolution and Empire 1750 to 1899 . Facts on File. ISBN 978-0-8160-6386-4 . Ackermann, Marsha E.; Schroeder, Michael J.; Terry, Janice J.; Upshur, Jiu-Hwa Lo; Whitters, Mark F., eds. (2008a). Encyclopedia of World History 5: Crisis and Achievement 1900 to 1949 . Facts on File. ISBN 978-0-8160-6386-4 . Ackermann, Marsha E.; Schroeder, Michael J.; Terry, Janice J.; Upshur, Jiu-Hwa Lo; Whitters, Mark F., eds. (2008). Encyclopedia of World History 6: The Contemporary World 1950 to the Present . Facts on File. ISBN 978-0-8160-6386-4 . Ackermann RR, Mackay A, Arnold ML (2015). "The Hybrid Origin of "Modern" Humans". Evolutionary Biology . 43 (1): 1– 11. doi : 10.1007/s11692-015-9348-1 . S2CID 14329491 . Adovasio, J. M. ; Soffer, Olga; Page, Jake (2007).

The Invisible Sex: Uncovering the True Roles of Women in Prehistory . HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-157177-0 . OCLC 191804695 . Aldenderfer, Mark (2011). "Era 1: Beginnings of Human Society to 4000 BCE". World History Encyclopedia . Vol. 2. Greenwood. ISBN 978-1-85109-930-6 . Allchin, Bridget ; Allchin, Raymond (1997). Origins of a Civilization: The Prehistory and Early Archaeology of South Asia . Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-87713-3 . Allison, Graham (2018). "The Myth of the Liberal Order: From Historical Accident to Conventional Wisdom" . Foreign Affairs . Vol. 97, no. 4. pp. 124– 133. Archived from the original on 9 July 2022 . Retrieved 3 July 2022 . Andaya, Barbara Watson ; Andaya, Leonard (2015). A History of Early Modern Southeast Asia, 1400–1830 . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-88992-6 . Andrea, Alfred J. ; Neel, Carolyn (2011). "What Is World History?". World History Encyclopedia . Vol. 1. Greenwood. ISBN 978-1-85109-930-6 . Anthony, Reid (2015). A History of Southeast Asia: Critical Crossroads . John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-631-17961-0 . Armstrong McKay, David I.; et al. (2022). "Exceeding 1.5 °C Global Warming Could Trigger Multiple Climate Tipping Points". Science . 377 (6611) eabn7950. doi : 10.1126/science.abn7950 . hdl : 10871/131584 . PMID 36074831 . S2CID 252161375 . Axworthy, Michael (2008). A History of Iran: Empire of the Mind . Basic. ISBN 978-0-465-00888-9 . Babones, Salvatore (2008). "Studying Globalization: Methodological Issues" .

The Blackwell Companion to Globalization . John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-470-76642-2 . OCLC 232611725 . Bard, Kathryn A. (2000). "The Emergence of the Egyptian State (c. 3200–2686 BC)" .

The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt . Oxford University Press. pp. 57–82 . ISBN 978-0-19-280458-7 . Barker, Graeme ; Goucher, Candace , eds. (2015). A World with Agriculture, 12,000 BCE–500 CE .

The Cambridge World History . Vol. 2. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-19218-7 . Barro, Robert J.; Lee, Jong-Wha (2015). "2. International Comparisons of School Enrollment and Educational Attainment, 1870–2010".

In Barro, Robert J.; Yi, Chong-hwa (eds.). Education Matters: Global Schooling Gains from the 19th to the 21st Century . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-937923-1 . Baumann, Martin (2010). "Hinduism" .

In Melton, J. Gordon; Baumann, Martin (eds.). Religions of the World: A Comprehensive Encyclopedia of Beliefs and Practices . Bloomsbury. ISBN 978-1-59884-204-3 . Baumard, Nicolas; Hyafil, Alexandre; Boyer, Pascal (2015). "What Changed During the Axial Age: Cognitive Styles or Reward Systems?" . Communicative & Integrative Biology . 8 (5) e1046657. United States National Library of Medicine . doi : 10.1080/19420889.2015.1046657 . PMC 4802742 . PMID 27066164 . BBC (2001). "De-coding the Black Death" . BBC . Archived from the original on 7 July 2017 . Retrieved 24 November 2016 . Beard, Mary (2015). SPQR: A History of Ancient Rome . Profile. ISBN 978-1-84668-380-0 . Becker, Tobias; Platt, Len (2023). "Reading Cultures – Modernity and the Word" . Popular Culture in Europe Since 1800 . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-00-341259-5 . Benjamin, Craig , ed. (2015). A World with States, Empires, and Networks, 1200 BCE–900 CE .

The Cambridge World History . Vol. 4. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-01572-2 . Bennett, Matthew; et al. (2021). "Evidence of Humans in North America During the Last Glacial Maximum" (PDF) . Science . 373 (6562): 1528– 1531. Bibcode : 2021Sci...373.1528B . doi : 10.1126/science.abg7586 . PMID 34554787 . S2CID 237616125 . Bentley, Jerry ; Subrahmanyam, Sanjay ; Wiesner-Hanks, Merry , eds. (2015a).

The Construction of a Global World, 1400–1800 CE, Part 1, Foundations .

The Cambridge World History . Vol. 6. Cambridge University Press. doi : 10.1017/CBO9781139194594 . ISBN 978-0-521-76162-8 . Bentley, Jerry ; Subrahmanyam, Sanjay ; Wiesner-Hanks, Merry , eds. (2015b).

The Construction of a Global World, 1400–1800 CE, Part 2, Patterns of Change .

The Cambridge World History. Vol. 6. Cambridge University Press. doi : 10.1017/CBO9781139022460 . ISBN 978-0-521-19246-0 . Berger, Stefan (2008). "Introduction" . A Companion to Nineteenth-Century Europe, 1789–1914 . John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-4051-5232-7 . Bernstein, R. B. (2009).

The Founding Fathers Reconsidered . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-971362-2 . Bideleux, Robert; Jeffries, Ian (1998). A History of Eastern Europe: Crisis and Change . Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-16112-1 . Blackhawk, Ned ; Kiernan, Ben ; Madley, Benjamin; Taylor, Rebe , eds. (2023).

The Cambridge World History of Genocide . Vol. 2: Genocide in the Indigenous, Early Modern and Imperial Worlds, from c.1535 to World War One. Cambridge University Press . doi : 10.1017/9781108765480 . ISBN 978-1-108-76548-0 . Boltz, William G. (1996). "Early Chinese Writing".

In Bright, Peter; Daniels, William (eds.).

The World's Writing Systems . Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-507993-0 . Bozarslan, Hamit ; Duclert, Vincent ; Kévorkian, Raymond H. (2015). Comprendre le Génocide des Arméniens—1915 à nos Jours (in French). Tallandier . ISBN 979-1-02-100681-2 . Bristow, William (2023). "Enlightenment" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 7 June 2024 . Brown, Cynthia Stokes (2007). Big History: From the Big Bang to the Present . New Press. ISBN 978-1-59558-196-9 . Brown, Stephen F.; Anatolios, Khaled; Palmer, Martin (2009). O'Brien, Joanne (ed.). Catholicism & Orthodox Christianity . Infobase. ISBN 978-1-60413-106-2 . Bulliet, Richard; Crossley, Pamela; Headrick, Daniel; Hirsch, Steven; Johnson, Lyman (2011).

The Earth and Its Peoples, Brief Edition . Vol. 1. Cengage. ISBN 978-0-495-91311-5 . Bulliet, Richard ; Crossley, Pamela ; Headrick, Daniel ; Hirsch, Steven; Johnson, Lyman; Northrup, David (2015a).

The Earth and Its Peoples: A Global History . Vol. 1 (6th ed.). Cengage. ISBN 978-1-285-44567-0 . Bulliet, Richard ; Crossley, Pamela ; Headrick, Daniel ; Hirsch, Steven; Johnson, Lyman; Northrup, David (2015b).

The Earth and Its Peoples: A Global History . Vol. 2 (6th ed.). Cengage. ISBN 978-1-285-44570-0 . Burbank, Jane (2010). Empires in World History: Power and the Politics of Difference . Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-12708-8 . Burbank, Jane; Cooper, Frederick (2021). Empires in World History: Power and the Politics of Difference . Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-3470-9 . Burley, David V. (1998). "Tongan Archaeology and the Tongan Past, 2850–150 B.P.". Journal of World Prehistory . 12 (3): 368– 369, 375. Bibcode : 1998JWPre..12..337B . doi : 10.1023/A:1022322303769 . ISSN 1573-7802 . JSTOR 25801130 . S2CID 160340278 . Burstein, Stanley M. (2017).

The World from 1000 BCE to 300 CE . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-933613-5 . Butt, John J. (2005).

The Greenwood Dictionary of World History . Bloomsbury. ISBN 978-0-313-08315-0 . Cajani, Luigi (2013). "Periodization".

The Oxford Handbook of World History . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-968606-3 . Carter, Tim; Butt, John, eds. (2005).

The Cambridge History of Seventeenth-Century Music: Volume 1 . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-79273-8 . Casselman, Ben (2022). "Pandemic's Economic Impact Is Easing, but Aftershocks May Linger" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 11 May 2023 . Retrieved 11 May 2023 . Chainey, Dee Dee; Winsham, Willow (2021). Treasury of Folklore: Seas and Rivers: Sirens, Selkies and Ghost Ships . Batsford. ISBN 978-1-84994-705-3 . Chakrabarti, Dilip K. (2004). "Introduction".

In Chkrabarti, Dilip K. (ed.). Indus Civilization Sites in India: New Discoveries . Marg. pp. 10– 13. ISBN 978-81-85026-63-3 . Chapman, Tim (2002). Imperial Russia, 1801–1905 . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-57970-9 . Chrisp, Peter (2016). "Civilizations Develop" . Big History: Our Incredible Journey, from Big Bang to Now . Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 978-0-241-22590-5 . Christian, David (2008). This Fleeting World: A Short History of Humanity . Berkshire. ISBN 978-1-933782-04-1 . Christian, David (2011) . Maps of Time: An Introduction to Big History . University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-27144-9 . Christian, David, ed. (2015). Introducing World History, to 10,000 BCE .

The Cambridge World History . Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press. doi : 10.1017/CBO9781139194662 . ISBN 978-0-521-76333-2 . Christian, David (2015a). "Introduction and Overview".

The Cambridge World History . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-76333-2 . Clarkson C, Jacobs Z, Marwick B, Fullagar R, Wallis L, Smith M, et al. (2017). "Human Occupation of Northern Australia by 65,000 Years Ago" . Nature . 547 (7663): 306– 310. Bibcode : 2017Natur.547..306C . doi : 10.1038/nature22968 . hdl : 2440/107043 . PMID 28726833 . S2CID 205257212 . Clavin, Patricia (2005). "Defining Transnationalism". Contemporary European History . 14 (4): 421– 439. doi : 10.1017/S0960777305002705 . Coe, Michael D. (2011).

The Maya (8th ed.). Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-28902-0 . Coedès, George (1968). Walter F. Vella (ed.).

The Indianized States of Southeast Asia . Translated by Cowing, Susan Brown. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 978-0-8248-0368-1 . Conrad, Sebastian (2016). What is Global History? . Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-15525-8 . Coolidge, Frederick Lawrence; Wynn, Thomas Grant (2018).

The Rise of Homo Sapiens: The Evolution of Modern Thinking . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-068091-6 . Curley, Robert, ed. (2011).

The Complete History of Aviation: From Ballooning to Supersonic Flight . Britannica. ISBN 978-1-61530-725-8 . Davies, Norman (2005). God's Playground: A History of Poland . Vol. 1: The Origins to 1795. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-925339-5 . de la Torre, Ignacio (2019). "Searching for the Emergence of Stone Tool Making in Eastern Africa" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 116 (24): 11567– 11569. Bibcode : 2019PNAS..11611567D . doi : 10.1073/pnas.1906926116 . PMC 6575166 . PMID 31164417 . DeLaet, Debra L.; DeLaet, David E. (2015). Global Health in the 21st Century: The Globalization of Disease and Wellness . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-25899-5 . Deanesly, Margaret (2019). "The Carolingian Conquests" . A History of Early Medieval Europe . Taylor & Francis. pp. 339– 355. doi : 10.4324/9780429061530-18 . ISBN 978-0-429-06153-0 . S2CID 198789183 . Retrieved 17 September 2021 . Deming, David (2014). Science and Technology in World History, Volume 1: The Ancient World and Classical Civilization . McFarland & Co. ISBN 978-0-7864-5657-4 . Denemark, Robert Allen (2000). World System History: The Social Science of Long-term Change . Psychology Press. ISBN 978-0-415-23276-0 . Diener, Alexander C.; Hagen, Joshua (2010). "Russia's Kaliningrad Exclave: Discontinuity as a Threat to Sovereignty" .

In Diener, Alexander C. (ed.). Borderlines and Borderlands: Political Oddities at the Edge of the Nation-State . Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-5635-5 . Dinan, Desmond (2004). Europe Recast: A History of European Union . Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 0-333-98734-9 . Domínguez-Rodrigo, Manuel; Alcalá, Luis (2016). "3.3-Million-Year-Old Stone Tools and Butchery Traces? More Evidence Needed" (PDF) . PaleoAnthropology : 46– 53. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 December 2023 . Retrieved 14 December 2023 . Duchesne, Ricardo (2011).

The Uniqueness of Western Civilization . Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-19461-8 . Dunbar, Robin (2016). Human Evolution: Our Brains and Behavior . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-061678-6 . Dunham, Will (2008). "Black Death 'Discriminated' Between Victims" . ABC Science . Archived from the original on 20 December 2016 . Retrieved 24 November 2016 . Dunn, John (1994). Democracy: The Unfinished Journey 508 BCE – 1993 CE . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-827934-1 . Dynneson, Thomas L. (2008). City-state Civism in Ancient Athens: Its Real and Ideal Expressions . Peter Lang. ISBN 978-1-4331-0311-7 . Easton, Richard D. (2013). GPS Declassified . Potomac. ISBN 978-1-61234-408-9 . Evans, Damian; et al. (2007). "A Comprehensive Archaeological Map of the World's Largest Pre-industrial Settlement Complex at Angkor, Cambodia" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 104 (36): 14279. Bibcode : 2007PNAS..10414277E . doi : 10.1073/pnas.0702525104 . PMC 1964867 . PMID 17717084 . Fagan, Brian M. (2005). Ancient North America: The Archaeology of a Continent (4th ed.). Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-28148-2 . Fagan, Brian M.; Beck, Charlotte, eds. (1996).

The Oxford Companion to Archaeology . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-507618-9 . Fagan, Brian M.; Durrani, Nadia (2021). "3. Enter Homo Sapiens (c. 300,000 Years Ago and Later)". World Prehistory: The Basics . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-00-046679-9 . Faltin, Lucia; Wright, Melanie J. (2007).

The Religious Roots of Contemporary European Identity . A&C Black. ISBN 978-0-8264-9482-5 . Fasulo, Linda (2015). An Insider's Guide to the UN (3rd ed.). Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-20365-3 . Flannery, Kent V. ; Marcus, Joyce (1996). Zapotec Civilization: How Urban Society Evolved in Mexico's Oaxaca Valley . Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-05078-1 . Flenley, John; Bahn, Paul (2003).

The Enigmas of Easter Island . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-164719-2 . Friedman, Thomas (2007).

The World Is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty-First Century (Further Updated and Expanded ed.). Picador. ISBN 978-0-312-42507-4 . Gamble, Andrew (1981). An Introduction to Modern Social and Political Thought . Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-349-16615-2 . Geraghty, Paul (1994). "Linguistic Evidence for the Tongan Empire" .

In Dutton, Tom (ed.). Language Contact and Change in the Austronesian World . Trends in linguistics: Studies and monographs. Vol. 77. Gruyter. ISBN 978-3-11-012786-7 . Gernet, Jacques (1996). A History of Chinese Civilization . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-49781-7 . Getzen, Thomas E. (2022). Money and Medicine: The Evolution of National Health Expenditures . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-757328-0 . Gilbert, Martin (2013).

The Routledge Atlas of Russian History . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-135-10831-1 . Gleick, James (2019). "Moon Fever" .

The New York Review of Books . Vol. LXVI, no. 13. Archived from the original on 1 July 2022 . Retrieved 1 July 2022 . Goldhill, Simon (1997). "The Audience of Athenian Tragedy".

The Cambridge Companion to Greek Tragedy . Cambridge Companions to Literature series. Cambridge University Press. pp. 54– 68. ISBN 0-521-42351-1 . Gowlett, J. A. J. (2016). "The Discovery of Fire by Humans: A Long and Convoluted Process" . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 371 (1696) 20150164. doi : 10.1098/rstb.2015.0164 . PMC 4874402 . PMID 27216521 . Graeber, David; Wengrow, David (2021).

The Dawn of Everything: A New History of Humanity . Farrar, Straus & Giroux. ISBN 978-0-374-15735-7 . Greene, Elizabeth B. (2017). Buildings and Landmarks of 19th-Century America: American Society Revealed . Bloomsbury. ISBN 978-1-4408-3573-5 . Grewal, J. S. (1998).

The Sikhs of the Punjab . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-63764-0 . Haigh, Gerald (2009). Special Times: Sikhism . A&C Black. ISBN 978-1-4081-0434-7 . Hammer MF (2013). "Human Hybrids" (PDF) . Scientific American . 308 (5): 66– 71. Bibcode : 2013SciAm.308e..66H . doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican0513-66 . PMID 23627222 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 August 2018. Harmand, Sonia ; et al. (2015). "3.3-million-year-old Stone Tools from Lomekwi 3, West Turkana, Kenya" . Nature . 521 (7552): 310– 315. Bibcode : 2015Natur.521..310H . doi : 10.1038/nature14464 . PMID 25993961 . S2CID 1207285 . Harvati, Katerina ; Röding, Carolin; Bosman, Abel M.; Karakostis, Fotios A.; Grün, Rainer; Stringer, Chris; Karkanas, Panagiotis; Thompson, Nicholas C.; Koutoulidis, Vassilis; Moulopoulos, Lia A.; Gorgoulis, Vassilis G. (2019). "Apidima Cave Fossils Provide Earliest Evidence of Homo Sapiens in Eurasia" . Nature . 571 (7766): 500– 504. Bibcode : 2019Natur.571..500H . doi : 10.1038/s41586-019-1376-z . hdl : 10072/397334 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMID 31292546 . S2CID 195873640 . Archived from the original on 10 July 2019 . Retrieved 10 July 2022 . Hayas, Caltron J. H. (1953). Christianity and Western Civilization . Stanford University Press. Haynes, Jeffrey; Hough, Peter; Pilbeam, Bruce (2023). World Politics . Sage. ISBN 978-1-5297-7459-7 . Headrick, Daniel R. (2009). Technology: A World History . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-533821-8 . Hemingway, Colette; Hemingway, Seán (2007). "Art of the Hellenistic Age and the Hellenistic Tradition" . Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History . Metropolitan Museum of Art. Archived from the original on 31 May 2013 . Retrieved 18 November 2016 . Henshall, Kenneth (1999). A History of Japan: From Stone Age to Superpower . St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0-312-21986-5 . Henshall, Kenneth (2012). A History of Japan: From Stone Age to Superpower (3rd ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-230-36918-4 . Herries AI, Martin JM, Leece AB, Adams JW, Boschian G, Joannes-Boyau R, et al. (2020). "Contemporaneity of Australopithecus , Paranthropus , and Early Homo Erectus in South Africa" . Science . 368 (6486) eaaw7293: 7293. Bibcode : 2020Sci...368w7293H . doi : 10.1126/science.aaw7293 . hdl : 11568/1040368 . PMID 32241925 . Herschkovitz, Israel; et al. (2018). "The Earliest Modern Humans Outside Africa" . Science . 359 (6374): 456– 459. Bibcode : 2018Sci...359..456H . doi : 10.1126/science.aap8369 . hdl : 10072/372670 . PMID 29371468 . Heyman, Neil (1997). World War I . Greenwood. ISBN 978-1-57356-656-8 . Hiro, Dilip (1989). Holy Wars: The Rise of Islamic Fundamentalism . Routledge. ISBN 0-415-90207-X . Horn, Jeff (2016).

The Industrial Revolution: History, Documents, and Key Questions . Bloomsbury. ISBN 978-1-61069-885-6 . Hourani, Albert (1991). A History of the Arab Peoples . New York: MJF Books. ISBN 978-1-56731-216-4 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) Howe, D. C.; Chauhan, R. S.; Soderberg, A. T.; Buckley, M. R. (2020). "Paradigm Shifts Caused by the COVID-19 Pandemic" . Organizational Dynamics . 50 (4) 100804. doi : 10.1016/j.orgdyn.2020.100804 . PMC 7648497 . PMID 33191959 . Hublin JJ, Ben-Ncer A, Bailey SE, Freidline SE, Neubauer S, Skinner MM, et al. (2017). "New Fossils from Jebel Irhoud, Morocco and the Pan-African Origin of Homo Sapiens" (PDF) . Nature . 546 (7657): 289– 292. Bibcode : 2017Natur.546..289H . doi : 10.1038/nature22336 . hdl : 1887/74734 . PMID 28593953 . S2CID 256771372 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 January 2020 . Retrieved 27 July 2022 . Huffman, James (2010). Japan in World History . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-536808-6 . Hughes-Warrington, Marnie (2015). "Writing World History".

The Cambridge World History . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-76333-2 . Huhle, Teresa (2022). "Demographic Concerns and Interventions" .

In Unger, Corinna R.; Borowy, Iris; Pernet, Corinne A. (eds.).

The Routledge Handbook on the History of Development . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-00-060205-0 . Huntington, Samuel P. (1991).

The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late 20th Century . University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 978-0-8061-8604-7 . Iliffe, John (2007). Africans: The History of a Continent (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-68297-8 . Ivanov, Serguey F. (2009). "Population Growth and New World Population Redistribution" .

In Vishnevsky, Anatoly G. (ed.). Population and Development: Challenges and Opportunities . EOLSS. ISBN 978-1-84826-086-3 . Johnston, Sarah Iles , ed. (2004). Religions of the Ancient World: A Guide . Belknap. ISBN 978-0-674-01517-3 . Kazeroony, Hamid H. (2023). "2. Postcoloniality: Colonialism Roots and Scope" . Decoloniality Praxis . Emerald. ISBN 978-1-80262-953-8 . Keay, John (2000). India: A History . Atlantic Monthly. ISBN 978-0-87113-800-2 . Kedar, Benjamin ; Wiesner-Hanks, Merry , eds. (2015). Expanding Webs of Exchange and Conflict, 500 CE–1500 CE .

The Cambridge World History . Vol. 5. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-19074-9 . Kelly, Christopher (2007).

The Roman Empire: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-280391-7 . Kennedy, Paul (1987).

The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers: Economic Change and Military Conflict from 1500 to 2000 . Random House. ISBN 978-0-394-54674-2 . Kent, Susan Kingsley (2020). Gender: A World History . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-062197-1 . Kiernan, Ben ; Lemos, T. M.; Taylor, Tristan S., eds. (2023).

The Cambridge World History of Genocide . Vol. 1: Genocide in the Ancient, Medieval and Premodern Worlds. Cambridge University Press. doi : 10.1017/9781108655989 . ISBN 978-1-108-65598-9 . Kirch, Patrick Vinton; Green, Roger C. (2001). Hawaiki, Ancestral Polynesia: An Essay in Historical Anthropology . Cambridge University press. ISBN 978-0-521-78879-3 . Koch, Paul L.; Barnosky, Anthony D. (2006). "Late Quaternary Extinctions: State of the Debate". Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics . 37 (1): 215– 250. doi : 10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.34.011802.132415 . S2CID 16590668 . Kolbert, Elizabeth (2014).

The Sixth Extinction: An Unnatural History . Henry Holt & Co. ISBN 978-0-8050-9979-9 . Kolbert, Elizabeth (2023). "Phosphorus Saved Our Way of Life—and Now Threatens to End It" .

The New Yorker . ISSN 0028-792X . Archived from the original on 28 November 2023 . Retrieved 18 November 2023 . Kosso, Cynthia; Scott, Anne (2009).

The Nature and Function of Water, Baths, Bathing, and Hygiene from Antiquity Through the Renaissance . Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-17357-6 . Kte'pi, Bill (2013). "Chronology" .

In Ainsworth, James (ed.). Sociology of Education: An A-to-Z Guide . Sage. ISBN 978-1-5063-5473-6 . Kulke, Hermann; Rothermund, Dietmar (1990). A History of India . Dorset. ISBN 0-88029-577-5 . Kunertova, Dominika (2024). "9 Transatlantic Burden Sharing" .

In Olsen, John Andreas (ed.). Routledge Handbook of NATO . Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-04-002626-7 . Kuran, Timur (2023). Freedoms Delayed: Political Legacies of Islamic Law in the Middle East . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-00-932001-6 . Lal, Vinay (2001). "The Mughal Empire" . Manas: India and its Neighbors . University of California, Los Angeles. Archived from the original on 30 April 2015 . Retrieved 12 April 2015 . Landes, David S. (1969).

The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and Industrial Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-07200-7 . Lang, Michael (2015). "Evolution, Rupture, and Periodization".

The Cambridge World History . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-76333-2 . Larson, G.; Piperno, D. R.; Allaby, R. G.; Purugganan, M. D.; Andersson, L.; Arroyo-Kalin, M.; Barton, L.; Climer Vigueira, C.; Denham, T.; Dobney, K.; Doust, A. N.; Gepts, P.; Gilbert, M. T. P.; Gremillion, K. J.; Lucas, L.; Lukens, L.; Marshall, F. B.; Olsen, K. M.; Pires, J. C.; Richerson, P. J.; Rubio De Casas, R.; Sanjur, O. I.; Thomas, M. G.; Fuller, D. Q. (2014). "Current Perspectives and the Future of Domestication Studies" . PNAS . 111 (17): 6139– 6146. Bibcode : 2014PNAS..111.6139L . doi : 10.1073/pnas.1323964111 . PMC 4035915 . PMID 24757054 . Lewin, Roger (2009) . Human Evolution: An Illustrated Introduction (5th ed.). John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-4051-5614-1 . Lewis, Mark Edward (2009). China's Cosmopolitan Empire: The Tang Dynasty . Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-03306-1 . Lewton, Kristi L. (2017). "Bipedalism" .

The International Encyclopedia of Primatology, 3 Volume Set . John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-470-67337-9 . Li, Feng; Petraglia, Michael; Roberts, Patrick; Gao, Xing (2020). "The northern dispersal of early modern humans in eastern Eurasia" (PDF) . Science Bulletin . 65 (20): 1699– 1701. Bibcode : 2020SciBu..65.1699L . doi : 10.1016/j.scib.2020.06.026 . hdl : 10072/412741 . PMID 36659239 . Lieberman, Victor B. (2003). Strange Parallels: Southeast Asia in Global Context, c. 800–1830, Volume 1, Integration on the Mainland . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-80496-7 . Lorge, Peter (2015).

The Reunification of China: Peace Through War Under the Song Dynasty . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-1-107-08475-9 . MacKnight, C. C. (1986). "Macassans and the Aboriginal Past". Archaeology in Oceania . 21 : 69– 75. doi : 10.1002/j.1834-4453.1986.tb00126.x . Manning, Patrick (2013). "Epistemology".

The Oxford Handbook of World History . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-968606-3 . Manning, Patrick (2020). Methods for Human History: Studying Social, Cultural, and Biological Evolution . Springer. ISBN 978-3-030-53882-8 . Martell, Luke (2010).

The Sociology of Globalization . Polity. ISBN 978-0-7456-3674-0 . Martikainen, Tuomas (2017). "The Global Political Economy, Welfare State Reforms, and the Governance of Religion" .

In Nynas, Peter (ed.). Post-Secular Society . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-351-49761-9 . Martin, Thomas (2000) . Ancient Greece: From Prehistoric to Hellenic Times (Revised ed.). Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-08493-1 . Mathew, Oommen P.; Bhatia, Jatinder (2010). Innovations in Neonatal-perinatal Medicine: Innovative Technologies and Therapies that Have Fundamentally Changed the Way We Deliver Care for the Fetus and the Neonate . World Scientific. ISBN 978-981-4280-04-4 . Matsuda, Matt (2012). Pacific Worlds: A History of Seas, Peoples, and Cultures . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-88763-2 . McClellan, James E.; Dorn, Harold (2006). Science and Technology in World History: An Introduction . Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-8360-6 . McEvedy, Colin (1961).

The Penguin Atlas of Medieval History . Penguin. McNeill, William H. (1999) . A World History (4th ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-511616-8 . McNeill, William H. (2010). History of Western Civilization: A Handbook . University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-56162-2 . McNeill, William Hardy (2017).

The Global Condition: Conquerors, Catastrophes, and Community . Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-8510-7 . McNeill, J. R. ; McNeill, William (2003).

The Human Web: A Bird's-eye View of World History . Norton. ISBN 0-393-05179-X . McNeill, J. R. ; Pomeranz, Kenneth , eds. (2015a). Production, Destruction and Connection, 1750-Present, Part 1, Structures, Spaces, and Boundary Making .

The Cambridge World History . Vol. 7. Cambridge University Press. doi : 10.1017/CBO9781139196079 . ISBN 978-1-108-40775-5 . McNeill, J. R.; Pomeranz, Kenneth, eds. (2015b). Production, Destruction and Connection, 1750–Present, Part 2, Shared Transformations? .

The Cambridge World History . Vol. 7. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-19964-3 . McNiven, Ian J. (2017). "22. Australasia and the Pacific".

The Cambridge World History: Volume 4, A World with States, Empires and Networks 1200 BCE-900 CE . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-108-40771-7 . McPherron, Shannon P.; Alemseged, Zeresenay; Marean, Curtis W.; Wynn, Jonathan G.; Reed, Denné; Geraads, Denis; Bobe, René; Béarat, Hamdallah A. (2010). "Evidence for Stone-tool-assisted Consumption of Animal Tissues Before 3.39 million Years Ago at Dikika, Ethiopia". Nature . 466 (7308): 857– 860. Bibcode : 2010Natur.466..857M . doi : 10.1038/nature09248 . PMID 20703305 . S2CID 4356816 . Merrill, Ronald T.; McElhinny, Michael W. (1983).

The Earth's magnetic field: Its history, origin and planetary perspective (2nd printing ed.). Academic. p. 1 . ISBN 0-12-491242-7 . Meyer-Fong, Tobie S. (2013). What Remains: Coming to Terms with Civil War in 19th Century China . Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-5425-5 . Mirsepassi, Ali; Fernée, Tadd Graham (2014). Islam, Democracy, and Cosmopolitanism: At Home and in the World . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-05397-7 . Morley, Iain (2013).

The Prehistory of Music: Human Evolution, Archaeology, and the Origins of Musicality . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-923408-0 . Morys, Matthias (2020).

The Economic History of Central, East and South-East Europe: 1800 to the Present . Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-317-41411-7 . Murphy, John (2014). Gods & Goddesses of the Inca, Maya, and Aztec Civilizations . Rosen. ISBN 978-1-62275-396-3 . Naughton, John (2016). "The Evolution of the Internet: From Military Experiment to General Purpose Technology". Journal of Cyber Policy . 1 (1): 5– 28. doi : 10.1080/23738871.2016.1157619 . ISSN 2373-8871 . Naver. 남북국시대 . Encyclopedia (in Korean). Naver . Retrieved 24 November 2016 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) Neel, Carolyn (2011). "Introduction" . World History Encyclopedia . Vol. 1. Greenwood. ISBN 978-1-85109-930-6 . Nichols, Deborah L.; Pool, Christopher A. (2012).

The Oxford Handbook of Mesoamerican Archaeology . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-999634-6 . Ning, Liu (2023). "Literature in the Heyday of the Tang Dynasty" .

In Liu, Yuejin (ed.). Concise Reader of Chinese Literature History . Springer. ISBN 978-981-99-5814-6 . Nohr, Ellen Aagaard; Olsen, Jorn (2007). "Maternal and Child Health Epidemiology" .

In Boslaugh, Sarah (ed.). Encyclopedia of Epidemiology . SAGE. ISBN 978-1-4522-6559-9 . Norberg, Matilda Baraibar; Deutsch, Lisa (2023).

The Soybean Through World History: Lessons for Sustainable Agrofood Systems . Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-00-090347-8 . Northrup, David R. (2015). "From Divergence to Convergence: Centrifugal and Centripetal Forces in History".

The Cambridge World History . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-76333-2 . Nugent, Jeffrey B. (2021). "Refugees in the Mena Region: Historical Overview, Effects and Challenges" .

The Routledge Handbook on the Middle East Economy . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-351-59668-8 . O'Brien, Patrick Karl, ed. (2002). Atlas of World History . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-521921-0 . O'Connell, J. F.; Allen, J.; Williams, M. A. J.; Williams, A. N.; Turney, C. S. M.; Spooner, N. A.; Kamminga, J.; Brown, G.; Cooper, A. (2018). "When Did Homo Sapiens First Reach Southeast Asia and Sahul?" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 115 (34): 8482– 8490. Bibcode : 2018PNAS..115.8482O . doi : 10.1073/pnas.1808385115 . PMC 6112744 . PMID 30082377 . O'Rourke, Kevin H.; Williamson, Jeffrey G. (2002). "When Did Globalization Begin?". European Review of Economic History . 6 (1): 23– 50. doi : 10.1017/S1361491602000023 . S2CID 15767303 . Oreskes, Naomi (2022). "New Nuclear Power Plants Are Unlikely to Stop the Climate Crisis" . Scientific American . Archived from the original on 18 November 2023 . Retrieved 18 November 2023 . Osborne, Eric W. (3 July 2020). "The Ulcer of the Mughal Empire: Mughals and Marathas, 1680–1707". Small Wars & Insurgencies . 31 (5): 992, 1005. doi : 10.1080/09592318.2020.1764711 . ISSN 0959-2318 . S2CID 221060782 . Pääbo, Svante (2003). "The Mosaic That Is Our Genome" .

In Clayton, Julie; Dennis, Carina (eds.). 50 Years of DNA . Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4039-1479-8 . Paine, Lincoln P. (2011). "The Promotion of Trade through Buddhist Sanghas" .

In Andrea, Alfred J. (ed.). World History Encyclopedia . Greenwood. ISBN 978-1-85109-930-6 . Paine, Lincoln P. (2013).

The Sea and Civilization: A Maritime History of the World . Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-1-4000-4409-2 . Pettersson E, Lundeberg J, Ahmadian A (2009). "Generations of Sequencing Technologies" . Genomics . 93 (2): 105– 111. doi : 10.1016/j.ygeno.2008.10.003 . PMID 18992322 . Pillalamarri, Akhilesh (2017). "Buddhism and Islam in Asia: A Long and Complicated History" .

The Diplomat . Archived from the original on 23 January 2019 . Retrieved 17 September 2021 . Pollack, Henry (2010). A World Without Ice . Penguin. ISBN 978-1-101-52485-5 . Posth C, Renaud G, Mittnik A, Drucker DG, Rougier H, Cupillard C, et al. (2016). "Pleistocene Mitochondrial Genomes Suggest a Single Major Dispersal of Non-Africans and a Late Glacial Population Turnover in Europe" (PDF) . Current Biology . 26 (6): 827– 833. Bibcode : 2016CBio...26..827P . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2016.01.037 . hdl : 2440/114930 . PMID 26853362 . S2CID 140098861 . Price, Simon; Thonemann, Peter (2010).

The Birth of Classical Europe: A History from Troy to Augustine . Penguin. ISBN 978-0-670-02247-2 . Radivojevic, M; Rehren, T; Kuzmanovic-Cvetkovic, J; Jovanovic, M; Northover, JP (2013). "Tainted Ores and the Rise of Tin Bronzes in Eurasia, c. 6500 years ago" . Antiquity . 87 (338): 1030– 1045. doi : 10.1017/S0003598X0004984X . Archived from the original on 19 November 2018 . Retrieved 30 September 2023 . Reagan, Timothy (2005). Non-Western Educational Traditions: Alternative Approaches to Educational Thought and Practice . Lawrence Erlbaum. ISBN 978-0-8058-4857-1 . Regulski, Ilona (2016). "The Origins and Early Development of Writing in Egypt" . Online Only -- Archaeology . doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199935413.013.61 . ISBN 978-0-19-993541-3 . Retrieved 19 April 2020 . {{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) Ricklefs, M. C. (2001). A History of Modern Indonesia Since C. 1200 . Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-4479-9 . Ritchie, Hannah (2024). "The World Solved Acid Rain. We Can Also Solve Climate Change" . Scientific American . Retrieved 23 May 2024 . Roberts, J. M.; Westad, Odd Arne (2013).

The Penguin History of the World (6th ed.). Penguin. ISBN 978-1-84614-443-1 . Robinson, Andrew (2009). Writing and Script: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-157916-5 . Robinson, Chase F. (2010).

The New Cambridge History of Islam . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83823-8 . Roivainen, Eka (2023). "I Gave ChatGPT an IQ Test. Here's What I Discovered" . Scientific American . Retrieved 23 May 2024 . Ropp, Paul S. (2010). China in World History . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-979876-6 . Rosas, Antionio; Bastir, Markus (2020). "An Assessment of the Late Middle Pleistocene Occipital from Apidima 1 Skull (Greece)" . L'Anthropologie . 124 (1) 102745. doi : 10.1016/j.anthro.2020.102745 . ISSN 0003-5521 . S2CID 216223477 . Archived from the original on 7 August 2022 . Retrieved 17 August 2022 . Sainsbury, Keith (1986).

The Turning Point: Roosevelt, Stalin, Churchill, and Chiang Kai-Shek, 1943: The Moscow, Cairo, and Teheran Conferences . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-285172-7 . Scarre, Chris , ed. (2024).

The Human Past: World Prehistory and the Development of Human Societies (5th ed.). Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-296301 . Schoppa, R. Keith (2021).

The Twentieth Century: A World History . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-049735-4 . Schulman, Alex (2011).

The Secular Contract: The Politics of Enlightenment . Bloomsbury. ISBN 978-1-4411-8467-2 . Scott, William; Vare, Paul (2020). Learning, Environment and Sustainable Development: A History of Ideas . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-00-020802-3 . Scranton, Philip (2006). "Urgency, Uncertainty, and Innovation: Building Jet Engines in Postwar America" . Management & Organizational History . 1 (2): 131. doi : 10.1177/1744935906064096 . ISSN 1744-9359 . S2CID 143813033 . Retrieved 15 September 2022 . Seow, Victor (3 July 2022). "A Tradition of Invention: The Paradox of Glorifying Past Technological Breakthroughs" . East Asian Science, Technology and Society . 16 (3): 349– 366. doi : 10.1080/18752160.2022.2095103 . Serle, Percival (1949). "Tasman, Abel". Dictionary of Australian Biography . Angus & Robertson. Shady Solis, Ruth ; Haas, Jonathan; Creamer, Winifred (2001). "Dating Caral, a Preceramic Site in the Supe Valley on the Central Coast of Peru" . Science . 292 (5517): 723– 726. Bibcode : 2001Sci...292..723S . doi : 10.1126/science.1059519 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 11326098 . S2CID 10172918 . Archived from the original on 12 November 2022 . Retrieved 13 November 2022 . Shaw, Stanford (1976). History of the Ottoman Empire and Modern Turkey: Volume I: Empire of the Gazis: The Rise and Decline of the Ottoman Empire 1280–1808 . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-29163-7 . Shelley, Fred M. (2022). Examining Education Around the World . Bloomsbury. ISBN 978-1-4408-6448-3 . Short, John R. (1987). An Introduction to Urban Geography . Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7102-0372-4 . Showalter, Dennis E.; Royde-Smith, John Graham (2024). "World War I" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 9 August 2024 . Siler, Julia Flynn (2012). Lost Kingdom: Hawaii's Last Queen, the Sugar Kings, and America's First Imperial Adventure . Grove. ISBN 978-0-8021-9488-6 . Simmons, Beth A. (2009). Mobilizing for Human Rights: International Law in Domestic Politics . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-139-48348-3 . Singh, Patwant (2000).

The Sikhs . Knopf. ISBN 0-375-40728-6 . Singh, Upinder (2008). A History of Ancient and Early Medieval India: From the Stone Age to the 12th Century . Pearson. ISBN 978-81-317-1120-0 . Spielvogel, Jackson J. (2016). Western Civilization: A Brief History, Volume I: To 1715 . Cengage. ISBN 978-1-305-63347-6 . Spoor, Fred; Gunz, Philipp; Neubauer, Simon; Stelzer, Stefanie; Scott, Nadia; Kwekason, Amandus; Dean, M. Christopher (2015). "Reconstructed Homo Habilis Type OH 7 Suggests Deep-rooted Species Diversity in Early Homo ". Nature . 519 (7541): 83– 86. Bibcode : 2015Natur.519...83S . doi : 10.1038/nature14224 . PMID 25739632 . S2CID 4470282 .

The Statesman's Yearbook 2024: The Politics, Cultures and Economies of the World . Springer. 2023. ISBN 978-1-349-96076-7 . Stearns, Peter N. (2001).

The Encyclopedia of World History: Ancient, Medieval, and Modern, Chronologically Arranged . Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-395-65237-4 . Stearns, Peter N. (2008). World History in Documents: A Comparative Reader . NYU Press. ISBN 978-0-8147-4101-6 . Stearns, Peter N. (2010). World History: The Basics . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-136-88817-5 . Stearns, Peter N. ; Langer, William L., eds. (2001).

The Encyclopedia of World History: Ancient, Medieval, and Modern, Chronologically Arranged (6th ed.). Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-395-65237-4 . Stein, Burton (2010). A History of India . John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-4443-2351-1 . Stephens, Lucas; Fuller, Dorian; Boivin, Nicole; Rick, Torben; Gauthier, Nicolas; Kay, Andrea; Marwick, Ben; Armstrong, Chelsey Geralda; Barton, C. Michael (2019). "Archaeological Assessment Reveals Earth's Early Transformation Through Land Use". Science . 365 (6456): 897– 902. Bibcode : 2019Sci...365..897S . doi : 10.1126/science.aax1192 . hdl : 10150/634688 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 31467217 . S2CID 201674203 . Stevenson, Tom (2020). "In the Grey Zone" . London Review of Books . Vol. 42, no. 20. pp. 41– 43. Archived from the original on 29 July 2022 . Retrieved 24 July 2022 . Strait, David (2010). "The Evolutionary History of the Australopiths" . Evolution: Education and Outreach . 3 (3): 341. doi : 10.1007/s12052-010-0249-6 . ISSN 1936-6434 . S2CID 31979188 . Strauss, Barry (2005).

The Battle of Salamis: The Naval Encounter That Saved Greece – and Western Civilization . Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-7453-1 . Stutz, Aaron Jonas (2018). "Paleolithic" .

In Trevathan, Wenda; Cartmill, Matt; Dufour, Darna; Larsen, Clark (eds.).

The International Encyclopedia of Biological Anthropology . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. pp. 1– 9. doi : 10.1002/9781118584538.ieba0363 . ISBN 978-1-118-58442-2 . S2CID 240083827 . Retrieved 4 August 2022 . Suny, Ronald Grigor (2015). "They Can Live in the Desert but Nowhere Else": A History of the Armenian Genocide . Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-6558-1 . Svard, Lois (2023).

The Musical Brain: What Students, Teachers, and Performers Need to Know . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-758417-0 . Tamrat, Taddesse (1977). "Ethiopia, the Red Sea and the Horn".

The Cambridge History of Africa: From c.1050 to c.1600 . Vol. 3. Cambridge University Press. pp. 98– 182. ISBN 978-0-521-20981-6 . Retrieved 3 September 2024 . Taylor, Keith (1976). "The Rise of Đại Việt and the Establishment of Thăng-long" .

In Hall, Kenneth R.; Whitmore, John K. (eds.). Explorations in Early Southeast Asian History: The Origins of Southeast Asian Statecraft . University of Michigan Press. doi : 10.3998/mpub.19404 . ISBN 978-0-89148-011-2 . JSTOR 10.3998/mpub.19404 . S2CID 237194486 . Retrieved 31 December 2022 .

The Association of Korean History Teachers (2005). Korea Through the Ages; Volume One: Ancient .

The Center for Information on Korean Culture, The Academy of Korean Studies. ISBN 978-89-7105-545-8 . "Large, Creative AI Models Will Transform Lives and Labour Markets" .

The Economist . 2023. ISSN 0013-0613 . Archived from the original on 12 December 2023 . Retrieved 13 December 2023 . "Progress on Climate Change Has Been Too Slow. But It's Been Real" .

The Economist . 2023a. ISSN 0013-0613 . Archived from the original on 2 December 2023 . Retrieved 2 December 2023 . Tignor, Robert; Adelman, Jeremy; Brown, Peter; Elman, Benjamin; Liu, Xinru; Pittman, Holly; Shaw, Brent (2014). Worlds Together, Worlds Apart, Volume One: Beginnings Through the 15th Century (4th ed.). W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-92208-0 . Tiliouine, Habib; Renima, Ahmed; Estes, Richard J. (2016). "The Islamic Golden Age: A Story of the Triumph of the Islamic Civilization" .

In Tiliouine, Habib; Estes, Richard J. (eds.).

The State of Social Progress of Islamic Societies: Social, Economic, Political, and Ideological Challenges . Springer. ISBN 978-3-319-24774-8 . Tindall, George; Shi, David (2010). America: A Narrative History . Vol. 1 (8th ed.). Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-93406-9 . Tor, Deborah (2009). "The Islamization of Central Asia in the Sāmānid Era and the Reshaping of the Muslim World". Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London . 72 (2). Cambridge University Press : 279– 299. doi : 10.1017/S0041977X09000524 . JSTOR 40379005 . S2CID 153554938 . Totman, Conrad (2002). A History of Japan . Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4051-2359-4 . Tozzo, Brandon (2017). American Hegemony after the Great Recession: A Transformation in World Order . Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-137-57539-5 . Trubek, Anne (2016).

The History and Uncertain Future of Handwriting . Bloomsbury. ISBN 978-1-62040-216-0 . Urata, Shūjirō; Kuroda, Kazuo; Tonegawa, Yoshiko (2022). Sustainable Development Disciplines for Humanity: Breaking Down the 5Ps—People, Planet, Prosperity, Peace, and Partnerships . Springer. ISBN 978-981-19-4859-6 . Vásquez, Ian (2001). "Ending Mass Poverty" . Cato Institute . Retrieved 23 May 2024 . Villmoare, Brian; Kimbel, William; Seyoum, Chalachew; Campisano, Christopher; DiMaggio, Erin; Rowan, John; et al. (2015). "Paleoanthropology. Early Homo at 2.8 Ma from Ledi-Geraru, Afar, Ethiopia" . Science . 347 (6228): 1352– 1355. Bibcode : 2015Sci...347.1352V . doi : 10.1126/science.aaa1343 . PMID 25739410 . Weber, Gerhard W.; Hershkovitz, Israel; Gunz, Philipp; Neubauer, Simon; Ayalon, Avner; Latimer, Bruce; Bar-Matthews, Miryam; Yasur, Gal; Barzilai, Omry; May, Hila (2020). "Before the Massive Modern Human Dispersal into Eurasia: A 55,000-year-old Partial Cranium from Manot Cave, Israel" . Quaternary International . 551 : 29– 39. Bibcode : 2020QuInt.551...29W . doi : 10.1016/j.quaint.2019.10.009 . ISSN 1040-6182 . S2CID 210628420 . Archived from the original on 24 January 2022 . Retrieved 17 August 2022 . Wengrow, David (2011). "The Invention of Writing in Egypt".

Before the Pyramids: Origin of Egyptian Civilization . Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago. Wheeler, Mary E. (1971). "Empires in Conflict and Cooperation: The "Bostonians" and the Russian-American Company". Pacific Historical Review . 40 (4): 441. doi : 10.2307/3637703 . JSTOR 3637703 . Whitecotton, Joseph W. (1977).

The Zapotecs: Princes, Priests, and Peasants . University of Oklahoma Press. Whitfield, Susan (2004).

The Silk Road: Trade, Travel, War, and Faith . Serendia. ISBN 978-1-932476-13-2 . Wiesner-Hanks, Merry E. (2015). A Concise History of the World . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-02837-1 . Wiesner-Hanks, Merry E. (2021). What is Early Modern History? . John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-5095-4058-7 . Williams, Stephen; Friell, Gerard (2005). Theodosius: The Empire at Bay . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-135-78262-7 . Wolfe, Audra J. (2013). Competing with the Soviets: Science, Technology, and the State in Cold War America . Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-1-4214-0901-6 . Wolpert, Stanley (1997). A New History of India (5th ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-510030-1 . Woods, Thomas E. ; Canizares, Antonio (2012). How the Catholic Church Built Western Civilization (Reprint ed.). Regnery History. ISBN 978-1-59698-328-1 . Wragg-Sykes, Rebecca (2016). "Humans Evolve" . Big History: Our Incredible Journey, from Big Bang to Now . Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 978-0-241-22590-5 . Yoffee, Norman , ed. (2015). Early Cities in Comparative Perspective, 4000 BCE–1200 CE .

The Cambridge World History . Vol. 3. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-19008-4 . Yong E (2011). "Mosaic Humans, the Hybrid Species" . New Scientist . 211 (2823): 34– 38. Bibcode : 2011NewSc.211...34Y . doi : 10.1016/S0262-4079(11)61839-3 . Zhu Z, Dennell R, Huang W, Wu Y, Qiu S, Yang S, et al. (2018). "Hominin Occupation of the Chinese Loess Plateau Since About 2.1 million Years Ago". Nature . 559 (7715): 608– 612. Bibcode : 2018Natur.559..608Z . doi : 10.1038/s41586-018-0299-4 . PMID 29995848 . S2CID 49670311 . Ṭabīb, Rashīd al-Dīn; Faḍlallāh, Rašīd-ad-Dīn; Nishapuri, Zahir al-Din; Nīšāpūrī, Ẓahīr-ad-Dīn (2001). Bosworth, Clifford Edmund (ed.).

The History of the Seljuq Turks from the Jāmiʻ Al-tawārīkh: An Ilkhanid Adaptation of the Saljūq-nāma of Ẓahīr Al-Dīn Nīshāpūrī . Translated by Luther, Kenneth Allin. Psychology Press. ISBN 978-0-7007-1342-4 . .mw-parser-output .portal-bar{font-size:88%;font-weight:bold;display:flex;justify-content:center;align-items:baseline}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-bordered{padding:0 2em;background-color:#fdfdfd;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;clear:both;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-related{font-size:100%;justify-content:flex-start}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-unbordered{padding:0 1.7em;margin-left:0}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-header{margin:0 1em 0 0.5em;flex:0 0 auto;min-height:24px}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-content{display:flex;flex-flow:row wrap;flex:0 1 auto;padding:0.15em 0;column-gap:1em;align-items:baseline;margin:0;list-style:none}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-content-related{margin:0;list-style:none}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-item{display:inline-block;margin:0.15em 0.2em;min-height:24px;line-height:24px}@media screen and (max-width:768px){.mw-parser-output .portal-bar{font-size:88%;font-weight:bold;display:flex;flex-flow:column wrap;align-items:baseline}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-header{text-align:center;flex:0;padding-left:0.5em;margin:0 auto}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-related{font-size:100%;align-items:flex-start}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-content{display:flex;flex-flow:row wrap;align-items:center;flex:0;column-gap:1em;border-top:1px solid #a2a9b1;margin:0 auto;list-style:none}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-content-related{border-top:none;margin:0;list-style:none}}.mw-parser-output .navbox+span.mw-empty-elt+.portal-bar,.mw-parser-output .navbox+span.mw-empty-elt+.portal-bar-bordered,.mw-parser-output .sister-bar+span.mw-empty-elt+.portal-bar,.mw-parser-output .sister-bar+span.mw-empty-elt+.portal-bar-bordered{margin-top:-1px} Portals : History Modern history World .mw-parser-output .sister-bar{display:flex;justify-content:center;align-items:baseline;font-size:88%;background-color:#fdfdfd;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;clear:both;margin:1em 0 0;padding:0 2em}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-header{margin:0 1em 0 0.5em;padding:0.2em 0;flex:0 0 auto;min-height:24px;line-height:22px}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-content{display:flex;flex-flow:row wrap;flex:0 1 auto;align-items:baseline;padding:0.2em 0;column-gap:1em;margin:0;list-style:none}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-item{display:flex;align-items:baseline;margin:0.15em 0;min-height:24px;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-logo{width:22px;line-height:22px;margin:0 3px 0 2px;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-link{margin:0 2px 0 4px;text-align:left}@media screen and (max-width:960px){.mw-parser-output .sister-bar{flex-flow:column wrap;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-header{flex:0 1}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-content{flex:1;border-top:1px solid #a2a9b1;margin:0;list-style:none}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-item{flex:0 0 20em;min-width:20em}}.mw-parser-output .navbox+link+.sister-bar,.mw-parser-output .navbox+style+.sister-bar,.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+link+.sister-bar,.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+style+.sister-bar,.mw-parser-output .sister-bar+.navbox-styles+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .sister-bar+.navbox-styles+.portal-bar{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+.mw-empty-elt+.sister-bar,.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+.mw-empty-elt+link+.sister-bar,.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+.mw-empty-elt+style+.sister-bar,.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+link+.mw-empty-elt+.sister-bar,.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+style+.mw-empty-elt+.sister-bar,.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+.mw-empty-elt+.mw-empty-elt+.sister-bar{margin-top:-1px}@media print{body.ns-0 .mw-parser-output .sister-bar{display:none!important}} Human history at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons Textbooks from Wikibooks Data from Wikidata .mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+span.mw-empty-elt+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}body.skin--responsive .mw-parser-output .navbox-image img{max-width:none!important}@media print{body.ns-0 .mw-parser-output .navbox{display:none!important}} v t e World history Overviews Human history Recorded history List of historical periods Timelines of Big History Major concepts: Cradle of civilization World regions: History of Western civilization Specific histories : Economic history of the world Topical History of: Agriculture Government Law Communication Economics Trade War Philosophy Science/Technology: History of: Medicine Science Writing Technology Navigation Arts: History of: Art Drama Literature Music Painting Historical eras Chronological world eras: Prehistory Three-age system Agricultural Revolution Ancient history Post-classical history Middle Ages Early modern period Modern history Societal eras: Renaissance Age of Discovery Scientific Revolution Age of Enlightenment Second Agricultural Revolution Industrial Revolution Second Industrial Revolution Britain's Imperial Century American Century Digital Age Types of societies Society Pre-industrial Hunter-gatherer Montane Circumpolar Subarctic Nomadic Pastoral Horticultural Agricultural/Agrarian Feudal Complex Industrial Post-industrial Related Historiography