The Indian Army was established on 1 April 1895 alongside the long established presidency armies of the East India Company , which too were absorbed into it in 1903. Some princely states maintained their own armies which formed the Imperial Service Troops which, along with the Indian Army formed the land component of the Armed Forces of the Crown of India, responsible for the defence of the Indian Empire.

The Imperial Service Troops were merged into the Indian Army after independence .

The units and regiments of the Indian Army have diverse histories and have participated in several battles and campaigns around the world, earning many battle and theatre honours before and after Independence.

The primary mission of the Indian Army is to ensure national security and national unity, to defend the nation from external aggression and internal threats, and to maintain peace and security within its borders . It conducts humanitarian rescue operations during natural calamities and other disturbances, such as Operation Surya Hope , and can also be requisitioned by the government to cope with internal threats. It is a major component of national power, alongside the Indian Navy and the Indian Air Force .

The independent Indian army has been involved in four wars with neighbouring Pakistan and one with China . It has emerged victorious in all wars against Pakistan . Other major operations undertaken by the army include Operation Vijay , Operation Meghdoot , and Operation Cactus .

The army has conducted large peacetime exercises such as Operation Brasstacks and Exercise Shoorveer, and it has also been an active participant in numerous United Nations peacekeeping missions .

The Indian Army was a major force in the First and Second World Wars , particularly in the Western Front and the Middle Eastern theatre during World War I , and the South-East Asian Theatre and the East African and North African campaigns during World War II .

The Indian Army is operationally and geographically divided into seven commands , with the basic field formation being a division .

The army is an all-volunteer force and comprises more than 80% of the country's active defence personnel. It is the largest standing army in the world , with 1,248,000 active troops and 960,000 reserve troops.

The army has embarked on an infantry modernisation program known as Futuristic Infantry Soldier As a System ( F-INSAS ), and is also upgrading and acquiring new assets for its armoured, artillery, and aviation branches.

The "Army of India" meant the combined Indian Army and the British Army in India. Background Main article: British Indian Army Further information: List of regiments of the British Indian Army (1903) No. 4 ( Hazara ) Mountain Battery with RML7 pounder "Steel Gun" Mountain Gun in Review Order. Left to right Naick, Havaldar, Subadar (Sikhs) and Gunner (Punjabi Musalman) c. 1895 .

In 1776, a Military Department was created within the government of the East India Company at Calcutta . Its main function was to record orders that were issued to the army by various departments of the East India Company for the territories under its control. With the Charter Act 1833 , the Secretariat of the government of the East India Company was reorganised into four departments, including a Military Department.

The army in the presidencies of Bengal , Bombay and Madras functioned as respective Presidency Armies until 1 April 1895, when they were unified into a single force known as the Indian Army . For administrative convenience, it was divided into four commands, namely Punjab (including the North West Frontier), Bengal, Madras (including Burma), and Bombay (including Sind, Quetta and Aden).

The Indian Army was a critical force for maintaining the primacy of the British Empire , both in India and throughout the world. Besides maintaining internal security, the Army fought in many other theatres: Third Anglo-Afghan war; the Boxer Rebellion in China; in Abyssinia and in the First and Second World Wars . World wars Main articles: Indian Army during World War I and Indian Army during World War II Indian Cavalry on the Western Front during World War I. A Sikh soldier of the 4th Division (the Red Eagles) of the Indian Army, attached to the British Fifth Army in Italy. Holding a captured Nazi flag after the surrender of German forces in Italy, May 1945. Behind him, a fascist inscription says "VIVA IL DUCE", "Long live the Duce " (i.e. Mussolini).

The Kitchener Reforms brought the British Army to a new century.

In the 20th century, the Indian Army was a crucial adjunct to the forces of the British Empire in both world wars . 1.3 million Indian soldiers served in World War I (1914–1918) with the Allies , in which 74,187 Indian troops were killed or missing in action.

In 1915 there was a mutiny by Indian soldiers in Singapore.

The United Kingdom made promises of self-governance to the Indian National Congress in return for its support but reneged on them after the war, following which the Indian Independence movement gained strength.

The " Indianisation " of the Indian Army began with the formation of the Prince of Wales Royal Indian Military College at Dehradun, in March 1912, to provide education to the scions of aristocratic and well-to-do Indian families and to prepare selected Indian boys for admission into the Royal Military College, Sandhurst . Cadets were given a King's commission, after passing out, and were posted to one of the eight units selected for Indianisation. Because of the slow pace of Indianisation, with just 69 officers being commissioned between 1918 and 1932, political pressure was applied, leading to the formation of the Indian Military Academy in 1932 and greater numbers of officers of Indian origin being commissioned.

On the eve of World War II , the officer corps consisted of roughly 500 Indians holding regular commissions against approximately 3,000 British officers.

In World War II Indian soldiers fought alongside the Allies .

In 1939, British officials had no plan for expansion and training of Indian forces, which comprised about 130,000 men (in addition there were 44,000 men in British units in India in 1939), whose mission was internal security and defence against a possible Soviet threat through Afghanistan.

As the war progressed, the size and role of the Indian Army expanded dramatically, and troops were sent to battlefronts as soon as possible.

The most serious problem was the lack of equipment. Indian units served in Burma, wherein 1944–45, five Indian divisions were engaged along with one British and three African divisions. Even larger numbers operated in the Middle East. Some 87,000 Indian soldiers died in the war.

By the end of the war, it had become the largest volunteer army in history, rising to over 2.5 million men in August 1945.

In the African and Middle East campaigns , captured Indian troops were given a choice to join the German Army , to eventually "liberate" India from Britain, instead of being sent to POW camps . These men, along with Indian students who were in Germany when the war broke out, made up what was called the Free India Legion . They were originally intended as pathfinders for German forces in Asia but were soon sent to help guard the Atlantic Wall . Few who were part of the Free India Legion ever saw any combat, and very few were ever stationed outside Europe.

At its height, the Free India Legion had over 3,000 troops in its ranks. Indian POWs also joined the Indian National Army , which was allied with the Empire of Japan . It was raised by a former colonel of the Indian Army, General Mohan Singh, but was later led by Subhas Chandra Bose and Rash Bihari Bose . With the fall of Singapore in 1942, about 40,000 Indian soldiers were captured.

When given the choice, over 30,000 joined the Indian National Army. Those who refused became POWs and were mostly shipped to New Guinea.

After initial success, this army was defeated, along with the Japanese; but it had a huge impact on the Indian independence movement. Indian independence Upon the Partition of India and Indian independence in 1947, four of the ten Gurkha regiments were transferred to the British Army.

The rest of the Indian Army was divided between the newly created Union of India and the Dominion of Pakistan .

The Punjab Boundary Force , which had been formed to help police Punjab during the partition period, was disbanded. Headquarters Delhi and the East Punjab Command were formed to administer the area.

The departure of virtually all senior British officers following independence, and their replacement by Indian officers, meant many of the latter held acting ranks several ranks above their substantive ones. For instance, S. M. Shrinagesh , the ground-forces commander of Indian forces during the first Indo-Pak War of 1947–49 (and the future third COAS), was first an acting major-general and then an acting lieutenant-general during the conflict while holding the substantive rank of major, and only received a substantive promotion to lieutenant-colonel in August 1949. Gopal Gurunath Bewoor , the future ninth COAS, was an acting colonel at his promotion to substantive major from substantive captain in 1949, while future Lieutenant General K. P. Candeth was an acting brigadier (substantive captain) at the same time.

The Maharaja of Kashmir wanted to have a standstill position.

Since Kashmir was a Muslim majority state, Pakistan wanted to make Kashmir a Pakistani territory.

As a result, Pakistan invaded Kashmir on 22 October 1947, causing Maharaja Hari Singh to look to India, specifically to Lord Mountbatten of Burma , the governor-general, for help. He signed the Instrument of Accession to India on 26 October 1947. Indian troops were airlifted to Srinagar from dawn on 27 October. This contingent included General Thimayya who distinguished himself in the operation and in the years that followed became a Chief of the Indian Army. An intense war was waged across the state and former comrades found themselves fighting each other. Pakistan suffered significant losses. Its forces were stopped on the line formed which is now called the Line of Control (LOC). An uneasy peace, sponsored by the UN, returned by the end of 1948, with Indian and Pakistani soldiers facing each other across the Line of Control, which has since divided Indian-held Kashmir from that part held by Pakistan. Several UN Security Council resolutions were passed, with Resolution 47 calling for a plebiscite to be held in Kashmir to determine accession to India or Pakistan, only after Pakistan withdrew its army from Kashmir. A precondition to the resolution was for Pakistan and India to return to a state of "as was" before the conflict . Pakistan would withdraw all tribesmen and Pakistani nationals brought in to fight in Kashmir. Pakistan refused to pull back, and there could be no further dialogue on fulfilling the UN resolution. Tensions between India and Pakistan, largely over Kashmir, have never been eliminated. Annexation of Hyderabad (1948) Main article: Operation Polo Major General El Edroos (at right) offers his surrender of the Hyderabad State Forces to Major General (later Army Chief) J.N. Chaudhuri at Secunderabad After the partition of India, Hyderabad State , a princely state under the rule of the Nizam of Hyderabad , chose to remain independent.

The ensuing stand-off between the Government of India and the Nizam ended on 12 September 1948, when India's then Deputy Prime Minister Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel ordered Indian troops to secure Hyderabad State.

During five days of fighting, the Indian Army, backed by an Indian Air Force squadron of Hawker Tempest aircraft, routed the Hyderabad State forces. Five Indian Army infantry battalions and one armoured squadron were engaged in the operation.

The following day, Hyderabad was proclaimed part of India. Major General Joyanto Nath Chaudhuri , who led the operation, and accepted the surrender of the Nizam's forces on 18 September 1948, was appointed the military governor of Hyderabad, to restore law and order, and served until 1949. Assistance during the Korean War (1950–1953) Main article: Korean War During the Korean War, although deciding against sending combat forces, India sent its 60th Parachute Field Ambulance unit to aid the UN troops fighting against the North Korean invasion of South Korea, as part of the 1st Commonwealth Division .

In the aftermath of the war, an Indian infantry brigade formed the Custodian Force of India, some of whose soldiers were also part of the Neutral Nations Repatriation Commission , which assisted in the exchange of prisoners of war and was headed by Lieutenant General K. S. Thimayya . Annexation of Goa, Daman and Diu (1961) Main article: Annexation of Goa Even though the British and French vacated all their colonial possessions in the Indian subcontinent , Portugal refused to relinquish control of its colonies of Goa , Daman, and Diu .

After repeated attempts by India to negotiate were spurned by Portuguese prime minister and dictator, António de Oliveira Salazar , on 12 December 1961 India launched Operation Vijay to capture the Portuguese colonies, which was accomplished by small contingents of Indian troops.

After a brief conflict that lasted twenty-six hours—during which 31 Portuguese soldiers were killed, the Portuguese Navy frigate Afonso de Albuquerque was destroyed, and over 3,000 Portuguese were captured—Portuguese General Manuel António Vassalo e Silva surrendered to Major General Kunhiraman Palat Kandoth of the Indian Army. Goa, Daman, and Diu became a part of the Republic of India. Sino-Indian War (1962) Main article: Sino-Indian War Indian Army Hall of Fame at Leh , near Indo-Tibet border The cause of this war was a dispute over the sovereignty of the widely separated Aksai Chin and Arunachal Pradesh border regions. Aksai Chin, claimed by India as part of Kashmir, and by China as part of Xinjiang, contains an important road link that connects the Chinese regions of Tibet and Xinjiang. China's construction of this road was one of the triggers of the conflict. Small-scale clashes between Indian and Chinese forces broke out as India insisted on the disputed McMahon Line being regarded as the international border between the two countries. Chinese troops claimed not to have retaliated to the cross-border firing by Indian troops, despite sustaining losses. China's suspicion of India's involvement in Tibet created more rifts between the two countries.

In 1962, the Indian Army was ordered to move to the Thag La ridge , located near the border between Bhutan and Arunachal Pradesh and about 5 kilometres (3 miles) north of the disputed McMahon Line. Meanwhile, Chinese troops had also made incursions into Indian-held territory, and tensions between the two reached a new high when Indian forces discovered the road constructed by China in Aksai Chin.

After a series of failed negotiations, the People's Liberation Army attacked Indian Army positions on the Thag La ridge. This move by China caught India by surprise, and on 12 October Nehru gave orders for the Chinese to be expelled from Aksai Chin. However, poor coordination among various divisions of the Indian Army, and the late decision to mobilise the Indian Air Force in vast numbers, gave China a crucial tactical and strategic advantage over India.

On 20 October, Chinese soldiers attacked India from both the northwest and northeast; and captured large portions of Aksai Chin and Arunachal Pradesh.

As the fighting moved beyond disputed territories, China called on the Indian government to negotiate; however, India remained determined to regain lost territory. With no agreement in sight, China unilaterally withdrew its forces from Arunachal Pradesh.

The reasons for the withdrawal are disputed, with India claiming various logistical problems for China and diplomatic support from the United States, while China stated that it still held territory it had staked a claim on.

The dividing line between the Indian and Chinese forces was named the Line of Actual Control .

The poor decisions made by India's military commanders, and the political leadership, raised several questions.

The Henderson-Brooks and Bhagat committee was soon set up by the government of India to determine the causes of the poor performance of the Indian Army. Its report criticised the decision not to allow the Indian Air Force to target Chinese transport lines, out of fear of a Chinese aerial counterattack on Indian civilian areas. Much of the blame was placed on the then–defence minister, Krishna Menon , who resigned from his post soon after the war ended. Despite frequent calls for its release, the Henderson-Brooks report remains classified. Neville Maxwell has written an account of the war. Indo-Pakistani War of 1965 Main article: Indo-Pakistani War of 1965 A second confrontation with Pakistan took place in 1965.

Although the war is described as inconclusive, India had the better of the war and was the clear winner in tactical and strategic terms. Pakistani president Ayub Khan launched Operation Gibraltar in August 1965, during which Pakistani paramilitary troops infiltrated into Indian-administered Kashmir and attempted to ignite anti-India agitation in Jammu and Kashmir . Pakistani leaders believed that India, which was still recovering from the Sino-Indian War , would be unable to deal with a military thrust and a Kashmiri rebellion. India reacted swiftly and launched a counter-offensive against Pakistan.

In reply, on 1 September Pakistan launched Operation Grand Slam , invading India's Chamb-Jaurian sector.

In retaliation, the Indian Army launched a major offensive all along its border with Pakistan, with Lahore as its prime target. Indian Army officer next to a destroyed Pakistani Sherman tank , after the battle of Asal Uttar . Initially, the Indian Army met with considerable success in the northern sector.

After launching prolonged artillery barrages against Pakistan, India was able to capture three important mountain positions in Kashmir.

By 9 September, the Indian Army had made considerable inroads into Pakistan. India had its largest haul of Pakistani tanks when an offensive by Pakistan's 1st Armoured Division was blunted at the Battle of Asal Uttar , which took place on 10 September near Khemkaran.

The biggest tank battle of the war was the Battle of Chawinda , the largest tank battle in history after World War II . Pakistan's defeat at the Battle of Asal Uttar hastened the end of the conflict.

At the time of the ceasefire declaration, India reported casualties of about 3,000.

On the other hand, it was estimated that more than 3,800 Pakistani soldiers were killed in the conflict. About 200–300 Pakistani tanks were either destroyed or captured by India. India lost a total of 150-190 tanks during the conflict.

The decision to return to pre-war positions, following the Tashkent Declaration , caused an outcry in New Delhi. It was widely believed that India's decision to accept the ceasefire was due to political factors, not military, since it was facing considerable pressure from the United States and the United Nations to cease hostilities. 1967 Sino-Indian conflict Main article: Cho La incident The 1967 Sino-Indian skirmish, also known as the Cho La incident , was a military conflict between Indian troops and members of the Chinese People's Liberation Army who, on 1 October 1967, invaded Sikkim , which was then a protectorate of India.

On 10 October, both sides clashed again. Defence minister Sardar Swaran Singh assured the Indian people that the government was taking care of developments along the border. Indian losses were 88 killed, and 163 wounded, while Chinese casualties were 300 killed and 450 wounded in Nathula , and 40 in Chola.

The Chinese Army left Sikkim after this defeat. Operation against the Naxalites during 1971 Under Prime Minister Indira Gandhi , during the president's rule in 1971, the Indian Army and the Indian police launched Operation Steeplechase , a gigantic "counter-insurgency" operation against the Naxalites , which resulted in the death of hundreds of Naxalites and the imprisonment of more than 20,000 suspects and cadres, including senior leaders.

The army was also assisted by a brigade of para commandos and the Indian paramilitary .

In early 1971, India declared its full support for the Bengali freedom fighters, known as Mukti Bahini , and Indian agents were extensively involved in covert operations to aid them.

On 20 November 1971, the Indian Army moved 14 Punjab Battalion of the 45th Cavalry regiment, into Garibpur, a strategically important town in East Pakistan, near India's border, and successfully captured it .

The following day, more clashes took place between Indian and Pakistani forces. Wary of India's growing involvement in the Bengali rebellion, the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) launched a preemptive strike on 10 Indian air bases—at Srinagar , Jammu , Pathankot , Amritsar , Agra , Adampur , Jodhpur , Jaisalmer , Uttarlai , and Sirsa —at 17:45 hours on 3 December. However, this aerial offensive failed to accomplish its objectives and gave India an excuse to declare a full-scale war against Pakistan the same day.

By midnight, the Indian Army, accompanied by the Indian Air Force , launched a major three-pronged assault into East Pakistan.

The Indian Army won several battles on the eastern front including the decisive Battle of Hilli .

On 4 December 1971, A Company of the 23rd Battalion of India's Punjab Regiment intercepted the Pakistani 51st Infantry Brigade near Ramgarh, Rajasthan.

The Battle of Longewala ensued, during which A Company, though outnumbered, thwarted the Pakistani advance until the Indian Air Force directed its fighters to engage the Pakistani tanks.

By the time the battle had ended, 38 Pakistani tanks and 100 armoured vehicles were either destroyed or abandoned. About 200 Pakistani troops were killed in action, while only two Indian soldiers died. Pakistan suffered another major defeat on the western front at the Battle of Basantar , which was fought from 4 to 16 December.

During the battle, about 66 Pakistani tanks were destroyed and 40 more were captured. Pakistani forces destroyed only 11 Indian tanks.

By 16 December, Pakistan had lost sizeable territory on both the eastern and western fronts.

On 16 December 1971, under the command of Lt. General J. S. Arora , elements of the three corps of the Indian Army that had invaded East Pakistan entered Dhaka as a part of the Indo-Bangladesh allied force and forced Pakistani forces to surrender, one day after the conclusion of the Battle of Basantar .

After Pakistan's Lt General A. A. K. Niazi signed the Instrument of Surrender , India, as a part of the allied forces, took more than 90,000 Pakistani prisoners of war .

By the time of the signing, 11,000 Pakistani soldiers had been killed in action, while India suffered 3,500 battle-related deaths.

In addition, Pakistan lost 220 tanks during the battle compared to India's 69.

In 1972, the Simla Agreement was signed between the two countries, although subsequent incidences of heightened tensions have resulted in continued military vigilance on both sides. Siachen conflict (1984) Main article: Siachen conflict A memorial for the 22 Indian Army Medical Corps at the War Cemetery in Taiping, Perak The Siachen Glacier , although a part of the Kashmir region, was not demarcated on maps prepared and exchanged between the two sides in 1947.

In consequence, before the 1980s neither India nor Pakistan maintained a permanent military presence in the region. However, beginning in the 1950s, Pakistan began sending mountaineering expeditions to the glacier.

By the early 1980s, the Government of Pakistan was granting special expedition permits to mountaineers and United States Army maps showed Siachen as a part of Pakistan. This practice gave rise to the term oropolitics . India, possibly irked by these developments, launched Operation Meghdoot in April 1984. An entire battalion of the Kumaon Regiment was airlifted to the glacier. Pakistani forces responded quickly, and clashes between the two followed.

The Indian Army secured the strategic Sia La and Bilafond La mountain passes, and by 1985 more than 2,600 km 2 (1,000 sq mi) of territory claimed by Pakistan was under Indian control.

The Indian Army continues to control all of the Siachen Glacier and its tributary glaciers. Pakistan has made several unsuccessful attempts to regain control over Siachen.

In late 1987, Pakistan mobilised about 8,000 troops and garrisoned them near Khapalu , aiming to capture Bilafond La . However, they were repulsed by Indian Army personnel guarding Bilafond.

During the battle, about 23 Indian soldiers lost their lives, while more than 150 Pakistani troops perished. Further unsuccessful attempts to reclaim positions were launched by Pakistan in 1990, 1995, 1996, and 1999, most notably in Kargil in the latter year. An Indian Army soldier, part of a patrolling group, in snow camouflage holding a SIG 716i . Indian Army soldiers patrolling snow clad mountain range. India continues to maintain a strong military presence in the region, despite inhospitable conditions.

The conflict over Siachen is regularly cited as an example of mountain warfare .

The highest peak in the Siachen Glacier region, Saltoro Kangri , could be viewed as strategically important for India because of its height, which would enable Indian forces to monitor Pakistani or Chinese movements in the area. Maintaining control over Siachen poses several logistical challenges for the Indian Army. Several infrastructure projects were constructed in the region, including a helipad at an elevation of 6,400 m (21,000 ft).

In 2004, the Indian Army was spending an estimated US$2 million a month to support its personnel stationed in the region. Counter-insurgency activities The Indian Army has played a crucial role in fighting insurgents and terrorists within the nation.

The army launched Operation Blue Star and Operation Woodrose in the 1980s to combat Sikh insurgents.

The army, along with some paramilitary forces , has the prime responsibility of maintaining law and order in the troubled Jammu and Kashmir region, under Northern Command.

The Indian Army sent a contingent to Sri Lanka in 1987 as a part of the Indian Peace Keeping Force .

The Indian Army also successfully conducted Operation Golden Bird in 1995, as a counter-insurgency operation in northeast India. Kargil war (1999) Main article: Kargil War In 1998, India carried out nuclear tests ; and a few days later, Pakistan responded with nuclear tests of its own, giving both countries nuclear deterrence capability, although India had tested a hydrogen bomb, which Pakistan lacked. Diplomatic tensions eased after the Lahore Summit was held in 1999. However, the sense of optimism was short-lived.

In mid-1999, Pakistani paramilitary forces and Kashmiri insurgents captured the deserted, but strategic, Himalayan heights in the Kargil district of India. These had been vacated by the Indian Army during the onset of the inhospitable winter and were to be reoccupied in spring.

The troops that took control of these areas received important support, of both arms and supplies, from Pakistan. Some of the heights under their control, which also included the Tiger Hill , overlooked the vital Srinagar – Leh Highway ( NH 1A ), Batalik , and Dras . Kargil War Memorial looking at National Highway 1 from the foot of Tololing Once the scale of the Pakistani incursion was realised, the Indian Army quickly mobilised about 200,000 troops, and Operation Vijay was launched. However, since the heights were under Pakistani control, India was at a clear strategic disadvantage.

From their observation posts , the Pakistani forces had a clear line-of-sight to lay down indirect artillery fire on NH 1A, inflicting heavy casualties on the Indians. This was a serious problem for the Indian Army as the highway was its main supply route. Thus, the Indian Army's priority was to recapture peaks near NH 1A. This resulted in Indian troops first targeting the Tiger Hill and Tololing complex in Dras. This was soon followed by more attacks on the Batalik–Turtok sub-sector, which provided access to Siachen Glacier. Point 4590, which had the nearest view of the NH 1A, was successfully recaptured by Indian forces on 14 June. Indian soldiers after winning a battle during the Kargil War. Though most of the posts in the vicinity of the highway were cleared of the enemy by mid-June, some posts near Dras endured sporadic shelling until the end of the war. Once the NH 1A area was cleared, the Indian Army turned to drive the invading force back across the Line of Control.

The Battle of Tololing , among others, slowly tilted the war in India's favour. Nevertheless, some Pakistani posts put up a stiff resistance, including Tiger Hill (Point 5140), which fell only later in the war.

As the operation was fully underway, about 250 artillery guns were brought in to clear the infiltrators in posts that were in the line-of-sight .

At many vital points, neither artillery nor air power could dislodge the Pakistan soldiers, who were out of visible range.

The Indian Army mounted some direct frontal ground assaults, which were slow and took a heavy toll, given the steep ascents that had to be made on peaks as high as 5,500 m (18,000 ft). Two months into the conflict, Indian troops had slowly retaken most of the ridges they had lost. According to official accounts, an estimated 75%–80% of the enemy-occupied area, and nearly all the high ground, was back under Indian control.

Following the Washington Accord of 4 July, where Sharif agreed to withdraw Pakistani troops, most of the fighting came to a gradual halt; but some Pakistani forces remained in positions on the Indian side of the LOC.

In addition, the United Jihad Council (an umbrella group for all extremists) rejected Pakistan's plan for a draw-down, deciding instead to fight on.

The Indian Army launched its final attacks in the last week of July.

As soon as the Dras sub-sector had been cleared of Pakistani forces, the fighting ceased on 26 July, which has since been celebrated as Kargil Vijay Diwas (Kargil Victory Day) in India.

By the end of the war, India had resumed control of all the territory south and east of the Line of Control, as was established in July 1972 per the Shimla Accord .

By the time all hostilities had ended, the number of Indian soldiers killed during the conflict stood at 527, while more than 700 regular members of the Pakistani Army had been killed.

The number of Islamist fighters, also known as Mujahideen, killed by Indian armed forces during the conflict stood at about 3,000. 2016 Surgical Strikes on Kashmir and the 2016–2018 India-Pakistan conflict Main article: India–Pakistan border skirmishes (2016–2018) On 18 September 2016, a fedayeen attack was made by four armed militants on an army base near the town of Uri . Nineteen Indian Army soldiers were killed. India accused Jaish-e-Muhammad , a Pakistan-based terrorist organisation.

On 29 September 2016, the India Army announced that it conducted " surgical strikes " against militant launch pads across the Line of Control , in Pakistani-administered Kashmir , and inflicted "significant casualties". Indian media reported the casualty figures variously from 35 to 70 killed. Partial footage of the strikes was released to the Indian media on 27 June 2018 as proof of the strike.

The incident triggered the 2016–2018 India-Pakistan border conflict , which ended on 16 June 2018 with both India and Pakistan agreeing on a ceasefire. 2019 India–Pakistan border skirmishes Main article: 2019 India–Pakistan border skirmishes Following the 2019 Pulwama attack in Jammu and Kashmir , which killed 40 Indian Central Reserve Police Force personnel. Responsibility for the attack was claimed by a Pakistan -based militant group, Jaish-e-Mohammed . India blamed Pakistan for the attack and promised a robust response, while the latter condemned the attack and denied having any connection to it. Twelve days later, in the early morning of 26 February 2019, India carried out a cross-border airstrike near Balakot , Khyber Pakhtunkhwa , Pakistan.

After over a month-long skirmish, both Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan agreed on a peace offer on 22 March 2019 ending hostilities and vowed to fight against terrorism together. United Nations peacekeeping missions Main article: Indian Army United Nations peacekeeping missions An Indian Army peacekeeper and an FARDC soldier shake hands and encourage each other India has been the largest troop contributor to UN peacekeeping missions since its inception. So far, India has taken part in 43 Peacekeeping missions, with a total contribution exceeding 160,000 troops and a significant number of police personnel having been deployed.

In 2014, India was the third largest troop contributor (TCC), with 7,860 personnel deployed, of which 995 were police personnel, including the first UN Female Formed Police Unit , serving with ten UN peacekeeping missions.

As of 30 June 2014 , 157 Indians have been killed during such missions.

The exercise was the largest ever conducted in India; it included nine infantry, three mechanised, three armoured divisions, and one air assault division, as well as three independent armoured brigades. Amphibious assault exercises were also conducted with the Indian Navy . Brasstacks also allegedly incorporated nuclear attack drills. It led to tensions with Pakistan and a subsequent rapprochement in mid-1987. Exercise Nomadic Elephant Since 2004, and every year since, the Indian Army has been conducting training exercises with the Mongolian Army .

In 2012, the exercise took place in Belgaum ; in June 2013, it was held in Mongolia.

The aim of the exercises is to enhance counterinsurgency and counter-terrorism operations, and to train in conducting peacekeeping operations under the mandate of the United Nations. Exercise Ashwamedha Indian Army tested its network-centric warfare capabilities in the Ashwamedha exercise.

The exercise was held in the Thar desert , and over 300,000 troops participated. Asymmetric warfare capability was also tested by the Indian Army during the exercise. Exercise Yudh Abhyas Main article: India–United States relations § Military relations Yudh Abhyas 2012 – US and Indian Army military exercise video trailer Indian Army Aviation Corps Dhruv helicopter ferrying U.S. soldiers during the Yudh Abhyas training exercise in 2009 The Yudh Abhyas exercise is an ongoing series, since 2005 of joint exercises between the Indian and United States armies, agreed upon under the New Framework of the India-US Defence Relationship. Commencing at the platoon level, the exercise has graduated to a command post (CPX) and field training exercise (FTX). Indian army armoured vehicles during Yudh Abhyas exercises The seventh edition of Yudh Abhyas began on 5 March 2012, in two locations under the Southwestern Command.

The US Army contingent is from the US Army Pacific (USARPAC) , part of the United States Pacific Command (USPACOM).

The command post exercise has an engineer brigade headquarters, with its planners drawn from both countries, while the field training exercise comprises troops of the United States' 2nd Squadron, 14th Cavalry Regiment , from the 25th Infantry Division , Hawaii, along with a Stryker platoon, and a similarly sized Indian Army contingent of mechanised infantry. Several key surveillance, communications, and IED detection and neutralisation technologies, available to both sides, were fielded in the exercise.

The eighth edition of Yudh Abhyas was conducted from 3 to 17 May 2013 as a U.S.-Army-Pacific-sponsored bilateral training exercise with the Indian Army, an exercise that focused on the two countries' cultures, weapons training, and tactics. Units from the United States included the 1st Brigade Combat Team, 82nd Airborne Division , from Fort Bragg , N.C., and the 3rd Squadron, 73rd Cavalry Regiment . Units from India were the Indian Army's 99th Mountain Brigade ; the 2nd Battalion, 5th Gurka Rifles ; the 50th Independent Parachute Brigade ; and the 54th Engineers Regiment. Exercise Shakti Indian Army showcasing ASMI to French soldier during Exercise Shakti The Shakti exercise is an ongoing series, since 2011, of joint exercises between the Indian and French armies.

The exercise is conducted to practice and validate anti-terrorist operations in snowbound and mountainous areas.

The first joint exercise was held in India in October 2011 and the second one in September 2013.

The theme of the exercise is to conduct joint platoon-level counter-insurgency operations in high-altitude mountainous terrain under the UN Charter, thus emphasising the shared concerns of both countries regarding global terrorism. An added aim of the exercise is to qualitatively enhance knowledge of each other's military procedures, thus increasing the scope for interoperability and the ability to respond to a common threat.

The twelve-day exercise with the French Army is scheduled to be conducted in multiple modules in order to achieve complete integration between the two contingents at every stage. Exercise Shoorveer From the first week of April to the first week of May 2012, the Indian Army launched a massive summer exercise in the Rajasthan desert, involving over 50,000 troops and several hundred artillery pieces and infantry combat vehicles, as part of its efforts to shore up its battle worthiness on the western front, the border with Pakistan.

The exercise, code-named "Shoorveer", was being conducted by the Jaipur-based South Western Command. This was the largest ever exercise conducted by the Indian army since 1947.

The collective training started with the honing of basic battle procedures and tactical drills. Several field firings were carried out to check the accuracy and lethality of weapon systems. Many innovations, adopted by units and formations to enhance combat power, were tested in the field.

The troops built on the training momentum gradually, with increasing combat tempo, to set the stage for a major joint army–air force exercise in the latter part of the exercise. Exercise Rudra Akrosh In May 2012, the Indian Army conducted several war games aimed (according to officials) at validating "the operational and transformational effectiveness of various formations under the Western Army Command".

The exercise involved approximately 20,000 troops and support from the Indian Air Force. Exercise Shatrujeet In April 2016, the Indian Army conducted a major exercise called Shatrujeet, with the elite Mathura-based Strike Corps in the desert area of the Mahajan Field Firing Range in Rajasthan , whose object was to evaluate the capability to strike deep into enemy territory, to deliver a quick, lethal strike against the enemy in an integrated air-land battle environment, with co-ordination among all the forces in a nuclear, biological, and chemical warfare scenario. Mission and doctrine Initially, the army's main objective was to defend the nation's frontiers. However, over the years, the army has also taken up the responsibility of providing internal security, especially against insurgencies in Kashmir and Northeast India . Currently, the army is also looking at enhancing its special forces capabilities. With India's increasing international role, and the requirement to protect its interests in far-off countries becoming important, the Indian Army and the Indian Navy are jointly planning to set up a marine brigade.

The current combat doctrine of the Indian Army is based on effectively utilising holding formations and strike formations.

In the case of an attack, the holding formations would contain the enemy and strike formations would counter-attack to neutralise enemy forces.

In the case of an Indian attack, the holding formations would pin enemy forces down, whilst the strike formations would attack at a point of India's choosing.

The Indian Territorial Army has battalions affiliated with different infantry regiments and some department units that are from the Corps of Engineers, Army Medical Corps, or the Army Service Corps. They serve as a part-time reserve.

On 4 June 2017, the chief of staff announced that the Army was planning to open combat positions to women, who would first be appointed to positions in the military police. President's Bodyguard in summer ceremonial uniforms in Rashtrapati Bhavan courtyard during changing of the guard Name Director General Centre Armoured Corps The Armoured Corps Centre and School, Ahmednagar Regiment of Artillery Lieutenant General Anoop Shinghal, AVSM, SM The School of Artillery, Devlali near Nasik Corps of Army Air Defence Lieutenant General Sumer Ivan D'Cunha, PVSM, SM Gopalpur , Odisha . Army Aviation Corps Lieutenant General Vinod Nambiar, SM Combat Army Aviation Training School, Nasik . Electronic and Mechanical Engineers Lieutenant General Rajiv Kumar Sahni, AVSM, VSM Military College of Electronic and Mechanical Engineering, Secunderabad Corps of Engineers Lieutenant General Vikas Rohella, AVSM, SM** College of Military Engineering, Pune Madras Engineer Group , Bangalore Bengal Engineer Group , Roorkee Bombay Engineer Group , Khadki near Pune Corps of Signals Lieutenant General Vivek Dogra, SM Military College of Telecommunication Engineering (MCTE), Mhow Two Signal Training Centres at Jabalpur and Goa . Infantry Lieutenant General Ajay Kumar, AVSM, VSM Multiple centres Armoured Corps Kalyani and Tata Mine Protected Vehicles There are 65 armoured regiments in the Indian Army. These include the President's Bodyguard and the 61st Cavalry as well as the following historic regiments dating back to the nineteenth century or earlier: 1st (Skinner's) Horse , the 2nd Lancers (Gardner's Horse) , the 3rd Cavalry , the 4th (Hodson's) Horse , the 7th Light Cavalry , the 8th Light Cavalry , the 9th (Deccan) Horse , the 14th (Scinde) Horse , the 17th (Poona) Horse , the 15th Lancers , the 16th Light Cavalry , the 18th Cavalry , the 20th Lancers and the 21st (Central India) Horse . A substantial number of additional units designated as either "Cavalry" or "Armoured" Regiments have been raised since Independence. Mechanised Infantry TATA Kestrel of the Indian Army The Mechanised Infantry is the newest combat arm of the Indian Army. Often referred to as "tomorrow's arm in today's army", it is formed of two regiments— The Brigade of the Guards and Mechanised Infantry Regiment —and comprises 50 Mechanised Infantry battalions in all. It is the brainchild of General Krishnaswamy Sundarji (28 April 1930 – 8 February 1999), who was the Chief of Army Staff of the Indian Army from 1986 to 1988.

During the late 70s, as part of Indian Army modernisation, there was an urgent need to re-calibrate the Indian Mechanised Forces, which led to the forming of Mechanised Infantry units to further the shock-action, fire-power, flexibility, and mobility of armoured formations by including ground-holding ability.

The Mechanised Infantry regiments were first created with carefully selected existing Infantry battalions, based on their operational performance.

As the need for more mechanised battalions grew, the elite Brigade of The Guards was also converted to the mechanised profile.

The two regiments along with the Armoured Corps form part of the Indian Army's elite "Mechanised Forces". There are 50 mechanised infantry battalions in the Army. Of these, 10 are for reconnaissance and support battalions (5 wheeled and 5 tracked) and 40 are standard mechanised infantry battalions (10 wheeled and 30 tracked).

The Standard and Recce & Support Tracked battalions are equipped with BMP-2 while the Wheeled ones are equipped with Jeep (mounted ATGM launchers) and BRDM-2 .

The recce and support battalions also included 4 ATGM battalions (including 17 Guards battalion). These were later converted to R&S battalions. Infantry Indian soldier from White Knight Corps armed with a standard issued Sig 716i, 2021 Soldiers of the Rajput Regiment during a Republic Day Parade Soldiers of the Sikh Light Infantry during a Republic Day Parade Upon its inception, the Indian Army inherited the British Army's organisational structure, which is still maintained today. Therefore, like its predecessor, an Indian infantry regiment's responsibility is not to undertake field operations but to provide battalions and well-trained personnel to the field formations.

As such, it is common to find battalions of the same regiment spread across several brigades, divisions, corps, commands, and even theatres. Like its British and Commonwealth counterparts, troops enlisted within the regiment are immensely loyal, take great pride in the regiment to which they are assigned, and generally spend their entire career within the regiment. Most Indian Army infantry regiments recruit based on certain selection criteria, such as region (for example, the Assam Regiment ), caste/community ( Jat Regiment ), or religion ( Sikh Regiment ). Most regiments continue the heritage of regiments raised under the British Raj, but some have been raised after independence, some of which have specialised in border defence, in particular the Ladakh Scouts , the Arunachal Scouts , and the Sikkim Scouts . Over the years there have been fears that troops' allegiance lay more with their regiments and the regions/castes/communities/religions from which they were recruited, as opposed to the Indian union as a whole. Thus some "all India" or "all class" regiments have been created, which recruit troops from all over India, regardless of region, caste, community, or religion: such as the Brigade of the Guards (which later converted to the Mechanised Infantry profile) and the Parachute Regiment . Given the rise in drone warfare , the Indian Army included drone platoons to each of its infantry battalions. Infantry regiments in the Indian Army Regiment Regimental Center Raised Parachute Regiment Bangalore , Karnataka 1945 Punjab Regiment Ramgarh Cantonment , Jharkhand 1761 Madras Regiment Wellington Cantonment , Tamil Nadu 1758 The Grenadiers Jabalpur , Madhya Pradesh 1778 Maratha Light Infantry Belgaum , Karnataka 1768 Rajputana Rifles Delhi Cantonment , New Delhi 1775 Rajput Regiment Fatehgarh , Uttar Pradesh 1778 Jat Regiment Bareilly , Uttar Pradesh 1795 Sikh Regiment Ramgarh Cantonment, Jharkhand 1846 Sikh Light Infantry Fatehgarh , Uttar Pradesh 1857 Dogra Regiment Faizabad , Uttar Pradesh 1877 Garhwal Rifles Lansdowne , Uttarakhand 1887 Kumaon Regiment Ranikhet , Uttarakhand 1813 Assam Regiment Shillong , Meghalaya 1941 Bihar Regiment Danapur Cantonment , Bihar 1941 Mahar Regiment Sagar , Madhya Pradesh 1941 Jammu & Kashmir Rifles Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh 1821 Jammu and Kashmir Light Infantry Avantipur , Jammu and Kashmir 1947 Naga Regiment Ranikhet, Uttarakhand 1970 1 Gorkha Rifles Sabathu , Himachal Pradesh 1815 3 Gorkha Rifles Varanasi , Uttar Pradesh 1815 4 Gorkha Rifles Sabathu, Himachal Pradesh 1857 5 Gorkha Rifles (Frontier Force) Shillong, Meghalaya 1858 8 Gorkha Rifles Shillong, Meghalaya 1824 9 Gorkha Rifles Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 1817 11 Gorkha Rifles Lucknow , Uttar Pradesh 1918 Ladakh Scouts Leh , Jammu and Kashmir 1963 Rashtriya Rifles Udhampur , Jammu and Kashmir 1990 Arunachal Scouts Shillong, Meghalaya 2010 Sikkim Scouts Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 2013 Artillery Pinaka Multi Barrel Rocket Launchers were used during the Kargil War .

The Regiment of Artillery is the second-largest arm of the Indian Army, constituting nearly one-sixth of the Army's total strength. Originally raised in 1935 as part of the Royal Indian Artillery of the British Indian Army, the Regiment is now tasked with providing the Army's towed and self-propelled field artillery , including guns, howitzers, heavy mortars, rockets, and missiles.

As an integral part of nearly all combat operations conducted by the Indian Army, the Regiment of Artillery has a history of being a major contributor to its military success.

During the Kargil War , it was the Indian Artillery that inflicted the most damage. Over the years, five artillery officers have gone on to the Army's highest post as Chief of Army Staff. Dhanush artillery gun For some time, the Regiment of Artillery commanded a significantly larger share of the Army's personnel than it does now, as it was also responsible for air defence artillery and some aviation assets.

The 1990s saw the formation of the Corps of Army Air Defence and the coalescing of all aviation assets into the Army Aviation Corps.

The arm is now focused on field artillery and supplies regiments and batteries to each of the operational commands.

The home of the Regiment is in Nashik , Maharashtra , where their headquarters is located, along with the service's museum.

The School of Artillery of the Indian Army is located nearby, in Devlali .

After suffering consistent failure to import or produce modern artillery for three decades, the Regiment of Artillery is finally going ahead with procurement of brand new 130-mm and 155-mm guns.

The Army is also putting large numbers of rocket launchers into service, with 22 regiments to be equipped with the indigenously developed Pinaka multi barrel rocket launcher by the end of the next decade. Corps of Engineers The Indian Army Corps of Engineers has a long history dating back to the mid-18th century.

The earliest existing subunit of the Corps (18 Field Company) dates back to 1777, while the Corps officially recognises its birth as 1780, when the senior-most group of the Corps, the Madras Sappers, were raised.

The Corps consists of three groups of combat engineers, namely the Madras Sappers , the Bengal Sappers , and the Bombay Sappers . A group is roughly analogous to a regiment of the Indian infantry, each group consisting of several engineer regiments.

The engineer regiment is the basic combat-engineer unit, analogous to an infantry battalion. Corps of Signals Indian Army Corps of Signals is a corps and the arm of the Indian Army which handles its military communications . It was formed on 15 February 1911 as a separate entity under Lieutenant Colonel S. H. Powell and went on to make important contributions during World War I and World War II.

On 15 February 2011, the corps celebrated the 100th anniversary of its raising. Army Aviation Corps The Army Aviation Corps , formed on 1 November 1986, is the aviation arm of the Indian Army. It is headed by a Director-General with the rank of Lieutenant General at Army HQ in New Delhi . Corps of Army Air Defence During Operation Sindoor , Akashteer played a central role in neutralizing drone and air attacks by Pakistan The Corps of Army Air Defence (abbreviated AAD) is an active corps of the Indian Army, and a major combat formation tasked with the air defences of the country from foreign threats.

The Corps is responsible for the protection of Indian air space from enemy aircraft and missiles, especially those below 5,000 feet.

The history of the AAD dates back to 1939, during the times of the British Raj in India.

The corps actively took part in the Second World War , fighting on behalf of the British Empire . Post-independence, the corps has participated in all the wars involving India , starting with the 1947 Indo-Pakistani War , up to the 1999 Kargil conflict .

The corps enjoyed autonomous status from 1994, after the bifurcation of the Corps of Air Defence Artillery from the Army's artillery regiment. A separate training school, the Army Air Defence College (AADC), was established to train its personnel. Services Name Director General Centre Army Service Corps Lieutenant General Mukesh Chadha, AVSM, SM, VSM Bangalore Army Medical Corps Lieutenant General C G Muralidharan, AVSM Lucknow / Pune Army Dental Corps Lieutenant General Vineet Sharma, AVSM, VSM Lucknow Army Ordnance Corps Lieutenant General Deepak Ahuja Jabalpur and Secunderabad (HQ) Corps of Electronics and Mechanical Engineers Lieutenant General Rajiv Kumar Sahni, AVSM, VSM Secunderabad Remount and Veterinary Corps Meerut Army Education Corps - Pachmarhi Corps of Military Police Bangalore Pioneer Corps Bangalore Army Postal Service Corps - Kamptee near Nagpur Territorial Army New Delhi Defence Security Corps - Kannur Cantonment , Kerala Intelligence Corps - Pune Judge Advocate General's Department - Institute of Military Law Kamptee , Nagpur Military Nursing Service - Pune and Lucknow Human Rights Cell - Delhi Recruitment and training Main article: Military academies in India Pre-commission training of Gentlemen Cadets is carried out at the Indian Military Academy at Dehradun and the Officers Training Academy at Chennai . There are also specialised training institutions such as the Army War College , at Mhow, Madhya Pradesh; the High Altitude Warfare School (HAWS), at Gulmarg, Jammu and Kashmir; the Counter Insurgency and Jungle Warfare School (CIJW), in Vairengte, Mizoram; and the College of Military Engineering (CME), in Pune.

The Army Training Command (ARTRAC), at Shimla , supervises training of personnel.

In 2020 a 'Tour of Duty' scheme was proposed for voluntary recruitment into the forces for civilians, to enable them to join for three years of short service.

The scheme is on a trial basis and will start with a test group of 100 officers and 1000 jawans. Agnipath Scheme Main article: Agnipath Scheme Agnipath Scheme is a new scheme introduced by the Government of India on 14 June 2022, for recruitment of soldiers below the rank of commissioned officers into the three services of the armed forces . All recruits will be hired only for a four-year period. Personnel recruited under this system are to be called Agniveers ( transl. Fire-Warriors ), which will be a new military rank.

The introduction of the scheme has been criticized for lack of consultation and public debate.

The scheme was implemented in September 2022. Recruitment in the Indian Army from 2015 Year Soldiers 2015–16 71,804 2016–17 52,447 2017–18 50,026 2018–19 53,431 2019–20 80,572 2020–21 0 2021–22 0 2022–23 0 2023-24 13,000 This scheme will bypass many things including long tenures, pension and other benefits which were there in old system. Opposition parties in India have criticised and expressed concerns about the consequences of the new scheme. They have asked the scheme to be put on hold and that the scheme be discussed in the Parliament . Intelligence Main article: Directorate of Military Intelligence (India) The Directorate of Military Intelligence (DMI) is an intelligence-gathering arm of the Indian Army.

The MI (as it is commonly referred to) was constituted in 1941. It was initially created to check corruption in the Army's ranks. With time, its role has evolved into cross-border intelligence, intelligence sharing with friendly nations, infiltrating insurgent groups, and counterterrorism.

In the late 1970s, the MI was embroiled in the Samba spy scandal , wherein three Indian Army officers were falsely implicated as Pakistani spies.

The organisation has since emerged from the scandal as a prime intelligence organisation of the Indian Army.

As of 2012 , the MI has seen many of its roles taken away by the newly created National Technical Research Organisation and the Defence Intelligence Agency .

Since it was set up in 2004 as a premier scientific agency under the National Security Adviser in the Prime Minister's Office, it also includes the National Institute of Cryptology Research and Development (NICRD), which is the first of its kind in Asia. STEAG The Signals Technology Evaluation and Adaptation Group (STEAG), a specialist technical unit tasked with investigating and evaluating cutting-edge communication technologies, was founded by the Indian Army on 18 March 2024. It will prioritize the development of specialized technologies for both wired and wireless systems, such as 5G and 6G networks, quantum technologies , artificial intelligence , machine learning , software-defined radios (SDR), electronic exchanges , mobile communications , and Electronic Warfare (EW) systems.

In order to find appropriate defense applications, the unit will work with industry and academics to utilize state-of-the-art technology.

In addition to developing and evaluating key Information and Communications Technology (ICT) solutions, STEAG will do technical scouting and provide user interface assistance by maintaining and upgrading modern technologies. Field formations Below are the basic field formations of the Indian Army: Command : Indian Army has six operational commands and one training command. Each one is headed by a general officer commanding-in-chief (GOC-in-C) , known as the army commander, who is among the senior-most Lieutenant General officers in the army. Corps : A command generally consists of two or more corps. Indian Army has 14 Corps each one commanded by a general officer commanding (GOC) , known as the corps commander, who holds the rank of Lieutenant General . Each corps is composed of three or four divisions. There are three types of corps in the Indian Army: Strike, Holding and Mixed.

The Corps HQ is the highest field formation in the army. Division : Each division is headed by GOC (division commander) in the rank of major general . It usually consists of three to four Brigades. Currently, the Indian Army has 40 Divisions including four RAPIDs (Re-organised Army Plains Infantry Division), 18 Infantry Divisions, 12 Mountain Divisions, three Armoured Divisions and three Artillery Divisions. Brigade : A brigade generally consists of around 3,000 combat troops with supporting elements. An Infantry Brigade usually has three Infantry battalions along with various Support Elements. It is commanded by a brigade commander who is a Brigadier , equivalent to a brigadier general in some armies.

The Indian Army is a voluntary service, and although a provision for military conscription exists in the Indian constitution , conscription has never been imposed.

As of 1 July 2017 , the Indian Army has a sanctioned strength of 49,932 officers (42,253 serving, being 7,679 under strength), and 1,215,049 enlisted personnel (1,194,864 serving, being 20,185 under strength). Recently, it has been proposed to increase the strength of the army by more than 90,000, to counter the increasing presence of Chinese troops along the Line of Actual Control . According to the International Institute for Strategic Studies , in 2020 the army had a strength of 1,237,000 active personnel and 960,000 reserve personnel. Of those in reserve, 300,000 are first-line reserves (within 5 years of active service), 500,000 are committed to return if called until the age of 50, and 160,000 were in the Indian Territorial Army , with 40,000 in regular establishment. This makes the Indian Army the world's largest standing volunteer army . Rank structure Main article: Army ranks and insignia of India The ranks of the Indian Army for the most part follow the British Army tradition.

The Indian Army uniform standardised on dun for khaki.

The service dress consists of a dark green coloured short-sleeved shirt with matching dark green trousers. Officers can add a four pocket tunic worn over a peach coloured button down shirt and black tie.

The Winter "Angola", meaning Angora wool, version substitutes a light brown/dark khaki long-sleeved button up shirt. It is accompanied by beret or peaked cap depending on the regiment the soldier belongs to. Organizational headwear, sashes, belts, spats , medals, lanyards, and other achievements are added for ceremonial duties. A black version is worn by the Armoured Corps.

The 2006 standard issued camouflage uniform of the Indian Army was the PC-DPM which consists of French Camouflage Europe Centrale featuring a forest camouflage pattern and is designed for use in woodland environments being printed on BDU .

The Desert variant issued in 2006 was based on the French Camouflage Daguet printed on BDU , which features a desert camouflage pattern, is used by artillery and infantry posted in dusty, semi-desert, and desert areas of Rajasthan and its vicinity. Starting in 2022, a digital pixelated camouflage pattern uniform designed by NIFT has been adopted, while the uniform style is similar to the US Marine MMCUU uniform.

The new camouflage pattern retains the mix of colours including olive green and earthen , and has been designed keeping in mind aspects like areas of deployment of the troops and climatic conditions they operate in. According to the officials, the fabric of the new material makes it lighter, sturdier, more breathable, and more suitable for the different terrains that the soldiers are posted in.

The new uniform, unlike the old one, has a combat T-shirt worn underneath and a jacket over it. Also, unlike the older uniform, the shirt will not be tucked in.

The jacket has angular top pockets, lower pockets with vertical openings, knife pleats at the back, a pocket on the left sleeve & a pen holder on the left forearm, and improved-quality buttons.

The trousers will be adjustable at the waist with elastic and buttons, and has a double layer at the groin. For the caps, the girth will be adjustable, and the logo of the Army will be of better quality than earlier.

The new uniforms would not be available in the open market .

The uniforms will be barcoded and QR coded to maintain their uniqueness and will be available only through the ordnance chain or military canteens. To control random proliferation, they will come in over a dozen pre-stitched standard sizes.

The new uniform will be made available in a phased manner to the nearly 1.2 million personnel of the Indian Army.

The modern Indian Army wears distinctive parade uniforms characterised by variegated turbans and waist-sashes in regimental colours.

The Gurkha and Garhwal Rifles and the Assam, Kumaon, and Naga Regiments wear broad-brimmed hats of traditional style. Traditionally, all rifle regiments (the Jammu and Kashmir Rifles, the Garhwal Rifles, all Gorkha Rifles, and the Rajputana Rifles), as well as the Jammu and Kashmir Light Infantry, wear rank badges , buttons, and wire-embroidered articles in black, instead of the usual brass (or gold) colour, as the original role of the rifle regiments was camouflage and concealment. Indian Army officer in green service uniform Soldiers of the Assam Regiment wearing the Angola winter shirt. Winter camouflage adopted in 2022 Indian Army Para-Commando wearing the PC-DPM based on a combination of French French Camouflage Europe Centrale printed on US-style BDU Senior officer from Northern Command wearing the new NIFT Camouflage Indian Army personnel wearing the new uniform designed by NIFT 14th Maratha jawan in ceremonial version of the service dress Medals and awards Main article: Awards and decorations of the Indian Armed Forces The medals awarded by the President of India for gallantry displayed on the battlefield, in order of precedence, are Param Vir Chakra , Maha Vir Chakra , and Vir Chakra .

The medals awarded by the President for gallantry displayed away from the battlefield, in order of precedence, are Ashoka Chakra , Kirti Chakra , and Shaurya Chakra . Many of the recipients of these awards have been Indian Army personnel. Women All Women contingents from the three services during Republic day parade 2024 Main article: Women in the Indian Army The role of women in the Indian Army began when the Indian Military Nursing Service was formed in 1888. Nurses served in World Wars I and II, where 350 Indian Army nurses either died, were taken prisoner of war, or declared missing in action; this includes nurses who died when SS Kuala was sunk by Japanese Bombers in 1942.

In 1992, the Indian Army began inducting women officers in non-medical roles. Agnipath Recruiting Scheme The Agnipath Scheme (also spelled Agneepath Scheme ) ( Hindi : Agnīpath Yojanā , transl. Agnipath Scheme ) is a tour of duty style scheme approved by the Government of India on 14 June 2022 and implemented in the country a few months later in September 2022, for recruitment of soldiers below the rank of commissioned officers into the three services of the armed forces . All recruits will be hired only for a four-year period however 25% will be eligible for advancement into career status. Personnel recruited under this system are to be called Agniveers ( transl. Fire-Warriors ), which will be a new military rank.

The introduction of the scheme has been criticised for lack of consultation and public debate. Initial training will last six months and the remaining three years and six months will be service time. Recruitment and Training Officers (Permanent commission) National Defence Academy and Naval Academy Examination NDA is the premier officer training academy for the army The NDA/NA is the premier entry route to join the army as Permanent Commission officers. It is open to unmarried candidates aged 16½–19½ years, NDA/NA selects students after 10+2, irrespective of stream for army.

The NDA/NA exam is held twice a year, consisting of Mathematics and General Ability. Candidates who clear the cutoff undergo a five-day Services Selection Board (SSB) interview, followed by a medical examination.

The final merit determines the selection.

The examination is highly competitive as approximately 600,000 candidates apply for roughly 800 vacancies each year. Training is conducted in two phases. First, cadets spend three years at National Defence Academy , earning a Jawaharlal Nehru University affiliated degree in B.Sc. or B.A. while undergoing basic military training.

After graduation, Army cadets move to the Indian Military Academy (IMA), Dehradun for one year of advanced army training focused on leadership and field warfare.

On completion, cadets are commissioned as Lieutenants. Based on merit and preference, they are allotted to infantry (such as Rajputana Rifles , Dogra Regiment , etc.), armoured corps (such as Poona Horse , 87th Armoured Regiment , etc.), Regiment of Artillery , Corps of Engineers , Corps of Signals , etc. Combined Defence Services Examination (IMA) The IMA is the sole PC general duty training academy for officers The Combined Defence Services Examination (CDSE) is conducted for graduates to join the army as Permanent Commission officers. It is conducted by UPSC twice a year (April and September), CDSE allows entry into the Indian Military Academy (IMA) for the Army. Candidates applying must be unmarried Indian male citizens, aged 19–24 years for IMA entry. A bachelor's degree in any stream is required for the Army, along with medical fitness standards similar to NDA, with strict requirements for vision, height, and general health.

The selected candidates for the army join the Indian Military Academy (IMA), Dehradun, for 12 months of pre-commission training. This includes advanced weapon training, field tactics, leadership development, and physical conditioning.

After the successful completion of the training, the candidate is commissioned as a Lieutenant in the army. Medical officers (AFMC) The AFMC is the only permanent commission officers (medical) training academy The Armed Forces Medical College (AFMC) is India's premier military medical institution and the primary pathway to join the army as a medical officer (PC). It trains qualified physicians for the Armed Forces Medical Services (AFMS), which serves the Army, Navy , and Air Force . AFMC offers a fully funded MBBS program, after which graduates are commissioned as officers in the Army Medical Corps (AMC).

The candidate applying must be an unmarried Indian citizen, aged 17 to 24 years.

The candidate must have opted for Physics , Chemistry , Biology or Biotechnology and English in 10+2 with minimum 60% aggregate (50% minimum in each subject).

The selection is based shortlisting of candidates based on National Eligibility cum Entrance Test scores. Then shortlisted candidates attend a ToELR-WT test (Test of English Language, Comprehension, Logic, and Reasoning + Written Test) followed by Psychological Assessment, Interview Board, and document verification, and medical tests.

The final merit list is preepared using NEET scores, ToELR-WT marks, and interview performance.

After the selection, the candidate obtains a Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS) undergraduate degree from AFMC, along with basic military training.

After completion of the course graduates are directly commissioned as Captains in the Army Medical Corps with a Permanent Commission. Around 150 seats are available every year in the AFMC, and 2.5 to 3 lakh NEET aspirants apply annually for these limited seats, making it the most competitive and academically challenging course in the Indian Armed Forces . Technical Entry Scheme (TES) OTA, Gaya: Training academy engineering cadets, selected through TES CME Pune, the professional training academy for the TES cadets The Technical Entry Scheme (TES) is a specialized route for 10+2 students who have opted for Physics, Chemistry and Maths as their main subjects to join the Army as engineering officers in technical branches. Candidates applying for TES shall be unmarried male Indian citizens, aged 16½ to 19½ years, and must have passed 10+2 with Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics with at least 60% aggregate, and appeared in Joint Entrance Examination - Main with 85-90 percentile score. Unlike NDA or CDSE, TES has no written exam and selection is based on academic performance, SSB evaluation and final medical tests. TES offers a 5-year integrated program, combining engineering education and military training: In the first three years, academic engineering training at one of the Army's technical institutes like College of Military Engineering , MCEME, Secunderabad, or MCTE, Mhow. Cadets also undergo basic military training, discipline, and physical conditioning.

In the last few years the cadets are trained at Officers Training Academy, Gaya.

On successful completion of training, cadets are awarded a B.Tech degree in their engineering stream. Technical Graduate Course The Technical Graduate Course (TGC) is a direct entry scheme for engineering graduates to join the army as engineering officers in technical branches. It is available for candidates who have completed or are in the final year of their B.E./B.Tech and want to serve in core technical roles like Engineers, Signals, or EME.

The candidate must be an unmarried male candidate, aged 20 to 27 years at the commencement of the course and must have completed or be in the final year of an engineering degree in a stream notified in the TGC recruitment notification (e.g., Civil , Mechanical , Electronic , Computer Science ). Around 30–40 seats, distributed across engineering streams like Civil, Mechanical, ECE, CSE, etc. are available each year, and the interview process is similar to TES. Officers (SSC) Enlisted (Agnipath) Soldier (Gorkha — General Duty) Since the introduction of the Agnipath Scheme in 2022, India has shifted to inducting Gorkha troops exclusively through this new recruitment system. However, the Government of Nepal strongly opposed the scheme, stating that its four-year short-term service contracts and absence of long-term benefits were inconsistent with the principles of the historic 1947 Britain–India–Nepal Tripartite Agreement , which has governed the recruitment of Gorkhas for decades.

As a result, Nepal has refused to allow its citizens to participate in Agnipath recruitment. This deadlock has led to a complete halt in the recruitment of Nepali Gorkhas for nearly five years, creating deep uncertainty for thousands of aspiring candidates and casting doubt on the future of the legendary Gorkha regiments, which have been an integral part of the army for over seven decades. Traditionally, India recruits Gorkha soldiers who are citizens of Nepal under the framework of the Tripartite Agreement. To qualify, a candidate shall be aged between 17.3 and 21 years and must have successfully completed Class 10 and hold a matriculation certificate from a recognized educational board.

Following this, the candidate must undergo a rigorous physical and medical examination, demonstrating excellent physical fitness, 6/6 eyesight, and being completely free of deformities, disorders, or diseases that could impair service. Gorkha candidates are provided special height relaxation compared to the general requirements for the Western Plains region.

As per current standards, the minimum height required for Gorkha recruits is 157 centimetres, with a minimum weight of 48 kilograms and a chest measurement of 77 centimetres (with a 5 cm expansion). Enlisted (Regular cadre) Equipment Main articles: List of equipment of the Indian Army and List of active Indian military aircraft Akash Surface to Air Missile Most of the army equipment is imported, but efforts are being made to manufacture indigenous equipment.

The Defence Research and Development Organisation has developed a range of weapons for the Indian Army, including small arms, artillery, radars, and the Arjun tank. All Indian military small-arms are manufactured under the umbrella administration of the Ordnance Factories Board , with principal firearm manufacturing facilities in Ichhapore, Cossipore , Kanpur, Jabalpur, and Tiruchirapalli.

The Indian Small Arms System ( INSAS ) rifle, which has been successfully deployed since 1997, is a product of Rifle Factory Ishapore , while ammunition is manufactured at Khadki, and possibly at Bolangir.

In 2014, Army chief General Bikram Singh said that if given sufficient budget support, the Indian Army might be able to acquire half the ammunition needed to fight in a major conflict by the next year. HAL Rudra Aircraft The Army Aviation Corps is the main body of the Indian Army for tactical air transport, reconnaissance, and medical evacuation, while the Indian Air Force 's helicopter assets are responsible for assisting army troop transport and close air support.

The Aviation Corps operates approximately 150 helicopters.

The Indian army had projected a requirement for a helicopter that can carry loads of up to 750 kilograms (1,650 lb) to heights of 7,000 m (23,000 ft) on the Siachen Glacier in Jammu and Kashmir. Flying at these heights poses unique challenges due to the rarefied atmosphere.

The Indian Army will induct the HAL Light Utility Helicopter to replace its ageing fleet of Chetaks and Cheetahs , some of which were deployed more than three decades ago.

On 13 October 2012, the defence minister gave control of attack helicopters to the Indian Army, which had formerly rested the Indian Air force. Future developments Main articles: List of equipment of the Indian Army § Future procurement and projects , and List of infantry equipment of the Indian Army § Future procurement and projects The major ongoing weapons programmes of the Indian Army are as follows: F-INSAS is the Indian Army's principal infantry modernisation programme, which aims to modernise the army's 465 infantry and paramilitary battalions by 2020.

The programme aims to upgrade the infantry to a multi-calibre rifle with an under-barrel grenade launcher, as well as bulletproof jackets and helmets.

The helmet would include a visor, flashlight, thermal sensors, night vision devices, and a miniature computer with an audio headset. There would also be a new lightweight and waterproof uniform, which would help the soldier in carrying extra loads and fighting in an NBC environment.

In 2008, the Cabinet Committee on Security approved raising two new infantry mountain divisions (with around 15,000 combat soldiers each) and an artillery brigade. These divisions were likely to be armed with ultralight howitzers.

In July 2009, it was reported that the Army was advocating a new artillery division.

The proposed artillery division, to be under the Kolkata-based Eastern Command , was to have three brigades – two armed with 155 mm howitzers and one with the Russian "Smerch" and indigenous "Pinaka" multiple-launch rocket systems.

In February 2024, reports emerged for the formation of a new Corps under the Central Command for deployment along Line of Actual Control (LAC).

The XVIII Corps would consist of at least one division (with around 15,000 to 18,000 combat soldiers each) and three independent brigades. This includes 14 RAPID Division, 9 Mountain Brigade, 136 Mountain Brigade and 119 Mountain Brigade. This move will convert HQ Uttar Bharat from a Static Formation into 'Full-fledged Combat Arm'. This move is in a proposal stage in the Army and will be forwarded to the Ministry of Defence for clearance.

In April 2024, Indian Army proposed two new formations. One of them was the creation of an "adversial force" acting as opposing force which will represent an enemy force in wargames.

The other one is a "test-bed brigades or formation" which will enhance the efficiency of testing new weapons for procurement. Force modernisation and reorganisation The Indian Army planned to undergo a phased restructuring from 2023 in order to become a lean, agile, and technologically advanced military.

The internal study report Re-organization and Rightsizing of the Indian Army from 2022 served as its foundation.

As part of the restructuring, the Chief of the Army Staff General Upendra Dwivedi ordered the creation of the Rudra all-arms brigades , Bhairav light commando battalions , Shaktibaan artillery regiments and Divyastra batteries on 25 July 2025. He announced these approvals in Drass War Memorial on 26 July on the occasion of Kargil Vijay Diwas . Additionally, he also announced that each infantry battalion is also equipped with drone platoons.

In multi-domain battlefields dominated by information, digitization, automation, precision, and AI , Rudra and Bhairav are built for quick and decisive action.

The Chief of the Army Staff General Upendra Dwivedi called these restructuring moves as Indian Army's approach as a “transformative, modern, and future-oriented force”.

On 10 August, it was reported that the Indian Army has issued "specific orders" with "implementation instructions" to undertake these major reorganisations through “Save and Raise” mode which will not have an effect on the defence budget.

On 22 October, Director General (Infantry), Lieutenant General Ajay Kumar, announced the completion of raising 380 'Ashni' specialist drone platoons with each of the 380 infantry battalions. Each platoon employs 20–25 soldiers and is equipped with loitering munitions and drones to perform intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) roles.

The Army is procuring six types of loitering munitions and four types of ISR drones for the infantry. Integrated Battle Groups The concept of combined arms operations was first demonstrated with the Indian Army in a field exercises in Punjab in 2013.

The idea was later reintroduced in 2018 by the then CoAS General Bipin Rawat as Integrated Battle Group (IBG).

The Integrated Battle Groups would be Brigade-sized, self-sufficient combined arms formations commanded by an officer of the rank Major General .

The IBGs are meant to transform the overall field formation of the Indian Army.

By July 2019, the new concept of formations had been test-bedded with the IX Corps ( Rising Star Corps ) and were being re-organised based on the basis of feedbacks.

The formation of a specific IBG and its resource allocation would depend on three T's — Threat, Terrain and Task.

The formation would have mobilisation time of 12–48 hours.

The IBG will replace the traditional field formation of Commands – Corps – Divisions – Brigades with Commands and Corps being the largest static formation spread across a defined geography and the largest mobile formation, respectively.

The composition of IBG also depends on its nature — offensive or defensive.

While Offensive IBG will be designed to be mobilised at the earliest to thrust into enemy territory for strike operations, the Defensive IBG will be tasked to hold ground at vulnerable points where enemy action is expected.

In October 2019, the 59 Infantry Division of the XVII Corps ( Brahmastra Corps ) conducted the first military exercise to validate the concept of Integrated Battle Groups (IBG). Exercise Him Vijay included three IBGs of the Division.

The aim was to reduce the response time Cold Start Doctrine 's 72 hours to under 24 hours.

By May 2022, the IBGs were test-bedded by IX Corps and further validated by the XVII Corps.

The Army identified these Holding Corps in the Western Front and the Strike Corps in the Northern/Eastern Front for total 'IBG-isation' parallel to the formation of the larger Integrated Theatre Commands of the Armed Forces.

By June 2024, two and five IBGs under IX Corps and XVII Corps were raised under the first and second phases, respectively. These formations also participated in wargame s and were validated in multiple scenarios. Though the Army HQ had earlier submitted the report on Phase 1 of 'IBG-isation', the Defence Ministry also demanded the same for Phase 2 before the official Government Sanction Letter (GSL) can be issued.

The original plan was to initially carve out 8–10 IBGs (5,000 to 6,000 troops each) and followed by more over the years.

By November, the Army submitted a draft GSL seeking official approval for the establishment of the IBGs.

The issuing of the GSL implied the approval for the implementation of IBGs. Post approval, the Army aimed to have the IBGs operational by 2025.

During the annual press conference on 15 January 2025, on the occasion of the Army Day , CoAS General Upendra Dwivedi said that the Integrated Battle Groups will be either implemented by 2025 given the approval is granted otherwise the project will be totally abandoned.

The proposals were in the final stages of approval and has financial as well as equipment and human resources implications. "It is the first Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) as far as the restructuring is concerned. If it goes through, others will also follow suit," as per the COAS stated by a report. Some top-of-the-rack changes in the Northern Theatre Command has been identified to implement the IBGs and will incorporate lessons learnt from Exercise Him Vijay 2019.

The IBGs could be equipped to lead surgical strike -like operations in case of a war unlike the current structure of the Army where the same role is carried out by Strike Corps.

In January 2026, a report revealed plans of the Indian Army to convert two Divisions under XVII Corps.

The plans have been fast-tracked according to sources.

The IBGs will comprise a Major General -ranked commanding officer with a size of over 5,000 troops but without any Brigade commander .

The IBG will be able to draw logistics and other support elements from units placed under its respective Corps HQ, while a dedicated group can also be established to draw fire support . However, their implementation remains under discussion and could be further refined before deployment.

The approach to capability development is based on capacity assessments, not on a threat-based model.

On 29 June, reports indicated that the formation of the XVII Corps will be restructured into four integrated battle groups and a fire support group, Each of which will be commanded by a Major General-ranked commanding officer.

The will be operationalised from 1 July onwards in a phased manner.

The four IBGs will be subordinate to the 59 Division and 23 Division of the Corps.

The timeline for the formations has been expedited; they were previously expected to be formed in September.

The newly formed Divyastra batteries may be placed under the FSG. Rudra all-arms brigades On the occasion of 26th Kargil Vijay Diwas , the COAS announced that he had approved the formation of Rudra all-arms brigades a day earlier, on 25 July 2025 and that two brigades deployed on the border has already been converted to Rudra brigades.

As part of the plan, 250 single-arm brigades — with over 3,000 soldiers each — are to be converted to all-arms ones with integration of fighting elements like infantry, mechanised infantry, armoured (tanks), Special Forces as well as support elements like artillery , engineers , air defence , electronic warfare and UAVs ( unmanned aerial vehicles ).

The formations will receive specially prepared logistics for support and combat support. Though, the design of the Rudra brigades is based on the concept of Integrated Battle Groups, there are few but major modifications. Firstly, while an IBG was conceptualised to be a scaled-down Division, the Rudra brigades are not so but are slightly larger than standard brigades. Secondly, IBGs were envisioned to be commanded by a Major General, eliminating the rank of Brigadier . However, the Rudra brigades will have a Brigadier- ranked commanding officer . Reportedly, the two Rudra brigades that are already formed will be operationalised in eastern Ladakh and Sikkim likely under IX Corps and XVII Corps, respectively, within few months.

The Rudra Brigade under the Konark Corps of the Southern Command was operationally validated during Exercise Akhand Prahaar under the Tri Service Exercise (TSE) Trishul in early November 2025. With the operationalisation of these brigades, the Army reportedly plans to upgrade its Cold Start military doctrine to "Cold Strike".

The term was coined by a retired Army officer, Lieutenant General A B Shivane and later used by the commanding officer of Southern Command, Lieutenant General Dhiraj Seth . Bhairav Light Commando Battalions Bhairav Battalion Marching Bhairav Battalions are another type of formation that is being raised by the Indian Army.

The battalion has a strength of 250 personnel, including 78 officers, which is much less than that of a standard infantry battalion (800 soldiers) or a Parachute Regiment battalion (620 soldiers). AK-203 is the standard issue rifle for the Bhairav light commandos. These agile and compact battalions, evolving from the Ghatak Platoon concept, are designed as shock troops to undertake clandestine missions or deliver surprise strikes under high-risk conditions the enemy lines to inflict maximum damage.

The units are being raised under the long-standing “son of the soil” concept, in which soldiers are recruited from the areas they will be called upon to defend, in order to recruit soldiers with local knowledge and connections, as well as a direct personal stake in defending their communities.

The Army Chief has tasked the individual Infantry Regimental Centres to select, train, and depute personnel from their respective units, which will be affiliated with and operate alongside specific corps.

The selected soldiers will be trained for 2–3 months for their first phase under the Regimental Centre, followed by a month-long second phase of advanced training under the aegis of Special Forces training centres of the troops' respective deployment theatres . These units will be lighter armed and less strategically tasked than the Special Forces, serving instead as a bridge between Special Forces and regular infantry, thereby freeing the former for more critical operations.

As per a report on 14 August, the Indian Army plans to have five such battalions by the end of 31 October.

From the five battalions, three of the battalions will be assigned to the Northern Command with one each for XIV Corps , XV Corps and XVI Corps , while one each will be deployed in the Western and the Northeastern sectors .

The battalions will be tasked for roles like cross-border interdiction, reconnaissance and disruption of adversary positions. Ultimately, 23 Bhairav Battalions are planned to be raised.

As of 22 October, the service will raise 25 Bhairav battalions within six months. Meanwhile, five battalions, as earlier planned, have already been deployed and their training programme will culminate on 30 October, following which, the battalions will be operationalised. Additionally, four additional battalions are being raised.

As of 4 January 2026, the Army has raised 15 such battalions.

The 4 Bhairav battalion, formed from the Sikh Light Infantry Regiment, participated in the 77th Delhi Republic Day parade in 2026. Additionally, on the same occasion, the 6 Bhairav of the Eastern Command also took part in the Red Road parade in Kolkata . A report on 27 January by the Hindustan Times indicated that the Army had raised 21 Bhairav battalions.

On 25 April 2026, the 16 'Bhairav' Battalion was raised and commissioned by Brigadier Joydeep Mukherjee, Commandant of the Maratha Light Infantry Regimental Centre in Belgaum .

The battalion flag was presented to the Commanding Officer of the newly raised unit. Under the "Son of the Soil" concept, the soldiers are in listed from the same region where the unit is to be deployed. This ensures that the soldiers are familiar with the area’s geography, language and social conditions. Hence, they operate more efficiently because of their inherent knowledge of the terrain. List of known Bhairav Battalions Battalion Nickname Corps Command Affiliated Regiment The Indian Army will also reorganise the Artillery Regiments to adapt with modern battlefield needs. Each newly raised Shaktibaan regiment will be purely technology-driven units with the objective of "see-and-strike" operations and will include three batteries, with two of them operating long- and medium-range loitering munitions and the third operating swarm drones and remotely piloted aircraft system (RPAS).

The regiments are being raised under "Save and Raise" format, implying restructuring existing assets and infrastructure rather than forming entirely new units. Additionally, each traditional artillery regiment will be equipped with a Divyastra Battery. These will be composite batteries equipped with loitering munitions as well as dual-role RPAs and operating alongside the two batteries equipped with eight medium artillery guns each.

The configuration will enable sensor-to-shoot networking and integrate real-time surveillance and engagement into an independent unit. Under the first phase, five artillery regiments are expected to be introduced with Divyastra batteries by the end of August 2025.

On 29 December 2025, the Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) cleared the Indian Army proposal to procure 850 loitering munitions with launchers worth ₹ 2,000 crore (US$210 million) from Indian sources.

The munitions will equip the Shaktibaan regiments and Divyastra batteries of the Indian Army Regiment of Artillery . This is part of an overall procurement of 30,000 such munitions to equip all three defence forces as well as special forces . Shaurya squadron The Shaurya squadron was introduced during its validation trials in March 2026. These drone warfare units are part of the Armoured Regiment of the Armoured Corps . Six squadrons have been activated under five Army commands as of 27 March, one of which took part in the 13-day long Amogh Jwala exercise.

The exercise was conducted at the Babina Field Firing Ranges near Jhansi by the 31st Armoured Division ( White Tiger Division ) under the XXI Corps ( Sudarshan Chakra Corps ).

The Chamber of Prince . p. 206. Liability with regard to Defence This point was examined at length and it was put forward that with due regard to the obligations undertaken by the Crown to protect the States against internal commotion and external aggression, the States could not be asked to contribute the cost of the armed forces of the Crown of India.

In the case of several States the price of protection was settled by the Crown and paid by the States. ^ a b Sikhs Across Borders . p. 37.

In 1914, the Indian Army consisted of 39 cavalry regiments, 118 battalions of Indian infantry, and 20 battalions of Gurkha Rifles.

The army contained 159,134 Indian soldiers, and 2,333 British officers (plus reserves). Together with the 70,000 troops of the British garrison of India these forces made up the "Army in India." This army had three principal functions: first, the maintenance of internal security; second, the defence of the Indian Empire's frontiers; and third (if necessary) the provision of a force for imperial purposes outside India. ^ Singh, Sarbans (1993). Battle Honours of the Indian Army 1757–1971 . New Delhi: Vision Books. ISBN 978-8170941156 . ^ "Indian Army Doctrine" . Headquarters Army Training Command. October 2004. Archived from the original on 1 December 2007 . Retrieved 1 December 2007 . ^ "Indian Army now world's largest ground force as China halves strength on modernisation push" . ThePrint . 17 March 2020 . Retrieved 16 January 2022 . ^ International Institute for Strategic Studies (3 February 2014).

The Military Balance 2014 . London : Routledge . pp. 241– 246. ISBN 978-1-85743-722-5 . ^ The Military Balance 2017 . Routledge, Chapman & Hall, Incorporated. 14 February 2017. ISBN 978-1-85743-900-7 . ^ The Military Balance 2010 . Oxfordshire: Routledge. 2010. pp. 351 , 359– 364. ISBN 978-1-85743-557-3 . ^ "Indian Army Modernisation Needs a Major Push" . India Strategic . February 2010. Archived from the original on 6 September 2013 . Retrieved 10 July 2013 . ^ "India's Military Modernisation Up To 2027 Gets Approval" . Defence Now . 2 April 2012. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013 . Retrieved 10 July 2013 . ^ Oxford History of the British Army ^ "About The Ministry" . Ministry of Defence, Government of India. Archived from the original on 9 May 2012 . Retrieved 31 March 2011 . ^ SSBCrack (20 July 2015). "10 Facts Which Prove Indian Army Living Up To Its Motto – "Service Before Self" " . SSB Interview Tips & Coaching . Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. ^ "Indian army official Facebook page wiki-facts, official website, motto" . GuidingHawk . Archived from the original on 11 April 2016 . Retrieved 2 April 2016 . ^ Rich Reynolds (6 February 2015). "The British Indian Army During the First World War" . 20th Century Battles . Archived from the original on 28 February 2016 . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . ^ Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses "Direction of Higher Defence: II" . Archived from the original on 15 April 2016 . Retrieved 2 April 2016 . ^ Harold E. Raugh, The Victorians at war, 1815–1914: an encyclopaedia of British military history (2004) pp 173–79 ^ Lydgate, John (June 1965). Quezon, Kitchener and the Problem of Indian Army Administration, 1899–1909 (PDF) . SOAS Research Online (PhD thesis). University of London. Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 4 January 2020 . ^ Urlanis, Boris (1971). Wars and Population . Translated by Lempert, Leo. Moscow: Progress Publishers . p. 85 . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . ^ Khanduri, Chandra B. (2006). Thimayya: an amazing life . New Delhi: Knowledge World. p. 394. ISBN 978-81-87966-36-4 . Archived from the original on 6 January 2016 . Retrieved 30 July 2010 . ^ "Nationalisation of Officer Ranks of the Indian Army" (PDF) . Press Information Bureau of India – Archive . 7 February 1947 . Retrieved 28 August 2021 . ^ Kaushik Roy, "Expansion And Deployment of the Indian Army during World War II: 1939–45," Journal of the Society for Army Historical Research, Autumn 2010, Vol. 88 Issue 355, pp 248–268 ^ Sumner, p.25 ^ "Commonwealth War Graves Commission Report on India 2007–2008" (PDF) . Commonwealth War Graves Commission . Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 June 2010 . Retrieved 7 September 2009 . ^ Martin Bamber; Aad Neeven (26 August 1942). "Infantry Regiment 950 (Ind)" .

The Free Indian Legion. Archived from the original on 17 March 2012 . Retrieved 1 June 2012 . ^ Peter Stanley, "Great in adversity": Indian prisoners of war in New Guinea," Journal of the Australian War Memorial (October 2002) No. 37 online Archived 8 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ For the Punjab Boundary Force, see Daniel P. Marston, "The Indian Army, Partition, and the Punjab Boundary Force, 1945–47", War in History November 2009, vol. 16 no. 4 469–505 ^ "Part I-Section 4: Ministry of Defence (Army Branch)".

The Gazette of India. 24 September 1949. p. 1375. ^ "Part I-Section 4: Ministry of Defence (Army Branch)".

The Gazette of India. 29 October 1949. p. 1520. ^ "Press Note" (PDF) . Press Information Bureau of India – Archive . 6 April 1948 . Retrieved 15 February 2020 . ^ "Part I-Section 4: Ministry of Defence (Army Branch)".

The Gazette of India. 11 February 1950. p. 227. ^ Cooper, Tom (29 October 2003). "Indo-Pakistani War, 1947–1949" . ACIG Journal . Archived from the original on 13 June 2006 . Retrieved 12 April 2022 . ^ "Explained: What Is Line Of Control And How It Came Into Existence" . ^ "Line of Control,Background and How was it formed" . 5 May 2025. ^ a b "Kashmir in the United Nations" . Kashmiri Overseas Association of Canada . 28 January 1998. Archived from the original on 28 January 1998 . Retrieved 13 April 2022 . ^ "47 (1948). Resolution of 21 April 1948 " . United Nations . Archived from the original on 13 May 2016 . Retrieved 13 July 2016 . ^ "Why Operation Polo was launched to take over Hyderabad, 77 years ago" . 15 September 2025. ^ "Watch: Operation Polo: The battle that changed the fate of the Nizam and Hyderabad" .

The Hindu . 20 September 2024. ^ "Indian medical unit during Korean War" . 14 March 2022 . Retrieved 6 June 2024 . ^ Harrison, M. (2023). "Casualty Evacuation in Korea, 1950-53: The British Experience" . Ui Sahak . 32 (2): 503– 552. doi : 10.13081/kjmh.2023.32.503 . PMC 10556416 . PMID 37718561 . ^ "The Annexation of Goa Operation Vijay 17th to 19th December 1961 by Nick Brazil" . ^ "The Annexation of Goa" . ^ Bruce Bueno de Mesquita & David Lalman. War and Reason: Domestic and International Imperatives . Yale University Press (1994), p. 201 Archived 9 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine ISBN 978-0-300-05922-9 ^ Alastair I. Johnston & Robert S. Ross. New Directions in the Study of China's Foreign Policy . Stanford University Press (2006), p. 99 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine ISBN 978-0-8047-5363-0 ^ Claude Arpi. India and her neighbourhood: a French observer's views . Har-Anand Publications (2005), p. 186 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine . ISBN 978-81-241-1097-3 . ^ CenturyChina, www.centurychina.com/plaboard/uploads/1962war.htm ^ Dennis Kux's India and the United States: estranged democracies, 1941–1991 , ISBN 1-4289-8189-6 , DIANE Publishing, Pg 238 ^ Dijkink, Gertjan. National identity and geopolitical visions: maps of pride and pain . Routledge, 1996. ISBN 0-415-13934-1 . ^ Praagh, David.

The greater game: India's race with destiny and China . McGill-Queen's Press – MQUP, 2003. ISBN 0-7735-2639-0 . ^ a b c R.D. Pradhan; Yashwantrao Balwantrao Chavan (2007). 1965 War, the Inside Story: Defence Minister Y.B. Chavan's Diary of India-Pakistan War . Atlantic Publishers & Distributors. p. 47. ISBN 978-81-269-0762-5 . Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. ^ Sumit Ganguly. "Pakistan".

In India: A Country Study Archived 1 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine (James Heitzman and Robert L. Worden, editors). Library of Congress Federal Research Division (September 1995). ^ a b Ganguly, Sumit (2009). "Indo-Pakistan Wars" . Microsoft Encarta . Archived from the original on 8 May 2009 . Retrieved 3 December 2022 . ^ Thomas M. Leonard (2006). Encyclopedia of the developing world, Volume 2 . Taylor & Francis, 2006. ISBN 978-0-415-97663-3 . ^ Spencer Tucker. Tanks: An Illustrated History of Their Impact . ABC-CLIO (2004), p. 172 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine . ISBN 978-1-57607-995-9 . ^ Sumit Ganguly. Conflict unending: India-Pakistan tensions since 1947 . Columbia University Press (2002), p. 45 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine . ISBN 978-0-231-12369-3 . ^ Mishra, Keshav (2004). Rapprochement Across the Himalayas: Emerging India-China Relations Post Cold War Period (1947–2003) . Gyan Publishing House. p. 40. ISBN 9788178352947 . Archived from the original on 6 January 2016 . Retrieved 15 November 2015 . ^ Hoontrakul, Pongsak (2014).

The Global Rise of Asian Transformation: Trends and Developments in Economic Growth Dynamics (illustrated ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. p. 37. ISBN 978-1-137-41235-5 . Archived from the original on 18 May 2016. ^ "50 years after Sino-Indian war" . Millennium Post . 16 May 1975. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 12 July 2013 . ^ "Kirantis' khukris flash at Chola in 1967" . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 28 February 2016 . Retrieved 22 July 2015 . ^ Lawoti, Mahendra; Pahari, Anup Kumar (2009). "Part V: Military and state dimension" .

The Maoist Insurgency in Nepal: Revolution in the Twenty-first Century . London: Routledge . p. 208. ISBN 978-1-135-26168-9 .

The second turning point came in the wake of the 1971 Bangladesh war of independence which India supported with armed troops. With large contingents of Indian Army troops amassed in the West Bengal border with what was then East Pakistan, the Government of Indira Gandhi used the opening provided by President's Rule to divert sections of the army to assist the police in decisive counter-insurgency drives across Naxal–impacted areas. "Operation Steeplechase," a police and army joint anti–Naxalite undertaking, was launched in July–August 1971.

By the end of "Operation Steeplechase" over 20,000 suspected Naxalites were imprisoned and including senior leaders and cadre, and hundreds had been killed in police encounters. It was a massive counter-insurgency undertaking by any standards. ^ Pandita, Rahul (2011). Hello, Bastar : The Untold Story of India's Maoist Movement . Chennai: Westland (Tranquebar Press). pp. 23– 24. ISBN 978-93-80658-34-6 . OCLC 754482226 . Meanwhile, the Congress government led by Indira Gandhi decided to send in the army and tackle the problem militarily. A combined operation called Operation Steeplechase was launched jointly by the military, paramilitary and state police forces in West Bengal, Bihar and Orissa.

In Kolkata, Lt General J.F.R. Jacob of the Indian Army's Eastern Command received two very important visitors in his office in October 1969. One was the army chief General Sam Manekshaw and the other was the home secretary Govind Narain. Jacob was told of the Centre's plan to send in the army to break the Naxal. More than 40 years later, Jacob would recall how he had asked for more troops, some of which he got along with a brigade of para commandos.

When he asked his boss to give him something in writing, Manekshaw declined, saying, 'Nothing in writing.' while secretary Narain added that there should be no publicity and no records. ^ "About 10 Unknown Victories Of RAW " . 13 April 2024. ^ "India's secret war in Bangladesh" .

The Hindu . 25 December 2011. ^ Owen Bennett Jones. Pakistan: Eye of the Storm . Yale University Press (2003), p. 177 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine . ISBN 978-0-300-10147-8 . ^ Eric H. Arnett. Military capacity and the risk of war: China, India, Pakistan, and Iran . Oxford University Press (1997), p. 134 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine . ISBN 978-0-19-829281-4 . ^ S. Paul Kapur. Dangerous deterrent: nuclear weapons proliferation and conflict in South Asia . Stanford University Press (2007), p. 17 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine . ISBN 978-0-8047-5550-4 . ^ Encyclopedia of the Developing World, p. 806 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ North, Andrew (12 April 2014). "Siachen dispute: India and Pakistan's glacial fight" . BBC News . BBC . Retrieved 23 May 2022 . ^ Edward W. Desmond. "The Himalayas War at the Top Of the World" Archived 14 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine . Time (31 July 1989). ^ Vivek Chadha. Low Intensity Conflicts in India: An Analysis . SAGE (2005), p. 105 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine . ISBN 978-0-7619-3325-0 . ^ Pradeep Barua.

The State at War in South Asia . University of Nebraska Press (2005), p. 256 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine . ISBN 978-0-8032-1344-9 . ^ Tim McGirk with Aravind Adiga. "War at the Top of the World" . Time (4 May 2005). ^ Kamal Thakur (1 November 2014). "16 Things You Should Know About India's Soldiers Defending Siachen" . Topyaps . Archived from the original on 31 October 2014 . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . ^ Sanjay Dutt. War and Peace in Kargil Sector . APH Publishing (2000), p. 389-90 Archived 21 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine . ISBN 978-81-7648-151-9 . ^ Nick Easen. Siachen: The world's highest cold war Archived 23 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine . CNN (17 September 2003). ^ Arun Bhattacharjee. "On Kashmir, hot air and trial balloons" Archived 28 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine . Asia Times (23 September 2004). ^ "Indian Army organizes a Symposium titled "North Technical-2014" – Scoop News Jammu Kashmir" . Archived from the original on 6 January 2016 . Retrieved 4 April 2016 . ^ "e-Symposium – Northern Command" . Official Website of Indian Army . Archived from the original on 24 December 2016 . Retrieved 9 January 2017 . ^ "e-Symposium – Northern Command: North Tech Symposium 2016" . Official Website of Indian Army . Archived from the original on 24 December 2016 . Retrieved 9 January 2017 . ^ Bhaumik, Subir (10 December 2009). Troubled Periphery: The Crisis of India's North East By Subir Bhaumik . SAGE Publications India. ISBN 9788132104797 . Archived from the original on 6 January 2017. ^ Indian general praises Pakistani valour at Kargil 5 May 2003 Daily Times, Pakistan Archived 16 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Kashmir in the Shadow of War By Robert Wirsing Published by M.E. Sharpe, 2003 ISBN 0-7656-1090-6 pp36 ^ Managing Armed Conflicts in the 21st Century By Adekeye Adebajo, Chandra Lekha Sriram Published by Routledge pp192,193 ^ The State at War in South Asia By Pradeep Barua Published by U of Nebraska Press Page 261 ^ "Tariq Ali · Bitter Chill of Winter: Kashmir · LRB 19 April 2001" . London Review of Books . Archived from the original on 1 October 2009 . Retrieved 4 April 2016 . ^ Colonel Ravi Nanda (1999). Kargil : A Wake Up Call . Vedams Books. ISBN 978-81-7095-074-5 . Online summary of the Book Archived 28 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ Alastair Lawson. "Pakistan and the Kashmir militants" . BBC News (5 July 1999). ^ A.K. Chakraborty. "Kargil War brings into sharp focus India's commitment to peace" Archived 18 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine . Government of India Press Information Bureau (July 2000). ^ Michael Edward Brown. Offense, defence, and war . MIT Press (2004), p. 393 Archived 6 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Kargil War" . ^ "Pak lost 2700 men in Kargil: Shariff" .

The Times of India . 6 July 2006. ^ "Kargil War India-Pakistan " . ^ Sameer Yasir (21 September 2016), "Uri attack carried out by Jaish-e-Mohammad militants, confirms Indian Army" , Firstpost ^ "India's surgical strikes across LoC: Full statement by DGMO Lt Gen Ranbir Singh" . Hindustan Times . 29 September 2016. Archived from the original on 2 October 2016 . Retrieved 2 October 2016 . ^ "Uri avenged: 35–40 terrorists, 9 Pakistani soldiers killed in Indian surgical strikes" . 29 September 2016. Archived from the original on 2 October 2016. ^ "Surgical strikes in PoK: How Indian para commandos killed 50 terrorists, hit 7 camps" . India Today . 29 September 2016. Archived from the original on 1 October 2016 . Retrieved 1 October 2016 . ^ "Video footage provides proof of surgical strikes across LoC" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 28 June 2018 . ^ "Surgical strikes video out, shows terror casualties, damage to bunkers" .

The Indian Express . 28 June 2018 . Retrieved 28 June 2018 . ^ "New Video Of 2016 Surgical Strikes Shows Assault On Terror Launch Pads" . ^ "BSF carries out 9 major strikes on Pak; 10 posts, bunkers decimated" . Daily Excelsior . 4 June 2018. ^ "Indian Army's 21-year-old Rifleman killed in ceasefire violation" .

The Economic Times . 16 June 2018. ^ Safi, Michael; Farooq, Azhar (15 February 2019). "Dozens of Indian paramilitaries killed in Kashmir car bombing" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 4 April 2019 . Retrieved 1 July 2023 .

The Pakistan-based militant group Jaish-e-Mohammed claimed responsibility for the bombing. It said it was carried out by Adil Ahmad Dar, a locally recruited fighter from south Kashmir's Pulwama district.

The group released a video showing Dar delivering his will and a photograph of him surrounded by guns and grenades ^ Safi, Michael; Farooq, Azhar (15 February 2019). "Dozens of Indian paramilitaries killed in Kashmir car bombing" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 4 April 2019 . Retrieved 1 July 2023 . We will give a befitting reply, our neighbour will not be allowed to de-stabilise us", Modi said ^ Abi-Habib, Maria; Yasir, Sameer; Kumar, Hari (15 February 2019). "India Blames Pakistan for Attack in Kashmir, Promising a Response" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 23 February 2019 . Retrieved 1 July 2023 . Pakistan has denied involvement in the attack, in which at least 40 Indian soldiers were killed Thursday when a driver slammed an explosives-packed vehicle into a paramilitary convoy. ^ Joanna Slater (26 February 2019), "India strikes Pakistan in severe escalation of tensions between nuclear rivals", The Washington Post ^ Safi, Michael; Zahra-Malik, Mehreen (27 February 2019). " 'Get ready for our surprise': Pakistan warns India it will respond to airstrikes" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 31 March 2019 . Retrieved 1 July 2023 . Pakistan, said the war planes made it up to five miles inside its territory ^ Gul, Ayaz (22 March 2019). "Pakistani PM Receives National Day Greetings from Indian Counterpart" . VOA . Retrieved 1 July 2023 . ^ "Pakistan welcomes India's peace offer | Pakistan Today" . Pakistan Today . ^ Archived 21 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Past peacekeeping operations" . United Nations Peacekeeping. Archived from the original on 12 September 2009 . Retrieved 31 March 2011 . ^ "United Nations peacekeeping – Fatalities By Year up to 30 June 2014" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 July 2017. ^ John Cherian (26 May – 8 June 2001). "An exercise in anticipation" . Frontline . Vol. 18, no. 11. Archived from the original on 7 December 2004 . Retrieved 13 April 2022 . ^ "India, Mongolia engage in joint military exercises" . Business Standard . 11 June 2013. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013 . Retrieved 27 June 2013 . ^ Exercise Nomadic Elephant, Indo Mongolian Joint Military Exercise Archived 18 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine . Facebook (24 June 2013). Retrieved 12 July 2013. ^ "Indian Army tests network-centric warfare capability in Ashwamedha war games" . India-defence.com. Archived from the original on 5 February 2012 . Retrieved 1 June 2012 . ^ " 'Ashwamedha' reinforces importance of foot soldiers" . Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. ^ "Indo-US war games at its peak" .

The Times of India . 14 March 2012. ^ "Exercise Yudh Abhyas 2012" . ^ "Yudh Abhyas enhances U.S., Indian Army partnership" . Hawaii Army Weekly. 22 May 2013. Archived from the original on 5 July 2014 . Retrieved 11 August 2014 . ^ "Steele_August2013.pdf – Association of the United States Army" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 September 2013. ^ Sgt. Michael J. MacLeod (11 May 2013). "Yudh Abhyas 2013 Begins" . Archived from the original on 2 October 2015 . Retrieved 4 April 2016 . ^ "File:Sgt. Balkrishna Dave explains weapons-range safety procedures to Indian Army soldiers with the 99th Mountain Brigade before they fire American machine guns.jpg" . 3 May 2013. Archived from the original on 26 October 2015 . Retrieved 4 April 2016 . ^ "Indo-French joint Army exercise Shakti 2013 begins today" . Zeenews.india.com. 9 September 2013. Archived from the original on 6 July 2014 . Retrieved 11 August 2014 . ^ "Indo-French Joint Army Exercise "Shakti 2016" " . Facebook. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015 . Retrieved 11 August 2014 . ^ "Indian Army gears up for war game in Rajasthan desert" . FacenFacts. 25 April 2012. Archived from the original on 5 June 2012 . Retrieved 1 June 2012 . ^ "Western Army Command conducts summer training exercises" . Business Standard India . 11 May 2012 . Retrieved 27 June 2019 . ^ "Indian Army's firing exercise 'Shatrujeet' enters its last phase – Times of India" .

The Times of India . 17 April 2016. Archived from the original on 18 April 2016 . Retrieved 18 April 2016 . ^ "Indian Army Conducts Battle Exercise 'Shatrujeet' In Rajasthan" . NDTV.com . Archived from the original on 17 April 2016 . Retrieved 18 April 2016 . ^ "Indian Army Test Its Operation Abilities" . News Ghana . 17 April 2016. Archived from the original on 22 April 2016 . Retrieved 18 April 2016 . ^ "Army and navy plan to set up a marine brigade" . Indiatoday.intoday.in. 9 June 2010. Archived from the original on 19 October 2010 . Retrieved 1 June 2012 . ^ "Peninsular command by next year end, theatre commands by 2022: Gen. Rawat" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 19 July 2021 . ^ "GENERAL DHIRAJ SETH TAKES OVER AS THE CHIEF OF THE ARMY STAFF" . pib.gov.in . 30 June 2026. ^ "LT GEN SANDEEP JAIN ASSUMES APPOINTMENT OF VICE CHIEF OF THE ARMY STAFF" . pib.gov.in . 1 July 2026. ^ "Lt Gen Rajiv Ghai appointed Deputy Chief of Army Staff (Strategy); will continue as DGMO" . ANI . 9 June 2025. ^ "Lt General Vipul Shinghal, assumed the appointment of Deputy Chief of Army Staff (Information System & Training)" . www.spslandforces.com . Retrieved 2 February 2026 . ^ "Lieutenant General Rahul R Singh, assumed the appointment of Deputy Chief of Army Staff (Capability Development & Sustenance) today" . x.com (formerly known as Twitter) . 1 November 2024 . Retrieved 1 November 2024 . ^ "Lieutenant General VPS Kaushik Appointed as the New Adjutant General of the Indian Army" . 3 August 2024 . Retrieved 4 August 2024 . ^ "Leadership Transition at Chinar Corps: Lt Gen Balbir Singh Takes Charge as Lt Gen Prashant Srivastava Moves to Army HQ" . Wion . Retrieved 14 May 2026 . ^ "Lt Gen Amardeep Singh Aujla appointed as Indian Army's new MGS" . ThePrint . ANI. 20 May 2023 . Retrieved 5 September 2024 . ^ a b "Lieutenant General Vikas Rohella has assumed the appointment of Engineer-in-Chief" . x.com (formerly twitter) . 4 October 2025 . Retrieved 4 October 2025 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m "Know Your Army: Structure" . Official Indian Army Web Portal . Archived from the original on 24 December 2016 . Retrieved 31 December 2016 . ^ "Lt Gen Anindya Sengupta takes over as GOC-In-C, Central Command" .

The Times of India . 2 July 2024. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 2 July 2024 . ^ Indian Army, ADGPI (1 April 2026). "Lieutenant General VMB Krishnan, PVSM, AVSM, YSM assumed the appointment of General Officer Commanding-in-Chief of Eastern Command" . x.com . ^ "Eye on China, India to raise second division for mountain corps" .

The Indian Express . 2 May 2025 . Retrieved 3 August 2025 . ^ Philip, Snehesh Alex (12 April 2021). "These are the key changes Army has made in Ladakh to counter China in summer" . ThePrint . Retrieved 20 February 2024 . ^ "LT GEN RAJESH PUSHKAR AVSM, VSM ASSUMES COMMAND OF SOUTHERN COMMAND" . pib.gov.in . 1 July 2026. ^ "LIEUTENANT GENERAL MOHIT MALHOTRA, ASSUMES COMMAND OF JAIPUR BASED SOUTH WESTERN COMMAND" . pib.gov.in . 1 July 2026. ^ "Lt Gen Pushpendra Pal Singh to be next GOC-in-C Western Command" .

The Indian Express . 7 March 2026 . Retrieved 31 March 2026 . ^ "Lt General Devendra Sharma Takes Over As New Army Training Command Chief" . English Jagran . Retrieved 2 July 2024 . ^ Indian Army, ADGPI (1 April 2026). "Lieutenant General Anoop Shinghal, assumed the appointment of Director General of the Regiment of Artillery" . X (formerly twitter) . ^ "Goan Native Sumer Ivan D'Cunha Promoted To Lieutenant General" . Free Press Journal . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ "Lt Gen Vinod Nambiar assumed the appointment of Director General & Colonel Commandant of Army Aviation - ADGPI Twitter" . X (formerly twitter) . Retrieved 2 August 2024 . ^ a b "Lieutenant General Rajiv Kumar Sahni, assumed the appointment of Director General of Electronics and Mechanical Engineers and Colonel Commandant of the Corps of EME, today" . x.com (formerly twitter) . 1 October 2025 . Retrieved 1 October 2025 . ^ Indian Army, ADGPI (1 January 2026). "Lieutenant General Vivek Dogra assumed the appointment of Signal Officer-in-Chief today.

In a solemn ceremony, he laid the wreath and paid homage at the National War Memorial to the Bravehearts, honouring their supreme sacrifice for the nation and unwavering devotion to duty" . X (formerly twitter) . ^ "Lieutenant General Ajay Kumar assumed the appointment of Director General Infantry today" . x.com (formerly twitter) . 1 October 2024. ^ Deshpande, Smruti (5 July 2024). "India set to carry out trials for US-made Stryker combat vehicles in Ladakh & deserts" . ThePrint . Retrieved 6 July 2024 . ^ "Indian Army and Anti-Tank Guided Missile" . Strategic Front Forum - Indian Defence and Strategic Forum . 3 December 2017 . Retrieved 19 August 2024 . ^ Sharma, Shivani (26 July 2025). "Rudra brigades, Bhairav battalions to boost Army's capabilities in border areas" . India Today . Retrieved 29 July 2025 . ^ "Infantry Regiments" . Bharat Rakshak. 2008. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013 . Retrieved 24 January 2014 . ^ "Indian artillery inflicted maximum damage to Pak during Kargil" . Zee News . 19 November 2010. Archived from the original on 31 October 2014 . Retrieved 26 November 2014 . ^ RAGHUVSNSHI, VIVEK (21 March 2014). "Upgraded Indian Howitzers Cleared for Summer Trials" . defensenews.com . Gannett Government Media . Retrieved 21 March 2014 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ Swami, Praveen (29 March 2012). "Inside India's defence acquisition mess" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 7 January 2014 . Retrieved 4 January 2014 . ^ "In 'Dhanush', Indian Army's Prayers Answered" . NDTV.com . Archived from the original on 3 November 2014 . Retrieved 26 November 2014 . ^ "Defence ministry agrees to army's long pending demand of artillery guns" . dna . Archived from the original on 24 November 2014 . Retrieved 26 November 2014 . ^ "Indigenous Artillery Gun 'Dhanush' to be Ready This Year" .

The New Indian Express . Archived from the original on 22 November 2014 . Retrieved 26 November 2014 . ^ "Indian Army to increase indigenous rocket regiments by 2022" . Firstpost . 7 December 2016. Archived from the original on 8 December 2016 . Retrieved 8 December 2016 . ^ Brett-James, Antony Report my Signals London Hennel Locke 1948 – personal account of a British officer attached to Indian Army in Egypt and Burma ^ "Corps Of Signals – Inaugural: Ceremony Centenary Year" . Ministry of Defence. 15 February 2010. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. ^ "Akashteer: How India's indigenous 'Iron Dome' swatted Pakistan drones from the sky - all you need to know" .

The Times of India . 16 May 2025. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ Sharma, Swastik (16 May 2025). "What Makes Akashteer a Breakthrough in India's Military Defence?" .

The Daily Guardian . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ "Akashteer neutralised barrage of Pakistani missiles, drones" .

The Economic Times . 16 May 2025. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 17 May 2025 . ^ Rishabh Mishra (24 June 2015). "21 Different Branches Of Indian Army That Make It Such An Efficient Defence Force" . TopYaps . Archived from the original on 11 June 2016 . Retrieved 10 October 2024 . ^ "On taking over the reins of DGST and Sr Comdt of Army Service Corps, Lt Gen Mukesh Chadha, AVSM, SM, VSM, laid wreath and paid homage to Bravehearts at National War Memorial" . x.com (formerly twitter) . 1 April 2025 . Retrieved 1 April 2025 . ^ "Lt Gen CG Muralidharan Assumes Office as Director General of Medical Services (Army)" . Press Information Bureau . 18 October 2025 . Retrieved 19 October 2025 . ^ "Lt Gen Daljit Singh, DGAFMS & All Ranks of AFMS congratulate Lt Gen Vineet Sharma on assumption of the appointment of Director General Dental Services wef 01 Feb 2024" . x.com (formerly twitter) . 1 February 2024 . Retrieved 3 October 2025 . ^ ADGPI, Indian Army (6 October 2025). "Lieutenant General Deepak Ahuja has assumed the appointment of Director General Ordnance Services. Upon taking over, in a solemn ceremony, he laid a wreath to honour the supreme sacrifice of the Bravehearts at the National War Memorial, New Delhi" . x.com (formerly twitter) . ^ Som, Vishnu (16 May 2020). "Anand Mahindra May Recruit Those Who Served In Army's New 3-Year 'Tour Of Duty' Scheme" . NDTV . Retrieved 16 May 2020 . ^ "What is Tour of Duty in Indian Army – Times of India" .

The Times of India . 14 May 2020 . Retrieved 16 May 2020 . ^ a b "Explained: The Agnipath scheme for recruiting soldiers – what is it, how will it work?" .

The Indian Express. 15 June 2022. ^ a b c Singh, Sushant (16 June 2022). " 'Agnipath': What is India's new military recruitment system?" . www.aljazeera.com . ^ De, Abhishek (18 June 2022). "Why Is There So Much Anger Against Agnipath Scheme, Especially In North India?" . news.abplive.com . Archived from the original on 25 June 2022 . Retrieved 25 June 2022 . ^ "What is Agnipath scheme: Why Agniveer aspirants in Bihar protesting against it" . Daily News & Analysis . Archived from the original on 17 June 2022 . Retrieved 17 June 2022 . ^ "Put Agnipath on hold, take it up in Parliament: Opposition" .

The Times of India . TNN. 17 June 2022. Archived from the original on 17 June 2022 . Retrieved 19 June 2022 . ^ "How Indian Army's Military Intelligence Directorate works : Special Report – India Today" . Indiatoday.intoday.in. 28 January 2012. Archived from the original on 31 October 2012 . Retrieved 4 November 2012 . ^ "State govt allots land for NTRO in Borda village" . IBNLive . Archived from the original on 17 October 2013 . Retrieved 4 April 2016 . ^ "What is STEAG, Army's new elite tech unit" .

The Times of India . 18 March 2024. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 22 March 2024 . ^ Richard Rinaldi; Ravi Rikhye (2010). Indian Army Order of Battle . General Data LLC. ISBN 978-0-9820541-7-8 . Archived from the original on 28 February 2016. ^ "Structure of Indian Army & its Organizational Divisions" . ^ "Know about Ghatak commandos, the invincible Special Forces of India" . 10 February 2014. Archived from the original on 15 October 2014 . Retrieved 26 November 2014 . ^ "National War Memorial (Rashtriya Samar Smarak)" . nationalwarmemorial.gov.in . Retrieved 23 February 2023 . ^ "20% Sailor Shortage in Navy, 15% Officer Posts Vacant In Army, Nirmala Sitharaman Tells Parliament" . News18 . Archived from the original on 27 December 2017 . Retrieved 28 December 2017 . ^ "Armed forces facing shortage of nearly 60,000 personnel: Government" .

The Economic Times . 27 December 2017. Archived from the original on 28 December 2017 . Retrieved 28 December 2017 . ^ "The mountain is now a molehill" . Archived from the original on 19 November 2016 . Retrieved 18 November 2016 . ^ "More soldiers but weaker Army" . dailypioneer.com . Archived from the original on 19 November 2016 . Retrieved 18 November 2016 . ^ The Military Balance 2020 . Routledge, Chapman & Hall, Incorporated. 14 February 2020. ISBN 978-0-367-46639-8 . {{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ "General V K Singh takes over as new Indian Army chief" .

The Times of India . 31 March 2010. Archived from the original on 28 February 2016 . Retrieved 31 March 2010 . ^ Page, Jeremy. "Comic starts adventure to find war heroes" Archived 9 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine .

The Times (9 February 2008). ^ Bhatt, Ajay (1 April 2022). "Unstarred Ques no. 4929, Lok Sabha" (PDF) . Sansad . Retrieved 1 August 2025 . ^ "PIB INDIA" . ^ a b "Indian Army Rank Badges" . indianarmy.nic.in . Indian Army . Retrieved 27 May 2021 . ^ "14 Different Uniforms of Indian Army" . Defence Directed Education (DDE) . 1 June 2023 . Retrieved 10 October 2024 . ^ "Army to adopt new combat fatigues next year" . 15 January 2022. ^ "Indian Army Day 2022: Indian Army unveils new combat uniform with a digital disruptive pattern" . Firstpost.com. 15 January 2022 . Retrieved 19 January 2022 . ^ "Lighter fabric to unique pattern, here's how NIFT team created Indian Army's new combat uniform" .

The Indian Express . 18 January 2022 . Retrieved 12 April 2022 . ^ "New Army Combat Uniforms for Troops Only Through Fixed Channels, Fabric Won't Be Sold in Open Market" . News18 . 4 February 2022 . Retrieved 12 April 2022 . ^ Indian Army must stop its discrimination against military nurses Archived 14 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine , Hindustan Times , 13 December 2017. ^ "Entry Schemes Women : Officers Selection – Join Indian Army" . joinindianarmy.nic.in . Archived from the original on 25 February 2016 . Retrieved 21 January 2016 . ^ "Agniveer Yojana – MyGov.in" . MyGov.in . 14 June 2022. Archived from the original on 15 June 2022 . Retrieved 17 June 2022 . ^ "Agneepath Scheme Details, Apply Online, Age Limit, Salary, Eligibility, etc. - Agneepath Scheme" . 19 July 2024 . Retrieved 31 July 2024 . ^ Singh, Rahul (14 June 2022). "Recruitment model for soldiers to create an 'Agniveer' rank" . Hindustan Times . Retrieved 21 July 2022 . ^ The Indian Expresshttps://agneepathscheme.in/ ^ "What's the Fate of the Gurkhas in Agnipath? Here's Everything You Need to Know!" . Nepal News . Retrieved 22 September 2025 . ^ Shankar, Priyanka. "Why Nepal's Gurkha fighters want to join India's army again" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 22 September 2025 . ^ "Agniveer Physical Eligibility 2024: Check Height, Chest, Other Criteria For Army, Air Force, And Navy" . Jagranjosh.com . 2 January 2024 . Retrieved 22 September 2025 . ^ "Indian Gorkha Army" . British Gurkha Recruitment . Retrieved 22 September 2025 . ^ "TF_Oct_2021.pdf" (PDF) . Retrieved 6 June 2024 . ^ "Our History" . Retrieved 6 June 2024 . ^ Pandit, Rajat (24 March 2014). "Army running low on ammunition" . indiatimes.com . TNN. Archived from the original on 26 March 2014 . Retrieved 24 March 2014 . ^ "HAL developing light choppers for high-altitude operations" .

The Hindu Business Line . PTI. Archived from the original on 21 March 2014 . Retrieved 26 November 2014 . ^ Gautam Datt (13 October 2012). "Army to get attack helicopters: Defence Ministry" . Mail Today (epaper) . Archived from the original on 1 December 2012 . Retrieved 30 November 2012 . ^ "DRDO's F-INSAS programme to be ready in two years" . Defence News . 9 July 2013. Archived from the original on 12 December 2013 . Retrieved 10 July 2013 . ^ Pandit, Rajat. "Army to raise 2 mountain units to counter Pak, China" .

The Times of India , 7 February 2008. Retrieved 4 January 2010. ^ Rajat Pandit, Eye on China, is India adding muscle on East? 2 2009 July 0325hrs ^ "Army to set up new corps for operations along LAC" .

The Indian Express . 20 February 2024 . Retrieved 20 February 2024 . ^ Philip, Snehesh Alex (20 February 2024). "Army's Central Command gets 'combatised' to counter China, new corps raised" . ThePrint . Retrieved 20 February 2024 . ^ "Indian Army to set up new corps for operations along LAC" . Indian Army to set up new corps for operations along LAC . Retrieved 20 February 2024 . ^ "Indian Army Mulls XVIII Corps Formation for Enhanced Border Security with China" . Financialexpress . 25 February 2024 . Retrieved 27 February 2024 . ^ "Indian Army plans aggressor red team, test-bed units in modernisation drive" . www.business-standard.com . Retrieved 8 April 2024 . ^ Mallick, Ashesh (26 July 2025). " 'New All-Arms Brigades Being Formed': Army Chief Announces 'Rudra' On Kargil Vijay Diwas" . News18 . Retrieved 29 July 2025 . ^ a b c Banerjee, Ajay (28 July 2025). " 'Rudra' to power up brigades for future wars" .

The Tribune . Retrieved 29 July 2025 . ^ "India's new strike power: Army Chief announces 'Rudra Brigade' for multi-domain combat readiness" .

The Statesman . 26 July 2025 . Retrieved 29 July 2025 . ^ a b " 'Shaktiban regiment' of Indian Army: What it is? What will it do?" .

The Week . Retrieved 13 August 2025 . ^ Mohan, Vijay (27 July 2025). "Explainer: High on mobility and firepower, Rudra brigades align with post-Op Sindoor strategy" .

The Tribune . Retrieved 29 July 2025 . ^ a b "All about Indian Army's new Rudra brigade and Bhairav Commando units" . Hindustan Times . 27 July 2025 . Retrieved 27 July 2025 . ^ a b Singh, Mayank (11 August 2025). "Bhairav, Rudra units to boost combat power" .

The New Indian Express . Retrieved 13 August 2025 . ^ a b "Army to station specialised 'Rudra' brigades in eastern Ladakh, Sikkim" .

The Tribune . Retrieved 13 August 2025 . ^ a b Singh, Rahul (22 October 2025). "New weapons, specialist units to boost army's capabilities" . Hindustan Times . Retrieved 22 October 2025 . ^ a b c d e f "Army transforming its 382 infantry battalions with new weapons & drone platoons" .

The Times of India . 23 October 2025. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 24 October 2025 . ^ "Integrated Battle Groups" . Current Affairs . 11 May 2022 . Retrieved 30 November 2024 . ^ Peri, Dinakar (28 July 2019). "Army's first Integrated Battle Groups to be structured by end of next month" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 30 November 2024 . Retrieved 30 November 2024 . ^ Philip, Snehesh (11 September 2019). "Army to debut its Mountain Strike Corps next month, at HimVijay exercise in Arunachal" . ThePrint . Archived from the original on 30 November 2024 . Retrieved 20 December 2020 . ^ Singh, Mayank (11 May 2022). "Integrated Battle Groups are in final stage, says Army Chief" .

The New Indian Express . Retrieved 30 November 2024 . ^ Peri, Dinakar (10 May 2022). "Consultations on creation of Integrated Battle Groups being compiled: Army Chief Gen. Pande" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 30 November 2024 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "New government to decide on Army's integrated battle group plan" .

The Times of India . 10 June 2024. ISSN 0971-8257 . Archived from the original on 30 November 2024 . Retrieved 30 November 2024 . ^ "India Gears Up for Battle-Ready Integrated Groups Along Its Borders" . Financialexpress . 5 November 2024 . Retrieved 30 November 2024 . ^ "India to deploy Integrated Battle Groups to counter China days after border truce" . India Today . 5 November 2024. Archived from the original on 30 November 2024 . Retrieved 30 November 2024 . ^ "Integrated Battle Groups to be up by 2025 or never: Army chief Gen Upendra Dwivedi" .

The Week . Retrieved 17 January 2025 . ^ Singh, Mayank (13 January 2025). "Indian Army's Integrated Battle Groups await final approval: General Upendra Dwivedi" .

The New Indian Express . Retrieved 17 January 2025 . ^ "Exclusive: Plans for four agile Army battle groups in the east gather pace" .

The Indian Express . 12 January 2026. Archived from the original on 12 January 2026 . Retrieved 12 January 2026 . ^ "Army set to establish, operationalise first Integrated Battle Groups next month" .

The Indian Express . 29 June 2026 . Retrieved 30 June 2026 . ^ "What are Indian Army's Integrated Battle Groups that will change the way it fights?" . India Today . 29 June 2026 . Retrieved 30 June 2026 . ^ Sharma, Shivani (26 July 2025). "Rudra brigades, Bhairav battalions to boost Army's capabilities in border areas" . India Today . Retrieved 2 August 2025 . ^ a b "Fast, furious, and future-ready: Why Indian Army's Rudra Brigade could be a game-changer against China and Pakistan" .

The Economic Times . 28 July 2025. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 2 August 2025 . ^ a b c d e f g h Rana, Javaria (25 August 2025). "Army ramps up two-front readiness, 5 Bhairav Commando units ready for frontline deployment" . ThePrint . Retrieved 25 August 2025 . ^ a b "Rudra may change how Army operates: Upgrade likely from 'Cold Start' to 'Cold Strike' doctrine" .

The Times of India . 17 November 2025. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 20 November 2025 . ^ "What is Operation Akhand Prahar? RUDRA Brigade's 'Prachand' manoeuvres signal a new era for Indian defence" .

The Economic Times . 13 November 2025. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 20 November 2025 . ^ a b "Rudra brigade revolution: How this new formation could transform the way Indian Army fights its enemies" .

The Economic Times . 17 November 2025. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 20 November 2025 . ^ "From doctrine to dominance: Do Rudra, Bhairav, Divyastra mark India's Cold Strike moment?" .

The Week . Retrieved 20 November 2025 . ^ "India now ready for Cold Strike? Indian Army's Rudra Brigade validates the ability to hit hard and fast" .

The Week . Retrieved 20 November 2025 . ^ "What is Bhairav Light Commando Battalion of the Indian Army?" . Shop SSBCrack . 9 January 2026 . Retrieved 11 January 2026 . ^ a b c "Bhairav commandos to add muscle to Army by October 31" .

The Times of India . 30 August 2025. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 1 September 2025 . ^ a b c d "Bhairav Battalion: Meet Indian Army's new elite 'invisible, invincible, sons of soil' force that can elminate threats within hours" .

The Economic Times . 27 January 2026. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 29 January 2026 . ^ "Army equips 380 infantry battalions with 'Ashney' drone platoons" .

The Economic Times . 22 October 2025. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 27 October 2025 . ^ "Bhairav Battalions: Inside India's 'lean and mean' elite Army units that can launch surprise attacks on the enemy" . Firstpost . 23 October 2025 . Retrieved 23 October 2025 . ^ a b "Indian Army creates 'modern warfare force' with over one lakh drone operatives, new Special Forces Bhairav raised for modern warfare" .

The Times of India . 4 January 2026. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 4 January 2026 . ^ a b "77th Republic Day Parade: Kartavya Path set to unveil unique mix of 150 years of 'Vande Mataram' and the nation's progress & military might, immersed in rich cultural diversity and Jan Bhagidari" (Press release). Press Information Bureau . 25 January 2026 . Retrieved 26 January 2026 . Marching down Kartavya Path would be the... 4 BHAIRAV Battalion – Sikh Light Infantry Regiment; and Combined Military Bands. ^ "Indian Army to monitor low-altitude airspace along China, Pakistan borders" . Hindustan Times . 27 January 2026 . Retrieved 27 January 2026 . ^ a b "Indian Army raises 16th 'Bhairav' Battalion at Maratha Light Infantry Centre in Belagavi" .

The Hindu . 27 April 2026. ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 30 April 2026 . ^ "In boost for Army's high-mobility tactical force, 16th Bhairon Battalion raised at Belagavi" .

The Times of India . 26 April 2026. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 30 April 2026 . ^ a b c " 'Rudra, Bhairav, Shaktibaan': Army Ready For All-Arms Brigades, Exclusive Drone Units, Special Ops Battalions" . News18 . Retrieved 14 August 2025 . ^ "Rudra, Bhairava, Divyastra and Shaktibaan: How Indian Army is preparing for next-gen warfare through comprehensive transformation" .

The Economic Times . 18 August 2025. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 19 August 2025 . ^ "Defence ministry nod to Rs 79,000 crore military projects" .

The Times of India . 30 December 2025. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 30 December 2025 . ^ "DAC clears proposals worth Rs 79,000 crore to enhance the capabilities of the Armed Forces" (Press release). Press Information Bureau . 29 December 2025 . Retrieved 29 December 2025 . ^ "Indian Army to buy 850 Kamikaze drones worth Rs 2000 crore" .

The Economic Times . 19 December 2025. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 22 December 2025 . ^ "Army rolls out Shaurya Squadron, drone-powered tank regiments" . India Today . 25 March 2026 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ "Army puts to test its new 'Shaurya' drone squadron for tank units" .

The Times of India . 27 March 2026. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ "Surveillance boost: Army to raise 'Baaz Battalions' " .

The Military Balance 2010 . London: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-85743-557-3 . International Institute for Strategic Studies (7 March 2012). Hackett, James (ed.).

The Military Balance 2012 . London : Routledge . ISBN 978-1-85743-642-6 . International Institute for Strategic Studies (3 February 2014).

The Military Balance 2014 . London : Routledge . ISBN 978-1-85743-722-5 . Mazumder, Rajit K.

The Indian Army and the making of Punjab (Orient Blackswan, 2003) online . Omissi, David.

The Sepoy and the Raj: the Indian army, 1860-1940 (Springer, 2016) online Praval, K.C. Indian Army After Independence (3rd ed. 2013) online Rose, Patrick.