The rise of Nazism and Adolf Hitler's anti-Semitic propaganda shocked Kallenbach into a rediscovery of his Jewish roots. He became a Zionist and served on the Executive Board of the South African Zionist Federation and planned to settle in Palestine (" Eretz Israel " in Hebrew ). He wanted society there to involve no state, military, or industry, in order to avoid colonialism through Zionist settlements.

At the request of Moshe Shertok (Sharett), Kallenbach visited Gandhi in May 1937 to enlist his sympathy and support for Zionism.

The architect once again became a simple man, participating in all the activities of Gandhi's ashram life. Kallenbach wrote, "I join the whole programme... It is 'almost' as the old joint life, as if the 23 years, with all the events that affected millions of people, had disappeared." Kallenbach disagreed with Gandhi over Zionism and the need to violently resist Hitler. Nevertheless, Kallenbach continued his deep friendship with Gandhi, visiting him again in 1939 India's position on the establishment of the State of Israel was affected by many factors, including India's own partition on religious lines, and India's relationship with other nations. Indian independence leader Mahatma Gandhi believed the Jews had a good case and a prior claim for Israel, but opposed the creation of Israel on religious or mandated terms. Gandhi believed that the Arabs were the "rightful occupants" of Palestine, and was of the view that the Jews should return to their countries of origin. Albert Einstein wrote a four-page letter to Jawaharlal Nehru on 13 June 1947, to persuade India to support the setting up of a Jewish state. Nehru, however, couldn't accept Einstein's request, and explained his dilemma stating that national leaders "have to unfortunately pursue policies that are essentially selfish". India voted against the partitioning of Palestine plan of 1947 and voted against Israel's admission to the United Nations in 1949. Various proponents of Hindutva supported or sympathised with the creation of Israel. Hindu Mahasabha leader Veer Savarkar supported the creation of Israel on both moral and political grounds, and condemned and deplored India's vote at the UN against Israel. Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh leader Madhav Sadashiv Golwalkar admired Jewish nationalism and believed Palestine was the natural territory of the Jewish people, essential to their aspiration for nationhood . Informal recognition (1950–1991) On 17 September 1950, India officially recognised the State of Israel. Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru stated, "We would have long ago, because Israel is a fact. We refrained because of our desire not to offend the sentiments of our friends in the Arab countries." In 1953, Israel was permitted to open a consulate in Bombay (now Mumbai). Jayaprakash Narayan meeting David Ben-Gurion , 1958 During the Six-Day War India took a pro-Arab stance. Israel supported India during the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 . Israeli arms manufacturer Shlomo Zabludowicz provided India and the Bengali nationalist and Bangladeshi independence organization Mukti Bahini with mortars , ammunition and instructors. India's opposition to official diplomatic relations stemmed from domestic and foreign considerations. Domestically, politicians in India feared losing the Muslim votebank (motivated in large part by Muslim appeasement and pseudosecularism) if relations were normalised with Israel. Additionally, India did not want to jeopardise its citizens working in Arab states of the Persian Gulf , who were helping India maintain its foreign-exchange reserves . India's domestic need for energy was another reason, in order to safeguard the flow of oil from Arab nations. India's foreign policy goals and alliances also proved problematic to formal relations with Israel, including India's support for the pro- Palestine Liberation Organization Non-Aligned Movement , India's tilt towards the Soviet Union during the Cold War , and India's desire to counter Pakistan's influence with the Arab states.

On an ideological level, the dominant political party in India during this era, namely the Indian National Congress , opposed Israel due to their perception that it was a state based on religion, analogous to Pakistan .

Although there was no formal relationship for several decades, meetings and cooperation took place between both countries, including figures such as Moshe Dayan . Israel also provided India with crucial information during its multiple wars. Full recognition (1992–2022) After decades of non-aligned and pro-Arab policy, India formally established relations with Israel when it opened an embassy in Tel Aviv in January 1992. Ties between the two nations have flourished since, primarily due to common strategic interests and security threats, particularly from terrorism .

In 1999, Israel supported India in the Kargil war by providing arms and ammunition.

The formation of Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), which allegedly neglected the sentiments of Indian Muslims , and the blocking of India by Pakistan from joining the OIC are considered to be the causes of this diplomatic shift.

On a diplomatic level, India and Israel have maintained healthy relations despite India's repeated condemnations of Israeli military actions in Palestinian territories , which are believed to be motivated by the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) government.

Since his election in 2014, the Modi government has maintained a de-hyphenation policy, where it keeps its relations with Israel and Palestine independent from each other.

At the height of the 2014 Israel–Gaza war , India blamed both sides and asked Israel to "stop disproportionate use of force." External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj insisted that there was no change in India's policy of supporting the Palestinian cause while maintaining good relations with Israel. Nevertheless, India joined other BRICS nations in voting at the United Nations Human Rights Council for a probe into alleged human rights violations in Gaza , which generated mixed response among media and analysts in India.

When the UNHRC report alleging that Israel had committed war crimes was tabled for vote, India abstained from voting, one of five countries to do so. Israeli envoy to India Daniel Carmon thanked India for not supporting what he described as another anti-Israel bashing resolution. Indian prime minister Narendra Modi with Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu in New Delhi, India, January 2018 India–Israel relationship has been very close and warm under the premiership of Narendra Modi since 2014.

In 2017, he was the first ever Prime Minister of India to visit Israel. India was the largest arms customer of Israel in 2017. Defence relations between the two countries are longstanding. India voted in favour of Israel's resolution to deny observer status to Palestinian non-governmental organization Shahed at the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) on 6 June 2019.

In August 2022, President Isaac Herzog joined the Indian Embassy in Tel Aviv for its 75th Independence Day celebrations.

In his speech, he welcomed India's rise as a regional and global power and described Israel and India as two modern republics proudly bound together by creativity and democracy, by ingenuity coupled with deep respect for timeless faiths and belief systems. Meeting Indian External Affairs Minister Subrahmanyam Jaishankar , Herzog underscored his personal commitment to strengthening the India–Israel relationship. Post-7 October 2023 The Israeli government described the operation as a "measured and decisive response to terrorism" and reaffirmed its support for India's right to self-defence, adding, "Israel supports India's right for self defense". Terrorists should know there's no place to hide from their heinous crimes against the innocent." The airstrikes, part of what was reported as Operation Sindoor , targeted terrorist launchpads and infrastructure across the Line of Control . Military aid The foreign ministers of the two countries said intensified co-operation would range from counter-terrorism to information technology. 2003 Israeli and Indian flags in New Delhi during Ariel Sharon's visit, September 2003 In 2003, Ariel Sharon was the first Israeli Prime Minister to visit India. He was welcomed by the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) led National Democratic Alliance coalition government of India. Several newspapers expressed positive views on his visit, and Indian Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee voiced confidence that Sharon's visit would pave the way for further consolidating bilateral ties. Sharon's visit was condemned in leftist and Muslim circles. Hundreds of supporters of India's various communist parties rallied in New Delhi while nearly 100 Muslims were arrested in Mumbai . Students of Aligarh Muslim University demanded that India sever ties with Israel and increase ties with Palestine.

The Hindi -language daily Navbharat Times called Sharon an important friend of India.

The Hindu nationalist Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) condemned the protest against Sharon. Sharon expressed satisfaction over his talks with Indian leaders. Indian prime minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee said the visit would increase ties between India and Israel. Sharon invited Vajpayee to visit Israel. Sharon said that Israelis regard India to be one of the most important countries in the world, and Vajpayee was sure that Sharon's visit would bring the two countries closer together. 2006 In early 2006 Indian government ministers Sharad Pawar , Kapil Sibal , and Kamal Nath visited Israel. Then-Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi visited Israel in October 2006. 2012 Despite India's "unwavering support for the Palestinian cause", Foreign Minister S.M. Krishna made a two-day visit to Israel in 2012.

The Israeli PM deemed this visit by Krishna a historical step forward in developing the relations between the two nations. 2014 In May 2014, after the victory of Narendra Modi in the 2014 general election Israeli PM Benjamin Netanyahu personally congratulated Modi. Modi in turn met his Israeli counterpart Benjamin Netanyahu in New York City on the sideline of the UN General Assembly during his US visit in 2014. This was the first meeting between the prime ministers of the two countries in over a decade.

On the occasion of the Hanukkah festival, Indian PM Modi greeted his Israeli counterpart in Hebrew on Twitter while the Israeli PM replied in Hindi . Indian Home Minister Rajnath Singh visited Israel in November 2014 to observe the country's border security arrangements.

During his tour he also met Israeli PM Netanyahu. Breaking from convention, Singh was the first Indian minister to visit Israel without also visiting Palestine on the same trip.

In the same year, former Israeli president Shimon Peres visited India. A high level Israeli delegation with the Agriculture Minister of Israel , Yair Shamir , also participated in the Vibrant Gujarat summit in 2015.

In December 2014, a news article was published in The Hindu which stated that India may end support to Palestine at the UN. 2015 13th President of India Pranab Mukherjee with 10th President of Israel Reuven Rivlin and Nechama Rivlin in 2015 In February 2015 Israeli Defence Minister Moshe Ya'alon came to India .

During his visit he participated in Aero India 2015. He also met his Indian counterpart, as well as the Indian PM. Pranab Mukherjee became the first president of India to visit Israel from 13 to 15 October 2015. Mukherjee was given the rare honour of addressing the Knesset . 2016 Israeli president Reuven Rivlin (left) with Indian prime minister Narendra Modi , during a joint press briefing in New Delhi; November 2016 Foreign Minister Sushma Swaraj visited Israel in January 2016.

During the visit, she visited the Yad Vashem Holocaust Memorial in Jerusalem, and met with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, President Reuven Rivlin, members of the cabinet, and the Indian Jewish communities in Israel.

In September 2016, Indian Minister of Agriculture , Radha Mohan Singh visited Israel to bolster India-Israel agricultural ties. He met his Israeli counterpart Uri Ariel , where the discussion concerned about collaborative opportunities in agriculture between both the countries. Israeli president Reuven Rivlin visited India for a week-long state visit in November 2016, becoming the second Israeli president to visit the country. Rivlin visited New Delhi , Agra , Karnal , Chandigarh and Mumbai . He spent the last day of his visit in Mumbai paying homage to the victims of the 2008 Mumbai attacks , and meeting with the Indian Jewish community. Israel currently regards Iran as a major threat to its national security, and Rivlin expressed this concern in meetings with Prime Minister Modi.

Following his visit, Rivlin told Israeli media that despite growing economic ties with both countries, the Indian government had assured him that India would support Israel despite the former's relations with Iran. Rivlin told The Jerusalem Post , "They assure us that when the time will come they will never, never, ever let anyone act against the existence of Israel." 2021 Israeli prime minister Naftali Bennett meeting Indian prime minister Narendra Modi at COP26 in the city of Glasgow (November 2021) In October 2021, India's Minister of External Affairs , S. Jaishankar , made his first visit to Israel since taking office. 2023 After the October 7 attacks , Israel's ambassador to India, Naor Gilon , highlighted the overwhelming support for Israel from Indians. He stated, "If you look at the Israeli Embassy's social media, it's amazing. I could have another IDF with Indian volunteers. Everyone is telling me that they want to volunteer and go to fight for Israel. This level of support is unprecedented for me.

The closeness between India and Israel is something I cannot explain." Indian prime minister Narendra Modi and his Bharatiya Janata Party took a strong pro-Israel position, which was seen as motivated by a desire to shore up political support from Hindu voters , forge closer ties with the United States which tends to favor Israel, and India's past experiences with terrorism . Indians are consequently widely viewed as being exceptionally supportive of Israel.

At the same time Israelis were widely viewed as being appreciative of the support. A growing diaspora of Indians also fill the ranks of Israel.

By 2024 Indians made up the largest share of foreign students in Israel. They are also a growing source of manual labour. With increased tension between Iran and Israel in 2024, there has been a geopolitical shift by India away from Iran and towards Israel, a long-stated goal of the Hindu nationalists . Official state visits Narendra Modi's visit to Israel (2017) In July 2017, Narendra Modi became the first ever Indian prime minister to visit Israel . It was noted that Prime Minister Modi did not visit Palestine during the trip, breaking from convention. With the sole exception of Union Minister Rajnath Singh, previous trips by Indian ministers and President Mukherjee included visits to both Israel and Palestine.

The Indian media described the move as the dehyphenation of India's relations with the two states.

As a personal gesture, Israel named a new type of Chrysanthemum flower after Narendra Modi .

The media houses of both countries had termed the visit to be historic.

During the visit, India and Israel signed 7 Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs), which are listed as below: MoU for setting up of India-Israel Industrial Research and Development and Technological Innovation Fund ( I4F ) MoU for Water Conservation in India MoU on State Water Utility Reform in India India-Israel Development Cooperation – 3-year work program in Agriculture 2018–2020 Plan of cooperation regarding atomic clocks MoU regarding cooperation in GEO-LEO optical link MoU regarding cooperation in Electric Propulsion for Small Satellites India and Israel also signed an agreement, upgrading their bilateral relations to a strategic partnership.

During the trip, Prime Minister Modi also addressed the Indian diaspora in Israel in a highly televised event in Tel Aviv .

In illustrating an Indian welcome to the Indian diaspora from its homeland, he announced Overseas Citizenship of India cards for Jews of Indian origin who had completed their compulsory military service in the Israel Defense Force and also pledged the construction of a major Indian cultural centre in Tel Aviv. Modi also visited the northern Israeli city of Haifa , where he paid homage to the Indian soldiers of the Indian Army who had fallen to save Jewish land in the Battle of Haifa , and unveiled a special plaque commemorating the steadfast military leadership of Major Dalpat Singh who liberated the ancient city from the Ottoman Empire . Benjamin Netanyahu's visit to India (2018) In January, to commemorate 25 years of Indian-Israeli relations, a highly televised visit of the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu to India took place, during which both Netanyahu and India's prime minister Modi have exchanged mutual applauses. This visit was the first since the 2003 visit of Ariel Sharon to India. Netanyahu, accompanied by a 130-member delegation, the largest that has ever accompanied a visiting Israeli premier, wants to increase exports to India by 25 percent over the three years. Israel is to invest $68.6 million in areas such as tourism, technology, agriculture and innovation over a period of four years, a senior Israeli official had said ahead of the visit.

During this visit, an official commemoration ceremony took place, that honoured the Indian soldiers who perished in the Battle of Haifa during World War I took place, where Teen Murti Chowk, representing the Hyderabad, Jodhpur and Mysore lancers, was renamed 'Teen Murti Haifa Chowk', after the Israeli port city of Haifa .

During the official visit by the Israeli prime minister, the two countries signed 9 MoUs in the fields of cybersecurity, oil & gas production, air transport, homeopathic medicine, film production, space technology and innovation, he also met with the heads of the Bollywood movie industry. Netanyahu's Indian visit also included efforts to revive Rafael missiles for Delhi. Netanyahu was also the guest of honour, and delivered the inaugural address at India's annual strategic and diplomatic conference, Raisina Dialogue , where he highlighted various aspects of Israel 's success story as a high-tech and innovation-based economy, and also spoke about challenges plaguing the Middle East, while expressing hope and optimism for the future of his country's relations with India. Notable leaders who attended his conference included Narendra Modi , Sushma Swaraj , former Afghan president Hamid Karzai , Indian Minister of State M J Akbar and Indian National Congress leader Shashi Tharoor . Netanyahu's son Yair Netanyahu was supposed to accompany the Israeli premier on an Indian state visit, but only a week prior to the visit a scandalous recording about Yair's private visit to a strip club with his friends was disclosed on Israel Television News' main broadcast. Narendra Modi's visit to Israel (2026) Prime Minister Narendra Modi arrived in Israel on February 25, 2026, for a two-day state visit. He was invited by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu . This is the second time an Indian prime minister has visited Israel and includes a scheduled address to the Knesset , the first ever by an Indian leader. Upon landing in Israel, Modi was received by Netanyahu and his wife, with an official ceremony featuring the national anthems of both countries.

The diplomatic agenda focuses on a proposed "Hexagon of Alliances," a strategic framework introduced by Netanyahu to coordinate security and economic efforts among Israel, India, Greece, Cyprus, and other regional partners against what he described as "radical axes".

In relation to defense, the two countries are reviewing their strategic partnership with an emphasis on advanced technology transfers. These discussions reportedly include the integration of Israeli-developed systems, such as the Iron Beam laser-based air defense platform and Iron Dome components, into India's long-term security infrastructure. Exchange of MoUs between India and Israel, in Israel on February 26, 2026.

In addition to military cooperation, the visit addresses economic and civilian ties, including negotiations for a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) and a potential mobility pact for Indian workers in Israel. Modi is also scheduled to meet with President Isaac Herzog and visit the Yad Vashem Holocaust Remembrance Center before holding delegation-level talks to discuss innovation, agriculture, and water management. Military and strategic ties 10th President of Israel (middle) and Chief of General Staff of the Israel Defense Forces Gadi Eizenkot with Prime minister Narendra Modi New Delhi found in the defense industry of Israel a useful source of weapons, one that could supply it with advanced military technology. Thus was established the basis of a burgeoning arms trade, which reached almost $600 million in 2016, making Israel the second-largest source of defense equipment for India, after Russia. India and Israel have increased co-operation in military and intelligence ventures since the establishment of diplomatic relations.

The rise of Islamic extremist terrorism in both nations has generated a strong strategic alliance between the two.

In 2008, India launched a military satellite TecSAR for Israel through its Indian Space Research Organisation .

In 1996, India purchased 32 IAI Searcher unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), Electronic Support Measure sensors and an Air Combat Manoeuvering Instrumentation simulator system from Israel.

Since then Israel Aerospace Industries (IAI) has serviced several large contracts with the Indian Air Force including the upgrading of the IAF's Russian-made MiG-21 ground attack aircraft and there have been further sales of unmanned aerial vehicles as well as laser-guided bombs .

In 1997, Israel's president Ezer Weizman became the first head of the Jewish state to visit India. He met with Indian president Shankar Dayal Sharma , Vice President K R Narayanan and Prime Minister H D Deve Gowda . Weizman negotiated the first weapons deal between the two nations, involving the purchase of Barak-1 vertically launched surface-to-air (SAM) missiles from Israel.

The Barak-1 has the ability to intercept anti-ship missiles such as the Harpoon .

The purchase of the Barak-1 missiles from Israel by India was a tactical necessity since Pakistan had purchased Lockheed P-3 Orion maritime surveillance aircraft and 27 Harpoon sea-skimming anti-ship missiles from the United States. Israel was one of the selected few nations, a group that also included France and Russia, that did not condemn India's 1998 Pokhran-II nuclear tests.

In 1999, Israel supported India in the Kargil war by providing arms and ammunition.

In 2000, Israeli submarines reportedly conducted test launches of cruise missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads in the waters of the Indian Ocean , off the Sri Lankan coast.

In naval terms, Israel sees great strategic value in an alliance with the Indian Navy , given India's naval dominance of South Asian waters and Indian Ocean at large. Due to the great importance of maritime trade to the Israeli economy it thus sees the potential of establishing a logistical infrastructure in the Indian Ocean with the help of the Indian Navy. India purchased three Phalcon AWACS , fitted with IAI radar equipment mounted on Russian IL-76 transport aircraft, in 2003 at cost of $1 billion. India purchased 50 Israeli drones for $220 million in 2005. India was considering buying the newer Harop drone. India is also in the process of obtaining missile-firing Hermes 900. Israel Aerospace Industries Ltd signed a US$2.5 billion deal with India in 2007 to develop an anti-aircraft system and missiles for the country, in the biggest defence contract in the history of Israel at the time. IAI CEO Yitzhak Nissan visited India to finalise the agreement with heads of the defence establishment and the country's president. IAI is developing the Barak 8 missile for the Indian Navy and Indian Air Force which is capable of protecting sea vessels and ground facilities from aircraft and cruise missiles.

The missile has a range of over 70 kilometres.

The missile will replace the current obsolete Russian system used by India.

On 10 November 2008, Indian military officials visited Israel to discuss joint weapons development projects, additional sales of Israeli equipment to the Indian military, and anti-terrorism strategies.

The new round of talks was seen as a significant expansion in the Indian-Israeli strategic partnership.

Following the 2008 Mumbai attacks , Israel offered a team of about 40 special-operations forces and assistance in investigations. Tzipi Livni said: "If they need us we will help where needed". Magen David Adom dispatched a team of paramedics, medics and other professionals to assist with rescue efforts in the wake of the attacks. Israeli newspapers reported that the Manmohan Singh government turned down an offer by Defense Minister Ehud Barak to send counter-terrorist units to help fight the attackers.

In December 2009, Lt Gen Gabi Ashkenazi , Chief of Staff of the Israel Defense Forces , made a visit to India to cement the defence ties between the two countries. He pledged every help to India in fighting terrorism.

In March 2011, it was reported that India would buy 8356 Israeli Spike anti-tank missiles , 321 launchers, 15 training simulators and peripheral equipment, for $1 billion, from Israel's Rafael Advanced Defense Systems .

The deal was finalised by Prime Minister Narendra Modi after coming into office. INS Trikand entering the port of Haifa, Israel, 19 August 2015 In September 2015, the Indian government approved the air force's request to purchase 10 Heron TP drones from Israel Aerospace Industries (IAI).

The date and location were not announced.

In September 2016, the Indian government approved the purchase of two more Phalcon AWACS.

In 2017, the countries signed a military agreement worth US$2 billion.

In 2017, India participated in the Blue Flag exercise in Uvda Air Force Base in southern Israel for the first time, where it deployed its elite and Garud Commando Force and a Hercules C-130J plane from its "Veiled Vipers" Squadron. Indian and Israeli special forces conducted a range of tactical joint exercises, which included protection of strategic assets, ground infiltration and evacuation.

The Indian Air Force sent five Dassault Mirage 2000 fighter aircraft to participate in Blue Flag 2021.

The Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) and the Directorate of Defence Research and Development (DDR&D) signed a Bilateral Innovation Agreement on 9 November 2021.

The agreement facilitates the joint production of defence technology such as drones, robotics, artificial intelligence, quantum technology and other areas. Production will be jointly funded by both agencies and all technologies developed under the agreement will be available for use by both India and Israel. Intelligence-sharing cooperation When the Research and Analysis Wing (RAW) was founded in September 1968 by R.N. Kao , he was advised by then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi to cultivate links with Mossad . This was suggested as a countermeasure to military links between that of Pakistan and China, as well as with North Korea . Israel was also concerned that Pakistani army officers were training Libyans and Iranians in handling Chinese and North Korean military equipments. Pakistan believed intelligence relations between India and Israel threatened Pakistani security.

When young Israeli tourists began visiting the Kashmir valley in the early 1990s, Pakistan suspected they were disguised Israeli army officers there to help Indian security forces with anti-terrorism operations. Israeli tourists were attacked, with one slain and another kidnapped. Pressure from the Kashmiri Muslim diaspora in the United States led to the kidnapped tourist's eventual release. Kashmiri Muslims feared that the attacks could isolate the American Jewish community, and result in them lobbying the US government against Kashmiri separatist groups. A Rediff story in 2003 revealed clandestine links between R&AW and Mossad.

In 1996, R.K. Yadav, a former RAW official had filed a disproportionate assets case in the Delhi High Court against Anand Kumar Verma, RAW chief between 1987 and 1990. Yadav listed eight properties that he claimed were purchased illegally by Verma using RAW's unaudited funds for secret operations.

Although his petition for a CBI inquiry into Verma's properties was dismissed, Yadav managed to obtain more information through a right to information request in 2005 and filed another case in 2009.

In 2013, the CBI carried out an investigation of Verma's properties. Proceedings in the Delhi High Court revealed the names of two companies operated by RAW in 1988 – Piyush Investments and Hector Leasing and Finance Company Ltd.

The firms were headed by two senior RAW officials V. Balachandran and B. Raman. Balachandran and Raman retired in 1994 and 1995 respectively.

The companies were listed as trading houses that dealt in several kinds of minerals, automobiles, textiles, metals and spare parts, and also claimed to produce feature films.

The companies purchased two flats in Gauri Sadan, a residential building on Hailey Road, New Delhi in March 1989 for ₹ 23 lakh. India Today reported that the two flats were RAW safe houses used as operational fronts for Mossad agents and housed Mossad's station chief between 1989 and 1992. RAW had reportedly decided to have closer ties to Mossad, and the subsequent secret operation was approved by then Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi . India Today cites "RAW insiders" as saying that RAW agents hid a Mossad agent holding an Argentine passport and exchanged intelligence and expertise in operations, including negotiations for the release of an Israeli tourist by the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front militants in June 1991.

When asked about the case Verma refused to speak about the companies, but claimed his relationship with them was purely professional. Raman stated, "Sometimes, spy agencies float companies for operational reasons. All I can say is that everything was done with government approval. Files were cleared by the then prime minister and his cabinet secretary. Balachandran stated, "It is true that we did a large number of operations but at every stage, we kept the Cabinet Secretariat and the prime minister in the loop." In November 2015, The Times of India reported that agents from Mossad and MI5 were protecting Prime Minister Narendra Modi during his visit to Turkey. Modi was on a state visit to the United Kingdom and was scheduled to attend the 2015 G-20 Summit in Antalya, Turkey.

The paper reported that the agents had been called in to provide additional cover to Modi's security detail, composed of India's Special Protection Group and secret agents from RAW and IB, in wake of the November 2015 Paris attacks .

On 14 February 2019 , a convoy of vehicles carrying security personnel on the Jammu-Srinagar National Highway was attacked by a vehicle-borne suicide bomber at Lethpora in the Pulwama district, Jammu and Kashmir, India. 40 Central Reserve Police Force personals were killed by the bomber. Israel responded to India, offering unconditional support to the Indian Army and the Government. Israel has informed that they will share intelligence and technology to help India respond.

Following the Pahalgam attack on 22 April 2025, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu condemned the incident as "barbaric" and affirmed that Israel stands with India in its fight against terrorism, with similar messages of solidarity echoed by Israel's Foreign Minister.

After India's Operation Sindoor on 7 May, Israel's Ambassador to India, Reuven Azar, reiterated support for India's right to self-defense, stating that terrorists must know there is no safe haven for those committing heinous crimes against the innocent. Bilateral trade The Israeli headquarters of the State Bank of India , located in Ramat Gan , Tel Aviv District Bilateral trade between India and Israel grew from $200 million in 1992 to $4.52 billion in 2014.

As of 2014, India is Israel's tenth-largest trade partner and import source, and seventh-largest export destination. India's major exports to Israel include precious stones and metals, organic chemicals, electronic equipment, plastics, vehicles, machinery, engines, pumps, clothing and textiles, and medical and technical equipment. Israel's imports from India amounted to $2.3 billion or 3.2% of its overall imports in 2014. Israel's major exports to India include precious stones and metals, electronic equipment, fertilisers, machines, engines, pumps, medical and technical equipment, organic and inorganic chemicals, salt, sulphur, stone, cement, and plastics. Israeli exports to India amounted to $2.2 billion or 3.2% of its overall exports in 2014.

The two countries have also signed a 'Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement'.

In 2007, Israel proposed starting negotiations on a free trade agreement with India, and in 2010, then Indian prime minister Manmohan Singh accepted that proposal.

The agreement is set to focus on many key economic sectors, including information technology, biotechnology, water management, pharmaceuticals, and agriculture.

In 2013, then Israeli Minister of Economy Naftali Bennett projected a doubling of trade from $5 to $10 billion between the two countries, if a free trade agreement was successfully negotiated.

As of 2015, negotiations on a free trade agreement continue, with both countries considering negotiating a more narrow free trade agreement on goods, followed by separate agreements on trade in investment and services.

Following the coronavirus pandemic, on 9 April 2020, India exported to Israel a five-ton shipment of drugs and chemicals.

The consignment included ingredients for the drugs hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine.

On this occasion, Sanjeev Singla, India's then ambassador to Israel, stressed the bilateral ties between both the countries. It was in March 2020, that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu asked Modi to exempt Israel from the export ban on raw materials used to make medicines which would help in treating the patients affected with coronavirus. Israel will be sending life-saving equipment including oxygen generators and respirators to India throughout the week to assist it in the fight against coronavirus .

The 10 major commodities exported from India to Israel were: Gems , precious metals and coins: $973.6 million Organic chemicals : $296.5 million Electronic equipment : $121.2 million Medical, technical equipment: $59.3 million Plastics : $56.4 million Vehicles : $44.4 million Machinery : $38.1 million Other textiles, worn clothing: $31.8 million Knit or crochet clothing: $31.6 million Clothing (not knit or crochet): $30.8 million Israeli exports to India amounted to $2.3 billion or 3.8% of its overall exports in 2015.

The 10 major commodities exported from Israel to India were: Gems , precious metals and coins: $933.7 million Electronic equipment : $389.3 million Medical, technical equipment: $180.7 million Iron or steel products: $170.3 million Fertilisers : $157 million Machinery : $110.9 million Organic chemicals : $69.8 million Other chemical goods: $44.2 million Inorganic chemicals : $43.6 million Plastics : $29.5 million Science and technology collaboration In 1993, during the visit to India of then Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres , India and Israel signed an agreement on science and technology, which allowed for direct scientific cooperation between both governments. Specific areas of cooperation included information technology , biotechnology , lasers , and electro-optics . Additionally, a joint committee to monitor collaboration between the two nations was established and set to meet biennially.

In 1994, a $3 million joint science and technology fund was set up to facilitate R&D collaboration between both countries.

In 1996, Indian scientists attended a seminar on advanced materials in Israel.

In 1997, Israeli scientists attended a seminar on biotechnology in Delhi .

In 1998, India and Israel had 22 ongoing joint research projects. A joint symposium on the human genome was held in Jerusalem , where six Indian scientists took part.

In November 1999, India and Israel agreed on four proposals for joint research projects in the field of human genome research.

In 2000, even more joint projects related to human genome research were agreed on, and a status seminar on this field was held in India.

In early 1999, more than 20 Israeli scientists participated in a physics symposium on condensed matter in Delhi.

In 2001, a similar symposium was held in Jerusalem, with 18 Indian scientists attending.

In 2003, both countries discussed doubling their investment in their ongoing science and technology collaboration to $1 million each, starting in October 2004.

In 2005, India and Israel signed a memorandum of understanding to set up a fund to encourage bilateral investment into industrial research and development and specific projects. Under the agreement, at least one Indian and one Israeli company must be collaborating on a project for that project to qualify for the fund.

From 2006 to 2014, the fund, named i4RD, has been used in seven projects.

In 2012, the two countries signed a five-year $50 million academic research agreement for promoting collaborative research across a wide range of disciplines, including medical and information technology, social and life sciences, humanities, and the arts.

In 2012, Israel stated its intent to increase technological and economic cooperation with the Indian state of Bihar , in the fields of agriculture, water management, solar energy, and medical insurance.

In 2014, Israel made plans to open two agricultural centers of excellence in Bihar, focusing on increasing productivity of vegetable and mango crops. Israel has offered to help the India government with a project to clean the Ganga. An Israeli delegation visited India in August 2015 and met with officials of the Union Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation. Israeli ambassador to India Daniel Carmon also called on Union Urban Development and Parliamentary Affairs Minister M. Venkaiah Naidu to offer Israel's expertise in water management to battle water scarcity . Ohad Horsandi, spokesperson of the Israeli Embassy in New Delhi stated that Israel was keen to help in India meet its water needs for agriculture and drinking, and was pushing for more government-to-government agreements.

Following Prime Minister Modi's visit to Israel in 2017, there has been an increased call for collaboration between Israel and India on innovation development.

The non-profit Indian based global trade body NASSCOM , along with the professional service company Accenture , released the report Collaborative Innovation: The Vehicle Driving Indo-Israel Prosperity , to highlight areas of scientific and technological collaboration between the two countries. Additionally, the non-profit organization TAVtech Ventures is launching a program that connect students from Israel and the United States with local Indian students to come up with tech-based startups. Space collaboration In 2002, India and Israel signed a cooperative agreement promoting space collaboration between both nations.

In 2003, the Israel Space Agency , or ISA, expressed interest in collaborating with the Indian Space Research Organisation , or ISRO, in using satellites for improved management of land and other resources. Israel also expressed interest in participating in ISRO's proposed mission of sending an unmanned craft to the moon. Additionally, the two countries signed an agreement outlining the deployment of TAUVEX , an Israeli space telescope array, on India's GSAT-4 , a planned navigation and communication satellite.

In 2010, the TAUVEX array was removed from GSAT-4 by the ISRO, and the array was never subsequently launched.

The GSAT-4 itself failed to launch, due to the failure of its cryogenic engine .

In 2005, Israel decided to launch TecSAR , its first synthetic aperture radar imaging satellite, on India's Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle , or PSLV. TecSAR was chosen to launch through India's PSLV due to Israeli concerns about the reliability and technical limitations of its own Shavit space launch vehicle, economic considerations, and also due to Israel's desire to increase strategic cooperation with India.

In 2008, TecSAR was successfully inserted into orbit by India's PSLV. One of TecSAR's primary functions is to monitor Iran's military activities.

In 2009, India successfully launched RISAT-2 , a synthetic aperture radar imaging satellite. RISAT-2 was manufactured by Israel Aerospace Industries , or IAI, in conjunction with ISRO.

The launch of the RISAT-2 satellite aimed to provide India with greater earth observation power, which would improve disaster management, and increase surveillance and defense capabilities.

The acquisition and subsequent launch of the RISAT-2 satellite was accelerated after the 2008 Mumbai attacks , to boost India's future surveillance capabilities. Agriculture collaboration India has chosen Israel as a strategic partner (G2G) in the field of agriculture.This partnership evolved into the Indo-Israel Agricultural Project (IIAP), under the Indo Israel Action Plan, based on a MOU signed by Indian and Israeli ministers of Agriculture in 2006.

The partnership aim to introduce crop diversity, increasing productivity & increasing water use efficiency. IIAP has been initiated in 2009 after signing a bilateral agreement between Indian and Israeli ministers of Agriculture (2006). IIAP is implemented via establishment of Centers of Excellence (CoE), in which Israeli Technologies and know-how are disseminated tailored to local Indian conditions. Till date three phases of IIAP has been channeled. Each IIAP phase lasts for three years (2009–2012; 2012–2015, 2015–2018).Within the 16 States that has been invited to take part in the IIAP, 22 CoE's are currently into the fully active stage. Acknowledging the success of MIDH MASHAV IIAP Program as implemented during the last decade a three-year work program in Agriculture" 2018–2020 was signed between the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmer's Welfare of the Republic of India and Mashav - Ministry of Foreign Affairs Israel to increase the value chain demonstrated with the fully operative Indo-Israel Center of Excellence by introducing new components including the Indo-Israeli Centre of Excellence for Animal Husbandary & Dairying, Hisar . Center of Excellence (CoE) is a platform for knowledge transfer and Israeli Agro-Technology.

As a goal the CoE aims to serve the farmer with a focus on a key crop. Each CoE is composed of Nursery management, Cultivation techniques, and Irrigation and fertigation. Also in 2008, Israel and India finalised an agricultural plan introducing crops native to the Middle East and Mediterranean to India, with a particular focus on olives . Subsequently, around 112,000 olive trees were planted in the desert of Rajasthan .

In 2014, more than 100 tonnes of olives were produced in Rajasthan. Workforce collaboration Israel is conducting a recruitment drive in India to address its growing demand for skilled construction workers. This initiative, facilitated by a government-to-government agreement, is focused on recruiting up to 10,000 Indian workers.

The recruitment process is taking place at various locations across India, including the Industrial Training Institute in Aundh, Pune.

The Indian government is supporting this effort by providing infrastructure and logistical assistance. This recruitment drive offers Indian workers the opportunity for international employment and competitive salaries. To date, thousands of Indian workers have already been deployed to Israel. Oil and natural gas sector cooperation With the recent discovery of the Tamar and Levianthan gas fields off the coast of Israel, India has been one of the first countries to bid for an exploration license in order to extract and import natural gas from the fields. India's ONGC Videsh , Bharat PetroResources, Indian Oil and Oil India were awarded an exploration license by the Israeli government, a clear sign of the ongoing diversification in ties between the two countries. Cultural ties and cross-country perceptions In 2011, cultural artists and performers from India arrived in Israel to participate in a three-week festival commemorating 20 years of diplomatic relations between the two countries. According to India's then ambassador to Israel Navtej Sarna , the purpose of the festival was to improve the bilateral relationship between the two countries by facilitating a greater understanding of each other's culture. According to a 2009 international study commissioned by the Israeli Foreign Ministry , the greatest level of sympathy towards Israel can be found in India, with 58% of Indian respondents showing sympathy towards Israel.

As reported in 2015, opinion polls taken in India showed 70% and above of respondents had favorable views of Israel.

In 2015, the United Nations General Assembly voted unanimously in favour of adopting 21 June as International Yoga Day .

In a clear sign of growing affinity between the two countries, the Indian Embassy in Tel Aviv organizes annual yoga day celebrations, where Israelis from all walks of life take part in various yogic exercises. Yoga has proven to be immensely popular in Israel and is a sign of Israel's cultural connection to India.

In 2019, Israel was a country partner at an event scheduled to be held in the central university Jamia Millia Islamia . Israel's involvement was protested against by students for their "occupation of Palestine." The university relented and announced that "it would not allow Israeli delegates to take part in events on the campus in future." Some Members of Parliament (MPs) had also lent support to the protesting students.

The teachers association at Jamia had in 2014 protested against the Israeli offensive in Gaza and were joined by various activists, academicians, human rights defenders and members of civil society. Tourism A Hebrew Chabad sign in Kasol , Himachal Pradesh , India Around 40,000 Israelis, many of whom have just finished military service , visit India annually. There are dozens of Chabad -operated community centers in India, where many Israelis celebrate holidays and observe religious traditions. Popular destinations for Israelis include Goa , the Himalayas , Manali , Vashisht , Naggar , Kasol , and the villages surrounding Dharamsala .

In many of these areas, Hebrew signs on businesses and public transportation are widely noticeable.

The number of tourists from India visiting Israel touched 15,900 in the year 2000.

By 2010, the number of tourists had increased to 43,439.

In 2014, the number of tourists from India visiting Israel was 34,900. A popular destination for Indian tourists traveling to Israel is Jerusalem .

In part of 2010, Indian tourists were the biggest spenders in Israel, spending an average of $1,364 per tourist; the average tourist expenditure in Israel during this time was $1,091.

In 2011, representatives from both countries met in Delhi, and planned to enhance tourism through collaboration in the spheres of destination management and promotion, as well as in manpower development. Plans for tour-operators and travel agents in both countries to coordinate were also discussed.

In 2015, 600 travel agents from India arrived in Israel for the annual Travel Agents Federation of India conference, and ways to decrease barriers to tourism were discussed. Currently, El Al flies between Tel Aviv and Mumbai, Air India flies between Delhi and Tel Aviv, and Arkia flies between Tel Aviv and Kochi as well as Tel Aviv and Goa .

In March 2018, Air India, operating flight number AI139, became the first airline to fly non-stop from New Delhi to Tel Aviv , via the airspace of Saudi Arabia , overturning an overfly ban on flights to Israel that had lasted 70 years. Currently, Air India is the only airline in the world that has been given such permission, and indicates a behind-the-scenes improvement in relations between Israel and the Arab world.

The new flight takes approximately 7 hours to traverse the distance between India and Israel, which is 2 hours and 10 minutes shorter than the route taken by El Al from Mumbai to Tel Aviv.

In recent days, the success of the route has prompted the airline to increase the frequency of flights to one each day.

In recent months, Israel has observed a constant rise in the number of Indian tourists to the country. Towards an additional effort to boost tourism from India, the Israeli government has simplified visa procedures for Indians who have already availed visas from either Canada , Australia , United States , Schengen countries or Israel and have completed their travel to these countries. Visa processing fees for Indian applicants has also been reduced from the original 1700 to 1100.

In the year 2017, Indian tourist arrivals to Israel rose by 31%, with over 60,000 tourists visiting the country that year. Israel plans to meet a target of over 100,000 Indian tourists for the year 2018.

From 1 January 2025, the Ministry of Tourism of Israel has launched a digital e-visa system for Indian travellers. This initiative aligns with Israel's broader strategy to enhance tourism ties with India, a rapidly growing market for international visitors. Interfaith relations Further information: Hinduism and Judaism In February 2007, the first Jewish-Hindu interfaith leadership summit was held in New Delhi .

The summit included the then Chief Rabbi of Israel Yona Metzger , the American Jewish Committee 's International Director of Interreligious Affairs David Rosen , a delegation of chief rabbis from around the world, and Hindu leaders from India.

During the summit, Rabbi Metzger stated that Jews have lived in India for over 2,000 years and have never been discriminated against. This is something unparalleled in human history.

In August 2007, amidst protests, a delegation of Indian Muslim leaders and journalists traveled to Israel.

The visit was touted as a dialogue of democracies, and was organised by the American Jewish Committee's India office.

During this trip, Maulana Jameel Ahmed Ilyasi, the then secretary-general of the All-India Association of Imams and Mosques, praised the mutual respect Israeli Arabs and Israeli Jews have for each other, and encouraged resolving problems by dialogue rather than violence. Muslim leaders met with then president Shimon Peres , where Peres highlighted the coexistence of religions in Jerusalem and India's struggle with terror and separatism.

In 2008, a second Hindu-Jewish summit took place in Jerusalem. Included in the summit was a meeting between Hindu groups and then Israeli president Shimon Peres , where the importance of a strong Israeli-Indian relationship was discussed.

The Hindu delegation also met with Israeli politicians Isaac Herzog and Majalli Wahabi . Hindu groups visited and said their prayers at the Western Wall , and also paid their respects to Holocaust victims.

In 2009, a smaller Hindu-Jewish interfaith meeting organised by the Hindu American Foundation and the American Jewish Committee was held in New York City and Washington . Hindu and Jewish representatives gave presentations, and participants wore lapel pins combining the Israeli, Indian, and American flags.

In November 2012, Israeli president Shimon Peres remarked, "I think India is the greatest show of how so many differences in language, in sects can coexist facing great suffering and keeping full freedom." In 2019, a large scale summit to further boost Hindu-Jewish cultural ties was organized by Indo-Israel Friendship Association in Mumbai . Many important leaders like Subramanian Swamy attended the event. Judaism in India Main article: Judaism in India Further information: Indian Jews in Israel Jewish immigrants arriving at Kochi in 68 AD A Bene Israel family in Bombay (c. late 19th century) Interior of the Magen David Synagogue in Kolkata The history of the Jewish people in India dates back to ancient times. Judaism was one of the first foreign religions to arrive in India in recorded history . Indian Jews are a religious minority of India, but unlike many parts of the world, have historically lived in India without any instances of antisemitism from the local majority populace, the Hindus .

The better-established ancient communities have assimilated a large number of local traditions through cultural diffusion .

The Jewish population in India is hard to estimate since each Jewish community is distinct with different origins; while some allegedly arrived during the time of the Kingdom of Judah , others are seen by some as descendants of Israel's Ten Lost Tribes .

In addition to Jewish expatriates and recent immigrants, there are several distinct Jewish groups in India: Cochin Jews , also called Malabar Jews , are of Mizrahi and Sephardi heritage. They are the oldest group of Jews in India, with possible roots claimed to date to the time of King Solomon .

The Cochin Jews settled in the Kingdom of Cochin in South India .

The so-called Spanish and Portuguese Jews , Paradesi Jews and British Jews arrived at Madras during the 16th century, mainly as traders and diamond businessmen. They also have a large presence in the former Portuguese colony of Goa , where the Goan Inquisition was initiated in 1560.

The Bene Israel arrived in the state of Maharashtra 900 years ago. Another branch of the Bene Israel community, resided in Karachi until the Partition of India in 1947, when they fled to India (in particular: Mumbai). Many of them also moved to Israel .

The Jews from Sindh , Punjab or Pathan area are often incorrectly called Bani Israel Jews.

The Jewish community who used to reside in other parts of what became Pakistan (such as Lahore or Peshawar ) also fled to India in 1947, in a similar manner to the larger Karachi Jewish community.

The Baghdadi Jews arrived in the city of Surat from Iraq (and other Arab states), Iran and Afghanistan about 250 years ago.

The Bnei Menashe are Mizo and Kuki tribesmen in Manipur and Mizoram who are recent converts to Judaism.

The Bene Ephraim (also called Telugu Jews) are a small group who speak Telugu ; their observance of Judaism dates to 1981.

The majority of Indian Jews have made Aliyah (migrated) to Israel since the creation of the modern state in 1948. Over 70,000 Indian Jews now live in Israel (over 1% of Israel's total population). Of the remaining 5,000, the largest community is concentrated in Mumbai , where 3,500 have stayed over from the over 30,000 Jews registered there in the 1940s, divided into Bene Israel and Baghdadi Jews , though the Baghdadi Jews refused to recognize the B'nei Israel as Jews, and withheld dispensing charity to them for that reason. There are reminders of Jewish localities in Kerala still left such as synagogues.

In the beginning of the 21st century, new Jewish communities have been established in Mumbai, New Delhi, Bangalore, and other cities in India.

The new communities have been established by the Chabad-Lubavitch movement which has sent rabbis to create those communities.

The communities serve the religious and social needs of Jewish business people who have immigrated to or are visiting India, and Jewish backpackers touring India.

The Times of India . Retrieved 5 July 2017 . ^ Basu, Nayanima (12 February 2015). "India, Israel FTA not likely to be signed soon" . Business Standard . Retrieved 5 July 2017 . ^ Wilkes, Tommy (18 February 2015). "Israeli defense minister lands at India airshow to boost arms sales" . Reuters . Retrieved 29 April 2015 . ^ Essa, Azad (31 May 2022). "India and Israel: The arms trade in charts and numbers" . Middle East Eye . Retrieved 25 September 2023 . ^ "India to hold wide-ranging strategic talks with US, Israel" .

The Times of India . 19 January 2010 . Retrieved 29 April 2015 . ^ "India (IND) and Israel (ISR) Trade" .

The Observatory of Economic Complexity . Retrieved 26 September 2024 . ^ Boudreaux, Richard (29 November 2008). "Israel has 'no doubt' citizens were targeted" . Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 29 April 2015 . ^ a b Lal, Neeta (21 April 2009). "India's eye in the sky takes aim" . Asia Times . Archived from the original on 21 April 2009 . Retrieved 5 November 2015 . ^ THE GUJARAT EARTHQUAKE 2001 , Asian Disaster Reduction Center ^ Eichner, Itamar (22 June 2024). "Support and drones supplies: India's close relations with Israel" . Ynetnews . Retrieved 26 September 2024 . ^ a b "The Coming Drift in India-Iran Relations" . thediplomat.com . Retrieved 4 October 2024 . ^ a b "How PM Modi is realising RSS idea of India-Israel friendship" . India Today . 17 October 2023 . Retrieved 4 October 2024 . ^ Eichner, Itamar (4 March 2009). "From India with love" . Ynet News . Retrieved 5 July 2017 . 58% of Indian respondents showed sympathy to the Jewish State .

The United States came in second, with 56% of American respondents sympathizing with Israel . Other countries that showed significant sympathy to Israel included Russia (52%) Mexico (52%) and China (50%).

At the bottom of the list, the study ranked Britain (34%) France (27%) and Spain (23%) as the least sympathetic countries towards Israel. ^ Samuels, Ben. "Israel Views India More Favorably Than Any Country in the World, Survey Finds" . ^ Scott, Ashley; Power, Robert C.; Altmann-Wendling, Victoria; Artzy, Michal; Martin, Mario A. S.; Eisenmann, Stefanie; Hagan, Richard; Salazar-García, Domingo C.; Salmon, Yossi; Yegorov, Dmitry; Milevski, Ianir (12 January 2021). "Exotic foods reveal contact between South Asia and the Near East during the second millennium BCE" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 118 (2) e2014956117. Bibcode : 2021PNAS..11814956S . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2014956117 . hdl : 10550/76877 . ISSN 0027-8424 . PMC 7812755 . PMID 33419922 . ^ Hananya Goodman (1994). Between Jerusalem and Benares: Comparative Studies in Judaism and Hinduism . SUNY Press. p. 28. ISBN 978-0-7914-1715-7 . ^ The Bible in Basic English . Cambridge University Press. 1956. p. 349. ^ Catherine Cornille.

The Wiley-Blackwell Companion to Inter-Religious Dialogue . Wiley. p. 417. ^ Hananya Goodman (1994). Between Jerusalem and Benares: Comparative Studies in Judaism and Hinduism . SUNY Press. p. 25. ISBN 978-0-7914-1715-7 . ^ Hananya Goodman (1994). Between Jerusalem and Benares: Comparative Studies in Judaism and Hinduism . SUNY Press. pp. 25– 30. ISBN 978-0-7914-1715-7 . ^ "פרופ' מאיר בר-אילן: Major trends in Jewish Society in the Land of Israel: From the 5th century BCE till the 7th century CE" . Archived from the original on 21 May 2022 . Retrieved 23 May 2020 . ^ a b c Kumaraswamy, P. R. (January 1995). "India's Recognition of Israel, September 1950". Middle Eastern Studies . 31 (1). Taylor & Francis, Ltd. : 124– 138. doi : 10.1080/00263209508701044 . JSTOR 4283702 . ^ a b c Panter-Brick, Simone (5 January 2009). "Gandhi's Views on the Resolution of the Conflict in Palestine: A Note". Middle Eastern Studies . 45 (1). Routledge : 127– 133. doi : 10.1080/00263200802547719 . S2CID 143820059 . ^ Fischer, Louis (1 December 2006). Mahatma Gandhi/His Life & Times (PDF) . Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan . p. 479. ISBN 978-81-7276-306-0 . Retrieved 5 May 2015 . ^ Bishku, Michael (Winter 2011). "India's Israel Policy (review)" . Middle East Journal . 65 (1). Middle East Institute . Retrieved 5 May 2015 . ^ a b Mohandas, Gandhi (26 November 1938). "The Jews" . Harijan . 6 (42) . Retrieved 30 April 2015 . ^ Mohandas, Gandhi (21 July 1946). "Jews and Palestine" . Harijan . 10 (24) . Retrieved 5 May 2015 . ^ Moses, Nissim (29 October 2019). "Gandhi was not a Zionist" .

The Jerusalem Post . Archived from the original on 22 November 2020 . Retrieved 26 November 2020 . ^ "Einstein's other theory" .

The Guardian . 16 February 2005. ^ "Narendra Modi ends India's Israel dilemma, 70 years after Einstein urged Nehru to support Jewish cause" . 4 July 2017. ^ "From Gandhi to Tagore, A Look at Einstein's 'Desi' Connections" . 14 March 2018. ^ "What Einstein told Nehru" . Rediff.com . ^ "Future government of Palestine: resolution / adopted by the General Assembly" . UN Bibliographic Information System. 29 November 1947. Archived from the original on 17 January 2016 . Retrieved 24 June 2015 . ^ "Admission of Israel to membership in the United Nations: resolution / adopted by the General Assembly" . UN Bibliographic Information System. 5 May 1949. Archived from the original on 17 January 2016 . Retrieved 24 June 2015 . ^ Abhyankar, Rajendra (March 2012). "The Evolution and Future of India-Israel Relations" (PDF) .

The S. Daniel Abraham Center for International and Regional Studies. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 November 2015 . Retrieved 6 November 2015 . ^ Savarkar, S.S.; Joshi, G.M., eds. (28 May 1967). Historic Statements by Savarkar (PDF) . G.P. Parchure. pp. 135– 136. ^ Jaffrelot, Christophe, ed. (2007). Hindu Nationalism: A Reader (PDF) . Princeton University Press . p. 108. ISBN 978-0-691-13098-9 . ^ Elst, Koenraad (18 February 2015). Return of the Swastika: Hate and Hysteria versus Hindu Sanity . Voice of India . p. 204. ISBN 978-81-85990-79-8 . ^ "RAW & Mossad: The Secret Link" . Rediff.com . ^ Abandi, Jacob (2004). Israel's Quest for Recognition and Acceptance in Asia Garrison State Diplomacy . Taylor & Francis. p. 273. ^ "Israel secretly provided arms to India in 1971: Book" .

The Times of India . November 2013. ^ Bass, Gary (2013).

The Blood Telegram: Nixon, Kissinger, and a Forgotten Genocide . Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-307-70020-9 . Archived from the original on 27 June 2023 . Retrieved 12 October 2023 . ^ a b c Aafreedi, Navras (2012). "The Impact of Domestic Politics on India's Attitudes towards Israel and Jews" .

In Singh, Priya; Susmita, Bhattacharya (eds.). Perspectives on West Asia: The Evolving Geopolitical Discourses . Shipra Publications. pp. 171– 183. ISBN 978-81-7541-637-6 . ^ Naaz, Farah (2000). "Indo-Israel military cooperation". Strategic Analysis . 24 (5). Routledge : 969– 985. doi : 10.1080/09700160008455261 . S2CID 154177438 . ^ a b c d Pant, Harsh V. (December 2004). "India-Israel Partnership: Convergence and Constraints" (PDF) . Middle East Review of International Affairs . 8 (4). Rubin Center for Research in International Affairs: 60– 73. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 November 2015 . Retrieved 2 November 2015 . ^ B., Raman (2007).

The kaoboys of R & AW: down memory lane . New Delhi: Lancer. ISBN 978-0-9796174-3-0 . OCLC 164636265 . ^ "Israeli help and Indian jugaad in recapture of Tiger Hill" .

The Indian Express . 5 July 2017 . Retrieved 5 July 2017 . ^ Roche, Elizabeth (7 December 2017). "India differs with US on Jerusalem as capital of Israel" . Mint . Retrieved 8 December 2017 . ^ "How Israel helped India during the Kargil war" . India Today . 5 July 2017. ^ "Bilateral Relations: Historical Overview" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Retrieved 28 November 2008 . ^ c.f. C. Jaffrelot, op.cit. ^ c.f. A Financial Times article Archived 28 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine . ^ "What is India's de-hyphenation policy toward Israel and why does it matter?" .

The Jerusalem Post . 18 January 2018. ISSN 0792-822X . Retrieved 11 July 2024 . ^ "Why Modi's India aligns more closely with Israel than with Palestinians" . Al Jazeera . 3 August 2014 . Retrieved 16 September 2014 . ^ "Gaza crisis: Modi govt's UNHRC vote against Israel must be lauded" . Firstpost . 25 July 2014 . Retrieved 16 September 2014 . ^ Haidar, Suhasini (3 July 2015). "India abstains from UNHRC vote against Israel" .

The Hindu . ^ IANS (4 July 2015). "Warming ties: Israel thanks India for abstaining on UNHRC vote" . Business Standard India . ^ "Here's why Hindu nationalists aspire to Israel's "ethnic democracy" " . 15 February 2019. ^ "India-Israel Ties Set to Blossom Under Modi" . 22 May 2014. ^ "Israel's Arms Sales to India: Bedrock of a Strategic Partnership – Analysis" . Eurasia Review . 9 September 2019. ^ "India backs Israel to keep Palestinian group out of UN bodies" . Hindustan Times . 11 June 2019 . Retrieved 11 June 2019 . ^ Mishra, Harinder (16 August 2022). "Israeli leaders highlight growing influence of India on 75 years of Independence" . ThePrint . Retrieved 17 August 2022 . ^ "President Isaac Herzog holds diplomatic working meeting with Indian Foreign Minister Dr. Subrahmanyam Jaishankar" . GOV.IL . Retrieved 17 August 2022 . ^ Laskar, Rezaul H (28 October 2023). "India explains why it abstained in UN vote on Israel-Hamas conflict" . Hindustan Times . ^ Elmusa, Sharif (1 February 2024). "A Palestinian Gandhi or an Israeli de Gaulle? Why the Context of Violence Matters" .

The Cairo Review of Global Affairs . Retrieved 27 February 2025 . ^ Miller, Manjari Chatterjee (9 October 2023). "Modi's Statement on the Israel Crisis Demonstrates a Transformed India-Israel Bilateral Relationship" . Council on Foreign Relations . Retrieved 27 February 2025 . ^ "PM's silence on Israel's genocide in Gaza has diminished India's moral standing: Congress" .

The Hindu . 24 June 2025. ^ Nath, Sanstuti, ed. (7 May 2025). "How World Leaders Reacted To Indian Strikes On Terror Camps In Pakistan" . NDTV . ^ Marsi, Federica (26 June 2024). "India exports rockets, explosives to Israel amid Gaza war, documents reveal" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 11 October 2024 . ^ "India-Made Drones in Gaza? New Delhi Delivers 'Killer' Hermes 900 to Israel | Report" . Hindustan Times . 13 February 2024 . Retrieved 11 October 2024 . ^ Saballa, Joe (26 June 2024). "India Supplying Israel with Weapons 'to Return Favor': Reports" .

The Defense Post . Retrieved 11 October 2024 . ^ "Spain refuses docking to ship carrying weapons for Israel" . Independent.co.uk . 17 May 2024. ^ "Spain denies port of call to ship carrying arms to Israel" .

The Times of Israel . Reuters . Retrieved 13 July 2024 . ^ Badcock, James (17 May 2024). "Spain blocks ship carrying weapons to Israel from docking" .

The Telegraph . ^ a b "Rivlin to JPost: India won't let anyone threaten Israel's right to exist" .

The Jerusalem Post . 23 November 2016 . Retrieved 25 November 2016 . ^ "Advani meets Israeli President" .

The Hindu . 15 June 2000 . Retrieved 6 July 2017 . ^ Peres Visit Highlights Growing Ties Between Israel and New Ally India Archived 18 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine , United Jewish Communities ^ India/Israel , fas.org ^ Jaswant to visit Israel to boost bilateral ties Archived 20 March 2006 at the Wayback Machine , The Daily Excelsior ^ Ariel Sharon's India visit , rediff.com ^ Ariel Sharon arrives in India , Rediff.com ^ Left wants 'killer' Sharon to go home , Rediff.com ^ a b c India and Israel vow to fight terrorism , BBC News ^ "AMU students protest against Sharon's visit" . Rediff.com . Retrieved 17 June 2013 . ^ "RSS slams Left for opposing Sharon's visit" . Rediff.com . Retrieved 17 June 2013 . ^ "RSS slams Left for opposing Sharon's visit" . 20 July 2012. {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Sharon's visit will consolidate ties PM , rediff.com ^ Sharon invites Vajpayee to Israel , rediff.com ^ Talk to Palestine, Israel tells India Rediff – 9 February 2006 ^ Archived 21 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ "External Affairs Minister S M Krishna's visit to Israel marks new high in bilateral ties" .

The Times of India . 12 January 2012. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. ^ Foreign Minister Krishna's Visit to Israel: Adding Political Content to a Robust Partnership Archived 6 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine . Full report here . 16 January 2012. idsa.in ^ "Netanyahu Congratulates Narendra Modi for Victory in India Election" . Haaretz . Reuters. 16 May 2014. Archived from the original on 16 May 2014. ^ "Modi meets Israeli PM Netanyahu, discusses defence cooperation, west Asia" .

The Times of India . 29 September 2014. ^ " 'My Friend, Awaiting Your Historic Visit': Israel's Benjamin Netanyahu To PM Narendra Modi" . NDTV.com . Retrieved 13 April 2017 . ^ "PM Modi greets Jews on Hanukkah | Indiablooms – First Portal on Digital News Management" . Indiablooms.com . 20 December 2014. ^ "English News Headlines: Latest News Today, Breaking News from India & World" . Jagran English . Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. ^ "Modi greets Jews on Hanukkah, impresses Netanyahu" . Archived from the original on 20 March 2015 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 . ^ "israel: Rajnath Singh in Jerusalem today, Israel says visit 'very significant' " .

The Times of India . 5 November 2014. ^ "Rajnath Singh in Israel to bolster ties, meets Benjamin Natanyahu" . 7 November 2014. ^ "Rajnath for strengthening ties with Israel" .

The Hindu . 6 November 2014. ^ a b "Change of policy? PM Modi will visit Israel, but skip Palestine" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 3 March 2017 . ^ a b "Business News Today: Read Latest Business news, India Business News Live, Share Market & Economy News" .

The Economic Times . ^ "Vibrant Gujarat Summit: India, Israel Sign Pact for Third Phase of Agriculture Project" . Archived from the original on 24 November 2018 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 . ^ "Ashkelon city of Israel signs twin city pact with Vadodara" . Archived from the original on 24 November 2018 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 . ^ "Vibrant Gujarat Summit: India, Israel Sign Pact for Third Phase of Agriculture Project" . NDTV.com . ^ Baruah, Amit (21 December 2014). "India may end support to Palestine at U.N." The Hindu . ^ "Israel's defence minister to visit India for first time" .

The Times of India . 5 February 2015. ^ Wilkes, Tommy (18 February 2015). "Israeli defence minister lands at Bengaluru airshow to boost arms..." Reuters . Archived from the original on 20 February 2019 . Retrieved 5 July 2021 . ^ "President Pranab Mukherjee to visit Israel, Palestine next week" . 7 October 2015. ^ "India attaches top priority to ties with Israel: Swaraj" .

The Hindu . 18 January 2016. ^ "Israeli, Indian agriculture ministers promote expanded collaboration" .

The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com . 19 September 2016. ^ "Israeli President Reuven Rivlin in India on week-long visit" . Hindustan Times . 14 November 2016 . Retrieved 25 November 2016 . ^ "Israel presses India on Iran threat" .

The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com . 20 November 2016. ^ "S. Jaishankar on Israel visit from October 17; will hold talks to strengthen strategic ties" .

The Hindu . 16 October 2021. ^ "Visit of External Affairs Minister to Israel (October 17–21, 2021)" . Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India . Mea.gov.in. 16 October 2021 . Retrieved 11 August 2022 . ^ "Can have another army with Indian volunteers: Israeli envoy" . India Today . 13 October 2023 . Retrieved 8 November 2023 . ^ Online, E. T. (13 October 2023). " 'Can have another Israeli Army with Indian volunteers': Israel Envoy overwhelmed by India's support" .

The Economic Times . Retrieved 8 November 2023 . ^ "India's Modi slammed for his 'complete solidarity' with Israel over Palestinians" . South China Morning Post . 21 November 2023 . Retrieved 22 November 2023 . ^ Sen, Somdeep. "India's deepening love affair with Israel" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 23 May 2024 . ^ Hourany, Dana (24 October 2023). "Why India is leading the pro-Israel disinformation campaign" . www.newarab.com/ . Retrieved 23 May 2024 . ^ "Israel: India Outs Its Israel Affair" . www.freiheit.org . 27 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 May 2024 . ^ Kallungal, Dhinesh (20 May 2024). "Despite war clouds, Indian students make up the largest share of foreign students in Israel" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 23 May 2024 . ^ "Dozens of Indian workers depart for Israel to take up construction jobs" . AP News . 4 April 2024 . Retrieved 23 May 2024 . ^ "Plan to dehyphenate ties: PM Modi's visit to Israel may not include Palestine stop" .

The Indian Express . 4 March 2017 . Retrieved 3 March 2017 . ^ "Introducing the 'Modi' flower: Israel names chrysanthemum after Indian PM" .

The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com . 5 July 2017. ^ Ahren, Raphael (4 July 2017). "Indian PM Modi makes 'historic' 3-day visit to Israel" .

The Times of Israel . ^ "PM Narendra Modi seals 7 big MoUs with Israel: What are they, How will they help India, Tel Aviv" . 5 July 2017. ^ "PM Modi in Israel: India, Israel elevate their ties to strategic partnership" .

The Times of India . 6 July 2017. ^ "PM Modi addresses Indian diaspora in Israel; announces cultural centre, OCI cards" . 6 July 2017. ^ "Narendra Modi: PM Modi visits Haifa, pays homage to Indian World War I heroes" .

The Times of India . 6 July 2017. ^ a b c d Jain, Saudamini (15 January 2018). "India's 'Internet Hindus' Are in Love With Israel" . haaretz . Archived from the original on 16 January 2018 . Retrieved 20 April 2018 . ^ "Israel to invest $68.6 million to boost cooperation with India" .

The Times of India . 11 January 2018. ^ "Teen Murti Chowk renamed after Israeli city Haifa" .

The Economic Times . 14 January 2018. ^ "List of MoUs/Agreements signed during the visit of Prime Minister of Israel to India (January 15, 2018)" . pib.gov.in . ^ "Raisina Dialogue: Netanyahu inaugurates 'Raisina Dialogue', says India & Israel can shape a good future" .

The Times of India . 16 January 2018. ^ a b c "Visit of Prime Minister to Israel (February 25 - 26, 2026)" (Press release). Ministry of External Affairs, India. 24 February 2026 . Retrieved 25 February 2026 . ^ a b c d Cornwell, Alexander (25 February 2026). "India's Modi visits Israel as US-Iran tensions mount" . Reuters . Retrieved 25 February 2026 . ^ a b c AFP (22 February 2026). "Netanyahu says India's Modi to visit Israel Wednesday" . L'Orient Today . Retrieved 25 February 2026 . ^ "Netanyahu outlines 'hexagon' plan placing India at core of new alliance" . Business Today . 25 February 2026 . Retrieved 25 February 2026 . ^ Jeremy Bob, Yonah (25 February 2026). "Israel and India expand defense ties with $10 billion deal" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 25 February 2026 . ^ "India, Israel may finalise USD 8-10 billion worth defence deals" .

The Statesman . 25 February 2026 . Retrieved 25 February 2026 . ^ "India and Israel launch first round of Negotiations for Free Trade Agreement" (Press release). Press Information Bureau, India. 24 February 2026 . Retrieved 25 February 2026 . ^ "How Modi 'broke down walls' between India, Israel – at Palestine's expense" . Al Jazeera . 23 February 2026 . Retrieved 25 February 2026 . ^ Roy, Shubhajit (25 February 2026). "PM Modi on Israel visit from today, strategic ties upgrade on table" .

The Indian Express . Retrieved 25 February 2026 . ^ Ayoob, Mohammed (10 July 2017). "What Brought India and Israel Together" . ^ a b "India and Israel Forge a Solid Strategic Alliance" . Archived from the original on 7 November 2006 . Retrieved 7 November 2006 . by Martin Sherman, The Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs ^ Archived 5 May 2006 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c The Barak Missile Deal Scandal involving graft for an unnecessary missile system would hamper relations in 2006. "Israel-India Military and Civil Trade Ties Skyrocket" . Archived from the original on 2 October 2006 . Retrieved 13 November 2006 . , The Jewish Institute for National security Affairs ^ India-Israel Military Ties Continue to Grow Archived 7 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine , The Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs ^ "Israel's Indian alliance: the Jewish state has become one of Hindu India's most important strategic allies, providing arms and intelligence in their common war against militant Islam. – Free Online Library" . Thefreelibrary.com . Retrieved 9 November 2012 . ^ India Today ^ India Israeli Drones www.globalsecurity.org ^ Israel negotiating Harop drone with India Archived 15 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine defense-update.com ^ "Israeli 'Hermes 900' drones to prowl in Indian skies" .

The Week . Retrieved 8 June 2024 . ^ Egozy, Arieh (20 June 1995). "IAI signs $2.5 billion deal with India" . Ynetnews . Retrieved 9 November 2012 . ^ Rajat Pandit (9 November 2008). "New heights: India, Israel step up defence ties" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 9 November 2012 . ^ McElroy, Damien (29 November 2008). "Mumbai-attacks-Britain-sends-team-of-forensic-experts" .

The Daily Telegraph . London . Retrieved 1 December 2008 . ^ Medzini, Ronen (27 November 2008). " 'We'll help India where needed' – Livni" . Ynetnews . ^ Horovitz, David; Matthew Wagner (27 November 2008). "10 hostages reportedly freed from Mumbai Chabad House" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 27 November 2008 . ^ Boudreaux, Richard (29 November 2008). "Israel has 'no doubt' citizens were targeted" . Los Angeles Times . ^ "India declines Israeli offer of aid delegation to Mumbai" . Archived from the original on 1 December 2008. ^ "IDF official announcement" . Archived from the original on 14 December 2009 . Retrieved 6 February 2010 . ^ "JPOST article" . Archived from the original on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved 18 September 2018 . ^ "HAARETZ article" . Archived from the original on 8 December 2009. ^ "IDF Chief of Staff Visits India – Defense/Middle East" . Arutz Sheva. 6 December 2009. ^ "Rafael in $1b Indian anti-tank missile deal – Globes(Israel's Business Arena)" . Globes . 24 March 2011 . Retrieved 17 June 2013 . ^ "Defence Now India, News" . Defencenow.com. 15 April 2011. Archived from the original on 18 June 2013 . Retrieved 17 June 2013 . ^ Miglani, Sanjeev (21 September 2015). "India turns to Israel for armed drones as Pakistan, China build fleets" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 16 December 2020 . Retrieved 10 December 2015 . ^ Grave-Lazi, Lidar (18 January 2015). "Israeli delegation to visit India to strengthen strategic relationship" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 16 June 2015 .

As part of their visit, the parties intend to discuss the security situation in West Asia, including in Pakistan and in Iran.

In addition, they will aim to analyze new trends in international terrorism and assess the current situation in the Middle East and South Asia. ^ "India, Israel to lift Defence ties veil" . Archived from the original on 8 October 2015. ^ Haaretz (3 March 2016). "India Okays Spy Plane Deal With Israel Ahead of PM Modi's Visit" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. ^ Pandit, Rajat (7 April 2017). "India inks defence deals worth over $2 billion with Israel ahead of PM Narendra Modi's visit" .

The Times of India . ^ "Indian commandos in Israel for 2-week long Blue Flag military drills" . Hindustan Times . 9 November 2017. ^ "As Indian jets roar over Blue Flag, remembering Israel's love for Mirage fighters" .

The Week . Retrieved 11 November 2021 . ^ Gross, Judah Ari (5 November 2017). "IDF's largest-ever aerial exercise takes off, with India on board" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 11 November 2021 . ^ Roche, Elizabeth (9 November 2021). "India, Israel sign pact to speed up innovation, dual-use technology" . mint . Retrieved 11 November 2021 . ^ "Israel, India agree to develop bilateral defense technology" .

The Jerusalem Post . 11 November 2021 . Retrieved 11 November 2021 . ^ a b RAW and MOSSAD, the Secret Link , rediff.com ^ a b "An ex-RAW employee takes boss to unveil a riveting story of safe houses for Mossad, fake firms and secret funds" . India Today . 30 November 1999. ^ "Mossad, MI5 roped in to shield Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Turkey?" .

The Times of India . 15 November 2015. ^ "Mossad may be protecting Modi at Turkey G20 summit, paper claims" .

The Times of Israel . 15 November 2015. ^ "Israel offers unconditional help to India to defend itself especially against terror envoy" .

The Economic Times . ^ Mukherjee, Vasudha (7 May 2025). "Israel backs India's 'right to self defence' following Operation Sindoor" . Business Standard . Retrieved 7 May 2025 . ^ "What Israeli PM Netanyahu said after Pahalgam terror attack" . Hindustan Times . 23 April 2025. Archived from the original on 23 April 2025 . Retrieved 7 May 2025 . ^ a b c "India-Israel Economic and Commercial Relations" . Embassy of India- Tel Aviv, Israel . February 2014. Archived from the original on 5 May 2015 . Retrieved 4 May 2015 . ^ "Overview of India-Israel Bilateral Trade and Economic Relations" . Israel Trade & Economic Office- Embassy of Israel, India . 2012 . Retrieved 8 May 2015 . ^ a b "Top Israel Imports" . worldsrichestcountries.com . ^ a b "Top Israel Exports" . worldsrichestcountries.com . ^ "India-Israel DTAA protocol notified" . @businessline . 21 February 2017. ^ Coren, Ora (25 February 2010). "India, Israel to hold free-trade talks" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 6 August 2011 . Retrieved 24 June 2015 . ^ a b "Free Trade Agreement may double India-Israel trade to $10 bn in 5 years" .

The Economic Times . 7 October 2013. Archived from the original on 9 October 2013 . Retrieved 24 June 2015 . ^ a b Basu, Nayanima (13 February 2015). "India, Israel FTA not likely to be signed soon" . Business Standard . Retrieved 4 May 2015 . ^ "Materials used in experimental drugs against virus arrive in Israel from India" .

The Times of Israel . 9 April 2020. ^ "Israel to Send Life-Saving Medical Equipment to India Amid COVID-19 Crisis" .

The Indian Hawk . 9 May 2021 . Retrieved 4 May 2021 . ^ a b c d e Sreekantan Nair, R (2004). Dynamics of a Diplomacy Delayed: India and Israel . Kalpaz Publications. pp. 159– 161. ISBN 978-81-7835-180-3 . ^ Annual Report 1999-2000:Bilateral Cooperation (Report). Department of Science and Technology (India) . Archived from the original on 10 September 2015 . Retrieved 6 November 2015 . ^ Annual Report 2000-2001:Bilateral Cooperation (Report). Department of Science and Technology (India) . Archived from the original on 11 September 2015 . Retrieved 6 November 2015 . ^ Annual Report 2001-2002:Bilateral Cooperation (Report). Department of Science and Technology (India) . Archived from the original on 10 September 2015 . Retrieved 6 November 2015 . ^ a b c Sunderarajan, P. (25 December 2003). "Israel plans thrust on science and technology collaboration" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 15 October 2015 . Retrieved 28 June 2015 . ^ "Israel-India-Commercial and Economic Relations" . Israel Trade & Economic Office- Embassy of Israel, India . 2014. Archived from the original on 26 June 2015 . Retrieved 26 June 2015 . ^ "India–Israel Relations" (PDF) . Ministry of External Affairs (India) . March 2012 . Retrieved 26 June 2015 . ^ "India forms science ties with Canada, Israel, Vietnam" . Science and Development Network . 2005 . Retrieved 26 June 2015 . ^ Sunderarajan, P. (3 August 2012). "India-Israel sign MoU on research programme" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 4 May 2015 . ^ Dattel, Lior (7 August 2012). "India, Israel sign $50 million academic research pact" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 26 February 2013 . Retrieved 4 May 2015 . ^ Salomi, Vithika (30 August 2012). "Israel to aid Bihar's development bid" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 7 August 2015 . ^ "Israel to open centres on agri-horticulture in Bihar" .

The Hindu . 24 June 2014 . Retrieved 7 August 2015 . ^ Ramachandran, Smriti Kak (19 July 2015). "Israel offers help to clean up Ganga" .

The Hindu . ^ a b "Collaborative Innovation: The vehicle driving Indo-Israel prosperity" . NASSCOM . 11 July 2017 . Retrieved 13 August 2017 . ^ "Tavtech India – A Youth Driven Programme For Collaborative Startups" . Retrieved 13 August 2017 . ^ a b Barzilai, Amnon (3 November 2002). "Israel, India Sign Agreement on Space Research Cooperation" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 17 January 2016 . Retrieved 4 November 2015 . ^ "ISRO to Launch Israel's Scientific Instrument" (Press release). Government of India- Department of Space . Indian Space Research Organisation . 25 December 2003. Archived from the original on 17 January 2016 . Retrieved 4 November 2015 . ^ a b Dorminey, Bruce (22 May 2012). "Israeli Space Telescope On 'Clean Room' Ice For Years; May Never See Launch" . Forbes . Retrieved 4 November 2015 . ^ Subramanian, T.S. (16 April 2010). "India's own cryogenic rocket launch fails" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 4 November 2015 . ^ a b Opall-Rome, Barbara; Jayaraman, K.S. (14 November 2005). "Israel Chooses Indian PSLV To Launch New Spy Satellite" . Space.com . Retrieved 5 November 2015 . ^ Shapir, Yiftah (13 February 2008). "The Launch of Israel's Tecsar Satellite" . Scoop Independent News . Retrieved 5 November 2015 . ^ Opall-Rome, Barbara (25 February 2008). "India Launches Israeli Radar Satellite" . Space.com . Retrieved 5 November 2015 . ^ Azoulay, Yuval (25 February 2008). "Israel Launches Sophisticated Spy Satellite TECSAR" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 2 December 2010 . Retrieved 5 November 2015 . ^ Opall-Rome, Barbara (22 January 2008). "India Launches Israeli Radar Satellite" . Space.com . Retrieved 5 November 2015 . ^ "India Launches Israeli Satellite" . BBC News. 21 January 2008 . Retrieved 5 November 2015 . ^ Sugden, Joanna (16 October 2014). "India Launches Navigation Satellite into Orbit Using PSLV" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 5 November 2015 . ^ Bagchi, Indrani (21 April 2009). "Military surveillance gets a boost with RISAT-2" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 5 November 2015 . ^ "India to launch Israel-backed satellite" . CNN. 21 March 2009. Archived from the original on 23 June 2018 . Retrieved 5 November 2015 . ^ "India plans to launch 10 satellites every year" .

The Hindu . 13 July 2010 . Retrieved 5 November 2015 . ^ "PSLV Successfully launches RISAT-2 and ANUSAT Satellites" (Press release). Government of India- Department of Space . Indian Space Research Organisation . 20 April 2009. Archived from the original on 9 September 2017 . Retrieved 5 November 2015 . ^ "Report: India Bought Advanced Spy Satellite From Israel" . Haaretz . 20 March 2009. Archived from the original on 6 June 2011 . Retrieved 5 November 2015 . ^ "Ministry of External Affairs. India" (PDF) . ^ "Israel Embassy in India" . ^ https://www.pressreader.com/india/the-times-of-india-new-delhi-edition/20170706/281973197681269 . Retrieved 25 November 2018 – via PressReader. {{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ Blakely, Rhys (22 May 2008). "A million olive trees to make Indian desert bloom for farmers" .

The Times . Retrieved 12 March 2009 . ^ Das, Goutam (25 May 2014). "A Growing Olive Branch" . Business Today . Retrieved 25 June 2015 . ^ Reuben, Ofira; Dharamraj, Paul (29 May 2013). "The Indian-Israeli olive agribusiness experiment" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 25 June 2015 . ^ "Rajasthan produces 100 Tonnes of olives, production expected to grow manyfold" . Daily News and Analysis . 24 September 2014 . Retrieved 25 June 2015 . ^ www.ETHRWorld.com. "Israel seeks 10,000 Indian construction workers, offering Rs 1.92 lakh/month salary - ETHRWorld" . ETHRWorld.com . Retrieved 25 September 2024 . ^ Choudhary, Sanjeev (28 December 2017). "Israel to award gas exploration license to a consortium of Indian oil PSUs" .

The Economic Times . ^ a b "Three week fest to commemorate Indo-Israel diplomatic ties" .

The Economic Times . 6 April 2011. Archived from the original on 31 May 2012 . Retrieved 4 May 2015 . ^ Eichner, Itamar (4 March 2009). "From India with love" . Ynetnews . Retrieved 29 April 2015 . ^ Swift, Robert (29 October 2015). "India – Israel relationship emerges from the closet" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 2 November 2015 . ^ "Welcome to International Day of Yoga" . pminewyork.org . Archived from the original on 14 December 2018 . Retrieved 22 June 2018 . ^ "International Day of Yoga 2018" . Secret Tel Aviv . ^ "Jamia Millia Islamia university agrees to keep out Israel as students wanted" .

The Telegraph . India. 24 October 2019. Archived from the original on 2 February 2021 . Retrieved 8 May 2021 . ^ "JTA organizes 'Protest Rally' against genocide in Gaza" (PDF) . Jamia Millia Islamia (PDF). 11 August 2014. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 May 2021 . Retrieved 8 May 2021 . ^ "Anti Israel slogans, Palestinian flags raised in Jamia Millia" .

The Siasat Daily . 22 October 2019. Archived from the original on 25 January 2021 . Retrieved 8 May 2021 . ^ Paller, Shalev (29 June 2016). "Lifting away the weight of 3 years: Why we Israelis go to India after the army" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 19 August 2016 . ^ "India warns of al-Qaida terror plots against Israeli tourists during holiday season" .

The Jerusalem Post . 9 September 2014 . Retrieved 5 May 2015 . ^ "Profile of Israeli tourists visiting India is changing: Envoy" . Zee News . 23 August 2014 . Retrieved 5 May 2015 . ^ a b Singh, Khushwant (2 July 2007). "A Jewish summer in Himalayas" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 5 May 2015 . ^ Judy, Maltz (5 March 2015). "Meet the new tourists to Israel (who don't care for hummus)" . Haaretz . Retrieved 5 May 2015 . ^ a b "India and Israel to Enhance Tourism Cooperation" . Press Information Bureau . 5 September 2011 . Retrieved 5 May 2015 . ^ a b Elis, Niv (25 February 2015). "India's first travel convention in Israel eases conflict worries" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 5 May 2015 . ^ Rozenberg, Rina (27 June 2012). "India tourism minister: Nearly every Indian wants to visit Jerusalem" . Haaretz . Retrieved 5 May 2015 . ^ "India passes Korea as top Asian source of incoming tourism" . Globes . 13 February 2011 . Retrieved 5 May 2015 . ^ WEIZMAN, Stephen (22 March 2018). "In world first, Air India crosses Saudi airspace to Israel" .

The Times of Israel . ^ "Air India to launch daily Tel Aviv-Delhi flights – report" . Globes . 24 June 2018. ^ "israel: Israel eases visa procedure for Indians" .

The Times of India . 14 December 2017. ^ "Visa fee to Israel down from Rs 1,700 to Rs 1,100" .

The Times of India . 3 June 2018. ^ "Indian tourist arrivals to Israel increases by record breaking 31% in 2017" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 19 July 2018 . Retrieved 22 June 2018 . ^ "Israel Tourism targets 100,000 Indian travellers for 2018" . 16 April 2018. ^ "Israel launches e-visa for Indian travellers: How to apply & required docs" . ^ "Israel introduces e-visa system for Indian travellers starting January 2025" . 8 January 2025. ^ a b c Kopf, Shulfa (6 March 2013). "The biggest show on earth" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 6 May 2015 . ^ Banerjee, Neela (2 October 2007). "In Jews, Indian-Americans See a Role Model in Activism" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 6 May 2015 . ^ a b "Indian Muslims protest peace delegation to Israel" . Ynetnews . 15 August 2007 . Retrieved 6 May 2015 . ^ a b c d Lappin, Yaakov (19 August 2007). "Time to end violence" . Ynetnews . Retrieved 6 May 2015 . ^ a b Ahmad, Tufail (7 November 2007). "Dialogue of Democracy: Indian Muslims Visit Israel" . Yale Center for the Study of Globalization . Archived from the original on 30 October 2017 . Retrieved 6 May 2015 . ^ a b c Brill, Alan (2 July 2009). "Two ancient religions behave like old friends" . New Jersey Jewish News . Archived from the original on 24 June 2015 . Retrieved 6 May 2015 . ^ a b c d "Hindu American Foundation Joins in Historic Hindu-Jewish Summit Held in Israel" . Hindu American Foundation . 26 February 2008. Archived from the original on 7 April 2015 . Retrieved 6 May 2015 . ^ Acharaya, Pratip (27 August 2019). "Neither Hindus nor Jews proselytise, yet prosecuted: Subramanian Swamy" . Free Press Journal . Retrieved 11 November 2019 . ^ The Jews of India: A Story of Three Communities by Orpa Slapak.

The Israel Museum, Jerusalem. 2003. ISBN 965-278-179-7 . ^ a b Weil, Shalva. India's Jewish Heritage: Ritual, Art and Life-Cycle . Mumbai: Marg Publications . 2009. ^ "Solomon To Cheraman | Outlook India Magazine" . outlookindia.com/ . 5 February 2022. ^ Weil, Shalva. "Indian Judaic Tradition" in Sushil Mittal and Gene Thursby (eds) Religions in South Asia , London: Palgrave Publishers, 2006. pp. 169–183. ^ Weil, Shalva. "Bene Israel Rites and Routines" in Shalva Weil (ed.) India's Jewish Heritage: Ritual, Art and Life-Cycle , Mumbai: Marg Publications, 2009. (first published in 2002); 3Arts, 54(2): 26–37. ^ Weil, Shalva. (1991) "Beyond the Sambatyon: the Myth of the Ten Lost Tribes." Tel-Aviv: Beth Hatefutsoth, the Nahum Goldman Museum of the Jewish Diaspora. ^ Weil, Shalva. "From Persecution to Freedom: Central European Jewish Refugees and their Jewish Host Communities in India" in Anil Bhatti and Johannes H. Voigt (eds) Jewish Exile in India 1933–1945 , New Delhi: Manohar and Max Mueller Bhavan, 1999. pp. 64–84. ^ The Jews of India: A Story of Three Communities by Orpa Slapak.

The Israel Museum, Jerusalem. 2003. p. 27. ISBN 965-278-179-7 . ^ Weil, Shalva. "Jews in India." in M. Avrum Erlich (ed.) Encyclopaedia of the Jewish Diaspora , Santa Barbara, USA: ABC CLIO. 2008, 3: 1204–1212. ^ Weil, Shalva. India's Jewish Heritage: Ritual, Art and Life-Cycle, Mumbai: Marg Publications, 2009. Katz 2000; Koder 1973; Menachery 1998 ^ Weil, Shalva. "Cochin Jews", in Carol R. Ember, Melvin Ember and Ian Skoggard (eds) Encyclopedia of World Cultures Supplement , New York: Macmillan Reference USA, 2002. pp. 78–80. ^ Weil, Shalva. "Cochin Jews" in Judith Baskin (ed.) Cambridge Dictionary of Judaism and Jewish Culture , New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011. pp. 107. ^ "A Jewish past annihilated over time" .