The Indian Navy ( IN ) ( ISO : Bhāratīya Nau Senā ) is the maritime branch of the Indian Armed Forces .

The Chief of Naval Staff , a four-star admiral , commands the navy.

As a blue-water navy , it operates significantly in the Persian Gulf Region , the Horn of Africa , the Strait of Malacca , and routinely conducts anti-piracy operations with other navies in the region. It also conducts routine two to three month-long deployments in the South and East China seas as well as in the western Mediterranean sea simultaneously.

The primary objective of the navy is to safeguard the nation's maritime borders, and in conjunction with other Armed Forces of the union , act to deter or defeat any threats or aggression against the territory, people or maritime interests of India, both in war and peace. Through joint exercises, goodwill visits and humanitarian missions, including disaster relief, the Indian Navy promotes bilateral relations between nations.

Since October 2008, the Indian Navy keeps at least one frontline warship on continuous deployment in the Gulf of Aden .

As of June 2019, the Indian Navy has 67,252 active and 75,000 reserve personnel in service and has a fleet of 150 ships and submarines, and 300 aircraft.

As of 2025, the operational fleet consists of 2 active aircraft carriers and 1 amphibious transport dock , 4 landing ship tanks , 8 landing craft utility , 13 destroyers , 17 frigates , 2 ballistic missile submarines , 17 conventionally-powered attack submarines , 18 corvettes , one mine countermeasure vessel , 4 fleet tankers and numerous other auxiliary vessels , small patrol boats and sophisticated ships. It is considered as a multi-regional power projection blue-water navy . History The maritime history of India dates back 6,000 years to the pre- Indus Valley Civilisation . A Kutch mariner's log book from 19th century recorded that the first tidal dock in India was built at Lothal around 2300 BC during the Indus Valley Civilisation , near the present-day harbor of Mangrol on the Gujarat coast.

The Rig Veda credits Varuna , the Hindu god of water and the celestial ocean , with knowledge of the ocean routes and describes the use of ships having hundred oars in the naval expeditions by Indians. There are also references to the side wings of a ship called Plava , which stabilise the vessel during storms. Plava are considered to be the precursors of modern-day stabilisers. Alexander the Great , during his campaigns in India, built a harbour at the ancient city of Patala , which has been hyphothzied to be the present day city of Thatta . His army retreated to Mesopotamia using ships built at Sindh .

In the period after his conquest, records show that the Emperor of Maurya Empire , Chandragupta Maurya , as a part of his war office, established an Admiralty Division. Many historians from ancient India recorded Indian trade relations. Indian trade reached Java and Sumatra . There were also references to the trade routes of countries in the Pacific and Indian Ocean. India also had trade relations with the Greeks and the Romans .

At one instance Roman historian Gaius Plinius Secundus mentioned Indian traders carrying away large masses of gold and silver from Rome, in payment for skins, precious stones, clothes, indigo, sandalwood, herbs, perfumes, and spices.

During 5–10 AD, Kalinga conquered Western Java, Sumatra and Malaya .

The Andaman and Nicobar Islands served as an important halt point for trade ships en route to these nations and as well as China. Middle Ages Main article: Chola Navy Further information: South-East Asia campaign of Rajendra I Chola territories during Rajendra Chola I , c. 1030 Medieval Empires in the Indian subcontinent further developed their naval forces.

During 844–848 AD the daily revenue from these nations was expected to be around 200 maunds (8 tonnes (7.9 long tons; 8.8 short tons)) of gold.

During 984–1042 AD, under the reign of Raja Raja Chola I , Rajendra Chola I and Kulothunga Chola I , a naval expedition by the Chola dynasty captured parts of Burma , Sumatra, Sri Lanka , and Malaya, and simultaneously repressed pirate activities by Sumatran warlords .

The bottoms were smeared with a preparation of quicklime and hemp, pounded together and mixed with oil from a certain tree which is a better material than pith — During the 14th and 15th centuries, Indian shipbuilding and maritime abilities skill set exceeded European capabilities at the time. Their ships could carry over a hundred crew and were compartmentalized to limit the effect of damage keeping the ship afloat. Decline By the end of 15th century Indian naval power had started to decline, and had reached its low by the time the Portuguese entered India. Soon after they set foot in India, the Portuguese started to seize all Asian vessels not permitting their trade. Amidst this, in 1529, a naval war at Bombay Harbour resulted in the surrender of Thane , Karanja , and Bandora .

By 1534, the Portuguese took complete control over Bombay Harbour .

The Zamorin of Calicut challenged the Portuguese trade when Vasco da Gama refused to pay the customs levy as per the trade agreement. This resulted in two major naval wars, the first one— Battle of Cochin , was fought in 1504, and the second engagement happened four years later off Diu . Both these wars exposed the weakness of Indian maritime power and simultaneously helped the Portuguese to gain mastery over the Indian waters. However, in 1526 the Zamorin launched the siege of Calicut on the Portuguese forts in Calicut , successfully eliminating Portuguese influence in the city.

Later revival Further information: Mughal Navy and Maratha Navy By the later seventeenth century Indian naval power revived.

The Mughal Empire maintained a significant naval fleet although it was the weakest branch of the military .

The Ganj-i-Sawai , one of the largest trade ships in the 17th century. Empress Mariam-uz-Zamani maintained large fleets of trade ships including the Rahīmī and Ganj-i-Sawai .

The Rahimi was the largest of the Indian ships trading in the Red Sea .

After being sacked by pirates, this ship was replaced by the Ganj-i-Sawa . This ship was eventually sacked by English Pirate Henry Every .

The Navy mainly patrolled coastal areas.

The navy was active in the Siege of Hooghly and the Anglo-Mughal War . One of the best-documented naval campaign of the Mughal empire were provided during the conflict against kingdom of Arakan , where in December 1665, Aurangzeb dispatched Shaista Khan , his governor of Bengal to command 288 vessels and more than 20,000 men to pacify the pirate activities within Arakan territory and to capture Chittagong , A depiction of a Maratha naval attack in 1812 against the East India Company 's ship Aurora .

The Maratha Confederacy had a significant coastal navy .

The alliance of the Moghuls and the Sidis of Janjira was marked as a major power on the west coast.

On the southern front, the 1st Sovereign of the Maratha Kingdom , Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj , started creating his own fleet. His fleet was commanded by notable admirals like Sidhoji Gujar and Kanhoji Angre .

The Maratha Navy under the leadership of Angre kept the English, Dutch and Portuguese away from the Konkan coast. However, the Marathas witnessed remarkable decline in their naval capabilities following the death of Angre in 1729.

The origins of the current Indian Navy date to 1612, when an English vessel under the command of Captain Thomas Best defeated the Portuguese at the Battle of Swally .

Although the Portuguese were defeated, this incident along with the trouble caused by the pirates to the merchant vessels, forced the British to maintain fleet near Surat , Gujarat. East India Company (HEIC) formed a naval arm, and the first squadron of fighting ships reached the Gujarat coast on 5 September 1612. Their objective was to protect British merchant shipping off the Gulf of Cambay and up the Narmada and Tapti rivers.

As the HEIC continued to expand its rule and influence over different parts of India, the responsibility of Company's Marine increased too. Over time, the British predominantly operated from Bombay, and in 1686, the HEIC's naval arm was renamed the Bombay Marine.

At times the Bombay Marine engaged Dutch, French, Maratha, and Sidi vessels. Much later, it was also involved in the First Anglo-Burmese War of 1824. East India Company to independence Main article: Royal Indian Navy (1612–1950) In 1834, the Bombay Marine became Her Majesty's Indian Navy.

The Navy saw action in the First Opium War of 1840 and in the Second Anglo-Burmese War in 1852. Due to some unrecorded reasons, the Navy's name reverted to the Bombay Marine from 1863 to 1877, after which it was named Her Majesty's Indian Marine.

At that time, the Marine operated in two divisions—the Eastern Division at Calcutta under the Superintendent of Bay of Bengal, and the Western Division at Bombay Superintendent of Arabian Sea.

In 1892, the Marine was renamed the Royal Indian Marine, and by the end of the 19th century it operated over fifty ships.

The Marine participated in World War I with a fleet of patrol vessels, troop carriers, and minesweepers.

In 1928, D. N. Mukherji was the first Indian to be granted a commission, in the rank of an Engineer Sub-lieutenant . Also in 1928, the RIM was accorded combatant status, which entitled it to be considered a true fighting force and to fly the White Ensign of the Royal Navy.

In 1934, the Marine was upgraded to a full naval force, thus becoming the Royal Indian Navy (RIN) , and was presented the King's colours in recognition of its services to the British Crown.

During the early stages of World War II , the tiny Royal Indian Navy consisted of five sloops, one survey vessel, one depot ship, one patrol vessel and numerous assorted small craft; personnel strength was at only 114 officers and 1,732 sailors.

The onset of war led to an expansion in numbers of vessels and personnel.

By June 1940, the navy had doubled its number in terms of both personnel and material, and expanded nearly six times of its pre-war strength by 1942.

The navy was actively involved in operations during the war around the world and was heavily involved in operations around the Indian Ocean , including convoy escorts, mine-sweeping and supply, as well as supporting amphibious assaults. HMIS Bombay of Royal Indian Navy in Sydney Harbour during World War II When hostilities ceased in August 1945, the Royal Indian Navy had expanded to a personnel strength of over 25,000 officers and sailors. Its fleet comprised seven sloops, four frigates , four corvettes , fourteen minesweepers , sixteen trawlers , two depot ships , thirty auxiliary vessels, one hundred and fifty landing craft, two hundred harbour craft and several offensive and defensive motor launches.

During World War II the Navy suffered two hundred and seventy five casualties—twenty seven officers, two warrant officers and 123 ratings killed in action, two ratings missing in action and a further 14 officers, two warrant officers and 123 ratings wounded. For their role in the war, the officers and ratings of the Navy received the following honours and decorations—a KBE (Mil.), a knighthood, a CB (Mil.), 10 CIEs, two DSOs, a CBE, 15 DSCs, an OBE, 28 DSMs, eight OBIs, two IOMs, 16 BEMs, 10 Indian Defence Service Medals, a Royal Humane Society Medal, 105 mentions in dispatches and 118 assorted commendations. Immediately after the war, the navy underwent a rapid, large-scale demobilisation of vessels and personnel.

From the inception of India's naval force, some senior Indian politicians had voiced concerns about the degree of "Indianisation" of the Navy and its subordination to the Royal Navy in all important aspects.

On the eve of WWII, the RIN had no Indian senior line officers and only a single Indian senior engineer officer. Even by the war's end, the Navy remained a predominantly British-officered service; in 1945, no Indian officer held a rank above engineer commander and only a few Indian officers in the executive branch held substantive senior line officer rank. This situation, coupled with inadequate levels of training and discipline, poor communication between officers and ratings, instances of racial discrimination and the ongoing trials of ex- Indian National Army personnel ignited the Royal Indian Navy mutiny by Indian ratings in 1946. A total of 78 ships, 20 shore establishments and 20,000 sailors were involved in the strike, which spread over much of India.

After the strike began, the sailors received encouragement and support from the Communist Party in India; unrest spread from the naval ships, and led to student and worker hartals in Bombay.

The strike ultimately failed as the sailors did not receive substantial support from either the Indian Army or from political leaders in Congress or the Muslim League.

On 21 July 1947, H.M.S. Choudhry and Bhaskar Sadashiv Soman , both of whom would eventually command the Pakistani and Indian Navies, respectively, became the first Indian RIN officers to attain the acting rank of captain. Independence to the end of the 20th century Main articles: 1961 Indian annexation of Goa and Indo-Pakistani wars and conflicts Following independence and the partition of India on 15 August 1947, the RIN's depleted fleet of ships and remaining personnel were divided between the newly independent Dominion of India and Dominion of Pakistan . 21 per cent of the Navy's officer cadre and 47 per cent of its sailors opted to join the portion of the fleet which became the Royal Pakistan Navy .

In January 1948, D.N. Mukherji, the first Indian officer in the RIN, became the first Indian to be promoted acting engineer captain.

In May 1948, Captain Ajitendu Chakraverti became the first Indian officer to be appointed to the rank of commodore .

When India became a republic on 26 January 1950, the Royal prefix was dropped and the name Indian Navy was officially adopted.

The prefix for naval vessels was changed from His Majesty's Indian Ship (HMIS) to Indian Naval Ship (INS).

At the same time, the imperial crown in insignia was replaced with the Lion Capital of Ashoka and the Union Jack in the canton of the White Ensign was replaced with the Indian Tricolour.

By 1955, the Navy had largely overcome its post-Independence personnel shortfalls.

During the early years following independence, many British officers continued to serve in the Navy on secondment from the Royal Navy, due to the post-Independence retirement or transfer of many experienced officers to the Royal or the Pakistan navies.

The first C-in-C of the Navy was Admiral Sir Edward Parry who took over from Hall in 1948 and handed over to Admiral Sir Charles Thomas Mark Pizey in 1951. Admiral Pizey also became the first Chief of the Naval Staff in 1955, and was succeeded by Vice Admiral Sir Stephen Hope Carlill the same year The pace of "Indianising" continued steadily through the 1950s.

By 1952, senior Naval appointments had begun to be filled by Indian officers, and by 1955, basic training for naval cadets was entirely conducted in India.

On 22 April 1958, Vice Admiral Katari assumed the command of the Indian Navy from Carlill as the first Indian Chief of Staff of the Indian Navy. With the departure in 1962 of the last British officer on secondment to the Navy, Commodore David Kirke, the Chief of Naval Aviation, the Indian Navy finally became an entirely Indian service.

The first engagement in action of the Indian Navy was against the Portuguese Navy during the liberation of Goa in 1961. Operation Vijay followed years of escalating tension due to Portuguese refusal to relinquish its colonies in India.

On 21 November 1961, Portuguese troops fired on the passenger liner Sabarmati near Anjadip Island , killing one person and injuring another.

During Operation Vijay, the Indian Navy supported troop landings and provided fire support.

The cruiser INS Delhi sank one Portuguese patrol boat , while frigates INS Betwa and INS Beas destroyed the Portuguese frigate NRP Afonso de Albuquerque .

The 1962 Sino-Indian War was largely fought over the Himalayas and the Navy had only a defensive role in the war. INS Kursura , an Indian submarine which played a vital role in the 1971 Indo-Pak war At the outbreak of Indo-Pakistani War of 1965 , the Navy had one aircraft carrier, two cruisers, nineteen destroyers and frigates, and one tanker. Of these twenty-ships ten were under refit.

The others were largely involved coastal patrols.

During the war, the Pakistani Navy attacked the Indian coastal city of Dwarka , although there were no military resources in the area.

While this attack was insignificant, India deployed naval resources to patrol the coast and deter further bombardment.

Following these wars in the 1960s, India resolved to strengthen the profile and capabilities of its Armed Forces. Aircraft carrier INS Vikrant during the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 .

The ship played a crucial role in enforcing the naval blockade on East Pakistan and ensuring India's victory during the war.

The dramatic change in the Indian Navy's capabilities and stance was emphatically demonstrated during the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 . Under the command of Admiral Sardarilal Mathradas Nanda , the navy successfully enforced a naval blockade of West and East Pakistan . Pakistan's lone long-range submarine PNS Ghazi was sunk following an attack by the destroyer INS Rajput off the coast of Visakhapatnam in the midnight of 3–4 December 1971.

On 4 December, the Indian Navy successfully executed Operation Trident , a devastating attack on the Pakistan Naval Headquarters of Karachi that sank a minesweeper, a destroyer and an ammunition supply ship.

The attack also irreparably damaged another destroyer and oil storage tanks at the Karachi port. To commemorate this, 4 December is celebrated as the Navy Day. This was followed by Operation Python on 8 December 1971, further deprecating the Pakistan Navy's capabilities. Indian frigate INS Khukri , commanded by Captain M. N. Mulla was sunk by PNS Hangor , while INS Kirpan was damaged on the west coast.

In the Bay of Bengal , the aircraft carrier INS Vikrant was deployed to successfully enforce the naval blockade on East Pakistan. Sea Hawk and the Alizé aircraft from INS Vikrant sank numerous gunboats and Pakistani merchant marine ships. To demonstrate its solidarity as an ally of Pakistan, the United States sent Task Force 74 centred around the aircraft carrier USS Enterprise into the Bay of Bengal.

In retaliation, Soviet Navy submarines trailed the American task force, which moved away from the Indian Ocean towards Southeast Asia to avert a confrontation.

In the end, the Indian naval blockade of Pakistan choked off the supply of reinforcements to the Pakistani forces, which proved to be decisive in the overwhelming defeat of Pakistan.

Since playing a decisive role in the victory, the navy has been a deterrent force maintaining peace for India in a region of turmoil.

In 1983, the Indian Navy planned for Operation Lal Dora to support the government of Mauritius against a feared coup.

In 1986, in Operation Flowers are Blooming , the Indian Navy averted an attempted coup in the Seychelles .

In 1988, India launched Operation Cactus , to successfully thwart a coup d'état by PLOTE in the Maldives . Naval maritime reconnaissance aircraft detected the ship hijacked by PLOTE rebels. INS Godavari and Indian marine commandos recaptured the ship and arrested the rebels.

During the 1999 Kargil War , the Western and Eastern fleets were deployed in the Northern Arabian Sea, as a part of Operation Talwar . They safeguarded India's maritime assets from a potential Pakistani naval attack, and also deterred Pakistan from attempting to block India's sea-trade routes.

The Indian Navy's aviators flew sorties and marine commandos fought alongside Indian Army personnel in the Himalayas.

In October 1999, the Navy along with the Indian Coast Guard rescued MV Alondra Rainbow , a pirated Japanese cargo ship. 21st century onwards Indian Navy flotilla including aircraft carrier INS Viraat escorting INS Vikramaditya on its way home in 2014 In the 21st century, the Indian Navy has played an important role in maintaining peace for India on the maritime front, in spite of the state of foment in its neighbourhood. It has been deployed for humanitarian relief in times of natural disasters and crises across the globe, as well as to keep India's maritime trade routes free and open.

The Indian Navy was a part of the joint forces exercises, Operation Parakram , during the 2001–2002 India–Pakistan standoff . More than a dozen warships were deployed to the northern Arabian Sea .

In October, the Indian Navy took over operations to secure the Strait of Malacca , to relieve US Navy resources for Operation Enduring Freedom . Indian Navy flood relief operations in the aftermath of floods and landslides in Sri Lanka The navy plays an important role in providing humanitarian relief in times of natural disasters, including floods, cyclones and tsunamis.

In the aftermath of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami , the Indian Navy launched massive disaster relief operations to help affected Indian states as well as Maldives , Sri Lanka and Indonesia . Over 27 ships, dozens of helicopters, at least six fixed-wing aircraft and over 5000 personnel of the navy were deployed in relief operations. These included Operation Madad in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu , Operation Sea Waves in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands , Operation Castor in Maldives, Operation Rainbow in Sri Lanka and Operation Gambhir in Indonesia. Gambhir, carried out following the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami , was one of the largest and fastest force mobilisations that the Indian Navy has undertaken. Indian naval rescue vessels and teams reached neighbouring countries less than 12 hours from the time that the tsunami hit. Lessons from the response led to decision to enhance amphibious force capabilities, including the acquisition of landing platform docks such as INS Jalashwa , as well as smaller amphibious vessels.

From top to bottom: INS Ranjit , INS Jyoti and INS Mysore During the 2006 Israel-Lebanon conflict , the Indian Navy launched Operation Sukoon and evacuated 2,280 persons from 20 to 29 July 2006 including 436 Sri Lankans, 69 Nepalese and 7 Lebanese nationals from war-torn Lebanon.

In 2006, Indian naval doctors served for 102 days on board USNS Mercy to conduct medical camps in the Philippines , Bangladesh, Indonesia and East Timor .

In 2007, Indian Navy supported relief operations for the survivors of Cyclone Sidr in Bangladesh.

In 2008, Indian Naval vessels were the first to launch international relief operations for victims of Cyclone Nargis in Myanmar.

In 2008, the navy deployed INS Tabar and INS Mysore into the Gulf of Aden to combat piracy in Somalia . Tabar prevented numerous piracy attempts, and escorted hundreds of ships safely through the pirate-infested waters.

The navy also undertook anti-piracy patrols near the Seychelles , upon that country's request.

During the November 2008 Mumbai terror attack , the MARCOS , a special force of the Indian Navy, fought against the terrorists from the Pakistan based terror outfit Lashkar-e-Taiba at the Taj Mahal Palace Hotel and rescued hostages.

The commandos were later joined by the National Security Guard .

In February 2011, the Indian Navy launched Operation Safe Homecoming and rescued Indian nationals from war torn Libya. Between January–March, the navy launched Operation Island Watch to deter piracy attempts by Somali pirates off the Lakshadweep archipelago. This operation has had numerous successes in preventing pirate attacks.

During the 2015 crisis in Yemen , the Indian Navy was part of Operation Raahat and rescued 3074 individuals of which 1291 were foreign nationals.

On 15 April 2016, a Poseidon-8I long-range patrol aircraft managed to thwart a piracy attack on the high seas by flying over MV Sezai Selaha , a merchant vessel, which was being targeted by a pirate mother ship and two skiffs around 800 nautical miles (1,500 km; 920 mi) from Mumbai . India enacted its first domestic anti-piracy legislation as the Maritime Anti-Piracy Act 2022, on 20 December 2022 criminalizing maritime piracy and empowering the Indian Navy and other government agencies with the authority to respond to threats at sea.

In 2024, Chief Admiral R. Hari Kumar referred to the new law as a "great enabler" in the navy's anti-piracy success. That year, The Economic Times referred to the Indian Navy's commitment in combating maritime piracy as "unwavering". Indian Navy mission deployed in the North/Central Arabian sea and Gulf of Aden following attack on tanker Chem Pluto In January 2024, the Indian Navy deployed over 10 warships under Operation Sankalp to protect commercial shipping in the Gulf of Aden and the Arabian Sea in the wake of Houthi-led attacks on merchant vessels. Some of the ships deployed included guided missile destroyers like the INS Kolkata , INS Kochi , INS Chennai and INS Mormugao , as well as frigates like the INS Talwar and INS Tarkash .

On 5 January, the INS Chennai prevented the hijacking of the Liberian merchant vessel MV Lila Norfolk.

Although India declined to join the multinational US-led Operation Prosperity Guardian , the Indian Navy continued to share information and coordinate operations with the United States, United Kingdom, and France.

In May 2024, the Navy officially replaced the terms "Jack" and "Jackstaff" with "National Flag" and "National Flag Staff".

The words Jack and Jackstaff originates from the Royal Navy's traditions which implies for national flag and the short pole on the bow of the ship to host the flag in 'naval parlance', respectively. Current role Indian Navy Carrier Battle Group deployment during Operation Sindoor As of August 2015, the Indian Navy is classified as a Rank 3 navy (Power projection to regions adjacent to its own) on the Todd-Lindberg navy classification system of naval strength.

The principal roles of the Indian Navy are: In conjunction with other Armed Forces of the Union, act to deter or defeat any threats or aggression against the territory, people or maritime interests of India, both in war and peace; Project influence in India's maritime area of interest, to further the nation's political, economic and security objectives; In co-operation with the Indian Coast Guard , ensure good order and stability in India's maritime zones of responsibility. Provide maritime assistance (including disaster relief) in India's maritime neighbourhood. Command and organisation Organisation Main article: List of serving admirals of the Indian Navy PM Narendra Modi inspects Guard of honour at the Naval Dockyard, 2025.

While the provision for the rank of Admiral of the Fleet exists, no officer of the Indian Navy has yet been conferred this rank.

The CNS is assisted by the Vice Chief of Naval Staff (VCNS), a Vice Admiral ; the CNS also heads the Integrated Headquarters (IHQ) of the Ministry of Defence (Navy), based in New Delhi.

The Deputy Chief of Naval Staff (DCNS), a vice-admiral, is a Principal Staff Officer (PSO), along with the Chief of Personnel (COP) and the Chief of Materiel (COM), both of whom are also vice-admirals.

The Director General Medical Services (Navy) is a Surgeon Vice-Admiral, heads the medical services of the Indian Navy.

The Indian Navy operates two operational commands and one training command. Each command is headed by a Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief (FOC-in-C) of the rank of Vice Admiral .

The Eastern and Western commands each have a Fleet commanded by a Rear Admiral .

The Western Fleet based at Mumbai is commanded by the Flag Officer Commanding Western Fleet (FOCWF) and the Eastern Fleet , based at Visakhapatnam , is commanded by the Flag Officer Commanding Eastern Fleet (FOCEF). Apart from the two fleets, there is a Flotilla each, based at Mumbai, Visakhapatnam and Port Blair, that provide Local Naval Defence in their respective regions.

The Eastern and Western commands each also have a Commodore commanding submarines (COMCOS) - the Commodore Commanding Submarines (East) and the Commodore Commanding Submarines (West) .

The Flag Officer Naval Aviation and the Flag Officer Submarines , the single-point class authority for naval aviation and submarines are based at Visakhapatnam and Goa respectively.

In May 2005, the Indian Navy commissioned INS Kadamba at Karwar , 100 kilometres (62 mi) from Goa . Built under the first phase of the Project Seabird , at first it was an exclusively Navy controlled base without sharing port facilities with commercial shipping.

The Indian Navy also has berthing rights in Oman and Vietnam.

The Navy operates a monitoring station, fitted with radars and surveillance gear to intercept maritime communication, in Madagascar . It also plans to build a further 32 radar stations in Seychelles, Mauritius, Maldives and Sri Lanka. According to Intelligence Online , published by a France-based global intelligence gathering organisation, Indigo Publications, the Navy is believed to be operating a listening post in Ras al-Hadd , Oman.

The post is located directly across from Gwadar Port in Balochistan , Pakistan, separated by approximately 400 kilometres (250 mi) of the Arabian Sea.

The navy operates INS Kattabomman , a VLF and ELF transmission facility at Vijayanarayanapuram near Tirunelveli in Tamil Nadu. INS Abhimanyu and INS Karna are two bases dedicated for MARCOS . Project Varsha is a project undertaken by the Navy to construct a hi-tech base under the Eastern Naval Command .

The base is said to house nuclear submarines and also a VLF facility. Training Main article: Military academies in India Indian Navy personnel issued with NWU Type-1 camo replacing previous "No. 10" uniform Indian Navy has a specialized training command which is responsible for organisation, conduct and overseeing of all basic, professional and specialist training throughout the Navy.

The Chief of Personnel (CoP) at HQ of Indian Navy is responsible for the framework of training and exercises the responsibility through Directorate of Naval Training (DNT).

The training year of Indian Navy is defined from 1 July to 30 June of the following year. Seaman training is held at INS Chilika , Orissa. Officer training is conducted at Indian Naval Academy (INA) at Ezhimala , on the coast of Kerala . Established in 2009, it is the largest naval academy in Asia. Cadets from National Defence Academy also move to INA for their later terms.

The Navy also has specialized training establishments for gunnery, aviation, leadership, logistics, music, medicine, physical training, educational training, engineering, hydrography, submarines etc. at several naval bases along the coastline of India. Naval officers also attend the tri-service institutions National Defence College , College of Defence Management and Defence Services Staff College for various staff courses to higher command and staff appointments.

The Navy's War college is the Naval War College, Goa . A dedicated wing for naval architecture under Directorate of Naval Architecture at IIT Delhi is operated by the Navy. Indian Navy also trains officers and men from the navies of friendly foreign countries. MARCOS Main article: MARCOS A Marine Commando during urban combat training at Malabar 2021.

The Marine Commando Force (MCF), also known as MARCOS , is a special operations unit that was raised by the Indian Navy in 1987 for Amphibious warfare , Close Quarter Combat Counter-terrorism , Direct action , Special reconnaissance , Unconventional warfare , Hostage rescue , Personnel recovery , Combat search and rescue , Asymmetric warfare , Foreign internal defence , Counterproliferation , Amphibious reconnaissance including Hydrographic reconnaissance .

Since their inception MARCOS proved themselves in various operations and wars, notable of them include Operation Pawan , Operation Cactus , UNOSOM II , Kargil War and Operation Black Tornado . They are also actively deployed on anti-piracy operations throughout the year. Rank structure Main article: Naval ranks and insignia of India The total strength of the Indian Navy, comprising 10,169 officers and 57,786 sailors, was formally presented by the Government of India, Ministry of Defence, Department of Military Affairs, and submitted in the Lok Sabha through an unstarred question to be answered on a specified date (document details partially obscured). This information, provided by the Minister of Defence, reflects the borne strength as of 31 December 2021, and represents the latest official data available from this source as of 02:10 PM IST on Friday, 1 August 2025. Strength of the Indian Navy Pay level Rank Borne Strength (status as on 31 December 2021) Officers (except Indian Navy Medical Service officers) 18 Admiral 1 17/16/15 Vice Admiral 23 14 Rear Admiral 71 13A/13 Commodore & Captain 919 — The highest ranked naval officer in organisation structure is the Chief of Naval Staff , who holds the rank of admiral. Rank group General / flag officers Senior officers Junior officers Indian Navy The selection process of candidates for the INA 4-year program is identical to NDA Navy, but the candidates do not train through NDA in this stream.

The candidates directly join Indian Naval Academy (INA) for 4 years of integrated B.Tech and naval training.

The candidates are offered various engineering specialisations such as electrical and electronics engineering (EE/ETE), mechanical engineering , marine engineering , naval Architecture and aeronautical engineering . Upon completion of training the candidates are awarded a Jawaharlal Nehru University -affiliated Bachelor of Technology degree in their specialised stream and are commissioned as Sub-Lieutenants in engineering or architectural branch. Medical officers in the Indian Navy are inducted primarily through the Armed Forces Medical College (AFMC), via the NEET (UG) examination, followed by AFMC-specific medical and selection assessments. Eligibility for entry into naval medical service requires candidates to have opted Physics , Chemistry , and Biology or Biotechnology at the 10+2 level, with a minimum of 60% marks in each subject. Selected candidates undergo integrated medical and military training at AFMC, where they complete the Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS) programme, followed by a one-year compulsory internship, typically conducted at a naval hospital . Upon successful completion of MBBS (4.5 years) and internship (1 year), candidates are commissioned as officers with the rank of Lieutenant in the Indian Navy. Naval Air Arm Main article: Indian Naval Air Arm Indian Navy Dornier 228 flying over Island territory.

The naval air-arm of the Indian Navy currently operates twenty-one air squadrons . Of these, ten operate fixed-wing aircraft, eight are helicopter squadrons and the remaining three are equipped with unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV). Building on the legacy inherited from the Royal Navy prior to Indian independence, the concept of naval aviation in India started with the establishment of Directorate of Naval Aviation at Naval Headquarters (NHQ) in early 1948.

Later that year officers and sailors from the Indian Navy were sent to Britain for pilot training .

In 1951, the Fleet Requirement Unit (FRU) was formed to meet the aviation requirements of the navy.

On 1 January 1953, the charge of Cochin airfield was handed over to the navy from the Directorate General of Civil Aviation .

On 11 March, the FRU was commissioned at Cochin with ten newly acquired Sealand aircraft.

The navy's first air station, INS Garuda , was commissioned two months later.

From February 1955 to December 1958, ten Firefly aircraft were acquired. To meet the training requirements of the pilots, the indigenously developed HAL HT-2 trainer was inducted into the FRU.

On 17 January 1959, the FRU was commissioned as Indian Naval Air Squadron (INAS) 550 , to be the first Indian naval air squadron. HAL Dhruv during special operation Currently the air arm operates an aircraft carrier INS Vikramaditya with ability to carry over thirty aircraft including MiG 29K, Kamov 31, Kamov 28, Sea King and domestic-built HAL-Dhruv and Chetak helicopters.

The Kamov-31 choppers also provide the airborne early warning cover for the fleet.

In the anti-submarine role, the Sea King , Ka-28 , and the domestic built HAL Dhruv are used.

The MARCOS also use Sea King and HAL Dhruv helicopters while conducting operations. Maritime patrol and reconnaissance operations are carried out by the Boeing P-8 Poseidon and the Ilyushin 38 . Indian Navy is also procuring 24 Lockheed Martin MH-60R Multi Role Helicopters under the foreign military sales from the US.

The UAV arm consists of the IAI Heron and Searcher-IIs that are operated from both surface ships and shore establishments for surveillance missions.

The Indian Navy also maintains an aerobatic display team, the Sagar Pawan .

The fleet of the Indian Navy is a mixture of domestic built and foreign vessels, as of May 2025 , the surface fleet comprises 2 aircraft carriers , 1 amphibious transport dock , 4 landing ship tanks , 13 destroyers , 15 frigates , 20 corvettes , 10 large offshore patrol vessels , 4 fleet tankers , 7 Survey ships , 1 research vessel , 3 training vessels and various auxiliary vessels , Landing Craft Utility vessels, and small patrol boats .

The Navy has two aircraft carriers in active service, one of which is the INS Vikramaditya , which serves as the flagship of the fleet. Vikramaditya (formerly Admiral Gorshkov ) is a modified Kiev -class aircraft carrier procured at a total cost $2.3 billion from Russia in December 2013. A second aircraft carrier, the indigenously built INS Vikrant was commissioned on 2 September 2022.

The Navy has an amphibious transport dock of the Austin class , renamed as INS Jalashwa in Indian service. It also maintains a fleet of landing ship tanks . INS Shakti , a Deepak -class fleet tanker The navy currently operates four Visakhapatnam , three Kolkata , three Delhi and three Rajput -class guided-missile destroyers .

The ships of the Rajput class are being replaced by the next-generation Visakhapatnam -class destroyers (Project 15B) which feature a number of improvements.

In addition to destroyers, the navy operates several classes of frigates such as three Shivalik (Project 17 class) and six Talwar -class frigates,three Nilgiri-class and Brahmaputra-class frigate , Smaller littoral zone combatants in service are in the form of corvettes, of which the Indian Navy operates the Kamorta , Kora , Khukri , Veer and Abhay -class corvettes. Replenishment tankers such as the Jyoti -class tanker , INS Aditya and the new Deepak -class fleet tanker help improve the navy's endurance at sea. Submarines Main article: List of submarines of the Indian Navy INS Kalvari , conventional submarine of the Indian Navy As of August 2024 , the Navy's sub-surface fleet includes three Arihant-class SSBN 17 conventionally-powered attack submarines .

The conventional attack submarines of the Indian Navy consist of six Kalvari (French Scorpène-class submarine design), seven Sindhughosh (Russian Kilo-class submarine design), and the four Shishumar (German Type 209/1500 design) classes. India previously possessed a single Akula -class nuclear-powered attack submarine named INS Chakra . She was leased to India for a period of ten years, between 2012 and 2021. Three hundred Indian Navy personnel were trained in Russia for the operation of these submarines. Negotiations are on with Russia for the lease of the second Akula-class submarine. INS Arihant was launched on 26 July 2009 in Visakhapatnam , and was secretly commissioned into active service in August 2016.

The Navy plans to have six nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines in service in the near future. Arihant is both the first boat of the Arihant -class nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines and the first nuclear-powered submarine to be built in India. India is planning to entirely modernise its submarine fleet. Initially, it was planned that 24 conventionally powered attack submarine would be acquired. First 12 submarines (6 Project 75 and 6 Project 75I ) would be inducted by 2012 and the next 12 indigenous Project 76 submarines would be inducted by 2030. However, this was revised in 2015. Now, the planned numbers stand at 4 SSBNs, 6 SSNs and 18 conventionally powered attack submarines .

The clearance for Project 75 Alpha submarines was approved by the Government on 18 February 2024.

As of January 2026 , the Navy's planned acquisitions of submarines include :– Nuclear-powered , ballistic missile submarine 2 Arihant -class submarines — Both undergoing sea trials. 2 S5 -class submarines — Under construction; at least 4 planned. Nuclear-powered , attack submarine 2 Project 77 -class submarines — Design phase; 6 planned. INS Chakra III — One to be leased by 2028. Diesel-electric , attack submarine 3 Kalvari -class submarine — Batch II proposed. Project might not proceed. 6 Project 75I-class — Contract negotiations complete. 6–12 Project 76 submarines — Design phase. Aircraft Further information: Indian Naval Air Arm The air arm of the Indian Navy was established in 1948.

The navy operates 26 air squadrons stationed across eight naval air stations that operate under the flag officers of the various naval commands.

The air arm maintains a fleet of combat and maritime patrol aircraft , various helicopters , and unmanned aerial vehicles . Aircraft Origin Type Variant In service Notes Combat Dassault Rafale France Multirole Rafale M – 26 (22 single-seat and four twin-seat) on order Mikoyan MiG-29K Russia MiG-29K 34 MiG-29KUB 6 Two seater Patrol / Utility Boeing P-8 United States ASW / Patrol P-8I 12 6 planned Britten-Norman BN-2 United Kingdom Patrol / Utility BN-2B/2T 4 Dornier 228 Germany / India Patrol / Surveillance 228-201 31 Includes 4 upgraded, rest being upgraded. 8 more on order Helicopters Aérospatiale Alouette III France / India Utility Chetak 42 HAL Dhruv India Dhruv Mk I/III 24 Kamov Ka-27 Russia ASW Ka-28 14 Westland Sea King United Kingdom WS-61 Mk 42B 25 Utility WS-61 Mk 42C Kamov Ka-31 Russia AEW Ka-31 14 Sikorsky SH-60 United States Combat / Utility MH-60R 21 3 on order Trainer BAE Hawk United Kingdom / India Jet trainer Hawk 132 17 HAL Kiran India HJT-16 18 Pipistrel Virus Slovenia Ab-initio trainer Garud 12 UAV Elbit Hermes 900 Israel / India Surveillance Drishti-10 1 10 planned IAI Heron Israel Heron Mk I 10 General Atomics MQ-9 Reaper United States Combat / Surveillance SeaGuardian 2 15 on order Weapon systems Main article: Weapon systems of the Indian Navy VL-SRSAM fired from Naval ship will replace Barak-1 in service. Shakti Thermal Torpedo The Navy use a mix of indigenously developed and foreign made missile systems. These include submarine-launched ballistic missiles, ship-launched ballistic missiles, cruise and anti-ship missiles, air-to-air missiles, surface-to-air missiles, torpedoes, air-to-air guns, main guns and anti-submarine rocket launchers. Its inventory comprises 100 mm (3.9 in) AK 190 gun with a range of 21.5 kilometres (13.4 mi), 130 kilometres (81 mi) KH-35E 4 Quad Uran, ASW RBU-2000 etc.

In recent years, BrahMos has been one of the most advanced missile system adapted by the Indian Navy. It has been jointly developed by India's Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) and Russian NPO Mashinostroyeniya . BrahMos is the world's fastest anti-ship cruise missile in operation.

The BrahMos has been tailored to meet Indian needs and features a large proportion of India-designed components and technology, including its fire control systems, transporter erector launchers, and its onboard navigational attack systems.

The successful test of Brahmos from INS Rajput provides Indian Navy with precision land attack capability. India has also fitted its Boeing P-8I reconnaissance aircraft with all-weather, active-radar-homing , over-the-horizon AGM-84L Harpoon Block II missiles and Mk 54 All-Up-Round Lightweight Torpedoes. Indian warships' primary air-defence shield is provided by Barak 1 surface-to-air missile while an advanced version Barak 8 is in development in collaboration with Israel. India's next-generation Scorpène-class submarines will be armed with Exocet anti-ship missile system. Among indigenous missiles, ship-launched version of Prithvi-II is called Dhanush , which has a range of 350 kilometres (220 mi) and can carry nuclear warheads.

The K-15 Sagarika (Oceanic) submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) , which has a range of at least 700 km (some sources claim 1000 km) forms part of India's nuclear triad and is extensively tested to be integrated with the Arihant class of nuclear submarines. A longer range submarine launched ballistic missile called K-4 is under induction process, to be followed by K-5 SLBM. Electronic warfare and systems management Sangraha is a joint electronic warfare programme between Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) and the Indian Navy.

The programme is intended to develop a family of electronic warfare suites, for use on different naval platforms capable of detecting, intercepting, and classifying pulsed, carrier wave , pulse repetition frequency agile, frequency agile and chirp radars .

The systems are suitable for deployment on various platforms like helicopters, vehicles, and ships. Certain platforms, along with ESM (Electronic Support Measures) capabilities, have ECM (Electronic Countermeasure) capabilities such as multiple-beam phased array jammers.

The Indian Navy also relies on information technology to face the challenges of the 21st century.

The Indian Navy is implementing a new strategy to move from a platform centric force to a network centric force by linking all shore-based installations and ships via a high-speed data networks and satellites. This will help in increased operational awareness.

The network is referred to as the Navy Enterprise Wide Network (NEWN).

The Indian Navy has also provided training to all its personnel in Information Technology (IT) at the Naval Institute of Computer Applications (NICA) located in Mumbai. Information technology is also used to provide better training, like the usage of simulators and for better management of the force.

The Navy has a dedicated cadre for matters pertaining to information technology cadre named as Information Technology Cadre, under the Directorate of Information Technology (DRI).

The cadre is responsible for implementation for enterprise wide networking and software development projects, development activities with respect to cyber security products, administration of shore and on-board networks, and management of critical Naval Networks and software applications. Naval satellite India's first exclusive defence satellite GSAT-7 was successfully launched by European space consortium Arianespace's rocket from Kourou spaceport in French Guiana in August 2013. GSAT-7 was fabricated by the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) to serve for at least seven years in its orbital slot at 74°E, providing UHF , S-band , C-band and Ku-band relay capacity. Its Ku-band allows high-density data transmission, including both audio and video. This satellite also has a provision to reach smaller and mobile terminals. GSAT-7 approximately has a footprint of 3,500–4,000 kilometres (2,200–2,500 miles; 1,900–2,200 nautical miles) over the Indian Ocean region, including both the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal region. This enables the Navy to operate in a network-centric atmosphere having real-time networking of all its operational assets at sea and on land.

On 15 June 2019 the navy placed an order for GSAT-7R satellite as a replacement for GSAT-7.

The first president's fleet review by India was hosted by Rajendra Prasad on 10 October 1953. President's reviews usually take place once in the President's term.

In all, twelve fleet reviews have taken place, including two International fleet reviews in 2011 and 2016.

The latest fleet review was held in February 2022 at Visakhapatnam, by President Ram Nath Kovind .

The Indian Navy also conducted an International fleet review named Bridges of Friendship in February 2001 in Mumbai. Many ships of friendly Navies from all around the world participated, including two from the US Navy.

The Indian Navy conducted a naval exercise with the People's Liberation Army Navy in 2003, and also sent ships to the South China Sea to participate in the fleet review.

In 2005, TROPEX (Theatre-level Readiness Operational Exercises) was held during which Indian Navy experimented the doctrine of influencing a land and air battle to support the Indian Army and the Indian Air Force . TROPEX has been conducted annually every year with an exception to 2016.

In 2007, Indian Navy conducted naval exercises with Japan Maritime Self-Defence Force and U.S. Navy in the Pacific, and also signed an agreement with Japan in October 2008 for joint naval patrolling in the Asia-Pacific region.

In 2007, India conducted naval exercises with Vietnam , Philippines, and New Zealand .

In 2007, India and South Korea conducted an annual naval exercise, alongside India's participation in the South Korean International Fleet Review in 2008.

The first Atlantic Ocean deployment of the Indian Navy happened in 2009.

During this deployment, the Indian Naval fleet conducted exercises with the French, German, Russian and British navies. Once in two years navies from the Indian Ocean region meet at the Andaman and Nicobar Islands for the Exercise MILAN .

In 2021 India assisted in US-led Exercise Cutlass Express as a trainer. Indian Navy's destroyers sailing in unison during Exercise Tropex 2025 In 2007 India held the first Indian Ocean Naval Symposium (IONS) with an objective to provide a forum for all the littoral nations of the Indian Ocean to co-operate on mutually agreed areas for better security in the region.

Since the past decade, Indian naval ships have made goodwill port calls to Israel , Turkey , Egypt , Greece , Thailand , Indonesia , Australia, New Zealand , Tonga , South Africa, Kenya , Qatar , Oman, United Arab Emirates , Bahrain, Kuwait, and various other countries. Exploration Lt Cdr Dilna K & Lt Cdr Roopa crossed Point Nemo in INSV Tarini , during their Navika Sagar Parikrama II expedition The Indian Navy regularly conducts adventure expeditions.

The sailing ship and training vessel INS Tarangini began circumnavigating the world on 23 January 2003, intending to foster good relations with various other nations; she returned to India in May 2004 after visiting 36 ports in 18 nations. Lt. Cdr. M. S. Kohli led the Indian Navy's first successful expedition to Mount Everest in 1965; the Navy's ensign was again flown atop Everest on 19 May 2004 by a similar expedition. Another Navy team also successfully scaled Everest from the north face, a technically more challenging route.

The expedition was led by Cdr Satyabrata Dam of the submarine arm. Cdr. Dam is a mountaineer of international repute and has climbed many mountains including the Patagonias , the Alps among others.

In 2017, to commemorate 50 years of the Navy's first expedition in 1965, a team set off to climb Mount Everest. An Indian Navy team comprising 11 members successfully completed an expedition to the Arctic pole. To prepare, they first traveled to Iceland , where they attempted to summit a peak.

The team next flew to eastern Greenland ; in the Kulusuk and Angmassalik areas, they used Inuit boats to navigate the region's ice-choked fjords . They crossed northward across the Arctic Circle , reaching seventy degrees North on skis.

The team scaled an unnamed peak of height 11,000 feet (3,400 m) and named it Indian Peak .

The Indian Naval ensign first flew in Antarctica in 1981.

The Indian Navy succeeded in Mission Dakshin Dhruv 2006 by traversing to the South Pole on skis. With this historic expedition, they have set the record for being the first military team to have successfully completed a ski traverse to the Geographic South Pole. Also, three of the ten member team—the expedition leader—Cdr. Satyabrata Dam, leading medical assistants Rakesh Kumar and Vikas Kumar are now among the few people in the world to have visited the two poles and summited Mount Everest. Indian Navy became the first organisation to reach the poles and Mount Everest. Cdr. Dilip Donde completed the first solo circumnavigation by an Indian citizen on 22 May 2010. Cdr. Abhilash Tomy became the first Indian to complete a solo, non-stop circumnavigation of the world on a sailboat not fitted with any technology or navigational aids. Navika Sagar Parikrama (lit. 'Sailors' Sea Circumambulation') was a circumnavigation of the globe by female officers of the Indian Navy.

The six-member all-woman team circumnavigated and managed the whole operation in their first-ever global journey, with their ship INSV Tarini that lasted 254 days. Navika Sagar Parikrama II is led by two women officers. Future of the Indian Navy Main article: Future of the Indian Navy HAL TEDBF will replace the MiG-29Ks in service.

By the end of the 14th Plan (2020), the Indian Navy was expected to have over 150 ships and close to 500 aircraft.

In addition to the existing mission of securing both sea flanks in the Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea, the navy was tasked with responding to emergencies far away from the Indian mainland. Marine assault capabilities were to be enhanced by setting up a new amphibious warfare facility at Kakinada , Andhra Pradesh.

Since then, the Indian Navy has initiated Phase II expansion of INS Kadamba , its third largest naval base, near Karwar . Phase II will involve expansion of the berthing facilities to accommodate 40–45 more front-line warships, including the aircraft carrier INS Vikramaditya , raise manpower to 300 officers and around 2,500 sailors, and build a naval air station with a 6,000-foot runway. This is to be followed by Phase IIA and IIB, at the end of which INS Kadamba will be able to base 50 front-line warships.

The Indian Navy is also in the process of constructing a new naval base, INS Varsha , at Rambilli for its Arihant class submarines. Hypersonic LRAShM undergoing tests India's planned second aircraft carrier, INS Vishal (formerly known as Indigenous Aircraft Carrier-II ), will displace around 65,000 tonnes and is expected to be delivered to the Indian Navy in the mid-2030s. With the future delivery of Vishal , the Navy's goal to have three aircraft carriers in service, with two fully operational carriers and a third in refit, will be achieved.

In November 2011, the Defence Acquisition Council launched the Multi-Role Support Vessel .

The Indian Navy has subsequently sent out an international RFP for up to 2 large landing helicopter docks .

The contenders are expected to tie up with local shipyards for construction of the ships.

In addition to aircraft carriers and large amphibious assault ships, the Indian Navy is acquiring numerous surface combatants such as the Project 17A-class and Talwar -class frigates, ASW shallow water corvettes , ASuW corvettes , and MCM vessels . It plans to build Project 18 -class destroyer and Project 17B-class frigate . New submarine classes under various stages of planning include the Project 75 Alpha , Project 75I , and the nuclear-powered Arihant class . New auxiliary ships include; five replenishment oilers, a Missile Range Instrumentation Ship (MRIS) and an Ocean Surveillance Ship. Matangi ASV on autonomous transit In 2024, Sagar Defence Engineering Pvt Ltd demonstrated 850 nautical mile autonomous transit of, Matangi Autonomous Surface Vessel to the Indian Navy.

The autonomous transit began from Mumbai and ended at Toothukudi. This demonstration was part of Indian Navy's Swavalamban 2024 self reliance in technology contest to enable the development of autonomous vessels for various military applications. These boats are equipped with 12.7mm SRCG gun and is capable of day and night patrolling with speed above 50 knots. 12 such autonomous boats are to be acquired by the Indian Navy and will also be used to patrol Pangong Tso lake.

The Indian Navy is also acquiring 30 autonomous underwater vehicles.

The Indian Navy is planning to procure 22 General Atomics Sea Guardian drones at an estimated cost of $2 billion. This is the first instance of General Atomics drones being sold to a non- NATO military. Indian Naval Ensign Main article: Indian Naval Ensign The rajmudra ( seal ) used by Shivaji I .

The Indian Navy from 1950 to 2001 used a modified version of the British White Ensign, with the Union flag replaced with the Indian Tricolour in the canton.

In 2001, this flag was replaced with a white ensign bearing the Indian Navy crest, as the previous ensign was thought to reflect India's colonial past.

However complaints arose that the new ensign was indistinguishable as the blue of the naval crest easily merged with the sky and the ocean. Hence in 2004, the ensign was changed back to the St. George's cross design, with the addition of the emblem of India in the intersection of the cross.

In 2014, the ensign as well as the naval crest was further modified to include the Devanagari script: सत्यमेव जयते ( Satyameva Jayate ) which means 'Truth Alone Triumphs' in Sanskrit .

The traditional crest of Indian Navy ships is topped by a crown featuring three sailing ships symbolising India's rich maritime history .

The ribbon of the crown depicts the Ashoka Chakra surrounded by a horse and a bull . Each ship has a unique motif which is encircled by a ring of lotus buds .

In August 2022, the Prime Minister's Office announced that the naval ensign featuring the Saint George's Cross would be irrevocably disposed of, in favour of a newer design derived from octagonal shaped imperial seal of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj and his Maratha Navy that would "do away with the colonial past" and reflect the "rich Indian maritime heritage".

The new ensign is slated to be revealed by prime minister Narendra Modi on 2 September 2022, coinciding with the commissioning ceremony of INS Vikrant , the Indian Navy's first indigenously built aircraft carrier .

The new ensign retains much the design of the 2001-04 ensign with the national flag as the canton, but with the addition of an octagonal navy blue shield based on Shivaji's royal seal surrounding the heraldic arms in gold and the addition of the official motto of the Navy May the Lord of Waters Be Auspicious Unto Us ( Shaṁ No Varunaḥ ) in the Devanagari script. Documents Indian Maritime Doctrine 2004, 2009, 2014 Author Maritime Doctrines and Concepts Centre (MDCC) Publisher Integrated Headquarters , Ministry of Defence (Navy) Website https://www.indiannavy.nic.in/content/indian-maritime-doctrine-2015-version The Indian Maritime Doctrine is a foundational primer document of the Indian Navy. Three editions have been published in 2004, 2009 and 2014. It has to be considered along with other foundational documents such as the naval strategy Freedom to Use the Seas (2007) and the updated edition Ensuring Secure Seas (2015).

The 2004 edition (INBR 8) was published amidst a larger strategic overhaul in the country. It contains a large number of key words along with their definitions and grouped into a number of sections. Select themes pervade throughout the document. Some themes are subtle such as the ongoing and future transition to a blue-water navy and others are louder such as the text related to nuclear submarines and aircraft carriers. There is justification and explanation for India's need for these transitions and acquisitions.

The Military Balance 2017 . Routledge, Chapman & Hall, Incorporated. ISBN 9781857439007 . ^ A. Mahadev, Shastri (1901). Taittiriya Upanishad . Mysore. {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "Indian Navy to commission four warships, submarines in a mth" .

The Times of India . ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 4 December 2024 . ^ "Strength of Defence Forces" . pib.gov.in . 24 July 2019 . Retrieved 16 October 2019 . ^ Dutta, Amrita Nayak (18 November 2020). "Hit by budget crunch, Indian Navy now plans to buy 2 Landing Platform Docks instead of 4" . ThePrint . Retrieved 27 November 2020 . current strength of 150 ships and submarines. ^ "FAQ" . Ministry Of Defence . Retrieved 27 November 2020 . Q 1. What are the current Force Levels of the Indian Navy? Ans.

The Indian Navy's present force level comprises about 150 ships and submarines. ^ Todd, Daniel; Lindberg, Michael (1996). Navies and Shipbuilding Industries: The Strained Symbiosis . Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 56– 57. ISBN 9780275953102 . Retrieved 30 November 2015 . ^ Kirchberger, Sarah (2015). Assessing China's Naval Power: Technological Innovation, Economic Constraints, and Strategic Implications . Heidelberg: Springer. p. 60. ISBN 9783662471272 . OCLC 911616881 . ^ "Interesting facts about India" . India . Government of India. Archived from the original on 6 December 2007 . Retrieved 17 June 2017 . ^ Sen 1999 , p. 48. ^ a b c d e f g "Early History of the Indian Navy" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 21 September 2016 . Retrieved 17 June 2017 . ^ Burnes, Alexander (31 July 2014). Travels into Bokhara . Cambridge University Press. doi : 10.1017/cbo9781107589513 . ISBN 978-1-108-07546-6 . ^ "Maritime Trade of Ancient Kalinga" (PDF) . Retrieved 5 June 2024 . ^ Findlay 2009 , p. 67. ^ Mathew, K. M. (1988). History of the Portuguese Navigation in India, 1497-1600 . Mittal Publications. ISBN 978-81-7099-046-8 . ^ Roy, Atulchandra (1961). "Naval Strategy of the Mughals in Bengal" . Proceedings of the Indian History Congress . 24 : 170– 175. ISSN 2249-1937 . JSTOR 44140736 . ^ Safdar, Aiysha; Khan, Muhammad Azam (2021). "History of Indian Ocean-A south Indian perspective" . Journal of Indian Studies . 7 (1): 186– 188.

The Empress, Mariam Zamani then ordered the building of an even larger ship with 62 guns and placements for over 400 musket men. It was named Ganj-i-Sawai, and it was in its day the most fearsome ship on the seas, and its objective was to trade and take pilgrims to Mecca, and on the way back convert all the goods sold into gold and silver as well as bring the pilgrims back. But then the English, posing as pirates, attacked with a 25-ship armada of alleged pirates.

At Mecca, they claimed they were slave traders. ^ "Harking back: The Empress and her two doomed pilgrim ships" . 11 April 2021. ^ Findly, Ellison B. (1988). "The Capture of Maryam-uz-Zamānī's Ship: Mughal Women and European Traders" . Journal of the American Oriental Society . 108 (2): 227– 238. doi : 10.2307/603650 . ISSN 0003-0279 . JSTOR 603650 . ^ "The trial of Joseph Dawson, Edward Forseith, William May, Wm. Bishop, James Lewis, and John Sparkes, at the Old-Bailey, for felony and piracy". A Complete Collection of State Trials and Proceedings for High Treason and Other Crimes and Misdemeanors . 13 (392, column 451). 1812. ^ H. C. Das; Indu Bhusan Kar (1988). Pani, Subas (ed.). Glimpses of History and Culture of Balasore . Orissa State Museum. p. 66 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 . ^ Bhattacharya, Sudip (2014). Unseen Enemy The English, Disease, and Medicine in Colonial Bengal, 1617-1847 (ebook) . Cambridge Scholars Publishing. ISBN 9781443863094 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 . ^ de la Garza, Andrew (February 2014). "Command of the Coast: The Mughal Navy and Regional Strategy" . World History Connected . 12 (1). Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois . Retrieved 23 May 2023 . ^ a b c d e f g "Genesis of Indian Navy" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 6 July 2017 . Retrieved 18 June 2017 . ^ Singh 1986 , pp. 45–46. ^ Singh 1986 , pp. 32–33. ^ Singh 1986 , pp. 34. ^ Singh 1986 , pp. 37. ^ Singh 1986 , pp. 142–143. ^ Singh 1986 , pp. 142. ^ Singh 1986 , pp. 46–47. ^ The Navy List for August 1939 . HM Stationery Office. 1939. pp. 620– 622. ^ The Navy List for August 1939 . HM Stationery Office. 1939. pp. 2098– 2101. ^ Singh 1986 , pp. 105–110. ^ Meyer, John M. (13 December 2016). "The Royal Indian Navy Mutiny of 1946: Nationalist Competition and Civil-Military Relations in Postwar India" . Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History . 45 : 46– 69. doi : 10.1080/03086534.2016.1262645 . S2CID 159800201 . ^ "Higher Ranks for Indian Officers of the R.I.N." (PDF) . Press Information Bureau of India - Archive . 21 July 1947 . Retrieved 26 January 2020 . ^ a b c Singh 1992 , pp. 240–241. ^ Singh 1992 , pp. 246. ^ "Nationalisation of Armed Forces" (PDF) . Press Information Bureau of India - Archive . 20 December 1947 . Retrieved 4 January 2021 . ^ "Press Note" (PDF) . Press Information Bureau of India – Archive . 29 December 1947 . Retrieved 28 August 2021 . ^ "Press Note" (PDF) . Press Information Bureau of India - Archive . 8 May 1948 . Retrieved 8 March 2020 . ^ "New Designs of Crests and Badges in the Services" (PDF) . Press Information Bureau of India – Archive . Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 August 2017. ^ Singh 1992 , pp. 242. ^ Singh 1992 , pp. 254. ^ Singh 1992 , pp. 250. ^ Stewart 2009 , p. 185. ^ Singh 1992 , pp. 243. ^ "When the Navy's Operation Chutney evicted Portugal from Anjadiv" .

The Indian Express . 26 July 2023 . Retrieved 29 November 2023 . ^ "Ministry of Defence Report" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 March 2012 . Retrieved 6 January 2012 . ^ "Navy, Coast Guard nab pirates, rescue hijacked merchant vessel off Goa coast" . Express India . 17 November 1999. Archived from the original on 14 January 2012 . Retrieved 26 June 2017 . ^ "Indian Navy's Vision" (PDF) . Indian Navy. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 December 2010 . Retrieved 3 August 2011 . ^ "Naval Diplomacy: Indian Initiatives" . Bharat Rakshak. Archived from the original on 13 April 2009 . Retrieved 16 July 2010 . ^ "President Discusses Strong U.S.-India Partnership in New Delhi, India" .

The White House. 3 March 2006. Archived from the original on 11 March 2011. ^ "Tsunami diplomacy improves India's global image" . Express India . 9 February 2005. Archived from the original on 6 May 2005. ^ Sakhuja, Vijay (8 February 2005). "Indian Naval Diplomacy: Post Tsunami" . Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies. Archived from the original on 8 January 2009. ^ Giridharadas, Anand (22 September 2008). "India is projecting its military power" . International Herald Tribune . Archived from the original on 25 September 2008 . Retrieved 6 January 2012 . ^ "INS Jalashwa joins Eastern Fleet" .

The Hindu . 14 September 2007. Archived from the original on 12 November 2007 . Retrieved 25 June 2017 . ^ "Operation Sukoon for the evacuation of Indian Nationals from Lebanon" . Press Information Bureau . Government of India. Archived from the original on 31 July 2017 . Retrieved 26 June 2017 . ^ " 'Op SUKOON' – Making 'Sweet Music' : 24 July 2006" (PDF) . Indian Navy . Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 July 2007 . Retrieved 26 June 2017 . ^ "Indian Navy Doctors Serve on U.S. Navy Hospital Ship Mercy's Aid Mission in South and Southeast Asia" . Embassy of United States (New Delhi, India) . U.S. Department of State . Archived from the original on 22 September 2006 . Retrieved 26 June 2017 . ^ "India sends rice for Bangladesh storm victims" . Reuters . 8 December 2007. Archived from the original on 31 July 2017 . Retrieved 26 June 2017 . ^ "India – Myanmar Relations" (PDF) . Ministry of External Affairs . Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 December 2016 . Retrieved 26 June 2017 . ^ Asian Legal Resource Centre (7 May 2008). "India's assistance to Myanmar must reflect its regional role" . Relief Web . Archived from the original on 31 July 2017 . Retrieved 26 June 2017 . ^ "India 'to step up piracy battle' " . BBC News . 21 November 2008. Archived from the original on 27 February 2017 . Retrieved 26 June 2017 . ^ "India 'sinks Somali pirate ship' " . BBC News . 19 November 2008. Archived from the original on 14 June 2017 . Retrieved 26 June 2017 . ^ "Navy responds to SOS from Seychelles" .

The Indian Express . 20 April 2009 . Retrieved 26 June 2017 . ^ "Indian Navy in 2010" (PDF) . Indian Navy . pp. 6– 7. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 July 2017 . Retrieved 26 June 2017 . ^ "MARCOS – Bravehearts who rescued Mumbai's hostages" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 28 November 2008. Archived from the original on 1 December 2008 . Retrieved 28 November 2008 . ^ "Naval ships to bail out Indians stranded in Libya" .

The Times of India . 27 February 2011 . Retrieved 27 June 2017 . ^ "Pirate Mother Ship Prantalay Sinks off Lakshadweep during Anti Piracy Operations by India" . Marine Buzz . 30 January 2011. Archived from the original on 3 April 2016 . Retrieved 27 June 2017 . ^ Suman Sharma (14 March 2011). "Indian Navy captures 61 pirates, rescues 13 sailors" . DNA India . Retrieved 27 June 2017 . ^ Ben Arnoldy (7 February 2011). "India pushes back on Somali pirates' new 'mother ship' offensive" .

The Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved 27 June 2017 . ^ "The great Yemen escape: Operation Rahat by numbers" .

The Hindu . 10 April 2015. Archived from the original on 1 February 2017 . Retrieved 27 June 2017 . ^ Rajat Pandit (19 April 2016). "Navy plane thwarts piracy bid in Arabian Sea" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 27 June 2017 . ^ a b "9 pirates being brought to India to face legal action, says Navy a day after rescuing 23 Pakistani crew from Iranian fishing vessel" .

The Economic Times . Retrieved 9 May 2024 . ^ "Anti-piracy Act has been a great enabler: Navy chief" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 9 May 2024 . ^ "Over 10 warships sent to deter pirates of the Arabian Sea" .

The Times of India . 9 January 2024. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 13 January 2024 . ^ "Navy does away with ship terms 'Jackstaff' and 'Jack', replaces with National Flag Staff, National Flag" .

The Indian Express . 24 May 2024 . Retrieved 24 May 2024 . ^ Bratton, Patrick C; Till, Geoffrey (2012). Sea Power and the Asia-Pacific . London, United Kingdom: Routledge. ISBN 978-1136627248 . ^ Kirchberger, Sarah (2015). Assessing China's Naval Power: Technological Innovation, Economic Constraints, and Strategic Implications . Heidelberg: Springer. p. 60. ISBN 9783662471272 . OCLC 911616881 . ^ Admiral Arun Prakash (November 2005). "Shaping India's Maritime Strategy – Opportunities and Challenges" . Indian Navy . Government of India. Archived from the original on 2 May 2006 . Retrieved 27 June 2017 . ^ "Vision of the Indian Navy" . Indian Navy . Ministry of Defence (Navy). 12 October 2014. Archived from the original on 2 June 2017 . Retrieved 27 June 2017 . ^ a b c d "Organisation of Indian Navy" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 2 June 2017 . Retrieved 16 June 2017 . ^ a b Anwesha Madhukalya (24 February 2016). "Did You Know That Only 3 People Have Been Given The Highest Ranks in the Indian Armed Forces?" . ScoopWhoop . Archived from the original on 4 January 2017 . Retrieved 7 July 2017 . ^ "Director Generals" . www.indiannavy.nic.in . Archived from the original on 2 June 2017 . Retrieved 7 July 2017 . ^ "The Commands" . Indian Navy . Government of India. Archived from the original on 2 June 2017 . Retrieved 7 July 2017 . ^ "Basic Organisation" . joinindiannavy.gov.in . Retrieved 27 September 2024 . ^ "WNC Mumbai Organisation" . Indian Navy . Retrieved 7 July 2017 . ^ "Flag Officer Sea Training (FOST)" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 2 June 2017 . Retrieved 7 July 2017 . ^ "ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR COMMAND" . Integrated Defence Staff . Ministry of Defence. Archived from the original on 8 January 2017 . Retrieved 7 July 2017 . ^ Admiral Arun Prakash (retd.) (August 2007). "INDIA'S HIGHER DEFENCE ORGANIZATION: IMPLICATIONS FOR NATIONAL SECURITY AND JOINTNESS" (PDF) . Institute for Defence Studies and Analysis . pp. 13– 31. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 7 July 2017 . ^ "Principal Staff Officers, Indian Navy" . Retrieved 11 July 2019 . ^ "DGs and Controllers, Indian Navy" . Retrieved 11 July 2019 . ^ "ADMIRAL KRISHNA SWAMINATHAN, PVSM, AVSM, VSM ASSUMES CHARGE AS THE 27th CHIEF OF THE NAVAL STAFF OF INDIAN NAVY" . pib.gov.in . Retrieved 31 May 2026 . ^ "VICE ADMIRAL AJAY KOCHHAR, PVSM, AVSM, NM, ASSUMES CHARGE AS THE 48TH VICE CHIEF OF THE NAVAL STAFF" . pib.gov.in . Retrieved 30 May 2026 . ^ "VICE ADMIRAL TARUN SOBTI, AVSM, VSM ASSUMED CHARGE AS DEPUTY CHIEF OF NAVAL STAFF" . pib.gov.in . Retrieved 1 October 2023 . ^ "VICE ADMIRAL GURCHARAN SINGH, AVSM, NM ASSUMES CHARGE AS THE CHIEF OF PERSONNEL OF THE INDIAN NAVY" . PIB Delhi . 1 November 2025 . Retrieved 2 November 2025 . ^ "VICE ADMIRAL B SIVAKUMAR, AVSM, VSM, ASSUMES CHARGE AS THE CHIEF OF MATERIEL" . PIB Delhi . 1 November 2025 . Retrieved 2 November 2025 . ^ "VICE ADMIRAL SANJAY VATSAYAN, PVSM, AVSM, NM TAKES OVER AS THE FLAG OFFICER COMMANDING-IN-CHIEF, WESTERN NAVAL COMMAND" . pib.gov.in . Retrieved 30 May 2026 . ^ "Vice Admiral Sanjay Bhalla takes charge as flag officer commanding-in-chief, eastern naval command" . Mid-day . 31 October 2025 . Retrieved 31 October 2025 . ^ "VICE ADMIRAL SAMEER SAXENA, AVSM, NM TAKES OVER AS THE FLAG OFFICER COMMANDING-IN-CHIEF, SOUTHERN NAVAL COMMAND" . pib.gov.in . Retrieved 31 October 2025 . ^ "WNC Authorities & Units" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 31 July 2017 . Retrieved 16 July 2017 . ^ "Eastern Naval Command Authorities & Units" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 22 July 2017 . Retrieved 16 July 2017 . ^ "Southern Naval Command Authorities & Units" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 31 July 2017 . Retrieved 16 July 2017 . ^ "INS Shivaji" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 31 July 2017 . Retrieved 16 July 2017 . ^ "INS Kadamba" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 31 July 2017 . Retrieved 16 July 2017 . ^ Ravi Sharma (June 2005). "INS Kadamba commissioned" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 16 July 2017 . ^ "Overseas Military Bases of a budding Super Power – India" . Defence News . 28 November 2016. Archived from the original on 31 July 2017 . Retrieved 16 July 2017 . ^ Peri, Dinakar (20 December 2020). "India looks at integrating more countries into coastal radar network" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 29 November 2023 . ^ "Indian Listening Station in Oman Monitoring Pakistan's Naval Communications" . AA Me, IN . 27 February 2013. Archived from the original on 31 July 2017 . Retrieved 16 July 2017 . ^ "INS Kattabomman" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 30 September 2016 . Retrieved 16 July 2017 . ^ a b "INS Abhimanyu" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 30 September 2016 . Retrieved 16 July 2017 . ^ G. S. Subrahmanyam (12 July 2016). "Admiral Lanba commissions Marine Commandos unit 'INS Karna' " .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 23 December 2016 . Retrieved 16 July 2017 . ^ Jyoti Malhotra (12 August 2013). "How India's pride INS Arihant was built" . Business Standard India . New Delhi. Archived from the original on 11 February 2017 . Retrieved 16 July 2017 . ^ Rajat Pandit (26 March 2013). "India readies hi-tech naval base to keep eye on China" .

The Economic Times . 11 August 2024. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 12 August 2024 . ^ "Submarines Active" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 2 June 2017 . Retrieved 18 July 2017 . ^ "Sindhughosh Class" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 1 October 2016 . Retrieved 18 July 2017 . ^ "Shishumar Class" . Indian Navy . Retrieved 18 July 2017 . ^ "INS Chakra: Govt inducts Russian-origin Akula II class Nerpa into Navy" . Economic Times . 4 April 2012. Archived from the original on 6 September 2015 . Retrieved 18 July 2017 . ^ Sudhi Ranjan Sen (16 December 2014). "India to Lease a Second Nuclear Submarine From Russia" . NDTV . Archived from the original on 1 July 2017 . Retrieved 18 July 2017 . ^ Peri, Dinakar (18 October 2016). "Now, India has a nuclear triad" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 21 December 2016 . Retrieved 18 July 2017 . ^ Suman Sharma (12 June 2010). "Navy creating a new base for nuke submarines" . DNA India . Archived from the original on 7 January 2016 . Retrieved 18 July 2017 . ^ Rajat Pandit (17 July 2009). "India set to launch nuclear-powered submarine" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 1 February 2015 . Retrieved 18 July 2017 . ^ Pandit, Rajat (18 February 2015). "Government clears construction of 7 stealth frigates, 6 nuclear-powered attack submarines" .

The Economic Times . ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 12 August 2024 . ^ Sharma, Shivani; Negi, Manjeet (2 December 2025). "Navy to get INS Aridhaman, third Indian-made nuclear submarine" . India Today . Retrieved 2 December 2025 . ^ a b "CHAKRA EXCLUSIVE: India's fourth SSBN sails out for sea trials" . chakranewz . Retrieved 30 December 2025 . ^ a b "India is reported to have begun sea trials of the fourth of its new Arihant-class nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines" . Zona Militar . 30 December 2025 . Retrieved 31 December 2025 . ^ "Centre clears deal to build 2 nuclear submarines, purchase 31 predator drones" . India Today . 9 October 2024 . Retrieved 10 October 2024 . ^ Sharma, Shivani; Negi, Manjeet (2 December 2025). "Navy to get INS Aridhaman, third Indian-made nuclear submarine" . India Today . Retrieved 2 December 2025 . ^ Sharma, Shivani; Negi, Manjeet (2 December 2025). "Navy to get INS Aridhaman, third Indian-made nuclear submarine" . India Today . Retrieved 2 December 2025 . ^ Gady, Franz-Stefan (5 March 2019). "India, Russia To Sign $3 Billion Nuclear Sub Deal This Week" .

The Diplomat . Archived from the original on 5 March 2019 . Retrieved 6 March 2019 . ^ "India, Russia sign deal on nuclear submarine" .

The Hindu . PTI. 7 March 2019. ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 6 January 2026 . ^ "Govt fact checks report claiming India, Russia sealed USD 2-billion submarine deal" . India Today . 4 December 2025 . Retrieved 6 January 2026 . ^ Singh, Mayank (10 July 2025). "Mazagon Dockyard to finalise two submarine projects this financial year" .

The New Indian Express . Retrieved 12 July 2025 . ^ Bhattacharjya, Satarupa; Kumar, Bhaswar (27 July 2025). "India eyes stealth edge with new submarines amid China's growing presence" . Business Standard . Retrieved 28 July 2025 . ^ "India going for German-origin submarines, may scrap project for more French ones" .

The Times of India . 14 October 2025. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 14 October 2025 . ^ "Defence ministry to seek CCS approval to build 6 submarines under Project 75" . Hindustan Times . 16 January 2026 . Retrieved 16 January 2026 . ^ Philip, Snehesh Alex (1 December 2025). "India hopes to seal submarine contract with Germany this fiscal, MDL pares down cost 'significantly' " . ThePrint . Retrieved 2 December 2025 . ^ Snehesh Alex Phillip (18 July 2022). "India's submarine plans hit by dwindling fleet as Navy decommissions INS Sindhudhvaj" .

The Print . New Delhi . Retrieved 3 September 2022 . ^ Menon, Adithya Krishna (15 September 2025). "Indian Navy's indigenous submarine programs gather steam" . Naval News . Retrieved 10 January 2026 . ^ Peri, Dinakar (22 February 2025). "DRDO indigenous submarine proposal to go for CCS approval in couple of months; eight years for first sub" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 22 February 2025 . ^ "Naval air units" . Global Security . Archived from the original on 9 June 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Naval air squadrons" . Indian Navy . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ IISS 2024 , p. 268-269. ^ "India, France Sign Rs 63,000 Crore Deal For 26 Rafale-M Jets For Navy" . NDTV . 28 April 2025. Archived from the original on 28 April 2025 . Retrieved 29 April 2025 . ^ a b "Indian Navy reports crash of fifth MiG-29K in four years" . Janes Information Services . 10 March 2024. Archived from the original on 25 August 2023 . Retrieved 10 March 2024 . ...India originally procured 37 single-seat MiG-29K and eight MiG-29KUB trainers...Of the five MiG-29K crashes in the navy, two involved KUBs... ^ "INS Vikrant: Meet MiG-29 'Black Panthers', primary fighter jets to operate from India Navy's aircraft carrier" . Zee News . 5 September 2022. Archived from the original on 13 August 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . Russia shipped a total of 45 MiG-29K/KUB fighters to India in two batches. ^ "MiG-29K Trainer Jet Crashes Into Sea, Pilot Saved, Search On For Other" . NDTV . 27 November 2020 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ IISS 2024 , p. 268. ^ a b c d e f g h i "World Air Forces 2026" . FlightGlobal . p. 20 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "India clears purchase of 114 Rafale, six P8I Poseidon aircraft" . CNBC TV18 . 12 February 2026 . Retrieved 12 February 2026 . ^ "BN-2 Islander" . Bharat Rakshak . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Defence ministry, HAL ink ₹2,890 cr deal to upgrade navy's 25 Dornier aircraft" .

The Hindustan Times . 15 March 2024. Archived from the original on 1 April 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 .

The defence ministry in March last year signed a ₹667-crore contract with HAL for six Dornier-228 aircraft ^ "Commissioning of INAS 314 - "Raptors" " . Press Information Bureau (Press release). 29 November 2019. Archived from the original on 22 January 2025 . Retrieved 3 January 2022 . ^ a b IISS 2024 , p. 269. ^ "World Air Forces 2026" . FlightGlobal . p. 20 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Indian Navy bids farewell to UH-3H helicopter after 17 years of service" .

The Economic Times . 28 June 2024. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 28 June 2024 . UH-3H helicopter will be replaced by Sea King 42C ^ "Romeos are coming to India! Long wait for MH-60R multi-mission helicopter for Indian Navy is over" .

The Financial Express . 28 July 2022. Archived from the original on 12 November 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ a b Rana, Javaria (10 June 2026). "Navy receives 21 of the 24 Romeos; mulling a repeat order" .

The New Indian Express . Retrieved 12 June 2026 . ^ "India buys 194 microlight aircraft from Slovenia" . Deccan Herald . 13 October 2015. Archived from the original on 21 July 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ...110 microlight for training air wing cadets, IAF would get 72 and Navy 12 microlights. ^ "Adani Defence Delivers 2nd Drishti-10 Drone To Navy For Maritime Security" . NDTV . 4 December 2024. Archived from the original on 2 April 2025 . Retrieved 1 May 2025 . ^ "Navy inducts 2nd UAV from Adani Defence and Aerospace" . Business Line . 4 December 2024. Archived from the original on 9 January 2025 . Retrieved 1 May 2025 . ^ "Drishti 10 Starliner drone crashes off Porbandar during Naval pre-acceptance trial by vendor" .

The Print . 14 January 2025 . Retrieved 21 July 2025 . ^ "Indian Navy to Induct 10 Drishti 10 MALE Drones for Round-the-Clock Sea Surveillance" . Newsd Defence . 10 January 2026 . Retrieved 12 January 2026 . ^ "Navy's Heron UAV Crashes Off Kerala's Coast After Engine Failure" . NDTV . 21 December 2024. Archived from the original on 19 February 2025 . Retrieved 1 May 2025 .

The navy has ten such UAVs. ^ Peri, Dinakar (25 November 2020). "Navy inducts two Sea Guardian drones on lease from U.S." The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 19 June 2021 . Retrieved 30 November 2020 . ^ "India, US sign deal worth Rs 32,000 crore for buying 31 Predator drones" . ANI News . 15 October 2024. Archived from the original on 18 April 2025 . Retrieved 1 May 2025 . Of these 31 Predator drones, 15 will go to the Indian Navy, while the rest will be equally divided between the Air Force and the Army. ^ Commodore Ranjit B Rai (retd.) (December 2013). "The progression of Indian Navy's weaponry and status" . India Strategic . Archived from the original on 3 August 2016 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ Franz-Stefan Gady (15 March 2017). "India Test Fires Supersonic Cruise Missile" .

The Diplomat . he Convention News Company, Inc. Archived from the original on 20 March 2017 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ "Brahmos naval version tested successfully" . Press Information Bureau . 25 March 2008. Archived from the original on 24 September 2010 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ Neelam Mathews (23 August 2013). "Indian Navy Requests New Patrol Aircraft" . AIN Online . Archived from the original on 31 July 2017 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ "Air Defense: Barak Gets Bigger And Better" . Strategy Page . Strategy World. 7 August 2013. Archived from the original on 1 December 2021 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ Y. Mallikarjun (5 October 2012). "Nuclear-capable Dhanush successfully test-fired" .

The Hindu . ^ Rajat Pandit (19 February 2008). "India ready to join elite N-strike club" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ Mallikarjun, Y.; Subramanian, T. S. (19 February 2008). "India successfully test-fires underwater missile" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 24 November 2016 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ Ankit Panda (13 May 2004). "India Inches Closer to Credible Nuclear Triad With K-4 SLBM Test" .

The Diplomat . Archived from the original on 8 August 2017 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ "Area of Work DRDO" . Defence Research and Development Organization . Ministry of Defence. Archived from the original on 14 August 2017 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ Arunkumar Bhatt (6 December 2004). "Navy building high-speed data network" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 7 January 2016 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ Vijay Sakhuja Change but Continuity: The Indian Navy Marches Ahead . Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies. 10 August 2004 ^ Vijay Sakhuja (10 August 2004). "Change but Continuity: The Indian Navy Marches Ahead" . Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies . Archived from the original on 7 January 2009 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ "Information technology and Indian Navy" . Deccan Herald . 12 April 2006. Archived from the original on 26 April 2006 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ "Indian Navy to have Information Technology cadre" . Economic Times . 12 July 2012 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ "Directorate of Information Technology" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 3 August 2016 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ a b Ajey Lele (9 September 2013). "GSAT-7: India's Strategic Satellite" . Space News . Retrieved 19 July 2017 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Pubby, Manu (18 July 2019). "Indian Navy: Navy to buy Rs 1,589 crore satellite from ISRO" .

The Economic Times . Retrieved 28 December 2019 . ^ "Isro to build 2nd dedicated satellite for Navy to interlink warships, aircraft - Times of India" .

The Times of India . 21 July 2019 . Retrieved 28 December 2019 . ^ a b Anil Chopra (6 February 2016). "All you need to know about the Fleet Review being hosted by Indian Navy in Vizag" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 31 July 2017 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ Cdr R Madhusoodanan. "Building Bridges of Friendship" . Ministry of Defence . Archived from the original on 11 April 2009 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ "India hosts Milan naval exercise; around 50 countries participating" .

The Economic Times . 19 February 2024. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 28 February 2024 . ^ "From 4 to 39 Navies: How Milan Soared Over the Years, What It Means for the Indian Navy" . News18 . 4 March 2022 . Retrieved 7 April 2022 . ^ "Indian Navy showcases power" .

The Times of India . 21 February 2024 . Retrieved 30 March 2024 . ^ "21st EDITION OF INDIA FRANCE BILATERAL NAVAL EXERCISE 'VARUNA' – 2023" . pib.gov.in . Retrieved 30 March 2024 . ^ "INS Tarkash participates in KONKAN bilateral exercise" . Business Standard India . 15 August 2019 . Retrieved 28 November 2020 . ^ "ANNUAL BILATERAL MARITIME EXERCISE KONKAN 2023" . pib.gov.in . Retrieved 30 March 2024 . ^ "Indo – Russian Bilateral Naval Exercise ( Indra Navy – 2016)" . Press Information Bureau . Ministry of Defence. 13 December 2016. Archived from the original on 15 June 2017 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ "INDRA NAVY 2020: Indian, Russian navies begin naval exercise; guided missile destroyers, frigates in action" . Times Now . 4 September 2020 . Retrieved 28 November 2020 . ^ "Exercise Malabar – 2016" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 10 June 2017 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ "Nimitz Strike Group Participates in Malabar with Australia, India and Japan" . United States Navy . 17 November 2020 . Retrieved 21 November 2020 . ^ "28th EDITION OF SINGAPORE-INDIA MARITIME BILATERAL EXERCISE 'SIMBEX' " . pib.gov.in . Retrieved 7 September 2021 . ^ "INDIAN NAVAL SHIP TARKASH REACHES SOUTH AFRICA FOR IBSAMAR VII" . pib.gov.in . Retrieved 14 October 2022 . ^ "INDIAN NAVY PARTICIPATES IN INDIA, SINGAPORE AND THAILAND TRILATERAL MARITIME EXERCISE 'SITMEX' " . pib.gov.in . Retrieved 30 March 2024 . ^ "SLINEX 15 – Sri Lanka-India Exercise" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "India and Sri Lanka begin their annual exercise SLINEX today" . DD News . 19 October 2020 . Retrieved 27 November 2020 . ^ " 'Naseem Al Bahr - 2022' " . Indian Navy . Retrieved 30 March 2024 . ^ Arora, Sumit (22 November 2022). "13th bilateral naval exercise Naseem Al Bahr-2022" . adda247 . Retrieved 30 March 2024 . ^ "5TH EDITION OF AUSINDEX-23 AT SYDNEY" . pib.gov.in . Retrieved 30 March 2024 . ^ "JAPAN INDIA MARITIME EXERCISE 2023 (JIMEX 23)" . pib.gov.in . Retrieved 30 March 2024 . ^ Arora, Sumit (24 August 2021). "2nd Indo-Qatari joint Naval Exercise "Zair-Al-Bahr" in Persian Gulf" . adda247 . Retrieved 30 March 2024 . ^ "Joint Exercise Between the Qatari Emiri Navy and the Indian Navy Forces (The Roar of the Sea)" . Indian Navy . Retrieved 29 November 2020 . ^ "4th edition of Indo-Indonesia Bilateral Exercise Samudra Shakti-23 concluded in South China Sea" . Indian Navy . Retrieved 30 March 2024 . ^ "INDIA & BANGLADESH NAVIES UNDERTAKE CORPAT & EX-BONGOSAGAR" . pib.gov.in . Retrieved 30 March 2024 . ^ "Indian Navy holds bilateral naval drill 'Zayed Talwar' with UAE" . India Today . 12 August 2023 . Retrieved 30 March 2024 . ^ "INDIA-SAUDI ARABIA BILATERAL MARITIME EXERCISE AL MOHED AL HINDI 23" . pib.gov.in . Retrieved 30 March 2024 . ^ "Indian Navy to participate in multilateral maritime exercise with African nations" . ddnews.gov.in . Retrieved 26 March 2025 . ^ "28th Indo-Thai Corpat - Closing Ceremony" . Indian Navy . Retrieved 27 November 2020 . ^ "33rd Edition of India-Indonesia Coordinated Patrol (Ind-Indo Corpat) Commences at Port Blair" . pib.gov.in . 19 March 2020 . Retrieved 27 November 2020 . ^ "8th Indo – Myanmar Coordinated Patrol" . pib.gov.in . 21 May 2020 . Retrieved 27 November 2020 . ^ Vijay Sakhuja (6 December 2005). "Strategic Shift in Chinese Naval Strategy in Indian Ocean" . Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies . Archived from the original on 6 July 2017 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ "India to take part in China's International Fleet Review" .

The Hindu . 20 March 2009. Archived from the original on 16 November 2010 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ Annual Report . Ministry of Defence. 2006. p. 29. ^ "Indian Navy Concludes Theatre Level Readiness and Operational Exercise (TROPEX 2017)" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ Anil K. Joseph (17 April 2007). "Indian Navy holds joint drills with top naval powers" .

The Tribune . Archived from the original on 14 October 2007 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ P Vaidyanathan Iyer (23 October 2008). "Eye on China, India and Japan ink security pact" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 7 January 2016 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 . ^ "Two Indian naval ships dock in Sai Gon Port for 5-day visit" . Vietnam News Service . 9 May 2007. Archived from the original on 12 June 2008 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ Anushree Bhattacharya (3 August 2007). "India's Joint Naval Exercises in the ASEAN Region" . Institute for Peace and Conflict Studies . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ Scott 2011 , p. 152. ^ "India, S Korea to hold joint naval exercise" . Outlook India . 31 May 2007. Archived from the original on 14 October 2007 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "A year of determined pursuit of perfection for Navy fleet" .

The Hindu . 22 December 2008 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Navy war games with French, British in Atlantic next month" .

The Hindu . 29 May 2009. Archived from the original on 1 June 2009 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ Ekatha Ann John (10 February 2014). "Milan 2014: Naval exercise off Andamans concludes" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 7 September 2016 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "INS Talwar in exercise Cutlass Express-21 conduct of VBSS training by Indian Navy" . Press Information Bureau, Indian Navy. 29 July 2021 . Retrieved 16 February 2022 . ^ "Cutlass Express" . www.africom.mil . United States Africa Command . Retrieved 16 February 2022 . ^ "PM calls on Indian Ocean navies to pool resources" .

The Times of India . 15 February 2008. Archived from the original on 11 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "INDIAN OCEAN NAVAL SYMPOSIUM (IONS)" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 10 February 2008 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ ANNA AHRONHEIM (10 May 2017). "INDIAN NAVY SHIPS DOCK IN HAIFA PORT AHEAD OF HISTORICAL VISIT BY INDIAN PM" .

The Jerusalem Post . Archived from the original on 24 July 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Indian Navy: INS Brahmaputra on Goodwill Visit to Israel" . Marine Buzz . 2 June 2009. Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "INS Trikand visits Istanbul, Turkey" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Indian Warships visit Alexandria, Egypt" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Indian Warships on Overseas Deployment: Visit Souda Bay, Greece" . Press Information Bureau . Ministry of Defence. 18 April 2017. Archived from the original on 19 April 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Indian Naval Ships visit Phuket (Thailand)" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Eastern Fleet Ships on Overseas Deployment to Indonesia" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Naval Ships visit Freemantle (Perth), Australia" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "INS Sumitra visits Auckland, New Zealand for International Naval Review 2016" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "India – Tonga Relations" (PDF) . Ministry of External Affairs . Government of India. 15 January 2016. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 April 2016 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Western Fleet Ships visit South Africa" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Visit of Indian Warships to Mombasa, Kenya" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Warships on visit to Qatar" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Warships on visit to Oman" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Indian Navy's Western fleet ships visit United Arab Emirates" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Warships on visit to Bahrain" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Warships on visit to Kuwait" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "INS Tarangini" . Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 1 September 2006 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ a b "Indian Navy's second Mt Everest expedition flagged off" . Daily News and Analysis . Diligent Media Corporation Ltd. 23 March 2017. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Indian Navy on top of the world" . Chennai Online . Chennai Interactive Business Services. Archived from the original on 11 June 2008 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Indian Navy's Mt. Everest Team sets many new records: From the deep blue seas to the highest peaks Indian naval team does it all" . Everest News . Archived from the original on 21 August 2006 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Indian Navy Team in Iceland" . Embassy of Iceland – New Delhi, India . 25 August 2006. Archived from the original on 3 December 2008 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "An Indian Navy team is just back from an arduous ski expedition in Greenland" .

The Hindu . 19 August 2006. Archived from the original on 29 October 2010 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Indian Navy Timeline" . Bharat Rakshak . Archived from the original on 6 February 2007 . Retrieved 1 August 2017 . ^ "Navy team becomes first military unit to ski to South Pole" .

The Times of India . Hubli. 4 December 2016. Archived from the original on 11 August 2017 . Retrieved 2 August 2017 . ^ "INS Kadamba Naval Base, India" . Naval Technology . Kable Intelligence Limited. Archived from the original on 15 August 2017 . Retrieved 2 August 2017 . ^ Sudhi Ranjan Sen (10 September 2015). "Now, India has the Largest Naval Base East of the Suez Canal" . NDTV . Archived from the original on 3 August 2017 . Retrieved 2 August 2017 . ^ "Seabird phase II work will start by 2016: Naval officer" . Deccan Herald . Karwar: The Printers (Mysore) Private Ltd. 5 December 2015. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 2 August 2017 . ^ Saurav Jha (30 March 2016). "India's Undersea Deterrent" .

The Diplomat . Archived from the original on 8 April 2016. ^ Franz-Stefan Gady (9 November 2016). "Confirmed: India's Next Aircraft Carrier Will Be Nuclear" .

The Diplomat . Archived from the original on 4 August 2017 . Retrieved 3 August 2017 . ^ "Navy's long-term plan is to have three aircraft carriers, says Navy chief Admiral Karambir Singh" . Business Line . 3 December 2019 . Retrieved 4 December 2019 . ^ "Government gives green signal to build worth over Rs 20,000 crore" .

The Economic Times . Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. 21 May 2017 . Retrieved 3 August 2017 . ^ "MoD gives nod to 7 stealth frigates worth Rs 13,000 crore" .

The Times of India . 12 March 2016. Archived from the original on 23 April 2016 . Retrieved 3 August 2017 . ^ Pandit, Rajat (20 November 2018). "India, Russia ink $500 million deal for construction of two guided-missile stealth frigates - Times of India" .

The Times of India . ^ K. V. Prasad (25 December 2013). "MoD clears Navy plans to get 16 shallow-water anti-sub vessels" .

The Tribune . New Delhi. Archived from the original on 13 December 2016 . Retrieved 4 August 2017 . ^ "India Issues RFI for Next Generation Missile Vessel" . Forecast International . 11 February 2015. Archived from the original on 5 August 2017 . Retrieved 4 August 2017 . ^ Rahul Singh (2 March 2017). "India may ink Rs 32,000-cr deal for building minesweepers next month" . Hindustan Times . HT Media Limited. Archived from the original on 4 August 2017 . Retrieved 4 August 2017 . ^ "Indian Navy gears up to induct more submarines, warships in 2017" .

The Asian Age . Mumbai. 2 January 2017. Archived from the original on 4 August 2017 . Retrieved 4 August 2017 . ^ Rajat Pandit (24 July 2017). "India finally kick-starts 'mother of all underwater defence deals' after 10-year delay" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 29 July 2017 . Retrieved 4 August 2017 . ^ Abhishek Saxena (15 May 2015). "Indian Navy Soon To Be The Most Formidable Submarine Force on the Planet! Here's What You Need To Know" . Indiatimes . Times Internet Limited. Archived from the original on 5 August 2017 . Retrieved 4 August 2017 . ^ "Defence projects worth Rs. 21,000 crore cleared" .

The Hindu . 19 July 2014. Archived from the original on 28 August 2017 . Retrieved 4 August 2017 . ^ "Autonomous surface vessel completes 1,500-km voyage from Mumbai to Thoothukudi - India Shipping News" . 8 November 2024 . Retrieved 12 November 2024 . ^ "Pune company to provide forces with 12 unmanned weaponised boats for coast, Pangong lake surveillance" .

The Times of India . 5 October 2023. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 12 November 2024 . ^ a b " 'Drone sale to India would cement bilateral ties with US' - Times of India" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 31 October 2017 . ^ "Indian Navy to change its ensign" . Rediff . 24 April 2004. Archived from the original on 19 August 2016 . Retrieved 4 August 2017 . ^ Gautum Datt (5 August 2014). "Indian Navy to finally include Satyameva Jayate below national emblem on its flag and crest" . India Today . Archived from the original on 2 January 2020 . Retrieved 2 January 2020 . ^ "Indian Navy gets new deadly submarine! INS Vela gets commissioned" .