The Hope") Show globe Map of Israel ( Green Line ) The Land of Israel , also called Palestine or the Holy Land , was home to the ancient Canaanites and later the kingdoms of Israel and Judah and Hasmonean Judea . Located near continental crossroads , its demographics shifted under various empires. 19th-century European antisemitism fuelled the Zionist movement for a Jewish homeland , which gained British support with the 1917 Balfour Declaration .

After World War I , Britain occupied the region and established Mandatory Palestine . British rule and Jewish immigration in the leadup to the Holocaust intensified Arab-Jewish tensions , which escalated into a civil war after the 1947 United Nations (UN) Partition Plan . Israel declared independence as the British Mandate ended on 14 May 1948, followed by an invasion by Arab states .

The 1949 armistice expanded Israel beyond the UN plan, while no new Arab state was created, leaving Gaza under Egyptian control and the West Bank ruled by Jordan . Most Palestinian Arabs fled or were expelled during the Nakba , while Israeli independence prompted antisemitism in the Arab world and Jewish exodus therefrom , mainly to Israel.

After the 1967 Six-Day War , Israel occupied the West Bank, Gaza and Egyptian Sinai , and annexed East Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan Heights . Peace treaties were signed with Egypt in 1979 (the Sinai being returned in 1982) and Jordan in 1994.

The 1993 Oslo Accords introduced limited Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza, while the 2020 Abraham Accords normalised ties with more Arab states, but the Israeli–Palestinian conflict persists. Israel's illegal occupation of the Palestinian territories has drawn international criticism, with most Middle East experts arguing that Israel's treatment of Palestinians in the West Bank vis-à-vis Israeli settlers constitutes a system of apartheid .

After the Hamas -led October 7 attacks , Israel began committing genocide against Palestinians in Gaza . Israel and its allies, including the United States , deny that Israel's actions constitute genocide.

The Basic Laws of Israel establish the Knesset as a proportionally elected parliament . It shapes the government , led by the prime minister , and elects the largely ceremonial president . Israel has one of the Middle East's largest economies, one of Asia's highest living standards , and globally ranks 25th in nominal GDP and 14th in nominal GDP per capita . One of the world's most technologically advanced countries, Israel allocates a larger share of its economy to research and development than any other state and is believed to possess nuclear weapons .

The only country with a revived official language, Hebrew , the culture of Israel combines Jewish traditions with Arab influences. Etymology Further information: Israel (name) and Names of the Levant § Israel and Judea The names Land of Israel and Children of Israel have historically been used to refer to the biblical Kingdom of Israel and the entire Jewish people respectively.

The name Israel (Hebrew: Yīsrāʾēl ; Septuagint Ancient Greek : Ἰσραήλ , Israēl , " El (God) persists/rules") refers to the patriarch Jacob who, according to the Hebrew Bible , was given the name after he successfully wrestled with the Angel of the Lord .

The earliest known archaeological artefact to mention the word Israel as a collective is the Merneptah Stele of ancient Egypt (dated to the late-13th century BCE). Under the British Mandate (1920–1948), the entire region was known as Palestine . Upon establishment in 1948 , the country formally adopted the name State of Israel ( Hebrew : מְדִינַת יִשְׂרָאֵל , Medīnat Yisrā'el ⓘ ; Arabic : دَوْلَة إِسْرَائِيل , Dawlat Isrāʼīl , ) after other proposed names including Land of Israel ( Eretz Israel ), Ever (from ancestor Eber ), Zion , and Judea , were considered but rejected.

The name Israel was suggested by David Ben-Gurion and passed by a vote of 6–3.

In the early weeks after establishment, the government chose the term Israeli to denote a citizen of the state. History Main article: History of Israel Further information: History of Israel (1948–present) For a chronological guide, see Timeline of Israeli history . Prehistory Further information: Prehistory of the Levant The Ubeidiya prehistoric site in northern Israel shows the presence of archaic humans around 1.5 million years ago.

The second-oldest evidence of anatomically modern humans outside Africa is a 200,000-year-old fossil from Misliya Cave on Mount Carmel.

The Natufian culture ( c. 10,000 BCE) may be linked to the Proto-Afroasiatic language and is notable for adopting sedentism before the advent of agriculture and the Neolithic Revolution . Bronze and Iron Ages Further information: Ancient Israel and Judah Tel Megiddo , the ruins of a Canaanite and later Israelite city Early references to " Canaan " and "Canaanites" appear in ancient Near Eastern and Egyptian texts ( c. 2000 BCE); these populations were structured as politically independent city-states .

During the Late Bronze Age (1550–1200 BCE), large parts of Canaan formed vassal states of the New Kingdom of Egypt .

As a result of the Late Bronze Age collapse , Canaan fell into chaos, and Egyptian control over the region collapsed. Ancestors of the Israelites are thought to have included ancient Semitic-speaking peoples native to this area. : 78–79 Modern archaeological accounts suggest that the Israelites and their culture branched out of the Canaanite peoples through the settlement of the central highlands and the development of a distinct monolatristic —and later monotheistic —religion centered on Yahweh . They spoke an archaic form of Hebrew , known as Biblical Hebrew . Around the same time, the Philistines settled on the southern coastal plain .

The Yavne-Yam ostracon , a Paleo-Hebrew inscription documenting administration in Judah Most modern scholars agree that the Exodus narrative in the Torah and Old Testament did not take place as depicted; however, some elements of these traditions do have historical roots . There is debate about the earliest existence of the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah and their extent and power.

While it is unclear if there was a United Kingdom of Israel , historians and archaeologists agree that the northern Kingdom of Israel existed by ca. 900 BCE : 169–195 and the Kingdom of Judah by ca. 850 BCE.

The Kingdom of Israel was the more prosperous of the two and soon developed into a regional power, with a capital at Samaria ; during the Omride dynasty , it controlled Samaria , Galilee , the upper Jordan Valley , the plain of Sharon and large parts of Transjordan .

The Kingdom of Israel was conquered around 720 BCE by the Neo-Assyrian Empire .

The Kingdom of Judah, under Davidic rule with its capital in Jerusalem , later became a client state of first the Neo-Assyrian Empire and then the Neo-Babylonian Empire . It is estimated that the region's population was around 400,000 in the Iron Age II .

In 587/6 BCE, following a revolt in Judah , King Nebuchadnezzar II besieged and destroyed Jerusalem and Solomon's Temple , dissolved the kingdom and exiled much of the Judean elite to Babylon . Classical antiquity Further information: Second Temple period Hasmonean coin of Antigonus II Mattathias , depicting the Temple menorah After capturing Babylon in 539 BCE, Cyrus the Great , founder of the Achaemenid Empire , issued a proclamation allowing the exiled Judean population to return.

The construction of the Second Temple was completed c. 520 BCE .

The Achaemenids ruled the region as the province of Yehud Medinata .

In 332 BCE, Alexander the Great conquered the region as part of his campaign against the Achaemenid Empire .

After his death, the area was controlled by the Ptolemaic and Seleucid empires as a part of Coele-Syria . Under the Hellenistic kingdoms, ongoing Hellenisation generated cultural tensions among the Jewish population that culminated under Antiochus IV , whose decrees outlawed Jewish practices and triggered the Maccabean Revolt in 167 BCE.

The revolt weakened Seleucid control over Judea; by 142/141 BCE the Hasmoneans had secured autonomy and soon established an independent Jewish kingdom that, in the late 2nd–early 1st century BCE, expanded into neighbouring territories.

The Hasmonean civil war ended with the Roman siege of Jerusalem in 63 BCE. View of the Masada fortress overlooking the Dead Sea , which is the location of a 1st-century Roman siege In 37 BCE, Herod the Great was installed as a dynastic vassal of Rome following the Roman–Parthian Wars .

In 6 CE, the area was annexed as the Roman province of Judaea ; tensions with Roman rule led to a series of Jewish–Roman wars , resulting in widespread destruction.

The First Jewish–Roman War (66–73 CE) resulted in the destruction of Jerusalem and the Second Temple and a sizable portion of the population being killed or displaced. A second uprising known as the Bar Kokhba revolt (132–136 CE) initially allowed the Jews to form an independent state, but the Romans brutally crushed the rebellion, devastating and depopulating Judea's countryside. Jerusalem was rebuilt as a Roman colony ( Aelia Capitolina ), and the province of Judea was renamed Syria Palaestina . Jews were expelled from the districts surrounding Jerusalem. Nevertheless, there was a continuous small Jewish presence, and Galilee became its religious center. Late antiquity and the medieval period Further information: Byzantine Palestine , Bilad al-Sham , and Kingdom of Jerusalem 3rd-century Kfar Bar'am synagogue in the Galilee During the Byzantine period , Early Christianity displaced Roman paganism in the 4th century CE, with Constantine embracing and promoting the Christian religion and Theodosius I making it the state religion . A series of laws were passed that discriminated against Jews and Judaism, and Jews were persecuted by both the church and the authorities. Many Jews had emigrated to flourishing diaspora communities, while locally there was both Christian immigration and local conversion.

By the middle of the 5th century, there was a Christian majority. Towards the end of the 5th century, Samaritan revolts erupted, continuing until the late 6th century and resulting in a large decrease in the Samaritan population.

After the Sasanian conquest of Jerusalem and the short-lived Jewish revolt against Heraclius in 614 CE, the Byzantine Empire reconsolidated control of the area in 628.

In 634–641 CE, the Rashidun Caliphate conquered the Levant . Caliph Umar ibn al-Khattab ( r. 634–644 ) lifted the Christian ban on Jews entering Jerusalem and permitted them to worship there. Over the next six centuries, control of the region transferred between the Umayyad , Abbasid , and Fatimid caliphates, and subsequently the Seljuk and Ayyubid dynasties.

The population drastically decreased during the following several centuries, dropping from an estimated 1 million during Roman and Byzantine periods to about 300,000 by the early Ottoman period , and there was steady Arabisation and Islamisation .

The end of the 11th century brought the Crusades , papally -sanctioned incursions of Christian crusaders intent on wresting Jerusalem and the Holy Land from Muslim control and establishing crusader states .

The Ayyubids pushed back the crusaders before Muslim rule was fully restored by the Mamluk sultans of Egypt in 1291. Modern period and the emergence of Zionism Main articles: Ottoman Palestine , Old Yishuv , and Zionism Jews at the Western Wall in the 1870s, a holy site in Judaism In 1516, the Ottoman Empire conquered the region and ruled it as part of Ottoman Syria . Two violent incidents took place against Jews, the 1517 Safed attacks and the 1517 Hebron attacks , after the Turkish Ottomans ousted the Mamluks during the Ottoman–Mamluk War . Under the Ottoman Empire, the Levant was fairly cosmopolitan, with religious freedoms for Christians, Muslims, and Jews .

In 1561 the Ottoman sultan invited Sephardic Jews escaping the Spanish Inquisition to settle in and rebuild the city of Tiberias . Under the Ottoman Empire's millet system , Christians and Jews were considered dhimmi ("protected") under Ottoman law in exchange for loyalty to the state and payment of the jizya tax. Non-Muslim Ottoman subjects faced geographic and lifestyle restrictions, though these were not always enforced.

The millet system organised non-Muslims into autonomous communities on the basis of religion.

The First Zionist Congress (1897) in Basel , Switzerland The concept of an eventual return to Zion remained a symbol within religious Jewish belief which emphasised that their return should be determined by Divine Providence rather than human action.

The Jewish population of Palestine from the Ottoman rule to the beginning of the Zionist movement, known as the Old Yishuv , comprised a minority and fluctuated in size.

During the 16th century, Jewish communities struck roots in the Four Holy Cities —Jerusalem, Tiberias, Hebron , and Safed —and in 1697, Rabbi Yehuda Hachasid led 1,500 Jews to Jerusalem. A 1660 Druze revolt against the Ottomans destroyed Safed and Tiberias .

In the second half of the 18th century, Eastern European Jews who were opponents of Hasidism , known as the Perushim , settled in Palestine.

In the late 18th century, local Arab Sheikh Daher al-Umar created a de facto independent emirate in the Galilee. Ottoman attempts to subdue the sheikh failed.

After Daher's death the Ottomans regained control of the area.

In 1799, governor Jazzar Pasha repelled an assault on Acre by Napoleon 's troops, prompting the French to abandon the Syrian campaign.

In 1834, a revolt by Palestinian Arab peasants against Egyptian conscription and taxation policies under Muhammad Ali was suppressed; Muhammad Ali's army retreated and Ottoman rule was restored with British support in 1840.

The Tanzimat reforms were implemented across the Ottoman Empire.

The first wave of modern Jewish migration to Ottoman-ruled Palestine , known as the First Aliyah , began in 1881, as Jews fled pogroms in Eastern Europe.

The 1882 May Laws increased economic discrimination against Jews, and restricted where they could live. Antisemitism, pogroms and official policies in tsarist Russia led to the emigration of three million Jews in the years between 1882 and 1914, only 1% of whom went to Palestine. Those who went to Palestine were driven primarily by ideas of self-determination and Jewish identity, rather than as a response to pogroms or economic insecurity. Zionism emerged during this time as a political movement to reestablish a Jewish homeland in Palestine.

The revival of the Hebrew language , during which Hebrew was adapted for modern use and gradually became the primary language of Jews in Palestine, also began.

The Second Aliyah (1904–1914) began after the Kishinev pogrom ; some 40,000 Jews settled in Palestine, although nearly half left eventually. Both the first and second waves of migrants were mainly Orthodox Jews .

In 1920, the territory was divided between Britain and France under the mandate system , and the British-administered area (including modern Israel) was named Mandatory Palestine . Arab opposition to British rule and Jewish immigration led to the 1920 Palestine riots and the formation of a Jewish militia known as the Haganah as an outgrowth of Hashomer, from which the Irgun and Lehi paramilitaries later split.

In 1922, the League of Nations granted Britain the Mandate for Palestine under terms which included the Balfour Declaration with its promise to the Jews and with similar provisions regarding the Arab Palestinians.

The population of the area was predominantly Arab and Muslim, with Jews accounting for about 11% and Arab Christians about 9.5% of the population.

The Third (1919–1923) and Fourth Aliyahs (1924–1929) brought an additional 100,000 Jews to Palestine.

The rise of Nazism and the increasing persecution of Jews in 1930s Europe led to the Fifth Aliyah , with an influx of a quarter of a million Jews. This was a major cause of the Arab revolt of 1936–39 , which was suppressed by British security forces and Zionist militias. Several hundred British security personnel and Jews were killed; 5,032 Arabs were killed, 14,760 wounded, and 12,622 detained. An estimated ten per cent of the adult male Palestinian Arab population was killed, wounded, imprisoned, or exiled. "Jews and Arabs in Grim Struggle for Holy Land", article from 1938 The British introduced restrictions on Jewish immigration to Palestine with the White Paper of 1939 . With countries around the world turning away Jewish refugees fleeing the Holocaust , a clandestine movement known as Aliyah Bet was organised to bring Jews to Palestine.

During World War II , Palestine was repeatedly bombed by Axis aircraft, causing casualties among both Jews and Arabs. About 30,000 Jews from Palestine served in the British military during the war, of whom around 700 were killed. Some 12,000 Palestinian Arabs also served in the British military during the war.

At the end of the war, about 31% of the population of Palestine was Jewish.

The UK found itself facing a Jewish insurgency over immigration restrictions from 1944, which intensified following the end of the war, and continued conflict with the Arab community over limit levels.

The Haganah joined Irgun and Lehi in an armed struggle against British rule.

The Haganah attempted to bring tens of thousands of Jewish refugees and Holocaust survivors to Palestine by ship. Most of the ships were intercepted by the Royal Navy and the refugees placed in detention camps in Atlit and Cyprus .

On 22 July 1946, Irgun bombed the British administrative headquarters for Palestine, killing 91.

The attack was a response to Operation Agatha (a series of raids, including one on the Jewish Agency , by the British) and was the deadliest directed at the British during the Mandate era.

The Jewish insurgency continued throughout 1946 and 1947 despite concerted efforts by the British military and Palestine Police Force to suppress it. British efforts to mediate with Jewish and Arab representatives were not successful as the Jews were unwilling to accept any solution that did not involve a Jewish state and suggested a partition of Palestine into Jewish and Arab states, while the Arabs were adamant that a Jewish state in any part of Palestine was unacceptable and that the only solution was a unified Palestine under Arab rule.

In February 1947, the British referred the Palestine issue to the newly formed United Nations .

On 15 May 1947, the UN General Assembly resolved that a Special Committee be created "to prepare ... a report on the question of Palestine".

The Report of the Committee proposed a plan to replace the British Mandate with "an independent Arab State, an independent Jewish State, and the City of Jerusalem the last to be under an International Trusteeship System". Meanwhile, the Jewish insurgency continued and peaked in July 1947, with a series of widespread guerrilla raids culminating in the Sergeants affair , in which the Irgun took two British sergeants hostage as attempted leverage against the planned execution of three Irgun operatives.

After the executions were carried out, the Irgun killed the two British soldiers, hanged their bodies from trees, and left a booby trap at the scene which injured a British soldier.

The incident caused widespread outrage in the UK.

In September 1947, the British cabinet decided to evacuate Palestine as the Mandate was no longer tenable. 1947 partition plan of Palestine between Israel and the State of Palestine , as proposed by the United Nations On 29 November 1947, the General Assembly adopted Resolution 181 (II) .

The plan attached to the resolution was essentially that proposed in the report of 3 September.

The Jewish Agency, the recognised representative of the Jewish community, accepted the plan, which assigned 55–56% of Mandatory Palestine to the Jews.

At the time, the Jews were about a third of the population and owned around 6–7% of the land. Arabs constituted the majority and owned about 20% of the land, with the remainder held by the Mandate authorities or foreign landowners.

The Arab League and Arab Higher Committee of Palestine rejected the partition plan on the basis that the partition plan privileged European interests over those of the Palestinians, and indicated that they would reject any other plan of partition.

On 1 December 1947, the Arab Higher Committee proclaimed a three-day strike, and riots broke out in Jerusalem .

The situation spiralled into a civil war . Colonial Secretary Arthur Creech Jones announced that the British Mandate would end on 15 May 1948, at which point the British would evacuate.

As Arab militias and gangs attacked Jewish areas, they were faced mainly by the Haganah as well as the smaller Irgun and Lehi.

In April 1948, the Haganah moved onto the offensive. Independence and early years Further information: Israeli Declaration of Independence David Ben-Gurion declaring the establishment of Israel on 14 May 1948 On 14 May 1948, the day before the expiration of the British Mandate, David Ben-Gurion , the head of the Jewish Agency, declared "the establishment of a Jewish state in Eretz-Israel" .

The following day, the armies of four Arab countries—Egypt, Syria, Transjordan, and Iraq—entered what had been Mandatory Palestine, launching the 1948 Arab–Israeli War ; contingents from Yemen , Morocco , Saudi Arabia , and Sudan joined the war.

The purpose of the invasion was to prevent the establishment of the Jewish state.

The Arab League stated the invasion was to restore order and prevent further bloodshed. Raising of the Ink Flag on 10 March 1949, marking the end of the 1948 war After a year of fighting, a ceasefire was declared and temporary borders, known as the Green Line , were established. Jordan annexed what became known as the West Bank , including East Jerusalem , and Egypt occupied the Gaza Strip . Over 700,000 Palestinians fled or were expelled by Zionist militias and the Israeli military —what would become known in Arabic as the Nakba ('catastrophe').

The events also led to the destruction of most of Palestine's Arab culture , identity , and national aspirations . Some 156,000 Arabs remained and became Arab citizens of Israel .

By United Nations General Assembly Resolution 273 , Israel was admitted as a member of the UN on 11 May 1949.

In the early years of the state, the Labour Zionist movement led by Prime Minister Ben-Gurion dominated Israeli politics . Immigration to Israel during the late 1940s and early 1950s was aided by the Israeli Immigration Department and the non-government sponsored Mossad LeAliyah Bet ( lit. "Institute for Immigration B ").

The latter engaged in clandestine operations in countries, particularly in the Middle East and Eastern Europe, where the lives of Jews were in danger and exit was difficult. Mossad LeAliyah Bet was disbanded in 1953.

The immigration was in accordance with the One Million Plan . Some immigrants held Zionist beliefs or came for the promise of a better life, while others moved to escape persecution or were expelled from their homes. An influx of Holocaust survivors and Jews from Arab and Muslim countries to Israel during the first three years increased the number of Jews from 700,000 to 1,400,000.

By 1958, the population had risen to two million. Between 1948 and 1970, approximately 1,150,000 Jewish refugees relocated to Israel. Some immigrants arrived as refugees and were housed in temporary camps known as ma'abarot ; by 1952, over 200,000 people were living in these tent cities. Jews of European background were often treated more favourably than Jews from Middle Eastern and North African countries—housing units reserved for the latter were often re-designated for the former, so Jews newly arrived from Arab lands generally ended up staying longer in transit camps.

During this period, food, clothes and furniture were rationed in what became known as the austerity period .

The need to solve the crisis led Ben-Gurion to sign a reparations agreement with West Germany that triggered mass protests by Jews angered at the idea that Israel could accept monetary compensation for the Holocaust. Arab–Israeli conflict Main article: Arab–Israeli conflict There were further expulsions of Palestinians after the establishment of Israel.

During the 1950s, Israel was frequently attacked by Palestinian fedayeen , nearly always against civilians, mainly from the Egyptian-occupied Gaza Strip, leading to several Israeli reprisal operations .

In 1956, the UK and France aimed at regaining control of the Suez Canal , which Egypt had nationalised.

The continued blockade of the Suez Canal and Straits of Tiran to Israeli shipping, together with increasing fedayeen attacks against Israel's southern population and recent Arab threatening statements, prompted Israel to attack Egypt. Israel joined a secret alliance with the UK and France and overran the Sinai Peninsula in the Suez Crisis but was pressured to withdraw by the UN in return for guarantees of Israeli shipping rights.

The war resulted in significant reduction of Israeli border infiltration. U.S. newsreel on the trial of Adolf Eichmann In the early 1960s, Israel captured Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann in Argentina and brought him to Israel for trial . Eichmann remains the only person executed in Israel by conviction in an Israeli civilian court.

In 1963, Israel was engaged in a diplomatic standoff with the United States in relation to the Israeli nuclear programme .

Since 1964 Arab countries, concerned over Israeli plans to divert waters of the Jordan River into the coastal plain , had been trying to divert the headwaters to deprive Israel of water resources, provoking tensions between Israel on the one hand, and Syria and Lebanon on the other. Arab nationalists led by Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser refused to recognise Israel and called for its destruction.

By 1966, Israeli-Arab relations had deteriorated to the point of battles taking place between Israeli and Arab forces.

In May 1967, Egypt massed its army near the border with Israel, expelled UN peacekeepers stationed in the Sinai Peninsula since 1957, and blocked Israel's access to the Red Sea. Other Arab states mobilised their forces. Israel reiterated that these actions were a casus belli and launched a pre-emptive strike ( Operation Focus ) against Egypt in June. Jordan, Syria and Iraq attacked Israel. Territory held by Israel: before the Six-Day War after the war The Sinai Peninsula was returned to Egypt in 1982.

In the ensuing Six-Day War , Israel captured and occupied the West Bank from Jordan, the Gaza Strip and Sinai Peninsula from Egypt, and the Golan Heights from Syria. Israeli forces expelled ~300,000 Palestinians from the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. Jerusalem's boundaries were enlarged, incorporating East Jerusalem .

The 1949 Green Line became the administrative boundary between Israel and the occupied territories .

Following the 1967 war and the " Three Nos " resolution of the Arab League, Israel faced attacks from the Egyptians in the Sinai Peninsula during the 1967–1970 War of Attrition , and from Palestinian groups targeting Israelis in the occupied territories, globally, and in Israel. Most important among the Palestinian and Arab groups was the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO), established in 1964, which initially committed itself to "armed struggle as the only way to liberate the homeland".

In the late 1960s and early 1970s, Palestinian groups launched attacks against Israeli and Jewish targets around the world, including a massacre of Israeli athletes at the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich.

The Israeli government responded with an assassination campaign against the organisers of the massacre, a bombing and a raid on the PLO headquarters in Lebanon .

On 6 October 1973, the Egyptian and Syrian armies launched a surprise attack against Israeli forces in the Sinai Peninsula and Golan Heights, opening the Yom Kippur War .

The war ended on 25 October with Israel repelling Egyptian and Syrian forces but suffering great losses. An internal inquiry exonerated the government of responsibility for failures before and during the war, but public anger forced Prime Minister Golda Meir to resign.

On 27 June 1976, Air France Flight 139 was hijacked in flight from Israel to France by Palestinian guerrillas; Israeli commandos rescued 102 of 106 Israeli hostages days later. Peace process Main article: Israeli–Palestinian peace process The 1977 Knesset elections marked a major turning point in Israeli political history as Menachem Begin 's Likud party took control from the Labor Party .

Later that year, Egyptian President Anwar El Sadat made a trip to Israel and spoke before the Knesset in what was the first recognition of Israel by an Arab head of state. Sadat and Begin signed the Camp David Accords (1978) and the Egypt–Israel peace treaty (1979).

In return, Israel withdrew from the Sinai Peninsula and agreed to enter negotiations over autonomy for Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.

On 11 March 1978, a PLO guerilla raid from Lebanon led to the Coastal Road massacre . Israel responded by launching an invasion of southern Lebanon to destroy PLO bases. Begin's government meanwhile provided incentives for Israelis to settle in the occupied West Bank , increasing friction with the Palestinians there.

The 1980 Jerusalem Law was believed by some to reaffirm Israel's 1967 annexation of Jerusalem by government decree and reignited international controversy over the status of the city . No Israeli legislation has defined the territory of Israel, and no act specifically included East Jerusalem therein.

In 1981 Israel effectively annexed the Golan Heights.

The international community largely rejected these moves, with the UN Security Council declaring both the Jerusalem Law and the Golan Heights Law null and void. Several waves of Ethiopian Jews immigrated to Israel since the 1980s, while between 1990 and 1994, immigration from the post-Soviet states increased Israel's population by twelve per cent.

On 7 June 1981, during the Iran–Iraq War , the Israeli air force destroyed Iraq's sole nuclear reactor, then under construction, in order to impede the Iraqi nuclear weapons programme.

Following a series of PLO attacks in 1982, Israel invaded Lebanon to destroy the PLO bases.

In the first six days, Israel destroyed the military forces of the PLO in Lebanon and decisively defeated the Syrians. An Israeli government inquiry (the Kahan Commission ) held Begin and several Israeli generals indirectly responsible for the Sabra and Shatila massacre and held defence minister Ariel Sharon as bearing "personal responsibility". Sharon was forced to resign.

In 1985, Israel responded to a Palestinian terrorist attack in Cyprus by bombing the PLO headquarters in Tunisia. Israel withdrew from most of Lebanon in 1986 but continued to occupy a borderland buffer zone in southern Lebanon until 2000, from where Israeli forces engaged in conflict with Hezbollah .

The First Intifada , a Palestinian uprising against Israeli rule, broke out in 1987, with waves of uncoordinated demonstrations and violence in the occupied West Bank and Gaza. Over the following six years, the intifada became more organised and included economic and cultural measures aimed at disrupting the Israeli occupation. Over 1,000 people were killed.

During the 1991 Gulf War , the PLO supported Saddam Hussein and Iraqi missile attacks against Israel . Despite public outrage, Israel heeded American calls to refrain from hitting back. Shimon Peres (left) with Yitzhak Rabin (center) and King Hussein of Jordan (right), prior to signing the Israel–Jordan peace treaty in 1994 In 1992, Yitzhak Rabin became prime minister following an election in which his party called for compromise with Israel's neighbours.

The following year, Shimon Peres on behalf of Israel and Yasser Arafat for the PLO signed the Oslo Accords , which gave the Palestinian National Authority (PNA) the right to govern parts of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.

The PLO also recognised Israel's right to exist and pledged an end to terrorism.

In 1994, the Israel–Jordan peace treaty was signed, making Jordan the second Arab country to normalise relations with Israel. Arab public support for the Accords was damaged by the continuation of Israeli settlements and checkpoints , and the deterioration of economic conditions. Israeli public support for the Accords waned after Palestinian suicide attacks .

In November 1995, Rabin was assassinated by Yigal Amir , a far-right Jew who opposed the Accords.

During Benjamin Netanyahu 's premiership at the end of the 1990s, Israel agreed to withdraw from Hebron , though this was never ratified or implemented, and he signed the Wye River Memorandum .

The agreement dealt with further redeployments in the West Bank and security issues.

The memorandum was criticised by major international human rights organisations for its "encouragement" of human rights abuses. Ehud Barak , elected prime minister in 1999, withdrew forces from southern Lebanon and conducted negotiations with PNA Chairman Yasser Arafat and U.S. President Bill Clinton at the 2000 Camp David Summit . Barak offered a plan for the establishment of a Palestinian state , including the entirety of the Gaza Strip and over 90% of the West Bank with Jerusalem as a shared capital. Each side blamed the other for the failure of the talks. 21st century Further information: Iran–Israel proxy conflict , Gaza–Israel conflict , and Middle Eastern crisis (2023–present) In late 2000, after a controversial visit by Sharon to the Temple Mount , the Second Intifada began.

The popular uprising faced disproportionate repression from the Israeli state. Palestinian suicide bombings eventually developed into a recurrent feature of the intifada. Some commentators contend that the intifada was pre-planned by Arafat after the collapse of peace talks. Sharon became prime minister in a 2001 election ; he carried out his plan to unilaterally withdraw from the Gaza Strip and spearheaded the construction of the West Bank barrier , ending the intifada. Between 2000 and 2008, 1,063 Israelis, 5,517 Palestinians and 64 foreign citizens were killed.

In July 2006, a Hezbollah artillery assault on Israel's northern border communities and a cross-border abduction of two Israeli soldiers precipitated the month-long Second Lebanon War , including an Israeli invasion of Lebanon.

The war wound down in August 2006 after the passage of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1701 ; Israeli forces mostly withdrew from Lebanon by October 2006 but continued to occupy the Lebanese portion of Ghajar village.

In 2007 the Israeli Air Force destroyed a nuclear reactor in Syria.

In 2008, a ceasefire between Hamas and Israel collapsed, resulting in the three-week Gaza War .

In what Israel described as a response to over a hundred Palestinian rocket attacks on southern Israeli cities, Israel began an operation in the Gaza Strip in 2012, lasting eight days. Israel started another operation in Gaza following an escalation of rocket attacks by Hamas in July 2014.

In May 2021, another round of fighting took place in Gaza and Israel, lasting eleven days.

By the 2010s, increasing regional cooperation between Israel and Arab League countries have been established, culminating in the signing of the Abraham Accords .

The Israeli security situation shifted from the traditional Arab–Israeli conflict towards the Iran–Israel proxy conflict and direct confrontation with Iran during the Syrian civil war . Satellite view of fires in the Gaza envelope on 7 October 2023 On 7 October 2023, Palestinian militant groups from Gaza , led by Hamas, launched a series of coordinated attacks on Israel, leading to the start of the Gaza war .

On that day, approximately 1,300 Israelis, predominantly civilians, were killed in communities near the Gaza Strip border and during a music festival . Over 200 hostages were kidnapped and taken to the Gaza Strip. Studies modeling trauma exposure and assessing mental health outcomes estimated that approximately 5.3% of Israelis may develop PTSD , with national data showing that probable PTSD nearly doubled from 16.2% to 29.8% and rates of anxiety and depression also rising sharply.

After clearing militants from its territory, Israel launched one of the most destructive bombing campaigns in modern history and invaded Gaza on 27 October with the stated objectives of destroying Hamas and freeing hostages.

The fifth war of the Gaza–Israel conflict since 2008, it has been the deadliest for Palestinians in the entire Israeli–Palestinian conflict and the most significant military engagement in the region since the Yom Kippur War in 1973. A United Nations Special Committee , multiple governments , and various experts and human rights organisations have concluded that Israel is committing genocide against the Palestinian people due to the harm and loss of life inflicted on civilians during the Gaza War .

In April 2024, Israel initiated a wave of airstrikes on Iran, after Iranian strikes targeted Israel, marking the 2024 Iran–Israel conflict the first time in which the two countries have ever directly exchanged fire.

In October 2024, Israel invaded Lebanon and exchanged missile barrages with Iran three weeks later, in response of Iranian strikes earlier in that month.

After nearly a year of the Israel–Hezbollah conflict from October 2023 due to Hezbollah shooting rockets at Israel to support Hamas in Gaza, Israel assassinated Hezbollah secretary general Hassan Nasrallah in September 2024. A November 2024 ceasefire agreement instructed Israel to withdraw from Lebanon, which Israel mostly did by February 2025, but against the agreement, Israeli forces stayed in five military outposts on highlands in Southern Lebanon.

In June 2025, Israel launched a renewed series of airstrikes on Iran, targeting Iran's air defence systems, missile launchers, their military leadership, and their nuclear programme , which escalated into a full-scale war .

In February 2026, Israel and the United States launched extensive airstrikes on Iran, assassinating Iranian Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei and sparking the 2026 Iran war and the 2026 Lebanon war .

However Israel is so narrow (100 km at its widest, compared to 400 km from north to south) that the exclusive economic zone in the Mediterranean is double the land area of the country.

The total area under Israeli law, including East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights, is 22,072 square kilometres (8,522 sq mi), and the total area under Israeli control, including the military-controlled and partially Palestinian-governed territory of the West Bank, is 27,799 square kilometres (10,733 sq mi). Despite its small size, Israel is home to a variety of geographic features, from the Negev desert in the south to the inland fertile Jezreel Valley , with mountain ranges of the Galilee , Carmel and towards the Golan in the north.

The Israeli coastal plain on the shores of the Mediterranean is home to most of the population. East of the central highlands lies the Jordan Rift Valley , a small part of the 6,500-kilometre (4,039 mi) Great Rift Valley .

The Jordan River runs along the Jordan Rift Valley, from Mount Hermon through the Hulah Valley and the Sea of Galilee to the Dead Sea , the lowest point on the surface of the Earth. Further south is the Arabah , ending with the Gulf of Eilat , part of the Red Sea . Makhtesh , or "erosion cirques" are unique to the Negev and the Sinai Peninsula , the largest being the Makhtesh Ramon at 38 km in length. Israel has the largest number of plant species per square metre of the countries in the Mediterranean Basin and contains four terrestrial ecoregions: Eastern Mediterranean conifer–sclerophyllous–broadleaf forests , Southern Anatolian montane conifer and deciduous forests , Arabian Desert , and Mesopotamian shrub desert . Forests accounted for 8.5% of the area in 2016, up from 2% in 1948, as the result of a large-scale forest planting programme by the Jewish National Fund . Tectonics and seismicity Further information: List of earthquakes in the Levant The Jordan Rift Valley is the result of tectonic movements within the Dead Sea Transform (DST) fault system.

The DST forms the transform boundary between the African Plate to the west and the Arabian Plate to the east.

The Golan Heights and all of Jordan are part of the Arabian Plate, while the Galilee, West Bank, Coastal Plain, and Negev along with the Sinai Peninsula are on the African Plate. This tectonic disposition leads to a relatively high seismic activity.

The entire Jordan Valley segment is thought to have ruptured repeatedly, for instance during the last two major earthquakes along this structure in 749 and 1033 .

The deficit in slip that has built up since 1033 is sufficient to cause an earthquake of M w ~7.4.

The most catastrophic known earthquakes occurred in 31 BCE, 363 , 749, and 1033 CE, that is every ca. 400 years on average. Destructive earthquakes strike about every 80 years, leading to serious loss of life .

While stringent construction regulations are in place and recently built structures are earthquake resistant, as of 2007 many public buildings as well as 50,000 residential buildings did not meet the new standards and were "expected to collapse" if exposed to a strong earthquake. Climate Further information: Climate change in Israel The projections of the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report show clearly the impacts of climate change on Israel even at 2 degrees of warming. Temperatures vary widely, especially during the winter. Coastal areas, such as those of Tel Aviv and Haifa, have a typical Mediterranean climate with cool, rainy winters and long, hot summers.

The area of Beersheba and the northern Negev have a semi-arid climate with hot summers, cool winters, and fewer rainy days.

The southern Negev and the Arabah areas have a desert climate with very hot, dry summers, and mild winters with few days of rain.

The highest temperature of 54 °C (129 °F) was recorded in 1942 in the Tirat Zvi kibbutz. Mountainous regions can be windy and cold, and areas at elevation of 750 metres (2,460 ft) or more (same elevation as Jerusalem) usually receive at least one snowfall each year.

From May to September, rain is rare. There are four different phytogeographic regions, due to its location between the temperate and tropical zones. For this reason, the flora and fauna are extremely diverse. There are 2,867 known species of plants in Israel . Of these, at least 253 species are introduced and non-native . There are 380 Israeli nature reserves . Israel was the thirteenth most water-stressed country in the world in 2022. With scarce water resources, Israel has developed various water-saving technologies, including drip irrigation .

The considerable sunlight available for solar energy makes Israel the leading nation in solar energy use per capita—practically every house uses solar panels for water heating.

The Ministry of Environmental Protection has reported that climate change "will have a decisive impact on all areas of life", particularly for vulnerable populations. Government and politics Main articles: Israeli system of government and Politics of Israel Isaac Herzog President Benjamin Netanyahu Prime Minister The Knesset chamber, home to the Israeli parliament Israel has a parliamentary system , proportional representation and universal suffrage . A member of parliament supported by a parliamentary majority becomes the prime minister —usually this is the chair of the largest party.

The prime minister is the head of government and of cabinet .

The president is head of state , with largely ceremonial duties. Israel is governed by a 120-member parliament, known as the Knesset . Membership of the Knesset is based on proportional representation of political parties , with a 3.25% electoral threshold, which in practice has resulted in coalition governments. Residents of Israeli settlements in the West Bank are eligible to vote, and after the 2015 election , 10 of the 120 members of the Knesset ( 8%) were settlers. Parliamentary elections are scheduled every four years, but unstable coalitions or a no-confidence vote can dissolve a government earlier.

The first Arab-led party was established in 1988, and as of 2022, Arab-led parties hold about 10% of seats. A party cannot run for election to the Knesset if its objectives or actions include the "negation of the existence of the State of Israel as the state of the Jewish people".

The Basic Laws of Israel function as an uncodified constitution . These define Israel as a Jewish and democratic state and the nation-state of exclusively the Jewish people.

In 2003, the Knesset began to draft an official constitution based on these laws. Israel has no official religion, but the definition of the state as "Jewish and democratic" creates a strong connection with Judaism .

On 19 July 2018, the Knesset passed a Basic Law that characterises Israel as principally a " Nation State of the Jewish People " and Hebrew as its official language.

The bill ascribes an undefined "special status" to the Arabic language.

The same bill gives Jews a unique right to national self-determination and views the developing of Jewish settlement in the country as "a national interest", empowering the government to "take steps to encourage, advance and implement this interest". Administrative divisions Main article: Districts of Israel Districts of Israel Central Haifa Jerusalem Northern Southern Tel Aviv Judea and Samaria Area v t e The State of Israel is divided into six main administrative districts, known as mehozot (Hebrew: מחוזות ; sing. : mahoz )— Center , Haifa , Jerusalem , North , South , and Tel Aviv , as well as the Judea and Samaria Area in the West Bank. All of the Judea and Samaria Area and parts of the Jerusalem and Northern districts are not recognised internationally as part of Israel. Districts are divided into 15 sub-districts known as nafot (Hebrew: נפות ; sing. : nafa ), which are partitioned into 50 natural regions. District Capital Largest city Population, 2021 Jews Arabs Total note Jerusalem Jerusalem 66% 32% 1,209,700 a North Nof HaGalil Nazareth 42% 54% 1,513,600 Haifa Haifa 67% 25% 1,092,700 Center Ramla Rishon LeZion 87% 8% 2,304,300 Tel Aviv Tel Aviv 92% 2% 1,481,400 South Beersheba Ashdod 71% 22% 1,386,000 Judea and Samaria Area Ariel Modi'in Illit 98% 0% 465,400 b The 1950 Law of Return grants Jews the unrestricted right to immigrate to Israel and obtain Israeli citizenship. Individuals born within the country receive birthright citizenship if at least one parent is a citizen. Israeli law defines Jewish nationality as distinct from Israeli nationality, and the Supreme Court of Israel has ruled that an Israeli nationality does not exist. A Jewish national is defined as any person practicing Judaism and their descendants. Israeli-occupied territories Main articles: Israeli-occupied territories , Israeli occupation of the West Bank , and Golan Heights Overview of administration and sovereignty in Israel , the Palestinian territories and the Golan Heights This box: view talk edit Area Administered by Recognition of governing authority Sovereignty claimed by Recognition of claim Gaza Strip Palestinian National Authority ( de jure ) Controlled by Hamas ( de facto ) Witnesses to the Oslo II Accord Palestine 157 UN member states West Bank Palestinian enclaves (Areas A and B) Palestinian National Authority and Israeli military Area C Israeli enclave law ( Israeli settlements ) and Israeli military (Palestinians under Israeli occupation ) East Jerusalem Israeli administration Honduras , Guatemala , Nauru , and the United States China , Russia West Jerusalem Russia , Czech Republic , Honduras, Guatemala, Nauru, and the United States United Nations as an international city along with East Jerusalem Various UN member states and the European Union ; joint sovereignty also widely supported Golan Heights United States Syria All UN member states except the United States Israel (Green Line border) 165 UN member states Israel 165 UN member states The Golan Heights and East Jerusalem have been fully incorporated under Israeli law but not under international law. Israel has applied civilian law to both areas and granted their inhabitants permanent residency status and the ability to apply for citizenship.

The UN Security Council has declared the annexation of the Golan Heights and East Jerusalem to be "null and void" and continues to view the territories as occupied.

The status of East Jerusalem in any future peace settlement has at times been a difficult issue in negotiations between Israeli governments and representatives of the Palestinians.

The Israeli West Bank barrier is a separation barrier built by Israel along the Green Line and inside parts of the West Bank.

The West Bank area, excluding East Jerusalem, is known as the Judea and Samaria Area.

The almost 400,000 Israeli settlers residing in the area are considered part of Israel's population, have Knesset representation, are subject to a large part of Israel's civil and criminal laws , and their output is considered part of Israel's economy.

The land is not considered part of Israel under Israeli law, as Israel has consciously refrained from annexing the territory, without ever relinquishing its legal claim to the land or defining a border. Israeli political opposition to annexation primarily stems from the perceived "demographic threat" of incorporating the West Bank's Palestinian population into Israel. Outside of the Israeli settlements, the West Bank remains under direct Israeli military rule, and Palestinians in the area cannot become Israeli citizens.

The international community maintains that Israel does not have sovereignty in the West Bank and considers Israel's control of the area to be the longest military occupation in modern history.

The West Bank was occupied and annexed by Jordan in 1950, following the 1949 Armistice Agreements. Only Britain recognised this annexation, and Jordan has since ceded its claim to the territory to the PLO.

The population is mainly Palestinians, including refugees of the 1948 Arab–Israeli War.

From their occupation in 1967 until 1993, the Palestinians living in these territories were under Israeli military administration .

Since the Israel–PLO letters of recognition , most of the Palestinian population and cities have been under the internal jurisdiction of the Palestinian Authority, and only partial Israeli military control, although Israel has redeployed its troops and reinstated full military administration during periods of unrest. Israel's claim of universal suffrage has been questioned due to its blurred territorial boundaries, its simultaneous extension of voting rights to Israeli settlers in the occupied territories and denial of voting rights to their Palestinian neighbours, as well as the alleged ethnocratic nature of the state.

The Gaza Strip is considered to be a "foreign territory" under Israeli law. Israel and Egypt operate a land, air, and sea blockade of the Gaza Strip .

The Gaza Strip was occupied by Israel after 1967.

In 2005, as part of a unilateral disengagement plan , Israel removed its settlers and forces from the territory but continues to maintain control of its airspace and waters.

The international community, including numerous international humanitarian organisations and UN bodies, consider Gaza to remain occupied.

Following the 2007 Battle of Gaza, when Hamas assumed power in the Gaza Strip , Israel tightened control of the Gaza crossings along its border , as well as by sea and air, and prevented persons from entering and exiting except for isolated cases it deemed humanitarian. Gaza has a border with Egypt , and an agreement between Israel, the EU, and the PA governs how border crossings take place.

The allegations include violations of international humanitarian law by the UN Human Rights Council .

The U.S. State Department has called reports of abuses of significant human rights of Palestinians "credible" both within Israel and the occupied territories. Amnesty International and other NGOs have documented mass arbitrary arrests, torture, unlawful killings, systemic abuses and impunity in tandem with a denial of the right to Palestinian self-determination . Prime Minister Netanyahu has defended the country's security forces for protecting the innocent from terrorists and expressed contempt for what he describes as a lack of concern about the human rights violations committed by "criminal killers".

The international community widely regards Israeli settlements in the occupied territories illegal under international law . United Nations Security Council Resolution 2334 (passed 2016) states that Israel's settlement activity constitutes a "flagrant violation" of international law and demands that Israel stop such activity and fulfill its obligations as an occupying power under the Fourth Geneva Convention . A United Nations special rapporteur concluded that the settlement programme was a war crime under the Rome Statute , and Amnesty International found that the settlement programme constitutes an illegal transfer of civilians into occupied territory and "pillage", which is prohibited by the Hague Conventions and Geneva Conventions as well as being a war crime under the Rome Statute.

In a 2024 advisory opinion , the International Court of Justice stated that occupation of the Palestinian territories violated international law; Israel should end its occupation as quickly as possible and pay reparations.

In addition, the court found that Israel was in breach of article 3 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination , which requires states to prevent, prohibit and eradicate all practices of racial segregation and apartheid. Accusations of apartheid Main article: Israeli apartheid Treatment of Palestinians within the occupied territories and to a lesser extent in Israel itself have drawn widespread accusations that it is guilty of apartheid , a crime against humanity under the Rome Statute and the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid .

The Washington Post' s 2021 survey of scholars and academic experts on the Middle East found an increase from 59% to 65% of these scholars describing Israel as a "one-state reality akin to apartheid".

The claim that Israel's policies for Palestinians within Israel or within Israeli-occupied territories amount to apartheid has been affirmed by Israeli human rights organisation B'tselem , University Network for Human Rights, and international human rights organisations such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch . Israeli human rights organisation Yesh Din has also accused Israel of apartheid. Amnesty's claim was criticised by politicians and representatives from Israel and its closest allies such as, the US, the UK, the European Commission , Australia, Netherlands and Germany, while said accusations were welcomed by Palestinians and the Arab League .

In 2022, Michael Lynk, a Canadian law professor appointed by the U.N. Human Rights Council said that the situation met the legal definition of apartheid, and concluded: "Israel has imposed upon Palestine an apartheid reality in a post-apartheid world". Subsequent reports from his successor, Francesca Albanese and from Permanent United Nations Fact Finding Mission on the Israel Palestine conflict chair Navi Pillay echoed the opinion.

In February 2024, the ICJ held public hearings in regards to the legal consequences arising from the policies and practices of Israel in the occupied Palestinian territory including East Jerusalem.

During the hearings, 24 states and three international organisations said that Israeli practices amount to a breach of the prohibition of apartheid and/or amount to prohibited acts of racial discrimination.

The International Court of Justice in its 2024 advisory opinion found that Israel's occupation of the Palestinian territories constitutes systemic discrimination and is in breach of Article 3 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination , which prohibits racial segregation and apartheid.

The opinion is silent as to whether the discrimination amounts to apartheid; individual judges were split on the question. Foreign relations Main articles: Foreign relations of Israel and International recognition of Israel State of Israel Countries that recognise Israel Countries that have withdrawn their recognition of Israel Countries that have suspended/cut bilateral ties, but maintain recognition Countries that have never recognised Israel Israel maintains diplomatic relations with 165 UN member states , the Holy See , Kosovo , the Cook Islands and Niue . It has 107 diplomatic missions ; countries with which it has no diplomatic relations include most Muslim countries. Six out of 22 nations in the Arab League have normalised relations with Israel. Israel remains formally in a state of war with Syria , dating back uninterrupted to 1948. It has been in a similarly formal state of war with Lebanon since the end of the Lebanese Civil War in 2000, with the Israel–Lebanon border remaining unagreed by treaty. Despite the peace treaty between Israel and Egypt, Israel is still widely considered an enemy country among Egyptians. Iran withdrew its recognition of Israel during the Islamic Revolution . Israeli citizens may not visit Syria, Lebanon, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and Yemen without permission from the Ministry of the Interior .

As a result of the 2008–09 Gaza War, Mauritania, Qatar, Bolivia, and Venezuela suspended political and economic ties with Israel, though Bolivia renewed ties in 2019. Yitzhak Rabin and Yasser Arafat at the signing ceremony of the Oslo Accords peace agreements , with then US President Bill Clinton (center) The United States and the Soviet Union were the first two countries to recognise the State of Israel, having declared recognition roughly simultaneously. Diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union were broken in 1967 following the Six-Day War and renewed in 1991.

The United States regards Israel as its "most reliable partner in the Middle East", based on "common democratic values, religious affinities, and security interests".

The US has provided $68 billion in military assistance and $32 billion in grants to Israel since 1967, under the Foreign Assistance Act (period beginning 1962), more than any other country for that period until 2003. Most surveyed Americans have held consistently favourable views of Israel.

The United Kingdom is seen as having a "natural" relationship with Israel because of the Mandate for Palestine.

By 2007 , Germany had paid 25 billion euros in reparations to Israel and individual Israeli Holocaust survivors. Israel is included in the European Union's European Neighbourhood Policy .

Although Turkey and Israel did not establish full diplomatic relations until 1991, Turkey has cooperated with the Jewish state since its recognition of Israel in 1949. Turkey's ties to other Muslim-majority nations in the region have at times resulted in pressure from Arab and Muslim states to temper its relationship with Israel. Relations took a downturn after the 2008–09 Gaza War and Israel's raid of the Gaza flotilla . Relations between Greece and Israel have improved since 1995 after decline of Israeli–Turkish relations.

The two countries have a defence cooperation agreement and in 2010, the Israeli Air Force hosted Greece's Hellenic Air Force in a joint exercise.

The joint Cyprus-Israel oil and gas explorations centred on the Leviathan gas field are an important factor for Greece, given its strong links with Cyprus. Cooperation in the world's longest submarine power cable , the EuroAsia Interconnector , has strengthened Cyprus–Israel relations . Azerbaijan is one of the few majority Muslim countries to develop strategic and economic relations with Israel . Kazakhstan also has an economic and strategic partnership with Israel. India established full diplomatic ties with Israel in 1992 and has fostered a strong military, technological and cultural partnership with the country since then. India is the largest customer of the Israeli military equipment , and Israel is the second-largest military partner of India after Russia. Ethiopia is Israel's main ally in Africa due to common political, religious and security interests.

As of 2025, Israel is the only UN member state to recognise the Republic of Somaliland . Foreign aid Israel has a history of providing emergency foreign aid and humanitarian response to disasters across the world.

In 1955 Israel began its foreign aid programme in Burma and then shifted to Africa. Israel's humanitarian efforts officially began in 1957 with the establishment of Mashav , the Israel's Agency for International Development Cooperation.

In this early period, whilst Israel's aid represented only a small percentage of total aid to Africa, its programme was effective in creating goodwill; however, following the 1967 war relations soured. Israel's foreign aid programme subsequently shifted its focus to Latin America.

Since the late 1970s Israel's foreign aid has gradually decreased, although in recent years Israel has tried to reestablish aid to Africa. There are additional Israeli humanitarian and emergency response groups that work with the government, including IsraAid , a joint programme run by Israeli organisations and North American Jewish groups, ZAKA , The Fast Israeli Rescue and Search Team, Israeli Flying Aid, Save a Child's Heart and Latet . Between 1985 and 2015, Israel sent 24 delegations of their search and rescue unit the Home Front Command to 22 countries. Currently Israeli foreign aid ranks low among OECD nations, spending less than 0.1% of its GNI on development assistance.

The country ranked 38th in the 2018 World Giving Index . Military Further information: List of wars involving Israel , List of the Israel Defense Forces operations , and Israel and weapons of mass destruction F-35 fighter jets of the Israeli Air Force The Israel Defence Forces (IDF) is the sole military wing of the Israeli security forces and is headed by its Chief of the General Staff , the Ramatkal , subordinate to the Cabinet.

The IDF consists of the army , air force and navy . It was founded during the 1948 Arab–Israeli War by consolidating paramilitary organisations, chiefly the Haganah.

The IDF also draws upon the resources of the Military Intelligence Directorate ( Aman ). Most Israelis are conscripted at age 18. Men serve two years and eight months, and women serve two years.

Following mandatory service, Israeli men join the reserve forces and usually do up to several weeks of reserve duty every year until their forties. Most women are exempt from reserve duty. Arab citizens of Israel (except the Druze ) and those engaged in full-time religious studies are exempt , although the exemption of yeshiva students has been a source of contention. An alternative for those who receive exemptions on various grounds is Sherut Leumi , or national service, which involves a programme of service in social welfare frameworks. A small minority of Israeli Arabs also volunteer in the army.

As a result of its conscription programme, the IDF maintains approximately 176,500 active troops and 465,000 reservists, giving Israel one of the world's highest percentage of citizens with military training . Iron Dome is the world's first operational anti- artillery rocket defence system.

The military relies heavily on high-tech weapons systems designed and manufactured in Israel as well as some foreign imports.

The Arrow missile is one of the world's few operational anti-ballistic missile systems.

The Python air-to-air missile series is often considered one of the most crucial weapons in its military history. Israel's Spike missile is one of the most widely exported anti-tank guided missiles in the world. Israel's Iron Dome anti-missile air defence system gained worldwide acclaim after intercepting hundreds of rockets fired by Palestinian militants from the Gaza Strip.

Since the Yom Kippur War , Israel has developed a network of reconnaissance satellites .

The Ofeq programme has made Israel one of seven countries capable of launching such satellites. Israel is widely believed to possess nuclear weapons and per a 1993 report, chemical and biological weapons of mass destruction . Israel has not signed the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and maintains a policy of deliberate ambiguity towards its nuclear capabilities.

The Israeli Navy's Dolphin submarines are believed to be armed with nuclear missiles offering second-strike capability.

Since the Gulf War in 1991, all homes in Israel are required to have a reinforced security room, Merkhav Mugan , impermeable to chemical and biological substances.

Since Israel's establishment, military expenditure constituted a significant portion of the country's gross domestic product , with peak of 30.3% of GDP in 1975.

In 2021, Israel ranked 15th in the world by total military expenditure , with $24.3 billion, and 6th by defence spending as a percentage of GDP, with 5.2%.

Since 1974, the United States has been a particularly notable contributor of military aid . Under a memorandum of understanding signed in 2016, the U.S. is expected to provide the country with $3.8 billion per year, or around 20% of Israel's defence budget, from 2018 to 2028. Israel ranked 8th globally for arms exports in 2020–2024.

The majority of Israel's arms exports are unreported for security reasons. Israel is consistently rated low in the Global Peace Index , ranking 134th out of 163 nations in 2022. Legal system Main articles: Judiciary of Israel and Israeli law Supreme Court of Israel , Givat Ram, Jerusalem Israel has a three-tier court system .

At the lowest level are magistrate courts, situated in most cities across the country. Above them are district courts , serving as both appellate courts and courts of first instance ; they are situated in five of Israel's six districts .

The third and highest tier is the Supreme Court , located in Jerusalem; it serves a dual role as the highest court of appeals and the High Court of Justice .

In the latter role, the Supreme Court rules as a court of first instance, allowing both citizens and non-citizens to petition against the decisions of state authorities.

The legal system combines three legal traditions: English common law , civil law , and Jewish law . It is based on the principle of stare decisis (precedent) and is an adversarial system . Court cases are decided by professional judges. Marriage and divorce are under the jurisdiction of the religious courts: Jewish , Muslim , Druze, and Christian.

The election of judges is carried out by a selection committee chaired by the justice minister (currently Yariv Levin ). Israel's Basic Law: Human Dignity and Liberty seeks to defend human rights and liberties in Israel .

The United Nations Human Rights Council and Israeli human rights organisation Adalah have highlighted that this law does not in fact contain a general provision for equality and non-discrimination.

As a result of " Enclave law ", large portions of Israeli civil law are applied to Israeli settlements and Israeli residents in the occupied territories. Israeli law is seldom enforced in the occupied territories, with 96% of police investigations into settler violence in the West Bank from 2020 to 2025 ending without an indictment. No one has been charged in the killings of at least 1,100 Palestinian civilians by Israeli soldiers and settlers since 2020. Economy Main article: Economy of Israel The Diamond Exchange District in Ramat Gan Israel is considered the most advanced country in West Asia and the Middle East in economic and industrial development.

As of October 2023 , the IMF estimated its GDP at 521.7 billion dollars and GDP per capita at 53.2 thousand ( ranking 13th worldwide ). It is the third richest country in Asia by nominal per capita income and has the highest average wealth per adult in the Middle East.

The Economist ranked Israel as the fourth most successful economy among the developed countries for 2022. It has the most billionaires in the Middle East and the 18th most in the world.

In recent years, Israel had one of the highest growth rates in the developed world.

The country is ranked 35th on the World Bank 's Ease of Doing Business index . Economic data covers the economic territory of Israel, including the Golan Heights, East Jerusalem and Israeli settlements in the West Bank. Despite limited natural resources, intensive development of the agricultural and industrial sectors over the past decades has made Israel largely self-sufficient in food production, apart from grains and beef. Imports, totalling $96.5 billion in 2020, include raw materials, military equipment, investment goods, rough diamonds, fuels, grain, and consumer goods. Leading exports include machinery, equipment, software, cut diamonds , agricultural products, chemicals, textiles, and apparel; in 2020, exports reached $114 billion.

The Bank of Israel holds $201 billion of foreign-exchange reserves, the 17th highest in the world.

Since the 1970s, Israel has received military aid from the United States, as well as loan guarantees, which account for roughly half of Israel's external debt. Israel has one of the lowest external debts in the developed world, and is a lender in terms of net external debt ( assets vs. liabilities abroad ), which in 2015 stood at a surplus of $69 billion. Israel has the second-largest number of startup companies after the United States and the third-largest number of NASDAQ-listed companies . It is the world leader for number of start-ups per capita and has been dubbed the " Start-Up Nation ". Intel and Microsoft built their first overseas research and development facilities in Israel, and other high-tech multinational corporations have opened research and development centres in the country .

The days which are allocated to working times are Sunday through Thursday (for a five-day workweek), or Friday (for a six-day workweek).

In observance of Shabbat , in places where Friday is a work day and the majority of population is Jewish, Friday is a "short day". Several proposals have been raised to adjust the work week with the majority of the world. Science and technology Main articles: Science and technology in Israel and List of Israeli inventions and discoveries Matam high-tech park in Haifa Israel's development of cutting-edge technologies in software, communications and the life sciences have evoked comparisons with Silicon Valley . Israel is first in the world in expenditure on research and development as a percentage of GDP. It is ranked 14th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025, and 5th in the 2019 Bloomberg Innovation Index . Israel has 140 scientists, technicians, and engineers per 10,000 employees, the highest number in the world and has produced six Nobel Prize-winning scientists, mostly in chemistry, since 2004 and has been frequently ranked as one of the countries with the highest ratios of scientific papers per capita. Israeli universities are ranked among the top 50 world universities in computer science ( Technion and Tel Aviv University ), mathematics ( Hebrew University of Jerusalem ) and chemistry ( Weizmann Institute of Science ).

In 2012, Israel was ranked ninth in the world by the Futron's Space Competitiveness Index .

The Israel Space Agency coordinates all space research programmes with scientific and commercial goals, and have designed and built at least 13 commercial, research and spy satellites. Some satellites are ranked among the world's most advanced space systems. Shavit is a space launch vehicle produced by Israel to launch small satellites into low Earth orbit . It was first launched in 1988, making Israel the eighth nation to have a space launch capability.

In 2003, Ilan Ramon became Israel's first astronaut, serving on the fatal mission of Space Shuttle Columbia .

The ongoing water shortage has spurred innovation in water conservation techniques, and a substantial agricultural modernisation , drip irrigation , was invented in Israel. Israel is also at the technological forefront of desalination and water recycling.

The Sorek desalination plant is the largest seawater reverse osmosis desalination facility in the world.

By 2014, desalination programmes provided roughly 35% of the drinking water, and it is expected to supply 70% by 2050.

As of 2015 , over 50 per cent of the water for households, agriculture and industry is artificially produced.

In 2011, Israel's water technology industry was worth around $2 billion per year with annual exports of products and services in the tens of millions of dollars.

As a result of innovations in reverse osmosis technology, Israel is set to become a net exporter of water .

The world's largest solar parabolic dish at the Ben-Gurion National Solar Energy Center Israel has embraced solar energy ; its engineers are on the cutting edge of solar energy technology, and its solar companies work on projects around the world. Over 90% of homes use solar energy for hot water, the highest per capita. According to government figures, the country saves 8% of its electricity consumption per year because of its solar energy use in heating.

The high annual incident solar irradiance at its geographic latitude creates ideal conditions for what is an internationally renowned solar research and development industry in the Negev. Israel had a modern electric car infrastructure involving a countrywide network of charging stations; however, its electric car company Better Place shut down in 2013. Energy Main article: Energy in Israel Israel began producing natural gas from its own offshore gas fields in 2004.

In 2009 Tamar gas field was discovered near the coast, and Leviathan gas field was discovered in 2010.

The natural gas reserves in these two fields could make Israel energy-secure for more than 50 years. Commercial production of natural gas from the Tamar field began in 2013, with over 7.5 billion cubic metres (bcm) produced annually. Israel had 199 billion bcm of proven reserves of natural gas as of 2016.

The Leviathan gas field started production in 2019. Ketura Sun is Israel's first commercial solar field. Built in 2011 by the Arava Power Company , the field will produce about 9 gigawatt-hours (32 TJ) of electricity per year, sparing the production of some 125,000 tonnes (123,000 long tons; 138,000 short tons) of carbon dioxide over 20 years. Transport Main article: Transport in Israel Ben Gurion International Airport , the main international airport of Israel As of 2016, Israel has 19,224 kilometres (11,945 mi) of paved roads and 3 million motor vehicles.

The number of motor vehicles per 1,000 persons is 365, relatively low among developed countries.

The country aims to have 30% of vehicles on its roads powered by electricity by 2030. Israel has 5,715 buses on scheduled routes, operated by several carriers, the largest and oldest of which is Egged , serving most of the country. Railways stretch across 1,277 kilometres (793 mi) and are operated by government-owned Israel Railways .

In 2017, a record 3.6 million tourists visited Israel, yielding a 25 per cent growth since 2016 and contributed NIS 20 billion to the economy. Real estate Main article: Housing in Israel Housing prices are listed in the top third of all countries, with an average of 150 salaries required to buy an apartment.

As of 2022, there are about 2.7 million properties in Israel, with an annual increase of over 50,000. However, demand for housing exceeds supply, with a shortage of about 200,000 apartments as of 2021.

As a result, by 2021 housing prices rose by 5.6%.

In 2021, Israelis took a record of NIS 116.1 billion in mortgages, an increase of 50% from 2020. Demographics Main articles: Demographics of Israel and Israelis Aliyah in the years 1948–2015.

The two peaks were in 1949 and 1990. Israel has the largest Jewish population in the world and is the only country where Jews are the majority.

As of April 2025, the population was an estimated 10,094,000.

In 2025, the government recorded 72% of the population as Jews , 21% as Arabs , and 7% as "Others" (non-Arab Christians and people who have no religion listed). Over the last decade, large numbers of migrant workers from Romania, Thailand, China, Africa, and South America have settled in Israel. Exact figures are unknown, as many of them are living in the country illegally, but estimates run from 166,000 to 203,000.

By June 2012, approximately 60,000 African migrants had entered Israel. About 93% of Israelis live in urban areas. 90% of Palestinian Israelis reside in 139 densely populated towns and villages concentrated in the Galilee, Triangle and Negev regions, with the remaining 10% in mixed cities and neighbourhoods.

The OECD in 2016 estimated the average life expectancy at 82.5 years, the 6th-highest in the world . Israeli Arab life expectancy lags by 3 to 4 years and is higher than in most Arab and Muslim countries.

The country has the highest fertility rate in the OECD and the only one which is above the replacement figure of 2.1. Retention of Israel's population since 1948 is about even or greater, when compared to other countries with mass immigration. Jewish emigration from Israel (called yerida ), primarily to the United States and Canada, is described by demographers as modest, but is often cited by Israeli government ministries as a major threat to Israel's future. Approximately 80% of Israeli Jews are born in Israel , 14% are immigrants from Europe and the Americas, and 6% are immigrants from Asia and Africa. Jews from Europe and the former Soviet Union and their descendants born in Israel, including Ashkenazi Jews, constitute approximately 44% of Jewish Israelis. Jews from Arab and Muslim countries and their descendants, including both Mizrahi and Sephardi Jews, form most of the rest of the Jewish population. Jewish intermarriage rates run at over 35% and recent studies suggest that the percentage of Israelis descended from both Sephardi and Ashkenazi Jews increases by 0.5 per cent yearly, with over 25% of schoolchildren now originating from both. Around 4% of Israelis (300,000), ethnically defined as "others", are Russian descendants of Jewish origin or family who are not Jewish according to rabbinical law, but were eligible for citizenship under the Law of Return. Israeli settlers beyond the Green Line number over 600,000 (≈10% of the Jewish Israeli population).

In 2016 , 399,300 Israelis lived in West Bank settlements, including those that predated the establishment of the State of Israel and which were re-established after the Six-Day War. Additionally there were more than 200,000 Jews living in East Jerusalem and 22,000 in the Golan Heights. Approximately 7,800 Israelis lived in settlements in the Gaza Strip, known as Gush Katif , until they were evacuated by the government as part of its 2005 disengagement plan . Israeli Arabs (including the Arab population of East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights) comprise 21.1% of the population or 1,995,000 people.

In a 2017 poll, 40% of Arab citizens of Israel identified as "Arab in Israel" or "Arab citizen of Israel", 15% identified as "Palestinian", 8.9% as "Palestinian in Israel" or "Palestinian citizen of Israel", and 8.7% as "Arab"; a poll found that 60% of Israeli Arabs have a positive view of the state. Major urban areas For a more comprehensive list, see List of cities in Israel .

The largest municipality, in population and area, is Jerusalem with 1,050,153 residents in an area of 125 square kilometres (48 sq mi). Statistics on Jerusalem include the population and area of East Jerusalem, the status of which is in international dispute. Tel Aviv and Haifa rank as Israel's next most populous cities, with populations of 494,900 and 297,082, respectively.

The (mainly Haredi ) city of Bnei Brak is the most densely populated city in Israel and one of the 10 most densely populated cities in the world. Israel has 16 cities with populations over 100,000.

As of 2018 there are 77 localities granted "municipalities" (or "city") status by the Ministry of the Interior, four of which are in the West Bank .

The official language is Hebrew . Hebrew is the primary language of the state and is spoken daily by the majority of the population. Prior to 1948, opposition to Yiddish , the historical language of the Ashkenazi Jews, was common among supporters of the Zionist movement, including the Yishuv, who sought to promote Hebrew's revival as a unifying national language. These sentiments were reflected in the early policies of the Israeli government, which largely banned Yiddish theatre and publications. Until 2018, Arabic was also an official language; in 2018 it was downgraded to having a "special status in the state". Arabic is spoken by the Arab minority and is the main medium of teaching in Arab schools where Hebrew is studied as a subject. Arabic is studied in most Jewish schools and is often used on signage and in transport announcements. Due to mass immigration from the former Soviet Union and Ethiopia (some 130,000 Ethiopian Jews live in Israel ), Russian and Amharic are widely spoken. Over one million Russian-speaking immigrants arrived in Israel between 1990 and 2004. French is spoken by around 700,000 Israelis, mostly originating from France and North Africa (see Maghrebi Jews ). English was an official language during the Mandate period; it lost this status after the establishment of Israel, but retains a role comparable to that of an official language. Many Israelis communicate reasonably well in English, as many television programmes are broadcast in English with subtitles and the language is taught in elementary school.

The primary medium of teaching in Israeli universities is Hebrew, but some courses are offered in English.

The main language of the Circassians in Israel is Adyghe , and most of them also know Hebrew and Arabic.

The religious affiliation of Israeli Jews varies widely: a 2016 survey by Pew Research indicates that 49% self-identify as Hiloni (secular), 29% as Masorti (traditional), 13% as Dati (religious) and 9% as Haredi (ultra-Orthodox). Haredi Jews are expected to represent over 20% of the Jewish population by 2028. Muslims constitute the largest religious minority, making up about 18.1% of the population. About 1.9% of the population is Christian , and 1.6% is Druze .

The Christian population comprises primarily Arab Christians and Aramean Christians but also includes post-Soviet immigrants, foreign labourers, Armenian Christians , and followers of Messianic Judaism , considered by most Christians and Jews to be a form of Christianity. Members of many other religious groups, including Buddhists and Hindus , maintain a presence in Israel, albeit in small numbers. Out of over one million immigrants from the former Soviet Union, about 300,000 are considered not Jewish by the Chief Rabbinate of Israel . Israel comprises a major part of the Holy Land , a region of significant importance to all Abrahamic religions . Jerusalem is of special importance to Jews, Muslims, and Christians, as it is the home of sites that are pivotal to their religious beliefs, such as the Old City that incorporates the Western Wall and the Temple Mount (Al-Aqsa Mosque compound) and the Church of the Holy Sepulchre . Other locations of religious importance are Nazareth (site of the Annunciation of Mary ), Tiberias and Safed (two of the Four Holy Cities in Judaism), the White Mosque in Ramla (shrine of the prophet Saleh ), and the Church of Saint George and Mosque of Al-Khadr, Lod (tomb of Saint George or Al Khidr ). A number of other religious landmarks are located in the West Bank , including Joseph's Tomb , the birthplace of Jesus , Rachel's Tomb , and the Cave of the Patriarchs .

The administrative center of the Baháʼí Faith and the Shrine of the Báb are located at the Baháʼí World Centre in Haifa ; the leader of the faith is buried in Acre .

The Mahmood Mosque is affiliated with the reformist Ahmadiyya movement. Kababir , Haifa's mixed neighbourhood of Jews and Ahmadi Arabs, is one of a few of its kind in the country. Education Main article: Education in Israel Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center at Bar-Ilan University In 2015, Israel ranked third among OECD members for the percentage of 25–64-year-olds that have attained tertiary education with 49% compared with the OECD average of 35%.

In 2012, the country ranked third in the number of academic degrees per capita (20 per cent of the population). Israel has a school life expectancy of 16 years and a literacy rate of 97.8%.

The State Education Law (1953) established five types of schools: state secular, state religious, ultra orthodox, communal settlement schools, and Arab schools.

The public secular is the largest school group and is attended by the majority of Jewish and non-Arab pupils. Most Arabs send their children to Arabic-language schools. Education is compulsory between the ages of three and eighteen. Schooling is divided into three tiers—primary school (grades 1–6), middle school (grades 7–9), and high school (grades 10–12)—culminating with Bagrut matriculation exams. Proficiency in core subjects such as mathematics, the Hebrew language, Hebrew and general literature, the English language, history, Biblical scripture and civics is necessary to receive a Bagrut certificate.

The Jewish population maintains a relatively high level of educational attainment where just under half of all Israeli Jews (46%) hold post-secondary degrees. Israeli Jews 25 and older have an average 11.6 years of schooling, making them one of the most highly educated of all major religious groups in the world.

In Arab, Christian and Druze schools, the exam on Biblical studies is replaced by an exam on Muslim, Christian or Druze heritage, respectively.

In 2020, 68.7% of 12th graders earned a matriculation certificate. Mount Scopus Campus of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem Israel has a tradition of higher education where its university education has been largely responsible in spurring modern economic development. Israel has nine public universities subsidised by the state and 49 private colleges .

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem houses the National Library of Israel , the world's largest repository of Judaica and Hebraica.

The Technion and the Hebrew University consistently ranked among world's 100 top universities by ARWU ranking. Other major universities include the Weizmann Institute of Science , Tel Aviv University , Ben-Gurion University of the Negev , Bar-Ilan University , the University of Haifa , and the Open University of Israel . Culture Main article: Culture of Israel Cultural diversity stems from its diverse population: Jews from various diaspora communities brought their cultural and religious traditions with them. Arab influences are found in architecture , music , and cuisine , among others. Israel is the only country where life revolves around the Hebrew calendar , which is aligned to the seasons in the Levant. Public holidays are determined by the Jewish holidays , and except for Yom HaAtzma'ut (Independence Day) there are no annual civil holidays.

The official day of rest is Saturday, the Jewish Sabbath . Literature Israeli literature is primarily poetry and prose written in Hebrew, as part of the renaissance of Hebrew as a spoken language since the mid-19th century, although a small body of literature is published in other languages.

By law, two copies of all works published in Israel must be deposited in the National Library .

In 2016, 89 per cent of the 7,300 books transferred to the library were in Hebrew.

In 1966, Shmuel Yosef Agnon shared the Nobel Prize in Literature with German Jewish author Nelly Sachs . Leading poets include Yehuda Amichai , Nathan Alterman , Leah Goldberg , and Rachel Bluwstein . Internationally famous contemporary novelists include Amos Oz , Etgar Keret and David Grossman . Music and dance Further information: Music of Israel and Dance in Israel Israel Philharmonic Orchestra conducted by Zubin Mehta Israeli music includes Mizrahi and Sephardic music , Hasidic melodies, Greek music , jazz , and pop rock .

The Israel Philharmonic Orchestra has been in operation for over seventy years and performs more than two hundred concerts each year. Itzhak Perlman , Pinchas Zukerman and Ofra Haza are among the internationally acclaimed musicians born in Israel.

The country has participated in the Eurovision Song Contest nearly every year since 1973, winning it four times and hosting three times. Eilat has hosted its own international music festival, the Red Sea Jazz Festival , every summer since 1987.

The nation's canonical folk songs are known as "Songs of the Land of Israel". Cinema and theatre Main article: Cinema of Israel Ten Israeli films have been final nominees for Best Foreign Language Film at the Academy Awards . Palestinian Israeli filmmakers have made films dealing with the Arab-Israeli conflict and status of Palestinians within Israel, such as Mohammad Bakri 's 2002 film Jenin, Jenin and The Syrian Bride . Continuing the strong theatrical traditions of the Yiddish theatre in Eastern Europe, Israel maintains a vibrant theatre scene. Founded in 1918, Habima Theatre in Tel Aviv is Israel's oldest repertory theatre company and national theatre. Other theatres include Ohel , the Cameri and Gesher . Visual arts Main article: Visual arts in Israel The Roaring Lion sculpture by Avraham Melnikov Israeli Jewish art has been particularly influenced by the Kabbalah , the Talmud and the Zohar . Another art movement that held a prominent role in the 20th century was the School of Paris .

In the late 19th and early 20th century, the Yishuv's art was dominated by art trends emanating Bezalel . Beginning in the 1920s, the local art scene was heavily influenced by modern French art, first introduced by Isaac Frenkel Frenel . Jewish masters of the school of Paris , such as Soutine , Kikoine , Frenkel , Chagall heavily influenced the development of Israeli art. Israeli sculpture took inspiration from modern European sculpture as well Mesopotamian , Assyrian and local art. Avraham Melnikov 's The Roaring Lion , David Polus' Alexander Zaid and Ze'ev Ben Zvi 's cubist sculpture exemplify some of the different streams in sculpture. Common themes in art are the mystical cities of Safed and Jerusalem, the bohemian café culture of Tel Aviv, agricultural landscapes, biblical stories and war. Today Israeli art has delved into optical art , AI art , digital art and the use of salt in sculpture. Architecture Main article: Architecture of Israel Bauhaus Museum Tel Aviv Due to the immigration of Jewish architects, architecture has come to reflect different styles.

In the early 20th century Jewish architects sought to combine Occidental and Oriental architecture producing buildings that showcase a myriad of infused styles.

The eclectic style gave way to the modernist Bauhaus style with the influx of German Jewish architects (among them Erich Mendelsohn ) fleeing Nazi persecution .

The White City of Tel Aviv is a UNESCO heritage site .

Following independence, multiple government projects were commissioned, a grand part built in a brutalist style with heavy emphasis on the use of concrete and acclimatisation to the desert climate. Several novel ideas such as the Garden City were implemented in Israeli cities; the Geddes plan of Tel Aviv became renowned internationally for its revolutionary design and adaptation to the local climate. Museums For a more comprehensive list, see List of Israeli museums . Shrine of the Book , repository of the Dead Sea Scrolls in Jerusalem The Israel Museum in Jerusalem is one of Israel's most important cultural institutions, and houses the Dead Sea Scrolls , along with an extensive collection of Judaica and European art . Yad Vashem ( Hebrew : יָד וַשֵׁם , lit. ' a memorial and a name ' ) is the world's central Holocaust memorial institution and archive of Holocaust-related information. ANU - Museum of the Jewish People is an interactive museum devoted to the history of Jewish communities around the world. Israel has the highest number of museums per capita. Several museums are devoted to Islamic culture, including the Rockefeller Archaeological Museum and the L. A. Mayer Institute for Islamic Art , both in Jerusalem.

The Rockefeller specialises in archaeological remains from Middle East history. It is also the home of the first hominid fossil skull found in West Asia, called Galilee Man . Mass media Main article: Mass media in Israel Notable newspapers include the left-wing Haaretz , centrist Yedioth Ahronoth , and center-right Israel Hayom . There are several major television channels which cater to different audiences, from Russian-language Channel 9 to Arabic-language Kan 33 .

The 2024 Freedom House report found Israeli media is "vibrant and free to criticise government policy".

In the 2024 Press Freedom Index by Reporters Without Borders , Israel was placed 112th of 180 countries, second in the Middle East and North Africa. Reporters Without Borders reported that the Israel Defence Forces had killed more than 100 Palestinian journalists in Gaza.

During the 2023 Gaza war, Israel has been alleged to be "trying to suppress the reporting coming out of the besieged enclave while disinformation infiltrates its own media ecosystem".

In May 2024, Israel shut down the local offices of Al Jazeera .

In 2024, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists , Israel was the second leading country in jailing journalists, and responsible for the majority of journalists killed in the world. Cuisine Main article: Israeli cuisine A meal including falafel , hummus , French fries and Israeli salad Israeli cuisine includes local dishes as well as Jewish cuisine brought to the country by immigrants. Particularly since the late 1970s, a fusion cuisine has developed.

The cuisine has adapted elements of the Mizrahi , Sephardi , and Ashkenazi styles of cooking. It incorporates many foods traditionally eaten in the Levantine , Arab , Middle Eastern and Mediterranean cuisines, such as falafel , hummus , shakshouka , couscous , and za'atar . Schnitzel , pizza , hamburgers , French fries , rice and salad are common. Ptitim (Israeli couscous) is a notable Israeli food invented in the 1950s due to rice shortages during the austerity period . Roughly half of the Jewish population attests to keeping kosher at home. Kosher restaurants make up around a quarter of the total as of 2015 . Pork—often called "white meat" in Israel —is produced and consumed despite attempts to ban it; it is forbidden by both Judaism and Islam but is permitted by Christianity and mostly produced in traditionally Christian areas of northern Israel. Other non-kosher foods produced and eaten in Israel include rabbits, ostriches, and non-kosher fish. Sports Main article: Sport in Israel Maccabi Haifa F.C. fans at Sammy Ofer Stadium in the city of Haifa The most popular spectator sports in Israel are association football and basketball.

The Israeli Premier League is the country's premier football league, and the Israeli Basketball Premier League is the premier basketball league. Maccabi Haifa , Maccabi Tel Aviv , Hapoel Tel Aviv and Beitar Jerusalem are the largest football clubs . Maccabi Tel Aviv, Maccabi Haifa and Hapoel Tel Aviv have competed in the UEFA Champions League and Hapoel Tel Aviv reached the UEFA Cup quarter-finals. Israel hosted and won the 1964 AFC Asian Cup ; in 1970 the Israel national football team qualified for the FIFA World Cup , the only time it participated.

The 1974 Asian Games , held in Tehran, were the last Asian Games in which Israel participated , plagued by Arab countries that refused to compete with Israel. Israel was excluded from the 1978 Asian Games and since then has not competed in Asian sport events.

In 1994, UEFA agreed to admit Israel, and its football teams now compete in Europe. Maccabi Tel Aviv B.C. has won the European championship in basketball six times. Israel has won 20 Olympic medals since its first win in 1992 , including a gold medal in windsurfing at the 2004 Summer Olympics , and seven medals at the 2024 Paris Olympics. Israel has won over 100 gold medals in the Paralympic Games and is ranked 20th in the all-time medal count .

The 1968 Summer Paralympics were hosted by Israel.

The Czech Republic currently, before the peace between Israel and Palestine is signed, recognizes Jerusalem to be in fact the capital of Israel in the borders of the demarcation line from 1967." The Ministry also said that it would only consider relocating its embassy based on "results of negotiations. ^ "Javier Milei on his first diplomatic visit to Israel as President of Argentina" . Retrieved 28 November 2025 . ^ "Honduras recognizes Jerusalem as Israel's capital" .

The Times of Israel . 29 August 2019. Archived from the original on 3 December 2019 . Retrieved 29 August 2019 . ^ "Guatemala se suma a EEUU y también trasladará su embajada en Israel a Jerusalén" . Infobae (in Spanish). 24 December 2017. Archived from the original on 17 April 2020 . Retrieved 25 December 2017 . Guatemala's embassy was located in Jerusalem until the 1980s, when it was moved to Tel Aviv. ^ "Nauru recognizes J'lem as capital of Israel" . Israel National News . 29 August 2019. Archived from the original on 11 June 2020 . Retrieved 29 August 2019 . ^ "Trump Recognizes Jerusalem as Israel's Capital and Orders U.S. Embassy to Move" .

The New York Times . 6 December 2017. Archived from the original on 17 June 2020 . Retrieved 6 December 2017 . ^ The Legal Status of East Jerusalem (PDF) , Norwegian Refugee Council , December 2013, pp. 8, 29, archived (PDF) from the original on 10 May 2021 , retrieved 26 October 2021 ^ "Constitution for Israel" . knesset.gov.il . Archived from the original on 4 August 2023 . Retrieved 9 December 2023 . ^ a b "Israel Passes 'National Home' Law, Drawing Ire of Arabs" .

The New York Times . 19 July 2018. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019 . Retrieved 19 July 2018 . ^ a b Lubell, Maayan (19 July 2018). "Israel adopts divisive Jewish nation-state law" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 24 December 2018 . Retrieved 19 July 2018 . ^ a b "Arabic in Israel: an official language and a cultural bridge" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . 18 December 2016. Archived from the original on 2 August 2020 . Retrieved 8 August 2018 . ^ a b Population, by Population Group (PDF) . Monthly Bulletin of Statistics (Report). Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. 14 August 2025 . Retrieved 14 September 2025 . ^ Population Of Israelis, by Religion (PDF) . Statistical Abstract of Israel (Report). Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. 30 December 2024 . Retrieved 14 September 2025 . ^ "Israel" . Central Intelligence Agency. 27 February 2023. Archived from the original on 10 January 2021 . Retrieved 24 February 2023 – via CIA.gov. ^ "Israel country profile" . BBC News . 24 February 2020. Archived from the original on 24 January 2021 . Retrieved 27 January 2021 . ^ "Surface water and surface water change" . OECD.Stat . OECD. Archived from the original on 24 March 2021 . Retrieved 11 October 2020 . ^ "Time Series DataBank" . Israel Central Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 14 September 2025 . ^ "Geographic Areas – Nationwide" . 2022 Population Census Data . Central Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 31 July 2024 . ^ a b c d e "World Economic Outlook Database (April 2026 Edition)" . www.imf.org . International Monetary Fund . 14 April 2026 . Retrieved 18 April 2026 . ^ "Gini Index coefficient" .

The World Factbook . Archived from the original on 26 January 2026. ^ "Human Development Report 2025" (PDF) . United Nations Development Programme . 6 May 2025. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 May 2025 . Retrieved 6 May 2025 . ^ Akram, Susan M., Michael Dumper, Michael Lynk, and Iain Scobbie, eds. 2010. International Law and the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict: A Rights-Based Approach to Middle East Peace . Routledge. p. 119: "UN General Assembly Resolution 181 recommended the creation of an international zone, or corpus separatum, in Jerusalem to be administered by the UN for a 10-year period, after which there would be a referendum to determine its future. This approach applies equally to West and East Jerusalem and is not affected by the occupation of East Jerusalem in 1967. To a large extent it is this approach that still guides the diplomatic behaviour of states and thus has greater force in international law." ^ Morris, Benny (1999). Righteous Victims: A History of the Zionist-Arab Conflict, 1881–2001 (reprint ed.). Knopf. ISBN 978-0-679-74475-7 . Archived from the original on 22 March 2024 . Retrieved 22 March 2024 .

The fear of territorial displacement and dispossession was to be the chief motor of Arab antagonism to Zionism down to 1948 (and indeed after 1967 as well). Also quoted, among many, by Mark M. Ayyash (2019). Hermeneutics of Violence: A Four-Dimensional Conception . University of Toronto Press, p. 195 Archived 22 March 2024 at the Wayback Machine , ISBN 978-1-4875-0586-8 . Accessed 22 March 2024. ^ Fildis, Ayse; Nisanci, Ensar (2019). "British Colonial Policy "Divide and Rule": Fanning Arab Rivalry in Palestine" (PDF) . International Journal of Islamic and Civilizational Studies . 6 (1). UTM Press. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 May 2024 . Retrieved 10 May 2024 . ^ a b "Zionism | Definition, History, Examples, & Facts | Britannica" . www.britannica.com . 19 October 2023. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018 . Retrieved 29 October 2023 . ^ Meir-Glitzenstein, Esther (Fall 2018). "Turning Points in the Historiography of Jewish Immigration from Arab Countries to Israel". Israel Studies . 23 (3). Indiana University Press: 114– 122. doi : 10.2979/israelstudies.23.3.15 . JSTOR 10.2979/israelstudies.23.3.15 . S2CID 150208821 .

The mass immigration from Arab countries began in mid-1949 and included three communities that relocated to Israel almost in their entirety: 31,000 Jews from Libya, 50,000 from Yemen, and 125,000 from Iraq. Additional immigrants arrived from Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia, Turkey, Iran, India, and elsewhere. Within three years, the Jewish population of Israel doubled.

The ethnic composition of the population shifted as well, as immigrants from Muslim counties and their offspring now comprised one third of the Jewish population—an unprecedented phenomenon in global immigration history.

From 1952–60, Israel regulated and restricted immigration from Muslim countries with a selective immigration policy based on economic criteria, and sent these immigrants, most of whom were North African, to peripheral Israeli settlements.

The selective immigration policy ended in 1961 when, following an agreement between Israel and Morocco, about 100,000 Jews immigrated to the State.

From 1952–68 about 600,000 Jews arrived in Israel, three quarters of whom were from Arab countries and the remaining immigrants were largely from Eastern Europe. Today fewer than 30,000 remain in Muslim countries, mostly concentrated in Iran and Turkey. ^ Fischbach 2008 , p. 26–27. ^ Slater 2020 , pp. 81–92, 350, " It is no longer a matter of serious dispute that in the 1947–48 period—beginning well before the Arab invasion in May 1948—some 700,000 to 750,000 Palestinians were expelled from or fled their villages and homes in Israel in fear of their lives—an entirely justifiable fear, in light of massacres carried out by Zionist forces." ^ Ghanim, Honaida (March 2009). "Poetics of Disaster: Nationalism, Gender, and Social Change Among Palestinian Poets in Israel After Nakba" . International Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society . 22 (1): 23–39 . doi : 10.1007/s10767-009-9049-9 . ISSN 0891-4486 . JSTOR 40608203 . S2CID 144148068 . Archived from the original on 6 November 2021. Around 750,000–900,000 Palestinians were systematically expelled from their homes and lands and about 531 villages were deliberately destroyed. ^ Cleveland, William L.; Bunton, Martin (2016). A History of the Modern Middle East . Westview Press . p. 270. ISBN 978-0-429-97513-4 . Not only was there no Palestinian Arab state, but the vast majority of the Arab population in the territory that became Israel-over 700,000 people-had become refugees.

The Arab flight from Palestine began during the intercommunal war and was at first the normal reaction of a civilian population to nearby fighting-a temporary evacuation from the zone of combat with plans to return once hostilities ceased. However, during spring and early summer 1948, the flight of the Palestinian Arabs was transformed into a permanent mass exodus... . ^ Beker, Avi (2005). "The Forgotten Narrative: Jewish Refugees from Arab Countries" . Jewish Political Studies Review . 17 (3/4): 3– 19. ISSN 0792-335X . JSTOR 25834637 . Archived from the original on 9 January 2024 . Retrieved 23 May 2024 . ^ Dinstein, Yoram (11 October 2021). Israel Yearbook on Human Rights, Volume 6 (1976) . BRILL. p. 282. ISBN 978-90-04-42287-2 . Archived from the original on 21 May 2024 . Retrieved 23 May 2024 . ^ a b "Here's how experts on the Middle East see the region's key issues, our new survey finds" .

The Washington Post . 16 February 2021. Archived from the original on 22 July 2025 . Retrieved 20 April 2022 . ^ a b "Academic experts believe that Middle East politics are actually getting worse" .

The Washington Post . 17 September 2021. Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 20 April 2022 . ^ Multiple sources: "A genocide is unfolding before our eyes: History will not forgive our inaction, UN Special Committee warns General Assembly in report" . OHCHR . 19 November 2024. Archived from the original on 2 October 2025 . Retrieved 21 December 2025 . Our findings conclude that Israel's methods of war align with the characteristics of genocide "Israel has committed genocide in the Gaza Strip, UN Commission finds" . OHCHR . 16 September 2025. Archived from the original on 6 December 2025 . Retrieved 21 December 2025 .

The Commission has been investigating the events on and since 7 October 2023 for the last two years, and concluded that Israeli authorities and Israeli security forces committed four of the five genocidal acts defined by the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, namely killing, causing serious bodily or mental harm, deliberately inflicting conditions of life calculated to bring about the destruction of the Palestinians in whole or in part, and imposing measures intended to prevent births. "Report of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and Israel" . UN Human Rights Council . 14 August 2025. Archived from the original on 18 November 2025 . Retrieved 22 December 2025 . para. 76: ...Israeli authorities deliberately inflicted conditions of life on the Palestinians in Gaza calculated to destroy, in whole or in part, the Palestinians in Gaza, which is an underlying act of genocide... "Legal analysis of the conduct of Israel in Gaza pursuant to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide" (PDF) . UN Human Rights Council . 16 September 2025. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 December 2025 . Retrieved 22 December 2025 . Para. 233: the Commission concludes that the 'direct and public incitement to commit genocide' under article III(c) of the Genocide Convention is established. Para. 252.

The Commission concludes on reasonable grounds that the Israeli authorities and Israeli security forces have committed and are continuing to commit the following actus reus of genocide against the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, namely (i) killing members of the group; (ii) causing serious bodily or mental harm to members of the group; (iii) deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole or in part; and (iv) imposing measures intended to prevent births within the group " "More than a human can bear": Israel's systematic use of sexual, reproductive and other forms of gender-based violence since 7 October 2023" (PDF) . UN Human Rights Council . 13 March 2025. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 October 2025 . Retrieved 22 December 2025 . Para. 175: The Commission concludes that the destruction of the Basma IVF clinic was a measure intended to prevent births among Palestinians in Gaza, which is a genocidal act under the Rome Statute and Genocide Convention. Para. 178: The Commission concludes that the ISF caused serious bodily and mental harm to members of this group, and deliberately inflicted conditions of life that were calculated to bring about the physical destruction of Palestinians in Gaza as a group, in whole or in part, which are categories of genocidal acts in the Rome Statute and the Genocide Convention. Para. 218: The Commission finds that the Israeli authorities have destroyed in part the reproductive capacity of the Palestinians in Gaza as a group, including by imposing measures intended to prevent births, one of the categories of genocidal acts in the Rome Statute and the Genocide Convention. Para. 219: The harm for pregnant, lactating and new mothers is of an unprecedented scale in Gaza…The underlying acts amount to crimes against humanity and deliberately inflicting conditions of life calculated to bring about the physical destruction of Palestinians as a group, one of the categories of genocidal acts in the Rome Statute and the Genocide Convention "UN Independent International Commission of Inquiry, legal analysis and recommendations on the implementation of the International Court of Justice Advisory Opinion, Legal Consequences arising from the Policies and Practices of Israel in the Occupied Palestinian Territory" (PDF) . UN Human Rights Council . 18 October 2024. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2025 . Retrieved 22 December 2025 . Para. 23: On the issue of genocide, the Commission notes the provisional measures orders issued by the Court in the Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in the Gaza Strip (South Africa v. Israel).

The Commission finds that all States are on notice that Israel may be or is committing internationally wrongful acts in both its conduct in the military operations in Gaza and its unlawful occupation of the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Thus, the Commission finds that, unless States cease their aid and assistance to Israel in the commission of these acts, those States shall be deemed to be complicit in those internationally wrongful acts. "Application of the Genocide Convention (Order 26 I 24)" (PDF) . International Court of Justice . 26 January 2024. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 September 2025 . Retrieved 22 December 2025 . Para. 54: In the Court's view, the facts and circumstances mentioned above are sufficient to conclude that at least some of the rights claimed by South Africa and for which it is seeking protection are plausible. This is the case with respect to the right of the Palestinians in Gaza to be protected from acts of genocide and related prohibited acts identified in Article III, and the right of South Africa to seek Israel's compliance with the latter's obligations under the Convention. "Application of the Genocide Convention (Order 28 III 24)" (PDF) . International Court of Justice . 28 March 2025. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 March 2025 . Retrieved 22 December 2025 . Para. 25: …The Court also sees no reason to revisit this conclusion . Para. 30: The Court has already observed that the catastrophic humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip that existed when it issued its Order of 26 January 2024 has deteriorated even further… Para. 34: …"he situation of hunger, starvation and famine is a result of Israel's extensive restrictions on the entry and distribution of humanitarian aid and commercial goods, displacement of most of the population, as well as the destruction of crucial civilian infrastructure"… "Application of the Genocide Convention (Order 24 V 24)" (PDF) . International Court of Justice . 24 May 2025. Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 June 2025 . Retrieved 22 December 2025 . Para. 31-32: . Para. 47: the Court finds that the current situation arising from Israel's military offensive in Rafah entails a further risk of irreparable prejudice to the plausible rights claimed by South Africa ^ Deutsch, Anthony; Sterling, Toby; Berg, Stephanie van den (12 January 2024). "Israel rejects genocide charges, tells World Court it must defend itself" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 11 March 2026 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ "Biden: What's happening in Gaza is not genocide" . Reuters . 20 May 2024 . Retrieved 27 February 2026 . ^ "Trump Rejects Israel Is Committing Genocide In Gaza: 'They're In a War' " . Latin Times . 4 August 2025 . Retrieved 23 August 2025 . ^ a b "How Israel's electoral system works" . CNN.com . CNN International . Retrieved 14 October 2021 . ^ "Israel datasets" . www.imf.org . Retrieved 22 April 2025 . ^ "30 Wealthiest Countries by Per Capita Net Worth" . Yahoo Finance . 9 September 2023 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ "Global Innovation Index (GII)" . global-innovation-index . Retrieved 28 October 2025 . ^ Dutta, Soumitra; Lanvin, Bruno; Wunsch-Vincent, Sacha (2022). Global Innovation Index 2023, 15th Edition . World Intellectual Property Organization. doi : 10.34667/tind.46596 . ISBN 978-92-805-3432-0 . Retrieved 10 August 2024 . ^ Getzoff, Marc (9 August 2023). "Most Technologically Advanced Countries In The World 2023" . Global Finance Magazine . Archived from the original on 8 November 2023 . Retrieved 8 November 2023 . ^ Geoffrey W. Bromiley (1995). "Israel" . International Standard Bible Encyclopedia : E–J . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 907. ISBN 978-0-8028-3782-0 . ^ Barton & Bowden 2004 , p. 126. "The Merneptah Stele ... is arguably the oldest evidence outside the Bible for the existence of Israel as early as the 13th century BCE." ^ K.L. Noll, Canaan and Israel in Antiquity: A Textbook on History and Religion, A&C Black, 2012, rev.ed. pp. 137ff. ^ Thomas L. Thompson , Early History of the Israelite People: From the Written & Archaeological Sources, Brill, 2000 pp. 275–276 ^ Hasel, Michael G. (1 January 1994). "Israel in the Merneptah Stela". Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research . 296 (296): 45– 61. doi : 10.2307/1357179 . JSTOR 1357179 . S2CID 164052192 . * Bertman, Stephen (14 July 2005). Handbook to Life in Ancient Mesopotamia . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-518364-1 . * Meindert Dijkstra (2010). "Origins of Israel between history and ideology".

In Becking, Bob; Grabbe, Lester (eds.). Between Evidence and Ideology Essays on the History of Ancient Israel read at the Joint Meeting of the Society for Old Testament Study and the Oud Testamentisch Werkgezelschap Lincoln Nebraska, July 2009 . Brill. p. 47. ISBN 978-90-04-18737-5 .

As a West Semitic personal name it existed long before it became a tribal or a geographical name. This is not without significance, though is it rarely mentioned. We learn of a maryanu named ysr"il (*Yi¡sr—a"ilu) from Ugarit living in the same period, but the name was already used a thousand years before in Ebla.

The word Israel originated as a West Semitic personal name. One of the many names that developed into the name of the ancestor of a clan, of a tribe and finally of a people and a nation. ^ Lemche, Niels Peter (1998).

The Israelites in History and Tradition . Westminster John Knox Press. p. 35. ISBN 978-0-664-22727-2 . ^ Noah Rayman (29 September 2014). "Mandatory Palestine: What It Was and Why It Matters" . Time . Archived from the original on 18 May 2019 . Retrieved 5 December 2015 . ^ "The Avalon Project : The Palestine Mandate" . avalon.law.yale.edu . Retrieved 5 October 2025 . ^ "Popular Opinion" .

The Palestine Post . 7 December 1947. p. 1. Archived from the original on 15 August 2012. ^ Israel: The First Decade of Independence . State University of New York Press. 1995. ISBN 978-0-7914-2260-1 . ^ Elli Wohlgelernter (30 April 1998). "One Day that Shook the world" .

The Jerusalem Post . Archived from the original on 12 January 2012. ^ Forman, Jacob (17 April 2023). "Jewish Word | Israel: What's in a Name?" . Moment Magazine . Retrieved 5 October 2025 . ^ "On the Move" . Time . 31 May 1948. Archived from the original on 16 October 2007 . Retrieved 6 August 2007 . ^ Tchernov, Eitan (1988). "The Age of 'Ubeidiya Formation (Jordan Valley, Israel) and the Earliest Hominids in the Levant". Paléorient . 14 (2): 63– 65. doi : 10.3406/paleo.1988.4455 . ^ Wade, Lizzie (10 July 2019). "Skull fragment from Greek cave suggests modern humans were in Europe more than 200,000 years ago" . Science . American Association for the Advancement of Science. doi : 10.1126/science.aay6927 . Retrieved 21 April 2025 . ^ Winfried Nöth (1994). Origins of Semiosis: Sign Evolution in Nature and Culture . Walter de Gruyter. p. 293. ISBN 978-3-11-087750-2 . ^ Roger Blench, Matthew Spriggs (2003). Archaeology and Language IV: Language Change and Cultural Transformation . Routledge. p. 70. ISBN 978-1-134-81623-1 . ^ Hershkovitz, Israel ; Gopher, Avi (30 September 2008). "Demographic, Biological and Cultural Aspects of the Neolithic Revolution: A View from the Southern Levant" .

In Bocquet-Appel, Jean-Pierre; Bar-Yosef, Ofer (eds.).

The Neolithic Demographic Transition and its Consequences . Springer Science+Business Media. p. 465. doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-8539-0_17 . ISBN 978-1-4020-8538-3 . Retrieved 20 April 2025 . ^ "Canaanites" . obo . Archived from the original on 3 April 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Glassman, Ronald M. (2017), Glassman, Ronald M. (ed.), "The Political Structure of the Canaanite City-States: Monarchy and Merchant Oligarchy" , The Origins of Democracy in Tribes, City-States and Nation-States , Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 473– 477, doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-51695-0_49 , ISBN 978-3-319-51695-0 , archived from the original on 29 April 2024 , retrieved 1 December 2023 {{ citation }} : CS1 maint: work parameter with ISBN ( link ) ^ Braunstein, Susan L. (2011). "The Meaning of Egyptian-Style Objects in the Late Bronze Cemeteries of Tell el-Farʿah (South)". Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research . 364 (364): 1– 36. doi : 10.5615/bullamerschoorie.364.0001 . JSTOR 10.5615/bullamerschoorie.364.0001 . S2CID 164054005 . ^ Dever, William G. Beyond the Texts , Society of Biblical Literature Press, 2017, pp. 89–93 ^ S. Richard, "Archaeological sources for the history of Palestine: The Early Bronze Age: The rise and collapse of urbanism", The Biblical Archaeologist (1987) ^ Miller, James Maxwell; Hayes, John Haralson (1986). A History of Ancient Israel and Judah . Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 978-0-664-21262-9 . ^ Rendsberg, Gary (2008). "Israel without the Bible".

The Hebrew Bible: New Insights and Scholarship. NYU Press, pp. 3–5 ^ Gnuse, Robert Karl (1997). No Other Gods: Emergent Monotheism in Israel . Sheffield Academic Press Ltd. pp. 28, 31. ISBN 978-1-85075-657-6 . ^ Steiner, Richard C. (1997), "Ancient Hebrew", in Hetzron, Robert (ed.), The Semitic Languages , Routledge, pp. 145–173, ISBN 978-0-415-05767-7 ^ Killebrew 2005 , p. 230. ^ Shahin 2005 , p. 6. ^ Faust 2015 , p. 476: "While there is a consensus among scholars that the Exodus did not take place in the manner described in the Bible, surprisingly most scholars agree that the narrative has a historical core, and that some of the highland settlers came, one way or another, from Egypt." ^ Redmount 2001 , p. 61: "A few authorities have concluded that the core events of the Exodus saga are entirely literary fabrications. But most biblical scholars still subscribe to some variation of the Documentary Hypothesis, and support the basic historicity of the biblical narrative." ^ Lipschits, Oded (2014). "The History of Israel in the Biblical Period" .

In Berlin, Adele; Brettler, Marc Zvi (eds.).

The Jewish Study Bible (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-997846-5 . Archived from the original on 9 April 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2018 . ^ Kuhrt, Amiele (1995).

The Ancient Near East . Routledge. p. 438 . ISBN 978-0-415-16762-8 . ^ Finkelstein, Israel; Silberman, Neil Asher (2001).

The Bible unearthed: archaeology's new vision of ancient Israel and the origin of its stories (1st Touchstone ed.). Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-86912-4 . ^ Finkelstein, Israel, (2020). "Saul and Highlands of Benjamin Update: The Role of Jerusalem" , in Joachim J. Krause, Omer Sergi, and Kristin Weingart (eds.), Saul, Benjamin, and the Emergence of Monarchy in Israel: Biblical and Archaeological Perspectives , SBL Press, Atlanta, GA, p. 48, footnote 57: "...They became territorial kingdoms later, Israel in the first half of the ninth century BCE and Judah in its second half..." ^ The Pitcher Is Broken: Memorial Essays for Gosta W. Ahlstrom, Steven W. Holloway, Lowell K. Handy, Continuum, 1 May 1995 Archived 9 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine Quote: "For Israel, the description of the battle of Qarqar in the Kurkh Monolith of Shalmaneser III (mid-ninth century) and for Judah, a Tiglath-pileser III text mentioning (Jeho-) Ahaz of Judah (IIR67 = K. 3751), dated 734–733, are the earliest published to date." ^ Finkelstein & Silberman 2002 , pp. 146–147: Put simply, while Judah was still economically marginal and backward, Israel was booming. ...

In the next chapter we will see how the northern kingdom suddenly appeared on the ancient Near Eastern stage as a major regional power. ^ a b Finkelstein, Israel (2013).

The Forgotten Kingdom: the archaeology and history of Northern Israel . pp. 65– 66, 73, 74, 78, 87– 94. ISBN 978-1-58983-911-3 . OCLC 880456140 . ^ Finkelstein, Israel (1 November 2011). "Observations on the Layout of Iron Age Samaria". Tel Aviv . 38 (2): 194– 207. doi : 10.1179/033443511x13099584885303 . ISSN 0334-4355 . S2CID 128814117 . ^ Broshi, Maguen (2001). Bread, Wine, Walls and Scrolls . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 174. ISBN 978-1-84127-201-6 . Archived from the original on 10 February 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2018 . ^ a b Broshi, M., & Finkelstein, I. (1992). "The Population of Palestine in Iron Age II" Archived 5 March 2023 at the Wayback Machine . Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research , 287 (1), 47–60. ^ Finkelstein & Silberman 2002 , p. 307: "Intensive excavations throughout Jerusalem have shown that the city was indeed systematically destroyed by the Babylonians.

The conflagration seems to have been general.

When activity on the ridge of the City of David resumed in the Persian period, the-new suburbs on the western hill that had flourished since at least the time of Hezekiah were not reoccupied." ^ Lipschits, Oded (1999). "The History of the Benjamin Region under Babylonian Rule". Tel Aviv . 26 (2): 155– 190. doi : 10.1179/tav.1999.1999.2.155 . ISSN 0334-4355 . ^ Wheeler, P. (2017). "Review of the book Song of Exile: The Enduring Mystery of Psalm 137, by David W. Stowe".

The Catholic Biblical Quarterly . 79 (4): 696– 697. doi : 10.1353/cbq.2017.0092 . S2CID 171830838 . ^ a b "Second Temple Period (538 BCE to 70 CE) Persian Rule" . Biu.ac.il. Archived from the original on 16 January 1999 . Retrieved 15 March 2014 . ^ Harper's Bible Dictionary , ed. by Achtemeier, etc., Harper & Row, San Francisco, 1985, p. 103 ^ Grabbe, Lester L. (2004). A History of the Jews and Judaism in the Second Temple Period: Yehud – A History of the Persian Province of Judah v. 1 . T & T Clark. p. 355. ISBN 978-0-567-08998-4 . Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2018 . ^ Helyer, Larry R.; McDonald, Lee Martin (2013). "The Hasmoneans and the Hasmonean Era".

In Green, Joel B.; McDonald, Lee Martin (eds.).

The World of the New Testament: Cultural, Social, and Historical Contexts . Baker Academic. pp. 45– 47. ISBN 978-0-8010-9861-1 . OCLC 961153992 .

The ensuing power struggle left Hyrcanus with a free hand in Judea, and he quickly reasserted Jewish sovereignty... Hyrcanus then engaged in a series of military campaigns aimed at territorial expansion. He first conquered areas in the Transjordan. He then turned his attention to Samaria, which had long separated Judea from the northern Jewish settlements in Lower Galilee.

In the south, Adora and Marisa were conquered; (Aristobulus') primary accomplishment was annexing and Judaizing the region of Iturea, located between the Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon mountains ^ Ben-Sasson, H.H. (1976). A History of the Jewish People . Harvard University Press. p. 226. ISBN 978-0-674-39731-6 .

The expansion of Hasmonean Judea took place gradually. Under Jonathan, Judea annexed southern Samaria and began to expand in the direction of the coast plain...

The main ethnic changes were the work of John Hyrcanus... it was in his days and those of his son Aristobulus that the annexation of Idumea, Samaria and Galilee and the consolidation of Jewish settlement in Trans-Jordan was completed. Alexander Jannai, continuing the work of his predecessors, expanded Judean rule to the entire coastal plain, from the Carmel to the Egyptian border... and to additional areas in Trans-Jordan, including some of the Greek cities there. ^ Ben-Eliyahu, Eyal (30 April 2019). Identity and Territory: Jewish Perceptions of Space in Antiquity . Univ of California Press. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-520-29360-1 . OCLC 1103519319 .

From the beginning of the Second Temple period until the Muslim conquest—the land was part of imperial space. This was true from the early Persian period, as well as the time of Ptolemy and the Seleucids.

The only exception was the Hasmonean Kingdom, with its sovereign Jewish rule—first over Judah and later, in Alexander Jannaeus's prime, extending to the coast, the north, and the eastern banks of the Jordan. ^ a b Schwartz, Seth (2014).

The ancient Jews from Alexander to Muhammad . Cambridge University Press. pp. 85– 86. ISBN 978-1-107-04127-1 . OCLC 863044259 . Archived from the original on 3 April 2024 . Retrieved 4 February 2024 .

The year 70 ce marked transformations in demography, politics, Jewish civic status, Palestinian and more general Jewish economic and social structures, Jewish religious life beyond the sacrificial cult, and even Roman politics and the topography of the city of Rome itself.

The Revolt's failure had, to begin with, a demographic impact on the Jews of Palestine; many died in battle and as a result of siege conditions, not only in Jerusalem.

As indicated above, the figures for captives are conceivably more reliable. If 97,000 is roughly correct as a total for the war, it would mean that a huge percentage of the population was removed from the country, or at the very least displaced from their homes. ^ Werner Eck, "Sklaven und Freigelassene von Römern in Iudaea und den angrenzenden Provinzen", Novum Testamentum 55 (2013): 1–21 ^ Raviv, Dvir; Ben David, Chaim (2021). "Cassius Dio's figures for the demographic consequences of the Bar Kokhba War: Exaggeration or reliable account?" . Journal of Roman Archaeology . 34 (2): 585– 607. doi : 10.1017/S1047759421000271 . ISSN 1047-7594 . S2CID 245512193 . Scholars have long doubted the historical accuracy of Cassius Dio's account of the consequences of the Bar Kokhba War (Roman History 69.14). According to this text, considered the most reliable literary source for the Second Jewish Revolt, the war encompassed all of Judea: the Romans destroyed 985 villages and 50 fortresses, and killed 580,000 rebels. This article reassesses Cassius Dio's figures by drawing on new evidence from excavations and surveys in Judea, Transjordan, and the Galilee. Three research methods are combined: an ethno-archaeological comparison with the settlement picture in the Ottoman Period, comparison with similar settlement studies in the Galilee, and an evaluation of settled sites from the Middle Roman Period (70–136 CE).

The study demonstrates the potential contribution of the archaeological record to this issue and supports the view of Cassius Dio's demographic data as a reliable account, which he based on contemporaneous documentation. ^ a b Mor, Menahem (18 April 2016).

The Second Jewish Revolt . BRILL. pp. 483– 484. doi : 10.1163/9789004314634 . ISBN 978-90-04-31463-4 . Land confiscation in Judaea was part of the suppression of the revolt policy of the Romans and punishment for the rebels. But the very claim that the sikarikon laws were annulled for settlement purposes seems to indicate that Jews continued to reside in Judaea even after the Second Revolt. There is no doubt that this area suffered the severest damage from the suppression of the revolt. Settlements in Judaea, such as Herodion and Bethar, had already been destroyed during the course of the revolt, and Jews were expelled from the districts of Gophna, Herodion, and Aqraba. However, it should not be claimed that the region of Judaea was completely destroyed. Jews continued to live in areas such as Lod (Lydda), south of the Hebron Mountain, and the coastal regions.

In other areas of the Land of Israel that did not have any direct connection with the Second Revolt, no settlement changes can be identified as resulting from it. ^ Oppenheimer, A'haron and Oppenheimer, Nili. Between Rome and Babylon: Studies in Jewish Leadership and Society . Mohr Siebeck, 2005, p. 2. ^ H.H. Ben-Sasson, A History of the Jewish People , Harvard University Press, 1976, ISBN 978-0-674-39731-6 , page 334: "In an effort to wipe out all memory of the bond between the Jews and the land, Hadrian changed the name of the province from Judaea to Syria-Palestina, a name that became common in non-Jewish literature." ^ Ariel Lewin.

The archaeology of Ancient Judea and Palestine . Getty Publications, 2005 p. 33. "It seems clear that by choosing a seemingly neutral name – one juxtaposing that of a neighbouring province with the revived name of an ancient geographical entity (Palestine), already known from the writings of Herodotus – Hadrian was intending to suppress any connection between the Jewish people and that land." ISBN 978-0-89236-800-6 ^ Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History . 4:6.3-4 ^ Cohn-Sherbok, Dan (1996). Atlas of Jewish History . Routledge. p. 58. ISBN 978-0-415-08800-8 . ^ Lehmann, Clayton Miles (18 January 2007). "Palestine" . Encyclopedia of the Roman Provinces . University of South Dakota. Archived from the original on 10 November 2007 . Retrieved 9 February 2013 . ^ Judaism in late antiquity, Jacob Neusner, Bertold Spuler, Hady R Idris, Brill, 2001, p. 155 ^ הר, משה דוד (2022). "היהודים בארץ-ישראל בימי האימפריה הרומית הנוצרית" . ארץ-ישראל בשלהי העת העתיקה: מבואות ומחקרים (in Hebrew). Vol. 1. ירושלים: יד יצחק בן-צבי. pp. 210– 212. ISBN 978-965-217-444-4 . ^ a b Ehrlich, Michael (2022).

The Islamization of the Holy Land, 634–1800 . Arc Humanities Press. pp. 3– 4. ISBN 978-1-64189-222-3 . OCLC 1302180905 .

The Jewish community strove to recover from the catastrophic results of the Bar Kokhva revolt (132–135 CE).

Although some of these attempts were relatively successful, the Jews never fully recovered.

During the Late Roman and Byzantine periods, many Jews emigrated to thriving centres in the diaspora, especially Iraq, whereas some converted to Christianity and others continued to live in the Holy Land, especially in Galilee and the coastal plain.

During the Byzantine period, the three provinces of Palestine included more than thirty cities, namely, settlements with a bishop see.

After the Muslim conquest in the 630s, most of these cities declined and eventually disappeared.

As a result, in many cases the local ecclesiastical administration weakened, while in others it simply ceased to exist. Consequently, many local Christians converted to Islam. Thus, almost twelve centuries later, when the army led by Napoleon Bonaparte arrived in the Holy Land, most of the local population was Muslim. ^ David Goodblatt (2006). "The Political and Social History of the Jewish Community in the Land of Israel, c. 235–638".

The Cambridge History of Judaism . Vol. IV. Cambridge University Press. pp. 404– 430. ISBN 978-0-521-77248-8 . Few would disagree that, in the century and a half before our period begins, the Jewish population of Judah () suffered a serious blow from which it never recovered.

The destruction of the Jewish metropolis of Jerusalem and its environs and the eventual refounding of the city... had lasting repercussions. However, in other parts of Palestine the Jewish population remained strong What does seem clear is a different kind of change. Immigration of Christians and the conversion of pagans, Samaritans and Jews eventually produced a Christian majority ^ Bar, Doron (2003). "The Christianisation of Rural Palestine during Late Antiquity".

The Journal of Ecclesiastical History . 54 (3): 401– 421. doi : 10.1017/s0022046903007309 . ISSN 0022-0469 .

The dominant view of the history of Palestine during the Byzantine period links the early phases of the consecration of the land during the fourth century and the substantial external financial investment that accompanied the building of churches on holy sites on the one hand with the Christianisation of the population on the other. Churches were erected primarily at the holy sites, 12 while at the same time Palestine's position and unique status as the Christian 'Holy Land' became more firmly rooted. All this, coupled with immigration and conversion, allegedly meant that the Christianisation of Palestine took place much more rapidly than that of other areas of the Roman empire, brought in its wake the annihilation of the pagan cults and meant that by the middle of the fifth century there was a clear Christian majority. ^ Kohen, Elli (2007). History of the Byzantine Jews: A Microcosmos in the Thousand Year Empire . University Press of America . pp. 26– 31. ISBN 978-0-7618-3623-0 . Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 30 March 2023 . ^ "Roman Palestine" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived from the original on 30 October 2023 . Retrieved 30 March 2023 . ^ a b לוי-רובין, מילכה; Levy-Rubin, Milka (2006). "The Influence of the Muslim Conquest on the Settlement Pattern of Palestine during the Early Muslim Period / הכיבוש כמעצב מפת היישוב של ארץ-ישראל בתקופה המוסלמית הקדומה". Cathedra: For the History of Eretz Israel and Its Yishuv / קתדרה: לתולדות ארץ ישראל ויישובה (121): 53– 78. ISSN 0334-4657 . JSTOR 23407269 . ^ a b Ellenblum, Ronnie (2010). Frankish Rural Settlement in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-511-58534-0 . OCLC 958547332 .

From the data given above it can be concluded that the Muslim population of Central Samaria, during the early Muslim period, was not an autochthonous population which had converted to Christianity. They arrived there either by way of migration or as a result of a process of sedentarization of the nomads who had filled the vacuum created by the departing Samaritans at the end of the Byzantine period To sum up: in the only rural region in Palestine in which, according to all the written and archeological sources, the process of Islamization was completed already in the twelfth century, there occurred events consistent with the model propounded by Levtzion and Vryonis: the region was abandoned by its original sedentary population and the vacuum was apparently filled by nomads who, at a later stage, gradually became sedentarized ^ Al-Fasi, D. (1936). Solomon L. Skoss (ed.).

The Hebrew-Arabic Dictionary of the Bible, Known as 'Kitāb Jāmiʿ al-Alfāẓ' (Agron) (in Hebrew). Vol. 1. New Haven: Yale University Press . p. xxxix–xl (Introduction). ^ Gil, Moshe (1997). A History of Palestine, 634–1099 . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-59984-9 . ^ a b Gil, Moshe (1992). A History of Palestine, 634–1099 . Cambridge University Press. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-521-59984-9 . Archived from the original on 17 May 2024 . Retrieved 17 May 2024 . ^ Broshi, Magen (1979). "The Population of Western Palestine in the Roman-Byzantine Period". Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research . 236 (236): 1– 10. doi : 10.2307/1356664 . ISSN 0003-097X . JSTOR 1356664 . S2CID 24341643 . ^ "crusades" . Oxford English Dictionary (online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ a b Kramer, Gudrun (2008). A History of Palestine: From the Ottoman Conquest to the Founding of the State of Israel . Princeton University Press. p. 376 . ISBN 978-0-691-11897-0 . ^ a b Joel Rappel, History of Eretz Israel from Prehistory up to 1882 (1980), vol. 2, p. 531. "In 1662 Sabbathai Sevi arrived to Jerusalem. It was the time when the Jewish settlements of Galilee were destroyed by the Druze: Tiberias was completely desolate and only a few of former Safed residents had returned...." ^ D. Tamar, "On the Jews of Safed in the Days of the Ottoman Conquest" Cathedra 11 (1979), cited Dan Ben Amos, Dov Noy (eds.), Folktales of the Jews, V. 3 (Tales from Arab Lands), Jewish Publication Society 2011 p.61, n.3: Tamar . .challenges David's conclusion concerning the severity of the riots against the Jews, arguing that the support of the Egyptian Jews saved the community of Safed from destruction'. ^ The Solomon Goldman lectures . Spertus College of Judaica Press. 1999. p. 56. ISBN 978-0-935982-57-2 .

The Turks' conquest of the city in 1517, was marked by a violent pogrom of murder, rape, and plunder of Jewish homes.

The surviving Jews fled to the " land of Beirut ", not to return until 1533. ^ Toby Green (2007). Inquisition; The Reign of Fear . Macmillan Press ISBN 978-1-4050-8873-2 pp. xv–xix. ^ Alfassá, Shelomo (17 August 2007). "Sephardic Contributions to the Development of the State of Israel" (PDF) . Alfassa.com . Archived from the original on 12 October 2007 . Retrieved 14 January 2015 . ^ Cane, Peter; Conaghan, Joanne (2008). Millet system – Oxford Reference . doi : 10.1093/acref/9780199290543.001.0001 . ISBN 978-0-19-929054-3 . ^ Kieser, Hans-Lukas (27 October 2006). Turkey Beyond Nationalism: Towards Post-Nationalist Identities . I.B.Tauris. ISBN 978-0-85771-757-3 . ^ H. Inalcik; The Ottoman Empire: The Classical Age 1300–1600, Phoenix Press, (2001) ^ "EARLY MODERN JEWISH HISTORY: Overview » 5. Ottoman Empire" . jewishhistory.research.wesleyan.edu . Archived from the original on 28 September 2020 . Retrieved 24 November 2018 . ^ Akbar, M. J. (2003), The shade of swords: jihad and the conflict between Islam and Christianity , p. 89 ^ L. Stavrianos; The Balkans since 1453, NYU Press (2000) ^ a b Avineri 2017 . ^ Eisen, Yosef (2004). Miraculous journey: a complete history of the Jewish people from creation to the present . Targum Press. p. 700. ISBN 978-1-56871-323-6 . ^ Morgenstern, Arie (2006). Hastening redemption: Messianism and the resettlement of the land of Israel . Oxford University Press. p. 304. ISBN 978-0-19-530578-4 . ^ Barnai, Jacob (1992).

The Jews in Palestine in the Eighteenth Century: Under the Patronage of the Istanbul committee of Officials for Palestine . University Alabama Press. p. 320. ISBN 978-0-8173-0572-7 . ^ "Palestine – Ottoman rule" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived from the original on 4 December 2021 . Retrieved 27 November 2018 . ^ Macalister, R. A. Stewart; Masterman, E. W. G. (1906). "The Modern Inhabitants of Palestine" . Quarterly Statement – Palestine Exploration Fund : 40 . ^ Halpern, Ben (1998). Zionism and the creation of a new society . Reinharz, Jehuda. Oxford University Press. pp. 53 –54. ISBN 978-0-585-18273-5 . OCLC 44960036 . ^ Mandel, Neville J. (1974). "Ottoman Policy and Restrictions on Jewish Settlement in Palestine: 1881–1908: Part I" (PDF) . Middle Eastern Studies . 10 (3): 312– 332. doi : 10.1080/00263207408700278 . ISSN 0026-3206 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Levine, Aaron (2014). Russian Jews and the 1917 Revolution (PDF) . p. 14. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 March 2023 . Retrieved 7 December 2023 . ^ Zionism | Social Sciences and Humanities ^ Hebrew wasn't spoken for 2,000 years. Here's how it was revived ^ Stein 2003 , p. 88. "As with the First Aliyah, most Second Aliyah migrants were non-Zionist orthodox Jews ..." ^ Moris, Beni (2001). Righteous victims: a history of the Zionist-Arab conflict, 1881 – 2001 (1. Vintage Books ed.). New York, NY: Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0-679-74475-7 . Many of these newcomers possessed a mixture of socialist and nationalist values, and they eventually succeeded in setting up a separate Jewish economy, based wholly on Jewish labor. ^ Romano 2003 , p. 30. ^ Moris, Beni (2001). Righteous victims: a history of the Zionist-Arab conflict, 1881 – 2001 (1. Vintage Books ed.). New York, NY: Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0-679-74475-7 . Another major cause of antagonism was the labor controversy.

The hard core of Second Aliyah socialists, who were to become the Yishuv's leaders in the 1920s and 1930s, believed that the settler economy must not depend on or exploit Arab labor... But, in reality, rather than "meshing," the nationalist ethos had simply overpowered and driven out the socialist ethos... There were other reasons for the "conquest of labor." The socialists of the Second Aliyah used the term to denote three things: overcoming the Jews' traditional remove from agricultural labor and helping them transform into the "new Jews"; struggling against employers for better conditions; and replacing Arabs with Jews in manual jobs. ^ Goldstein, Yossi. Bar Giora and Ha’S̄homer, 1907-1918 . Jerusalem, 1994. ^ Gelvin, James (2014) .

The Israel-Palestine Conflict: One Hundred Years of War (3 ed.). Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-0-521-85289-0 . Archived from the original on 9 October 2023 . Retrieved 9 November 2020 . ^ Macintyre, Donald (26 May 2005). "The birth of modern Israel: A scrap of paper that changed history" .

The Independent . Archived from the original on 14 November 2012 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ Yapp, M.E. (1987).

The Making of the Modern Near East 1792–1923 . Longman. p. 290 . ISBN 978-0-582-49380-3 . ^ Avi Shlaim (2001). "PROLOGUE: THE ZIONIST FOUNDATIONS" .

The Iron Wall . W.W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-32112-8 . Archived from the original on 3 April 2024 . Retrieved 4 February 2024 . ^ Schechtman, Joseph B. (2007). "Jewish Legion" . Encyclopaedia Judaica . Vol. 11. Macmillan Reference. p. 304. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 6 August 2014 . ^ "The Covenant of the League of Nations" . Article 22 . Archived from the original on 26 July 2011 . Retrieved 18 October 2012 . ^ "Mandate for Palestine," Encyclopaedia Judaica , Vol. 11, p. 862, Keter Publishing House, Jerusalem, 1972 ^ Scharfstein 1996 , p. 269. "During the First and Second Aliyot, there were many Arab attacks against Jewish settlements ...

In 1920, Hashomer was disbanded and Haganah ("The Defense") was established." ^ "League of Nations: The Mandate for Palestine, July 24, 1922" . Modern History Sourcebook . 24 July 1922. Archived from the original on 4 August 2011 . Retrieved 27 August 2007 . ^ Shaw, J. V. W. (1991) . "Chapter VI: Population". A Survey of Palestine: Prepared in December 1945 and January 1946 for the information of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry . Vol. I (Reprint ed.). Institute for Palestine Studies. p. 148. ISBN 978-0-88728-213-3 . OCLC 311797790 . Archived from the original on 27 August 2013. ^ "Report to the League of Nations on Palestine and Transjordan, 1937" . British Government. 1937. Archived from the original on 23 September 2013 . Retrieved 14 July 2013 . ^ Walter Laqueur (2009). A History of Zionism: From the French Revolution to the Establishment of the State of Israel . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-307-53085-1 . Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 15 October 2015 . ^ Hughes, M (2009). "The banality of brutality: British armed forces and the repression of the Arab Revolt in Palestine, 1936–39" (PDF) . English Historical Review . CXXIV (507): 314– 354. doi : 10.1093/ehr/cep002 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 February 2016. ^ Levenberg, Haim (1993). Military Preparations of the Arab Community in Palestine: 1945–1948. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7146-3439-5, pp. 74–76 ^ Khalidi, Walid (1987).

From Haven to Conquest: Readings in Zionism and the Palestine Problem Until 1948 . Institute for Palestine Studies. ISBN 978-0-88728-155-6 ^ "Jewish Brigade Group | Holocaust Encyclopedia" . ^ "When Palestinian Arabs and Jews fought the Nazis side by side | The Jerusalem Post" .

The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com . 19 June 2019. ^ Government of Palestine, Department of Statistics, Village Statistics, 1945. ^ Fraser 2004 , p. 27. ^ Motti Golani (2013). Palestine Between Politics and Terror, 1945–1947 . UPNE. p. 130. ISBN 978-1-61168-388-2 . Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2018 . ^ Cohen, Michael J (2014). Britain's Moment in Palestine:Retrospect and Perspectives, 1917–1948 (1st ed.). Routledge. p. 474. ISBN 978-0-415-72985-7 . Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2018 . ^ Smith, Paul J. (2007).

The Terrorism Ahead: Confronting Transnational Violence in the Twenty-First . M. E. Sharpe . p. 27. Louis, William Roger (1986).

The British Empire in the Middle East, 1945–1951: Arab Nationalism, the United States, and Postwar Imperialism . Oxford University Press . p. 430. Kushner, Harvey W. (2003). Encyclopedia of Terrorism . SAGE Publications . p. 181. ^ Encyclopædia Britannica Archived 17 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine article on the Irgun Zvai Leumi ^ a b Clarke, Thurston .

By Blood and Fire , G.P. Puttnam's Sons, 1981 ^ a b Bethell, Nicholas (1979).

The Palestine Triangle . Andre Deutsch. ^ "A/RES/106 (S-1)" . General Assembly resolution . United Nations. 15 May 1947. Archived from the original on 6 August 2012 . Retrieved 12 August 2012 . ^ "A/364" . Special Committee on Palestine . United Nations. 3 September 1947. Archived from the original on 10 June 2012 . Retrieved 12 August 2012 . ^ "Background Paper No. 47 (ST/DPI/SER.A/47)" . United Nations. 20 April 1949. Archived from the original on 3 January 2011 . Retrieved 31 July 2007 . ^ Hoffman, Bruce: Anonymous Soldiers (2015) ^ "British Colonial Office Statement upon Termination of the Mandate for Palestine – English (1948)" . ecf.org.il . p. 10 . Retrieved 20 June 2024 . ^ "Resolution 181 (II). Future government of Palestine" . United Nations. 29 November 1947. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 21 March 2017 . ^ Avneri, Aryeh L. (1984).

The Claim of Dispossession: Jewish Land-Settlement and the Arabs, 1878–1948. Transaction Publishers. ISBN 978-0-87855-964-0. Retrieved 2 May 2009, p. 224. Stein, Kenneth W. (1987) .

The Land Question in Palestine, 1917–1939. University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-4178-5. pp. 3–4, 247 Imseis 2021 , pp. 13–14: "As to territorial boundaries, under the plan the Jewish State was allotted approximately 57 per cent of the total area of Palestine even though the Jewish population comprised only 33 per cent of the country.

In addition, according to British records relied upon by the ad hoc committee, the Jewish population possessed registered ownership of only 5.6 per cent of Palestine, and was eclipsed by the Arabs in land ownership in every one of Palestine's 16 sub-districts. Moreover, the quality of the land granted to the proposed Jewish state was highly skewed in its favour. UNSCOP reported that under its majority plan "he Jews will have the more economically developed part of the country embracing practically the whole of the citrus-producing area"—Palestine's staple export crop—even though approximately half of the citrus-bearing land was owned by the Arabs.

In addition, according to updated British records submitted to the ad hoc committee's two sub-committees, "of the irrigated, cultivable areas" of the country, 84 per cent would be in the Jewish State and 16 per cent would be in the Arab State"." Morris 2008 , p. 75: "The night of 29–30 November passed in the Yishuv's settlements in noisy public rejoicing. Most had sat glued to their radio sets broadcasting live from Flushing Meadow. A collective cry of joy went up when the two-thirds mark was achieved: a state had been sanctioned by the international community." ^ a b Morris 2008 , p. 396: "The immediate trigger of the 1948 War was the November 1947 UN partition resolution.

The Zionist movement, except for its fringes, accepted the proposal." ^ Matthews, John: Israel-Palestine land division Archived 5 October 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ Imseis 2021 , pp. 14–15: "Although the Zionists had coveted the whole of Palestine, the Jewish Agency leadership pragmatically, if grudgingly, accepted Resolution 181(II).

Although they were of the view that the Jewish national home promised in the Mandate was equivalent to a Jewish state, they well understood that such a claim could not be maintained under prevailing international law. Based on its own terms, it is impossible to escape the conclusion that the partition plan privileged European interests over those of Palestine's indigenous people and, as such, was an embodiment of the Eurocentricity of the international system that was allegedly a thing of the past. For this reason, the Arabs took a more principled position in line with prevailing international law, rejecting partition outright. This rejection has disingenuously been presented in some of the literature as indicative of political intransigence, 69 and even hostility towards the Jews as Jews." ^ Morris 2008 , p. 66: at 1946 "The League demanded independence for Palestine as a "unitary" state, with an Arab majority and minority rights for the Jews.", p. 67: at 1947 "The League's Political Committee met in Sofar, Lebanon, on 16–19 September, and urged the Palestine Arabs to fight partition, which it called "aggression," "without mercy." The League promised them, in line with Bludan, assistance "in manpower, money and equipment" should the United Nations endorse partition.", p. 72: at December 1947 "The League vowed, in very general language, "to try to stymie the partition plan and prevent the establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine."" ^ Bregman 2002 , pp. 40–41. ^ Gelber, Yoav (2006). Palestine 1948 . Sussex Academic Press. p. 17. ISBN 978-1-902210-67-4 . ^ Morris 2008 , p. 77–78. ^ Tal, David (2003). War in Palestine, 1948: Israeli and Arab Strategy and Diplomacy . Routledge. p. 471. ISBN 978-0-7146-5275-7 . ^ Clifford, Clark, "Counsel to the President: A Memoir", 1991, p. 20. ^ Ben-Sasson 1985 , p. 1058. ^ Morris 2008 , p. 205. ^ Rabinovich, Itamar; Reinharz, Jehuda (2007). Israel in the Middle East: Documents and Readings on Society, Politics, and Foreign Relations, Pre-1948 to the Present . Brandeis. p. 74 . ISBN 978-0-87451-962-4 . ^ David Tal (2004). War in Palestine, 1948: Israeli and Arab Strategy and Diplomacy . Routledge. p. 469. ISBN 978-1-135-77513-1 . Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2018 . some of the Arab armies invaded Palestine in order to prevent the establishment of a Jewish state, Transjordan... ^ Morris 2008 , p. 187: "A week before the armies marched, Azzam told Kirkbride: "It does not matter how many there are. We will sweep them into the sea." ... Ahmed Shukeiry, one of Haj Amin al-Husseini 's aides (and, later, the founding chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization), simply described the aim as "the elimination of the Jewish state." ... al-Quwwatli told his people: "Our army has entered ... we shall win and we shall eradicate Zionism"" ^ "PDF copy of Cablegram from the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States to the Secretary-General of the United Nations: S/745: 15 May 1948" . un.org. 9 September 2002. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020 . Retrieved 15 October 2024 . ^ Karsh, Efraim (2002).

The Arab–Israeli conflict: The Palestine War 1948 . Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-372-9 . ^ Morris, Benny (2004).

The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Problem Revisited . Cambridge University Press. p. 602. ISBN 978-0-521-00967-6 . ^ "עיצוב יחסי יהודים – ערבים בעשור הראשון" . lib.cet.ac.il . Archived from the original on 8 October 2022 . Retrieved 2 September 2021 . ^ "Two Hundred and Seventh Plenary Meeting" .

The United Nations. 11 May 1949. Archived from the original on 12 September 2007 . Retrieved 13 July 2007 . ^ Lustick 1988 , pp. 37–39. ^ Lewis, Mark A. (1990). "Labor Zionism".

In Metz, Helen Chapin (ed.). Israel: A Country Study (3rd ed.). Washington, D.C.: Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. pp. 28– 29. ^ Anita Shapira (1992). Land and Power . Stanford University Press. pp. 416, 419. ^ Segev, Tom. 1949: The First Israelis. "The First Million". Trans. Arlen N. Weinstein. New York: The Free Press, 1986. Print. pp. 105–107 ^ Shulewitz, Malka Hillel (2001).

The Forgotten Millions: The Modern Jewish Exodus from Arab Lands . Continuum. ISBN 978-0-8264-4764-7 . ^ Laskier, Michael "Egyptian Jewry under the Nasser Regime, 1956–70" pp. 573–619 from Middle Eastern Studies , Volume 31, Issue #3, July 1995 p. 579. ^ "Population, by Religion" . Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. 2016. Archived from the original on 18 September 2016 . Retrieved 4 September 2016 . ^ Bard, Mitchell (2003).

The Founding of the State of Israel . Greenhaven Press. p. 15. ^ Hakohen, Devorah (2003). Immigrants in Turmoil: Mass Immigration to Israel and Its Repercussions in the 1950s and After . Syracuse University Press. ISBN 978-0-8156-2969-6 . ; for ma'abarot population, see p. 269. ^ Clive Jones, Emma Murphy, Israel: Challenges to Identity, Democracy, and the State, Routledge 2002 p. 37: "Housing units earmarked for the Oriental Jews were often reallocated to European Jewish immigrants; Consigning Oriental Jews to the privations of ma'aborot (transit camps) for longer periods." ^ Segev 2007 , pp. 155–157. ^ Shindler 2002 , pp. 49–50. ^ Kameel B. Nasr (1996). Arab and Israeli Terrorism: The Causes and Effects of Political Violence, 1936–1993 . McFarland. pp. 40–. ISBN 978-0-7864-3105-2 . Fedayeen to attack...almost always against civilians ^ Gilbert 2005 , p. 58. ^ Isaac Alteras (1993). Eisenhower and Israel: U.S.-Israeli Relations, 1953–1960 . University Press of Florida. pp. 192–. ISBN 978-0-8130-1205-6 . Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2018 . the removal of the Egyptian blockade of the Straits of Tiran at the entrance of the Gulf of Aqaba.

The blockade closed Israel's sea lane to East Africa and the Far East, hindering the development of Israel's southern port of Eilat and its hinterland, the Nege. Another important objective of the Israeli war plan was the elimination of the terrorist bases in the Gaza Strip, from which daily fedayeen incursions into Israel made life unbearable for its southern population. And last but not least, the concentration of the Egyptian forces in the Sinai Peninsula, armed with the newly acquired weapons from the Soviet bloc, prepared for an attack on Israel. Here, Ben-Gurion believed, was a time bomb that had to be defused before it was too late. Reaching the Suez Canal did not figure at all in Israel's war objectives. ^ Dominic Joseph Caraccilo (2011). Beyond Guns and Steel: A War Termination Strategy . ABC-CLIO. pp. 113–. ISBN 978-0-313-39149-1 . Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2018 .

The escalation continued with the Egyptian blockade of the Straits of Tiran, and Nasser's nationalization of the Suez Canal in July 1956.

On October 14, Nasser made clear his intent:"I am not solely fighting against Israel itself. My task is to deliver the Arab world from destruction through Israel's intrigue, which has its roots abroad. Our hatred is very strong. There is no sense in talking about peace with Israel. There is not even the smallest place for negotiations." Less than two weeks later, on October 25, Egypt signed a tripartite agreement with Syria and Jordan placing Nasser in command of all three armies.

The continued blockade of the Suez Canal and Gulf of Aqaba to Israeli shipping, combined with the increased fedayeen attacks and the bellicosity of recent Arab statements, prompted Israel, with the backing of Britain and France, to attack Egypt on October 29, 1956. ^ Alan Dowty (2005). Israel/Palestine . Polity. pp. 102–. ISBN 978-0-7456-3202-5 . Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2018 . Gamal Abdel Nasser, who declared in one speech that "Egypt has decided to dispatch her heroes, the disciples of Pharaoh and the sons of Islam and they will cleanse the land of Palestine....There will be no peace on Israel's border because we demand vengeance, and vengeance is Israel's death."...The level of violence against Israelis, soldiers and civilians alike, seemed to be rising inexorably. ^ "Suez Crisis: Key players" . 21 July 2006. Archived from the original on 26 October 2021 . Retrieved 19 July 2018 . ^ Schoenherr, Steven (15 December 2005). "The Suez Crisis" . Archived from the original on 30 April 2014 . Retrieved 31 May 2013 . ^ Gorst, Anthony; Johnman, Lewis (1997).

The Suez Crisis . Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-11449-3 . ^ Benny Morris (25 May 2011). Righteous Victims: A History of the Zionist-Arab Conflict, 1881–1998 . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. pp. 300, 301. ISBN 978-0-307-78805-4 .

In exchange (for Israeli withdrawal) the United states had indirectly promised to guarantee Israel's right of passage through the straits (to the Red sea) and its right to self defense if the Egyptian closed them....(p 301) The 1956 war resulted in a significant reduction of...Israeli border tension. Egypt refrained from reactivating the Fedaeen, and...Egypt and Jordan made great effort to curb infiltration ^ Bascomb 2009 , p. 219–229. ^ "Operation Eichmann. Adolf Eichmann was captured in Argentina on May 11, 1960" . wwv.yadvashem.org . Retrieved 30 September 2025 . ^ Shlomo Shpiro (2006). "No place to hide: Intelligence and civil liberties in Israel". Cambridge Review of International Affairs . 19 (44): 629– 648. doi : 10.1080/09557570601003361 . S2CID 144734253 . ^ Cohen, Avner (3 May 2019). "How a Standoff with the U.S. Almost Blew up Israel's Nuclear Program" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 2 February 2021 . Retrieved 11 November 2019 . ^ "The Battle of the Letters, 1963: John F. Kennedy, David Ben-Gurion, Levi Eshkol, and the U.S. Inspections of Dimona | National Security Archive" . 29 April 2019. Archived from the original on 11 November 2019 . Retrieved 11 November 2019 . ^ "The Politics of Miscalculation in the Middle East", by Richard B. Parker (1993 Indiana University Press) p. 38 ^ Gilbert 2005 , p. 1 ^ Maoz, Moshe (1995). Syria and Israel: From War to Peacemaking . Oxford University Press. p. 70. ISBN 978-0-19-828018-7 . ^ "On This Day 5 Jun" . BBC. 5 June 1967. Archived from the original on 14 July 2007 . Retrieved 26 December 2011 . ^ Segev 2007 , p. 178. ^ Gat, Moshe (2003). Britain and the Conflict in the Middle East, 1964–1967: The Coming of the Six-Day War . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 202. ISBN 978-0-275-97514-2 . Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 4 October 2020 . ^ John Quigley , The Six-Day War and Israeli Self-Defense: Questioning the Legal Basis for Preventive War , Cambridge University Press, 2013, p. 32. ^ Samir A. Mutawi (2002). Jordan in the 1967 War . Cambridge University Press. p. 93. ISBN 978-0-521-52858-0 . Archived from the original on 31 October 2023 . Retrieved 17 September 2021 .

Although Eshkol denounced the Egyptians, his response to this development was a model of moderation. His speech on 21 May demanded that Nasser withdraw his forces from Sinai but made no mention of the removal of UNEF from the Straits nor of what Israel would do if they were closed to Israeli shipping.

The next day Nasser announced to an astonished world that henceforth the Straits were, indeed, closed to all Israeli ships ^ Segev 2007 , p. 289. ^ Smith 2006 , p. 126. "Nasser, the Egyptian president, decided to mass troops in the Sinai ... casus belli by Israel." ^ Shlay & Rosen 2010 , pp. 362–363. ^ Bennet, James (13 March 2005). "The Interregnum" .

The New York Times Magazine . Archived from the original on 16 April 2009 . Retrieved 11 February 2010 . ^ Silke, Andrew (2004). Research on Terrorism: Trends, Achievements and Failures . Routledge. p. 149 (256 pp.). ISBN 978-0-7146-8273-0 . Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 8 March 2010 . ^ Gilbert, Martin (2002).

The Routledge Atlas of the Arab–Israeli Conflict: The Complete History of the Struggle and the Efforts to Resolve It . Routledge. p. 82. ISBN 978-0-415-28116-4 . Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 8 March 2010 . ^ Andrews, Edmund ; Kifner, John (27 January 2008). "George Habash, Palestinian Terrorism Tactician, Dies at 82" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 13 March 2013 . Retrieved 29 March 2012 . ^ "1973: Arab states attack Israeli forces" .

On This Day . BBC News. 6 October 1973. Archived from the original on 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 15 July 2007 . ^ "Agranat Commission" . Knesset. 2008. Archived from the original on 29 December 2010 . Retrieved 8 April 2010 . ^ "Editorial Content for Operation Thunderbolt: Flight 139 and the Raid on Entebbe Airport, the Most Audacious Hostage Rescue Mission in History | Bookreporter.com" . www.bookreporter.com . Retrieved 5 December 2025 . ^ Bregman 2002 , pp. 169–170: "In hindsight we can say that 1977 was a turning point ..." ^ Bregman 2002 , pp. 171–174. ^ a b c Bregman 2002 , pp. 186–187. ^ Cleveland, William L. (1999). A history of the modern Middle East . Westview Press. p. 356 . ISBN 978-0-8133-3489-9 . ^ Lustick, Ian (1997). "Has Israel Annexed East Jerusalem?" . Middle East Policy . V (1): 34– 45. doi : 10.1111/j.1475-4967.1997.tb00247.x . ISSN 1061-1924 . OCLC 4651987544 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 November 2009 . Retrieved 1 June 2013 . ^ "Golan Heights profile" . BBC News . 27 November 2015. Archived from the original on 17 June 2019 . Retrieved 6 January 2017 . ^ Hillier, T. (1998). Sourcebook on Public International Law . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-135-35366-7 . Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 12 October 2021 . ^ Monacella, R.; Ware, S.A. (2007). Fluctuating Borders: Speculations about Memory and Emergence . RMIT University Press. ISBN 978-1-921166-48-8 . Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 12 October 2021 . ^ Friedberg, Rachel M. (November 2001). "The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market" (PDF) .

The Quarterly Journal of Economics . 116 (4): 1373– 1408. Bibcode : 2001QJEco.116.1373F . CiteSeerX 10.1.1.385.2596 . doi : 10.1162/003355301753265606 . hdl : 10419/102605 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2012 . Retrieved 14 August 2012 . ^ "1981: Israel bombs Baghdad nuclear reactor" . 7 June 1981 . Retrieved 20 June 2024 . ^ Bregman 2002 , p. 199. ^ Schiff, Ze'ev ; Ehud, Yaari (1984). Israel's Lebanon War . Simon & Schuster . p. 284 . ISBN 978-0-671-47991-6 . ^ Silver, Eric (1984). Begin: The Haunted Prophet . Random House . p. 239 . ISBN 978-0-394-52826-7 . ^ Tessler, Mark A. (2009) . A History of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict (2nd ed.). Indiana University Press . p. 677 . ISBN 978-0-253-20873-6 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: ref duplicates default ( link ) ^ Stone & Zenner 1994 , p. 246. "Toward the end of 1991 ... were the result of internal Palestinian terror." ^ Haberman, Clyde (9 December 1991). "After 4 Years, Intifada Still Smolders" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 1 June 2009 . Retrieved 28 March 2008 . ^ Mowlana, Gerbner & Schiller 1992 , p. 111. ^ Bregman 2002 , p. 236. ^ "From the End of the Cold War to 2001" . Boston College . Archived from the original on 27 August 2013 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "The Oslo Accords, 1993" . U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 22 January 2010 . Retrieved 30 March 2010 . ^ Tessler 2009 , p. 729. ^ Harkavy & Neuman 2001 , p. 270. "Even though Jordan in 1994 became the second country, after Egypt to sign a peace treaty with Israel ..." ^ "Sources of Population Growth: Total Israeli Population and Settler Population, 1991–2003" . Settlements information . Foundation for Middle East Peace. Archived from the original on 26 August 2013 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ Kurtzer, Daniel; Lasensky, Scott (2008). Negotiating Arab-Israeli peace: American leadership in the Middle East . United States Institute of Peace Press. p. 44 . ISBN 978-1-60127-030-6 . ^ Cleveland, William L. (1999). A history of the modern Middle East . Westview Press. p. 494 . ISBN 978-0-8133-3489-9 . ^ "Israel marks Rabin assassination" . BBC News. 12 November 2005. Archived from the original on 17 January 2010 . Retrieved 12 May 2010 . ^ Bregman 2002 , p. 257. ^ Hanne Eggen Røislien, "Living with Contradiction: Examining the Worldview of the Jewish Settlers in Hebron" , 2 October 2015 International Journal of Conflict and Violence , Vol.1 (2) 2007, pp.169–184 ^ Human Rights Watch, An Analysis of the Wye River Memorandum ^ Amnesty International, The United States, Israel and the Palestinian Authority: Human Rights Neglected in the Theory and Practice by All Involved in "Peacemaking" ^ Gelvin 2005 , p. 240. ^ Ben-Ami 2007 : "Israel's disproportionate response to what had started as a popular uprising with young, unarmed men confronting Israeli soldiers armed with lethal weapons fuelled the Intifada beyond control and turned it into an all-out war" ^ Sela-Shayovitz, R. (2007). Suicide bombers in Israel: Their motivations, characteristics, and prior activity in terrorist organizations. International Journal of Conflict and Violence (IJCV) , 1 (2), 163. "The period of the second Intifada significantly differs from other historical periods in Israeli history, because it has been characterised by intensive and numerous suicide attacks that have made civilian life into a battlefront." ^ Gross, Tom (16 January 2014). "The big myth: that he caused the Second Intifada" .

The Jewish Chronicle . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 22 April 2016 . ^ Hong, Nicole (23 February 2015). "Jury Finds Palestinian Authority, PLO Liable for Terrorist Attacks in Israel a Decade Ago" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 14 April 2016 . Retrieved 22 April 2016 . ^ Ain, Stewart (20 December 2000). "PA: Intifada Was Planned" .

The Jewish Week . Archived from the original on 13 October 2007. ^ Samuels, David (1 September 2005). "In a Ruined Country" .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on 30 August 2008 . Retrieved 27 March 2013 . ^ "West Bank barrier route disputed, Israeli missile kills 2" . USA Today . 29 July 2004. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012 . Retrieved 1 October 2012 . ^ See for example: * Harel, Amos; Issacharoff, Avi (1 October 2010). "Years of rage" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 2 July 2014 . Retrieved 12 August 2012 . * King, Laura (28 September 2004). "Losing Faith in the Intifada" . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on 21 September 2012 . Retrieved 12 August 2012 . * Diehl, Jackson (27 September 2004). "From Jenin To Fallujah?" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 3 February 2014 . Retrieved 12 August 2012 . * Amidror, Yaakov. "Winning Counterinsurgency War: The Israeli Experience" (PDF) . Strategic Perspectives . Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 August 2012 . Retrieved 12 August 2012 . * Frisch, Hillel (12 January 2009). "The Need for a Decisive Israeli Victory Over Hamas" . Perspectives Papers on Current Affairs . Begin-Sadat Center for Strategic Studies. Archived from the original on 14 June 2012 . Retrieved 12 August 2012 . * Buchris, Ofek (9 March 2006). "The "Defensive Shield" Operation as a Turning Point in Israel's National Security Strategy" . Strategy Research Project . United States Army War College. Archived from the original on 7 October 2012 . Retrieved 12 August 2012 . * Krauthammer, Charles (18 June 2004). "Israel's Intifada Victory" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 19 September 2017 . Retrieved 12 August 2012 . * Plocker, Sever (22 June 2008). "2nd Intifada forgotten" . Ynetnews . Archived from the original on 19 August 2014 . Retrieved 12 August 2012 . * Ya'alon, Moshe (January 2007). "Lessons from the Palestinian 'War' against Israel" (PDF) . Policy Focus . Washington Institute for Near East Policy. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 August 2012 . Retrieved 12 August 2012 . * Hendel, Yoaz (20 September 2010). "Letting the IDF win" . Ynetnews . Archived from the original on 24 September 2012 . Retrieved 12 August 2012 . * Zvi Shtauber; Yiftah Shapir (2006).

The Middle East strategic balance, 2004–2005 . Sussex Academic Press. p. 7. ISBN 978-1-84519-108-5 . Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 12 February 2012 . ^ "Fatalities before Operation "Cast Lead" " . B'Tselem. Archived from the original on 20 January 2018 . Retrieved 14 January 2017 . ^ "Security Council Calls for End to Hostilities between Hizbollah, Israel, Unanimously Adopting Resolution 1701 (2006)" . United Nations Security Council Resolution 1701 . 11 August 2006. Archived from the original on 30 January 2009 . Retrieved 28 June 2017 . Escalation of hostilities in Lebanon and in Israel since Hizbollah's attack on Israel on 12 July 2006 ^ Harel, Amos (13 July 2006). "Hezbollah kills 8 soldiers, kidnaps two in offensive on northern border" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 13 May 2011 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "UN peacekeepers: Israeli troops still in Lebanon" . CNN . 1 October 2006 . Retrieved 21 May 2025 . ^ Mroue, Bassem (14 July 2023). "Moves at a small border village hike Israel-Hezbollah tensions at a time of regional jitters" . Associated Press . Retrieved 21 May 2025 . ^ Koutsoukis, Jason (5 January 2009). "Battleground Gaza: Israeli ground forces invade the strip" . Sydney Morning Herald . Archived from the original on 8 January 2009 . Retrieved 5 January 2009 . ^ Ravid, Barak (18 January 2009). "IDF begins Gaza troop withdrawal, hours after ending 3-week offensive" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 17 August 2014 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ Lappin, Yaakov; Lazaroff, Tovah (12 November 2012). "Gaza groups pound Israel with over 100 rockets" .

The Jerusalem Post . Archived from the original on 14 April 2019 . Retrieved 27 March 2013 . ^ Stephanie Nebehay (20 November 2012). "UN rights boss, Red Cross urge Israel, Hamas to spare civilians" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 20 November 2012 . * al-Mughrabi, Nidal (24 November 2012). "Hamas leader defiant as Israel eases Gaza curbs" . Reuters. Archived from the original on 14 January 2016 . Retrieved 8 February 2013 . * "Israeli air strike kills top Hamas commander Jabari" .

The Jerusalem Post . Archived from the original on 14 November 2012 . Retrieved 14 November 2012 . ^ "Israel and Hamas Trade Attacks as Tension Rises" .

The New York Times . 8 July 2014. Archived from the original on 22 February 2015 . Retrieved 16 February 2017 . ^ "Israel and Hamas agree Gaza truce, Biden pledges assistance" . Reuters. 21 May 2021. Archived from the original on 31 May 2021 . Retrieved 26 May 2021 . ^ Martínez, Andrés R.; Bubola, Emma (10 October 2023). "What We Know About the Hamas Attack and Israel's Response" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 8 October 2023 . Retrieved 10 October 2023 . ^ Gillett, Francesca (8 October 2023). "How an Israel music festival turned into a nightmare after Hamas attack" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 8 October 2023 . Retrieved 8 October 2023 . ^ Tabachnick, Cara (8 October 2023). "Israelis search for loved ones with posts and pleas on social media" . CBS News . Archived from the original on 8 October 2023 . Retrieved 8 October 2023 . ^ Amanda Borschel-Dan (7 October 2023). "Thousands flee rocket and gunfire at all-night desert 'Nature Party'; dozens missing" .

The Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 7 October 2023 . Retrieved 8 October 2023 . ^ Katsoty, D., Greidinger, M., Neria, Y. et al. A prediction model of PTSD in the Israeli population in the aftermath of october 7th, 2023, terrorist attack and the Israel–Hamas war. Isr J Health Policy Res 13, 63 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13584-024-00644-6 ^ Levi-Belz, Yossi et al. "PTSD, depression, and anxiety after the October 7, 2023 attack in Israel: a nationwide prospective study." eClinicalMedicine , Volume 68, 102418. ^ Frankel, Julia (21 December 2023). "Israel's military campaign in Gaza is among the most destructive in history, experts say" . PBS NewsHour . Associated Press. Archived from the original on 22 April 2024 . Retrieved 22 April 2024 . ^ "Israeli bombardment destroyed over 70% of Gaza homes: Report" . Al Jazeera . 31 December 2023. Archived from the original on 23 April 2024 . Retrieved 22 April 2024 . ^ "Can Israel achieve its war goals in Gaza?" . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 7 April 2024 . Retrieved 6 May 2024 . ^ "Netanyahu says IDF will control Gaza after war, rejects notion of international force" .

The Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 12 November 2023 . Retrieved 13 November 2023 . ^ Krauss, Joseph (14 May 2024). "Palestinians mark 76 years of dispossession as a potentially even larger catastrophe unfolds in Gaza" . AP News . Archived from the original on 13 June 2024 . Retrieved 14 June 2024 .

The war in Gaza, which was triggered by Hamas' Oct. 7 attack into Israel, has killed over 35,000 Palestinians, according to local health officials, making it by far the deadliest round of fighting in the history of the conflict. ^ El Deeb, Sarah (9 October 2023). "What is Hamas?

The group that rules the Gaza Strip has fought several rounds of war with Israel" . AP News . Archived from the original on 23 October 2023 . Retrieved 5 December 2023 . ^ Dumper & Badran 2024 , p. 2: "In this context we should not overlook the latest turning point in the history of Palestine – the attack by Hamas on 7th October 2023 on Israeli settlements adjacent to Gaza and the subsequent genocidal war that the state of Israel has carried out in the Gaza strip" Speri, Alice (20 December 2024). "Defining genocide: how a rift over Gaza sparked a crisis among scholars" . Guardian . Retrieved 23 December 2024 . Narea, Nicole (25 October 2024). "Is Israel committing genocide? Reexamining the question, a year later" . Vox . Archived from the original on 26 October 2024 . Retrieved 28 October 2024 . Albanese, Francesca (25 March 2024). Anatomy of a Genocide: Report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, Francesca Albanese (PDF) (Report). United Nations Special Rapporteur on the occupied Palestinian territories . p. 1.

By analysing the patterns of violence and Israeli policies in its onslaught on Gaza, the present report concludes that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the threshold indicating that Israel has committed genocide has been met Amnesty International (2024). 'You Feel Like You Are Subhuman': Israel's Genocide Against Palestinians In Gaza (PDF) (Report). p. 13. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 December 2024. This report focuses on the Israeli authorities' policies and actions in Gaza as part of the military offensive they launched in the wake of the Hamas-led attacks on 7 October 2023 while situating them within the broader context of Israel's unlawful occupation, and system of apartheid against Palestinians in Gaza, the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Israel. It assesses allegations of violations and crimes under international law by Israel in Gaza within the framework of genocide under international law, concluding that there is sufficient evidence to believe that Israel's conduct in Gaza following 7 October 2023 amounts to genocide. Traverso, Enzo (2024). Gaza Faces History . Other Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-1-63542-555-0 .

The only normative definition we have, codified at the United Nations Genocide Convention of 1948, accurately describes the current situation in Palestine ... describes exactly what is happening in Gaza today "One year of denouncing the genocide of Palestinians in Gaza" . International Federation for Human Rights . 12 December 2024 . Retrieved 4 June 2025 . One year ago, the FIDH International Board, its governing body elected by all its member organisations, recognised, after extensive debate and examination, that Israel was carrying out genocide against the Palestinian people in Gaza B'Tselem 2025 , p. 86: "The review presented in this report leaves no room for doubt: since October 2023, the Israeli regime has been responsible for carrying out genocide against the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip. Killing tens of thousands of people; causing bodily or mental harm to hundreds of thousands more; destroying homes and civilian infrastructure on a massive scale; starvation, displacement, and denying humanitarian aid — all this is being perpetrated systematically, as part of a coordinated attack aimed at annihilating all facets of life in the Gaza Strip." ^ "Gaza: UN experts call on international community to prevent genocide against the Palestinian people" . OHCHR . 16 November 2023. Archived from the original on 24 December 2023 . Retrieved 22 December 2023 . Grave violations committed by Israel against Palestinians in the aftermath of 7 October, particularly in Gaza, point to a genocide in the making, UN experts said today. They illustrated evidence of increasing genocidal incitement, overt intent to "destroy the Palestinian people under occupation", loud calls for a 'second Nakba' in Gaza and the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory, and the use of powerful weaponry with inherently indiscriminate impacts, resulting in a colossal death toll and destruction of life-sustaining infrastructure. ^ Burga, Solcyré (13 November 2023). "Is What's Happening in Gaza a Genocide? Experts Weigh In" . Time . Archived from the original on 25 November 2023 . Retrieved 24 November 2023 . ; Corder, Mike (2 January 2024). "South Africa's genocide case against Israel sets up a high-stakes legal battle at the UN's top court" . ABC News . Archived from the original on 7 January 2024 . Retrieved 3 January 2024 . ; Quigley, John (3 July 2024). "The Lancet and Genocide By "Slow Death" in Gaza" . Arab Center Washington DC . Archived from the original on 13 July 2024 . Retrieved 13 July 2024 . ^ Federman, Josef; Lee, Matthew; Sewell, Abby (1 October 2024). "Israel begins ground offensive against Hezbollah in southern Lebanon" . Associated Press . Retrieved 21 May 2025 . ^ "Israel's first open attack on Iran targets missile sites and apparently spares oil and nuclear ones" . AP News . 26 October 2024 . Retrieved 20 June 2025 . ^ Gunter, Joel (1 December 2024). "Thousands visit site of Hassan Nasrallah's assassination" . BBC News . Retrieved 21 May 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (17 February 2025). "In Lebanon, Katz says troops to stay 'without time limit' to defend border communities" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 20 May 2025 . ^ Krauss, Joseph (17 April 2025). "Why Israel is expanding its frontiers into Gaza, Lebanon and Syria" . Associated Press . Retrieved 20 May 2025 . ^ Gordon, Michael R. (13 June 2025). "In Twist, U.S. Diplomacy Served as Cover for Israeli Surprise Attack" . WSJ . Retrieved 20 June 2025 . ^ Jackson, Lauren; McCoy, Lara (28 February 2026). "The United States and Israel Attack Iran" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 5 May 2026 . ^ a b c d e f g "Israel" .

The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 10 January 2021 . Retrieved 5 January 2017 . ^ Cohen, Gili (9 January 2012). "Israel Navy to devote majority of missile boats to secure offshore drilling rafts" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 22 May 2020 . Retrieved 9 January 2012 . ^ "Area of Districts, Sub-Districts, Natural Regions and Lakes" . Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. 11 September 2012. Archived from the original on 4 October 2018 . Retrieved 13 June 2013 . ^ Avruch, Kevin (1990). "Geography".

In Metz, Helen Chapin (ed.). Israel: A Country Study (3rd ed.). Washington, D.C.: Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. p. 85. ^ "The Coastal Plain" . Israel Ministry of Tourism. Archived from the original on 7 January 2017 . Retrieved 6 January 2017 . ^ The Living Dead Sea . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 1999. ISBN 978-0-8264-0406-0 . Retrieved 20 July 2007 . ^ Makhteshim Country . UNESCO. 2001. ISBN 978-954-642-135-7 . Archived from the original on 10 May 2020 . Retrieved 19 September 2007 . ^ Rinat, Zafrir (29 May 2008). "More endangered than rain forests?" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ Dinerstein, Eric; Olson, David; Joshi, Anup; Vynne, Carly; Burgess, Neil D.; Wikramanayake, Eric; Hahn, Nathan; Palminteri, Suzanne; Hedao, Prashant; Noss, Reed; Hansen, Matt; Locke, Harvey; Ellis, Erle C; Jones, Benjamin; Barber, Charles Victor; Hayes, Randy; Kormos, Cyril; Martin, Vance; Crist, Eileen; Sechrest, Wes; Price, Lori; Baillie, Jonathan E. M.; Weeden, Don; Suckling, Kierán; Davis, Crystal; Sizer, Nigel; Moore, Rebecca; Thau, David; Birch, Tanya; Potapov, Peter; Turubanova, Svetlana; Tyukavina, Alexandra; de Souza, Nadia; Pintea, Lilian; Brito, José C.; Llewellyn, Othman A.; Miller, Anthony G.; Patzelt, Annette; Ghazanfar, Shahina A.; Timberlake, Jonathan; Klöser, Heinz; Shennan-Farpón, Yara; Kindt, Roeland; Lillesø, Jens-Peter Barnekow; van Breugel, Paulo; Graudal, Lars; Voge, Maianna; Al-Shammari, Khalaf F.; Saleem, Muhammad (2017). "An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm" . BioScience . 67 (6): 534– 545. doi : 10.1093/biosci/bix014 . ISSN 0006-3568 . PMC 5451287 . PMID 28608869 . ^ Tal, Alon (2013). All the Trees of the Forest . Yale University Press. pp. 5, 66. ISBN 978-0-300-18950-6 . ^ "Forestry and Green Innovations" . Jewish National Fund. Archived from the original on 16 October 2023 . Retrieved 13 November 2023 . ^ Ferry M.; Meghraoui M.; Karaki A.A.; Al-Taj M.; Amoush H.; Al-Dhaisat S.; Barjous M. (2008). "A 48-kyr-long slip rate history for the Jordan Valley segment of the Dead Sea Fault". Earth and Planetary Science Letters . 260 ( 3– 4): 394– 406. Bibcode : 2007E&PSL.260..394F . doi : 10.1016/j.epsl.2007.05.049 . ^ American Friends of the Tel Aviv University, Earthquake Experts at Tel Aviv University Turn to History for Guidance (4 October 2007). Quote: The major ones were recorded along the Jordan Valley in the years 31 B.C.E., 363 C.E., 749 C.E., and 1033 C.E. "So roughly, we are talking about an interval of every 400 years. If we follow the patterns of nature, a major quake should be expected any time because almost a whole millennium has passed since the last strong earthquake of 1033." (Tel Aviv University Associate Professor Dr. Shmuel (Shmulik) Marco). Archived 11 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Zafrir Renat, Israel Is Due, and Ill Prepared, for Major Earthquake , Haaretz, 15 January 2010. "On average, a destructive earthquake takes place in Israel once every 80 years, causing serious casualties and damage." Archived 15 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ Watzman, Haim (8 February 1997). "Left for dead" . New Scientist . Archived from the original on 14 November 2012 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "WMO Region 6: Highest Temperature" . World Meteorological Organization's World Weather & Climate Extremes Archive . Arizona State University. Archived from the original on 13 September 2021 . Retrieved 14 September 2021 . ^ Goldreich 2003 , p. 85. ^ "Average Weather for Tel Aviv-Yafo" .

The Weather Channel . Archived from the original on 20 January 2013 . Retrieved 11 July 2007 . ^ "Average Weather for Jerusalem" .

The Weather Channel . Archived from the original on 20 January 2013 . Retrieved 11 July 2007 . ^ "Flora of Israel Online" . Flora.huji.ac.il. Archived from the original on 30 April 2014 . Retrieved 29 September 2010 . ^ "National Parks and Nature Reserves, Israel" . Israel Ministry of Tourism. Archived from the original on 19 October 2012 . Retrieved 18 September 2012 . ^ Degani, Corin (14 August 2023). "How Israel achieved one of the most secure water economies, drip by drip" . Haaretz . Retrieved 17 June 2024 . ^ "The History of Drip Irrigation" . 21 September 2017. ^ a b Grossman, Gershon; Ayalon, Ofira; Baron, Yifaat; Kauffman, Debby. "Solar energy for the production of heat Summary and recommendations of the 4th assembly of the energy forum at SNI" . Samuel Neaman Institute for Advanced Studies in Science and Technology. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013 . Retrieved 12 August 2012 . ^ "Climate Change Trends and Impact in Israel" . Gov.il . Ministry of Environmental Protection . 2 November 2020. Archived from the original on 6 August 2021 . Retrieved 29 June 2021 . ^ a b "Field Listing — Executive Branch" .

The World Factbook . 19 June 2007. Archived from the original on 13 June 2007 . Retrieved 20 July 2007 . ^ In 1996, direct elections for the prime minister were inaugurated, but the system was declared unsatisfactory and the old one reinstated. See "Israel's election process explained" . BBC News. 23 January 2003 . Retrieved 31 March 2010 . ^ "The Electoral System in Israel" .

The Knesset . Retrieved 8 August 2007 . ^ סגל, עמית (2021). סיפורה של הפוליטיקה הישראלית: מבן גוריון ועד בנט (in Hebrew). Hotsaʼat ʻAmit Segal. ISBN 978-965-599-597-8 . ^ Jewish settlers can vote in Israeli elections, though West Bank is officially not Israel , Fox News, February 2015: "When Israelis go to the polls next month, tens of thousands of Jewish settlers in the West Bank will also be casting votes, even though they do not live on what is sovereign Israeli territory. This exception in a country that doesn't allow absentee voting for citizens living abroad is a telling reflection of Israel's somewhat ambiguous and highly contentious claim to the territory, which has been under military occupation for almost a half century." ^ The Social Composition of the 20th Knesset , Israeli Democracy Institute, 30 March 2015 ^ Halbfinger, David M.; McCann, Allison (28 February 2020). "As Israel Votes Again (and Again), Arabs See an Opportunity" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 28 February 2020 . Retrieved 30 April 2022 . ^ Abu Much, Afif (7 November 2022). "Arab Israeli parties trade blame for election fiasco" . Al-Monitor . Retrieved 12 May 2023 . ^ "Israel" . Freedom in the World . Freedom House. 2020 . Retrieved 13 October 2020 . ^ Mazie 2006 , p. 34. ^ Charbit, Denis (2014). "Israel's Self-Restrained Secularism from the 1947 Status Quo Letter to the Present" .

In Berlinerblau, Jacques; Fainberg, Sarah; Nou, Aurora (eds.). Secularism on the Edge: Rethinking Church-State Relations in the United States, France, and Israel . Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 167– 169. ISBN 978-1-137-38115-6 .

The compromise, therefore, was to choose constructive ambiguity: as surprising as it may seem, there is no law that declares Judaism the official religion of Israel. However, there is no other law that declares Israel's neutrality toward all confessions. Judaism is not recognized as the official religion of the state, and even though the Jewish, Muslim and Christian clergy receive their salaries from the state, this fact does not make Israel a neutral state. This apparent pluralism cannot dissimulate the fact that Israel displays a clear and undoubtedly hierarchical pluralism in religious matters. ... It is important to note that from a multicultural point of view, this self-restrained secularism allows Muslim law to be practiced in Israel for personal matters of the Muslim community.

As surprising as it seems, if not paradoxical for a state in war, Israel is the only Western democratic country in which Sharia enjoys such an official status. ^ Sharot, Stephen (2007). "Judaism in Israel: Public Religion, Neo-Traditionalism, Messianism, and Ethno-Religious Conflict" .

In Beckford, James A.; Demerath, Jay (eds.).

The Sage Handbook of the Sociology of Religion . Sage Publications. pp. 671– 672. ISBN 978-1-4129-1195-5 . It is true that Jewish Israelis, and secular Israelis in particular, conceive of religion as shaped by a state-sponsored religious establishment. There is no formal state religion in Israel, but the state gives its official recognition and financial support to particular religious communities, Jewish, Islamic and Christian, whose religious authorities and courts are empowered to deal with matters of personal status and family law, such as marriage, divorce, and alimony, that are binding on all members of the communities. ^ Jacoby, Tami Amanda (2005). Women in Zones of Conflict: Power and Resistance in Israel . McGill-Queen's University Press. pp. 53– 54. ISBN 978-0-7735-2993-9 .

Although there is no official religion in Israel, there is also no clear separation between religion and state.

In Israeli public life, tensions frequently arise among different streams of Judaism: Ultra-Orthodox, National-Religious, Mesorati (Conservative), Reconstructionist Progressive (Reform), and varying combinations of traditionalism and non-observance. Despite this variety in religious observances in society, Orthodox Judaism prevails institutionally over the other streams. This boundary is an historical consequence of the unique evolution of the relationship between Israel nationalism and state building. ...

Since the founding period, in order to defuse religious tensions, the State of Israel has adopted what is known as the 'status quo,' an unwritten agreement stipulating that no further changes would be made in the status of religion, and that conflict between the observant and non-observant sectors would be handled circumstantially.

The 'status quo' has since pertained to the legal status of both religious and secular Jews in Israel. This situation was designed to appease the religious sector, and has been upheld indefinitely through the disproportionate power of religious political parties in all subsequent coalition governments. ...

On one hand, the Declaration of Independence adopted in 1948 explicitly guarantees freedom of religion.

On the other, it simultaneously prevents the separation of religion and state in Israel. ^ "Israel's Jewish Nation-State Law – Adalah" . adalah.org . ^ "Jewish nation state: Israel approves controversial bill" . BBC. 19 July 2018 . Retrieved 20 July 2018 . ^ "Introduction to the Tables: Geophysical Characteristics" . Central Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original (doc) on 21 February 2011 . Retrieved 4 September 2007 . ^ a b c "Localities and Population, by Population Group, District, Sub-District and Natural Region" (PDF) . Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. 15 September 2022 . Retrieved 21 February 2023 . ^ a b Yaniv, Omer; Haddad, Netta; Assaf-Shapira, Yair (2022). Jerusalem Facts and Trends 2022 (PDF) (Report). Jerusalem Institute for Policy Research. p. 25 . Retrieved 21 February 2023 . ^ Harpaz, Yossi; Herzog, Ben (June 2018). Report on Citizenship Law: Israel (Report). European University Institute . hdl : 1814/56024 . ^ a b Tekiner, Roselle (1991). "Race and the Issue of National Identity in Israel". International Journal of Middle East Studies . 23 (1). Cambridge University Press : 39– 55. doi : 10.1017/S0020743800034541 . JSTOR 163931 . S2CID 163043582 . ^ Goldenberg, Tia (4 October 2013). "Supreme Court rejects 'Israeli' nationality status" .

The Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 13 February 2020 . Retrieved 6 November 2018 . ^ "Resolution 497 (1981)" . United Nations. 1981. Archived from the original on 12 June 2012 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "East Jerusalem: UNSC Res. 478" . UN. 1980. Archived from the original on 31 December 2010 . Retrieved 10 April 2010 . ^ a b c Gilead Sher, The Application of Israeli Law to the West Bank: De Facto Annexation? , INSS Insight No. 638, 4 December 2014 ^ a b OECD 2011 . ^ Quarterly Economic and Social Monitor Archived 9 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine , Volume 26, October 2011, p. 57: "When Israel bid in March 2010 for membership in the 'Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development'... some members questioned the accuracy of Israeli statistics, as the Israeli figures (relating to gross domestic product, spending and number of the population) cover geographical areas that the Organization does not recognize as part of the Israeli territory. These areas include East Jerusalem, Israeli settlements in the West Bank and the Golan Heights." ^ See for example: * Hajjar, Lisa (2005). Courting Conflict: The Israeli Military Court System in the West Bank and Gaza . University of California Press. p. 96. ISBN 978-0-520-24194-7 .

The Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza is the longest military occupation in modern times. * Anderson, Perry (July–August 2001). "Editorial: Scurrying Towards Bethlehem" . New Left Review . 10 . Archived from the original on 1 October 2018 . Retrieved 9 January 2015 . longest official military occupation of modern history—currently entering its thirty-fifth year * Makdisi, Saree (2010). Palestine Inside Out: An Everyday Occupation . W.W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-33844-7 . longest-lasting military occupation of the modern age * Kretzmer, David (Spring 2012). "The law of belligerent occupation in the Supreme Court of Israel" (PDF) . International Review of the Red Cross . 94 (885): 207– 236. doi : 10.1017/S1816383112000446 . S2CID 32105258 . SSRN 2657530 . This is probably the longest occupation in modern international relations, and it holds a central place in all literature on the law of belligerent occupation since the early 1970s * Alexandrowicz, Ra'anan (24 January 2012). "The Justice of Occupation" .

The New York Times (opinion). Israel is the only modern state that has held territories under military occupation for over four decades * Weill, Sharon (2014).

The Role of National Courts in Applying International Humanitarian Law . Oxford University Press. p. 22. ISBN 978-0-19-968542-4 .

Although the basic philosophy behind the law of military occupation is that it is a temporary situation modem occupations have well demonstrated that rien ne dure comme le provisoire A significant number of post-1945 occupations have lasted more than two decades such as the occupations of Namibia by South Africa and of East Timor by Indonesia as well as the ongoing occupations of Northern Cyprus by Turkey and of Western Sahara by Morocco.

The Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories, which is the longest in all occupation's history has already entered its fifth decade. * Azarova, Valentina. 2017, Israel's Unlawfully Prolonged Occupation: Consequences under an Integrated Legal Framework , European Council on Foreign Affairs Policy Brief: "June 2017 marks 50 years of Israel's belligerent occupation of Palestinian territory, making it the longest occupation in modern history." ^ "UNRWA in Figures: Figures as of 30 June 2009" (PDF) . United Nations. June 2009 . Retrieved 27 September 2007 . ^ Yiftachel, O. (1999). " 'Ethnocracy': The Politics of Judaizing Israel/Palestine" (PDF) . Constellations . 6 (3): 364– 390. doi : 10.1111/1467-8675.00151 . Israel's political structure and settlement activity have in effect undermined the existence of universal suffrage (as Jewish settlers in the Occupied Territories can vote to the parliament that governs them, but their Palestinian neighbours cannot). ^ Ghanem, A. A.; Rouhana, N.; Yiftachel, O. (1998). "Questioning" ethnic democracy": A response to Sammy Smooha". Israel Studies . 3 (2): 253– 267. doi : 10.2979/ISR.1998.3.2.253 . JSTOR 30245721 . S2CID 3524173 . settlers remain fully enfranchised Israeli citizens while their Palestinian neighbors have no voting rights and no impact on Israeli policies ^ "Situation Report on the Humanitarian Situation in the Gaza Strip" . Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. 23 January 2009. Archived from the original on 12 June 2012. ^ "The occupied Palestinian territories: Dignity Denied" . International Committee of the Red Cross. 13 December 2007. ^ "World Report 2013: Israel/Palestine". Israel/Palestine . Human Rights Watch. 2013 . Retrieved 13 June 2013 . ^ "Human Rights in Palestine and Other Occupied Arab Territories: Report of the United Nations Fact Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict" (PDF) . United Nations Human Rights Council. 15 September 2009. p. 85. ^ "Israel/Occupied Territories: Road to nowhere" . Amnesty International. 1 December 2006. ^ a b "The scope of Israeli control in the Gaza Strip" . B'Tselem . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "Agreed documents on movement and access from and to Gaza" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 15 November 2005 . Retrieved 13 June 2013 . ^ Jerome Slater (1 October 2020). Mythologies Without End: The US, Israel, and the Arab-Israeli Conflict, 1917–2020 . Oxford University Press. p. 15. ISBN 978-0-19-045909-3 . It is now clear that Israel is a true democracy in its broadest sense only for its Jewish citizens.

The Arab-Israeli (or, as some prefer, the Palestinian-Israeli) peoples, roughly 20 per cent of the total population of Israel its pre-1967 boundaries, are citizens and have voting rights, but they face political, economic, and social discrimination. And, of course, Israeli democracy is inapplicable to the nearly 4 million Palestinian Arabs in the West Bank and Gaza, conquered by Israel in June 1967, who are occupied, repressed, and in many ways, directly and indirectly, effectively ruled by Israel. ^ Ben White (15 January 2012). Palestinians in Israel: Segregation, Discrimination and Democracy . Pluto Press. ISBN 978-0-7453-3228-4 . ^ "Arabs will ask U.N. to seek razing of Israeli wall" . NBC News. 9 July 2004 . Retrieved 9 February 2013 . ^ "Olmert: Willing to trade land for peace" . Ynetnews . 16 December 2006 . Retrieved 26 September 2007 . ^ "Syria ready to discuss land for peace" .

The Jerusalem Post . 12 June 2007 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "Egypt: Israel must accept the land-for-peace formula" .

The Jerusalem Post . 15 March 2007 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "A/RES/36/147. Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories" . Retrieved 12 February 2017 . ^ Rudoren, Jodi; Sengupta, Somini (22 June 2015). "U.N. Report on Gaza Finds Evidence of War Crimes by Israel and by Palestinian Militants" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 12 February 2017 . ^ "Human Rights Council establishes Independent, International Commission of Inquiry for the Occupied Palestinian Territory" . Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights . 23 July 2014 . Retrieved 12 February 2017 . ^ "UN condemns Israel's West Bank settlement plans" . BBC News. 25 January 2017 . Retrieved 12 February 2017 . ^ "The Avalon Project: United Nations Security Council Resolution 605" . avalon.law.yale.edu . 22 December 1987 . Retrieved 12 February 2017 . ^ "Faced with Israeli denial of access to Occupied Palestinian Territory, UN expert resigns" . 4 January 2016. Archived from the original on 5 December 2016. ^ "Human Rights Council adopts six resolutions and closes its thirty-first regular session" . Retrieved 12 February 2017 . ^ 'Significant human rights issues included credible reports of: unlawful or arbitrary killings; arbitrary detention, often extraterritorial detention of Palestinians from the occupied territories in Israel; restrictions on Palestinians residing in Jerusalem including arbitrary or unlawful interference with privacy, family, and home; substantial interference with the freedom of association; arbitrary or unlawful interference with privacy; harassment of nongovernmental organizations; significant restrictions on freedom of movement within the country; violence against asylum seekers and irregular migrants; violence or threats of violence against national, racial, or ethnic minority groups; and labour rights abuses against foreign workers and Palestinians from the West Bank.' Israel 2021 Human Rights Report, United States Department of State 17 April 2021. ^ 'With respect to Israeli security forces in the West Bank: credible reports of unlawful or arbitrary killings due to unnecessary or disproportionate use of force by Israeli officials; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment by Israeli officials; arbitrary arrest or detention; arbitrary or unlawful interference with privacy; restrictions on free expression and media, including violence, threats of violence, unjustified arrests and prosecutions against journalists, and censorship; restrictions on internet freedom; restrictions on Palestinians residing in Jerusalem, including arbitrary or unlawful interference with privacy, family, and home; substantial interference with the rights of peaceful assembly and freedom of association, including harassment of nongovernmental organizations; and restrictions on freedom of movement and residence.' 2021 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Israel, West Bank and Gaza, United States Department of State 12 April 2022 ^ Heyer, Julia Amalia (7 October 2014). "Kids Behind Bars: Israel's Arbitrary Arrests of Palestinian Minors" . Der Spiegel . Retrieved 23 April 2017 . ^ "Israel and Occupied Palestinian Territories 2016/2017" . Amnesty International . Retrieved 23 April 2017 . ^ Isfahan, Ali (11 August 2014). "Why Israel's Impunity Goes Unpunished by International Authorities" . Foreign Policy Journal . Retrieved 23 April 2017 . ^ Barghouti, Marwan (16 April 2017). "Why We Are on Hunger Strike in Israel's Prisons" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 23 April 2017 . ^ Dorfman, Zach. "George Mitchell wrote 'A Path to Peace' about Israel and Palestine. Is there one?" . Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 1 February 2017 . ^ "Outrage over Maimane's visit to Israel" . IOL . Retrieved 1 February 2017 . ^ "The subordination of Palestinian rights must stop" .

The National . Retrieved 1 February 2017 . ^ "Palestine-Israel Journal: Settlements and the Palestinian Right to Self-Determination" . pij.org . Retrieved 1 February 2017 . ^ Hammond, Jeremy R. "The Rejection of Palestinian Self Determination" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 February 2017 . Retrieved 1 February 2017 . ^ "Top US senator clashes with Netanyahu over Israeli rights record" . Politico . 31 March 2016 . Retrieved 12 February 2017 . ^ "Allegations of Israeli Human Rights Violations Closely Scrutinized, Says U.S. State Department" . Haaretz . 6 May 2017. Archived from the original on 6 May 2016 . Retrieved 12 February 2017 . ^ Barak-Erez, Daphne (1 July 2006). "Israel: The security barrier—between international law, constitutional law, and domestic judicial review" . International Journal of Constitutional Law . 4 (3): 548. doi : 10.1093/icon/mol021 .

The real controversy hovering over all the litigation on the security barrier concerns the fate of the Israeli settlements in the occupied territories.

Since 1967, Israel has allowed and even encouraged its citizens to live in the new settlements established in the territories, motivated by religious and national sentiments attached to the history of the Jewish nation in the land of Israel. This policy has also been justified in terms of security interests, taking into consideration the dangerous geographic circumstances of Israel before 1967 (where Israeli areas on the Mediterranean coast were potentially threatened by Jordanian control of the West Bank ridge).

The international community, for its part, has viewed this policy as patently illegal, based on the provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention that prohibit moving populations to or from territories under occupation. ^ "Choosing not to veto, Obama lets anti-settlement resolution pass at UN Security Council" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 23 December 2016 . ^ Nebehay, Stephanie (9 July 2021). "Israeli settlements amount to war crime – U.N. rights expert" . Reuters . Retrieved 6 April 2023 . ^ "Chapter 3: Israeli Settlements and International Law" . Amnesty International . 30 January 2019 . Retrieved 6 April 2023 . ^ Siddique, Haroon (19 July 2024). "UN court orders Israel to end its occupation of Palestinian territories" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 20 August 2024 . ^ "ICJ says Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories is illegal" . BBC News . 19 July 2024 . Retrieved 20 August 2024 . ^ "LEGAL CONSEQUENCES ARISING FROM THE POLICIES AND PRACTICES OF ISRAEL IN THE OCCUPIED PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, INCLUDING EAST JERUSALEM" (PDF) . icj-cij.org . 19 July 2024. ^ Shakir 2021 . ^ a b "Israel committing crimes of apartheid and persecution – HRW" . BBC News . 27 April 2021 . Retrieved 6 April 2023 . ^ Mansour 2024 , p. 134: "It stated that 'all Palestinians living under Israeli rule are treated as inferior in right and status to Jews who live the very same area'; the gist was in the title: 'A regime of Jewish supremacy from the Jordan River to the Mediterranean Sea: This is apartheid' (B'Tselem 2021)" ^ B'Tselem 2021 . ^ University Network for Human Rights 2025 : "This report analyzes the crime of apartheid and its application to Israel's policies and practices in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (OPT)1 before and after October 7, 2023. Our analysis relies on a close examination of more than 25 credible human rights reports and judicial opinions from institutions and individuals with expertise in the region. Consistent with the findings of these experts, we conclude that Israel has committed and continues to commit the crime of apartheid as defined by the 1973 United Nations International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid (Apartheid Convention)" ^ Amnesty International 2022 . ^ a b Rosenfeld, Arno (27 April 2021). "Israel is committing 'crime of apartheid,' Human Rights Watch says" .

The Forward . Retrieved 15 February 2022 . ^ "U.S. State Department Rejects Amnesty's Apartheid Claim Against Israel" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 1 February 2022 . Retrieved 16 February 2022 . ^ Elgot, Jessica (28 April 2022). "Keir Starmer hosts Israeli Labor party in charm offensive ahead of local elections" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 25 October 2023 . ^ "Parliamentary question E-000932/2022(ASW) | Answer given by High Representative/Vice-President Borrell i Fontelles on behalf of the European Commission" . European Parliament . 20 January 2023 . Retrieved 25 October 2023 . ^ Andrew Tillett (2 February 2022). "PM, Labor defend Israel over apartheid claim" . Australian Financial Review . Retrieved 25 October 2023 . ^ "Netherlands rejects Amnesty report accusing Israel of apartheid" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 2 May 2022 . ^ "Germany rejects use of word 'apartheid' in connection with Israel" . Reuters. 2 February 2022 . Retrieved 16 February 2022 . ^ "Israeli policies against Palestinians amount to apartheid – Amnesty" . BBC News. 1 February 2022 . Retrieved 15 February 2022 . ^ "Arab League, OIC welcome Amnesty's report on Israel's 'apartheid' against Palestinians" . Arab News . 3 February 2022. ^ Kingsley, Patrick (23 March 2022). "U.N. Investigator Accuses Israel of Apartheid, Citing Permanence of Occupation" .

The New York Times . ^ Berman, Lazar (23 March 2022). "UN Human Rights Council report accuses Israel of apartheid" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 2 June 2024 . ^ "UN report urges plan to 'end Israeli colonialism, apartheid' " .

The New Arab . 19 October 2022. ^ Tress, Luke (28 October 2022). "UN commission says it will investigate 'apartheid' charges against Israel" .

The Times of Israel . ^ Kattan, Victor (20 March 2024). "The Implications of An ICJ Finding that Israel is Committing the Crime Against Humanity of Apartheid" . Just Security . ^ " 'Racial Segregation and Apartheid' in the ICJ Palestine Advisory Opinion" . 31 July 2024. ^ "Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legal Consequences of Israel's Policies and Practices in the "Occupied Palestinian Territory" " . January 2024. ^ Solomon, Solon (20 August 2024). "The Limits of the ICJ Advisory Opinion on Israel's Occupation and the West Bank" . Lawfare . ^ "ICJ Delivers Advisory Opinion on the Legality of Israel's Occupation of Palestinian Territories" . 20 July 2024. ^ Keane, David (31 July 2024). " 'Racial Segregation and Apartheid' in the ICJ Palestine Advisory Opinion" . ^ Jeßberger, Florian; Mehta, Kalika (19 September 2024). "The Inadvertent Protagonist" . Verfassungsblog . doi : 10.59704/27788635acf1f7b5 – via verfassungsblog.de. ^ "Israel's Diplomatic Missions Abroad: Status of relations" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 20 April 2016 . Retrieved 25 April 2016 . ^ Mohammed Mostafa Kamal (21 July 2012). "Why Doesn't the Muslim World Recognize Israel?" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 30 November 2015 . ^ "Massive Israel protests hit universities" (Egyptian Mail, 16 March 2010) "According to most Egyptians, almost 31 years after a peace treaty was signed between Egypt and Israel, having normal ties between the two countries is still a potent accusation and Israel is largely considered to be an enemy country" ^ Abadi 2004 , pp. 47–49. ^ הוראות הדין הישראלי (in Hebrew). Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 2004. Archived from the original on 1 July 2007 . Retrieved 9 August 2007 . ^ "Qatar, Mauritania cut Israel ties" . Al Jazeera English. 17 January 2009 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ Flores, Paola (29 November 2019). "Bolivia to renew Israel ties after rupture under Morales" . ABC News . Retrieved 15 December 2020 . ^ Brown, Philip Marshall (1948). "The Recognition of Israel".

The American Journal of International Law . 42 (3): 620– 627. doi : 10.2307/2193961 . JSTOR 2193961 . S2CID 147342045 . ^ Yaakov, Saar (18 October 2017). "There Were Times (Hayu Zemanim)" (in Hebrew). Israel Hayom. p. 30. ^ "U.S. Relations With Israel Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs Fact Sheet March 10, 2014" . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 30 October 2014 . ^ "Israel: Background and Relations with the United States Updated" (PDF) . Defense Technical Information Center. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2011 . Retrieved 19 October 2009 . ^ a b "U.S. Overseas Loans and Grants" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 May 2011. ^ "U.S. Government Foreign Grants and Credits by Type and Country: 2000 to 2010" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 October 2011. ^ "Foreign Aid" . Archived from the original on 25 December 2007. ^ "Americans Still Pro-Israel, Though Palestinians Gain Support" . Gallup, Inc . 17 March 2022. ^ "Friend or Enemy — Israel" . YouGov . 2 February 2022. ^ "The bilateral relationship" . UK in Israel . Foreign and Commonwealth Office. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "Congressional Research Service: Germany's Relations with Israel: Background and Implications for German Middle East Policy, Jan 19, 2007. (p. CRS-2)" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 February 2007 . Retrieved 29 September 2010 . ^ Eric Maurice (5 March 2015). "EU to Revise Relations with Turbulent Neighbourhood" . EUobserver . Retrieved 1 December 2015 . ^ Abadi 2004 , p. 3. "However, it was not until 1991 that the two countries established full diplomatic relations." ^ Abadi 2004 , pp. 4–6. ^ Uzer, Umut (26 March 2013). "Turkish-Israeli Relations: Their Rise and Fall" . Middle East Policy . XX (1): 97– 110. doi : 10.1111/mepo.12007 . Retrieved 7 January 2017 . ^ "Israel woos Greece after rift with Turkey" . BBC News. 16 October 2010. ^ "Turkey, Greece discuss exploration off Cyprus" . Haaretz . Associated Press. 26 September 2011. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011 . Retrieved 1 January 2012 . ^ Benari, Elad (5 March 2012). "Israel, Cyprus Sign Deal for Underwater Electricity Cable" . Arutz Sheva . Retrieved 7 January 2017 . ^ a b "Inequality Report: The Palestinian Arab Minority in Israel – Adalah" . www.adalah.org . Retrieved 12 January 2024 . ^ "The Israel-Kazakhstan Partnership" .

The Diplomat . 19 July 2016. Archived from the original on 18 May 2022. ^ Kumar, Dinesh. "India and Israel: Dawn of a New Era" (PDF) . Jerusalem Institute for Western Defense. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 May 2012 . Retrieved 19 March 2012 . ^ "India to hold wide-ranging strategic talks with US, Israel" .

The Times of India . 19 January 2010. Archived from the original on 9 January 2026 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "Iran and Israel in Africa: A search for allies in a hostile world" .

The Economist . 4 February 2010 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ Eichner, Itamar (26 December 2025). "Before addressing attack: Netanyahu announces official recognition of Republic of Somaliland" . Ynetglobal . Retrieved 26 December 2025 . ^ "Reforming Somaliland's Judiciary" (PDF) . UN.org . United Nations. 9 January 2006 . Retrieved 2 February 2010 . ^ "Arab League condemns Israel over Somaliland recognition" . ethjournal.com . 7 March 2010. Archived from the original on 21 June 2010 . Retrieved 6 May 2010 . ^ Pfeffer, Anshel (28 April 2015). "The Downsides of Israel's Missions of Mercy Abroad" . Haaretz . Retrieved 22 November 2015 . And even when no Israelis are involved, few countries are as fast as Israel in mobilizing entire delegations to rush to the other side of the world. It has been proved time and again in recent years, after the earthquake in Haiti, the typhoon in the Philippines and the quake/tsunami/nuclear disaster in Japan. For a country of Israel's size and resources, without conveniently located aircraft carriers and overseas bases, it is quite an impressive achievement. ^ a b Deon Geldenhuys (1990). Isolated States: A Comparative Analysis . Cambridge University Press. p. 428 . ISBN 978-0-521-40268-2 . israel international aid africa 1970. ^ "About MASHAV" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Retrieved 20 January 2017 . ^ Tareq Y. Ismael (1986). International Relations of the Contemporary Middle East: A Study in World Politics . Syracuse University Press. p. 249 . ISBN 978-0-8156-2382-3 . Israel foreign aid 1958 burundi. ^ Haim Yacobi (2016). Israel and Africa: A Genealogy of Moral Geography . Routledge. pp. 111–112 . ISBN 978-1-138-90237-4 . ^ Haim Yacobi (2016). Israel and Africa: A Genealogy of Moral Geography . Routledge. p. 113 . ISBN 978-1-138-90237-4 . ^ Ki-moon, Ban (1 December 2016). "Secretary-General's remarks at reception in honour of ZAKA International Rescue Unit " . United Nations . Retrieved 20 January 2017 . ^ Ueriel Hellman, "Israeli aid effort helps Haitians – and Israel's image" , Jewish Telegraphic Agency 19 January 2010 ^ Jenny Hazan (12 March 2006). "Israel's 'superwoman' takes flight to help others" . ISRAEL21c . ^ "Wolfson cardiac surgeons save lives of more Gazan children" .

The Jerusalem Post . 4 September 2014. ^ "Earthquake in Haiti – Latet Organization deploys for immediate relief to victims" . ReliefWeb (Press release). 17 January 2010. ^ "When catastrophe strikes the IDF is there to help" . Israel Today . 20 May 2015. Archived from the original on 19 January 2016 . Retrieved 24 November 2015 . ^ "Israel's Official Development Assistance (ODA)" . oecd.org . OECD . Retrieved 30 March 2023 . ^ World Giving Index (PDF) (Report). Charities Aid Foundation. October 2018 . Retrieved 22 February 2022 . ^ "History: 1948" . Israel Defense Forces. 2007. Archived from the original on 12 April 2008 . Retrieved 31 July 2007 . ^ Henderson 2003 , p. 97. ^ "The Israel Defense Forces" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Retrieved 21 October 2006 . ^ Stendel 1997 , pp. 191–192. ^ Shtrasler, Nehemia (16 May 2007). "Cool law, for wrong population" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 18 November 2010 . Retrieved 19 March 2012 . ^ "Sherut Leumi (National Service)" . Nefesh B'Nefesh . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "Israel's Arab soldiers who fight for the Jewish state" . BBC News . 8 November 2016. ^ IISS 2018 , pp. 339–340 ^ Katz, Yaakov (30 March 2007). "Arrow can fully protect against Iran" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ Israeli Mirage III and Nesher Aces , By Shlomo Aloni, (Osprey 2004), p. 60 ^ Spike Anti-Tank Missile, Israel army-technology.com ^ Robert Johnson (19 November 2012). "How Israel Developed Such A Shockingly Effective Rocket Defense System" . Business Insider . Retrieved 20 November 2012 . ^ Sarah Tory (19 November 2012). "A Missile-Defense System That Actually Works?" . Slate . Retrieved 20 November 2012 . ^ Zorn, E.L. (8 May 2007). "Israel's Quest for Satellite Intelligence" . Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 26 April 2010 . Retrieved 19 March 2012 . ^ Katz, Yaakov (11 June 2007). "Analysis: Eyes in the sky" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ ElBaradei, Mohamed (27 July 2004). "Transcript of the Director General's Interview with Al-Ahram News" . International Atomic Energy Agency. Archived from the original on 18 April 2012 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction: Assessing the Risks" (PDF) . Office of Technology Assessment. August 1993. pp. 65, 84. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 May 2012 . Retrieved 29 March 2012 . ^ "Background Information" . 2005 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) . United Nations. 27 May 2005 . Retrieved 9 April 2012 . ^ Ziv, Guy, "To Disclose or Not to Disclose: The Impact of Nuclear Ambiguity on Israeli Security", Israel Studies Forum, Vol. 22, No. 2 (Winter 2007): 76–94 ^ "Popeye Turbo" . Federation of American Scientists. Archived from the original on 4 March 2011 . Retrieved 19 February 2011 . ^ "Glossary" . Israel Homeowner. Archived from the original on 17 May 2012 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ Defence Expenditure in Israel, 1950–2015 (PDF) (Report). Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. 29 May 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 June 2017 . Retrieved 22 June 2017 . ^ Trends in World Military Expenditure, 2021 (PDF) (Report). Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. April 2022 . Retrieved 21 February 2023 . ^ Sharp, Jeremy M. (22 December 2016). U.S. Foreign Aid to Israel (PDF) (Report). Congressional Research Service. p. 36. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 July 2015 . Retrieved 22 June 2017 . ^ Lake, Eli (15 September 2016). "The U.S.-Israel Memorandum of Misunderstanding" . Bloomberg . Retrieved 17 March 2017 . ^ Wezeman, Pieter D.; Djokic, Katarina; George, Mathew; Hussain, Zain; Wezeman, Siemon T. (March 2025). "Trends in international Arms Transfer 2024" . sipri.org : 2. doi : 10.55163/XXSZ9056 . ^ Israel reveals more than $7 billion in arms sales, but few names By Gili Cohen | 9 January 2014, Haaretz ^ Global Peace Index 2022 (PDF) (Report). Institute for Economics and Peace. June 2022. p. 11 . Retrieved 21 February 2023 . ^ "Israel's high court unique in region" . Boston Herald . 9 September 2007 . Retrieved 27 March 2013 . ^ "The Judiciary: The Court System" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 1 August 2005 . Retrieved 5 August 2007 . ^ "Yariv Levin" . Ministry of Justice . Retrieved 21 November 2023 . . ^ Concluding Observations of the Human Rights Committee—Israel, CCPR/C/ISR/CO/3, 29 July 2010, para. 2, available at: http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrc/docs/CCPR.C.ISR.CO.3.doc ^ Orna Ben-Naftali; Michael Sfard; Hedi Viterbo (2018).

The ABC of the OPT: A Legal Lexicon of the Israeli Control over the Occupied Palestinian Territory . Cambridge University Press. pp. 52–. ISBN 978-1-107-15652-4 . ^ Graham-Harrison, Emma (25 March 2026). "Israeli former PM calls on ICC to halt West Bank 'Jewish terrorists' after prosecutions stop" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 25 March 2026 . ^ Chua, Amy (2003). World On Fire . Knopf Doubleday Publishing. pp. 219–220 . ISBN 978-0-385-72186-8 . ^ Bramwell, Martyn (2000). Northern and Western Asia . Lerner Publications Company. ISBN 978-0-8225-2915-6 . ^ "Israel" . IMF data mapper . International Monetary Fund. October 2023 . Retrieved 21 November 2023 . ^ Team, FAIR (6 September 2023). "Top 10 Richest Countries in Asia " . FAIR . Retrieved 20 November 2023 . ^ "Global wealth report" . credit-suisse.com . Credit Suisse . Retrieved 20 September 2022 . ^ Wrobel, Sharon (26 December 2022). "Israel ranked 4th-best-performing economy among OECD countries in 2022" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 8 February 2023 . ^ Chang, Richard J. "The Countries With The Most Billionaires 2022" . Forbes . Retrieved 29 March 2023 . ^ "Israel" . OECD Data . OECD . Retrieved 13 October 2023 . ^ "Israel's accession to the OECD" . oecd.org . OECD. Archived from the original on 16 May 2020 . Retrieved 12 August 2012 . ^ "List of OECD Member countries — Ratification of the Convention on the OECD" . oecd.org . OECD . Retrieved 12 August 2012 . ^ "Rankings" . World Bank . Retrieved 1 December 2021 . ^ "Israel's International Investment Position (IIP), June 2015" (Press release). Bank of Israel. 20 September 2015. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018 . Retrieved 29 January 2017 . ^ Bounfour, Ahmed; Edvinsson, Leif (2005). Intellectual Capital for Communities: Nations, Regions, and Cities . Butterworth-Heinemann. p. 47 (368 pages). ISBN 978-0-7506-7773-8 . ^ Richard Behar (11 May 2016). "Inside Israel's Secret Startup Machine" . Forbes . Retrieved 30 October 2016 . ^ "The Israeli technological Eco-system" . Deloitte Israel . Retrieved 26 February 2023 . ^ Yerman, Jordan (22 May 2019). "A Startup Nation: Why Israel Has Become The New Silicon Valley" . APEX . Retrieved 22 October 2023 . ^ "Israel's economy is a study in contrasts" .

The Economist . ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 22 October 2023 . ^ Ioniță, Antoanela (3 February 2023). "Lessons from Tel Aviv: What Has Fueled Israel's Startup Ecosystem's Growth" . TheRecursive.com . Retrieved 22 October 2023 . ^ "Israel: Start-up nation comes of age" . Financial Times . 6 January 2016 . Retrieved 22 October 2023 . ^ Krawitz, Avi (27 February 2007). "Intel to expand Jerusalem R&D" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "Microsoft Israel R&D center: Leadership" . Microsoft. Archived from the original on 13 March 2012 . Retrieved 19 March 2012 . Avi returned to Israel in 1991, and established the first Microsoft R&D Center outside the US ... ^ Koren, Orah (26 June 2012). "Instead of 4 work days: 6 optional days to be considered half day-outs" .

The Marker . Retrieved 26 June 2012 . (in Hebrew) ^ "Israel keen on IT tie-ups" . Business Line . 10 January 2001. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013 . Retrieved 19 March 2012 . ^ "Israel's technology industry: Punching above its weight" .

The Economist . 10 November 2005 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "Research and development (R&D) – Gross domestic spending on R&D" . OECD Data . OECD . Retrieved 10 February 2016 . ^ "GII Innovation Ecosystems & Data Explorer 2025" . WIPO . Retrieved 16 October 2025 . ^ Dutta, Soumitra; Lanvin, Bruno (2025). Global Innovation Index 2025: Innovation at a Crossroads . World Intellectual Property Organization . p. 19. doi : 10.34667/tind.58864 . ISBN 978-92-805-3797-0 . Retrieved 17 October 2025 . ^ Jamrisko, Michelle; Miller, Lee J.; Lu, Wei (22 January 2019). "These Are the World's Most Innovative Countries" . Bloomberg.com . Retrieved 24 January 2019 . ^ Shteinbuk, Eduard (22 July 2011). "R&D and Innovation as a Growth Engine" (PDF) . National Research University – Higher School of Economics. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 August 2019 . Retrieved 11 May 2013 . ^ Augusto Lopez-Claros; Irene Mia (2006). Israel: Factors in the Emergence of an ICT Powerhouse (PDF) (Report). Geneva: Foreign Direct Investment Database. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 July 2015 – via InvestinIsrael.gov. ^ Haviv Rettig Gur (9 October 2013). "Tiny Israel a Nobel heavyweight, especially in chemistry" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 30 January 2017 . ^ Heylin, Michael (27 November 2006). "Globalization of Science Rolls On" (PDF) . Chemical & Engineering News . pp. 29– 31 . Retrieved 5 February 2013 . ^ Gordon, Evelyn (24 August 2006). "Kicking the global oil habit" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ Yarden Skop (2 September 2013). "Israel's scientific fall from grace: Study shows drastic decline in publications per capita" . Haaretz . ^ a b "Israel" . Academic Ranking of World Universities. 2016. Archived from the original on 17 August 2016 . Retrieved 6 January 2017 . ^ "Futron Releases 2012 Space Competitiveness Index" . Archived from the original on 24 December 2013 . Retrieved 21 December 2013 . ^ O'Sullivan, Arieh (9 July 2012). "Israel's domestic satellite industry saved" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 9 December 2012 .

The Amos 6 will be IAI's 14th satellite ^ Tran, Mark (21 January 2008). "Israel launches new satellite to spy on Iran" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "Space launch systems – Shavit" . Deagel . Retrieved 19 November 2013 . ^ e-Teacher (9 February 2010). "Learning Hebrew Online – Colonel Ilan Ramon" .

The Jerusalem Post . Archived from the original on 8 December 2015 . Retrieved 1 December 2015 . ^ Talbot, David (2015). "Megascale Desalination" . MIT Technology Review . Retrieved 13 February 2017 . ^ Federman, Josef (30 May 2014). "Israel solves water woes with desalination" . Associated Press. Archived from the original on 2 June 2014 . Retrieved 30 May 2014 . ^ Kershner, Isabel (29 May 2015). "Aided by the Sea, Israel Overcomes an Old Foe: Drought" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 31 May 2015 . ^ Rabinovitch, Ari (6 December 2011). "Desalination plant could make Israel water exporter" . Reuters . ^ Lettice, John (25 January 2008). "Giant solar plants in Negev could power Israel's future" .

The Register . ^ a b Gradstein, Linda (22 October 2007). "Israel Pushes Solar Energy Technology" . NPR. ^ a b Parry, Tom (15 August 2007). "Looking to the sun" . Canadian Broadcasting Corporation . Archived from the original on 24 September 2008. ^ a b Sandler, Neal (26 March 2008). "At the Zenith of Solar Energy" . Bloomberg Businessweek . Archived from the original on 5 November 2012 . Retrieved 12 August 2012 . ^ Del Chiaro, Bernadette; Telleen-Lawton, Timothy (3 April 2007). "Solar Water Heating: How California Can Reduce Its Dependence on Natural Gas" (PDF) . Environment California . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ Berner, Joachim (January 2008). "Solar, what else?!" (PDF) . Sun & Wind Energy . Israel Special. p. 88. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 15 May 2010 . ^ "Will Israel's Electric Cars Change the World?" . Time . 26 April 2011. Archived from the original on 15 April 2012 . Retrieved 11 April 2012 . ^ "Electric cars are all the rage in Israel" . Financial Times . 17 September 2010 . Retrieved 11 April 2012 . ^ "Israel to keep electric car recharging fees low" . Haaretz . 13 March 2012. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012 . Retrieved 11 April 2012 . ^ "Electric Car Company Folds After Taking $850 Million From GE And Others" . Business Insider . 26 May 2013. ^ Wainer, David; Ben-David, Calev (22 April 2010). "Israel Billionaire Tshuva Strikes Gas, Fueling Expansion in Energy, Hotels" . Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 12 January 2011. ^ "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency" . cia.gov . Archived from the original on 15 March 2016 . Retrieved 11 May 2018 . ^ "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency" . cia.gov . Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. ^ Cohen, Tova; Ari, Rabinovitch (31 December 2019). "Israel gets first gas from Leviathan with exports to follow" . Reuters . Retrieved 26 June 2022 . ^ "Ketura Sun Technical Figures" . Arava Power Company. Archived from the original on 9 March 2012 . Retrieved 26 June 2011 . ^ "Ketura Sun Field Profile" . Arava Power Company. Archived from the original on 27 December 2013 . Retrieved 26 June 2011 . ^ "Roads, by Length and Area" . Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. 1 September 2016 . Retrieved 15 February 2017 . ^ a b "3.09 Million Motor Vehicles in Israel in 2015" . Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. 30 March 2016 . Retrieved 15 February 2017 . ^ "Israel expects 30% of cars on its roads to be electric by 2030" . 12 September 2023. ^ "Bus Services on Scheduled Routes" (PDF) . Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics. 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 June 2011 . Retrieved 5 February 2010 . ^ Stub, Zev. "Egged's monopoly ends, Superbus taking over Jerusalem lines in late 2021" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 1 December 2021 . ^ a b "Railway Services" . Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. 1 September 2016 . Retrieved 15 February 2017 . ^ "Number of Passengers at Ben-Gurion Airport Rises 10% Despite Cancellations Due to Israel-Hamas War" . Haaretz . 22 January 2024. ^ Yan (3 January 2018). "Israel sees record 3.6 mln inbound tourists in 2017" . Xinhua . Archived from the original on 24 January 2018. ^ Raz-Chaimovich, Michal (27 December 2017). "Record 3.6m tourists visit Israel in 2017" . Globes . ^ "Housing prices" . OECD Data . OECD. ^ "Average salary in Israel" (PDF) . Central Bureau of Statistics of Israel . Retrieved 4 January 2022 . ^ "Dwellings and Buildings in Israel" (PDF) . Central Bureau of Statistics of Israel . Retrieved 26 January 2022 . ^ Tsion, Hila (23 June 2021). "Housing crisis: about 200,000 apartments are missing" . Ynet (in Hebrew). ^ Brian Blum (15 September 2021). "Israeli housing prices show largest increase in the world" . ISRAEL21c . Retrieved 28 January 2022 . ^ "Report on housing loans" . Bank of Israel . Archived from the original on 26 January 2022 . Retrieved 26 January 2022 . ^ Dashefsky, Arnold ; Della-Pergola, Sergio ; Sheskin, Ira, eds. (2021). World Jewish Population (PDF) (Report). Berman Jewish DataBank . Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 September 2023 . Retrieved 4 September 2023 . ^ "Media Release Israel's Independence Day 2025" . www.cbs.gov.il . Retrieved 6 May 2025 . ^ "ISRAEL: Crackdown on illegal migrants and visa violators" . IRIN . 14 July 2009. Archived from the original on 19 January 2016 . Retrieved 11 April 2026 . ^ Adriana Kemp, "Labour migration and racialisation: labour market mechanisms and labour migration control policies in Israel", Social Identities 10:2, 267–292, 2004 ^ "Israel rounds up African migrants for deportation" . Reuters. 11 June 2012. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021 . Retrieved 5 July 2021 . ^ "Urban population (% of total population) – Israel" . data.worldbank.org . World Bank . Archived from the original on 11 February 2023 . Retrieved 11 February 2023 . ^ "Can Jews and Palestinians live peacefully in Israel?

The data on mixed neighborhoods says yes" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 15 February 2022 . ^ "Life expectancy at birth" . OECD Data . OECD. Archived from the original on 2 February 2015 . Retrieved 30 May 2019 . ^ "Arab and Jewish medics together on frontline of Israel's virus fight" . France 24 . Agence France Presse . 29 March 2020. Archived from the original on 23 June 2022 . Retrieved 23 June 2022 . ^ Dov Chernichovsky, Bishara Bisharat, Liora Bowers, Aviv Brill, and Chen Sharony, "The Health of the Arab Israeli Population" Archived 10 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine . Taub Centre for Social Policy Studies in Israel December 2017 pp.1–50, 13 (2015) ^ "Saudi writer: 'Why is life expectancy in Israel better?' " . BBC News . 9 October 2012. Archived from the original on 23 June 2022 . Retrieved 30 March 2023 . ^ "Taub Center report shows discrepancy in Jewish, Arab life expectancy" . Ynetnews . Archived from the original on 15 February 2022 . Retrieved 15 February 2022 . ^ "Israel's birth rate remains highest in OECD by far, at 2.9 children per woman" . Times of Israel . 21 June 2024. ^ DellaPergola, Sergio (2000). "Still Moving: Recent Jewish Migration in Comparative Perspective".

In Daniel J. Elazar; Morton Weinfeld (eds.).

The Global Context of Migration to Israel . Transaction Publishers. pp. 13– 60. ISBN 978-1-56000-428-8 . ^ Herman, Pini (1 September 1983). "The Myth of the Israeli Expatriate". Moment Magazine . Vol. 8, no. 8. pp. 62– 63. ^ Gould, Eric D.; Moav, Omer (2007). "Israel's Brain Drain". Israel Economic Review . 5 (1): 1– 22. SSRN 2180400 . ^ Rettig Gur, Haviv (6 April 2008). "Officials to US to bring Israelis home" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "Jews, by Continent of Origin, Continent of Birth and Period of Immigration" (PDF) . Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. 15 September 2022 . Retrieved 21 February 2023 . ^ Goldberg, Harvey E. (2008). "From Sephardi to Mizrahi and Back Again: Changing Meanings of "Sephardi" in Its Social Environments" . Jewish Social Studies . 15 (1): 165– 188. doi : 10.18647/2793/JJS-2008 . ^ Joel Schalit (31 August 2009). "The Missing Mizrahim" . Jewcy . ^ Okun, Barbara S.; Khait-Marelly, Orna (2006). "Socioeconomic Status and Demographic Behavior of Adult Multiethnics: Jews in Israel" (PDF) . Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 October 2013 . Retrieved 26 May 2013 . ^ DellaPergola, Sergio (2011). "Jewish Demographic Policies" (PDF) .

The Jewish People Policy Institute. ^ "Israel (people)" . Encyclopedia.com . 2007. ^ Yoram Ettinger (5 April 2013). "Defying demographic projections" . Israel Hayom . Retrieved 29 October 2013 . ^ Gorenberg, Gershom (26 June 2017). "Settlements: The Real Story" .

The American Prospect . Retrieved 25 August 2017 . ^ "Settlements in the Gaza Strip" . Settlement Information . Archived from the original on 26 August 2013 . Retrieved 12 December 2007 . ^ "Population of Israel on the Eve of 2022" . Cbs.gov.il . Retrieved 13 February 2022 . ^ Citizenship, Identity and Political Participation: Measuring the Attitudes of the Arab Citizens in Israel (Report). Konrad Adenauer Foundation . December 2017. pp. 22, 25, 28. (p.28) "The positions of the participants in the focus groups reflect the strength of Palestinian-Arab identity among Arab citizens and the fact that they do not see a contradiction between Palestinian-Arab national identity and Israeli civic identity.

The designation "Israeli-Arab" aroused great opposition in the focus groups, as did Israel's Independence Day. ...

The collective position presented in the focus group discussions finds expression in the public sphere and emphasizes the Palestinian national identity. Conversely, the responses of the survey participants reveal individual attitudes that assign a broader (albeit secondary, identity) dimension to the component of Israeli civic identity"; quote (p.25): The designation "Arab citizens of Israel" was acceptable to them on the basis of the understanding that it is impossible to live without citizenship, and as long as Israeli citizenship does not harm the national consciousness. Conversely, the participants spoke out against the designation "Arab-Israeli"... ^ Lynfield, Ben (27 September 2017). "Survey: 60% of Arab Israelis have positive view of state" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 23 October 2017 . ^ "Localities, Population and Density per Sq. Km., by Metropolitan Area and Selected Localities" . Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. 6 September 2017 . Retrieved 19 September 2017 . ^ a b c "Regional Statistics" . Israel Central Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ Roberts 1990 , p. 60 Although East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights have been brought directly under Israeli law, by acts that amount to annexation, both of these areas continue to be viewed by the international community as occupied, and their status as regards the applicability of international rules is in most respects identical to that of the West Bank and Gaza. ^ "Population Density by City 2024" . worldpopulationreview.com . ^ 2.22 Localities and Population, by Municipal Status and District , 2018 ^ "List of Cities in Israel" . ^ Population of Jerusalem, by Age, Religion and Geographical Spreading (PDF) . Statistical Yearbook of Jerusalem (Report). Jerusalem Institute for Policy Research. 2023 . Retrieved 16 August 2025 . ^ Laub, Karin (18 June 1987). "Long Suppressed, Yiddish is Making a Comeback in Israel" . Associated Press News . Jerusalem. Archived from the original on 24 November 2022. ^ Golden, Zach (11 September 2023). "How Yiddish became a 'foreign language' in Israel despite being spoken there since the 1400s" .

The Forward . Retrieved 14 May 2024 . ^ a b Franklin, Parker (10 October 1984). Israeli Schools: Religious and Secular Problems . Education Resources Information Center . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "The sudden, surprising rise of Arabic on Israeli street signs" .

The Economist . 6 December 2017 . Retrieved 11 December 2017 . ^ Israel Central Bureau of Statistics : The Ethiopian Community in Israel ^ "Israel may admit 3,000 Ethiopia migrants if Jews" . Reuters. 16 July 2009. ^ Meyer, Bill (17 August 2008). "Israel's welcome for Ethiopian Jews wears thin" .

The Plain Dealer . Retrieved 1 October 2012 . ^ "Study: Soviet immigrants outperform Israeli students" . Haaretz . 10 February 2008. Archived from the original on 31 May 2012. ^ "French radio station RFI makes aliyah" . Ynetnews . 5 December 2011. ^ Spolsky, Bernard (1999). Round Table on Language and Linguistics . Georgetown University Press. pp. 169– 170. ISBN 978-0-87840-132-1 .

In 1948, the newly independent state of Israel took over the old British regulations that had set English, Arabic, and Hebrew as official languages for Mandatory Palestine but, as mentioned, dropped English from the list.

In spite of this, official language use has maintained a de facto role for English, after Hebrew but before Arabic. ^ Bat-Zeev Shyldkrot, Hava (2004). "Part I: Language and Discourse" .

In Diskin Ravid, Dorit ; Bat-Zeev Shyldkrot, Hava (eds.). Perspectives on Language and Development: Essays in Honor of Ruth A. Berman . Kluwer Academic Publishers. p. 90. ISBN 978-1-4020-7911-5 . English is not considered official but it plays a dominant role in the educational and public life of Israeli society. ... It is the language most widely used in commerce, business, formal papers, academia, and public interactions, public signs, road directions, names of buildings, etc. ^ Shohamy, Elana (2006). Language Policy: Hidden Agendas and New Approaches . Routledge. pp. 72– 73. ISBN 978-0-415-32864-7 .

While English is not declared anywhere as an official language, the reality is that it has a very high and unique status in Israel. It is the main language of the academy, commerce, business, and the public space. ^ "English programs at Israeli universities and colleges" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. ^ a b "Israel" .

The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency . 10 September 2024. Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 30 September 2024 . ^ Starr, Kelsey Jo; Masci, David (8 March 2016). "In Israel, Jews are united by homeland but divided into very different groups" . Pew Research Center . Retrieved 14 January 2017 . ^ Shahar Ilan (24 November 2009). "At the edge of the abyss" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 12 August 2010. ^ Bassok, Moti (25 December 2006). "Israel's Christian population numbers 148,000 as of Christmas Eve" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 21 November 2010 . Retrieved 26 April 2012 . ^ "National Population Estimates" (PDF) . Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. p. 27. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 August 2011 . Retrieved 6 August 2007 . ^ "Israel's disputatious Avigdor Lieberman: Can the coalition hold together?" .

The Economist . 11 March 2010 . Retrieved 12 August 2012 . ^ Levine, Lee I. (1999). Jerusalem: its sanctity and centrality to Judaism, Christianity, and Islam . Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 516. ISBN 978-0-8264-1024-5 . ^ Hebrew Phrasebook . Lonely Planet Publications. 1999. p. 156. ISBN 978-0-86442-528-7 . ^ "The Baháʼí World Centre: Focal Point for a Global Community" .

The Baháʼí International Community. Archived from the original on 29 June 2007 . Retrieved 2 July 2007 . ^ "Teaching the Faith in Israel" . Baháʼí Library Online. 23 June 1995 . Retrieved 6 August 2007 . ^ "Kababir and Central Carmel – Multiculturalism on the Carmel" . Retrieved 8 January 2015 . ^ "Visit Haifa" . Archived from the original on 15 December 2018 . Retrieved 8 January 2015 . ^ Education at a Glance: Israel (Report). Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 15 September 2016. Archived from the original on 10 November 2017 . Retrieved 18 January 2017 . ^ "Israel: IT Workforce" . Information Technology Landscape in Nations Around the World . Archived from the original on 13 September 2006 . Retrieved 14 August 2007 . ^ Kashti, Or; Ilan, Shahar (18 July 2007). "Knesset raises school dropout age to 18" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 5 December 2010 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ a b Shetreet, Ida Ben; Woolf, Laura L. (2010). "Education" (PDF) . Publications Department . Ministry of Immigrant Absorption . Retrieved 30 August 2012 . ^ "Religion and Education Around the World" . 13 December 2016. ^ "6. Jewish educational attainment" . 13 December 2016. ^ "How Religious Groups Differ in Educational Attainment" . 13 December 2016. ^ "Jews at top of class in first-ever global study of religion and education" . 13 December 2016. ^ "The Israeli Matriculation Certificate" . United States-Israel Educational Foundation via the University of Szeged University Library. January 1996. Archived from the original on 15 September 2017 . Retrieved 5 August 2007 . ^ "Students in Grade 12 – Matriculation Examinees and Those Entitled to a Certificate" (PDF) . Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. 2023 . Retrieved 19 October 2023 . ^ Silver, Stefan (11 May 2017). "Israel's educational tradition drives economic growth" . Kehlia News Israel . Archived from the original on 7 February 2019 . Retrieved 31 July 2017 . ^ "Higher Education in Israel" . Embassy of Israel In India. Archived from the original on 25 July 2012 . Retrieved 19 March 2012 . ^ Paraszczuk, Joanna (17 July 2012). "Ariel gets university status, despite opposition" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 21 December 2013 . ^ "History of the Library" . National Library of Israel . Retrieved 22 August 2014 . ^ "Asian Studies: Israel as a 'Melting Pot' " . National Research University Higher School of Economics . Retrieved 18 April 2012 . ^ Ran, Ami (25 August 1998). "Encounters: The Vernacular Paradox of Israeli Architecture" . Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Retrieved 6 September 2007 . ^ Brinn, David (23 October 2005). "Israeli, Palestinian and Jordanian DJs create bridge for peace" . ISRAEL21c . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "The International Israeli Table" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Retrieved 26 June 2009 . ^ Mendel, Yonatan; Ranta, Ronald (2016).

From the Arab Other to the Israeli Self: Palestinian Culture in the Making of Israeli National Identity . Routled. pp. 137, 140– 141. ISBN 978-1-317-13171-7 . ^ "Jewish Festivals and Days of Remembrance in Israel" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 14 August 2007 . Retrieved 16 September 2007 . ^ "Depositing Books to The Jewish National & University Library" . Jewish National and University Library. Archived from the original on 15 April 2016 . Retrieved 21 August 2007 . ^ "The Annual Israeli Book Week Report 2016" . National Library of Israel . Retrieved 26 April 2018 . ^ "The Nobel Prize in Literature 1966" . Nobel Foundation . Retrieved 12 August 2007 . ^ "Yehuda Amichai" . Poetry Foundation . Retrieved 1 July 2023 . ^ "5 Israeli authors you should know – DW – 09/03/2021" . dw.com . Retrieved 1 July 2023 . ^ Books, Five. "The Best Contemporary Israeli Fiction" . Five Books . Retrieved 1 July 2023 . ^ Broughton, Ellingham & Trillo 1999 , pp. 365–369. ^ "Israel" . World Music . National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 10 February 2012 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ Ben-Sasson 1985 , p. 1095. ^ Ewbank, Alison J.; Papageorgiou, Fouli T. (1997). Whose Master's Voice?: The Development of Popular Music in Thirteen Cultures . Greenwood Press. p. 117. ISBN 978-0-313-27772-6 . ^ Davis, Barry (4 February 2007). "US music lovers join the birthday fun for Israel's greatest classical ensemble – the IPO" . ISRAEL21c . ^ "Israel" . Eurovision.tv . European Broadcasting Union (EBU) . Retrieved 9 August 2023 . ^ "About the Red Sea Jazz Festival" . Red Sea Jazz Festival. Archived from the original on 12 March 2012 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "Israeli Folk Music" . World Music . National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 3 January 2012 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ התיאטרון הלאומי הבימה (in Hebrew). Habima National Theatre . Retrieved 13 August 2007 . ^ "Theatre in Israel" . jewishvirtuallibrary.org . Retrieved 19 October 2023 . ^ "Israeli Theatre" . My Jewish Learning . Archived from the original on 18 March 2015 . Retrieved 19 October 2023 . ^ "1883 | Encyclopedia of the Founders and Builders of Israel" . tidhar.tourolib.org . Retrieved 19 October 2023 . ^ "Alexandre FRENEL" . Bureau d’art Ecole de Paris . 2 January 2019 . Retrieved 3 June 2024 . ^ "Chaim Soutine – From Russia to Paris by Ben Uri Research Unit" . issuu.com . 25 May 2023 . Retrieved 19 October 2023 . ^ a b "Israel Studies An Anthology: Art in Israel" . jewishvirtuallibrary.org . Retrieved 19 October 2023 . ^ a b "South Africa launches case at top UN court accusing Israel of genocide in Gaza" . Associated Press . 29 December 2023. Archived from the original on 2 January 2024 . Retrieved 5 January 2024 . ^ "Israel – Art, Music, Dance" . britannica.com . Retrieved 26 December 2023 . ^ Hannabuss, Stuart (18 January 2008). "Encyclopaedia Judaica (2nd edition)" . Reference Reviews . 22 (1): 51– 53. doi : 10.1108/09504120810843177 . ISSN 0950-4125 . ^ "1938-1941 - Alexander Zaid, David Polus" . CIE . 11 April 2023 . Retrieved 26 December 2023 . ^ "Eclectic–Modern \ Tel Aviv Museum of Art" . tamuseum.org.il . Retrieved 22 October 2023 . ^ " "Erich Mendelsohn: Berlin – Jerusalem" Photography by Carsten Krohn | Bauhaus Center Tel Aviv" . Retrieved 27 October 2023 . ^ "Erich Mendelsohn" . Weizmann Wonder Wander . Retrieved 27 October 2023 . ^ Centre, UNESCO World Heritage. "White City of Tel-Aviv – the Modern Movement" . UNESCO World Heritage Centre . Retrieved 22 October 2023 . ^ Constantinoiu, Marina (21 April 2021). "In Tel Aviv, amazing Brutalist architecture hides in plain sight" . ISRAEL21c . Retrieved 22 October 2023 . ^ "Beyond Bauhaus – The allure of Israeli Brutalism" .

The Jerusalem Post . 12 January 2019. ISSN 0792-822X . Retrieved 22 October 2023 . ^ "Sir Patrick Geddes Plan for Tel-Aviv" . ESRAmagazine . Retrieved 22 October 2023 . ^ a b "About the Museum" .

The Israel Museum, Jerusalem. Archived from the original on 2 March 2013 . Retrieved 13 March 2013 . ^ "Shrine of the Book" .

The Israel Museum, Jerusalem. Archived from the original on 9 July 2007 . Retrieved 13 August 2007 . ^ "About Yad Vashem" . Yad Vashem. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "Museum Information" . Beth Hatefutsoth . Retrieved 13 August 2007 . ^ Ahituv, Netta (12 July 2017). "10 of Israel's best museums" . CNN . Retrieved 1 August 2024 . ^ Rast, Walter E. (1992). Through the Ages in Palestinian Archaeology: An Introductory Handbook . Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 50. ISBN 978-1-56338-055-6 . "Galilee man" (lowercase "m") in this source is a typo – ref. Solo Man , Peking Man and so forth. ^ "Israel — Hebrew- and English-Language Media Guide" (PDF) . Open Source Center. 16 September 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 May 2021 . Retrieved 15 July 2022 . ^ "Israeli Newspaper Brawl Moving to the Internet" .

The Forward . 25 February 2005 . Retrieved 24 July 2024 . ^ Bernard Reich; David H. Goldberg, eds. (2016). Historical Dictionary of Israel . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 271. ISBN 978-1-4422-7185-2 . ^ Russian TV channel Israel Plus sees loss, Haaretz, 2 December 2013 ^ Tucker, Nati (12 September 2019). "Israel's Only Private Arabic TV Channel Thrives After Help From Surprising Ally". Haaretz . ^ "Israel: Freedom in the World 2024 Country Report" . Freedom House . Retrieved 24 July 2024 . ^ "2024 World Press Freedom Index" . Reporters Without Borders. 2024 . Retrieved 30 May 2024 . ^ a b "Middle East – North Africa Journalism throttled by political pressure" . Reporters Without Borders. 2024 . Retrieved 30 May 2024 . ^ Sharon, Jeremy (7 May 2024). "Shin Bet report that led to closure of Al Jazeera is 'classified,' won't be released" . Times of Israel . ^ "Journalist jailings near record high in 2024 as crackdown on press freedom grows" . Committee to Protect Journalists . 16 January 2025 . Retrieved 27 May 2025 . ^ "2024 is deadliest year for journalists in CPJ history; almost 70% killed by Israel" . Committee to Protect Journalists . 12 February 2025 . Retrieved 27 May 2025 . ^ a b Yael Raviv, Falafel Nation, University of Nebraska Press, 2015 ^ Gur, Janna (2008). "Simple Pleasures" .

The Book of New Israeli Food: A Culinary Journey . Schocken Books. p. 127. ISBN 978-0805212242 . ^ Uzi Rebhun, Lilakh Lev Ari, American Israelis: Migration, Transnationalism, and Diasporic Identity, Brill, 2010 pp. 112–113. ^ Bernstein 2010 , pp. 227 , 233–234 ^ a b Bernstein 2010 , pp. 231–233 ^ Jeffrey Yoskowitz (8 August 2012). "Israel's Pork Problem" . Slate . Retrieved 28 December 2015 . ^ Rubin, Shira (19 June 2015). "Land of Pork and Honey" . Slate . Retrieved 31 May 2025 . ^ Torstrick 2004 , p. 141. ^ "Basketball Super League Profile" . Winner Basketball Super League . Retrieved 13 August 2007 . ^ "Israel Barred from Asian Games" . Jewish Telegraphic Agency. 26 July 1976 . Retrieved 11 April 2014 . ^ "Maccabi Electra Tel Aviv – Welcome to EUROLEAGUE BASKETBALL" . Archived from the original on 25 June 2014 . Retrieved 30 October 2014 . ^ "Israel" . International Olympic Committee . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ "Paris 2024 Olympics : Medals Table of Israel" . Le Monde.fr . Retrieved 28 April 2025 . ^ "Tel Aviv 1968" . International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 20 March 2012 . Retrieved 20 March 2012 . ^ Ellis, Judy (4 May 1998). "Choke! Gouge! Smash!" . Time . Retrieved 1 January 2017 . ^ "Pawn stars shine in new 'national sport' " . Haaretz . 4 October 2010. Archived from the original on 7 October 2010 . Retrieved 21 May 2012 . Sources The Making of Modern Zionism . Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-09479-0 . Barton, John ; Bowden, Julie (2004).

The Original Story: God, Israel and the World . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-8028-2900-9 . Bascomb, Neal (2009). Hunting Eichmann: How a Band of Survivors and a Young Spy Agency Chased Down the World's Most Notorious Nazi . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 978-0-618-85867-5 . Ben-Ami, Shlomo (2007). Scars of war, wounds of peace: the Israeli-Arab tragedy . Oxford New York Auckland Cape Town: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-532542-3 . Ben-Sasson, Hayim (1985). A History of the Jewish People . Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-39731-6 . Bernstein, Julia (2010). Food for Thought: Transnational Contested Identities and Food Practices of Russian-Speaking Jewish Migrants in Israel and Germany . Campus Verlag. ISBN 978-3-593-39252-3 . Bregman, Ahron (2002). A History of Israel . Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-333-67631-8 . Broughton, Simon; Ellingham, Mark; Trillo, Richard (1999). World Music: The Rough Guide . Rough Guides. ISBN 978-1-85828-635-8 . B'Tselem (12 January 2021). "Apartheid" . B'Tselem . Archived from the original on 26 January 2024 . Retrieved 27 January 2024 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: ref duplicates default ( link ) B'Tselem (July 2025). Our Genocide (PDF) (Report). Cole, Tim (2003). Holocaust City: The Making of a Jewish Ghetto . Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-92968-4 . Dieckhoff, Alain (2003).

The Invention of a Nation . Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-12766-0 . Dumper, Michael; Badran, Amneh (2024). "Introduction".

In Dumper, Michael; Badran, Amneh (eds.). Routledge Handbook on Palestine (1st ed.). Routledge. doi : 10.4324/9781003031994 . ISBN 978-1-003-03199-4 . Faust, Avraham (28 March 2015). "The Exodus Group".

In Levy, Thomas E.; Schneider, Thomas; Propp, William H. C. (eds.). Israel's Exodus in Transdisciplinary Perspective: Text, Archaeology, Culture, and Geoscience . Springer. ISBN 978-3-319-04768-3 . Finkelstein, Israel; Silberman, Neil Asher (6 March 2002).

The Bible Unearthed: Archaeology's New Vision of Ancient Israel and the Origin of Sacred Texts . Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-2338-6 . Finkelstein, Norman (9 January 2018). Gaza . Oakland, California: Univ of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-96838-7 . Fischbach, Michael (2008). Jewish Property Claims Against Arab Countries . Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-51781-2 . Fraser, T.G. (2004).

The Arab-Israeli Conflict . Palgrave Macmillan Limited. ISBN 978-1-4039-1338-8 . Retrieved 12 May 2013 . Gelvin, James L. (2005).

The Israel-Palestine Conflict: One Hundred Years of War . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-85289-0 . Gilbert, Martin (2005).

The Routledge Atlas Of The Arab–Israeli conflict (8th ed.). Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-35900-9 . Goldreich, Yair (2003).

The Climate of Israel: Observation, Research and Application . Springer. ISBN 978-0-306-47445-3 . Harkavy, Robert E.; Neuman, Stephanie G. (2001). Warfare and the Third World . Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-312-24012-7 . Henderson, Robert D'A. (2003). Brassey's International Intelligence Yearbook (2003 ed.). Brassey's Inc. ISBN 978-1-57488-550-7 . Herzl, Theodor (1946).

In Dumper, Michael; Badran, Amneh (eds.). Routledge Handbook on Palestine (1st ed.). Routledge. doi : 10.4324/9781003031994 . ISBN 978-1-003-03199-4 . Mazie, Steven (2006). Israel's Higher Law: Religion and Liberal Democracy in the Jewish State . Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0-7391-1485-8 . Morris, Benny (2008). 1948: A History of the First Arab–Israeli War . Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-14524-3 . Mowlana, Hamid; Gerbner, George; Schiller, Herbert I. (1992). Triumph of the File: The Media's War in the Persian Gulf — A Global Perspective . Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-1610-9 . OECD (2011). Study on the Geographic Coverage of Israeli Data (PDF) (Report). OECD. Redmount, Carol A. (7 June 2001). "The Literary and Historical Character of the Exodus Narrative".

The Oxford History of the Biblical World . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-988148-2 . Roberts, Adam (1990). "Prolonged Military Occupation: The Israeli-Occupied Territories Since 1967".

The American Journal of International Law . 84 (1): 44– 103. doi : 10.2307/2203016 . JSTOR 2203016 . S2CID 145514740 . Romano, Amy (2003). A Historical Atlas of Israel .

The Rosen Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-8239-3978-7 . Rosenzweig, Rafael (1997).

The Economic Consequences of Zionism . Brill Academic Publishers. ISBN 978-90-04-09147-4 . Scharfstein, Sol (1996). Understanding Jewish History . KTAV Publishing House. ISBN 978-0-88125-545-4 . Segev, Tom (2007). 1967: Israel, the War, and the Year that Transformed the Middle East . Henry Holt and Company. ISBN 978-0-8050-7057-6 . Shahin, Mariam (2005). Palestine: A Guide . Interlink Books. ISBN 978-1-56656-557-8 . Shakir, Omar (27 April 2021). A Threshold Crossed: Israeli Authorities and the Crimes of Apartheid and Persecution (Report). Human Rights Watch . Archived from the original on 17 January 2023 . Retrieved 9 January 2024 . Shimoni, Gideon (1995).

The Zionist ideology . University Press of New England / Brandeis University Press . ISBN 978-0-87451-703-3 . Shindler, Colin (2002).

The Land Beyond Promise: Israel, Likud and the Zionist Dream . I.B.Tauris Publishers. ISBN 978-1-86064-774-1 . Shlay, Anne B.; Rosen, Gillad (December 2010). "Making Place: The Shifting Green Line and the Development of "Greater" Metropolitan Jerusalem" . City & Community . 9 (4): 358– 389. doi : 10.1111/j.1540-6040.2010.01344.x . ISSN 1535-6841 . Smith, Derek (2006). Deterring America: Rogue States and the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86465-7 . Stein, Leslie (2003).

The Hope Fulfilled: The Rise of Modern Israel . Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-275-97141-0 . Stendel, Ori (1997).