The light has gone out of our lives Constituent Assembly of India Interim Government of India 1950 Cambridge election Liaquat–Nehru Pact Political integration of India International trips by Nehru Non-Aligned Movement First Nehru ministry Second Nehru ministry Third Nehru ministry Fourth Nehru ministry Accession of Jammu and Kashmir Annexation of Junagarh Annexation of Hyderabad Annexation of Goa Annexation of Dadra and Nagar Haveli India–Pakistan war of 1947–1948 Sino-Indian War Death and state funeral of Jawaharlal Nehru Philosophy Gandhian socialism Scientific temper Secular humanism Secularism Publications An Autobiography Before Freedom: Nehru's Letters to His Sister 1909–1947 The Discovery of India Glimpses of World History Letters from a Father to His Daughter National Herald Influences Theosophy G. M. Trevelyan Giuseppe Garibaldi Mahatma Gandhi Motilal Nehru Hindu agnosticism Social democracy Fabian Society Associates Abul Kalam Azad Subhas Chandra Bose V. K. Krishna Menon Panjabrao Deshmukh Vallabhbhai Patel Jagjivan Ram Morarji Desai Govind Ballabh Pant C. D. Deshmukh Legacy Gandhi cap Nehru jacket Nehru vest Nehru Brigade List of things named after Jawaharlal Nehru Jawaharlal Nehru Award Jawaharlal Nehru Fellowship Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya Jawaharlal Nehru University Family Raj Kaul Gangadhar Nehru Nandlal Nehru Motilal Nehru Swarup Rani Nehru Brijlal Nehru Rameshwari Nehru Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit Uma Nehru Krishna Hutheesing Kamala Nehru Indira Gandhi Braj Kumar Nehru Nayantara Sahgal Feroze Gandhi Rajiv Gandhi Sanjay Gandhi Arun Nehru Sonia Gandhi Maneka Gandhi Rahul Gandhi Priyanka Vadra Varun Gandhi Robert Vadra Influenced Nelson Mandela Atal Bihari Vajpayee Shashi Tharoor Gamal Abdel Nasser P. B. Gajendragadkar Jairam Ramesh Purushottam Agrawal Manmohan Singh Martin Luther King Jr. Pupul Jayakar Rajiv Gandhi Kwame Nkrumah Vikram Sarabhai Pervez Hoodbhoy Bipan Chandra Raja Rao Places related Anand Bhavan Teen Murti Bhavan Nehru Planetarium Jawahar Planetarium Shantivan Nehru Memorial Museum and Library Nehru: A Contemporary's Estimate Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium (Chennai) Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium (Delhi) Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium (Kochi) Gallery : Picture, Sound, Video The Discovery of India (1946), that have been read around the world.

The son of Motilal Nehru , a prominent lawyer and Indian nationalist , Jawaharlal Nehru was educated in England—at Harrow School and Trinity College, Cambridge , and trained in the law at the Inner Temple . He became a barrister , returned to India, enrolled at the Allahabad High Court and gradually became interested in national politics, which eventually became a full-time occupation. He joined the Indian National Congress , rose to become the leader of a progressive faction during the 1920s, and eventually of the Congress, receiving the support of Mahatma Gandhi , who was to designate Nehru as his political heir.

As Congress president in 1929, Nehru called for complete independence from the British Raj . Nehru promoted the idea of the secular nation-state in the 1937 provincial elections , allowing the Congress to sweep the elections and form governments in several provinces.

In September 1939, the Congress ministries resigned to protest Viceroy Lord Linlithgow 's decision to join the war without consulting them.

After the All India Congress Committee 's Quit India Resolution of 8 August 1942, senior Congress leaders were imprisoned, and for a time, the organisation was suppressed. Nehru, who had reluctantly heeded Gandhi's call for immediate independence, and had desired instead to support the Allied war effort during World War II , came out of a lengthy prison term to a much altered political landscape. Under Muhammad Ali Jinnah , the Muslim League had come to dominate Muslim politics in the interim.

In the 1946 provincial elections , Congress won the elections, but the League won all the seats reserved for Muslims, which the British interpreted as a clear mandate for Pakistan in some form. Nehru became the interim prime minister of India in September 1946 and the League joined his government with some hesitancy in October 1946. Upon India's independence on 15 August 1947, Nehru gave a critically acclaimed speech, " Tryst with Destiny "; he was sworn in as the Dominion of India 's prime minister and raised the Indian flag at the Red Fort in Delhi.

On 26 January 1950, when India became a republic within the Commonwealth of Nations , Nehru became the Republic of India 's first prime minister. He embarked on an ambitious economic, social, and political reform programme. Nehru promoted a pluralistic multi-party democracy.

In foreign affairs, he led the establishment of the Non-Aligned Movement , a group of nations that did not seek membership in the two main ideological blocs of the Cold War. Under Nehru's leadership, the Congress dominated national and state-level politics and won elections in 1951 , 1957 and 1962 . He died in office from a heart attack in 1964. His birthday is celebrated as Children's Day in India.

The younger, Krishna Hutheesing , became a noted writer, authoring several books on her brother. Childhood Jawaharlal Nehru as a child with his mother Swarup Rani and father Motilal Nehru , 1894.jpg Nehru described his childhood as "sheltered and uneventful". He grew up in an atmosphere of privilege, which included life in the mansion Anand Bhavan in Allahabad . He was educated at home by private governesses and tutors. One of these was an Irishman, Ferdinand T. Brooks, who was interested in theosophy .

The Irish Home Rule and Indian Home Rule leaguer Annie Besant initiated Jawaharlal into the Theosophical Society when he was thirteen. However, his interest in theosophy was not enduring, and he left the society shortly after Brooks departed as his tutor. Nehru was to write: "For nearly three years was with me and in many ways, he influenced me greatly". Nehru's theosophical interests led him to study the Buddhist and Hindu scriptures . According to B. R. Nanda , these scriptures were Nehru's "first introduction to the religious and cultural heritage of .... provided Nehru the initial impulse for long intellectual quest which culminated...in The Discovery of India ." Youth A young Nehru dressed in a cadet's uniform at Harrow School in England Nehru became an ardent nationalist during his youth.

The Second Boer War and the Russo-Japanese War intensified his feelings. Of the latter he wrote, " Japanese victories stirred up my enthusiasm. ... Nationalistic ideas filled my mind. ... I mused of Indian freedom and Asiatic freedom from the thraldom of Europe." Later, in 1905, when he had begun his institutional schooling at Harrow , a leading school in England where he was nicknamed "Joe", G. M. Trevelyan 's Garibaldi books, which he had received as prizes for academic merit, influenced him greatly. He viewed Garibaldi as a revolutionary hero. He wrote: "Visions of similar deeds in India came before, of gallant fight for freedom and in my mind, India and Italy got strangely mixed together." Graduation Nehru went to Trinity College, Cambridge , in October 1907 and graduated with an honours degree in natural science in 1910.

During this period, he studied politics, economics, history and literature with interest.

The writings of Bernard Shaw , H. G. Wells , John Maynard Keynes , Bertrand Russell , Lowes Dickinson and Meredith Townsend moulded much of his political and economic thinking.

After completing his degree in 1910, Nehru moved to London and studied law at the Inner Temple (one of the four Inns of Court to which English barristers must belong).

During this time, he continued to study Fabian Society scholars including Beatrice Webb . He was called to the Bar in 1912. Legal practice Jawaharlal Nehru, Barrister-at-Law After returning to India in August 1912, Nehru enrolled at the Allahabad High Court and tried to settle down as a barrister. His father was one of the wealthiest barristers in British India, with a monthly income exceeding Indian rupees 10,000 (£850).

Although Nehru was expected to inherit the family's lucrative practice, he had little interest in his profession, and relished neither the practice of law nor the company of lawyers. His involvement in nationalist politics was to gradually replace his legal practice.

In 1945–46, he was a member of the INA Defence Committee during the INA Trials , putting on a barrister's gown and appearing in court after over twenty-five years. Nationalist movement (1912–1939) Civil rights and home rule: 1912–1919 Nehru and Kamala Kaul at their wedding in Delhi, 1916 Nehru in 1919 with wife Kamala and daughter Indira Nehru's father, Motilal, was an important moderate leader of the Indian National Congress.

The moderates believed British rule was modernising, and sought reform and more participation in government in cooperation with British authorities. However, Nehru sympathised with the Congress radicals, who promoted Swaraj , Swadesh , and boycott.

After returning to India in 1912, Nehru attended the annual session of the Congress at Patna .

The Congress was then considered a party of moderates and elites dominated by Gopal Krishna Gokhale , and Nehru was disconcerted by what he saw as "very much an English-knowing upper-class affair". However, Nehru agreed to raise funds for the ongoing Indian civil rights movement led by Mahatma Gandhi in South Africa.

In 1916, Nehru married Kamala Kaul , who came from a Kashmiri Pandit family settled in Delhi. Their only daughter, Indira , was born in 1917. Kamala gave birth to a son in 1924, but the baby lived for only a few days.

The influence of moderates declined after Gokhale died in 1915. Several nationalist leaders banded together in 1916 under the leadership of Annie Besant and Bal Gangadhar Tilak to voice a demand for Swaraj or self-governance . Besant and Tilak formed separate Home Rule Leagues . Nehru joined both groups, but he worked primarily with Besant, with whom he had a close relationship since childhood. He became the secretary of Besant's Home Rule League.

In June 1917, the British government arrested Besant.

The Congress and other organisations threatened to launch protests if she was not freed.

The government was forced to release Besant in September, but the protestors successfully negotiated further concessions . Non-cooperation and afterwards: 1919–1929 Jawaharlal Nehru, circa 1925 Nehru met Gandhi for the first time in 1916 at the Lucknow session of the Congress, but he had been then dissuaded by his father from being drawn into Gandhi's satyagraha politics. 1919 marked the beginning of a strong wave of nationalist activity and subsequent government repression that included the Jallianwala Bagh killings . Motilal Nehru lost his belief in constitutional reform, and joined his son in accepting Gandhi's methods and paramount leadership of the Congress.

In December 1919, Nehru's father was elected president of the Indian National Congress in what is regarded as "the first Gandhi Congress".

During the non-cooperation movement launched by Gandhi in 1920, Nehru played an influential role in directing political activities in the United Provinces (now Uttar Pradesh ) as provincial Congress secretary. He was imprisoned on 6 December 1921 on charges of anti-governmental activities, marking the first of eight periods of detention between 1921 and 1945, lasting over nine years in all.

In 1923, Nehru was imprisoned in Nabha , a princely state , when he went there to see the struggle that was being waged by the Sikhs against the corrupt Mahants . He was released after his sentence was unconditionally suspended by the British administration under the criminal procedure code.

By 1923, Nehru had emerged as a national figure of some stature. He was elected general secretary of the Congress, president of the United Provinces Congress, and mayor of Allahabad all in the same year.

The non-cooperation movement was halted in 1922 as a result of the Chauri Chaura incident . Nehru's two-year term as general secretary ended after 1925, and earlier that year he resigned as mayor of Allahabad due to his disillusionment with municipal politics.

In 1926, Nehru left for Europe with his wife and daughter to seek treatment for his wife's tuberculosis diagnosis.

While in Europe, he was invited to attend the Congress of oppressed nationalities in Brussels, Belgium.

The meeting was called to coordinate and plan a common struggle against imperialism . Nehru represented India and was elected to the Executive Council of the League against Imperialism which was born at this meeting. He made a statement in favour of complete independence for India. Nehru's stay in Europe included a visit to the Soviet Union, which sparked his interest in Marxism and socialism. Appealed by its ideas but repelled by some of its tactics, he never completely agreed with Karl Marx 's ideas. However, from that time on, the benchmark of his economic view remained Marxist, adapted, where necessary, to Indian circumstances.

After returning to India in December 1927, Nehru was elected to another two-year term as Congress general secretary. Declaration of independence Nehru, President-elect of the Lahore session of the Indian National Congress in 1929, with the outgoing President, his father Motilal Nehru and Mahatma Gandhi in 1929 Nehru was one of the first leaders to demand that the Congress Party should resolve to make a complete and explicit break from all ties with the British Empire.

The Madras session of Congress in 1927, approved his resolution for independence despite Gandhi's criticism.

At that time, he formed the Independence for India League, a pressure group within the Congress.

In 1928, Gandhi agreed to Nehru's demands and proposed a resolution that called for the British to grant Dominion status to India within two years. If the British failed to meet the deadline, the Congress would call upon all Indians to fight for complete independence. Nehru was one of the leaders who objected to the time given to the British—he pressed Gandhi to demand immediate actions from the British. Gandhi brokered a further compromise by reducing the time given from two years to one.

The British rejected demands for Dominion status in 1929. Nehru assumed the presidency of the Congress party during the Lahore session on 29 December 1929 and introduced a successful resolution calling for complete independence . Nehru drafted the Indian Declaration of Independence, which stated: We believe that it is the inalienable right of the Indian people, as of any other people, to have freedom and to enjoy the fruits of their toil and have the necessities of life, so that they may have full opportunities for growth. We believe also that if any government deprives a people of these rights and oppresses them the people have a further right to alter it or abolish it.

The British government in India has not only deprived the Indian people of their freedom but has based itself on the exploitation of the masses, and has ruined India economically, politically, culturally, and spiritually. We believe, therefore, that India must sever the British connection and attain Purna Swaraj or complete independence.

At midnight on New Year's Eve 1929, Nehru hoisted the tricolour flag of India upon the banks of the Ravi in Lahore. A pledge of independence was read out, which included a readiness to withhold taxes.

The massive gathering of the public attending the ceremony was asked if they agreed with it, and the majority of people were witnessed raising their hands in approval. 172 Indian members of central and provincial legislatures resigned in support of the resolution and in accordance with Indian public sentiment.

The Congress asked the people of India to observe 26 January as Independence Day. Congress volunteers, nationalists, and the public hoisted the flag of India publicly across India. Plans for mass civil disobedience were also underway.

After the Lahore session of the Congress in 1929, Nehru gradually emerged as the paramount leader of the Indian independence movement. Gandhi stepped back into a more spiritual role.

Although Gandhi did not explicitly designate Nehru as his political heir until 1942, as early as the mid-1930s, the country saw Nehru as the natural successor to Gandhi.

In 1929, Nehru had already drafted the "Fundamental Rights and Economic Policy" resolution that set the government agenda for an independent India.

The resolution was ratified in 1931 at the Karachi session chaired by Vallabhbhai Patel . Salt March: 1930 Nehru and most of the Congress leaders were ambivalent initially to Gandhi's plan to begin civil disobedience with a satyagraha aimed at the British salt tax .

After the protest had gathered steam, they realised the power of salt as a symbol. Nehru remarked about the unprecedented popular response, "It seemed as though a spring had been suddenly released". He was arrested on 14 April 1930 while on a train from Allahabad to Raipur . Earlier, after addressing a huge meeting and leading a vast procession, he had ceremoniously manufactured some contraband salt. He was charged with breach of the salt law and sentenced to six months of imprisonment at Central Jail. He nominated Gandhi to succeed him as the Congress president during his absence in jail, but Gandhi declined, and Nehru nominated his father as his successor. With Nehru's arrest, the civil disobedience acquired a new tempo, and arrests, firing on crowds and lathi charges grew to be ordinary occurrences. Salt satyagraha success The salt satyagraha ("pressure for reform through passive resistance") succeeded in attracting world attention. Indian, British, and world opinion increasingly recognised the legitimacy of the claims by the Congress party for independence. Nehru considered the salt satyagraha the high-water mark of his association with Gandhi, and felt its lasting importance was in changing the attitudes of Indians: Of course these movements exercised tremendous pressure on the British Government and shook the government machinery. But the real importance, to my mind, lay in the effect they had on our own people, and especially the village masses. ... Non-cooperation dragged them out of the mire and gave them self-respect and self-reliance. ... They acted courageously and did not submit so easily to unjust oppression; their outlook widened and they began to think a little in terms of India as a whole. ... It was a remarkable transformation and the Congress, under Gandhi's leadership, must have the credit for it.

In prison 1930–1935 On 11 October 1930, Nehru's detention ended, but he was back in jail in less than ten days for resuming the presidency of the banned Congress.

On 26 January 1931, Nehru and other prisoners were released early by Lord Irwin , who was negotiating with Gandhi. His father died on 6 February 1931. Nehru was back in jail on 26 December 1931 after violating court orders not to leave Allahabad while leading a "no-rent" campaign to alleviate peasant distress.

On 30 August 1933, Nehru was released from prison, but the government soon moved to detain him again.

On 22 December 1933, the Home Secretary sent a memo to all local governments in India: The Government of India regard him as by far the most dangerous element at large in India, and their view is that the time has come, in accordance with their general policy of taking steps at an early stage to prevent attempts to work up mass agitation, to take action against him. He was arrested in Allahabad on 12 January 1934.

In August 1934, he was briefly released for eleven days to attend to his wife's ailing health.

In October, he was allowed to see her again, but he turned down an early release conditional on withdrawing from politics for the duration of his sentence. Congress president, provincial elections: 1935–1939 Nehru in Karachi after returning from Lausanne , Switzerland with the ashes of his wife Kamala Nehru in March 1936 Nehru with Indian Nobel Prize-winning poet Rabindranath Tagore in 1936 Nehru in a procession at Peshawar , North-West Frontier Province , 14 October 1937 Nehru on a visit to Egypt in June 1938 In September 1935, Nehru's wife, Kamala, became terminally ill while receiving medical treatment in Badenweiler , Germany. Nehru was released from prison early on compassionate grounds, and moved his wife to a sanatorium in Lausanne , Switzerland, where she died on 28 February 1936.

While in Europe, Nehru learned that he was elected as Congress president for the coming year. He returned to India in March 1936 and led the Congress response to the Government of India Act 1935 . He condemned the Act as a "new charter of bondage" and a "machine with strong brakes but no engine". He initially wanted to boycott the 1937 provincial elections , but agreed to lead the election campaign after receiving vague assurances about abstentionism from the party leaders who wished to contest. Nehru hoped to treat the election campaign as a mass outreach programme.

During the campaign, Nehru was elected to another term as Congress president.

The election manifesto, drafted largely by Nehru, attacked both the Act and the Communal Award that went with it. He campaigned against the Muslim League , and argued that Muslims could not be regarded as a separate nation.

The Congress won most general seats, and the Muslim League fared poorly with Muslim electorates.

After the elections, Nehru drafted a resolution against taking office, but there were many Congress leaders who wanted to assume power under the 1935 Act.

The Congress Working Committee (CWC) under Gandhi passed a compromise resolution that authorised office acceptance, but reiterated that the fundamental objective of the Congress was the destruction of the 1935 Act. Nehru was more popular than before with the public, but he found himself isolated at the CWC meetings due to the anti-socialist orientation of its membership. Gandhi had to personally intervene when a group of CWC members and Nehru threatened to resign and counter-resign their posts over disagreements. He became discontented with his role, especially after the death of his mother in January 1938.

In February 1938, he did not stand for re-election as president, and was succeeded by Subash Chandra Bose . He left for Europe in June, stopping on the way at Alexandria , Egypt.

While in Europe, Nehru became concerned with the possibility of another world war.

At that time, he emphasised that, in the event of war, India's place was alongside the democracies, though he insisted India could only fight in support of Great Britain and France as a free country.

After returning to India in December 1938, Nehru accepted Bose's offer to head the Planning Commission .

In February 1939, he became president of the All India States Peoples Conference (AISPC), which was leading popular agitations in princely states. Nehru was not directly involved in the events that split the Congress during the Bose presidency, and unsuccessfully attempted to mediate. Nationalist movement (1939–1947) Gandhi , Nehru, and Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan at the Congress Working Committee meeting in Wardha in September 1939 When World War II began, Viceroy Linlithgow unilaterally declared India a belligerent on the side of Britain, without consulting the elected Indian representatives. Nehru hurried back from a visit to China, announcing that, in a conflict between democracy and fascism , "our sympathies must inevitably be on the side of democracy, ... I should like India to play its full part and throw all her resources into the struggle for a new order".

When Nehru presented Lord Linlithgow with these demands, he chose to reject them. A deadlock was reached: "The same old game is played again," Nehru wrote bitterly to Gandhi, "the background is the same, the various epithets are the same and the actors are the same and the results must be the same".

On 23 October 1939, the Congress condemned the Viceroy's attitude and called upon the Congress ministries in the various provinces to resign in protest.

Before this crucial announcement, Nehru urged Jinnah and the Muslim League to join the protest, but Jinnah declined. Civil disobedience, Lahore Resolution, August Offer: 1940 Nehru with the Seva Dal volunteer corps in Allahabad, 1940 In March 1940, Muhammad Ali Jinnah passed what came to be known as the Pakistan Resolution , declaring that, "Muslims are a nation according to any definition of a nation, and they must have their homelands , their territory and their State." This state was to be known as Pakistan, meaning 'Land of the Pure'. Nehru angrily declared that "all the old problems ... pale into insignificance before the latest stand taken by the Muslim League leader in Lahore". Linlithgow made Nehru an offer on 8 October 1940, which stated that Dominion status for India was the objective of the British government. However, it referred neither to a date nor a method to accomplish this. Only Jinnah received something more precise: "The British would not contemplate transferring power to a Congress-dominated national government, the authority of which was denied by various elements in India's national life".

In October 1940, Gandhi and Nehru, abandoning their original stand of supporting Britain, decided to launch a limited civil disobedience campaign in which leading advocates of Indian independence were selected to participate one by one. Nehru was arrested and sentenced to four years imprisonment.

On 15 January 1941, Gandhi stated: Some say Jawaharlal and I were estranged. It will require much more than a difference of opinion to estrange us. We had differences from the time we became co-workers and yet I have said for some years and say so now that not Rajaji but Jawaharlal will be my successor.

After spending a little more than a year in jail, Nehru was released, along with other Congress prisoners, three days before the bombing of Pearl Harbor in Hawaii. Japan attacks India, Cripps' mission, Quit India: 1942 Gandhi and Nehru during the drafting of Quit India Resolution in Bombay, August 1942 When the Japanese carried their attack through Burma (now Myanmar ) to the borders of India in the spring of 1942, the British government, faced with this new military threat, decided to make some overtures to India, as Nehru had originally desired. Prime Minister Winston Churchill dispatched Sir Stafford Cripps , a member of the War Cabinet who was known to be politically close to Nehru and knew Jinnah, with proposals for a settlement of the constitutional problem.

As soon as he arrived, he discovered that India was more deeply divided than he had imagined. Nehru, eager for a compromise, was hopeful; Gandhi was not. Jinnah had continued opposing the Congress: "Pakistan is our only demand, and by God, we will have it," he declared in the Muslim League newspaper Dawn . Cripps' mission failed as Gandhi would accept nothing less than independence. Relations between Nehru and Gandhi cooled over the latter's refusal to co-operate with Cripps, but the two later reconciled.

In 1942, Gandhi called on the British to leave India; Nehru, though reluctant to embarrass the allied war effort, had no alternative but to join Gandhi.

Following the Quit India resolution passed by the Congress party in Bombay on 8 August 1942, the entire Congress working committee, including Gandhi and Nehru, was arrested and imprisoned. Most of the Congress working committee including Nehru, Abdul Kalam Azad, and Sardar Patel were incarcerated at the Ahmednagar Fort until 15 June 1945.

In prison 1943–1945 Nehru's room at Ahmednagar fort where he was incarcerated from 1942 to 1945, and where he wrote The Discovery of India During the period when all the Congress leaders were in jail, the Muslim League under Jinnah grew in power.

In April 1943, the League captured the governments of Bengal and, a month later, that of the North-West Frontier Province .

In none of these provinces had the League previously had a majority—only the arrest of Congress members made it possible. With all the Muslim-dominated provinces except Punjab under Jinnah's control, the concept of a separate Muslim State was turning into a reality. However, by 1944, Jinnah's power and prestige were waning. A general sympathy towards the jailed Congress leaders was developing among Muslims, and much of the blame for the disastrous Bengal famine of 1943 –44 during which two million died had been laid on the shoulders of the province's Muslim League government.

The numbers at Jinnah's meetings, once counted in thousands, soon numbered only a few hundred.

In despair, Jinnah left the political scene for a stay in Kashmir. His prestige was restored unwittingly by Gandhi, who had been released from prison on medical grounds in May 1944 and had met Jinnah in Bombay in September. There, he offered the Muslim leader a plebiscite in the Muslim areas after the war to see whether they wanted to separate from the rest of India. Essentially, it was an acceptance of the principle of Pakistan—but not in so many words. Jinnah demanded that the exact words be used. Gandhi refused and the talks broke down. Jinnah, however, had greatly strengthened his own position and that of the League.

The most influential member of the Congress had been seen to negotiate with him on equal terms. Cabinet mission, Interim government 1946–1947 Nehru and the Congress party members of his interim government after being sworn in by the Viceroy, Lord Wavell , 2 September 1946 Nehru and his colleagues were released prior to the arrival of the British 1946 Cabinet Mission to India to propose plans for the transfer of power.

The agreed plan in 1946 led to elections to the provincial assemblies.

In turn, the members of the assemblies elected members of the Constituent Assembly. Congress won the majority of seats in the assembly and headed the interim government , with Nehru as the prime minister.

The Muslim League joined the government later with Liaquat Ali Khan as the Finance member. Prime Minister of India (1947–1964) Teen Murti Bhavan , Nehru's official residence as prime minister, is now a museum. Nehru served as prime minister for 16 years, initially as the interim prime minister, then from 1947 as the prime minister of the Dominion of India and then from 1950 as the prime minister of the Republic of India. Republicanism Nehru showed his concern for the princely states of South Asia since 1920s.

During his Presidential Address at the Lahore session in 1929, Nehru had declared that, "The Indian States cannot live apart from the rest of India and their rulers must, unless they accept their inevitable limitations, go the way of others like them." In July 1946, Nehru pointedly observed that no princely state could prevail militarily against the army of independent India.

In January 1947, he said that independent India would not accept the divine right of kings .

In May 1947, he declared that any princely state which refused to join the Constituent Assembly would be treated as an enemy state. Vallabhbhai Patel and V. P. Menon were more conciliatory towards the princes, and as the men charged with integrating the states, were successful in the task.

During the drafting of the Indian constitution, many Indian leaders (except Nehru) were in favour of allowing each princely state or covenanting state to be independent as a federal state along the lines suggested originally by the Government of India Act 1935. But as the drafting of the constitution progressed, and the idea of forming a republic took concrete shape, it was decided that all the princely states/covenanting states would merge with the Indian republic.

In 1963, Nehru brought in legislation making it illegal to demand secession and introduced the Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution which makes it necessary for those running for office to take an oath that says "I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India". Independence, Dominion of India: 1947–1950 Lord Mountbatten swears in Nehru as the first Prime Minister of independent India on 15 August 1947 The period before independence in early 1947 was impaired by outbreaks of communal violence and political disorder, and the opposition of the Muslim League led by Muhammad Ali Jinnah, who were demanding a separate Muslim state of Pakistan. Independence Main article: Tryst with Destiny He took office as the prime minister of India on 15 August and delivered his inaugural address titled " Tryst with Destiny ". Long years ago we made a tryst with destiny, and now the time comes when we shall redeem our pledge, not wholly or in full measure, but very substantially.

At the stroke of the midnight hour, when the world sleeps, India will awake to life and freedom. A moment comes, which comes but rarely in history when we step out from the old to the new when an age ends, and when the soul of a nation, long suppressed, finds utterance. It is fitting that at this solemn moment we take the pledge of dedication to the service of India and her people and to the still larger cause of humanity. Assassination of Mahatma Gandhi: 1948 Main articles: Assassination of Mahatma Gandhi and Nehru's address on Gandhi Nehru visiting an Indian soldier recovering from injuries at the Brigade Headquarters Military Hospital in Srinagar , Kashmir On 30 January 1948, Gandhi was shot while he was walking in the garden of Birla House on his way to address a prayer meeting.

The assassin, Nathuram Godse , was a Hindu nationalist with links to the extremist Hindu Mahasabha party, who held Gandhi responsible for weakening India by insisting upon a payment to Pakistan. Nehru addressed the nation by radio: Friends and comrades, the light has gone out of our lives, and there is darkness everywhere, and I do not quite know what to tell you or how to say it. Our beloved leader, Bapu as we called him, the father of the nation, is no more. Perhaps I am wrong to say that; nevertheless, we will not see him again, as we have seen him for these many years, we will not run to him for advice or seek solace from him, and that is a terrible blow, not only for me but for millions and millions in this country. Yasmin Khan argued that Gandhi's death and funeral helped consolidate the authority of the new Indian state under Nehru and Patel.

The Congress tightly controlled the epic public displays of grief over a two-week period—the funeral, mortuary rituals and distribution of the martyr's ashes with millions participating in different events.

The British Indian Empire, which included present-day India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh , was divided into two types of territories: the provinces of British India, which were governed directly by British officials responsible to the Viceroy of India; and princely states, under the rule of local hereditary rulers who recognised British suzerainty in return for local autonomy, in most cases as established by a treaty. Between 1947 and about 1950, the territories of the princely states were politically integrated into the Indian Union under Nehru and Sardar Patel. Most were merged into existing provinces; others were organised into new provinces, such as Rajputana , Himachal Pradesh , Madhya Bharat , and Vindhya Pradesh , made up of multiple princely states; a few, including Mysore, Hyderabad, Bhopal and Bilaspur, became separate provinces.

The Government of India Act 1935 remained the constitutional law of India the pending adoption of a new Constitution.

In December 1946, Nehru moved the Objectives Resolution. This resolution, upon Nehru's suggestion, ultimately turned into the Preamble to the Constitution of India .

The preamble is considered to be the spirit of the Constitution.

The new Constitution of India , which came into force on 26 January 1950 (Republic Day), made India a sovereign democratic republic.

The new republic was declared to be a "Union of States". Election of 1952 Nehru as the main campaigner of the Indian National Congress, 1951–52 elections After the adoption of the constitution on 26 November 1949, the Constituent Assembly continued to act as the interim parliament until new elections. Nehru's interim cabinet consisted of 15 members from diverse communities and parties.

The first elections to Indian legislative bodies (National parliament and State assemblies) under the new constitution of India were held in 1951-52 .

The Congress party under Nehru's leadership won a large majority at both state and national levels. Tenure: 1952–1957 In December 1953, Nehru appointed the States Reorganisation Commission to prepare for the creation of states on linguistic lines. Headed by Justice Fazal Ali , the commission itself was also known as the Fazal Ali Commission. Govind Ballabh Pant , who served as Nehru's home minister from December 1954, oversaw the commission's efforts.

The commission created a report in 1955 recommending the reorganisation of India's states. Under the Seventh Amendment , the existing distinction between Part A, Part B, Part C, and Part D states was abolished.

The distinction between Part A and Part B states was removed, becoming known simply as states . A new type of entity, the union territory , replaced the classification as a Part C or Part D state. Nehru stressed commonality among Indians and promoted pan-Indianism, refusing to reorganise states on either religious or ethnic lines. Subsequent elections: 1957, 1962 In the 1957 elections , under Nehru's leadership, the Indian National Congress easily won a second term in power, taking 371 of the 494 seats. They gained an extra seven seats (the size of the Lok Sabha had been increased by five) and their vote share increased from 45.0% to 47.8%.

The INC won nearly five times more votes than the Communist Party , the second-largest party.

In 1962 , Nehru led the Congress to victory with a diminished majority.

The war ended with China announcing a unilateral ceasefire and with its forces withdrawing to 20 kilometres behind the line of actual control of 1959.

The war exposed the unpreparedness of India's military, which could send only 14,000 troops to the war zone in opposition to the much larger Chinese Army , and Nehru was widely criticised for his government's insufficient attention to defence.

In response, defence minister V. K. Krishna Menon resigned and Nehru sought US military aid . Nehru's improved relations with the US under John F. Kennedy proved useful during the war, as in 1962, the president of Pakistan (then closely aligned with the Americans) Ayub Khan was made to guarantee his neutrality regarding India, threatened by " communist aggression from Red China". India's relationship with the Soviet Union, criticised by right-wing groups supporting free-market policies, was also seemingly validated. Nehru would continue to maintain his commitment to the non-aligned movement, despite calls from some to permanently align with one ally.

The unpreparedness of the army was blamed on Defence Minister Menon, who "resigned" from his government post to allow for someone who might modernise India's military further. India's policy of weaponisation using indigenous sources and self-sufficiency began in earnest under Nehru, completed by his daughter Indira Gandhi, who later led India to a crushing military victory over rival Pakistan in 1971. Toward the end of the war, India had increased her support for Tibetan refugees and revolutionaries, some of them having settled in India, as they were fighting the same common enemy in the region. Nehru ordered the raising of an elite Indian-trained "Tibetan Armed Force" composed of Tibetan refugees, which served with distinction in future wars against Pakistan in 1965 and 1971. Popularity Nehru with Albert Einstein in Princeton, New Jersey, 1949 Nehru with Indonesian president Sukarno in Jakarta in 1950 Nehru playing with a tiger cub at his home in 1955 To date, Nehru is considered the most popular prime minister, winning three consecutive elections with around 45% of the vote. A Pathé News archive video reporting Nehru's death remarks "Neither on the political stage nor in moral stature was his leadership ever challenged".

In his book Verdicts on Nehru , Ramachandra Guha cited a contemporary account that described what Nehru's 1951–52 Indian general election campaign looked like: Almost at every place, city, town, village or wayside halt, people had waited overnight to welcome the nation's leader. Schools and shops closed; milkmaids and cowherds had taken a holiday; the kisan and his helpmate took a temporary respite from their dawn-to-dusk programme of hard work in field and home.

In Nehru's name, stocks of soda and lemonade sold out; even water became scarce ... Special trains were run from out-of-the-way places to carry people to Nehru's meetings, enthusiasts travelling not only on footboards but also on top of carriages. Scores of people fainted in milling crowds.

In the 1950s, Nehru was admired by world leaders such as British prime minister Winston Churchill, and US President Dwight D. Eisenhower . A letter from Eisenhower to Nehru, dated 27 November 1958, read: Universally you are recognised as one of the most powerful influences for peace and conciliation in the world. I believe that because you are a world leader for peace in your individual capacity, as well as a representative of the largest neutral nation....

In 1955, Churchill called Nehru, "the light of Asia", and a greater light than Gautama Buddha . Nehru has repeatedly been described as a charismatic leader with a rare charm. Vision and governing policies Nehru with schoolchildren at the Durgapur Steel Plant . Durgapur, Rourkela and Bhilai were three integrated steel plants set up under India's Second Five-Year Plan in the late 1950s. According to Bhikhu Parekh , Nehru can be regarded as the founder of the modern Indian state. Parekh attributes this to the national philosophy Nehru formulated for India. For him, modernisation was the national philosophy, with seven goals: national unity, parliamentary democracy, industrialisation, socialism, development of the scientific temper, and non-alignment.

In Parekh's opinion, the philosophy and the policies that resulted from this benefited a large section of society such as public sector workers, industrial houses, and middle and upper peasantry. However, it failed to benefit the urban and rural poor, the unemployed and the Hindu fundamentalists . Nehru is credited with having prevented civil wars in India. Nehru convincingly succeeded in secularism and religious harmony , increasing the representation of minorities in government. Economic policies Nehru meeting with Chancellor Konrad Adenauer and Deutsche Bank chairman Hermann Josef Abs during a state visit to West Germany in June 1956. Nehru during the construction of the Bhakra Dam in the Punjab, 1953 Nehru at an antibiotics manufacturing facility, Poona , 1956 Nehru implemented policies based on import substitution industrialisation and advocated a mixed economy where the government-controlled public sector would co-exist with the private sector . He believed the establishment of basic and heavy industry was fundamental to the development and modernisation of the Indian economy.

The government, therefore, directed investment primarily into key public sector industries—steel, iron, coal, and power—promoting their development with subsidies and protectionist policies. Nehru's vision of an egalitarian society was "a co-operative ideal, a one world ideal, based on social justice and economic equality".

In 1928, Nehru had affirmed that "Our economic programme must aim at the removal of all economic inequalities".

Later in 1955, he declared that "I also want a classless society in India and the world." He identified his concept of economic freedom with the country's economic development and material advancement.

The policy of non-alignment during the Cold War meant that Nehru received financial and technical support from both power blocs in building India's industrial base from scratch. Steel mill complexes were built at Bokaro and Rourkela with assistance from the Soviet Union and West Germany . There was substantial industrial development.

The industry grew 7.0% annually between 1950 and 1965—almost trebling industrial output and making India the world's seventh-largest industrial country . Nehru's critics, however, contended that India's import substitution industrialisation, which continued long after the Nehru era, weakened the international competitiveness of its manufacturing industries. India's share of world trade fell from 1.4% in 1951–1960 to 0.5% between 1981 and 1990. However, India's export performance is argued to have shown actual sustained improvement over the period.

The volume of exports grew at an annual rate of 2.9% in 1951–1960 to 7.6% in 1971–1980. GDP and GNP grew 3.9 and 4.0% annually between 1950 and 1951 and 1964–1965. It was a radical break from the British colonial period, but the growth rates were considered anaemic at best compared to other industrial powers in Europe and East Asia. India lagged behind the miracle economies (Japan, West Germany, France, and Italy). However, this mixed development strategy allowed native industrialisation to gain ground.

While India's economy grew faster than both the United Kingdom and the United States, low initial income and rapid population increase meant that growth was inadequate for any sort of catch-up with rich income nations. India saw significant improvements in health, literacy and life expectancy since its independence. Agriculture policies Under Nehru's leadership, the government attempted to develop India quickly by embarking on agrarian reform and rapid industrialisation. A successful land reform was introduced that abolished giant landholdings , but efforts to redistribute land by placing limits on landownership failed. Attempts to introduce large-scale cooperative farming were frustrated by landowning rural elites, who formed the core of the powerful right-wing of the Congress and had considerable political support in opposing Nehru's efforts. Agricultural production expanded until the early 1960s, as additional land was brought under cultivation and some irrigation projects began to have an effect.

The establishment of agricultural universities, modelled after land-grant colleges in the United States, contributed to the development of the economy. These universities worked with high-yielding varieties of wheat and rice, initially developed in Mexico and the Philippines, that in the 1960s began the Green Revolution , an effort to diversify and increase crop production.

At the same time, a series of failed monsoons would cause serious food shortages, despite the steady progress and an increase in agricultural production. Social policies Education Nehru was a passionate advocate of education for India's children and youth, believing it essential for India's future progress. His government oversaw the establishment of many institutions of higher learning, including the All India Institute of Medical Sciences , the Indian Institutes of Technology , the Indian Institutes of Management and the National Institutes of Technology . Nehru also outlined a commitment in his five-year plans to guarantee free and compulsory primary education to all of India's children. For this purpose, Nehru oversaw the creation of mass village enrolment programs and the construction of thousands of schools. Nehru also launched initiatives such as the provision of free milk and meals to children to fight malnutrition . Adult education centres and vocational and technical schools were also organised for adults, especially in the rural areas. Hindu code bills and marriage laws Under Nehru, the Indian Parliament enacted many changes to Hindu law through the Hindu code bills to criminalise caste discrimination and increase the legal rights and social freedoms of women.

The Nehru administration saw such codification as necessary to unify the Hindu community, which ideally would be a first step towards unifying the nation. They succeeded in passing four Hindu code bills in 1955–56: the Hindu Marriage Act , Hindu Succession Act , Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act , and Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act . Those who practise Sikhism , Jainism , and Buddhism are categorised as Hindus under the jurisdiction of the Code Bill. Nehru specifically wrote Article 44 of the Indian constitution under the Directive Principles of State Policy which states: "The State shall endeavor to secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India." The article has formed the basis of secularism in India. However, Nehru has been criticised for the inconsistent application of the law. Most notably, he allowed Muslims to keep their personal law in matters relating to marriage and inheritance.

In the small state of Goa , a civil code based on the old Portuguese Family Laws was allowed to continue, and Nehru prohibited Muslim personal law. This resulted from the annexation of Goa in 1961 by India, when Nehru promised the people that their laws would be left intact. This has led to accusations of selective secularism.

While Nehru exempted Muslim law from legislation and they remained unreformed, he passed the Special Marriage Act in 1954.

The idea behind this act was to give everyone in India the ability to marry outside the personal law under a civil marriage .

In many respects, the act was almost identical to the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 , demonstrating how secularised the law regarding Hindus had become.

The Special Marriage Act allowed Muslims to marry under it and keep the protections, generally beneficial to Muslim women, that could not be found in the personal law. Under the act, polygamy was illegal, and inheritance and succession would be governed by the Indian Succession Act, rather than the respective Muslim personal law. Divorce would be governed by secular law, and maintenance of a divorced wife would be along the lines set down in civil law. Language policy The Constituent assembly debated the question of national language between 1946 and 1949. Within the assembly there were two blocs, pro-Hindi and anti-Hindi.

The pro-Hindi bloc was further divided between supporters of Hindustani led by Nehru, and supporters of Modern Standard Hindi based on Sanskrit .

The anti-Hindi bloc was generally in favour of promoting English to an official status.

After an exhaustive and divisive debate, Hindi was adopted as the official rather than national language of India in 1950, with English continuing as an associate official language for 15 years, after which Hindi would become the sole official language.

The Hindi-Hindustani debate was resolved through a compromise that the official language would be called Hindi, with a directive clause that while Sanskrit would be the primary source of vocabulary, the traditional Hindustani vocabulary would also be supported. Claims of other Indian languages were upheld through the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India . Efforts by the Indian government to make Hindi the sole official language after 1965 were unacceptable to many non-Hindi Indian states, which wanted the continued use of English.

The Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK), a descendant of Dravidar Kazhagam , led the opposition to Hindi. To allay their fears, Nehru enacted the Official Languages Act in 1963 to ensure the continuing use of English beyond 1965.

The text of the Act did not satisfy the DMK and increased their scepticism that future administrations might not honour his assurances.

The Commonwealth Queen Elizabeth II with Nehru and other Commonwealth leaders, taken at the 1960 Commonwealth Conference , Windsor Castle After independence, Nehru wanted to maintain good relations with Britain and other British Commonwealth countries.

As prime minister of the Dominion of India , he acquiesced only after Krishna Menon's redrafting of the 1949 London Declaration , under which India agreed to remain within the Commonwealth of Nations after becoming a republic in January 1950, and to recognise the British monarch as a "symbol of the free association of its independent member nations and as such the Head of the Commonwealth".

The other nations of the Commonwealth recognised India's continuing membership of the association. Non-aligned movement Nehru with Gamal Abdel Nasser and Josip Broz Tito in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 1961 On the international scene, Nehru was an opponent of military action and military alliances. He was a strong supporter of the United Nations, except when it tried to resolve the Kashmir question. He pioneered the policy of non-alignment and co-founded the Non-Aligned Movement of nations professing neutrality between the rival blocs of nations led by the US and the USSR.

The term "non-alignment" was coined earlier by V. K. Krishna Menon at the United Nations in 1953 and 1954. India recognised the People's Republic of China soon after its founding (while most of the Western bloc continued relations with Taiwan ). Nehru argued for its inclusion in the United Nations and refused to brand the Chinese as the aggressors in the West's conflict with Korea. He sought to establish warm and friendly relations with China in 1950 and hoped to act as an intermediary to bridge the gulf and tensions between the communist states and the Western bloc. Nehru was a key organiser of the Bandung Conference of April 1955, which brought 29 newly independent nations together from Asia and Africa, and was designed to galvanise the nonalignment movement under Nehru's leadership. He envisioned it as his key leadership opportunity on the world stage, where he would bring together emerging nations. He was one of the key participants of the 1st Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement in 1961 in Belgrade , FPR Yugoslavia . Defence and nuclear policy While averse to war, Nehru led the campaigns against Pakistan in Kashmir. He used military force to annex Hyderabad in 1948 and Goa in 1961.

While laying the foundation stone of the National Defence Academy in 1949, he stated: We, who for generations had talked about and attempted in everything a peaceful way and practised non-violence, should now be, in a sense, glorifying our army, navy and air force. It means a lot. Though it is odd, yet it simply reflects the oddness of life. Though life is logical, we have to face all contingencies, and unless we are prepared to face them, we will go under. There was no greater prince of peace and apostle of non-violence than Mahatma Gandhi...but yet, he said it was better to take the sword than to surrender, fail or run away. We cannot live carefree assuming that we are safe. Human nature is such. We cannot take the risks and risk our hard-won freedom. We have to be prepared with all modern defence methods and a well-equipped army, navy, and air force." Many hailed Nehru for working to defuse global tensions and the threat of nuclear weapons after the Korean War (1950–1953). He commissioned the first study of the effects of nuclear explosions on human health and campaigned ceaselessly for the abolition of what he called "these frightful engines of destruction". He also had pragmatic reasons for promoting de-nuclearisation, fearing a nuclear arms race would lead to over-militarisation that would be unaffordable for developing countries such as his own. Defending Kashmir Further information: Indo-Pakistani War of 1947–1948 and UN mediation of the Kashmir dispute Nehru inspecting the troops on a visit to the Srinagar Brigade Headquarters Military Hospital, April 1948 At Lord Mountbatten's urging, in 1948, Nehru had promised to hold a plebiscite in Kashmir under the auspices of the UN. Kashmir was a disputed territory between India and Pakistan, the two went to war over it in 1947. However, as Pakistan failed to pull back troops in accordance with the UN resolution, and as Nehru grew increasingly wary of the UN, he declined to hold a plebiscite in 1953. His policies on Kashmir and the integration of the state into India were frequently defended before the United Nations by his aide, V. K. Krishna Menon, who earned a reputation in India for his passionate speeches.

In 1953, Nehru orchestrated the ouster and arrest of Sheikh Abdullah , the prime minister of Kashmir, whom he had previously supported but was now suspected of harbouring separatist ambitions; Bakshi Ghulam Mohammad replaced him. Menon was instructed to deliver an unprecedented eight-hour speech defending India's stand on Kashmir in 1957; to date, the speech is the longest ever delivered in the United Nations Security Council , covering five hours of the 762nd meeting on 23 January, and two hours and forty-eight minutes on the 24th, reportedly concluding with Menon's collapse on the Security Council floor.

During the filibuster , Nehru moved swiftly and successfully to consolidate Indian power in Kashmir (then under great unrest). Menon's passionate defence of Indian sovereignty in Kashmir enlarged his base of support in India and led to the Indian press temporarily dubbing him the "Hero of Kashmir". Nehru was then at the peak of his popularity in India; the only (minor) criticism came from the far right. China Nehru and Mao Zedong in Beijing, China, October 1954 In 1954, Nehru signed with China the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence , known in India as the Panchsheel (from the Sanskrit words, panch : five, sheel : virtues), a set of principles to govern relations between the two states. Their first formal codification in treaty form was in an agreement between China and India in 1954, which recognised Chinese sovereignty over Tibet . They were enunciated in the preamble to the "Agreement (with the exchange of notes) on Trade and Intercourse between Tibet Region of China and India", which was signed at Peking on 29 April 1954. Negotiations took place in Delhi from December 1953 to April 1954 between the Delegation of the People's Republic of China (PRC) Government and the Delegation of the Indian Government on the relations between the two countries regarding the disputed territories of Aksai Chin and South Tibet.

By 1957, Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai had also persuaded Nehru to accept the Chinese position on Tibet, thus depriving Tibet of a possible ally, and of the possibility of receiving military aid from India.

The treaty was disregarded in the 1960s, but in the 1970s, the Five Principles again came to be seen as important in China–India relations , and more generally as norms of relations between states. They became widely recognised and accepted throughout the region during the premiership of Indira Gandhi and the three-year rule of the Janata Party (1977–1980).

Although the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence were the basis of the 1954 Sino-Indian border treaty, in later years, Nehru's foreign policy suffered from increasing Chinese assertiveness over border disputes and his decision to grant asylum to the 14th Dalai Lama . United States Nehru receiving US President Dwight D. Eisenhower at Parliament House, 1959 Nehru with John F. Kennedy at the White House, 7 November 1961 In 1956, Nehru criticised the joint invasion of the Suez Canal by the British, French, and Israelis. His role, both as Indian prime minister and a leader of the Non-Aligned Movement, was significant; he tried to be even-handed between the two sides while vigorously denouncing Anthony Eden and co-sponsors of the invasion. Nehru had a powerful ally in the US President Dwight Eisenhower who, if relatively silent publicly, went to the extent of using America's clout at the International Monetary Fund to make Britain and France back down.

The first attempt was made during partition in 1947 while he was visiting the North-West Frontier Province (now in Pakistan) in a car.

The second attempt came from Baburao Laxman Kochale, a knife-wielding rickshaw -puller, near Nagpur in 1955.

The third attempt was a plot by Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) in 1955.

The fourth attempt took place in Bombay in 1956, and the fifth was a failed bombing attempt on train tracks in Maharashtra in 1961. Despite threats to his life, Nehru despised having too much security around him and did not like to disrupt traffic because of his movements. Death Main article: Death and state funeral of Jawaharlal Nehru If any people choose to think of me then I should like them to say, "This was the man who with all his mind and heart loved India and the Indian people. And they in turn were indulgent to him and gave him of their love most abundantly and extravagantly." – Jawaharlal Nehru, 1954. Nehru's health began declining steadily in 1962.

In the spring of 1962, he was affected with a viral infection over which he spent most of April in bed.

In the next year, through 1963, he spent months recuperating in Kashmir. Some writers attribute this dramatic decline to his surprise and chagrin over the Sino-Indian War, which he perceived as a betrayal of trust. Upon his return from Dehradun on 26 May 1964, he was feeling quite comfortable and went to bed at about 23:30 as usual. He had a restful night until about 06:30. Soon after he returned from the bathroom, Nehru complained of pain in the back. He spoke to the doctors who attended to him for a brief while, and almost immediately he collapsed. He remained unconscious until he died at 13:44. His death was announced in the Lok Sabha at 14:00 local time on 27 May 1964; the cause of death was believed to be a heart attack. Draped in the Indian national Tri-colour flag, the body of Jawaharlal Nehru was placed for public viewing. " Raghupati Raghava Rajaram " was chanted as the body was placed on the platform.

On 28 May, Nehru was cremated in accordance with Hindu rites at the Shantivan on the banks of the Yamuna , witnessed by 1.5 million mourners who had flocked into the streets of Delhi and the cremation grounds. US President Lyndon B. Johnson remarked on his death:- History has already recorded his monumental contribution to the molding of a strong and independent India. And yet, it is not just as a leader of India that he has served humanity. Perhaps more than any other world leader he has given expression to man's yearning for peace. This is the issue of our age.

In his fearless pursuit of a world free from war he has served all humanity. Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and the future Soviet Leader Leonid Brezhnev remarked:- The name of Jawaharal Nehru enjoyed the tremendous respect and love of the Soviet people, who knew him as a tested and wise leader of the Indian people's struggle for national independence and the rebirth of their country, and as an active fighter against colonialism. Jawaharal Nehru is known as an outstanding statesman of modern times who devoted his entire life to the struggle for strengthening friendship and cooperation among peoples and for the progress of humanity. He was a passionate fighter for peace in the world and an ardent champion of principles of peaceful coexistence of states. He was the inspirer of the nonalignment policy promoted by the Indian Government. This reasonable policy won India respect and, due to it, India is now occupying a worthy place in the international arena. Countries such as Egypt, Cambodia, Nepal, Kuwait, Bhutan , Kingdom of Sikkim , Nepal, Pakistan, Syria, Iraq, Uganda, Malaysia, Yugoslavia, Ceylon (now Sri Lanka), India and others declared national mourning over the death of Nehru. Nehru's death left India with no clear political heir to his leadership. Lal Bahadur Shastri later succeeded Nehru as the prime minister.

The death was announced to the Indian parliament in words similar to Nehru's own at the time of Gandhi's assassination: " The light is out ." India's future prime minister and then a Rajya Sabha MP from Uttar Pradesh Atal Bihari Vajpayee famously delivered Nehru an acclaimed eulogy.

After Nehru's death, Vajpayee made a speech in the Rajya Sabha, hailing Nehru as Bharat Mata 's "favourite prince" and likened him to the Hindu god Rama . Positions held Year Description 1946–1950 Elected to Constituent Assembly of India Vice President of Executive Council (2 Sep 1946 – 15 April 1952) Prime Minister of India (15 Aug 1947 – 15 April 1952) Union Minister for External Affairs (15 Aug 1947 – 15 April 1952) 1952–1957 Elected to 1st Lok Sabha Prime Minister of India (15 Apr 1952 – 17 April 1957) Union Minister for External Affairs (15 Apr 1952 – 17 April 1957) 1957–1962 Elected to 2nd Lok Sabha Prime Minister of India (17 Apr 1957 – 2 April 1962) Union Minister for External Affairs (17 Apr 1957 – 2 April 1962) 1962–1964 Elected to 3rd Lok Sabha Prime Minister of India (2 Apr 1962 – 27 May 1964) Union Minister for External Affairs (2 Apr 1962 – 27 May 1964) Key cabinet members and associates Nehru served as the prime minister for nearly eighteen years, first as interim prime minister during 1946–1947 during the last year of the British Raj and then as prime minister of independent India from 15 August 1947 to 27 May 1964. V. K. Krishna Menon (1896–1974) was a close associate of Nehru, and was described as the second most powerful man in India during Nehru's tenure as prime minister.

From the inception of Nehru's prime ministry, Menon carefully selected Lord Mountbatten as the only suitable candidate and presented him as such to Labour through Sir Stafford Cripps and Clement Attlee , who promptly appointed him the last Viceroy.

The early governance and partition ultimately reduced to Mountbatten, Nehru, Menon, V.P. Menon, Sardar Patel, and an adamant Jinnah. Under Nehru, he served as India's high commissioner to the UK, ambassador to Ireland, ambassador-at-large and plenipotentiary, UN ambassador, minister without portfolio, de facto Foreign minister, and Union minister of defence. He was significantly involved in the annexation of Goa . He resigned after the debacle of the 1962 China War but remain a close friend of Nehru. B. R. Ambedkar , the law minister in the interim cabinet, also chaired the Constitution Drafting Committee. Vallabhbhai Patel served as home minister in the interim government. He was instrumental in getting the Congress party working committee to vote for partition. He is also credited with integrating many princely states of India. Patel was a long-time comrade to Nehru but died in 1950, leaving Nehru as the unchallenged leader of India until his own death in 1964. Syama Prasad Mukherjee served as the first Minister for Industry and Supply in the first ministry of Nehru.

After resigning from the cabinet, he founded the Bharatiya Jana Sangh in 1951, the forerunner of the Bharatiya Janata Party . Maulana Azad was the First Minister of Education in the Indian government Minister of Human Resource Development (until 25 September 1958, Ministry of Education). His contribution to establishing the education foundation in India is recognised by celebrating his birthday as National Education Day across India. Jagjivan Ram became the youngest minister in Nehru's Interim Government of India, a labour minister and also a member of the Constituent Assembly of India, where, as a member of the Dalit caste, he ensured that social justice was enshrined in the Constitution . He went on to serve as a minister with various portfolios during Nehru's tenure and in Shastri and Indira Gandhi governments. Morarji Desai was a nationalist with anti-corruption leanings but was socially conservative, pro-business, and in favour of free enterprise reforms, as opposed to Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru's socialistic policies.

After serving as chief minister of Bombay State , he joined Nehru's cabinet in 1956 as the finance minister of India. He held that position until 1963 when he along with other senior ministers in the Nehru cabinet resigned under the Kamaraj plan .The plan, as proposed by Madras Chief Minister K. Kamaraj, was to revert government ministers to party positions after a certain tenure and vice versa. With Nehru's age and health failing in the early 1960s, Desai was considered a possible contender for the position of Prime Minister.

Later Desai alleged that Nehru used the Kamaraj Plan to remove all possible contenders from the path of his daughter, Indira Gandhi. Desai succeeded Indira Gandhi as the prime minister in 1977 when he was selected by the victorious Janata alliance as their parliamentary leader. Govind Ballabh Pant (1887–1961) was a key figure in the Indian independence movement and later a pivotal figure in the politics of Uttar Pradesh (UP) and in the Indian Government. Pant served in Nehru's cabinet as Union home minister from 1955 until his death in 1961.

As home minister, his chief achievement was the re-organisation of states along linguistic lines . He was also responsible for the establishment of Hindi as the official language of the central government and a few states.

During his tenure as the home minister, Pant was awarded the Bharat Ratna . C. D. Deshmukh was one of five members of the Planning Commission when it was constituted in 1950 by a cabinet resolution. Deshmukh succeeded John Mathai as the Union Finance Minister in 1950 after Mathai resigned in protest over the transfer of certain powers to the Planning Commission.

As finance minister, Deshmukh remained a member of the Planning Commission. Deshmukh's tenure—during which he delivered six budgets and an interim budget —is noted for the effective management of the Indian economy and its steady growth which saw it recover from the impacts of the events of the 1940s.

During Deshmukh's tenure, the State Bank of India was formed in 1955 through the nationalisation and amalgamation of the Imperial Bank with several smaller banks. He accomplished the nationalisation of insurance companies and the formation of the Life Insurance Corporation of India through the Life Insurance Corporation of India Act, 1956. Deshmukh resigned over the Government's proposal to move a bill in Parliament bifurcating Bombay State into Gujarat and Maharashtra while designating the city of Bombay a Union territory.

In the years following independence, Nehru frequently turned to his daughter Indira Gandhi for managing his personal affairs. Indira moved into Nehru's official residence to attend to him and became his constant companion in his travels across India and the world. She would virtually become Nehru's chief of staff. Towards the end of the 1950s, Indira Gandhi served as the president of the Congress.

In that capacity, she was instrumental in getting the Communist-led Kerala State Government dismissed in 1959. Indira was elected as Congress party president in 1959, which aroused criticism for alleged nepotism , although Nehru had actually disapproved of her election, partly because he considered that it smacked of "dynasticism"; he said, indeed it was "wholly undemocratic and an undesirable thing", and refused her a position in his cabinet. Indira herself was at loggerheads with her father over policy; most notably, she used his oft-stated personal deference to the Congress Working Committee to push through the dismissal of the Communist Party of India government in the state of Kerala , over his own objections. Nehru began to be embarrassed by her ruthlessness and disregard for parliamentary tradition and was "hurt" by what he saw as an assertiveness with no purpose other than to stake out an identity independent of her father. Religious and personal beliefs The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 Proclamation of the Republic 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup attempt Spanish Civil War 1944 Icelandic constitutional referendum 1946 Italian institutional referendum Egyptian revolution of 1952 14 July Revolution 1960 South African republic referendum North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan revolution 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi 1974 Greek republic referendum Iranian Revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état 1993 Brazilian constitutional referendum Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Catalonia Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Consul Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of monarchy referendums List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Described as a Hindu agnostic , and styling himself as a " scientific humanist ", Nehru thought that religious taboos were preventing India from moving forward and adapting to modern conditions: "No country or people who are slaves to dogma and dogmatic mentality can progress, and unhappily our country and people have become extraordinarily dogmatic and little-minded." The spectacle of what is called religion, or at any rate organised religion, in India and elsewhere, has filled me with horror and I have frequently condemned it and wished to make a clean sweep of it. Almost always it seemed to stand for blind belief and reaction, dogma and bigotry, superstition, exploitation and the preservation of vested interests. — Toward Freedom: The Autobiography of Jawaharlal Nehru (1936); pp. 240–241.

As a humanist, Nehru considered that his afterlife was not in some mystical heaven or reincarnation but in the practical achievements of a life lived fully with and for his fellow human beings: "...Nor am I greatly interested in life after death. I find the problems of this life sufficiently absorbing to fill my mind," he wrote.

In his Last Will and Testament, he wrote: "I wish to declare with all earnestness that I do not want any religious ceremonies performed for me after my death. I do not believe in such ceremonies, and to submit to them, even as a matter of form, would be hypocrisy and an attempt to delude ourselves and others." In his autobiography, he analysed Abrahamic and Indian religions and their impact on India. He wanted to model India as a secular country ; his secularist policies remain a subject of debate mainly by the Hindutva proponents. Nehru also believed that a world government needs to be formed for the sake of world peace .

The Committee is of the opinion that future peace, security and ordered progress of the world demand a world federation of free nations, and on no other basis can the problems of the world be solved. Such a world federation would ensure the freedom of its constituent nations, the prevention of aggression and exploitation of one nation over another, the protection of national minorities, the advancement of all backward areas and peoples, and the pooling of the world’s resources for the common good of all.

On the establishment of such a world federation, disarmament would be practicable in all countries, national armies, navies and air forces would no longer be necessary, and a world federal defence force would keep the peace and prevent aggression. …The Committee regretfully realizes, however, despite the tragic and overwhelming lessons of the war and the perils that overhang the world, the Governments of few countries are yet prepared to take this inevitable step towards world federation. — Quit India resolution of 8 August 1942 . Awards and honours In 1948, Nehru was conferred an honorary doctorate by the University of Mysore . He later received honorary doctorates from the University of Madras , Columbia University , and Keio University .

The Hamburg University had awarded Nehru two honorary degrees of the Faculties of Law and Agriculture.

In 1955, Nehru was awarded the Bharat Ratna , India's highest civilian honour. President Rajendra Prasad awarded him the honour without taking advice from the Prime Minister and added that "I am taking this step on my own initiative".

In 1970, he was posthumously awarded with the World Peace Council Prize . National honours India : Bharat Ratna (1955) Foreign honours Indonesia : Star of the Republic of Indonesia , Adipurna (1995, posthumous) South Africa : Order of the Companions of O. R. Tambo , Grand Companion (2005, posthumous) Freedom of the City Belgrade, Yugoslavia: Honorary Citizenship of Belgrade (1955) London, United Kingdom: Freedom of the City of London (1956). Legacy Further information: List of things named after Jawaharlal Nehru Nehru was a great man... Nehru gave to Indians an image of themselves that I don't think others might have succeeded in doing. – Sir Isaiah Berlin Jawaharlal Nehru, next to Mahatma Gandhi, is regarded as the most significant figure of the Indian independence movement that successfully ended British rule over the Indian subcontinent. He is also noted for contributing in the independence of Libya, Indonesia and other countries.

As India's first Prime minister and external affairs minister, Nehru played a major role in shaping modern India's government and political culture along with the sound foreign policy. He is praised for creating a system providing universal primary education, reaching children in the farthest corners of rural India. Nehru's education policy is also credited for the development of world-class educational institutions like the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Indian Institutes of Technology, and the Indian Institutes of Management.

Following the independence, Nehru popularised the credo of "unity in diversity" and implemented it as state policy. This proved particularly important as post-Independence differences surfaced since British withdrawal from the subcontinent prompted regional leaders to no longer relate to one another as allies against a common adversary.

While differences in culture and, especially, language threatened the unity of the new nation, Nehru established programs such as the National Book Trust and the National Literary Academy which promoted the translation of regional works of literatures between languages and organised the transfer of materials between regions.

In pursuit of a single, unified India, Nehru warned, "Integrate or perish." Called an "architect of India", he is widely recognised as the greatest figure of modern India after Mahatma Gandhi.

On the occasion of his first death anniversary in 1965, Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan , Lal Bahadur Shastri and others described Nehru as the greatest figure of India after Gandhi. Writing in 2005, Ramachandra Guha wrote that while no other Indian prime minister was ever close to the challenges that Nehru dealt with and if Nehru had died in 1958 then he would be remembered as the greatest statesman of the 20th century. However, in recent years, Nehru's reputation has seen re-emergence and he is credited for keeping India together contrary to predictions of many that the country was bound to fall apart. Bust of Nehru at Aldwych , London Bust of Nehru at Peace Palace , The Hague Nehru's study in Teen Murti Bhavan , which is now converted into a museum. Commemoration Nehru on a 1989 USSR commemorative stamp In his lifetime, Jawaharlal Nehru enjoyed an iconic status in India and was generally admired across the world for his idealism and statesmanship.

The honorific Pandit , meaning Wise One , has been applied before his name since his lifetime. Nehru's ideals and policies continue shaping the Congress Party's manifesto and core political philosophy. His birthday, 14 November is celebrated in India as Bal Divas (" Children's Day ") in recognition of his lifelong passion and work for the welfare, education and development of children and young people. Children across India remember him as Chacha Nehru ("Uncle Nehru"). Nehru remains a popular symbol of the Congress Party which frequently celebrates his memory. People often emulate his style of clothing, especially the Gandhi cap and the Nehru jacket . Nehru's preference for the sherwani ensured it continues to be considered formal wear in North India today. Indian 5 rupees coin , commemorating the birth centenary of Nehru in 1989. Many public institutions and memorials across India are dedicated to Nehru's memory.

The Jawaharlal Nehru University in Delhi is among the most prestigious universities in India.

The Jawaharlal Nehru Port near the city of Mumbai is a modern port and dock designed to handle a huge cargo and traffic load. Nehru's residence in Delhi is preserved as the Teen Murti House now has the Nehru Memorial Museum & Library , and one of five Nehru Planetariums that were set in Mumbai, Delhi, Bangalore, Allahabad and Pune.

The complex also houses the offices of the Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund, established in 1964 under the chairmanship of Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan , then president of India.

The foundation also gives away the prestigious Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fellowship, established in 1968.

The Nehru family homes at Anand Bhavan and Swaraj Bhavan are also preserved to commemorate Nehru and his family's legacy.

In 1997, Nehru was voted as the greatest Indian since independence in India Today ' poll.

In 2012, he ranked number four in Outlook ' s poll of The Greatest Indian .

In 2010, he ranked among Britannica 's The 100 Most Influential World Leaders of All Time .

The canonical performance is probably that of Roshan Seth , who played him three times: in Richard Attenborough 's 1982 film Gandhi , Shyam Benegal 's 1988 television series Bharat Ek Khoj , based on Nehru's The Discovery of India , and in a 2007 TV film entitled The Last Days of the Raj . Benegal directed the 1984 documentary film, Nehru , covering his political career. Indian film director Kiran Kumar made a film about Nehru titled Nehru: The Jewel of India in 1990 starring Partap Sharma in the titular role.

In Ketan Mehta 's film Sardar , Benjamin Gilani portrayed Nehru. Naunihal ( lit. ' Young man ' ), a 1967 Indian Hindi-language drama film by Raj Marbros, follows Raju, an orphan, who believes that Jawaharlal Nehru is his relative and sets out to meet him. Nehru distributes sweets among children at Nongpoh , Meghalaya Similarly, in the 1957 film Ab Dilli Dur Nahin ( lit. ' Now Delhi is not far away ' ) by Amar Kumar, Rattan, a young boy, travels to Delhi and seeks to avert the death sentence of his wrongly convicted father by asking Prime Minister Nehru for help. Another 1957 English language short documentary Our Prime Minister was produced, compiled and directed by Ezra Mir , who also directed Three Weeks in the Life of Prime Minister Nehru in 1962. Girish Karnad 's historical play, Tughlaq (1962) is an allegory about the Nehruvian era. It was staged by Ebrahim Alkazi with the National School of Drama Repertory at Purana Qila , Delhi in the 1970s and later at the Festival of India, London in 1982. Writings Nehru was a prolific writer in English who wrote The Discovery of India , Glimpses of World History , An Autobiography (released in the United States as Toward Freedom ,) and Letters from a Father to His Daughter , all written in jail. Letters comprised thirty letters written to his daughter Indira Priyadarshani Nehru (later Gandhi) who was then ten years old and studying at a boarding school in Mussoorie . It attempted to instruct her about natural history and world civilisations. Nehru, as PM, wrote biweekly letters to Chief Ministers of the states from 1947 to 1964. Nehru's books have been widely read. An Autobiography , in particular, has been critically acclaimed. John Gunther , writing in Inside Asia , contrasted it with Gandhi's autobiography: The Mahatma's placid story compares to Nehru's as a cornflower to an orchid, a rhyming couplet to a sonnet by MacLeish or Auden, a water pistol to a machine gun. Nehru's autobiography is subtle, complex, discriminating, infinitely cultivated, steeped in doubt, suffused with intellectual passion. Lord Halifax once said that no one could understand India without reading it; it is a kind of 'Education of Henry Adams,' written in superlative prose—hardly a dozen men alive write English as well as Nehru ... Michael Brecher, who considered Nehru to be an intellectual for whom ideas were important aspects of Indian nationalism, wrote in Political Leadership and Charisma: Nehru, Ben-Gurion, and Other 20th-Century Political Leaders : Nehru's books were not scholarly, nor were they intended to be. He was not a trained historian, but his feel for the flow of events and his capacity to weave together a wide range of knowledge in a meaningful pattern give to his books qualities of a high order.

In these works, he also revealed a sensitive literary style. ... Glimpses of World History is the most illuminating on Nehru as an intellectual.

The first of the trilogy, Glimpses , was a series of thinly connected sketches of the story of mankind in the form of letters to his teenage daughter, Indira, later prime minister of India. ... Despite its polemical character in many sections and its shortcomings as an impartial history, Glimpses is a work of great artistic value, a worthy precursor of his noble and magnanimous Autobiography . Michael Crocker thought An Autobiography would have given Nehru literary fame had the political fame eluded him: It is to his years in prison that we owe his three main books, ... Nehru's writings illustrate a cerebral life, and a power of self-discipline, altogether out of the ordinary. Words by the million bubbled up out of his fullness of mind and spirit. Had he never been prime minister of India he would have been famous as the author of the Autobiography and the autobiographical parts of The Discovery of India . An Autobiography , at least with some excisions here and there, is likely to be read for generations. ... There are, for instance, the characteristic touches of truism and anticlimax, strange in a man who could both think and, at his best, write so well ... Nehru's speech " Tryst with Destiny " was rated by the British newspaper The Guardian to be among the great speeches of the 20th century. Ian Jack wrote in his introduction to the speech: Dressed in a golden silk jacket with a red rose in the buttonhole, Nehru rose to speak. His sentences were finely made and memorable—Nehru was a good writer; his Discovery of India stands well above the level reached by most politician-writers. ...

The Legacy of Nehru: Appraisal and Analysis . New Delhi: Manohar. p. 75. ISBN 978-93-5098-189-4 . How can one forget that unlike Bankim , Nehru and Gandhi were leading participants in the same anti-colonial nationalist movements despite their different approaches? ^ – Nath, Sushmita (2022).

The Secular Imaginary: Gandhi, Nehru, and the Idea(s) of India . Cambridge University Press. pp. 157– 158. ISBN 9781009276566 . Thus, we see that a secular and scientific humanism undergirded Nehru's conception and application of reason to politics and society. And despite the universal appeal of secular humanism and scientific spirit, one could, in Nehru's opinion, 'add to them or seek to mould them in accordance with our national genius'. ^ — Ganguly, Sumit; Mukherji, Rahul (2011). India Since 1980 . Cambridge University Press. p. 64. ISBN 978-1-139-49866-1 . Nehru was a social democrat who believed that liberal political and economic institutions could deliver economic growth with redistribution.

The 1950s witnessed greater state control over industrial activity and the birth of the industrial licensing system, which made it necessary for companies to seek the permission of the government before initiating business in permitted areas. Schenk, Hans (2020). Housing India's Urban Poor 1800–1965: Colonial and Post-colonial Studies . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-00-019185-1 .

The idea that the state should actively and in a planned and 'rational' and 'modern' manner promote development originated abroad. Inspiration came to some extent from the Soviet Russian planned economic development, and for some, including Nehru, from the—at that time still a bit remote—concept of the West European and largely social-democrat idea of the 'Welfare' state. Winiecki, Jan (2016). Shortcut or Piecemeal: Economic Development Strategies and Structural Change . Central European University Press. p. 41. ISBN 9789633860632 . Nehru, a Fabian socialist, or social-democrat in modern parlance, either did not read Mill or disregarded the (minimal) institutional requirements outlined by that classical writer.

In Nehru's view, it was the state that should direct the economy from the center, as well as decide about the allocation of scarce resources. Chalam, K. S. (2017). Social Economy of Development in India . Sage. p. 325. ISBN 9789385985126 . Social democrats advocate peaceful transition from capitalism to socialism.

While Jawaharlal Nehru was considered as a social democrat, his colleague in the Constituent Assembly, B. R. Ambedkar, was emphatic about state socialism. It appears that the compromise between these two ideas has been reflected in the Directive Principles of State Policy.

The principles of social democracy and/or democratic socialism can be interrogated in the context of the present situation in India. ^ "PANDIT JAWAHARLAL NEHRU" . Indian National Congress. ^ a b Stein, B. (2010). Arnold, D. (ed.). A History of India (2nd ed.). Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell . pp. 326– 327. ISBN 978-1-4051-9509-6 . ^ "Jawaharlal Nehru: Architect of modern India" . Hindustan Times . 14 November 2019. ^ Zachariah 2004 , p. 11. ^ Babu, D. Shyam (11 July 2019). "Nehru and the Kashmir quandary" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 2 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ Nanda, B.R. (1963).

The Nehrus: Motilal and Jawaharlal . Oxford University Press. pp. 38– 40. ^ Moraes 2007 , p. 21. ^ Nanda 2007 , p. 25. ^ Smith, Bonnie G.

The Oxford Encyclopedia of Women in World History . Oxford: Oxford University Press , 2008. ISBN 978-0-19-514890-9 . pp. 406–407. ^ a b "Jawaharlal Nehru: Freedom struggle icon, maker of modern India" . Hindustan Times . 2 December 2020. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021 . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ "Mrs. Krishna Hutheesing, an Author and a Sister of Nehru, Dies" .

The New York Times . 10 November 1967. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021 . Retrieved 2 July 2021 . ^ Moraes 2007 , p. 22. ^ Gokhale, Balkrishna Govind (1978). "Nehru and History". History and Theory . 17 (3): 311– 322. doi : 10.2307/2504742 . ISSN 0018-2656 . JSTOR 2504742 . ^ Moraes 2007 , p. 23. ^ a b c d e Misra, Om Prakash. 1995. Economic Thought of Gandhi and Nehru: A Comparative Analysis . M.D. Publications. ISBN 978-81-85880-71-6 . pp. 49–65. ^ a b Nanda 2007 , p. 88. ^ Bharathi, K.S. (1998). Encyclopaedia of eminent thinkers . Concept Publishing Company Pvt. Ltd. ISBN 978-81-7022-684-0 . ^ Tharoor, Shashi (27 November 2018). Nehru: The Invention of India . Penguin Random House India Private Limited. ISBN 978-93-5305-355-0 . ^ Moraes 2007 , p. 36. ^ Moraes 2007 , p. 43. ^ a b Sen, Zoë Keshap C. 1964. "Jawaharlal Nehru." Civilisations 14(1/2):25–39. JSTOR 41230788 . ^ Moraes 2007 , p. 47. ^ Nanda 2007 , p. 34. ^ Pandey, B.N. (1976). Nehru . Palgrave Macmillan UK. p. 19. ISBN 978-1-349-00792-9 . ^ Bhagavan, Manu (2023). Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit . Penguin Random House India. p. 23. ISBN 9789357086462 . ^ Nanda 2007 , p. 167. ^ Gopal 1976 , p. 308. ^ Nanda, B.R. (2015). Gokhale: The Indian Moderates and the British Raj . Princeton University Press . pp. 484– 486. ISBN 9781400870493 . ^ Zachariah 2004 , pp. 20–21. ^ a b c d Ghose 1993 , p. 25. ^ a b Moraes 2007 , p. 50. ^ Moraes 2007 , p. 49. ^ Nanda 2007 , p. 173. ^ Nanda 2007 , p. 330. ^ a b Moraes 2007 , p. 55. ^ "Jawaharlal Nehru – a chronological account" . Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund (JNMF) . Archived from the original on 4 June 2012 . Retrieved 23 June 2012 . ^ Moraes 2007 , p. 58. ^ Nanda 2007 , p. 214. ^ Nanda 2007 , p. 228. ^ Zachariah 2004 , p. 39. ^ a b Nanda 2007 , p. 325. ^ Nanda 2007 , p. 259. ^ Moraes 2007 , p. 106. ^ a b Nanda 2007 , p. 323. ^ Leoene, Fabio (2019). Prophet and Statesmen in Crafting Democracy in India: Political Leadership, Ideas, and Compromises . Lexington Books. p. 105. ISBN 9781498569378 . ^ Nanda 2007 , p. 267. ^ Nanda 2007 , p. 327. ^ Nanda 2007 , p. 331. ^ Nanda 2007 , p. 334. ^ Keenleyside, T.A. (1983). "The Indian Nationalist Movement and the League of Nations: Prologue to the United Nations". India Quarterly . 39 (3): 281– 298. doi : 10.1177/097492848303900303 . JSTOR 45071841 . S2CID 150520531 . ^ Nanda 2007 , p. 335. ^ Hoiberg, Dale (2000). Students' Britannica India . Popular Prakashan . p. 107 . ISBN 978-0-85229-760-5 . ^ Nanda 2007 , p. 391. ^ Dutt, R.C. (1981). Socialism of Jawaharlal Nehru . New Delhi: Shakti Malik, Abhinav Publications. pp. 54– 55. ISBN 978-81-7017-128-7 . Retrieved 8 September 2017 . ^ a b c d e f Gandhi, Rajmohan (28 November 1991). "Patel: A Life" . Navajivan Publishing House. p. 171 – via Internet Archive. ^ Nag, Kingshuk (2015). Netaji: Living Dangerously . Paranjoy Guha Thakurta. ISBN 978-93-84439-70-5 . ^ "Purna Swaraj: The Demand for Full Independence 26 January 1930" . indiaofthepast.org. Archived from the original on 8 November 2018 . Retrieved 6 July 2015 . ^ Office, Public Record. "Learning Curve British Empire" . Public Record Office, The National Archives . Archived from the original on 28 November 2021 . Retrieved 28 November 2021 . ^ Khalid, Haroon (26 January 2018). "Republic Day story: On Ravi's banks, a pledge that shaped the course of modern India 88 years ago" . Scroll.in . Archived from the original on 30 July 2021 . Retrieved 16 August 2021 . ^ "Explained: Why India celebrates January 26 as Republic Day" . 30 January 2021. Archived from the original on 21 November 2021 . Retrieved 21 November 2021 . ^ Education, Pearson. SSC topic-wise Previous Years Solved Papers General Awareness . Pearson Education India. ISBN 978-93-5286-640-3 . ^ Davar, Praveen (15 November 2018). "The greatest Indian after the Mahatma? Why Gandhi chose Nehru to lead India" . Deccan Chronicle . Archived from the original on 21 November 2021 . Retrieved 21 November 2021 . ^ Maheshwari, Neerja (1997). Economic Policy of Jawaharlal Nehru . Deep & Deep. p. 41. ISBN 978-81-7100-850-6 . Retrieved 9 November 2018 . ^ Pandey, BN, ed. (2015).

The Indian Nationalist Movement 1885–1947: Select Documents . Springer Publishing . p. 45. ISBN 978-1-349-86215-3 . ^ Gandhi, Gopalkrishna . "The Great Dandi March – eighty years after" Archived 17 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine , The Hindu , 5 April 2010. ^ Khanal, Vinod (13 November 2014). "Mahatma Gandhi describes Nehru's arrest in 1930 as 'rest' " . Times of India . Archived from the original on 28 November 2021 . Retrieved 16 August 2021 . ^ "Telegram Post No. 90, dated (and read) 14th April, 1930". Civil Disobedience Movement in the United Provinces. Arrest of Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru . New Delhi: United Provinces Government. 1930. p. 71. Archived from the original on 10 October 2022 . Retrieved 9 September 2022 – via National Archives of India . For breaking Salt Law Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru was arrested at Allahabad this morning. ^ Moraes 2007 , p. 167. ^ Moraes 2007 , p. 168. ^ Fisher, Margaret W. June 1967. "India's Jawaharlal Nehru." Asian Survey 7(6):363–373 . doi : 10.2307/2642611 . JSTOR 2642611 ^ Johnson, Richard L. 2005. Gandhi's Experiments With Truth: Essential Writings By And About Mahatma Gandhi . Lexington Books . ISBN 978-0-7391-1142-0 . p. 37. ^ Gopal 1976 , p. 147. ^ Moraes 2007 , p. 181. ^ Gopal 1976 , p. 170. ^ a b Gopal 1976 , p. 185. ^ Moraes 2007 , pp. 255–256. ^ Zachariah 2004 , pp. 76–77. ^ Moraes 2007 , pp. 245–248. ^ Gupta, R.L. (1976). Conflict and harmony: Indo-British relations; a new perspective . Trimurti Publications. p. 18. ^ Sethi, R.R. (1958).

The last phase of British sovereignty in India (1919–1947): being the concluding chapters of the Cambridge history of India, vol. VI. and the Cambridge shorter history of India . S. Chand. p. 34. ^ a b c Gopal 1976 , p. 214. ^ Möller, U.; Schierenbeck, I. (2014). Political Leadership, Nascent Statehood and Democracy: A Comparative Study . Taylor & Francis. p. 52. ISBN 9781317673101 . ^ Mukherjee 2018 , p. 41. ^ Schöttli, J., 2012. Vision and Strategy in Indian Politics: Jawaharlal Nehru's Policy Choices and the Designing of Political Institutions , p. 54. Milton Park: Taylor & Francis. ^ Mukherjee 2018 , p. 43. ^ Möller & Schierenbeck 2014 , p. 52. ^ a b Gopal 1976 , p. 233. ^ Hoiberg, Dale; Ramchandani, Indu (21 November 2000). "Students' Britannica India" . New Delhi : Encyclopaedia Britannica (India) – via Internet Archive. ^ Hoiberg, Dale (2000). Students' Britannica India . Popular Prakashan . pp. 108–. ISBN 978-0-85229-760-5 . ^ Bose, Sugata (2012). His Majesty's Opponent: Subhas Chandra Bose and India's Struggle Against Empire . Harvard University Press. p. 146. ISBN 9780674065963 . ^ Bandyopadhyay, Sekhara (2004).

From Plassey to Partition: A History of Modern India . Orient Blackswan . pp. 409– 410. ISBN 978-81-250-2596-2 . ^ Mukherjee 2018 , p. 44. ^ Saraf, Nandini (2012).

The Life and Times of Lokmanya Tilak . Ocean Books. p. 119. ISBN 978-81-84301-52-6 . ^ Menon, Vapal Pangunni (8 December 2015). Transfer of Power in India . Princeton University Press . p. 60. ISBN 978-1-4008-7937-3 . ^ a b Bandyopadhyay, Sekhara (2004).

From Plassey to Partition: A History of Modern India . India: Orient Longman . p. 412. ISBN 978-81-250-2596-2 . ^ Moraes, Frank R. "Jawaharlal Nehru" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on 28 June 2023 . Retrieved 2 October 2018 . ^ W. Sears, Stephen (1973).

The Horizon History of the British Empire Volume 2 . American Heritage Publishing Company. p. 465. ISBN 978-0-07-030354-6 – via Google Books. ^ Wolpert, Stanley (2001). Gandhi's Passion: The Life and Legacy of Mahatma Gandhi . Oxford University Press. pp. 192 –193. ISBN 0-19-515634-X . Retrieved 4 December 2007 . ^ Anderson, Ken. "Gandhi – The Great Soul" .

The British Empire: Fall of the Empire . Archived from the original on 23 July 2018 . Retrieved 4 December 2007 . ^ Kermani, Secunder (18 August 2017). "How Jinnah's ideology shapes Pakistan's identity" . BBC . Archived from the original on 21 November 2021 . Retrieved 21 November 2021 . ^ Chand, Attar (2010). India and Asia-Pacific Security Volume 2 . Amar Prakashan. p. 223. ISBN 978-81-8542-031-8 – via Google Books. ^ Radhey Shyam Chaurasia (2002). History of Modern India, 1707 A. D. to 2000 A. Atlantic Publishers. pp. 281–283 ^ Sears, Stephen W. (2014).

The British Empire . New Word City. ISBN 978-1-61230-809-8 – via Google Books. ^ Science & culture, Volume 30 . Indian Science News Association. 1964. ^ Aditit De (8 September 2009). Jawaharlal Nehruh – The Jewel of India . Puffin Books . ISBN 978-81-8475-866-5 – via Google Books. ^ Hoiberg, Dale (2018). Students' Britannica India . Popular Prakashan. ISBN 978-0-85229-760-5 – via Google Books. ^ Amy McKenna, ed. (2009).

The 100 Most Influential World Leaders of All Time .

The Rosen Publishing Group|pages=223 , Inc. ISBN 978-1-61530-015-0 – via Google Books. ^ Hoiberg, Dale (2018). Students' Britannica India . Vol. 4. Popular Prakashan. pp. 108– 109. ISBN 978-0-85229-760-5 – via Google Books. ^ Mansergh, Nicholas (2013). Survey of British Commonwealth Affairs: Problems of Wartime Cooperation and Post-War Change 1939–1952 . Routledge. p. 145. ISBN 978-1-136-24289-2 – via Google Books. ^ "The National Archives – Homepage" . nationalarchives.gov.uk . Archived from the original on 1 December 2021 . Retrieved 16 August 2021 . ^ "1942 Quit India Movement" . open.ac.uk . Archived from the original on 2 June 2021 . Retrieved 29 May 2021 . ^ Aamir R. Mufti (2009). Enlightenment in the Colony: The Jewish Question and the Crisis of Postcolonial Culture . Princeton University Press . pp. 129– 131. ISBN 978-1-4008-2766-4 . ^ Amy McKenna, ed. (2009).

The 100 Most Influential World Leaders of All Time .

The Rosen Publishing Group, Inc. p. 224. ISBN 978-1-61530-015-0 – via Google Books. ^ Kher, N.N. Civics & History . Pitambar Publishing. ISBN 978-81-209-1088-1 – via Google Books. ^ Sears, Stephen W. (2014).

The British Empire . New Word City. ISBN 978-1-61230-809-8 – via Google Books. ^ a b B. N, Pandey (1969). Break Up of British India . Macmillan Education UK. p. 169. ISBN 978-1-349-15307-7 – via Google Books. ^ Sears, Stephen W. (2014).

The British Empire . NewWord City. ISBN 978-1-61230-809-8 . ^ Kasniyal, B.D. (13 November 2015). "Nehru's belongings still intact in Almora jail" . Tribuneindia News Service . Archived from the original on 6 December 2021 . Retrieved 6 December 2021 . ^ Mukhopadhyay, Nilanjan (14 November 2018). "Past Continuous: Those Who Think Nehru Was Power Hungry Should Review Events Leading to Independence" .

The Wire . Archived from the original on 9 November 2018 . Retrieved 9 November 2018 . ^ Marathe, Om (3 September 2019). "Explained: When India's interim government was formed in 1946" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 2 June 2021 . Retrieved 29 May 2021 . ^ V. Krishna Ananth. India Since Independence: Making Sense of Indian Politics . Pearson Education India. 2010. pp 28–30. ^ Bombwall, K.R. (1967).

The Foundations of Indian Federalism . Asia Publishing House. p. 151. ^ Menon, Shivshankar (2021). India and Asian Geopolitics: The Past, Present . Brookings Institution Press. p. 34. ISBN 978-0-670-09129-4 . ^ Lumby, E. W. R. 1954.

The Transfer of Power in India, 1945–1947 . London: George Allen & Unwin . p. 228 ^ Tiwari, Aaditya (30 October 2017). "Sardar Patel – Man who United India" . Press Information Bureau . Archived from the original on 27 March 2023. ^ Roychowdhury, Adrija (31 October 2017). "How Vallabhbhai Patel, V P Menon and Mountbatten unified India" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 27 March 2023. ^ Furber, Holden (1951). "The Unification of India, 1947–1951". Pacific Affairs . 24 (4): 352– 371. doi : 10.2307/2753451 . JSTOR 2753451 . ^ C.A. Chandraprema (1991). Sri Lanka, the Years of Terror: The J.V.P. Insurrection, 1987–1989 . Lake House Bookshop. p. 81. ISBN 9789559029038 . Nehru brought in legislation making illegal the demand for secession in 1963. Thereafter, the DMK dropped its demand for a "Dravida Nadu". ^ Jayantha Dhanapala, United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (1999). Small Arms Control: Old Weapons, New Issues . Ashgate Publishing . ISBN 9780754620761 .

Although the campaign for secession has reached its apex in Kashmir, the first Indian state to agitate for separatism was Tamil Nadu.

In 1963, in response to the vociferous campaign for a Dravidastan, Premier Nehru introduced the Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution, making it mandatory for those running for office to take an oath stating, "I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India". ^ Encyclopaedia Indica: Independent India and wars – I . Anmol Publications. 1996. ISBN 978-81-7041-859-7 . ^ Encyclopaedia of Indian War of Independence, 1857–1947: Gandhi era : Jawahar Lal Nehru and Sardar Patel . Anmol Publications. 2009. ISBN 978-81-261-3745-9 . ^ Nehru, Jawaharlal (30 April 2007). "A Tryst with Destiny" . TheGuardian.com . Archived from the original on 24 May 2014 . Retrieved 16 August 2021 . ^ Saha, Abhishek (15 August 2015). "The politics of an assassination: Who killed Gandhi and why?" . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 13 December 2021 . Retrieved 13 December 2021 . ^ Janak Raj Jai (1996). 1947–1980 . Regency Publications. pp. 45– 47. ISBN 978-81-86030-23-3 . ^ Ansari, Sarah; Gould, William (2019). " 'Performing the State' in Post-1947 India and Pakistan". Boundaries of Belonging . Cambridge University Press. pp. 23– 66. doi : 10.1017/9781108164511.003 . ISBN 978-1-107-19605-6 . S2CID 211394653 . Archived from the original on 11 September 2021 . Retrieved 11 September 2021 . ^ Khan, Yasmin. "Performing Peace: Gandhi's assassination as a critical moment in the consolidation of the Nehruvian state" (PDF) . core.ac.uk . Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 September 2021 . Retrieved 11 September 2021 . ^ Khan, Yasmin (2011). "Performing Peace: Gandhi's assassination as a critical moment in the consolidation of the Nehruvian state" . Modern Asian Studies . 45 (1): 57– 80. doi : 10.1017/S0026749X10000223 . S2CID 144894540 . (subscription required) ^ Khan, Yasmin (12 January 2011). "Performing Peace: Gandhi's assassination as a critical moment in the consolidation of the Nehruvian state" . Modern Asian Studies . 45 (1): 57– 80. doi : 10.1017/S0026749X10000223 . S2CID 144894540 . ^ Ghosh, Bishwanath (17 March 2016). "Maps are malleable. Even Bharat Mata's" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 2 March 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ Roychowdhury, Adrija (17 August 2017). "Five states that refused to join India after Independence" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 13 January 2022 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ S., Mohamed Imranullah (1 February 2016). "Time to recall efforts made to create the Constitution" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 3 June 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ Bhaskar, Anurag (25 November 2022). "Republic at 70: Preamble embodies Constitution's vision" . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 11 March 2024 . Retrieved 12 March 2024 . ^ Chauhan, Dinesh. "Preamble the Spirit of Constitution of India" . Archived from the original on 11 March 2024 . Retrieved 12 March 2024 . ^ Sinha, Shakti; Roy, Himanshu (2018). Patel: Political Ideas and Policies . Sage Publications. ISBN 978-93-5280-854-0 . ^ Marathe, Om (3 September 2019). "Explained: When India's interim government was formed in 1946" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 2 June 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ Park, Richard Leonard (1952). "India's General Elections". Far Eastern Survey . 21 (1): 1– 8. doi : 10.2307/3024683 . JSTOR 3024683 . ^ "Indian and Foreign Review" . Publications Division of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. 1969. ^ Guha, Ramachandra (2002). "Democracy's Biggest Gamble: India's First Free Elections in 1952" . World Policy Journal . 19 (1): 95– 103. doi : 10.1215/07402775-2002-2005 . JSTOR 40209795 . Archived from the original on 3 June 2021 . Retrieved 29 May 2021 . ^ a b Koshi, Luke (2 November 2016). "Explainer: The reorganization of states in India and why it happened" .

The News Minute . Archived from the original on 3 April 2019 . Retrieved 3 April 2019 . ^ "Govind Ballabh Pant's Death Anniversary: Remembering the First Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh" . News18 . 7 March 2021. Archived from the original on 2 June 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ "State of the Nation" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 1 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ Noorani, A.G. (29 August 2003). "Perseverance in the peace process" . Frontline . hinduonnet.com. Archived from the original on 26 March 2005 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ Klintworth, G. (1987). China's India War: A Question of Confidence . Working paper (Australian National University. Strategic and Defence Studies Centre). Strategic and Defence Studies Centre, Research School of Pacific Studies, Australian National University. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-7315-0087-1 . China declared a unilateral ceasefire and by December it had withdrawn its forces to positions 20 km behind the line of actual control that had existed in 1959 ^ Michele L. Louro (2018). Comrades against Imperialism: Nehru, India, and Interwar Internationalism . Cambridge University Press. p. 195. ISBN 9781108419307 . Menon resigned under India's military preparedness failed to prevent a Chinese invasion during the Sino-Indian war of 1962 ^ "Asia: Ending the Suspense" . Time . 17 September 1965. Archived from the original on 21 May 2013 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ Lüthi, Lorenz M., ed. (2020). Alternative World Visions . Cambridge University Press . pp. 261– 328. ISBN 978-1-108-41833-1 . Archived from the original on 10 July 2021 . Retrieved 10 July 2021 . ^ Sehgal, Saransh (7 May 2014). "Tibetans-in-exile divided over right to vote in Indian elections" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 18 December 2018 . Retrieved 18 December 2018 . ^ "After Nehru and Indira, Modi is only PM to come back to power with full majority" .

The Economic Times . 23 May 2019. Archived from the original on 22 August 2021 . Retrieved 22 August 2021 . ^ World Mourns Nehru (1964) , 13 April 2014, archived from the original on 31 July 2021 , retrieved 31 July 2021 ^ Guha, Ramachandra (2013). Verdicts on Nehru . Penguin Books . ISBN 978-93-5118-757-8 . ^ "Letter From President Eisenhower to Prime Minister Nehru" . history.state.gov . Foreign Relations of the United States, 1958–1960, South and Southeast Asia, Volume XV – Office of the Historian. 27 November 1958. Archived from the original on 31 July 2021 . Retrieved 31 July 2021 . ^ Nayantara Sahgal (2010). Jawaharlal Nehru: Civilizing a Savage World . Penguin Books India. p. 59. ISBN 978-0-670-08357-2 . ^ Ian Hall, The Conversation (22 August 2021). "Nehru, the architect of modern India, also helped discredit European imperialism" . Scroll.in . Archived from the original on 15 November 2021 . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ "How the ANC could fade away – Opinion" . www.politicsweb.co.za . Archived from the original on 15 November 2021 . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ "UP Next: How Nehru, Swami Prabhu Dutt Brahmachari's ideas of India resonate in 2022 polls" . Firstpost . 15 November 2021. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021 . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ "PM Modi Is a 'Charismatic' Leader Like Jawaharlal Nehru, Rajiv Gandhi: Rajinikanth" . outlookindia . Archived from the original on 28 May 2019 . Retrieved 15 November 2015 . ^ Service, Tribune News. "A thousand lies can't dwarf the giant Nehru was" . Tribuneindia News Service . Archived from the original on 30 March 2024 . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ Parekh, Bhiku (1991). "Nehru and the National Philosophy of India". Economic and Political Weekly . 26 (5–12 Jan 1991): 35– 48. JSTOR 4397189 . ^ Puri, S. (2020).

The Great Imperial Hangover: How Empires Have Shaped the World . Atlantic Books. p. 206. ISBN 978-1-78649-834-2 . ^ Heller, P. (1999).

The Labor of Development: Workers and the Transformation of Capitalism in Kerala, India . Cornell paperbacks. Cornell University Press. p. 75. ISBN 978-0-8014-8624-1 . Retrieved 23 February 2024 . ^ Singh, Ravi Ranjan & M. K. (14 August 2021). "Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru" . K.K. Publications. p. 20 – via Google Books. ^ Ghose 1993 , p. 243. ^ a b Kopstein 2005 , p. 364. ^ Maheshwari, N. (1997). Economic Policy of Jawaharlal Nehru . Deep & Deep. pp. 36– 39. ISBN 978-81-7100-850-6 . ^ a b c Walsh, Judith E. (2006). A Brief History of India . Infobase Publishing . p. 190. ISBN 978-1-4381-0825-4 . ^ Yokokawa, Nobuharu; Jayati Ghosh ; Bob Rowthorn (2013). Industrialization of China and India: Their Impacts on the World Economy . Routledge . p. 213. ISBN 978-1-134-09387-8 . ^ a b Grabowski, Richard; Sharmistha Self; Michael P. Shields (2007). Economic Development: A Regional, Institutional, And Historical Approach . M.E. Sharpe . p. 161. ISBN 978-1-134-09387-8 . ^ Shand, R. Richard Tregurtha; K.P. Kalirajan; Ulaganathan Sankar (2003). Economic Reform and the Liberalisation of the Indian Economy: Essays in Honour of Richard T. Shand; papers Presented at a Major Conference on Second Generation Reforms in Chennai from 8 – 10 December 1999 . Edward Elgar Publishing . p. 39. ISBN 978-1-78195-943-5 . ^ Thakur, Anil Khumar; Debes Mukhopadhayay (2010). Economic Philosophy of Jawaharlal Nehru . Deep and Deep Publications. p. 14. ISBN 978-81-8450-272-5 . ^ Chandra, Bipan ; Aditya Mukherjee; Mridula Mukherjee (2008). India Since Independence . Penguin Books India . p. 449. ISBN 978-0-14-310409-4 . ^ Kapila, Uma (2009). Indian Economic Developments Since 1947 (3rd ed.). Academic Foundation. p. 132. ISBN 978-81-7188-711-8 . ^ a b Kapila, Uma (2009). Indian Economic Developments Since 1947 (3rd ed.). Academic Foundation. p. 66. ISBN 978-81-7188-711-8 . ^ a b Giersch, Herbert ; Karl-Heinz Paqué ; Holger Schmieding (1994).

The Fading Miracle: Four Decades of Market Economy in Germany . Cambridge University Press . p. 4. ISBN 978-0-521-35869-9 . ^ Parker, Randall E.; Robert M. Whaples (2013).

The Routledge Handbook of Major Events in Economic History . Routledge. p. 306. ISBN 978-0-415-67703-5 . ^ Kopstein 2005 , p. 366. ^ Brown, Judith M. (2014). Nehru . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-87476-8 . ^ Ashutosh Varshney (1998). Democracy, Development, and the Countryside: Urban-Rural Struggles in India . Cambridge University Press . pp. 30– 31. ISBN 978-0-521-64625-3 . ^ India Today . New Horizons. 1963. ^ Farmer, B.H. (1993). An Introduction to South Asia . Routledge. p. 120. ISBN 978-0-415-05695-3 . ^ "Children's Day 2021: Here's Why Jawaharlal Nehru's Birthday Celebrated as Bal Diwas" . News18 . 14 November 2021. Archived from the original on 26 December 2021 . Retrieved 26 December 2021 . ^ Lion M.G. Agrawal (2008). Freedom Fighters of India . Vol. 2. Isha Books. p. 132. ISBN 978-81-8205-470-7 – via Google Books. ^ Som, Reba (February 1994). "Jawaharlal Nehru and the Hindu Code: A Victory of Symbol over Substance?". Modern Asian Studies . 28 (1): 165– 194. doi : 10.1017/S0026749X00011732 . JSTOR 312925 . S2CID 145393171 . ^ Basu, Srimati (2005). She Comes to Take Her Rights: Indian Women, Property, and Propriety . SUNY Press . p. 3. ISBN 978-81-86706-49-7 .

The Hindu Code Bill was visualised by Ambedkar and Nehru as the flagship of modernisation and a radical revision of Hindu law ... it is widely regarded as dramatic benchmark legislation giving Hindu women equitable if not superior entitlements as legal subjects. ^ Williams, p. 107. ^ Williams, p. 106. ^ Uppal, N. (2021). Narcissus or Machiavelli?: Learning Leadership from Indian Prime Ministers . Taylor & Francis. p. 48. ISBN 978-1-000-41480-6 . ^ Erckel, Sebastian (2011). India and the European Union – Two Models of Integration , GRIN Verlag, ISBN 978-3-656-01048-7 , p. 128 ^ Merchant, Minhaz (27 August 2020). "Nehru's noble intent of treating Muslims fairly put India on slippery slope of faux secularism" . ThePrint . Archived from the original on 23 August 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ Kulke, Hermann; Dietmar Rothermund (2004). A History of India . Routledge. p. 328. ISBN 978-0-415-32919-4 . One subject that particularly interested Nehru was the reform of Hindu law, particularly with regard to the rights of Hindu women ... ^ Purandare, Vaibhav (23 August 2017). "triple talaq: Uniform code: Nehru okayed principle, but didn't make it a directive" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 16 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ Soman, Zakia; Niaz, Noorjehan (17 June 2016). "Why Triple Talaq Needs to Be Abolished" .

The Wire . Archived from the original on 27 July 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ a b c d e Gusain, Lakhan (2012). "The Effectiveness of Establishing Hindi as a National Language". Georgetown Journal of International Affairs . 13 (1): 43– 50. JSTOR 43134213 . ^ a b c d e E. Annamalai (1979). "Language Movements Against Hindi as An Official Language". Language movements in India . Central Institute of Indian Languages. p. 85. ^ Rathi, Nandini (15 September 2017). "Hindi Diwas: Journey of Hindi from pre-Partition India to post-independence language politics" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 30 June 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ Viswanathan, S. (6 December 2009). "Language issue again: The need for a clear-headed policy" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 19 September 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ Chandra, Bipan (2000). India After Independence: 1947–2000 . Penguin Books Limited. p. 146. ISBN 9789351181200 . ^ Sorensen, Clark W.; Baker, Donald (2013).

The Journal of Korean Studies, Volume 18, Number 2 (Fall 2013) . Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-4422-3336-2 . ^ K. Srinivasan (7 November 2005).

The Rise, Decline and Future of the British Commonwealth . Palgrave Macmillan UK. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-230-24843-4 . ^ "London Declaration" . 16 May 2019. Archived from the original on 4 July 2021 . Retrieved 22 August 2021 . ^ Haque, Affanul (20 May 2017). "Non-Aligned Movement: Jawaharlal Nehru – The architect of India's foreign policy" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 6 October 2018 . Retrieved 7 January 2022 . ^ Ali, H.M.W. (2004). India and the Non-aligned Movement . Adam Pub. p. 7. ISBN 978-81-7435-367-2 . ^ Robert Sherrod (19 January 1963). "Nehru:The Great Awakening".

The Saturday Evening Post . 236 (2): 60– 67. ^ Shashi, Shyam Singh (1996). Encyclopaedia Indica: Great political personalities of Post Colonial Era-I . Anmol Publications. p. 81. ISBN 9788170418597 . ^ Sarvepalli Gopal , "Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography" Vol.2 , 2:232–235. ^ Indian Express , 6 October 1949 at Pune at the time of lying of the foundation stone of National Defence Academy . ^ Mahatma Gandhi's relevant quotes, "My non-violence does not admit of running away from danger and leaving dear ones unprotected. Between violence and cowardly flight, I can only prefer violence to cowardice. Non-violence is the summit of bravery." "I do believe that, where there is only a choice between cowardice and violence, I would advise violence." "I would rather have India resort to arms in order to defend her honour than that she should in a cowardly manner become or remain a helpless witness to her own dishonour." – All Men Are Brothers Life and Thoughts of Mahatma Gandhi as told in his own words. UNESCO. pp. 85–108. ^ Bhatia, Vinod (1989). Jawaharlal Nehru, as Scholars of Socialist Countries See Him . Panchsheel Publishers. p. 131. ^ Dua, B. D.; James Manor (1994). Nehru to the Nineties: The Changing Office of Prime Minister in India . C. Hurst & Co. Publishers. pp. 141, 261. ISBN 978-1-85065-180-2 . ^ Mihir Bose (2004). Raj, Secrets, Revolution: A Life of Subhas Chandra Bose . Grice Chapman Publishing. p. 291. ISBN 978-0-9545726-4-8 . ^ a b "V.K. Krishna Menon, India Defense Minister, U.N. Aide, Dies" .

The New York Times . 6 October 1974. Archived from the original on 2 December 2018 . Retrieved 2 December 2018 . ^ Guha, Ramachandra (2 August 2008). "A fateful arrest" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 19 March 2022 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ Sankar Ghose (1993). Jawaharlal Nehru, a Biography . Allied Publishers. pp. 1888– 190. ISBN 978-81-7023-369-5 . ^ "A short history of long speeches" . BBC News . 25 September 2009. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. ^ Majid, Amir A. (2007). "Can Self Determination Solve the Kashmir Dispute?" (PDF) . Romanian Journal of European Affairs . 7 (3): 38. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 March 2012. ^ Sankar Ghose (1993). Jawaharlal Nehru, a Biography . Allied Publishers. pp. 266– 268. ISBN 978-81-7023-369-5 . ^ Li, Jianglin; Wilf, Susan (2016). Tibet in agony : Lhasa 1959 . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press . pp. 40– 41. ISBN 978-0-674-08889-4 . OCLC 946579956 . ^ The full text of this agreement (which entered into force on 3 June 1954): "Treaties and international agreements registered or filed and recorded with the Secretariat of the United Nations" (PDF) . United Nations Treaty Series . New York: United Nations. 1958. pp. 57– 81. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 March 2012 . Retrieved 14 August 2012 . ^ "Nehru's India" . Mint . 23 May 2014. Archived from the original on 12 December 2022 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ Nayudu, Swapna Kona (8 November 2016). "India's moment in the Suez Canal crisis" . Business Line . Archived from the original on 28 July 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ Mathai (1978). Reminiscences of the Nehru Age . ^ "Assassination Attempt on Nehru Made in Car" . Gettysburg Times . 22 March 1955. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ "Rickshaw Boy Arrested for Nehru Attack" . Sarasota Herald Tribune . 14 March 1955. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ "Rickshaw Boy Arrested for Attempting to Kill Nehru" .

The Victoria Advocate . 14 March 1955. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ "Knife Wielder Jumps on Car of Indian Premier" .

The Telegraph . 12 March 1955. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Covertaction Quarterly . Covert Action Publications. 1992. p. 9. ^ William Blum (2006). Rogue State: A Guide to the Worlds Only Superpower . Zed Books . p. 50. ISBN 9781842778272 . ^ "Police Say Nehru's Assassination Plot is Thwarted" . Altus Times-Democrat . 4 June 1956. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ "Bombay Police Thwart Attempt on Nehru's Life" . Oxnard Press-Courier . 4 June 1956. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ "Bomb Explodes on Nehru's Route" . Toledo Blade . 30 September 1961. Archived from the original on 28 November 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Mathai, M.O. (1979). My Days with Nehru . Vikas Publishing House. ^ Roberts, Elizabeth Mauchline (2017) , Gandhi, Nehru and Modern India , Routledge Library Editions: British in India, Routledge, ISBN 978-1-00-063959-9 ^ Sarvepalli Gopal (2014). Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography Volume 3 1956–1964 . Random House. p. 293. ISBN 978-1-4735-2189-6 . ^ Asia Society (1988). "Jawaharlal Nehru" .

In Embree, Ainslie T. (ed.). Encyclopedia of Asian History . Vol. 3. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons . pp. 98–100 . ISBN 978-0-684-18899-7 . ^ Kanwar Raj . "The evening 58 years ago when I saw off Nehru on his last flight" . Deccan Herald . Archived from the original on 27 May 2022 . Retrieved 27 May 2022 . ^ BBC On This Day | 27 | 1964: Light goes out in India as Nehru dies Archived 11 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine . BBC News . Retrieved 17 March 2011. ^ Brady, Thomas F. (29 May 1964). "1.5 Million View Rites for Nehrus; Procession Route Jammed as Indians and Foreigners Pay Last Respects" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 2 August 2017 . Retrieved 18 May 2017 . ^ "Letter to the President of India on the Death of Prime Minister Nehru" .

The American Presidency Project . 27 May 1964. Archived from the original on 4 September 2023 . Retrieved 21 February 2023 . ^ Daily Report, Foreign Radio Broadcasts . 1964. p. 2 . Retrieved 21 March 2024 . ^ Mideast Mirror . Arab News Agency. 1964. p. 18. ^ Iran Society (Calcutta, India) (2024). Indo-iranica . Iran Society. p. 12. ^ Pandey 1976 , p. 436. ^ Pakistan. Safārah (U.S.) (10 March 1963). Pakistan Affairs . Information Division, Embassy of Pakistan. p. 37. ^ West Bengal . Director of Information. 1964. p. 137. ^ "From the archive, 28 May 1964: The death of Mr Nehru, hero and architect of modern India" .

The Guardian . 28 May 2014. Archived from the original on 29 June 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ "A Man Who, with All His Mind and Heart, Loved India" . Life Magazine . Time Inc. 5 June 1964. p. 32. ^ "India Mourning Nehru, 74, Dead of a Heart Attack; World Leaders Honor Him" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 22 March 2017 . Retrieved 28 March 2017 . ^ Pathak, Vikas (17 August 2018). "Atal Bihari Vajpayee, the orator: Speech that sounded like poetry" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 7 January 2022 . Retrieved 7 January 2022 . ^ "Vajpayee on Nehru's death: Bharat Mata has lost her favourite prince" . ThePrint . 16 August 2018. Archived from the original on 7 January 2022 . Retrieved 7 January 2022 .

In the Ramayana, Maharashi Valmiki has said of Lord Rama that he brought the impossible together.

In Panditji's life, we see a glimpse of what the great poet said. He was a devotee of peace and yet the harbinger of revolution, he was a devotee of non-violence but advocated every weapon to defend freedom and honour. ^ Palmer, Norman D. (12 January 2007). "The 1962 Election in North Bombay" (PDF) . cs.nyu.edu . Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 March 2012 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Fuller, C.J. (30 December 1976).

The Nayars today – Christopher John Fuller . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-29091-3 . Retrieved 11 July 2012 – via Google Books. ^ Michael Brecher, and Janice Gross Stein, eds., India and world politics: Krishna Menon's view of the world ( Praeger Publishing , 1968). ^ Chaudhuri, R. (2014). Forged in Crisis: India and the United States Since 1947 . Oxford University Press, Incorporated. p. 108. ISBN 978-0-19-935486-3 . ^ "We ensured B R Ambedkar was chairman of drafting committee of Constitution: Congress" .

The Economic Times . 30 November 2015. Archived from the original on 18 July 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 . ^ Jivanta Schoettli (2011). Vision and Strategy in Indian Politics: Jawaharlal Nehru's Policy Choices and the Designing of Political Institutions . Routledge. p. 88. ISBN 978-1-136-62787-3 . ^ Lahiry, Sutapa (26 April 2024). "Jana Sangh and Bharatiya Janata Party : A Comparative Assessment of Their Philosophy and Strategy and Their Proximity with the Other Members of the Sangh Parivar".

The Indian Journal of Political Science . 66 (4). Indian Political Science Association: 831– 850. ISSN 0019-5510 . JSTOR 41856171 . ^ "International Urdu conference from Nov. 10" .

The Hindu . 7 November 2010. Archived from the original on 11 November 2010 . Retrieved 13 April 2012 . ^ Chawla, Muhammad (2016). "Maulana Azad and the Demand for Pakistan: A Reappraisal" . Journal of the Pakistan Historical Society . 64 (3): 7– 24. Archived from the original on 17 November 2020 . Retrieved 11 August 2020 . ^ Singh, Pradyuman (2021). Bihar General Knowledge Digest . Prabhat Prakashan. ISBN 978-93-5266-769-7 . ^ Anwarul Haque Haqqi; Indian Political Science Association (1986). Indian Democracy at the Crossroads . Mittal Publications. p. 123. GGKEY:X2U27GYQ2L1. ^ Mahendra Prasad Singh (1981). Split in a Predominant Party: The Indian National Congress in 1969 . Abhinav Publications. p. 50. ISBN 978-81-7017-140-9 . ^ Da, S (2001). "The Nehru years in Indian politics" (PDF) . Edinburgh Papers in South Asian Studies . 16 : 24. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 September 2021 . Retrieved 10 September 2021 . ^ G.G. Mirchandani (2003). 320 Million Judges . Abhinav Publications. pp. 177– 178. ISBN 978-81-7017-061-7 . ^ "Nation pays homage to Govind Ballabh Pant" .

The Times of India . 10 September 2006. {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "Govind Ballabh Pant Engineering College, Pauri Garhwal, Uttarakhand" . Gbpec.net. Archived from the original on 25 December 2012 . Retrieved 1 January 2013 . ^ "Padma Awards Directory (1954–2007)" (PDF) . Ministry of Home Affairs. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 April 2009 . Retrieved 26 November 2010 . ^ Jivanta Schoettli (2012). Vision and Strategy in Indian Politics: Jawaharlal Nehru's Policy Choices and the Designing of Political Institutions . Oxon: Routledge. p. 106. ISBN 978-1-136-62787-3 . ^ S. A. Palekar (2012). Development Administration . New Delhi: PHI Learning. p. 74. ISBN 978-81-203-4582-9 . ^ Malhotra, Inder (26 September 2014). "Once upon a plan" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 13 August 2016 . Retrieved 11 July 2016 . ^ "Reference Material 2010 Notes of the Functioning of Various DiviionsI" (PDF) . Planning Commission of India. 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 December 2016 . Retrieved 11 July 2016 . ^ M M Sury (2003). "India: Central Government Budgets – 1947–48 to 2003–04" . New Century Publications. Archived from the original on 16 September 2016 . Retrieved 20 July 2016 . ^ "North Block Mavericks" . Business Standard . 1 March 1997. Archived from the original on 16 August 2016 . Retrieved 11 July 2016 . ^ D K Rangnekar (2012).

The Politics of Poverty: Planning India's Development . New Delhi: Sage Publications. p. 134. ISBN 978-81-321-0902-0 . ^ "dated December 21, 1954: State Bank of India" .

The Hindu . 21 December 2004. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016 . Retrieved 12 July 2016 . ^ Thaur, B.S. (20 April 2003). "Tracing history of the SBI" .

The Tribune . Archived from the original on 22 December 2016 . Retrieved 12 July 2016 . ^ Arvind Panagariya (2008). India: The Emerging Giant . New York: Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-989014-9 . ^ P.S. Palande; R.S. Shah (2003). Insurance in India: Changing Policies and Emerging Opportunities . New Delhi: Response Books. p. 31. ISBN 978-0-7619-9747-4 . ^ Ziaul Hasan Faruqi (1999). Dr. Zakir Hussain, Quest for Truth . Delhi: APH Publishing. p. 280. ISBN 978-81-7648-056-7 . ^ Niranjan Rajadhyaksha (7 December 2012). "The anxiety that lingers" . Mint . Archived from the original on 17 August 2016 . Retrieved 11 July 2016 . ^ Steinberg, Blema S. (2008). Women in power : the personalities and leadership styles of Indira Gandhi, Golda Meir, and Margaret Thatcher . Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press . p. 20. ISBN 978-0-7735-3356-1 . Retrieved 2 December 2015 . ^ Steinberg, Blema S. (2008). Women in power : the personalities and leadership styles of Indira Gandhi, Golda Meir, and Margaret Thatcher . Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press . p. 20. ISBN 978-0-7735-3356-1 . Retrieved 2 December 2015 . ^ Upadhyaya, Prakash Chandra (1989). "Review of Marxist State Governments in India, Politics, Economics and Society by T.J. Nossiter". Social Scientist . 17 (1/2 January – February 1989): 84– 91. doi : 10.2307/3520112 . JSTOR 3520112 . ^ a b Frank, Katherine (2002). Indira: The Life of Indira Nehru Gandhi . Houghton Mifflin Books. p. 250. ISBN 978-0-395-73097-3 . ^ Marlay, Ross; Clark D. Neher (1999). Patriots and Tyrants: Ten Asian Leaders . Rowman & Littlefield . p. 368. ISBN 978-0-8476-8442-7 . Archived from the original on 5 February 2021 . Retrieved 19 August 2021 . ^ Sarvepalii, Gopal . Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography, Volume 3; Volumes 1956–1964 . Oxford University Press . p. 17. Nehru was still an agnostic, but a Hindu agnostic. ^ "The death of Nehru: From the archive, 28 May 1964" . TheGuardian.com . 28 May 2013. Archived from the original on 11 August 2014 . Retrieved 22 August 2021 . ^ Vohra, Ashok (27 May 2011). "Nehru's Scientific Humanism" . Times of India . Archived from the original on 26 August 2017 . Retrieved 18 August 2017 . ^ Sarvepalli Gopal (2015). Jawaharlal Nehru;a Biography Volume 1 1889–1947 . Random House . ISBN 978-1-4735-2187-2 . ^ Thursby, Gene R. (1975). Hindu-Muslim Relations in British India: A Study of Controversy, Conflict, and Communal Movements in Northern India 1923–1928 . Brill. p. 1. ISBN 978-90-04-04380-0 . ^ A.A. Parvathy (1994). Secularism and Hindutva, a Discursive Study . Codewood Process & Printing. p. 42. ^ Mohammad Jamil Akhtar. Babri Masjid: a tale untold . Genuine Publications. p. 359. ^ Ram Puniyani (1999). Communal Threat to Secular Democracy . Kalpaz Publications. p. 113. ^ Sankar Ghose (1993). Jawaharlal Nehru, a Biography . Alied Publishers. p. 210. ^ "Nehru and the Concept of One World -Idealistic Fantasy or Practical Necessity?" (PDF) . 2014. ^ Khan, Laiqh A. (18 October 2020). "Nehru's address at UoM convocation in 1948 remains untraceable" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 21 July 2021 . ^ "Who We Are" . globalcenters.columbia.edu . Retrieved 5 July 2021 . ^ "Conferment of Honorary Degree of Doctor" . Keio University . Retrieved 21 July 2021 . ^ Girija Kanta Mookerjee (1972). Nehru, the Humanist . Trimurti Publications. p. 8. ^ "Padma Awards Directory (1954–2007)" (PDF) . Ministry of Home affairs. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 April 2009 . Retrieved 26 November 2010 . ^ Prasad, Rajendra (1958). Speeches of President Rajendra Prasad 1952–1956 .

The Publication Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, GOI. pp. 340– 341. : "In doing so, for once, I may be said to be acting unconstitutionally, as I am taking this step on my own initiative and without any recommendation or advice from my Prime Minister; but I know that my action will be endorsed most enthusiastically not only by my Cabinet and other Ministers but by the country as a whole." ^ "Peace Laureates – Living Humanity" . livinghumanity . 2 September 1996 . Retrieved 21 March 2024 . ^ "Decoration Ceremony of the First Class Star of the Republic of Indonesia and the First Class Star of Services Awarded by the Government of Indonesia" (PDF) . Government of the Republic Indonesia. 12 December 1995 . Retrieved 11 January 2021 . ^ "The Order of the Companions of O.R. Tambo" .

The Presidency . 25 April 2019. Archived from the original on 4 August 2023 . Retrieved 25 June 2023 . ^ Diwanchand Institute of National Affairs; Indian Council of World Affairs (1955). Indian Recorder & Digest (in German). p. 23 . Retrieved 11 November 2023 . ^ "1956: Commonwealth heads honoured" . BBC News . Retrieved 28 November 2024 . ^ Jahanbegloo, Ramin Conversations with Isaiah Berlin (London 2000), ISBN 978-1-84212-164-1 pp. 201–202 ^ Gail Omvedt (1980). We Will Smash this Prison!.: Indian Women in Struggle . Women in the Third World series. Zed Press. p. 124. ISBN 978-0-905762-44-9 . Jawaharlal Nehru was the most famous leader, next to Mahatma Gandhi, of the Indian independence movement ^ Wiatr, J.J. (2022). Political Leadership Between Democracy and Authoritarianism: Comparative and Historical Perspectives . Verlag Barbara Budrich. p. 71. ISBN 978-3-8474-1693-7 . scholars underline the importance of demographic political culture and its roots in the decades of peaceful struggle for independence (Vidyarthi 1967). Next to Gandhi himself, it was Nehru who deserved credit for such development. ^ Patil, V.T. (1987). Studies on Nehru . Facet Books International. p. 117. ISBN 978-0-932377-14-2 . Among the many giants of the freedom movement, next to Gandhi, Nehru was the tallest ^ Cannon, P.G.; Cannon, G.; Brine, K. (1995). Objects of Enquiry: The Life, Contributions, and Influences of Sir William Jones, 1746-1794 . New York University Press . p. 158. ISBN 978-0-8147-1517-8 . "In the generation that won independence for India and the one following it Jawaharlal Nehru, the second most important Indian nationalist next to Gandhi ^ Shukla, K.R.G.V. (2009). Foreign Policy of India . Atlantic Publishers & Distributors. p. 99. ISBN 978-81-269-1030-4 . ^ Lorne John Kavic. "In search of peace and security – A study of Indian foreign policy in the Cold War" . University of British Columbia . Archived from the original on 23 April 2024 . Retrieved 23 April 2024 . ^ a b Madan, Karuna (13 November 2014). "The relevance of Jawaharlal Nehru" . gulfnews.com . Archived from the original on 24 July 2021 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ Pal, R.M. (September 1997). "Universal primary education first on the Prime Minster's agenda" . pucl.org . Archived from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ "Introduction" . AIIMS . Archived from the original on 25 June 2014. ^ "Institute History" . Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur . Archived from the original on 13 August 2007 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ "Nehru, a 'Queer Mixture of East and West,' Led the Struggle for a, Modern India; Devoted His Life to Nation's Cause; Blended Skill in Politics With the Spiritualism of His Mentor, Gandhi" .

The New York Times . 28 May 1964. Archived from the original on 14 June 2021 . Retrieved 14 June 2021 . ^ Vertovec, Steven (2014). Routledge International Handbook of Diversity Studies . Routledge International Handbooks. Taylor & Francis. p. 140. ISBN 978-1-317-60069-5 . ^ Harrison, Selig S. (July 1956). "The Challenge to Indian Nationalism". Foreign Affairs . 34 (2): 620– 636. doi : 10.2307/20031191 . JSTOR 20031191 . ^ Sherman, T.C. (2022). Nehru's India: A History in Seven Myths . Princeton University Press. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-691-22722-1 . ^ "Architect of modern India" . Frontline . 8 November 2018. Archived from the original on 4 December 2021 . Retrieved 4 December 2021 . ^ " 'Architect of modern India': Congress pays tributes to Jawaharlal Nehru on death anniversary" .

The New Indian Express . 27 May 2021. Archived from the original on 4 December 2021 . Retrieved 4 December 2021 . ^ "Jawaharlal Nehru: Architect of modern India" . Hindustan Times . 14 November 2019. Archived from the original on 9 November 2021 . Retrieved 4 December 2021 . ^ Ian Hall, The Conversation (22 August 2021). "Nehru, the architect of modern India, also helped discredit European imperialism" . Scroll.in . Archived from the original on 15 November 2021 . Retrieved 4 December 2021 . ^ Dixit, J.N. (14 November 2021). "From the archives: How Jawaharlal Nehru shaped India in the 20th century" . India Today . Archived from the original on 15 November 2021 . Retrieved 4 December 2021 . ^ "Editorial: Master's voice" . www.telegraphindia.com . Archived from the original on 4 December 2021 . Retrieved 4 December 2021 . ^ "Opinion: Nehruvian legacy is his idea of India" .

The Siasat Daily . 26 May 2021. Archived from the original on 3 November 2021 . Retrieved 4 December 2021 . ^ Service, Tribune News. "A thousand lies can't dwarf the giant Nehru was" . Tribuneindia News Service . Archived from the original on 30 March 2024 . Retrieved 4 December 2021 . ^ "Nehru, the real architect of modern India" . Deccan Chronicle . 16 November 2014. Archived from the original on 9 November 2021 . Retrieved 4 December 2021 . ^ Subramanian, V.K. (2003).

The Great Ones Vol. IV . Abhinav Publications. p. 161. ISBN 978-81-7017-472-1 . He was the greatest figure after Gandhi in the history of modern India. ^ Inder Malhotra (2014). Indira Gandhi: A Personal and Political Biography . Hay House. p. 124. ISBN 978-93-84544-16-4 . Jawaharlal Nehru, the greatest of all Indians after Gandhi and free India's first prime minister ^ Bhatia, V. (1989). Jawaharlal Nehru, as Scholars of Socialist Countries See Him . Panchsheel Publishers. p. 105. Jawaharlal Nehru was incomparably the greatest figure after Gandhi in our history - a man of dynamic force, intellectual power and profound vision. ^ Lok Rajya . Directorate-General of Information and Public Relations. 1965. p. 40. Nehru was the greatest man produced by the nation after Mahatma Gandhi and the torch he lit must remain burning forever. ^ Guha, Ramachandra (2005). "Verdicts on Nehru: Rise and Fall of a Reputation". Economic and Political Weekly . 40 (19): 1958– 1962. eISSN 2349-8846 . ISSN 0012-9976 . JSTOR 4416605 . ^ Craig Jeffrey, John Harriss (2014). Keywords for Modern India . Oxford University Press. p. 134. ISBN 978-0-19-966563-1 . Retrieved 21 February 2023 . ^ Kaur, Navtej (2008). "Nehru as a prophet of world peace".

The Indian Journal of Political Science . 69 (1). Indian Political Science Association: 203– 222. ISSN 0019-5510 . JSTOR 41856405 . He was generally praised and supported for his statesmanship. Nehru did a commendable job in promoting world peace.

As a statesman, committed to world peace, he strive hard to promote international understanding and co-operation ^ Finck, L.; Hayes, J.P. (1987). Jawaharlal Nehru . World leaders past & present. Chelsea House Publishers. p. 95. ISBN 978-0-87754-543-9 . Nehru was now given a special title of respect by the people of India. They called him Pandit, or Wise One. ^ a b Thakur, Harish (2010). Gandhi Nehru and Globalization . Concept Publishing. ISBN 978-81-8069-684-8 . ^ "Remembering Jawaharlal Nehru" . Deccan Chronicle . 29 May 2019. Archived from the original on 8 September 2021 . Retrieved 8 September 2021 . ^ "Modish Designs" . outlookindia . 4 February 2022. Archived from the original on 8 September 2021 . Retrieved 8 September 2021 . ^ Lahiri, Tripti (20 January 2012). "A Profile of the Nehru Jacket" . blogs.wsj.com . Archived from the original on 3 March 2015 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ "Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund" . Archived from the original on 7 November 2015 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ "The relevance of Jawaharlal Nehru" . gulfnews.com . 13 November 2014. Archived from the original on 24 July 2021 . Retrieved 2 December 2018 . ^ India Today, Volume 22 . Thomson Living Media India Limited. 1997. p. 77. on the choice of the greatest Indian since 1947. Jawaharlal Nehru was the clear choice of 42 percent ^ Sengupta, Uttam (20 August 2012). "A Measure Of The Man" . Outlook . Archived from the original on 24 July 2021 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ "The Britannica Guide the World's Most Influential People Series: The 100 Most Influential World Leaders of All Time" . Gale eBooks . Archived from the original on 23 April 2024 . Retrieved 23 April 2024 . ^ Suman Bhuchar (2002). "Seth, Roshan" .

In Alison Donnell (ed.). Companion to Contemporary Black British Culture . Routledge. p. 276. ISBN 978-1-134-70025-7 . ^ "What makes Shyam special..." The Hindu . 17 January 2003. Archived from the original on 27 June 2003 . Retrieved 6 June 2013 . ^ "Universal Studio Scraps Nehru-Edwina Film" . ^ Sharma, Garima (7 March 2010). "Shyam Benegal on his film Nehru" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ Documentary Today . Films Division , Government of India . 2010. p. 7. ^ "Jawaharlal Nehru Biography – Childhood, Facts & Achievements of India's First Prime Minister" . culturalindia.net . Archived from the original on 13 August 2017 . Retrieved 25 August 2017 . ^ "Naunihal" . Rotten Tomatoes . Retrieved 14 June 2026 . ^ "Ab Dilli Dur Nahin (1957)" . Rotten Tomatoes . Retrieved 13 August 2021 . ^ Ashish Rajadhyaksha; Paul Willemen (2014). "Mir, Ezra" . Encyclopedia of Indian Cinema . Taylor & Francis. pp. 9–. ISBN 978-1-135-94325-7 . Retrieved 17 August 2015 . ^ Richard Meran Barsam (1992). Nonfiction Film: A Critical History . Indiana University Press. p. 271. ISBN 978-0-253-20706-7 . Retrieved 26 February 2013 . ^ "India, 1951–1960" . Movie Movie . 2009–2012. Archived from the original on 13 January 2018 . Retrieved 29 September 2022 . ^ Awards: The multi-faceted playwright Frontline , Vol. 16, No. 3, 30 January – 12 February 1999. ^ Sachindananda (2006). "Girish Karnad" . Authors speak . Sahitya Akademi . p. 58. ISBN 978-81-260-1945-8 . ^ "Children's Day: Popular Books On and By Jawaharlal Nehru" .

The Times of India . 13 November 2020. ^ Balakrishnan, Anima (4 August 2006). "Young World : From dad with love" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 12 November 2009 . Retrieved 31 October 2008 . ^ "Jawaharlal Nehru Letters to Chief Ministers 1947-1964" . Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund. 1985 . Retrieved 2 May 2025 . ^ Roberts, Adam; Willis, Michael J.; McCarthy, Rory; Garton Ash, Timothy (2016). Civil Resistance in the Arab Spring: Triumphs and Disasters . OUP Oxford. p. 44. ISBN 978-0-19-108833-9 . Nehru's books were translated into Arabic and widely read ^ Rana, A.P. (1994). Four Decades of Indo-U.S. Relations: A Commemorative Retrospective . Har-Anand Publications. p. 203. ISBN 978-81-241-0156-8 . Nehru's books were widely read and reviewed. ^ Gunther, John (1942), Inside Asia , New York and London: Harper and Brothers, p. 429 ^ Brecher, Michael (2016), Political Leadership and Charisma: Nehru, Ben-Gurion, and Other 20th-Century Political Leaders, Intellectual Odyssey I , London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 80– 81, ISBN 978-3-319-32627-6 ^ Crocker, Walter (2008), Nehru: A Contemporary's Estimate , Penguin Random House India, ISBN 9788184002133 ^ Jack, Ian (1 May 2007), Noble words , Great speeches of the 20th-century: Nehru, Guardian Sources Ghose, Sankar (1993). Jawaharlal Nehru . Allied Publishers. ISBN 978-81-7023-369-5 . Gopal, Sarvepalli. Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography Volume 1 1889–1947 (1975); Jawaharlal Nehru Vol. 2 1947–1956 (1979); Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography Volume 3 1956–1964 (2014), a major scholarly biography. Gopal, Sarvepalli (1976). Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography, Volume 1 1889–1947 . Oxford University Press . ISBN 9780198079828 . Kopstein, Jeffrey (2005). Comparative Politics: Interests, Identities, and Institutions in a Changing Global Order . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-1-139-44604-4 . Moraes, Frank (2007). Jawaharlal Nehru . Jaico Publishing House . ISBN 978-81-7992-695-6 . Nanda, B.R. (2007).

The Essential Writings of Jawaharlal Nehru (Oxford University Press, 2003) ISBN 978-0-19-565324-3 Autobiography: Toward freedom , Oxford University Press Letters for a Nation: From Jawaharlal Nehru to His Chief Ministers 1947–1963 (Penguin UK, 2015). Letters from a father to his daughter by Jawaharlal Nehru, Children's Book Trust Independence and After: A collection of the more important speeches of Jawaharlal Nehru from September 1946 to May 1949 (1949). Delhi: The Publications Division, Government of India. "A Tryst with Destiny" – Historic speech made by Jawaharlal Nehru on 14 August 1947 Baru, Sanjaya (2021). India's Power Elite: Class, Caste and Cultural Revolution . Penguin Random House India Private Limited. ISBN 978-93-90914-76-0 . Prime Minister Modi decided to alter the character of the premises as part of his campaign to liberate India from the Nehruvian intellectual inheritance. Brown, Judith M. (1984). "The Mountbatten Viceroyalty. Announcement and Reception of the 3 June Plan, 31 May–7 July 1947".

The English Historical Review . 99 (392): 667– 668. doi : 10.1093/ehr/XCIX.CCCXCII.667 . Lumby, E.W.R. (1954).

The Oxford Handbook of Indian Foreign Policy. (2015) excerpt ; a comprehensive overview by over 50 leading experts. Purushotham, Sunil. "World history in the atomic age: Past, present and future in the political thought of Jawaharlal Nehru." Modern Intellectual History 14.3 (2017): 837–867. Raghavan, Srinath. War and peace in modern India (Springer, 2016); focus on Nehru's foreign policy Raghavan, Srinath.