The Chera dynasty , the first major kingdom in the region, rose to prominence through maritime commerce but often faced invasions from the neighbouring Chola and Pandya dynasties.

In the 15th century, the spice trade attracted Portuguese traders to Kerala, initiating European colonisation in India.

After Indian independence in 1947, the kingdoms Travancore and Cochin acceded to the newly formed republic and were merged together in 1949 to form the state of Travancore-Cochin .

In 1956, the modern state of Kerala was instituted by exchanging peripheral areas with the former Madras State ; Malabar district and the Kasargod taluk of South Canara district were merged with Travancore-Cochin to form Kerala, while Kanyakumari district and parts of Shenkottai taluk were annexed to Madras State. Kerala consists of 14 districts since 1984. Kerala has the highest Human Development Index , at 0.784 in 2018; the highest literacy rate, 96.2% in 2018; the highest life expectancy, at 77.3 years; and the highest sex ratio , with 1,084 women per 1,000 men and the lowest positive population growth rate in India (3.44%). It is the least impoverished and the second-most urbanised state in the country.

The state has witnessed significant emigration, particularly to the Arab states of the Persian Gulf during the Gulf Boom of the 1970s and early 1980s, and its economy relies heavily on remittances from a large Malayali expatriate population. Hinduism is practised by more than 54% of the population , followed by Islam and Christianity.

The culture is a synthesis of Aryan and Dravidian traditions, shaped over millennia by influences from across India and abroad.

The production of black pepper and natural rubber contributes significantly to the national output.

In the agricultural sector, coconut, tea, coffee, cashew, and spices are important crops.

The state has a coastline of 595 kilometres (370 mi), and 1.1 million people depend on the fishing industry, which accounts for around 3% of the state's income.

The economy is largely service sector oriented, while the primary sector contributes a comparatively smaller share. Kerala has the highest media exposure in India , with newspapers published in nine languages, primarily Malayalam and English. Kerala is one of the prominent tourist destinations of India, with coconut-lined sandy beaches , backwaters , hill stations , Ayurvedic tourism and tropical greenery as its major attractions. Name Etymology The word Kerala is first recorded as Keralaputo ('son of Chera ') in a 3rd-century-BCE rock inscription left by the Maurya emperor Ashoka (274–237 BCE), one of his edicts pertaining to welfare.

At that time, one of three states in the region was called Cheralam in Classical Tamil: Chera and Kera are variants of the same word.

The word Cheral refers to the oldest known dynasty of Kerala kings and is derived from the Old Tamil word for 'lake'. Keralam may stem from the Classical Tamil cherive-alam 'declivity of a hill or a mountain slope' or chera alam 'land of the Cheras'. One folk etymology derives Kerala from the Malayalam word kera 'coconut tree' and alam 'land'; thus, 'land of coconuts', which is a nickname for the state used by locals due to the abundance of coconut trees. Kerala was alternatively called Malabar in the foreign trade circles .

From the time of Cosmas Indicopleustes (6th century CE) itself, the Arab sailors used to call Kerala Male . Renaming to Keralam There have been long-standing demands for changing the name to Keralam, the Malayalam name of the state. Officially, the state's name in Malayalam is 'Keralam' (കേരളം), while its English name is 'Kerala'.

The Kerala Legislative Assembly passed a unanimous resolution in June 2024 to change the state's name from 'Kerala' to 'Keralam', following an earlier unanimous resolution in August 2023. Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan had moved both resolutions, which sought to amend the state's name under Article 3 of the Constitution to reflect its Malayali identity.

The Union Cabinet approved this proposal on February 24, 2026.

Following Cabinet approval, the President of India will refer the Kerala (Alteration of Name) Bill, 2026 to the State Legislative Assembly for expressing its views under the proviso to Article 3 of the Constitution of India.

After the Kerala Legislative Assembly 's approval, this bill will be introduced in the Parliament of India and if passed, the state's name will officially become Keralam. History Main article: History of Kerala Legend A painting depicting Parashurama , surrounded by settlers, commanding Varuna (the Hindu god of water) to part the seas In stories of the Dashavatara from Hindu mythology, the lands of Kerala were recovered from the sea by the axe-wielding warrior sage Parashurama , the sixth avatar (incarnation) of Vishnu .

As a result, Kerala is traditionally referred to as Parashurama Kshetram ("The Land of Parashurama"). According to legend, Parashurama threw his axe across the sea, and the water receded to the point where it landed. This land that emerged extended from Gokarna to Kanyakumari .

The land that emerged was saline and uninhabitable, so Parashurama invoked the snake king Vasuki , who spat holy poison to purify the soil, transforming it into fertile land. Out of respect, Vasuki and all snakes were appointed as guardians of the land.

The legend was expanded and codified in the 17th or 18th century text Keralolpathi . It links the origin of early Kerala institutions—such as land tenure and administration—to Parashurama's story.

In medieval times, the Chera king Chenkuttuvan may have emulated the Parashurama tradition by throwing his spear into the sea to symbolise his lordship over it. A prominent Puranic figure associated with Kerala is Mahabali , an asura and archetypal just king who is said to have ruled the earth from Kerala. He defeated the devas in battle, driving them into exile.

In response, the devas appealed to Vishnu, who assumed his fifth avatar as Vamana and, to restore order, pushed Mahabali down to Patala (the netherworld). According to popular belief, Mahabali returns to Kerala once a year, which is commemorated as the Onam festival.

The Matsya Purana , one of the oldest among the 18 Puranas , situates the story of Matsya —the first avatar of Vishnu—and king Manu , the first man and ruler of the region—in the Malaya Mountains of Kerala and Tamil Nadu . Pre-history A dolmen erected by Neolithic people in Marayur A substantial portion of present-day Kerala is believed to have been submerged under the sea in ancient times.

The discovery of marine fossils near Changanassery supports this hypothesis. Prehistoric archaeological discoveries in Kerala include Neolithic -era dolmens in the Marayur region of the Idukki district, locally known as muniyara —from muni (hermit or sage) and ara (dolmen). Rock engravings in the Edakkal caves in Wayanad date back to the Neolithic period, around 6000 BCE. Archaeological studies have identified Mesolithic , Neolithic and Megalithic sites throughout the region. These findings indicate that the development of early Kerala society and culture began in the Paleolithic Age and progressed through the Mesolithic, Neolithic and Megalithic periods. Foreign cultural interactions also played a role in shaping this development; some historians suggest possible connections with the Indus Valley Civilisation during the late Bronze Age and early Iron Age . Ancient history Silk Road map.

The spice trade was along the water routes (blue). Kerala has been a major spice exporter since at least 3000 BCE, according to Sumerian records , and it is continues to be referred to as the "Garden of Spices" or as the "Spice Garden of India".

The region's spices attracted ancient Babylonians , Assyrians , and Egyptians to the Malabar Coast during the 3rd and 2nd millennia BCE. Arabs and Phoenicians also established trade links with Kerala during this period.

The land of Keralaputra was one of four independent kingdoms in southern India during the time of Emperor Ashoka, alongside the Chola , Pandya , and Satiyaputra kingdoms. Scholars generally identify Keralaputra as another name for the Cheras , the earliest major dynasty based in Kerala. These southern territories once shared a common language and cultural framework, within a region historically known as Tamilakam .

While the Cheras governed most of what is now Kerala, the southern tip of the region fell under the control of the Pandyas , whose trading port is sometimes identified in ancient Western sources as Nelcynda (or Neacyndi). Later, control of the region alternated among the Pandyas, Cheras, and Cholas.

The Ays and Mushikas were two other dynasties of ancient Kerala, located to the south and north of the Chera territory, respectively.

By the last centuries BCE, the coast had become an important hub for Greek and Roman trade, particularly in black pepper .

The Cheras maintained commercial links with Ancient China , West Asia , Egypt, Greece, and the Roman Empire .

In foreign trade records, the region was referred to as Male or Malabar . Principal ports of the time included Muziris , Berkarai, and Nelcynda.

The value of Rome's annual trade with Kerala has been estimated at around 50 million sesterces . Contemporary Sangam literature describes Roman ships arriving at Muziris, laden with gold in exchange for pepper. One of the earliest Western traders to navigate the monsoon winds to reach Kerala was Eudoxus of Cyzicus , who made the voyage around 118 or 166 BCE under the patronage of Ptolemy VIII , king of the Hellenistic Ptolemaic dynasty in Egypt. Roman establishments in the region's port cities—including a temple of Augustus and barracks for garrisoned Roman soldiers—are recorded in the Tabula Peutingeriana , the only surviving map of the Roman cursus publicus . Merchants from West Asia and Southern Europe established coastal posts and settlements in Kerala.

The Jewish connection with Kerala is believed to date back to 573 BCE. Arab traders had links with Kerala from at least the 4th century BCE; Herodotus (484–413 BCE) noted that goods brought by Arabs from Kerala were sold to Jews in Eden. These Arab traders intermarried with local communities, leading to the formation of the Muslim Mappila community.

In the 4th century CE, some Christians migrated from Persia and joined the early Syrian Christian community, which traces its origins to the evangelistic activities of Thomas the Apostle in the 1st century CE.

The term Mappila—originally an honorific applied to esteemed foreign visitors—later became associated with the descendants of Jewish, Syrian Christian, and Muslim immigrants, leading to the terms Juda Mappilas , Nasrani Mappilas , and Muslim Mappilas , respectively. According to the traditions of these communities, some of the earliest religious establishments in India were built in Kerala. These include the Saint Thomas Christian churches , the Cheraman Juma Masjid (established in 629 CE), India's first mosque, and the Paradesi Synagogue (built in 1568 CE), the oldest active synagogue in the Commonwealth of Nations . Medieval period Tharisapalli plates granted to Saint Thomas Christians testify that merchant guilds and trade corporations played a very significant role in the economy and social life during the Kulasekhara period. A second Chera kingdom (c. 800–1102), also known as the Kulasekhara dynasty of Mahodayapuram , was founded by Kulasekhara Varman and governed over a territory comprising most of present-day Kerala and parts of modern Tamil Nadu.

During the early phase of the Kulasekara period, the southern region—from Nagerkovil to Thiruvalla —was controlled by the Ay dynasty .

By the 10th century, however, the Ays had lost their power, and the region was incorporated into the Kulashekara realm. Under Kulashekhara rule, Kerala experienced a flourishing period marked by developments in art, literature, trade, and the Bhakti movement within Hinduism. It was during this time that a distinct Keralite identity began to emerge, separate from Tamil culture, particularly through linguistic differentiation. For administrative purposes, the kingdom was divided into provinces governed by local chieftains called Naduvazhis . Each province was further subdivided into desams , which were overseen by Desavazhis. A series of Chera–Chola conflicts in the 11th century disrupted foreign trade through Kerala's ports.

During this period, Buddhism and Jainism , which had previously coexisted with Hinduism, declined and eventually disappeared from the region. Social structures became increasingly rigid, and caste divisions deepened.

The Kulashekhara dynasty ultimately fell in 1102 CE following a combined assault by the Later Pandyas and Later Cholas .

In the 14th century, Ravi Varma Kulashekhara (r. 1299–1314) of the southern Venad kingdom briefly established a short-lived supremacy over much of southern India.

Following his death, and in the absence of a strong central authority, the region fragmented into thirty small, frequently warring principalities. Among the most powerful were the kingdom of Samuthiri (Zamorin) in the north, Venad in the south and Kochi in the central region.

In the 18th century, King Anizham Thirunal Marthanda Varma of Travancore launched a series of military campaigns and annexed territories up to northern Kerala, establishing Travancore as the dominant power in the region.

The Kochi ruler sued for peace, and the Malabar region eventually came under direct British rule until Indian independence in 1947. Colonial rule The route taken by Vasco da Gama to reach Kerala (indicated in black) During the High and Late Middle Ages , Arab traders held a maritime monopoly over the spice trade in the Indian Ocean . This dominance was challenged during the European Age of Discovery when the spice trade—particularly in black pepper—became a major focus of European commercial activity.

By the 15th century, the Portuguese had begun asserting control over eastern maritime routes, culminating in Vasco Da Gama 's arrival at Kappad , near Kozhikode (Calicut), in 1498.

The Zamorin of Kozhikode granted the Portuguese permission to trade with his subjects, leading to the establishment of a prosperous Portuguese factory and fort. However, tensions arose when the Portuguese attacked Arab traders operating under the Zamorin's protection, causing a breakdown in relations. Seizing the opportunity presented by rivalry between the Zamorin and the King of Kochi, the Portuguese allied with Kochi.

When Francisco de Almeida was appointed Viceroy of Portuguese India in 1505, he established his headquarters at Fort Kochi ( Fort Emmanuel ), rather than in Kozhikode. Under his administration, the Portuguese consolidated their influence by building several fortifications along the Malabar Coast. Despite these advances, the Portuguese faced significant resistance from the Zamorin's naval forces, particularly under the command of the Kunjali Marakkars —admirals of Kozhikode—who launched effective maritime campaigns. This resistance eventually forced the Portuguese to seek a treaty.

In 1571, the Zamorin's forces defeated the Portuguese in the Battle of Chaliyam Fort , marking a major setback for Portuguese ambitions in the region.

The Portuguese were eventually supplanted by the Dutch East India Company , which capitalised on ongoing conflicts between the Kozhikode and Kochi to gain control over trade in the region. However, the Dutch too faced military resistance, most notably from Marthanda Varma of the Travancore royal family .

After a decisive Dutch defeat at the Battle of Colachel in 1741, the Treaty of Mavelikkara was signed in 1753, forcing the Dutch to withdraw from regional political affairs and confining their role to trade. Marthanda Varma continued his military campaigns, establishing Travancore as the preeminent power in Kerala.

In 1766, Hyder Ali , ruler of Mysore , invaded northern Kerala , and his son and successor, Tipu Sultan , launched military campaigns against the expanding British East India Company . These confrontations contributed to two of the four Anglo-Mysore Wars .

By the early 1790s, Tipu Sultan was forced to cede the Malabar district and South Kanara to the British, and these regions were annexed into the Madras Presidency of British India in 1792.

The British East India Company also secured tributary alliances with Kochi in 1791 and Travancore in 1795.

By the end of 18th century, the entirety of Kerala was either directly administered by the British or under their suzerainty .

In the 20th century, Kerala was the site of several major uprisings during the Indian independence movement. Among the most notable was the 1921 Malabar Rebellion , in which Mappila Muslims of the Malabar region rioted against Hindu zamindars (landlords) and British colonial authorities. Social reform moments also gained momentum during this period, particularly those challenging caste-based discrimination. A major milestone was the Temple Entry Proclamation of 1936 in Travancore, which granted lower-caste Hindus the right to enter temples previously restricted to upper castes. State of India After the Partition of India in 1947 into the independent dominions of India and Pakistan, the princely states of Travancore and Kochi acceded to the Union of India .

On 1 July 1949, the two states were merged to form Travancore-Cochin .

On 1 November 1956, the taluk of Kasargod from the South Kanara district of Madras, the Malabar district of Madras State (excluding Gudalur taluk of Nilgiris district , Lakshadweep , Topslip , and the Attappadi forest east of Anakatti), and the state of Travancore-Cochin—excluding four southern taluks ( Kanyakumari district and Shenkottai taluks), which were transferred to Tamil Nadu—were merged to form the state of Kerala under the States Reorganisation Act . A Communist -led government under E. M. S. Namboodiripad was formed following the first elections for the new Kerala Legislative Assembly in 1957. It was among the earliest democratically elected Communist governments in the world, following Communist electoral success in the Republic of San Marino in 1945. Geography Main article: Geography of Kerala The state is wedged between the Laccadive Sea and the Western Ghats . Lying between northern latitudes 8°18' and 12°48' and eastern longitudes 74°52' and 77°22', Kerala experiences humid tropical rainforest climate with some cyclones.

The state has a coast of 590 km (370 mi) and the width of the state varies between 11 and 121 kilometres (7 and 75 mi). Geographically, Kerala can be divided into three climatically distinct regions: the eastern highlands; rugged and cool mountainous terrain, the central mid-lands; rolling hills, and the western lowlands; coastal plains. : 110 Pre-Cambrian and Pleistocene geological formations compose the bulk of Kerala's terrain. A catastrophic flood in Kerala in 1341 CE drastically modified its terrain and consequently affected its history; it also created a natural harbour for spice transport.

The eastern region of Kerala consists of high mountains, gorges and deep-cut valleys immediately west of the Western Ghats' rain shadow . : 110 41 of Kerala's west-flowing rivers, and 3 of its east-flowing ones originate in this region.

The Western Ghats form a wall of mountains interrupted only near Palakkad ; hence also known Pal ghat , where the Palakkad Gap breaks.

The Western Ghats rise on average to 1,500 metres (4,900 feet ) above sea level , while the highest peaks reach around 2,500 metres (8,200 feet). Anamudi in the Idukki district is the highest peak in south India, is at an elevation of 2,695 m (8,842 ft).

The Western Ghats mountain chain is recognised as one of the world's eight "hottest hotspots" of biological diversity and is listed among UNESCO World Heritage Sites .

The chain's forests are considered to be older than the Himalaya mountains.

The Athirappilly Falls , which is situated on the background of Western Ghat mountain ranges, is also known as The Niagara of India . It is located in the Chalakudy River and is the largest waterfall in the state. Wayanad is the sole Plateau in Kerala.

The eastern regions in the districts of Wayanad , Malappuram ( Chaliyar valley at Nilambur ), and Palakkad ( Attappadi Valley), which together form parts of the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve and a continuation of the Mysore Plateau , are known for natural Gold fields, along with the adjoining districts of Karnataka . Minerals including Ilmenite , Monazite , Thorium , and Titanium , are found in the coastal belt of Kerala. Kerala's coastal belt of Karunagappally is known for high background radiation from thorium -containing monazite sand.

In some coastal panchayats, median outdoor radiation levels are more than 4 mGy/yr and, in certain locations on the coast, it is as high as 70 mGy/yr. Kerala's western coastal belt is relatively flat compared to the eastern region, : 33 and is criss-crossed by a network of interconnected brackish canals, lakes, estuaries , and rivers known as the Kerala Backwaters . Kuttanad , also known as The Rice Bowl of Kerala , has the lowest altitude in India , and is also one of the few places in world where cultivation takes place below sea level.

The country's longest lake Vembanad , dominates the backwaters; it lies between Alappuzha and Kochi and is about 200 km 2 (77 sq mi) in area. Around eight percent of India's waterways are found in Kerala. Kerala's 44 rivers include the Periyar ; 244 kilometres (152 mi), Bharathapuzha ; 209 kilometres (130 mi), Pamba ; 176 kilometres (109 mi), Chaliyar ; 169 kilometres (105 mi), Kadalundipuzha ; 130 kilometres (81 mi), Chalakudipuzha ; 130 kilometres (81 mi), Valapattanam ; 129 kilometres (80 mi) and the Achankovil River ; 128 kilometres (80 mi).

The average length of the rivers is 64 kilometres (40 mi). Many of the rivers are small and entirely fed by monsoon rain.

As Kerala's rivers are small and lacking in delta , they are more prone to environmental effects.

The rivers face problems such as sand mining and pollution.

The state experiences several natural hazards like landslides, floods and droughts.

The state was also affected by the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami , and in 2018 received the worst flooding in nearly a century.

In 2024, Kerala experienced its worst landslides in history. Climate With around 120–140 rainy days per year, : 80 Kerala has a wet and maritime tropical climate influenced by the seasonal heavy rains of the southwest summer monsoon and northeast winter monsoon . Around 65% of the rainfall occurs from June to August corresponding to the Southwest monsoon, and the rest from September to December corresponding to Northeast monsoon.

The moisture-laden winds of the Southwest monsoon, on reaching the southernmost point of the Indian Peninsula , because of its topography, divides into two branches; the "Arabian Sea Branch" and the "Bay of Bengal Branch".

The "Arabian Sea Branch" of the Southwest monsoon first hits the Western Ghats, making Kerala the first state in India to receive rain from the Southwest monsoon.

The distribution of pressure patterns is reversed in the Northeast monsoon, during this season the cold winds from North India pick up moisture from the Bay of Bengal and precipitate it on the east coast of peninsular India.

In Kerala, the influence of the Northeast monsoon is seen in southern districts only. Kerala's rainfall averages 2,923 mm (115 in) annually. Some of Kerala's drier lowland regions average only 1,250 mm (49 in); the mountains of the eastern Idukki district receive more than 5,000 mm (197 in) of orographic precipitation : the highest in the state.

In eastern Kerala, a drier tropical wet and dry climate prevails.

During the summer, the state is prone to gale-force winds, storm surges, cyclone-related torrential downpours, occasional droughts, and rises in sea level. : 26, 46, 52 The mean daily temperature ranges from 19.8 °C to 36.7 °C. Mean annual temperatures range from 25.0 to 27.5 °C in the coastal lowlands to 20.0–22.5 °C in the eastern highlands. : 65 Flora and fauna Main article: Flora and fauna of Kerala A migratory Ichthyaetus in Kadalundi Bird Sanctuary Silent Valley National Park The Cardamom Hills are notable for their biodiversity Most of the biodiversity is concentrated and protected in the Western Ghats . Three-quarters of the land area of Kerala was under thick forest up to the 18th century.

As of 2004 , over 25% of India's 15,000 plant species are in Kerala. Out of the 4,000 flowering plant species; 1,272 of which are endemic to Kerala, 900 are medicinal , and 159 are threatened . : 11 Its 9,400 km 2 (3,600 sq mi) of forests include tropical wet evergreen and semi-evergreen forests (lower and middle elevations—3,470 km 2 ), tropical moist and dry deciduous forests (mid-elevations—4,100 km 2 and 100 km 2 (39 sq mi), respectively), and montane subtropical and temperate ( shola ) forests (highest elevations—100 km 2 ). Altogether, 24% of Kerala is forested. : 12 Four of the world's Ramsar Convention listed wetlands — Lake Sasthamkotta , Ashtamudi Lake , Thrissur-Ponnani Kole Wetlands , and the Vembanad-Kol wetlands—are in Kerala, as well as 1,455.4 km 2 (561.9 sq mi) of the vast Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve and 1,828 km 2 (706 sq mi) of the Agasthyamala Biosphere Reserve . Subjected to extensive clearing for cultivation in the 20th century, : 6–7 much of the remaining forest cover is now protected from clearfelling . Eastern Kerala's windward mountains shelter tropical moist forests and tropical dry forests , which are common in the Western Ghats.

The world's oldest teak plantation 'Conolly's Plot' is in Nilambur . Kerala's fauna are notable for their diversity and high rates of endemism: it includes 118 species of mammals (1 endemic), 500 species of birds , 189 species of freshwater fish, 173 species of reptiles (10 of them endemic), and 151 species of amphibians (36 endemic). These are threatened by extensive habitat destruction, including soil erosion, landslides, salinisation , and resource extraction.

In the forests, sonokeling , Dalbergia latifolia , anjili , mullumurikku , Erythrina , and Cassia number among the more than 1,000 species of trees in Kerala. Other plants include bamboo , wild black pepper, wild cardamom , the calamus rattan palm, and aromatic vetiver grass, Vetiveria zizanioides . : 12 Indian elephant , Bengal tiger , Indian leopard , Nilgiri tahr , common palm civet , and grizzled giant squirrels are also found in the forests. : 12, 174–75 Reptiles include the king cobra , viper , python , and mugger crocodile . Kerala's birds include the Malabar trogon , the great hornbill , Kerala laughingthrush , darter and southern hill myna .

The districts that serve as administrative regions for taxation and land revenue purposes are further subdivided into 27 revenue divisions and 77 taluks , which have fiscal and administrative powers over settlements within their borders, including maintenance of local land records. Kerala's taluks are further subdivided into 1,674 revenue villages .

Since the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments, local self-government institutions in Kerala function as the third tier of government, comprising 14 District Panchayats , 152 Block Panchayats , and 941 Grama Panchayats for rural governance, and 87 Municipalities , six Municipal Corporations for urban governance. Mahé , a part of the Indian union territory of Puducherry , though 647 kilometres (402 mi) away from it, is a coastal exclave surrounded by Kerala on all of its landward approaches.

The Kannur District surrounds Mahé on three sides with the Kozhikode District on the fourth.

In 1664, the municipality of Fort Kochi was established by Dutch Malabar , making it the first municipality in the Indian subcontinent , which was dissolved when the Dutch authority got weaker in the 18th century.

The municipalities of Kozhikode , Palakkad , Fort Kochi , Kannur , and Thalassery , were founded on 1 November 1866 of the British Indian Empire , making them the first modern municipalities in the state of Kerala.

The Municipality of Thiruvananthapuram came into existence in 1920.

After two decades, during the reign of Sree Chithira Thirunal , Thiruvananthapuram Municipality was converted into Corporation on 30 October 1940, making it the oldest Municipal Corporation of Kerala.

The first Municipal Corporation founded after the independence of India as well as the second-oldest Municipal Corporation of the state is at Kozhikode in the year 1962. There are six Municipal corporations in Kerala that govern Thiruvananthapuram , Kozhikode , Kochi , Kollam , Thrissur , and Kannur .

The Kerala Legislative Assembly also known as Niyamasabha, consists of 140 members who are elected for five-year terms.

The state elects 20 members to the Lok Sabha , the lower house of the Indian Parliament , and 9 members to the Rajya Sabha , the upper house.

The Government of Kerala is a democratically elected body in India with the governor as its constitutional head and is appointed by the president of India for a five-year term.

The leader of the party or coalition with a majority in the legislative assembly is appointed as the chief minister by the governor, and the council of ministers is appointed by the governor on the advice of the chief minister.

The governor remains a ceremonial head of the state, while the chief minister and his council are responsible for day-to-day government functions.

The council of ministers consists of cabinet ministers and ministers of state (MoS).

The secretariat headed by the chief secretary assists the council of ministers in formulation and implementation of government policies.

The chief secretary is the senior-most civil servant and the administrative head of the state government.

The administration of the state government functions through 47 secretariat departments. Each government department is headed politically by a Minister and administratively by a Secretary to Government, in the rank of additional chief secretary , principal secretary , or secretary , who is typically an officer of the Indian Administrative Service (IAS).

The additional chief secretaries/principal secretaries serve as the administrative heads of the department to which they are assigned. Each department also has officers of the rank of special secretary, additional secretary, joint secretary, deputy secretary, under secretary and other supporting officials. These secretariat departments are responsible for policy formulation and administrative supervision, while line departments and other executive agencies are implementing government policies and programmes at the field level. Each Secretariat department exercises administrative control over one or more line departments, directorates, commissionerates, boards, or similar executive agencies. These agencies are responsible for implementing government policies, regulatory administration, enforcement, delivering public services and carrying out functions at the field level. They are generally headed by a Director, Commissioner, or similar authority, who functions as the Head of Department, depending on the nature of the organisation. Each of these departments/agencies has its own administrative subdivisions.

The state is divided into fourteen districts, each having a collectorate as the headquarters of the district administration.

The District Collector is the head of district administration and is responsible for land revenue administration, disaster management, elections, maintenance of law and order, and coordination of various government departments within the district. For administrative convenience, each district is further divided into revenue divisions , taluks , and revenue villages , primarily for the purpose of land revenue administration. Law enforcement in Kerala is primarily carried out by the Kerala Police , which functions under the administrative control of the Home Department of the Government of Kerala. Kerala Police is structured into two police zones (North and South), which are further divided into ranges, police districts, subdivisions, and police stations. There are 484 local police stations, which are responsible for primary law enforcement.

The judiciary consists of the Kerala High Court and a system of lower courts.

The High Court, located in Kochi , has a Chief Justice along with 35 permanent and twelve additional pro tempore justices as of 2021 .

The high court also hears cases from the Union Territory of Lakshadweep .

The state's subordinate judiciary consists of District and Sessions Courts in each of the 14 districts, headed by District Judges, along with civil courts ( Munsiff and Senior Civil Judges ) and criminal courts ( Judicial Magistrates, Chief Judicial Magistrates, and Sessions Courts ) handling cases according to their jurisdiction. Local government Main article: Local government in Kerala In Kerala, local government bodies such as Panchayats, Municipalities, and Corporations have existed since 1959. However, a significant decentralization initiative began in 1993, aligning with constitutional amendments by the union government . : 12 The Kerala Panchayati Raj Act and the Kerala Municipality Act were enacted in 1994, establishing a three-tier system for rural governance and a single-tier system for urban governance.

The rural governance three-tier structure consists of Gram Panchayats , Block Panchayats , and District Panchayats .

The Kerala Panchayati Raj Act, 1994 define clear powers for these institutions. For urban areas, the Kerala Municipality Act provides a single-tier system, comprising Municipalities and Municipal Corporations , which are responsible for local governance and civic administration. These bodies are regularly constituted through local body elections . These bodies receive substantial administrative, legal, and financial powers to ensure effective decentralization. : 13 Currently, the state government allocates around 40% of the state plan outlay to local governments. Kerala has 1,200 local bodies, including 941 Gram Panchayats, 152 Block Panchayats, 14 District Panchayats, 87 Municipalities, and 6 Municipal Corporations. Kerala was declared the first digital state of India in 2016 and, according to the India Corruption Survey 2019 by Transparency International , is considered the least corrupt state in India.

The Public Affairs Index-2020 designated Kerala as the best-governed state in India. Politics Main article: Politics of Kerala Pinarayi Vijayan , Leader of opposition Kerala is often regarded as one of the most egalitarian states in India due to its strong social welfare policies, land reforms, and high human development indicators. Kerala's politics is primarily shaped by communism , democratic socialism , secularism , centrism and regional interests. Right-wing politics is a relatively smaller force and is primarily represented by the Bharatiya Janata Party -led NDA . Kerala hosts two major political alliances: the United Democratic Front (UDF), led by the Indian National Congress ; and the Left Democratic Front (LDF), led by the Communist Party of India (Marxist) (CPI(M)).

Since 1980, Kerala's politics has been dominated by the LDF and UDF, with governments largely alternating between the two alliances.

As of the 2026 Kerala Legislative Assembly election , the UDF is the ruling coalition, and while the LDF is the official opposition. According to the Constitution of India , Kerala has a parliamentary system of representative democracy ; universal suffrage is granted to residents. Economy Main article: Economy of Kerala After independence, the state was managed as a social democratic welfare economy .

The "Kerala phenomenon" or " Kerala model of development" of very high human development and in comparison low economic development has resulted from a strong service sector. : 48 : 1 In 2019–20, the economy of Kerala was the 8th-largest in India with ₹ 8.55 trillion (US$90 billion) in gross state domestic product (GSDP) and a per capita net state domestic product of ₹ 222,000 (US$2,300).

In 2019–20, the tertiary sector contributed around 63% of the state's GSVA , compared to 28% by secondary sector , and 8% by primary sector .

In the period between 1960 and 2020, Kerala's economy was gradually shifting from an agrarian economy into a service-based one. Technopark at Thiruvananthapuram , the first and largest information technology (IT) park in India Vallarpadam Terminal at Kochi , the first transshipment terminal in India Mappila Bay harbour at Kannur The state's service sector which accounts for around 63% of its revenue is mainly based upon hospitality industry , tourism , Ayurveda and medical services, pilgrimage, information technology , transportation , financial sector, and education . Major initiatives under the industrial sector include Cochin Shipyard , shipbuilding, oil refinery, software industry, coastal mineral industries, food processing, marine products processing, and Rubber based products.

The primary sector of the state is mainly based upon cash crops . Kerala produces a significant amount of the national output of cash crops such as coconut , tea , coffee , pepper , natural rubber , cardamom , and cashew in India.

The cultivation of food crops began to reduce since the 1950s. Kerala's economy depends significantly on emigrants working in foreign countries , mainly in the Arab states of the Persian Gulf , and the remittances annually contribute more than a fifth of GSDP.

The state witnessed significant emigration during the Gulf Boom of the 1970s and early 1980s.

In 2012, Kerala still received the highest remittances of all states: US$11.3 billion, which was nearly 16% of the US$71 billion remittances to the country.

In 2015, NRI deposits in Kerala have soared to over ₹ 1 lakh crore (US$10 billion), amounting to one-sixth of all the money deposited in NRI accounts, which comes to about ₹ 7 lakh crore (US$73 billion). Malappuram district has the highest proportion of emigrant households in state. A study commissioned by the Kerala State Planning Board , suggested that the state look for other reliable sources of income, instead of relying on remittances to finance its expenditure.

As of March 2002, Kerala's banking sector comprised 3341 local branches: each branch served 10,000 people, lower than the national average of 16,000; the state has the third-highest bank penetration among Indian states.

On 1 October 2011, Kerala became the first state in the country to have at least one banking facility in every village. Unemployment in 2007 was estimated at 9.4%; chronic issues are underemployment , low employability of youth, and a low female labour participation rate of only 13.5%, : 5, 13 as was the practice of Nokku kooli , "wages for looking on".

By 1999–2000, the rural and urban poverty rates dropped to 10.0% and 9.6%, respectively.

The state's budget of 2020–2021 was ₹ 1.15 lakh crore (US$12 billion).

The state government's tax revenues (excluding the shares from Union tax pool) amounted to ₹ 674 billion (US$7.1 billion) in 2020–21; up from ₹ 557 billion (US$5.8 billion) in 2019–20. Its non-tax revenues (excluding the shares from Union tax pool) of the Government of Kerala reached ₹ 146 billion (US$1.5 billion) in 2020–2021. However, Kerala's high ratio of taxation to GSDP has not alleviated chronic budget deficits and unsustainable levels of government debt, which have impacted social services. A record total of 223 hartals were observed in 2006, resulting in a revenue loss of over ₹ 20 billion (US$210 million). Kerala's 10% rise in GDP is 3% more than the national GDP.

In 2013, capital expenditure rose 30% compared to the national average of 5%, owners of two-wheelers rose by 35% compared to the national rate of 15%, and the teacher-pupil ratio rose 50% from 2:100 to 4:100.

The Kerala Infrastructure Investment Fund Board is a government-owned financial institution in the state to mobilise funds for infrastructure development from outside the state revenue, aiming at overall infrastructure development of the state.

In November 2015, the Ministry of Urban Development selected seven cities of Kerala for a comprehensive development program known as the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT). A package of ₹ 2.5 million (US$26,000) was declared for each of the cities to develop service level improvement plan (SLIP), a plan for better functioning of the local urban bodies in the cities of Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam, Alappuzha, Kochi, Thrissur, Kozhikode, and Palakkad.

The Grand Kerala Shopping Festival (GKSF) was started in 2007, covering more than 3000 outlets across the nine cities of Kerala with huge tax discounts, VAT refunds and huge array of prizes. Lulu International Mall at Thiruvananthapuram is the largest shopping mall in India. Despite many achievements, Kerala faces many challenges like high levels of unemployment that disproportionately impact educated women, a high degree of global exposure and a very fragile environment. Industries Traditional industries manufacturing items; coir , handlooms , and handicrafts employ around one million people. Kerala supplies 60% of the total global produce of white coir fibre. India's first coir factory was set up in Alleppey in 1859–60.

The Central Coir Research Institute was established there in 1959.

As per the 2006–2007 census by SIDBI , there are 1,468,104 micro, small and medium enterprises in Kerala employing 3,031,272 people.

The KSIDC has promoted more than 650 medium and large manufacturing firms in Kerala, creating employment for 72,500 people. A mining sector of 0.3% of GSDP involves extraction of ilmenite , kaolin , bauxite , silica , quartz , rutile , zircon , and sillimanite . Other major sectors are tourism , medical sector, educational sector , banking, ship building , oil refinery , infrastructure, manufacturing, home gardens , animal husbandry and business process outsourcing . Agriculture Tea plantations at Munnar , Kerala A paddy field at Palakkad , also known as The Granary of Kerala The major change in agriculture in Kerala occurred in the 1970s when production of rice fell due to increased availability of rice all over India and decreased availability of labour. Consequently, investment in rice production decreased and a major portion of the land shifted to the cultivation of perennial tree crops and seasonal crops. Profitability of crops fell due to a shortage of farm labour, the high price of land, and the uneconomic size of operational holdings. Only 27.3% of the families in Kerala depend upon agriculture for their livelihood, which is also the least corresponding rate in India. Kerala produces 97% of the national output of black pepper and accounts for 85% of the natural rubber in the country. Coconut , tea , coffee , cashew , and spices—including cardamom, vanilla , cinnamon , and nutmeg are the main agricultural products. : 74 Around 80% of India 's export quality cashew kernels are prepared in Kollam .

The key cash crop is coconut and Kerala ranks first in the area of coconut cultivation in India. Around 90% of the total cardamom produced in India is from Kerala. India is the second-largest producer of cardamom in world. About 20% of the total coffee produced in India are from Kerala.

The key agricultural staple is rice, with varieties grown in extensive paddy fields. Home gardens made up a significant portion of the agricultural sector. Fisheries With 590 kilometres (370 miles ) of coastal belt, 400,000 hectares of inland water resources and approximately 220,000 active fishermen, Kerala is one of the leading producers of fish in India. According to 2003–04 reports, about 11 lakh(1.1 million) people earn their livelihood from fishing and allied activities such as drying, processing, packaging, exporting and transporting fisheries.

The annual yield of the sector was estimated as 6,08,000 tons in 2003–04. This contributes to about 3% of the total economy of the state.

In 2006, around 22% of the total Indian marine fishery yield was from Kerala.

During the southwest monsoon, a suspended mud bank develops along the shore, which in turn leads to calm ocean water, peaking the output of the fishing industry. This phenomenon is locally called chakara .

The state's largest checkpoint, Walayar , is on NH 544 , in the border town between Kerala and Tamil Nadu , through which a large amount of public and commercial transportation reaches the northern and central districts of Kerala.

The Department of Public Works is responsible for maintaining and expanding the state highways system and major district roads.

The Kerala State Transport Project (KSTP), which includes the GIS -based Road Information and Management Project (RIMS), is responsible for maintaining and expanding the state highways in Kerala. It also oversees a few major district roads. Traffic in Kerala has been growing at a rate of 10–11% every year, resulting in high traffic and pressure on the roads. Traffic density is nearly four times the national average, reflecting the state's high population. Kerala's annual total of road accidents is among the nation's highest.

The accidents are mainly the result of the narrow roads and irresponsible driving. National Highways in Kerala are among the narrowest in the country and will remain so for the foreseeable future, as the state government has received an exemption that allows narrow national highways.

In Kerala, highways are 45 metres (148 feet) wide.

In other states, national highways are grade separated, 60 metres (200 feet) wide with a minimum of four lanes, as well as 6 or 8-lane access-controlled expressways.

The National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) has threatened the Kerala state government that it will give higher priority to other states in highway development since political commitment to better highways in Kerala has been lacking.

The railway network in the state is controlled by two out of six divisions of the Southern Railway ; Thiruvananthapuram Railway division headquartered at Thiruvananthapuram and Palakkad Railway Division headquartered at Palakkad . Thiruvananthapuram Central (TVC) is the busiest railway station in the state. Kerala's major railway stations are: The major port in the state is at Kochi , which has an area of 8.27 km 2 (3.19 sq mi).

The Vizhinjam International Seaport Thiruvananthapuram , which is currently classified as a major port, only completed Phase I as others are under construction. Other intermediate ports include Beypore , Kollam , and Azheekal .

The remaining ports are classified as minor which include Manjeshwaram , Kasaragod , Nileshwaram , Kannur , Thalassery , Vadakara , Ponnani , Munambam , Manakodam, Alappuzha , Kayamkulam , Neendakara , and Valiyathura .

The Kerala Maritime Institute is headquartered at Neendakara , which has an additional subcentre at Kodungallur too.

The state has numerous backwaters , which are used for commercial inland navigation . Transport services are mainly provided by country craft and passenger vessels. There are 67 navigable rivers in the state while the total length of inland waterways is 1,687 kilometres (1,048 mi).

The main constraints to the expansion of inland navigation are; lack of depth in waterways caused by silting, lack of maintenance of navigation systems and bank protection, accelerated growth of the water hyacinth , lack of modern inland craft terminals, and lack of a cargo handling system. Kerala also have India's first water metro , called 'Kochi water metro'.

The Kochi water metro project identified 15 routes, connecting 10 islands along a network of routes that span 78 km with a fleet of 78 fast, and fully electrically propelled hybrid ferries .

The 616 kilometres (383 mi) long West-Coast Canal is the longest waterway in state connecting Kasaragod to Poovar . It is divided into five sections: 41 kilometres (25 mi) long Kasaragod - Nileshwaram reach, 188 kilometres (117 mi) long Nileshwaram - Kozhikode reach, 160 kilometres (99 mi) Kozhikode - Kottapuram reach, 168 kilometres (104 mi) long National Waterway 3 ( Kottapuram - Kollam reach), and 74 kilometres (46 mi) long Kollam - Vizhinjam reach.

As of 2011 , Thiruvananthapuram is the most populous city in Kerala.

In the state, the rate of population growth is India's lowest, and the decadal growth of 4.9% in 2011 is less than one-third of the all-India average of 17.6%. Kerala's population more than doubled between 1951 and 1991 by adding 15.6 million people to reach 29.1 million residents in 1991; the population stood at 33.3 million by 2011. Kerala's coastal regions are the most densely settled with population of 2022 persons per km 2 , 2.5 times the overall population density of the state, 859 persons per km 2 , leaving the eastern hills and mountains comparatively sparsely populated. Kerala is the second-most urbanised major state in the country with 47.7% urban population according to the 2011 Census of India . Around 31.8 million Keralites are predominantly Malayali.

The state's 321,000 indigenous tribal Adivasis , 1.1% of the population, are concentrated in the east. : 10–12 Gender There is a tradition of matrilineal inheritance in Kerala, where the mother is the head of the household.

As a result, women in Kerala have had a much higher standing and influence in the society. This was common among certain influential castes and is a factor in the value placed on daughters. Christian missionaries also influenced Malayali women in that they started schools for girls from poor families. Opportunities for women such as education and gainful employment often translate into a lower birth rate, which in turn, make education and employment more likely to be accessible and more beneficial for women. This creates an upward spiral for both the women and children of the community that is passed on to future generations. According to the Human Development Report of 1996, Kerala's Gender Development Index was 597; higher than any other state of India. Factors, such as high rates of female literacy, education, work participation and life expectancy, along with favourable sex ratio , contributed to it. Kerala's sex ratio of 1.084 (females to males) is higher than that of the rest of India; it is the only state where women outnumber men. : 2 While having the opportunities that education affords them, such as political participation, keeping up to date with current events, reading religious texts, etc., these tools have still not translated into full, equal rights for the women of Kerala. There is a general attitude that women must be restricted for their own benefit.

In the state, despite the social progress, gender still influences social mobility . LGBT rights Main article: LGBT rights in Kerala Kerala has been at the forefront of LGBT issues in India . Kerala is one of the first states in India to form a welfare policy for the transgender community.

In 2016, the Kerala government introduced free sex reassignment surgery through government hospitals. Queerala is one of the major LGBT organisations in Kerala. It campaigns for increased awareness of LGBT people and sensitisation concerning healthcare services, workplace policies and educational curriculum.

Since 2010, Kerala Queer Pride has been held annually across various cities in Kerala.

As of 2015 , Kerala has a Human Development Index (HDI) of 0.770, which is in the "high" category, ranking it first in the country. It was 0.790 in 2007–08 and it had a consumption-based HDI of 0.920, which is better than that of many developed countries. Comparatively higher spending by the government on primary level education , health care and the elimination of poverty from the 19th century onwards has helped the state maintain an exceptionally high HDI; the report was prepared by the central government's Institute of Applied Manpower Research . However, the Human Development Report 2005, prepared by Centre for Development Studies envisages a virtuous phase of inclusive development for the state since the advancement in human development had already started aiding the economic development of the state. Kerala is also widely regarded as the cleanest and healthiest state in India. According to the 2011 census, Kerala has the highest literacy rate (94%) among Indian states.

In 2018, the literacy rate was calculated to be 96.2% in the 2018 literacy survey conducted by the National Statistical Office, India.

In the Kottayam district , the literacy rate was 97%.

The life expectancy in Kerala is 74 years, among the highest in India as of 2011 . Kerala's rural poverty rate fell from 59% (1973–1974) to 12% (1999–2010); the overall (urban and rural) rate fell 47% between the 1970s and 2000s against the 29% fall in overall poverty rate in India.

By 1999–2000, the rural and urban poverty rates dropped to 10.0% and 9.6%, respectively.

The 2013 Tendulkar Committee Report on poverty estimated that the percentages of the population living below the poverty line in rural and urban Kerala are 9.1% and 5.0%, respectively. These changes stem largely from efforts begun in the late 19th century by the kingdoms of Cochin and Travancore to boost social welfare. This focus was maintained by Kerala's post-independence government. : 48 Kerala is the least impoverished state in India according to NITI Aayog 's Sustainable Development Goals dashboard and Reserve Bank of India 's Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy . Kerala has undergone a " demographic transition " characteristic of such developed nations as Canada , Japan , and Norway . : 1 In 2005, 11.2% of people were over the age of 60.

In 2023, the BBC reported on the problems and benefits which have arisen from migration away from Kerala, focussing on the village of Kumbanad.

In 2004, the birthrate was low at 18 per 1,000. According to the 2011 census, Kerala had a total fertility rate (TFR) of 1.6. All districts except Malappuram district had fertility rates below 2. Fertility rate is highest in Malappuram district (2.2) and lowest in Pathanamthitta district (1.3).

In 2001, Muslims had the TFR of 2.6 as against 1.5 for Hindus and 1.7 for Christians.

The state also is regarded as the "least corrupt Indian state" according to the surveys conducted by CMS Indian Corruption Study (CMS-ICS) Transparency International (2005) and India Today (1997). Kerala has the lowest homicide rate among Indian states, with 1.1 per 100,000 in 2011.

In respect of female empowerment, some negative factors such as higher suicide rate , lower share of earned income , child marriage , complaints of sexual harassment and limited freedom are reported.

The Malappuram district has the highest number of child marriages and the number of such cases is increasing in Malappuram. Child marriages are particularly higher among the Muslim community .

In 2019, Kerala recorded the highest child sex abuse complaints in India.

In 2015, Kerala had the highest conviction rate of any state, over 77%. Kerala has the lowest proportion of homeless people in rural India, <0.1%, and the state is attempting to reach the goal of becoming the first "Zero Homeless State", in addition to its acclaimed "Zero landless project", with private organisations and the expatriate Malayali community funding projects for building homes for the homeless.

The state was also among the lowest in the India State Hunger Index next only to Punjab .

The sub-replacement fertility level and infant mortality rate are lower compared to those of other states, estimated from 12 : 49 to 14 : 5 deaths per 1,000 live births; as per the National Family Health Survey 2015–16, it has dropped to 6. According to a study commissioned by Lien Foundation, a Singapore -based philanthropic organisation, Kerala is considered to be the best place to die in India based on the state's provision of palliative care for patients with serious illnesses. However, Kerala's morbidity rate is higher than that of any other Indian state—118 (rural) and 88 (urban) per 1,000 people.

The corresponding figures for all India were 55 and 54 per 1,000, respectively as of 2005 . : 5 Kerala's 13.3% prevalence of low birth weight is higher than that of many first world nations. Outbreaks of water-borne diseases such as diarrhoea , dysentery , hepatitis , and typhoid among the more than 50% of people who rely on 3 million water wells is an issue worsened by the lack of sewers . : 5–7 As of 2017, the state has the highest number of diabetes patients and also the highest prevalence rate of the disease in India.

The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the World Health Organization designated Kerala the world's first " baby-friendly state" because of its effective promotion of breastfeeding over formulas. Over 95% of Keralite births are hospital-delivered and the state also has the lowest infant mortality rate in the country.

The third National Family Health Survey ranks Kerala first in "Institutional Delivery" with 100% of births being in medical facilities. Ayurveda , : 13 siddha , and endangered and endemic modes of traditional medicine , including kalari , marmachikitsa and vishavaidyam , are practised. Some occupational communities such as Kaniyar were known as native medicine men in relation to the practice of such streams of medical systems, apart from their traditional vocation. These propagate via gurukula discipleship, : 5–6 and comprise a fusion of both medicinal and alternative treatments. : 15 The Arya Vaidya Sala established by Vaidyaratnam P. S. Warrier at Kottakkal (about 10 km from Malappuram ) in 1902, is the largest Ayurvedic medicinal network and health centre in the state. It is also one of the largest Ayurvedic medicinal brands in the world.

In 2014, Kerala became the first state in India to offer free cancer treatment to the poor, via a program called Sukrutham. People in Kerala experience elevated incidence of cancers , liver and kidney diseases.

In April 2016, the Economic Times reported that 250,000 residents undergo treatment for cancer. It also reported that approximately 150 to 200 liver transplants are conducted in the region's hospitals annually. Approximately 42,000 cancer cases are reported in the region annually. This is believed to be an underestimate as private hospitals may not be reporting their figures. Long waiting lists for kidney donations have stimulated illegal trade in human kidneys, and prompted the establishment of the Kidney Federation of India which aims to support financially disadvantaged patients.

As of 2017–18, there are 6,691 modern medicine institutions under the Department of Health Services , of which the total bed strength is 37,843; 15,780 in rural areas and 22,063 in urban. Language Languages spoken by district: The origin of the Latin Catholic Christians in Kerala is the result of the missionary endeavours of the Portuguese Padroado in the 16th century.

As a consequence of centuries of mixing with colonial immigrants, beginning with the Portuguese, Dutch, French, British and other Europeans, there is a community of Anglo-Indians in Kerala of mixed European and Indian parentage or ancestry. Kerala has the highest population of Christians among all the states of India. Judaism reached Kerala in the 10th century BCE during the time of King Solomon . They are called Cochin Jews or Malabar Jews and are the oldest group of Jews in India . There was a significant Jewish community which existed in Kerala until the 20th century, when most of them migrated to Israel .

The Paradesi Synagogue at Kochi is the oldest synagogue in the Commonwealth . Jainism has a considerable following in the Wayanad district . Education Main article: Education in Kerala University of Kerala at Thiruvananthapuram The Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics flourished between the 14th and 16th centuries.

In attempting to solve astronomical problems, the Kerala school independently created a number of important mathematics concepts, including series expansion for trigonometric functions.

In the early decades of the 19th century, the modern educational transformation of Kerala was triggered by the efforts of the Church Mission Society missionaries to promote mass education.

Following the recommendations of the Wood's despatch of 1854, the princely states of Travancore and Cochin launched mass education drives mainly based on castes and communities, and introduced a system of grant-in-aid to attract more private initiatives. Catholic institutions such as St Thomas College Thrissur and SB College Changanasserry were established under the leadership of the Catholic Church.

The efforts by leaders such as Fr. Kuriakose Elias Chavara , Mar Charles Lavigne SJ , Vaikunda Swami , Narayana Guru and Ayyankali in aiding the socially discriminated castes in the state—with the help of community-based organisations like Nair Service Society , SNDP , Muslim Educational Society , Muslim Mahajana Sabha, Yoga Kshema Sabha (of Nambudiris) and congregations of Christian churches—led to the further development of mass education in Kerala.

In 1991, Kerala became the first state in India to be recognised as completely literate, although the effective literacy rate at that time was only 90%.

In 2006–2007, the state topped the Education Development Index (EDI) of the 21 major states in India.

As of 2007 , enrolment in elementary education was almost 100%; and, unlike other states in India, educational opportunity was almost equally distributed among sexes, social groups, and regions. According to the 2011 census, Kerala has a 93.9% literacy, compared to the national literacy rate of 74.0%.

In January 2016, Kerala became the first Indian state to achieve 100% primary education through its Athulyam literacy programme.

The educational system prevailing in the state's schools specifies an initial 10-year course of study, which is divided into three stages: lower primary, upper primary, and secondary school—known as 4+3+3 , which signifies the number of years for each stage.

After the first 10 years of schooling, students typically enroll in Higher Secondary Schooling in one of the three major streams— liberal arts , commerce, or science.

The majority of public schools are affiliated with the Kerala Board of Public Examination . Other educational boards are the Indian Certificate of Secondary Education (ICSE), the Central Board for Secondary Education (CBSE), and the National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS). Culture Main article: Culture of Kerala A Kathakali artist During Onam , Kerala's biggest celebration, Keralites create pookkalam (floral carpet) designs in front of their houses. Thrissur Pooram festival A mohiniattam performance Onam Sadya The culture of Kerala is composite and cosmopolitan in nature and it is an integral part of Indian culture . It is a synthesis of Aryan , Dravidian , Arab , and European cultures, developed over millennia, under influences from other parts of India and abroad. It is defined by its antiquity and the organic continuity sustained by the Malayali people . It was elaborated through centuries of contact with neighbouring and overseas cultures. However, the geographical insularity of Kerala from the rest of the country has resulted in the development of a distinctive lifestyle, art, architecture, language, literature and social institutions. Over 10,000 festivals are celebrated in the state every year.

The Malayalam calendar , a solar sidereal calendar started from 825 CE in Kerala, finds common usage in planning agricultural and religious activities. Malayalam , one of the classical languages in India, is Kerala's official language . Over a dozen other scheduled and unscheduled languages are also spoken. Kerala has the greatest consumption of alcohol in India. Festivals Main articles: Temple Festivals of Kerala and Onam Many of the temples in Kerala hold festivals on specific days of the year. A common characteristic of these festivals is the hoisting of a holy flag which is brought down on the final day of the festival after immersing the deity. Some festivals include Poorams, the best known of these being the Thrissur Pooram . "Elephants, firework displays and huge crowds" are the major attractions of Thrissur Pooram. Other known festivals are Makaravilakku , Chinakkathoor Pooram , Attukal Pongala and Nenmara Vallangi Vela Other than these, festivals locally known as utsavams are conducted by many temples mostly on annual basis. Temples that can afford it will usually involve at least one richly caparisoned elephant as part of the festivities.

The idol in the temple is taken out on a procession around the countryside atop this elephant.

When the procession visits homes around the temple, people will usually present rice, coconuts, and other offerings to it. Processions often include traditional music such as Panchari melam or Panchavadyam . Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha are celebrated by the Muslim community of the state while the festivals like Christmas and Easter are observed by the Christians. Onam is a harvest festival celebrated by the people of Kerala and is reminiscent of the state's agrarian past. It is a local festival of Kerala consisting of a four-day public holidays; from Onam Eve (Uthradam) to the fourth Onam Day. Onam falls in the Malayalam month of Chingam (August–September) and marks the commemoration of the homecoming of King Mahabali .

The total duration of Onam is 10 days and it is celebrated all across Kerala. It is one of the festivals celebrated with cultural elements such as Vallam Kali , Pulikali , Pookkalam, Thumbi Thullal and Onavillu . Music and dance Main articles: Arts of Kerala and Music of Kerala Kerala is home to a number of performance arts . These include five classical dance forms: Kathakali , Mohiniyattam , Koodiyattom , Thullal and Krishnanattam , which originated and developed in the temple theatres during the classical period under the patronage of royal houses. Kerala natanam , Thirayattam , Kaliyattam , Theyyam , Koothu and Padayani are other dance forms associated with the temple culture of the region. Some traditional dance forms such as Oppana and Duffmuttu were popular among the Muslims of the state, while Margamkali and Parichamuttukali are popular among the Syrian Christians and Chavittu nadakom is popular among the Latin Christians.

The development of classical music in Kerala is attributed to the contributions it received from the traditional performance arts associated with the temple culture of Kerala.

The development of the indigenous classical music form, Sopana Sangeetham , illustrates the rich contribution that temple culture has made to the arts of Kerala. Carnatic music dominates Keralite traditional music. This was the result of Swathi Thirunal Rama Varma 's popularisation of the genre in the 19th century. Raga-based renditions known as sopanam accompany kathakali performances. Melam , including the paandi and panchari variants, is a more percussive style of music; it is performed at Kshetram -centered festivals using the chenda . Panchavadyam is a form of percussion ensemble, in which artists use five types of percussion instruments. Kerala's visual arts range from traditional murals to the works of Raja Ravi Varma , the state's most renowned painter. Most of the castes and communities in Kerala have rich collections of folk songs and ballads associated with a variety of themes; Vadakkan Pattukal (Northern Ballads), Thekkan pattukal (Southern Ballads), Vanchi pattukal (Boat Songs), Mappila Pattukal (Muslim songs) and Pallipattukal (Church songs) are a few of them. Cinema Main article: Malayalam cinema Malayalam films carved a niche for themselves in the Indian film industry with the presentation of social themes. Directors from Kerala, like Adoor Gopalakrishnan , Mankada Ravi Varma , G. Aravindan , Bharathan , P. Padmarajan , M.T. Vasudevan Nair , K.G. George , Priyadarshan , John Abraham , Ramu Karyat , K S Sethumadhavan , A. Vincent and Shaji N Karun have made a considerable contribution to the Indian parallel cinema . Kerala has also given birth to numerous actors, such as Mohanlal , Mammootty , Satyan , Prem Nazir , Madhu , Sheela , Sharada , Miss Kumari , Jayan , Adoor Bhasi , Seema , Bharath Gopi , Thilakan , Vijaya Raghavan , Kalabhavan Mani , Indrans , Shobana , Nivin Pauly , Sreenivasan , Urvashi , Manju Warrier , Suresh Gopi , Jayaram , Murali , Shankaradi , Kavya Madhavan , Bhavana Menon , Prithviraj , Parvathy , Jayasurya , Dulquer Salmaan , Oduvil Unnikrishnan , Jagathy Sreekumar , Nedumudi Venu , KPAC Lalitha , Innocent and Fahadh Faasil . Late Malayalam actor Prem Nazir holds the world record for having acted as the protagonist of over 720 movies.

Since the 1980s, actors Mohanlal and Mammootty have dominated the movie industry; Mohanlal has won five National Film Awards (four for acting), while Mammootty has three National Film Awards for acting. Malayalam Cinema has produced a few more notable personalities such as K. J. Yesudas , K.S. Chitra , M.G. Sreekumar , Vayalar Rama Varma , V. Madhusoodanan Nair , M.T. Vasudevan Nair and O.N.V. Kurup , the last two mentioned being recipients of Jnanpith award , the highest literary award in India. Resul Pookutty , who is from Kerala, is the only Indian to win an Academy Award for Best Sound Mixing , for the breakthrough film Slumdog Millionaire .

As of 2018, Malayalam cinema has got 14 awards for the best actor, 6 for the best actress, 11 for the best film, and 13 for the best film director in the National Film Awards , India . Literature Main article: Malayalam Literature The Sangam literature can be considered as the ancient predecessor of Malayalam . Malayalam literature starts from the Old Malayalam period (9th–13th century CE) and includes such notable writers as the 14th-century Niranam poets (Madhava Panikkar, Sankara Panikkar and Rama Panikkar), and the 16th-century poet Thunchaththu Ezhuthachan , whose works mark the dawn of both the modern Malayalam language and its poetry. For the first 600 years of Malayalam calendar , the literature mainly consisted of the oral Ballads such as Vadakkan Pattukal in North Malabar and Thekkan Pattukal in Southern Travancore . Designated a " Classical Language in India " in 2013, it developed into the current form mainly by the influence of the poets Cherusseri Namboothiri , Thunchaththu Ezhuthachan , and Poonthanam Nambudiri , in the 15th and the 16th centuries of Common Era . Unnayi Variyar , a probable poet of the 17th/18th century CE, and Kunchan Nambiar , a poet of the 18th century CE, have also influenced a lot in the growth of modern Malayalam literature in its pre-mature form.

The Bharathappuzha river, also known as River Ponnani , and its tributaries, have played a major role in the development of modern Malayalam Literature. Paremmakkal Thoma Kathanar and Kerala Varma Valiakoi Thampuran are noted for their contribution to Malayalam prose.

The " triumvirate of poets " ( Kavithrayam ): Kumaran Asan , Vallathol Narayana Menon , and Ulloor S. Parameswara Iyer , are recognised for moving Keralite poetry away from archaic sophistry and metaphysics, and towards a more lyrical mode.

The poets like Moyinkutty Vaidyar and Pulikkottil Hyder have made notable contributions to the Mappila songs , which is a genre of the Arabi Malayalam literature.

The first travelogue in any Indian language is the Malayalam Varthamanappusthakam , written by Paremmakkal Thoma Kathanar in 1785.

The prose literature, Malayalam journalism , and criticism began after the latter-half of the 18th century. Contemporary Malayalam literature deals with social, political, and economic life context.

The tendency of the modern literature is often towards political radicalism . Malayalam literature has been presented with 6 Jnanapith awards , the second-most for any Dravidian language and the third-highest for any Indian language.

In the second half of the 20th century, Jnanpith winning poets and writers like G. Sankara Kurup , S. K. Pottekkatt , Thakazhi Sivasankara Pillai , M. T. Vasudevan Nair , O. N. V. Kurup , and Akkitham Achuthan Namboothiri , had made valuable contributions to the modern Malayalam literature. Later, writers like O. V. Vijayan , Kamaladas , M. Mukundan , Arundhati Roy , Vaikom Muhammed Basheer , have gained international recognition. Cuisine Main article: Cuisine of Kerala Kerala cuisine includes a wide variety of vegetarian and non-vegetarian dishes prepared using fish, poultry, and meat. Culinary spices have been cultivated in Kerala for millennia and they are characteristic of its cuisine. Rice is a dominant staple that is eaten at all times of day. A majority of the breakfast foods in Kerala are made out of rice, in one form or the other ( idli , dosa , puttu , pathiri , appam , or idiyappam ), tapioca preparations, or pulse-based vada . These may be accompanied by chutney , kadala , payasam , payar pappadam , appam , chicken curry, beef fry, egg masala and fish curry. Porotta and Biryani are also often found in restaurants in Kerala. Thalassery biryani is popular as an ethnic brand. Lunch dishes include rice and curry along with rasam , pulisherry and sambar . Sadhya is a vegetarian meal, which is served on a banana leaf and followed with a cup of payasam. Popular snacks include banana chips , yam crisps, tapioca chips , Achappam , Unni appam and kuzhalappam . Seafood specialties include karimeen , prawns, shrimp and other crustacean dishes. Thalassery Cuisine is varied and is a blend of many influences. Media Main article: Media in Kerala The media, telecommunications, broadcasting and cable services are regulated by the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI).

The National Family Health Survey – 4, conducted in 2015–16, ranked Kerala as the state with the highest media exposure in India . Dozens of newspapers are published in Kerala, in nine major languages, but principally Malayalam and English. Kerala has the highest media exposure in India .

The most widely circulated Malayalam-language newspapers are Malayala Manorama , Mathrubhumi , Deshabhimani , Madhyamam , Kerala Kaumudi , Mangalam , Chandrika , Deepika , Janayugam , Janmabhumi , Siraj Daily and Suprabhaatham . Major Malayalam periodicals include Mathrubhumi Azhchappathippu , Vanitha , India Today Malayalam, Madhyamam Weekly , Grihalakshmi , Dhanam , Chithrabhumi and Bhashaposhini . Malayala Manorama office in Kottiyam , Kollam DD Malayalam is a state-owned television broadcaster. Multiple-system operators provide a mix of Malayalam, English, other Indian languages, and international channels. Some of the popular Malayalam television channels are Asianet , Asianet News , Asianet Plus , Asianet Movies , Surya TV , Surya Movies , Mazhavil Manorama , Manorama News , Kairali TV , Kairali News , Flowers , Media One TV , Mathrubhumi News , Kappa TV , Amrita TV , Reporter TV , Jaihind , Janam TV , Jeevan TV , Kaumudy TV and Shalom TV . With the second-highest internet penetration rate in India, Digital media including social media and OTT services are a main source of information and entertainment in the state. A sizeable people's science movement has taken root in the state, and activities like writer's cooperatives are becoming increasingly common. BSNL , Airtel , Vodafone Idea Limited , Jio are the major cell phone service providers. Broadband Internet services are widely available throughout the state; some of the major Internet service providers are BSNL , Asianet Satellite Communications , Airtel , Vodafone Idea Limited , RailWire , and Tata Communications . Sports Main article: Sports in Kerala The annual snake boat race is performed during Onam on the Pamba River By the 21st century, almost all of the native sports and games from Kerala had either disappeared or become just an art form performed during local festivals; including Poorakkali , Padayani, Thalappandukali, Onathallu, Parichamuttukali, Velakali, and Kilithattukali. However, Kalaripayattu , regarded as "the mother of all martial arts in the world", is an exception and is practised as the indigenous martial sport. Another traditional sport of Kerala is the boat race, especially the race of snake boats . Cricket and football became popular in the state; both were introduced in Malabar during the British colonial period in the 19th century. Cricketers, like Tinu Yohannan , Abey Kuruvilla , Chundangapoyil Rizwan , Sreesanth , Sanju Samson and Basil Thampi found places in the national cricket team. A cricket franchise from Kerala, the Kochi Tuskers , played in the Indian Premier League 's fourth season . However, this team was disbanded after the season because of conflicts of interest among its franchises. Kerala has only performed well recently in the Ranji Trophy cricket competition, in 2017–18 reaching the quarterfinals for the first time in history. Football is one of the most widely played and watched sports with huge in this state support for club and district level matches. Kochi hosts Kerala Blasters FC in the Indian Super League .

The Blasters are one of the most widely supported clubs in the country as well as the fifth most-followed football club from Asia in social media. Also, Kozhikode hosts Gokulam Kerala FC in the I-League as well as the Sait Nagjee Football Tournament . Kerala is one of the major footballing states in India along with West Bengal and Goa and has produced national players like I. M. Vijayan , C. V. Pappachan, V. P. Sathyan , U. Sharaf Ali , Jo Paul Ancheri , Ashique Kuruniyan , Muhammad Rafi , Jiju Jacob , Mashoor Shereef , Pappachen Pradeep , C.K. Vineeth , Anas Edathodika , Sahal Abdul Samad , and Rino Anto .

The Kerala state football team has won the Santhosh Trophy seven times; in 1973, 1992, 1993, 2001, 2004, 2018, and 2022. They were also the runners-up eight times. Among the prominent athletes hailing from the state are P. T. Usha , Shiny Wilson and M.D. Valsamma , all three of whom are recipients of the Padma Shri as well as Arjuna Award , while K. M. Beenamol and Anju Bobby George are Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna and Arjuna Award winners. T. C. Yohannan , Suresh Babu , Sinimol Paulose , Angel Mary Joseph, Mercy Kuttan , K. Saramma, K. C. Rosakutty , Padmini Selvan and Tintu Luka are the other Arjuna Award winners from Kerala. Volleyball is another popular sport and is often played on makeshift courts on sandy beaches along the coast. Jimmy George was a notable Indian volleyball player, rated in his prime as among the world's ten best players. Other popular sports include badminton , basketball and kabaddi .

The Indian Hockey team captain P. R. Shreejesh , ace goalkeeper hails from Kerala. International Walkers from the state include K. T. Irfan . For the 2017 FIFA U-17 World Cup in India , the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium (Kochi) , was chosen as one of the six venues where the game would be hosted in India . Greenfield International Stadium at located at Kariavattom in Thiruvananthapuram city, is India's first DBOT (design, build, operate and transfer) model outdoor stadium and it has hosted international cricket matches and international football matches including 2015 SAFF Championship . Tourism Main article: Tourism in Kerala Kerala's culture and traditions, coupled with its varied demographics , have made the state one of the most popular tourist destinations in India.

In 2012, National Geographic 's Traveller magazine named Kerala as one of the "ten paradises of the world" and "50 must see destinations of a lifetime". Travel and Leisure also described Kerala as "One of the 100 great trips for the 21st century".

In 2012, it overtook the Taj Mahal to be the number one travel destination in Google's search trends for India. CNN Travel listed Kerala among its '19 best places to visit in 2019'. Kerala was named by TIME magazine in 2022 among the 50 extraordinary destinations to explore in its list of the World's Greatest Places.

In 2025, Kerala was ranked 16th in the Rough Guides ' list of the “World’s Top 26 Destinations for 2026”, making it the only Indian state to be included in the international travel guide’s annual global destinations ranking. Kerala's beaches, backwaters, lakes, mountain ranges, waterfalls, ancient ports, palaces, religious institutions and wildlife sanctuaries are major attractions for both domestic and international tourists.

The city of Kochi ranks first in the total number of international and domestic tourists in Kerala. Until the early 1980s, Kerala was a relatively unknown destination compared to other states in the country.

In 1986 the government of Kerala declared tourism an important industry and it was the first state in India to do so. Marketing campaigns launched by the Kerala Tourism Development Corporation , the government agency that oversees the tourism prospects of the state, resulted in the growth of the tourism industry. Many advertisements branded Kerala with the tagline Kerala, God's Own Country . Kerala tourism is a global brand and regarded as one of the destinations with highest recall.

In 2006, Kerala attracted 8.5 million tourists, an increase of 23.7% over the previous year, making the state one of the fastest-growing popular destinations in the world.

In 2011, tourist inflow to Kerala crossed the 10-million mark. Ayurvedic tourism has become very popular since the 1990s, and private agencies have played a notable role in tandem with the initiatives of the Tourism Department. Kerala is known for its ecotourism initiatives which include mountaineering, trekking and bird-watching programmes in the Western Ghats as the major activities.

The state's tourism industry is a major contributor to the state's economy , growing at the rate of 13.3%.

The revenue from tourism increased five-fold between 2001 and 2011 and crossed the ₹ 190 billion mark in 2011. According to the Economic Times Kerala netted a record revenue of INR 365280.1 million from the tourism sector in 2018, clocking an increase of Rs 28743.3 million from the previous year. Over 16.7 million tourists visited Kerala in 2018 as against 15.76 million the previous year, recording an increase of 5.9%.

The industry provides employment to approximately 1.2 million people.

The state's only drive-in beach, Muzhappilangad Beach in Kannur, which stretches across 5 kilometres (3.1 mi) of sand, was chosen by the BBC as one of the top six drive-in beaches in the world in 2016. Idukki Dam , the world's second arch dam, and Asia's first is at Idukki .

The major beaches are at Kovalam , Varkala , Kozhikode , Fort Kochi , Cherai , Alappuzha , Ponnani , Kadalundi , Tanur , Chaliyam , Payyambalam , Kappad, Muzhappilangad and Bekal . Popular hill stations are at Ponmudi , Wayanad , Vagamon , Munnar , Peermade , Ramakkalmedu , Arimbra , Paithalmala of Kannur district, Kodikuthimala , and Nelliampathi . Munnar is 4,500 feet above sea level and is known for tea plantations, and a variety of flora and fauna. Kerala's ecotourism destinations include 12 wildlife sanctuaries and two national parks: Periyar Tiger Reserve , Parambikulam Wildlife Sanctuary , Chinnar Wildlife Sanctuary , Thattekad Bird Sanctuary , Wayanad Wildlife Sanctuary , Kadalundi Bird Sanctuary , Karimpuzha Wildlife Sanctuary , Muthanga Wildlife Sanctuary, Aralam Wildlife Sanctuary , Eravikulam National Park , and Silent Valley National Park are the most popular among them.

The Indian Express . PTI . 17 March 2018. Archived from the original on 22 March 2018 . Retrieved 22 March 2018 . ^ P. C. Alexander. Buddhism in Kerala . p. 23. ^ Nicasio Silverio Sainz (1972). Cuba y la Casa de Austria . Ediciones Universal. p. 120 . Retrieved 6 January 2013 . ^ John R. Marr (1985).

The Eight Anthologies: A Study in Early Tamil Literature . Institute of Asian Studies. p. 263. ^ Rayson K. Alex; S. Susan Deborah; Sachindev P.S. (2014). Culture and Media: Ecocritical Explorations . Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 226. ISBN 978-1-4438-6190-8 . ^ S. N. Sadasivan (2000). A Social History of India . APH Publishing. p. 101. ISBN 978-8176481700 . ^ Victor R. Preedy; Ronald Ross Watson; Vinood B. Patel (2011). Nuts and Seeds in Health and Disease Prevention . Academic Press. p. 400. ISBN 978-0-12-375689-3 . ^ Vineeth, T. K. (7 March 2026). "KERALA-M: What's in a name?" .

The New Indian Express . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ "Renaming Kerala: Modi Hails Kerala's New Name Keralam" . Deccan Herald . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ TNIE online desk, Agencies (24 February 2026). "Ahead of polls, Union Cabinet approves Kerala's renaming to 'Keralam' " .

The New Indian Express . Retrieved 24 February 2026 . ^ "Kerala will now be called Keralam" . India Today . 24 February 2026 . Retrieved 24 February 2026 . ^ S. C. Bhatt, Gopal K. Bhargava (2006) "Land and People of Indian States and Union Territories: Volume 14.", p.18 ^ Aiya VN (1906).

The Lord who is Half Woman: Ardhanārīśvara in Indian and Feminist Perspective . SUNY Press. p. 20. ISBN 978-0-7914-5325-4 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ Kemmerer, Lisa (2011). Animals and World Religions . Oxford University Press. p. 78. ISBN 978-0-19-991255-1 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ Dalal, Roshen (2011). Hinduism: An Alphabetical Guide . Penguin Books India. p. 250. ISBN 978-0-14-341421-6 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ Ragozin, Zenaide A. (2005). Vedic India As Embodied Principally in the Rig-veda . Kessinger Publishing. p. 341. ISBN 978-1-4179-4463-7 . Retrieved 21 March 2013 . ^ A. Sreedhara Menon (1 January 2007). A Survey of Kerala History . DC Books. pp. 20– 21. ISBN 978-81-264-1578-6 . Retrieved 27 July 2012 . ^ "Unlocking the secrets of history" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 6 December 2004 . Retrieved 12 November 2015 . ^ Subodh Kapoor (1 July 2002).

The Indian Encyclopaedia . Cosmo Publications. p. 2184. ISBN 978-81-7755-257-7 . Retrieved 1 August 2012 . ^ "Travel and Tourism" . kerala.gov.in . Government of Kerala . Retrieved 12 November 2015 . ^ Udai Prakash Arora; A. K. Singh (1 January 1999). Currents in Indian History, Art, and Archaeology . Anamika Publishers & Distributors. p. 116. ISBN 978-81-86565-44-5 . Retrieved 6 October 2012 . ^ Udai Prakash Arora; A. K. Singh (1 January 1999). Currents in Indian History, Art, and Archaeology . Anamika Publishers & Distributors. pp. 118, 123. ISBN 978-81-86565-44-5 . Retrieved 6 October 2012 . ^ Udai Prakash Arora; A. K. Singh (1 January 1999). Currents in Indian History, Art, and Archaeology . Anamika Publishers & Distributors. p. 123. ISBN 978-81-86565-44-5 . Retrieved 6 October 2012 . ^ "Symbols akin to Indus valley culture discovered in Kerala" .

The Hindu . 29 September 2009 . Retrieved 12 November 2015 . ^ Pradeep Kumar, Kaavya (28 January 2014). "Of Kerala, Egypt, and the Spice link" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 12 November 2015 . ^ Striving for sustainability, environmental stress and democratic initiatives in Kerala , p. 79; ISBN 81-8069-294-9, Srikumar Chattopadhyay, Richard W. Franke; Year: 2006. ^ Subramanian, Archana (December 2016). "Route it through the seas" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 5 March 2022 . Retrieved 8 January 2024 . ^ A Sreedhara Menon (1 January 2007). A Survey Of Kerala History . DC Books. pp. 57– 58. ISBN 978-81-264-1578-6 . Retrieved 10 October 2012 . ^ Vincent A. Smith; A. V. Williams Jackson (30 November 2008). History of India, in Nine Volumes: Vol. II – From the Sixth Century BCE to the Mohammedan Conquest, Including the Invasion of Alexander the Great . Cosimo, Inc. p. 166. ISBN 978-1-60520-492-5 . Retrieved 1 August 2012 . ^ The Cambridge Shorter History of India . CUP Archive. p. 193. GGKEY:2W0QHXZ7K40 . Retrieved 10 October 2012 . ^ Bhanwar Lal Dwivedi (1 January 1994). Evolution of Education Thought in India . Northern Book Centre. p. 164. ISBN 978-81-7211-059-8 . Retrieved 10 October 2012 . ^ Kanakasabhai, V. (1997).

The First Spring: The Golden Age of India . Penguin Books India. pp. 246–. ISBN 978-0-670-08478-4 . Retrieved 7 August 2012 . ^ Iyengar PTS (2001). History Of The Tamils: From the Earliest Times to 600 A.D. Asian Educational Services. ISBN 81-206-0145-9 . Retrieved 29 December 2008 . ^ Iyengar PTS (2001). History Of The Tamils: From the Earliest Times to 600 A.D. Asian Educational Services. pp. 192– 195. ISBN 81-206-0145-9 . Retrieved 29 December 2008 . ^ The Jews of India: A Story of Three Communities by Orpa Slapak.

The Israel Museum, Jerusalem. 2003. p. 27. ISBN 965-278-179-7. ^ David D'Beth Hillel (1832).

The Travels of Rabbi David D'Beth Hillel: From Jerusalem, Through Arabia, Koordistan, Part of Persia, and India to Madras . author. p. 135. ^ The Jews in India and the Far East . Greenwood Press. 1976. pp. 24– 26. ISBN 978-0-8371-2615-9 . ^ a b Rolland E. Miller (1993). Hindu-Christian Dialogue: Perspectives and Encounters . Motilal Banarsidass Publications. p. 50. ISBN 978-81-208-1158-4 . ^ The Encyclopedia of Christianity, Volume 5 by Erwin Fahlbusch. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing - 2008. p. 285. ISBN 978-0-8028-2417-2. ^ Geoffrey Wainwright (2006).

The Oxford History Of Christian Worship . Oxford University Press. p. 666. ISBN 978-0-19-513886-3 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ * Bindu Malieckal (2005) Muslims, Matriliny, and A Midsummer Night's Dream: European Encounters with the Mappilas of Malabar, India; The Muslim World Volume 95 Issue 2 ^ Milton J, Skeat WW, Pollard AW, Brown L (31 August 1982).

The Indian Christians of St Thomas . Cambridge University Press. p. 171. ISBN 0-521-21258-8 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Susan Bayly (2004). Saints, Goddesses and Kings . Cambridge University Press. p. 40. ISBN 978-0-521-89103-5 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ Jonathan Goldstein (1999).

The Jews of China . M.E. Sharpe. p. 123. ISBN 978-0-7656-0104-9 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ Nathan Katz (2000). Who Are the Jews of India? . University of California Press. p. 245. ISBN 978-0-520-21323-4 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ a b K. Balachandran Nayar (1974).

In quest of Kerala . Accent Publications. p. 86 . Retrieved 8 August 2012 . ^ A Sreedhara Menon (1 January 2007). A Survey Of Kerala History . DC Books. p. 97. ISBN 978-81-264-1578-6 . Retrieved 8 August 2012 . ^ a b A Sreedhara Menon (1 January 2007). A Survey Of Kerala History . DC Books. pp. 123– 131. ISBN 978-81-264-1578-6 . Retrieved 8 August 2012 . ^ R. E. Asher; T. C. Kumari (1997). Malayalam . Psychology Press. pp. 24– 27. ISBN 978-0-415-02242-2 . ^ "The Buddhist History of Kerala" . Kerala.cc. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 25 September 2013 . ^ A Sreedhara Menon (1 January 2007). A Survey Of Kerala History . DC Books. p. 138. ISBN 978-81-264-1578-6 . Retrieved 9 August 2012 . ^ Educational Britannica Educational (15 August 2010).

The Geography of India: Sacred and Historic Places .

The Rosen Publishing Group. p. 311. ISBN 978-1-61530-202-4 . Retrieved 15 September 2012 . ^ Boland-Crewe, Tara; Lea, David (2003).

The Territories and States of India . pp. 144– 146. doi : 10.4324/9780203402900 . ISBN 978-1-135-35625-5 . ^ Corn, Charles; Glasserman, Debbie (March 1999).

The Scents of Eden: A History of the Spice Trade . Kodansha America. ISBN 1-56836-249-8 . ^ Ravindran PN (2000). Black Pepper: Piper Nigrum . CRC Press. p. 3. ISBN 978-90-5702-453-5 . Retrieved 11 November 2007 . ^ Philip D. Curtin (25 May 1984). Cross-Cultural Trade in World History . Cambridge University Press. p. 144. ISBN 978-0-521-26931-5 . ^ a b J. L. Mehta (1 January 2005). Advanced Study in the History of Modern India: Volume One: 1707–1813 . Sterling Publishers Pvt. Ltd. pp. 324– 327. ISBN 978-1-932705-54-6 . Retrieved 9 August 2012 . ^ K. K. N. Kurup (1 January 1997). India's Naval Traditions: The Role of Kunhali Marakkars . Northern Book Centre. pp. 37– 38. ISBN 978-81-7211-083-3 . Retrieved 9 August 2012 . ^ South Asia 2006 . Taylor & Francis. 1 December 2005. p. 289 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Murkot Ramunny (1 January 1993). Ezhimala: The Abode of the Naval Academy . Northern Book Centre. pp. 57– 70. ISBN 978-81-7211-052-9 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Anjana Singh (30 April 2010). Fort Kochi in Kerala, 1750–1830: The Social Condition of a Dutch Community in an Indian Milieu . BRILL. pp. 22– 52. ISBN 978-90-04-16816-9 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ S. Krishna Iyer (1995). Travancore Dutch relations, 1729–1741 . CBH Publications. p. 49. ISBN 978-81-85381-42-8 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Mark de Lannoy (1997).

The Kulasekhara Perumals of Travancore: history and state formation in Travancore from 1671 to 1758 . Leiden University. p. 190. ISBN 978-90-73782-92-1 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ A. Sreedhara Menon (1987). Political History of Modern Kerala . D C Books. p. 140. ISBN 978-81-264-2156-5 . Retrieved 10 August 2012 . ^ Raghunath Rai. History . FK Publications. pp. 14–. ISBN 978-81-87139-69-0 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ British Museum; Anna Libera Dallapiccola (22 June 2010). South Indian Paintings: A Catalogue of the British Museum Collection . Mapin Publishing Pvt Ltd. pp. 12–. ISBN 978-0-7141-2424-7 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Edgar Thorpe, Showick Thorpe; Thorpe Edgar.

The Pearson CSAT Manual 2011 . Pearson Education India. p. 99. ISBN 978-81-317-5830-4 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ The Edinburgh Gazetteer . Longman, Rees, Orme, Brown, and Green. 1827. pp. 63– . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Dharma Kumar (1965). Land and Caste in South India: Agricultural Labor in the Madras Presidency During the Nineteenth Century . CUP Archive. pp. 87–. GGKEY:T72DPF9AZDK . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ K.P. Ittaman (1 June 2003). History of Mughal Architecture Volume Ii . Abhinav Publications. pp. 30–. ISBN 978-81-7017-034-1 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Superintendent of Government Printing (1908). Imperial Gazetteer of India (Provincial Series): Madras . Calcutta: Government of India. p. 22 . Retrieved 11 November 2007 . ^ Kakkadan Nandanath Raj; Michael Tharakan (1981). Agrarian reform in Kerala and its impact on the rural economy: a preliminary assessment . International Labour Office. pp. 2– 3 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ M. Naeem Qureshi (1999). Pan-Islam in British Indian Politics: A Study of the Khilafat Movement, 1918–1924 . BRILL. pp. 445– 447. ISBN 90-04-11371-1 . ^ Bardwell L. Smith (1976). Religion and Social Conflict in South Asia . BRILL. pp. 35– 42. ISBN 978-90-04-04510-1 . Retrieved 31 July 2012 . ^ Gopa Sabharwal (2007). India Since 1947: The Independent Years . Penguin Books India. pp. 23–. ISBN 978-0-14-310274-8 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Tmh. General Knowledge Digest 2010 . Tata McGraw-Hill Education. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-07-069939-7 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ a b Sarina Singh; Amy Karafin; Anirban Mahapatra (1 September 2009). South India . Lonely Planet. ISBN 978-1-74179-155-6 . Retrieved 6 January 2013 . ^ "The States Reorganisation Act, 1956" (PDF) . legislative.gov.in . Government of India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 November 2021 . Retrieved 11 May 2021 . ^ K.G. Kumar (12 April 2007). "50 years of development" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 30 August 2013 . ^ Manali Desai (27 November 2006). State Formation and Radical Democracy in India . Taylor & Francis. p. 142. ISBN 978-0-203-96774-4 . Retrieved 31 August 2013 . ^ Madan Gopal Chitkara; Baṃśī Rāma Śarmā (1 January 1997). Indian Republic: Issues and Perspective . APH Publishing. pp. 134–. ISBN 978-81-7024-836-1 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF) . International Hydrographic Organization. 1953. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 October 2018 . Retrieved 28 December 2020 . ^ "Physical and Anatomical Characteristic of Wood of Some Less-Known Tree Species of Kerala" (PDF) . Kerala Forest Research Institute . Government of Kerala. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 July 2013 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ "Marine Fisheries" . fisheries.kerala.gov.in . Department of Fisheries, Government of Kerala. Archived from the original on 17 November 2015 . Retrieved 13 November 2015 . ^ V. Balakrishnan Nair (1994). Social Development and Demographic Changes in South India: Focus on Kerala . M.D. Publications Pvt. Ltd. p. 15. ISBN 978-8185880501 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ a b c d Srikumar Chattopadhyay; Richard W. Franke (2006). Striving for Sustainability: Environmental Stress and Democratic Initiatives in Kerala . Concept Publishing Company. ISBN 978-8180692949 . Retrieved 19 March 2019 . ^ Geological Survey Water-supply Paper . U.S. Government Printing Office. 1961. p. 4 . Retrieved 19 March 2019 . ^ Pradeep Sharma; Y. Dharnai Kumari; Tirunagaram Lakshmamma (2008). Status Of Women And Family Planning . Discovery Publishing House. p. 217. ISBN 978-8183563260 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Murdoch Books Pty Limited; Murdoch Books Test Kitchen (2010). India . Murdoch Books. p. 100. ISBN 978-1-74196-438-7 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ S. N. Sadasivan (2003). River Disputes in India: Kerala Rivers Under Siege . Mittal Publications. p. 223. ISBN 978-8170999133 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Pratiyogita Darpan (September 2006). Pratiyogita Darpan . Pratiyogita Darpan. p. 72 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Motilal (UK) Books of India (2008). Tourist Guide Kerala . Sura Books. p. 11. ISBN 978-8174781642 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Chandran Nair, Dr.S.Sathis. "India – Silent Valley Rainforest Under Threat Once More" . rainforestinfo.org.au . Archived from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 12 November 2015 . ^ M.R. Biju (2006). Sustainable Dimensions Of Tourism Management . Mittal Publications. p. 63. ISBN 978-8183241298 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Hussain. Geography Of India For Civil Ser Exam . Tata McGraw-Hill Education. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-07-066772-3 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ a b Frowde, Henry (1908–1909). Imperial Gazetteer of India (New ed.). Oxford: Clarendon Press. Archived from the original on 16 December 2008 . Retrieved 2 December 2020 . ^ a b "UN designates Western Ghats as world heritage site" .

The Times of India . 2 July 2012. Archived from the original on 31 January 2013 . Retrieved 27 November 2018 . ^ a b "The Times of India: Latest News India, World & Business News, Cricket & Sports, Bollywood" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 21 June 2013 . Retrieved 2 July 2013 . ^ William Logan (1887). Malabar Manual (Volume-II) . Madras Government Press. ^ "Mineral Resources" . Department of Mining and Geology – Government of Kerala . Archived from the original on 13 May 2022 . Retrieved 4 April 2022 . ^ a b Chandran 2018 , p. 343. ^ Nair RR, Rajan B, Akiba S, Jayalekshmi P, Nair MK, Gangadharan P, Koga T, Morishima H, Nakamura S, Sugahara T (January 2009). "Background radiation and cancer incidence in Kerala, India-Karanagappally cohort study". Health Physics. PMID 19066487 . ^ Danny Moss (2010). Public Relations Cases: International Perspectives . Taylor & Francis. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-415-77336-2 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Edgar Thorpe (2012).

The Pearson CSAT Manual 2012 . Pearson Education India. p. 3. ISBN 978-8131767344 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Press Trust of India (1 June 2020). "Kerala Boat Ferries Lone Passenger To Help Her Take Exam" . NDTV . Archived from the original on 16 November 2021 . Retrieved 17 November 2020 . ^ Suchitra, M (13 August 2003). "Thirst below sea level" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 22 September 2019 . Retrieved 17 November 2020 . ^ Majid Husain (2011). Understanding: Geographical: Map Entries: for Civil Services Examinations: Second Edition . Tata McGraw-Hill Education. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-07-070288-2 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI—Ministry of Shipping) (2005). "Introduction to Inland Water Transport" . IWAI (Ministry of Shipping) . Retrieved 19 January 2006 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ India., Planning Commission (2008). Kerala Development Report . Academic Foundation. p. 224. ISBN 978-8171885947 . ^ Padmalal, D.; Maya, K.; Sreebha, S.; Sreeja, R. (2008). "Environmental effects of river sand mining: A case from the river catchments of Vembanad lake, Southwest coast of India" . Environmental Geology . 54 (4): 879– 889. Bibcode : 2008EnGeo..54..879P . doi : 10.1007/s00254-007-0870-z . ISSN 0943-0105 . S2CID 129312081 . Archived from the original on 25 November 2023 . Retrieved 12 February 2020 . ^ M.K. Jha (2010). Natural and Anthropogenic Disasters: Vulnerability, Preparedness and Mitigation . Springer. p. 81. ISBN 978-9048124978 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Baynes, Chris (15 August 2018). "Worst floods in nearly a century kill 44 in India's Kerala state amid torrential monsoon rains" .

The Independent . Archived from the original on 23 May 2019 . Retrieved 16 August 2018 . ^ "Wayanad landslides: 133 dead, 481 saved, at least 98 missing" . Onmanorama . 30 July 2024. Archived from the original on 30 July 2024 . Retrieved 31 July 2024 . ^ Chacko, T.; Renuka, G. (2002). "Temperature mapping, thermal diffusivity and subsoil heat flux at Kariavattom, Kerala" . Proc Indian Acad Sci (Earth Planet Sci) . 111 (1): 79. Bibcode : 2002InEPS.111...79T . doi : 10.1007/BF02702224 . ^ a b Planning Commission, India (2007). Kerala Development Report . Academic Foundation. p. 223. ISBN 978-8171885947 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ RK Jain. Geography 10 . Ratna Sagar. p. 110. ISBN 978-8183320818 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Together with Social Science Term II . Rachna Sagar. p. 112. ISBN 978-8181373991 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Edgar Thorpe, Showick Thorpe; Thorpe Edgar.

The Pearson CSAT Manual 2011 . Pearson Education India. p. 7. ISBN 978-8131758304 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ N.N. Kher; Jaideep Aggarwal. A Text Book of Social Sciences . Pitambar Publishing. p. 5. ISBN 978-8120914667 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Sarina Singh; Amy Karafin; Anirban Mahapatra (2009). South India . Lonely Planet. p. 15. ISBN 978-1-74179-155-6 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ S.V. Jeevananda Reddy. Climate Change: Myths and Realities . Jeevananda Reddy. p. 71. GGKEY:WDFHBL1XHK3 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Rao (2008). Agricultural Meteorology . PHI Learning. pp. 173– 74. ISBN 978-8120333383 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ "Hydromet Division Updated/Real Time Maps" . India Meteorological Department . Archived from the original on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 21 October 2014 . ^ a b c d e Brenkert, A.; Malone, E. (2003). "Vulnerability and resilience of India and Indian states to climate change: a first-order approximation". Joint Global Change Research Institute . ^ Sudha, T. M. "Opportunities in participatory planning to Evolve a Landuse Policy for Western Ghats Region in Kerala" (PDF) . Department of Town and Country Planning, Kerala. p. 14. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2016 . Retrieved 18 January 2015 . ^ "History" . Kerala forests and wildlife department. Archived from the original on 12 September 2015 . Retrieved 12 August 2015 . ^ a b c d e Sreedharan TP (2004). "Biological Diversity of Kerala: A survey of Kalliasseri panchayat, Kannur district" (PDF) . Centre for Development Studies . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 March 2009 . Retrieved 28 December 2008 . ^ Chandran 2018 , p. 342. ^ Chandran 2018 , p. 347. ^ Jayarajan M (2004). "Sacred Groves of North Malabar" (PDF) . Centre for Development Studies . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 March 2009 . Retrieved 28 December 2008 . ^ Julian Evans (2008).

The Forests Handbook, Applying Forest Science for Sustainable Management . John Wiley & Sons. p. 235. ISBN 978-0-470-75683-6 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ R. P. Singh; Zubairul Islam (2012). Environmental Studies . Concept Publishing Company. p. 172. ISBN 978-8180697746 . Archived from the original on 25 November 2023 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Alexandra Anna Enrica van der Geer (2008). Animals in Stone: Indian Mammals Sculptured Through Time . Brill. p. 7. ISBN 978-9004168190 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ "World's oldest teak trees dying in Kerala" . DNA India . 13 May 2009. Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 25 November 2020 . ^ "View of A checklist of the vertebrates of Kerala State, India | Journal of Threatened Taxa" . threatenedtaxa.org . Archived from the original on 7 October 2016. ^ Institute, Kerala Forest Research (2003). Biodiversity Documentation for Kerala: Freshwater fishes . Kerala Forest Research Institute. ISBN 978-8185041544 . Archived from the original on 25 November 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2020 . ^ Vishnudattan, N. K.; et al. (15 June 2021). "A new Tardigrade species, Stygarctus keralensis sp. nov. (Arthrotardigrada: Stygarctidae) from the intertidal zone of Southwest coast of India" . Zootaxa . 4985 (3): 381391. doi : 10.11646/zootaxa.4985.3.5 . PMID 34186802 . S2CID 235688035 . Archived from the original on 27 November 2021 . Retrieved 22 June 2021 . ^ "Revenue Guide 2018" (PDF) . Government of Kerala . Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 September 2020 . Retrieved 28 September 2020 . ^ "Revenue department, government of Kerala" . Archived from the original on 17 August 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2020 . ^ "Local Self Governance in Kerala" . Government of Kerala. Archived from the original on 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2020 . ^ "Census of India 2001: Data from the 2001 Census, including cities, villages and towns (Provisional)" . Census Commission of India. Archived from the original on 16 June 2004 . Retrieved 1 November 2008 . ^ Dezan Shira; Associates. (2012). Doing Business in India . Springer. pp. 313–. ISBN 978-3-642-27618-7 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ D Banerjea; N. R. Madhava Menon (2002). Criminal Justice India Series, Vol. 20 . Allied Publishers. pp. 9–. ISBN 978-8177648713 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ M K Sunil Kumar (26 September 2017). "50 years on, Kochi still has a long way to go" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 17 November 2020 . ^ PTI (30 October 2020). "Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Goa best governed States: report" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 7 October 2021 . Retrieved 20 June 2021 . ^ B, Bibimol R.; Seena, Dr Anand Lali; Thanammal, Dr K. K. (30 November 2023). "C.Achutha Menon's Social Reforms: Paving The Way For A Progressive Kerala" . Educational Administration: Theory and Practice . 29 (4): 4074– 4079. doi : 10.53555/kuey.v29i4.8887 (inactive 15 June 2026). ISSN 2148-2403 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of June 2026 ( link ) ^ Duran, Jane (April 2025). "Egalitarianism and Justice in Kerala" . Think . 24 (70): 23– 29. doi : 10.1017/S147717562500017X . ISSN 1477-1756 . ^ Thiranagama, Sharika (2019). "Rural Civilities: Caste, Gender and Public Life in Kerala". South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies . 42 (2): 310– 327. doi : 10.1080/00856401.2019.1582190 . ^ Devika, J. (August 2010). "Egalitarian Developmentalism, Communist Mobilization, and the Question of Caste in Kerala State, India" .

The Journal of Asian Studies . 69 (3): 799– 820. doi : 10.1017/S0021911810001506 . ISSN 1752-0401 . ^ "Hindu Nationalism in South India: The Rise of Saffron in Kerala" . {{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Nair, A. Balakrishnan (1994). "The Dynamics of Kerala Politics" .

The Indian Journal of Political Science . 55 (3): 251– 260. ISSN 0019-5510 . ^ "Kerala election wrap-up: How UDF ended LDF's 10-year rule" .

The Times of India . 22 May 2026. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 19 June 2026 . ^ "Pinarayi Vijayan elected as Leader of Opposition in Kerala" . Deccan Herald . Retrieved 15 May 2026 . ^ Parthasarathy, Srinivasan Ramani , Pon Vasanth B. A. , Nitika Francis , Devyanshi Bihani , Areena Arora & Sambavi (6 May 2026). "UDF's near three-fourths majority marked a historic victory for the Congress-led coalition" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 15 May 2026 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Heller, Patrick (18 April 2020). "A virus, social democracy, and dividends for Kerala" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 19 November 2021 . Retrieved 2 February 2021 . ^ a b c d Tharamangalam J (2005). "The Perils of Social Development without Economic Growth: The Development Debacle of Kerala, India" (PDF) . Political Economy for Environmental Planners . Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 November 2013 . Retrieved 28 December 2008 . ^ "MOSPI State Domestic Product, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government of India" . 15 March 2021. Archived from the original on 17 June 2021 . Retrieved 23 June 2021 . ^ a b c d e f g h Government of Kerala (2021). Economic Review 2020 – Volume I (PDF) . Thiruvananthapuram: Kerala State Planning Board. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 May 2021 . Retrieved 18 June 2021 . ^ "Economy of Kerala – 2016" . slbckerala.com . Archived from the original on 28 March 2022 . Retrieved 7 February 2022 . ^ a b c d Chandran 2018 , p. 409. ^ K.P. Kannan; K.S. Hari (2002). Kerala's Gulf connection: Emigration, remittances and their macroeconomic impact, 1972–2000 . Research Papers in Economics (Report). Archived from the original on 28 June 2021 . Retrieved 4 April 2022 . ^ "Remittances: Kerala drives dollar flows to India" . Yahoo! Finance . 5 November 2013. Archived from the original on 7 November 2013 . Retrieved 8 November 2013 . ^ "NRI deposits in Kerala banks cross Rs 1 lakh crore" .

The Times of India . 22 June 2015. Archived from the original on 25 June 2015 . Retrieved 13 November 2015 . ^ India. Planning Commission (2008). Kerala Development Report . Academic Foundation. p. 396. ISBN 978-8171885947 . ^ "State/Union Territory-Wise Number of Branches of Scheduled Commercial Banks and Average Population Per Bank Branch" (PDF) . Reserve Bank of India . March 2002. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 August 2007 . Retrieved 28 December 2008 . ^ "Now, you can bank on every village in Kerala" .

The Times of India . 1 October 2011. Archived from the original on 4 January 2017 . Retrieved 13 November 2015 . ^ Kumar KG (8 October 2007). "Jobless no more?" . Business Line . Archived from the original on 6 November 2013 . Retrieved 16 November 2012 . A study by K.C. Zacharia and S. Irudaya Rajan, two economists at the Centre for Development Studies (CDS), unemployment in Kerala has dropped from 19.1 in 2003 to 9.4 in 2007. ^ Nair NG. Nair PR, Shaji H (eds.). Measurement of Employment, Unemployment, and Underemployment (PDF) . Kerala Research Programme on Local Level Development. Thiruvananthapuram: Centre for Development Studies. ISBN 978-8187621751 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 May 2015 . Retrieved 31 December 2008 . ^ Mary, John (12 May 2008). "Men (Not) At Work" . Outlook . Archived from the original on 6 November 2013 . Retrieved 13 November 2015 . ^ a b Deaton, Angus (22 August 2003). Regional poverty estimates for India, 1999–2000 (PDF) (Report). p. 10. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2011 . Retrieved 4 April 2022 . ^ a b "Budget In Brief" (PDF) . finance.kerala.gov.in . Government of Kerala. Archived from the original on 25 November 2020 . Retrieved 4 December 2020 . ^ "Memoranda from States: Kerala" (PDF) . fincomindia.nic.in . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2008 . Retrieved 25 September 2013 . ^ Kerala: Hartals Own Country? Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine 6 July 2008 ^ "India Today On Cm" . Keralacm.gov.in. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013 . Retrieved 11 January 2014 . ^ "Big push for infrastructure in Budget" .

The Hindu . 3 March 2017. Archived from the original on 29 January 2021 . Retrieved 25 November 2020 – via www.thehindu.com. ^ "Kerala Budget: Infrastructure projects get a major fillip" .

The New Indian Express . 4 March 2017. Archived from the original on 30 January 2021 . Retrieved 25 November 2020 . ^ "Modi to address heads of civic bodies on urban revamp" .

The Hindu . 20 June 2015. Archived from the original on 2 February 2021 . Retrieved 25 June 2015 . ^ R. Ramabhadran, Pillai. "AMRUT to roll out on a smaller scale" .

The Hindu . No. 12 November 2015. Archived from the original on 7 February 2021 . Retrieved 12 November 2015 . ^ "Shopping festival begins" .

The Hindu . 2 December 2007. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013 . Retrieved 24 January 2013 . ^ "LuLu Group: Going places" . Khaleej Times . Archived from the original on 26 April 2021 . Retrieved 13 November 2020 . ^ Heller, Patrick; Törnquist, Olle (13 December 2021). "Making sense of Kerala" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 14 December 2021 . Retrieved 5 March 2022 . Kerala has specific challenges: persistently high levels of unemployment that disproportionately impact educated women, a high degree of global exposure and a very fragile environment. More broadly, as the 21st century unfolds, it becomes increasingly clearer that the role of the State in supporting development must fundamentally change. First, in highly educated societies like Kerala, industrialisation is no longer the path to economic prosperity. ^ S. Rajitha Kumar; University of Kerala (2007). Traditional Industries of India in the Globalised World . University of Kerala. p. 223. ISBN 978-8177081435 . ^ "Indian Coir Industry" . Indian Mirror . Archived from the original on 2 May 2014 . Retrieved 29 April 2014 . ^ SIDBI Report on Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Sector, 2010 . Small Industries Development Bank of India. 2010. ^ N. Rajeevan (March 2012). "A Study on the Position of Small and Medium Enterprises in Kerala vis a vis the National Scenario". International Journal of Research in Commerce, Economics and Management . 2 (3). ^ "Functions, KSIDC, Thiruvananthapuram" . Kerala State Industrial Development Corporation. Archived from the original on 9 July 2014 . Retrieved 6 December 2013 . ^ Government of Kerala (2005). "Kerala at a Glance" . Government of Kerala . Archived from the original on 18 January 2006 . Retrieved 22 January 2006 . ^ B.R. Sinha (2003). Encyclopaedia Of Professional Education (10 Vol.) . Sarup & Sons. pp. 204– 05. ISBN 978-8176254106 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Babu P. Remesh (2010). Dynamics of Rural Labour: A Study of Small Holding Rubber Tappers in Kerala . Concept Publishing Company. pp. 52–. ISBN 978-8180696602 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Government of India Planning Commission (2008). Kerala Development Report . Academic Foundation. pp. 66–. ISBN 978-8171885947 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Planning Commission, India (2007). Kerala Development Report . Academic Foundation. p. 66. ISBN 978-8171885947 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ Chandran 2018 , p. 406. ^ Limca Book of Records . Bisleri Beverages Limited. 2001. p. 97 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ South Asia 2006 . Taylor & Francis. 2005. p. 291. ISBN 978-1-85743-318-0 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Economic Affairs . H. Roy. 1998. p. 47 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ a b James Newton (2012). Jay Rai's Kitchen – Keralan Cuisine . Springwood emedia. pp. 3–. ISBN 978-1-4761-2308-0 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Rajan, S. & B.L.Markose; Baby Lissy Markose (2007). Propagation of Horticultural Crops: Vol.06. Horticulture Science Series . New India Publishing. pp. 212–. ISBN 978-8189422486 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Pradhan (2009). Retailing Management 3E . Tata McGraw-Hill Education. pp. 256–. ISBN 978-0-07-015256-4 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ T. Pradeepkumar; Kumar, Pradeep (2008). Management of Horticultural Crops: Vol.11 Horticulture Science Series: In 2 Parts . New India Publishing. pp. 509–. ISBN 978-8189422493 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Filippo Osella; Caroline Osella (2000). Social Mobility In Kerala: Modernity and Identity in Conflict . Pluto Press. pp. 235–. ISBN 978-0-7453-1693-2 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ "Cashew sector in a tailspin" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 24 June 2016 . Retrieved 24 June 2016 . ^ Chandran 2018 , p. 407. ^ C.K. Varshney; J. Rzóska (1976). Aquatic Weeds in South East Asia . Springer. pp. 100–. ISBN 978-9061935568 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Aline Dobbie (2006). India the Elephants Blessing . Melrose Press. pp. 123–. ISBN 978-1-905226-85-6 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ "Kerala: Natural Resources" . Government of India. Archived from the original on 18 December 2011 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ "Kerala: April 2012" (PDF) . Indian Brand Equity Fund. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 May 2013 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ India. Planning Commission (1961). Third five year plan . Manager of Publications. p. 359 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Government of India Planning Commission (2008). Kerala Development Report . Academic Foundation. p. 51. ISBN 978-8171885947 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Planning Commission, India (2007). Kerala Development Report . Academic Foundation. p. 51. ISBN 978-8171885947 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ a b R. Quentin Grafton; Ray Hilborn; Dale Squires (2009). Handbook of Marine Fisheries Conservation and Management . Oxford University Press. pp. 10 –12. ISBN 978-0-19-537028-7 . ^ Leela Gulati (1984). Fisherwomen on the Kerala Coast: Demographic and Socio-Economic Impact of a Fisheries Development Project . International Labour Organization. p. 103 . ISBN 978-9221036265 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Journal of Kerala Studies . University of Kerala. 1987. p. 201 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ a b Ministry Annual Report (2019–20) (PDF) . New Delhi: Ministry of Road Transport & Highways Transport Research Wing, Government of India. 2020. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 October 2021 . Retrieved 20 June 2021 . ^ Basic Road Statistics of India (2016–17) (PDF) . New Delhi: Ministry of Road Transport & Highways Transport Research Wing, Government of India. 2019. pp. 7– 18. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 August 2021 . Retrieved 25 November 2020 . ^ Chandran 2018 , p. 422. ^ a b "National Highways in Kerala" . Kerala Public Works Department . Government of Kerala. ^ "Coastal, Hill Highways to become a reality" .

The Hindu . 12 July 2017. Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 12 February 2019 . ^ "District of Palakkad – the granary of Kerala, Silent Valley National Park, Nelliyampathy" . keralatourism.org. Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ "About us" . Kerala Public Works Department . Government of Kerala. Archived from the original on 1 December 2010 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Kumar VS (20 January 2006). "Kerala State transport project second phase to be launched next month" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 4 March 2007 . Retrieved 11 November 2007 . ^ Kumar VS (2003). "Institutional Strengthening Action Plan (ISAP)" . Kerala Public Works Department . Government of Kerala. Archived from the original on 12 May 2008 . Retrieved 11 November 2007 . ^ Kumar KG (22 September 2003). "Accidentally notorious" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 10 August 2011 . Retrieved 11 November 2007 . ^ "Kerala parties finally toe NHAI line of 45-m wide highways" . Indian Express . 18 August 2010 . Retrieved 25 September 2013 . ^ "Check out India's 13 super expressways" . Rediff.com . 5 July 2011. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013 . Retrieved 25 September 2013 . ^ "Kerala against development of five NHs" .

The Hindu . 28 March 2013. Archived from the original on 4 December 2024 . Retrieved 29 September 2024 . ^ Staff Reporter (30 June 2013). "State's troubled highways a shocking revelation for Centre" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 25 September 2013 . ^ "Introduction" (PDF) . Delhi Metro Rail Corporation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 September 2012 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ "The Zonal Dream Of Railway Kerala" . yentha.com . Archived from the original on 25 October 2012 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ "Thiruvananthapuram Central to be made a world-class station" .

The Hindu . 7 March 2007. ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 8 May 2016 . ^ "Aviation school proposal evokes mixed response" .

The Hindu . 8 June 2009. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016 . Retrieved 21 July 2015 . ^ Sudhakaran, P (14 September 2015). "Kannur flew, way before its first airport" .

The Times of India . Timesofindia.indiatimes.com. Archived from the original on 18 May 2017 . Retrieved 13 November 2020 . ^ "Silver jubilee does not bring cheer to Karipur airport users" .

The Times of India . 2 April 2012. Archived from the original on 4 June 2021 . Retrieved 7 February 2022 . ^ Menon, Supriya (9 October 2015). "How is the world's first solar-powered airport faring? – BBC News" . BBC News . Bbc.com. Archived from the original on 25 May 2023 . Retrieved 21 December 2018 . ^ "CIAL chosen for UN environmental honour" .

The New Indian Express . 26 July 2018. Archived from the original on 7 April 2023 . Retrieved 7 February 2022 . ^ "The three airports in Kerala can be in business without affecting each other" . Rediff . 6 December 1999. Archived from the original on 20 January 2008 . Retrieved 11 November 2007 . ^ "Kollam port gets ICP clearance" .

The Hindu . 15 June 2024. Archived from the original on 16 June 2024 . Retrieved 16 June 2024 . ^ "LIST OF IMMIGRATION CHECK POSTs" (PDF) . Ministry of Home Affairs - Govt. of India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 June 2024 . ^ a b c d e f Chandran 2018 , p. 424. ^ Government of India Planning Commission (2008). Kerala Development Report . Academic Foundation. p. 207. ISBN 978-8171885947 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Prabhakaran, Aishwarya (28 April 2024). " 'Sustainable, scenic': Kochi Water Metro carves niche & new paths" .

The New Indian Express . Retrieved 8 March 2025 . ^ "Kochi Water Metro | About Us" . Kochi Water Metro . Retrieved 8 March 2025 . ^ Chandran 2018 , p. 423. ^ a b c "Reviving the historic Canoly Canal" .

The Hindu . 5 January 2005. Archived from the original on 23 September 2010 . Retrieved 16 August 2009 . ^ a b c d "Size, Growth Rate and Distribution of Population" (PDF) . Census 2011 . Government of India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 13 November 2015 . ^ "Provisional Population Totals, Census of India 2011" (PDF) . Population of the urban local bodies in Kerala (2011) . Government of Kerala. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 September 2020 . Retrieved 4 December 2020 . ^ a b R Ramesh; R Purvaja; A Senthil Vel. Shoreline change assessment for Kerala coast (PDF) . National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management, Ministry of Environment and Forests. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 May 2015 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ "Level of Urbanisation in Indian States" . mohua.gov.in . Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, Government of India. Archived from the original on 7 February 2022 . Retrieved 7 February 2022 . ^ Kalathil MJ (2004). Nair PR, Shaji H (eds.). Withering Valli: Alienation, Degradation, and Enslavement of Tribal Women in Attappady (PDF) . Kerala Research Programme on Local Level Development. Thiruvananthapuram: Centre for Development Studies. ISBN 978-8187621690 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 May 2015 . Retrieved 29 December 2008 . ^ "International Women's Day 2017: Kerala and the myth of matriarchy" . Firstpost . 5 March 2017. Archived from the original on 16 July 2021 . Retrieved 16 July 2021 . ^ Lankina ; Tomila V.; Getachew, Lullit (2013). "Competitive religious entrepreneurs: Christian missionaries and female education in colonial and post-colonial India" . British Journal of Political Science . 43 : 103– 31. doi : 10.1017/s0007123412000178 . S2CID 145185494 . Archived from the original on 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 2 February 2016 . ^ ലേഖകൻ, മാധ്യമം (10 July 2021). "ജനസംഖ്യാദിനം; അറിയാം 21 കാര്യങ്ങൾ" . Madhyamam . Archived from the original on 16 July 2021 . Retrieved 16 July 2021 . ^ a b Ammu Joseph (1999). Oommen M.A. (ed.). Rethinking Development: Kerala's Development Experience . Concept Publishing Company. pp. 479– 86. ISBN 978-8170227656 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ Brenda Maddox mentions in: Maddox, Brenda. "A Marxist Paradise For Women?" New Statesman. (London, England: 1996) 128 no4440 30 January 14, 1999. ^ Antherjanam, Lalithambika. Cast Me Out If You Will. New York: The Feminist Press, 1997. ^ Jeffrey, Robin (1987). "Governments and Culture: How Women Made Kerala Literate". Pacific Affairs . 60 (3): 447– 72. doi : 10.2307/2758883 . JSTOR 2758883 . ^ "Kerala Government Has Unveiled A Policy To Enforce Constitutional Rights Of Transgenders" .

The Huffington Post . 12 November 2015. Archived from the original on 10 May 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2016 . ^ Devasia, T. K. (19 March 2016). "Why Kerala's free sex-change surgeries will offer a new lifeline for the transgender community" . Scroll.in . Archived from the original on 29 June 2019 . Retrieved 5 July 2019 . ^ "After She-Taxi, Kerala to launch G-Taxi for transgenders" .

The Times of India . Thiruvananthapuram. PTI. 31 January 2016. Archived from the original on 29 October 2019 . Retrieved 25 March 2016 . ^ "How Kerala left the country behind on transgender rights" . dna . 14 November 2015. Archived from the original on 29 June 2019 . Retrieved 19 March 2016 . ^ "Affirming their right, they march with pride" .

The Hindu . 13 August 2017. ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 28 December 2019 . Retrieved 4 April 2022 . ^ "Kerala to host its first gay parade" .

The Times of India . 30 June 2010. ^ "Kerala govt passes order to use 'transgender' instead of 'third/other gender' " . www.thenewsminute.com . 30 June 2019 . Retrieved 8 July 2019 . ^ Roshni, R. k (30 June 2019). "Only 'transgender' in official communication" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 8 July 2019 . ^ "Gendering Human Development Indices" (PDF) . Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India with UNDP India. March 2009. ^ Lin, Chun (2006).

The transformation of Chinese socialism . Durham : Duke University Press . p. 298. ISBN 978-0-8223-3785-0 . OCLC 63178961 . ^ "Sub-national HDI – Area Database" . Global Data Lab . Institute for Management Research, Radboud University . Retrieved 25 September 2018 . ^ a b "India Human Development Report 2011: Towards Social Inclusion" (PDF) . Institute of Applied Manpower Research, Planning Commission , Government of India . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 October 2013 . Retrieved 24 October 2014 . ^ a b "Kerala HDR 2005" . Human Development Report . Asia and the Pacific: United Nations . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ "Human Development Report 2005" (PDF) . Human Development Report . Asia and the Pacific: United Nations. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 March 2011 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 . ^ "Human Development Index rose 21 per cent; Kerala tops chart" . CNBC . 21 October 2011 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 . ^ "Growth, reforms lift living standards in India: Human development Index" . Economic Times . 22 October 2011 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 . ^ Sunil Mani; Anjini Kochar (2006). Kerala's Economy: Crouching Tiger, Sacred Cows . D.C. Books. p. 121. ISBN 978-8126413591 . Retrieved 24 September 2012 . ^ "Literacy Survey, India (2017–18)" . Firstpost. 8 September 2020. Archived from the original on 2 November 2021 . Retrieved 9 September 2020 . ^ "Literacy Rate in Kerala – 2018" . Archived from the original on 7 February 2022 . Retrieved 7 February 2022 . ^ a b "Tripura tops literacy rate with 94.65 per cent, leaves behind Kerala" . IBNLive . 9 September 2013. Archived from the original on 13 September 2013 . Retrieved 12 February 2015 . ^ Balaji, J. (22 October 2011). "Kerala tops in literacy rate, health services" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ Centre for Development Studies Thiruvananthapuram (2006). Human Development Report 2005 Kerala . Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala: State Planning Board. ^ "Press Note on Poverty Estimates, 2011–12" (PDF) . planningcommission.gov.in . Planning Commission, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2014 . Retrieved 27 November 2018 . ^ EFA Global Monitoring Report (PDF) (Report). UNESCO . 2003. p. 156. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 September 2004 . Retrieved 4 April 2022 . ^ Kutty VR (2000). "Historical analysis of the development of health care facilities in Kerala State, India" . Health Policy and Planning . 15 (1): 103– 09. doi : 10.1093/heapol/15.1.103 . PMID 10731241 . S2CID 7634887 . ^ a b Varma MS (4 April 2005). "Nap on HDI scores may land Kerala in an equilibrium trap" .

The Financial Express . Archived from the original on 17 June 2008 . Retrieved 12 November 2007 . ^ "SDG India – Index 2021–22 – Partnerships in the Decade of Action" (PDF) . NITI Aayog . 2021. Archived from the original on 13 June 2021 . Retrieved 29 September 2024 . ^ "Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy. Table 154 : Number and Percentage of Population Below Poverty Line. (2011-12)" . Reserve Bank of India . Archived from the original on 13 September 2021 . Retrieved 13 September 2021 . ^ "Kerala: A ghost town in the world's most populated country" . www.bbc.co.uk . BBC News. 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ a b c Kutty VR (2004). Nair PR, Shaji H (eds.). Why low birth weight (LBW) is still a problem in Kerala: A preliminary exploration (PDF) . Kerala Research Programme on Local Level Development. Thiruvananthapuram: Centre for Development Studies. p. 6. ISBN 978-8187621607 . Retrieved 12 November 2007 . ^ Christophe Z Guilmoto and Irudaya Rajan. "Fertility at District Level in India:Lessons from the 2011 Census" (PDF) . p. 31 . Retrieved 29 October 2020 . ^ "Fertility rate to even out in 20 years in Kerala" . Deccan Chronicle . Retrieved 29 October 2020 . ^ "Kerala among the least corrupt states in India, Karnataka tops the list: study" . OnManorama . ^ "India Corruption Study – 2005" . Transparency International . June 2005. Archived from the original on 13 April 2013 . Retrieved 11 November 2007 . ^ Jean Dreze; Amartya Sen (2002). India: Development and Participation . Oxford University Press. p. 368. ISBN 978-0-19-925749-2 . Retrieved 24 September 2012 . ^ "Table–3.1 Incidence And Rate Of Violent Crimes During 2011" (PDF) . 21 June 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 September 2013 . Retrieved 24 September 2014 . ^ "Child marriages remain Kerala's secret shame" .

The Hindu . 4 September 2015. ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 4 September 2015 . ^ Naha, Abdul Latheef (18 February 2018). "Child marriage cases go up in Malappuram" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 31 December 2019 . ^ "Child marriages shoot up in the most unlikely places in Kerala" . OnManorama . ^ Natu, Nitasha (25 December 2019). "Kerala No. 1 in child sex abuse complaints; Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra follow" .

The Time of India . Retrieved 31 December 2019 . ^ "Conviction rate up, Kerala tops with over 77% link" .

The Times of India . New Delhi, India. 9 August 2015 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 . ^ "Population of homeless in rural India dips" .

The Times of India . India. 7 December 2013 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 . ^ "CM told to pursue Zero Homeless Kerala project link" .

The Hindu . Pathanamthitta, India. 3 November 2013. ^ "Kerala-becomes-Indias-first-complete-digital-state link" .

The Times of India . New Delhi, India. 15 August 2015. ^ Maya, C (12 December 2013). "The road to universal health care in State" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 14 November 2015 . ^ a b Krishnaswami P (2004). Neelakantan S, Nair PR, Shaji H (eds.). Morbidity Study: Incidence, Prevalence, Consequences, and Associates (PDF) . Kerala Research Programme on Local Level Development. Thiruvananthapuram: Centre for Development Studies. ISBN 978-8187621669 . Retrieved 31 December 2008 . ^ "Kerala as good as US, OECD in saving newborn children" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 9 March 2017 . ^ Patel, Atish (4 May 2016). "Why Kerala is the best place in India to die" . ^ Roy MKP (2004). "Water quality and health status in Kollam Municipality" (PDF) . Centre for Development Studies . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 December 2016 . Retrieved 28 December 2008 . ^ "Diabetic patients: Kerala tops list of Indian states" .

The Times of India . 8 December 2017 . Retrieved 28 October 2019 . ^ "Kerala Named World's First WHO-UNICEF "Baby-Friendly State" " . United Nations Foundation . August 2002. Archived from the original on 6 March 2010 . Retrieved 14 March 2009 . ^ "Indian state wins 'baby-friendly' award" . BBC News . Kochi, India. 1 August 2002. ^ a b c Unnikrishnan, E (2004). " Materia Medica of the Local Health Traditions of Payyannur" (PDF) . Centre for Development Studies . Retrieved 22 January 2006 . ^ Angus Stewart, woodburn The Religious attitude: A psychological study of its differentiation, 1927 ^ a b "PK Warrier turns 90" .

The Hindu . 6 June 2011. ^ a b Arya Vaidya Sala Kottakkal – Part 1 (Documentary). BBC World – India Business Report. 30 May 2013. Archived from the original on 22 December 2021. ^ a b Leelakrishnan, Alamkode (17 June 2019). "അമ്പതിന്റെ നിറവില്‍ മലപ്പുറം; മലപ്പുറത്തിന്റെ മാനവിക മഹാപൈതൃകം" . Mathrubhumi . Archived from the original on 7 May 2021 . Retrieved 24 April 2021 . ^ "Kerala becomes first state to provide free cancer treatment – Free Press Journal" . www.freepressjournal.in . 11 October 2014 . Retrieved 18 May 2016 . ^ "Health Statistics and Public Health issues in Kerala" . Indus Health Plus . Retrieved 28 October 2019 . ^ Krishnakumar, P. K.; Sanandakumar, S. (23 April 2016). "Health crisis in Kerala: The increase in cancer, kidney and liver diseases – The Economic Times" .

The Economic Times . Retrieved 18 May 2016 . ^ Statistics Wing, Health Information Cell (2019). List of modern medicine institutions (2017–18) (PDF) . Thiruvananthapuram: Directorate of Health Services, Government of Kerala. pp. 1, 7. ^ a b " 'Classical' status for Malayalam" .

The Hindu . Thiruvananthapuram, India. 24 May 2013 . Retrieved 25 May 2013 . ^ "Kerala – Principal Language" . Government of India . Archived from the original on 10 June 2020 . Retrieved 27 November 2018 . ^ a b "Census of India – Language" . censusindia.gov.in . ^ "Kerala government to appoint officer to study issues of linguistic minorities" . City: Thiruvananthapuram.

The Times of India . TNN. 2 August 2017 . Retrieved 29 December 2019 . ^ "Population by religious community – 2011" . 2011 Census of India . Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner. Archived from the original on 25 August 2015 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 . ^ "The paradox of India's most religiously diverse state" .

The Ground Truth Project. 7 April 2019 . Retrieved 7 April 2019 . ^ "There's a Place in India Where Religions Coexist Beautifully and Gender Equality Is Unmatched" . Huffpost. 6 April 2016 . Retrieved 6 April 2016 . ^ Heller, Patrick (June 1996). "Social capital as a product of class mobilization and state intervention: Industrial workers in Kerala, India" . World Development . 24 (6): 1055– 1071. doi : 10.1016/0305-750X(96)00015-0 . ^ "Population by religious communities" . Census of India . Government of India . Retrieved 26 August 2015 . ^ "Increase in Muslim population in the State" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 23 September 2004. Archived from the original on 28 November 2004 . Retrieved 13 November 2015 . ^ "Kerala, not Goa, has maximum no. of Christians" .

The Times Group. 25 December 2007. ^ "Vital Statistics 2016" (PDF) . Ecostat, Kerala Government . Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 July 2019 . Retrieved 7 June 2019 . ^ Sethi, Atul (24 June 2007). "Trade, not invasion brought Islam to India" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 24 September 2014 . ^ Katz 2000; Koder 1973; Thomas Puthiakunnel 1973; David de Beth Hillel, 1832; Lord, James Henry 1977. ^ Varghese, Theresa (2006). Stark World Kerala . Stark World Pub. ISBN 978-8190250511 . ^ Kumar, Satish (2012). India's National Security: Annual Review 2009 . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-136-70491-8 . ^ Minu Ittyipe; Solomon to Cheraman; Outlook Indian Magazine; 2012 ^ Kunhali, V. "Muslim Communities in Kerala to 1798" PhD Dissertation Aligarh Muslim University (1986) ^ Chitra Divakaruni (2011).

The Palace of Illusions . Pan Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-330-47865-6 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Jonathan Goldstein (1999).

The Jews of China . M. E. Sharpe. p. 123. ISBN 978-0-7656-0104-9 . ^ Edward Simpson; Kai Kresse (2008). Struggling with History: Islam and Cosmopolitanism in the Western Indian Ocean . Columbia University Press. p. 333. ISBN 978-0-231-70024-5 . Retrieved 24 July 2012 . ^ Uri M. Kupferschmidt (1987).

The Supreme Muslim Council: Islam Under the British Mandate for Palestine . Brill. pp. 458– 59. ISBN 978-9004079298 . Archived from the original on 25 November 2023 . Retrieved 25 July 2012 . ^ Husain Raṇṭattāṇi (2007). Mappila Muslims: A Study on Society and Anti Colonial Struggles . Other Books. pp. 179–. ISBN 978-8190388788 . Retrieved 25 July 2012 . ^ The Encyclopedia of Christianity, Volume 5 Archived 26 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine by Erwin Fahlbusch. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing – 2008. p. 285. ISBN 978-0802824172 . ^ Johnson, Barbara C. (2003). "The Cochin Jews Of Kerala" .

The Jews of India: A Story of Three Communities . Jerusalem: The Israel Museum. p. 27. ISBN 9652781797 . ^ "Saint Thomas" . Encyclopædia Britannica . 1 January 2019. ^ Menachery G; 1973, 1998; Mundalan, A. M; 1984; Podipara, Placid J. 1970; Leslie Brown, 1956 ^ Selvister Ponnumuthan (1996). Authentic Interpretation in Canon Law: Reflections on a Distinctively Canonical Institution . Gregorian&Biblical BookShop. pp. 103–. ISBN 978-8876527210 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Raymond Brady Williams (1996). Christian Pluralism in the United States: The Indian Immigrant Experience . Cambridge University Press. pp. 144–. ISBN 978-0-521-57016-9 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Allan Anderson; Edmond Tang (2005). Asian and Pentecostal: The Charismatic Face of Christianity in Asia . OCMS. pp. 248–. ISBN 978-1-870345-43-9 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ John Anthony McGuckin (15 December 2010).

The Encyclopedia of Eastern Orthodox Christianity. pp. 377–. Retrieved 18 November 2012 . John Wiley & Sons. 2010. ISBN 978-1-4443-9254-8 . ^ Thomas Arthur Russell (2010). Comparative Christianity: A Student's Guide to a Religion and Its Diverse Traditions . Universal-Publishers. pp. 40–. ISBN 978-1-59942-877-2 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Stephen Neill (2002). A History of Christianity in India: 1707–1858 . Cambridge University Press. pp. 247– 251. ISBN 978-0-521-89332-9 . Retrieved 31 August 2012 . ^ Bergunder, Michael (2008).

The South Indian Pentecostal Movement in the Twentieth Century . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. pp. 15– 16, 26– 30, 37– 57. ISBN 978-0-8028-2734-0 . ^ A Sreedhara Menon (2007). A Survey Of Kerala History . DC Books. pp. 192–. ISBN 978-8126415786 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Knut A. Jacobsen, Selva J. Rak; Selva J. Raj (2008). South Asian Christian Diaspora: Invisible Diaspora in Europe and North America . Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. pp. 172–. ISBN 978-0-7546-6261-7 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Ajantha Subramanian (2009). Shorelines: Space and Rights in South India . Stanford University Press. pp. 95–. ISBN 978-0-8047-8685-0 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Singh, Anjana. "Fort Cochin in Kerala 1750–1830 The Social Condition of a Dutch Community in an Indian Milieu." Brill, Leiden Boston: 2010, 3: 92. ^ Weil, Shalva. "Jews in India." in M.Avrum Erlich (ed.) Encyclopedia of the Jewish Diaspora , Santa Barbara, CA: ABC CLIO. 2008, 3: 1204–12. ^ The Israelis (Jews) of India: A Story of Three Communities Archived 26 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine by Orpa Slapak.

The Israel Museum, Jerusalem. 2003. p. 27. ISBN 978-9652781796 . ^ Weil, Shalva. India's Jewish Heritage: Ritual, Art and Life-Cycle, Mumbai: Marg Publications, 2009. . Katz 200/*Religion */ 0; Koder 1973; Menachery 1998 ^ Joan G. Roland (1998).

The Jewish Communities of India: Identity in a Colonial Era . Transaction Publishers. pp. 283–. ISBN 978-0-7658-0439-6 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ "Paradesi Synagogue – tourist attractions at Mattancherry, Ernakulam Kerala Tourism" . www.keralatourism.org . ^ Stewart Lockie; David Carpenter (2012). Agriculture, Biodiversity and Markets: Livelihoods and Agroecology in Comparative Perspective . Routledge. p. 258. ISBN 978-1-136-54649-5 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ George Mathew; B S Baviskar (2009). Inclusion and Exclusion in Local Governance: Field Studies from Rural India . Sage Publications. p. 204. ISBN 978-8178298603 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Roy, Ranjan (1990). "Discovery of the Series Formula for π by Leibniz, Gregory, and Nilakantha". Mathematics Magazine . 63 (5): 291– 306. doi : 10.2307/2690896 . JSTOR 2690896 . ^ Pingree, David (1992), "Hellenophilia versus the History of Science", Isis , 83 (4): 554– 63, Bibcode : 1992Isis...83..554P , doi : 10.1086/356288 , JSTOR 234257 , S2CID 68570164 , One example I can give you relates to the Indian Mādhava's demonstration, in about 1400 A.D., of the infinite power series of trigonometrical functions using geometrical and algebraic arguments.

When this was first described in English by Charles Whish, in the 1830s, it was heralded as the Indians' discovery of the calculus. This claim and Mādhava's achievements were ignored by Western historians, presumably at first because they could not admit that an Indian discovered the calculus, but later because no one read anymore the Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society , in which Whish's article was published.

The matter resurfaced in the 1950s, and now we have the Sanskrit texts properly edited, and we understand the clever way that Mādhava derived the series without the calculus, but many historians still find it impossible to conceive of the problem and its solution in terms of anything other than the calculus and proclaim that the calculus is what Mādhava found.

In this case, the elegance and brilliance of Mādhava's mathematics are being distorted as they are buried under the current mathematical solution to a problem to which he discovered an alternate and powerful solution. ^ "Missionaries led State to renaissance: Pinarayi" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 30 July 2009 . ^ a b Planning Commission, India (2007). Kerala Development Report . Academic Foundation. pp. 255– 58. ISBN 978-8171885947 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ "Kerala becomes 1st Indian state to achieve 100% primary education" . International Business Times . 12 January 2016 . Retrieved 14 January 2016 . ^ a b "Education in Kerala" . Government of India. Archived from the original on 18 December 2011 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ "Kerala School Data Bank" . sametham.kite.kerala.gov.in . Government of Kerala . Retrieved 5 December 2020 . ^ a b A. Sreedhara Menon (2008). Cultural Heritage of Kerala . D C Books. pp. 13– 15. ISBN 978-8126419036 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ Menon, A. Sreedhara (2007). A Survey Of Kerala History . DC Books. p. 55. ISBN 978-8126415786 . ^ A. Sreedhara Menon (1978). Cultural Heritage of Kerala: An Introduction . East-West Publications. p. 10. ^ Contribution of Travancore to Karnatic Music . Information & Public Relations Department, Government of Kerala. 2004. pp. 7– 37. ^ a b S. Bhagyalekshmy (2004). Contribution of Travancore to Karnatic Music . Information & Public Relations Department, Government of Kerala . Retrieved 6 January 2013 . ^ "India's overworked elephants" . BBC . 4 March 2010 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ J. Devika (2005). Her-self: Early Writings on Gender by Malayalee Women, 1898–1938 . Popular Prakashan. p. 5. ISBN 978-8185604749 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 . ^ Kumar Suresh Singh (2004). People of India: Maharashtra . Popular Prakashan. p. 1524. ISBN 978-8179911020 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 . ^ Thomas Benedikter (2009). Language Policy and Linguistic Minorities in India: An Appraisal of the Linguistic Rights of Minorities in India . LIT Verlag Münster. p. 90. ISBN 978-3-643-10231-7 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ "Language – India, States and Union Territories" (PDF) . Census of India 2011 . Office of the Registrar General. pp. 13– 14. ^ "Shock after alcohol flows from kitchen taps in Kerala" . BBC News . 6 February 2020. ^ Cultural Heritage of Kerala . D.C. Books. 2008. p. 76. ISBN 978-8126419036 . ^ The Legacy of Kerala . Department of Public Relations, Government of Kerala. 1982. p. 34. ISBN 978-8126437986 . ^ World Encyclopaedia of Interfaith Studies: World religions . Jnanada Prakashan. 2009. pp. 704– 10. ISBN 978-8171392803 . ^ "The stars of Pooram show are jumbos" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 26 May 2006. Archived from the original on 18 November 2007 . Retrieved 11 November 2007 . ^ Infokerala Communications Pvt. Ltd. (2013). Pilgrimage to Temple Heritage . Biju Mathew. p. 433. ISBN 978-8192128443 . ^ David Stott (2014). Kerala Footprint Focus Guide: Includes Kochi, Alappuzha, Thrissur, Periyar, River Nila . Footprint Travel Guides. p. 94. ISBN 978-1-909268-79-1 . ^ M. G. S. Narayanan; K. K. N. Kurup (1976). Historical Studies in Kerala . Department of History, University of Calicut. pp. 68– 81. ^ Rolf Killius (2006). Ritual Music and Hindu Rituals of Kerala . B.R. Rhythms. p. 61. ISBN 978-8188827077 . ^ Sreedhara Menon, A. (2007). Kerala Charitram (2007 ed.). Kottayam: DC Books. ISBN 978-8126415885 . Archived from the original on 13 November 2021 . Retrieved 19 July 2020 . ^ Chummar Choondal (1980). Kerala Folk Literature . Kerala Folklore Academy. ^ A Sreedhara Menon (2007). A Survey Of Kerala History . DC Books. pp. 80–. ISBN 978-8126415786 . ^ Pratiyogita Darpan (2006). Pratiyogita Darpan . Pratiyogita Darpan. p. 624. ^ Purāṇam . All-India Kasiraja Trust. 2004. p. 17. ^ Cultural Heritage of Kerala . D.C. Books. 2008. p. 66. ISBN 978-8126419036 . ^ Praveen, M. P. (8 September 2011). "Myth, mystique, and traditions of Onam" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 12 November 2015 . ^ "Vallamkali – Resplendent Water Regattas of Kerala | Kerala Boat Races| Onam| Kerala Backwaters | Kerala" . Kerala Tourism . Retrieved 9 June 2021 . ^ Infokerala Communications Pvt. Ltd. (2013). Pilgrimage to Temple Heritage . Biju Mathew. p. 535. ISBN 978-8192128443 . ^ A Biblical Approach to Indian Traditions and Beliefs . Armour Publishing Pte Ltd. 2008. p. 90. ISBN 978-9814222396 . ^ J Mohapatra (2013). Wellness In Indian Festivals & Rituals . Partridge Pub. p. 142. ISBN 978-1-4828-1690-7 . ^ Gouri Lakshmi Bayi (Princess.) (1998). Thulasi garland . Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan. ISBN 978-8172761103 . ^ Kala Menon (November 2004). "Classical Dance Art Forms of Kerala" (PDF) . Sruti Ranjini . 14 (1): 11. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 7 February 2022 . ^ "Thirayattam" (Folklore Text-Malayalam), State Institute of language, Kerala ISBN 978-8120042940 ^ A Sreedhara Menon (2008). Cultural heritage of Kerala . D C Books. p. 106. ISBN 978-8126419036 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 . ^ Motilal (UK) Books of India (2008). Tourist Guide Kerala . Sura Books. p. 8. ISBN 978-8174781642 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 . ^ Kāvālaṃ Nārāyaṇappaṇikkar (1991). Folklore of Kerala . National Book Trust, India. p. 146. ISBN 978-8123725932 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 . ^ Asha Kasbekar (2006). Pop Culture India!: Media, Arts, And Lifestyle . ABC-CLIO. pp. 43– 44. ISBN 978-1-85109-636-7 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 . ^ a b c A. Sreedhara Menon (1982).

The Legacy of Kerala . D C Books. pp. 48– 51. ISBN 978-8126421572 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ Richard Schechner; Willa Appel (1990).

By Means of Performance: Intercultural Studies of Theatre and Ritual . Cambridge University Press. p. 145. ISBN 978-0-521-33915-5 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ a b Simon Broughton; Mark Ellingham; Richard Trillo (2000). World Music Volume 2 Latin and North America, Caribbean, India, Asia and Pacific: The Rough Guide . Rough Guides. p. 97. ISBN 978-1-85828-636-5 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ A. Sreedhara Menon (1982).

The Legacy of Kerala . D C Books. p. 41. ISBN 978-8126421572 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ Menon, Sreedhara (2008). Cultural Heritage of Kerala . D C Books. pp. 128– 29. ISBN 978-8126419036 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ Datta, Amaresh (1987). Encyclopaedia of Indian Literature . Sahitya Akademi. pp. 751– 53. ISBN 978-8126018031 . ^ Gangadhar, V. (2 October 2003). "Magic of Sophia Loren" . Sunday Magazine.

The Hindu . Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 30 November 2003 . Retrieved 18 January 2015 . ^ Subburaj V.V.K. Sura's Year Book 2006 . Sura Books. p. 620. ISBN 978-8172541248 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ "Jnanpith Awards for ONV Kurup, Akhlaq Khan Shahryar" .

The Times of India . 24 September 2014 . Retrieved 24 September 2014 . ^ "Jnanpith Award Winners | UPSC Guide" . upscguide.com. Archived from the original on 19 December 2012 . Retrieved 24 September 2014 . ^ Chandran 2018 , p. 358-361. ^ Chandran 2018 , p. 450. ^ P. K. Parameswaran Nair (1967). History of Malayalam literature . Sahitya Akademi. p. 296 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Sigfried J. de Laet (1994). History of Humanity: From the seventh to the sixteenth century . UNESCO. p. 407. ISBN 978-9231028137 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ K. M. George (1998). Eng when Poetry Comes . Sahitya Akademi. p. 58. ISBN 978-8126004133 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Chandran 2018 , p. 453. ^ "Cherussery (Krishnagadha) Malayalam author books" . keralaliterature.com . Archived from the original on 7 April 2019. ^ a b c d e Dr. K. Ayyappa Panicker (2006). A Short History of Malayalam Literature . Thiruvananthapuram: Department of Information and Public Relations, Kerala. ^ Arun Narayanan (25 October 2018). "The Charms of Poonthanam Illam" .

The Hindu . ^ Freeman, Rich (2003). "Genre and Society: The Literary Culture of Premodern Kerala".

In Literary Cultures in History: Reconstructions from South Asia ^ Krishna Kaimal, Aymanam (1989). Attakatha sahithyam . Trivandrum State Institute of Language. ^ Binoy, Rasmi (27 September 2018). "The river sutra" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 24 January 2021 . ^ P. K. Parameswaran Nair (1967). History of Malayalam literature . Sahitya Akademi. pp. 118– 21 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Madhubālā Sinhā (2009). Encyclopaedia of South Indian literature . Anmol Publ. p. 97. ISBN 978-8126137404 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ John V. Vilanilam (1987). Religious communication in India . Kairali Books International. p. 66 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Sukumār Al̲ikkōṭȧ (1979). Mahakavi Ulloor . Sahitya Akademi. p. 52 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Indian and Foreign Review . Publications Division of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. 1983. p. 25 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Ke. Eṃ Tarakan (1990). A brief survey of Malayalam literature: history of literature . K.M. Tharakan. pp. 41– 52 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ "Mappila songs cultural fountains of a bygone age, says MT" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 31 March 2007. Archived from the original on 8 November 2012 . Retrieved 15 August 2009 . ^ Pg 167, Mappila Muslims: a study on society and anti colonial struggles By Husain Raṇdathaṇi, Other Books, Kozhikode 2007 ^ a b Menon, A. Sreedhara (2008).

The legacy of Kerala (1st DCB ed.). Kottayam, Kerala: D C Books. ISBN 978-81-264-2157-2 . ^ "August 23, 2010 Archives" . Archived from the original on 27 April 2013. ^ "South Asian arts" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 15 September 2017 . ^ Naha, Abdul Latheef (24 September 2020). "Jnanpith given to Akkitham" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 12 June 2021 . ^ ANI (29 November 2019). "Celebrated Malayalam poet Akkitham wins 2019 Jnanpith Award" . Business Standard . Retrieved 12 June 2021 . ^ Subodh Kapoor (2002).

The Indian Encyclopaedia: Biographical, Historical, Religious, Administrative, Ethnological, Commercial and Scientific. Mahi-Mewat . Cosmo. p. 4542. ISBN 978-8177552720 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Accessions List, South Asia . E.G. Smith for the U.S. Library of Congress Office, New Delhi. 1994. p. 21 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Indian Writing Today . Nirmala Sadanand Publishers. 1967. p. 21 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Amaresh Datta; Sahitya Akademi (1987). Encyclopaedia of Indian Literature: K to Navalram . Sahitya Akademi. p. 2394. ISBN 978-0-8364-2423-2 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Malayalam Literary Survey . Kerala Sahitya Akademi. 1993. p. 19 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Eṃ Mukundan; C. Gopinathan Pillai (2004). Eng Adityan Radha And Others . Sahitya Akademi. p. 3. ISBN 978-8126018833 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Ed. Vinod Kumar Maheshwari (2002). Perspectives On Indian English Literature . Atlantic Publishers & Dist. p. 126. ISBN 978-8126900930 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Amit Chaudhuri (2008). Clearing a Space: Reflections On India, Literature, and Culture . Peter Lang. pp. 44– 45. ISBN 978-1-906165-01-7 . Retrieved 18 November 2012 . ^ Lyall, Sarah (15 October 1997). "Indian's First Novel Wins Booker Prize in Britain" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 11 November 2007 . ^ Murdoch Books Pty Limited; Murdoch Books Test Kitchen (2010). India . Murdoch Books. p. 10. ISBN 978-1-74196-438-7 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 . ^ Majumdar (2010). Consumer Behaviour: Insights From Indian Market . PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd. p. 181. ISBN 978-8120339637 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 . ^ Rachel Muthachen (1970). Regional Indian Recipes . Jaico Publishing House. p. 1. ISBN 978-8172240356 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 . ^ James Newton (2012). Jay Rai's Kitchen – Keralan Cuisine . Springwood emedia. pp. 4–. ISBN 978-1-4761-2308-0 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 . ^ Vijayan Kannampilly (2003). Essential Kerala Cook Book . Penguin Books India. pp. 10– 11. ISBN 978-0-14-302950-2 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 . ^ Kerala with Lakshadweep . Outlook Publishing. 2005. p. 27. ISBN 978-8189449018 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 . ^ George Koilparampil (1982). Caste in the Catholic community in Kerala: a study of caste elements in the inter rite relationships of Syrians and Latins . Dept. of Sociology, St. Teresa's College. p. 233 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 . ^ Paramatmananda (Swami.) (2000). Talks . Mata Amritanandamayi Center. p. 24. ISBN 978-1-879410-79-4 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 . ^ "Kerala Cuisine" . Ecotours. Archived from the original on 13 August 2015 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 . Georg Thieme Verlag. p. 112. GGKEY:BJ6HEPE0NRE. ^ "National Family Health Survey (NFHS-4)" (PDF) . International Institute for Population SciencesDeonar . Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 February 2022 . Retrieved 7 February 2022 . ^ "General Review" . Registrar of Newspapers for India. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007 . Retrieved 1 September 2006 . ^ K. M. George (1998). Eng when Poetry Comes . Sahitya Akademi. p. 186. ISBN 978-8126004133 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 . ^ "The DHS Program – India: Standard DHS, 2015–16" . dhsprogram.com . ^ "National Family Health Survey" . rchiips.org . Archived from the original on 7 March 2022 . Retrieved 7 February 2022 . ^ "Delhi ranks top in Internet penetration, Kerala comes second" .

The Hindu Business Line . 6 May 2020 . Retrieved 27 June 2021 . ^ Ranjith KS (2004). Nair PR, Shaji H (eds.). Rural Libraries of Kerala (PDF) . Kerala Research Programme on Local Level Development. Thiruvananthapuram: Centre for Development Studies. pp. 20– 21. ISBN 978-8187621812 . Retrieved 28 December 2008 . ^ "Highlights ofTelecom Subscription Data as on 28thFebruary, 2019" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 April 2019 . Retrieved 16 May 2019 . ^ a b c d "Sports and Games in Kerala" . Public Relations Dept, Kerala. 2002. Archived from the original on 28 April 2006 . Retrieved 9 June 2012 . ^ Arnaud Van Der Veere (2012). Muay Thai . Meyer & Meyer Verlag. p. 8. ISBN 978-1-84126-328-1 . ^ "India Wins World Twenty20 Thriller" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 25 September 2007. Archived from the original on 6 November 2013 . Retrieved 11 November 2007 . ^ "Minister convenes high-level meet" .

The Hindu . 4 July 2009. Archived from the original on 7 July 2009. ^ "Ranji Trophy: In historic first, Kerala join defending champions Gujarat in quarter-finals" .

The Times of India . 28 November 2017 . Retrieved 19 December 2017 . ^ Salikha, Adelaida. "Top FIVE Asian Clubs With Highest Social Media Followers, Up to October 2018 | Seasia.co" . Good News from Southeast Asia . Retrieved 17 September 2020 . ^ "Indian Football: Five most-followed clubs on social media" . Khel Now . 18 June 2020. Archived from the original on 13 November 2021 . Retrieved 10 September 2020 . ^ "Malayalam News – kerala blasters become fifth Asian club with the biggest social media following | News18 Kerala, Sports Latest Malayalam News | ലേറ്റസ്റ്റ് മലയാളം വാർത്ത" . malayalam.news18.com . 25 October 2018 . Retrieved 5 December 2020 . ^ "AIFF Award Player of the Year" . All India Football Federation. Archived from the original on 17 February 2009 . Retrieved 15 November 2015 . ^ James Wray; Ulf Stabe (15 September 2007). "Viva marks the resurgence of Kerala football" . Monstersandcritics.com . Retrieved 30 July 2009 . ^ "Indian football team suffer humiliating 1–9 defeat to Kuwait" . zeenews.india.com. 14 November 2010 . Retrieved 13 November 2016 . ^ Sportstar, Team (15 July 2019). "Sahal recalls journey from university football to senior national team" . Sportstar . Retrieved 6 June 2020 . ^ "Bipin Singh, Ishan Pandita in 35-man probables list for Oman, UAE friendlies" . thescroll.in . 2 March 2021. ^ "Past Winners" . All India Football Federation. Archived from the original on 24 May 2012 . Retrieved 9 June 2012 . ^ "Kerala State Athletics Association: History" . Kerala State Athletics Association. Archived from the original on 24 June 2012 . Retrieved 12 June 2012 . ^ David Abram; Nick Edwards (2004).

The Rough Guide to South India . Rough Guides. p. 64. ISBN 978-1-84353-103-6 . ^ "Jimmy George" . Sports Portal . Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports. Archived from the original on 14 May 2008 . Retrieved 11 November 2007 . ^ P.A. Reddy (2005). Sports Promotion In India . Discovery Publishing House. pp. 31– 42. ISBN 978-8171419272 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 . ^ Irfan, KT. "KT Irfan, World Athletics Championships, Moscow" . NDTV Sports . Archived from the original on 14 August 2013. ^ "FIFA Event at Kochi: Time is Ticking Away" .

The New Indian Express . Archived from the original on 8 March 2016 . Retrieved 3 April 2016 . ^ Chaudhuri, Arunava (2 July 2015). "Trivandrum will host upcoming SAFF Cup in December 2015/January 2016" . SportsKeeda . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ a b c "Kerala Tourism: Paradises in the world" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 4 September 2004 . Retrieved 20 February 2012 . ^ "Pravasi KairaLi Home" . Pravasikairali.com. Archived from the original on 8 November 2014 . Retrieved 11 January 2014 . ^ "Kerala: A vacation in paradise" .

The Times of India . 7 February 2014. Archived from the original on 25 November 2023 . Retrieved 17 January 2023 . ^ "Kerala – The Gateway of India" . Forbes . Retrieved 3 January 2012 . ^ "Kerala : National Geographic Traveler selects Kerala as 'one of the 50 must-see destinations of a lifetime' " . Travel Portal of India. 27 January 2009. Archived from the original on 4 September 2011 . Retrieved 11 June 2011 . ^ "Kerala beats Taj in Google Search Trends for 2012" . Indian Express . 28 December 2012 . Retrieved 11 January 2012 . ^ "CNN Travel's 19 places to visit in 2019" . CNN Travel . 22 May 2019 . Retrieved 4 April 2022 . ^ "Ahmedabad and Kerala on TIME magazine's list of World's Greatest Places of 2022" . India Today . 14 July 2022. ^ "This is the only Indian state to make it to the list of 'World's Top 26 Destinations For 2026' " .

The Times of India . 27 December 2025. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 30 December 2025 . ^ Infokerala Communications Pvt. Ltd. (2012). Kerala Tradition & Fascinating Destinations . Biju Mathew | Info Kerala Communications Pvt Ltd. p. 314. ISBN 978-8192128481 . ^ Admin (6 August 2011). "Kerala Family Tour Packages" . Archived from the original on 21 November 2021 . Retrieved 2 July 2019 . ^ Saju (6 August 2011). "Destination Wise Number of Foreign Tourists Visited Kerala During 2010" (PDF) . Retrieved 24 September 2014 . ^ "Tourist statistics – 2008" (PDF) . Government of Kerala, Tourism Department . Retrieved 22 October 2010 . ^ a b Santhanam K (27 January 2002). "An ideal getaway" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 23 June 2003 . Retrieved 11 November 2007 . ^ a b c Dasgupta Devashish (2011). Tourism Marketing . Pearson Education India. p. 203. ISBN 978-8131731826 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ "Tourist Statistics – 2006" (PDF) . Department of Tourism . Government of Kerala. 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2008 . Retrieved 11 November 2007 . ^ a b Joseph, George (16 May 2012). "Tourist inflow to Kerala crosses 10 million mark" . Business-Standard . Retrieved 15 November 2015 . ^ Planning Commission, India (2007). Kerala Development Report . Academic Foundation. p. 47. ISBN 978-8171885947 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ "Tourist Statistics – 2005 (Provisional)" (PDF) . Department of Tourism . Government of Kerala. 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2008 . Retrieved 11 November 2007 . ^ "Kerala records 6% rise in tourist arrivals despite floods and Nipah virus scare" .

The Economic Times . 14 February 2019 . Retrieved 14 August 2019 . ^ Gibson, David K. (11 June 2021). "The best beaches for driving" . BBC Autos . ^ Tapan K Panda (2007). Tourism Marketing . ICFAI Books. pp. 173– 77. ISBN 978-8131404690 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ "Kerala: Spellbound by this natural beauty" .

The Free Press Journal . 2 August 2015 . Retrieved 27 November 2015 . ^ M.R. Biju (2006). Sustainable Dimensions Of Tourism Management . Mittal Publications. pp. 151– 65. ISBN 978-8183241298 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ "Padmanabhapuram Palace" . Kerala Tourism . Retrieved 2 December 2016 . ^ "Mattancherry Palace" . Kerala Tourism . Retrieved 2 December 2016 . Notes ^ Indian English : /ˈkɛrələ/ ⓘ , KERR -ə-lə The Kerala model in the time of COVID19: Rethinking state, society and democracy" . World Development . 137 105207. doi : 10.1016/j.worlddev.2020.105207 . PMC 7510531 . PMID 32989341 . Devika, J. (2016). "The 'Kudumbashree Woman' and the Kerala Model Woman: Women and Politics in Contemporary Kerala" . Indian Journal of Gender Studies . 23 (3): 393– 414. doi : 10.1177/0971521516656077 . S2CID 151752480 . Jeffrey, Robin (2004). "Legacies of Matriliny: The Place of Women and the "Kerala Model" " (PDF) . Pacific Affairs . 77 (4): 647– 664. JSTOR 40023536 . Jeffrey, Robin (2009). "Testing Concepts about Print, Newspapers, and Politics: Kerala, India, 1800–2009" (PDF) .