The Supreme Being ( Krishnaism - Vaishnavism ) Member of Dashavatara Krishna lifting Govardhan Hill ; folio from the Harivamsa ( Mughal painting by Miskin ), c. 1590 Other names Achyuta , Damodara , Gopala , Gopinath , Govinda , Keshava , Madhava , Radha Ramana , Shyam , Vāsudeva , Krishnan , Kannan Devanagari कृष्ण Sanskrit transliteration Kṛṣṇa Affiliation Svayam Bhagavan (Krishnaism-Vaishnavism) Avatar of Vishnu Dashavatara Radha Krishna Abode The anecdotes and narratives of Krishna's life are known as Krishna Lila . He is a central figure in the Mahabharata , the Bhagavata Purana , the Brahma Vaivarta Purana , and the Bhagavad Gita , and is mentioned in many Hindu philosophical , theological , and mythological texts. These texts describes him as a divine statesman, teacher, savior of dharma , charioteer, and sometimes a cowherd. They portray him in various perspectives: as a god-child, a prankster, a model lover, a divine hero, and the universal supreme being. His iconography reflects these legends and shows him in different stages of his life, such as an infant eating butter, a young boy playing a flute , a handsome youth with Radha or surrounded by female devotees, or a friendly charioteer giving counsel to Arjuna . Krishna was born in Mathura to Devaki and Vasudeva , but was raised by Nanda and Yashoda in Gokul to escape his maternal uncle, the tyrant king Kamsa . His life as mentioned in texts incorporates highly symbolic miraculous elements; he enchanted the gopis with his divine flute playing, performed the celestial Rasa Lila , and lifted the Govardhan Hill to protect his community from devastating rains. He later defeated Kamsa and restored order in Mathura. He went on to establish the city of Dvaraka and played a central role in the Kurukshetra War , serving as Arjuna’s charioteer and delivering the philosophical teachings of the Bhagavad Gita .

The name and synonyms of Krishna have been traced to 1st millennium BCE literature and cults.

In some sub-traditions within Hinduism, like Krishnaism , Krishna is worshipped as the Supreme God and Svayam Bhagavan (God Himself). These sub-traditions arose in the context of the medieval era Bhakti movement . Krishna-related literature has inspired numerous performance arts such as Bharatanatyam , Kathakali , Kuchipudi , Odissi , and Manipuri dance . He is a pan-India god, but is particularly revered in some locations, such as Vrindavan in Uttar Pradesh, Dwarka and Junagadh in Gujarat, the Jagannatha aspect in Odisha , Mayapur in West Bengal, and other places. He is also worshipped in different regional forms across India.

The term is also associated with the Krishna Paksha , waning phase of the moon carrying its adjective meaning "darkening".

In accordance with the meaning of the name, Krishna murtis are often depicted with black or blue skin.

As a name of Vishnu , Krishna is appears as the 57th name in the Vishnu Sahasranama . Krishna is also known by various other names, epithets, and titles that reflecting his diverse associations and attributes. Among the most common names are: Achyuta ( Sanskrit : अच्युत code: san promoted to code: sa ): The infallible one; one who never falls from his divine nature Ananta ( Sanskrit : अनन्त code: san promoted to code: sa ): The endless or infinite one Bāl Gopāl ( Sanskrit : बाल गोपाल code: san promoted to code: sa ): The child Krishna; protector of cows Bānke Bihārī ( Sanskrit : बाँके बिहारी code: san promoted to code: sa ): The charming, graceful one who enjoys divine play Chakrapāṇi ( Sanskrit : चक्रपाणि code: san promoted to code: sa ): One who holds the Sudarshana Chakra (discus) Dāmodara ( Sanskrit : दामोदर code: san promoted to code: sa ): One who was tied around the waist with a rope Devakīnandana ( Sanskrit : देवकीनन्दन code: san promoted to code: sa ): Son of Devaki Dvārakādhīśa ( Sanskrit : द्वारकाधीश code: san promoted to code: sa ): Lord of Dwarka Ghanashyām ( Sanskrit : घनश्याम code: san promoted to code: sa ): Dark like a rain-filled cloud Giridhārī ( Sanskrit : गिरिधारी code: san promoted to code: sa ): Lifter of the ( Govardhan ) mountain Gopāla ( Sanskrit : गोपाल code: san promoted to code: sa ): Protector of cows Gopīnātha ( Sanskrit : गोपीनाथ code: san promoted to code: sa ): Lord of the Gopis Govinda ( Sanskrit : गोविन्द code: san promoted to code: sa ): One who gives joy to the cows Hari ( Sanskrit : हरि code: san promoted to code: sa ): The remover of sins and suffering Jagannātha ( Sanskrit : जगन्नाथ code: san promoted to code: sa ): Lord of the universe Janārdana ( Sanskrit : जनार्दन code: san promoted to code: sa ): One who protects people; one worshipped by devotees Kanhaiyā ( Sanskrit : कन्हैया code: san promoted to code: sa ): Beloved young Krishna Kānha ( Sanskrit : कान्हा code: san promoted to code: sa ): The dark-complexioned beloved one Keśava ( Sanskrit : केशव code: san promoted to code: sa ): One with beautiful hair; also, slayer of the demon Keshi Keev ( Sanskrit : कीव code: san promoted to code: sa ): Prankster Krishna ( Sanskrit : कृष्ण code: san promoted to code: sa ): The dark-complexioned one; the all-attractive one Mādhava ( Sanskrit : माधव code: san promoted to code: sa ): Consort of Lakshmi; sweet and spring-like one Madhusūdana ( Sanskrit : मधुसूदन code: san promoted to code: sa ): Slayer of the demon Madhu Manmohana ( Sanskrit : मनमोहन code: san promoted to code: sa ): One who enchants the mind Mohan ( Sanskrit : मोहन code: san promoted to code: sa ): The charming or enchanting one Murlīdhara ( Sanskrit : मुरलीधर code: san promoted to code: sa ): Holder of the flute (Murlī) Nandakumāra ( Sanskrit : नन्दकुमार code: san promoted to code: sa ): Son of Nanda Navanīta Chora ( Sanskrit : नवनीत चोर code: san promoted to code: sa ): Stealer of butter Parthasārathi ( Sanskrit : पार्थसारथि code: san promoted to code: sa ): Charioteer of Arjuna Purushottama ( Sanskrit : पुरुषोत्तम code: san promoted to code: sa ): The supreme being; highest among all beings Rādhāramaṇa ( Sanskrit : राधारमण code: san promoted to code: sa ): Beloved of Radha Rādhāvallabha ( Sanskrit : राधावल्लभ code: san promoted to code: sa ): Dear or beloved of Radha Ranchhod ( Sanskrit : रणछोड़ code: san promoted to code: sa ): One who left the battlefield as part of divine strategy Shyām ( Sanskrit : श्याम code: san promoted to code: sa ): The dark or dusky one Shyāmsundara ( Sanskrit : श्यामसुन्दर code: san promoted to code: sa ): The beautiful dark-complexioned one Vāsudeva ( Sanskrit : वासुदेव code: san promoted to code: sa ): Son of Vasudeva ( Sanskrit : वसुदेव code: san promoted to code: sa ) also the indwelling divine presence Venugopāla ( Sanskrit : वेणुगोपाल code: san promoted to code: sa ): Krishna as the flute-playing cowherd Viṣṇu ( Sanskrit : विष्णु code: san promoted to code: sa ): The all-pervading one Yādava ( Sanskrit : यादव code: san promoted to code: sa ): Descendant of the Yadu dynasty Yogeśvara ( Sanskrit : योगेश्वर code: san promoted to code: sa ): Lord of yoga ; master of divine wisdom Certain names of Krishna also hold regional importance such as Jagannatha , associated with the Jagannath Temple , Puri , is a popular manifestation of Krishna in Odisha state and nearby regions of eastern India .

In Hindu tradition, Krishna’s names and epithets signify his qualities, relationships, divine functions, and mythological deeds.

The Mahābhārata explains names such as Vāsudeva, Viṣṇu, Madhusūdana, Janārdana, and Puruṣottama by linking them to Krishna’s all-pervading nature, lineage, and slaying of demons, while the Bhāgavata Purāṇa connects names such as Dāmodara and Giridhārī to specific episodes in Krishna’s childhood and Vṛndāvana līlās. Role and significance in religion Murti of Krishna at ISKCON, Pune Krishna is the eighth avatar of Vishnu and a major deity in Hinduism . He is worshipped as a full incarnation of Vishnu and Supreme God in his own right. He is also referred as " Swayam Bhagavan " (God Himself) particularly in Krishnaism and Vaishnavism traditions. He is the god of protection, compassion, tenderness, and love and widely revered among Hindu divinities. He struck down his maternal uncle Kamsa , established the ancient city of Dwarka , and played a pivotal role in Mahabharata epic by fighting for Pandavas and concluding the war. Krishna is depicted in several Hindu texts including the Mahabharata and the Bhagavata Puran , where he is a central character and preaches many of his philosophical ideas. Bhagavad Gita , part of the epic Mahabharata , serves as an independent spiritual guide. It allegorically raises the ethical and moral dilemmas of human life through the conversation of Krishna and Arjuna during the Kurukshetra War .

The text presents answers, addressing the ideological questions on human freedoms, choices, and responsibilities (dharma) towards self and others. These teachings then become a prominent feature of Bhakti movement in medieval India . Origins and early sources The tradition of Krishna appears to developed through the amalgamation of several independent deities of ancient India, the earliest attested of which was Vāsudeva . Vāsudeva was a hero-god of the tribe of the Vrishnis , belonging to the Vrishni heroes , whose worship is attested from the 5th–6th centuries BCE in the writings of Pāṇini , and from the 2nd century BCE in epigraphic evidences such as the Heliodorus pillar . Vrishnis were thought to have later merged with the tribe of the Yadavas , whose hero-god was Krishna. Vāsudeva and Krishna subsequently merged into a single deity, who appears in the Mahabharata , and started to be identified with Vishnu in the Mahabharata and the Bhagavad Gita .

By the 4th century CE, tradition Gopala-Krishna tradition of the Abhiras , centred on the Krishna's role as protector of cattle, has also been incorporated into the broader Krishna tradition. Early epigraphic sources Main article: Vāsudeva-Krishna Depiction in coinage (2nd century BCE) Vāsudeva -Krishna, on a coin of Agathocles of Bactria , c. 180 BCE. This is "the earliest unambiguous image" of the deity. Around 180 BCE, the Indo-Greek king Agathocles issued some coinage (discovered in Ai-Khanoum , Afghanistan) bearing images of deities that are now interpreted as being related to Vaisnava imagery in India.

The deities displayed on the coins appear to be Saṃkarṣaṇa - Balarama with attributes consisting of the gada mace and the plow , and Vāsudeva-Krishna with attributes of the shankha (conch) and the sudarshana chakra wheel. Inscriptions Heliodorus Pillar , Madhya Pradesh , c. 120 BCE; inscription identifies Heliodorus as a Bhagvatena , and paraphrases a Sanskrit verse from the Mahabharata .

The Heliodorus Pillar is a stone pillar with a Brahmi script inscription that was discovered by colonial era archaeologists in Besnagar ( Vidisha , in the central Indian state of Madhya Pradesh ). Based on the internal evidence of the inscription, it has been dated to between 125 and 100 BCE and is now known as Heliodorus Pillar , named after Heliodorus , an Indo-Greek who served as an ambassador of the Greek king Antialcidas to a regional Indian king, Kasiputra Bhagabhadra .

The Heliodorus pillar inscription is a private religious dedication of Heliodorus to " Vāsudeva ", an early deity and another name for Krishna in the Indian tradition. It states that the column was constructed by "the Bhagavata Heliodorus" and that it is a " Garuda pillar" (both Vishnu-Krishna-related terms). Additionally, the inscription includes a Krishna-related verse from chapter 11.7 of the Mahabharata stating that the path to immortality and heaven is to correctly live a life of three virtues: self- temperance ( damah ), generosity ( cagah or tyaga ), and vigilance ( apramadah ).

The Heliodorus pillar site was fully excavated by archaeologists in the 1960s.

The effort revealed the brick foundations of a much larger ancient elliptical temple complex with a sanctum, mandapas , and seven additional pillars.

The Heliodorus Pillar inscription and the temple are among the earliest known evidence of Krishna-Vasudeva devotion and Vaishnavism in ancient India. Balarama and Krishna with their attributes at Chilas .

The Kharoshthi inscription nearby reads Rama ṣa . 1st century CE.

The Heliodorus inscription is not isolated evidence.

The Hathibada Ghosundi Inscriptions , all located in the state of Rajasthan and dated by modern methodology to the 1st century BCE, mention Saṃkarṣaṇa and Vāsudeva, and state that the structure was built for their worship in association with the supreme deity Narayana . These four inscriptions are known for being some of the oldest-known Sanskrit inscriptions. However, historians argue that the Hathibada-Ghosundi inscription is associated with Jainism , as it explicitly mentions the Jina . A Mora stone slab found at the Mathura-Vrindavan archaeological site in Uttar Pradesh , now held in the Mathura Museum , has a Brahmi inscription. It is dated to the 1st century CE and mentions the five Vrishni heroes , otherwise known as Saṃkarṣaṇa, Vāsudeva, Pradyumna , Aniruddha , and Samba .

The inscriptional record for Vāsudeva starts in the 2nd century BCE with the coinage of Agathocles and the Heliodorus Pillar , but the name of Krishna appears rather later in epigraphy.

At the Chilas II archaeological site dated to the first half of the 1st-century CE in northwest Pakistan, near the Afghanistan border, two male figures are engraved, along with many Buddhist images nearby.

The larger of the two male figures holds a plough and club in his two hands.

The artwork also has an inscription with it in Kharosthi script, which has been deciphered by scholars as Rama-Krsna , and interpreted as an ancient depiction of the two brothers, Balarama and Krishna.

The first known depiction of the life of Krishna himself comes relatively late, with a relief found in Mathura dated to the 1st–2nd century CE. This fragment seems to show Vasudeva , Krishna's father, carrying baby Krishna in a basket across the Yamuna .

The eighteen chapters of the sixth book ( Bhishma Parva ) of the epic that constitute the Bhagavad Gita contain the advice of Krishna to Arjuna on the battlefield.

At the time the Bhagavad Gita was composed, Krishna was widely seen as an avatar of Vishnu rather than an individual deity , yet he was immensely powerful and almost everything in the universe other than Vishnu was "somehow present in the body of Krishna". Krishna had "no beginning or end", "fill space", and every god but Vishnu was seen as ultimately him, including Brahma , "storm gods, sun gods, bright gods", light gods, and gods of ritual." Other forces also existed in his body, such as "hordes of varied creatures" that included "celestial serpents." He is also "the essence of humanity." The Harivamsa , a later appendix to the Mahabharata, contains a detailed version of Krishna's childhood and youth. Other sources Krishna is celebrated in the Vaishnava tradition in various stages of his life.

The Chandogya Upanishad (Verse III.xvii.6) mentions Krishna in Krishnaya Devakiputraya as a student of the sage Ghora of the Angirasa family. Ghora is identified with Neminatha , the twenty-second tirthankara in Jainism , by some scholars. This phrase, which means "To Krishna the son of Devaki ", has been mentioned by scholars such as Max Müller as a potential source of fables and Vedic lore about Krishna in the Mahabharata and other ancient literature – only potential because this verse could have been interpolated into the text, or the Krishna Devakiputra, could be different from the deity Krishna. These doubts are supported by the fact that the much later age Sandilya Bhakti Sutras , a treatise on Krishna, cites later age compilations such as the Narayana Upanishad but never cites this verse of the Chandogya Upanishad. Other scholars disagree that the Krishna mentioned along with Devaki in the ancient Upanishad is unrelated to the later Hindu god of the Bhagavad Gita fame. For example, Archer states that the coincidence of the two names appearing together in the same Upanishad verse cannot be dismissed easily. Yāska 's Nirukta , an etymological treatise published around the 6th century BCE, contains a reference to the Shyamantaka jewel in the possession of Akrura , a motif from the well-known Puranic story about Krishna. Shatapatha Brahmana and Aitareya-Aranyaka associate Krishna with his Vrishni origins.

In Ashṭādhyāyī , authored by the ancient grammarian Pāṇini (probably belonged to the 5th or 6th century BCE), Vāsudeva and Arjuna , as recipients of worship, are referred to together in the same sutra . Bala Krishna dancing, 14th century CE Chola sculpture, Tamil Nadu , in the Honolulu Academy of Arts . Megasthenes , a Greek ethnographer and an ambassador of Seleucus I to the court of Chandragupta Maurya towards the end of 4th century BCE, made reference to Herakles in his famous work Indica . This text is now lost to history, but was quoted in secondary literature by later Greeks such as Arrian , Diodorus , and Strabo . According to these texts, Megasthenes mentioned that the Sourasenoi tribe of India, who worshipped Herakles, had two major cities named Methora and Kleisobora, and a navigable river named the Jobares. According to Edwin Bryant , "there is little doubt that the Sourasenoi refers to the Shurasenas, a branch of the Yadu dynasty to which Krishna belonged".

The word Herakles, states Bryant, is likely a Greek phonetic equivalent of Hari-Krishna, as is Methora of Mathura, Kleisobora of Krishnapura, and the Jobares of Jamuna . Later, when Alexander the Great launched his campaign in the northwest Indian subcontinent , his associates recalled that the soldiers of Porus were carrying an image of Herakles.

The Buddhist Pali canon and the Ghata-Jâtaka (No. 454) polemically mention the devotees of Vâsudeva and Baladeva. These texts have many peculiarities and may be a garbled and confused version of the Krishna legends. Jain texts also mention Krishna themes, especially in works dedicated to Neminath, the twenty-second Tirthankara traditionally regarded as Krishna's cousin. This inclusion of Krishna-related legends in ancient Buddhist and Jaina literature suggests that Krishna theology was existent and important in the religious of ancient India .

The ancient Sanskrit grammarian Patanjali in his Mahabhashya makes several references to Krishna and his associates found in later Indian texts.

In his commentary on Pāṇini's verse 3.1.26, he also uses the word Kamsavadha or the "killing of Kamsa", an important part of the legends surrounding Krishna. Puranas Many Puranas tell Krishna's life story or some highlights from it. Two Puranas, the Bhagavata Purana and the Vishnu Purana , contain the most elaborate telling of Krishna's story, but the life stories of Krishna in these and other texts vary, and contain significant inconsistencies.

The Bhagavata Purana consists of twelve books subdivided into 332 chapters, with a cumulative total of between 16,000 and 18,000 verses depending on the version.

The tenth book of the text, which contains about 4,000 verses (approximately ~25% of total verses) is dedicated to legends about Krishna, has been the most popular and widely studied part of this text. Proposed dating and historicity According to Guy Beck, most scholars of Hinduism and Indian history accept the historicity of Krishna that Krishna is a real historical figure, whether human or divine, who likely lived on Indian soil at least prior to 1000 BCE and interacted with many other historical persons included in the epic and puranic histories. Beck further notes that, however there is enormous number of contradictions and discrepancies surrounding the chronology of Krishna's life as depicted in the Sanskrit canon. Some scholars believe that, among others, the detailed description of Krishna's peace mission in the 5th book of the Mahabharata (Udyoga Parvan) is likely to be based on real events.

The epic's translator J.A.B. van Buitenen in this context assumes that there was some degree of verisimilitude in the Mahabharata’s depictions of life. Iconography Main article: Iconography of Krishna The scenes from the narrative are set in ancient India, mostly in the present states of Uttar Pradesh , Bihar, Rajasthan , Haryana, Delhi, and Gujarat .

The legends about Krishna's life are called Krishna charitas . Birth Main article: Birth of Krishna Vasudeva carrying infrant Krishna across Yamuna Krishna is born to Devaki and her husband, Vasudeva , in a prison (jail) of Mathura . Devaki's brother is a tyrant named Kamsa .

At Devaki's wedding, according to Puranic legends, Kamsa is told by fortune tellers that the eighth child of Devaki would kill him, while in some texts, it is depicted as an akashvani (divine voice) announcing his death. Seeking to forestall this prophecy, Kamsa arranges to kill all of Devaki's children as soon as they are born. Kamsa originally planned to do the same with Krishna, but when Krishna is born, all the jailers miraculously fall into deep sleep and the prison door was eventually opened. Vasudeva secretly carries the infant Krishna across the Yamuna , and manages him to exchange with Yashoda 's daughter, and returns with that girl.

When Kamsa tries to kill the newborn girl, the exchanged baby appears as the Hindu goddess Yogamaya , warning him that the one who will kill him has already been born in his kingdom, and then disappears.

From onwards, Krishna grows up with his foster parents Nanda and Yashoda , near modern-day Mathura . Two of Krishna's siblings also survive, namely Balarama and Subhadra , according to these legends. Krishna's place of birth is marked by Krishna Janmbhumi Temple .

The day of the birth of Krishna is celebrated as Krishna Janmashtami . Childhood and youth Baby Krishna on a swing, depicted with his foster parents Nanda and Yashoda .

The legends of Krishna's childhood and youth describe him as a cow-herder, a mischievous boy whose pranks earn him the nickname Makhan Chor (butter thief), and a protector who steals the hearts of the people in both Gokul and Vrindavana.

The texts state, for example, that Krishna lifts the Govardhana hill to protect the inhabitants of Vrindavana from devastating rains and floods . Krishna and Balarama Studying with the Brahman Sandipani ( Bhagavata Purana , 1525–1550 CE print). Other legends describe him as an enchanter and playful lover of the gopis (milkmaids) of Vrindavana, especially Radha . These metaphor-filled love stories are known as the Rasa lila and were romanticized in the poetry of Jayadeva , author of the Gita Govinda . They are also central to the development of the Krishna bhakti traditions worshiping Radha Krishna . Krishna's childhood illustrates the Hindu concept of Lila , playing for fun and enjoyment and not for sport or gain. His interaction with the gopis at the Rasa-lila or Ras dance is an example. Krishna plays his flute and the gopis come immediately, from whatever they were doing, to the banks of the Yamuna River and join him in singing and dancing. Even those who could not physically be there join him through meditation. He is the spiritual essence and the love-eternal in existence, the gopis metaphorically represent the prakṛti matter and the impermanent body. : 256 This Lila is a constant theme in the legends of Krishna's childhood and youth. Even when he is battling with a serpent to protect others, he is described in Hindu texts as if he were playing a game. : 255 This quality of playfulness in Krishna is celebrated during festivals as Rasa-Lila and Janmashtami , where Hindus in some regions such as Maharashtra playfully mimic his legends, such as by making human gymnastic pyramids to break open handis (clay pots) hung high in the air to "steal" butter or buttermilk, spilling it all over the group. : 253–261 Adulthood Further information: Krishna in the Mahabharata Krishna with his consorts Rukmini and Satyabhama and his mount Garuda , Tamil Nadu, India, late 12th–13th century Krishna legends then describe his return to Mathura. He overthrows and kills the tyrant king, his maternal uncle Kamsa after quelling several assassination attempts by Kamsa. He reinstates Kamsa's father, Ugrasena , as the king of the Yadavas and becomes a leading prince at the court.

In one version of the Krishna story, as narrated by Shanta Rao, Krishna, after Kamsa's death, leads the Yadavas to the newly built city of Dwaraka . Thereafter, the Pandavas rise. Krishna befriends Arjuna and the other Pandava princes of the Kuru kingdom. Krishna plays a key role in the Mahabharata .

The Bhagavata Purana describes eight wives of Krishna who appear in sequence as Rukmini , Satyabhama , Jambavati , Kalindi , Mitravinda , Nagnajiti (also called Satya), Bhadra and Lakshmana (also called Madra). This has been interpreted as a metaphor where each of the eight wives signifies a different aspect of him. Vaishnava texts mention all gopis as wives of Krishna, but this is understood as spiritual symbolism of devotional relationship and Krishna's complete loving devotion to each and everyone devoted to him.

In Krishna-related Hindu traditions, he is most commonly seen with Radha . All of his wives and his lover Radha are considered in the Hindu tradition to be the avatars of the goddess Lakshmi , the consort of Vishnu. Gopis are considered as Lakshmi's or Radha's manifestations. Kurukshetra War and Bhagavad Gita Main articles: Kurukshetra War and Bhagavad Gita Temple sculpture of Krishna and Arjuna located at Kurukshetra According to the epic poem Mahabharata , Krishna becomes Arjuna's charioteer for the Kurukshetra War , but on the condition that he personally will not raise any weapon. Upon arrival at the battlefield and seeing that the enemies are his family, his grandfather, and his cousins and loved ones, Arjuna is moved and says his heart will not allow him to fight and kill others. He would rather renounce the kingdom and put down his Gandiva (Arjuna's bow). Krishna then advises him about the nature of life, ethics, and morality when one is faced with a war between good and evil, the impermanence of matter, the permanence of the soul and the good, duties and responsibilities, the nature of true peace and bliss and the different types of yoga to reach this state of bliss and inner liberation. This conversation between Krishna and Arjuna is presented as a discourse called the Bhagavad Gita . Death and ascension Main article: Mausala Parva Yadavas killing themselves, with Krishna and his brother Balarama depicted at right, illustration by M. V. Dhurandhar It is stated in the Indian texts that the legendary Kurukshetra War led to the death of all the hundred sons of Gandhari.

After Duryodhana's death, Krishna visits Gandhari to offer his condolences when Gandhari and Dhritarashtra visited Kurukshetra, as stated in Stree Parva. Feeling that Krishna deliberately did not put an end to the war, in a fit of rage and sorrow, Gandhari said, "Thou were indifferent to the Kurus and the Pandavas whilst they slew each other. Therefore, O Govinda, thou shalt be the slayer of thy own kinsmen!" According to the Mahabharata , a fight breaks out at a festival among the Yadavas, who end up killing each other. Temple at Bhalka marking the site where Krishna took his last breath Mistaking the sleeping Krishna for a deer, a hunter named Jara shoots an arrow towards Krishna's foot that fatally injures him. Krishna forgives Jara and dies.

The pilgrimage ( tirtha ) site of Bhalka in Gujarat marks the location where Krishna is believed to have died. It is also known as Dehotsarga , states Diana L. Eck , a term that literally means the place where Krishna "gave up his body". Krishna returned to his transcendent abode, Vaikunth , directly because of his yogic concentration. Waiting gods such as Brahma and Indra were unable to trace the path Krishna took to leave his human incarnation and return to his abode. Versions and interpretations Krishna iconography appears in many versions across India. For example (left to right): Srinath , Jagannath , Vithoba . There are numerous versions of Krishna's life story, of which three are most studied: the Harivamsa , the Bhagavata Purana , and the Vishnu Purana . They share the basic storyline but vary significantly in their specifics, details, and styles.

The most original composition, the Harivamsa is told in a realistic style that describes Krishna's life as a poor herder but weaves in poetic and allusive fantasy. It ends on a triumphal note, not with the death of Krishna. Differing in some details, the fifth book of the Vishnu Purana moves away from Harivamsa realism and embeds Krishna in mystical terms and eulogies.

The Vishnu Purana manuscripts exist in many versions.

The tenth and eleventh books of the Bhagavata Purana are widely considered to be a poetic masterpiece, full of imagination and metaphors, with no relation to the realism of pastoral life found in the Harivamsa . Krishna's life is presented as a cosmic play ( Lila ), where his youth is set as a princely life with his foster father Nanda portrayed as a king. Krishna's life is closer to that of a human being in Harivamsa , but is a symbolic universe in the Bhagavata Purana , where Krishna is within the universe and beyond it, as well as the universe itself, always.

The Bhagavata Purana manuscripts also exist in many versions, in numerous Indian languages. Krishna Janmashtami Main article: Krishna Janmashtami Krishna, as a young child with his foster mother, Yashoda Krishna Janmashtami , also known as Krishnashtami, Janmashtami, or Gokulashtami, is one of the most important festivals associated with Krishna alongside Holi .

The date of Krishna's birth is celebrated every year as Janmashtami .

The name Janmastami derives from the Sanskrit words janma , meaning "birth", and ashtami , meaning the eighth day of the Hindu lunar fortnight. Janmashtami is celebrated in diverse forms depending on their regional and cultural customs. Hindus celebrate Janmashtami by fasting, singing, praying together, preparing and sharing special food, night vigils, and visiting Krishna or Vishnu temples. Krishna's birth is celebrated and observed on the eighth day ( Ashtami ) of the dark fortnight ( Krishna Paksha ) in Shravana Masa (according to the amanta tradition) or Bhadrapada Masa, according to lunisolar Hindu calendar , which is often equivalent to late August or early September of the Gregorian calendar . North India ISKCON Temple, Delhi during Janmashtami Janmashtami is the largest festival in the North India particularly Braj region , cities such as Mathura and Vrindavan, where Krishna was born and spend most of his childhood are considered sacred pilgrimage sites in Hinduism and visited by millions of people during the festival. Vaishnava communities in these cities in Uttar Pradesh, as well as others in the state, as well as locations in Rajasthan, Delhi, Haryana, Uttarakhand and Himalayan north celebrate Janmashtami. Krishna temples are decorated and lighted up, they attract numerous visitors on the day, while Krishna devotees hold bhakti events and keep night vigil. Philosophy and theology A wide range of theological and philosophical ideas are presented through Krishna in Hindu texts.

The teachings of the Bhagavad Gita can be considered as the first Krishnaite system of theology according to Friedhelm Hardy . Ramanuja , a Hindu theologian and philosopher whose works were influential in Bhakti movement , presented Krishna in terms of qualified monism , or nondualism (namely, the Vishishtadvaita school). Madhvacharya , a philosopher whose works led to the founding of the Haridasa tradition of Vaishnavism, presented Krishna in the framework of dualism ( Dvaita ). Bhedabheda —a group of schools, which teaches that the individual self is both different and not different from the ultimate reality—predates the positions of monism and dualism. Among medieval Bhedabheda thinkers are Nimbarkacharya , who founded the Nimbarka Sampradaya (of Dvaitadvaita Vedanta ), and Jiva Goswami , a saint in Gaudiya Vaishnavism , who described Krishnaite theology in terms of Bhakti yoga and Achintya Bheda Abheda . Krishnaite theology is presented in a pure monism ( Shuddhadvaita ) framework by Vallabha Acharya , the founder of the Pushtimarg sect of Vaishnavism. Madhusūdana Sarasvatī , an Indian philosopher, developed a theology of Krishna using a nondualism-monism framework ( Advaita Vedanta ), while Adi Shankara , credited with unifying and establishing the main currents of thought in Hinduism, mentioned Krishna in his early eighth-century discussions on Panchayatana puja .

The Bhagavata Purana synthesizes an Advaita, Samkhya , and Yoga framework of Krishna that is based on loving devotion to Krishna. Bryant describes the synthesis of ideas in the Bhagavata Purana : The philosophy of the Bhagavata is a mixture of Vedanta terminology, Samkhyan metaphysics, and devotionalized Yoga praxis. (...) The tenth book promotes Krishna as the highest absolute personal aspect of godhead – the personality behind the term Ishvara and the ultimate aspect of Brahman . — Edwin Bryant , Krishna: A Sourcebook While Sheridan and Pintchman both affirm Bryant's view, the latter adds that the Vedantic view emphasized in the Bhagavata is non-dualist with a difference.

In conventional nondual Vedanta, all reality is interconnected and one; the Bhagavata posits that reality is interconnected and plural. Across various theologies and philosophies, a common theme presents Krishna as the essence and symbol of divine love, with human life and love reflecting the divine.

The longing and love-filled legends of Krishna and the gopi s, his playful pranks as a baby, as well as his later dialogues with other figures, are philosophically treated as metaphors for the human longing for the divine and for meaning, and the play between the universals and the human soul. Krishna's lila is a theology of love-play. According to John Koller, "Love is presented not simply as a means to salvation, it is the highest life". Human love is God's love. Other texts that include Krishna, such as the Bhagavad Gita , have attracted numerous bhasya (commentaries) in the Hindu traditions. Though only a part of the Mahabharata , the Bhagavad Gita itself has 700 verses divided into 18 chapters where Krishna, as a charioteer, guided Arjuna towards the path of dharma when Arjuna hesitated to fight against his own relatives and elders, whom he deeply respected, on the battlefield of Kurukshetra . Seeing Arjuna's confusion, Krishna shares his philosophical teachings and reminds Arjuna of his responsibility to protect the truth. This conversation between Krishna and Arjuna is presented as the Bhagavad Gita , a section of the Mahabharata epic. It allegorically raises the ethical and moral dilemmas of human life through Krishna and Arjuna. It then presents answers, addressing the ideological questions on human freedoms, choices, and responsibilities towards self and others. This Krishna dialogue has attracted numerous interpretations, from being a metaphor for inner human struggle that teaches non-violence to being a metaphor for outer human struggle that advocates a rejection of quietism and persecution. Madhusūdana Sarasvatī , known for his contributions to classical Advaita Vedanta, was also a devotee of Krishna and expressed his devotion in various verses within his works, notably in his Bhagavad Gita commentary, Bhagavad Gita Gudarthadipika .

In his works, Krishna is identified as the Supreme Deity and as Bhagavan, whom Madhusudana describes as the nondual Self, embodying Being, Consciousness, and Bliss, the pure Existence underlying all.

In his commentary on the Gita , Krishna is often interpreted as representing Nirguna Brahman , thus presenting a transtheistic understanding of deity. Influence Vaishnavism Main articles: Vaishnavism and Krishnaism Relief from the Chennakeshava Temple of Krishna with flute with humans and cows listening, 1258 CE.

The worship of Krishna is part of Vaishnavism , a major tradition within Hinduism. Krishna is considered a full avatar of Vishnu, or one with Vishnu himself. However, the exact relationship between Krishna and Vishnu is complex and diverse, with Krishna of Krishnaite sampradayas considered an independent deity and supreme. Vaishnavas accept many incarnations of Vishnu, but Krishna is particularly important. Their theologies are generally centered either on Vishnu or an avatar such as Krishna as supreme.

The terms Krishnaism and Vishnuism have sometimes been used to distinguish the two, the former implying that Krishna is the transcendent Supreme Being. Some scholars, as Friedhelm Hardy , do not define Krishnaism as a sub-order or offshoot of Vaishnavism, considering it a parallel and no less ancient current of Hinduism. All Vaishnava traditions recognise Krishna as the eighth avatar of Vishnu; others identify Krishna with Vishnu, while Krishnaite traditions such as Gaudiya Vaishnavism , Ekasarana Dharma , Mahanam Sampraday , Nimbarka Sampradaya and the Vallabha Sampradaya regard Krishna not just as an avatar of Vishnu, but as the Svayam Bhagavan , the original form of Lord or the same as the concept of Brahman in Hinduism. Gitagovinda of Jayadeva considers Krishna to be the supreme lord while the ten incarnations are his forms. Swaminarayan , the founder of the Swaminarayan Sampradaya , also worshipped Krishna as God himself. "Greater Krishnaism" corresponds to the second and dominant phase of Vaishnavism, revolving around the cults of the Vasudeva , Krishna, and Gopala of the late Vedic period . Today the faith has a significant following outside of India as well. Early traditions The deity Krishna-Vāsudeva ( kṛṣṇa vāsudeva "Krishna, the son of Vasudeva ) is historically one of the earliest forms of worship in Krishnaism and Vaishnavism . It is believed to be a significant tradition of the early history of Krishna religion in antiquity. Thereafter, there was an amalgamation of various similar traditions. These include ancient Bhagavatism , the cult of Gopala , of "Krishna Govinda" (cow-finding Krishna), of Balakrishna (baby Krishna) and of "Krishna Gopivallabha" (Krishna the lover). According to Andre Couture, the Harivamsa contributed to the synthesis of various figures as aspects of Krishna. Already in the early Middle Ages, Jagannathism ( a.k.a. Odia Vaishnavism) originated as the cult of the god Jagannath ( lit. ' 'Lord of the Universe' ' ) – an abstract form of Krishna. Jagannathism was a regional temple-centered version of Krishnaism , where Jagannath is understood as a principal god, Purushottama and Para Brahman , but can also be regarded as a non-sectarian syncretic Vaishnavite and all-Hindu cult. According to the Vishnudharma Purana ( c. 4th century), Krishna is worshipped in the form of Purushottama in Odia (Odisha). Bhakti tradition Main articles: Bhakti movement and Bhakti yoga Krishna has been a major part of the Bhakti movement . One of the key devotees was Meera (pictured).

The use of the term " bhakti " , transl. devotion in Sanskrit, is not confined to any particular deity. However, Krishna is an important and popular focus of the devotionalism tradition within Hinduism, particularly among the Vaishnava Krishnaite sects. Devotees of Krishna subscribe to the concept of lila , meaning 'divine play', as the central principle of the universe. It is a form of bhakti yoga, one of three types of yoga discussed by Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita . Indian subcontinent Bhakti movements devoted to Krishna became prominent in southern India in the 7th to 9th centuries CE.

The earliest works included those of the Alvar saints of Tamil Nadu . A major collection of their works is the Divya Prabandham . Alvar Andal 's popular collection of songs Tiruppavai , in which she conceives of herself as a gopi, is the most famous of the oldest works in this genre.

The movement originated in South India during the 7th century CE, spreading northwards from Tamil Nadu through Karnataka and Maharashtra; by the 15th century, it was established in Bengal and northern India. Early Krishnaite bhakti pioneers included Nimbarkacharya (7th century CE), and his disciple Srinivasacharya but most emerged later, including Vallabhacharya (15th century CE) and Chaitanya Mahaprabhu . They started their own schools, namely Nimbarka Sampradaya , Vallabha Sampradaya , and Gaudiya Vaishnavism , with Krishna and Radha as the supreme gods.

In addition, since the 15th century, flourished Tantric variety of Krishnaism, Vaishnava-Sahajiya , is linked to the Bengali poet Chandidas .

In the Deccan , particularly in Maharashtra , saint poets of the Warkari sect such as Dnyaneshwar , Namdev , Janabai , Eknath , and Tukaram promoted the worship of Vithoba , a regional form of Krishna, from the 13th to 18th century.

Before the Warkari tradition, devotion of Krishna became well established in Maharashtra due to the rise of the Mahanubhava Sampradaya founded by Sarvajna Chakradhara .

The Pranami Sampradaya emerged in the 17th century in Gujarat , based on the Krishna-focussed syncretist Hindu- Islamic teachings of Devchandra Maharaj and his famous successor, Mahamati Prannath.

In southern India, Purandara Dasa and Kanakadasa of Karnataka composed songs devoted to the Krishna image of Udupi . Rupa Goswami of Gaudiya Vaishnavism has compiled a comprehensive summary of bhakti called Bhakti-rasamrita-sindhu.

In South India, the acharyas of the Sri Sampradaya have written reverently about Krishna in most of their works, including the Tiruppavai by Andal and Gopalavimshati by Vedanta Desika . Outside Asia Main articles: International Society for Krishna Consciousness and A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada Krishna (left) with Radha at Bhaktivedanta Manor , Watford , England By 1965, the Krishna-bhakti movement had spread outside India after Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada (as instructed by his guru , Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura ) travelled from his homeland in West Bengal to New York City .

In 1966, he founded the International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON), popularly known as the Hare Krishna movement .

The purpose of this movement was to write about Krishna in English and to share the Gaudiya Vaishnava philosophy with people in the Western world by spreading the teachings of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu .

In the Gaudiya Vaishnava tradition, the six-word verse from the Kali-Saṇṭāraṇa Upaniṣad "Hare Krishna Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna Hare Hare; Hare Rama Hare Rama, Rama Rama Hare Hare" is considered the maha-mantra , or the great mantra, of Krishna bhakti .

The chanting of this maha-mantra is known as hari-nama sankirtana . Bhaktivedanta Swami initially had no support or acquaintances in the United States except the Agarwals, an Indian-American family, who were although strangers to him, had agreed to sponsor his visa.

After reaching New York, he travelled to Butler, Pennsylvania to met with Agarwals.

At Butler, he also delivered lectures to different groups at venues such as local YMCA .

After a month, he returned to New York City where he moved between several humble living spaces, from windowless room, and to a loft in the Bowery . With the help of a few early followers, he found a stable place on the Lower East Side , where he turned a small store-front curiosity shop at 26 Second Avenue named "Matchless Gifts" into a small temple. he offered classes on the Bhagavad-gita and other Vaishnava texts and held kirtan (group chanting) of the Hare Krishna mantra : Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

The Hare Krishna Tree in Tompkins Square Park , New York City After he and his followers held Hare Krishna kirtan one Sunday under a tree in nearby Tompkins Square Park . Amid the social and cultural upheavals of the 1960s, Bhaktivedanta Swami attracted a small but dedicated group of followers in New York City while advocating a disciplined devotional life rooted in Gaudiya Vaishnava teachings, introduced them to a spiritual framework centred on daily chanting of the Hare Krishna mantra, adherence to "four regulative principles".

In July 1966, he founded the International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON). That same year, he released the album entitled Krishna Consciousness , which helped introduce his teachings to a wider audience and early spread of "Hare Krishna movement". Alongside these efforts, he oversaw the publication and promotion of key religious texts, including Bhagavad-Gītā As It Is , and encouraged his disciples to spread Krishna devotion through public chanting of Hare Krishna mantra , literature distribution, food offerings, and preaching. Bhaktivedanta Swami's arrival at San Francisco Airport and being greeted by Allen Ginsberg In 1967, Bhaktivedanta Swami moved and established a second ISKCON centre in San Francisco after New York City. Situated in the Haight–Ashbury district, then a focal point of the American counterculture, the temple attracted a growing number of followers and marked a significant phase in the movement's early development. That same year, the Mantra Rock Dance , a public event combining kirtan with performances by prominent rock musicians, drew thousands of attendees and helped introduce the Hare Krishna movement to a wider audience. Poster of Mantra-Rock Dance musical event by Harvey W. Cohen A major breakthrough came in December 1968, he maha-mantra gained the attention of George Harrison and John Lennon of the Beatles after being met with Swami's disciples. Eventually, Harrison produced a 1969 recording of the mantra by devotees from the London Radha Krishna Temple . Titled " Hare Krishna Mantra ", the song reached the top twenty on the UK music charts and was also successful in West Germany and Czechoslovakia.

The mantra of the Upanishad thus helped bring Bhaktivedanta and ISKCON ideas about Krishna into the West. Southeast Asia Krishna lifting the " Govardhan " mountain , a 7th-century artwork from an archaeological site in Da Nang , Vietnam Krishna is found in Southeast Asian history and art, but to a far lesser extent than Shiva , Durga , Nandi , Agastya , and Buddha .

In temples ( candi ) of the archaeological sites in hilly volcanic Java , Indonesia, temple reliefs do not portray his pastoral life or his role as the erotic lover, nor do the historic Javanese Hindu texts. Rather, either his childhood or the life as a king and Arjuna's companion have been more favored.

The most elaborate temple arts of Krishna is found in a series of Krsnayana reliefs in the Prambanan Hindu temple complex near Yogyakarta . These are dated to the 9th century CE. Krishna remained a part of the Javanese cultural and theological fabric through the 14th century, as evidenced by the 14th-century Penataran reliefs along with those of the Hindu god Rama in east Java, before Islam replaced Buddhism and Hinduism on the island.

The medieval era arts of Vietnam and Cambodia feature Krishna.

The earliest surviving sculptures and reliefs are from the 6th and 7th centuries, and these include Vaishnavism iconography. According to John Guy , the curator and director of Southeast Asian arts at the Metropolitan Museum of Art , the Krishna Govardhana art from 6th/7th-century Vietnam at Danang , and 7th-century Cambodia at Phnom Da cave in Angkor Borei , are some of the most sophisticated of this era. Krishna's iconography has also been found in Thailand, along with those of Surya and Vishnu . For example, a large number of sculptures and icons have been found in the Si Thep and Klangnai sites in the Phetchabun region of northern Thailand. These are dated to about the 7th and 8th centuries, from both the Funan and Zhenla period archaeological sites. Sacred sites and temples The pilgrimage sites associated with Krishna such as Mathura and Vrindavan are visited by millions of devotees on this day.

By the late fifteenth century, many temples had been build in Vrindavan at sites associated with Puranic stories about Krishna. Regional variations in the iconography of Krishna are seen in his different forms, such as Jagannatha in Odisha, Vithoba in Maharashtra, Shrinathji in Rajasthan and Guruvayoorappan in Kerala.

The popular Jagannath temple in Puri , Odisha, has been particularly significant within the tradition since about 800 CE, with Jagannath worshipped as a regional form associated with Krishna along with Baladeva and Subhadra . South Indian states such as Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, and Kerala have many major Krishna temples, including Vithoba Temple , and Guruvayur Temple and Janmashtami is one of the widely celebrated festivals in South India. ISKCON has built Krishna temples in the West, as well as other locations such as South Africa. Braj Main article: Braj Zigzag from top-left: Radha Krishna at Kirti Temple, Barsana, Krishna Janmasthan in Mathura, Radha Rani Temple in Barsana, Radha Madan Mohan Temple, Vrindavan and Kusum Sarovar in Govardhan Hill . Braj , also known as Vraja and Brijbhumi, derived from the Sanskrit word vraja, which was used in oldest accounts on Krishna's childhood to mean "station of herdmen". Braj was never a official name of territory, so it was not defined by enclosed boundaries.

In modern days, Braj is a region on both sides of the Yamuna river with its centre at Mathura district . It covers districts of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh as well as some areas of Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh.

The region occupies a central place in traditions associated with Krishna because it is believed to preserve the landscapes connected with his childhood, youth, and divine play, considered as a sacred pilgrimage site in Hinduism. Braj is the birth place of Krishna and Radha and both spends most of their childhood there. Within Hindu sacred geography, Braj is regarded as the devotional landscape that holds the spatial and cultural memory of Krishna's earthy lilas (divine activities) with his associates. Every year million of devotees visits Mathura, Vrindavan, and other neighbouring places.

The region received 7.9 crore (79 million) devotees in the year 2023. Especially during Janmashtami, the region receives footfall of over 5 million devotees in one day. Mathura Main article: Mathura Vishram Ghat at Mathura across the Yamuna where Krishna rested after killing Kamsa Mathura is located at heart of the Braj region which is considered sacred in Hinduism. the birthplace of Krishna, one of the main deities, is believed to be located in Mathura. It is one of the Sapta Puri , the seven cities considered sacred by Hindus, also called the Mokshyadayni Tirth . Original temple built on the site of Krishna's birthplace (an underground prison) is replaced by Krishna Janmasthan Temple Complex due to its destruction by Mughal rulers in medieval era. Many places in Mathura are associated with divine activities of Krishna which are visited by devotees, as part of their pilgrimage. Mathura is considered a teerth stahl (pilgrimage site) alongside neighbour cities, due to its religious importance.

In ancient India, Kamsa ruled over Mathura and neighbouring cities, Vrindavan and Barsana, under Vrishni kingdom. Krishna Janmasthan Temple Complex is the main attraction, which includes important group of temples: Keshav Deva temple, Garbha Griha shrine, Bhagavata Bhavan and the Rangabhoomi where the final battle between Krishna and Kamsa took place.

The Dwarkadheesh Temple is one of the largest temples in Mathura. Vishram Ghat at the bank of river Yamuna is said to be the place were Krishna had rested after killing Kamsa . Other notable Hindu religious sites and heritage locations includes the Gita Mandir, Govind Dev temple, ISKCON temple, Kusum Sarovar , Naam yog Sadhna Mandir , Peepleshwar Mahadeo Temple and Yum Yamuna Temple. Vrindavan Vrindavan ( IAST : Vṛndāvana ), considered a twin-city to Mathura, is historical city in the Mathura district of Uttar Pradesh , India . It is a pivotal part of Braj region as it holds religious importance and considered holy in the Hinduism, because it is believed that Krishna spent most of his childhood in this city and believed to preserve his memories and cultural significance. Vrindavan has about 5,500 temples dedicated to the worship of Krishna and his chief consort, Radha . Performance arts Dance and culture The Krishna legends in the Bhagavata Purana have inspired many performance arts repertoire, such as Kathak , Kuchipudi (left), Odissi and Krishnanattam (right).

The Rasa Lila where Krishna plays with the gopis in Manipuri dance style (center) Indian dance and music theatre traces its origins and techniques to the ancient Sama Veda and Natyasastra texts.

The stories enacted and the numerous choreographic themes are inspired by the legends in Hindu texts, including Krishna-related literature such as Harivamsa and Bhagavata Purana .

The Krishna stories have played a key role in the history of Indian theatre, music, and dance, particularly through the tradition of Rasaleela . These are dramatic enactments of Krishna's childhood, adolescence, and adulthood. One common scene involves Krishna playing flute in Rasa Leela, only to be heard by certain gopis (cowherd maidens), which is theologically supposed to represent divine call only heard by certain enlightened beings. Some of the text's legends have inspired secondary theatre literature such as the eroticism in Gita Govinda . Krishna-related literature such as the Bhagavata Purana accords a metaphysical significance to the performances and treats them as a religious ritual, infusing daily life with spiritual meaning, thus representing a good, honest, happy life. Similarly, Krishna-inspired performances aim to cleanse the hearts of faithful actors and listeners. Singing, dancing, and performing any part of Krishna Lila is an act of remembering the dharma in the text, as a form of para bhakti (supreme devotion). To remember Krishna at any time and in any art, asserts the text, is to worship the good and the divine. Classical dance styles such as Kathak , Odissi , Manipuri , Kuchipudi and Bharatanatyam in particular are known for their Krishna-related performances . Krisnattam (Krishnattam) traces its origins to Krishna legends, and is linked to another major classical Indian dance form called Kathakali . Bryant summarizes the influence of Krishna stories in the Bhagavata Purana as, " has inspired more derivative literature, poetry, drama, dance, theatre and art than any other text in the history of Sanskrit literature, with the possible exception of the Ramayana .

The Palliyodam , a type of large boat built and used by Aranmula Parthasarathy Temple in Kerala for the annual water processions of Uthrattathi Jalamela and Valla Sadhya has the legend that it was designed by Krishna and were made to look like Sheshanaga , the serpent on which Vishnu rests.

In popular culture Krishna has been depicted in several television series and films in multiple languages across India. Many Hindu texts have been adapted into video series, with Krishna as a main character or a key supporting role. Krishna-related films include the Bengali film Radha Krishna (1933), the Telugu-Tamil film Mayabazar (1957), and the Hindi animated film Krishna Aur Kans (2012). Krishna has been portrayed in several Television series including B. R. Chopra 's Mahabharat (1988), Ramanand Sagar 's Shri Krishna (1993), Jai Shri Krishna (2008), Mahabharat (2013), RadhaKrishn (2018), and Shrimad Bhagwat Mahapuran (2019).

The Jainism tradition lists 63 Śalākāpuruṣa or notable figures which, amongst others, includes the twenty-four Tirthankaras (spiritual teachers) and nine sets of triads.

In every half time cycle, according to Jain cosmology , there are nine sets of Balabhadra (gentle heroes), Vasudevas (violent heroes), and Prativāsudevas (anti-heroes) each set known as triads. One of these sets is Krishna as the Vasudeva , Balarama as the Balabhadra , and Jarasandha as the Prativāsudeva .

In each age of the Jain cyclic, a Vasudeva (violent hero) is born with an elder brother termed as the Baladeva (gentle hero) . Between the triads, Baladeva upholds the principle of non-violence, a central idea in Jainism .

The villain is the Prati-vasudeva , who attempts to destroy the world. To save the world, Vasudeva-Krishna has to forsake the non-violence principle and kill the Prati-Vasudeva .

The stories of these triads can be found in the Harivamsa Purana ( c. 8th century CE ) of Jinasena (not be confused with its namesake, the addendum to Mahābhārata ) and the Trishashti-shalakapurusha-charita of Hemachandra .

The story of Krishna's life depicted in the Puranas of Jainism follows the same general outline as those in the Hindu texts, but in details, they are very different: they include Jain Tirthankaras as figures in the story, and generally are polemically critical of Krishna, unlike the versions found in the Mahabharata , the Bhagavata Purana , and the Vishnu Purana . For example, Krishna loses battles in the Jain versions, and his gopis and his clan of Yadavas die in a fire created by an ascetic named Dvaipayana. Similarly, after dying from the hunter Jara's arrow, the Jaina texts state Krishna goes to the third hell in Jain cosmology , while his brother is said to go to the sixth heaven . Vimalasuri is attributed to be the author of the Jain version of the Harivamsa Purana , but no manuscripts have been found that confirm this. It is likely that later Jain scholars, probably Jinasena of the 8th century, wrote a complete version of Krishna legends in the Jain tradition and credited it to the ancient Vimalasuri. Partial and older versions of the Krishna story are available in Jain literature, such as in the Antagata Dasao of the Svetambara Agama tradition.

In other Jain texts, Krishna is stated to be a cousin of the twenty-second Tirthankara , Neminatha.

The Jain texts state that Neminatha taught Krishna all the wisdom that he later gave to Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gita . According to Jeffery D. Long , a professor of religion known for his publications on Jainism, this connection between Krishna and Neminatha has been a historic reason for Jains to accept, read, and cite the Bhagavad Gita as a spiritually important text, celebrate Krishna-related festivals, and intermingle with Hindus as spiritual cousins. Buddhism Depiction of Krishna playing the flute, mural of Bhutia Busty Monastery , Darjeeling district , India The story of Krishna occurs in the Jataka tales in Buddhism .

The Vidhurapandita Jataka mentions Madhura (Sanskrit: Mathura), the Ghata Jataka mentions Kamsa, Devagabbha (Sk: Devaki), Upasagara or Vasudeva, Govaddhana (Sk: Govardhana), Baladeva (Balarama), and Kanha or Kesava (Sk: Krishna, Keshava). Like the Jain versions of the Krishna legends, the Buddhist versions such as one in Ghata Jataka follow the general outline of the story, but are different from the Hindu versions as well. For example, the Buddhist legend describes Devagabbha (Devaki) to have been isolated in a palace built upon a pole after she is born, so no future husband could reach her. Krishna's father similarly is described as a powerful king, but who meets up with Devagabbha anyway, and to whom Kamsa gives away his sister Devagabbha in marriage.

The siblings of Krishna are not killed by Kamsa, though he tries.

In the Buddhist version of the legend, all of Krishna's siblings grow to maturity. Krishna and his siblings' capital becomes Dvaravati.

The Arjuna and Krishna interaction is missing in the Jataka version. A new legend is included, wherein Krishna laments in uncontrollable sorrow when his son dies, and a Ghatapandita feigns madness to teach Krishna a lesson.

The Jataka tale also includes internecine destruction among his siblings after they all get drunk. Krishna also dies in the Buddhist legend by the hand of a hunter named Jara, but while he is traveling to a frontier city. Mistaking Krishna for a pig, Jara throws a spear that fatally pierces his feet, causing Krishna great pain and then his death.

At the end of this Ghata-Jataka discourse, the Buddhist text declares that Sariputta , one of the revered disciples of the Buddha in the Buddhist tradition, was incarnated as Krishna in his previous life to learn lessons on grief from the Buddha in his prior rebirth: Then he declared the Truths and identified the Birth: "At that time, Ananda was Rohineyya, Sariputta was Vasudeva , the followers of the Buddha were the other persons, and I myself was Ghatapandita." — Jataka Tale No. 454, Translator: W. H. D. Rouse While the Buddhist Jataka texts co-opt Krishna-Vasudeva and make him a student of the Buddha in his previous life, the Hindu texts co-opt the Buddha and make him an avatar of Vishnu .

In Chinese Buddhism , Taoism and Chinese folk religion , the figure of Krishna has been amalgamated and merged with that of Nalakuvara to influence the formation of the god Nezha , who has taken on iconographic characteristics of Krishna such as being presented as a divine god-child and slaying a nāga in his youth. Other Krishna's life is written about in "Krishna Avtar" of the Chaubis Avtar , a composition in Dasam Granth traditionally and historically attributed to Sikh Guru Gobind Singh . Within the Sikh-derived 19th-century Radha Soami movement, the followers of its founder Shiv Dayal Singh used to consider him the Living Master and incarnation of God (Krishna/Vishnu). Baháʼís believe that Krishna was a " Manifestation of God ", or one in a line of prophets who have revealed the Word of God progressively for a gradually maturing humanity.

The number of Krishna's children varies from one interpretation to another. According to the Bhagavata Purana , Krishna had 10 sons from each of his 8 chief wives (80 sons) and 1 daughter, Charumati, from Rukmini. ^ Radha is seen as Krishna's lover-consort (although in some beliefs Radha is considered to be Krishna's married consort).

On the other hand, Rukmini and others are already married to him. Krishna had eight chief wives, known as Ashtabharyas. Regional texts vary in the identity of Krishna's wives (consorts), some presenting them as Rukmini, some as Radha, all gopis, and some identifying all as different aspects or manifestations of the goddess Lakshmi. ^ Such as, in the form of Vithoba in Pandharpur , Maharashtra, Shrinathji at Nathdwara in Rajasthan, Udupi Krishna in Karnataka , Parthasarathy in Tamil Nadu, Aranmula and Guruvayoorappan ( Guruvayoor ) in Kerala. ^ Within a period of four or five centuries , we encounter our major sources of information, all in different versions.

The Mahabharata, the Harivamsa, the Visnu Purana, the Ghata Jataka, and the Bala Carita all appear between the first and the fifth century AD, and each of them represents a tradition of a Krsna cycle different from the others ^ Present-day Krishna worship is an amalgam of various elements. According to historical testimonies, Krishna-Vasudeva worship already flourished in and around Mathura several centuries before Christ. A second important element is the cult of Krishna Govinda. Still later is the worship of Bala-Krishna, the Child Krishna – a quite prominent feature of modern Krishnaism.

The last element seems to have been Krishna Gopijanavallabha, Krishna the lover of the Gopis, among whom Radha occupies a special position.

The Charles Strong Trust Lectures, 1972–1984 . Crotty, Robert B. Brill Academic Pub. p. 109. ISBN 978-90-04-07863-5 . (...) After attaining to fame eternal, he again took up his real nature as Brahman .

The most important among Visnu's avataras is undoubtedly Krsna, the black one, also called Syama . For his worshippers he is not an avatara in the usual sense, but Svayam Bhagavan, the Lord himself. ^ Raychaudhuri 1972 , p. 124 ^ a b c Diana L. Eck (2012). India: A Sacred Geography . Harmony. pp. 380– 381. ISBN 978-0-385-53190-0 . , Quote: "Krishna was shot through the foot, hand, and heart by the single arrow of a hunter named Jara. Krishna was reclining there, so they say, and Jara mistook his reddish foot for a deer and released his arrow. There Krishna died." ^ Naravane, Vishwanath S. (1987). A Companion to Indian Mythology: Hindu, Buddhist & Jaina . Thinker's Library, Technical Publishing House. p. 162. LCCN 89906064 . ^ Mani 1975 , pp. 426–427. ^ a b John Stratton Hawley, Donna Marie Wulff (1982).

The Divine Consort: Rādhā and the Goddesses of India . Motilal Banarsidass . p. 12. ISBN 978-0-89581-102-8 . ^ a b c Bryant 2007 , p. 443. ^ a b "KRISHNA Definition & Meaning | Dictionary.com" . Dictionary.com . Retrieved 21 May 2026 . ^ Bryant & Ekstrand 2004 , pp. 22–24. ^ Thompson, Ph.D., Richard (December 1994). "Reflections on the Relation Between Religion and Modern Rationalism" . International Society of Krishna Consciousness . Archived from the original on 4 January 2011 . Retrieved 12 April 2008 . ^ a b Mahony, W. K. (1987). "Perspectives on Krsna's Various Personalities". History of Religions . 26 (3): 333– 335. doi : 10.1086/463085 . ISSN 0018-2710 . JSTOR 1062381 . S2CID 164194548 . Quote: "Krsna's various appearances as a divine hero, alluring god child, cosmic prankster, perfect lover, and universal supreme being (...)". ^ Knott 2000 , pp. 15, 36, 56 ^ a b Hein, Norvin (1986). "A Revolution in Kṛṣṇaism : The Cult of Gopāla". History of Religions . 25 (4): 296– 317. doi : 10.1086/463051 . JSTOR 1062622 . S2CID 162049250 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j Hardy 1987 , pp. 387–392. ^ Gupta, Ravi M.; Valpey, Kenneth R. (November 2016).

The Bhāgavata Purāna: Selected Readings . Columbia University Press . pp. 185– 200. ISBN 978-0-231-54234-0 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: date and year ( link ) ^ a b Bryant 2007 , p. 118. ^ a b Varadpande 1987 , pp. 98–99. ^ Melton 2011 , pp. 330–331. ^ Cynthia Packert (2010).

The Art of Loving Krishna: Ornamentation and Devotion . Indiana University Press. pp. 5, 70– 71, 181– 187. ISBN 978-0-253-22198-8 . ^ Bryant 2007 , p. 3. ^ Lavanya Vemsani (2016). Krishna in History, Thought, and Culture . ABC-CLIO. pp. 112– 113. ISBN 978-1-61069-211-3 . ^ a b * Monier Williams Sanskrit–English Dictionary (2008 revision) Archived 18 October 2019 at the Wayback Machine Apte Sanskrit–English Dictionary Archived 16 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Blurton, T. Richard (1993). Hindu Art . Massachusetts : Harvard University Press . pp. 133– 134. ISBN 978-0-674-39189-5 . Archived from the original on 5 August 2021 . Retrieved 4 June 2026 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m "108 Names of Lord Krishna with Meaning | AstroVed Blog | AstroVed.com" . Astroved Blogs . 4 September 2025 . Retrieved 4 July 2026 . ^ a b c d "108 Names of Lord Krishna | Ashtottara Shatanamavali of Lord Krishna" . Drikpanchang . Retrieved 4 July 2026 . ^ a b "कृष्ण अष्टोत्तरशतनाम स्तोत्र (भगवान कृष्ण के १०८ नाम) - 108 Names Krishna Ashtottara Shatanama Stotram Sanskrit Lyrics" . stotramala.com . Retrieved 4 July 2026 . ^ a b c d "Kṛṣṇa Vedabase" . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o "Names of Krishna" . Vedikay . Retrieved 4 July 2026 . ^ Bryant 2007 , p. 17 ^ a b Hiltebeitel, Alf (2001). Rethinking the Mahābhārata: a reader's guide to the education of the dharma king . University of Chicago Press . ISBN 978-0-226-34054-8 . Archived from the original on 9 February 2023. ^ a b c "108 Names of Shri Krishna (With Meaning)" . My Vaishnav Parivar . 12 May 2007 . Retrieved 4 July 2026 . ^ a b "108 Names of Lord Krishna - ZindagiUp" . 29 August 2023 . Retrieved 4 July 2026 . ^ Monier-Williams, Monier (1995). A Sanskrit English Dictionary . Oxford University Press . p. 336 . ISBN 9780198643081 . Retrieved 18 May 2026 – via Ibiblio . ^ "Murlidhar" . ^ "Sanskritdictionary.com: Definition of pārthasārathi" . sanskritdictionary.com . Archived from the original on 3 September 2016 . Retrieved 30 June 2026 . ^ B. M. Misra (2007). Orissa: Shri Krishna Jagannatha: the Mushali parva from Sarala's Mahabharata . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-514891-6 . ^ Bryant 2007 , p. 139. ^ For the historic Jagannath temple in Ranchi, Jharkhand see: Francis Bradley Bradley-Birt (1989). Chota Nagpur, a Little-known Province of the Empire . Asian Educational Services (Orig: 1903). pp. 61– 64. ISBN 978-81-206-1287-7 . ^ "The Mahabharata, Book 5: Udyoga Parva: Sanat-sujata Parva" . ^ "Swaveda" . Swaveda . Retrieved 4 July 2026 . ^ "ŚB 10.25.25" . vedabase.io . Archived from the original on 20 October 2020 . Retrieved 4 July 2026 . ^ "CHAPTER NINE" . vedabase.io . Archived from the original on 23 July 2023 . Retrieved 4 July 2026 . ^ "Krishna" . Encyclopædia Britannica Online . 26 June 2023. ^ Ben-Ami Scharfstein (1993). Ineffability: The Failure of Words in Philosophy and Religion . State University of New York Press . p. 166 . ISBN 978-0-7914-1347-0 . ^ Bryant & Ekstrand 2004 , pp. 20–25, quote: "Three Dimensions of Krishna's Divinity (...) divine majesty and supremacy, (...) divine tenderness and intimacy, (...) compassion and protection., (..., p. 24) Krishna as the God of Love". ^ Matchett 2001 , p. 199. ^ Chaturvedi, B.K (2006). Shrimad Bhagawat Puran . Delhi: Diamond Pocket Books. pp. 85– 86. ISBN 81-7182-831-0 . (pp.86), Kansa was eventually killed, to the great delight of gods and noble persons..... ^ Yagnik, Achyut; Sheth, Suchitra (2005).

The Shaping of Modern Gujarat: Plurality, Hindutva, and Beyond . Penguin Books India . ISBN 978-0-14-400038-8 . Retrieved 2 May 2026 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Wendy Doniger (2008). "Britannica: Mahabharata" . encyclopedia . Encyclopædia Britannica Online . Retrieved 13 October 2008 . ^ a b c d e Juan Mascaró (1962).

The Bhagavad-Gita: A New Translation . Shambhala Publications . pp. ix– xi. ISBN 978-1-59030-893-6 . ^ a b c Kennedy, Melville T (1925).

The Chaitanya Movement: A Study of the Vaishnavism of Bengal . H. Milford, Oxford University Press , Madras. ^ Flood 1996 , p. 119-120. ^ a b c Singh, Upinder (2008). A History of Ancient and Early Medieval India: From the Stone Age to the 12th Century . Pearson Education India. pp. 436– 438. ISBN 978-81-317-1120-0 . ^ Allchin, Raymond (1978).

The Archaeology of Afghanistan from earliest times to the Timurid period . London; New York : Academic Press. p. 209, Fig. 4.13. ISBN 978-0-12-050440-4 . ^ a b c Srinivasan, Doris (1997). Many Heads, Arms, and Eyes: Origin, Meaning, and Form of Multiplicity in Indian Art . Brill. p. 215. ISBN 978-90-04-10758-8 . ^ Audouin, Rémy, and Paul Bernard, " Trésor de monnaies indiennes et indo-grecques d'Aï Khanoum (Afghanistan). II. Les monnaies indo-grecques. " Revue numismatique 6, no. 16 (1974), pp. 6–41 (in French). ^ Nilakanth Purushottam Joshi, Iconography of Balarāma, Abhinav Publications, 1979, p. 22 ^ a b c F. R. Allchin; George Erdosy (1995).

The Archaeology of Early Historic South Asia: The Emergence of Cities and States . Cambridge University Press. pp. 309– 310. ISBN 978-0-521-37695-2 . ^ L. A. Waddell (1914), Besnagar Pillar Inscription B Re-Interpreted, The Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland , Cambridge University Press, pp. 1031–1037 ^ a b Osmund Bopearachchi (2016). "Emergence of Viṣṇu and Śiva Images in India: Numismatic and Sculptural Evidence" . Retrieved 20 May 2026 . ^ Journal of Indian History . Department of Modern Indian History. 1973. ^ Richard Salomon (1998). Indian Epigraphy: A Guide to the Study of Inscriptions in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and the other Indo-Aryan Languages . Oxford University Press. pp. 265– 267. ISBN 978-0-19-535666-3 . ^ Preciado-Solís 1984 , p. 34. ^ Khare 1967 . ^ Irwin 1974 , pp. 169–176 with Figure 2 and 3. ^ Susan V Mishra & Himanshu P Ray 2017 , p. 5. ^ Burjor Avari (2016). India: The Ancient Past: A History of the Indian Subcontinent from C. 7000 BCE to CE 1200 . Routledge. pp. 165– 167. ISBN 978-1-317-23673-3 . ^ Salomon, Richard (1998). Indian epigraphy: a guide to the study of inscriptions in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and the other Indo-Aryan languages . South Asia research. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-509984-3 . ^ Srinivasan, Doris (1979). "Early Vaiṣṇava Imagery: Caturvyūha and Variant Forms" . Archives of Asian Art . 32 : 39– 54. ISSN 0066-6637 . JSTOR 20111096 . ^ Richard Salomon (1998). Indian Epigraphy: A Guide to the Study of Inscriptions in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and the Other Indo-Aryan Languages . Oxford University Press. pp. 86– 87. ISBN 978-0-19-509984-3 . ^ Bühler, Georg (1886). "The Ghosundi and Hāthibāḍā Inscriptions". Epigraphia Indica . Vol. I. Archaeological Survey of India. pp. 7–12. ^ Vemsani, Lavanya (2016). Krishna in history, thought, and culture: an encyclopedia of the Hindu lord of many names . Santa Barbara, Calif: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-61069-211-3 . ^ Varadpande 1987 , pp. 6–7. ^ Barnett, Lionel David (1922). Hindu Gods and Heroes: Studies in the History of the Religion of India . J. Murray. p. 93 . ^ Puri, B. N. (1968). India in the Time of Patanjali . Bhartiya Vidya Bhavan. p. 51: The coins of Rajuvula have been recovered from the Sultanpur District...the Brahmi inscription on the Mora stone slab, now in the Mathura Museum, ^ Doris Srinivasan (1997). Many Heads, Arms, and Eyes: Origin, Meaning, and Form of Multiplicity in Indian Art . Broll Academic. pp. 214–215 with footnotes. ISBN 90-04-10758-4 . ^ Jason Neelis (2010). Early Buddhist Transmission and Trade Networks: Mobility and Exchange Within and Beyond the Northwestern Borderlands of South Asia . Btill Academic. pp. 271– 272. ISBN 978-90-04-18159-5 . ^ a b c Bhattacharya, Sunil Kumar (1996). Krishna-cult in Indian Art . M.D. Publications Pvt. Ltd. p. 27. ISBN 978-81-7533-001-6 . ^ "The Mahabharata, Book 6: Bhishma Parva: Bhagavat-Gita Parva: Section XXV (Bhagavad Gita Chapter I)" . www.sacred-texts.com . Archived from the original on 21 May 2012 . Retrieved 8 May 2026 . ^ Armstrong, Karen (1996). A History of God: The 4000-year Quest of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam . New York: Alfred A. Knopf Inc . pp. 85– 86. ISBN 978-0-679-42600-4 . ^ Maurice Winternitz (1981), History of Indian Literature , Vol. 1, Delhi, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-0836408010 , pp. 426–431 ^ Natubhai Shah 2004 , p. 23. ^ a b Max Müller, Chandogya Upanishad 3.16–3.17 , The Upanishads, Part I, Oxford University Press, pp. 50–53 with footnotes ^ Bryant & Ekstrand 2004 , pp. 20–25. ^ Sandilya Bhakti Sutra SS Rishi (Translator), Sree Gaudia Math (Madras) ^ WG Archer (2004), The Loves of Krishna in Indian Painting and Poetry , Dover, ISBN 978-0486433714 , p. 5 ^ a b Bryant 2007 , p. 4 ^ Sunil Kumar Bhattacharya Krishna-cult in Indian Art . 1996 M. D. Publications Pvt. Ltd. ISBN 81-7533-001-5 p. 128: Satha-patha-brahmana and Aitareya- Aranyaka with reference to first chapter. ^ Archived 17 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ Pâṇ. IV. 3. 98, Vâsudevârjunâbhyâm vun. See Bhandarkar, Vaishnavism and Śaivism, p. 3 and J.R.A.S. 1910, p. 168. Sûtra 95, just above, appears to point to bhakti, faith or devotion, felt for this Vâsudeva. ^ Sunil Kumar Bhattacharya Krishna-cult in Indian Art . 1996 M. D. Publications Pvt. Ltd. ISBN 81-7533-001-5 p. 1 ^ a b c d e Bryant 2007 , p. 5. ^ Bryant 2007 , pp. 5–6. ^ Bryant 2007 , pp. 256–257. ^ a b Bryant 2007 , p. 6. ^ Hemacandra Abhidhânacintâmani, Ed. Boehtlingk and Rien, p. 128, and Barnett's translation of the Antagada Dasāo, pp. 13–15, 67–82. ^ Gopal, Madan (1990). K.S. Gautam (ed.). India through the ages . Publication Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. p. 73 . ^ Elkman, Stuart (1986). Jiva Gosvamin's Tattvasandarbha: A Study on the Philosophical and Sectarian Development of the Gaudiya Vaisnava Movement . Motilal Banarsidass . ISBN 9789359036144 . ^ Rocher 1986 , pp. 18, 49–53, 245–249. ^ Gregory Bailey (2003). Arvind Sharma (ed.).

The Study of Hinduism . University of South Carolina Press. pp. 141– 142. ISBN 978-1-57003-449-7 . ^ Richard Thompson (2007), The Cosmology of the Bhagavata Purana 'Mysteries of the Sacred Universe , Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120819191 ^ Holdrege, Barbara A. (2015). Bhakti and Embodiment: Fashioning Divine Bodies and Devotional bodies in Kṛṣṇa Bhakti . Routledge Hindu Studies Series. London ; New York: Routledge . pp. 109– 110. ISBN 978-0-415-67070-8 . ^ a b Bryant 2007 , p. 112. ^ Matchett 2001 , pp. 127–137. ^ Beck 2005 , pp. 4–5. ^ J.A.B. van Buitenen, The Mahabharata , vol. 3, University of Chicago 1978, p. 134 ^ Archer 2004 , The Krishna of Painting. ^ Guy, John (2014). Lost Kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia . Metropolitan Museum of Art. pp. 222– 223. ISBN 978-1-58839-524-5 . ^ Cooler, Richard M. (1978). "Sculpture, Kingship, and the Triad of Phnom Da". Artibus Asiae . 40 (1): 29– 40. doi : 10.2307/3249812 . JSTOR 3249812 . ; Bertrand Porte (2006), "La statue de Kṛṣṇa Govardhana du Phnom Da du Musée National de Phnom Penh." UDAYA, Journal of Khmer Studies, Volume 7, pp. 199–205 ^ Vishvanatha, Cakravarti Thakura (2011). Sarartha-darsini ( Bhanu Swami ed.). Sri Vaikunta Enterprises. p. 790. ISBN 978-81-89564-13-1 . ^ The Encyclopedia Americana . : Grolier. 1988. p. 589 . ISBN 978-0-7172-0119-8 . ^ Benton, William (1974).

The New Encyclopædia Britannica . Encyclopædia Britannica. p. 885. ISBN 978-0-85229-290-7 . ^ Harle, J. C. (1994).

The art and architecture of the Indian subcontinent . New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press . p. 410 . ISBN 978-0-300-06217-5 . figure 327. Manaku, Radha's messenger describing Krishna standing with the cow-girls, gopi from Basohli. ^ Diana L. Eck (1982). Banaras, City of Light . Columbia University Press. pp. 66– 67. ISBN 978-0-231-11447-9 . ^ Ariel Glucklich (2008).

The Strides of Vishnu: Hindu Culture in Historical Perspective . Oxford University Press. p. 106. ISBN 978-0-19-971825-2 . ^ T. A. Gopinatha Rao (1993). Elements of Hindu iconography . Motilal Banarsidass. pp. 210– 212. ISBN 978-81-208-0878-2 . ^ John Stratton Hawley (2014). Krishna, The Butter Thief . Princeton University Press. pp. 3– 8. ISBN 978-1-4008-5540-7 . ^ Hoiberg, Dale; Ramchandani, Indu (2000). Students' Britannica India . Popular Prakashan. p. 251. ISBN 978-0-85229-760-5 . ^ Satsvarupa dasa Goswami (1998).

The Qualities of Sri Krsna . GNPress. p. 152. ISBN 978-0-911233-64-3 . ^ Stuart Cary Welch (1985). India: Art and Culture, 1300–1900 . Metropolitan Museum of Art. p. 58. ISBN 978-0-03-006114-1 . ^ T. A. Gopinatha Rao (1993). Elements of Hindu iconography . Motilal Banarsidass. pp. 201– 204. ISBN 978-81-208-0878-2 . ^ T. A. Gopinatha Rao (1993). Elements of Hindu iconography . Motilal Banarsidass. pp. 204– 208. ISBN 978-81-208-0878-2 . ^ Karmakar, Bikas; Gupta, Ila (2018). "Tracing the Impact of Krishnalila Narratives on Bengal Temple Architecture: A Study of Terracotta Temples of Baranagar" . Journal of Heritage Management . 3 (1): 49– 70. doi : 10.1177/2455929618773274 . ISSN 2455-9296 . ^ Amit Guha, Krishnalila in Terracotta Temples , archived from the original on 2 January 2021 , retrieved 2 January 2021 ^ Matchett 2001 , p. 145. ^ a b James G. Lochtefeld (2002).

The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism: A-M .

The Rosen Publishing Group . pp. 401– 402. ISBN 978-0-8239-3179-8 . ^ "Shimad Bhagavad Puran - Canto 10, Chapter 50" . Vedabase . Retrieved 20 May 2026 . ^ "Yashoda and Krishna" . Metmuseum.org. 10 October 2011. Archived from the original on 13 October 2008 . Retrieved 23 October 2011 . ^ Lok Nath Soni (2000).

The Cattle and the Stick: An Ethnographic Profile of the Raut of Chhattisgarh . Anthropological Survey of India, Government of India, Ministry of Tourism and Culture, Department of Culture, Delhi: Anthropological Survey of India, Government of India, Ministry of Tourism and Culture, Department of Culture, 2000 Original from the University of Michigan. p. 16. ISBN 978-8185579573 . ^ Bryant 2007 , pp. 124–130, 224 ^ "Things to do in Mathura and Vrindavan – A complete travel guide" .

The Times of India . 30 September 2025. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 4 July 2026 . ^ a b Knott 2000 , p. 55 ^ Doniger, Wendy; Merriam-Webster (1999). Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia of World Religions . Internet Archive . Springfield, Mass. : Merriam-Webster. p. 503. ISBN 978-0-87779-044-0 . ^ Schweig, G. M. (2005). Dance of Divine love: India's Classic Sacred Love Story: The Rasa Lila of Krishna . Princeton University Press . ISBN 978-0-691-11446-0 . ^ a b c Largen, Kristin Johnston (2011). God at Play: Seeing God Through the Lens of the Young Krishna . India: Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1608330188 . OCLC 1030901369 . ^ "Krishna Rajamannar with His Wives, Rukmini and Satyabhama, and His Mount, Garuda | LACMA Collections" . collections.lacma.org. Archived from the original on 16 July 2014 . Retrieved 23 September 2014 . ^ Bryant 2007 , p. 290 ^ Rao, Shanta Rameshwar (2005). Krishna . New Delhi: Orient Longman. p. 108. ISBN 978-8125026969 . ^ D Dennis Hudson (2008).

The Body of God : An Emperor's Palace for Krishna in Eighth-Century Kanchipuram: An Emperor's Palace for Krishna in Eighth-Century Kanchipuram . Oxford University Press. pp. 263– 264. ISBN 978-0-19-970902-1 . Retrieved 28 March 2013 . ^ D Dennis Hudson (2008).

The Body of God : An Emperor's Palace for Krishna in Eighth-Century Kanchipuram: An Emperor's Palace for Krishna in Eighth-Century Kanchipuram . Oxford University Press. pp. 102– 103, 263– 273. ISBN 978-0-19-970902-1 . Retrieved 28 March 2013 . ^ George Mason Williams (2008). Handbook of Hindu Mythology . Oxford University Press. pp. 188, 222. ISBN 978-0-19-533261-2 . Retrieved 10 March 2013 . ^ Rosen 2006 , p. 136 ^ John Stratton Hawley, Donna Marie Wulff (1982).

The Divine Consort: Rādhā and the Goddesses of India . Motilal Banarsidass Publisher. p. 12. ISBN 978-0-89581-102-8 . Quote: "The regional texts vary in the identity of Krishna's wife (consort), some presenting it as Rukmini, some as Radha, some as Svaminiji, some adding all gopis , and some identifying all to be different aspects or manifestation of one Devi Lakshmi." ^ Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita, by Robert N. Minor in Bryant 2007 , pp. 77–79 ^ a b Jeaneane D. Fowler (2012).

The Bhagavad Gita: A Text and Commentary for Students . Sussex Academic Press. pp. 1– 7. ISBN 978-1-84519-520-5 . ^ Eknath Easwaran (2007).

The Bhagavad Gita: (Classics of Indian Spirituality) . Nilgiri Press. pp. 21– 59. ISBN 978-1-58638-019-9 . ^ Bryant 2007 , p. 148 ^ a b Mani 1975 , p. 429. ^ Bryant 2003 , pp. 417–418. ^ Largen, Kristin Johnston (2011). Baby Krishna, Infant Christ: A Comparative Theology of Salvation . Orbis Books. p. 44. ISBN 978-1-60833-018-8 . ^ Matchett 2001 , pp. 9–14, 145–149. ^ Preciado-Solís 1984 , p. 40. ^ Matchett 2001 , pp. 44–49, 63–64, 145. ^ Matchett 2001 , pp. 89–104, 146. ^ Rocher 1986 , pp. 18, 245–249. ^ Matchett 2001 , pp. 108–115, 146–147. ^ Matchett 2001 , pp. 145–149. ^ Rocher 1986 , pp. 138–149. ^ Knott 2000 , p. 58. ^ "Janamashtami" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 19 May 2026 . ^ Melton 2011 , p. 396. ^ "Happy Janmashtami 2022: History and significance behind Lord Krishna's birth anniversary explained" .

The Economic Times . 16 August 2022. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 3 May 2023 . ^ "Krishna Janmashtami" . International Society for Krishna Consciousness . 26 May 2022 . Retrieved 27 May 2026 . ^ Melton 2011 , p. 459. ^ a b c Taneja, Leena (10 May 2023). "Losing and Finding Braj: Commodification and Entrepreneurship in the Sacred Land of Krishna" . Religions . 14 (5): 643. doi : 10.3390/rel14050643 . ISSN 2077-1444 . ^ a b c Bryant 2007 , pp. 538–539. ^ a b "Mathura to Celebrate 5,252nd Krishna Janmashtami on Aug 16 with over 5 Million Devotees" . Deccan Herald . Retrieved 27 May 2026 . ^ Kishore, B. R. (2006). Hinduism (Revised ed.). Diamond Pocket Books (P) Ltd. (published 1998). p. 118 . ISBN 978-81-7182-073-3 . ^ Hermann Kulke; Dietmar Rothermund (2004). A History of India . Routledge . p. 149. ISBN 978-0-415-32920-0 . ^ Bryant 2007 , pp. 329–334 (Francis X Clooney). ^ Sharma; B. N. Krishnamurti (2000). A History of the Dvaita School of Vedānta and Its Literature . Motilal Banarsidass . pp. 514– 516. ISBN 978-8120815759 . ^ Bryant 2007 , pp. 358–365 (Deepak Sarma). ^ Ramnarace 2014 . ^ Tripurari, Swami. "The Life of Sri Jiva Goswami" . Harmonist . Archived from the original on 24 March 2013. ^ Bryant 2007 , pp. 373–378 (Satyanarayana Dasa). ^ Jindel, Rajendra (1976). Culture of a Sacred Town: A Sociological Study of Nathdwara . Popular Prakashan . pp. 34, 37. ISBN 978-8171540402 . ^ Bryant 2007 , pp. 479–480 (Richard Barz). ^ William, R. Pinch (1996). "Soldier Monks and Militant Sadhus" .

In David Ludden (ed.). Contesting the Nation . University of Pennsylvania Press . pp. 148– 150. ISBN 978-0-8122-1585-4 . ^ Shankara , Student's Encyclopædia Britannica – India (2000), Volume 4, Encyclopædia Britannica (UK) Publishing, ISBN 978-0-85229-760-5 , p. 379, Quote: "Shankaracharya, philosopher and theologian, most renowned exponent of the Advaita Vedanta school of philosophy, from whose doctrines the main currents of modern Indian thought are derived."; David Crystal (2004), The Penguin Encyclopedia, Penguin Books, p. 1353, Quote: " is the most famous exponent of Advaita Vedanta school of Hindu philosophy and the source of the main currents of modern Hindu thought." ^ Christophe Jaffrelot (1998), The Hindu Nationalist Movement in India , Columbia University Press, ISBN 978-0-231-10335-0 , p. 2, Quote: "The main current of Hinduism – if not the only one – which became formalized in a way that approximates to an ecclesiastical structure was that of Shankara". ^ Sahoo, Ajaya Kumar; Kruijf, Johannes G. de (2014). Indian Transnationalism Online: New Perspectives on Diaspora . Studies in Migration and Diaspora. Farnham , Surrey , England Burlington: Ashgate Publishing . p. 105. ISBN 978-1-4724-1913-2 .

In other words, according to Adi Shankara's argument, the philosophy of Advaita Vedanta stood over and above all other forms of Hinduism and encapsulated them. This then united Hinduism; (...) Another of Adi Shankara's important undertakings which contributed to the unification of Hinduism was his founding of a number of monastic centers ^ Bryant 2007 , pp. 313–318 (Lance Nelson). ^ Sheridan 1986 , pp. 1–2, 17–25. ^ Kumar Das 2006 , pp. 172–173. ^ Brown 1983 , pp. 553–557. ^ Bryant 2007 , p. 114. ^ Pintchman, Tracy (1994).

The rise of the Goddess in the Hindu tradition . Albany, N.Y: State University of New York Press . pp. 132– 134. ISBN 978-0-7914-2111-6 . ^ Sheridan 1986 , pp. 17–21. ^ John Stratton Hawley (2014). Krishna, The Butter Thief . Princeton University Press . pp. 10, 170. ISBN 978-1-4008-5540-7 . ^ Krishna: Hindu Deity , Encyclopædia Britannica (2015) ^ John M Koller (2016).

The Indian Way: An Introduction to the Philosophies & Religions of India . Routledge. pp. 210– 215. ISBN 978-1-315-50740-8 . ^ Vaudeville, Ch. (1962). "Evolution of Love-Symbolism in Bhagavatism". Journal of the American Oriental Society . 82 (1): 31– 40. doi : 10.2307/595976 . JSTOR 595976 . ^ John M Koller (2016).

The Indian Way: An Introduction to the Philosophies & Religions of India . Routledge. p. 210. ISBN 978-1-315-50740-8 . ^ Nicholas F. Gier (2004).

The Virtue of Nonviolence: From Gautama to Gandhi . State University of New York Press. pp. 36– 40. ISBN 978-0-7914-5949-2 . ^ Bryant 2007 , p. 315. ^ John Dowson (2003). Classical Dictionary of Hindu Mythology and Religion, Geography, History and Literature . Kessinger Publishing. p. 361. ISBN 978-0-7661-7589-1 . ^ See Beck, Guy, "Introduction" in Beck 2005 , pp. 1–18 ^ Flood 1996 , p. 117. ^ a b See McDaniel, June, Folk Vaishnavism and Ṭhākur Pañcāyat : Life and status among village Krishna statues in Beck 2005 , p. 39 ^ Indian Philosophy & Culture, Volume 20 . Institute of Oriental Philosophy (Vrindāvan, India), Institute of Oriental Philosophy, Vaishnava Research Institute, contributors.

On the touch-stone of this definition of the final and positive characteristic of Sri Krsna as the Highest Divinity as Svayam-rupa Bhagavan {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ Delmonico, N., The History Of Indic Monotheism And Modern Chaitanya Vaishnavism in Bryant & Ekstrand 2004 ^ De, S. K. (1960). Bengal's contribution to Sanskrit literature & studies in Bengal Vaisnavism . KL Mukhopadhyaya. p. 113: "The Bengal School identifies the Bhagavat with Krishna depicted in the Shrimad-Bhagavata and presents him as its highest personal God." ^ Bryant 2007 , p. 381 ^ "Vaishnava" . encyclopedia . Division of Religion and Philosophy University of Cumbria. Archived from the original on 12 February 2012 . Retrieved 13 October 2008 . , University of Cumbria website Retrieved 21 May 2008 ^ Graham M. Schweig (2005). Dance of Divine Love: The Rڄasa Lڄilڄa of Krishna from the Bhڄagavata Purڄa. na, India's classic sacred love story . Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Front Matter. ISBN 978-0-691-11446-0 . ^ Bhattacharya, Gouriswar: Vanamala of Vasudeva-Krsna-Visnu and Sankarsana-Balarama . In: Vanamala. Festschrift A. J. Gail. Serta Adalberto Joanni Gail LXV. diem natalem celebranti ab amicis collegis discipulis dedicata. ^ "Gopala: Understanding the Essence of Krishna as a Cowherd" . Isha Sadhguru . 5 August 2014 . Retrieved 30 June 2021 . ^ Klostermaier 2007 , pp. 203–204. ^ Basham, A. L. (May 1968). "Review: Krishna: Myths, Rites, and Attitudes . by Milton Singer; Daniel H. H. Ingalls".

The Journal of Asian Studies . 27 (3): 667– 670. doi : 10.2307/2051211 . JSTOR 2051211 . S2CID 161458918 . ^ Couture, André (2006). "The emergence of a group of four characters (Vasudeva, Samkarsana, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha) in the Harivamsa: points for consideration". Journal of Indian Philosophy . 34 (6): 571– 585. doi : 10.1007/s10781-006-9009-x . S2CID 170133349 . ^ Eschmann, Kulke & Tripathi 1978 ; Hardy 1987 , pp. 387–392; Starza 1993 ; Miśra 2005 , chapter 9. Jagannāthism. ^ Miśra 2005 , p. 97, chapter 9. Jagannāthism. ^ Starza 1993 , p. 76. ^ a b Klostermaier, K. (1974). "The Bhaktirasamrtasindhubindu of Visvanatha Cakravartin". Journal of the American Oriental Society . 94 (1): 96– 107. doi : 10.2307/599733 . JSTOR 599733 . ^ Jacobsen, Knut A., ed. (2005). Theory And Practice of Yoga: Essays in Honour of Gerald James Larson . Brill Academic Publishers. p. 351. ISBN 978-90-04-14757-7 . ^ Christopher Key Chapple (Editor) and Winthrop Sargeant (Translator), The Bhagavad Gita: Twenty-fifth–Anniversary Edition , State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-1438428420 , pp. 302–303, 318 ^ Vaudeville, C. (1962). "Evolution of Love-Symbolism in Bhagavatism". Journal of the American Oriental Society . 82 (1): 31– 40. doi : 10.2307/595976 . JSTOR 595976 . ^ Bowen, Paul (1998). Themes and issues in Hinduism . London: Cassell. pp. 64–65 . ISBN 978-0-304-33851-1 . ^ Radhakrisnasarma, C. (1975). Landmarks in Telugu Literature: A Short Survey of Telugu Literature . Lakshminarayana Granthamala. ^ Sisir Kumar Das (2005). A History of Indian Literature, 500–1399: From Courtly to the Popular . Sahitya Akademi. p. 49. ISBN 978-81-260-2171-0 . ^ Schomer & McLeod (1987) , pp. 1–2. ^ Ramnarace 2014 , p. 323. ^ Nimbarka , Encyclopædia Britannica ^ Hayes, Glen A. "The Vaisnava Sahajiya Traditions of Medieval Bengal" . Princeton University Press – via Academia.edu . ^ a b Vithoba is not only viewed as a form of Krishna. He is also by some considered that of Vishnu, Shiva and Gautama Buddha according to various traditions. See: Kelkar, Ashok R. (2001) . " Sri-Vitthal: Ek Mahasamanvay (Marathi) by R. C. Dhere" . Encyclopaedia of Indian literature . Vol. 5. Sahitya Akademi . p. 4179. ISBN 978-8126012213 . Retrieved 20 September 2008 . and Mokashi, Digambar Balkrishna; Engblom, Philip C. (1987). Palkhi: a pilgrimage to Pandharpur – translated from the Marathi book Pālakhī by Philip C. Engblom . Albany: State University of New York Press . p. 35. ISBN 978-0-88706-461-6 . ^ The religious system of the Mahānubhāva sect , by Anne Feldhaus, Manohar publications: Delhi, 1983. ^ Toffin 2012 , pp. 249–254. ^ "Thiruppavai" . Ibiblio . Retrieved 24 May 2013 . ^ Desika, Vedanta. "Gopala Vimshati" . Ibiblio , Sripedia . Retrieved 23 May 2013 . ^ Bryant & Ekstrand 2004 , p. 42. ^ Alanna Kaivalya (2014), Sacred Sound: Discovering the Myth and Meaning of Mantra and Kirtan, New World, ISBN 978-1608682430 , pp. 153–154 ^ Srila Prabhupada – He Built a House in which the whole world can live in peace , Satsvarupa Dasa Goswami, Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, 1984, ISBN 0-89213-133-0 p. xv ^ Selengut, Chales (December 1996). "Charisma and religious innovation: Prabhupada and the founding of ISKCON" . ISKCON Communications Journal . 4 (2) . Retrieved 27 May 2026 . ^ Satsvarūpa Dāsa Gosvāmī (1980). Srīla Prabhupāda-līlāmrta: a biography of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda . Internet Archive. Bhaktivedanta Book Trust. pp. 301, 343– 344. ISBN 978-0-89213-115-0 . ^ a b c Rochford 2007 , p. 12. ^ Goswami 2012 , p. 36. ^ Gosvāmī, Satsvarūpa Dāsa (2002). Srīla Prabhupāda-līlāmrta: A Biography of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda . Bhaktivedanta Book Trust . p. 391. ISBN 978-0-89213-355-0 . ^ Schlueter, Visuals by Krista; Lee, Text by Miya (21 May 2025). "These New Yorkers Are Touching Grass" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 28 May 2026 . ^ Rochford 2007 , pp. 12–13. ^ Lavezzoli, Peter (24 April 2006).

The Dawn of Indian Music in the West . Bloomsbury Academic . p. 195. ISBN 978-0-8264-1815-9 . Archived from the original on 15 March 2022. ^ Greene, Joshua M. (1 January 2018). Swami in a Strange Land . Jaico Publishing House . p. 148. ISBN 978-93-87944-09-1 . OL 27212292M . ^ Daner, Francine Jeanne (1976).

The American Children of Kṛṣṇa: A Study of the Hare Krsna Movement . Holt, Rinehart and Winston . p. 17. ISBN 978-0-0301-3546-0 . Archived from the original on 22 January 2018. ^ Lewis, James R. (2005). Cults: A Reference Handbook . Contemporary World Issues (2nd ed.). Santa Barbara, Calif: ABC-CLIO . p. 128. ISBN 978-1-85109-618-3 . ^ Greene, Joshua (2006). Here comes the sun: the spiritual and musical journey of George Harrison . Hoboken, N.J: John Wiley & Sons. p. 139. ISBN 978-0-471-69021-4 . ^ a b c Charles Brooks (1989), The Hare Krishnas in India , Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-8120809390 , pp. 83–85 ^ Peter Lavezzoli (2006), The Dawn of Indian Music in the West , Continuum, ISBN 0-8264-2819-3 , p. 195 ^ Peter Clarke (2005), Encyclopedia of New Religious Movements , Routledge, ISBN 978-0415267076 , p. 308 Quote: "There they captured the imagination of The Beatles, particularly George Harrison who helped them produce a chart-topping record of the Hare Krishna mantra (1969) and ...". ^ a b c John Guy (2014). Lost Kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia . Metropolitan Museum of Art. pp. 17, 146– 148. ISBN 978-1-58839-524-5 . ^ Anne-Valérie Schweyer; Paisarn Piemmettawat (2011). Viêt Nam ancien: histoire arts archéologie . Editions Olizane. p. 388. ISBN 978-2-88086-396-8 . ^ a b Marijke J. Klokke 2000 , pp. 19–23. ^ Subhadradis Diskul (M.C.); Jean Boisselier (1997). Natasha Eilenberg; Robert L. Brown (eds.). Living a life in accord with Dhamma: papers in honor of professor Jean Boisselier on his eightieth birthday . Silpakorn University. pp. 191– 204. ^ Triguṇa (Mpu.); Suwito Santoso (1986). Krĕṣṇāyana: The Krĕṣṇa Legend in Indonesia . IAIC. OCLC 15488486 . ^ Marijke J. Klokke 2000 , pp. 19–23, for reliefs details see 24–41. ^ a b John Guy; Pierre Baptiste; Lawrence Becker; et al. (2014). Lost Kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia . Yale University Press. pp. 222– 223. ISBN 978-0-300-20437-7 . ^ Klostermaier 2007 , p. 204. ^ Tryna Lyons (2004).

The Artists of Nathdwara: The Practice of Painting in Rajasthan . Indiana University Press. pp. 16– 22. ISBN 978-0-253-34417-5 . ^ Kunissery Ramakrishnier Vaidyanathan (1992). Sri Krishna, the Lord of Guruvayur . Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan. pp. 2– 5. ^ Bryant 2007 , pp. 139–141. ^ Jaganathan, Maithily (2005). "Sri Krishna Jayanti" . South Indian Hindu festivals and traditions (1st ed.). New Delhi: Abhinav Publication. pp. 104– 105. ISBN 978-81-7017-415-8 . ^ Brian A. Hatcher (2015). Hinduism in the Modern World . Routledge. pp. 118– 119. ISBN 978-1-135-04631-6 . ^ a b Entwistle 2025 , p. 1. ^ "7.9cr tourists visited Mathura-Vrindavan in 2023: Study" .

The Times of India . 20 September 2025. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 27 May 2026 . ^ Shah, Arti. "Vishram Ghat" .

The Times of India . ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 6 June 2026 . ^ Prasad, Dev (27 January 2015). Krishna: A Journey through the Lands & Legends of Krishna . Jaico Publishing House . p. 16. ISBN 978-81-8495-170-7 . ^ Gupta, Vinay Kumar (21 April 2021), Coleman, Tracy (ed.), "Mathura" , Oxford Bibliographies in Hinduism (1 ed.), Oxford University PressNew York, NY, doi : 10.1093/obo/9780195399318-0239 , ISBN 978-0-19-785894-3 , retrieved 16 June 2026 {{ citation }} : CS1 maint: work parameter with ISBN ( link ) ^ "Mythological Significance of Vrindavan and Mathura" .

The Times of India . 3 May 2017. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 16 June 2026 . ^ "Mathura gets five more 'teerth sthals' " .

The Times of India . 24 March 2018. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 6 June 2026 . ^ Aug 2019, ANI | 24; Ist, 07:07 Pm. "Devotees throng 'Krishna Janmbhumi' in UP's Mathura on occasion of 'Janmashtami' " . Archived from the original on 19 September 2019 . Retrieved 16 June 2026 – via economictimes.indiatimes.com. {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Krishna, Nanditha (2018).

The Book of Avatars and Divinities . Penguin Random House India. ISBN 9780143446880 . ^ a b Prasad, Dev (27 January 2015). Krishna: A Journey through the Lands & Legends of Krishna . Jaico Publishing House . p. 22. ISBN 978-81-8495-170-7 . ^ a b c Gupta, Sonam (15 May 2017). "Mathura Temple – The Famous Temples of Mathura" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 20 April 2021 . ^ Cite error: The named reference Prasad was invoked but never defined (see the help page ). ^ a b Shah, Arti (18 May 2018). "Exploring 5 ancient temples of Mathura" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 6 June 2023 . ^ Lal, Kanwar(1961). Holy Cities of India , Delhi : Asia Press, p.285. ^ Hawley 2020 . ^ "UP gets first officially designated 'teerth sthals' in Vrindavan and Barsana" . Times of India . 27 October 2017. ^ Gopal, Madan (1990). K.S. Gautam (ed.). India through the ages . Publication Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. p. 176 . ^ Ravi Gupta and Kenneth Valpey (2013), The Bhagavata Purana , Columbia University Press, ISBN 978-0231149990 , pp. 185–200 ^ Beck 1993 , pp. 107–108. ^ PV Kane, History of Sanskrit Poetics , Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120802742 (2015 Reprint), pp. 10–41 ^ Varadpande 1987 , pp. 92–94. ^ Vemsani, Lavanya (2016). "Music and Krishna" . Krishna in history thought and culture . California: ABC-Clio LLC. pp. 179– 180. ISBN 978-1-61069-210-6 . ^ Graham Schweig (2007), Encyclopedia of Love in World Religions (Editor: Yudit Kornberg Greenberg), Volume 1, ISBN 978-1851099801 , pp. 247–249 ^ Varadpande 1987 , pp. 95–97. ^ Varadpande 1987 , p. 98. ^ Zarrilli, P. B. (2000). Kathakali Dance-Drama: Where Gods and Demons Come to Play . Routledge. p. 246 . ^ Archer 2004 . ^ "Explained: What is a Palliyodam, and why a Kerala actor was arrested for photoshoot on it" . thenewsminute . Retrieved 13 September 2021 . ^ Sharmistha Gooptu (November 2010). Bengali Cinema: 'An Other Nation' . Routledge. ISBN 9781136912177 . Retrieved 3 May 2018 . ^ Srikanth (15 October 1967). "సినిమా: శ్రీ కృష్ణ అవతారం" . Visalaandhra (in Telugu). Archived from the original on 14 November 2020 . Retrieved 17 September 2020 . ^ " 'Krishna Aur Kans' set for widest ever domestic release of an Indian animation movie" .

The economic times . Archived from the original on 12 August 2014 . Retrieved 26 July 2012 . ^ "31 years of Mahabharat on Doordarshan: Interesting facts about one of most popular TV shows ever" .

The Financial Express . 2 October 2019 . Retrieved 24 July 2020 . ^ "After 'Ramayan' and 'Mahabharat', now 'Shri Krishna' is returning to Doordarshan" .

The Economic Times . 27 April 2020. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 30 June 2024 . ^ "Dubbed version of Jai Shri Krishna to entertain Tamil audience" .

The Times of India . 28 May 2020. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 3 May 2026 . ^ Nishi Tiwari. "Review: Mahabharat, so far so good" . Rediff. Archived from the original on 1 May 2022 . Retrieved 17 September 2013 . ^ "Mallika Singh and Sumedh Mudgalkar: We feel fortunate, it's a blessing to portray Radha and Krishna" .

The Historian . 65 (3): 665– 694. doi : 10.1111/1540-6563.00035 . S2CID 143606373 . ^ Schure, Edouard (1992). Great Initiates: A Study of the Secret History of Religions . Garber Communications. ISBN 978-0-89345-228-5 . ^ Hanegraaff, Wouter J. (1996). New Age Religion and Western Culture: Esotericism in the Mirror of Secular Thought . Brill Publishers . p. 390. ISBN 978-90-04-10696-3 . ^ Hammer, Olav (2004). Claiming Knowledge: Strategies of Epistemology from Theosophy to the New Age . Brill Publishers. pp. 62 , 174. ISBN 978-90-04-13638-0 . ^ Ellwood, Robert S. (1986). Theosophy: A Modern Expression of the Wisdom of the Ages . Quest Books. p. 139. ISBN 978-0-8356-0607-3 . ^ Crowley associated Krishna with Roman god Dionysus and Magickal formulae IAO, AUM and INRI . See Crowley, Aleister (1991). Liber Aleph . Weiser Books. p. 71. ISBN 978-0-87728-729-2 . and Crowley, Aleister (1980).

The Book of Lies . Red Wheels. pp. 24– 25. ISBN 978-0-87728-516-8 . ^ Apiryon, Tau; Apiryon (1995). Mystery of Mystery: A Primer of Thelemic Ecclesiastical Gnosticism . Berkeley: Red Flame. ISBN 978-0-9712376-1-2 . Sources The Loves of Krishna in Indian Painting and Poetry . Mineola, NY: Dover Publications . ISBN 0-486-43371-4 . Beck, Guy L. (1993). Sonic Theology: Hinduism and Sacred Sound . Studies in Comparative Religion. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press . ISBN 0872498557 . Beck, Guy L., ed. (2005). Alternative Krishnas: Regional and Vernacular Variations on a Hindu Deity . Albany, NY: SUNY Press . ISBN 978-0-7914-6415-1 . Brown, C. Mackenzie (1983). "The Origin and Transmission of the Two "Bhāgavata Purāṇas": A Canonical and Theological Dilemma". Journal of the American Academy of Religion . 51 (4): 551– 567. doi : 10.1093/jaarel/li.4.551 . JSTOR 1462581 . Bryant, Edwin F. ; Ekstrand, Maria (2004).

The Hare Krishna Movement: The Postcharismatic Fate of a Religious Transplant . New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-50843-8 . Bryant, Edwin F. (2003). Krishna: the beautiful legend of God: Srimad Bhagavata Purana . Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-191337-7 . Bryant, Edwin F. (2007). Krishna: A Sourcebook . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-514891-6 . Cort, J. E. (1993). Wendy Doniger (ed.). An Overview of the Jaina Puranas, in Purana Perennis . SUNY Press. ISBN 978-1-4384-0136-2 . Entwistle, Alan W. (10 February 2025). Braj, Centre of Krishna Pilgrimage . BRILL. ISBN 978-90-04-64659-9 . Eschmann, Anncharlott ; Kulke, Hermann ; Tripathi, Gaya Charan, eds. (1978) .

The Cult of Jagannath and the regional tradition of Orissa . South Asian Studies, 8. New Delhi: Manohar. ISBN 978-8173046179 . Flood, Galvin D. (1996). An Introduction to Hinduism . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-43878-0 . Garuda Pillar of Besnagar , Archaeological Survey of India, Annual Report (1908–1909). Calcutta: Superintendent of Government Printing, 1912, 129. Goswami, Tamal Krishna (2012). Schweig, Graham M. (ed.). A Living Theology of Krishna Bhakti: Essential Teachings of A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada . Oxford University Press . doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199796632.001.0001 . ISBN 978-0-1997-9663-2 . LCCN 2011050785 . OCLC 7335553355 . Hardy, Friedhelm E. (1987). "Kṛṣṇaism" .

The Encyclopedia of Religion . Vol. 8. New York: MacMillan. pp. 387– 392. ISBN 978-0-02897-135-3 – via Encyclopedia.com . Hawley, John Stratton (2020). Krishna's Playground: Vrindavan in the 21st Century . New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0190123987 . Irwin, John (1974). "The Heliodorus Pillar at Besanagar". Purātattva . 8 . Archaeological Society of India (co-published Art and Archaeology Research Papers, USA): 166– 176. Khare, M. D. (1967). "Discovery of a Vishnu temple near the Heliodorus pillar, Besnagar, Dist. Vidisha (MP)". Lalit Kala . 13 : 21– 27. JSTOR 44138838 . Klostermaier, Klaus K. (2007). A Survey of Hinduism (3rd ed.). Albany (N.Y.): State University of New York Press . ISBN 978-0-7914-7081-7 . Knott, Kim (2000). Hinduism: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-285387-5 . Kumar Das, Sisir (2006). A history of Indian literature, 500–1399 . Sahitya Akademi. ISBN 978-81-260-2171-0 . Mani, Vettam (1975). Puranic encyclopaedia : a comprehensive dictionary with special reference to the epic and Puranic literature . Delhi : Motilal Banarsidass. ISBN 978-0-8426-0822-0 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) Marijke J. Klokke (2000). Narrative Sculpture and Literary Traditions in South and Southeast Asia . Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-11865-2 . Matchett, Freda (2001). Kṛṣṇa, Lord or Avatāra? . Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7007-1281-6 . Melton, J. Gordon (13 September 2011). Religious Celebrations: An Encyclopedia of Holidays, Festivals, Solemn Observances, and Spiritual Commemorations . ABC-CLIO . ISBN 978-1-59884-205-0 . Miśra, Narayan (2005). Durga Nandan Mishra (ed.). Annals and Antiquities of the Temple of Jagannātha . New Delhi: Sarup & Sons. ISBN 81-7625-747-8 . Preciado-Solís, Benjamín (1984).

The Kṛṣṇa Cycle in the Purāṇas: Themes and Motifs in a Heroic Saga . Motilal Banarsidass. ISBN 978-0-89581-226-1 . Ramnarace, Vijay (2014). Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa's Vedāntic Debut: Chronology & Rationalisation in the Nimbārka Sampradāya (PDF) (PhD thesis). University of Edinburgh. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Raychaudhuri, Hemchandra (1972). Political History of Ancient India . Calcutta: University of Calcutta. Originally published in 1923 Rocher, Ludo (1986).

The Puranas . Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. ISBN 978-3-447-02522-5 . Rosen, Steven (2006). Essential Hinduism . New York: Praeger. ISBN 978-0-275-99006-0 . Schomer, Karine; McLeod, W. H., eds. (1987).

The Sants: Studies in a Devotional Tradition of India . Motilal Banarsidass. ISBN 978-8120802773 . Shah, Natubhai (2004) . Jainism: The World of Conquerors . Vol. I. Motilal Banarsidass . ISBN 978-81-208-1938-2 . Sheridan, Daniel (1986).

The Advaitic Theism of the Bhāgavata Purāṇa . Columbia, Mo: South Asia Books. ISBN 978-81-208-0179-0 . Singh, Upinder (2016). A History of Ancient and Early Medieval India: From the Stone Age to the 12th Century . Pearson Education . ISBN 978-93-325-6996-6 . Starza, O. M. (1993).

The Jagannatha Temple at Puri: Its Architecture, Art and Cult . Studies in South Asian culture, 15. Leiden; New York; Köln: Brill. ISBN 90-04-09673-6 . Susan V Mishra; Himanshu P Ray (2017).

The Archaeology of Sacred Spaces . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-138-67920-7 .

The Jataka or Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, (1895) The Mahabharata of Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa, translated by Kisari Mohan Ganguli , published between 1883 and 1896 The Vishnu-Purana , translated by H. H. Wilson, (1840) The Srimad Bhagavatam , translated by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada , (1988) copyright Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Toffin, Gérard (2012). "The Power of Boundaries: Transnational Links among Krishna Pranamis of India and Nepal" .