The term Latin America was first introduced in 1856 at a conference named Initiative of the Americas: Idea for a Federal Congress of the Republics ( Iniciativa de la América. Idea de un Congreso Federal de las Repúblicas ), at Paris. Chilean politician Francisco Bilbao coined the term to refer to countries sharing cultural and linguistic heritage. It gained further prominence during the 1860s under the rule of Napoleon III , whose government sought to justify France's intervention in the Second Mexican Empire . Etymology and definitions The first page of Nebrija's Gramática de la lengua castellana in 1492. Latin America is a geographical region where Spanish or Portuguese is the national language with a common culture, and tradition.

As a whole, it can be traced back to the 1830s, in the writing of the French Saint-Simonian Michel Chevalier , who postulated that a part of the Americas was inhabited by people of a " Latin race ", and that it could, therefore, ally itself with " Latin Europe ", ultimately overlapping the Latin Church , in a struggle with " Teutonic Europe " and " Anglo-Saxon America " with its Anglo-Saxonism , as well as " Slavic Europe " with its Pan-Slavism . Published in 1492 , Gramática de la lengua castellana ( lit. ' Grammar of the Castilian Language ' ) written by Antonio de Nebrija was the first work dedicated to the Spanish language and its rules, and it was the first grammar of a modern European language to be published. Uruguayan historian Arturo Ardao and Chilean historian Miguel Rojas Mix found evidence that the term "Latin America" was used earlier than John Leddy Phelan had claimed, and that the first use of the term was in opposition to imperialist projects in the Americas. Ardao wrote about this subject in his book Génesis de la idea y el nombre de América latina (Genesis of the Idea and the Name of Latin America, 1980), and Miguel Rojas Mix in his article " Bilbao y el hallazgo de América latina: Unión continental, socialista y libertaria " (Bilbao and the Finding of Latin America: a Continental, Socialist, and Libertarian Union, 1986). Michel Gobat notes that "Arturo Ardao, Miguel Rojas Mix, and Aims McGuinness have revealed the term 'Latin America' had already been used in 1856 by Central Americans and South Americans protesting US expansion into the Southern Hemisphere ". Edward Shawcross summarizes Ardao's and Rojas Mix's findings: "Ardao identified the term in a poem by a Colombian diplomat and intellectual resident in France, José María Torres Caicedo, published on 15 February 1857 in a French-based Spanish-language newspaper, while Rojas Mix located it in a speech delivered in France by the radical liberal Chilean politician Francisco Bilbao in June 1856".

By the late 1850s, the term was being used in California (by then a part of the United States), with local newspapers such as El Clamor Público writing about América latina and latinoamérica , and identifying as Latinos as the abbreviated term for their "hemispheric membership in la raza latina ".

The words "Latin" and "America" were first found to be combined in a printed work to produce the term "Latin America" in 1856 at a conference by the Chilean politician Francisco Bilbao in Paris.

The conference had the title "Initiative of the America.

The idea for a Federal Congress of Republics." The following year, Colombian writer José María Torres Caicedo also used the term in his poem "The Two Americas". Both authors advocated for the political and economic union of all Latin American countries, arguing that regional unity was the only effective means of defending their territories against further foreign interventions by the United States. They also rejected European imperialism, warning that the resurgence of non-democratic governments in Europe posed an additional threat to the stability and autonomy of Latin American nations.

In criticizing European political developments, they employed the same term to characterize the deteriorating state of European governance at the time: "despotism".l c Several years later, during the French invasion of Mexico , Bilbao wrote another work, "Emancipation of the Spirit in the Americas", where he asked all Latin American countries to support the Mexican cause against France, and rejected French imperialism in Asia, Africa, Europe and the Americas. He asked Latin American intellectuals to search for their "intellectual emancipation" by abandoning all French ideas, claiming that France was: "Hypocrite, because she calls herself protector of the Latin race just to subject it to her exploitation regime; treacherous, because she speaks of freedom and nationality, when, unable to conquer freedom for herself, she enslaves others instead!" Therefore, as Michel Gobat puts it, the term Latin America itself had an "anti-imperial genesis," and their creators were far from supporting any form of imperialism in the region, or in any other place of the globe.

Following in the tradition of Chilean writer Francisco Bilbao, who excluded Brazil, Argentina and Paraguay from his early conceptualization of Latin America, Chilean historian Jaime Eyzaguirre has criticized the term Latin America for "disguising" and "diluting" the Spanish character of a region (i.e. Hispanic America ) with the inclusion of nations that, according to him, do not share the same pattern of conquest and colonization . Historian Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo remarked, "the idea of 'Latin America' ought to have vanished with the obsolescence of racial theory." Modern definitions Areas of the world with a Catholic Christian majority. Latin America, like Latin Europe , is linked to the Latin Church .

The most common definition of Latin America is the countries and territories in the Americas where the populations speak Spanish or Portuguese and the dominant religion is Roman Catholic , with it being synonymous with Ibero-America ("Iberian America"). Puerto Rico, the Spanish-speaking Caribbean territory of the United States, acquired from the Spanish Empire following its defeat in the 1898 Spanish–American War , is usually included. This definition excludes the predominantly Protestant English-speaking and Dutch-speaking regions, as well as French-speaking predominantly Catholic regions. Belize, Guyana and Suriname, as well as several French overseas departments, are excluded from the definition.

By this definition, Latin America then comprises all of the countries in the Americas that were once part of the Spanish , Portuguese , and French Empires .

The term is sometimes used more broadly to refer to all of the Americas south of the United States, thus including the Guianas ( French Guiana , Guyana, and Suriname); the Anglophone Caribbean (and Belize); the Francophone Caribbean ; and the Dutch Caribbean . This definition emphasizes a similar socioeconomic history of the region, which was characterized by formal or informal colonialism , rather than cultural aspects (see, for example, dependency theory ). Some sources use the alternative phrase " Latin America and the Caribbean ", as in the United Nations geoscheme for the Americas . Quebec and Acadia , Francophone parts of North America, are generally excluded from the definition of Latin America. Subregions and countries The four common subregions in Latin America Latin America can be subdivided into several subregions based on geography, politics, democracy , demographics and culture.

The basic geographical subregions are North America, Central America, the Caribbean and South America; the latter contains further politico-geographical subdivisions such as the Southern Cone , the Guianas and the Andean civilizations . It may be subdivided on linguistic grounds into Spanish America and Portuguese America . Latin America Flag Country/Territory Capital(s) Name(s) in official language(s) Population The region came under control of the kingdoms of Spain and Portugal which established colonies, and imposed Roman Catholicism and their languages. These countries brought African slaves to their colonies as laborers, exploiting large, settled societies and their resources.

The Spanish Crown regulated immigration, allowing only Christians to travel to the New World.

The colonization process led to significant native population declines due to disease, forced labor, and violence. They imposed their culture, destroying native codices and artwork. Colonial-era religion played a crucial role in everyday life, with the Spanish Crown ensuring religious purity and aggressively prosecuting perceived deviations like witchcraft .

The decline of Spain was the gradual process of financial and military exhaustion and attrition suffered by Spanish Empire throughout the 17th century, in particular when viewed in comparison with ascendant rival powers of the Kingdom of France and Kingdom of England . Because Catholicism had played such an important role in the Reconquista (Catholic reconquest) of the Iberian Peninsula from the Muslims, the Catholic Church in essence became another arm of the Spanish government, since the crown was granted sweeping powers over ecclesiastical affairs in its overseas territories.

The Spanish Crown granted it a large role in the administration of the state, and this practice became even more pronounced in the New World, where prelates often assumed the role of government officials. Under Philip II of Spain , royal power over Latin America increased, but the crown knew little about its overseas possessions.

Although the Council of the Indies was tasked with oversight there, it acted without advice of high officials with direct colonial experience. Another serious problem was that the crown did not know what Spanish laws were in force there. Spanish Golden Age Main article: Spanish Golden Age The library of El Escorial The Spanish Golden Age was a period of intense artistic, literary, and intellectual flourishing in Spain is generally associated with the reigns of Isabella I , Ferdinand II , Charles V , Philip II , Philip III , and Philip IV , during which Spain became a leading political and military power.

The Spanish Golden Age is conventionally considered to have begun in 1492, and is often regarded as having ended in 1659 with the Treaty of the Pyrenees , which marked the decline of Spanish hegemony in Europe, although the period is commonly understood to have continued in cultural terms until 1681, the year of Pedro Calderón de la Barca 's death.

The era was characterized by extensive royal, aristocratic, and ecclesiastical patronage, which supported literature, painting, architecture, music, and theatre. Major artistic and cultural projects, including El Escorial , contributed to the formation of a distinctive Spanish court and religious culture.

The period encompassed the Plateresque and Renaissance styles and extended into the early Spanish Baroque . It produced many of the best-known figures in Spanish cultural history, including Miguel de Cervantes , Lope de Vega , Luis de Góngora , Francisco de Quevedo , Diego Velázquez , and composers such as Tomás Luis de Victoria and Francisco Guerrero . Independence movements In the early nineteenth century nearly all of areas of Spanish America attained independence by armed struggle, with the exceptions of Cuba and Puerto Rico. Brazil, which had become a monarchy separate from Portugal, became a republic in the late nineteenth century. Political independence from European monarchies did not result in the abolition of black slavery in the new nations, and it resulted in political and economic instability in Spanish America immediately after independence. Yet, as regional Caudillos started to rise in power, nation-builders started to view themselves as more modern than their former European colonizers. Leaders began to shift away from aristocracy toward republicanism and democracy, which allowed all citizens, not just the Creole elites, to have a voice in politics. This shift helped unify many of the Latin American nations as all people, even illiterate people, would gather in their communities to talk about political ideals and how they should be used in their nation. Great Britain and the United States exercised significant influence in the post-independence era, resulting in a form of neo-colonialism , where political sovereignty remained in place, but foreign powers exercised considerable power in the economic sphere. Newly independent nations faced domestic and interstate conflicts, struggling with economic instability and social inequality.

The 20th century brought U.S. intervention and the Cold War 's impact on the region, with revolutions in countries like Cuba influencing Latin American politics.

The late 20th and early 21st centuries saw shifts towards left-wing governments, followed by conservative resurgences, and a recent resurgence of left-wing politics in several countries.

After 2000 UNASUR summit in the Palacio de la Moneda, Santiago de Chile In many countries in the early 2000s, left-wing political parties rose to power, known as the Pink tide .

The presidencies of Hugo Chávez (1999–2013) in Venezuela, Ricardo Lagos and Michelle Bachelet in Chile, Lula da Silva and Dilma Rousseff of the Workers Party (PT) in Brazil, Néstor Kirchner and his wife Cristina Fernández in Argentina, Tabaré Vázquez and José Mujica in Uruguay, Evo Morales in Bolivia, Daniel Ortega in Nicaragua, Rafael Correa in Ecuador, Fernando Lugo in Paraguay, Manuel Zelaya in Honduras (removed from power by a coup d'état ), Mauricio Funes and Salvador Sánchez Cerén in El Salvador are all part of this wave of left-wing politicians who often declare themselves socialists , Latin Americanists , or anti-imperialists , often implying opposition to US policies towards the region . An aspect of this has been the creation of the eight-member ALBA alliance, or " The Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America " (Spanish: Alianza Bolivariana para los Pueblos de Nuestra América ) by some of these countries. Honduran demonstrator holding a banner with a "don't turn left" sign, 2009 Following the pink tide, there was a Conservative wave across Latin America.

In Mexico, the rightwing National Action Party (PAN) won the presidential election of 2000 with its candidate Vicente Fox , ending the 71-year rule of the Institutional Revolutionary Party . He was succeeded six years later by another conservative, Felipe Calderón (2006–2012), who attempted to crack down on the Mexican drug cartels and instigated the Mexican drug war . Several right-wing leaders rose to power, including Argentina's Mauricio Macri and Brazil's Michel Temer , following the impeachment of the country's first female president.

In Chile, the conservative Sebastián Piñera succeeded the socialist Michelle Bachelet in 2017.

In 2019, center-right Luis Lacalle Pou ended a 15-year leftist rule in Uruguay, after defeating the Broad Front candidate. Economically, the 2000s commodities boom caused positive effects for many Latin American economies. Another trend was the rapidly increasing importance of their relations with China . However, with the Great Recession beginning in 2008, there was an end to the commodity boom, resulting in economic stagnation or recession in some countries. A number of left-wing governments of the Pink tide lost support.

The worst-hit was Venezuela, which is facing severe social and economic upheaval . Charges against a major Brazilian conglomerate, Odebrecht , have raised allegations of corruption across the region's governments (see Operation Car Wash ). This bribery ring has become the largest corruption scandal in Latin American history.

As of July 2017, the highest ranking politicians charged were former Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva , who was arrested, and former Peruvian presidents Ollanta Humala and Alejandro Toledo , who fled to the United States and was extradited back to Peru.

The COVID-19 pandemic proved a political challenge for many unstable Latin American democracies, with scholars identifying a decline in civil liberties as a result of opportunistic emergency powers. This was especially true for countries with strong presidential regimes, such as Brazil. Geography Neotropical realm Main article: Neotropical realm The Neotropical realm (in purple) Most of Latin America is part of the Neotropical realm , one of the eight biogeographic realms of Earth's land surface.

The Neotropic is delimited by similarities in fauna or flora , which are distinct from the Nearctic realm , which includes most of North America.

The Neotropic includes more tropical rainforest ( tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests ) than any other realm. It extends from southern Mexico through Central America and northern South America to southern Brazil , including the vast Amazon rainforest . These rainforest ecoregions are one of the most important reserves of biodiversity on Earth. Climate Main article: Geography of South America South America Köppen climate map As part of the Hadley model of atmospheric circulation, the equator is characterised by the ascending branches of separate meridional cells, driven by intense insolation .

The vertical convection draws in air from the surrounding atmosphere, known as the trade winds .

As these inward flows of air converge they reduce horizontal wind speed, and as they rise, they form precipitation .

The vertical convection also results in a net export of heat and freshwater from the lower atmosphere into the troposphere .

The Great American Interchange was an important late Cenozoic paleozoogeographic biotic interchange event in which land and freshwater fauna migrated from North America to South America via Central America and vice versa, as the volcanic Isthmus of Panama rose up from the sea floor, forming a land bridge between the previously separated continents.

In the twenty-first century, there is a growing movement to protect nature, and many governments have sought recognition of natural sites by the UNESCO World Heritage Sites . Brazil, Mexico, and Peru currently have the greatest number of natural sites. Sumidero Canyon , located in Chiapas , Mexico. Glaucous macaw (behind hyacinth macaw ) and other macaws. Macaws are long-tailed, often colorful New World parrots . Environmental indicators for Latin American countries Country Environmental performance (2012) EPI CO2 emissions (2009) (tons of CO2 per capita) Argentina 56.48 4.14 Bolivia 54.57 1.31 Brazil 60.90 1.74 Chile 55.34 3.84 Colombia 62.33 1.33 Costa Rica 69.03 1.37 Cuba 56.48 2.40 Dominican Republic 52.44 1.79 Ecuador 60.55 2.09 El Salvador 52.08 1.10 Guatemala 51.88 1.03 Honduras 52.54 0.96 Mexico 49.11 3.72 Nicaragua 59.23 0.73 Panama 57.94 2.10 Paraguay 52.40 0.64 Peru 50.29 1.32 Uruguay 57.06 2.31 Venezuela 55.62 5.45 Economy Main article: Latin American economy Economic history Main article: Economic history of Latin America The former Casa Lonja (right), built by Philip II and today the General Archive of the Indies , next to the Cathedral of Seville Potosi produced massive amounts of silver from a single site in upper Peru.

The first image published in Europe. Pedro Cieza de León , 1553.

Before independence from Spain, international trade was regulated by the royal Casa de Contratación (House of Trade) based in Seville . Inter-regional trade was severely limited with merchants based in Spain and with overseas connections in the main colonial centers controlling the transatlantic trade. Economic thought between 1500 and 1700 was predominantly mercantilist , such as the School of Salamanca . This reflected early modern Europe before the Industrial Revolution but after the Renaissance . British traders began making inroads into the theoretically closed Spanish system in the eighteenth century, and the Spanish crown instituted a series of changes in policy in the eighteenth century, known as the Bourbon Reforms , designed to bring the Spanish America under closer crown control. However, one innovation was comercio libre ("free commerce"), which was not free trade as generally understood, but allowed all Spanish and Spanish American ports to be accessible to each other, excluding foreign traders, in a move to stimulate economic activity yet maintain crown control.

At independence in the early nineteenth century, Spanish America and Brazil had no foreign investment or direct, legal contact with economic partners beyond those allowed within controlled trade. Unlike the later East India Companies , which were chartered companies established by the Dutch , English , and others, the Casa collected all colonial taxes and duties, approved all voyages of exploration and trade, maintained secret information on trade routes and new discoveries, licensed captains, and administered commercial law .

In the period before the 18th century, Latin America's economy was larger than that of British America , and had a similar level of development.

The English and French colonies in North America had a temperate climate and no major indigenous populations whose labor could be exploited. France was developing Colbertism in the 17th century, during the reign of Louis XIV , which would later evolve into Dirigisme .

The Southern United States used plantation agriculture and had large black slave populations, sharing more characteristics with Brazil and the Caribbean than the northern English colonies.

The main difference with Latin America is that the southern English colonies are predominantly Protestant to this day, forming a " Bible Belt ," rather than Catholic.

The northern English colonies were characterized by the family farm, with a homogeneous European-descent population and a much less sharp divide between rich and poor. Unlike Spanish America and Brazil which restricted immigration, the northern English colonies were a magnet for migration, encouraged by the British crown. Size Population and economy size for Latin American countries Country Population (2021, millions) GDP (nominal) (2019, millions US$) GDP (PPP) (2019, millions US$) Argentina 45.3 445,469 903,542 Bolivia 12.1 42,401 94,392 Brazil 214.3 1,847,020 3,456,357 Chile 19.5 294,237 502,846 Colombia 51.5 327,895 783,002 Costa Rica 5.2 61,021 91,611 Cuba 11.3 — The four countries with the strongest agricultural sector in South America are Brazil, Argentina, Chile and Colombia. Currently: Brazil is the world's largest producer of sugarcane, soy, coffee, oranges, guaraná , açaí and Brazil nut ; is one of the top five producers of maize, papaya , tobacco, pineapple , banana, cotton, beans , coconut , watermelon , lemon and yerba mate ; is one of the top ten world producers of cocoa , cashew , avocado , tangerine , persimmon , mango , guava , rice, oat , sorghum and tomato; and is one of the top 15 world producers of grapes, apples, melons, peanuts, figs , peaches , onions, palm oil and natural rubber . Argentina is the world's largest producer of yerba mate ; is one of the five largest producers in the world of soy, maize, sunflower seeds , lemons and pears, one of the 10 largest producers in the world of barley , grapes, artichokes , tobacco and cotton, and one of the 15 largest producers in the world of wheat, oats , chickpeas , sugarcane, sorghum and grapefruit . Chile is one of the five largest world producers of cherries and cranberries , and one of the ten largest world producers of grapes, apples, kiwi , peaches, plums and hazelnuts , focusing on exporting high-value fruits. Colombia is one of the five largest producers in the world of coffee, avocados and palm oil, and one of the ten largest producers in the world of sugarcane, bananas, pineapples and cocoa . It is the main producer of Coca , an illegal plant that is the main ingredient in Cocaine Peru is the world's largest producer of quinoa ; is one of the five largest producers of avocados, blueberry , artichokes and asparagus ; one of the ten largest producers in the world of coffee and cocoa ; one of the 15 largest producers in the world of potatoes and pineapples, and also has a large production of grapes, sugarcane, rice, bananas, maize and cassava ; its agriculture is considerably diversified. Paraguay is currently the 6th largest producer of soy in the world and entering the list of the 20 largest producers of maize and sugarcane.

In Central America, the following stand out: Guatemala is one of the ten largest producers in the world of coffee, sugar cane, melons and natural rubber , and one of the world's 15 largest producers of bananas and palm oil . Honduras is one of the five largest producers of coffee in the world, and one of the ten largest producers of palm oil . Costa Rica is the world's largest producer of pineapples. Dominican Republic is one of the world's top five producers of papayas and avocados, and one of the ten largest producers of cocoa . Mexico is the world's largest producer of avocados, one of the world's top five producers of Chile , lemons, oranges, mangos, papayas, strawberries , grapefruit, pumpkins and asparagus, and one of the world's 10 largest producers of sugar cane, maize, sorghum , beans , tomatoes, coconuts , pineapple, melons and blueberries. Truck of a meat company in Brazil. Latin America produces 25% of the world's beef and chicken meat. Brazil is the world's largest exporter of chicken meat : 3.77 million tons in 2019.

The country had the second largest herd of cattle in the world, 22.2% of the world herd.

The country was the second largest producer of beef in 2019, responsible for 15.4% of global production. It was also the third largest world producer of milk in 2018. This year , the country produced 35.1 billion liters.

In 2019, Brazil was the fourth largest pork producer in the world, with almost four million tons.

In 2018, Argentina was the fourth largest producer of beef in the world, with a production of 3 million tons (behind only United States, Brazil and China). Uruguay is also a major meat producer.

In 2018, it produced 589 thousand tons of beef.

In the production of chicken meat , Mexico is among the ten largest producers in the world, Argentina among the 15 largest and Peru and Colombia among the 20 largest.

In beef production, Mexico is one of the ten largest producers in the world and Colombia is one of the 20 largest producers.

In the production of pork, Mexico is among the 15 largest producers in the world.

In the production of honey , Argentina is among the five largest producers in the world, Mexico among the ten largest and Brazil among the 15 largest.

In terms of cow's milk production, Mexico is among the 15 largest producers in the world and Argentina among the 20 largest. Mining and petroleum Cerro Rico , Potosi , Bolivia, still a major mine Mining is one of the most important economic sectors in Latin America, especially for Chile , Peru and Bolivia , whose economies are highly dependent on this sector.

The continent has large productions of: Gold (mainly in Peru , Mexico, Brazil and Argentina); Silver (mainly in Mexico, Peru, Chile, Bolivia and Argentina); Copper (mainly in Chile , Peru , Mexico and Brazil); Iron ore (Brazil, Peru and Chile ); Zinc (Peru, Mexico, Bolivia and Brazil); Molybdenum (Chile, Peru and Mexico); Lithium ( Chile , Argentina and Brazil); Lead (Peru, Mexico and Bolivia); Bauxite (Brazil and Jamaica); Tin (Peru, Bolivia and Brazil); Manganese (Brazil and Mexico); Antimony (Bolivia, Mexico, Guatemala and Ecuador); Nickel (Brazil, Dominican Republic and Cuba); Niobium (Brazil); Rhenium (Chile); Iodine ( Chile ), Brazil stands out in the extraction of Iron ore (where it is the 2nd largest producer and exporter in the world—iron ore is usually one of the three export products that generate the greatest value in the country's trade balance ) Copper Gold Bauxite (one of the five largest producers in the world) Manganese (one of the five largest producers in the world) Tin (one of the largest producers in the world) Niobium (98% of known world reserves) and Nickel In terms of gemstones, Brazil is the world's largest producer of amethysts , topaz , and agates and one of the main producers of tourmaline , emeralds, aquamarines , garnets and opals . Chile contributes about a third of the world's copper production.

In addition, Chile was, in 2019, the world's largest producer of iodine and rhenium , the second largest producer of lithium and molybdenum , the sixth largest producer of silver, the seventh largest producer of salt, the eighth largest producer of potash , the thirteenth-largest producer of sulfur and the thirteenth largest producer of iron ore in the world.

In 2019, Peru was the second largest world producer of copper and silver, 8th largest world producer of gold, third largest world producer of lead, second largest world producer of zinc , fourth largest world producer of tin , fifth largest world producer of boron , and fourth largest world producer of molybdenum.

In 2019, Bolivia was the eighth largest world producer of silver; fourth largest world producer of boron; fifth largest world producer of antimony ; fifth largest world producer of tin ; sixth largest world producer of tungsten ; seventh largest producer of zinc , and the eighth largest producer of lead.

In 2019, Mexico was the world's largest producer of silver (representing almost 23% of world production, producing more than 200 million ounces in 2019); ninth largest producer of gold, the eighth largest producer of copper, the world's fifth largest producer of lead, the world's sixth largest producer of zinc, the world's fifth largest producer of molybdenum, the world's third largest producer of mercury , the world's fifth largest producer of bismuth , the world's 13th largest producer of manganese and the 23rd largest world producer of phosphate . It is also the eighth largest world producer of salt .

In 2019, Argentina was the fourth largest world producer of lithium, the ninth largest world producer of silver, the 17th largest world producer of gold and the seventh largest world producer of boron. Colombia is the world's largest producer of emeralds .

In the production of gold, between 2006 and 2017, the country produced 15 tons per year until 2007, when its production increased significantly, breaking a record of 66.1 tons extracted in 2012.

The country is among the 25 largest gold producers in the world.

In the production of silver, in 2017 the country extracted 15,5 tons.

In oil production, Brazil was the tenth largest oil producer in the world in 2019, with 2.8 million barrels a day. Mexico was the twelfth largest, with 2.1 million barrels a day, Colombia in 20th place with 886 thousand barrels a day, Venezuela was the twenty-first place, with 877 thousand barrels a day, Ecuador in 28th with 531 thousand barrels a day and Argentina. 29th with 507 thousand barrels a day.

Since Venezuela and Ecuador consume little oil and export most of their production, they are part of OPEC . Venezuela had a big drop in production after 2015 (when it produced 2.5 million barrels a day), falling in 2016 to 2.2 million, in 2017 to 2 million, in 2018 to 1.4 million and in 2019 to 877 thousand, due to lack of investment.

In natural gas production, in 2018, Argentina produced 1,524 bcf (billions of cubic feet), Mexico produced 999, Venezuela 946, Brazil 877, Bolivia 617, Peru 451, Colombia 379.

In coal production, the continent had three of the 30 largest world producers in 2018: Colombia (12th), Mexico (24th) and Brazil (27th). Manufacturing Braskem , the largest Brazilian chemical industry EMS , the largest Brazilian pharmaceutical industry Steel production in San Nicolás , Argentina.

The World Bank annually lists the top manufacturing countries by total manufacturing value. According to the 2019 list: Mexico had the twelfth most valuable industry in the world (US$217.8 billion) Brazil the thirteenth largest (US$173.6 billion) Venezuela the thirtieth largest (US$58.2 billion, however, it depends on oil to reach this value) Argentina the 31st largest (US$57.7 billion) Colombia the 46th largest (US$35.4 billion) Peru the 50th largest (US$28.7 billion) Chile the 51st largest (US$28.3 billion).

In Latin America, few countries stand out in industrial activity: Brazil, Argentina, Mexico and, less prominently, Chile. Begun late, the industrialization of these countries received a great boost from World War II: this prevented the countries at war from buying the products they were used to importing and exporting what they produced.

At that time, benefiting from the abundant local raw material, the low wages paid to the labor force and a certain specialization brought by immigrants, countries such as Brazil, Mexico and Argentina, as well as Venezuela, Chile, Colombia and Peru, were able to implement important industrial parks.

In general, in these countries there are industries that require little capital and simple technology for their installation, such as the food processing and textile industries.

The basic industries (steel, etc.) also stand out, as well as the metallurgical and mechanical industries.

The industrial parks of Brazil, Mexico, Argentina and Chile, however, present much greater diversity and sophistication, producing advanced technology items.

In the rest of Latin American countries, mainly in Central America, the processing industries of primary products for export predominate.

In the food industry , in 2019, Brazil was the second largest exporter of processed foods in the world.

In 2016, the country was the second largest producer of pulp in the world and the eighth largest producer of paper.

In the footwear industry , in 2019, Brazil ranked fourth among world producers.

In 2019, the country was the eighth largest producer of vehicles and the ninth largest producer of steel in the world.

In 2018, the chemical industry of Brazil was the eighth largest in the world.

In the textile industry , Brazil, although it was among the five largest world producers in 2013, is very little integrated into world trade.

In the aviation sector, Brazil has Embraer , the third largest aircraft manufacturer in the world, behind Boeing and Airbus . Infrastructure Panama Canal expansion project ; New Agua Clara locks (Atlantic side) General Rafael Urdaneta Bridge Transport in Latin America is carried out primarily by road, the most developed mode in the region. There is also considerable port and airport infrastructure.

The railway and fluvial sector, although it has potential, is usually treated in a secondary way. Brazil has more than 1,700,000 km (1,100,000 mi) of roads , of which 215,000 km (134,000 mi) are paved, and about 14,000 km (8,700 mi) are divided highways .

The two most important highways in the country are BR-101 and BR-116 . Argentina has more than 600,000 km (370,000 mi) of roads, of which about 70,000 km (43,000 mi) are paved, and about 2,500 km (1,600 mi) are divided highways.

The three most important highways in the country are Route 9 , Route 7 and Route 14 . Colombia has about 210,000 km (130,000 mi) of roads, and about 2,300 km (1,400 mi) are divided highways. Chile has about 82,000 km (51,000 mi) of roads, 20,000 km (12,000 mi) of which are paved, and about 2,000 km (1,200 mi) are divided highways.

The most important highway in the country is the Route 5 ( Pan-American Highway ) These 4 countries have the most developed road infrastructure and the largest number of double-lane highways in South America.

The roadway network in Mexico has an extent of 366,095 km (227,481 mi), of which 116,802 km (72,577 mi) are paved, Of these, 10,474 km (6,508 mi) are multi-lane expressways : 9,544 km (5,930 mi) are four-lane highways and the rest have 6 or more lanes. Due to the Andes Mountains , Amazon River and Amazon Forest , there have always been difficulties in implementing transcontinental or bioceanic highways. Practically the only route that existed was the one that connected Brazil to Buenos Aires, in Argentina and later to Santiago, in Chile. However, in recent years, with the combined effort of countries, new routes have started to emerge, such as Brazil-Peru ( Interoceanic Highway ), and a new highway between Brazil, Paraguay, northern Argentina and northern Chile ( Bioceanic Corridor ). Port of Itajaí, Santa Catarina, Brazil There are more than 2,000 airports in Brazil.

The country has the second largest number of airports in the world, behind only the United States. São Paulo International Airport , located in the Metropolitan Region of São Paulo, is the largest and busiest in the country – the airport connects São Paulo to practically all major cities around the world. Brazil has 44 international airports, such as those in Rio de Janeiro , Brasília , Belo Horizonte , Porto Alegre , Florianópolis , Cuiabá , Salvador , Recife , Fortaleza , Belém and Manaus , among others. Argentina has important international airports such as Buenos Aires , Cordoba , Bariloche , Mendoza , Salta , Puerto Iguazú , Neuquén and Ushuaia , among others. Chile has important international airports such as Santiago , Antofagasta , Puerto Montt , Punta Arenas and Iquique , among others. Colombia has important international airports such as Bogotá , Medellín , Cartagena , Cali and Barranquilla , among others. Peru has important international airports such as Lima , Cuzco and Arequipa . Other important airports are those in the capitals of Uruguay ( Montevideo ), Paraguay ( Asunción ), Bolivia ( La Paz ) and Ecuador ( Quito ).

The 10 busiest airports in South America in 2017 were: São Paulo-Guarulhos (Brazil), Bogotá (Colombia), São Paulo-Congonhas (Brazil), Santiago (Chile), Lima (Peru), Brasília (Brazil), Rio de Janeiro (Brazil), Buenos Aires-Aeroparque (Argentina), Buenos Aires-Ezeiza (Argentina), and Minas Gerais (Brazil). There are 1,580 airports in Mexico, the fourth-largest number of airports by country in the world.

The seven largest airports—which absorb 90% of air travel—are (in order of air traffic): Mexico City , Cancún , Guadalajara , Monterrey , Tijuana , Acapulco , and Puerto Vallarta . Considering all of Latin America, the 10 busiest airports in 2024 were: Bogotá (Colombia), Mexico City (Mexico), São Paulo-Guarulhos (Brazil), Cancún (Mexico), Santiago (Chile), Lima (Peru), São Paulo-Congonhas (Brazil), Tocumen (Panama), Guadalajara (Mexico) and Brasilia (Brazil). Brazil has some of the busiest ports in South America, such as Port of Santos , Port of Rio de Janeiro , Port of Paranaguá , Port of Itajaí , Port of Rio Grande , Port of São Francisco do Sul and Suape Port . Argentina has ports such as Port of Buenos Aires and Port of Rosario . Chile has important ports in Valparaíso , Caldera , Mejillones , Antofagasta , Iquique , Arica and Puerto Montt . Colombia has important ports such as Buenaventura , Cartagena Container Terminal and Puerto Bolivar . Peru has important ports in Callao , Ilo and Matarani .

The 15 busiest ports in South America are: Port of Santos (Brazil), Port of Bahia de Cartagena (Colombia), Callao (Peru), Guayaquil (Ecuador), Buenos Aires (Argentina), San Antonio (Chile), Buenaventura (Colombia), Itajaí (Brazil), Valparaíso (Chile), Montevideo (Uruguay), Paranaguá (Brazil), Rio Grande (Brazil), São Francisco do Sul (Brazil), Manaus (Brazil) and Coronel (Chile).

The four major seaports concentrating around 60% of the merchandise traffic in Mexico are Altamira and Veracruz in the Gulf of Mexico , and Manzanillo and Lázaro Cárdenas in the Pacific Ocean. Considering all of Latin America, the 10 largest ports in terms of movement are: Colon (Panama), Santos (Brazil), Manzanillo (Mexico), Bahia de Cartagena (Colombia), Pacifico (Panama), Callao (Peru), Guayaquil (Ecuador), Buenos Aires (Argentina), San Antonio (Chile) and Buenaventura (Colombia).

The Brazilian railway network has an extension of about 30,000 kilometers. It is basically used for transporting ores.

The Argentine rail network , with 47,000 km of tracks, was one of the largest in the world and continues to be the most extensive in Latin America. It came to have about 100,000 km of rails, but the lifting of tracks and the emphasis placed on motor transport gradually reduced it. It has four different trails and international connections with Paraguay, Bolivia, Chile, Brazil and Uruguay. Chile has almost 7,000 km of railways, with connections to Argentina, Bolivia and Peru. Colombia has only about 3,500 km of railways. Among the main Brazilian waterways , two stand out: Hidrovia Tietê-Paraná (which has a length of 2,400 km, 1,600 on the Paraná River and 800 km on the Tietê River, draining agricultural production from the states of Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, Goiás and part of Rondônia, Tocantins and Minas General) and Hidrovia do Solimões-Amazonas (it has two sections: Solimões, which extends from Tabatinga to Manaus, with approximately 1600 km, and Amazonas, which extends from Manaus to Belém, with 1650 km. Almost entirely passenger transport from the Amazon plain is done by this waterway, in addition to practically all cargo transportation that is directed to the major regional centers of Belém and Manaus).

In Brazil, this transport is still underutilized: the most important waterway stretches, from an economic point of view, are found in the Southeast and South of the country. Its full use still depends on the construction of locks, major dredging works and, mainly, of ports that allow intermodal integration.

In Argentina, the waterway network is made up of the La Plata, Paraná, Paraguay and Uruguay rivers.

The main river ports are Zárate and Campana .

The port of Buenos Aires is historically the first in individual importance, but the area known as Up-River, which stretches along 67 km of the Santa Fé portion of the Paraná River, brings together 17 ports that concentrate 50% of the total exports of the country. Energy As of 2023, Latin America and the Caribbean generates 60% of its electricity from renewable energy – double the global average of 30%. Despite this, fossil fuels still play a substantial role, especially in transportation and industry, with oil and gas constituting a notable portion. Approximately two-thirds of the region's energy mix comes from fossil fuels, Of the region's total energy production, 43% is hydroelectric , 8% wind and 6% is solar . Brazil Main articles: Energy policy of Brazil and Renewable energy in Brazil Itaipu Dam in Paraná Wind power in Parnaíba Angra Nuclear Power Plant in Angra dos Reis , Rio de Janeiro Pirapora Solar Complex , the largest in Brazil and Latin America with a capacity of 321 MW The Brazilian government has undertaken an ambitious program to reduce dependence on imported petroleum. Imports previously accounted for more than 70% of the country's oil needs but Brazil became self-sufficient in oil in 2006–2007. Brazil was the 10th largest oil producer in the world in 2019, with 2.8 million barrels / day. Production manages to supply the country's demand.

In the beginning of 2020, in the production of oil and natural gas, the country exceeded 4 million barrels of oil equivalent per day, for the first time.

In January this year, 3.168 million barrels of oil per day and 138.753 million cubic meters of natural gas were extracted. Brazil is one of the main world producers of hydroelectric power .

In 2019, Brazil had 217 hydroelectric plants in operation, with an installed capacity of 98,581 MW, 60.16% of the country's energy generation.

In the total generation of electricity, in 2019 Brazil reached 170,000 megawatts of installed capacity, more than 75% from renewable sources (the majority, hydroelectric).

In 2013, the Southeast Region used about 50% of the load of the National Integrated System (SIN), being the main energy consuming region in the country.

The region's installed electricity generation capacity totaled almost 42,500 MW, which represented about a third of Brazil's generation capacity.

The hydroelectric generation represented 58% of the region's installed capacity, with the remaining 42% corresponding basically to the thermoelectric generation. São Paulo accounted for 40% of this capacity; Minas Gerais by about 25%; Rio de Janeiro by 13.3%; and Espírito Santo accounted for the rest.

The South Region owns the Itaipu Dam , which was the largest hydroelectric plant in the world for several years, until the inauguration of Three Gorges Dam in China. It remains the second largest operating hydroelectric in the world. Brazil is the co-owner of the Itaipu Plant with Paraguay: the dam is located on the Paraná River , located on the border between countries. It has an installed generation capacity of 14 GW for 20 generating units of 700 MW each. North Region has large hydroelectric plants, such as Belo Monte Dam and Tucuruí Dam , which produce much of the national energy. Brazil's hydroelectric potential has not yet been fully exploited, so the country still has the capacity to build several renewable energy plants in its territory.

As of July 2022, according to ONS, total installed capacity of wind power was 22 GW, with average capacity factor of 58%.

While the world average wind production capacity factors is 24.7%, there are areas in Northern Brazil, specially in Bahia State, where some wind farms record with average capacity factors over 60%; the average capacity factor in the Northeast Region is 45% in the coast and 49% in the interior.

In 2019, wind energy represented 9% of the energy generated in the country.

In 2019, it was estimated that the country had an estimated wind power generation potential of around 522 GW (this, only onshore), enough energy to meet three times the country's current demand.

In 2021 Brazil was the 7th country in the world in terms of installed wind power (21 GW), and the 4th largest producer of wind energy in the world (72 TWh), behind only China, USA and Germany. Nuclear energy accounts for about 4% of Brazil's electricity.

The nuclear power generation monopoly is owned by Eletronuclear (Eletrobrás Eletronuclear S/A) , a wholly owned subsidiary of Eletrobrás . Nuclear energy is produced by two reactors at Angra . It is located at the Central Nuclear Almirante Álvaro Alberto (CNAAA) on the Praia de Itaorna in Angra dos Reis , Rio de Janeiro. It consists of two pressurized water reactors , Angra I, with capacity of 657 MW, connected to the power grid in 1982, and Angra II, with capacity of 1,350 MW, connected in 2000. A third reactor, Angra III, with a projected output of 1,350 MW, is planned to be finished.

As of October 2022, according to ONS, total installed capacity of photovoltaic solar was 21 GW, with average capacity factor of 23%. Some of the most irradiated Brazilian States are MG ("Minas Gerais"), BA ("Bahia") and GO ("Goiás"), which have indeed world irradiation level records.

In 2019, solar power represented 1.27% of the energy generated in the country.

In 2021, Brazil was the 14th country in the world in terms of installed solar power (13 GW), and the 11th largest producer of solar energy in the world (16.8 TWh).

In 2020, Brazil was the 2nd largest country in the world in the production of energy through biomass (energy production from solid biofuels and renewable waste), with 15,2 GW installed. Other countries After Brazil, Mexico is the country in Latin America that most stands out in energy production.

In 2020, the country was the 14th largest petroleum producer in the world, and in 2018 it was the 12th largest exporter.

In natural gas, the country was, in 2015, the 21st largest producer in the world, and in 2007 it was the 29th largest exporter. Mexico was also the world's 24th largest producer of coal in 2018.

In renewable energies, in 2020, the country ranked 14th in the world in terms of installed wind energy (8.1 GW), 20th in the world in terms of installed solar energy (5.6 GW) and 19th in the world in terms of installed hydroelectric power (12.6 GW).

In third place, Colombia stands out: In 2020, the country was the 20th largest petroleum producer in the world, and in 2015 it was the 19th largest exporter.

In natural gas, the country was, in 2015, the 40th largest producer in the world. Colombia's biggest highlight is in coal, where the country was, in 2018, the world's 12th largest producer and the 5th largest exporter.

In renewable energies, in 2020, the country ranked 45th in the world in terms of installed wind energy (0.5 GW), 76th in the world in terms of installed solar energy (0.1 GW) and 20th in the world in terms of installed hydroelectric power (12.6 GW). Venezuela, which was one of the world's largest oil producers (about 2.5 million barrels/day in 2015) and one of the largest exporters, due to its political problems, has had its production drastically reduced in recent years: in 2016, it dropped to 2.2 million, in 2017 to 2 million, in 2018 to 1.4 million and in 2019 to 877 thousand, reaching only 300,000 barrels/day at a given point.

The country also stands out in hydroelectricity, where it was the 14th country in the world in terms of installed capacity in 2020 (16,5 GW). YPF headquarters in Buenos Aires, Argentina. Argentina was, in 2017, the 18th largest producer in the world, and the largest producer in Latin America, of natural gas, in addition to being the 28th largest oil producer; although the country has the Vaca Muerta field, which holds close to 16 billion barrels of technically recoverable shale oil, and is the second largest shale natural gas deposit in the world, the country lacks the capacity to exploit the deposit: it is necessary capital, technology and knowledge that can only come from offshore energy companies, who view Argentina and its erratic economic policies with considerable suspicion, not wanting to invest in the country.

In renewable energies, in 2020, the country ranked 27th in the world in terms of installed wind energy (2.6 GW), 42nd in the world in terms of installed solar energy (0.7 GW) and 21st in the world in terms of installed hydroelectric power (11.3 GW).

The country has great future potential for the production of wind energy in the Patagonia region. Chile, although currently not a major energy producer, has great future potential for solar energy production in the Atacama Desert region. Paraguay stands out today in hydroelectric production thanks to the Itaipu Power Plant. Trinidad and Tobago and Bolivia stand out in the production of natural gas, where they were, respectively, the 20th and 31st largest in the world in 2015. Ecuador, because it consumes little energy, is part of OPEC and was the 27th largest oil producer in the world in 2020, being the 22nd largest exporter in 2014. Tourism Aerial view of Cancún . Mexico is the most visited country in Latin America and 6th in the world. Income from tourism is key to the economy of several Latin American countries. Mexico is the only Latin American country to be ranked in the top 10 worldwide in the number of tourist visits. It received by far the largest number of international tourists, with 39.3 million visitors in 2017, followed by Argentina, with 6.7 million; then Brazil, with 6.6 million; Chile, with 6.5 million; Dominican Republic, with 6.2 million; Cuba with 4.3 million; Peru and Colombia with 4.0 million.

The World Tourism Organization reports the following destinations as the top six tourism earners for the year 2017: Mexico, with US$21,333 million; the Dominican Republic, with US$7,178 million; Brazil, with US$6,024 million; Colombia, with US$4,773 million; Argentina, with US$4,687 million; and Panama, with US$4,258 million. Monte Fitz Roy , Argentine Patagonia Places such as Cancún , Riviera Maya , Chichen Itza , Cabo San Lucas , Mexico City, Acapulco , Puerto Vallarta , Guanajuato City , San Miguel de Allende , Guadalajara in Mexico, Punta Cana , Santo Domingo in Dominican Republic, Punta del Este in Uruguay, San Juan , Ponce in Puerto Rico, Panama City in Panama, Poás Volcano National Park in Costa Rica, Viña del Mar in Chile, Rio de Janeiro , Florianópolis , Iguazu Falls , São Paulo, Armação dos Búzios , Salvador , Bombinhas , Angra dos Reis , Balneário Camboriú , Paraty , Ipojuca , Natal , Cairu , Fortaleza and Itapema in Brazil; Buenos Aires , Bariloche , Salta , Jujuy , Perito Moreno Glacier , Valdes Peninsula , Guarani Jesuit Missions in the cities of Misiones and Corrientes , Ischigualasto Provincial Park , Ushuaia and Patagonia in Argentina; Isla Margarita , Angel Falls , Los Roques archipelago , Gran Sabana in Venezuela; Machu Picchu , Lima, Nazca Lines , Cuzco in Peru; Lake Titicaca , Salar de Uyuni , La Paz, Jesuit Missions of Chiquitos in Bolivia; Tayrona National Natural Park , Santa Marta , Bogotá , Cali , Medellín , Cartagena , San Andrés in Colombia, and the Galápagos Islands in Ecuador are popular among international visitors in the region. Trade blocs Rafael Correa , Evo Morales , Néstor Kirchner , Cristina Fernández , Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva , Nicanor Duarte , and Hugo Chávez at the signing of the founding charter of the Bank of the South This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( April 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The major trade blocs (or agreements ) in the region are the Pacific Alliance and Mercosur . Minor blocs or trade agreements are the G3 Free Trade Agreement , the Dominican Republic – Central America Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA), the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the Andean Community of Nations (CAN). However, major reconfigurations are taking place along opposing approaches to integration and trade; Venezuela has officially withdrawn from both the CAN and G3 and it has been formally admitted into the Mercosur (pending ratification from the Paraguayan legislature).

The president-elect of Ecuador has manifested his intentions of following the same path. This bloc nominally opposes any Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the United States, although Uruguay has manifested its intention otherwise. Chile, Peru, Colombia and Mexico are the only four Latin American nations that have an FTA with the United States and Canada, both members of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). China China's economic influence in Latin America increased substantially in the 21st century. Imports from China valued $8.3 billion in 2000, but by 2022 its value was $450 billion and had grown to be the largest trading partner of South America, as well as the second-largest for the broader Latin America.

In particular, many of the investments are related to the Belt and Road Initiative or energy. China has also provided loans to several Latin American countries; this has raised concerns about the possibility of debt traps." Specifically, Venezuela, Brazil, Ecuador, and Argentina received the most loans from China during 2005–2016. Inequality Main article: Wealth inequality in Latin America Slums on the outskirts of a wealthy urban area in São Paulo , Brazil. Wealth inequality in Latin America remains a serious issue despite strong economic growth and improved social indicators. A report released in 2013 by the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs entitled Inequality Matters: Report of the World Social Situation , observed that: 'Declines in the wage share have been attributed to the impact of labour-saving technological change and to a general weakening of labour market regulations and institutions.' Such declines are likely to disproportionately affect individuals in the middle and bottom of the income distribution , as they rely mostly on wages for income.

In addition, the report noted that 'highly-unequal land distribution has created social and political tensions and is a source of economic inefficiency , as small landholders frequently lack access to credit and other resources to increase productivity , while big owners may not have had enough incentive to do so. According to the United Nations ECLAC , Latin America is the most unequal region in the world.

In 2025, The Economist said that Latin America's "tax and welfare systems are shockingly bad at reducing inequality." History of inequality Main article: Spain in the 17th century Spanish Inquisition 's auto-da-fé held in the Plaza Mayor, Madrid in 1680 Spanish society in 17th century Habsburg Spain was extremely inegalitarian.

The nobility, being wealthier than ordinary people, also had the privilege of being exempt from taxes. Spanish society associated social status with leisure and thus work was undignified for nobles. Even wealthy merchants invested in land, titles, and juros. Two acceptable careers for the nobility were the church and education.

In 1620, there were 100,000 Spaniards in the clergy, by the late 17th century there were 150,000. Many Spaniards spent long years in universities, taking advantage of the increase in its numbers.

By 1660, there were about 200,000 Spaniards in the clergy and the Church owned 20% of all the land in Spain. Inequality in Latin America has deep historical roots in the Latin European racially based Casta system instituted in Latin America during colonial times that has been difficult to eradicate because of the differences between initial endowments and opportunities among social groups have constrained the poorest's social mobility , thus causing poverty to transmit from generation to generation, and become a vicious cycle. Inequality has been reproduced and transmitted through generations because Latin American political systems allow a differentiated access on the influence that social groups have in the decision-making process, and it responds in different ways to the least favored groups that have less political representation and capacity of pressure. Recent economic liberalisation also plays a role as not everyone is equally capable of taking advantage of its benefits. Differences in opportunities and endowments tend to be based on race , ethnicity, rurality, and gender . Because inequality in gender and location are near-universal, race and ethnicity play a larger, more integral role in discriminatory practices in Latin America.

The differences have a strong impact on the distribution of income, capital and political standing. One indicator of inequality is access to and quality of education.

During the first phase of globalization in Latin America, educational inequality was on the rise, peaking around the end of the 19th century.

In comparison with other developing regions , Latin America then had the highest level of educational inequality , which is certainly a contributing factor for its current general high inequality.

During the 20th century, however, educational inequality started decreasing. Standard of living Latin America has the highest levels of income inequality in the world.

During the colonial era, with a dearth initially of European women, European men and Indigenous women and African women produced what were considered mixed-race children.

In Spanish America, the so-called Sociedad de castas or Sistema de castas was constructed by white elites to try to rationalize the processes at work.

In the sixteenth century the Spanish crown sought to protect Indigenous populations from exploitation by white elites for their labor and land.

The crown created the República de indios to paternalistically govern and protect Indigenous peoples. It also created the República de Españoles , which included not only European whites, but all non-Indigenous peoples, such as Black, mulattoes, and mixed-race castas who were not dwelling in Indigenous communities.

In the religious sphere, the Indigenous were deemed perpetual neophytes in the Catholic faith, which meant Indigenous men were not eligible to be ordained as Catholic priests; however, Indigenous were also excluded from the jurisdiction of the Inquisition . Catholics saw military conquest and religious conquest as two parts of the assimilation of Indigenous populations, suppressing Indigenous religious practices and eliminating the Indigenous priesthood. Some worship continued underground. Jews and other non-Catholics, such as Protestants (all called "Lutherans") were banned from settling and were subject to the Inquisition. Map of ethno-racial distribution by country. Considerable mixing of populations occurred in cities, while the countryside was largely Indigenous.

At independence in the early nineteenth century, in many places in Spanish America formal racial and legal distinctions disappeared, although slavery was not uniformly abolished. Significant black populations exist in Brazil and Spanish Caribbean islands such as Cuba and Puerto Rico and the circum-Caribbean mainland (Venezuela, Colombia, Panama), as long as in the southern part of South America and Central America (Honduras, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Ecuador, and Peru) a legacy of their use in plantations. All these areas also have significant white populations.

In Brazil, coastal Indigenous peoples largely died out in the early sixteenth century, with Indigenous populations surviving far from cities, sugar plantations, and other European enterprises. Many mixed-race people in much of Latin America are tri-racial, usually of European, African, and Indigenous blood, where European (mostly Spanish/Portuguese) tends to be the strongest of the three.

In most of Brazil and the Spanish Caribbean, the average ancestral mix is European and African blood, with much smaller amounts of indigenous blood.

While the opposite is true in many mainland Spanish-speaking Latin American countries like Venezuela, Colombia, and Panama, where the average ancestral mix is of European and indigenous blood, with smaller amounts of African. But in Mexico, and other places in northern Central America and southern South America, mixed race people tend to be completely of European and indigenous blood. Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico, Cuba, and Brazil have dominant Mulatto/Triracial populations ("Pardo" in Brazil). More specifically, in Brazil and Cuba, there is equally large white populations and smaller black populations, while Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico are more Mulatto/Triracial dominated, with significant black and white minorities. Parts of Central America and northern South America are more diverse in that they are predominantly made up of Mestizos and Whites but also have large numbers of Mulattos, Black, and Indigenous people, especially Colombia, Venezuela, and Panama. Italian immigrants arriving in Buenos Aires , during the great European immigration wave to Argentina .

The Southern Cone region—encompassing Argentina , Uruguay, and Chile—is predominantly White due to the massive European immigration that occurred from the late 19th century to the mid-20th century.

The rest of Latin America, including Mexico, northern Central America—Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras— and central South America—Peru, Ecuador, Bolivia, Paraguay—are dominated by mestizos but also have large white and indigenous minorities. Black people make up the majority of the French Caribbean, but it is generally not considered part of Latin America.

In the nineteenth century, a number of Latin American countries sought immigrants from Europe and Asia. With the abolition of black slavery in 1888, the Brazilian monarchy fell in 1889.

By then, another source of cheap labor to work on coffee plantations was found in Japan. Chinese male immigrants arrived in Cuba, Mexico, Peru and elsewhere. With political turmoil in Europe during the mid-nineteenth century and widespread poverty, Germans, Spaniards, and Italians immigrated to Latin America in large numbers, welcomed by Latin American governments both as a source of labor as well as a way to increase the size of their white populations.

In Argentina, many Afro-Argentines married Euro-Argentines.

In twentieth-century Brazil, sociologist Gilberto Freyre proposed that Brazil was a " racial democracy ", with less discrimination against black people than in the United States. Even if a system of legal racial segregation was never implemented in Latin America, unlike the United States, subsequent research has shown that in Brazil there's discrimination against darker citizens, and that whites remain the elites in the country.

In Mexico, the mestizo population was considered the true embodiment of " the cosmic race ", according to Mexican intellectual José Vasconcelos , thus erasing other populations. There was considerable discrimination against Asians, with calls for the expulsion of Chinese in northern Mexico during the Mexican Revolution (1910–1920) and racially motivated massacres .

In a number of Latin American countries, Indigenous groups have organized explicitly as Indigenous, to claim human rights and influence political power. With the passage of anti-colonial resolutions in the United Nations General Assembly and the signing of resolutions for Indigenous rights, the Indigenous are able to act to guarantee their existence within nation-states with legal standing . Ethnic groups Ethnic Group Year 2022 Number % South America 490,725,023 67.25% Brazilians 221,000,000 30.29% Argentinians 69,204,000 9.48% Colombians 57,600,923 7.89% Venezuelans 45,720,000 6.27% Peruvians 34,102,000 4.67% Chileans 27,829,000 3.81% Ecuadorians 19,300,000 2.65% Paraguayans 13,621,000 1.87% Bolivians 12,391,000 1.70% Uruguayans 7,103,000 0.97% North America 131,194,976 17.98% Mexicans 131,194,976 17.98% Central America 51,519,730 7.06% Guatemalans 17,141,463 2.35% Nicaraguans 12,904,622 1.77% Salvadorans 9,630,289 1.32% Panamanians 7,762,736 1.06% Costa Ricans 7,200,680 0.99% Hondurans 4,763,940 0.65% Caribbean 27,256,789 3.73% Cubans 12,729,000 1.74% Dominicans 12,706,605 1.74% Puerto Ricans 1,821,184 0.25% Indigenous People 11,860,350 1.63% Aymarans 9,278,905 1.27% Mapuche 2,672,499 0.37% Others 7,231,086 0.99% Total: 719,787,954 100% Language This section needs more citations . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( April 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Trilingual sign in Spanish, Italian and Piedmontese in San Francisco , Córdoba Province , Argentina. Most widely spoken Native languages in Latin America: The most widely-spoken creole language in the combined Latin America and the Caribbean region is Haitian Creole , the predominant language of Haiti, derived primarily from French and certain West African tongues, with Amerindian , English, Portuguese, and Spanish influences as well. Creole languages of mainland Latin America, similarly, are derived from European languages and various African tongues.

The aforementioned Papiamento, commonly spoken on the Dutch Caribbean ABC Islands , is a Portuguese-based creole .

The Garifuna language is spoken along the Caribbean coast in Honduras, Guatemala, Nicaragua, and Belize, mostly by the Garifuna people , a mixed-race Zambo people who were the result of mixing between Indigenous Caribbeans and escaped Black slaves. Primarily an Arawakan language , it has influences from Caribbean and European languages. Archaeologists have deciphered over 15 pre-Columbian distinct writing systems from Mesoamerican societies. Ancient Maya had the most sophisticated textually written language, but since texts were largely confined to the religious and administrative elite, traditions were passed down orally. Oral traditions also prevailed in other major Indigenous groups including, but not limited to, the Aztecs and other Nahuatl speakers, Quechua and Aymara of the Andean regions , the Quiché of Central America, the Tupi-Guaraní in today's Brazil, the Guaraní in Paraguay, and the Mapuche in Chile. Religion Main article: Religion in Latin America The first Mass in Brazil among the Native Brazilians on 26 April 1500. Painting by Victor Meirelles (1860).

The Las Lajas Sanctuary in southern Colombia, Department of Nariño Cathedral of Arequipa , in Southern Peru Buenos Aires Metropolitan Cathedral , where the remains of General José de San Martín lie, the Libertador of Argentina, Chile and Peru.

The vast majority of Latin Americans are Christians (90%), mostly Roman Catholics belonging to the Latin Church . About 70% of the Latin American population considers itself Catholic.

In 2012 Latin America constitutes in absolute terms the second world's largest Christian population , after Europe. According to the detailed Pew multi-country survey in 2014, 69% of the Latin American population is Catholic and 19% is Protestant. Protestants are 26% of the population in Brazil and over 40% in much of Central America. More than half of these are converts from Roman Catholicism. Religion in Latin America (2014) Country Catholic (%) Protestant (%) Irreligion (%) Other (%) Paraguay 89 7 1 2 Mexico 81 9 7 4 Colombia 79 13 6 2 Ecuador 79 13 5 3 Bolivia 77 16 4 3 Peru 76 17 4 3 Venezuela 73 17 7 4 Argentina 71 15 12 3 Panama 70 19 7 4 Chile 64 17 16 3 Costa Rica 62 25 9 4 Brazil 61 26 8 5 Dominican Republic 57 23 18 2 Puerto Rico 56 33 8 2 El Salvador 50 36 12 3 Guatemala 50 41 6 3 Nicaragua 50 40 7 4 Honduras 46 41 10 2 Uruguay 42 15 37 6 Total 69 19 8 3 The adolescent birth rate in women aged 10–19 years, 2016 Latin America has the highest rates of non-marital childbearing in the world, with 55–74% of all children in the region born to unmarried parents.

In most countries in this traditionally Catholic region, children born outside marriage are now the norm.

In 2014, non-marital births were 74% in Colombia, 70% in Paraguay, 69% in Peru, 63% in the Dominican Republic, 58% in Argentina, and 55% in Mexico.

In Brazil, non-marital births increased to 65.8% in 2009, up from 56.2% in 2000.

In the post-independence period, a number of Latin American countries sought to attract European immigrants as a source of labor as well as to deliberately change the proportions of racial and ethnic groups within their borders. Chile, Argentina, and Brazil actively recruited labor from Catholic southern Europe, where populations were poor and sought better economic opportunities. Many nineteenth-century immigrants went to the United States and Canada, but a significant number arrived in Latin America.

Although Mexico tried to attract immigrants, it largely failed.

As black slavery was abolished in Brazil in 1888, coffee growers recruited Japanese migrants to work in coffee plantations. There is a significant population of Japanese descent in Brazil. Cuba and Peru recruited Chinese labor in the late nineteenth century. Some Chinese immigrants who were excluded from immigrating to the United States settled in northern Mexico.

When the United States acquired its southwest by conquest in the Mexican–American War , Latin American populations did not cross the border to the United States, the border crossed them.

In the twentieth century there have been several types of migration. One is the movement of rural populations within a given country to cities in search of work, causing many Latin American cities to grow significantly. Another is international movement of populations, often fleeing repression or war. Other international migration is for economic reasons, often unregulated or undocumented. Mexicans immigrated to the U.S. during the violence of the Mexican Revolution (1910–1920) and the religious Cristero War (1926–29); during World War II, Mexican men worked in the U.S. in the bracero program . Economic migration from Mexico followed the crash of the Mexican economy in the 1980s. Spanish refugees fled to Mexico following the fascist victory in the Spanish Civil War (1936–38), with some 50,000 exiles finding refuge at the invitation of President Lázaro Cárdenas .

Following World War II a larger wave of refugees to Latin America, many of them Jews, settled in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Cuba, and Venezuela. Some were only transiting through the region, but others stayed and created communities. A number of Nazis escaped to Latin America, living under assumed names, in an attempt to avoid attention and prosecution.

In the aftermath of the Cuban Revolution, middle class and elite Cubans moved to the U.S., particularly to Florida. Some fled Chile for the U.S. and Europe after the 1973 military coup. Colombians migrated to Spain and the United Kingdom during the region's political turmoil, compounded by the rise of narcotrafficking and guerrilla warfare .

During the Central American wars of the 1970s to the 1990s, many Salvadorans, Guatemalans, and Hondurans migrated to the U.S. to escape narcotrafficking, gangs, and poverty.

As living conditions deteriorated in Venezuela under Hugo Chávez and Nicolás Maduro , many left for neighboring Colombia and Ecuador.

In the 1990s, economic stress in Ecuador during the La Década Perdida triggered considerable migration to Spain and to the U.S. Some Latin American countries seek to strengthen links between migrants and their states of origin, while promoting their integration in the receiving state. These emigrant policies focus on the rights, obligations, and opportunities for participation of emigrated citizens who already live outside the borders of the country of origin. Research on Latin America shows that the extension of policies towards migrants is linked to a focus on civil rights and state benefits that can positively influence integration in recipient countries.

In addition, the tolerance of dual citizenship has spread more in Latin America than in any other region of the world. Education Main article: Education in Latin America World map indicating literacy rate by country in 2015 (2015 CIA World Factbook ). Grey = no data. Colegio Nacional de Buenos Aires , one of the most prestigious schools in Latin America. Its alumni includes two Nobel laureates and four presidents of Argentina. Despite significant progress, education access and school completion remains unequal in Latin America.

The region has made great progress in educational coverage; almost all children attend primary school, and access to secondary education has increased considerably. Quality issues such as poor teaching methods, lack of appropriate equipment, and overcrowding exist throughout the region. These issues lead to adolescents dropping out of the educational system early. Most educational systems in the region have implemented various types of administrative and institutional reforms that have enabled reach for places and communities that had no access to education services in the early 1990s. School meal programs are also employed to expand access to education, and at least 23 countries in the Latin America and Caribbean region have large-scale school feeding activities, altogether reaching 88% of primary school-age children in the region. Compared to prior generations, Latin American youth have seen an increase in their levels of education.

On average, they have completed two more years of school than their parents. However, there are still 23 million children in the region between the ages of 4 and 17 outside of the formal education system. Estimates indicate that 30% of preschool age children (ages 4–5) do not attend school, and for the most vulnerable populations, the poor and rural, this proportion exceeds 40 percent. Among primary school age children (ages 6 to 12), attendance is almost universal; however, there is still a need to enroll five million more children in the primary education system. These children mostly live in remote areas, are Indigenous or Afro-descendants and live in extreme poverty. Among people between the ages of 13 and 17 years, only 80% are full-time students, and only 66% of these advance to secondary school. These percentages are lower among vulnerable population groups: only 75% of the poorest youth between the ages of 13 and 17 years attend school. Tertiary education has the lowest coverage, with only 70% of people between the ages of 18 and 25 years outside of the education system. Currently, more than half of low income or rural children fail to complete nine years of education. Life expectancy Main article: List of countries in the Americas by life expectancy List of countries by life expectancy at birth for 2023 according to the World Bank Group .

The Pan American Health Organization. ( This section is an excerpt from Pan American Health Organization ).

The Pan American Health Organization ( PAHO ) is a specialized agency of the United Nations (UN) in charge of international health cooperation in the Americas. This organization has played a crucial role in making efforts to combat communicable and noncommunicable diseases, strengthen health systems, and respond to emergencies and disasters. Public/Private Initiatives and Partnerships. An example that has been in place since 2015 is the Salud Mesoamérica Initiative (SMI). This research project that focuses on the inequalities in health outcomes and access in Central America. It is a model that supports the transformation of health systems in each country, to bring coverage, access to healthcare, and health services among the poor in Mesoamérica, in particular women and children. Water Palace of Running Waters , water pumping station and headquarters of Obras Sanitarias de la Nación soon after being inaugurated in Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The countries with the lowest rates were Chile (3.59), Cuba (4.72) and Argentina (6.53). Latin America has been cited by numerous sources to be the most dangerous region in the world. Studies have shown that Latin America contains the majority of the world's most dangerous cities . Crime and violence prevention and public security are now important issues for governments and citizens in the Latin America region. Homicide rates in Latin America are the highest in the world.

From the early 1980s through the mid-1990s, homicide rates increased by 50 percent. Latin America experienced more than 2.5 million murders between 2000 and 2017. There were a total of 63,880 murders in Brazil in 2018.

The most frequent victims of such homicides are young men, 69 percent of them between the ages of 15 and 19. Countries in Latin America and the Caribbean with the highest homicide rate per year per 100,000 inhabitants in 2015 were: El Salvador 109, Honduras 64, Venezuela 57, Jamaica 43, Belize 34.4, St. Kitts and Nevis 34, Guatemala 34, Trinidad and Tobago 31, the Bahamas 30, Brazil 26.7, Colombia 26.5, the Dominican Republic 22, St. Lucia 22, Guyana 19, Mexico 16, Puerto Rico 16, Ecuador 13, Grenada 13, Costa Rica 12, Bolivia 12, Nicaragua 12, Panama 11, Antigua and Barbuda 11, and Haiti 10. Most of the countries with the highest homicide rates are in Africa and Latin America. Countries in Central America, like El Salvador and Honduras, top the list of homicides in the world. Brazil has more overall homicides than any country in the world, at 50,108, accounting for one in 10 globally. Crime-related violence is the biggest threat to public health in Latin America, striking more victims than HIV/AIDS or any other infectious disease. Countries with the lowest homicide rate per year per 100,000 inhabitants as of 2015 were: Chile 3, Peru 7, Argentina 7, Uruguay 8 and Paraguay 9. Culture Main article: Latin American culture Roman Catholic Easter procession in Comayagua , Honduras Nicaraguan women wearing the Mestizaje costume, which is a traditional costume worn to dance the Mestizaje dance.

The costume demonstrates the Spanish influence upon Nicaraguan clothing. Argentine women making empanadas , a traditional Iberian food. This section needs more citations . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( April 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Latin American culture is a mixture of many influences including cultures from their indigenous people as well as European, African, Asian, and US influences. Indigenous cultures are that of the people who inhabited the continent prior to European colonization. Ancient and advanced civilizations developed their own political, social and religious systems.

The Maya, the Aztec and the Inca are examples of these. Indigenous legacies in music, dance, foods, arts and crafts, clothing, folk culture and traditions are strong in Latin America. Indigenous languages affected Spanish and Portuguese, giving rise to loanwords like pampa , taco , tamale , moccassin , cacique . European cultures were brought mainly by the colonial powers – the Spanish and Portuguese – between the 16th and 19th centuries, including as part of the Spanish Golden Age .

The most enduring European colonial influences are language, institutions, customs and Catholicism. Additional cultural influences came from Europe during the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries, due to growing immigration from Spain, Portugal, France, Italy and Germany; as well as artistic, ideological and technological developments of the time. Due to the impact of Enlightenment ideals after the French Revolution, a certain number of Iberian American countries decriminalized homosexuality after France and French territories in the Americas did so in 1791. Some of the countries that abolished sodomy laws or banned state interference in consensual adult sexuality in the 19th century were: Dominican Republic (1822) Brazil (1824) Peru (1836) Mexico (1871) Paraguay (1880) Argentina (1887) Honduras (1899) Guatemala El Salvador Today same-sex marriage is legal in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, Uruguay, and French overseas departments. South America experienced waves of immigration of Europeans, especially Italians, Spaniards, Portuguese, Germans, Austrians, Poles, Ukrainians, French, Dutch, Russians, Croatians, Lithuanians, and Ashkenazi Jews. With the end of colonialism, French culture also exerted a direct influence in Latin America, especially in the realms of high culture , Independentism , science and medicine. This can be seen in the region's artistic traditions, including painting, literature, and music, and in the realms of science and politics. Latin America also sees influences from African cultures , whose presence stems from a long history of the Atlantic slave trade . People of African descent have influenced the ethno-scapes of Latin America and the Caribbean. This is manifested for instance in music, dance and religion, especially in countries like Brazil, Puerto Rico, Venezuela, Colombia, Panama, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, and Cuba. Asian cultures are also present, which derives from the long history of the coolies who mostly arrived during the 19th and 20th centuries. This was most commonly Chinese workers in Peru and Venezuela, but also from Japanese and Korean immigration- especially headed to Brazil. This has greatly affected cuisine and other traditions including literature, art and lifestyles and politics. Asian influences have especially affected Brazil, Cuba, Panama and Peru. Lastly, the influence of the United States and globalization is present throughout the region, with particular strength in northern Latin America, especially Puerto Rico, which is an American territory. Prior to 1959, Cuba, which fought for its independence with American aid in the Spanish–American War , also had a close political and economic relationship with the United States.

In general, artistic Eurocentrism began to wane in the early twentieth century with the increased appreciation for indigenous forms of representation. Mural by Santiago Martinez Delgado at the Colombian Congress From the early twentieth century, the art of Latin America was greatly inspired by the Constructivist Movement .

The movement rapidly spread from Russia to Europe and then into Latin America. Joaquín Torres García and Manuel Rendón have been credited with bringing the Constructivist Movement into Latin America from Europe. An important artistic movement generated in Latin America is muralism represented by Diego Rivera , David Alfaro Siqueiros , José Clemente Orozco and Rufino Tamayo in Mexico, Santiago Martinez Delgado and Pedro Nel Gómez in Colombia and Antonio Berni in Argentina. Some of the most notable Muralista works can be found in Mexico, Colombia, New York City, San Francisco, Los Angeles, and Philadelphia . Painter Frida Kahlo , one of the most famous Mexican artists, painted about her own life and the Mexican culture in a style combining Realism , Symbolism , and Surrealism . Kahlo's work commands the highest selling price of all Latin American paintings.

The Venezuelan Armando Reverón , whose works are recognized internationally, is one of the most important artists of the 20th century in South America; he is a precursor of Arte Povera and Happening .

In the 60s kinetic art emerged in Venezuela. Its main representatives are Jesús Soto , Carlos Cruz-Diez , Alejandro Otero , and Gego . Colombian sculptor and painter Fernando Botero has gained regional and international recognition for his works which, on first examination, are noted for their exaggerated proportions and the corpulence of the human and animal figures.

The Ecuadorian Oswaldo Guayasamín is considered one of the most important and seminal artists in Ecuador and South America.

In his life, he made over 13,000 paintings and held more than 180 exhibitions all over the world, including Paris, Barcelona, New York, Buenos Aires, Moscow, Prague, and Rome. He brought his unique style of expressionism and cubism to the collection of Ecuador artwork during the Age of Anger which relates to the period of the Cold War when the United States opposed communist presence in South America. Social criticism of human and social inequality was central to his artwork. Film Main article: Latin American cinema The Guadalajara International Film Festival is considered the most prestigious film festival in Latin America. This section needs more citations . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( April 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Latin American film encompasses a wide range of genres and national industries. Historically, the main centers of production have been Mexico, Argentina, Brazil, and Cuba. Latin American film flourished after sound was introduced in cinema, which added a linguistic barrier to the export of Hollywood film south of the border.

In 2015, Alejandro González Iñárritu became the second Mexican director in a row to win both the Academy Award for Best Director and the Directors Guild of America Award for Best Director. He won his second Oscar in 2016 for The Revenant . Mexican cinema began in the silent era from 1896 to 1929 and flourished in the Golden Era of the 1940s. It boasted a huge industry comparable to Hollywood at the time, with stars such as María Félix , Dolores del Río , and Pedro Infante .

In the 1970s, Mexico was the location for many cult horror and action movies. More recently, films such as Amores Perros (2000) and Y tu mamá también (2001) enjoyed box office and critical acclaim and propelled Alfonso Cuarón and Alejandro González Iñárritu to the front rank of Hollywood directors. Iñárritu in 2010 directed Biutiful and Birdman (2014), Alfonso Cuarón directed Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban in 2004 and Gravity in 2013. A close friend of both, Guillermo del Toro , a top rank Hollywood director in Hollywood and Spain, directed Pan's Labyrinth (2006) and produced El Orfanato (2007). Carlos Carrera ( The Crime of Father Amaro ) , and screenwriter Guillermo Arriaga are also some of the best known modern Mexican film makers. Rudo y Cursi released in December (2008) in Mexico, was directed by Carlos Cuarón . President Cristina Fernández with the film director Juan José Campanella and the cast of The Secret in Their Eyes (2009) with the Oscar for Best Foreign Language Film Argentine cinema has also been prominent since the first half of the 20th century and today averages over 60 full-length titles yearly.

The industry suffered during the 1976–1983 military dictatorship ; but re-emerged to produce the Academy Award winner The Official Story in 1985. A wave of imported US films again damaged the industry in the early 1990s, though it soon recovered, thriving even during the Argentine economic crisis around 2001. Many Argentine movies produced during recent years have been internationally acclaimed, including Nueve reinas (2000), Son of the Bride (2001), El abrazo partido (2004), El otro (2007), the 2010 Foreign Language Academy Award winner El secreto de sus ojos , Wild Tales (2014) and Argentina, 1985 (2022).

In Brazil , the Cinema Novo movement created a particular way of making movies with critical and intellectual screenplays, clearer photography related to the light of the outdoors in a tropical landscape, and a political message.

The modern Brazilian film industry has become more profitable inside the country, and some of its productions have received prizes and recognition in Europe and the United States, with movies such as Central do Brasil (1999), Cidade de Deus (2002) and Tropa de Elite (2007). Cast of A Fantastic Woman on the red carpet at the Teatro de la Ciudad (City Theatre). It was selected as the Chilean entry for the Best Foreign Language Film where it won in the 90th Academy Awards . Puerto Rican cinema has produced some notable films, such as Una Aventura Llamada Menudo , Los Diaz de Doris and Casi Casi . An influx of Hollywood films affected the local film industry in Puerto Rico during the 1980s and 1990s, but several Puerto Rican films have been produced since and it has been recovering. Cuban cinema has enjoyed much official support since the Cuban revolution and important film-makers include Tomás Gutiérrez Alea . Venezuelan television has also had a great impact in Latin America, is said that whilst "Venezuelan cinema began sporadically in the 1950s only emerged as a national-cultural movement in the mid-1970s" when it gained state support and auteurs could produce work. International co-productions with Latin America and Spain continued into this era and beyond, and Venezuelan films of this time were counted among the works of New Latin American Cinema. This period is known as Venezuela's Golden Age of cinema, having massive popularity even though it was a time of much social and political upheaval. One of the most famous Venezuelan films, even to date, is the 1976 film Soy un delincuente by Clemente de la Cerda , which won the Special Jury Prize at the 1977 Locarno International Film Festival . Soy un delincuente was one of nine films for which the state gave substantial funding to produce, made in the year after the Venezuelan state began giving financial support to cinema in 1975.

The support likely came from increased oil wealth in the early 1970s, and the subsequent 1973 credit incentive policy.

At the time of its production the film was the most popular film in the country, and took a decade to be usurped from this position, even though it was only one in a string of films designed to tell social realist stories of struggle in the 1950s and '60s. Equally famous is the 1977 film El Pez que Fuma ( Román Chalbaud ).

In 1981 FONCINE (the Venezuelan Film Fund) was founded, and this year it provided even more funding to produce seventeen feature films. A few years later in 1983 with Viernes Negro , oil prices dropped and Venezuela entered a depression which prevented such extravagant funding, but film production continued; more transnational productions occurred, many more with Spain due to Latin America's poor economic fortune in general, and there was some in new cinema, as well: Fina Torres ' 1985 Oriana won the Caméra d'Or Prize at the 1985 Cannes Film Festival as the best first feature. Film production peaked in 1984–5, :37 with 1986 considered Venezuelan cinema's most successful year by the state, thanks to over 4 million admissions to national films, according to Venezuelanalysis .

From the very moment of Europe's discovery of the continents, early explorers and conquistadores produced written accounts and crónicas of their experience – such as Columbus 's letters or Bernal Díaz del Castillo 's description of the conquest of Mexico.

During the colonial period, written culture was often in the hands of the church, within which context Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz wrote memorable poetry and philosophical essays. Towards the end of the 18th century and the beginning of the 19th, a distinctive criollo literary tradition emerged, including the first novels such as Lizardi's El Periquillo Sarniento (1816).

The 19th century was a period of "foundational fictions" in critic Doris Sommer's words, novels in the Romantic or Naturalist traditions that attempted to establish a sense of national identity, and which often focussed on the Indigenous question or the dichotomy of "civilization or barbarism" (for which see, say, Domingo Sarmiento 's Facundo (1845), Juan León Mera 's Cumandá (1879), or Euclides da Cunha 's Os Sertões (1902)).

The 19th century also witnessed the realist work of Machado de Assis , who made use of surreal devices of metaphor and playful narrative construction, much admired by critic Harold Bloom . Jorge Luis Borges in 1951 At the turn of the 20th century, modernismo emerged, a poetic movement whose founding text was Nicaraguan poet Rubén Darío 's Azul (1888). This was the first Latin American literary movement to influence literary culture outside of the region, and was also the first truly Latin American literature, in that national differences were no longer so much at issue. José Martí , for instance, though a Cuban patriot, also lived in Mexico and the United States and wrote for journals in Argentina and elsewhere. However, what really put Latin American literature on the global map was no doubt the literary boom of the 1960s and 1970s, distinguished by daring and experimental novels (such as Julio Cortázar 's Rayuela (1963)) that were frequently published in Spain and quickly translated into English.

The Boom's defining novel was Gabriel García Márquez 's Cien años de soledad (1967), which led to the association of Latin American literature with magic realism , though other important writers of the period such as the Peruvian Mario Vargas Llosa and Carlos Fuentes do not fit so easily within this framework. Arguably, the Boom's culmination was Augusto Roa Bastos 's monumental Yo, el supremo (1974).

In the wake of the Boom, influential precursors such as Juan Rulfo , Alejo Carpentier , and above all Jorge Luis Borges were also rediscovered. Contemporary literature in the region is vibrant and varied, ranging from the best-selling Paulo Coelho and Isabel Allende to the more avant-garde and critically acclaimed work of writers such as Diamela Eltit , Giannina Braschi , Ricardo Piglia , or Roberto Bolaño . There has also been considerable attention paid to the genre of testimonio , texts produced in collaboration with subaltern subjects such as Rigoberta Menchú . Finally, a new breed of chroniclers is represented by the more journalistic Carlos Monsiváis and Pedro Lemebel.

The classical composer Heitor Villa-Lobos (1887–1959) worked on the recording of Native musical traditions within his homeland of Brazil.

The Idea of Latin America . Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 77– 80. ISBN 978-1-4051-0086-1 . ^ "Antonio de Nebrija, Antología del Ensayo Hispánico" . www.ensayistas.org . ^ Quoted by Henry Kamen at the outset of Empire: how Spain became a world power, 1492–1763 , 2002. ^ Ardao, Arturo (1980). Genesis de la idea y el nombre de América Latina (PDF) . Caracas, Venezuela: Centro de Estudios Latinoamericanos Rómulo Gallegos. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 27, 2019 . Retrieved March 8, 2019 . ^ Rojas Mix, Miguel (1986). "Bilbao y el hallazgo de América latina: Unión continental, socialista y libertaria…". Cahiers du monde hispanique et luso-brésilien . 46 (1): 35– 47. doi : 10.3406/carav.1986.2261 . ^ Gobat, Michel (December 2013). "The Invention of Latin America: A Transnational History of Anti-Imperialism, Democracy, and Race" .

The American Historical Review . 118 (5): 1345– 1375. doi : 10.1093/ahr/118.5.1345 . ^ Edward, Shawcross (February 6, 2018). France, Mexico and informal empire in Latin America, 1820–1867: equilibrium in the New World . Cham, Switzerland. p. 120. ISBN 9783319704647 . OCLC 1022266228 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Gutierrez, Ramon A. (2016). "What's in a Name?" .

In Gutierrez, Ramon A.; Almaguer, Tomas (eds.).

The New Latino Studies Reader: A Twenty-First-Century Perspective . Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 34. ISBN 978-0-520-28484-5 . OCLC 1043876740 .

The word latinoamericano emerged in the years following the wars of independence in Spain's former colonies By the late 1850s, californios were writing in newspapers about their membership in América latina (Latin America) and latinoamerica , calling themselves Latinos as the shortened name for their hemispheric membership in la raza latina (the Latin race). Reprinting an 1858 opinion piece by a correspondent in Havana on race relations in the Americas, El Clamor Publico of Los Angeles surmised that 'two rival races are competing with each other ... the Anglo Saxon and the Latin one .' ^ " América latina o Sudamérica? , por Luiz Alberto Moniz Bandeira, Clarín, 16 de mayo de 2005" . Clarin.com. May 16, 2005. Archived from the original on March 27, 2010 . Retrieved April 23, 2013 . ^ José María Torres Caicedo (September 26, 1856). "Las dos Américas" (in Spanish). Venice. Archived from the original on July 22, 2017 . Retrieved April 23, 2013 – via Proyecto Filosofía en español. ^ Claros, Alejandra (August 5, 2024). "In the footsteps of the name: the history of Latin America and the Caribbean" . CAF | Banco . ^ Bilbao, Francisco. "Emancipación del espíritu de América" . Francisco Bilbao Barquín, 1823–1865, Chile . Archived from the original on September 16, 2017 . Retrieved July 16, 2017 . ^ Francisco Bilbao, La América en peligro , Buenos Aires: Impr. de Berheim y Boeno 1862, 14, 23, quoted in Tenorio-Trillo, Latin America , p. 5. ^ Gongóra, Alvaro; de la Taille, Alexandrine; Vial, Gonzalo . Jaime Eyzaguirre en su tiempo (in Spanish). Zig-Zag. p. 223. ^ Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo, Latin America: The Allure and Power of an Idea . Chicago: University of Chicago Press 2017, 1, 3. ^ RAE (2005). Diccionario Panhispánico de Dudas . Madrid: Santillana Educación. ISBN 8429406239 . Archived from the original on April 4, 2010 . Retrieved October 15, 2010 . ^ Rangel, Carlos (1977).

The World Bank . Retrieved July 17, 2009. ^ "Country Directory. Latin American Network Information Center-University of Texas at Austin" . Lanic.utexas.edu. Archived from the original on March 11, 2014 . Retrieved December 9, 2013 . ^ "South America, Latin America" . Reflexions . University of Liège . Archived from the original on November 24, 2022 . Retrieved November 24, 2022 . ^ María Alejandra Acosta Garcia; González, Sheridan; Ma. de Lourdes Romero; Reza, Luis; Salinas, Araceli (June 2011). "Three". Geografía, Quinto Grado (Second ed.). Mexico City: Secretaría de Educación Pública . pp. 75– 83 – via Comisión Nacional de Libros de Texto Gratuitos (CONALITEG). ^ Central Intelligence Agency (2023). "The World Factbook – Country Comparisons: Population" . Archived from the original on January 6, 2021 . Retrieved June 28, 2023 . ^ "United Nations Statistics Division – Demographic and Social Statistics" . unstats.un.org . Archived from the original on October 15, 2017 . Retrieved July 18, 2021 . ^ Mark A. Burkholder (2016) "Spain's America: from kingdoms to colonies", Colonial Latin American Review , 25:2, 125–153, doi : 10.1080/10609164.2016.1205241 ^ De Vries, Jan (2009). "The Economic Crisis of the Seventeenth Century after Fifty Years". Journal of Interdisciplinary History . 40 (2): 151– 194. doi : 10.1162/jinh.2009.40.2.151 . ^ Oto-Peralías, Daniel; Romero-Ávila, Diego (December 2016). "The economic consequences of the Spanish Reconquest: the long-term effects of Medieval conquest and colonization". Journal of Economic Growth . 21 (4): 409– 464. doi : 10.1007/s10887-016-9132-9 . hdl : 10023/10769 . ^ Parker 2014 . ^ Payne, Stanley G. (2011). Spain: A Unique History . University of Wisconsin Press. p. 87. Not merely was the latter for a century the strongest state and military power in western Europe. ^ Kamen, Henry (1988). Golden Age Spain . Macmillan. p. 5. Spanish power was the most obvious reality of European politics for over a century. ^ Parker, Geoffrey (2004).

The Army of Flanders and the Spanish Road, 1567–1659: The Logistics of Spanish Victory and Defeat in the Low Countries' Wars (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. xiii. Habsburg Spain, the richest and most powerful state in Europe. ^ "Golden Age in Spain" . www.donquijote.org . Retrieved July 6, 2024 . ^ a b Grice Hutchinson, Marjorie (1952).

The School of Salamanca (PDF) . Clarendon Press. ^ Alfonso Pérez Sánchez , Pintura barroca en España (1600–1750) , Madrid, Cátedra, 1992, ISBN 84-376-0994-1 . Regarding 18th century Spanish baroque painting, discussing artists such as Antonio Palomino, Miguel Jacinto Meléndez and the Catalan painter Antoni Viladomat. See pages 403–431. ^ Izbicki, Thomas; Kaufmann, Matthias (2023), "School of Salamanca" , in Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2023 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved October 8, 2024 ^ Sanders, James E. (2011). "The Vanguard of the Atlantic World: Contesting Modernity in Nineteenth-Century Latin America". Latin American Research Review . 46 (2): 104– 127. doi : 10.1353/lar.2011.0030 . ^ "The Latin American Left's Shifting Tides" . catalyst-journal.com . Retrieved May 20, 2026 . ^ Ospina, Jose (October 28, 2018). "Is there a right-wing surge in South America?" . DW. Archived from the original on December 31, 2022 . Retrieved December 10, 2018 . ^ "Conservative Lacalle Pou wins Uruguay presidential election, ending 15 years of leftist rule" . France 24 . November 29, 2019. Archived from the original on June 13, 2022 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 . ^ Jordi Zamora. "China's double-edged trade with Latin America" . September 3, 2011. AFP. ^ Bull, Benedicte; Rosales, Antulio (2020). "The crisis in Venezuela: Drivers, transitions, and pathways". European Review of Latin American and Caribbean Studies / Revista Europea de Estudios Latinoamericanos y del Caribe (109): 1– 20. JSTOR 26936900 . ^ Casey, Nicholas; Zarate, Andrea (February 13, 2017). "Corruption Scandals With Brazilian Roots Cascade Across Latin America" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on June 13, 2017 . Retrieved June 16, 2017 . ^ Andreoni, Manuela; Londoño, Ernesto; Darlington, Shasta (April 7, 2018). "Ex-President 'Lula' of Brazil Surrenders to Serve 12-Year Jail Term" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on April 7, 2018 . Retrieved April 7, 2018 . ^ "Another former Peruvian president is sent to jail, this time as part of growing corruption scandal" . Los Angeles Times . July 14, 2017. Archived from the original on March 24, 2022 . Retrieved July 14, 2017 . ^ Weiffen, Brigitte (December 2020). "Latin America and COVID-19: Political Rights and Presidential Leadership to the Test". Democratic Theory . 7 (2): 61– 68. doi : 10.3167/dt.2020.070208 . ^ Ojeda, Ricardo A.; Novillo, Agustina (2024). "Diversity and Conservation of Neotropical Mammals". Encyclopedia of Biodiversity . pp. 204– 222. doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-822562-2.00150-X . ISBN 978-0-323-98434-8 .

The Neotropical Region is one of the major biogeographic divisions for both plants and animals on Earth. It spans from central Mexico and the Caribbean islands to southern South America.

The Neotropical Region contains the largest number of mammal species in the New World, and is the region with the largest number of endemic mammal families. ^ Sánchez-Dávila, Gabriel (September 15, 2022). "Clasificación climática de Sudamérica" . ArcGIS StoryMaps (in Spanish) . Retrieved November 6, 2024 . ^ a b Sylvestre, F. (2009). Moisture Pattern During the Last Glacial Maximum in South America. Past Climate Variability in South America and Surrounding Regions: From the Last Glacial Maximum to the Holocene. F. Vimeux, F. Sylvestre and M. Khodri. 14. ^ Grodsky, S. A. and J. A. Carton (2003). "The intertropical convergence zone in the South Atlantic and the equatorial cold tongue". Journal of Climate 16(4): 723–733. ^ Oliver, J. E. (2005). Encyclopedia of World Climatology , Springer. ^ O'Dea, A.; Lessios, H. A.; Coates, A. G.; et al. (2016). "Formation of the Isthmus of Panama" . Science Advances . 2 (8) e1600883. Bibcode : 2016SciA....2E0883O . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.1600883 . PMC 4988774 . PMID 27540590 . ^ a b World Heritage List Archived March 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , UNESCO World Heritage Sites official sites. ^ "macaw" . Oxford English Dictionary (online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ "Environmental Performance Index 2012" . Environmental Performance Index 2012 rankings . Yale University. {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion 2011" (PDF) . CO2 emissions / population . International Energy Agency (IEA). Archived from the original (PDF) on February 2, 2012 . Retrieved November 2, 2010 . ^ Clarence Haring , Trade and Navigation between Spain and the Indies in the Time of the Habsburgs . Cambridge MA: Harvard Economic Studies 1918. ^ P. and H. Chaunu, Seville et l'Atlantique aux XVIe et XVIIe siècles . Paris: Flammarion 1977. ^ Adrian Pearce. British Trade with Spanish America, 1763–1808 . Liverpool: Liverpool University Press 2008. ^ Clarence Haring, The Spanish Empire in America , New York: Oxford University Press 1947. ^ Woodrow Borah , Early Colonial Trade and Navigation between Mexico and Peru . Berkeley: University of California Press, Ibero-Americana: 38, 1954 ^ Richard Flint; Shirley Cushing Flint (March 18, 2003).

The Coronado Expedition: From the Distance of 460 Years . UNM Press. p. 265. ISBN 978-0-8263-2977-6 . ^ James D. Henderson; Helen Delpar; Maurice Philip Brungardt; Richard N. Weldon (2000). A Reference Guide to Latin American History . M.E. Sharpe. p. 26 . ISBN 978-1-56324-744-6 . ^ Wolfe, Martin (December 1966). "French Views on Wealth and Taxes from the Middle Ages to the Old Regime".

The Journal of Economic History . 26 (4): 466– 483. doi : 10.1017/S0022050700077500 . JSTOR 2115903 . ^ Kidd, Thomas S. (2007).

The Great Awakening: The Roots of Evangelical Christianity in Colonial America . Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0300148251 . Archived from the original on January 15, 2023 . Retrieved September 21, 2020 . ^ Reid 2017 . ^ a b "GDP 2019, some Latin American countries" . IMF WEO Database . Archived from the original on August 3, 2020 . Retrieved February 10, 2020 . ^ "Latin America production in 2020, by FAO" . Archived from the original on November 12, 2016 . Retrieved June 18, 2022 . ^ "South American countries production in 2018, by FAO" . Archived from the original on November 12, 2016 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Conheça os 3 países que desafiam o Brasil nas exportações de frango" . Avicultura Industrial . January 22, 2020. Archived from the original on August 14, 2021 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "maiores exportadores de carne de frango entre os anos de 2015 e 2019" . May 30, 2019. Archived from the original on June 1, 2019 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "IBGE: rebanho de bovinos tinha 218,23 milhões de cabeças em 2016" . September 29, 2017. Archived from the original on May 9, 2021 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Brasil é o 3º maior produtor de leite do mundo, superando o padrão Europeu em alguns municípios" . Archived from the original on September 17, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "principais países produtores de carne suína entre 2017 e a estimativa para 2019" . July 23, 2019. Archived from the original on August 16, 2021 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Argentina production in 2018, by FAO" . Archived from the original on November 12, 2016 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Producción de carne y leche, por FAO" . Archived from the original on October 16, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "mcs2021 /mcs2021-gold.pdf USGS Gold Production Statistics" . Archived from the original on June 15, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "Production statistics of USGS Silver" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on May 15, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "Copper production statistics for the USGS" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "Production statistics of USGS iron ore" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ a b c d "Zinc production statistics from USGS" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ a b c d "USGS Molybdenum Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS lithium production statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ a b c d "USGS Lead Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on May 15, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS Bauxite Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on December 8, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS tin production statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on August 13, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "Manganese production statistics from the USGS" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on June 25, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS antimony production statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS Nickel Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS Niobium Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS rhenium production statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on June 21, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS iodine production statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on June 25, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "ANM" . gov.br Agência Nacional de Mineração . July 31, 2023. Archived from the original on August 4, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Brasil extrai cerca de 2 gramas de ouro por habitante em 5 anos" . R7.com . June 29, 2019. Archived from the original on July 12, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "G1 > Economia e Negócios – NOTÍCIAS – Votorantim Metais adquire reservas de zinco da Masa" . g1.globo.com . Archived from the original on January 18, 2021 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Nióbio: G1 visita em MG complexo industrial do maior produtor do mundo" . G1 . December 12, 2019. Archived from the original on December 12, 2019 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Serviço Geológico do Brasil" . cprm.gov.br . Archived from the original on September 6, 2019 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Rio Grande do Sul: o maior exportador de pedras preciosas do Brasil" . Band.com.br . Archived from the original on May 2, 2018 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Copper production in 2019 by USGS" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS Iodine Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on June 25, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS Rhenium Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on June 21, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ a b "USGS Lithium Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ a b c d e "USGS Silver Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on May 15, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ a b "USGS Salt Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS Potash Product ion Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS Sulfur Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS Iron Ore Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ a b "USGS Copper Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ a b c "USGS Gold Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ a b "USGS Tin Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on August 13, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ a b c "USGS Boron Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on July 18, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS Antimony Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS Tungsten Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on July 5, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ Campbell, Keith (June 21, 2013). "The state of mining in South America – an overview" . Miningweekly.com. Archived from the original on December 7, 2020 . Retrieved March 19, 2022 . ^ "Anuário Mineral Brasileiro 2018" . Archived from the original on July 9, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "La minería en México se reiniciará la próxima semana" . May 14, 2020. Archived from the original on November 25, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "USGS Mercury Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on March 7, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS Bismuth Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 22, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS Manganese Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on June 25, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "USGS Phosphate Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on May 2, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "Colombian emeralds" . Archived from the original on December 21, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "Gold production in Colombia" . Archived from the original on August 16, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ "Silver production in Colombia" . Archived from the original on August 16, 2021 . Retrieved June 27, 2021 . ^ a b "Production of Crude Oil including Lease Condensate 2019" . Archived from the original on March 4, 2021 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Natural Gas production" . Archived from the original on October 19, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ a b "Statistical Review of World Energy 2018" . Archived from the original on October 12, 2015 . Retrieved June 26, 2021 . ^ "Manufacturing, value added (current US$)" . Archived from the original on January 7, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ Forero, David; Tena-Junguito, Antonio (March 2024). "Industrialization as an engine of growth in Latin America throughout a century 1913–2013". Structural Change and Economic Dynamics . 68 : 98– 115. doi : 10.1016/j.strueco.2023.08.009 . ^ "Alimentos Processados | A indústria de alimentos e bebidas na sociedade brasileira atual" . alimentosprocessados.com.br . Archived from the original on March 25, 2018 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Faturamento da indústria de alimentos cresceu 6,7% em 2019" . G1 . February 18, 2020. Archived from the original on February 19, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Indústria de alimentos e bebidas faturou R$699,9 bi em 2019" . Agência Brasil . February 18, 2020. Archived from the original on February 19, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Produção nacional de celulose cai 6,6% em 2019, aponta Ibá" . Valor Econômico . February 21, 2020. Archived from the original on February 21, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Sabe qual é o estado brasileiro que mais produz Madeira?" . October 9, 2017. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "São Mateus é o 6º maior produtor de madeira em tora para papel e celulose no país, diz IBGE" . G1 . September 28, 2017. Archived from the original on June 14, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Indústrias calçadistas em Franca, SP registram queda de 40% nas vagas de trabalho em 6 anos" . G1 . July 14, 2019. Archived from the original on July 14, 2019 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ Digital, Agência Maya: Criação de Sites e Marketing. "Fenac – Centro de Eventos e Negócios | Produção de calçados deve crescer 3% em 2019" . fenac.com.br . Archived from the original on November 1, 2019 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Abicalçados apresenta Relatório Setorial 2019" . abicalcados.com.br . Archived from the original on April 22, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Exportação de Calçados: Saiba mais" . February 27, 2020. Archived from the original on April 15, 2022 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ Comércio, Diário do (January 24, 2020). "Minas Gerais produz 32,3% do aço nacional em 2019" . Archived from the original on June 14, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "O novo mapa das montadoras, que agora rumam para o interior do País" . March 8, 2019. Archived from the original on March 8, 2019 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Indústria automobilística do Sul do Rio impulsiona superavit na economia" . G1 . July 12, 2017. Archived from the original on July 19, 2017 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Indústria Química no Brasil" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Estudo de 2018" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Produção nacional da indústria de químicos cai 5,7% em 2019, diz Abiquim" . economia.uol.com.br . Archived from the original on June 14, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Industria Textil no Brasil" . Archived from the original on June 19, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ a b "Anuário CNT do transporte 2018" . Archived from the original on November 11, 2019 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Transporte en Cifras Estadísticas 2015" . Archived from the original on January 27, 2021 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Carta Caminera 2017" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on April 14, 2021 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "CIA – The World Factbook" . CIA World Factbook . Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved December 20, 2010 . ^ a b Infraestructura Carretera Archived July 16, 2007, at the Wayback Machine . Secretaría de Comunicaciones y Transportes. México. Retrieved January 13, 2007 ^ With data from The World Factbook ^ "Brasil tem 9 dos maiores aeroportos da América Latina" . October 29, 2018. Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ Ranking on the number of airports per country Archived January 19, 2018, at the Wayback Machine . CIA Factbook ^ Infrastructuras Archived February 2, 2009, at the Wayback Machine . Información de México. Ministerio de Industria, Turismo y Comercio de España. ^ "ACI-LAC presents the 10 busiest airports in Latin America and the Caribbean: an industry on the rise" . ala.aero . Retrieved November 24, 2025 . ^ a b "Port Activity of Latin America and the Caribbean 2018" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on January 14, 2021 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence" . July 12, 2022. Archived from the original on August 12, 2021 . Retrieved January 24, 2021 . ^ "Diagnostico Transporte" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on March 7, 2023 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ IEA (June 2024). "World Energy Investment 2024: Latin America and the Caribbean" . IEA . Retrieved November 25, 2024 . ^ IEA (November 2023). "Latin America Energy Outlook 2023" . IEA . Retrieved November 25, 2024 . ^ Ember. "Electricity Data Explorer" . Ember . Archived from the original on November 18, 2024 . Retrieved November 25, 2024 . ^ "Produção de petróleo e gás no Brasil ultrapassa 4 milhões de boe/d pela primeira vez" . anp.gov.br . Archived from the original on February 20, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "How many power plants do we have in Brazil?" . April 5, 2019. Archived from the original on October 31, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Brasil alcança 170 mil megawatts de capacidade instalada em 2019" . Archived from the original on April 13, 2021 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "IEMA (Instituto de Energia e Meio Ambiente),2016.Série TERMOELETRICIDADE EM FOCO: Uso de água em termoelétricas" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on April 1, 2018. ^ "O BNDES e a questão energética e logística da Região Sudeste" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on July 9, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Power: World's biggest hydroelectric facility" . Archived from the original on May 19, 2006. ^ "Boletim Mensal de Geração Eólica Fevereiro/2021" (PDF) (in Portuguese). Operador Nacional do Sistema Elétrico – ONS. February 20, 2021. pp. 6, 14. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 10, 2021 . Retrieved April 7, 2021 . ^ "Eólica supera 22 GW em operação no Brasil" (in Brazilian Portuguese). Megawhar. July 21, 2022. Archived from the original on March 15, 2023 . Retrieved August 2, 2022 . ^ "Brasil é o país com melhor fator de aproveitamento da energia eólica" . Governo do Brasil (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on October 7, 2018 . Retrieved October 7, 2018 . ^ a b c d Rethinking Education: Towards a global common good? (PDF) . UNESCO. 2015. pp. 24, Box 1. ISBN 978-92-3-100088-1 . Archived (PDF) from the original on November 13, 2018 . Retrieved March 15, 2017 . ^ "Boletim Trimestral de Energia Eólica – Junho de 2020" (PDF) (in Brazilian Portuguese). Empresa de Pesquisa Energética . June 23, 2020. p. 4. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 11, 2021 . Retrieved October 24, 2020 . ^ a b "Quantas usinas geradoras de energia temos no Brasil?" . April 5, 2019. Archived from the original on October 31, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Ventos promissores a caminho" . Archived from the original on November 29, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ "Brazilian onshore wind potential could be 880 GW, study indicates" . Archived from the original on August 14, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ a b c "Renewable capacity statistics 2021" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on August 27, 2021 . Retrieved April 23, 2021 . ^ "Global wind statistics" (PDF) . IRENA . April 22, 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved April 22, 2022 . ^ a b Ritchie, Hannah ; Roser, Max ; Rosado, Pablo (October 27, 2022). "Energy" . Our World in Data . Archived from the original on August 4, 2020 . Retrieved October 27, 2022 – via ourworldindata.org. ^ "Nuclear Power in Brazil. Briefing Paper # 95" . Uranium Information Centre. May 2007. Archived from the original on February 8, 2007 . Retrieved May 19, 2007 . ^ "Brazil plans to build seven nuclear reactors" . Mecropress. October 23, 2006. Archived from the original on February 19, 2007 . Retrieved May 19, 2007 . ^ "Solar atinge 21 GW e R$ 108,6 bi em investimentos no Brasil" . canalenergia.com.br . Archived from the original on April 1, 2023 . Retrieved October 27, 2022 . ^ "Quais as melhores regiões do Brasil para geração de energia fotovoltaica? – Sharenergy" . Sharenergy (in Brazilian Portuguese). February 3, 2017. Archived from the original on October 7, 2018 . Retrieved October 7, 2018 . ^ "Boletim Mensal de Geração Solar Fotovoltaica Setembro/2020" (PDF) (in Portuguese). Operador Nacional do Sistema Elétrico – ONS. October 13, 2020. pp. 6, 13. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 2, 2020 . Retrieved October 21, 2020 . ^ "RENEWABLE CAPACITY STATISTICS 2022" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved October 27, 2022 . ^ "RENEWABLE CAPACITY STATISTICS 2021 page 41" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on August 27, 2021 . Retrieved May 24, 2021 . ^ "Annual production of oil and other liquids" . Archived from the original on June 27, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 . ^ IEA. Key World Energy Statistics 2014. Natural Gas. Archived October 21, 2014, at the Wayback Machine Access date – January 17, 2021 ^ "html CIA.

The World Factbook. Natural gas – production" . ^ Altés, Carmen. "El turismo en América Latina y el Caribe y la experiencia del BID" . Ingresos directos por turismo internacional . Inter-American Development Bank (IDB). Archived from the original on January 18, 2012 . Retrieved May 3, 2009 . ^ UNWTO Tourism Highlights: 2018 Edition . 2018. doi : 10.18111/9789284419876 . ISBN 978-92-844-1987-6 . ^ "ANUÁRIO ESTATÍSTICO DE TURISMO 2021 BRASIL" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 1, 2022 . Retrieved October 1, 2022 . ^ Destape, El (December 10, 2021). "Los 10 destinos más visitados de Argentina según los portales de turismo" . www.eldestapeweb.com . Archived from the original on October 1, 2022 . Retrieved October 1, 2022 . ^ a b "China's Growing Influence in Latin America" . Council on Foreign Relations . Archived from the original on May 5, 2022 . Retrieved May 5, 2022 . ^ China Africa Research Initiative (November 29, 2022). "Evolution of Chinese Lending to Sri Lanka Since the mid-2000s: Separating Myth from Reality" (PDF) . China Africa Research Initiative . Archived (PDF) from the original on March 6, 2023 . Retrieved January 5, 2023 . ^ "China Faces 'Creditor Trap' in Lending to Latin America: Q&A" . Bloomberg News . February 22, 2022. Archived from the original on May 5, 2022 . Retrieved May 5, 2022 . ^ Baisotti, Pablo (2022). New Global Cities in Latin America and Asia . doi : 10.3998/mpub.12105185 . ISBN 978-0-472-07523-2 . JSTOR 10.3998/mpub.12105185 . ^ Report on World Social Situation 2013: Inequality Matters . United Nations. 2013. ISBN 978-92-1-130322-3 . Archived from the original on May 25, 2017 . Retrieved June 28, 2017 . ^ Protección social inclusiva en América Latina. Una mirada integral, un enfoque de derechos . United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UNECLAC). March 2011. ISBN 9789210545556 . Archived from the original on February 1, 2014 . Retrieved August 9, 2012 . ^ "Slums, swimming pools and Latin America's inequality" .

The Economist . June 5, 2025 . Retrieved June 5, 2025 . ^ Kamen 2005 . ^ Nutini, Hugo; Isaac, Barry (2009). Social Stratification in central Mexico 1500–2000 . University of Texas Press. p. 55. There are basically four operational categories that may be termed ethnic or even racial in Mexico today: (1) güero or blanco (white), denoting European and Near East extraction; (2) criollo (creole), meaning light mestizo in this context but actually of varying complexion; (3) mestizo, an imprecise category that includes many phenotypic variations; and (4) indio, also an imprecise category. These are nominal categories, and neither güero/blanco nor criollo is a widely used term (see Nutini 1997: 230). Nevertheless, there is a popular consensus in Mexico today that these four categories represent major sectors of the nation and that they can be arranged into a rough hierarchy: whites and creoles at the top, a vast population of mestizos in the middle, and Indians (perceived as both a racial and an ethnic component) at the bottom. ^ Seed, Patricia (1988). To Love, Honor, and Obey in Colonial Mexico: conflicts over Marriage Choice, 1574–1821 . Stanford: Stanford University. pp. 21– 23. ISBN 0-8047-2159-9 . ^ Francisco H. Ferreira et al. Inequality in Latin America: Breaking with History?, The World Bank, Washington, D.C., 2004 ^ Jones, Nicola; Baker, Hayley. "Untangling links between trade, poverty and gender" . ODI Briefing Papers 38, March 2008 . Overseas Development Institute (ODI). Archived from the original on July 19, 2009 . Retrieved April 15, 2011 . ^ Baten, Joerg; Mumme, Christina (September 2010). "Globalization and educational inequality during the 18 th to 20 th centuries: Latin America in global comparison". Revista de Historia Económica / Journal of Iberian and Latin American Economic History . 28 (2): 279– 305. doi : 10.1017/S021261091000008X . hdl : 10016/21558 . ^ Baten, Jörg (2016). A History of the Global Economy.

From 1500 to the Present . Cambridge University Press. p. 148f. ISBN 9781107507180 . ^ Human Development Report 2025 – A matter of choice: People and possibilities in the age of AI . United Nations Development Programme. May 6, 2025. Archived from the original on May 6, 2025 . Retrieved May 6, 2025 . ^ "GDP per Capita Ranking 2015 – Data and Charts" . Knoema . Archived from the original on May 6, 2016 . Retrieved May 13, 2016 . ^ "Human Development Report 2011" (PDF) . Table 3: Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index . United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Archived from the original (PDF) on May 15, 2012 . Retrieved August 8, 2012 . ^ "Human Development Report 2011" (PDF) . Table 5: Multidimensional Poverty Index . United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 11, 2012 . Retrieved August 8, 2012 . ^ "ADULT AND YOUTH LITERACY: National, regional and global trends, 1985–2015" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on August 2, 2016 . Retrieved January 2, 2016 . ^ "Geoba.se: Gazetteer – The World – Life Expectancy – Top 100+ By Country (2016)" . Archived from the original on November 20, 2016 . Retrieved May 13, 2016 . ^ "Homicide Statistics 2014" . Murder rate per 100,000 inhabitants . United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). Archived from the original on February 2, 2017 . Retrieved February 2, 2017 . ^ a b "Global Rankings" . Vision of Humanity . Institute for Economics and Peace (IEP). July 24, 2020. Archived from the original on June 19, 2019 . Retrieved February 26, 2019 . ^ "socio-economic policies" (PDF) . dane.gov.co. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 6, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 . ^ "Statistic yearbook" (PDF) . policica.gob.ni. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 28, 2021 . Retrieved January 22, 2021 . ^ "Global Metro Monitor 2014" . Brookings Institution . January 22, 2015. Archived from the original on January 7, 2019 . Retrieved January 22, 2015 . ^ Vidart, Daniel; Pi Hugarte, Renzo. El legado de los inmigrantes II (PDF) . Editorial "Nuestra Tierra". p. 52. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 15, 2025 . Retrieved April 14, 2025 . ^ Andrews, George Reid. 1980.

The Afro-Argentines of Buenos Aires, 1800–1900, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press ^ Gilberto Freyre.

In Bradford Brown, B.; Larson, Reed W.; Saraswathi, T. S. (eds.).

The World's Youth . pp. 276– 306. doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511613814 . ISBN 978-0-521-80910-8 . ^ a b ^ "Life expectancy at birth, total" .

The World Bank Group. April 15, 2025. Archived from the original on February 2, 2021 . Retrieved April 28, 2025 . ^ "Life expectancy at birth, male" .

The World Bank Group. April 15, 2025. Archived from the original on March 11, 2021 . Retrieved April 28, 2025 . ^ "Life expectancy at birth, female" .

The World Bank Group. April 15, 2025. Archived from the original on March 12, 2021 . Retrieved April 28, 2025 . ^ "Life expectancy and Healthy life expectancy, data by country" . World Health Organization. December 4, 2022. ^ "Salud Mesoamérica Initiative (SMI) | Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation" . www.healthdata.org . Retrieved May 12, 2025 . ^ "Iniciativas de financiamiento basados en resultados | bid-saludmesoamerica" . www.saludmesoamerica.org (in Spanish) . Retrieved May 12, 2025 . ^ Onestini, Maria (March 2011). "Water Quality and Health in Poor Urban Areas of Latin America". International Journal of Water Resources Development . 27 (1): 219– 226. doi : 10.1080/07900627.2010.537244 . ^ "Chile abortion: Court approves easing total ban" . BBC News . August 21, 2017. ^ "Latin America and the Caribbean" . Center for Reproductive Rights . November 8, 2023 . Retrieved November 10, 2023 . ^ "Why we continue to march towards legal abortion in Argentina" . Amnesty International . August 8, 2019 . Retrieved October 20, 2023 . ^ "GAPD - The Global Abortion Policies Database - The Global Abortion Policies Database is designed to strengthen global efforts to eliminate unsafe abortion" . Retrieved October 19, 2023 . ^ a b "HIV and AIDS in Latin America the Caribbean regional overview" . Avert . July 21, 2015 . Retrieved November 17, 2019 . ^ a b c d "Global HIV & AIDS statistics — Fact sheet | UNAIDS" . www.unaids.org . Retrieved December 12, 2025 . ^ a b García, Patricia J ; Bayer, Angela; Cárcamo, César P (June 2014). "The Changing Face of HIV in Latin America and the Caribbean" . Current HIV/AIDS Reports . 11 (2): 146– 157. doi : 10.1007/s11904-014-0204-1 . ISSN 1548-3568 . PMC 4136548 . PMID 24824881 . ^ Latin America the Most Dangerous Region in terms of Violence , archived from the original on October 24, 2012 , retrieved August 28, 2013 ^ "Latin America: Crisis behind bars" . BBC News . November 16, 2005. Archived from the original on September 8, 2017 . Retrieved May 7, 2010 . ^ "Latin America Is the Murder Capital of the World" .

The Wall Street Journal . September 20, 2018. Archived from the original on March 23, 2023 . Retrieved July 26, 2019 . ^ "A Year of Violence Sees Brazil's Murder Rate Hit Record High" .

The New York Times . August 10, 2018. Archived from the original on August 16, 2021 . Retrieved July 26, 2019 . ^ a b "Intentional homicides (per 100,000 people)" . UN Office on Drugs and Crime's International Homicide Statistics database. Archived from the original on September 22, 2017 . Retrieved September 21, 2017 . ^ "Map: Here are countries with the world's highest murder rates" . UN Office on Drugs and Crime's International Homicide Statistics database. June 27, 2016. Archived from the original on February 1, 2017 . Retrieved February 1, 2017 . ^ "Crime Hinders Development, Democracy in Latin America, U.S. Says – US Department of State" . Archived from the original on February 13, 2008. ^ Briceno-Leon, R.; Villaveces, A.; Concha-Eastman, A. (2008). " "Understanding the uneven distribution of the incidence of homicide in Latin America" " . International Journal of Epidemiology . 37 (4): 751– 757. doi : 10.1093/ije/dyn153 . PMID 18653511 . Archived from the original on June 1, 2010. International Journal of Epidemiology ^ "Traditional Nicaraguan Costumes: Mestizaje Costume" . ViaNica.com . Archived from the original on October 24, 2023 . Retrieved November 21, 2007 . ^ Stepan, Nancy Leys (1991). "The Hour of Eugenics": Race, Gender, and Nation in Latin America . Ithaca: Cornell University Press. in passim. ISBN 978-0-8014-9795-7 . ^ Giannelli, Anthony (April 28, 2021). "Decolonizing Identity through Latin American Visual Art" . Artland Magazine . Archived from the original on July 2, 2022 . Retrieved July 2, 2022 . ^ Perez-Barreiro, Gabriel (December 1994). "Constructivism in Latin America". University of Essex Collection of Latin American Art . ^ "Kobro and Strzemiński. Avant-Garde Prototypes" . Issuu . November 29, 2017. Archived from the original on May 3, 2019 . Retrieved May 3, 2019 . ^ "Frida Kahlo "Roots" Sets $5.6 Million Record at Sotheby's" . Art Knowledge News. Archived from the original on June 20, 2007 . Retrieved September 23, 2007 . ^ Notimex / El Siglo De Torreón (April 1, 2012). "Fernando Botero, el gran artista de Latinoamérica" . Elsiglodetorreon.com.mx. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017 . Retrieved December 9, 2013 . ^ "Fernando Botero, el aprendiz eterno" . Revistaenie.clarin.com. October 6, 2013. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved December 9, 2013 . ^ Forero, Juan (May 8, 2005). " 'Great Crime' at Abu Ghraib Enrages and Inspires an Artist" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on July 16, 2014 . Retrieved February 19, 2017 . ^ "Oswaldo Guayasamin" . Archived from the original on January 22, 2023 . Retrieved January 22, 2023 . ^ "The life and art of famous Ecuadorian painter Oswaldo Guayasamín" . February 10, 2020. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023 . Retrieved January 22, 2023 . ^ Paul A. Schroeder Rodriguez. Latin American Cinema: A Comparative History (University of California Press; 2016) studies 50 films since the silent era. ^ Bacherbas (September 11, 2017). "Los latinos al Óscar 2018: Chile" . Premios Óscar Latinos . Retrieved September 11, 2017 . ^ Gethin. "Spain. Golden Age Literature. Innovations and Originality" . Retrieved March 15, 2025 . ^ "Juan Gabriel, superstar Mexican singer, dies at 66" . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on May 30, 2019 . Retrieved August 28, 2016 . ^ Washburne, Christopher. "Clave: The African Roots of Salsa" . University of Salsa. Archived from the original on May 7, 2006 . Retrieved May 23, 2006 . ^ "Guide to Latin Music" . Caravan Music. Archived from the original on May 6, 2006 . Retrieved May 23, 2006 . ^ "Heitor Villa-Lobos" . Leadership Medica. Archived from the original on August 11, 2006 . Retrieved May 23, 2006 . ^ "Latin music returns to America with wave of new pop starlets" .