A great power is a nation , state or empire that, through its economic , political and military strength, is able to exert power and influence not only over its own region of the world, but beyond to others. A great power typically possesses military, economic, and diplomatic strength that it can wield to influence the actions of middle or small powers .

In a modern context, recognized great powers first arose in Europe during the post- Napoleonic era.

The formalization of the division between small powers and great powers came about with the signing of the Treaty of Chaumont in 1814.

The historical terms "Great Nation", a distinguished aggregate of people inhabiting a particular country or territory, and "Great Empire", a considerable group of states or countries under a single supreme authority, are colloquial ; their use is seen in ordinary historical conversations.

The internationally recognized great powers today are China , France , Germany , Italy , Japan , Russia , the United Kingdom , and the United States , with India being the most likely country to become a great power in the near future.

The first (light blue) and second (dark blue) French colonial empires France has been one of the leading powers in Europe and the world, since the breakup of the Carolingian Empire and the emergence of West Francia , its predecessor state, although its power was only truly consolidated from 1214 onwards with its victory in the Anglo-French War . Over the 14th century, French kings would focus on bringing more of the kingdom's lands under their direct control, as France emerged as the most populous region in Europe by 1340.

After the discovery of the New World , France became a dominant empire possessing many colonies in various locations around the world. Still participating in his deadly Italian conflicts , Francis I of France managed to finance expeditions to find trade routes to China or Cathay through landmass already discovered by the Spanish under Giovanni da Verrazzano . Giovanni would lead the first French discovery of the " New World " just north of the Spanish invasions of Mesoamerica , later as New Spain , and a decade later, Jacques Cartier would firmly colonize the landmass in the name of Francis I. This New World colony would become New France , the first colony of the Kingdom of France .

In the 1500s, France was still the most populous country in Europe, and would remain so until the mid-19th to late 19th century.

During the reign of Louis XIV , the Sun King, from 1643 to 1715, France was the leading European power as Europe's richest and most powerful country.

The dominance of France over world affairs extended to most foreign European courts speaking French, including other great powers of the time such as England, Sweden, and Russia.

From the 16th to the 17th centuries, the first French colonial empire stretched over a total area, at its peak in 1680, of up to 10 million km 2 (3.9 million sq mi), the second-largest empire in the world at the time behind only the Spanish Empire (which France would also take control of, briefly, under Napoleon ). It had many possessions around the world, mainly in the Americas , Asia , and Africa . France has kept some of these possessions to this day, integrating them into its territory, such as La Réunion .

At its peak in 1750, French India had an area of 1.5 million km 2 (0.58 million sq mi) and a totaled population of 30 million people, making it the most populous colony under French rule .

At the onset of the French Revolutionary Wars , early French victories exported many ideological features of the French Revolution throughout Europe. Napoleon gained support by appealing to people's common concerns.

In France, these included fear by some of a restoration of the ancien régime , a dislike of the Bourbons and the emigrant nobility who had escaped the country, a suspicion of foreign kings who had tried to reverse the Revolution, and a wish by Jacobins to extend France's revolutionary ideals. Napoleon became Emperor of the French ( French : L'Empereur des Français ) on 18 May 1804 and crowned Emperor on 2 December 1804, ending the period of the French Consulate , and won early military victories in the Napoleonic Wars against most European allied nations, notably at the Battle of Austerlitz (1805) and the Battle of Friedland (1807). Subsequent years of military victories extended French influence over much of Western Europe and into Poland.

At its height in 1812, the French Empire had 134 départements , ruled over 90 million subjects, maintained an extensive military presence in Germany, Italy, Spain, and the Duchy of Warsaw, and could count Prussia, Russia, and Austria as nominal allies.

The First French Empire (1804–1814, 1815), otherwise known as the Napoleonic Empire, was also the dominant power of much of continental Europe, and ruled over 90 million people at its height. It was the preeminent power in Europe, if not the world, as Britain was its only rival during the early 19th century, the two countries battling for supremacy over the world, with France dominating on land and Britain on the sea.

The feudal system was abolished, aristocratic privileges were eliminated in all places except Poland, and the introduction of the Napoleonic Code throughout the continent increased legal equality, established jury systems, and legalized divorce. Napoleon placed his relatives on European thrones and granted many titles, most of which expired with the fall of the Empire. Napoleon and South India Mysore ruler Tipu Sultan wished to ally, having provided Mysore with French volunteers during the Anglo-Mysore Wars , with the continuous aim of having an eventual open way to attack the British in India . Historians have estimated the death toll from the Napoleonic Wars to be around 5 million people, or 15% of the French Empire's subjects.

After Napoleon's disastrous invasion of Russia , the continental powers joined Russia, Britain, Portugal, and the rebels in Spain.

The War of the Sixth Coalition , a coalition of Austria, Prussia, Russia, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Spain, and several German states , finally defeated France and drove Napoleon into exile on Elba .

When he returned, the coalition invaded France again , forcing Napoleon to abdicate and thus leading to the restoration of Bourbon rule . England and United Kingdom (1588–) At the end of the 16th century, having secured its position as a strong naval power, England began to challenge the Portuguese Empire 's monopoly of trade with Asia, forming private joint-stock companies to finance the voyages: most notably the English, later British, East India Company , chartered in 1600.

The primary aim of these companies was to tap into the lucrative spice trade , focusing mainly on two regions: the East Indies archipelago and India. There, England competed for trade supremacy with Portugal and the Netherlands.

Although England eventually eclipsed both countries as a colonial power, in the short term, the three Anglo-Dutch Wars of the 17th century left the Netherlands with a stronger position in Asia. Hostilities ceased when, in 1688, the Dutch William of Orange invaded and ascended to the English throne in what is known as the Glorious Revolution – bringing peace between the Dutch Republic and England. A deal between the two nations left the spice trade of the East Indies archipelago to the Netherlands and trade in the textiles industry of India to England, but textiles soon overtook spices in profitability. 1754 map, British Empire in red During the 16th to 18th centuries, British colonies were created along the east coast of North America .

The southern colonies had a plantation economy , made possible by slavery , which produced tobacco and cotton. This cotton was especially important in the development of British textile towns and the rise of the world's first Industrial Revolution in Britain by the end of the 18th century.

The northern colonies provided timber, ships , furs , and whale oil for lamps, allowing work to be done at times of the day without natural light. All of these colonies served as important captive markets for British finished goods and trade goods, including British textiles, Indian tea, West Indian coffee, and other items.

The British Empire participated officially in the Seven Years' War from 1756, a war described by some historians as the world's first World War .

The British had hoped winning the war against its colonial rival France would improve the defensibility of its important American colonies, where tensions from settlers eager to move west of the Appalachian Mountains had been a substantive issue.

The new British-Prussian alliance was successful in forcing France to cede Canada to Britain, and Louisiana to Spain , thus ostensibly securing British North America from external threats as intended.

The war also allowed Britain to capture the proto-industrialised Bengal from the French-allied Mughal Empire , then Britain's largest competitor (and by far the world's single largest producer) in the textile trade, it was also able to flip Hyderabad from the Mughals to its cause, and capture the bulk of French territorial possessions in India, effectively shutting them out of the sub-continent . Importantly, the war also saw Britain becoming the dominant global naval power. Despite its successes in the Seven Years' War, the British government was left close to bankruptcy, and in response, it raised taxes considerably to pay its debts. Britain was also faced with the delicate task of pacifying its new French-Canadian subjects, as well as the many American Indian tribes who had supported France, without provoking a new war with France.

In 1763, Pontiac's War broke out as a group of Indian tribes in the Great Lakes region and the Northwest (the modern American Midwest) were unhappy with the loss of congenial and friendly relations with the French and complained about being cheated by the new British monopoly on trade. Moreover, the Native Americans feared that British rule would lead to white settlers displacing them from their land, whereas it was known that the French had only come as fur traders, and indeed this had been the source of animosity on the part of British settlers with France and part of the reason the war had started in the first place. Pontiac's War was going very badly for the British, and it was only with their victory at the Battle of Bushy Run that a complete collapse of British power in the Great Lakes region was avoided. A portion of eastern North America; the 1763 "proclamation line" is the border between the red and the pink areas.

In response, King George III issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763 , which forbade white settlement beyond the crest of the Appalachians, with the hope of appeasing the Indians and preventing further insurrection, but this led to considerable outrage in the Thirteen Colonies , whose inhabitants were eager to acquire native lands.

The Quebec Act of 1774, similarly intended to win over the loyalty of French Canadians, also spurred resentment among American colonists.

As such, dissatisfaction with the Royal Proclamation and " Taxation Without Representation " are said to have led to the Thirteen Colonies declaring their independence and starting the American War of Independence (1775–1783). This war was comprehensively supported by Britain's competitors, France and Spain, and Britain lost. Britain and the new United States of America were able to retain the pre-existing trade arrangements, minimizing long-term harm to British trading interests.

After the war, the American trade deficit with Britain was approximately 5:1, leading to a shortage of gold for several years. However, the British Empire would shift its focus from North America to India, expanding from its new base in Bengal and signaling the beginning of the second phase of the British Empire. Russia (1703–) The Tsardom of Russia , c. 1700 , during the reign of Peter the Great The Russian Empire formed from what was the Tsardom of Russia under Peter the Great . Peter fought numerous wars and expanded an already vast empire, making it a major European power.

In 1703, he moved the capital from Moscow to the new model city of Saint Petersburg , which was largely built in the Western style. This would be the turning point of a series of major reforms he would gradually enact in Russia, aiming to transform the country into a westernized, major player on the world stage. He led a cultural revolution that replaced some of the traditionalist and medieval social and political mores with a modern, scientific, Western-oriented, and rationalist system. His victory over Sweden in the Great Northern War in 1721 saw Russia being recognized as a great power, dominating the Baltic region .

The Empire was officially proclaimed after the war, with Peter becoming the first Emperor of Russia . Empresses Elizabeth and Catherine the Great presided over a golden age ; in the late 17th century, they expanded the state by conquest, colonization , and diplomacy, while continuing Peter I's policy of modernization along Western European lines. Emperor Alexander I played a major role in defeating Napoleon 's ambitions to control Europe, as well as constituting the short-lived Holy Alliance of conservative eastern European monarchies. Russia further expanded to the west , south , and east , becoming one of the most powerful European empires of the time. Its victories in the Russo-Turkish Wars were checked by defeat in the Crimean War (1853–1856), which led to a period of reform and intensified expansion in Central Asia .

Following these conquests, Russia's territories spanned across Eurasia , with its western borders ending in eastern Poland , and its eastern borders ending in Alaska .

By the end of the 19th century, the area of the empire was about 22,800,000 square kilometers (8,800,000 sq mi), or almost The majority of the population lived in European Russia. More than 100 ethnic groups lived in the Russian Empire, with Russians comprising about 45% of the population. Emperor Alexander II initiated numerous reforms, most dramatically the emancipation of all 23 million serfs in 1861. Ottoman Empire (1453–1875) The Ottoman Empire was a Turkic state, which at the height of its power in the 16th–17th centuries spanned three continents, controlling parts of Southeastern Europe , the Middle East , and most of North Africa .

The empire has been called by historians a "Universal Empire" due to having both Roman and Islamic traditions. It was one of the powerful gunpowder empires .

The empire was at the center of interactions between the Eastern and Western worlds for several centuries.

The Ottoman Empire was the only power in the world to seriously challenge the rising power of Western Europe between the 15th and 19th centuries. With Constantinople (today Istanbul ) as its capital, the Empire was, in some respects, an Islamic successor to an earlier Mediterranean empire—the Eastern Roman Empire .

The effective military and bureaucratic structures of the early Empire also came under strain, while the Ottomans gradually fell behind European powers in military technology. Causes of this long decline are still debated today: the Ottoman decline thesis was the predominant view for most of history, but recent discoveries tend to contradict it. Potential factors contributing to this decline include a protracted period of misrule by weak Sultans; stifled innovation and research due to growing religious and intellectual conservatism; public or military opposition to reform; or simply a need to transform the country for it to survive, which could have hampered all efforts to strengthen the state itself. Despite these difficulties, the Empire remained a major expansionist power until the Battle of Vienna in 1683, which marked the end of Ottoman expansion into Europe and its maximum territorial extent on the continent. Ottoman military reform efforts began with Selim III (1789–1807), who made the first major attempts to modernize the army along European lines. These efforts, however, were hampered by reactionary movements, partly from the religious leadership, but primarily from the Janissary corps , who had become anarchic and ineffectual. Jealous of their privileges and firmly opposed to change, they revolted and deposed him. Selim's efforts cost him his throne and his life. Still, they were resolved in spectacular and bloody fashion by his successor, the dynamic Mahmud II , who massacred the Janissary corps in 1826 . Even then, it was too late: much of the decline took place in the 19th century under pressure from Russia and various other powers, beginning with the Greek War of Independence , and culminating in 1875 in the Great Eastern Crisis : by 1882, the Empire had lost effective control of Egypt , Tunisia , and more.

The Balkans were lost by 1913 , leading to a coup d'état , and the Empire disintegrated after the First World War, leaving Turkey as its successor state. Portugal (1415–1822) Portuguese Empire (1415–1999) The Portuguese Empire was the first empire to have territory on all continents, as well as the earliest and longest-lived of the Western European colonial empires, lasting from 1415 to 1999. Portugal 's small size and population restricted the empire, in the 16th century and beyond, to a collection of small but well-defended outposts along the African coasts, alongside three vast colonies, Angola , Mozambique and Brazil . For most of the 16th century, the Portuguese Indian Armadas , then one of the strongest navies in shipbuilding and naval artillery , dominated most of the Atlantic Ocean south of the Canary Islands , the Indian Ocean , and the western Pacific Ocean .

The height of the empire was reached in the 16th century, but isolation and competition with new colonial empires like the British , French , and Dutch began its long, gradual decline.

After the 18th century, Portugal focused on the colonization of Brazil and its African possessions . However, following the Liberal Revolution of 1820 , Brazil soon declared independence and the Portuguese Empire lost its most prized possession. Spain (1469–1815) The areas of the Spanish Empire at various times over a period exceeding 400 years The territories that came under the Spanish monarch during the Iberian Union After the crowns of Castile and Aragon united in 1469, modern Spain began to emerge as a great power. Besides conquering the Emirate of Granada and completing the " Reconquista ", in the 16th century, Spain was in the vanguard of European global exploration and colonial expansion and the opening of trade routes across the oceans, with trade flourishing across the Atlantic Ocean between Spain and the Americas and across the Pacific Ocean between the Asia–Pacific and Mexico via the Philippines. Conquistadors toppled the Aztec , Inca , and Maya civilizations , and laid claim to vast stretches of land in North and South America. For a long time, the Spanish Empire dominated the oceans with its navy and ruled the battlefield with its infantry, the effective tercios . Spain enjoyed a cultural golden age in the 16th and 17th centuries as Europe's foremost power, with the largest economy of all nations during at least half of the 16th century.

From 1580 to 1640, the Spanish Empire and the Portuguese Empire were conjoined in a personal union of its Habsburg monarchs , during the period of the Iberian Union . However, the empires continued to be administered separately.

From the middle of the 16th century, silver and gold from the American mines increasingly financed the military capability of Habsburg Spain , then the foremost global power, in its long series of European, American, and North African wars. Until the loss of its American colonies in the 19th century, Spain maintained one of the largest empires in the world, even though it suffered from fluctuating military and economic fortunes from the 1640s onward. Confronted with new experiences, Spanish thinkers formulated some of the first modern ideas on natural law, sovereignty, international law, war, and economics, going so far as to question the legitimacy of imperialism, in related schools of thought collectively referred to as the School of Salamanca . Constant contention with rival powers caused territorial, commercial, and religious conflict that contributed to the slow decline of Spanish power from the early 17th century, aggravated by both the General Crisis sweeping through Europe, as well as the collapse of the Habsburg Netherlands and ensuring Eighty Years' War , which would cripple Spain for decades.

In the Mediterranean , Spain warred constantly with the Ottoman Empire; on the European continent, France eventually replaced Spain as the leading military power. Overseas, Spain was initially rivaled by Portugal , and later by the English and Dutch .

In addition, English-, French-, and Dutch-sponsored privateering and piracy, overextension of Spanish military commitments in its territories, increasing government corruption, and economic stagnation caused by military expenditures ultimately contributed to the empire's weakening.

After a century of decline from its status as Europe's most powerful country, Spain entered the War of the Spanish Succession , with its population divided between pro-Bourbon and pro-Habsburg factions, as Europe decided the country's fate. Spain's European empire was finally undone by the Peace of Utrecht (1713), which stripped Spain of its remaining territories in Italy and the Low Countries . Spain's fortunes improved thereafter, but it remained a second-rate power in European politics. However, Spain maintained and enlarged its vast overseas empire until the 19th century, when the shock of the Peninsular War sparked declarations of independence in Quito , Venezuela , Paraguay and many more successive revolutions that split away its territories from its American mainland .

In the 15th century the ruling Jagiellonian dynasty managed to place its members on the thrones of the neighbouring kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungary , becoming one of the most powerful houses in Europe.

The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth was one of the largest, most powerful, and most populous countries in 16th, 17th, and 18th century Europe .

In fact, Poland was a major power that imposed its will on weaker neighbors. Its political structure was formed in 1569 by the Union of Lublin , which transformed the previous Polish–Lithuanian union into the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, and lasted in this form until the adoption of the Constitution of May 3, 1791 .

In the 16th century, the area of the Rzeczpospolita reached almost 1 million km 2 , with a population of 11 million.

At that time, it was the third largest country in Europe, and the largest country of Western Christian Europe. Poland was a political, military and economic power. It was a country of religious freedom , confirmed by the Warsaw Confederation , one of the first European acts of its kind, which encouraged an influx of immigrants, including Armenian , Czech , Dutch , French , Greek , Jewish , and Scottish .

The Union possessed features unique among contemporary states. This political system, unusual for its time, stemmed from the ascendance of the szlachta noble class over other social classes and over the political system of monarchy .

In time, the szlachta accumulated enough privileges (such as those established by the Nihil novi Act of 1505) that no monarch could hope to break the szlachta's grip on power.

The Commonwealth's political system does not readily fit into a simple category; it may best be described as a melange of: confederation and federation , concerning the broad autonomy of its regions. It is, however, difficult to decisively classify the Commonwealth as either a confederation or a federation, as it had qualities of both. oligarchy , as only the szlachta—around 15% of the population—had political rights; democracy , since all the szlachta were equal in rights and privileges, and the Sejm could veto the king on important matters, including legislation (the adoption of new laws), foreign affairs, declaration of war, and taxation (changes of existing taxes or the levying of new ones). Also, the 9% of the Commonwealth population who enjoyed those political rights (the szlachta) was a substantially larger percentage than in majority European countries; note that in 1789 in France, only about 1% of the population had the right to vote, and in 1867 in the United Kingdom, only about 3%. elective monarchy , since the monarch, elected by the szlachta, was Head of State; constitutional monarchy , since the monarch was bound by pacta conventa and other laws, and the szlachta could disobey decrees of the king that they deemed illegal.

The Polish Golden Age , in the reigns of Sigismund I and Sigismund II , the last two Jagiellonian kings, and more generally the 16th century, is identified with the culture of the Polish Renaissance . This flowering had its material basis in the prosperity of the elites, both the landed nobility and the urban patriciate, at centers such as Kraków and Gdańsk .

The University of Kraków became one of the leading centers of learning in Europe, and in Poland, Nicolaus Copernicus formulated a model of the universe that placed the Sun rather than Earth at its center , making a groundbreaking contribution, which sparked the Scientific Revolution in Europe.

Following the Union of Lublin, at various times, through personal unions and vassalages, Poland's sphere of influence reached Sweden and Finland in Northern Europe, the Danube in Southeastern Europe, and the Caribbean and West Africa .

In a rather unique feat, Poland became a territorially extensive state largely not through war conquests, but rather through peaceful incorporation of territories, with the Polish–Lithuanian union formed voluntarily, and Prussia , Caffa in Crimea and Livonia voluntarily recognizing Polish sovereignty in 1454, 1462 and 1561 , respectively, viewing Poland as a defender against either oppressive regimes, such as the Teutonic Order , or potential invaders such as Turkey and Russia. Poland had turbulent relations with the neighboring powers of Russia , Sweden , and Turkey , which challenged Polish power in a series of wars.

After victories in the Dimitriads (the Battle of Klushino , 1610), with Polish forces entering Moscow , Sigismund III 's son, Prince Władysław of Poland , was briefly elected Tsar of Russia .

The weakening of Poland was brought by the disastrous Russo-Swedish-Brandenburgian invasion of 1654–1660, yet Poland remained a great power.

The victory of Polish-led forces at the Battle of Vienna in 1683 saved Austria from Ottoman conquest and marked the end of Ottoman advances into Europe. Poland's great power came to an end with the Swedish invasion of Poland of 1701–1706 during the Great Northern War , and from Stanislaus I onwards, successive kings were consistently elected in the geopolitical interests of foreign nations. China (1683–1912) Qing dynasty in 1820 The Qing dynasty was the last ruling dynasty of China , proclaimed in 1636 and collapsed in 1912 (with a brief, abortive restoration in 1917 ). It was preceded by the Ming dynasty and followed by the Republic of China .

The dynasty was founded by the Manchu clan Aisin Gioro in what is today Northeast China (also known as " Manchuria "). Starting in 1644, it expanded into China proper and its surrounding territories. Complete pacification of China proper was accomplished around 1683 under the Kangxi Emperor .

The multiethnic Qing Empire assembled the territorial base for modern China . It was the largest Chinese dynasty and in 1790 the fourth-largest empire in world history in terms of territorial size. With a population of 432 million in 1912 , it was the world's most populous country at the time.

The Qing dynasty also reached its economic peak in 1820, when it became the world's largest economy, contributing to around 30% of the world's GDP . Originally, the Later Jin dynasty changed its official name to "Great Qing", meaning "clear" or "pellucid", in 1636.

In 1644, Beijing was sacked by a coalition of rebel forces led by Li Zicheng , a minor Ming official who later proclaimed the Shun dynasty .

The last Ming emperor, the Chongzhen Emperor , committed suicide when the city fell, marking the official end of the Ming dynasty. Qing forces then allied with Ming general Wu Sangui and seized control of Beijing to expel Shun forces from the city. Examples of the high quality porcelain that was mass-produced during the High Qing era The Qing dynasty reached its height during the reigns of the Kangxi Emperor , Yongzheng Emperor , and Qianlong Emperor .

The skillful rule of the era's emperors allowed for this success: rule through chiefdoms, in territories like Taiwan , allowed for the conquered peoples to retain their culture and be ruled by their own people, while the Qing Empire still possessed the ultimate control over its vast territory. These ruling tactics created little need or reason for the conquered to rebel. Another aspect of Manchu rule under the Qing Empire was its administration of modern-day China.

The Mongols' attempt to rule may have failed because they attempted to rule from the outside.

The High Qing emperors ruled from within, enabling them to obtain and retain stable, efficient control of the state. A new generation of emperors combined the strengths of their culture with a degree of sinicization of the conquered cultures, aiming to achieve assimilation while retaining their own cultural identity. This was initiated with the Kangxi Emperor , who was in power at the initiation of the High Qing.

As an emperor, he elevated the status of the Qing Empire through his passion for education, combined with his military expertise and his restructuring of the bureaucracy into a cosmopolitan one. His son and successor, the Yongzheng Emperor , ruled differently, using harsher, more brutal tactics, but possessed an unprecedented level of efficiency and commitment to the empire's betterment.

The last successful emperor of the High Qing was the Qianlong Emperor who, following in the footsteps of his father and grandfather, was a well-rounded ruler who created the peak of the High Qing Empire.

The unique and unprecedented ruling techniques of these three emperors, and the emphasis on multiculturalism fostered the productivity and success that lasted through the High Qing era. A heavy revival of the arts was another characteristic of the High Qing Empire. Through commercialization, items such as porcelain were mass-produced and traded. Literature was emphasized as Imperial libraries were erected, and literacy rates of men and women both rose within the elite class.

The significance of education and art in this era is that they created economic stimulation that would last for over fifty years.

After the Qianlong Emperor's death, the dynasty faced changes in the world system, foreign instrusion , internal revolts , population growth, economic disruption, official corruption, and the reluctance of Confucian elites to change their mindsets. With peace and prosperity, the population rose to some 400 million, but taxes and government revenues remained low, soon leading to a fiscal crisis. China, under the Qing dynasty, remained an unrecognized great power, as European powers did not, at the time, consider Asian nations to be their equals.

Following the First and Second Opium Wars , where Britain and France imposed their will on the imperial dynasty, the government attempted to pursue a policy of radical reforms known as the Self-Strengthening Movement .

While initially successful, the First Sino-Japanese War brought an abrupt end to the relative stability the Qing had managed to maintain, and was followed quickly by the Boxer Rebellion , until the Qing finally lost control in 1912 . India (1526–1818) Model depicting the Court of Emperor Aurangzeb, by Johann Melchior Dinglinger The Mughal Empire was a Persianate empire founded in 1526 by Babur of the Barlas clan with the backing of the neighboring Safavid Empire 's Shah Ismail Safavi acting as Babur's suzerain. Babur's victories at the First Battle of Panipat and the Battle of Khanwa against the Delhi Sultanate and Rajput Confederation led to the formation of the Mughal Empire. Over the next centuries under Akbar , Jahangir , Shah Jahan , the Mughal Empire would grow in area and power and dominate the Indian subcontinent , reaching its maximum extent under Emperor Aurangzeb . This imperial structure lasted until 1720, shortly after the Mughal-Maratha Wars and the death of Aurangzeb, where the Mughals would gradually lose their influence to new powers such as the Maratha Empire and the Sikh Confederacy .

The empire experienced a prolonged period of decline in the following century, notably culminating in the sacking of Delhi in 1739 and 1757.

The country was made an unofficial protectorate of the Maratha Empire in 1784.

After the Second Anglo-Maratha War , the British took over, until the Mughal Empire was formally dissolved by the British Raj after the Indian Rebellion of 1857 .

The Maratha Empire itself reached its territorial peak in 1760 before it entered its own period of decline starting with its defeat at the Third Battle of Panipat by Afghanistan in 1761.

The death of young Peshwa Madhavrao I marked the end of the Peshwa's effective authority over other chiefs in the empire.

The Indian subcontinent produced about 25% of the world's industrial output from the 1st millennium CE through the 18th century.

The exchequer of the Emperor Aurangzeb reported an annual revenue of more than £100 million, or $450 million, making him one of the wealthiest monarchs in the world at the time.

The empire had an extensive road network, which was vital to the economic infrastructure, built by a public works department set up by the Mughals, linking towns and cities across the empire, making trade easier to conduct.

The Mughals adopted and standardised the rupee ( rupiya , or silver) and dam (copper) currencies introduced by Sur Emperor Sher Shah Suri during his brief rule.

The Mughals minted coins with high purity, never dropping below 96%, and without debasement until the 1720s. A major sector of the Mughal economy was agriculture. A variety of crops were grown, including food crops such as wheat, rice, and barley , and non-food cash crops such as cotton, indigo , and opium .

By the mid-17th century, Indian cultivators began to extensively grow maize and tobacco imported from the Americas.

The Mughal administration emphasized agrarian reform , started by Sher Shah Suri , the work of which Akbar adopted and furthered with more reforms.

The civil administration was organised hierarchically based on merit, with promotions based on performance, exemplified by the common use of the seed drill among Indian peasants, and built irrigation systems across the empire, which produced much higher crop yields and increased the net revenue base, leading to increased agricultural production. Manufacturing was also a significant contributor to the Mughal Economy.

The Mughal empire produced about 25% of the world's industrial output up until the end of the 18th century. Manufactured goods and cash crops from the Mughal Empire were sold throughout the world. Key industries included textiles, shipbuilding , and steel. Processed products included cotton textiles, yarns , thread , silk, jute products, metalware , and foods such as sugar, oils and butter The Mughal Empire also took advantage of the demand of products from Mughal India in Europe, particularly cotton textiles, as well as goods such as spices, peppers, indigo , silks, and saltpeter (for use in munitions ). European fashion , for example, became increasingly dependent on Mughal Indian textiles and silks.

From the late 17th century to the early 18th century, Mughal India accounted for 95% of British imports from Asia, and the Bengal Subah province alone accounted for 40% of Dutch imports from Asia. Indian cotton textiles were the most important manufactured goods in world trade in the 18th century, consumed worldwide, from the Americas to Japan.

By the early 18th century, Mughal Indian textiles were clothing people across the Indian subcontinent, Southeast Asia, Europe, the Americas, Africa, and the Middle East. Netherlands (1648–1795) Lands held by The Netherlands The Dutch Empire came to control various territories after the Dutch achieved independence from Spain in the late 16th century.

The strength of their shipping industry and the expansion of trading routes between Europe and the Orient bolstered the overseas colonial empire, which lasted from the 17th to the 20th century.

The Dutch initially built up colonial possessions based on indirect state-capitalist corporate colonialism , as small European trading companies often lacked the capital or workforce for large-scale operations.

The companies' domination of global commerce contributed greatly to a commercial revolution and a cultural flowering in the Netherlands of the 17th century, known as the Dutch Golden Age .

During the Dutch Golden Age, Dutch trade, science, and art were among the most acclaimed in Europe. Dutch military power was at its height in the middle of the 17th century and in that era the Dutch navy was one of the biggest navies in the world.

By the middle of the 17th century, the Dutch had overtaken Portugal as the dominant player in the spice and silk trade.

In 1652, they founded a colony at Cape Town on the coast of South Africa as a way-station for their ships on the route between Europe and Asia.

After the first settlers spread out around the Company station, nomadic white livestock farmers, or Trekboers, moved farther afield, leaving the richer but limited coastal farming lands for the drier interior tableland. Between 1602 and 1796, many Europeans were sent to work in the Asian trade.

The majority died of disease or made their way back to Europe, but some of them made the Indies their new home. Interaction between the Dutch and the native population mainly took place in Sri Lanka and the modern Indonesian Islands.

In their search for new trade passages between Asia and Europe , Dutch navigators explored and charted distant regions such as Australia , New Zealand , Tasmania , and parts of the eastern coast of North America .

During the period of proto-industrialization , the empire received 50% of textiles and 80% of silks import from the India's Mughal Empire , chiefly from its most developed region known as Bengal Subah .

As a result of acquiring territories seized from Russia and the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth , as well as its involvement in the Thirty Years' War , Sweden found itself transformed into the leading power of the Baltic Sea and the leader of Lutheranism . Despite not being a populous country, Sweden has achieved the status of a dominant power in northern Europe due to its efficient administration, a near-monopoly on copper production in Europe, a strong arms industry , and a robust, innovative army with capable leaders.

The mid-17th and early 18th centuries were Sweden's most successful years as a great power.

During the Thirty Years' War, Sweden sought to conquer land from the Holy Roman Empire .

After its defeat in the Battle of Nördlingen (1634) , Sweden was left with only a couple of territories in present-day northern Germany.

After France intervened on Sweden's side, the tide shifted in its favor.

As the war continued, the civilian and military death toll grew, and when it was over, it led to severe depopulation in the German states.

Although exact population figures are unavailable, historians estimate that the Holy Roman Empire's population fell by one-third as a result of the war. Sweden had seats in the Imperial Diet of the Holy Roman Empire, and was able to interfere in its politics. Sweden's involvement in the Thirty Years' War weakened Imperial authority and delayed the unification of German states, which occurred only in the 19th century. Sweden controlled most of the Baltic Sea, where its only notable rival in the 17th century remained Poland, therefore Sweden initiated several invasions of Poland in an effort to conquer Polish coastal regions as well, however, except for the capture of central Livonia with Riga in the 1620s, without lasting success. Other major rivals of Sweden in the struggle for hegemony in Northern Europe were Denmark and Russia.

During the Northern War of 1655–1660 , Sweden even made unsuccessful attempts to annex Denmark , partition Poland , and unite with Lithuania to create a stronger Baltic bulwark against Russia. Swedish colonial empire Sweden also had colonial possessions as a minor colonial Empire that existed from 1638 to 1663 and later from 1784 to 1878. Sweden founded overseas colonies, principally in the New World. New Sweden was founded in the valley of the Delaware River in 1638, and Sweden later laid claim to some Caribbean islands. A string of Swedish forts and trading posts was constructed along the coast of West Africa as well, but these were not designed for Swedish settlers. Sweden even established its own East India Company for trade with Asia that operated from 1731 to 1813, and occupied the South Indian city of Parangipettai for one month in 1733 before it was retaken by Britain and France . Sweden reached its largest territorial extent during the rule of Charles X (1622–1660) after the treaty of Roskilde in 1658.

After half a century of expansive warfare, the Swedish economy had deteriorated. It would become the lifetime task of Charles' son, Charles XI (1655–1697), to rebuild the economy and refit the army. His legacy to his son, the coming ruler of Sweden Charles XII , was one of the finest arsenals in the world, with a large standing army and a great fleet. Sweden's largest threat at this time, Russia, had a larger army but was far behind in both equipment and training.

The Swedish army crushed the Russians at the Battle of Narva in 1700, one of the first battles of the Great Northern War .

The campaign had a successful opening for Sweden, which came to occupy half of Poland , and Charles laid claim to the Polish throne. But after a long march exposed by cossack raids, the Russian Tsar Peter the Great 's scorched-earth techniques and the very cold Russian climate, the Swedes stood weakened with shattered confidence and enormously outnumbered by the Russian army at Poltava .

The decisive Russian victory at the Battle of Poltava (1709) marked the end of Sweden as a great power. Late modern era great powers Further information: Modern era and International relations (1814–1919) France (1214–) Main article: French colonial empire The French empire with its colonies (dark blue) and occupied territories (light blue) in 1812 France maintained its status throughout the modern era as a dominant empire with numerous colonies around the world.

The French colonial empire is the set of territories outside Europe that were under French rule primarily from the 16th century to the late 1960s (some see the French control of places such as New Caledonia as a continuation of that colonial empire).

The first French colonial empire reached its peak in 1680, with over 10,000,000 km 2 (3,900,000 sq mi) of territory, which at the time was the second-largest in the world, behind the Spanish Empire .

In the 19th and 20th centuries, the French colonial empire was the second-largest in the world, behind the British Empire.

At its height in the 1920s and 1930s, including metropolitan France, the total area under French sovereignty reached 13,500,000 km 2 (5,200,000 sq mi), representing 10% of Earth's total land area.

The total area of the French colonial empire, with the first (mainly in the Americas and Asia) and second (mainly in Africa and Asia), combined, reached 24,000,000 km2 (9,300,000 sq mi), the second-largest ever overall. France began to establish colonies in North America, the Caribbean, and India, following Spanish and Portuguese successes during the Age of Discovery , in rivalry with Britain for supremacy. A series of wars with Britain during the 18th and early 19th centuries, which France lost, ended its colonial ambitions on these continents and, with them, what some historians term the "first" French colonial empire.

In the 19th century, France established a new empire in Africa and Southeast Asia. Some of these colonies lasted beyond the Second World War and were integrated into France proper as overseas territories. United Kingdom (1588–) Main articles: British Empire and Pax Britannica British Empire , 1600–present.

By 1920, it had become the largest empire in history , comprising approximately 25% of the world's land area and 25% of its population.

The Palace of Westminster , with Elizabeth Tower and Westminster Bridge The British Empire in the modern era was built primarily in Asia, the Middle East, and Africa. It included colonies in Canada , the Caribbean , and India , South Africa , and shortly thereafter began the settlement of Australia and New Zealand .

Following France's 1815 defeat in the Napoleonic Wars , Great Britain took possession of many more overseas territories in Africa and Asia. It established an informal empire based on free trade in South America, Persia , and elsewhere.

At its height, the British Empire was the largest empire in history and, for over a century, was the foremost global power.

In 1815–1914 , the Pax Britannica was the most powerful unitary authority in history due to the Royal Navy 's unprecedented naval predominance.

During the 19th century, the United Kingdom was the first country in the world to industrialize and embrace free trade, giving birth to the Industrial Revolution .

The rapid industrial growth after the conquests of the wealthy Mughal Bengal transformed Great Britain into the world's largest industrial and financial power.

In contrast, the world's largest navy gave it undisputed control of the seas and international trade routes. This advantage helped the British Empire, after a mid-century liberal reaction against empire-building, to grow faster than ever before.

The Victorian empire colonised large parts of Africa , including such territories as South Africa , Egypt , Kenya , Sudan , Nigeria , and Ghana , most of Oceania , colonies in the Far East, such as Singapore , Malaysia , and Hong Kong , and took control over the whole Indian subcontinent , making it the largest empire in the world.

After victory in the First World War , the Empire gained control of territories such as Tanzania and Namibia from the German Empire , and Iraq and Palestine (including the Transjordan ) from the Ottoman Empire .

By this point in 1920, the British Empire had become the largest empire in history , controlling approximately 25% of the world's land area and 25% of its population. It covered about 36.6 million km 2 (14.1 million sq mi). Because of its magnitude, it was often referred to as " the empire on which the sun never sets ".

The political, social, and economic changes and disruptions in the United Kingdom and throughout the world caused by the First World War, followed only two decades later by the Second World War , led the Empire to break up as colonies were gradually granted independence. Much of the reason the Empire ceased was that, by the mid-20th century, many colonies were no longer as undeveloped or as dependent as they had been at the arrival of British control. Social changes worldwide in the first half of the 20th century gave rise to national identity.

The British Government, reeling from the economic cost of two successive world wars and changing social attitudes towards being an empire, felt it could no longer afford to maintain it if the country were to recover economically, pay for the newly created welfare state , and fight the newly emerged Cold War with the Soviet Union .

The influence and power of the British Empire dropped dramatically after the Second World War, especially after the Partition of India in 1947 and the Suez Crisis in 1956.

The Commonwealth of Nations is the successor to the Empire, where the United Kingdom is an equal member with all other states. Russia and Soviet Union (1703–) Main articles: Russian Empire and Soviet Union Russian Empire (green) as of 1866, at the time of the maximum territorial expansion of the empire The Russian Empire as a state existed from 1721 until it was declared a republic in 1917.

The Russian Empire was the successor to the Tsardom of Russia and the predecessor of the Soviet Union. It was one of the largest empires in world history, surpassed in landmass only by the British and Mongolian empires .

At one point in 1866, it stretched from Northern Europe across Asia and into North America .

At the beginning of the 19th century, the Russian Empire extended from the Arctic Ocean in the north to the Black Sea in the south, from the Baltic Sea in the west to the Pacific Ocean in the east. With 125.6 million subjects registered by the 1897 census, it had the third-largest population in the world at the time, after Qing China and the British Empire. Like all empires, it represented significant disparities in economic, ethnic, and religious positions. Its government, ruled by the Emperor , was one of the last absolute monarchies in Europe.

Before the outbreak of World War I in August 1914, Russia was one of the five major Great Powers of Europe.

The Warsaw Pact , a collective defense treaty signed in Warsaw , Poland , between the Soviet Union and seven other Eastern Bloc socialist republics of Central and Eastern Europe in May 1955, during the Cold War Following the October Revolution that overthrew the Russian Republic, the Soviet Union was established by the Communist Party of the Soviet Union .

The Soviet Union began to resemble the old Russian Empire in landmass, with its territory stretching from Eastern Europe to Siberia , and from Northern Europe to Central Asia .

After the death of the first Soviet leader, Vladimir Lenin , in 1924, Joseph Stalin eventually won a power struggle and led the country through large-scale industrialization, a command economy, and political repression.

On 23 August 1939, after unsuccessful efforts to form an anti-fascist alliance with Western powers, the Soviets signed the non-aggression agreement with Nazi Germany .

After the start of World War II , the formally neutral Soviets invaded and annexed territories of several Central and Eastern European states, including eastern Poland , the Baltic states , northeastern Romania and eastern Finland .

In June 1941 the Germans invaded , opening the largest and bloodiest theater of war in history. Soviet war casualties accounted for the majority of Allied casualties of the conflict in the process of acquiring the upper hand over Axis forces at intense battles such as Stalingrad and Kursk . Soviet forces eventually captured Berlin and won World War II in Europe on 9 May 1945.

The territory overtaken by the Red Army became satellite states of the Eastern Bloc .

The Cold War emerged in 1947, where the Eastern Bloc confronted the Western Bloc , which would unite in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in 1949.

Following Stalin's death in 1953, a period known as de-Stalinization and the Khrushchev Thaw occurred under the leadership of Nikita Khrushchev .

The country developed rapidly as millions of peasants were moved to industrial cities.

The USSR took an early lead in the Space Race with the first ever satellite and the first human spaceflight and the first probe to land on another planet , Venus .

In the 1970s, there was a brief period of détente in relations with the United States, but tensions resumed when the Soviet Union deployed troops to Afghanistan in 1979.

The war drained economic resources and was matched by an escalation of American military aid to Mujahideen fighters.

In the mid-1980s, the last Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev , sought to further reform and liberalize the economy through his policies of glasnost and perestroika .

The goal was to preserve the Communist Party while reversing economic stagnation .

The Cold War ended during his tenure, and in 1989, Warsaw Pact countries in Eastern Europe overthrew their respective Marxist–Leninist regimes . Strong nationalist and separatist movements broke out across the USSR. Gorbachev initiated a referendum —boycotted by the Baltic republics, Armenia, Georgia, and Moldova—which resulted in a majority of participating citizens voting to preserve the Union as a renewed federation .

In August 1991, a coup d'état was attempted by Communist Party hardliners. It failed, with Russian President Boris Yeltsin playing a high-profile role in confronting the coup.

The main result was the Communist Party's ban.

The republics led by Russia and Ukraine declared independence.

On 25 December 1991, Gorbachev resigned. All the republics emerged from the dissolution of the Soviet Union as independent post-Soviet states .

The Russian Federation (formerly the Russian SFSR) assumed the Soviet Union's rights and obligations and is recognized as the Soviet Union's continued legal personality in international affairs.

The Soviet Union produced many significant social and technological achievements and innovations regarding military power. It boasted the world's second-largest economy and the largest standing military.

The USSR was recognized as one of the five nuclear weapons states . It was a founding permanent member of the United Nations Security Council as well as a member of the OSCE , the WFTU and the leading member of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance and the Warsaw Pact .

Before its dissolution, the USSR had maintained its status as a world superpower alongside the United States for four decades after World War II. Sometimes also called "the Soviet Empire ", it exercised its hegemony in Central and Eastern Europe and worldwide with military and economic strength, proxy conflicts and influence in developing countries and funding of scientific research, especially in space technology and weaponry. United States (1848–) United States territory at its largest The Statue of Liberty , a symbol of American culture The United States has exercised and continues to exercise worldwide economic, cultural, and military influence. Founded in 1776 by thirteen coastal colonies that declared their independence from Great Britain , the United States began its western expansion following the end of the American Revolutionary War and the recognition of U.S. sovereignty in the 1783 Treaty of Paris .

The treaty bequeathed to the nascent republic all land between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River , and Americans began migrating there in large numbers at the end of the 18th Century, resulting in the displacement of Native American cultures, often through native peoples' forcible deportation and violent wars of eviction. These efforts at expansion were greatly strengthened by the 1787 Constitutional Convention , which led to the ratification of the United States Constitution and transformed the U.S. from a loose confederation of semi-autonomous states into a federal system with a strong national core.

In 1803, the United States acquired Louisiana from France , doubling the country's size and extending its borders to the Rocky Mountains . American power and population grew rapidly, so that by 1823, President James Monroe felt confident enough to issue his Monroe Doctrine , which warned European powers against further territorial seizures in North America. This was the beginning of the U.S.'s emergence as a regional power in North America. That process was confirmed in the Mexican–American War of 1846–1848, in which the United States invaded Mexico to protect Texas and acquire California.

The war included the deployment of U.S. forces into Mexico, the taking of Veracruz by sea , and the occupation of Mexico City by American troops (which finally resulted in Mexico's defeat).

In the peace treaty ( Treaty of Guadelupe Hidalgo ) that followed, the U.S. annexed the northern half of Mexico , comprising what is now the Southwestern United States .

During the course of the war, the United States also negotiated by treaty the acquisition of the Oregon Territory's southern half from Great Britain .

In 1867, William H. Seward , the U.S. Secretary of State , negotiated the purchase of Alaska from the Russian Empire . Congress defeated President Ulysses Grant's scheme to annex the Dominican Republic.

The United States defeated Spain in the Spanish–American War in 1898, and gained the possessions of Cuba , Puerto Rico , and the Philippines .

The independent republic of Hawaii was annexed in 1898.

The United States became a major victorious power in both World Wars and a major economic power after World War I had tired out the European powers. Italy (1871–) Main article: Italian Empire Every territory ever controlled by the Italian Empire at some point in time during World War II. Kingdom of Italy (dark green), Italian colonial empire (light green), and Italian-occupied territories (grey). Modern Italy was unified from a collection of small states over several decades during the modern era.

The Kingdom of Italy was proclaimed in 1861, and the Risorgimento was only truly completed by 1871, with the capture of Rome and its designation as the kingdom's capital city.

The Italian colonial empire was created after Italy joined other European powers in establishing colonies overseas during the " scramble for Africa ".

By this time, France , Spain , Portugal , Britain , and the Netherlands had already carved out large empires over several hundred years. One of the last remaining areas open to colonization was on the African continent.

By the outbreak of World War I in 1914, Italy had annexed Eritrea and Somalia . It had wrested control of portions of the Ottoman Empire , including Libya , though it was defeated in its attempt to conquer Ethiopia .

The Fascist regime under Italian dictator Benito Mussolini , which came to power in 1922, sought to expand the empire further. Ethiopia was successfully taken , four decades after the previous failure, and Italy's European borders were expanded. An official "Italian Empire" was proclaimed on 9 May 1936 following the conquest of Ethiopia.

Before the outbreak of World War II, Italy boasted the fifth-largest economy in Europe and the seventh in the world. Italy sided with Nazi Germany during World War II, but Britain soon captured Italy's overseas colonies.

By the time Italy itself was invaded in 1943, its empire had ceased to exist.

On 8 September 1943, the fascist regime collapsed , Mussolini was arrested, and the country signed an armistice with the Allies.

Following this, Germany invaded Northern Italy to disarm Italian forces and secure their southern border. A civil war then broke out between the Italian Social Republic , a rump state led by Mussolini under German pressure and supported by Axis forces, and the now-Allied Kingdom of Italy, aided by the Italian resistance movement and supported by Allied forces. Italian naval presence increased, no longer having to face the British and American navies, and the Italian Navy undertook missions in Asia against the Japanese. Estimates based on government data show that Italy suffered almost a hundred thousand military casualties following the armistice. Unlike the other two major Axis powers, following the war, Italy was not occupied, its army was not limited, and it was allowed to keep its government, preserving much of its influence and independence. Austrian Empire and Austria-Hungary (1714–1918) Main articles: Austrian Empire and Austria-Hungary After the War of the Spanish Succession , Habsburg Austria , which had already controlled other Central European lands such as Bohemia , Hungary and Croatia , acquired the Italian lands of Milan , Mantua , Naples and Sardinia as well as the Austrian Netherlands from the declining Spanish Empire. It later briefly acquired Sicily after the War of the Quadruple Alliance as well as the Balkan lands of Serbia and Oltenia after the Austro–Turkish War .

In the second half of the 18th century, it participated in the Partitions of Poland by annexing Galicia , and even briefly ventured into overseas colonialism in Asia.

After Napoleon dissolved the Holy Roman Empire, the Imperial Crown and title of Holy Roman Emperor was directly transferred to the Austrian territories, most of which lay outside of the German Confederation .

The Habsburg Empire became one of the key powers in Europe after the Napoleonic Wars , with a sphere of influence stretching over Central Europe , Germany, and Italy.

During the second half of the 19th century, the Habsburgs could not prevent the unification of Italy and lost their preeminent position among the German states to Prussia, which would soon unify Germany. Eventually, the complex internal power struggle resulted in the establishment of a so-called dual monarchy between Austria and Hungary. Austria-Hungary maintained a strong economy, and its vast population gave it the industrial capacity and workforce to compete with other European powers.

Following the defeat and dissolution of the monarchy after the First World War , both Austria and Hungary became independent and self-governing countries ( First Austrian Republic , Kingdom of Hungary ). Other political entities emerged from the destruction of the Great War including Poland , Czechoslovakia , and the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes . Prussia and Germany (1763–1918, 1933–1945) Main articles: Kingdom of Prussia , German Empire , and Nazi Germany Prussia in Europe at its greatest extent in 1870 The Kingdom of Prussia attained its greatest importance in the 18th and 19th centuries, when it conquered various territories previously held by Sweden, Austria, Poland, France, Denmark, and various minor German principalities. It became a European great power under the reign of Frederick II of Prussia (1740–1786). It dominated Northern Germany politically, economically, and in terms of population, and played a key role in the unification of Germany in 1871.

After the territorial acquisitions of the Congress of Vienna (1815), the Kingdom of Prussia became the only great power with a majority German-speaking population.

During the 19th century, Chancellor Otto von Bismarck pursued a policy of uniting the German principalities into a " Lesser Germany " which would exclude the Austrian Empire . Prussia was the core of the North German Confederation formed in 1867, which became part of the German Empire or Deutsches Reich in 1871 when the southern German states, excluding Austria, were added. Reichstag in Berlin, 1900 After 1850, the states of Germany had rapidly become industrialized, with particular strengths in coal, iron (and later steel), chemicals, and railways.

In 1871, Germany had a population of 41 million; by 1913, it had increased to 68 million. A largely rural collection of states in 1815, the now-united Germany became predominantly urban.

The success of German industrialization manifested itself in two ways since the early 20th century: The German factories were larger and more modern than their British and French counterparts.

During its 47 years of existence, the German Empire became the industrial, technological, and scientific giant of Europe, and by 1913, Germany was the largest economy in Continental Europe and the third-largest in the world. Germany built up the longest railway network of Europe, the world's strongest army, and a fast-growing industrial base. Starting very small in 1871, in a few decades, the navy became second only to Britain 's Royal Navy , as Germany planned to match it .

After the removal of Otto von Bismarck by Wilhelm II in 1890, the empire embarked on Weltpolitik – a bellicose new course that ultimately contributed to the outbreak of World War I. German colonies in 1914 Wilhelm II wanted Germany to have her " place in the sun ", like Britain, which he constantly wished to emulate or rival. With German traders and merchants already active worldwide, he encouraged colonial efforts in Africa and the Pacific (" new imperialism "), causing the German Empire to vie with other European powers for remaining "unclaimed" territories. With the encouragement or at least the acquiescence of Britain, which at this stage saw Germany as a counterweight to her old rival France, Germany acquired German Southwest Africa (modern Namibia ), German Kamerun (modern Cameroon ), Togoland (modern Togo ) and German East Africa (modern Rwanda , Burundi , and the mainland part of current Tanzania ). Islands were acquired in the Pacific through purchases and treaties, and through a 99-year lease for the territory of Kiautschou in northeast China. But of these German colonies, only Togoland and German Samoa (after 1908) became self-sufficient and profitable; all others required subsidies from the Berlin treasury for building infrastructure, school systems, hospitals, and other institutions.

After World War I broke out, Germany participated in the war as a part of the Central Powers .

At its height, Germany occupied Belgium and parts of France , and also acquired Ukraine and the Baltic States in the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk .

After its defeat, the German Empire collapsed and, in the Treaty of Versailles , had to cede some of its territories and all of its overseas territories to Britain and France, as well as giving up most of its military. German-occupied territories during World War II in 1942. Germany (Reich) is shown in darkest green. Germany rose again to become a great power in 1933, when Nazi Germany replaced the Weimar Republic as Germany's government.

The most pressing economic matter the Nazis initially faced was the 30 percent national unemployment rate. Economist Dr. Hjalmar Schacht , President of the Reichsbank and Minister of Economics, created a scheme for deficit financing in May 1933. Capital projects were financed through the issuance of promissory notes known as Mefo bills .

When the notes were presented for payment, the Reichsbank printed money. Hitler and his economic team expected that the upcoming territorial expansion would provide the means of repaying the soaring national debt. Schacht's administration achieved a rapid decline in the unemployment rate, the largest of any country during the Great Depression. Economic recovery was uneven, with reduced working hours and erratic availability of necessities, leading to disenchantment with the regime as early as 1934.

In October 1933, the Junkers Aircraft Works was expropriated.

In concert with other aircraft manufacturers and under the direction of Aviation Minister Göring, production was ramped up.

From a workforce of 3,200 people producing 100 units per year in 1932, the industry grew to employ a quarter of a million workers manufacturing over 10,000 technically advanced aircraft annually, less than ten years later. An elaborate bureaucracy was created to regulate imports of raw materials and finished goods with the intention of eliminating foreign competition in the German marketplace and improving the nation's balance of payments .

The Nazis encouraged the development of synthetic replacements for materials such as oil and textiles.

As the market was experiencing a glut and prices for petroleum were low, in 1933, the Nazi government made a profit-sharing agreement with IG Farben , guaranteeing them a 5 percent return on capital invested in their synthetic oil plant at Leuna . Any profits in excess of that amount would be turned over to the Reich.

By 1936, Farben regretted making the deal, as excess profits were by then being generated.

In another attempt to secure an adequate wartime supply of petroleum, Germany intimidated Romania into signing a trade agreement in March 1939. Major public works projects financed with deficit spending included the construction of a network of Autobahnen and providing funding for programs initiated by the previous government for housing and agricultural improvements. To stimulate the construction industry, credit was offered to private businesses, and subsidies were made available for home purchases and repairs.

On the condition that the wife would leave the workforce, a loan of up to 1,000 Reichsmarks could be accessed by young couples of Aryan descent who intended to marry, and the amount that had to be repaid was reduced by 25 percent for each child born.

The caveat that the woman had to remain unemployed outside the home was dropped by 1937 due to a shortage of skilled laborers. Envisioning widespread car ownership as part of the new Germany, Hitler arranged for designer Ferdinand Porsche to draw up plans for the KdF-wagen ( Strength Through Joy car), intended to be an automobile that everyone could afford. A prototype was displayed at the International Motor Show in Berlin on 17 February 1939. With the outbreak of World War II, the factory was converted to produce military vehicles. None were sold until after the war, when the vehicle was renamed the Volkswagen (people's car). (from left) Hitler; Robert Ley , head of the German Labour Front ; Ferdinand Porsche , armaments manufacturer; and Hermann Göring , head of the Four Year Plan (1942) Six million people were unemployed when the Nazis took power in 1933, and by 1937, there were fewer than a million. This was in part due to the removal of women from the workforce. Real wages dropped by 25 percent between 1933 and 1938.

After the dissolution of the trade unions in May 1933, their funds were seized and their leadership arrested, including those who attempted to co-operate with the Nazis. A new organisation, the German Labour Front , was created and placed under Nazi Party functionary Robert Ley .

The average work week was 43 hours in 1933; by 1939 this increased to 47 hours.

By early 1934, the focus shifted towards rearmament.

By 1935, military expenditures accounted for 73 percent of the government's purchases of goods and services.

On 18 October 1936, Hitler named Göring as Plenipotentiary of the Four Year Plan, intended to speed up rearmament.

In addition to calling for the rapid construction of steel mills, synthetic rubber plants, and other factories, Göring instituted wage and price controls and restricted the issuance of stock dividends . Large expenditures were made on rearmament despite growing deficits. Plans unveiled in late 1938 for massive increases to the navy and air force were impossible to fulfill, as Germany lacked the finances and material resources to build the planned units, as well as the necessary fuel required to keep them running. With the introduction of compulsory military service in 1935, the Reichswehr , which had been limited to 100,000 by the terms of the Versailles Treaty, expanded to 750,000 on active service at the start of World War II, with a million more in the reserve.

By January 1939, unemployment was down to 301,800, and it dropped to only 77,500 by September.

After triumphing in economic success, the Nazis started a hostile foreign expansion policy. They first sent troops to occupy the demilitarized Rhineland in 1936, then annexed Austria and Sudetenland of Czechoslovakia in 1938.

In 1939, they further annexed the Czech part of Czechoslovakia and founded the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia , and annexed the Lithuanian port city of Klaipėda .

The Slovak part of Czechoslovakia declared independence under German support, and the Slovak Republic was established. World War II broke out in 1939, when Germany invaded Poland with the Soviet Union .

After occupying Poland , Germany started the conquest of Europe. It occupied Belgium , Luxembourg , Netherlands , Denmark , Norway , France and the British Channel Islands in 1940, Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Greece and Yugoslavia in 1941, Italy , Albania , Montenegro and Monaco in 1943, and Hungary in 1944.

The French government continued to operate after the defeat, but was actually a client state of Germany. Nazi Germany invaded the Soviet Union in 1941, but was forced to retreat following several Allied victories. This marks the start of the collapse of the German Reich.

On 8 May 1945 , Nazi Germany surrendered to the Allies, and the regime was dissolved shortly thereafter. Japan (1868–1945) Main article: Empire of Japan The Empire of Japan in 1942.

The empire until 1905 is in dark green, acquisitions until 1930 are in lighter green, and occupied/conceded territories are in the lightest green.

The Empire of Japan , officially the Empire of Great Japan or simply Great Japan (Dai Nippon), was an empire that existed from the Meiji Restoration on 3 January 1868 to the enactment of the post-World War II Constitution of Japan on 3 May 1947. Imperial Japan's rapid industrialization and militarization under the slogan Fukoku kyōhei (富国強兵, "Enrich the Country, Strengthen the Armed Forces") led to its emergence as a great power, eventually culminating in its shock victory in the Russo-Japanese War , the first time an Asian country had soundly defeated a relatively modern European great power. This resulted in a further rise in nationalism in Japan and in its recognition by other nations as a rising power.

After its military victories against China ( First Sino-Japanese War , and the later invasion of Manchuria ), the Japanese Empire was considered the preeminent power in Asia.

In August 1914, former president of the United States William Howard Taft listed Japan and his country as the only two great powers uninvolved in World War I. Its eventual membership in the Axis alliance , and the conquest of a large part of the Asia-Pacific region, allowed Japan to control much-needed resources for its further development.

The empire reached its maximum extent during the Second World War , when Japan conquered many Asian and Pacific countries (see Greater East Asian Co-Prosperity Sphere ).

At the height of its power in 1942, the Japanese Empire ruled over a geographic area spanning 7,400,000 km 2 (2,857,200 sq mi) to 8,508,100 km 2 (3,285,000 sq mi). This made it the 12th or 11th largest empire in history.

After suffering many defeats and the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki , however, the Empire of Japan surrendered to the Allies on 2 September 1945. A period of occupation by the Allies followed the surrender, and a new constitution was created with American involvement.

In 2018, France was the fifth-largest trading nation in the world and the second-largest in Europe, with the value of exports representing over a fifth of GDP. Its membership in the eurozone and the broader European Single Market facilitate access to capital, goods, services, and skilled labour. Despite protectionist policies over certain industries, particularly in agriculture, France has generally played a leading role in fostering free trade and commercial integration in Europe to enhance its economy.

In 2019, it ranked first in Europe and 13th in the world in foreign direct investment , with European countries and the United States being leading sources. Similarly, France is ranked 6th on the FDI Confidence Index.

The Paris region has the highest concentration of multinational firms in Europe. With 24 companies that are part of the world's biggest 500 companies , France was in 2025 the second-most represented European country in the 2025 Fortune Global 500 , behind Germany (30 companies) and ahead of the UK (20).

In addition, some companies such as Airbus , while not listed as French, have their operational headquarters set in France.

As of December 2024, France was also the country that weighed most on the eurozone's EURO STOXX 50 (representing 41.8% of total assets), ahead of Germany (26.5%), with six of the top ten companies on the list. Several French corporations rank amongst the largest in their industries such as AXA in insurance, the world's second-largest insurance company by total nonbanking assets in 2020 and Air France in air transportation. Luxury and consumer good are particularly relevant, with L'Oreal being the world's largest cosmetic company while LVMH and Kering are the world's two largest luxury product companies.

In energy and utilities, GDF-Suez and EDF are amongst the largest energy companies in the world, and Areva , now Framatome , is a large nuclear-energy company; Veolia Environnement is the world's largest environmental services and water management company; Vinci SA , Bouygues and Eiffage are large construction companies, with Vinci having the highest market capitalization of all construction companies; Michelin is the world's largest tire manufacturer by revenue since 2021; JCDecaux is the world's largest outdoor advertising corporation; BNP Paribas , Credit Agricole and Société Générale rank amongst the largest in the world by assets ; Capgemini and Atos are among the largest technology consulting companies; Carrefour is the world's second-largest retail group in terms of revenue; Total is the world's fourth-largest private oil company; Danone is the world's fifth-largest food company and the world's largest supplier of mineral water; Sanofi is the world's fifth-largest pharmaceutical company; Publicis is the world's third-largest advertising company; Groupe PSA , now Stellantis , is the world's 4th and Europe's second-largest automaker; Accor is the leading European hotel group; Alstom is one of the world's leading conglomerates in rail transport. Under the doctrine of Dirigisme , the government historically played a major role in the economy; policies such as indicative planning and nationalisation are credited for contributing to three decades of unprecedented postwar economic growth known as Trente Glorieuses . Policies aimed at promoting economic dynamism and privatisation have improved France's economic standing globally: it is among the world's 10 most innovative countries in the 2020 Bloomberg Innovation Index , and the 15th most competitive, according to the 2019 Global Competitiveness Report (up two places from 2018). Financial services, banking, and insurance are important parts of the French economy.

As of 2011, the three largest financial institutions cooperatively owned by their customers were French: Crédit Agricole , Groupe Caisse D'Epargne , and Groupe Caisse D'Epargne . According to a 2020 report and a 2024 report by S&P , France's leading banks, BNP Paribas and Crédit Agricole , are among the top world's 10 largest bank by assets, with Société Générale and Groupe BPCE ranking near the top 20 globally, and Crédit Mutuel in the top 30.

The Paris stock exchange merged with counterparts in Amsterdam and Brussels in 2000 to form Euronext , which in 2007 merged with the New York stock exchange to form NYSE Euronext , the world's largest stock exchange. Euronext Paris , the French branch of Euronext , is Europe's second-largest stock exchange market, behind the London Stock Exchange . According to the IMF, France ranks 22nd in GDP per capita , with roughly $48,000 per inhabitant. It placed 28th in the Human Development Index , indicating very high and rising human development. Public corruption is among the lowest in the world, with France consistently ranking among the 30 least corrupt countries since the Corruption Perceptions Index began in 2012; it placed 21st in 2021, 2022 and 2023. France is Europe's second-largest spender in research and development , at over 2 percent of GDP; globally, it ranks 12th. France is also the largest contributor to the European Space Agency , and is its de facto leader: France maintains and shares a fully-functioning space program with the European Union, the third-oldest in the world; the CNES , the French space agency, controls the Guiana Space Center , from where the ESA launches its missions. Kourou ranks among the launch centers with the highest success rates in the world, with Ariane 5 achieving a 95.5% success rate over its history. Paris is a leading global city , has the largest GDP of any city in Europe, and is one of the largest in the world. It ranks as the first city in Europe (and 3rd worldwide) by the number of companies classified in Fortune ' s Fortune Global 500 . Paris produced US$984 billion at market exchange rates in 2021 while the economy of the Paris metropolitan area — the largest in Europe with London — generates around $1.0 trillion. Paris has been ranked as the 2nd most attractive global city in the world in 2019 by KPMG . La Défense , Paris's Central Business District, was ranked by Ernst & Young in 2017 as the leading business district in continental Europe , and fourth in the world.

The other major economic centres of the country include Lyon , Toulouse (centre of the European aerospace industry), Marseille and Lille . France also maintains a strong military presence in the world, with one of the highest military expenditures in the world, overseas bases in Germany, Africa, and the Middle East, and troops around the world in its various overseas territories.

The French military routinely conducts military operations in foreign countries, such as operation Barkhane , Chammal, and Boali, with anti-terror and stabilization operations being the most frequent. France is also at the helm of the European Union's defense program, having pushed extensively for PESCO and, more generally, for French and European independence from outside influences. France remains the oldest-standing great power, and while its influence has waned, notably in Africa , it remains a source of soft power, a diplomatic powerhouse with a strong economy and military allowing it to exert influence in all regions of the world, in a much more friendly manner compared to its colonial and belligerent past – for instance, with de Gaulle's buildup of relations with the PRC , or by recently building close relations with India , or even by heading a new, comprehensive treaty on climate change . United Kingdom (1588–) Flag of the United Kingdom The United Kingdom is considered a great power.

The United Kingdom is a sovereign country in north-western Europe, off the north-­western coast of the European mainland.

The United Kingdom includes the island of Great Britain , the north-­eastern part of the island of Ireland , and many smaller islands within the British Isles . Northern Ireland shares a land border with the Republic of Ireland . Otherwise, the United Kingdom is surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean, with the North Sea to the east, the English Channel to the south, and the Celtic Sea to the south-west, giving it the 12th-longest coastline in the world .

The Irish Sea separates Great Britain and Ireland.

The total area of the United Kingdom is 244,376 square kilometres (94,354 sq mi), with an estimated population in 2024 of 68 million. Map which shows the majority of the world which has English as its native language.

The nearby Isle of Man , Guernsey , and Jersey are not part of the UK, being Crown Dependencies with the British Government responsible for defense and international representation. There are also 14 British Overseas Territories , the last remnants of the British Empire which, at its height in the 1920s, encompassed almost a quarter of the world's landmass and a third of the world's population, and was the largest empire in history . British influence can be observed in the language, culture and the legal and political systems of many of its former colonies ; the English language is the most spoken language in the world, and is the world's lingua franca today .

The United Kingdom has the world's sixth-largest economy by nominal gross domestic product (GDP), and the tenth-largest by purchasing power parity (PPP). It has a high-income economy and a very high human development index rating , ranking 15th in the world in 2024. Today the UK remains one of the world's leading powers with considerable economic, cultural, military, scientific, technological and political influence internationally. It is a recognised nuclear state and is ranked sixth globally in military expenditure . It has been a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council since its first session in 1946.

The United Kingdom is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations , the Council of Europe , the G7 , the Group of Ten , the G20 , the United Nations , NATO , the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Interpol , and the World Trade Organization (WTO). It was a member state of the European Communities (EC) and its successor, the European Union (EU), from its accession in 1973 until its withdrawal in 2020 following a referendum held in 2016.

Since the end of the Second World War, the United Kingdom has been described as a "super power in decline". Nonetheless, a 2019 study in geopolitical capability (carried out by the UK-based Henry Jackson Society ) found the United Kingdom to be the most powerful nation in Europe and the second most powerful in the world behind the United States. Several other studies point to the United Kingdom as one of the top ten countries country in soft power, diplomatic missions, and economy.

In the aftermath of the Second World War and the Suez Crisis , the United Kingdom's status as a world power declined substantially. Towards the end of the 20th century, and especially under the Conservative-led government of Margaret Thatcher and the Labour-led government of Tony Blair , the United Kingdom underwent a period of strong economic growth and cultural reach , especially in the United States; the relationship between the UK and the US is generally considered to be among the strongest international relationships . A notable break in this tradition occurred under the administration of Barack Obama , who sought to align with Germany as a principal European ally. President Donald Trump described the UK-US relationship as "just so important" and the administration of President Joe Biden has restored traditional relations, reiterating that "the United States has no closer ally than the United Kingdom".

The UK has been described as a "cultural superpower", and London , one of the highest-ranking global cities , has been described as a world cultural capital and the center of European trade, at least until its withdrawal from the European Union. With 20 companies that are part of the world's biggest 500 companies , the UK was in 2025 the third-most represented European country in the Fortune Global 500 index. Countries with United Kingdom military bases The UK has several military bases around the world and in the territories it controls, with the island of Diego Garcia being used for major operations during the war on terror .

After leaving the European Union, the UK formed a new strategic partnership with Australia and the United States, known as AUKUS . It remains one of the driving forces of NATO, and committed significant international aid during the Russian invasion of Ukraine .

The United Kingdom, while no longer the superpower it once was, remains a country with a diversified and powerful economy, whose culture, language, and diplomatic influence reach and affect regions around the world. With a strong military and a nuclear arsenal, the UK remains a great power. Russia (1703–) Flag of Russia Further information: Post-Soviet Russia Since its imperial times , Russia has risen from being a regional power to being considered a great power .

The Russian Federation , the world's largest nation by land area , is home to over 30% of the world's natural resources according to some sources. It is a high-income country and the world's fourth-largest economy in terms of PPP according to the World Bank. Throughout most of the Soviet -era, Russia was one of the world's two superpowers . However, after the dissolution of the Soviet Union , it lost its superpower status, and recently has been suggested as a potential candidate for resuming superpower status in the 21st century while others have asserted that it is already a superpower.

In 2009, Hugo Chavez , late President of Venezuela whose government was noted to have enjoyed warm relations with the Kremlin , stated that "Russia is a superpower", citing waning American influence in global affairs, and suggested the ruble be elevated to a global currency. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu called Russia an important superpower, praising its effectiveness as an ally of Israel.

In 2014, Stephen Kinzer of The Boston Globe compared Russia's actions with its own neighbouring territories, to those of "any other superpower", taking Ukraine and Crimea as examples. A mixed opinion has been offered by Matthew Fleischer of the Los Angeles Times : he contends that Russia will not become a superpower unless climate change eats away at the permafrost that covers, as of March 2014, two-thirds of the country's landmass.

The absence of this permafrost would reveal immense stores of oil, natural gas, and precious minerals, as well as potential farmland, which would allow Russia to "become the world's bread basket—and control the planet's food supply". Russian news agency RIA Novosti called Russia a "superpower" after its actions in Syria , and after the formation of a coalition to fight ISIS in Syria and Iraq , Benny Avni of the New York Post called Russia the "world's new sole superpower". Russian intervention in Syria was crucial in helping Bashar Al Assad to stay in power against ISIS and western-backed rebels.

Since the creation of the Wagner Group in 2014, Russia has used it to intervene in various conflicts (while maintaining plausible deniability) in Africa, aside from being involved in Libya , Syria , and even Venezuela by projecting power far away from the borders of the former Soviet Union. However, several analysts noted that Russia showed signs of an aging, shrinking population. Fred Weir said that this severely constricts and limits Russia's potential to re-emerge as a central world power.

In 2011, British historian and professor Niall Ferguson also highlighted the negative effects of Russia's declining population, and suggested that Russia is on its way to "global irrelevance". Russia has, however, shown a slight population growth since the late 2000s, partly due to immigration and slowly rising birth rates. Nathan Smith of the National Business Review has said that, despite Russia's potential, it did not win the new "Cold War" in the 1980s; thus superpower status is inaccurate. Dmitry Medvedev predicted that if the Russian elite is not consolidated, Russia will disappear as a single state. Vladimir Putin said the moment the Caucasus leaves Russia, other territorial regions would follow. A Russian ICBM in Red Square during the Moscow Victory Day Parade , 2023.

After Russia's poor performance in the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine , some analysts questioned Russia's military and power projection capabilities.

After two years of war, the Russian army did make progress in Ukraine, but the country's economy and resources have been strained. Russia's ally Syria was overrun by rebels ; Bashar al-Assad was granted asylum in Russia. Nevertheless, Russia maintains the world's largest nuclear arsenal , a large military force, and can project influence around the world. United States (1848–) Main articles: Pax Americana and American Century NATO members and their partners (NATO is a military alliance which the United States is part of.) NATO members Membership Action Plan Enhanced Opportunities Partners Individual Partnership Action Plan Partnership for Peace Mediterranean Dialogue Istanbul Cooperation Initiative Global Partners The United States was the foremost of the world's two superpowers during the Cold War .

After the Cold War, the most common belief was that only the United States fulfilled the criteria to be considered a superpower. Regardless of the debate on its status as a superpower, the United States is considered a great power. Its geographic area composes the third or fourth-largest state in the world , with an area of approximately 9.37 million km 2 .

The population of the US was 334.9 million in 2024, the third-largest of any nation.

The US holds a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council , with two allies with permanent seats, the United Kingdom and France .

The US has strong ties with most of Europe and NATO , Latin America , Australia , New Zealand , South Africa , Israel , Commonwealth Realms in Oceania and the Caribbean, and several East Asian countries ( South Korea , Taiwan , Japan , Singapore ).

The economic strength of the United States is a major driver of its power.

The United States is a highly developed country , and its economy accounts for more than a quarter of global GDP , the world's largest by country .

By value, the United States is the world's largest importer and second-largest exporter.

Although it accounts for just over 4.2% of the world's total population, the U.S. holds over 30% of the total wealth in the world, the largest share held by any country.

The US has abundant mineral, energy, and metal resources, as well as timber, a large and modernized farming industry, and a large industrial base.

The United States dollar is the dominant world reserve currency . US systems were rooted in capitalist economic theory based on supply and demand, in which production was determined by customer demand. America was allied with the G7 major economies. US economic policy prescriptions were the "standard" reform packages promoted for crisis-wracked developing countries by Washington, DC–based international institutions such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank , as well as the US Treasury Department . Countries with United States military bases , as of 2016 The military of the United States is a naval-based advanced military with by far the highest military expenditure in the world.

The United States Navy is the world's largest navy, with the largest number of aircraft carriers , and military bases all over the world .

The US had the largest nuclear arsenal in the world during the first half of the Cold War and still maintains the second-largest; it also has one of the largest armies and the largest air force in the world. Under the NATO nuclear sharing program, the United States provides nuclear weapons to protect several NATO states.

The US also possesses a powerful global intelligence network in the Central Intelligence Agency .

The cultural impact of the US, often known as Americanization , is evident in the influence of US music, TV, films, art, and fashion on other countries, as well as in the desire for freedom of speech and other guaranteed rights that its residents enjoy. Various styles of music born in the US have become globally influential.

Following the conclusion of the Cold War, the US enjoyed a short period of absolute dominance, stretching from 1993 to 2001.

The subsequent war on terrorism , second invasion of Iraq , the response to the Great Recession and the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States were all seen to damage the credibility of the United States.

The United States intervenes and can hold a military presence in several countries, notably Afghanistan , Somalia , and Iraq .

The US is able to strike around the world, as it proved during anti-terror operations like the killing of Osama Bin Laden , or the assassination of Qasem Soleimani .

In 2011, the U.S. had 10 major strengths, according to Chinese scholar Peng Yuan, the director of the Institute of American Studies of the China Institutes for Contemporary International Studies. He noted that the United States has a sizable population (300 million), enjoys its position as a two-ocean power, and has abundant natural resources. Besides, he believed that the United States' military muscle , high technology, fair education system , cultural power , cyber power, allies (as the United States has more allies than any other state), global force projection, intelligence capabilities (as demonstrated by the killing of Osama bin Laden), intellectual think tanks and research institutes, and strategic power lead the United States into the superpower status it now enjoys. However, he noted that the recent breakdown of bipartisanship in the US, economic slowdown, intractable deficits and rising debt, societal polarization, and the weakening of US institutional power since the US can no longer dominate global institutions, are the current flaws of the United States' power. Despite its recent issues, the United States' economic, technological, and military dominance keeps it the world's foremost great power for the time being. Italy (1871–) Main article: Least of the great powers The Italian Republic has been referred to as a great power with almost the same power as Germany, France, and the UK. Italy's great power strengths include a vast advanced economy , the second-strongest manufacturing industry in Europe, a large luxury goods market, a large national budget and the third largest gold reserve in the world. It has one of the largest SDRs and voting power in the IMF .

The country is a cultural superpower and it has close ties with the rest of the Catholic world as the home of the Pope . Italy is a key player in maintaining international security , especially in the wider Mediterranean region, by performing air policing duties for its allies and commanding multinational forces in foreign countries.

The country has therefore developed considerable military capabilities by building two aircraft carriers and establishing some overseas military bases .

The country is home to two nuclear bases and, as part of the NATO nuclear sharing program , therefore has a retaliatory nuclear capacity despite nominally being a non-nuclear state. According to the former Italian president Francesco Cossiga , Italy's plans of nuclear retaliation during the Cold War consisted of targeting nuclear weapons in Czechoslovakia and Hungary in case the Soviet Union waged nuclear war against NATO. He acknowledged the presence of U.S. nuclear weapons in Italy, and speculated about the possible presence of British and French nuclear weapons. Italy secretly developed its own nuclear weapons program , and one in collaboration with France and Germany, but abandoned such projects when it joined the nuclear sharing program.

The country has developed the ABM PAAMS system. It has developed several space-launch vehicles, such as Alfa and more recently Vega .

In more recent years, under the auspices of the European Space Agency , it has demonstrated the reentry and landing of a spacecraft, the Intermediate eXperimental Vehicle . Italy is home to one of two ground operations centers of the Galileo global satellite navigation system . Besides, Italy has one of the most advanced economies in the world as the eighth-largest economy by nominal GDP (third in the European Union ), the sixth-largest national wealth , and the third-largest central bank gold reserve . It ranks very high in life expectancy , quality of life, healthcare , and education.

The country is considered a great power and it plays a prominent role in regional and global economic, military, cultural, and diplomatic affairs. Italy is a founding and leading member of the European Union and a member of numerous international institutions, including the United Nations , NATO , the OECD , the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe , the World Trade Organization , the Group of Seven , the G20 , the Union for the Mediterranean , the Latin Union , the Council of Europe , Uniting for Consensus , and many more .

The source of many inventions and discoveries , the country has long been a global centre of art , music , literature , philosophy , science and technology , and fashion , and has greatly influenced and contributed to diverse fields including cinema , cuisine , sports , jurisprudence, banking, and business.

As a reflection of its cultural wealth , Italy has the world's largest number of World Heritage Sites (58), and is the fourth-most visited country in the world. Moreover, Italy contributes significantly to scientific research; in 2023, it was the sixth-largest producer of scientific articles. Italy operates some permanent research stations in Antarctica .

In terms of spaceflight capability, the country owns the Broglio Space Centre .

The country is a major contributor to the European Space Agency and the International Space Station . However, due to internal political instability, a large public debt, a diminishing economic productivity, low economic growth in the last fifteen years and a significant Centre-North/South socio-economic divide , Italy is often considered as the least of the great powers . Japan (1952–) Tokyo Stock Exchange , the third largest stock exchange in the world by market capitalization , as well as the 2nd largest stock market in Asia Japan is considered a great power . It is a member of numerous international organizations, including the United Nations (since 1956), the OECD , and the Group of Seven .

Although it has renounced its right to declare war , the country maintains Self-Defense Forces that ranks among the world's strongest militaries.

After World War II, Japan experienced record growth during the economic miracle , becoming the second-largest economy in the world by 1990.

The Japanese economy was the world's second-largest economy in terms of GDP until it was surpassed by China in 2010, then by Germany in 2023.

As of 2024 , the country's economy is the fourth-largest by nominal GDP as well as the fifth-largest by PPP .

The country is the third-largest in the world by total wealth. It is also ranked "very high" on the Human Development Index . Japan's capital, Tokyo , is a leading Alpha + Global city , with the Greater Tokyo Area having the second-largest metropolitan economy in the world and a gross metropolitan product estimated at US$2 trillion.

The city is also one of the world's major financial centres , being the headquarters of many of the world’s largest investment banks and insurance companies. It is also the hub for the country’s telecommunications, electronic, broadcasting, and publishing industries.

The other major economic centres of the country include Osaka , Yokohama and Nagoya .

In the 1980s, many political and economic analysts predicted that Japan would eventually accede to superpower status, due to its large population, huge gross domestic product , and high economic growth at that time. Japan was expected to eventually surpass the economy of the United States, which never happened. However, Japan is considered a cultural superpower in terms of the large-scale influence Japanese food , music , video games , manga , anime and movies have on the world.

In 2023, U.S. News & World Report ranked Japan as the most culturally influential country in Asia and 5th in the world. Similarly, in 2019 Japan was considered the 8th most powerful country in terms of soft power. Japan is also considered to be a technological power, being the leader in the automotive , electronics and robotics industries.

As of 2022, 40 of the Fortune Global 500 companies are based in Japan. Japan's most valuable and internationally known brands include: Toyota , Honda , Sony , SoftBank , Subaru , Nissan , Mazda , Canon Inc. , Uniqlo and Nintendo . Head of the 10th Division and other regiments on JSDF Day in 2011 Japan was ranked the world's fourth most powerful military in 2015.

The military capabilities of the Japan Self-Defense Forces are held back by the pacifist 1947 constitution . However, there is a gradual push for a constitutional amendment .

On 18 September 2015, the National Diet enacted the Legislation for Peace and Security , a series of laws that allow Japan's Self-Defense Forces to collective self-defense of allies in combat in certain conditions for the first time under its constitution.

In May 2017, former Japanese prime minister Shinzo Abe set a 2020 deadline for revising Article 9, which would legitimize the JSDF in the Constitution. However, Article 9 has not yet been revised as of 2025, and Japan's military forces are still only meant for its own defense. Japan is not the military giant it once was, and its new constitution restrains its power projection to having a single overseas military base, in Djibouti . However, its vast economical strength, alliances, technology and cultural influence over the world still make it one of the world's great powers. China (1971–) Main article: Chinese Century Further information: China's peaceful rise , Pax Sinica , and Potential superpowers § China Countries which signed cooperation documents related to the Belt and Road Initiative , which is a global infrastructure development strategy adopted by the Chinese government in 2013 to invest in nearly 150 countries and international organizations China started to be seen as a great power after World War II as one of the Four Policemen and principal Allies of World War II .

After its victory in the Chinese Civil War , the Korean War in 1950–1953 and the Sino-Soviet split in the 1960s, the People's Republic of China emerged as one of the main players in international geopolitics during the late Cold War, with its status as a recognized nuclear weapons state in the 1960s.

The People's Republic was officially recognized as the sole legitimate government of China to the United Nations, and as such one of the permanent members of the UN Security Council , in 1971.

After the motion passed, China was gradually recognized as a great power. Currently, China has the world's second-largest population, second-largest GDP per country , and the largest economy in the world by PPP since 2013 according to The Economist . China created the Belt and Road Initiative , which according to analysts has been a geostrategic effort to take a more significant role in global affairs and challenge US post-war hegemony . It has also been argued that China co-founded the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and New Development Bank to compete with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund in development finance .

In 2015, China launched the Made in China 2025 strategic plan to develop its manufacturing sector further. There have been debates on the effectiveness and practicality of these programs in promoting China's global status.

On a foreign exchange rate basis, some estimates in 2020 and early 2021 said that China could overtake the U.S. in 2028, or 2026 if the Chinese currency further strengthened.

As of July 2021, Bloomberg L.P. analysts estimated that China may either overtake the U.S. to become the world's biggest economy in the 2030s or never be able to reach such a goal.

The nation receives continual coverage in the popular press of its emerging superpower status, and has been identified as a rising or emerging economic growth and military superpower by academics and other experts.

The "rise of China" has been named the top news story of the 21st century by the Global Language Monitor , as measured by its appearances in global print and electronic media, on the Internet and in the blogosphere, and on social media.

The term " Second Superpower " has been applied by scholars to the possibility that the People's Republic of China could emerge with global power and influence on par with the United States.

The potential for the two countries to form stronger relations to address global issues is sometimes referred to as the Group of Two . Barry Buzan asserted in 2004 that "China certainly presents the most promising all-round profile" of a potential superpower. Buzan claimed that "China is currently the most fashionable potential superpower and the one whose degree of alienation from the dominant international society makes it the most obvious political challenger." However, he noted this challenge is constrained by the major challenges of development and by the fact that its rise could trigger a counter-coalition of states in Asia . Parag Khanna stated in 2008 that by making massive trade and investment deals with Latin America and Africa, China had established its presence as a superpower along with the European Union and the United States . China's rise is demonstrated by its rising share of trade in its gross domestic product . He believed that China's "consultative style" had enabled it to develop political and economic ties with many countries, including those the United States viewed as rogue states . He stated that the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation founded with Russia and the Central Asian countries may eventually be the " NATO of the East". Historian Timothy Garton Ash argued in 2011 that the International Monetary Fund predicted that China's GDP ( purchasing power parity adjusted) would overtake that of the United States in 2016 – which it did in 2013 – and that a power shift to a world with several superpowers was happening in the early 21st century. However, China still lacks soft power and power-projection capabilities and has a low GDP per capita .

The article also stated that the Pew Research Center , in a 2009 survey, found that people in 15 of 22 countries believed that China had already overtaken or would overtake the US as the world's leading superpower.

In an interview given in 2011, Singapore's first premier , Lee Kuan Yew , stated that while China supplanting the United States is not a foregone conclusion, Chinese leaders are nonetheless serious about displacing the United States as the most powerful country in Asia. "They have transformed a poor society by an economic miracle to become now the second-largest economy in the world. How could they not aspire to be number 1 in Asia, and in time the world?" The Chinese strategy, Lee maintains, will revolve around their "huge and increasingly highly skilled and educated workers to out-sell and out-build all others". Nevertheless, relations with the United States, at least in the medium term, will not take a turn for the worse because China will "avoid any action that will sour up relations with the U.S. To challenge a stronger and technologically superior power like the U.S. will abort their 'peaceful rise.'" Though Lee believes China is genuinely interested in growing within the global framework the United States has created, it is biding its time until it becomes strong enough to successfully redefine the prevailing political and economic order. China is thought to be on the course to becoming the world's largest economy and is making rapid progress in many areas.

The United States is seen as a declining superpower, as indicated by factors such as a weak economic recovery, financial instability, large deficits, increasing political polarization, and overregulation that forces jobs overseas to China. However, after the COVID-19 pandemic , China's economic growth has greatly stalled; while the country is still progressing, its rapid rise has been considerably slowed. Tiananmen , the "Gate of Heavenly Peace", is the front gate of the Imperial City of Beijing , first built under the Yongle Emperor who also commissioned the Yongle Encyclopedia and the Ming treasure voyages .

As a national symbol of China , Tiananmen features a giant portrait of Chairman Mao Zedong with two giant placards: the left one reads "Long Live the People's Republic of China " (中华人民共和国万岁; Zhōnghuá Rénmín Gònghéguó wànsuì), while the right one reads "Long Live the Great Unity of the World's Peoples" (世界人民大团结万岁; Shìjiè rénmín dà tuánjié wànsuì). Some consensus holds that China has met the criteria for superpower status, citing its growing political clout and leadership in certain economic sectors.

Although China's military projection is still premature and untested, the perceived humiliation of US leadership in failing to prevent its closest allies from joining the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank , along with the Belt and Road Initiative and China's role in the worldwide groundings of the Boeing 737 MAX , was seen as a paradigm shift or an inflection point to the unipolar world order that dominated post-Cold War international relations. University Professor Øystein Tunsjø argues that competition between China and the USA will intensify, narrowing the gap between them, while the gap between the two countries and the rest of the top ten largest economies will widen. Additionally, economics correspondent, Peter S. Goodman and Beijing Bureau Chief of China, Jane Perlez further stated that China is using a combination of its economic might and growing military advancements to pressure, coerce and change the current world order to accommodate China's interests at the expense of the United States and its allies. Diplomatically, China has seen some success in Africa, becoming the largest trading partner of the continent, and has made some overtures towards Europe. However, the country's authoritarian rule and controversies such as with the Uyghurs have soured relations with the major European powers.

The 2019 Chinese Defense White Paper highlights the growing strategic competition between China and the United States. According to Anthony H. Cordesman , although the paper flags both China and the US as competing superpowers, it was far more moderate in its treatment of the US than the United States' view of Chinese military developments. Cordesman states that the paper was a warning that will shape Sino-American relations as China becomes stronger than Russia in virtually every other aspect, except its nuclear arsenal.

On 19 August 2019, the United States Studies Centre published a report, suggesting that Washington no longer enjoys primacy in the Indo-Pacific. It stresses that the war on terror has greatly distracted the US response to China's role in the Pacific; that US military force in the region has greatly atrophied whereas Beijing only grew stronger and more capable since the September 11 attacks , to the point that China could now actively challenge the United States over the Indo-Pacific. China's challenging the United States for global predominance constitutes the core issue in the debate over the American decline . China's emergence as a global economic power is tied to its large working population. However, the population in China is aging faster than almost any other country in history. Current demographic trends could hinder economic growth, create challenging social problems, and limit China's capabilities to act as a new global hegemon. China's primarily debt-driven economic growth also creates concerns for substantial credit default risks and a potential financial crisis. Germany (1991–) The Federal Republic of Germany is, since its reunification , considered a great power .

The Reichstag building in Berlin is the site of the German parliament . Germany has a strong economy ; it has the largest economy in Europe , the world's third-largest economy by nominal GDP , and the sixth-largest by PPP . It is one of the most innovative countries in several industrial, scientific and technological sectors, and is both the world's third-largest exporter and importer .

As a developed country , which ranks very high on the Human Development Index , it offers social security , a universal health care system , and a tuition-free university education . Germany is a member of the United Nations , NATO , the G7 , the G20 , and the OECD . It has the third-greatest number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites . Germany's social market economy has a highly skilled labour force , a low level of corruption, and a high level of innovation . Its GDP per capita measured in purchasing power standards amounts to 121% of the EU27 average (100%).

The service sector contributes approximately 69% of the total GDP, industry 31%, and agriculture 1% as of 2017 . Its unemployment rate, published by Eurostat , amounts to 3.2% as of January 2020 , which is the fourth-lowest in the EU. Germany is part of the European single market .

In 2017, the country accounted for 28% of the eurozone economy according to the International Monetary Fund . Its monetary policy is set by the European Central Bank , which is headquartered in Frankfurt . Frankfurt is also home to the Frankfurt Stock Exchange , the 12th largest stock exchange by market capitalization and one of the biggest in Europe.

The automotive industry in Germany is regarded as one of the most competitive and innovative in the world, and is the sixth-largest by production . Building in the center of Frankfurt Of the world's 500 largest stock-market-listed companies measured by revenue in 2025, the Fortune Global 500 , 30 are headquartered in Germany, the most of any European country. Well-known international brands include Mercedes-Benz , BMW , Volkswagen , Audi , Siemens , Allianz , Adidas , Porsche , Bosch and Deutsche Telekom . Berlin is a hub for startup companies and has become the leading location for venture capital funded firms in the European Union. Germany is recognised for its large portion of specialised small and medium enterprises , known as the Mittelstand model. These companies represent 48% global market leaders in their segments, labelled hidden champions . Research and development efforts form an integral part of the German economy.

In 2018 Germany ranked fourth globally in terms of number of science and engineering research papers published. Germany was ranked 9th in the Global Innovation Index in 2019 and 2020. Research institutions in Germany include the Max Planck Society , the Helmholtz Association , and the Fraunhofer Society and the Leibniz Association . Germany is the largest contributor to the European Space Agency .

While its diplomatic power is limited compared to that of Britain and France, Germany still leads the European Union with France, formulating various European sanctions , yet remained dependent on Russian gas for a time. Germany has foreign relations with almost every country.

The European Union as a small power: After the post-Cold War. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. ^ Harrison, T., & J. Paul Getty Museum. (2009).

The great empires of the ancient world. Los Angeles, Calif: J. Paul Getty Museum. ^ Yonge, C. M. (1882). A pictorial history of the world's great nations: From the earliest dates to the present time. New York: S. Hess. ^ In Powell, T. (1888). Illustrated home book of the world's great nations: Being a geographical, historical and pictorial encyclopedia. Chicago: People's Pub. Co. ^ Edward Sylvester Ellis, Charles F. Horne (1906).

The story of the greatest nations: from the dawn of history to the twentieth century : a comprehensive history founded upon the leading authorities, including a complete chronology of the world and a pronouncing vocabulary of each nation, Volume 1. F. R. Niglutsch. ^ The Role of Pivot States in Regional and Global Security . Netherlands: The Hague Centre for Strategic Studies. 2014. p. Table on page 10 (Great Power criteria). Archived from the original on 11 October 2016 . Retrieved 14 June 2016 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Sterio, Milena (2013).

The right to self-determination under international law: "selfistans", secession and the rule of the great powers . Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge. p. xii (preface). ISBN 978-0415668187 .

The great powers are super-sovereign states: an exclusive club of the most powerful states economically, militarily, politically and strategically. These states include veto-wielding members of the United Nations Security Council (United States, United Kingdom, France, China, and Russia), as well as economic powerhouses such as Germany, Italy and Japan. ^ a b c d e f g Kuper, Stephen. " Clarifying the nation's role strengthens the impact of a National Security Strategy 2019 " . Archived from the original on 10 December 2021 . Retrieved 22 January 2020 . Traditionally, great powers have been defined by their global reach and ability to direct the flow of international affairs. There are a number of recognised great powers within the context of contemporary international relations – with Great Britain, France, India and Russia recognised as nuclear-capable great powers, while Germany, Italy and Japan are identified as conventional great powers ^ a b c d e f g T.V. Paul; James J. Wirtz; Michel Fortmann (2005). "Great+power"&pg=PA59 Balance of Power . State University of New York Press. pp. 59, 282. ISBN 978-0-7914-6401-4 . Accordingly, the great powers after the Cold War are Britain, China, France, Germany, Japan, Russia and the United States p. 59 ^ a b c d e f g Carter, Keith Lambert (2019). Great Power, Arms, And Alliances . Retrieved 25 January 2021 . U.S., Russia, China, France, Germany, U.K. and Italy – Table on page 56,72 (Major powers-great power criteria) ^ a b c d e f g h i "Great Powers" . encarta.msn.com . Archived from the original on 31 October 2009 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . Today's great powers—the United States, Britain, France, Russia, and China—all have large military forces and substantial nuclear weapons capabilities. Japan and Germany—with huge economies and relatively large military forces but no nuclear weapons—also qualify as great powers. ^ a b c d e f g h Baron, Joshua (22 January 2014). Great Power Peace and American Primacy: The Origins and Future of a New International Order . United States: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 15– 17. ISBN 978-1137299482 .

The list of great powers in contemporary international society consists of China, France, Great Britain, Germany, Japan, Russia, and the United States. ^ "Philip Ii and The Rise of France" . Medieval France at War : 113– 146. 30 November 2022. doi : 10.1017/9781802700664.008 . ISBN 978-1-80270-066-4 . ^ Bradbury, Jim (1998). Philip Augustus: King of France, 1180 - 1223 .

The medieval world (1. publ ed.). London: Longman. ISBN 978-0-582-06058-6 . ^ Josiah C., Russell. "Medieval Sourcebook: Tables on Population in Medieval Europe" . "Population in Europe:, in Carlo M. Cipolla, ed., The Fontana Economic History of Europe, Vol. I: The Middle Ages . Collins/Fontana . Retrieved 2 March 2011 . ^ Jones, J. A. P.; Jones, J. A. P., eds. (1997). Europe, 1500–1600 . Challenging history / (1. publ ed.). Walton-on-Thames, Surrey: Nelson. ISBN 978-0-17-435064-4 . ^ Mitchell, Brian R. (1980). European historical statistics 1750 – 1975 (2., rev. ed.). London: Macmillan. ISBN 978-90-286-0660-9 . ^ Fumaroli, Marc; Howard, Richard (2010).

When the world spoke French . New York review books classics. New York: New York Review Books. ISBN 978-1-59017-375-6 . ^ "Western colonialism – European expansion since 1763" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 20 August 2021 . ^ Montagnon, Pierre (2010). Dictionnaire de la colonisation française . Paris: Pygmalion. ISBN 978-2-7564-0265-9 . ^ Rein Taagepera (September 1997). "Expansion and Contraction Patterns of Large Polities: Context for Russia" . International Studies Quarterly . 41 (3): 501. doi : 10.1111/0020-8833.00053 . JSTOR 2600793 . Retrieved 20 August 2021 . ^ Lyons, Martyn (1994). Napoleon Bonaparte and the Legacy of the French Revolution . European Studies. London: Bloomsbury Academic. ISBN 978-1-349-23436-3 . ^ Shovlin, John (2021). Trading with the enemy: Britain, France, and the 18th-century quest for a peaceful world order . New Haven; London: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-25356-6 . ^ Hamilton, C. I. (1993). Anglo-French naval rivalry, 1840-1870 . Oxford : New York: Clarendon Press; Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-820261-5 . ^ Sicker, Martin (20 February 2001).

The Islamic World in Decline: From the Treaty of Karlowitz to the Disintegration of the Ottoman Empire . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 97. ISBN 978-0-275-96891-5 – via Google Books. ^ Kaushik Roy, War, Culture and Society in Early Modern South Asia, 1740–1849 , Routledge, 2011, 77. ^ Napoleon and Persia by Iradj Amini p.11 ^ Gates, David (1997).

The Napoleonic wars: 1803–1815 . Modern wars. London New York Sydney : Arnold. ISBN 978-0-340-69184-7 . ^ Lloyd 1996 , p. 13 ^ Ferguson 2004 , p. 19. ^ Richter (2011) , p. 330–331. ^ Richter (2011) , p. 332–336. ^ Richter (2011) , p. 329–330. ^ Hamilton, Richard F.; Herwig, Holger H. (24 February 2003). "Chapter 1: World Wars: Definition and Causes" .

In Richard F. Hamilton; Holger H. Herwig (eds.).

The Origins of World War I . Cambridge University Press. pp. 4– 9. ISBN 978-1-107-39386-8 . Archived from the original on 21 January 2022 . Retrieved 21 January 2022 . ^ Anderson (2007) , p. 17 . ^ Szabo, Franz A.J. (2007).

The Seven Years' War in Europe 1756–1763 . Routledge. p. 432. ISBN 978-0-582-29272-7 . ^ Kennedy, Paul (1976).

The Rise and Fall of British Naval Mastery (new introduction ed.). London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-684-14609-6 . ^ Eccles, William John (2006). "Seven Years' War" .

The Canadian Encyclopedia . Retrieved 17 June 2006 . ^ a b Calloway 2007 , p. 12 ^ a b Marston (2002) , pp. 84–85. ^ Marston (2002) , p. 87. ^ MacLeod, D. Peter (2008). Northern Armageddon: The Battle of the Plains of Abraham . Vancouver: Douglas & McIntyre. ISBN 978-1-55365-412-4 . ^ Calloway 2007 , p. 4 ^ Marshall Smelser, The Democratic Republic, 1801–1815 (1968). ^ a b Cracraft, James (15 March 2006).

The Revolution of Peter the Great . Harvard University Press. doi : 10.2307/j.ctv1pncq7q . ISBN 978-0-674-02994-1 . JSTOR j.ctv1pncq7q . ^ Rice, Tamara Talbot (1970). Elizabeth, Empress of Russia . London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-00109-6 . ^ Whitelaw, Nancy (2005). Catherine the Great and the Enlightenment in Russia . European queens. Greensboro, N.C: Morgan Reynolds Pub. ISBN 978-1-931798-27-3 . ^ "The Great Game, 1856–1907: Russo-British Relations in Central and East Asia | Reviews in History" . reviews.history.ac.uk . Retrieved 8 October 2021 . ^ Martin Gilbert, Routledge Atlas of Russian History (4th ed. 2007) excerpt and text search Archived 25 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ Caroline Finkel, Osman's Dream: The Story of the Ottoman Empire, 1300–1923. ^ H. Inaicik "The rise of the Ottoman Empire" in P.M. Holt, A. K.S. Lambton, and B. Lewis (eds), The Cambridge History of Islam (2005).(Cambridge University). pages 295–200 ^ Howard, Douglas A. "Genre and myth in the Ottoman advice for kings literature," in Aksan, Virginia H. and Daniel Goffman eds.

The Early Modern Ottomans: Remapping the Empire (Cambridge University Press, 2007; 2009), 143. ^ Faroqhi, "Crisis and Change," 411–414. ^ Leitsch, Walter (July 1983). "1683: The Siege of Vienna" . History Today . 33 (7). Archived from the original on 21 December 2018 . Retrieved 19 December 2014 . ^ *Alan Palmer, The Decline and Fall of the Ottoman Empire . (1992) ^ "Portuguese Empire | Encyclopedia.com" . encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 7 April 2021 . ^ Vianna, Hélio; Donato, Hernâni (1994). História do Brasil (15a. ed. rev. e atualizada até o governo de Fernando Collor ed.). São Paulo, SP: Melhoramentos. ISBN 978-85-06-01999-3 . ^ Kamen, Henry (2004). Empire: how Spain became a world power, 1492–1763 . New York: Perennial. ISBN 978-0-06-093264-0 . ^ Torgal, Luís Reis (1981). "A Restauração – Sua Dinâmica Sócio-política" . Ideologia Política e Teoria do Estado na Restauração (in Portuguese). Vol. I. Coimbra : Biblioteca Geral da Universidade de Coimbra . pp. 69– 85. hdl : 10316/665 . ISBN 9789726160823 . ^ Nolan, Cathal J. (2008). Wars of the Age of Louis XIV, 1650–1715: An Encyclopedia of Global Warfare and Civilization (1st ed.). New York: Bloomsbury Publishing USA. ISBN 978-0-313-35920-0 . ^ Ekdahl, Sven (2008), "The Battle of Tannenberg-Grunwald-Žalgiris (1410) as reflected in Twentieth-Century monuments" , in Victor Mallia-Milanes (ed.), The Military Orders: History and Heritage , vol. 3, Ashgate, p. 175, ISBN 978-0-7546-6290-7 ^ Grant, R. G. (2017). 1001 Battles That Changed the Course of History . Chartwell. p. 214. ISBN 978-0-7858-3553-0 . ^ a b c Kort, Michael (2001).

The Handbook of the New Eastern Europe . Brookfield, Connecticut: Twenty-First Century Books. pp. 39– 40. ^ Brand, Hanno (2005). Trade, Diplomacy and Cultural Exchange: Continuity and change in the North Sea area and the Baltic c. 1350–1750 . Hilversum: Uitgeverij Verloren. p. 17. ISBN 90-6550-881-3 . ^ Deletant, Dennis (1986). "Moldavia between Hungary and Poland, 1347–1412".

The Slavonic and East European Review . 64 (2). Modern Humanities Research Association , UCL School of Slavonic and East European Studies : 191, 210. ISSN 1427-1443 . ^ Małowist, Marian (2010). Western Europe, Eastern Europe and World Development, 13th–18th Centuries . Leiden/Boston: Brill. pp. 115– 116. ISBN 978-90-04-17917-2 . ^ a b "The Historical Setting: The Jagiellonian Era (1385–1572)" . Retrieved 9 July 2022 . ^ Heritage: Interactive Atlas: Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth , last accessed on 19 March 2006. "At its apogee, the Poland comprised some 400,000 square miles (1,000,000 km 2 ) and a multi-ethnic population of 11 million." For population comparisons, see also those maps: "AD 1618 Republic of Poland The Bastion of Western Civilization" . Archived from the original on 17 February 2013 . Retrieved 18 June 2017 . , "AD 1717 Republic of Poland in Crisis of Sovereignty With Western Christianity" . Archived from the original on 17 February 2013 . Retrieved 18 June 2017 . . ^ Koyama, Satoshi (2007). "The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth as a Political Space: Its Unity and Complexity". Regions in Central and Eastern Europe: Past and Present (15). Slavic Research Center Hokkaido University : 137. ^ "Files and library of the Unity of the Brethren" . UNESCO . Retrieved 23 August 2024 . ^ a b (in English) David Sneath (2007).

The headless state: aristocratic orders, kinship society, & misrepresentations of nomadic inner Asia . New York: Columbia University Press. p. 188. ISBN 978-0-231-14054-6 . ^ a b (in English) M. L. Bush (1988). Rich noble, poor noble . Manchester University Press ND. pp. 8– 9. ISBN 0-7190-2381-5 . ^ "Moldavia" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 9 July 2022 . ^ "Zamoyski Jan" . Encyklopedia PWN (in Polish) . Retrieved 9 July 2022 . ^ Górski, Karol (1949). Związek Pruski i poddanie się Prus Polsce: zbiór tekstów źródłowych (in Polish). Poznań: Instytut Zachodni. p. 54. ^ "wojny polsko-moskiewskie" . Encyklopedia PWN (in Polish) . Retrieved 24 August 2024 . ^ a b c "wojny polsko-szwedzkie" . Encyklopedia PWN (in Polish) . Retrieved 24 August 2024 . ^ "wojny polsko-tureckie" . Encyklopedia PWN (in Polish) . Retrieved 24 August 2024 . ^ "Siege of Vienna" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 9 July 2022 . ^ Leitsch, Walter (July 1983). "1683: The Siege of Vienna" . History Today . 33 (7) . Retrieved 9 July 2022 . ^ "wojna północna" . Encyklopedia PWN (in Polish) . Retrieved 28 August 2024 . ^ "Stanisław I – king of Poland" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 11 April 2019 . ^ "Groningen Growth and Development Centre" (PDF) . 27 July 2016. ^ Immanuel C. Y. Hsü, The rise of modern China (4th ed. 1990) online free to borrow ^ Hu, Minghui. "High Qing Society" HIS 140B, 31 January 2018, UCSC ^ Rowe, William (10 September 2012). China's Last Empire .

The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. p. 66. ISBN 978-0-674-06624-3 . ^ Porter, Jonathan (4 February 2016). Imperial China 1350–1900 . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. ISBN 978-1-4422-2293-9 . ^ Hu, Minghui. "Settlement and Border Regions". HIS 140B, 9 February 2018. UCSC ^ Chu, Samuel C.; Liu, Kwang-Ching, eds. (1994). Li Hung-chang and China's early modernization . Armonk, New York: M. E. Sharpe. ISBN 978-1-56324-242-7 . ^ Canfield, Robert L. (1991). Turko-Persia in Historical Perspective . Cambridge University Press. p. 20. ISBN 0521522919 .

The Mughals – Persianized Turks who invaded from Central Asia and claimed descent from both Timur and Genghis – strengthened the Persianate culture of Muslim India ^ a b Sicker, Martin (2000).

The Islamic World in Ascendancy: From the Arab Conquests to the Siege in Vienna . Bloomsbury Academic. p. 189. ISBN 0-275-96892-8 . Ismail was quite prepared to lend his support to the displaced Timurid prince, Zahir ad-Din Babur, who offered to accept Safavid suzerainty in return for help in regaining control of Transoxiana. ^ Hooja, Rima (2006). A History of Rajasthan . Rupa. p. 454. ISBN 9788129115010 .

From Baburs memoirs we learn that Sanga's success against the Mughal advance guard commanded by Abdul Aziz and other forces at Bayana, severely demoralised the fighting spirit of Baburs troops encamped near Sikri. ^ Berndl, Klaus (2005). National Geographic Visual History of the World . National Geographic Society. pp. 318– 320. ISBN 978-0-7922-3695-5 . ^ Stein, Burton (2010), A History of India , John Wiley & Sons, pp. 159–, ISBN 978-1-4443-2351-1 , The imperial career of the Mughal house is conventionally reckoned to have ended in 1707 when the emperor Aurangzeb, a fifth-generation descendant of Babur, died. His fifty-year reign began in 1658 with the Mughal state seeming as strong as ever or even stronger. But in Aurangzeb's later years the state was brought to the brink of destruction, over which it toppled within a decade and a half after his death; by 1720 imperial Mughal rule was largely finished and an epoch of two imperial centuries had closed. ^ Richards, John F. (1995), The Mughal Empire , Cambridge University Press, p. xv, ISBN 978-0-521-56603-2 Quote: "By the latter date (1720) the essential structure of the centralized state was disintegrated beyond repair." ^ Bose, Sugata; Jalal, Ayesha (2003). Modern South Asia: history, culture, political economy (Reprinted ed.). London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-16951-6 . ^ Bang, Peter Fibiger; Bayly, C. A.; Scheidel, Walter (2020).

The Oxford World History of Empire: Volume One: The Imperial Experience . Oxford University Press. pp. 92– 94. ISBN 978-0-19-977311-4 . ^ Ghosh, D.K. Ed. A Comprehensive History Of India Vol. 9 . pp. 512– 523. ^ New Cambridge History of India.

The Marathas – Cambridge History of India (Vol. 2, Part 4) . ^ "Maratha confederacy | Maratha Empire, Peshwa, Shivaji | Britannica" . www.britannica.com . Retrieved 24 April 2025 .

The effective control of the peshwas ended with the great defeat of Panipat (1761) at the hands of the Afghans and the death of the young peshwa Madhav Rao I in 1772. Thereafter, the Maratha state was a confederacy of five chiefs under the nominal leadership of the peshwa at Poona (now Pune) in western India. Though they united on occasion, as against the British (1775–82), more often they quarreled. ^ a b Jeffrey G. Williamson & David Clingingsmith, India's Deindustrialization in the 18th and 19th Centuries Archived 29 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine , Global Economic History Network, London School of Economics ^ Harrison, Lawrence ; Berger, Peter L. (2006). Developing cultures: case studies . Routledge . p. 158. ISBN 978-0-415-95279-8 . ^ Roy, Tirthankar (2010). "The Long Globalization and Textile Producers in India" .

In Lex Heerma van Voss; Els Hiemstra-Kuperus; Elise van Nederveen Meerkerk (eds.).

The Ashgate Companion to the History of Textile Workers, 1650–2000 . Ashgate Publishing . p. 255. ISBN 978-0-7546-6428-4 . ^ a b c d e f Schmidt, Karl J. (2015). An Atlas and Survey of South Asian History . Routledge. pp. 100–. ISBN 978-1-317-47681-8 . ^ "Picture of original Mughal rupiya introduced by Sher Shah Suri" . Archived from the original on 5 October 2002 . Retrieved 4 August 2017 . ^ Irfan Habib ; Dharma Kumar ; Tapan Raychaudhuri (1987).

The Cambridge Economic History of India (PDF) . Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press . p. 464. ^ Richards, John F. (2003).

The Unending Frontier: An Environmental History of the Early Modern World . University of California Press. pp. 27–. ISBN 978-0-520-93935-6 . ^ Pagaza, Ignacio; Argyriades, Demetrios (2009). Winning the Needed Change: Saving Our Planet Earth . IOS Press. p. 129. ISBN 978-1-58603-958-5 . ^ Om Prakash , " Empire, Mughal ", History of World Trade Since 1450 , edited by John J. McCusker , vol. 1, Macmillan Reference US, 2006, pp. 237–240, World History in Context . Retrieved 3 August 2017 ^ Parthasarathi, Prasannan (2011), Why Europe Grew Rich and Asia Did Not: Global Economic Divergence, 1600–1850 , Cambridge University Press, p. 2, ISBN 978-1-139-49889-0 ^ Jeffrey G. Williamson (2011). Trade and Poverty: When the Third World Fell Behind . MIT Press . p. 91. ISBN 978-0-262-29518-5 . ^ Hunt, John (2005). Campbell, Heather-Ann (ed.). Dutch South Africa: Early Settlers at the Cape, 1652–1708 . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 2– 13. ISBN 978-1-904744-95-5 . ^ Hsin-Hui, Chiu (2008).

The Colonial 'civilizing Process' in Dutch Formosa: 1624–1662 . Leiden: Tuta Sub Aegide Pallas. pp. 3– 8. ISBN 978-9004165076 . ^ "Royal Netherlands Navy" . Archived from the original on 11 May 2013. ^ Fisher, Ann Richmond (2007). Explorers of the New World Time Line . Dayton, Ohio: Teaching & Learning Company. pp. 53– 59. ISBN 978-1-4291-1317-5 . ^ Junie T. Tong (2016). Finance and Society in 21st Century China: Chinese Culture Versus Western Markets . CRC Press. p. 151. ISBN 978-1-317-13522-7 . ^ John L. Esposito , ed. (2004).

The Islamic World: Past and Present . Vol. 1: Abba – Hist. Oxford University Press. p. 174. ISBN 978-0-19-516520-3 . ^ Nanda, J. N (2005). Bengal: the unique state . Concept Publishing Company. p. 10. 2005. ISBN 978-81-8069-149-2 . Bengal was rich in the production and export of grain, salt, fruit, maize, liquors and wines, precious metals and ornaments besides the output of its handlooms in silk and cotton. Europe referred to Bengal as the richest country to trade with. ^ Om Prakash , " Empire, Mughal Archived 18 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine ", History of World Trade Since 1450 , edited by John J. McCusker, vol. 1, Macmillan Reference USA, 2006, pp. 237–240, World History in Context . Retrieved 3 August 2017 ^ Indrajit Ray (2011). Bengal Industries and the British Industrial Revolution (1757–1857) . Routledge. pp. 57, 90, 174. ISBN 978-1-136-82552-1 . ^ Hobkirk, Michael (1992). Land, Sea or Air?: Military Priorities- Historical Choices . Basingstoke: Palgrave-Macmillan. pp. 77– 80. ISBN 978-0-312-07493-7 . ^ Dalio, Ray. "The Big Cycles of the Dutch and British Empires and Their Currencies" Archived 1 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine , LinkedIn , 21 May 2020 ^ a b Jones, Guno (2014). Essed, Philomena; Hoving, Isabel (eds.). Dutch Racism . Amsterdam: Rodopi B.V. pp. 315– 316. ISBN 978-9042037588 . ^ a b c Michael Roberts (9 July 2024). "Gustavus Adolphus" . Britannica . Retrieved 28 August 2024 . ^ a b c d e f g Derek Mckay; H.M. Scott (1983).

The Rise of the Great Powers 1648–1815 . Pearson. pp. 10– 14. ISBN 978-1-317-87284-9 . ^ Lunde, Henrik O. (2014). A warrior dynasty: the rise and decline of Sweden as a military superpower . Philadelphia Oxford: Casemate. ISBN 978-1-61200-243-9 . ^ De Vries, Jan (2009). "The economic crisis of the seventeenth century after fifty years".

The Journal of Interdisciplinary History . 40 (2): 160. ^ Englund, Peter (2000). Den oövervinnerlige (in Swedish). Stockholm: Atlantis. p. 601. ISBN 91-7486-999-X . ^ Robert I. Frost, After the Deluge: Poland-Lithuania and the Second Northern War, 1655-1660 , Cambridge University Press, 2004, ISBN 0-521-54402-5 , Google Print, p. 85 ^ Meilus, Elmantas (2013). "LDK istorija: Kėdainių unija – nuo Lenkijos prie Švedijos" (in Lithuanian). 15min . Archived from the original on 31 August 2013. Retrieved 27 January 2023. ^ Bumblauskas, Alfredas (2005). Senosios Lietuvos istorija (1009–1795) (in Lithuanian). R. Paknio leidykla, p. 307. ISBN 9986830893 ^ Thompson, Mark L. (2013).

The contest for the Delaware Valley: allegiance, identity, and empire in the seventeenth century . Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press. ISBN 978-0-8071-5058-0 . ^ "Porto Novo" . Nordisk familjebok (in Swedish) . Retrieved 2 December 2018 . ^ Esposito, Gabriele; Rava, Giuseppe (2019). Armies of the Great Northern War 1700–1720 . Men-at-arms. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4728-3366-2 . ^ Kekke Stadin, "The masculine image of a great power: Representations of Swedish imperial power c. 1630–1690." Scandinavian journal of history 30.1 (2005): 61–82. ^ "Battle of Poltava" . Britannica . Retrieved 28 August 2024 . ^ Aldrich, Robert (1996). Greater France: A History of French Overseas Expansion . European Studies. London: Bloomsbury Academic. ISBN 978-1-349-24729-5 . ^ Page, Melvin E.; Sonnenburg, Penny M., eds. (2003). Colonialism: an international, social, cultural, and political encyclopedia . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-57607-335-3 . ^ a b Angus Maddison.

The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective (p. 98, 242). OECD , Paris, 2001. ^ Nigel Dalziel, The Penguin Historical Atlas of the British Empire (2006), ^ Timothy H. Parsons, The British Imperial Century, 1815–1914: A World History Perspective (2nd ed. 2019) ^ Timothy H. Parsons, The Second British Empire (2014) ^ After 1866, Alaska was sold, and South Sakhalin lost to Japan, but Batum, Kars, Pamir, and the Transcaspian region (Turkmenistan) were acquired.

The map incorrectly shows Tuva in dark green, although the protectorate over Tuva was established only in 1914. ^ Iver B. Neumann, "Russia as a great power, 1815–2007." Journal of International Relations and Development 11.2 (2008): 128–151. online ^ Cross, Robin (2002).

The battle of Kursk: Operation Citadel 1943 . Classic military history. London; New York: Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-139109-0 . ^ "GDP – Million – Flags, Maps, Economy, Geography, Climate, Natural Resources, Current Issues, International Agreements, Population, Social Statistics, Political System" . Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 29 August 2018 . ^ Scott and Scott (1979) p. 305 ^ "October 30, 1961 – The Tsar Bomba: CTBTO Preparatory Commission" . Archived from the original on 19 March 2016 . Retrieved 29 August 2018 . ^ "The Soviet Union and the United States – Revelations from the Russian Archives | Exhibitions – Library of Congress" . loc.gov . 15 June 1992. Archived from the original on 15 September 2017 . Retrieved 12 November 2017 . ^ Wheatcroft, S. G.; Davies, R. W.; Cooper, J. M. (1986). Soviet Industrialization Reconsidered: Some Preliminary Conclusions about Economic Development between 1926 and 1941 . Vol. 39. Economic History Review . pp. 30– 2. ISBN 978-0-7190-4600-1 . ^ Tucker, Spencer; Arnold, James R.; Wiener, Roberta; Pierpaoli, Paul G.; Cutrer, Thomas W.; Santoni, Pedro, eds. (2013).

The encyclopedia of the Mexican-American War: a political, social, and military history . Santa Barbara, Calif: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-853-8 . ^ "The Impact of the First World War and Its Implications for Europe Today | Heinrich Böll Stiftung | Brussels office – European Union" . Heinrich-Böll-Stiftung . ^ Giuseppe Finaldi, A History of Italian Colonialism, 1860–1907: Europe's Last Empire (Routledge, 2016). ^ Angelo Del Boca, "The myths, suppressions, denials, and defaults of Italian colonialism." in Patrizia Palumbo, ed. A place in the sun: Africa in Italian colonial culture from post-unification to the present (2003): 17–36. ^ Lowe, p.289 ^ Levy-Leboyer, Maurice (1981). Disparities in Economic Development since the Industrial Revolution . Paul Bairoch, Maurice Levy-Leboyerd. London: Palgrave Macmillan UK. ISBN 978-1-349-04707-9 . ^ Bianchi, Gianfranco (2003). Perché e come cadde il fascismo: 25 luglio 1943, crollo di un regime . Testimonianze fra cronaca e storia. 1939-1945: Seconda guerra mondiale. Milano: Mursia. ISBN 978-88-425-3144-9 . ^ "Il Cacciatorpediniere Carabiniere e i 38 rubini (Lanfranco Sanna)" . August 2016 . Retrieved 19 May 2023 . ^ Glei, Bruzzone & Caselli. "Effects of war losses on mortality estimates for Italy: a first attempt." Demographic Research Vol. 13, Article 15 (2005): pp. 363–388. ^ "v49.pdf (Treaty of Peace with Italy)" (PDF) . United Nations . ^ Kann, Robert A. (2020). A History of the Habsburg Empire 1526-1918 (2nd. printing, with corrections, Reprint 2020 ed.). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-04206-3 . ^ Falkner, James (2015).

The War of the Spanish Succession 1701–1714 . Pen & Sword. pp. 4173– 4181. ISBN 978-1-78159-031-7 . ^ Lindsay, J.O. (1957).

The New Cambridge Modern History . Vol. 7: The Old Regime, 1713– 1763. Cambridge University Press. p. 420. ^ Good, David F.; Good, David F.; Good, David F. (1986). Der wirtschaftliche Aufstieg des Habsburgerreiches 1750 – 1914 . Forschungen zur Geschichte des Donauraumes. Translated by Streissler, Monika. Wien Köln Graz: Böhlau. ISBN 978-3-205-06390-2 . ^ Copy of the Treaty of Peace between the Allied and Associated Powers and Austria, as signed at St. Germain on September 10, 1919 . 1919 – via Internet Archive. ^ "Second Northern War" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 9 July 2022 . ^ "Congress of Vienna" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 9 July 2022 . ^ a b c "Prussia" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 9 July 2022 . ^ J. H. Clapham, The Economic Development of France and Germany 1815–1914 (1936) ^ "Germany – The economy, 1890–1914 | Britannica" . www.britannica.com . ^ Azar Gat (2008). War in Human Civilization . Oxford University Press. p. 517. ISBN 978-0-19-923663-3 . ^ Alfred Vagts, "Land and Sea Power in the Second German Reich." The Journal of Military History 3.4 (1939): 210+ JSTOR 3038611 ^ Paul Kennedy, The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers: Economic Change and Military Conflict from 1500 to 2000 (1987) ^ "Wilhelm II (1859–1941)" . BBC . Retrieved 19 April 2014 . ^ Truitt 2010 , p. 114. ^ Reinach 1920 , p. 193. ^ Ingrao & Szabo 2007 , p. 261. ^ a b c d DeLong 1997 . ^ Evans 2005 , p. 345. ^ Tooze 2006 , p. 97. ^ Tooze 2006 , pp. 125–127. ^ Tooze 2006 , p. 131. ^ Tooze 2006 , pp. 106, 117–118. ^ Tooze 2006 , pp. 308–309. ^ Evans 2005 , pp. 322–326, 329. ^ Evans 2005 , p. 320. ^ Evans 2005 , pp. 330–331. ^ Evans 2005 , p. 166. ^ Evans 2005 , pp. 327–328, 338. ^ Evans 2005 , pp. 328, 333. ^ Evans 2005 , p. 331. ^ a b Kershaw 2008 , p. 289. ^ Shirer 1960 , p. 202. ^ McNab 2009 , pp. 54, 71. ^ Tooze 2006 , pp. 61–62. ^ Evans 2005 , pp. 357–360. ^ Evans 2005 , p. 360. ^ Tooze 2006 , p. 294. ^ Evans 2005 , pp. 141–142. ^ McNab 2009 , p. 59. ^ Jansen, Marius B. (1994). Sakamoto Ryōma and the Meiji restoration (Morningside ed.). New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-10173-8 . ^ a b "Empire of Japan - US Occupation, WWII, Postwar | Britannica" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived from the original on 10 August 2025 . Retrieved 28 November 2025 . ^ Takemae, Eiji; Ricketts, Robert; Swann, Sebastian (2002). Inside GHQ: the Allied occupation of Japan and its legacy . New York: Continuum. ISBN 978-0-8264-6247-3 . ^ Steinberg, John W.; Wolf, David, eds. (2007).

The Russo-Japanese war in global perspective: World War Zero. Volume 2 . History of warfare 1385-7827. Leiden Boston: Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-14284-8 . ^ Paine, Sarah Crosby Mallory (2006).

The Sino-Japanese War of 1894 - 1895: perceptions, power, and primacy (Repr ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. ISBN 978-0-521-81714-1 . ^ Taft, William Howard (10 August 1914). "A Message to the People of the United States" .

The Independent . pp. 198– 199 . Retrieved 17 May 2022 . ^ James, David H. (2011).

The rise and fall of the Japanese Empire . Routledge library editions : Japan. Oxon : Routledge. ISBN 978-1-136-92546-7 . ^ Conrad, Sebastian (2014). "The Dialectics of Remembrance: Memories of Empire in Cold War Japan" (PDF) . Comparative Studies in Society and History . 56 (1): 8. doi : 10.1017/S0010417513000601 . ISSN 0010-4175 . JSTOR 43908281 . S2CID 146284542 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 July 2020 . Retrieved 7 July 2020 .

In 1942, at the moment of its greatest extension, the empire encompassed territories spanning over 7,400,000 square kilometers. ^ " "Official Names of Member States (UNTERM)" " (PDF) . protocol.un.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 June 2020 . Retrieved 28 November 2025 . ^ a b c Farrell, Theo (2013). Transforming Military Power – Since the Cold War: Britain, France, and the United States, 1991–2012 . Sten Rynning, Terry Terriff (1st ed.). West Nyack: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-36014-3 . ^ a b c d e f g Canada Among Nations, 2004: Setting Priorities Straight . McGill-Queen's Press – MQUP. 17 January 2005. p. 85. ISBN 0773528369 . (" The United States is the sole world's superpower. France, Italy, Germany and the United Kingdom are great powers ") ^ a b c d e Yasmi Adriansyah, 'Questioning Indonesia's place in the world', Asia Times (20 September 2011): 'Though there are still debates on which countries belong to which category, there is a common understanding that the GP countries are the United States, China, United Kingdom, France, and Russia. Besides their political and economic dominance of the global arena, these countries have a special status in the United Nations Security Council with their permanent seats and veto rights.' ^ Tullio, Scovazzi (6 October 2023), "World Heritage Committee and World Heritage List" , The 1972 World Heritage Convention , Oxford University Press, pp. 133– 161, doi : 10.1093/law/9780198877448.003.0009 , ISBN 978-0-19-887744-8 , retrieved 27 December 2024 {{ citation }} : CS1 maint: work parameter with ISBN ( link ) ^ a b "World Tourism Barometer" (PDF) . World Tourism Organization . May 2024. p. 19 . Retrieved 5 July 2024 . ^ a b "Cultural Influence rankings" . USnews. 2021 . Retrieved 24 May 2021 . ^ "World Soft Power Index 2023" . 15 August 2023 . Retrieved 31 October 2023 . ^ "Soft Power 30" . Soft Power . Archived from the original on 6 January 2026 . Retrieved 19 April 2026 . ^ "GDP, current prices" . www.imf.org . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ "Global Wealth Report" (PDF) . Credit Suisse. October 2010. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 November 2014 . Retrieved 27 October 2014 . "In euro and USD terms, the total wealth of French households is very sizeable.

Although it has just 1% of the world's adults, France ranks fourth among nations in aggregate household wealth – behind China and just ahead of Germany. Europe as a whole accounts for 35% of the individuals in the global top 1%, but France itself contributes a quarter of the European contingent. ^ "World Health Organization Assesses the World's Health Systems" . World Health Organization. 8 December 2010 . Retrieved 16 July 2011 . ^ "World Population Prospects – The 2006 Revision" (PDF) . United Nations . Retrieved 27 April 2010 . ^ WIPO. "Global Innovation Index 2024, 17th Edition" . www.wipo.int . Retrieved 1 October 2024 . ^ Jack S. Levy, War in the Modern Great Power System, 1495–1975 , (2014) p. 29 ^ Aldrich, Robert (2024). France in World Politics . Routledge Revivals Series. John Connell (1st ed.). Oxford: Taylor & Francis Group. ISBN 978-1-032-84176-2 . ^ "Table 10.1. World nuclear forces, January 2020" , page 326, Chapter 10: "World nuclear forces", Military Spending and Armaments, 2019 , Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), retrieved March 18, 2023 ^ "Europa Official Site – France" . EU . Retrieved 28 October 2014 . ^ a b c "NATO's nuclear deterrence policy and forces" . Site name seo . Retrieved 29 November 2025 . ...should an adversary decide to attack NATO, they must not only contend with NATO's decision-making, but also make a judgement about decision-making from the leaders of the United States, the United Kingdom and France. ^ "Portail de l'Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (OIF)" . Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (in French) . Retrieved 29 November 2025 . ^ "True Map of France: Republic On Which The Sun Never Sets – Brilliant Maps" . 15 November 2015 . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ "Field Listing :: Area" .

The World Factbook . CIA. Archived from the original on 31 January 2014 . Retrieved 1 November 2015 . This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain . ^ The World Economy . Development Centre Studies. 11 June 2001. doi : 10.1787/9789264189980-en . ISBN 978-92-64-18608-8 . Retrieved 27 December 2024 – via OECD. ^ Lynch, Frances M. B. (2021).

The French economy . World economies. Newcastle upon Tyne: Agenda Publishing. ISBN 978-1-78821-166-6 . ^ a b c "About the G7" . g7.canada.ca . Retrieved 29 November 2025 . ^ a b "Group of Ten" . Oxford Reference . Oxford University Press . Retrieved 7 August 2024 . ^ a b c "Members and partners" . OECD . Retrieved 29 November 2025 . ^ a b c "G20 Members" . Archived from the original on 22 September 2025 . Retrieved 29 November 2025 . ^ Country profile: France , Euler Hermes ^ "These are the top 10 manufacturing countries in the world" . World Economic Forum . 25 February 2020 . Retrieved 10 February 2022 . ^ Country profil: France , CIA World factbook ^ France: the market Archived 19 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine , Société Générale (latest Update: September 2020) ^ World Trade Statistical Review 2019 , World Trade Organization , p. 11 ^ Andrews, Edmund L. (1 January 2002). "Germans Say Goodbye to the Mark, a Symbol of Strength and Unity" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 1 May 2011. ^ "France – Finance" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 28 August 2021 . ^ Taylor Martin, Susan (28 December 1998). "On Jan. 1, out of many arises one Euro".

The St. Petersburg Times . p. National, 1.A. ^ How can Europe reset the investment agenda now to rebuild its future? , EY , 28 May 2020 ^ "The 2024 Kearney Foreign Direct Investment Confidence Index®: Continued optimism in the face of instability" . Kearney . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ "Foreign direct investment (FDI) in France – Investing – International Trade Portal International Trade Portal" . lloydsbanktrade.com . Retrieved 28 August 2021 . ^ a b c "Fortune Global 500" . Fortune . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ EURO STOXX 50 , 27 December 2024 ^ "Top companies by sectors – GlobalData" . www.globaldata.com . Archived from the original on 23 May 2024 . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ "World's Largest Insurers — 2022 Edition: China Insurers, US Health Writers Show Gains in AM Best's Ranking" . news.ambest.com . Retrieved 10 February 2022 . ^ World's largest insurers – Total non banking assets, 2019 , AM Best , 2019 ^ "Global 2000 Leading Companies" . Forbes . May 2015. Archived from the original on 23 April 2011. ^ "Largest construction companies by market cap" . companiesmarketcap.com . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ "Leading tyre manufacturers" . Tyrepress . Retrieved 29 November 2025 . ^ "Jean-Claude Decaux & family" . Forbes . Retrieved 29 August 2024 . ^ Deanna Ting (10 April 2019). "Is Accor the Next Starwood? What's Next for Hotel Mergers" . Skift.com . Retrieved 8 September 2019 . ^ "SCI Verkehr - Herstellerstudie_engl" (PDF) . SCI . ^ "France – Economy" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 28 August 2021 . ^ These are the world's most innovative countries , Business Insider ^ "The Global Competitiveness Report 2019" (PDF) . ^ Gould, Charles. "Global300 Report 2010, International Co-operative Alliance.

The world's major co-operatives and mutual businesses" (PDF) . ica.coop . Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 August 2021 . Retrieved 29 November 2018 . ^ Ali, Zarmina (7 April 2020). "The world's 100 largest banks" . Standard & Poor . Retrieved 23 June 2020 . ^ Jimenea, Adrian; Wu, John; Terris, Harry (30 April 2024). "The world's largest banks by assets, 2024" . spglobal.com . S&P Global Market Intelligence . Retrieved 8 May 2024 . ^ a b Embassy of France. "Embassy of France in Washington: Economy of France" . Ambafrance-us.org. Archived from the original on 9 October 2011 . Retrieved 16 July 2011 . ^ "Euronext Paris" . Sustainable Stock Exchanges Initiative . Retrieved 14 April 2022 . ^ "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects" . IMF . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ United Nations (13 March 2024). Human Development Report 2023-24 (Report). United Nations. ^ "2023 Corruption Perceptions Index: Explore the results" . Transparency.org . 30 January 2024 . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ How does your country invest in R&D ? , UNESCO Institute for Statistics (retrieved on 27 September 2020) ^ a b "Funding" . www.esa.int . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ Johnston, Scott Alan (23 January 2022). "With Webb Safely Launched, Focus Shifts to the Ariane 6" . Universe Today . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ The global geography of world cities , iied, 9 July 2020 ^ 10 reasons to move to Paris La Défense , Official website of Paris La Défense ^ a b "Global Wealth PPP Distribution: Who Are The Leaders Of The Global Economy? – Full Size" . www.visualcapitalist.com . Retrieved 21 October 2021 . ^ Global Cities Investment Monitor 2019 , KPMG , 2019 ^ The attractiveness of world-class business districts: Paris La Défense vs. its global competitors Archived 18 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine , EY , November 2017 ^ "Dossier Cartographie" (PDF) . prefectures-regions.gouv.fr . ^ Fraudet, Xavier (2006). France's security independence: originality and constraints in Europe, 1981–1995 . Europäische Hochschulschriften. Bern; Oxford: Peter Lang. ISBN 978-3-03911-141-1 . ^ Bossuat, Gérard; Cummings, Gordon D., eds. (2013). France, Europe and Development Aid.

From the Treaties of Rome to the Present Day . Histoire économique et financière - XIXe-XXe. Vincennes: Institut de la gestion publique et du développement économique. doi : 10.4000/books.igpde.2932 . ISBN 978-2-8218-3882-6 . ^ a b "Lowy Institute Global Diplomacy Index 2024" . globaldiplomacyindex.lowyinstitute.org . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ Gosset, David (8 January 2009). "A Return to De Gaulle's 'Eternal China' " . Greater China. Asia Times . Archived from the original on 19 January 2009 . Retrieved 14 January 2016 . ^ "Paris Agreement, FCCC/CP/2015/L.9/Rev.1" (PDF) . UNFCCC secretariat . Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 December 2015 . Retrieved 12 December 2015 . ^ "Historic Paris Agreement on Climate Change – 195 Nations Set Path to Keep Temperature Rise Well Below 2 Degrees Celsius" . UN Climate Change Newsroom . United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 12 December 2015. Archived from the original on 17 January 2016 . Retrieved 14 December 2015 . ^ United Kingdom Permanent Committee on Geographical Names (May 2017). "Toponymic guidelines for the United Kingdom" . GOV.UK . 10.2 Definitions. usually shortened to United Kingdom ...

The abbreviation is UK or U.K. ^ "Definition of Great Britain in English" . Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 4 October 2013 . Retrieved 29 October 2014 . Great Britain is the name for the island that comprises England, Scotland and Wales, although the term is also used loosely to refer to the United Kingdom. ^ "Standard Area Measurements for Administrative Areas (December 2023) in the UK" . geoportal.statistics.gov.uk . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ "Office for National Statistics" . ons.gov.uk . ^ "Key facts about the United Kingdom" . Directgov . Archived from the original on 15 October 2012 . Retrieved 6 March 2015 .

The full title of this country is 'the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland'. Great Britain is made up of England, Scotland and Wales.

The United Kingdom (UK) is made up of England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. 'Britain' is used informally, usually meaning the United Kingdom.

The Channel Islands and the Isle of Man are not part of the UK. ^ "Supporting the Overseas Territories" . Foreign and Commonwealth Office . Retrieved 9 March 2015 . ^ Hogg , p. 424 chapter 9 English Worldwide by David Crystal : "approximately one in four of the worlds population are capable of communicating to a useful level in English". ^ Reynolds, Glenn (28 October 2004). "Explaining the 'Anglosphere' " .

The Guardian . London. ^ "Head of the Commonwealth" . Commonwealth Secretariat. Archived from the original on 6 July 2010 . Retrieved 9 October 2010 . ^ Julian Go (2007). "A Globalizing Constitutionalism?, Views from the Postcolony, 1945-2000" .

In Arjomand, Saïd Amir (ed.). Constitutionalism and political reconstruction . Brill. pp. 92– 94. ISBN 978-90-04-15174-1 . ^ Ferguson 2004 , p. 307. ^ "Most spoken languages in the World" .

The World Factbook . CIA . Archived from the original on 26 January 2021 . Retrieved 1 January 2022 . ^ Salomone, Rosemary C. (2022).

The rise of English: global politics and the power of language . New York, NY: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-062561-0 . ^ Seidlhofer, Barbara (10 January 2013). Understanding English as a Lingua Franca . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-442620-6 . ^ "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects" . IMF . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ McCourt, David (2014). Britain and World Power Since 1945: Constructing a Nation's Role in International Politics . United States: University of Michigan Press . ISBN 978-0-472-07221-7 . ^ "IISS Military Balance 2021" .

The Military Balance . 121 (1): 23– 29. January 2021. doi : 10.1080/04597222.2021.1868791 . S2CID 232050862 . Retrieved 1 October 2021 . ^ a b "Current Members | Security Council" . main.un.org . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ United Nations. "United Nations Charter (full text)" . United Nations . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ "Brexit: UK leaves the European Union" . www.bbc.com . 1 February 2020 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ Gamble, Andrew (1994). Britain in Decline: Economic Policy, Political Strategy and the British State (Fourth ed.). London: The MacMillan Press. p. xiv. ISBN 978-0-333-61441-9 . ^ Rogers, James (ed.). "Audit of Geopolitical Capability: An Assessment of Twenty Major Powers" (PDF) .

The Henry Jackson Society. p. 38 . Retrieved 7 March 2022 . ^ ISSF (issf.org.in) (15 August 2023). ISSF World Soft Power Index 2023 . ^ "The Global Competitiveness Report 2019" (PDF) . weforum.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 December 2024 . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ Elliott, Michael (22 January 2007). "China Takes on the World" . Time Magazine . Archived from the original on 14 January 2007. ^ Allen, Nick (14 November 2016). "Barack Obama delivers parting snub to special relationship with Britain by naming Angela Merkel his 'closest partner' " .

The Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. ^ "History of the Special Relationship" . U.S. Embassy and Consulates in the United Kingdom . United States Government . Retrieved 7 March 2022 . ^ "The cultural superpower: British cultural projection abroad" Archived 16 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine . Journal of the British Politics Society, Norway. Volume 6. No. 1. Winter 2011 ^ Sheridan, Greg (15 May 2010). "Cameron has chance to make UK great again" .

The Australian . Sydney . Retrieved 20 May 2012 . ^ "London is the world capital of the 21st century... says New York | News" . Evening Standard . London. Archived from the original on 25 January 2012 . Retrieved 10 February 2012 . ^ Calder, Simon (22 December 2007). "London, capital of the world" .

The Independent . London. ^ Abrahamson, Mark (2004). Global cities . New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-514203-7 . ^ "UK support to Ukraine: factsheet" . GOV.UK . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ "UK Sends Entire AS-90 Howitzer Fleet to Ukraine, Retiring the Iconic Artillery System" . UNITED24 Media . 5 May 2025 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ "What military equipment has the UK sent Ukraine?" . www.forcesnews.com . 5 October 2023 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ "Міністерство Фінансів України" . mof.gov.ua . Archived from the original on 19 July 2025 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ McCourt, David M. (2014). Britain and world power since 1945: constructing a nation's role in international politics . Configurations. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-472-07221-7 . ^ Kevin M. Korabik, Russia's Natural Resources and their Economic Effects Archived 20 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine , Penn State College of Earth and Mineral Sciences , 1 December 1997 ^ "India Partner Country at INNOPROM-2016 Show: Russia: (11–14 July 2016, Yekaterinburg, Russia)" (PDF) . EEPC India . July 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 June 2016 . Retrieved 4 January 2017 . ^ "Pre-empting Russia's Year of Ecology" . Ocean Unite . February 2016. Archived from the original on 4 September 2016 . Retrieved 4 November 2021 . ^ "Russia was classified as a high-income country" . World Bank . Retrieved 20 July 2024 . ^ Steven Rosefielde (February 2005). Russia in the 21st Century . UNC Press. ISBN 978-0-521-54529-7 . ^ New York Times by Ronald Steel professor of international relations, August 24, 2008 (Superpower Reborn) ^ Farooque Chowdhury (22 December 2013). "A Militarily Resurging Russia" . Counter Currents . Retrieved 13 September 2015 . ^ Steel, Ronald (24 August 2008). "A Superpower Is Reborn" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 19 November 2015 . ^ Megan K. Stack (11 September 2009). "Venezuela's Hugo Chavez recognizes independence of breakaway Georgia republics" . Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 7 July 2014 . ^ Robert Berger (13 February 2010). "Netanyahu Heads to Russia with Call for 'Crippling Sanctions' on Iran" . Voice of America . Retrieved 7 July 2014 . ^ Stephen Kinzer (11 May 2014). "Russia acts like any other superpower" .

The Boston Globe . Retrieved 7 July 2014 . ^ Matthew Fleischer (12 March 2014). "How curbing climate change can prevent Russia from becoming a superpower" . Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 7 July 2014 . ^ "Россия – военная сверхдержава, и США должны с этим считаться" (in Russian). РИА Новости . Retrieved 8 November 2015 . ^ "Obama has turned Putin into the world's most powerful leader" . New York Post . 29 September 2015 . Retrieved 6 September 2023 . ^ Dreazen, Yochi (21 November 2017). "Bashar al-Assad is taking a sickening victory lap through Russia" . Vox . Retrieved 6 September 2023 . ^ "It's about time we all admit that Putin has prevailed in Syria" . openDemocracy . Retrieved 6 September 2023 . ^ Bill Bray, Miyako Yerick (31 August 2017). "Putin Saved Assad, Will He Save Maduro?" .

The National Interest . Retrieved 6 September 2023 . ^ "Obama has turned Putin into the world's most powerful leader" . New York Post . Retrieved 8 November 2015 . ^ "What Is Russia's Wagner Group Doing in Africa?" . Council on Foreign Relations . Retrieved 6 September 2023 . ^ "Russia's Wagner Group: Where is it active? – DW – 06/25/2023" . dw.com . Retrieved 6 September 2023 . ^ Fred Weir (3 November 2011). "Despite huge cash bonuses to mothers, Russia's population is shrinking" . GlobalPost . Retrieved 8 July 2014 . ^ Niall Ferguson (12 December 2011). "In Decline, Putin's Russia Is on Its Way to Global Irrelevance" . Newsweek . Retrieved 2 August 2014 . ^ Mark Adomanis (11 May 2013). "Russia's Population Isn't Shrinking (It's Growing Very, Very Slowly)" . Forbes . Archived from the original on 9 June 2013 . Retrieved 8 July 2014 . ^ Nathan Smith (8 March 2014). "Do not treat Russia like a superpower, it isn't" . National Business Review . Archived from the original on 15 July 2014 . Retrieved 7 July 2014 . ^ "Философские науки — 2/2015. В. Н. Шевченко. К дискуссиям вокруг темы «Распад России»: В поисках оптимальной формы Российского государства" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 September 2016. ^ "Владимир Путин: Отделение Кавказа от России приведет к развалу страны" . Российская газета (in Russian). 20 December 2011. Archived from the original on 29 July 2021 . Retrieved 6 May 2018 . ^ "Poor planning, low moral, weak supplies erode Russian invasion from within" . MSNBC. 2 March 2022. ^ "Damage to Russian equipment raises questions about its military effectiveness" . ABC News . 18 March 2022. ^ "Why Russia's military operations have fallen short of expectations" . CBS News . 2 May 2022. ^ "War in Ukraine: why is Russia's army so weak" .

The Economist . ^ drezner, daniel. "Is Russia still a great power?" . ^ Gebeily, Maya; Azhari, Timour (8 December 2024). "Assad gets asylum in Russia, rebels sweep through Syria" . Reuters . ^ "Nuclear risks grow as new arms race looms—new SIPRI Yearbook out now | SIPRI" . www.sipri.org . 16 June 2025 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ Nilsson, Niklas; Weissmann, Mikael, eds. (2024). Russian warfare and influence: states in the intersection between East and West (1 ed.). New York: Bloomsbury Academic. ISBN 978-1-350-33524-0 . ^ "How Russian-funded fake news network aims to disrupt European election - BBC investigation" . www.bbc.com . 21 September 2025 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ "Russia's Means of Global Influence" . www.rand.org . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ "Analyzing American Power in the Post-Cold War Era" . Archived from the original on 11 March 2007 . Retrieved 28 February 2007 . ^ "United States Geography 1989 – Flags, Maps, Economy, Geography, Climate, Natural Resources, Current Issues, International Agreements, Population, Social Statistics, Political System" . www.theodora.com . ^ "National Population Totals and Components of Change: 2020–2024" . Census.gov . United States Census Bureau . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ Embassy of France in the United States, Washington, D.C. "Political Relations - France in the United States / Embassy of France in Washington, D.C." France in the United States / Embassy of France in Washington, D.C . Archived from the original on 26 February 2024 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ Nolan, Mary (2012).

The transatlantic century: Europe and America, 1890-2010 . New approaches to European history. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-87167-9 . ^ Barshefsky, Charlene; Chairs, James T. Hill; O’Neil, Shannon K. (2008). U.S.-Latin America Relations: A New Direction for a New Reality (Report). Council on Foreign Relations. ^ U. S. Embassy in Canberra (16 November 2022). "U.S.-Australia Relations" . U.S. Embassy & Consulates in Australia . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ "South Korea's Image at New High in U.S." Gallup.com . 20 February 2018 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ " "한국에 긍정적 영향을 미친 국가는 미국 " 80.7% - 1등 인터넷뉴스 조선닷컴" . news.chosun.com . Archived from the original on 24 December 2011 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ Tucker, Nancy Bernkopf (2009). Strait Talk: United States-Taiwan Relations and the Crisis with China . Harvard University Press. doi : 10.2307/j.ctv1pncpw2 . ISBN 978-0-674-03187-6 . JSTOR j.ctv1pncpw2 . ^ "US and Taiwan strengthen ties by signing agreement to formalize consular functions" . Stars and Stripes . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ "Americans, Japanese: Mutual Respect 70 Years After the End of WWII" . Pew Research Center . 7 April 2015 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ "gov.sg | The Straits Times - Singapore-US ties 'very, very strong': Obama" . www.gov.sg . Archived from the original on 26 November 2015 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ Williamson, John: What Washington Means by Policy Reform Archived 25 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine , in: Williamson, John (ed.): Latin American Readjustment: How Much has Happened , Washington: Institute for International Economics 1989. ^ "World Wide Military Expenditures" . www.globalsecurity.org . ^ Chalmers, Malcolm; Lunn, Simon (March 2010), NATO's Tactical Nuclear Dilemma (PDF) , Royal United Services Institute , archived from the original (PDF) on 29 May 2012 , retrieved 16 March 2010 ^ Biddle, Julian (2001). What Was Hot!: Five Decades of Pop Culture in America . New York: Citadel, p. ix. ISBN 0-8065-2311-5 . ^ "In Depth: Topics A to Z, Iraq" . news.gallup.com . Retrieved 29 July 2021 . ^ Klein, Bradley S. (1988). "Hegemony and Strategic Culture: American Power Projection and Alliance Defence Politics" . Review of International Studies . 14 (2): 133– 148. doi : 10.1017/S026021050011335X . ISSN 0260-2105 . JSTOR 20097137 . ^ Woody, Christopher. "Congress may repeal the post-9/11 act the US military used to justify the fight against ISIS" . Business Insider . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . Under Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama, the 2001 AUMF was used to justify the deployment of US forces to Afghanistan, the Philippines, Georgia, Yemen, Djibouti, Kenya, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Iraq, and Somalia. ^ "The 2001 AUMF: A Comprehensive Look at Where and How It Has Been Used | Costs of War" .

The Costs of War . Archived from the original on 3 June 2023 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ...between 2018-2020, the U.S. undertook what it labeled "counterterrorism" operations in 85 countries. ^ Quoted in Josef Joffe, The Myth of America's Decline: Politics, Economics, and a Half Century of False Prophecies (2014) ch. 7. ^ Bremmer, Ian. "5 Reasons Why the US Remains the World's Only Superpower" . TIME . Archived from the original on 18 March 2025 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ Baron, Joshua (2014). Great Power Peace and American Primacy: The Origins and Future of a New International Order . Palgrave Studies in International Relations. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-137-29948-2 . ^ Jones, Bruce D. (17 March 2014). Still Ours to Lead: America, Rising Powers, and the Tension between Rivalry and Restraint . Brookings Institution Press. ISBN 9780815725138 . ^ "The global economic balance of power is shifting" . Weforum.org . 20 September 2017. ^ "Manufacturing statistics" . Eurostat . November 2015 . Retrieved 8 February 2015 . ^ "Italy remains the third market for luxury goods" . S24ore.it . Retrieved 10 March 2022 . ^ Andre Melville, Yuri Polunin, Mikhail Ilyin (2011). Political atlas of the Modern World ^ Vignoli, Valerio; Coticchia, Fabrizio (27 May 2022). "Italy's Military Operations Abroad (1945–2020): Data, Patterns, and Trends" . International Peacekeeping . 29 (3): 436– 462. doi : 10.1080/13533312.2022.2054044 . ISSN 1353-3312 . ^ "Anche l'Italia coinvolta nel riarmo nucleare da noi settanta testate" . Ricera.repubblica.it . 17 January 2018. ^ "Cossiga: "In Italia ci sono bombe atomiche Usa" " (in Italian). Tiscali. Archived from the original on 28 September 2015 . Retrieved 18 September 2015 . ^ "SEDUTA POMERIDIANA DI GIOVEDÌ 23 GENNAIO 1969" (PDF) . Legislature.camera.it . Retrieved 10 March 2022 . ^ Baracca, Angelo (2005). A volte ritornano: Il nucleare : La proliferazione nucleare ieri, oggi e soprattutto domani . Editoriale Jaca Book. ISBN 9788816407107 . ^ "Eurosam" . MBDA . Retrieved 10 March 2022 . ^ "System | European GNSS Service Centre (GSC)" . www.gsc-europa.eu . Retrieved 6 December 2025 .

The Galileo ground segment consists of two Galileo Control Centres (GCC) situated in Oberpfaffenhofen (Germany) and Fucino (Italy). ^ The Economist Intelligence Unit's quality-of-life index Archived 2 August 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Economist, 2005 ^ "The World Health Organization's ranking of the world's health systems" . Photius.com . Retrieved 7 September 2015 . ^ Gabriele Abbondanza, Italy as a Regional Power: the African Context from National Unification to the Present Day (Rome: Aracne, 2016) ^ " Operation Alba may be considered one of the most important instances in which Italy has acted as a regional power, taking the lead in executing a technically and politically coherent and determined strategy. " See Federiga Bindi, Italy and the European Union (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2011), p. 171. ^ Canada Among Nations, 2004: Setting Priorities Straight . McGill-Queen's Press – MQUP. 17 January 2005. p. 85. ISBN 978-0-7735-2836-9 . Retrieved 13 June 2016 . (" The United States is the sole world's superpower. France, Italy, Germany and the United Kingdom are great powers ") ^ Sterio, Milena (2013).

The right to self-determination under international law : "selfistans", secession and the rule of the great powers . Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge. p. xii (preface). ISBN 978-0-415-66818-7 . Retrieved 13 June 2016 . (" The great powers are super-sovereign states: an exclusive club of the most powerful states economically, militarily, politically and strategically. These states include veto-wielding members of the United Nations Security Council (United States, United Kingdom, France, China, and Russia), as well as economic powerhouses such as Germany, Italy and Japan. ") ^ Michael Barone (2 September 2010). "The essence of Italian culture and the challenge of the global age" . Council for Research in Values and philosophy. Archived from the original on 22 September 2012 . Retrieved 22 September 2012 . ^ "SJR – International Science Ranking" . www.scimagojr.com . Retrieved 28 December 2024 . ^ "INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION" . ASI (in Italian) . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ a b Holtemöller, Oliver; Knedlik, Tobias; Lindner, Axel (2018). "On the Risk of a Sovereign Debt Crisis in Italy" . Intereconomics . 2018 (6): 316– 319. doi : 10.1007/s10272-018-0775-y . hdl : 10419/213187 . S2CID 158807558 . ^ "Why Italy's Economy Stopped Growing" . newswise.com . 26 May 2021. ^ Italy: 150 years of a small great power , eurasia-rivista.org, 21 December 2010 ^ Glosserman, Brad (17 August 2020). "Japan and the 'great power competition' " .

The Japan Times . Retrieved 8 April 2021 . ^ United Nations. Human Development Index (Report). United Nations. ^ United Nations (6 May 2025). Human Development Report 2025 (Report). United Nations. ^ "World Economic Outlook Database, April 2021" . IMF . Archived from the original on 7 April 2021 . Retrieved 22 June 2024 . ^ "The World's Leading Financial Cities" . Investopedia . 1 February 2024. ^ Fujita, Kuniko; Hill, Richard Child (2009). Japanese Cities . Conflicts In Urban & Regional. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. pp. 53– 82, 120– 140, 159– 174. ISBN 978-1-56639-034-7 . ^ "Tokyo-Yokohama Metropolitan Area - Economic Hub, Industries, Trade | Britannica" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived from the original on 9 August 2025 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ Zakaria, Fareed (2008).

The Post-American World . W. W. Norton and Company. p. 210 . ISBN 978-0-393-06235-9 . ^ "Land of the setting sun" .

The Economist . 12 November 2009. ^ "Japan From Superrich To Superpower" . Time . 4 July 1988. ^ "How Japan became a pop culture superpower" .

The Spectator . 31 January 2015. ^ Nagata, Kazuaki (7 September 2010). " 'Anime' makes Japan a cultural superpower" – via Japan Times Online. ^ Tamaki, Taku (26 April 2017). "Japan has turned its culture into a powerful political tool" .

The Conversation . ^ " 'Pure Invention': How Japan's pop culture became the 'lingua franca' of the internet" .

The Japan Times . 18 July 2020. ^ "How Japan's global image morphed from military empire to eccentric pop-culture superpower" . Quartz . 27 May 2020. ^ "Cultural Influence rankings" . USnews. 2024 . Retrieved 24 May 2021 . ^ "Soft Power 30" . Soft Power . Retrieved 28 December 2024 . ^ "The rise of Japan: How the car industry was won" .

The Globe and Mail . 5 November 2015. ^ "How Japan's semiconductor industry is leaping into the future" . World Economic Forum . 20 November 2023. ^ "Top 10 Countries for Technological Expertise, Ranked by Perception" . U.S. News & World Report . 18 May 2021. ^ "Japan, the World's Leading "Robot Nation" " .

The University of Tokyo. ^ "Global 500 (updated)" . Fortune . ^ "Brand value of the leading 50 most valuable Japanese brands in 2021" . Statista . 7 June 2021. ^ O’Sullivan, Michael; Subramanian, Krithika (17 October 2015).

The End of Globalization or a more Multipolar World? (Report). Credit Suisse AG. Archived from the original on 15 February 2018 . Retrieved 14 July 2017 . ^ Slavin, Erik (18 September 2015). "Japan enacts major changes to its self-defense laws" . Stars and Stripes . Tokyo. Archived from the original on 19 June 2018. ^ Tatsumi, Yuki. "Abe's New Vision for Japan's Constitution" . thediplomat.com . Retrieved 18 May 2017 . ^ "THE CONSTITUTION OF JAPAN" . japan.kantei.go.jp . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . Article 9. Aspiring sincerely to an international peace based on justice and order, the Japanese people forever renounce war as a sovereign right of the nation and the threat or use of force as means of settling international disputes.

In order to accomplish the aim of the preceding paragraph, land, sea, and air forces, as well as other war potential, will never be maintained.

The right of belligerency of the state will not be recognized. ^ "Japan between the Great Powers" . Engelsberg ideas (in Swedish) . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ Alt, Matt (2021). Pure invention: how Japan made the modern world (Paperback ed.). London: Constable. ISBN 978-1-9848-2671-8 . ^ Doenecke, Justus D.; Stoler, Mark A. (2005). Debating Franklin D. Roosevelt's Foreign Policies, 1933–1945 . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 62. ISBN 978-0-8476-9416-7 . THE FOUR POLICEMEN AND CHINA POLICY in turning to the wider issue of the entire postwar order, one notes that by 1942 FDR saw four great powers as the major guarantors of the peace.

In order of importance, they were the United States, the Soviet Union, China, and Britain. ^ VAN ALSTYNE, RICHARD W. (1950). "The United States and Russia in World War II: Part I" . Current History . 19 (111): 257– 260. doi : 10.1525/curh.1950.19.111.257 . ISSN 0011-3530 . JSTOR 45307844 . S2CID 249683657 . ^ Clubb, O. Edmund (1 January 1964). "Living with China as a Great Power" .

The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science . 351 (1): 140– 147. doi : 10.1177/000271626435100116 . ISSN 0002-7162 . S2CID 154986216 . ^ "Less Revolution, More Realpolitik: China's Foreign Policy in the Early and Middle 1970s" . wilsoncenter.org . 12 February 2020 . Retrieved 21 August 2022 . ^ UN. General Assembly (26th sess. : 1971) (1972), Restoration of the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations (in Arabic, English, Spanish, French, Russian, and Chinese) , retrieved 6 December 2025 ^ Lemahieu, Herve. "Five big takeaways from the 2019 Asia Power Index" . Lowy Institute . Archived from the original on 24 July 2021 . Retrieved 6 May 2020 . China, the emerging superpower, netted the highest gains in overall power in 2019, ranking first in half of the eight Index measures. For the first time, China narrowly edged out the United States in the Index's assessment of economic resources.

In absolute terms, China's economy grew by more than the total size of Australia's economy in 2018.

The world's largest trading nation has also paradoxically seen its GDP become less dependent on exports. This makes China less vulnerable to an escalating trade war than most other Asian economies. ^ Huhua, Cao; Jeremy, Paltiel (2016). Facing China as a New Global Superpower . Singapore: Springer . pp. XI, 279. doi : 10.1007/978-981-287-823-6 . ISBN 978-981-287-823-6 . ^ "The Chinese century is well under way" .

The Economist . 27 October 2018. ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 24 July 2021 . ^ "China's one belt, one road initiative set to transform economy by connecting with trading partners along ancient Silk Road" . South China Morning Post . 21 June 2016. Archived from the original on 7 January 2017 . Retrieved 7 January 2017 . ^ "One Belt, One Road" . Caixin Online. 10 December 2014. Archived from the original on 12 September 2016 . Retrieved 13 April 2016 . ^ "What Does China's Belt and Road Initiative Mean for US Grand Strategy?" . thediplomat.com . Retrieved 24 July 2021 . ^ "AIIB Vs. NDB: Can New Players Change the Rules of Development Financing?" . Caixin . Archived from the original on 26 December 2016 . Retrieved 26 December 2016 . ^ Cohn, Theodore H. (5 May 2016). Global Political Economy: Theory and Practice . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-33481-1 . ^ "Is 'Made in China 2025' a Threat to Global Trade? | Council on Foreign Relations" . www.cfr.org . Retrieved 28 December 2024 . ^ Elliot, Larry (26 December 2020). "China to overtake US as world's biggest economy by 2028, report predicts" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 28 December 2020 . With the US expected to contract by 5% this year, China will narrow the gap with its biggest rival, the CEBR said. Overall, global gross domestic product is forecast to decline by 4.4% this year, in the biggest one-year fall since the second world war. Douglas McWilliams , the CEBR's deputy chairman, said: "The big news in this forecast is the speed of growth of the Chinese economy. We expect it to become an upper-income economy during the current five-year plan period (2020–25). And we expect it to overtake the US a full five years earlier than we did a year ago. It would pass the per capita threshold of $12,536 (£9,215) to become a high-income country by 2023. ^ Cheng, Evelyn; Lee, Yen Nee (February 2021). "New chart shows China could overtake the U.S. as the world's largest economy earlier than expected" . CNBC . Retrieved 24 July 2021 . could ^ Zhu, Eric; Orlik, Tom (5 July 2021). "When Will China Rule the World? Maybe Never" . Bloomberg News . Bloomberg News . Retrieved 6 July 2021 . ^ "Visions of China – Asian Superpower" . CNN. 1999. Archived from the original on 27 July 2001 . Retrieved 19 July 2014 . ^ "China's military presence is growing. Does a superpower collision loom?" .

The Guardian . 1 January 2014 . Retrieved 19 July 2014 . ^ Cordesman, Anthony (1 October 2019). "China and the United States: Cooperation, Competition, and/or Conflict" . Center for Strategic and International Studies . Retrieved 22 March 2021 . Seen from this perspective, such trends clearly that show that China already is a true economic superpower with growing resources and a steadily improving technology base. Its military structure is evolving to the point where China can compare or compete with the U.S. – at least in Asia. ^ Silver, Laura; Devlin, Kat; Huang, Christine (5 December 2019). "China's Economic Growth Mostly Welcomed in Emerging Markets, but Neighbors Wary of Its Influence" . Pew Research Center . Retrieved 22 March 2021 . China has emerged as a global economic superpower in recent decades. It is not only the world's second largest economy and the largest exporter by value, but it has also been investing in overseas infrastructure and development at a rapid clip ^ Lendon, Brad (5 March 2021). "China has built the world's largest navy. Now what's Beijing going to do with it?" . CNN . Retrieved 22 March 2021 .

In 2018, China held 40% of the world's shipbuilding market by gross tons, according to United Nations figures cited by the China Power Project at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, well ahead of second place South Korea at 25%. Put in a historical perspective, China's shipbuilding numbers are staggering – dwarfing even the U.S. efforts of World War II. China built more ships in one year of peace time (2019) than the U.S. did in four of war (1941–1945). ^ Lemahieu, Herve (29 May 2019). "Five big takeaways from the 2019 Asia Power Index" . Lowy Institute. Archived from the original on 24 July 2021 . Retrieved 22 March 2021 . China, the emerging superpower, netted the highest gains in overall power in 2019, ranking first in half of the eight Index measures. For the first time, China narrowly edged out the United States in the Index's assessment of economic resources.

In absolute terms China's economy grew by more than the total size of Australia's economy in 2018.

The world's largest trading nation has also paradoxically seen its GDP become less dependent on exports. This makes China less vulnerable to an escalating trade war than most other Asian economies. ^ 21世纪新闻排行中国崛起居首位 . Ycwb.com (in Chinese). 7 May 2011. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011 . Retrieved 10 February 2012 . ^ Romana, Chito (2 March 2010). "Does China Want to Be Top Superpower?" . Abcnews.go.com . Retrieved 10 February 2012 . ^ Muldavin, Joshua (9 February 2006). "From Rural Transformation to Global Integration: The Environmental and Social Impacts of China's Rise to Superpower – Carnegie Endowment for International Peace" . Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . Archived from the original on 16 March 2012 . Retrieved 10 February 2012 . ^ "China: The Balance Sheet Summary" . getabstract.com . 2006 . Retrieved 19 July 2014 . ^ Uckert, Merri B. (April 1995). "China As An Economic and Military Superpower: A Dangerous Combination?" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 January 2013 . Retrieved 10 February 2012 . ^ Wood, James (2000). History of International Broadcasting . IET. p. 155. ^ "Forign Policy Association" . www.fpa.org . Archived from the original on 27 September 2011 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ "Analysis: After a decade, Xi floats 'G2' world with U.S. again" . Nikkei Asia . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ Armstrong, David (8 November 2025). "US-China power shift: a G2 world – Asian Media Report" . Pearls and Irritations . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ Buzan, Barry (2004).

The United States and the Great Powers . Cambridge, United Kingdom: Polity Press. p. 70. ISBN 0-7456-3375-7 . ^ Khanna, Parag (27 January 2008). "Waving Goodbye to Hegemony" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 19 July 2014 . ^ "Oxford Prof on China and the New World OrderPart 1" . Caixin . 27 February 2012 . Retrieved 19 July 2014 . ^ Kuan Yew Lee; Graham Allison; Robert D. Blackwill; Ali Wyne (1 February 2013). "Future of China" . Lee Kuan Yew: The Grand Master's Insights on China, the United States, and the World . MIT Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-262-01912-5 . Retrieved 11 December 2015 . ^ a b Allison, Graham; Robert D. Blackwill; Ali Wyne (2012). Lee Kuan Yew: The Grand Master's Insights on China, the United States, and the World . Cambridge Massachusetts: The MIT Press. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-262-01912-5 . ^ Allison, Graham; Robert D. Blackwill; Ali Wyne (2012). Lee Kuan Yew: The Grand Master's Insights on China, the United States, and the World . Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press. p. 12. ISBN 978-0-262-01912-5 . ^ "Counting the jobs lost to China" . Economic Policy Institute . 31 March 2010 . Retrieved 8 July 2014 . ^ Kenneth Lieberthal; Wang Jisi (2 April 2012). "US, China Experts Warn of Growing Bilateral Distrust" . Voice of America . Retrieved 19 July 2014 . ^ "Addressing U.S.-China Strategic Distrust" (PDF) . China Center at Brookings. March 2012 . Retrieved 19 July 2014 . ^ Palmer, James (1 January 2025). "China Is Still Suffering an Economic Hangover" . Foreign Policy . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ "The New Reality of Dealing With a China in Decline" . thediplomat.com . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ "China economy slowdown deepens, official figures show" . www.bbc.com . 18 October 2024 . Retrieved 27 December 2024 . ^ Allen-Ebrahimian, Bethany (1 April 2015). "Obama Is Sitting Alone at a Bar Drinking a Consolation Beer" . Foreign Policy . ^ Aboulafia, Richard (20 March 2019). "Boeing's Crisis Strengthens Beijing's Hand" . Foreign Policy . ^ Tunsjø, Øystein (27 February 2018).

The Return of Bipolarity in World Politics: China, the United States, and Geostructural Realism . Columbia University Press . ISBN 978-0-231-54690-4 . ^ Goodman, Peter; Perlez, Jane (25 November 2018). "Beijing is leveraging its commercial and military might to redraw the terms of trade, diplomacy and security, challenging the liberal democratic order" .

The New York Times . ^ "Understanding evolving China-Africa economic relations" . World Economic Forum . Archived from the original on 12 December 2024 . Retrieved 28 December 2024 . ^ "Thailand: Statement by the Spokesperson on the deportation of Uyghurs to China | EEAS" . www.eeas.europa.eu . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ "EU condemns China for human rights violations against Uyghurs" . Voice of America . 11 October 2024 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ Cordesman, Anthony H. (24 July 2019). "China's New 2019 Defense White Paper: An Open Strategic Challenge to the United States, But One Which Does Not Have to Lead to Conflict" . Center for Strategic and International Studies . ^ Ashley Townshend; Brendan Thomas-Noone; Matilda Steward (19 August 2019). Averting Crisis: American strategy, military spending and collective defence in the Indo-Pacific . United States Studies Centre (Report). ^ Wyne, Ali (21 June 2018). "Is America Choosing Decline?" .

The New Republic . Retrieved 28 March 2019 . ^ Brown, Stuart S. (2013).

The Future of US Global Power: Delusions of Decline . Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-137-02315-5 . Retrieved 24 March 2019 . ^ Rapoza, Kenneth. "The Future: China's Rise, America's Decline" . Forbes . Retrieved 28 March 2019 . ^ a b c "Does China have an aging problem?" . ChinaPower Project . 15 February 2016. Archived from the original on 18 May 2019 . Retrieved 16 May 2019 . ^ Kapadia, Reshma (7 September 2019). "What Americans Can Learn From the Rest of the World About Retirement" . Barron's . Archived from the original on 16 March 2021 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 . ^ Tozzo, Brandon (18 October 2017). "The Demographic and Economic Problems of China". American Hegemony after the Great Recession . London: Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 79– 92. doi : 10.1057/978-1-137-57539-5_5 . ISBN 978-1-137-57538-8 . ^ Nick Eberstadt (11 June 2019). "With Great Demographics Comes Great Power" . Foreign Affairs . Archived from the original on 20 January 2021 . Retrieved 4 February 2021 . ^ Sasse, Ben (26 January 2020). "The Responsibility to Counter China's Ambitions Falls to Us" .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on 8 February 2021 . Retrieved 4 February 2021 . ^ Zhu, Xiaohuang (2018). A Study of the Turning Point of China's Debt . Lin Song, Lin Wang, Wenqi Wu, Quanli Qin. Singapore: Springer. ISBN 978-981-13-1324-0 . ^ Ziegler, Nicholas (2019). Governing Ideas: Strategies for Innovation in France and Germany . Cornell Studies in Political Economy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-1-5017-4496-9 . ^ Centre, UNESCO World Heritage. "UNESCO World Heritage Centre - World Heritage List Statistics" . UNESCO World Heritage Centre . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ a b "Germany" .

The World Factbook . CIA. Archived from the original on 9 January 2021 . Retrieved 29 March 2020 . ^ "Corruption Perceptions Index 2019" . Transparency International. 24 January 2020. Archived from the original on 27 March 2020 . Retrieved 29 March 2020 . ^ Schwab, Klaus. "The Global Competitiveness Report 2018" (PDF) . p. 11. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 February 2020 . Retrieved 29 March 2020 . ^ "GDP per capita in PPS" . ec.europa.eu/eurostat . Eurostat . Archived from the original on 20 January 2015 . Retrieved 18 June 2020 . ^ "Unemployment statistics" . Eurostat . Archived from the original on 6 April 2020 . Retrieved 29 March 2020 . ^ "The European single market" . European Commission. 5 July 2016. Archived from the original on 9 April 2020 . Retrieved 30 March 2020 . ^ "Germany: Spend More at Home" . International Monetary Fund. Archived from the original on 8 January 2018 . Retrieved 28 April 2018 . ^ "Monetary policy" . Bundesbank. Archived from the original on 20 June 2021 . Retrieved 30 March 2020 . ^ Lavery, Scott; Schmid, Davide (2018). Frankfurt as a financial centre after Brexit (PDF) (Report). SPERI Global Political Economy Brief. University of Sheffield. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 June 2021 . Retrieved 30 March 2020 . ^ Market, Deutsche Börse Cash. "Deutsche Börse Cash Market – Organisation of the FWB" . www.deutsche-boerse-cash-market.com . Archived from the original on 5 April 2016 . Retrieved 9 April 2016 . ^ Randall, Chris (10 December 2019). "CAM study reveals: German carmakers are most innovative" . Electrive. Archived from the original on 10 May 2020. ^ "2023 Statistics | www.oica.net" . www.oica.net . Retrieved 26 March 2024 . ^ "Brand value of the leading 10 most valuable German brands in 2019" . Statista . Archived from the original on 10 December 2019 . Retrieved 30 March 2020 . ^ Frost, Simon (28 August 2015). "Berlin outranks London in start-up investment" . euractiv.com . Archived from the original on 6 November 2015 . Retrieved 28 October 2015 . ^ Dakers, Marion (11 May 2017). "Secrets of growth: the power of Germany's Mittelstand" .

The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 6 March 2019. ^ Bayley, Caroline (17 August 2017). "Germany's 'hidden champions' of the Mittelstand" . BBC News. Archived from the original on 22 May 2019. ^ "Federal Report on Research and Innovation 2014" (PDF) . Federal Ministry of Education and Research. 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 May 2016 . Retrieved 26 March 2015 . ^ McCarthy, Niall (13 January 2020). "The countries leading the world in scientific research" . World Economic Forum. Archived from the original on 12 March 2020. ^ "Release of the Global Innovation Index 2020: Who Will Finance Innovation?" . WIPO . Retrieved 2 September 2021 . ^ "Global Innovation Index 2019" . WIPO . Retrieved 2 September 2021 . ^ Boytchev, Hristio (27 March 2019). "An introduction to the complexities of the German research scene" . Nature . 567 (7749): S34– S35. Bibcode : 2019Natur.567S..34B . doi : 10.1038/d41586-019-00910-7 . PMID 30918381 . ^ "Germany invests 3.3 billion euro in European space exploration and becomes ESA's largest contributor" . German Aerospace Centre. 28 November 2019. Archived from the original on 20 June 2021 . Retrieved 17 May 2020 . ^ Pedersen, Thomas (1998). Germany, France, and the integration of Europe: a realist interpretation . London; New York: Pinter. ISBN 978-1-85567-537-7 . ^ "Lowy Institute Global Diplomacy Index 2024" . Lowy Institute . Archived from the original on 25 August 2025 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ "The ruins of Ostpolitik" . www.eurozine.com . 23 February 2022. ^ "The German problem? It's an analogue country in a digital world" .

The Guardian . 1 September 2024 . Retrieved 6 September 2024 . ^ "GDP – International Comparisons: Key Economic Indicators" . House of Commons Library . 15 August 2024 . Retrieved 6 September 2024 . ^ "Germany's Defense Budget 2024 | DGAP" . dgap.org . 19 July 2023 . Retrieved 28 December 2024 . ^ Leonard, Mark (28 July 2017). "Germany's New Power of the Purse" . Project Syndicate . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ "01-herolf-germany-a-great-power" (PDF) . KKrVA . ^ Shaw, Timothy M.; Cornelissen, Scarlett; Miranda, Liliana Avendãno; McDonald, Matthew (June 2010). "The Emerging Politics of the Emerging Powers: The BRICs and the Global South" (PDF) .

The Third Reich in Power . New York: Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-303790-3 . Ferguson, Niall (2004). Empire: The Rise and Demise of the British World Order and the Lessons for Global Power . Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-02329-5 . Ingrao, Charles & Szabo, Franz A.J., eds. (2007).

The Germans and the East . Purdue University Press. ISBN 978-1-55753-443-9 . Kershaw, Ian (2008). Hitler: A Biography . New York: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-06757-6 . Lloyd, Trevor Owen (1996).

The British Empire 1558–1995 . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-873134-4 . Marston, Daniel (2002).

The French and Indian War . Essential Histories. Osprey. ISBN 1-84176-456-6 . McNab, Chris (2009).

The Third Reich . London: Amber Books. ISBN 978-1-906626-51-8 . Reinach, Joseph (1920). "Le rôle de l'impératrice Eugénie en septembre et octobre 1870" . Revue d'Histoire du XIXe siècle – 1848 (in French). 17 (85). Société d'Histoire de la Révolution de 1848: 193. doi : 10.3406/r1848.1920.1652 . Richter, Daniel (2011).

Before the Revolution: America's ancient pasts . Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-05580-3 . Shirer, William L. (1960).

The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich . New York: Simon & Schuster. Truitt, Wesley B. (2010). Power and Policy: Lessons for Leaders in Government and Business . Praeger. ISBN 978-0-313-38240-6 . Tooze, Adam (2006).

The myth of America's decline: Politics, economics, and a half century of false prophecies ( WW Norton & Company, 2014). Kinder, Hermann and Werner Hilgemann.

The Penguin Atlas of World History (2 vol, 2004); advanced topical atlas. excerpt of vol 1 also see excerpt vol 2 Langer, William, ed. (1973) An Encyclopedia of World History (1948 And later editions) online Stearns, Peter, ed.

The Encyclopedia of World History (2007), 1245pp; update of Langer Mckay, Derek; H.M. Scott (1983).

The Rise of the Great Powers 1648–1815 . Pearson. ISBN 978-1-317-87284-9 . Pella, John & Erik Ringmar, (2019) History of international relations Online Archived 16 August 2019 at the Wayback Machine O'Brian, Patrick K. Atlas of World History (2007) online Pastor, Robert, ed. A Century's Journey: How The Great Powers Shape The World (2000) Rand McNally Atlas of World History (1983), maps #76–81. Published in Britain as the Hamlyn Historical Atlas online Roberts, J. M. and Odd Arne Westad, eds.

The Penguin History of the World (6th ed. 2014) 1280pp excerpt Robertson, Charles Grant. An historical atlas of modern Europe from 1789 to 1922 with an historical and explanatory text (1922) online .mw-parser-output .hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .hlist ul{margin:0;padding:0}.mw-parser-output .hlist dd,.mw-parser-output .hlist dt,.mw-parser-output .hlist li{margin:0;display:inline}.mw-parser-output .hlist.inline,.mw-parser-output .hlist.inline dl,.mw-parser-output .hlist.inline ol,.mw-parser-output .hlist.inline ul,.mw-parser-output .hlist dl dl,.mw-parser-output .hlist dl ol,.mw-parser-output .hlist dl ul,.mw-parser-output .hlist ol dl,.mw-parser-output .hlist ol ol,.mw-parser-output .hlist ol ul,.mw-parser-output .hlist ul dl,.mw-parser-output .hlist ul ol,.mw-parser-output .hlist ul ul{display:inline}.mw-parser-output .hlist .mw-empty-li{display:none}.mw-parser-output .hlist dt::after{content:": "}.mw-parser-output .hlist dd::after,.mw-parser-output .hlist li::after{content:"\a0 · ";font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .hlist dd:last-child::after,.mw-parser-output .hlist dt:last-child::after,.mw-parser-output .hlist li:last-child::after{content:none}.mw-parser-output .hlist dd dd:first-child::before,.mw-parser-output .hlist dd dt:first-child::before,.mw-parser-output .hlist dd li:first-child::before,.mw-parser-output .hlist dt dd:first-child::before,.mw-parser-output .hlist dt dt:first-child::before,.mw-parser-output .hlist dt li:first-child::before,.mw-parser-output .hlist li dd:first-child::before,.mw-parser-output .hlist li dt:first-child::before,.mw-parser-output .hlist li li:first-child::before{content:" (";font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .hlist dd dd:last-child::after,.mw-parser-output .hlist dd dt:last-child::after,.mw-parser-output .hlist dd li:last-child::after,.mw-parser-output .hlist dt dd:last-child::after,.mw-parser-output .hlist dt dt:last-child::after,.mw-parser-output .hlist dt li:last-child::after,.mw-parser-output .hlist li dd:last-child::after,.mw-parser-output .hlist li dt:last-child::after,.mw-parser-output .hlist li li:last-child::after{content:")";font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .hlist ol{counter-reset:listitem}.mw-parser-output .hlist ol>li{counter-increment:listitem}.mw-parser-output .hlist ol>li::before{content:" "counter(listitem)"\a0 "}.mw-parser-output .hlist dd ol>li:first-child::before,.mw-parser-output .hlist dt ol>li:first-child::before,.mw-parser-output .hlist li ol>li:first-child::before{content:" ("counter(listitem)"\a0 "} .mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+span.mw-empty-elt+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}body.skin--responsive .mw-parser-output .navbox-image img{max-width:none!important}@media print{body.ns-0 .mw-parser-output .navbox{display:none!important}} .mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:""}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}html.skin-theme-clientpref-night .mw-parser-output .navbar li a abbr{color:var(--color-base)!important}@media(prefers-color-scheme:dark){html.skin-theme-clientpref-os .mw-parser-output .navbar li a abbr{color:var(--color-base)!important}}@media print{.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:none!important}} v t e Power in international relations Types Climate Economic Energy Food Hard Maritime National Politics Realpolitik Sharp Smart Soft Status Small Middle Regional Emerging Great ( Least Great ) Super ( Potential ) Geopolitics African American ( Pax ) Asian Chinese Indian Pacific History List of ancient great powers List of medieval great powers List of modern great powers International relations (1814–1919) Theory American decline Balance of power European Deterrence theory Hegemonic stability theory Internationalism Multilateralism Philosophy of power Polarity Power projection Power transition theory Second Superpower Sphere of influence Superpower collapse Superpower disengagement Studies Composite Index of National Capability Comprehensive National Power Organizations and groups by region Africa African Union Union for the Mediterranean Africa–Asia Arab League Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC) Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) Americas Association of Caribbean States (ACS) Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Central American Integration System (SICA) Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) Mercosur North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Organization of American States (OAS) Union of South American Nations (UNASUR) Asia Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD) Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia (CICA) Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) Trilateral Cooperation Secretariat (TCS) Europe Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Council of Europe (CoE) European Political Community (EPC) European Union (EU) Nordic Council Visegrád Group (V4) Eurasia Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) Eurasian Economic Union (EaEU) Organization of Turkic States North America–Europe Arctic Council North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Africa–Asia–Europe Union for the Mediterranean Africa–South America South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone Oceania–Pacific Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Australia–New Zealand–United States Security Treaty (ANZUS) Melanesian Spearhead Group (MSG) Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) Polynesian Leaders Group (PLG) Non–regional Brazil–Russia–India–China–South Africa (BRICS) Commonwealth of Nations Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP) E9 G4 G7 G8 G8+5 G10 G20 G24 G77 India–Brazil–South Africa Dialogue Forum (IBSA) Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (OIF) Uniting for Consensus (UfC) Global United Nations (UN) v t e Empires Ancient ( colonies ) Akkadian Armenian Urartu Orontid Ancient Assyrian Middle Assyrian Neo-Assyrian Babylonian Old Babylonian Kassite Neo-Babylonian Chinese Qin Han Jin Dʿmt Egyptian Old Kingdom Middle Kingdom New Kingdom Goguryeo Harsha Hellenistic Greek colonisation Macedonian Seleucid Ptolemaic Bactrian Indo-Greek Hittite Hunnic White Xiongnu Iranian Median Achaemenid Parthian Sasanian Kush Kushan Magadha Haryanka Shaishunaga Nanda Maurya Shunga Gupta Nabatean Phoenician Carthaginian Roman Western Eastern Satavahana Neo-Sumerian Xianbei Rouran Post-classical Angevin Aragonese Armenian Bagratid Vaspurakan Artsakh Cilician Zakarid Ayyubid Aztec Benin Bornu Bruneian Bulgarian First Second Burmese First Calakmul Caliphate Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Fatimid Chalukya Western Eastern Chinese Sui Tang Liao Song Jīn Yuan Chola Ethiopian Aksum Zagwe Solomonic Genoese Georgian Huetar Inca Vilcabamba Kannauj Pala Gurjara-Pratihara Rashtrakuta Iranian Tahirid Saffarid Samanid Buyid Japanese Yamato Kamakura Muromachi Edo Kanem Khmer Latin Lithuanian Grand Duchy Commonwealth Majapahit Mali Mongol Yuan Golden Horde Chagatai Khanate Ilkhanate Berber Almoravid Almohad Norwegian North Sea Oyo Polish Kingdom Commonwealth Eastern-Roman Byzantine Nicaea Thessalonica Trebizond Epirus Morea Romano-Germanic Carolingian Holy Roman Serbian Singhasari Songhai Srivijaya Tibetan Tikal Tiwanaku Toltec Turco-Persian Ghaznavid Great Seljuk Khwarezmian Timurid Turkic First Western Eastern Second Türgesh Uighur Kyrgyz Venetian Vietnamese Dinh Early Le Ly Tran Ho Later Tran Later Le Vijayanagara Wagadou Wari Modern Afghan Ashanti Austro-Hungarian Brazilian Burmese Second Third Central African Chinese Ming Qing China Manchukuo Ethiopian Haitian First Second French First Second German German Empire Nazi Germany Indian Indo-Persian Mughal Sikh Iranian Safavid Afsharid Zand Qajar Pahlavi Japanese Kazakh Korean Maratha Mexican First Second Mongol Oirat Khoshut Dzungar Ottoman Moroccan Saadi 'Alawi Russian Tsarist Imperial Contemporary Sokoto Swedish Tongan Vietnamese Mạc Revival Lê Tay Sơn Dainam Vietnam Colonial Austrian attempts Belgian British English Scottish Chinese Danish Dutch French German attempts Italian Venetian Genoese Maltese attempts Japanese Mongol Norwegian Omani Polish–Lithuanian Couronian attempts Portuguese Russian Spanish Catalan-Aragonese Basque Swedish Lists Empires largest Ancient great powers Medieval great powers Modern great powers European colonialism African empires Middle Eastern empires Nomadic empire Imperialism Imperialism by country American Chinese Russian Eurasianism Academic Cultural Ecological Green Media New Nuclear Liberal Linguistic Platform Scientific Social Theories Related Anti-imperialism Colonialism Internal Settler Colonization Concessions and leases in international relations Fascism Han chauvinism Ottomanism Neo Soviet empire White supremacy