The drug was initially explored for psychiatric use due to its structural similarity to serotonin and safety profile. It was used experimentally in psychiatry for treating alcoholism and schizophrenia .

By the mid-1960s, LSD became central to the youth counterculture in places like San Francisco and London , influencing art, music, and social movements through events like Acid Tests and figures such as Timothy Leary , Owsley Stanley and Michael Hollingshead . Its psychedelic effects inspired distinct visual art styles and musical innovations, and caused a lasting cultural impact. However, its association with the counterculture movement of the 1960s led to its classification as a Schedule I drug in the United States in 1970. It was also listed as a Schedule I controlled substance by the United Nations in 1971 and remains without approved medical uses. Despite its legal restrictions, LSD remains influential in scientific and cultural contexts. Research on LSD declined due to cultural controversies by the 1960s, but has resurged since 2009.

In 2024, the United States Food and Drug Administration designated LSD (code name MM120 or DT120) as a breakthrough therapy for generalized anxiety disorder .

As of 2017, about 10% of people in the United States had used LSD at some point, with 0.7% having used it in the past year. Usage rates have risen, with a 56.4% increase in adult use in the United States from 2015 to 2018.

The usual dose range of LSD for psychedelic effects is 20 to 200 μg.

The typical intermediate and "good effect" dose for a psychedelic experience is 100 μg (range 75–150 μg, while 20 to 50 μg is a low or "minidose" and 200 μg is a high or ego-dissolution dose.) A dose range as wide as 10 to 450 μg has been reported. LSD may also be used in microdosing .

In this context, it may be used at subthreshold or microdoses of less than 10 μg.

The extremely high potency of LSD played an essential role in its emergence and popularity during the counterculture of the 1960s due to the economic feasibility of its manufacture, in contrast to the case of mescaline, which had been known for many decades previously but remained relatively little-known.

The doses of LSD present in illicit LSD samples have decreased over time.

In the mid-1960s, Owsley Stanley , the most important black market LSD manufacturer in the United States , distributed LSD at a standard concentration of 270 μg, while street samples of the 1970s contained 30 to 300 μg.

By the 1980s, the amount had reduced to between 100 and 125 μg, dropping more in the 1990s to the 20 to 80 μg range, and even further in the 2000s. Effects LSD produces a variety of physical, psychological, and sensory effects. Psychological The primary immediate psychological effects of LSD are visual pseudo-hallucinations and altered thought, often referred to as "trips". These sensory alterations are considered pseudohallucinations because the subject does not perceive the patterns seen as being located in three-dimensional space outside the body. LSD is not considered addictive. An " afterglow " effect, characterized by an improved mood or perceived mental state, may persist for days or weeks following ingestion. Positive experiences, or "good trips", are described as intensely pleasurable and can include feelings of joy, euphoria, an increased appreciation for life, decreased anxiety, a sense of spiritual enlightenment, and a feeling of interconnectedness with the universe. Negative experiences, commonly known as " bad trips ", can induce feelings of fear, agitation, anxiety, panic, and paranoia.

While the occurrence of a bad trip is unpredictable, factors such as mood, surroundings, sleep, hydration, and social setting, collectively referred to as " set and setting ", can influence the risk and are considered important in minimizing the likelihood of a negative experience. Uniquely among psychedelics, LSD appears to have two temporally and qualitatively distinct phases of psychoactive effects. These include an initial psychedelic phase associated with serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor agonism and a subsequent paranoia - and psychosis -like phase associated with dopamine D 2 -like receptor agonism. Subsequent research has found that the delayed dopaminergic phase is associated with the highly potent dopamine D 4 receptor agonism of LSD's metabolite 13-hydroxy-LSD .

The first phase is described as a "psychedelic experience", with "meaningfulness and portentousness" as the primary effects, while the latter phase is "clearly a paranoid state", including feeling "at the least self-centered, and usually suspicious, with ideas of reference or even paranoid convictions".

The second phase typically develops about 4 to 6 hours after administration but at times up to 10 hours after administration. Parallels have been drawn between this phase and amphetamine psychosis . There is no indication that similar effects occur with other psychedelics like phenethylamines and simple tryptamines , which lack dopamine receptor agonism .

The preceding findings have been described by researchers like Daniel X. Freedman and David E. Nichols . Sensory LSD induces an animated sensory experience affecting senses, emotions, memories, time, and awareness.

The effects range from subtle perceptual changes to profound cognitive shifts . Alterations in auditory and visual perception are common. Users may experience enhanced visual phenomena, such as vibrant colors, objects appearing to morph, ripple, or move, and geometric patterns on various surfaces. Changes in the perception of food's texture and taste are also noted, sometimes leading to aversion towards certain foods. There are reports of inanimate objects appearing animated, with static objects seeming to move in additional spatial dimensions.

The auditory effects of LSD may include echo -like distortions of sounds, and an intensified experience of music. Basic visual effects often resemble phosphenes and can be influenced by concentration, thoughts, emotions, or music. Higher doses can lead to more intense sensory perception alterations, including synesthesia, perception of additional dimensions, and temporary dissociation . Physical Some symptoms reported for LSD. Patient with mydriasis (pupil dilation) due to usage of LSD. LSD can induce physical effects such as pupil dilation , decreased appetite , increased sweating , and wakefulness .

The physical reactions to LSD vary greatly, and some may be a result of its psychological effects. Commonly observed symptoms include increased body temperature , blood sugar , and heart rate , as well as goose bumps , jaw clenching , dry mouth , and hyperreflexia .

In cases of adverse reactions, users may experience numbness , weakness , nausea , and tremors . Onset and duration The psychoactive effects of LSD last on average between 7 and 11 hours, with a possible range of 4 to 22 hours. Higher doses tend to lead to a longer duration of action.

The onset of action when administered orally is 0.4 to 1.0 hours on average, with a possible range of 0.1 to 1.8 hours.

The time to peak effects given orally is 2.2 to 2.8 hours on average, with a range of 1.3 to 6.5 hours.

The duration of LSD can be shortened through the use of trip killers or shorteners like ketanserin .

The etiology of flashbacks is varied. Some cases are attributed to somatic symptom disorder , where individuals fixate on normal somatic experiences previously unnoticed before drug consumption. Other instances are linked to associative reactions to contextual cues, similar to responses observed in individuals with past trauma or emotional experiences.

The risk factors for flashbacks remain unclear, but pre-existing psychopathologies may be significant contributors. Estimating the prevalence of HPPD is challenging. It is considered rare, with occurrences ranging from 1 in 20 users experiencing the transient and less severe type 1 HPPD, to 1 in 50,000 for the more concerning type 2 HPPD. Contrary to internet rumors , LSD is not stored long-term in the spinal cord or other parts of the body. Pharmacological evidence indicates LSD has a half-life of 175 minutes and is metabolized into water-soluble compounds like 2-oxo-3-hydroxy-LSD, eliminated through urine without evidence of long-term storage. Clinical evidence also suggests that chronic use of SSRIs can potentiate LSD-induced flashbacks, even months after stopping LSD use. : 145 Tolerance LSD shows significant tachyphylaxis , with tolerance developing 24 hours after administration.

The progression of tolerance at intervals shorter than 24 hours remains largely unknown. Tolerance typically resets to baseline after 3–4 days of abstinence. Significant cross-tolerance occurs between LSD, mescaline and psilocybin . A slight cross-tolerance to DMT is observed in humans highly tolerant to LSD. Tolerance to LSD also builds up with consistent use, and is believed to result from serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor downregulation . Researchers believe that tolerance returns to baseline after two weeks of not using psychedelics. Addiction and dependence liability LSD is widely considered to be non-addictive, despite its potential for abuse . Attempts to train laboratory animals to self-administer LSD have been largely unsuccessful.

In contrast to certain other psychedelics, MAOIs do not inhibit the metabolism of or potentiate the effects of LSD and instead reduce its effects. Interactions between psychedelics and antipsychotics or anticonvulsants are not well-documented; however, co-use with mood stabilizers like lithium may induce seizures and dissociative effects , particularly in individuals with bipolar disorder . : 146 Lithium notably intensifies LSD reactions, potentially leading to acute comatose states when combined. Overdose LSD at typical recreational doses (~50–250 μg) is considered to be very safe in terms of toxicity , with not a single toxicity-related death having been reported at such doses despite many millions of exposures.

In addition, LSD is considered to be a relatively non-toxic drug in overdose . It is estimated, based on animal studies and human case reports , that the lethal dose of LSD in humans is approximately 100 mg, or about 1,000 times the usual recreational dose of 100 μg. There have been a handful of reported cases of fatal overdose with LSD as of 2024. However, critical review of the literature by David E. Nichols found that of five identified cases, one was not consistent with the effects of LSD but instead may have been another drug like 25I-NBOMe , two involved normal doses of LSD in individuals who were placed in maximal physical restraint (hogtied) by police followed by presumed positional asphyxia and fatal cardiovascular collapse (hogtying being a practice that is associated with accidental death generally). Two were associated with massive LSD overdose involving doses of possibly more than 300 mg. Besides death due to toxicity, LSD is rarely associated with death via suicide , accidents , or violent encounters due to induction of abnormal behavior.

In one well-known 1974 case series , 8 people accidentally insufflated two "lines" of nearly pure LSD powder that they thought were cocaine .

The exact doses of LSD were unknown, but were considered to be massive. For context, a typical "line" of cocaine for insufflation is 50 to 100 mg.

The individuals reported to the hospital within 10 to 15 minutes, with five of them comatose , three requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation , and the conscious individuals experiencing severe hallucinogenic effects, among other toxic symptoms. All of them completely recovered within 12 hours and there were no deaths. A subsequent 2020 case similarly involved accidental insufflation of a confirmed 55 mg dose of LSD instead of cocaine, which was without adverse health consequences.

In other reports, a 5 mg overdose of LSD produced severe nausea and vomiting along with severe behavioral disturbances, while a 10 mg overdose was also non-fatal. Despite acting as non-selective serotonin receptor agonists , major psychedelics like LSD and psilocybin do not cause serotonin syndrome even with extreme overdose. This is thought to be because they act as partial agonists of serotonin receptors like the serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor relative to serotonin itself. Conversely, NBOMe psychedelics like 25I-NBOMe are more efficacious and have been uniquely associated with serotonin syndrome-like toxicity. A 2018 retrospective analysis of 3,554 LSD-only exposures reported to poison control centers in the United States between 2000 and 2016 found that serious toxicity was infrequent. Common adverse effects (2.4–42%) included agitation or irritability , tachycardia , hallucinations or delusions , confusion , pupil dilation , hypertension , drowsiness or lethargy , elevated creatine phosphokinase (CPK), nausea and vomiting , and others. Selected serious adverse effects included fever or hyperthermia in 3.8%, single seizure in 2.4%, coma in 1.4%, elevated creatinine in 1.4%, multiple seizures in 1.2%, rhabdomyolysis in 1.1%, respiratory depression in 0.9%, cardiac conduction disorder in 0.5%, and status epilepticus in 0.4%. There is a case report of severe neurological sequelae following a single typical recreational dose of LSD involving seizure and cardiorespiratory arrest .

In general, psychedelics like LSD may rarely cause seizures in some individuals.

The median lethal dose (LD 50 ) of LSD in animals varies and is 50 to 60 mg/kg in mice, 16.5 mg/kg in rats, and 0.3 mg/kg in rabbits all given by injection . A well-known 1962 instance of an elephant named Tusko given 297 mg (~0.1 mg/kg) LSD by intramuscular injection proved fatal. These findings suggest that elephants may be much more sensitive to LSD in overdose than humans and other species. However, this instance has been mired in criticism and controversy due to miscalculation of LSD dose and concomitant post-LSD administration of promazine and pentobarbital .

The experiment was repeated in two elephants with similar doses of LSD in 1984 without incident. Massive doses of LSD are largely managed by symptomatic treatments , and agitation can be addressed with benzodiazepines . Reassurance in a calm, safe environment is beneficial. Antipsychotics such as haloperidol are not recommended as they may have adverse effects . Gastrointestinal decontamination with activated charcoal is of little use due to the rapid absorption of LSD, unless performed within 30 to 60 minutes of ingesting exceedingly huge amounts. Administration of anticoagulants , vasodilators , and sympatholytics may be useful for treating ergotism . LSD substitute overdose Although LSD is relatively safe in overdose, 25-NB (NBOMe) psychedelics like 25I-NBOMe and 25B-NBOMe are often sold as "LSD" and are highly toxic in overdose, with many reported severe intoxications and deaths. Owing to their high potency analogous to LSD, these drugs are also regularly sold as "LSD" in blotter papers . Fatalities involved in NBOMe intoxication suggest that a significant number of individuals ingested the substance which they believed was LSD, and researchers report that "users familiar with LSD may have a false sense of security when ingesting NBOMe inadvertently". Researchers state that the alleged physiological toxicity of LSD is likely due to psychoactive substances other than LSD. NBOMe compounds are reported to have a bitter taste, are not active orally, and are usually taken sublingually .

When NBOMes are administered sublingually, numbness of the tongue and mouth followed by a metallic chemical taste was observed, and researchers describe this physical side effect as one of the main discriminants between NBOMe compounds and LSD. Despite its high potency, recreational doses of LSD have only produced low incidents of acute toxicity, but NBOMe compounds have extremely different safety profiles. Testing with Ehrlich's reagent gives a positive result for LSD and a negative result for NBOMe compounds. Pharmacology Pharmacodynamics Activities of LSD Target Affinity (K i , nM) 5-HT 1A 0.64–7.3 (K i ) 6.4 ( EC 50 Tooltip half-maximal effective concentration ) 110% ( E max Tooltip maximal efficacy ) 5-HT 1B 3.9 5-HT 1D 3.9–14 5-HT 1E 93 5-HT 1F ND 5-HT 2A 0.47–21 (K i ) 0.24–538 ( EC 50 ) 23–88% ( E max ) 5-HT 2B 0.98–30 (K i ) 0.68–12,000 ( EC 50 ) 13–73% ( E max ) 5-HT 2C 1.1–48 (K i ) 0.85–1,590 ( EC 50 ) 26–79% ( E max ) 5-HT 3 >10,000 5-HT 4 1,000 (rat) 5-HT 5A 9.0 5-HT 5B 3.2 (rat) 5-HT 6 2.3–6.9 5-HT 7 6.3–6.6 α 1A 670–1,128 α 1B 8,677 α 1D ND α 2A 12–46 α 2B , α 2C ND β 1 140–1,601 β 2 740–3,461 β 3 ND D 1 155–340 (K i ) 35–63 ( EC 50 ) 35–44% ( E max ) D 2 61–126 D 3 27–60 D 4 26–158 D 5 75–344 H 1 1,100–1,540 H 2 – H 4 ND M 1 – M 5 ND I 1 ND σ 1 , σ 2 ND TAAR1 450 (K i ) (rat) 10,000 (K i ) (mouse) 1,400 ( EC 50 ) (rat) 9,700 ( EC 50 ) (mouse) >20,000 ( EC 50 ) (human) SERT Tooltip Serotonin transporter >30,000 (K i ) >100,000 ( IC 50 Tooltip half-maximal inhibitory concentration ) NET Tooltip Norepinephrine transporter 5,600–>30,000 (K i ) >100,000 ( IC 50 ) DAT Tooltip Dopamine transporter >30,000 (K i ) >100,000 ( IC 50 ) Notes: The smaller the value, the more avidly the drug binds to the site. All proteins are human unless otherwise noted. Refs: LSD is a serotonergic psychedelic and acts as a non-selective serotonin receptor modulator . It binds with high affinity to most of the serotonin receptors .

The psychedelic effects of LSD are thought to be mediated specifically by activation of the serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor . However, the role of other serotonin receptors and targets in the effects of LSD cannot be ruled out and may be considered likely. Uniquely among serotonergic psychedelics, LSD also shows potentially significant affinity for the dopamine receptors , albeit much lower than for most of the serotonin receptors. LSD binds to most serotonin receptor subtypes except for the serotonin 5-HT 3 and 5-HT 4 receptors . However, some of these serotonin receptors may not be affected at typical brain concentrations of LSD.

In humans, recreational doses of LSD may affect serotonin 5-HT 1A , 5-HT 2A , 5-HT 2B , 5-HT 2C , 5-HT 5A , and 5-HT 6 receptors .

Although not present in humans, serotonin 5-HT 5B receptors found in rodents also have high affinity for LSD.

The psychedelic effects of LSD are attributed to activation of 5-HT 2A receptors. Many but not all serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor agonists are psychedelics, and serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor antagonists block the psychedelic effects of LSD.

The drug exhibits pronounced functional selectivity or biased agonism at the serotonin 5-HT 2A and 5-HT 2C receptors in that it activates the signal transduction enzyme phospholipase A2 (PLA2) instead of activating the enzyme phospholipase C (PLC) as the endogenous ligand serotonin does, among other differences. Exactly how LSD produces its effects is unknown, but it is thought that it may work in part by increasing glutamate release in the cerebral cortex and therefore excitation in this area, specifically in layer V . LSD, like many other drugs of recreational use, has been shown to activate DARPP-32 -related pathways.

The drug enhances dopamine D 2 receptor protomer recognition and signaling of D 2 –5-HT 2A heteromeric receptor complexes, which may contribute to its psychotropic effects. LSD has been shown to have low affinity for histamine H 1 receptors , displaying antihistamine effects, although the significance of this at doses used in humans is unknown. David E. Nichols has suggested that there may be a pharmacological basis for some bad trips with LSD, with this thought to be related to LSD's metabolite 13-hydroxy-LSD , a highly potent dopamine D 4 receptor agonist. LSD is a biased agonist that induces a conformation in serotonin 5-HT 2 receptors that preferentially recruits β-arrestin over activating G proteins . It also has an exceptionally long residence time when bound to serotonin receptors lasting hours, consistent with the long-lasting effects of LSD despite its relatively rapid clearance .

In rodents, LSD levels are undetectable by 8 hours post-dosing, yet LSD continues to produce partial interoceptive effects (54% responding) at this time point. A crystal structure of the serotonin 5-HT 2B receptor bound to LSD reveals an extracellular loop that forms a "lid" over the diethylamide end of the binding cavity and "traps" LSD in the binding pocket, which explains the slow rate of LSD unbinding from serotonin receptors.

The related lysergamide lysergic acid amide (LSA) that lacks the diethylamide moiety is far less potent in comparison. Moreover, a specific residue in the binding pocket is partially responsible for the prolonged action of LSD, and this residue is found in the human protein but not in the receptors of rodents. LSD is an extraordinarily potent psychoactive drug and is among the most potent psychedelics known in humans.

The very high potency of LSD in producing psychedelic-like effects is also the case in animals, including rodents and monkeys. It is unclear why LSD is so potent.

The affinity and activational potency of LSD at the human serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor in vitro is unremarkable compared to other psychedelics such as DOI and DOB . There is no evidence for its greater potency being related to pharmacokinetics or metabolism . It appears that the N , N -diethylamide moiety of LSD fits into a sterically constrained region of the serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor that specifically accommodates this moiety. LSD, like other psychedelics, has been found to increase the expression of genes related to synaptic plasticity and hence to have psychoplastogenic effects. This appears to be mediated by serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor agonism. LSD has also been reported to act as a highly potent positive allosteric modulator of the tropomyosin receptor kinase B (TrkB), one of the receptors of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). However, subsequent studies failed to reproduce these findings and instead found no interaction of LSD with TrkB. There appears to be no significant acute tolerance to the subjective effects of LSD. Hence, its duration appears to be dictated by pharmacokinetics rather than by pharmacodynamics . This is in contrast to MDMA , which shows marked acute tolerance and a duration of effects that is shorter than its elimination half-life .

The cryo-EM structures of the serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor with LSD, as well as with various other psychedelics and serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor agonists, have been solved and published by Bryan L. Roth and colleagues. Mechanisms of action The oral bioavailability of LSD was crudely estimated as approximately 71% using previous data on intravenous administration of LSD.

The sample was equally divided between male and female subjects. There were no significant sex differences observed in the pharmacokinetics of LSD.

In a subsequent higher-quality 2025 study, the oral bioavailability of LSD was about 80%.

The pharmacokinetics of LSD were not properly determined until 2015, which is not surprising for a drug with the kind of low-μg potency that LSD possesses.

In a sample of 16 healthy subjects, a single mid-range 200 μg oral dose of LSD was found to produce mean maximal concentrations of 4.5 ng/mL at a median of 1.5 hours (range 0.5–4 hours) post-administration. A large meal before taking LSD has been found to result in circulating levels that were 50% lower than on an empty stomach. Distribution In terms of distribution , it is estimated that only about 1 to 1.5% of the drug reaches the brain both in animals and humans.

Following a typical 100 μg dose in humans, this would be about 1 μg that is distributed into the brain. LSD levels in different brain areas have been found to vary in monkeys. Levels were equal in blood, cerebral cortex , cerebellum , and brainstem , whereas levels were 1.5 times higher in the thalamus and extrapyramidal system , 2 to 3 times higher in the hypothalamus and limbic system , 2 to 5 times higher in the auditory and visual cortex , 5 to 7 times higher in the posterior pituitary and pineal gland , and 10 times higher in the anterior pituitary gland . These varying concentrations in different brain areas may explain the profile of psychedelic effects of LSD. Bodily distribution of LSD has also been studied. It has been said that there is a peculiar 40-minute lag before onset of the psychedelic effects of LSD when it is administered intravenously . This has been said to be related to time-dependent interactions of LSD with the serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor. However, contradicting the preceding claims, other sources have stated that intravenous injection of LSD results in onset of effects within a few minutes.

In a 2025 pharmacokinetic study comparing oral and intravenous LSD, the onset orally was about 45 minutes and the onset by intravenous injection was about 2.5 minutes.

In addition, intrathecal injection (intraspinal injection) is reported to have a virtually instantaneous onset of action. However, in the 2025 study, time to maximal effects was about 2.5 hours orally and about 1.2 hours intravenously.

In an earlier 2016 study, intravenous LSD effects similarly peaked after about 1.7 hours. For comparison, intravenous dimethyltryptamine (DMT) given as a bolus has been found to produce maximal effects after about 2 minutes and intravenous psilocybin given over 60 seconds after about 4 minutes. Doses of LSD are said to be similar by oral and injectable routes, with the exception of intrathecal injection in which the dose is reduced to about one-third of usual. Metabolism Metabolism of LSD in animals and humans.

The metabolites of LSD include 2-oxo-3-hydroxy-LSD (O-H-LSD), 2-oxo-LSD , lysergic acid ethylamide (LAE), lysergic acid ethyl-2-hydroxyethylamide (LEO), nor-LSD , 13-hydroxy-LSD , 14-hydroxy-LSD , and the glucuronide conjugates of the 13- and 14-hydroxylated metabolites, among other possible metabolites.

The major metabolite of LSD is O-H-LSD. Levels of O-H-LSD in urine have been found to be 4 to 40 times higher than those of LSD, indicating extensive metabolism of LSD into this compound. It is formed by cytochrome P450 enzymes , although the specific enzymes involved are unknown, and O-H-LSD's potential pharmacology is little-studied. However, it was found to have profoundly reduced activity at the serotonin 5-HT 2 receptors relative to LSD in vitro . Little is known about the specific enzymes responsible for the formation of LSD metabolites. LSD is not metabolized by monoamine oxidase (MAO) enzymes. Elimination Only 1% of the drug was eliminated in urine unchanged, whereas 13% was eliminated as O-H-LSD within 24 hours. Aghajanian and Bing (1964) found LSD had an elimination half-life of only 175 minutes (about 3 hours); however, using more accurate techniques, Papac and Foltz (1990) reported that 1 μg/kg oral LSD given to a single male volunteer had an apparent plasma half-life of 5.1 hours, with a peak plasma concentration of 5 ng/mL at 3 hours post-dose.

In a more modern 2015 study, concentrations of LSD decreased following first-order kinetics with a half-life of 3.6 ± 0.9 hours and a terminal half-life of 8.9 ± 5.9 hours. A 2026 review found half-lives ranging from 3.0 to 4.3 hours in different studies. LSD has a longer half-life of on average 8 hours in CYP2D6 poor metabolizers or people taking CYP2D6 inhibitors due to slower metabolism . Miscellaneous The acute effects of LSD normally last between 6 and 12 hours depending on dose, tolerance, and age.

In a modern study, the effects of the dose of LSD given lasted for up to 12 hours and were closely correlated with the concentrations of LSD present in circulation over time, with no acute tolerance observed. Chemistry The four possible stereoisomers of the LSD molecule. Only LSD ( d -LSD) is active.

The other, inactive isomers are iso-LSD ( d -iso-LSD), l -LSD , and l -iso-LSD . LSD is a chiral compound with two stereocenters at the carbon atoms C-5 and C-8, so that theoretically four different optical isomers of LSD could exist. LSD, also called d -LSD or (+)-LSD, has the absolute configuration (5 R ,8 R ).

The other stereoisomers are iso-LSD ( d -iso-LSD), l -LSD , and l -iso-LSD .

The 5 S - or levo - stereoisomers of lysergamides do not exist in nature and are not formed during the synthesis from d -lysergic acid. Retrosynthetically , the C-5 stereocenter could be analysed as having the same configuration as the alpha carbon of the naturally occurring amino acid L- tryptophan , the precursor to all biosynthetic ergoline compounds. However, LSD and iso-LSD, the two C-8 isomers, rapidly interconvert in the presence of bases , as the alpha proton is acidic and can be deprotonated and reprotonated. Non-psychoactive iso-LSD, which has formed during the synthesis, can be separated by chromatography and can be isomerized to LSD. Pure salts of LSD are triboluminescent , emitting small flashes of white light when shaken in the dark. LSD is strongly fluorescent and will glow bluish-white under UV light . Synthesis The chemical synthesis of LSD has been described. It is commonly synthesized by reacting diethylamine with an activated form of lysergic acid . Activating reagents include phosphoryl chloride and peptide coupling reagents . Lysergic acid is made by alkaline hydrolysis of lysergamides like ergotamine , a substance usually derived from the ergot fungus on agar plate . Lysergic acid can also be produced synthetically, although these processes are not used in clandestine manufacture due to their low yields and high complexity. Albert Hofmann synthesized LSD in the following manner: (1) hydrazinolysis of ergotamine into D- and L-isolysergic acid hydrazide, (2) separation of the enantiomers with di-( p -toluyl)-D-tartaric acid to get D-isolysergic acid hydrazide, (3) enantiomerization into D-lysergic acid hydrazide, (4) substitution with HNO 2 to D-lysergic acid azide and (5) finally substitution with diethylamine to form D-lysergic acid diethylamide.

The precursor for LSD, lysergic acid , has been produced by GMO baker's yeast . Stability "LSD," writes the chemist Alexander Shulgin , "is an unusually fragile molecule ...

As a salt, in water, cold, and free from air and light exposure, it is stable indefinitely." LSD has two labile protons at the tertiary stereogenic C5 and C8 positions, rendering these centers prone to epimerisation .

The C8 proton is more labile due to the electron-withdrawing carboxamide attachment, but the removal of the chiral proton at the C5 position (which was once also an alpha proton of the parent molecule tryptophan ) is assisted by the inductively withdrawing nitrogen and pi electron delocalisation with the indole ring. LSD also has enamine -type reactivity because of the electron-donating effects of the indole ring. Because of this, chlorine destroys LSD molecules on contact; even though chlorinated tap water contains only a slight amount of chlorine, the small quantity of compound typical to an LSD solution will likely be eliminated when dissolved in tap water.

The double bond between the 8-position and the aromatic ring , being conjugated with the indole ring, is susceptible to nucleophilic attacks by water or alcohol , especially in the presence of UV or other kinds of light. LSD often converts to lumi-LSD (10-hydroxy-9,10-dihydro-LSD), which is inactive in human beings. A controlled study was undertaken to determine the stability of LSD in pooled urine samples.

The concentrations of LSD in urine samples were followed over time at various temperatures, in different types of storage containers, at various exposures to different wavelengths of light, and at varying pH values. These studies demonstrated no significant loss in LSD concentration at 25 °C for up to four weeks.

After four weeks of incubation, a 30% loss in LSD concentration at 37 °C and up to a 40% at 45 °C were observed. Urine fortified with LSD and stored in amber glass or nontransparent polyethylene containers showed no change in concentration under any light conditions.

The stability of LSD in transparent containers under light depended on the distance between the light source and the samples, the wavelength of light, exposure time, and the light intensity.

After prolonged exposure to heat in alkaline pH conditions, 10 to 15% of the parent LSD epimerized to iso-LSD. Under acidic conditions, less than 5% of the LSD was converted to iso-LSD. It was also demonstrated that trace amounts of metal ions in the buffer or urine could catalyze the decomposition of LSD and that this process could be avoided by the addition of EDTA . Detection Ehrlich's reagent can be used to test for the presence of LSD in a sample, turning purple upon reaction. LSD can be detected in concentrations larger than approximately 10% in a sample using Ehrlich's reagent and Hofmann's reagent. However, detecting LSD in human tissues is more challenging due to its active dose being significantly lower (in micrograms ) compared to most other drugs (in milligrams ). LSD may be quantified in urine for drug testing programs, in plasma or serum to confirm poisoning in hospitalized victims, or in whole blood for forensic investigations.

In addition to lysergamide derivatives , simplified or "partial" LSD analogues or seco-LSD compounds, such as NDTDI (8,10-seco-LSD), DEIMDHPCA (3,5-seco-LSD), 10,11-seco-LSD , and N -DEAOP-NMT , are known. A notable bioisostere of LSD is JRT , the isotryptamine analogue of LSD and a psychedelic and psychoplastogen which is under investigation for the potential treatment of schizophrenia . History The first intentional ingestion of LSD occurred on April 19, 1943, when Hofmann ingested 250 μg of LSD. He said this would be a threshold dose based on the doses of other ergot alkaloids; however, Hofmann found the effects to be much stronger than he anticipated. Information about synthesizing LSD was first published in scientific literature by Hofmann and his colleague, psychiatrist Werner Stoll in 1943; a description of LSD's hallucinogenic effects was later published by Stoll in 1947. Historical pharmaceutical production and distribution Sandoz Laboratories introduced LSD as a psychiatric drug in 1947, marketing it as a psychiatric panacea which could serve "as a cure for everything from schizophrenia to criminal behavior, 'sexual perversions', and alcoholism." Sandoz also sent the drug for free to researchers investigating its effects.

In 1963, the Sandoz patents on LSD expired and the Czech company Spofa began to produce the substance. Sandoz stopped the production and distribution in 1965. Historical use in psychiatry and psychotherapy LSD was subject to exceptional interest within the field of psychiatry in the 1950s and early 1960s, and Sandoz distributed LSD to researchers under the trademark name Delysid in an attempt to find a marketable use for it.

During this period, LSD was controversially administered to hospitalised schizophrenic autistic children, with varying degrees of therapeutic success. It was said to have been tried in every type of mental disorder by 1960. LSD was also used in an attempt to cure homosexuality . Most of the early studies of LSD for psychiatric conditions were of very low quality, often lacking even control groups .

In 1975, it was concluded that LSD showed little difference from placebo for most conditions. LSD-assisted psychotherapy was used in the 1950s and early 1960s by psychiatrists such as Humphry Osmond , who pioneered the application of LSD to the treatment of alcoholism , with promising results. Osmond coined the term "psychedelic," meaning "mind manifesting," as a term for LSD and related hallucinogens , superseding the previously held " psychotomimetic " model (in which LSD was believed to mimic schizophrenia ).

In contrast to schizophrenia, LSD can induce transcendent experiences, with lasting psychological benefit. Historical use by government agencies 'Effects of Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD) on Troops Marching' – 16mm film produced by the United States military circa 1958 Beginning in the 1950s, the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) began a research program code-named Project MKUltra .

The CIA introduced LSD to the United States, purchasing the entire world's supply for $240,000 and propagating the LSD through CIA front organizations to American hospitals, clinics, prisons, and research centers. Experiments included administering LSD to CIA employees, military personnel, doctors, other government agents, prostitutes, mentally ill patients, and members of the general public to study their reactions (usually without the subjects' knowledge), the most well-known example of this being Operation Midnight Climax .

The project was revealed in the US congressional Rockefeller Commission report in 1975. However, the extent of the experiments conducted under Project MKUltra are still mostly unknown, as acting CIA director Richard Helms destroyed many of the key documents related to MKUltra in 1973. According to declassified CIA documents, it's possible that the American agency spread LSD amongst civilians in Europe in the 1950s. LSD was also one of several psychoactive substances evaluated by the U.S. Army Chemical Corps as possible non-lethal incapacitants in the Edgewood Arsenal human experiments . History of cultural impact The use of LSD was most widespread from the 1960s through the 1980s.

In the 1960s, LSD and other psychedelics were adopted by and became synonymous with the Hippie counterculture movement due to their perceived ability to expand consciousness. This resulted in LSD being viewed as a cultural threat to American values and the Vietnam War effort, and it was designated as a Schedule I (illegal for medical as well as recreational use) substance in 1968. It was listed as a Schedule I controlled substance by the United Nations in 1971 and currently has no approved medical uses. Several figures, including Aldous Huxley , Timothy Leary , and Al Hubbard , had begun to advocate the consumption of LSD as it became central to the counterculture of the 1960s.

In the early 1960s, the use of LSD and other hallucinogens was advocated by new proponents of consciousness expansion such as Leary, Huxley, Alan Watts and Arthur Koestler , and, according to historians, they profoundly influenced the thinking of the new generation of youth. Historical legality and modern-day usage in the United States On October 24, 1968, possession of LSD was made illegal in the United States.

The last FDA approved study of LSD in patients ended in 1980, while a study in healthy volunteers was made in the late 1980s. Legally approved and regulated psychiatric use of LSD continued in Switzerland until 1993.

As of 2017 , about 10% of people in the United States have used LSD at some point in their lives, while 0.7% have used it in the last year.

The use of LSD among US adults increased by 56.4% from 2015 to 2018.

In November 2020, Oregon became the first US state to decriminalize possession of small amounts of LSD after voters approved Ballot Measure 110 . Society and culture Counterculture By the mid-1960s, the youth countercultures in California, particularly in San Francisco, had widely adopted the use of hallucinogenic drugs, including LSD.

The first major underground LSD factory was established by Owsley Stanley . Around this time, the Merry Pranksters , associated with novelist Ken Kesey , organized the Acid Tests , events in San Francisco involving LSD consumption, accompanied by light shows and improvised music. Their activities, including cross-country trips in a psychedelically-decorated bus and interactions with major figures of the beat movement, were later documented in Tom Wolfe 's The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test (1968).

In San Francisco's Haight-Ashbury neighborhood, the Psychedelic Shop was opened in January 1966 by brothers Ron and Jay Thelin to promote the safe use of LSD. This shop played a significant role in popularizing LSD in the area and establishing Haight-Ashbury as the epicenter of the hippie counterculture.

The Thelins also organized the Love Pageant Rally in Golden Gate Park in October 1966, protesting against California's ban on LSD. A similar movement developed in London, led by British academic Michael Hollingshead , who first tried LSD in America in 1961.

After experiencing LSD and interacting with notable figures such as Aldous Huxley , Timothy Leary , and Richard Alpert , Hollingshead played a key role in the famous LSD research at Millbrook before moving to New York City for his experiments.

In 1965, he returned to the UK and founded the World Psychedelic Center in Chelsea, London. Art and music Art Blotter art Main article: Blotter art LSD tabs (50 mcg) featuring blotter art Blotter art is an art form printed on perforated sheets of absorbent blotting paper infused with liquid LSD.

The delivery method gained popularity following the banning of the hallucinogen LSD in the late 1960s.

The use of graphics on blotter sheets originated as an underground art form in the early 1970s, sometimes to help identify the dose, maker, or batch of LSD. LSD art Main article: LSD art A drawing of a face, made under the effects of LSD. Dr. Oscar Janiger noted similarities between paintings made under the influence of the drug and those made by schizophrenics. LSD art is any art or visual displays inspired by psychedelic experiences and hallucinations known to follow the ingestion of LSD (also known colloquially as acid). Artists and scientists have been interested in the effect of LSD on drawing and painting since it first became available for legal use and general consumption. Music Psychedelic art for the cover of an issue of underground counterculture newspaper Helix , 1967.

The influence of LSD in the realms of music and art became pronounced in the 1960s, especially through the Acid Tests and related events involving bands like the Grateful Dead , Jefferson Airplane , and Big Brother and the Holding Company . San Francisco-based artists such as Rick Griffin , Victor Moscoso , and Wes Wilson contributed to this movement through their psychedelic poster and album art.

The Grateful Dead , in particular, became central to the culture of "Deadheads", with their music heavily influenced by LSD.

In the United Kingdom, Michael Hollingshead, reputed for introducing LSD to various artists and musicians like Storm Thorgerson , Donovan , Keith Richards , and members of the Beatles , played a significant role in the drug's proliferation in the British art and music scene. Despite LSD's illegal status since 1966, it was widely used by groups including the Beatles , the Rolling Stones , and the Moody Blues . Their experiences influenced works such as the Beatles' Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band and Cream's Disraeli Gears , featuring psychedelic-themed music and artwork. Psychedelic music of the 1960s often sought to replicate the LSD experience, incorporating exotic instrumentation, electric guitars with effects pedals, and elaborate studio techniques. Artists and bands used instruments such as sitars and tablas and employed studio effects such as backward tape, panning, and phasing. Songs such as John Prine 's "Illegal Smile" and the Beatles' " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " have been associated with LSD, although the latter's authors denied such claims. Contemporary artists influenced by LSD include Keith Haring in the visual arts, various electronic dance music creators, and the jam band Phish .

The 2018 Leo Butler play All You Need is LSD is inspired by the author's interest in the history of LSD. Legal status The United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 mandates that signing parties, including the United States, Australia, New Zealand, and most of Europe, prohibit LSD. Enforcement of these laws varies by country.

The convention allows medical and scientific research with LSD. Australia In Australia , LSD is classified as a Schedule 9 prohibited substance under the Poisons Standard (February 2017), indicating it may be abused or misused and its manufacture, possession, sale, or use should be prohibited except for approved research purposes.

In Western Australia, the Misuse of Drugs Act 1981 provides guidelines for possession and trafficking of substances like LSD. Canada In Canada , LSD is listed under Schedule III of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA). Unauthorized possession and trafficking of the substance can lead to significant legal penalties. United Kingdom In the United Kingdom , LSD is a Class A drug under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 , making unauthorized possession and trafficking punishable by severe penalties.

The Runciman Report and Transform Drug Policy Foundation have made recommendations and proposals regarding the legal regulation of LSD and other psychedelics. United States In the United States , LSD is classified as a Schedule I controlled substance under the Controlled Substances Act of 1970 , making its manufacture, possession, and distribution illegal without a DEA license.

The law considers LSD to have a high potential for abuse, no legitimate medical use, and to be unsafe even under medical supervision.

The US Supreme Court case Neal v. United States (1995) clarified the sentencing guidelines related to LSD possession. Oregon decriminalized personal possession of small amounts of drugs, including LSD, in February 2021, and California has seen legislative efforts to decriminalize psychedelics. Mexico Mexico decriminalized the possession of small amounts of drugs, including LSD, for personal use in 2009.

The law specifies possession limits and establishes that possession is not a crime within designated quantities. Czech Republic In the Czech Republic , possession of "amount larger than small" of LSD is criminalized, while possession of smaller amounts is a misdemeanor.

The definition of "amount larger than small" is determined by judicial practice and specific regulations. Illicit supply chain Production Glassware seized by the DEA. An active dose of LSD is very minute, allowing a large number of doses to be synthesized from a comparatively small amount of raw material. Twenty-five kilograms of precursor ergotamine tartrate can produce 5–6 kg of pure crystalline LSD; this corresponds to around 50–60 million doses at 100 μg. Because the masses involved are so small, concealing and transporting illicit LSD is much easier than smuggling cocaine , cannabis , or other illegal drugs. Manufacturing LSD requires laboratory equipment and experience in the field of organic chemistry . It takes two to three days to produce 30 to 100 grams of pure compound. It is believed that LSD is not usually produced in large quantities, but rather in a series of small batches. This technique minimizes the loss of precursor chemicals in case a step does not work as expected. Ali Altaft, the lead chemist at the University of Okara , in Punjab , Pakistan, performed the synthesis of LSD on video. Forms LSD is produced in crystalline form and is then mixed with excipients or redissolved for production in ingestible forms. Liquid solution is either distributed in small vials or, more commonly, sprayed onto or soaked into a distribution medium. Historically, LSD solutions were first sold on sugar cubes, but practical considerations forced a change to tablet form. Appearing in 1968 as an orange tablet measuring about 6 mm across, "Orange Sunshine" acid was the first largely available form of LSD after its possession was made illegal. Tim Scully , a prominent chemist, made some of these tablets, but said that most "Sunshine" in the USA came by way of Ronald Stark, who imported approximately thirty-five million doses from Europe. Over some time, tablet dimensions, weight, shape and concentration of LSD evolved from large (4.5–8.1 mm diameter), heavyweight (≥150 μg), round, high concentration (90–350 μg/tab) dose units to small (2.0–3.5 mm diameter) lightweight (as low as 4.7 μg/tab), variously shaped, lower concentration (12–85 μg/tab, average range 30–40 μg/tab) dose units. LSD tablet shapes have included cylinders, cones, stars, spacecraft, and heart shapes.

The smallest tablets became known as "Microdots".

After tablets came "computer acid" or "blotter paper LSD", typically made by dipping a preprinted sheet of blotting paper into an LSD/water/alcohol solution. More than 200 types of LSD tablets have been encountered since 1969, and more than 350 blotter paper designs have been observed since 1975. About the same time as blotter paper, LSD came "Windowpane" (AKA "Clearlight"), which contained LSD inside a thin gelatin square a quarter of an inch (6 mm) across. LSD has been sold under a wide variety of often short-lived and regionally restricted street names, including Acid, Trips, Uncle Sid, Blotter, Lucy , Alice and doses, as well as names that reflect the designs on the sheets of blotter paper. Authorities have encountered the drug in other forms—including powder or crystal, and capsule. Blotters Blotter art designs printed on blotter paper can identify dose strengths, different batches, or makers.

On the other hand, blotters without art may be considered safer by some, since there is no guarantee that the printer ink used in clandestine production is edible or non-toxic for long-term exposure, and it is also possible for unscrupulous dealers to mimic reputable blotter art designs to boost sales.

The Brotherhood of Eternal Love and Its Quest to Spread Peace, Love, and Acid to the World describes one such group, the Brotherhood of Eternal Love .

The group was a major American LSD trafficking group in the late 1960s and early 1970s.

In the second half of the 20th century, dealers and chemists loosely associated with the Grateful Dead like Owsley Stanley , Nicholas Sand , Karen Horning, Sarah Maltzer, "Dealer McDope", and Leonard Pickard played an essential role in distributing LSD. Mimics LSD blotter acid mimic actually containing DOC. Different blotters which could possibly be mimics.

Since 2005, law enforcement in the United States and elsewhere has seized several chemicals and combinations of chemicals in blotter paper which were sold as LSD mimics, including DOB , a mixture of DOC and DOI , 25I-NBOMe , and a mixture of DOC and DOB . Many mimics are toxic in comparatively small doses, or have extremely different safety profiles. Many street users of LSD are often under the impression that blotter paper, which is actively hallucinogenic, can only be LSD because that is the only chemical with low enough doses to fit on a small square of blotter paper.

While it is true that LSD requires lower doses than most other hallucinogens, blotter paper is capable of absorbing a much larger amount of material.

The DEA performed a chromatographic analysis of blotter paper containing 2C-C which showed that the paper contained a much greater concentration of the active chemical than typical LSD doses, although the exact quantity was not determined. Blotter LSD mimics can have relatively small dose squares; a sample of blotter paper containing DOC seized by Concord, California police had dose markings approximately 6 mm apart. Several deaths have been attributed to 25I-NBOMe. Notable individuals Some notable individuals have commented publicly on their experiences with LSD. Some of these comments date from the era when it was legally available in the US and Europe for non-medical uses. Others pertain to psychiatric treatment in the 1950s and 1960s. Still others describe experiences with illegal LSD, obtained for philosophic, artistic, therapeutic, spiritual, or recreational purposes. W. H. Auden , the poet, said, "I myself have taken mescaline once and L.S.D. once. Aside from a slight schizophrenic dissociation of the I from the Not-I, including my body, nothing happened at all." He also said, "LSD was a complete frost. … What it does seem to destroy is the power of communication. I have listened to tapes done by highly articulate people under LSD, for example, and they talk absolute drivel. They may have seen something interesting, but they certainly lose either the power or the wish to communicate." He also said, "Nothing much happened but I did get the distinct impression that some birds were trying to communicate with me." James Cameron , the Canadian filmmaker, has said he experimented with LSD during his college years. Daniel Ellsberg , an American peace activist, says he has had several hundred experiences with psychedelics. Richard Feynman , a notable physicist at California Institute of Technology , tried LSD during his professorship at Caltech. Feynman largely sidestepped the issue when dictating his anecdotes; he mentions it in passing in the "O Americano, Outra Vez" section. Jerry Garcia stated in a July 3, 1989 interview for Relix Magazine , in response to the question "Have your feelings about LSD changed over the years?" "They haven't changed much. My feelings about LSD are mixed. It's something that I both fear and that I love at the same time. I never take any psychedelic, have a psychedelic experience, without having that feeling of, "I don't know what's going to happen." In that sense, it's still fundamentally an enigma and a mystery." Bill Gates implied in an interview with Playboy that he tried LSD during his youth. Aldous Huxley , author of Brave New World , became a user of psychedelics after moving to Hollywood . He was at the forefront of the counterculture's use of psychedelic drugs, which led to his 1954 work The Doors of Perception . Dying from cancer, he asked his wife on 22 November 1963 to inject him with 100 μg of LSD. He died later that day. Steve Jobs , co-founder and former CEO of Apple Inc. , said, "Taking LSD was a profound experience, one of the most important things in my life." Ernst Jünger , German writer and philosopher, throughout his life had experimented with drugs such as ether , cocaine , and hashish ; and later in life he used mescaline and LSD. These experiments were recorded comprehensively in Annäherungen (1970, Approaches ).

The novel Besuch auf Godenholm (1952, Visit to Godenholm ) is clearly influenced by his early experiments with mescaline and LSD. He met with LSD inventor Albert Hofmann and they took LSD together several times. Hofmann's memoir LSD, My Problem Child describes some of these meetings.

In the 1950s and 1960s, it was used in psychiatry to enhance psychotherapy , known as psychedelic therapy .

In the United States , the earliest research began in the 1950s. Albert Kurland and his colleagues published research on LSD's therapeutic potential to treat schizophrenia .

In Canada , Humphry Osmond and Abram Hoffer completed LSD studies as early as 1952. Some psychiatrists , such as Ronald A. Sandison , who pioneered its use at Powick Hospital in England, believed that LSD was especially useful at helping patients to "unblock" repressed subconscious material through other psychotherapeutic methods, and also for treating alcoholism . One study concluded, "The root of the therapeutic value of the LSD experience is its potential for producing self-acceptance and self-surrender," presumably by forcing the user to face issues and problems in that individual's psyche.

By the 1960s, however, controversies surrounding " hippie " counterculture began to deplete institutional support for continued study.

In 2001, the United States Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) stated that LSD "produces no aphrodisiac effects, does not increase creativity , has no lasting positive effect in treating alcoholics or criminals , does not produce a " model psychosis ", and does not generate immediate personality change." In more recent years, there has been renewed clinical research on and interest in LSD for potential therapeutic uses. This has been supported by several organizations, including the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS), the Beckley Foundation , the Heffter Research Institute , and the Albert Hofmann Foundation, which exist to fund, encourage, and coordinate research into the medicinal and spiritual uses of LSD and related psychedelics. New clinical LSD experiments in humans started in 2009 for the first time in 35 years.

As the drug is illegal in many areas of the world, potential medical uses have historically been difficult to study. Investigational uses of LSD include the treatment of alcoholism , anxiety , and depression , among other conditions. Another use is alleviation of anxiety in terminally ill cancer patients. A single dose of LSD may temporarily reduce alcohol abuse and some psychiatric symptoms, but evidence is limited and unreliable due to methodological flaws and unclear causation.

In 2024, the FDA designated a form of LSD as a breakthrough therapy to treat generalized anxiety disorder which is being developed by MindMed . A study published by the Journal of the American Medical Association in September, 2025 explored the optimal dose of LSD to lower patients' anxiety.

The study was conducted by the pharmaceutical company MindMed .

The researchers compared how LSD doses of 25 μg, 50 μg, 100 μg, 200 μg, or placebo impacted anxiety scores among study participants.

The results of the study found that 100 μg was the optimal dose to reduce anxiety among the studied patients. A single dose of LSD ( Definium Therapeutics 's DT120 candidate) markedly reduced major depressive disorder symptoms versus placebo in a Phase 3 trial, with benefits lasting at least 12 weeks and no major safety concerns. LSD is a psychoplastogen , a compound capable of promoting rapid and sustained neural plasticity , an action that hypothetically might be involved in its therapeutic benefits. Preliminary evidence in humans suggests that a single dose of LSD may also temporarily benefit learning and memory. More research is needed to substantiate such notions.

The British critical psychiatrist Joanna Moncrieff has critiqued the use and study of psychedelics like LSD for treatment of psychiatric disorders, highlighting concerns including excessive hype around these drugs, questionable biologically-based theories of benefit, blurred lines between medical and recreational use, flawed clinical trial findings, financial conflicts of interest, strong expectancy effects and large placebo responses, small and short-term benefits over placebo, and their potential for difficult experiences and adverse effects, among others. Other conditions LSD has been studied for the relief of pain and headaches . It has been used as a treatment for cluster headaches with positive results in some small studies.

The drug might have analgesic properties related to pain in terminally ill patients and phantom pain and might be useful for treating inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis due to anti-inflammatory effects. Enhancing creativity In the 1950s and 1960s, some psychiatrists, such as Oscar Janiger , explored the potential effect of LSD on creativity . Experimental studies attempted to measure the effect of LSD on creative activity and aesthetic appreciation.

The International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology . 19 (1) pyv072. doi : 10.1093/ijnp/pyv072 . PMC 4772267 . PMID 26108222 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j Dolder P (2017).

The Pharmacology of d-Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD) (PDF) (Thesis). University of Basel. p. 112. doi : 10.5451/UNIBAS-006786123 . Retrieved June 3, 2025 . ^ a b c d e Nichols D, Billac GB, Harbit RC, Smith JM (March 1, 2026). A Pharmacological Basis for Some Bad LSD Trips?: A 50+ Year Odyssey . International Society for Research on Psychedelics (ISRP) 2026. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 12, 2026. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u Holze F, Singh N, Liechti ME, D'Souza DC (May 2024). "Serotonergic Psychedelics: A Comparative Review of Efficacy, Safety, Pharmacokinetics, and Binding Profile" . Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging . 9 (5): 472– 489. doi : 10.1016/j.bpsc.2024.01.007 . PMID 38301886 . ^ a b c d Shulgin AT (1980). "Profiles of Psychedelic Drugs: LSD". J Psychedelic Drugs . 12 (2): 173– 174. doi : 10.1080/02791072.1980.10471571 . PMID 7420434 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Mucke HA (July 2016). "From Psychiatry to Flower Power and Back Again: The Amazing Story of Lysergic Acid Diethylamide". Assay and Drug Development Technologies . 14 (5): 276– 281. doi : 10.1089/adt.2016.747 . PMID 27392130 . ^ "Lysergide" . pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov . Archived from the original on April 12, 2023 . Retrieved April 12, 2023 . ^ "Lysergide" . PubChem . U.S. National Library of Medicine . Retrieved May 22, 2025 . ^ "What are hallucinogens?" . National Institute of Drug Abuse . January 2016. Archived from the original on April 17, 2016 . Retrieved April 24, 2016 . ^ Polito V, Liknaitzky P (August 2024). "Is microdosing a placebo? A rapid review of low-dose LSD and psilocybin research" . Journal of Psychopharmacology . 38 (8): 701– 711. doi : 10.1177/02698811241254831 . PMC 11311906 . PMID 38877715 . ^ a b c d e f g h "LSD profile (chemistry, effects, other names, synthesis, mode of use, pharmacology, medical use, control status)" . EMCDDA . Archived from the original on April 28, 2021 . Retrieved July 14, 2018 . ^ Gershon L (July 19, 2016). "How LSD Went From Research to Religion" . JSTOR Daily . Archived from the original on January 28, 2021 . Retrieved July 14, 2018 . ^ Liechti ME, Dolder PC, Schmid Y (May 2017). "Alterations of consciousness and mystical-type experiences after acute LSD in humans" . Psychopharmacology . 234 ( 9– 10): 1499– 1510. doi : 10.1007/s00213-016-4453-0 . PMC 5420386 . PMID 27714429 . ^ Griffiths RR, Hurwitz ES, Davis AK, Johnson MW, Jesse R (April 23, 2019). "Survey of subjective "God encounter experiences": Comparisons among naturally occurring experiences and those occasioned by the classic psychedelics psilocybin, LSD, ayahuasca, or DMT" . PLOS ONE . 14 (4) e0214377. Bibcode : 2019PLoSO..1414377G . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0214377 . PMC 6478303 . PMID 31013281 . ^ Preller KH, Burt JB, Ji JL, Schleifer CH, Adkinson BD, Stämpfli P, et al. (October 2018). "Changes in global and thalamic brain connectivity in LSD-induced altered states of consciousness are attributable to the 5-HT2A receptor" . eLife . 7 e35082. doi : 10.7554/eLife.35082 . PMC 6202055 . PMID 30355445 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j Nichols DE (April 2016). Barker EL (ed.). "Psychedelics" . Pharmacological Reviews . 68 (2): 264– 355. doi : 10.1124/pr.115.011478 . ISSN 0031-6997 . PMC 4813425 . PMID 26841800 . ^ Girn M, Roseman L, Bernhardt B, Smallwood J, Carhart-Harris R, Spreng RN (2022). "Serotonergic psychedelic drugs LSD and psilocybin reduce the hierarchical differentiation of unimodal and transmodal cortex". NeuroImage . 256 119220. bioRxiv 10.1101/2020.05.01.072314 . doi : 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.119220 . PMID 35483649 . ^ Leptourgos P, Fortier-Davy M, Carhart-Harris R, Corlett PR, Dupuis D, Halberstadt AL, et al. (December 2020). "Hallucinations Under Psychedelics and in the Schizophrenia Spectrum: An Interdisciplinary and Multiscale Comparison" . Schizophrenia Bulletin . 46 (6): 1396– 1408. doi : 10.1093/schbul/sbaa117 . PMC 7707069 . PMID 32944778 . ^ Holze F, Vizeli P, Ley L, Müller F, Dolder P, Stocker M, et al. (February 2021). "Acute dose-dependent effects of lysergic acid diethylamide in a double-blind placebo-controlled study in healthy subjects" . Neuropsychopharmacology . 46 (3): 537– 544. doi : 10.1038/s41386-020-00883-6 . PMC 8027607 . PMID 33059356 . ^ a b "Commonly Abused Drugs Charts" . National Institute on Drug Abuse . July 2, 2018. Archived from the original on March 1, 2020 . Retrieved July 14, 2018 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Nichols DE (October 2018). "Dark Classics in Chemical Neuroscience: Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD)" (PDF) . ACS Chemical Neuroscience . 9 (10): 2331– 2343. doi : 10.1021/acschemneuro.8b00043 . PMID 29461039 . ^ a b c Chwelos N, Blewett DB, Smith CM, Hoffer A (September 1959). "Use of d-lysergic acid diethylamide in the treatment of alcoholism". Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol . 20 (3): 577– 590. doi : 10.15288/qjsa.1959.20.577 . PMID 13810249 . ^ a b United States Congress House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce Subcommittee on Public Health and Welfare (1968). Increased Controls Over Hallucinogens and Other Dangerous Drugs . U.S. Government Printing Office. Archived from the original on July 13, 2020 . Retrieved August 3, 2021 . ^ a b Terry K (March 26, 2024). "FDA Opens the Door to Clinical Use of LSD" . WebMD . Archived from the original on May 25, 2024 . Retrieved May 25, 2024 . ^ a b National Institute on Drug Abuse. "Hallucinogens" . Archived from the original on June 3, 2020 . Retrieved January 16, 2026 . ^ Yockey RA, Vidourek RA, King KA (July 2020). "Trends in LSD use among US adults: 2015–2018". Drug and Alcohol Dependence . 212 108071. doi : 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2020.108071 . PMID 32450479 . S2CID 218893155 . ^ "DrugFacts: Hallucinogens – LSD, Peyote, Psilocybin, and PCP" . National Institute on Drug Abuse. December 2014. Archived from the original on February 16, 2015 . Retrieved February 17, 2015 . ^ Fahey DM, Miller JS (August 27, 2013). Fahey D, Miller JS (eds.). Alcohol and Drugs in North America: A Historical Encyclopedia . Bloomsbury Academic. p. 375. ISBN 978-1-59884-478-8 . ^ San Francisco Chronicle September 20, 1966 Page One ^ Grof S , Grof JH (1979). Realms of the Human Unconscious (Observations from LSD Research) . London: Souvenir Press (E & A) Ltd. pp. 13– 14. ISBN 978-0-285-64882-1 . Archived from the original on October 18, 2007 . Retrieved November 18, 2007 . ^ a b Nutt DJ, King LA, Nichols DE (August 2013). "Effects of Schedule I drug laws on neuroscience research and treatment innovation". Nature Reviews. Neuroscience . 14 (8): 577– 585. doi : 10.1038/nrn3530 . PMID 23756634 . S2CID 1956833 . ^ Liechti ME, Gasser P, Aicher HD, Mueller F, Hawrot T, Schmid Y (January 2025). "Implementing psychedelic-assisted therapy: History and characteristics of the Swiss limited medical use program" . Neuroscience Applied . 4 105525. doi : 10.1016/j.nsa.2025.105525 . PMC 12341733 . PMID 40800003 . ^ a b c d e f Liechti ME, Holze F (2022). "Dosing Psychedelics and MDMA" . Disruptive Psychopharmacology . Curr Top Behav Neurosci. Vol. 56. pp. 3– 21. doi : 10.1007/7854_2021_270 . ISBN 978-3-031-12183-8 . PMID 34734392 . ^ a b c d e f Nichols DE (2017). "Chemistry and Structure–Activity Relationships of Psychedelics" . Behavioral Neurobiology of Psychedelic Drugs . Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences. Vol. 36. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 1– 43. doi : 10.1007/7854_2017_475 . ISBN 978-3-662-55878-2 . PMID 28401524 . Archived from the original on March 23, 2025.

Although LSD is the most well-known psychedelic, only a very few structural modifications can be made to its structure, and nearly all of those attenuate its activity by about an order of magnitude.

In addition, there is a paucity of structure–activity data for ergolines, principally due to the synthetic difficulty inherent in their chemistry.

Although LSD is the most potent psychedelic agent in humans, its affinity and potency at the human 5-HT2A receptor is rather unremarkable compared with much simpler molecules such as DOI. Because of its structural complexity and tedious approaches to its total synthesis, only a few structural modifications of LSD have been reported. Unfortunately, only a few of them have been assessed in human psychopharmacology, most being much less active than LSD itself. ^ a b c d e f Nichols DE (2001). "LSD and Its Lysergamide Cousins" (PDF) .

The Heffter Review of Psychedelic Research . 2 . Heffter Research Institute : 80– 87. ISSN 1534-9640 . Lysergic Acid N, N-diethylamide (LSD) is the most "famous" (notorious?) of the psychedelics. That dubious distinction came about not only because of its effects, but also because of its extremely high potency.

The type of effect it produced was not completely unknown, however, because mescaline had been relatively available to interested persons since the late 1920s, and produced a similar mental state. Aldous Huxley's book The Doors of Perception also generated a great deal of interest in mescaline in the 1950s, at least in certain circles, but its low potency (one gram is only 3-4 doses) made it somewhat uneconomical for manufacture. This cost factor may be one of the reasons that it never achieved the popularity gained by LSD in the 1960s and 1970s.

By contrast, LSD was easily made from relatively available starting materials such as ergotamine, and its high potency made it economical to manufacture in relatively large quantities. One gram of LSD probably costs no more than a few hundred dollars in raw materials to manufacture, whereas it represents approximately 10,000 clinical doses that could "retail" on the street for upwards of $50,000. Combine this strong economic incentive with the high potency of the drug, which makes distribution easy because doses are very small and easily hidden, and one readily sees some of the factors that led to the high popularity of LSD. Indeed, the potency of LSD at the 5-HT2A receptor is not as great as that of some of the amphetamine hallucinogens such as DOB or DOI, yet its human potency is about ten times greater. Furthermore, there is a cavity within these receptors that accommodates and is complementary to the activating drug, in this case LSD. What we are forced to conclude is that the area within the receptor that binds to the diethylamide function of LSD is a specific region that must be just large enough to contain the diethyl groups. ^ Albert Hofmann (1968). "Psychotomimetic Agents" .

In Burger A (ed.). Drugs Affecting the Central Nervous System . Vol. 2. New York: M. Dekker. pp. 169– 235. OCLC 245452885 . OL 13539506M . Subsequent experiments on volunteers of the Sandoz research laboratories confirmed the extraordinary activity of lysergic acid diethylamide on the human psyche. These showed that the effective oral dose of LSD in human beings is 0.03—0.05 mg. LSD is by far the most active and most specific psychotomimetic. It is about 5,000—10,000 times more active than mescaline or about 100–200 times more active than psilocybin. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Brimblecombe RW, Pinder RM (1975). "Indolealkylamines and Related Compounds". Hallucinogenic Agents . Bristol: Wright-Scientechnica. pp. 98– 144. ISBN 978-0-85608-011-1 . OCLC 2176880 . OL 4850660M . ^ Luethi D, Liechti ME (October 2018). "Monoamine Transporter and Receptor Interaction Profiles in Vitro Predict Reported Human Doses of Novel Psychoactive Stimulants and Psychedelics" . Int J Neuropsychopharmacol . 21 (10): 926– 931. doi : 10.1093/ijnp/pyy047 . PMC 6165951 . PMID 29850881 . ^ Polito V, Stevenson RJ (February 6, 2019). "A systematic study of microdosing psychedelics" . PLOS ONE . 14 (2) e0211023. Bibcode : 2019PLoSO..1411023P . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0211023 . PMC 6364961 . PMID 30726251 . ^ a b Hidalgo E (2009). "LSD Samples Analysis" . Erowid. Archived from the original on February 13, 2010 . Retrieved February 8, 2010 . ^ a b Henderson LA, Glass WJ (1994). LSD: Still with us after all these years . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. ISBN 978-0-7879-4379-0 . ^ Fire & Earth Erowid (November 2003). "LSD Analysis – Do we know what's in street acid?" . Erowid. Archived from the original on January 26, 2010 . Retrieved February 8, 2010 . ^ El-Mallakh RS, Walker KL (2010). "Hallucinations, psuedohallucinations, and parahallucinations". Psychiatry . 73 (1): 34– 42. doi : 10.1521/psyc.2010.73.1.34 . PMID 20235616 . ^ Majić T, Schmidt TT, Gallinat J (March 2015). "Peak experiences and the afterglow phenomenon: when and how do therapeutic effects of hallucinogens depend on psychedelic experiences?". Journal of Psychopharmacology . 29 (3): 241– 253. doi : 10.1177/0269881114568040 . PMID 25670401 . S2CID 16483172 . ^ a b Honig D. "Frequently Asked Questions" . Erowid . Archived from the original on February 12, 2016. ^ a b McGlothlin W, Cohen S, McGlothlin MS (November 1967). "Long lasting effects of LSD on normals" (PDF) . Archives of General Psychiatry . 17 (5): 521– 532. doi : 10.1001/archpsyc.1967.01730290009002 . PMID 6054248 . Archived from the original (PDF) on April 30, 2011. ^ Kopra EI, Ferris JA, Rucker JJ, McClure B, Young AH, Copeland CS, et al. (August 2022). "Adverse experiences resulting in emergency medical treatment seeking following the use of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)" . Journal of Psychopharmacology . 36 (8): 956– 964. doi : 10.1177/02698811221099650 . PMC 9353972 . PMID 35672900 . ^ Rogge T (May 21, 2014), Substance use – LSD , MedlinePlus, U.S. National Library of Medicine, archived from the original on July 28, 2016 , retrieved July 14, 2016 ^ CESAR (October 29, 2013), LSD , Center for Substance Abuse Research, University of Maryland, archived from the original on July 15, 2016 , retrieved July 14, 2016 ^ a b c Kuypers KP, Ng L, Erritzoe D, Knudsen GM, Nichols CD, Nichols DE, et al. (September 2019). "Microdosing psychedelics: More questions than answers? An overview and suggestions for future research" . J Psychopharmacol . 33 (9): 1039– 1057. doi : 10.1177/0269881119857204 . PMC 6732823 . PMID 31303095 . ^ a b c Kyzar EJ, Nichols CD, Gainetdinov RR, Nichols DE, Kalueff AV (November 2017). "Psychedelic Drugs in Biomedicine". Trends Pharmacol Sci . 38 (11): 992– 1005. doi : 10.1016/j.tips.2017.08.003 . PMID 28947075 . ^ a b c d e f g h Marona-Lewicka D, Nichols CD, Nichols DE (September 2011). "An animal model of schizophrenia based on chronic LSD administration: old idea, new results" . Neuropharmacology . 61 (3): 503– 512. doi : 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.02.006 . PMC 3110609 . PMID 21352832 . ^ a b c d e f Freedman DX (1984). "The Bridge from Human to Animal. Hallucinogens: Neurochemical, Behavioral, and Clinical Perspectives" .

In Jacobs BL (ed.). Hallucinogens, Neurochemical, Behavioral, and Clinical Perspectives . Central Nervous System Pharmacology. Raven Press. pp. 203– 226. ISBN 978-0-89004-990-7 . ^ Mittman SM, Geyer MA (1991). "Dissociation of multiple effects of acute LSD on exploratory behavior in rats by ritanserin and propranolol". Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 105 (1): 69– 76. doi : 10.1007/BF02316866 . PMID 1745714 . ^ a b Linton HR, Langs RJ (May 1962). "Subjective Reactions to Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD-25)". Archives of General Psychiatry . 6 (5): 352– 368. doi : 10.1001/archpsyc.1962.01710230020003 . ^ Katz MM, Waskow IE, Olsson J (February 1968). "Characterizing the psychological state produced by LSD". Journal of Abnormal Psychology . 73 (1): 1– 14. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.409.4030 . doi : 10.1037/h0020114 . PMID 5639999 . ^ Parker LA (June 1996). "LSD produces place preference and flavor avoidance but does not produce flavor aversion in rats". Behavioral Neuroscience . 110 (3): 503– 508. doi : 10.1037/0735-7044.110.3.503 . PMID 8888996 . ^ Oster G (1966). "Moiré patterns and visual hallucinations" (PDF) . Psychedelic Review . 7 : 33– 40. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 19, 2017. ^ Kaelen M, Roseman L, Kahan J, Santos-Ribeiro A, Orban C, Lorenz R, et al. (July 2016). "LSD modulates music-induced imagery via changes in parahippocampal connectivity". European Neuropsychopharmacology . 26 (7): 1099– 1109. doi : 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2016.03.018 . PMID 27084302 . S2CID 24037275 . ^ "Hallucinogens – LSD, Peyote, Psilocybin, and PCP" . NIDA InfoFacts .

The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). June 2009. Archived from the original on November 21, 2009. ^ Schiff PL (October 2006). "Ergot and its alkaloids" . American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education . 70 (5): 98. doi : 10.5688/aj700598 (inactive March 30, 2026). PMC 1637017 . PMID 17149427 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of March 2026 ( link ) ^ a b c Halman A, Kong G, Sarris J, Perkins D (January 2024). "Drug-drug interactions involving classic psychedelics: A systematic review" . J Psychopharmacol . 38 (1): 3– 18. doi : 10.1177/02698811231211219 . PMC 10851641 . PMID 37982394 . ^ a b Becker AM, Klaiber A, Holze F, Istampoulouoglou I, Duthaler U, Varghese N, et al. (February 2023). "Ketanserin Reverses the Acute Response to LSD in a Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, Crossover Study in Healthy Participants" . Int J Neuropsychopharmacol . 26 (2): 97– 106. doi : 10.1093/ijnp/pyac075 . PMC 9926053 . PMID 36342343 . ^ Nutt DJ, King LA, Phillips LD (November 2010). "Drug harms in the UK: a multicriteria decision analysis". Lancet . 376 (9752): 1558– 1565. Bibcode : 2010Lanc..376.1558N . CiteSeerX 10.1.1.690.1283 . doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61462-6 . PMID 21036393 . S2CID 5667719 . ^ Nutt D, King LA, Saulsbury W, Blakemore C (March 2007). "Development of a rational scale to assess the harm of drugs of potential misuse". Lancet . 369 (9566): 1047– 53. Bibcode : 2007Lanc..369.1047N . doi : 10.1016/s0140-6736(07)60464-4 . PMID 17382831 . S2CID 5903121 . ^ a b c d e f g h i Nichols DE (February 2004). "Hallucinogens". Pharmacology & Therapeutics . 101 (2): 131– 181. doi : 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2003.11.002 . ISSN 1879-016X . PMID 14761703 . ^ a b Nichols DE, Grob CS (March 2018). "Is LSD Toxic?". Forensic Science International . 284 : 141– 145. doi : 10.1016/j.forsciint.2018.01.006 . PMID 29408722 . ^ Nutt DJ, King LA, Phillips LD (November 2010). "Drug harms in the UK: a multicriteria decision analysis". Lancet . 376 (9752): 1558– 65. Bibcode : 2010Lanc..376.1558N . CiteSeerX 10.1.1.690.1283 . doi : 10.1016/s0140-6736(10)61462-6 . PMID 21036393 . S2CID 5667719 . ^ Krebs TS, Johansen PØ (August 19, 2013). Lu L (ed.). "Psychedelics and mental health: a population study" . PLOS ONE . 8 (8) e63972. Bibcode : 2013PLoSO...863972K . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0063972 . PMC 3747247 . PMID 23976938 . ^ Murray RM, Paparelli A, Morrison PD, Marconi A, Di Forti M (October 2013), "What can we learn about schizophrenia from studying the human model, drug-induced psychosis?", American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B , Special Issue: Identifying the Origins of Mental Illness: A Festschrift in Honor of Ming T. Tsuang, 162 (7): 661– 670, doi : 10.1002/ajmg.b.32177 , PMID 24132898 , S2CID 205326399 ^ Rockefeller IV JD (December 8, 1994). "Is Military Research Hazardous to Veterans Health? Lessons Spanning Half A Century, part F. HALLUCINOGENS" . West Virginia: 103rd Congress, 2nd Session-S. Prt. 103-97; Staff Report prepared for the committee on veterans' affairs. Archived from the original on August 13, 2006 . Retrieved December 13, 2018 . ^ Middlefell R (March 1967). "The effects of LSD on body sway suggestibility in a group of hospital patients" (PDF) .

The British Journal of Psychiatry . 113 (496): 277– 280. doi : 10.1192/bjp.113.496.277 . PMID 6029626 . S2CID 19439549 . Archived from the original (PDF) on April 30, 2011. ^ Sjoberg BM, Hollister LE (November 1965). "The effects of psychotomimetic drugs on primary suggestibility". Psychopharmacologia . 8 (4): 251– 262. doi : 10.1007/BF00407857 . PMID 5885648 . S2CID 15249061 . ^ Halpern JH, Pope HG (March 2003). "Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder: what do we know after 50 years?". Drug and Alcohol Dependence . 69 (2): 109– 19. doi : 10.1016/S0376-8716(02)00306-X . PMID 12609692 . ^ Müller F, Kraus E, Holze F, Becker A, Ley L, Schmid Y, et al. (January 2022). "Flashback phenomena after administration of LSD and psilocybin in controlled studies with healthy participants" . Psychopharmacology . 239 (6): 1933– 1943. doi : 10.1007/s00213-022-06066-z . PMC 9166883 . PMID 35076721 . S2CID 246276633 . ^ a b Halpern JH, Lerner AG, Passie T (2018). A Review of Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder (HPPD) and an Exploratory Study of Subjects Claiming Symptoms of HPPD . Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences. Vol. 36. pp. 333– 360. doi : 10.1007/7854_2016_457 . ISBN 978-3-662-55878-2 . PMID 27822679 . ^ Johansen PØ, Krebs TS (March 2015). "Psychedelics not linked to mental health problems or suicidal behavior: a population study". Journal of Psychopharmacology . 29 (3): 270– 279. doi : 10.1177/0269881114568039 . PMID 25744618 . S2CID 2025731 . ^ Holland D, Passie T (2011). Flashback-Phänomene als Nachwirkung von Halluzinogeneinnahme . Bewusstsein – Kognition – Erleben (in German). Vol. 2. VWB Report. ISBN 978-3-86135-207-5 . Archived from the original on June 9, 2023 . Retrieved June 9, 2023 . ^ Abraham HD, Duffy FH (October 1996). "Stable quantitative EEG difference in post-LSD visual disorder by split-half analysis: evidence for disinhibition". Psychiatry Research . 67 (3): 173– 87. doi : 10.1016/0925-4927(96)02833-8 . PMID 8912957 . S2CID 7587687 . ^ a b c d Nutt DJ, Castle D (March 7, 2023). "Drug-interaction with psychotropic drugs". Psychedelics as Psychiatric Medications . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-267852-2 . Archived from the original on May 21, 2023 . Retrieved May 21, 2023 . ^ Buchborn T, Grecksch G, Dieterich D, Hollt V (2016). "Chapter 79 - Tolerance to Lysergic Acid Diethylamide: Overview, Correlates, and Clinical Implications". Neuropathology of Drug Addictions and Substance Misuse . Vol. 2. Academic Press . pp. 848– 849. doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-800212-4.00079-0 . ISBN 978-0-12-800212-4 . ^ a b Dolder DS, Grünblatt E, Müller F, Borgwardt SJ, Liechti ME (June 28, 2017). "A Single Dose of LSD Does Not Alter Gene Expression of the Serotonin 2A Receptor Gene (HTR2A) or Early Growth Response Genes (EGR1-3) in Healthy Subjects" . Frontiers in Neuroscience . 8 423. doi : 10.3389/fphar.2017.00423 . PMC 5487530 . PMID 28701958 . ^ Kooijman NI, Willegers T, Reuser A, Mulleners WM, Kramers C, Vissers KCP, et al. (January 4, 2023). "Are psychedelics the answer to chronic pain: A review of current literature" . Pain Practice . 23 (4): 455. doi : 10.1111/papr.13203 . hdl : 2066/291903 . ISSN 1533-2500 . PMID 36597700 . S2CID 255470638 . ^ Wolbach AB, Isbell H, Miner EJ (March 1962). "Cross tolerance between mescaline and LSD-25, with a comparison of the mescaline and LSD reactions" . Psychopharmacologia . 3 : 1– 14. doi : 10.1007/BF00413101 . PMID 14007904 . S2CID 23803624 . Archived from the original on April 19, 2014 . Retrieved December 1, 2007 . ^ Isbell H, Wolbach AB, Wikler A, Miner EJ (1961). "Cross tolerance between LSD and psilocybin" . Psychopharmacologia . 2 (3): 147– 159. doi : 10.1007/BF00407974 . PMID 13717955 . S2CID 7746880 . Archived from the original on March 15, 2016 . Retrieved December 1, 2007 . ^ Rosenberg D, Isbell H, Miner E, Logan C (August 7, 1963). "The effect of N,N-dimethyltryptamine in human subjects tolerant to lysergic acid diethylamide". Psychopharmacologia . 5 (3): 223– 224. doi : 10.1007/BF00413244 . PMID 14138757 . S2CID 32950588 . ^ Jonas S, Downer JD (October 1964). "Gross behavioural changes in monkeys following administration of LSD-25, and development of tolerance to LSD-25". Psychopharmacologia . 6 (4): 303– 386. doi : 10.1007/BF00413161 . PMID 4953438 . S2CID 11768927 . ^ Schlemmer RF, Nawara C, Heinze WJ, Davis JM, Advokat C (March 1986). "Influence of environmental context on tolerance to LSD-induced behavior in primates". Biological Psychiatry . 21 (3): 314– 317. doi : 10.1016/0006-3223(86)90053-3 . PMID 3947713 . S2CID 35508993 . ^ Lüscher C, Ungless MA (November 2006). "The mechanistic classification of addictive drugs" . PLOS Medicine . 3 (11) e437. doi : 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030437 . PMC 1635740 . PMID 17105338 . ^ a b Liechti ME (October 2017). "Modern Clinical Research on LSD" . Neuropsychopharmacology . 42 (11): 2114– 2127. doi : 10.1038/npp.2017.86 . PMC 5603820 . PMID 28447622 . ^ Balestrieri A, Fontanari D (September 1959). "Acquired and crossed tolerance to mescaline, LSD-25, and BOL-148". Archives of General Psychiatry . 1 (3): 279– 282. doi : 10.1001/archpsyc.1959.03590030063008 . PMID 13796178 . ^ Hamill J, Hallak J, Dursun SD, Baker G (2019). "Ayahuasca: Psychological and Physiologic Effects, Pharmacology and Potential Uses in Addiction and Mental Illness" . Current Neuropharmacology . 17 (2): 1– 15. doi : 10.2174/1570159X16666180125095902 . ISSN 1875-6190 . PMC 6343205 . PMID 29366418 . ^ Morgenstern J, Langenbucher J, Labouvie E (September 1994). "The generalizability of the dependence syndrome across substances: an examination of some properties of the proposed DSM-IV dependence criteria". Addiction . 89 (9). Society for the Study of Addiction: 1105– 1113. doi : 10.1111/j.1360-0443.1994.tb02787.x . PMID 7987187 . ^ Li JH, Lin LF (November 1998). "Genetic toxicology of abused drugs: a brief review" . Mutagenesis . 13 (6): 557– 65. doi : 10.1093/mutage/13.6.557 . PMID 9862186 . ^ a b c Tagen M, Mantuani D, van Heerden L, Holstein A, Klumpers LE, Knowles R (September 2023). "The risk of chronic psychedelic and MDMA microdosing for valvular heart disease". J Psychopharmacol . 37 (9): 876– 890. doi : 10.1177/02698811231190865 . PMID 37572027 . ^ a b Rouaud A, Calder AE, Hasler G (March 2024). "Microdosing psychedelics and the risk of cardiac fibrosis and valvulopathy: Comparison to known cardiotoxins" . J Psychopharmacol . 38 (3): 217– 224. doi : 10.1177/02698811231225609 . PMC 10944580 . PMID 38214279 . ^ a b Nahlawi A, Ptaszek LM, Ruskin JN (February 2025). "Cardiovascular effects and safety of classic psychedelics". Nat Cardiovasc Res . 4 (2): 131– 144. doi : 10.1038/s44161-025-00608-2 . PMID 39910289 . ^ a b c Wsół A (December 2023). "Cardiovascular safety of psychedelic medicine: current status and future directions" . Pharmacol Rep . 75 (6): 1362– 1380. doi : 10.1007/s43440-023-00539-4 . PMC 10661823 . PMID 37874530 . ^ McIntyre RS (2023). "Serotonin 5-HT2B receptor agonism and valvular heart disease: implications for the development of psilocybin and related agents". Expert Opin Drug Saf . 22 (10): 881– 883. doi : 10.1080/14740338.2023.2248883 . PMID 37581427 . ^ Effinger D, King J, Calderon J, Strong J, Thompson S (December 2024). "ACNP 63rd Annual Meeting: Poster Abstracts P609-P914: P680. Assessing the Potential Cardiovascular Risk of Microdosing Lysergic Acid Diethylamide in Mice" . Neuropsychopharmacology . 49 (Suppl 1): 418–594 (459–459). doi : 10.1038/s41386-024-02013-y . PMID 39643635 . ^ Luethi D, Liechti ME (2021). "Drugs of Abuse Affecting 5-HT2B Receptors". 5-HT2B Receptors .

The Receptors. Vol. 35. Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp. 277– 289. doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-55920-5_16 . ISBN 978-3-030-55919-9 . ^ a b c d Vogt SB, Liechti ME (2025). "Clinical Pharmacology" .

In Nutt DJ, Thurgur H (eds.). Psychedelics in Psychiatry . International Review of Neurobiology. Vol. 181. London: Academic Press. pp. 99– 148. doi : 10.1016/bs.irn.2025.02.003 . ISBN 978-0-443-34386-5 . PMID 40541320 . ^ a b c Rached G, Campana A, Fiani D, Nguyen C, Van den Eynde V, Gillman PK, et al. (January 2026). "Safety and Efficacy of Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors in Patients Who Use Psychoactive Substances: Potential Drug Interactions and Substance Use Disorder Treatment Data". CNS Drugs . 40 (3): 359– 417. doi : 10.1007/s40263-025-01256-7 . PMID 41546846 . ^ Becker AM, Humbert-Droz M, Mueller L, Jelušić A, Tolev A, Straumann I, et al. (February 2025). "Acute Effects and Pharmacokinetics of LSD after Paroxetine or Placebo Pre-Administration in a Randomized, Double-Blind, Cross-Over Phase I Trial" . Clin Pharmacol Ther . 117 (6): 1784– 1792. doi : 10.1002/cpt.3618 . PMC 12087691 . PMID 40022427 . ^ Vizeli P, Straumann I, Holze F, Schmid Y, Dolder PC, Liechti ME (May 2021). "Genetic influence of CYP2D6 on pharmacokinetics and acute subjective effects of LSD in a pooled analysis" . Sci Rep . 11 (1) 10851. Bibcode : 2021NatSR..1110851V . doi : 10.1038/s41598-021-90343-y . PMC 8149637 . PMID 34035391 . ^ Simonsson O, Goldberg SB, Chambers R, Osika W, Long DM, Hendricks PS (October 1, 2022). "Prevalence and associations of classic psychedelic-related seizures in a population-based sample" . Drug and Alcohol Dependence . 239 109586. doi : 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2022.109586 . PMC 9627432 . PMID 35981469 . ^ Fisher D, Ungerleider J (1967). "Grand mal seizures following ingestion of LSD" . Western Journal of Medicine . 106 (3): 201– 211. PMC 1502729 . PMID 4962683 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Thomas K (2024). "Toxicology and Pharmacological Interactions of Classic Psychedelics" . Psychedelic Harm Reduction . Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences. Vol. 77. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 43– 62. doi : 10.1007/7854_2024_508 . ISBN 978-3-032-21106-4 . PMID 39042251 . Retrieved May 14, 2025 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j Nichols DE, Grob CS (March 2018). "Is LSD toxic?". Forensic Sci Int . 284 : 141– 145. doi : 10.1016/j.forsciint.2018.01.006 . PMID 29408722 . ^ a b c d e f g h i Henríquez-Hernández LA, Rojas-Hernández J, Quintana-Hernández DJ, Borkel LF (February 2023). "Hofmann vs. Paracelsus: Do Psychedelics Defy the Basics of Toxicology?-A Systematic Review of the Main Ergolamines, Simple Tryptamines, and Phenylethylamines" . Toxics . 11 (2): 148. Bibcode : 2023Toxic..11..148H . doi : 10.3390/toxics11020148 . PMC 9963058 . PMID 36851023 . ^ Klock JC, Boerner U, Becker CE (March 1974). "Coma, hyperthermia and bleeding associated with massive LSD overdose. A report of eight cases" . West J Med . 120 (3): 183– 188. PMC 1129381 . PMID 4816396 . ^ a b c Klock JC, Boerner U, Becker CE (1975). "Coma, hyperthermia, and bleeding associated with massive LSD overdose, a report of eight cases". Clin Toxicol . 8 (2): 191– 203. doi : 10.3109/15563657508988063 . PMID 1149410 . ^ Goldstein RA, DesLauriers C, Burda A, Johnson-Arbor K (February 2009). "Cocaine: history, social implications, and toxicity: a review". Semin Diagn Pathol . 26 (1): 10– 17. doi : 10.1053/j.semdp.2008.12.001 . PMID 19292024 .

When "snorted," a typical "line" of cocaine contains approximately 50-100 mg of parent compound, although it is often "cut" or adulterated with other substances.20 ^ Haden M, Woods B (January 2020). "LSD Overdoses: Three Case Reports". J Stud Alcohol Drugs . 81 (1): 115– 118. doi : 10.15288/jsad.2020.81.115 . PMID 32048609 . ^ a b Shulgin AT (1976). "Psychotomimetic Agents".

In Gordon M (ed.). Psychopharmacological Agents: Use, Misuse and Abuse . Medicinal Chemistry: A Series of Monographs. Vol. 4. Academic Press. pp. 59– 146. doi : 10.1016/b978-0-12-290559-9.50011-9 . ISBN 978-0-12-290559-9 .

In Dargan P, Wood D (eds.). Novel Psychoactive Substances: Classification, Pharmacology and Toxicology (2nd ed.). Academic Press. pp. 279– 300. doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-818788-3.00008-5 . ISBN 978-0-12-818788-3 . S2CID 240583877 . ^ Ivory ST, Rotella J, Schumann J, Greene SL (March 28, 2022). "A cluster of 25B-NBOH poisonings following exposure to powder sold as lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)". Clinical Toxicology . 60 (8): 966– 969. doi : 10.1080/15563650.2022.2053150 . PMID 35343858 . S2CID 247764056 . ^ Díaz Moreno M, Alarcón Ayala N, Estrada Y, Morris V, Quintero J (November 2022). "Échele Cabeza as a harm reduction project and activist movement in Colombia" . Drugs, Habits and Social Policy . 23 (3): 263– 276. doi : 10.1108/DHS-07-2022-0026 . ISSN 2752-6739 . ^ Clancy L, Philp M, Shimmon R, Fu S (May 2021). "Development and validation of a color spot test method for the presumptive detection of 25-NBOMe compounds". Drug Testing and Analysis . 13 (5): 929– 943. doi : 10.1002/dta.2905 . PMID 32744773 . ^ "PDSP Database" . UNC (in Zulu) . Retrieved December 11, 2024 . ^ Liu T. "BindingDB BDBM21342 (4R,7R)-N,N-diethyl-6-methyl-6,11-diazatetracyclohexadeca-1(16),2,9,12,14-pentaene-4-carboxamide::CHEMBL263881::LSD::LSD 25::LSD,(+)::LSD,l-::Lysergic Acid Diethylamide::Lysergic Acid Diethylamide Tartrate::US20240166618, Compound LSD::-LSD::d-Isolysergic acid amide" . BindingDB . Retrieved December 11, 2024 . ^ Ray TS (February 2010). "Psychedelics and the human receptorome" . PLOS ONE . 5 (2) e9019. Bibcode : 2010PLoSO...5.9019R . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0009019 . PMC 2814854 . PMID 20126400 . ^ Rickli A, Luethi D, Reinisch J, Buchy D, Hoener MC, Liechti ME (December 2015). "Receptor interaction profiles of novel N-2-methoxybenzyl (NBOMe) derivatives of 2,5-dimethoxy-substituted phenethylamines (2C drugs)" (PDF) . Neuropharmacology . 99 : 546– 553. doi : 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.08.034 . PMID 26318099 . ^ Rickli A, Moning OD, Hoener MC, Liechti ME (August 2016). "Receptor interaction profiles of novel psychoactive tryptamines compared with classic hallucinogens" (PDF) . Eur Neuropsychopharmacol . 26 (8): 1327– 1337. doi : 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2016.05.001 . PMID 27216487 . ^ Luethi D, Trachsel D, Hoener MC, Liechti ME (May 2018). "Monoamine receptor interaction profiles of 4-thio-substituted phenethylamines (2C-T drugs)" (PDF) . Neuropharmacology . 134 (Pt A): 141– 148. doi : 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2017.07.012 . PMID 28720478 . ^ Eshleman AJ, Forster MJ, Wolfrum KM, Johnson RA, Janowsky A, Gatch MB (March 2014). "Behavioral and neurochemical pharmacology of six psychoactive substituted phenethylamines: mouse locomotion, rat drug discrimination and in vitro receptor and transporter binding and function" . Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 231 (5): 875– 888. doi : 10.1007/s00213-013-3303-6 . PMC 3945162 . PMID 24142203 . ^ Janowsky A, Eshleman AJ, Johnson RA, Wolfrum KM, Hinrichs DJ, Yang J, et al. (July 2014). "Mefloquine and psychotomimetics share neurotransmitter receptor and transporter interactions in vitro" . Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 231 (14): 2771– 2783. doi : 10.1007/s00213-014-3446-0 . PMC 4097020 . PMID 24488404 . ^ Egan C, Grinde E, Dupre A, Roth BL, Hake M, Teitler M, et al. (February 2000). "Agonist high and low affinity state ratios predict drug intrinsic activity and a revised ternary complex mechanism at serotonin 5-HT(2A) and 5-HT(2C) receptors". Synapse . 35 (2): 144– 150. doi : 10.1002/(SICI)1098-2396(200002)35:2<144::AID-SYN7>3.0.CO;2-K . PMID 10611640 . ^ Wacker D, Wang S, McCorvy JD, Betz RM, Venkatakrishnan AJ, Levit A, et al. (January 2017). "Crystal Structure of an LSD-Bound Human Serotonin Receptor" . Cell . 168 (3): 377–389.e12. doi : 10.1016/j.cell.2016.12.033 . PMC 5289311 . PMID 28129538 . ^ McCorvy JD (January 16, 2013). Mapping the binding site of the 5-HT2A receptor using mutagenesis and ligand libraries: Insights into the molecular actions of psychedelics (Ph.D. thesis). Purdue University. Archived from the original on March 25, 2025 – via Purdue e-Pubs. Table 5.2 Binding affinities using 3 H-LSD at 5-HT2A EL2 mutants Table B.1 Binding affinities for 5-HT2A, 5-HT2C, 5-HT1A receptors using 3 H-LSD Alt URL ^ Porter RH, Benwell KR, Lamb H, Malcolm CS, Allen NH, Revell DF, et al. (September 1999). "Functional characterization of agonists at recombinant human 5-HT2A, 5-HT2B and 5-HT2C receptors in CHO-K1 cells" . Br J Pharmacol . 128 (1): 13– 20. doi : 10.1038/sj.bjp.0702751 . PMC 1571597 . PMID 10498829 . ^ Gainetdinov RR, Hoener MC, Berry MD (July 2018). "Trace Amines and Their Receptors" . Pharmacol Rev . 70 (3): 549– 620. doi : 10.1124/pr.117.015305 . PMID 29941461 . ^ Simmler LD, Buchy D, Chaboz S, Hoener MC, Liechti ME (April 2016). "In Vitro Characterization of Psychoactive Substances at Rat, Mouse, and Human Trace Amine-Associated Receptor 1" (PDF) . J Pharmacol Exp Ther . 357 (1): 134– 144. doi : 10.1124/jpet.115.229765 . PMID 26791601 . Archived from the original (PDF) on May 9, 2025. ^ Halberstadt AL, Geyer MA (September 2011). "Multiple receptors contribute to the behavioral effects of indoleamine hallucinogens" . Neuropharmacology . 61 (3): 364– 381. doi : 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.01.017 . PMC 3110631 . PMID 21256140 . ^ Marona-Lewicka D, Thisted RA, Nichols DE (July 2005). "Distinct temporal phases in the behavioral pharmacology of LSD: dopamine D2 receptor-mediated effects in the rat and implications for psychosis". Psychopharmacology . 180 (3): 427– 435. doi : 10.1007/s00213-005-2183-9 . PMID 15723230 . S2CID 23565306 . ^ a b Aghajanian GK, Bing OH (1964). "Persistence of lysergic acid diethylamide in the plasma of human subjects" (PDF) . Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics . 5 (5): 611– 614. doi : 10.1002/cpt196455611 . PMID 14209776 . S2CID 29438767 . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 27, 2009. ^ Nelson DL (February 2004). "5-HT5 receptors". Current Drug Targets. CNS and Neurological Disorders . 3 (1): 53– 58. doi : 10.2174/1568007043482606 . PMID 14965244 . ^ Moreno JL, Holloway T, Albizu L, Sealfon SC, González-Maeso J (April 2011). "Metabotropic glutamate mGlu2 receptor is necessary for the pharmacological and behavioral effects induced by hallucinogenic 5-HT2A receptor agonists" . Neuroscience Letters . 493 (3): 76– 79. doi : 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.01.046 . PMC 3064746 . PMID 21276828 . ^ Urban JD, Clarke WP, von Zastrow M, Nichols DE, Kobilka B, Weinstein H, et al. (January 2007). "Functional selectivity and classical concepts of quantitative pharmacology" .

The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics . 320 (1): 1– 13. doi : 10.1124/jpet.106.104463 . PMID 16803859 . S2CID 447937 . Archived from the original on June 11, 2023 . Retrieved June 11, 2023 . ^ Bonniwell EM, Alabdali R, Hennessey JJ, McKee JL, Cavalco NG, Lammers JC, et al. (October 2025). "Serotonin 5-HT2C Receptor Signaling Analysis Reveals Psychedelic Biased Agonism" . ACS Chem Neurosci . 16 (19): 3899– 3914. doi : 10.1021/acschemneuro.5c00647 . PMC 12629614 . PMID 40944639 . ^ Aghajanian GK, Marek GJ (August 1999). "Serotonin and hallucinogens" . Neuropsychopharmacology . 21 (2 Suppl): 16S– 23S. doi : 10.1016/S0893-133X(98)00135-3 . PMID 10432484 . ^ Svenningsson P, Nairn AC, Greengard P (October 2005). "DARPP-32 mediates the actions of multiple drugs of abuse" .

The AAPS Journal . 7 (2): E353-60. doi : 10.1208/aapsj070235 . PMC 2750972 . PMID 16353915 . ^ a b Borroto-Escuela DO, Romero-Fernandez W, Narvaez M, Oflijan J, Agnati LF, Fuxe K (January 2014). "Hallucinogenic 5-HT2AR agonists LSD and DOI enhance dopamine D2R protomer recognition and signaling of D2-5-HT2A heteroreceptor complexes". Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications . 443 (1): 278– 84. Bibcode : 2014BBRC..443..278B . doi : 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.11.104 . PMID 24309097 . ^ Green JP, Johnson CL, Weinstein H, Maayani S (December 1977). "Antagonism of histamine-activated adenylate cyclase in brain by D-lysergic acid diethylamide" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 74 (12): 5697– 701. Bibcode : 1977PNAS...74.5697G . doi : 10.1073/pnas.74.12.5697 . PMC 431860 . PMID 23536 . ^ a b Nichols DE, Frescas S, Marona-Lewicka D, Kurrasch-Orbaugh DM (September 2002). "Lysergamides of isomeric 2,4-dimethylazetidines map the binding orientation of the diethylamide moiety in the potent hallucinogenic agent N, N-diethyllysergamide (LSD)". Journal of Medicinal Chemistry . 45 (19): 4344– 9. doi : 10.1021/jm020153s . PMID 12213075 . ^ a b Chen Q, Tesmer JJ (January 2017). "A Receptor on Acid" . Cell . 168 (3): 339– 341. doi : 10.1016/j.cell.2017.01.012 . PMC 5520807 . PMID 28129534 . ^ a b c Roth BL, Gumpper RH (May 2023). "Psychedelics as Transformative Therapeutics" . Am J Psychiatry . 180 (5): 340– 347. doi : 10.1176/appi.ajp.20230172 . PMID 37122272 . We now have molecular-level details regarding how psychedelic drugs interact with and activate 5-HT2A receptors (39) (Figure 2B). Studies on a related serotonin receptor (5-HT2B) have clarified how LSD can stabilize distinct signaling complexes (40, 41). A key finding of these studies was the discovery that once LSD binds to the 5-HT2A receptor, a lid is formed over the binding pocket, which "traps" LSD for several hours (39, 40) (Figure 2B). These findings imply that at least part of the reason for the long duration of action of drugs like LSD is the trapping of the receptor via conformational changes that occur after drug binding. These studies also showed that this prolonged action of LSD is due in part to a specific residue within the binding pocket, which is found in humans but not in mice or rats (39). This residue (Ser242) also is essential for the high-affinity interactions of LSD, psilocybin, and perhaps other such drugs at the human and nonhuman primate 5-HT2A receptors. ^ a b Higgins GA, MacMillan C, de Lannoy I, Tyler C, Slassi M (August 2025). "Pharmacological characterisation of psilocybin and 5-MeO-DMT discriminative cues in the rat and their translational value for identifying novel psychedelics". J Psychopharmacol 2698811251361453. doi : 10.1177/02698811251361453 . PMID 40862395 . Based on the time-course data, LSD appeared to show the largest disconnect between plasma exposure and generalisation profile.

By 8 h post-dosing, plasma LSD levels were undetectable, yet drug lever generalisation levels were at 54%; even at 24 h post-dose, there was some residual (10%) drug lever responding. LSD is recognised to have a long residence time when bound to the 5-HT2A receptor, which, in the human receptor form, is due to a conformational change on binding that traps an LSD molecule within the binding pocket (Gumpper et al., 2025; Kim et al., 2020). A further feature of LSD is a time-dependent change in the pharmacology of its discriminative cue (Marona-Lewica et al., 2005; Marona-Lewica and Nichols, 2007). Thus, a long residence time bound to the 5-HT2A receptor and/or time-dependent changes in its discriminative cue may explain the PK/PD disconnect in rats. Dolder et al. (2015, 2017) have described a similar disconnection in humans where 100 and 200 µg doses of LSD had a plasma half-life of 2.6 h, yet the subjective effects lasted 8–12 h. ^ a b Wacker D, Wang S, McCorvy JD, Betz RM, Venkatakrishnan AJ, Levit A, et al. (January 2017). "Crystal Structure of an LSD-Bound Human Serotonin Receptor" . Cell . 168 (3): 377–389.e12. doi : 10.1016/j.cell.2016.12.033 . PMC 5289311 . PMID 28129538 . ^ Halberstadt AL, Chatha M, Klein AK, Wallach J, Brandt SD (May 2020). "Correlation between the potency of hallucinogens in the mouse head-twitch response assay and their behavioral and subjective effects in other species" (PDF) . Neuropharmacology . 167 107933. doi : 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2019.107933 . PMC 9191653 . PMID 31917152 . ^ a b c d Gumpper RH, Nichols DE (October 2024). "Chemistry/structural biology of psychedelic drugs and their receptor(s)". Br J Pharmacol bph.17361. doi : 10.1111/bph.17361 . PMID 39354889 . ^ a b Calder AE, Hasler G (January 2023). "Towards an understanding of psychedelic-induced neuroplasticity" . Neuropsychopharmacology . 48 (1): 104– 112. doi : 10.1038/s41386-022-01389-z . PMC 9700802 . PMID 36123427 . ^ Hatzipantelis CJ, Olson DE (February 2024). "The Effects of Psychedelics on Neuronal Physiology" . Annu Rev Physiol . 86 : 27– 47. doi : 10.1146/annurev-physiol-042022-020923 . PMC 10922499 . PMID 37931171 . ^ Moliner R, Girych M, Brunello CA, Kovaleva V, Biojone C, Enkavi G, et al. (June 2023). "Psychedelics promote plasticity by directly binding to BDNF receptor TrkB" . Nat Neurosci . 26 (6): 1032– 1041. doi : 10.1038/s41593-023-01316-5 . PMC 10244169 . PMID 37280397 . ^ Jain MK, Gumpper RH, Slocum ST, Schmitz GP, Madsen JS, Tummino TA, et al. (July 2025). "The polypharmacology of psychedelics reveals multiple targets for potential therapeutics" (PDF) . Neuron . 113 (19): 3129–3142.e9. doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2025.06.012 . PMID 40683247 . Recent studies have suggested that psychedelics such as LSD directly interact with TrkB with high affinity, promoting BDNF-mediated neuroplasticity and antidepressant-like effects via allosteric potentiation of BDNF signaling in active synapses.8 To investigate this, we screened LSD across 450 human kinases, including TrkB, but found no significant interactions between LSD and any tested human kinases. Further experiments in transfected cells revealed no effect of LSD or psilocin on BDNF-mediated activation of a TrkB reporter. We note that similar negative preliminary results, which have not yet been published in a peer-reviewed journal, were recently reported by Boltaev et al.63 ^ a b c Matthias Liechti (2016), "Pharmacology of novel psychoactive substances, MDMA, and LSD" (PDF) , Department of Biomedicine. Report 2014–2016 , pp. 52– 53, LSD produced subjective drug effects that lasted up to 12 h (Fig. 3a) and correlated well with the concentrations of LSD in the blood plasma over time (Fig. 3b and c).

The half-life of LSD in plasma was 3.5 h.

In contrast to LSD, the half-life of MDMA is longer (8 h), but the effects of MDMA last only up to 6 h despite the continued presence of the substance in the body (Fig. 3d). Thus, there is marked acute tolerance to the effects of MDMA. Fig. 3: Pharmacokinetics-Pharmacodynamics of LSD. LSD effects last up to 12 h (a), corresponding to its plasma-concentration time curve (b) and exhibiting no hysteresis in the LSD concentration-effect plot (c).

In contrast, the MDMA concentration-effect plot shows pronounced hysteresis consistent with acute tolerance (d). ^ Gumpper RH, Jain MK, Kim K, Sun R, Sun N, Xu Z, et al. (March 2025). "The structural diversity of psychedelic drug actions revealed" . Nature Communications . 16 (1) 2734. Bibcode : 2025NatCo..16.2734G . doi : 10.1038/s41467-025-57956-7 . PMC 11923220 . PMID 40108183 . ^ Gumpper RH, DiBerto J, Jain M, Kim K, Fay J, Roth BL (September 2022). Structures of Hallucinogenic and Non-Hallucinogenic Analogues of the 5-HT2A Receptor Reveals Molecular Insights into Signaling Bias (PDF) . University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Department of Pharmacology Research Retreat September 16th, 2022 – William and Ida Friday Center. ^ a b Carhart-Harris RL, Muthukumaraswamy S, Roseman L, Kaelen M, Droog W, Murphy K, et al. (April 11, 2016). "Neural correlates of the LSD experience revealed by multimodal neuroimaging" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 113 (17): 4853– 4858. Bibcode : 2016PNAS..113.4853C . doi : 10.1073/pnas.1518377113 . PMC 4855588 . PMID 27071089 . ^ Singleton SP, Luppi AI, Carhart-Harris RL, Cruzat J, Roseman L, Nutt DJ, et al. (October 2022). "Receptor-informed network control theory links LSD and psilocybin to a flattening of the brain's control energy landscape" . Nat Commun . 13 (1) 5812. Bibcode : 2022NatCo..13.5812S . doi : 10.1038/s41467-022-33578-1 . PMC 9530221 . PMID 36192411 . ^ Delli Pizzi S, Chiacchiaretta P, Sestieri C, Ferretti A, Onofrj M, Della Penna S, et al. (July 2023). "Spatial Correspondence of LSD-Induced Variations on Brain Functioning at Rest With Serotonin Receptor Expression". Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging . 8 (7): 768– 776. doi : 10.1016/j.bpsc.2023.03.009 . PMID 37003409 . S2CID 257862535 . ^ a b Delli Pizzi S, Chiacchiaretta P, Sestieri C, Ferretti A, Tullo MG, Della Penna S, et al. (December 2023). "LSD-induced changes in the functional connectivity of distinct thalamic nuclei" . NeuroImage . 283 120414. doi : 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2023.120414 . PMID 37858906 . ^ Nichols DE, Nichols CD (2021). "The Pharmacology of Psychedelics" .

In Grob CS, Grigsby J (eds.). Handbook of Medical Hallucinogens . Guilford Publications. pp. 3– 28. ISBN 978-1-4625-4544-5 . Retrieved January 17, 2025 . ^ Virmani A, Ali SF, Binienda ZK (June 2010). "Neuroprotective strategies in drug abuse-evoked encephalopathy". Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences . 1199 (1): 52– 68. Bibcode : 2010NYASA1199...52V . doi : 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05171.x . PMID 20633109 . LSD has been reported to potentiate the neurotoxic action of MDMA in animal experiments.85 In these experiments, the MDMA-induced neurotoxicity was dose dependently increased by LSD and attenuated by 5-HT2A/2C receptor antagonist MDL 11,939. ^ Hirschfeld T, Smit-Rigter L, van der Gouwe D, Reiche S, Stöver H, Majić T (2021). "Safer Tripping: Serotonergic Psychedelics and Drug Checking. Submission and Detection Rates, Potential Harms, and Challenges for Drug Analysis" . Current Addiction Reports . 8 (3): 389– 398. doi : 10.1007/s40429-021-00385-5 . ISSN 2196-2952 . Retrieved January 6, 2026 . Also, the concomitant use of other substance classes, either intentionally or unintentionally due to adulterations, could be a health risk since LSD has been shown to potentiate the neurotoxic effect of MDMA in animals . ^ Armstrong BD, Paik E, Chhith S, Lelievre V, Waschek JA, Howard SG (2004). "Potentiation of (DL)-3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)-induced toxicity by the serotonin 2A receptior partial agonist d-lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), and the protection of same by the serotonin 2A/2C receptor antagonist MDL 11,939". Neuroscience Research Communications . 35 (2): 83– 95. doi : 10.1002/nrc.20023 . ^ a b c Snyder SH, Reivich M (March 1966). "Regional localization of lysergic acid diethylamide in monkey brain" . Nature . 209 (5028): 1093– 1095. Bibcode : 1966Natur.209.1093S . doi : 10.1038/2091093a0 . PMID 4958949 . ^ Herian M (2022). "Pharmacological Action of LSD: LSD Effect on the Neurotransmission and Animal Behavior" . Handbook of Substance Misuse and Addictions . Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp. 2457– 2475. doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-92392-1_131 . ISBN 978-3-030-92391-4 . Retrieved June 7, 2025 . ^ Carhart-Harris RL, Muthukumaraswamy S, Roseman L, Kaelen M, Droog W, Murphy K, et al. (April 2016). "Neural correlates of the LSD experience revealed by multimodal neuroimaging" (PDF) . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 113 (17): 4853– 8. Bibcode : 2016PNAS..113.4853C . doi : 10.1073/pnas.1518377113 . PMC 4855588 . PMID 27071089 . ^ Libânio Osório Marta RF (August 2019). "Metabolism of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD): an update". Drug Metab Rev . 51 (3): 378– 387. doi : 10.1080/03602532.2019.1638931 . PMID 31266388 . ^ a b c Meyer MR, Maurer HH (February 2011). "Absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion pharmacogenomics of drugs of abuse". Pharmacogenomics . 12 (2): 215– 233. doi : 10.2217/pgs.10.171 . PMID 21332315 . It is rapidly metabolized to the following five metabolites which have been identified in urine or blood from human users: N-demethyl-LSD (nor-LSD), 2-oxoLSD, 2-oxo-3-hydroxy-LSD, 13-hydroxyLSD and 14-hydroxy-LSD .

The 13- and 14-hydroxy metabolites are additionally excreted as glucuronides . 2-oxo-3-hydroxy-LSD was shown to be the main human urinary metabolite with concentrations four- to 40-times higher than that of LSD .

As concluded by Yu in his review on indolalkylamines, almost nothing is known regarding the contribution of specific drug-metabolizing enzymes to the production of individual LSD metabolites in humans. ^ a b c Maurer HH, Meyer MR (April 18, 2012). "Drugs of Abuse (Including Designer Drugs)". Metabolism of Drugs and Other Xenobiotics . Wiley. pp. 429– 463. doi : 10.1002/9783527630905.ch16 . ISBN 978-3-527-32903-8 . Retrieved June 7, 2025 . is metabolized to the following five metabolites: N-demethyl-LSD (nor-LSD), 2-oxo-LSD, 2-oxo-3-hydroxy-LSD, 13-hydroxy-LSD, and 14-hydroxy-LSD .

The 13- and 14-hydroxy metabolites are additionally excreted as glucuronides . 2-Oxo-3-hydroxy-LSD was shown to be the main human urinary metabolite with concentrations 4–40 times higher than that of LSD .

In incubations of LSD with human liver microsomes and hepatocytes, 2,3-dihydroxy-LSD could be identified . So far, the contribution and importance of specific enzymes in the formation of the LSD main metabolites, such as 2-oxo-3-hydroxy-LSD, remain unclear. ^ Luethi D, Hoener MC, Krähenbühl S, Liechti ME, Duthaler U (June 2019). "Cytochrome P450 enzymes contribute to the metabolism of LSD to nor-LSD and 2-oxo-3-hydroxy-LSD: Implications for clinical LSD use". Biochem Pharmacol . 164 : 129– 138. doi : 10.1016/j.bcp.2019.04.013 . PMID 30981875 . ^ Papac DI, Foltz RL (May–June 1990). "Measurement of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) in human plasma by gas chromatography/negative ion chemical ionization mass spectrometry" (PDF) . Journal of Analytical Toxicology . 14 (3): 189– 190. doi : 10.1093/jat/14.3.189 . PMID 2374410 . Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. ^ "LSD" (PDF) . Handbook of Medical Hallucinogens . Guilford Publications. 2021. p. 160. ISBN 978-1-4625-4545-2 . Archived (PDF) from the original on March 14, 2024 . Retrieved March 14, 2024 . ^ Monte AP, Marona-Lewicka D, Kanthasamy A, Sanders-Bush E, Nichols DE (March 1995). "Stereoselective LSD-like activity in a series of d-lysergic acid amides of (R)- and (S)-2-aminoalkanes". Journal of Medicinal Chemistry . 38 (6): 958– 66. doi : 10.1021/jm00006a015 . PMID 7699712 . ^ Kornfeld EC, Fornefeld EJ, Kline GB, Mann MJ, Morrison DE, Jones RG, et al. (1956). "The Total Synthesis of Lysergic Acid". Journal of the American Chemical Society . 78 (13): 3087– 3114. Bibcode : 1956JAChS..78.3087K . doi : 10.1021/ja01594a039 . ^ Inuki S, Oishi S, Fujii N, Ohno H (November 2008). "Total synthesis of (+/-)-lysergic acid, lysergol, and isolysergol by palladium-catalyzed domino cyclization of amino allenes bearing a bromoindolyl group" . Organic Letters . 10 (22): 5239– 42. doi : 10.1021/ol8022648 . PMID 18956869 . ^ National University of Singapore, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine (February 10, 2022). "Harvesting baker's yeast for aging-related therapeutics" . ScienceDaily . Archived from the original on November 27, 2022 . Retrieved May 4, 2023 . Journal Reference: Wong G, Lim LR, Tan YQ, Go MK, Bell DJ, Freemont PS, et al. (February 2022). "Reconstituting the complete biosynthesis of D-lysergic acid in yeast" . Nature Communications . 13 (1) 712. Bibcode : 2022NatCo..13..712W . doi : 10.1038/s41467-022-28386-6 . PMC 8821704 . PMID 35132076 . ^ Li Z, McNally AJ, Wang H, Salamone SJ (October 1998). "Stability study of LSD under various storage conditions" . Journal of Analytical Toxicology . 22 (6): 520– 5. doi : 10.1093/jat/22.6.520 . PMID 9788528 . ^ "Lysergide (LSD) drug profile" . European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA) . Archived from the original on February 2, 2023 . Retrieved May 15, 2023 . ^ a b Appel JB, Whitehead WE, Freedman DX (July 1968). "Motivation and the behavioral effects of LSD" . Psychonomic Science . 12 (7): 305– 306. doi : 10.3758/BF03331322 . ISSN 0033-3131 . S2CID 144527673 . ^ R. Baselt, Disposition of Toxic Drugs and Chemicals in Man , 12th edition, Biomedical Publications, Foster City, CA, 2020, pp. 1197–1199. ^ Dolder PC, Schmid Y, Steuer AE, Kraemer T, Rentsch KM, Hammann F, et al. (October 2017). "Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics of Lysergic Acid Diethylamide in Healthy Subjects" . Clinical Pharmacokinetics . 56 (10): 1219– 1230. doi : 10.1007/s40262-017-0513-9 . PMC 5591798 . PMID 28197931 . ^ a b Jiaming Z, Xin W, Jiali Z, Hang R, Yunli Z, Ping X (March 2023). "Concentrations of LSD, 2-oxo-3-hydroxy-LSD, and iso-LSD in hair segments of 18 drug abusers". Forensic Science International . 344 111578. doi : 10.1016/j.forsciint.2023.111578 . PMID 36753839 . S2CID 256574276 . ^ a b c Shulgin AT (2003). "Basic Pharmacology and Effects" .

In Laing RR (ed.). Hallucinogens: A Forensic Drug Handbook . Forensic Drug Handbook Series. Elsevier Science. pp. 67– 137. ISBN 978-0-12-433951-4 . Retrieved February 1, 2025 . ^ a b Jacob P, Shulgin AT (1994). "Structure-activity relationships of the classic hallucinogens and their analogs" (PDF) . NIDA Res Monogr . 146 : 74– 91. PMID 8742795 . Archived from the original (PDF) on August 5, 2023. ^ a b Shulgin AT (1982). "Chemistry of Psychotomimetics" .

In Hoffmeister F, Stille G (eds.). Psychotropic Agents, Part III: Alcohol and Psychotomimetics, Psychotropic Effects of Central Acting Drugs . Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology. Vol. 55 / 3. Berlin: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 3– 29. doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-67770-0_1 . ISBN 978-3-642-67772-4 . OCLC 8130916 . ^ a b Alexander T. Shulgin (1980). "Hallucinogens" .

In Burger A, Wolf ME (eds.). Burger's Medicinal Chemistry . Vol. 3 (4 ed.). New York: Wiley. pp. 1109– 1137. ISBN 978-0-471-01572-7 . OCLC 219960627 . ^ Mangner TJ (1978). Potential Psychotomimetic Antagonists. N,n -diethyl-1-methyl-3-aryl-1, 2, 5, 6-tetrahydropyridine-5-carboxamides (Ph.D. thesis). University of Michigan. doi : 10.7302/11268 . Archived from the original on March 30, 2025. ^ Rutschmann J, Stadler PA (1978). "Chemical Background".

In Berde B, Schild HO (eds.). Ergot Alkaloids and Related Compounds . Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology (HEP). Vol. 49. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 29– 85. doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-66775-6_2 . ISBN 978-3-642-66777-0 . ^ Fanchamps A (1978). "Some Compounds With Hallucinogenic Activity" .

In 1938 the Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann produced lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)—the first, and most prominent, of these chemically synthesized agents—in the course of a systematic investigation of partially synthetic amides of lysergic acid in the Sandoz Pharmaceutical Laboratories in Basel (Hofmann 1970). LSD by accident in 1943, Hofmann discovered its psychoactivity. He then experimented with it on himself and found that it produced a peculiar restlessness, extreme activity of the imagination, and an uninterrupted stream of images. Hofmann did not publish the results of his experiment, though he became quite famous later. Hofmann and Arthur Stoll, the head of the Sandoz pharmaceutical laboratory in Basle, published the first paper on the synthesis of LSD in 1943, while Stoll went on to publish the first paper on the effects of lysergic diethylamide acid in 1947. Stoll, Arthur and Hofmann, Albert. 1943. Partialsynthese von Alkaloiden vom Typus des Ergobasins. Helv. Chim. Acta 26:944. Stoll, Arthur. 1947. Lysergsäure-diäthylamid, ein Phantastikum aus der Mutterkorngruppe. Schweiz. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat. 60:279. ^ Michael Horowitz (July 1976). "Interview: Albert Hofmann" . High Times . No. 11. pp. 24– 28, 31, 81. Archived from the original on May 5, 2025. High Times: Why was it four years from your discovery of the psychic effects of LSD until your report was published? Hofmann: After confirmation of the action of this extraordinary compound by volunteers of the Sandoz staff, Professor Arthur Stoll, who was then head of the Sandoz pharmaceutical department, asked me if I would permit his son, Werner A. Stoll—who was starting his career at the psychiatric hospital of the University of Zurich—to submit this new agent to a fundamental psychiatric study on normal volunteers and on psychiatric patients. This investigation took a rather long time, This excellent and comprehensive study was not published until 1947. ^ Stoll A, Hofmann A (May 3, 1943). "Partialsynthese von Alkaloiden vom Typus des Ergobasins. (6. Mitteilung über Mutterkornalkaloide)" . Helvetica Chimica Acta . 26 (3): 944– 965. Bibcode : 1943HChAc..26..944S . doi : 10.1002/hlca.19430260326 . ISSN 0018-019X . ^ Stoll WA (1947). "11. Lysergsäure-diäthylamid, ein Phantastikum aus der Mutterkorngruppe" . Schweizer Archiv für Neurologie und Psychiatrie . 60 : 279– 323. ISSN 0258-7661 . Archived from the original on April 1, 2025. ^ Stoll W (1949). "Ein neues, in sehr kleinen Mengen wirksames Phantastikum" . Schweizer Archiv für Neurologie und Psychiatrie . 64 : 483– 484. ISSN 0258-7661 . Archived from the original on April 1, 2025. ^ a b c "LSD: The Drug" . LSD in the United States (Report). U.S. Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration. October 1995. Archived from the original on April 27, 1999 . Retrieved November 27, 2010 . ^ a b c Hofmann A (2009). LSD, my problem child: reflections on sacred drugs, mysticism, and science (4th ed.). Santa Cruz, CA: Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies. ISBN 978-0-9798622-2-9 . OCLC 610059315 . ^ a b c d e Lee MA, Shlain B (1992). Acid dreams: the complete social history of LSD: the CIA, the Sixties, and beyond . New York: Grove Weidenfeld. ISBN 0-8021-3062-3 . OCLC 25281992 . ^ Freedman AM, Ebin EV, Wilson EA (March 1962). "Autistic schizophrenic children. An experiment in the use of d-lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD-25)". Archives of General Psychiatry . 6 (3): 203– 213. doi : 10.1001/archpsyc.1962.01710210019003 . PMID 13894863 . ^ Simmons JQ, Leiken SJ, Lovaas OI, Schaeffer B, Perloff B (May 1966). "Modification of autistic behavior with LSD-25".

The American Journal of Psychiatry . 122 (11): 1201– 1211. doi : 10.1176/ajp.122.11.1201 . PMID 5325567 . ^ Sigafoos J, Green VA, Edrisinha C, Lancioni GE (2007). "Flashback to the 1960s: LSD in the treatment of autism" . Developmental Neurorehabilitation . 10 (1): 75– 81. doi : 10.1080/13638490601106277 . PMID 17608329 . ^ Abramson HA (December 1967). "The use of LSD (d-lysergic acid diethylamide) in the therapy of children (a brief review)".

The Journal of Asthma Research . 5 (2): 139– 143. doi : 10.3109/02770906709104325 . PMID 4865578 . ^ "Psychiatric Research with Hallucinogens" . www.druglibrary.org . Archived from the original on July 26, 2021 . Retrieved July 26, 2021 . ^ a b Krebs TS, Johansen PØ (July 2012). "Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) for alcoholism: meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials". Journal of Psychopharmacology . 26 (7): 994– 1002. doi : 10.1177/0269881112439253 . PMID 22406913 . S2CID 10677273 . ^ Marks J (1978).

The Search for the Manchurian Candidate: The CIA and Mind Control . U.S.A.: Times Books. p. 57. ISBN 07139-12790 . ^ "The CIA's Secret Quest For Mind Control: Torture, LSD And A 'Poisoner In Chief' " . NPR.org . Archived from the original on June 28, 2021 . Retrieved October 6, 2019 . ^ Marks J (1978).

The Search for The Manchurian Candidate: The CIA and Mind Control . Times Books. p. 97. ^ "French bread spiked with LSD in CIA experiment" .

The Telegraph . March 11, 2010 . Retrieved April 1, 2025 . ^ "Pont-Saint-Esprit poisoning: Did the CIA spread LSD?" . BBC News . August 23, 2010 . Retrieved April 1, 2025 . ^ Brecher EM, et al. (Editors of Consumer Reports Magazine) (1972). "How LSD was popularized" . Druglibrary.org. Archived from the original on May 13, 2012 . Retrieved June 20, 2012 . ^ Applebaum A (January 26, 2010). "Did The Death Of Communism Take Koestler And Other Literary Figures With It?" .

The Huffington Post . Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. ^ " Out-Of-Sight! SMiLE Timeline" . Archived from the original on February 1, 2010 . Retrieved October 30, 2011 . ^ Veysey LR (1978).

The Communal Experience: Anarchist and Mystical Communities in Twentieth-Century America . Chicago IL: University of Chicago Press. p. 437. ISBN 0-226-85458-2 . ^ United States Congress (October 24, 1968). "Staggers-Dodd Bill, Public Law 90-639" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on May 9, 2010 . Retrieved September 8, 2009 . ^ Gasser P (1994). "Psycholytic Therapy with MDMA and LSD in Switzerland" . Archived from the original on October 11, 2009 . Retrieved September 8, 2009 . ^ Yockey RA, Vidourek RA, King KA (July 2020). "Trends in LSD use among US adults: 2015–2018". Drug and Alcohol Dependence . 212 108071. doi : 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2020.108071 . PMID 32450479 . S2CID 218893155 . ^ Feuer W (November 4, 2020). "Oregon becomes first state to legalize magic mushrooms as more states ease drug laws in 'psychedelic renaissance' " . CNBC . Archived from the original on November 4, 2020 . Retrieved November 7, 2020 . ^ DeRogatis J (2003). Turn On Your Mind: Four Decades of Great Psychedelic Rock . Milwaukie, Michigan: Hal Leonard. pp. 8– 9. ISBN 0-634-05548-8 . ^ Gilliland J (1969). "Show 41 – The Acid Test: Psychedelics and a sub-culture emerge in San Francisco. : UNT Digital Library" (audio) . Pop Chronicles . Digital.library.unt.edu. Archived from the original on November 9, 2011 . Retrieved May 6, 2011 . ^ Hicks M (2000). Sixties Rock: Garage, Psychedelic, and Other Satisfactions Music in American Life . Chicago, IL: University of Illinois Press. p. 60. ISBN 0-252-06915-3 . ^ Mann J (2009). Turn on and Tune in: Psychedelics, Narcotics and Euphoriants . Royal Society of Chemistry. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-84755-909-8 . ^ Taylor M (March 22, 1996). "OBITUARY — Ron Thelin" . SFGate . Archived from the original on August 28, 2021 . Retrieved May 13, 2020 . ^ Davis JC (January 2015). "The business of getting high: head shops, countercultural capitalism, and the marijuana legalization movement".

The Sixties . 8 (1): 27– 49. doi : 10.1080/17541328.2015.1058480 . hdl : 11603/7422 . S2CID 142795620 . ^ Conners P (2010). White Hand Society - The Psychedelic Partnership of Timothy Leary and Allen Ginsberg . City Lights Books. p. 148 . ISBN 978-0-87286-535-8 . ^ Schmid Y, Enzler F, Gasser P, Grouzmann E, Preller KH, Vollenweider FX, et al. (October 15, 2015). "Acute Effects of Lysergic Acid Diethylamide in Healthy Subjects" (PDF) . Biological Psychiatry . 78 (8): 544– 553. doi : 10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.11.015 . ISSN 0006-3223 . PMID 25575620 . S2CID 31659064 . ^ Stafford PG, Golightly BH. LSD — The Problem-Solving Psychedelic . ^ a b Jarnow J (2016). Heads: A Biography of Psychedelic America . Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-82255-1 . ^ Gilmore M (August 25, 2016). "Beatles' Acid Test: How LSD Opened the Door to 'Revolver' " . Rolling Stone . Archived from the original on December 3, 2020 . Retrieved December 9, 2021 . ^ Rubin R, Melnick JP (2007). Immigration and American Popular Culture: an Introduction . New York, NY: New York University Press. pp. 162– 4. ISBN 978-0-8147-7552-3 . ^ Prown P, Newquist HP, Eiche JF (1997). Legends of Rock Guitar: the Essential Reference of Rock's Greatest Guitarists . London: Hal Leonard Corporation, 1997. p. 48. ISBN 0-7935-4042-9 . ^ a b Sheff D (2000). All We Are Saying: The Last Major Interview with John Lennon and Yoko Ono . New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-25464-3 . ^ Thompson T (June 16, 1967). "The New Far-Out Beatles" . Life . Chicago: Time Inc. p. 101. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021 . Retrieved December 8, 2016 . ^ Haring K (2006). Keith Haring: Journey of the Radiant Baby . Bunker Hill Publishing. p. 25. ISBN 1-59373-052-7 . Archived from the original on October 2, 2023 . Retrieved December 5, 2023 . ^ Daisy Jones (June 5, 2017). "Why Certain Drugs Make Specific Genres Sound So Good" . Vice. Archived from the original on December 5, 2023 . Retrieved December 5, 2023 . ^ Kendall Deflin (June 22, 2017). "Phishin' With Matisyahu: How LSD "Turned My Entire World Inside Out" " . Archived from the original on September 30, 2023 . Retrieved December 5, 2023 . ^ "How LSD influenced Western culture" . www.bbc.com . October 17, 2018. Archived from the original on November 27, 2020 . Retrieved January 8, 2024 . ^ "Final act of the United Nations Conference" (PDF) . UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances . 1971. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 15, 2012. ^ "Poisons Standard" . Therapeutic Goods Administration . Australian Government Department of Health. July 2016. Archived from the original on March 2, 2017. ^ "Misuse of Drugs Act 1981" (PDF) . Government of Western Australia. November 18, 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 22, 2015. ^ Canadian government (1996). "Controlled Drugs and Substances Act" . Justice Laws . Canadian Department of Justice. Archived from the original on December 15, 2013 . Retrieved December 15, 2013 . ^ "Drugs and the law: Report of the inquiry into the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971" . Runciman Report . London: Police Foundation. 2000. Archived from the original on January 30, 2016. ^ "After the War on Drugs: Blueprint for Regulation" . Transform Drug Policy Foundation . 2009. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. ^ Orange Book: List of Controlled Substances and Regulated Chemicals (January 2026) (PDF) , United States : U.S. Department of Justice : Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA): Diversion Control Division, January 2026 ^ Neal v. United States , 516 U.S. 284 (1996), archived from the original., originating from U.S. v. Neal, 46 F.3d 1405 (7th Cir. 1995) ^ Jaeger K (June 29, 2021). "California Lawmakers Approve Bill To Legalize Psychedelics Possession In Committee" . Marijuana Moment . Archived from the original on July 9, 2021 . Retrieved July 8, 2021 . ^ "Ley de Narcomenudeo" . El Pensador (in Spanish). October 17, 2009. Archived from the original on November 30, 2010. ^ Explanatory Report to Act No. 112/1998 Coll., which amends the Act No. 140/1961 Coll., the Criminal Code, and the Act No. 200/1990 Coll., on misdemeanors (Report) (in Czech). Prague: Parliament of the Czech Republic. 1998. ^ Supreme Court of the Czech Republic (February 25, 2012), 6 Tdo 156/2010 ^ a b DEA (2007). "LSD Manufacture – Illegal LSD Production" . LSD in the United States . U.S. Department of Justice Drug Enforcement Administration. Archived from the original on August 29, 2007. ^ Maravelias P (December 18, 2024). "Willy Myco Just Released the First-Ever Video Demonstrating How to Synthesize LSD" . DoubleBlind Mag . Retrieved February 10, 2025 . ^ a b c Stafford P (1992). "Chapter 1 – The LSD Family". Psychedelics Encyclopaedia (3rd ed.). Ronin Publishing. p. 62. ISBN 978-0-914171-51-5 . ^ a b c Laing RR, Beyerstein BL, Siegel JA (2003). "Chapter 2.2 – Forms of the Drug" . Hallucinogens: A Forensic Drug Handbook . Academic Press. pp. 39– 41. ISBN 978-0-12-433951-4 . Archived from the original on February 2, 2021 . Retrieved May 12, 2020 . ^ "Street Terms: Drugs and the Drug Trade" . Office of National Drug Control Policy . April 5, 2005. Archived from the original on April 18, 2009 . Retrieved January 31, 2007 . ^ DEA (2008). "Photo Library (page 2)" . US Drug Enforcement Administration. Archived from the original on June 23, 2008 . Retrieved June 27, 2008 . ^ Sfetcu N (2014). Health & Drugs: Disease, Prescription & Medication . Nicolae Sfetcu. p. 1958. Archived from the original on July 14, 2023 . Retrieved July 14, 2023 . ^ MacLean JR, Macdonald DC, Ogden F, Wilby E (1967). "LSD-25 and mescaline as therapeutic adjuvants.".

The Use of LSD in Psychotherapy and Alcoholism . New York: Bobbs-Merrill. pp. 407– 426. ^ Ditman KS, Bailey JJ. "Evaluating LSD as a psychotherapeutic agent".

In Hoffer A (ed.). A program for the treatment of alcoholism: LSD, malvaria, and nicotinic acid . pp. 353– 402. ^ Schou N (2010). Orange Sunshine: The Brotherhood of Eternal Love and Its Quest to Spread Peace, Love, and Acid to the World . Thomas Dunne Books. ISBN 978-0-312-55183-4 . ^ United States Drug Enforcement Administration (October 2005). "LSD Blotter Acid Mimic Containing 4-Bromo-2,5-dimethoxy-amphetamine (DOB) Seized Near Burns, Oregon" (PDF) . Microgram Bulletin . 38 (10). Archived from the original (PDF) on October 18, 2012 . Retrieved August 20, 2009 . ^ United States Drug Enforcement Administration (November 2006). "Intelligence Alert – Blotter Acid Mimics (Containing 4-Bromo-2,5-Dimethoxy-Amphetamine (DOB)) in Concord, California" (PDF) . Microgram Bulletin . 39 (11): 136. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 18, 2012 . Retrieved August 20, 2009 . ^ United States Drug Enforcement Administration (March 2008). "Unusual "Rice Krispie Treat"-Like Balls Containing Psilocybe Mushroom Parts in Warren County, Missouri" (PDF) . Microgram Bulletin . 41 (3). Archived from the original (PDF) on October 17, 2012 . Retrieved August 20, 2009 . ^ Iversen L (May 29, 2013). "Temporary Class Drug Order Report on 5-6APB and NBOMe compounds" (PDF) . Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs . Gov.Uk. p. 14. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 21, 2013 . Retrieved June 16, 2013 . ^ United States Drug Enforcement Administration (March 2009). " "Spice" – Plant Material(s) Laced With Synthetic Cannabinoids or Cannabinoid Mimicking Compounds" . Microgram Bulletin . 42 (3). Archived from the original (PDF) on January 18, 2012 . Retrieved August 20, 2009 . ^ United States Drug Enforcement Administration (November 2005). "Bulk Marijuana in Hazardous Packaging in Chicago, Illinois" (PDF) . Microgram Bulletin . 38 (11). Archived from the original (PDF) on October 18, 2012 . Retrieved August 20, 2009 . ^ United States Drug Enforcement Administration (December 2007). "SMALL HEROIN DISKS NEAR GREENSBORO, GEORGIA" (PDF) . Microgram Bulletin . 40 (12). Archived from the original (PDF) on October 17, 2012 . Retrieved August 20, 2009 . ^ Erowid. "25I-NBOMe (2C-I-NBOMe) Fatalities / Deaths" . Erowid. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved February 28, 2016 . ^ Hastings D (May 6, 2013). "New drug N-bomb hits the street, terrifying parents, troubling cops" . New York Daily News . Archived from the original on May 10, 2013 . Retrieved May 7, 2013 . ^ Feehan C (January 21, 2016). "Powerful N-Bomb drug – responsible for spate of deaths internationally – responsible for hospitalisation of six in Cork" . Irish Independent . Archived from the original on April 12, 2019 . Retrieved January 22, 2016 . ^ Iversen L (May 29, 2013). "Temporary Class Drug Order Report on 5-6APB and NBOMe compounds" (PDF) . Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs . Gov.Uk. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 21, 2013 . Retrieved June 16, 2013 . ^ "Famous LSD users" .

The Good Drugs Guide. Archived from the original on October 7, 2008 . Retrieved October 20, 2008 . ^ "People on psychedelics" . Archived from the original on April 21, 2013 . Retrieved November 1, 2012 . ^ Mason D (Autumn 2015). "Review: Awe for Auden".

The Hudson Review, Inc.: 492– 500. ^ Auden WH (November 15, 1971). "W. H. Auden at Swathmore; An hour of questions and answers with Auden" . Exhibition notes from the W.H. Auden Collection . the Swarthmore College Library. Archived from the original on June 11, 2021 . Retrieved February 23, 2021 . ^ MacMonagle N (February 17, 2007). "A Master of Memorable speech" .

The Irish Times . ^ "The Impossible Reality of James Cameron" . Rolling Stone India . January 10, 2010 . Retrieved March 24, 2025 . ^ Meyer A (January 24, 2022). "Daniel Ellsberg Talks Psychedelics, Consciousness and World Peace" . Lucid News . Archived from the original on January 29, 2022 . Retrieved January 29, 2022 . ^ Feynman RP (1985). Leighton R (ed.). Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman!: Adventures of a Curious Character . W. W. Norton . ISBN 978-0-393-01921-6 . OCLC 10925248 . ^ Gleick J (1992). Genius: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman . Pantheon Books . ISBN 978-0-679-40836-9 . OCLC 243743850 . ^ Alderson J (April 20, 2010). "Q&A with Jerry Garcia: Portrait of an Artist as a Tripper" . Relix Magazine. Archived from the original on May 21, 2010 . Retrieved June 29, 2013 . ^ "The Bill Gates Interview" . Playboy . July 1994. Archived from the original on July 7, 2014. ^ Colman D (October 2011). "Aldous Huxley's LSD Death Trip" . Open Culture . Archived from the original on November 12, 2011 . Retrieved November 1, 2011 . ^ Bosker B (October 21, 2011). "The Steve Jobs Reading List: The Books And Artists That Made The Man" . Huffington Post . Archived from the original on October 22, 2011 . Retrieved October 23, 2011 . ^ "LSD, My Problem Child · Radiance from Ernst Junger" . www.psychedelic-library.org . Archived from the original on May 12, 2021 . Retrieved April 17, 2021 . ^ "Is 'Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds' Code for LSD?" . Snopes.com . February 15, 1998. Archived from the original on December 20, 2021 . Retrieved June 20, 2012 . ^ Matus V (June 2004). "The Truth Behind "LSD" " .

The Weekly Standard . Archived from the original on March 8, 2021 . Retrieved November 3, 2019 . ^ "When Michel Foucault Tripped on Acid in Death Valley and Called It "The Greatest Experience of My Life" " . Open Culture . September 1975. Archived from the original on March 15, 2021 . Retrieved April 27, 2019 . ^ Penner J (June 17, 2019). "Blowing The Philosopher's Fuses: Michel Foucault's LSD Trip in The Valley of Death" . Los Angeles Review of Books . Archived from the original on April 11, 2021 . Retrieved April 11, 2021 . Wade: "We fell silent to listen to Stockhausen's Songs of Youth . Zabriskie Point was filled with the sound of a kindergarten playground overlaid with electric tonalities. Kontakte followed. Glissandos bounced off the stars, which glowed like incandescent pinballs. Foucault turned to Michael and said, "This is the first time he really understood what Stockhausen had achieved". ^ Wade S (2019). Foucault in California: . Heyday Books. ISBN 978-1-59714-463-6 .

In a letter to Wade, dated 16 September 1978, Foucault authorised the book's publication and added: "How could I not love you?" ^ Harrison A (January 16, 2006). "LSD: The Geek's Wonder Drug?" . Wired . Archived from the original on May 5, 2008 . Retrieved March 11, 2008 . Like Herbert, many scientists and engineers also report heightened states of creativity while using LSD.

During a press conference on Friday, Hofmann revealed that he was told by Nobel-prize-winning chemist Kary Mullis that LSD had helped him develop the polymerase chain reaction that helps amplify specific DNA sequences. ^ Higgins C (April 14, 2018). " 'There is no such thing as past or future': physicist Carlo Rovelli on changing how we think about time" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on January 11, 2022 . Retrieved February 6, 2022 . ^ Sacks O (2012). Hallucinations . Vintage Books . p. 106. ISBN 978-0-307-94743-7 . Archived from the original on April 21, 2021 . Retrieved June 30, 2018 .

On the West Coast in the early 1960s LSD and morning glory seeds were readily available, so I sampled those, too. ^ Bose SD (December 27, 2021). "When Trey Parker and Matt Stone went to the Oscars on LSD Swapnil Dhruv Bose" . FarOutMagazine.co.uk . Archived from the original on January 20, 2022 . Retrieved January 20, 2022 . ^ Dyck E (1965). "Flashback: Psychiatric Experimentation with LSD in Historical Perspective". Canadian Journal of Psychiatry . 50 (7). ^ Cohen, S. (1959). "The therapeutic potential of LSD-25". A Pharmacologic Approach to the Study of the Mind , p. 251–258. ^ Chwelos N, Blewett DB, Smith CM, Hoffer A (1959). "Use of d-Lysergic Acid Diethylamide in the Treatment of Alcoholism" . Q. J. Stud. Alcohol . 20 (3): 577– 590. doi : 10.15288/qjsa.1959.20.577 . PMID 13810249 . Archived from the original on February 24, 2021 . Retrieved June 20, 2012 . Via "Abstract" . Hofmann.org . Archived from the original on February 3, 2012 . Retrieved February 22, 2012 . ^ Frood A (March 9, 2012). "LSD helps to treat alcoholism" . Nature News . doi : 10.1038/nature.2012.10200 . S2CID 137367650 . Archived from the original on March 8, 2021 . Retrieved December 25, 2020 . ^ a b c "LSD-Assisted Psychotherapy" . MAPS . Archived from the original on May 11, 2018 . Retrieved October 16, 2013 . ^ "The Albert Hofmann Foundation" . Hofmann Foundation . Archived from the original on July 19, 2019 . Retrieved September 27, 2007 . ^ Bogenschutz MP (March 2013). "Studying the effects of classic hallucinogens in the treatment of alcoholism: rationale, methodology, and current research with psilocybin". Current Drug Abuse Reviews . 6 (1): 17– 29. doi : 10.2174/15733998113099990002 . PMID 23627783 . ^ "LSD Therapy for Persons Suffering From Major Depression - Full Text View" . ClinicalTrials.gov . February 8, 2021. Archived from the original on June 11, 2021 . Retrieved March 9, 2021 . ^ a b Lustberg D (October 14, 2022). "Acid for Anxiety: Fast and Lasting Anxiolytic Effects of LSD" . Psychedelic Science Review . Archived from the original on December 1, 2022 . Retrieved December 1, 2022 . ^ Holze F, Gasser P, Müller F, Dolder PC, Liechti ME (September 2022). "Lysergic Acid Diethylamide-Assisted Therapy in Patients With Anxiety With and Without a Life-Threatening Illness: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Phase II Study" . Biological Psychiatry . 93 (3): 215– 223. doi : 10.1016/j.biopsych.2022.08.025 . PMID 36266118 . S2CID 252095586 . ^ Carhart-Harris R (April 20, 2021). "Psychedelics are transforming the way we understand depression and its treatment" .