The COVID-19 pandemic has affected people's mental health all over the world .

The pandemic has led to widespread feelings of anxiety , depression , and post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms. According to the UN health agency WHO , in the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic, prevalence of common mental health conditions, such as depression and anxiety, went up by more than 25 percent.

The pandemic has damaged social relationships, trust in institutions and in other people, has caused changes in work and income, and has imposed a substantial burden of anxiety and worry on the population. Women and young people face the greatest risk of depression and anxiety. According to The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention study of Mental Health, Substance Use, and Suicidal Ideation During the COVID-19 Pandemic, "63 percent of young people reported experiencing substantial symptoms of anxiety and depression." COVID-19 triggered issues caused by substance use disorders (SUDs).

The pandemic disproportionately affects people with SUDs.

The health consequences of SUDs (for example, cardiovascular diseases , respiratory diseases , type 2 diabetes , immunosuppression and central nervous system depression , and psychiatric disorders ), and the associated environmental challenges (such as housing instability, unemployment, and criminal justice involvement), are associated with an increased risk for contracting COVID-19. Confinement rules, along with unemployment and austerity measures implemented during and after the pandemic period, can significantly affect the illicit drug market and alter patterns of drug use among consumers. Mitigation measures (i.e. physical distancing, quarantine, and isolation ) can worsen loneliness, mental health symptoms, withdrawal symptoms, and psychological trauma.

The public and healthcare professionals experience higher levels of anxiety as a result of increased worldwide knowledge.

The WHO formally designates COVID-19 a pandemic on March 11, 2020. Reports of anxiety and sadness rise as a result of widespread panic and terror. March 2020: Lockdowns and social distancing measures are implemented in several nations. Social isolation aggravates pre-existing mental health issues and adds to feelings of loneliness. April 2020: Research indicates a sharp increase in mental health problems, including a considerable rise in feelings of anxiety and sadness on a global scale.

As more individuals look for help, the need for mental health services rises. According to the CDC, 40% of American people suffer from substance abuse or mental health problems as of May 2020. June 2020: As the epidemic strikes, racial injustice demonstrations take place in several areas. For many people, the combined pressures of societal upheaval and COVID-19 intensify trauma and anxiety. November 2020: According to preliminary statistics, PTSD, anxiety, and depression are more common among healthcare professionals. More support services are advocated for when the mental health costs of frontline workers are acknowledged. Global vaccination efforts start in January 2021.

Although vaccination campaigns offer optimism, some people experience vaccine reluctance and related stress as a result. June 2021: Many people are experiencing "post-pandemic" stress, according to reports, and mental health problems continue even after lockdowns end. Long-term mental health care and rehabilitation techniques become the main focus. 2022 and Beyond: Research into the pandemic's long-term psychological impacts, such as "long COVID" and its affects on mental health, is still ongoing. Constant research emphasizes the necessity of long-term mental health care and prevention strategies. Predictors and potential causes of mental health symptoms Sign in a gym in Ireland discouraging casual social contact due to the risk of infection. Loss of these kind of interactions has had an impact on many people during the pandemic.

The known causes of mental health issues during the pandemic included fear of infection, stigma associated with infection, isolation (imposed by individuals sheltering on their own or in compliance with lockdowns), and masks. Billions of people shifted to remote work , temporary unemployment, homeschooling or distance education , and lack of physical contact with family members, friends and colleagues. Some socio-demographic characteristics were also identified as risk factors such as age, female sex, lower educational attainment, lower income, or pre-existing mental health conditions, pre-existing other chronic diseases ( comorbidities ) and living alone or with children. Unknowns As the pandemic began, the risks were uncertain.

As sick people flooded into hospitals and official advice evolved, the lack of information increased stress and anxiety. Many uncertainties surrounded the beginning of the pandemic, including estimating infection risk, symptom overlap between COVID-19 and other health problems. COVID-19 also caused many mental health problems. Patients experienced unfavorable psychological effects such as post-traumatic stress symptoms, disorientation, and rage when exposed to COVID-19. Lack of preparation During the first wave of the epidemic, critical supplies were quickly exhausted.

The most prominent items were personal protective equipment (PPE) for hospital workers and ventilators for treatment.

At the onset of the pandemic in early 2020, a national survey found that many medical facilities were running out of PPE supplies, including one third of the surveyed medical facilities reporting being out of face masks and a quarter reporting a shortage or almost shortage of gowns. Another study reported that 63.3% of nurses agreed with the statement, "I am worried about inadequate personal protective equipment for healthcare personnel (PPE)". Stigma As the pandemic began, anyone who interacted with infected people had to address the possibility that they might have been infected themselves and might therefore present an unknown risk to their family and others.

In some cases, they were initially stigmatized. Isolation Many care homes subjected their residents to enforced isolation. They were locked into their rooms around the clock, including at mealtimes when their meals were delivered to their doors. Visitors were not allowed, nor was any socialization among the residents. Powerlessness Nurses worked longer hours during the pandemic, which increased anxiety in many. Many patients rapidly progressed once in the hospital to the ICU and ultimately, death.

The absence of approved therapeutics meant that palliative care (supplemental oxygen, ventilators and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation ) were the only options.

In some cases, this stimulated frustration and a sense of powerlessness. Disruption Those caring for COVID-19 patients were subject strict biosecurity measures, consigned to wearing gowns, uncomfortable masks and face shields at work.

After returning home, many changed clothes before entering and isolated themselves, in an attempt to protect their families. Their jobs demanded constant awareness and vigilance, reduced their autonomy, reduced access to social support, reduced self-care, uncertainty about the effects of long-term exposure to COVID-19 patients, and fear of infecting others.

In some jurisdictions, schools were closed during the early months of the pandemic. Such closures increased anxiety, loneliness, stress, sadness, frustration, indiscipline, and hyperactivity among children. Prevention and management Coping with bipolar disorder and other mental health issues during COVID-19 infographic The Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee of the United Nations recommends that mental health support during an emergency "do no harm, promote human rights and equality, use participatory approaches, build on existing resources and capacities, adopt multi-layered interventions and work with integrated support systems." One author suggested implementing habits that act as "psychological PPE". These habits include healthy eating, healthy coping mechanisms, and practicing mindfulness and relaxation methods. Another method that many companies followed for their employees was to provide the employees with specific mental health improvement programs in order to increase the morale of the employees and improve their mental health. World Health Organization and Centers for Disease Control guidelines WHO and CDC issued guidelines for minimizing mental health issues during the pandemic.

The social and collective perception of OCD as an illness albeit, is subjective and varies cross-culturally.

As such, data relating to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic upon sufferers of OCD is skewed because of different cultural influences on behavior and 'relationships between beliefs'. Those living with OCD have been subject to socioeconomic, pandemic-related stressors, as COVID-19 has been covered across social media and the 24/7 news cycle since its outbreak. These media outlets emanate fear, and the probability of contamination in conjunction with regulatory quarantines and periods of isolation, trigger precautionary compulsions in OCD patients. Such behavior is driven by the 'psychological distress' of governmental control and social restrictions. Post-traumatic stress disorder Emotions of high stress and loneliness are contributing factors of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and the COVID-19 pandemic has provided individuals with conditions in which these symptoms foster. COVID-19 has affected social structures across cultures, and for people living with PTSD, global measures that regulate the body by means of school closures, border restrictions, social distancing, mask wearing and hand washing, expose the 'population to feelings of intense fear and helplessness'. A study on the psychological distress experienced by health care workers across 21 countries reveals a PTSD prevalence of 21.5%.

The Middle East and Europe were both countries of interest in this study, indicating the cross-cultural impact that COVID-19 has had upon PTSD. PTSD in Children Studies from previous years and epidemics reported that children who were isolated were much more likely to develop PTSD. PTSD in children can have long-term consequences on brain development and affected kids are more likely to develop psychiatric disorders. Autism spectrum disorder Pandemic lockdowns impacted mental health outcomes for children with neurodevelopmental disorders, such as ASD, creating challenges including the lack of understanding about the pandemic and the ability to complete school work. Children on the autism spectrum were more likely to become agitated by the changing environment. An increase in stimming, self-injury, nervousness and impulsiveness were observed to have increased in children with autism during the pandemic. Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder Adolescents and children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) struggled with staying confined in only one space, creating difficulties for caregivers to find activities that were engaging/meaningful to them.

The impact of COVID-19 restrictions and isolation impacted on children's abilities to use successful coping mechanisms and management techniques for ADHD. Issues of diagnosis and treatment were also prevalent. Primarily, clinicians faced the problem of differentiating between situational and persistent ADHD symptoms in children and adolescents, who did not have the same environmental triggers (i.e. social spheres) which allowed their symptoms to be best evaluated. Those wanting to be evaluated for expression of ADHD symptoms were subject to extensive wait lists for clinical analysis as a result of staff shortages during the pandemic. Those that were offered a positive diagnosis were then further restricted by the limited non-medication based treatment options, such as behavioural and educational therapies. Those children and adolescents already living with diagnosed ADHD were also facing substantial challenges. Studies conducted during the pandemic showed that social isolation and homestay directives led to an increased reliance on screen-time to manage attention problems. A 75% increase in online gaming participation was observed.

In some instances, gaming may represent an unhealthy coping mechanism for ADHD youth and has already been demonstrated to exacerbate poor management of symptoms. Furthermore, this excessive screen-time was prolonged by the use of Zoom for learning. Children with ADHD were required to simultaneously process auditory and visual cues during these online classes, leading to 'distracted connection' and mental overstimulation. Anxiety and depression An increase of mental health issues such as depression and anxiety during the COVID-19 pandemic is a commonly held perception worldwide. Studies indicate that globally, approximately one-third of adults experienced anxiety symptoms during the pandemic, with similar prevalence across high-, middle-, and low-income countries. Some studies have also examined mental health symptoms among patients infected with COVID-19. Mental health symptoms in hospitalized patients may be underdiagnosed because clinicians often prioritize physical illness during treatment. Depression and anxiety in infected patients have also been associated with poorer health outcomes, including longer hospital stays and increased likelihood of readmission.

While studies have documented changes in mental health during the pandemic, studies have also found that some people experienced more anxiety than other. A systematic review and meta-analysis comparing mental health symptoms before and during the pandemic found that changes in anxiety and depression symptoms are not uniform across populations, as some groups experienced more symptoms than others. For example, a study in China found that people in historically rice-farming areas of southern China reported more anxiety during the pandemic than people in wheat-farming areas of northern China. This is despite the fact that rice-farming areas experienced fewer COVID-19 cases than wheat-farming areas.

The higher levels of anxiety could be due to cultural differences between regions, such as the tighter social norms of cultures with a history of rice farming. Rice farming required more coordination than crops like wheat, and rice-farming cultures score higher on measures of collectivism, which research has linked to anxiety.

In the US, a study concluded that levels of perceived anxiety and depression had increased for pregnant African American women during the pandemic. They also concluded that pregnant African American women experienced higher levels of loneliness that increased their levels of perceived anxiety, stress, and depression.

The higher levels of anxiety and depression may be related to a history of underlying social inequity and oppression, influencing rates of mortality and morbidity rate, job loss, and food and housing insecurities. Behavioral Addictions The COVID-19 pandemic affected patterns of behavioral addictions, including gambling, compulsive sexual behaviors, and pornography use. Social isolation from lockdowns increased stress from common coping activities that would take place in the form of socializing, which likely increased vulnerability to addictive behaviors. Studies reported increased online gambling activity, particularly among those with prior gambling issues. Pandemic restrictions affected access to treatment access to addictive disorders, as group therapy and support groups changed to online formats, affecting those with mental health issues.

During the pandemic there was a significant increase in the amount of time children spent on screens, and less on physical activity and sleeping. More than half of the caregiver's reported their psychological distress levels increased during the lockdown, which was significantly related to child symptoms. Fear was also very common amongst youth, particularly fear for infection or concern for family members and as mentioned above, this led to an increase of the levels of anxiety and depression.

On October 19, 2021, the American Academy of Pediatrics , the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry , and the Children's Hospital Association declared a "national emergency" for children's mental health. One study reported that many children who were separated from caregivers during the pandemic experienced a crisis. Children who were isolated or quarantined during past pandemics were more likely to develop acute stress disorders, adjustment disorders and experience grief, with 30% of children meeting the clinical criteria for PTSD. A meta-analysis of 15 studies performed reported that 79.4% of children and teenagers suffered negative consequences: 42.3% were irritable, 41.7% had symptoms of depression, 34.5% struggled with anxiety, and 30.8% had problems with inattention. Many young people struggled with boredom, fear, and sleep problems. A collection of 29 studies posted in August 2021 by Jamanetwork showed that the prevalence of symptoms of depression and anxiety had doubled during COVID-19. They had also found that older adolescents were affected more and it was the most prevalent in girls.

In an October 2020 global study, negative emotions experienced by students included boredom (45.2%), anxiety (39.8%), frustration (39.1%), anger (25.9%), hopelessness (18.8%), and shame (10.0%).

The highest levels of anxiety were found in South America (65.7%) and Oceania (64.4%), followed by North America (55.8%) and Europe (48.7%).

The least anxious were students from Africa (38.1%) and Asia (32.7%). A similar order of continents was found for frustration. School closures caused anxiety for students with special needs as daily routines are disrupted and therapy and social skill groups halted. Others who incorporated school routines into their coping mechanisms experienced an increase in depression and difficulty in readjusting to normal routines. Closures limited mental health service availability, along with educators' ability to identify at-risk youth.

While children with neurodevelopmental conditions were not universally worse off, there was high variability: some students experienced worse mental health outcomes due to the change in lifestyle, but also some students experienced better mental health outcomes, due to less stresses from being at home. LGBTQ Youth A National survey that focuses on LGBTQ youth mental health was conducted by The Trevor Project in 2021. This survey highlights some of the specific challenges faced by LGBTQ youth during the Coronavirus pandemic in 2020, like increased restraints on expressing their gender expression and sexuality.

The data collected was from about 35,000 LGBTQ people aged 13–24 years old. 45% of youths surveyed were people of color and 38% were transgender or nonbinary. Overall, 70% of LGBTQ youth "stated that their mental health was "poor" most of the time or always during COVID-19", as well as 80% of youths aged 13–17, and 81% of youths aged 18–24, said that COVID-19 negatively impacted their mental health. COVID happened so quickly that it was a difficult adjustment for some LGBTQ youth to have to go back to living at their parent's houses full time, especially when some families of LGBTQ kids were not as accepting of them. Only 1 in 3 LGBTQ youth found their homes to be supportive, and 81% of youths aged 13–17, and 81% of youths aged 18–24, reported that they experienced a more stressful living situation. Many college aged kids came out for the first time while they were at school, so when they had to go back home they had to decide whether or not to tell their parents, who could be potentially unsupportive or even abusive. Younger kids were isolated at home with no access to their friends, guidance counselors, or teachers who were their only potential support systems. 50% of youths aged 13–17, and 42% of youths aged 18–24, said COVID-19 impacted their ability to express their sexual orientation. 65% of youths aged 13–17, and 52% of youths aged 18–24, said that COVID-19 impacted their ability to express their gender identity. 72% of LGBTQ youth reported "symptoms of generalized anxiety disorder" and 62% of LGBTQ youth reported "symptoms of major depressive disorder".

In regards to suicide, it was reported that 42% of LGBTQ youth "seriously considered attempting suicide in the past year". 48% of this being youths aged 13–17 and 34% were youths aged 18–24.

The percentages of attempted suicides were 31% of Native/Indigenous youth, 21% of Black youth, 21% of multiracial youth, 18% of Latinx youth, 12% of Asian/Pacific Islander youth, and 12% of white youth. Overall, 20% of LGBTQ youths aged 13–17 and 9% of LGBTQ youths aged 18–24 attempted suicide. Sexual and gender minority young adults were particularly vulnerable to challenges with their mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic. One study of 227 sexual and gender minority individuals had higher levels of COVID-related stress and increased symptoms of depression and anxiety.

The researchers also found that when participants had more supportive relationships, they had reduced impacts of pandemic related stress on depressive symptoms. Impact on Students A infographic students can use to stay connected to better their mental health K-12 Schools have been able to play the role of a safety net in many cases where adults look out for the mental health status of their students.

In schools teachers and adults are able to be on the look out and recognize physical/emotional distress, signs of physical abuse, and/or sudden significant or subtle changes in behavior. Should they recognize any apparent disruptions, teachers are able to intervene and provide their students with the necessary resources to help them. However, during the COVID-19 pandemic, with students and teachers out, this system has not been in place.

When schools shut down, teachers had to resort to online learning where they were no longer able to see how students were doing physically/mentally and weren't able to provide them with the help they needed. With the lack of resources to help students, it resulted in a drastic increase in depression and anxiety rates, increasing by over 20%.

Since students were suffering mentally, it became challenging for them to have the motivation to do their school work.

As COVID-19 mitigation efforts began to ease up and students return to the classroom, teachers have noticed an increase in crying and disruptive behavior in this population of students and also increased occurrences in violence and bullying . Mental health professionals call for schools and education institutions everywhere to implement a number of health promotion programs in their schools that may teach students how to prevent succumbing to adverse mental health issues and how to cope with the reality and continuing effects of COVID-19 so that it does not get in the way of their education and future endeavors. Higher education Studies conducted in the first stages of the pandemic found the age group of the average higher education student (i.e. 18–24-year-olds) among the most affected in terms of mental health.

The Higher Education Policy Institute conducted a study that reported that 63% of students claimed that their mental health had worsened, and that 38% demonstrated satisfaction with the mental health service access. Physical harm such as overdose, suicide and substance abuse reached an all-time high. Academic stress, dissatisfaction with the quality of teaching and fear of infection were associated with higher depression scores. Involvement in a steady relationship and living with others were associated with lower depressive scores. Research reported that psychological stress following strict confinement was moderated by levels of the pre-pandemic stress hormone cortisol and individual coping skills. Stay-at-home orders that worsened self-reports of stress also increased cognitive abilities including perspective taking and working memory. However, that greater emotion regulation (measured pre-pandemic) was associated with lower acute stress (measured by the Impact of Event Scale-Revised ) in response to the early pandemic in the US during lockdown. Students who experienced a death of a close family member, a known stressor, were more likely to decide to stay home and attend college virtually. Isolation from others and lack of contact with mental health services worsened symptoms.

The specific level of impact on students reflected their demographic backgrounds: students from low-income households and students of color experienced greater mental health and academic impacts. Students who struggle with mental health also struggled academically. Students from high-income households and those in successful school districts were more likely to have to mental health (and other) resources. A study in Belgian higher education students found the following factors to be associated with higher scores of depression during the COVID-19 pandemic: academic stress, dissatisfaction with the quality of teaching, fear of being infected, higher levels of frustration and boredom, inadequate supplies of resources, inadequate information from public health authorities, insufficient financial resources and perceived stigma. These factors were in line with a review that identified a comprehensive set of mental health stressors playing a role in people who were quarantined to limit the transmission of pathogens similar to COVID-19. Individuals with a known history of psychiatric disorders were more vulnerable to experience heightened levels of distress during lockdown measures. Specifically, researchers saw an increase in the amount of eating disorders related vulnerabilities. Social isolation that accompanies lockdown and stay at home measures for many resulted in a decrease in physical movement and activity, an increased amount of food in the home, and an increased time spent with a screen. There was an increase of 10% of student's perception of their body and the description of their weight as a risk factor for acquiring an eating disorder and exhibiting symptoms during the months between January 2020 and April 2020.

After lockdown ended, student's levels of physical activity remained below their pre-pandemic levels, even for those attending colleges that resumed in-person instruction. Studies showed that although college students did not have significant increases in their BMI, the rates in which college students were concerned about gaining weight and subsequent increases in their BMI significantly increased. An international survey conducted in Norway, USA, UK, and Australia at the end of 2020 found that university students in higher education had poorer mental health than non-students. A research study conducted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) looked into data gathered from a nationwide survey of high school students during the COVID-19 pandemic.

The data collected revealed disturbingly high incidences of worsening mental health, with 37.1% of students saying they experienced poor mental health during the pandemic, and 31.1% reporting poor mental health during the first 30 days after the original survey. Also students reported that 12 months before the survey how they were feeling with 44.2% saying they experienced persistent feelings of sadness or hopelessness, while 19.9% had deeply considered attempting suicide, and 9.0% had attempted suicide. Based on the data, the pandemic increased stress, anxiety and depression amongst high school students mainly because of social isolation, online learning difficulties, and familial conflicts. This study sheds light on the importance of being connected to school, family, and community groups especially during a time of prime development. Students who were able to maintain these aspects of life were found to have lower rates of poor mental health and suicidal thoughts/behaviors. Impact on women Studies in China have shown that females have high risk factors of physiological impact including stress, anxiety, depression, and post-traumatic stress that intensify due to the pandemic. Mothers, who are most commonly in charge of caregiving and childcare reported feeling agitated, scared, depressed, and anxious due to the lack of resources during the COVID-19 pandemic. Many women lost their jobs or quit their jobs to avoid infecting family members. Through becoming unemployed, women faced an increase in caregiving roles at home. Women also dealt with grief of losing loved ones to the pandemic which took a toll on their mental health . A 2020 Kaiser Family Foundation survey found that 57% of women reported mental health issues due to the stress the pandemic caused them. Studies show that women are highly susceptible to physical violence and suffer from economic inequality during the pandemic. Single women have less support and more roles to take on so the pandemic promoted more stress and less time to work on their mental health.

The unknown effects of SARS-CoV-2 on the developing fetus, limited treatment options, and reduced available resources leave many women facing the difficult decision of whether to try to conceive or delay pregnancy. For example, in one study, 37.3% of survey participants who wanted children before the COVID-19 pandemic no longer wanted children. Pregnant women During pregnancy, women often experience heightened symptoms of depression and anxiety.

The COVID-19 pandemic caused an increase in stress and anxiety for nearly everyone worldwide, but more vulnerable groups such as pregnant women, were especially at risk of suffering the psychological effects.

The pandemic resulted in heightened mental health issues for vulnerable groups, such as pregnant and postpartum women, because of the 'physiological and psychological changes' the body undergoes during the stages of pregnancy. Women who were already experiencing an increase in stress, depression, and anxiety due to the changes in hormones that occur during pregnancy, suffered an increase in symptoms associated with mental health issues as the pandemic progressed. COVID-19 increases fear and worries of vulnerability due to the unclear understanding of how COVID-19 impacts pregnancy. A 2020 study in China of 4,124 pregnant women found that after they learned that COVID-19 could be spread from human to human their scores on the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale were much higher. They showed increased anxiety levels, depression levels, and suicidal thoughts. A 2020 study in Canada of 1,987 pregnant women showed results that 37% of the women showed depression symptoms, 46.3% showed high anxiety levels, and 67.6% showed an increase in pregnancy-correlated anxiety. Pregnant women that tested positive for COVID-19 faced complications including preterm birth, premature rupture of membranes, fetal distress, stillbirth, and placental infections. More than one third of Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI) and Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) scores in pregnant women were above normal during the pandemic in a study conducted by Durankus.

The pandemic increased stress which impacted those vulnerable to handling stressful situations. Women who dealt with economic issues, and unemployment during the pandemic showed poor mental health but women with the neuroticism trait were most vulnerable to mental health issues during pandemic. Turkish women A survey conducted in Turkey in 2020 concluded that younger women and women who are in school showed higher mental burnout.

The shift from in-person learning to online learning negatively affected women's mental health. Women had to balance school, work, and caregiving during the pandemic which caused them to burn out and experience increased stress. They also worried about testing positive and possibly spreading the disease since they were working and coming home during the pandemic. Staying at home while being restricted from socializing created a negative impact on women's mental wellbeing; they become exhausted, lonely, stressed, and worried. Impact on Asian Americans Hate crimes targeted towards Asians rose nearly 150% across major U.S. cities from 2019 to 2020.

As the pandemic progressed, about 40% of Asian and Black Americans reported that people felt uncomfortable around them.

The harassment against those of Asian descent ranges in its forms; these include both verbal and physical attacks, and even acts of vandalism. Some attest the increase in attack rates to the negative expressions used by President Donald Trump, an example of this being when he referred to the COVID-19 virus as "kung flu." Studies found that for Asian Americans, the racism they experienced due to COVID-19 was strongly linked to issues such as anxiety, depression, stress, and lower self-esteem. Asian American youth were especially vulnerable, experiencing things like being blamed for the virus, anti-Asian slurs, and increased harassment, bullying, and social exclusion. Asian Americans disproportionately hold positions as high-risk essential workers, and many regions heavily affected by COVID-19 have an abundance of Asian-owned businesses. Suggestions for aiding in the support of Asian Americans throughout this time include ensuring Asian inclusion in businesses, preventing the use of Anti-Asian rhetoric, and encouraging a dialogue that accounts for the acknowledgement of Asian American treatment and support throughout this time. Impact on African Americans African Americans have been diagnosed with COVID-19 and died at a disproportionately higher rate. Many factors contributed to this outcome. African Americans disproportionately represent service industry workers. These essential workers have a higher risk of exposure to COVID-19 due to the inability to shelter at home.

The contributing factors to this disparity are the limited public testing available, an increase in low-wage worker unemployment, lack of healthcare, medical racism/biases, and a higher rate of pre-existing conditions. Due to these disparities, the Black-White life expectancy gap is expected to increase by 40%, from 3.6 years to over five years. Structural health inequalities have intensified the effect of COVID-19 on African Americans. African Americans are less likely to have adequate access to consistent healthcare, residential segregation and food insecurity lead to underlying health conditions, and underrepresentation in government and medicine leads to biased decision-making and policies that don't fully address the needs of Black communities. A meta analysis found that African Americans were found to have higher risk and severity of COVID-19, as well as the social determinants of health being strongly correlated with COVID-19 outcomes. Impact on essential workers Key workers did not shift to remote work despite low availability of PPE and while risks from the virus were undetermined. These workers earn modest wages on average and are more likely to be racial/ethnic minorities. Low income workers Fewer than 5% of US workers without a high school diploma were remote workers during the COVID-19 pandemic . Only 7% of US service workers, the majority of whom were low-wage customer-facing workers, could use remote work. Service industry workers were the least likely to get compensated for time off.

The pandemic's nationwide economic implications resulted in business closures and record unemployment rates. Low-wage and part-time workers were those most likely to be unemployed and people of color (especially women) had disproportionate job losses compared to the general population. Frontline workers during the Pandemic were experiencing an increase in workload which made them more likely to suffer from stress, depression and PTSD. Healthcare workers Before COVID-19, healthcare workers already faced many stressors, including health risks, the possibility of infecting their household, and the stress of working with extremely sick patients. COVID-19's physical and emotional burden impacted healthcare workers increased rates of anxiety, depression, and burnout that impacted sleep, quality work/empathy towards patients, and suicide rates. Cases of anxiety and depression within healthcare workers who interact with COVID-19 patients increased by 1.57% and 1.52% respectively. One study reported that frontline nurses experience higher rates of anxiety, emotional exhaustion, depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder. A cross-sectional study using an online survey in Southern California examined stress levels before and during the pandemic.

The study used the 10-item Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) and the Connor-Davidson Resilience Scale to assess psychological stress and resilience in nurses.

The experiment concluded that nurses reported feeling moderate and high levels of stress compared to before the pandemic. A five-part questionnaire conducted among healthcare workers in Ghana to examine the correlation between COVID-19 and mental health.

The questionnaire classified participant fears as "none", "mild", "moderate", and "extreme". Participants also answered and ranked questions about depression using the Depression Anxiety Stress Scale (DASS). Because the DASS-21 assessment is split up into three categories, (Depression, Anxiety and Stress), participants provided three numbers, one for each category.

The fourth part assessed whether participants perceived that they were provided with a good psychological environment.

The fifth part assessed coping success. Over 40% of health staff reported mild to extreme fear. Depression ranked highest with 16%. However, only 30% received their salary, and only 40% were insured in case of infection. 42% of respondents in Ghana proved that their hospitals do not provide sufficient protective equipment. Hospitals in China such as The Second Xiangya Hospital (Psychology Research Center), and the Chinese Medical and Psychological Disease Clinical Medicine Research Center noticed signs of psychological distress and set up a plan to help struggling staff. They suggested coping strategies for stress, a hotline, and education. Healthcare workers stated that all they needed was uninterrupted rest as well as more supplies. Moreover, medical staff in China agreed to use psychologists' skills to help them deal with distressed patients. They suggested having mental health specialists ready when a patient becomes emotionally distressed. Initially, healthcare workers experienced fear over possible exposure. This fear correlated to significant mental health declines amongst nurses. Increased patient workloads contributed to mental health impacts. Patient counts in hospitals increased during seasonal waves, sometimes overloading hospitals. A majority of medical professionals experienced higher patient workloads. Limitations on family visitation increased staff demands. Anxiety in healthcare workers rose. Anxiety directly correlates with worker performance. One study reported that 13% of COVID nurses and 16% of other COVID healthcare workers reported severe anxiety. Another study surveyed workers in March 2020 and again in May and reported that psychological distress and anxiety had increased. Other studies reported that the pandemic had led at least one in five healthcare professionals to report symptoms of anxiety. Specifically, anxiety was assessed in 12 studies, with a pooled prevalence of 23.2%. One study reported that things changed drastically in a couple of months after the pandemic began. It found that the prevalence rates of post-COVID anxiety were about 32%. Participants with moderate to extremely severe anxiety made up 26% of the sample. Individuals who worked during the pandemic reported higher rates of anxiety.

In another study, 42% of patient care respondents had significantly more anxiety than providers who did not care directly for patients. Increased depression and burnout were observed in healthcare workers.

In one study more than 28% of the sample reported high levels of emotional exhaustion. More than 50% of the sample reported low levels of depersonalization , except for COVID nurses and physicians, 37% of whom reported depersonalization. Another study reported that the prevalence rates of depression were as high as 22% and that extremely severe depression occurred in 13%.

In a cross-sectional survey, a high percentage of the nurses surveyed reported high stress levels and/or PTSD symptoms. Eight major themes were identified: working in an isolated environment PPE shortage and the discomfort of prolonged usage sleep problems intensity of workload cultural and language barriers lack of family support fear of being infected insufficient work experiences with COVID-19 Many of these concerns are related to the pandemic. Healthcare understaffing not only affects patient health but can rebound against healthcare workers. A study found that 70+% of doctors and nurses perceived moderate-to-severe stress.

The study reported that direct dealing with COVID-19 patients significantly increases stress. Without intervention the nursing staff and patients would struggle. Mental health professionals The pandemic affected mental healthcare workers by greatly altering how services would be provided to patients. Many mental healthcare workers were forced to adapt to new service models, including widespread use of remote services such as telephone consultations and online meetings.

The changes increased the load on these mental healthcare workers, as they were also struggling to meet the increased demand in their roles as mental health issues rose across the globe during the pandemic.

The impacts on these workers included insomnia, psychological distress, anxiety, as well as other psychological issues, and caring for patients placed a large burden on them. Other mental health consequences Relationships The stress of the pandemic was cited as being a major cause in the increased numbers of break-ups and divorces which was observable from mid-2020 onwards as the upheaval of societal norms prompted people to reconsider their lives, relationships and jobs . Relationship experts noted that people often do not recognize the impact that stress can have on a relationship and a couple's ability to be good partners to each other. Some of the causes cited included the stresses brought about by living in cramped and shared spaces, arguments over the division of housework, and differing attitudes towards the seriousness of the virus with some partners choosing not to observe government guidelines over quarantine, mask mandates, or vaccinations .

The influence of unemployment and/or wage decreases brought about as a result of the pandemic was also cited, noting that this can manifest as anxiety, anger and frustration as well as an increased likelihood of domestic abuse . A survey by Relate , a UK relationship-support charity, in April 2020 found that nearly a quarter of people had felt that lockdown had been placing additional pressures on their relationship.

In couples where one party chose to get vaccinated while the other did not, tensions arose over the anger felt towards the partner for depriving them of their chance to enjoy life again.

As the pandemic took away "well-established routines that offered comfort, stability and rhythm", according to Ronen Stilman, a psychotherapist and spokesperson for the UK Council for Psychotherapy , it left many partners around the world with limited opportunities to "seek other forms of support or stimulation" beyond their relationship, which put them under severe strain.

The pandemic was also noted as acting as a catalyst for break-ups that may have been impending already, especially when the previous separate routines of partners had served to mask problems in this regard.

As of December 2020 it was noted the number of couples seeking relationship counseling had "surged" during lockdown.

As 2020 drew to a close, divorce rates around the world had noticeably increased with many previously content couples having separated due to the cumulative stresses brought about by COVID-19. British law firm Stewarts logged a 122% increase in enquiries between July and October 2020, compared with the same period in 2019.

In the US, 'Legal Templates', a legal contract-creation site, reported a 34% increase in sales of its basic divorce agreement, in the first half of 2020, compared to the same time period in 2019. It was reported that newlyweds married in the previous five months to that made up 20% of these sales. A noticeable increase in the number of applications for divorce during the coronavirus pandemic also occurred in Sweden.

The UK charity Citizens Advice reported a spike in searches for online advice on ending a relationship.

In January 2022 it was revealed the U.K.'s largest family law firm reported a 95% increase in divorce inquiries during the pandemic (detecting a majority of inquiries coming from women).

As vaccinations began to be extended to children, differences of opinion between parents also strained marriages and relationships. Suicides The pandemic triggered concern over increased suicides , caused by social isolation due to quarantine and social-distancing guidelines, fear, and unemployment and financial factors. A 2020 study reported that suicide rates were either the same or lower than before the pandemic began, especially in higher income countries, as often happens in crises.

The number of crisis hotlines calls increased, and some countries established new hotlines. For example, Ireland launched a new hotline aimed at older generations that received around 16,000 calls in its first month in March 2020.

The Kids Helpline in the Australian state of Victoria reported a 184% increase in calls from suicidal teenagers between early December 2020 and late May 2021. A March 2020 survey of over 700,000 people in the UK reported that 1 in 10 people had suicidal thoughts as a result of lockdown. Charities such as the Martin Gallier Project as of November 2020 had intervened in 1,024 suicides during the pandemic. Suicide cases remained constant or decreased, although the best evidence is often delayed. According to a study conducted on twenty-one high and upper-middle-income countries in April–July 2020, the number of suicides remained static. These results were attributed to factors, including the composition of mental health support, financial assistance, family/community support, use of technology to connect, and time spent with family members. Despite this, isolation, fear, stigma, abuse, and economic fallout increased. Self-reported levels of depression, anxiety, and suicidal thoughts were elevated during lockdown, according to evidence from several countries, but did not appear to have increased suicides. According to CDC surveys conducted in June 2020, 10.7 percent of adults aged 18 and up said they had seriously considered suicide in the previous 30 days. They ranged in age from 18 to 24 and were classified as members of minority racial/ethnic groups, unpaid caregivers, and essential workers. Few studies have been conducted to examine suicides in low- and lower-middle-income countries. WHO stated, "in 2016, low- and middle-income countries accounted for 79 percent of global suicides." This is because of registration system limitations, and lack of real-time suicide data. Middle income Myanmar and Tunisia were studied along with low-income Malawi.

The study reported that, "In Malawi, there was reportedly a 57% increase in January–August 2020, compared with January–August 2019, and in Tunisia, there was a 5% increase in March–May 2020, compared with March–May, 2019.

By contrast, in Myanmar, there was a 2% decrease in January–June 2020, compared with January–June 2019." Damage to the economy is associated with higher suicide rates.

The pandemic put many businesses on hold, led to reduced employment, and triggered a major stock market drop. Stigma is a primary cause. Frontline workers, the elderly, the homeless, migrants, and daily wage workers were more vulnerable. Stigma led to reported suicides in infected individuals in Bangladesh and India. Long COVID Long COVID is the wide range of long term symptoms that appear in patients for weeks or months after the initial infection. It has been widely associated with a range of mental health effects, such as depression, PTSD, "brain fog", and anxiety. These symptoms can persist for months and impact daily quality of life in a severe manner. Impact in China Studies reported that the outbreak had a significant impact on mental health, with an increase in health anxiety, acute stress reactions, adjustment disorders, depression, panic attacks, and insomnia. Relapses and increased hospitalization rates are occurring in cases of severe mental disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and anxiety disorders. All of which increase suicide risks. National surveys in China (and Italy) revealed a high prevalence of depression and anxiety, both of which increase suicide risks. One Shanghai district reported 14 cases of suicides among primary and secondary school students as of June 2020, more than annual averages. Domestic media reported additional suicides by young people even though topics like suicide are usually avoided in Chinese society. A psychological intervention plan was developed by the Second Xiangya Hospital, the Institute of Mental Health, the Medical Psychology Research Center of the Second Xiangya Hospital, and the Chinese Medical and Psychological Disease Clinical Medicine Research Center. It focused on building an intervention medical team to provide online courses for medical staff, a hotline team, and interventions. Online education and counseling services were created for social media platforms such as WeChat , Weibo , and TikTok . Printed books about mental health and COVID-19 were republished online. Free electronic copies were available through the Chinese Association for Mental Health. A study of Chinese participants showed that adolescents also had negative impacts to their wellbeing during the COVID-19 lockdown. This study explored how increases in depression, anxiety, and insomnia created difficulties of adolescents when it came to academic engagement during online learning. Impact in other countries An infographic from the World Health Organization showing statistics related to the impact of COVID-19 on mental health COVID-19 lockdowns were first used in China and later worldwide by national and state governments. Most workplaces, schools, and public places were closed. Lockdowns closed most mental health centers. Patients who already had mental health disorders may have worsened symptoms. Fiji In September 2021, mental health organizations and an advisor to the government urged the government to address suicide prevention, although suicides in 2020 were lower than in 2019, as they warned that Fiji was beginning to suffer from a "mental health epidemic." Italy Italy was the first country to enter a nationwide lockdown. According to a questionnaire, 21% of participants reported moderate to extremely high depression, while 19% reported moderate to extremely high anxiety. Moreover, about 41% reported poor sleep before the lockdown, increasing to 52% during the lockdown. A cross-sectional study of 1,826 Italian adults confirmed the lockdown's impact on sleep quality, which was especially prevalent among females, those less educated, and those who experienced financial problems. India Alcohol bans during the pandemic reportedly led to suicides in India . Pakistan Pakistan is a low-income country and generally has poor mental health and does not prioritize mental health, so the pandemic increased these effects on the population. Pakistan thrives on community living, and the pandemic cut relationships off and increased feelings of distress and negative emotions to the public. Lockdowns were enforced in major cities to control the spread, and emotional welfare deteriorated, causing increased depression, anxiety, PTSD, and stress. Japan In July 2020, Japan was in "mild lockdown", which was not enforced and was non-punitive. A study of 11,333 individuals across Japan were asked to evaluate the impact of a one-month lockdown, answering questions related to lifestyle, stress management, and stressors. It suggested that psychological distress indices significantly correlated with items relating to COVID-19. One study reported that people had been influenced by anxiety- and trauma-related disorders and by adverse societal dynamics relating to work and PPE shortages. Overall, suicide rates in Japan appeared to decrease 20% at the beginning, partly offset by a rise in August 2020. Counseling helplines by telephone or text message are provided by many organizations.

On September 20, 2020, Sankei Shimbun reported that the month of July and August saw more suicides than in the previous year due to the pandemic's economic impact . Estimates for suicide deaths include a 7.7% increase or a 15.1% increase in August 2020, compared to August 2019. Sankei Shimbun further reported that rates increased more among women, with the month of August seeing a 40.1% increase in suicide compared to August 2019. South Africa South Africa implemented a strict lockdown on 26 March 2020 that lasted until 1 June. Of the 860 respondents to an online questionnaire in May 2020, 46% met the diagnostic criteria of anxiety disorder and 47% met the diagnostic criteria of depressive disorder.

The participants who met these criteria reported substantial daily life repercussions, but fewer than 20% consulted a formal practitioner. Distress over lockdown and fear of infection were associated with anxiety and depressive symptoms. Pre-existing mental health conditions, younger age, female sex, and living in a non-rural area were associated with more anxiety and depressive symptoms. Spain Spain's outbreak started at the end of February.

On March 14, 2020, the Spanish Government declared the state of alarm to limit viral transmission. However, by 9 April Spain reported the second highest rate of confirmed cases and deaths. 36% of participants reported moderate to severe psychological impact, 25% showed mild to severe levels of anxiety, 41% reported depressive symptoms, and 41% felt stressed. A longitudinal study collected data pre-pandemic and during confinement. It reported direct and indirect effects of pre-pandemic cortisol on the changes in self-reported, perceived self-efficacy during confinement.

The indirect effects were mediated by increases in working memory span and cognitive empathy. Other longitudinal study reported that older adults did not evidence higher emotional distress than during the initial lockdown. Furthermore, depression remained stable and anxiety significantly decreased. Older adults may adapt to the adverse pandemic impact by using more adaptive resources that reduce their distress. United Kingdom A 2022 study assessed the levels of mental wellbeing and potential for clinical need in a sample of UK university students aged 18–25 during the COVID-19 pandemic. Study has found "higher levels of lockdown severity were prospectively associated with higher levels of depressive symptoms. Nearly all students had at least one mental wellbeing concern at either time point." The results suggest that lockdown has caused "a wellbeing crisis in young people." United States As of November 2020 , the rate of deaths from suicide appeared to be unchanged in the US.

In Clark County, Nevada , 18 high school students committed suicide over nine months of school closures.

In March 2020, the federal crisis hotline, Disaster Distress Helpline, received a 338% increase in calls compared to February and an 891% increase in calls compared to March 2019. Suicide rates increased for African Americans .

The government loosened Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulations through a limited waiver. It allowed clinicians to evaluate and treat individuals though video chatting services that were not previously permitted, allowing patients to receive remote care.

On October 5, 2020, then-president Donald Trump issued an executive order to address mental and behavioral health issues, establishing a Coronavirus Mental Health Working Group.

In the executive order, he cited a CDC report that found that during June 24–30, 2020, 40.9% of more than 5,000 Americans reported at least one adverse mental or behavioral health condition, and 10.7% had seriously considered suicide during the month preceding the survey.

On 9 November 2020, a study reported findings from an electronic health record network cohort study using data from nearly 70 million individuals, including 62,354 individuals. Nearly 20% of COVID-19 survivors were diagnosed with a psychiatric condition between 14 and 90 days after diagnosis, including 5.8% first-time psychiatric diagnoses. Among patients without previous psychiatric history, patients hospitalized for COVID-19 had increased incidence of a first psychiatric diagnosis compared to other health events analyzed. Together, these findings suggest that COVID-19 may increase psychiatric sequelae, and those with pre-existing psychiatric conditions may be at increased risk for COVID-19. Vietnam As of January 2021, Vietnam had largely returned to everyday life.

The government employed effective communication, early development of test kits, contact tracing, and containment based upon epidemiological risk rather than symptoms.

By appealing to universal Vietnamese values such as tam giao (Three Teachings), the Vietnamese government encouraged a culture that values public health. However, Vietnamese patients quarantining reported psychological strain associated with the stigma of sickness, financial constraints, and guilt from contracting the virus. Frontline healthcare workers at Bach Mai Hospital in Hanoi who quarantined for greater than three weeks reported comparatively poorer self-image and general attitude when compared to shorter term isolees. Mental health aftercare The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence recommended active monitoring of staff for issues such as PTSD, moral injuries, and other associated mental illness. Telemental health Delivering mental health services through telecommunications technology (mostly videoconferencing and phone calls), also known as telepsychiatry or telemental health, became common. Due to lockdowns or 'stay at home' orders at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, mental health services in high-income countries were able to adapt existing service provision to telemental health care. Estimates suggest that between 48% and 100% of service users who were already receiving care at the start of the pandemic were able to continue their mental health care using remote methods. Some face-to-face appointments still took place if necessary.

The benefits of telemental health include accessibility, increased safety due to less in-person contact, and reducing the use of scarce personal protective equipment.

The role of telemental health and telehealth in lowering fatality rates and preventing increased presence in high-risk areas such as hospitals was generally significant. A recent study of COVID-19 and Open Notes reports promising evidence of patients' benefits when reading their clinical notes online from mental health care.

While some consequences reflect realistic dangers, others stem from lack of knowledge. Many community members show altruism and cooperation in a crisis, and some experience satisfaction from helping others.

While most adolescents experienced a decline in mental health during the pandemic, some reported improvements due to changes in their lifestyle and reduced social pressures that lead to behavioral changes. Some may have positive experiences, such as pride about coping. One study examined how individuals cope and find meaning across 30 countries.

The study reported that people who were able to reframe their experiences in a positive way had lower levels of depression, anxiety, and stress. Gender, socioeconomic factors, physical health, and country of origin were not associated with outcome measures. Another study of nearly 10,000 participants from 78 countries found similar results, with 40% reporting well-being. Another study reported that positive stressor reframing allowed individuals to view the adversity as a growth opportunity, rather than a crisis to be avoided. Once recovered from COVID-19, many will continue to experience long-term effects of the virus. Of these effects may include a lost or lessened sense of taste and smell, which is a result of the virus affecting cells in the nose.

The New England Journal of Medicine . 382 (8): 727– 733. doi : 10.1056/NEJMoa2001017 . PMC 7092803 . PMID 31978945 . ^ Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, Li X, Yang B, Song J, et al. (February 2020). "A Novel Coronavirus from Patients with Pneumonia in China, 2019" .

The New England Journal of Medicine . 382 (8): 727– 733. doi : 10.1056/NEJMoa2001017 . PMC 7092803 . PMID 31978945 . ^ "COVID-19 Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) Global research and innovation forum" . www.who.int . Retrieved 27 May 2026 . ^ a b Schuchat A (May 2020). "Public Health Response to the Initiation and Spread of Pandemic COVID-19 in the United States, February 24-April 21, 2020" . MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report . 69 (18): 551– 556. doi : 10.15585/mmwr.mm6918e2 . PMC 7737947 . PMID 32379733 . ^ a b Raney JH, Weinstein S, Ganson KT, Testa A, Jackson DB, Pantell M, et al. (March 2024). "Mental Well-Being Among Adversity-Exposed Adolescents During the COVID-19 Pandemic" . JAMA Network Open . 7 (3): e242076. doi : 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2024.2076 . PMC 10938185 . PMID 38477919 . ^ Czeisler MÉ, Lane RI, Petrosky E, Wiley JF, Christensen A, Njai R, et al. (August 2020). "Mental Health, Substance Use, and Suicidal Ideation During the COVID-19 Pandemic - United States, June 24-30, 2020" . MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report . 69 (32): 1049– 1057. doi : 10.15585/mmwr.mm6932a1 . PMC 7440121 . PMID 32790653 . ^ a b Crocker KM, Gnatt I, Haywood D, Butterfield I, Bhat R, Lalitha AR, et al. (April 2023). "The impact of COVID-19 on the mental health workforce: A rapid review" . International Journal of Mental Health Nursing . 32 (2): 420– 445. doi : 10.1111/inm.13097 . PMC 9878253 . PMID 36461629 . ^ a b Mamun MA, Ullah I (July 2020). "COVID-19 suicides in Pakistan, dying off not COVID-19 fear but poverty? - The forthcoming economic challenges for a developing country" . Brain, Behavior, and Immunity . 87 : 163– 166. doi : 10.1016/j.bbi.2020.05.028 . PMC 7212955 . PMID 32407859 . ^ a b Morgan C, Dazzan P, Lappin J, Heslin M, Donoghue K, Fearon P, et al. (October 2022). "Rethinking the course of psychotic disorders: modelling long-term symptom trajectories" . Psychological Medicine . 52 (13): 2641– 2650. doi : 10.1017/S0033291720004705 . PMC 9647538 . PMID 33536092 . ^ a b Blanchflower DG, Bryson A (22 July 2022). Tatsiramos K (ed.). "Covid and mental health in America" . PLOS ONE . 17 (7) e0269855. Bibcode : 2022PLoSO..1769855B . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0269855 . PMC 9307159 . PMID 35867704 . ^ Larsen J (29 November 2021). "7 Remote Working From Home Techniques To Protect Mental Health" . jolarsen.com . ^ Fancourt D, Steptoe A, Bu F (February 2021). "Trajectories of anxiety and depressive symptoms during enforced isolation due to COVID-19 in England: a longitudinal observational study" .

The Lancet. Psychiatry . 8 (2): 141– 149. doi : 10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30482-X . PMC 7820109 . PMID 33308420 . ^ Magnúsdóttir I, Lovik A, Unnarsdóttir AB, McCartney D, Ask H, Kõiv K, et al. (May 2022). "Acute COVID-19 severity and mental health morbidity trajectories in patient populations of six nations: an observational study" .

The Lancet. Public Health . 7 (5): e406– e416. doi : 10.1016/S2468-2667(22)00042-1 . PMC 8920517 . PMID 35298894 . ^ Hastie CE, Lowe DJ, McAuley A, Winter AJ, Mills NL, Black C, et al. (October 2022). "Outcomes among confirmed cases and a matched comparison group in the Long-COVID in Scotland study" . Nature Communications . 13 (1): 5663. Bibcode : 2022NatCo..13.5663H . doi : 10.1038/s41467-022-33415-5 . PMC 9556711 . PMID 36224173 . ^ a b c d Labrague LJ (October 2021). "Pandemic fatigue and clinical nurses' mental health, sleep quality and job contentment during the covid-19 pandemic: The mediating role of resilience" . Journal of Nursing Management . 29 (7): 1992– 2001. doi : 10.1111/jonm.13383 . PMC 8237073 . PMID 34018270 . ^ a b c d "Inter-Agency Standing Committee Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial support" (PDF) . MH Innovation. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 March 2020 . Retrieved 28 March 2020 . ^ Visser M, Law-van Wyk E (June 2021). "University students' mental health and emotional wellbeing during the COVID-19 pandemic and ensuing lockdown" . South African Journal of Psychology = Suid-Afrikaanse Tydskrif Vir Sielkunde . 51 (2): 229– 243. doi : 10.1177/00812463211012219 . PMC 8144883 . PMID 38603064 . ^ Santini A, Messina A, Costantini E, Protti A, Cecconi M (December 2022). "COVID-19: dealing with ventilator shortage" . Current Opinion in Critical Care . 28 (6): 652– 659. doi : 10.1097/MCC.0000000000001000 . PMC 9612413 . PMID 36226709 . ^ Cohen J, Rodgers YV (December 2020). "Contributing factors to personal protective equipment shortages during the COVID-19 pandemic" . Preventive Medicine . 141 106263. doi : 10.1016/j.ypmed.2020.106263 . PMC 7531934 . PMID 33017601 . ^ Ranney ML, Griffeth V, Jha AK (April 2020). "Critical Supply Shortages - The Need for Ventilators and Personal Protective Equipment during the Covid-19 Pandemic" .

The New England Journal of Medicine . 382 (18) e41. doi : 10.1056/NEJMp2006141 . PMID 32212516 . S2CID 214643757 . ^ Kamerow D (April 2020). "Covid-19: the crisis of personal protective equipment in the US" . BMJ . 369 m1367. doi : 10.1136/bmj.m1367 . PMID 32245847 . S2CID 214763266 . ^ a b Kamberi F, Sinaj E, Jaho J, Subashi B, Sinanaj G, Jaupaj K, et al. (October 2021). "Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on mental health, risk perception and coping strategies among health care workers in Albania - evidence that needs attention" . Clinical Epidemiology and Global Health . 12 100824. doi : 10.1016/j.cegh.2021.100824 . PMC 8567021 . PMID 34751254 . S2CID 237014324 . ^ "ICN COVID-19 Update: New guidance on mental health and psychosocial support will help to alleviate effects of stress on hard-pressed staff" . ICN - International Council of Nurses . Archived from the original on 28 March 2020 . Retrieved 28 March 2020 . ^ "Emergency Responders: Tips for taking care of yourself" . emergency.cdc.gov . 10 January 2020. Archived from the original on 27 March 2020 . Retrieved 28 March 2020 . ^ Leary JE (10 June 2021). "Managing the Impact of Isolation in Nursing Homes Due to COVID-19" . HealthCity . Boston Medical Center. ^ Hoedl M, Bauer S, Eglseer D (2021). "Influence of nursing staff working hours on stress levels during the COVID-19 pandemic: A cross-sectional online survey" . HeilberufeSCIENCE . 12 ( 3– 4): 92– 98. doi : 10.1007/s16024-021-00354-y . PMC 8432278 . PMID 34522573 . ^ a b Cho M, Kim O, Pang Y, Kim B, Jeong H, Lee J, et al. (June 2021). "Factors affecting frontline Korean nurses' mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic" . International Nursing Review . 68 (2): 256– 265. doi : 10.1111/inr.12679 . PMC 8251381 . PMID 33894067 . ^ a b Wu PE, Styra R, Gold WL (April 2020). "Mitigating the psychological effects of COVID-19 on health care workers" . Canadian Medical Association Journal . 192 (17): E459– E460. doi : 10.1503/cmaj.200519 . PMC 7207194 . PMID 32295761 . ^ a b Spoorthy MS, Pratapa SK, Mahant S (June 2020). "Mental health problems faced by healthcare workers due to the COVID-19 pandemic-A review" . Asian Journal of Psychiatry . 51 102119. doi : 10.1016/j.ajp.2020.102119 . PMC 7175897 . PMID 32339895 . ^ "CG REPORT 3: The Impact of Pandemic Restrictions on Childhood Mental Health" . Collateral Global . Retrieved 27 January 2022 . ^ Richards EC, Allen MR, Weiss MD (March 2023). "The Impact of School Closures on Service Utilization in School-Based Health Centers" . International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health . 20 (5): 4588. doi : 10.3390/ijerph20054588 . PMC 10001771 . PMID 36901598 . ^ Hertel RA (2020). "The Use of Psychological PPE in the Face of COVID-19" . Medsurg Nursing . 29 (5): 293– 296. OCLC 8880017676 . ProQuest 2451175792 . ^ a b c d e f g h Shipman K, Burrell DN, Huff Mac Pherson A (2021). "An organizational analysis of how managers must understand the mental health impact of teleworking during COVID-19 on employees" . International Journal of Organizational Analysis . 1 (1): 24. doi : 10.1108/IJOA-03-2021-2685 . ISSN 1934-8835 . S2CID 239688255 . ^ "Mental health and psychosocial considerations during the COVID-19 outbreak" (PDF) . World Health Organization. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 March 2020 . Retrieved 28 March 2020 . ^ "Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)" . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . 11 February 2020. Archived from the original on 29 March 2020 . Retrieved 28 March 2020 . ^ Chew QH, Wei KC, Vasoo S, Sim K (October 2020). "Psychological and Coping Responses of Health Care Workers Toward Emerging Infectious Disease Outbreaks: A Rapid Review and Practical Implications for the COVID-19 Pandemic".

The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry . 81 (6). doi : 10.4088/JCP.20r13450 . PMID 33084255 . S2CID 224825968 . ^ " 'Schizophrenic' vs. 'person with schizophrenia': Does person-first language really matter?" . Advisory Board . 28 September 2021. ^ a b c d Woon LS, Sidi H, Nik Jaafar NR, Leong Bin Abdullah MF (December 2020). "Mental Health Status of University Healthcare Workers during the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Post-Movement Lockdown Assessment" . International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health . 17 (24): 9155. doi : 10.3390/ijerph17249155 . PMC 7762588 . PMID 33302410 . ^ a b Stuijfzand S, Deforges C, Sandoz V, Sajin CT, Jaques C, Elmers J, et al. (August 2020). "Psychological impact of an epidemic/pandemic on the mental health of healthcare professionals: a rapid review" . BMC Public Health . 20 (1) 1230. doi : 10.1186/s12889-020-09322-z . PMC 7422454 . PMID 32787815 . ^ a b Zaçe D, Hoxhaj I, Orfino A, Viteritti AM, Janiri L, Di Pietro ML (April 2021). "Interventions to address mental health issues in healthcare workers during infectious disease outbreaks: A systematic review" . Journal of Psychiatric Research . 136 : 319– 333. doi : 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2021.02.019 . PMC 7880838 . PMID 33636688 . ^ a b c d Ghosh R, Dubey MJ, Chatterjee S, Dubey S (June 2020). "Impact of COVID -19 on children: special focus on the psychosocial aspect". Minerva Pediatrica . 72 (3): 226– 235. doi : 10.23736/s0026-4946.20.05887-9 . PMID 32613821 . S2CID 220307198 . ^ a b c Guessoum SB, Lachal J, Radjack R, Carretier E, Minassian S, Benoit L, et al. (September 2020). "Adolescent psychiatric disorders during the COVID-19 pandemic and lockdown" . Psychiatry Research . 291 113264. doi : 10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113264 . PMC 7323662 . PMID 32622172 . ^ a b c Imran N, Aamer I, Sharif MI, Bodla ZH, Naveed S (26 June 2020). "Psychological burden of quarantine in children and adolescents: A rapid systematic review and proposed solutions" . Pakistan Journal of Medical Sciences . 36 (5): 1106– 1116. doi : 10.12669/pjms.36.5.3088 . PMC 7372688 . PMID 32704298 . ^ a b c d e f Panda PK, Gupta J, Chowdhury SR, Kumar R, Meena AK, Madaan P, et al. (January 2021). "Psychological and Behavioral Impact of Lockdown and Quarantine Measures for COVID-19 Pandemic on Children, Adolescents and Caregivers: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis" . Journal of Tropical Pediatrics . 67 (1) fmaa122. doi : 10.1093/tropej/fmaa122 . PMC 7798512 . PMID 33367907 . ^ a b c Sethy M, Mishra R (September 2020). "An Integrated Approach to Deal with Mental Health Issues of Children and Adolescent during COVID-19 Pandemic" . Journal of Clinical and Diagnostic Research . 14 (9). doi : 10.7860/jcdr/2020/45418.14002 . ^ a b c d Shah K, Mann S, Singh R, Bangar R, Kulkarni R (August 2020). "Impact of COVID-19 on the Mental Health of Children and Adolescents" . Cureus . 12 (8) e10051. doi : 10.7759/cureus.10051 . PMC 7520396 . PMID 32999774 . ^ a b c d e f g h Singh S, Roy D, Sinha K, Parveen S, Sharma G, Joshi G (November 2020). "Impact of COVID-19 and lockdown on mental health of children and adolescents: A narrative review with recommendations" . Psychiatry Research . 293 113429. doi : 10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113429 . PMC 7444649 . PMID 32882598 . ^ a b c d Pedrosa AL, Bitencourt L, Fróes AC, Cazumbá ML, Campos RG, de Brito SB, et al. (2020). "Emotional, Behavioral, and Psychological Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic" . Frontiers in Psychology . 11 566212. doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.566212 . PMC 7561666 . PMID 33117234 . ^ a b Fegert JM, Vitiello B, Plener PL, Clemens V (12 May 2020). "Challenges and burden of the Coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic for child and adolescent mental health: a narrative review to highlight clinical and research needs in the acute phase and the long return to normality" . Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Mental Health . 14 (1) 20. doi : 10.1186/s13034-020-00329-3 . PMC 7216870 . PMID 32419840 . ^ Marques de Miranda D, da Silva Athanasio B, Sena Oliveira AC, Simoes-E-Silva AC (December 2020). "How is COVID-19 pandemic impacting mental health of children and adolescents?" . International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction . 51 101845. Bibcode : 2020IJDRR..5101845M . doi : 10.1016/j.ijdrr.2020.101845 . PMC 7481176 . PMID 32929399 . ^ "Coping with a Disaster or Traumatic Event" . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. 13 September 2019. ^ Barr M, Copeland-Stewart A (6 May 2021). "Playing Video Games During the COVID-19 Pandemic and Effects on Players' Well-Being" . Games and Culture . 17 : 122– 139. doi : 10.1177/15554120211017036 . ^ Kaczmarek ŁD, Chwiłkowska P, Behnke M, Drążkowski D (26 August 2025). "Video game play and well-being during the COVID-19 pandemic: a meta-analysis of global findings" . Humanities and Social Sciences Communications . 12 (1): 1388. doi : 10.1057/s41599-025-05581-6 . ISSN 2662-9992 . ^ Vandamme J, Beerten SG, Crèvecoeur J, Van den Bulck S, Aertgeerts B, Delvaux N, et al. (March 2023). "The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Registration and Care Provision of Mental Health Problems in General Practice: Registry-Based Study" . JMIR Public Health and Surveillance . 9 (1) e43049. doi : 10.2196/43049 . PMC 10039400 . PMID 36599160 . S2CID 255466590 . ^ a b Magnúsdóttir I, Lovik A, Unnarsdóttir AB, McCartney D, Ask H, Kõiv K, et al. (May 2022). "Acute COVID-19 severity and mental health morbidity trajectories in patient populations of six nations: an observational study" .

The Lancet. Public Health . 7 (5): e406– e416. doi : 10.1016/S2468-2667(22)00042-1 . PMC 8920517 . PMID 35298894 . ^ Zhao Y, Leach LS, Walsh E, Batterham PJ, Calear AL, Phillips C, et al. (June 2022). "COVID-19 and mental health in Australia - a scoping review" . BMC Public Health . 22 (1) 1200. doi : 10.1186/s12889-022-13527-9 . PMC 9200373 . PMID 35705931 . This article incorporates text from this source, which is available under the CC BY 4.0 license. ^ Allison KM, Levac DE (April 2022). "Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on therapy service delivery and functioning for school-aged children with disabilities in the United States" . Disability and Health Journal . 15 (2) 101266. doi : 10.1016/j.dhjo.2021.101266 . PMC 8730530 . PMID 35115260 . ^ Williams MT, Chapman LK, Simms JV, Tellawi G (2017). "Cross-Cultural Phenomenology of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder".

The Wiley Handbook of Obsessive Compulsive Disorders . pp. 56– 74. doi : 10.1002/9781118890233.ch4 . ISBN 978-1-118-88964-0 . ^ Taylor S (May 2022). "The Psychology of Pandemics". Annual Review of Clinical Psychology . 18 : 581– 609. doi : 10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-072720-020131 . PMID 34780260 . S2CID 244131033 . ^ Jeftić A, Ikizer G, Tuominen J, Chrona S, Kumaga R (October 2021). "Connection between the COVID-19 pandemic, war trauma reminders, perceived stress, loneliness, and PTSD in Bosnia and Herzegovina" . Current Psychology . 42 (10): 8582– 8594. doi : 10.1007/s12144-021-02407-x . PMC 8531897 . PMID 34703194 . ^ Li Y, Scherer N, Felix L, Kuper H (2021). "Prevalence of depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder in health care workers during the COVID-19 pandemic: A systematic review and meta-analysis" . PLOS ONE . 16 (3) e0246454. Bibcode : 2021PLoSO..1646454L . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0246454 . PMC 7946321 . PMID 33690641 . ^ a b c Al-Beltagi M, Saeed NK, Bediwy AS, Alhawamdeh R, Qaraghuli S (November 2022). "Effects of COVID-19 on children with autism" . World Journal of Virology . 11 (6): 411– 425. doi : 10.5501/wjv.v11.i6.411 . PMC 9724198 . PMID 36483100 . ^ a b Stein MA (July 2022). "Editorial Perspective: COVID-19, ADHD management and telehealth: uncertain path" . Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines . 63 (7): 829– 831. doi : 10.1111/jcpp.13584 . PMC 9114980 . PMID 35137959 . ^ Delpino FM, da Silva CN, Jerônimo JS, Mulling ES, da Cunha LL, Weymar MK, et al. (13 September 2022). "Prevalence of anxiety during the COVID-19 pandemic: A systematic review and meta-analysis of over 2 million people" . Journal of Affective Disorders . 318 : 272– 282. doi : 10.1016/j.jad.2022.09.003 . ^ a b Deng J, Zhou F, Hou W, Silver Z, Wong CY, Chang O, et al. (2 October 2020). "The prevalence of depression, anxiety, and sleep disturbances in COVID‐19 patients: a meta‐analysis" . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences . 1486 (1): 90– 111. doi : 10.1111/nyas.14506 . ISSN 0077-8923 . PMC 7675607 . PMID 33009668 . ^ Xiong J, Lipsitz O, Nasri F, Lui LM, Gill H, Phan L, et al. (December 2020). "Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on mental health in the general population: A systematic review" . Journal of Affective Disorders . 277 : 55– 64. doi : 10.1016/j.jad.2020.08.001 . PMC 7413844 . PMID 32799105 . ^ Sun Y, Wu Y, Fan S, Santo TD, Li L, Jiang X, et al. (8 March 2023). "Comparison of mental health symptoms before and during the covid-19 pandemic: evidence from a systematic review and meta-analysis of 134 cohorts" . BMJ . 380 e074224. doi : 10.1136/bmj-2022-074224 . ISSN 1756-1833 . PMC 9992728 . PMID 36889797 . ^ Zhang X, English A, Talhelm T, Nam BH, Wei L (2023). "Rice-farming areas report more anxiety across two years of the COVID-19 pandemic in China" . Social and Personality Psychology Compass . 17 (9) e12795. doi : 10.1111/spc3.12795 . ISSN 1751-9004 . ^ Talhelm T, Lee CS, English AS, Wang S (November 2023). "How Rice Fights Pandemics: Nature-Crop-Human Interactions Shaped COVID-19 Outcomes". Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin . 49 (11): 1567– 1586. doi : 10.1177/01461672221107209 . PMID 35856451 . ^ Talhelm T, English AS (August 2020). "Historically rice-farming societies have tighter social norms in China and worldwide" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 117 (33): 19816– 19824. Bibcode : 2020PNAS..11719816T . doi : 10.1073/pnas.1909909117 . PMC 7443949 . PMID 32732432 . ^ Talhelm T, Oishi S (22 March 2018). How Rice Farming Shaped Culture in Southern China . Vol. 1. Oxford University Press. doi : 10.1093/oso/9780190492908.003.0003 . ^ Talhelm T, Dong X (February 2024). "People quasi-randomly assigned to farm rice are more collectivistic than people assigned to farm wheat" . Nature Communications . 15 (1): 1782. Bibcode : 2024NatCo..15.1782T . doi : 10.1038/s41467-024-44770-w . PMC 10899190 . PMID 38413584 . ^ Altweck L, Marshall TC, Ferenczi N, Lefringhausen K (8 September 2015). "Mental health literacy: a cross-cultural approach to knowledge and beliefs about depression, schizophrenia and generalized anxiety disorder" . Frontiers in Psychology . 6 : 1272. doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01272 . PMC 4561812 . PMID 26441699 . ^ Giurgescu C, Wong AC, Rengers B, Vaughan S, Nowak AL, Price M, et al. (January 2022). "Loneliness and Depressive Symptoms among Pregnant Black Women during the COVID-19 Pandemic" . Western Journal of Nursing Research . 44 (1): 23– 30. doi : 10.1177/01939459211043937 . PMC 10493043 . PMID 34549653 . S2CID 237593309 . ^ a b Moustafa, A. A. (Ed.). (2021). Mental health effects of COVID-19. London, England: Academic Press. ^ a b Morgül E, Kallitsoglou A, Essau CA (September 2020). "Psychological effects of the COVID-19 lockdown on children and families in the UK" (PDF) . Revista de Psicología Clínica con Niños y Adolescentes . 7 (nº 3): 42– 48. doi : 10.21134/rpcna.2020.mon.2049 . S2CID 234651045 . ^ Samji H, Wu J, Ladak A, Vossen C, Stewart E, Dove N, et al. (May 2022). "Review: Mental health impacts of the COVID‐19 pandemic on children and youth – a systematic review" . Child and Adolescent Mental Health . 27 (2): 173– 189. doi : 10.1111/camh.12501 . ISSN 1475-357X . PMC 8653204 . PMID 34455683 . ^ "AAP-AACAP-CHA Declaration of a National Emergency in Child and Adolescent Mental Health" . American Academy of Pediatrics. 19 October 2021. ^ Liu JJ, Bao Y, Huang X, Shi J, Lu L (May 2020). "Mental health considerations for children quarantined because of COVID-19" .

The Lancet. Child & Adolescent Health . 4 (5): 347– 349. doi : 10.1016/S2352-4642(20)30096-1 . PMC 7118598 . PMID 32224303 . ^ Racine N, McArthur BA, Cooke JE, Eirich R, Zhu J, Madigan S (November 2021). "Global Prevalence of Depressive and Anxiety Symptoms in Children and Adolescents During COVID-19: A Meta-analysis" . JAMA Pediatrics . 175 (11): 1142– 1150. doi : 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2021.2482 . PMC 8353576 . PMID 34369987 . ^ Aristovnik A, Keržič D, Ravšelj D, Tomaževič N, Umek L (October 2020). "Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Life of Higher Education Students: A Global Perspective" . Sustainability . 12 (20): 8438. Bibcode : 2020Sust...12.8438A . doi : 10.3390/su12208438 . ^ a b Golberstein E, Wen H, Miller BF (September 2020). "Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) and Mental Health for Children and Adolescents" . JAMA Pediatrics . 174 (9): 819– 820. doi : 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2020.1456 . PMID 32286618 . ^ Ching BC, Downs J, Zhang S, Abdul Cader H, Penhallow J, Voraite E, et al. (August 2025). "Research Review: The impact of the COVID ‐19 pandemic on the mental health of children and young people with pre‐existing mental health and neurodevelopmental conditions – a systematic review and meta‐analysis of longitudinal studies" . Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry . 66 (8): 1274– 1298. doi : 10.1111/jcpp.14117 . ISSN 0021-9630 . PMC 12267672 . PMID 39887362 . ^ a b c d e f g h i Paley A (2021). "National Survey On LGBTQ Youth Mental Health 2021" .

The Trevor Project . Retrieved 11 April 2023 . ^ a b c d "How Pandemic Has Affected Mental Health Of LGBTQ Youth In The U.S." NPR . 20 July 2020 . Retrieved 27 May 2026 . ^ Paddock B (11 April 2022). "LGBTQ Young People at Greater Risk of Mental Health Problems During Pandemic" . WTTW News . Retrieved 2 May 2023 . ^ Bothwell, S. J., Lawlace, M., Newcomb, M. E., & Whitton, S. W. (2024). Relationship quality, COVID stress, and mental health in sexual and gender minority young adults. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships , 41 (4), 912–930. https://doi.org/10.1177/02654075231217390 ^ a b Powder J (17 May 2021). "Teen Mental Health During COVID-19" . Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. ^ Barbosa-Camacho FJ, Romero-Limón OM, Ibarrola-Peña JC, Almanza-Mena YL, Pintor-Belmontes KJ, Sánchez-López VA, et al. (June 2022). "Depression, anxiety, and academic performance in COVID-19: a cross-sectional study" . BMC Psychiatry . 22 (1) 443. doi : 10.1186/s12888-022-04062-3 . PMC 9243721 . PMID 35773635 . ^ "COVID Harmed Kids' Mental Health—And Schools Are Feeling It" . pew.org . 8 November 2021 . Retrieved 4 March 2022 . ^ Pieh C, Plener PL, Probst T, Dale R, Humer E (June 2021). "Assessment of Mental Health of High School Students During Social Distancing and Remote Schooling During the COVID-19 Pandemic in Austria" . JAMA Network Open . 4 (6): e2114866. doi : 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.14866 . PMC 8239947 . PMID 34181016 . ^ Pierce M, Hope H, Ford T, Hatch S, Hotopf M, John A, et al. (October 2020). "Mental health before and during the COVID-19 pandemic: a longitudinal probability sample survey of the UK population" .

The Lancet. Psychiatry . 7 (10): 883– 892. doi : 10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30308-4 . PMC 7373389 . PMID 32707037 . ^ Hu K, Godfrey K, Ren Q, Wang S, Yang X, Li Q (September 2022). "The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on college students in USA: Two years later" . Psychiatry Research . 315 114685. doi : 10.1016/j.psychres.2022.114685 . PMC 9197567 . PMID 35872401 . ^ "Covid: Many students say their mental health is worse due to pandemic" . BBC News . 31 March 2021 . Retrieved 6 April 2021 . ^ a b Baliyan S, Cimadevilla JM, de Vidania S, Pulopulos MM, Sandi C, Venero C (March 2021). "Differential Susceptibility to the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Working Memory, Empathy, and Perceived Stress: The Role of Cortisol and Resilience" . Brain Sciences . 11 (3): 348. doi : 10.3390/brainsci11030348 . PMC 7998983 . PMID 33803413 . ^ Tyra AT, Griffin SM, Fergus TA, Ginty AT (June 2021). "Individual differences in emotion regulation prospectively predict early COVID-19 related acute stress" . Journal of Anxiety Disorders . 81 102411. doi : 10.1016/j.janxdis.2021.102411 . PMC 9759661 . PMID 33962141 . ^ a b Anderson JR, Bloom MJ, Chen G, Jost SR, Keating DP, Lang A, et al. (July 2022). "The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on College Student's Stress and Physical Activity Levels" . Building Healthy Academic Communities Journal . 6 : 9– 21. doi : 10.18061/bhac.v6i1.8670 . ^ Terada Y (23 June 2020). "Covid-19's Impact on Students' Academic and Mental Well-Being" . Edutopia . Retrieved 18 April 2021 . ^ "Coronavirus Impact on Students and Education Systems" . NAACP . Archived from the original on 18 April 2021 . Retrieved 18 April 2021 . ^ De Man J, Buffel V, van de Velde S, Bracke P, Van Hal GF, Wouters E (January 2021). "Disentangling depression in Belgian higher education students amidst the first COVID-19 lockdown (April-May 2020)" . Archives of Public Health . 79 (1) 3. doi : 10.1186/s13690-020-00522-y . PMC 7789891 . PMID 33413635 . ^ Quattrocchi A (4 January 2022). "Perspective | COVID-19 sparks mental health crisis on college campuses nationwide" . EducationNC . Retrieved 24 February 2022 . ^ a b c Keel PK, Gomez MM, Harris L, Kennedy GA, Ribeiro J, Joiner TE (November 2020). "Gaining "The Quarantine 15:" Perceived versus observed weight changes in college students in the wake of COVID-19" .

The International Journal of Eating Disorders . 53 (11): 1801– 1808. doi : 10.1002/eat.23375 . PMC 7461524 . PMID 32856752 . ^ Bonsaksen T, Chiu V, Leung J, Schoultz M, Thygesen H, Price D, et al. (May 2022). "Students' Mental Health, Well-Being, and Loneliness during the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Cross-National Study" . Healthcare . 10 (6): 996. doi : 10.3390/healthcare10060996 . PMC 9222513 . PMID 35742047 . ^ a b Jones SE (2022). "Mental Health, Suicidality, and Connectedness Among High School Students During the COVID-19 Pandemic — Adolescent Behaviors and Experiences Survey, United States, January–June 2021" . MMWR Supplements . 71 . doi : 10.15585/mmwr.su7103a3 . ISSN 2380-8950 . ^ a b c d e Almeida M, Shrestha AD, Stojanac D, Miller LJ (December 2020). "The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on women's mental health" . Archives of Women's Mental Health . 23 (6): 741– 748. doi : 10.1007/s00737-020-01092-2 . PMC 7707813 . PMID 33263142 . ^ a b Foxwell AM, Kennedy EE, Naylor M (July 2021). "Investment in Women's Mental Health During and After the COVID-19 Pandemic" . Journal of Women's Health . 30 (7): 918– 919. doi : 10.1089/jwh.2021.0224 . PMC 8290297 . PMID 34077682 . ^ a b c d e Tekkas Kerman K, Albayrak S, Arkan G, Ozabrahamyan S, Beser A (August 2022). "The effect of the COVID-19 social distancing measures on Turkish women's mental well-being and burnout levels: A cross-sectional study" . International Journal of Mental Health Nursing . 31 (4): 985– 1001. doi : 10.1111/inm.13009 . PMC 9111787 . PMID 35466490 . ^ Kaugars AS, Zemlak J, Oswald DL (November 2023). "Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on U.S. Women's Mental Health". Journal of Women's Health . 32 (11): 1166– 1173. doi : 10.1089/jwh.2023.0253 . PMID 37788396 . S2CID 263622021 . ^ Arzamani N, Soraya S, Hadi F, Nooraeen S, Saeidi M (20 September 2022). "The COVID-19 pandemic and mental health in pregnant women: A review article" . Frontiers in Psychiatry . 13 949239. doi : 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.949239 . PMC 9531726 . PMID 36203829 . ^ a b Eleftheriades M, Vousoura E, Eleftheriades A, Pervanidou P, Zervas IM, Chrousos G, et al. (May 2022). "Physical Health, Media Use, Stress, and Mental Health in Pregnant Women during the COVID-19 Pandemic" . Diagnostics . 12 (5): N.PAG. doi : 10.3390/diagnostics12051125 . PMC 9140022 . PMID 35626281 . ^ a b c Ornelas IJ, Tornberg-Belanger S, Balkus JE, Bravo P, Perez Solorio SA, Perez GE, et al. (December 2021). "Coping With COVID-19: The Impact of the Pandemic on Latina Immigrant Women's Mental Health and Well-being" . Health Education & Behavior . 48 (6): 733– 738. doi : 10.1177/10901981211050638 . PMC 9241170 . PMID 34672827 . ^ a b c Muro A, Feliu-Soler A, Castellà J (August 2021). "Psychological impact of COVID-19 lockdowns among adult women: the predictive role of individual differences and lockdown duration". Women & Health . 61 (7): 668– 679. doi : 10.1080/03630242.2021.1954133 . PMID 34284689 . S2CID 236156497 . ^ Ladika S (13 August 2021). "Hate Crimes" . CQ Researcher . 31 (29): 1– 30 . Retrieved 13 March 2022 . ^ Lui PP, Parikh K, Katedia S, Jouriles EN (September 2021). "Anti-Asian Discrimination and Antiracist Bystander Behaviors amid the COVID-19 Outbreak" . Asian American Journal of Psychology . doi : 10.31234/osf.io/eaz3k . S2CID 236658795 . ^ Cai W, Burch AD, Patel JK (4 April 2021). "Swelling Anti-Asian Violence: Who Is Being Attacked Where" .

The New York Times . ^ "President Trump calls coronavirus 'kung flu' " . BBC News . Retrieved 13 March 2022 . ^ a b Chang TF, Shih KY (December 2025). "Experienced Racism Among Asian American Adolescents and Emerging Adults Amid the COVID ‐19 Pandemic: A Systematic Review From the Perspective of Asian Critical Theory". Journal of Family Theory & Review . 17 (4): 932– 951. doi : 10.1111/jftr.70025 . ISSN 1756-2570 . ^ a b "COVID-19 and Asian Americans" . McKinsey . Retrieved 14 March 2022 . ^ Adesogan O, Lavner JA, Carter SE, Beach SR (November 2022). "COVID-19 Stress and the Health of Black Americans in the Rural South" . Clinical Psychological Science . 10 (6): 1111– 1128. doi : 10.1177/21677026211049379 . PMC 8552003 . PMID 38603071 . ^ Vasquez Reyes M (December 2020). "The Disproportional Impact of COVID-19 on African Americans" . Health and Human Rights . 22 (2): 299– 307. PMC 7762908 . PMID 33390715 . ^ Kirksey L, Tucker DL, Taylor E, White Solaru KT, Modlin CS (February 2021). "Pandemic Superimposed on Epidemic: Covid-19 Disparities in Black Americans" . Journal of the National Medical Association . 113 (1): 39– 42. doi : 10.1016/j.jnma.2020.07.003 . PMC 7395612 . PMID 32747313 . S2CID 220907233 . ^ Andrasfay T, Goldman N (February 2021). "Reductions in 2020 US life expectancy due to COVID-19 and the disproportionate impact on the Black and Latino populations" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 118 (5) e2014746118. Bibcode : 2021PNAS..11814746A . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2014746118 . PMC 7865122 . PMID 33446511 . ^ Wright JE, Merritt CC (September 2020). "Social Equity and COVID ‐19: The Case of African Americans" . Public Administration Review . 80 (5): 820– 826. doi : 10.1111/puar.13251 . ISSN 0033-3352 . PMC 7300605 . PMID 32836453 . ^ Magesh S, John D, Li WT, Li Y, Mattingly-app A, Jain S, et al. (11 November 2021). "Disparities in COVID-19 Outcomes by Race, Ethnicity, and Socioeconomic Status: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis" . JAMA Network Open . 4 (11): e2134147. doi : 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.34147 . ISSN 2574-3805 . PMC 8586903 . PMID 34762110 . ^ Tomer A, Kane JW (10 June 2020). "To protect frontline workers during and after COVID-19, we must define who they are" . Brookings . Retrieved 30 November 2021 . ^ Bourdon O, Raymond C, Marin MF, Olivera-Figueroa L, Lupien SJ, Juster RP (April 2020). "A time to be chronically stressed? Maladaptive time perspectives are associated with allostatic load". Biological Psychology . 152 107871. doi : 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2020.107871 . PMID 32070718 . S2CID 211116656 . ^ "The intersection of COVID-19 and mental health" .

The Lancet. Infectious Diseases . 20 (11): 1217. November 2020. doi : 10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30797-0 . PMC 7544473 . PMID 33038942 . ^ Shreffler J, Petrey J, Huecker M (August 2020). "The Impact of COVID-19 on Healthcare Worker Wellness: A Scoping Review" .

The Western Journal of Emergency Medicine . 21 (5): 1059– 1066. doi : 10.5811/westjem.2020.7.48684 . PMC 7514392 . PMID 32970555 . ^ Shaukat N, Ali DM, Razzak J (July 2020). "Physical and mental health impacts of COVID-19 on healthcare workers: a scoping review" . International Journal of Emergency Medicine . 13 (1) 40. doi : 10.1186/s12245-020-00299-5 . PMC 7370263 . PMID 32689925 . ^ a b Kim SC, Quiban C, Sloan C, Montejano A (March 2021). "Predictors of poor mental health among nurses during COVID-19 pandemic" . Nursing Open . 8 (2): 900– 907. doi : 10.1002/nop2.697 . PMC 7753542 . PMID 33570266 . ^ Ofori AA, Osarfo J, Agbeno EK, Manu DO, Amoah E (1 January 2021). "Psychological impact of COVID-19 on health workers in Ghana: A multicentre, cross-sectional study" . SAGE Open Medicine . 9 20503121211000919. doi : 10.1177/20503121211000919 . PMC 7958156 . PMID 33786183 . ^ Ghosh R, Dubey MJ, Chatterjee S, Dubey S (June 2020). "Impact of COVID -19 on children: special focus on the psychosocial aspect". Minerva Pediatrica . 72 (3): 226– 235. doi : 10.23736/S0026-4946.20.05887-9 . PMID 32613821 . S2CID 220307198 . ^ Liu YE, Zhai ZC, Han YH, Liu YL, Liu FP, Hu DY (September 2020). "Experiences of front-line nurses combating coronavirus disease-2019 in China: A qualitative analysis" . Public Health Nursing . 37 (5): 757– 763. doi : 10.1111/phn.12768 . PMC 7405388 . PMID 32677072 . ^ Arnetz JE, Goetz CM, Arnetz BB, Arble E (November 2020). "Nurse Reports of Stressful Situations during the COVID-19 Pandemic: Qualitative Analysis of Survey Responses" . International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health . 17 (21): 8126. doi : 10.3390/ijerph17218126 . PMC 7663126 . PMID 33153198 . ^ Glasofer A, Townsend AB (October 2020). "Supporting nurses' mental health during the pandemic". Nursing . 50 (10): 60– 63. doi : 10.1097/01.NURSE.0000697156.46992.b2 . PMID 32947374 . S2CID 221799178 . ^ a b c Di Mattei VE, Perego G, Milano F, Mazzetti M, Taranto P, Di Pierro R, et al. (May 2021). "The "Healthcare Workers' Wellbeing (Benessere Operatori)" Project: A Picture of the Mental Health Conditions of Italian Healthcare Workers during the First Wave of the COVID-19 Pandemic" . International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health . 18 (10): 5267. doi : 10.3390/ijerph18105267 . PMC 8156728 . PMID 34063421 . ^ Sasaki N, Kuroda R, Tsuno K, Kawakami N (November 2020). "The deterioration of mental health among healthcare workers during the COVID-19 outbreak: A population-based cohort study of workers in Japan" . Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment & Health . 46 (6): 639– 644. doi : 10.5271/sjweh.3922 . PMC 7737801 . PMID 32905601 . ^ a b Pappa S, Ntella V, Giannakas T, Giannakoulis VG, Papoutsi E, Katsaounou P (August 2020). "Prevalence of depression, anxiety, and insomnia among healthcare workers during the COVID-19 pandemic: A systematic review and meta-analysis" . Brain, Behavior, and Immunity . 88 : 901– 907. doi : 10.1016/j.bbi.2020.05.026 . PMC 7206431 . PMID 32437915 . ^ a b Leng M, Wei L, Shi X, Cao G, Wei Y, Xu H, et al. (March 2021). "Mental distress and influencing factors in nurses caring for patients with COVID-19" . Nursing in Critical Care . 26 (2): 94– 101. doi : 10.1111/nicc.12528 . PMID 33448567 . S2CID 225407069 . ^ Kader N, Elhusein B, Chandrappa NS, Nashwan AJ, Chandra P, Khan AW, et al. (August 2021). "Perceived stress and post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms among intensive care unit staff caring for severely ill coronavirus disease 2019 patients during the pandemic: a national study" . Annals of General Psychiatry . 20 (1) 38. doi : 10.1186/s12991-021-00363-1 . PMC 8379565 . PMID 34419094 . ^ a b Crocker, K. M., Gnatt, I., Haywood, D., Butterfield, I., Bhat, R., Lalitha, A. R. N., … Castle, D. J. (2023).

The impact of COVID‐19 on the mental health workforce: A rapid review. International Journal of Mental Health Nursing , 32 (2), 420–445. https://doi.org/10.1111/inm.13097 ^ a b c Aratani L (14 February 2021). "Caught in a Covid romance: how the pandemic has rewritten relationships" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 18 April 2022 . ^ a b c d Ellyatt H (21 January 2022). "Arguing with your partner over Covid? You're not alone, with the pandemic straining many relationships" . CNBC . Retrieved 18 April 2022 . ^ a b c d e f Savage M (7 December 2020). "Why the pandemic is causing spikes in break-ups and divorces" . BBC . Retrieved 18 April 2022 . ^ a b Ailes E (3 December 2020). " 'Covid ended our marriage': The couples who split in the pandemic" . BBC News . Retrieved 18 April 2022 . ^ Colier N (12 October 2021). "When COVID Threatens to Break Up Your Relationship" . Psychology Today . Retrieved 18 April 2022 . ^ Foster K (21 August 2020). "Sweden sees a rise in divorce applications during pandemic" . Sveriges Radio . Retrieved 18 April 2022 . ^ Gunnell D, Appleby L, Arensman E, Hawton K, John A, Kapur N, et al. (June 2020). "Suicide risk and prevention during the COVID-19 pandemic" .

The Lancet. Psychiatry . 7 (6): 468– 471. doi : 10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30171-1 . PMC 7173821 . PMID 32330430 . ^ Baker N (22 April 2020). "Warning Covid-19 could lead to spike in suicide rates" . Irish Examiner . Retrieved 27 April 2020 . ^ a b c d John A, Pirkis J, Gunnell D, Appleby L, Morrissey J (November 2020). "Trends in suicide during the covid-19 pandemic" . BMJ . 371 m4352. doi : 10.1136/bmj.m4352 . hdl : 1983/57a4ec48-779d-4e8d-99c4-2b4e187bd87c . PMID 33184048 . S2CID 226300218 . ^ Hilliard M (27 April 2020). " 'Cocooning' and mental health: Over 16,000 calls to Alone support line" .

The Irish Times . Retrieved 27 April 2020 . ^ Piovesan A (9 June 2021). "Attempted suicide rates among Victorian teenagers soar by 184 per cent in past six months, Kids Helpline reveals" . Nationwide News. NCA NewsWire. Disturbing new data from the Kids Helpline revealed the shocking statistic after Victoria was plunged into its fourth major Covid-19 lockdown in the past 12 months. ^ "The Martin Gallier Project" .

The Martin Gallier Project . Retrieved 25 January 2022 . ^ "COVID-19: Is the pandemic costing us our mental health?" . Sky News . Retrieved 6 April 2021 . ^ Rogers JP, Chesney E, Oliver D, Begum N, Saini A, Wang S, et al. (April 2021). "Suicide, self-harm and thoughts of suicide or self-harm in infectious disease epidemics: a systematic review and meta-analysis" . Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences . 30 e32. doi : 10.1017/S2045796021000214 . PMC 7610720 . PMID 33902775 . ^ a b c d Pirkis J, John A, Shin S, DelPozo-Banos M, Arya V, Analuisa-Aguilar P, et al. (July 2021). "Suicide trends in the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic: an interrupted time-series analysis of preliminary data from 21 countries" .

The Lancet. Psychiatry . 8 (7): 579– 588. doi : 10.1016/S2215-0366(21)00091-2 . PMC 9188435 . PMID 33862016 . S2CID 233279069 . ^ a b c d Banerjee D, Kosagisharaf JR, Sathyanarayana Rao TS (January 2021). " 'The dual pandemic' of suicide and COVID-19: A biopsychosocial narrative of risks and prevention" . Psychiatry Research . 295 113577. doi : 10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113577 . PMC 7672361 . PMID 33229123 . ^ a b Czeisler MÉ, Lane RI, Petrosky E, Wiley JF, Christensen A, Njai R, et al. (August 2020). "Mental Health, Substance Use, and Suicidal Ideation During the COVID-19 Pandemic - United States, June 24-30, 2020" . MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report . 69 (32): 1049– 1057. doi : 10.15585/mmwr.mm6932a1 . PMC 7440121 . PMID 32790653 . ^ Reger MA, Stanley IH, Joiner TE (November 2020). "Suicide Mortality and Coronavirus Disease 2019-A Perfect Storm?" . JAMA Psychiatry . 77 (11): 1093– 1094. doi : 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2020.1060 . PMID 32275300 . ^ Mamun MA, Griffiths MD (June 2020). "First COVID-19 suicide case in Bangladesh due to fear of COVID-19 and xenophobia: Possible suicide prevention strategies" . Asian Journal of Psychiatry . 51 102073. doi : 10.1016/j.ajp.2020.102073 . PMC 7139250 . PMID 32278889 . ^ Hawke, L. D., Nguyen, A. T. P., Wang, W., Brown, E. E., Xu, D., Deuville, S., … Castle, D. (2024). Systematic review of interventions for mental health, cognition and psychological well-being in long COVID. BMJ Mental Health , 27 (1), e301133. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjment-2024-301133 ^ Hawke, L. D., Nguyen, A. T. P., Wang, W., Brown, E. E., Xu, D., Deuville, S., … Castle, D. (2024). Systematic review of interventions for mental health, cognition and psychological well-being in long COVID. BMJ Mental Health , 27 (1), e301133. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjment-2024-301133 ^ a b Zhou W, Goh G (11 June 2020). "In post-lockdown China, student mental health in focus amid reported jump in suicides" . Reuters . Retrieved 2 December 2020 . ^ Chen Q, Liang M, Li Y, Guo J, Fei D, Wang L, et al. (April 2020). "Mental health care for medical staff in China during the COVID-19 outbreak" .

The Lancet. Psychiatry . 7 (4): e15– e16. doi : 10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30078-X . PMC 7129426 . PMID 32085839 . ^ Liu S, Yang L, Zhang C, Xiang YT, Liu Z, Hu S, et al. (April 2020). "Online mental health services in China during the COVID-19 outbreak" .

The Lancet. Psychiatry . 7 (4): e17– e18. doi : 10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30077-8 . PMC 7129099 . PMID 32085841 . ^ Liu S, Zou S, Zhang D, Wang X, Wu X (July 2022). "Problematic Internet use and academic engagement during the COVID-19 lockdown: The indirect effects of depression, anxiety, and insomnia in early, middle, and late adolescence" . Journal of Affective Disorders . 309 : 9– 18. doi : 10.1016/j.jad.2022.04.043 . PMC 9013175 . PMID 35439467 . ^ Marazziti D, Stahl SM (June 2020). "The relevance of COVID-19 pandemic to psychiatry" . World Psychiatry . 19 (2): 261. doi : 10.1002/wps.20764 . PMC 7215065 . PMID 32394565 . ^ Vijayaraghavan P, Singhal D (13 April 2020). "A Descriptive Study of Indian General Public's Psychological responses during COVID-19 Pandemic Lockdown Period in India" . PsyArXiv . doi : 10.31234/osf.io/jeksn . S2CID 225951123 . ^ Rovoi D (22 September 2021). "Call for some TLC to address mental health crisis in Fiji" . RNZ . Retrieved 22 September 2021 . ^ Gualano MR, Lo Moro G, Voglino G, Bert F, Siliquini R (July 2020). "Effects of Covid-19 Lockdown on Mental Health and Sleep Disturbances in Italy" . International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health . 17 (13): 4779. doi : 10.3390/ijerph17134779 . PMC 7369943 . PMID 32630821 . ^ Costi S, Paltrinieri S, Bressi B, Fugazzaro S, Giorgi Rossi P, Mazzini E (January 2021). "Poor Sleep during the First Peak of the SARS-CoV-2 Pandemic: A Cross-Sectional Study" . International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health . 18 (1): 306. doi : 10.3390/ijerph18010306 . PMC 7795804 . PMID 33406588 . ^ "Two tipplers in Kerala commit suicide upset at not getting liquor during COVID-19 lockdown" .

The New Indian Express . Archived from the original on 29 March 2020 . Retrieved 29 March 2020 . ^ Shah, S. M., Sun, T., Xu, W., Jiang, W., & Yuan, Y. (2022).

The mental health of China and Pakistan, mental health laws and COVID-19 mental health policies: a comparative review. General Psychiatry , 35 (5), e100885-n/a. https://doi.org/10.1136/gpsych-2022-100885 ^ Yamamoto T, Uchiumi C, Suzuki N, Yoshimoto J, Murillo-Rodriguez E (December 2020). "The Psychological Impact of 'Mild Lockdown' in Japan during the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Nationwide Survey under a Declared State of Emergency" . International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health . 17 (24): 2020.07.17.20156125. doi : 10.3390/ijerph17249382 . PMC 7765307 . PMID 33333893 . S2CID 220601718 . ^ Sugaya N, Yamamoto T, Suzuki N, Uchiumi C (October 2020). "A real-time survey on the psychological impact of mild lockdown for COVID-19 in the Japanese population" . Scientific Data . 7 (1) 372. Bibcode : 2020NatSD...7..372S . doi : 10.1038/s41597-020-00714-9 . PMC 7596049 . PMID 33122626 . ^ Ueda M, Nordström R, Matsubayashi T (August 2022). "Suicide and mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic in Japan" . Journal of Public Health . 44 (3): 541– 548. doi : 10.1093/pubmed/fdab113 . medRxiv 10.1101/2020.10.06.20207530 . PMC 8083330 . PMID 33855451 . S2CID 222307132 . ^ "新型コロナウイルス感染症対策（こころのケア）｜こころの耳：働く人のメンタルヘルス・ポータルサイト" . kokoro.mhlw.go.jp . Retrieved 3 May 2020 . ^ Owatari M (20 September 2020). "〈独自〉女性の自殺急増 コロナ影響か 同様の韓国に異例の連絡" . 産経ニュース (in Japanese). Archived from the original on 21 September 2020 . Retrieved 23 September 2020 . ^ a b c De Man J, Smith MR, Schneider M, Tabana H (January 2022). "An exploration of the impact of COVID-19 on mental health in South Africa". Psychology, Health & Medicine . 27 (1): 120– 130. doi : 10.1080/13548506.2021.1954671 . hdl : 10067/1804460151162165141 . PMID 34319182 . S2CID 236471921 . ^ Oliver N, Barber X, Roomp K, Roomp K (September 2020). "Assessing the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic in Spain: Large-Scale, Online, Self-Reported Population Survey" . Journal of Medical Internet Research . 22 (9) e21319. doi : 10.2196/21319 . PMC 7485997 . PMID 32870159 . ^ "Government will declare state of emergency due to coronavirus on Saturday" . La Moncloa . 13 March 2020. ^ Rodríguez-Rey R, Garrido-Hernansaiz H, Collado S (2020). "Psychological Impact and Associated Factors During the Initial Stage of the Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic Among the General Population in Spain" . Frontiers in Psychology . 11 1540. doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01540 . PMC 7325630 . PMID 32655463 . ^ López J, Perez-Rojo G, Noriega C, Carretero I, Velasco C, Martinez-Huertas JA, et al. (November 2020). "Psychological well-being among older adults during the COVID-19 outbreak: a comparative study of the young-old and the old-old adults" . International Psychogeriatrics . 32 (11): 1365– 1370. doi : 10.1017/S1041610220000964 . hdl : 10486/695622 . PMC 7324658 . PMID 32438934 . ^ Owens M, Townsend E, Hall E, Bhatia T, Fitzgibbon R, Miller-Lakin F (January 2022). "Mental Health and Wellbeing in Young People in the UK during Lockdown (COVID-19)" . International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health . 19 (3): 1132. doi : 10.3390/ijerph19031132 . PMC 8834421 . PMID 35162165 . ^ Green EL (24 January 2021). "Surge of Student Suicides Pushes Las Vegas Schools to Reopen" .

The New York Times . ^ Jackson A (10 April 2020). "A crisis mental-health hotline has seen an 891% spike in calls" . CNN . Retrieved 27 April 2020 . ^ Blum K (20 April 2021). "Suicides Rise in Black Population During COVID-19 Pandemic" . Johns Hopkins Medicine. ^ Trump DJ (5 October 2020). "Executive Order on Saving Lives Through Increased Support For Mental- and Behavioral-Health Needs" . ^ Taquet M, Luciano S, Geddes JR, Harrison PJ (February 2021). "Bidirectional associations between COVID-19 and psychiatric disorder: retrospective cohort studies of 62 354 COVID-19 cases in the USA" .

The Lancet. Psychiatry . 8 (2): 130– 140. doi : 10.1016/s2215-0366(20)30462-4 . PMC 7820108 . PMID 33181098 . S2CID 226846568 . ^ Taquet M, Luciano S, Geddes JR, Harrison PJ (February 2021). "Bidirectional associations between COVID-19 and psychiatric disorder: retrospective cohort studies of 62 354 COVID-19 cases in the USA" .

The Lancet. Psychiatry . 8 (2): 130– 140. doi : 10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30462-4 . PMC 7820108 . PMID 33181098 . ^ Small S, Blanc J (8 January 2021). "Mental Health During COVID-19: Tam Giao and Vietnam's Response" . Frontiers in Psychiatry . 11 589618. doi : 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.589618 . PMC 7820702 . PMID 33488422 . ^ Do Duy C, Nong VM, Ngo Van A, Doan Thu T, Do Thu N, Nguyen Quang T (October 2020). "COVID-19-related stigma and its association with mental health of health-care workers after quarantine in Vietnam" . Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences . 74 (10): 566– 568. doi : 10.1111/pcn.13120 . PMC 7404653 . PMID 32779787 . ^ Greenberg N, Docherty M, Gnanapragasam S, Wessely S (March 2020). "Managing mental health challenges faced by healthcare workers during covid-19 pandemic" . BMJ . 368 m1211. doi : 10.1136/bmj.m1211 . PMID 32217624 . ^ Wind TR, Rijkeboer M, Andersson G, Riper H (April 2020). "The COVID-19 pandemic: The 'black swan' for mental health care and a turning point for e-health" . Internet Interventions . 20 100317. doi : 10.1016/j.invent.2020.100317 . PMC 7104190 . PMID 32289019 . ^ Topooco N, Riper H, Araya R, Berking M, Brunn M, Chevreul K, et al. (June 2017). "Attitudes towards digital treatment for depression: A European stakeholder survey" . Internet Interventions . 8 : 1– 9. doi : 10.1016/j.invent.2017.01.001 . PMC 6096292 . PMID 30135823 . ^ "Supplemental Material for Systematic Review of Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy and Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction via Group Videoconferencing: Feasibility, Acceptability, Safety, and Efficacy". Journal of Psychotherapy Integration int0000216.supp. 2022. doi : 10.1037/int0000216.supp . S2CID 242659723 . ^ Appleton R, Williams J, Vera San Juan N, Needle JJ, Schlief M, Jordan H, et al. (December 2021). "Implementation, Adoption, and Perceptions of Telemental Health During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Systematic Review" . Journal of Medical Internet Research . 23 (12) e31746. doi : 10.2196/31746 . PMC 8664153 . PMID 34709179 . ^ Koonin LM, Hoots B, Tsang CA, Leroy Z, Farris K, Jolly T, et al. (October 2020). "Trends in the Use of Telehealth During the Emergence of the COVID-19 Pandemic - United States, January-March 2020" . MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report . 69 (43): 1595– 1599. doi : 10.15585/mmwr.mm6943a3 . PMC 7641006 . PMID 33119561 . ^ Schlief M, Saunders KR, Appleton R, Barnett P, Vera San Juan N, Foye U, et al. (September 2022). "Synthesis of the Evidence on What Works for Whom in Telemental Health: Rapid Realist Review" . Interactive Journal of Medical Research . 11 (2) e38239. doi : 10.2196/38239 . PMC 9524537 . PMID 35767691 . ^ Monaghesh E, Hajizadeh A (August 2020). "The role of telehealth during COVID-19 outbreak: a systematic review based on current evidence" . BMC Public Health . 20 (1) 1193. doi : 10.1186/s12889-020-09301-4 . PMC 7395209 . PMID 32738884 . ^ a b Blease C, Salmi L, Hägglund M, Wachenheim D, DesRoches C (June 2021). "COVID-19 and Open Notes: A New Method to Enhance Patient Safety and Trust" . JMIR Mental Health . 8 (6) e29314. doi : 10.2196/29314 . PMC 8218899 . PMID 34081603 . S2CID 235334523 . ^ Schwarz J, Bärkås A, Blease C, Collins L, Hägglund M, Markham S, et al. (December 2021). "Sharing Clinical Notes and Electronic Health Records With People Affected by Mental Health Conditions: Scoping Review" . JMIR Mental Health . 8 (12) e34170. doi : 10.2196/34170 . PMC 8715358 . PMID 34904956 . ^ Blease C, Dong Z, Torous J, Walker J, Hägglund M, DesRoches CM (March 2021). "Association of Patients Reading Clinical Notes With Perception of Medication Adherence Among Persons With Serious Mental Illness" . JAMA Network Open . 4 (3): e212823. doi : 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.2823 . PMC 7991965 . PMID 33760088 . ^ O'Neill S, Chimowitz H, Leveille S, Walker J (October 2019). "Embracing the new age of transparency: mental health patients reading their psychotherapy notes online". Journal of Mental Health . 28 (5): 527– 535. doi : 10.1080/09638237.2019.1644490 . PMID 31364902 . S2CID 199000133 . ^ Blease CR, O'Neill S, Walker J, Hägglund M, Torous J (November 2020). "Sharing notes with mental health patients: balancing risks with respect".

The Lancet. Psychiatry . 7 (11): 924– 925. doi : 10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30032-8 . PMID 32059796 . S2CID 211121648 . ^ Blease CR, O'Neill SF, Torous J, DesRoches CM, Hagglund M (April 2021). "Patient Access to Mental Health Notes: Motivating Evidence-Informed Ethical Guidelines".

The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease . 209 (4): 265– 269. doi : 10.1097/NMD.0000000000001303 . PMID 33764954 . S2CID 232367133 . ^ Blease C, Salmi L, Rexhepi H, Hägglund M, DesRoches CM (September 2022). "Patients, clinicians and open notes: information blocking as a case of epistemic injustice" . Journal of Medical Ethics . 48 (10): 785. doi : 10.1136/medethics-2021-107275 . PMC 9554023 . PMID 33990427 . S2CID 234499337 . ^ Tyler W (8 May 2020). "The Bottomless Pit: Social Distancing, COVID-19 & The Bubonic Plague" . Sandbox Watch . Archived from the original on 29 June 2020 . Retrieved 10 May 2020 . ^ "Social Distancing: How To Keep Connected And Upbeat" . SuperWellnessBlog . 29 April 2020. Archived from the original on 25 July 2020 . Retrieved 25 July 2020 . ^ Nwabueze, K. K., Akubue, N., Onakoya, A., Okolieze, S. C., Otaniyen-Igbinoba, I. J., Chukwunonye, C., … Adindu, K. N. (2025). Exploring the prevalence and risk factors of adolescent mental health issues in the COVID and post-COVID era in the U.K.: A systematic review. EXCLI Journal , 24 , 508–523. https://doi.org/10.17179/excli2025-8325 ^ a b Eisenbeck N, Carreno DF, Pérez-Escobar JA (17 March 2021). "Meaning-Centered Coping in the Era of COVID-19: Direct and Moderating Effects on Depression, Anxiety, and Stress" . Frontiers in Psychology . 12 648383. doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.648383 . PMC 8010126 . PMID 33815231 . ^ Gloster AT, Lamnisos D, Lubenko J, Presti G, Squatrito V, Constantinou M, et al. (31 December 2020). Francis JM (ed.). "Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on mental health: An international study" . PLOS ONE . 15 (12) e0244809. Bibcode : 2020PLoSO..1544809G . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0244809 . PMC 7774914 . PMID 33382859 . ^ Shen Q, Joyce EE, Ebrahimi OV, Didriksen M, Lovik A, Sævarsdóttir KS, et al. (December 2023). "COVID-19 illness severity and 2-year prevalence of physical symptoms: an observational study in Iceland, Sweden, Norway and Denmark" .