The monarch butterfly or simply monarch ( Danaus plexippus ) is a milkweed butterfly ( subfamily Danainae ) in the family Nymphalidae . Other common names, depending on region, include milkweed , common tiger , wanderer , and black-veined brown . It is among the most familiar of North American butterflies and an iconic pollinator , although it is not an especially effective pollinator of milkweeds . Its wings feature an easily recognizable black, orange, and white pattern, with a wingspan of 8.9–10.2 cm (3.5–4.0 in). A Müllerian mimic , the viceroy butterfly , is similar in color and pattern, but is markedly smaller and has an extra black stripe across each hindwing.

The eastern North American monarch population is notable for its annual southward late-summer/autumn instinctive migration from the northern and central United States and southern Canada to Florida and Mexico.

During the fall migration, monarchs cover thousands of miles, with a corresponding multigenerational return north in spring.

The western North American population of monarchs west of the Rocky Mountains often migrates to sites in southern California, but have been found in overwintering Mexican sites, as well. Populations are found further south in the Americas, and in parts of Europe, Oceania, and Southeast Asia. Etymology The species was originally described by Carl Linnaeus in his Systema Naturae of 1758 and placed in the genus Papilio .

In 1780, Jan Krzysztof Kluk used the monarch as the type species for a new genus, Danaus . However, many works published between at least 1883 and 1964 identified the species as Anosia plexippus or Anosia archippus .

In 1874, entomologist Samuel Hubbard Scudder suggested naming the butterfly "The Monarch". He cited its large size and the notion that it "rules a vast domain" as the basis for the name, which he preferred to William D'Urban's "Storm Fritillary" and Philip Henry Gosse 's "Archippus." In 2005, investigators reported that the monophyletic genus Danaus s.l. had previously been divided into three subgenera ( Danaus s. s. , Salatura , and Anosia ). However, based on their own studies, which combined mitochondrial DNA and nuclear DNA sequence information with morphological data, they concluded that the earlier classification was unsustainable and should be abandoned. Danaus ( Ancient Greek Δαναός ), a great-grandson of Zeus , was a mythical king in Egypt or Libya, who founded Argos ; Plexippus ( Πλήξιππος ) was one of the 50 sons of Aegyptus , the twin brother of Danaus.

In Homeric Greek , his name means 'one who urges on horses', i.e., 'rider' or ' charioteer '.

In the tenth edition of Systema Naturae , at the bottom of page 467, Linnaeus wrote that the names of the Danai festivi , the division of the genus to which Papilio plexippus belonged, were derived from the sons of Aegyptus. Linnaeus divided his large genus Papilio , containing all known butterfly species, into what we would now call subgenera.

The Danai festivi formed one of the "subgenera", containing colorful species, as opposed to the Danai candidi , containing species with bright white wings. Linnaeus wrote: " Danaorum Candidorum nomina a filiabus Danai Aegypti, Festivorum a filiis mutuatus sunt. " (English: "The names of the Danai candidi have been derived from the daughters of Danaus, those of the Danai festivi from the sons of Aegyptus."). Robert Michael Pyle suggested Danaus is a masculinized version of Danaë (Greek Δανάη ), Danaus's great-great-granddaughter, to whom Zeus came as a shower of gold, which seemed to him a more appropriate source for the name of this butterfly. Taxonomy White morph of the monarch in Hawaii called the white monarch Monarch butterfly, Ashbury, Sydney, 2023 Monarchs belong to the subfamily Danainae of the family Nymphalidae . Danainae was formerly considered a separately family Danaidae .

The three species of monarch butterflies are: D. plexippus , described by Linnaeus in 1758, is the species known most commonly as the monarch butterfly ranging from North America to northern South America. Its range extends worldwide, including Hawaii, Australia, New Zealand, Spain, and the Pacific Islands . D. erippus , the southern monarch, was described by Pieter Cramer in 1775. This species is found in tropical and subtropical latitudes of South America, mainly in Brazil, Uruguay, Paraguay, Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, and southern Peru.

The South American monarch and the North American monarch may have been one species at one time. Some researchers believe the southern monarch separated from the monarch's population some two million years ago, at the end of the Pliocene . Sea levels were higher, and the entire Amazonas lowland was a vast expanse of brackish swamp that offered limited butterfly habitat. D. cleophile , the Jamaican monarch, described by Jean-Baptiste Godart in 1819, ranges from Jamaica to Hispaniola . Six subspecies and two color morphs of D. plexippus have been identified: D. p. plexippus – nominate subspecies, described by Linnaeus in 1758, is the migratory subspecies known from most of North America. D. p. p. "form nivosus", the white monarch commonly found on Oahu , Hawaii, and rarely in other locations. D. p. p. (as yet unnamed) – a color morph lacking some wing vein markings. D. p. nigrippus ( Richard Haensch , 1909) – South America - as forma : Danais archippus f. nigrippus . Hay-Roe et al. in 2007 identified this taxon as a subspecies D. p. megalippe ( Jacob Hübner , ) – nonmigratory subspecies, and is found from Florida and Georgia southwards, throughout the Caribbean and Central America to the Amazon River . D. p. leucogyne ( Arthur G. Butler , 1884) − St. Thomas D. p. portoricensis Austin Hobart Clark , 1941 − Puerto Rico D. p. tobagi Austin Hobart Clark, 1941 − Tobago The population level of the white morph in Oahu is nearing 10%.

On other Hawaiian islands, the white morph occurs at a relatively low frequency. White monarchs ( D. p. p. "form nivosus") have been found throughout the world, including Australia, New Zealand, Indonesia, and the United States. However, some taxonomists disagree on these classifications. Genome The monarch was the first butterfly to have its genome sequenced. : 12 The 273-million- base pair draft sequence includes a set of 16,866 protein-coding genes.

The genome provides researchers insights into migratory behavior, the circadian clock, juvenile hormone pathways, and microRNAs that are differentially expressed between summer and migratory monarchs. More recently, the genetic basis of monarch migration and warning coloration has been described. No genetic differentiation exists between the migratory populations of eastern and western North America. : 16 Recent research has identified the specific areas in the genome of the monarch that regulate migration. No genetic difference is seen between a migrating and nonmigrating monarch, but the gene is expressed in migrating monarchs, but not expressed in nonmigrating monarchs. A 2015 publication identified genes from wasp bracoviruses in the genome of the North American monarch leading to articles about monarch butterflies being genetically modified organisms . Life cycle The life cycle of the monarch butterfly Like all Lepidoptera, monarchs undergo complete metamorphosis ; their life cycle has four phases: egg, larva, pupa, and adult. Monarchs transition from eggs to adults during warm summer temperatures in as little as 25 days, extending to as many as seven weeks during cool spring conditions.

During their development, both larvae and their milkweed hosts are vulnerable to weather extremes, predators, parasites, and diseases; commonly fewer than 10% of monarch eggs and caterpillars survive. : 21–22 Egg Sequential stages of monarch development - an egg, five caterpillars, and a chrysalis on common milkweed leaves Egg Monarch butterfly flying around narrowleaf milkweed , depositing an egg. Played a second time at half speed.

The egg is derived from materials ingested as a larva and from the spermatophores received from males during mating. Female monarchs lay eggs singly, most often on the underside of a young leaf of a milkweed plant during the spring and summer. Females secrete a small amount of glue to attach their eggs directly to the plant. They typically lay 300 to 500 eggs over a two- to five-week period. Eggs are cream colored or light green, ovate to conical in shape, and about 1.2 mm × 0.9 mm (0.047 in × 0.035 in) in size.

The eggs weigh less than 0.5 mg (0.0077 gr) each and have raised ridges that form longitudinally from the point to apex to the base.

Although each egg is The number of eggs laid by a female, which may mate several times, can reach 1,180. Eggs take three to eight days to develop and hatch into larvae or caterpillars . : 21 The offspring's consumption of milkweed benefits health and helps defend them against predators.

In the US Monarchs lay eggs along the southern migration route. Larva Monarch caterpillar Size comparison between a parsley worm (top), a monarch caterpillar (middle), and a queen caterpillar (bottom) all on a human hand The larva (caterpillar) has five stages ( instars ), molting at the end of each instar. Instars last about 3 to 5 days, depending on factors such as temperature and food availability.

The first-instar caterpillar that emerges from the egg is pale green or grayish-white, shiny, almost translucent, with a large, black head. It lacks banding coloration or tentacles.

The larva or caterpillar eats its egg case and begins to feed on milkweed in a circular motion, often leaving a characteristic, arc-shaped hole in the leaf. Older first-instar larvae have dark stripes on a greenish background and develop small bumps that later become front tentacles.

The first instar is usually between 2 and 6 mm (0.079 and 0.236 in) long.

The second-instar larva develops a characteristic pattern of white, yellow, and black transverse bands.

The larva has a yellow triangle on the head and two sets of yellow bands around this central triangle. It is no longer translucent and is covered in short setae . Pairs of black tentacles begin to grow, a larger pair on the thorax and a smaller pair on the abdomen.

The second instar is usually between 6 mm (0.24 in) and 1 cm (0.39 in) long. Fifth-instar monarch caterpillar eating milkweed leaves (Some at 20 × speed). A second-instar larva grazing on a leaf and cutting through a latex vein.

The third-instar larva has more distinct bands and the two pairs of tentacles become longer. Legs on the thorax differentiate into smaller pairs near the head and larger pairs further back. Third-instar larvae usually feed using a cutting motion on leaf edges.

The third instar is usually between 1 and 1.5 cm (0.39 and 0.59 in) long.

The fourth-instar larva has a different banding pattern. It develops white spots on the prolegs near its back, and is usually between 1.5 and 2.5 cm (0.59 and 0.98 in) long.

The fifth-instar larva has a more complex banding pattern and white dots on the prolegs, with small front legs very close to the head. Its length ranges from 2.5 to 4.5 cm (0.98 to 1.77 in).

The larvae typically chew through a latex vein to relieve the pressure and feed above it. Fifth-instar larvae often chew a notch in the petiole of the leaf they are eating, which relieves the latex pressure and causes the leaf to fall into a vertical position.

As the caterpillar completes its growth, it is 4.5 cm (1.8 in) long (large specimens can reach 5 cm (2.0 in)) and 7 to 8 mm (0.28 to 0.31 in) wide, and weighs about 1.5 g (0.053 oz), compared to the first instar, which is 2 to 6 mm (0.079 to 0.236 in) long and 0.5 to 1.5 mm (0.020 to 0.059 in) wide. Fifth-instar larvae greatly increase in size and weight. They then stop feeding and are often found far from milkweed plants as they seek a site for pupating. A monarch caterpillar can travel up to 10 meters from its milkweed plant to find a safe place to pupate.

In a laboratory setting, the fourth- and fifth-instar caterpillar stages showed aggressive behavior with lower food availability. Attacked caterpillars were found to be attacked when feeding on milkweed leaves, and the caterpillars attacked when foraging for milkweed. This demonstrates the aggressive behavior of monarch caterpillars due to the availability of milkweed. Pupa A caterpillar metamorphosing into a pupa Chrysalis To prepare for the pupal or chrysalis stage, the caterpillar chooses a safe place for pupation, where it spins a silk pad on a downward-facing horizontal surface.

At this point, it turns around and securely latches on with its last pair of hind legs and hangs upside down, in the form of the letter J.

After "J-hanging" for about 12–16 hours, it soon straightens out its body and goes into peristalsis some seconds before its skin splits behind its head. It then sheds its skin over a few minutes, revealing a green chrysalis.

At first, the chrysalis is long, soft, and somewhat amorphous, but over a few hours, it compacts into its distinct shape – an opaque, pale-green chrysalis with small golden dots near the bottom, and a gold-and-black rim around the dorsal side near the top.

At first, its exoskeleton is soft and fragile, but it hardens and becomes more durable within about a day.

At this point, it is about 2.5 cm (0.98 in) long and 10–12 mm (0.39–0.47 in) wide, weighing about 1.2 g (0.042 oz).

At normal summer temperatures, it matures in 8–15 days (usually 11–12 days).

During this pupal stage, the adult butterfly forms inside. A day or so before emerging, the exoskeleton first becomes translucent and the chrysalis more bluish. Finally, within 12 hours or so, it becomes transparent, revealing the black and orange colors of the butterfly inside before it ecloses (emerges).

In 2009, monarchs were reared on the International Space Station as part of the Monarchs in Space project, launched aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis mission STS-129 , successfully emerging from pupae located in the station's Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus. Adult The adult emerges from its chrysalis after about two weeks of pupation.

The emergent adult hangs upside down for several hours while it pumps fluids and air into its wings, which expand, dry, and stiffen.

The butterfly then extends and retracts its wings. Once conditions allow, it flies and feeds on many nectar plants.

During the breeding season, adults reach sexual maturity in 4–5 days. However, the migrating generation does not reach maturity until overwintering is complete. A monarch emerging from its chrysalis An emergent monarch clinging to its chrysalis shell Monarch butterflies flying and sipping nectar from milkweed flowers The adult's wingspan ranges from 8.9 to 10.2 centimetres (3.5 to 4.0 in).

The upper sides of the wings are tawny orange, the veins and margins are black, and two series of small white spots occur in the margins. Monarch forewings also have a few orange spots near their tips. Wing undersides are similar, but the tips of forewings and hindwings are yellow-brown instead of tawny orange and the white spots are larger.

The shape and color of the wings change at the beginning of the migration and appear redder and more elongated than later migrants. Wings size and shape differ between migratory and nonmigratory monarchs. Monarchs from eastern North America have larger and more angular forewings than the western population.

In eastern North American populations, overall wing size in the physical dimensions of wings varies. Males tend to have larger wings than females and are typically heavier than females. Both males and females have similar thoracic dimensions. Female monarchs tended to have thicker wings, which are thought to convey greater tensile strength and reduce the likelihood of being damaged during migration. Additionally, females had lower wing loading than males, meaning females require less energy to fly. Adults are sexually dimorphic . Males are slightly larger than females and have a black spot on a vein on each hindwing.

The spots contain androconial scales that produce pheromones that many Lepidoptera use during courtship. Females are often darker than males and have wider veins on their wings.

The ends of the abdomens of males and females differ in shape.

The adult thorax has six legs, but like all Nymphalidae, the forelegs are small and held against the body.

The butterfly uses only its middle and hind legs when walking and clinging. Adults typically live for 2–5 weeks during their breeding season. : 22–23 Larvae growing in high densities are smaller, have lower survival, and weigh less as adults compared with those growing in lower densities. Excessive cardenolide consumption adversely affects the growth and survival of monarch larvae.

When laying eggs, reproducing monarch females therefore tend to select individual milkweed plants, such as many of those of Asclepias syriaca (common milkweed), whose sap has moderate levels of cardenolides. Male Male monarch butterflies can be distinguished from females by the small, black, fuzzy spots on their hind wings, which are scent glands used for courtship, and by their slightly thinner black wing veins. Female Female monarch butterflies lack these spots, have a darker, more orange-brown appearance, and generally have thicker, wider black wing veins than males. Vision Physiological experiments suggest that monarch butterflies view the world through a tetrachromatic system. Like humans, their retina contain three types of opsin proteins, expressed in distinct photoreceptor cells, each of which absorbs light at a different wavelength. Unlike humans, one of those types of photoreceptor cells corresponds to a wavelength in the ultraviolet range; the other two correspond to blue and green.

In addition to these three photoreceptor cells in the main retina, monarch butterfly eyes contain orange filtering pigments that filter the light reaching some green-absorbing opsins, thereby making a fourth photoreceptor cell sensitive to longer-wavelength light.

The combination of filtered and unfiltered green opsins allows the butterflies to distinguish yellow from orange colors.

The ultraviolet opsin protein has also been detected in the dorsal rim region of monarch eyes. One study suggests that this allows the butterflies to detect ultraviolet-polarized skylight to orient themselves with the sun for their long migratory flight. These butterflies are capable of distinguishing colors based on their wavelength only, and not based on intensity; this phenomenon is termed "true color vision". This is important for many butterfly behaviors, including seeking nectar for nourishment, choosing a mate, and finding milkweed on which to lay eggs. One study found that floral color is more easily recognized at a distance by butterflies searching for nectar than floral shape. This may be because flowers have highly contrasting colors to the green background of a vegetative landscape. Leaf shape is important for oviposition so that the butterflies can ensure their eggs are laid on milkweed. Beyond the perception of color, the ability to remember certain colors is essential in the life of monarch butterflies. These insects can easily learn to associate color, and to a lesser extent, shape, with sugary food rewards.

When searching for nectar , color is the first cue that draws the insect's attention toward a potential food source, and shape is a secondary characteristic that promotes the process.

When searching for a place to lay its eggs, the roles of color and shape are switched. Also, a difference may exist between male and female butterflies from other species regarding the ability to learn certain colors; however, no differences are noted between the sexes for monarch butterflies. Courtship and mating Monarch butterflies mating (video) Monarch butterflies mating with male clinging to leaf Monarch courtship occurs in two phases.

During the aerial phase, a male pursues and often forces a female to the ground.

During a ground phase and a post-nuptial flight, the butterflies copulate and remain attached for up to 16 hours. Only 30% of mating attempts end in copulation, suggesting that females can avoid mating, though some have more success than others.

During copulation, a male transfers his spermatophore to a female. Along with sperm , the spermatophore provides a female with nutrition, which aids her in laying eggs. An increase in spermatophore size increases the fecundity of female monarchs. Males that produce larger spermatophores also fertilize more females' eggs. Females and males typically mate more than once. Females that mate several times lay more eggs. Mating for the overwintering populations occurs in the spring, before dispersion. Mating is less dependent on pheromones than in other species in its genus. Male search and capture strategies may influence copulatory success, and human-induced changes to the habitat can influence monarch mating activity at overwintering sites. Distribution and habitat String of monarchs wintering at California's Pismo State Beach Monarch Preserve (2015) The range of the western and eastern populations of D. p. plexippus expands and contracts depending upon the season.

The range differs between breeding areas, migration routes, and winter roosts. : 18 However, no genetic differences between the western and eastern monarch populations exist; reproductive isolation has not led to subspeciation of these populations, as it has elsewhere within the species' range. : 19 In the Americas, the monarch ranges from southern Canada through northern South America. It is also found in Bermuda, the Cook Islands , Hawaii, Cuba, and other Caribbean islands, : 18 the Solomons, New Caledonia , New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Australia, the Azores , the Canary Islands , Madeira , continental Portugal, Gibraltar , the Philippines, and Morocco. It appears in the UK in some years as an accidental migrant. Overwintering populations of D. p. plexippus are found in Mexico, California, along the Gulf Coast of the United States , year-round in Florida, and in Arizona where the habitat has the specific conditions necessary for survival.

On the East Coast of the United States , they have overwintered as far north as Virginia Beach, Virginia . Their wintering habitat typically provides access to streams, plenty of sunlight (enabling body temperatures that allow flight), and appropriate roosting vegetation, and is relatively free of predators. Overwintering, roosting butterflies have been seen on basswoods, elms, sumacs, locusts, oaks, osage-oranges, mulberries, pecans, willows, cottonwoods, and mesquites.

While breeding, monarch habitats can be found in agricultural fields, pasture land, prairie remnants, urban and suburban residential areas, gardens, trees, and roadsides – anywhere there is access to larval host plants. Larval host plants Asclepias syriaca , common milkweed Asclepias viridis , green antelopehorn milkweed Asclepias asperula , antelope horns milkweed Asclepias curassavica , tropical milkweed The host plants used by the monarch caterpillar include: The World Wildlife Fund has published lists of milkweed species that thrive in each of six U.S. regions: Western, Northeast, Southeast, South-central, Arizona, and California.

The eastern monarch migration largely depends upon only three of these species: Asclepias syriaca , A. viridis , and A. asperula . Using cardenolide fingerprinting analysis, investigators have found that 85-92% of monarchs overwintering in Mexico had fed on A. syriaca as caterpillars, while 84% of the first-generation monarchs that colonized the Upper Midwest had fed as larvae on A. viridis . However, Asclepias curassavica , or tropical milkweed, is often planted as an ornamental in butterfly gardens. Year-round plantings in the USA are controversial and criticized, as they may cause new overwintering sites along the U.S. Gulf Coast, leading to year-round breeding of monarchs. This is thought to adversely affect migration patterns and to cause a dramatic buildup of the dangerous parasite, Ophryocystis elektroscirrha . New research also has shown that monarch larvae reared on tropical milkweed show reduced migratory development (reproductive diapause), and when migratory adults are exposed to tropical milkweed, it stimulates reproductive tissue growth. Adult food sources Nectaring on Mexican sunflower ( Tithonia rotundifolia ) (August 2019) Nectaring on butterfly-bush ( Buddleja ) (2006) Although monarch larvae eat only milkweed, adult monarchs and other pollinators feed on the nectar of many plants, including: Apocynum cannabinum — Indian hemp Asclepias spp. — milkweeds Asteraceae family (many genera, including Eurybia — asters) Buddleja davidii — butterfly-bush Caryopteris × clandonensis — bluebeard Ceanothus americanus — New Jersey tea Cephalanthus occidentalis — buttonbush Cercis spp. — redbuds Cirsium spp. — thistles Clethra alnifolia — coastal sweetpepperbush Conoclinium coelestinum — blue mistflower Coreopsis spp. — calliopsis, tickseed Chromolaena odorata - jack in the bush Daucus carota — wild carrot Dasiphora fruticosa — shrubby cinquefoil Diervilla spp. — bush honeysuckle Dipsacus sylvestris — teasel Echinacea spp. — coneflowers Erigeron canadensis — horseweed Erigeron glaucus — Seaside fleabane Eutrochium (Eupatorium) spp. — Joe-Pye weeds, including Eupatorium maculatum (spotted Joe-Pye weed) Eupatorium perfoliatum — common boneset Hamelia patens — firebush Helianthus spp. — sunflowers Heptacodium miconioides — seven-son flower Hesperis matronalis — dame's rocket Hibiscus syriacus — rose of Sharon Hypericum kalmianum — Kalm's St. John’s wort Itea virginica — Virginia sweetspire Lantana spp. — lantanas Liatris spp. — blazing stars Lindera benzoin — spicebush Medicago sativa — alfalfa Monarda spp. — beebalms Phlox spp. — phloxes Prunus americana — American plum Prunus serotina — black cherry Pycnanthemum spp. — mountain mints Rhus spp. — sumacs Ribes odoratum — clove currant Rudbeckia spp. — coneflowers, black-eyed-susans Sambucus spp. — elderberries Solidago spp. — goldenrods Spiraea alba — meadowsweet Symphyotrichum spp. — asters Syringa vulgaris – common lilac Tithonia rotundifolia — Mexican sunflower Trifolium pinetorum – woods clover Trifolium pratense – red clover Vaccinium spp. – blueberries Verbena spp. — verbenas Verbesina virginica – frostweed Vernonia spp. – ironweeds, including Vernonia gigantea (giant ironweed) and Vernonia lettermannii (narrowleaf ironweed) Viburnum spp. – viburnums Adult monarchs prefer to feed on sturdy plants that have relatively flat surfaces (sunflowers, asters) or long multi-flowering inflorescences (gayfeather), where the nectar is easily accessed, as in many species in the Asteraceae (sunflower) family. Common characteristics of this family include clusters of flowers with shallow, easily accessed nectar. Milkweeds, which also have easily accessible nectar, are excellent nectar sources. Publications have reported that Mexican sunflower ( Tithonia rotundifolia ) is especially attractive to adult monarchs. Like that species, coneflowers ( Echinacea spp. ), gayfeathers ( Liatris spp. ), goldenrods ( Solidago spp. ), blue mistflower ( Conoclinium coelestinum ), frostweed ( Verbesina virginica ), Joe-Pye weeds ( Eutrochium spp. ), ironweeds ( Vernonia spp. ), asters ( Symphyotrichum spp. and Eurybia spp. ) and other late-flowering genera of the Asteraceae family, are major nectar sources for monarchs during their fall migration.

During the spring migration, important nectar sources include early-blooming Asclepias spp. , Coreopsis spp. , Viburnum spp ., and Phlox spp. Monarchs obtain moisture and minerals from damp soil and wet gravel, a behavior known as mud-puddling . Flight and migration Overwintering on Oyamel fir ( Abies religiosa ) in Piedra Herrada, Mexico , within the Monarch Butterfly Biosphere Reserve (February 2023) The population east of the Rocky Mountains attempts to migrate to the sanctuaries of the Monarch Butterfly Biosphere Reserve in the Mexican state of Michoacán northwest of Mexico City , the Joya Redonda Monarch Butterfly Sanctuary, located 50 miles (80 km) southeast of Mexico City in the foothills of the volcanoes Popocatépetl and Ixtaccíhuatl in the State of México 's municipality of Atlautla , and to parts of Florida.

The western population tries to reach overwintering destinations in various coastal sites in central and southern California.

The populations east of the Rocky Mountains , which mostly overwinter in central Mexico , may return the following spring as far north as Texas and Oklahoma before producing offspring to carry the journey northward.

The second, third, and fourth generations return to their northern locations in the United States and Canada later in the spring and far into the summer. Flight speeds of adults are around 9 km/h (6 mph). Monarchs travel between 1,200 and 2,800 miles or more from the northeast United States, and southeast Canada, to the mountain forests in central Mexico, where they find the right climate conditions to hibernate from the beginning of November to mid-March.

In 2025, Project Monarch deployed over 400 solar-powered ultralight transmitters on the thoraxes of that year's southward-migrating monarchs. A mid-November 2025 web page showed the routes that the monarchs had taken up to that time. Captive-raised monarchs appear capable of migrating to overwintering sites in Mexico, though they have a much lower migratory success rate than do wild monarchs (see section on captive-rearing below). Monarch overwintering sites have been discovered recently in Arizona. Monarchs from the eastern US generally migrate longer distances than monarchs from the western US.

Since the 1800s, monarchs have spread globally, and there are now many non-migratory populations. Climate change and habitat loss have significantly altered the monarch butterfly’s migration behavior. Rising temperatures and the widespread loss of milkweed ( Asclepias spp.), the primary host plant for monarch larvae, have disrupted breeding and migratory patterns across North America, contributing to population declines over the past two decades. Interactions with predators In both caterpillar and butterfly forms, monarchs are aposematic , warding off predators with a bright display of contrasting colors to warn potential predators of their undesirable taste and poisonous characteristics.

When discussing a recent publication that had described species distribution models for natural enemies of monarchs, a monarch scientist emphasized that predation on eggs, larvae, or adults is natural since monarchs are part of the food chain. Larvae feed exclusively on milkweed and consume protective cardiac glycosides. Toxin levels in the Asclepias species vary. Not all monarchs are unpalatable, but exhibit Batesian or automimics . Cardiac glycoside levels are higher in the abdomen and wings. Some predators can differentiate between these parts and consume the most palatable ones. Butterfly weed ( A. tuberosa ) lacks significant amounts of cardiac glycosides (cardenolides) but instead contains other types of toxic glycosides, including pregnanes . This difference may reduce the toxicity of monarchs whose larvae feed on that milkweed species and affect the butterfly's breeding choices, as a naturalist and others have reported that egg-laying monarchs do not favor the plant. Some other milkweeds have similar characteristics. Types of predators A European paper wasp takes a monarch butterfly caterpillar from within a narrow leaf milkweed umbel . Part is shown at one fourth speed.

While monarchs have a wide range of natural predators, none of these is suspected of causing harm to the overall population, or are the cause of the long-term declines in winter colony sizes. Several species of birds have acquired methods that allow them to ingest monarchs without experiencing the ill effects associated with the cardiac glycosides (cardenolides).

The black-backed oriole can eat the monarch through an exaptation of its feeding behavior that gives it the ability to identify cardenolides by taste and reject them.

The black-headed grosbeak , though, has developed an insensitivity to secondary plant poisons that allows it to ingest monarchs without vomiting.

As a result, these orioles and grosbeaks periodically have high levels of cardenolides in their bodies, and they are forced to go on periods of reduced monarch consumption. This cycle effectively reduces potential predation of monarchs by 50% indicating that monarch aposematism has a legitimate purpose.

The black-headed grosbeak has also evolved resistance mutations in the molecular target of the heart poisons, the sodium pump.

The specific mutations that evolved in one of the grosbeak's four copies of the sodium pump gene are the same as those found in some rodents that have also evolved to resist cardiac glycosides. Known bird predators include brown thrashers , grackles , robins , cardinals , sparrows , scrub jays , and pinyon jays . Chinese mantis feeding on a monarch butterfly.

The species also feeds on monarch caterpillars, being resistant to their toxins and gutting them before consumption to remove most of the toxins.

The monarch's white morph appeared in Oahu after the 1965–1966 introduction of two bulbul bird species, Pycnonotus cafer and Pycnonotus jocosus . These are now the most common avian insectivores in Hawaii, and probably the only ones that eat insects as large as monarchs.

Although Hawaiian monarchs have low cardiac glycoside levels, the birds may also be tolerant of that toxin.

The two species hunt the larvae and some pupae from the branches and undersides of leaves in milkweed bushes.

The bulbuls also eat resting and ovipositing adults, but rarely flying ones. Because of its color, the white morph has a higher survival rate than the orange one. This is either because of apostatic selection (i.e., the birds have learned the orange monarchs can be eaten), because of camouflage (the white morph matches the white pubescence of milkweed or the patches of light shining through foliage), or because the white morph does not fit the bird's search image of a typical monarch, so is thus avoided. 1) A stink (shield) bug killing and consuming a fourth-instar monarch larva. 2) A mature fifth instar larva jerking to dislodge a large milkweed bug (a herbivore). 3) A fourth-instar larva killed by insect parasitoids, non-insect parasites, or a pathogen. Some mice, particularly the black-eared mouse ( Peromyscus melanotis ), are, like all rodents, able to tolerate large doses of cardenolides and can eat monarchs. Overwintering adults become less toxic over time making them more vulnerable to predators.

In Mexico, about 14% of the overwintering monarchs are eaten by birds and mice and black-eared mice can eat up to 40 monarchs per night.

In North America, larvae and adults of the introduced Asian lady beetle ( Harmonia axyridis ) feed on eggs and first-instar monarch larvae.

The Chinese mantis ( Tenodera sinensis ) will consume the larvae once the gut is removed thus avoiding cardenolides. Predatory wasps commonly consume larvae. Many Hemipteran bugs including predatory stink bugs in the subfamily Asopinae and assassin bugs in family Reduviidae prey on monarch caterpillars or eggs, as do many species of spiders, grasshoppers, crickets, ants, flies, beetles and other arthropods . Larvae can sometimes avoid predation by dropping from the plant or by jerking their bodies. Parasitoids , including tachinid flies and braconid wasps develop inside the monarch larvae eventually killing them and emerging from the larvae or pupa. Non-insect parasites and infectious diseases ( pathogens ) also kill monarchs. Aposematism Chemical structure of oleandrin , one of the cardiac glycosides Monarchs are toxic and foul-tasting because of the presence of cardenolides in their bodies, which the caterpillars ingest as they feed on milkweed. Monarchs and other cardenolide-resistant insects rely on a resistant form of the Na+/ K+-ATPase enzyme to tolerate significantly higher concentrations of cardenolides than nonresistant species.

By ingesting a large number of plants in the genus Asclepias , primarily milkweed, monarch caterpillars can sequester cardiac glycosides, or more specifically cardenolides , which are steroids that act in heart-arresting ways similar to digitalis . It has been found that monarchs can sequester cardenolides most effectively from plants of intermediate cardenolide content rather than those of high or low content. Three mutations that evolved in the monarch's Na+/ K+-ATPase were found to be sufficient together to confer resistance to dietary cardiac glycosides. This was tested by swapping these mutations into the same gene in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster using CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing. These fruit flies-turned monarch flies were completely resistant to dietary ouabain , a cardiac glycoside found in Apocynaceae , and even sequestered some through metamorphosis, like the monarch. Different milkweed species have variable effects on parasite growth, virulence, and transmission. One species, Asclepias curassavica , appears to reduce the symptoms of Ophryocystis elektroscirrha (OE) infection.

The two possible explanations for this include that it promotes overall monarch health to boost the monarch's immune system or that chemicals from the plant have a direct negative effect on the OE parasites. A. curassavica does not cure or prevent the infection with OE; it merely allows infected monarchs to live longer, and this would allow infected monarchs to spread the OE spores for longer periods. For the average home butterfly garden, this scenario only adds more OE to the local population.

After the caterpillar becomes a butterfly, the toxins shift to different body parts.

Since many birds attack the butterfly's wings, having three times the cardiac glycosides in the wings leaves predators with a foul taste and may prevent them from ever ingesting the butterfly's body. To combat predators that remove the wings only to ingest the abdomen, monarchs keep the most potent cardiac glycosides in their abdomens. Mimicry Monarch (left) and viceroy (right) butterflies exhibiting Müllerian mimicry Monarchs share the defense of noxious taste with the similar-appearing viceroy butterfly in what is perhaps one of the most well-known examples of mimicry . Though long purported to be an example of Batesian mimicry , the viceroy is more unpalatable than the monarch, making this a case of Müllerian mimicry . Human interaction The monarch is the state insect of Alabama , Idaho , Illinois , Minnesota , Texas , Vermont , and West Virginia . Legislation was introduced to make it the national insect of the United States, but this failed in 1989 and again in 1991. Homeowners are increasingly establishing butterfly gardens; monarchs can be attracted by cultivating a butterfly garden with specific milkweed species and nectar plants. These efforts are organized to establish monarch waystations. A 2012 IMAX film, Flight of the Butterflies , describes the story of the Urquharts , Brugger , and Trail to document the then-unknown monarch migration to Mexican overwintering areas. Nectaring monarch tagged for Monarch Watch (Washington, D.C., October 2012) Sanctuaries and reserves have been created at overwintering locations in Mexico and California to limit habitat destruction . These sites can generate significant tourism revenue. However, with less tourism, monarch butterflies may exhibit higher survival rates, as butterflies in tourist isolated areas have shown increases in protein content, immune response and oxidative defense. Organizations and individuals participate in tagging programs. Tagging information is used to study migration patterns.

The 2012 novel by Barbara Kingsolver , Flight Behavior , deals with the fictional appearance of a large population in the Appalachians . Captive rearing Humans interact with monarchs when rearing them in captivity. This has become increasingly popular. This is considered to be a controversial activity.

On one hand, captive rearing has many positive aspects. Monarchs are reared in schools and used for butterfly releases at hospices, memorial events, and weddings. Memorial services for the September 11 attacks include the release of captive-bred monarchs. Monarchs are used in schools and nature centers for educational purposes. Adult monarchs will extend their proboscises to reach people's fingertips. With assistance, they will also extend their proboscises into a dish containing artificial food.

On the other hand, this practice becomes problematic when monarchs are "mass-reared". Stories in the Huffington Post in 2015 and Discover magazine in 2016 have summarized the controversy around this issue.

The frequent media reports of monarch declines have encouraged many homeowners to attempt to rear as many monarchs as possible in their homes and then release them to the wild to "boost the monarch population". Some individuals, such as one in Linn County, Iowa , have reared thousands of monarchs at the same time. Some monarch scientists do not condone the practice of rearing "large" numbers of monarchs in captivity for release into the wild because of the risks of genetic issues and disease spread. One of the biggest concerns of mass rearing is the potential for spreading the monarch parasite Ophryocystis elektroscirrha into the wild. This parasite can rapidly build up in captive monarchs, especially if they are housed together.

The parasite spores can quickly contaminate all housing equipment so all subsequent monarchs reared in the same containers become infected. One researcher stated that rearing more than 100 monarchs constitutes "mass rearing" and should not be done.

In addition to the disease risks, some researchers believe these captive-reared monarchs are not as fit as wild ones, owing to the unnatural conditions in which they are raised. Homeowners often raise monarchs in plastic or glass containers in their kitchens, basements, porches, etc., and under artificial lighting and controlled temperatures. Such conditions would not mimic what the monarchs are used to in the wild and may result in adults unsuited for the realities of their wild existence.

In support of this, a recent study by a citizen scientist found that captive-reared monarchs have a lower migration success rate than wild monarchs. A 2019 study shed light on captive-reared monarchs' fitness by testing reared and wild monarchs on a tethered flight apparatus that assessed navigational ability.

In that study, monarchs that were reared to adulthood in artificial conditions showed a reduction in navigational ability. This happened even with monarchs brought into captivity from the wild for a few days. A few captive-reared monarchs did show proper navigation. This study revealed the fragility of monarch development; if the conditions are not suitable, their ability to properly migrate could be impaired.

The same study also examined the genetics of a collection of reared monarchs purchased from a butterfly breeder and found they were dramatically different from wild monarchs, so much so that the lead author described them as "franken-monarchs". An unpublished study in 2019 compared the behavior of captive-reared versus wild monarch larvae.

The study showed that reared larvae exhibited more defensive behavior than wild larvae.

The reason for this is unknown, but it could relate to reared larvae being frequently handled and/or disturbed. Threats In February 2015, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) reported a study that showed that nearly a billion monarchs had vanished from the butterfly's overwintering sites since 1990.

The agency attributed the monarch's decline partly to a loss of milkweed caused by herbicides that farmers and homeowners had used. A 2017 report included mention of the new ethanol -in-gasoline standards as reducing the amount of acreage left fallow in the U.S. midwest: "Federal policies such as the Ethanol Fuel Standards ( Renewable Fuel Standard ), crop insurance , and waning Farm Bill support for the Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) reduce support for integrated agro-ecological landscapes capable of sustaining both food production and monarch habitat, principally because these policies promote row crops over mixed, herbaceous perennial vegetation." In 2018, a study correlated monarch butterfly decline to the fact that 95% of corn and soybean crops grown in the United States used genetically modified seeds resistant to the herbicide glyphosate . This meant that instead of spreading the herbicide only before seed planting, farmers could spread the herbicide a second time by air when weeds had begun to challenge the crops. Air application of the herbicide meant that the unplowed margins between the field and road that previously supported milkweed and a range of nectar flowers were now greatly diminished.

By 2024, the USFWS calculated that the eastern butterflies had declined by approximately 80 percent since the 1980s.

The western population was more imperiled, declining by 95 percent. According to the USFWS, the species faces a host of threats, including the loss and degradation of its breeding, migratory, and overwintering habitats, exposure to insecticides , and the growing impacts of climate change. Western monarch population Further information: Threats to monarch population in California and Monarch butterfly conservation in California Western monarch populations from 1997 to 2013 (from Xerces Society data) Based on a 2014 20-year comparison, the overwintering numbers west of the Rocky Mountains have dropped more than 50% since 1997 and the overwintering numbers east of the Rockies have declined by more than 90% since 1995. According to the Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation , the monarch population in California decreased by 86% in 2018, going from millions to tens of thousands of butterflies.

The society's annual winter counts have shown a significant decline in the California population.

The three lowest counts in the program’s history have all occurred in recent years: 1,901 individual monarchs in 2020, 9,119 in 2024, and 12,260 in 2025. One Pacific Grove site had no monarch butterflies in 2020. A primary explanation for this was the destruction of the butterfly's milkweed habitats. Eastern and midwestern monarch populations The number of monarchs overwintering in Mexico has shown a long-term downward trend.

Since 1995, coverage numbers have been as high as 18 hectares (44 acres) during the winter of 1996–1997, but on average about 6 hectares (15 acres). Coverage declined to its lowest point to date (0.67 hectares (1.66 acres)) during the winter of 2013–2014, but rebounded to 4.01 hectares (10 acres) in 2015–2016.

The average population of monarchs in 2016 was estimated at 200 million. Historically, on average there are 300 million monarchs.

The 2016 increase was attributed to favorable breeding conditions in the summer of 2015. However, coverage declined by 27% to 2.91 hectares (7.19 acres) during the winter of 2016–2017. Some believe this was because of a storm that had occurred during March 2016 in the monarchs' previous overwintering season. However, this seems unlikely since most current research shows that the overwintering colony sizes do not predict the size of the next summer breeding population. A 2016 study attributed the previous decade's 90% decline in overwintering numbers of the eastern monarch population primarily to the loss of breeding habitat and milkweed.

The publication's authors stated that an 11%–57% probability existed that this population will become "quasi-extinct" over the next 20 years (i.e. unable to sustain a stable population). Other threats identified in the study include climate change, insecticides, and disease. Monarchs wintering in central Mexico's forests in 2024-2025 occupied 1.79 hectares (4.42 acres), almost doubling the 0.90 hectares (2.22 acres) occupied during the previous winter. Scientists found that monarchs occupied 2.93 hectares (7.24 acres) of Mexican forest during the winter of 2025-2026, a 64% increase over the previous winter. Chip Taylor, the director of Monarch Watch at the University of Kansas , stated in 2013 that the Midwest milkweed habitat "is virtually gone" with 120–150 million acres lost. However, he predicted in 2024 that in the immediate future and perhaps into the next two decades, the eastern monarch butterfly population will be relatively stable because it is not presently on a continuous downward trend as it was from 2000-2006. To help fight the population decline, Monarch Watch encourages the planting of "Monarch Waystations". Habitat loss due to herbicide use and genetically modified crops Declines in milkweed abundance and monarch populations between 1999 and 2010 are correlated with the adoption of herbicide-tolerant genetically modified (GM) corn and soybeans, which now constitute 89% and 94% of these crops, respectively, in the U.S. GM corn and soybeans are resistant to the effect of the herbicide glyphosate. Some conservationists attribute the disappearance of milkweed to agricultural practices in the Midwest , where GM seeds are bred to resist herbicides that farmers use to kill unwanted plants that grow near their rows of food crops.

In 2015, the Natural Resources Defense Council filed a suit against the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

The Council argued that the agency ignored warnings about the dangers of glyphosate usage for monarchs. However, a 2018 study has suggested that the decline in milkweed predates the arrival of GM crops. Losses during migration Eastern and midwestern monarchs are experiencing problems reaching Mexico. Many monarch researchers have cited recent evidence from long-term citizen science data that shows that the number of breeding (adult) monarchs has not declined in the last two decades.

The lack of long-term declines in the numbers of breeding and migratory monarchs, yet the clear declines in overwintering numbers, suggests a growing disconnect exists between these life stages. One researcher has suggested that mortality from car strikes constitutes an increasing threat to migrating monarchs. A study of road mortality in northern Mexico, published in 2019, showed very high mortality from just two "hotspots" each year, amounting to 200,000 monarchs killed. Importance of overwintering habitat Area covered by monarchs ( D. plexippus , eastern migratory population) in their overwintering areas in Mexico between 1993 and 2018 The area of Mexican forest to which eastern and midwestern monarchs migrate reached its lowest level in two decades in 2013.

The decline was expected to increase during the 2013–2014 season. Mexican environmental authorities continue to monitor illegal logging of the oyamel fir trees ; however, organized criminals have repeatedly crushed such efforts in the name of very short-term financial gain.

The oyamel is a major species of evergreen on which the overwintering butterflies spend a significant time during their winter diapause , or suspended development. A 2014 study acknowledged that while "the protection of overwintering habitat has no doubt gone a long way towards conserving monarchs that breed throughout eastern North America", their research indicates that habitat loss on breeding grounds in the United States is the main cause of recent and projected population declines. Western monarch populations have rebounded slightly since 2014 with the Western Monarch Thanksgiving Count tallying 335,479 monarchs in 2022.

The population still has much to go for a full recovery. Parasites Pteromalus cassotis on monarch chrysalis Parasites include the tachinid flies Sturmia convergens , Compsilura concinnata , Madremyia saundersii , Hyphantrophaga virilis , Nilea erecta , and Lespesia archippivora . Lespesia -parasitized butterfly larvae suspend, but die prior to pupation .

The fly's maggot lowers to the ground, forms a brown puparium , and then emerges as an adult. Pteromalid wasps , specifically Pteromalus cassotis , parasitize monarch pupae. These wasps lay their eggs in the pupae while the chrysalis is still soft. Up to 400 adults emerge from the chrysalis after 14–20 days, killing the monarch.

The bacterium Micrococcus flacidifex danai also infects larvae. Just before pupation, the larvae migrate to a horizontal surface and die a few hours later, attached only by one pair of prolegs, with the thorax and abdomen hanging limp.

The body turns black shortly thereafter.

The bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa has no invasive powers, but causes secondary infections in weakened insects. It is a common cause of death in laboratory-reared insects. Ophryocystis elektroscirrha is another parasite of the monarch. It infects the subcutaneous tissues and propagates by spores formed during the pupal stage.

The spores are found over all of the bodies of infected butterflies, with the greatest number on the abdomen. These spores are passed, from female to caterpillar , when spores rub off during egg laying and are then ingested by caterpillars. Severely infected individuals are weak, unable to expand their wings, or unable to eclose, and have shortened lifespans, but parasite levels vary in populations. This is not the case in laboratory rearing, where after a few generations, all individuals can be infected. Infection with O. elektroscirrha creates an effect known as culling , whereby migrating monarchs that are infected are less likely to complete the migration. This results in overwintering populations with lower parasite loads. Owners of commercial butterfly-breeding operations claim that they take steps to control this parasite in their practices, although this claim is doubted by many scientists who study monarchs. Confusion of host plants The black swallow-wort ( Cynanchum louiseae ) and pale swallow-wort ( Cynanchum rossicum ) plants are problematic for monarchs in North America. Monarchs lay their eggs on these relatives of native vining milkweed ( Cynanchum laeve ) because they produce stimuli similar to milkweed. Once the eggs hatch, the caterpillars are poisoned by the toxicity of this invasive plant from Europe. Climate Climate variations during the fall and summer affect butterfly reproduction. Rainfall and freezing temperatures affect milkweed growth. Omar Vidal, director general of WWF-Mexico, said, "The monarch's lifecycle depends on the climatic conditions in the places where they breed. Eggs, larvae, and pupae develop more quickly in milder conditions. Temperatures above 35 °C (95 °F) can be lethal for larvae, and eggs dry out in hot, arid conditions, causing a drastic decrease in hatch rate." If a monarch's body temperatures is below 30 °C (86 °F), a monarch cannot fly. To warm up, they sit in the sun or rapidly shiver their wings to warm themselves. Climate change may dramatically affect the monarch migration. A study from 2015 examined the impact of warming temperatures on the breeding range of the monarch and showed that in the next 50 years, the monarch host plant will expand its range further north into Canada and that the monarchs will follow this.

While this will expand the breeding locations of the monarch, it will also have the effect of increasing the distance that monarchs must travel to reach their overwintering destination in Mexico, which could result in greater mortality during the migration. Milkweeds grown at increased temperatures have been shown to contain higher cardenolide concentrations, making the leaves too toxic for the monarch caterpillars. However, these increased concentrations are likely in response to increased insect herbivory, which is also caused by the increased temperatures. Whether increased temperatures make milkweed too toxic for monarch caterpillars when other factors are not present is unknown. Additionally, milkweed grown at carbon dioxide levels of 760 parts per million was found to produce a different mix of the toxic cardenolides, one of which was less effective against monarch parasites. Conservation status On July 20, 2022, the International Union for Conservation of Nature added the migratory monarch butterfly (the subspecies common in North America) to its red list as an endangered species. However, a petition in 2023 resulted in its status being changed to "vulnerable".

The monarch butterfly is not listed under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora or specifically protected under federal laws in the United States.

On August 14, 2014, the Center for Biological Diversity and the Center for Food Safety petitioned the United States Secretary of the Interior through the USFWS to protect the Danaus plexippus plexippus subspecies of the monarch butterfly as a threatened species under the Endangered Species Act .

On December 31, 2014, the USFWS initiated a review of the status of the butterfly to determine whether the petitioned action was warranted, with a due date for the submission of information of March 3, 2015, later extended to December 15, 2020.

On December 17, 2020, the USFWS published in the Federal Register a notice in which it stated that adding the butterfly to the list of threatened and endangered species was " warranted-but-precluded " because budgetary limitations required it to devote its resources to species with higher priorities for listing .

The notice stated that the USFWS had 422 12-month petition findings for domestic species yet to be initiated and completed at the beginning of Fiscal Year 2020 (October 1, 2019).

On June 27, 2023, the USFWS published in the Federal Register a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking for a rule that would give the butterfly a listing priority number (LPN) of 8 for adding its species to that list. LPNs range from 1 to 12 (the lower the LPN, the higher the listing priority).

On December 12, 2024, the USFWS published in the Federal Register a proposed rule that would list the monarch butterfly ( Danaus plexippus ) as a threatened species and would designate the butterfly's critical habitat per the provisions of the Endangered Species Act.

The USFWS estimated in the proposed rule that the probability of extinction in the foreseeable future (60 years) is 56-74 percent for the eastern monarch migratory population and 99 percent for the western migratory population.

The proposed rule designated seven areas near California's Pacific coast as "critical habitat units" for monarch butterflies.

The USFWS accepted comments on the proposed rule until March 12, 2025.

On March 19, 2025, the USFWS reopened the comment period on the proposed rule until May 19, 2025.

In December 2023, the Government of Canada listed the monarch as an endangered species under the federal Species at Risk Act .

The listing protects the butterfly on Canadian federal lands by making it illegal to kill, hurt, catch or remove a monarch egg, caterpillar, chrysalis or adult when on land that the Canadian federal government owns and/or administers. These include Canadian national parks , national wildlife areas , military bases and First Nations reserves . It is also illegal to possess, collect, buy, sell, or trade an individual monarch or any part or derivative of an individual when on that land.

The Canadian government must prepare a recovery strategy and one or more action plans for the species to outline the work that can be done to conserve the species.

The strategy must identify the critical habitat necessary for the monarch to survive and recover in Canada.

In Ontario , Canada, the monarch butterfly is listed as a species of special concern.

The memorandum established a Pollinator Health Task Force, to be co-chaired by the Secretary of Agriculture and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency , and stated: The number of migrating Monarch butterflies sank to the lowest recorded population level in 2013–14, and there is an imminent risk of failed migration.

The U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) publishes sets of landscape performance requirements in its P100 documents, which mandate standards for the GSA's Public Buildings Service . Beginning in March 2015, those performance requirements and their updates have included four primary aspects for planting designs that are intended to provide adequate on-site foraging opportunities for targeted pollinators.

The targeted pollinators include bees, butterflies, and other beneficial insects.

In May 2015, the Pollinator Health Task Force issued a "National Strategy to Promote the Health of Honey Bees and Other Pollinators".

The strategy laid out federal actions to achieve three goals, two of which were: Monarch Butterflies: Increase the Eastern population of the monarch butterfly to 225 million butterflies occupying an area of approximately 15 acres (6.1 hectares) in the overwintering grounds in Mexico, through domestic/international actions and public-private partnerships, by 2020. Pollinator Habitat Acreage: Restore or enhance 7 million acres of land for pollinators over the next 5 years through Federal actions and public/private partnerships. Many of the priority projects that the National Strategy identified focused on the I-35 corridor, which extends for 1,500 miles (2,400 km) from Texas to Minnesota.

The area through which that highway travels provides spring and summer breeding habitats in the United States' key monarch migration corridor.

The Task Force simultaneously issued a "Pollinator Research Action Plan".

The Plan outlined five main action areas, covered in ten subject-specific chapters.

The action areas were: (1) Setting a Baseline; (2) Assessing Environmental Stressors; (3) Restoring Habitat; (4) Understanding and Supporting Stakeholders; (5) Curating and Sharing Knowledge.

In May 2015, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the U.S. Department of the Interior (USDI) issued a 52-page document entitled "Pollinator-Friendly Best Management Practices for Federal Lands".

The document consolidated general information about the practices and procedures to use when considering pollinator needs in project development and management of Federal lands that are managed for native diversity and multiple uses.

The document also contained a series of actions to be considered when determining those lands best suited for restoration and rehabilitation of monarch habitat. These included an assurance that native wildflowers are available, diverse, and abundant to provide nectar for monarchs and an assurance that milkweed species that female monarchs prefer for egg laying are available or will be planted.

The document identified those milkweed species for each of seven regions within the United States.

On December 4, 2015, President Obama signed into law the Fixing America's Surface Transportation (FAST) Act (Pub. L. 114-94).

The FAST Act placed a new emphasis on efforts to support pollinators. To accomplish this, the FAST Act amended Title 23 (Highways) of the United States Code .

The amendment directed the United States Secretary of Transportation when carrying out programs under that title in conjunction with willing states, to: encourage integrated vegetation management practices on roadsides and other transportation rights-of-way, including reduced mowing; and encourage the development of habitat and forage for Monarch butterflies, other native pollinators, and honey bees through plantings of native forbs and grasses, including noninvasive, native milkweed species that can serve as migratory way stations for butterflies and facilitate migrations of other pollinators.

The FAST Act also stated that activities to establish and improve pollinator habitat, forage, and migratory way stations may be eligible for Federal funding if related to transportation projects funded under Title 23.

In February 2016, the Office of the U.S. Secretary of the Interior issued a memorandum containing an attachment entitled "Strategy for Implementing Pollinator-Friendly Landscaping Design and Maintenance at Department of the Interior Sites".

The attachment described specific actions that would address the incorporation of pollinator-friendly landscaping design and maintenance into new construction and major renovations, existing sites, contracts, leases and occupancy agreements, and education/outreach programs.

The memorandum containing the attachment directed the USDI's bureaus and offices (which include the Fish and Wildlife Service, the Bureau of Land Management , and the National Park Service ) to implement those actions to the extent that they are appropriate for and consistent with, the mission and function of the facility/site.

In June 2016, the Pollinator Health Task Force issued a "Pollinator Partnership Action Plan". That Plan provided examples of past, ongoing, and possible future collaborations between the federal government and non-federal institutions to support pollinator health under each of the National Strategy's goals.

The USDA's Farm Service Agency helps increase U.S. populations of the monarch butterfly and other pollinators through its Conservation Reserve Program 's State Acres for Wildlife Enhancement (SAFE) Initiative .

The SAFE Initiative provides an annual rental payment to farmers who agree to remove environmentally sensitive land from agricultural production and plant species that will improve environmental health and quality. Among other things, the initiative encourages landowners to establish wetlands, grasses, and trees to create habitats for species that the USFWS has designated to be threatened or endangered.

As part of its targeted monarch butterfly effort, the USDA's Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) works with agricultural producers in the midwest and southern Great Plains to combat the decline of monarch butterflies by planting milkweed and other nectar-rich plants on private lands.

The NRCS also provides region-specific guides and plant lists that support populations of monarch butterflies and other pollinators in the Greater Appalachian Mountains Region, the Midwest Region, the Northern and Southern Great Plains, the Southern High Plains and the Western Coastal Plain.

In January 2024, staff of the National Capital Planning Commission (the federal government's planning agency for the National Capital Region ) introduced a "Pollinator Best Practices Resource Guide".

The Guide summarizes existing federal guidance from the Council on Environmental Quality , the USDA, and the GSA regarding best practices for creating pollinator habitats in both meadow and non-meadow/designed landscapes.

When discussing milkweeds, the Guide states that although more than 100 species of such plants are considered native to North America, Asclepias syriaca , or common milkweed, stands out and "is clearly an important species that is critical to the survival of monarch butterflies". Other actions Agriculture companies and other organizations are being asked to set aside unsprayed areas to allow monarchs to breed.

In addition, national and local initiatives are underway to help establish and maintain pollinator habitats along corridors containing power lines and roadways.

The Federal Highway Administration , state governments, and local jurisdictions are encouraging highway departments and others to limit their use of herbicides, to reduce mowing, to help milkweed to grow, and to encourage monarchs to reproduce within their right-of-ways. State and local governments A Scientific Collecting Permit (SCP) is required to handle wild monarchs in California including for educational purposes. It is unlawful to collect, remove from the wild and/or captively rear monarchs in that state without an SCP.

As of June 2025, at least 14 states (California, Connecticut, Illinois, Kentucky, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Missouri, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Vermont and Washington) had enacted legislation to protect, develop and restore habitat suitable for pollinators. For example, the New Jersey General Assembly considered legislation in 2014 that was intended to increase the monarch butterfly's migrating population within the state. New Jersey's government subsequently approved legislation in May 2017 that established an "Integrated Roadside Vegetation Management Program". Among other things, the legislation required the state's transportation department to develop and adopt a plan for "cost effective maintenance and planting along roadsides, with an emphasis on adaptable vegetation with long life cycles, native vegetation, and wildflowers".

In January 2018, the New Jersey government approved an "Adopt a Monarch Butterfly Waystation Act" and a "Milkweed for Monarchs Act".

The latter act required the state's environmental protection department to establish criteria for the planting of milkweed in stormwater management basins on state-owned lands and to take related actions.

In June 2019, Tennessee's transportation department announced a partnership with the state's environment and conservation and agriculture departments to promote pollinator health and awareness in the state's parks.

The partners expected to install pollinator meadows and interpretive signage in nine such parks. Virginia's wildlife resources department encourages plantings of native species that are highly beneficial to pollinators. These include forbs such as Asclepias spp. (milkweeds), Pycnanthemum spp. (mountain mints), those in the Asteraceae family (which includes Coreopsis spp. ), Helianthus spp. (sunflowers), Rudbeckia spp. (coneflowers), Solidago spp. (goldenrods), and Eutrochium spp. (Joe-Pye weeds), as well as shrubs such as Prunus americana (American plum), Cercis spp. (redbuds), Vaccinium spp. (blueberries), and Samubucus spp. (elderberries).

In April 2025, the Chicago Park District 's general superintendent launched "Project Monarch", a citywide initiative to conserve and celebrate monarch butterflies and their habitats.

In addition, many local jurisdictions throughout the United States have made commitments to increase monarch habitat by joining "Monarch City USA" or by taking the National Wildlife Federation 's "Mayors' Monarch Pledge" and planting native milkweeds and other nectar plants within their boundaries. Many cities, towns, counties, and communities have joined “ Bee City USA ” (an initiative of the Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation ) and made commitments to conserve native bees, butterflies and other pollinators by increasing the abundance of native plants, providing nesting sites, and reducing the use of pesticides. Molesting or interfering in any way with monarch butterflies during their annual migratory visit to the city of Pacific Grove, California , carries a fine of $1,000 except under defined circumstances. National Cooperative Highway Research Program report In 2020, the National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP) of the Transportation Research Board issued a 208-page report that described a project that had examined the potential for roadway corridors to provide habitat for monarch butterflies. A part of the project developed tools for roadside managers to optimize potential habitats for monarch butterflies in their road rights-of-way. Such efforts are controversial because the risk of butterfly mortality near roads is high. Several studies have shown that motor vehicles kill millions of monarchs and other butterflies annually. Also, some evidence indicates that monarch larvae living near roads experience physiological stress conditions, as evidenced by elevations in their heart rate.

The NCHRP report acknowledged that, among other hazards, roads present a danger of traffic collisions for monarchs, stating that these effects appear to be more concentrated in particular funnel areas during migration. Nevertheless, the report concluded: In summary, threats along roadway corridors exist for monarchs and other pollinators, but in the context of the amount of habitat needed for recovery of sustainable populations, roadsides are of vital importance. Butterfly gardening and monarch waystations Further information: Butterfly gardening A monarch waystation near the town of Berwyn Heights in Prince George's County, Maryland (June 2017) The practice of butterfly gardening and creating "monarch waystations" is commonly thought to increase the populations of butterflies. Efforts to restore falling monarch populations by establishing butterfly gardens and monarch waystations require particular attention to the butterfly's food preferences and population cycles, as well to the conditions needed to propagate and maintain milkweed. For example, in the Washington, D.C., area and elsewhere in the northeastern and midwestern United States, common milkweed ( Asclepias syriaca ) is among the most important food plants for monarch caterpillars. Within its range it can be found in a broad array of habitats from croplands to pastures, roadsides, ditches and old fields.

The plant typically grows to a height of 3-5 feet (0.9-1.5 m), but can reach 8 feet (2.4 m) in ditches and gardens. A USDA conservation planting guide for Maryland recommends that, for optimum wildlife and pollinator habitat in mesic sites, a seed mix containing 30 seeds for each square foot of planting area should have 17.0% A. syriaca by weight and 6.0% by seed. However, monarchs prefer to lay eggs on A. syriaca when its foliage is soft and fresh. Because monarch reproduction peaks in those areas during the late summer when milkweed foliage is old and tough, A. syriaca needs to be mowed or cut back in June through August to ensure that it will be regrowing rapidly when monarch reproduction reaches its peak. Similar conditions exist for showy milkweed ( A. speciosa ) in Michigan and for green antelopehorn milkweed ( A. viridis ), where it grows in the Southern Great Plains and the Western United States. Further, the seeds of A. syriaca and some other milkweeds need periods of cold treatment ( cold stratification ) before they will germinate. To protect seeds from washing away during heavy rains and from seed-eating birds, one can cover the seeds with a light fabric or with an 0.5-inch (13 mm) layer of straw mulch . However, mulch acts as an insulator . Thicker layers of mulch can prevent seeds from germinating if they prevent soil temperatures from rising enough when winter ends. Further, few seedlings can push through a thick layer of mulch.

Although monarch caterpillars will feed on butterfly weed ( A. tuberosa ) in butterfly gardens, it is typically not a heavily used host plant for the species.

The plant has rough leaves and a layer of trichomes , which may inhibit oviposition or decrease a female's ability to sense leaf chemicals.

The plant's low levels of cardenolides may also deter monarchs from laying eggs on the plant.

While A. tuberosa 's colorful flowers provide nectar for many adult butterflies, the plant may be less suitable for use in butterfly gardens and monarch waystations than are other milkweed species. Breeding monarchs prefer to lay eggs on swamp milkweed ( A. incarnata ) in the midwest. However, A. incarnata is an early successional plant that usually grows at the margins of wetlands and in seasonally flooded areas.

The plant is slow to spread via seeds, does not spread by runners, and tends to disappear as vegetative densities increase and habitats dry out.

Although A. incarnata plants can survive up to 20 years, most live only two to five years in gardens.

The Butterflies of the Eastern United States and Canada With Special Reference to New England .

The Urban Naturalist . Courier Dover Publications. pp. 76– 79. ISBN 978-0-486-40399-1 . ^ Groth, Jacob (November 10, 2000). "Do Farm-Raised Monarchs Migrate?" . Swallowtail Farms . Retrieved July 21, 2014 . ^ "Monarch Migration" . Monarch Joint Venture. 2013. ^ Linnaeus, Carl (1758). Systema Naturae (in Latin). Vol. 1. Stockholm: Laurentius Salvius. p. 471. OCLC 174638949 . Retrieved June 5, 2012 . ^ Multiple sources: Moore (1883). " Anosia plexippus ". Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London : 234– 235. (Cited in Scudder, Samuel Hubbard ; Davis, William M. ; Woodworth, Charles W. ; Howard, Leland O. ; Riley, Charles V. ; Williston, Samuel (1889).

The Butterfly Book: A Popular Guide To A Knowledge Of The Butterflies Of North America . Garden City, New York : Country Life Press . pp. 63 , 81 . Retrieved December 26, 2023 – via Project Gutenberg . Linnæus for a fanciful reason gave this insect the name Plexippus . This is its specific name, by which it is distinguished from all other butterflies. It belongs to the genus Anosia .

The genus Anosia is one of the genera which make up the subfamily of the Euplœinæ.

The Euplœinæ belong to the great family of the Nymphalidæ.

The Nymphalidæ are a part of the suborder of the Rhopalocera, or true butterflies, one of the two great subdivisions of the order Lepidoptera, belonging to the great class Insecta, the highest class in the subkingdom of the Arthropoda. (page 63) Moffat, J.A. (1902). " Anosia archippus does not hibernate". Report of the Entomological Society of Ontario . 32 . Entomological Society of Ontario : 78– 82. (Cited in "Monarch Behavior: Migration" . Reading Room . MonarchWatch.org . Archived from the original on October 9, 2024 . Retrieved October 6, 2025 . ) Dyer, Harrison G. (1902). "Family LYMNADIDAE: ANOSIA Hubner" . Bulletin of the United States National Museum (52: A List Of North American Lepidoptera And Key To The Literature Of This Order Of Insects). Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press : 33 . Retrieved October 4, 2025 – via Internet Archive . Pocock, R.I. (October 12, 1911). "The Distastefulness of Anosia plexippus " . Nature . 87 (2189): 484– 485. Bibcode : 1911Natur..87..484P . doi : 10.1038/087484d0 . ISSN 1476-4687 . Letter To The Editor. Archived from the original on April 17, 2025 . Retrieved October 6, 2025 . Banta, A.M. (December 21, 1911). "The Distastefulness of Anosia plexippus " . Nature . 88 (2199): 243. Bibcode : 1911Natur..88..243P . doi : 10.1038/088243c0 . ISSN 1476-4687 . Letter To The Editor. Pocock, R.I. (December 21, 1911). "The Distastefulness of Anosia plexippus " . Nature . 88 (2199): 243. Bibcode : 1911Natur..88..243P . doi : 10.1038/088243c0 . ISSN 1476-4687 . Letter To The Editor. Banta, A.M. (May 9, 1912). "The Distastefulness of Anosia plexippus " . Nature . 89 (2219): 242– 243. Bibcode : 1912Natur..89..242B . doi : 10.1038/089242a0 . ISSN 1476-4687 . Letter To The Editor. Archived from the original on April 17, 2025 . Retrieved October 6, 2025 . Pocock, R.I. (May 9, 1912). "The Distastefulness of Anosia plexippus " . Nature . 89 (2219): 243. Bibcode : 1912Natur..89..243P . doi : 10.1038/089243a0 . ISSN 1476-4687 . Letter To The Editor. Archived from the original on April 17, 2025 . Retrieved October 6, 2025 . Webster, F.M. (December 1912). "The Migration of Anosia plexippus FAB" .

The Canadian Entomologist . 44 (12). Entomological Society of Canada : 366– 367. doi : 10.4039/Ent44366-12 . Archived from the original on October 5, 2025 . Retrieved October 5, 2025 – via Cambridge University Press - May 31, 2012. Webster, F.M. (March 1914). "Another Migration of Anosia plexippus FAB" .

The Canadian Entomologist . 46 (3). Entomological Society of Canada : 100. doi : 10.4039/Ent46100a-3 . Archived from the original on April 29, 2025 . Retrieved October 5, 2025 – via Cambridge University Press - May 31, 2012. Webster, F.M. (December 1915). "Field Notes and Questions: Migrating Notes on the Milkweed Butterfly, Anosia plexippus " .

The Canadian Entomologist . 47 (12). Entomological Society of Canada : 406. doi : 10.4039/Ent47406-12 . Archived from the original on April 29, 2025 . Retrieved October 6, 2025 – via Cambridge University Press - May 31, 2012. Teale, Edwin Way (December 1944). "Observations on the migration of the monarch butterfly ( Anosia plexippus )" . Bulletin of the Brooklyn Entomological Society . 39 . Brooklyn, New York : Brooklyn Entomological Society : 161– 163. Archived from the original on June 16, 2025 . Retrieved October 6, 2025 – via Biodiversity Heritage Library . Hirumi, H.; Maramorosch, K. (1964). "Tissue culture of monarch butterfly Anosia plexippus ". Contributions from Boyce Thompson Institute . 22 : 259– 268. (Cited in "Tissue culture of monarch butterfly Anosia plexippus " . MonarchNet. Archived from the original on October 6, 2025 . Retrieved October 6, 2025 . ) Heywood, Hortense Butler. "Drawing of wings of Anosia Plexippus" . Hortense Butler Heywood collection, Iowa State University Library Digital Collections . Iowa State University Library . Archived from the original on October 6, 2025 . Retrieved October 6, 2025 . "Anosia: Classification" . ADW: Animal Diversity Web . University of Michigan Museum of Zoology . 2025. Archived from the original on June 22, 2025 . Retrieved October 6, 2025 . ^ Scudder, Samuel Hubbard (July 1874). "English Names for Butterflies" . Psyche: A Journal of Entomology . 1 (3): 10 . Retrieved April 6, 2026 . ^ a b c Smith, David A.S.; Lushai, Gugs; Allen, John A. (June 10, 2005). "A classification of Danaus butterflies (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae) based upon data from morphology and DNA" . Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society . 144 (2). Oxford, Oxfordshire, England: Oxford University Press : 191– 212. doi : 10.1111/j.1096-3642.2005.00169.x . Retrieved October 7, 2025 . ^ πλήξιππος . Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert ; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project ^ Linnaeus, C. (1758). Systema Naturae ed. X: 467. BHL . ^ Pyle, Robert Michael (2001). Chasing Monarchs: Migrating with the Butterflies of Passage . Houghton Mifflin Books. pp. 148– 149. ISBN 978-0-618-12743-6 . ^ Ackery, P. R.; Vaine-Wright, R. I. (1984). Milkweed butterflies, their cladistics and biology: being an account of the natural history of the Danainae, subfamily of the Lepidoptera, Nymphalidae . British Museum (Natural History), London. p. 17 . ISBN 978-0-565-00893-2 . ^ a b Gibbs, Lawrence; Taylor, O. R. (1998). "The White Monarch" . Department of Entomology University of Kansas. Archived from the original on January 14, 2018 . Retrieved July 17, 2014 . ^ Groth, Jacob (February 12, 2022). "Monarch Butterfly Mutants" . Swallowtail Farms . Retrieved July 22, 2014 . ^ a b Hay-Roe, Miriam M.; Lamas, Gerardo; Nation, James L. (2007). "Pre- and postzygotic isolation and Haldane rule effects in reciprocal crosses of Danaus erippus and Danaus plexippus (Lepidoptera: Danainae), supported by differentiation of cuticular hydrocarbons, establish their status as separate species" . Biological Journal of the Linnean Society . 91 (3): 445– 453. doi : 10.1111/j.1095-8312.2007.00809.x . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k "Petition to protect the Monarch butterfly ( Danaus plexippus plexippus ) under the endangered species act" (PDF) . Xerces Society . Retrieved September 1, 2014 . ^ Multiple sources: Zhan, Shuai; Merlin, Christine; Boore, Jeffrey L.; Reppert, Steven M. (November 2011). "The Monarch Butterfly Genome Yields Insights into Long-Distance Migration" . Cell . 147 (5): 1171– 85. doi : 10.1016/j.cell.2011.09.052 . PMC 3225893 . PMID 22118469 . Stensmyr, Marcus C.; Hansson, Bill S. (November 2011). "A Genome Befitting a Monarch" . Cell . 147 (5): 970– 2. doi : 10.1016/j.cell.2011.11.009 . PMID 22118454 . S2CID 16035019 . Johnson, Carolyn Y. (November 23, 2011). "Monarch butterfly genome sequenced" . Boston Globe . Boston, MA . Retrieved January 9, 2012 . ^ Zhan, Shuai; Zhang, Wei; Niitepold, Kristjan; Hsu, Jeremy; Haeger, Juan Fernandez; Zalucki, Myron P.; Altizer, Sonia; de Roode, Jacobus C.; Reppert, Stephen M.; Kronforst, Marcus R. (October 1, 2014). "The genetics of Monarch butterfly migration and warning coloration" . Nature . 514 (7522): 317– 321. Bibcode : 2014Natur.514..317Z . doi : 10.1038/nature13812 . PMC 4331202 . PMID 25274300 . ^ a b Zhan, Shuai; Merlin, Christine; Boore, Jeffrey L.; Reppert, Steven M. (November 23, 2012). "The monarch butterfly genome yields insights into long-distance migration" . Cell . 147 (5): 1171– 1185. doi : 10.1016/j.cell.2011.09.052 . PMC 3225893 . PMID 22118469 . ^ Gasmi, Laila; Boulain, Helene; Gauthier, Jeremy; Hua-Van, Aurelie; Musset, Karine; Jakubowska, Agata K.; Aury, Jean-Marc; Volkoff, Anne-Nathalie; Huguet, Elisabeth (September 17, 2015). "Recurrent Domestication by Lepidoptera of Genes from Their Parasites Mediated by Bracoviruses" . PLOS Genetics . 11 (9) e1005470. doi : 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005470 . PMC 4574769 . PMID 26379286 . ^ Multiple sources: Le Page, Michael (September 17, 2015). "If viruses transfer wasp genes into butterflies, are they GM?" . New Scientist . Retrieved July 13, 2016 . Main, Douglas (September 17, 2015). "Wasps Have Genetically Modified Butterflies, Using Viruses" . Newsweek . Archived from the original on August 9, 2016 . Retrieved July 13, 2016 . ^ Be Smart (July 25, 2023). "The Truth About Butterfly Metamorphosis (It's VERY WEIRD)" . PBS . Retrieved March 7, 2026 – via YouTube. Video: 15:30 minutes. ^ a b c (June 2008). North American Monarch Conservation Plan (PDF) (Report). Montreal, Quebec: Commission for Environmental Cooperation . Archived (PDF) from the original on January 30, 2026 . Retrieved February 10, 2026 . ^ a b Oberhauser, Karen S. ; Solensky, Michelle J (2004).

The Monarch Butterfly: Biology and Conservation (First ed.). Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-8014-4188-2 . ^ "Monarch Butterfly Life Cycle and Migration" . National Geographic Education . October 24, 2008. Archived from the original on April 6, 2011 . Retrieved August 15, 2013 . ^ "Egg" . Monarch Joint Venture. 2021. Archived from the original on July 11, 2021 . Retrieved October 6, 2021 . ^ Oberhauser, Karen S. ; Solensky, Michelle J (2004).

The Monarch Butterfly: Biology and Conservation (First ed.). Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-8014-4188-2 . ^ Lefevre, T.; Chiang, A.; Li, H; Li, J; de Castillejo, C.L.; Oliver, L.; Potini, Y.; Hunter, M. D.; de Roode, J.C. (2012). "Behavioral resistance against a protozoan parasite in the monarch butterfly" (PDF) . Journal of Animal Ecology . 81 (1): 70– 9. Bibcode : 2012JAnEc..81...70L . doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2656.2011.01901.x . hdl : 2027.42/89483 . PMID 21939438 . ^ "The other butterfly effect – A youth reporter talks to Jaap de Roode" . TED Blog. November 25, 2014 . Retrieved December 12, 2014 . ^ Oberhauser, Karen S. ; Solensky, Michelle J (2004).

The Monarch Butterfly: Biology and Conservation (First ed.). Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press. p. 51. ISBN 978-0-8014-4188-2 . ^ a b c d e f g "Guide to Monarch Instars" . Monarch Joint Venture. 2021. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021 . Retrieved October 1, 2021 . ^ "Frequently Asked Questions" . Monarch Joint Venture .

The Monarch Joint Venture . Retrieved January 2, 2025 . ^ Collie, Joseph; Granela, Odelvys; Brown, Elizabeth B.; Keene, Alex C. (November 2020). "Aggression Is Induced by Resource Limitation in the Monarch Caterpillar" . iScience . 23 (12) 101791. Bibcode : 2020iSci...23j1791C . doi : 10.1016/j.isci.2020.101791 . PMC 7756136 . PMID 33376972 . ^ Petersen, B. (1964). "Humidity, Darkness, and Gold Spots as Possible Factors in Pupal Duration of Monarch Butterflies". Journal of the Lepidopterists' Society . 18 : 230– 232. ^ Multiple sources: "Pupa" . Monarch Joint Venture. 2021. Archived from the original on July 11, 2021 . Retrieved October 5, 2021 . Pocius, V. M.; Debinski, D. M.; Pleasants, J. M.; Bidne, K. G.; Hellmich, R. L.; Brower, L. P. (September 7, 2017). "Milkweed Matters: Monarch Butterfly (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae) Survival and Development on Nine Midwestern Milkweed Species" . Environmental Entomology . 46 (5): 1098– 1105. doi : 10.1093/ee/nvx137 . ISSN 0046-225X . PMC 5850784 . PMID 28961914 . ^ Multiple sources: "Butterflies Emerge from Cocoons Aboard Station" . NASA. 2009. Archived from the original on December 15, 2009. "First Monarch butterflies in space take flight" . NBC News . December 9, 2009 . Retrieved November 12, 2023 . ^ "Reproduction" . Monarch Lab . Regents of the University of Minnesota. Archived from the original on July 16, 2019 . Retrieved December 13, 2014 . ^ a b Braby, Michael F. (2000). Butterflies of Australia: Their Identification, Biology and Distribution . CSIRO Publishing. pp. 597– 599. ISBN 978-0-643-06591-8 . ^ Satterfield, Dara A.; Davis, Andrew K. (April 2014). "Variation in wing characteristics of monarch butterflies during migration: Earlier migrants have redder and more elongated wings" . Animal Migration . 2 (1): 1– 7. doi : 10.2478/ami-2014-0001 . ^ Davis, A. K.; Holden, Michael T. (2015). "Measuring Intraspecific Variation in Flight-Related Morphology of Monarch Butterflies ( Danaus plexippus ): Which Sex Has the Best Flying Gear?" (PDF) . Journal of Insects . 2015 (59170). Hindawi Publishing Corporation: 1– 6. doi : 10.1155/2015/591705 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . ^ "Monarch, Danaus plexippus " . Archived from the original on February 19, 2012 . Retrieved August 27, 2008 . ^ Multiple sources: "Adult" . Monarch Joint Venture. 2021. Archived from the original on July 21, 2021 . Retrieved October 5, 2021 . "Sensory Systems" . Biology . Monarch Watch . Archived from the original on March 19, 2018 . Retrieved October 5, 2021 . "Sexing Monarchs" . Biology . Monarch Watch . Archived from the original on May 5, 2021 . Retrieved October 5, 2021 . ^ Darby, Gene (1958). What is a Butterfly . Chicago: Benefic Press . p. 10. ^ Flockhart, D. T. Tyler; Martin, Tara G.; Norris, D. Ryan (2012). "Experimental Examination of Intraspecific Density-Dependent Competition during the Breeding in Monarch Butterflies ( Danaus plexippus )" . PLOS ONE . 7 (9) e45080. Bibcode : 2012PLoSO...745080F . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0045080 . PMC 3440312 . PMID 22984614 . ^ Multiple sources: "Important Plants of the Monarch Butterfly: Greater Appalachian Mountains Region: Staff Guide" (PDF) . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service . January 2018. p. 8. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 20, 2025 . Retrieved March 26, 2026 . Zalucki, M; Brower, L.; Malcolm, S. (1990). "Oviposition by Danaus plexippus in relation to cardenolide content of 3 Asclepias species in the Southeastern U.S.A." Ecological Entomology . 15 . Royal Entomological Society : 231– 240. doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2311.1990.tb00804.x . Archived from the original on March 28, 2026 . Retrieved March 26, 2026 . Hearn, Holli. "Toxicity of Milkweeds" .

The Beautiful Monarch . Archived from the original on March 28, 2026 . Retrieved March 26, 2026 . ... list of the cardenolides in milkweed sap. Study was done by Professor Jaap de Roode and Professor Mark Hunter. ^ "Monarch Butterfly | Species | WWF" . World Wildlife Fund . Retrieved September 2, 2025 . ^ "Monarch Watch: Size and Mass" . monarchwatch.org . Retrieved September 2, 2025 . ^ a b c Blackiston, Douglas; Briscoe, Adriana D.; Weiss, Martha R. (February 1, 2011). "Color vision and learning in the monarch butterfly, Danaus plexippus (Nymphalidae)" .

The Journal of Experimental Biology . 214 (Pt 3): 509– 520. Bibcode : 2011JExpB.214..509B . doi : 10.1242/jeb.048728 . ISSN 1477-9145 . PMID 21228210 . ^ Stalleicken, Julia; Labhart, Thomas; Mouritsen, Henrik (March 2006). "Physiological characterization of the compound eye in monarch butterflies with focus on the dorsal rim area". Journal of Comparative Physiology A . 192 (3): 321– 331. doi : 10.1007/s00359-005-0073-6 . ISSN 0340-7594 . PMID 16317560 . S2CID 31493135 . ^ Sauman, Ivo; Briscoe, Adriana D.; Zhu, Haisun; Shi, Dingding; Froy, Oren; Stalleicken, Julia; Yuan, Quan; Casselman, Amy; Reppert, Steven M. (May 5, 2005). "Connecting the Navigational Clock to Sun Compass Input in Monarch Butterfly Brain" . Neuron . 46 (3): 457– 467. doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.03.014 . ISSN 0896-6273 . PMID 15882645 . S2CID 17755509 . ^ a b Cepero, Laurel C.; Rosenwald, Laura C.; Weiss, Martha R. (July 1, 2015). "The Relative Importance of Flower Color and Shape for the Foraging Monarch Butterfly (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae)". Journal of Insect Behavior . 28 (4): 499– 511. Bibcode : 2015JIBeh..28..499C . doi : 10.1007/s10905-015-9519-z . ISSN 1572-8889 . S2CID 18380612 . ^ Multiple sources: Pliske, Thomas E. (January 15, 1975). "Courtship Behavior of the Monarch Butterfly, Danaus plexippus L." . Annals of the Entomological Society of America . 68 (1). Entomological Society of America : 143– 151. doi : 10.1093/aesa/68.1.143 . Archived from the original on March 28, 2022 . Retrieved February 24, 2026 . "Reproduction" . Monarch Biology .

The Monarch Joint Venture . Retrieved February 24, 2026 . ^ Oberhauser, Karen S. ; Solensky, Michelle J (2004).

The Monarch Butterfly: Biology and Conservation (First ed.). Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press. pp. 61– 68. ISBN 978-0-8014-4188-2 . ^ Frey, D.; Leong, K. L. H.; Peffer, E.; Smidt, R. K.; Oberhauser, K. S. (1998). "Mating patterns of overwintering monarch butterflies ( Danaus plexippus (L.)) in California" (PDF) . Journal of the Lepidopterists' Society . 52 : 84– 97. ^ Solensky, M.J.; K.S. Oberhauser (2009). "Sperm Precedence in Monarch Butterflies ( Danaus plexippus )" . Behavioral Ecology . 20 (2): 328– 34. doi : 10.1093/beheco/arp003 . ^ Oberhauser, K. S. (1989). "Effects of spermatophores on male and female monarch butterfly reproductive success". Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology . 25 (4): 237– 246. Bibcode : 1989BEcoS..25..237O . doi : 10.1007/bf00300049 . S2CID 6843773 . ^ a b Kane, Ethan. " Danaus plexippus (monarch butterfly)" . ADW: Animal Diversity Web . University of Michigan Museum of Zoology . Archived from the original on February 28, 2007 . Retrieved August 27, 2008 . ^ Solensky, Michelle J. (November 2004). "The Effect of Behavior and Ecology on Male Mating Success in Overwintering Monarch Butterflies ( Danaus plexippus )". Journal of Insect Behavior . 17 (6): 723– 743. Bibcode : 2004JIBeh..17..723S . doi : 10.1023/b:joir.0000048985.58159.0d . ISSN 0892-7553 . S2CID 31954178 . ^ Gerald McCormack (December 7, 2005). "Cook Islands' Largest Butterfly – The Monarch" . Cook Islands Biodiversity . ^ a b Scott, James A. (1986).

The Butterflies of North America . Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA. ISBN 0-8047-2013-4 ^ Brower, Lincoln P.; Malcolm, Stephen B. (1991). "Animal Migrations: Endangered Phenomena" . American Zoologist . 31 (1): 265– 276. doi : 10.1093/icb/31.1.265 . ^ Davis, Donald (November 27, 2014). "DPLEX-L:59250 The possibility of a trans-Gulf migration, oil rigs, Dr. Gary Ross, and more". Monarch Watch . University of Kansas. ^ "Monarch Sightings Map" . Monarch Butterfly New Zealand Trust. Archived from the original on February 12, 2021 . Retrieved December 15, 2014 . ^ "The lonely flight of the monarch butterfly" . NewsAdvance.com, Lynchburg, Virginia Area. October 4, 2014 . Retrieved October 7, 2014 . ^ "Provisional species list of the Lepidoptera" . Gibraltar Ornithological and Natural History Society. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015. ^ Pais, Miguel. "Northwestern African sightings of D. plexippus , Maroc>Pappilons> Danaus plexippus " . Google Maps . Retrieved September 19, 2014 . ^ Coombes, Simon. "1995 Monarch Invasion of the UK" . butterfly-guide.co.uk. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015 . Retrieved September 20, 2014 . ^ a b Cech, Rick and Tudor, Guy (2005). Butterflies of the East Coast . Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ. ISBN 0-691-09055-6 ^ a b Iftner, David C.; Shuey, John A. and Calhoun, John C. (1992). Butterflies and Skippers of Ohio . College of Biological Sciences and The Ohio State University. ISBN 0-86727-107-8 ^ "Monarch Butterfly Journey North" . University of Wisconsin-Madison Arboretum . Retrieved July 16, 2017 . ^ Pyle, Robert Michael (2014). Chasing monarchs: Migrating with the butterflies of passage . Yale University Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-395-82820-5 . ^ Halpern, Sue (2002). Four Wings and a Prayer . Kindle edition location 1594. New York, New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-307-78720-0 . ^ Multiple sources: " Araujia sericifera " . Plant Toolbox . North Carolina Cooperative Extension ( North Carolina State University and North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University ). Archived from the original on February 7, 2024 . Retrieved March 8, 2024 . Wise, K. A. J. (June 1963). "Food-Plants of 'Monarch' Butterfly Larvae" . Tuatara . 11 (2). Wellington, New Zealand : Victoria University of Wellington : 81– 82. Archived from the original on November 30, 2023 . Retrieved March 7, 2024 . ^ Multiple sources: "Clasping milkweed" . Maitland, Florida : Florida Wildflower Foundation, Inc. Archived from the original on September 11, 2025 . Retrieved May 25, 2025 . " Asclepias amplexicaulis " . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . Archived from the original on August 25, 2025 . Retrieved May 25, 2026 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s "Plant Milkweed for Monarchs" (PDF) . United States Forest Service . Archived (PDF) from the original on January 15, 2024 . Retrieved March 1, 2024 . ^ Multiple sources: " Asclepias albicans " . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . May 31, 2023. Archived from the original on March 28, 2023 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . "Asclepias albicans" . Flora of North America . eFloras.org. Archived from the original on January 17, 2024 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . ^ Multiple sources: " Asclepias asperula ssp. capricornu " . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . Archived from the original on November 17, 2025 . Retrieved February 6, 2026 . " Asclepias asperula subsp. asperula " .

The University and Jepson Herbaria, University of California, Berkeley . Regents of the University of California. December 15, 2025. Archived from the original on February 6, 2026 . Retrieved February 6, 2026 . " Asclepias asperula , (Antelope horn, Spider Milkweed)" . Bring Back The Monarchs . Monarch Watch . Archived from the original on September 15, 2025 . Retrieved February 6, 2026 . Borders, Brianna; Casey, Allen; Row, John M.; Wynia, Rich; King, Randy; Jacobs, Alayna; Taylor, Chip; Mader, Eric (June 2013). " Asclepias asperula ssp. capricornu Antelope horns".

In Walls, Hailey; Rich, Kaitlyn (eds.). Pollinator Plants of the Central United States: Native Milkweeds ( Asclepias spp.) (PDF) . Portland, Oregon : The Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation . p. 9. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 6, 2020 . Retrieved February 6, 2026 . ^ Multiple sources: "Carolina milkweed" . Maitland, Florida : Florida Wildflower Foundation, Inc. Archived from the original on January 22, 2026 . Retrieved May 25, 2025 . " Asclepias cinerea " . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . Archived from the original on May 24, 2024 . Retrieved May 25, 2026 . ^ Multiple sources: "Largeflower milkweed" . Maitland, Florida : Florida Wildflower Foundation, Inc. Archived from the original on December 6, 2025 . Retrieved May 25, 2025 . " Asclepias connivens " . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . May 31, 2023. Archived from the original on May 24, 2025 . Retrieved May 25, 2026 . ^ Multiple sources: " Asclepias curassavica " . Plant Finder . St. Louis : Missouri Botanical Garden . Archived from the original on May 19, 2022 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . " Asclepias curassavica " . Plant Toolbox . North Carolina Cooperative Extension ( North Carolina State University and North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University ). Archived from the original on January 12, 2024 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . " Asclepias curassavica L." Plants of the World Online . Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew . Archived from the original on June 24, 2025 . Retrieved May 25, 2025 . ^ Multiple sources: " Asclepias exaltata " . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . August 5, 2016. Archived from the original on January 11, 2024 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . " Asclepias exaltata " . Plant Toolbox . North Carolina Cooperative Extension ( North Carolina State University and North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University ). Archived from the original on September 22, 2023 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . " Asclepias exaltata , (Poke Milkweed)" . Bring Back The Monarchs . Monarch Watch . Archived from the original on October 4, 2023 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . ^ Multiple sources: "Florida Milkweed" . Maitland, Florida : Florida Wildflower Foundation, Inc. Archived from the original on January 21, 2026 . Retrieved May 25, 2025 . " Asclepias feayi " . NatureServe Explorer . Retrieved June 7, 2025 . " Asclepias feayi " . Report . Integrated Taxonomic Information System . Archived from the original on January 18, 2026 . Retrieved May 25, 2026 . " Asclepias feayi : Florida milkweed" . PLANTS Database . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service . Retrieved May 15, 2019 . "Florida milkweed" . Atlas of Florida Plants . University of South Florida Libraries . 2021. Archived from the original on May 14, 2026 . Retrieved May 14, 2026 . " Asclepias feayi " . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . Archived from the original on February 18, 2025 . Retrieved May 14, 2026 . ^ Multiple sources: "Tall Green Milkweed: Asclepias hirtella " . Illinois Wildflowers . Archived from the original on March 26, 2010 . Retrieved January 15, 2024 . NRCS . " Asclepias hirtella " . PLANTS Database . United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) . Retrieved February 13, 2018 . ^ a b c Multiple sources: "Recommended Native Plant Species for Monarch Butterflies" (PDF) . Florida Plant Materials Fact Sheet No. 5: Planting for Monarch Butterflies . United States Department of Agriculture . October 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 10, 2025 . Retrieved May 25, 2026 . "Gardening Solutions: Native Milkweeds" . University of Florida Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences Extension . Archived from the original on March 12, 2026 . Retrieved May 25, 2026 . ^ Multiple sources: Kirk, S.; Belt, S. "Plant fact sheet for swamp milkweed ( Asclepias incarnata )" (PDF) . Beltsville, Maryland : United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service : Norman A. Berg National Plant Materials Center. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 9, 2021 . Retrieved July 9, 2021 . Holmes, Forest Russell. "Swamp Milkweed ( Asclepias incarnata L.)" . Plant of the Week . Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Agriculture : United States Forest Service . Archived from the original on March 28, 2021 . Retrieved July 9, 2021 . "Plant Milkweed for Monarchs" (PDF) . United States Forest Service . Archived (PDF) from the original on January 15, 2024 . Retrieved March 1, 2024 . " Asclepias incarnata " . Bring Back The Monarchs . Monarch Watch . Archived from the original on June 12, 2021 . Retrieved July 5, 2021 . " Asclepias incarnata " . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . October 10, 2013. Archived from the original on March 23, 2026 . Retrieved May 17, 2024 . " Asclepias incarnata " . Plant Finder . St. Louis : Missouri Botanical Garden . Archived from the original on January 22, 2026 . Retrieved May 17, 2026 . ^ Multiple sources: " Asclepias lanceolata Walt" . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . October 10, 2013. Archived from the original on September 30, 2023 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . " Asclepias lanceolata " . Plant Toolbox . North Carolina Cooperative Extension ( North Carolina State University and North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University ). Archived from the original on September 23, 2023 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . ^ Multiple sources " Asclepias linaria Cav" . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . November 12, 2014. Archived from the original on January 22, 2022 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . "Threadleaf Milkweed: Asclepias linaria " . Tucson, Arizona : Horticulture Unlimited, Inc. 2024. Archived from the original on October 17, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . "Asclepias linaria" . Flora of North America . eFloras.org. Archived from the original on January 17, 2024 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . ^ "Longleaf milkweed" . Maitland, Florida : Florida Wildflower Foundation, Inc. 2021. Archived from the original on January 19, 2026 . Retrieved May 14, 2026 . ^ Multiple sources: Betz, R. F. (1989). Bragg, Thomas B.; Stubbendieck, James (eds.). "Ecology of Mead's milkweed ( Asclepias meadii Torrey)" (PDF) . Prairie pioneers: ecology, history and culture: proceedings of the Eleventh North American Prairie Conference held 7–11 August 1988 . Lincoln, Nebraska : University of Nebraska Printing. pp. 187– 191. OCLC 741871225 . Archived (PDF) from the original on October 16, 2022 . Retrieved March 10, 2024 – via University of Wisconsin-Madison Libraries . " Asclepias meadii " . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . November 12, 2014. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021 . Retrieved March 10, 2024 . " Asclepias meadii : Meade's Milkweed" . NatureServe Explorer . Arlington County, Virginia : NatureServe . Archived from the original on January 24, 2022 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . " Asclepias meadii , (Mead's milkweed)" . Bring Back The Monarchs . Monarch Watch . Archived from the original on September 27, 2022 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . ^ " Asclepias nivea " . Butterfly gardening & all things milkweed . Archived from the original on July 7, 2015 . Retrieved July 7, 2015 . ^ Multiple sources: " Asclepias oenotheroides " . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . Archived from the original on August 25, 2025 . Retrieved February 10, 2026 . " Asclepias oenotheroides Schltdl. & Cham" . Plants of the World Online . Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew . Archived from the original on December 28, 2024 . Retrieved February 10, 2026 . "Plants Profile for Asclepias oenotheroides (zizotes milkweed)" . PLANTS Database . Natural Resources Conservation Service : United States Department of Agriculture . Retrieved January 11, 2020 . ^ Multiple sources: " Asclepias pedicellata " . NatureServe Explorer . Retrieved September 4, 2025 . " Asclepias pedicellata " . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . " Asclepias pedicellata " . Atlas of Florida Plants . University of South Florida Libraries . Archived from the original on June 27, 2025 . Retrieved May 14, 2026 . ^ Multiple sources: "Four-leaved milkweed" . Ontario , Canada. July 17, 2014. Archived from the original on May 23, 2023 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . " Asclepias quadrifolia " . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . May 4, 2022. Archived from the original on September 23, 2023 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . " Asclepias quadrifolia " . Plant Finder . St. Louis : Missouri Botanical Garden . Archived from the original on May 6, 2022 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . ^ Marcus, Joseph A. (November 2, 2014). " Asclepias rubra (Red milkweed)" . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . Archived from the original on February 18, 2025 . Retrieved December 24, 2025 . ^ Multiple sources: Stevens, Michelle (May 30, 2006). "Plant guide for Asclepias speciosa " (PDF) . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service . Archived (PDF) from the original on July 12, 2021 . Retrieved July 12, 2021 . Young-Mathews, A.; Eldredge, E. (2012). "Plant fact sheet for showy milkweed ( Asclepias speciosa )" (PDF) . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service , Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon, and Great Basin Plant Materials Center, Fallon, Nevada . Archived from the original (PDF) on April 1, 2021 . Retrieved July 12, 2021 . " Asclepias speciosa " . Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Agriculture : United States Forest Service . Archived from the original on March 7, 2021 . Retrieved July 12, 2021 . Wiese, Karen (2000). "Showy Milkweed: Asclepias speciosa " . Sierra Nevada Wildflowers: A Field Guide to Common Wildflowers and Shrubs of the Sierra Nevada, Including Yosemite, Sequoia, and Kings Canyon National Parks . Helena, Montana : Falcon Publishing, Inc. p. 50. ISBN 0-585-36283-1 . LCCN 00022385 . OCLC 47011272 . Retrieved July 12, 2021 – via Internet Archive . ^ Multiple sources: " Asclepias sullivantii " . Plant Finder . St. Louis : Missouri Botanical Garden . Archived from the original on May 29, 2023 . Retrieved January 15, 2024 . " Asclepias sullivantii " . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . November 2, 2014. Archived from the original on March 29, 2023 . Retrieved January 15, 2024 . Penskar, M.R.; Higman, P.J (2000). " Asclepias sullivantii Engelm.: Sullivant's milkweed" (PDF) . Michigan Natural Features Inventory . Lansing, Michigan : Michigan State University Extension . Archived (PDF) from the original on September 5, 2012 . Retrieved January 15, 2024 . ^ Multiple sources: Stevens, Michelle. "Plant guide for common milkweed ( Asclepias syriaca )" (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service : National Plant Data Center. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 5, 2021 . Retrieved July 5, 2021 . Taylor, David. "Common Milkweed ( Asclepias syriaca L.)" . Plant of the Week . United States Department of Agriculture , United States Forest Service . Archived from the original on January 22, 2023 . Retrieved December 24, 2023 . "Asclepias syriaca" . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . August 9, 2020. Archived from the original on March 2, 2024 . Retrieved January 15, 2024 . " Asclepias syriaca " . Plant Finder . St. Louis : Missouri Botanical Garden . Archived from the original on January 21, 2026 . Retrieved May 17, 2026 . " Asclepias syriaca , (Common Milkweed)" . Bring Back The Monarchs . Monarch Watch . Archived from the original on December 8, 2023 . Retrieved March 10, 2024 . "Plant Milkweed for Monarchs" (PDF) . United States Forest Service . Archived (PDF) from the original on January 15, 2024 . Retrieved March 1, 2024 . Borders, Brianna; Casey, Allen; Row, John M.; Wynia, Rich; King, Randy; Jacobs, Alayna; Taylor, Chip; Mader, Eric (June 2013). " Asclepias syriaca Common Milkweed".

In Walls, Hailey; Rich, Kaitlyn (eds.). Pollinator Plants of the Central United States: Native Milkweeds ( Asclepias spp.) (PDF) . Portland, Oregon : The Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation . p. 12. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 6, 2020 . Retrieved February 6, 2026 . Higgins, Adrian (May 27, 2015). "A gardener's guide to saving the monarch" . Home & Garden.

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on September 26, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . Higgins, Adrian (May 27, 2015). "7 milkweed varieties and where to find them" . Home & Garden.

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on September 26, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . Gomez, Tony (March 14, 2013). " Asclepias syriaca : Common Milkweed for Monarch Caterpillars" . Monarch Butterfly Garden . MonarchButterflyGarden.net. Archived from the original on March 16, 2015 . Retrieved July 5, 2021 . " Asclepias syriaca " . Butterfly gardening & all things milkweed . Archived from the original on July 7, 2015 . Retrieved July 7, 2015 . ^ Multiple sources: " Asclepias tomentosa " . NatureServe Explorer . Retrieved June 7, 2025 . "USDA Plants Database" . "Velvetleaf milkweed" . Florida Wildflower Foundation, Inc. 2021. Archived from the original on March 6, 2026 . Retrieved May 14, 2026 . " Asclepias tomentosa " . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , The University of Texas at Austin . Archived from the original on February 10, 2026 . Retrieved May 15, 2026 . ^ Multiple sources: "Query Page" . BONAP’s Taxonomic Data Center (TDC): The Biota of North America Program: North American Vascular Flora . " Asclepias tuberosa " . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center - The University of Texas at Austin . Archived from the original on February 5, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . Stevens, Michelle. "Plant guide for Butterfly Milkweed: Asclepias tuberosa L." (PDF) . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service : National Plant Data Center. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 9, 2021 . Retrieved July 5, 2021 . Stritch, Larry. "Butterfly Milkweed ( Asclepias tuberosa L.)" . Plant of the Week . United States Department of Agriculture : United States Forest Service . Archived from the original on March 27, 2021 . Retrieved July 9, 2021 . ^ Multiple sources: Davis, Lee (May 31, 2006). "Plant guide for Green Milkweed: Asclepias viridis Walt" (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service . Archived (PDF) from the original on July 11, 2021 . Retrieved July 11, 2021 . Taylor, David. "Green Antelopehorn ( Asclepias viridis )" . Plant of the Week . Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Agriculture : United States Forest Service . Archived from the original on March 27, 2021 . Retrieved July 11, 2021 . " Asclepias viridis Walter: Green Milkweed" . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center . Austin, Texas : University of Texas at Austin . Archived from the original on November 12, 2025 . Retrieved February 6, 2026 . " Asclepias viridis , (Green Antelopehorn Milkweed)" . Bring Back The Monarchs . Monarch Watch . Archived from the original on November 18, 2025 . Retrieved February 6, 2026 . Borders, Brianna; Casey, Allen; Row, John M.; Wynia, Rich; King, Randy; Jacobs, Alayna; Taylor, Chip; Mader, Eric (June 2013). " Asclepias viridis Green antelopehorn".

In Walls, Hailey; Rich, Kaitlyn (eds.). Pollinator Plants of the Central United States: Native Milkweeds ( Asclepias spp.) (PDF) . Portland, Oregon : The Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation . p. 13. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 6, 2020 . Retrieved February 6, 2026 . " Asclepias viridis : Spider Milkweed" . NatureServe Explorer . Arlington County, Virginia : NatureServe, Inc. January 30, 2026. Archived from the original on August 5, 2025 . Retrieved February 6, 2026 . ^ "Butterfly Society of Hawaii" . Butterfly Society of Hawaii . Retrieved January 6, 2017 . ^ Multiple sources: " Calotropis procera " . Plant Finder . St. Louis : Missouri Botanical Garden . Archived from the original on November 26, 2022 . Retrieved February 3, 2024 . "Not All Monarchs Migrate!

The Puerto Rican Subspecies Stays Put" (PDF) . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service . June 23, 2016. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 8, 2023 . Retrieved February 2, 2024 .

The Puerto Rican monarch's primary host plants are red milkweed ( Asclepias curassavica ), which is native to North and South America, and giant milkweed ( Calotropis procera ), which is native to Europe. ^ "Swallow-wort, Cynanchum angustifolium" . November 14, 2025. ^ Multiple sources: Hansen, Jeff (December 24, 2024). "Butterfly Gardening" . Kansas Native Plants . Topeka, Kansas: Jeff D. Hansen. Archived from the original on February 24, 2012 . Retrieved August 14, 2025 . " Cynanchum laeve " . Plant Database . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , The University of Texas at Austin . October 6, 2022. Archived from the original on December 5, 2023 . Retrieved August 14, 2025 . " Cynanchum laeve : Climbing Milkweed" . missouriplants.com (members of Missouri Native Plant Society). Archived from the original on July 29, 2025 . Retrieved August 14, 2025 . ^ Multiple sources: Wise, K. A. J. (June 1963). "Food-Plants of 'Monarch' Butterfly Larvae" . Tuatara . 11 (2). Wellington, New Zealand : Victoria University of Wellington : 81– 82. Archived from the original on November 30, 2023 . Retrieved March 7, 2024 . "Narrow-leaved Cotton Bush ( Gomphocarpus fruticosus " . Weeds of Melbourne . March 30, 2021. Archived from the original on September 29, 2023 . Retrieved March 7, 2024 . ^ Multiple sources: Mahr, Susan. "Balloon Plant, Gomphocarpus physocarpus" . Wisconsin Horticulture: Division of Extension . Madison, Wisconsin : University of Wisconsin–Madison . Archived from the original on October 16, 2023 . Retrieved March 2, 2024 . " Gomphocarpus physocarpus " . Plant Finder . St. Louis : Missouri Botanical Garden . Archived from the original on March 2, 2024 . Retrieved March 2, 2024 . " Gomphocarpus physocarpa " . Plant Toolbox . North Carolina Cooperative Extension ( North Carolina State University and North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University ). Archived from the original on November 30, 2022 . Retrieved March 2, 2024 . "Asclepias physocarpus (Ballon Plant)" . Gardenia. Archived from the original on May 16, 2022 . Retrieved March 2, 2022 . ^ Wagner, David L. (2005). Caterpillars of Eastern North America . Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ. ISBN 0-691-12144-3 ^ "Monarch milkweed finder" . Resources . World Wildlife Fund . Archived from the original on February 24, 2026 . Retrieved February 23, 2026 . ^ a b c d Taylor, Chip (March 29, 2024). "Is the eastern monarch population continuing to decline?: Milkweed and monarchs" . Monarch Watch Blog . MonarchWatch.org . Archived from the original on July 16, 2024 . Retrieved September 8, 2024 . ^ Borders, B.; Lee-Mäder, E. (2014). "Chapter 2. Milkweed Biology & Ecology". Milkweeds: A Conservation Practitioner's Guide (PDF) . Portland, OR: The Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation . p. 8. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 27, 2025 . Retrieved July 27, 2025 . ^ Howard, Elizabeth; Aschen, Harlen; Davis, Andrew K. (2010). "Citizen Science Observations of Monarch Butterfly Overwintering in the Southern United States" . Psyche: A Journal of Entomology . 2010 : 1. doi : 10.1155/2010/689301 . ^ Satterfield, D. A.; Maerz, J. C.; Altizer, S (2015). "Loss of migratory behaviour increases infection risk for a butterfly host" . Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . 282 (1801) 20141734. doi : 10.1098/rspb.2014.1734 . PMC 4308991 . PMID 25589600 . ^ Majewska, Ania A.; Altizer, Sonia (August 16, 2019). "Exposure to Non-Native Tropical Milkweed Promotes Reproductive Development in Migratory Monarch Butterflies" . Insects . 10 (8): 253. doi : 10.3390/insects10080253 . PMC 6724006 . PMID 31426310 . ^ Multiple sources: "Important Plants of the Monarch Butterfly: Greater Appalachian Mountains Region: Staff Guide" (PDF) . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service . January 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 20, 2025 . Retrieved March 20, 2026 . "Important Plants of the Monarch Butterfly: Midwest Region: Staff Guide" (PDF) . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service . February 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 19, 2025 . Retrieved March 20, 2026 . "Important Plants of the Monarch Butterfly: Northern Great Plains: Staff Guide" (PDF) . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service . February 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 19, 2025 . Retrieved March 20, 2026 . "Important Plants of the Monarch Butterfly: Southern Great Plains: Staff Guide" (PDF) . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service . April 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 22, 2025 . Retrieved March 20, 2026 . "Important Plants of the Monarch Butterfly: Southern High Plains Region: Staff Guide" (PDF) . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service . July 2024. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 19, 2025 . Retrieved March 20, 2026 . "Important Plants of the Monarch Butterfly: Western Coastal Plain: Staff Guide" (PDF) . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service . October 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 24, 2025 . Retrieved March 20, 2026 . "Monarch Butterfly Nectar Plants for Conservation Plantings" (PDF) . Portland, Oregon : Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation . Archived (PDF) from the original on September 12, 2025 . Retrieved March 19, 2026 . "Nectar Plants for Butterflies & Other Pollinators" (PDF) . Plants for Butterfly and Pollinator Gardens: Native and Non-native Plants Suitable for Gardens in the Northeastern United States . Monarch Watch . Archived (PDF) from the original on November 12, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2021 . "Nectar Plants For Monarchs" (PDF) . Wild for Monarchs . Neenah, Wisconsin : Wild Ones (wildones.org) . Archived (PDF) from the original on August 21, 2025 . Retrieved February 28, 2026 . Heiser, Carol A. (June 24, 2020). "Celebrate Pollinators!" . Virginia Department of Wildlife Resources . Archived from the original on June 25, 2025 . Retrieved August 13, 2025 . Ingram, Bruce (June 9, 2022). "Help the Bees, Butterflies, Bucks, and Bears: Create a Pollinator Plot" . Virginia Department of Wildlife Resources . Archived from the original on June 27, 2025 . Retrieved August 13, 2025 . Staake, Jill (2026). "17 Blooming Bushes That Attract Butterflies" . Birds&Blooms . RDA Enthusiast Brands, LLC. Archived from the original on February 13, 2026 . Retrieved March 19, 2026 . ^ a b c d e f "Monarch Butterfly Nectar Plants for Conservation Plantings" (PDF) . Portland, Oregon : Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation . Archived (PDF) from the original on September 12, 2025 . Retrieved March 19, 2026 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l "Conservation and Management of Monarch Butterflies: A Land Manager's Restoration Guide for the Eastern U.S." (PDF) . San Francisco, California: Pollinator Partnership : pollinator.org. p. 8. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 25, 2024 . Retrieved February 26, 2026 . ^ Multiple sources: Kimmerle, Lynn (March 27, 2018). "Monarch butterfly feeding on a Buddleja flower" (photograph) . Archived from the original on November 23, 2023 . Retrieved September 9, 2024 . " Buddleja davidii " . Plant Finder . St. Louis : Missouri Botanical Garden . Archived from the original on December 3, 2023 . Retrieved September 9, 2024 . Flowers (each to ½" long) are mildly fragrant, and, as the common name suggests, very attractive to butterflies. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Staake, Jill (2026). "17 Blooming Bushes That Attract Butterflies" . Birds&Blooms . RDA Enthusiast Brands, LLC. Archived from the original on February 13, 2026 . Retrieved March 19, 2026 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Vogt, Scott (February 16, 2022). "Beyond Milkweed: More Plants for Monarchs" . Hesston, Kansas : Dyck Arboretum of the Plains . Archived from the original on December 9, 2025 . Retrieved March 17, 2026 . ^ "Nectar Plants For Monarchs" (PDF) . Wild for Monarchs . Neenah, Wisconsin : Wild Ones (wildones.org) . Archived (PDF) from the original on August 21, 2025 . Retrieved February 28, 2026 . ^ a b c d e f g Pierle, Matt (Summer 2010). "A Natural History of the Monarch Butterfly (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae Danaus plexippus )" . Ann Arbor, Michigan : University of Michigan Library . p. 6. Archived from the original on March 20, 2026 . Retrieved March 19, 2026 .

As adults, the males and females feed on nectar of milkweed but also other plants including: Asters, Thistles, Alfalfa, Golden Rods, Lilac, Red Clover, Wild Carrot ( Daucus carota ), Teasel ( Dipsacus sylvestris ), Spotted Joe‐Pye Weed ( Eupatorium maculatum ), Boneset ( Eupatorium perfoliatum ), Tall Ironweed ( Veronica altissima ) and Dame's Rocket ( Hesperis matronalis ). ^ " Conoclinium coelestinum (L.): Blue Mistflower" . Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center , University of Texas at Austin . January 14, 2025 . Retrieved February 23, 2026 . Bloom Time: Jul, Aug, Sep, Oct, Nov .....

The fluffy-edged flowers are a magnet for late-season butterflies ^ De Vasconcelos, Luiza. "Monarch Butterfly" . Prezi . Archived from the original on March 20, 2026 . Retrieved March 20, 2026 . Ten plants that attract the Monarch butterfly include: ... 6. Erigeron Canadensis: Horseweed ^ "Important Plants of the Monarch Butterfly: Midwest Region: Staff Guide" (PDF) . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service . February 2018. p. 14. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 19, 2025 . Retrieved March 20, 2026 . ^ a b c d e f Ajilvsgi, Geyata (June 3, 2013). Butterfly Gardening for Texas . College Station, Texas : Texas A&M University Press . p. 141 . ISBN 9781603449571 . LCCN 2012031589 . OCLC 841909864 . Archived from the original on February 16, 2025 . Retrieved November 29, 2025 .

During the breeding season, the Monarch's favorite habitats are open fields, meadows, and flower gardens. ....

In the fall, it seems especially fond of Blue Mistflower ( Conoclinium coelestinum ), Virginia Frostweed ( Verbesina virginica ), Giant Ironweed ( Vernonia gigantea ), Mexican Sunflower ( Tithonia rotundifolia ), and various lantanas ( Lantana spp.), goldenrods ( Solidago spp.), and verbenas ( Verbena spp.) ^ "Important Plants of the Monarch Butterfly: Greater Appalachian Mountains Region: Staff Guide" (PDF) . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service . January 2018. pp. 22, 80. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 20, 2025 . Retrieved March 20, 2026 . ^ a b c Multiple sources: "Mexican Sunflower Seeds - (Tithonia rotundifolia 'Torch')" . Chino Valley, Arizona : Terroir Seeds. 2025. Archived from the original on July 20, 2025 . Retrieved December 5, 2025 . Butterflies of all kinds, but especially the endangered Monarchs, carry a "Torch" for the Mexican sunflower. Swarms of migrating Monarchs are commonly seen mobbing the big, bold, red-orange dahlia-like blooms. Gomez, Tony (June 5, 2013). "Mexican sunflower: Monarch Butterflies Hold a 'Torch' for Tithonia: Tithonia rotundifolia 'torch' " . Anoka, Minnesota : Monarch Butterfly Garden. Archived from the original on February 18, 2025 . Retrieved November 28, 2025 . Attracts swarms of migrating monarchs. ....

The 'Torch' cultivar has been widely reported by butterfly gardeners to attract lots of butterflies, but some of the lesser planted varieties might bring home the butterflies too. Eberl, Karuna (September 5, 2024). "Grow Mexican Sunflower in Pollinator Gardens" . Birds&Blooms . RDA Enthusiast Brands, LLC. Archived from the original on September 22, 2025 . Retrieved December 2, 2025 .

The blooms of Mexican sunflowers range from red and orange to yellow, with fuzzy stalks that branch out in a big, gangly bunch. They resemble native prairie sunflowers and zinnia more than common sunflowers. Native to Central America and Mexico, they are hearty in arid regions, plus grow quickly into full, lush landscapes with an abundance of flower heads. "That makes them a nectar buffet for swallowtails, monarchs and other butterflies," says Keri Wilson, a horticulturist with Garden Media Group. "Tithonia also thrives in heat, blooming even when other flowers start to wilt and fade, making it an excellent late-season food source for migrating butterflies." ^ " Tithonia rotundifolia " . Plant Finder . St. Louis, Missouri : Missouri Botanical Garden . Archived from the original on June 14, 2025 . Retrieved November 28, 2025 .

The blooms are attractive to hummingbirds, butterflies, and other pollinators. ^ Ingram, Bruce (June 9, 2022). "Help the Bees, Butterflies, Bucks, and Bears: Create a Pollinator Plot" . Virginia Department of Wildlife Resources . Archived from the original on June 27, 2025 . Retrieved August 13, 2025 . ^ "Important Plants of the Monarch Butterfly: Greater Appalachian Mountains Region: Staff Guide" (PDF) . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service . January 2018. p. 9. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 20, 2025 . Retrieved March 26, 2026 . ^ "Beyond milkweed: Five native plants that help power the monarch butterfly migration" . Resources: Facts . Washington, D.C.: World Wildlife Fund . 2026. These late-blooming plants native to North America help feed butterflies—especially monarchs—at a crucial point. ^ Multiple sources: Be Smart (April 9, 2019). "How We Finally Solved the Monarch Butterfly Migration Mystery" . PBS . Retrieved March 7, 2026 – via YouTube. Video: 10:15 minutes. "Inside the monarch butterfly migration mystery: flying to Mexico from Canada, the U.S." 60 Minutes . April 21, 2025 . Retrieved March 7, 2026 – via YouTube. Video: 12:51 minutes. "Anderson Cooper on witnessing the monarch butterfly migration" . 60 Minutes Overtime . April 20, 2025 . Retrieved March 7, 2026 – via YouTube. Video: 5:03 minutes. Natural Habitat Adventures (August 29, 2022). "Endangered Migration: A Monarch Butterfly Story" . Retrieved March 7, 2026 – via YouTube. Video: 6:50 minutes. Reppert, Steven M (2018). "Demystifying monarch butterfly migration" . Current Biology . 28 (17): R1009– R1022. Bibcode : 2018CBio...28R1009R . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2018.02.067 . PMID 30205052 . S2CID 52186799 . ^ Multiple sources: Frieje, Vanessa; Hernandez, Yolotzi (April 7, 2023). "How This Tiny Mexican Town Has Saved Their Monarch Butterflies—For Now" . Atlas Obscura . Archived from the original on January 20, 2024 . Retrieved November 2, 2024 . Brandes, Rebekah (October 29, 2024). "The Migratory Monarch Butterfly Population Is Soaring in This Tiny Mexican Town" . Nice News . Archived from the original on March 6, 2026 . Retrieved March 6, 2026 . ^ "MonarchButterfly" . Worldwildlife. 2015–2024 . Retrieved March 23, 2025 . ^ "monarchscience" . Akdavis6.wixsite.com. December 31, 2016 . Retrieved January 6, 2017 . ^ Multiple sources: Fagin, Dan (November 17, 2025). "We Can Now Track Individual Monarch Butterflies. It's a Revelation" .

The New York Times . New York City . Retrieved November 19, 2025 . "Revolutionary tracking study follows monarch butterflies to Mexico using groundbreaking technology and continent-wide collaboration" .

The Monarch Joint Venture. November 17, 2025. Archived from the original on November 19, 2025 . Retrieved November 19, 2025 . Fisher, Ashley (September 27, 2025). "With Upgraded Transmitters, We Can Now Track Migrating Monarchs Better Than Ever" . Portland, Oregon: The Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation . Archived from the original on December 4, 2025 . Retrieved December 3, 2025 . A new radiotelemetry transmitter, called the Blu+, is revolutionizing how scientists can track migrating monarchs this fall.

The Blu+ transmitter, .... , weighs just 0.06g and can be attached to monarch butterflies. ^ "Revolutionary tracking study follows monarch butterflies to Mexico using groundbreaking technology and continent-wide collaboration" .

The Monarch Joint Venture. November 17, 2025. Archived from the original on November 19, 2025 . Retrieved November 19, 2025 . ^ Taylor, O. R. (August 3, 2000). "Monarch Watch 1999 Season Recoveries" (PDF) . pp. 1– 11. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 6, 2014 . Retrieved July 5, 2021 . ^ a b Steffy, Gayle (2015). "Trends observed in fall migrant Monarch butterflies (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae) east of the Appalachian Mountains at an inland stopover in southern Pennsylvania over an eighteen year period". Annals of the Entomological Society of America . 108 (5): 718. doi : 10.1093/aesa/sav046 . S2CID 86201332 . ^ "Monarch butterflies are a steady presence in Arizona" . Arizona Daily Star . Retrieved January 15, 2016 . ^ "Butterfly genomics: Monarchs migrate and fly differently, but meet up and mate" . phys.org . Retrieved July 31, 2020 . ^ Nail, Kelly R. (2019). "Butterflies Across the Globe: A Synthesis of the Current Status and Characteristics of Monarch ( Danaus plexippus ) Populations Worldwide" . Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution . 27 362. Bibcode : 2019FrEEv...7..362N . doi : 10.3389/fevo.2019.00362 . ^ Grant, T. J., Fisher, K. E., Krishnan, N., Mullins, A. N., Hellmich II, R. L., Sappington, T. W., Adelman, J. S., Coats, J. R., Hartzler, R. G., Pleasants, J. M., & Bradbury, S. P. (2022). Monarch butterfly ecology, behavior, and vulnerabilities in North Central United States agricultural landscapes. BioScience, 72(12), 1176–1203. https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/biac094 ^ Flockhart, D. T. T., Pichancourt, J. B., Norris, D. R., & Martin, T. G. (2015). Unravelling the annual cycle in a migratory animal: Breeding-season habitat loss drives population declines of monarch butterflies. Journal of Animal Ecology, 84(1), 155–165. https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2656.12253 ^ Multiple sources: Davis, A. (April 5, 2016). "Very interesting study on monarch predators recently published" . monarchscience . Akdavis6.wixsite.com. Archived from the original on November 24, 2020 . Retrieved May 10, 2026 . McCoshum, S.M.; Andreoli, S.L.; Stenoien, C.M.; Oberhauser, K.S.; Baum, K.A. (March 18, 2016). "Species distribution models for natural enemies of monarch butterfly ( Danaus plexippus ) larvae and pupae: distribution patterns and implications for conservation" . Journal of Insect Conservation . 20 . Springer Nature : 223– 237. doi : 10.1007/s10841-016-9856-z . Archived from the original on August 19, 2025 . Retrieved May 10, 2026 . ^ a b Barbosa, Pedro; Deborah Kay Letourneau (1988). "5" . Novel Aspects of Insect-plant Interactions . Wiley-Interscience. pp. 29–31 . ISBN 978-0-471-83276-8 . ^ Multiple sources: "Butterfly Weed: Asclepias tuberosa " (PDF) . Becker County, Minnesota : Becker Soil and Water Conservation District. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 11, 2020 . Retrieved September 11, 2020 . Unlike other milkweeds, this plant has a clear sap, and the level of toxic cardiac glycosides is consistently low (although other toxic compounds may be present). Mikkelsen, Lauge Hjorth; Hamoudi, Hassan; Altuntas Gül, Cigdem; Heegaard, Steffen (2017). "Corneal Toxicity Following Exposure to Asclepias tuberosa " .

The Open Ophthalmology Journal . 11 . Bentham Science Publishers : 1– 4. doi : 10.2174/1874364101711010001 . PMC 5362972 . PMID 28400886 .

The latex of A. tuberosa seems to be different from other Asclepias species since even though cardenolides are normally present in Asclepias species, these cardenolides have not been found in A. tuberosa . Instead some unique pregnane glycosides are found in A. tuberosa . Warashina, Tsutomu; Noro, Tadataka (February 2010). "8,12;8,20-Diepoxy-8,14-secopregnane Glycosides from the Aerial Parts of Asclepias tuberosa " . Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin . 58 (2). Pharmaceutical Society of Japan: 172– 179. doi : 10.1248/cpb.58.172 . PMID 20118575 . Retrieved September 11, 2020 . Though cardenolides are considered to be characteristic constituents of Asclepias spp. together with pregnane glycosides, we could find no cardenolides in the more hydrophobic fraction of the methanol extract of the aerial parts of A. tuberosa , the same as previously. ^ Multiple sources: Gunn, John (May 20, 2016). "Milkweeds (mostly Asclepias spp.)" . Alonso Abugattas Shares Native Plant Picks for Wildlife . Mid-Atlantic Gardener (John Gunn). Archived from the original on October 21, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . And if you have hot, dry conditions in your yard, try Butterflyweed ( A. tuberosa ). ... It's the least favored by Monarch caterpillars because it has very little toxin (cardiac glycosides) in its leaves. Abugattas, Alonzo (January 3, 2017). "Monarch Way Stations" . Capital Naturalist . Archived from the original on June 5, 2017 . Retrieved June 5, 2017 – via Blogger . ( A. tuberosa ) is the least favored by monarch caterpillars ... because it has very little toxin (cardiac glycosides) in its leaves Gomez, Tony. " Asclepias tuberosa : Butterfly Weed for Monarchs and More" . Monarch Butterfly Garden . MonarchButterflyGarden.net. Archived from the original on August 16, 2017 . Retrieved October 17, 2010 . Rough leaves for monarch caterpillars, not typically a heavily used host plant Butterfly Society of Virginia (2019). "Growing Milkweed" . Archived from the original on June 24, 2019 . Retrieved December 25, 2023 . I've grown butterfly weed, swamp milkweed, Asclepias currassavica (bloodflower), Asclepias syriaca (common milkweed), and Asclepias verticillata (whorled milkweed). I've found that butterfly weed is the least favorite of my Monarch guests in my Virginia Beach garden for laying eggs (perhaps the leaves are tougher?) Pocius, Victoria M.; Debinski, Diane M.; Pleasants, John M.; Bidne, Keith G.; Hellmich, Richard L. (January 8, 2018). "Monarch butterflies do not place all of their eggs in one basket: oviposition on nine Midwestern milkweed species" . Ecosphere . 9 (1) e02064. Ecological Society of America : 1– 13. Bibcode : 2018Ecosp...9E2064P . doi : 10.1002/ecs2.2064 .

In our study, the least preferred milkweed species A. tuberosa (no choice; Fig. 2) and A. verticillata (choice; Fig. 3A) both have low cardenolide levels recorded in the literature (Roeske et al. 1976, Agrawal et al. 2009, 2015, Rasmann and Agrawal 2011) ^ Pocius, Victoria M.; Debinski, Diane M.; Pleasants, John M.; Bidne, Keith G.; Hellmich, Richard L. (January 8, 2018). "Monarch butterflies do not place all of their eggs in one basket: oviposition on nine Midwestern milkweed species" . Ecosphere . 9 (1) e02064. Ecological Society of America : 1– 13. Bibcode : 2018Ecosp...9E2064P . doi : 10.1002/ecs2.2064 .

In our study, the least preferred milkweed species A. tuberosa (no choice; Fig. 2) and A. verticillata (choice; Fig. 3A) both have low cardenolide levels recorded in the literature (Roeske et al. 1976, Agrawal et al. 2009, 2015, Rasmann and Agrawal 2011) ^ a b Brower, Lincoln (1988). "Avian Predation on the Monarch Butterfly and Its Implications for Mimicry Theory".

The American Naturalist . 131 : S4– S6. Bibcode : 1988ANat..131S...4B . doi : 10.1086/284763 . S2CID 84642806 . ^ Fink, Linda S.; Brower, Lincoln P. (May 1981). "Birds can overcome the cardenolide defence of monarch butterflies in Mexico". Nature . 291 (5810): 67– 70. Bibcode : 1981Natur.291...67F . doi : 10.1038/291067a0 . ISSN 0028-0836 . S2CID 4305401 . ^ Groen, Simon C.; Whiteman, Noah K. (November 2021). "Convergent evolution of cardiac-glycoside resistance in predators and parasites of milkweed herbivores" . Current Biology . 31 (22): R1465– R1466. Bibcode : 2021CBio...31R1465G . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2021.10.025 . ISSN 0960-9822 . PMC 8892682 . PMID 34813747 . S2CID 244485686 . ^ Mebs, Dietrich; Wunder, Cora; Pogoda, Werner; Toennes, Stefan W. (June 1, 2017). "Feeding on toxic prey.

The praying mantis (Mantodea) as predator of poisonous butterfly and moth (Lepidoptera) caterpillars" . Toxicon . 131 : 16– 19. Bibcode : 2017Txcn..131...16M . doi : 10.1016/j.toxicon.2017.03.010 . ISSN 0041-0101 . PMID 28300580 . ^ Stimson, John; Mark Berman (1990). "Predator induced colour polymorphism in Danaus plexippus L. (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae) in Hawaii" . Heredity . 65 (3): 401– 406. Bibcode : 1990Hered..65..401S . doi : 10.1038/hdy.1990.110 . ^ a b Álvarez-Castañeda, Sergio Ticul (2005). " Peromyscus melanotis ". Mammalian Species . 2005 (764): 1– 4. doi : 10.1644/1545-1410(2005)7642.0.CO;2 . S2CID 198968529 . ^ Koch, R. L.; W. D. Hutchison; R. C. Venette; G. E. Heimpel (October 2003). "Susceptibility of immature monarch butterfly, Danaus plexippus (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae: Danainae), to predation by Harmonia axyridis (Coleoptera: Coccinellidae)". Biological Control . 28 (2): 265– 270. Bibcode : 2003BiolC..28..265K . doi : 10.1016/S1049-9644(03)00102-6 . ^ Rafter, Jamie; Anurag Agruwal; Evan Preisser (2013). "Chinese mantids gut caterpillars: avoidance of prey defense?" . Ecological Entomology . 38 (1): 78– 82. doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2311.2012.01408.x . S2CID 15029022 . ^ Zalucki, Myron P.; Malcolm, Stephen B.; Paine, Timothy D.; Hanlon, Christopher C.; Brower, Lincoln P.; Clarke, Anthony R. (2001). "It's the first bites that count: Survival of first-instar monarchs on milkweeds". Austral Ecology . 26 (5): 547– 555. Bibcode : 2001AusEc..26..547Z . doi : 10.1046/j.1442-9993.2001.01132.x . ^ Hermann, Sara L.; Blackledge, Carissa; Haan, Nathan L.; Myers, Andrew T.; Landis, Douglas A. (October 4, 2019). "Predators of monarch butterfly eggs and neonate larvae are more diverse than previously recognised" . Scientific Reports . 9 (14304). Nature Research . doi : 10.1038/s41598-019-50737-5 . PMC 6778129 . Archived from the original on November 12, 2025 . Retrieved February 22, 2019 . ^ Oberhauser, Karen S. ; Solensky, Michelle J (2004).

The Monarch Butterfly: Biology and Conservation (First ed.). Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press. p. 44. ISBN 978-0-8014-4188-2 . ^ a b c Karageorgi, Marianthi; Groen, Simon C.; Sumbul, Fidan; Pelaez, Julianne N.; Verster, Kirsten I.; Aguilar, Jessica M.; Hastings, Amy P.; Bernstein, Susan L.; Matsunaga, Teruyuki; Astourian, Michael; Guerra, Geno (October 2019). "Genome editing retraces the evolution of toxin resistance in the monarch butterfly" . Nature . 574 (7778): 409– 412. Bibcode : 2019Natur.574..409K . doi : 10.1038/s41586-019-1610-8 . ISSN 1476-4687 . PMC 7039281 . PMID 31578524 . ^ a b Parsons, J.A. (1965). "A Digitallis-like Toxin in the Monarch Butterfly Danaus plexippus L" .

The Journal of Physiology . 178 (2): 290– 304. Bibcode : 1965JPhsg.178..290P . doi : 10.1113/jphysiol.1965.sp007628 . PMC 1357291 . PMID 14298120 . ^ Malcolm, S. B.; L. P. Brower (1989). "Evolutionary and ecological implications of cardenolide sequestration in the monarch butterfly". Experientia . 45 (3): 284– 295. doi : 10.1007/BF01951814 . S2CID 9967183 . ^ "CRISPRed flies mimic monarch butterfly — and could make you vomit | Research UC Berkeley" . vcresearch.berkeley.edu . Retrieved December 18, 2021 . ^ a b de Rood, J. C.; De Castillejo, C. L.; Faits, T.; Alizon, S. (2011). "Virulence evolution in response to anti-infection resistance: toxic food plants can select for virulent parasites of monarch butterflies". Journal of Evolutionary Biology . 24 (4): 712– 722. doi : 10.1111/j.1420-9101.2010.02213.x . PMID 21261772 . S2CID 1533504 . ^ "Is tropical milkweed really medicinal? (answer: yes, and that's really really bad for your garden)" . monarchscience . March 16, 2017 . Retrieved December 12, 2019 . ^ Glazier, Lincoln; Susan Glazier (1975). "Localization of Heart Poisons in the Monarch Butterfly". Science . 188 (4183): 19– 25. Bibcode : 1975Sci...188...19B . doi : 10.1126/science.188.4183.19 . PMID 17760150 . S2CID 44509809 . ^ Ritland, D.; L. P. Brower (1991). "The viceroy butterfly is not a Batesian mimic". Nature . 350 (6318): 497– 498. Bibcode : 1991Natur.350..497R . doi : 10.1038/350497a0 . S2CID 28667520 . Viceroys are as unpalatable as monarchs, and significantly more unpalatable than queens from representative Florida populations. ^ "Official Alabama Insect" . Alabama Emblems, Symbols and Honors . Alabama Department of Archives & History. July 12, 2001. Archived from the original on October 14, 2018 . Retrieved March 19, 2007 . ^ "Idaho Symbols, Insect: Monarch Butterfly" . Idaho State Symbols, Emblems, and Mascots . SHG resources, state handbook & guide. Archived from the original on February 8, 2012 . Retrieved March 26, 2008 . ^ "State Symbol: Illinois Official Insect — Monarch Butterfly ( Danaus plexippus )" . State Symbols . Illinois State Museum . Retrieved March 26, 2008 . ^ "Minnesota State Symbols" (PDF) . Minnesota House of Representatives . Retrieved March 26, 2008 . ^ "Texas State Symbols" .

The Texas State Library and Archives. Archived from the original on December 24, 2018 . Retrieved March 26, 2008 . ^ "(Vermont) State Butterfly" . Vermont Department of Libraries. Archived from the original on May 18, 2008 . Retrieved March 26, 2008 . ^ "West Virginia Statistical Information, General State Information" (PDF) . Official West Virginia Web Portal. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 11, 2008 . Retrieved March 26, 2008 . ^ Wade, Nicholas (June 1, 1990). "Choosing a National Bug" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 27, 2017 . ^ "Designating the monarch butterfly as the national insect. (1989 - H.J.Res. 411)" . GovTrack.us . ^ "Designating the monarch butterfly as the national insect. (1991 - H.J.Res. 200)" . GovTrack.us . ^ "Monarch Watch: Monarch Waystation Program" . University of Kansas , Entomology Department . Archived from the original on November 18, 2019 . Retrieved February 26, 2019 . ^ "Flight of the Butterflies" . Reuben H. Fleet Science Center . Archived from the original on February 17, 2013 . Retrieved February 18, 2013 . ^ Multiple sources: "Saving Butterflies: Insect Ecologist Spearheads Creation of Oases for Endangered Butterflies" . ScienceDaily . January 1, 2005. Archived from the original on June 4, 2008 . Retrieved May 27, 2008 . Natural Habitat Adventures (August 29, 2022). "Endangered Migration: A Monarch Butterfly Story" . Retrieved March 7, 2026 – via YouTube. Video: 6:50 minutes. ^ Nicoletti, Mélanie; Gilles, Florent; Galicia-Mendoza, Ivette; Rendón-Salinas, Eduardo; Alonso, Alfonso; Contreras-Garduño, Jorge (2020). "Physiological Costs in Monarch Butterflies Due to Forest Cover and Visitors" . Ecological Indicators . 117 106592. Bibcode : 2020EcInd.11706592N . doi : 10.1016/j.ecolind.2020.106592 . ^ "Monarch Monitoring Project" . Cap May Bird Observatory. 2008. Archived from the original on December 20, 2008 . Retrieved December 5, 2008 . ^ Kingsolver, Barbara (2012). Flight Behavior . HarperCollins. ^ "Live butterfly release for funerals and butterfly weddings" . Fragrant Acres Butterfly Farm . Retrieved November 14, 2014 . ^ Multiple sources: "In Memory of 9/11 "Wings of Hope" " . gayandciha.com. September 4, 2014 . Retrieved November 14, 2014 . Johnson, Pam (August 24, 2010). "Join Branford Rotary's 9/11 Town Green Event/Butterfly Release" . Shure Publishing.

The Day . Retrieved November 14, 2014 . "Ormond Beach Flying US Flags On Granada Bridge To Mark 9/11 Anniversary" . NewsDaytonaBeach.com. WNDB Local News First. 2013. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014 . Retrieved November 14, 2014 . ^ "Monarch Butterfly release at Children's Museum of Fond du Lac" . FDL Reporter . Retrieved November 14, 2014 . ^ Khrapko, Konstantin (September 14, 2023). "Waltz of Proboscises. Monarchs dancing on the fingertips" . Retrieved September 26, 2025 – via YouTube. Video: 0:36 minutes ^ Khrapko, Konstantin. "How to feed a monarch" . Retrieved September 26, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ Multiple sources: John Platt TakePart (October 14, 2015). "When Butterflies Shouldn't Fly Free" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved January 12, 2017 . "Are We Loving Monarchs to Death? – The Crux" . Discover . June 21, 2016. Archived from the original on April 14, 2020 . Retrieved January 12, 2017 . ^ Love, Orlan (August 25, 2016). "Monarch Moonshot: Officials hope to make Linn County center of butterfly production and habitat" .

The Gazette . Retrieved January 12, 2017 . ^ Rearing Monarchs Responsibly: A conservationist's guide to raising monarchs for science and education Archived September 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine . Monarch Joint Venture, University of Minnesota ^ "monarchscience" . Akdavis6.wixsite.com. September 7, 2015. ^ Tenger-Trolander, Ayşe; Lu, Wei; Noyes, Michelle; Kronforst, Marcus R. (July 16, 2019). "Contemporary loss of migration in monarch butterflies" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 116 (29): 14671– 14676. Bibcode : 2019PNAS..11614671T . doi : 10.1073/pnas.1904690116 . ISSN 0027-8424 . PMC 6642386 . PMID 31235586 . ^ Maeckle |, Monika (July 2, 2019). "Study of 'genetic franken monarchs' provokes online ire and debate" . texasbutterflyranch . Retrieved December 12, 2019 . ^ "Effects of captive-rearing on caterpillar anti-predator behavior - an inside look at some preliminary data" . monarchscience . August 10, 2019 . Retrieved December 12, 2019 . ^ Fears, Darryl (August 26, 2015). "Letter: As pesticides wipe out Monarch butterflies in the U.S., illegal logging is doing the same in Mexico" .

The Washington Post . ^ Thogmartin, Wayne E; et al. (2017). "Restoring monarch butterfly habitat in the Midwestern US: 'all hands on deck' " . Environmental Research Letters . 12 (7). Bristol , South West England : IOP Publishing . Bibcode : 2017ERL....12g4005T . doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/aa7637 . hdl : 10150/624923 . ISSN 1748-9326 . 074005. ^ "Florida monarch butterfly populations have dropped 80 percent since 2005" . Phys.org. November 8, 2018. ^ a b "US moves to save once-common monarch butterflies from extinction" . Phys.org. December 11, 2024. ^ Criss, Doug (January 7, 2019). "The Monarch butterfly population in California has plummeted 86% in one year" . CNN . Archived from the original on July 22, 2025 . Retrieved March 29, 2026 . ^ Howard, Isis; Cuadra-Vargas, Sara; Pelton, Emma (January 29, 2026). "Western Monarch Numbers Remain At Historic Low" . Portland, Oregon : Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation . Archived from the original on March 18, 2026 . Retrieved March 29, 2026 . ^ Mahoney, Erika (January 7, 2021). "A Winter Without Monarchs In Pacific Grove - Butterfly Town, U.S.A" . Pacific Grove, California : KAZU . Archived from the original on June 23, 2025 . Retrieved March 29, 2026 . ^ Rodriguez, Olga R. (January 19, 2021). "Monarch butterfly population moves closer to extinction" . Phys.org . United Kingdom. Archived from the original on December 30, 2025 . Retrieved March 29, 2026 . ^ Multiple sources: Howard, Elizabeth (February 26, 2016). "Monarch Population Size Announced" . Journey North . Archived from the original on February 28, 2016 . Retrieved June 6, 2017 . "Eastern Monarch Population Numbers Drop 27%" . News .

The Monarch Joint Venture. February 16, 2017. Archived from the original on June 23, 2024 . Retrieved January 5, 2024 . "Where Are All The Monarchs?" . Monarch Lab . University of Minnesota Extension. July 14, 2016. Archived from the original on August 22, 2016 . Retrieved June 5, 2017 . ^ "Another monarch study published showing the spring migration holds the key to everything" . monarchscience . November 4, 2019. Archived from the original on May 18, 2024 . Retrieved January 5, 2025 . ^ a b c Semmens, Brice X.; Semmens, Darius J.; Thogmartin, Wayne E.; Wiederholt, Ruscena; López-Hoffman, Laura; Diffendorfer, Jay E.; Pleasants, John M.; Oberhauser, Karen S.; Taylor, Orley R. (2016). "Quasi-extinction risk and population targets for the Eastern, migratory population of monarch butterflies ( Danaus plexippus )" . Scientific Reports . 6 23265. Bibcode : 2016NatSR...623265S . doi : 10.1038/srep23265 . PMC 4800428 . PMID 26997124 . ^ "Eastern monarch butterfly population nearly doubles in 2025" . News . Washington, D.C.: World Wildlife Fund . March 6, 2025. Archived from the original on March 29, 2026 . Retrieved February 23, 2026 . ^ "Monarch butterfly population increases by 64%" . News . Washington, D.C.: World Wildlife Fund . March 17, 2026. Archived from the original on March 25, 2026 . Retrieved March 29, 2026 . ^ Conniff, Richard (April 1, 2013). "Tracking the Causes of Sharp Decline of the Monarch Butterfly" . Yale University. Archived from the original on December 27, 2016 . Retrieved January 31, 2014 . ^ Wines, Michael (March 13, 2013). "Monarch Migration Plunges to Lowest Level in Decades" .

The New York Times . ^ "Monarch Watch" . University of Kansas , Entomology Department . Archived from the original on July 20, 2012 . Retrieved February 20, 2014 . ^ Pleasants, John M.; Oberhauser, Karen S. (2012). "Milkweed loss in agricultural fields because of herbicide use: effect on the monarch butterfly population" (PDF) . Insect Conservation and Diversity . 6 (2): 135– 144. doi : 10.1111/j.1752-4598.2012.00196.x . S2CID 14595378 . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 4, 2014. ^ a b Brennen, Shannon (July 2014). "For Love of Nature: Annual monarch butterfly migration in peril" .

The News & Advance, Lynchburg, Virginia . Retrieved July 4, 2014 . ^ "NRDC Sues EPA Over Demise of Monarch Butterfly Population" . NBC. 2015. ^ Puzey, J. R.; Dalgleish, H. J.; Boyle, J. H. (February 5, 2019). "Monarch butterfly and milkweed declines substantially predate the use of genetically modified crops" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 116 (8): 3006– 3011. Bibcode : 2019PNAS..116.3006B . doi : 10.1073/pnas.1811437116 . ISSN 0027-8424 . PMC 6386695 . PMID 30723147 . ^ a b Ries, Leslie; Taron, Douglas J.; Rendón-Salinas, Eduardo (2015). "The Disconnect Between Summer and Winter Monarch Trends for the Eastern Migratory Population: Possible Links to Differing Drivers". Annals of the Entomological Society of America . 108 (5): 691. doi : 10.1093/aesa/sav055 . S2CID 85597731 . ^ a b Inamine, Hidetoshi; Ellner, Stephen P.; Springer, James P.; Agrawal, Anurag A. (2016). "Linking the continental migratory cycle of the monarch butterfly to understand its population decline" . Oikos . 125 (8): 1081. Bibcode : 2016Oikos.125.1081I . doi : 10.1111/oik.03196 . ^ a b Davis, Andrew K. (2012). "Are migratory monarchs really declining in eastern North America? Examining evidence from two fall census programs" . Insect Conservation and Diversity . 5 (2): 101. doi : 10.1111/j.1752-4598.2011.00158.x . S2CID 54038257 . ^ a b "monarchscience" . Akdavis6.wixsite.com. August 24, 2016 . Retrieved January 6, 2017 . ^ Mora Alvarez, Blanca Xiomara; Carrera-Treviño, Rogelio; Hobson, Keith A. (2019). "Mortality of Monarch Butterflies ( Danaus plexippus ) at Two Highway Crossing "Hotspots" During Autumn Migration in Northeast Mexico" . Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution . 7 273. Bibcode : 2019FrEEv...7..273M . doi : 10.3389/fevo.2019.00273 . ISSN 2296-701X . ^ Guadarrama, Ricardo (January 12, 2024). "Crimen organizado y tala ilegal ahuyentan a la mariposa monarca en Jiquipilco, Edomex" . El Financiero . Archived from the original on January 12, 2024. ^ Paz, Fátima (June 18, 2014). "En espera de aprobación de la Profepa por tala ilegal en la Reserva de la Mariposa Monarca" Archived September 3, 2014, at the Wayback Machine . cambiodemichoacan.com.mx . ^ "Habitat Loss on Breeding Grounds Cause of Monarch Decline, U of G Study Finds" . University of Guelph. June 4, 2014 . Retrieved March 17, 2015 . ^ "Western Monarch Population Rebound Continues in 2022 but Winter Storms Could Impact Spring Breeding Population" . Farmers for Monarchs . February 1, 2023 . Retrieved April 14, 2023 . ^ Clarke, A. R.; Zalucki, M. P. (2001). " Taeniogonalos raymenti Carmean & Kimsey (Hymenoptera: Trigonalidae) reared as a hyperparasite of Sturmia convergens (Weidemann) (Diptera: Tachinidae), a primary parasite of Danaus plexippus (L.) (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae)" . Pan-Pacific Entomologist . 77 (2): 68– 70. ^ a b c d e Oberhauser, Karen; Elmquist, Dane; Perilla-Lopez, Juan Manuel; Gebhard, Ilse; Lukens, Laura; Stireman, John (November 2017). "Tachinid Fly (Diptera: Tachinidae) Parasitoids of Danaus plexippus (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae)" (PDF) . Annals of the Entomological Society of America . 110 (6). Oxford University Press : 536– 543. doi : 10.1093/aesa/sax048 . Archived (PDF) from the original on December 28, 2024 . Retrieved January 6, 2025 . ^ a b Brewer, Jo; Gerard M. Thomas (1966). "Causes of death encountered during rearing of Danaus plexippus (Danaidae)" (PDF) . Journal of the Lepidopterists' Society . 20 (4): 235– 238. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 25, 2009 . Retrieved April 13, 2008 . ^ a b Stenoien, Carl; McCoshum, Shaun; Caldwell, Wendy; De Anda, Alma; Oberhauser, Karen (January 2015). "New reports that Monarch butterflies (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae, Linnaeus) are hosts for a pupal parasitoid (Hymenoptera: Chalcidoidea, Walker)". Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society . 88 (1): 16– 26. doi : 10.2317/JKES1402.22.1 . S2CID 52231552 . ^ Deep Look (October 11, 2022). "This Parasite is Cramping The Monarch Butterfly's Style" . PBS Digital Studios . Retrieved March 7, 2026 – via YouTube. Video: 5:04 minutes. ^ Leong, K. L. H.; M. A. Yoshimura, H. K. Kaya and H. Williams (1997). "Instar susceptibility of the Monarch butterfly ( Danaus plexippus ) to the neogregarine parasite, Ophryocystis elektroscirrha ". Journal of Invertebrate Pathology . 69 (1): 79– 83. Bibcode : 1997JInvP..69...79L . CiteSeerX 10.1.1.494.9827 . doi : 10.1006/jipa.1996.4634 . PMID 9028932 . ^ Bartel, Rebecca; Oberhauser, Karen; De Roode, Jacob; Atizer, Sonya (February 2011). "Monarch butterfly migration and parasite transmission in eastern North America" . Ecology . 92 (2): 342– 351. Bibcode : 2011Ecol...92..342B . doi : 10.1890/10-0489.1 . PMC 7163749 . PMID 21618914 . ^ "Do My Monarch Butterflies Have OE? Ophryocystis elektroscirrha " . Butterfly Fun Facts. Archived from the original on March 4, 2015 . Retrieved March 24, 2015 . ^ Jepsen, S.; Schweitzer, D. F.; Young, B.; Sears, N.; Ormes, M.; Black, S. H. (2015). Conservation Status and Ecology of the Monarch Butterfly in the United States . NatureServe. pp. 23– 24. ^ Invasive species alert: Black swallow-wort ( Cynanchum louisea ) and pale swallow-wort ( Cynanchum rossicum ) Archived September 16, 2021, at the Wayback Machine . monarchjointventure.org ^ "Monarch Population Hits Lowest Point in More Than 20 Years" . World Wildlife Fund . Washington, D.C.: World Wildlife Fund . January 29, 2014. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021 . Retrieved October 12, 2021 . ^ "Basic Facts About Monarch Butterflies" . January 9, 2020. ^ Lemoine, Nathan P. (2015). "Climate Change May Alter Breeding Ground Distributions of Eastern Migratory Monarchs ( Danaus plexippus ) via Range Expansion of Asclepias Host Plants" . PLOS One . 10 (2) e0118614. Bibcode : 2015PLoSO..1018614L . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0118614 . PMC 4338007 . PMID 25705876 . ^ "monarchscience" . Akdavis6.wixsite.com. August 10, 2015. ^ Hahn, Philip G.; Agrawal, Anurag A.; Sussman, Kira I.; Maron, John L. (January 2019). "Population Variation, Environmental Gradients, and the Evolutionary Ecology of Plant Defense against Herbivory".

The American Naturalist . 193 (1): 20– 34. Bibcode : 2019ANat..193...20H . doi : 10.1086/700838 . ISSN 1537-5323 . PMID 30624107 . S2CID 54076888 . ^ "Climate change, pesticides put monarch butterflies at risk of extinction" . National Geographic. December 21, 2018. Archived from the original on December 23, 2018 . Retrieved December 31, 2018 . ^ Larson, Christina (July 21, 2022). "Beloved monarch butterflies now listed as endangered" . AP News . Archived from the original on September 29, 2024 . Retrieved January 5, 2024 . ^ "Monarch Butterfly" . United States Fish and Wildlife Service . Archived from the original on October 1, 2021. ^ Multiple sources: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (December 31, 2014). "Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; 90-Day Findings on Two Petitions" (PDF) . Federal Register . 79 (250): 78775– 78778. Federal Register Document Number 2014-30574. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 30, 2024 . Retrieved January 4, 2025 . "Endangered species listing for the monarch butterfly: What private landowners need to know" (PDF) . Keystone, Colorado : Keystone Policy Center. June 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 20, 2024. ^ Multiple sources: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (December 17, 2020). "Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; 12-Month Finding for the Monarch Butterfly" (PDF) . Federal Register . 85 (243): 78775– 78778. Federal Register Document Number 2020-27523. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 28, 2024 . Retrieved January 5, 2025 . Frazin, Rachel (December 15, 2021). "Trump administration punts on protections for monarch butterfly" .

The Hill . Archived from the original on October 1, 2021 . Retrieved October 6, 2021 .

The Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) determined that adding the butterfly to the list of threatened and endangered species was "warranted", but that it is unable to do so because it needs to devote its resources to higher-priority species.

The FWS said that its "warranted-but-precluded" determination means that every year it will consider adding the butterfly to the list until it decides to propose listing it or determines that protections are not warranted. "What is the fiscal year?" . Xero Limited . 2024. Archived from the original on October 4, 2024 . Retrieved January 16, 2025 . Fiscal years are named using the year when the period ends. For example, the US federal government fiscal year starts on October 1, 2024 and ends on September 30, 2025; this is referred to as FY25. ^ Multiple sources: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (June 27, 2023). "Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Review of Species That Are Candidates for Listing as Endangered or Threatened; Annual Notification of Findings on Resubmitted Petitions; Annual Description of Progress on Listing Actions" (PDF) . Federal Register . 88 (122): 41560– 41580. Federal Register Document Number 2023-13577. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 27, 2023 . Retrieved September 29, 2024 . Ibid., Monarch Butterfly, p. 41570. ^ Ibid., Previous CNORs, p. 41561. "We have been publishing CNORs since 1975.

The most recent was published on May 3, 2022 (87 FR 26152).

On September 21, 1983, we published guidance for assigning a listing priority number (LPN) for each candidate species (48 FR 43098). Using this guidance, we assign each candidate an LPN of 1 to 12, depending on the magnitude of threats, immediacy of threats, and taxonomic status; the lower the LPN, the higher the listing priority (that is, a species with an LPN of 1 would have the highest listing priority)." ^ U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (December 12, 2024). "Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Threatened Species Status With Section 4(D) Rule for Monarch Butterfly and Designation of Critical Habitat" (PDF) . Federal Register . 89 (239): 100662– 100716. Federal Register Document Number 2024-20855. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 26, 2024 . Retrieved January 5, 2025 . ^ U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (March 19, 2025). "Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Reopening Comment Periods for Three Proposed Rules; Announcement of a Public Hearing for One Proposed Rule" (PDF) . Federal Register . 90 (52): 12694– 12695. Federal Register Document Number 2025–04443. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 19, 2025 . Retrieved May 12, 2025 . ^ "Monarch Butterfly: profile of a species at risk" . Environment and Climate Change Canada , Government of Canada . February 18, 2025. Archived from the original on March 10, 2025 . Retrieved March 14, 2025 . ^ "Monarch" . Government of Ontario. February 27, 2014. Archived from the original on September 12, 2015 . Retrieved September 16, 2015 . ^ "Monarchs now listed as an endangered species in Nova Scotia Canada - a prelude for things to come elsewhere" . monarchscience . September 30, 2019 . Retrieved December 12, 2019 . ^ Crewe, Tara L.; Mitchell, Greg W.; Larrivée, Maxim (2019). "Size of the Canadian Breeding Population of Monarch Butterflies Is Driven by Factors Acting During Spring Migration and Recolonization" . Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution . 7 308. Bibcode : 2019FrEEv...7..308C . doi : 10.3389/fevo.2019.00308 . ISSN 2296-701X . ^ Flockhart, D. T. Tyler; Larrivée, Maxim; Prudic, Kathleen L.; Norris, D. Ryan (June 21, 2019). "Estimating the annual distribution of monarch butterflies in Canada over 16 years using citizen science data" . FACETS . 4 (1): 238– 253. Bibcode : 2019Facet...4..238T . doi : 10.1139/facets-2018-0011 . hdl : 10150/633480 . ^ Obama, President Barack (June 20, 2014). "Presidential Memorandum – Creating a Federal Strategy to Promote the Health of Honey Bees and Other Pollinators" . Office of the Press Secretary . Washington, D.C.: The White House . Retrieved May 2, 2018 . ^ Multiple sources: "PBS-P100 Facilities Standards For The Public Buildings Service" (PDF) . WBDG: Whole Building Design Guide . Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Building Sciences . March 1, 2015. p. 12. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 8, 2024 . Retrieved January 8, 2024 .

The P100 is a mandatory standard. It is not a guideline, textbook, handbook, training manual, or substitute for technical competence.

The P100 represents the current state of practice in designing facilities to meet GSA's commitments, maximize the efficiency of business processes, and comply with the requirements of law. "PBS-P100: Facilities Standards for the Public Buildings Service" (PDF) . Landscape Requirements . Washington, D.C.: U.S. General Services Administration . March 1, 2015. pp. 40– 47. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 8, 2024 . Retrieved January 8, 2024 . ^ a b Pollinator Health Task Force (May 19, 2015). "National Strategy to Promote the Health of Honey Bees and Other Pollinators" (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: The White House . Retrieved May 2, 2018 . ^ a b c EP News Wire Reports (May 19, 2015). "New U.S. pollinator strategy emphasizes science, industry collaboration" . EPNewswire . Archived from the original on September 30, 2015 . Retrieved January 5, 2024 . ^ Pollinator Health Task Force (May 19, 2015). "Pollinator Research Action Plan" (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: The White House . pp. 1– 3 . Retrieved January 5, 2024 . ^ "Pollinator-Friendly Best Management Practices for Federal Lands" (PDF) . U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of the Interior . May 11, 2015. pp. 7 and 35. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 2, 2023 . Retrieved March 8, 2024 . (p. 35) Implementation: To determine those lands best suited for restoration and rehabilitation of monarch habitat, the following actions should be considered: • Ensure that native wildflowers are available, diverse, and abundant to provide nectar for monarchs. • Ensure that milkweed species (preferred by female monarchs for egg laying) are available; if not, implement a planting program for milkweeds: o In the Eastern United States, plant swamp milkweed, butterfly milkweed, and common milkweed. o In the Southern United States, plant butterfly milkweed, swamp milkweed, aquatic milkweed, white milkweed, pinewoods milkweed, and swamp milkweed. o In the Northern Great Plains, plant showy milkweed, common milkweed, plains milkweed, green comet milkweed, and whorled milkweed. o In the Southern Great Plains, plant showy milkweed, butterfly milkweed, whorled milkweed, swamp milkweed, spider milkweed, and green antelopehorn milkweed. o For the California population, plant California milkweed, heartleaf milkweed, woollypod milkweed, Mexican whorled milkweed, also known as narrowleaf milkweed and woolly milkweed. o For the intermountain west and desert southwest plant butterfly milkweed, cor kernel milkweed, spider milkweed and pine needle milkweed. o In the Pacific Northwest, consider using showy milkweed or narrowleaf milkweed. This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain . ^ "Public Law 114–94: 114th Congress (129 Stat. 1312–1801)" (PDF) . United States Government Publishing Office . Archived (PDF) from the original on June 25, 2021 . Retrieved July 7, 2021 . ^ a b Multiple sources: "Sec. 1415. Administrative Provisions To Encourage Pollinator Habitat And Forage On Transportation Rights-Of-Way" (PDF) . Public Law 114–94: 114th Congress (129 Stat. 1421) . United States Government Publishing Office . Archived (PDF) from the original on June 25, 2021 . Retrieved July 7, 2021 . "23 U.S. Code § 319 - Landscaping and scenic enhancement" . Ithaca, New York : Cornell Law School : Legal Information Institute . Archived from the original on March 1, 2021 . Retrieved July 7, 2021 . (c) Encouragement of Pollinator Habitat and Forage Development and Protection on Transportation Rights-of-way.— In carrying out any program administered by Secretary under this title, the Secretary shall, in conjunction with willing States, as appropriate – (1) encourage integrated vegetation management practices on roadsides and other transportation rights-of-way, including reduced mowing; and (2) encourage the development of habitat and forage for Monarch butterflies, other native pollinators, and honey bees through plantings of native forbs and grasses, including noninvasive, native milkweed species that can serve as migratory way stations for butterflies and facilitate migrations of other pollinators. Nadeau, Gregory G. (March 25, 2016). "Memorandum: Improving Habitat for Pollinators" . Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Transportation : Federal Highway Administration . Archived from the original on July 9, 2021 . Retrieved July 7, 2021 . This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain . ^ "Attachment 1 - Strategy for Implementing Pollinator-Friendly Landscaping Design and Maintenance at Department of the Interior Sites" (PDF) . Memorandum: Increasing and Improving Pollinator Habitat through Landscaping . Washington, D.C.: Office of the Secretary of the Interior . February 9, 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 12, 2017 . Retrieved March 8, 2024 . ^ Pollinator Health Task Force (June 22, 2016). "Pollinator Partnership Action Plan" (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: The White House . Retrieved January 5, 2024 . ^ Multiple sources: "Fact Sheet: The State Acres for Wildlife Enhancement (SAFE) Initiative" (PDF) . Farm Service Agency: Conservation Reserve Program . United States Department of Agriculture : Farm Service Agency . December 2019. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 13, 2021 . Retrieved October 6, 2021 . "Conservation Reserve Program" . United States Department of Agriculture : Farm Service Agency . 2021. Archived from the original on September 17, 2021 . Retrieved October 6, 2021 . "Pollinators and monarchs SAFE in Wisconsin" . Newsroom . United States Department of the Interior : Fish and Wildlife Service . December 29, 2016. Archived from the original on December 31, 2017 . Retrieved October 6, 2021 . "Incentive Programs: Conservation Reserve Program (CRP): United States Department of Agriculture Farm Service Agency (FSA)" . Monarch Conservation Toolbox . Montreal , Quebec, Canada: Commission for Environmental Cooperation. May 18, 2017. Archived from the original on January 15, 2020 . Retrieved October 6, 2021 . ^ "Monarch Butterflies" . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service . Archived from the original on January 28, 2026 . Retrieved March 20, 2026 . ^ Free, Stephanie (January 4, 2024). "Information Presentation: Pollinator Best Practices Resource Guide" (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: National Capital Planning Commission . NCPC File Number 8510. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 4, 2025 . Retrieved August 13, 2025 . There are over 100 different species of milkweeds that are considered native to North America7, one of which stands out - Asclepias syriaca, or common milkweed. According to the U.S. Forest Service, Common milkweed is, "...among the most important food plants for Monarch caterpillars," and, "Nature's mega food market for insects. Over 450 insects are known to feed on some portion of the plant. Numerous insects are attracted to the nectar-laden flowers and it is not at all uncommon to see flies, beetles, ants, bees, wasps, and butterflies on the flowers at the same time." The Xerces Society has also identified Common milkweed as a priority species for habitat restoration efforts.8 Common milkweed also quickly spreads through rhizomatous roots and forms colonies which aids in its longevity. Therefore, common milkweed is clearly an important species that is critical to the survival of monarch butterflies. ^ Multiple sources: Hopwood, Jennifer; Black, Scott; Fleury, Scott (December 2015). Pollinators and Roadsides: Best Management Practices for Managers and Decision Makers (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Transportation ; Federal Highway Administration . OCLC 1252634388 . FHWA-HEP-16-020. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 2, 2021 . Retrieved July 9, 2021 . Hopwood, Jennifer; Black, Scott; Fleury, Scott (December 2015). Roadside Best Management Practices that Benefit Pollinators: Handbook for Supporting Pollinators through Roadside Maintenance and Landscape Design (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Transportation ; Federal Highway Administration . OCLC 1252634401 . FHWA-HEP-16-059. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 1, 2021. Remley, Deirdre; Redmon, Allison (September 2017). "Save The Bees and Butterflies!" . Public Roads . 81 (2). Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Transportation : Federal Highway Administration . FHWA-HRT-17-006. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Renkl, Margaret (September 16, 2019). "Tennessee Makes Way for Monarchs" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on November 25, 2020 . Retrieved July 7, 2021 . ^ Multiple sources: "Do I Need A Permit To Use Monarch Butterflies For Educational Purposes?" . California Department of Fish and Wildlife . April 6, 2023. Archived from the original on May 23, 2025 . Retrieved September 20, 2025 . Q: Do I need a permit to use monarch butterflies for educational purposes? A: Yes, a Scientific Collecting Permit (SCP) is required to handle wild monarchs in California including for educational purposes. It is unlawful to collect, remove from the wild and/or captively rear monarchs in California without an SCP, per California Code of Regulations (CCR), Title 14, section 650(a) "§ 650. Scientific Collecting Permits: Permits to Take or Possess Wildlife for Scientific, Educational, and/or Propagation Purposes. (a) General Provisions" . Scientific Collecting Laws and Regulations . California Department of Fish and Wildlife . Archived from the original on June 18, 2025 . Retrieved September 20, 2025 . (a) General Provisions. Except as otherwise authorized by the Fish and Game Code or regulations adopted pursuant thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person or entity to take and/or possess live or dead wildlife, or parts thereof in any part of the State of California, for scientific, educational, and/or propagation purposes except as authorized by a permit issued by the department pursuant to this Section. ^ Multiple sources: National Conference of State Legislatures (April 19, 2023). "Pollinator Health" . Denver, Colorado, and Washington, D.C. Archived from the original on June 5, 2025 . Retrieved August 31, 2025 . Blackledge, Steve; Kelly-Fischer, Patrick; Cummings, Deirdre (June 16, 2025). "A snapshot of state actions to protect pollinators: By limiting bee-killing neonics, conserving habitat and raising awareness, states are key actors in the campaign to protect pollinators" . Denver, Colorado: Environment America . Archived from the original on June 25, 2025 . Retrieved August 31, 2025 . ^ Gerhard, Dale (September 14, 2014). "Dwindling monarch butterflies in Cape May County has legislators worried" .

The Press of Atlantic City . Linwood, New Jersey . Archived from the original on May 26, 2018. ^ "Integrated Roadside Vegetation Management Program" . New Jersey Legislature . May 1, 2017. P.L.2017, Chapter 44. Archived from the original on December 1, 2024 . Retrieved August 9, 2025 . ^ Multiple sources: "Adopt a Monarch Butterfly Waystation Act" . New Jersey Legislature . January 8, 2018. P.L.2017, Chapter 250. Archived from the original on July 30, 2025 . Retrieved July 30, 2025 . "Milkweed for Monarchs Act" . New Jersey Legislature . January 8, 2018. P.L.2017, Chapter 252. Archived from the original on July 30, 2025 . Retrieved July 30, 2025 . ^ "Three Departments Partner on Pollinator Initiative in Tennessee State Parks: TDOT, TDEC, TDA benefit pollinators, spread awareness" . Nashville, Tennessee: Tennessee Department of Transportation . June 18, 2019. Archived from the original on January 25, 2025. ^ Multiple sources: Heiser, Carol A. (June 24, 2020). "Celebrate Pollinators!" . Virginia Department of Wildlife Resources . Archived from the original on June 25, 2025 . Retrieved August 13, 2025 . Ingram, Bruce (June 9, 2022). "Help the Bees, Butterflies, Bucks, and Bears: Create a Pollinator Plot" . Virginia Department of Wildlife Resources . Archived from the original on June 27, 2025 . Retrieved August 13, 2025 . ^ "Project Monarch" . Chicago, Illinois: Chicago Park District . 2025. Archived from the original on May 17, 2025 . Retrieved August 13, 2025 . ^ Multiple sources: "Monarch City USA Members" . Monarch City USA. Archived from the original on June 19, 2025 . Retrieved August 13, 2025 . "Monarch Butterfly Recovery: City by City" . Monarch City USA. 2014. Archived from the original on June 19, 2025 . Retrieved July 29, 2025 . "Ways to help" . Monarch City USA. Archived from the original on August 13, 2025 . Retrieved August 13, 2025 . "Orange City recently named a Monarch City USA" . South Daytona, Florida : Hometown News Volusia. July 25, 2019. Archived from the original on July 30, 2025 . Retrieved July 30, 2025 . "Monarch City" . Government of the City of Clemson, South Carolina . Archived from the original on March 29, 2025 . Retrieved July 30, 2025 . "Mayors' Monarch Pledge" . Merrifield, Virginia : National Wildlife Federation . Archived from the original on June 29, 2025 . Retrieved July 29, 2025 . "Signatories - Mayors' Monarch Pledge" . Mayors' Monarch Pledge . Merrifield, Virginia : National Wildlife Federation . 2025. Archived from the original on August 13, 2025 . Retrieved August 13, 2025 . "Mayors' Monarch Pledge Action Items" (PDF) . Mayors' Monarch Pledge . Merrifield, Virginia : National Wildlife Federation . Archived (PDF) from the original on February 24, 2024 . Retrieved August 13, 2025 . Garvey, Libby (June 21, 2016). "Monarch Pledge Day" . Government of Arlington County, Virginia . Archived from the original on October 8, 2024 . Retrieved July 29, 2025 . Adams, Ashley (August 3, 2023). "Pennsylvania's Conservation Heroes: 14 Municipalities Unite to Save the Monarch Butterfly: Municipalities across the commonwealth have pledged to create habitats and educate their communities to help save the monarch butterfly, which contributes to the health of the planet as a pollinator" .

The Keystone . Courier Newsroom . Archived from the original on June 7, 2025 . Retrieved August 13, 2025 . "Mesa Mayor Mark Freeman Signs National Wildlife Federation's Monarch Pledge" . MesaNow.org . Government of the City of Mesa, Arizona . March 19, 2025. Archived from the original on May 19, 2025 . Retrieved July 30, 2025 . ^ Multiple sources: "Bee City USA" . Portland, Oregon : Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation . Archived from the original on October 2, 2025 . Retrieved November 15, 2025 . "About Bee City USA & Bee Campus USA" . Bee City USA . Portland, Oregon : Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation . Archived from the original on September 21, 2025 . Retrieved November 15, 2025 .

In 2018 Bee City USA and Bee Campus USA became initiatives of the Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation ....

The steps that affiliates take to conserve our native bees, including creating safe habitats and hosting community events, will also help other pollinators including butterflies and moths as well as the non-native honey bee. "Bee City USA commitments" . Bee City USA . Portland, Oregon : Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation . Archived from the original on September 21, 2025 . Retrieved September 6, 2024 . "Bee City USA affiliates" . Bee City USA . Portland, Oregon : Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation . Archived from the original on September 21, 2025 . Retrieved November 15, 2025 . "Bee City USA" . City of Bellingham . City of Bellingham, Washington, government . Archived from the original on May 31, 2025 . Retrieved November 16, 2025 . "Fauquier County-Bee City USA" . Fauquier County, Virginia, government . Archived from the original on September 7, 2025 . Retrieved November 16, 2025 . "Bee City USA" . Town of Matthews, North Carolina, government . Archived from the original on June 29, 2024 . Retrieved November 16, 2025 . ^ Multiple sources: "Pacific Grove Municipal Code: Chapter 11.48: Monarch Butterflies" . codepublishing.com. Archived from the original on January 13, 2026 . Retrieved February 16, 2026 . 11.48.010 Interference with prohibited. It is declared to be unlawful for any person to molest or interfere with, in any way, the peaceful occupancy of the monarch butterflies on their annual visit to the city of Pacific Grove, and during the entire time they remain within the corporate limits of the city, in whatever spot they may choose to stop in; provided, however, that if said butterflies should at any time swarm in, upon or near the private dwelling house or other buildings of a citizen of the city of Pacific Grove in such a way as to interfere with the occupancy and use of said dwelling and/or other buildings, that said butterflies may be removed, if possible, to another location upon the application of said citizen to the chief of police. . "Monarch Grove Butterfly Sanctuary" . Seemonterey.com . Archived from the original on February 2, 2024 . Retrieved February 15, 2026 . Touching or interfering with a butterfly in any way is illegal in Pacific Grove–the fine is $1000. "Monarch Grove Sanctuary" . Pacific Grove, California : City of Pacific Grove. Archived from the original on January 13, 2026 . Retrieved February 16, 2026 .

The Pacific Grove Police Department enforces strict regulations that prohibit the "molestation of butterflies." The fine? $1,000. ^ Multiple sources: Cariveau, Alison B.; Caldwell, Wendy; Lonsdorf, Eric; Nootenboom, Chris; Tuerk, Karen; Snell-Rood, Emilie; Anderson, Eric; Baum, Kristen A.; Hopwood, Jennifer; Oberhauser, Karen (2020). Evaluating the Suitability of Roadway Corridors for Use by Monarch Butterflies . Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press . Bibcode : 2020nap..book25693N . doi : 10.17226/25693 . ISBN 978-0-309-48132-8 . LCCN 2020935714 . OCLC 1229163481 . S2CID 218854539 . National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP) Research Report 942. Archived from the original on July 29, 2020 . Retrieved July 8, 2021 . Cariveau, A.B.; Caldwell, W.; Lonsdorf, E.; Nootenboom, C.; Tuerk, K.; Snell-Rood, E.; Anderson, E.; Baum, K. A.; Hopwood, J.; Oberhauser, K. (2019). "Evaluating the Suitability of Roadway Corridors for Use by Monarch Butterflies" (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: Transportation Research Board . OCLC 1152199695 . Pre-publication draft of NCHRP Research Report 942. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 8, 2021 . Retrieved July 8, 2021 – via Northwestern University Library . ^ Davis, Andrew K.; Schroeder, Hayley; Yeager, Ian; Pearce, Jana (May 31, 2018). "Effects of simulated highway noise on heart rates of larval monarch butterflies, Danaus plexippus : implications for roadside habitat suitability" . Biology Letters . 14 (5) 20180018. doi : 10.1098/rsbl.2018.0018 . PMC 6012697 . PMID 29743264 . ^ a b Cariveau, A. B.; Caldwell, W.; Lonsdorf, E.; Nootenboom, C.; Tuerk, K.; Snell-Rood, E.; Anderson, E.; Baum, K. A.; Hopwood, J.; Oberhauser, K. (2019). "Evaluating the Suitability of Roadway Corridors for Use by Monarch Butterflies" (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: Transportation Research Board . pp. 2– 3. OCLC 1152199695 . Pre-publication draft of NCHRP Research Report 942. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 8, 2021 . Retrieved July 8, 2021 – via Northwestern University Library . ^ Multiple sources: Glassberg, J. (1995). Enjoying Butterflies More: Attract Butterflies to Your Backyard . Marietta, Ohio : Bird Watcher's Digest Press. ISBN 1-880241-08-0 . LCCN 96202681 . OCLC 35808599 . Retrieved March 9, 2020 – via Google Books . "Butterfly Gardening: Introduction" . University of Kansas : Monarch Watch . Archived from the original on February 2, 2020 . Retrieved March 9, 2020 . "Monarch Garden Plants" (PDF) . San Francisco, California: Pollinator Partnership . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 9, 2020 . Retrieved March 9, 2020 . "Monarch Waystation Program" . University of Kansas : Monarch Watch . Archived from the original on June 2, 2017 . Retrieved June 5, 2017 . Abugattas, Alonzo (January 3, 2017). "Monarch Way Stations" . Archived from the original on June 5, 2017 . Retrieved June 5, 2017 – via Blogger . "Plants for Butterfly and Pollinator Gardens: Native and Non-native Plants Suitable for Gardens in the Northeastern United States" (PDF) . Monarch Watch . Archived (PDF) from the original on August 9, 2020 . Retrieved October 18, 2020 . ^ Multiple sources: Borders, Brianna; Lee–Mäder, Eric (2014). "Milkweed Propagation and Seed Production" (PDF) . Milkweeds: A Conservation Practitioner's Guide: Plant Ecology, Seed Production Methods, and Habitat Restoration Opportunities . Portland, Oregon : The Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation . pp. 21– 95. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 4, 2021 . Retrieved July 12, 2021 . Landis, Thomas D.; Dumroese, R. Kasten (2015). "Propagating Native Milkweeds for Restoring Monarch Butterfly Habitat: Propagating Native Milkweeds: Seed Propagation" (PDF) . International Plant Propagators' Society, Combined Proceedings (2014) . 64 : 302. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 24, 2025 . Retrieved July 27, 2025 – via United States Department of Agriculture : United States Forest Service . Any of the standard seed propagation methods (Landis et al., 1999) are effective with milkweed. Direct sowing of non-stratified seeds during the fall followed by exposure to ambient winter conditions can be effective, but the seeds must be mulched and protected. Cover sown seeds with a thin mulch; research has found that common milkweed seeds germinate better when planted 1 to 2 cm (0.4 to 0.8 in.) deep than when at the soil surface (Jeffery and Robison, 1971). ^ Taylor, David. "Common Milkweed ( Asclepias syriaca L.)" . Plant of the Week . United States Department of Agriculture , United States Forest Service . Archived from the original on January 22, 2023 . Retrieved December 24, 2023 . ^ a b " Asclepias syriaca , (Common Milkweed)" . Bring Back The Monarchs . Monarch Watch . Archived from the original on December 8, 2023 . Retrieved March 10, 2024 . ^ United States Department of Agriculture (January 2017). "Maryland Conservation Planting Guide" (PDF) . Mix 16: High Diversity Native Grass/Forb Mix for Mesic Sites . p. 25. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 8, 2025 . Retrieved August 2, 2025 . This mix has a predominant wildflower component for optimum wildlife and pollinator habitat. ^ Multiple sources: Cariveau, Alison B.; Caldwell, Wendy; Lonsdorf, Eric; Nootenboom, Chris; Tuerk, Karen; Snell-Rood, Emilie; Anderson, Eric; Baum, Kristen A.; Hopwood, Jennifer; Oberhauser, Karen (2020). Evaluating the Suitability of Roadway Corridors for Use by Monarch Butterflies . Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press . pp. 79– 80. Bibcode : 2020nap..book25693N . doi : 10.17226/25693 . ISBN 978-0-309-48132-8 . LCCN 2020935714 . OCLC 1229163481 . S2CID 218854539 . National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP) Research Report 942. Archived from the original on July 29, 2020 . Retrieved July 8, 2021 . Could roadside mowing stimulate milkweed growth and support monarch breeding? Limited research in eastern North America has shown that spring or summer mowing can promote new growth and extend the availability of milkweed plants for monarch breeding. Mowing may stimulate the growth of some milkweed species, particularly those that spread through rhizomes like common milkweed ( A. syriaca ) and showy milkweed ( A. speciosa ). Summer (June or July) mowing in Michigan resulted in more monarch eggs on regenerated stems than on unmowed stems. Summer (July) mowing and burning can increase green antelopehorn milkweed ( A. viridis ) availability in the late summer and early fall in the Southern Great Plains, whereas in areas without mowing, the milkweed has senesced by August.

In the West, showy milkweed will regrow after summer mowing and continue to support monarch breeding (Stephanie McKnight, personal observation). However, more research is needed in other areas to determine the optimal timing and frequency of mowing that promotes not only milkweed but also nectar plants. It is also unknown if the benefit of additional milkweed availability in the fall outweighs the costs of the larval mortality caused by summer mowing.

The benefits are likely greater in areas that primarily have breeding monarchs in the spring and fall and where the dominant species of milkweed spread by rhizomes. Sources: Alcock et al. 2016; Baum and Mueller, 2015; Bhowick 1994; Haan and Landis 2019; Fischer et al. 2015 Higgins, Adrian (May 27, 2015). "A gardener's guide to saving the monarch" . Home & Garden.

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on May 31, 2015 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . 'The monarch doesn't care where the milkweed grows, and putting it in residential neighborhoods makes perfect sense,' said Doug Tallamy, an entomologist at the University of Delaware, author and expert on wildlife habitat gardens. ...

The Smithsonian Institution's Butterfly Habitat Garden ... and the Ripley Garden ... are both good places to see milkweed integrated into a garden setting.

At the butterfly garden, you can see the common milkweed ... now looking pretty good in fresh, unblemished clumps.

By late summer, it looks tall, tired, and tough. Tallamy says if you grow it, you should cut it back at least by half in June to produce soft foliage in late summer that will be more munchable for the caterpillars. If you do that, make sure there are no larvae on the plant before you chop it. Abugattas, Alonzo (January 3, 2017). "Monarch Way Stations" . Capital Naturalist . Archived from the original on March 8, 2021 . Retrieved July 5, 2021 – via Blogger . Virginia is blessed for instance with 13 native Asclepias species plus 4 climbing vines that Monarch caterpillars can feed on. For the best results, cut some of the stems back in late summer after they've bloomed. Fall is when we get the most Monarchs laying eggs on our milkweeds.

Since the mother butterflies prefer young, more tender growth, you can provide this by timing your pruning so there are new leaves by September or so for the arriving Monarchs. Just make sure to leave a few to produce pods for seeds.

The local monarch favorite is Common Milkweed ( A. syriaca ) Gomez, Tony. " Asclepias syriaca : Common Milkweed for Monarch Caterpillars" . Monarch Butterfly Garden . MonarchButterflyGarden.net. Archived from the original on March 16, 2015 . Retrieved October 17, 2010 . Cut- At midseason after the blooms have faded, cut some common plants back by about a third. This promotes fresh plant growth and could get you an extra generation of monarchs on the fresh new leaves. Leave some plants uncut if you want to harvest milkweed seeds in fall. Stevens, Michelle. "Plant guide for common milkweed ( Asclepias syriaca )" (PDF) . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service : National Plant Data Center. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 5, 2021 . Retrieved July 5, 2021 . ^ Multiple sources: Borders, Brianna; Lee–Mäder, Eric (2014). "Milkweed Propagation and Seed Production: Stratification" (PDF) . Milkweeds: A Conservation Practitioner's Guide: Plant Ecology, Seed Production Methods, and Habitat Restoration Opportunities . Portland, Oregon : The Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation . pp. 28– 29. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 4, 2021 . Retrieved July 12, 2021 . Landis, Thomas D.; Dumroese, R. Kasten (2015). "Propagating Native Milkweeds for Restoring Monarch Butterfly Habitat: Propagating Native Milkweeds: Seed Propagation" (PDF) . International Plant Propagators' Society, Combined Proceedings (2014) . 64 : 302. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 24, 2025 . Retrieved July 27, 2025 – via United States Department of Agriculture : United States Forest Service . Many sources of milkweed seeds require stratification (cold, moist treatment) before sowing.

In a review of stratification requirements for common milkweed, recommendations varied from as short as 7 days to as long as 11 months at 5°C (41°F) (Luna and Dumroese, 2013). Butterfly milkweed (A. tuberosa) germination increased from 29 to 48 to 62% as stratification duration increased from 0 to 30 to 60 days, respectively (Bir, 1986). ..... Any of the standard seed propagation methods (Landis et al., 1999) are effective with milkweed. Direct sowing of non-stratified seeds during the fall followed by exposure to ambient winter conditions can be effective, but the seeds must be mulched and protected. Cover sown seeds with a thin mulch; research has found that common milkweed seeds germinate better when planted 1 to 2 cm (0.4 to 0.8 in.) deep than when at the soil surface (Jeffery and Robison, 1971). Maeckle, Monika (March 13, 2013). "How to Get Texas Native Milkweed Seeds to Germinate" . Texas Butterfly Ranch. Archived from the original on November 10, 2025 . Retrieved February 7, 2026 . "Seed Germination" . New Braunfels, Texas : Native American Seed. 2026. Archived from the original on December 4, 2025 . Retrieved February 7, 2026 . Higgins, Adrian (May 27, 2015). "7 milkweed varieties and where to find them" . Home & Garden.

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on September 26, 2020 . Retrieved October 17, 2020 . Seed may be stubborn to germinate and may need a period of cold treatment. Gomez, Tony. " Asclepias syriaca : Common Milkweed for Monarch Caterpillars" . Monarch Butterfly Garden . MonarchButterflyGarden.net. Archived from the original on March 16, 2015 . Retrieved October 17, 2010 . Start seeds indoors 2 months before final frost- seeds must be cold stratified. Stevens, Michelle. "Plant guide for common milkweed ( Asclepias syriaca )" (PDF) . United States Department of Agriculture : Natural Resources Conservation Service : National Plant Data Center. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 5, 2021 . Retrieved July 5, 2021 . If planting in flats or in a greenhouse, common milkweed seeds should be cold-treated for three months. " Asclepias syriaca " . Butterfly gardening & all things milkweed . Archived from the original on July 7, 2015 . Retrieved July 7, 2015 . germination: seed requires cold moist period. ^ Multiple sources: Mader, Eric; Shepherd, Mathew; Vaughan, Mace; Black, Scott Hoffman; LeBuhn, Gretchen (2011). "Establishing Pollinator Habitat from Seed: Sowing Seed" . Attracting Native Pollinators: Protecting North America's Bees and Butterflies: The Xerces Society guide . North Adams, Massachusetts : Storey Publishing . pp. 113– 114. ISBN 978-1-60342-747-0 . LCCN 2010043054 . OCLC 776997073 . Retrieved July 7, 2021 – via Internet Archive . Landis, Thomas D.; Dumroese, R. Kasten (2015). "Propagating Native Milkweeds for Restoring Monarch Butterfly Habitat: Propagating Native Milkweeds: Seed Propagation" (PDF) . International Plant Propagators' Society, Combined Proceedings (2014) . 64 : 302. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 24, 2025 . Retrieved July 27, 2025 – via United States Department of Agriculture : United States Forest Service . Any of the standard seed propagation methods (Landis et al., 1999) are effective with milkweed. Direct sowing of non-stratified seeds during the fall followed by exposure to ambient winter conditions can be effective, but the seeds must be mulched and protected. Cover sown seeds with a thin mulch; research has found that common milkweed seeds germinate better when planted 1 to 2 cm (0.4 to 0.8 in.) deep than when at the soil surface (Jeffery and Robison, 1971). ^ Bush-Brown, James; Bush-Brown, Louise (1958). "Chapter 32: Mulches" . America's Garden Book . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons . p. 768 . LCCN 58005738 . OCLC 597041748 – via Internet Archive . ^ Butterfly Society of Virginia (2019). "Growing Milkweed" . Archived from the original on June 24, 2019 . Retrieved December 25, 2023 . I've grown butterfly weed, swamp milkweed, Asclepias currassavica (bloodflower), Asclepias syriaca (common milkweed), and Asclepias verticillata (whorled milkweed). I've found that butterfly weed is the least favorite of my Monarch guests in my Virginia Beach garden for laying eggs (perhaps the leaves are tougher?) ^ a b Gomez, Tony. " Asclepias tuberosa : Butterfly Weed for Monarchs and More" . Monarch Butterfly Garden . MonarchButterflyGarden.net. Archived from the original on July 29, 2016 . Retrieved October 17, 2010 . Rough leaves for monarch caterpillars, not typically a heavily used host plant . ^ Pocius, Victoria M.; Debinski, Diane M.; Pleasants, John M.; Bidne, Keith G.; Hellmich, Richard L. (January 8, 2018). "Monarch butterflies do not place all of their eggs in one basket: oviposition on nine Midwestern milkweed species" . Ecosphere . 9 (1) e02064. Ecological Society of America : 1– 13. Bibcode : 2018Ecosp...9E2064P . doi : 10.1002/ecs2.2064 . Additionally, A. tuberosa has a layer of trichomes, which may inhibit oviposition or decrease a female's ability to sense leaf chemicals. ^ Multiple sources: Pocius, Victoria M.; Debinski, Diane M.; Pleasants, John M.; Bidne, Keith G.; Hellmich, Richard L. (January 8, 2018). "Monarch butterflies do not place all of their eggs in one basket: oviposition on nine Midwestern milkweed species" . Ecosphere . 9 (1) e02064. Ecological Society of America : 1– 13. Bibcode : 2018Ecosp...9E2064P . doi : 10.1002/ecs2.2064 .

In our study, the least preferred milkweed species A. tuberosa (no choice; Fig. 2) and A. verticillata (choice; Fig. 3A) both have low cardenolide levels recorded in the literature (Roeske et al., Agrawal et al., Rasmann and Agrawal) Abugattas, Alonzo (January 3, 2017). "Monarch Way Stations" . Capital Naturalist . Archived from the original on March 8, 2021 . Retrieved July 5, 2021 – via Blogger . If you have hot, dry conditions, then try Butterflyweed ( A. tuberosa ). ... It is the least favored by monarch caterpillars though because it has very little toxin (cardiac glycosides) in its leaves. ^ Pocius, Victoria M.; Debinski, Diane M.; Pleasants, John M.; Bidne, Keith G.; Hellmich, Richard L. (January 8, 2018). "Monarch butterflies do not place all of their eggs in one basket: oviposition on nine Midwestern milkweed species" . Ecosphere . 9 (1) e02064. Ecological Society of America : 1– 13. Bibcode : 2018Ecosp...9E2064P . doi : 10.1002/ecs2.2064 .

In no-choice tests, we saw the highest egg counts on Asclepias incarnata followed by Asclepias sullivantii and Asclepias syriaca (Fig. 2).