The New Testament ( NT ) is the second division of the Christian biblical canon . It discusses the teachings and person of Jesus , as well as events relating to first-century Christianity .

The New Testament's background, the first division of the Christian Bible, has the name of Old Testament , which is based primarily upon the Hebrew Bible ; together they are regarded as Sacred Scripture by Christians .

The New Testament is a collection of 27 Christian texts written in Koine Greek by various authors. It includes four gospels , the Acts of the Apostles , epistles attributed to Paul and other authors, and the Book of Revelation .

The New Testament canon developed gradually over the first few centuries of Christianity through a complex process of debate, rejection of heretical texts, and recognition of writings deemed apostolic , culminating in the formalization of the 27-book canon by the late 4th century. It has been widely accepted across Christian traditions since Late Antiquity . Literary analysis suggests many of its texts were written in the mid-to-late first century. There is no scholarly consensus on the date of composition of the latest New Testament text.

The earliest surviving New Testament manuscripts date from the late second to early third centuries AD, with the possible exception of Papyrus 52 .

The New Testament was transmitted through thousands of manuscripts in various languages and church quotations and contains variants. Textual criticism uses surviving manuscripts to reconstruct the oldest version feasible and to chart the history of the written tradition. It has varied reception among Christians today. It is viewed as a holy scripture alongside Sacred Tradition among Catholics and Orthodox , while evangelicals and some other Protestants view it as the inspired word of God without tradition. Etymology The word testament The word testament in the expression "New Testament" refers to a Christian new covenant that Christians believe completes or fulfils the Mosaic covenant (the Jewish covenant) that Yahweh (the God of Israel) made with the people of Israel on Mount Sinai through Moses , described in the books of the Old Testament of the Christian Bible.

While Christianity traditionally even claims this Christian new covenant as being prophesied in the Jewish Bible 's Book of Jeremiah , Judaism traditionally disagrees: The word covenant means 'agreement' (from Latin convenio 'to agree', literally 'to come together'): the use of the word testament , which describes the different idea of written instructions for inheritance after death, to refer to the covenant with Israel in the Old Testament, is foreign to the original Hebrew word brit ( בְּרִית ) describing it, which only means 'alliance, covenant, pact' and never 'inheritance instructions after death'. This use comes from the transcription of Latin testamentum 'will (left after death)', a literal translation of Greek diathēkē ( διαθήκη ) 'will (left after death)', which is the word used to translate Hebrew brit in the Septuagint .

The choice of this word diatheke , by the Jewish translators of the Septuagint in Alexandria in the 3rd and 2nd century BC, has been understood in Christian theology to imply a reinterpreted view of the Old Testament covenant with Israel as possessing characteristics of a 'will left after death' (the death of Jesus ) and has generated considerable attention from biblical scholars and theologians: in contrast to the Jewish usage where brit was the usual Hebrew word used to refer to pacts, alliances and covenants in general, like a common pact between two individuals, and to the one between God and Israel in particular, in the Greek world diatheke was virtually never used to refer to an alliance or covenant (one exception is noted in a passage from Aristophanes ) and referred instead to a will left after the death of a person. There is scholarly debate as to the reason why the translators of the Septuagint chose the term diatheke to translate Hebrew brit , instead of another Greek word generally used to refer to an alliance or covenant.

The phrase New Testament as the collection of scriptures The use of the phrase New Testament ( Koine Greek : Ἡ Καινὴ Διαθήκη , Hē Kainḕ Diathḗkē ) to describe a collection of first- and second-century Christian Greek scriptures can be traced back to Tertullian in his work Against Praxeas . Irenaeus uses the phrase New Testament several times, but does not use it in reference to any written text.

In Against Marcion , written c. 208 AD, Tertullian writes of: the Divine Word, who is doubly edged with the two testaments of the law and the gospel . And Tertullian continues later in the book, writing: it is certain that the whole aim at which he has strenuously laboured, even in the drawing up of his Antitheses, centres in this, that he may establish a diversity between the Old and the New Testaments, so that his own Christ may be separate from the Creator , as belonging to this rival God, and as alien from the law and the prophets .

By the 4th century , the existence—even if not the exact contents—of both an Old and New Testament had been established. Lactantius , a 3rd–4th century Christian author wrote in his early-4th-century Latin Institutiones Divinae ( Divine Institutes ): But all scripture is divided into two Testaments. That which preceded the advent and passion of Christ—that is, the law and the prophets —is called the Old; but those things which were written after His resurrection are named the New Testament.

The Jews make use of the Old, we of the New: but yet they are not discordant, for the New is the fulfilling of the Old, and in both there is the same testator, even Christ, who, having suffered death for us, made us heirs of His everlasting kingdom, the people of the Jews being deprived and disinherited.

The word "gospel" derives from the Old English gōd-spell (rarely godspel ), meaning "good news" or "glad tidings"; its Greek and Hebrew equivalents are euangélion (εὐαγγέλιον) and besorah (בְּשׂוֹרָה), respectively.

The gospel was considered the "good news" of the coming Kingdom of God 's own Messiah , and the redemption through the life and death of Jesus, the central Christian message. Starting in the late second century, the four narrative accounts of the life and work of Jesus Christ have been referred to as "The Gospel of ..." or "The Gospel according to ..." followed by the name of the supposed author.

The first author to explicitly name the canonical gospels is Irenaeus of Lyon , who promoted the four canonical gospels in his book Against Heresies , written around 180.

The Gospel of Matthew , ascribed to the Apostle Matthew . This gospel begins with a genealogy of Jesus and a story of his birth that includes a visit from magi and a flight into Egypt , and it ends with the commissioning of the disciples by the resurrected Jesus.

The Gospel of Mark , ascribed to Mark the Evangelist . This gospel begins with the preaching of John the Baptist and the baptism of Jesus and ends with the Ascension of Jesus .

The Gospel of Luke , ascribed to Luke the Evangelist , who was not one of the Twelve Apostles , but was mentioned as a companion of the Apostle Paul and as a physician.

The Gospel of John , ascribed to John the Evangelist . This gospel begins with a philosophical prologue and ends with appearances of the resurrected Jesus. These four gospels that were eventually included in the New Testament were only a few among many other early Christian gospel traditions; the existence of such traditions, both written and oral, is even mentioned at the beginning of the Gospel of Luke. Various non-canonical gospels , such as the so-called " Jewish-Christian Gospels " and the Gospel of Thomas , were also written after the canonical gospels became widely known and used among early Christian communities, advocating for differing theological views, in particular Gnostic ones.

In modern scholarship, the Synoptic Gospels are the primary sources for reconstructing Jesus Christ's ministry. Acts of the Apostles Main article: Acts of the Apostles The Acts of the Apostles is a narrative of the apostles' ministry and activity after Jesus Christ's death and resurrection, from which point it resumes and functions as a sequel to the Gospel of Luke . Examining style, phraseology, and other evidence, modern scholarship generally concludes that Acts and the Gospel of Luke share the same author, referred to as Luke–Acts . Luke–Acts does not name its author. Church tradition identified him as Luke the Evangelist , the companion of Paul, but critical views at the end of the 20th century were evenly divided about whether Luke the physician wrote it due to the many differences between Acts and the authentic Pauline letters, though most scholars still believe the author, whether named Luke or not, met Paul .

The most probable date of composition is around 80–90 AD, although some scholars date it significantly later.

The earliest witnesses for Luke fall into the Western and the Alexandrian text-types and the dominant view is that the Western text represents a process of deliberate revision in the second century, as the variations seem to form specific patterns. Epistles Pauline letters to churches Main article: Pauline epistles The Pauline letters are the thirteen New Testament books that present Paul the Apostle as their author. Paul's authorship of six of the letters is disputed. Four are thought by most modern scholars to be pseudepigraphic , i.e., not actually written by Paul even if attributed to him within the letters themselves. Opinion is more divided on the other two disputed letters (2 Thessalonians and Colossians). These letters were written to Christian communities in specific cities or geographical regions, often to address issues faced by that particular community. Prominent themes include the relationship both to broader " pagan " society, to Judaism, and to other Christians. Epistle to the Romans First Epistle to the Corinthians Second Epistle to the Corinthians Epistle to the Galatians Epistle to the Ephesians * Epistle to the Philippians Epistle to the Colossians * First Epistle to the Thessalonians Second Epistle to the Thessalonians * Pauline letters to persons The last four Pauline letters in the New Testament are addressed to individual persons. They include the following: First Epistle to Timothy * Second Epistle to Timothy * Epistle to Titus * Epistle to Philemon All of the above except for Philemon are known as the Pastoral epistles . They are addressed to individuals charged with pastoral oversight of churches and discuss issues of Christian living, doctrine and leadership. They often address different concerns to those of the preceding epistles. These letters are believed by many to be pseudepigraphic. Some scholars (e.g., Bill Mounce, Ben Witherington, R.C. Sproul) will argue that the letters are genuinely Pauline, or at least written under Paul's supervision. Hebrews The Epistle to the Hebrews addresses a Jewish audience who had come to believe that Jesus was the Anointed One (Hebrew: מָשִׁיחַ—transliterated in English as "Moshiach", or "Messiah"; Greek: Χριστός—transliterated in English as "Christos", for " Christ ") who was predicted in the writings of the Hebrew Scriptures.

The author discusses the superiority of the new covenant and the ministry of Jesus, to the Mosaic Law Covenant and urges the readers in the practical implications of this conviction through the end of the epistle.

The book has been widely accepted by the Christian church as inspired by God and thus authoritative, despite the acknowledgment of uncertainties about who its human author was. Regarding authorship, although the Epistle to the Hebrews does not internally claim to have been written by the Apostle Paul , some similarities in wordings to some of the Pauline Epistles have been noted and inferred.

In antiquity, some began to ascribe it to Paul in an attempt to provide the anonymous work an explicit apostolic pedigree.

In the 4th century, Jerome and Augustine of Hippo supported Paul's authorship .

The Church largely agreed to include Hebrews as the fourteenth letter of Paul, and affirmed this authorship until the Reformation .

The letter to the Hebrews had difficulty in being accepted as part of the Christian canon because of its anonymity.

As early as the 3rd century, Origen wrote of the letter, "Men of old have handed it down as Paul's, but who wrote the Epistle God only knows." Contemporary scholars often reject Pauline authorship for the epistle to the Hebrews, based on its distinctive style and theology, which are considered to set it apart from Paul's writings. Catholic epistles The Catholic epistles (or "General epistles") consist of both letters and treatises in the form of letters written to the church at large.

The term " catholic " (Greek: καθολική, katholikē ), used to describe these letters in the oldest manuscripts containing them, here simply means "general" or "universal" and does not refer to their canonical status among Christian traditions.

The authorship of a number of these is disputed. Epistle of James , written by an author named "James", often identified with James, the brother of Jesus . First Epistle of Peter , ascribed to the Apostle Peter . Second Epistle of Peter , ascribed to the Apostle Peter, though widely considered not to have been written by him. First Epistle of John , ascribed to John the Apostle . Second Epistle of John , ascribed to John the Apostle. Third Epistle of John , ascribed to John the Apostle. Epistle of Jude , written under the name of Jude, the brother of Jesus and James . Book of Revelation Further information: Authorship of the Johannine works The final book of the New Testament is the Book of Revelation , also known as the Apocalypse of John.

In the New Testament canon, it is considered prophetical or apocalyptic literature . Its authorship has been attributed either to John the Apostle (in which case it is often thought that John the Apostle is John the Evangelist , i.e. author of the Gospel of John ) or to another John designated " John of Patmos " after the island where the text says the revelation was received (1:9). Some ascribe the writership date as c. 81–96 AD, and others at around 68 AD.

The Acts of Thaddeus was included in the biblical canon of Gregory of Tatev . There is some uncertainty about whether Armenian canon lists include the Doctrine of Addai or the related Acts of Thaddeus . Moreover, the correspondence between King Abgar V and Jesus Christ, which is found in various forms—including within both the Doctrine of Addai and the Acts of Thaddeus—sometimes appears separately (see list ).

The Prayer of Euthalius and the Repose of St. John the Evangelist appear in the appendix of the 1805 Armenian Zohrab Bible. Some of the aforementioned books, though they are found within canon lists, have nonetheless never been discovered to be part of any Armenian biblical manuscript. ^ Though widely regarded as non-canonical, the Gospel of James obtained early liturgical acceptance among some Eastern churches and remains a major source for many of Christendom's traditions related to Mary, the mother of Jesus . ^ a b c d The Diatessaron , Tatian 's gospel harmony , became a standard text in some Syriac-speaking churches down to the 5th century, when it gave way to the four separate gospels found in the Peshitta. ^ a b c d Parts of these four books are not found in the most reliable ancient sources; in some cases, are thought to be later additions, and have therefore not appeared historically in every biblical tradition. They are as follows: Mark 16:9–20 , John 7:53–8:11 , the Comma Johanneum , and portions of the Western version of Acts . To varying degrees, arguments for the authenticity of these passages—especially for the one from the Gospel of John—have occasionally been made. ^ Skeireins , a commentary on the Gospel of John in the Gothic language , was included in the Wulfila Bible . It exists today only in fragments. ^ a b The Acts of Paul and Thecla and the Third Epistle to the Corinthians are all portions of the greater Acts of Paul narrative, which is part of a stichometric catalogue of New Testament canon found in the Codex Claromontanus , but has survived only in fragments. Some of the content within these individual sections may have developed separately. ^ a b c d These four works were questioned or " spoken against " by Martin Luther , and he changed the order of his New Testament to reflect this, but he did not leave them out, nor has any Lutheran body since. Traditional German Luther Bibles are still printed with the New Testament in this changed "Lutheran" order.

The vast majority of Protestants embrace these four works as fully canonical. ^ a b c d e The Peshitta excludes 2 John, 3 John, 2 Peter, Jude, and Revelation, but certain Bibles of the modern Syriac traditions include later translations of those books. Still today, the official lectionary followed by the Syriac Orthodox Church and the Assyrian Church of the East presents lessons from only the twenty-two books of Peshitta, the version to which appeal is made for the settlement of doctrinal questions. ^ The Epistle to the Laodiceans is present in some western non-Roman Catholic translations and traditions. Especially of note is John Wycliffe 's inclusion of the epistle in his English translation, and the Quakers ' use of it to the point where they produced a translation and made pleas for its canonicity, see Poole's Annotations , on Col. 4:16.

The epistle is nonetheless widely rejected by the vast majority of Protestants. ^ The Apocalypse of Peter , though not listed in this table, is mentioned in the Muratorian fragment and is part of a stichometric catalogue of New Testament canon found in the Codex Claromontanus. It was also held in high regard by Clement of Alexandria . ^ Other known writings of the Apostolic Fathers not listed in this table are as follows: the seven Epistles of Ignatius , the Epistle of Polycarp , the Martyrdom of Polycarp , the Epistle to Diognetus , the fragment of Quadratus of Athens , the fragments of Papias of Hierapolis , the Reliques of the Elders Preserved in Irenaeus , and the Apostles' Creed . ^ Though they are not listed in this table, the Apostolic Constitutions were considered canonical by some including Alexius Aristenus , John of Salisbury , and to a lesser extent, Grigor Tat`evatsi . They are even classified as part of the New Testament canon within the body of the Constitutions itself; moreover, they are the source for a great deal of the content in the Orthodox Tewahedo broader canon. ^ a b c d e These five writings attributed to the Apostolic Fathers are not currently considered canonical in any biblical tradition, though they are more highly regarded by some more than others. Nonetheless, their early authorship and inclusion in ancient biblical codices, as well as their acceptance to varying degrees by various early authorities, requires them to be treated as foundational literature for Christianity as a whole. ^ a b Ethiopic Clement and the Ethiopic Didascalia are distinct from and should not be confused with other ecclesiastical documents known in the west by similar names. Book order The order in which the books of the New Testament appear differs between some collections and ecclesiastical traditions.

In the Latin West, prior to the Vulgate (an early 5th-century Latin version of the Bible), the four Gospels were arranged in the following order: Matthew, John, Luke, and Mark.

The Syriac Peshitta places the major Catholic epistles (James, 1 Peter, and 1 John) immediately after Acts and before the Pauline epistles.

The order of an early edition of the letters of Paul is based on the size of the letters: longest to shortest, though keeping 1 and 2 Corinthians and 1 and 2 Thessalonians together.

The Pastoral epistles were apparently not part of the Corpus Paulinum in which this order originated and were later inserted after 2 Thessalonians and before Philemon. Hebrews was variously incorporated into the Corpus Paulinum either after 2 Thessalonians, after Philemon (i.e. at the very end), or after Romans. Luther's canon , found in the 16th-century Luther Bible , continues to place Hebrews, James, Jude, and the Apocalypse (Revelation) last. This reflects the thoughts of the Reformer Martin Luther on the canonicity of these books. Authors Main article: Authorship of the Bible § New Testament It is considered the books of the New Testament were all or nearly all written by Jewish Christians —that is, Jewish disciples of Christ, who lived in the Roman Empire , and under Roman occupation .

The author of the Gospel of Luke and the Book of Acts is frequently thought of as an exception; scholars are divided as to whether he was a Gentile or a Hellenistic Jew . A few scholars identify the author of the Gospel of Mark as probably a Gentile, and similarly for the Gospel of Matthew, though most assert Jewish-Christian authorship. However, more recently the above understanding has been challenged by the publication of evidence showing only educated elites after the Jewish War would have been capable of producing the prose found in the Gospels. Gospels Main article: Synoptic Gospels Evangelist Mathäus und der Engel , by Rembrandt , 1661 Authorship of the Gospels remains divided among both evangelical and critical scholars.

The names of each Gospel stems from church tradition.

The gospels are anonymous , as was common for bios of the time; biographies by Plutarch and Suetonius were also originally anonymous as well.

The Gospel of John claims to be based on eyewitness testimony from the Disciple whom Jesus loved , but never names this character.

The author of Luke-Acts claimed to be a companion of Paul ; this claim remains accepted by most scholars. Objections to this viewpoint mainly take the form of the following two interpretations, but also include the claim that Luke-Acts contains differences in theology and historical narrative which are irreconcilable with the authentic letters of Paul the Apostle . Ehrman has argued for a scholarly consensus that many New Testament books were not written by the individuals whose names are attached to them. Scholarly opinion is that names were fixed to the gospels by the mid second century AD. Many scholars believe that none of the gospels were written in the region of Palestine . Most scholars hold to Marcan priority , which posits that Mark was the first gospel to be written. Many argue the authors of the Gospel of Matthew and the Gospel of Luke used the Gospel of Mark and a hypothetical Q source , though alternative hypotheses that posit the direct use of Matthew by Luke or vice versa without Q are increasing in popularity within scholarship. These three gospels are called the Synoptic Gospels , because they include many of the same stories, often in the same sequence, and sometimes in exactly the same wording. Scholars agree that the Gospel of John was written last, by using a different tradition and body of testimony.

In addition, most scholars agree that the author of Luke also wrote the Acts of the Apostles . Scholars hold that these books constituted two-halves of a single work, Luke–Acts . Acts Main article: Authorship of Luke–Acts The same author appears to have written the Gospel of Luke and the Acts of the Apostles, and most refer to them as the Lucan texts.

The most direct evidence comes from the prefaces of each book; both were addressed to Theophilus , and the preface to the Acts of the Apostles references "my former book" about the ministry of Jesus. Furthermore, there are linguistic and theological similarities between the two works, suggesting that they have a common author. Pauline epistles Main article: Authorship of the Pauline epistles Saint Paul Writing His Epistles by Valentin de Boulogne (c. 1618–1620). Most scholars think Paul actually dictated his letters to a secretary.

The Pauline epistles are the thirteen books in the New Testament traditionally attributed to Paul of Tarsus . Seven letters are generally classified as "undisputed", expressing contemporary scholarly near consensus that they are the work of Paul: Romans, 1 Corinthians, 2 Corinthians, Galatians, Philippians, 1 Thessalonians and Philemon. Six additional letters bearing Paul's name do not currently enjoy the same academic consensus: Ephesians, Colossians, 2 Thessalonians, 1 Timothy, 2 Timothy and Titus.

The anonymous Epistle to the Hebrews is, despite unlikely Pauline authorship, often functionally grouped with these thirteen to form a corpus of fourteen "Pauline" epistles.

While many scholars uphold the traditional view, some question whether the first three, called the "Deutero-Pauline Epistles", are authentic letters of Paul.

As for the latter three, the "Pastoral epistles", some scholars uphold the traditional view of these as the genuine writings of the Apostle Paul; most regard them as pseudepigrapha . One might refer to the Epistle to the Laodiceans and the Third Epistle to the Corinthians as examples of works identified as pseudonymous.

Since the early centuries of the church, there has been debate concerning the authorship of the anonymous Epistle to the Hebrews, and contemporary scholars generally reject Pauline authorship.

The epistles all share common themes, emphasis, vocabulary and style; they exhibit a uniformity of doctrine concerning the Mosaic Law , Jesus, faith, and various other issues. All of these letters easily fit into the chronology of Paul's journeys depicted in Acts of the Apostles. Other epistles The author of the Epistle of James identifies himself in the opening verse as "James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ".

From the middle of the 3rd century, patristic authors cited the Epistle as written by James the Just . Ancient and modern scholars have always been divided on the issue of authorship. Many consider the epistle to be written in the late 1st or early 2nd centuries.

The author of the First Epistle of Peter identifies himself in the opening verse as "Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ", and the view that the epistle was written by St. Peter is attested to by a number of Church Fathers : Irenaeus (140–203), Tertullian (150–222), Clement of Alexandria (155–215) and Origen of Alexandria (185–253). Unlike The Second Epistle of Peter , the authorship of which was debated in antiquity, there was little debate about Peter's authorship of this first epistle until the 18th century.

Although 2 Peter internally purports to be a work of the apostle, many biblical scholars have concluded that Peter is not the author. For an early date and (usually) for a defense of the Apostle Peter's authorship see Kruger, Zahn, Spitta, Bigg, and Green.

The Epistle of Jude title is written as follows: "Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ and brother of James".

The debate has continued over the author's identity as the apostle, the brother of Jesus, both, or neither. Johannine works Main article: Authorship of the Johannine works The Gospel of John, the three Johannine epistles , and the Book of Revelation , exhibit marked similarities, although more so between the gospel and the epistles (especially the gospel and 1 John) than between those and Revelation. Most scholars therefore treat the five as a single corpus of Johannine literature , albeit not from the same author. Christian tradition identifies John the Apostle with John the Evangelist , the supposed author of the Gospel of John .

The majority of scholars interpret John 21:24 as claiming the beloved disciple was the author of the gospel, though others interpret it to mean he was source of its traditions. Scholars such as Bart Ehrman have speculated that John 21 was an addition by either the author of chapters 1-20 or a redactor , but no manuscript evidence for this assertion has been discovered, and a growing number views it as part of the earliest text.

The author may also claim to be a witness in 1:14 and 19:35. 20th century scholarship viewed John as a communal work written in stages, but recent scholarship tends to view the gospel as the product of a single author and are less interested in theories about hypothetical editions or sources of the gospel. Christian tradition identifies this disciple as the apostle John , but while this idea still has supporters, for a variety of reasons the majority of modern scholars have abandoned it or hold it only tenuously, though they view the beloved disciple as the source of much of John's content. John's usage of Mark is well in line with the rewriting methods used by Jewish authors, and the patterns of variation in the gospels are typical of ancient biographies about actual people and history.

The author of the Book of Revelation identifies himself as "John". and states that he was on Patmos when he received his first vision.

As a result, the author is sometimes referred to as John of Patmos .

The author has traditionally been identified with John the Apostle to whom the Gospel and the epistles of John were attributed. It was believed that he was exiled to the island of Patmos during the reign of Domitian , and wrote Revelation there. Justin Martyr (c. 100–165 AD) who was acquainted with Polycarp , who had been mentored by John, makes a possible allusion to this book, and credits John as the source. Irenaeus (c. 115–202) assumes it as a conceded point. According to the Zondervan Pictorial Encyclopedia of the Bible , modern scholars are divided between the apostolic view and several alternative hypotheses put forth in the last hundred years or so. Ben Witherington points out that linguistic evidence makes it unlikely that the books share the same author. Dating the New Testament Main article: Dating the Bible § Table IV: New Testament There is scholarly consensus on the date of composition of the latest New Testament texts. John A. T. Robinson , Dan Wallace , William F. Albright , Maurice Casey , and James Crossley all dated many or all of the books of the New Testament before 70 AD. Jonathan Bernier's recent argument for early dates has enjoyed a positive reception, with endorsements from Chris Keith and Anders Runesson, among others. Many other scholars, such as Bart D. Ehrman and Stephen L. Harris , date some New Testament texts much later than this; Richard Pervo dated Luke–Acts to c. 115 AD , and David Trobisch places Acts in the mid-to-late second century, contemporaneous with the publication of the first New Testament canon. Whether the Gospels were composed before or after 70 AD, according to Bas van Os, the lifetime of various eyewitnesses that includes Jesus's own family through the end of the First Century is very likely statistically. Markus Bockmuehl finds this structure of lifetime memory in various early Christian traditions. External evidence The earliest manuscripts of New Testament books date from the late second to early third centuries (although see Papyrus 52 for a possible exception). Internal evidence Literary analysis of the New Testament texts themselves can be used to date many of the books of the New Testament to the mid-to-late first century.

The earliest works of the New Testament are the letters of the Apostle Paul . It can be determined that 1 Thessalonians is likely the earliest of these letters, written around 52 AD. Language Main article: Language of the New Testament The major languages spoken by both Jews and Greeks in the Holy Land at the time of Jesus were Aramaic and Koine Greek , and also a colloquial dialect of Mishnaic Hebrew . It is generally agreed that the historical Jesus primarily spoke Aramaic, perhaps also some Hebrew and Greek.

The books that would form the New Testament were written in the Koine Greek language.

As Christianity spread , these books were translated into other languages such as Latin , Syriac , and Coptic . Some of the Church Fathers imply or claim that Matthew was originally written in Hebrew or Aramaic , and then soon after was written in Koine Greek. Scholars have proposed various explanations for this assertion given that Matthew was written in Greek and is not a translation: one theory is that Matthew himself produced a Semitic work and secondly Greek recension; Josephus also claimed to write a translation of an Aramaic version of The Jewish War , though both the extant Gospel of Matthew and the War are not translations. Another is that others translated Matthew into Greek rather freely. Another is that Papias simply means "Ἑβραΐδι διαλέκτῳ" as a Hebrew style of Greek. Style The style of Koine Greek in which the New Testament is written differs from the general Koine Greek used by Greek writers of the same era, a difference that some scholars have explained by the fact that the authors of the New Testament, nearly all Jews and deeply familiar with the Septuagint , wrote in a Jewish-Greek dialect strongly influenced by Aramaic and Hebrew (see Jewish Koine Greek , related to the Greek of the Septuagint ). But other scholars say that this view is arrived at by comparing the linguistic style of the New Testament to the preserved writings of the literary men of the era, who imitated the style of the great Attic texts and as a result did not reflect the everyday spoken language, so that this difference in style could be explained by the New Testament being written, unlike other preserved literary material of the era, in the Koine Greek spoken in everyday life, in order to appeal to the common people, a style which has also been found in contemporary non-Jewish texts such as private letters, receipts and petitions discovered in Egypt (where the dry air has preserved these documents which, as everyday material not deemed of literary importance, had not been copied by subsequent generations). Development of the New Testament canon Main article: Development of the New Testament canon The process of canonization of the New Testament was complex and lengthy.

In the initial centuries of early Christianity , there were many books widely considered by the church to be inspired, but there was no single formally recognized New Testament canon.

The process was characterized by a compilation of books that apostolic tradition considered authoritative in worship and teaching, relevant to the historical situations in which they lived, and consonant with the Old Testament. Writings attributed to the apostles circulated among the earliest Christian communities and the Pauline epistles were circulating, perhaps in collected forms, by the end of the 1st century AD . One of the earliest attempts at solidifying a canon was made by Marcion , c. 140 AD, who accepted only a modified version of Luke (the Gospel of Marcion ) and ten of Paul's letters, while rejecting the Old Testament entirely. His canon was largely rejected by other groups of Christians, notably the proto-orthodox Christians , as was his theology, Marcionism . Adolf von Harnack , John Knox, and David Trobisch , among other scholars, have argued that the church formulated its New Testament canon partially in response to the challenge posed by Marcion. Polycarp , Irenaeus and Tertullian held the epistles of Paul to be divinely inspired "scripture". Other books were held in high esteem but were gradually relegated to the status of New Testament apocrypha . Justin Martyr, in the mid 2nd century , mentions "memoirs of the apostles" as being read on Sunday alongside the "writings of the prophets" .

The Muratorian fragment , dated at between 170 and as late as the end of the 4th century (according to the Anchor Bible Dictionary ), may be the earliest known New Testament canon attributed to mainstream Christianity. It is similar, but not identical, to the modern New Testament canon.

The oldest clear endorsement of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John being the only legitimate gospels was written c. 180 AD. A four gospel canon (the Tetramorph ) was asserted by Irenaeus, who refers to it directly in his polemic Against Heresies : It is not possible that the gospels can be either more or fewer in number than they are. For, since there are four zones of the world in which we live, and four principal winds, while the church is scattered throughout all the world, and the "pillar and ground" of the church is the gospel and the spirit of life; it is fitting that she should have four pillars, breathing out immortality on every side, and vivifying men afresh. — Irenaeus of Lyon (emphasis added) The books considered to be authoritative by Irenaeus included the four gospels and many of the letters of Paul, although, based on the arguments Irenaeus made in support of only four authentic gospels, some interpreters deduce that the fourfold Gospel must have still been a novelty in Irenaeus's time. Origen (3rd century) By the early 200s, Origen may have been using the same twenty-seven books as in the Catholic New Testament canon, though there were still disputes over the canonicity of the Letter to the Hebrews, Epistle of James, II Peter, II John and III John and the Book of Revelation, known as the Antilegomena . Likewise, the Muratorian fragment is evidence that, perhaps as early as 200, there existed a set of Christian writings somewhat similar to the twenty-seven book NT canon, which included four gospels and argued against objections to them. Thus, while there was a good measure of debate in the Early Church over the New Testament canon, the major writings are claimed to have been accepted by almost all Christians by the middle of the 3rd century . Origen was largely responsible for the collection of usage information regarding the texts that became the New Testament.

The information used to create the late-4th-century Easter Letter , which declared accepted Christian writings, was probably based on the Ecclesiastical History (HE) of Eusebius of Caesarea , wherein he uses the information passed on to him by Origen to create both his list at HE 3:25 and Origen's list at HE 6:25. Eusebius got his information about what texts were then accepted and what were then disputed , by the third-century churches throughout the known world , a great deal of which Origen knew of firsthand from his extensive travels, from the library and writings of Origen.

In fact, Origen would have possibly included in his list of "inspired writings" other texts kept out by the likes of Eusebius—including the Epistle of Barnabas , Shepherd of Hermas , and 1 Clement . Notwithstanding these facts, "Origen is not the originator of the idea of biblical canon, but he certainly gives the philosophical and literary-interpretative underpinnings for the whole notion." Eusebius's Ecclesiastical History Eusebius , c. 300 , gave a detailed list of New Testament writings in his Ecclesiastical History Book 3 , Chapter XXV: "1... First then must be put the holy quaternion of the gospels; following them the Acts of the Apostles... the epistles of Paul... the epistle of John... the epistle of Peter...

After them is to be placed, if it really seem proper, the Book of Revelation, concerning which we shall give the different opinions at the proper time. These then belong among the accepted writings." "3 Among the disputed writings, which are nevertheless recognized by many, are extant the so-called epistle of James and that of Jude, also the second epistle of Peter, and those that are called the second and third of John, whether they belong to the evangelist or to another person of the same name. Among the rejected writings must be reckoned also the Acts of Paul , and the so-called Shepherd , and the Apocalypse of Peter , and in addition to these the extant epistle of Barnabas , and the so-called Teachings of the Apostles ; and besides, as I said, the Apocalypse of John , if it seem proper, which some, as I said, reject, but which others class with the accepted books. And among these some have placed also the Gospel according to the Hebrews ... And all these may be reckoned among the disputed books." "6... such books as the Gospels of Peter , of Thomas , of Matthias , or of any others besides them, and the Acts of Andrew and John and the other apostles... they clearly show themselves to be the fictions of heretics. Wherefore they are not to be placed even among the rejected writings, but are all of them to be cast aside as absurd and impious." The Book of Revelation is counted as both accepted (Kirsopp Lake translation: "recognized") and disputed, which has caused some confusion over what exactly Eusebius meant by doing so.

From other writings of the church fathers, it was disputed with several canon lists rejecting its canonicity. EH 3.3.5 adds further detail on Paul: "Paul's fourteen epistles are well known and undisputed. It is not indeed right to overlook the fact that some have rejected the Epistle to the Hebrews, saying that it is disputed by the church of Rome, on the ground that it was not written by Paul." EH 4.29.6 mentions the Diatessaron : "But their original founder, Tatian, formed a certain combination and collection of the gospels, I know not how, to which he gave the title Diatessaron, and which is still in the hands of some. But they say that he ventured to paraphrase certain words of the apostle Paul, in order to improve their style." 4th century and later In his Easter letter of 367, Athanasius , Bishop of Alexandria, gave a list of the books that would become the twenty-seven-book NT canon, and he used the word "canonized" ( kanonizomena ) in regards to them.

The first council that accepted the present canon of the New Testament may have been the Synod of Hippo Regius in North Africa (393 AD).

The acts of this council are lost. A brief summary of the acts was read at and accepted by the Council of Carthage (397) and the Council of Carthage (419) . These councils were under the authority of St. Augustine , who regarded the canon as already closed. Pope Damasus I 's Council of Rome in 382, if the Decretum Gelasianum is correctly associated with it, issued a biblical canon identical to that mentioned above, or, if not, the list is at least a 6th-century compilation. Likewise, Damasus' commissioning of the Latin Vulgate edition of the Bible, c. 383 , was instrumental in the fixation of the canon in the West.

In c. 405 , Pope Innocent I sent a list of the sacred books to a Gallic bishop, Exsuperius of Toulouse . Christian scholars assert that, when these bishops and councils spoke on the matter, they were not defining something new but instead "were ratifying what had already become the mind of the Church." The New Testament canon as it is now was first listed by St. Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria , in 367, in a letter written to his churches in Egypt, Festal Letter 39 . Also cited is the Council of Rome , but not without controversy. That canon gained wider and wider recognition until it was accepted at the Third Council of Carthage in 397 and 419.

The Book of Revelation was not added till the Council of Carthage (419) . Thus, some claim that, from the 4th century , there existed unanimity in the West concerning the New Testament canon (as it is today), and that, by the 5th century , the Eastern Church , with a few exceptions, had come to accept the Book of Revelation and thus had come into harmony on the matter of the canon. Nonetheless, full dogmatic articulations of the canon were not made until the Canon of Trent of 1546 for Roman Catholicism , the Thirty-Nine Articles of 1563 for the Church of England , the Westminster Confession of Faith of 1647 for Calvinism , and the Synod of Jerusalem of 1672 for the Greek Orthodox .

On the question of NT Canon formation generally, New Testament scholar Lee Martin McDonald has written that: Although a number of Christians have thought that church councils determined what books were to be included in the biblical canons, a more accurate reflection of the matter is that the councils recognized or acknowledged those books that had already obtained prominence from usage among the various early Christian communities. According to the Catholic Encyclopedia article on the Canon of the New Testament: "The idea of a complete and clear-cut canon of the New Testament existing from the beginning, that is from Apostolic times, has no foundation in history.

The Canon of the New Testament, like that of the Old, is the result of a development, of a process at once stimulated by disputes with doubters, both within and without the Church, and retarded by certain obscurities and natural hesitations, and which did not reach its final term until the dogmatic definition of the Tridentine Council ." In 331, Constantine I commissioned Eusebius to deliver fifty Bibles for the Church of Constantinople . Athanasius ( Apol. Const. 4 ) recorded Alexandrian scribes around 340 preparing Bibles for Constans . Little else is known, though there is plenty of speculation. For example, it is speculated that this may have provided motivation for canon lists, and that Codex Vaticanus and Codex Sinaiticus may be examples of these Bibles. Together with the Peshitta and Codex Alexandrinus , these are the earliest extant Christian Bibles. Early manuscripts Papyrus Bodmer VIII, at the Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, showing 1 and 2 Peter.

The Codex Regius (L or 019 ) , an 8th-century Greek manuscript of the New Testament with strong affinities to Codex Vaticanus . Main article: New Testament manuscripts Like other literature from antiquity , the text of the New Testament was (prior to the advent of the printing press ) preserved and transmitted in manuscripts . Manuscripts containing at least a part of the New Testament number in the thousands.

The earliest of these (like manuscripts containing other literature) are often very fragmentarily preserved. Some of these fragments have even been thought to date as early as the 2nd century (i.e., Papyrus 90 , Papyrus 98 , Papyrus 104 , and famously Rylands Library Papyrus P52 , though the early date of the latter has recently been called into question). Textual variation Main articles: Textual variants in the New Testament and Textual criticism of the New Testament Textual criticism deals with the identification and removal of transcription errors in the texts of manuscripts . Ancient scribes made errors or alterations (such as including non-authentic additions ).

The New Testament has been preserved in more than 5,800 Greek manuscripts, 10,000 Latin manuscripts and 9,300 manuscripts in various other ancient languages including Syriac , Slavic , Ethiopic and Armenian . Even if the original Greek versions were lost, the entire New Testament could still be assembled from the translations.

In addition, there are so many quotes from the New Testament in early church documents and commentaries that the entire New Testament could also be assembled from these alone. Not all biblical manuscripts come from orthodox Christian writers. For example, the Gnostic writings of Valentinus come from the 2nd century AD, and these Christians were regarded as heretics by the mainstream church.

The sheer number of witnesses presents unique difficulties, but it also gives scholars a better idea of how close modern Bibles are to the original versions.

On noting the large number of surviving ancient manuscripts, Bruce Metzger sums up the view on the issue by saying "The more often you have copies that agree with each other, especially if they emerge from different geographical areas, the more you can cross-check them to figure out what the original document was like.

The only way they'd agree would be where they went back genealogically in a family tree that represents the descent of the manuscripts. Interpolations In attempting to determine the original text of the New Testament books, some modern textual critics have identified sections as additions of material, centuries after the gospel was written. These are called interpolations .

In modern translations of the Bible, the results of textual criticism have led to certain verses, words and phrases being left out or marked as not original. According to Bart D. Ehrman , "These scribal additions are often found in late medieval manuscripts of the New Testament, but not in the manuscripts of the earlier centuries." Most modern Bibles have footnotes to indicate passages that have disputed source documents. Bible commentaries also discuss these, sometimes in great detail.

While many variations have been discovered between early copies of biblical texts, almost all have no importance, as they are variations in spelling, punctuation, or grammar. Also, many of these variants are so particular to the Greek language that they would not appear in translations into other languages. For example, order of words (i.e. "man bites dog" versus "dog bites man") often does not matter in Greek, so textual variants that flip the order of words often have no consequences. Outside of these unimportant variants, there are a couple variants of some importance.

The two most commonly cited examples are the last verses of the Gospel of Mark and the story of Jesus and the woman taken in adultery in the Gospel of John. Many scholars and critics also believe that the Johannine Comma reference supporting the Trinity doctrine in the First Epistle of John to have been a later addition. According to Norman Geisler and William Nix, "The New Testament, then, has not only survived in more manuscripts than any other book from antiquity, but it has survived in a purer form than any other great book—a form that is 99.5% pure".

The Rossano Gospels , sixth century, a representative of Byzantine text The often referred to Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible , a book written to prove the validity of the New Testament, says: "A study of 150 Greek of the Gospel of Luke has revealed more than 30,000 different readings... It is safe to say that there is not one sentence in the New Testament in which the is wholly uniform." Biblical criticism Main article: Biblical criticism Biblical criticism is the scholarly "study and investigation of biblical writings that seeks to make discerning judgments about these writings." Establishing a critical text Main article: New Testament manuscripts The textual variation among manuscript copies of books in the New Testament prompted attempts to discern the earliest form of text already in antiquity (e.g., by the 3rd-century Christian author Origen ).

The efforts began in earnest again during the Renaissance , which saw a revival of the study of ancient Greek texts.

During this period, modern textual criticism was born.

In this context, Christian humanists such as Lorenzo Valla and Erasmus promoted a return to the original Greek of the New Testament. This was the beginning of modern New Testament textual criticism , which over subsequent centuries would increasingly incorporate more and more manuscripts, in more languages (i.e., versions of the New Testament), as well as citations of the New Testament by ancient authors and the New Testament text in lectionaries in order to reconstruct the earliest recoverable form of the New Testament text and the history of changes to it. Relationship to earlier and contemporaneous literature Further information: Non-canonical books referenced in the Bible Books that later formed the New Testament, like other Christian literature of the period, originated in a literary context that reveals relationships not only to other Christian writings, but also to Graeco-Roman and Jewish works. Most scholars understand the gospels as examples of Greco-Roman biography. Of singular importance is the extensive use of and interaction with the Jewish Bible and what would become the Christian Old Testament. Both implicit and explicit citations, as well as countless allusions, appear throughout the books of the New Testament, from the Gospels and Acts, to the Epistles, to the Apocalypse. Early versions The first translations (usually called "versions") of the New Testament were made beginning already at the end of 2nd century.

The earliest versions of the New Testament are the translations into the Syriac , Latin , and Coptic languages. Syriac Main article: Syriac versions of the Bible The Rabbula Gospels , Eusebian Canons .

The Philoxenian probably was produced in 508 for Bishop Philoxenus of Mabbug . Coptic Main article: Bible translations into Coptic There are several dialects of the Coptic language: Bohairic (the Nile Delta ), Fayyumic (in the Faiyum in Middle Egypt ), Sahidic (in Upper Egypt ), Akhmimic (what is now Sohag Governorate in Upper Egypt), and others.

The first translation was made by at least the third century into the Sahidic dialect (cop sa ). This translation represents a mixed text, mostly Alexandrian , though also with Western readings. A Bohairic translation was made later, but existed already in the 4th century. Though the translation makes less use of Greek words than the Sahidic, it does employ some Greek grammar (e.g., in word-order and the use of particles such as the syntactic construction μεν—δε). For this reason, the Bohairic translation can be helpful in the reconstruction of the early Greek text of the New Testament. Other ancient translations Main article: Early translations of the New Testament BL Add. MS 59874 with Ethiopic Gospel of Matthew .

The continued spread of Christianity, and the foundation of national churches, led to the translation of the Bible—often beginning with books from the New Testament—into a variety of other languages at a relatively early date: Armenian , Georgian , Ethiopic , Persian , Sogdian , and eventually Gothic , Old Church Slavonic , Arabic , and Nubian . Modern translations Main article: Bible translations Mikael Agricola hands over the Finnish-language translation, Se Wsi Testamenti , to King Gustav Wasa of Sweden in 1548.

The 16th century saw the rise of Protestantism and an explosion of translations of the New (and Old) Testament into the vernacular . Notable are those of Martin Luther (1522), Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples (1523), the Froschau Bible (1525–1529, revised in 1574), William Tyndale (1526, revised in 1534, 1535 and 1536), the Brest Bible (1563), and the Authorized Version (also called the "King James Version") (1611). Translations of the New Testament made since the appearance of critical editions of the Greek text (notably those of Tischendorf , Westcott and Hort , and von Soden ) have largely used them as their base text . Unlike the Textus Receptus , they have a pronounced Alexandrian character. Standard critical editions are those of Nestle-Åland (the text, though not the full critical apparatus of which is reproduced in the United Bible Societies ' "Greek New Testament"), Souter , Vogels, Bover and Merk. Notable translations of the New Testament based on these most recent critical editions include the Revised Standard Version (1946, revised in 1971), La Bible de Jérusalem (1961, revised in 1973 and 2000), the Einheitsübersetzung (1970, final edition 1979), the New American Bible (1970, revised in 1986 and 2011), the New International Version (1973, revised in 1984 and 2011), the Traduction Oecuménique de la Bible (1988, revised in 2004), the New Revised Standard Version (1989) and the English Standard Version (2001, revised in 2007, 2011 and 2016). Theological interpretation in Christian churches Main article: New Testament theology According to Gary T. Meadors: The self-witness of the Bible to its inspiration demands a commitment to its unity.

The ultimate basis for unity is contained in the claim of divine inspiration in 2 Timothy 3:16 that "all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness" (KJV).

The term "inspiration" renders the Greek word theopneustos . This term only occurs here in the New Testament and literally means "God-breathed" (the chosen translation of the NIV). Unity in diversity The notion of unity in diversity of Scripture claims that the Bible presents a noncontradictory and consistent message concerning God and redemptive history.

The fact of diversity is observed in comparing the diversity of time, culture, authors' perspectives, literary genre, and the theological themes. Studies from many theologians considering the "unity in diversity" to be found in the New Testament (and the Bible as a whole) have been collected and summarized by New Testament theologian Frank Stagg . He describes them as some basic presuppositions, tenets, and concerns common among the New Testament writers, giving to the New Testament its "unity in diversity": The reality of God is never argued but is always assumed and affirmed Jesus Christ is absolutely central: he is Lord and Savior, the foretold Prophet, the Messianic King, the Chosen, the way, the truth, and the light, the One through whom God the Father not only acted but through whom He came The Holy Spirit came anew with Jesus Christ.

The Christian faith and life are a calling, rooted in divine election.

The plight of everyone as sinner means that each person is completely dependent upon the mercy and grace of God Salvation is both God's gift and his demand through Jesus Christ, to be received by faith The death and resurrection of Jesus are at the heart of the total event of which he was the center God creates a people of his own, designated and described by varied terminology and analogies History must be understood eschatologically, being brought along toward its ultimate goal when the kingdom of God, already present in Christ, is brought to its complete triumph In Christ, all of God's work of creation, revelation, and redemption is brought to fulfillment Roman Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and Classical Anglicanism For the Roman Catholic Church , there are two modes of Revelation: Scripture and Tradition . Both of them are interpreted by the teachings of the Church.

The Roman Catholic view is expressed clearly in the Catechism of the Catholic Church (1997): § 82: As a result the Church, to whom the transmission and interpretation of Revelation is entrusted, does not derive her certainty about all revealed truths from the holy Scriptures alone. Both Scripture and Tradition must be accepted and honoured with equal sentiments of devotion and reverence. § 107: The inspired books teach the truth.

Since therefore all that the inspired authors or sacred writers affirm should be regarded as affirmed by the Holy Spirit, we must acknowledge that the books of Scripture firmly, faithfully, and without error teach that truth which God, for the sake of our salvation, wished to see confided to the Sacred Scriptures.

In Catholic terminology the teaching office is called the Magisterium .

The Catholic view should not be confused with the two-source theory.

As the Catechism states in §§ 80 and 81, Revelation has "one common source ... two distinct modes of transmission." While many Eastern Orthodox writers distinguish between Scripture and Tradition, Bishop Kallistos Ware says that for the Orthodox there is only one source of the Christian faith, Holy Tradition, within which Scripture exists. Traditional Anglicans believe that "Holy Scripture containeth all things necessary to salvation", (Article VI), but also that the Catholic Creeds "ought thoroughly to be received and believed" (Article VIII), and that the Church "hath authority in Controversies of Faith" and is "a witness and keeper of Holy Writ" (Article XX).

In the words of Thomas Ken , Bishop of Bath and Wells : "As for my religion, I dye in the holy catholic and apostolic faith professed by the whole Church before the disunion of East and West, more particularly in the communion of the Church of England, as it stands distinguished from all Papal and Puritan innovations, and as it adheres to the doctrine of the Cross." Protestantism Following the doctrine of sola scriptura , Protestants believe that their traditions of faith, practice and interpretations carry forward what the scriptures teach, and so tradition is not a source of authority in itself. Their traditions derive authority from the Bible, and are therefore always open to reevaluation. This openness to doctrinal revision has extended in Liberal Protestant traditions even to the reevaluation of the doctrine of Scripture upon which the Reformation was founded, and members of these traditions may even question whether the Bible is infallible in doctrine, inerrant in historical and other factual statements, and whether it has uniquely divine authority.

The adjustments made by modern Protestants to their doctrine of scripture vary widely. American evangelical and fundamentalist Protestantism The Seventh-day Adventist Church holds the New Testament as the inspired Word of God, with God influencing the "thoughts" of the Apostles in the writing, not necessarily every word though.

The first fundamental belief of the Seventh-Day Adventist church stated that "The Holy Scriptures are the infallible revelation of will." Adventist theologians generally reject the "verbal inspiration" position on Scripture held by many conservative evangelical Christians . They believe instead that God inspired the thoughts of the biblical authors and apostles, and that the writers then expressed these thoughts in their own words. This view is popularly known as "thought inspiration", and most Adventist members hold to that view. According to Ed Christian, former JATS editor, "few if any ATS members believe in verbal inerrancy". How the Mosaic Law should be applied came up at Adventist conferences in the past, and Adventist theologians such as A. T. Jones and E. J. Waggoner looked at the problem addressed by Paul in Galatians as not the ceremonial law, but rather the wrong use of the law ( legalism ). They were opposed by Uriah Smith and George Butler at the 1888 Conference. Smith in particular thought the Galatians issue had been settled by Ellen White already, yet in 1890 she claimed that justification by faith is "the third angel's message in verity." White interpreted Colossians 2:14 as saying that the ceremonial law was nailed to the cross. Latter-day Saints Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) believe that the New Testament, as part of the Christian biblical canon , is accurate "as far as it is translated correctly". They believe the Bible as originally revealed is the word of God, but that the processes of transcription and translation have introduced errors into the texts as currently available, and therefore they cannot be regarded as completely inerrant.

In addition to the Old and New Testaments, the Book of Mormon , the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price are considered part of their scriptural canon. A Byzantine lectionary, Codex Harleianus ( l 150 ), 995 AD, text of John 1:18.

In the arts Further information: Nativity of Jesus in art and Passion play Gaudenzio Ferrari 's Stories of the Life and Passion of Christ , fresco, 1513, Church of Santa Maria delle Grazie, Varallo Sesia, Italy. Depicting the life of Jesus The text of the famous "Hallelujah" chorus in G. F. Händel's Messiah is drawn from three passages in the Book of Revelation: 19:6, 11:5, and 19:16 (audio clip from the German translation of the Messiah ). Problems playing this file? See media help . Most of the influence of the New Testament upon the arts has come from the Gospels and the Book of Revelation . Literary expansion of the Nativity of Jesus found in the Gospels of Matthew and Luke began already in the 2nd century, and the portrayal of the Nativity has continued in various art forms to this day.

The earliest Christian art would often depict scenes from the New Testament such as the raising of Lazarus , the baptism of Jesus or the motif of the Good Shepherd . Biblical paraphrases and poetic renditions of stories from the life of Christ (e.g., the Heliand ) became popular in the Middle Ages , as did the portrayal of the arrest , trial and execution of Jesus in Passion plays . Indeed, the Passion became a central theme in Christian art and music .

The First Edition of the New Testament . New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 43– 44. ISBN 978-0-19-511240-5 . ^ a b c Trobisch, David (2012). "The New Testament in Light of Book Publishing in Antiquity" (PDF) .

In Kloppenberg, John S.; Newman, Judith H. (eds.). Editing the Bible: Assessing the Task Past and Present . Resources for Biblical Study. Vol. 69. Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Literature. pp. 161– 170. ISBN 978-1-58983-648-8 . ^ "If I fail in resolving this article (of our faith) by passages which may admit of dispute out of the Old Testament, I will take out of the New Testament a confirmation of our view, that you may not straightway attribute to the Father every possible (relation and condition) which I ascribe to the Son." – Tertullian , Against Praxeas 15 ^ Tertullian. "Chapter XIV". Against Marcion, Book III . ^ Tertullian. "Chapter VI". Against Marcion, Book IV . ^ Lactantius. "Chapter XX". "The Divine Institutes, Book IV" . ^ Jer 31:31–32 ^ "Gospel" . Merriam-Webster Dictionary . Retrieved 10 May 2016 . ^ Cross & Livingstone 2005 , "Gospel". ^ Irenaeus , Against Heresies III.11 ^ Due to its reference to Eleutherus as the current bishop of Rome , the work is usually dated c. 180 . Schaff, Philip (2001) " Introductory Note to Irenæus Against Heresies ", Ante-Nicene Fathers , Volume I, Against Heresies , William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company . ^ Gil, Jesús; Domínguez, Joseángel (2022). Bible Portico . Translated by Scott, Helena. Saxum International Foundation. p. 103. ISBN 979-12-80113-17-7 . ^ Gil, Jesús; Domínguez, Joseángel (2022). Bible Portico . Translated by Scott, Helena. Saxum International Foundation. p. 104. ISBN 979-12-80113-17-7 . ^ Fitzmyer, Joseph A. (1981).

The Gospel according to Luke (I–IX) . Anchor Bible. Vol. 28 (2nd ed.). New York: Doubleday. pp. 35– 53. ISBN 0-385-00515-6 . ^ a b Gil, Jesús; Domínguez, Joseángel (2022). Bible Portico . Translated by Scott, Helena. Saxum International Foundation. p. 106. ISBN 979-12-80113-17-7 . ^ Luke 1:1–4 ^ Petersen 2010 , p. 51. ^ Culpepper 1999 , p. 66. ^ Sanders 2010 . ^ Burkett 2002 , p. 196. ^ Ehrman 2003 , p. 235 ^ Fitzmyer, Joseph (1998).

The Acts of the Apostles (The Anchor Yale Bible Commentaries) . Yale University Press. p. 50. ISBN 978-0300139822 . ^ Peterson, David (2009).

The Acts of the Apostles . Eerdmans. p. 1-4, 17. ISBN 978-0802837318 . ^ Brown 1997 , pp. 267–268 . ^ a b Keener, Craig (2020). Acts (New Cambridge Bible Commentary) . Cambridge University Press. p. 49. ISBN 978-1108468688 . ^ a b Pervo, Richard (2015). "Acts in Ephesus (and Environs) c. 115" (PDF) . Forum . 3 (Fall 2015): 125– 151. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 March 2021. ^ a b c Trobisch, David . "Who Published the New Testament?" (PDF) . Free Inquiry . 28 (Dec. 2007/Jan. 2008): 30– 33. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 April 2021. ...Acts provides information that makes it possible to identify Luke, the author of the Gospel, as the doctor who travels with Paul and to identify Mark as someone close to Peter and Paul. This 'canon consciousness' suggests that the book of Acts was composed at a later date than is typically thought; this theory is supported by the first attestation of the book around 180 CE. ^ Perkins 2009 , pp. 250–53. ^ Boring, M. Eugene (2012). An Introduction to the New Testament: History, Literature, Theology . Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 978-0-664-25592-3 . ^ Gal 6:11 ^ 2 Thess. 3:17 ; 2 Thess. 3:17 ^ Lightfoot, Joseph Barber (1866). St Paul's Epistle to the Galatians (2nd ed.). MacMillan & Co. p. 217. ^ Bassler, Jouette M. (2010). "Paul and his Letters".

The Blackwell Companion to the New Testament . Wiley-Blackwell. p. 388. ISBN 978-1-4443-1894-4 . ^ Roetzel, Calvin J. (2009).

The Letters of Paul: Conversations in Context (5th ed.). Louisville, Kentucky: Westminster John Knox. p. ix–x ISBN 978-0-664-23392-1 ^ Heb. 1:1–10:18 ^ Heb. 10:19–13:25 ^ Attridge, Harold W. (1989). Hebrews . Hermeneia. Philadelphia: Fortress. pp. 1–6. ^ Lane, William L. (1991). Hebrews 1–8 . Word Biblical Commentary series, Vol. 47A. Dallas, Texas: Word Books. p. cliv. ^ Eusebius. "Chapter 25" . Church History, Book VI . ^ Ehrman 2004a , p. 323: "Scholars in the ancient world went about detecting forgeries in much the same way that modern scholars do. They looked to see whether the ideas and writing style of a piece conformed with those used by the author in other writings, and they examined the text for any blatant anachronisms, that is, statements about things that could not have existed at the time the alleged author was writing (like the letter reputedly from an early seventeenth-century American colonist that mentions "the United States")- Arguments of this kind were used by some Christian scholars of the third century to show that Hebrews was not written by Paul or the Book of Revelation by John the son of Zebedee. Modern scholars, as we will see, concur with these judgments. To be sure, neither of these books can be considered a forgery. Hebrews does not claim to be written by Paul (it is anonymous), and the John who wrote Revelation does not claim to be the son of Zebedee (it is therefore homonymous). Are there other books in the New Testament, though, that can be considered forgeries?" ^ Powell 2009 , pp. 431–32 . ^ Mounce, Robert (1998).

The New International Commentary on the New Testament Series. Cambridge, UK: Eerdmans. pp. 15–16. ISBN 0-8028-2537-0 . ^ For a detailed study of the Apocalypse of John, see Aune, David E. (1998). Revelation , 3 volumes. Word Biblical Commentary series. Nashville, Tennessee: Thomas Nelson. ^ a b Nersessian 2001 , p. 29. ^ Burris, Catherine; Van Rompay, Lucas (2002). "Thecla in Syriac Christianity: Premliminary Observations" . Hugoye: Journal of Syriac Studies . 5 (2). Beth Mardutho: The Syriac Institute: 225– 236. doi : 10.31826/hug-2010-050112 . ^ Carter, Nancy A. (2000). "The Acts of Thecla: A Pauline Tradition Linked to Women" . Conflict and Community in the Corinthian Church. Archived from the original on 28 November 2014. ^ Poole, Matthew (1852). "Annotations Upon the Holy Bible, Vol. III" . Robert Carter and Brothers. p. 729. ^ "Web Directory: German Bible Versions" . Bible Research . Retrieved 17 February 2016 . ^ "Luther's Antilegomena" . www.bible-researcher.com . Retrieved 15 July 2020 . ^ Powell 2009 , p. 16. ^ Strelan, Rick (2013). Luke the Priest: The Authority of the Author of the Third Gospel . Farnham, ENG: Routledege- Ashgate . pp. 102–05. ^ For discussion of Mark, see Schröter, Jens (2010). "Gospel of Mark".

The Blackwell Companion to the New Testament . New York: Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 281ff. ^ For discussion of Mark, see Hare, Douglas R. A. (1996). Mark . Louisville, Kentucky: Westminster John Knox Press. pp. 3–5. ^ For discussion of Matthew, see Repschinski, Boris (1998). "Forschungbericht: Matthew and Judaism".

The Controversy Stories in the Gospel of Matthew . Göttingen, GER: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. pp. 13–61. ^ Walsh, Robin Faith (2021).

The Origins of Early Christian Literature – Contextualizing the New Testament within Greco-Roman Literary Culture . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781108883573 . ^ Skinner, Christopher (2025). Mark, Volume 2 (New Word Biblical Themes) . Zondervan Academic. p. 7. ISBN 978-0310126850 . ^ Vytlacilova, Magdalena. "Why Does the Genre of the Gospels Matter?

The Gospels' Genre and Historical Jesus Research".

The Synoptic Gospels: An Introduction (Second ed.). Westminster John Knox Press. p. 43. ISBN 978-0-664-22349-6 . ^ Theissen, Gerd (2004).

The Gospels in Context . London, ENG: Bloomsbury-Continuum. p. 290. ^ Runesson, Anders (2021). Jesus, New Testament, Christian Origins . Eerdmans. ISBN 9780802868923 . ^ The Synoptic Problem 2022: Proceedings of the Loyola University Conference . Peeters Pub and Booksellers. 2023. ISBN 9789042950344 . ^ Achtemeier, Paul J. (1992). "The Gospel of Mark".

The Anchor Bible Dictionary . Vol. 4. New York: Doubleday. p. 545. ISBN 978-0-385-19362-7 . ^ Easton, M. G. (1996) "Luke, Gospel According To". Easton's Bible Dictionary . Oak Harbor, Washington: Logos Research. ^ Meier, John P. (1991). A Marginal Jew . Vol. 2. New York: Doubleday. pp. 955–56 . ISBN 978-0-385-46993-7 . ^ Horrell, D. G. (2006). An Introduction to the Study of Paul . 2nd ed. London, Bloomsbury-T&T Clark. p. 7. ^ See Knox 1948 , pp. 2–15 for detailed arguments. ^ "Acts 1:1" . ^ Sean A. Adams, "The Relationships of Paul and Luke: Luke, Paul's Letters, and the 'We' Passages of Acts." In Paul and His Social Relations , edited by Stanley E. Porter and Christopher D. Land (Leiden: Brill, 2012), 132–34. ISBN 978-9004242111 Scholarly agreement of the single-author/editor theory of the Lucan texts is not without question, e.g. Patricia Walters, The Assumed Authorial Unity of Luke and Acts: A Reassessment of the Evidence (Cambridge University Press, 2009). ISBN 978-0521509749 ^ Kenny, Anthony (1986). A Stylometric Study of the New Testament . Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-0-19-826178-0 . ^ Schnelle 1998 , p. 259. ^ Bruce 1952 , p. 2. ^ Guthrie 1990 , p. 621–622. ^ Wallace, Daniel B. (28 June 2004). "Hebrews: Introduction, Argument, and Outline" . Bible.org. ^ Ehrman 2004a , p. 385. ^ Ehrman 2004a , p. 323 ^ "Epistle of St. James" . 1914 Catholic Encyclopedia . ^ "Epistle of James" . Early Christian Writings . Retrieved 19 November 2010 . ^ Harner, Philip B. (2004). What Are They Saying About the Catholic Epistles? . Paulist Press. p. 49. ISBN 978-0-8091-4188-3 . ^ Kruger, M.J. (1999). "The Authenticity of 2 Peter" Archived 12 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine . Journal of the Evangelical Theological Society . 42 (4): 645–71. ^ Zahn, S. T. (1909). Introduction to the New Testament . Vol. II. Translated by Trout, John Moore; Mather, William Arnot; Hodous, Louis; Worcester, Edward Strong; Worrell, William Hoyt; Dodge, Rowland Backus (English translation of 3rd German ed.). New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. p. 250. ^ Spitta, Friedrich (1885). Der zweite Brief des Petrus und der Brief des Judas: Eine geschichtliche Untersuchung (in German). Halle an der Saale: Buchhandlung des Waisenhauses. . ^ Bigg, Charles (1902) . A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Epistles of St. Peter and St. Jude .

The final reference (John 21:24) makes the claim that this figure is "the one who wrote these things." Most scholars construe the verse to claim that the Beloved Disciple authored the text, or at least chapters 1-20. Some, however, have argued that the passage merely claims that the Beloved Disciple is the authoritative witness who caused the work to be written, or who perhaps wrote an early account of Jesus on which the final gospel was based. ^ Ehrman 2003 , p. 235: "The four Gospels that eventually made it into the New Testament, for example, are all anonymous, written in the third person about Jesus and his companions. None of them contains a first-person narrative ('One day, when Jesus and I went into Capernaum...'), or claims to be written by an eyewitness or companion of an eyewitness. ... Some scholars abandon these traditional identifications, and recognize that the books were written by otherwise unknown but relatively well-educated Greek-speaking (and writing) Christians during the second half of the first century." ^ Ehrman 2004b , p. 110 : "In fact, contrary to what you might think, these Gospels don't even claim to be written by eyewitnesses." ^ Ehrman 2006 , p. 143 : "The Gospels of the New Testament are therefore our earliest accounts. These do not claim to be written by eyewitnesses to the life of Jesus, and historians have long recognized that they were produced by second- or third-generation Christians living in different countries than Jesus (and Judas) did, speaking a different language (Greek instead of Aramaic), experiencing different situations, and addressing different audiences." ^ Thompson, Marianne (2015). John: A Commentary . Westminster John Knox Press. p. 432. ISBN 978-0664221119 . Taken together, these features-the plausible ending of the Gospel at 20:30-31; the unanticipated narrative elements introduced in chapter 21; the focused articulation of the distinctive roles of Simon Peter and the beloved disciple, and the anticipation of their deaths-have led some interpreters to regard John 21 as an extended epilogue to the Gospel, added after it was essentially finished, either by the author of the earlier chapters or by someone else. ^ Bart Ehrman; Misquoting Jesus , 166 ^ Felix Just, "Combining Key Methodologies in Johannine Studies", in Tom Thatcher (ed), What We Have Heard from the Beginning: The Past, Present, and Future of Johannine Studies , ( Baylor University Press , 2007), p. 356. ^ Keith, Chris (2020).

The Gospel as Manuscript: An Early History of the Jesus Tradition as Material Artifact . Oxford University Press. pp. 142– 143. ISBN 978-0199384372 . Placing myself in a growing minority of Johannine scholars, I presently consider John 21 a constituent part of the early text of the Gospel of John. I am not blind to the narrative and vocabulary curiosities of John 21 that cause most scholars to view it as a later addition. Yet, in light of the fact that linguistic style is an unreliable indicator of authorial origin, the fact that one can equally read John 21 as a planned epilogue to the Gospel, and, most important, the absence of any early manuscript or patristic evidence that the Gospel of John circulated without John 21, I view it as original until further evidence emerges. ^ Goodacre, Mark (2012). Thomas and the Gospels: The Case for Thomas's Familiarity with the Synoptics . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co. p. 175. ISBN 978-0802867483 . ^ Goodacre, Mark (2025).

The Fourth Synoptic Gospel: John's Knowledge of Matthew, Mark, and Luke . Eerdmans. p. 237. ISBN 978-0802875136 . ^ Mendez, Hugo (2020). "Did the Johannine Community Exist?". Journal for the Study of the New Testament . 42 (3): 350– 374. doi : 10.1177/0142064X19890490 – via Sage. ^ a b Mendez, Hugo (2025).

The Gospel of John: A New History . Oxford University Press. pp. 35, 43. ISBN 978-0197686126 . It may seem intuitive to attribute the Gospel of John to a single pen. Scholars attribute most other ancient works, even most ancient gospels, to individual authors. And yet, through much of the twentieth century most critical scholars conceptualized John as...a communal product, "composed in two or more successive editions by a School of Johannine writers who felt free to write, and to rewrite the Gospel." Today, however, this view is in retreat, and for good reason.

The past quarter-century of scholarship...has seen dramatic changes to the study of the Gospel of John...In keeping with recent scholarly trends, I argue that John is mostly the work of a single author rather than multiple authors. ^ Edwards 2015 , p. ix. ^ Lincoln 2005 , p. 18. ^ Licona, Mike (2016). Why are there Differences in the Gospels? What we can Learn from Ancient Biography . Oxford University Press. p. 115. ISBN 978-0190264260 .

Although most of today's New Testament scholars reject that tradition, they still think the Beloved Disciple...was the eyewitness source of much of the information contained in John. Many think him to be one of Jesus's minor disciples; others continue to maintain that the author was in fact John the son of Zebedee. ^ Lindars, Edwards & Court 2000 , p. 41. ^ Keener, Craig (2019). Christobiography: Memory, History, and the Reliability of the Gospels . Eerdmans. ISBN 978-0-80287675-1 . ^ Burge 2014 , pp. 236–37. ^ Williams, Catrin (2021). John's Transformation of Mark . T&T Clark. p. 65. ISBN 978-0567691897 . ^ Rev. 1:1, 4, 9; 22:8 ^ Rev. 1:9; 4:1–2 ^ Justin Martyr. Dialogue with Trypho . Chapter LXXXI. ^ Tenney, Merrill C., gen. ed. (2009). "Revelation, Book of the". Zondervan Pictorial Encyclopedia of the Bible, Vol. 5 (Q–Z) . Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan. ^ Witherington, Ben (2003). Revelation . Cambridge University Press. p. 2. ^ Robinson, John Arthur Thomas (2000) . Redating the New Testament . Eugene, Oregon: Wipf & Stock. p. 352. ISBN 978-1-57910-527-3 . ^ Casey, Maurice (2010). Jesus of Nazareth: An Independent Historian's Account of his Life and Teaching . T&T Clark. p. 60-80. ISBN 978-0567645173 . ^ Crossley, James (2004).

The Eerdmans Bible Dictionary . Grand Rapids, Michigan: William B. Eerdmans. p. 72. ISBN 978-0-8028-2402-8 . It is generally agreed that Aramaic was the common language of Israel in the 1st century AD. Jesus and his disciples spoke the Galilean dialect, which was distinguished from that of Jerusalem (Matt. 26:73). ^ Aland, K.; Aland, B. (1995).

The Text of the New Testament . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8028-4098-1 . ^ Koester, Helmut (1982). Introduction to the New Testament, Volume 2 . Philadelphia. p. 172. ^ Davies, W. D.; Allison, Dale C. (1988). A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on The Gospel according to Saint Matthew, Vol. 1 . Edinburgh: T&T Clark. pp. 33–58. ^ Evans, Craig (2012). Matthew (New Cambridge Bible Commentary) . Cambridge University Press. p. 40. ISBN 978-0521011068 . ^ Buth, Randall; Pierce, Chad (2014). "Hebraisti in Ancient Texts: Does ἑβραιστί Ever Mean 'Aramaic'?" .

In Buth, Randall; Notley, R. Steven (eds.).

The Language Environment of First Century Judaea: Jerusalem Studies in the Synoptic Gospels . Jewish and Christian perspectives series no. 26. Vol. 2. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill. p. 89. ISBN 9789004263406 . ^ Culpepper, Alan (2022). Matthew: A Commentary . Westminster John Knox Press. p. 133. ISBN 978-0664230616 . ^ Machen 1998 , p. 5. ^ Machen 1998 , p. 4. ^ Eusebius. "Chapter 25". Church History, Book III . ^ Gamble, Harry Y. (1985).

In de Jonge, H. J.; Auwers, J. M (eds.).

The Biblical Canons . Leuven University Press. p. 315. ^ Ackroyd & Evans 1970 , p. 308. ^ Bateman, C. G. (3 August 2010). Origen's Role in the Formation of the New Testament Canon (Thesis). Regent College. SSRN 1653073 . ^ McGuckin, John A. (2003). "Origen as Literary Critic in the Alexandrian Tradition".

In Perrone, L. (ed.). Origeniana Octava: Origen and the Alexandrian Tradition, Vol. 1 . Bibliotheca Ephemeridum Theologicarum Lovaniensium 164. Leuven: Leuven University Press. pp. 121–37. ^ a b Lindberg, Carter (2006). A Brief History of Christianity . Blackwell Publishing. p. 15 . ISBN 978-1-4051-1078-5 . ^ Brakke, David (October 1994). "Canon Formation and Social Conflict in Fourth-Century Egypt: Athanasius of Alexandria's Thirty-Ninth Festal Letter ". Harvard Theological Review . 87 (4): 395– 419. doi : 10.1017/S0017816000030200 . JSTOR 1509966 . S2CID 161779697 . ^ McDonald & Sanders 2002 , Appendix D-2, note 19: "Revelation was added later in 419 at the subsequent synod of Carthage." ^ a b Ferguson 2002 , p. 320. ^ Bruce 1988 , p. 280. ^ Augustine. De Civitate Dei . 22.8. ^ Bruce 1988 , p. 234. ^ Bruce 1988 , p. 225. ^ Metzger 1987 , pp. 237–238. ^ Bruce 1988 , p. 97. ^ McDonald & Sanders 2002 , Appendix D-2, note 19 ^ Bruce 1988 , p. 215. ^ Ackroyd & Evans 1970 , p. 305. ^ McDonald, Lee M. (1995).

The Formation of the Christian Biblical Canon . Peabody, Massachusetts: Hendrickson. p. 116. ^ Reid, George (1908). "Canon of the New Testament" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company. ^ McDonald & Sanders 2002 , pp. 414–415. ^ For the initial dating of P52, see Roberts 1935 and Bell & Skeat 1935 . Though see now Nongbri 2005 and Martinez 2009 . ^ Ehrman 2005 , p. 46. ^ a b c d Strobel, Lee (1998).

The Case for Christ . Chapter Three, when quoting biblical scholar Bruce Metzger . ^ a b Bruce 1981 , p. 14. ^ Ehrman 2005 , p. 265 . ^ Nave, Guy D. (2002).

The Role and Function of Repentance in Luke-Acts . p. 194. ^ Spong, John Shelby (26 September 1979). "The Continuing Christian Need for Judaism" . Christian Century . p. 918. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. ^ Levine, Amy-Jill; Blickenstaff, Marianne (2001). A Feminist Companion to John, Vol. II . Feminist Companion to the New Testament and Early Christian Writings, Vol. 5. A&C Black. p. 175. ^ "NETBible: John 7" . Bible.org . Retrieved 17 October 2009 . See note 139 on that page. ^ Keith, Chris (2008). "Recent and Previous Research on the Pericope Adulterae (John 7.53–8.11)". Currents in Biblical Research . 6 (3): 377– 404. doi : 10.1177/1476993X07084793 . S2CID 145385075 . ^ Cross & Livingstone 2005 , "Pericope adulterae". ^ Ehrman 2005 , p. 80-83: "on one condition: that his opponents produce a Greeks manuscript in which the verse could be found (finding it in Latin manuscripts was not enough). And so a Greek manuscript was produced.

In fact, it was produced for the occasion. It appears that someone copied out the Greek text of the Epistles, and when he came to the passage in question, he translated the Latin text into Greek, giving the Johannine Comma in its familiar, theologically useful form.

The manuscript provided to Erasmus, in other words, was a sixteenthcentury production, made to order." ^ Metzger 1994 . ^ Metzger 1994 , p. 367. ^ Parvis, M. M. (1962). "Text, ".

In Buttrick, George A.; Kepler, Thomas S.; Knox, John; May, Herbert Gordon; Terrien, Samuel; Bucke, Emory Stevens (eds.).

The First Biography of Jesus . Eerdmans. p. 79. ISBN 978-0802874603 . ^ See Stendahl 1954 ; Marcus 1993 ; Smith 1972 ; Juel 1988 ; and Barr 1966 . ^ Võõbus 1954 , pp. 1–128, 211–240. ^ Metzger 1977 , pp. 3–98. ^ Võõbus 1954 , pp. 216–229. ^ Võõbus 1954 , pp. 229–237; Metzger 1977 , pp. 99–152. ^ On the Armenian, Georgian, Ethiopic, Arabic, and Gothic, see Võõbus 1954 , pp. 133–210, 243–309 ^ 2 Timothy 3:16 ^ a b Meadors, Gary T. (1997). "Scripture, Unity and Diversity of" .

In Elwell, Walter A. (ed.). Baker's Evangelical Dictionary of Biblical Theology. Grand Rapids: Baker Books. ^ Stagg, Frank (1962). New Testament Theology . Broadman. ISBN 0-8054-1613-7 . ^ Ware, Kallistos (1993). "Holy Tradition: The Source of the Orthodox Faith" .

The Orthodox Church . Penguin UK. ^ "Articles of Religion" . Anglicans Online . Retrieved 19 November 2010 . ^ Duyckinck, George Long (1859).

The Life of Thomas Ken, Bishop of Bath and Wells . General Protestant Episcopal Sunday School Union and Church Book Society. p. 26. ^ Chismar, Janet (20 June 2001). "Homosexual Ordination Vote Widens Gap Between Presbyterian Factions" . Religion Today . Archived from the original on 24 May 2021 – via www.christianheadlines.com. ^ "Our Beliefs" . Beit Simcha . Retrieved 7 June 2012 . To study the whole and authoritative Word of God, including the Tenach (Hebrew Scriptures) and the B'rit Chadasha (New Covenant) under the leading of the Holy Spirit. ^ "Essential Statement of Faith" .

The Harvest: A Messianic Charismatic Congregation. Archived from the original on 27 November 2015 . Retrieved 7 June 2012 . We believe that the Torah (five books of Moses) is a comprehensive summary of God's foundational laws and ways, as found in both the Tanakh and Apostolic Scriptures. Additionally, the Bible teaches that without holiness no man can see God. We believe in the Doctrine of Sanctification as a definite, yet progressive work of grace, commencing at the time of regeneration and continuing until the consummation of salvation. Therefore we encourage all believers, both Jews and Gentiles, to affirm, embrace, and practice these foundational laws and ways as clarified through the teachings of Messiah Yeshua. ^ Equipped for Every Good Work (PDF) . Brooklyn, New York: Watchtower Bible and Tract Society & International Bible Students Association. 1946. pp. 12– 13. ^ See, for example, Raddatz, Tom (26 October 2000). "A Response to the Oneness-Trinity Debate" . 1Lord1Faith.org. Archived from the original on 20 March 2005. ^ Dulle, Jason. "How We Get Our Bible" . Institute for Biblical Studies. Retrieved 15 April 2013. ^ Dulle, Jason. "Defending the Inerrancy and Canon of Scripture" . Institute for Biblical Studies. Retrieved 15 April 2013. ^ Dulle, Jason. "The Nature of Inspiration" . Institute for Biblical Studies. Retrieved 15 April 2013. ^ Ministerial Association, General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists (2005). Seventh-day Adventists Believe (2nd ed.). Pacific Press Publishing Association. pp. 14– 16. ^ McLarty, John (15 November 2001). "The Adventist Theological Society" . Adventist Today . Archived from the original on 25 December 2007. ^ White, E. G. (1 April 1890). "Repentance the Gift of God" (PDF) . Advent Review and Sabbath Herald . 67 (13): 193– 94 . Retrieved 30 December 2020 . Several have written to me, inquiring if the message of justification by faith is the third angel's message, and I have answered, "it is the third angel's message in verity." ... Brightness, glory, and power are to be connected with the third angel's message, and conviction will follow wherever it is preached in demonstration of the Spirit. ^ Colossians 2:14 ^ White, Ellen (2015). Patriarchs and Prophets . Start Publishing LLC. p. 365. ^ "Articles of Faith" .

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. Archived from the original on 31 May 2013 . Retrieved 17 February 2016 . ^ Givens, Terry L. (2015).

The Oxford Handbook of Mormonism . Oxford University Press. pp. 124– 25. ISBN 978-0-19-977836-2 . ^ "Bible, Inerrancy of" .

In Coogan, Michael D.; Brettler, Mark Zvi; Newsom, Carol Ann (eds.).

The New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical Books: New Revised Standard Version . Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199743919 . Brown, Raymond E. (1997). An Introduction to the New Testament . Anchor Bible . New York: Doubleday. ISBN 9780385247672 . OCLC 1035750767 . Brown, Raymond E. (1988).

The Gospel and Epistles of John: A Concise Commentary . Liturgical Press. ISBN 978-0-8146-1283-5 . Bruce, F. F. (1952) .

The Acts of the Apostles: The Greek Text with Introduction and Commentary (2nd ed.). London: Tyndale Press. OCLC 1244214359 . Bruce, F. F. (1981).

The New Testament Documents: Are They Reliable? . InterVarsity Press. Bruce, F. F. (1988).

The Canon of Scripture . Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press. ISBN 9780830812585 . Burge, Gary M. (2014). "Gospel of John" .

The Routledge Encyclopedia of the Historical Jesus . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-72224-3 . Burkett, Delbert (2002). An Introduction to the New Testament and the Origins of Christianity . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-00720-7 . Cousland, J.R.C. (2010). Coogan, Michael David; Brettler, Marc Zvi; Newsom, Carol Ann; Perkins, Pheme (eds.).

The New Oxford Annotated Bible: New Revised Standard Version . Oxford University Press. p. 1744. ISBN 978-0-19-528955-8 . Cousland, J.R.C. (1 March 2018). Coogan, Michael David; Brettler, Marc Zvi; Newsom, Carol Ann; Perkins, Pheme (eds.).

The New Oxford Annotated Bible: New Revised Standard Version . Oxford University Press. p. 1380. ISBN 978-0-19-027605-8 . Cross, F. L. ; Livingstone, E. A. , eds. (2005).

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (3rd rev. ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780192802903 . Culpepper, R. Alan (1999). "The Christology of the Johannine Writings" .

In Kingsbury, Jack Dean; Powell, Mark Allan Powell; Bauer, David R. (eds.). Who Do You Say that I Am?: Essays on Christology . Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 9780664257521 . Davidson, Robert (1993). "Jeremiah, Book of".

In Metzger, Bruce M.; Coogan, Michael D. (eds.).

The Oxford Companion to the Bible . Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199743919 . Edwards, James R. (2015).

The Gospel According to Luke . Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans. ISBN 978-0-8028-3735-6 . Ehrman, Bart D. (1997).

The New Testament: A Historical Introduction to the Early Christian Writings . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-508481-8 . Ehrman, Bart D. (1999). Jesus: Apocalyptic Prophet of the New Millennium . Oxford: Oxford University Press. Ehrman, Bart D. (2000).

The New Testament: A Historical Introduction to Early Christian Writings . Oxford University Press. Ehrman, Bart D. (2003). Lost Christianities: The Battles for Scripture and the Faiths We Never Knew . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-518249-1 . Ehrman, Bart D. (2004a) .

The New Testament: A Historical Introduction to the Early Christian Writings (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-515462-2 . Ehrman, Bart D. (2004b). Truth and Fiction in The Da Vinci Code: A Historian Reveals What We Really Know about Jesus, Mary Magdalene, and Constantine . Oxford University Press, US. ISBN 978-0-19-534616-9 . Ehrman, Bart D. (2005). Misquoting Jesus: The Story Behind Who Changed the Bible and Why . HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-073817-4 . Ehrman, Bart D. (2006).

The Lost Gospel of Judas Iscariot: A New Look at Betrayer and Betrayed . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-971104-8 . Ehrman, Bart D. (2009). Jesus, Interrupted: Revealing the Hidden Contradictions in the Bible (and Why We Don't Know About Them) . New York: Harper Collins. ISBN 978-0-06-117393-6 . Ferguson, Everett (2002). "Factors leading to the Selection and Closure of the New Testament Canon" .

In McDonald, L. M.; Sanders, J. A. (eds.).

The Canon Debate . Hendrickson. ISBN 978-1-4412-4163-4 . Guthrie, Donald (1990). New Testament Introduction (4th (revised) ed.). Downers Grove, Illinois: InterVarsity Press. ISBN 0-85111-761-9 . Harris, Stephen L. (1980). Understanding the Bible: A Reader's Guide and Reference . Mayfield Pub. Co. ISBN 978-0-87484-472-6 . Harris, Stephen L. (1985). Understanding the Bible . Palo Alto, California: Mayfield. Harris, Stephen L. (2006). Understanding the Bible (7th ed.). McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-296548-3 . Harris, Stephen L. (2010). Understanding The Bible . McGraw-Hill Education. ISBN 978-0-07-340744-9 . Juel, Donald (1988). Messianic Exegesis: Christological Interpretation of the Old Testament in Early Christianity . Philadelphia: Fortress. Knox, Wilfred L. (1948).

The Acts of the Apostles . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Lincoln, Andrew (2005). Gospel According to St John: Black's New Testament Commentaries . Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4411-8822-9 . Lindars, Barnabas ; Edwards, Ruth B.; Court, John M. (2000).

The Johannine Literature . Sheffield Academic Press. ISBN 978-1841270814 . Machen, John Gresham (1998) .

The New Testament Greek for Beginners . ISBN 978-1579101800 . Marcus, Joel (1993).

The Way of the Lord: Christological Exegesis of the Old Testament in the Gospel of Mark . Studies of the New Testament and its World. Edinburgh: T&T Clark. ISBN 978-0567096371 . Martinez, David G. (2009). "The Papyri and Early Christianity".

The Oxford Handbook of Papyrology . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 590– 623. McDonald, Lee M; Sanders, James A. , eds. (2002).

The Canon Debate . Peadbody, Massachusetts: Hendrickson. ISBN 1-56563-517-5 . Metzger, Bruce M. (1977).

The Early Versions of the New Testament . Oxford: Clarendon Press. Metzger, Bruce M. (1987).

The Canon of the New Testament: Its Origins, Development, and Significance . Oxford: Clarendon. ISBN 0-19-826180-2 . Metzger, Bruce M. (1994). A Textual Commentary on the New Testament (2nd ed.). German Bible Society. Metzger, Bruce M. ; Ehrman, Bart D. (2005) .

The Text of the New Testament: Its Transmission, Corruption, and Restoration (4th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. OCLC 1245822346 . Nersessian, Vrej (2001). "The Armenian Canon of the New Testament" .

The Bible in the Armenian Tradition . Los Angeles, CA: J. Paul Getty Museum. ISBN 978-0-89236-640-8 . Nongbri, Brent (2005). "The Use and Abuse of P52: Papyrological Pitfalls in the Dating of the Fourth Gospel". Harvard Theological Review . 98 : 23– 52. doi : 10.1017/S0017816005000842 . S2CID 163128006 . Perkins, Pheme (2009). Introduction to the Synoptic Gospels . Eerdmans. ISBN 978-0-8028-6553-3 . Petersen, William L. (2010). "The Diatessaron and the Fourfold Gospel" .

The Earliest Gospels . Bloomsbury. ISBN 9780567000972 . Powell, Mark A. (2009). Introducing the New Testament: A Historical, Literary, and Theological Survey . Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Academic. ISBN 978-0-8010-2868-7 . Roberts, C. H. , ed. (1935). An Unpublished Fragment of the Fourth Gospel in the John Rylands Library . Manchester: Manchester University Press. OCLC 1245905274 . Sanders, E. P. (2010). "Jesus Christ" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on 3 May 2015 . Retrieved 27 November 2010 . Schnelle, Udo (1998).

The History and Theology of the New Testament Writings . Minneapolis: Fortress Press. Schubert, Judith (2016).

The Gospel of John: Question by Question . Wipf & Stock Publishers. ISBN 978-1-5326-0727-1 . Smith, D. Moody (1972). "The Use of the Old Testament in the New".

The Use of the Old Testament in the New and Other Essays: Studies in Honor of William Franklin . Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press. pp. 3– 65. Stendahl, Krister (1954).

The Formation of the Christian Bible , English translation. Philadelphia: Fortress Press. Clark, Gordon (1990). "Logical Criticisms of Textual Criticism", The Trinity Foundation: Jefferson, Maryland Conzelmann, Hans ; Lindemann, Andreas (1999). Interpreting the New Testament: An Introduction to the Principles and Methods of New Testament Exegesis , English translation. Peabody, Massachusetts: Hendrickson. Dormeyer, Detlev (1998).

The New Testament among the Writings of Antiquity , English translation. Sheffield. Duling, Dennis C.; Perrin, Norman (1993).

The New Testament: Proclamation and Parenesis, Myth and History , 3rd edition. New York: Harcourt Brace. Ehrman, Bart D. (2011).

The New Testament: A Historical Introduction to the Early Christian Writings , 5th edition. New York: Oxford University Press. Goodspeed, Edgar J. (1937). An Introduction to the New Testament . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Levine, Amy-Jill ; Brettler, Marc Z. (2011).

The Jewish Annotated New Testament . Oxford: Oxford University Press. Koester, Helmut (1995 and 2000). Introduction to the New Testament , 2nd edition, 2 volumes. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. Kümmel, Werner Georg (1996). Introduction to the New Testament , revised and enlarged English translation. Nashville: Abingdon Press. Mack, Burton L. (1995). Who Wrote the New Testament? . San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco. Myles, Robert J. (2019). Class Struggle in the New Testament . Lanham: Fortress Academic. ISBN 978-1-9787-0209-7 . Neill, Stephen ; Wright, Tom (1988).