At 7,088 kilometers (4,404 mi) long, it is the longest river in the world , although the volume of water it carries is much smaller than other major rivers such as the Amazon or the Congo .

The Nile has played a central role in the environmental, economic, and cultural history of Africa for millennia.

The Nile has two major tributaries : the White Nile and the Blue Nile .

The White Nile is longer and is considered to be the headwaters , yet the Blue Nile contributes over twice the volume of the White Nile.

The White Nile begins near Lake Victoria and flows through Uganda and South Sudan; while the Blue Nile begins near Lake Tana in Ethiopia and flows into Sudan from the southeast.

The two rivers meet at the Sudanese capital of Khartoum .

From there, the Nile flows north through the Nubian Desert to Egypt's capital, Cairo , and finally empties into the Mediterranean Sea near Alexandria , where it has formed a large river delta . Geologically, the Nile is a young river and has followed its present course for about 15,000 years. Its drainage basin extends across eleven countries. Most of the water in the Nile comes from rainfall in the upstream countries Ethiopia , Kenya , Tanzania , and Uganda . Downstream countries – Egypt , Sudan , and South Sudan – are primarily desert and withdraw river water for irrigation. Other countries that lie wholly or partly in the Nile Basin are Burundi , the Democratic Republic of the Congo , Eritrea , and Rwanda .

The Nile was the foundation of the Ancient Egyptian civilization , which relied on the river for nearly every aspect of life.

The annual flooding of the river deposited nutrient-rich silt along the riverbanks. This soil supported crops that enabled a sophisticated society to thrive in an otherwise inhospitable desert.

The Nile facilitated trade, communication, transportation, and governance. South (upstream) of the second Nile cataract lay Nubia , the historical home of the ancient Kerma culture and the Kushite Empire . Many Europeans were fascinated by the Nile, and their explorations around Lake Victoria in the late 19th century located the source of the river. Among the cultures that live along the Nile in the modern era are the Nilotic peoples , semi-nomadic cattle herders who practice nomadic pastoralism , moving their cattle seasonally in response to the Nile's floods.

In the modern era, the Nile plays a critical role in the economies of Egypt and Sudan, which rely on it to irrigate extensive croplands.

Since the late 20th century, over a dozen dams have been built in the Nile Basin to provide for irrigation and to generate electricity .

The dams have altered the river's annual flood cycle and restricted the transport of silt downstream, causing the Nile Delta to shrink. Some dams – such as the Aswan High Dam and Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam – have been the source of international political disputes about water scarcity , safety, food security , and forced displacement of peoples . Names and etymology The English word "Nile" is derived from the Latin Nilus and the Ancient Greek Νεῖλος (Neilos), which possibly originated from the Semitic term naḥal , meaning 'river'.

The English name "Blue Nile" is a translation of the Arabic name Al-Baḥr Al-Azraq .

In the modern era, the river goes by several names within the Nile Basin.

In Egypt, it is referred to as Al-Nīl , Baḥr Al-Nīl or Nahr Al-Nīl .

In South Sudan, it is sometimes referred to by the Arabic Baḥr el-Jebel , بحر الجبل , literally 'Mountain River'.

In Uganda, the speakers of Luganda use the name Kiyira . Some Nubian peoples of Egypt and Sudan use the Nobiin name Áman Dawū ('Great Water'). Several tributaries (smaller rivers that merge into the Nile) and segments of the river incorporate "Nile" in their names, including: Albert Nile – Segment of the White Nile flowing north from Lake Albert to Nimule Black Nile – An alternate name for the Atbarah River Blue Nile – One of the two major tributaries of the Nile Kyoga Nile – Segment of White Nile from Lake Kyoga to Lake Albert Main Nile – Segment of the Nile downstream from the confluence of Blue Nile and White Nile Mountain Nile – Segment of the White Nile from the mountains of Uganda to the plains of South Sudan Victoria Nile – Segment of White Nile from Lake Victoria to Lake Kyoga White Nile – One of the two major tributaries of the Nile Yellow Nile – The Wadi Howar , remnant of an ancient tributary that dried up several thousand years ago Sources The Nile has six cataracts and several sources.

The source of the Nile is a tributary of the Rukarara River , in Nyungwe National Park , Rwanda, at 2°19′35″S 29°21′30″E ﻿ / ﻿ 2.32639°S 29.35833°E ﻿ / -2.32639; 29.35833 , at an elevation of 2,539 meters (8,330 ft).

The source is defined as the starting point of the longest year-round watercourse in the Nile's drainage basin .

From this source, the river runs 7,088 kilometers (4,404 mi) to its mouth at the Mediterranean Sea .

The distance was measured in 2009 along the centerline of the river using satellite imagery.

The highest sources of the Nile are on the slopes of the Rwenzori Mountains in Uganda .

The legendary Mountains of the Moon , described by the Greek astronomer Ptolemy , have been associated with Rwenzori.

The southernmost source of the Nile is in Burundi at one of the heads of the Ruvyironza River , which feeds into the Kagera River . A monument was erected nearby in 1937 by Burkhart Waldecker close to the town of Rutovu , near Mount Kikizi . Lake Victoria – shared by Tanzania, Uganda, and Kenya – is sometimes informally described as the source, because it feeds the White Nile from its outflow at Jinja, Uganda . However, some have suggested that the genuine source of the Nile is the rain clouds that are often found above Lake Victoria, because they contribute the vast majority of the lake's water.

The source of the Blue Nile tributary is near the town of Gish Abay , south of Lake Tana . Geography The waters of the Nile originate as rainfall in the mountains in the south and east regions of the Nile Basin.

The Nile is a major river in northeast Africa which flows into the Mediterranean Sea.

The Nile Basin is all land that drains into the Nile, and it covers 2,927,843 km 2 – about 10% of the African continent (see adjacent map). Eleven countries are wholly or partially within the basin: Burundi, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda.

The basin covers a wide variety of climates, ecosystems, and topographies – ranging from arid, sandy deserts in the north, to flat, swampy wetlands in the middle, to rainy, forested mountains in the south.

The basin can be divided into seven regions; five of these regions encompass the longest course of the Nile. Proceeding in a downstream sequence, these five regions are: the African Great Lakes , the Mountain Nile , the White Nile , the main Nile, and the Nile Delta . Two additional regions encompass major tributaries: the Blue Nile and the Atbarah River . African Great Lakes The African Great Lakes region contains the source of the Nile as well as several large lakes that are part of the Nile River system: Lake Victoria , Lake Albert , Lake George , and Lake Edward .

The source of the Nile is the Rukarara River within Rwanda's Nyungwe National Park, and it leads to the Kagera River which drains into Lake Victoria.

Although it is a large lake – the second-largest freshwater lake in the world – Lake Victoria is relatively shallow, with an average depth of 40 meters (130 ft).

The Nile River first assumes the name "Nile" where Lake Victoria empties on its north side: the stretch from there to Lake Albert is called the Victoria Nile. A pair of waterfalls – Ripon Falls and Owen Falls – were located where the Nile exits Lake Victoria, but have both been submerged by the construction of the Nalubaale dam .

After Bujagali Falls and Bujagali Power Station , the Victoria Nile empties into Lake Kyoga .

After exiting Lake Kyoga, the river is joined by the River Kafu tributary, then passes over Murchison Falls and flows into Lake Albert. Unlike Lake Victoria, Lake Albert is a deep lake surrounded by mountains.

The river exits Lake Albert on its north shore, where it is called the Albert Nile ; this stretch of the river is relatively flat and broad, and suitable for navigation by steamboats . Mountain Nile The second region of the Nile Basin, proceeding downstream, is the Mountain Nile ( Arabic : Bahr al Jabal ). This region begins near the town of Nimule , extends to Lake No , and is entirely within South Sudan.

After passing through Nimule, the river goes through the Fula Rapids and on to Juba – the capital of South Sudan.

After Juba, the Nile passes through the town of Bor , then enters the Sudd , a large swamp located in a flat plain.

The incline of the ground in the Sudd is only 1:13,000 rise over run , so the river slows down and widens. Lush vegetation, including sedges , papyrus , and common water hyacinth (an invasive species ) clog the waterways and make navigation difficult.

At the north edge of the Sudd swamp, the Nile passes through Lake No, a small lake where the Nile is joined by the Bahr el Ghazal River (Arabic: 'gazelle river') – a tributary from the west. A major tributary in the Mountain Nile region is Bahr el Ghazal which arrives from west Sudan and joins the White Nile at Lake No.

The drainage basin of the Bahr el Ghazal River is large – about 860,000 square km – and receives a relatively large amount of rain, but its contribution to the Nile is small compared to other tributaries. Its basin includes Lake Kundi and Lake Keilak .

The Bahr el Ghazal passes through the city of Wau , South Sudan: it is a permanent stream east of Wau, but a seasonal stream to the west. White Nile region The distinct colors of the White Nile (left) and the Blue Nile (right) are visible where they merge to form the main Nile (top left). Continuing downstream, the third region of the Nile Basin is the White Nile region which includes an 800 kilometers (500 mi) stretch of river from near Malakal to Khartoum , the capital of Sudan. There it is joined by the Blue Nile. This portion of the river is a wide, calm stream with a fringe of swamps on both banks.

The river here is shallow and undergoes significant losses due to evaporation. Where the White Nile merges with the Blue Nile, they are noticeably distinct colors.

The White Nile is a lighter shade because the sediment it carries includes a significant amount of quartz and feldspar . This is in contrast to the Blue Nile which carries dark clay sediments originating from Ethiopia's basaltic rocks .

The Sobat River is a tributary which joins the White Nile near the town of Malakal (after the Bahr el Ghazal confluence, before the Blue Nile). Its basin – which includes the Machar Marshes – covers about 225,000 square km.

The Sobat floods between July and December. Main Nile The Aswan High Dam is located on the main Nile near the border between Egypt and Sudan. Its electrical generators have the capacity to produce 2.1 gigawatts .

The fourth region of the Nile Basin – the main Nile – extends from Khartoum to Cairo, the capital of Egypt. This stretch has a relatively uniform width and depth: about 500 meters (1,600 ft) wide and 10 meters (33 ft) deep at its deepest point (when not in flood). Soon after leaving Khartoum, the river enters the Sabaloka Game Reserve and goes through large, powerful rapids that are impassable by boat. This is the sixth (and furthest upstream) of the six cataracts of the Nile .

The Atbarah River – a major tributary – joins the Nile, which then follows a large S-shaped curve to the west. Four more cataracts (numbered 5, 4, 3, and 2) are encountered in this large S-curve, which render the river unnavigable; although ships may travel in certain calm stretches between the cataracts.

The river then enters a reservoir: Lake Nasser . This lake – the world's second-largest human-made lake – was formed when the Aswan High Dam was built in Egypt, and inundates more than 480 kilometers (300 mi) of the Nile.

The Aswan Low Dam – older and smaller than the High Dam – lies beneath the Aswan High Dam, near the location of the first Nile cataract (now submerged).

From these dams, the Nile flows about 800 kilometers (500 mi) through a limestone plateau, bordered by large amounts of irrigated farmland, until it reaches Cairo. Nile Delta Main article: Nile Delta The Nile Delta is the large triangular vegetated region at the top of this photograph, where the river empties into the Mediterranean Sea .

The fifth, and final, region encompassing the Nile River is the Nile Delta, a large triangular river delta (about 22,000 km 2 ) that extends from Cairo to the Mediterranean Sea.

The river splits into two major distributaries (channels) within the delta: the Rosetta branch and the Damietta branch.

The total volume of the delta (including the submerged portions) is about 150,000 km 3 .

The delta was created over several million years, built-up from sediment carried down the river from upstream.

Since the Aswan High Dam was completed in 1970, the delta has begun to shrink because of erosion from currents in the Mediterranean Sea.

In the past, erosion was balanced by new soils arriving in the form of sediment carried by the river; but the dam traps sediment in its reservoir, preventing new soil from reaching the delta. Blue Nile tributary Main article: Blue Nile The source of the Blue Nile is Gish Abay at the bottom of the bright line.

The river flows north from there to Lake Tana at the top.

The longest course of the Nile – which includes the White Nile tributary – has several other tributaries.

The drainage basins of the Blue Nile and the Atbarah comprise the final two regions of the Nile Basin.

The Blue Nile springs from hills in Ethiopia where it originates as a stream named Abay near the town of Gish Abay : Gish is an Amharic word meaning 'source', and Abay is the name of the stream. Gish Abay flows into Lake Tana , a large, shallow lake, which has a single outflow where it adopts the "Blue Nile" name.

The river then makes a wide loop: first south, then west through a spectacular gorge 2 kilometers (6,600 ft) deep, then north passing through South Sudan into Sudan, where it joins with the White Nile at Khartoum to form the main Nile. Along its course, the Blue Nile generates electricity at several hydropower plants, including the Tis Abay hydropower project at the Blue Nile Falls , the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam near the border between Ethiopia and South Sudan, the Roseires Dam near the town of Ad Damazin , and the Sennar Dam .

The size of the Blue Nile's drainage basin is over 306,000 square km. Atbarah tributary Main article: Atbarah River The Atbarah River is a tributary of the Nile which arises in northern Ethiopia, and joins the Nile about 320 kilometers (200 mi) north of Khartoum. Its drainage basin covers over 204,000 square km.

The Atbarah has a heavy flow during and following the monsoon season in Ethiopia (summer and fall), but can dry up in the winter and spring. Despite the intermittent nature of the river, it provides more than 10% of the total annual flow of the Nile. Dams on the Atbarah include the Khashm el-Girba Dam , the Upper Atbara and Setit Dam Complex , and the Tekezé Dam (on the Tekezé River tributary). Hydrology The flow of the Nile River varies widely throughout the year. Rates (m 3 /sec) measured at Dongola on the main Nile. Flow and floods Further information: Flooding of the Nile Although the Nile is the longest river in the world , it does not have the largest discharge . Its flow – about 87 km 3 per year – is small compared to other major rivers.

The Nile's discharge is only about 1% of the Amazon , 6% of the Congo , and 12% of the Yangtze .

The annual contributions to the main Nile from the three primary tributaries are: 54% from the Blue Nile, 32% from the White Nile (including contributions from the Bahr el Ghazal and Sobat tributaries), and 14% from the Atbarah.

The highlands of the White Nile and Blue Nile both experience seasonal rain, but the White Nile's flow into the main Nile is much more constant than the Blue Nile. This is due to the many lakes and wetlands on the White Nile, which moderate the cyclic effects of seasonal rainfall.

As the White Nile passes through the Sudd swamps about half the water is lost to evaporation.

In contrast, the flow of the Blue Nile varies widely through the year: it floods between July and October, due to summer monsoon rains.

The waters of the Blue Nile are so substantial during the summer that the White Nile backs up during this time at the confluence .

During the summer floods, the contributions to the main Nile are about 70% from the Blue Nile, about 20% from the Atbarah, and about 10% from the White Nile.

At the peak of the flood, the daily flow into Lake Nasser is about 0.71 km 3 , about three times the annual daily average of 0.23 km 3 per day. Prior to the construction of dams on the Nile, the flow of the Nile in Egypt varied seasonally: higher in the summer/fall; lower in the winter/spring. However, following the construction of the Aswan High Dam – which created a reservoir that can hold about two years of river flow – the flow downstream from that dam is now more constant year-round. Sediment transport The Nile carries sediment downstream.

The movement of sediment is classified as suspended sediment (particles suspended in the water) or bedload (sediment on the river bottom that rolls or tumbles downstream). Ninety-seven percent of the transported sediment carried by the Nile comes from the Atbarah and Blue Nile, both of which originate in Ethiopia.

The erosion and transportation of silt only occurs during the Ethiopian rainy season when rainfall is especially high in the Ethiopian Highlands ; the rest of the year, the major rivers draining Ethiopia into the Nile have a weaker flow.

The soil in the Nile Delta originated as rocks in Ethiopia.

The cumulative amount of rock eroded in the past 30 million years from the Ethiopia headwaters of the Nile is about 102,000 km 3 , which is roughly comparable to the volume of the soil in the Nile Delta (including the underwater portion) which is about 150,000 km 3 . Sediment carried by a river into a reservoir can settle in the reservoir and reduce its storage capacity. Sediment accumulated behind the Sennar Dam, Roseires Dam (on the Blue Nile), and Khashm el Girba Dam (on the Atbarah) has significantly reduced the storage capacity of their reservoirs since they were built. Annual sediment transport measured at several locations are listed below.

The bedload percentages are the ratio of bedload sediment to total (bedload and suspended) sediment. This data was collected before the construction of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, which has a significant impact on sediment loads downstream of the dam. Gilgel Abay , Ethiopia : 7.6 million tonnes of suspended, and an additional 0.7% of bedload El Deim (at the border of Ethiopia and Sudan): 140 million tonnes Aswan , Egypt: 0.14 million tonnes of suspended, and an additional 28% of bedload Beni Sweif , Egypt: 0.5 million tonnes of suspended, and an additional 20% of bedload Qena , Egypt: 0.27 million tonnes of suspended, and an additional 27% of bedload Sohag , Egypt: 1.5 million tonnes of suspended, and an additional 13% of bedload Water sources and sinks Water balance in the Nile Basin is analyzed using hydrology : water input from rain is balanced by water output to the soil, evaporation, and streams.

As the river moves downstream, it gains volume in some regions and loses volume in other regions. A region is a "source" if the region contributes water; conversely, a region is a "sink" if the region removes water. Identifying sources and sinks is important to scientists who study water movement ( hydrology ), as well as policy makers who negotiate water sharing issues.

The regions of the Nile Basin that are water sources are the upstream areas including the Ethiopian Highlands and the African Great Lakes region.

The water sink areas are generally found in the downstream regions, including South Sudan, Sudan, and Egypt.

The water balance methodology is employed to determine which regions are sources and which are sinks. Water balance is a hydrological principle that states that the water entering a region is balanced by the water leaving a region. For a given region, hydrologists measure (or estimate) precipitation , evaporation , transpiration , groundwater recharge , lake-filling rate, and net streamflow . Evaluating these values will indicate if a region is a source or a sink. Generally, a region is a source if the net streamflow is positive; conversely, a region is a sink if the net streamflow is negative. Sources and sinks: countries The following table summarizes water balance measurements for countries within the Nile Basin. Portions of countries outside the Nile Basin are excluded from the values. Key for "Source/Sink" columns Source The country is a significant water source Sink The country is a significant water sink Neutral The country is not a significant source or sink Most of the per-basin data is presented as annual measurements (usually in km 3 ); but some data is also presented as an equivalent "depth" value (millimeters per year, covering the entire basin).

The water balance tables of this article contain water flow information measured at the twelve stations shown in this map. Another way of analyzing the water balance of the Nile is to partition the basin geographically (and ignore national boundaries).

The following table splits the Nile Basin into twelve smaller basins, and summarizes the water balance data of each of the smaller basins.

The data is based on measurements made at a dozen river measurement stations .

The stations, shown in the adjacent map, divide the Nile Basin into smaller basins. These basins are each named after their downstream station. For example, the Murchison Falls station (2) is downstream of the Lake Victoria outlet station (1), so the basin between them is named the Murchison Falls basin. Geographic basin water balance (annual) Basin's downstream station Source/Sink (water bal km 3 ) Basin Area km 2 Precip km 3 Evap km 3 Runoff km 3 1 Lake Victoria outlet Source (74) 264,259 353 279 57 2 Murchison Falls Source (15) 85,513 109 94 9 3 Mongalla Neutral (1) 131,691 159 158 5 4 Malakal Sink (−159) 925,160 798 957 150 5 Khartoum Sink (−40) 257,130 134 174 14 6 Dam Source (105) 188,296 246 142 70 7 Khartoum Neutral (10) 118,651 96 72 9 8 Khashm el Girba Source (30) 100,318 95 66 10 9 Mouth of Atbarah River Neutral (−3) 104,051 22 25 1 11 Aswan Dam Sink (−10) 188,011 2 13 0 12 Cairo / Delta Sink (−10) 145,293 3 12 0 Nilometers Measurements of the Nile's flow have always been essential in helping Egyptians manage their safety and irrigation. Simple gauges , called nilometers , have been used for thousands of years to measure the level of the Nile. An ideal flood in Egypt – not too high and not too low – was a 6-meter (20 ft) rise over the non-flood water level. Any higher and disastrous floods may damage the river communities; any lower, and fertile silt would not be deposited on the croplands. An important nilometer has been in use on Roda Island since at least 622 CE; Egyptians kept records of maximum and minimum river levels from that gauge until 1921. Modern gauges to measure the river level began to be installed in the 1860s, and gauges that also measure the river's current – which provide more accurate flow information – were installed beginning in 1900. Ecology Animals A Hippopotamus amphibius near Lake Edward , one of the lakes that feed the Nile The total number of fish species found in the Nile Basin is estimated at over 800.

In the river alone, 128 species are found, belonging to 27 families.

The majority of species belong to the four families: Cichlidae (cichlids), Cyprinidae (carp), Mormyridae (elephantfish), and Mochokidae (catfish). A number of Cichlid species are found in the African Great Lakes.

In addition to fish, animals that sometimes reside in the Nile's waters include hippos , crocodiles , and African buffalo . Other water dwellers include molluscs , crabs , and shrimp . Many animals live in the ecosystems along the riverbanks, including elephants , antelope , and giraffes . Snails found in Nile lakes carry parasitic flatworms – known as blood flukes – which are responsible for schistosomiasis that afflicts livestock and humans. Birds that live on or near the Nile include herons , kingfishers , ospreys , and various kinds of storks – including shoebills . Some of the bird species are endemic to the Nile Basin (such as blue-winged goose ), while other species have a cosmopolitan distribution (including moorhen and osprey ). Several species of heron, ducks, geese, and egrets live in the basin year-round, and 14 species of ducks and geese arrive only for winter residence. Of the gulls and terns in the basin, the vast majority are migratory.

During the past thousand years, the ranges of some species have been reduced due to human encroachment on their habitat. Plants The white Egyptian lotus is native to still waters of the Nile Basin.

The Great Lakes region of the Nile Basin includes plants such as the water lily , papyrus , and water hyacinth .

The water hyacinth is an invasive species, and has adversely impacted the populations of native species in Lake Kyoga. Plants common in the Sudd swamp include species that thrive in deep flooding such as Vossia , hippo grass , reed mace , ambatch , and papyrus.

The Sudd also hosts species that thrive in shallow flooding, for example Oryza , antelope grass , and Phragmites . Pollution Historically, the water of the Nile was noted for being drinkable, but in the late 20th century, it became less healthy in certain areas. Pollution is most pronounced in Lake Tana, near major cities, and in the Nile Delta. Sources of pollution in the Nile include agricultural, industrial, and household waste. There are 36 industries that discharge their pollution sources directly into the Nile, and 41 into irrigation canals. These types of industries are: chemical, electrical, engineering, fertilizers, food, metal, mining, oil and soap, pulp and paper, textile and wood. There are over 90 agricultural drains that discharge into the Nile that also include industrial wastewater . River pollution is most pronounced between Aswan and the Mediterranean Sea.

The pollution there comes from human activities, agricultural runoff, and industrial waste. Concentrations of pollutants increase as the river flows downstream, due to the cumulative effects of pollution sources.

The delta is susceptible to accumulated concentrations because of poor flushing actions, exacerbated by a flat topography and heavy silting in the riverbed.

In the late 20th century, Lake Victoria experienced increased eutrophication (excess nutrients in the lake which cause the growth of plants and algae that deplete the oxygen in the water).

The eutrophication is due to human activity, deforestation, and poor agricultural practices, and has caused algal blooms and a rapid proliferation of water hyacinth, which have disrupted the ecosystem. Conservation and human impact Murchison Falls on the White Nile The Nile Basin was relatively wet and humid from 15 thousand years ago (kya) to 5 kya, which enabled the start of large-scale agriculture in the Nile Basin around 5 kya.

The growth of agriculture has had an increasing impact on the environment since then, leading to widespread deforestation and soil erosion.

The impacts were worsened by drier conditions in Africa that started about 4 kya . These arid conditions led to famines, social disruption, and environmental degradation. Several species of animals have become extinct in the Nile Basin due to human activity.

The sacred ibis was important in the ancient Egyptian religion, and millions of the ibis were ritually sacrificed.

The species became locally extinct in Egypt in the late 19th century, but remains common in central and southern Africa.

In Egypt, overpopulation and the construction of the Aswan High Dam have led to the extinction or near-extinction of a large number of plant and animal species.

The Nile perch was native to several places in Africa, including the Congo, but was not present in the Nile or its lakes until it was surreptitiously introduced to Lake Victoria in the 1950s to create a fishing stock.

The Nile perch caused the extinction of over 500 species of cichlids in Lake Victoria, which the scientist Les Kaufman described as the first mass extinction of vertebrates that scientists have had the opportunity to observe.

The Nile perch also led to increased deforestation, because firewood was required to process the fish.

The satellite lakes of Lake Kyoga are potentially important for future conservation efforts, because they contain at least 60 species of haplochromines, and have not yet been invaded by the Nile perch. Climate and climate change Further information: Climate change in Egypt This map shows the Köppen climate classification zones in the Nile Basin and the surrounding region.

The northern part of the basin is a hot, dry desert (Bwh) while the south is cooler and wetter (C and A zones).

The climate of the Nile Basin is characterized by a gradient, transitioning from very dry in the north to wetter to the south.

The basin can be divided into nine distinct rainfall regions: the northern regions (Egypt and Sudan) are very dry all year; the middle regions (including Ethiopia) have strong peaks of rainfall in the summer; and the southern regions (around Lake Victoria) have two rainfall peaks – in spring and fall.

The majority of the rainfall in the Nile Basin is associated with the summer monsoon .

The Nile Basin is experiencing climate changes related to the increasing prevalence of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Some projections for the 21st century predict a temperature increase of 2 to 4 °C. Models of the future climate in the North Africa and Middle East region predict an increase in the frequency and severity of droughts, and increasing variability of precipitation.

The Nile Delta is particularly vulnerable, and the combined action of sea level rise and lack of sediment replenishment (due to dams on the Nile) may cause one third of the surface area of the Nile Delta to disappear within the next century. Geological history Further information: East African Rift Geological data, as seen in this map of northeast Africa, are used by geologists to reconstruct ancient topography and water flows.

The Nile – like most rivers – evolved from ancestral river systems that followed significantly different courses. Over millions of years, tectonic and environmental forces shifted, separated, and merged rivers.

The river assumed its current form relatively recently, about 15,000 years ago. One hypothesis describes the Nile's geological history as a sequence of five evolutionary periods. Around 20 million years ago (mya), the west flank of the East African Rift System began to uplift , separating the African Great Lakes region from the Congo basin. About 6 mya, the ancestral Nile in Egypt was a relatively short river, originating near the modern Wadi Howar and flowing north into the Mediterranean Sea. Lake Victoria did not exist, and the rivers in the Ethiopian and Ugandan highlands did not flow north or connect to the Egyptian Nile.

From 6 to 5.4 mya, Lake Tana in the Ethiopian Highlands was formed, and a large paleolake – Obweruka – existed where the modern Lake Albert and Lake Edward are.

The Messinian salinity crisis happened in this period: the Mediterranean Sea became disconnected from the Atlantic Ocean , so the sea completely evaporated.

The empty Mediterranean caused the ancestral Nile to cut a deep gorge in Egypt, called the Eonile.

The river waters flowing through the gorge eroded a canyon several hundred meters below world ocean level at Aswan, and 2,400 meters (7,900 ft) below at Cairo.

After the Mediterranean Sea once again connected to the ocean, the sea refilled and the Eonile became a gulf which eventually filled with sediment. About 2.5 mya – for the first time – the Ethiopian waters flowed north and connected to the ancestral Egyptian Nile.

The Rwenzori Mountains uplifted causing paleolake Obweruka to begin draining to the east (before, it drained to the west) and to start forming Lake Victoria.

The waters forming Lake Victoria did not yet drain northward into Sudan or Egypt. Around 0.5 mya, Lake Victoria assumed roughly its modern shape, and the great lakes plateau tilted northward and began intermittently draining into Sudan and connecting to the ancestral Nile in Egypt, forming a series of rivers that approximately traced the course of the modern White Nile. Paleolakes formed in the area of the modern Sudd swamps. Fifteen kya, the African Great Lakes assumed their current shapes, and the flow from those lakes north to Sudan was no longer intermittent. Some paleolakes dried out in South Sudan and in Egypt near the Toshka Lakes .

During this period, the summer monsoon shifted and substantially increased rainfall in the area of Lake Victoria and Lake Albert.

The high water levels of both the Blue Nile and White Nile fluctuated widely during this period, with unusually high water levels occurring several times.

The present-day course of the Nile was established early in this period. Human history Prehistory The Nile (bottom) flows through Egypt's desert, which was much wetter during the African humid period . Early ancestors of the human species lived near the Nile Basin.

The Australopithecus afarensis fossil Lucy was found slightly east of the basin's boundary. Olduvai Gorge – site of the first Homo habilis fossils – is located just south of the basin. Within the Nile Basin, the Nyayanga archaeological site on the east shore of Lake Victoria has Oldowan tools dating back 2.6 million years. Human settlements on the banks of the Nile have been dated to between 12,000 and 20,000 years ago in a settlement near the modern town of Qurta (Egypt). These humans carved petroglyphs into rock, depicting aurochs , birds, hippopotamids , gazelle, hartebeest , and fish. Some scholars have hypothesized that these peoples, or other peoples that resided nearby, may have domesticated sheep, goats, or cattle.

The Nile was central to every facet of Egyptian life: it provided food through the crops it watered, and it caused death when droughts led to crop failures and famine.

The Nile encouraged the growth of science and government: irrigation, flood predictions and taxation all required new mathematical and administrative skills. Weather prediction and astronomy also developed as a consequence of the Egyptians' need to understand the river and its floods.

The ancient Egyptian calendar was based on the flood cycle of the Nile.

The year was divided into three seasons, each consisting of four months of thirty days each.

The seasons were Akhet (literally, 'inundation'), Peret ('growing'), and Shemu ('harvest'). Akhet was the time of the year when the Nile flooded, leaving a new layer of fertile soil behind; Peret was the growing season; and Shemu was the harvest season when there were no rains.

The Nile influenced their language: compass directions were based on a person facing upstream: the same word could be used for both up and south ; another word for left and east ; and another for right and west . They sometimes referred to rain as "Nile in the sky". Ancient Egypt consisted of two regions: Lower Egypt (the Nile Delta) and Upper Egypt (the Nile Valley, roughly between Giza and the first cataract).

The Nile played a role in determining the unique character of each region, because the ever-shifting waterways in Lower Egypt meant that transportation routes, settlements, and administrative regions were often forced to relocate.

The Lower and Upper regions were each represented by a unique Nile plant: papyrus and sedge , respectively. Ancient Egypt's southern boundary was – informally – at the river's first cataract (near Elephantine Island ) because transportation beyond those rapids was difficult.

The Egyptians were familiar with the course of the Nile upstream to the sixth cataract (present-day Khartoum), but were not familiar with the river's course (nor its source) beyond that.

The Nile led the Egyptians to build the world's earliest known major dam – now known as the Sadd el-Kafara – circa 2600 BCE in an attempt to control flooding. Nubian, Ethiopian, and Nilotic cultures The Twenty-fifth Dynasty of Egypt was led by Kushite kings, also known as the Black Pharaohs. South of the second Nile cataract lies Nubia , home to a series of cultures along the Nile (in what is now modern Sudan) that started development at the end of the African humid period. These Nubian cultures developed in parallel with the Egyptian civilization to the north, but they had little contact with each other until the Old Kingdom of Egypt around 3,000 BCE. An early Nubian civilization was the Kerma culture , extant from about 2600 BCE to 1500 BCE. Kerma culture was originally pastoral and cattle-oriented, but gradually shifted to agriculture as the Sahara dried at the end of the African humid period. Around 780 BCE, the Kushite Empire arose along the banks of the Nile, including the Atbarah tributary.

The Kushite Empire conquered much of Egypt under the rule of its Black Pharaohs , who led the empire from the cities Napata and Meroë on the banks of the Nile.

After the rise of Christianity, Christian kingdoms in Nubia (including Nobatia , Makuria , and Alodia ) developed along the Nile.

In the area occupied by modern Eritrea and northern Ethiopia , the Kingdom of Aksum flourished from the 1st century to 960 CE. Aksum primarily used the Red Sea for transport, but the Atbarah and Blue Nile were also within its realm.

The Funj Sultanate (1504 to 1821) ruled over the area approximately covered by modern Sudan.

The Ethiopian Empire (1270–1974) occupied the areas of modern Ethiopia and Eritrea.

The Nile Basin is home to the Nilotic peoples , a broad group of communities which originated near the Nile in what is now South Sudan, and migrated south and east into present-day Uganda and Kenya. Nilotic peoples include the Dinka and Nuer , who are South Sudan's largest ethnic groups; both are semi-nomadic cattle herders who practice nomadic pastoralism , moving their cattle seasonally in response to the Nile's floods. Egypt from Roman era to colonial era The Mahmoudiyah Canal was built by Muhammad Ali (ruler of Egypt from 1805 to 1848) to support irrigation and transportation.

The Nile was a major factor in the growth of the Roman Empire , which ruled Egypt for several centuries.

The Romans imported vast amounts of grain from Egypt, grown with the Nile's floodwaters.

In the first century, emperor Trajan constructed a canal connecting the Nile to the Red Sea . Between 945 and 977 CE, the Nile floods were exceptionally low; the resulting crop failures caused political instability which led to the rise of the Fatimid Caliphate . Canals in Egypt continued to be built and maintained by the Fatimids (10th and 11th centuries), Mamluk Sultanate (13th to 16th centuries), and Ottoman Egypt (16th to 19th centuries). Canals were used for agricultural purposes, and also for trade and for military purposes.

Although Egyptian civilizations were proficient at canal-building, they did not successfully build dams or reservoirs on the Nile until the 19th century, when cotton – irrigated with Nile waters – became an important cash crop for Egypt. These early dams were built during the rule of Muhammad Ali (ruler of Egypt from 1805 to 1848).

The first small dams were constructed in the Nile Delta and near Cairo, and acted to extend the growing season of crops. Ali also built canals including the Mahmoudiyah Canal , started in 1818. Ismail Pasha (Viceroy of Egypt, 1863–1879) built the Ibrahimiya Canal – completed in 1873 – that runs parallel to the Nile and is used for irrigation. Search for the source of the Nile Further information: European exploration of Africa Seventeenth century European map of central Africa.

The Nile is labeled Nilus fl. Many features in the map are speculative or fanciful.

Since the time of the ancient Greeks, Europeans have been curious about the source of the Nile and the origin of its floods. Herodotus was a Greek historian who visited Egypt in 457 BCE and traveled up the Nile to Aswan; he was puzzled by the Nile floods, which began in the summer – a season when Egypt had no rainfall. Geographers in Europe, Africa, and Arabia – dating back to Eratosthenes in the second century BCE – speculated that the source was a collection of lakes in central Africa. Many early maps of Africa showed the Nile originating in large lakes in Africa's interior but until the 1600s they were all speculative and not based on firm scientific knowledge.

The source of the Blue Nile was established as a result of Portuguese interest in Ethiopia: the Jesuit missionary Pedro Páez visited the source – Gish Abay – in the early 17th century, and wrote História da Ethiópia describing his time in Ethiopia. His accounts do not contain a specific date for his visit to Gish Abay.

Later European explorers who reached Ethiopia in the 17th and 18th centuries – including Jerónimo Lobo and James Bruce – publicized Páez's writings and estimated that he visited the source between 1613 and 1618.

The source of the White Nile proved to be more difficult to establish than that of the Blue Nile. Lake Victoria was not definitively established as a major source of the White Nile until 260 years after Gish Abay was identified as the Blue Nile's source.

In 1858, John Hanning Speke was the first European to see Lake Victoria, and he later found a river flowing out from the north side of the lake which he concluded was the Nile. He did not follow that river from Lake Victoria to Sudan, leading some to doubt his conclusion that the lake's outflow was the Nile. Efforts to precisely pinpoint the farthest source of the White Nile began in the early 20th century when Richard Kandt suggested that the source was a tributary of the Kagera River in the Nyungwe Forest – the Kagera feeds into Lake Victoria.

The source location was refined in 1969 when a group of researchers from Waseda University identified a specific tributary of the Kagera.

In 2006, a group of adventurers rediscovered the 1969 location, and placed a large marker on a nearby tree.

In 2009, academics used satellite imagery to further refine the location of the source, placing it at a spring several km from the 1969/2006 source. Water politics in the modern era Further information: Water politics in the Nile Basin The Nile crosses several international borders, making it a transboundary river and the subject of political tensions. Colonial era After British colonial rule of Egypt commenced in 1882, they started additional water projects to enhance cotton production and support the rapidly growing Egyptian population.

The first major dam built on the Nile was the Aswan Low Dam , completed in 1902. Its height was raised twice: in 1912 and 1933. Other dams built under the colonial regime include the Sennar Dam, built between 1914 and 1925 on the Blue Nile in Sudan, and the Jebel Aulia Dam , completed in 1937 near Khartoum.

The primary purpose of the dams built in the 20th century was to support irrigation; hydropower generation was only a secondary goal.

In 1929, an agreement between Egypt and Anglo-Egyptian Sudan was reached.

The agreement provided that Egypt and Sudan utilize 48 and 4 billion cubic meters of the Nile flow per year, respectively. Egypt reserved the right to monitor the Nile flow in the upstream countries, to undertake river-related projects without the consent of upriver nations, and to veto any construction projects that would adversely affect Egypt. Post-colonial era The Abu Simbel temples were relocated to higher ground when the Aswan High Dam was built and submerged their original location. Egypt and Sudan became independent from Britain in the mid-1950s.

In 1959 Egypt and Sudan updated the 1929 water-sharing agreement.

The new agreement allocated the water to be shared between Egypt and Sudan at 55.5 and 18.5 billion cubic meters respectively. Upstream countries within the Nile Basin were excluded from the 1959 agreement – including Ethiopia, which is the source of over two-thirds of the Nile's water.

The 1959 agreement included terms permitting Egypt and Sudan to build dams, which they did: Egypt built the Aswan High Dam (completed 1970); Sudan built the Khashm el-Girba Dam (1964), Roseires Dam (1966), Merowe Dam (2009), and Upper Atbara and Setit Dam Complex (2017).

In 1960, Egypt started building the Aswan High Dam which stores roughly two years' flow of the Nile.

The dam effectively turned the downstream stretch of the Nile (from the dam to the sea) into a large irrigation canal.

The dam has positive impacts: more water is available for irrigation, and hydropower has provided more electricity for Egyptian manufacturing. Negative impacts of the dam include poorer water quality, reduced fertility of soil due to lack of new sediment deposited by floods, increased salinity of soil , schistosomiasis, habitat loss for native flora and fauna, and displacement of Nubians.

The Aswan High Dam flooded a large area of the Nile Valley, and would have submerged several important historical monuments. An international campaign to save some monuments from becoming submerged by the new reservoir successfully saved some monuments, including the Abu Simbel temples .

The Aswan High Dam also forced the relocation of many Nubians that lived in the valley inundated by the new reservoir.

The Nubians were removed from their ancestral homelands, and many were forced to migrate to cities in Egypt and Sudan. Late 20th century disagreements and negotiations Throughout the 20th century, there was a marked imbalance in political power within the Nile Basin: Egypt and Sudan in the north wielded more power than the other ten nations to the south.

After Egypt and Sudan created the 1959 agreement, several of the upstream nations (including Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, and Ethiopia) began to voice objections to the terms of the agreement, and argued that they were not bound by the agreement because they were not parties to it.

The arguments of the upstream nations were that the dams built by Egypt and Sudan protected those two countries from drought, famine, and floods, yet upstream countries such as Ethiopia were still subject to droughts and famine. For example, the Aswan High Dam generated about 10 billion kilowatt-hours per year; and enabled Egyptian farmers to cultivate three harvests per year, compared to a single harvest before the dam. Egyptian leaders often stated that they were willing to employ military force to protect their rights under the 1959 agreement.

In the late 20th century, African nations participated in several efforts to establish water-sharing policies – including the Undugu Commission (active from 1983 to 1993) and TECCONILE (active 1993 to 1998) – but were not successful in creating long-term agreements.

In 1999, nine of the ten Nile Basin countries – Burundi, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania and Uganda – established the Nile Basin Initiative to promote peaceful dialogue regarding issues related to the Nile Basin. Power shift to upstream nations Further information: Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam , completed in 2025, generates over 5 gigawatts.

At the start of the 21st century, power shifted to the upstream nations as they began to build dams without the consent of Egypt or Sudan.

In 2008, Ethiopia built the Tekezé Dam without seeking permission from Egypt or Sudan.

In 2010, five upstream countries – Uganda, Ethiopia, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Kenya – signed a new agreement – the Cooperative Framework Agreement – which aimed to allocate waters more equitably for upstream countries. Kenya was motivated to sign the agreement because it had plans to pump water out of Lake Victoria for irrigation.

The 2010 agreement was opposed by Egypt and Sudan.

In 2011, South Sudan became independent from Sudan , becoming the eleventh country in the Nile Basin.

In subsequent water disputes, South Sudan allied with the upstream nations rather than with Sudan.

In 2011, Ethiopia announced plans to build a large dam on the Blue Nile near the border with Sudan.

The dam was later named the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD). Ethiopia viewed the GERD as essential to the nation's future, because the electrical power generated by the dam would enable it to significantly increase the quality of life of its population. Egypt was concerned that the dam would imperil the irrigation of its crops because Egypt already uses nearly all of the river water that enters its country, and it was concerned that the new dam would lead to water shortages. Sudan was concerned about safety and water supply.

After the dam was announced, Egyptian president Mohamed Morsi hinted that military strikes on Ethiopia were an option, and Sudan and Egypt conducted several joint military exercises . Numerous negotiations were conducted between Ethiopia, Sudan, and Egypt while the dam was constructed and the reservoir was filled.

In 2015 the countries signed a "Declaration of Principles" which contained high-level agreements regarding water usage and reservoir filling procedures.

In 2019, the United States hosted talks between the involved nations.

In 2020, the African Union started facilitating talks. That year, Egypt asked the United Nations Security Council to intervene, but it declined to do so.

In 2021 and 2022, the UAE hosted talks. Construction of the GERD dam was completed in 2020, and in 2025 the reservoir was full and most of the dam's generators were producing electricity. Economy Agriculture These crops in Egypt (near the Toshka Lakes ) are the result of an irrigation system that pumps Nile water out of Lake Nasser . There is a significant difference in agricultural practices between the northern nations of the Nile Basin (Egypt, Sudan, and South Sudan) and the southern nations (Uganda, Ethiopia, etc).

The north is primarily a desert, yet the south receives significant rainfall; crops in the north rely primarily on irrigation, whereas the south relies on rainfall retained in the soil ( soil water ); crop yields are higher in the north (due to intensive use of fertilizers and pesticides) than in the south; and the north has extensive irrigation infrastructure (dams, canals, etc) supported by governmental policies and international funding sources.

The amount of soil water used annually for crops in the south is 229 km 3 , which is more than twice the total annual water flow of the Nile (about 100 km 3 ). Crop yields in the south are adversely influenced by longer distances to market; in contrast to the north, where nearly all farms are concentrated in a narrow strip along riverbanks with ample transportation opportunities.

The lack of rainfall and groundwater leads Egypt to rely on the Nile for virtually all its water needs. Principal crops grown in Egypt include cotton, wheat, corn, rice, sorghum, and fava beans. There are generally two growing seasons in Egypt: summer (cotton) and winter (grains and vegetables).

Since the 1950s, Egypt has increasingly used industrial farming techniques (including extensive use of fertilizers and pesticides) to improve crop yield. Egypt's land is 94% desert and 3% arable land .

The vast majority of Egypt's farmland is located in the Nile Delta, with the remainder along the banks of the Nile.

The primary crops in Sudan are peanuts, cotton, sesame, sugarcane, and sorghum . Other crops include millet, wheat, corn, and barley. Sudan's crops draw upon water from both the Blue Nile and White Nile, supported by several dams including the Sennar Dam and Khashm el-Girba Dam. Much of the irrigated land is within the Gezira Scheme , an extensive irrigation project started in the 1920s. Fisheries The Nile perch was introduced to Lake Victoria in the 1950s to create a new fishery.

The Nile and its associated lakes have been an important food source for peoples living near the waters since prehistoric times.

In the year 2000, the Nile Basin produced about 1.4 million tonnes of fish per year, which is more than half of the total fresh water yield from the entire African continent (2.2 million tonnes). Lake Victoria alone – Africa's largest lake – provided 1 million tonnes.

The yield of the lakes of the Nile Basin far exceeds the amount of fish caught in its rivers. All waters of the Nile Basin – with the exception of the Sudd – show evidence of overfishing.

In the 1950s, Nile perch and Nile tilapia were introduced into Lake Victoria in an effort to reverse the shrinking yields of native fishes in the lake; the effort was successful, but led to a decline in the number of native fish species in the lake. Currently, the vast majority of fish caught in Lake Victoria are Nile perch and Silver cyprinid (Lake Victoria sardine). Some fisheries – particularly the Nile perch – are primarily exported to Europe, rather than consumed locally. Fish farming is carried out in some parts of the basin. Hydropower Further information: List of power stations in Egypt , List of power stations in Sudan , List of power stations in Ethiopia , and List of power stations in Uganda Some hydropower stations on the Nile. "GERD" is the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam .

The Nile and its tributaries power dozens of hydropower stations, which collectively have a capacity to generate over 10 gigawatts (GW) of electrical power. Prior to the year 2000, there were few dams on the Nile, but thereafter, governments accelerated the pace of dam construction. Hydropower stations with capacities over 100 MW are listed in the table below. Major hydropower stations in the Nile Basin Hydropower station Nearby landmark Year completed Power (MW, in 2025) Tributary Aswan Low Dam Aswan, Egypt 1902, 1912, 1933, 1985 550 Main Nile Aswan High Dam Aswan Egypt 1970 2,100 Main Nile Merowe Dam Merowe, Sudan 2009 1,250 Main Nile Upper Atbara and Setit Showak, Sudan 2017 320 Atbarah and Tekezé Roseires Dam Er Roseires, Sudan 1966, 2013 280 Blue Nile Tana Beles Lake Tana, Ethiopia 2010 460 Beles River , Blue Nile Tekezé Dam Tekezé River, Ethiopia 2009 300 Tekezé , Atbarah Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam Bameza, Ethiopia 2020 5,150 Blue Nile Fincha Fincha'a, Ethiopia 1973 134 Blue Nile (Chomen Lake) Karuma Karuma Falls, Uganda 2024 600 Victoria Nile Isimba Kamuli District, Uganda 2019 183 Victoria Nile Bujagali Bujagali Falls, Uganda 2012 250 Victoria Nile Kiira Kimaka, Uganda 2003 200 Victoria Nile Nalubaale Jinja, Uganda 1954 180 Victoria Nile Transportation Barges – like this one near Luxor , Egypt – are used to carry cargo on the river.

The Nile has a flatter gradient in the north relative to the mountainous southern region – so the northern countries (Egypt, Sudan, and South Sudan) have more navigable stretches of water.

In Egypt, the river has no major obstacles between the delta and the first cataract at Aswan, and as a consequence that stretch has been utilized heavily for transportation. That stretch could be used even before the arrival of steamships , because currents could carry boats downstream, and winds from the north often helped sailboats travel upstream.

The Blue Nile is generally not navigable in most places. Instead of the river, Ethiopians and Italian colonizers used an overland route – the Strada Imperiale – for north-south transportation in Ethiopia.

As recently as 1903, explorers were still researching the Blue Nile to see if it could be used for transportation between Ethiopia and Sudan, but were not successful.

In ancient Egypt, the river was the primary mode of transportation, and a wide variety of boats were built – both utilitarian and ceremonial. Egyptian boats were sufficiently sturdy to carry large obelisks and stones for building pyramids and temples.

In the modern era, the river is still used for transportation, particularly in Egypt, which has four navigable waterways suitable for large ships: two in the delta, one between the delta and the Aswan High Dam, and one in Lake Nasser. Egypt moves 500 million tonnes of cargo on the river per year, which is only about 0.8% of Egypt's total freight movement (the vast majority of freight moves by road or railway). Cargo transported on the river includes cement, limestone, coal, petroleum products, and phosphates. Upstream from Lake Nasser, the Nile and its tributaries contain waterfalls, cataracts , rapids, and dams that make long-distance navigation difficult. Another obstacle to navigation is the Sudd , a large swampy wetland on the White Nile in South Sudan. Plans to build a canal through the swamp – called the Jonglei Canal – were initiated in the early 20th century with the goal of providing more water to grow cotton in Egypt. Construction was briefly started in 1978, but the endeavor was soon halted. Tourism and recreation Several parts of the river attract tourists. This boat is viewing Murchison Falls on the White Nile, between Lake Victoria and Lake Albert.

The Nile – in particular, the stretch in Egypt – has been one of the world's most popular tourist destinations for millennia, and has been the subject of a vast amount of travel literature. One of the most visited tourist destinations along the Nile is the Giza pyramid complex – about 9 kilometers (5.6 mi) from the modern course of the Nile in Cairo – which has been a tourist destination since the time of the Greeks.

The stretch of the Nile between Cairo and Aswan has long been a popular destination for tourists: during celebrations surrounding the opening of the Suez Canal in 1870, a large group of tourists took a boat ride on that stretch of the river and visited Luxor , Dendera , Saqqara , Edfu , and Philae . One of the world's first travel agencies , Thomas Cook & Son , started offering tours of the river in 1870 when the Suez Canal opened, and started regular steamboat cruises on the Nile in 1875.

Since the construction of the Aswan High Dam in 1970, the dam itself has become a tourist attraction, along with the nearby temples that were moved during construction to avoid becoming submerged.

The Aswan High Dam also benefited the cruise industry because the river from Aswan to the delta became safely navigable all year.

The Nile Basin is home to several parks and nature reserves, including Uganda's Murchison Falls National Park and Egypt's Salouga and Ghazal Protected Area .

The Bujagali Falls were once among Africa's most notable rafting sites, but have become submerged due to construction of the Bujagali Power Station .

In culture Art and literature The river was frequently featured in ancient Egyptian art , often with kings fishing or harpooning hippopotamuses. Landscape artworks featuring the Nile – either directly or allegorically – are called nilotic landscapes . Nilotic landscapes are characterized by a river scene featuring plant and animal life, much of which is native to Egypt. Common elements include papyrus, palm trees, fish and water birds, and – less often – felines, monkeys, and crocodile. Nilotic landscapes are also represented in artwork from ancient Greece and ancient Rome . Imperial Roman Nilotic art places greater emphasis on fierce animals, usually including crocodiles and hippopotamuses. A notable representation of the Nile in art is the Personification of the River Nile , a colossal marble sculpture from c. 2nd century CE Rome – now in the Vatican Museum .

The Nile is represented as a reclining man holding sheaves of wheat in his hand.

At his side are a sphinx – representing Egypt – and sixteen children which allude to sixteen cubits (the ideal height of the annual flood).

At the base are crocodiles, pygmies, and hippopotamuses.

The Nile is seen in artworks that feature four major rivers of the world: Nile (Africa), Danube (Europe), Ganges (Asia), and Río de la Plata (Americas). Examples include the painting The Four Rivers of Paradise by Peter Paul Rubens (1615) and the fountain in Rome Fontana dei Quattro Fiumi designed by Gian Lorenzo Bernini (1651).

In Bernini's fountain, the Nile is depicted as a man with his head covered in a cloth, symbolizing the mystery of the unknown source of the Nile.

The Hymn to the Nile was composed and sung by the ancient Egyptian peoples; it celebrated the flooding of the Nile and the benefits it brought to Egyptian civilization. Giuseppe Verdi was commissioned by Isma'il Pasha to compose an opera to celebrate the opening of the Suez Canal.

The opera, Aida , was performed at the newly-constructed Egyptian Royal Opera House in 1871.

The opera's third act is set on the banks of the Nile.

Since the start of construction of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, Ethiopian musicians have produced songs that celebrate and glorify the Nile and the dam. William Shakespeare has the character Marc Antony describe the Nile floods in the play Antony and Cleopatra : "Thus do they, sir: they take the flow o' the Nile By certain scales i' the pyramid; they know, By the height, the lowness, or the mean, if dearth Or foison follow: the higher Nilus swells, The more it promises: as it ebbs, the seedsman Upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain, And shortly comes to harvest." Agatha Christie wrote the popular 1937 mystery novel Death on the Nile , about a murder on a Nile steamboat, which inspired several adaptations. Adrift on the Nile is a 1966 novel by Egyptian author and Nobel Prize winner Naguib Mahfouz about a young man who lives aboard a houseboat on the Nile.

The river is a metaphor for a life that he cannot control, leading him to turn his back on society.

The Nile plays a prominent role in several video games , including Civilization VI . Myth and religion The Egyptian god Hapy was responsible for the annual Nile floods.

The Hebrew Bible contains a story about the infant Moses being rescued from the Nile.

The cosmology of the ancient Egyptians was cyclic in nature: rather than viewing life as having a start and end, it was viewed as a perpetual cycle. This cyclic life-view was rooted in the natural world that surrounded the Egyptians, the daily passage of the sun, and the annual floods of the Nile.

The sun god Ra passed through the sky each day from east to west, and the three phases of the day (sunrise, daytime, and sunset) corresponded to the human lifecycle: birth, life, and death. For this reason, many burial sites were positioned on the west bank of the Nile, where they would be closer to the setting sun.

In the ancient Egyptian religion , no single god personified the Nile in the same way that the god Ra personified the sun. Gods associated with the river included Hapy (god of the annual floods) and Khnum (god of the first cataract ), who were jointly responsible for producing the annual Nile flood that fertilized the country's farmland.

The Egyptian religion placed the source of the Nile's annual flood at Elephantine Island (at the first cataract) where the floodwaters were believed to flow up out of the netherworld. Isis was a major deity in the Egyptian religion, strongly associated with the Nile. Cults based on Isis spread from Egypt into Europe in the second century BCE. An example of the influence of the cult of Isis in Europe is the Nile mosaic of Palestrina , located in Rome and dated to the first century BCE: the 4 by 3 meter mosaic depicts a detailed Nilotic landscape.

In Greek mythology , Nilus is the god of the Nile, one of thousands of river-god children of Titans Oceanus and his sister-wife Tethys . Nilus was father of the naiad Memphis , mythical founder of the city of Memphis .

The imagery was collected during the years 1999 to 2002.

The lengths of all rivers vary over time, as the river changes course, sources are refined, deltas change size, or new measurement methodologies are developed.

The title of longest river is somewhat controversial. Sources stating that the Nile is the longest river include Liu 2009 ; Fierro & Nyer 2007 , p. 5.35; Talbot & Williams 2009 , p. 39; Dumont 2009 , p. 1; and Sutcliffe 2009 , p. 336. ^ a b c Discharge rate is 2,757 m 3 /sec (87 km 3 /yr) at Aswan. Between Aswan and the Mediterranean, Egypt withdraws large amounts of water for irrigation, leading to lower discharge values downstream. Near Cairo, the discharge is 1,251 m 3 /sec (40 km 3 /yr).

The discharge from the delta into the Mediterranean Sea is only 150 m 3 /sec (5 km 3 /yr). These values were measured before construction of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam . ^ Other hieroglyphs for 'river' are presented in Faulkner 1964 , p. 33 and Allen 2000 , pp. 21, 101. ^ Some of the cataracts have been submerged by human-made reservoirs. ^ a b The source of the Nile leads to the Rukarara River , then to the Mwogo River , which joins with the Mbirurume River to form the Nyabarongo River , which leads to the Kagera River , which drains into Lake Victoria. ^ The monument erected by Waldecker for the southernmost source is at 3°54′54.0″S 29°50′16.5″E ﻿ / ﻿ 3.915000°S 29.837917°E ﻿ / -3.915000; 29.837917 . ^ The Nile exits Lake Victoria at the town of Jinja , which hosts several tourist sights named "source of the Nile" including the Source of the Nile Bridge . ^ The source of the Blue Nile is about 75 km south of Lake Tana , at 10°58′12″N 37°11′55″E ﻿ / ﻿ 10.9699°N 37.1986°E ﻿ / 10.9699; 37.1986 . ^ In 2011, South Sudan broke away from Sudan , becoming the eleventh country in the Nile Basin. ^ Measured by area, not volume. ^ Most precipitation in the Bahr el Ghazal basin is lost to evaporation before reaching the Nile. ^ The White Nile region, as defined here, contains only a small portion of the much larger White Nile River. ^ The segment of the Nile between the Blue/White confluence and the Mediterranean is called the main Nile or the Saharan Nile. ^ a b c d e Data does not include impacts of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam , completed in 2025 ^ Comparisons are using discharge of the Nile as measured at Aswan.

The Nile's discharge into the Mediterranean Sea is far less. ^ As the Blue Nile flow diminishes in the winter, the pent-up waters of the White Nile increase their flow past Khartoum.

In April and May, the White Nile supplies about 80% of the main Nile's water. Thus, the areas downstream of Khartoum receive a steady (not to say constant) flow that made irrigation possible year-round. ^ The magnitude of the annual Nile flood can vary widely from year to year. Low-flood periods can last for decades or centuries. ^ The annual flow of the river at Aswan is about 84 cubic km; and the capacity of the Aswan High Dam's reservoir is about 160 cubic km. ^ The sediment transport data was gathered over a wide range of years, spanning from 1997 to 2019. Every measurement site had unique collection time spans, specified in Lemma 2019 , p. 11 and Sutcliffe 2009 , p. 359. ^ The technical definitions of source and sink used by scientists are more complicated than presented here. For clarity, the definitions of source and sink have been simplified. ^ Sources and sinks are useful to policy makers when negotiating international water-sharing issues, such as dam construction.

In the 21st century, Egypt and Sudan continue to rely on extracting large amounts of water from the Nile for their existence. Some experts predict that the Nile Basin may experience a water scarcity problem in the future, if population growth, agricultural needs, and climate change combine to create a scenario where the water demands exceed the amount of water available. ^ The water balance of a region can be represented by equation. There are many water balance equations. A relatively simple equation is: P = E T + Δ S + D + Q {\displaystyle P=ET+\Delta S+D+Q} In this formula, the precipitation ( P ) received is equal to the sum of the water losses: evaporation and transpiration ( ET ), groundwater recharge ( Δ S {\displaystyle \Delta S} ), lake-filling ( D ), and net streamflow ( Q ). ^ a b Hydrology Table Legend: Precip - Precipitation (P) Evap - Evapotranspiration (ET) Water Bal - Precip-ET Discharge - River flow at measuring station (average of the entire year) Source or Sink - Is basin a significant source or sink of water? ^ Basin area is the Nile Basin within the country. ^ a b c For clarity, the names of some stations have been changed to use the names of nearby major geographic features. For example, the Kilo3 station is presented here as "Mouth of the Atbarah River ".

The Paara station is presented here as " Murchison Falls ".

The "Owen Reservoir" station is presented here as " Lake Victoria outlet". ^ The measuring stations are listed in the following table proceeding from upstream to downstream.

The discharge "rate" data is an average of the entire year.

The basin data in the table is for each individual basin; it is not cumulative. For example, the runoff of the second basin (Murchison Falls) does not include the runoff of the upstream basin (Lake Victoria outlet). ^ Measured at Nalubaale dam . ^ Measured at Paara (Uganda) , slightly downstream from Murchison Falls. ^ Measured at Mongalla, South Sudan , about 40 km downstream (north) of Juba . ^ Malakal is after the confluence of the White Nile and Sobat. It includes both Bahr el Ghazal and Sobat River tributaries. ^ Measured at Al Mogran before the Blue Nile confluence (includes only the White Nile). ^ Includes only Blue Nile (excludes White Nile). ^ Roughly at the midpoint of the Atbarah river. ^ Measured at the Kilo3 station, where the Atbarah joins the Nile. ^ Station is El Ekhsase, near Cairo. Basin data includes the Nile Delta, even though the delta is downstream of the station. ^ Jack Talling wrote "Two characteristics of water from the Lower Nile long attracted attention – that it was of excellent quality for drinking and irrigation, and that it seasonally contained high concentration of silt." ^ The Nile perch was introduced to Lake Victoria by Ugandan authorities in a clandestine effort to create a new fishery; but this has never been acknowledged by Uganda. ^ These five periods were proposed by Abdelsalam 2018 based on major environmental and tectonic events that impacted the Nile. Other scientists hypothesize a different set of evolutionary periods; for example, geologist Rushdi Said hypothesized eight periods in their book Said 1993 . ^ Obweruka existed from about 7.5 mya to 2.5 mya. ^ The Nile and Lake Victoria did not exist in their current forms during the times of Australopithecus afarensis , Homo habilis , or the Oldowan industry . ^ The ancient Egyptians were familiar with the Blue Nile's course up to Lake Tana. ^ The Sadd el-Kafara failed before it was completed, and never functioned as a dam. ^ Some authorities place the northern limit of Nubia at the First Cataract; others at the Second Cataract. ^ Also called "Kushite Pharaohs". ^ Around 642 CE, Arab conquerors had brought Islam to Egypt, supplanting the Ancient Egyptian religion. ^ The map was engraved by Jodocus Hondius or one of his followers, and published around 1619. ^ An example of an early map that shows the Nile and its source is from the 12th century, when the Arabian geographer Muhammad al-Idrisi published a book Tabula Rogeriana which showed the Nile flowing from a large lake in Africa's interior. ^ European powers divided up Africa during a process called the Scramble for Africa , formalized in the Berlin Conference of 1885. Under that agreement, Britain received most of the Nile Basin. ^ a b Egypt became nominally independent in 1922, but Britain maintained control of foreign policy and kept armed forces near the Suez Canal. Full independence was achieved in 1957 after the Suez Crisis . ^ The 1959 agreement also provided for financial compensation paid from Egypt to Sudan for the displacement of Nubians as a result of the new reservoir behind the Aswan High Dam. ^ According to Sundeep Waslekar , Nile Basin droughts in the 20th century affected around 170 million people and killed half a million people.

From the 70 incidents of drought which took place between 1900 and 2012, 55 incidents took place in Ethiopia, Sudan, South Sudan, Kenya and Tanzania. ^ South Sudan was not yet a country in 1999, but joined the Nile Basin Initiative in 2012. Eritrea has declined to participate in the Nile Basin Initiative. ^ Kenya was not one of the initial signatories, but signed it soon after it was created. ^ The 2015 agreement stipulated that the three countries would use the Nile's waters in a fair and appropriate manner; and they agreed on an approach to filling the reservoir and operating the dam. ^ Total generation capacity for the Nile Basin was computed by summing generation capacity values from the table titled "Major hydropower stations in the Nile Basin". Sources for capacities of individual power stations are identified in that same table. ^ This table only includes hydropower stations with capacities over 100 MW. Smaller stations including Assiut Barrage , Jebel Aulia Dam , Naga Hammadi dam , Esna Power Plant , and Tis Abay I, II are not included. Hydropower stations outside the Nile Basin are not included, such as Ethiopia's Gilgel Gibe Dams I , II , and III . ^ Colors in the "Landmark" column indicate the country in which the hydropower station is located. ^ a b Artwork showing an obelisk on a boat is in the Deir el-Bahari mortuary temples .

The Nile River used to be much closer to the Giza Pyramid Complex than it is today, enabling boats to bring stones close to the construction site. ^ Data regarding Egyptian waterborne cargo is from 2023. ^ In 1992, Smithsonian librarian Martin R. Kalfatovic documented 1,150 books that described travels on the Nile. ^ Detail of larger artwork in the Tomb of Menna in the Theban Necropolis ^ A colossal sculpture is one twice life size or larger. ^ Quote from Antony and Cleopatra (Act 2, Scene 7). "Foison" means a rich harvest. ^ The west side of the river is where many Egyptian funerary monuments are located, including the Giza pyramid complex , the Memphite Necropolis , and the Valley of the Kings . Citations ^ a b Senay 2014 , p. 8640, Table 5. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m The value "one third" is from the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . ^ Abdelsalam 2018 , p. 743. ^ Abdelsalam 2018 , p. 742. Embabi 2018 , pp. 39–40. Tvedt 2021 , p. 4. Young river. Said 1993 , pp. 32–52. ^ a b Abdelsalam 2018 , pp. 742, 768, Figures 30A, 30B, 30C, 30D. ^ Abdelsalam 2018 , p. 768. ^ Abdelsalam 2018 , p. 761. ^ Abdelsalam 2018 , pp. 742, 768–770, Figure 30A. Hamza 2009 , pp. 77–78. ^ Abdelsalam 2018 , pp. 742, 770, Figure 30B. ^ Abdelsalam 2018 , pp. 742, 763–764, 770, Figure 30B Talbot & Williams 2009 , pp. 39–40. Warren 2006 , p. 352. El Mahmoudi & Gabr 2008 , pp. 53–67. Embabi 2018 , pp. 39–45. ^ Abdelsalam 2018 , p. 749. ^ Abdelsalam 2018 , pp. 742, 770, Figure 30C. ^ Abdelsalam 2018 , pp. 742, 770, Figure 30D. ^ Abdelsalam 2018 , pp. 742, 770. Van Damme & Bocxlaer 2009 , p. 606. Williams 2009 , pp. 61, 70. ^ Williams 2009 , pp. 61, 70. ^ a b Williams 2009 , p. 70. ^ Abdelsalam 2018 , pp. 767, 770. Between 15,000 and 12,000 kya. Tvedt 2021 , p. 346. Slightly more than 15,000 kya. Van Damme & Bocxlaer 2009 , p. 606. Around 12,000 kya. ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 246, 346. ^ Plummer 2023 . ^ Bunbury 2023 , p. 53. Huyge 2011 . Leplongeon 2017 . ^ a b Van de Moortel 2007 . Creasman 2010 . ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 9–10. Bunbury 2023 , pp. 49, 63, 69. ^ Allen 2000 , p. 103. Tvedt 2021 , p. 355. Footnote 10. Bunbury 2023 , p. 62. ^ Allen 2000 , p. 21. Bunbury 2023 , p. 61. ^ Assmann 2001 , p. 59. ^ Redford 2001 , pp. 17, 305–306, Articles: "Geography", "Lower Egypt". Redford 2001a , pp. 464–466, Article: "Upper Egypt". ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 82, 92–93. ^ a b Assmann 2001 , pp. 54–55. Dumont 2009 , p. 6. Hurst 2025 . ^ a b Tvedt 2021 , pp. 11–12. ^ a b Tvedt 2021 , pp. 92–95. Bunbury 2023 , p. 60. Collins 2002 , pp. 107–115. Shoup 2017 , Articles: "History of the Nile", "History of Egypt: Ancient", "History of Sudan: Ancient Kush and Nubia", "Atbara River", "Meroe". ^ a b Tvedt 2021 , pp. 92–95. Shoup 2017 , Articles: "Culture of the Nile", "History of the Nile", "History of Egypt: Ancient", "History of Sudan: Ancient Kush and Nubia", "Atbara River". Little contact between Egypt and Sudan: "Culture of the Nile". Collins 2002 , pp. 39–42. Collins focuses on language groups, and refers to the Kerma as "Cushitic people" based on their use of Cushitic languages . ^ Appiah & Gates 2005 , pp. 1447. ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 93. ^ Shoup 2017 , Article: "Culture of the Nile". ^ Shoup 2017 , Article: "History of Egypt: Ancient". ^ Shoup 2017 , Article: "History of Sudan: Arrival of Christianity and Islam". ^ a b Shoup 2017 , Article: "Ethiopia (Abyssinia)". ^ Collins 2002 , p. 102. Shoup 2017 , Articles: "Blue Nile River", "History of Sudan: Arrival of Christianity and Islam", "History of Sudan: Modern Period". ^ Stokes 2009 , pp. 499–500, Article: "Nilotes". ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 138–144. Collins 2002 , pp. 70–77. Shoup 2017 , Articles: "Sudd", "Dinka", "Nuer" ^ a b c Bunbury 2023 , p. 52. Dumont 2009 , p. 15. ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 19–20. ^ Bunbury 2023 , p. 50. ^ a b Collins 2002 , p. 21. ^ a b Bunbury 2023 , pp. 50–52. ^ Beaumont 1993 , p. 249. Shoup 2017 , Article: "Khedive Isma'il 1830-1895". ^ a b "Abyssinia", Library of Congress . ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 2. Warburg 2007 , p. 475. ^ Hurst 2025 . Tvedt 2021 , pp. 177–179. ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 177–179. ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 178. ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 324. ^ Source of Blue Nile: 1613-1618. Tvedt 2021 , p. 324. Source of White Nile: 1874. Tvedt 2021 , pp. 174–175. ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 173–174. Collins 2002 , p. 36. ^ Allan 2009 , pp. 749–751. ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 176–177, 317. Shoup 2017 , Article: "Geography of the Nile". ^ Dumont 2009 , p. 15. Tvedt 2021 , pp. 59–64. Bunbury 2023 , p. 52. ^ Dumont 2009 , p. 15. Tvedt 2021 , pp. 62–63. Hurst 2025 . ^ Ranjan 2024 , p. 22. ^ a b Dumont 2009 , p. 17. ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 63–64. Roach 2025 , p. 5. ^ Ranjan 2024 , p. 22. Tvedt 2021 , pp. 63–64. Roach 2025 , p. 5. ^ a b Fleming & Lothian 1997 , pp. 135–136. ^ Ranjan 2024 , pp. 22–23. ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 63–68. ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 122–123. Ranjan 2024 , pp. 22–24. ^ a b Ranjan 2024 , p. 24. ^ Ranjan 2024 , pp. 22–24. ^ Dumont 2009 , pp. 15–16. El-Shabrawy 2009 , p. 125. Hurst 2025 . Bunbury 2023 , p. 52. ^ Dumont 2009 , p. 16. ^ El-Shabrawy 2009 , pp. 148–151. Talling 2009 , p. 29. Tvedt 2021 , pp. 132–133. Bunbury 2023 , pp. 46, 53, 69. ^ Hassan 2007 . Tvedt 2021 , pp. 132–133. Collins 2002 , pp. 187–189. ^ a b Ranjan 2024 , pp. 20–21, 25, 32–33. Tvedt 2021 , pp. 336–337, 341–342. Allan 2009 , pp. 760–768. ^ Ranjan 2024 , pp. 24–25. ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 71, 339–344. ^ a b Waslekar 2009 , p. 2. ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 70. ^ Ranjan 2024 , pp. 24–25. Tvedt 2021 , p. 82. ^ Ranjan 2024 , pp. 26–27. ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 312. ^ "The Nile Basin Trust Fund", World Bank Group . Dumont 2009 , p. 16. ^ a b Endeshaw 2025 . ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 336–337. ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 244–245. ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 244–245. Ranjan 2024 , pp. 25–26. Roussi 2020 . Bunbury 2023 , p. 70. ^ a b Ranjan 2024 , p. 27. ^ Ranjan 2024 , p. 30. Tvedt 2021 , p. 316. ^ İlkbahar & Mercan 2023 , pp. 1165–1166. ^ Roach 2025 , pp. 1–2. ^ a b c Ranjan 2024 , p. 28. ^ Ranjan 2024 , pp. 29–31. ^ Ranjan 2024 , pp. 30–32. ^ Ranjan 2024 , pp. 30, 33. ^ Mureithi 2025 . ^ "Desert Agriculture", Copernicus Programme . Tvedt 2021 , pp. 84–85. ^ a b Allan 2009 , pp. 754–758. ^ Allan 2009 , pp. 754–755. ^ Allan 2009 , p. 758. ^ a b Hamza 2009 , p. 84. Holt 2026 . ^ a b Holt 2026 . ^ Hamza 2009 , p. 85. Holt 2026 . ^ Hamza 2009 , pp. 75, 84. ^ a b Sabr 2026 . ^ Sabr 2026 Tvedt 2021 , p. 315. ^ a b c Witte 2009a , pp. 723–724. ^ Witte 2009a , pp. 724–725. ^ Witte 2009a , pp. 724–725, 742. ^ Witte 2009a , pp. 723–724, 742. Dumont 2009 , p. 17. Vijverberg 2009 , p. 182. ^ Witte 2009a , p. 723. ^ Dumont 2009 , p. 17. El-Shabrawy & Dumont 2009 , p. 119. ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 348. ^ "Aswan Low Dam", Egypt MOEE . ^ "Merowe Dam - Sudan", Abu Dhabi Fund for Development . ^ "Upper Atbara Dam", OPEC Fund for International Development . ^ "Roseires Dam", IHA . ^ a b c Hailu 2022 , Table 4. ^ "Karuma", Uganda Radio Network . ^ "Isimba Power Station", UEGCL . ^ Griffin 2018 . ^ Angurini 2021 . ^ Tumwesigye 2011 , p. 10. ^ Sutcliffe 2009 , p. 336. ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 12. ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 12, 14. Bunbury 2023 , p. 64. ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 317. ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 115–117, 317. ^ Robins 2008 , p. 126. Bunbury 2023 , p. 60, Figure 4.6. Younes 2024 . ^ Younes 2024 . ^ "Private Sector in River Transport", EnterpriseAM . ^ "Private Sector in River Transport", EnterpriseAM . "Current State of River Transport", EnterpriseAM . ^ Dumont 2009 , pp. 6–7. ^ Shahin 2002 , pp. 286–287. Tvedt 2021 , p. 154. Collins 2002 , pp. 61–64, 195–212. ^ a b c Tvedt 2021 , p. 47. ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 54. ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 77. ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 85–87. ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 71. ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 189. ^ Bunbury 2023 , p. 53. ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 219. ^ a b c Siliotti 1997 , pp. 154–155. ^ a b c Robins 2008 , pp. 68–69, 97, 126. Bunbury 2023 , pp. 53–54. ^ a b Schama 1995 , pp. 282–289. "Nile", Vatican Museum . "Personification of the River Nile", Yale Peabody Museum . ^ a b Betancourt 2007 , pp. 93, 122, 146, 190. Versluys 2002 , pp. 3–4, 23, 28–30, 43–50, 55, 65. ^ "Colossal", The Concise Oxford Dictionary . ^ Rosenthal 2005 , pp. 41–42. ^ Schama 1995 , pp. 289–305. ^ Schama 1995 , p. 302. Tvedt 2021 , p. 351. ^ "Hymn to the Nile Flood", University College London . ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 43. ^ Ayenalem 2023 . ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 59. ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 77–78. ^ Tvedt 2021 , pp. 72–73. ^ Tian 2025 , pp. 95, 100–102. ^ a b Hart 2005 , pp. 61, 85–86. Tvedt 2021 , p. 9. Fleming & Lothian 1997 , pp. 30–31. Bunbury 2023 , pp. 62–63. Collins 2002 , pp. 14–15. ^ a b c d Tvedt 2021 , pp. 20–22. ^ Allen 2000 , p. 104. Assmann 2001 , pp. 63–64. Fleming & Lothian 1997 , pp. 15, 108. Tvedt 2021 , p. 10. ^ a b Redford 2001 , p. 147, Article: "Hymns". Redford 2001a , pp. 123, 376, Articles: "Re", "Temples". Tvedt 2021 , p. 10. Fleming & Lothian 1997 , pp. 18, 29, 60. ^ Hornung 1982 , pp. 77–79. ^ Assmann 2001 , pp. 54–55, 63. ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 1. ^ Tvedt 2021 , p. 2. ^ Smith 1878 , pp. 499, 553–554, 564, 866. Sources Books The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 749– 770. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Allen, James P (2000). Middle Egyptian: An Introduction to the Language and Culture of Hieroglyphs . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521774837 . Appiah, A. ; Gates, H.L. , eds. (2005). Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and African American Experience . Oxford University Press . ISBN 9780195170559 . Assmann, Jan (2001) .

The Search for God in Ancient Egypt . Lorton, David transl. Cornell University Press . ISBN 0801487293 . Badawi, Mohammad, ed. (2003). Al-Muhit Oxford Study Dictionary: English-Arabic . Academia. ISBN 995330050X . Retrieved 31 January 2026 . Beaumont, Peter (1993). Drylands: Environmental Management and Development . Routledge . ISBN 0415004578 . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . Betancourt, P.P (2007). Introduction to Aegean Art . Institute for Aegean Prehistory . ISBN 9781623030841 . Retrieved 1 January 2026 . Bunbury, Judith ; et al. (2023). "The Egyptian Nile".

In Wantzen, Karl M. (ed.). River Culture . UNESCO . pp. 43– 78. doi : 10.54677/HHMI3947 . ISBN 9789231005404 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . Camberlin, Pierre; et al. (2009). "Nile Basin Climates" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 307– 333. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Collins, Robert (2002).

The Nile . Yale University Press . ISBN 9780300097641 . Retrieved 16 March 2026 .

The "Bibliographical Essay" (pp. 245–248) lists books about the Nile River. Dumont, Henri (2009). "A Description of the Nile Basin, and a Synopsis of Its History, Ecology, Biogeography, Hydrology, and Natural Resources" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 1– 22. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Eggermont, Hilde; et al. (2009). "Rwenzori Mountains (Mountains of the Moon): Headwaters of the Nile" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 243– 262. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . El-Shabrawy, Gamal; Dumont, Henri (2009). "The Fayum Depression" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 95– 124. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . El-Shabrawy, Gamal (2009). "Lake Nasser-Nubia" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 125– 156. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . El-Sheekh, Mostafa (2009). "River Nile Pollutants and Their Effect on Life Forms and Water Quality" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 395– 406. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Embabi, N.S. (2018). Landscapes and Landforms of Egypt . Springer Nature . doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-65661-8_4 . ISBN 9783319656595 . Archived from the original on 4 February 2020 . Retrieved 4 February 2020 . Faulkner, Raymond (1964) . A Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian . Griffith Institute . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . Fierro, Pedro; Nyer, Evan K. (2007).

The Water Encyclopedia: Hydrologic Data and Internet Resources . CRC Press . ISBN 9781420012583 . Retrieved 24 March 2026 . Fleming, Fergus; Lothian, Alan (1997).

The Way to Eternity: Egyptian Myth . Duncan Baird. ISBN 0705435032 . Gardiner, Alan (1964) . Egyptian Grammar (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . Ghabbour, Samir (2009). "The Oligochaeta of the Nile Basin Revisited" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 499– 520. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Green, Jim (2009). "The Kyoga Catchment" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 205– 214. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Green, Jim (2009a). "Birds of the Nile" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 705– 720. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Green, Jim; El-Moghraby, Asim (2009). "Swamps of the Upper White Nile" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 193– 204. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Hamilton, Alan (2016). Luganda Dictionary and Grammar . Alan Hamilton. ISBN 9780954149611 . Retrieved 31 January 2026 . Hamza, Waleed (2009). "The Nile Delta" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 75– 94. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Hart, George (2005).

The Routledge Dictionary of Egyptian Gods and Goddesses (Second ed.). Routledge . ISBN 0415344956 . Retrieved 15 January 2026 . Hornung, Erik (1982) . Conceptions of God in Egypt: The One and the Many . Translated by Baines, John . Original in German. Cornell University Press . ISBN 9780801412233 . Retrieved 15 January 2026 . Hughes, Ralph H.; et al. (1992). IUCN Directory of African Wetlands (PDF) . International Union for Conservation of Nature . ISBN 9782880329495 . Retrieved 25 March 2013 . Lehman, John (2009). "Lake Victoria" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 215– 242. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Murray, G. W. (1923). An English-Nubian Comparative Dictionary . Humphrey Milford , Oxford University Press . Retrieved 15 January 2026 . Okidi, C. O. (1994). "History of the Nile and Lake Victoria Basins through Treaties" .

The Nile: Sharing a Scarce Resource . Cambridge University Press . pp. 321– 350. ISBN 9780521450409 . Retrieved 12 January 2026 . Redford, Donald B. , ed. (2001). Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt . Vol. 2. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195138228 . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . Redford, Donald B. , ed. (2001a). Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt . Vol. 3. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195138236 . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . Roach, Steven (2025). "Introduction: Nile Basin Politics and its Challenges".

In Roach, Steven; Hudson, Derrick (eds.). Nile Basin Politics: From Coordinated to Cooperative Peace . Edward Elgar Publishing . pp. 1– 16. doi : 10.4337/9781803927176 . ISBN 9781803927176 . Retrieved 15 January 2026 . Robins, Gay (2008) .

The Art of Ancient Egypt . Harvard University Press . ISBN 9780674030657 . Retrieved 24 February 2026 . Rosenthal, Lisa (2005). Gender, Politics, and Allegory in the Art of Rubens . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 9780521842440 . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . Said, Rushdi (1993).

The River Nile: Geology, Hydrology, and Utilization . Pergamon Press . ISBN 0080418864 . Retrieved 11 February 2026 . Schama, Simon (1995). Landscape and Memory . A.A. Knopf . ISBN 9780679402558 . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . Shahin, Mamdouh (2002). Hydrology and Water Resources of Africa . Springer Netherlands . ISBN 9781402008665 . Retrieved 7 January 2026 . Shoup, John A.; et al. (2017).

The Nile: An Encyclopedia of Geography, History, and Culture . Bloomsbury Publishing / ABC-CLIO . ISBN 9798216123323 . Retrieved 14 February 2026 . EBook.

The hardcover is ISBN 9781440840401 . Siliotti, Alberto (1997). Guide to the Valley of the Kings . Barnes & Noble . ISBN 9780760733257 . Retrieved 24 February 2026 . Smith, William (1878). A New Classical Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography, Mythology And Geography . Harper & Brothers . LCCN 04035163 . Retrieved 7 January 2026 . Stokes, Jamie (2009). Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Africa and the Middle East . Vol. 2. Facts On File . ISBN 9781438126760 . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . Sutcliffe, John; et al. (2009). "The Hydrology of the Nile Basin" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 334– 364. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Talbot, Michael; Williams, Martin (2009). "Cenozoic Evolution of the Nile Basin" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 37– 60. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Talling, Jack (2009). "History of Scientific Research" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 23– 34. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Talling, Jack (2009a). "Physical and Chemical Water Characteristics" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 367– 394. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Tian, Tian (2025). "Pharaohs, Labourers and Wonder Builders: Illustrating Ancient Egypt with Game Mechanics in Strategy Games".

In Cromwell, Jennifer (ed.). Ancient Egypt in Video Games . de Gruyter Oldenbourg . pp. 87– 110. ISBN 9783111534022 . Tvedt, Terje (2021).

The Nile: History's Greatest River . Bloomsbury Publishing . ISBN 9780755616800 . Retrieved 10 December 2025 . Van Damme, Dirk; Bocxlaer, Bert (2009). "Freshwater Molluscs of the Nile Basin, Past and Present" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Monographiae Biologicae. Springer Netherlands . pp. 585– 630. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Versluys, M. J. (2002). Aegyptiaca Romana : Nilotic Scenes and the Roman Views of Egypt . Brill Publishers . ISBN 9004124403 . Retrieved 15 January 2026 . Vijverberg, Jacobus; et al. (2009). "Lake Tana: Source of the Blue Nile" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 163– 192. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Warren, John (2006). Evaporites: Sediments, Resources and Hydrocarbons . Springer Science+Business Media . ISBN 3540260110 . Williams, Martin; et al. (2009). "Late Quaternary Environments in Nile Basin" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 61– 72. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Williams, Martin (2009a). "Human Impact on Nile Basin" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 771– 780. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Witte, Frans; et al. (2009). "Fish Fauna of the Nile" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 647– 676. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Witte, Frans; et al. (2009a). "Fisheries of the Nile System" .

The Nile: Origin, Environments, Limnology and Human Use . Springer Netherlands . pp. 723– 748. ISBN 9781402097263 . Retrieved 1 December 2025 . Journals and websites Abdelsalam, Mohamed G. (February 2018). "The Nile's journey through space and time: A geological perspective" . Earth-Science Reviews . 177 : 742– 773. Bibcode : 2018ESRv..177..742A . doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2018.01.010 . Abotalib, Abotalib Z.; et al. (March 2023). "Irreversible and Large-Scale Heavy Metal Pollution Arising From Increased Damming and Untreated Water Reuse in the Nile Delta" . Earth's Future . 11 (3) e2022EF002987. Bibcode : 2023EaFut..1102987A . doi : 10.1029/2022EF002987 . Angurini, Tom (2021). "Eskom Invests in Kiira Dam Water Controllers" . Daily Monitor . Uganda. OCLC 44216472 . Retrieved 8 February 2026 . Ayenalem, Abebe Yirga; et al. (28 December 2023). "Popular culture and Nile hydropolitics: Amharic songs about the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam" . International Journal of Water Governance . 10 (1). doi : 10.59490/ijwg.10.2023.7359 . Beck, Hylke E.; et al. (30 October 2018). "Present and future Köppen-Geiger climate classification maps at 1-km resolution" . Scientific Data . 5 (1) 180214. Bibcode : 2018NatSD...580214B . doi : 10.1038/sdata.2018.214 . PMC 6207062 . PMID 30375988 . Creasman, Pearce Paul; et al. (16 September 2010). "Overland Boat Transportation During the Pharaonic Period: Archaeology and Iconography". Journal of Ancient Egyptian Interconnections . 2 (3). doi : 10.2458/azu_jaei_v02i3_creasman . Driouech, Fatima; et al. (September 2020). "Assessing Future Changes of Climate Extreme Events in the CORDEX-MENA Region Using Regional Climate Model ALADIN-Climate" . Earth Systems and Environment . 4 (3): 477– 492. Bibcode : 2020ESE.....4..477D . doi : 10.1007/s41748-020-00169-3 . El Mahmoudi, A.; Gabr, A. (2008). "Geophysical Surveys to Investigate the Relation Between the Quaternary Nile Channels and the Messinian Nile Canyon at East Nile Delta, Egypt". Arabian Journal of Geosciences . 2 (1). Springer Nature: 53– 67. doi : 10.1007/s12517-008-0018-9 . ISSN 1866-7511 . Endeshaw, Dawit (2025). "Ethiopia Opens Africa's Largest Hydroelectric Dam to Egyptian Protest" . Reuters . Retrieved 20 January 2026 . Griffin, Dan (2018). "Nearly Completed Dam on White Nile Casts a Long Shadow" .

The American Journal of Philology . 47 (4): 305– 318. doi : 10.2307/289993 . JSTOR 289993 . Healy, R. W.; et al. (2007). "Water Budgets: Foundations for Effective Water-Resources and Environmental Management" (PDF) . U.S. Geological Survey . Retrieved 14 January 2026 . Hegab, Mahmoud H.; et al. (4 March 2025). "Evaluating the spatial pattern of water quality of the Nile River, Egypt, through multivariate analysis of chemical and biological indicators" . Scientific Reports . 15 (1) 7626. Bibcode : 2025NatSR..15.7626H . doi : 10.1038/s41598-025-89982-2 . PMC 11880377 . PMID 40038343 . Holt, Peter ; et al. (2026). "Egypt: Agriculture and Fishing" . Britannica . Retrieved 7 February 2026 . Hurst, Harold Edwin ; et al. (2025). "Nile River" . Britannica . Retrieved 11 December 2025 . Huyge, Dirk; et al. (November 2011). "First evidence of Pleistocene rock art in North Africa: securing the age of the Qurta petroglyphs (Egypt) through OSL dating". Antiquity . 85 (330): 1184– 1193. doi : 10.1017/S0003598X00061998 . İlkbahar, Hasan; Mercan, Muhammed Hüseyin (2023). "Hydro-Hegemony, Counter-Hegemony And Neoclassical Realism on the Nile Basin: An Analysis of Egypt's Response to the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (Gerd)" . Journal of Asian and African Studies . 60 (2). Sage Publishing : 7– 8. doi : 10.1177/00219096231188953 . ISSN 0021-9096 . Kuper, Rudolph; Kröpelin, Stefan (11 August 2006). "Climate-Controlled Holocene Occupation in the Sahara: Motor of Africa's Evolution". Science . 313 (5788): 803– 807. Bibcode : 2006Sci...313..803K . doi : 10.1126/science.1130989 . PMID 16857900 . Lemma, Hanibal; et al. (October 2019). "Bedload transport measurements in the Gilgel Abay River, Lake Tana Basin, Ethiopia". Journal of Hydrology . 577 123968. Bibcode : 2019JHyd..57723968L . doi : 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2019.123968 . Leplongeon, Alice (27 December 2017). "Technological variability in the Late Palaeolithic lithic industries of the Egyptian Nile Valley: The case of the Silsilian and Afian industries" . PLOS ONE . 12 (12) e0188824. Bibcode : 2017PLoSO..1288824L . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0188824 . PMC 5744920 . PMID 29281660 . Liu, S.; et al. (March 2009). "Pinpointing the sources and measuring the lengths of the principal rivers of the world". International Journal of Digital Earth . 2 (1): 80– 87. Bibcode : 2009IJDE....2...80L . doi : 10.1080/17538940902746082 . Marshall, Brian E. (September 2018). "Guilty as charged: Nile perch was the cause of the haplochromine decline in Lake Victoria". Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences . 75 (9): 1542– 1559. Bibcode : 2018CJFAS..75.1542M . doi : 10.1139/cjfas-2017-0056 . hdl : 1807/87547 . McCoy, Terrence; et al. (20 June 2023). "The Nile is the World's Longest River?

The Amazon Would Like a Word" . Washington Post . Retrieved 24 March 2026 . McKenna, Amy; et al. (2025). "Blue Nile River" . Britannica . Retrieved 31 December 2025 . Mureithi, Carlos (9 September 2025). "Ethiopia Inaugurates Africa's Largest Hydroelectric Dam as Egypt Rift Deepens" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 15 February 2026 . Plummer, Thomas W.; et al. (10 February 2023). "Expanded geographic distribution and dietary strategies of the earliest Oldowan hominins and Paranthropus" . Science . 379 (6632): 561– 566. Bibcode : 2023Sci...379..561P . doi : 10.1126/science.abo7452 . PMID 36758076 . Ranjan, Amit (2 January 2024). "Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam dispute: implications, negotiations, and mediations". Journal of Contemporary African Studies . 42 (1): 18– 36. doi : 10.1080/02589001.2023.2287425 . Roussi, Antoaneta (23 July 2020). "Row over Africa's largest dam in danger of escalating, warn scientists". Nature . 583 (7817): 501– 502. Bibcode : 2020Natur.583..501R . doi : 10.1038/d41586-020-02124-8 . PMID 32669727 . Sabr, Mohy el-Din; et al. (2026). "Sudan: Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing" . Britannica . Retrieved 7 February 2026 . Senay, Gabriel B.; et al. (November 2014). "Understanding the hydrologic sources and sinks in the N ile B asin using multisource climate and remote sensing data sets". Water Resources Research . 50 (11): 8625– 8650. Bibcode : 2014WRR....50.8625S . doi : 10.1002/2013WR015231 . Tumwesigye, Robert; et al. (2011). Key Issues in Uganda's Energy Sector (PDF) . International Institute for Environment and Development . ISBN 978-1-84369-831-9 . Retrieved 7 February 2026 . Van de Moortel, Aleydis (October 2007). "Book Review of Sacred and Secular: Ancient Egyptian Ships and Boats, by Cheryl A. Ward" . American Journal of Archaeology . 111 (4). doi : 10.3764/ajaonline1114.VandeMoortel . Walubiri, Moses (16 October 2018). "New Nile Bridge Is Fifth Longest of Its Kind in Africa" . New Vision . Retrieved 16 October 2018 . Warburg, Gabriel R. (2007). "The Search for the Sources of the White Nile and Egyptian-Sudanese Relations". Middle Eastern Studies . 43 (3): 475– 486. doi : 10.1080/00263200701246165 . JSTOR 4284556 . Waslekar, Sundeep (2009). "Blue Peace for the Nile" (PDF) . Strategic Foresight Group . Retrieved 20 January 2026 . Younes, Gamal; et al. (February 2024). "The pyramid builders' waterways: Reconstructing the ancient topography of Khufu's Pharaonic Harbour at Giza, Egypt" . Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports . 53 104303. Bibcode : 2024JArSR..53j4303Y . doi : 10.1016/j.jasrep.2023.104303 . Unknown author "Abyssinia, Or the Empire of Prester John" . Library of Congress . Jodocus Hondius . 1619 . Retrieved 11 February 2026 . "A Look into the Current State of the River Transport Sector" . EnterpriseAM . 16 July 2025 . Retrieved 11 February 2026 . "Aswan Dam (1,2) Electric Hydro Power Plant" . Ministry of Electricity and Renewable Energy . 2011. Archived from the original on 20 July 2011 . Retrieved 2 January 2011 . "Baḥr Al-Ghazāl" . Britannica . 2025 . Retrieved 7 January 2026 . "Colossal" . Concise Oxford English Dictionary . Oxford University Press . 2001. p. 282. ISBN 0198604386 . Retrieved 27 December 2025 . "Desert Agriculture in Egypt" . Copernicus: Europe's Eyes on Earth . European Union Space Programme . 3 February 2024 . Retrieved 12 February 2026 . "Gov't Wants the Private Sector to Get in on Developing Egypt's River Transport" . EnterpriseAM . 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 11 February 2026 . "Hymn to the Nile Flood" . Digital Egypt for Universities . University College London . 2000 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . "Isimba Hydropower Station" . Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited . 1 February 2026 . Retrieved 7 February 2026 . "The 600 MW Karuma Hydropower Plant Commissioned" .

The Independent (Uganda) . Uganda Radio Network . 26 September 2024 . Retrieved 3 August 2025 . "Merowe Dam - Sudan" . Abu Dhabi Fund for Development . 2024 . Retrieved 13 April 2026 . "Nile" . Vatican Museum . Retrieved 14 January 2026 . "Nile Basin - Station: Dongola" . Global Runoff Data Center . University of New Hampshire . Retrieved 12 February 2026 . "Nile Basin National Water Quality Monitoring Baseline Study Report for Egypt" . Nile Basin Initiative . 2005 . Retrieved 31 December 2025 . "Personification of the River Nile" . Yale Peabody Museum . Retrieved 14 January 2026 . "Sudan - Roseires" . International Hydropower Association . 2022 . Retrieved 9 February 2026 . "Source Du Nil" . Google Maps . 18 March 2026 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . "The Nile Basin Trust Fund" . World Bank Group . 14 January 2016 . Retrieved 20 January 2026 . "Upper Atbara Dam Complex Project" . OPEC Fund for International Development . 2026 . Retrieved 12 April 2026 . Water Accounting in the Nile River Basin . Food and Agriculture Organization - United Nations . 2020. doi : 10.4060/ca9895en . ISBN 9789251329825 . Retrieved 11 December 2025 . .mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+span.mw-empty-elt+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{background-color:#ccf;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent;color:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}body.skin--responsive .mw-parser-output .navbox-image img{max-width:none!important}@media print{body.ns-0 .mw-parser-output .navbox{display:none!important}} @media screen{.mw-parser-output .navbox-musical-artist-solo .navbox-title{background-color:#f0e68c}.mw-parser-output .navbox-musical-artist-non-vocal .navbox-title{background-color:#f4bf92}.mw-parser-output .navbox-musical-artist-non-perform .navbox-title{background-color:#bfe0bf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-musical-artist-group .navbox-title{background-color:#b0c4de}.mw-parser-output .navbox-musical-artist-cover .navbox-title{background-color:#d8bfd8}.mw-parser-output .navbox-musical-artist-classical .navbox-title{background-color:#b0e0e6}.mw-parser-output .navbox-musical-artist-temp .navbox-title{background-color:#d3d3d3}.mw-parser-output .navbox-musical-artist .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-musical-artist .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:var(--background-color-neutral,#eaecf0)}html.skin-theme-clienpref-night .mw-parser-output .navbox-musical-artist .navbox-title{background-color:inherit}}@media screen and (prefers-color-scheme:dark){html.skin-theme-clienpref-os .mw-parser-output .navbox-musical-artist .navbox-title{background-color:inherit}} v t e Nile Tributaries Atbarah River Bahr el Ghazal Blue Nile Kagera River Mountain Nile ( Bahr al Jabal ) Sobat River Victoria Nile White Nile Dams, powerplants, and waterfalls Aswan High Dam Aswan Low Dam Bujagali Falls Bujagali Power Station Cataracts of the Nile Great Ethiopian Renaissance Dam Khashm el-Girba Dam Murchison Falls Merowe Dam Nalubaale dam Owen Falls Dam Roseires Dam Sennar Dam Tekezé Dam Upper Atbara and Setit Dam Complex Lakes and reservoirs African Great Lakes Lake Albert Lake Edward Lake Keilak Lake Kivu Lake Kundi Lake Kyoga Lake Moeris Lake Nasser-Nubia Lake No Lake Tana Lake Victoria Sudd History, government, and politics Climate change in Egypt Nile Basin Initiative Scramble for Africa Water politics in the Nile Basin People Muhammad Ali of Egypt Samuel Baker Richard Francis Burton James Augustus Grant Pedro Páez John Hanning Speke Henry Morton Stanley Other Flooding of the Nile Nilometer Nile Basin Nile Delta Nilotic landscape Nilotic languages Nilotic peoples Pollution v t e Egypt topics History Chronology Prehistoric Ancient topics Achaemenid 27th Dynasty 31st Dynasty Ptolemaic Battle of Actium Lighthouse of Alexandria Roman Diocese of Egypt Library of Alexandria Christian Sassanid Muslim Rashidun Caliphate Fustat Islamization Tulunid dynasty Ikhshidid dynasty Fatimid Caliphate Crusader invasions Ayyubid dynasty Mamluk Sultanate Mamluk Ottoman Ottoman Egypt Khedivate and Kingdom of Egypt Muhammad Ali dynasty Nahda Khedivate Egyptian–Ethiopian War Urabi revolt Modern French occupation Revolt of Cairo British occupation 1919 revolution Sultanate World War II Kingdom 1948 Arab–Israeli War Republic Nasser era 1952 Egyptian revolution Land reform Suez Crisis United Arab Republic Six-Day War Sadat era Yom Kippur War Egyptian–Libyan War Assassination of Anwar Sadat Mubarak era 2010s Crisis 2011 Egyptian revolution 2013 Rabaa massacre By topic Anarchism Capital Cigarette industry Constitution Copts Genetic Jews Muslim Brotherhood 1928–1938 1939–1954 1954–present Parliament Population Postal Saladin Timekeeping devices By city Alexandria Cairo Port Said Geography Cities Climate Earthquakes Environmental issues Fossils Geology Halfaya Pass Islands Lakes Mount Sinai Nile Delta Northern coast Oases Qattara Depression Red Sea Riviera Rivers Nile Sinai Peninsula Suez Canal Towns and villages Wildlife Politics Administrative divisions Governorates Civil Code Corruption Conscription Constitution Elections Foreign relations Missions Islamic extremism Judiciary Law enforcement Massacres Military Supreme Council Nationality law Parliament Passport Political parties President list Prime Minister list Proposed new capital Refugees of the Syrian civil war Terrorism Terrorism and tourism Twin towns and sister cities Economy Agriculture Banking National Bank Companies Economic regions Egyptian stock exchange Egyptian pound Energy Entrepreneurship policies Fishing Impact on the environment Lighthouses Military industry Mining Mines Nuclear program Power stations Aswan Dam Role of the Egyptian Armed Forces Tallest buildings Telecommunications Internet Tourism Cultural tourism Transport Airlines Airports Railway stations Water supply and sanitation Water resources management Society General Abortion Animal welfare Billionaires Cannabis Capital punishment Censuses Corruption Crime Human trafficking Mass sexual assault Rape Demographics Diaspora Education Academic grading Law schools Medical schools Schools Universities Families Abaza family Feminism Gender inequality Health Healthcare Hospitals Housing Human rights Freedom of religion LGBT rights International rankings Languages Egyptian Arabic Saʽidi Arabic Sign Language Liberalism Literature Prostitution Religion Baháʼí Blasphemy law Christianity Catholic dioceses Coptic Churches Hinduism Identification card controversy Irreligion Islam Ahmadiyya Mosques Niqāb Judaism Synagogues Scientology Smoking Units of measurement Vehicle registration plates Waste management Women Culture Architecture Art (ancient) Art (contemporary) Botanical gardens Castles Cinema Clothing in ancient Egypt Dance in ancient Egypt Belly dance Almah Raqs sharqi Baladi Tahtib Tanoura Zaffa Cuisine Coat of arms Cuisine Films Beer Wine National symbols Flag list regions Football Football clubs Football stadiums Egyptians Mass media Magazines Newspapers Radio TV Museums Music Mythology National anthem Sport Olympics Public holidays World Heritage Sites Category Portal WikiProject Commons v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Agriculture Architecture Labyrinth Obelisks Pylon Revival Astronomy Art Painting Portraiture Beauty and cosmetics Chronology Cities List Clothing Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Population history of Egypt Race controversy Pottery Prehistoric Egypt Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade Egypt–Mesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject .mw-parser-output .sister-bar{display:flex;justify-content:center;align-items:baseline;font-size:88%;background-color:#fdfdfd;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;clear:both;margin:1em 0 0;padding:0 2em}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-header{margin:0 1em 0 0.5em;padding:0.2em 0;flex:0 0 auto;min-height:24px;line-height:22px}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-content{display:flex;flex-flow:row wrap;flex:0 1 auto;align-items:baseline;padding:0.2em 0;column-gap:1em;margin:0;list-style:none}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-item{display:flex;align-items:baseline;margin:0.15em 0;min-height:24px;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-logo{width:22px;line-height:22px;margin:0 3px 0 2px;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-link{margin:0 2px 0 4px;text-align:left}@media screen and (max-width:960px){.mw-parser-output .sister-bar{flex-flow:column wrap;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-header{flex:0 1}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-content{flex:1;border-top:1px solid #a2a9b1;margin:0;list-style:none}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-item{flex:0 0 20em;min-width:20em}}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+.mw-empty-elt+.sister-bar,.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+.mw-empty-elt+.mw-empty-elt+.sister-bar,.mw-parser-output .sister-bar+.navbox-styles+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .sister-bar+.mw-empty-elt+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}@media print{body.ns-0 .mw-parser-output .sister-bar{display:none!important}} Nile at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Travel guides from Wikivoyage .mw-parser-output .tooltip-dotted{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help} Authority control databases International VIAF GND FAST WorldCat National United States France 2 BnF data 2 Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Croatia Geographic Pleiades Other IdRef NARA İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX