The Leibstadt Nuclear Power Plant in Switzerland Per capita nuclear power production Nuclear power is the use of nuclear reactions to produce electricity . Nuclear power can be obtained from nuclear fission , nuclear decay and nuclear fusion reactions. Presently, the vast majority of electricity from nuclear power is produced by nuclear fission of uranium and plutonium in nuclear power plants . Nuclear decay processes are used in niche applications such as radioisotope thermoelectric generators in some space probes such as Voyager 2 . Reactors producing controlled fusion power have been operated since 1958 but have yet to generate net power and are not expected to be commercially available in the near future.

The first nuclear power plant was built in the 1950s.

The global installed nuclear capacity grew to 100 GW in the late 1970s, and then expanded during the 1980s, reaching 300 GW by 1990.

The 1979 Three Mile Island accident in the United States and the 1986 Chernobyl disaster in the Soviet Union resulted in increased regulation and public opposition to nuclear power plants. Nuclear power plants supplied 2,602 terawatt hours (TWh) of electricity in 2023, equivalent to about 9% of global electricity generation , and were the second largest low-carbon power source after hydroelectricity .

As of November 2025, there are 416 civilian fission reactors in the world , with overall capacity of 376 GW, 63 under construction and 87 planned, with a combined capacity of 66 GW and 84 GW, respectively.

The United States has the largest fleet of nuclear reactors, generating almost 800 TWh per year with an average capacity factor of 92%.

The average global capacity factor is 89%. Most new reactors under construction are generation III reactors in Asia. Nuclear power is a safe and sustainable energy source that reduces carbon emissions. Nuclear power generation results in one of the lowest levels of fatalities per unit of energy generated compared to other energy sources. One study estimated that each nuclear plant built could have saved 800,000 life years due to averted air pollution from fossil fueled power plants. Coal, petroleum, natural gas and hydroelectricity have each caused more fatalities per unit of energy due to air pollution and accidents . Nuclear power plants also emit no greenhouse gases and result in less life-cycle carbon emissions than common sources of renewable energy .

The radiological hazards associated with nuclear power are the primary motivations of the anti-nuclear movement , which contends that nuclear power poses threats to people and the environment, citing the potential for accidents like the Fukushima nuclear disaster in Japan on March 11, 2011, and is too expensive to deploy when compared to alternative sustainable energy sources.

The first light bulbs ever lit by electricity generated by nuclear power at EBR-1 at Argonne National Laboratory -West (now the Idaho National Laboratory ), December 20, 1951.

The process of nuclear fission was discovered in 1938 after over four decades of work on the science of radioactivity and the elaboration of new nuclear physics that described the components of atoms . Soon after the discovery of the fission process, it was realized that neutrons released by a fissioning nucleus could, under the right conditions, induce fissions in nearby nuclei, thus initiating a self-sustaining chain reaction . Once this was experimentally confirmed in 1939, scientists in many countries petitioned their governments for support for nuclear fission research, just on the cusp of World War II , in order to develop a nuclear weapon .

In the United States, these research efforts led to the creation of the first human-made nuclear reactor , the Chicago Pile-1 under the Stagg Field stadium at the University of Chicago , which achieved criticality on December 2, 1942.

The reactor's development was part of the Manhattan Project , the Allied effort to create atomic bombs during World War II. It led to the building of larger single-purpose production reactors for the production of weapons-grade plutonium for use in the first nuclear weapons.

The United States tested the first nuclear weapon in July 1945, the Trinity test , and the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki happened one month later.

The launching ceremony of USS Nautilus January 1954.

In 1958 it would become the first vessel to reach the North Pole .

The Calder Hall nuclear power station in the United Kingdom, the world's first commercial nuclear power station Despite the military nature of the first nuclear devices, there was strong optimism in the 1940s and 1950s that nuclear power could provide cheap and endless energy. Electricity was generated for the first time by a nuclear reactor on December 20, 1951, at the EBR-I experimental station near Arco, Idaho , which initially produced about 100 kW.

In 1953, American President Dwight Eisenhower gave his " Atoms for Peace " speech at the United Nations , emphasizing the need to develop "peaceful" uses of nuclear power quickly. This was followed by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 which allowed rapid declassification of U.S. reactor technology and encouraged development by the private sector. First power generation The first organization to develop practical nuclear power was the U.S. Navy , with the S1W reactor for the purpose of propelling submarines and aircraft carriers .

The first nuclear-powered submarine, USS Nautilus , was put to sea in January 1954.

The S1W reactor was a pressurized water reactor . This design was chosen because it was simpler, more compact, and easier to operate compared to alternative designs, thus more suitable to be used in submarines. This decision would result in the PWR being the reactor of choice also for power generation, thus having a lasting impact on the civilian electricity market in the years to come.

On June 27, 1954, the Obninsk Nuclear Power Plant in the USSR became the world's first nuclear power plant to generate electricity for a power grid , producing around 5 megawatts of electric power.

The world's first commercial nuclear power station, Calder Hall at Windscale, England was connected to the national power grid on 27 August 1956.

In common with a number of other generation I reactors , the plant had the dual purpose of producing electricity and plutonium-239 , the latter for the nascent nuclear weapons program in Britain . Expansion and first opposition The total global installed nuclear capacity initially rose relatively quickly, rising from less than 1 gigawatt (GW) in 1960 to 100 GW in the late 1970s.

During the 1970s and 1980s rising economic costs (related to extended construction times largely due to regulatory changes and pressure-group litigation) and falling fossil fuel prices made nuclear power plants then under construction less attractive.

In the 1980s in the U.S. and 1990s in Europe electricity liberalization made investment in new nuclear power plants (which have high initial capital costs but low operating costs) less desirable than natural gas plants (which had little political opposition, were faster to build, and had low fuel prices).

The 1973 oil crisis had a significant effect on countries, such as France and Japan , which had relied more heavily on oil for electric generation to invest in nuclear power. France would construct 25 nuclear power plants over the next 15 years, and as of 2019, 71% of French electricity was generated by nuclear power, the highest percentage for any nation in the world. Some local opposition to nuclear power emerged in the United States in the early 1960s.

In the late 1960s, some members of the scientific community began to express pointed concerns. These anti-nuclear concerns related to nuclear accidents , nuclear proliferation , nuclear terrorism and radioactive waste disposal .

In the early 1970s, there were large protests about a proposed nuclear power plant in Wyhl , Germany.

The anti-nuclear success at Wyhl inspired opposition to nuclear power in other parts of Europe and North America.

By the mid-1970s anti-nuclear activism gained a wider appeal and influence, and nuclear power started to become an issue of major public protest.

In some countries, the nuclear power debate "reached an intensity unprecedented in the history of technology controversies".

The increased public hostility to nuclear power led to a longer license procurement process, more regulations and increased requirements for safety equipment, which made new construction much more expensive.

In the United States, over 120 reactor proposals were ultimately cancelled and the construction of new reactors ground to a halt.

The 1979 accident at Three Mile Island played a major part in the reduction in the number of new plant constructions in many countries. Chernobyl and renaissance The town of Pripyat abandoned since 1986, with the Chernobyl plant and the Chernobyl New Safe Confinement arch in the distance Olkiluoto 3 under construction in 2009. It was the first EPR , a modernized PWR design, to start construction.

During the 1980s one new nuclear reactor started up every 17 days on average.

By the end of the decade, global installed nuclear capacity reached 300 GW.

Since the late 1980s, new capacity additions slowed significantly, with the installed nuclear capacity reaching 365 GW in 2005.

The 1986 Chernobyl disaster in the USSR , involving an RBMK reactor, altered the development of nuclear power and led to a greater focus on meeting international safety and regulatory standards. It is considered the worst nuclear disaster in history both in total casualties, with 56 direct deaths, and financially, with the cleanup and the cost estimated at 18 billion Rbls (US$68 billion in 2019, adjusted for inflation).

The international organization to promote safety awareness and the professional development of operators in nuclear facilities , the World Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO), was created as a direct outcome of the 1986 Chernobyl accident.

The Chernobyl disaster played a major part in the reduction in the number of new plant constructions in the following years. Influenced by these events, Italy voted against nuclear power in a 1987 referendum, becoming the first major economy to completely phase out nuclear power in 1990.

In the early 2000s, nuclear energy was expecting a nuclear renaissance , an increase in the construction of new reactors, due to concerns about carbon dioxide emissions .

During this period, newer generation III reactors , such as the EPR began construction. Net electrical generation by source and growth from 1980.

In terms of energy generated between 1980 and 2010, the contribution from fission grew the fastest. Electricity production in France , showing the shift to nuclear power.

The rate of new reactor constructions essentially halted in the late 1980s. Increased capacity factor in existing reactors was primarily responsible for the continuing increase in electrical energy produced during this period. Electricity generation trends in the top producing countries (Our World in Data) Fukushima accident Prospects of a nuclear renaissance were delayed by another nuclear accident.

The 2011 Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident was caused by the Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami , one of the largest earthquakes ever recorded.

The Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant suffered three core meltdowns due to failure of the emergency cooling system for lack of electricity supply. This resulted in the most serious civilian nuclear accident since the 1986 Chernobyl disaster.

The accident prompted a re-examination of nuclear safety and nuclear energy policy in many countries. Germany approved plans to close all its reactors by 2022, and many other countries reviewed their nuclear power programs.

Following the disaster, Japan shut down all of its nuclear power reactors, some of them permanently, and in 2015 began a gradual process to restart the remaining 40 reactors, following safety checks and based on revised criteria for operations and public approval.

In 2022, the Japanese government, under the leadership of Prime Minister Fumio Kishida , declared that 10 more nuclear power plants were to be reopened since the 2011 disaster. Kishida is also pushing for research and construction of new safer nuclear plants to safeguard Japanese consumers from the fluctuating price of the fossil fuel market and reduce Japan's greenhouse gas emissions. Kishida intends to have Japan become a significant exporter of nuclear energy and technology to developing countries around the world. Current prospects By 2015, the IAEA's outlook for nuclear energy had become more promising, recognizing the importance of low-carbon generation for mitigating climate change .

As of 2015 , the global trend was for new nuclear power stations coming online to be balanced by the number of old plants being retired.

In 2016, the U.S. Energy Information Administration projected for its "base case" that world nuclear power generation would increase from 2,344 terawatt hours (TWh) in 2012 to 4,500 TWh in 2040. Most of the predicted increase was expected to be in Asia.

As of 2018, there were over 150 nuclear reactors planned including 50 under construction.

In January 2019, China had 45 reactors in operation, 13 under construction, and planned to build 43 more, which would make it the world's largest generator of nuclear electricity.

As of 2021, 17 reactors were reported to be under construction. Its share of electricity from nuclear power was 5% in 2019.

In October 2021, the Japanese cabinet approved the new Plan for Electricity Generation to 2030 prepared by the Agency for Natural Resources and Energy (ANRE) and an advisory committee, following public consultation.

The nuclear target for 2030 requires the restart of another ten reactors. Prime Minister Fumio Kishida in July 2022 announced that the country should consider building advanced reactors and extending operating licences beyond 60 years.

As of 2022, with world oil and gas prices on the rise, while Germany is restarting its coal plants to deal with loss of Russian gas that it needs to supplement its Energiewende , many other countries have announced ambitious plans to reinvigorate ageing nuclear generating capacity with new investments. French President Emmanuel Macron announced his intention to build six new reactors in coming decades, placing nuclear at the heart of France's drive for carbon neutrality by 2050. Meanwhile, in the United States, the Department of Energy , in collaboration with commercial entities, TerraPower and X-energy , is planning on building two different advanced nuclear reactors by 2027, with further plans for nuclear implementation in its long term green energy and energy security goals.

During the 2020s, nuclear industry interest in small modular reactors (SMR) has grown enormously, on the expectation that smaller reactors will permit faster deployment with lower financing costs during the build, and lower cost from higher-volume factory manufacturing of the smaller major components, more than compensating for the economies of scale of traditional large reactors.

In 2026, Natixis Corporate and Investment Banking reported that the SMR sector was still far from commercial reality and was entering a phase where engineering ambition must confront regulatory complexity, financing realities and industrial execution. Power plants An animation of a pressurized water reactor in operation The reaction releases energy and neutrons.

The released neutrons can hit other uranium or plutonium nuclei, causing new fission reactions, which release more energy and more neutrons. This is called a chain reaction .

In most commercial reactors, the reaction rate is contained by control rods that absorb excess neutrons.

The controllability of nuclear reactors depends on the fact that a small fraction of neutrons resulting from fission are delayed .

The time delay between the fission and the release of the neutrons slows changes in reaction rates and gives time for moving the control rods to adjust the reaction rate. Fuel cycle The nuclear fuel cycle begins when uranium is mined, enriched, and manufactured into nuclear fuel (1), which is delivered to a nuclear power plant .

After use, the spent fuel is delivered to a reprocessing plant (2) or to a final repository (3).

In nuclear reprocessing , 95% of spent fuel can potentially be recycled to be returned to use in a power plant (4). Main articles: Nuclear fuel cycle and Integrated Nuclear Fuel Cycle Information System The nuclear fuel cycle starts with uranium mining .

The uranium ore is then converted into a compact ore concentrate , known as yellowcake (U 3 O 8 ), to facilitate transport. Fission reactors generally need uranium-235 , a fissile isotope of uranium .

The concentration of uranium-235 in natural uranium is low (about 0.7%). Some reactors can use this natural uranium as fuel, depending on their neutron economy . These reactors generally have graphite or heavy water moderators. For light water reactors, the most common type of reactor, this concentration is too low, and it must be increased by a process called uranium enrichment .

In civilian light water reactors, uranium is typically enriched to 3.5–5% uranium-235.

The uranium is then generally converted into uranium oxide (UO 2 ), a ceramic, that is then compressively sintered into fuel pellets, a stack of which forms fuel rods of the proper composition and geometry for the particular reactor.

After some time in the reactor, the fuel have reduced fissile material and increased fission products, until its use becomes impractical.

At this point, the spent fuel will be moved to a spent fuel pool which provides cooling for the thermal heat and shielding for ionizing radiation.

After several months or years, the spent fuel is radioactively and thermally cool enough to be moved to dry storage casks or reprocessed. Uranium resources Main articles: Uranium market , Uranium mining , and Energy development § Nuclear Proportions of the isotopes uranium-238 (blue) and uranium-235 (red) found in natural uranium and in enriched uranium for different applications. Light water reactors use 3–5% enriched uranium, while CANDU reactors work with natural uranium. Uranium is a fairly common element in the Earth's crust: it is approximately as common as tin or germanium , and is about 40 times more common than silver . Uranium is present in trace concentrations in most rocks, dirt, and ocean water, but is generally economically extracted only where it is present in relatively high concentrations.

As of 2011 the world's known resources of uranium, economically recoverable at the arbitrary price ceiling of US$130/kg, were enough to last for between 70 and 100 years in current reactors. Light water reactors (which account for almost all operational reactors) make relatively inefficient use of nuclear fuel, mostly using only the very rare uranium-235 isotope. Limited uranium-235 supply may inhibit substantial expansion with the current nuclear technology. Nuclear reprocessing can make this waste reusable, and newer reactors also achieve a more efficient use of the available resources than older ones. More advanced nuclear reactor technologies, such as fast reactors , can use much more of the natural uranium, use current nuclear waste as fuel, as well as creating new fuel out of non-fissile material (see breeder reactor ). With a pure fast reactor fuel cycle with a burn up of all the uranium and actinides (which presently make up the most hazardous substances in nuclear waste), there is an estimated 160,000 years worth of uranium in total conventional resources and phosphate ore at the price of 60–100 US$/kg. These advanced fuel cycles and nuclear reprocessing are currently not widely used because the price of uranium is very low compared to the cost of nuclear plants, so it's more economically viable to mine new uranium rather than reprocess it. Nuclear reprocessing also carries higher risk of nuclear proliferation, as it separates material that can be used to manufacture nuclear weapons. Unconventional uranium resources also exist. Uranium is naturally present in seawater at a concentration of about 3 micrograms per liter, with 4.4 billion tons of uranium considered present in seawater at any time.

In 2014 it was suggested that it would be economically competitive to produce nuclear fuel from seawater if the process was implemented at large scale. Over geological timescales, uranium extracted on an industrial scale from seawater would be replenished by both river erosion of rocks and the natural process of uranium dissolved from the surface area of the ocean floor, both of which maintain the solubility equilibria of seawater concentration at a stable level. Some commentators have argued that this strengthens the case for nuclear power to be considered a renewable energy . Waste Main article: Nuclear waste Typical composition of uranium dioxide fuel before and after approximately three years in the once-through nuclear fuel cycle of a LWR The normal operation of nuclear power plants and facilities produce radioactive waste , or nuclear waste. This type of waste is also produced during plant decommissioning. There are two broad categories of nuclear waste: low-level waste and high-level waste.

The first has low radioactivity and includes contaminated items such as clothing, which poses limited threat. High-level waste is mainly the spent fuel from nuclear reactors, which is very radioactive and must be cooled and then safely disposed of or reprocessed. High-level waste Main articles: High-level waste and Spent nuclear fuel Activity of spent UOx fuel in comparison to the activity of natural uranium ore over time Dry cask storage vessels storing spent nuclear fuel assemblies The most important waste stream from nuclear power reactors is spent nuclear fuel , which is considered high-level waste (HLW). For light water reactors (LWRs), spent fuel is typically composed of 95% uranium, 4% fission products , and about 1% transuranic actinides (mostly plutonium , neptunium and americium ).

The fission products are responsible for the bulk of the short-term radioactivity, whereas the plutonium and other transuranics are responsible for the bulk of the long-term radioactivity. High-level waste must be stored isolated from the biosphere with sufficient shielding so as to limit radiation exposure.

After being removed from the reactors, used fuel bundles are stored for six to ten years in spent fuel pools , which provide cooling and shielding against radiation.

After that, the fuel is cool enough that it can be safely transferred to dry cask storage .

The radioactivity decreases exponentially with time, such that it will have decreased by 99.5% after 100 years.

The more intensely radioactive short-lived fission products (SLFPs) decay into stable elements in approximately 300 years, and after about 100,000 years, the spent fuel becomes less radioactive than natural uranium ore. Commonly suggested methods to isolate long-lived fission product (LLFP) waste from the biosphere include separation and transmutation , synroc treatments, or deep geological storage. Thermal-neutron reactors , which presently constitute the majority of the world fleet, cannot burn up the reactor grade plutonium that is generated during the reactor operation. This limits the life of nuclear fuel to a few years.

In some countries, such as the United States, spent fuel is classified in its entirety as a nuclear waste.

In other countries, such as France, it is largely reprocessed to produce a partially recycled fuel, known as mixed oxide fuel or MOX . For spent fuel that does not undergo reprocessing, the most concerning isotopes are the medium-lived transuranic elements , which are led by reactor-grade plutonium (with a half-life 24,000 years). Some proposed reactor designs, such as the integral fast reactor and molten salt reactors , can use as fuel the plutonium and other actinides in spent fuel from light water reactors, thanks to their fast fission spectrum. This offers a potentially more attractive alternative to deep geological disposal.

The facility is seen as a potential demonstration for storing spent fuel from civilian reactors.

Following interim storage in a spent fuel pool , the bundles of used fuel rod assemblies of a typical nuclear power station are often stored on site in dry cask storage vessels. Disposal of nuclear waste is often considered the most politically divisive aspect in the lifecycle of a nuclear power facility.

The most common fissionable material that is recycled is the reactor-grade plutonium (RGPu) that is extracted from spent fuel. It is mixed with uranium oxide and fabricated into mixed-oxide or MOX fuel . Because thermal LWRs remain the most common reactor worldwide, this type of recycling is the most common. It is considered to increase the sustainability of the nuclear fuel cycle, reduce the attractiveness of spent fuel to theft, and lower the volume of high level nuclear waste. Spent MOX fuel cannot generally be recycled for use in thermal-neutron reactors. This issue does not affect fast-neutron reactors , which are therefore preferred in order to achieve the full energy potential of the original uranium.

The main constituent of spent fuel from LWRs is slightly enriched uranium . This can be recycled into reprocessed uranium (RepU), which can be used in a fast reactor, used directly as fuel in CANDU reactors, or re-enriched for another cycle through an LWR. Re-enriching of reprocessed uranium is common in France and Russia. Reprocessed uranium is also safer in terms of nuclear proliferation potential. Reprocessing has the potential to recover up to 95% of the uranium and plutonium fuel in spent nuclear fuel, as well as reduce long-term radioactivity within the remaining waste. However, reprocessing has been politically controversial because of the potential for nuclear proliferation and varied perceptions of increasing the vulnerability to nuclear terrorism . Reprocessing also leads to higher fuel cost compared to the once-through fuel cycle.

While reprocessing can reduce the volume of high-level waste by 80%, it does not reduce the fission products that are the primary causes of residual heat generation and radioactivity for the first century outside the reactor. Thus, reprocessed waste still requires an almost identical treatment to spent nuclear fuel at least for the first hundred years, after which the radioactivity of reprocessed waste may decline more rapidly. Reprocessing of civilian fuel from power reactors is currently done in France, the United Kingdom, Russia, Japan, and India.

In the United States, spent nuclear fuel is currently not reprocessed.

The La Hague reprocessing facility in France has operated commercially since 1976 and is responsible for half the world's reprocessing as of 2010. It produces MOX fuel from spent fuel derived from several countries. More than 32,000 tonnes of spent fuel had been reprocessed as of 2015, with the majority from France, 17% from Germany, and 9% from Japan. Breeding Nuclear fuel assemblies being inspected before entering a pressurized water reactor in the United States Main articles: Breeder reactor and Nuclear power proposed as renewable energy Breeding is the process of converting non-fissile material into fissile material that can be used as nuclear fuel.

The non-fissile material that can be used for this process is called fertile material , and constitute the vast majority of current nuclear waste. This breeding process occurs naturally in breeder reactors .

As opposed to light water thermal-neutron reactors, which use uranium-235 (0.7% of all natural uranium), fast-neutron breeder reactors use uranium-238 (99.3% of all natural uranium) or thorium. A number of fuel cycles and breeder reactor combinations are considered to be sustainable or renewable sources of energy.

In 2006 it was estimated that with seawater extraction, there was likely five billion years' worth of uranium resources for use in breeder reactors. Breeder technology has been used in several reactors, but as of 2006, the high cost of reprocessing fuel safely requires uranium prices of more than US$200/kg before becoming justified economically. Breeder reactors are however being developed for their potential to burn all of the actinides (the most active and dangerous components) in the present inventory of nuclear waste, while also producing power and creating additional quantities of fuel for more reactors via the breeding process.

As of 2017, there are two breeders producing commercial power, BN-600 reactor and the BN-800 reactor , both in Russia.

The Phénix breeder reactor in France was powered down in 2009 after 36 years of operation. Both China and India are building breeder reactors.

The Indian 500 MWe Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor is in the commissioning phase, with plans to build more. Another alternative to fast-neutron breeders are thermal-neutron breeder reactors that use uranium-233 bred from thorium as fission fuel in the thorium fuel cycle . Thorium is about 3.5 times more common than uranium in the Earth's crust, and has different geographic characteristics. India's three-stage nuclear power programme features the use of a thorium fuel cycle in the third stage, as it has abundant thorium reserves but little uranium. Decommissioning Main article: Nuclear decommissioning Nuclear decommissioning is the process of dismantling a nuclear facility to the point that it no longer requires measures for radiation protection, returning the facility and its parts to a safe enough level to be entrusted for other uses. Due to the presence of radioactive materials, nuclear decommissioning presents technical and economic challenges.

The costs of decommissioning are generally spread over the lifetime of a facility and saved in a decommissioning fund. Production Further information: Nuclear power by country and List of nuclear reactors The map shows the commercial nuclear power plants in the world. Research reactors are not considered nuclear power plants. Operating reactors, building new reactors Operating reactors, planning new build No reactors, building new reactors No reactors, new in planning Operating reactors, stable Operating reactors, decided on phase-out Civil nuclear power is illegal No reactors 2024 world electricity generation by source in terawatt-hours (TWh). Total generation was 30.85 petawatt-hours . Coal 10,587 (34.4%) Natural gas 6,796 (22.1%) Hydro 4,417 (14.4%) Nuclear 2,765 (8.99%) Wind 2,497 (8.12%) Solar 2,130 (6.92%) Other 1,569 (5.10%) Civilian nuclear power supplied 2,602 terawatt hours (TWh) of electricity in 2023, equivalent to about 9% of global electricity generation , and was the second largest low-carbon power source after hydroelectricity . Nuclear power's contribution to global energy production was about 4% in 2023. This is a little more than wind power, which provided 3.5% of global energy in 2023. Nuclear power's share of global electricity production has fallen from 16.5% in 1997, in large part because the economics of nuclear power have become more difficult.

As of November 2024, there are 415 civilian fission reactors in the world , with a combined electrical capacity of 374 gigawatt (GW). There are also 66 nuclear power reactors under construction and 87 reactors planned, with a combined capacity of 72 GW and 84 GW, respectively.

The United States has the largest fleet of nuclear reactors, generating over 800 TWh per year with an average capacity factor of 92%. Most reactors under construction are generation III reactors in Asia. Regional differences in the use of nuclear power are large.

The United States produces the most nuclear energy in the world, with nuclear power providing 19% of the electricity it consumes, while France produces the highest percentage of its electrical energy from nuclear reactors—65% in 2023.

In the European Union , nuclear power provides 22% of the electricity as of 2022. Nuclear power is the single largest low-carbon electricity source in the United States, and accounts for about half of the European Union's low-carbon electricity. Nuclear energy policy differs among European Union countries, and some, such as Austria, Estonia , Ireland and Italy , have no active nuclear power stations.

In addition, there were approximately 140 naval vessels using nuclear propulsion in operation, powered by about 180 reactors. These include military and some civilian ships, such as nuclear-powered icebreakers . International research is continuing into additional uses of process heat such as hydrogen production (in support of a hydrogen economy ), for desalinating sea water, and for use in district heating systems. Economics A comparison of levelized cost of energy (LCOE) over time for nuclear power and other sources.

While wind turbines and solar panels can be mass-produced and thus enjoy learning curve effects , nuclear are almost always one-of-a-kind projects due to the limited number of reactors being built.

The source of this chart, Our World in Data notes that the costs presented here is the global average , and these costs were driven up by 2 projects in the United States.

The organization recognises that the median cost of the most exported and produced nuclear energy facility in the 2010s the South Korean APR1400 , remained "constant", including in export. Main articles: Economics of nuclear power plants , List of companies in the nuclear sector , and cost of electricity by source The economics of new nuclear power plants is a controversial subject. Nuclear power plants typically have high capital costs for building the plant. For this reason, comparison with other power generation methods is strongly dependent on assumptions about construction timescales and capital financing for nuclear plants. Because of this strong dependency, the final cost of electricity from nuclear power is strongly dependent on the cost of capital . Analysis of the economics of nuclear power must also take into account who bears the risks of future uncertainties.

As of 2010, all operating nuclear power plants have been developed by state-owned or regulated electric utility monopolies. Many countries have since liberalized the electricity market where these risks, and the risk of cheaper competitors emerging before capital costs are recovered, are borne by plant suppliers and operators rather than consumers, which leads to a significantly different evaluation of the economics of new nuclear power plants.

The levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) from a new nuclear power plant is estimated to be 69 USD/MWh, according to an analysis by the International Energy Agency and the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency . This represents the median cost estimate for an nth-of-a-kind nuclear power plant to be completed in 2025, at a discount rate of 7%. Nuclear power was found to be the least-cost option among dispatchable technologies . Variable renewables can generate cheaper electricity: the median cost of onshore wind power was estimated to be 50 USD/MWh, and utility-scale solar power 56 USD/MWh. However, these sources are not directly comparable to nuclear power as they are not dispatchable . Measures to mitigate global warming , such as a carbon tax or carbon emissions trading , may favor the economics of nuclear power.

At the assumed CO 2 emission cost of 30 USD/ton, power from coal (88 USD/MWh) and gas (71 USD/MWh) is more expensive than low-carbon technologies. Electricity from long-term operation of nuclear power plants by lifetime extension was found to be the least-cost option, at 32 USD/MWh.

The high cost of construction is one of the biggest challenges for nuclear power plants. Nuclear power cost trends show large disparity by nation, design, build rate and the establishment of familiarity in expertise.

The only two nations for which data is available that saw cost decreases in the 2000s were India and South Korea. New small modular reactors , such as those developed by NuScale Power , are aimed at reducing the investment costs for new construction by making the reactors smaller and modular, so that they can be built in a factory. Certain designs had considerable early positive economics, such as the CANDU , which realized a much higher capacity factor and reliability when compared to generation II light water reactors up to the 1990s. Due to the on-line refueling reactor design, PHWRs (of which the CANDU design is a part) continue to hold many world record positions for longest continual electricity generation, often over 800 days.

The specific record as of 2019 is held by a PHWR at Kaiga Atomic Power Station , generating electricity continuously for 962 days. Nuclear power plants, though capable of some grid- load following , are typically run as much as possible to keep the cost of the generated electrical energy as low as possible, supplying mostly base-load electricity.

In some cases, Governments were found to force "consumers to pay upfront for potential cost overruns" or subsidize uneconomic nuclear energy or be required to do so. Nuclear operators are liable to pay for the waste management in the European Union.

In the U.S., the Congress reportedly decided 40 years ago that the nation, and not private companies, would be responsible for storing radioactive waste with taxpayers paying for the costs.

The chain reaction can also be manually stopped by inserting control rods into the reactor core. Emergency core cooling systems (ECCS) can remove the decay heat from the reactor if normal cooling systems fail. If the ECCS fails, multiple physical barriers limit the release of radioactive materials to the environment even in the case of an accident.

The last physical barrier is the large containment building . With a death rate of 0.03 per TWh , nuclear power is the second safest energy source per unit of energy generated, after solar power, in terms of mortality when the historical track-record is considered. Energy produced by coal, petroleum, natural gas and hydropower has caused more deaths per unit of energy generated due to air pollution and energy accidents . This is found when comparing the immediate deaths from other energy sources to both the immediate and the latent, or predicted, indirect cancer deaths from nuclear energy accidents.

When the direct and indirect fatalities (including fatalities resulting from the mining and air pollution) from nuclear power and fossil fuels are compared, the use of nuclear power has been calculated to have prevented about 1.84 million deaths from air pollution between 1971 and 2009, by reducing the proportion of energy that would otherwise have been generated by fossil fuels.

The severity of nuclear accidents is generally classified using the International Nuclear Event Scale (INES) introduced by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

The scale ranks anomalous events or accidents on a scale from 0 (a deviation from normal operation that poses no safety risk) to 7 (a major accident with widespread effects). There have been three accidents of level 5 or higher in the civilian nuclear power industry, two of which, the Chernobyl accident and the Fukushima accident , are ranked at level 7.

The first major nuclear accidents were the Kyshtym disaster in the Soviet Union and the Windscale fire in the United Kingdom, both in 1957.

The first major accident at a nuclear reactor in the USA occurred in 1961 at the SL-1 , a U.S. Army experimental nuclear power reactor at the Idaho National Laboratory . An uncontrolled chain reaction resulted in a steam explosion which killed the three crew members and caused a meltdown . Another serious accident happened in 1968, when one of the two liquid-metal-cooled reactors on board the Soviet submarine K-27 underwent a fuel element failure , with the emission of gaseous fission products into the surrounding air, resulting in 9 crew fatalities and 83 injuries.

The Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident was caused by the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami .

The accident has not caused any radiation-related deaths but resulted in radioactive contamination of surrounding areas.

The difficult cleanup operation is expected to cost tens of billions of dollars over 40 or more years.

The Three Mile Island accident in 1979 was a smaller scale accident, rated at INES level 5. There were no direct or indirect deaths caused by the accident.

The impact of nuclear accidents is controversial. According to Benjamin K. Sovacool , fission energy accidents ranked first among energy sources in terms of their total economic cost, accounting for 41% of all property damage attributed to energy accidents. Another analysis found that coal, oil, liquid petroleum gas and hydroelectric accidents (primarily due to the Banqiao Dam disaster ) have resulted in greater economic impacts than nuclear power accidents.

The study compares latent cancer deaths attributable to nuclear power with immediate deaths from other energy sources per unit of energy generated, and does not include fossil fuel related cancer and other indirect deaths created by the use of fossil fuel consumption in its "severe accident" (an accident with more than five fatalities) classification.

The Chernobyl accident in 1986 caused approximately 50 deaths from direct and indirect effects, and some temporary serious injuries from acute radiation syndrome .

The future predicted mortality from increases in cancer rates is estimated at 4000 in the decades to come. Nuclear power works under an insurance framework that limits or structures accident liabilities in accordance with national and international conventions. It is often argued that this potential shortfall in liability represents an external cost not included in the cost of nuclear electricity. This cost is small, amounting to about 0.1% of the levelized cost of electricity , according to a study by the Congressional Budget Office in the United States. These beyond-regular insurance costs for worst-case scenarios are not unique to nuclear power. Hydroelectric power plants are similarly not fully insured against a catastrophic event such as dam failures . For example, the failure of the Banqiao Dam caused the death of an estimated 30,000 to 200,000 people, and 11 million people lost their homes.

As private insurers base dam insurance premiums on limited scenarios, major disaster insurance in this sector is likewise provided by the state. Attacks and sabotage Main articles: Vulnerability of nuclear plants to attack , Nuclear terrorism , and Nuclear safety in the United States Terrorists could target nuclear power plants in an attempt to release radioactive contamination into the community.

The United States 9/11 Commission has said that nuclear power plants were potential targets originally considered for the September 11, 2001 attacks . An attack on a reactor's spent fuel pool could also be serious, as these pools are less protected than the reactor core.

The release of radioactivity could lead to thousands of near-term deaths and greater numbers of long-term fatalities.

In the United States, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission carries out "Force on Force" (FOF) exercises at all nuclear power plant sites at least once every three years.

In the United States, plants are surrounded by a double row of tall fences which are electronically monitored.

The plant grounds are patrolled by a sizeable force of armed guards. Insider sabotage is also a threat because insiders can observe and work around security measures.

The re-purposing of civilian nuclear industries for military purposes would be a breach of the Non-Proliferation Treaty , to which 190 countries adhere.

As of April 2012, there are thirty-one countries that have civil nuclear power plants, of which nine have nuclear weapons.

The vast majority of these nuclear weapons states have produced weapons before commercial nuclear power stations. A fundamental goal for global security is to minimize the nuclear proliferation risks associated with the expansion of nuclear power.

The Global Nuclear Energy Partnership was an international effort to create a distribution network in which developing countries in need of energy would receive nuclear fuel at a discounted rate, in exchange for that nation agreeing to forgo their own indigenous development of a uranium enrichment program.

The France-based Eurodif / European Gaseous Diffusion Uranium Enrichment Consortium is a program that successfully implemented this concept, with Spain and other countries without enrichment facilities buying a share of the fuel produced at the French-controlled enrichment facility, but without a transfer of technology. Iran was an early participant from 1974 and remains a shareholder of Eurodif via Sofidif . A 2009 United Nations report said that: the revival of interest in nuclear power could result in the worldwide dissemination of uranium enrichment and spent fuel reprocessing technologies, which present obvious risks of proliferation as these technologies can produce fissile materials that are directly usable in nuclear weapons.

On the other hand, power reactors can also reduce nuclear weapon arsenals when military-grade nuclear materials are reprocessed to be used as fuel in nuclear power plants.

The Megatons to Megawatts Program is considered the single most successful non-proliferation program to date. Up to 2005, the program had processed $8 billion of high enriched, weapons-grade uranium into low enriched uranium suitable as nuclear fuel for commercial fission reactors by diluting it with natural uranium . This corresponds to the elimination of 10,000 nuclear weapons. For approximately two decades, this material generated nearly 10 percent of all the electricity consumed in the United States, or about half of all U.S. nuclear electricity, with a total of around 7,000 TWh of electricity produced.

In total it is estimated to have cost $17 billion, a "bargain for US ratepayers", with Russia profiting $12 billion from the deal. Much needed profit for the Russian nuclear oversight industry, which after the collapse of the Soviet economy , had difficulties paying for the maintenance and security of the Russian Federation's highly enriched uranium and warheads.

The Megatons to Megawatts Program was hailed as a major success by anti-nuclear weapon advocates as it has largely been the driving force behind the sharp reduction in the number of nuclear weapons worldwide since the cold war ended. However, without an increase in nuclear reactors and greater demand for fissile fuel, the cost of dismantling and down blending has dissuaded Russia from continuing their disarmament.

The nuclear power debate concerns the controversy which has surrounded the deployment and use of nuclear fission reactors to generate electricity from nuclear fuel for civilian purposes. Proponents of nuclear energy regard it as a sustainable energy source that reduces carbon emissions and increases energy security by decreasing dependence on other energy sources that are often dependent on imports. For example, proponents note that annually, nuclear-generated electricity reduces 470 million metric tons of carbon dioxide emissions that would otherwise come from fossil fuels. Additionally, the amount of comparatively low waste that nuclear energy does create is safely disposed of by the large scale nuclear energy production facilities or it is repurposed/recycled for other energy uses. Proponents also claim that the present quantity of nuclear waste is small and can be reduced through the latest technology of newer reactors and that the operational safety record of fission-electricity in terms of deaths is so far "unparalleled". Kharecha and Hansen estimated that "global nuclear power has prevented an average of 1.84 million air pollution-related deaths and 64 gigatonnes of CO 2 -equivalent (GtCO 2 -eq) greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions that would have resulted from fossil fuel burning" and, if continued, it could prevent up to 7 million deaths and 240 GtCO 2 -eq emissions by 2050. Proponents also bring to attention the opportunity cost of using other forms of electricity. For example, the United States Environmental Protection Agency estimates that coal kills 30,000 people a year as a result of its environmental impact, while 60 people died in the Chernobyl disaster. A real world example of impact provided by proponents is the 650,000 ton increase in carbon emissions in the two months following the closure of the Vermont Yankee nuclear plant. A 2015 survey of AAAS members found that 65% support building more nuclear power plants, which rose to 79% among physicists. Opponents believe that nuclear power poses many threats to people's health and environment such as the risk of nuclear weapons proliferation, long-term safe waste management and terrorism in the future. They also contend that nuclear power plants are complex systems where many things can and have gone wrong. Critics find that one of the largest drawbacks to building new nuclear fission power plants are the high costs when compared to alternatives of sustainable energy sources. Proponents note that focusing on the levelized cost of energy (LCOE), however, ignores the value premium associated with 24/7 dispatchable electricity and the cost of storage and backup systems necessary to integrate variable energy sources into a reliable electrical grid. "Nuclear thus remains the dispatchable low-carbon technology with the lowest expected costs in 2025. Only large hydro reservoirs can provide a similar contribution at comparable costs but remain highly dependent on the natural endowments of individual countries". Regulatory requirements and licensing delays have been cited as one of the main drivers of nuclear cost increases; modern compliance costs average $60 million per plant annually, which exceeds profit in some facilities. Anti-nuclear protest near nuclear waste disposal centre at Gorleben in northern Germany Overall, many opponents find that nuclear energy cannot meaningfully contribute to climate change mitigation .

In a similar analysis, Brook had earlier determined that 50% of all global energy , including transportation synthetic fuels etc., could be generated within approximately 30 years if the global nuclear fission build rate was identical to historical proven installation rates calculated in GW per year per unit of global GDP (GW/year/$). This is in contrast to the conceptual studies for 100% renewable energy systems, which would require an order of magnitude more costly global investment per year, which has no historical precedent. These renewable scenarios would also need far greater land devoted to onshore wind and onshore solar projects. Brook notes that the "principal limitations on nuclear fission are not technical, economic or fuel-related, but are instead linked to complex issues of societal acceptance, fiscal and political inertia, and inadequate critical evaluation of the real-world constraints facing low-carbon alternatives". Land use The median land area used by US nuclear power stations per 1 GW installed capacity is 1.3 square miles (3.4 km 2 ). To generate the same amount of electricity annually (taking into account capacity factors ) from solar PV would require about 60 square miles (160 km 2 ), and from a wind farm about 310 square miles (800 km 2 ). Not included in this, is land required for the associated transmission lines, water supply, rail lines, mining and processing of nuclear fuel, and for waste disposal. Research Advanced fission reactor designs Main article: Generation IV reactor Current fission reactors in operation around the world are second or third generation systems, with most of the first-generation systems having been already retired. Research into advanced generation IV reactor types was officially started by the Generation IV International Forum (GIF) based on eight technology goals, including to improve economics, safety, proliferation resistance, natural resource use and the ability to consume existing nuclear waste in the production of electricity. Most of these reactors differ significantly from current operating light water reactors, and are expected to be available for commercial construction after 2030. Hybrid fusion-fission Main article: Nuclear fusion–fission hybrid Hybrid nuclear power is a proposed means of generating power by the use of a combination of nuclear fusion and fission processes.

The concept dates to the 1950s and was briefly advocated by Hans Bethe during the 1970s, but largely remained unexplored until a revival of interest in 2009, due to delays in the realization of pure fusion.

When a sustained nuclear fusion power plant is built, it has the potential to be capable of extracting all the fission energy that remains in spent fission fuel, reducing the volume of nuclear waste by orders of magnitude, and more importantly, eliminating all actinides present in the spent fuel, substances which cause security concerns. Fusion The US has been counting on private industry to lead in fusion power, while more recently China's government has made fusion a national priority.

In 2025, $2.1 billion was poured into a single Chinese state-owned fusion company, an amount two and a half times the U.S. Energy Department's annual fusion budget. Schematic of the ITER tokamak under construction in France Main articles: Nuclear fusion and Fusion power Nuclear fusion reactions have the potential to be safer and generate less radioactive waste than fission. These reactions appear potentially viable, though technically quite difficult and have yet to be created on a scale that could be used in a functional power plant. Fusion power has been under theoretical and experimental investigation since the 1950s. Nuclear fusion research is underway but fusion energy is not likely to be commercially widespread before 2050. Several experimental nuclear fusion reactors and facilities exist.

The largest and most ambitious international nuclear fusion project currently in progress is ITER , a large tokamak under construction in France. ITER is planned to pave the way for commercial fusion power by demonstrating self-sustained nuclear fusion reactions with positive energy gain. Construction of the ITER facility began in 2007, but the project has run into many delays and budget overruns.

The facility is now not expected to begin operations until the year 2034. A follow on commercial nuclear fusion power station, DEMO , has been proposed. There are also suggestions for a power plant based upon a different fusion approach, that of an inertial fusion power plant . Fusion-powered electricity generation was initially believed to be readily achievable, as fission-electric power had been. However, the extreme requirements for continuous reactions and plasma containment led to projections being extended by several decades.

The Atomic Age Opens . New York: Pocket Books. Archived from the original on 2016-03-28 . Retrieved 2017-11-03 . ^ "Reactors Designed by Argonne National Laboratory: Fast Reactor Technology" . U.S. Department of Energy, Argonne National Laboratory. 2012. Archived from the original on 2021-04-18 . Retrieved 2012-07-25 . ^ "Reactor Makes Electricity" . Popular Mechanics . Hearst Magazines. March 1952. p. 105. ^ J. Samuel Walker; Thomas R. Wellock. "A Short History of Nuclear Regulation, 1946–2009" (PDF) . U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. p. 2 . Retrieved 4 September 2025 . ^ a b c "50 Years of Nuclear Energy" (PDF) . International Atomic Energy Agency. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-01-07 . Retrieved 2006-11-09 . ^ "STR (Submarine Thermal Reactor) in "Reactors Designed by Argonne National Laboratory: Light Water Reactor Technology Development" " . U.S. Department of Energy, Argonne National Laboratory. 2012. Archived from the original on 2012-06-22 . Retrieved 2012-07-25 . ^ Rockwell, Theodore (1992).

The Rickover Effect . Naval Institute Press. p. 162. ISBN 978-1-55750-702-0 . ^ "From Obninsk Beyond: Nuclear Power Conference Looks to Future" . International Atomic Energy Agency . 2004-06-23. Archived from the original on 2006-11-15 . Retrieved 2006-06-27 . ^ Hill, C. N. (2013). An atomic empire: a technical history of the rise and fall of the British atomic energy programme . London, England: Imperial College Press. ISBN 978-1-908977-43-4 . ^ a b Bernard L. Cohen (1990).

The Nuclear Energy Option: An Alternative for the 90s . New York: Plenum Press. ISBN 978-0-306-43567-6 . ^ Beder, Sharon (2006). "The Japanese Situation, English version of conclusion of Sharon Beder, "Power Play: The Fight to Control the World's Electricity" " . Soshisha, Japan. Archived from the original on 2011-03-17 . Retrieved 2009-05-15 . ^ Palfreman, Jon (1997). "Why the French Like Nuclear Energy" . Frontline . Public Broadcasting Service . Archived from the original on 25 August 2007 . Retrieved 25 August 2007 . ^ de Preneuf, Rene. "Nuclear Power in France – Why does it Work?" . Archived from the original on 13 August 2007 . Retrieved 25 August 2007 . ^ a b "Nuclear Share of Electricity Generation in 2023" . Power Reactor Information System . International Atomic Energy Agency . Retrieved 2024-11-11 . ^ Garb, Paula (1999). "Review of Critical Masses: Opposition to Nuclear Power in California, 1958–1978" . Journal of Political Ecology . 6 . Archived from the original on 2018-06-01 . Retrieved 2011-03-14 . ^ a b c Rüdig, Wolfgang, ed. (1990). Anti-nuclear Movements: A World Survey of Opposition to Nuclear Energy . Detroit, Michigan: Longman Current Affairs. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-8103-9000-3 . ^ Martin, Brian (2007). "Opposing nuclear power: past and present" . Social Alternatives . 26 (2): 43– 47. Archived from the original on 2019-05-10 . Retrieved 2011-03-14 . ^ Mills, Stephen; Williams, Roger (1986). Public acceptance of new technologies: an international review . London: Croom Helm. pp. 375– 376. ISBN 978-0-7099-4319-8 . ^ Robert Gottlieb (2005). Forcing the Spring: The Transformation of the American Environmental Movement , Revised Edition, Island Press, p. 237. ^ Falk, Jim (1982). Global Fission: The Battle Over Nuclear Power . Melbourne, Australia: Oxford University Press. pp. 95–96 . ISBN 978-0-19-554315-5 . ^ a b Walker, J. Samuel (2004). Three Mile Island: A Nuclear Crisis in Historical Perspective Archived 2023-03-23 at the Wayback Machine (Berkeley, California: University of California Press), pp. 10–11. ^ a b Kitschelt, Herbert P. (January 1986). "Political Opportunity Structures and Political Protest: Anti-Nuclear Movements in Four Democracies". British Journal of Political Science . 16 (1): 57– 85. doi : 10.1017/s000712340000380x . ^ "Costs of Nuclear Power Plants – What Went Wrong?" . www.phyast.pitt.edu . Archived from the original on 2010-04-13 . Retrieved 2007-12-04 . ^ Ginn, Vance; Raia, Elliott (August 18, 2017). "nuclear energy may soon be free from its tangled regulatory web" . Washington Examiner . Archived from the original on January 6, 2019 . Retrieved January 6, 2019 . ^ "Nuclear Power: Outlook for New U.S. Reactors" (PDF) . p. 3. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2015-09-24 . Retrieved 2015-10-18 . ^ Cook, James (1985-02-11). "Nuclear Follies". Forbes Magazine . ^ Thorpe, Gary S. (2015). AP Environmental Science, 6th ed . Barrons Educational Series. ISBN 978-1-4380-6728-5 . ISBN 1-4380-6728-3 ^ "PRIS - Trend reports - Unit Capability" . pris.iaea.org . International Atomic Energy Agency . Retrieved 5 September 2025 . ^ "Chernobyl Nuclear Accident" . www.iaea.org . IAEA. 14 May 2014. Archived from the original on 11 June 2008 . Retrieved 23 March 2021 . ^ "Chernobyl: Assessment of Radiological and Health Impact, 2002 update; Chapter II – The release, dispersion and deposition of radionuclides" (PDF) . OECD-NEA. 2002. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 June 2015 . Retrieved 3 June 2015 . ^ Johnson, Thomas (author/director) (2006).

The battle of Chernobyl . Play Film / Discovery Channel. Archived from the original on 2021-03-07 . Retrieved 2021-03-23 . (see 1996 interview with Mikhail Gorbachev.) ^ Sassoon, Donald (2014-06-03). Contemporary Italy: Politics, Economy and Society Since 1945 . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-89377-6 . ^ Saltori, Massimiliano (17 May 2023). "Italy Votes to Include Nuclear Power In the National Energy Mix" . Earth.Org . Retrieved 5 September 2025 . ^ a b "Analysis: Nuclear renaissance could fizzle after Japan quake" . Reuters . 2011-03-14. Archived from the original on 2015-12-08 . Retrieved 2011-03-14 . ^ "Nuclear Reactors: Generation to Generation | American Academy of Arts and Sciences" . www.amacad.org . American Academy of Arts & Sciences . Retrieved 5 September 2025 . ^ "Analysis: The legacy of the Fukushima nuclear disaster" . Carbon Brief . 10 March 2016. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 24 March 2021 . ^ "The Fukushima-Daiichi Nuclear Power Station Accident: An overview" . United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation . Retrieved 2024-05-09 . ^ Westall, Sylvia & Dahl, Fredrik (2011-06-24). "IAEA Head Sees Wide Support for Stricter Nuclear Plant Safety" . Scientific American . Retrieved 2011-06-25 . {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Chandler, Jo (2011-03-19). "Is this the end of the nuclear revival?" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . Sydney, Australia. Archived from the original on 2020-05-10 . Retrieved 2020-02-20 . ^ "Israeli PM cancels plan to build nuclear plant" . xinhuanet.com . 2011-03-18. Archived from the original on March 18, 2011 . Retrieved 2011-03-17 . ^ "Startup of Sendai Nuclear Power Unit No.1" . Kyushu Electric Power Company Inc . 2015-08-11. Archived from the original on 2017-05-25 . Retrieved 2015-08-12 . ^ "Japan turns back to nuclear power in post-Fukushima shift" . Financial Times . London, England. 24 August 2022. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022 . Retrieved November 15, 2022 . ^ a b "Japan Is Reopening Nuclear Power Plants and Planning To Build New Ones" . August 25, 2022. Archived from the original on November 15, 2022 . Retrieved November 26, 2022 . ^ "January: Taking a fresh look at the future of nuclear power" . www.iea.org . Archived from the original on 2016-04-05 . Retrieved 2016-04-18 . ^ "Plans for New Reactors Worldwide" . World Nuclear Association . October 2015. Archived from the original on 2016-01-31 . Retrieved 2016-01-05 . ^ "International Energy outlook 2016" . US Energy Information Administration. Archived from the original on 15 August 2016 . Retrieved 17 August 2016 . ^ "Plans for New Nuclear Reactors Worldwide" . www.world-nuclear.org . World Nuclear Association. Archived from the original on 2018-09-28 . Retrieved 2018-09-29 . ^ "Can China become a scientific superpower? – The great experiment" .

The Economist . 12 January 2019. Archived from the original on 25 January 2019 . Retrieved 25 January 2019 . ^ "A global nuclear phaseout or renaissance? | DW | 04.02.2021" . Deutsche Welle (www.dw.com) . Archived from the original on 25 November 2021 . Retrieved 25 November 2021 . ^ World Nuclear Association. "Nuclear Power in Japan" . Archived from the original on 2020-04-01 . Retrieved 2022-09-12 . ^ "Germany's Uniper to restart coal-fired power plant as Gazprom halts supply to Europe" . Reuters. 22 August 2022. Archived from the original on 2022-09-09 . Retrieved 2022-09-12 . ^ "Macron bets on nuclear in carbon-neutrality push, announces new reactors" . Reuters. 10 February 2022. Archived from the original on 2022-09-14 . Retrieved 2022-09-12 . ^ "Department of Energy picks two advanced nuclear reactors for demonstration projects, announces new reactors" . Science.org. 16 October 2020. Archived from the original on 24 February 2023 . Retrieved 3 March 2023 . ^ Benoist, Eric; Boutros, Rita (2 June 2026). "Small Modular (Nuclear) Reactors: is the dream still alive?" . Natixis Corporate and Investment Banking . Paris . Retrieved 11 June 2026 . ^ "Nuclear Power Reactors in the World – 2015 Edition" (PDF) . International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 November 2020 . Retrieved 26 October 2017 . ^ a b "How does a nuclear reactor make electricity?" . www.world-nuclear.org . World Nuclear Association. Archived from the original on 24 August 2018 . Retrieved 24 August 2018 . ^ Spyrou, Artemis; Mittig, Wolfgang (2017-12-03). "Atomic age began 75 years ago with the first controlled nuclear chain reaction" . Scientific American . Archived from the original on 2018-11-18 . Retrieved 2018-11-18 . ^ a b "Stages of the Nuclear Fuel Cycle" . NRC Web . Nuclear Regulatory Commission . Archived from the original on 20 April 2021 . Retrieved 17 April 2021 . ^ a b c d "Nuclear Fuel Cycle Overview" . www.world-nuclear.org . World Nuclear Association. Archived from the original on 20 April 2021 . Retrieved 17 April 2021 . ^ "uranium Facts, information, pictures | Encyclopedia.com articles about uranium" . Encyclopedia.com . 2001-09-11. Archived from the original on 2016-09-13 . Retrieved 2013-06-14 . ^ "Second Thoughts About Nuclear Power" (PDF) . A Policy Brief – Challenges Facing Asia . January 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 16, 2013 . Retrieved September 11, 2012 . ^ a b c "Waste Management in the Nuclear Fuel Cycle" . Information and Issue Briefs . World Nuclear Association. 2006. Archived from the original on 2010-06-11 . Retrieved 2006-11-09 . ^ Muellner, Nikolaus; Arnold, Nikolaus; Gufler, Klaus; Kromp, Wolfgang; Renneberg, Wolfgang; Liebert, Wolfgang (August 2021). "Nuclear energy - The solution to climate change?" . Energy Policy . 155 112363. Bibcode : 2021EnPol.15512363M . doi : 10.1016/j.enpol.2021.112363 . ^ "Energy Supply" (PDF) . p. 271. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-12-15. and figure 4.10. ^ "Toward an Assessment of Future Proliferation Risk" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 November 2021 . Retrieved 25 November 2021 . ^ Martin, Brian (1 January 2015). "Nuclear power and civil liberties" . Faculty of Law, Humanities and the Arts – Papers (Archive) : 1– 6. Archived from the original on 25 November 2021 . Retrieved 26 November 2021 . ^ Kemp, R. Scott (29 June 2016). "Environmental Detection of Clandestine Nuclear Weapon Programs". Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences . 44 (1): 17– 35. Bibcode : 2016AREPS..44...17K . doi : 10.1146/annurev-earth-060115-012526 . hdl : 1721.1/105171 .

Although commercial reprocessing involves large, expensive facilities, some of which are identifiable in structure, a small, makeshift operation using standard industrial supplies is feasible (Ferguson 1977, US GAO 1978). Such a plant could be constructed to have no visual signatures that would reveal its location by overhead imaging, could be built in several months, and once operational could produce weapon quantities of fissile material in several days ^ Ferronsky, V. I.; Polyakov, V. A. (2012). Isotopes of the Earth's Hydrosphere . Springer. p. 399. ISBN 978-94-007-2856-1 . ^ a b Seko, Noriaki (July 29, 2013). "The current state of promising research into extraction of uranium from seawater – Utilization of Japan's plentiful seas" . Global Energy Policy Research. Archived from the original on October 9, 2018 . Retrieved October 9, 2018 . ^ Wang, Taiping; Khangaonkar, Tarang; Long, Wen; Gill, Gary (7 February 2014). "Development of a Kelp-Type Structure Module in a Coastal Ocean Model to Assess the Hydrodynamic Impact of Seawater Uranium Extraction Technology" . Journal of Marine Science and Engineering . 2 (1): 81– 92. Bibcode : 2014JMSE....2...81W . doi : 10.3390/jmse2010081 . ^ Alexandratos, Spiro D.; Kung, Stephen (20 April 2016). "Preface to the Special Issue: Uranium in Seawater" . Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research . 55 (15): 4101– 4102. doi : 10.1021/acs.iecr.6b01293 . ^ a b c d Finck, Philip. "Current Options for the Nuclear Fuel Cycle" (PDF) . JAIF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-04-12. ^ a b "Backgrounder on Radioactive Waste" . NRC . Nuclear Regulatory Commission . Archived from the original on 13 November 2017 . Retrieved 20 April 2021 . ^ "A fast reactor system to shorten the lifetime of long-lived fission products" . ^ "Radioactivity: Minor Actinides" . www.radioactivity.eu.com . Archived from the original on 2018-12-11 . Retrieved 2018-12-23 . ^ Ojovan, Michael I. (2014). An introduction to nuclear waste immobilisation, second edition (2nd ed.). Kidlington, Oxford, U.K.: Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-08-099392-8 . ^ "High-level radioactive waste" . nuclearsafety.gc.ca . Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission. February 3, 2014. Archived from the original on April 14, 2022 . Retrieved April 19, 2022 . ^ Hedin, A. (1997). Spent nuclear fuel - how dangerous is it? A report from the project 'Description of risk' (Technical report). Energy Technology Data Exchange. OSTI 587853 . ^ Bruno, Jordi; Duro, Lara; Diaz-Maurin, François (2020). "Spent nuclear fuel and disposal". Advances in Nuclear Fuel Chemistry . pp. 527– 553. doi : 10.1016/B978-0-08-102571-0.00014-8 . ISBN 978-0-08-102571-0 . ^ Ojovan, M. I.; Lee, W. E. (2005). An Introduction to Nuclear Waste Immobilisation . Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier Science Publishers. p. 315. ISBN 978-0-08-044462-8 . ^ National Research Council (1995). Technical Bases for Yucca Mountain Standards . Washington, DC: National Academy Press. p. 91. ISBN 978-0-309-05289-4 . ^ "The Status of Nuclear Waste Disposal" .

The American Physical Society. January 2006. Archived from the original on 2008-05-16 . Retrieved 2008-06-06 . ^ "Public Health and Environmental Radiation Protection Standards for Yucca Mountain, Nevada; Proposed Rule" (PDF) . United States Environmental Protection Agency. 2005-08-22. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-06-26 . Retrieved 2008-06-06 . ^ "CRS Report for Congress. Radioactive Waste Streams: Waste Classification for Disposal" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-08-29 . Retrieved 2018-12-22 .

The Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 (NWPA) defined irradiated fuel as spent nuclear fuel, and the byproducts as high-level waste. ^ Vandenbosch 2007, p. 21. ^ Clark, Duncan (2012-07-09). "Nuclear waste-burning reactor moves a step closer to reality" . Guardian . London, England. Archived from the original on 2022-10-08 . Retrieved 2013-06-14 . ^ Monbiot, George (5 December 2011). "A Waste of Waste" . Monbiot.com. Archived from the original on 2013-06-01 . Retrieved 2013-06-14 . ^ "Energy From Thorium: A Nuclear Waste Burning Liquid Salt Thorium Reactor" . YouTube. 2009-07-23. Archived from the original on 2021-12-11 . Retrieved 2013-06-14 . ^ "Role of Thorium to Supplement Fuel Cycles of Future Nuclear Energy Systems" (PDF) . IAEA. 2012. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 May 2021 . Retrieved 7 April 2021 . Once irradiated in a reactor, the fuel of a thorium–uranium cycle contains an admixture of 232U (half-life 68.9 years) whose radioactive decay chain includes emitters (particularly 208Tl) of high energy gamma radiation (2.6 MeV). This makes spent thorium fuel treatment more difficult, requires remote handling/control during reprocessing and during further fuel fabrication, but on the other hand, may be considered as an additional non-proliferation barrier. ^ "NRC: Low-Level Waste" . www.nrc.gov . Archived from the original on 17 August 2018 . Retrieved 28 August 2018 . ^ "The Challenges of Nuclear Power" . Archived from the original on 2017-05-10 . Retrieved 2013-01-04 . ^ "Coal Ash Is More Radioactive than Nuclear Waste" . Scientific American . 2007-12-13. Archived from the original on 2013-06-12 . Retrieved 2012-09-11 . ^ Gabbard, Alex (2008-02-05). "Coal Combustion: Nuclear Resource or Danger" . Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Archived from the original on February 5, 2007 . Retrieved 2008-01-31 . ^ "Coal ash is not more radioactive than nuclear waste" . CE Journal . 2008-12-31. Archived from the original on 2009-08-27. ^ "Yankee Nuclear Power Plant" . Yankeerowe.com. Archived from the original on 2006-03-03 . Retrieved 2013-06-22 . ^ "Why nuclear energy" . Generation Atomic . 26 January 2021. Archived from the original on 23 December 2018 . Retrieved 22 December 2018 . ^ "NPR Nuclear Waste May Get A Second Life" . NPR . Archived from the original on 2018-12-23 . Retrieved 2018-12-22 . ^ "Energy Consumption of the United States - The Physics Factbook" . hypertextbook.com . Archived from the original on 2018-12-23 . Retrieved 2018-12-22 . ^ "NRC: Dry Cask Storage" . Nrc.gov. 2013-03-26. Archived from the original on 2013-06-02 . Retrieved 2013-06-22 . ^ a b Montgomery, Scott L. (2010).

The Powers That Be , University of Chicago Press, p. 137. ^ "international Journal of Environmental Studies, The Solutions for Nuclear waste, December 2005" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-04-26 . Retrieved 2013-06-22 . ^ "Oklo: Natural Nuclear Reactors" . U.S. Department of Energy Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management, Yucca Mountain Project, DOE/YMP-0010. November 2004. Archived from the original on 2009-08-25 . Retrieved 2009-09-15 . ^ a b Gore, Al (2009). Our Choice: A Plan to Solve the Climate Crisis . Emmaus, Pennsylvania: Rodale. pp. 165–166 . ISBN 978-1-59486-734-7 . ^ Muller, Richard A.; Finsterle, Stefan; Grimsich, John; Baltzer, Rod; Muller, Elizabeth A.; Rector, James W.; Payer, Joe; Apps, John (29 May 2019). "Disposal of High-Level Nuclear Waste in Deep Horizontal Drillholes" . Energies . 12 (11): 2052. doi : 10.3390/en12112052 . ^ Mallants, Dirk; Travis, Karl; Chapman, Neil; Brady, Patrick V.; Griffiths, Hefin (14 February 2020). "The State of the Science and Technology in Deep Borehole Disposal of Nuclear Waste" . Energies . 13 (4): 833. doi : 10.3390/en13040833 . ^ "A Nuclear Power Renaissance?" . Scientific American . 2008-04-28 . Retrieved 2008-05-15 . {{ cite magazine }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ von Hippel, Frank N. (April 2008). "Nuclear Fuel Recycling: More Trouble Than It's Worth" . Scientific American . Archived from the original on 2008-11-19 . Retrieved 2008-05-15 . ^ "Licence granted for Finnish used fuel repository" . World Nuclear News . 2015-11-12. Archived from the original on 2015-11-24 . Retrieved 2018-11-18 . ^ Poinssot, Ch.; Bourg, S.; Ouvrier, N.; Combernoux, N.; Rostaing, C.; Vargas-Gonzalez, M.; Bruno, J. (May 2014). "Assessment of the environmental footprint of nuclear energy systems. Comparison between closed and open fuel cycles" . Energy . 69 : 199– 211. Bibcode : 2014Ene....69..199P . doi : 10.1016/j.energy.2014.02.069 . ^ a b c R. Stephen Berry and George S. Tolley, Nuclear Fuel Reprocessing Archived 2017-05-25 at the Wayback Machine , The University of Chicago, 2013. ^ Fairley, Peter (February 2007). "Nuclear Waste Land". IEEE Spectrum . 44 (2): 38– 44. doi : 10.1109/MSPEC.2007.295507 . ^ a b c "Processing of Used Nuclear Fuel" . World Nuclear Association. 2024-08-23. Archived from the original on 2018-12-25 . Retrieved 2026-01-16 . ^ Campbell, D. O.; Gift, E. H. (1978). Proliferation-resistant nuclear fuel cycles. (Technical report). Oak Ridge National Laboratory. doi : 10.2172/6743129 . OSTI 6743129 – via Office of Scientific and Technical Information. ^ Fedorov, M. I.; Dyachenko, A. I.; Balagurov, N. A.; Artisyuk, V. V. (2015). "Formation of proliferation-resistant nuclear fuel supplies based on reprocessed uranium for Russian nuclear technologies recipient countries" . Nuclear Energy and Technology . 1 (2): 111– 116. Bibcode : 2015NEneT...1..111F . doi : 10.1016/j.nucet.2015.11.023 . ^ Lloyd, Cody; Goddard, Braden (April 2018). "Proliferation resistant plutonium: An updated analysis". Nuclear Engineering and Design . 330 : 297– 302. Bibcode : 2018NuEnD.330..297L . doi : 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2018.02.012 . ^ a b Feiveson, Harold; et al. (2011). "Managing nuclear spent fuel: Policy lessons from a 10-country study" . Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists . Archived from the original on 2012-04-26 . Retrieved 2016-07-18 . ^ Kok, Kenneth D. (2010). Nuclear Engineering Handbook . CRC Press. p. 332. ISBN 978-1-4200-5391-3 . ^ Jarry, Emmanuel (6 May 2015). "Crisis for Areva's plant as clients shun nuclear" . Moneyweb . Reuters. Archived from the original on 23 July 2015 . Retrieved 6 May 2015 . ^ David, S. (April 2005). "Future Scenarios for Fission Based Reactors". Nuclear Physics A . 751 : 429– 441. Bibcode : 2005NuPhA.751..429D . doi : 10.1016/j.nuclphysa.2005.02.014 . ^ Brundtland, Gro Harlem (20 March 1987). "Chapter 7: Energy: Choices for Environment and Development" . Our Common Future: Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development . Oslo. Archived from the original on 21 January 2013 . Retrieved 27 March 2013 . Today's primary sources of energy are mainly non-renewable: natural gas, oil, coal, peat, and conventional nuclear power. There are also renewable sources, including wood, plants, dung, falling water, geothermal sources, solar, tidal, wind, and wave energy, as well as human and animal muscle-power. Nuclear reactors that produce their own fuel ('breeders') and eventually fusion reactors are also in this category ^ John McCarthy (2006). "Facts From Cohen and Others" . Progress and its Sustainability . Stanford. Archived from the original on 2007-04-10 . Retrieved 2006-11-09 . Citing: Cohen, Bernard L. (January 1983). "Breeder reactors: A renewable energy source". American Journal of Physics . 51 (1): 75– 76. Bibcode : 1983AmJPh..51...75C . doi : 10.1119/1.13440 . ^ "Advanced Nuclear Power Reactors" . Information and Issue Briefs . World Nuclear Association. 2006. Archived from the original on 2010-06-15 . Retrieved 2006-11-09 . ^ "Synergy between Fast Reactors and Thermal Breeders for Safe, Clean, and Sustainable Nuclear Power" (PDF) . World Energy Council . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-01-10 . Retrieved 2013-02-03 . ^ Kessler, Rebecca. "Are Fast-Breeder Reactors A Nuclear Power Panacea? by Fred Pearce: Yale Environment 360" . E360.yale.edu. Archived from the original on 2013-06-05 . Retrieved 2013-06-14 . ^ a b "Fast Neutron Reactors | FBR – World Nuclear Association" . www.world-nuclear.org . Archived from the original on 23 December 2017 . Retrieved 7 October 2018 . ^ "Prototype fast breeder reactor to be commissioned in two months: IGCAR director" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 15 September 2018 . Retrieved 28 August 2018 . ^ "India's breeder reactor to be commissioned in 2013" . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 2013-04-26 . Retrieved 2013-06-14 . ^ a b c "Thorium" . Information and Issue Briefs . World Nuclear Association. 2006. Archived from the original on 2013-02-16 . Retrieved 2006-11-09 . ^ Invernizzi, Diletta Colette; Locatelli, Giorgio; Velenturf, Anne; Love, Peter ED.; Purnell, Phil; Brookes, Naomi J. (September 2020). "Developing policies for the end-of-life of energy infrastructure: Coming to terms with the challenges of decommissioning" . Energy Policy . 144 111677. Bibcode : 2020EnPol.14411677I . doi : 10.1016/j.enpol.2020.111677 . hdl : 11311/1204791 . ^ "Decommissioning of nuclear installations" . www.iaea.org . 17 October 2016. Archived from the original on 21 April 2021 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . ^ Invernizzi, Diletta Colette; Locatelli, Giorgio; Brookes, Naomi J. (August 2017). "How benchmarking can support the selection, planning and delivery of nuclear decommissioning projects". Progress in Nuclear Energy . 99 : 155– 164. Bibcode : 2017PNuE...99..155I . doi : 10.1016/j.pnucene.2017.05.002 . ^ "Backgrounder on Decommissioning Nuclear Power Plants" . United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Archived from the original on 3 May 2021 . Retrieved 27 August 2021 .

Before a nuclear power plant begins operations, the licensee must establish or obtain a financial mechanism – such as a trust fund or a guarantee from its parent company – to ensure there will be sufficient money to pay for the ultimate decommissioning of the facility ^ "Yearly electricity data" . ember-energy.org . 21 April 2025 . Retrieved 21 April 2025 . ^ "Steep decline in nuclear power would threaten energy security and climate goals" . International Energy Agency. 2019-05-28. Archived from the original on 2019-10-12 . Retrieved 2019-07-08 . ^ "Energy consumption by source, World" . Our World in Data . Retrieved 2024-11-10 . ^ Butler, Nick (3 September 2018). "The challenge for nuclear is to recover its competitive edge" . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 2022-12-10 . Retrieved 9 September 2018 . ^ "What's the Lifespan for a Nuclear Reactor? Much Longer Than You Might Think" . Energy.gov . 16 April 2020. Archived from the original on 2020-06-09 . Retrieved 2020-06-09 . ^ "Under Construction Reactors" . International Atomic Energy Agency. Archived from the original on 2018-11-22 . Retrieved 2019-12-15 . ^ a b "Nuclear Power in the European Union" . World Nuclear Association. 2024-08-13 . Retrieved 2024-11-11 . ^ Apt, Jay; Keith, David W.; Morgan, M. Granger (January 1, 1970). "Promoting Low-Carbon Electricity Production" . Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. ^ "PRIS - Country Statistics" . pris.iaea.org . International Atomic Energy Agency . Retrieved 5 September 2025 . ^ "What is Nuclear Power Plant – How Nuclear Power Plants work | What is Nuclear Power Reactor – Types of Nuclear Power Reactors" . EngineersGarage. Archived from the original on 2013-10-04 . Retrieved 2013-06-14 . ^ Ragheb, Magdi. "Naval Nuclear Propulsion" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-02-26 . Retrieved 2015-06-04 .

As of 2001, about 235 naval reactors had been built. ^ "Nuclear Icebreaker Lenin" . Bellona. 2003-06-20. Archived from the original on October 15, 2007 . Retrieved 2007-11-01 . ^ Non-electric Applications of Nuclear Power: Seawater Desalination, Hydrogen Production and other Industrial Applications . International Atomic Energy Agency. 2007. ISBN 978-92-0-108808-6 . Archived from the original on 27 March 2019 . Retrieved 21 August 2018 . ^ Roser, Max (1 December 2020). "Why did renewables become so cheap so fast?" . Our World in Data . ^ "Economics of Nuclear Power - World Nuclear Association" . world-nuclear.org . World Nuclear Association . Retrieved 1 September 2025 . ^ Crooks, Ed (2010-09-12). "Nuclear: New dawn now seems limited to the east" . Financial Times . London, England. Archived from the original on 2022-12-10 . Retrieved 2010-09-12 . ^ The Future of Nuclear Power . Massachusetts Institute of Technology . 2003. ISBN 978-0-615-12420-9 . Archived from the original on 2017-05-18 . Retrieved 2006-11-10 . ^ a b c "Projected Costs of Generating Electricity 2020" . International Energy Agency & OECD Nuclear Energy Agency. 9 December 2020. Archived from the original on 2 April 2022 . Retrieved 12 December 2020 . ^ Update of the MIT 2003 Future of Nuclear Power (PDF) . Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 2009. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 February 2023 . Retrieved 21 August 2018 . ^ "Splitting the cost" .

The Economist . 12 November 2009. Archived from the original on 21 August 2018 . Retrieved 21 August 2018 . ^ Lovering, Jessica R.; Yip, Arthur; Nordhaus, Ted (April 2016). "Historical construction costs of global nuclear power reactors" . Energy Policy . 91 : 371– 382. Bibcode : 2016EnPol..91..371L . doi : 10.1016/j.enpol.2016.01.011 . ^ "The Canadian Nuclear FAQ – Section A: CANDU Technology" . Archived from the original on 2013-11-01 . Retrieved 2019-08-05 . ^ "Indian reactor breaks operating record" . World Nuclear News . 25 October 2018. Archived from the original on 4 August 2019 . Retrieved 4 August 2019 . ^ "Indian-Designed Nuclear Reactor Breaks Record for Continuous Operation" . POWER Magazine . 1 February 2019. Archived from the original on 28 March 2019 . Retrieved 28 March 2019 . ^ A. Lokhov. "Load-following with nuclear power plants" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-02-22 . Retrieved 2016-03-12 . ^ a b "Hidden military implications of 'building back' with new nuclear in the UK" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 October 2021 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 . ^ Gardner, Timothy (13 September 2021). "Illinois approves $700 million in subsidies to Exelon, prevents nuclear plant closures" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 3 November 2021 . Retrieved 28 November 2021 . ^ "Building new nuclear plants in France uneconomical -environment agency" . Reuters . 10 December 2018. Archived from the original on 25 November 2021 . Retrieved 25 November 2021 . ^ "Europe faces €253bn nuclear waste bill" .

The Guardian . 4 April 2016 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 . ^ Wade, Will (14 June 2019). "Americans are paying more than ever to store deadly nuclear waste" . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on 28 November 2021 . Retrieved 28 November 2021 . ^ "The World Nuclear Waste Report 2019" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 November 2021 . Retrieved 28 November 2021 . ^ "Energy Subsidies" . World Nuclear Association. 2018. Archived from the original on 2021-12-04. ^ a b c "Nuclear Reactors for Space – World Nuclear Association" . world-nuclear.org . Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 17 April 2021 . ^ Patel, Prachi. "Nuclear-Powered Rockets Get a Second Look for Travel to Mars" . IEEE Spectrum . Archived from the original on 10 April 2021 . Retrieved 17 April 2021 . ^ a b Deitrich, L. W. "Basic principles of nuclear safety" (PDF) . International Atomic Energy Agency. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-11-19 . Retrieved 2018-11-18 . ^ "Emergency core cooling systems (ECCS)" . United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 2018-07-06. Archived from the original on 2021-04-29 . Retrieved 2018-12-10 . ^ Ritchie, Hannah (10 February 2020). "What are the safest and cleanest sources of energy?" . Our World in Data . Archived from the original on 2020-11-29 . Retrieved 2023-11-15 . ^ a b "Dr. MacKay Sustainable Energy without the hot air " . Data from studies by the Paul Scherrer Institute including non EU data . p. 168. Archived from the original on 2012-09-02 . Retrieved 2012-09-15 . ^ Nicholson, Brendan (2006-06-05). "Nuclear power 'cheaper, safer' than coal and gas" .

The Age . Melbourne. Archived from the original on 2008-02-08 . Retrieved 2008-01-18 . ^ a b Markandya, Anil; Wilkinson, Paul (September 2007). "Electricity generation and health".

The Lancet . 370 (9591): 979– 990. doi : 10.1016/s0140-6736(07)61253-7 . PMID 17876910 . Nuclear power has lower electricity related health risks than Coal, Oil, & gas. ...the health burdens are appreciably smaller for generation from natural gas, and lower still for nuclear power. This study includes the latent or indirect fatalities, for example those caused by the inhalation of fossil fuel created particulate matter, smog induced cardiopulmonary events, black lung etc. in its comparison. ^ "Nuclear Power Prevents More Deaths Than It Causes | Chemical & Engineering News" . Cen.acs.org. Archived from the original on 2014-03-01 . Retrieved 2014-01-24 . ^ a b c Kharecha, Pushker A.; Hansen, James E. (2013). "Prevented Mortality and Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Historical and Projected Nuclear Power" . Environmental Science & Technology . 47 (9): 4889– 4895. Bibcode : 2013EnST...47.4889K . doi : 10.1021/es3051197 . hdl : 2060/20140017100 . PMID 23495839 . ^ "Random Sample". Science . 337 (6093): 395– 396. 27 July 2012. doi : 10.1126/science.337.6093.395-b . ^ Hasegawa, Arifumi; Tanigawa, Koichi; Ohtsuru, Akira; Yabe, Hirooki; Maeda, Masaharu; Shigemura, Jun; Ohira, Tetsuya; Tominaga, Takako; Akashi, Makoto; Hirohashi, Nobuyuki; Ishikawa, Tetsuo; Kamiya, Kenji; Shibuya, Kenji; Yamashita, Shunichi; Chhem, Rethy K (August 2015). "Health effects of radiation and other health problems in the aftermath of nuclear accidents, with an emphasis on Fukushima".

The Lancet . 386 (9992): 479– 488. doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)61106-0 . PMID 26251393 . ^ Revkin, Andrew C. (2012-03-10). "Nuclear Risk and Fear, from Hiroshima to Fukushima" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 2015-09-05 . Retrieved 2013-07-08 . ^ von Hippel, Frank N. (September 2011). "The radiological and psychological consequences of the Fukushima Daiichi accident". Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists . 67 (5): 27– 36. Bibcode : 2011BuAtS..67e..27V . doi : 10.1177/0096340211421588 . ^ Yamazaki, Tomoko & Ozasa, Shunichi (2011-06-27). "Fukushima Retiree Leads Anti-Nuclear Shareholders at Tepco Annual Meeting" . Bloomberg . ^ Saito, Mari (2011-05-07). "Japan anti-nuclear protesters rally after PM call to close plant" . Reuters . ^ IDO-19313: Additional Analysis of the SL-1 Excursion Archived 2011-09-27 at the Wayback Machine Final Report of Progress July through October 1962 , November 21, 1962, Flight Propulsion Laboratory Department, General Electric Company, Idaho Falls, Idaho, U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, Division of Technical Information. ^ McKeown, William (2003). Idaho Falls: The Untold Story of America's First Nuclear Accident . Toronto, Canada: ECW Press. ISBN 978-1-55022-562-4 . ^ Johnston, Robert (2007-09-23). "Deadliest radiation accidents and other events causing radiation casualties" . Database of Radiological Incidents and Related Events. Archived from the original on 2007-10-23 . Retrieved 2011-03-14 . ^ Schiffman, Richard (2013-03-12). "Two years on, America hasn't learned lessons of Fukushima nuclear disaster" .

The Guardian . London, England. Archived from the original on 2017-02-02 . Retrieved 2016-12-12 . ^ Fackler, Martin (2011-06-01). "Report Finds Japan Underestimated Tsunami Danger" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 2017-02-05 . Retrieved 2017-02-25 . ^ "The Worst Nuclear Disasters" . Time . 2009-03-25. Archived from the original on March 28, 2009 . Retrieved 2013-06-22 . ^ a b Sovacool, Benjamin K. (2008). "The costs of failure: A preliminary assessment of major energy accidents, 1907–2007" . Energy Policy . 36 (5): 1802– 1820. Bibcode : 2008EnPol..36.1802S . doi : 10.1016/j.enpol.2008.01.040 . ^ Burgherr, Peter; Hirschberg, Stefan (10 October 2008). "A Comparative Analysis of Accident Risks in Fossil, Hydro, and Nuclear Energy Chains". Human and Ecological Risk Assessment . 14 (5): 947– 973. Bibcode : 2008HERA...14..947B . doi : 10.1080/10807030802387556 . ^ "Chernobyl at 25th anniversary – Frequently Asked Questions" (PDF) . World Health Organisation. 23 April 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 April 2012 . Retrieved 14 April 2012 . ^ "Assessing the Chernobyl Consequences" . International Atomic Energy Agency . Archived from the original on 30 August 2013. ^ "UNSCEAR 2008 Report to the General Assembly, Annex D" (PDF) . United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation . 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2011-08-04 . Retrieved 2018-12-15 . ^ a b c "UNSCEAR 2008 Report to the General Assembly" (PDF) . United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation. 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2019-01-05 . Retrieved 2012-05-17 . ^ "Publications: Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage" . International Atomic Energy Agency . 27 August 2014. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 8 September 2016 . ^ "Nuclear Power's Role in Generating Electricity" (PDF) . Congressional Budget Office . May 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2014-11-29 . Retrieved 2016-09-08 . ^ "Availability of Dam Insurance" (PDF) . 1999. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-01-08 . Retrieved 2016-09-08 . ^ a b Ferguson, Charles D. & Settle, Frank A. (2012). "The Future of Nuclear Power in the United States" (PDF) . Federation of American Scientists . Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-05-25 . Retrieved 2016-07-07 . ^ "Nuclear Security – Five Years After 9/11" . U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Archived from the original on 15 July 2007 . Retrieved 23 July 2007 . ^ Bunn, Matthew & Sagan, Scott (2014). "A Worst Practices Guide to Insider Threats: Lessons from Past Mistakes" .

The American Academy of Arts & Sciences. ^ McFadden, Robert D. (1971-11-14). "Damage Is Put at Millions In Blaze at Con Ed Plant" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 2020-01-15 . Retrieved 2020-01-15 . ^ Knight, Michael (1972-01-30). "Mechanic Seized in Indian Pt. Fire" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 2020-01-15 . Retrieved 2020-01-15 . ^ a b Miller, Steven E. & Sagan, Scott D. (Fall 2009). "Nuclear power without nuclear proliferation?" . Dædalus . 138 (4): 7. doi : 10.1162/daed.2009.138.4.7 . ^ "Nuclear Power in the World Today" . World-nuclear.org. Archived from the original on 2013-02-12 . Retrieved 2013-06-22 . ^ "Uranium Enrichment" . www.world-nuclear.org . World Nuclear Association. Archived from the original on 2013-07-01 . Retrieved 2015-08-12 . ^ Sovacool, Benjamin K. (2011). Contesting the Future of Nuclear Power: A Critical Global Assessment of Atomic Energy . Hackensack, New Jersey: World Scientific . p. 190. ISBN 978-981-4322-75-1 . ^ a b "The Bulletin of atomic scientists support the megatons to megawatts program" . 2008-10-23. Archived from the original on 2011-07-08 . Retrieved 2012-09-15 . ^ "Megatons to Megawatts Eliminates Equivalent of 10,000 Nuclear Warheads" . Usec.com. 2005-09-21. Archived from the original on 2013-04-26 . Retrieved 2013-06-22 . ^ a b Stover, Dawn (2014-02-21). "More megatons to megawatts" .

The Quarterly Review of Biology . 52 (4): 467– 468. doi : 10.1086/410301 . JSTOR 2823429 . ^ "U.S. Energy Legislation May Be 'Renaissance' for Nuclear Power" . Bloomberg . Archived from the original on 2009-06-26 . Retrieved 2017-03-10 . . ^ Patterson, Thom (2013-11-03). "Climate change warriors: It's time to go nuclear" . CNN . Archived from the original on 2013-11-04 . Retrieved 2013-11-05 . ^ "Renewable Energy and Electricity" . World Nuclear Association. June 2010. Archived from the original on 2010-06-19 . Retrieved 2010-07-04 . ^ "Climate" . Archived from the original on 18 February 2022 . Retrieved 18 February 2022 . ^ "Radioactive Waste Management" . February 2022. Archived from the original on 2016-02-01 . Retrieved 2022-02-18 . ^ Bennett, James E.; Tamura-Wicks, Helen; Parks, Robbie M.; Burnett, Richard T.; Pope, C. Arden; Bechle, Matthew J.; Marshall, Julian D.; Danaei, Goodarz; Ezzati, Majid (23 July 2019). "Particulate matter air pollution and national and county life expectancy loss in the USA: A spatiotemporal analysis" . PLOS Medicine . 16 (7) e1002856. doi : 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002856 . PMC 6650052 . PMID 31335874 . ^ "Nuclear Power and Energy Independence" . 22 October 2008. Archived from the original on 18 February 2022 . Retrieved 18 February 2022 . ^ "Climate" . Archived from the original on 18 February 2022 . Retrieved 18 February 2022 . ^ Funk, Lee Rainie and Cary (2015-07-23). "Elaborating on the Views of AAAS Scientists, Issue by Issue" . Pew Research Center . Retrieved 2026-01-09 . ^ Weart, Spencer R. (2012).

The Rise of Nuclear Fear . Harvard University Press. ^ Sturgis, Sue. "Investigation: Revelations about Three Mile Island disaster raise doubts over nuclear plant safety" .

The Institute for Southern Studies . Institute for Southern Studies . Archived from the original on 2010-04-18 . Retrieved 2010-08-24 . ^ "Energy Revolution: A Sustainable World Energy Outlook" (PDF) . Greenpeace International and European Renewable Energy Council. January 2007. p. 7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-08-06 . Retrieved 2010-02-28 . ^ Giugni, Marco (2004). Social protest and policy change: ecology, antinuclear, and peace movements in comparative perspective . Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield. p. 44. ISBN 978-0-7425-1826-1 . Archived from the original on 2023-12-24 . Retrieved 2015-10-18 . ^ Cooke, Stephanie (2009).

In Mortal Hands: A Cautionary History of the Nuclear Age . New York: Bloomsbury. p. 280. ISBN 978-1-59691-617-3 . ^ Griffiths, James. "China's gambling on a nuclear future, but is it destined to lose?" . CNN . Archived from the original on 25 November 2021 . Retrieved 25 November 2021 . ^ Ramana, M. V.; Mian, Zia (1 June 2014). "One size doesn't fit all: Social priorities and technical conflicts for small modular reactors". Energy Research & Social Science . 2 : 115– 124. Bibcode : 2014ERSS....2..115R . doi : 10.1016/j.erss.2014.04.015 . ^ Ramana, M. V.; Ahmad, Ali (1 June 2016). "Wishful thinking and real problems: Small modular reactors, planning constraints, and nuclear power in Jordan". Energy Policy . 93 : 236– 245. Bibcode : 2016EnPol..93..236R . doi : 10.1016/j.enpol.2016.03.012 . ^ Meckling, Jonas (1 March 2019). "Governing renewables: Policy feedback in a global energy transition". Environment and Planning C: Politics and Space . 37 (2): 317– 338. Bibcode : 2019EnPlC..37..317M . doi : 10.1177/2399654418777765 . ^ "New nuclear, LTO among cheapest low carbon options, report shows" . Reuters Events . Archived from the original on 2022-05-19 . Retrieved 2022-04-19 . ^ "Projected Costs of Generating Electricity 2020 – Analysis" . IEA . 9 December 2020. Archived from the original on 2022-04-02 . Retrieved 2020-12-12 . ^ OECD; Agency, Nuclear Energy (2020-08-16). "Unlocking Reductions in the Construction Costs of Nuclear: A Practical Guide for Stakeholders" . OECD . Retrieved 2026-04-24 . ^ IER (2018-01-19). "Regulations Hurt Economics of Nuclear Power" . IER . Retrieved 2026-04-24 . ^ a b Wealer, Ben; Breyer, Christian; Hennicke, Peter; Hirsch, Helmut; von Hirschhausen, Christian; Klafka, Peter; Kromp-Kolb, Helga; Präger, Fabian; Steigerwald, Björn; Traber, Thure; Baumann, Franz; Herold, Anke; Kemfert, Claudia; Kromp, Wolfgang; Liebert, Wolfgang; Müschen, Klaus (16 October 2021). "Kernenergie und Klima". Diskussionsbeiträge der Scientists for Future (in German). doi : 10.5281/zenodo.5573718 . ^ "Empirically grounded technology forecasts and the energy transition" (PDF) . University of Oxford . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2021-10-18. ^ "Nuclear energy too slow, too expensive to save climate: report" . Reuters . 24 September 2019. Archived from the original on 16 March 2021 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 . ^ Farmer, J. Doyne; Way, Rupert; Mealy, Penny (December 2020). "Estimating the costs of energy transition scenarios using probabilistic forecasting methods" (PDF) . University of Oxford . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2021-10-18. ^ "Scientists pour cold water on Bill Gates' nuclear plans | DW | 08.11.2021" . Deutsche Welle (www.dw.com) . Archived from the original on 24 November 2021 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 . ^ "Scientists Warn Experimental Nuclear Plant Backed by Bill Gates Is 'Outright Dangerous' " . Common Dreams . Archived from the original on 24 November 2021 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 . ^ Szyszczak, Erika (1 July 2015). "State aid for energy infrastructure and nuclear power projects". ERA Forum . 16 (1): 25– 38. doi : 10.1007/s12027-015-0371-6 . ^ "Does Hitachi decision mean the end of UK's nuclear ambitions?" .

The Guardian . 17 January 2019. ^ Zappa, William; Junginger, Martin; van den Broek, Machteld (1 January 2019). "Is a 100% renewable European power system feasible by 2050?" . Applied Energy . 233– 234: 1027– 1050. Bibcode : 2019ApEn..233.1027Z . doi : 10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.08.109 . ^ Ross Koningstein; David Fork (18 November 2014). "What It Would Really Take to Reverse Climate Change" . IEEE Spectrum . Archived from the original on 24 November 2016 . Retrieved 13 January 2019 . ^ Johnson, Nathanael (2018). "Agree to Agree Fights over renewable standards and nuclear power can be vicious. Here's a list of things that climate hawks agree on" . Grist . Archived from the original on 2019-01-16 . Retrieved 2019-01-16 . ^ "What's missing from the 100% renewable energy debate" . Utility Dive . Archived from the original on 2019-01-06 . Retrieved 2019-01-05 . ^ Deign, Jason (March 30, 2018). "Renewables or Nuclear? A New Front in the Academic War Over Decarbonization" . gtm . Greentech Media. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018 . Retrieved December 13, 2018 . ^ "Turkey may benefit from nuclear power in its bid for clean energy" . DailySabah . 6 July 2019. Archived from the original on 2019-07-14 . Retrieved 2019-07-14 . ^ "2019 Key World Energy Statistics" (PDF) . IEA. 2019. ^ Starfelt, Nils; Wikdahl, Carl-Erik. "Economic Analysis of Various Options of Electricity Generation – Taking into Account Health and Environmental Effects" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-09-27 . Retrieved 2012-09-08 . ^ Biello, David (2009-01-28). "Spent Nuclear Fuel: A Trash Heap Deadly for 250,000 Years or a Renewable Energy Source?" . Scientific American . Archived from the original on 2017-09-03 . Retrieved 2014-01-24 . ^ Stothard, Michael (14 July 2016). "Nuclear waste: keep out for 100,000 years" . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 2022-12-10 . Retrieved 28 November 2021 . ^ "High-Level Waste" . NRC Web . Archived from the original on 27 November 2021 . Retrieved 28 November 2021 . ^ Grambow, Bernd (12 December 2008). "Mobile fission and activation products in nuclear waste disposal". Journal of Contaminant Hydrology . 102 (3): 180– 186. Bibcode : 2008JCHyd.102..180G . doi : 10.1016/j.jconhyd.2008.10.006 . PMID 19008015 . ^ "Closing and Decommissioning Nuclear Power Plants" (PDF) . United Nations Environment Programme . 2012-03-07. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-05-18 . Retrieved 2013-01-04 . ^ Qvist, Staffan A.; Brook, Barry W. (13 May 2015). "Potential for Worldwide Displacement of Fossil-Fuel Electricity by Nuclear Energy in Three Decades Based on Extrapolation of Regional Deployment Data" . PLOS ONE . 10 (5) e0124074. Bibcode : 2015PLoSO..1024074Q . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0124074 . PMC 4429979 . PMID 25970621 . ^ "Report: World can Rid Itself of Fossil Fuel Dependence in as little as 10 years" . Discovery . Archived from the original on 2019-02-01 . Retrieved 2019-01-31 . ^ a b c Brook, Barry W. (2012). "Could nuclear fission energy, etc., solve the greenhouse problem?

The affirmative case". Energy Policy . 42 : 4– 8. Bibcode : 2012EnPol..42....4B . doi : 10.1016/j.enpol.2011.11.041 . ^ a b Loftus, Peter J.; Cohen, Armond M.; Long, Jane C. S.; Jenkins, Jesse D. (January 2015). "A critical review of global decarbonization scenarios: what do they tell us about feasibility?". WIREs Climate Change . 6 (1): 93– 112. Bibcode : 2015WIRCC...6...93L . doi : 10.1002/wcc.324 . ^ a b "Land Needs for Wind, Solar Dwarf Nuclear Plant's Footprint" . nei.org . NEI. July 9, 2015. Archived from the original on January 7, 2019 . Retrieved January 6, 2019 . ^ a b "THE ULTIMATE FAST FACTS GUIDE TO NUCLEAR ENERGY" (PDF) . United States Department of Energy . 2019-01-01. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-06-07 . Retrieved 2022-06-07 . ^ "Quadrennial technology review concepts in integrated analysis" (PDF) . September 2015. p. 388. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-03-07 . Retrieved 2019-01-12 . ^ "4th Generation Nuclear Power – OSS Foundation" . Ossfoundation.us. Archived from the original on 2014-02-01 . Retrieved 2014-01-24 . ^ Gerstner, E. (2009). "Nuclear energy: The hybrid returns". Nature . 460 (7251): 25– 28. Bibcode : 2009Natur.460...25G . doi : 10.1038/460025a . PMID 19571861 . ^ a b Zhong, Raymond; Buckley, Chris; Bradsher, Keith; Stevens, Harry (13 December 2025). "Clean, Limitless Energy Exists. China Is Going Big in the Race to Harness It" .

The New York Times . 2025 data through Dec. 5. Other countries include Germany, Britain, Canada, Japan, France, Israel, Sweden and Australia. Source: Fusion Energy Base {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Roth, J. Reece (1986). Introduction to fusion energy . Charlottesville, Va.: Ibis Pub. ISBN 978-0-935005-07-3 . ^ Hamacher, T. & Bradshaw, A. M. (October 2001). "Fusion as a Future Power Source: Recent Achievements and Prospects" (PDF) . World Energy Council. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2004-05-06 . Retrieved 2010-09-16 . ^ a b "A lightbulb moment for nuclear fusion?" .

The Guardian . 27 October 2019 . Retrieved 25 November 2021 . ^ a b Entler, Slavomir; Horacek, Jan; Dlouhy, Tomas; Dostal, Vaclav (1 June 2018). "Approximation of the economy of fusion energy" . Energy . 152 : 489– 497. Bibcode : 2018Ene...152..489E . doi : 10.1016/j.energy.2018.03.130 . ^ Timmer, John (5 July 2024). "ITER fusion reactor to see further delays, with operations pushed to 2034" . Ars Technica . Retrieved 24 October 2025 . ^ a b "Beyond ITER" .

The ITER Project . Information Services, Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory. Archived from the original on 2006-11-07 . Retrieved 2011-02-05 . – Projected fusion power timeline. ^ "Overview of EFDA Activities" . www.efda.org . European Fusion Development Agreement . Archived from the original on 2006-10-01 . Retrieved 2006-11-11 . ^ Turrell, Arthur (28 August 2021). "The race to give nuclear fusion a role in the climate emergency" .

In Mortal Hands: A Cautionary History of the Nuclear Age . Black Inc. Cravens, Gwyneth (2007). Power to Save the World: the Truth about Nuclear Energy . New York: Knopf. ISBN 978-0-307-26656-9 . Elliott, David (2007). Nuclear or Not? Does Nuclear Power Have a Place in a Sustainable Energy Future? . Palgrave. Ferguson, Charles D. (2007). Nuclear Energy: Balancing Benefits and Risks . Council on Foreign Relations . Garwin, Richard L.; Charpak, Georges (2001). Megawatts and Megatons : A Turning Point in the Nuclear Age? . Knopf. Högselius, Per; Evens, Siegfried, eds. (2025).

The Nuclear-Water Nexus . MIT Press . doi : 10.7551/mitpress/15572.001.0001 . ISBN 978-0-262-38304-2 . Mahaffey, James (2015). Atomic accidents: a history of nuclear meltdowns and disasters: from the Ozark Mountains to Fukushima . Pegasus Books. ISBN 978-1-60598-680-7 . Oreskes, Naomi (February 2022). "Breaking the Techno-Promise: We do not have enough time for nuclear power to save us from the climate crisis ". Scientific American . 326 (2): 74. doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican0222-74 . PMID 39016661 . Patterson, Eann A.; Taylor, Richard J. (2024). "The commoditization of civil nuclear power" . Royal Society Open Science . 11 (5) 240021. Bibcode : 2024RSOS...1140021P . doi : 10.1098/rsos.240021 . PMC 11285846 . PMID 39076811 . Schneider, Mycle ; Thomas, Steve ; Froggatt, Antony ; Koplow, Doug (2016).

The World Nuclear Industry Status Report : World Nuclear Industry Status as of 1 January 2016 (Report). Walker, J. Samuel (1992). Containing the Atom: Nuclear Regulation in a Changing Environment, 1946–1971 . Berkeley, California: University of California Press. Weart, Spencer R. (2012).