The company has four main operating systems: Gotham, Foundry, Apollo, and AIP. Gotham is an intelligence tool used by militaries and counter-terrorism analysts, including the United States Intelligence Community and United States Department of Defense . Multiple police departments have used Gotham for crime analysis. Its software as a service (SaaS) is one of five offerings the U.S. Department of Defense authorized for Mission Critical National Security Systems (IL5). Palantir has been used for data integration and analysis by corporate clients such as Morgan Stanley , Merck KGaA , Airbus , Wejo , Lilium , PG&E and Fiat Chrysler Automobiles . Apollo is a platform to facilitate continuous integration/continuous delivery (CI/CD) across all environments. Palantir has been criticized for its involvement in expanding government surveillance through artificial intelligence and facial recognition systems . Critics have raised concerns about its contracts with the Trump administration , which enable deportations of undocumented immigrants and the aggregation of sensitive data on Americans. Civil liberties organizations have criticized Palantir's police technology as predictive policing . CEO Alex Karp disputes this characterization. Others observe that Palantir does not collect or store data, but only helps analyze data that customers have already collected and provides services and platforms where customers retain the rights, although examples of data management failures have been noted. History 2003–2008: Founding and early years Palantir founder and chairman Peter Thiel in 2009 Palantir was founded in 2003. Thiel named the startup after the " seeing stone " in J. R. R. Tolkien 's legendarium . Likewise, Palantir's office locations have names from Tolkien: The Shire (Palo Alto, California), Rivendell (McLean, Virginia), and Grey Havens (London, U.K.).

In 2013, Thiel said Palantir was a "mission-oriented company" that could apply software similar to PayPal 's fraud recognition systems to "reduce terrorism while preserving civil liberties".

In 2004, Thiel bankrolled the creation of a prototype by PayPal engineer Nathan Gettings and Stanford University students Joe Lonsdale and Stephen Cohen .

The same year, he hired Alex Karp , a former colleague of his from Stanford Law School , as chief executive officer . There are at least four versions of the story of Palantir's founding, but they all say that Thiel and Karp produced software that others found applications for. According to The Wall Street Journal , when Palantir launched in 2004, there were three investors other than Thiel and Karp but little interest from venture capital firms, so Thiel and his venture fund largely bankrolled the initial $30 million cost. CIA -affiliated venture capital firm In-Q-Tel invested about $2 million. According to Techcrunch , Oakhouse Partners led Palantir's $7.5 million Series A (June 2006) and REV led its $10.5 million Series B (November 2006).

In its early years, Palantir maintained founder control by declining to offer board seats to investors, including In-Q-Tel. This practice continued through subsequent funding rounds.

The New Republic called Karp's formation of Palantir an embrace of techno-militarism to advance American global supremacy through hard power and targeted violence.

The Wall Street Journal said Palantir had a "pro-America ethos" from its inception, highlighting a 2025 fellowship where fellows received a four-week seminar on Western civilization and whether it was worth defending. According to the Journal , for two years the company continuously revised its technology based on the demands of analysts from the intelligence agencies, introduced to them by In-Q-Tel. A 2009 VentureBeat article said that most of the intelligence community knew about the company by word of mouth.

In its early years its work included a subprime lender study for Center for Public Integrity and analyses of Somali piracy, Hezbollah, and the platform used to detect the Chinese GhostNet . Palantir said computers alone using artificial intelligence could not defeat an adaptive adversary. Instead, it proposed using human analysts to explore data from many sources, called intelligence augmentation . 2010–2012: Expansion In April 2010, Palantir announced a partnership with Thomson Reuters to sell the Palantir Metropolis product as "QA Studio" (a quantitative analysis tool).

On June 18, 2010, Vice President of the United States Joe Biden and Office of Management and Budget Director Peter Orszag held a press conference at the White House announcing the success of fighting fraud in the stimulus by the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board (RATB). Biden credited Palantir with supporting the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board's fraud detection efforts, highlighting specific cases identified through the system. He announced that the capability would be deployed at other government agencies, starting with Medicare and Medicaid . Industry analysts estimated Palantir's 2011 revenues at approximately $250 million. 2013–2017: Additional funding " the U.S. spy agencies also employed Palantir to connect databases across departments.

Before this, most of the databases used by the CIA and FBI were siloed , forcing users to search each database individually. Now everything is linked together using Palantir." — TechCrunch in January 2015 A document leaked to TechCrunch revealed that Palantir's clients as of 2013 included at least 12 groups in the U.S. government, including the CIA , the DHS , the NSA , the FBI , the CDC , the Marine Corps , the Air Force , the Special Operations Command , the United States Military Academy , the Joint Improvised-Threat Defeat Organization and Allies, the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board and the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children .

At the time, the United States Army continued to use its own data analysis tool. Also according to TechCrunch, U.S. intelligence agencies such as the CIA and FBI were linked for the first time with Palantir software, as their databases had previously been siloed .

In September 2013, Palantir disclosed over $196 million in funding, according to a U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission filing. It was estimated that the company would likely sign almost $1 billion in contracts in 2014. CEO Alex Karp announced in 2013 that the company would not pursue an IPO , as going public would make "running a company like ours very difficult." In December 2013, the company began a round of financing, raising around $450 million from private funders. This raised the company's value to $9 billion, according to Forbes , with the magazine reporting that the valuation made Palantir "among Silicon Valley's most valuable private technology companies." In December 2014, Forbes reported that Palantir was looking to raise $400 million in an additional round of financing, after the company filed paperwork with the Securities and Exchange Commission the month before.

The report was based on research by VC Experts. If completed, Forbes said Palantir's funding could reach $1.2 billion.

As of December 2014, the company continued to have diverse private funders, Ken Langone and Stanley Druckenmiller , In-Q-Tel of the CIA, Tiger Global Management , and Founders Fund , a venture firm operated by Thiel. Palantir was valued at $15 billion in November 2014.

In June 2015, BuzzFeed reported the company was raising up to $500 million in new capital at a valuation of $20 billion.

By December, it had raised a further $880 million, while the company was still valued at $20 billion.

In February 2016, Palantir bought Kimono Labs, a startup that makes it easy to collect information from public-facing websites.

In August 2016, Palantir acquired data visualization startup Silk.

In 2017, BuzzFeed News reported that despite the reputation that connected Palantir to U.S. intelligence agencies (which Palantir deliberately crafted to help it win business), including the CIA, NSA, and FBI, the actual relationship was rocky for various reasons, with episodes of friction and recalcitrance.

The NSA in particular had been resistant because it had plenty of its own talent and focused more on SIGINT while Palantir's software worked better for HUMINT . Meanwhile, the CIA had been so frustrated by the publicity associating Palantir with it that it tried to cancel the Palantir contract. But according to Karp, Palantir had a firm hold at the FBI because "They'll have no choice". 2018–present Palantir's former headquarters at Palo Alto, which remains an office Palantir was one of four large technology firms to start working with the NHS on supporting COVID-19 efforts through the provision of software from Palantir Foundry, and by April 2020, several countries had used Palantir's technology to track contagion. Palantir also developed Tiberius, a software for vaccine allocation used in the United States.

In August 2020, Palantir Technologies moved its headquarters to Denver, Colorado , distancing itself from the "engineering elite of Silicon Valley ... they do not know more about how society should be organized or what justice requires".

In September it became a publicly traded company with a direct listing on the NYSE , advertising a goal of becoming the "default operating system across the US".

In December 2020, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration awarded Palantir a $44.4 million contract, boosting its shares by about 21%.

In February 2023, Palantir reported its first quarter of positive GAAP net income, totaling $31 million.

In November 2024, the Navy awarded Palantir a nearly $1 billion software contract. Various outlets have said that the company's actual business and size remain small.

In 2025, Fortune noted that Palantir, with a market capitalization exceeding $400 billion, ranked among the world's most valuable companies by market cap, yet would fail to meet Fortune 500 revenue thresholds (requiring $50+ billion annually in sales).

The company's headcount in August 2025 was 4,100, but Karp wanted to reduce it to 3,600.

As of May 2025, the second Trump administration had spent $113 million on existing and new contracts with the Department of Homeland Security and The Pentagon plus a contract of $795 million with the DOD, while deliberating contracts for the Social Security Administration and the Internal Revenue Service .

In February 2026, Palantir announced plans to move its headquarters from Denver, Colorado , to Miami , Florida . Valuation The company was valued at $9 billion in December 2013 after raising an additional $107.5 million in funding. Forbes wrote that the valuation made Palantir "among Silicon Valley's most valuable private technology companies". Palantir's valuation rose to $15 billion after a $50 million round of funding in November 2014, and to $20 billion in late 2015 as the company closed an $880 million round of funding.

In 2018, Morgan Stanley valued the company at $6 billion.

On October 18, 2018, The Wall Street Journal reported that Palantir considered an IPO in the first half of 2019 following a $41 billion valuation.

Before its IPO, Palantir had not made a profit.

In July 2020, it filed for an IPO, and on September 30, 2020, it went public on the New York Stock Exchange through a direct public offering under the ticker symbol "PLTR".

On September 6, 2024, S&P Global announced that Palantir would be added to the S&P 500 index . Its share price rose 14% the next trading day.

On November 14, Palantir announced transfer of its stock listing from the New York Stock Exchange to the Nasdaq Global Select Market effective November 26.

The company's Class A Common Stock continued to trade under the symbol PLTR.

In 2025, The Economist called Palantir possibly "the most over-valued firm of all time", with a market value of $430 billion—over 600 times its 2024 earnings.

As of November 2025, its shares were the most expensive on the S&P 500 , at 85 times expected forward annual sales. Palantir was unprofitable for 20 years, reporting its first quarter of positive net income under non- GAAP metrics in Q4 2022 and its first quarter of positive GAAP net income in Q1 2023, totaling $31 million. Investments Palantir invested approximately $400 million in roughly 20 SPACs , a strategy that simultaneously positioned it as an investor in emerging companies and as a potential software provider to those portfolio companies, according to investment bank RBC Capital Markets . Products Palantir Gotham Released in 2008, Palantir Gotham is Palantir's defense and intelligence software. It is an evolution of Palantir's longstanding work in the United States Intelligence Community , and is used by intelligence and defense agencies. Among other things, the software supports alerts, geospatial analysis, and prediction. Foreign customers include the Ukrainian military . Palantir Gotham has also been used as a predictive policing system, which has elicited some controversy over racism in their AI analytics. Palantir Foundry Palantir Foundry is a software platform offered for use in commercial and civil government sectors. Foundry gained prominence in healthcare through deployment in the National COVID Cohort Collaborative, a federated network of electronic health records. Research using this platform generated extensive peer-reviewed publications and won the NIH/FASEB Dataworks Grand Prize. NHS England also used Foundry in dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic to analyze the operation of the vaccination program.

As of 2022, Foundry was also used for the administration of the UK Homes for Ukraine program to give caseworkers employed by local authorities access to data held by the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities and the Home Office .

In November 2023, NHS England awarded Palantir a seven-year contract valued at £330 million to design and operate a Federated Data Platform connecting patient data across England's healthcare system.

The contract was immediately criticized by the British Medical Association , The Doctors' Association UK , and cybersecurity professionals, citing concerns about patient data privacy, procurement transparency, and Palantir's commercial contracts with the Israel Defense Forces . NHS England originally published the contract in December 2023 with more than 70% of its pages redacted, prompting legal action that resulted in its republication with partial disclosure.

In 2024, medical professionals picketed outside NHS England HQ, demanding the deal's cancellation.

As of May 2025, four US federal agencies, including the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of Health and Human Services , used Foundry. Other products The company has been involved in a number of business and consumer products, designing in part or in whole. For example, in 2014, it premiered Insightics, which according to The Wall Street Journal "extracts customer spending and demographic information from merchants' credit-card records ". It was created in tandem with credit processing company First Data . Artificial Intelligence Platform (AIP) In April 2023, the company launched Artificial Intelligence Platform (AIP), which integrates large language models into privately operated networks.

The company demonstrated its use in war, where a military operator could deploy operations and receive responses via an AI chatbot . Citing potential risks of generative artificial intelligence , Karp said the product would not let the AI independently carry out targeting operations, but would require human oversight. Commercial companies have also used AIP across many domains. Applications include infrastructure planning, network analysis, and resource allocation. AIP lets users create LLMs called "agents" through a graphical user interface . Agents can interact with a digital representation of a company's business known as an ontology . This lets the models access an organization's documents and other external resources. Users can define output schemas and test cases to validate AI-generated responses. AIP comes with a library of templates that can be extended by clients. Palantir also offers five-day boot camps to onboard prospective customers. Palantir hosts an annual AIPCon conference featuring demos from existing customers. TITAN Palantir's TITAN (Tactical Intelligence Targeting Access Node) is a mobile command vehicle equipped with AI and analytics software for military field intelligence operations. Developed with IRAD funding in partnership with Anduril Industries and Northrop Grumman , TITAN integrates intelligence and targeting data to support tactical decision-making.

The company claims that TITAN can improve customers' ability to conduct long-range precision strikes. Palantir is under contract to deliver 10 units to the U.S. Army . MetaConstellation MetaConstellation is a satellite network that supports the deployment of AI models. Users can request information about specific locations, prompting the service to dispatch the necessary resources. MetaConstellation has been used by customers including the United States Northern Command . MOSAIC The AI-powered software platform MOSAIC was developed before 2015 and originally used by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to enforce the JCPOA . It integrates over 400 million digital objects globally, such as social media feeds and satellite photographs, as well as surveillance cameras in Iran and the Middle East. This application transformed a civilian software modality into an active weapon during the Iran war, and was used to allocate human targets in Iran. Skykit Skykit is a portable toolbox that supports intelligence operations in adverse environments. Palantir offers "Skykit Backpack" and "Skykit Maritime" to be transported by individuals and boats respectively. Contents include battery packs, a ruggedized laptop with company software, and a quadcopter supporting computer vision applications. Skykit can also connect to the MetaConstellation satellite network.

In 2023, various sources reported that the Ukrainian military had begun receiving Skykit units. Palantir Metropolis Palantir Metropolis (formerly known as Palantir Finance) was software for data integration , information management , and quantitative analytics .

The software integrates data from commercial, proprietary, and public sources, enabling analysts to identify trends, relationships, anomalies, and predictive patterns. Aided by 120 "forward-deployed engineers" of Palantir in 2009, Peter Cavicchia III of JPMorgan used Metropolis to surveil employee communications and alert the insider threat team when an employee showed signs of potential disgruntlement: the insider alert team would further scrutinize the employee and possibly stalk them after hours with bank security personnel.

The Metropolis team used emails, download activity, browser histories, and GPS locations from JPMorgan-owned smartphones and their transcripts of digitally recorded phone conversations to search, aggregate, sort, and analyze this information for specific keywords, phrases, and patterns of behavior.

In 2013, Cavicchia may have shared this information with Frank Bisignano , who had become CEO of First Data Corporation . Palantir Metropolis was succeeded by Palantir Foundry. ELITE ELITE (Enhanced Leads Identification and Targeting for Enforcement) is a software tool Palantir developed for the US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) agency.

The system reached full technical operational capability on June 22, 2026.

The initial report issued by NATO on June 30, 2026, said that it is compatible with any AI system such as the U.S.' Meta Platforms and France's Mistral AI, with integration of other systems planned. NATO commanders have reacted to the discussion on sovereignty in the EU member countries.

In May 2026, Admiral Pierre Vandier , NATO's supreme allied commander transformation , said that currently there is no competitor for Palantir, and if European countries want alternatives, these alternatives should prove themselves in a few months or years, and not a decade. He advised countries to focus on control over processed data in the short term and development of infrastructure (like cloud and chips) in the long term, and not to mix these problems with dependence on single suppliers, which can be dealt with by pushing suppliers toward interoperable systems. Kai Rohrschneider , commander of Allied Joint Support and Enabling Command , criticized the distrust towards the United States and praised the Palantir software's "enormous value", noting that if member countries want to use different systems on the national level, connectivity between such systems and the programs of the NATO commands must be established. U.S. civil entities Palantir's software was used by the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board to detect and investigate fraud and abuse in the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act . Specifically, the Recovery Operations Center (ROC) used Palantir to integrate transactional data with open-source and private data sets to better screen the entities receiving stimulus funds. Other clients as of 2019 included Polaris Project , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children , the National Institutes of Health , Team Rubicon , and the United Nations World Food Programme .

In October 2020, Palantir began helping the federal government set up a system to track the manufacture, distribution, and administration of COVID-19 vaccines across the country.

From November 2023 to March 2026, NYC Health + Hospitals contracted with Palantir to increase revenue collection.

In May 2026, the United States Department of Agriculture entered into a $3.9 million contract with Palantir to surveil employees to enforce its return-to-office policy. U.S. military, intelligence, and police Palantir Gotham is used by counter-terrorism analysts at offices in the United States Intelligence Community and United States Department of Defense , fraud investigators at the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board , and cyber analysts at Information Warfare Monitor (responsible for the GhostNet and the Shadow Network investigation). Gotham was used by fraud investigators at the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board , a former U.S. federal agency which operated from 2009 to 2015. Other clients as of 2013 included DHS , NSA , FBI , the U.S. Marine Corps , the U.S. Air Force , U.S. Special Operations Command , West Point , the Joint IED Defeat Organization , and Allies.

The U.S. Army continued to use its own data analysis tool. According to TechCrunch , "The U.S. spy agencies also employed Palantir to connect databases across departments.

Before this, most of the databases used by the CIA and FBI were siloed, forcing users to search each database individually. Now everything is linked together using Palantir." U.S. military intelligence used the Palantir product to improve its ability to predict locations of improvised explosive devices in its war in Afghanistan . Field practitioners in Afghanistan reported that Palantir's analytical capabilities provided better support than the U.S. Army's Program of Record , the Distributed Common Ground System (DCGS-A), though adoption remained limited across the theater. Congressman Duncan D. Hunter complained of United States Department of Defense obstacles to its wider use in 2012. It was reported that Palantir's technological phalanx was crucial in finding Osama bin Laden in 2011. Palantir has also been reported to be working with various U.S. police departments, for example accepting a contract in 2013 to support the Northern California Regional Intelligence Center in developing a license plate reader database. Civil liberties organizations raised concerns about potential mass surveillance and privacy implications.

In 2012, the New Orleans Police Department partnered with Palantir to create a predictive policing program.

In 2014, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) awarded Palantir a $41 million contract to build and maintain a new intelligence system called Investigative Case Management (ICM) to track personal and criminal records of legal and illegal immigrants . This application was originally conceived by ICE's office of Homeland Security Investigations (HSI), allowing its users access to other federal and private law enforcement entities' intelligence platforms.

The system reached its "final operation capacity" under the Trump administration in September 2017.

In 2021, ICE announced that it would terminate its contract with Palantir as it was developing its own technology. But a year later, as replacement proved unsuccessful, ICE reversed that decision. Palantir took over the Pentagon's Project Maven contract in 2019 after Google decided not to continue developing AI unmanned drones used for bombings and intelligence.

In 2024, Palantir emerged as a "Trump trade" for further enforcing the law on illegal immigrants and profiting on federal spending for national security and immigration. Palantir has a $30 million contract with ICE to track the movement of migrants.

The Department of Government Efficiency asked Palantir to help it speed up deportation by creating a master database.

On July 31, 2025, the U.S. Army awarded Palantir an "Enterprise Service Agreement" valued at up to $10 billion over 10 years. This contract vehicle consolidates 75 previously separate data and software contracts (in 15 of which Palantir is the prime contractor and in 60 of which it is a subcontractor) into a single software contract, streamlining the Army's procurement of Palantir's AI, data integration, and analytics tools. Financial Conduct Authority (United Kingdom) In March 2026, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), the United Kingdom 's primary financial regulatory body, awarded Palantir a contract to investigate its highly sensitive regulation data.

The Guardian reported that Palantir beat one unnamed competitor to win the contract.

The deal has raised serious concerns inside and outside the FCA, as it gives Palantir access to data including whole email accounts, phone calls, aggregated social media posts, and full financial records. NHS England (United Kingdom) Palantir has contracts relating to patient data from England's National Health Service .

In 2020, it was awarded an emergency non-competitive contract to mine COVID-19 patient data and consolidate government databases to help ministers and officials respond to the pandemic.

The contract was valued at more than £23.5 million and extended for two more years.

The awarding of the contract without competition was heavily criticised, prompting the NHS to pledge an open and transparent procurement process for any future data contract. Liam Fox encouraged the firm "to expand their software business" in Britain. It was said to be "critical to the success of the vaccination and PPE programmes", but its involvement with the NHS was controversial among civil liberties groups. Conservative MP David Davis called for a judicial review into the sharing of patient data with Palantir.

The procurement of a £480m Federated Data Platform by NHS England , launched in January 2023, has been called a "must win" for Palantir.

The procurement has been called a "farce" by civil liberties campaigners who allege that Palantir has a competitive advantage as it "already has its feet under the table in NHS England" and benefits from a short procurement window.

In April 2023 it was revealed that a consortium of UK companies had unsuccessfully bid for the contract.

In April 2023, Davis publicly expressed his concern over the procurement process, saying it could become a "battle royale". He was one of a dozen MPs pressing the government over privacy concerns with the use of data. Labour peer and former Health Minister Philip Hunt voiced his concern about Palantir's use of data, saying, "The current NHS and current government doesn't have a good track record of getting the details right, and the procurement shows no sign of going better." Also in April 2023, The Guardian reported that 11 NHS trusts had suspended use of Palantir Foundry software pending resolution of technical implementation issues, according to a Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson.

In March 2023, it was revealed that NHS hospitals had been ordered to share patient data with Palantir, prompting renewed criticism from civil liberties groups, including for supporting genocide , privacy and security practices, and "buying their way in". Groups including the Doctors' Association UK , National Pensioners' Convention , and Just Treatment subsequently threatened legal action over NHS England's procurement of the FDP contract, citing concerns over the use of patient data.

In 2022, Palantir recruited NHS England 's former artificial intelligence chief, Indra Joshi. It said it was planning to increase its team in the UK by 250. Palantir's UK head, Louis Mosley , grandson of the former British Union of Fascists leader Oswald Mosley , was quoted internally as saying that Palantir's strategy for entry into the British health industry was to "Buy our way in" by acquiring smaller rival companies with existing relationships with the NHS to "take a lot of ground and take down a lot of political resistance".

In November 2023, NHS England awarded Palantir a £330 million contract to create and manage the Federated Data Platform.

In April 2024, medical professionals picketed at NHS England headquarters, demanding that it end its contract with Palantir over contracts with the IDF . Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom) Palantir has held contracts with the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence (MoD) relating to data analytics capabilities supporting strategic, tactical, and live decision-making.

In December 2022, Palantir was awarded a £75 million Enterprise Agreement to provide its software toolset to meet the UK MoD's requirements across all security classifications for a three-year period, aligned with defence data strategies.

In December 2025, the Ministry of Defence awarded Palantir a further £240 million contract to support data analytics capabilities enabling critical strategic, tactical, and live decision-making across defence operations, including interoperability with NATO systems. This contract was a direct award, meaning no other companies were considered during the procurement process.

The reasons given for this exception were that switching supplier (Palantir were awarded a previous contract) would cause technical difficulties, and that no other supplier could provide a similar service.

The 2025 contract attracted political scrutiny, with critics raising concerns about transparency surrounding meetings between UK political figures and representatives of the company. Metropolitan police (United Kingdom) In February 2026, it was revealed that Scotland Yard was using AI tools supplied by Palantir to profile its officers, specifically to look at their illness levels, absences from duty and overtime patterns. Responding to FOI requests, the Metropolitan police refused to confirm or deny whether it had used Palantir's technology since 2021 but confirmed it had not used any between November 2019 and July 2021. Palantir is included as one of 29 possible suppliers for the Metropolitan police and the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime between 3 December 2025 and 2 December 2030 as part of its "Precise Policing 2" dynamic market.

In May 2026, Mayor of London Sadiq Khan blocked a contract between Palantir and the Metropolitan Police worth up to £50 million.

The Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime (MOPAC) cited concerns with Palantir's ethics and that the Metropolitan Police had failed to demonstrate sufficient value for money. Territorial Police Forces (United Kingdom) In November 2025, Bedfordshire police used Palantir tools to convict a criminal gang named “Fuck the Police”, which was suspected of stealing £800,000 from cash points in more than 3,000 withdrawals across the UK. Bedfordshire police seized the suspects' smartphones and used Palantir's Nectar to read and translate over 100,000 text messages from Romanian to English. Nectar analyzed their movements, combining images and text to suggest possible crimes, and created charts of the connections among those investigated. Europol Europol has used the Gotham system. Denmark The Danish POL-INTEL predictive policing project has been operational since 2017 and is based on the Gotham system. According to the AP, the Danish system "uses a mapping system to build a so-called heat map identifying areas with higher crime rates." In 2025, when the Danish government was integrating Palantir into the country's military, police and intelligence services, a major argument made by opponents was that the Praxis project (backed by Thiel through Pronomos) threatened Greenland. Other arguments were concerned with Thiel's politics in the U.S., Palantir's association with U.S. and other European intelligence services (Jacob Kaarsbo, a former chief analyst at Danish Defence Intelligence Service , could not name these intelligence services for reasons of confidentiality), and the security risk posed by giving Palantir citizens' data.

The Danish National Police answered with a reference to a 2021 response to the Folketing , but otherwise, the Police, the Danish Security and Intelligence Service , and Minister of Justice Peter Hummelgaard refused to comment on the matter.

In June 2026, Denmark granted Palantir access to the police force in Greenland. Norway Norwegian Customs uses Palantir Gotham to screen passengers and vehicles for control. Known inputs are prefiled freight documents, passenger lists, the national Currency Exchange database (tracks all cross-border currency exchanges), the Norwegian Labour and Welfare Administrations employer- and employee-registry, the Norwegian stock holder registry and 30 public databases from InfoTorg. InfoTorg provides access to more than 30 databases, including the Norwegian National Citizen registry, European Business Register, the Norwegian DMV vehicle registry, various credit databases etc. These databases are supplemented by the Norwegian Customs Departments own intelligence reports, including results of previous controls.

The system is also augmented by data from public sources such as social media. Germany In 2023, German interior minister Nancy Faeser stopped the federal use of Palantir.

As of July 2025, German police departments in three of its 16 states— Bavaria , Hesse , and Nordrhein-Westfalen —have used Palantir for data mining.

In March, Baden-Württemberg entered a $25 million contract without a legal basis to use the software.

In May 2026, the Bundeswehr leadership said that, for the moment, they would not give Palantir contracts on the national level, preferring a German or European company. Inspector of cyber ​​and information space Thomas Daum said that the Bundeswehr is already working with Palantir on the NATO level, where Palantir not only provides the software but operates it, and while this operating model is efficient, it is "currently inconceivable" to hand over access to the national database to the industry's side, and the Bundeswehr wants to handle the operation of the software by the military side's personnel. France In France, after the November 2015 Paris attacks , the Directorate-General for Internal Security signed a contract with Palantir, which was extended in 2019. President Emmanuel Macron said Palantir would retain its role in the French intelligence sector until the end of his term in office, but a replacement program was launched in May 2017.

In June 2026, after the US government suddenly cut off access to Anthropic 's newest models, it was announced that France's General Directorate for Internal Security would replace Palantir with ChapsVision, a local alternative, with prime minister Sébastien Lecornu saying the government was worried about strategic dependence. Ukraine Karp claims to have been the first CEO of a large U.S. company to have visited Ukraine after the 2022 Russian invasion . Ukraine uses Palantir for military purposes such as air defense, mining warfare, logistics, as well as management of the wartime economy, education system, refugees, and reconstruction activities, including organization of electronic services and demining. Gotham uses data from drone videos, intercepted communications, satellite imagery, and civilian tips (using apps such as the Ukrainian "E-Enemy") to produce complete battlefield pictures that help commanders choose targets, thereby shortening the "kill chain" .

The Meta Constellation tool is used to organize satellite swarms while PRISMA is used to coordinate drone strikes. Other platforms Ukraine uses include AIP, Foundry, and a form of Maven. According to a December 2022 report by The Times , Palantir's AI has allowed Ukraine to increase its artillery strikes' accuracy, speed, and deadliness.

The Prosecutor General of Ukraine also plans to use Palantir's software to help document alleged Russian war crimes . Palantir's software is used at command centers with strong internet connections, complementing Ukraine's Delta, which serves offline situations ( Militarnyi links Palantir to Delta's development, but the details are not specified). Together with Ukraine's Ministry of Defense, Palantir organizes the Brave1 Dataroom, where 100 companies use real battlefield data to train more than 80 AI models. It is generally recognized that Palantir provides essential wartime capabilities for Ukraine; Zelensky has called the relationship between Ukraine and Palantir "mutually beneficial". Commentators also remark that these benefits ( InDepthNews dubs the relationship "software-based guarantee") come with strategic dependency for the Ukraine side.

The protesters accused Palantir of being complicit in Israeli war crimes in the Gaza war because it provides the Israel Defence Force (IDF) with intelligence and surveillance services, including a form of predictive policing .

In January 2024, Palantir agreed to a strategic partnership with the IDF under which it would provide the IDF with services to assist its "war-related missions". Karp has been emphatic in his public support for Israel. He has frequently criticized what he calls the inaction of other tech leaders. His position has prompted several employees to leave Palantir.

In 2024, Irish politician and former Palantir employee Eoin Hayes was suspended by his party, the Social Democrats , for saying at a press conference that he had sold shares in Palantir before he entered politics, when he had sold the shares a month after being elected as a city councillor. Hayes corrected the date in a statement issued that day and provided additional details later.

The Social Democrats criticized the Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip and accused Hayes of "profiting from genocide".

In May 2025, a pro-Palestinian protest was held in Denver against Congressman Jason Crow for repeatedly accepting campaign donations from Palantir executives. Switzerland In late 2025, the left-leaning Swiss publication Republik revealed internal reports by the Swiss federal government that Switzerland had been courted as a client of Palantir since 2018. Palantir has offices in Zurich and Bern , and the Swiss Defence Department through Armasuisse was initially interested in buying Palantir's information systems, but larger deals with the Swiss government were rejected out of concern that data could be released to U.S. intelligence agencies.

The publication also mentioned a possible reputational risk if Switzerland had adopted such surveillance software.

Later it was made public that Palantir attempted to sue Republik for not having the right to reply to the allegations. Spain In July 2026, it was reported that the Spanish government has been directing government agencies and companies with stakes controlled by the sovereign wealth fund SEPI to avoid Palantir. A prospective contract with the company Navantia was reportedly blocked after the government interfered. Despite this, Palantir was awarded a contract with the Armed Forces Intelligence Center in 2023, and military commanders have reportedly defended the relationship with the company. Italy According to a July 2026 report by Turkey's Clash report , the government of Italy has been increasingly skeptical of a relationship with Palantir, and Palantir's only confirmed government contract in Italy is a minor, open-source data integration contract with the ministry of defense. A 2026 report by The good lobby notes that there is little transparency on the matter, but government documents show the existence of a series of contracts since 2015.

The ministry of defense refused to answer questions about a 2024 initiative on "supply of the Palantir Gotham license", saying the information was classified. Canada The military forces started a contract with Palantir in 2020. 2025 documents showed that the contract's value has increased over the years. According to Public Services and Procurement Canada , 18 Palantir employees have received security clearance and access to sensitive data under Contract Security Program since March 28, 2019. Cyber analysts at Information Warfare Monitor , a Canadian public-private venture that operated from 2003 to 2012, used Palantir Gotham. Ecuador Ecuador's National Customs Service (SENAE) signed a contract with Palantir in May 2025, targeting drug trafficking and smuggling. Brazil While the federal government's Transparency Portal does not show any contract with Palantir, in 2024, the National Fund for the Development of Education mentioned a "success story that modernized the transfer of public funds from the agency to the federated entities", which an executive of Palantir Brazil confirmed.

After a September 2025 meeting of members of the Special Committee on Artificial Intelligence of the Chamber of Deputies and Palantir in the US, federal deputy Rui Falcão asked the ministries of management and education to clarify which public bodies use Palantir's software, but got no answer. Australia The Australian Defence Force has been using Palantir since 2011.

In February 2026, the Cyber and Electronic Warfare Division signed a contract that secured local military use of Palantir's ICT System Platform. Other The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) used Palantir to verify whether Iran was in compliance with the 2015 agreement . Partnerships with corporations United States Palantir's partnership with Anduril Industries extends to many areas.

In later 2024, there were reportedly building and leading a consortium with another dozen contractors, including SpaceX , OpenAI , and Saronic, to challenge the domination of the traditional "primes". They also partner with EVTOL company Archer Aviation . Alongside 8VC and General Catalyst , Palantir also helped create and is a member of the New American Industrial Alliance.

The other members are other defense contractors and hardtech companies, such as Anduril, Andreessen Horowitz , Hadrian, Oklo Inc. , Narya Capital , Booz Allen , Joby Aviation , Regent Craft, Atomic Industries, Impulse Space, and Dirac, which hope to reduce government regulations. Palantir, TWG Global , and xAI have a joint venture. Palantir collaborates with Anthropic and Amazon Web Services to provide Anthropic's Claude AI models to U.S. intelligence and defense agencies. It also partners with the traditional defense "primes": Boeing (specifically its defense and space unit), Lockheed Martin , Northrop Grumman (TITAN system), and General Dynamics (through General Dynamics Land System). Palantir is known to disrupt the traditional consulting business model. It also partners with traditional companies (and rivals in government contract) such as Deloitte , Booz Allen, and Accenture .

On February 8, 2021, Palantir and IBM announced a partnership that would use IBM 's hybrid cloud data platform alongside Palantir's operations platform for building applications.

The product, Palantir for IBM Cloud Pak for Data, was expected to simplify the process of building and deploying AI-integrated applications with IBM Watson .

On March 5, 2021, Palantir announced its partnership with Amazon AWS . Palantir's ERP Suite was optimized to run on Amazon Web Services . BP used the ERP suite.

On August 8, 2024, Palantir and Microsoft announced a partnership whereby Palantir will deploy its suite of products on Microsoft Azure Government clouds. Korea In Korea, Palantir has strategic relationships with HD Hyundai and KT . It has a data alliance with HD Hyundai and partners with HD Hyundai and Siemens to automate shipbuilding for both Korea and the U.S. KT cooperates with Palantir to scale Foundry and AIP across Korean industries.

In 2025, Samsung partnered with Palantir to increase the yield and quality of its chips. Germany SAP has strategic partnerships with Palantir and Perplexity , aiming to enhance SAP's business AI offerings. Palantir also partners with SAP's U.S.-based branch, SAP National Security Services, to offer AI systems to the U.S. public sector. Palantir has a partnership with Axel Springer SE , a publisher known to have a close relationship with Karp, who sat on its board, and Thiel, who employed Springer's Mathias Döpfner 's son Moritz as his chief of staff and business associate. Some German media outlets have speculated about Thiel's political influence in Germany through his relationships with media executives and his investment in emerging political figures. Palantir partners with Merck KGaA through joint ventures Syntrophy, which focuses on cancer data analytics, and Athinia, which focuses on the semiconductor sector. Palantir is strategic partners with Helsing . Espreso TV has linked the unusual number of defense CEOs (Brian Schimpf of Anduril Industries, Gundbert Scherf of Helsing, and Karp) at the 2025 Bilderberg Conference to Thiel's influence. United Arab Emirates On November 4, 2025, a joint venture between Palantir and Dubai Holding , the Dubai government’s investment arm, was announced.

The New Arab noted that the partnership came just a day after Microsoft revealed plans to invest $15.2 billion in AI and cloud computing projects across the UAE. Controversies Palantir has been criticized for its role in expanding government surveillance using artificial intelligence and facial recognition software . Some former employees and outside observers have also criticized the company's contracts under the second Trump Administration , which enable deportations and the aggregation of sensitive data on Americans across administrative agencies . Wired wrote that some people think Palantir "maintains a giant, centralized database of information collected from all of its clients", which is untrue.

The company's work does not affect how each organization collects its data but helps organizations "integrate and analyze data without needing to fix the underlying architecture", effectively functioning like "a technical band-aid". Palantir's customers "need to already have the data they want to work with—Palantir itself does not provide any". Citing a former Palantir employee, Wired reported that the government can rely on Gotham to "centralize everything an agency knows about a person in one place". Others observe that Palantir does not collect or store data, but only helps analyze data that customers have already collected and provides services and platforms where customers retain the rights; still, it is generally accepted that abuses by governments and data management failures can happen.

The researchers Andrew Iliadis and Amelia Acker wrote, "lines of critique concerning hypothetical data sourcing can be defended", but Palantir "remains open to the critique of potentially being an accessory to acts of deportation, imprisonment, and racism through its contracts". They also wrote that Palantir is in contact with sensitive data through its forward-deployed software engineers, and that the clients use Palantir's platform to track and collect data, as shown in Palantir's patents. Incidents of data leaks or mismanagement have been noted, including the 2015 data leak in which Techcrunch received documents that revealed the tools Palantir used and a list of key customers; the 2021 software misconfiguration that allowed some FBI employees unwarranted access; and the 2025 lawsuit Palantir filed against former employees Radha Jain and Joanna Cohen for stealing data to launch a "copycat" company with the help of General Catalyst (the two had been entrusted with the source code and Cohen was noted to have interacted with Palantir's important customers).

In December 2025, Palantir expanded its lawsuit to include the CEO of Percepta AI. Algorithm development i2 Inc sued Palantir in Federal Court, alleging fraud, conspiracy, and copyright infringement over Palantir's algorithm. Shyam Sankar, Palantir's then-director of business development, used a private eye company known as the cutout for obtaining i2's code. i2 settled out of court for $10 million in 2011. WikiLeaks proposals (2010) In 2010, Hunton & Williams LLP allegedly asked Berico Technologies, Palantir, and HBGary Federal to draft a response plan to "the WikiLeaks Threat".

In early 2011 Anonymous publicly released HBGary-internal documents, including the plan.

The plan proposed that Palantir software would "serve as the foundation for all the data collection, integration, analysis, and production efforts".

The plan also included slides, allegedly authored by HBGary CEO Aaron Barr, which suggested " disinformation" and "disrupting" Glenn Greenwald 's support for WikiLeaks. Palantir CEO Alex Karp ended all ties to HBGary and issued a statement apologizing to "progressive organizations ... and Greenwald ... for any involvement that we may have had in these matters". Palantir placed an employee on leave pending a review by a third-party law firm.

The employee was later reinstated. Racial discrimination lawsuit (2016) On September 26, 2016, the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs of the U.S. Department of Labor filed a lawsuit against Palantir alleging that the company discriminated against Asian job applicants on the basis of their race. According to the lawsuit, the company "routinely eliminated" Asian applicants during the hiring process, even when they were "as qualified as white applicants" for the same jobs. Palantir settled the suit in April 2017 for $1.7 million while not admitting wrongdoing. UK During questioning in front of the Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee , Christopher Wylie , the former research director of Cambridge Analytica , said that Palantir and Cambridge Analytica had had several meetings and that SCL chief executive Alexander Nix had facilitated its use of Aleksandr Kogan 's data, which had been obtained from his app "thisisyourdigitallife" by mining personal surveys. Kogan later established Global Science Research to share the data with Cambridge Analytica and others. Wylie confirmed that employees from both Cambridge Analytica and Palantir used Kogan's Global Science Research and harvested Facebook data together in the same offices. Palantir said it had contact with Cambridge Analytica but decided not to move forward with a relationship. Palantir also said that it discovered only in March 2018 that one of its employees, Alfredas Chmieliauskas, had worked with Cambridge Analytica in a personal capacity.

When shown proof of Chmieliauskas's activities, the company retracted its denial and issued a press release saying that Chmieliauskas had "engaged in an entirely personal capacity". Testifying before British lawmakers the same day The Times published its story about Palantir and CA, Wylie said that "senior Palantir employees" had also been involved with CA. He said that "Palantir staff would come into the office and work on the data".

In an interview with The Times , Wylie said that he and Nix had visited Palantir's London office.

The New York Times wrote, "emails reviewed by The Times indicate that Mr. Nix and Mr. Chmieliauskas sought to revive talks about a formal partnership through early 2014, but Palantir executives again declined." Wylie admitted that Palantir and Cambridge Analytica signed no contract and had no formal relationship.

The New York Times also wrote that Wylie did not identify or specify the number of Palantir employees that he mentioned.

In June 2021, reacting to the NHS's use of Foundry, the tech-justice nonprofit Foxglove began a campaign against Palantir because "Their background has generally been in contracts where people are harmed, not healed." Supporting the campaign, Clive Lewis MP said Palantir had an "appalling track record". Palantir UK is headed by Louis Mosley , grandson of British fascist leader Oswald Mosley . Palantir UK came under scrutiny after allegations about former British Labour politician and Ambassador to the United States Peter Mandelson .

In 2026, The Chartered Institute of Public Relations (CIPR) called for the immediate release of fully transparent information relating to Mandelson's lobbying firm, Global Counsel, and its role in securing government contracts for Palantir, warning that the current lobbying system is "failing the public". ICE partnership (since 2014) Palantir has come under criticism due to its partnership developing software for U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE).

In a statement provided to The New York Times , the firm implied that because its contract was with HSI, a division of ICE focused on investigating criminal activities, it played no role in deportations.

In 2017, The Intercept obtained documents that disprove this claim and show that ICE considers Palantir's ICM software "mission critical".

The documents obtained by The Intercept and Mijente, an immigration advocacy group, show that in 2017 HSI and ERO undertook a joint operation using the ICM database to arrest and possibly deport family members of undocumented children caught trying to cross the border.

In August 2019, when HSI, deploying FALCON, led a raid on food-processing plants in Mississippi, nearly 700 people were arrested.

In an interview with CNBC a few months later, Karp acknowledged that Palantir's blanket denials had been misleading. But in 2019, he renewed Palantir's contract with ICE for $50 million over three years. Other groups critical of Palantir include the Brennan Center for Justice , National Immigration Project, the Immigrant Defense Project, the Tech Workers Coalition , and Mijente .

In one internal ICE report Mijente acquired, Palantir's software was said to have been critical in an operation to arrest the parents of children residing illegally.

In September 2020, Amnesty International released a report criticizing Palantir's failure to conduct human rights due diligence for its contracts with ICE. Palantir's human rights record has been scrutinized for contributing to human rights violations of asylum-seekers and migrants .

In April 2025, Palantir signed a new $30 million contract with ICE to provide software for a new platform called ImmigrationOS, which would expedite deportations. Immigration Lifecycle Operating System (Immigration OS) In April 2025, Palantir was reported to be working closely with ICE to enable deportation in the second presidency of Donald Trump . ICE reportedly paid Palantir $30 million to develop the Immigration Lifecycle Operating System (Immigration OS).

The Washington Post reported that Palantir developed the software to track undocumented immigrants with the goal of deporting them faster.

The Immigration OS project was renewed in September 2025, despite facing some Palantir employees questioning whether "the contract should be discontinued if ICE's use of the technology veers into extrajudicial actions or violate the company's civil liberties principles".

In an October 2025 interview with The New York Times , Palantir chief technology officer Shyam Sankar said that Immigration OS "tracked encounters at the border, asylum applications and applications for benefits". According to Palantir, Immigration OS "does not track information of U.S. citizens who are relatives of undocumented immigrants".

The Immigration OS project has also been criticized by Y Combinator co-founder Paul Graham , who wrote that Palantir is "building the infrastructure of the police state". Palantir's continued affiliation with ICE coincided with the changes to its employee code of conduct that were made in response to executive orders by President Trump forbidding federal contractors from diversity practices.

In 2022, DHS awarded Palantir $139.3 million for "investigative case management operations, maintenance support services and custom enhancements"; the contract is ongoing as of January 2026 . "HHS Protect Now" and privacy concerns (2020) The COVID-19 pandemic prompted tech companies to respond to growing demand for citizen information from governments in order to conduct contact tracing and to analyze patient data. Consequently, data collection companies such as Palantir had been contracted to partake in pandemic data collection practices. Palantir's participation in "HHS Protect Now", a program launched by the United States Department of Health and Human Services to track the spread of the coronavirus, attracted criticism from US lawmakers. Palantir's participation in COVID-19 response projects reignited debates over its involvement in tracking illegal immigrants, especially its alleged effects on digital inequality and restrictions on online freedoms. Critics allege that confidential data acquired by HHS could be exploited by other federal agencies in unregulated and potentially harmful ways. Alternative proposals request greater transparency in the process to determine whether any of the data aggregated would be shared with the US Immigration and Customs Enforcement to single out illegal immigrants. Second Trump administration (2025) According to required financial disclosures, Stephen Miller , who as United States homeland security advisor has been actively involved in the second Trump administration 's deportation efforts, owns between $100,000 and $250,000 of Palantir stock; some Trump critics have raised concerns about a potential conflict of interest. Similar financial disclosure requirements of U.S. government employees show that at least 10 other members of the Trump administration own Palantir stock. Advocacy groups such as the Alliance for Secure AI have also criticized Palantir's use of AI during the second Trump administration.

In February 2025, The New York Times reported that Trump and Palantir were compiling a master list of personal information on every American that could give Trump "untold surveillance power" by illegally combining information from various government departments. Palantir denies this.

The company is acting as a subcontractor of Monkton, a computer and network security company, which won a $9.8 million contract to design, develop, and deploy a " Section 117 Information Sharing Environment Capable of Providing Greater Transparency ". German police software (2020s) There is considerable controversy about the use of Palantir by the state and the Federal Ministry of Interior's ongoing attempt to introduce it at the federal level.

The controversy also elicits debate from neighboring countries, with De Tijd noting that even when a German court ruled the software unconstitutional in 2023, it was not abandoned, and the law was changed.

The controversy also touches on Thiel's and Karp's German origins and alleged relationships with powerful political and economic actors in Germany (especially in the wealthier, more powerful states, such as Bavaria , Baden-Württemberg , North Rhine-Westphalia , and Hesse ). Hesse is Thiel's home state (he was born in Frankfurt), and Karp completed his PhD there. Hesse was the first federal state to introduce Palantir software (as Hessendata, since 2017 ) while Bavaria promotes its VeRA version at the federal level. Bavaria Minister of the Interior Joachim Herrmann has said that VeRA must be used nationwide to "create a uniform and effective security infrastructure". There is also debate about the founders' application of the philosophy of René Girard , Nietzsche , Carl Schmitt , and the Frankfurt School at Palantir and in the surveillance industry. According to a 2025 documentary produced by Hessischer Rundfunk , Karp, like Thiel, seeks world domination. Franz-Josef Hanke, a spokesperson for the Humanist Union in Hesse, has also said that this is Thiel's goal with Palantir.

The German version of Jacobin has written that while Palantir does not steal data or carry out surveillance activity, its increased power in Germany is still worrisome, considering the founders' non-democratic tendencies, and that SPD and Alliance 90/The Greens also carry responsibility.

The European has written that Thiel and Karp cause themselves trouble by trying to create a mysterious aura, which leads to a negative reaction to Palantir software despite its usefulness in civilian and defense applications. According to an August 2025 Süddeutsche Zeitung article, a YouGov poll on behalf of the SZ Dossier found that a slim majority of Germans support federal agencies' use of Palantir: 51% of respondents partly or completely supported it, 30% partly or completely opposed it, and 19% did not give a response. Nevertheless, civil skepticism of the company and software remains prominent; a petition on the platform Campact gathered 84,000 signatures against Palantir within a few hours and has more than 400,000 as of September 2025. Corporate tax practices An Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy (ITEP) report found that Palantir Technologies paid no U.S. federal income tax in 2025 despite reporting about $1.5 billion in domestic income. According to the analysis, the company's zero tax liability was largely due to provisions in recent U.S. tax legislation , particularly rules allowing immediate deduction of research and development expenses, which significantly reduced its taxable income.

The report also noted that Palantir has benefited from substantial government contracts , including work with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), while simultaneously receiving tax advantages through the federal tax code . AI-assisted targeting tools In April 2026, Palantir published a manifesto based on a book co-authored by Alex Karp that frames AI weapons proliferation using Cold War-style deterrence logic , warning that adversaries "will proceed" regardless of ethical debate, which has faced backlash for framing AI weapons development as inevitable and necessary for US hegemony .

The manifesto's claim that "No other country in the history of the world has advanced progressive values more than this one" has been criticized by academics and analysts for Western supremacism .

In June 2025, Francesca Albanese 's report for the United Nations on corporations complicit in the Gaza genocide named Palantir as a source of AI tools linked to the Israeli military's activities in Gaza. Corporate affairs Alex Karp at work, December 2015 Leadership Board of directors As of January 2026, the board of directors of Palantir includes: Alex Karp , CEO of Palantir Alexander Moore, co-founder and former CEO of NodePrime Alexandra Schiff, former reporter of The Wall Street Journal Stephen Cohen , president of Palantir Peter Thiel , chairman of Palantir Lauren Friedman Stat, former Fractional Chief Administration Officer at Friendly Force Eric Woersching, former general partner at Initialized Capital Executive management As of October 2025, the executive management of Palantir includes: Alex Karp, CEO. He is also co-managing director at Frankfurt-based Palantir Technologies Gmbh. Stephen Cohen, Co-Founder, President, Secretary, and Director Shyam Sankar, Chief Technology Officer and Executive Vice President David Glazer, Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer Ryan Taylor, Chief Revenue Officer and Chief Legal Officer Other personnel Jamie Fly , former Radio Free Europe president and CEO, serves as senior counselor to the CEO. Fabrice Brégier is president of Palantir France. He is the former COO and president of commercial aircraft at Airbus . Koichi Narasaki is CEO of Palantir Japan. Previously, he was group chief digital officer of SOMPO Holdings , with which Palantir has a joint venture. Louis Mosley is the head and executive vice president of Palantir Technologies UK. Details about Palantir Korea's boards of directors are not fully known, but one board member is Shawn Pelsinger, who is also Acrisure 's chief administrative officer.

As a firm doing sensitive work for governments, Palantir has connections with politicians, and some of its former employees have become public officials. This type of relationship (sometimes called a "revolving door") can cause controversy. Laura Rudas is the executive vice president of strategy. She is a former Austrian politician, having served as secretary-general of the Social Democrats and as a member of the Austrian Parliament . She left for Palantir despite having won a national reelection campaign. Mike Gallagher , former Chair of the House Committee on the Chinese Communist Party (2023–2024), is head of defense. French politician Julie Martinez ( Socialist Party ) is the global data protection officer (she has worked for Palantir for three years) and her party's spokesperson, having been appointed to this office in September 2025. She and Palantir's reputation have caused controversy in France, but her party says the situation is not problematic. She also heads the think tank France Positive. David MacNaughton , former ambassador of Canada to the United States (2016–2019), is president of Palantir Technologies Canada. He resigned his ambassadorship to join the firm. His activities involving Palantir before and after his resignation have been controversial. Jacob Helberg , former senior advisor to Karp, is now the U.S. Under Secretary of State for Economic Growth, Energy, and the Environment . Mike Kelly is president of Palantir Australia. He served as Parliamentary Secretary for Defence from 2011 to 2013 and Minister for Defence Materiel in 2013. Matthew Turpin , former director for China at the White House National Security Council and senior advisor for China to the Secretary of Commerce during the first Trump administration , serves as senior advisor. Ownership The largest shareholders of Palantir in early 2024 were: Shareholder name Percentage The Vanguard Group 9.4% Peter Thiel 7.2% BlackRock 4.7% SOMPO Holdings 3.9% Alex Karp 2.5% Renaissance Technologies 2.1% State Street Corporation 1.9% Geode Capital Management 1.4% Jane Street Capital 1.1% Eaton Vance 1.1% D. E. Shaw & Co. 1.0% Others 66.2% Voting structure Palantir has a special voting structure, tied to the classification of shares into Class A, Class B and Class F.

The Class F shares, totaling 1,005,000, are managed by the Founder Voting Trust and owned equally by the three founders Thiel, Karp, and Cohen, which ensures them a 49.99% voting interest regardless of the number of other shares they hold or the number of new shares the company issues.

In response to criticism that the founders wanted to remain "emperors for life", they said the creation of the Class F shares did not violate the law or the company charter and had been approved by a majority of other Palantir investors when the firm went public in 2020.

In 2025, Bloomberg wrote: The founders, executives, and "insiders" also hold Class B shares, each of which carries ten votes, while the publicly traded Class A shares carry only one vote each. Class B shares can be converted to Class A shares on a 1-to-1 basis to be sold to outsiders. Finances For the fiscal year 2024, Palantir reported earnings of $462 million, with annual revenue of $2.9 billion, an increase of 28.8% over the previous fiscal cycle. Year Revenue (US$ ml.) Net income (US$ ml.) Total assets (US$ ml.) Employees 2018 595 −598 − − 2019 743 −588 3,735 2,391 2020 1,093 −1,166 2,691 2,439 2021 1,542 −520 3,247 2,920 2022 1,906 −374 3,461 3,838 2023 2,225 210 4,522 3,735 2024 2,866 462 6,341 3,936 2025 4,628 1,133 — 4,127 For Q4 2025, Palantir reported revenue of $1.4 billion, a 70% increase year-over-year, driven largely by rapid enterprise adoption of its AI Platform (AIP). U.S. commercial revenue rose 137% year-over-year to $507 million. Total contract value reached a record $4.3 billion in the quarter. For 2026, management guided revenue of approximately $2.2 billion, implying 61% growth.

In December 2025, the UK Ministry of Defence awarded Palantir a £240 million three-year contract. Influence on other companies Palantir's success has led a new wave of companies (mostly in the defense sector) to follow its business model, often connected to its personnel.

The Wall Street Journal and Business Insider have described a "Palantir Mafia" that they compared to the PayPal Mafia .

The Wall Street Journal has written that venture-capital firms, such as Palumni VC and XYZ Capital, have emerged with a mission to invest in startups founded by former Palantir employees. Those mentioned include founders of companies like Anduril Industries , 8VC , Addepar , and Ironclad . Joe Lonsdale also co-founded anti-drone tech startup Epirus.

The German unicorn Helsing was built as a German or European answer to Palantir. Thiel also had a role in Helsing's success, and the company is considered part of the "Thiel ecosystem", though he does not directly invest in it. Govradar is a startup focused on public procurement for the German government and Bundeswehr. It was founded in 2020 by former Palantir employee Sascha Goyk, who has also served as a Bundeswehr reserve officer since 2005. His task at Palantir was developing solutions to make the company's data analytics platform accessible to German police and intelligence agencies, but because Palantir faced intense scrutiny, he left and founded his own company. Nordic Air Defence (NAV) is a Swedish startup developing counter-drone missile technology that is staffed by former employees of Palantir and Quantum-Systems , which is backed by Thiel Capital . Thiel-backed SNÖ Ventures invests in NAV.

The French startup Comand AI, founded in 2023 by Antoine Chassang (ex- Snapchat ) and Loïc Mougeolle (ex- Naval Group ), aims to be a more adaptive alternative to Palantir. Its team was poached from Palantir, OpenAI, and Anduril.

The British company Arondite was founded by Will Blyth (also CEO), a former British Army officer who had also worked for Palantir and Helsing.

The Israeli defense tech startup Kela was founded by Hamutal Meridor (president, former officer in the Israeli army, and former head of Palantir's general operations in Israel), Alon Dror (CEO and former Israeli tank platoon commander), Jason Manne, and Omer Bar Ilan. Like Palantir, Kela develops commercial and military systems "in service of Western defense". London-based Conduct is a company founded by three ex-Palantir employees to overhaul legacy ERP systems, with a focus on SAP .

In 2024, alongside General Catalyst and Red Cell Partners, the Founders Fund incubated the defense incubator Valinor Enterprises.

The co-founders are former Palantir senior vice president Julie Bush (CEO), Trae Stephens , General Catalyst's Paul Kwan, and Red Cell's Grant Verstandig.

The team is sourced from Palantir, Anduril, and Helsing.

The firm also has strategic relationships with these companies.

In 2025, biodefense company Valthos emerged from stealth, with backing from Lux Capital , OpenAI , and Founders Fund. Its co-founders are Kathleen McMahon (CEO), who previously served as leader of Palantir's life sciences division, and Lux Capital partner Tess van Stekelenburg. Beijing-based Deepexi (滴普科技) is seen as China's effort to build a version of Palantir. It went public in Hong Kong on October 28, 2025. Its website calls it an "enterprise- large-model artificial intelligence (AI) application solution provider and a National Specialised and Innovative 'Little Giant' Enterprise", using a "general-purpose enterprise operational decision-making large model".

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved October 28, 2024 . ^ Dowd, Maureen (August 17, 2024). "Alex Karp Has Money and Power. So What Does He Want?" .

The New York Times . Retrieved May 19, 2025 . ^ Liy, Macarena Vidal (March 8, 2025). "Palantir, Trump's 'big brother' dominating the stock market" . El País English . ^ Au-Yeung, Angel (September 30, 2020). "Palantir IPO Cements Billionaire Fortunes For Cofounder Peter Thiel And CEO Alexander Karp" . Forbes . ^ "Palantir advises clients against using DeepSeek's AI tech; forecasts upbeat 2025 revenue" . Reuters. February 4, 2025. ^ a b "Peter Thiel's Palantir Wins Role in $823 Million Government Contract" . Bloomberg. February 25, 2020. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved March 18, 2020 . ^ a b "Palantir CEO Alex Karp said although the company won't build tools that predict crimes, Palantir would do it 'very well' " . Business Insider . ^ "What Is an IL5 Certification?" . Akamai . November 13, 2024. Archived from the original on November 13, 2024 . Retrieved November 13, 2024 . IL5 is a certification by the United States Department of Defense (DoD) that authorizes a cloud service provider (CSP) to store and process some of the DoD's most sensitive data.

The IL5 certification indicates that a CSP has the level of controls, protocols, and technologies to securely handle Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) that is deemed to be mission critical.

The security controls required for IL5 certification are among the strictest in the cloud services industry. * Impact Level 5 (IL5) is for DoD CUI and National Security Systems (NSS) ^ a b c d Gorman, Siobhan (September 4, 2009). "How Team of Geeks Cracked Spy Trade" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on April 16, 2019 . Retrieved August 8, 2017 . ^ a b "A Tech Fix For Illegal Government Snooping?" . NPR. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved January 30, 2012 . ^ "Palantir Posted Nearly $1 Billion in 2018 Sales, Executive Says" . Bloomberg.com. Bloomberg. January 16, 2019. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved February 21, 2019 . ^ "Apollo" . Palantir. Archived from the original on December 14, 2021 . Retrieved December 14, 2021 . ^ "Palantir Apollo | Continuous deployment is achievable at scale — no matter the complexity or constraints" . Palantir. Archived from the original on February 2, 2024 . Retrieved February 2, 2024 . ^ a b Hvistendahl, Mara (January 30, 2021). "How the LAPD and Palantir Use Data to Justify Racist Policing" .

The Intercept . Retrieved June 24, 2025 . ^ a b Allyn, Bobby (May 3, 2025). "How Palantir, the secretive tech company, is rising in the Trump era" . NPR . Retrieved June 24, 2025 . ^ a b "Trump appears to be building an unprecedented spy machine that could track Americans" . MSNBC . May 30, 2025 . Retrieved June 24, 2025 . ^ a b c d Frenkel, Sheera; Krolik, Aaron (May 30, 2025). "Trump Taps Palantir to Compile Data on Americans" .

The Venture Alchemists: How Big Tech Turned Profits Into Power . New York City: Columbia University Press . pp. 247, 248. doi : 10.7312/lalk21026 . ISBN 978-0-231-21026-3 . JSTOR 10.7312/lalk21026 . Retrieved August 22, 2025 . ^ Harris, Shane (July 31, 2012). "Palantir Technologies spots patterns to solve crimes and track terrorists" . Wired . {{ cite magazine }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Tréguer, Félix (May 1, 2026). "Anthropic, Silicon Valley's conscience?" . Le Monde diplomatique . Retrieved May 21, 2026 . ^ Wilhelm, Alex (July 7, 2020). "As Palantir preps IPO, a look back at its growth history" . TechCrunch . Retrieved August 22, 2025 . ^ Steinberger, Michael (November 4, 2025).

The Philosopher in the Valley: Alex Karp, Palantir, and the Rise of the Surveillance State . New York City: Simon and Schuster . p. 73. ISBN 978-1-6680-1297-0 . ^ Steinberger 2025 , pp. 64, 66, 209. ^ Ganz, John (February 21, 2025). "Palantir's Call to Arms Is Also a Sales Pitch" . Bloomberg.com . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "Book Review: The Technological Republic: Hard Power, Soft Belief, and the Future of the West , Alexander C. Karp and Nicholas W. Zamiska" . Independent Institute. 2025 . Retrieved December 6, 2025 . ^ McCordick, Jack (February 28, 2025). "Alex Karp's War for the West" .

The New Republic . Retrieved November 29, 2025 . ^ Au-Yeung, Angel (November 2, 2025). "Palantir Thinks College Might Be a Waste. So It's Hiring High-School Grads" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved November 29, 2025 . ^ Widman, Jeff (June 5, 2009). "Palantir keeps it lean and mean on five-year journey from zero to 150 employees" . VentureBeat . Archived from the original on May 16, 2025. ^ Gesher, Ari (March 8, 2010). "Friction in Human-Computer Symbiosis: Kasparov on Chess" . Palantir tech. Archived from the original on April 14, 2012 . Retrieved January 30, 2012 . ^ "Press release: Thomson Reuters and Palantir Technologies enter exclusive agreement to create next-generation analytics platform for financial clients" . Thomson Reuters. April 12, 2010. Archived from the original on May 8, 2012 . Retrieved May 27, 2013 . ^ Kauffman, Tim (June 27, 2010). "The new high-tech weapons against fraud" . Federal Times . Retrieved January 30, 2012 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Kiely, Kathy (June 18, 2010). "Obama administration to create 'do not pay' list to bar shady contractors" . USA Today . Retrieved June 22, 2010 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Orszag, Peter (June 18, 2010). "Do Not Pay? Do Read This Post" . Office of Management and Budget . Archived from the original on January 21, 2017 . Retrieved January 30, 2012 – via National Archives . ^ a b Kuhn, Eric (June 1, 2010). "Companies capitalize on 'open government' " . Political Ticker blog . CNN. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved September 28, 2013 . ^ "Using Palantir with Open Source Data: Finding and Preventing Fraud in Stimulus Spending" . Palantir Technologies. May 4, 2010. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013 . Retrieved May 27, 2013 . ^ Vance, Ashlee ; Stone, Brad (November 22, 2011). "Palantir, the War on Terror's Secret Weapon: A Silicon Valley startup that collates threats has quietly become indispensable to the U.S. intelligence community" . Business Week Magazine . Archived from the original on February 18, 2013 . Retrieved September 28, 2013 . ^ a b c d e f Burns, Matt (January 11, 2015). "Leaked Palantir Doc Reveals Uses, Specific Functions And Key Clients" . TechCrunch . Archived from the original on November 27, 2015 . Retrieved February 21, 2015 . ^ "Notice of Exempt Offering of Securities" .

The United States Securities and Exchange Commission. September 27, 2013. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved September 28, 2013 . ^ Cutler, Kim-Mai (September 28, 2013). "Palantir Is Raising $197M In Growth Capital, SEC Filing Shows" . TechCrunch. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved June 25, 2017 . ^ Greenberg, Andy; Mac, Ryan (September 2, 2013). "How A 'Deviant' Philosopher Built Palantir, A CIA-Funded Data-Mining Juggernaut" . Forbes . Archived from the original on June 4, 2015 . Retrieved September 28, 2013 . ^ a b c d e Mac, Ryan (December 11, 2014). "Palantir Aiming To Raise $400 Million In New Round" . Forbes . Archived from the original on January 2, 2015 . Retrieved February 21, 2015 . ^ a b Tirone, Jonathan (May 8, 2018). "Peter Thiel and Palantir Are at the Heart of the Iran Nuclear Deal" . Bloomberg . Archived from the original on November 13, 2020 . Retrieved May 8, 2018 . Palantir, which Thiel and his partners built with CIA funding ^ "Palantir raising more money after tagged with 15 billion valuation" , The Wall Street Journal , January 16, 2015, archived from the original on October 28, 2020 , retrieved August 4, 2017 . ^ Alden, William (June 23, 2015). "Palantir Valued At $20 Billion In New Funding Round" . BuzzFeed . Archived from the original on June 24, 2015 . Retrieved June 23, 2015 . ^ Buhr, Sarah (December 23, 2015). "Palantir Has Raised $880 Million At A $20 Billion Valuation" . TechCrunch . Archived from the original on January 29, 2017 . Retrieved December 15, 2016 . ^ Yeung, Ken (February 15, 2016). "Palantir acquires Kimono Labs, will shutter data collection service on February 29" . VentureBeat . Archived from the original on May 2, 2023. ^ Condon, Stephanie. "Palantir acquires data visualization startup Silk" . Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved August 10, 2016 . ^ Alden, William (April 22, 2017). "Palantir's Relationship With The Intelligence Community Has Been Worse Than You'd Think" . BuzzFeed News . Retrieved August 13, 2025 . ^ Hale, Chasity (July 15, 2025). "Protesters target Palo Alto's Palantir office" . Palo Alto Online . ^ Kelion, Leo (March 28, 2020). "NHS turns to big tech to tackle Covid-19 hot spots" . BBC News. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved March 29, 2020 . ^ "The power of data in a pandemic - Technology in the NHS" . healthtech.blog.gov.uk . March 28, 2020. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved March 29, 2020 . ^ Steinberger, Michael (October 21, 2020). "Does Palantir See Too Much?" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved October 26, 2020 . ^ Parker, Ashley; Stanley-Becker, Isaac; Linskey, Annie. "10 days of struggle: Inside Biden's early coronavirus vaccine effort" .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Archived from the original on January 30, 2021 . Retrieved January 31, 2021 . ^ Levy, Ari (August 25, 2020). "Palantir CEO rips Silicon Valley in letter to investors" . Retrieved July 2, 2025 . ^ Levy, Ari (September 30, 2020). "Palantir closes below first trade after NYSE debut" . Retrieved July 2, 2025 . ^ Riley, Tonya (September 29, 2020). "The Technology 202: Activists slam Palantir for its work with ICE ahead of market debut" .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved July 30, 2025 . ^ O'Donnell, Carl (December 7, 2020). "Palantir wins $44 million FDA contract, boosting shares 21%" . Reuters. Archived from the original on December 21, 2020 . Retrieved December 8, 2020 . ^ Capoot, Ashley (February 13, 2023). "Shares of Palantir pop as it reports first profitable quarter" . CNBC. ^ "Notice of Intent to Award a Sole Source contract to Palantir Technologies" . November 6, 2024 . Retrieved July 2, 2025 . ^ Mathews, Jessica (August 6, 2025). "How Palantir—a company too small to make the Fortune 500—became one of the world's 25 most valuable companies" . Fortune . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Motley Fool (August 3, 2025). "Why Is Wall Street Obsessed With AI (Artificial Intelligence) Leader Palantir?" . ^ "Palantir Moves Headquarters to Miami From Denver" . Bloomberg . February 17, 2026 . Retrieved February 17, 2026 . ^ Subin, Samantha (February 17, 2026). "Palantir moving its headquarters from Denver to Miami" . CNBC . Retrieved February 18, 2026 . ^ "CIA-backed Palantir Technologies raises $107.5 million" . San Francisco: Reuters. December 11, 2013 . Retrieved August 1, 2025 . Palantir Technologies, the data-mining company that is partly backed by the Central Intelligence Agency, has raised another $107.5 million... brings the total raised by the company to over $800 million, values the company at more than $9 billion... Clients such as the National Security Agency, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the CIA, along with corporate customers such as banks, use Palantir software to piece together information on terrorist plots, financial frauds and the like.

The start-up has drawn attention because of its Prism software product, which has the same name as an NSA program that monitors emails and other communications of ordinary people on a mass scale. Palantir has said its product is separate. ^ "SEC FORM D" . Securities and Exchange Commission . Archived from the original on July 25, 2015 . Retrieved May 31, 2015 . ^ Buhr, Sarah (December 23, 2015). "Palantir Has Raised $880 Million At A $20 Billion Valuation" . TechCrunch . Archived from the original on January 29, 2017 . Retrieved December 15, 2016 . ^ Waldman, Peter; Chapman, Lizette; Robertson, Jordan. "Palantir Knows Everything About You" . Bloomberg.com . Bloomberg. Archived from the original on April 23, 2018 . Retrieved April 23, 2018 . ^ Copeland, Rob (October 18, 2018). "Secretive Data Company Palantir Weighs Giant Public Offering" .

The Wall Street Journal . ISSN 0099-9660 . Archived from the original on October 18, 2018 . Retrieved October 19, 2018 . ^ Korosec, Kirsten; Whittaker, Zack; Mascarenhas, Natasha (July 7, 2020). "Secretive data startup Palantir has confidentially filed for an IPO" . TechCrunch . Archived from the original on July 7, 2020. ^ Kindig, Beth (September 29, 2020). "Palantir IPO: Deep-Dive Analysis" . Forbes . Archived from the original on December 15, 2020 . Retrieved November 9, 2020 . ^ Novet, Jordan (September 9, 2024). "Palantir soars 14% on software vendor's inclusion in S&P 500" . CNBC. Archived from the original on October 7, 2024 . Retrieved October 7, 2024 . ^ "Palantir IR" . Palantir. Archived from the original on November 18, 2024 . Retrieved November 25, 2024 . ^ "Palantir might be the most over-valued firm of all time" .

The Telegraph . ISSN 0307-1235 . Archived from the original on May 10, 2024 . Retrieved January 28, 2025 . ^ Sidel, Robin (February 10, 2015). "First Data Reports First Quarterly Profit in More Than Seven Years" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved February 25, 2015 . ^ Gault, Matthew (April 26, 2023). "Palantir Demos AI to Fight Wars But Says It Will Be Totally Ethical Don't Worry About It" . Vince . Archived from the original on May 3, 2023 . Retrieved May 3, 2023 . ^ Tarantola, Andrew (April 26, 2023). "Palantir shows off an AI that can go to war" . Engadget . Archived from the original on May 3, 2023 . Retrieved May 3, 2023 . ^ Capoot, Ashley (May 8, 2023). "Palantir soars on earnings beat and prediction of full-year profitability" . CNBC . Archived from the original on May 9, 2023 . Retrieved May 9, 2023 . ^ a b "Protesters blockade office of tech giant with NHS contract over ties to Israel" .

The Independent . December 21, 2023. Archived from the original on December 29, 2023 . Retrieved December 29, 2023 . ^ "Jacobs and Palantir Expand Partnership" . Jacobs. Archived from the original on October 7, 2024 . Retrieved October 7, 2024 . ^ a b "Palantir IR" . Palantir. Archived from the original on October 7, 2024 . Retrieved October 7, 2024 . ^ "Palantir Artificial Intelligence Platform" . Palantir. Archived from the original on October 7, 2024 . Retrieved October 7, 2024 . ^ "Palantir AIP Bootcamp" . Palantir. Archived from the original on October 7, 2024 . Retrieved October 7, 2024 . ^ "TITAN" . Palantir. Archived from the original on October 7, 2024 . Retrieved October 7, 2024 . ^ "Army Awards TITAN Ground Station Contract to Palantir Inc" . AFCEA International. March 6, 2024 . Retrieved October 7, 2024 . ^ "Palantir's MetaConstellation software harnesses the power of satellite technology" . Palantir. Archived from the original on October 7, 2024 . Retrieved October 7, 2024 . ^ "Pentagon to adopt Palantir AI as core US military system" reuters.com. Accessed Apr 13 2026 ^ "Palantir Skykit brings intelligence and operations to the edge" . Palantir . Retrieved October 7, 2024 . ^ "L'Ukraine, laboratoire des guerres du futur" . L'Express (in French). February 16, 2023 . Retrieved October 7, 2024 . ^ "Ukrainian Armed Force use Skykit Palantir" . Militarnyi . Archived from the original on October 7, 2024 . Retrieved October 7, 2024 . ^ "Palantir Stops Mocking Salespeople and Starts Hiring Them" . Bloomberg.com . January 7, 2019. Archived from the original on October 9, 2020 . Retrieved February 28, 2019 . ^ a b c d e Waldman, Peter; Chapman, Lizette; Robertson, Jordan (April 19, 2018). "Peter Thiel's data-mining company is using War on Terror tools to track American citizens.

The scary thing? Palantir is desperate for new customers" . Bloomberg. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved April 24, 2018 . ^ a b c Mak, Aaron (April 19, 2018). "Report: Palantir Helped JPMorgan Spy on Employees" . Bloomberg. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved April 24, 2018 . ^ "Data mining firm Palantir mocked idea of a sales staff; now it's hiring" . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on August 30, 2024 . Retrieved April 14, 2024 . ^ Cox, Joseph (January 15, 2026). " 'ELITE': The Palantir App ICE Uses to Find Neighborhoods to Raid" . 404 Media . ^ Richman, Josh (January 15, 2026). "Report: ICE Using Palantir Tool That Feeds On Medicaid Data" . Electronic Frontier Foundation. ^ a b c "Palantir Technologies Inc.: Shareholders Board Members Managers and Company Profile | US69608A1088" . MarketScreener.com . Archived from the original on March 5, 2024 . Retrieved March 7, 2024 . ^ "Q2 2024 | Letter to Shareholders" . Palantir. Archived from the original on October 7, 2024 . Retrieved October 7, 2024 . ^ a b Chiang, Oliver (April 30, 2010). "PayPal-Based Technology Helped Bust India's And The Dalai Lama's Cyberspies" . Forbes . Archived from the original on August 14, 2017 . Retrieved September 7, 2017 . ^ "A Human Driven Data-centric Approach to Accountability: Analyzing Data to Prevent Fraud, Waste and Abuse in Stimulus Spending: Gov 2.0 Expo 2010 - Co-produced by UBM TechWeb & O'Reilly Conferences, May 25 - 27, 2010, Washington, DC" . Gov2expo.com. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved January 30, 2012 . ^ "Merck KGaA, Palantir's new joint venture looks to tear down cancer research data silos" . MobiHealthNews . November 20, 2018. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved February 27, 2019 . ^ "Airbus believes its AI can eliminate flight delays" . VentureBeat . October 23, 2018. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved February 27, 2019 . ^ Palantir. "Palantir Foundry Enables Scuderia Ferrari Through Data" . PRNewsWire (Press release). Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved February 27, 2019 . ^ "CNN.com Video" . CNN. Archived from the original on August 16, 2000 . Retrieved June 26, 2010 . ^ Markoff, John (March 29, 2009). "Vast Spy System Loots Computers in 103 Countries" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on April 1, 2009 . Retrieved February 25, 2017 . ^ "NATO acquires AI-enabled Warfighting System" . April 14, 2025 . Retrieved July 3, 2026 . ^ "NATO Maven Smart System Achieves Full Technical Operational Capability" . shape.nato.int . June 30, 2026. ^ "NATO commander: Europe has no alternative to Palantir's warfare tech for now" . POLITICO . May 20, 2026. ^ "Bundeswehr will mächtiges KI-Spionage-Tool aus USA nicht nutzen – doch NATO-Kommandeur schwärmt" . www.merkur.de (in German). May 17, 2026. ^ Knox, Karin (January 24, 2014). "How Many Years A Slave?" . Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. ^ "With $7M contract, NIH taps big data analysis platform Palantir to streamline health research" . MobiHealthNews . September 24, 2018. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved February 28, 2019 . ^ "Can Data-Crunching Palantir Find Missing Children and Catch Traffickers?" . Fortune . Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved February 28, 2019 . ^ "Palantir and WFP partner to help transform global humanitarian delivery" . World Food Programme. February 5, 2019. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved February 28, 2019 . ^ Winkler, Peter Loftus and Rolfe (October 22, 2020). "Palantir to Help U.S. Track Covid-19 Vaccines" .

The Wall Street Journal . ISSN 0099-9660 . Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved October 23, 2020 . ^ Biddle, Sam (February 15, 2026). "Palantir Gets Millions of Dollars From New York City's Public Hospitals" .

The Intercept . Retrieved April 21, 2026 . ^ Mansoor, Sanya (March 26, 2026). "New York City hospitals drop Palantir as controversial AI firm expands in UK" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved April 21, 2026 . ^ Curry Wimbish, Whitney (May 18, 2026). "Palantir Gets an Initial $3.9 Million to Spy on Federal Workers" .

The American Prospect . Retrieved May 25, 2026 . ^ Scarborough, Rowan (July 16, 2012). "Military has to fight to purchase lauded IED buster" .

The Washington Times . Archived from the original on July 19, 2012 . Retrieved September 29, 2013 . ^ Finn, Holly (February 23, 2013). "The Humane Way to Crack Terrorists" (PDF) .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved June 3, 2026 . ^ Blagdon, Jeff (June 29, 2013). "Palantir is helping California police develop controversial license plate database" .

The Verge . Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved September 7, 2017 . ^ Winston, Ali (February 27, 2018). "Palantir Has Secretly Been Using New Orleans to Test its Predictive Policing Technology" .

The Verge . Archived from the original on February 28, 2018 . Retrieved February 28, 2018 . ^ a b Woodman, Spencer (March 2, 2017). "Palantir Provides the Engine for Donald Trump's Deportation Machine" .

The Intercept . Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved November 6, 2018 . ^ Steinberger 2025 , p. 227. ^ "Palantir took over from Google on Project Maven" . Business Insider . December 2019. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved January 17, 2020 . ^ "Palantir Stock At $63: The Good, Bad And Ugly" Archived December 26, 2024, at the Wayback Machine Forbes . Retrieved December 17, 2024. ^ "How Palantir, the secretive tech company, is rising in the Trump era" NPR. Retrieved June 21, 2025. ^ "U.S. Army Awards Enterprise Service Agreement to Enhance Military Readiness and Drive Operational Efficiency" . United States Army. July 31, 2025 . Retrieved April 14, 2026 . ^ "Army consolidates dozens of Palantir software contracts into one deal worth up to $10 billion" . Breaking Defense . August 1, 2025 . Retrieved April 14, 2026 . ^ Booth, Robert (March 22, 2026). "Palantir extends reach into British state as it gets access to sensitive FCA data" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved March 23, 2026 . ^ Lewis, Paul; Conn, David; Pegg, David (April 12, 2020). "UK government using confidential patient data in coronavirus response" .

The Guardian . Retrieved January 22, 2024 . ^ Times, Byline; Hencke, David (April 22, 2020). "Palantir Coronavirus Contract Did Not Go to Competitive Tender" . Byline Times . Archived from the original on October 5, 2020 . Retrieved April 14, 2023 . ^ "Commentary: We've won our lawsuit over UK govt's £23m NHS data deal with Palantir" . Business & Human Rights Resource Centre. Archived from the original on April 14, 2023 . Retrieved April 14, 2023 . ^ "UK trade department courted US firm Palantir over 'untapped' NHS data potential" . Politico . June 29, 2021 . Retrieved July 6, 2021 . ^ "Palantir gears up to expand its reach into UK's NHS" . Financial Times . June 9, 2022. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 9, 2022 . ^ Clark, Lindsay. "Backbench Tory campaigner promises judicial review of data grab of English GP patients unless UK government changes tack" .

The Daily Mirror . Archived from the original on April 4, 2023 . Retrieved April 4, 2023 . ^ says, Basil_Bekdash (April 13, 2023). "UK Consortium unsuccessful in its bid for £480M Federated Data Platform" . Digital Health . Retrieved April 14, 2023 . ^ a b Mason; Whitehall, Rowena (April 27, 2023). "Ex-minister predicts 'battle royale' over US firm's bid for NHS data contract" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved April 28, 2023 . ^ Mitib, Ali; Amin, Lucas. "NHS tells hospitals to share medical records with US spy-tech company" .

The Times . ISSN 0140-0460 . Archived from the original on March 31, 2023 . Retrieved March 31, 2023 . ^ Clark, Lindsay. "NHS threatened with legal action over patient data platform" .

The Register . Archived from the original on March 30, 2023 . Retrieved March 31, 2023 . ^ "NHS's AI chief joins CIA-linked US tech firm" . Health Service Journal . April 22, 2022 . Retrieved May 24, 2022 . ^ Brown, Larisa (September 22, 2024). "How tech giant Palantir is secretly changing the face of warfare" .

The Times . Retrieved April 17, 2025 . ^ "Peter Thiel's Palantir Had Secret Plan to Crack UK's NHS: 'Buying Our Way In' " . Bloomberg . September 30, 2022. Archived from the original on January 24, 2023 . Retrieved April 4, 2023 . ^ Trickett, Jon (December 2, 2023). "NHS data given to CIA-backed Palantir" . Morning Star . Archived from the original on December 2, 2023 . Retrieved December 2, 2023 . ^ "UK defence data contract coverage" . Financial Times . Retrieved February 12, 2026 . ^ "Enterprise Agreement for provision of Palantir software tool-set" . Contracts Finder . Retrieved February 12, 2026 . ^ "Contract award notice: Data analytics support services" . Find a Tender Service . Retrieved February 12, 2026 . ^ a b Langford, Craig (February 18, 2026). "MOD confirms Palantir contract was direct award" . ^ ^ Booth, Robert (February 22, 2026). "Met police using AI tools supplied by Palantir to flag officer misconduct" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved March 18, 2026 . ^ "UK police forces dodge questions on Palantir" . Good Law Project. February 28, 2025 . Retrieved March 18, 2026 . ^ "Precise Policing 2 - Find a Tender" . find-tender.service.gov.uk . Retrieved March 18, 2026 . ^ Kundaliya, Dev. "Sadiq Khan blocks Met's £50m AI deal with Palantir" . www.computing.co.uk . Archived from the original on May 28, 2026 . Retrieved June 3, 2026 . ^ "Met Police Palantir contract blocked by City Hall" . BBC News . May 21, 2026 . Retrieved June 3, 2026 . ^ Booth, Robert (February 24, 2026). " 'It's not Robocop': UK police embrace AI 'efficiency' in complex investigations" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved March 18, 2026 . ^ Gjerding, Sebastian; Andersen, Lasse Skou (April 25, 2025). "Kontroversiel amerikansk virksomhed har adgang til fortrolige oplysninger hos dansk politi" . Information (in Danish) . Retrieved August 13, 2025 . ^ Seidelin, Matias (May 21, 2025). "OLFI - Kontroversielt amerikansk firma på vej ind i dansk våbenindustri" (in Danish). ^ Bech-Nielsen, Peter Christian (May 5, 2025). "Hummelgaard trods dybt kontroversielt PET-forslag om masseovervågning: Vil ikke tale om Palantir" . Radar (in Danish) . Retrieved August 13, 2025 . ^ Erhvervsjournalist, Charlotte Pries (June 11, 2026). "Rigspolitiet kobler Grønlands Politi på Palantir" . Computerworld (in Danish). ^ "Norwegian Customs implement new methods to catch smugglers" . Nettavisen. January 24, 2018. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021 . Retrieved December 5, 2021 . ^ "Faeser stoppt Anti-Gangster-Software - Reul glaubt an Wahlkampf-Manöver". Fokus . ^ Volk, Iris. "Baden-Württemberg: Polizei will umstrittene Palantir-Software einsetzen: BW-Grüne halten dagegen" . Tagesschau (in German) . Retrieved July 30, 2025 . ^ Deutschland, Business Insider (May 8, 2026). "Bundeswehr verzichtet auf Palantir – wegen Sicherheitsbedenken" . Business Insider (in German). {{ cite news }} : |first1= has generic name ( help ) ^ Hong, Jinju (April 29, 2026). "Germany excludes Palantir from military AI solution" . DigitalToday . ^ a b Pugnet, Aurélie; Henning, Maximilian; Strohmaier, Brenda (August 8, 2025). "Palantir is well on its way to conquering Europe" . Retrieved September 3, 2025 . ^ Gastineau, Pierre (April 17, 2025). "France • US' Palantir to stay part of French intelligence until end of Macron presidency? - 17/04/2025" . Intelligence Online . ^ Henley, Jon (June 16, 2026). "France to ditch Palantir's AI data tools in favour of domestic provider" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved June 20, 2026 . ^ O'Brien, Chris; O'Reilly-Durand, Helen (June 17, 2026). "🤖 La Machine #81: France Responds To Anthropic Fable's Sovereignty Jolt⚡" .

The French Tech Journal . ^ "French security service to replace Palantir with domestic firm" . euronews . June 16, 2026. ^ Oshin, Olafmihan (June 6, 2022). "Palantir CEO travels to Ukraine for Zelensky meeting" .

The Hill . Archived from the original on October 7, 2024 . Retrieved October 7, 2024 . ^ "AI Giant Palantir Testing its 'War Operating System' Managing Ukraine's Fight Against Russia" . Military Watch Magazine. May 13, 2026. ^ "How Tech Giants Turned Ukraine Into an AI War Lab" . TIME . February 8, 2024. Archived from the original on February 14, 2024 . Retrieved February 15, 2024 . ^ a b "Palantir, the Secretive Tech Giant Shaping Ukraine's War Effort" . UNITED24 Media . January 31, 2025. ^ a b c d e f " "Software on the Front Line": How Palantir Is Aiding Ukraine in Its War with Russia" . IDN-InDepthNews . August 24, 2025. ^ Chapman, Lizette (May 25, 2023). "Palantir Signs on For Reconstruction Work in War-Torn Ukraine" . Bloomberg.com . ^ Kushnikov, Vadim (May 29, 2023). "Palantir Inc to provide IT assistance to the Ukrainian army" . Militarnyi . ^ Ignatius, David (December 19, 2022). "How the algorithm tipped the balance in Ukraine" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on December 19, 2022. ^ a b Upadhayay, Prapti (June 1, 2026). "What Is Palantir's PRISMA, The AI Software Ukraine Is Using To Strike Russia" . ^ Grylls, George (December 24, 2022). "Ukraine is outflanking Russia with ammunition from Big Tech" .

The Times . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Wright, Ben (April 22, 2023). "The 'all-seeing' tech giant mapping Putin's war crimes" .

The Good Lobby Italia (in Italian). ^ "Documents reveal that Palantir contract was worth $30M more than government disclosed" .

The Toronto Star . June 4, 2026. ^ "Ottawa a autorisé 18 employés de Palantir à accéder à des documents de défense classifiés" . Radio-Canada (in Canadian French). June 10, 2026. ^ Bennett, Nicole M. (August 27, 2025). "When the government can see everything: How one company – Palantir – is mapping the nation's data" .

The Conversation . Retrieved September 16, 2025 . ^ "Palantir's tools pose an invisible danger we are just beginning to comprehend" .

The Guardian . August 24, 2025. ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved September 16, 2025 . ^ "Tracking Cyberspies Through the Web Wilderness (Published 2009)" . May 12, 2009 . Retrieved September 16, 2025 . ^ Reporters, RT Staff (May 30, 2025). "Ecuador Deploys Palantir's A.I. in High-Stakes War Against Drug Smugglers" .

The Rio Times . ^ a b Ehl, David (April 22, 2026). "O que diz o manifesto da Palantir, que promove "armas de IA" " . dw.com (in Portuguese). ^ Gregoire, Paul (July 12, 2026). "Australian Integration into Palantir's Global Surveillance Panopticon Is Not Inevitable" . Sydney Criminal Lawyers . ^ Kinder, Tabby; Hammond, George (December 22, 2024). "Palantir and Anduril join forces with tech groups to bid for Pentagon contracts" . Financial Times . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Sharwood, Simon (December 9, 2024). "Palantir and Anduril form partnership, as Sauron funded" . ^ Root, Al (May 13, 2025). "Archer Aviation Stock Soars. It's Working With Palantir" . Barron's . ^ Jeans, David (December 11, 2024). "Trump Wants Manufacturing Jobs Back. Silicon Valley Is Lining Up To Help" . Forbes . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ a b Tabby, Kinder; Murchu, Cynthia (February 7, 2025). "Palantir's 'revolving door' with government spurs huge growth" . Financial Times . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "Inside Palantir's Expanding Influence Operation" . Tech Transparency Project . Retrieved October 18, 2025 . ^ "Our Mission" . NAIA . Retrieved October 18, 2025 . ^ Silverman, Jacob (September 12, 2025). "Elon Musk's AI Grift" . ^ Rosenberg, Scott (November 8, 2024). "Anthropic, Palantir, Amazon team up on defense AI" . Axios . ^ Jain, Aishwarya (September 24, 2025). "Boeing's defense and space unit partners with Palantir for AI adoption" . ^ Eckstein, Megan (November 30, 2022). "Palantir, Lockheed Martin team up to modernize naval combat systems" . Defense News . ^ Subin, Samantha (March 7, 2025). "Palantir delivers first two AI-enabled systems to U.S. Army" . CNBC. ^ McMiler, Arthur (March 27, 2025). "General Dynamics Units Form Partnership on Combat Software" . executivebiz.com . Archived from the original on July 19, 2025. ^ Schumpeter (June 26, 2025). "Who needs Accenture in the age of AI?" .

The Economist . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Kelly, Makena (August 1, 2025). "Palantir Is Extending Its Reach Even Further Into Government" . Wired . {{ cite magazine }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Kline, Alan (December 6, 2024). "Booz Allen teams with tech giant Palantir to drive innovation for U.S. military" . bizjournals . ^ Collins, Elodie (July 22, 2025). "Deloitte, Palantir Jointly Develop EOS" . ExecutiveBiz . Archived from the original on July 27, 2025. ^ Jamison, Miles (July 1, 2025). "Palantir, Accenture Seek to Boost US Gov't Ops With AI" . executivebiz.com . Archived from the original on July 4, 2025. ^ "IBM and Palantir Partner to Help Businesses Easily Deploy Powerful and Open AI Applications; Unlock Valuable Data Across Hybrid Cloud Environments" . IBM Newsroom . Archived from the original on March 24, 2021 . Retrieved April 5, 2021 . ^ "Launching ERP Suite to deliver cost savings for AWS customers" . March 5, 2021. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021 . Retrieved April 5, 2021 . ^ Haselton, Todd (August 8, 2024). "Palantir jumps 11% on Microsoft partnership to sell AI to U.S. defense, intel agencies" . CNBC. Archived from the original on August 9, 2024 . Retrieved August 10, 2024 . ^ "Microsoft, Palantir Partner on AI for U.S. Gov't Agencies" . Redmond Channel Partner . Retrieved March 17, 2025 . ^ Ki, Hyun (February 28, 2025). "HD Hyundai Partners with Palantir, Siemens for Shipyard Automation" . KoreaTechToday - Korea's Leading Tech and Startup Media Platform . ^ Park, Soo-nam (September 23, 2025). " Behind the HD Hyundai-Palantir 'Data Alliance': Chung Kisun Bets the Future of Korea's Defense Industry on the U.S. Security System" . ^ Ga-eul (October 14, 2025). "Inside KT and Palantir's Next Move: Building the Future of AI-Powered Enterprises in Korea" . KoreaTechToday - Korea's Leading Tech and Startup Media Platform . ^ Ye-eun, Jie (October 14, 2025). "KT, Palantir chiefs discuss AI expansion in Seoul" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved December 17, 2025 . ^ a b Harris, Shane (January 31, 2012). "Killer App" . Washingtonian . Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved March 14, 2012 . ^ Wray, James; Stabe, Ulf. "Data intelligence firms proposed a systematic attack against WikiLeaks" .

The Tech Herald . Archived from the original on November 26, 2018 . Retrieved January 30, 2012 . ^ "Complaint for violations of Executive Order 11246" (PDF) . United States Department of Justice . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 1, 2016 . Retrieved September 27, 2016 . ^ Kosoff, Maya (September 27, 2016). "U.S. Government sues Peter Thiel's secretive big-data start-up for discrimination" . Vanity Fair . Archived from the original on November 4, 2016 . Retrieved October 31, 2016 . ^ Kravets, David (April 26, 2017). "Palantir settles US charges that it discriminated against Asian engineers" . Ars Technica . Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved April 26, 2017 . ^ Pegg, David; Cadwalladr, Carole (March 27, 2018). "US data firm admits employee approached Cambridge Analytica: Palantir confirm employee 'engaged in a personal capacity' with the company" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved April 23, 2018 . ^ Confessore, Nicholas ; Rosenberg, Matthew (March 27, 2018). "Spy Contractor's Idea Helped Cambridge Analytica Harvest Facebook Data" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved April 24, 2018 . ^ Pegg, David; Cadwalladr, Carole (March 28, 2018). "US data firm admits employee approached Cambridge Analytica" .

The New York Times . December 11, 2018. Archived from the original on August 4, 2019 . Retrieved August 4, 2019 . ^ The Philosopher In The Valley Alex Karp, Palantir, and the Rise of the Surveillance State by Michael Steinberger Avid Reader Press (2025) pps. 155-164 ^ The Philosopher In The Valley Alex Karp, Palantir, and the Rise of the Surveillance State by Michael Steinberger Avid Reader Press (2025) pps. 155-164 ^ "Palantir Contract Dispute Exposes NYPD's Lack of Transparency" . Brennan Center for Justice. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved August 4, 2019 . ^ "National Immigration Project of the National Lawyers Guild" . National Immigration Project. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved August 4, 2019 . ^ "Immigrant Defense Project - Fighting for Justice & Human Rights for ALL" . Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved August 4, 2019 . ^ "Mijente" . Mijente . Archived from the original on August 4, 2019 . Retrieved August 4, 2019 . ^ "Palantir Played Key Role in Arresting Families for Deportation, Document Shows" . Mijente . May 2, 2019. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved August 4, 2019 . ^ "Failing To Do Right:The Urgent Need for Palantir to Respect Human Rights" (PDF) . Amnesty International. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved September 28, 2020 . ^ "Amnesty International slams Palantir's human rights record" . CBS News. September 29, 2020. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved September 29, 2020 . ^ The Philosopher In The Valley Alex Karp, Palantir, and the Rise of the Surveillance State by Michael Steinberger Avid Reader Press (2025) p. 282 ^ Cox ·, Joseph (April 17, 2025). "Leaked: Palantir's Plan to Help ICE Deport People" . 404 Media . Retrieved April 17, 2025 . ^ Haskins, Caroline (April 18, 2025). "ICE is Paying Palantir $30 Million to Build 'ImmigrationOS' Surveillance Program" . Wired . ^ a b c d e Dou, Eva (December 3, 2025). "How Palantir shifted course to play key role in ICE deportations" .

The Washington Post . ^ Douthat, Ross; Boyd, Sophia (October 30, 2025). "What Palantir Sees" .

The New York Times . ^ USA Government (2026). "Contract Summary, Delivery Order (DO) PIID 70CTD022FR0000170" . USAspending.gov . Retrieved January 26, 2026 . ^ Ty Roush (January 26, 2026). "These Companies—Palantir, AT&T, Deloitte—Have The Biggest ICE Contracts As DHS Funding Under Fire" . Forbes . Retrieved January 26, 2026 . ^ Muhlberg, Byron (May 13, 2020). "Privacy Advocates Calls for Transparency Over Use of Patient Data" . CPO Magazine . Archived from the original on October 24, 2020 . Retrieved November 30, 2020 . ^ a b c Albergotti, Reed (July 1, 2020). "Lawmakers call for more transparency in health agency's pandemic data collection practices" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on December 24, 2020 . Retrieved November 30, 2020 . ^ "Trump Adviser Stephen Miller Holds Six-Figure Investment in Tech Firm Profiting from Deportations" . Democracy Now! . Retrieved September 16, 2025 . ^ "Damning Report Exposes Stephen Miller's Shady Ties to Palantir" .

The European (in German). ^ Rinaldi, Gabriel (August 20, 2025). "Was die Deutschen über den Einsatz von Palantir-Software denken (Meldung)" . SZ Dossier (in German). ^ "Nein zum Palantir-Deal – jetzt Appell unterzeichnen" . aktion.campact.de (in German). ^ "Big Data bei der Polizei: (Nicht nur) Hessen sucht mit Palantir-Software (nicht nur) nach Gefährdern" . Retrieved September 3, 2025 . ^ Joswig, Gareth (July 23, 2025). "Klage gegen KI-Überwachungs-Software in Bayern" . Die Tageszeitung: taz (in German). ^ "Palantir Pays Zero Federal Income Tax Despite Explosive Growth, Largely Due to Trump Tax Law" . ITEP . Retrieved March 22, 2026 . ^ a b c d "Palantir posted a manifesto that reads like the ramblings of a comic book villain" . Engadget . April 19, 2026 . Retrieved April 22, 2026 . ^ "Palantir's "Progressive" Manifesto: an AI Death Drive? | Steven Methven" . Novara Media . Archived from the original on April 22, 2026 . Retrieved April 22, 2026 . ^ Staff, Al Jazeera. " "Technofascism": Critics accuse Palantir of pushing AI war doctrine" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved April 22, 2026 . ^ Borger, Julian (July 3, 2025). "Global firms 'profiting from genocide' in Gaza, says UN rapporteur" .

The Guardian . Retrieved April 23, 2026 . ^ Marsi, Federica (July 1, 2025). "UN report lists companies complicit in Israel's "genocide": Who are they?" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved April 23, 2026 . ^ "Board of Directors" . investors.palantir.com . Retrieved January 26, 2026 . ^ "Board of Directors" . investors.palantir.com . Retrieved October 22, 2025 . ^ "Alexander Caedmon Karp - PLTR | Palantir Technologies Inc. - Wall Street Journal" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on October 22, 2025. ^ "Palantir Privacy and Security Statement" . Palantir . Retrieved October 22, 2025 . ^ Daniels, Eugene; Lizza, Ryan; Bade, Rachael (September 6, 2023). "Playbook: An Obama vet's message on Biden bedwetting" . Politico . Archived from the original on November 19, 2023 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 . ^ "Interview with Fabrice Brégier, President of Palantir France" . Palantir . Retrieved October 22, 2025 . ^ "United States/France • Palantir nabs Fabrice Bregier - 26/09/2018" . Intelligence Online . September 26, 2018. ^ "Airbus Board of Directors Announces Top Management Succession Plan" . Airbus. October 28, 2021 . Retrieved October 22, 2025 . ^ Ben-Hutta, Avi (November 19, 2019). "Sompo and Palantir cofound Palantir Japan" . Coverager - Insurance news and insights . ^ Cordon, Miguel (November 20, 2019). "Tech in Asia - Connecting Asia's startup ecosystem" . techinasia.com . ^ Church, Sophie (April 4, 2025). "Palantir Boss Louis Mosley: Keir Starmer 'Gets' AI, 'You Could See In His Eyes' " . Politics Home . ^ "Science, Innovation and Technology Committee Oral evidence: Digital centre of government, HC 790" . committees.parliament.uk . Retrieved October 25, 2025 . ^ "8-K" . Securities and Exchange Commission . Retrieved October 22, 2025 . ^ Jimenez-Sanchez, Kassandra (April 9, 2025). "Acrisure appoints Pelsinger Chief Administrative Officer, Wassersug named CTO – Reinsurance News" . ReinsuranceNe.ws . ^ a b "TTP – Inside Palantir's Expanding Influence Operation" . Tech Transparency Project . Retrieved October 22, 2025 . ^ a b "Munich Security Conference 2025 List of Confirmed Participants (alphabetical)" (PDF) . Munich Security Conference . Retrieved October 22, 2025 . ^ "Laura Rudas bei Palantir: Im Dunstkreis der Geheimdienste" . Der Standard (in Austrian German). September 11, 2015. ^ "Laura Rudas" . Milken Institute . Retrieved October 22, 2025 . ^ Champaigne-Kitetoa, Antoine (September 6, 2025). "Porte-Parole du Parti socialiste et " en même temps " Global Data Protection Officer chez Palantir" . Reflets.info (in French). ^ Gastineau, Nicolas (September 19, 2025). "Julie Martinez, une " hobbit " socialiste made in Palantir" . Revue21.fr (in French). ^ Fleury, Elisabeth (September 5, 2025). "IA : la porte-parole du PS travaille chez Palantir, l'ogre de la surveillance algorithmique choyé par Donald Trump – L'Humanité" . humanite.fr (in French). ^ Blatchford, Andy (May 7, 2020). "Former Canadian envoy to Washington defends work pitching for Palantir" . Politico . Retrieved October 22, 2025 . ^ Yakabuski, Konrad (June 17, 2020). "Opinion: The murky business of Canada's former U.S. ambassador" .

The Globe and Mail . ^ Tunney, Catharine (September 16, 2020). "Freeland, Vance and several federal officials barred from official dealings with ex-ambassador" . ^ Lavers, Michael K. (October 20, 2025). "Vance swears in gay State Department official" . ^ "Kelly Explains His Decision to Join Palantir" . Palantir Blog . Retrieved October 22, 2025 . ^ "Palantir Technologies Australia" . Defence Connect . September 1, 2022. Archived from the original on August 2, 2023. ^ "Parliamentary Handbook" . handbook.aph.gov.au . Archived from the original on October 22, 2025 . Retrieved October 22, 2025 . ^ "Matthew Turpin" . Hoover Institution. Archived from the original on November 18, 2023 . Retrieved November 18, 2023 . ^ "China expert Matt Turpin on Beijing's strategic objectives – "Intelligence Matters" – CBS News" . CBS News. July 14, 2021. Archived from the original on November 18, 2023 . Retrieved November 18, 2023 . ^ "Palantir Technologies Inc. Insider Trading & Ownership Structure" . Simply Wall St . Archived from the original on March 9, 2024 . Retrieved March 9, 2024 . ^ a b Sloan, Dylan; Carson, Biz (August 4, 2025). "Palantir's 525% Stock Surge Makes CTO Shyam Sankar the Firm's Fifth Billionaire" . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ a b Lin, Ed (September 10, 2024). "Palantir Chairman Peter Thiel to Sell Up to $1 Billion of Stock" . Barron's . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ a b Wolverton, Troy (August 26, 2020). "Palantir will have a stock structure that ensures its 3 founders will remain in control 'for the foreseeable future' " . Business Insider . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Leonard, Mike (July 24, 2021). "Peter Thiel, Palantir Co-Founders Slam 'Emperor for Life' Claims" . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Chapman, Lizette (July 30, 2025). "Palantir Stock Structure Gives Founders the Power to Stay the Course" . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Lin, Ed (May 6, 2025). "Palantir CEO Alex Karp Ends Plan to Sell Stock" . Barron's . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "SEC FORM 4" . Securities and Exchange Commission . Retrieved October 28, 2025 . ^ "2020 Annual Report" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on December 17, 2024 . Retrieved December 16, 2024 . ^ "2021 Annual Report" (PDF) . ^ "2022 Annual Report" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on December 20, 2024 . Retrieved December 16, 2024 . ^ "2023 Annual Report" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on December 20, 2024 . Retrieved December 16, 2024 . ^ "Palantir Q4 2025 Earnings" . Palantir Investor Relations . Retrieved March 21, 2026 . ^ "Palantir wins £240m MoD contract" . Yahoo Finance . Retrieved March 21, 2026 . ^ a b Au-Yeung, Angel (August 15, 2025). "The Palantir Mafia Behind Silicon Valley's Hottest Startups" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved August 17, 2025 . ^ Stokes, Samantha; Hornstein, Julia; Russell, Melia. "Meet the new tech mafia in town: the Palantir Mafia" . Business Insider . Retrieved August 14, 2025 . ^ Lonsdale, Joe (January 31, 2022). "The American Optimist: An Interview with Joe Lonsdale" . Profectus Magazine . ^ Rollet, Charles (March 5, 2025). "Defense tech startup Epirus raises $250M Series D to counter drone swarms" . TechCrunch . Retrieved August 14, 2025 . ^ Hellrand, Maris (June 6, 2025). "Helsing: the AI powerhouse reshaping Europe´s military future — Trade with Estonia" . Retrieved August 14, 2025 . ^ "Warum Spotify-Gründer Daniel Ek jetzt Milliarden in Helsing steckt" . InvestmentWeek (in German). June 22, 2025 . Retrieved August 14, 2025 . ^ Mathewson, Fiona (December 19, 2022). "Beschaffung neu denken: Soldat baut ein Check24 für den Staat" . Business Insider (in German). ^ Sauveton, Pierre (April 23, 2025). "IA militaire: l'OTAN choisit Palantir, la France riposte" . OpexNews (in French) . Retrieved August 14, 2025 . ^ "La start-up d'IA militaire Comand AI recrute chez le géant Anduril - 28/04/2025" . La Lettre (in French). April 28, 2025 . Retrieved August 14, 2025 . ^ Matthews, Jason (May 1, 2025). "AI defence tech startup Arondite secures $12M to connect autonomous systems at scale — TFN" . Tech Funding News . Retrieved August 14, 2025 . ^ "Kela" . Retrieved October 11, 2025 . ^ " "To build Israeli companies like Anduril or Palantir, we must focus on comprehensive solutions, not niche ones" " . ctech . February 17, 2025 . Retrieved August 14, 2025 . ^ "Kela: The Israeli startup rewriting how wars are fought" . ctech . April 30, 2025. ^ Escárzaga, Antonio L. (September 18, 2025). "London-based Conduct secures €11.2 million to modernise enterprise IT systems with AI" . EU-Startups . ^ Demarest, Colin (October 15, 2025). "Exclusive: Valinor wants to build defense-tech "picks and shovels" " . Axios . ^ Irvine, Bethany (December 4, 2023). "Playbook PM: Senate border talks in limbo" . Politico . ^ "Seeding the Future with Valinor" . generalcatalyst.com . ^ "In conversation with General Catalyst" . Resilience Media. ^ Chapman, Lizette (October 24, 2025). "OpenAI Backs a New Venture Trying to Thwart AI Bio-Attacks" . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ 王智佳 (Wang Zhijia) (October 28, 2025). "中国版Palantir滴普科技成功登陆港股，首日开盘股价飙涨超111%，开启价值重估新征程" . stcn.com . ^ "Four IPOs to be gray market tonight; short-term trading recommended" .

The Standard . Hong Kong. October 27, 2025. ^ "Deepexi Technology Co., Ltd" . Deepexi Technology Co., Ltd . Retrieved November 3, 2025 . ^ Parul, Prakriti (November 1, 2025). "Beijing Built its Palantir : Where is India's?" .