The ongoing Israeli–Palestinian conflict dates back to the rise of the Zionist movement , supported by the United Kingdom during World War I .

The war saw Britain occupying Palestine from the Ottoman Empire , where it set up Mandatory Palestine under the auspices of the League of Nations . Increased Jewish immigration led to intercommunal conflict between Jews and Palestinian Arabs , which escalated into a civil war in 1947 after a proposed partitioning by the United Nations was rejected by the Palestinians and other Arab nations .

The 1948 Palestine war saw the forcible displacement of a majority of the Arab population, and consequently the establishment of Israel; these events are referred to by Palestinians as the Nakba ('catastrophe').

In the Six-Day War in 1967, Israel occupied the West Bank and the Gaza Strip , which had been held by Jordan and Egypt respectively.

The Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) declared independence in 1988.

In 1993, the PLO signed the Oslo Accords with Israel, creating limited PLO governance in the West Bank and Gaza Strip through the Palestinian Authority (PA). Israel withdrew from Gaza in its unilateral disengagement in 2005.

In 2007, internal divisions between political factions led to a takeover of Gaza by Hamas .

Since then, the West Bank has been governed in part by the Fatah -led PA, while the Gaza Strip has remained under the control of Hamas .

The Gaza Strip has long been subject to Israeli military occupation and an illegal blockade . Israel has also constructed large settlements in the occupied West Bank and East Jerusalem since 1967, which currently house more than 737,000 Israeli settlers, which are illegal under international law .

Following the October 7 attacks by Hamas in Israel, Israel launched a large-scale military campaign in Gaza that has killed over 72,000 Palestinians , caused mass population displacement , a humanitarian crisis , and a famine in the Gaza Strip; these acts have been recognised as constituting genocide against the Palestinian people by a growing scholarly consensus. Palestine is a permanent non-member observer state at the United Nations (UN) and is recognized as a sovereign state by 157 of the UN's 193 member states .

The questions of Palestine's borders , legal and diplomatic status of Jerusalem, and the right of return of Palestinian refugees remain unsolved. Some of the other challenges to Palestine include restrictions on movement , ineffective government and Israeli settlements and settler violence , as well as an overall poor security situation. Despite these challenges, the country maintains an emerging economy and sees frequent tourism . Arabic is the official language of the country.

While the majority of Palestinians practice Islam , Christianity also has a presence . Palestine is also a member of several international organizations , including the Arab League and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation , UNESCO , and a delegation of parliamentarians sit at the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe . Etymology Further information: Palestine (region) § Etymology , and Timeline of the name Palestine The term "Palestine" (in Latin, Palæstina ) comes via ancient Greek from a Semitic toponym for the general area dating back to the late second millennium BCE, a reflex of which is also to be found in the Biblical ethnonym Philistines .

The term "Palestine" has been used to refer to the area at the southeast corner of the Mediterranean Sea beside Syria .

In the Bronze Age , the Canaanites established city-states influenced by surrounding civilizations, among them Egypt, which ruled the area in the Late Bronze Age.

During the Iron Age , the kingdoms of Israel and Judah , emerged in the interior, while kingdoms belonging to Philistia and Phoenicia ruled the Palestinian coast.

The Assyrians conquered the region in the 8th century BCE, then the Babylonians c. 601 BCE , followed by the Persian Achaemenid Empire that conquered the Babylonian Empire in 539 BCE. Alexander the Great conquered the Persian Empire in the late 330s BCE, intensifying Hellenizing influences.

In the late 2nd-century BCE Maccabean Revolt , the Jewish Hasmonean Kingdom conquered most of Palestine; the kingdom subsequently became a vassal of Rome , which annexed it in 63 BCE. Roman Judea was troubled by Jewish revolts in 66 CE, so Rome destroyed Jerusalem and the Second Jewish Temple in 70 CE.

In the 4th century, as the Roman Empire adopted Christianity , Palestine became a center for the religion, attracting pilgrims, monks and scholars.

Following Muslim conquest of the Levant in 636–641, ruling dynasties succeeded each other: the Rashiduns ; Umayyads ; Abbasids ; the semi-independent Tulunids and Ikhshidids ; Fatimids ; and the Seljuks .

In 1099, the First Crusade resulted in Crusaders establishing of the Kingdom of Jerusalem , which was reconquered by the Ayyubid Sultanate in 1187.

Following the invasion of the Mongol Empire in the late 1250s, the Egyptian Mamluks reunified Palestine under its control, before the region was conquered by the Ottoman Empire in 1516, being ruled as Ottoman Syria until the 20th century largely without dispute. These paragraphs are an excerpt from Timeline of the name Palestine .

The ancient Greek term that forms the basis for the term Palestine first appears in the 5th century BCE when the historian Herodotus wrote of a "district of Syria, called Palaistinê " between Phoenicia and Egypt in The Histories . Herodotus provides the first historical reference clearly denoting a wide region for Philistia , extending beyond the coast to the inland regions such as the Judean Mountains and the Jordan Rift Valley .

Later Greek writers such as Aristotle , Polemon and Pausanias also used the word, which was followed by Roman writers such as Ovid , Tibullus , Pomponius Mela , Pliny the Elder , Dio Chrysostom , Statius , Plutarch as well as Roman Judean writers Philo of Alexandria and Josephus , these examples covering every century from the 4th BCE to the 1st CE. There is, however, no evidence of official use of the name in the Hellenistic period on any coin or inscription and it is from absent from the New Testament .

In the early 2nd century CE, the Roman province called Judaea was renamed Syria Palaestina following the suppression of the Bar Kokhba revolt (132–136 CE), the last of the major Jewish–Roman wars . A commonly held yet contested historical interpretation sees the name change as a punitive measure aimed at severing the symbolic and historical connection between the Jewish people and the land. Other Roman provincial renamings had never followed a rebellion, making this instance unique. Around the year 390, during the Byzantine period , the imperial province of Syria Palaestina was reorganized into Palaestina Prima , Palaestina Secunda and Palaestina Salutaris .

Following the Muslim conquest , place names that were in use by the Byzantine administration generally continued to be used in Arabic, and Jund Filastin became one of the military districts within the Umayyad and Abbasid province of Bilad al-Sham .

The use of the name "Palestine" became common in Early Modern English , and was used in English and Arabic during the Mutasarrifate of Jerusalem .

The term is recorded widely in print as a self-identification by Palestinians from the start of the 20th century onwards, coinciding with the period when the printing press first came into use by Palestinians.

In the 20th century the name was used by the British to refer to " Mandatory Palestine ," a territory from the former Ottoman Empire which had been divided in the Sykes–Picot Agreement and secured by Britain via the Mandate for Palestine obtained from the League of Nations . Starting from 2013, the term was officially used in the eponymous " State of Palestine ." Both incorporated geographic regions from the land commonly known as Palestine , into states whose territory was named Palestine. Rise of Palestinian nationalism Though Palestinian elites, in particular urban notable families who worked within the Ottoman bureaucracy, generally retained their loyalty to the Ottomans, they also played a significant role proportionately in the rise of Arab nationalism , and the Pan-Arabic movements that arose in response to both the emergence of the Young Turks movement and the subsequent weakening of Ottoman power in World War I.

The onset of the Zionist movement , which sought to establish a Jewish homeland in Palestine, also exercised a strong influence on Palestinian national consciousness. Abdul Hamid , the last sultan of the Ottoman Empire to exert effective control over a fracturing state, opposed the Zionist movement's efforts in Palestine.

The end of the Ottoman Empire 's rule in Palestine coincided with the conclusion of World War I .

The failure of Emir Faisal to establish a Greater Syria in the face of French and British colonial claims to the area, also shaped Palestinian elites' efforts to secure local autonomy.

In the aftermath of the war, Palestine came under British control with the implementation of the British Mandate for Palestine in 1920. British Mandate Main article: Mandatory Palestine Deir Yassin massacre of Palestinian villagers was carried out by Zionist militias, the Irgun and Lehi during the 1948 Palestine war .

The defeat of the Ottoman Empire in World War I resulted in the dismantling of their rule.

In 1920, the League of Nations granted Britain the mandate to govern Palestine, leading to the subsequent period of British administration.

In 1917, Jerusalem was captured by British forces led by General Allenby , marking the end of Ottoman rule in the city.

By 1920, tensions escalated between Jewish and Arab communities, resulting in violent clashes and riots across Palestine.

The League of Nations approved the British Mandate for Palestine in 1922, entrusting Britain with the administration of the region. Throughout the 1920s, Palestine experienced growing resistance from both Jewish and Arab nationalist movements, which manifested in sporadic violence and protests against British policies.

In 1929, violent riots erupted in Palestine due to disputes over Jewish immigration and access to the Western Wall in Jerusalem.

The 1930s witnessed the outbreak of the Arab Revolt , as Arab nationalists demanded an end to Jewish immigration and the establishment of an independent Arab state.

In response to the Arab Revolt, the British deployed military forces and implemented stringent security measures in an effort to quell the uprising. Arab nationalist groups, led by the Arab Higher Committee , called for an end to Jewish immigration and land sales to Jews.

The issuance of the 1939 White Paper by the British government aimed to address escalating tensions between Arabs and Jews in Palestine. This policy document imposed restrictions on Jewish immigration and land purchases, with the intention to limit the establishment of a Jewish state. Met with strong opposition from the Zionist movement, the White Paper was perceived as a betrayal of the Balfour Declaration and Zionist aspirations for a Jewish homeland.

In response to the White Paper, the Zionist community in Palestine organized a strike in 1939, rallying against the restrictions on Jewish immigration and land acquisition. This anti-White Paper strike involved demonstrations, civil disobedience, and a shutdown of businesses. Supported by various Zionist organizations, including the Jewish Agency and the Histadrut (General Federation of Jewish Labor), the anti-White Paper strike aimed to protest and challenge the limitations imposed by the British government.

In the late 1930s and 1940s, several Zionist militant groups, including the Irgun , Hagana , and Lehi , carried out acts of violence against British military and civilian targets in their pursuit of an independent Jewish state. Menachem Begin and Yitzhak Shamir , who later became Prime Ministers of Israel, were behind these terrorist attacks.

In 1946, a bombing orchestrated by the Irgun at the King David Hotel in Jerusalem resulted in the deaths of 91 people, including British officials, civilians, and hotel staff. Mandatory Palestine in 1946 The Exodus 1947 incident unfolded when a ship carrying Jewish Holocaust survivors, who sought refuge in Palestine, was intercepted by the British navy, leading to clashes and the eventual deportation of the refugees back to Europe.

During World War II , Palestine served as a strategically significant location for British military operations against Axis forces in North Africa .

The Grand Mufti of Jerusalem, Haj Amin al-Husseini , collaborated with Nazi Germany while in exile during World War II. Arab–Israeli wars Further information: 1948 Palestine war and 1967 Arab-Israeli war In 1947, the United Nations proposed a partition plan for Palestine , suggesting separate Jewish and Arab states, but it was rejected by the Palestinians and by neighboring Arab nations, leading to the outbreak of a civil war in Palestine , the first phase of the broader 1948 Palestine war .

During the war, Israel gained additional territories that were designated to be part of the Arab state under the UN plan.

On May 14, 1948, on the eve of final British withdrawal, the Jewish Agency for Israel , headed by David Ben-Gurion , declared the establishment of the State of Israel .

The neighboring Arab states of Transjordan , Egypt, and the other members of the Arab League of the time entered the war in Palestine beginning the 1948 Arab–Israeli war .

By the end of the war, Egypt occupied the Gaza Strip , and Transjordan occupied and then annexed the West Bank . Egypt initially supported the creation of an All-Palestine Government but disbanded it in 1959. Transjordan never recognized it and instead decided to incorporate the West Bank with its own territory to form Jordan .

The annexation was ratified in 1950 but was rejected by the international community.

In 1964, when the West Bank was controlled by Jordan, the Palestine Liberation Organization was established there with the goal to confront Israel.

The Palestinian National Charter of the PLO defines the boundaries of Palestine as the whole remaining territory of the mandate, including Israel.

The Six-Day War in 1967, when Israel fought against Egypt, Jordan, and Syria, ended with Israel occupying the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, besides other territories.

Following the Six-Day War, the PLO moved to Jordan, but relocated to Lebanon in 1971.

The October 1974 Arab League summit designated the PLO as the "sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people" and reaffirmed "their right to establish an independent state of urgency".

In November 1974, the PLO was recognized as competent on all matters concerning the question of Palestine by the UN General Assembly granting them observer status as a "non-state entity" at the UN. Through the Camp David Accords of 1979, Egypt signaled an end to any claim of its own over the Gaza Strip.

In July 1988, Jordan ceded its claims to the West Bank —with the exception of guardianship over Haram al-Sharif—to the PLO.

After Israel captured and occupied the West Bank from Jordan and Gaza Strip from Egypt, it began to establish Israeli settlements there. Administration of the Arab population of these territories was performed by the Israeli Civil Administration of the Coordinator of Government Activities in the Territories and by local municipal councils present since before the Israeli takeover.

In 1980, Israel decided to freeze elections for these councils and to establish instead Village Leagues , whose officials were under Israeli influence.

Later this model became ineffective for both Israel and the Palestinians, and the Village Leagues began to break up, with the last being the Hebron League, dissolved in February 1988. Uprising, declaration and peace treaty The First Intifada broke out in 1987, characterized by widespread protests, strikes, and acts of civil disobedience by Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank against Israeli occupation.

In November 1988, the PLO legislature, while in exile, declared the establishment of the "State of Palestine" .

In the month following, it was quickly recognized by many states, including Egypt and Jordan.

In the Palestinian Declaration of Independence, the State of Palestine is described as being established on the "Palestinian territory", without explicitly specifying further.

After the 1988 Declaration of Independence, the UN General Assembly officially acknowledged the proclamation and decided to use the designation "Palestine" instead of "Palestine Liberation Organization" in the UN.

In spite of this decision, the PLO did not participate at the UN in its capacity of the State of Palestine's government. Violent clashes between Palestinian protesters and Israeli forces intensified throughout 1989, resulting in a significant loss of life and escalating tensions in the occupied territories. 1990 witnessed the imposition of strict measures by the Israeli government, including curfews and closures, in an attempt to suppress the Intifada and maintain control over the occupied territories.

The First Intifada in Gaza, 1987 The 1990–1991 Gulf War brought increased attention to the conflict, leading to heightened diplomatic efforts to find a peaceful resolution. Saddam Hussein was a supporter of Palestinian cause and won support from Arafat during the war.

Following the invasion of Kuwait , Saddam surprised the international community by presenting a peace offer to Israel and withdrawing Iraqi forces from Kuwait, in exchange of withdrawal from the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, East Jerusalem and Golan Heights.

The peace offer was rejected, and Saddam then ordered firing of scud missiles into Israeli territory. This movement was supported by Palestinians.

The war also led to the expulsion of Palestinians from Kuwait and Saudi Arabia , as their government supported Iraq .

In 1993, the Oslo Accords were signed between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), leading to the establishment of the Palestinian Authority (PA) and a potential path to peace. Yasser Arafat was elected as president of the newly formed Palestinian Authority in 1994, marking a significant step towards self-governance. Yasser Arafat was the first president of Palestine, serving from 1989 to 2004. Israel acknowledged the PLO negotiating team as "representing the Palestinian people", in return for the PLO recognizing Israel's right to exist in peace, acceptance of UN Security Council resolutions 242 and 338 , and its rejection of "violence and terrorism".

As a result, in 1994 the PLO established the Palestinian National Authority (PNA or PA) territorial administration, that exercises some governmental functions in parts of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.

As envisioned in the Oslo Accords, Israel allowed the PLO to establish interim administrative institutions in the Palestinian territories, which came in the form of the PNA. It was given civilian control in Area B and civilian and security control in Area A, and remained without involvement in Area C . Friday prayer in Jerusalem after the 1994 Cave of the Patriarchs massacre The peace process gained opposition from both Palestinians and Israelis. Islamist militant organizations such as Hamas and Islamic Jihad opposed the process and responded by conducting attacks on civilians across Israel.

In 1994, Baruch Goldstein , an Israeli extremist shot 29 people to death in Hebron, known as the Cave of the Patriarchs massacre . These events led an increase in Palestinian opposition to the peace process.

In 1995, Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was assassinated by Yigal Amir , causing political instability in the region.

The first-ever Palestinian general elections took place in 1996, resulting in Arafat's re-election as president and the formation of a Palestinian Legislative Council . Initiating the implementation of the Oslo Accords, Israel began redeploying its forces from select Palestinian cities in the West Bank in 1997. Negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian Authority continued, albeit with slow progress and contentious debates on Jerusalem, settlements, and refugees in 1998.

In 1997, Israeli government led by Benjamin Netanyahu and the Palestinian government signed the Hebron Protocol , which outlined the redeployment of Israeli forces from parts of Hebron in the West Bank, granting the government greater control over the city. Israel and the Palestinian government signed the Wye River Memorandum in 1998, aiming to advance the implementation of the Oslo Accords.

The agreement included provisions for Israeli withdrawals and security cooperation.

The period of the Oslo Years brought a great prosperity to the government-controlled areas, despite some economic issues.

The Palestinian Authority built the country's second airport in Gaza, after the Jerusalem International Airport . Inaugural ceremony of the airport was attended by Bill Clinton and Nelson Mandela .

In 1999, Ehud Barak assumed the position of Israeli Prime Minister, renewing efforts to reach a final status agreement with the Palestinians.

The Camp David Summit in 2000 aimed to resolve the remaining issues but concluded without a comprehensive agreement, serving as a milestone in the peace process. Second intifada and civil war Further information: Second Intifada , Fatah–Hamas conflict , and Battle of Gaza (2007) Civil unrest in Hebron, 2000 A peace summit between Yasser Arafat and Ehud Barak was mediated by Bill Clinton in 2000. It was intended to be the final agreement, permanently ending conflict; however, the agreement failed to address the Palestinian refugee issues, the status of Jerusalem and Israeli security concerns. Both sides blamed each other for the summit failures. This became one of the main triggers for the resulting uprising.

In September 2000, then opposition leader from the Likud Party , Ariel Sharon , made a proactive visit to the Temple Mount and delivered a controversial speech, which angered Palestinian Jerusalemites .

The tensions escalated into riots. Bloody clashes took place around Jerusalem. Escalating violence resulted in the closure of Jerusalem Airport , which has not operated to date. More and more riots between Jews and Arabs took place in October 2000 in Israel.

The Church of the Nativity under siege in 2002 In the same month, two Israeli soldiers were lynched and killed in Ramallah . Between November and December clashes between Palestinians and Israelis increased further.

In 2001 the Taba summit was held between Israel and Palestine, but the summit failed and Ariel Sharon became prime minister in the 2001 elections.

By 2001, attacks by Palestinian militant groups on Israel increased. Gaza Airport was destroyed in an airstrike by the Israeli army in 2001, with Israel claiming this was retaliation for previous attacks by Hamas.

In January 2002, the IDF Shayetet 13 naval commandos captured the Karine A , a freighter carrying weapons from Iran towards Israel. UNSC Resolution 1397 was passed, which reaffirmed a two-state solution and laid the groundwork for a road map for peace . Another attack by Hamas left 30 people killed in Netanya .

During a peace summit in Beirut , a proposal for an end to the Arab–Israeli conflict was unanimously endorsed by all Arab League members, but rejected by Israel.

In 2002, Israel launched Operation Defensive Shield after the Passover massacre . Heavy fighting between IDF and Palestinian fighters took place in Jenin .

The Church of the Nativity was besieged by the IDF for one week until successful negotiations took place, which resulted in withdrawal of the Israeli troops from the church. Between 2003 and 2004, people from Qawasameh tribe in Hebron were either killed or blew themselves up in suicide bombing. Ariel Sharon ordered construction of barriers across Palestinian-controlled areas and Israeli settlements in the West Bank to prevent future attacks. Saddam Hussein provided financial support to Palestinian militants from Iraq during the intifada period, from 2000 until his overthrow in 2003. A peace proposal was made in 2003, which was supported by Arafat and rejected by Sharon.

In 2004 Hamas's leader and co-founder, Ahmed Yassin , was assassinated by the Israeli army in Gaza. Yasser Arafat was confined to his headquarters in Ramallah.

On 11 November, Yasser Arafat died in Paris. A demonstration against a road block, Kafr Qaddum , March 2012 In the first week of 2005, Mahmoud Abbas was elected as the president of the State of Palestine.

In 2005, Israel completely withdrew from the Gaza Strip by destroying its settlements there.

By 2005, the situation began de-escalating.

In 2006, Hamas won in Palestinian legislative elections. This led to a political standoff with Fatah. Armed clashes took place across both the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.

The clashes turned into a civil war, which ended in bloody clashes on the Gaza Strip.

As a result, Hamas gained control over all the territory of Gaza. Hundreds of people were killed in the civil war, including militants and civilians.

Since then Hamas has gained more independence in its military practices.

Since 2007, Israel has been leading a partial blockade on Gaza. Another peace summit was organized by the Arab League in 2007, with the same offer which was presented at the 2002 summit. However, the peace process could not progress.

The division also hindered the establishment of a unified Palestinian state and led to different governance structures and policies in the two territories.

Following the intra-Palestinian conflict in 2006, Hamas took over control of the Gaza Strip (it already had majority in the PLC), and Fatah took control of the West Bank.

From 2007, the Gaza Strip was governed by Hamas, and the West Bank by the Fatah-party–led Palestinian Authority. International efforts to revive the peace process continued.

The United States, under the leadership of different administrations, made various attempts to broker negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians. Significant obstacles, such as settlement expansion, the status of Jerusalem, borders , and the right of return for Palestinian refugees , remained unresolved.

In recent years, diplomatic initiatives have emerged, including the normalization agreements between Israel and several Arab states , known as the Abraham Accords . These agreements, while not directly addressing the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, have reshaped regional dynamics and raised questions about the future of Palestinian aspirations for statehood.

The status quo remains challenging for Palestinians, with ongoing issues of occupation, settlement expansion, restricted movement, and economic hardships.

The Palestinian led October 7 attacks on Israel in 2023 were followed by the Gaza war .

The war has caused widespread destruction, a humanitarian crisis , and an famine in the Gaza Strip. Most of the Palestinian population in Gaza was forcibly displaced .

Since the start of the war, over 70,000 Palestinians in Gaza have been killed , almost half of them women and children , and more than 148,000 injured. Israel has been accused of genocide against the Palestinian people during its ongoing invasion and bombing of the Gaza Strip . A study in The Lancet estimated 64,260 deaths in Gaza from traumatic injuries by June 2024, while noting a potentially larger death toll when "indirect" deaths are included.

As of May 2025, a comparable figure for traumatic-injury deaths would be 93,000. There was also a spillover of the war occurring in the West Bank .

In an attempt to keep alive the possibility of peace and a two-state solution following the Gaza war, the UK, Australia, Canada and France have recognized a Palestinian state in late 2025. Geography Main article: Geography of Palestine Located around Nablus , Mount Gerizim is the holiest site for Samaritans . Areas claimed by the country, known as the Palestinian territories, lie in the Southern Levant of the Middle East region. Palestine is part of the Fertile Crescent , along with Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq and Syria.

The Gaza Strip borders the Mediterranean Sea to the west, Egypt to the south, and Israel to the north and east.

The West Bank is bordered by Jordan to the east, and Israel to the north, south, and west. Palestine shares its maritime borders with Israel , Egypt and Cyprus . Thus, the two enclaves constituting the area claimed by the State of Palestine have no geographical border with one another, being separated by Israel. These areas would constitute the world's 163rd largest country by land area .

The West Bank is a mountainous region. It is divided in three regions, namely the Mount Nablus ( Jabal Nablus ), the Hebron Hills and Jerusalem Mountains ( Jibal al–Quds ).

The Samarian Hills and Judean Hills are mountain ranges in the West Bank, with Mount Nabi Yunis at a height of 1,030 meters (3,380 ft) in Hebron Governorate as their highest peak. Until 19th century, Hebron was highest city in the Middle East. Jerusalem is located on a plateau in the central highlands and is surrounded by valleys.

The territory consists of fertile valleys, such as the Jezreel Valley and the Jordan River Valley . Palestine is home to world's largest olive tree, located in Jerusalem. Around 45% of Palestine's land is dedicated to growing olive trees. Palestine features significant lakes and rivers that play a vital role in its geography and ecosystems.

The Jordan River flows southward, forming part of Palestine's eastern border and passing through the Sea of Galilee before reaching the Dead Sea. According to Christian traditions, it is site of the baptism of Jesus .

The Dead Sea , bordering the country's east is the lowest point on the earth. Jericho , located nearby, is the lowest city in the world. Villages and suburban areas around Jerusalem are home to ancient water bodies. There are several river valleys ( wadi ) across the country. These waterways provide essential resources for agriculture and recreation while supporting various ecosystems. Three terrestrial ecoregions are found in the area: Eastern Mediterranean conifer–sclerophyllous–broadleaf forests , Arabian Desert , and Mesopotamian shrub desert . Palestine has a number of environmental issues; issues facing the Gaza Strip include desertification ; salination of fresh water; sewage treatment ; water-borne diseases ; soil degradation ; and depletion and contamination of underground water resources.

In the West Bank, many of the same issues apply; although fresh water is much more plentiful, access is restricted by the ongoing dispute . Climate Main article: Climate of Palestine Temperatures in Palestine vary widely.

The climate in the West Bank is mostly Mediterranean , slightly cooler at elevated areas compared with the shoreline, west to the area.

In the east, the West Bank includes much of the Judean Desert including the western shoreline of the Dead Sea, characterized by dry and hot climate. Gaza has a hot semi-arid climate ( Köppen : BSh) with mild winters and dry hot summers. Spring arrives around March–April.

The hottest months are July and August, with the average high being 33 °C (91 °F).

The coldest month is January, with temperatures usually at 7 °C (45 °F). Rain is scarce and generally falls between November and March. Annual precipitation is approximately 4.57 inches (116 mm). Biodiversity Main article: Biodiversity in Palestine Camels in the Judaean Desert Palestine does not have officially recognized national parks or protected areas. However, there are areas within the West Bank that are considered to have ecological and cultural significance and are being managed with conservation efforts. These areas are often referred to as nature reserves or protected zones. Located near Jericho in the West Bank, Wadi Qelt is a desert valley with unique flora and fauna.

The reserve is known for its rugged landscapes, natural springs, and historical sites such as the St. George Monastery . Efforts have been made to protect the biodiversity and natural beauty of the area.

The Judaean Desert is known for its Judaean Camels. Qalqilya Zoo in Qalqilya Governorate , is the only zoo currently active in the country. Gaza Zoo was closed due to poor conditions.

The country consists of the institutions that are associated with the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), which includes the President of the State of Palestine , who is appointed by the Palestinian Central Council , the Palestinian National Council , and the Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization , which performs the functions of a government in exile, maintaining an extensive foreign-relations network.

The PLO is combination of several political parties. These should be distinguished from the President of the Palestinian National Authority , Palestinian Legislative Council, and PNA Cabinet , all of which are instead associated with the Palestinian National Authority (PNA). Palestine's founding document is the Palestinian Declaration of Independence, which should be distinguished from the unrelated PLO Palestinian National Covenant and PNA Palestine Basic Law .

The Palestinian government is divided into two geographic entities – the Palestinian Authority, governed by Fatah, which has partial control over the West Bank, and the Gaza Strip, which is under control of the militant group Hamas. Fatah is a secular party that was founded by Yasser Arafat and enjoys relatively good relations with the western powers.

On the other hand, Hamas is a militant group based on Palestinian nationalist and Islamic ideology , inspired by the Muslim Brotherhood . Hamas has tense relations with the United States, but it receives support from Iran. Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine is another popular secular party, founded by George Habash . Mahmoud Abbas is the president of the country since 2005. Mohammad Shtayyeh was the prime minister of Palestine and resigned in 2024.

In 2024, Mohammad Mustafa was appointed as the new prime minister of the country after the resignation of Shtayyeh. Yahya Sinwar was leader of the Hamas government in the Gaza Strip before his death in October 2024. According to Freedom House , the PNA governs Palestine in an authoritarian manner, including by repressing activists and journalists critical of the government, with elections postponed indefinitely . East Jerusalem , including the old city and Haram ash-Sharif , is claimed as capital by Palestine, despite being under occupation by Israel .

The temporary administration center is in Ramallah , which is 10 km from Jerusalem.

The Muqata hosts state ministries and representative offices.

In 2000, a government building was built in the Jerusalem suburb of Abu Dis , to house the office of Yasser Arafat and the Palestinian parliament.

The governorates in the West Bank are grouped into three areas per the Oslo II Accord . Area A forms 18% of the West Bank by area and is administered by the Palestinian government. Area B forms 22% of the West Bank and is under Palestinian civil control and joint Israeli–Palestinian security control. Area C , except East Jerusalem, forms 60% of the West Bank and is administered by the Israeli Civil Administration .

The Palestinian government provides the education and medical services to the 150,000 Palestinians in the area, an arrangement agreed upon in the Oslo II accord by Israeli and Palestinian leadership. More than 99% of Area C is off-limits to Palestinians, due to security concerns, and is a point of ongoing negotiation. There are about 330,000 Israelis living in settlements in Area C.

Although Area C is under martial law , Israelis living there are entitled to full civic rights . Palestinian enclaves currently under Palestinian administration in red (Areas A and B; not including Gaza Strip, which is under Hamas rule). Governorates of Palestine East Jerusalem, comprising the small pre-1967 Jordanian eastern-sector Jerusalem municipality, together with a significant area of the pre-1967 West Bank demarcated by Israel in 1967, is administered as part of the Jerusalem District of Israel. It is claimed by Palestine as part of the Jerusalem Governorate . It was effectively annexed by Israel in 1967, by application of Israeli law, jurisdiction and administration under a 1948 law amended for the purpose, this purported annexation being constitutionally reaffirmed (by implication) in Basic Law: Jerusalem 1980 , but this annexation is not recognized by any other country.

In 2010, of the 456,000 people in East Jerusalem, roughly 60% were Palestinians and 40% were Israelis. However, since the late 2000s, Israel's West Bank Security Barrier has effectively re-annexed tens of thousands of Palestinians bearing Israeli ID cards to the West Bank, leaving East Jerusalem within the barrier with a small Israeli majority (60%). Under the Oslo Accords, Jerusalem was proposed to be included in future negotiations. According to Israel, the Oslo Accords prohibit the Palestinian Authority from operating in Jerusalem. However, certain parts of Jerusalem, those neighborhoods which are located outside the historic Old City but are part of East Jerusalem, were allotted to the Palestinian Authority. a Name Area (km 2 ) Population Density (per km 2 ) Muhafazah (district capital) Jenin 583 311,231 533.8 Jenin Tubas 402 64,719 161.0 Tubas Tulkarm 246 182,053 740.0 Tulkarm Nablus 605 380,961 629.7 Nablus Qalqiliya 166 110,800 667.5 Qalqilya Salfit 204 70,727 346.7 Salfit Ramallah & Al-Bireh 855 348,110 407.1 Ramallah Jericho & Al Aghwar 593 52,154 87.9 Jericho Jerusalem 345 419,108 a 1214.8 Jerusalem ( see Status of Jerusalem ) Bethlehem 659 216,114 927.9 Bethlehem Hebron 997 706,508 708.6 Hebron North Gaza 61 362,772 5947.1 Jabalya Gaza 74 625,824 8457.1 Gaza Deir Al-Balah 58 264,455 4559.6 Deir al-Balah Khan Yunis 108 341,393 3161.0 Khan Yunis Rafah 64 225,538 3524.0 Rafah The Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) represents the State of Palestine and maintains embassies in countries that recognize it. It also participates in international organizations as a member, associate, or observer.

In some cases, due to conflicting sources, it is difficult to determine if the participation is on behalf of the State of Palestine, the PLO as a non-state entity, or the Palestinian National Authority (PNA).

The Vatican shifted recognition to the State of Palestine in May 2015, following the 2012 UN vote . This change aligned with the Holy See's evolving position. Indian prime minister Narendra Modi with Mahmoud Abbas in at Ramallah in 2018 Currently, 156 UN member states (80.8%) recognize the State of Palestine . Though some do not recognize it, they acknowledge the PLO as the representative of the Palestinian people.

The PLO's executive committee acts as the government, empowered by the PNC. It is a full member of the Arab League , the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Union for the Mediterranean . Sweden took a significant step in 2013 by upgrading the status of the Palestinian representative office to a full embassy. They became the first EU member state outside the former communist bloc to officially recognize the State of Palestine. Members of the Arab League and member of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation have strongly supported the country's position in its conflict with Israel . Iran has been a strong ally of Palestine since the Islamic revolution and has provided military support to Palestinian fedayeen and militant groups, including Hamas through its Axis of Resistance , which includes a military coalition of governments and rebels from Iraq , Syria , Lebanon and Yemen . Hamas is also part of the axis of resistance. Even before the emergence of the Iran-backed Islamic Resistance in Iraq , Iraq was a strong supporter of Palestine when it was under the Ba'athist government of Saddam Hussein . Turkey is a supporter of Hamas and Qatar has been a key-financial supporter and has hosted Hamas leaders.

In 1988, as part of the request to admit it to UNESCO, an explanatory note was prepared that listed 92 states that had recognized the State of Palestine, including both Arab and non-Arab states such as India. : 19 India, which historically was a strong supporter of the Palestinian cause , especially in the period pre-1990s, has gradually shifted to more balanced foreign policy since 1991-92, including establishing full diplomatic relations and growing ties with Israel, while still maintaining some diplomatic support for Palestine. Muammar Gaddafi of Libya was a supporter of Palestinian independence and was sought as a mediator in the Arab–Israeli conflict when he presented a one-state peace offer titled Isratin in 2000. Relations with the United Arab Emirates deteriorated when it signed normalization agreement with Israel .

During the Sri Lankan Civil War , the PLO provided training for Tamil rebels to fight against the Sri Lankan government .

The Republic of Ireland , Venezuela and South Africa are political allies of Palestine and have strongly advocated for establishment of independent Palestine.

As a result of the ongoing war , support for the country has increased.

Since Israel's invasion of Gaza , many countries in support of Palestinians have officially recognized the country. This includes Armenia , Spain , Norway , The Bahamas , Jamaica , Barbados and Trinidad and Tobago . Status and recognition Main articles: Legal status of Palestine and Palestine and the United Nations The Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) declared the establishment of the State of Palestine on 15 November 1988. There is a wide range of views on the legal status of the State of Palestine, both among international states and legal scholars.

The existence of a state of Palestine is recognized by the states that have established bilateral diplomatic relations with it.

In January 2015, the International Criminal Court affirmed Palestine's "State" status after its UN observer recognition, a move condemned by Israeli leaders as a form of "diplomatic terrorism".

In December 2015, the UN General Assembly passed a resolution demanding Palestinian sovereignty over natural resources in the occupied territories. It called on Israel to cease exploitation and damage while granting Palestinians the right to seek restitution.

In 1988, the State of Palestine's declaration of independence was acknowledged by the General Assembly with Resolution 43/177 .

In 2012, the United Nations General Assembly passed Resolution 67/19 , granting Palestine " non-member observer state " status, effectively recognizing it as a sovereign state .

In August 2015, Palestine's representatives at the United Nations presented a draft resolution that would allow the non-member observer states Palestine and the Holy See to raise their flags at the United Nations headquarters. Initially, the Palestinians presented their initiative as a joint effort with the Holy See, which the Holy See denied.

In a letter to the Secretary General and the President of the General Assembly, Israel's Ambassador at the UN Ron Prosor called the step "another cynical misuse of the UN ... in order to score political points".

After the vote, which was passed by 119 votes to 8 with 45 countries abstaining, the US Ambassador Samantha Power said that "raising the Palestinian flag will not bring Israelis and Palestinians any closer together". US Department of State spokesman Mark Toner called it a "counterproductive" attempt to pursue statehood claims outside of a negotiated settlement.

At the ceremony itself, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said the occasion was a "day of pride for the Palestinian people around the world, a day of hope", and declared "Now is the time to restore confidence by both Israelis and Palestinians for a peaceful settlement and, at last, the realization of two states for two peoples." International recognition Main article: International recognition of Palestine State of Palestine Countries that have recognized Palestine Countries that have not recognized Palestine The State of Palestine has been recognized by 157 of the 193 UN members and since 2012 has had a status of a non-member observer state in the United Nations. This limited status is largely due to the fact that the United States , a permanent member of the UN Security Council with veto power, has consistently used its veto or threatened to do so to block Palestine's full UN membership.

On 29 November 2012, in a 138–9 vote (with 41 abstentions and 5 absences), the United Nations General Assembly passed resolution 67/19 , upgrading Palestine from an "observer entity" to a " non-member observer state " within the United Nations System , which was described as recognition of the PLO's sovereignty. Palestine's UN status is equivalent to that of the Holy See .

The UN has permitted Palestine to title its representative office to the UN as "The Permanent Observer Mission of the State of Palestine to the United Nations". Palestine has instructed its diplomats to officially represent "The State of Palestine"—no longer the Palestinian National Authority.

On 17 December 2012, UN Chief of Protocol Yeocheol Yoon declared that "the designation of 'State of Palestine' shall be used by the Secretariat in all official United Nations documents", thus recognizing the title 'State of Palestine' as the state's official name for all UN purposes.

On 21 December 2012, a UN memorandum discussed appropriate terminology to be used following GA 67/19. It was noted therein that there was no legal impediment to using the designation Palestine to refer to the geographical area of the Palestinian territory.

At the same time, it was explained that there was also no bar to the continued use of the term "Occupied Palestinian Territory including East Jerusalem" or such other terminology as might customarily be used by the Assembly.

As of 23 September 2025, 157 ( 81.3%) of the 193 member states of the United Nations have recognized the State of Palestine . Many of the countries that do not recognize the State of Palestine nevertheless recognize the PLO as the "representative of the Palestinian people ".

The PLO's Executive Committee is empowered by the Palestinian National Council to perform the functions of government of the State of Palestine.

On 2 April 2024, Riyad Mansour , the Palestinian ambassador to the UN, requested that the Security Council consider a renewed application for membership.

As of April, seven UNSC members recognize Palestine but the US has indicated that it opposes the request and in addition, US law stipulates that US funding for the UN would be cut off in the event of full recognition without an Israeli–Palestinian agreement.

On 18 April, the US vetoed a widely supported UN resolution that would have admitted Palestine as a full UN member. A May 2024 UNGA resolution came into force with the 2024 general assembly.

The resolution, which recognized the Palestinian right to become a full member state, also granted the right to Palestinians to submit proposals and amendments and Palestine was permitted to take a seat with other member states in the assembly. Military Main article: Palestinian Security Services The 25th anniversary of Hamas taking place in Gaza, 2012 The Palestinian Security Services consists of the armed forces and intelligence agencies, which were established during the Oslo Accords. Their function is to maintain internal security and enforce law in the PA-controlled areas. It does not operate as an independent armed force of a country.

Before the Oslo Accords, the PLO led armed rebellion against Israel, which included coalition of militant groups and included its own military branch – the Palestine Liberation Army .

Since the 1993–1995 agreements, it has been inactive and operates only in Syria. Palestinian fedayeen are the Palestinian militants and guerilla army. They are considered as "freedom fighters" by Palestinians and "terrorists" by Israelis. Hamas considers itself as an independent force, which is more powerful and influential than PSF, along with other militant organizations such as Islamic Jihad (Al-Quds Bridage). It is a guerilla army, which is supported by Iran, Qatar and Turkey. According to the CIA World Factbook, the Qassam Brigades have 20,000 to 25,000 members, although this number is disputed. Israel's 2005 withdrawal from Gaza provided Hamas with the opportunity to develop its military wing. Iran and Hezbollah have smuggled weapons to Hamas overland through the Sinai Peninsula via Sudan and Libya , as well as by sea. Intensive military training and accumulated weapons have allowed Hamas to gradually organize regional units as large as brigades containing 2,500–3,500 fighters each.

Since 2020, joint exercises conducted with other militant groups in Gaza like the Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) have habituated units to operating in a coordinated fashion, supported Hamas command and control, and facilitated cooperation between Hamas and smaller factions. Such efforts began in earnest in 2007, upon Hamas's seizure of power in the Gaza Strip. Iran has since supplied materiel and know-how for Hamas to build a sizable rocket arsenal, with more than 10,000 rockets and mortar shells fired in the current conflict. With Iran's help, Hamas has developed robust domestic rocket production that uses pipes, electrical wiring, and other everyday materials for improvised production. Law and security Main article: Crime in Palestine The State of Palestine has a number of security forces, including a Civil Police Force , National Security Forces and Intelligence Services, with the function of maintaining security and protecting Palestinian citizens and the Palestinian State. All of these forces are part of Palestinian Security Services .

The PSF is primarily responsible for maintaining internal security, law enforcement, and counterterrorism operations in areas under Palestinian Authority control.

The Palestinian Liberation Army (PLA) is the standing army of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). It was established during the early years of the Palestinian national movement but has largely been inactive since the Oslo Accords.

The PLA's role was intended to be a conventional military force but has shifted to a more symbolic and political role. Economy Main article: Economy of Palestine Construction in Rawabi and surrounding industrial areas Palestine is classified as a middle income and developing country by the IMF .

In 2023, the GDP of the country was $40 billion and per-capita around $4,500. Due to its disputed status, the economic condition has been affected. Carbon dioxide emissions were 0.6 metric tons per capita in 2010.

In 2011, Palestine's poverty rate was 25.8%. According to a new World Bank report, Palestinian economic growth is expected to soften in 2023. Palestine's economy relies heavily upon international aid , remittances from overseas Palestinians and local industries.

The State of Palestine's overall gross-domestic-product (GDP) declined by 35% in the first quarter of 2024, due to the ongoing war in Gaza, the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics (PCBS) reports. There was a stark difference between the West Bank, which witnessed a decline of 25% and in the Gaza Strip, the number is 86% amid the ongoing war.

The manufacturing sector decreased by 29% in the West Bank and 95% in Gaza, while the construction sector decreased by 42% in the West Bank and essentially collapsed in Gaza, with a 99% decrease. Agriculture After Israel occupied the West Bank and Gaza Strip in 1967, Palestinian agriculture suffered significant setbacks.

The sector's contribution to the GDP declined, and the agricultural labor force decreased.

The cultivated areas in the West Bank have continuously declined since 1967. Palestinian farmers face obstacles in marketing and distributing their products, and Israeli restrictions on water usage have severely affected Palestinian agriculture. Over 85% of Palestinian water from the West Bank aquifers is used by Israel, and Palestinians are denied access to water resources from the Jordan and Yarmouk rivers.

In Gaza, the coastal aquifer is suffering from saltwater intrusion. Israeli restrictions have limited the irrigation of Palestinian land, with only 6% of West Bank land cultivated by Palestinians being irrigated, while Israeli settlers irrigate around 70% of their land.

The water resources of Palestine are partially controlled by Israel, due in part to historical and geographical complexities, with Israel granting partial autonomy in 2017.

The division of groundwater is subject to provisions in the Oslo II Accord , agreed upon by both Israeli and Palestinian leadership. Israel provides the Palestinian territories water from its own water supply and desalinated water supplies, in 2012 supplying 52 MCM . Generally, the water quality is considerably worse in the Gaza Strip when compared to the West Bank. About a third to half of the delivered water in the Palestinian territories is lost in the distribution network .

The lasting blockade of the Gaza Strip and the Gaza War have caused severe damage to the infrastructure in the Gaza Strip. Concerning wastewater, the existing treatment plants do not have the capacity to treat all of the produced wastewater, causing severe water pollution.

The development of the sector highly depends on external financing. Manufacturing Manufacturing sectors in Palestine include textiles, food processing, pharmaceuticals, construction materials, furniture, plastic products, stone, and electronics. Notable products include clothing, olive oil, dairy, furniture, ceramics, and construction materials.

Before the Second Intifada, Palestine had a strong industrial base in Jerusalem and Gaza. Barriers erected in the West Bank have made movement of goods difficult; the blockade of the Gaza Strip has severely affected the territory's economic conditions.

As of 2023 , according to the Ministry of Economy , the manufacturing sector expected to grow by 2.5% and create 79,000 jobs over the following six years. Palestine mainly exports articles of stone (limestone, marble – 13.3%), furniture (11.7%), plastics (10.2%) and iron and steel (9.1%). Most of these products are exported to Jordan, the United States, Israel and Egypt. Hebron is the most industrially advanced city in the region and serves as an export hub for Palestinian products. More than 40% of the national economy produced there.

The most advanced printing press in the Middle East is in Hebron. Many quarries are in the surrounding region. Silicon reserves are found in the Gaza territory. Jerusalem stone, extracted in the West Bank, has been used for constructing many structures in Jerusalem. Hebron is widely known for its glass production. Nablus is noted for its Nablus soap . Some of the companies operating in the Palestinian territories include Siniora Foods , Sinokrot Industries , Schneider Electric , PepsiCo and Coca-Cola . Israeli–Palestinian economic peace efforts have resulted in several initiatives, such as the Valley of Peace initiative and Breaking the Impasse , which promote industrial projects between Israel, Palestine and other Arab countries, with the goal of promoting peace and ending conflict. These include joint industrial parks opened in Palestine.

The Palestinian Authority has built industrial cities in Gaza, Bethlehem, Jericho, Jenin and Hebron. Some are in joint cooperation with European countries. Energy Main article: Energy in Palestine A solar plant in Jericho Palestine does not produce its own oil or gas. But as per UN reports, "sizeable reserves of oil and gas" lie in the Palestinian territories. Due to its state of conflict, most of the energy and fuel in Palestine are imported from Israel and other all neighboring countries such as Egypt, Jordan and Saudi Arabia.

In 2012, electricity available in West Bank and Gaza was 5,370 GW-hour (3,700 in the West Bank and 1,670 in Gaza), while the annual per capita consumption of electricity (after deducting transmission loss) was 950 kWh.

The Gaza Power Plant is the only power plant in the Gaza Strip. It is owned by Gaza Power Generating Company (GPGC), a subsidiary of the Palestine Electric Company PLC (PEC). Jerusalem District Electricity Company, a subsidiary of PEC, provides electricity to Palestinian residents of Jerusalem. Government officials have increasingly focused on solar energy to reduce dependency on Israel for energy. Palestine Investment Fund have launched "Noor Palestine", a project which aims to provide power in Palestine. Qudra Energy, a joint venture between Bank of Palestine and NAPCO have established solar power plants across Jammala , Nablus, Birzeit and Ramallah.

In 2019, under Noor Palestine campaign, first solar power plant and solar park was inaugurated in Jenin. Two more solar parks have been planned for Jericho and Tubas. A new solar power plant is under construction at Abu Dis campus of Al-Quds University , for serving Palestinian Jerusalemites. Oil and gas Main articles: Natural gas in the Gaza Strip and Gaza Marine Palestine holds massive potential reserves of oil and gas. Over 3 billion barrels (480,000,000 m 3 ) of oil are estimated to exist off the coast and beneath occupied Palestinian lands.

The Levant Basin holds around 1.7 billion barrels (270,000,000 m 3 ) of oil, with another 1.5 billion barrels (240,000,000 m 3 ) beneath the occupied West Bank area. Around 2 billion barrels (320,000,000 m 3 ) of oil reserves are believed to exist in shore of the Gaza Strip. According to a report by the UNCTAD , around 1,250 billion barrels (1.99 × 10 11 m 3 ) of oil reserves are in the occupied Palestinian territory of the West Bank, probably the Meged oil field .

As per the Palestinian Authority, 80% of this oil field falls under the lands owned by Palestinians. Masadder, a subsidiary of the Palestine Investment Fund is developing the oilfield in the West Bank. Block-1 field, which spans an area of 432 square kilometers (167 sq mi) from northwest Ramallah to Qalqilya in Palestine, has significant potential for recoverable hydrocarbon resources . It is estimated to have a P90 (a level of certainty) of 0.03 billion barrels (4,800,000 m 3 ) of recoverable oil and 6,000,000,000 cubic feet (170,000,000 m 3 ) of recoverable gas.

The estimated cost for the development of the field is $390 million, and it will be carried out under a production sharing agreement with the Government of Palestine . Currently, an initial pre-exploration work program is underway to prepare for designing an exploration plan for approval, which will precede the full-fledged development of the field. Natural gas in Palestine is mostly found in Gaza Strip. Gaza Marine is a natural gas field , located around 32 kilometers (20 mi) from the coast of the territory in the Mediterranean shore. It holds gas reserves ranging between 28 billion cubic meters (990 billion cubic feet) to 32 billion cubic meters (1.1 trillion cubic feet). These estimates far exceed the needs of the Palestinian territories in energy .

The gas field was discovered by the British Gas Group in 1999. Upon the discovery of the gas field, it was lauded by Yasser Arafat as a "Gift from God". A regional cooperation between the Palestinian Authority , Israel and Egypt were signed for developing the field and Hamas also gave approval to the Palestinian Authority. However, since the ongoing war in Gaza , this project have been delayed. Transportation Main article: Transport in Palestine A multilingual signboard in Hebron Governorate Two airports of Palestine – Jerusalem International Airport and Gaza International Airport – were destroyed by Israel in the early years of the second intifada.

Since then no airport has been operational in the country. Palestinians used to travel through airports in Israel – Ben Gurion Airport and Ramon Airport – and Queen Alia International Airport of Amman , capital of Jordan. Many proposals have been made by both the government and private entities to build airports in the country.

In 2021, the most recent proposal was made by both the Palestinian government and Israeli government to redevelop Qalandia Airport as a binational airport for both Israelis and Palestinians. Gaza Strip is the only coastal region of Palestine, where Port of Gaza is located. It is under naval siege by Israel, since the territory's blockade.

During Oslo years, the Palestinian government collaborated with the Netherlands and France to build an international seaport but the project was abandoned.

In 2021, then prime minister of Israel Naftali Bennett launched a development project for Gaza, which would include a seaport. Tourism Main article: Tourism in Palestine Al Mashtal Hotel in Gaza, before the Gaza war Jerusalem is holy for the world's three major religions — Christianity, Islam and Judaism, as well as for Mandaeism. Tourism in the country refers to tourism in East Jerusalem, the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.

In 2010, 4.6 million people visited the Palestinian territories, compared to 2.6 million in 2009. Of that number, 2.2 million were foreign tourists, while 2.7 million were domestic. Most tourists come for only a few hours or as part of a day trip itinerary.

In the last quarter of 2012 over 150,000 guests stayed in West Bank hotels. 40% were European and 9% were from the United States and Canada. Lonely Planet travel guide writes that "the West Bank is not the easiest place in which to travel but the effort is richly rewarded." Sacred sites such as the Western Wall , the Church of the Holy Sepulchre , and the Al-Aqsa Mosque draw countless pilgrims and visitors each year.

In 2013, Palestinian Authority Tourism minister Rula Ma'ay'a stated that her government aims to encourage international visits to Palestine, but the occupation is the main factor preventing the tourism sector from becoming a major income source to Palestinians. There are no visa conditions imposed on foreign nationals other than those imposed by the visa policy of Israel. Access to Jerusalem, the West Bank, and Gaza is completely controlled by the government of Israel . Entry to the occupied Palestinian territories requires only a valid international passport . Tourism is mostly centered around Jerusalem and Bethlehem. Jericho is a popular tourist spot for local Palestinians. Communications Main article: Communications in Palestine Palestine is known as the "Silicon Valley of NGOs".

The high tech industry in Palestine, have experienced good growth since 2008.

In 2020, the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics (PCBS) and the Ministry of Telecom and Information Technology said there were 4.2 million cellular mobile subscribers in Palestine compared to 2.6 million at the end of 2010.

The number of ADSL subscribers in Palestine increased to about 363 thousand by the end of 2019, from 119 thousand over the same period.

In 2020, 97% of Palestinian households had at least one cellular mobile line.

At least one smartphone is owned by 86% of households (91% in the West Bank and 78% in Gaza Strip). About 80% of the Palestinian households have access to the internet in their homes and about a third have a computer.

The Protocol on Economic Relations , also known as the Paris Protocol was signed between the PLO and Israel, which prohibited Palestinian Authority from having its own currency. This agreement paved a way for the government to collect taxes. Prior to 1994, the occupied Palestinian territories had limited banking options, with Palestinians avoiding Israeli banks . This resulted in an under-banked region and a cash-based economy . Currently, there are 14 banks operating in Palestine, including Palestinian, Jordanian, and Egyptian banks, compared to 21 in 2000.

The number of banks has decreased over time due to mergers and acquisitions. Deposits in Palestinian banks have seen significant growth, increasing from US$1.2 billion in 2007 to US$6.9 billion in 2018, representing a 475% increase.

The banking sector has shown impressive annual growth rates in deposits and loan portfolios, surpassing global averages.

The combined loan facilities provided by all banks on 31 December 2018, amounted to US$8.4 billion, marking a significant growth of 492 percent compared to US$1.42 billion in 2007. Palestinian registered banks accounted for US$0.60 billion or 42 percent of total deposits in 2007.

In 2018, the loans extended by Palestinian registered banks reached US$5.02 billion, representing 61 percent of total loans. This showcases a remarkable 737 percent increase between 2007 and 2018. Currently, Palestinian registered banks hold 57 percent of customer deposits and provide 61 percent of the loans, compared to 26 percent of deposits and 42 percent of loans in 2007. Impact of Israeli policies According to a report by the World Bank , the economic impact of Israel's closure policy has been profound, directly contributing to a significant decline in economic activity, widespread unemployment, and a rise in poverty since the onset of the Second Intifada in September 2000.

The Israeli restrictions imposed on Area C alone result in an estimated annual loss of approximately $3.4 billion, which accounts for nearly half of the current Palestinian GDP. These restrictions have severely hindered economic growth and development in the region.

In the aftermath of the 2014 Gaza War , where many structures were damaged or destroyed, the flow of construction and raw materials into Gaza has been severely limited. Regular exports from the region have been completely halted, exacerbating the economic challenges faced by the population.

The Gaza War and Israeli incursions in the West Bank during the Gaza war caused a severe economic contraction.

In the West Bank, the gross domestic product (GDP) shrank by more than 17%, regressing to 2014 levels, with per capita GDP returning to 2008 levels. Gaza's economy collapsed with GDP contracting to one-eighth of its levels in 2022.

The cumulative losses incurred as of 2024 were estimated by UNCTAD to be $170 billion, representing 17 times the size of Palestine's GDP in 2024. One of the burdensome measures imposed by Israel is the "back-to-back" system enforced at crossing points within Palestinian territories. This policy forces shippers to unload and reload their goods from one truck to another, resulting in significant transportation costs and longer transit times for both finished products and raw materials. Under the 1995 Oslo II Accord , it was agreed that governance of Area C would be transferred to the Palestinian Authority within 18 months, except for matters to be determined in the final status agreement. However, Israel has failed to fulfill its obligations under the Oslo agreement.

The European Commission has highlighted the detrimental impact of the Israeli West Bank barrier , estimating that it has led to an annual economic impoverishment of Palestinians by 2–3% of GDP. Furthermore, the escalating number of internal and external closures continues to have a devastating effect on any prospects for economic recovery in the region.

In 2015, the economic impact of Israel's illegal use of Palestinian natural resources was conservatively estimated by the State of Palestine at US$1.83 billion, equivalent to 22% of Palestine's GDP that year.

In a 2015 World Bank report, the manufacturing sector's share of GDP decreased from 19% to 10% between the signing of the Oslo Accords until 2011.

The same report, which adopted conservative estimates, suggests that access to Area 'C' in specific sectors like Dead Sea minerals, telecommunications , mining, tourism , and construction could contribute at least 22% to Palestinian GDP.

The report notes that Israel and Jordan together generate around $4.2 billion annually from the sale of these products, representing 6% of the global potash supply and 73% of global bromine output.

The State of Palestine estimates that if Palestinians had unrestricted access to their own land in Area 'C,' the potential economic benefits for Palestine could increase by 35% of GDP, amounting to at least $3.4 billion annually. Similarly, water restrictions incurred a cost of US$1.903 billion, equivalent to 23.4% of GDP, while Israel's ongoing blockade of the Gaza Strip resulted in a cost of $1.908 billion US$, representing 23.5% of GDP in 2010. Demographics Main article: Demographics of Palestine According to the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics (PCBS), as of 26 May 2021, the State of Palestine 2021 mid-year population is 5,227,193. Ala Owad, the president of the PCBS, estimated a population of 5.3 million at year end, 2021. Within an area of 6,020 square kilometers (2,320 mi 2 ), there is a population density of about 827 people per square kilometer. To put this in a wider context, the average population density of the world was 25 people per square kilometer in 2017. Half of the Palestinian population live in the diaspora , or are refugees . Due to being in a state of conflict with Israel, the subsequent wars have resulted in the widespread displacement of Palestinians , known as Nakba or Naksa .

In the 1948 war , around 700,000 Palestinians were expelled . Most of them are seeking refuge in neighboring Arab countries like Jordan, Iraq, Lebanon and Egypt, while others live as expats in Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Oman and Kuwait. A large number of Palestinians are in the United States, the United Kingdom and the rest of Europe . Population Main articles: List of cities in Palestine and List of cities in the Gaza Strip The Nawar are a small Dom and Romani community, living in Jerusalem, who trace their origins to India .

The Russian diaspora is also found in Palestine, particularly in the Russian Compound of Jerusalem and in Hebron. Most of them are Christians of the Russian Orthodox Church .

In 2022, an estimate of approximately 5,000–6,000 Armenians lived across Israel and Palestine , of which around 1,000 Armenians lived in Jerusalem ( Armenian Quarter ) and the rest lived in Bethlehem.

Since 1987, 400,000 to 500,000 Turks live in Palestine . Due to the 1947–1949 civil war , many Turkish families fled the region and settled in Jordan , Syria and Lebanon . According to a 2022 news article by Al Monitor , many families of Turkish origin in Gaza have been migrating to Turkey due to the "deteriorating economic conditions in the besieged enclave". Minorities of the country are also subjected to occupation and restrictions by Israel. Language Main article: Languages of Palestine Arabic is the official language of the State of Palestine, specifically the Palestinian Arabic dialect which is commonly spoken by the local population. Hebrew and English are also widely spoken. Around 16% of the population consists of Israeli settlers, whose primary language is typically Hebrew. Many Palestinians use Hebrew as a second or third language. Religion Further information: Islam in Palestine , Palestinian Christians , Palestinian Jews , Palestinian Baháʼís , and Freedom of religion in Palestine Jerusalem is home to the Al-Aqsa , including Qibli Mosque and Dome of the Rock , which is the 3rd holiest site in Islam .

The country has been known for its religious significance and site of many holy places, with religion playing an important role in shaping the country's society and culture. It is traditionally part of the Holy Land , which is considered sacred land to Abrahamic religions and other faiths as well.

The Basic Law states that Islam is the official religion but also grants freedom of religion, calling for respect for other faiths. Religious minorities are represented in the legislature for the Palestinian National Authority. 98% of Palestinians are Muslim , the vast majority of whom are followers of the Sunni branch of Islam and a small minority of Ahmadiyya . 15% are nondenominational Muslims . Palestinian Christians represent a significant minority of 1%, followed by much smaller religious communities, including Baháʼís and Samaritans .

The largest concentration of Christians are in Bethlehem , Beit Sahour , and Beit Jala in the West Bank, as well as in the Gaza Strip. Denominationally, most Palestinian Christians belong to Eastern Orthodox or Oriental Orthodox churches, including the Greek Orthodox Church , Armenian Apostolic Church , and Syriac Orthodox Church . There are significant group of Roman Catholics , Greek Catholics ( Melkites ), and Protestant denominations . With a population of 350 people, Samaritans are highly concentrated around the Mount Gerizim . Due to similarities between Samaritanism and Judaism , Samaritans are often referred to as "the Jews of Palestine".

The PLO considers those Jews as Palestinians , who lived in the region peacefully before the rise of Zionism. Certain individuals, especially anti-Zionists, consider themselves Palestinian Jews, such as Ilan Halevi and Uri Davis . Around 600,000 Israeli settlers, mostly Jews, live in the Israeli settlements , illegal under international law, across the West Bank. Jericho synagogue , situated in Jericho is the only synagogue maintained by the Palestinian Authority. Education Main article: Education in Palestine Students at Birzeit University The administration building of the Islamic University of Gaza The literacy rate of Palestine was 96.3% according to a 2014 report by the United Nations Development Programme , which is high by international standards. There is a gender difference in the population aged above 15 with 5.9% of women considered illiterate compared to 1.6% of men. Illiteracy among women has fallen from 20.3% in 1997 to less than 6% in 2014.

In the State of Palestine, the Gaza Strip has the highest literacy rate. According to a press blog of Columbia University , Palestinians are the most educated refugees.

The education system in Palestine encompasses both the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, and it is administered by the Ministry of Education and Higher Education . Basic education in Palestine includes primary school (grades 1–4) and preparatory school (grades 5–10). Secondary education consists of general secondary education (grades 11–12) and vocational education.

The curriculum includes subjects such as Arabic, English, mathematics, science, social studies, and physical education. Islamic and Christian religious studies are also part of the curriculum as per the educational ministry.

The West Bank and the Gaza Strip together have 14 universities, 18 university colleges, 20 community colleges, and 3,000 schools. An-Najah National University in Nablus is the largest university in the country, followed by Al-Quds University in Jerusalem and Birzeit University in Birzeit near Ramallah. Al-Quds University achieved a 5-star rating in quality standards and was termed the "most socially responsible university in the Arab world ".

The largest hospital of the West Bank is in Nablus, while Al-Shifa Hospital is largest in the Gaza Strip. Operating under the auspices of the World Health Organization (WHO), the Health Cluster for the occupied Palestinian territory (oPt) was established in 2009 and represents a partnership of over 70 local and international nongovernmental organizations and UN agencies providing a framework for health actors involved in the humanitarian response for the oPt.

The Cluster is co-chaired by the MOH to ensure alignment with national policies and plans.

The report of WHO Director-General of 1 May 2019 describes health sector conditions in the oPt identifying strategic priorities and current obstacles to their achievement pursuant to the country cooperation strategy for WHO and the Occupied Palestinian Territory 2017–2020. Culture Main article: Culture of Palestine Streets of the Old City, Jerusalem at night during Ramadan Palestinians are ethnically and linguistically considered part of the Arab world.

The culture of Palestine has had a heavy influence on religion , arts , literature , sports architecture , and cinema . UNESCO have recognized Palestinian culture.

The Palestine Festival of Literature ( PalFest ) brings together Palestinian and international writers, musicians, and artists for a celebration of literature and culture.

The annual Palestine Cinema Days festival showcases Palestinian films and filmmakers. Culture of Palestine is an amalgamation of indigenous traditions, Arab customs, and the heritage of various empires that have ruled the region.

The land of Palestine has witnessed the presence of ancient civilizations such as the Canaanites, Philistines, and Israelites, each contributing to its cultural fabric.

The Arab conquest in the 7th century brought the influence of Islam, which has been a cornerstone of Palestinian identity ever since. Islamic traditions, including language, art, and architecture, have infused the culture with distinct features. Palestinian cultural expression often serves as a form of resistance against occupation and oppression. Street art, such as the work of Banksy in Bethlehem, and the annual Palestinian music and arts festival, Al-Mahatta, are examples of this cultural resistance.

The Old City of Jerusalem, with its religious sites like the Western Wall , the Al-Aqsa Mosque , and the Church of the Holy Sepulchre , holds immense cultural and historical significance. Other notable cultural sites include the ancient city of Jericho, the archaeological site of Sebastia , and the town of Bethlehem . A large number of cultural centers are found throughout the country, almost in all major cities.

The architectural style varies across different regions, with notable features including arched doorways, domes, and intricate geometric patterns. Islamic architecture has left a profound impact on Palestinian buildings. Mosques , mausoleums , and madrasas showcase exquisite craftsmanship, with notable examples including the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem and the Great Mosque of Nablus . Rawabi is home to the largest Roman amphitheater in the Middle East and the Arab world . Palestine is home to several Byzantine and Crusader architectural marvels.

The Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem, which dates back to the 4th century, is a significant pilgrimage site.

The Crusader fortress of Krak des Chevaliers in the Golan Heights is another remarkable example.

During the Ottoman period, numerous mosques, palaces, and public buildings were constructed throughout Palestine.

The iconic Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem underwent restoration and renovation in the Ottoman era, showcasing a blend of Islamic and Byzantine architectural elements. Rasem Badran and Mohamed Hadid are popular Palestinian architects.

In recent years, modern architecture has emerged in Palestine, blending traditional elements with contemporary designs.

The Palestinian Museum in Birzeit , designed by Heneghan Peng Architects , exemplifies this fusion, incorporating local motifs and sustainable building practices. International Convention Center in Bethlehem, is a prominent structure showcasing contemporary Palestinian architecture. Another notable building is the Palestinian National Theatre in Jerusalem. Elements of modern architecture can be found in shopping malls, luxury hotels, technology parks and high rise skyscrapers.

The Palestine Trade Tower in Ramallah is the tallest building in Palestine. Art, music, and clothing Main articles: Palestinian art , Music of Palestine , and Palestinian traditional costumes Singer Mohammed Assaf gained global coverage when he won Arab Idol . Traditional Palestinian music is deeply rooted in the region's history and culture. It features instruments such as the oud (a stringed instrument), the qanun (a type of zither), and various percussion instruments. Traditional folk songs often depict themes of love, longing, and daily life experiences. Artists like Mohammad Assaf , winner of the Arab Idol competition, have gained international recognition for their renditions of traditional Palestinian songs. Dabke is a popular Palestinian dance form accompanied by music.

The Palestinian Film Festival, held annually in various cities around the world, showcases Palestinian cinema and provides a platform for Palestinian filmmakers to share their stories. Sports Main article: Sport in Palestine Faisal Al-Husseini International Stadium at Al-Ram , Jerusalem Palestine has been participating in the Olympic Games since 1996, with athletes competing in various sports, including athletics, swimming, judo, and taekwondo. Palestinian Olympians represent their nation on the international stage.

The country is a member of the International Olympic Committee.

In addition to football, basketball, handball, and volleyball are also popular sports in Palestine.

The Palestinian Basketball Federation and Palestinian Handball Federation oversee these sports' development and organization. Association football (soccer) is the most popular sport in Palestine , with the Palestine national football team representing the state in international football and governed by FIFA worldwide.

The American Journal of International Law . 84 (1): 85– 86. doi : 10.2307/2203016 . ISSN 0002-9300 . JSTOR 2203016 . S2CID 145514740 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 February 2020.

The international community has taken a critical view of both deportations and settlements as being contrary to international law. General Assembly resolutions have condemned the deportations since 1969, and have done so by overwhelming majorities in recent years. Likewise, they have consistently deplored the establishment of settlements, and have done so by overwhelming majorities throughout the period (since the end of 1976) of the rapid expansion in their numbers.

The Security Council has also been critical of deportations and settlements; and other bodies have viewed them as an obstacle to peace, and illegal under international law...

Although East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights have been brought directly under Israeli law, by acts that amount to annexation, both of these areas continue to be viewed by the international community as occupied, and their status as regards the applicability of international rules is in most respects identical to that of the West Bank and Gaza. ^ "Occupied Palestinian Territories" . Association of Religion Data Archives . 2020 . Retrieved 22 February 2025 . ^ "Association of Religion Data Archives-Islamic schismatics" . Islamic schismatics include Kharijite and other orthodox sects; reform movements (Sanusi, Mahdiya), also heterodox sects (Ahmadiya, Druzes, Sabbateans) ^ a b "Declaration of Independence (1988) (UN Doc)" . State of Palestine Permanent Observer Mission to the United Nations . United Nations. 18 November 1988. Archived from the original on 8 June 2014 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 . ^ United Nations General Assembly Session 67 Resolution 19 . Status of Palestine in the United Nations A/RES/67/19 29 November 2012. Retrieved 16 July 2026. "Taking into consideration that the Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization, in accordance with a decision by the Palestine National Council, is entrusted with the powers and responsibilities of the Provisional Government of the State of Palestine" ^ Miskin, Maayana (5 December 2012). "PA Weighs 'State of Palestine' Passport" . Arutz Sheva. Archived from the original on 7 December 2012 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 . A senior PA official revealed the plans in an interview with Al-Quds newspaper.

The change to 'state' status is important because it shows that 'the state of Palestine is occupied,' he said. ^ "State of Palestine name change shows limitations" . Associated Press. 17 January 2013. Archived from the original on 10 January 2013. Israel remains in charge of territories the world says should one day make up that state. ^ a b "Table 3, Population by sex, annual rate of population increase, surface area and density" (PDF) . Demographic Yearbook . United Nations Statistics Division . 2012. Archived from the original on 15 October 2017 . Retrieved 28 January 2018 . ^ "The World Factbook: Middle East: West Bank" . Central Intelligence Agency. 7 April 2014. Archived from the original on 22 July 2021 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 . ^ "The World Factbook: Middle East: Gaza Strip" . Central Intelligence Agency. 12 May 2014. Archived from the original on 12 January 2021 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 . ^ a b c "Estimated Population in the Palestine Mid-Year by Governorate, 1997–2026" . Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original on 7 December 2022 . Retrieved 7 December 2022 . ^ a b c d "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2023 Edition. (Palestine)" . IMF.org . International Monetary Fund . 10 October 2023. Archived from the original on 23 October 2023 . Retrieved 16 October 2023 . ^ "GINI index coefficient: West Bank & Gaza" .

The World Factbook . Archived from the original on 30 June 2021 . Retrieved 12 August 2021 . ^ "Human Development Report 2025" (PDF) . United Nations Development Programme . 6 May 2025. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 May 2025 . Retrieved 6 May 2025 . ^ According to Article 4 of the 1994 Paris Protocol , the State of Palestine has no official currency.

The Protocol allows the Palestinian Authority to adopt multiple currencies.

In the West Bank , the Israeli new sheqel and Jordanian dinar are widely accepted, while in the Gaza Strip , the Israeli new sheqel and Egyptian pound are widely accepted. ^ "About" . +972 Magazine . Retrieved 16 April 2025 . ^ Bissio, Robert Remo, ed. (1995).

The World: A Third World Guide 1995–96 . Montevideo : Instituto del Tercer Mundo . p. 443. ISBN 978-0-85598-291-1 . ^ Baroud, Ramzy (2004). Middle East Review (27th ed.). London: Kogan Page . p. 161. ISBN 978-0-7494-4066-4 . ^ a b c United Nations General Assembly Session 43 Resolution 43/117 . 75th plenary meeting . Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees A/RES/43/117 8 December 1988. Retrieved 10 June 2014. ^ "STATE OF PALESTINE: Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the occupied Syrian Golan" (PDF) . Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights . March 2025. ^ a b c Dannenbaum, Tom; Dill, Janina (2024). "International Law in Gaza: Belligerent Intent and Provisional Measures" . American Journal of International Law . 118 (4): 659– 683. doi : 10.1017/ajil.2024.53 . ^ a b "GAZA STRIP: Famine confirmed in Gaza Governorate, projected to expand | 1 July - 30 September 2025" (PDF) . Integrated Food Security Phase Classification . 22 August 2025. ^ a b "Gaza no longer in famine after aid access improves, hunger monitor says" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 21 December 2025 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ a b * Dumper, Michael; Badran, Amneh (2024). "Introduction".

In Dumper, Michael; Badran, Amneh (eds.). Routledge Handbook on Palestine (1st ed.). Routledge. p. 2. doi : 10.4324/9781003031994 . ISBN 9781003031994 .

In this context we should not overlook the latest turning point in the history of Palestine – the attack by Hamas on 7th October 2023 on Israeli settlements adjacent to Gaza and the subsequent genocidal war that the state of Israel has carried out in the Gaza strip Speri, Alice (20 December 2024). "Defining genocide: how a rift over Gaza sparked a crisis among scholars" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 23 December 2024 . Narea, Nicole (25 October 2024). "Is Israel committing genocide? Reexamining the question, a year later" . Vox . Archived from the original on 26 October 2024 . Retrieved 28 October 2024 . Albanese, Francesca (25 March 2024). Anatomy of a Genocide: Report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, Francesca Albanese (PDF) (Report). United Nations Special Rapporteur on the occupied Palestinian territories . p. 1.

By analysing the patterns of violence and Israeli policies in its onslaught on Gaza, the present report concludes that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the threshold indicating that Israel has committed genocide has been met Amnesty International (2024). 'You Feel Like You Are Subhuman': Israel's Genocide Against Palestinians In Gaza (PDF) (Report). p. 13. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 December 2024. This report focuses on the Israeli authorities' policies and actions in Gaza as part of the military offensive they launched in the wake of the Hamas-led attacks on 7 October 2023 while situating them within the broader context of Israel's unlawful occupation, and system of apartheid against Palestinians in Gaza, the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Israel. It assesses allegations of violations and crimes under international law by Israel in Gaza within the framework of genocide under international law, concluding that there is sufficient evidence to believe that Israel's conduct in Gaza following 7 October 2023 amounts to genocide. Traverso, Enzo (2024). Gaza Faces History . Other Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-1-63542-555-0 .

The only normative definition we have, codified at the United Nations Genocide Convention of 1948, accurately describes the current situation in Palestine ... describes exactly what is happening in Gaza today "One year of denouncing the genocide of Palestinians in Gaza" . International Federation for Human Rights . 12 December 2024 . Retrieved 4 June 2025 . One year ago, the FIDH International Board, its governing body elected by all its member organisations, recognised, after extensive debate and examination, that Israel was carrying out genocide against the Palestinian people in Gaza B'Tselem (July 2025). Our Genocide (PDF) (Report). p. 86.

The review presented in this report leaves no room for doubt: since October 2023, the Israeli regime has been responsible for carrying out genocide against the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip. Killing tens of thousands of people; causing bodily or mental harm to hundreds of thousands more; destroying homes and civilian infrastructure on a massive scale; starvation, displacement, and denying humanitarian aid — all this is being perpetrated systematically, as part of a coordinated attack aimed at annihilating all facets of life in the Gaza Strip. ^ a b Mohyeldin, Ayman; Hamdan, Basel (10 December 2024). "Why Amnesty International and other experts say Israel is committing genocide in Gaza" . MSNBC . Archived from the original on 3 July 2025. De Vogli, Roberto; Montomoli, Jonathan; Abu-Sittah, Ghassan; Pappé, Ilan (2025). "Break the selective silence on the genocide in Gaza".

The Lancet . 406 (10504). Supplementary appendix pp. 3–4 . doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(25)01541-7 . PMID 40752501 . van Laarhoven, Kasper; Peek, Eva; Walters, Derk (14 May 2025). "Zeven gerenommeerde wetenschappers vrijwel eensgezind: Israël pleegt in Gaza genocide" . NRC (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 15 May 2025 . Retrieved 27 May 2025 . Tharoor, Ishaan (30 July 2025). "Leading genocide scholars see a genocide happening in Gaza" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 2 August 2025 . ^ a b " 'It Is Important to Call a Genocide a Genocide', Consider Suspending Israel's Credential as UN Member State, Experts Tell Palestinian Rights Committee" . United Nations. 31 October 2024. Archived from the original on 5 November 2024 . Retrieved 22 February 2025 . ^ "Palestine's status at the UN explained | UN News" . news.un.org . 18 April 2024 . Retrieved 14 October 2025 . ^ This limited status is largely due to the fact that the United States, a permanent member of the UN Security Council with veto power, has consistently blocked Palestine's full UN membership ^ "State of Palestine" . ^ "16 Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels - Council of Europe Contribution to the United Nations 2030 agenda for sustainable development goals - www.coe.int" . Council of Europe Contribution to the United Nations 2030 agenda for sustainable development goals . ^ "Herodotus, The Histories, book 3, chapter 91, section 1" . ^ Masalha, Nur (15 August 2018). Palestine: A Four Thousand Year History . Zed Books . p. 22. ISBN 978-1-78699-273-4 . ^ Nation, United (20 September 2022). "United Nations Common Country Analysis for the Occupied Palestinian Territory" (PDF) . p. xi. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 March 2024. ^ "Common Country Analysis 2016: Leave No One Behind: A Perspective on Vulnerability and Structural Disadvantage in Palestine" (PDF) . United Nations Country Team Occupied Palestinian Territory. 2016. p. 9. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 November 2019 . ^ The Ancient Levant , UCL Institute of Archaeology, May 2008 ^ Steiner & Killebrew, p. 9 Archived 1 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine : "The general limits ..., as defined here, begin at the Plain of 'Amuq in the north and extend south until the Wâdī al-Arish, along the northern coast of Sinai. ...

The western coastline and the eastern deserts set the boundaries for the Levant ...

The Euphrates and the area around Jebel el-Bishrī mark the eastern boundary of the northern Levant, as does the Syrian Desert beyond the Anti-Lebanon range's eastern hinterland and Mount Hermon. This boundary continues south in the form of the highlands and eastern desert regions of Transjordan." ^ Egyptian Journal of Geology , Volume 42, Issue 1, p. 263, 1998 ^ Rainey 2001 , pp. 57–63 • Jacobson 2001 : As early as the Histories of Herodotus, written in the second half of the fifth century BCE, the term Palaistinê is used to describe not just the geographical area where the Philistines lived, but the entire area between Phoenicia and Egypt—in other words, the Land of Israel . • Jacobson 1999 : The first known occurrence of the Greek word Palaistine is in the Histories of Herodotus, ... Palaistinê Syria, or simply Palaistinê, is applied to what may be identified as the southern part of Syria, comprising the region between Phoenicia and Egypt. ^ • Sicker, Martin (1999). Reshaping Palestine: From Muhammad Ali to the British Mandate, 1831-1922 . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 9 . ISBN 978-0-275-96639-3 . OCLC 1023081856 .

The name later appears in the Persian Wars of the Greek historian Herodotus in the form of an adjective describing "the Philistine Syria," which presumably was intended to include all of Cis-Jordan . • Gösta Werner Ahlström; Gary Orin Rollefson; Diana Vikander Edelman (1993).

The History of Ancient Palestine from the Palaeolithic Period to Alexander's Conquest . Sheffield Academic Press. ISBN 978-1-85075-367-4 . : "The Greek historian Herodotus (1.105, 3.5) called Cisjordan the Palestinian Syria or sometimes only Palaestina. Thus, there is a tradition from at least the fifth century BCE for the use of this name" • Isidore Singer; Cyrus Adler (1925).

The Jewish encyclopedia: a descriptive record of the history, religion, literature, and customs of the Jewish people from the earliest times to the present day . Funk and Wagnalls. : "As early as Herodotus, who is followed by other classical writers, as Ptolemy and Pliny, the phrase Συρίε ἡ Παλαιστίνη (Syrian Palestine, Palestine of Syria) denotes both the littoral and the neighboring inland region (Judea and Palestine), as well as the entire interior as far as the Arabian desert" • Nur Masalha , The Concept of Palestine: The Conception Of Palestine from the Late Bronze Age to the Modern Period, Journal of Holy Land and Palestine Studies, Volume 15 Issue 2, Page 143-202: "Herodotus uses the name accordingly and Aristotle, for example, used the term in a way that includes the regions of Transjordan, or 'Eastern Palestine', beyond the Jordan Rift Valley. Herodotus' conception of Palaistine included the Galilee and applied to Palestine in the wider sense." ^ Jacobson 1999 : "The first known occurrence of the Greek word Palaistine is in the Histories of Herodotus, written near the mid-fifth century B.C. Palaistine Syria, or simply Palaistine, is applied to what may be identified as the southern part of Syria, comprising the region between Phoenicia and Egypt.

Although some of Herodotus' references to Palestine are compatible with a narrow definition of the coastal strip of the Land of Israel, it is clear that Herodotus does call the "whole land by the name of the coastal strip."..."It is believed that Herodotus visited Palestine in the fifth decade of the fifth century B.C."..."In the earliest Classical literature references to Palestine generally applied to the Land of Israel in the wider sense." ^ Feldman 1990 , p. 1: When Herodotus in the fifth century B.C.E. mentions Palestine he refers only to the coastal area, so called because it had been inhabited by the Philistines; or he is speaking loosely, since the only part of the area that he had visited was apparently along the coast. ^ Tuell 1991 : Herodotus considered Abar-Nahara (his "fifth province") a maritime province. That this would be true of Cyprus and Phoenicia is self-evident. However, Herodotus claims the same distinction for Syri he Palaistine kaleomenj ("the part of Syria called Palestine," or "Palestinian Syria"). Hence, in both 3.5 and 3.91, as we have seen, he describes Palestine as a coastal strip. ... Herodotus apparently considered Palestine a coastal region. Hence, his description of the satrapy of Abar Nahara, which consisted largely of Phoenicia and Palestinian Syria, as a strip of coastland is consistent with his view concerning the nature of Palestine expressed elsewhere. ^ Robinson, Edward, Physical geography of the Holy Land , Crocker & Brewster, Boston, 1865, p.15. Robinson, writing in 1865 when travel by Europeans to the Ottoman Empire became common asserts that, "Palestine, or Palestina, now the most common name for the Holy Land, occurs three times in the English version of the Old Testament; and is there put for the Hebrew name פלשת, elsewhere rendered Philistia.

As thus used, it refers strictly and only to the country of the Philistines , in the southwest corner of the land. So, too, in the Greek form, Παλαςτίνη), it is used by Josephus . But both Josephus and Philo apply the name to the whole land of the Hebrews; and Greek and Roman writers employed it in the like extent." ^ Cohen, Getzel M. (2006). "A Geographic Overview".

The Hellenistic Settlements in Syria, the Red Sea Basin, and North Africa (1st ed.). University of California Press. pp. 21– 70. ISBN 978-0-520-24148-0 . JSTOR 10.1525/j.ctt1pnd22.5 . Nevertheless, it is important to note that despite its appearance in various literary texts of and pertaining to the Hellenistic period, the term "Palestine" is not found on any extant Hellenistic coin or inscription.

In other words, there is no attestation for its use in an official context in the Hellenistic period. Even in the early Roman period its use was not especially widespread. For example, Philo and Josephus generally used "Judaea" rather than "Palestine" to refer to the area.48 Furthermore, "Palestine" is nowhere attested in the New Testament. "Palestine" did not come into official use until the early second century a.d., when the emperor Hadrian decided to rename the province of Judaea; for its new name he chose "Syria Palaestina."49 The new name took hold. It is found thereafter in inscriptions, on coins, and in numerous literary texts.50 Thus Arrian (7.9.8, Indica 43.1) and Appian (Syr. 50), who lived in the second century a.d., and Cassius Dio (e.g., 38.38.4, 39.56.6), who lived in the third, referred to the region as "Palestine." And in the rabbinic literature "Palestine" was used as the name of the Roman province adjacent to Phoenicia and Arabia (e.g., Bereshith Rabbah 90.6) ^ Isaac, Benjamin (22 December 2015). "Judaea-Palaestina" . Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Classics . doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199381135.013.3500 . ISBN 978-0-19-938113-5 . Archived from the original on 24 June 2022 . Retrieved 8 July 2022 .

After the Bar Kokhba war, in the reign of Hadrian, the Roman province of Judaea was re-named Syria-Palaestina. Thus an appellation referring to an ethnic element associated with Jews was replaced by the purely geographic one: Syria-Palaestina. ^ Lehmann, Clayton Miles (Summer 1998). "Palestine: History: 135–337: Syria Palaestina and the Tetrarchy" .

The On-line Encyclopedia of the Roman Provinces . University of South Dakota. Archived from the original on 11 August 2009 . Retrieved 24 August 2014 .

In the aftermath of the Bar Cochba Revolt, the Romans excluded Jews from a large area around Aelia Capitolina, which Gentiles only inhabited.

The province now hosted two legions and many auxiliary units, two colonies, and-to complete the disassociation with Judaea-a new name, Syria Palaestina. ^ Jacobson 2001 , pp. 44–45: "Hadrian officially renamed Judea Syria Palaestina after his Roman armies suppressed the Bar-Kokhba Revolt (the Second Jewish Revolt) in 135 C.E.; this is commonly viewed as a move intended to sever the connection of the Jews to their historical homeland. However, that Jewish writers such as Philo, in particular, and Josephus, who flourished while Judea was still formally in existence, used the name Palestine for the Land of Israel in their Greek works, suggests that this interpretation of history is mistaken. Hadrian's choice of Syria Palaestina may be more correctly seen as a rationalization of the name of the new province, in accordance with its area being far larger than geographical Judea. Indeed, Syria Palaestina had an ancient pedigree that was intimately linked with the area of greater Israel." ^ Schwartz, Seth (2016). "The Impact of the Jewish Rebellions, 66–135 CE: Destruction or Provincialization?". Revolt and Resistance in the Ancient Classical World and the Near East . Brill. p. 248. doi : 10.1163/9789004330184_016 . ISBN 978-90-04-33018-4 . Retrieved 31 May 2025 .

The Romans thus quelled the Bar Kokhba revolt with unparalleled severity. ... To celebrate the de-judaization of the province, so it seems, its name was changed from Judaea to Syria Palaestina. ^ a b Eshel, Hanan (2006). "The Bar Kochba Revolt, 132–135".

The Cambridge History of Judaism . Vol. 4: The Late Roman-Rabbinic Period. Cambridge University Press. p. 127. doi : 10.1017/chol9780521772488.006 . ISBN 978-0-521-77248-8 . Retrieved 31 May 2025 . An additional, more lasting punitive measure taken by the Romans involved expunging Judaea from the provincial name, changing it from Provincia Judaea to Provincia Syria Palestina.

Although such name changes occurred elsewhere, never before or after was a nation's name expunged as the result of rebellion. ^ Magness, Jodi (2013).

The Archaeology of the Holy Land: From the Destruction of Solomon's Temple to the Muslim Conquest (Reprinted with corrections ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 260. ISBN 978-0-521-12413-3 . To further punish the Jews, Hadrian instituted bans restricting or prohibiting some Jewish practices, such as circumcision and sabbath observance. For the first time, Jews living under Roman rule were subject to persecution under the law for practicing their religion. Finally, to obliterate the memory of this troublesome people, Hadrian changed the name of the province from Judea to Syria-Palaestina, reviving the name of the ancient kingdom of Philistia. ^ a b Eck, Werner (1999). "The Bar Kokhba Revolt: The Roman Point of View" .

The Journal of Roman Studies . 89 : 88– 89. doi : 10.2307/300735 . ISSN 0075-4358 . JSTOR 300735 .

At the end of the war, a drastic decision was made, probably by Hadrian himself, to change the name of the province from Judaea to Syria Palaestina. Our familiarity with the new name may have jaded us to the significance of the change. True, the Romans changed names of provinces quite often ... But never before (or after) was the old name of a province changed as a corollary of a revolt. Not that revolts were not frequent in other provinces as well: the Germani in Germania, the Pannonii in Pannonia, and the Brittones in Britannia all revolted against Rome at one time or another. Yet none of these provinces lost its original name derived from the name of its people. But Judaea, derived from Iudaei, ceased to exist for the Roman government after the Bar Kokhba revolt. It was not because the Jewish population was much reduced as a result of losses suffered during the war that the name of the province was changed; the same was true, for example, of Pannonia, and yet the old name was kept.

The change of name was part of the punishment inflicted on the Jews; they were punished with the loss of a name. This is the clear message of this exceptional measure, the one and only example of such a measure in the history of the Empire. ^ Kaegi (1995), p. 41. ^ Sharon (1988), p. 4. ^ Cavendish, Marshall (2007), p. 559. ^ Avni, Gideon (2014). "Shifting Paradigms for the Byzantine–Islamic Transition".

The Byzantine-Islamic Transition in Palestine: An Archaeological Approach . Oxford: Oxford University Press . ISBN 9780199684335 . ^ Gudrun Krämer (2008) A History of Palestine: From the Ottoman Conquest to the Founding of the State of Israel Translated by Gudrun Krämer and Graham Harman Princeton University Press, ISBN 0-691-11897-3 p.16 ^ Beška & Foster 2021 , p. 1-7: The word "Palestinian" gained acceptance as a description of Palestine's Arabic speakers during the first decade and a half of the 20th century. ^ "Reading Palestine: Printing and Literacy, 1900–1948" . Department of Near Eastern Studies at Princeton University . Retrieved 17 December 2024 . ^ "The British Mandate over Palestine" . Cotf.edu. Archived from the original on 11 February 2017 . Retrieved 12 June 2018 . ^ " 'State Of Palestine' Name Change Ordered By Palestinian Authority President Abbas" . HuffPost . 7 January 2013. Archived from the original on 7 January 2013. ^ Muslih, Muhammad (1987). "Arab Politics and the Rise of Palestinian Nationalism" . Journal of Palestine Studies . 16, No. 4 Summer, 1987 (4): 77– 94, 80– 82, 87. doi : 10.2307/2536721 . JSTOR 2536721 . ^ a b As'ad Ghanem, Israel Studies , Vol. 18, No. 2 Summer 2013, pp.11–29, p.12 ^ "40 Years of Israeli Occupation" . arij.org . Retrieved 2 March 2024 . ^ admin (14 September 2017). "Remembering the Ottoman Empire in Palestine" . Palestine Chronicle . Retrieved 2 March 2024 . ^ a b c d "The Mandate years: colonialism and the creation of Israel" .

The Guardian . 31 May 2001. ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 18 June 2024 . ^ a b c d e f "British-Controlled Mandatory Palestine (1920–1948): A History" . TheCollector . 27 May 2024 . Retrieved 18 June 2024 . ^ Menahem Begin, from Terrorism to Power – via www.palestine-studies.org. ^ Sells 2015 , p. 725. ^ Laron, G. (2017).

The Six Day War: The Breaking of the Middle East . Yale University Press. ^ Singh, S. (2015). Black September: A turning point in the Palestinian national movement . International journal of applied social science , 2 (5/6), 135-145. ^ al Madfai, Madiha Rashid (1993). Jordan, the United States and the Middle East Peace Process, 1974–1991 . Cambridge Middle East Library. Vol. 28. Cambridge University Press . p. 21. ISBN 978-0-521-41523-1 . ^ United Nations General Assembly Session 29 Resolution 3237 (XXIX) . 2296th plenary meeting . Observer status for the Palestine Liberation Organization A/RES/3237(XXIX) 22 November 1974. Retrieved 10 June 2014. ^ Geldenhuys, Deon (1990). Isolated States: A Comparative Analysis . Cambridge Studies in International Relations. Vol. 15. Cambridge University Press . p. 155 . ISBN 978-0-521-40268-2 . ^ "40 Years of Israeli Occupation" . arij.org . Archived from the original on 18 July 2011 . Retrieved 19 January 2011 . ^ a b c Hillier, Tim (1998). Sourcebook on Public International Law . Cavendish Publishing sourcebook. Cavendish Publishing. p. 205. ISBN 978-1-84314-380-2 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 . ^ United Nations General Assembly Session 55 Agenda item 36 . 54th plenary meeting . Bethlehem 2000 Draft resolution (A/55/L.3) A/55/PV.54 page 10. Al-Kidwa, Nasser (Palestine) (in Arabic ). 7 November 2000 at 3 p.m. Retrieved 10 June 2014. "Moreover, we are confident that in the near future we will truly be able to join the international community, represented in the Organization as Palestine, the State that encompasses Bethlehem." ^ a b c "Opinion | WHY ARAFAT BACKED SADDAM" .

The Washington Post . 2 January 2024. ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 15 June 2024 . ^ a b c d "MIFTAH – Palestine and Iraq" . MIFTAH . Retrieved 15 June 2024 . ^ a b Murphy, Kim (10 September 1993). "Israel and PLO, in Historic Bid for Peace, Agree to Mutual Recognition: Mideast: After decades of conflict, accord underscores both sides' readiness to coexist. Arafat reaffirms the renunciation of violence in strong terms" . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on 23 April 2010 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 . ^ a b Israel's control of the airspace and the territorial waters of the Gaza Strip Archived 5 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine . ^ Map of Gaza fishing limits, "security zones" Archived 26 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine . ^ Israel's Disengagement Plan: Renewing the Peace Process Archived 2 March 2007 at the Wayback Machine : "Israel will guard the perimeter of the Gaza Strip, continue to control Gaza air space, and continue to patrol the sea off the Gaza coast. ... Israel will continue to maintain its essential military presence to prevent arms smuggling along the border between the Gaza Strip and Egypt ( Philadelphi Route ), until the security situation and cooperation with Egypt permit an alternative security arrangement." ^ "Israel: 'Disengagement' Will Not End Gaza Occupation" . Human Rights Watch . 29 October 2004. Archived from the original on 1 November 2008 . Retrieved 16 July 2010 . ^ Gold, Dore (26 August 2005). "Legal Acrobatics: The Palestinian Claim that Gaza Is Still 'Occupied' Even After Israel Withdraws" . Jerusalem Issue Brief . 5 (3). Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs . Archived from the original on 21 June 2010 . Retrieved 16 July 2010 . ^ Bell, Abraham (28 January 2008). "International Law and Gaza: The Assault on Israel's Right to Self-Defense" . Jerusalem Issue Brief . 7 (29). Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs . Archived from the original on 21 June 2010 . Retrieved 16 July 2010 . ^ Transcript (22 January 2008). "Address by FM Livni to the 8th Herzliya Conference" . Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Archived from the original on 26 October 2011 . Retrieved 26 September 2011 . ^ Salih, Zak M. (17 November 2005). "Panelists Disagree Over Gaza's Occupation Status" . University of Virginia School of Law . Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 26 September 2011 . ^ United Nations General Assembly Session 52 Resolution 52/250 . Participation of Palestine in the work of the United Nations A/RES/52/250 13 July 1998. Retrieved 16 July 2026. ^ a b "Written Statement Submitted by Palestine" (PDF) . International Court of Justice (ICJ) . 30 January 2004. pp. 44– 49. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 February 2009 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 , in "Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (Index)" . International Court of Justice . 10 December 2003. Archived from the original on 7 October 2012 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 , referred to the ICJ by United Nations General Assembly Resolution ES-10/14 . Agenda item 5 . Tenth emergency special session; 23rd plenary meeting . Illegal Israeli actions in Occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory A/RES/ES/10/14 12 December 2003. Retrieved 10 June 2014. ^ a b c d "Israel – Netanyahu, Politics, Middle East | Britannica" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 4 April 2024 . ^ a b "Siege of the Church of the Nativity recalled: 'It was a battle to stay alive' " . churchtimes.co.uk . Retrieved 1 March 2024 . ^ a b c d "Al-Aqsa intifada timeline" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 10 June 2024 . ^ a b c d e f g h i "Al-Aqsa Intifada timeline" . 29 September 2004 . Retrieved 10 June 2024 . ^ Latest suicide attack overshadows Arab summit Archived December 5, 2007, at the Wayback Machine . Lateline . Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Program originally broadcast March 28, 2002. ^ Arab leaders relaunch peace plan Archived December 19, 2008, at the Wayback Machine . BBC News. March 28, 2007. ^ "Church siege ending after 39 days" .

The Guardian . 10 May 2002. ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 1 March 2024 . ^ a b "Timeline: Hamas-Fatah conflict" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 10 June 2024 . ^ "Israel-Hamas war: Fatah and Hamas step up contacts to achieve Palestinian reconciliation" . Le Monde . 20 February 2024 . Retrieved 1 March 2024 . ^ "Hamas leader's Tunisia visit angers Palestinian officials" . Al Arabiya News . Agence France-Presse (AFP). 7 January 2012. Archived from the original on 8 January 2012 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 . ^ "Palestinian unity government sworn in by Mahmoud Abbas" . BBC News Middle East. 2 June 2014. Archived from the original on 3 June 2014 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 . ^ Black, Ian; Tran, Mark (15 June 2007). "Hamas takes control of Gaza" .

The Guardian . London. Archived from the original on 31 August 2013 . Retrieved 11 October 2021 . ^ "What Is U.S. Policy on the Israeli–Palestinian Conflict?" . Council on Foreign Relations . 12 July 2023 . Retrieved 4 April 2024 . ^ Yglesias, Matthew. "Palestinian right of return matters" . slowboring.com . Retrieved 4 April 2024 . ^ "Israeli settlement expansion in Palestinian areas amounts to war crime: UN" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 4 April 2024 . ^ "Israel's borders explained in maps" . 15 September 2020 . Retrieved 4 April 2024 . ^ DC, Arab Center Washington (28 March 2024). "Jerusalem's Status Quo Agreement: History and Challenges to Its Viability" . Arab Center Washington DC . Retrieved 4 April 2024 . ^ "The Abraham Accords" . StandWithUs . Retrieved 4 April 2024 . ^ Dpr 3 (3 April 2024). "History of the Question of Palestine" . Question of Palestine . Retrieved 4 April 2024 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Spain to recognize Palestinian statehood by July" . Politico . 3 April 2024 . Retrieved 4 April 2024 . ^ "Why Palestinian Statehood Is a Question for the U.N." Brookings . Retrieved 4 April 2024 . ^ "How many Palestinians has Israel's Gaza offensive killed" . Reuters . 29 July 2025 . Retrieved 29 July 2025 . ^ "Over 60,000 Palestinians killed in the 21-month Israel-Hamas war, Gaza's Health Ministry says" . Associated Press . 29 July 2025. ^ "Reported impact snapshot | Gaza Strip (30 July 2025)" . Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs . 30 July 2025. ^ Jamaluddine, Zeina; Abukmail, Hanan; Aly, Sarah; Campbell, Oona M. R.; Checchi, Francesco (9 January 2025). "Traumatic injury mortality in the Gaza Strip from Oct 7, 2023, to June 30, 2024: a capture–recapture analysis" .

The Lancet . 405 (10477). Elsevier: 469– 477. doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)02678-3 . PMID 39799952 . ^ Bloxham, Donald (3 April 2025). "The 7 October Atrocities and the Annihilation of Gaza: Causes and Responsibilities" . Journal of Genocide Research . 28 (Forum: Israel–Palestine: Atrocity Crimes and the Crisis of Holocaust and Genocide Studies): 23– 24. doi : 10.1080/14623528.2025.2483546 . A study of traumatic injury deaths in Gaza in The Lancet using multiple data sources and capture-recapture analysis suggested that the MoH's methods, far from producing an exaggerated number, actually under-estimated the death toll by around 41 percent. ...

When considering the total 'excess mortality,' we need to add the Palestinians who have died because of the blockade in combination with the IDF's destruction of health and sanitation and food infrastructure.

As public health experts noted, in many wars, 'most deaths' are 'due to the indirect impacts of war: malnutrition, communicable disease, exacerbations of noncommunicable disease, maternal and infant disorders.'117 'Indirect' would be the wrong word for this conflict given the nature of Israeli policies, including the systematic obstruction of supplies into Gaza. ^ "Gaza death toll 40% higher than official number, Lancet study finds" .

The Guardian . 10 January 2025. ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 18 May 2025 . ^ Tanno, Sophie (9 January 2025). "Gaza death toll has been significantly underreported, study finds" . CNN . Retrieved 18 May 2025 . ^ "How many people have died in Gaza?" .

The researchers found that the overlap was so small that the true number of deaths was probably 46-107% higher than the official ministry total. If you assume that the ratio has stayed the same since last June (and not fallen, as systems caught up during the ceasefire, say) and apply them to the current tally, it would suggest that between 77,000 and 109,000 Gazans have been killed, 4-5% of the territory's pre-war population (see chart). ^ Adams, Paul (22 September 2025). "What does recognising a Palestinian state mean?" . BBC . Retrieved 5 April 2026 . ^ a b "UNdata | country profile | State of Palestine" . United Nations. Archived from the original on 9 January 2022 . Retrieved 26 April 2020 . ^ a b c "State of Palestine Population (2020)" . worldometers.info . Archived from the original on 7 February 2022 . Retrieved 22 November 2019 . ^ "Geography of Palestine - Fanack.com" .

The MENA Chronicle | Fanack . Retrieved 12 August 2024 . ^ admin (28 April 2012). "Jabal-Nablus, a Page from Palestine's History" . Palestine Chronicle . Retrieved 12 August 2024 . ^ a b c d "Samarian Hills | hills, West Bank | Britannica" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 13 April 2024 . ^ "Unknown Facts about Palestine for Islamic Heritage Month" . What a Relief Blog . 28 October 2020 . Retrieved 12 August 2024 . ^ "Palestine Facts for Kids" . www.twinkl.com.sa . Retrieved 12 August 2024 . ^ a b Marsi, Federica. " 'From the river to the sea': What does the Palestinian slogan really mean?" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 20 February 2024 . ^ Adeel, Zafar (23 October 2023). "Israel–Palestine conflict: How sharing the waters of the Jordan River could be a pathway to peace" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 20 February 2024 . ^ "The Dead Sea, Lowest Point on Earth | Bein Harim" . www.beinharimtours.com . Retrieved 12 August 2024 . ^ "Jericho City" . Welcome To Palestine . Retrieved 12 August 2024 . ^ "A Tour of Rural Jerusalem" . This Week in Palestine . Retrieved 12 August 2024 . ^ Dinerstein, Eric; et al. (2017). "An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm" . BioScience . 67 (6): 534– 545. doi : 10.1093/biosci/bix014 . ISSN 0006-3568 . PMC 5451287 . PMID 28608869 . ^ "Search" . alhaq.org . Archived from the original on 23 February 2022 . Retrieved 26 April 2020 . ^ Ajjur, Salah Basem; Al-Ghamdi, Sami G. (2021). "Variation in Seasonal Precipitation over Gaza (Palestine) and Its Sensitivity to Teleconnection Patterns" . Water . 13 (5): 3. Bibcode : 2021Water..13..667A . doi : 10.3390/w13050667 . According to Köppen-Geiger climate classiﬁcation, the Gaza region is classiﬁed mainly into semi-arid (BSh class) in the middle and southern parts, and temperate with dry summer (Csa class) in the northern region. ^ "Monthly Averages for Gaza, Gaza Strip" . MSN Weather. Archived from the original on 10 February 2009 . Retrieved 15 January 2009 . ^ "St. George's Monastery, Wadi Qelt | Bein Harim Tours" . beinharimtours.com . Retrieved 20 February 2024 . ^ "Wadi Qelt reserve" . Mahmiyat . Retrieved 20 February 2024 . ^ "Unitary States" . juri-globe.ca . Retrieved 2 May 2026 . ^ "Square Pegs and Round Holes: The Story of the Palestinian Political System" . École de droit . ^ Government of the Dominican Republic (15 July 2009). "Comunicado Conjunto para Establecimiento Relaciones Diplomaticas entre la Republica Dominican y el Estado de Palestina" (PDF) (in Spanish, English, and Arabic). Dominican Republic Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 August 2011 . Retrieved 15 June 2014 . Presidente del Estado de Palestina . ^ a b c d e United Nations General Assembly Session 67 Agenda item 37 . Question of Palestine A/67/L.28 26 November 2012. Retrieved 11 June 2014. and United Nations General Assembly Session 67 Resolution 67/19 . Status of Palestine in the United Nations A/RES/67/19 29 November 2012. Retrieved 11 June 2014. ^ a b c Sayigh, Yezid (1999). Armed Struggle and the Search for State: The Palestinian National Movement, 1949–1993 (illustrated ed.). Oxford University Press . p. 624. ISBN 978-0-19-829643-0 .

The Palestinian National Council also empowered the central council to form a government-in-exile when appropriate, and the executive committee to perform the functions of government until such time as a government-in-exile was established. ^ PLO Body Elects Abbas 'President of Palestine' Archived 1 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine 25 November 2008. Agence France-Presse (via MIFTAH ). Retrieved 12 August 2017. "'I announce that the PLO Central Council has elected Mahmud Abbas president of the State of Palestine. He takes on this role from this day, November 23, 2008,' the body's chairman Salem al-Zaanun told reporters." ^ Executive Board of UNESCO (12 May 1989). "Hundred and Thirty-First Session – Item 9.4 of the Provisional Agenda – Request for the Admission of the State of Palestine to UNESCO as a Member State" (PDF) . UNESCO . p. 18, Annex II. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 July 2011 . Retrieved 28 September 2011 . A government-in-exile, having no effective control in the territory and not having had previous control, ... . ^ "Palestinian National Council (PNC)" . European Institute for Research on Mediterranean and Euro-Arab Cooperation . Medea Institute. Archived from the original on 6 August 2011 . Retrieved 16 June 2014 .

The Palestinian National Council (PNC), Parliament in exile of the Palestinian people, is the most important institution of the Palestinian Liberation Organisation (PLO).

The PNC elects the Executive Committee of the organization which makes up the leadership between sessions. ^ "Who Governs the Palestinians?" . Council on Foreign Relations . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . ^ Allen, L. 2013.

The Rise and Fall of Human Rights . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. ^ "Opinion | Hamas Didn't Attack Israelis Because They Are Jewish | Common Dreams" . commondreams.org . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . ^ "i24NEWS" . i24news.tv . 28 October 2018 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . ^ "Mahmoud Abbas (President)" . ECFR . 23 March 2018 . Retrieved 13 April 2024 . ^ Thompson, Nick (26 February 2024). "Palestinian Authority prime minister and government resign amid pressure to reform" . CNN . Retrieved 13 April 2024 . ^ "Palestinian President Abbas appoints Mohammed Mustafa as prime minister" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 13 April 2024 . ^ Hubbard, Ben (17 October 2024). "Yahya Sinwar, Leader of Hamas, Is Dead" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 17 October 2024 . ^ "West Bank: Freedom in the World 2022 Country Report" . Freedom House . Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 . ^ "What is the Palestinian Authority and what is its relationship with Israel?" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 13 April 2024 . ^ Menachem, Yoni Ben (10 January 2018). "Palestinian Capital in Abu Dis or Ramallah?" . Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs . Retrieved 21 February 2024 . ^ "Ramallah looks ever more like Palestinian capital" . Dawn . Pakistan. 1 December 2010 . Retrieved 21 February 2024 . ^ Prusher, Ilene (29 May 2015). "Palestine's abandoned parliament – a history of cities in 50 buildings, day 46" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 21 February 2024 . ^ "AP PHOTOS: Unfinished Palestinian parliament a grim symbol" . Associated Press News . 6 July 2018 . Retrieved 21 February 2024 . ^ a b c d Zahriyeh, Ehab (4 July 2014). "Maps: The occupation of the West Bank" . Al Jazeera Media Network . Archived from the original on 16 July 2014 . Retrieved 8 August 2014 . ^ Gvirtzman, Haim. "Maps of Israeli Interests in Judea and Samaria" . Bar-Ilan University . Archived from the original on 11 January 2014 . Retrieved 8 August 2014 . ^ West Bank and Gaza – Area C and the future of the Palestinian economy (Report). World Bank Group . 2 October 2013. p. 4. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 August 2014 . Retrieved 8 August 2014 . ^ "The Struggle over Area C Change Direction toward a Space for Understanding with the Palestinian Authority" . inss.org.il . 23 August 2023. Archived from the original on 14 November 2023 . Retrieved 14 November 2023 . Israeli governments see Area C as essential for Jewish settlement and security, and as an asset in future negotiations.

By contrast, the Palestinians see Area C as essential for a contiguous, sustainable, and viable Palestinian state. ^ "Group: Israel Controls 42% of West Bank" . CBS News . Associated Press . 6 July 2010. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014 . Retrieved 8 August 2014 . ^ Consideration of reports submitted by States parties under article 9 of the Convention (PDF) (Report). UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination . 9 March 2012. p. 6. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 July 2014 . Retrieved 8 August 2014 . ^ Kelly, Tobias (May 2009). Von Benda-Beckmann, Franz ; Von Benda-Beckmann, Keebet; Eckert, Julia M. (eds.). Laws of Suspicion:Legal Status, Space and the Impossibility of Separation in the Israeli-occupied West Bank . Ashgate Publishing . p. 91. ISBN 978-0-7546-7239-5 . ^ Jerusalem, Facts and Trends 2009/2010 (PDF) (Report). Jerusalem Institute for Israel Studies . 2010. p. 11. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 July 2014 . Retrieved 8 August 2014 . ^ "The Unique Status of the Jerusalem Suburb of Wadi Hummus" . Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs . Retrieved 20 February 2024 . ^ "Palestine" . GeoHive . Johan van der Heyden. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014 . Retrieved 3 October 2015 . ^ 'PLO: Vatican accord with Palestine a contribution to justice,' Archived 18 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine Ma'an News Agency 14 May 2015.:"The Holy See has identified the State of Palestine as such since the vote" by the UN general assembly to recognize it in November 2012, Vatican spokesman Federico Lombardi told AFP. ^ "Vatican recognizes state of Palestine in new treaty" . Associated Press. Archived from the original on 13 May 2015 . Retrieved 21 April 2015 . ^ Sayigh, Yezid (1999). Armed Struggle and the Search for State: The Palestinian National Movement, 1949–1993 (illustrated ed.). Oxford University Press . p. 624. ISBN 978-0-19-829643-0 . "The Palestinian National Council also empowered the central council to form a government-in-exile when appropriate, and the executive committee to perform the functions of government until such time as a government-in-exile was established." ^ Beaumont, Peter (3 October 2014). "Sweden to recognise state of Palestine" .

The Guardian . London. Archived from the original on 15 October 2014 . Retrieved 14 October 2014 . ^ "Sweden officially recognises state of Palestine" .

The Guardian . 30 October 2014. Archived from the original on 30 October 2014 . Retrieved 31 October 2014 . ^ Wallström, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Margot (30 October 2014). "Sweden today decides to recognise the State of Palestine" . Dagens Nyheter . Stockholm. Archived from the original on 16 April 2015 . Retrieved 21 April 2015 . ^ "MPs back Palestinian statehood alongside Israel" . BBC News. 14 October 2014. Archived from the original on 14 October 2014 . Retrieved 14 October 2014 . ^ "League of Arab States (LAS) Archives" . Question of Palestine . Retrieved 29 June 2024 . ^ Heaney, Christopher. "OIC Committee of Six on Palestine Considers Launching Global Action to Support the Rights of the Palestinian People and End the Occupation – Press Release (Non-UN Document)" . Question of Palestine . Retrieved 29 June 2024 . ^ "What is Iran's 'axis of resistance' and why is it uniting in fury against the US and Israel?" .

The Conversation . 1 February 2024. ^ "Challenging the Axis of Resistance: Syria, Iran and the Strategic Balance in the Middle East" . USIP . Archived from the original on 4 September 2016 . Retrieved 25 May 2016 . ^ Drums of War: Israel And The "AXIS OF RESISTANCE" (PDF) , International Crisis Group, 2 August 2010, archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 ^ "جمهوری اسلامی دولت مقاومت است" . Khamenei.ir (in Persian). ^ "Yemen's Houthis warn they will fire missiles, drones if US intervenes in Gaza conflict" . Reuters . 10 October 2023. ^ "الرئيس الإيراني يستقبل وفدا من الجبهة الشعبية" . وكـالـة مـعـا الاخـبـارية . ^ Ibrahim, Arwa. "Iranian support vital for Hamas after ties restored with Syria" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 7 October 2023 . ^ Wistrich, Robert (2002). Muslim Anti-Semitism: A Clear and Present Danger . p. 43. ^ "IRAQI CHIEF, IN APPARENT SHIFT, CITES ISRAELI NEED FOR SECURITY" .

The New York Times . Reuters. 3 January 1983. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 11 February 2024 . ^ Pala, Özgür; Al-Jaber, Khalid (4 April 2022). Turkish-Qatari Relations: From Past to Present in a Turbulent Geopolitical Landscape . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 113. ISBN 978-1-6669-0173-3 . ^ Request for the admission of the State of Palestine to UNESCO as a Member State (Report). UNESCO. 12 May 1989 . Retrieved 26 October 2024 . ^ "India's Stance on Palestine: From Solidarity to Strategic Neutrality" . Outlook India . 17 December 2024 . Retrieved 23 September 2025 . ^ "India gives $10 mn aid to Palestine, pledges support – Firstpost" . firstpost.com . 11 September 2012. ^ "EAM Jaishankar Reaffirms India's Support For Two-State Solution For Israel, Palestine | Decoding New Delhi's Stance" . Outlook India . 5 December 2024 . Retrieved 23 September 2025 . ^ Qadaffi, Muammar (21 January 2009). "The One-State Solution" .

The New York Times . p. A33 . Retrieved 22 January 2009 . ^ "The Untold Story" . 7 August 2002 . Retrieved 11 April 2024 . ^ "Have a personal rapport with the late Palestinian President, Yasser Arafat" . 11 January 2005 . Retrieved 11 April 2024 . ^ "Mapping Militant Organisations EROS and the PLO" . 7 August 2013 . Retrieved 11 April 2024 . ^ "South African union joins boycott of Israel" . Ynet . 6 August 2006. ^ "Palestinian-Irish Relations" . Archived from the original on 17 November 2020 . Retrieved 22 May 2018 . ^ Rasgon, Adam (24 January 2019). "Palestinian official slams US over its support for Venezuelan opposition leader" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 15 September 2019 . ^ AJLabs. "Mapping which countries recognise Palestine in 2024" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 29 June 2024 . ^ "Q. and A. on Palestinian Statehood" .

The New York Times . 5 January 2015. Archived from the original on 10 October 2022 . Retrieved 10 October 2022 . Q. Does Palestine meet that legal definition ? A.Many experts say that it does, though there is considerable complexity surrounding the particular criteria. & Q. What about recognition? A.The Palestinian leadership has been trying for years to garner as much international recognition as possible, hoping to achieve a diplomatic critical mass that would force the hand of Israel and the United States.

By November 2012, when the United Nations General Assembly voted to upgrade Palestine's status to that of a nonmember observer state, 132 of the 198 members of the United Nations recognized Palestinian statehood. Several more have done so since then. ^ Robbie Sabel (April 2022). International Law and the Arab-Israeli Conflict . Cambridge university Press. p. 399. ISBN 978-1-108-76267-0 . Archived from the original on 10 October 2022 . Retrieved 10 October 2022 .

The issue of whether Palestine is, at present, a State remains controversial. ^ Victor Matthew Kattan (2021). "The Statehood of Palestine: A Constitutivist View (May 21, 2021)".

In Hani Sayed &Thomas Skouteris (ed.). Oxford Handbook on International Law in the Arab World . Oxford University Press, Forthcoming. doi : 10.2139/ssrn.3850777 . S2CID 241140129 . It would be difficult to deny that the recognition of Palestine by over two-thirds of the member states of the United Nations (72 per cent of members), its membership of seventeen international organizations, three international courts and its accession to many major multilateral treaties, in pursuit of Palestinian self-determination, means that Palestine is a state under international law even though its territory continues to be occupied – illegally – by the Government of Israel ^ "The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, Fatou Bensouda, opens a preliminary examination of the situation in Palestine" . ICC . 16 January 2015. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 20 September 2019 . ^ Yuval Abraham and Meron Rapoport, Surveillance and interference: Israel's covert war on the ICC exposed +972 magazine 28 May 2024 ^ United Nations General Assembly Session 70 Resolution Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources A/RES/70/225 22 December 2015. Retrieved 21 April 2025. ^ UNGA, 15 December 1988; Resolution 43/177. Question of Palestine Archived 19 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine (doc.nr. A/RES/43/177) ^ a b "United Nations Sixty-seventh General Assembly: General Assembly Plenary, 44th & 45th Meetings (PM & Night). GA/11317: General Assembly Votes Overwhelmingly to Accord Palestine 'Non-Member Observer State' Status in United Nations" . United Nations. 29 November 2012. Archived from the original on 30 November 2012 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 . ^ UN backs raising Palestinian flag at NY headquarters Archived 27 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine . i24news and AFP, 9 September 2015 ^ Response:Palestinian Attempt to Raise Flag at UNHQ Archived 21 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine . Permanent Mission of Israel to the United Nations, 1 September 2015. ^ a b "Historic raising of Palestinian flag at United Nations" . CNN. 30 September 2015. Archived from the original on 21 April 2021 . Retrieved 1 June 2019 . ^ "Palestinian flag raised at UN in New York" . BBC News. 30 September 2015. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 1 June 2019 . ^ "Palestinian flag to be raised at United Nations for the first time" .

The Independent . 30 September 2015. Archived from the original on 24 May 2022 . Retrieved 1 June 2019 . ^ U.N. General Assembly approves Palestinian request to fly its flag Archived 19 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine . Louis Charbonneau, Reuters, 10 September 2015 ^ UN strongly approves Palestinian proposal to raise flag Archived 12 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine . Al Jazeera, 11 September 2015 ^ "Palestinian Flag Raised at the United Nations for the First Time" . Newsweek . 30 September 2015. Archived from the original on 15 May 2021 . Retrieved 1 June 2019 . ^ "Israel defies UN after vote on Palestine with plans for 3,000 new homes in the West Bank" .

The Independent . 1 December 2012. Archived from the original on 18 October 2017 . Retrieved 15 September 2017 . ^ a b Charbonneau, Louis (29 November 2012). "Palestinians win implicit U.N. recognition of sovereign state" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 5 June 2014 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 . ^ a b Lederer, Edith M (30 November 2012). "Live Stream: Palestine asks United Nations for a 'birth certificate' ahead of vote" . 3news.com . New Zealand: MediaWorks TV. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 . ^ "UN assembly approves resolution granting Palestine new rights and reviving its UN membership bid" . Associated Press News . 10 May 2024 . Retrieved 30 June 2024 . ^ "General Assembly grants Palestine non-member observer State status at UN" . United Nations News Centre. 29 November 2012. Archived from the original on 2 January 2013 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 . ^ a b "Palestine: What is in a name (change)?" . Aljazeera Inside Story . Al Jazeera English . 8 January 2013. Archived from the original on 9 January 2013 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 . ^ Hume, Tim; Fantz, Ashley (30 November 2012). "Palestinian United Nations bid explained" . CNN International Edition: Middle East. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 . ^ "Website of the State of Palestine's Permanent Observer Mission to the United Nations" . Archived from the original on 31 January 2013. ^ Gharib, Ali (20 December 2012). "U.N. Adds New Name: "State of Palestine" " .

The Daily Beast . Archived from the original on 21 December 2012 . Retrieved 10 January 2013 . ^ O'Brien, Patricia (21 December 2012). "Issues related to General assembly resolution 67/19 on the status of Palestine in the United nations" (PDF) . United Nations. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 October 2021 . Retrieved 22 November 2019 . ^ Christmas Message from H.E. President Mahmoud Abbas Archived 3 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine , Christmas 2012: "133 countries that took the courageous step of recognizing the State of Palestine on the 1967 borders." ^ "Palestinians want April vote on UN membership despite US saying peace with Israel must come first" . Associated Press News . 4 April 2024 . Retrieved 16 April 2024 . ^ "US vetoes widely supported resolution backing full UN membership for Palestine" . Associated Press News . 18 April 2024 . Retrieved 18 April 2024 . ^ Borger, Julian (18 April 2024). "US vetoes Palestinian request for full UN membership" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 18 April 2024 . ^ "PA says US veto of Palestinian UN membership 'unfair, unethical' " . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 18 April 2024 . ^ "Palestinians take new seat at UN General Assembly" . 11 September 2024 – via Le Monde. ^ Fink, Rachel. " 'A Historic Moment for Us': Palestinians Take Unprecedented Seat at UN General Assembly - Palestinians - Haaretz.com" . ^ Beverley Milton-Edwards (1996). Islamic Politics in Palestine . I.B.Tauris. pp. 94–95 . ISBN 978-1-86064-475-7 . ^ Milton Glaser and Mirko Ilic (2005).

The Design of Dissent . Rockport Publishers. ISBN 978-1-59253-117-2 . ^ "National Security Forces (NSF) – PA/Hamas" . ECFR . 21 March 2018 . Retrieved 21 February 2024 . ^ a b "What is Hamas? A simple guide to the armed Palestinian group" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 21 February 2024 . ^ "Palestine Liberation Army: Our people's struggle will continue until the liberation of the Palestinian land" . Syrian Times . 29 November 2022 . Retrieved 21 February 2024 . ^ "How Hamas Built an Army" .

The Washington Institute . Retrieved 22 May 2024 . ^ "MERIA: The Palestinian Security Services: Between Police and Army" . ciaotest.cc.columbia.edu . Retrieved 21 February 2024 . ^ "Palestine Liberation Organization" . palestineun.org . Retrieved 21 February 2024 . ^ "Palestine Liberation Army | Encyclopedia.com" . encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 21 February 2024 . ^ "Palestine Liberation Army | Office of Justice Programs" . ojp.gov . Retrieved 21 February 2024 . ^ "The Palestinian Economy Remains Vulnerable Amid Socio-Political Instability" . World Bank . Retrieved 10 March 2024 . ^ Daoudi, Hanna; Khalidi, Raja (2008). "The Palestinian War-Torn Economy : Aid, Development and State Formation" . A Contrario (in French). 5 (1): 23– 36. doi : 10.3917/aco.052.0023 . ISSN 1660-7880 . ^ DAOUDI Hanna, KHALIDI Raja, " The Palestinian War-Torn Economy : Aid, Development and State Formation ", A contrario , 2008/1 (Vol. 5), p. 23-36. DOI : 10.3917/aco.052.0023. URL : https://www.cairn.info/revue-a-contrario-2008-1-page-23.htm ^ "Palestine: share of economic sectors in GDP 2011–2021" . Statista . Retrieved 10 March 2024 . ^ a b "The Preliminary Estimates of Quarterly National Accounts, First Quarter, 2024" . PCBS . Retrieved 28 June 2024 . ^ "Palestinian economy contracts by 35 percent in first quarter of 2024: report" . Middle East Eye . Retrieved 28 June 2024 . ^ "Gaza's GDP contracts 86 pct amid Israeli attacks" . bastillepost.com . 28 June 2024 . Retrieved 28 June 2024 . ^ a b "Agriculture in Palestine" . socialsciences.mcmaster.ca . Archived from the original on 11 May 2024 . Retrieved 16 April 2024 . ^ "Israel gives Pal. Authority limited water autonomy in West Bank" .

The Jerusalem Post . 17 January 2017. Archived from the original on 14 November 2023 . Retrieved 14 November 2023 . ^ Selby, Jan. "Joint mismanagement: reappraising the Oslo water regime." In Water Resources in the Middle East: Israel-Palestinian Water Issues—From Conflict to Cooperation , pp. 203-212. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007. ^ Newman, Rachel Wilson, Mark Oliver, Alexandra (18 October 2023). "Gaza's limited water access, mapped" . CNN. Archived from the original on 18 October 2023 . Retrieved 14 November 2023 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Israeli gov, Water Authority, The Water issue between Israel and the Palestinians, https://www.gov.il/BlobFolder/reports/water-authority-data-english/he/21-Water-Issues-between-Israel-and-Palestinians-Main-Facts.pdf Archived 7 October 2023 at the Wayback Machine 2012 ^ "Gaza water crisis prompts UN call for immediate opening of crossings" . United Nations. 3 September 2009. Archived from the original on 8 June 2010 . Retrieved 25 November 2009 . ^ "Gaza Strip Water and Sanitation Situation" . World Bank. 2009. Archived from the original on 22 February 2018. ^ Fatta, D. (2005). "Urban Wastewater Treatment and Reclamation for Agricultural Irrigation: The situation in Morocco and Palestine" .

The Environmentalist . 24 (4): 227– 236. doi : 10.1007/s10669-005-0998-x . ISSN 0251-1088 . S2CID 85346288 . ^ Assaf, Karen (2004). "Water as a human right: The understanding of water in Palestine" (PDF) . Boell.de . Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2015. ^ "Trade & Investment – Palestinian Mission to the United Kingdom" . palmissionuk.org . 22 October 2019 . Retrieved 1 March 2024 . ^ "Trade Profile – Palestine" . Lloyds Bank . Retrieved 1 March 2024 . ^ "Manufacturing sector expected to grow by 2.5% and absorb 79,000 jobs in six years – Ministry of Economy" . WAFA. 26 September 2023 . Retrieved 26 October 2024 . ^ "Hebron, the wealthiest, most high-tech Palestinian Authority City" . the Jewish Community of Hebron . 6 April 2016 . Retrieved 16 April 2024 . ^ Goodfriend, Sophia (29 February 2024). "How the Occupation Fuels Tel Aviv's Booming AI Sector" . Foreign Policy . Retrieved 1 March 2024 . ^ Levy, Elior (3 December 2016). "First Coca-Cola plant opens in Gaza" . Ynetnews . Retrieved 1 March 2024 . ^ Reiff, Ben (7 March 2023). "At Davos, talk of Palestinian prosperity without freedom is 'a charade' " . +972 Magazine . Retrieved 1 March 2024 . ^ "Industrial zones" . quartetoffice.org . Retrieved 1 March 2024 . ^ "Massader Palestine – Noor Palestine Solar Program" . massader.ps . Retrieved 28 March 2024 . ^ "Projects" . Qudra Energy . Retrieved 28 March 2024 . ^ admin (24 May 2019). "Palestine to Open First-Ever Solar Power Station" . Palestine Chronicle . Retrieved 28 March 2024 . ^ admsusint (7 April 2023). "Abu Kishek and businessman Samir Aweidah sign an agreement to finance and construct a solar power station at Al-Quds University" . Sustainability . Retrieved 28 March 2024 . ^ a b c "Offshore Gas Field Could Help Gaza Recovery" . OilPrice.com . Retrieved 10 March 2024 . ^ a b Atmos (29 November 2023). "This Genocide Is About Oil" . Atmos . Retrieved 10 March 2024 . ^ a b c d e f "West Bank Oil Field" . massader.ps . Retrieved 23 March 2024 . ^ Saglam, Muhdan (26 October 2023). "Is Israel attacking Gaza for oil and gas? – Muhdan Saglam" . Gercek News . Archived from the original on 3 February 2024 . Retrieved 23 March 2024 . ^ a b "Palestine Natural Resources Overview" . massader.ps . Retrieved 23 March 2024 . ^ "Gaza: Gas Rich but in Ruins" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 12 April 2024 . ^ "Gaza Marine: Natural gas extraction in tumultuous times?" . Brookings . Retrieved 12 April 2024 . ^ Robbins, Elizabeth (18 June 2023). "Israel Green-Lights Gaza Offshore Gas Development" . FDD . Retrieved 12 April 2024 . ^ "Gaza offshore gas project: Agreement expected by year-end" . Arab News . 18 October 2022 . Retrieved 12 April 2024 . ^ a b Gaza, Sally Ibrahim (20 June 2023). "Exclusive: Hamas 'allows development of gas field off Gaza' " . newarab.com/ . Retrieved 12 April 2024 . ^ Moussa, Emad (26 July 2022). "Palestine's airports: Past, present, and future dreams" . newarab.com/ . Retrieved 25 March 2024 . ^ "A New Airport Is Being Proposed to Serve Both Israel and the Palestinian Authority" . Architectural Digest . 1 December 2021 . Retrieved 25 March 2024 . ^ "Israeli Foreign Minister Lapid proposes Gaza development plan" . France 24. 13 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 March 2024 . ^ "PCBS: Marked increase in West Bank tourism in 2010" . M'aan . 26 September 2011. Archived from the original on 18 June 2013 . Retrieved 10 October 2012 . ^ Imtiaz Muqbil; Sana Muqbil (11 March 2013). "Europeans Dominate Visitor Arrivals to Palestine in 2012" (Press release). Travel-impact-newswire.com. Archived from the original on 29 August 2016 . Retrieved 6 July 2016 . ^ Israel and the Palestinian Territories. p. 254. Lonely Planet Publications. 2012 ^ "Tourism in Palestine an Act of Solidarity, says Minister of Tourism" . Archived from the original on 12 August 2017 . Retrieved 12 August 2017 . ^ "Entering and Exiting Jerusalem, The west Bank, and Gaza" . Archived from the original on 18 March 2014 . Retrieved 15 March 2014 . ^ Chang, Angie (10 February 2022). "Entrepreneurship in Palestine" . Medium . Retrieved 19 March 2024 . ^ "4.2 million cellular mobile subscriptions in Palestine, says Bureau of Statistics" . WAFA. 17 May 2020. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021 . Retrieved 17 May 2020 . ^ "US$15 Million Investment in Information Technology to Boost High-Skilled Jobs for Palestinian Youth" . WAFA. 15 June 2020. Archived from the original on 29 September 2020 . Retrieved 15 June 2020 . ^ "Palestine Monetary Authority: Starting to Provide Electronic Payment Services in Palestine" . PNN. May 2020. Archived from the original on 2 February 2022 . Retrieved 17 May 2020 . ^ a b "The Palestinian Banking Sector" . This Week in Palestine . Retrieved 26 March 2024 . ^ Ajluni, Salem (2003). "The Palestinian Economy and the Second Intifada" . Journal of Palestine Studies . 32 (3): 64– 73. doi : 10.1525/jps.2003.32.3.64 . ^ a b c d e f g h "Economy" . NAD . 5 October 2015 . Retrieved 28 June 2024 . ^ UNCTAD Report: Economic costs of the Israeli occupation for the Palestinian people: the post-October 2023 shocks compounding the historical cumulative cost of the occupation of the West Bank (A/80/356) ^ "Brief Report on the Population of Palestine at the End of 2021" . Archived from the original on 7 December 2022 . Retrieved 7 December 2022 . ^ Ritchie, Hannah; Mathieu, Edouard (6 September 2019). "Which countries are most densely populated?" . Our World in Data . Archived from the original on 1 February 2022 . Retrieved 23 November 2019 . ^ "Trapped in Indefinite Exile: The History of Palestinian Refugees Over Last Seven Decades" .

The Wire . Retrieved 21 April 2024 . ^ "The Nakba did not start or end in 1948" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 21 April 2024 . ^ a b "Palestinian Expatriates" . This Week in Palestine . Retrieved 21 April 2024 . ^ Jazeera, Al. "Al Nakba – PalestineRemix" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 21 April 2024 . ^ "Palestinians in the Middle East: Where and how do they live? – DW – 11/29/2023" . Deutsche Welle . Retrieved 21 April 2024 . ^ Labadi, Taher (5 December 2018). "The Palestinian Diaspora and the State-Building Process" . Arab Reform Initiative . ^ Ufheil-Somers, Amanda (4 May 1985). "The Palestinian Diaspora of the Gulf" . MERIP . Retrieved 21 April 2024 . ^ PCBS. "PCBS – Population Projections" . pcbs.gov.ps . Archived from the original on 9 April 2024 . Retrieved 23 February 2024 . ^ a b Marom, Roy (2026). Settled Land: The Arab Countryside in Israel/Palestine (in Hebrew). Ra'anana: Lamda Scholarship, The Open University of Israel Press. p. 7. ISBN 978-965-06-1769-1 . {{ cite book }} : External link in |title= ( help ) ^ Hass, Amira (6 February 2012). "Bedouin Community Wins Reprieve From Forcible Relocation to Jerusalem Garbage Dump" . Archived from the original on 6 February 2012 – via Haaretz. ^ حاج طاهر, زكية (2018). "مخطوطات البحر الميت:, مقاربة جديدة للنقد التوراتي" . مجلة دفاتر البحوث العلمية . Tipaza , Algeria: Abdellah Morsli University Center: 151. doi : 10.37218/1426-000-012-009 . ^ a b c Sitta, Salman Abu (1 January 2009), The Denied Inheritance: Palestinian Land Ownership in Beer Sheba , archived from the original on 30 November 2024 , retrieved 28 June 2024 ^ "Hamas' use of excessive force to displace Bedouins angers Gazans" . Al-Monitor: Independent, trusted coverage of the Middle East. 20 June 2022 . Retrieved 1 November 2022 . ^ Hammad, Tarneem (7 June 2017). "The Bedouins of Gaza" . We Are Not Numbers . Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 1 November 2022 . ^ Rubin, Barry ; Colp Rubin, Judith (2005). Yasir Arafat: A Political Biography . Oxford University Press. pp. 196– 197. ISBN 978-0-19-518127-2 . ^ Hovsepian, Mary (2015), "Demography of Race and Ethnicity in Palestine" , in Sáenz, Rogelio; Embrick, David G.; Rodríguez, Néstor P. (eds.), The International Handbook of the Demography of Race and Ethnicity , International Handbooks of Population, vol. 4, Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp. 339– 352, doi : 10.1007/978-90-481-8891-8_17 , ISBN 978-90-481-8891-8 , retrieved 23 March 2026 ^ Ilan Ben Zion, The Old City's African secret Archived 6 October 2019 at the Wayback Machine , The Times of Israel 6 April 2014. ^ Roger Hercz (25 September 2017). "How Palestinians came to reject Kurdish demands for a homeland" . alaraby.co.uk . Retrieved 26 November 2017 . ^ "Who are the Palestinians?" . Arutz Sheva. 11 August 2017 . Retrieved 26 November 2017 . ^ A People Apart: The Romani community seeks recognition.

By Eetta Prince-Gibson. Dom Research Center. 2001 ^ "Map of Hebron region produced by the Survey of Palestine, showing the compound 'El Moskobiya' " .

The National Library of Israel, Eran Laor Cartographic collection . 1945. Archived from the original on 25 May 2024 . Retrieved 28 June 2024 . ^ "The Russians in Jerusalem" . Parallel Histories . Retrieved 25 October 2019 . ^ Shams, Alex. "Armenians in Palestine face uncertain future" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 11 December 2022 . ^ Jerusalem The Old City The Urban Fabric and Geopolitical Implications (PDF) . International Peace and Cooperation Center. 2009. p. 43. ISBN 978-965-7283-16-5 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 September 2013 . Retrieved 30 August 2013 . ^ Khateeb, Alya (1987), عرب التركمان أبناء مرج بن عامر ("The Arab Turkmen – Merj Beni Amir Children") , Dar Al-Jalil ^ Suwaed, Muhammad (2015), "Turkmen, Israeli", Historical Dictionary of the Bedouins , Rowman & Littlefield , p. 121, ISBN 978-1442254510 ^ Al Gherbawi, Hadeel (2022), Palestinian, Turkish ethnic mixture persists over times , Al-Monitor , retrieved 3 November 2022 ^ "New movement restrictions in East Jerusalem" (PDF) . United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. 5 November 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 March 2016. ^ Barahona, Ana (2013). Bearing Witness – Eight weeks in Palestine . London: Metete. p. 80. ISBN 978-1-908099-02-0 . ^ a b Dana Rosenblatt (14 October 2002). "Amid conflict, Samaritans keep unique identity" . CNN. Archived from the original on 20 November 2018 . Retrieved 30 May 2007 . ^ "PA's Moderate Muslims Face Threats" . Arutz Sheva. 31 May 2010. Archived from the original on 26 April 2014 . Retrieved 26 April 2014 . ^ Lybarger, Loren D. (2007). Identity and Religion in Palestine: The Struggle Between Islamism and Secularism in the Occupied Territories . Princeton University Press. p. 114. ISBN 978-0-691-12729-3 . ^ "Are all Palestinians Muslim?" . Institute for Middle East Understanding . Archived from the original on 13 April 2014 . Retrieved 16 April 2014 . ^ "National Profiles | World Religion" .

The Association of Religion Data Archives (the ARDA) . Retrieved 6 January 2025 . ^ "Religious Identity Among Muslims" . Pewforum.org. 9 August 2012. Archived from the original on 26 December 2016 . Retrieved 6 July 2016 . ^ Salome, Louis J. (2010). Violence, Veils and Bloodlines: Reporting from War Zones . McFarland. p. 77. ISBN 978-0-7864-5584-3 . ^ a b c "Palestine: Christians" . Refworld . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ "The Palestinian National Charter: Resolutions of the Palestine National Council July 1–17, 1968: Articles 6–7" . Retrieved 22 April 2016 . ^ McCarthy, Rory (17 August 2009). "Fatah congress elects first Jewish-born member" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 9 April 2024 . ^ "جريدة القدس" . alquds.com . 7 September 2023 . Retrieved 19 March 2024 . ^ "Education (2014)" (PDF) . United Nations Development Programme. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 March 2017 . Retrieved 30 January 2017 . ^ "Why Palestinians Are Known as the World's "Best Educated Refugees"Anne Irfan – Columbia University Press Blog" . 23 August 2023 . Retrieved 19 March 2024 . ^ "The Palestinian education system" . palestineembassy.vn . Retrieved 21 March 2024 . ^ "Palestine Education System" . scholaro.com . Retrieved 21 March 2024 . ^ "Fast Facts" . jmcc.org . Retrieved 21 March 2024 . ^ "Educational Challenges in Palestine –" . 4 May 2023 . Retrieved 21 March 2024 . ^ "Education System in Palestine Primary Secondary Territory" . palestineeducation.info . Retrieved 21 March 2024 . ^ "State of Palestine | NON-STATE ACTORS IN EDUCATION | Education Profiles" . education-profiles.org . Retrieved 21 March 2024 . ^ "Study in Palestine | THE World University Rankings" . Times Higher Education (THE) . 16 February 2017 . Retrieved 21 March 2024 . ^ "Education sector" . pipa.ps . Retrieved 21 March 2024 . ^ "Number of Schools in Palestine by Region and Governorate for the scholastic years 2014/2015 – 2018/2019" . pcbs.gov.ps . Retrieved 21 March 2024 . ^ Jordan, Masri (28 August 2023). "Al-Quds University Achieves 5 Star Rating in QS World University Rankings" . Munib and Angela Masri Foundation (MAF) . Archived from the original on 2 May 2024 . Retrieved 21 March 2024 . ^ "An-Najah National University - An-Najah is Ranked in the Clinical and Health Subject Ranking at the 2023 Times Higher Education World University Rankings by Subject" . ^ "جريدة القدس" . alquds.com . 12 April 2023 . Retrieved 21 March 2024 . ^ aqu2020 (11 February 2024). "Al-Quds University Ranks First among Palestinians in the QS Sustainable Development Classification" . Al-Quds University . Retrieved 21 March 2024 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ aqu2020 (22 June 2023). "Al-Quds University Wins a Five Star Rating in all QS International Indicators as the First University in the History of Palestinian Higher Education" . Al-Quds University . Retrieved 21 March 2024 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Distribution of Schools in Palestine by Supervising Authority, Region and Governorate, for Scholastic Years 2011/2012-2022/2023" . pcbs.gov.ps . Retrieved 21 March 2024 . ^ admin (11 June 2018). "Palestine's Birzeit University Ranked as One of the Top Universities in the World" . Palestine Chronicle . Retrieved 26 March 2024 . ^ Rega, Giuseppe (2019). "Tribute to Ali H. Nayfeh (1933-2017)" . IUTAM Symposium on Exploiting Nonlinear Dynamics for Engineering Systems . Springer . pp. 1– 2. ISBN 9783030236922 . ^ "Overview of Public Health in Palestine" . Palestinian National Institute of Public Health. 2018. Archived from the original on 12 August 2020 . Retrieved 24 November 2019 . ^ "WHO | About Us" . WHO . Archived from the original on 9 December 2020 . Retrieved 25 November 2019 . ^ "Health Cluster OPT" . healthclusteropt.org . Archived from the original on 13 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 November 2019 . ^ "Health conditions in the occupied Palestinian territory, including east Jerusalem, and in the occupied Syrian Golan" (PDF) . WHO. 1 May 2019. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 January 2022 . Retrieved 24 November 2019 . ^ "Country cooperation strategy for WHO and the Occupied Palestinian Territory 2017–2020" (PDF) . WHO. 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 October 2023 . Retrieved 24 November 2019 . ^ "Palestinian Culture – Core Concepts" . Cultural Atlas . 2020 . Retrieved 22 February 2024 . ^ "The Palestine Festival of Literature" .

The Palestine Festival of Literature احتفالية فلسطين للأدب . Retrieved 22 February 2024 . ^ "Triangle Network | Triangle Network" . trianglenetwork.org . Retrieved 22 February 2024 . ^ Zoll, Rachel (6 December 2017). "Jerusalem is sacred place for Jews, Muslims, Christians" . Associated Press News . Retrieved 22 February 2024 . ^ "Jericho | Facts & History | Britannica" . Encyclopædia Britannica . 26 December 2023 . Retrieved 22 February 2024 . ^ "Sebastia" . UNESCO World Heritage Centre . Retrieved 22 February 2024 . ^ "What Is the Significance of the City of Bethlehem in the Bible?" . Christianity.com . Retrieved 22 February 2024 . ^ Febles, Kaitlin Miller (16 December 2021). "Bethlehem: Little Town, Big Significance" .

The Gospel Coalition . Retrieved 22 February 2024 . ^ Capitals of Arab Culture – Jerusalem (2009) Archived 25 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ "The project of Arab cultural capitals and cities: 22 years later, diagnosis and perspectives" . Culture of Peace News Network . 22 December 2018. Archived from the original on 3 June 2020 . Retrieved 25 May 2020 . ^ "These are the 100 Best Cuisines in 2025 - TasteAtlas Awards 24/25" . www.tasteatlas.com . Retrieved 22 September 2025 . ^ a b c d "The Power of Palestinian Architecture: Transforming the Landscape 2023" . 16 October 2023 . Retrieved 19 April 2024 . ^ "The Impossible Promise of Building a New Palestinian City | The Walrus" . 8 April 2024 . Retrieved 18 July 2024 . ^ Lawson-Tancred, Jo (22 February 2024). "The West Bank's Palestinian Museum Reopens After Four Months" . Artnet News . Retrieved 19 April 2024 . ^ "Palestinian Museum" . Cultural Innovations . Retrieved 19 April 2024 . ^ Ditmars, Hadani (19 February 2024). "Palestinian Museum in West Bank Reopens After Months of Closure" . Hyperallergic . Retrieved 19 April 2024 . ^ "The Palestinian National Theatre El-Hakawati" . jerusalemstory.com . Retrieved 19 April 2024 . ^ "Palestinian Music" . Interactive Encyclopedia of the Palestine Question – palquest . Retrieved 13 April 2024 . ^ Shurrab, Hatem. "Love, loss, longing: How Palestinian musicians are reviving old folk songs" . Love, loss, longing: How Palestinian musicians are reviving old folk songs . Retrieved 13 April 2024 . ^ Saeed, Saeed (30 December 2023). "Ten songs calling for peace in Palestine" .

The Reality of International Law: Essays in Honour of Ian Brownlie (illustrated, reprint ed.). Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-826837-6 . Feldman, Louis H. (1990). "Some Observations on the Name of Palestine". Hebrew Union College Annual . 61 . Hebrew Union College – Jewish Institute of Religion: 1– 23. JSTOR 23508170 . Feldman, Louis H. (1996). "Some Observations on the Name of Palestine" . Studies in Hellenistic Judaism . Arbeiten zur Geschichte des antiken Judentums und des Urchristentums. Vol. 30. Brill Publishers . pp. 553– 576. doi : 10.1163/9789004332836_024 . ISBN 978-90-04-10418-1 . Retrieved 1 May 2025 . Gerson, Allan (1978). Israel, the West Bank and International Law . London: Taylor & Francis . ISBN 978-0-7146-3091-5 . Grant, Thomas D. (1999).

The Recognition of States: Law and Practice in Debate and Evolution . Greenwood Publishing. ISBN 978-0-275-96350-7 . Hillier, Tim (1998). Sourcebook on Public International Law . Routledge . ISBN 978-1-85941-050-9 . Jacobson, David (1999). "Palestine and Israel". Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research . 313 (313): 65– 74. doi : 10.2307/1357617 . JSTOR 1357617 . S2CID 163303829 . Jacobson, David (2001). "When Palestine Meant Israel" . Biblical Archaeology Review . 27 (3). Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. Kassim, Anis F. (1997).

The Palestine Yearbook of International Law 1989 . Martinus Nijhoff Publishers . pp. 49, 279, 291, 294. ISBN 978-90-411-0342-0 . Kellerman, Aharon (1993). Society and Settlement: Jewish Land of Israel in the Twentieth Century . Albany, New York: State University of New York Press. p. 352. ISBN 978-0-7914-1295-4 . Kogan Page (2004). Middle East Review (27th ed.). Kogan Page Publishers. p. 161. ISBN 978-0-7494-4066-4 . Le More, Anne (2008). International Assistance to the Palestinians After Oslo: Political Guilt, Wasted Money . Routledge. p. 27. ISBN 978-0-415-45385-1 . Osmańczyk, Edmund Jan ; Mango, Anthony (2003). Encyclopedia of the United Nations and International Agreements (3rd ed.). Taylor & Francis . ISBN 978-0-415-93921-8 . Quigley, John B. (2005).

The Case for Palestine: An International Law Perspective (2nd, revised ed.). Duke University Press . ISBN 978-0-8223-3539-9 . Rainey, Anson F. (2001). "Herodotus' Description of the East Mediterranean Coast" . Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research . 321 (321): 57– 63. doi : 10.2307/1357657 . ISSN 0003-097X . JSTOR 1357657 . S2CID 163534665 . Archived from the original on 29 July 2021 . Retrieved 14 May 2018 . Rubin, Don (1999).

The World Encyclopedia of Contemporary Theatre: The Arab World (illustrated, reprint ed.). Taylor & Francis . ISBN 978-0-415-05932-9 . Sayigh, Yezid (1999). Armed Struggle and the Search for State: The Palestinian National Movement, 1949–1993 . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-829643-0 . Segal, Jerome M. (1997). Tomis Kapitan (ed.). Philosophical Perspectives on the Israeli–Palestinian Conflict . M.E. Sharpe . ISBN 978-1-56324-878-8 . Sells, Michael A. (2015). "Holocaust Abuse: The Case of Hajj Muhammad Amin al-Husayni". Journal of Religious Ethics . 43 (4): 723– 759. doi : 10.1111/jore.12119 . JSTOR 24586167 . Silverburg, Sanford R. (2002). Palestine and International Law: Essays on Politics and Economics . Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company . ISBN 978-0-7864-1191-7 . Takkenberg, Alex (1998).

The Middle East and North Africa 2004 (50th ed.). London: Europa Publications. ISBN 978-1-85743-184-1 . Tessler, Mark A. (1994). A History of the Israeli–Palestinian Conflict (2nd, illustrated ed.). Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press . ISBN 978-0-253-35848-6 . Watson, Geoffrey R. (2000).