The psychedelic experience is often compared to non-ordinary forms of consciousness such as those experienced in meditation , mystical experiences , and near-death experiences , which also appear to be partially underpinned by altered default mode network (DMN) activity.

The phenomenon of ego death is often described as a key feature of the psychedelic experience. Many psychedelic drugs are illegal to possess without lawful authorisation, exemption or license worldwide under the UN conventions , with occasional exceptions for religious use or research contexts. Despite these controls, recreational use of psychedelics is common. There is also a long history of use of naturally occurring psychedelics as entheogens dating back thousands of years. Legal barriers have made the scientific study of psychedelics more difficult. Research has been conducted, however, and studies show that psychedelics are physiologically safe and rarely lead to addiction . Psychedelic drugs are being studied for use in medicine, including treatment of depression , anxiety , addiction , post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and other conditions.

As a lysergamide, LSD contains both a tryptamine and phenethylamine group within its structure. Uniquely among psychedelics, LSD agonises dopamine receptors as well as serotonin receptors. Drugs like ALD-52 (1A-LSD), 1P-LSD , and 1V-LSD are prodrugs of LSD. Psilocin (4-HO-DMT) is the dephosphorylated active metabolite of the indole alkaloid psilocybin (4-PO-DMT) and a substituted tryptamine , which is produced by hundreds of species of psilocybin-containing mushrooms . Of the classical psychedelics, psilocybin has attracted the greatest academic interest regarding its ability to manifest mystical experiences, although all psychedelics are capable of doing so to variable degrees. 4-AcO-DMT ( O -acetylpsilocin or psilacetin) is a synthetic acetylated analogue of psilocin and is a prodrug of psilocin similarly to psilocybin. Mescaline (3,4,5-trimethoxyphenethylamine) is a phenethylamine alkaloid found in various species of cacti, the best-known of these being peyote ( Lophophora williamsii ) and the San Pedro cactus ( Echinopsis pachanoi , syn. Trichocereus macrogonus var. pachanoi ). Mescaline has effects comparable to those of LSD and psilocybin. Ceremonial San Pedro use seems to be characterized by relatively strong spiritual experiences, and low incidence of challenging experiences. DMT ( N , N -dimethyltryptamine) is an indole alkaloid found in various species of plants. Traditionally, it is consumed by tribes in South America in the form of ayahuasca . A brew is used that consists of DMT-containing plants as well as plants containing monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), like harmine and harmaline , which allows DMT to be consumed orally without being rendered inactive by monoamine oxidase (MAO) enzymes in the digestive system. A pharmaceutical version of ayahuasca is called pharmahuasca .

In the Western world, DMT is more commonly consumed via the vaporisation of freebase DMT. Whereas ayahuasca typically lasts for several hours, inhalation has an onset measured in seconds and has effects measured in minutes, being much more intense. Particularly in smoked or vaporised form, DMT has the ability to cause users to enter a hallucinatory realm fully detached from reality, being typically characterised by hyperbolic geometry , and described as defying visual or verbal description. Users have also reported encountering and communicating with entities within this hallucinatory state. DMT is the archetypal substituted tryptamine, being the structural scaffold of psilocybin and, to a lesser extent, the lysergamides. 5-MeO-DMT (5-methoxy- N , N -dimethyltryptamine; mebufotenin) is a naturally occurring substituted 5-methoxytryptamine which was first identified as having psychedelic effects in the 1960s. It is found in certain hallucinogenic snuffs and in Incilius alvarius ( Bufo alvarius ; Colorado River toad) toad venom . 5-MeO-DMT is about 5- to 20-fold more potent by weight than DMT. It produces atypical psychedelic effects, including powerful experiences but a relative absence of visual effects, with these experiences often described as "whiteouts". 5-MeO-DMT is usually smoked similarly to DMT and has been described as the "most powerful" known psychedelic or as the "Mount Everest" of psychedelics.

The atypical effects of 5-MeO-DMT are thought to be related to strong concomitant activity at the serotonin 5-HT 1A receptor . 2C-B (2,5-dimethoxy-4-bromophenethylamine) is a substituted phenethylamine first synthesized in 1974 by Alexander Shulgin . 2C-B has been described as both a psychedelic and a mild entactogen , with its psychedelic effects increasing and its entactogenic effects decreasing with dose. 2C-B is the most well-known compound in the 2C family , their general structure being discovered as a result of modifying the structure of mescaline. It is also the most widely used synthetic phenethylamine psychedelic. MDMA ("ecstasy") is sometimes said to also have weak psychedelic effects, but it acts and is classified mainly as an entactogen rather than as a hallucinogen. Certain closely related drugs like MDA and MMDA , while much less common, have greater psychedelic effects however.

In addition to the above-listed psychedelics, there are hundreds of other much lesser-known psychedelic drugs. Some research suggests that there may be more than 100,000 unique possible serotonergic psychedelics.

The name has its origin in the belief that just as St Peter holds the keys to heaven, the effects of the cactus allow users "to reach heaven while still on earth." In 2022, the Peruvian Ministry of Culture declared the traditional use of San Pedro cactus in northern Peru as cultural heritage .

Although people of Western culture have tended to use psychedelics for either psychotherapeutic or recreational reasons, most indigenous cultures, particularly in South America, have seemingly tended to use psychedelics for more supernatural reasons such as divination . This can often be related to "healing" or health as well but typically in the context of finding out what is wrong with the individual, such as using psychedelic states to "identify" a disease and/or its cause, locate lost objects, and identify a victim or even perpetrator of sorcery .

In some cultures and regions, even psychedelics themselves, such as ayahuasca and the psychedelic lichen of eastern Ecuador ( Dictyonema huaorani ) that supposedly contains both 5-MeO-DMT and psilocybin, have also been used by witches and sorcerers to conduct their malicious magic , similarly to nightshade deliriants like brugmansia and latua . Medical Main article: Psychedelic therapy Psychedelic therapy (or psychedelic-assisted therapy) is the proposed use of psychedelic drugs to treat mental disorders .

As of 2021, psychedelic drugs are controlled substances in most countries and psychedelic therapy is not legally available outside clinical trials. However, certain psychedelics like psilocybin and LSD are legally approved and/or used for treatment of conditions like treatment-resistant depression under special access programs in several countries including Australia , Switzerland , Canada , and Israel .

The procedure for psychedelic therapy differs from that of therapies using conventional psychiatric medications .

While conventional medications are usually taken without supervision at least once daily, in contemporary psychedelic therapy the drug is administered in a single session (or sometimes up to three sessions) in a therapeutic context.

The therapeutic team prepares the patient for the experience beforehand and helps them integrate insights from the drug experience afterwards.

After ingesting the drug, the patient normally wears eyeshades and listens to music to facilitate focus on the psychedelic experience, with the therapeutic team interrupting only to provide reassurance if adverse effects such as anxiety or disorientation arise.

As of 2022, the body of high-quality evidence on psychedelic therapy remains relatively small and more, larger studies are needed to reliably show the effectiveness and safety of psychedelic therapy's various forms and applications.

On the basis of favorable early results, ongoing research is examining proposed psychedelic therapies for conditions including major depressive disorder , and anxiety and depression linked to terminal illness .

The United States Food and Drug Administration has granted breakthrough therapy status, which expedites the assessment of promising drug therapies for potential approval, to psilocybin therapy for treatment-resistant depression and major depressive disorder. It has been proposed that psychedelics used for therapeutic purposes may act as active "super placebos ".

On the other hand, the inverse placebo effect (or "knowcebo" effect) caused by blinding failure may create an illusion of large effect sizes with psychedelics. Microdosing Main article: Psychedelic microdosing Psychedelic microdosing is the practice of using sub-threshold doses ( microdoses ) of psychedelics in an attempt to improve creativity, boost physical energy level, emotional balance, increase performance on problems-solving tasks and to treat anxiety, depression and addiction.

The preceding 1.0 to 5.0 g range corresponds to psilocybin doses of about 10 to 50 mg. Psilocybin-containing mushrooms vary in their psilocybin and psilocin content, but are typically around 1% of the dried weight of the mushrooms (in terms of total or combined psilocybin and psilocin content). Psilocybin and psilocin are similar in potency and dose but psilocin is about 1.4-fold more active, this being related to the difference in molecular weight between the two compounds. Some psychedelics, such as 2C-B , 2C-E , 2C-P , methallylescaline (MAL), and 4-HO-DiPT among others, have been said to have steep dose–response curves , meaning that the difference in dose between a light experience and an overwhelming disconnection from reality can be small. : 506, 518 : 467 Conversely, 2C-D is described as having an unusually wide and gradual dose range. Durations The typical durations of major psychedelics are as follows: Psilocybin oral: 5–6 hours LSD oral: 7–11 hours (dose-dependent) Mescaline oral: 10–11 hours (range 6–14 hours) (dose-dependent) Dimethyltryptamine (DMT) inhaled: 5–20 minutes Ayahuasca (oral DMT with an MAOI Tooltip monoamine oxidase inhibitor ): 4–6 hours 5-MeO-DMT inhaled: 5–20 minutes 2C-B oral: 3–5 hours (range 2–8 hours) The shortest-acting oral psychedelics are the less-well-known ASR-3001 (5-MeO-iPALT) (1.5–2.5 hours) and 4-HO-DiPT (2–3 hours), while the longest-acting known psychedelic is 2C-G-5 (32–48 hours). However, DOx psychedelics like DOM and the FLY psychedelic Bromo-DragonFLY (DOB-DFLY) reportedly may produce effects lasting for up to a few days at high doses. Effects Psychedelic effects Main article: Psychedelic experience Although several attempts have been made, starting in the 19th and 20th centuries, to define common phenomenological structures of the effects produced by classic psychedelics, a universally accepted taxonomy does not yet exist.

At lower doses, features of psychedelic experiences include sensory alterations, such as the warping of surfaces, shape suggestibility, pareidolia , and color variations. Users often report intense colors that they have not previously experienced, and repetitive geometric shapes or form constants are common as well. Higher doses often cause intense and fundamental alterations of sensory (notably visual ) perception, such as synesthesia or the experience of additional spatial or temporal dimensions. Tryptamines are well documented to cause classic psychedelic states, such as increased empathy , visual distortions (drifting, morphing, breathing, melting of various surfaces and objects), auditory hallucinations, ego dissolution or ego death with high enough dose, mystical, transpersonal and spiritual experiences, autonomous " entity " encounters, time distortion, closed eye hallucinations and complete detachment from reality with a high enough dose. Luis Luna describes psychedelic experiences as having a distinctly gnosis -like quality, and says that they offer "learning experiences that elevate consciousness and can make a profound contribution to personal development ." Czech psychiatrist Stanislav Grof studied the effects of psychedelics like LSD early in his career and said of the experience, that it commonly includes "complex revelatory insights into the nature of existence… typically accompanied by a sense of certainty that this knowledge is ultimately more relevant and 'real' than the perceptions and beliefs we share in everyday life." Traditionally, the standard model for the subjective phenomenological effects of psychedelics has typically been based on LSD, with anything that is considered "psychedelic" evidently being compared to it and its specific effects . Good trips are reportedly deeply pleasurable, and typically involve intense joy or euphoria, a greater appreciation for life, reduced anxiety, a sense of spiritual enlightenment, and a sense of belonging or interconnectedness with the universe. Negative experiences, colloquially known as "bad trips," evoke an array of dark emotions, such as irrational fear, anxiety, panic, paranoia, dread, distrustfulness, hopelessness, and even suicidal ideation.

While it is impossible to predict when a bad trip will occur, one's mood, surroundings, sleep, hydration , social setting, and other factors can be controlled (colloquially referred to as " set and setting ") to minimize the risk of a bad trip.

The concept of "set and setting" also generally appears to be more applicable to psychedelics than to other types of hallucinogens such as deliriants, hypnotics and dissociative anesthetics. Psychedelics include naturally occurring tryptamines like psilocybin and DMT , the naturally occurring phenethylamine mescaline , and naturally occurring lysergamides like ergine (lysergic acid amide; LSA), as well as synthetic analogues and derivatives like LSD and 2C-B . Many of these psychedelics cause remarkably similar effects, despite their different chemical structures . However, many users anecdotally report that the three major families have subjectively different qualities in the "feel" of the experience, which are difficult to describe. There can also be very substantial differences between the drugs; for instance, 5-MeO-DMT rarely produces the visual effects typical of other psychedelics.

As additional examples, DiPT is said to primarily affect the auditory sense, 2C-T , 2C-T-17 , MiPT , and ASR-3001 (5-MeO-iPALT) are said to produce psychedelic effects on thinking or "head space" with few or no visuals, and N -methyltryptamine (NMT) is said to be a spatial psychedelic.

The visuals of psychedelics have been reproduced, with these creations known as psychedelic replications . Some rare individuals do not experience hallucinogenic effects with serotonergic psychedelics. Other psychoactive effects Some psychedelics have been associated with other psychoactive effects in addition to their hallucinogenic effects. For example, psychedelics like LSD and DOM have been described as having mild stimulant and/or " psychic-energizing " (i.e., acute antidepressant ) effects. Some psychedelics and related drugs, like DOET (low doses), Ariadne , and ASR-2001 (2CB-5PrO), have been investigated specifically for such effects. 2C-B has been said to have mild entactogenic effects at low doses. 5-MeO-DiPT and 5-MeO-MiPT have unique and unusual effects at typical doses including tactile and sexual enhancement , mild entactogenic effects, and only light hallucinogenic effects. Uniquely among psychedelics, LSD shows biphasic effects and two temporally distinct phases of effects, including an initial psychedelic state and a delayed " paranoid " or psychosis -like state. LSD's delayed second phase of effects is associated with dopamine D 2 -like receptor agonism , most likely due to the highly potent dopamine D 4 receptor agonism of its metabolite 13-hydroxy-LSD . Some drugs, such as MDxx compounds like MDMA and MDA as well as α-alkyltryptamines like α-methyltryptamine (AMT), are entactogens and/or stimulants acting at monoamine transporters in addition to having varying degrees of psychedelic effects. Psychedelic afterglows Psychedelics are associated with an afterglow , also known as positive subacute or post-experience effects, which may last days or even weeks after the psychedelic experience. These effects include reduction in psychopathology and increased well-being , mood , mindfulness , social functioning , spirituality , and executive functioning , and positive behavioral changes. They also include mixed changes in personality , values , attitudes , creativity , and flexibility , as well as adverse effects like headaches , sleep disturbances , and sometimes increased psychological distress .

The afterglow period has been associated with changes in brain function, neuroplasticity , and immune system function. Both psychological and pharmacological effects may be involved in the afterglow phenomenon.

In 1898, the English writer and intellectual Havelock Ellis reported a heightened perceptual sensitivity to "the more delicate phenomena of light and shade and color" for a prolonged period of time after his exposure to mescaline.

The term "psychedelic afterglow" was first formally coined in the 1960s. Albert Hofmann , the discoverer of LSD, said the following about the aftermath of his first full LSD experience in his 1980 book LSD: My Problem Child : The world was as if newly created. All my senses vibrated in a condition of highest sensitivity, which persisted for the entire day.

In some cases, individuals taking psychedelics have performed dangerous or fatal acts because they believed they possessed superhuman powers. A significant risk involves extended difficulties and persistent mental health effects following the acute experience. A 2023 international survey found 14% of respondents felt more anxious for an extended period following ingestion.

In one survey , 9% of users reported functional impairment lasting at least 24 hours beyond the trip itself.

In another survey of 608 people who all reported post-psychedelic difficulties, one third of the dataset said the difficulties lasted longer than a year, and one fifth said the difficulties lasted longer than three years.

The most commonly-reported post-psychedelic difficulties in that study were anxiety, feeling traumatized by the experience or uncovering earlier trauma, social isolation, derealization/depersonalization, visual distortions and existential confusion. Most people recover from these difficulties with the help of accurate information , social support, and therapy. Psilocybin-induced states of mind share features with states experienced in psychosis , and while a causal relationship between psilocybin and the onset of psychosis has not been established as of 2011, researchers have called for investigation of the relationship. Many of the persistent negative perceptions of psychological risks are unsupported by the currently available scientific evidence, with the majority of reported adverse effects not being observed in a regulated and/or medical context. A population study on associations between psychedelic use and mental illness published in 2013 found no evidence that psychedelic use was associated with increased prevalence of any mental illness.

In any case, induction of psychosis has been associated with psychedelics in small percentages of individuals, and the rates appear to be higher in people with schizophrenia . Using psychedelics poses certain risks of re-experiencing of the drug's effects, including flashbacks and hallucinogen persisting perception disorder (HPPD). These non-psychotic effects are poorly studied, but the permanent symptoms (also called "endless trip") are considered to be rare. Psychedelics can induce hypomania or mania in people with bipolar disorder . This is of low but clinically meaningful incidence (5.8% in clinical trials, 30% in naturalistic settings) and is typically acute and self-limited. Some people with aphantasia have been reported to have acquired visual mental imagery after using psychedelics.

While enhanced mental imagery may seem appealing, it may also pose risks such as increased risk of psychiatric disorders . Tolerance A very rapid and strong tolerance , known as tachyphylaxis , develops to the effects of psychedelics with repeated administration. It develops with a single dose and is present within hours to days. Already by the second day, with LSD , there was a 50% decrease in psychoactive effects in one study.

Following a few days of repeated administration, or 3 to 4 days in the case of LSD, there is an almost complete absence of effects.

The tolerance remains stable thereafter.

In one study that gave LSD continuously for up to 84 days, doubling, tripling, and quadrupling the dose was unable to fully overcome the tolerance and restore effects. An abstinence period of 3 to 6 days is required for sensitivity to return and tolerance to fully reset. LSD, psilocybin , and mescaline all show cross-tolerance with each other. Tolerance has been shown to develop to numerous psychedelics in animals and/or humans. Tolerance with psychedelics develops to both their psychoactive effects and their physical effects, such as pupil dilation and tachycardia .

As a result of the tolerance, recreational psychedelic users do not use the drugs daily but often show a once-per-week use pattern. Some possible exceptions among psychedelics which may not build tolerance or may develop it much less rapidly include dimethyltryptamine (DMT), ayahuasca (which contains DMT), and 5-MeO-DMT . Similarly, the structurally related dipropyltryptamine (DPT) and diisopropyltryptamine (DiPT) did not show behavioral tolerance in rodents, in contrast to DOI and 2C-T-7 .

The reasons for the apparently reduced tolerance development with the preceding psychedelics is unclear. It has been suggested that the lack of tolerance with shorter-acting psychedelics like DMT and DPT might simply be due to their short durations. Contrary to earlier findings, subsequent clinical studies employing DMT by continuous intravenous infusion (also known as DMTx ) have found rapid and moderate acute tolerance development.

The same may be true of other dopamine D 2 receptor antagonists such as metoclopramide . Unlike atypical antipsychotics, which also have concomitant serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor antagonism, more selective dopamine D 2 receptor antagonists like haloperidol do not block the hallucinogenic effects of psychedelics and hence are not useful as "trip killers". Due to the increased risk of negative experiences, it is recommended that dopamine D 2 receptor antagonists like haloperidol and metoclopramide not be combined with psychedelics.

On the other hand, the peripherally selective dopamine D 2 receptor antagonist domperidone is not expected to pose similar adverse interactions and may be helpful in managing nausea and vomiting with psychedelics.

The serotonin 5-HT 1A receptor partial agonist buspirone has been found to markedly reduce the hallucinogenic effects of psilocybin in humans. Conversely, the serotonin 5-HT 1A receptor antagonist pindolol has been found to robustly potentiate the hallucinogenic effects of DMT in humans. Serotonin 5-HT 1A receptor agonism may modify and self-inhibit the effects of psychedelics that possess this property. A particularly notable example is 5-methoxytryptamine derivatives such as 5-MeO-DMT , which are more potent serotonin 5-HT 1A receptor agonists than other psychedelics and have qualitatively unique and differing hallucinogenic effects. Benzodiazepines , for example diazepam , alprazolam , clonazepam , and lorazepam , as well as alcohol , which act as GABA A receptor positive allosteric modulators , have been limitedly studied in combination with psychedelics and are not currently known to directly interact with them. However, these GABAergic drugs produce effects such as anxiolysis , sedation , and amnesia , and in relation to this, may diminish or otherwise oppose the effects of psychedelics.

As a result of this, benzodiazepines and alcohol are often used by recreational users as "trip killers" to manage difficult hallucinogenic experiences with psychedelics, for instance experiences with prominent anxiety.

The safety of this strategy is not entirely clear and might have risks. However, benzodiazepines have been used clinically to manage the adverse psychological effects of psychedelics, for instance in clinical studies and in the emergency department . A clinical trial of psilocybin and midazolam coadministration found that midazolam clouded the effects of psilocybin and impaired memory of the experience. Benzodiazepines might interfere with the therapeutic effects of psychedelics, such as sustained antidepressant effects. Some serotonergic psychedelics, for instance dimethyltryptamine (DMT) and 5-MeO-DMT , are highly susceptible substrates for monoamine oxidase (MAO), specifically MAO-A , and hence can be greatly potentiated by monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). An example of this is ayahuasca , in which plants containing both DMT and harmala alkaloids acting as MAOIs such as harmine and harmaline are combined. This allows DMT to become orally active and to have a much longer duration of action than usual.

The 2C psychedelics, such as 2C-B , 2C-I , and 2C-E , are also substrates of both MAO-A and MAO-B , and may likewise be greatly potentiated by MAOIs. Examples of MAOIs that may potentiate psychedelics behaving as MAO-A and/or MAO-B substrates include phenelzine , tranylcypromine , isocarboxazid , moclobemide , and selegiline . Combination of MAO-substrate psychedelics with MAOIs can result in overdose and serious toxicity , including death. Other psychedelics, such as LSD , are not substrates of MAO and are not potentiated by MAOIs.

The extent to which psilocin (and by extension psilocybin ) is metabolized by MAO, specifically MAO-A, is not fully clear, but has ranged from 4% to 33% in different studies based on metabolite excretion . However, circulating levels of the deaminated metabolite of psilocin are far higher than those of free unmetabolized psilocin with psilocybin administration. An early clinical study of psilocybin in combination with short-term tranylcypromine pretreatment found that tranylcypromine marginally potentiated the peripheral effects of psilocybin, including pressor effects and mydriasis , but overall did not significantly modify the psychoactive and hallucinogenic effects of the psilocybin, although some of its emotional effects were said to be reduced and some of its perceptual effects were said to be amplified. Some psychedelics are substrates of cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzymes , for instance LSD being a substrate of CYP2D6 as well as of several other CYP450 enzymes.

As such, CYP450 inhibitors may increase exposure to CYP450-substrate psychedelics such as LSD and thereby potentiate their effects as well as risks. A clinical study found that administration of LSD to people taking paroxetine , a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) and strong CYP2D6 inhibitor, increased LSD exposure by about 1.5-fold.

The combination was well-tolerated and did not modify the pleasant subjective effects or physiological effects of LSD, whereas negative effects of LSD, including "bad drug effect", anxiety , and nausea , were reduced. Similarly to the findings with a strong CYP2D6 inhibitor, a pharmacogenomic clinical study with LSD found that LSD levels were 75% higher in people with non-functional CYP2D6 ( poor metabolizers ) compared to those with functional CYP2D6. Serotonin syndrome can be caused by combining psychedelics with other serotonergic drugs , including certain antidepressants , opioids , psychostimulants (e.g. MDMA ), serotonin 5-HT 1 receptor agonists (e.g. triptans ), herbs or supplements , and others. However, there is said to be no risk of serotonin syndrome when psychedelics like LSD or psilocybin are taken while on SSRIs.

The same is not true of ayahuasca , as ayahuasca also contains harmala alkaloids which act as MAOIs and can produce life-threatening serotonin toxicity when combined with SSRIs. A high rate of seizures has been reported when people on lithium have taken serotonergic psychedelics.

In an analysis of online reports, 47% of 62 accounts reported seizures when a psychedelic was taken while on lithium.

In addition, the intensity of hallucinogenic effects in humans is directly correlated with the level of serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor occupancy as measured with positron emission tomography (PET) imaging . Serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor blockade with drugs like the semi-selective ketanserin and the non-selective risperidone can abolish the hallucinogenic effects of psychedelics in humans. However, studies with more selective serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor antagonists, like pimavanserin , are still needed.

In animals, potency for stimulus generalization to the psychedelic DOM in drug discrimination tests is strongly correlated with serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor affinity. Non-selective serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor antagonists, like ketanserin and pirenperone , and selective serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor antagonists, like volinanserin (MDL-100907), abolish the stimulus generalization of psychedelics in drug discrimination tests. Conversely, serotonin 5-HT 2B and 5-HT 2C receptor antagonists are ineffective.

The potencies of serotonin 5-HT 2 receptor antagonists in blocking psychedelic substitution are strongly correlated with their serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor affinities. Highly selective serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor agonists have recently been developed and show stimulus generalization to psychedelics, whereas selective serotonin 5-HT 2C receptor agonists do not do so.

The head-twitch response (HTR) is induced by serotonergic psychedelics and is a behavioral proxy of psychedelic-like effects in animals.

The HTR is invariably induced by serotonergic psychedelics, is blocked by selective serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor antagonists, and is abolished in serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor knockout mice .

In addition, there is a strong correlation between hallucinogenic potency in humans and potency in the HTR assay. Moreover, the HTR paradigm is one of the only animal tests that can distinguish between hallucinogenic serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor agonists and non-hallucinogenic serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor agonists, such as lisuride .

In accordance with the preceding animal and human findings, it has been said that the evidence that the serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor mediates the hallucinogenic effects of serotonergic psychedelics is overwhelming.

The serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor activates several downstream signaling pathways . These include the G q , β-arrestin2 , and other pathways. Activation of both the G q and β-arrestin2 pathways have been implicated in mediating the hallucinogenic effects of serotonergic psychedelics. However, subsequently, activation of the G q pathway and not β-arrestin2 has been implicated. Interestingly, G q signaling appeared to mediate hallucinogenic-like effects, whereas β-arrestin2 mediated receptor downregulation and tachyphylaxis .

The lack of psychedelic effects with non-hallucinogenic serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor agonists may be due to partial agonism of the serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor with efficacy insufficient to produce psychedelic effects or may be due to biased agonism of the serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor. There appears to be a threshold level of G q activation (in terms of intrinsic activity , with E max Tooltip maximal efficacy >70%) required for production of hallucinogenic effects. Full agonists and partial agonists above this threshold are psychedelic 5-HT 2A receptor agonists, whereas partial agonists below this threshold, such as lisuride, 2-bromo-LSD , 6-fluoro-DET , 6-MeO-DMT , and Ariadne , are non-hallucinogenic 5-HT 2A receptor agonists.

In addition, biased agonists that activate β-arrestin2 signaling but not G q signaling, such as ITI-1549 , IHCH-7086 , and 25N-N1-Nap , are non-hallucinogenic serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor agonists.

The hallucinogenic effects of serotonergic psychedelics may be critically mediated by serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor activation in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). Layer V pyramidal neurons in this area are especially discussed. Activation of serotonin 5-HT 2A receptors in the mPFC results in marked excitatory and inhibitory effects as well as increased release of glutamate and GABA . Direct injection of serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor agonists into the mPFC produces the HTR. Drugs that suppress glutamatergic activity in the mPFC, including AMPA receptor antagonists, metabotropic glutamate mGlu 2 / 3 receptor agonists, μ-opioid receptor agonists, and adenosine A 1 receptor agonists, block or suppress many of the neurochemical and behavioral effects of serotonergic psychedelics, including the HTR. Metabotropic glutamate mGlu 2 receptors are primarily expressed as presynaptic autoreceptors and have inhibitory effects on glutamate release. Serotonergic psychedelics have been found to produce frontal cortex hyperactivity in humans in PET and single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging studies.

The PFC projects to many other cortical and subcortical brain areas, such as the locus coeruleus , nucleus accumbens , and amygdala , among others, and activation of the PFC by serotonergic psychedelics may thereby indirectly modulate these areas.

In addition to the PFC, there is moderate to high expression of serotonin 5-HT 2A receptors in the primary visual cortex (V1), as well as expression of the serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor in other visual areas, and activation of these receptors may contribute to or mediate the visual effects of serotonergic psychedelics. Serotonergic psychedelics also directly or indirectly modulate a variety of other brain areas, like the claustrum , and this may be involved in their effects as well. Psychedelics may work in part by disrupting the default mode network (DMN), a collection of interconnected brain areas which has high serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor expression and is said to construct our sense of space, time, and self.

The ego dissolution and altered time perception caused by psychedelics correlates with DMN desynchronization, whereas psychedelic visual imagery correlates with disruption in the visual cortex. Serotonin, as well as drugs that increase serotonin levels, like the serotonin precursor 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), serotonin reuptake inhibitors , and serotonin releasing agents , are non-hallucinogenic in humans despite increasing activation of serotonin 5-HT 2A receptors. Serotonin is a hydrophilic molecule which cannot easily cross biological membranes without active transport , and the serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor is usually expressed as a cell surface receptor that is readily accessible to extracellular serotonin.

The HTR, a behavioral proxy of psychedelic-like effects, appears to be mediated by activation of intracellularly expressed serotonin 5-HT 2A receptors in a population of mPFC neurons that do not also express the serotonin transporter (SERT) and hence cannot be activated by serotonin.

In contrast to serotonin, serotonergic psychedelics are more lipophilic than serotonin and are able to readily enter these neurons and activate the serotonin 5-HT 2A receptors within them. Artificial expression of the SERT in this population of neurons in animals resulted in a serotonin releasing agent that doesn't normally produce the HTR being able to do so.

Although serotonin itself is non-hallucinogenic, at very high concentrations achieved pharmacologically (e.g., injected into the brain or with massive doses of 5-HTP) it can produce psychedelic-like effects in animals by being metabolized by indolethylamine N -methyltransferase (INMT) into more lipophilic N - methylated tryptamines like N -methylserotonin and bufotenin ( N , N -dimethylserotonin).

In addition to their hallucinogenic effects, serotonergic psychedelics may also produce a variety of other effects, including psychoplastogenic (i.e., neuroplasticity -enhancing), antidepressant , anxiolytic , empathy -enhancing or prosocial effects, anti-obsessional , anti-addictive , anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects, analgesic effects, and/or antimigraine effects.

While psychedelics themselves are also being clinically evaluated for these potential therapeutic benefits, non-hallucinogenic serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor agonists, which are often analogues of serotonergic psychedelics, have been developed and are being studied for potential use in medicine in an attempt to provide some such benefits without hallucinogenic effects.

Although the hallucinogenic effects of serotonergic psychedelics are thought to be mediated by serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor activation, interactions with other receptors, such as the serotonin 5-HT 1A , 5-HT 1B , 5-HT 2B , and 5-HT 2C receptors among many others, may additionally contribute to and modulate their effects. Many psychedelics show pronounced biased agonism at the serotonin 5-HT 2C receptor. Certain psychedelics, including LSD and psilocin, have been reported to act as highly potent positive allosteric modulators of the tropomyosin receptor kinase B (TrkB), one of the signaling receptors of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). However, subsequent studies failed to reproduce these findings and instead found no interaction of LSD or psilocin with TrkB. Moreover, the psychoplastogenic effects of serotonergic psychedelics, including dendritogenesis , spinogenesis , and synaptogenesis , appear to be mediated by activation of multiple serotonin receptors as well as non‑serotonergic targets, whereas psychedelics do not generally stimulate neurogenesis .

The neurotoxicity induced by the preceding psychedelics has included MDMA -like serotonergic neurotoxicity , for instance with DOI, MAL, and 5-MeO-DiPT.

The neurotoxicity of psychedelics has been found to be partially blocked by serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor inhibition, which was also the case with the neurotoxicity of MDMA. Besides producing neurotoxicity on their own, psychedelics have been found to potentiate the serotonergic neurotoxicity of MDMA via serotonin 5-HT 2 receptor activation in rodents. DOM is known to metabolize into 2,5-DDM-DOM (2- O -,5- O -didesmethyl-DOM; 2,5-dihydroxy-4-methylamphetamine), which bears a close resemblance to 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA; 2,4,5-trihydroxyphenethylamine) and has been found to be a potent neurotoxin similarly. Other related phenethylamine psychedelics may also undergo similar metabolism and form analogous potentially neurotoxic metabolites . Chronic administration of LSD has been associated with long-lasting schizophrenia -like behavioral changes in rodents, which was not blocked by serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor antagonism but may instead be related to LSD's dopamine D 2 -like receptor agonism. Single macrodoses of LSD do not produce such changes in rodents, but the preceding findings may have implications for continuous psychedelic microdosing with LSD. Chemistry The three major chemical groups of serotonergic psychedelics include the tryptamines , phenethylamines , and lysergamides , which each have different profiles of pharmacological activity . A number of other miscellaneous structural groups also exist. Tryptamines Main article: Substituted tryptamine Dimethyltryptamine (DMT). Tryptamines are derivatives of tryptamine and are structurally related to the monoamine neurotransmitter serotonin (also known as 5-hydroxytryptamine or 5-HT). Many tryptamines act as non-selective serotonin receptor agonists , including of the serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor. Some tryptamines also act as monoamine releasing agents , including of serotonin, norepinephrine, and/or dopamine. Examples of psychedelic tryptamines include psilocin and psilocybin , dimethyltryptamine (DMT), 5-MeO-DMT , bufotenin , α-methyltryptamine (αMT), 4-AcO-DMT (psilacetin), 4-HO-MET , 5-MeO-MiPT , and 5-MeO-DiPT , among others. Harmala alkaloids like harmaline and iboga-type alkaloids like ibogaine are cyclized tryptamines and may also be considered hallucinogenic tryptamines. Phenethylamines Main articles: Substituted phenethylamine , Scaline , 2C (psychedelics) , DOx , and 25-NB Mescaline . Phenethylamines , as well as amphetamines (α-methylphenethylamines), are derivatives of β-phenethylamine and are structurally related to the monoamine neurotransmitters dopamine , norepinephrine , and epinephrine . Some phenethylamines and amphetamines, particularly those with methoxy and other substitions on the phenyl ring , are potent serotonin 5-HT 2 receptor agonists, including of the serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor, and can produce psychedelic effects.

In contrast to phenethylamines and amphetamines generally, most psychedelic phenethylamines are not monoamine releasing agents . Examples of psychedelic phenethylamines and amphetamines include mescaline and other scalines like trimethoxyamphetamine (TMA) and escaline , the 2C drugs like 2C-B , 2C-E , and 2C-I , the DOx drugs like DOM , DOB , DOI , certain MDxx drugs like MDA and MDMA (weak psychedelics), FLY drugs like 2C-B-FLY and Bromo-DragonFLY , and the NBOMe (25x-NBx) drugs like 25I-NBOMe , among others. Lysergamides Main article: Substituted lysergamide LSD . Lysergamides are ergoline derivatives related to the ergot alkaloids . They are notable in containing both tryptamine and phenethylamine within their chemical structures .

The kykeon of the Eleusinian Mysteries in Ancient Greece might have been a psychedelic, for instance ergot or psilocybin-containing mushrooms.

The use of hallucinogenic snuffs by indigenous South American people was first observed by Western explorers like Christopher Columbus as early as 1496.

The first written description of an observed psychedelic experience, with cohoba , was published by Ramon Pane in 1511. Spanish explorers observed the use of psilocybin-containing mushrooms (teonanacatl) in Mexico as early as 1519 with the arrival of Hernán Cortés . Spanish ethnographer Bernardino de Sahagún traveled to Mexico in 1529 and described the use of these mushrooms in his books. A case report of the effects of Psilocybe semilanceata mushrooms picked from London 's Green Park was published in 1799.

The botanists Richard Spruce and Alfred Russel Wallace observed and described the use of ayahuasca in the Amazon in the 1850s.

The phenethylamine psychedelic mescaline Mescaline is sometimes described as the "first psychedelic", as it was the first to be discovered and characterized by the Western world. American physician John Raleigh Briggs , living in Texas , learned of peyote from Native Americans and Mexicans , who told him that it produced "beautiful visions" and made them journey into the "spirit world". He obtained mescal buttons from Mexico and published a journal article about trying a very low dose of them in May 1887. This article is said to have brought peyote into North American pharmacology . Briggs described the physiological symptoms of his experience, such as dramatically increased heart rate and of experiencing " intoxication ". However, a modern interpretation is that Briggs simply had a severe panic attack in response to the drug.

In any case, his article was read by George Davis, of Parke, Davis and Company , who then obtained the buttons from Briggs in June 1887. Parke-Davis attempted to market peyote as a cardiac stimulant and for other uses, but met with little success.

The German pharmacologist Louis Lewin obtained mescal buttons from Parke-Davis during a trip to the United States in 1887 and began studying them and sharing his findings. James Mooney , the first Westerner known to have participated in a Native American peyote ceremony in 1892, distributed peyote to a number of authorities in 1894. Using these specimens, the hallucinogenic effects of peyote were first properly described by Daniel W. Prentiss and F. P. Morgan in 1895.

Following this report, American neurologist Silas Weir Mitchell tried peyote and published his experience with it in December 1896.

After reading Mitchell's article, others, including psychologist and sexologist Havelock Ellis and American psychologist William James tried peyote and described their experiences.

The German chemist Arthur Heffter isolated and ingested mescaline from peyote, experiencing psychedelic effects with the pure compound, in 1897, and published his findings in 1898. Austrian chemist Ernst Späth synthesized mescaline for the first time in 1919.

The German pharmaceutical company Merck then began distributing pharmaceutical mescaline in 1920.

The German psychiatrist Kurt Beringer , a student of Lewin and an acquaintance of Hermann Hesse and Carl Jung , became the father of psychedelic psychiatry and conducted experiments with mescaline in more than 60 people starting in 1921. He published his monograph on the subject, Der Meskalinrausch ( Mescaline Intoxication ), in 1927. German– American psychologist Heinrich Klüver published his monograph, Mescal: The Divine Plant and Its Psychological Effects , in English in 1928. He is said to have been the first to attempt to provide a phenomenological description of the psychedelic experience.

The French pharmacist Alexandre Rouhier also studied and published on peyote and mescaline with his book Le Peyotl: La Plante Qui Fait les Yeux Émerveillés ( Peyote: The Plant That Fills the Eyes with Marvels ) in 1927. Tryptamine and lysergamide psychedelics Austrian anthropologist and ethnobotanist Blas Pablo Reko , traveling through Central and South America , wrote of the use of teonanacatl by native Mexican people in Oaxaca in 1919. Reko subsequently sent samples of teonanacatl ( Psilocybe mexicana ) as well as Ipomoea violacea (morning glory) seeds to Swedish anthropologist Henry Wassén in 1937. Reko had obtained the mushroom sample from Austrian engineer Robert Weitlaner who was working in Mexico . Eventually, Wassén forwarded Reko and Weitlaner's mushroom sample to Harvard University , where the mushrooms came to the attention of American ethnobotanist Richard Evans Schultes . However, they had decomposed so badly that they could not be identified. Prior to Wassén obtaining specimens around 1936, the existence of teonanacatl was very controversial and was debated and even denied by some.

In 1938, a small group of Westerners, which included Weitlaner's daughter and American anthropologist Jean Basset Johnson , attended a mushroom ceremony. They were the first Westerners known to do so and described the event. Schultes published reviews of teonanacatl being a hallucinogenic mushroom in the late 1930s. Schultes obtained specimens of three of the hallucinogenic mushrooms used in ceremonies, including Psilocybe caerulescens , Panaeolus campanulatus , and Stropharia cubensis , but further investigations of the mushrooms were interrupted by World War II . Ergine (lysergic acid amide; LSA) and isoergine (isolysergic acid amide; iso-LSA) were first identified from hydrolysis of ergot alkaloids in 1932 and 1936, respectively.

In 1938, Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann , working at Sandoz Laboratories , synthesized lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), a synthetic derivative of ergine, while developing new oxytocic drugs derived from ergot . LSD was not further investigated and was placed in storage for 5 years.

In 1943 however, Hofmann worked with LSD again and accidentally discovered its hallucinogenic effects when minute amounts of the potent psychedelic absorbed through his skin. His subsequent self-experiment with LSD three days later on April 19 is the psychedelic holiday Bicycle Day . Hofmann and his colleague, psychiatrist Werner Stoll , first described LSD in 1943 and first described its psychedelic effects in 1947. LSD began being distributed by Sandoz Laboratories for research purposes under the brand name Delysid in 1949. Schultes described the indigenous and shamanic use of dimethyltryptamine (DMT)-containing psychedelic plants in 1954 and also described the use of hallucinogenic morning glories in the 1950s.

The psychedelic effects of synthesized DMT were described by Hungarian chemist and psychiatrist Stephen Szára in 1956. Osmond described the hallucinogenic and other effects of morning glory seeds in clinical studies in 1955. Hofmann identified and described ergine and isoergine as the active constituents of morning glory seeds in 1960. Their hallucinogenic effects were first described by Hofmann in 1963.

In 1952, couple and amateur ethnomycologists R. Gordon Wasson and Valentina Wasson learned of the ritual use of hallucinogenic mushrooms in the 16th century in Mexico from the published work of Schultes. They made several trips to Mexico in search of the mushrooms.

In mid-1955, the Wassons participated in a mushroom ceremony with Mazatec curandera Maria Sabina in Huautla de Jiménez , Oaxaca, Mexico. Gordon Wasson published his experience in an article for Life magazine titled " Seeking the Magic Mushroom " in 1957, while Valentina Wasson published her experience as "I Ate the Sacred Mushroom" in This Week magazine the same year.

Later in 1957, a second expedition was made by the Wassons to Mexico with French mycologist Roger Heim . Heim identified several of the mushrooms as belonging to the genus Psilocybe . They collected samples of the mushrooms and Heim sent a sample to Hofmann. Hofmann identified psilocybin as the active constituent in 1958 and developed a chemical synthesis for it. Sandoz Pharmaceuticals began distributing tablets of psilocybin under the brand name Indocybin in 1960. French scientists Césaire Phisalix and Gabriel Bertrand isolated bufotenin from Bufo toads in 1893 and named it.

The compound was first isolated to purity by Austrian chemist Hans Handovsky in 1920. Clinical studies assessed the effects of bufotenin and were published starting in 1956. However, the findings of these studies were conflicting, and bufotenin developed a long-standing reputation of being inactive and toxic. American ethnobotanist Jonathan Ott and colleagues subsequently showed in 2001 that bufotenin is in fact a psychedelic and does not necessarily produce major adverse effects, although marked nausea and vomiting are prominent.

The related psychedelic 5-MeO-DMT was first synthesized by Japanese chemists Toshio Hoshino and Kenya Shimodaira in 1936. It was later isolated from Dictyoloma incanescens in 1959. Subsequently, 5-MeO-DMT was isolated from numerous other plants and fungi.

By the end of the 1960s, psychedelic clinical research throughout the world had largely ceased. Besides public research, it was eventually learned that the United States government had also conducted research into psychedelics, as possible mind-control and truth-serum drugs, in the 1940s through the 1970s, for instance Project MKUltra by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and the Edgewood Arsenal research by the U.S. Army . Creation of other synthetic psychedelics The synthetic mescaline analogue 2,6-dibromomescaline was described by Arthur Heffter in 1901, although he is not known to have tested it and its psychedelic effects weren't reported until much later.

The psychedelic effects of 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA), a synthetic analogue of mescaline that had been derived from amphetamine in 1910, were discovered by American chemist and pharmacologist Gordon Alles in 1930, but weren't subsequently published until 1959. 3,4,5-Trimethoxyamphetamine (TMA), another synthetic mescaline analogue, was first described in 1947 and its psychedelic effects were described in 1955. 2,4,5-Trimethoxyphenethylamine (2C-O), a synthetic positional isomer of mescaline, was synthesized and claimed to be psychedelic similarly to mescaline in 1931, but later trials found it to be inactive. Various synthetic tryptamine psychedelics, such as diethyltryptamine (DET), 4-PO-DET (CEY-19), and 4-HO-DET (CZ-74), were developed in the late 1950s.

In addition, the synthetic α-alkyltryptamine analogues α-methyltryptamine (AMT; Indopan) and α-ethyltryptamine (AET; Monase), which are psychedelics and/or entactogens , were marketed and clinically used at non-hallucinogenic doses as antidepressants in the early 1960s, but were quickly withdrawn due to physical toxicity . Numerous synthetic psychedelic tryptamines were known by the mid-1970s. Alexander Shulgin , an American chemist working at Dow Chemical Company , tried mescaline by 1960. This experience has been described as "the most consequential mescaline trip of the sixties", as it caused Shulgin to redirect his focus and life's work to psychedelic chemistry. Starting in the 1960s, Shulgin synthesized and gradually described hundreds of novel synthetic psychedelics as well as entactogens in scientific publications and published books such as PiHKAL (1991) and TiHKAL (1997). Notable major examples of these drugs have included the DOx psychedelic DOM , the 2C psychedelic 2C-B , and the MDxx entactogen MDMA , among others. However, MDMA was not an original creation of Shulgin's but had previously been first synthesized in 1912 and had surfaced as a recreational drug related to MDA by the mid- to late-1960s. Instead, Shulgin had merely served to help popularize and spread awareness about MDMA and its unique effects. MDMA became outlawed in the mid-1980s.

In response to this, the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS) was founded by Rick Doblin in 1986 and began efforts to develop MDMA and other psychedelics as medicines. American chemist David E. Nichols has developed numerous novel psychedelics and entactogens from the 1970s to present. Swiss chemist Daniel Trachsel , sometimes referred to as the "German Shulgin", has also developed and published numerous novel psychedelics as well as entactogens since the 1990s. NBOMe psychedelics such as 25I-NBOMe , derived from structural modification of 2C psychedelics, were first described by Ralf Heim and colleagues by 2000.

The NBOMe drugs were subsequently encountered as novel recreational drugs by 2010, and by 2012 had eclipsed other psychedelics like LSD and psilocybin-containing mushrooms in popularity, at least for a time. Psychedelics, serotonin, and their actions Serotonin , also known as 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) and originally called enteramine, was discovered by Vittorio Erspamer in the 1930s and its structural identity was fully characterized in the late 1940s and early 1950s. Serotonin was discovered in the brain by Betty Twarog and Irvine Page in 1953. It was quickly noticed that LSD contains the serotonin-like tryptamine scaffold within its chemical structure . Shortly thereafter, it was found that LSD showed serotonin-like effects and could antagonize serotonin in certain assays . Studies in the 1960s and 1970s showed that various serotonin antagonists could block the behavioral effects of psychedelics in animals. It was first proposed that LSD may be acting as an agonist of serotonin receptors by N. E. Andén and colleagues in 1968.

The serotonin receptors, including the serotonin 5-HT 2 receptors , were identified by the late 1970s. Mediation of the hallucinogenic effects of psychedelics specifically by serotonin 5-HT 2 receptor agonism was proposed by Richard Glennon and other researchers by the early 1980s.

The human serotonin 5-HT 2A receptor was first cloned in 1990.

The peak publications were 311 in the 1960s and 1970s and 1,460 in 2025.

Since the prohibition of the 1960s and 1970s, clinical research into psychedelics started to resume by the 1990s, for instance the studies of DMT by Rick Strassman , and they have once again started to be developed as pharmaceutical drugs for potential medical use. A so-called "psychedelic renaissance", in which interest in psychedelics has resurged, began in the late 2010s and early 2020s. Michael Pollan 's 2018 book How to Change Your Mind , which was also adapted into a Netflix series in 2022, was especially impactful in terms of increasing mainstream awareness and interest in psychedelics. More than 100 clinical trials of four major psychedelics, including psilocybin, LSD , ayahuasca , and MDMA , were identified as being underway in 2024. Society and culture Etymology and nomenclature The term psychedelic was coined by the psychiatrist Humphrey Osmond during written correspondence with author Aldous Huxley (written in a rhyme: "To fathom Hell or soar angelic/Just take a pinch of psychedelic." ) and presented to the New York Academy of Sciences by Osmond in 1957. It is irregularly derived from the Greek words ψυχή ( psychḗ , meaning 'mind, soul') and δηλείν ( dēleín , meaning 'to manifest'), with the intended meaning "mind manifesting" or alternatively "soul manifesting", and the implication that psychedelics can reveal unused potentials of the human mind.

The term was loathed by American ethnobotanist Richard Schultes but championed by American psychologist Timothy Leary . Aldous Huxley had suggested his own coinage phanerothyme (Greek phaneroein - "to make manifest or visible" and Greek thymos "soul", thus "to reveal the soul") to Osmond in 1956. Recently, the term entheogen (meaning "that which produces the divine within") has come into use to denote the use of psychedelic drugs, as well as various other types of psychoactive substances, in a religious, spiritual, and mystical context.

In 2004, David E. Nichols wrote the following about the nomenclature used for psychedelic drugs: Many different names have been proposed over the years for this drug class.

The famous German toxicologist Louis Lewin used the name phantastica earlier in this century, and as we shall see later, such a descriptor is not so farfetched.

The most popular names—hallucinogen, psychotomimetic, and psychedelic ("mind manifesting")—have often been used interchangeably. Hallucinogen is now, however, the most common designation in the scientific literature, although it is an inaccurate descriptor of the actual effects of these drugs.

In the lay press, the term psychedelic is still the most popular and has held sway for nearly four decades. Most recently, there has been a movement in nonscientific circles to recognize the ability of these substances to provoke mystical experiences and evoke feelings of spiritual significance. Thus, the term entheogen , derived from the Greek word entheos , which means "god within", was introduced by Ruck et al. and has seen increasing use. This term suggests that these substances reveal or allow a connection to the "divine within".

Although it seems unlikely that this name will ever be accepted in formal scientific circles, its use has dramatically increased in the popular media and on internet sites. Indeed, in much of the counterculture that uses these substances, entheogen has replaced psychedelic as the name of choice and we may expect to see this trend continue. Robin Carhart-Harris and Guy Goodwin write that the term psychedelic is preferable to hallucinogen for describing classical psychedelics because of the term hallucinogen ' s "arguably misleading emphasis on these compounds' hallucinogenic properties." While the term psychedelic is most commonly used to refer only to serotonergic hallucinogens, it is sometimes used for a much broader range of drugs, including entactogens , dissociatives , and atypical hallucinogens/psychoactives such as Amanita muscaria , Cannabis sativa , Nymphaea nouchali and Salvia divinorum . Thus, the term serotonergic psychedelic is sometimes used for the narrower class. It is important to check the definition of a given source.

The present article uses the more common, narrower definition of psychedelic . David E. Nichols and Charles D. Nichols have criticized the expansion of the definition of the term psychedelic and called for it to continue to refer only to serotonergic psychedelics. Surrounding culture Psychedelic rock band Jefferson Airplane in 1967 Main article: Psychedelia Psychedelic culture includes manifestations such as psychedelic music , psychedelic art , psychedelic literature , psychedelic film , and psychedelic festivals . Examples of psychedelic music are found in the work of 1960s rock bands like the Grateful Dead , Jefferson Airplane , The 13th Floor Elevators , and Syd Barrett -era Pink Floyd . Many psychedelic bands and elements of the psychedelic subculture originated in San Francisco during the mid to late 1960s. Usage prevalence A September 2025 national survey of American adults conducted by the RAND Corporation found that the most commonly used psychedelics and related drugs (past-year use) were psilocybin (4.3%), MDMA or MDA (1.8%), Amanita muscaria (1.3%), ketamine (1.3%), LSD (1.1%), DMT (0.84%), mescaline (0.53%), 2C-B (0.46%), Salvia divinorum (0.43%), ibogaine or iboga (0.36%), and 5-MeO-DMT (0.30%).

In addition, many countries have analogue laws; for example, in the United States, the Federal Analogue Act of 1986 automatically forbids any drugs sharing similar chemical structures or chemical formulas to prohibited substances if sold for human consumption.

During the 1950s and 1960s, lack of informed consent in some scientific trials on psychedelics led to significant, long-lasting harm to some participants.

Since then, research regarding the effectiveness of psychedelic therapy has been conducted under strict ethical guidelines, with fully informed consent and a pre-screening to avoid people with psychosis taking part. Psychedelics, particularly psilocybin, show potential therapeutic benefits for depression, anxiety, and other mental disorders, with generally mild and transient adverse effects. It has long been known that psychedelics promote neurite growth and neuroplasticity and are potent psychoplastogens . There is evidence that psychedelics induce molecular and cellular adaptations related to neuroplasticity and that these could potentially underlie therapeutic benefits.

Although LSD is the most well-known psychedelic, only a very few structural modifications can be made to its structure, and nearly all of those attenuate its activity by about an order of magnitude.

In addition, there is a paucity of structure–activity data for ergolines, principally due to the synthetic difficulty inherent in their chemistry.

Although LSD is the most potent psychedelic agent in humans, its affinity and potency at the human 5-HT2A receptor is rather unremarkable compared with much simpler molecules such as DOI. Because of its structural complexity and tedious approaches to its total synthesis, only a few structural modifications of LSD have been reported. Unfortunately, only a few of them have been assessed in human psychopharmacology, most being much less active than LSD itself. ^ Siegel GJ (11 November 2005). Basic neurochemistry: Molecular, cellular and medical aspects (7th ed.). Amsterdam: Elsevier Science. ISBN 978-0-08-047207-2 . OCLC 123438340 . ^ Smigielski L, Scheidegger M, Kometer M, Vollenweider FX (August 2019). "Psilocybin-assisted mindfulness training modulates self-consciousness and brain default mode network connectivity with lasting effects" . NeuroImage . 196 : 207– 215. doi : 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.04.009 . PMID 30965131 . S2CID 102487343 . ^ a b Letheby C, Gerrans P (2017). "Self unbound: ego dissolution in psychedelic experience" . Neuroscience of Consciousness . 3 (1) nix016. doi : 10.1093/nc/nix016 . PMC 6007152 . PMID 30042848 .

The connection with findings about PCC deactivation in 'effortless awareness' meditation is obvious, and bolstered by the finding that acute ayahuasca intoxication increases mindfulness-related capacities. ^ Van Eyghen H (2025). "Psychedelic Mystical Experiences Are Authentic" . Religions . 16 (10): 1294. doi : 10.3390/rel16101294 . ^ Brewer JA, Worhunsky PD, Gray JR, Tang YY, Weber J, Kober H (2011-12-13). "Meditation experience is associated with differences in default mode network activity and connectivity" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 108 (50): 20254– 20259. Bibcode : 2011PNAS..10820254B . doi : 10.1073/pnas.1112029108 . PMC 3250176 . PMID 22114193 . ^ a b c d e f g h i Siegel JS, Liston C, Nicol GE, Carhart-Harris RL, Bogenschutz MP (February 2026). "The science of psychedelic medicine". Nat Med . 32 (2): 449– 462. doi : 10.1038/s41591-025-04194-5 . PMID 41652120 .

The majority of psychedelic clinical trials in recent years have used psilocybin. But a closer look reveals psychedelics to be a rich and growing class of compounds. There are at least six naturally occurring serotonergic psychedelic compounds, more than 100 psychedelic compounds currently under development by pharmaceutical companies157 and many additional synthetic compounds with documented psychedelic or hallucinogenic effects in humans—many first described and systematically cataloged in the PiHKAL and TiHKAL volumes158,159. AI-based tools for drug discovery (that is, AlphaFold2) suggest that the number of unique molecules with psychedelic 5-HT2A agonism could be over 100,000 (refs. 160,161). These compounds may differ not only in the profile of receptors that are co-activated, but also in the ways in which the 5-HT2A itself is engaged and activated162.

The number of possible combinations between drug, dosing protocol and medical indication are limitless. ^ a b Krebs, Teri S, Johansen, Pål-Ørjan (28 March 2013). "Over 30 million psychedelic users in the United States" . F1000Research . 2 : 98. doi : 10.12688/f1000research.2-98.v1 . PMC 3917651 . PMID 24627778 . ^ a b c Garcia-Romeu, Albert, Kersgaard, Brennan, Addy, Peter H. (August 2016). "Clinical applications of hallucinogens: A review" . Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology . 24 (4): 229– 268. doi : 10.1037/pha0000084 . PMC 5001686 . PMID 27454674 . ^ a b Le Dain G (1971).

The Non-medical Use of Drugs: Interim Report of the Canadian Government's Commission of Inquiry . p. 106. Physical dependence does not develop to LSD ^ a b Lüscher, Christian, Ungless, Mark A. (14 November 2006). "The Mechanistic Classification of Addictive Drugs" . PLOS Medicine . 3 (11) e437. doi : 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030437 . PMC 1635740 . PMID 17105338 . ^ a b c d Bender D, Hellerstein DJ (2022). "Assessing the risk–benefit profile of classical psychedelics: a clinical review of second-wave psychedelic research". Psychopharmacology . 239 (6): 1907– 1932. doi : 10.1007/s00213-021-06049-6 . PMID 35022823 . S2CID 245906937 . ^ a b c Reiff CM, Richman EE, Nemeroff CB, Carpenter LL, Widge AS, Rodriguez CI, et al. (May 2020). "Psychedelics and Psychedelic-Assisted Psychotherapy".

The American Journal of Psychiatry . 177 (5): 391– 410. doi : 10.1176/appi.ajp.2019.19010035 . PMID 32098487 . S2CID 211524704 . ^ a b c d Tupper KW, Wood E, Yensen R, Johnson MW (2015-10-06). "Psychedelic medicine: a re-emerging therapeutic paradigm" . CMAJ: Canadian Medical Association Journal . 187 (14): 1054– 1059. doi : 10.1503/cmaj.141124 . ISSN 0820-3946 . PMC 4592297 . PMID 26350908 . ^ Orth T (July 28, 2022). "One in four Americans say they've tried at least one psychedelic drug" . YouGov . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Walker SR, Pullella GA, Piggott MJ, Duggan PJ (5 July 2023). "Introduction to the chemistry and pharmacology of psychedelic drugs" . Australian Journal of Chemistry . 76 (5): 236– 257. doi : 10.1071/CH23050 . ISSN 0004-9425 . Retrieved 4 April 2025 . ^ Creese I, Burt DR, Snyder SH (1975-12-01). "The dopamine receptor: Differential binding of d-LSD and related agents to agonist and antagonist states" . Life Sciences . 17 (11): 1715– 1719. doi : 10.1016/0024-3205(75)90118-6 . ISSN 0024-3205 . PMID 1207384 . ^ Passie T, Seifert J, Schneider U, Emrich HM (October 2002). "The pharmacology of psilocybin" . Addiction Biology . 7 (4): 357– 364. doi : 10.1080/1355621021000005937 . PMID 14578010 . S2CID 12656091 . ^ Ponce JD (2024). "The use of prodrugs as drugs of abuse" . WIREs Forensic Science . 6 (3) e1514. doi : 10.1002/wfs2.1514 . ISSN 2573-9468 . ^ Elliott SP, Holdbrook T, Brandt SD (May 2020). "Prodrugs of New Psychoactive Substances (NPS): A New Challenge". Journal of Forensic Sciences . 65 (3): 913– 920. doi : 10.1111/1556-4029.14268 . PMID 31943218 . ^ Griffiths RR, Richards WA, McCann U, Jesse R (August 2006). "Psilocybin can occasion mystical-type experiences having substantial and sustained personal meaning and spiritual significance" . Psychopharmacology . 187 (3): 268– 283. doi : 10.1007/s00213-006-0457-5 . ISSN 0033-3158 . PMID 16826400 . S2CID 7845214 . ^ Freye E (2009). Pharmacology and abuse of cocaine, amphetamines, ecstasy and related designer drugs: a comprehensive review on their mode of action, treatment of abuse and intoxication . Dordrecht: Springer. ISBN 978-90-481-2448-0 . OCLC 489218895 . ^ Bohn A, Kiggen MH, Uthaug MV, van Oorsouw KI, Ramaekers JG, van Schie HT (2022-12-05). "Altered States of Consciousness During Ceremonial San Pedro Use" .

The International Journal for the Psychology of Religion . 33 (4): 309– 331. doi : 10.1080/10508619.2022.2139502 . hdl : 2066/285968 . ISSN 1050-8619 . ^ a b c d e f g h i Alexander T. Shulgin , Ann Shulgin (1997). TiHKAL: The Continuation (1st ed.). Berkeley, CA: Transform Press . ISBN 978-0-9630096-9-2 . OCLC 38503252 . ^ Riba J, Valle M, Urbano G, Yritia M, Morte A, Barbanoj MJ (July 2003). "Human Pharmacology of Ayahuasca: Subjective and Cardiovascular Effects, Monoamine Metabolite Excretion, and Pharmacokinetics" . Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics . 306 (1): 73– 83. doi : 10.1124/jpet.103.049882 . ISSN 0022-3565 . PMID 12660312 . S2CID 6147566 . ^ Mueller MJ, Aicher HD, Dornbierer DA, Marten L, Suay D, Meling D, et al. (2024-12-28). "Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of an innovative psychedelic N,N-dimethyltryptamine/harmine formulation in healthy participants: a randomized controlled trial" .

The International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology . 28 (1) pyaf001. doi : 10.1093/ijnp/pyaf001 . ISSN 1469-5111 . PMC 11770821 . PMID 39774840 . ^ Haroz R, Greenberg MI (November 2005). "Emerging drugs of abuse".

In D. H. Efron (ed.). Psychotomimetic Drugs (PDF) . New York: Raven Press. pp. 21– 41. ^ a b c d e Delgrasso A (17 February 2024). "Defining 5-MeO-DMT in Historical and Cultural Contexts". World Futures . 80 (2): 174– 197. doi : 10.1080/02604027.2024.2330255 . ISSN 0260-4027 . ^ a b c d e f g Brimblecombe RW, Pinder RM (1975). "Indolealkylamines and Related Compounds". Hallucinogenic Agents . Bristol: Wright-Scientechnica. pp. 98– 144. ISBN 978-0-85608-011-1 . OCLC 2176880 . OL 4850660M . ^ Nelson K (1984). "Bufo alvarius: The Psychedelic Toad of the Sonoran Desert" . Erowid . Illustrated by Gail Patterson . Retrieved October 20, 2023 . ^ a b c Hayes C (14 April 2025). "A Toad Less Traveled: Should 5-MeO-DMT Have a Role in Treating Depression?" . Psychedelic Medicine psymed.2024.0049. doi : 10.1089/psymed.2024.0049 . ISSN 2831-4425 . Retrieved 6 May 2025 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Alexander T. Shulgin , Ann Shulgin (1991). PiHKAL: A Chemical Love Story (1st ed.). Berkeley, CA: Transform Press. pp. 503– 506. ISBN 978-0-9630096-0-9 . OCLC 25627628 . ^ a b Luethi D, Liechti ME (April 2020). "Designer drugs: mechanism of action and adverse effects" . Arch Toxicol . 94 (4): 1085– 1133. Bibcode : 2020ArTox..94.1085L . doi : 10.1007/s00204-020-02693-7 . PMC 7225206 . PMID 32249347 .

In one of the few clinical studies of a designer drug, 4-bromo-2,5-dimethoxyphenylethylamine (2C-B) was shown to induce euphoria, well-being, and changes in perception, and to have mild stimulant properties (Gonzalez et al. 2015). 2C-B may thus be classified as a psychedelic with entactogenic properties, an effect profile that is similar to various other phenethylamine psychedelics (Shulgin and Shulgin 1995). ^ a b Wills B, Erickson T (9 March 2012). "Psychoactive Phenethylamine, Piperazine, and Pyrrolidinophenone Derivatives".

In Barceloux DG (ed.). Medical Toxicology of Drug Abuse: Synthesized Chemicals and Psychoactive Plants . Wiley. pp. 156– 192. doi : 10.1002/9781118105955.ch10 . ISBN 978-0-471-72760-6 . DOSE EFFECT: Anecdotal data suggests that recreational doses of 2C-B range from 4—30 mg with lower doses (4—10 mg) producing entactogenic effects, whereas high doses (10— 20 mg) cause psychedelic and sympathomimetic effects. ^ a b González D, Torrens M, Farré M (2015-10-12). "Acute Effects of the Novel Psychoactive Drug 2C-B on Emotions" . BioMed Research International . 2015 643878. doi : 10.1155/2015/643878 . PMC 4620274 . PMID 26543863 . ^ a b c d e Oeri HE (May 2021). "Beyond ecstasy: Alternative entactogens to 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine with potential applications in psychotherapy" . Journal of Psychopharmacology . 35 (5): 512– 536. doi : 10.1177/0269881120920420 . PMC 8155739 . PMID 32909493 .

While an argument can be made that compounds like 4-bromo-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine (2CB) or N,N-diisopropyl-5-methoxytryptamine (5-MeO-DiPT) are also entactogenic, and they have been described as such in the past (González et al., 2015; Palamar and Acosta, 2020; Schifano et al., 2019), they were also excluded due to their high affinity as agonists at post-synaptic 5-HT2 and 5-HT1A receptors (Fantegrossi et al., 2006; Nugteren-van Lonkhuyzen et al., 2015; Taylor et al., 1986; Villalobos et al., 2004), which would indicate that their effects also include a marked psychedelic component. ^ a b c Dunlap LE, Andrews AM, Olson DE (October 2018). "Dark Classics in Chemical Neuroscience: 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine" . ACS Chem Neurosci . 9 (10): 2408– 2427. doi : 10.1021/acschemneuro.8b00155 . PMC 6197894 . PMID 30001118 . ^ Catalani V, Corkery JM, Guirguis A, Napoletano F, Arillotta D, Zangani C, et al. (August 2021). "Psychonauts' psychedelics: A systematic, multilingual, web-crawling exercise" . Eur Neuropsychopharmacol . 49 : 69– 92. doi : 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2021.03.006 . PMID 33857740 . ^ "Peyote San Pedro Cactus – Shamanic Sacraments" . D.M.Taylor . ^ Krebs, Teri S., Johansen, Pål-Ørjan (August 19, 2013). "Psychedelics and Mental Health: A Population Study" . PLOS ONE . 8 (8) e63972. Bibcode : 2013PLoSO...863972K . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0063972 . PMC 3747247 . PMID 23976938 . ^ Goldman M (2024-06-27). "Mushrooms are the most commonly used psychedelic, study finds" . Axios . Retrieved 2024-06-28 . ^ Sattler, Sebastian, Wood, Suzanne, Petersen, Margit A., Seiffert, Fiona, Mehlkop, Guido (May 29, 2025). "Population-based estimates of different dosage types of psychedelic use across socio-demographic groups in Germany" . Scientific Reports . 15 (18952) 18952. Bibcode : 2025NatSR..1518952S . doi : 10.1038/s41598-025-03873-0 . PMC 12122786 . PMID 40442205 . ^ Carlini EA, Maia LO (2020). "Plant and Fungal Hallucinogens as Toxic and Therapeutic Agents" . Plant Toxins . Toxinology. Springer Netherlands. pp. 1– 44. doi : 10.1007/978-94-007-6728-7_6-2 . ISBN 978-94-007-6728-7 . S2CID 239438352 . Retrieved 23 February 2022 . ^ "History of Psychedelics: How the Mazatec Tribe Brought Entheogens to the World" . Psychedelic Times . 28 October 2015 . Retrieved 23 February 2022 . ^ Ismael Eduardo Apud Peláez. (2020). Ayahuasca: Between Cognition and Culture . Publicacions Universitat Rovira i Virgili. ISBN 978-84-8424-834-7 . OCLC 1229544084 . ^ Prince MA, O'Donnell MB, Stanley LR, Swaim RC (May 2019). "Examination of Recreational and Spiritual Peyote Use Among American Indian Youth" . Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs . 80 (3): 366– 370. doi : 10.15288/jsad.2019.80.366 . PMC 6614926 . PMID 31250802 . ^ Bussmann RW, Sharon D (2006). "Traditional medicinal plant use in Northern Peru: tracking two thousand years of healing culture" . J Ethnobiol Ethnomed . 2 (1) 47. doi : 10.1186/1746-4269-2-47 . PMC 1637095 . PMID 17090303 . ^ Socha DM, Sykutera M, Orefici G (2022-12-01). "Use of psychoactive and stimulant plants on the south coast of Peru from the Early Intermediate to Late Intermediate Period" . Journal of Archaeological Science . 148 105688. Bibcode : 2022JArSc.14805688S . doi : 10.1016/j.jas.2022.105688 . ISSN 0305-4403 . S2CID 252954052 . ^ Larco L (2008). "Archivo Arquidiocesano de Trujillo Sección Idolatrías. (Años 1768–1771)". Más allá de los encantos – Documentos sobre extirpación de idolatrías, Trujillo . Travaux de l'IFEA. Lima: IFEA Instituto Francés de Estudios Andinos, Fondo Editorial de la Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos. pp. 67– 87. ISBN 978-2-8218-4453-7 . Retrieved April 9, 2020 . ^ Anderson EF (2001).

The Cactus Family . Pentland, Oregon: Timber Press. ISBN 978-0-88192-498-5 . pp. 45–49. ^ "Declaran Patrimonio Cultural de la Nación a los conocimientos, saberes y usos del cactus San Pedro" . elperuano.pe (in Spanish). 2022-11-17 . Retrieved 2022-12-10 . ^ a b "Psychedelics Weren't As Common in Ancient Cultures As We Think" . Vice Media . Vice. December 10, 2020 . Retrieved January 14, 2023 . ^ Nutt D, Spriggs M, Erritzoe D (2023-02-01). "Psychedelics therapeutics: What we know, what we think, and what we need to research" . Neuropharmacology . 223 109257. doi : 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2022.109257 . ISSN 0028-3908 . PMID 36179919 . ^ a b c Marks M, Cohen IG (October 2021). "Psychedelic therapy: a roadmap for wider acceptance and utilization" . Nature Medicine . 27 (10): 1669– 1671. doi : 10.1038/s41591-021-01530-3 . PMID 34608331 . S2CID 238355863 . ^ Pilecki B, Luoma JB, Bathje GJ, Rhea J, Narloch VF (2021). "Ethical and legal issues in psychedelic harm reduction and integration therapy" . Harm Reduction Journal . 18 (1): 40. doi : 10.1186/s12954-021-00489-1 . PMC 8028769 . PMID 33827588 . ^ Langlitz N (6 September 2025). "Experiments in medicalization: psychedelic therapy in Switzerland and Australia" . BioSocieties . doi : 10.1057/s41292-025-00369-y . ISSN 1745-8552 . Retrieved 11 February 2026 . Drawing on long-term ethnographic engagement with the psychedelic research community, presents two case studies: Switzerland's Limited Medical Use Program and Australia's Authorized Prescriber scheme. Both allow psychedelic therapies outside clinical trials, yet neither grants market access. ^ Nutt DJ, Hunt P, Schlag AK, Fitzgerald P (December 2024). "The Australia story: Current status and future challenges for the clinical applications of psychedelics". Br J Pharmacol . 183 (14) bph.17398. doi : 10.1111/bph.17398 . PMID 39701143 . in 2023, the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) approved the use of psilocybin for treatment-resistant depression and MDMA for PTSD to take effect from 1 July 2023. compassionate use has been allowed in Switzerland for decades and more recently in Canada (TheraPsil, 2024) and Israel. ^ Aicher HD, Müller F, Gasser P (March 2025). "Further education in psychedelic-assisted therapy - experiences from Switzerland" . BMC Med Educ . 25 (1) 341. doi : 10.1186/s12909-025-06871-y . PMC 11881254 . PMID 40045361 .

In Switzerland, MDMA, psilocybin, and LSD are applied in the framework of limited medical use as exceptional treatment options since 2014. ^ Liechti ME, Gasser P, Aicher HD, Mueller F, Hawrot T, Schmid Y (2025). "Implementing psychedelic-assisted therapy: History and characteristics of the Swiss limited medical use program" . Neurosci Appl . 4 105525. doi : 10.1016/j.nsa.2025.105525 . PMC 12341733 . PMID 40800003 . This article describes the Swiss limited access program for psychedelic/3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)-assisted therapy.

The Swiss Federal Office of Public Health can issue authorizations for the limited medical use of otherwise prohibited substances. To be eligible, patients suffer from a mostly incurable disease, the prohibited substance can alleviate the suffering, and there are no alternative treatments, or such treatments have already extensively been used with insufficient outcome.

The current program started in 2014 with two physicians.

In 2024, there were approximately 100 physicians who held authorizations to treat 723 patients with MDMA (245 patients), lysergic acid diethylamide (130 patients), or psilocybin (348 patients). ^ Nutt D, Erritzoe D, Carhart-Harris R (2020). "Psychedelic Psychiatry's Brave New World" . Cell . 181 (1): 24– 28. doi : 10.1016/j.cell.2020.03.020 . PMID 32243793 . S2CID 214753833 . ^ a b Johnson MW, Richards WA, Griffiths RR (2008). "Human hallucinogen research: guidelines for safety" . Journal of Psychopharmacology . 22 (6): 603– 620. doi : 10.1177/0269881108093587 . PMC 3056407 . PMID 18593734 . ^ a b Garcia-Romeu A, Richards WA (2018). "Current perspectives on psychedelic therapy: use of serotonergic hallucinogens in clinical interventions". International Review of Psychiatry . 30 (4): 291– 316. doi : 10.1080/09540261.2018.1486289 . ISSN 0954-0261 . PMID 30422079 . S2CID 53291327 . ^ Bathje GJ, Majeski E, Kudowor M (2022-08-04). "Psychedelic integration: An analysis of the concept and its practice" . Frontiers in Psychology . 13 824077. doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.824077 . ISSN 1664-1078 . PMC 9386447 . PMID 35992410 . ^ Romeo B, Karila L, Martelli C, Benyamina A (2020). "Efficacy of psychedelic treatments on depressive symptoms: A meta-analysis". Journal of Psychopharmacology . 34 (10): 1079– 1085. doi : 10.1177/0269881120919957 . PMID 32448048 . S2CID 218873949 . ^ Schimmel N, Breeksema JJ, Smith-Apeldoorn SY, Veraart J, van den Brink W, Schoevers RA (2022). "Psychedelics for the treatment of depression, anxiety, and existential distress in patients with a terminal illness: a systematic review" . Psychopharmacology . 239 ( 15– 33): 15– 33. doi : 10.1007/s00213-021-06027-y . PMID 34812901 . S2CID 244490236 . ^ Dupuis D, Veissière S (October 2022). "Culture, context, and ethics in the therapeutic use of hallucinogens: Psychedelics as active super-placebos?". Transcult Psychiatry . 59 (5): 571– 578. doi : 10.1177/13634615221131465 . PMID 36263513 . ^ van Elk M, Yaden DB (September 2022). "Pharmacological, neural, and psychological mechanisms underlying psychedelics: A critical review". Neurosci Biobehav Rev . 140 104793. doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2022.104793 . hdl : 1887/3515020 . PMID 35878791 .

In addition, the strong prior expectations that many people have about psychedelics directly contribute to the psychedelic experience and as a consequence it has been suggested that psychedelics may act as a 'super-placebo' (Hartogsohn, 2016). Specifically, strong prior expectations (e.g., that a specific intervention will likely trigger a mystical experience) will increase the likelihood of having e.g., a mystical-type experience (Maij et al., 2019), and this placebo-effect is further boosted by the psychedelic-induced suggestibility. ^ Ansari M, Elliot SI, Holmes SE, Sanacora G (2025). "Placebo Effects in the Treatment of Depression—Implications for the Psychedelic Renaissance" . Neurologic Clinics . 44 (1): 63– 75. doi : 10.1016/j.ncl.2025.08.009 . PMID 41232997 . Retrieved 15 October 2025 . ^ Ansari M, Elliott SI, Holmes SE, Sanacora G (February 2026). "Placebo Effects in the Treatment of Depression-Implications for the Psychedelic Renaissance". Neurol Clin . 44 (1): 63– 75. doi : 10.1016/j.ncl.2025.08.009 . PMID 41232997 . ^ Hamzelou J (20 March 2026). "Mind-altering substances are (still) falling short in clinical trials" . MIT Technology Review . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . But with psychedelics, the difference between active drug and placebo is much greater. That's partly because people who get the psychedelic drug know they're getting it and are expecting the drug to improve their symptoms, But it's also partly because of the effect on those who know they're not getting it. It's pretty obvious when you're getting a placebo, says Szigeti, and it can be disappointing. Scientists have long recognized the "nocebo" effect as placebo's "evil twin"—essentially, when you expect to feel worse, you will.

The disappointment of getting a placebo is slightly different, and Szigeti calls it the "knowcebo effect." "It's kind of like a negative psychedelic effect, because you have figured out that you're taking the placebo," he says. This phenomenon can distort the results of psychedelic drug trials.

While a placebo in a traditional antidepressant drug trial improves symptoms by eight points, placebos in psychedelic trials improve symptoms by a mere four points, says Szigeti. If the active drug similarly improves symptoms by around 10 points, that makes it look as though the psychedelic is improving symptoms by around six points compared with a placebo. It "gives the illusion" of a huge effect, says Szigeti. ^ Fadiman J (2016-01-01). "Microdose research: without approvals, control groups, double blinds, staff or funding" . Psychedelic Press . XV . ^ Brodwin E (30 January 2017). "The truth about 'microdosing,' which involves taking tiny amounts of psychedelics like LSD" . Business Insider . Retrieved 19 April 2017 . ^ Dahl H (7 July 2015). "A Brief History of LSD in the Twenty-First Century" . Psychedelic Press UK . Retrieved 19 April 2017 . ^ Webb M, Copes H, Hendricks PS (August 2019). "Narrative identity, rationality, and microdosing classic psychedelics".

The International Journal on Drug Policy . 70 : 33– 39. doi : 10.1016/j.drugpo.2019.04.013 . PMID 31071597 . S2CID 149445841 . ^ Chemistry Uo, Prague T. "Recognizing signatures of psilocybin microdosing in natural language" . medicalxpress.com . Retrieved 2022-10-03 . ^ Sanz C, Cavanna F, Muller S, de la Fuente L, Zamberlan F, Palmucci M, et al. (2022-09-01). "Natural language signatures of psilocybin microdosing" . Psychopharmacology . 239 (9): 2841– 2852. doi : 10.1007/s00213-022-06170-0 . ISSN 1432-2072 . PMID 35676541 . S2CID 247067976 . ^ a b c d e f g h Holze F, Singh N, Liechti ME, D'Souza DC (May 2024). "Serotonergic Psychedelics: A Comparative Review of Efficacy, Safety, Pharmacokinetics, and Binding Profile" . Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging . 9 (5): 472– 489. doi : 10.1016/j.bpsc.2024.01.007 . PMID 38301886 . ^ a b c Liechti ME, Holze F (2022). "Dosing Psychedelics and MDMA" . Disruptive Psychopharmacology . Curr Top Behav Neurosci. Vol. 56. pp. 3– 21. doi : 10.1007/7854_2021_270 . ISBN 978-3-031-12183-8 . PMID 34734392 . ^ a b Engel LB, Thal S, Bright SJ, Low M (17 July 2024). "Psychedelic trip sitting, dosages and intensities: Supplementing clinical studies with anecdotal reports" (PDF) . Journal of Psychedelic Studies . doi : 10.1556/2054.2024.00377 . ISSN 2559-9283 . Retrieved 15 March 2025 . ^ a b Ley L, Holze F, Arikci D, Becker AM, Straumann I, Klaiber A, et al. (October 2023). "Comparative acute effects of mescaline, lysergic acid diethylamide, and psilocybin in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled cross-over study in healthy participants" . Neuropsychopharmacology . 48 (11): 1659– 1667. doi : 10.1038/s41386-023-01607-2 . PMC 10517157 . PMID 37231080 . ^ a b Holze F, Vizeli P, Ley L, Müller F, Dolder P, Stocker M, et al. (February 2021). "Acute dose-dependent effects of lysergic acid diethylamide in a double-blind placebo-controlled study in healthy subjects" . Neuropsychopharmacology . 46 (3): 537– 544. doi : 10.1038/s41386-020-00883-6 . PMC 8027607 . PMID 33059356 . ^ a b c Holze F, Becker AM, Kolaczynska KE, Duthaler U, Liechti ME (April 2023). "Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics of Oral Psilocybin Administration in Healthy Participants" . Clin Pharmacol Ther . 113 (4): 822– 831. doi : 10.1002/cpt.2821 . PMID 36507738 . ^ a b Holze F, Vizeli P, Müller F, Ley L, Duerig R, Varghese N, et al. (February 2020). "Distinct acute effects of LSD, MDMA, and D-amphetamine in healthy subjects" . Neuropsychopharmacology . 45 (3): 462– 471. doi : 10.1038/s41386-019-0569-3 . PMC 6969135 . PMID 31733631 . ^ Kozlowska U, Nichols C, Wiatr K, Figiel M (July 2022). "From psychiatry to neurology: Psychedelics as prospective therapeutics for neurodegenerative disorders". J Neurochem . 162 (1): 89– 108. doi : 10.1111/jnc.15509 . PMID 34519052 . One dosing method of psychedelics is the use of so called "microdoses"—very low concentrations of various psychedelics that do not reach the threshold of perceivable behavioral effects. This is usually 10% of active recreational doses (e.g., 10–15 µg of LSD, or 0.1–0.3 g of dry "magic mushrooms") taken up to three times per week. ^ a b van Amsterdam J, Opperhuizen A, van den Brink W (April 2011). "Harm potential of magic mushroom use: a review" (PDF) . Regul Toxicol Pharmacol . 59 (3): 423– 429. doi : 10.1016/j.yrtph.2011.01.006 . PMID 21256914 . ^ a b c Lowe H, Toyang N, Steele B, Valentine H, Grant J, Ali A, et al. (May 2021). "The Therapeutic Potential of Psilocybin" . Molecules . 26 (10): 2948. doi : 10.3390/molecules26102948 . PMC 8156539 . PMID 34063505 . S2CID 235227972 . ^ Pepe M, Hesami M, de la Cerda KA, Perreault ML, Hsiang T, Jones AM (December 2023). "A journey with psychedelic mushrooms: From historical relevance to biology, cultivation, medicinal uses, biotechnology, and beyond". Biotechnol Adv . 69 108247. doi : 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2023.108247 . PMID 37659744 . ^ a b c Tylš F, Páleníček T, Horáček J (March 2014). "Psilocybin - summary of knowledge and new perspectives" . Eur Neuropsychopharmacol . 24 (3): 342– 356. doi : 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2013.12.006 . PMID 24444771 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r Nichols DE (October 2020). "Psilocybin: from ancient magic to modern medicine" . J Antibiot (Tokyo) . 73 (10): 679– 686. doi : 10.1038/s41429-020-0311-8 . PMID 32398764 . Total psilocybin and psilocin levels in species known to be used recreationally varied from 0.1% to nearly 2% by dry weight .

The medium oral dose of psilocybin is 4–8 mg, which elicits the same symptoms as the consumption of about 2 g of dried Psilocybe Mexicana . ^ Kurzbaum E, Páleníček T, Shrchaton A, Azerrad S, Dekel Y (28 January 2025). "Exploring Psilocybe cubensis Strains: Cultivation Techniques, Psychoactive Compounds, Genetics and Research Gaps" . Journal of Fungi . 11 (2): 99. doi : 10.3390/jof11020099 . ISSN 2309-608X . PMC 11856550 . PMID 39997393 . ^ Goff R, Smith M, Islam S, Sisley S, Ferguson J, Kuzdzal S, et al. (February 2024). "Determination of psilocybin and psilocin content in multiple Psilocybe cubensis mushroom strains using liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry". Anal Chim Acta . 1288 342161. Bibcode : 2024AcAC.128842161G . doi : 10.1016/j.aca.2023.342161 . PMID 38220293 . A method for clinical potency determination of psilocybin and psilocin in hallucinogenic mushroom species Psilocybe cubensis was developed using liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Five strains of dried, intact mushrooms were obtained and analyzed: Blue Meanie, Creeper, B-Plus, Texas Yellow, and Thai Cubensis.

From most to least potent, the study found that the average total psilocybin and psilocin concentrations for the Creeper, Blue Meanie, B+, Texas Yellow, and Thai Cubensis strains were 1.36, 1.221, 1.134, 1.103, and 0.879 % (w/w), respectively. ^ Gotvaldová K, Borovička J, Hájková K, Cihlářová P, Rockefeller A, Kuchař M (November 2022). "Extensive Collection of Psychotropic Mushrooms with Determination of Their Tryptamine Alkaloids" . Int J Mol Sci . 23 (22) 14068. doi : 10.3390/ijms232214068 . PMC 9693126 . PMID 36430546 . ^ Albert Hofmann (1968). "Psychotomimetic Agents" .

In Burger A (ed.). Drugs Affecting the Central Nervous System . Vol. 2. New York: M. Dekker. pp. 169– 235. OCLC 245452885 . OL 13539506M . Psilocin is approximately 1.4 times as potent as psilocybin. This ratio is the same as that of the molecular weights of the two drugs. ^ Wolbach AB, Miner EJ, Isbell H (1962). "Comparison of psilocin with psilocybin, mescaline and LSD-25". Psychopharmacologia . 3 (3): 219– 223. doi : 10.1007/BF00412109 . PMID 14007905 . Psilocin is approximately 1.4 times as potent as psilocybin. This ratio is the same as that of the molecular weights of the two drugs. ^ Hardison C (1 July 2007). "A brief history and motivation of an entheogenic chemist" . Drugs and Alcohol Today . 7 (2): 26– 31. doi : 10.1108/17459265200700013 . ISSN 1745-9265 . 2C-D has a very gentle dose-response curve with a fantastically large range. 2C-D is what some have called a 'pharmacological tofu' (Shulgin & Shulgin, 1991). ^ a b c d Ballentine G, Friedman SF, Bzdok D (March 2022). "Trips and neurotransmitters: Discovering principled patterns across 6850 hallucinogenic experiences" . Sci Adv . 8 (11) eabl6989. Bibcode : 2022SciA....8L6989B . doi : 10.1126/sciadv.abl6989 . PMC 8926331 . PMID 35294242 . ^ a b c d e Geiger HA, Wurst MG, Daniels RN (October 2018). "DARK Classics in Chemical Neuroscience: Psilocybin". ACS Chem Neurosci . 9 (10): 2438– 2447. doi : 10.1021/acschemneuro.8b00186 . PMID 29956917 . Tachyphylaxis, the rapid desensitization to a drug or toxin resulting in diminished physiologic effect, is a phenomenon seen with most hallucinogens. Tolerance begins to develop after the administration of a single dose.

The mechanism behind this rapid desensitization is the physiologic response to 5-HT2A receptor overstimulation by quickly downregulating receptor sites.41,42 In general, it is thought that these receptor sites return to 50 percent of their baseline within 3−7 days of the initial dose and return to baseline within 1−4 weeks, depending on dose and duration of repeated use. Additionally, cross-tolerance is evident between indolealkylamine and phenylalkylamine classes of hallucinogens.22 ^ Klaiber A, Schmid Y, Becker AM, Straumann I, Erne L, Jelusic A, et al. (September 2024). "Acute dose-dependent effects of mescaline in a double-blind placebo-controlled study in healthy subjects" . Transl Psychiatry . 14 (1) 395. doi : 10.1038/s41398-024-03116-2 . PMC 11442856 . PMID 39349427 . ^ a b c Carbonaro TM, Gatch MB (September 2016). "Neuropharmacology of N,N-dimethyltryptamine" . Brain Res Bull . 126 (Pt 1): 74– 88. doi : 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2016.04.016 . PMC 5048497 . PMID 27126737 . ^ Rodrigues AV, Almeida FJ, Vieira-Coelho MA (2019). "Dimethyltryptamine: Endogenous Role and Therapeutic Potential". J Psychoactive Drugs . 51 (4): 299– 310. doi : 10.1080/02791072.2019.1602291 . hdl : 10216/114373 . PMID 31018803 . ^ a b c d Egger K, Aicher HD, Cumming P, Scheidegger M (10 September 2024). "Neurobiological research on N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) and its potentiation by monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibition: from ayahuasca to synthetic combinations of DMT and MAO inhibitors" . Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences . 81 (1). Springer Science and Business Media LLC: 395. doi : 10.1007/s00018-024-05353-6 . ISSN 1420-682X . PMC 11387584 . PMID 39254764 . ^ Brito-da-Costa AM, Dias-da-Silva D, Gomes NG, Dinis-Oliveira RJ, Madureira-Carvalho Á (October 2020). "Toxicokinetics and Toxicodynamics of Ayahuasca Alkaloids N,N-Dimethyltryptamine (DMT), Harmine, Harmaline and Tetrahydroharmine: Clinical and Forensic Impact" . Pharmaceuticals (Basel) . 13 (11): 334. doi : 10.3390/ph13110334 . PMC 7690791 . PMID 33114119 . ^ Holze F, Arikci D, Thomann J, Luethi D, Liechti ME (18 December 2025). "ACNP 64th Annual Meeting: Poster Abstracts P584-P872: P654. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of oral 4-bromo-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine (2C-B) administration in healthy participants" . Neuropsychopharmacology . 51 (1). Nature Publishing Group: 410–571 (448–449). doi : 10.1038/s41386-025-02281-2 . ISSN 1740-634X . PMC 12783840. PMID 41507446 . ^ Mallaroni P, Mason NL, Reckweg JT, Paci R, Ritscher S, Toennes SW, et al. (August 2023). "Assessment of the Acute Effects of 2C-B vs. Psilocybin on Subjective Experience, Mood, and Cognition". Clin Pharmacol Ther . 114 (2): 423– 433. doi : 10.1002/cpt.2958 . PMID 37253161 . ^ Joe Moore (2 April 2024). "Shulgin Farm and the Future of Psychedelic Drug Development (Featuring: Paul F. Daley, Ph.D.)" (Podcast). Psychedelics Today. Event occurs at 16:12–20:45. is a tryptamine that's orally active, fast-onset, the latent period before you start to feel effects is as little as 6 to 8 minutes, relatively short-acting, 90 minutes to two and a half hours, and satisfyingly internally psychedelic as opposed to entactogenic. ^ a b Goldstein L (10 July 2023). "Pioneering Psychedelics Scientist Alexander "Sasha" Shulgin's Legacy Lives On Via New Compounds And Research" . Benzinga . Retrieved 19 April 2025 . ^ a b c Trachsel D, Lehmann D, Enzensperger C (2013). Phenethylamine: von der Struktur zur Funktion . Nachtschatten-Science (in German) (1 ed.). Solothurn: Nachtschatten-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-03788-700-4 . OCLC 858805226 . Archived from the original on 21 August 2025. ^ Corazza O, Schifano F, Farre M, Deluca P, Davey Z, Torrens M, et al. (May 2011). "Designer drugs on the internet: a phenomenon out-of-control? the emergence of hallucinogenic drug Bromo-Dragonfly" . Curr Clin Pharmacol . 6 (2): 125– 129. doi : 10.2174/157488411796151129 . hdl : 2299/10464 . PMID 21592070 . ^ Mallaroni P, Mason NL, Vinckenbosch FR, Ramaekers JG (June 2022). "The use patterns of novel psychedelics: experiential fingerprints of substituted phenethylamines, tryptamines and lysergamides" . Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 239 (6): 1783– 1796. doi : 10.1007/s00213-022-06142-4 . PMC 9166850 . PMID 35487983 . ^ a b Hill SL, Thomas SH (October 2011). "Clinical toxicology of newer recreational drugs". Clin Toxicol (Phila) . 49 (8): 705– 719. doi : 10.3109/15563650.2011.615318 . PMID 21970769 . ^ a b c d e f g Baggott MJ (1 October 2023). "Learning about STP: A Forgotten Psychedelic from the Summer of Love" (PDF) . History of Pharmacy and Pharmaceuticals . 65 (1): 93– 116. doi : 10.3368/hopp.65.1.93 . ISSN 2694-3034 . Retrieved 26 January 2025 .

The Grateful Dead learned they could use small amounts as a stimulant, an effect they used extensively during the recording of the album Aoxomoxoa in 1968 and 1969.143 The use of lower doses of DOM echoed DOET's "psychic energizer" effects and may be the first documented use of subpsychedelic doses of a psychedelic for cognitive enhancement, a practice that is now called microdosing.144 ^ Trout K, Daley PF (December 2024). "The origin of 2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine (DOM, STP)" (PDF) . Drug Test Anal . 16 (12): 1496– 1508. doi : 10.1002/dta.3667 . PMID 38419183 . ^ Preller KH, Vollenweider FX (2016). "Phenomenology, Structure, and Dynamic of Psychedelic States".

In Adam L. Halberstadt, Franz X. Vollenweider, David E. Nichols (eds.). Behavioral Neurobiology of Psychedelic Drugs . Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences. Vol. 36. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 221– 256. doi : 10.1007/7854_2016_459 . ISBN 978-3-662-55878-2 . PMID 28025814 . ^ Swanson LR (2018-03-02). "Unifying Theories of Psychedelic Drug Effects" . Frontiers in Pharmacology . 9 172. doi : 10.3389/fphar.2018.00172 . ISSN 1663-9812 . PMC 5853825 . PMID 29568270 . ^ Luke, David (28 November 2013). "Rock Art or Rorschach: Is there More to Entoptics than Meets the Eye?". Time and Mind . 3 (1): 9– 28. doi : 10.2752/175169710x12549020810371 . S2CID 144948636 . ^ Berry MD (July 2004). "Mammalian central nervous system trace amines. Pharmacologic amphetamines, physiologic neuromodulators" . Journal of Neurochemistry . 90 (2): 257– 271. doi : 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2004.02501.x . ISSN 0022-3042 . PMID 15228583 . S2CID 12126296 . ^ Luna LE (1984). "The concept of plants as teachers among four mestizo shamans of Iquitos, northeastern Peru" (PDF) . Journal of Ethnopharmacology . 11 (2): 135– 156. doi : 10.1016/0378-8741(84)90036-9 . PMID 6492831 . Retrieved 10 July 2020 . ^ Honig D. "Frequently Asked Questions" . Erowid . Archived from the original on 12 February 2016. ^ McGlothlin W, Cohen S, McGlothlin MS (November 1967). "Long lasting effects of LSD on normals" (PDF) . Archives of General Psychiatry . 17 (5): 521– 32. doi : 10.1001/archpsyc.1967.01730290009002 . PMID 6054248 . Archived from the original (PDF) on April 30, 2011. ^ Canadian government (1996). "Controlled Drugs and Substances Act" . Justice Laws . Canadian Department of Justice. Archived from the original on December 15, 2013 . Retrieved December 15, 2013 . ^ Rogge T (May 21, 2014), Substance use – LSD , MedlinePlus, U.S. National Library of Medicine, archived from the original on July 28, 2016 , retrieved July 14, 2016 ^ CESAR (29 October 2013), LSD , Center for Substance Abuse Research, University of Maryland, archived from the original on July 15, 2016 , retrieved 14 July 2016 ^ Garcia-Romeu A, Kersgaard B, Addy PH (August 2016). "Clinical applications of hallucinogens: A review" . Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology . 24 (4): 229– 268. doi : 10.1037/pha0000084 . PMC 5001686 . PMID 27454674 . ^ Tittarelli R, Mannocchi G, Pantano F, Romolo FS (January 2015). "Recreational use, analysis and toxicity of tryptamines" . Curr Neuropharmacol . 13 (1): 26– 46. doi : 10.2174/1570159X13666141210222409 . PMC 4462041 . PMID 26074742 . ^ a b Busby M (2 November 2023). "The Heirs to a Vault of Novel Psychedelics Take a Trip Into the Unknown" . DoubleBlind Mag . Retrieved 19 April 2025 . ^ Busby M (30 March 2025). "What Happens When You Inherit 500 Psychedelic Compounds?" . DoubleBlind Mag . Retrieved 19 April 2025 . ^ Nen (4 December 2011). Entheogenic effects of NMT from Acacia . Entheogenesis Australis (EGA) Conference, Victoria, Australia, 2–5 December 2011 (PDF) . ^ Nen (13 July 2013). NMT: A Spatial Hallucinogen With Therapeutic Applications . Breaking Convention: The Second Multidisciplinary Conference on Psychedelic Consciousness, University of Greenwich, London, 12–14 July 2013 . ^ Friedler D (15 June 2022). "AI Can Now Generate DMT Visuals, Thanks To This Online Community" . DoubleBlind Mag . Retrieved 15 March 2025 . ^ Magee T (24 April 2023). "DMT Users Are Using AI to Draw the Strange Beings They Meet While Tripping" . VICE . Retrieved 15 March 2025 . ^ Bilderbeck P (23 November 2022). "Video shows 'most accurate' representation of what psychedelic visuals look like" . UNILAD . Retrieved 15 March 2025 . ^ French K (2 June 2023). "What Hallucinogens Will Make You See" . Nautilus . Retrieved 15 March 2025 . ^ Rosa T (25 November 2022). "Jak člověk vidí svět pod vlivem halucinogenů? Vědkyně vytvořila přesná videa" . Deník.cz (in Czech) . Retrieved 15 March 2025 . ^ Spangemacher M, Colmenero AS, Scharf D, Brand M, Rohrmoser B, Kärtner L, et al. (2024). "Absence of psychedelic effects: case series and systematic literature review" . Neuroscience Applied . 3 104769. doi : 10.1016/j.nsa.2024.104769 . ^ a b Kuypers KP (2024). "Microdosing Psychedelics as a Promising New Pharmacotherapeutic" . Modern CNS Drug Discovery . Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland. pp. 407– 436. doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-61992-2_26 . ISBN 978-3-031-61991-5 . Retrieved 28 May 2025 . Interestingly, users sometimes attribute other effects to different psychedelics, in which LSD is more associated with cognitive and/or stimulant effects and psilocybin with emotional or well-being effects (Anderson et al. 2019b; Johnstad 2018). This stronger stimulant character of LSD compared to psilocybin was seen by some as an advantage while others experienced it as uncomfortable (Johnstad 2018). Additionally, McGlothlin et al. (1967) showed that LSD (25 mcg) indeed induces stimulant effects, as the effects were similar to those of amphetamine (20 mg) (McGlothlin et al. 1967). Notwithstanding this does not confirm that psilocybin and LSD would have dissimilar effects; it rather supports the claims by users that LSD in low doses has stimulant effects (Johnstad 2018; Anderson et al. 2019a). Decades earlier, Albert Hofmann, the "discoverer" of LSD and its hallucinogenic effects, mentioned that "very small doses, perhaps 25 micrograms," could be useful as an antidepressant (Ghose 2015; Horowitz 1976) or as a substitute for Ritalin (Fadiman 2017; Horowitz 1976). ^ Shulgin A, Manning T, Daley PF (2011). "#7. ARIADNE" .

The Shulgin Index, Volume One: Psychedelic Phenethylamines and Related Compounds . Vol. 1. Berkeley, CA: Transform Press. pp. 7– 9. ISBN 978-0-9630096-3-0 . OCLC 709667010 . ^ a b Cunningham MJ, Bock HA, Serrano IC, Bechand B, Vidyadhara DJ, Bonniwell EM, et al. (January 2023). "Pharmacological Mechanism of the Non-hallucinogenic 5-HT 2A Agonist Ariadne and Analogs" . ACS Chemical Neuroscience . 14 (1): 119– 135. doi : 10.1021/acschemneuro.2c00597 . PMC 10147382 . PMID 36521179 . ^ Palamar JJ, Acosta P (January 2020). "A qualitative descriptive analysis of effects of psychedelic phenethylamines and tryptamines" . Hum Psychopharmacol . 35 (1) e2719. doi : 10.1002/hup.2719 . PMC 6995261 . PMID 31909513 . ^ Shulgin AT, Carter MF (1980). "N, N-Diisopropyltryptamine (DIPT) and 5-methoxy-N,N-diisopropyltryptamine (5-MeO-DIPT). Two orally active tryptamine analogs with CNS activity" . Commun Psychopharmacol . 4 (5): 363– 369. PMID 6949674 . ^ Aragón M (9 January 2024). "Meet Moxy: The Novel Psychedelic the DEA Tried To Ban" . DoubleBlind Mag . Retrieved 8 October 2025 . ^ a b c d Kuypers KP, Ng L, Erritzoe D, Knudsen GM, Nichols CD, Nichols DE, et al. (September 2019). "Microdosing psychedelics: More questions than answers? An overview and suggestions for future research" . J Psychopharmacol . 33 (9): 1039– 1057. doi : 10.1177/0269881119857204 . PMC 6732823 . PMID 31303095 . ^ a b c Kyzar EJ, Nichols CD, Gainetdinov RR, Nichols DE, Kalueff AV (November 2017). "Psychedelic Drugs in Biomedicine". Trends Pharmacol Sci . 38 (11): 992– 1005. doi : 10.1016/j.tips.2017.08.003 . PMID 28947075 . ^ a b c Marona-Lewicka D, Nichols CD, Nichols DE (September 2011). "An animal model of schizophrenia based on chronic LSD administration: old idea, new results" . Neuropharmacology . 61 (3): 503– 512. doi : 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.02.006 . PMC 3110609 . PMID 21352832 . ^ a b Nichols D, Billac GB, Harbit RC, Smith JM (1 March 2026). A Pharmacological Basis for Some Bad LSD Trips?: A 50+ Year Odyssey . International Society for Research on Psychedelics (ISRP) 2026. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 May 2026. ^ a b Freedman DX (1984). "The Bridge from Human to Animal. Hallucinogens: Neurochemical, Behavioral, and Clinical Perspectives" .

In Jacobs BL (ed.). Hallucinogens, Neurochemical, Behavioral, and Clinical Perspectives . Central Nervous System Pharmacology. Raven Press. pp. 203– 226. ISBN 978-0-89004-990-7 . ^ a b c d Evens R, Schmidt ME, Majić T, Schmidt TT (2023). "The psychedelic afterglow phenomenon: a systematic review of subacute effects of classic serotonergic psychedelics" . Ther Adv Psychopharmacol . 13 20451253231172254. doi : 10.1177/20451253231172254 . PMC 10240558 . PMID 37284524 . ^ a b Majić T, Schmidt TT, Gallinat J (March 2015). "Peak experiences and the afterglow phenomenon: when and how do therapeutic effects of hallucinogens depend on psychedelic experiences?". J Psychopharmacol . 29 (3): 241– 253. doi : 10.1177/0269881114568040 . PMID 25670401 . ^ a b Basedow LA, Majić T, Hafiz NJ, Algharably EA, Kreutz R, Riemer TG (June 2024). "Cognitive functioning associated with acute and subacute effects of classic psychedelics and MDMA - a systematic review and meta-analysis" . Sci Rep . 14 (1) 14782. Bibcode : 2024NatSR..1414782B . doi : 10.1038/s41598-024-65391-9 . PMC 11208433 . PMID 38926480 . ^ Majić T, Schmidt TT, Gröticke A, Gasser P, Richards WA, Riemer TG, et al. (March 2025). "The Afterglow Inventory (AGI): Validation of a new instrument for measuring subacute effects of classic serotonergic psychedelics" . J Psychopharmacol . 39 (5): 474– 488. doi : 10.1177/02698811251326937 . PMC 12099019 . PMID 40165350 . ^ a b c Chisamore N, Kaczmarek E, Le GH, Wong S, Orsini DK, Mansur R, et al. (26 April 2024). "Neurobiology of the Antidepressant Effects of Serotonergic Psychedelics: A Narrative Review". Current Treatment Options in Psychiatry . 11 (2). Springer Science and Business Media LLC: 90– 105. doi : 10.1007/s40501-024-00319-8 . ISSN 2196-3061 . ^ Kinderlehrer DA (2025). "Mushrooms, Microdosing, and Mental Illness: The Effect of Psilocybin on Neurotransmitters, Neuroinflammation, and Neuroplasticity" . Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat . 21 : 141– 155. doi : 10.2147/NDT.S500337 . PMC 11787777 . PMID 39897712 . Mason et al studied the immune status of healthy humans after administration of oral psilocybin compared with placebo, and found an immediate reduction in the plasma concentration of TNF-α in the treatment group.Citation106 Although there was no immediate change in IL-6 and CRP, at seven days these levels were reduced while TNF-α concentrations had returned to baseline. They also documented an association between the degree of reduction of IL-6 and CRP and the positive effect on the participants' mood and social activity. ^ Mason NL, Szabo A, Kuypers KP, Mallaroni PA, de la Torre Fornell R, Reckweg JT, et al. (November 2023). "Psilocybin induces acute and persisting alterations in immune status in healthy volunteers: An experimental, placebo-controlled study" . Brain Behav Immun . 114 : 299– 310. doi : 10.1016/j.bbi.2023.09.004 . PMID 37689275 . ^ Hanson D (29 April 2013). "When the Trip Never Ends" . Dana Foundation . ^ Hofmann A (2013) . LSD: My Problem Child . OUP Oxford. p. 22. ISBN 978-0-19-963941-0 . ^ "LSD: The Geek's Wonder Drug?" . Wired . 16 January 2006 . Retrieved 29 April 2008 . ^ Byock I (2018). "Taking Psychedelics Seriously" . Journal of Palliative Medicine . 21 (4): 417– 421. doi : 10.1089/jpm.2017.0684 . PMC 5867510 . PMID 29356590 . ^ a b Evans J, Robinson OC, Argyri EK, Suseelan S, Murphy-Beiner A, McAlpine R, et al. (October 24, 2023). "Extended difficulties following the use of psychedelic drugs: A mixed methods study" . PLOS ONE . 18 (10) e0293349. Bibcode : 2023PLoSO..1893349E . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0293349 . PMC 10597511 . PMID 37874826 . ^ Simonsson O, Hendricks PS, Chambers R, Osika W, Goldberg SB (1 April 2023). "Prevalence and associations of challenging, difficult or distressing experiences using classic psychedelics" . Journal of Affective Disorders . 326 : 105– 110. doi : 10.1016/j.jad.2023.01.073 . PMC 9974873 . PMID 36720405 . ^ Argyri EK, Evans J, Luke D, Michael, Michelle K, Rohani-Shukla C, et al. (5 May 2025). "Navigating groundlessness: An interview study on dealing with ontological shock and existential distress following psychedelic experiences" . PLOS ONE . 20 (5) e0322501. Bibcode : 2025PLoSO..2022501A . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0322501 . PMC 12052184 . PMID 40323979 . ^ "Difficulties after psychedelics" . Challenging Psychedelic Experiences . Retrieved 11 December 2025 . ^ a b van Amsterdam J, Opperhuizen A, van den Brink W (2011). "Harm potential of magic mushroom use: A review". Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology . 59 (3): 423– 429. doi : 10.1016/j.yrtph.2011.01.006 . PMID 21256914 . ^ Schlag AK, Aday J, Salam I, Neill JC, Nutt DJ (2022-02-02). "Adverse effects of psychedelics: From anecdotes and misinformation to systematic science" . Journal of Psychopharmacology . 36 (3): 258– 272. doi : 10.1177/02698811211069100 . ISSN 0269-8811 . PMC 8905125 . PMID 35107059 . ^ Krebs, Teri S., Johansen, Pål-Ørjan, Lu, Lin (19 August 2013). "Psychedelics and Mental Health: A Population Study" . PLOS ONE . 8 (8) e63972. Bibcode : 2013PLoSO...863972K . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0063972 . PMC 3747247 . PMID 23976938 . ^ Sabé M, Sulstarova A, Glangetas A, De Pieri M, Mallet L, Curtis L, et al. (November 2024). "Reconsidering evidence for psychedelic-induced psychosis: an overview of reviews, a systematic review, and meta-analysis of human studies" . Mol Psychiatry . 30 (3): 1223– 1255. doi : 10.1038/s41380-024-02800-5 . PMC 11835720 . PMID 39592825 . ^ Baggott MJ, Coyle JR, Erowid E, Erowid F, Robertson LC (1 March 2011). "Abnormal visual experiences in individuals with histories of hallucinogen use: A web-based questionnaire". Drug and Alcohol Dependence . 114 (1): 61– 67. doi : 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2010.09.006 . PMID 21035275 . ^ a b Eskinazi M, Nasserdine R, Cusin RM, Baniotoupoulos P, Saccaro LF, De Pieri M, et al. (May 2026). "Psychedelic-induced hypomania and mania: a systematic review and meta-analysis". Mol Psychiatry . doi : 10.1038/s41380-026-03657-6 . PMID 42215638 . ^ a b Koenig-Robert R, Keogh R, Pearson J (October 2025). "The potential risks of opening the mind's eye with psychedelic therapies". Cortex . 191 : 167– 171. doi : 10.1016/j.cortex.2025.08.002 . PMID 40850037 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae Halberstadt AL (January 2015). "Recent advances in the neuropsychopharmacology of serotonergic hallucinogens" . Behav Brain Res . 277 : 99– 120. doi : 10.1016/j.bbr.2014.07.016 . PMC 4642895 . PMID 25036425 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Buchborn T, Grecksch G, Dieterich D, Höllt V (2016). "Tolerance to Lysergic Acid Diethylamide: Overview, Correlates, and Clinical Implications". Neuropathology of Drug Addictions and Substance Misuse . Elsevier. pp. 846– 858. doi : 10.1016/b978-0-12-800212-4.00079-0 . ISBN 978-0-12-800212-4 . Retrieved 27 November 2025 . ^ a b c Passie T, Halpern JH, Stichtenoth DO, Emrich HM, Hintzen A (2008). "The pharmacology of lysergic acid diethylamide: a review" . CNS Neurosci Ther . 14 (4): 295– 314. doi : 10.1111/j.1755-5949.2008.00059.x . PMC 6494066 . PMID 19040555 . ^ a b Halberstadt AL, Geyer MA (September 2011). "Multiple receptors contribute to the behavioral effects of indoleamine hallucinogens" . Neuropharmacology . 61 (3): 364– 381. doi : 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.01.017 . PMC 3110631 . PMID 21256140 . ^ a b c Dinis-Oliveira RJ, Pereira CL, da Silva DD (2019). "Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic Aspects of Peyote and Mescaline: Clinical and Forensic Repercussions" . Curr Mol Pharmacol . 12 (3): 184– 194. doi : 10.2174/1874467211666181010154139 . PMC 6864602 . PMID 30318013 . Cross tolerance of mescaline with other serotonergic drugs such as LSD and psilocybin has been described in humans and other animals ; mescaline tolerance develops after a few days of consumption but sensitivity is restored after 3-4 days of drug abstinence . ^ a b Vamvakopoulou IA, Narine KA, Campbell I, Dyck JR, Nutt DJ (January 2023). "Mescaline: The forgotten psychedelic" . Neuropharmacology . 222 109294. doi : 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2022.109294 . PMID 36252614 . A cross-tolerance study of mescaline with other serotonergic psychedelics, like LSD and psilocybin, shows evidence of tolerance developing a few days after mescaline consumption. These effects were restored following 3–4 days of abstinence (Wolbach et al., 1962a, 1962b). ^ a b c d Smith DA, Bailey JM, Williams D, Fantegrossi WE (December 2014). "Tolerance and cross-tolerance to head twitch behavior elicited by phenethylamine- and tryptamine-derived hallucinogens in mice" . J Pharmacol Exp Ther . 351 (3): 485– 491. doi : 10.1124/jpet.114.219337 . PMC 4309922 . PMID 25271256 . ^ Strassman RJ, Qualls CR, Berg LM (May 1996). "Differential tolerance to biological and subjective effects of four closely spaced doses of N,N-dimethyltryptamine in humans". Biol Psychiatry . 39 (9): 784– 795. doi : 10.1016/0006-3223(95)00200-6 . PMID 8731519 . ^ Dos Santos RG, Hallak JE (November 2024). "Ayahuasca: pharmacology, safety, and therapeutic effects" . CNS Spectr . 30 (1) e2. doi : 10.1017/S109285292400213X . PMC 13064705 . PMID 39564645 . ^ Dos Santos RG, Grasa E, Valle M, Ballester MR, Bouso JC, Nomdedéu JF, et al. (February 2012). "Pharmacology of ayahuasca administered in two repeated doses". Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 219 (4): 1039– 1053. doi : 10.1007/s00213-011-2434-x . PMID 21842159 . ^ Blough BE, Landavazo A, Decker AM, Partilla JS, Baumann MH, Rothman RB (October 2014). "Interaction of psychoactive tryptamines with biogenic amine transporters and serotonin receptor subtypes" . Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 231 (21): 4135– 4144. doi : 10.1007/s00213-014-3557-7 . PMC 4194234 . PMID 24800892 . ^ Martin WR, Sloan JW (1977). "Pharmacology and Classification of LSD-like Hallucinogens" . Drug Addiction II: Amphetamine, Psychotogen, and Marihuana Dependence . Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 305– 368. doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-66709-1_3 . ISBN 978-3-642-66711-4 .

The observation that tolerance to LSD does not confer cross tolerance to several of DMT's autonomic effects suggests that these N-disubstituted compounds may differ in some respects from LSD.

The duration of action of DMT is less than that of LSD. Further, we have not been able to demonstrate tachyphylaxis to the actions of tryptamine in the dog (MARTIN and EADES, 1972). Tryptamine's duration of action is less than that of DMT. It is possible that a long duration of action is a necessary attribute of LSD-like hallucinogens for them to effectively induce tolerance (see Subsect. E.III). ^ Vogt SB, Ley L, Erne L, Straumann I, Becker AM, Klaiber A, et al. (May 2023). "Acute effects of intravenous DMT in a randomized placebo-controlled study in healthy participants" . Transl Psychiatry . 13 (1) 172. doi : 10.1038/s41398-023-02477-4 . PMC 10206108 . PMID 37221177 . ^ Luan LX, Eckernäs E, Ashton M, Rosas FE, Uthaug MV, Bartha A, et al. (January 2024). "Psychological and physiological effects of extended DMT" . J Psychopharmacol . 38 (1): 56– 67. doi : 10.1177/02698811231196877 . PMC 10851633 . PMID 37897244 . ^ Erne L, Vogt SB, Müller L, Nuraj A, Becker A, Klaiber A, et al. (May 2025). "Acute dose-dependent effects and self-guided titration of continuous N,N-dimethyltryptamine infusions in a double-blind placebo-controlled study in healthy participants" . Neuropsychopharmacology . 50 (6): 1008– 1016. doi : 10.1038/s41386-024-02041-8 . PMC 12032411 . PMID 39702577 . ^ Smith RL, Canton H, Barrett RJ, Sanders-Bush E (November 1998). "Agonist properties of N,N-dimethyltryptamine at serotonin 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C receptors". Pharmacol Biochem Behav . 61 (3): 323– 330. doi : 10.1016/s0091-3057(98)00110-5 . PMID 9768567 . ^ Kuypers KP (2020). "The therapeutic potential of microdosing psychedelics in depression" . Ther Adv Psychopharmacol . 10 2045125320950567. doi : 10.1177/2045125320950567 . PMC 7457631 . PMID 32922736 . ^ a b c Tagen M, Mantuani D, van Heerden L, Holstein A, Klumpers LE, Knowles R (September 2023). "The risk of chronic psychedelic and MDMA microdosing for valvular heart disease". J Psychopharmacol . 37 (9): 876– 890. doi : 10.1177/02698811231190865 . PMID 37572027 . ^ a b c Rouaud A, Calder AE, Hasler G (March 2024). "Microdosing psychedelics and the risk of cardiac fibrosis and valvulopathy: Comparison to known cardiotoxins" . J Psychopharmacol . 38 (3): 217– 224. doi : 10.1177/02698811231225609 . PMC 10944580 . PMID 38214279 . ^ Märcher Rørsted E, Jensen AA, Kristensen JL (November 2021). "25CN-NBOH: A Selective Agonist for in vitro and in vivo Investigations of the Serotonin 2A Receptor" . ChemMedChem . 16 (21): 3263– 3270. doi : 10.1002/cmdc.202100395 . PMID 34288515 . ^ a b c d e f g h Duan W, Cao D, Wang S, Cheng J (January 2024). "Serotonin 2A Receptor (5-HT2AR) Agonists: Psychedelics and Non-Hallucinogenic Analogues as Emerging Antidepressants". Chem Rev . 124 (1): 124– 163. doi : 10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00375 . PMID 38033123 . ^ a b Peplow M (2024). "Next-generation psychedelics: should new agents skip the trip?". Nature Biotechnology . 42 (6): 827– 830. doi : 10.1038/s41587-024-02285-1 . ISSN 1087-0156 . PMID 38831049 . Another problem is that some classical psychedelics are also agonists of the 5-HT2B receptor, which is expressed in heart tissue and can cause long-term cardiac problems. Kristensen's company Lophora aims to solve that with its lead compound LPH-5, a phenylethylamine derivative with an extra molecular ring that makes it less flexible. LPH-5 has a 60-fold higher selectivity for 5-HT2A over 5-HT2B. ^ a b c d e f g h Thomas K (2024). "Toxicology and Pharmacological Interactions of Classic Psychedelics" . Psychedelic Harm Reduction . Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences. Vol. 77. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 43– 62. doi : 10.1007/7854_2024_508 . ISBN 978-3-032-21106-4 . PMID 39042251 . Retrieved 14 May 2025 . ^ Henríquez-Hernández LA, Rojas-Hernández J, Quintana-Hernández DJ, Borkel LF (February 2023). "Hofmann vs. Paracelsus: Do Psychedelics Defy the Basics of Toxicology?-A Systematic Review of the Main Ergolamines, Simple Tryptamines, and Phenylethylamines" . Toxics . 11 (2): 148. Bibcode : 2023Toxic..11..148H . doi : 10.3390/toxics11020148 . PMC 9963058 . PMID 36851023 . ^ a b Malcolm B, Thomas K (June 2022). "Serotonin toxicity of serotonergic psychedelics". Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 239 (6): 1881– 1891. doi : 10.1007/s00213-021-05876-x . PMID 34251464 . ^ a b Tap SC, Thomas K, Páleníček T, Stenbæk DS, Oliveira-Maia AJ, van Dalfsen J, et al. (September 2025). "Concomitant use of antidepressants and classic psychedelics: A scoping review" . J Psychopharmacol . 39 (10): 1072– 1088. doi : 10.1177/02698811251368360 . PMC 12572353 . PMID 40937732 . Importantly, the idea of increased risk for developing serotonin syndrome and/or serotonin toxicity, when are co-administered with high doses of psychedelics, has recently been challenged, in part because classic psychedelics are partial agonists of the 5-HT2A receptor and would also compete for serotonin binding (Malcolm and Thomas, 2022; Rickli et al., 2016; Sarparast et al., 2022). Based on this clinical rationale, the concomitant use of ADs and classic psychedelics may be preferred, or patients could temporarily reduce the dose of ADs around dosing days with psychedelics to have minimal interactions. Simultaneously, the competition for 5-HT2A receptors could impede the biological action of psychedelics during concomitant use of ADs and potentially limit efficacy (Halman et al., 2024), particularly as the 5-HT2A receptor induces neuroplasticity (Cameron et al., 2023; Ly et al., 2018; Vargas et al., 2023). ^ a b c d e Vollenweider FX, Vollenweider-Scherpenhuyzen MF, Babler A, Vogel H, Hell D (1998). "Psilocybin induces schizophrenia-like psychosis in humans via a serotonin-2 agonist action". NeuroReport . 9 (17): 3897– 3902. doi : 10.1097/00001756-199812010-00024 . PMID 9875725 . ^ Kometer M, Schmidt A, Jancke L, Vollenweider FX (2013). "Activation of serotonin 2A receptors underlies the psilocybin-induced effects on alpha oscillations, N170 visual-evoked potentials, and visual hallucinations" . Journal of Neuroscience . 33 (25): 10544– 10551. doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3007-12.2013 . PMC 6618596 . PMID 23785166 . ^ a b Preller KH, Herdener M, Pokorny T, Planzer A, Kraehenmann R, Stampfli P, et al. (2017). "The Fabric of Meaning and Subjective Effects in LSD-Induced States Depend on Serotonin 2A Receptor Activation". Current Biology . 27 (3): 451– 457. Bibcode : 2017CBio...27..451P . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2016.12.030 . PMID 28132813 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Halman A, Kong G, Sarris J, Perkins D (January 2024). "Drug-drug interactions involving classic psychedelics: A systematic review" . J Psychopharmacol . 38 (1): 3– 18. doi : 10.1177/02698811231211219 . PMC 10851641 . PMID 37982394 . ^ a b c d e Yates G, Melon E (January 2024). "Trip-killers: a concerning practice associated with psychedelic drug use" . Emerg Med J . 41 (2): 112– 113. doi : 10.1136/emermed-2023-213377 . PMID 38123961 . ^ a b c d Bellanavidanalage Gothami Ayanthie Vis Jayasinha (8 February 2024). Towards Safer Trips: Exploring Harm Reduction Strategies for Recreational Psychedelic Use in Aotearoa New Zealand (Thesis). University of Otago . Retrieved 3 October 2024 . ^ a b c d Suran M (February 2024). "Study Finds Hundreds of Reddit Posts on "Trip-Killers" for Psychedelic Drugs". JAMA . 331 (8): 632– 634. doi : 10.1001/jama.2023.28257 . PMID 38294772 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Vogt SB, Liechti ME (2025). "Clinical Pharmacology" .

In Nutt DJ, Thurgur H (eds.). Psychedelics in Psychiatry . International Review of Neurobiology. Vol. 181. London: Academic Press. pp. 99– 148. doi : 10.1016/bs.irn.2025.02.003 . ISBN 978-0-443-34386-5 . PMID 40541320 . ^ a b Lewis V, Bonniwell EM, Lanham JK, Ghaffari A, Sheshbaradaran H, Cao AB, et al. (March 2023). "A non-hallucinogenic LSD analog with therapeutic potential for mood disorders" . Cell Rep . 42 (3) 112203. doi : 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112203 . PMC 10112881 . PMID 36884348 . ^ a b Glatfelter GC, Pottie E, Partilla JS, Stove CP, Baumann MH (March 2024). "Comparative Pharmacological Effects of Lisuride and Lysergic Acid Diethylamide Revisited" . ACS Pharmacol Transl Sci . 7 (3): 641– 653. doi : 10.1021/acsptsci.3c00192 . PMC 10928901 . PMID 38481684 . ^ a b c d e Holze F, Liechti ME, Müller F (July 2024). "Pharmacological Properties of Psychedelics with a Special Focus on Potential Harms". Psychedelic Harm Reduction . Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences. Vol. 77. pp. 25– 42. doi : 10.1007/7854_2024_510 . ISBN 978-3-032-21106-4 . PMID 39080236 . ^ a b c Nichols D, Nichols CD (2021). "The Pharmacology of Psychedelics" .

In Grob C, Grigsby J (eds.). Handbook of Medical Hallucinogens . Guilford Publications. pp. 3– 28. ISBN 978-1-4625-4544-5 . Retrieved 17 January 2025 . ^ a b Brandt SD, Kavanagh PV, Twamley B, Westphal F, Elliott SP, Wallach J, et al. (February 2018). "Return of the lysergamides. Part IV: Analytical and pharmacological characterization of lysergic acid morpholide (LSM-775)" . Drug Test Anal . 10 (2): 310– 322. doi : 10.1002/dta.2222 . PMC 6230476 . PMID 28585392 . Additionally, pretreatment with the 5‐HT1A agonist buspirone (20 mg p.o.) markedly attenuates the visual effects of psilocybin in human volunteers.59 Although buspirone failed to completely block the hallucinogenic effects of psilocybin, the limited inhibition is not necessarily surprising because buspirone is a low efficacy 5‐HT1A partial agonist.60 The level of 5‐HT1A activation produced by buspirone may not be sufficient to completely counteract the stimulation of 5‐HT2A receptors by psilocin (the active metabolite of psilocybin). Another consideration is that psilocin acts as a 5‐HT1A agonist.30 If 5‐HT1A activation by psilocin buffers its hallucinogenic effects similar to DMT58 then competition between psilocin and a weaker partial agonist such as buspirone would limit attenuation of the hallucinogenic response. ^ a b Pokorny T, Preller KH, Kraehenmann R, Vollenweider FX (April 2016). "Modulatory effect of the 5-HT1A agonist buspirone and the mixed non-hallucinogenic 5-HT1A/2A agonist ergotamine on psilocybin-induced psychedelic experience". Eur Neuropsychopharmacol . 26 (4): 756– 766. doi : 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2016.01.005 . PMID 26875114 . ^ Zahid Z, Strassman RJ, Qualls CR, Nayak SM (May 2026). "5-HT1A receptor blockade potentiates the subjective effects of DMT". Joural of Psychopharmacology 02698811261443696. doi : 10.1177/02698811261443696 . PMID 42068196 . ^ Strassman RJ (1996). "Human psychopharmacology of N,N-dimethyltryptamine". Behav Brain Res . 73 ( 1– 2): 121– 124. doi : 10.1016/0166-4328(96)00081-2 . PMID 8788488 . ^ a b Halberstadt AL, Nichols DE (2020). "Serotonin and serotonin receptors in hallucinogen action". Handbook of Behavioral Neuroscience . Vol. 31. Elsevier. pp. 843– 863. doi : 10.1016/b978-0-444-64125-0.00043-8 . ISBN 978-0-444-64125-0 . ISSN 1569-7339 . ^ Shahar O, Botvinnik A, Esh-Zuntz N, Brownstien M, Wolf R, Lotan A, et al. (November 2022). "Role of 5-HT2A, 5-HT2C, 5-HT1A and TAAR1 Receptors in the Head Twitch Response Induced by 5-Hydroxytryptophan and Psilocybin: Translational Implications" . Int J Mol Sci . 23 (22) 14148. doi : 10.3390/ijms232214148 . PMC 9698447 . PMID 36430623 . ^ Zhu H, Wang L, Wang X, Yao Y, Zhou P, Su R (November 2024). "5-hydroxytryptamine 2C/1A receptors modulate the biphasic dose response of the head twitch response and locomotor activity induced by DOM in mice". Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 241 (11): 2315– 2330. doi : 10.1007/s00213-024-06635-4 . PMID 38916640 . ^ a b Glatfelter GC, Clark AA, Cavalco NG, Landavazo A, Partilla JS, Naeem M, et al. (December 2024). "Serotonin 1A Receptors Modulate Serotonin 2A Receptor-Mediated Behavioral Effects of 5-Methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine Analogs in Mice" . ACS Chem Neurosci . 15 (24): 4458– 4477. doi : 10.1021/acschemneuro.4c00513 . PMC 12745965 . PMID 39636099 . ^ Puigseslloses P, Nadal-Gratacós N, Ketsela G, Weiss N, Berzosa X, Estrada-Tejedor R, et al. (August 2024). "Structure-activity relationships of serotonergic 5-MeO-DMT derivatives: insights into psychoactive and thermoregulatory properties" . Mol Psychiatry . 29 (8): 2346– 2358. doi : 10.1038/s41380-024-02506-8 . PMC 11412900 . PMID 38486047 . ^ a b c Sarparast A, Thomas K, Malcolm B, Stauffer CS (June 2022). "Drug-drug interactions between psychiatric medications and MDMA or psilocybin: a systematic review" . Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 239 (6): 1945– 1976. doi : 10.1007/s00213-022-06083-y . PMC 9177763 . PMID 35253070 . ^ Olsen RW (July 2018). "GABAA receptor: Positive and negative allosteric modulators" . Neuropharmacology . 136 (Pt A): 10– 22. doi : 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.01.036 . PMC 6027637 . PMID 29407219 . ^ Kaminski D, Reinert JP (August 2024). "The Tolerability and Safety of Psilocybin in Psychiatric and Substance-Dependence Conditions: A Systematic Review". Ann Pharmacother . 58 (8): 811– 826. doi : 10.1177/10600280231205645 . PMID 37902038 . ^ Leikin JB, Krantz AJ, Zell-Kanter M, Barkin RL, Hryhorczuk DO (1989). "Clinical Features and Management of Intoxication Due to Hallucinogenic Drugs". Medical Toxicology and Adverse Drug Experience . 4 (5). Springer Science and Business Media LLC: 324– 350. doi : 10.1007/bf03259916 . ISSN 0113-5244 . PMID 2682130 . ^ Halpern JH, Suzuki J, Huertas PE, Passie T (2010). "Hallucinogens". Addiction Medicine . New York, NY: Springer New York. pp. 1083– 1098. doi : 10.1007/978-1-4419-0338-9_54 . ISBN 978-1-4419-0337-2 . ^ Gartner HT, Wan HZ, Simmons RE, Sollee DR, Sheikh S (November 2024). "Psychedelic mushroom-containing chocolate exposures: Case series". Am J Emerg Med . 85 : 208– 213. doi : 10.1016/j.ajem.2024.09.038 . PMID 39288500 . ^ Lima G, Soares C, Teixeira M, Castelo-Branco M (December 2024). "Psychedelic research, assisted therapy and the role of the anaesthetist: A review and insights for experimental and clinical practices". Br J Clin Pharmacol . 90 (12): 3119– 3134. doi : 10.1111/bcp.16264 . PMID 39380091 . ^ Nicholas CR, Banks MI, Lennertz RC, Wenthur CJ, Krause BM, Riedner BA, et al. (September 2024). "Co-administration of midazolam and psilocybin: differential effects on subjective quality versus memory of the psychedelic experience" . Transl Psychiatry . 14 (1) 372. doi : 10.1038/s41398-024-03059-8 . PMC 11393325 . PMID 39266503 . ^ Barnett BS, Vest MF, Delatte MS, King Iv F, Mauney EE, Coulson AJ, et al. (January 2025). "Practical considerations in the establishment of psychedelic research programs" . Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 242 (1): 27– 43. doi : 10.1007/s00213-024-06722-6 . PMC 11742797 . PMID 39627438 . Furthermore, benzodiazepines might attenuate the antidepressant effects of psychedelics (Hibicke et al. 2024). ^ Hibicke M, Billac G, Nichols CD (March 2024). "Preadministration of Lorazepam Reduces Efficacy and Longevity of Antidepressant-Like Effect from a Psychedelic" . Psychedelic Med (New Rochelle) . 2 (1): 10– 14. doi : 10.1089/psymed.2023.0037 . PMC 11658646 . PMID 40051761 . ^ a b Dean BV, Stellpflug SJ, Burnett AM, Engebretsen KM (June 2013). "2C or not 2C: phenethylamine designer drug review" . J Med Toxicol . 9 (2): 172– 178. doi : 10.1007/s13181-013-0295-x . PMC 3657019 . PMID 23494844 . ^ Theobald DS, Maurer HH (January 2007). "Identification of monoamine oxidase and cytochrome P450 isoenzymes involved in the deamination of phenethylamine-derived designer drugs (2C-series)". Biochem Pharmacol . 73 (2): 287– 297. doi : 10.1016/j.bcp.2006.09.022 . PMID 17067556 . ^ Thomann J, Kolaczynska KE, Stoeckmann OV, Rudin D, Vizeli P, Hoener MC, et al. (2024). "In vitro and in vivo metabolism of psilocybin's active metabolite psilocin" . Front Pharmacol . 15 1391689. doi : 10.3389/fphar.2024.1391689 . PMC 11089204 . PMID 38741590 . ^ Dodd S, Norman TR, Eyre HA, Stahl SM, Phillips A, Carvalho AF, et al. (August 2023). "Psilocybin in neuropsychiatry: a review of its pharmacology, safety, and efficacy" (PDF) . CNS Spectr . 28 (4): 416– 426. doi : 10.1017/S1092852922000888 . PMID 35811423 . ^ Hasler F, Bourquin D, Brenneisen R, Bär T, Vollenweider FX (June 1997). "Determination of psilocin and 4-hydroxyindole-3-acetic acid in plasma by HPLC-ECD and pharmacokinetic profiles of oral and intravenous psilocybin in man". Pharm Acta Helv . 72 (3): 175– 184. doi : 10.1016/s0031-6865(97)00014-9 . PMID 9204776 . ^ a b c d Fradet M, Kelly CM, Donnelly AJ, Suppes T (December 2024). "Psilocybin and hallucinogenic mushrooms". CNS Spectr . 29 (6): 611– 632. doi : 10.1017/S1092852924002487 . PMID 39789676 . ^ Barnett BS, Koons CJ, Van den Eynde V, Gillman PK, Bodkin JA (June 2024). "Hypertensive Emergency Secondary to Combining Psilocybin Mushrooms, Extended Release Dextroamphetamine-Amphetamine, and Tranylcypromine" . J Psychoactive Drugs . 57 (3): 297– 303. doi : 10.1080/02791072.2024.2368617 . PMID 38903003 . ^ Vojtĕchovský M, Hort V, Safratová V (October 1968). "Ovlvinĕní experimntálních psychóz po psilocybinu inhibitory MAO" . Act Nerv Super (Praha) (in Czech). 10 (3): 278– 279. PMID 5702524 . ^ a b c d Becker AM, Humbert-Droz M, Mueller L, Jelušić A, Tolev A, Straumann I, et al. (February 2025). "Acute Effects and Pharmacokinetics of LSD after Paroxetine or Placebo Pre-Administration in a Randomized, Double-Blind, Cross-Over Phase I Trial" . Clin Pharmacol Ther . 117 (6): 1784– 1792. doi : 10.1002/cpt.3618 . PMC 12087691 . PMID 40022427 . ^ Vizeli P, Straumann I, Holze F, Schmid Y, Dolder PC, Liechti ME (May 2021). "Genetic influence of CYP2D6 on pharmacokinetics and acute subjective effects of LSD in a pooled analysis" . Sci Rep . 11 (1) 10851. Bibcode : 2021NatSR..1110851V . doi : 10.1038/s41598-021-90343-y . PMC 8149637 . PMID 34035391 . ^ Bijl D (October 2004). "The serotonin syndrome". Neth J Med . 62 (9): 309– 13. PMID 15635814 . Mechanisms of serotonergic drugs implicated in serotonin syndrome... Stimulation of serotonin receptors... LSD ^ "AMT" . DrugWise.org.uk . 2016-01-03 . Retrieved 2019-11-18 . ^ Alpha-methyltryptamine (AMT) – Critical Review Report (PDF) (Report). World Health Organisation – Expert Committee on Drug Dependence (published 2014-06-20). 20 June 2014 . Retrieved 2019-11-18 . ^ Boyer EW, Shannon M (March 2005). "The serotonin syndrome" (PDF) .

The New England Journal of Medicine . 352 (11): 1112– 20. doi : 10.1056/NEJMra041867 . PMID 15784664 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 2013-06-18. ^ a b c Nayak SM, Gukasyan N, Barrett FS, Erowid E, Erowid F, Griffiths RR (September 2021). "Classic Psychedelic Coadministration with Lithium, but Not Lamotrigine, is Associated with Seizures: An Analysis of Online Psychedelic Experience Reports" (PDF) . Pharmacopsychiatry . 54 (5): 240– 245. doi : 10.1055/a-1524-2794 . PMID 34348413 . ^ Ray TS (February 2010). "Psychedelics and the human receptorome" . PLOS ONE . 5 (2) e9019. Bibcode : 2010PLoSO...5.9019R . doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0009019 . PMC 2814854 . PMID 20126400 . ^ Roth BL, Gumpper RH (May 2023). "Psychedelics as Transformative Therapeutics" . Am J Psychiatry . 180 (5): 340– 347. doi : 10.1176/appi.ajp.20230172 . PMID 37122272 . ^ a b Kozlenkov A, González-Maeso J (2013). "Animal Models and Hallucinogenic Drugs".

The Neuroscience of Hallucinations . New York, NY: Springer New York. pp. 253– 277. doi : 10.1007/978-1-4614-4121-2_14 . ISBN 978-1-4614-4120-5 . ^ Halberstadt AL, Chatha M, Klein AK, Wallach J, Brandt SD (May 2020). "Correlation between the potency of hallucinogens in the mouse head-twitch response assay and their behavioral and subjective effects in other species" . Neuropharmacology . 167 107933. doi : 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2019.107933 . PMC 9191653 . PMID 31917152 . ^ a b c Glennon RA, Dukat M (June 2024). "1-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl)-2-aminopropane (DOI): From an Obscure to Pivotal Member of the DOX Family of Serotonergic Psychedelic Agents - A Review" . ACS Pharmacology & Translational Science . 7 (6): 1722– 1745. doi : 10.1021/acsptsci.4c00157 . PMC 11184610 . PMID 38898956 .

Although the specific signaling cascades mediating the HTR have not been conclusively identified, Gq and β-arrestin2 have been implicated. Recent studies with different existing and novel agents, including DOI, found that the HTR was correlated with Gq efficacy but not with β-arrestin2 recruitment.114 ^ a b c d Barksdale BR, Doss MK, Fonzo GA, Nemeroff CB (March 2024). "The mechanistic divide in psychedelic neuroscience: An unbridgeable gap?" . Neurotherapeutics . 21 (2) e00322. doi : 10.1016/j.neurot.2024.e00322 . PMC 10963929 . PMID 38278658 . ^ a b c d e Gumpper RH, Nichols DE (October 2024). "Chemistry/structural biology of psychedelic drugs and their receptor(s)". Br J Pharmacol . 183 (14) bph.17361. doi : 10.1111/bph.17361 . PMID 39354889 . ^ a b c d e Wallach J, Cao AB, Calkins MM, Heim AJ, Lanham JK, Bonniwell EM, et al. (December 2023). "Identification of 5-HT2A receptor signaling pathways associated with psychedelic potential" . Nat Commun . 14 (1) 8221. Bibcode : 2023NatCo..14.8221W . doi : 10.1038/s41467-023-44016-1 . PMC 10724237 . PMID 38102107 . ^ Felsing DE, Nilson A, Jain M, Raval S, Inoue A, Allen J (2019). "β-arrestins mediate rapid 5-HT2A receptor endocytosis to regulate intensity and duration of signaling" .

The FASEB Journal . 33 (S1). doi : 10.1096/fasebj.2019.33.1_supplement.502.3 . ISSN 0892-6638 . ^ Davis R, Dutheil SS, Zhang L, Lehmann E, Awadallah N, Yao W, et al. (December 2023). "ACNP 62nd Annual Meeting: Poster Abstracts P251 - P500: P358. Discovery and Characterization of ITI-1549, a Novel Non-Hallucinogenic Psychedelic for the Treatment of Neuropsychiatric Disorders" . Neuropsychopharmacology . 48 (Suppl 1): 211–354 (272–273). doi : 10.1038/s41386-023-01756-4 . PMC 10729596 . PMID 38040810 . ^ Marek GJ (2018). "Interactions of Hallucinogens with the Glutamatergic System: Permissive Network Effects Mediated Through Cortical Layer V Pyramidal Neurons". Behavioral Neurobiology of Psychedelic Drugs . Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences. Vol. 36. pp. 107– 135. doi : 10.1007/7854_2017_480 . ISBN 978-3-662-55878-2 . PMID 28831734 . ^ Salinsky LM, Merritt CR, Zamora JC, Giacomini JL, Anastasio NC, Cunningham KA (2023). "μ-opioid receptor agonists and psychedelics: pharmacological opportunities and challenges" . Front Pharmacol . 14 1239159. doi : 10.3389/fphar.2023.1239159 . PMC 10598667 . PMID 37886127 . ^ a b c Halberstadt AL, Geyer MA (2018). "Effect of Hallucinogens on Unconditioned Behavior". Behavioral Neurobiology of Psychedelic Drugs . Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences. Vol. 36. pp. 159– 199. doi : 10.1007/7854_2016_466 . ISBN 978-3-662-55878-2 . PMC 5787039 . PMID 28224459 . the 5-HT releasing drugs fenfluramine and p-chloroamphetamine (PCA) do produce a robust HTR (Singleton and Marsden 1981; Darmani 1998a). Fenfluramine and PCA are thought to act indirectly, by increasing carrier-mediated release of 5-HT, because the response can be blocked by inhibition of the 5-HT transporter (Balsara et al. 1986; Darmani 1998a) or by depletion of 5-HT (Singleton and Marsden 1981; Balsara et al. 1986). Because indirect 5-HT agonists such as fenfluramine, PCA, and 5-HTP are not hallucinogenic (Van Praag et al. 1971; Brauer et al. 1996; Turner et al. 2006), their effects on HTR can potentially be classified as false-positive responses. ^ Aqil M, Roseman L (February 2023). "More than meets the eye: The role of sensory dimensions in psychedelic brain dynamics, experience, and therapeutics". Neuropharmacology . 223 109300. doi : 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2022.109300 . PMID 36334767 . ^ Császár-Nagy N, Kapócs G, Bókkon I (July 2019). "Classic psychedelics: the special role of the visual system". Rev Neurosci . 30 (6): 651– 669. doi : 10.1515/revneuro-2018-0092 . PMID 30939118 . ^ Bressloff PC, Cowan JD, Golubitsky M, Thomas PJ, Wiener MC (March 2002). "What geometric visual hallucinations tell us about the visual cortex". Neural Comput . 14 (3): 473– 491. doi : 10.1162/089976602317250861 . PMID 11860679 . ^ Doss MK, Madden MB, Gaddis A, Nebel MB, Griffiths RR, Mathur BN, et al. (April 2022). "Models of psychedelic drug action: modulation of cortical-subcortical circuits" . Brain . 145 (2): 441– 456. doi : 10.1093/brain/awab406 . PMC 9014750 . PMID 34897383 . ^ Rieser NM, Schmidt TT, Preller KH (July 2024). "Neurobiological Correlates of Psychedelic Experiences and Psychedelic-Associated Adverse Effects". Psychedelic Harm Reduction . Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences. Vol. 77. pp. 87– 106. doi : 10.1007/7854_2024_507 . ISBN 978-3-032-21106-4 . PMID 39080245 . ^ a b c d e Sapienza J (13 October 2023). "The Key Role of Intracellular 5-HT2A Receptors: A Turning Point in Psychedelic Research?" . Psychoactives . 2 (4): 287– 293. doi : 10.3390/psychoactives2040018 . ISSN 2813-1851 . ^ Wojtas A, Gołembiowska K (December 2023). "Molecular and Medical Aspects of Psychedelics" . Int J Mol Sci . 25 (1): 241. doi : 10.3390/ijms25010241 . PMC 10778977 . PMID 38203411 .

While some false positives have been identified, such as fenfluramine, p-chloroamphetamine, and 5-hydroxytryptophan, the test predominantly exhibits specificity for 5-HT2A receptor agonists . ^ a b c d e f Vargas MV, Dunlap LE, Dong C, Carter SJ, Tombari RJ, Jami SA, et al. (February 2023). "Psychedelics promote neuroplasticity through the activation of intracellular 5-HT2A receptors" . Science . 379 (6633): 700– 706. Bibcode : 2023Sci...379..700V . doi : 10.1126/science.adf0435 . PMC 10108900 . PMID 36795823 .

In addition to promoting psychedelic-induced structural neuroplasticity, the intracellular population of 5-HT2ARs might also contribute to the hallucinogenic effects of psychedelics.

When we administered a serotonin-releasing agent to wild type mice, we did not observe a HTR. However, the same drug was able to induce a HTR in mice expressing SERT on cortical neurons of the mPFC—a brain region known to be essential for the HTR (49). Thus, activation of intracellular cortical 5-HT2ARs may play a role in the subjective effects of psychedelics. This hypothesis is further supported by previous work demonstrating that a high dose of the serotonin precursor 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) induces a HTR in WT mice, which can be blocked by an N-methyltransferase inhibitor that prevents the metabolism of 5-HTP to N-methyltryptamines (50). Inhibition of N-methyltransferase failed to block the HTR induced by 5-MeO-DMT (50). Taken together, this work emphasizes that accessing intracellular 5-HT2ARs is important for 5-HT2AR agonists to produce a HTR. ^ Schmid CL, Bohn LM (2018). "βArrestins: Ligand-Directed Regulators of 5-HT2A Receptor Trafficking and Signaling Events". 5-HT2A Receptors in the Central Nervous System . Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp. 31– 55. doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-70474-6_2 . ISBN 978-3-319-70472-2 . ^ Schmid CL, Bohn LM (October 2010). "Serotonin, but not N-methyltryptamines, activates the serotonin 2A receptor via a β-arrestin2/Src/Akt signaling complex in vivo" . J Neurosci . 30 (40): 13513– 24. doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1665-10.2010 . PMC 3001293 . PMID 20926677 . ^ Olson DE (2018). "Psychoplastogens: A Promising Class of Plasticity-Promoting Neurotherapeutics" . J Exp Neurosci . 12 1179069518800508. doi : 10.1177/1179069518800508 . PMC 6149016 . PMID 30262987 . ^ Vargas MV, Meyer R, Avanes AA, Rus M, Olson DE (2021). "Psychedelics and Other Psychoplastogens for Treating Mental Illness" . Front Psychiatry . 12 727117. doi : 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.727117 . PMC 8520991 . PMID 34671279 . ^ a b Olson DE (February 2022). "Biochemical Mechanisms Underlying Psychedelic-Induced Neuroplasticity" . Biochemistry . 61 (3): 127– 136. doi : 10.1021/acs.biochem.1c00812 . PMC 9004607 . PMID 35060714 . ^ a b c Hatzipantelis CJ, Olson DE (February 2024). "The Effects of Psychedelics on Neuronal Physiology" . Annu Rev Physiol . 86 : 27– 47. doi : 10.1146/annurev-physiol-042022-020923 . PMC 10922499 . PMID 37931171 . ^ Husain MI, Ledwos N, Fellows E, Baer J, Rosenblat JD, Blumberger DM, et al. (2022). "Serotonergic psychedelics for depression: What do we know about neurobiological mechanisms of action?" . Front Psychiatry . 13 1076459. doi : 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.1076459 . PMC 9950579 . PMID 36844032 . ^ Feulner L, Sermchaiwong T, Rodland N, Galarneau D (2023). "Efficacy and Safety of Psychedelics in Treating Anxiety Disorders" . Ochsner J . 23 (4): 315– 328. doi : 10.31486/toj.23.0076 . PMC 10741816 . PMID 38143548 . ^ Werle I, Bertoglio LJ (December 2024). "Psychedelics: A review of their effects on recalled aversive memories and fear/anxiety expression in rodents". Neurosci Biobehav Rev . 167 105899. doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2024.105899 . PMID 39305969 . ^ Markopoulos A, Inserra A, De Gregorio D, Gobbi G (2021). "Evaluating the Potential Use of Serotonergic Psychedelics in Autism Spectrum Disorder" . Front Pharmacol . 12 749068. doi : 10.3389/fphar.2021.749068 . PMC 8846292 . PMID 35177979 . ^ Bhatt KV, Weissman CR (February 2024). "The effect of psilocybin on empathy and prosocial behavior: a proposed mechanism for enduring antidepressant effects" . npj Ment Health Res . 3 (1) 7. doi : 10.1038/s44184-023-00053-8 . PMC 10955966 . PMID 38609500 . ^ Kupferberg A, Hasler G (2024). "From antidepressants and psychotherapy to oxytocin, vagus nerve stimulation, ketamine and psychedelics: how established and novel treatments can improve social functioning in major depression" . Front Psychiatry . 15 1372650. doi : 10.3389/fpsyt.2024.1372650 . PMC 11513289 . PMID 39469469 . ^ Delgado PL, Moreno FA (1998). "Hallucinogens, serotonin and obsessive-compulsive disorder". J Psychoactive Drugs . 30 (4): 359– 366. doi : 10.1080/02791072.1998.10399711 . PMID 9924841 . ^ Ehrmann K, Allen JJ, Moreno FA (2022). "Psilocybin for the Treatment of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorders". Disruptive Psychopharmacology . Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences. Vol. 56. pp. 247– 259. doi : 10.1007/7854_2021_279 . ISBN 978-3-031-12183-8 . PMID 34784024 . ^ Collins HM (November 2024). "Psychedelics for the Treatment of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder: Efficacy and Proposed Mechanisms" . Int J Neuropsychopharmacol . 27 (12) pyae057. doi : 10.1093/ijnp/pyae057 . PMC 11635828 . PMID 39611453 . ^ Szafoni S, Gręblowski P, Grabowska K, Więckiewicz G (2024). "Unlocking the healing power of psilocybin: an overview of the role of psilocybin therapy in major depressive disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder and substance use disorder" . Front Psychiatry . 15 1406888. doi : 10.3389/fpsyt.2024.1406888 . PMC 11196758 . PMID 38919636 . ^ Owe-Larsson M, Kamińska K, Buchalska B, Mirowska-Guzel D, Cudnoch-Jędrzejewska A (October 2024). "Psilocybin in pharmacotherapy of obsessive-compulsive disorder" . Pharmacol Rep . 76 (5): 911– 925. doi : 10.1007/s43440-024-00633-1 . PMC 11387457 . PMID 39088105 . ^ Urban MM, Stingl MR, Meinhardt MW (2023). "Mini-review: The neurobiology of treating substance use disorders with classical psychedelics" . Front Neurosci . 17 1156319. doi : 10.3389/fnins.2023.1156319 . PMC 10149865 . PMID 37139521 . ^ Vamvakopoulou IA, Nutt DJ (2024). "Psychedelics: From Cave Art to 21st-Century Medicine for Addiction" . Eur Addict Res . 30 (5): 302– 320. doi : 10.1159/000540062 . PMC 11527458 . PMID 39321788 . ^ Gomez-Escolar A, Folch-Sanchez D, Stefaniuk J, Swithenbank Z, Nisa A, Braddick F, et al. (October 2024). "Current Perspectives on the Clinical Research and Medicalization of Psychedelic Drugs for Addiction Treatments: Safety, Efficacy, Limitations and Challenges" . CNS Drugs . 38 (10): 771– 789. doi : 10.1007/s40263-024-01101-3 . PMID 39033264 . ^ Valdez T, Patel V, Senesombath N, Hatahet-Donovan Z, Hornick M (November 2024). "Therapeutic Potential of Psychedelic Compounds for Substance Use Disorders" . Pharmaceuticals . 17 (11): 1484. doi : 10.3390/ph17111484 . PMC 11597566 . PMID 39598395 . ^ Nichols DE, Johnson MW, Nichols CD (February 2017). "Psychedelics as Medicines: An Emerging New Paradigm". Clin Pharmacol Ther . 101 (2): 209– 219. doi : 10.1002/cpt.557 . PMID 28019026 . ^ Flanagan TW, Nichols CD (2022). "Psychedelics and Anti-inflammatory Activity in Animal Models". Disruptive Psychopharmacology . Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences. Vol. 56. pp. 229– 245. doi : 10.1007/7854_2022_367 . ISBN 978-3-031-12183-8 . PMID 35546383 . ^ Nichols CD (November 2022). "Psychedelics as potent anti-inflammatory therapeutics" . Neuropharmacology . 219 109232. doi : 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2022.109232 . PMID 36007854 . ^ Thompson C, Szabo A (December 2020). "Psychedelics as a novel approach to treating autoimmune conditions". Immunol Lett . 228 : 45– 54. doi : 10.1016/j.imlet.2020.10.001 . hdl : 10852/80687 . PMID 33035575 . ^ Low ZX, Ng WS, Lim ES, Goh BH, Kumari Y (September 2024). "The immunomodulatory effects of classical psychedelics: A systematic review of preclinical studies" . Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry . 136 111139. doi : 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2024.111139 . PMID 39251080 . ^ Castellanos JP, Woolley C, Bruno KA, Zeidan F, Halberstadt A, Furnish T (July 2020). "Chronic pain and psychedelics: a review and proposed mechanism of action". Reg Anesth Pain Med . 45 (7): 486– 494. doi : 10.1136/rapm-2020-101273 . PMID 32371500 . ^ Zia FZ, Baumann MH, Belouin SJ, Dworkin RH, Ghauri MH, Hendricks PS, et al. (August 2023). "Are psychedelic medicines the reset for chronic pain? Preliminary findings and research needs" . Neuropharmacology . 233 109528. doi : 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2023.109528 . PMID 37015315 . ^ Goel A, Rai Y, Sivadas S, Diep C, Clarke H, Shanthanna H, et al. (October 2023). "Use of Psychedelics for Pain: A Scoping Review". Anesthesiology . 139 (4): 523– 536. doi : 10.1097/ALN.0000000000004673 . PMID 37698433 . ^ Schindler EA (2022). "Psychedelics in the Treatment of Headache and Chronic Pain Disorders". Disruptive Psychopharmacology . Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences. Vol. 56. pp. 261– 285. doi : 10.1007/7854_2022_365 . ISBN 978-3-031-12183-8 . PMID 35546382 . ^ Schindler EA, Hendricks PS (2023). "Adapting psychedelic medicine for headache and chronic pain disorders". Expert Rev Neurother . 23 (10): 867– 882. doi : 10.1080/14737175.2023.2246655 . PMID 37652000 . ^ Schindler EA (September 2023). "The Potential of Psychedelics for the Treatment of Episodic Migraine". Curr Pain Headache Rep . 27 (9): 489– 495. doi : 10.1007/s11916-023-01145-y . PMID 37540398 . ^ Atiq MA, Baker MR, Voort JL, Vargas MV, Choi DS (May 2024). "Disentangling the acute subjective effects of classic psychedelics from their enduring therapeutic properties" . Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 242 (7): 1481– 1506. doi : 10.1007/s00213-024-06599-5 . PMC 12226698 . PMID 38743110 . ^ Schmitz GP, Roth BL (July 2023). "G protein-coupled receptors as targets for transformative neuropsychiatric therapeutics" . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol . 325 (1): C17– C28. doi : 10.1152/ajpcell.00397.2022 . PMC 10281788 . PMID 37067459 . ^ a b c Cameron LP, Benetatos J, Lewis V, Bonniwell EM, Jaster AM, Moliner R, et al. (November 2023). "Beyond the 5-HT2A Receptor: Classic and Nonclassic Targets in Psychedelic Drug Action" . J Neurosci . 43 (45): 7472– 7482. doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1384-23.2023 . PMC 10634557 . PMID 37940583 . ^ Bonniwell EM, Alabdali R, Hennessey JJ, McKee JL, Cavalco NG, Lammers JC, et al. (October 2025). "Serotonin 5-HT2C Receptor Signaling Analysis Reveals Psychedelic Biased Agonism" . ACS Chem Neurosci . 16 (19): 3899– 3914. doi : 10.1021/acschemneuro.5c00647 . PMC 12629614 . PMID 40944639 . ^ Brunello CA, Cannarozzo C, Castrén E (November 2024). "Rethinking the role of TRKB in the action of antidepressants and psychedelics" . Trends Neurosci . 47 (11): 865– 874. doi : 10.1016/j.tins.2024.08.011 . PMID 39304417 . ^ Moliner R, Girych M, Brunello CA, Kovaleva V, Biojone C, Enkavi G, et al. (June 2023). "Psychedelics promote plasticity by directly binding to BDNF receptor TrkB" . Nat Neurosci . 26 (6): 1032– 1041. doi : 10.1038/s41593-023-01316-5 . PMC 10244169 . PMID 37280397 . ^ Jain MK, Gumpper RH, Slocum ST, Schmitz GP, Madsen JS, Tummino TA, et al. (July 2025). "The polypharmacology of psychedelics reveals multiple targets for potential therapeutics" (PDF) . Neuron . 113 (19): 3129–3142.e9. doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2025.06.012 . PMID 40683247 . Recent studies have suggested that psychedelics such as LSD directly interact with TrkB with high affinity, promoting BDNF-mediated neuroplasticity and antidepressant-like effects via allosteric potentiation of BDNF signaling in active synapses.8 To investigate this, we screened LSD across 450 human kinases, including TrkB, but found no significant interactions between LSD and any tested human kinases. Further experiments in transfected cells revealed no effect of LSD or psilocin on BDNF-mediated activation of a TrkB reporter. We note that similar negative preliminary results, which have not yet been published in a peer-reviewed journal, were recently reported by Boltaev et al.63 ^ Sonda S, Pendin D, Comai S, De Martin S, Manfredi P, Mattarei A (2025). "Emerging mechanisms of psilocybin-induced neuroplasticity". Trends in Pharmacological Sciences . 46 (11): 1130– 1143. doi : 10.1016/j.tips.2025.08.012 . PMID 40957728 . ^ a b Kwan AC, Mantsch JR, McCorvy JD (December 2025). "The ABCs of psychedelics: a preclinical roadmap for drug discovery" . Trends Pharmacol Sci . 46 (12): 1224– 1240. doi : 10.1016/j.tips.2025.07.017 . PMC 12404667 . PMID 40877079 . Dosing is an important consideration when performing translating across species.

The approximate dose can be estimated using allometric scaling formulas that account for metabolic rate and surface area differences between animals . For psilocybin, the standard dose of 25 mg in a 60 kg human translates to 5.1 mg/kg in mice. These numbers provide a rough guideline dosage but are not determined specifically with psychedelics in mind. Ideally, it should be empirically determined that the chosen dosages produce similar levels of receptor occupancy in animals and humans. ^ a b Masthay JC, Kwan AC, Chang SW (January 2026). "Psychedelic studies in nonhuman primates: Past and future" . Mol Psychiatry . 31 (1): 514– 525. doi : 10.1038/s41380-025-03240-5 . PMC 12709594 . PMID 40940559 . ^ a b c d Rudin D, Liechti ME, Luethi D (September 2021). "Molecular and clinical aspects of potential neurotoxicity induced by new psychoactive stimulants and psychedelics". Exp Neurol . 343 113778. doi : 10.1016/j.expneurol.2021.113778 . PMID 34090893 . ^ a b c Custodio RJ, Ortiz DM, Lee HJ, Sayson LV, Kim M, Lee YS, et al. (July 2025). "Serotonin 2C receptors are also important in head-twitch responses in male mice". Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 242 (7): 1585– 1605. doi : 10.1007/s00213-023-06482-9 . PMID 37882810 . ^ a b c Capela JP, Ruscher K, Lautenschlager M, Freyer D, Dirnagl U, Gaio AR, et al. (2006). "Ecstasy-induced cell death in cortical neuronal cultures is serotonin 2A-receptor-dependent and potentiated under hyperthermia". Neuroscience . 139 (3): 1069– 1081. doi : 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2006.01.007 . PMID 16504407 . ^ a b c d Capela JP, Carmo H, Remião F, Bastos ML, Meisel A, Carvalho F (June 2009). "Molecular and cellular mechanisms of ecstasy-induced neurotoxicity: an overview". Mol Neurobiol . 39 (3): 210– 271. doi : 10.1007/s12035-009-8064-1 . PMID 19373443 . To further corroborate the fact that MDMA agonistic properties at the 5-HT2A receptor could produce neuronal death, DOI, a prototypical agonist of that receptor was added to cortical neurons . DOI (10 to 100 μM for 24 or 48 h) also induced a dose- and time-dependent apoptotic cortical neuronal apoptosis, which was attenuated by ketanserin and R-96544 . Ketanserin and R-96544 are competitive selective 5-HT2A receptor antagonists and only attenuated MDMA-induced cortical neurodegeneration. However, an antibody raised against the 5-HT2A-receptor, an "irreversible" non-competitive 5-HT2A receptor blocker, prevented almost completely MDMA- and DOI-induced cortical neurotoxicity . Neuronal apoptosis mediated by MDMA is accompanied by activation of caspase 3, which could be blocked by the antibody raised against the 5-HT2A receptor . Therefore, it is likely that DOI- and MDMA-induced neuronal apoptosis arises from direct stimulation of the 5-HT2A receptor . ^ Green AR, Mechan AO, Elliott JM, O'Shea E, Colado MI (September 2003). "The pharmacology and clinical pharmacology of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, "ecstasy")". Pharmacol Rev . 55 (3): 463– 508. doi : 10.1124/pr.55.3.3 . PMID 12869661 . ^ Gudelsky GA, Yamamoto BK, Nash JF (November 1994). "Potentiation of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine-induced dopamine release and serotonin neurotoxicity by 5-HT2 receptor agonists". Eur J Pharmacol . 264 (3): 325– 330. doi : 10.1016/0014-2999(94)90669-6 . PMID 7698172 . ^ Schmidt CJ, Black CK, Abbate GM, Taylor VL (October 1990). "Methylenedioxymethamphetamine-induced hyperthermia and neurotoxicity are independently mediated by 5-HT2 receptors". Brain Res . 529 ( 1– 2): 85– 90. doi : 10.1016/0006-8993(90)90813-q . PMID 1980848 . ^ Armstrong BD, Paik E, Chhith S, Lelievre V, Waschek JA, Howard SG (2004). "Potentiation of (DL)-3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)-induced toxicity by the serotonin 2A receptior partial agonist d-lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), and the protection of same by the serotonin 2A/2C receptor antagonist MDL 11,939". Neuroscience Research Communications . 35 (2): 83– 95. doi : 10.1002/nrc.20023 . ^ Shulgin AT (1980). "Hallucinogens" .

In Burger A, Wolf ME (eds.). Burger's Medicinal Chemistry . Vol. 3 (4 ed.). New York: Wiley. pp. 1109– 1137. ISBN 978-0-471-01572-7 . OCLC 219960627 .

The third principal metabolic route common to the hallucinogenic drugs is oxidation. Benzylic oxidation had been reported with both DOM (60.22aa) and DOET (60.22bb) (61, 62). Of greater theoretical interest is oxidative cyclization to form an indole species, reminiscent of the conversion of epinephrine to adrenochrome. Many of the hallucinogens are in fact indoles, and since the phenethylamine chain has the exact atom composition of indole itself, there has been frequent speculation that there might be some metabolic conversion from one family to the other. It has been shown (63) that one of the metabolites of DOM (2,5-dihydroxyphenylisopropylamine, 60.17), which bears a close chemical and pharmacological resemblance to the potent neurodegenerative agent 6-hydroxydopamine (60.18) (64), can undergo a facile oxidative cyclization to form a 5-hydroxyindole.

The intermediate iminoquinone is potentially very reactive with nucleophilic agents found in normal body chemistry, and may be important in any explanation of biological activity. ^ Castagnoli N (1978). "Drug Metabolism: Review of Principles and the Fate of One-Ring Psychotomimetics" . Stimulants . Boston, MA: Springer US. pp. 335– 387. doi : 10.1007/978-1-4757-0510-2_7 . ISBN 978-1-4757-0512-6 . Retrieved 3 February 2026 . FIG. 9. Metabolic pathways for amine III (DOM).

The third general metabolic pathway for 111 is oxidative O-demethylation of the methyl phenyl ether groups. All three possible O-demethylated metabolites, compounds 118-120, have been characterized in rabbit liver homogenates (Zweig and Castagnoli, 1975, 1977).

The p-hydroquinone 120 is an analog of the sympatholytic agent 6-hydroxydopamine (107) and has been shown to possess some of the neurodegenerative properties of 6-hydroxydopamine (Butcher, 1975). Similar to 6-hydroxydopamine (Blank et ai., 1972), hydroquinone 120 undergoes facile oxidation to form the quinone 129 (Fig. 10), which cyclizes to the iminoquinone 130 (Zweig and Castagnoli, 1974).

In the absence of nucleophiles, 130 is relatively stable at pH 7.4.

As the pH is raised, however, proton rearrangements take place, eventually leading to the indole 132 via the indolinine 131.

In view of the ease with which the hydroquinone 120 undergoes oxidation at pH 7.4, it is somewhat surprising that this compound survives the one hour pH 7.4 incubation. This stabilization may be analogous to the inhibition by liver constituents of hydroxylamine auto-oxidation. It should prove of interest to determine the nature and significance of the protection of these substances from air oxidation. FIG. 10. Oxidative cyclization of p-hydroquinone metabolite derived from DOM. ^ Glennon RA (April 2017). "The 2014 Philip S. Portoghese Medicinal Chemistry Lectureship: The "Phenylalkylaminome" with a Focus on Selected Drugs of Abuse" . J Med Chem . 60 (7): 2605– 2628. doi : 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b00085 . PMC 5824997 . PMID 28244748 . However, there was some concern that 2-DM-DOM and 5-DM-DOM might undergo further O-demethylation in vivo to a hydroquinone. It had been shown years earlier that DOM can undergo metabolic bis-demethylation to a hydroquinone, and that the hydroquinone undergoes oxidation to a para-quinone (and/or a cyclic iminoquinone) that reacts irreversibly with various proteins.44 As a consequence, this approach was not pursued because of potential risks of neurotoxicity. 44. Jacob P. 3rd; Kline, T., Castagnoli, N. Jr. Chemical and biological studies of 1-(2,5-dihydroxy-4- methylphenyl)-2-aminopropane, an analogue of 6-hydroxydopamine. J Med Chem. 1979; 22:662– 671. ^ Jacob P, Kline T, Castagnoli N (June 1979). "Chemical and biological studies of 1-(2,5-dihydroxy-4-methylphenyl)-2-aminopropane, an analogue of 6-hydroxydopamine". J Med Chem . 22 (6): 662– 671. doi : 10.1021/jm00192a011 . PMID 458821 . ^ Butcher LL (1975). "Degenerative processes after punctate intracerebral administration of 6-hydroxydopamine". J Neural Transm . 37 (3): 189– 203. doi : 10.1007/BF01670128 . PMID 1185165 . Similarly, 1-(2,5-dihydroxy-4-methylphenyl)-2-aminopropane was not a more potent cytotoxin than 6-OHDA even though this new neurotoxin has a propane side chain which renders it immune to monoamine oxidase.

The neurotoxin 1-(2,5-dihydroxy-4-methylphenyl)-2-aminopropane-HC1 (DIMPAP) was synthesized by Dr. Nell Castagnoli, University of California Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, U.S.A. Fig. 28. Chemical structure of 1-(2, 5-dihydroxy-4-methylphenyl)-2-aminopropaneHC1 (DIMPAP) The extent of zone-3 damage: after intrastriatal infusion of various doses of DIMPAP is depicted in figures 29–33. No significant difference exists between the non-selective damage produced by DIMPAP and similar doses of 6-OHDA (e.g., compare Figs. 29–33 with Figs. 25–30 in Butcher et al., 1974). Furthermore, nialamide pre-treatment does not alter the destructive potency of either 6-OHDA or DIMPAP (compare Figs. 34–38 with Figs. 39–43 and Figs. 44–47). ^ Blank CL, Lewis RJ, Lehr RE (1998). "6-Hydroxydopamine and Related Catecholaminergic Neurotoxins: Molecular Mechanisms" . Highly Selective Neurotoxins . Totowa, NJ: Humana Press. p. 1–18. doi : 10.1007/978-1-59259-477-1_1 . ISBN 978-1-61737-047-2 . Retrieved 3 February 2026 . A number of agents structurally similar to the original 6-HDA have been demonstrated, or are strongly suspected, to possess neurodegenerative properties. These include: 1.

The 16 trisubstituted phenethylamines or α-methylphenethylamines in which the trisubstitution pattern on the ring is of the 2,3,5- or 2,4,5- variety with respect to the side chain, and involves either trihydroxy or aminodihydroxy functional group entities (15-18); For example, in regard to CNS noradrenergic effects, the seven other derivatives implicated in Fig. 2 have been shown equipotent or more potent than the standard 6-HDA while simultaneously being equally or more selective (13,15-17,19,24,25). ^ Cheng AC, Castagnoli N (April 1984). "Synthesis and physicochemical and neurotoxicity studies of 1-(4-substituted-2,5-dihydroxyphenyl)-2-aminoethane analogues of 6-hydroxydopamine". J Med Chem . 27 (4): 513– 520. doi : 10.1021/jm00370a014 . PMID 6423824 . ^ Shulgin AT (1976). "Profiles of Psychedelic Drugs: 1. DMT & 2. TMA-2" . Journal of Psychedelic Drugs . 8 (2): 167– 169. doi : 10.1080/02791072.1976.10471846 . ISSN 0022-393X . Theoretical interest in TMA-2 stems from the recognition of 6-hydroxy dopamine as an extremely potent disrupter of the adrenergic nervous system. TMA-2 is structurally related with an identical oxygenation pattern, and has been shown to be partially demethylated in vivo.

The end product, 2,4,5-trihydroxyamphetamine, has been studied clinically as an antihypertensive, but has not been reported to produce sensory or perceptual changes in humans even at dosages of 200 mg.

The metabolism and fate of TMA-2 in humans is unknown. ^ Araújo AM, Carvalho F, Bastos Md, Guedes de Pinho P, Carvalho M (2015). "The hallucinogenic world of tryptamines: an updated review". Archives of Toxicology . 89 (8): 1151– 1173. Bibcode : 2015ArTox..89.1151A . doi : 10.1007/s00204-015-1513-x . ISSN 0340-5761 . PMID 25877327 . ^ Shulgin AT (2003). "Basic Pharmacology and Effects" .

In Laing RR (ed.). Hallucinogens: A Forensic Drug Handbook . Forensic Drug Handbook Series. Elsevier Science. pp. 67– 137. ISBN 978-0-12-433951-4 . Retrieved 1 February 2025 . ^ Jacob P, Shulgin AT (1994). "Structure-activity relationships of the classic hallucinogens and their analogs" (PDF) . NIDA Res Monogr . 146 : 74– 91. PMID 8742795 . Archived from the original (PDF) on August 5, 2023. ^ Nagai F, Nonaka R, Satoh Hisashi Kamimura K (March 2007). "The effects of non-medically used psychoactive drugs on monoamine neurotransmission in rat brain". Eur J Pharmacol . 559 ( 2– 3): 132– 137. doi : 10.1016/j.ejphar.2006.11.075 . PMID 17223101 . ^ Eshleman AJ, Forster MJ, Wolfrum KM, Johnson RA, Janowsky A, Gatch MB (March 2014). "Behavioral and neurochemical pharmacology of six psychoactive substituted phenethylamines: mouse locomotion, rat drug discrimination and in vitro receptor and transporter binding and function" . Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 231 (5): 875– 888. doi : 10.1007/s00213-013-3303-6 . PMC 3945162 . PMID 24142203 . ^ Glennon RA, Dukat M (2 May 2023). "Quipazine: Classical hallucinogen? Novel psychedelic?". Australian Journal of Chemistry . 76 (5): 288– 298. doi : 10.1071/CH22256 . ISSN 0004-9425 . ^ de la Fuente Revenga M, Shah UH, Nassehi N, Jaster AM, Hemanth P, Sierra S, et al. (March 2021). "Psychedelic-like Properties of Quipazine and Its Structural Analogues in Mice" . ACS Chem Neurosci . 12 (5): 831– 844. doi : 10.1021/acschemneuro.0c00291 . PMC 7933111 . PMID 33400504 . ^ Zareifopoulos N, Lagadinou M, Karela A, Pouliasi F, Economou I, Tsigkou A, et al. (October 2020). "Efavirenz as a psychotropic drug". Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci . 24 (20): 10729– 10735. doi : 10.26355/eurrev_202010_23433 . PMID 33155233 . ^ Zareifopoulos N, Lagadinou M, Karela A, Kyriakopoulou O, Velissaris D (August 2020). "Neuropsychiatric Effects of Antiviral Drugs" . Cureus . 12 (8) e9536. doi : 10.7759/cureus.9536 . PMC 7465925 . PMID 32905132 . ^ Dalwadi DA, Kim S, Amdani SM, Chen Z, Huang RQ, Schetz JA (August 2016). "Molecular mechanisms of serotonergic action of the HIV-1 antiretroviral efavirenz" . Pharmacol Res . 110 : 10– 24. doi : 10.1016/j.phrs.2016.04.028 . PMC 4914440 . PMID 27157251 . ^ Gatch MB, Kozlenkov A, Huang RQ, Yang W, Nguyen JD, González-Maeso J, et al. (November 2013). "The HIV antiretroviral drug efavirenz has LSD-like properties" . Neuropsychopharmacology . 38 (12): 2373– 2384. doi : 10.1038/npp.2013.135 . PMC 3799056 . PMID 23702798 . ^ Hamilton Morris (31 March 2014). "Getting High on HIV Medication" . Hamilton's Pharmacopeia . Episode S0E10. Vice Media . . ^ Mangner TJ (1978). Potential Psychotomimetic Antagonists. N,N-diethyl-1-methyl-3-aryl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine-5-carboxamides (Ph.D. thesis). University of Michigan. doi : 10.7302/11268 . Archived from the original on 30 March 2025. ^ Nichols DE (May 1973). Potential Psychotomimetics: Bromomethoxyamphetamines and Structural Congeners of Lysergic Acid (Thesis). University of Iowa . p. 23. OCLC 1194694085 . ^ Autorizēties savā kontā (March 2017). "Par aizlieguma noteikšanu vielai NDTDI un tās saturošiem izstrādājumiem" . LIKUMI.LV (in Latvian) . Retrieved 20 March 2025 . ^ a b Carod-Artal FJ (2015). "Hallucinogenic drugs in pre-Columbian Mesoamerican cultures". Neurologia . 30 (1): 42– 49. doi : 10.1016/j.nrl.2011.07.003 . PMID 21893367 . ^ a b c d e Simms D (21 December 2022). "The History of Psychedelics: Our Connection to Consciousness & Mind-Altering Substances Throughout Time" . Tripsitter . Retrieved 4 April 2025 . ^ Valencic, I. (1994). Has the Mystery of the Eleusinian Mysteries been solved. Yearbook for Ethnomedicine and the Study of Consciousness, 3, 325–336. https://www.druglibrary.org/schaffer/lsd/valencic.htm ^ Wasson RG, Hofmann A, Ruck CA (25 November 2008).

The Road to Eleusis: Unveiling the Secret of the Mysteries . North Atlantic Books. ISBN 978-1-55643-752-6 . ^ Samorini G (29 March 2019). "The oldest archeological data evidencing the relationship of Homo sapiens with psychoactive plants: A worldwide overview" . Journal of Psychedelic Studies . 3 (2): 63– 80. doi : 10.1556/2054.2019.008 . ISSN 2559-9283 . Retrieved 26 June 2026 . ^ McKenna D, Riba J (2018). "New World Tryptamine Hallucinogens and the Neuroscience of Ayahuasca". Behavioral Neurobiology of Psychedelic Drugs . Curr Top Behav Neurosci. Vol. 36. pp. 283– 311. doi : 10.1007/7854_2016_472 . ISBN 978-3-662-55878-2 . PMID 28401525 . S2CID 4398627 . ^ Fish MS, Horning EC (July 1956). "Studies on hallucinogenic snuffs". J Nerv Ment Dis . 124 (1): 33– 37. doi : 10.1097/00005053-195607000-00004 . PMID 13416916 . ^ Holmstedt B, Lindgren JE (1967). "Chemical Constituents and Pharmacology of South American Snuffs" .

In Efron DH, Holmstedt B, Kline NS (eds.). Ethnopharmacologic Search for Psychoactive Drugs, Proceedings of a Symposium held in San Francisco, California, January 28-30, 1967 . Raven Press. pp. 339– 373. ISBN 978-0-89004-047-8 . OCLC 14498182 .

The first written account of the action of the American intoxicating snuffs is that by Friar Ramon Pane on cohoba, published first in 1511 and quoted in detail by Wassén (this volume). Ramon Pane's observation of symptoms is revealing: This undoubtedly constitutes the first written account of the psychotomimetic effects of the tryptamines, ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Garcia-Romeu A, Kersgaard B, Addy PH (August 2016). "Clinical applications of hallucinogens: A review" . Exp Clin Psychopharmacol . 24 (4): 229– 268. doi : 10.1037/pha0000084 . PMC 5001686 . PMID 27454674 . ^ Guzmán G (2015). "New Studies on Hallucinogenic Mushrooms: History, Diversity, and Applications in Psychiatry". Int J Med Mushrooms . 17 (11): 1019– 1029. doi : 10.1615/intjmedmushrooms.v17.i11.10 . PMID 26853956 . VI. THE FIRST RECORD OF AN INTOXICATION OF THE NEUROLOGICAL TYPE WITH A PSILOCYBE: Brande in 179945 reported a case of mushroom poisoning in an English family, from mushrooms that were gathered in a park in London.

The cooked mushrooms were eaten at breakfast, resulting in neurological problems, visions, and laughing. This interesting case was discussed by Sowerby46 This case reported by Brande is the first documented case of hallucinations caused by a mushroom. Redhead et al.,31 studying plate 248 by Sowerby,46 stated that mushrooms 1–3 are Psilocybe semilanceatus, In summary, the report of Brande in 179945 was the first case of an intoxication by a Psilocybe of the neurological type with laughing, although we need to take into consideration that Sahagún and de Molina in the 16th century made the first reports on hallucinogenic mushrooms (in that case, among the Mexican Indians). ^ Gartz J (1997). Magic Mushrooms Around the World (PDF) . Los Angeles, California: LIS Publications. pp. 15– 16. ISBN 978-0-9653399-0-2 . About 200 years ago, E. Brande published an account about a remarkable case of mushroom intoxication in London.

On October 3, 1799 an impoverished family picked some mushrooms in St. James's Green Park and prepared them for a meal (see Figure 8, p. 15). ^ Brande E. (1799). "Mr. E. Brande, on a poisonous species of Agaric" .

The Medical and Physical Journal: Containing the Earliest Information on Subjects of Medicine, Surgery, Pharmacy, Chemistry, and Natural History . 3 (11): 41– 44. PMC 5659401 . PMID 30490162 . Archived from the original on February 24, 2024 . Retrieved October 19, 2016 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Jay M (18 June 2019). Mescaline: A Global History of the First Psychedelic . Yale University Press. pp. 62, 65, 67, 85, 91– 92, 98– 100, 131– 132, 135, 138. ISBN 978-0-300-23107-6 . ^ a b c d e f g h Dawson AS (4 September 2018). "1887: Dr. John Briggs Eats Some Peyote".

The Peyote Effect: From the Inquisition to the War on Drugs (PDF) . University of California Press. pp. 11– 22. doi : 10.1525/california/9780520285422.003.0002 . ISBN 978-0-520-28542-2 . ^ a b c d Briggs JR (8 April 1887). " "Muscale Buttons"—Physiological Effects—Personal Experience" .

The Medical Register . 1 : 267– 268. Archived from the original on 5 April 2025. ^ a b c d e Daniel M. Perrine (2001). "Visions of the Night Western Medicine Meets Peyote 1887-1899" .

The Heffter Review of Psychedelic Research . 2 : 6– 52. ^ Alexander S. Dawson (31 December 2019). "Chapter One. 1887: Dr. John Briggs Eats Some Peyote".

The Peyote Effect . University of California Press. pp. 11– 22. doi : 10.1515/9780520960909-003 . ISBN 978-0-520-96090-9 . Retrieved 11 June 2026 . ^ Mooney J (15 January 1896). "The Mescal Plant and Ceremony" . Therapeutic Gazette . 12 (1): 7– 11. Archived from the original on 10 June 2026. ^ Prentiss DW, Morgan FP (16 September 1895). "Anhalonium Lewinii (Mescal Buttons). A Study of the Drug, With Especial Reference to its Physiological Action Upon Man, With Report of Experiments" . Therapeutic Gazette . 19 : 577– 585. Archived from the original on 10 June 2026. ^ Mitchell SW (December 1896). "Remarks on the Effects of Anhelonium Lewinii (the Mescal Button)" . Br Med J . 2 (1875): 1625– 1629. doi : 10.1136/bmj.2.1875.1625 . PMC 2511273 . PMID 20756623 . ^ Dawson A (30 January 2024). "Peyote". Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Latin American History . Oxford University Press. doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199366439.013.1139 . ISBN 978-0-19-936643-9 . ^ Havelock Ellis (January 1898). "Mescal: A New Artificial Paradise" .

The Contemporary Review . 73 : 130– 141. ^ Heffter A (1898). "Ueber Pellote: Beiträge zur chemischen und pharmakologischen Kenntniss der Cacteen Zweite Mittheilung" (PDF) . Archiv für Experimentelle Pathologie und Pharmakologie (in German). 40 ( 5– 6): 385– 429. doi : 10.1007/BF01825267 . ISSN 0028-1298 . Retrieved 5 April 2025 . ^ Beringer K (1927). Der Meskalinrausch: seine Geschichte und Erscheinungsweise (in German). ^ Klüver H (1928). Mescal: The ʻDivine' Plant and Its Psychological Effects (PDF) . K. Paul, Trench, Trubner & Company Limited. Archived from the original on 24 June 2026. ^ Dubus Z, Grandgeorge E, Verroust V (2023). "History of the administration of psychedelics in France" . Front Psychol . 14 1131565. doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1131565 . PMC 10513055 . PMID 37744588 .

In the 1920s, the pharmacologist Alexandre Rouhier captured the attention of the French and international scientific communities, first through his important monograph on the uses of peyote, which was translated several times, and later through his pharmaceutical preparations. Alexandre Rouhier: the totality of peyote's alkaloids, for a polyvalent therapeutic action: The 1927 appearance of pharmacist Alexandre Rouhier's Le Peyotl: la plante qui fait les yeux émerveillés (Peyote: The Plant That Fills the Eyes with Marvels) was a success considering its somewhat obscure subject matter (Rouhier, 1927). ^ Rouhier A (1927). Le Peyotl: La Plante Qui Fait les Yeux Émerveillés (in French). Doin. Archived from the original on 14 March 2024 . Retrieved 26 June 2026 . ^ Schultes, R. E. (1939).

The identifications of teonanácatl, a narcotic basidiomycete of the Aztecs. Botanical Museum Leaflets , Harvard University, 7, 37–55. ^ Smith S, Timmis GM (1932). "98.

The alkaloids of ergot. Part III. Ergine, a new base obtained by the degradation of ergotoxine and ergotinine" . Journal of the Chemical Society (Resumed) : 763– 766. doi : 10.1039/jr9320000763 . ISSN 0368-1769 . ^ Smith S, Timmis GM (1936). "311.

The alkaloids of ergot. Part VII. isoErgine and isolysergic acids". Journal of the Chemical Society (Resumed) : 1440. doi : 10.1039/jr9360001440 . ISSN 0368-1769 . ^ Belouin SJ, Henningfield JE (November 2018). "Psychedelics: Where we are now, why we got here, what we must do" . Neuropharmacology . 142 : 7– 19. doi : 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.02.018 . PMID 29476779 . ^ Gach J (2008). "Biological Psychiatry in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries". History of Psychiatry and Medical Psychology (PDF) . Boston, MA: Springer US. pp. 381– 418. doi : 10.1007/978-0-387-34708-0_12 . ISBN 978-0-387-34707-3 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 March 2025.

In 1938 the Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann produced lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)—the first, and most prominent, of these chemically synthesized agents—in the course of a systematic investigation of partially synthetic amides of lysergic acid in the Sandoz Pharmaceutical Laboratories in Basel (Hofmann 1970). LSD by accident in 1943, Hofmann discovered its psychoactivity. He then experimented with it on himself and found that it produced a peculiar restlessness, extreme activity of the imagination, and an uninterrupted stream of images. Hofmann did not publish the results of his experiment, though he became quite famous later. Hofmann and Arthur Stoll, the head of the Sandoz pharmaceutical laboratory in Basle, published the first paper on the synthesis of LSD in 1943, while Stoll went on to publish the first paper on the effects of lysergic diethylamide acid in 1947. Stoll, Arthur and Hofmann, Albert. 1943. Partialsynthese von Alkaloiden vom Typus des Ergobasins. Helv. Chim. Acta 26:944. Stoll, Arthur. 1947. Lysergsäure-diäthylamid, ein Phantastikum aus der Mutterkorngruppe. Schweiz. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat. 60:279. ^ Stoll A, Hofmann A (3 May 1943). "Partialsynthese von Alkaloiden vom Typus des Ergobasins. (6. Mitteilung über Mutterkornalkaloide)" . Helvetica Chimica Acta . 26 (3): 944– 965. Bibcode : 1943HChAc..26..944S . doi : 10.1002/hlca.19430260326 . ISSN 0018-019X . ^ Stoll WA (1947). "11. Lysergsäure-diäthylamid, ein Phantastikum aus der Mutterkorngruppe" . Schweizer Archiv für Neurologie und Psychiatrie . 60 : 279– 323. ISSN 0258-7661 . Archived from the original on 1 April 2025. ^ Stoll W (1949). "Ein neues, in sehr kleinen Mengen wirksames Phantastikum" . Schweizer Archiv für Neurologie und Psychiatrie . 64 : 483– 484. ISSN 0258-7661 . Archived from the original on 1 April 2025. ^ Nichols DE (October 2018). "Dark Classics in Chemical Neuroscience: Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD)". ACS Chem Neurosci . 9 (10): 2331– 2343. doi : 10.1021/acschemneuro.8b00043 . PMID 29461039 . ^ Bonson KR (February 2018). "Regulation of human research with LSD in the United States (1949-1987)". Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 235 (2): 591– 604. doi : 10.1007/s00213-017-4777-4 . PMID 29147729 . ^ a b Szára S (December 2007). "DMT at fifty" (PDF) . Neuropsychopharmacol Hung . 9 (4): 201– 205. PMID 18510265 . ^ Szara S (November 1956). "Dimethyltryptamin: its metabolism in man; the relation to its psychotic effect to the serotonin metabolism". Experientia . 12 (11): 441– 442. doi : 10.1007/BF02157378 . PMID 13384414 . ^ Szara I, Sai-Halasz A, Boszormenyi Z (1958). "Dimethyltryptamine als neues Psychotikum" . Acta Physiol Acad Sci Hung (in German). 11 (Suppl): 78– 79. PMID 13469470 . ^ Abram Hoffer , Humphrey Osmond (1967). "Chapter II A d-Lysergic Acid Diethylamide" .

The Hallucinogens . Elsevier. pp. 83– 236. doi : 10.1016/B978-1-4832-3296-6.50005-7 . ISBN 978-1-4832-3296-6 . LCCN 66030086 . OCLC 332437 . OL 35255701M . ^ a b Hofmann A (1963). "The Active Principles of the Seeds of Rivea Corymbosa and Ipomoea Violacea". Botanical Museum Leaflets, Harvard University . 20 (6). Harvard University Herbaria: 194– 212. doi : 10.5962/p.168542 . ISSN 0006-8098 . JSTOR 41762231 . ^ Hofmann A, Tscherter H (1960). "Isolierung von Lysergsäure-Alkaloiden aus der mexikanischen Zauberdroge Ololiuqui (Rivea corymbosa (L.) Hall. f.)" (PDF) . Experientia (in German). 16 (9): 414. Bibcode : 1960Expea..16..414H . doi : 10.1007/BF02178840 . ISSN 0014-4754 . PMID 13715089 . Retrieved 28 March 2025 . ^ a b c d Mangini M (2024). "Unseen Women in Psychedelic History". Journal of Humanistic Psychology . 64 (4): 635– 652. doi : 10.1177/00221678211029186 . ISSN 0022-1678 . ^ a b c d Lyttle T, Goldstein D, Gartz J (1996). "Bufo toads and bufotenine: fact and fiction surrounding an alleged psychedelic". J Psychoactive Drugs . 28 (3): 267– 290. doi : 10.1080/02791072.1996.10472488 . PMID 8895112 . ^ Bochner, R., & Goyffon, M. (2007). L'œuvre scientifique de Césaire Phisalix (1852-1906), découvreur du sérum antivenimeux. Bull Soc Herp Fr, 123, 15-46. https://www.icict.fiocruz.br/sites/www.icict.fiocruz.br/files/L%20oeuvre%20scientifique%20de%20Cesaire%20Phisalix%20(1852--1906)%20decouvreur%20du%20serum%20antivenimeux.pdf ^ Phisalix C, Bertrand G (1893) Toxicité comparée du sang et du venin de crapaud commun, considérée au point de vue de la sécrétion interne des glandes cutanées de cet animal. C R Soc Biol 45:477–479. https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cluster=14905926340091797397 ^ a b McBride MC (2000). "Bufotenine: toward an understanding of possible psychoactive mechanisms". Journal of Psychoactive Drugs . 32 (3): 321– 331. doi : 10.1080/02791072.2000.10400456 . PMID 11061684 . ^ Ott J (2001). "Shamanic-Snuff Psychonautica: Pharmañopo: Bufotenine—Psychonautics" . Shamanic Snuffs or Entheogenic Errhines . Entheobotanica. pp. 99–116 (105–112, 114–115). ISBN 978-1-888755-02-2 . OCLC 56061312 . Retrieved 24 January 2025 . ^ Ott J (2001). "Pharmañopo-psychonautics: human intranasal, sublingual, intrarectal, pulmonary and oral pharmacology of bufotenine". Journal of Psychoactive Drugs . 33 (3): 273– 281. doi : 10.1080/02791072.2001.10400574 . PMID 11718320 . S2CID 5877023 . ^ Erspamer V, Vitali T, Roseghini M, Cei JM (July 1967). "5-Methoxy- and 5-hydroxyindoles in the skin of Bufo alvarius" . Biochem Pharmacol . 16 (7): 1149– 1164. doi : 10.1016/0006-2952(67)90147-5 . PMID 6053590 . ^ Siebert A (8 January 2021). "Hamilton Morris On Mistakes, 5-MeO-DMT And Preserving Psychedelic Toads" . Forbes . Retrieved 4 April 2025 . ^ Weil AT, Davis W (January 1994). "Bufo alvarius: a potent hallucinogen of animal origin". J Ethnopharmacol . 41 ( 1– 2): 1– 8. doi : 10.1016/0378-8741(94)90051-5 . PMID 8170151 . ^ Webb A (2023). "Nested hermeneutics: Mind at Large as a curated trope of psychedelic experience" . Interdisciplinary Science Reviews . 48 (5): 768– 787. Bibcode : 2023ISRv...48..768W . doi : 10.1080/03080188.2023.2249208 . ISSN 0308-0188 . ^ a b Swanson LR (2018). "Unifying Theories of Psychedelic Drug Effects" . Front Pharmacol . 9 172. doi : 10.3389/fphar.2018.00172 . PMC 5853825 . PMID 29568270 . ^ Lukasiewicz K, Baker JJ, Zuo Y, Lu J (2021). "Serotonergic Psychedelics in Neural Plasticity" . Front Mol Neurosci . 14 748359. doi : 10.3389/fnmol.2021.748359 . PMC 8545892 . PMID 34712118 . ^ Fahey TB (November 1991). "The Original Captain Trips" . High Times . pp. 38– 40, 54– 65. Archived from the original on 20 May 2018. ^ a b Pollan M (15 May 2018). How to Change Your Mind: What the New Science of Psychedelics Teaches Us About Consciousness, Dying, Addiction, Depression, and Transcendence . Penguin. ISBN 978-0-525-55894-1 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 . ^ Passie T, Benzenhöfer U (January 2018). "MDA, MDMA, and other "mescaline-like" substances in the US military's search for a truth drug (1940s to 1960s)" (PDF) . Drug Test Anal . 10 (1): 72– 80. doi : 10.1002/dta.2292 . PMID 28851034 . ^ Smith DE, Raswyck GE, Davidson LD (2014). "From Hofmann to the Haight Ashbury, and into the future: the past and potential of lysergic acid diethlyamide". J Psychoactive Drugs . 46 (1): 3– 10. doi : 10.1080/02791072.2014.873684 . PMID 24830180 . ^ Parker M (1998). Studies of perceptiotropic phenethylamines: Determinants of affinity for the 5-HT2A receptor (PhD. Thesis). Purdue University. Archived from the original on 2012-04-25 . Retrieved 2011-12-16 . ^ "2,6-BM (Dibromomescaline)" . АИПСИН (in Russian). 1 May 1998 . Retrieved 25 November 2025 . ^ Heffter A (1901). "Ueber Cacteenalkaloide. (IV. Mittheilung)" . Berichte der Deutschen Chemischen Gesellschaft (in German). 34 : 3004– 3015. doi : 10.1002/cber.190103402266 . ^ "The First MDA trip and the measurement of 'mystical experience' after MDA, LSD, and Psilocybin" . Psychedelic research . 18 July 2008. Archived from the original on 2011-07-27. ^ a b c d Benzenhöfer U, Passie T (August 2010). "Rediscovering MDMA (ecstasy): the role of the American chemist Alexander T. Shulgin". Addiction . 105 (8): 1355– 61. doi : 10.1111/j.1360-0443.2010.02948.x . PMID 20653618 . ^ Gordon A. Alles (1959). "Some Relations Between Chemical Structure and Physiological Action of Mescaline and Related Compounds / Structure and Action of Phenethylamines" .

In Abramson HA (ed.). Neuropharmacology: Transactions of the Fourth Conference, September 25, 26, and 27, 1957, Princeton, N. J. New York: Josiah Macy Foundation. pp. 181– 268. OCLC 9802642 . Archived from the original on 21 March 2025. ^ Gordon A. Alles (1959). "Subjective Reactions to Phenethylamine Hallucinogens" . A Pharmacologic Approach to the Study of the Mind . Springfield: CC Thomas. pp. 238–250 (241–246). ^ Peretz DI, Smythies JR, Gibson WC (April 1955). "A new hallucinogen: 3,4,5-trimethoxyphenyl-beta-aminopropane with notes on the stroboscopic phenomenon". J Ment Sci . 101 (423): 317– 329. doi : 10.1192/bjp.101.423.317 . PMID 13243046 . ^ Shulgin AT, Bunnell S, Sargent T (1961). "The Psychotomimetic Properties of 3,4,5-Trimethoxyamphetamine". Nature . 189 (4769): 1011– 1012. Bibcode : 1961Natur.189.1011S . doi : 10.1038/1891011a0 . ISSN 0028-0836 . ^ Hey P (1947). "The synthesis of a new homologue of mescaline" . Q J Pharm Pharmacol . 20 (2): 129– 134. PMID 20260568 . Archived from the original on 19 July 2019. ^ a b Shulgin AT (1978). "Psychotomimetic Drugs: Structure-Activity Relationships" .

In Iversen LL, Iversen SD, Snyder SH (eds.). Stimulants . Boston, MA: Springer US. pp. 243– 333. doi : 10.1007/978-1-4757-0510-2_6 . ISBN 978-1-4757-0512-6 . ^ Jansen, MPJM (1931). "β-2: 4: 5-Trimethoxyphenylethylamine, an isomer of mescaline" . Recueil des Travaux Chimiques des Pays-Bas . 50 (4): 291– 312. doi : 10.1002/recl.19310500403 . Retrieved 22 November 2022 . ^ Passie T, Guss J, Krähenmann R (2022). "Lower-dose psycholytic therapy - A neglected approach" . Front Psychiatry . 13 1020505. doi : 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.1020505 . PMC 9755513 . PMID 36532196 . Around 1960, Sandoz developed two short-acting derivatives of psilocybin, codenamed CZ-74 (4-HO-DET, 4-hydroxy-N,N-diethyltryptamine) and CEY-19 (ethocybin, 4-phosphoryloxy-N,N-diethyltryptamine) (37), which were used in psycholytic therapy . ^ Boszormenyi Z, Der P, Nagy T (January 1959). "Observations on the psychotogenic effect of N-N diethyltryptamine, a new tryptamine derivative". J Ment Sci . 105 (438): 171– 181. doi : 10.1192/bjp.105.438.171 . PMID 13641966 . ^ Leuner H, Baer G (1965). "Two new short-acting hallucinogens of the psilocybin group" . Neuropsychopharmacology . 4 : 471– 474. Archived from the original on 2025-04-22. ^ Barceloux DG (9 March 2012). "Tryptamine Designer Drugs". Medical Toxicology of Drug Abuse: Synthesized Chemicals and Psychoactive Plants . Wiley. pp. 193– 199. doi : 10.1002/9781118105955.ch11 . ISBN 978-0-471-72760-6 .

During the early 1960s, α-ethyltryptamine (Monase®, Upjohn Company) was marketed in the United States as an antidepressant and stimulant, but the drug was removed shortly after introduction because of the occurrence of serious blood disorders. (Indopan) was marketed in the Soviet Union during the 1960s as an antidepressant. ^ Glennon RA, Dukat MG (December 2023). "α-Ethyltryptamine: A Ratiocinatory Review of a Forgotten Antidepressant" . ACS Pharmacology & Translational Science . 6 (12): 1780– 1789. doi : 10.1021/acsptsci.3c00139 . PMC 10714429 . PMID 38093842 . ^ a b Romero D (September 5, 1995). "Sasha Shulgin, Psychedelic Chemist" . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on March 26, 2007 . Retrieved July 8, 2006 . ^ a b Passie T (29 June 2023).

The History of MDMA . Oxford University Press. pp. 6– 16, 18, 27, 29, 32, 40. doi : 10.1093/oso/9780198867364.001.0001 . ISBN 978-0-19-886736-4 . ^ a b Bernschneider-Reif S, Oxler F, Freudenmann RW (November 2006). "The origin of MDMA ("ecstasy")--separating the facts from the myth". Pharmazie . 61 (11): 966– 972. PMID 17152992 . ^ a b Emerson A, Ponté L, Jerome L, Doblin R (2014). "History and future of the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS)". J Psychoactive Drugs . 46 (1): 27– 36. doi : 10.1080/02791072.2014.877321 . PMID 24830183 . ^ Hamilton Morris (8 February 2021). "Ultra LSD" . Hamilton's Pharmacopeia . Season 3. Episode 6. Vice Media . Event occurs at 19:41–22:17. Viceland . David Nichols has synthesized more psychedelic compounds than almost any other chemist in history. Maybe the most. He's made enormous contributions to the pharmacological understanding of how psychedelics act in the brain. And he's a real legend among anyone who cares about the science surrounding psychedelics. ^ Nichols DE (2022). "Entactogens: How the Name for a Novel Class of Psychoactive Agents Originated" . Front Psychiatry . 13 863088. doi : 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.863088 . PMC 8990025 . PMID 35401275 . ^ Baumeister D, Tojo LM, Tracy DK (April 2015). "Legal highs: staying on top of the flood of novel psychoactive substances" . Ther Adv Psychopharmacol . 5 (2): 97– 132. doi : 10.1177/2045125314559539 . PMC 4521440 . PMID 26240749 . ^ Passie T, Brandt SD (2018). "Self-Experiments with Psychoactive Substances: A Historical Perspective" (PDF) . New Psychoactive Substances . Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology. Vol. 252. pp. 69– 110. doi : 10.1007/164_2018_177 . ISBN 978-3-030-10560-0 . PMID 30478735 . ^ Hamilton Morris (27 November 2021). "PODCAST 34: A Four Hour Interview with Dr. David E Nichols" .

The Hamilton Morris Podcast (Podcast). Patreon . Retrieved 30 January 2025 . ^ Heim R, Elz S (March 2000). "39. Novel Extremely Potent Partial 5-HT2A-Receptor Agonists: Successful Application of a New Structure-Activity Concept" . Arch. Pharm. Pharm. Med. Chem . 333 (Suppl 1): 1–40 (18). ISSN 0365-6233 . Archived from the original on 20 March 2025. ^ Pertz HH, Heim R, Elz S (2000). "B 1.11. N-Benzylated phenylethanamines are highly potent partial agonists at 5-HT2A receptors" . Arch. Pharm. Pharm. Med. Chem . 333 (Suppl 2): 1–84 (30). Archived from the original on 20 March 2025. ^ Heim R (25 March 2003). "Synthese und Pharmakologie potenter 5-HT 2A -Rezeptoragonisten mit N-2-Methoxybenzyl-Partialstruktur. Entwicklung eines neuen Struktur-Wirkungskonzepts" (in German). diss.fu-berlin.de. Archived from the original on 2012-04-16 . Retrieved 2013-05-10 . ^ Wood DM, Sedefov R, Cunningham A, Dargan PI (February 2015). "Prevalence of use and acute toxicity associated with the use of NBOMe drugs". Clin Toxicol (Phila) . 53 (2): 85– 92. doi : 10.3109/15563650.2015.1004179 . PMID 25658166 . ^ Morgans J (8 February 2017). "NBOMe in Australia: Everything We Know About the Drug and Why it's Killing People" . VICE . Retrieved 4 April 2025 . ^ Lawn W, Barratt M, Williams M, Horne A, Winstock A (August 2014). "The NBOMe hallucinogenic drug series: Patterns of use, characteristics of users and self-reported effects in a large international sample". J Psychopharmacol . 28 (8): 780– 788. doi : 10.1177/0269881114523866 . hdl : 1959.4/unsworks_73366 . PMID 24569095 . ^ a b c d e f g h Nichols DE, Nichols CD (May 2008). "Serotonin receptors". Chem Rev . 108 (5): 1614– 1641. doi : 10.1021/cr078224o . PMID 18476671 . ^ a b c d e McCorvy JD, Roth BL (June 2015). "Structure and function of serotonin G protein-coupled receptors" . Pharmacol Ther . 150 : 129– 142. doi : 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2015.01.009 . PMC 4414735 . PMID 25601315 . ^ Rapport MM, Green AA, Page IH (December 1948). "Serum vasoconstrictor, serotonin; isolation and characterization" . J Biol Chem . 176 (3): 1243– 1251. doi : 10.1016/S0021-9258(18)57137-4 . PMID 18100415 . ^ Twarog BM, Page IH (October 1953). "Serotonin content of some mammalian tissues and urine and a method for its determination". Am J Physiol . 175 (1): 157– 161. doi : 10.1152/ajplegacy.1953.175.1.157 . PMID 13114371 . ^ a b Glennon RA (23 October 1992). "Animal Models for Assessing Hallucinogenic Agents". Animal Models of Drug Addiction . Vol. 24. New Jersey: Humana Press. pp. 345– 382. doi : 10.1385/0-89603-217-5:345 . ISBN 978-0-89603-217-0 . ^ Corne SJ, Pickering RW, Warner BT (February 1963). "A method for assessing the effects of drugs on the central actions of 5-hydroxytryptamine" . Br J Pharmacol Chemother . 20 (1): 106– 120. doi : 10.1111/j.1476-5381.1963.tb01302.x . PMC 1703746 . PMID 14023050 . ^ Browne RG, Ho BT (1975). "Role of serotonin in the discriminative stimulus properties of mescaline". Pharmacol Biochem Behav . 3 (3): 429– 435. doi : 10.1016/0091-3057(75)90052-0 . PMID 125425 . ^ Winter JC (April 1975). "Blockade of the stimulus properties of mescaline by a serotonin antagonist". Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther . 214 (2): 250– 253. PMID 1156033 . ^ Andén NE, Corrodi H, Fuxe K, Hökfelt T (September 1968). "Evidence for a central 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor stimulation by lysergic acid diethylamide" . Br J Pharmacol . 34 (1): 1– 7. doi : 10.1111/j.1476-5381.1968.tb07943.x . PMC 1703426 . PMID 5302837 . ^ Peroutka SJ, Snyder SH (November 1979). "Multiple serotonin receptors: differential binding of 5-hydroxytryptamine, lysergic acid diethylamide and spiroperidol". Mol Pharmacol . 16 (3): 687– 699. doi : 10.1016/S0026-895X(25)13812-1 . PMID 530254 . ^ Fordyce BA, Roth BL (February 2024). "Making Sense of Psychedelics in the CNS" . Int J Neuropsychopharmacol . 27 (2) pyae007. doi : 10.1093/ijnp/pyae007 . PMC 10888522 . PMID 38289825 . ^ López-Giménez JF, González-Maeso J (2017). "Hallucinogens and Serotonin 5-HT2A Receptor-Mediated Signaling Pathways". Behavioral Neurobiology of Psychedelic Drugs . Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences. Vol. 36. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 45– 73. doi : 10.1007/7854_2017_478 . ISBN 978-3-662-55878-2 . PMC 5756147 . PMID 28677096 . ^ Branchek T, Adham N, Macchi M, Kao HT, Hartig PR (November 1990). "-DOB(4-bromo-2,5-dimethoxyphenylisopropylamine) and ketanserin label two affinity states of the cloned human 5-hydroxytryptamine2 receptor". Mol Pharmacol . 38 (5): 604– 609. doi : 10.1016/S0026-895X(25)09519-7 . PMID 2233697 . ^ Barker SA (2018). "N, N-Dimethyltryptamine (DMT), an Endogenous Hallucinogen: Past, Present, and Future Research to Determine Its Role and Function" . Front Neurosci . 12 536. doi : 10.3389/fnins.2018.00536 . PMC 6088236 . PMID 30127713 . ^ Sessa B (February 2018). "The 21st century psychedelic renaissance: heroic steps forward on the back of an elephant". Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 235 (2): 551– 560. doi : 10.1007/s00213-017-4713-7 . PMID 28831571 . ^ Rhee TG, Davoudian PA, Sanacora G, Wilkinson ST (December 2023). "Psychedelic renaissance: Revitalized potential therapies for psychiatric disorders". Drug Discov Today . 28 (12) 103818. doi : 10.1016/j.drudis.2023.103818 . PMID 37925136 . ^ Mikos RA (18 October 2022). "Observations on 25 Years of Cannabis Law Reforms and Their Implications for the Psychedelic Renaissance in the United States" . Annual Review of Law and Social Science . 18 (1): 155– 167. doi : 10.1146/annurev-lawsocsci-120621-012645 . ISSN 1550-3585 . ^ Noorani T, Bedi G, Muthukumaraswamy S (October 2023). "Dark loops: contagion effects, consistency and chemosocial matrices in psychedelic-assisted therapy trials" . Psychol Med . 53 (13): 5892– 5901. doi : 10.1017/S0033291723001289 . PMC 10520581 . PMID 37466178 . ^ a b Bawks J, Gomes F (February 2025). "Bias and Balance in Psychedelic Academia- A Tricky Business" . Trends Psychiatry Psychother . 47 : e20240990. doi : 10.47626/2237-6089-2024-0990 . PMC 12956137 . PMID 40009852 .

The investigative journalist Michael Pollan brought the topic to public attention with his book How to Change Your Mind in 2018, which was then made into a Netflix documentary in 2022.