The bitter lesson Chinese room Friendly AI Ethics Existential risk Turing test Uncanny valley Human–AI interaction History Timeline Progress AI winter AI boom AI bubble Controversies Deepfake pornography Taylor Swift deepfake pornography controversy Grok sexual deepfake scandal Google Gemini image generation controversy It's the Most Terrible Time of the Year Pause Giant AI Experiments Removal of Sam Altman from OpenAI Statement on AI Risk Tay (chatbot) Théâtre D'opéra Spatial Voiceverse NFT plagiarism scandal Glossary v t e Regulation of artificial intelligence is the development of public sector policies and laws for promoting and regulating artificial intelligence (AI).

The regulatory and policy landscape for AI is an emerging issue in jurisdictions worldwide, including for international organizations without direct enforcement power like the IEEE or the OECD .

Since 2016, numerous AI ethics guidelines have been published in order to maintain social control over the technology. Furthermore, organizations deploying AI have a central role to play in creating and implementing trustworthy AI , adhering to established principles, and taking accountability for mitigating risks.

The European Union adopted in 2024 a common legal framework for AI with the AI Act . AI governance is a term used in policy, industry, and academic contexts to describe how artificial intelligence systems are directed and overseen. A 2025 systematic literature review by Batool, Zowghi, and Bano defined it as encompassing the questions of who is accountable for AI systems, what elements are governed, when governance occurs within the development lifecycle, and how it is implemented through frameworks, tools, or models. Charlotte Stix noted that related terms, including "trustworthy AI", "responsible AI", and "ethical AI", have shifted in meaning over time and are often used interchangeably. Background Mitchell Waldrop used the term "machine ethics" in a 1987 article in AI Magazine .

The AAAI held a symposium on machine ethics in 2005. Anna Jobin, Marcello Ienca, and Effy Vayena identified 84 sets of AI ethics guidelines published worldwide by 2019, 88% of which had been released after 2016.

The guidelines showed agreement on five principles: transparency, justice, non-maleficence, responsibility, and privacy.

The Partnership on AI was established in 2016 by Apple, Amazon, Google, Facebook, IBM, and Microsoft.

The IEEE launched its Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems in 2016.

The initiative published Ethically Aligned Design in 2019. According to Stanford University 's 2025 AI Index, legislative mentions of AI rose 21.3% across 75 countries since 2023, marking a ninefold increase since 2016.

The U.S. federal agencies introduced 59 AI-related regulations in 2024—more than double the number in 2023.

In 2024, nearly 700 AI-related bills were introduced across 45 states, up from 191 in 2023. There is currently no broad consensus on the degree or mechanics of AI regulation. Several prominent figures in the field, including Elon Musk , Sam Altman , Dario Amodei , and Demis Hassabis have publicly called for immediate regulation of AI.

In 2023, following GPT-4 's creation, Elon Musk and others signed an open letter urging a moratorium on the training of more powerful AI systems. Others, such as Mark Zuckerberg and Marc Andreessen , have warned about the risk of preemptive regulation stifling innovation.

In a 2022 Ipsos survey, attitudes towards AI varied greatly by country; 78% of Chinese citizens, but only 35% of Americans, agreed that "products and services using AI have more benefits than drawbacks". Ipsos poll found that 61% of Americans agree, and 22% disagree, that AI poses risks to humanity.

In a 2023 Fox News poll, 35% of Americans thought it "very important", and an additional 41% thought it "somewhat important", for the federal government to regulate AI, versus 13% responding "not very important" and 8% responding "not at all important".

In 2023, the United Kingdom started a series of international summits on AI with the AI Safety Summit . It was followed by the AI Seoul Summit in 2024, the AI Action Summit in Paris in 2025, and the AI Impact Summit in New Delhi in 2026. Perspectives The regulation of artificial intelligence is the development of public sector policies and laws for promoting and regulating AI. Public administration and policy considerations generally focus on the technical and economic implications and on trustworthy and human-centered AI systems, regulation of artificial superintelligence , the risks and biases of machine-learning algorithms, the explainability of model outputs, and the tension between open source AI and unchecked AI use. There have been both hard law and soft law proposals to regulate AI. Some legal scholars have noted that hard law approaches to AI regulation have substantial challenges. Among the challenges, AI technology is rapidly evolving leading to a "pacing problem" where traditional laws and regulations often cannot keep up with emerging applications and their associated risks and benefits. Similarly, the diversity of AI applications challenges existing regulatory agencies, which often have limited jurisdictional scope.

As an alternative, some legal scholars argue that soft law approaches to AI regulation are promising, as they offer greater flexibility to adapt to emerging technologies and the evolving nature of AI applications. However, soft law approaches often lack substantial enforcement potential. Cason Schmit, Megan Doerr, and Jennifer Wagner proposed the creation of a quasi-governmental regulator by leveraging intellectual property rights (i.e., copyleft licensing) in certain AI objects (i.e., AI models and training datasets) and delegating enforcement rights to a designated enforcement entity. They argue that AI can be licensed under terms that require adherence to specified ethical practices and codes of conduct. (e.g., soft law principles). Prominent youth organizations focused on AI, namely Encode AI, have also issued comprehensive agendas calling for more stringent AI regulations and public-private partnerships . AI regulation could derive from basic principles. A 2020 Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society meta-review of existing sets of principles, such as the Asilomar Principles and the Beijing Principles, identified eight such basic principles: privacy, accountability, safety and security, transparency and explainability, fairness and non-discrimination, human control of technology, professional responsibility, and respect for human values. AI law and regulations have been divided into three main topics, namely governance of autonomous intelligence systems, responsibility and accountability for the systems, and privacy and safety issues. A public administration approach sees a relationship between AI law and regulation, the ethics of AI , and 'AI society', defined as workforce substitution and transformation, social acceptance and trust in AI, and the transformation of human to machine interaction.

The development of public sector strategies for management and regulation of AI is deemed necessary at the local, national, and international levels and in a variety of fields, from public service management and accountability to law enforcement, healthcare (especially the concept of a Human Guarantee), the financial sector, robotics, autonomous vehicles, the military and national security, and international law. Henry Kissinger , Eric Schmidt , and Daniel Huttenlocher published a joint statement in November 2021 entitled "Being Human in an Age of AI", calling for a government commission to regulate AI.

In 2025, the UK and US governments declined to sign an international agreement on AI at the AI Action Summit in Paris.

The agreement was described as proposing an open, inclusive and ethical approach to AI development, including environmental protection measures. US Vice President JD Vance argued that the agreement would be detrimental to the growth of the AI industry.

The UK government added that the agreement "didn't provide enough practical clarity on global governance, nor sufficiently address harder questions around national security".

As a response to the AI control problem The development of a global governance board to regulate AI development was suggested at least as early as 2017.

In December 2018, Canada and France announced plans for a G7 -backed International Panel on Artificial Intelligence, modeled on the International Panel on Climate Change , to study the global effects of AI on people and economies and to steer AI development.

In 2019, the Panel was renamed the Global Partnership on AI.

The Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence (GPAI) was launched in June 2020, stating a need for AI to be developed in accordance with human rights and democratic values, to ensure public confidence and trust in the technology, as outlined in the OECD Principles on Artificial Intelligence (2019).

The 15 founding members of the Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence are Australia, Canada, the European Union, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Mexico, New Zealand, Singapore, Slovenia, the United States and the UK.

The GPAI Secretariat is hosted by the OECD in Paris, France. GPAI's mandate covers four themes, two of which are supported by the International Centre of Expertise in Montréal for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, namely, responsible AI and data governance. A corresponding centre of excellence in Paris will support the other two themes on the future of work, and on innovation and commercialization. GPAI also investigated how AI can be leveraged to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.

The GPAI, the OECD AI Policy Observatory, and the United Nations High-Level Advisory Body on Artificial Intelligence serve as multilateral coordination bodies.

At the United Nations (UN), several entities have begun to promote and discuss aspects of AI regulation and policy, including the UNICRI Centre for AI and Robotics .

In partnership with INTERPOL, UNICRI's Centre issued the report AI and Robotics for Law Enforcement in April 2019 and the follow-up report Towards Responsible AI Innovation in May 2020.

At UNESCO 's Scientific 40th session in November 2019, the organization commenced a two-year process to achieve a "global standard-setting instrument on ethics of artificial intelligence".

In pursuit of this goal, UNESCO forums and conferences on AI were held to gather stakeholder views. A draft text of a Recommendation on the Ethics of AI of the UNESCO Ad Hoc Expert Group was issued in September 2020 and included a call for legislative gaps to be filled. UNESCO tabled the international instrument on the ethics of AI for adoption at its General Conference in November 2021; this was subsequently adopted by all 193 member states.

While the UN is making progress with the global management of AI, its institutional and legal capability to manage the AGI existential risk is more limited.

On August 26, 2025, the United Nations Resolution A/RES/79/325 established the Independent International Scientific Panel on AI and the Global Dialogue on AI Governance.

The UN calls the panel the “first global scientific body on Artificial Intelligence”.

The resolution mandates the panel to produce an annual report using evidence-based scientific assessments on the opportunities, risks, and impacts of artificial intelligence.

The report is to be presented every year at the Global Dialogue on AI Governance.

The panel may also prepare briefs on issues of concern, provide biannual updates to the General Assembly, form working groups, or act as informal consultants.

In 2026, the first session of the Global Dialogue on AI Governance will take place in Geneva, Switzerland on July 6 and 7. It will be co-chaired by Egriselda López (Permanent Representative of El Salvador to the United Nations) and Rein Tammsaar (Permanent Representative of Estonia to the United Nations).

In recent years, academic researchers have made more efforts to promote multilateral dialogue and policy development, advocating for the adoption of international frameworks that govern the deployment of AI in military and cybersecurity contexts, with a strong emphasis on human rights and international humanitarian law. Initiatives such as the Munich Convention on AI, Data and Human Rights, which brought together scholars from various academic institutions, have called for a binding international agreement to protect human rights in the age of AI. A key element of such initiatives is identifying common ground between different regional approaches, such as those of the African Union and the Council of Europe.

In September 2025, a global call for AI red lines was presented at the United Nations General Assembly , urging governments to reach a binding agreement prohibiting unacceptable AI uses and behaviors by the end of 2026.

The OECD's Recommendation on Artificial Intelligence and its AI Principles were adopted in May 2019 (and amended in 2024).

The framework includes five value-based principles: inclusive growth, human-centred values, transparency, robustness, and accountability. More than 40 countries have adopted it.

The G20 AI Principles followed in June 2019.

In September 2019 the World Economic Forum issued ten "AI Government Procurement Guidelines".

In February 2020, the European Union published a white paper for promoting and regulating AI. This evolved into the Artificial Intelligence Act (Regulation 2024/1689), adopted by the European Union in 2024. It classifies AI applications by risk level. Article 14 requires human oversight capabilities for high-risk AI systems.

The Framework Convention on Artificial Intelligence was opened for signature on 5 September 2024 under the Council of Europe . It is the first binding international treaty on AI.

As of January 2026, 19 parties had signed it.

The AI Safety Summit was held at Bletchley Park in November 2023.

The AI Action Summit was held in Paris in February 2025.

The India AI Impact Summit took place in New Delhi in February 2026. G7 On 30 October 2023, the Group of Seven ( G7 ) nations adopted a set of eleven guiding principles relating to the design, development and deployment of advanced artificial intelligence systems. These principles form part of the Hiroshima Process, a framework aimed at ensuring that AI technologies are implemented responsibly across global markets. Alongside these principles, a voluntary Code of Conduct for AI developers was introduced to encourage transparency, accountability, and risk-mitigation in emerging AI models and platforms.

The announcement was welcomed internationally, notably by Ursula von der Leyen , who stated that the initiative reflects the direction of the AI Directive, which was in its final stage of negotiation at the time. New guidelines also aim to establish a coordinated global effort towards the responsible development and use of advanced AI systems.

While non-binding , the G7 governments encourage organizations to voluntarily adopt the guidelines, which emphasize a risk-based approach across the AI lifecycle—from pre-deployment risk assessment to post-deployment incident reporting and mitigation.

The AI Principles and Code of Conduct (AIP&CoC) also highlight the importance of AI system security, internal adversarial testing ('red teaming'), public transparency about capabilities and limitations, and governance procedures that include privacy safeguards and content authentication tools.

The guidelines additionally promote AI innovation directed at solving global challenges such as climate change and public health, and call for advancing international technical standards. Looking ahead, the G7 intends to further refine their principles and Code of Conduct in collaboration with other organizations like the OECD , GPAI , and broader stakeholders. Areas of broader development include clearer AI terminology (e.g., "advanced AI systems"), the setting of risk benchmarks, and mechanisms for cross-border information sharing on potential AI risks. Despite general alignment on AI safety, analysts have noted that differing regulatory philosophies—such as the EU's prescriptive AI Act versus the U.S.'s sector-specific approach—may challenge global regulatory harmonization. Regional and national regulation Timeline of strategies, action plans and policy papers setting defining national, regional and international approaches to AI The regulatory and policy landscape for AI is an emerging issue in regional and national jurisdictions globally, for example in the European Union and Russia.

Since early 2016, many national, regional and international authorities have begun adopting strategies, actions plans and policy papers on AI. These documents cover a wide range of topics such as regulation and governance, as well as industrial strategy, research, talent and infrastructure. Different countries have approached the problem in different ways. Regarding the three largest economies, it has been said by Anu Bradford , a law professor at Columbia University , that "the United States is following a market-driven approach, China is advancing a state-driven approach, and the EU is pursuing a rights-driven approach." African Union The African Union has increasingly been active in the field. Most importantly, the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights published a study on AI and human rights and advocated for an African Framework Convention on AI and Human Rights. This initiative builds on earlier debates within the AU, particularly discussions on autonomous lethal weapons, which African representatives had previously raised in international forums. A distinctive feature of the proposed African Framework is its strong emphasis on collective rights, as enshrined in the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights . This approach is situated within the broader debate on aligning AI governance with African values, including ethical traditions such as Ubuntu ("humanity to others"). Australia As of 2025 , Australia has not passed AI-specific laws, but existing statutes such as the Privacy Act 1988 , Corporations Act 2001 , and Online Safety Act 2021 affect AI use.

In October 2023, the Australian Computer Society , Business Council of Australia , Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry , Ai Group (aka Australian Industry Group) , Council of Small Business Organisations Australia, and Tech Council of Australia jointly published an open letter calling for a national approach to AI strategy.

The letter backs the federal government establishing a whole-of-government AI taskforce.

In August 2024, the Australian government set a Voluntary AI Safety Standard, which was followed by a Proposals Paper later in September of that year, outlining potential guardrails for high-risk AI that could become mandatory. These guardrails include areas such as model testing, transparency, human oversight, and record-keeping, all of which may be enforced through new legislation.

In September 2024, a bill was introduced which granted the Australian Communications and Media Authority powers to regulate AI-generated misinformation. Several agencies, including the ACMA, ACCC , and Office of the Australian Information Commissioner , are all expected to play roles in future AI regulation.

The South Australian Government appointed a Minister for Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy for the state of South Australia in March 2026. Brazil On September 30, 2021, the Brazilian Chamber of Deputies (Câmara dos Deputados) approved the Brazilian Legal Framework for Artificial Intelligence (Marco Legal da Inteligência Artificial). This legislation aimed to regulate AI development and usage while promoting research and innovation in ethical AI solutions that prioritize culture, justice, fairness, and accountability.

The 10-article bill established several key objectives: developing ethical principles for AI, promoting sustained research investment, and removing barriers to innovation. Article 4 specifically emphasized preventing discriminatory AI solutions, ensuring plurality, and protecting human rights.

When the bill was first released to the public, it faced substantial criticism, alarming the government for critical provisions.

The underlying issue is that this bill failed to thoroughly and carefully address accountability, transparency, and inclusivity principles. Article VI establishes subjective liability, meaning any individual that is damaged by an AI system and is wishing to receive compensation must specify the stakeholder and prove that there was a mistake in the machine's life cycle. Scholars emphasize that it is out of legal order to assign an individual responsible for proving algorithmic errors given the high degree of autonomy, unpredictability, and complexity of AI systems. This also drew attention to the currently occurring issues with face recognition systems in Brazil leading to unjust arrests by the police, which would then imply that when this bill is adopted, individuals would have to prove and justify these machine errors.

The main controversy of this draft bill was directed to three proposed principles. First, the non-discrimination principle, suggests that AI must be developed and used in a way that merely mitigates the possibility of abusive and discriminatory practices. Secondly, the pursuit of neutrality principle lists recommendations for stakeholders to mitigate biases; however, with no obligation to achieve this goal. Lastly, the transparency principle states that a system's transparency is only necessary when there is a high risk of violating fundamental rights.

As easily observed, the Brazilian Legal Framework for Artificial Intelligence lacks binding and obligatory clauses and is rather filled with relaxed guidelines.

In fact, experts emphasize that this bill may even make accountability for AI discriminatory biases even harder to achieve. Compared to the EU's proposal of extensive risk-based regulations, the Brazilian Bill has 10 articles proposing vague and generic recommendations.

The Brazilian AI Bill lacks the diverse perspectives that characterized earlier Brazilian internet legislation.

When Brazil drafted the Marco Civil da Internet (Brazilian Internet Bill of Rights) in the 2000s, it used a multistakeholder approach that brought together various groups—including government, civil society, academia, and industry—to participate in dialogue, decision-making, and implementation. This collaborative process helps capture different viewpoints and trade-offs among stakeholders with varying interests, ultimately improving transparency and effectiveness in AI regulation.

In May 2023, a new bill was passed, superseding the 2021 bill. It calls for risk assessments of AI systems before deployment and distinguishes "high risk" and "excessive risk" systems.

The latter are characterized by their potential to expose or exploit vulnerabilities and will be subject to regulation by the Executive Branch. Canada The Pan-Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy (2017) is supported by federal funding of Can $125 million with the objectives of increasing the number of outstanding AI researchers and skilled graduates in Canada, establishing nodes of scientific excellence at the three major AI centres, developing 'global thought leadership' on the economic, ethical, policy and legal implications of AI advances and supporting a national research community working on AI.

The Canada CIFAR AI Chairs Program is the cornerstone of the strategy. It benefits from funding of Can$86.5 million over five years to attract and retain world-renowned AI researchers.

The federal government appointed an Advisory Council on AI in May 2019 with a focus on examining how to build on Canada's strengths to ensure that AI advancements reflect Canadian values, such as human rights, transparency and openness.

The Advisory Council on AI has established a working group on extracting commercial value from Canadian-owned AI and data analytics.

In 2020, the federal government and Government of Quebec announced the opening of the International Centre of Expertise in Montréal for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, which will advance the cause of responsible development of AI.

In June 2022, the government of Canada started a second phase of the Pan-Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy.

In November 2022, Canada has introduced the Digital Charter Implementation Act (Bill C-27), which proposes three acts that have been described as a holistic package of legislation for trust and privacy: the Consumer Privacy Protection Act, the Personal Information and Data Protection Tribunal Act, and the Artificial Intelligence & Data Act (AIDA).

In September 2023, the Canadian Government introduced a Voluntary Code of Conduct for the Responsible Development and Management of Advanced Generative AI Systems.

The code, based initially on public consultations, seeks to provide interim guidance to Canadian companies on responsible AI practices. Ultimately, it is intended to serve as a stopgap until formal legislation, such as the Artificial Intelligence and Data Act (AIDA), is enacted. Moreover, in November 2024, the Canadian government announced the creation of the Canadian Artificial Intelligence Safety Institute (CAISI) as part of a 2.4 billion CAD federal AI investment package. This includes 2 billion CAD to support a new AI Sovereign Computing Strategy and the AI Computing Access Fund, which aims to bolster Canada's advanced computing infrastructure. Further funding includes 700 million CAD for domestic AI development, 1 billion CAD for public supercomputing infrastructure, and 300 million CAD to assist companies in accessing new AI resources. China Further information: Artificial intelligence industry in China The regulation of AI in China is mainly governed by the State Council of the People's Republic of China 's July 8, 2017 "A Next Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan" (State Council Document No. 35), in which the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party and the State Council of the PRC urged the governing bodies of China to promote the development of AI up to 2030. Regulation of the issues of ethical and legal support for the development of AI is accelerating, and policy ensures state control of Chinese companies and over valuable data, including storage of data on Chinese users within the country and the mandatory use of People's Republic of China's national standards for AI, including over big data, cloud computing, and industrial software.

In 2021, China published ethical guidelines for the use of AI in China which state that researchers must ensure that AI abides by shared human values, is always under human control, and is not endangering public safety.

In 2023, China introduced Interim Measures for the Management of Generative AI Services .

On August 15, 2023, China's first generative AI measures officially came into force , becoming one of the first comprehensive national regulatory frameworks for generative AI.

The measures apply to all providers offering generative AI services to the Chinese public, including foreign entities, ultimately setting the rules related to data protection, transparency, and algorithmic accountability.

In April 2026, China's National Development and Reform Commission ordered Meta to unwind its $2 billion acquisition of Manus , an AI startup that had relocated from China to Singapore in 2025. This marks a rare move to block a completed cross-border tech deal.

The decision signals Beijing's effort to prevent foreign firms from acquiring Chinese AI talent and intellectual property, establishing national security review as a regular condition for cross-border technology transactions involving Chinese assets, founders, or technology.

In parallel, earlier regulations such as the Chinese government's Deep Synthesis Provisions (effective January 2023) and the Algorithm Recommendation Provisions (effective March 2022) continue to shape China's governance of AI-driven systems, including requirements for watermarking and algorithm filing with the Cyberspace Administration of China (CAC). Additionally, In October 2023, China also implemented a set of Ethics Review Measures for science and technology, mandating certain ethical assessments of AI projects which were deemed socially sensitive or capable of negatively influencing public opinion.

As of mid-2024, over 1,400 AI algorithms had been already registered under the CAC's algorithm filing regime, which includes disclosure requirements and penalties for noncompliance. This layered approach reflects a broader policy process shaped by not only central directives but also academic input, civil society concerns, and public discourse.

Later procedures set out detailed mandatory AI content labeling rules.

In 2025, Chinese regulators issued the Measures for Labeling of AI-Generated Synthetic Content. These procedures standardize the use of on-screen disclosure labels and embedded provenance metadata for AI-generated text, images, audio, video, and virtual scenes. Additionally, they introduce a mandatory requirement for online service providers to disclose their name or code and content reference number in the embedded metadata, encourage the use of digital watermarking , require online content platforms to detect or infer AI-generated material and add conspicuous consumer disclosures, and mandate that providers describe their labeling methods in online terms of service. Colombia Although Colombia has not issued specific AI laws, this does not mean there is a lack of frameworks or initiatives to govern it.

In fact, there are numerous instruments issued for that purpose, including national policies, ethical frameworks, roadmaps, rulings, and guidelines.

In addition, there are other existing regulations applicable to AI systems, such as data protection, intellectual property, consumer laws, and civil liability rules. One of the first specific instruments issued was the CONPES 3920 of 2019, the National Policy on Exploitation of Data (Big Data).

The main purpose of this policy was to leverage data in Colombia by creating the conditions to handle it as an asset to generate social and economic value. Another milestone occurred in 2021, when the National Government published the Ethical Framework for AI in Colombia. It was a soft law guide for public entities, offering recommendations to consider in the management of AI-related projects. An additional framework for AI was adopted by Colombia in 2022: the Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence by UNESCO. It includes values and principles applicable in the public and private sectors in all stages of the AI system life cycle. A regional political commitment on AI was made in 2023, involving Latin American and Caribbean countries. It was called the Declaration of Santiago, whose main purpose is to promote ethical AI in the region. 2024 was a prolific year in governing AI in Colombia. A roadmap for an ethical and sustainable AI adoption was launched by the National Government.

The Superintendence of Industry and Commerce issued a guide on the processing of personal data in AI systems.

The Judiciary Council published a guideline for the use of AI in the judicial sector.

In the global context, the OECD principles were updated, the Global Digital Compact by the United Nations was published, and the UN adopted Resolution A/78/L.49 on safe, trustworthy, and reliable AI systems for sustainable development.

In 2025, a new national policy on AI was issued by the National Government, contained in CONPES 4144.

The ruling T-067/25 by the Constitutional Court provided some rules for access to public information and transparency of algorithms. Until Congress issues AI regulations, these soft-law documents can guide the design, development, and use of AI systems in Colombia. Council of Europe The Council of Europe (CoE) is an international organization that promotes human rights, democracy and the rule of law. It comprises 46 member states, including all 29 Signatories of the European Union's 2018 Declaration of Cooperation on Artificial Intelligence.

The CoE has created a common legal space in which the members have a legal obligation to guarantee rights as set out in the European Convention on Human Rights . Specifically in relation to AI, "The Council of Europe's aim is to identify intersecting areas between AI and our standards on human rights, democracy and rule of law, and to develop relevant standard setting or capacity-building solutions".

The large number of relevant documents identified by the CoE include guidelines, charters, papers, reports and strategies.

The authoring bodies of these AI regulation documents are not confined to one sector of society and include organizations, companies, bodies and nation-states.

In 2019, the Council of Europe initiated a process to assess the need for legally binding regulation of AI, focusing specifically on its implications for human rights and democratic values. Negotiations on a treaty began in September 2022, involving the 46 member states of the Council of Europe, as well as Argentina, Australia, Canada, Costa Rica, the Holy See, Israel, Japan, Mexico, Peru, the United States of America, and Uruguay, as well as the European Union.

On 17 May 2024, the " Framework Convention on Artificial Intelligence and Human Rights, Democracy and the Rule of Law " was adopted. It was opened for signature on 5 September 2024.

Although developed by a European organisation, the treaty is open for accession by states from other parts of the world.

The first ten signatories were: Andorra, Georgia, Iceland, Norway, Moldova, San Marino, the United Kingdom, Israel, the United States, and the European Union. Czech Republic The Czech Republic adopted a National AI Strategy in 2019 and updated it in 2024 with the National AI Strategy of the Czech Republic 2030.

The updated strategy includes a provision to ensure effective legislation, to create codes of ethics for developers and users, to establish supervisory bodies and to promote the ethical use of AI. European Union Main article: Artificial Intelligence Act The EU is one of the largest jurisdictions in the world and plays an active role in the global regulation of digital technology through the GDPR , Digital Services Act , and the Digital Markets Act . For AI in particular, the Artificial intelligence Act was regarded as the most far-reaching regulation of AI worldwide in 2023. Most European Union (EU) countries have their own national strategies towards regulating AI, but these are largely convergent.

The European Union is guided by a European Strategy on Artificial Intelligence, supported by a High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence.

In April 2019, the European Commission published its Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence (AI) , following this with its Policy and investment recommendations for trustworthy Artificial Intelligence in June 2019.

The EU Commission's High Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence carries out work on Trustworthy AI, and the commission has issued reports on the Safety and Liability Aspects of AI and on the Ethics of Automated Vehicles.

In 2020. the EU Commission sought views on a proposal for AI specific legislation, and that process is ongoing.

On February 2, 2020, the European Commission published its White Paper on Artificial Intelligence – A European approach to excellence and trust .

The White Paper consists of two main building blocks, an 'ecosystem of excellence' and a 'ecosystem of trust'.

The 'ecosystem of trust' outlines the EU's approach for a regulatory framework for AI.

In its proposed approach, the Commission distinguishes AI applications based on whether they are 'high-risk' or not. Only high-risk AI applications should be in the scope of a future EU regulatory framework. An AI application is considered high-risk if it operates in a risky sector (such as healthcare, transport or energy) and is "used in such a manner that significant risks are likely to arise". For high-risk AI applications, the requirements are mainly about the : "training data", "data and record-keeping", "information to be provided", "robustness and accuracy", and "human oversight".

The NIST AI RMF addresses oversight through its GOVERN function. ISO 37000 assigns ultimate accountability for organisational conduct to the governing body. There are also requirements specific to certain usages such as remote biometric identification. AI applications that do not qualify as 'high-risk' could be governed by a voluntary labeling scheme.

As regards compliance and enforcement, the Commission considers prior conformity assessments which could include "procedures for testing, inspection or certification" and/or "checks of the algorithms and of the data sets used in the development phase". A European governance structure on AI in the form of a framework for cooperation of national competent authorities could facilitate the implementation of the regulatory framework. A January 2021 draft was leaked online on April 14, 2021, before the Commission presented their official "Proposal for a Regulation laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence" a week later. Shortly after, the Artificial Intelligence Act (also known as the AI Act) was formally proposed on this basis. This proposal includes a refinement of the 2020 risk-based approach with, this time, 4 risk categories: "minimal", "limited", "high" and "unacceptable".

The proposal has been severely critiqued in the public debate. Academics have expressed concerns about various unclear elements in the proposal – such as the broad definition of what constitutes AI – and feared unintended legal implications, especially for vulnerable groups such as patients and migrants.

The risk category "general-purpose AI" was added to the AI Act to account for versatile models like ChatGPT , which did not fit the application-based regulation framework. Unlike for other risk categories, general-purpose AI models can be regulated based on their capabilities, not just their uses. Weaker general-purpose AI models are subject transparency requirements, while those considered to pose "systemic risks" (notably those trained using computational capabilities exceeding 10 25 FLOPS ) must also undergo a thorough evaluation process. A subsequent version of the AI Act was finally adopted in May 2024.

The AI Act will be progressively enforced. Recognition of emotions and real-time remote biometric identification will be prohibited, with some exemptions, such as for law enforcement.

The European Union's AI Act has created a regulatory framework with significant global implications. This legislation introduces a risk-based approach to categorizing AI systems, focusing on high-risk applications like healthcare, education, and public safety. It requires organizations to ensure transparency, data governance, and human oversight in their AI solutions.

While this aims to foster ethical AI use, the stringent requirements could increase overhead and compliance costs, delaying certain AI designs and deployments. Observers have expressed concerns about the multiplication of legislative proposals under the von der Leyen Commission .

The speed of the legislative initiatives is partially led by political ambitions of the EU and could put at risk the digital rights of the European citizens, including rights to privacy, especially in the face of uncertain guarantees of data protection through cyber security. Among the stated guiding principles in the variety of legislative proposals in the area of AI under the von der Leyen Commission are the objectives of strategic autonomy and the concept of digital sovereignty.

On May 29, 2024, the European Court of Auditors published a report stating that EU measures were not well coordinated with those of EU countries; that the monitoring of investments was not systematic; and that stronger governance was needed.

The EU's Artificial Intelligence Act (Regulation (EU) 2024/1689) entered into force on 1 August 2024, creating a risk-based legal framework for AI systems, including special provisions for general-purpose AI models enforceable by 2 August 2025. Finland Finland has appointed a working group to evaluate what national legislation is required by the EU Artificial intelligence Act , and to prepare a legislative proposal on its national implementation.

The working group began its evaluation on April 29, 2024, and is expected to conclude by June 30, 2026.

In the first stage of national implementation, legislation defining the powers of the supervisory authorities and the system of administrative penalties was approved by the President of the Republic on 22 December 2025 and entered into force on 1 January 2026. Finland adopted a decentralised supervision model, dividing oversight among existing market surveillance authorities according to an AI system's purpose of use, with the Finnish Transport and Communications Agency (Traficom) acting as the single point of contact. A second stage, covering an AI regulatory sandbox and a national register for high-risk AI systems related to critical infrastructure, was expected to take effect around the Act's full application date of 2 August 2026. India IndiaAI was established in 2024, and an IndiaAI Safety Institute the following year. Germany In November 2020, DIN , DKE and the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy published the first edition of the "German Standardization Roadmap for Artificial Intelligence" (NRM KI) and presented it to the public at the Digital Summit of the Federal Government of Germany. NRM KI describes requirements to future regulations and standards in the context of AI.

The implementation of the recommendations for action is intended to help to strengthen the German economy and science in the international competition in the field of artificial intelligence and create innovation-friendly conditions for this emerging technology .

The first edition is a 200-page long document written by 300 experts.

The second edition of the NRM KI was published to coincide with the German government's Digital Summit on December 9, 2022. DIN coordinated more than 570 participating experts from a wide range of fields from science, industry, civil society and the public sector.

The second edition is a 450-page long document.

On the one hand, NRM KI covers the focus topics in terms of applications (e.g. medicine, mobility, energy & environment, financial services, industrial automation) and fundamental issues (e.g. AI classification, security, certifiability, socio-technical systems, ethics).

On the other hand, it provides an overview of the central terms in the field of AI and its environment across a wide range of interest groups and information sources.

In total, the document covers 116 standardisation needs and provides six central recommendations for action. Israel On October 30, 2022, pursuant to government resolution 212 of August 2021, the Israeli Ministry of Innovation, Science and Technology released its "Principles of Policy, Regulation and Ethics in AI" white paper for public consultation.

By December 2023, the Ministry of Innovation and the Ministry of Justice published a joint AI regulation and ethics policy paper, outlining several AI ethical principles and a set of recommendations including opting for sector-based regulation, a risk-based approach, preference for "soft" regulatory tools such as AI sandboxes and maintaining consistency with existing global regulatory approaches to AI.

In December 2023, Israel unveiled its first comprehensive national AI policy, which was jointly developed through a collaboration between ministers and stakeholders.

In general, the new policy outlines ethical principles aligned with current OECD guidelines and recommends a sector-based, risk-driven regulatory framework, which focuses on areas like transparency and accountability.

The policy proposes the creation of a national AI Policy Coordination Center to support regulators and further develop the tools necessary for responsible AI deployment.

In addition to domestic policy development, alongside 56 other nations, Israel signed in March 2024 the world's first binding international treaty on artificial intelligence. This treaty, led by the Council of Europe and named the Framework Convention on Artificial Intelligence , has obliged signatories to ensure current AI systems uphold democratic values, human rights, and the rule of law. Italy In October 2023, the Italian privacy authority approved a regulation that provides three principles for therapeutic decisions taken by automated systems: transparency of decision-making processes, human supervision of automated decisions and algorithmic non-discrimination.

In March 2024, the President of the Italian Data Protection Authority reaffirmed the agency's readiness to implement the European Union's newly introduced Artificial Intelligence Act , praising the framework of institutional competence and independence. Italy has continued to develop guidance on AI applications through existing legal frameworks, including recent innovations in areas such as facial recognition for law enforcement, AI in healthcare , deepfakes , and smart assistants .

The Italian government's National AI Strategy (2022–2024) emphasizes responsible innovation and outlines goals for talent development, public and private sector adoption, and regulatory clarity, particularly in coordination with EU-level initiatives.

While Italy has not enacted standalone AI legislation, courts and regulators have begun interpreting existing laws to address transparency, non-discrimination, and human oversight in algorithmic decision-making. Morocco In Morocco, a new legislative proposal has been put forward by a coalition of political parties in Parliament to establish the National Agency for Artificial Intelligence (AI). This agency is intended to regulate AI technologies, enhance collaboration with international entities in the field, and increase public awareness of both the possibilities and risks associated with AI.

In recent years, Morocco has made efforts to advance its use of artificial intelligence in the legal sector, particularly through AI tools that assist with judicial prediction and document analysis, helping to streamline case law research and support legal practitioners with more complex tasks. Alongside these efforts to establish a national AI agency, AI is being gradually introduced into legislative and judicial processes in Morocco, with ongoing discussions emphasizing the benefits as well as the potential risks of these technologies. Generally speaking, Morocco's broader digital policy includes robust data governance measures including the 2009 Personal Data Protection Law and the 2020 Cybersecurity Law, which establish requirements in areas such as privacy, breach notification , and data localization .

As of 2024, additional decrees have also expanded cybersecurity standards for cloud infrastructure and data audits within the nation. And while general data localization is not mandated, sensitive government and critical infrastructure data must be stored domestically. Oversight is led by the National Commission for the Protection of Personal Data (CNDP) and the General Directorate of Information Systems Security (DGSSI), though public enforcement actions in the country remain limited. New Zealand As of July 2023 , no AI-specific legislation exists, but AI usage is regulated by existing laws, including the Privacy Act , the Human Rights Act , the Fair Trading Act and the Harmful Digital Communications Act .

In 2020, the New Zealand Government sponsored a World Economic Forum pilot project titled "Reimagining Regulation for the Age of AI", aimed at creating regulatory frameworks around AI.

The same year, the Privacy Act was updated to regulate the use of New Zealanders' personal information in AI.

In 2023, the Privacy Commissioner released guidance on using AI in accordance with information privacy principles.

In February 2024, the Attorney-General and Technology Minister announced the formation of a Parliamentary cross-party AI caucus , and that framework for the Government's use of AI was being developed. She also announced that no extra regulation was planned at that stage. Philippines In 2023, a bill was filed in the Philippine House of Representatives which proposed the establishment of the Artificial Intelligence Development Authority (AIDA) which would oversee the development and research of artificial intelligence. AIDA was also proposed to be a watchdog against crimes using AI.

The Commission on Elections has also considered in 2024 the ban of using AI and deepfake for campaigning. They look to implement regulations that would apply as early as for the 2025 general elections. South Korea In December 2024, South Korea passed the Act on the Development of Artificial Intelligence and Establishment of Trust (AI Basic Act).

The act established legal grounds for creating a national AI control tower, an AI safety institute, and various other government initiatives for AI-related research, standardization and policies.

As part of the AI Basic Act, businesses that develop and deploy generative AI are responsible for safety and transparency, including implementing risk assessments.

In July 2026, the Act on Promotion of Industrial Digital Transformation and Utilization of Artificial Intelligence (Act No. 21250) came into effect.

The amendments to this Act require those who profit from industrial data to prevent loss, theft, alteration or damage to that data. If these obligations are violated intentionally or negligently, then those persons are held liable. Spain In 2018, the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities approved an R&D Strategy on Artificial Intelligence.

The Council of Ministers , at its meeting on 13 September 2022, began the process for the election of the AESIA headquarters. 16 Spanish provinces presented candidatures, with the Government opting for A Coruña , which proposed the La Terraza building.

On 22 August 2023, the Government approved the internal regulations of the Agency. With this, Spain became the first European country with an agency dedicated to the supervision of AI, anticipating the entry into force of the future European Regulation on Artificial Intelligence, which establishes the need for Member States to have with a supervisory authority in this matter.

The agency officially launched its operations on 19 June 2024.

In April 2025, it became the reinforcing body for Spain's new law against unlabeled AI-generated content. Sweden In February 2026, the Swedish government adopted the country's first comprehensive AI strategy, replacing a national orientation for AI that had been in place since 2018.

The strategy sets the objective of placing Sweden among the ten leading AI nations globally and states, and that AI should be developed and used to advance societal benefit, sustainable development, competitiveness and innovation. It was prepared by the Ministry of Finance , with civil affairs minister Erik Slottner as responsible minister, and drew on the AI Commission's report Färdplan för Sverige (SOU 2025:12) and the national digitalisation strategy for 2025–2030.

The strategy emphasises regulatory simplification, advocating rules that are simple, predictable, technology-neutral and fit for purpose, and states that Sweden will work within the EU to ensure that AI legislation does not impede innovation. It supports the use of regulatory sandboxes as controlled testing environments under the EU Artificial Intelligence Act (Regulation (EU) 2024/1689), and identifies improved data sharing within and between public authorities as a priority. Other stated priorities include public-sector adoption of AI, standardisation, computing infrastructure, research and skills provision, and the development of language models trained on Swedish and national minority languages to support digital sovereignty.

The strategy also addresses AI in security and defence, including the risk of AI-generated disinformation, proposing media and information literacy as a countermeasure. Implementation is to proceed through agency assignments, legislative changes, collaboration forums and budget measures, accompanied by an action plan setting out measures, timeframes and responsible actors.

The Agency for Digital Government (Digg) and the Swedish Post and Telecom Authority (PTS) were tasked with supporting implementation, with annual follow-up linked to the digitalisation strategy and to the OECD review process. Related measures included a proposed law on interoperability requirements for data sharing in public administration (Prop. 2025/26:244) and the establishment of a shared public-sector AI infrastructure ( AI-verkstad ), with foundations laid in 2026 and full build-out planned for 2030. Switzerland Switzerland currently has no specific AI legislation, but on 12 February 2025, the Federal Council announced plans to ratify the Council of Europe 's AI Convention and incorporate it into Swiss law. A draft bill and implementation plan are to be prepared by the end of 2026.

The approach includes sector-specific regulation, limited cross-sector rules, such as data protection, and non-binding measures such as industry agreements.

The goals are to support innovation, protect fundamental rights, and build public trust in AI. United Kingdom The UK supported the application and development of AI in business via the Digital Economy Strategy 2015–2018 introduced at the beginning of 2015 by Innovate UK as part of the UK Digital Strategy.

In the public sector, the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport advised on data ethics and the Alan Turing Institute provided guidance on responsible design and implementation of AI systems.

In terms of cyber security, in 2020 the National Cyber Security Centre has issued guidance on 'Intelligent Security Tools'.

The following year, the UK published its 10-year National AI Strategy, which describes actions to assess long-term AI risks, including AGI-related catastrophic risks.

In March 2023, the UK released the white paper A pro-innovation approach to AI regulation . This white paper presents general AI principles, but leaves significant flexibility to existing regulators in how they adapt these principles to specific areas such as transport or financial markets.

In November 2023, the UK hosted the first AI safety summit , with the prime minister Rishi Sunak aiming to position the UK as a leader in AI safety regulation.

During the summit, the UK created an AI Safety Institute , as an evolution of the Frontier AI Taskforce led by Ian Hogarth .

The institute was notably assigned the responsibility of advancing the safety evaluations of the world's most advanced AI models, also called frontier AI models .

The UK government indicated its reluctance to legislate early, arguing that it may reduce the sector's growth and that laws might be rendered obsolete by further technological progress.

By 2026 however, the House of Lords has conducted a debate on the impact of artificial intelligence on human relationships and society. Archbishop of Canterbury Sarah Mullally (sitting with the Lords Spiritual ) called for the Government and Parliament "to have backbone and regulate AI. There may be some who are worried about what that means for a US trade deal. My advice to Ministers is to put the future of our society, our cohesion and our children first." The House of Lords Library also prepared a report on documented effects of AI on mental health , healthcare , creative industries , and the environmental . United States Main article: Regulation of artificial intelligence in the United States Discussions on regulation of AI in the United States cover topics such as the timeliness of regulating AI, how to update regulations in the face of rapidly changing technology, the roles of state governments and courts , and the nature of the federal regulatory framework to govern and promote AI (what agency should lead and with what regulatory and governing powers).

In October 2023, the Executive Order 14110 presented federal requirements on the safety, security and trustworthiness of AI development and deployment.

The order also requires individuals who develop the most capable AI systems to share any safety testing results with government agencies before releasing them to the public. It was revoked in January 2025 when Donald Trump became President.

On December 11, 2025, President Trump signed an executive order trying to preempt state AI laws.

The executive order additionally directs federal agencies to develop a unified national approach to AI policy, evaluate state AI laws for potential conflicts, challenge them through legal action, and condition certain federal funding on state compliance, while exempting state laws related to child safety, data center infrastructure, and state government procurement. White House aide Will Scharf said that the executive order aims to "ensure that AI can operate within a single national framework in this country, as opposed to being subject to state level regulation that could potentially cripple the industry". Walter Donway, writing for a publication of the American Institute for Economic Research , criticized the order, saying, "The premise behind it is philosophically wrong: that a central authority can foresee the risks of an emergent technology better than the distributed knowledge of millions of actors operating within a free market. That premise was wrong when applied to railroads, radio, electricity, telephony, airlines, and nuclear power. It is even more disastrously wrong when applied to artificial intelligence." Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits discrimination by covered employers on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin (see 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2 ) and requires employers to make reasonable accommodations for an applicant or employee whose sincerely held religious belief, practice, or observance conflicts with a work requirement, unless providing the accommodation would create an undue hardship for the employer. With artificial intelligence entering workplaces, it is speculated that religious objections to it may require accommodation. Business Insider found at least one such religious objector, a Unitarian Universalist software engineer.

In 2026, the encyclical Magnifica humanitas was written and promulgated by Pope Leo XIV including several criticisms of artificial intelligence.

The pope's moral authority among Catholics in the United States (the largest single religious denomination of the country) has led to speculation that demands for accommodations may grow. USA Today spoke with James Paul, a labor and employment litigator, who stated that he expects AI-related religious accommodation cases to "mushroom". South Africa The Department of Communications and Digital Technologies (DCDT) published the Draft South Africa National Artificial Intelligence (AI) Policy 2026 on 10 April 2026 as the first step towards regulating the safe and secure adoption of AI technologies across all public and private sectors in the country. However, the policy was withdrawn following a scandal involving the inclusion of fake, AI-hallucinated citations in its reference list. Regulation of fully autonomous weapons Main article: Lethal autonomous weapon Under the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons , states have held discussions since 2014 on possible international rules for lethal autonomous weapon systems, an important area of AI regulation in warfare. Notably, informal meetings of experts took place in 2014, 2015 and 2016 and a Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) was appointed to further deliberate on the issue in 2016. A set of guiding principles on LAWS affirmed by the GGE on LAWS were adopted in 2018.

The discussions have addressed international humanitarian law, accountability, possible prohibitions and regulations, and the extent of human control required over AI-enabled weapons.

In 2016, China published a position paper questioning the adequacy of existing international law to address the eventuality of fully autonomous weapons, becoming the first permanent member of the U.N. Security Council to broach the issue, and leading to proposals for global regulation.

The US government maintains that current international humanitarian law is capable of regulating the development or use of LAWS.

The Verge . Archived from the original on 19 June 2023 . Retrieved 19 June 2023 . ^ "Artificial Intelligence Index Report 2025" . Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence . Stanford University . 2025. Archived from the original on 16 June 2025 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ "2025 State AI Wave Building After 700 Bills in 2024" . www.bsa.org . Archived from the original on 2025-08-17 . Retrieved 2025-08-08 . ^ Varanasi, Lakshmi. "OpenAI's Sam Altman says an international agency should monitor the 'most powerful' AI to ensure 'reasonable safety' " . Business Insider . Archived from the original on 2025-04-09 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ Aloisi, Silva (19 June 2023). "Elon Musk repeats call for artificial intelligence regulation" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 26 November 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ Milmo, Dan (24 October 2023). "AI risk must be treated as seriously as climate crisis, says Google DeepMind chief" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ Sherry, Ben (5 June 2025). "Why Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei Is Asking for AI Regulation" . Inc . Archived from the original on 16 June 2025 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ "Pause Giant AI Experiments: An Open Letter" . Future of Life Institute . Archived from the original on 2023-10-14 . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ Goldman, Sharon. "How Mark Zuckerberg has fully rebuilt Meta around Llama" . Fortune . Archived from the original on 16 June 2025 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ Heath, Ryan (17 October 2023). "Civilization depends on more AI, Marc Andreessen says" . Axios . Archived from the original on 6 May 2025 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ Edwards, Benj (17 May 2023). "Poll: AI poses risk to humanity, according to majority of Americans" . Ars Technica . Archived from the original on 19 June 2023 . Retrieved 19 June 2023 . ^ Kasperowicz, Peter (1 May 2023). "Regulate AI? GOP much more skeptical than Dems that government can do it right: poll" . Fox News . Archived from the original on 19 June 2023 . Retrieved 19 June 2023 . ^ "Fox News Poll" (PDF) . Fox News. 2023. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 May 2023 . Retrieved 19 June 2023 . ^ Neuillé, Hugo (2025-02-05). "From Safety To Action: The Upcoming French AI Summit | TechPolicy.Press" . Tech Policy Press . Archived from the original on 2025-07-23 . Retrieved 2025-08-25 . ^ "India AI Impact Summit 2026" . India AI Impact Summit 2026 . Retrieved 2026-03-24 . ^ Barfield, Woodrow; Pagallo, Ugo (2018). Research handbook on the law of artificial intelligence . Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing. ISBN 978-1-78643-904-8 . OCLC 1039480085 . ^ a b Artificial intelligence in society . Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 11 June 2019. ISBN 978-92-64-54519-9 . OCLC 1105926611 . ^ Kamyshansky, Vladimir P.; Rudenko, Evgenia Y.; Kolomiets, Evgeniy A.; Kripakova, Dina R. (2020). "Revisiting the Place of Artificial Intelligence in Society and the State". Artificial Intelligence: Anthropogenic Nature vs. Social Origin . Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing. Vol. 1100. Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp. 359– 364. doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-39319-9_41 . ISBN 978-3-030-39318-2 . S2CID 213070224 . ^ Buiten, Miriam C. (2019). "Towards Intelligent Regulation of Artificial Intelligence" . European Journal of Risk Regulation . 10 (1): 41– 59. doi : 10.1017/err.2019.8 . ^ "Co-Governance and the Future of AI Regulation" . Harvard Law Review . 10 April 2025. Archived from the original on 24 July 2025 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ "Not all AI models should be freely available, argues a legal scholar" .

The Economist . Archived from the original on 24 July 2025 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ "Keep the code behind AI open, say two entrepreneurs" .

The Economist . Archived from the original on 23 July 2025 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ "Special Issue on Soft Law Governance of Artificial Intelligence: IEEE Technology and Society Magazine publication information" . IEEE Technology and Society Magazine . 40 (4): C2. December 2021. doi : 10.1109/MTS.2021.3126194 . ^ a b c d e Marchant, Gary. " "Soft Law" Governance of AI" (PDF) . AI Pulse . AI PULSE Papers. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 March 2023 . Retrieved 28 February 2023 . ^ a b c Johnson, Walter G.; Bowman, Diana M. (December 2021). "A Survey of Instruments and Institutions Available for the Global Governance of Artificial Intelligence". IEEE Technology and Society Magazine . 40 (4): 68– 76. Bibcode : 2021ITSMg..40d..68J . doi : 10.1109/MTS.2021.3123745 . S2CID 245053179 . ^ Sutcliffe, Hillary R.; Brown, Samantha (December 2021). "Trust and Soft Law for AI". IEEE Technology and Society Magazine . 40 (4): 14– 24. Bibcode : 2021ITSMg..40d..14S . doi : 10.1109/MTS.2021.3123741 . S2CID 244955938 . ^ a b Schmit, C. D.; Doerr, M. J.; Wagner, J. K. (17 February 2023). "Leveraging IP for AI governance". Science . 379 (6633): 646– 648. Bibcode : 2023Sci...379..646S . doi : 10.1126/science.add2202 . PMID 36795826 . S2CID 256901479 . ^ Lima-Strong, Cristiano (16 May 2024). "Youth activists call on world leaders to set AI safeguards by 2030" . Washington Post . Archived from the original on 4 July 2024 . Retrieved 24 June 2024 . ^ Haldane, Matt (21 May 2024). "Student AI activists at Encode Justice release 22 goals for 2030 ahead of global summit in Seoul" . Archived from the original on 25 September 2024 . Retrieved 24 June 2024 . ^ Fjeld, Jessica; Achten, Nele; Hilligoss, Hannah; Nagy, Adam; Srikumar, Madhu (2020-01-15). Principled Artificial Intelligence: Mapping Consensus in Ethical and Rights-based Approaches to Principles for AI (Report). Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society. Archived from the original on 2021-07-16 . Retrieved 2021-07-04 . ^ Wirtz, Bernd W.; Weyerer, Jan C.; Geyer, Carolin (2018-07-24). "Artificial Intelligence and the Public Sector—Applications and Challenges" . International Journal of Public Administration . 42 (7): 596– 615. doi : 10.1080/01900692.2018.1498103 . ISSN 0190-0692 . S2CID 158829602 . Archived from the original on 2020-08-18 . Retrieved 2020-08-17 . ^ Wirtz, Bernd W.; Weyerer, Jan C.; Sturm, Benjamin J. (2020-04-15). "The Dark Sides of Artificial Intelligence: An Integrated AI Governance Framework for Public Administration". International Journal of Public Administration . 43 (9): 818– 829. doi : 10.1080/01900692.2020.1749851 . ISSN 0190-0692 . S2CID 218807452 . ^ a b Bredt, Stephan (2019-10-04). "Artificial Intelligence (AI) in the Financial Sector—Potential and Public Strategies" . Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence . 2 16. doi : 10.3389/frai.2019.00016 . ISSN 2624-8212 . PMC 7861258 . PMID 33733105 . ^ a b c White Paper: On Artificial Intelligence – A European approach to excellence and trust (PDF) . Brussels: European Commission. 2020. p. 1. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2024-10-09 . Retrieved 2026-06-23 . ^ Wirtz, Bernd W.; Müller, Wilhelm M. (2018-12-03). "An integrated artificial intelligence framework for public management". Public Management Review . 21 (7): 1076– 1100. doi : 10.1080/14719037.2018.1549268 . ISSN 1471-9037 . S2CID 158267709 . ^ Reisman, Dillon; Schultz, Jason; Crawford, Kate; Whittaker, Meredith (2018). Algorithmic impact assessments: A practical framework for public agency accountability (PDF) . New York: AI Now Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-06-14 . Retrieved 2020-04-28 . ^ a b "Towards Responsible Artificial Intelligence Innovation" . UNICRI . July 2020. Archived from the original on 2022-07-05 . Retrieved 2022-07-18 . ^ Kohli, Ajay; Mahajan, Vidur; Seals, Kevin; Kohli, Ajit; Jha, Saurabh (2019). "Concepts in U.S. Food and Drug Administration Regulation of Artificial Intelligence for Medical Imaging". American Journal of Roentgenology . 213 (4): 886– 888. doi : 10.2214/ajr.18.20410 . ISSN 0361-803X . PMID 31166758 . S2CID 174813195 . ^ Hwang, Thomas J.; Kesselheim, Aaron S.; Vokinger, Kerstin N. (2019-12-17). "Lifecycle Regulation of Artificial Intelligence– and Machine Learning–Based Software Devices in Medicine". JAMA . 322 (23): 2285– 2286. doi : 10.1001/jama.2019.16842 . ISSN 0098-7484 . PMID 31755907 . S2CID 208230202 . ^ Sharma, Kavita; Manchikanti, Padmavati (2020-10-01). "Regulation of Artificial Intelligence in Drug Discovery and Health Care". Biotechnology Law Report . 39 (5): 371– 380. doi : 10.1089/blr.2020.29183.ks . ISSN 0730-031X . S2CID 225540889 . ^ Petkus, Haroldas; Hoogewerf, Jan; Wyatt, Jeremy C (2020). "What do senior physicians think about AI and clinical decision support systems: Quantitative and qualitative analysis of data from specialty societies" . Clinical Medicine . 20 (3): 324– 328. doi : 10.7861/clinmed.2019-0317 . ISSN 1470-2118 . PMC 7354034 . PMID 32414724 . ^ Cheng, Jerome Y.; Abel, Jacob T.; Balis, Ulysses G.J.; McClintock, David S.; Pantanowitz, Liron (2021). "Challenges in the Development, Deployment, and Regulation of Artificial Intelligence in Anatomic Pathology" .

The American Journal of Pathology . 191 (10): 1684– 1692. doi : 10.1016/j.ajpath.2020.10.018 . ISSN 0002-9440 . PMID 33245914 . S2CID 227191875 . ^ a b c Gurkaynak, Gonenc; Yilmaz, Ilay; Haksever, Gunes (2016). "Stifling artificial intelligence: Human perils". Computer Law & Security Review . 32 (5): 749– 758. doi : 10.1016/j.clsr.2016.05.003 . ISSN 0267-3649 . ^ Iphofen, Ron; Kritikos, Mihalis (2019-01-03). "Regulating artificial intelligence and robotics: ethics by design in a digital society". Contemporary Social Science . 16 (2): 170– 184. doi : 10.1080/21582041.2018.1563803 . ISSN 2158-2041 . S2CID 59298502 . ^ AI principles: Recommendations on the ethical use of artificial intelligence by the Department of Defense (PDF) . Washington, DC: United States Defense Innovation Board. 2019. OCLC 1126650738 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-01-14 . Retrieved 2020-03-28 . ^ a b c Babuta, Alexander; Oswald, Marion; Janjeva, Ardi (2020). Artificial Intelligence and UK National Security: Policy Considerations (PDF) . London: Royal United Services Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-05-02 . Retrieved 2020-04-28 . ^ a b "Robots with Guns: The Rise of Autonomous Weapons Systems" . Snopes.com . 21 April 2017. Archived from the original on 25 September 2024 . Retrieved 24 December 2017 . ^ Bento, Lucas (2017). "No Mere Deodands: Human Responsibilities in the Use of Violent Intelligent Systems Under Public International Law" . Harvard Scholarship Depository . Archived from the original on 2020-03-23 . Retrieved 2019-09-14 . ^ Kissinger, Henry (1 November 2021). "The Challenge of Being Human in the Age of AI" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 4 November 2021 . Retrieved 4 November 2021 . ^ "UK and US refuse to sign international AI declaration" . BBC News . 2025-02-11. Archived from the original on 2025-08-24 . Retrieved 2025-08-25 . ^ a b c d Sotala, Kaj; Yampolskiy, Roman V (2014-12-19). "Responses to catastrophic AGI risk: a survey" . Physica Scripta . 90 (1) 018001. Bibcode : 2015PhyS...90a8001S . doi : 10.1088/0031-8949/90/1/018001 . ISSN 0031-8949 . ^ a b Barrett, Anthony M.; Baum, Seth D. (2016-05-23). "A model of pathways to artificial superintelligence catastrophe for risk and decision analysis". Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence . 29 (2): 397– 414. arXiv : 1607.07730 . doi : 10.1080/0952813x.2016.1186228 . ISSN 0952-813X . S2CID 928824 . ^ "AI Index Report 2024 - chapter 3: Responsible AI" (PDF) . aiindex.stanford.edu . April 2024. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2024-05-24 . Retrieved 2024-06-07 . ^ Boyd, Matthew; Wilson, Nick (2017-11-01). "Rapid developments in Artificial Intelligence: how might the New Zealand government respond?" . Policy Quarterly . 13 (4). doi : 10.26686/pq.v13i4.4619 . ISSN 2324-1101 . ^ Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada (2019-05-16). "Declaration of the International Panel on Artificial Intelligence" . gcnws . Archived from the original on 2020-03-29 . Retrieved 2020-03-29 . ^ Simonite, Tom (2020-01-08). "The world has a plan to rein in AI—but the US doesn't like it" . Wired . Archived from the original on 2020-04-18 . Retrieved 2020-03-29 . ^ a b "AI Regulation: Has the Time Arrived?" . InformationWeek . 24 February 2020. Archived from the original on 2020-05-23 . Retrieved 2020-03-29 . ^ a b c d e f g UNESCO Science Report: the Race Against Time for Smarter Development . Paris: UNESCO. 11 June 2021. ISBN 978-92-3-100450-6 . Archived from the original on 18 June 2022 . Retrieved 18 September 2021 . ^ "Community" . GPAI . Archived from the original on March 30, 2023. ^ a b c d e Maas, Matthijs M. (2025). "The Global AI Governance Architecture: Past and Futures". Architectures of Global AI Governance: From Technological Change to Human Choice . Oxford Academic. doi : 10.1093/9780191988455.003.0001 . ^ "High-Level Event: Artificial Intelligence and Robotics – Reshaping the Future of Crime, Terrorism and Security" . UNICRI . Archived from the original on 2022-07-18 . Retrieved 2022-07-18 . ^ a b c d NíFhaoláin, Labhaoise; Hines, Andrew; Nallur, Vivek (2020). Assessing the Appetite for Trustworthiness and the Regulation of Artificial Intelligence in Europe (PDF) . Dublin: Technological University Dublin, School of Computer Science, Dublin. pp. 1– 12. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-01-15 . Retrieved 2021-03-27 . This article incorporates text available under the CC BY 4.0 license. (The CC BY 4.0 licence means that everyone have the right to reuse the text that is quoted here, or other parts of the original article itself, if they credit the authors. More info: Creative Commons license ) Changes were made as follows: citations removed and minor grammatical amendments. ^ "Recommendation on the ethics of artificial intelligence" . UNESCO . 2020-02-27. Archived from the original on 2022-07-18 . Retrieved 2022-07-18 . ^ Nindler, Reinmar (2019-03-11). "The United Nation's Capability to Manage Existential Risks with a Focus on Artificial Intelligence" . International Community Law Review . 21 (1): 5– 34. doi : 10.1163/18719732-12341388 . ISSN 1871-9740 . S2CID 150911357 . Archived from the original on 2022-08-30 . Retrieved 2022-08-30 . ^ "United Nations Resolution A/RES/79/325" . docs.un.org . Archived from the original on 2026-03-13 . Retrieved 2026-06-22 . ^ "Home | Independent International Scientific Panel on AI" . United Nations . Archived from the original on 2026-06-03 . Retrieved 2026-06-22 . ^ "FAQ | Independent International Scientific Panel on AI" . United Nations . Retrieved 2026-06-22 . ^ "Inaugural Global Dialogue on AI Governance convenes in Geneva" . United Nations . Retrieved 2026-06-22 . ^ a b "Promoting and Advancing Human Rights in Global AI Ecosystems" . AI Ethics Lab at Rutgers University . 2025. Archived from the original on 17 March 2025 . Retrieved 28 June 2025 . ^ Hossain, Md; Rashid, Fazlur; Akhter, Md; Aziz, Muhammad; Hoque, Md (October 2024). "The Munich Convention on AI, Data and Human Rights" . ResearchGate . 17 : 1– 15. doi : 10.3390/en17092171 . Archived from the original on 2025-06-15 . Retrieved 2026-06-23 . ^ Fourie, Willem (2025-08-20). "Stellenbosch dialogue advances AI and human rights convention" .

The Policy Innovation Lab . Archived from the original on 2025-08-26 . Retrieved 2025-08-25 . ^ "U.N. General Assembly opens with urgent plea for binding AI safeguards" . NBC News . 2025-09-22. Archived from the original on 2026-04-10 . Retrieved 2026-04-05 . ^ a b "Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence" . OECD Legal Instruments . Retrieved 2026-06-28 . ^ "AI-Principles Overview" . OECD.AI . Archived from the original on 2023-10-23 . Retrieved 2023-10-20 . ^ a b "Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence" . OECD . 2019 . Retrieved 2026-03-15 . ^ G20 Ministerial Statement on Trade and Digital Economy (PDF) . Tsukuba City, Japan: G20. 2019. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-02-26 . Retrieved 2020-03-29 . ^ "International AI ethics panel must be independent" . Nature . 572 (7770): 415. 2019-08-21. Bibcode : 2019Natur.572R.415. . doi : 10.1038/d41586-019-02491-x . PMID 31435065 . ^ Guidelines for AI Procurement (PDF) . Cologny/Geneva: World Economic Forum. 2019. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-07-17 . Retrieved 2020-04-28 . ^ a b "Article 14: Human Oversight" . EU Artificial Intelligence Act . Retrieved 2026-03-15 . ^ a b "Armenia signs the Council of Europe's Framework Convention on Artificial Intelligence" . Council of Europe . 2026-01-28 . Retrieved 2026-03-15 . ^ "Hiroshima Process International Guiding Principles for Advanced AI system | Shaping Europe's digital future" . digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu . 2023-10-30. Archived from the original on 2023-11-01 . Retrieved 2023-11-01 . ^ a b "G7 AI Principles and Code of Conduct" . Ernst & Young . January 19, 2024. Archived from the original on June 12, 2025 . Retrieved May 7, 2025 . ^ Schildkraut, Peter J. (January 19, 2024). "What the G7 Code of Conduct Means for Global AI Compliance Programs" . Arnold & Porter . Retrieved May 8, 2025 . ^ "Artificial Intelligence and Robotics" . UNICRI . Archived from the original on 2020-10-19 . Retrieved 2020-08-08 . ^ Law Library of Congress (U.S.). Global Legal Research Directorate, issuing body. Regulation of artificial intelligence in selected jurisdictions . LCCN 2019668143 . OCLC 1110727808 . ^ Popova, Anna V.; Gorokhova, Svetlana S.; Abramova, Marianna G.; Balashkina, Irina V. (2021), The System of Law and Artificial Intelligence in Modern Russia: Goals and Instruments of Digital Modernization , Studies in Systems, Decision and Control, vol. 314, Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 89– 96, doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-56433-9_11 , ISBN 978-3-030-56432-2 , S2CID 234309883 ^ "OECD Observatory of Public Sector Innovation – Ai Strategies and Public Sector Components" . 21 November 2019. Archived from the original on 2024-09-25 . Retrieved 2020-05-04 . ^ Berryhill, Jamie; Heang, Kévin Kok; Clogher, Rob; McBride, Keegan (2019). Hello, World: Artificial Intelligence and its Use in the Public Sector (PDF) . Paris: OECD Observatory of Public Sector Innovation. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2019-12-20 . Retrieved 2020-05-05 . ^ Campbell, Thomas A. (2019). Artificial Intelligence: An Overview of State Initiatives (PDF) . Evergreen, CO: FutureGrasp, LLC. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 31, 2020. ^ Bradford, Anu (2023-06-27). "The Race to Regulate Artificial Intelligence" . Foreign Affairs . ISSN 0015-7120 . Archived from the original on 2023-08-11 . Retrieved 2023-08-11 . ^ "Study on human and peoples' rights and artificial intelligence, robotics, and other new and emerging technologies in Africa" (PDF) . African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights . 2025-04-08. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2025-11-01 . Retrieved 2026-06-23 . ^ Odero, Brenda; Nderitu, David; Samuel, Gabrielle (2024). "The Ubuntu Way: Ensuring Ethical AI Integration in Health Research" . Wellcome Open Research . 9 : 625. doi : 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.23021.1 . ISSN 2398-502X . PMC 11599802 . PMID 39606617 . ^ Yilma, Kinfe (2025-05-16). "Ethics of AI in Africa: Interrogating the role of Ubuntu and AI governance initiatives". Ethics and Information Technology . 27 (2) 24. doi : 10.1007/s10676-025-09834-5 . ISSN 1572-8439 . ^ "What's in a word: the meaning of Ubuntu" .

The Dandelion Philosophy . Retrieved 2025-09-24 . ^ a b c "AI Watch: Global regulatory tracker - Australia" . whitecase.com . 19 November 2025. Archived from the original on 10 March 2026 . Retrieved July 5, 2026 . ^ a b "Australia needs a national approach to AI strategy" . Information Age . Archived from the original on 2024-04-01 . Retrieved 2023-11-08 . ^ "Hon Chris Picton" . parliament.sa.gov.au . 25 March 2026. Archived from the original on 25 March 2026 . Retrieved 31 March 2026 . ^ "Câmara aprova marco legal da inteligência artificial no Brasil" . Revista Globo Rural (in Brazilian Portuguese). 2022-08-24. Archived from the original on 2025-07-15 . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ a b Belli, Luca; Curzi, Yasmin; Gaspar, Walter B. (2023-04-01). "AI regulation in Brazil: Advancements, flows, and need to learn from the data protection experience" . Computer Law & Security Review . 48 105767. doi : 10.1016/j.clsr.2022.105767 . ISSN 2212-473X . ^ "Insufficiency of Ethical Principles for the Regulation of Artificial Intelligence: Antiracism and Antidiscrimination as Vectors for AI Regulation in Brazil" . Data Privacy Brasil Research . Archived from the original on 2025-07-15 . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ "Brazil: Introduced Bill No. 2338 of 2023 regulating the use of Artificial Intelligence, including algorithm design and technical standards" . digitalpolicyalert.org . 2023. Archived from the original on 15 February 2025 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ "Government of Canada launches second phase of the Pan-Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy" . Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada . 2022-06-22. Archived from the original on 2023-10-26 . Retrieved 2023-10-24 . ^ "Bill C-27 summary: Digital Charter Implementation Act, 2022" . Government of Canada . 2022-08-18. Archived from the original on 2023-12-20 . Retrieved 2023-10-24 . ^ "Government Bill (House of Commons) C-27 (44–1) – First Reading – Digital Charter Implementation Act, 2022" . Parliament of Canada . 2022-06-16. Archived from the original on 2022-07-14 . Retrieved 2022-07-12 . ^ "Intelligence and Data Act" . Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada . 2023-09-27. Archived from the original on 2025-04-18 . Retrieved May 4, 2025 . ^ a b "AI Watch: Global regulatory tracker – Canada" . Whitecase.com . 2024-12-16 . Retrieved May 8, 2025 . ^ State Council China. "New Generation of Artificial Intelligence Development Plan" . www.unodc.org . Archived from the original on June 7, 2023 . Retrieved 2022-07-18 . ^ Department of International Cooperation Ministry of Science and Technology (September 2017). "Next Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan Issued by State Council" (PDF) . China Science & Technology Newsletter (17): 2– 12. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 21, 2022 – via Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China . ^ Wu, Fei; Lu, Cewu; Zhu, Mingjie; Chen, Hao; Zhu, Jun; Yu, Kai; Li, Lei; Li, Ming; Chen, Qianfeng; Li, Xi; Cao, Xudong (2020). "Towards a new generation of artificial intelligence in China" . Nature Machine Intelligence . 2 (6): 312– 316. doi : 10.1038/s42256-020-0183-4 . ISSN 2522-5839 . S2CID 220507829 . Archived from the original on 2022-07-18 . Retrieved 2022-07-18 . ^ "Ethical Norms for New Generation Artificial Intelligence Released" . Center for Security and Emerging Technology . Archived from the original on 2023-02-10 . Retrieved 2022-07-18 . ^ "China just gave the world a blueprint for reigning in generative A.I." Fortune . Archived from the original on 2023-07-24 . Retrieved 2023-07-24 . ^ a b c "Navigating the Complexities of AI Regulation in China" . Reed Smith . August 2024. Archived from the original on 2025-04-04 . Retrieved 2025-05-08 . ^ Sharma, Animesh Kumar; Sharma, Rahul (2024). "Comparative Analysis of Data Protection Laws and ai Privacy Risks in brics Nations: A Comprehensive Examination" . Global Journal of Comparative Law . 13 (1): 56– 85. doi : 10.1163/2211906X-13010003 (inactive 17 July 2026). {{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2026 ( link ) ^ Baptista, Eduardo; Chen, Laurie; Wu, Kane; Potkin, Fanny; Yong, Jun Yuan (27 April 2026). "China orders Meta to unwind $2 billion purchase of AI startup Manus" . Reuters . Retrieved 28 April 2026 . ^ a b Sheehan, Matt (2024-02-27). "Tracing the Roots of China's AI Regulations" . Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . Archived from the original on 2024-12-04 . Retrieved 2025-05-06 . ^ "Measures for Labeling of AI-Generated Synthetic Content" . China Law Translate . 14 March 2025. Archived from the original on 17 January 2026 . Retrieved 12 December 2025 . ^ "Política nacional de explotación de datos (Big Data) | CONPES 3920" (PDF) . National Planning Department, Ministry of Information and Communications Technology, and Superintendency of Industry and Commerce (in Spanish). 2018-04-17. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2025-07-10 . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ a b c "Colombia adopta de forma temprana recomendaciones de ética en Inteligencia Artificial de la Unesco para la región" . Ministry of Information and Communications Technology (in Spanish). 2022-03-09. Archived from the original on 2025-03-31 . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ "Declaración de santiago" (PDF) . Cumbre Ministerial y de Altas Autoridades de América Latina y el Caribe (in Spanish). October 2023. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2025-06-13 . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ "Hoja de Ruta Para el Desarrollo y Aplicación de la Inteligencia Artificial en Colombia" (PDF) . Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (in Spanish). 2024 . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ "Circular externa No. DE 2024" (PDF) . Superintendence of Industry and Commerce (in Spanish). 2024-08-21. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2025-10-23 . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ "Acuerdo PCSJA24-12243" (PDF) . Judiciary Council (in Spanish). 2024-12-16. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2025-08-13 . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ "Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence" . OECD Legal Instruments . Archived from the original on 2025-06-16 . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ "Homepage | Global Digital Compact" . United Nations . Archived from the original on 2025-06-24 . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ "Seizing the opportunities of safe, secure and trustworthy artificial intelligence systems for sustainable development" . United Nations General Assembly . 2024-03-11 . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ "Política nacional de intelligencia artificial | CONPES 4144" (PDF) . National Planning Department (in Spanish). 2025-02-14. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2025-04-27 . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ "Sentencia T-067/25" . Constitutional Court of Colombia (in Spanish). 2025. Archived from the original on 2025-07-15 . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ "Council of Europe and Artificial Intelligence" . Artificial Intelligence . Archived from the original on 2024-01-19 . Retrieved 2021-07-29 . ^ "The Framework Convention on Artificial Intelligence" . Council of Europe . Archived from the original on 2024-09-05 . Retrieved 2024-09-05 . ^ "Council of Europe opens first ever global treaty on AI for signature" . Council of Europe . 5 September 2024. Archived from the original on 2024-09-17 . Retrieved 2024-09-17 . ^ "Artificial Intelligence | MPO" . mpo.gov.cz . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ "Czechia as a technological leader. Government approved the National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence of the Czech Republic 2030" . mpo.gov.cz . 2024-07-24. Archived from the original on 2025-07-10 . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ Peukert, Christian; Bechtold, Stefan; Kretschmer, Tobias; Batikas, Michail (2020-09-30). "Regulatory export and spillovers: How GDPR affects global markets for data" . CEPR . Archived from the original on 2023-10-26 . Retrieved 2023-10-26 . ^ Coulter, Martin (2023-08-24). "Big Tech braces for EU Digital Services Act regulations" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 2023-10-26 . Retrieved 2023-10-26 . ^ "Europe's new role in digital regulation" . Le Monde.fr . 2023-08-28. Archived from the original on 2023-10-26 . Retrieved 2023-10-26 . ^ Satariano, Adam (2023-06-14). "Europeans Take a Major Step Toward Regulating A.I." The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 2023-10-26 . Retrieved 2023-10-25 . ^ Browne, Ryan (2023-06-14). "EU lawmakers pass landmark artificial intelligence regulation" . CNBC . Archived from the original on 2023-10-26 . Retrieved 2023-10-25 . ^ Anonymous (2018-04-25). "Communication Artificial Intelligence for Europe" . European Commission. Archived from the original on 2020-05-13 . Retrieved 2020-05-05 . ^ "High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence" . European Commission. 2018-06-14. Archived from the original on 2019-10-24 . Retrieved 2020-05-05 . ^ a b Andraško, Jozef; Mesarčík, Matúš; Hamuľák, Ondrej (2021-01-02). "The regulatory intersections between artificial intelligence, data protection and cyber security: challenges and opportunities for the EU legal framework". AI & Society . 36 (2): 623– 636. doi : 10.1007/s00146-020-01125-5 . ISSN 0951-5666 . S2CID 230109912 . ^ "Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI" . European Commission . 2019. Archived from the original on 2023-03-29 . Retrieved 2022-05-30 . ^ "Policy and investment recommendations for trustworthy Artificial Intelligence" . European Commission. 2019-06-26. Archived from the original on 2024-10-06 . Retrieved 2020-05-05 . ^ a b White paper on artificial intelligence: a European approach to excellence and trust . European Commission. 2020. OCLC 1141850140 . Archived from the original on 2024-01-05 . Retrieved 2021-06-07 . ^ Broadbent, Meredith (17 March 2021). "What's Ahead for a Cooperative Regulatory Agenda on Artificial Intelligence?" . www.csis.org . Archived from the original on 7 June 2021 . Retrieved 2021-06-07 . ^ "Article 14: Human Oversight" . EU Artificial Intelligence Act . Retrieved 2026-03-15 . ^ Tabassi, Elham (January 2023). Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework (AI RMF 1.0) (PDF) (Report). National Institute of Standards and Technology . doi : 10.6028/NIST.AI.100-1 . ^ "ISO 37000:2021 Governance of Organizations — Guidance" . International Organization for Standardization . Retrieved 2026-03-15 . ^ Heikkilä, Melissa (2021-04-14). "POLITICO AI: Decoded: The EU's AI rules — Finland talks to machines — Facebook's fairness project" Archived 2024-11-15 at the Wayback Machine (newsletter). POLITICO . Retrieved 2021-05-14. ^ European Commission (2021-04-21). Europe fit for the Digital Age: Commission proposes new rules and actions for excellence and trust in Artificial Intelligence (press release). Archived 2021-05-14 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 2021-05-14. ^ Pery, Andrew (2021-10-06). "Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence and Process Mining: Challenges and Opportunities" . DeepAI . Archived from the original on 2022-02-18 . Retrieved 2022-02-27 . ^ Browne, Ryan (2023-05-15). "Europe takes aim at ChatGPT with what might soon be the West's first A.I. law. Here's what it means" . CNBC . Archived from the original on 2023-10-26 . Retrieved 2023-10-25 . ^ Veale, Michael; Borgesius, Frederik Zuiderveen (2021-08-01). "Demystifying the Draft EU Artificial Intelligence Act — Analysing the good, the bad, and the unclear elements of the proposed approach" . Computer Law Review International . 22 (4): 97– 112. arXiv : 2107.03721 . doi : 10.9785/cri-2021-220402 . hdl : 2066/245672 . ISSN 2194-4164 . S2CID 235765823 . Archived from the original on 2023-03-26 . Retrieved 2023-01-12 . ^ van Kolfschooten, Hannah (January 2022). "EU regulation of artificial intelligence: Challenges for patients' rights" . Common Market Law Review . 59 (1): 81– 112. doi : 10.54648/COLA2022005 . S2CID 248591427 . Archived from the original on 2024-09-25 . Retrieved 2023-12-10 . ^ Coulter, Martin (December 7, 2023). "What is the EU AI Act and when will regulation come into effect?" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 2023-12-10 . Retrieved 2024-06-01 . ^ Bertuzzi, Luca (December 7, 2023). "AI Act: EU policymakers nail down rules on AI models, butt heads on law enforcement" . euractiv . Archived from the original on January 8, 2024 . Retrieved June 1, 2024 . ^ Browne, Ryan (2024-05-21). "World's first major law for artificial intelligence gets final EU green light" . CNBC . Archived from the original on 2024-05-21 . Retrieved 2024-06-01 . ^ "Artificial Intelligence Act: MEPs adopt landmark law" . European Parliament . 2024-03-13. Archived from the original on 2024-03-15 . Retrieved 2024-06-01 . ^ "Experts react: The EU made a deal on AI rules. But can regulators move at the speed of tech?" . Atlantic Council . 11 December 2023. Archived from the original on 19 May 2026 . Retrieved 23 June 2026 . ^ "European approach to artificial intelligence" . European Commission. 2024-11-20. Archived from the original on 2024-12-06 . Retrieved 2024-12-09 . ^ Blackman, Reid; Vasiliu-Feltes, Ingrid (2024-02-22). "The EU's AI Act and How Companies Can Achieve Compliance" . Harvard Business Review . ISSN 0017-8012 . Archived from the original on 2025-11-04 . Retrieved 2025-09-24 . ^ "Clarifying the costs for the EU's AI Act" . CEPS . 2021-09-24. Archived from the original on 2025-11-03 . Retrieved 2025-09-24 . ^ Natale, Lara (February 2022). "EU's digital ambitions beset with strategic dissonance" . Encompass . Archived from the original on 14 June 2024 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ Bertuzzi, Luca; Killeen, Molly (17 September 2021). "Digital Brief powered by Google: make it or break it, Chips Act, showing the path" . Euractiv . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ Propp, Kenneth (7 February 2022). "France's new mantra: liberty, equality, digital sovereignty" . Atlantic Council . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ "Artificial intelligence: EU must pick up the pace" . European Court of Auditors . 29 May 2024. Archived from the original on 25 September 2024 . Retrieved 29 May 2024 . ^ "Long awaited EU AI Act becomes law after publication in the EU's Official Journal | White & Case LLP" . www.whitecase.com . 2024-07-16. Archived from the original on 2025-07-25 . Retrieved 2025-08-03 . ^ "National implementation of EU Artificial Intelligence Regulation" . Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment of Finland . Archived from the original on 2025-05-23 . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ "National supervision of EU Artificial Intelligence Act to begin – laws on powers of authorities to take effect at start of the year" . Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment of Finland. 22 December 2025 . Retrieved 24 June 2026 . ^ "AI Regulation" . Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment of Finland . Retrieved 24 June 2026 . ^ "EU AI Act – Latest Regulatory Developments in Finland" . Hannes Snellman. 14 May 2025 . Retrieved 24 June 2026 . ^ "India Takes the Lead: Establishing the IndiaAI Safety Institute for Responsible AI Innovation" . IndiaAI . Archived from the original on 2026-04-13 . Retrieved 2026-06-22 . ^ " "KI – Made in Germany" etablieren" . Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Klimaschutz (in German). 30 November 2020. Archived from the original on 12 June 2023 . Retrieved 12 June 2023 . ^ "DIN, DKE und BMWi veröffentlichen Normungsroadmap für Künstliche Intelligenz" . all-electronics (in German). Archived from the original on 12 June 2023 . Retrieved 12 June 2023 . ^ a b Runze, Gerhard; Haimerl, Martin; Hauer, Marc; Holoyad, Taras; Obert, Otto; Pöhls, Henrich; Tagiew, Rustam; Ziehn, Jens (2023). "Ein Werkzeug für eine gemeinsame KI-Terminologie – Das AI-Glossary als Weg aus Babylon" . Java Spektrum (in German) (3): 42– 46. Archived from the original on 2024-04-27 . Retrieved 2023-06-12 . ^ "Normungsroadmap Künstliche Intelligenz" . www.dke.de (in German). Archived from the original on 12 June 2023 . Retrieved 12 June 2023 . ^ Cahane, Amir (November 13, 2022). "Israeli AI regulation and policy white paper: a first glance" . RAILS Blog . Archived from the original on November 4, 2025 . Retrieved June 23, 2026 . ^ Cahane, Amir; Sierra, Michael (2025-12-10). "Nascent regulatory sandbox frameworks for AI in Israel" . Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance . 1 e40. doi : 10.1017/cfl.2025.10032 . ISSN 3033-3733 . Archived from the original on 2025-12-12 . Retrieved 2026-06-23 . ^ Ministry of Innovation, Science and Technology and the Ministry of Justice (December 12, 2023). "Israel's Policy on Artificial Intelligence Regulation and Ethics" . Archived from the original on December 5, 2025 . Retrieved June 23, 2026 . ^ "Artificial Intelligence Regulation and Ethics Policy" . gov.il . December 17, 2023. Archived from the original on 2025-04-19 . Retrieved 2025-05-07 . ^ Wroble, Sharon (2024-05-03). "Israel Signs Global Treaty to Address Risks of Artificial Intelligence" . Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 2025-06-18 . Retrieved 2025-05-08 . ^ "UK signs first international treaty to implement AI safeguards" .

The Guardian . 2024-09-05. ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2026-07-05 . ^ Marzio Bartoloni (11 October 2023). "Cures and artificial intelligence: privacy and the risk of the algorithm that discriminates" . Archived from the original on 30 October 2023 . Retrieved 23 June 2026 . ^ a b "AI Watch: Global regulatory tracker – Italy" . whitecase.com . 2024-12-16. Archived from the original on 2025-05-18 . Retrieved 2025-05-09 . ^ Olivi; Bocchi; Cirotti (2024-05-07). "The road to the AI Act: The Italian approach – Part 3: The Italian national competent AI Authority" . Dentons . Archived from the original on 2025-02-10 . Retrieved 2025-05-09 . ^ "Morocco Proposes Legislation for National AI Agency" .

The Moroccan Times . 2024-04-24. Archived from the original on 2024-04-25 . Retrieved 2024-04-25 . ^ a b c Buza, Maria; Taha, Sherif (2025-04-09). "DPA Digital Digest: Morocco " . Digital Policy Alert . Archived from the original on 2025-04-28 . Retrieved May 8, 2025 . ^ Rebecca (2023-07-13). "Why is regulating AI such a challenge?" . Prime Minister's Chief Science Advisor . Archived from the original on 2024-09-25 . Retrieved 2024-08-20 . ^ "Reimagining Regulation for the Age of AI: New Zealand Pilot Project" . World Economic Forum . 2020-06-29. Archived from the original on 2026-03-14 . Retrieved 2026-06-23 . ^ Cann, Geraden (2023-05-25). "Privacy Commission issues warning to companies and organisations using AI" . Stuff . Archived from the original on 2024-09-25 . Retrieved 2024-08-20 . ^ "Artificial Intelligence and the IPPs" . www.privacy.org.nz . 2023-09-21. Archived from the original on 2024-08-20 . Retrieved 2024-08-20 . ^ "Survey finds most Kiwis spooked about malicious AI - minister responds" .

The New Zealand Herald . 2024-02-21. Archived from the original on 2024-08-20 . Retrieved 2024-08-20 . ^ Arasa, Dale (13 March 2023). "Philippine AI Bill Proposes Agency for Artificial Intelligence" . Philippine Daily Inquirer . Archived from the original on 25 September 2024 . Retrieved 29 May 2024 . ^ Abarca, Charie (29 May 2024). "Comelec wants AI ban on campaign materials ahead of 2025 polls" . Philippine Daily Inquirer . Archived from the original on 29 May 2024 . Retrieved 29 May 2024 . ^ a b "South Korea Artificial Intelligence (AI) Basic Act" . International Trade Administration . April 14, 2025. Archived from the original on June 11, 2026 . Retrieved June 23, 2026 . ^ "인공지능 발전과 신뢰 기반 조성 등에 관한 기본법 ( 약칭: 인공지능기본법 )" . Archived from the original on 2026-06-09 . Retrieved 2026-06-23 . ^ "Republic of Korea: Act on Promotion of Industrial Digital Transformation and Utilization of Artificial Intelligence (Act No. 21250) including cybersecurity regulation enters into force" . Digital Policy Alert . ^ Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy. "산업 디지털 전환 및 인공지능 활용 촉진법" . Archived from the original on 2026-01-15 . Retrieved 2026-06-23 . ^ Ministry of Science of Spain (2018). "Spanish RDI Strategy in Artificial Intelligence" (PDF) . www.knowledge4policy.ec.europa.eu . Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 July 2023 . Retrieved 9 December 2023 . ^ a b "Chaining the chatbots: Spain closes in on AI Act" . POLITICO . 2023-06-22 . Retrieved 2023-09-03 . ^ Ministry of Science of Spain (2018). "Spanish RDI Strategy in Artificial Intelligence" (PDF) . www.knowledge4policy.ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 9 December 2023 . ^ Castillo, Carlos del (2021-12-28). "España vigilará la Inteligencia Artificial como a los fármacos o los alimentos" . elDiario.es (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2023-09-03 . ^ "España comienza el proceso para elegir la sede de la futura Agencia Española de Supervisión de la IA" . El Español (in Spanish). 2022-09-13 . Retrieved 2023-09-03 . ^ Marcos, José (2022-09-12). "El Gobierno inicia con la Agencia de Inteligencia Artificial el traslado de sedes fuera de Madrid" . El País (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2023-09-03 . ^ "A Coruña acogerá la Agencia Española de Inteligencia Artificial" . Europa Press. 2022-12-05 . Retrieved 2023-09-03 . ^ "El Gobierno aprueba el estatuto de la Agencia Española de Supervisión de la Inteligencia Artificial" . Europa Press. 2023-08-22 . Retrieved 2023-09-03 . ^ Guerrini, Federico. "European Countries Race To Set The AI Regulatory Pace" . Forbes . Retrieved 2023-09-04 . ^ "Comienza la actividad de la Agencia Española de Supervisión de la Inteligencia Artificial" . Computerworld.es (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2026-01-03 . ^ "Spain's AI Detection Requirement: $38 Million Fine for Unlabeled AI" . www.aiornot.com . Retrieved 2026-01-03 . ^ a b "Sveriges AI-strategi" (in Swedish). Regeringskansliet. 20 February 2026 . Retrieved 24 June 2026 . ^ "Sveriges första heltäckande AI-strategi ska ge en topp tio-placering" (in Swedish). Regeringskansliet. 20 February 2026 . Retrieved 24 June 2026 . ^ "Uppdrag till Myndigheten för digital förvaltning och Post- och telestyrelsen att stödja genomförandet av Sveriges AI-strategi" (in Swedish). Regeringskansliet. 26 February 2026 . Retrieved 24 June 2026 . ^ "Nya krav på interoperabilitet vid datadelning inom den offentliga förvaltningen, Prop. 2025/26:244" (in Swedish). Regeringskansliet. 16 April 2026 . Retrieved 24 June 2026 . ^ "Artificial Intelligence: Overview and Switzerland's regulatory approach" . Swiss Federal Office of Communications (OFCOM) . 12 February 2025 . Retrieved 31 March 2025 . ^ a b "Digital economy strategy 2015 to 2018" . www.ukri.org . 16 February 2015. Archived from the original on 2022-09-01 . Retrieved 2022-07-18 . ^ "Data ethics and AI guidance landscape" . GOV.UK . Archived from the original on 2023-10-26 . Retrieved 2023-10-26 . ^ Leslie, David (2019-06-11). "Understanding artificial intelligence ethics and safety: A guide for the responsible design and implementation of AI systems in the public sector" . Zenodo . arXiv : 1906.05684 . doi : 10.5281/zenodo.3240529 . S2CID 189762499 . Archived from the original on 2020-04-16 . Retrieved 2020-04-28 . ^ "Intelligent security tools" . www.ncsc.gov.uk . 18 April 2019. Archived from the original on 2020-04-06 . Retrieved 2020-04-28 . ^ Richardson, Tim. "UK publishes National Artificial Intelligence Strategy" . www.theregister.com . Archived from the original on 2023-02-10 . Retrieved 2022-01-01 . ^ The National AI Strategy of the UK Archived 2023-02-10 at the Wayback Machine , 2021 (actions 9 and 10 of the section "Pillar 3 – Governing AI Effectively") ^ "A pro-innovation approach to AI regulation" . GOV.UK . Archived from the original on 2023-10-27 . Retrieved 2023-10-27 . ^ Gikay, Asress Adimi (2023-06-08). "How the UK is getting AI regulation right" .

The Conversation . Archived from the original on 2023-10-27 . Retrieved 2023-10-27 . ^ Browne, Ryan (2023-06-12). "British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak pitches UK as home of A.I. safety regulation as London bids to be next Silicon Valley" . CNBC . Archived from the original on 2023-07-27 . Retrieved 2023-10-27 . ^ "AI Safety Summit: introduction (HTML)" . GOV.UK . Archived from the original on 2023-10-26 . Retrieved 2023-10-27 . ^ "Introducing the AI Safety Institute" . GOV.UK . Archived from the original on 2024-07-07 . Retrieved 2024-07-08 . ^ Henshall, Will (2024-04-01). "U.S., U.K. Will Partner to Safety Test AI" . TIME . Archived from the original on 2024-07-07 . Retrieved 2024-07-08 . ^ "Artificial Intelligence: Impact on Human Relationship - Hansard - UK Parliament" . hansard.parliament.uk . 2026-06-14 . Retrieved 2026-06-14 . ^ Haves, Emily (2026-05-26). "Artificial intelligence: Impact on human relationships and society" . Archived from the original on 2026-06-07 . Retrieved 2026-06-23 . {{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Weaver, John Frank (2018-12-28). "Regulation of artificial intelligence in the United States" . Research Handbook on the Law of Artificial Intelligence : 155– 212. doi : 10.4337/9781786439055.00018 . ISBN 978-1-78643-905-5 . Archived from the original on 2020-06-30 . Retrieved 2020-06-29 . ^ Kang, Cecilia; Sanger, David (2023). "Biden Issues Executive Order to Create A.I. Safeguards" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 2026-01-24 . Retrieved 2026-06-23 . ^ "Trump revokes Biden executive order on addressing AI risks" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 2025-09-25 . Retrieved 2026-07-05 . ^ "Trump is trying to preempt state AI laws via an executive order. It may not be legal" . NPR . 2025-12-11 . Retrieved 2026-07-05 . ^ "Ensuring a National Policy Framework for Artificial Intelligence" .

The White House . 2025-12-11 . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ Waldenberg, Samantha; Gold, Hadas; Duffy, Clare (2025-12-12). "Trump signs executive order blocking states from enforcing their own regulations around AI" . CNN . Retrieved 2025-12-13 . ^ Donway, Walter (2025-12-22). "The Nationalization of AI Threatens Innovation and the American Mind" .

The Daily Economy . Archived from the original on 2025-12-23 . Retrieved 2025-12-24 . ^ "Civil Rights Act of 1964 – CRA – Title VII – Equal Employment Opportunities – 42 US Code Chapter 21" . finduslaw. Archived from the original on October 21, 2010 . Retrieved June 6, 2010 . ^ "Fact Sheet: Religious Accommodations in the Workplace" . U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission . Retrieved 2026-06-14 . ^ Needleman, Sarah E. "She won an exemption from using AI at her tech job.

The Pope's remarks could fuel similar appeals" . Business Insider . Archived from the original on 2026-06-13 . Retrieved 2026-06-14 . ^ "Pope Leo's 'Magnifica humanitas': AI must serve humanity not concentrate power" . Vatican News . 2026-05-25. Archived from the original on 2026-06-21 . Retrieved 2026-06-22 . ^ Cross, Greta. "The Pope addressed AI. Can employees reject it for religious reasons?" . USA Today . Archived from the original on 2026-06-01 . Retrieved 2026-06-03 . ^ "Draft AI policy approved for publication for public comment | SAnews" . www.sanews.gov.za . 2026-04-02 . Retrieved 2026-05-11 . ^ "Minister announces withdrawal of draft AI Policy | SAnews" . www.sanews.gov.za . 2026-04-26. Archived from the original on 2026-04-27 . Retrieved 2026-05-11 . ^ Schutters, Lindsey (2026-04-27). "Malatsi withdraws draft AI policy after hallucination revelations" . Daily Maverick . Archived from the original on 2026-04-28 . Retrieved 2026-05-11 . ^ "GGE on lethal autonomous weapons systems" . Digital Watch Observatory . 2025-11-27. Archived from the original on 2026-04-27 . Retrieved 2026-04-26 . ^ "Guiding Principles affirmed by the Group of Governmental Experts on Emerging Technologies in the Area of Lethal Autonomous Weapons System" (PDF) . United Nations Geneva. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-12-01 . Retrieved 2020-05-05 . ^ "Statements at the First 2025 GGE LAWS Session" . APILS . 2025-03-09. Archived from the original on 2026-04-28 . Retrieved 2026-04-26 . ^ Baum, Seth (2018-09-30). "Countering Superintelligence Misinformation" . Information . 9 (10): 244. doi : 10.3390/info9100244 . ISSN 2078-2489 . ^ "Country Views on Killer Robots" (PDF) .

The Precipice: Existential Risk and the Future of Humanity Other Artificial Intelligence Act Open letter on artificial intelligence Regulation of artificial intelligence US Statement on AI Risk Category v t e Public policy Fields Agricultural Climate change Communication Knowledge Media Cultural Domestic Drug reform Economic Fiscal Incomes Industrial Investment Monetary Tax Trade Education Energy Nuclear energy Renewable energy Environmental Food Foreign Health Pharmaceutical Vaccination Housing Immigration Language Military Science Stem cell Space Technology Social Other topics Evidence-based policy Public administration Public budgeting Public policy doctrine Public policy school Policy analysis Policy studies Regulation Youth services Public policy by country