The Republican Party , also known as the Grand Old Party ( GOP ), is a right-wing populist and nationalist political party in the United States, sitting on the right-wing to far-right of the political spectrum . Founded in 1854, it emerged as the main rival of the Democratic Party in the 1850s, and the two parties have dominated American politics since then.

The Republican Party was founded in 1854 by anti-slavery activists who opposed the Kansas–Nebraska Act and the expansion of slavery into American territories . It rapidly gained support in the North , drawing in former Whigs , Free Soilers , and former Know Nothings . Abraham Lincoln 's election in 1860 as president led to the secession of Southern states and the outbreak of the American Civil War . Under Lincoln and a Republican-controlled Congress, the party led efforts to preserve the Union , defeat the Confederacy , and abolish slavery .

During the Reconstruction era , Republicans sought to extend civil rights protections to freedmen , but by the late 1870s, the party shifted its focus toward business interests and industrial expansion .

In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, it dominated national politics, promoting protective tariffs , infrastructure development, and laissez-faire economic policies, while navigating internal divisions between progressive and conservative factions .

The party's support declined during the Great Depression , as the New Deal coalition reshaped American politics. Republicans returned to national power with the 1952 election of Dwight D. Eisenhower , whose moderate conservatism reflected a pragmatic acceptance of many New Deal -era programs.

Following the civil rights era , the Republican Party's use of the Southern strategy appealed to many white voters disaffected by Democratic support for civil rights, and de facto flipping the two parties' stances.

The 1980 election of Ronald Reagan as president realigned national politics, consolidating a coalition of free market advocates, social conservatives and foreign policy hawks under the Republican banner.

Since 2009, a shift toward right-wing populism culminated in the 2016 election of Donald Trump as president, whose leadership style and political agenda—often referred to as Trumpism —reshaped the party's identity and political platform .

The present-day Republican Party is primarily right-wing populist and nationalist with smaller conservative , Christian right , and libertarian factions, all of which have greatly diminished in influence since 2016. Its ideology has since largely shifted towards illiberalism , favoring strong presidential power and a statist government to enforce conservative cultural values . This includes broad opposition to abortion , LGBT rights , immigration , and gun control .

On economic policy, it supports mercantilism while opposing labor unions .

During the 20th and early 21st centuries, it cooperated internationally with conservative parties.

Since the 2020s it has aligned with global far-right parties, and white nationalist beliefs have become influential within the party, including support for remigration . History Main article: History of the Republican Party (United States) 1850s to 1930s Birthplace of the Republican Party in the Little White Schoolhouse in Ripon, Wisconsin In 1854, the Republican Party began as an antislavery party to combat the expansion of slavery into western territories after the passing of the Kansas–Nebraska Act by the Democrats under Stephan Douglas .

The party was formed in the Northern and Border states, but not the South. It rapidly gained support in the North , drawing in former Whigs and Free Soil Democrats . Under the Presidency of Abraham Lincoln it led the successful war effort against the Confederacy.

By 1865 it encompassed northern Protestants , factory workers, professionals, businessmen, prosperous farmers, and also black former slaves. It also included a minority of white Southerners who had opposed the Confederacy—men ridiculed by Democrats as " Scalawags ".

The great majority of white southerners were Democrats, as were the great majority of Irish Catholics and German Catholics.

While both parties adopted pro-business policies in the 19th century, the early GOP was distinguished by its support for the national banking system , the gold standard , railroads , and high tariffs .

The Republican Party largely dominated the national political scene until 1932.

However it split in 1912, as former president Theodore Roosevelt formed the liberal Progressive Party to oppose the conservatives under William Howard Taft .

The split allowed Democrats under Woodrow Wilson to win in 1912 .

The GOP lost its congressional majorities during the Great Depression (1929–1940). Under Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry S Truman , the Democrats formed a winning New Deal coalition that was dominant from 1932 through 1952. Shift rightward After the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , the Voting Rights Act of 1965 , and the Southern strategy , the party's core base shifted with the Southern states becoming more reliably Republican in presidential politics and the Northeastern states becoming more reliably Democratic. White voters increasingly identified with the Republican Party after the 1960s.

Following the Supreme Court's 1973 decision in Roe v. Wade , the Republican Party opposed abortion in its party platform and grew its support among evangelicals .

The Republican Party won five of the six presidential elections from 1968 to 1988. Two-term President Ronald Reagan , who held office from 1981 to 1989, was a transformative party leader . His conservative policies called for reduced social government spending and regulation, increased military spending, lower taxes , and a strong anti-Soviet foreign policy. Reagan's influence upon the party persisted into the 21st century.

Since the 1990s, the party's support has chiefly come from the South, the Great Plains , the Mountain States , and rural areas in the North. Trump era Main articles: First presidency of Donald Trump , Second presidency of Donald Trump , and Trumpism Donald Trump , the 45th (2017–2021) and 47th (since 2025) president In the 2016 presidential election , Republican nominee Donald Trump defeated Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton .

The result was unexpected; polls leading up to the election showed Clinton leading the race. Trump's victory was fueled by narrow victories in three states— Michigan , Pennsylvania , and Wisconsin —that had been part of the Democratic blue wall for decades. It was attributed to strong support amongst working-class white voters, who felt dismissed and disrespected by the political establishment. Trump became popular with them by abandoning Republican establishment orthodoxy in favor of a broader nationalist message. His election accelerated the Republican Party's shift towards right-wing populism and resulted in decreasing influence among its conservative factions.

After the 2016 elections , Republicans maintained their majority in the Senate , the House , and governorships , and wielded newly acquired executive power with Trump's election.

The Republican Party controlled 69 of 99 state legislative chambers in 2017, the most it had held in history.

The Party also held 33 governorships, the most it had held since 1922.

The party had total control of government in 25 states, the most since 1952.

The opposing Democratic Party held full control of only five states in 2017.

In the 2018 elections , Republicans lost control of the House, but strengthened their hold on the Senate. Over the course of his presidency, Trump appointed three justices to the Supreme Court . Trump lost the 2020 presidential election to Joe Biden but refused to concede the race, claiming widespread electoral fraud and attempting to overturn the results .

On January 6, 2021, the United States Capitol was attacked by Trump supporters following a rally at which Trump spoke.

After the attack, the House impeached Trump for a second time on the charge of incitement of insurrection , making him the only federal officeholder to be impeached twice; however, he was not removed from office.

The Senate acquitted him in February 2021, after he had already left office.

Following the 2020 election, election denial became increasingly mainstream in the party, with the majority of Republican candidates in 2022 being election deniers.

The party also made efforts to restrict voting based on false claims of fraud. Furthermore, the party began to systematically downplay, deny, or reinterpret controversial actions from Trump's first term, particularly the Capitol attack, regarding which the party has circulated revisionist narratives, some of which are also being presented as official accounts during Trump's second term.

By the early 2020s, the Republican Party had largely shifted towards illiberalism , with a 2020 study conducted by the V-Dem Institute concluding that it was more ideologically extreme than France's National Rally and similar in its views, rhetoric, actions and practices to authoritarian or far-right parties such as Law and Justice in Poland, Fidesz in Hungary, Justice and Development in Turkey, Bharatiya Janata Party in India, and Alternative for Germany .

The United States has experienced substantial democratic backsliding under the two presidencies of Donald Trump , with a majority of political scientists and several democracy indices classifying the country as either having transitioned or being in a phase of transition from a liberal democracy to an illiberal democracy or hybrid regime since 2016. Trump easily won the nomination to be the party's candidate again in 2024 , marking the third straight election of him being the GOP nominee. Trump achieved victory against Vice President Kamala Harris . He won both the electoral college and a plurality of the popular vote, becoming the first Republican to do so since George W. Bush in 2004 , and improving his vote share among working class voters, particularly among young men, those without college degrees, and Hispanic voters. Current status As of 2026, the GOP holds the presidency, and majorities in both the U.S. House of Representatives and U.S. Senate , giving them a federal government trifecta . It also holds 26 state governorships , 28 state legislatures , and 23 state government trifectas. Six of the nine current U.S. Supreme Court justices were appointed by Republican presidents. There have been 19 Republicans who have served as president, the most from any one political party; the most recent being current president Donald Trump , who became the 47th president on January 20, 2025. Trump also served as the 45th president from 2017 to 2021.

During Trump's second term, the GOP has been partially divided on a number of key policies, including tariffs and support for Ukraine in the Russo-Ukrainian war . Name and symbols The Republican Party's founding members chose its name as homage to the values of republicanism promoted by the Democratic-Republican Party, which its founder, Thomas Jefferson, called the "Republican Party".

The idea for the name came from an editorial by the party's leading publicist, Horace Greeley , who called for "some simple name like 'Republican' would more fitly designate those who had united to restore the Union to its true mission of champion and promulgator of Liberty rather than propagandist of slavery".

The name was selected as it "connected voters with the original political organization of Thomas Jefferson in the 1790s, the Democratic-Republican Party". "Republican" has a variety of meanings around the world, and the Republican Party has evolved such that the meanings no longer always align.

The term "Grand Old Party" is a traditional nickname for the Republican Party, and the abbreviation "GOP" is a commonly used designation.

The term originated in 1875 in the Congressional Record , referring to the party associated with the successful military defense of the Union as "this gallant old party".

The following year in an article in the Cincinnati Commercial , the term was modified to "grand old party".

The first use of the abbreviation is dated 1884.

The traditional mascot of the party is the elephant. A political cartoon by Thomas Nast , published in Harper's Weekly on November 7, 1874, is considered the first important use of the symbol.

The cartoon was published during the debate over a possible run for a third term by President Ulysses S. Grant . It draws imagery and text from the Aesop fable " The Ass in the Lion's Skin ", combined with rumors of animals escaping from the Central Park Zoo . An alternate symbol of the Republican Party in states such as Indiana, New York, and Ohio is the bald eagle as opposed to the Democratic rooster or the Democratic five-pointed star.

In Kentucky , the log cabin is a symbol of the Republican Party. Traditionally the party had no consistent color identity.

After the 2000 presidential election, the color red became politically associated with Republicans.

During and after the election, the major broadcast networks used the same color scheme for the electoral map: states won by Republican nominee George W. Bush were colored red and states won by Democratic nominee Al Gore were colored blue. Due to the weeks-long dispute over the election results , these color associations became firmly ingrained, persisting in subsequent years.

Although the assignment of colors to political parties is unofficial and informal, the media has come to represent the respective political parties using these colors.

The party and its candidates have also come to embrace the color red. Contrarily, the color red tends to represent left-leaning socialist, communist, and labor political movements in many nations, while blue is linked with conservatism. An 1874 cartoon by Thomas Nast , featuring the first notable appearance of the Republican elephant The red, white, and blue elephant as seen on the GOP website in 2011 The GOP banner logo, c. 2013 A GOP banner logo, c. 2017 Factions Main article: Factions in the Republican Party (United States) Civil War and Reconstruction era Main article: Radical Republicans U.S. representative Thaddeus Stevens , considered a leader of the Radical Republicans, was a fierce opponent of slavery and discrimination against African Americans.

The Radical Republicans were a major factor in the party from its inception in 1854 until the end of the Reconstruction Era in 1877. Like the moderate Republicans the radicals strongly opposed the expansion of slavery . Unlike the moderates they were hard-line abolitionists calling for the end of slavery in the South.

By 1865 Both factions advocated equal rights for the freedmen . Radicals were heavily influenced by religious ideals and evangelical Christianity . Radical Republicans pressed for abolition as a major war aim and they opposed the moderate Reconstruction plans of Abraham Lincoln as both too lenient on the Confederates and not going far enough to help former slaves.

After the war's end and Lincoln's assassination, the Radicals clashed with Andrew Johnson over Reconstruction policy. Radicals led efforts to establish civil rights for former slaves and fully implement emancipation, pushing the Fourteenth Amendment for statutory protections through Congress . They opposed allowing ex-Confederate officers to retake political power in the Southern U.S. , and emphasized liberty, equality, and the Fifteenth Amendment which provided voting rights for the freedmen . Many later became Stalwarts , who supported machine politics. Moderate Republicans were known for their loyal support of President Abraham Lincoln 's war policies and expressed antipathy towards the more militant stances advocated by the Radical Republicans.

In contrast to Radicals, Moderate Republicans were less enthusiastic on the issue of Black suffrage even while embracing civil equality and the expansive federal authority observed throughout the American Civil War . They were also skeptical of the lenient, conciliatory Reconstruction policies of President Andrew Johnson. Members of the Moderate Republicans comprised in part of the previous Radical Republicans who became disenchanted with the alleged corruption of the latter faction. They generally opposed efforts by Radical Republicans to rebuild the Southern U.S. under an economically mobile, free-market system. 20th century Ronald Reagan speaks in support of Republican presidential candidate Barry Goldwater during the 1964 presidential campaign .

The 20th century saw the Republican party split into an Old Right and a moderate-liberal faction in the Northeast that eventually became known as Rockefeller Republicans . Opposition to Roosevelt's New Deal saw the formation of the conservative coalition .

The 1950s saw fusionism of traditionalist and social conservatism and right-libertarianism, along with the rise of the First New Right to be followed in 1964 with a more populist Second New Right .

The election of Barack Obama saw the formation of the Tea Party movement in 2009 that coincided with a global rise in right-wing populist movements from the 2010s to 2020s.

The global rise in right-wing populism has been attributed to factors including economic insecurity due to financialization , a decline in organized religion, backlash to globalization, and migrant crises . Right-wing populism became an increasingly dominant ideological faction within the GOP throughout the 2010s and helped lead to the election of Donald Trump in 2016. Starting in the 1970s and accelerating in the 2000s, American right-wing interest groups invested heavily in external mobilization vehicles that led to the organizational weakening of the GOP establishment.

The outsized role of conservative media, in particular Fox News , led to it being followed and trusted more by the Republican base over traditional party elites.

The depletion of organizational capacity partly led to Trump's victory in the Republican primaries against the wishes of a very weak party establishment and traditional power brokers. : 27–28 Trump's election exacerbated internal schisms within the GOP, : 18 and saw the GOP move from a center coalition of moderates and conservatives to a solidly right-wing party hostile to liberal views and any deviations from the party line.

The Party has since faced intense factionalism. These factions are particularly apparent in the U.S. House of Representatives , where three Republican House leaders ( Eric Cantor , John Boehner , and Kevin McCarthy ) have been ousted since 2009. All three of the top Republican elected officials during Trump's first term (Vice President, Speaker of the House, and Senate Republican leader) were ousted or stepped down by Trump's second term.

The party's establishment conservative faction has lost all of its influence. Many conservatives critical of the Trumpist faction have also lost influence within the party, with no former Republican presidential or vice presidential nominees attending the 2024 Republican National Convention .

The victory of Trump in the 2024 presidential election saw the party increasingly shift towards Trumpism, and party criticism of Trump was described as being muted to non-existent.

The New York Times described it as a "hostile takeover", and a victory of right-wing populism over the old conservative establishment. Polling found that 53% of Republican voters saw loyalty to Trump as central to their political identity and what it means to be a Republican.

The Republican Party's right-wing populist movements emerged in concurrence with a global increase in populist movements in the 2010s and 2020s, coupled with entrenchment and increased partisanship within the party since 2010. This included the rise of the Tea Party movement , which has also been described as far-right. Compared to other Republicans, the populist faction is more likely to oppose legal immigration , free trade, neoconservatism , and environmental protection laws . It has been described as featuring anti-intellectualism and overtly racial appeals.

In international relations, populists typically support American aid to Israel but not to Ukraine, though since 2025, a growing element is critical of aid to Israel as well. They are generally supportive of improving relations with Russia , and favor an isolationist " America First " foreign policy agenda. This faction has been described as closer to that of Vladimir Putin's Russia and Recep Tayyip Erdoğan's Turkey than Western Europe and the Anglosphere in terms of positions on international cooperation, support for an autocratic leadership style, and trust in institutions. This faction takes nationalist and irredentist views towards other countries in North America, advocating for American territorial expansion to include Canada , Greenland and the Panama Canal , the renaming of the Gulf of Mexico , and potential military action on Mexican soil.

The party's far-right faction includes members of the Freedom Caucus. They generally reject compromise within the party and with the Democrats , and are willing to oust fellow Republican office holders they deem to be too moderate. According to sociologist Joe Feagin , political polarization by racially extremist Republicans as well as their increased attention from conservative media has perpetuated the near extinction of moderate Republicans and created legislative paralysis at numerous government levels in the last few decades.

The Christian right faction is characterized by strong support of socially conservative policies. Holding to right-wing interpretations of Christianity, they have varying beliefs on how it should influence law and public policy. Compared to other Republicans, the Christian right faction is more likely to oppose LGBT rights , marijuana legalization , and support significantly restricting the legality of abortion .

The Christian right is strongest in the Bible Belt , which covers most of the Southern United States. Mike Pence , Donald Trump's vice president from 2017 to 2021, was a member of the Christian right.

In the 21st century, a significant amount of former Republican moderates have switched to the Democratic Party, and the faction is in decline. Notable Republicans include Senators Lisa Murkowski of Alaska and Susan Collins of Maine, Vermont governor Phil Scott , and former Maryland governor Larry Hogan . Political positions Main article: Political positions of the Republican Party The Federalist Papers (1788) Frontier Thesis (1893) The Idea of Nationalism (1944) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Organizations Media Breitbart News Daily Wire The Federalist Infowars National Review Newsmax One America News Network The Washington Times Other organizations America First Policies Christian Nationalist Crusade (defunct) Conservative Partnership Institute John Birch Society Nationalist Clubs (defunct) Oath Keepers TPUSA Movements African-American patriotism Fascism MAGA Communism Nativism Patriot movement Populism Right-wing Radical right Alt-right Secessionism Neo-Confederates Texas Related American expansionism under Donald Trump American School (economics) Bipartisan effort Conservatism in the United States Immigration reduction in the United States " Make America Great Again " Pax Americana Pledge of Allegiance Pro-Americanism Xenophobia in the United States United States portal Conservatism portal The Republican Party is a right-wing populist and nationalist party; until 2017, it was generally described as upholding American conservatism , with conservatives now only making up a minority of the party. Comparative politics studies by the V-Dem Institute , Polity Data Series , Global Party Survey , Protect Democracy , The Washington Post , and the Manifesto Project Database classify the party as " far-right " in an international context, as well as a majority of political scientists. Freedom House described "the Republicans on the right and the Democrats on the left " in its 2026 report for the United States.

By 2025, congressional Republicans have increasingly used overtly bigoted language and offensive tropes against the racial and religious identity of their political opponents with little to no pushback from GOP leadership.

In 2026, elected Republicans have increasingly used blatantly anti-Muslim rhetoric which was described by commentators as mirroring a prior increase in such rhetoric by the GOP following the 9/11 attacks in 2001.

The second presidency of Trump saw him nominate several White House officials with ties to antisemitic extremists. His administration promoted social media content promoting remigration and containing antisemitic slurs, and was criticized as promoting Nazism and white nationalism , the latter of which has become influential within the party since the 2020s. Other social media posts from multiple government agencies have variously alluded to neo-Nazi and white supremacist literature and promoted ethnic cleansing and QAnon conspiracies.

The Southern Poverty Law Center found that some "images and language appear to come directly from antisemitic and neo-Nazi publications and a white Christian nationalist website". According to The New York Times , Republican youth groups have grown increasingly divided over the acceptance and prevalence of far-right speakers and ideology.

In October 2025, Politico revealed leaked group chats among high-ranking leaders of the " Young Republicans " that included language praising Adolf Hitler and promoting Nazism, encouraging the rape and killing of political opponents, extensive use of antisemitic and racial slurs, and favorable opinions on slavery .

The messages drew bipartisan condemnation, and another incident involving the display of an American flag with a swastika in Republican Congressman David Taylor 's office a day later spurred significant political commentary about the future of the GOP and condemnation about the prominence of Nazi ideology within the party.

The same month, Politico posted more leaked messages from Republican Office of Special Council nominee Paul Ingrassia where he stated he had "a Nazi streak", that he wanted white men in positions of leadership, used ethnic slurs for Black people and Italians, and proposed making Kwanzaa and all celebrations of Black culture illegal.

In March 2026, group chats among young Republicans created by the Miami-Dade Republican Party included slurs against Black and Jewish people, killing African-Americans, and Hitler's policies. Starting in October 2025, Axios , Politico , The Economist , The Wall Street Journal , and The New York Times described the party as undergoing a "rift" among a growing cohort of anti-Jewish and antisemitic voices within the party and debate over how expansive the party's coalition should be.

In January 2026, Trump publicly came out against those with antisemitic views in the party, which The New York Times and The Economist described as being contrasted with J.D. Vance's prior refusal to condemn the incidents and statement that the party did not need "purity tests". Beginning in the early 2020s, several Republican politicians have been promoting the Great Replacement conspiracy theory . Economic policies Enacting high tariffs on foreign imports is a core component of Donald Trump 's fiscal agenda. Tariffs are taxes on foreign imports, mainly paid by domestic businesses, given that consumers generally do not import foreign goods directly.

By raising tariffs to their highest levels since the Gilded Age , Trump enacted one of the largest tax increases by any Republican president.

The Constitution's Import-Export Clause requires that only the federal government be allowed to collect tariff revenue from imports. Traditionally, Republicans believe that free markets and individual achievement are the primary factors behind economic prosperity. Reduction in income taxes for those with higher incomes is a core component of Republicans' fiscal agenda.

As of 2025, Trump and the Republican Party largely abandoned traditional Republican orthodoxy about protecting and promoting the free market, instead favoring state capitalism by taking direct government equity stakes in major US corporations, an approach that has been characterized by critics in favor of free market economics as socialist .

The Trump administration has also deviated from the GOP's conventional free market approach by ordering Nvidia and AMD to pay the federal government a portion of chip sales to China. Taxes and trade As of 2025 the Republican Party supports near-universal tariffs , but that has not always been the case. For example, during the last half of the 20th century, Republicans were strong proponents of free trade .

However 68% of Republicans and Republican-leaning independents approve of the increasing tariffs while the Democrats overwhelmingly disapprove of it at 89%.

The current Republican president, Donald Trump, has been a staunch proponent of enacting tariffs as a means of generating tax revenue and has been described as a mercantilist .

In 2025, Trump raised American tariff rates to the highest in the world, at the highest level since the Smoot–Hawley Tariff Act of 1930. Donald Trump opposes globalization , and his economic policies have been described as attempting to unravel the multilateral global economic order, including the power of the World Trade Organization (WTO). Trump has expressed his admiration for Republican president William McKinley 's tariff policies. McKinley was the author of the Tariff Act of 1890 , and both Trump and McKinley nicknamed themselves as a "Tariff Man". According to an April 2025 Economist/ YouGov poll, "Republican voters overwhelmingly support Trump's tariffs, while Democratic voters generally do not." At its inception, the Republican Party supported protective tariffs . Abraham Lincoln enacted tariffs during the Civil War.

The great battle over the high Payne–Aldrich Tariff Act in 1910 caused a split in the party.

The Reciprocal Tariff Act of 1934 marked a sharp departure from the era of protectionism in the United States. American duties on foreign products declined from an average of 46% in 1934 to 12% by 1962, which included the presidency of Republican president Dwight D. Eisenhower .

After World War II, the U.S. promoted the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) established in 1947, to minimize tariffs and other restrictions, and to liberalize trade among all capitalist countries.

During the Reagan and George H. W. Bush administrations, Republicans abandoned protectionist policies and came out against quotas and in favor of the GATT and the World Trade Organization policy of minimal economic barriers to global trade. Free trade with Canada came about as a result of the Canada–United States Free Trade Agreement of 1987, which led in 1994 to the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) based on Reagan's plan to enlarge the scope of the market for American firms to include Canada and Mexico. President Bill Clinton , with strong Republican support in 1993, pushed NAFTA through Congress over the vehement objection of labor unions.

The 2016 presidential election marked a return to supporting protectionism, beginning with Donald Trump's first presidency .

In 2017, only 36% of Republicans agreed that free trade agreements are good for the United States, compared to 67% of Democrats.

When asked if free trade has helped respondents specifically, the approval numbers for Democrats drop to 54%, however approval ratings among Republicans remain relatively unchanged at 34%. Income tax cuts have been at the core of Republican economic policy since 1980.

At the national level and state level, Republicans tend to pursue policies of tax cuts and deregulation. Modern Republicans advocate the theory of supply-side economics , which holds that lower tax rates increase economic growth. Many Republicans oppose higher tax rates for higher earners , which they believe are unfairly targeted at those who create jobs and wealth. They believe private spending is more efficient than government spending. Republican lawmakers have also sought to limit funding for tax enforcement and tax collection .

The modern Republican Party's economic policy positions tend to align with business interests and the affluent. Republicans have traditionally advocated in favor of fiscal conservatism .

By the 2020s, Republicans have largely abandoned fiscal conservatism as an ideological cornerstone. Labor unions and the minimum wage The Republican Party is generally opposed to labor unions. Republicans believe corporations should be able to establish their own employment practices, including benefits and wages, with the free market deciding the price of work.

Since the 1920s, Republicans have generally been opposed by labor union organizations and members.

At the national level, Republicans supported the Taft–Hartley Act of 1947, which gives workers the right not to participate in unions. Modern Republicans at the state level generally support various right-to-work laws . Most Republicans also oppose increases in the minimum wage . Environmental policies Main article: Political positions of the Republican Party § Environmental policies The Republican Party rejects cap-and-trade policy to limit carbon emissions.

In the 2000s, Senator John McCain proposed bills (such as the McCain-Lieberman Climate Stewardship Act ) that would have regulated carbon emissions, but his position on climate change was unusual among high-ranking party members. Some Republican candidates have supported the development of alternative fuels to achieve energy independence for the United States . Some Republicans support increased oil drilling in protected areas such as the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge , a position that has drawn criticism from activists. Many Republicans during the presidency of Barack Obama opposed his administration's new environmental regulations, such as those on carbon emissions from coal.

In particular, many Republicans supported building the Keystone Pipeline ; this position was supported by businesses, but opposed by indigenous peoples' groups and environmental activists. According to the Center for American Progress , a non-profit liberal advocacy group, more than 55% of congressional Republicans were climate change deniers in 2014. PolitiFact in May 2014 found "relatively few Republican members of Congress ... accept the prevailing scientific conclusion that global warming is both real and man-made." The group found eight members who acknowledged it, although the group acknowledged there could be more and that not all members of Congress have taken a stance on the issue.

From 2008 to 2017, the Republican Party went from "debating how to combat human-caused climate change to arguing that it does not exist", according to The New York Times .

In January 2015, the Republican-led U.S. Senate voted 98–1 to pass a resolution acknowledging that "climate change is real and is not a hoax"; however, an amendment stating that "human activity significantly contributes to climate change" was supported by only five Republican senators.

By 2025, the GOP during the second Trump administration moved to abandon all efforts to regulate greenhouse gases by reversing the endangerment finding , and Trump criticized global warming as a "hoax" and a "con job".

The Energy Department also released a report promoting climate change denial and refuting the scientific consensus on climate change after several climate skeptics were given government jobs. Health care The party opposes a single-payer health care system, describing it as socialized medicine . It also opposes the Affordable Care Act and expansions of Medicaid. Historically, there have been diverse and overlapping views within both the Republican Party and the Democratic Party on the role of government in health care, but the two parties became highly polarized on the topic during 2008–2009 and onwards. Both Republicans and Democrats made various proposals to establish federally funded aged health insurance prior to the bipartisan effort to establish Medicare and Medicaid in 1965. No Republican member of Congress voted for the Affordable Care Act in 2009, and after it passed, the party made frequent attempts to repeal it.

At the state level, the party has tended to adopt a position against Medicaid expansion . Republicans typically believe individuals should take responsibility for their own circumstances and that the private sector is more effective in helping the poor through charity than the government is through welfare programs, and argue that social assistance programs cause government dependency.

As of November 2022, all 11 states that had not expanded Medicaid had Republican-controlled state legislatures .

The rise of neoconservatism saw the Republican Party become further pro-Israel by the 1990s and 2000s, although notable anti-Israel sentiment persisted through paleoconservative figures such as Pat Buchanan .

As president, Donald Trump generally supported Israel during most of his term, but became increasingly critical of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu towards the end of it. According to i24NEWS , the 2020s have seen declining support for Israel among nationalist Republicans, led by individuals such as Tucker Carlson . Nevertheless, the 2024 Republican Party platform reaffirmed the party would "stand with Israel" and called for the deportation of "pro- Hamas radicals", while expressing a desire for peace in the Middle East.

Although the Republican Party has often positioned itself as an opponent of antisemitism and denounced Democrats as insufficiently supportive of Israel, many members of the Christian right support Israel primarily due to theological beliefs about the centrality of Israel to the Second Coming of Jesus Christ and the conversion or damnation of Jews and other non-Christians. Taiwan In the party's 2016 platform, its stance on Taiwan is: "We oppose any unilateral steps by either side to alter the status quo in the Taiwan Straits on the principle that all issues regarding the island's future must be resolved peacefully, through dialogue, and be agreeable to the people of Taiwan." In addition, if "China were to violate those principles, the United States, in accord with the Taiwan Relations Act , will help Taiwan defend itself". Mention of Taiwan was omitted from the party's 2024 platform. War on terror Main article: War on terror Further information: September 11 attacks Since the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, neoconservatives in the party have supported the war on terror, including the War in Afghanistan and the Iraq War .

The George W. Bush administration took the position that the Geneva Conventions do not apply to unlawful combatants , while other prominent Republicans, such as Ted Cruz , strongly oppose the use of enhanced interrogation techniques , which they view as torture.

In April 2024, a majority of Republican members of the U.S. House of Representatives voted against a military aid package to Ukraine. Both Trump and Senator JD Vance , the 2024 Republican presidential nominee and vice presidential nominee respectively, have been vocal critics of military aid to Ukraine and advocates of a peace deal between Russia and Ukraine.

The 2024 Republican Party platform did not mention Russia or Ukraine, but stated the party's objectives to "prevent World War III" and "restore peace to Europe".

In February 2025, during the Trump–Zelenskyy meeting , Trump and Vance hostilely berated Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy . Social issues The Republican Party is generally associated with social conservative policies, although it does have dissenting centrist and libertarian factions.

The social conservatives support laws that uphold their traditional values , such as opposition to same-sex marriage , abortion, and marijuana.

The Republican Party's positions on social and cultural issues are in part a reflection of the influential role that the Christian right has had in the party since the 1970s. Most conservative Republicans also oppose gun control , affirmative action , and illegal immigration .

By the 2020s, the GOP has shifted from traditional conservative support of limited government to instead support statism and increased government oversight when enforcing conservative cultural values . Abortion and embryonic stem cell research The Republican position on abortion has changed significantly over time.

During the 1960s and early 1970s, opposition to abortion was concentrated among members of the political left and the Democratic Party; most liberal Catholics—which tended to vote for the Democratic Party—opposed expanding abortion access while most conservative evangelical Protestants supported it.

During this period, Republicans generally favored legalized abortion more than Democrats, although significant heterogeneity could be found within both parties. Leading Republican political figures, including Richard Nixon , Gerald Ford , Ronald Reagan , and George H. W. Bush , took pro-choice positions until the early 1980s. However, starting at this point, both George H.W. Bush and Ronald Reagan described themselves as pro-life during their presidencies.

In the 21st century, both George W. Bush and Donald Trump described themselves as " pro-life " during their terms. However, Trump stated that he supported the legality and ethics of abortion before his candidacy in 2015. Summarizing the rapid shift in the Republican and Democratic positions on abortion, Sue Halpern writes: ...in the late 1960s and early 1970s, many Republicans were behind efforts to liberalize and even decriminalize abortion; theirs was the party of reproductive choice, while Democrats, with their large Catholic constituency, were the opposition. Republican governor Ronald Reagan signed the California Therapeutic Abortion Act, one of the most liberal abortion laws in the country, in 1967, legalizing abortion for women whose mental or physical health would be impaired by pregnancy, or whose pregnancies were the result of rape or incest.

The same year, the Republican strongholds of North Carolina and Colorado made it easier for women to obtain abortions. New York, under Governor Nelson Rockefeller , a Republican, eliminated all restrictions on women seeking to terminate pregnancies up to twenty-four weeks gestation.... Richard Nixon, Barry Goldwater, Gerald Ford, and George H.W. Bush were all pro-choice, and they were not party outliers.

In 1972, a Gallup poll found that 68 percent of Republicans believed abortion to be a private matter between a woman and her doctor.

The government, they said, should not be involved...

Since the 1980s, opposition to abortion has become strongest in the party among traditionalist Catholics and conservative Protestant evangelicals. Initially, evangelicals were relatively indifferent to the cause of abortion and overwhelmingly viewed it as a concern that was sectarian and Catholic . Historian Randall Balmer notes that Billy Graham 's Christianity Today published in 1968 a statement by theologian Bruce Waltke that: "God does not regard the fetus as a soul, no matter how far gestation has progressed." Typical of the time, Christianity Today "refused to characterize abortion as sinful" and cited "individual health, family welfare, and social responsibility" as "justifications for ending a pregnancy." Similar beliefs were held among conservative figures in the Southern Baptist Convention , including W. A. Criswell , who is partially credited with starting the " conservative resurgence " within the organization, who stated: "I have always felt that it was only after a child was born and had a life separate from its mother that it became an individual person and it has always, therefore, seemed to me that what is best for the mother and for the future should be allowed." Balmer argues that evangelical American Christianity being inherently tied to opposition to abortion is a relatively new occurrence.

After the late 1970s, he writes, opinion against abortion among evangelicals rapidly shifted in favor of its prohibition. Today, opinion polls show that Republican voters are heavily divided on the legality of abortion, although the vast majority of the party's national and state candidates are anti-abortion and oppose elective abortion on religious or moral grounds.

While many advocate exceptions in the case of incest , rape, or the mother's life being at risk, in 2012 the party approved a platform advocating banning abortions without exception. There were not highly polarized differences between the Democratic Party and the Republican Party before the Roe v. Wade 1973 Supreme Court ruling (which made prohibitions on abortion rights unconstitutional), but after the Supreme Court ruling, opposition to abortion became an increasingly key national platform for the Republican Party.

As a result, Evangelicals gravitated towards the Republican Party. Most Republicans oppose government funding for abortion providers, notably Planned Parenthood . This includes support for the Hyde Amendment . Until its dissolution in 2018, Republican Majority for Choice , an abortion rights PAC, advocated for amending the GOP platform to include pro-abortion rights members.

The Republican Party has pursued policies at the national and state levels to restrict embryonic stem cell research beyond the original lines because it involves the destruction of human embryos .

The 2012 Republican national platform stated, "We support efforts to help low-income individuals get a fair chance based on their potential and individual merit; but we reject preferences, quotas, and set-asides, as the best or sole methods through which fairness can be achieved, whether in government, education, or corporate boardrooms...Merit, ability, aptitude, and results should be the factors that determine advancement in our society." Gun policy Both major parties in the United States support policies on gun ownership, in comparison to a large majority of the world, which give broad legality to the possession of private firearms .

The modern Republican Party is now often seen as more favorable to laissez-faire gun laws.

The National Rifle Association of America , a special interest group in support of gun ownership, has consistently aligned itself with the Republican Party.

Following gun control measures under the Clinton administration , such as the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 , the Republicans allied with the NRA during the Republican Revolution in 1994 .

In the 2010s, however, prominent Republicans demonstrated some interest in criminal justice reform designed to combat mass incarceration , with President Trump signing the First Step Act , which expanded good behavior credits for perpetrators of most nonviolent crimes and required the U.S. Attorney General to develop a system to assess the recidivism risk of all federal prisoners.

By 2024, however, the Republican Party and its leaders had largely left behind its prior support for reform of the justice system. Republican elected officials have historically supported the war on drugs . They generally oppose legalization or decriminalization of drugs such as marijuana . Opposition to the legalization of marijuana has softened significantly over time among Republican voters and politicians. A 2021 Quinnipiac poll found that 62% of Republicans supported the legalization of recreational marijuana use and that net support for the position was +30 points. Some Republican-controlled states have legalized medical and recreational marijuana in recent years.

In the period between 1850 and 1870, the Republican Party was more opposed to immigration than the Democrats.

The GOP's opposition was, in part, caused by its reliance on the support of anti-Catholic and anti-immigrant parties such as the Know-Nothings .

In the decades following the Civil War, especially in the 1880s, the Republican Party lessened its stance on immigration, as it represented the manufacturers in the northeast (who wanted additional labor); although during this period, the Democratic Party still came to be seen as the party of both American and foreign labor, and many religious Republicans used anti-Irish and pro-Christian sentiments . Starting in the early 1930s, the parties focused on Mexican emigration , as the Democrats proposed a softer stance on Mexican immigration during the Great Depression and New Deal , rather than Republicans under Herbert Hoover .

The modern GOP opposes the large majority of immigration from non-Western countries, including the Middle East , Africa , Asia , and Latin America .

In 2016, Donald Trump proposed to build a wall along the southern border of the United States. Trump immigration policies during his administration included a travel ban from multiple Muslim-majority countries, a Remain in Mexico policy for asylum-seekers, a controversial family separation policy , and attempting to end DACA .

The party largely opposes immigration reform.

The party's 2024 platform is opposed to immigration, and calls for the mass deportation of all illegal immigrants in the United States, which during Trump's second presidency was extended to immigrants without permanent legal status.

The platform also calls for eliminating family-sponsored immigration , replacing the employment-based preference framework with a points system , and cutting federal funding for sanctuary cities.

Since the 2024 presidential election , the party's leading figures have shifted towards supporting remigration.

In September, Donald Trump called for "remigration" of illegal immigrants to their home countries and suspending refugee resettlement , also pledging to "do large deportations in Springfield, Ohio ", referring to the town's community of legal Haitian immigrants .

The usage mainstreamed the term in the country.

In May 2025 the Department of State released a "reorganisation chart" that included the creation of an " Office of Remigration ".

As President, Trump once again endorsed "remigration" in June 2025 as "reversing the invasion" of illegal immigrants into the United States.

In July 2025 Trump claimed that the One Big Beautiful Bill Act would allow for remigration to be implemented. White House Deputy Chief of Staff Stephen Miller has been described as an advocate for remigration within the Trump administration.

In October 2025, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security gained attention after tweeting "remigrate" from its official X account.

The Trump administration has brought Afrikaner South Africans to the United States and other European-ethnic refugees through its refugee program .

In May 2025, Ramaphosa made a state visit to meet with President Donald Trump .

During the press conference, Trump confronted him with claims of Afrikaner genocide in South Africa , which was denied by Ramaphosa. LGBT issues Main articles: 2020s anti-LGBT movement in the United States and Transgender genocide The Republican Party is broadly opposed to LGBT rights , including same-sex marriage , expression , and transgender rights .

The large majority of its state and county/equivalent chapter platforms oppose same-sex marriage.

From the early 2000s to the mid-2010s, Republicans opposed same-sex marriage , while being divided on the issue of civil unions and domestic partnerships for same-sex couples.

During the 2004 election, George W. Bush campaigned prominently on a constitutional amendment to prohibit same-sex marriage; many believe it helped Bush win re-election.

In both 2004 and 2006 , President Bush, Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist , and House Majority Leader John Boehner promoted the Federal Marriage Amendment , a proposed failed constitutional amendment which would legally restrict the definition of marriage to heterosexual couples.

As more states legalized same-sex marriage in the 2010s, Republicans increasingly supported allowing each state to decide its own marriage policy.

As of 2014, most state GOP platforms expressed opposition to same-sex marriage.

The 2016 GOP Platform defined marriage as "natural marriage, the union of one man and one woman," and condemned the Supreme Court's ruling legalizing same-sex marriages.

The 2020 platform, which reused the 2016 platform, retained the statements against same-sex marriage.

Following his election as president in 2016, Donald Trump stated that he had no objection to same-sex marriage or to the Supreme Court decision in Obergefell v. Hodges , but had previously promised to consider appointing a Supreme Court justice to roll back the constitutional right.

The Trump administration banned transgender individuals from service in the United States military and rolled back other protections for transgender people which had been enacted during the previous Democratic presidency.

The Republican Party platform previously opposed the inclusion of gay people in the military and opposed adding sexual orientation to the list of protected classes since 1992.

The Republican Party opposed the inclusion of sexual preference in anti-discrimination statutes from 1992 to 2004.

The 2008 and 2012 Republican Party platform supported anti-discrimination statutes based on sex, race, age, religion, creed, disability, or national origin, but both platforms were silent on sexual orientation and gender identity .

The 2016 platform was opposed to sex discrimination statutes that included the phrase "sexual orientation".

In the early 2020s, numerous Republican-led states proposed or passed laws that have been described as anti-trans by critics, as well as laws limiting or banning public performances of drag shows , and teaching schoolchildren about LGBT topics.

In defending their restrictions to voting rights, Republicans have made false and exaggerated claims about the extent of voter fraud in the United States; all existing research indicates that it is extremely rare, and civil and voting rights organizations often accuse Republicans of enacting restrictions to influence elections in the party's favor. Many laws or regulations restricting voting enacted by Republicans have been successfully challenged in court, with court rulings striking down such regulations and accusing Republicans of establishing them with a partisan purpose.

After the Supreme Court decision in Shelby County v. Holder rolled back aspects of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 , Republicans introduced cuts to early voting, purges of voter rolls, and imposition of strict voter ID laws.

The 2016 Republican platform advocated proof of citizenship as a prerequisite for registering to vote and photo ID as a prerequisite when voting.

The Illustrated Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era . Oxford University Press . p. 129. ISBN 978-0-19-974390-2 . ^ James M. McPherson, Ordeal by Fire: Volume I.

The Coming of War , second edition ( ISBN 0-07045837-5 ) p. 94. ^ a b c d e Ball, Molly (January 23, 2024). "The GOP Wants Pure, Uncut Trumpism" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on January 24, 2024 . Retrieved February 22, 2024 . ^ a b c d e f Martin, Jonathan (March 1, 2021). "Trumpism Grips a Post-Policy G.O.P. as Traditional Conservatism Fades" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on May 23, 2024 . Retrieved February 3, 2025 . ^ a b c d Peoples, Steve (February 14, 2021). "Trump remains dominant force in GOP following acquittal" . AP News . Archived from the original on June 12, 2024 . Retrieved February 3, 2025 . ^ a b c d e f g h i Boot, Max (September 8, 2024). "How the GOP Went From Reagan to Trump" .

The Trump-dominated, populist-nationalist GOP is certainly very different from the conservative party that Reagan led in the 1980s ^ a b Winberg, Oscar (2017). "Insult Politics: Donald Trump, Right-Wing Populism, and Incendiary Language" . European Journal of American Studies . 12 (2): 1– 16. doi : 10.4000/ejas.12132 . ISSN 1991-9336 . Archived from the original on December 31, 2024 . Retrieved February 2, 2025 . pp. 5– 6: With the presidency of George W. Bush, coinciding with the ascendance of the conservative media establishment and ending with the mass protests of the Tea Party, the long tradition of right-wing populism was a firmly institutionalized part of the conservative movement and, by extension, the Republican Party. Trump's rise should be understood as part of the long tradition of right-wing populism and the ultimate triumph of the Tea Party movement; a right-wing populist eruption within the Republican Party fueled by both a conservative media establishment and anti-intellectual and, at times, overtly racial appeals. Fiorino, Daniel J. (2022). "Climate change and right-wing populism in the United States". Environmental Politics . 31 (5): 801– 819. Bibcode : 2022EnvPo..31..801F . doi : 10.1080/09644016.2021.2018854 . ISSN 0964-4016 .

In recent years, the Republican Party in the United States has taken on the characteristics of right-wing populism, especially under President Donald Trump. Like most right-wing populist parties, the party under Trump is hostile to climate mitigation. This is reflected in skepticism or rejection of climate science, opposition to multilateral institutions and agreements, aggressive domestic exploitation of fossil fuels, and depiction of climate advocates and experts as 'elites' set on undermining the will of 'the people'. Arhin, Kofi; Stockemer, Daniel; Normandin, Marie-Soleil (May 29, 2023). "The Republican Trump Voter: A Populist Radical Right Voter Like Any Other?" . World Affairs . 186 (3). doi : 10.1177/00438200231176818 . ISSN 1940-1582 .

In this article, we first illustrate that the Republican Party, or at least the dominant wing, which supports or tolerates Donald Trump and his Make America Great Again (MAGA) agenda have become a proto-typical populist radical right-wing party (PRRP). Cohn, Nate (November 25, 2024). "How Democrats Lost Their Base and their Message" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on November 25, 2024 . Retrieved November 25, 2024 . Donald Trump's populist pitch bumped Democrats off their traditional place in American politics. Burn-Murdoch, John (March 6, 2025). "Why the Maga mindset is different" . Financial Times . Retrieved March 18, 2025 . US decisions can no longer be analyzed using assumptions shared across the democratic west Arhin, Kofi; Stockemer, Daniel; Normandin, Marie-Soleil (May 29, 2023). "THE REPUBLICAN TRUMP VOTER: A Populist Radical Right Voter Like Any Other?" . World Affairs . 186 (3). doi : 10.1177/00438200231176818 . ISSN 1940-1582 .

In this article, we first illustrate that the Republican Party, or at least the dominant wing, which supports or tolerates Donald Trump and his Make America Great Again (MAGA) agenda have become a proto-typical populist radical right-wing party (PRRP). Beauchamp, Zack (July 19, 2024). "It's Trump's party now. Mostly" . Vox . Archived from the original on January 18, 2025 . Retrieved January 28, 2025 . Page, Susan. "Trump's takeover: In a redefined GOP, populism and a new coalition. Goodbye, old guard" . USA TODAY . Archived from the original on September 2, 2024 . Retrieved January 28, 2025 . Aratani, Lauren (February 26, 2021). "Republicans unveil two minimum wage bills in response to Democrats' push" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on August 14, 2021 . Retrieved September 7, 2021 .

In keeping with the party's deep division between its dominant Trumpist faction and its more traditionalist party elites, the twin responses seem aimed at appealing on one hand to its corporate-friendly allies and on the other hand to its populist rightwing base. Both have an anti-immigrant element. ^ a b "DEMOCRACY REPORT 2026: Unraveling The Democratic Era?" (PDF) . V-Dem Institute . March 17, 2026 . Retrieved March 22, 2026 . One notable shift is the transformation of the Republican Party to endorsing a far-right, nationalist, and anti-pluralist agenda. Nationalist, anti-liberal, far-right parties and leaders have largely driven the "third wave of autocratization." Yet the USA stands out as the only case where such movement seized control over one party in a rigid two-party system. ^ a b Amira, Karyn (October 3, 2023). "Reagan wouldn't recognize Trump-style 'conservatism' – a look at how the GOP has changed" .

The Conversation . Retrieved May 10, 2026 . ^ Burns, Jennifer (September 9, 2024). "Did Ronald Reagan Pave the Way for Donald Trump?" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved May 12, 2026 . ^ Meaney, Thomas. "Trumpism After Trump: Will the movement outlive the man?" . Harper's Magazine . Vol. February 2020. ISSN 0017-789X . Retrieved July 8, 2023 . ^ Baker, Paula; Critchlow, Donald T., eds. (2020). "Chapter 15: Religion and American Politics".

The Oxford Handbook of American Political History . New York City: Oxford University Press. pp. 278– 294. ISBN 9780199341788 . Lewis, Andrew R. (August 28, 2019). "The Inclusion-Moderation Thesis: The U.S. Republican Party and the Christian Right". Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Politics . Oxford University Press. doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190228637.013.665 . ISBN 978-0-19-022863-7 . Considering all the evidence, the most apt description is that conservative Christianity has transformed the Republican Party, and the Republican Party has transformed conservative Christianity ... With its inclusion in the Republican Party, the Christian right has moderated on some aspects ...

At the same time, the Christian right has altered Republican politics. Perry, Samuel L. (2022). "American Religion in the Era of Increasing Polarization" . Annual Review of Sociology . 48 (1). San Mateo, California: Annual Reviews : 87– 107. doi : 10.1146/annurev-soc-031021-114239 . ISSN 0360-0572 . p. 91: Unaffiliated Americans were not abandoning orthodox beliefs, but rather, the increase in "no religion" was confined to political moderates and liberals who were likely reacting to the growing alignment of Christian identity with the religious Right and Republicans. Berlet, Chip; Hardisty, Berlet, eds. (2019). "Drifting Right and going wrong: An overview of the US political Right" . Trumping Democracy: From Reagan to the Alt-right (1 ed.). London: Routledge. p. 91. doi : 10.4324/9781315438412-9 . ISBN 9781315438412 . Within the Republican Party, the Christian Right competes with more secular, upstart free market libertarianism and button-down business conservatism for dominance. Gannon, Thomas M. (July–September 1981). "The New Christian Right in America as a Social and Political Force" . Archives de sciences sociales des religions . 26 ( 52– 1). Paris: Éditions de l'EHESS : 69– 83. doi : 10.3406/assr.1981.2226 . ISSN 0335-5985 . JSTOR 30125411 . Ben Barka, Mokhtar (December 2012). "The New Christian Right's relations with Israel and with the American Jews: the mid-1970s onward" . E-Rea . 10 (1). Aix-en-Provence and Marseille : Centre pour l'Édition Électronique Ouverte on behalf of Aix-Marseille University . doi : 10.4000/erea.2753 . ISSN 1638-1718 . S2CID 191364375 . Palmer, Randall; Winner, Lauren F. (2005) . "Protestants and Homosexuality" . Protestantism in America . Columbia Contemporary American Religion Series. New York City: Columbia University Press . pp. 149– 178. ISBN 9780231111317 . LCCN 2002023859 . "Content Pages of the Encyclopedia of Religion and Social Science" . Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Trollinger, William (October 8, 2019). "Fundamentalism turns 100, a landmark for the Christian Right" .

The Conversation . ISSN 2201-5639 . Archived from the original on May 7, 2022 . Retrieved July 3, 2022 .

The emergent Christian Right attached itself to the Republican Party, which was more aligned with its members' central commitments than the Democrats ...

By the time Falwell died, in 2007, the Christian Right had become the most important constituency in the Republican Party. It played a crucial role in electing Donald Trump in 2016. Thomson-DeVeaux, Amelia (October 27, 2022). "How Much Power Do Christians Really Have?" . FiveThirtyEight . Archived from the original on April 10, 2024 . Retrieved June 16, 2024 .

In the 1980s and 1990s, as white Christian conservatives forged an alliance with the Republican Party, Christianity itself started to become a partisan symbol. Identifying as a Christian was no longer just about theology, community or family history — to many Americans, the label became uncomfortably tangled with the Christian Right's political agenda, which was itself becoming increasingly hard to separate from the GOP's political agenda. ^ a b Wilbur, Miller (2012). "Libertarianism".

The Social History of Crime and Punishment in America . Vol. 3. Thousand Oaks, California : SAGE Publications . pp. 1006– 1007. ISBN 978-1-4129-8876-6 .

While right-libertarianism has been equated with libertarianism in general in the United States, left-libertarianism has become a more predominant aspect of politics in western European democracies over the past three decades. ...

Since the 1950s, libertarianism in the United States has been associated almost exclusively with right-libertarianism ...

As such, right-libertarianism in the United States remains a fruitful discourse with which to articulate conservative claims, even as it lacks political efficacy as a separate ideology. However, even without its own movement, libertarian sensibility informs numerous social movements in the United States, including the U.S. patriot movement, the gun-rights movement, and the incipient Tea Party movement. ^ "DEMOCRACY REPORT 2026: Unraveling The Democratic Era?" (PDF) . V-Dem Institute . March 17, 2026 . Retrieved March 22, 2026 . One notable shift is the transformation of the Republican Party to endorsing a far-right, nationalist, and anti-pluralist agenda. Nationalist, anti-liberal, far-right parties and leaders have largely driven the "third wave of autocratization." Yet the USA stands out as the only case where such movement seized control over one party in a rigid two-party system. McKay, David (2020), "Facilitating Donald Trump: Populism, the Republican Party and Media Manipulation" , in Crewe, Ivor; Sanders, David (eds.), Authoritarian Populism and Liberal Democracy , Cham: Springer International Publishing , pp. 107– 121, doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-17997-7_7 , ISBN 978-3-030-17997-7 , retrieved June 13, 2024 , The first was the transformation of the Republican Party from a centre-right party used to brokering policy solutions with the Democrats to a far-right insurgent outlier intent on imposing its will through manipulation and confrontation. Arhin, Kofi; Stockemer, Daniel; Normandin, Marie-Soleil (May 29, 2023). "THE REPUBLICAN TRUMP VOTER: A Populist Radical Right Voter Like Any Other?" . World Affairs . 186 (3). doi : 10.1177/00438200231176818 . ISSN 1940-1582 .

In this article, we first illustrate that the Republican Party, or at least the dominant wing, which supports or tolerates Donald Trump and his Make America Great Again (MAGA) agenda have become a proto-typical populist radical right-wing party (PRRP). Greenberg, David (January 27, 2021). "An Intellectual History of Trumpism" . Politico Magazine . Archived from the original on April 11, 2024 . Retrieved June 13, 2024 .

The larger ideology that the president-elect represents is a post-Iraq War, post-crash, post-Barack Obama update of what used to be called paleoconservatism: On race and immigration, where the alt-right affinities are most pronounced, its populist ideas are carrying an already right-wing party even further right. ^ "Members" . IDU. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. ^ "Regional Unions" . International Democracy Union . Archived from the original on June 17, 2010 . Retrieved August 19, 2024 . ^ "About – ECR Party" . European Conservatives and Reformists Party . August 4, 2022. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023 . Retrieved August 19, 2024 . ^ a b c Lührmann, Anna; Medzihorsky, Juraj; Hindle, Garry; Lindberg, Staffan I. (October 2020). "New Global Data on Political Parties: V-Party" (PDF) . Briefing Paper No. 9. V-Dem Institute. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 14, 2024 . Retrieved November 13, 2024 . ^ "How President Trump has challenged a constitutional foundation" . NPR . January 23, 2026 . Retrieved May 9, 2026 .

In his first year back in the White House, President Trump has presided over a sweeping expansion of executive power while eroding democratic norms. Many scholars of democracy say that these moves are unprecedented in U.S. history and that Trump has pushed the United States toward authoritarianism. ^ a b Tyler Godines Camarillo, C.; Clark Wilson, Walter; Perroud, Jace; VanGoethem, Margaret (January 3, 2026). "The New Republican Revolution: The Implications of Illiberalism and Populism for GOP Politics and Policy".

The Roads to Congress 2024: Navigating Elections in an Era of Upheaval . Palgrave Macmillan Cham. pp. 127– 151. ISBN 978-3-032-07119-4 . ^ a b c Colom, Guillem (2024). "An International Far-Right Alliance? A Comparative Analysis of the Linkages Between the Republican Party and European Far-Right Parties" . SSRN Electronic Journal . doi : 10.2139/ssrn.4739346 . ISSN 1556-5068 . ^ a b c Tharoor, Ishaan (October 12, 2021). "The GOP alliance with Europe's far-right deepens" .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved April 26, 2026 .

The Republican Party of the United States is, in global terms, a far-right party. ^ a b Sunshine, Spencer (January 6, 2026). "The Far Right Is Quietly Building Power Under Trump" .

The New Republic . ISSN 0028-6583 . Retrieved May 9, 2026 .

The administration has also made efforts to help the European far right, which it is increasingly allied with. Trump is close to Hungary's Prime Minister Viktor Orbán and Britain's head of the nativist Reform Party, Nigel Farage, while JD Vance met with the leader of the extremist Alternative for Germany party and called on European parties to remove their "firewalls" against cooperating with the far right. ^ a b * Massey, Douglas S. (2021). "The Bipartisan Origins of White Nationalism" . Daedalus . 150 (2): Abstract. doi : 10.1162/daed_a_01843 . ISSN 0011-5266 . Archived from the original on January 29, 2026. Until 2016, this cultivation relied on a dog whistle politics of racially coded symbolic language, but with the election of Donald Trump as president, White nationalist sentiments became explicit and White nationalism emerged as an ideological pillar of the Republican Party. Ehrenberg, John (May 18, 2022). White Nationalism and the Republican Party: Toward Minority Rule in America (1 ed.). New York: Routledge. doi : 10.4324/9781003182962 . ISBN 978-1-003-18296-2 . Bartels, Larry M. (September 15, 2020). "Ethnic antagonism erodes Republicans' commitment to democracy" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 117 (37): 22752– 22759. Bibcode : 2020PNAS..11722752B . doi : 10.1073/pnas.2007747117 . PMC 7502764 . PMID 32868419 . Olzak, Susan (2023). "Ethno-nationalism and Right-Wing Extremist Violence in the United States, 2000 through 2018" . Sociological Science . 10 : 197– 226. doi : 10.15195/v10.a6 .

The Republican party has increasingly aligned itself with extremist right-wing views that can be classified as ethno-nationalist (Bonikowski 2017; Thompson 2021). Woods, Eric Taylor; Fortier-Chouinard, Alexandre; Closen, Marcus; Ouellet, Catherine; Schertzer, Robert (December 7, 2023). "The Battle for the Soul of the Nation: Nationalist Polarization in the 2020 American Presidential Election and the Threat to Democracy" . Political Communication . 41 (2): 173– 198. doi : 10.1080/10584609.2023.2291150 . ISSN 1058-4609 . Manza, Jeff; Crowley, Ned (2018). "Ethnonationalism and the Rise of Donald Trump" . Contexts . 17 (1): 28– 33. doi : 10.1177/1536504218766548 . ISSN 1536-5042 . With ethnonationalist sentiment increasingly centered in the GOP base, the possibility of future Trump-like candidacies cannot be discounted. McClellan, Fletcher; Le, Loan (January 22, 2025), Democratic Theory and the New Undergraduate Political Science Major , doi : 10.33774/apsa-2025-1blzz , retrieved July 19, 2026 , Lieberman and Schlozman (2024) categorized the Republican Party as a majority ethnic party , based on white group identity, which executed backsliding behaviors such as vote manipulation and voter suppression. ^ a b c d Kneeland, Timothy W. (2016). Today's Social Issues: Democrats and Republicans: Democrats and Republicans . ABC-CLIO. p. 206. ISBN 978-1610698368 . Archived from the original on December 15, 2023 . Retrieved December 16, 2020 . ^ a b Shamim, Sarah. "What is remigration, the far-right fringe idea going mainstream?" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved May 6, 2026 . Remigration — once a fringe far-right notion advocating the deportation of ethnic minorities — is now gaining traction in United States Republican circles as President Donald Trump's second term enters the final weeks of its first year. ^ a b c Yousef, Odette (December 9, 2025). " 'Remigration,' once a fringe idea, becomes a mantra for the Trump administration" . NPR . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . So President Trump on Thanksgiving Day posted to social media about how immigration policies have hurt, quote, "gains and living conditions for many." And he said only reverse migration can fully cure this situation. But also, the State Department's proposed reorganization plan included a new office of remigration, and the Department of Homeland Security has called for remigration on social media posts. One of them, for example, Ailsa, with simply the word remigrate. ^ a b Tharoor, Ishaan (November 30, 2025). "Trump's embrace of 'remigration' echoes Europe's far right" .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . ^ Lewis L. Gould: The Republicans a history of the Grand Old Party (Oxford University Press/ 2014), pp. 3–23. ^ Gould, pp. 34–115. ^ Gould, pp. 116–245. ^ Zingher, Joshua N. (2018). "Polarization, Demographic Change, and White Flight from the Democratic Party".

The Journal of Politics . 80 (3): 860– 872. doi : 10.1086/696994 . ISSN 0022-3816 . S2CID 158351108 . ^ Layman, Geoffrey (2001).

The New York Times . August 9, 2017. ^ "12 days that stunned a nation: How Hillary Clinton lost" . NBC News . August 23, 2017. Archived from the original on January 28, 2021 . Retrieved December 8, 2019 . ^ a b "How Trump won and proved everyone wrong with his populist message" . NBC News Specials . December 14, 2016. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 8, 2019 . ^ a b c d Campani, Giovanna; Fabelo Concepción, Sunamis; Rodriguez Soler, Angel; Sánchez Savín, Claudia (December 2022). "The Rise of Donald Trump Right-Wing Populism in the United States: Middle American Radicalism and Anti-Immigration Discourse" . Societies . 12 (6): 154. doi : 10.3390/soc12060154 . ISSN 2075-4698 . ^ Cohn, Nate (November 9, 2016). "Why Trump Won: Working-Class Whites" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on November 9, 2016 . Retrieved February 15, 2021 . ^ Hacker, Jacob S.; Pierson, Paul (July 7, 2020). "The origins of the Republican Party's plutocratic populism" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on January 30, 2021 . Retrieved January 28, 2025 . Bolton, Alexander (July 17, 2023). "GOP senators rattled by radical conservative populism" .

The Hill . Archived from the original on December 14, 2024 . Retrieved January 28, 2025 . Lange, Jason; Oliphant, James (March 21, 2024). "Republicans have taken sharp populist turn in the Trump era: Reuters/Ipsos" . Reuters . Archived from the original on June 28, 2024 . Retrieved January 28, 2025 . Cliffe, Jeremy (February 15, 2023). "The strange death of the centre right" .

The New Statesman . Archived from the original on February 11, 2025 . Retrieved February 5, 2025 .

In Western democracies conventional conservatism is foundering. How did this once-dominant political force become so diminished? ^ a b Starr, Paul (March 27, 2026). "How the Republican Party Forgot It Was Conservative" .

The American Prospect . Retrieved May 4, 2026 . But the truly consequential change is that Republicans have broken with their own past. Under Donald Trump, the party hasn't just reversed its positions on specific policies. It has routinely betrayed basic tenets of the conservative philosophy that Republicans have long claimed was the bedrock of their party. ^ a b Graham, David A. (July 8, 2023). "The Democrats Are Now America's Conservative Party" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved May 4, 2026 . Third, and relatedly, the Trump-era Republican Party has abandoned much of the party's old orthodoxy in favor of radicalism on domestic and foreign affairs. ^ Bosman, Julie; Davey, Monica (November 11, 2016). "Republicans Expand Control in a Deeply Divided Nation" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on November 19, 2016 . Retrieved February 18, 2017 . ^ "2017–2018 Governors' Races: Where Power Is Most and Least Likely to Flip" . Governing . January 3, 2017. Archived from the original on January 28, 2024 . Retrieved January 28, 2024 . ^ "Republicans Governorships Rise to Highest Mark Since 1922" . U.S. News & World Report . Archived from the original on September 15, 2017 . Retrieved September 10, 2017 . ^ Lieb, David A. (November 6, 2016). "Republican governorships rise to highest mark since 1922" . U.S. News & World Report . Associated Press. ^ Phillips, Amber (November 12, 2016). "These 3 maps show just how dominant Republicans are in America after Tuesday" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on November 13, 2016 . Retrieved November 14, 2016 . ^ Lieb, David A. (December 29, 2016). "GOP-Controlled States Aim to Reshape Laws" . Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 31, 2016 . Retrieved December 30, 2016 . ^ Greenblatt, Alan (November 9, 2016). "Republicans Add to Their Dominance of State Legislatures" . Governing . Archived from the original on November 16, 2016 . Retrieved November 17, 2016 . ^ Graham, David A. (November 7, 2018). "The Democrats Are Back, and Ready to Take On Trump" .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on December 9, 2019 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 . ^ Kumar, Anita (September 26, 2020). "Trump's legacy is now the Supreme Court" . Politico . Archived from the original on February 16, 2021 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 . ^ Chappell, Bill (January 13, 2021). "House Impeaches Trump A 2nd Time, Citing Insurrection At U.S. Capitol" . NPR . Archived from the original on February 20, 2021 . Retrieved February 14, 2021 . ^ Fandos, Nicholas (January 13, 2021). "Trump Impeached for Inciting Insurrection" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved February 14, 2021 . ^ Gregorian, Dareh (February 13, 2021). "Trump acquitted in impeachment trial; 7 GOP Senators vote with Democrats to convict" . NBC News . Archived from the original on February 13, 2021 . Retrieved February 14, 2021 . ^ Riccardi, Nicholas; Mascaro, Lisa (May 21, 2024). "Election deniers moving closer to GOP mainstream, report shows, as Trump allies fill Congress" . AP . Archived from the original on May 21, 2024 . Retrieved August 15, 2024 . ^ Blanco, Adrián; Wolfe, Daniel; Gardner, Amy (November 7, 2022). "Tracking which 2020 election deniers are winning, losing in the midterms" . Washington Post . Archived from the original on January 11, 2024 . Retrieved August 15, 2024 . ^ Izaguirre, Anthony; Coronado, Acacia (January 31, 2021). "GOP lawmakers seek tougher voting rules after record turnout" . Associated Press . Archived from the original on January 31, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 . ^ McCaskill, Nolan D. (March 15, 2021). "After Trump's loss and false fraud claims, GOP eyes voter restrictions across nation" . Politico . Archived from the original on March 15, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 . ^ Collinson, Stephen (June 18, 2021). "Analysis: The Republican Party's mission: whitewash the Trump presidency" . CNN . Retrieved July 12, 2026 . ^ Holan, Angie Drobnic (January 4, 2022). "A year of debunking false narratives about Jan. 6" . PolitiFact.com . Retrieved July 12, 2026 . ^ DeBonis, Mike; Barr, Jeremy (March 1, 2021). "Rewriting January 6th: Republicans push false and misleading accounts of Capitol riot" .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved July 12, 2026 . ^ Lehmann, Chris (January 6, 2025). "Trump's Next Term Will Make His Historical Revisionism Official" .

The Nation . ISSN 0027-8378 . Retrieved July 12, 2026 . ^ Ibssa, Lalee; Stoddart, Michelle; Hutzler, Alexandra (January 7, 2026). "Trump White House attempts to rewrite history of Jan. 6, accuses Capitol Police of escalating tensions" . ABC News . Retrieved July 12, 2026 . ^ Levine, Sam (January 6, 2026). "January 6, five years on: sustained effort by Trump to rewrite history" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved July 12, 2026 . ^ "The Republican Party has lurched towards populism and illiberalism" .

The Economist . October 31, 2020. ISSN 0013-0613 . Archived from the original on June 2, 2024 . Retrieved November 9, 2024 .

In the late 20th century the Republican Party already looked a bit less liberal and more populist than most mainstream European parties. But according to the V-Dem Institute's analysis, it only really started to deviate to "illiberalism" when it embraced religious values under Mr Bush after his election in 2000.

The party then veered into populism in 2010 with the rise of the Tea Party movement, which vowed to curb what it saw as the unjustifiable expansion of the federal government under Barack Obama. However, the greatest shift, especially towards illiberalism, came with the election of Mr Trump. Encarnación, Omar G. (June 12, 2023). "Democratic Backsliding: Comparative Reflections on the American Experience". Political Science Quarterly . 138 (3): 407– 424. doi : 10.1093/psquar/qqad036 . pp. 410– 423: Despite the appearance of being consolidated, the American political system is institutionally vulnerable to backsliding—from an electoral system fraught with so many deficiencies that election experts deem it archaic and undemocratic; to an imperial presidency that sits at the center of federal power and towers over the legislature and the judiciary; to the recent transformation of the Republican Party into an illiberal force more interested in acquiring power than in governing. ...

The Republican Party's pivotal role in enabling backsliding in the Trump era mirrors the post-Communist experience.

In recent years, the Republican party has fashioned itself after the Fidesz Party in Hungary (Europe's most sobering example of backsliding), from embracing the ideology of Christian Nationalism to using the state to fight culture wars to cynically rejecting the idea of democracy.

In connection to the last point, a popular argument among Republican election deniers is that the United States is not a democracy but a republic.

As noted by the New York Times, "There is more at stake than the health of the Republican Party when its core activists, as well as a growing number of officials and those campaigning for governmental positions, openly espouse hostility not just to democratic principles, but, increasingly, to the word 'democracy' itself." Indeed, this illiberal behavior puts American democracy in peril. Main, Thomas J. (January 4, 2022).

The Rise of Illiberalism . Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press. p. 188. ISBN 9780815738503 . Archived from the original on January 28, 2025 . Retrieved November 12, 2024 . A sharp repudiation at the polls would have checked the vogue for illiberal and identitarian ideologies and driven the Republican party back within the bounds of the liberal democratic political spectrum. Laruelle, Marlene (March 1, 2022). "Illiberalism: a conceptual introduction" . East European Politics . 38 (2): 303– 327. doi : 10.1080/21599165.2022.2037079 . ISSN 2159-9165 . pp. 315– 316: Classical conservatives—such as the Christian Democrats in Europe or the Republican Party in the US before Donald Trump—are/were fervent supporters of political rights and constitutionalism, while illiberalism challenges them ...

The struggle of the European People's Party to win concessions from Orbán's Fidesz or the Polish PiS, as well as the subjugation of the Republican Party by Donald Trump, have revealed how attractive illiberal leaders may be to the more mainstream right.

As Marc Plattner has stated, the future of liberal democracy will largely depend on how successful or unsuccessful the classical conservative right is at resisting illiberalism. Cooley, Alexander; Nexon, Daniel H. (January–February 2022). "The Real Crisis of Global Order: Illiberalism on the Rise" . Foreign Affairs . Vol. 101, no. 1. New York City: Council on Foreign Relations . ISSN 0015-7120 . Retrieved November 12, 2024 .

The election of Donald Trump in 2016 sparked a major debate over the nature and fate of the liberal international order, suddenly caught, it seemed, between the Charybdis of illiberal great-power challengers and the Scylla of a hostile U.S. president. Trump may have lost the presidency in 2020, but the liberal order remains under threat. ...

In the United States, one of the two major political parties remains beholden to an authoritarian demagogue. Motivated by the "Big Lie" (the objectively false claim that Democrats stole the election from Trump through systematic voter fraud), the Republican Party is purging officials who stood in the way of efforts to overturn the 2020 presidential election. Republican voter-suppression efforts are accelerating. Dunwoody, Phillip T.; Gershtenson, Joseph; Plane, Dennis L.; Upchurch-Poole, Territa (August 9, 2022). "The fascist authoritarian model of illiberal democracy" . Frontiers in Political Science . 4 907681. doi : 10.3389/fpos.2022.907681 . ISSN 2673-3145 . p. 12: All the components of the fascist authoritarian model of illiberal democracy were evidenced in the recent 2020 U.S. presidential election. ...

In classic authoritarian fashion, Trump sought to remain in power by asserting his preferred fiction over more objective realities promoted by those in traditional, truth-based professions. Trump engaged in threat othering to work up his base so that they would support the use of force to "save" their country.

The result of these combined mechanisms was the support of blatantly illiberal antidemocratic behavior at the U.S. Capitol on January 6, 2021. Hopkin, Jonathan ; Blyth, Mark (2020). "Global Trumpism: Understanding Anti-System Politics in Western Democracies" .

In Vormann, Boris; Weinman, Michael D. (eds.).

The Emergence of Illiberalism . Routledge . ISBN 978-0367366247 . Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved October 11, 2020 . Norris, Pippa (2017). "Online Exchange on "Democratic Deconsolidation" (PDF) . Journal of Democracy . 12 . Retrieved November 9, 2024 . pp. 14–15–18: The rise of populist authoritarianism in the United States, especially by the risks that President Trump poses to core democratic values, practices and institutions, pose major threats to liberal democracy. ...

When the populist style of governance is coupled with authoritarian values, however, this potent combination presents most dangerous risk to the principles and practices at the heart of liberal democracy. Trump falls into this category. ... populist-authoritarian forces threatening to dismantle core values in liberal democracy pose the gravest risk, especially in America, given the vast powers of the U.S. presidency and its hegemonic role in the world.

The mainstream news media, the courts, and a reenergized civil society are actively pushing back to resist the threats to democracy arising from the Trump administration.

In Congress and State Houses, however, the Democrats are decimated, and the Republican party and conservative activists seem willing to be seduced by dreams of power. Drutman, Lee (June 8, 2021). "The Republican party is now an explicitly illiberal party" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved May 4, 2026 . Though these anti-democratic sentiments have been building within the ranks of the party for years, the events of 2021 mark the transformation of the Republican party into a genuinely illiberal party, and a grave threat to the continuation of American democracy as we've known it. ^ "The Republican Party has lurched towards populism and illiberalism" .

The Economist . October 31, 2020. ISSN 0013-0613 . Archived from the original on June 2, 2024 . Retrieved November 9, 2024 .

In the late 20th century the Republican Party already looked a bit less liberal and more populist than most mainstream European parties. But according to the V-Dem Institute's analysis, it only really started to deviate to "illiberalism" when it embraced religious values under Mr Bush after his election in 2000.

The party then veered into populism in 2010 with the rise of the Tea Party movement, which vowed to curb what it saw as the unjustifiable expansion of the federal government under Barack Obama. However, the greatest shift, especially towards illiberalism, came with the election of Mr Trump. Lührmann, Anna; Medzihorsky, Juraj; Hindle, Garry; Lindberg, Staffan I. (October 2020). "New Global Data on Political Parties: V-Party" (PDF) . Briefing Paper No. 9. V-Dem Institute. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 14, 2024 . Retrieved November 13, 2024 . Drutman, Lee (March 18, 2021). "American Democracy Can't Survive Unless the Far Right Is Marginalized. Here's How to Do It" . Time . Retrieved May 9, 2026 .

By international standards, the current Republican Party is an illiberal anti-democratic nativist global outlier, with positions more extreme than France's National Rally, and in line with the Germany's AfD, Hungary's Fidesz, Turkey's AKP and Poland's PiS, according to the widely respected V-Dem (Varieties of Democracy) Institute. Kottasová, Ivana (October 26, 2020). "Republicans are starting to look like authoritarian parties in Hungary and Turkey, study finds" . CNN . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . Experts from the V-Dem Institute at the University of Gothenburg in Sweden said the US Republican Party had become more illiberal and populist in recent decades and that its recent retreat from democratic norms has left it resembling authoritarian ruling parties like Hungary's Fidesz and Turkey's AKP. "Trump's GOP resembles authoritarian parties in India and Turkey, and Poland, study stays" .

The Independent . October 26, 2020 . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . Donald Trump's Republican party has become more illiberal and retreated from upholding democratic norms in recent years, a study has found, with its rhetoric shifting closer that of authoritarian parties ruling in Turkey, Hungary, Poland and India. Borger, Julian (October 26, 2020). "Republicans closely resemble autocratic parties in Hungary and Turkey – study" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved May 9, 2026 .

In a significant shift since 2000, the GOP has taken to demonising and encouraging violence against its opponents, adopting attitudes and tactics comparable to ruling nationalist parties in Hungary, India, Poland and Turkey. ^ a b c d e Rovira Kaltwasser, Cristóbal; Roberts, Kenneth. "Is the United States Still a Democracy?" . European Consortium for Political Research . Retrieved April 27, 2026 . A key argument developed in this contribution is that the central problem lies less with the figure of Trump himself than with the broader transformation from a mainstream conservative party into a far-right one. ^ "DEMOCRACY REPORT 2026: Unraveling The Democratic Era?" (PDF) . V-Dem Institute . March 17, 2026 . Retrieved March 22, 2026 . One notable shift is the transformation of the Republican Party to endorsing a far-right, nationalist, and anti-pluralist agenda. Nationalist, anti-liberal, far-right parties and leaders have largely driven the "third wave of autocratization." Yet the USA stands out as the only case where such movement seized control over one party in a rigid two-party system. Klaas, Brian (September 9, 2025). "Is The United States Still A Democracy?" .

The London School of Economics and Political Science . Retrieved April 9, 2026 . Political scientists continue to debate this topic, but few would classify the United States as a robust democracy. It is either a democracy in crisis that is barely clinging onto the label, or one that has tipped over the edge into competitive authoritarianism - and I believe it's the latter. Grumbach, Jacob M. (December 1, 2021). "Laboratories of Democratic Backsliding" . American Political Science Review . 117 (3). Published by Cambridge University Press on behalf of the American Political Science Association : 967– 984. doi : 10.1017/S0003055422000934 . ISSN 0003-0554 . Prominent cross-national measures of democracy from the Varieties of Democracy Project (V-Dem), Bright Line Watch, and Freedom House, which had once ranked the country as a global leader, show a U.S. democracy slipping toward "mixed regime" or "illiberal democracy" status. Morris, G. Elliott (October 1, 2025). "Experts now rate the U.S. as a "mixed" or "illiberal" democracy" . www.gelliottmorris.com . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . Langfitt, Frank (April 22, 2025). "Hundreds of scholars say U.S. is swiftly heading toward authoritarianism" . NPR . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . A survey of more than 500 political scientists finds that the vast majority think the United States is moving swiftly from liberal democracy toward some form of authoritarianism. Gambino, Lauren (January 21, 2026). "American democracy on the brink a year after Trump's inauguration, experts say" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . Schenkkan, Nate (January 15, 2026). "Century's New Democracy Meter Shows America Took an Authoritarian Turn in 2025" .

The Century Foundation . Retrieved May 9, 2026 .

The Century Foundation's 2025 evaluation finds that American democracy is already collapsing—the Democracy Meter rates the United States at 57/100, a 28 percent drop in just one year.

In the first year of Trump 2.0, the United States went from being a passing if imperfect democracy to behaving like an authoritarian state: breaking the law, ignoring court rulings, engaging in grand corruption, targeting critics for persecution, and conducting a campaign against immigrants, in particular, that flagrantly violates civil rights. "index" . Polity data series . Retrieved May 9, 2026 .

The USA is no longer considered a democracy and lies at the cusp of autocracy; it has experienced a Presidential Coup and an Adverse Regime Change event (8-point drop in its POLITY score). ^ Pfannenstiel, Brianne (July 15, 2024). " "Make America great again!": Iowa Republican chair gives fiery Trump nominating speech at RNC" .

The Des Moines Register . Archived from the original on July 22, 2024 . Retrieved July 18, 2024 . ^ Lange, Jason; Erickson, Bo; Heath, Brad (November 7, 2024). "Trump's return to power fueled by Hispanic, working-class voter support" . Reuters . Archived from the original on December 21, 2024 . Retrieved November 13, 2024 . ^ "Presidents of the United States of America" . OhioSoS.gov . Ohio Secretary of State . Retrieved August 24, 2025 . ^ "Trump clinches 2024 Republican nomination" . PBS NewsHour . Associated Press. March 12, 2024. Archived from the original on April 29, 2024 . Retrieved June 11, 2024 . ^ Sinclair, Anthony (March 17, 2026). "The GOP's Shifting Policy Stance in President Trump's Second Term" . CONGRESS.NET . Retrieved March 18, 2026 . ^ "Contrasting views of Russia show deepening Republican split over foreign policy" . Reuters . Archived from the original on December 19, 2025 . Retrieved March 18, 2026 . ^ Rutland, RA (1996).

The Republicans: From Lincoln to Bush . University of Missouri Press. p. 2 . ISBN 0826210902 . ^ "The Origins of the Republican Party" . UShistory.org. July 4, 1995. Archived from the original on September 30, 2012 . Retrieved October 25, 2012 . ^ Gould, pp. 14–15 ^ "Republican Party | political party, United States " . Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on May 5, 2017 . Retrieved May 9, 2017 . ^ Joyner, James. "The Changing Definition of 'Conservative' " .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on May 25, 2017 . Retrieved May 9, 2017 . ^ "Grand Old Party", Oxford English Dictionary . ^ a b "The Third-Term Panic" . Cartoon of the Day . November 7, 2003. Archived from the original on September 21, 2011 . Retrieved September 5, 2011 . ^ "Ballots of United States: Indiana" . University of North Carolina. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017 . Retrieved February 6, 2017 . ^ Lopez, Tomas (October 23, 2014). "Poor Ballot Design Hurts New York's Minor Parties ... Again" . Brennan Center for Justice . Archived from the original on February 7, 2017 . Retrieved February 6, 2017 . ^ "See Sample Ballots for Today's Primary Elections" . West Kentucky Star. May 19, 2015. Archived from the original on February 7, 2017 . Retrieved February 6, 2017 . ^ Bump, Philip (November 8, 2016). "Red vs. Blue: A history of how we use political colors" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on November 7, 2017 . Retrieved October 30, 2017 . ^ Drum, Kevin (November 13, 2004). "Red State, Blue State" . Washington Monthly . Archived from the original on November 7, 2017 . Retrieved October 30, 2017 . ^ Drum, Kevin (November 14, 2004). "Red States and Blue States ... Explained!" . Washington Monthly . Archived from the original on November 7, 2017 . Retrieved October 30, 2017 . ^ Bump, Philip. "Red vs. Blue: A history of how we use political colors" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on February 22, 2021 . Retrieved November 8, 2018 . ^ Holland, Oscar (September 20, 2024). "Republicans are red and Democrats blue. But it wasn't always that way" . CNN . Retrieved May 30, 2026 . ^ Howard, Victor B. (2015). Religion and the Radical Republican Movement, 1860–1870 . University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-6144-0 . Archived from the original on December 15, 2023 . Retrieved March 24, 2023 . ^ Foner, Eric (1988). Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863–1877 (1st ed.). pp. 236– 37. ^ "The Roots of Modern Conservatism | Michael Bowen" . University of North Carolina Press . Archived from the original on May 22, 2017 . Retrieved May 20, 2019 . ^ a b c Ashbee, Edward; Waddan, Alex (December 13, 2023). "US Republicans and the New Fusionism".

The Political Quarterly . 95 : 148– 156. doi : 10.1111/1467-923X.13341 . ISSN 1467-923X . S2CID 266282896 . ^ Gottfried, Paul ; Fleming, Thomas (1988).

The Conservative Movement . Boston: Twayne Publishers. pp. 77– 95. ISBN 0805797238 . ^ a b c Smith, Robert C. (2021). "Ronald Reagan, Donald Trump, and the Future of the Republican Party and Conservatism in America". American Political Thought . 10 (2): 283– 289. doi : 10.1086/713662 . ^ a b Ward, Ian (August 26, 2022). "Trump Didn't Kill Reaganism. These Guys Did" . Politico . Retrieved February 8, 2024 . ^ Adams, Ian (2001). Political Ideology Today (reprinted, revised ed.). Manchester: Manchester University Press. pp. 32– 33. ISBN 978-0719060205 . Archived from the original on January 20, 2023 . Retrieved February 2, 2023 . Ideologically, all US parties are liberal and always have been. Essentially they espouse classical liberalism, that is a form of democratised Whig constitutionalism plus the free market.

The point of difference comes with the influence of social liberalism" and the proper role of government... ...the American right has nothing to do with maintaining the traditional social order, as in Europe. What it believes in is... individualism...

The American right has tended towards... classical liberalism... ^ Rathburn, Brian C. (Summer 2008). "Does One Right Make a Realist? Conservatism, Neoconservatism, and Isolationism in the Foreign Policy Ideology of American Elites". Political Science Quarterly . 123 (2): 271– 299. doi : 10.1002/j.1538-165X.2008.tb00625.x . ISSN 1538-165X . ^ a b Isaac, Jeffrey (November 2017). "Making America Great Again?" . Perspectives on Politics . 15 (3). Cambridge University Press: 625– 631. doi : 10.1017/S1537592717000871 . ^ Scheiring, Gábor; Serrano-Alarcón, Manuel; Moise, Alexandru; McNamara, Courtney; Stuckler, David (July 2024). "The Populist Backlash Against Globalization: A Meta-Analysis of the Causal Evidence" . British Journal of Political Science . 54 (3): 892– 916. doi : 10.1017/S0007123424000024 . ISSN 0007-1234 . ^ Badger, Emily; Gebeloff, Robert; Bhatia, Aatish (October 26, 2024). "They Used to Be Ahead in the American Economy. Now They've Fallen Behind" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on October 27, 2024 . Retrieved October 26, 2024 . ^ a b Maxwell, Rahsaan (March 5, 2019). "Analysis | Why are urban and rural areas so politically divided?" .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Archived from the original on October 30, 2020 . Retrieved May 6, 2024 .

In general, the core supporters of right-wing populist political parties across Europe are in more rural areas, where they feel left behind by the globalized economy and alienated from the multiculturalism of European capitals. ^ a b Gidron, Noam; Ziblatt, Daniel (2019). "Center-Right Political Parties in Advanced Democracies" . Annual Review of Political Science . 12 . Annual Reviews : 17– 35. doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-090717-092750 . ISSN 1094-2939 . ^ McKay, David (2020), "Facilitating Donald Trump: Populism, the Republican Party and Media Manipulation", in Crewe, Ivor; Sanders, David (eds.), Authoritarian Populism and Liberal Democracy , Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 107– 121, doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-17997-7_7 , ISBN 978-3-030-17997-7 , the Republicans changed from being a right of centre coalition of moderates and conservatives to an unambiguously right-wing party that was hostile not only to liberal views but also to any perspective that clashed with the core views of an ideologically cohesive conservative cadre of party faithfuls ^ Broadwater, Luke (October 23, 2023). " '5 Families' and Factions Within Factions: Why the House G.O.P. Can't Unite" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on October 27, 2023 . Retrieved October 27, 2023 . ^ "The 8 Types Of Democrats And Republicans In The House" . FiveThirtyEight . May 4, 2024. Archived from the original on May 3, 2024 . Retrieved May 4, 2024 . ^ Kane, Paul (October 5, 2023). "McCarthy thought he could harness forces of disruption. Instead they devoured him" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on August 11, 2024 . Retrieved August 4, 2024 .

As far back as 2009, the future House speaker tried to channel the anti-politician, tea party wave building into a political force, but the movement crushed him. Martin, Jonathan (June 10, 2014). "Eric Cantor Defeated by David Brat, Tea Party Challenger, in G.O.P. Primary Upset" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on June 11, 2014 . Retrieved August 4, 2024 . Lizza, Ryan (December 14, 2015). "A House Divided: How a radical group of Republicans pushed Congress to the right" .

The New Yorker . Archived from the original on February 7, 2021 . Retrieved January 8, 2016 . Steinhauer, Jennifer (September 25, 2015). "John Boehner Will Resign From Congress" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on March 27, 2021 . Retrieved October 8, 2015 . "McCarthy elected House speaker in rowdy post-midnight vote" . AP News . January 7, 2023. Archived from the original on January 7, 2023 . Retrieved April 22, 2024 . "Speaker McCarthy ousted in historic House vote, as scramble begins for a Republican leader" . AP News . October 3, 2023. Archived from the original on October 3, 2023 . Retrieved April 22, 2024 . ^ a b c Biebricher, Thomas (October 25, 2023). "The Crisis of American Conservatism in Historical–Comparative Perspective" . Politische Vierteljahresschrift . 65 (2): 233– 259. doi : 10.1007/s11615-023-00501-2 . hdl : 10419/312444 . ISSN 2075-4698 . ^ a b c Arhin, Kofi; Stockemer, Daniel; Normandin, Marie-Soleil (May 29, 2023). "THE REPUBLICAN TRUMP VOTER: A Populist Radical Right Voter Like Any Other?" . World Affairs . 186 (3). doi : 10.1177/00438200231176818 . ISSN 1940-1582 .

In this article, we first illustrate that the Republican Party, or at least the dominant wing, which supports or tolerates Donald Trump and his Make America Great Again (MAGA) agenda have become a proto-typical populist radical right-wing party (PRRP). ^ a b c Desiderio, Andrew; Sherman, Jake; Bresnahan, John (February 7, 2024). "The end of the Old GOP" . Punchbowl News . Archived from the original on February 7, 2024 . Retrieved February 8, 2024 .

The structures and standards that have come to define the GOP have been breaking down since the Tea Party movement began in 2009. They were further eroded when Trump won the White House in 2016. But in recent months, the last holdout of the old Republican Party — the Senate GOP Conference — has all but abandoned many of its generational positions on foreign policy and governance. ... McConnell, perhaps the embodiment of the Republican Party for the last 40 years, is increasingly looking like an anachronism — and not just on policy. ^ a b c Tackett, Michael (2024).

The Price of Power: How Mitch McConnell Mastered the Senate, Changed America, and Lost His Party . New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-1-6680-0584-2 .

The Trump years brought with them the rise of an almost unrecognizable Republican party, suffused with a reactive populism that even McConnell himself would struggle to control. ^ Nagourney, Adam (July 16, 2024). "Guess Who's Not Coming to Milwaukee? Bush, Quayle, Pence, Cheney or Romney" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on September 16, 2024 . Retrieved September 17, 2024 . ^ a b Dawsey, Josh; Arnsdorf, Isaac; Vozzella, Laura (July 19, 2024). "Trump's overhaul of GOP shows his sway but leaves some on sidelines" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on July 21, 2024 . Retrieved August 4, 2024 . ^ a b c Cohn, Nate (December 25, 2024). "Trump's Re-election Defines a New Era of American Politics" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on December 25, 2024 . Retrieved December 25, 2024 . Instead, it's the three Trump elections — in 2016, 2020 and 2024 — that look as if they have the makings of a new era of politics, one defined by Donald J. Trump's brand of conservative populism. ... Much of the Republican Party's old establishment — like the Cheneys, the Romneys, Paul Ryan — is now without a home. ^ Barkan, Ross (January 25, 2025), "Goodbye, 'Resistance.' The Era of Hyperpolitics Is Over." , The New York Times , ISSN 0362-4331 , retrieved June 15, 2026 ^ Berman, Russell (May 21, 2025). "Republicans Still Can't Say No to Trump" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved June 15, 2026 . ^ Brickner-Wood, Brady (February 5, 2025). "What Happened to the Trump Resistance?" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved June 15, 2026 . ^ Swan, Jonathan; Haberman, Maggie (December 12, 2024). "The Stock Market and TV: Trump's Most Durable Guardrails" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on January 28, 2025 . Retrieved January 20, 2025 . Mr. Trump is likely to receive only the meekest resistance from his own party, which will control both the House and Senate and whose members fear Trump-backed primary challengers. He has completed his hostile takeover of the Republican Party and the dissenters have been driven into retirement, defeated in primaries or cowed into silence. ^ a b c Cliffe, Jeremy (February 15, 2023). "The strange death of the centre right" .

The New Statesman . Archived from the original on February 11, 2025 . Retrieved February 5, 2025 .

In Western democracies conventional conservatism is foundering. How did this once-dominant political force become so diminished? ...

The picture today is drastically different.

In every one of those countries the moderate conservative tendency represented by those leaders has been sidelined in one way or another. It has either been displaced by more hard-line elements within the same party, or by another party farther to the right; or it has started cooperating with the hard-line right; or has been partly or wholly marginalised within the political system.

In one notable case (Orbán) it has self-radicalised.

In several countries more than one of these things has occurred. ...

The traditional centre right of the postwar decades could do so by "bundling" moderate social conservatism (moderate by the standards of its day, at least) with the pro-business economic conservatism favoured by higher earners. But today those two elements are coming apart: richer folk are more likely to have gone to university and be socially liberal, while social conservatism is more associated with poorer groups. That puts centre-right politics in zugzwang: forced to move, but with no good options. It can emphasize its social conservatism and lose pro-business graduates to the centre, or play it down, shore up its support among those voters and lose social conservatives to the radical right. ^ Edwards-Levy, Ariel (January 19, 2025). "CNN Poll: Most Democrats think their party needs major change, while the GOP coalesces around Trump" . CNN . Retrieved January 20, 2025 . ^ Linkins, Jason (February 23, 2025). "The Incredible Disappearing Republican Lawmaker" .

The New Republic . Retrieved February 23, 2025 .

The GOP's total withdrawal from governing is nearly complete, and they're increasingly determined to push the entire legislative branch into functional irrelevance. ^ Green, Erica L.; Kanno-Youngs, Zolan; Haberman, Maggie (March 20, 2025). "How Trump Is Trying to Consolidate Power Over Courts, Congress and More" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 20, 2025 . President Trump's expansive interpretation of presidential power has become the defining characteristic of his second term. ^ Orr, James (July 16, 2024). "JD Vance's nomination proves Trumpism is here to stay" .

The Daily Telegraph . ISSN 0307-1235 . Archived from the original on July 18, 2024 . Retrieved July 17, 2024 . ^ "Panel Study of the MAGA Movement" . University of Washington . January 6, 2021. Archived from the original on March 24, 2024 . Retrieved March 24, 2024 . ^ Gabbatt, Adam; Smith, David (August 19, 2023). " 'America First 2.0': Vivek Ramaswamy pitches to be Republicans' next Trump" . the Guardian . Retrieved March 24, 2024 . ^ Norris, Pippa (November 2020). "Measuring populism worldwide" . Party Politics . 26 (6): 697– 717. doi : 10.1177/1354068820927686 . ISSN 1354-0688 . S2CID 216298689 . ^ Cassidy, John (February 29, 2016). "Donald Trump is Transforming the G.O.P. Into a Populist, Nativist Party" .

The New Yorker . Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved July 22, 2016 . ^ " "National conservatives" are forging a global front against liberalism" .

The Economist . London. February 15, 2024. Archived from the original on February 20, 2024. ^ Zhou, Shaoqing (December 8, 2022). "The origins, characteristics and trends of neo-nationalism in the 21st century" . International Journal of Anthropology and Ethnology . 6 (1) 18. doi : 10.1186/s41257-022-00079-4 . PMC 9735003 . PMID 36532330 .

On a practical level, the United Kingdom's withdrawal from the European Union and Trump's election as the United States president are regarded as typical events of neo-nationalism. ^ a b Burn-Murdoch, John (March 6, 2025). "Why the Maga mindset is different" . Financial Times . Retrieved March 18, 2025 . US decisions can no longer be analyzed using assumptions shared across the democratic west ... But the series of shock decisions ... are less brain-bendingly inexplicable once you realise this: their version of America is operating on an entirely different set of values from the rest of the western world. ... A government seemingly driven by zero-sum ideology and a commitment to reducing international co-operation is one whose threats of a trade war you should probably take seriously despite possible economic self-harm. Likewise, a leadership team that believes geopolitics is a game of cards played by strong men and great powers is one whose support and cooperation other countries should quickly build independence from. ^ a b Helleiner, Eric (January 5, 2021). "The Return of National Self-Sufficiency.Excavating Autarkic Thought in a De-Globalizing Era" . International Studies Review . 23 (3): 933– 957. doi : 10.1093/isr/viaa092 . ISSN 1521-9488 . PMC 7928914 .

The election of Donald Trump as American president in 2016 encouraged further interest in ideas of national self-sufficiency. ... Trump's worldview was much closer to a neomercantilist one than an autarkist one, but some of his supporters on the far right are more clearly in the latter camp.14 For example, in a 2020 publication from the Claremont Institute, Curtis Yarvin called for the promotion of an "isolationist" policy of "neo-Sakoku". Like some other past autarkists, he argued that a world of autarkic states would be more peaceful because the reasons for conflict would diminish (Yarvin 2020).

The Trump administration also indirectly encouraged new interest in greater national self-sufficiency in other countries because of its protectionism and its broader "weaponization" of America's international economic relations (Farrell and Newman 2019). ^ a b Fleming, Sam; Strauss, Delphine (April 4, 2025). "Trump's aggressive push to roll back globalisation" . Financial Times . Retrieved April 4, 2025 .

The US president wants to unwind decades of economic integration.

The risk of a 1930s-style global trade war is causing markets to panic. ^ * Katzenstein, Peter J. (March 20, 2019). "Trumpism is US" . WZB | Berlin Social Science Center . Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved September 11, 2021 .

The Christian Science Monitor (November 5, 2020). "Why Trumpism is here to stay" .

The Christian Science Monitor . Archived from the original on June 12, 2024 . Retrieved February 3, 2025 . Klein, Rick; Parks, Mary Alice (June 13, 2018). "The Note: Trumpism again dominates Republican Party" . ABC News . Archived from the original on June 12, 2024 . Retrieved February 3, 2025 . ^ Kimmage, Michael (February 25, 2025). "The World Trump Wants: American Power in the New Age of Nationalism" . Foreign Affairs . Vol. 104, no. 2 . Retrieved March 18, 2025 .

In the two decades that followed the Cold War's end, globalism gained ground over nationalism. Simultaneously, the rise of increasingly complex systems and networks—institutional, financial, and technological—overshadowed the role of the individual in politics. But in the early 2010s, a profound shift began.

By learning to harness the tools of this century, a cadre of charismatic figures revived the archetypes of the previous one: the strong leader, the great nation, the proud civilization. ... They are self-styled strongmen who place little stock in rules-based systems, alliances, or multinational forums. They embrace the once and future glory of the countries they govern, asserting an almost mystical mandate for their rule.

Although their programs can involve radical change, their political strategies rely on strains of conservatism, appealing over the heads of liberal, urban, cosmopolitan elites to constituencies animated by a hunger for tradition and a desire for belonging. ^ Mazzetti, Mark; Kingsley, Patrick (March 21, 2025). "For Trump and Netanyahu, Similar Strategies With Similar Goals" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 22, 2025 .

The American and Israeli leaders have been mirroring each other as they go to war with their own governments "With Trump's Victory, Europe's Populist Right Sees Return of a Fellow Believer" . New York Times . November 8, 2024. "Saudi Arabia Has Its Own 'Deal of the Century' for Trump" . Newsweek . November 24, 2024.

The president-elect's "America First" platform resounds heavily with the transformative, increasingly nationalist path on which Riyadh's monarch-in-waiting has embarked. ^ Lowndes, Joseph (November 8, 2021). "Far-right extremism dominates the GOP. It didn't start — and won't end — with Trump" . Washington Post . Archived from the original on November 23, 2021 . Retrieved December 31, 2023 . ^ Blum, Rachel M.; Cowburn, Mike (2024). "How Local Factions Pressure Parties: Activist Groups and Primary Contests in the Tea Party Era" . British Journal of Political Science . 54 (1). Cambridge University Press: 88– 109. doi : 10.1017/S0007123423000224 . Archived from the original on September 11, 2024 . Retrieved December 31, 2023 . ^ a b Baker, Paula; Critchlow, Donald T. (2020).

The Oxford Handbook of American Political History . Oxford University Press. p. 387. ISBN 978-0190628697 . Archived from the original on December 15, 2023 . Retrieved April 23, 2021 – via Google Books. Contemporary debate is fueled on one side by immigration restrictionists, led by President Donald Trump and other elected republicans, whose rhetorical and policy assaults on undocumented Latin American immigrants, Muslim refugees, and family-based immigration energized their conservative base. ^ Jones, Kent (2021). "Populism, Trade, and Trump's Path to Victory". Populism and Trade: The Challenge to the Global Trading System . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0190086350 . ^ Smith, Jordan Michael; Logis, Rich; Logis, Rich; Shephard, Alex; Shephard, Alex; Kipnis, Laura; Kipnis, Laura; Haas, Lidija; Haas, Lidija (October 17, 2022). "The Neocons Are Losing. Why Aren't We Happy?" .

The New Republic . ISSN 0028-6583 . Archived from the original on May 5, 2023 . Retrieved May 5, 2023 . ^ Arias-Maldonado, Manuel (January 2020). "Sustainability in the Anthropocene: Between Extinction and Populism" . Sustainability . 12 (6): 2538. Bibcode : 2020Sust...12.2538A . doi : 10.3390/su12062538 . ISSN 2071-1050 . ^ Winberg, Oscar (2017). "Insult Politics: Donald Trump, Right-Wing Populism, and Incendiary Language" . European Journal of American Studies . 12 (2): 1– 16. doi : 10.4000/ejas.12132 . ISSN 1991-9336 . Archived from the original on December 31, 2024 . Retrieved February 2, 2025 . pp. 5– 6: With the presidency of George W. Bush, coinciding with the ascendance of the conservative media establishment and ending with the mass protests of the Tea Party, the long tradition of right-wing populism was a firmly institutionalized part of the conservative movement and, by extension, the Republican Party. Trump's rise should be understood as part of the long tradition of right-wing populism and the ultimate triumph of the Tea Party movement; a right-wing populist eruption within the Republican Party fueled by both a conservative media establishment and anti-intellectual and, at times, overtly racial appeals. ^ a b Falk, Thomas O (November 8, 2023). "Why are US Republicans pushing for aid to Israel but not Ukraine?" . Al Jazeera . Archived from the original on December 31, 2023 . Retrieved December 31, 2023 . ^ a b Riccardi, Nicholas (February 19, 2024). "Stalled US aid for Ukraine underscores GOP's shift away from confronting Russia" . Associated Press . Archived from the original on February 28, 2024 . Retrieved February 28, 2024 . ^ "What I Learned Discussing Israel with Tucker Carlson, Steve Bannon and Marjorie Taylor Greene" . Politico . August 12, 2025. ^ Mahler, Jonathan (December 30, 2025), "A Rupture Over Israel Is Tearing MAGA Apart" , The New York Times , ISSN 0362-4331 , retrieved June 17, 2026 ^ Stub, Zev (July 30, 2025). "Trump's MAGA base defies conservative pro-Israel doctrine" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved June 17, 2026 . ^ a b Lillis, Mike (February 28, 2024). "GOP strained by Trump-influenced shift from Reagan on Russia" .

The Hill . Archived from the original on February 28, 2024 . Retrieved February 28, 2024 . Experts say a variety of factors have led to the GOP's more lenient approach to Moscow, some of which preceded Trump's arrival on the political scene ... Trump's popularity has only encouraged other Republicans to adopt a soft-gloves approach to Russia. Ball, Molly (February 23, 2024). "How Trump Turned Conservatives Against Helping Ukraine" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved February 28, 2024 . Jonathan, Chait (February 23, 2024). "Russian Dolls Trump has finally remade Republicans into Putin's playthings" . Intelligencer . Archived from the original on February 29, 2024 . Retrieved February 28, 2024 . But during his time in office and after, Trump managed to create, from the grassroots up, a Republican constituency for Russia-friendly policy ... Conservatives vying to be the Trumpiest of them all have realized that supporting Russia translates in the Republican mind as a proxy for supporting Trump. Hence the politicians most willing to defend his offenses against democratic norms — Marjorie Taylor Greene, Jim Jordan, Tommy Tuberville, Mike Lee, J. D. Vance — hold the most anti-Ukraine or pro-Russia views. Conversely, the least-Trumpy Republicans, such as Mitch McConnell and Mitt Romney, have the most hawkish views on Russia.

The rapid growth of Trump's once-unique pro-Russia stance is a gravitational function of his personality cult. ^ Jimison, Robert (February 19, 2025). "As Trump Turns Toward Russia and Against Ukraine, Republicans Are Mum" .

The New York Times . Congressional Republicans have mostly tempered their criticism or deferred to the president as he topples what were once their party's core foreign policy principles. ^ a b Lange, Jason (January 17, 2024). "Trump's rise sparks isolationist worries abroad, but voters unfazed" . Reuters . Retrieved January 17, 2024 . ^ a b Swan, Jonathan; Savage, Charlie; Haberman, Maggie (December 9, 2023). "Fears of a NATO Withdrawal Rise as Trump Seeks a Return to Power" . New York Times . Retrieved December 10, 2023 . ^ a b Baker, Peter (February 11, 2024). "Favoring Foes Over Friends, Trump Threatens to Upend International Order" .

The New York Times . ISSN 1553-8095 . Retrieved February 21, 2024 . ^ a b c d e f Cohn, Nate (August 17, 2023). "The 6 Kinds of Republican Voters" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on October 12, 2023 . Retrieved October 9, 2023 . ^ "Trump is teasing US expansion into Panama, Greenland and Canada" . CNN . December 23, 2024. His pitch to seize the Panama Canal – which he described as a "vital national asset" though it's been decades since America controlled it – reflected a similarly nationalist agenda that Trump often describes as "America First." "Lawmaker lauds Trump's expansion plan: Panama, Greenland, Canada 'should be honored' " .

The Hill . January 8, 2025. "Trump refuses to rule out use of military force to take control of Greenland and the Panama Canal" . AP . January 8, 2025. "AS REPUBLICANS THIRST FOR WAR WITH MEXICO, DEMOCRATS PUSH TO MAKE THEM VOTE ON IT" .

The response to the war powers resolution from the office of Rep. Matt Gaetz, R-Fla. — who has led recent efforts to reduce the U.S. military's foreign entanglements — highlights populist Republicans' growing pains in their emerging anti-war coalition with progressive Democrats. ^ Chatelain, Ryan (March 10, 2023). "Freedom Caucus issues demands for raising debt limit" . Spectrum News NY1 . Retrieved December 31, 2023 . "Far-right Republicans drafted a short-term funding bill with GOP centrists. It's now at risk of collapse" . NBC4 Washington . September 19, 2023 . Retrieved December 31, 2023 . Hulse, Carl (October 25, 2023). "In Mike Johnson, Far-Right Republicans Find a Speaker They Can Embrace" .

The New York Times . Retrieved December 31, 2023 . Mascaro, Lisa; Freking, Kevin; Amiri, Farnoush (October 13, 2023). "Republicans pick Jim Jordan as nominee for House speaker, putting job within the Trump ally's reach" . AP News . Retrieved December 31, 2023 . ^ Collinson, Stephen (October 4, 2023). "McCarthy became the latest victim of Trump's extreme GOP revolution" . CNN . Archived from the original on December 31, 2023 . Retrieved December 31, 2023 . ^ Rocha, Alander (September 7, 2023). "Mike Rogers says of 'far-right wing' of GOP: 'You can't get rid of them' " . AL . Retrieved December 31, 2023 . ^ Macpherson, James (July 24, 2021). "Far right tugs at North Dakota Republican Party" . AP News . Retrieved December 31, 2023 . ^ "Fringe activists threaten Georgia GOP's political future" .

The Times Herald . May 15, 2023 . Retrieved December 31, 2023 . ^ Feagin, Joe R. (April 25, 2023). White Minority Nation: Past, Present and Future . Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-000-86223-2 . ^ Homans, Charles (March 17, 2022). "Where Does American Democracy Go From Here? - The New York Times" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on March 17, 2022 . Retrieved November 27, 2024 . ^ a b c d "DEMOCRACY REPORT 2026: Unraveling The Democratic Era?" (PDF) . V-Dem Institute . March 17, 2026 . Retrieved March 22, 2026 . One notable shift is the transformation of the Republican Party to endorsing a far-right, nationalist, and anti-pluralist agenda. Nationalist, anti-liberal, far-right parties and leaders have largely driven the "third wave of autocratization." Yet the USA stands out as the only case where such movement seized control over one party in a rigid two-party system. ^ Jones, Jeffrey M. (February 22, 2019). "Conservatives Greatly Outnumber Liberals in 19 U.S. States" . Gallup . Archived from the original on February 22, 2019 . Retrieved December 27, 2021 . ^ Kight, Stef W. (February 13, 2023). "GOP's old guard on verge of extinction as Trump allies circle Senate" . Axios . Archived from the original on February 15, 2024 . Retrieved February 14, 2024 . ^ Ball, Molly (July 19, 2024). "Trump Hasn't Changed, but the GOP Has" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on August 11, 2024 . Retrieved July 20, 2024 . ^ Gerstle, Gary (2022).

The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order: America and the World in the Free Market Era . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0197519646 . Archived from the original on June 26, 2022 . Retrieved August 1, 2024 .

The most sweeping account of how neoliberalism came to dominate American politics for nearly a half century before crashing against the forces of Trumpism on the right and a new progressivism on the left. ^ Devine, Donald (April 4, 2014). "Reagan's Philosophical Fusionism" .

The American Conservative . Archived from the original on April 4, 2023 . Retrieved January 18, 2023 . ^ Coates, David (2012).

The Oxford Companion to American Politics . Vol. 2. Oxford University Press. p. 393. ISBN 978-0-19-976431-0 . ^ "Hard-right parties are now Europe's most popular" .

The Economist . February 28, 2025 . Retrieved March 21, 2025 . But over the past 15 years hard-right parties have made substantial gains across the region. Drawing on the work of political scientists, our analysis shows that they now make up Europe's most popular family of political parties by vote share, beating out the conservative and social-democratic blocs for the first time in modern European history. ^ a b Lewis, Andrew R. (2019). "The Inclusion-Moderation Thesis: The U.S. Republican Party and the Christian Right". Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Politics . doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190228637.013.665 . ISBN 978-0190228637 . ^ "Five things you should know about Mormon politics" . Religion News Service . April 27, 2015. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020 . Retrieved July 16, 2020 . ^ a b c d Williams, Daniel K. (May 9, 2022). "This Really Is a Different Pro-Life Movement" .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on May 10, 2022 . Retrieved February 2, 2023 . This was not merely a geographic shift, trading one region for another, but a more fundamental transformation of the anti-abortion movement's political ideology.

In 1973 many of the most vocal opponents of abortion were northern Democrats who believed in an expanded social-welfare state and who wanted to reduce abortion rates through prenatal insurance and federally funded day care.

In 2022, most anti-abortion politicians are conservative Republicans who are skeptical of such measures. What happened was a seismic religious and political shift in opposition to abortion that has not occurred in any other Western country. ^ * McDaniel, Eric L.; Nooruddin, Irfan; Shortle, Allyson F. (2022). "Preface".

The Everyday Crusade . pp. xiii– xvi. doi : 10.1017/9781009029445.001 . ISBN 978-1-009-02944-5 . p. xiii: White Christian Nationalists are today the base of the Republican Party and those who attacked the U.S. Capitol are drawn from their ranks. "First of Its Kind Survey Maps Support for Christian Nationalism Across All 50 States" . Public Religion Research Institute . February 7, 2024. Archived from the original on June 16, 2024 . Retrieved June 15, 2024 .

At the national level, Christian nationalism is strongly linked to Republican Party affiliation, white evangelical Protestant affiliation, and higher church attendance. Whitehead, Andrew L.; Perry, Samuel L. (2020). Taking America Back for God . doi : 10.1093/oso/9780190057886.001.0001 . ISBN 978-0-19-005788-6 . "A Christian Nation? Understanding the Threat of Christian Nationalism to American Democracy and Culture" . Public Religion Research Institute . February 8, 2023. Archived from the original on June 15, 2024 . Retrieved June 16, 2024 . Partisanship is closely linked to Christian nationalist views. Most Republicans qualify as either Christian nationalism sympathizers (33%) or adherents (21%), while at least three-quarters of both independents (46% skeptics and 29% rejecters) and Democrats (36% skeptics and 47% rejecters) lean toward rejecting Christian nationalism. Republicans (21%) are about four times as likely as Democrats (5%) or independents (6%) to be adherents of Christian nationalism. Baker, Joseph O.; Perry, Samuel L.; Whitehead, Andrew L. (August 6, 2020). "Crusading for Moral Authority: Christian Nationalism and Opposition to Science". Sociological Forum . 35 (3): 587– 607. doi : 10.1111/socf.12619 . hdl : 1805/26816 . Christian nationalism has become a powerful predictor of supporting conservative policies and political candidates. This is in large part due to the Republican Party platform becoming synonymous with "restoring" the sacred values, moral superiority, unity, pride, and prosperity of America's mythic past. Whitehead, Andrew L.; Perry, Samuel L.; Baker, Joseph O. (January 25, 2018). "Make America Christian Again: Christian Nationalism and Voting for Donald Trump in the 2016 Presidential Election". Sociology of Religion . 79 (2): 147– 171. doi : 10.1093/socrel/srx070 . JSTOR 48556986 .

The current study establishes that, independent of these influences, voting for Trump was, at least for many Americans, a symbolic defense of the United States' perceived Christian heritage. Data from a national probability sample of Americans surveyed soon after the 2016 election shows that greater adherence to Christian nationalist ideology was a robust predictor of voting for Trump... Lauter, David (February 17, 2024). "Will Republicans become a Christian nationalist party? Can they win if they do?" . Los Angeles Times . Los Angeles, California. Archived from the original on April 5, 2024 . Retrieved June 16, 2024 .

The strength of Christian nationalist sentiment can be clearly seen in a wide range of issues that Republican elected officials have stressed, including efforts to curtail the rights and visibility of transgender people, but also some less obvious topics, such as immigration. Whitehead, Andrew L.; Perry, Samuel L. (February 17, 2024). "Is Christian nationalism growing or declining? Both" .

The Washington Post . ProQuest 2728318819 . Archived from the original on June 16, 2024 . Retrieved June 16, 2024 . According to political scientists Stella Rouse and Shibley Telhami, most Republicans support declaring the United States a Christian nation. And Christian nationalists are running for office at all levels of government, from local school boards to presumptive presidential candidates. Though the numbers of those who claim Christian nationalist beliefs may decline, Christian nationalism's influence in public life only continues to grow. Perry, Samuel (August 5, 2022). "After Trump, Christian nationalist ideas are going mainstream – despite a history of violence" .

The Conversation . Archived from the original on June 1, 2024 . Retrieved June 16, 2024 .

The presence of Christian nationalist ideas in recent political campaigns is concerning, given its ties to violence and white supremacy. Trump and his advisers helped to mainstream such rhetoric with events like his photo op with a Bible in Lafayette Square in Washington following the violent dispersal of protesters, and making a show of pastors laying hands on him. But that legacy continues beyond his administration. Cummings, Mike (March 15, 2022). "Yale sociologist Phil Gorski on the threat of white Christian nationalism" . Yale News . Archived from the original on June 12, 2024 . Retrieved June 16, 2024 . White Christian nationalism is a dangerous threat because it's incredibly well-organized and powerful. There's absolutely nothing like it on the left. Smith, Peter (February 17, 2024). "Many believe the founders wanted a Christian America. Some want the government to declare one now" .

The Associated Press . New York. Archived from the original on February 19, 2024 . Retrieved February 22, 2024 . Rouse, Stella; Telhami, Shibley (September 21, 2022). "Most Republicans Support Declaring the United States a Christian Nation" . Politico . Archived from the original on September 27, 2022 . Retrieved February 22, 2024 . Christian nationalism, a belief that the United States was founded as a white, Christian nation and that there is no separation between church and state, is gaining steam on the right. Prominent Republican politicians have made the themes critical to their message to voters in the run up to the 2022 midterm elections. Contreras, Russell (February 18, 2026). "Where Christian nationalism is most dominant in the U.S." Axios . Retrieved February 18, 2026 . 56% of all Republicans are Christian nationalism "adherents" or "sympathizers," the survey said. ...

The report found that many of those who support Christian nationalism also support far-right conservative views around immigration, pluralism, and gender roles ^ Andersen, Margaret L.; Taylor, Howard Francis (2006). Sociology: Understanding a Diverse Society . Thomson/Wadsworth. ISBN 978-0-534-61716-5 . ^ Smith, Robert B. (2014). "Social Conservatism, Distractors, and Authoritarianism: Axiological Versus Instrumental Rationality". Mediations of Social Life in the 21st Century . pp. 95– 133. doi : 10.1108/S0278-120420140000032005 . ISBN 978-1-78441-223-4 . ^ Brunn, Stanley D.; Webster, Gerald R.; Archer, J. Clark (2011). "The Bible Belt in a Changing South: Shrinking, Relocating, and Multiple Buckles". Southeastern Geographer . 51 (4): 513– 549. doi : 10.1353/sgo.2011.0040 . JSTOR 26228980 . Gale A280558258 Project MUSE 464683 ProQuest 1010367954 . ^ Contreras, Russell (February 18, 2026). "Where Christian nationalism is most dominant in the U.S." Axios . Retrieved February 18, 2026 . 56% of all Republicans are Christian nationalism "adherents" or "sympathizers," the survey said ^ Mahler, Jonathan; Johnson, Dirk (July 20, 2016). "Mike Pence's Journey: Catholic Democrat to Evangelical Republican" .

The New York Times . ProQuest 1805520866 . Archived from the original on November 14, 2016 . Retrieved March 22, 2017 . ^ Karni, Annie; Graham, Ruth; Eder, Steve (October 28, 2023). "For Mike Johnson, Religion Is at the Forefront of Politics and Policy" .

The New York Times . ProQuest 2882597068 . ^ "Christian conservatives cheer one of their own as Mike Johnson assumes Congress' most powerful seat" . AP News . October 27, 2023. Archived from the original on February 24, 2024 . Retrieved February 8, 2024 . ^ Dionne Jr., E.J. (1991). Why Americans Hate Politics . New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 161. ^ Poole, Robert (August–September 1998), "In memoriam: Barry Goldwater" , Reason (Obituary), archived from the original on June 28, 2009 ^ Gordon, Doris. "Abortion and Rights: Applying Libertarian Principles Correctly" . Libertarians for Life . Archived from the original on May 26, 2016 . Retrieved March 8, 2023 . Also see: McElroy, Wendy (2002). Liberty for Women . Chicago: Ivan R. Dee. p. 156. ISBN 978-1566634359 . OCLC 260069067 . Libertarians for Life declare that abortion is not a right but a 'wrong under justice.' ^ a b "Who are Mike Lee and Rand Paul, the senators slamming the White House's Iran briefing?" .

The Courier-Journal . Archived from the original on December 15, 2023 . Retrieved May 26, 2023 . ^ "Sen. Rand Paul talks CPAC straw poll victory, looks ahead to 2016" . Hannity with Sean Hannity (Fox News Network). March 18, 2013. Archived from the original on April 1, 2013. ^ Miller, Joshua (December 22, 2012). "Scientist, Farmer Brings Tea Party Sensibility to House" . Roll Call . Archived from the original on September 1, 2020 . Retrieved September 1, 2020 . ^ Glueck, Katie (July 31, 2013). "Paul, Cruz and Lee in rare form" . Politico . Archived from the original on May 26, 2023 . Retrieved May 26, 2023 . ^ a b Kashinsky, Lisa (July 19, 2023). "Sununu's exit spells the end of a whole breed of Republican governor" . POLITICO . Archived from the original on November 8, 2023 . Retrieved November 8, 2023 . ^ "Losing Its Preference: Affirmative Action Fades as Issue" .

The Washington Post . 1996. Archived from the original on February 23, 2017. ^ Silverleib, Alan (May 6, 2009). "Analysis: An autopsy of liberal Republicans" . cnn.com . Archived from the original on June 25, 2018 . Retrieved October 14, 2018 . ^ Tatum, Sophie (December 20, 2018). "3 Kansas legislators switch from Republican to Democrat" . CNN . Archived from the original on October 30, 2020 . Retrieved January 8, 2021 . ^ Weiner, Rachel. "Charlie Crist defends party switch" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on February 25, 2021 . Retrieved January 8, 2021 . ^ Davis, Susan (August 23, 2019). "Meltdown On Main Street: Inside The Breakdown Of The GOP's Moderate Wing" . NPR . Archived from the original on June 17, 2022 . Retrieved June 17, 2022 . ^ * "The Decline of GOP Moderates" . Washington Post . December 7, 2006 . Retrieved February 3, 2025 . "Decline of the GOP moderates" .

The Seattle Times . November 29, 2006 . Retrieved July 18, 2026 . Harris, Paul (October 25, 2008). "Republicans fear long exile in the wilderness" .

The Guardian . Retrieved February 3, 2025 . Horowitz, Jason (January 18, 2012). "Mitt Romney and the fall of Republican moderates" . Washington Post . Retrieved February 3, 2025 . Drutman, Lee (August 24, 2020). "Why There Are So Few Moderate Republicans Left" . FiveThirtyEight . Archived from the original on August 24, 2020 . Retrieved February 3, 2025 . Berman, Russell (January 27, 2023). " 'We Used to Be Called Moderate. We Are Not Moderate.' " .

The Atlantic . Retrieved February 3, 2025 . Skolnik, Jon (December 3, 2021). "Moderate Republicans are quitting as the GOP's big tent narrows" . Salon . Retrieved February 3, 2025 . ^ Calabro, Elaina Plott (October 6, 2018). "Two Moderate Senators, Two Very Different Paths" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved July 16, 2026 . ^ Bolton, Alexander (September 25, 2018). "Kavanaugh's fate rests with Sen. Collins" .

The Hill . Archived from the original on October 30, 2025 . Retrieved July 16, 2026 . ^ Connolly, Griffin (October 9, 2018). "Sen. Lisa Murkowski Could Face Reprisal from Alaska GOP" . Roll Call . Archived from the original on October 11, 2018 . Retrieved July 16, 2026 . ^ Richards, Parker (November 3, 2018). "The Last Liberal Republicans Hang On" .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on November 9, 2018 . Retrieved February 23, 2019 . ^ Reich, Greta (September 29, 2024). "Larry Hogan confirms he won't vote for Trump, despite the former president's endorsement" . Politico . Retrieved September 29, 2024 . ^ "Gov. Larry Hogan positions himself as moderate on the national stage at second inauguration" . WUSA . January 16, 2019. Archived from the original on February 21, 2019 . Retrieved February 23, 2019 . ^ Levitsky, Steven (2021). "Republicans Would Rather End Democracy Than Turn Away From Trump, Says Harvard Professor" . Salon . I think ideologically it (the GOP) has evolved into something fairly similar to European far-right parties. It's primarily an ethno-nationalist nativist party. It's essentially preserving the identity of white Christian America, and that is fairly similar to what we describe as far-right parties in Europe. ^ Mudde, Cas (2019).

The Far-Right Today . Cambridge: Polity Press. ISBN 978-1-5095-3683-2 . ^ "DEMOCRACY REPORT 2026: Unraveling The Democratic Era?" (PDF) . V-Dem Institute . March 17, 2026 . Retrieved March 22, 2026 . One notable shift is the transformation of the Republican Party to endorsing a far-right, nationalist, and anti-pluralist agenda. Nationalist, anti-liberal, far-right parties and leaders have largely driven the "third wave of autocratization." Yet the USA stands out as the only case where such movement seized control over one party in a rigid two-party system. ^ "index" . Polity data series . October 2025 . Retrieved November 7, 2025 . NOTE: The USA dropped below the "democracy threshold" (+6) on the POLITY scale in 2020 and was considered an anocracy (+5) at the end of the year 2020; the USA score for 2021 returned to democracy (+8). Beginning on 1 July 2024, due to the US Supreme Court ruling granting the US Presidency broad, legal immunity, the USA is noted by the Polity Project as experiencing a regime transition through, at least, 20 January 2025.

As of the latter date, the USA is coded EXREC=8, "Competitive Elections"; EXCONST=1 "Unlimited Executive Authority"; and POLCOMP=6 "Factional/Restricted Competition." Polity scores: DEMOC=4; AUTOC=4; POLITY=0.

The USA is no longer considered a democracy and lies at the cusp of autocracy; it has experienced a Presidential Coup and an Adverse Regime Change event (8-point drop in its POLITY score). ^ a b "Polity V Regime Narrative: United States (2025)" (PDF) . Polity Data Series . January 20, 2025. pp. 12– 15 . Retrieved April 3, 2026 . ^ Guillem, Colom (February 26, 2024). "An International Far-Right Alliance? A Comparative Analysis of the Linkages Between the Republican Party and European Far-Right Parties". SSRN 4739346 . Norris's findings conveyed that the Republican Party is as far-right ideologically as many prominent European far-right parties.

The Republican Party was measured to be more conservative in comparison to various mainstream European parties. More specifically, the Republican Party was valued to be as economically conservative as the Swiss People's Party and as socially conservative as the German Alternative for Germany (AfD). ^ "The Authoritarian Playbook" (PDF) . Protect Democracy . 2024 . Retrieved April 26, 2026 .

As globalization and looser borders force many nations to grapple with questions about national identity; immigrants and refugees have been the targets of far-right populist parties across many backsliding democracy - including the United States ^ Chinoy, Sahil (June 26, 2019). "What Happened to America's Political Center of Gravity?" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved April 26, 2026 .

The Republican Party leans much further right than most traditional conservative parties in Western Europe and Canada, according to an analysis of their election manifestos. It is more extreme than Britain's Independence Party and France's National Rally (formerly the National Front), which some consider far-right populist parties.

The Democratic Party, in contrast, is positioned closer to mainstream liberal parties. ^ Mudde, Cas (2022). "The Far-Right Threat in the United States: A European Perspective" .

The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science . 699 : 101– 115. doi : 10.1177/00027162211070060 . ^ Drutman, Lee (2021). "Reform American Democracy" . Time Magazine . Retrieved April 27, 2026 . ^ Levitsky, Steven (October 13, 2021). "GOP Would Rather End Democracy Than Turn Away From Trump, Says Harvard Professor" . Salon . Retrieved April 27, 2026 . ^ Griffin, Roger (2025). "Is Donald Trump A Fascist?" . Oxford Union . Retrieved April 27, 2026 . ^ Zerofsky, Elisabeth (October 23, 2024). "Is It Fascism? A Leading Historian Changes His Mind" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved April 27, 2026 . ^ a b Klaas, Brian (September 9, 2025). "Is The United States Still A Democracy?" .

The London School of Economics and Political Science . Retrieved April 9, 2026 . Political scientists continue to debate this topic, but few would classify the United States as a robust democracy. It is either a democracy in crisis that is barely clinging onto the label, or one that has tipped over the edge into competitive authoritarianism - and I believe it's the latter. ^ a b Ralf, Fücks; Jarosław, Kuisz; Karolina, Wigura (2026). "Wehrlose Demokratie? Lektionen aus den USA". Ende des liberalen Zeitalters? Krise und Erneuerung der freiheitlichen Demokratie (PDF) (in German). Bielefeld. p. 124. doi : 10.14361/9783839452448 . ISBN 978-3-8376-8012-6 . Es sind die Republikaner, die sich in den vergangenen Jahrzehnten erschreckend radikalisiert haben – und doch, aufgrund des fest gefügten Zwei-Parteien-Systems, immer noch bei vielen den Eindruck von »Mainstream« erwecken. Inhaltlich bewegen sie sich inzwischen rechts von der AfD; und in ihren Verlautbarungen sprechen viele Republikaner – wie alle Rechtspopulisten – ihren Gegnern grundsätzlich die Legitimität ab (man kennt die Rhetorik allenthalben: »Volksverräter« etc.) {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "United States: Freedom in the World 2026 Country Report" . Freedom House . Retrieved April 26, 2026 .

The intensely competitive US political environment is dominated by two major parties: the Republicans on the right and the Democrats on the left. ^ * Baker, Peter (December 1, 2022). "Trump Embraces Extremism as He Seeks to Reclaim Office" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 20, 2025 . Analysts and strategists see Mr. Trump's pivot toward the far right as a tactic to re-create political momentum Mr. Trump has long flirted with the fringes of American society as no other modern president has, openly appealing to prejudice based on race, religion, national origin and sexual orientation, among others Mr. Trump's expanding embrace of extremism has left Republicans once again struggling to figure out how to distance themselves from him. Oreskes, Benjamin (May 23, 2024). "Trump and GOP repeatedly echo Nazi and far-right ideology as they aim to retake White House" . Los Angeles Times . Retrieved July 27, 2025 . Bierman, Noah (August 22, 2016). "Donald Trump helps bring far-right media's edgier elements into the mainstream" . Los Angeles Times . Retrieved October 7, 2021 . Swenson, Ali; Kunzelman, Michael (November 18, 2023). "Fears of political violence are growing as the 2024 campaign heats up and conspiracy theories evolve" . AP News . Retrieved January 20, 2025 . Trump has amplified social media accounts that promote QAnon, which grew from the far-right fringes of the internet to become a fixture of mainstream Republican politics In his 2024 campaign, Trump has ramped up his combative rhetoric with talk of retribution against his enemies. He recently joked about the hammer attack on Paul Pelosi and suggested that retired Gen. Mark Milley, a former Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman, should be executed for treason. Heer, Jeet (July 31, 2023). "The GOP's Nazi Problem Has Deep Roots" .

The Nation . ISSN 0027-8378 . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . His extensive record includes his numerous sly uses of alt-right memes, his promotion of extremists like Steve Bannon and Sebastian Gorka, and his infamous "very fine people" response to the 2017 white nationalist rally in Charlottesville, Va. Lowndes, Joseph (November 8, 2021). "Far-right extremism dominates the GOP. It didn't start — and won't end — with Trump" .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . But far-right extremism did not work its way to the heart of the Republican Party until the nomination and 2016 election of Trump. Neither single election cycles nor individual presidencies determine the trajectories of political parties. But through racial demonization, the treatment of political opponents as enemies and an embrace of executive authoritarianism, Trump achieved two critical things at once: He moved far-right radicals toward the Republican Party and the Republican voter base toward greater radicalization. Brownstein, Ronald (February 14, 2021). "Analysis: Is the GOP's extremist wing now too big to fail?" . CNN . Retrieved June 5, 2026 . Robert P. Jones , founder and CEO of the Public Religion Research Institute , agrees. All these findings about Republican voters' tolerance for violence and conspiracy theories, he says, present "a chilling portrait of how far down the extremist tracks rank-and-file Republicans have gone with Trump." ^ Stephens-Dougan, LaFluer (May 2021). "The Persistence of Racial Cues and Appeals in American Elections" . Annual Review of Political Science . 24 : 301– 320. doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-082619-015522 . ISSN 1094-2939 . p. 302: Trump, however, managed to achieve electoral success in 2016 despite routinely using racial appeals that openly and categorically disparaged racial, religious, and ethnic minorities, or what the racial priming literature refers to as explicit racial appeals. ... Throughout his campaign and subsequent presidency, Trump continued to traffic in similar explicit racial appeals ^ Berman, Sheri (May 2021). "The Causes of Populism in the West" . Annual Review of Political Science . 24 : 71– 88. doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-041719-102503 . ISSN 1094-2939 . p. 76: In the United States, scholars consistently find that "racial animus," or attitudes regarding "blacks, immigrants, Muslims" are the best predictors of support for President Trump ^ Karni, Annie (June 26, 2025). "Right-Wing Republicans in Congress Attack Mamdani With Islamophobic Comments" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 7, 2025 .

The responses to Mr. Mamdani's electoral triumph were the latest examples of how far-right Republicans in Congress have become overt in their use of bigoted language and ethnically offensive tropes, in both casual comments and official statements. (..) But the kind of language that Mr. Ogles used on social media and the questions he raised in his letter these days have become commonplace among some Republicans. And they almost always go without any real condemnation from G.O.P. leaders. ^ Capelletti, Joey (March 14, 2026). "Anti-Muslim rhetoric rises among Republicans with little pushback from GOP leadership" . AP News . ^ Lillis, Mike (March 17, 2026). "Rise in anti-Muslim rhetoric by GOP sparks uproar on Capitol Hill" .

The difference now is that the GOP lawmakers have doubled down, and their leaders have refused to condemn the anti-Muslim remarks from within their ranks. ^ Solender, Andrew (March 13, 2026). "Tensions erupt in Congress over anti-Muslim posts" . Axios . ^ Knowles, Hannah (March 19, 2026). "Republicans are ramping up attacks on Muslims — and getting rewarded" .

The Washington Post . ^ Dreisbach, Tom (May 14, 2025). "Multiple Trump White House officials have ties to antisemitic extremists" . NPR News . Retrieved October 20, 2025 . ^ Novak, Matt (October 15, 2025). "Border Patrol Posts Instagram Propaganda Video Featuring Antisemitic Slurs" . Gizmodo . Retrieved October 16, 2025 . ^ Nichols, Tom (February 23, 2026). "The Republican Party Has a Nazi Problem" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . ^ Breuninger, Kevin (January 16, 2026). "Labor Department accused of echoing Nazi slogan in social media post" . CNBC . Retrieved July 16, 2026 . ^ Makuch, Ben (January 14, 2026). "White House post nods to racist, far-right subculture, extremism expert says" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved July 16, 2026 . ^ Breland, Ali (January 21, 2026). "The Trump Administration Is Publishing a Stream of Nazi Propaganda" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved July 16, 2026 . ^ a b Kieffer, Caleb; Cravens, R.G. (August 28, 2025). "Homeland Security deploys white nationalist, anti-immigrant graphics to recruit" . Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved September 6, 2025 . ^ Williams, Michael (August 13, 2025). "On social media, the Department of Homeland Security appeals to nostalgia — with motifs of White identity" . CNN . Retrieved September 6, 2025 . ^ Evan, Gorelick (January 27, 2026). "Administration Social Media Posts Echo White Supremacist Messaging" .

The New York Times . Retrieved April 11, 2026 . ^ Saul, Stephanie (June 26, 2026). "The Far Right Is Dividing College Republicans" .

The New York Times . Retrieved June 26, 2026 .

The conflict in Maryland is the latest in a debate that has been dividing college Republicans everywhere: whether to avoid or embrace the far right. ^ " 'I love Hitler': Leaked messages expose Young Republicans' racist chat" . POLITICO . October 14, 2025 . Retrieved October 15, 2025 . ^ Kim, Catherine; McHugh, Calder (October 16, 2025). "The Young Republicans' Leaked Chat Is a Sign of Where We Could Be Headed" . Politico . Retrieved October 16, 2025 . Dunbar, Marina (October 15, 2025). "US Capitol police investigating flag with swastika in Republican representative's office – report" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved October 16, 2025 . Stieb, Matt (October 15, 2025). "Republicans Have a Real Nazi Thing Going On" . Intelligencer . Retrieved October 16, 2025 . Heer, Jeet (October 17, 2025). "JD Vance Thinks That Tomorrow Belongs to Hitler-Loving Young Republicans" .

The Nation . Retrieved October 18, 2025 . Chait, Jonathan (October 16, 2025). "Vance's Telling Defense of a Racist Group Chat" .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on October 17, 2025 . Retrieved October 18, 2025 . ^ Lippman, Daniel (October 20, 2025). "Trump nominee says he has a 'Nazi streak,' bashes MLK Jr. Day, according to texts" . Politico . Retrieved October 20, 2025 . ^ Mazzie, Patricia (March 5, 2026). "Slurs Filled a Chat Created by a Republican Party Official in Florida" .

The New York Times . Retrieved June 26, 2026 .

The scandal is the latest example of extremism rankling establishment Republicans in Florida as the party has consolidated power in a state that was once a political battleground. ...

The Miami-Dade County Republican Party has had extremists in its ranks before. Four years ago, several members of the Proud Boys secured seats on its executive committee with the apparent goal of radicalizing and influencing local politics. ^ a b "MAGA is eating itself" .

The Economist . December 23, 2025 . Retrieved January 26, 2026 . But they also reveal a broader fight within the Republican Party.

As the right begins to look past Mr Trump and debate the party's future, they are brawling over how big the conservative movement's tent should be. ...

The vice-president seemed to suggest that the conservative movement could include the likes of Ms Owens and Mr Fuentes. He declined to criticise racism and antisemitism among the movement's rising stars. ^ Beeferman, Jason (December 3, 2025). "Young Republicans chapter plans to host far-right German leader after 'I love Hitler' chat" . Politico . Retrieved January 26, 2026 .

The event is taking place amid a broader rift among Republicans over whether anti-Jewish voices have a place in their party and as an anti-Israel fervor among Democrats has sparked a wave of primary challenges in New York. Benson, Samuel (November 2, 2025). "GOP leaders denounce antisemitism in their ranks but shift blame to Democrats" . Politico . Retrieved January 26, 2026 . Republican Jews acknowledged antisemitism is cropping up in their movement during a conference this weekend, but were quick to blame left-leaning Democrats for fanning the flames. Zitner, Aaron; Collins, Eliza (December 22, 2025). "After Charlie Kirk's Death, MAGA Battles Over Free Speech" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved January 26, 2026 . Now, three months after Kirk was shot and killed at one of those events, his commitment to open debate is at the center of a bitter fight within the MAGA movement over the rise of antisemitic ideas and conspiracy theories. Axelrod, Tal (November 2, 2025). "MAGA's war within: Right-wing purity tests" . Axios . Retrieved January 26, 2026 . President Trump's MAGA movement is increasingly at war with itself.

The central issue: a purity test over MAGA inclusion. Why it matters: The MAGA fight, ignited by ideological differences over Israel, pulls on a lot of -isms — nativism, antisemitism, racism, sexism and Trumpism. ^ Karni, Annie (January 11, 2026). " 'I Think We Don't Like Them': Trump Says MAGA Has No Room for Antisemites" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 26, 2026 .

After years in which Mr. Trump has variously embraced and tolerated far-right figures and groups, the Republican Party is mired in a debate about how expansive its coalition should be and whether it should include figures like Nick Fuentes, a Holocaust denier and avowed antisemite. Mr. Trump's comments stand in contrast to Vice President JD Vance, who said last month that the party did not need "purity tests." ^ Blake, Aaron (September 27, 2021). "How Republicans learned to stop worrying and embrace 'replacement theory' — by name" .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . Legum, Judd (May 17, 2022). "Republicans have invoked the 'great replacement' theory over and over" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . Joffe-Block, Jude (September 13, 2024). "How Trump is relying on a racist conspiracy theory to question election results" . NPR . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . He was also echoing the latest iteration of a once-fringe racist conspiracy theory that has now become mainstream in the Republican Party.

The conspiracy — known as the "great replacement" — claims there is a plan to bring nonwhite immigrants into the United States and other Western countries to replace white voters to achieve a political agenda. Beauchamp, Zack (December 2, 2025). "The dark reality behind Trump's new anti-immigrant policies" . Vox . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . And the concept of a "great replacement" of Americans by migrants, once the province of tiki-torch marchers at Charlottesville, is now widely proclaimed by the Republican Party's leading figures – from Trump on down. Confessore, Nicholas; Yourish, Karen (May 16, 2022). "A Fringe Conspiracy Theory, Fostered Online, Is Refashioned by the G.O.P." The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . Serwer, Adam (May 18, 2022). "Conservatives Are Defending a Sanitized Version of 'The Great Replacement' " .

The Atlantic . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . Their reaction to the Buffalo shooting shows that the racist theory has now entered the Republican mainstream. "Our View: 'Great replacement' lie runs deep in Republican politics" .

The Portland Press Herald . May 17, 2022 . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . Once again, the political agenda was "the great replacement" conspiracy theory, an idea born in the fringes of white supremacist movements that is becoming mainstream in Republican politics. Goldmacher, Shane; Broadwater, Luke (May 17, 2022). "Republicans Play on Fears of 'Great Replacement' in Bid for Base Voters" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved May 9, 2026 . ^ a b Swan, Jonathan; Haberman, Maggie; Swanson, Ana (March 17, 2025). "Trump's Unwelcome News to Auto Chiefs: Buckle Up for What's to Come" .

The New York Times . President Trump's approach to tariffs has unsettled many corporate leaders who believed he would use the levies as a negotiating tool.

As it turns out, he sees them as an end in themselves. ^ Duehren, Andrew (April 5, 2025). "Republicans Like to Cut Taxes. With Tariffs, Trump Is Raising Them" .

The New York Times . Retrieved April 5, 2025 . President Trump's tariffs are scrambling the Republican plan for the economy, long centered on tax cuts and growth. ^ Sanger, David E. (February 1, 2025). "To Trump, Tariffs Are Not a Means but an End" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on February 2, 2025 . Retrieved February 1, 2025 . Many presidents use tariffs to force negotiations. But for President Trump, they are the point, a source of revenue as he pursues a Gilded Age vision. ^ Mair, Patrick; Rusch, Thomas; Hornik, Kurt (November 27, 2014). "The grand old party – a party of values?" . SpringerPlus . 3 697. doi : 10.1186/2193-1801-3-697 . PMC 4256162 . PMID 25512889 . ^ "Trump tax cuts, if made permanent, stand to benefit highest income earners, Treasury analysis shows" . Associated Press News . January 10, 2025. ^ "A Distributional Analysis of Donald Trump's Tax Plan" . Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy . October 7, 2024. ^ "How Tax Cuts Became Central to the Republican Party" . www.russellsage.org . ^ Aspan, Maria (August 14, 2025). "Trump is tightening the screws on corporate America — and CEOs are staying mum" . NPR . Retrieved August 24, 2025 .

By demanding a cut of a private company's sales, in exchange for the right to do business, Trump is defying the traditionally Republican gospel of free-market capitalism. Morrow, Allison; Mattingly, Phil (August 20, 2025). "Corporate America is silent as Trump abandons free-market principles" . CNN . Retrieved August 24, 2025 . Wile, Rob (August 22, 2025). "U.S. takes 10% stake in Intel as Trump flexes more power over big business" . NBC News . Retrieved August 24, 2025 . Trump continues to bulldoze through long-held norms regarding government and business, departing from the free-market ethos that has long prevailed in both major U.S. political parties. Sutton, Sam; Guida, Victoria (August 22, 2025). "Trump is turning the government into an investment firm" . Politico . Retrieved August 24, 2025 .

From tariff carveouts to pro bono legal work from white-shoe law firms, Trump is exerting power over U.S. businesses in ways that go beyond even Sen. Bernie Sanders's (I-Vt.) aspirations. His ability to inject his agenda into private enterprises and dealmaking has shaken the guardrails that protect businesses from sudden political shifts and defied the free-market orthodoxy that was a hallmark of Republican economic policymaking. ^ Graham, David A. (August 25, 2025). "Trump's Right-Wing Socialism" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved September 6, 2025 . Bennett, John T. (September 5, 2025). " 'This is socialism': Trump's private sector intervention causes heartburn on right" . Roll Call . Retrieved September 7, 2025 . Johnson, Keith; Lu, Chritina (July 16, 2025). "Trump Embraces State Capitalism" . Foreign Policy . Retrieved August 24, 2025 . "Trump wants to command bosses like Xi does. He is failing" .

The Economist . August 13, 2025 . Retrieved August 24, 2025 . Thankfully, Mr Trump only dabbles in state capitalism. Even so, his approach is damaging. Morrow, Allison (August 13, 2025). "Trump is tightening his grip on the economy, taking a page from China" . CNN . Retrieved August 24, 2025 . Trump's realignment of American business also bears similarities to China's model of "state capitalism" — a mix between socialism and classic free-market capitalism in which the state is involved in, but doesn't directly own, private businesses. Ip, Greg (August 11, 2025). "The U.S. Marches Toward State Capitalism With American Characteristics" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved August 24, 2025 . ^ "Nvidia and AMD to pay 15% of China chip sales to US government" . www.bbc.com . August 11, 2025 . Retrieved March 19, 2026 . ^ Kiley, Jocelyn; Borelli, Gabriel; Copeland, Joseph; Gracia, Shanay (August 14, 2025). "How Americans view the Trump administration's tariff policies and the GOP's budget and tax bill" . Pew Research Center . Retrieved September 30, 2025 . ^ Lynch, David J.; Sheridan, Mary Beth; Coletta, Amanda (January 31, 2025). "Trump sketches unprecedented plan for sweeping tariffs" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved February 1, 2025 . ^ "Donald Trump escalates global trade war with sweeping tariff blitz" . Financial Times . April 2, 2025 . Retrieved April 2, 2025 . ^ Jeong, Andrew (January 27, 2025). "Why Trump admires President McKinley, the original 'tariff man' " .

The Washington Post . Retrieved February 1, 2025 . ^ Lotz, Avery (March 6, 2025). "Republicans favor Trump tariffs despite anticipated price hikes: poll" . Axios . Retrieved March 10, 2025 . ^ Cross II, Coy F. (2012). Justin Smith Morrill: Father of the Land-Grant Colleges . MSU Press. p. 45. ISBN 9780870139055 . ^ Republican Party National Platform, 1860 Archived August 13, 2023, at the Wayback Machine Reported from the Platform Committee by Judge Jessup of Pennsylvania and adopted unanimously by the Republican National Convention held at Chicago on May 17, 1860. Broadside printing by The Chicago Press & Tribune , May 1860 ^ Stanley D. Solvick, "William Howard Taft and the Payne-Aldrich Tariff." Mississippi Valley Historical Review 50.3 (1963): 424–442 online Archived March 7, 2021, at the Wayback Machine ^ Bailey, Michael A.; Goldstein, Weingast (April 1997). "The Institutional Roots of American Trade Policy". World Politics . 49 (3): 309– 38. doi : 10.1353/wp.1997.0007 . S2CID 154711958 . ^ John H. Barton, Judith L. Goldstein , Timothy E. Josling, and Richard H. Steinberg, The Evolution of the Trade Regime: Politics, Law, and Economics of the GATT and the WTO (2008) ^ McClenahan, William (1991). "The Growth of Voluntary Export Restraints and American Foreign Economic Policy, 1956–1969". Business and Economic History . 20 : 180– 190. JSTOR 23702815 . ^ Karagiannis, Nikolaos; Madjd-Sadjadi, Zagros; Sen, Swapan, eds. (2013).

The New York Times . Retrieved May 26, 2019 . ^ "Support for free trade agreements rebounds modestly, but wide partisan differences remain" . Pew Research . April 25, 2017. Archived from the original on April 11, 2023 . Retrieved August 14, 2023 . ^ Fox, Justin (January 18, 2019). "Why Republicans Fell in Love With Tax Cuts" . www.bloomberg.com . ^ a b Grumbach, Jacob M.; Hacker, Jacob S.; Pierson, Paul (2021), "The Political Economies of Red States" , in Hertel-Fernandez, Alexander; Hacker, Jacob S.; Thelen, Kathleen; Pierson, Paul (eds.), The American Political Economy: Politics, Markets, and Power , Cambridge University Press, pp. 209– 244, ISBN 978-1316516362 , archived from the original on November 23, 2021 , retrieved November 10, 2021 ^ "Diving into the rich pool" .

The Economist . September 24, 2011. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012 . Retrieved January 13, 2012 . ^ Paul Kiel, Jesse Eisinger (December 11, 2018). "How the IRS Was Gutted" . ProPublica . Archived from the original on December 11, 2018 . Retrieved December 11, 2018 . ^ Grossmann, Matt; Mahmood, Zuhaib; Isaac, William (2021). "Political Parties, Interest Groups, and Unequal Class Influence in American Policy".

The Journal of Politics . 83 (4): 1706– 1720. doi : 10.1086/711900 . ^ Bartels, Larry M. (2016). Unequal Democracy: The Political Economy of the New Gilded Age (2nd ed.). Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1400883363 . Archived from the original on November 5, 2021 . Retrieved January 13, 2022 . ^ Rhodes, Jesse H.; Schaffner, Brian F. (2017). "Testing Models of Unequal Representation: Democratic Populists and Republican Oligarchs?". Quarterly Journal of Political Science . 12 (2): 185– 204. doi : 10.1561/100.00016077 . ^ Lax, Jeffrey R.; Phillips, Justin H.; Zelizer, Adam (2019). "The Party or the Purse? Unequal Representation in the US Senate". American Political Science Review . 113 (4): 917– 940. doi : 10.1017/S0003055419000315 . ^ Hacker, Jacob S.; Pierson, Paul (2020). Let them Eat Tweets: How the Right Rules in an Age of Extreme Inequality . Liveright Publishing. ISBN 978-1631496851 . ^ Milkis, Sidney M.; King, Desmond; Jacobs, Nicholas F. (2019). "Building a Conservative State: Partisan Polarization and the Redeployment of Administrative Power" . Perspectives on Politics . 17 (2): 453– 469. doi : 10.1017/S1537592718003511 . ISSN 1537-5927 . ^ "The Rise in Per Capita Federal Spending" . Mercatus Center . November 12, 2014. Archived from the original on December 14, 2021 . Retrieved August 30, 2020 . ^ Atske, Sara (April 11, 2019). "Little Public Support for Reductions in Federal Spending" . Pew Research Center . Retrieved December 25, 2024 . ^ Rappeport, Alan (June 19, 2025). "Record Debt Limit Increase Would Break Republican Precedent" .

The New York Times . Retrieved June 20, 2025 . This year, the party of fiscal conservatism is poised to discard that philosophy as Republicans prepare to press ahead with domestic policy legislation that combines nearly $4 trillion in tax cuts with a $5 trillion increase to the debt limit. An increase of that magnitude would be a record and underscore the ideological flexibility that many Republicans are willing to embrace when they are in power. ^ "What the GOP candidates have said about strikes and unions" .

The Independent . January 9, 2024. ^ Greenhouse, Steven (October 25, 2022). "Republicans want working-class voters — without actually supporting workers" .

The Guardian . ^ "Employer/Union Rights and Obligations" . National Labor Relations Board. Archived from the original on July 11, 2017 . Retrieved July 7, 2017 . ^ Kapur, Sahil (June 10, 2025). "GOP Sen. Josh Hawley introduces bill to raise federal minimum wage to $15 per hour" . NBC NEWS . NBCUniversal Media, LLC . Retrieved December 4, 2025 . ^ ● "54% of Americans view climate change as a major threat, but the partisan divide has grown" . Pew Research Center. April 18, 2023. Archived from the original on April 22, 2023. ● Broader discussion by Tyson, Alec; Funk, Cary; Kennedy, Brian (April 18, 2023). "What the data says about Americans' views of climate change" . Pew Research Center. Archived from the original on May 12, 2023. ^ a b Tyson, Alec; Funk, Cary; Kennedy, Brian (March 1, 2022). "Americans Largely Favor U.S. Taking Steps To Become Carbon Neutral by 2050 / Appendix (Detailed charts and tables)" . Pew Research . Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. ^ Filler, Daniel. "Theodore Roosevelt: Conservation as the Guardian of Democracy" . Archived from the original on August 2, 2003 . Retrieved November 9, 2007 . ^ Ewert, Sara Dant (July 3, 2003). "Environmental Politics in the Nixon Era" . Journal of Policy History . 15 (3): 345– 348. doi : 10.1353/jph.2003.0019 . ISSN 1528-4190 . S2CID 153711962 . Archived from the original on August 9, 2017 . Retrieved June 3, 2017 . ^ a b c d e Dunlap, Riley E.; McCright, Araon M. (2008). "A Widening Gap: Republican and Democratic Views on Climate Change". Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable Development . 50 (5): 26– 35. Bibcode : 2008ESPSD..50e..26D . doi : 10.3200/ENVT.50.5.26-35 . ^ Bergquist, Parrish; Warshaw, Christopher (2020). "Elections and parties in environmental politics". Handbook of U.S. Environmental Policy . doi : 10.4337/9781788972840.00017 . ISBN 978-1-78897-284-0 . ^ Fredrickson, Leif; Sellers, Christopher; Dillon, Lindsey; Ohayon, Jennifer Liss; Shapiro, Nicholas; Sullivan, Marianne; Bocking, Stephen; Brown, Phil; de la Rosa, Vanessa; Harrison, Jill; Johns, Sara; Kulik, Katherine; Lave, Rebecca; Murphy, Michelle; Piper, Liza; Richter, Lauren; Wylie, Sara (2018). "History of US Presidential Assaults on Modern Environmental Health Protection" . American Journal of Public Health . 108 (S2): S95– S103. doi : 10.2105/AJPH.2018.304396 . PMC 5922215 . PMID 29698097 . ^ Coley, Jonathan S.; Hess, David J. (2012). "Green energy laws and Republican legislators in the United States". Energy Policy . 48 : 576– 583. Bibcode : 2012EnPol..48..576C . doi : 10.1016/j.enpol.2012.05.062 . ^ Turner, James Morton; Isenberg, Andrew C. (2018).

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on September 14, 2017 . Retrieved September 22, 2017 .

The Republican Party's fast journey from debating how to combat human-caused climate change to arguing that it does not exist is a story of big political money, Democratic hubris in the Obama years and a partisan chasm that grew over nine years like a crack in the Antarctic shelf, favoring extreme positions and uncompromising rhetoric over cooperation and conciliation. ^ Shabecoff, Philip (2000). Earth Rising: American Environmentalism in the 21st Century . Island Press. p. 125 . ISBN 978-1-59726-335-1 . Retrieved November 9, 2017 . republican party anti-environmental. ^ Hayes, Samuel P. (2000). A History of Environmental Politics Since 1945 . University of Pittsburgh Press. p. 119. ISBN 978-0-8229-7224-2 . Retrieved November 9, 2017 . ^ Sellers, Christopher (June 7, 2017). "How Republicans came to embrace anti-environmentalism" . Vox . Retrieved November 9, 2017 . ^ Båtstrand, Sondre (2015). "More than Markets: A Comparative Study of Nine Conservative Parties on Climate Change". Politics & Policy . 43 (4): 538– 561. doi : 10.1111/polp.12122 .

The U.S. Republican Party is an anomaly in denying anthropogenic climate change. ^ a b Chait, Jonathan (September 27, 2015). "Why Are Republicans the Only Climate-Science-Denying Party in the World?" . New York . Retrieved September 20, 2017 . Of all the major conservative parties in the democratic world, the Republican Party stands alone in its denial of the legitimacy of climate science. Indeed, the Republican Party stands alone in its conviction that no national or international response to climate change is needed. To the extent that the party is divided on the issue, the gap separates candidates who openly dismiss climate science as a hoax, and those who, shying away from the political risks of blatant ignorance, instead couch their stance in the alleged impossibility of international action. ^ "Schwarzenegger takes center stage on warming" . NBC News . MSNBC News. September 27, 2006. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014 . Retrieved July 3, 2014 . ^ Text of Opinion ^ Bush, George W. (March 13, 2001). "Text of a Letter from the President" . Archived from the original on July 22, 2009 . Retrieved November 9, 2007 . ^ Schrope, Mark (2001). "Criticism mounts as Bush backs out of Kyoto accord". Nature . 410 (6829): 616. Bibcode : 2001Natur.410..616S . doi : 10.1038/35070738 . PMID 11287908 . ^ "Our GOP: The Party of Opportunity" . Archived from the original on August 21, 2014 . Retrieved December 11, 2014 . ^ John Collins Rudolf (December 6, 2010). "On Our Radar: Republicans Urge Opening of Arctic Refuge to Drilling" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on July 14, 2014 . Retrieved December 11, 2014 . ^ Davenport, Coral (November 10, 2014). "Republicans Vow to Fight E.P.A. and Approve Keystone Pipeline" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on January 13, 2016 . Retrieved January 25, 2016 . ^ Levy, Gabrielle (February 24, 2015). "Obama Vetoes Keystone XL, Republicans Vow to Continue Fight" . U.S. News & World Report . Archived from the original on February 1, 2016 . Retrieved January 25, 2016 . ^ "Keystone XL pipeline: Why is it so disputed?" . BBC News . November 6, 2015. Archived from the original on February 9, 2016 . Retrieved January 25, 2016 . ^ Matthews, Chris (May 12, 2014). "Hardball With Chris Matthews for May 12, 2014". Hardball With Chris Matthews . MSNBC . NBC news. According to a survey by the Center for American Progress' Action Fund, more than 55 percent of congressional Republicans are climate change deniers. And it gets worse from there. They found that 77 percent of Republicans on the House Science Committee say they don't believe it in either. And that number balloons to an astounding 90 percent for all the party's leadership in Congress. ^ "Earth Talk: Still in denial about climate change".

The Charleston Gazette . Charleston, West Virginia . December 22, 2014. p. 10. ... a recent survey by the non-profit Center for American Progress found that some 58 percent of Republicans in the U.S. Congress still "refuse to accept climate change. Meanwhile, still others acknowledge the existence of global warming but cling to the scientifically debunked notion that the cause is natural forces, not greenhouse gas pollution by humans. ^ Kliegman, Julie (May 18, 2014). "Jerry Brown says 'virtually no Republican' in Washington accepts climate change science" . Tampa Bay Times . PolitiFact . Archived from the original on August 13, 2017 . Retrieved September 18, 2017 . ^ McCarthy, Tom (November 17, 2014). "Meet the Republicans in Congress who don't believe climate change is real" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on September 19, 2017 . Retrieved September 18, 2017 . ^ Weaver, Dustin (January 21, 2015). "Senate votes that climate change is real" .

The Hill . Archived from the original on March 27, 2019 . Retrieved March 26, 2019 . ^ Friedman, Lisa; Joselow, Maxine (February 9, 2026). "Trump Allies Near 'Total Victory' in Wiping Out U.S. Climate Regulation" .

The New York Times . Retrieved February 10, 2026 . ^ Joselow, Maxine; Plumer, Brad (July 31, 2025). "Energy Dept. Attacks Climate Science in Contentious Report" .

The New York Times . ^ "Beyond Obamacare: Democrats have plans, GOP is out to destroy them" . NBC News . September 11, 2018. ^ Klein, Ezra (June 30, 2012). "The Republican Turn Against Universal Health Insurance" . Washington Post . ^ Oberlander, Jonathan (March 1, 2020). "The Ten Years' War: Politics, Partisanship, And The ACA". Health Affairs . 39 (3): 471– 478. doi : 10.1377/hlthaff.2019.01444 . PMID 32119603 . ^ Hertel-Fernandez, Alexander; Skocpol, Theda; Lynch, Daniel (April 2016). "Business Associations, Conservative Networks, and the Ongoing Republican War over Medicaid Expansion". Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law . 41 (2): 239– 286. doi : 10.1215/03616878-3476141 . PMID 26732316 . ^ a b Hacker, Jacob S. (2010). "The Road to Somewhere: Why Health Reform Happened: Or Why Political Scientists Who Write about Public Policy Shouldn't Assume They Know How to Shape It". Perspectives on Politics . 8 (3): 861– 876. doi : 10.1017/S1537592710002021 . ^ Chapin, Christy Ford, ed. (2015), "The Politics of Medicare, 1957–1965", Ensuring America's Health: The Public Creation of the Corporate Health Care System , Cambridge University Press, pp. 194– 232, doi : 10.1017/CBO9781107045347.008 , ISBN 978-1107044883 ^ Jacobson, Louis; Kennedy, Patrick (April 15, 2011). "Peter DeFazio says "Medicare passed with virtually no Republican support" " . Politifact . Archived from the original on April 19, 2022 . Retrieved November 10, 2021 . ^ a b Zeitz, Joshua (June 27, 2017). "How the GOP Turned Against Medicaid" . Politico . Archived from the original on February 13, 2021 . Retrieved November 10, 2021 . ^ Cohn, Jonathan (2021).

The Ten Year War: Obamacare and the Unfinished Crusade for Universal Coverage . St. Martin's Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1250270948 . ^ Konczal, Mike (March 24, 2014). "The Conservative Myth of a Social Safety Net Built on Charity" .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on May 3, 2022 . Retrieved December 30, 2021 . ^ "Status of State Medicaid Expansion Decisions: Interactive Map" . Kaiser Family Foundation . November 9, 2022. Archived from the original on June 24, 2022 . Retrieved February 26, 2023 . Scroll down for state by state info. ^ Tahir, Darius (September 30, 2024). "Trump leads, and his party follows, on vaccine skepticism" . CNN . Archived from the original on December 1, 2024 . Retrieved December 19, 2024 . ^ Fordham, Benjamin O.; Flynn, Michael (2022). "Everything Old Is New Again: The Persistence of Republican Opposition to Multilateralism in American Foreign Policy". Studies in American Political Development . 37 : 56– 73. doi : 10.1017/S0898588X22000165 . ^ Wasson, Erik (July 18, 2013). "House GOP unveils spending bill with $5.8B cut to foreign aid" .

The Hill . Archived from the original on December 15, 2014 . Retrieved December 11, 2014 . ^ Rogers, David (February 1, 2011). "GOP seeks to slash foreign aid" . Politico . Archived from the original on February 22, 2015 . Retrieved December 11, 2014 . ^ Trujillo, Mario (July 1, 2014). "Republicans propose halting foreign aid until border surge stops" .

The Hill . Archived from the original on December 15, 2014 . Retrieved December 11, 2014 . ^ "TAFT SEEKS ACTION ON JEWISH STATE; Senator Stresses Vital Need for the Immediate Political Recognition of Palestine" . New York Times . March 22, 1945.

The vital need for immediate political recognition of a Jewish national home and a Jewish State in Palestine by the great powers was stressed by Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio ^ "Republicans Adopt Strong Israel Platform; Taft Supporters Upset Vandenberg Policy" . Jewish Telegraphic Agency . June 23, 1948. ^ a b Cavari, Amnon; Freedman, Guy (2020). American Public Opinion Toward Israel: From Consensus to Divide . Taylor & Francis . p. 145. ^ Beauchamp, Zack (November 11, 2015). "How Republicans fell in love with Israel" . Vox . Archived from the original on November 9, 2023 . Retrieved November 9, 2023 . ^ Ponnuru, Ramesh (May 15, 2018). "The GOP and the Israeli Exception" . National Review . Archived from the original on November 9, 2023 . Retrieved November 9, 2023 . ^ Collinson, Stephen (October 13, 2023). "Trump's turn against Israel" . CNN . Retrieved November 9, 2023 . ^ Naftali, India (February 6, 2024). "Hey Israel, don't be so sure about your support among Republicans" . I24news . Retrieved February 9, 2024 . ^ "GOP platform pledges to stand with Israel, deport 'pro-Hamas radicals' from US" . Times of Israel . July 9, 2024. ^ Barbara, Sprunt (May 29, 2024). "GOP lawmakers plan to keep focus on antisemitism to divide Democrats" . NPR . Retrieved February 24, 2025 . ^ Alnaqib, Saafya (September 30, 2024). "American Evangelicals' Unique Support for Israel" . Chicago Council on Global Affairs . Retrieved February 24, 2025 . ^ Posner, Sarah (October 22, 2023). "The dispiriting truth about why many evangelical Christians support Israel" . CNN . Retrieved February 24, 2025 . ^ "Republican Platform 2016" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on July 19, 2016 . Retrieved July 20, 2016 . ^ "Republican Party Platform Omits Taiwan Mention" . TNL . July 10, 2024. ^ "Cruz: 'America Does Not Need Torture to Protect Ourselves' " . December 3, 2015. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016 . Retrieved December 27, 2015 . ^ Nick, Turse (April 27, 2023). "REP. MATT GAETZ, PROGRESSIVES JOINTLY CALL FOR U.S. MILITARY TO LEAVE SOMALIA" .

The Intercept . Retrieved April 27, 2023 . ^ Wilkinson, Tracy (July 21, 2016). "In a shift, Republican platform doesn't call for arming Ukraine against Russia, spurring outrage" . Los Angeles Times . Retrieved July 25, 2016 . ^ "Trump admin approves new sale of anti-tank weapons to Ukraine" . ABC News . Retrieved October 1, 2019 .

The Trump administration first approved the sale of Javelins to Ukraine in December 2017 – a step that former President Barack Obama never took and that Trump allies have pointed to as a sign of Trump's toughness on Russia. ^ Erik, Piccoli. "Republicans are no friends of Europe" . ISPI . Retrieved January 31, 2024 . ^ "Trump's threat to NATO allies draws little condemnation from GOP, reflecting his grip on the party" . AP. February 12, 2024 . Retrieved February 12, 2024 . ^ Lotz, Avery (April 7, 2024). "House Intelligence Committee chair says Russian propaganda has spread through parts of GOP" . CNN. Archived from the original on April 11, 2024. ^ Blake, Aaron (February 16, 2024). "Republicans begin to target Putin 'apologists' in their midst" .

The Washington Post . ^ Miranda, Shauneen (April 7, 2024). "Turner: Russian propaganda "being uttered on the House floor" " . Axios . ^ Blake, Aaron (April 8, 2024). "Top GOPers' extraordinary comments on their party and Russian propaganda" .

The Washington Post . ^ "US House approves $61bn in military aid for Ukraine after months of stalling" .

The Guardian . April 20, 2024. 210 Democrats and 101 Republicans joined to support Ukraine, with 112 Republicans – a majority of the GOP members – voting against ^ Stanton, Andrew (July 15, 2024). "JD Vance eyes shift in Republican Party" . Newsweek . Archived from the original on July 16, 2024 . Retrieved July 16, 2024 . ^ "Trump threatens to cut US aid to Ukraine quickly if reelected" . Politico . June 16, 2024. ^ "Trump's choice of Vance 'terrible news' for Ukraine, Europe experts warn" .

The Guardian . July 17, 2024. ^ "Exclusive: Trump handed plan to halt US military aid to Kyiv unless it talks peace with Moscow" . Reuters . June 25, 2024. ^ "Republican Party committee approves 2024 platform, makes no mention of Ukraine, Russia" . Kyiv Independent . July 9, 2024. ^ Smith, David (February 28, 2025). "Diplomacy dies on live TV as Trump and Vance gang up to bully Ukraine leader" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved February 28, 2025 . ^ a b Zelizer, Julian E. (2004).

The New York Review of Books . ISSN 0028-7504 . Archived from the original on February 4, 2023 . Retrieved February 4, 2023 . ^ Williams, Daniel K. (2011). "The GOP's Abortion Strategy: Why Pro-Choice Republicans Became Pro-Life in the 1970s". Journal of Policy History . 23 (4): 513– 539. doi : 10.1017/S0898030611000285 . ^ a b Taylor, Justin (May 9, 2018). "How the Christian Right Became Prolife on Abortion and Transformed the Culture Wars" .

The Gospel Coalition . Archived from the original on February 4, 2023 . Retrieved February 4, 2023 . ^ Bruni, Frank (January 23, 2000). "Bush Says He Supports the Party's Strong Anti-Abortion Stand" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on February 4, 2023 . Retrieved February 4, 2023 . ^ Smith, David (May 5, 2022). "Trump the hero for anti-abortion movement after bending supreme court his way" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on February 4, 2023 . Retrieved February 4, 2023 . ^ a b c Abdelfatah, Rund (June 22, 2022). "Evangelicals didn't always play such a big role in the fight to limit abortion access" . National Public Radio . Archived from the original on February 24, 2023 . Retrieved February 24, 2023 . ^ Waltke, Bruce K. (November 8, 1968). "The Old Testament and Birth Control" . Christianity Today . Archived from the original on February 24, 2023 . Retrieved February 24, 2023 . ^ a b Balmer, Randall (May 10, 2022). "The Religious Right and the Abortion Myth" . Politico . Archived from the original on February 24, 2023 . Retrieved February 24, 2023 . ^ Allen, Bob (November 6, 2012). "Evangelicals and abortion: chicken or egg?" . Baptist News Global . Archived from the original on February 24, 2023 . Retrieved February 24, 2023 . ^ Doherty, Carroll (January 19, 2023). "How Republicans view their party and key issues facing the country as the 118th Congress begins" . Pew Research Center . Archived from the original on January 21, 2023 . Retrieved January 21, 2023 . There are fissures in the GOP coalition.

The same typology study found fissures in the GOP coalition, including over economic fairness, tax policy, and in views of abortion and same-sex marriage. ^ Fram, Alan; Elliot, Philip (August 29, 2012). "GOP OKs platform barring abortions, gay marriage" . Finance.yahoo.com . Archived from the original on February 26, 2017 . Retrieved December 27, 2016 . ^ a b Layman, Geoffrey (2001).

The Great Divide: Religious and Cultural Conflict in American Party Politics . Columbia University Press. pp. 115, 119– 120. ISBN 978-0231120586 . Archived from the original on June 25, 2015 . Retrieved July 15, 2018 . ^ a b "How race and religion have polarized American voters" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on July 16, 2018 . Retrieved July 15, 2018 . ^ Gould, Eric D.; Klor, Esteban F. (2019). "Party hacks and true believers: The effect of party affiliation on political preferences". Journal of Comparative Economics . 47 (3): 504– 524. doi : 10.1016/j.jce.2019.03.004 . S2CID 241140587 . ^ "Bobby Jindal on the Issues" . Ontheissues.org. Archived from the original on June 13, 2012 . Retrieved May 16, 2010 . ^ Kilgore, Ed. "The Near-Extinction of Pro-Choice Republicans in Congress" . New York Intelligencer . Archived from the original on September 20, 2018 . Retrieved October 10, 2018 . ^ Levine, A. D.; Lacy, T. A.; Hearn, J. C. (February 18, 2013). "The origins of human embryonic stem cell research policies in the US states". Science and Public Policy . 40 (4): 544– 558. doi : 10.1093/scipol/sct005 . ^ Blendon, Robert J.; Kim, Minah Kang; Benson, John M. (November 17, 2011). "The Public, Political Parties, and Stem-Cell Research". New England Journal of Medicine . 365 (20): 1853– 1856. doi : 10.1056/NEJMp1110340 . PMID 22087677 . ^ Leonhardt, David (April 6, 2023). "The Power and Limits of Abortion Politics" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on April 6, 2023 . Retrieved April 7, 2023 .

After the Supreme Court overturned Roe last June and allowed states to ban abortion, more than a dozen quickly imposed tight restrictions. Today, abortion is largely illegal in most of red America, even though polls suggest many voters in these states support at least some access. ^ Siders, David (April 6, 2023). "No Wisconsin wake-up call: Republicans go full steam ahead on abortion restrictions" . Politico . Archived from the original on April 6, 2023 . Retrieved April 7, 2023 . ^ "Most Americans approve of Supreme Court decision restricting use of race in college admissions" . ABC News . Retrieved March 15, 2024 . ^ See Republican 2012 Platform ^ "Bush criticizes university 'quota system' " . CNN . January 15, 2003. Archived from the original on June 4, 2010 . Retrieved May 22, 2010 . ^ Eilperin, Juliet (May 12, 1998). "Watts Walks a Tightrope on Affirmative Action" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on May 24, 2010 . Retrieved January 22, 2007 . ^ Republican National Committee (July 30, 2015). "Republican Views On Affirmative Action" . Archived from the original on April 19, 2022. ^ "The differences between Canada and the U.S. remain significant" . Policy Options . 2022 . Retrieved May 12, 2026 . ^ a b Astor, Maggie (September 22, 2022). "For First Time in at Least 25 Years, No Democrat Has Top Grade From N.R.A." The New York Times . Archived from the original on September 22, 2022 . Retrieved September 11, 2023 .

The Democratic break from the National Rifle Association is complete: For the first time in at least 25 years, not a single Democrat running for Congress anywhere in the country received an A in the group's candidate ratings, which were once a powerful influence in U.S. elections. ^ Russell, George Fabe. "What is the Republican Party's stance on guns? Here's what GOP politicians are saying" . USA Today . Retrieved May 23, 2026 . ^ Nass, Daniel (September 9, 2020). "A Democrat with an 'A' Grade from the NRA? There's One Left" .

The Trace . Archived from the original on September 9, 2020 . Retrieved September 11, 2023 . ^ Siegel, Reva B. "Dead or Alive: Originalism as Popular Constitutionalism in Heller." The Second Amendment on Trial: Critical Essays on District of Columbia v. Heller , edited by Saul Cornell and Nathan Kozuskanich, University of Massachusetts Press, 2013, p. 104. ^ Carlson, Jennifer (December 8, 2025). "Guns in Politics" . pp. 165– 170. doi : 10.1002/9781394300365.ch23 . ISBN 978-1-394-30033-4 . {{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) ; Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ a b "Republican Party on Crime" .

On The Issues . Retrieved February 24, 2025 . ^ Lancaster, Joe (July 17, 2024). "Republicans Have Completely Abandoned Criminal Justice Reform" . Reason . Retrieved February 24, 2025 . ^ "Political Party Platforms and the Death Penalty" . Death Penalty Information Center . Retrieved February 25, 2025 . ^ "Overview of the First Step Act" . Federal Bureau of Prisons . Retrieved February 24, 2025 . ^ a b Tesler, Michael (April 20, 2022). "Why Do GOP Lawmakers Still Oppose Legalizing Weed?" . FiveThirtyEight . Archived from the original on August 24, 2022 . Retrieved August 13, 2022 . ^ "Republican Views on Drugs | Republican Views" . www.republicanviews.org . Archived from the original on May 2, 2017 . Retrieved May 1, 2017 . ^ "House votes to decriminalize marijuana as GOP resists national shift" .

The Washington Post . 2020. Archived from the original on December 21, 2020 . Retrieved December 18, 2020 . ^ Newburn, Greg (July 18, 2014). "Top GOP Presidential Contenders Support Mandatory Minimum Reform" . Families Against Mandatory Minimums . Archived from the original on November 29, 2014 . Retrieved December 11, 2014 . ^ Florko, Nicholas (September 30, 2024). "The GOP's Tipping Point on Weed" .

The Republican Party has become openly anti-immigrant and is proposing mass deportations... {{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) ; Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ Hajnal, Zoltan (January 4, 2021). "Immigration & the Origins of White Backlash" . Daedalus . 150 (2): 23– 39. doi : 10.1162/daed_a_01844 . ISSN 0011-5266 . ^ Hackman, Michelle; Zitner, Aaron (February 2, 2024). "Why Both Parties Have Shifted Right on Immigration—and Still Can't Agree" .

The Wall Street Journal . ^ Haberman, Maggie; Goldmacher, Shane; Swan, Jonathan (July 8, 2024). "Trump Presses G.O.P. for New Platform That Softens Stance on Abortion" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on July 18, 2024 . Retrieved July 9, 2024 .

The platform is even more nationalistic, more protectionist and less socially conservative than the 2016 Republican platform that was duplicated in the 2020 election. ^ McCann, Allison; Sun, Albert; Sullivan, Eileen (January 24, 2025). "Who Are the Millions of Immigrants Trump Wants to Deport?" .

The New York Times . New York Times . Retrieved February 26, 2025 . ^ "Immigration Policies Proposed in the Major Party Platforms for the 2024 US Presidential Election" . Population and Development Review . 50 (3). Wiley-Blackwell: 941– 947. September 5, 2024. doi : 10.1111/padr.12666 . Retrieved June 25, 2026 . ^ "Donald Trump Vows To 'Immediately End Migrant Invasion Of America' On Taking Office, Remigrate Illegal Aliens" . News18 . September 16, 2024. ^ Mathias, Christopher (September 20, 2024). "Trump's Alarming Use Of A Word With A Deep Fascist History" . HuffPost . Archived from the original on September 20, 2024 . Retrieved September 20, 2024 . ^ Kabas, Marisa . "State Department set to launch 'Office of Remigration' " .

The Handbasket . Retrieved May 29, 2025 . ^ Gilbert, David (May 29, 2025). "The Trump Administration Wants to Create an 'Office of Remigration' to Kick Immigrants Out of the Country" . Wired . Retrieved May 30, 2025 . ^ "State Department Restructuring Memo. Congressional Note 25-032" . archive.org . 2025. ^ " 'America was invaded': Donald Trump pushes for 'remigration'; slams Biden, Newsom" . Times of India . June 18, 2025. ^ " 'It's Called REMIGRATION!' Trump Celebrates 'Largest Mass Deportation' in History for 'July 4th Weekend' ICE Post" . Mediaite . July 5, 2025. ^ "Stephen Miller meeting with ICE officials was the spark for LA protests and National Guard call-up: report" .

The Independent . June 10, 2025. ^ "Nationwide Outrage: DHS Under Fire for "Remigrate" Tweet as Anti-Authoritarian Protests Grow" . Country Herald . October 14, 2025. ^ Savage, Rachel; Smith, David (May 12, 2025). "First group of white South Africans arrive in US after Trump grants refugee status" .

The Guardian . Retrieved May 12, 2025 . ^ "Watch moment Trump ambushes Ramaphosa with video" . BBC News . May 21, 2025 . Retrieved May 21, 2025 . ^ a b Wyatt-Nichol, Heather (November 21, 2025), "Political Attacks on the Lgbtqia+ Community" , LGBTQIA+ Communities, Pandemics, and Policy Responses , New York: Routledge, pp. 23– 41, doi : 10.4324/9781003566687-4 , ISBN 978-1-003-56668-7 , retrieved May 9, 2026 , This chapter explores the sociopolitical contestation of power in the fight for LGBTQIA+ rights by examining the rightward shift in the Republican Party and its use of anti-LGBTQIA+ tropes during pandemics, and as a political wedge strategy that contributes to the polarization of Americans. ^ Li, Anne (March 9, 2016). " 'Religious Liberty' Has Replaced 'Gay Marriage' In GOP Talking Points" . FiveThirtyEight . Archived from the original on August 14, 2022 . Retrieved August 13, 2022 . ^ a b Lerer, Lisa; Russonello, Giovanni; Paz, Isabella Grullón (June 17, 2020). "On L.G.B.T.Q. Rights, a Gulf Between Trump and Many Republican Voters" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on June 17, 2020 . Retrieved June 8, 2021 . ^ Dao, James (November 4, 2004). "Same-Sex Marriage Issue Key to Some G.O.P. Races" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on August 12, 2019 . Retrieved August 25, 2019 . ^ "Bush calls for ban on same-sex marriages" . CNN . February 25, 2004. Archived from the original on May 15, 2009 . Retrieved February 3, 2016 . ^ "Bush urges federal marriage amendment" . NBC News . June 6, 2006. Archived from the original on April 8, 2016 . Retrieved February 3, 2016 . ^ Stout, David (February 24, 2004). "Bush Backs Ban in Constitution on Gay Marriage" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on December 17, 2018 . Retrieved December 17, 2018 . ^ Murray, Shailagh (June 8, 2006). "Gay Marriage Amendment Fails in Senate" .

The Washington Post and Times-Herald . ISSN 0190-8286 . Archived from the original on March 8, 2019 . Retrieved December 17, 2018 . ^ "Constitutional Amendment on Marriage Fails" . Fox News . March 25, 2015. Archived from the original on December 17, 2018 . Retrieved December 17, 2018 . ^ Jones, Robert P.; Cox, Daniel; Navarro-Rivera, Juhem (February 26, 2014). "A Shifting Landscape" (PDF) . Public Religion Research Institute . Archived from the original (PDF) on April 17, 2016 . Retrieved December 27, 2016 . ^ Terkel, Amanda (May 5, 2014). "Anti-Gay Stance Still Enshrined In Majority Of State GOP Platforms" . HuffPost . Archived from the original on August 24, 2019 . Retrieved August 24, 2019 . ^ Drabold, Will (July 18, 2016). "Read the Republican Platform on Same-Sex Marriage, Guns and Wall Street" . Time . Archived from the original on August 4, 2019 . Retrieved August 24, 2019 . ^ "The 2016 Republican Party Platform" . GOP . July 18, 2016. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021 . Retrieved February 1, 2020 . ^ Orr, Gabby (June 11, 2020). "Republicans across the spectrum slam RNC's decision to keep 2016 platform" . Politico . Archived from the original on August 2, 2020 . Retrieved June 12, 2020 . ^ Kilgore, Ed (June 11, 2020). "Republicans Will Just Recycle Their 2016 Party Platform" . New York Intelligencer . Archived from the original on July 30, 2020 . Retrieved June 12, 2020 . ^ Epstein, Reid J.; Karni, Annie (June 11, 2020). "G.O.P. Platform, Rolled Over From 2016, Condemns the 'Current President' " .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on June 11, 2020 . Retrieved June 12, 2020 . ^ de Vogue, Ariane (November 14, 2016). "Trump: Same-sex marriage is 'settled,' but Roe v Wade can be changed" . CNN . Archived from the original on May 11, 2019 . Retrieved May 11, 2019 . ^ Fadulu, Lola; Flanagan, Annie (December 6, 2019). "Trump's Rollback of Transgender Rights Extends Through Entire Government" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on August 24, 2019 . Retrieved August 24, 2019 . ^ Fisher, Marc (August 28, 2012). "GOP platform through the years shows party's shift from moderate to conservative" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. ^ Mellnik, Ted; Alcantara, Chris; Uhrmacher, Kevin (July 15, 2016). "What Republicans and Democrats have disagreed on, from 1856 to today" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on November 14, 2017. ^ "Republican Party Platforms: Republican Party Platform of 1992" . Presidency.ucsb.edu . August 17, 1992. Archived from the original on February 4, 2017 . Retrieved December 27, 2016 . ^ "Layout 1" (PDF) . Gop.com . Archived (PDF) from the original on July 30, 2014 . Retrieved December 27, 2016 . ^ "Republican Party Platforms: 2008 Republican Party Platform" . Presidency.ucsb.edu . Archived from the original on January 28, 2017 . Retrieved December 27, 2016 . ^ "Republican Party Platform" . GOP . Archived from the original on November 23, 2019 . Retrieved December 29, 2019 . ^ "Republican Platform 2016" (PDF) . GOP.com . 2016. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 3, 2017 . Retrieved December 29, 2019 . ^ a b Astor, Maggie (January 25, 2023). "G.O.P. State Lawmakers Push a Growing Wave of Anti-Transgender Bills" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on June 15, 2023 . Retrieved June 12, 2023 . ^ Gabriel, Trip (July 22, 2022). "After Roe, Republicans Sharpen Attacks on Gay and Transgender Rights" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 30, 2024 . Funakoshi, Minami (August 19, 2023). "The rise of anti-trans bills in the US" . Reuters . Retrieved September 30, 2024 . Clare Foran, Shawna Mizelle (April 20, 2023). "CNN" . CNN . Retrieved September 30, 2024 . "1A Remaking America: Why The GOP Has Rallied Behind Anti-Trans Legislation : 1A" . NPR . June 2, 2022 . Retrieved September 30, 2024 . "From drag bans to sports restrictions, 75 anti-LGBTQ bills have become law in 2023" . NBC News . December 17, 2023 . Retrieved September 30, 2024 . Schoenbaum, Hannah (January 7, 2023). "Republican states aim to restrict transgender health care in first bills of 2023" . PBS News . Retrieved September 30, 2024 . ^ "2024 Republican Party Platform | The American Presidency Project" . www.presidency.ucsb.edu . Retrieved July 3, 2026 . ^ "Four in Five Americans Support Voter ID Laws, Early Voting" . Gallup.com . August 22, 2016. Archived from the original on April 6, 2021 . Retrieved April 7, 2021 . ^ Rakich, Nathaniel (April 2, 2021). "Americans Oppose Many Voting Restrictions — But Not Voter ID Laws" . FiveThirtyEight . Archived from the original on April 6, 2021 . Retrieved April 7, 2021 . ^ Vasilogambros, Matt (February 5, 2021). "Republicans Target Ballot Access After Record Turnout" . Stateline . Pew Trusts. Archived from the original on April 25, 2021 . Retrieved April 25, 2021 . ^ Bump, Philip (October 13, 2014). "The disconnect between voter ID laws and voter fraud" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved July 26, 2016 . Levitt, Justin (August 6, 2014). "A comprehensive investigation of voter impersonation finds 31 credible incidents out of one billion ballots cast" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on October 28, 2019. ^ a b c Hakim, Danny; Wines, Michael (November 3, 2018). " 'They Don't Really Want Us to Vote': How Republicans Made it Harder" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on November 4, 2018 . Retrieved November 4, 2018 . ^ a b "The big conservative lie on 'voter fraud' " .

The Week . October 23, 2018. Archived from the original on December 28, 2018 . Retrieved December 27, 2018 . ^ Mali, Meghashyam (July 19, 2016). "GOP platform calls for tough voter ID laws" .

The Hill . Archived from the original on April 18, 2021 . Retrieved April 7, 2021 . ^ Wines, Michael (February 27, 2021). "In Statehouses, Stolen-Election Myth Fuels a G.O.P. Drive to Rewrite Rules" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. ^ Mena, Kelly (February 2, 2021). "More than 100 bills that would restrict voting are moving through state legislatures" . CNN . Archived from the original on February 3, 2021 . Retrieved February 3, 2021 . ^ a b Gardner, Amy (March 26, 2021). "After Trump tried to intervene in the 2020 vote, state Republicans are moving to take more control of elections" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on June 14, 2022 . Retrieved April 7, 2021 . ^ "State Voting Bills Tracker 2021" . Brennan Center for Justice . February 24, 2021. Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. ^ Corisaniti, Nick; Epstein, Reid J. (March 23, 2021). "G.O.P. and Allies Draft 'Best Practices' for Restricting Voting" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. ^ Corasaniti, Nick (March 24, 2021). "Republicans Aim to Seize More Power Over How Elections Are Run" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. Kalmbacher, Colin (May 26, 2021). "Arizona GOP Bill Would Allow GOP-Controlled State Legislature to Strip Key Election Powers from Democratic Secretary of State" . Law & Crime . Archived from the original on May 31, 2021 . Retrieved October 20, 2022 . Gardner, Amy (May 29, 2021). "Texas Republicans finalize bill that would enact stiff new voting restrictions and make it easier to overturn election results" .

The Southern Strategy Revisited: Republican Top-Down Advancement in the South (1996). Bauman, Dan, and Brock Read. "A Brief History of GOP Attempts to Kill the Education Dept" Chronicle of Higher Education (June 21, 2018) Black, Earl, and Merle Black.

The Rise of Southern Republicans (2002). Bowen, Michael, The Roots of Modern Conservatism: Dewey, Taft, and the Battle for the Soul of the Republican Party. (U of North Carolina Press, 2011). xii, 254pp. Brennan, Mary C. Turning Right in the Sixties: The Conservative Capture of the GOP (1995). Conger, Kimberly H.

The Christian Right in Republican State Politics (2010) 202 pages; focuses on Arizona, Indiana, and Missouri. Crane, Michael.

The Political Junkie Handbook: The Definitive Reference Books on Politics (2004) covers all the major issues explaining the parties' positions. Critchlow, Donald T.

The Conservative Ascendancy: How the Republican Right Rose to Power in Modern America (2nd ed. 2011). Ehrman, John, The Eighties: America in the Age of Reagan (2005). Fauntroy, Michael K. Republicans and the Black vote (2007). Fried, J (2008). Democrats and Republicans – Rhetoric and Reality . New York: Algora Publishing. Frank, Thomas. What's the Matter with Kansas? How Conservatives Won the Heart of America (2005). Frum, David. What's Right: The New Conservative Majority and the Remaking of America (1996). Gould, Lewis L.

The Republicans : A History of the Grand Old Party (2nd ed, 2014); First edition 2003 was entitled: Grand Old Party: A History of the Republicans online ; the standard scholarly history Hemmer, Nicole. Partisans: The Conservative Revolutionaries Who Remade American Politics in the 1990s (2022) Judis, John B. and Ruy Teixeira .

The Emerging Democratic Majority (2004), two Democrats project social trends. Kabaservice, Geoffrey. Rule and Ruin: The Downfall of Moderation and the Destruction of the Republican Party, From Eisenhower to the Tea Party (2012) scholarly history ISBN 978-0199768400 . Kleppner, Paul, et al.

The Evolution of American Electoral Systems (1983), applies the party systems model. Kurian, George Thomas ed.

The Encyclopedia of the Republican Party (4 vol., 2002). Lamis, Alexander P. ed. Southern Politics in the 1990s (1999). Levendusky, Matthew.

The Partisan Sort: How Liberals Became Democrats and Conservatives Became Republicans (2009). Chicago Studies in American Politics. Mason, Robert.

The Republican Party and American Politics from Hoover to Reagan (2011). Mason, Robert and Morgan, Iwan (eds.) Seeking a New Majority: The Republican Party and American Politics, 1960–1980. (2013) Nashville, TN. Vanderbilt University Press. 2013. Mayer, George H.

The Republican Party, 1854–1966. 2d ed. (1967); an older standard scholarly history; online McPherson, James M. (1988). Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era . Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195038637 . Oakes, James.

The Crooked Path to Abolition: Abraham Lincoln and the Antislavery Constitution (W.W. Norton, 2021). Perlstein, Rick .

Before the Storm: Barry Goldwater and the Unmaking of the American Consensus (2002), broad account of 1964. Perlstein, Rick. Nixonland: The Rise of a President and the Fracturing of America (2009). Reinhard, David W.

The Republican Right since 1945 (1983). Ruffini, Patrick. Party of the people: Inside the multiracial populist coalition remaking the GOP (2023) online Rutland, Robert Allen.

The Republicans: From Lincoln to Bush (1996), popular history online Sabato, Larry J. Divided States of America: The Slash and Burn Politics of the 2004 Presidential Election (2005). Sabato, Larry J. and Bruce Larson.

The Party's Just Begun: Shaping Political Parties for America's Future (2001), textbook. Schlesinger, Arthur Meier Jr. ed. History of American Presidential Elections, 1789–2000 (various multivolume editions, latest is 2001). Essays on the most important election are reprinted in Schlesinger, The Coming to Power: Critical presidential elections in American history (1972). online editions Shafer, Byron E. and Anthony J. Badger, eds. Contesting Democracy: Substance and Structure in American Political History, 1775–2000 (2001), essays by specialists on each time period: includes: "To One or Another of These Parties Every Man Belongs": 1820–1865 by Joel H. Silbey ; "Change and Continuity in the Party Period: 1835–1885" by Michael F. Holt; "The Transformation of American Politics: 1865–1910" by Peter H. Argersinger; "Democracy, Republicanism, and Efficiency: 1885–1930" by Richard Jensen; "The Limits of Federal Power and Social Policy: 1910–1955" by Anthony J. Badger; "The Rise of Rights and Rights Consciousness: 1930–1980" by James T. Patterson; and "Economic Growth, Issue Evolution, and Divided Government: 1955–2000" by Byron E. Shafer. Shafer, Byron, and Richard Johnston.

The End of Southern Exceptionalism (2006), uses statistical election data and polls to argue that GOP growth was primarily a response to economic change. Steely, Mel.

The Gentleman from Georgia: The Biography of Newt Gingrich Mercer University Press, 2000. ISBN 0865546711 . Sundquist, James L. Dynamics of the Party System: Alignment and Realignment of Political Parties in the United States (1983). Wooldridge, Adrian and John Micklethwait.