The fighting has caused hundreds of thousands of military casualties and tens of thousands of Ukrainian civilian casualties .

As of July 2026, Russian troops occupy roughly 20% of Ukraine .

From a population of 41 million, about 8 million Ukrainians have been internally displaced and 6–7 million have fled the country , creating Europe's largest refugee crisis since World War II.

In late 2021, Russia massed troops near Ukraine's borders and issued demands to the West , including a ban on Ukraine ever joining NATO .

After repeatedly denying having plans to attack Ukraine, on 24 February 2022, Russian president Vladimir Putin announced a " special military operation ," saying it was to support the Russian-backed breakaway republics of Donetsk and Luhansk , whose paramilitary forces had been fighting Ukraine in the Donbas war since 2014. Putin espoused irredentist and imperialist views challenging Ukraine's legitimacy as a state . He claimed without evidence that the Ukrainian government were neo-Nazis committing genocide against the Russian minority in the Donbas and that Russia's goal was to "demilitarise and denazify" Ukraine. Russian air strikes and a ground invasion were launched on a northern front from Belarus towards the capital, Kyiv ; a southern front from occupied Crimea ; and an eastern front from the Donbas towards Kharkiv . Ukraine enacted martial law , ordered a general mobilisation , and severed diplomatic relations with Russia . Russian troops retreated from the north and the outskirts of Kyiv by April 2022, after encountering stiff resistance and logistical challenges.

The Bucha massacre was uncovered after their withdrawal. Russia launched an offensive in the Donbas and captured Mariupol after a destructive siege . Russia continued to bomb military and civilian targets far from the front and struck Ukraine's energy grid during winter months.

In late 2022, Ukraine launched successful counteroffensives in the south and east , liberating most of Kharkiv Oblast . Soon after, Russia illegally annexed four partly occupied provinces .

In November, Ukraine liberated the city of Kherson and all land west of the Dnipro River .

After small but steady Russian advances in the east in the first half of 2024, Ukraine launched a cross-border offensive into Russia's Kursk Oblast in August, where North Korean soldiers were sent to help Russia.

The United Nations Human Rights Office reports that Russia is committing severe human rights violations in occupied Ukraine. Russia's attacks on civilians , as well as its policies in occupied territories, have led to allegations of genocide .

The direct cost of the war for Russia has been estimated as over US$450 billion, while the World Bank Group estimates the cost of reconstruction in Ukraine at US$588 billion.

The Russian invasion was met with international condemnation . Many countries imposed sanctions on Russia and its ally Belarus while providing humanitarian and military aid to Ukraine. Protests occurred around the world. Within its borders, Russia met anti-war protesters with mass arrests and greater media censorship . War-related disruption to Ukrainian agriculture and shipping worsened the world food crisis ; war-related environmental damage was described as ecocide .

The International Criminal Court (ICC) opened an investigation into crimes against humanity , war crimes , abduction of Ukrainian children , and genocide against Ukrainians.

The ICC issued arrest warrants for Putin and five other Russian officials. Peace negotiations have stalled, and Russia has repeatedly refused calls for a ceasefire.

The Putin regime put pressure on Ukraine to reject the agreement and imposed economic sanctions on the country. Kremlin adviser Sergei Glazyev warned in September 2013 that if Ukraine signed the EU agreement, Russia would no longer acknowledge Ukraine's borders .

In November, Ukrainian president Yanukovych suddenly withdrew from signing the agreement, choosing closer ties to Russia instead. This coerced withdrawal sparked massive protests known as Euromaidan , culminating in the Revolution of Dignity in February 2014. Almost 100 protesters were killed by state forces, most of them shot by police snipers . Despite signing an agreement , Yanukovych secretly fled to Russia. Ukraine's parliament then voted to remove him and hold new elections , which elected Petro Poroshenko as President of Ukraine . Russian invasion of Crimea and Donbas Main articles: 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine , 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea , and War in Donbas Map of Russian-controlled territory in Ukraine, September 2014 On 27 February 2014, Russian soldiers with no insignia began to occupy the Ukrainian territory of Crimea, blockading Ukrainian military bases.

In March, Russia annexed Crimea following an illegitimate referendum held under occupation. It was the first time since World War II that a European country had annexed part of another, and several scholars likened it to Nazi Germany's annexation of Austria .

The UN General Assembly adopted a resolution affirming the "territorial integrity of Ukraine" and rejecting the annexation. NATO also suspended cooperation with Russia . Putin said Crimea should never have been part of an independent Ukraine and claimed that Russia did not want to take any other regions of Ukraine. Pro-Russian protests followed in the Ukrainian cities of Donetsk and Luhansk , covertly funded and organised by Russia.

In April 2014, armed Russian paramilitaries seized Sloviansk and other settlements, proclaiming the independent Donetsk People's Republic (DPR) and Luhansk People's Republic (LPR). Their commander, Igor Girkin , acknowledged that this sparked the War in Donbas , as Ukraine soon launched an operation to retake the territory. Russia covertly supported the separatists with troops, tanks and artillery.

The International Criminal Court judged that the war was a national and international armed conflict involving Russia, and the European Court of Human Rights judged that Russia controlled the DPR and LPR from 2014 onward. Ukraine's parliament declared the Donbas region to be occupied by Russia.

The annexation of Crimea and the Donbas war sparked a wave of Russian nationalism . Analyst Vladimir Socor called Putin's 2014 speech following the annexation a "manifesto of Greater Russia irredentism ." Putin began referring to " Novorossiya " (New Russia), a former Russian imperial territory that covered much of southern Ukraine. Russian-backed forces were influenced by Russian neo-imperialism and sought to create a new Novorossiya .

The Normandy Format meeting in December 2019 was the only meeting between Zelenskyy and Putin.

When the conflict began in 2014, Ukraine was officially neutral and said it was not seeking NATO membership.

Following Russia's occupation of Crimea and invasion of the Donbas , Ukraine's parliament voted in December 2014 to revoke the country's neutral status and seek NATO membership .

The Minsk agreements (September 2014 and February 2015) aimed to resolve the Donbas War, but ceasefires and further negotiations failed.

The West 's weak response to Russian actions led Putin to believe the West would not react strongly to the 2022 invasion. Several political scientists said this encouraged further Russian aggression. Prelude Main article: Prelude to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine Further information: Russian opposition to Ukrainian NATO membership and Disinformation in the Russian invasion of Ukraine Russian military buildup and demands Russian military build-up around Ukraine as of 3 December 2021 There was a Russian military build-up near Ukraine's borders in March and April 2021, and again in both Russia and Belarus from October 2021 onward. Russia said it was only holding military exercises . Members of its government, including Putin, repeatedly denied having plans to invade Ukraine, issuing denials up until the day before the invasion. Russia's proxy forces launched thousands of attacks on Ukrainian troops in the Donbas. Observers from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) reported more than 90,000 ceasefire violations throughout 2021, most in Russian-controlled territory.

In July 2021, Putin published " On the Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians ," in which he called Ukraine "historically Russian lands" and claimed there is "no historical basis" for the "idea of Ukrainian people as a nation separate from the Russians." Putin was accused of promoting Russian imperialism , historical revisionism, and disinformation. Meeting of the NATO-Russia Council on 12 January 2022 The December 2021 Russian ultimatum to NATO included demands that NATO end all activity in its Eastern European member states and ban Ukraine or any former Soviet state from ever joining the alliance. Russia's government said NATO was a threat and warned of a military response if it followed an "aggressive line." A US official said the US was willing to discuss the proposals, but there were some that "the Russians know are unacceptable" and had already been ruled out. NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg replied that "Russia has no veto" on whether Ukraine joins and "has no right to establish a sphere of influence to try to control their neighbours." NATO underlined that it is a defensive alliance and had co-operated with Russia until the Crimea annexation. Several Western political analysts suggested that Russia knew its "unrealistic demands" would be rejected, giving it a pretext to invade. No countries bordering Russia had joined NATO since 2004. Ukraine had not yet applied, and some NATO states would likely veto its membership. Analysts Taras Kuzio and Vladimir Socor agree that "when Russia made its decision to invade Ukraine, that country was more remote than ever not only from NATO membership but also from any track that might lead to membership." Political scientists Michael McFaul and Robert Person said Russia's occupation of Crimea and the Donbas had already blocked Ukraine's NATO membership; they suggested Putin's real aim was to subjugate Ukraine. NATO offered to negotiate some of Russia's demands and to improve military transparency , as long as Russia stopped its troop buildup.

The alliance rejected Russia's demand to keep Ukraine out of NATO forever, pointing out that Russia had signed agreements affirming the right of Ukraine and other countries to join alliances.

The US proposed that it and Russia sign an agreement not to station missiles or troops in Ukraine. Putin replied that Russia's demands had been "ignored," and the Russian troop buildup continued. Western leaders vowed heavy sanctions should Putin invade rather than negotiate. French president Emmanuel Macron and German chancellor Olaf Scholz met Putin in February 2022 to dissuade him from invading. Putin told Scholz that Ukraine should not be an independent state. Zelenskyy said Putin had broken agreements and could not be trusted to respect Ukrainian neutrality.

At the Munich Security Conference , Zelenskyy called for Western powers to end their " appeasement " of Putin and give a timeframe for when Ukraine could join NATO. Luhansk power station after being shelled by Russian-backed forces in the Donbas, 22 February 2022 Shortly before the invasion, Russia's proxy forces stepped up attacks on Ukrainian forces and civilians in the Donbas. Separatist leaders warned that Ukraine was about to launch an offensive, but they gave no evidence, and The Guardian noted it would be "exceedingly risky" for Ukraine to assault the Donbas while Russian troops were massed on its borders. Ukraine and Western leaders accused Russia of staging false-flag attacks and trying to provoke retaliation to give Russia a pretext for invading.

On 17 February, Russian proxy forces shelled a kindergarten in Ukrainian-held territory, then blamed it on Ukraine. Zelenskyy said his military would not respond to the provocations. Invasion plans The Royal United Services Institute reported that Russia's plan involved defeating Ukraine within ten days and capturing or killing its government, followed by "mopping up" operations ; establishing filtration camps for Ukrainians ; setting up occupation regimes; executing people involved in the Revolution of Dignity; and annexation.

The decision to invade was reportedly made by Putin and a small group of war hawks or siloviki in Putin's inner circle, including national security adviser Nikolai Patrushev and defence minister Sergei Shoigu .

After the invasion began, Ukrainian and Western analysts assessed that Putin seemed to have believed the Russian military could seize Kyiv within days. This assessment led to the conclusion that "taking Kyiv in three days" had been the original goal of the invasion. Putin's invasion announcement Main article: Putin's invasion of Ukraine speech Putin's address to the nation on 24 February 2022. Minutes after Putin's announcement, the invasion began.

On 21 February, Putin announced the formal recognition of the independence of the Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People's Republic by Russia.

The following day, Russia announced that it was sending troops into the territories as "peacekeepers", and the Federation Council of Russia authorised the use of military force abroad.

Before 5 a.m. Kyiv time on 24 February, Putin, in another speech , announced a " special military operation ," which effectively declared war on Ukraine. Putin said the operation was to "protect the people" of the Russian-controlled breakaway republics. He baselessly claimed that Russians in the Donbas had "been facing humiliation and genocide perpetrated by the Kyiv regime" for 8 years. Putin said Russia was being threatened: he baselessly claimed that Ukrainian officials were neo-Nazis under Western control, that Ukraine was developing nuclear weapons, and that a hostile NATO was building up its forces and infrastructure in Ukraine. He said Russia sought the "demilitarisation and denazification" of Ukraine and denied the legitimacy of the Ukrainian state. Putin said he had no plans to occupy Ukraine.

The invasion began within minutes of Putin's speech. Events For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the Russo-Ukrainian war (2022–present) . For a more comprehensive list, see List of military engagements during the Russo-Ukrainian war (2022–present) . Russian troops in Ukraine early in the 2022 invasion The invasion began at dawn on 24 February. It was the biggest attack on a European country and the first full-scale war in Europe since World War II. Russia launched a simultaneous ground and air attack. Missiles struck targets throughout Ukraine, and Russian troops invaded from the north, east, and south. Russia did not officially declare war. Immediately after the invasion began, Zelenskyy declared martial law in Ukraine in a video speech.

The same evening, he ordered a general mobilisation of all Ukrainian males aged 18–60, prohibiting them from leaving the country. Wreckage of a destroyed Russian column on 27 February in Bucha The first stage of the invasion was conducted on four fronts: one towards western Kyiv from Belarus by the Russian Eastern Military District ; one deployed towards eastern Kyiv by the Central Military District (northeastern front), comprising the 41st Combined Arms Army and the 2nd Guards Combined Arms Army , one deployed towards Kharkiv; and a fourth, southern front originating in Crimea and Russia's Rostov oblast with an eastern axis towards Odesa and a western area of operations toward Mariupol .

The invasion was unexpectedly met by fierce resistance. Russia failed to take Kyiv and was repulsed in the battles of Irpin , Hostomel , and Bucha .

The Russians tried to encircle the capital, but defenders under Oleksandr Syrskyi held their ground, using anti-tank and anti-aircraft missiles to thin Russian supply lines and stall the offensive.

By 7 April, Russian troops deployed to the northern front pulled back to resupply and redeploy to the Donbas.

The northeastern front was similarly withdrawn for redeployment to southeastern Ukraine.

On 26 April, delegates from the US and 40 allied nations met in Germany to discuss a coalition to provide economic support, military supplies, and refitting to Ukraine. Initial invasion (24 February – 7 April 2022) Main article: 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine Animated map of the Russian invasion from 24 February to 7 April 2022 The invasion began on 24 February, launched out of Belarus to target Kyiv and from the northeast against the city of Kharkiv.

The southeastern front was conducted as two separate spearheads, from Crimea and the southeast against Luhansk and Donetsk. Kyiv and northern front Further information: Capture of Chernobyl , Battle of Kyiv (2022) , Bucha massacre , Siege of Chernihiv , Battle of Sumy , and Russian occupation of Sumy Oblast The Antonov An-225 Mriya , the largest aircraft ever built, was destroyed during the Battle of Antonov Airport . Russian troops tried to seize Kyiv quickly with a spearhead on 24 February, from Belarus south along the west bank of the Dnipro River , with Spetsnaz infiltrating into the city, supported by airborne operations and a rapid mechanised advance from the north, but failed.

The apparent intent was to encircle the city from the west, supported by two separate axes of attack along the east bank of the Dnipro: the western at Chernihiv and from the east at Sumy . Russian forces advanced into Chernihiv Oblast on 24 February, besieging its administrative capital within four days of fighting . Travelling along highways, Russian forces reached Brovary , an eastern suburb of Kyiv, on 4 March.

The US contacted Zelenskyy and offered to help him flee, lest the Russian army attempt to kidnap or kill him; Zelenskyy responded that "The fight is here; I need ammunition, not a ride ." By early March, Russian advances along the west side of the Dnipro were limited by Ukrainian defences.

As of 5 March, a Russian convoy , reportedly 64 kilometres (40 mi) long, had made little progress toward Kyiv. Advances from Chernihiv largely halted as a siege began there . Russian forces advanced on Kyiv from the northwest, capturing Bucha , Hostomel and Vorzel by 5 March.

By 11 March, the lengthy convoy had largely dispersed and taken cover.

On 16 March, Ukrainian forces began a counter-offensive. Unable to achieve a quick victory in Kyiv, Russian forces switched to indiscriminate bombing and siege warfare.

On 25 March, a Ukrainian counteroffensive retook towns to the east and west of Kyiv. Russian troops in the Bucha area retreated north. Ukrainian forces entered the city on 1 April and recaptured the region around Kyiv and uncovered evidence of war crimes in Bucha .

The Pentagon confirmed on 6 April that the Russian army had left Chernihiv Oblast ; local authorities said Russian troops had left Sumy Oblast. NATO secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg said the Russian "retraction, resupply, and redeployment" of troops from the Kyiv area should be interpreted as an expansion of Putin's plans for concentrating his forces on eastern Ukraine. Southern and eastern front Further information: Siege of Mariupol , Odesa strikes (2022–present) , Battle of Kherson , Battle of Enerhodar , Battle of Kharkiv (2022) , Battle of Izium , Millerovo air base attack , Russian occupation of Kherson Oblast , Russian occupation of Zaporizhzhia Oblast , and Russian occupation of Kharkiv Oblast School of Economics of the National University of Kharkiv after Russian bombardment, 2 March 2022 On 24 February, Russian attack groups moved northwest from Crimea, capturing bridges over the Dnieper and the North Crimean Canal .

On 1 March, Kherson was the first major city to fall to Russia. Russian troops moved on Mykolaiv and attacked it but were repelled. Russian forces approached the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant and besieged Enerhodar .

By 25 February, Russian units had begun advancing on Mariupol . Russian forces captured Berdiansk .

On 1 March, Denis Pushilin , head of the DPR, announced that it had surrounded Volnovakha .

By 18 March, Mariupol was encircled and fighting had reached the city centre, hampering efforts to evacuate civilians.

The Russians demanded surrender, and the Ukrainians refused.

On 27 March, Ukrainian deputy prime minister Olha Stefanishyna said that "more than 85 percent of the whole town is destroyed". Russia refused safe passage into Mariupol to 50 buses sent by the UN to evacuate civilians.

In the east, Russian troops attempted to capture Kharkiv and met strong Ukrainian resistance. Izium was captured by Russian forces on 1 April after a monthlong battle.

On 25 March, the Russian defence ministry said it would seek to occupy major cities in eastern Ukraine.

On 3 April, following the retreat of Russian forces from Kyiv, Russia expanded its attack on southern Ukraine, with bombardment and strikes against Odesa, Mykolaiv, and the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant.

By 7 April, the renewed massing of Russian troops and tanks around Izium, Sloviansk , and Kramatorsk prompted Ukrainian officials to advise remaining residents near the eastern border to evacuate to western Ukraine. Southeastern front (8 April – 5 September 2022) For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the Russian invasion of Ukraine (8 April – 28 August 2022) . Animated map of the Russian invasion from 7 April to 5 September 2022 By 17 April, Russian progress on the southeastern front appeared impeded by Ukrainian forces in the large, heavily fortified Azovstal Iron and Steel Works and surrounding area in Mariupol.

On 19 April Russia launched an "eastern assault" across a 480-kilometre (300 mi) front extending from Kharkiv to Donetsk and Luhansk, with simultaneous missile attacks again directed at Kyiv and Lviv. An anonymous US defence official called the Russian offensive "minimal at best".

By 30 May, disparities between Russian and Ukrainian artillery were apparent, with Ukrainian artillery vastly outgunned.

In response to Biden's indication that enhanced artillery would be provided to Ukraine, Putin said Russia would expand its invasion to include new cities and ordered a missile strike against Kyiv on 6 June after not directly attacking it for weeks.

On 10 June, deputy head of the SBU Vadym Skibitsky stated that during the Sievierodonetsk campaign, the frontlines were where the future of the invasion would be decided: The chief spokesman for the Russian Ministry of Defence , Igor Konashenkov , revealed that Russian troops were divided between the army groups "Centre", commanded by Colonel General Aleksander Lapin , and "South", commanded by Army General Sergey Surovikin .

On 20 July, Lavrov announced that Russia would respond to the increased military aid being received by Ukraine from abroad by expanding its special military operation to Zaporizhzhia and Kherson oblasts. Russian Ground Forces started recruiting volunteer battalions to create a new 3rd Army Corps within the Western Military District, with a planned strength of 16,000–60,000 personnel. Its units were deployed to the front around the September Kharkiv counteroffensive , in time to join the Russian retreat.

The 3rd Army "melted away" according to Forbes , having little impact on the battlefield along with other irregular forces. Fall of Mariupol Further information: Siege of Mariupol On 13 April, Russian forces intensified their attack on the Azovstal Iron and Steel Works . Ukrainian prime minister Denys Shmyhal said Ukrainian soldiers had vowed to ignore the ultimatum to surrender and fight to the last.

On 20 April, Putin said the siege could be considered tactically complete, since the 500 Ukrainian troops entrenched in bunkers within the ironworks and estimated 1,000 civilians were sealed off from relief.

After meetings with Putin and Zelenskyy, UN secretary-general Guterres on 28 April said he would attempt to organise an evacuation from Azovstal in accordance with assurances from Putin.

On 30 April, Russian troops allowed civilians to leave under UN protection.

By 3 May, after allowing 100 civilians to depart, Russian troops renewed their bombardment.

On 6 May, The Daily Telegraph reported that Russia had used thermobaric bombs against the remaining soldiers. Zelenskyy authorised the commander of the steel factory to surrender as necessary.

On 7 May, all civilians were evacuated. A children's hospital in Mariupol after a Russian airstrike After the last civilians evacuated, 2,000 Ukrainian soldiers remained barricaded there; 700 were injured. They communicated a plea for a military corridor to evacuate, as they expected execution if they surrendered. Reports of dissent on 8 May indicated that the commander of the Ukrainian marines had made an unauthorised acquisition of tanks, munitions, and personnel, broke out from the position and fled.

The remaining soldiers spoke of a weakened defence as a result, which allowed progress to advancing Russian attacks. Ilia Somolienko , deputy commander of the remaining Ukrainian troops, said, "We are basically here, dead men. Most of us know this, and it's why we fight so fearlessly." On 16 May, the Ukrainian General Staff announced that the Mariupol garrison had "fulfilled its combat mission" and final evacuations had begun. 264 service members were evacuated to Olenivka under Russian control, while 53 who were seriously injured were taken to a hospital in Novoazovsk , controlled by Russia.

Following the evacuation, Russian and DPR forces fully controlled Mariupol. Russia press secretary Dmitry Peskov said Putin had guaranteed that the fighters who surrendered would be treated "in accordance with international standards," while Zelenskyy said that "the work of bringing the boys home continues..." Fall of Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk Main article: Battle of Donbas (2022) Further information: Battle of Popasna , Kramatorsk railway station attack , Battle of Sievierodonetsk (2022) , and Battle of Lysychansk Aftermath of the Kramatorsk railway station attack by Russia, which killed 63 civilians On 11 April, Zelenskyy said Ukraine expected a new Russian offensive in the east. American officials said Russia had withdrawn or been repulsed elsewhere and was preparing a retraction, resupply, and redeployment to the southeastern Ukraine front. Military satellites photographed Russian convoys of infantry and mechanised units deploying south from Kharkiv to Izium on 11 April, apparently part of the planned Russian redeployment.

On 18 April, with Mariupol overtaken by Russian forces, the Ukrainian government announced that the second phase of the reinforced invasion of the Donetsk, Luhansk and Kharkiv oblasts had intensified with expanded invasion forces occupying the Donbas.

On 22 May, the BBC reported that after the fall of Mariupol, Russia had intensified offensives in Luhansk and Donetsk while concentrating missile attacks and intense artillery fire on Sievierodonetsk, the largest city under Ukrainian control in Luhansk Oblast.

On 23 May, Russian forces were reported entering Lyman , capturing the city by 26 May. Ukrainian forces were reported leaving Sviatohirsk .

By 24 May, Russian forces captured Svitlodarsk .

On 30 May, Reuters reported that Russian troops had breached the outskirts of Sievierodonetsk.

By 2 June, The Washington Post reported that Sievierodonetsk was on the brink of capitulation with over 80% in the hands of Russian troops.

On 3 June, Ukrainian forces reportedly began a counter-attack in Sievierodonetsk.

By 4 June, Ukrainian government sources claimed 20% or more of the city had been recaptured. Russian tanks at a pontoon crossing over the Seversky Donets River, 9 April 2022 Ukrainian authorities estimated that 800 Ukrainian civilians were besieged at the Azot chemical factory in Sievierodonetsk; Russian-backed separatists said it sheltered 300–400 soldiers. With the Ukrainian defences of Sievierodonetsk faltering, Russian troops began intensifying their attack on the neighbouring city of Lysychansk .

On 20 June it was reported that Russian troops continued to tighten their grip on Sievierodonetsk by capturing surrounding villages.

On 24 June, CNN reported that, amid scorched-earth tactics by advancing Russian troops, Ukraine's armed forces were ordered to evacuate Sievierodonetsk; several hundred civilians taking refuge in the Azot chemical plant were left behind, with some comparing their plight to those in Mariupol.

On 3 July, the Russian defence ministry claimed Lysychansk had been captured and occupied.

On 2 May, the UN, reportedly with the cooperation of Russian troops, evacuated about 100 survivors from the siege of Mariupol.

On 28 June, Reuters reported that a Russian missile attack on Kremenchuk , detonated in a mall, had killed at least 18. France's Macron called it a " war crime ." The president of the Ukrainian nuclear agency Energoatom called the situation at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant "extremely tense," saying that it was being operated by Ukrainian staff but controlled by up to 500 Russian soldiers, with Russia shelling nearby areas and storing weapons at the plant. Russia agreed on 19 August to allow IAEA inspectors access to the plant after a call from Macron to Putin.

As of July 2023, access to the plant remained limited. Ukrainian civilians killed by the Russian Armed Forces during the Zaporizhzhia civilian convoy attack in September 2022 Russia reported that 12 attacks with explosions from 50 artillery shells had been recorded by 18 August at the plant and the company town of Enerhodar . Tobias Ellwood , chair of the UK's Defence Select Committee , and US congressman Adam Kinzinger said that radiation leaks would be a breach of the North Atlantic Treaty , under which an attack on a member of NATO is an attack on them all. Russian annexations and occupation losses (6 September – 11 November 2022) For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the Russian invasion of Ukraine (29 August – 11 November 2022) . Animated map of the Russian invasion from 5 September 2022 to 11 November 2022 On 6 September 2022, Ukrainian forces launched a surprise counteroffensive in the Kharkiv region , beginning near Balakliia , led by General Syrskyi . An emboldened Kyiv launched a counteroffensive 12 September around Kharkiv, successful enough to make Russia admit losing key positions and for The New York Times to say that it dented the image of a "Mighty Putin." Kyiv sought more arms from the West to sustain the counteroffensive.

On 21 September 2022, Vladimir Putin announced a partial mobilisation , and Minister of Defence Sergei Shoigu said 300,000 reservists would be called. He also said that his country would use "all means" to "defend itself." Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to Zelenskyy, said that the decision was predictable and that it was an attempt to justify "Russia's failures." British Foreign Office Minister Gillian Keegan called the situation an "escalation," while former Mongolian president Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj accused Russia of using Russian Mongols as "cannon fodder." Russian annexation of Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhia oblasts Main article: Russian annexation of Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhia oblasts In late September 2022, Russian-installed officials in Ukraine organised referendums on the annexation of the Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic, as well as the Russian-appointed military administrations of Kherson Oblast and Zaporizhzhia Oblast. Denounced by Ukraine's government and allies as sham elections , official results showed overwhelming majorities in favour of annexation.

On 30 September 2022, Vladimir Putin announced the annexation of Ukraine's Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson, and Zaporizhzhia oblasts. Ukraine, the United States, the European Union, and the United Nations all denounced the annexation as illegal. Kherson counteroffensive Main articles: 2022 Kherson counteroffensive and Liberation of Kherson Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy , participating in reraising the Ukrainian flag in Kherson a few days after the city's liberation On 29 August, Zelenskyy announced the start of a full-scale counteroffensive in the southeast to retake Russian-occupied territory in the Kherson and Mykolaiv regions.

By 4 September, Ukrainian forces had retaken the village of Vysokopillia . Ukrainian attacks also continued along the southern frontline, though reports about territorial changes were largely unverifiable.

In October, Ukrainian forces pushed further south towards the city of Kherson, taking control of 1,170 square kilometres (450 sq mi), with fighting extending to Dudchany .

On 9 November, defence minister Shoigu ordered Russian forces to leave part of Kherson Oblast, including the city of Kherson , and move to the eastern bank of the Dnieper.

On 11 November, Ukrainian troops entered Kherson as Russia completed its withdrawal. This meant that Russian forces no longer had a foothold on the west bank of the Dnieper. Kharkiv counteroffensive Main article: 2022 Kharkiv counteroffensive Retained by Ukraine Retaken by Ukraine Occupied by Russia Map of the Kharkiv front as of 19 July 2026 Ukrainian forces launched another surprise counteroffensive on 6 September in the Kharkiv Oblast near Balakliia led by General Syrskyi.

By 7 September, Ukrainian forces had advanced 20 kilometres (12 mi) into Russian-occupied territory and claimed to have recaptured approximately 400 square kilometres (150 sq mi). Russian commentators said this was likely due to the relocation of Russian forces to Kherson.

On 8 September, Ukrainian forces captured Balakliia and advanced to within 15 kilometres (9.3 mi) of Kupiansk . Military analysts said Ukrainian forces appeared to be moving towards Kupiansk, a major railway hub, with the aim of cutting off the Russian forces at Izium from the north.

On 9 September, the Russian occupation administration of Kharkiv Oblast announced it would "evacuate" the civilian populations of Izium, Kupiansk and Velykyi Burluk .

The Institute for the Study of War (ISW) said it believed Kupiansk would likely fall in the next 72 hours, while Russian reserve units were sent to the area by both road and helicopter.

On the morning of 10 September, photos emerged claiming to depict Ukrainian troops raising the Ukrainian flag in the centre of Kupiansk, and the ISW said Ukrainian forces had captured approximately 2,500 square kilometres (970 sq mi). Reuters reported that Russian positions in northeast Ukraine had "collapsed" in the face of the Ukrainian assault, with Russian forces forced to withdraw from their base at Izium after being cut off by the capture of Kupiansk.

By 15 September, an assessment by the UK Ministry of Defence confirmed that Russia had either lost or withdrawn from almost all of their positions west of the Oskil River , abandoning high-value military assets.

The offensive continued pushing east, and by 1 October, Ukrainian forces had liberated Lyman . Winter stalemate, attrition campaign and first military surge (12 November 2022 – 7 June 2023) Further information: Russian winter offensive in Ukraine (2022–2023) , Battle of Vuhledar , Battle of Marinka (2022–2023) , and Timeline of the Russian invasion of Ukraine (12 November 2022 – 7 June 2023) After the end of the twin Ukrainian counteroffensives, the fighting was semi-deadlocked during the winter, with heavy casualties but reduced motion of the frontline. Russia launched a self-proclaimed winter offensive in eastern Ukraine, but the campaign stalled with limited gains. Analysts blamed the failure on Russia's lack of "trained men" and supply problems with artillery ammunition, among other problems. Near the end of May, Mark Galeotti assessed that "after Russia's abortive and ill-conceived winter offensive, which squandered its opportunity to consolidate its forces, Ukraine is in a relatively strong position." On 7 February, The New York Times reported that Russians had newly mobilised nearly 200,000 soldiers to participate in the offensive in the Donbas.

The Russian private military company Wagner Group took on greater prominence in the war, leading "grinding advances" in Bakhmut with tens of thousands of recruits from prison battalions taking part in "near suicidal" assaults on Ukrainian positions.

In late January 2023, fighting intensified in southern Zaporizhzhia Oblast, with both sides suffering heavy casualties.

In nearby southern parts of Donetsk Oblast, an intense, three-week Russian assault near the coal-mining town of Vuhledar was called the largest tank battle of the war to date and ended in disaster for Russian forces, who lost "at least 130 tanks and armored personnel carriers," according to Ukrainian commanders.

The British Ministry of Defence stated that "a whole Russian brigade was effectively annihilated." In late 2022, as Russian casualties exceeded 50,000, the Russian army introduced barrier troops .

The UK defence ministry stated that these are units that threaten to shoot their own retreating soldiers to compel offensives.

In March 2023, Russian soldiers filmed a video addressed to Putin where they stated that after suffering casualties, they attempted to return to their headquarters, but their superiors denied them evacuation, and barrier troops were placed behind them, threatening to "destroy them".

In particular, Storm-Z units have been reported to be "kept in line" by barrier troops. Battle of Bakhmut Main article: Battle of Bakhmut View of western Bakhmut during the battle, 5 April 2023 Following defeat in Kherson and Kharkiv, Russian and Wagner forces focused on taking Bakhmut and breaking the half-year-long stalemate there since the start of the war. Russian forces sought to encircle the city, attacking from the north via Soledar .

After taking heavy casualties, Russian and Wagner forces took control of Soledar on 16 January 2023.

By early February 2023, Bakhmut was facing attacks from north, south, and east, with the sole Ukrainian supply lines coming from Chasiv Yar to the west.

On 4 March, Bakhmut's deputy mayor told news services that there was street fighting in the city.

On 20 May 2023, the Wagner Group claimed full control over Bakhmut, and a victory in the battle was officially declared by Russia the next day, following which Wagner forces retreated from the city and were replaced by regular Russian units. 2023 Ukrainian counteroffensives (8 June 2023 – 1 December 2023) For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the Russian invasion of Ukraine (8 June 2023 – 31 August 2023) and Timeline of the Russian invasion of Ukraine (1 September – 30 November 2023) . Further information: 2023 Ukrainian counteroffensive Flood in Kherson Oblast on 10 June 2023 caused by the destruction of the Kakhovka Dam 4 days earlier In June 2023, Ukrainian forces launched counteroffensives on multiple fronts. Efforts faced stiff Russian resistance.

By 12 June, Ukraine reported advances and liberated settlements.

On 24 June, the Wagner Group rebellion briefly unfolded before a peace deal.

In late June, Ukraine reclaimed territory in Donbas and made gains in Kherson Oblast. Russia heavily mined areas, making Ukraine the most mined country in the world.

Following Russia leaving the Black Sea Grain Initiative, Ukraine targeted Russian ships.

In September 2023, Russian strikes hit Ukrainian energy facilities.

The US announced sending long-range ATACMS missiles , and Ukraine struck the Sevastopol naval base.

In October–December 2023, Ukrainian forces crossed the Dnipro River despite heavy losses.

On 1 December 2023, Zelenskyy stated that the Ukrainian counter-offensive was unsuccessful.

In December 2023, media outlets described the Ukrainian counteroffensive as having failed to regain significant territory or meet any of its objectives. Battle of Avdiivka Main article: Battle of Avdiivka (2023–2024) For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the Russian invasion of Ukraine (1 December 2023 – 31 March 2024) . Residential buildings damaged by Russian strikes in Avdiivka during fighting over the city in May 2023 In October 2023, it was reported that there were growing mutinies among Russian troops due to the extensive losses in Russian offensives around Avdiivka , with a lack of artillery, food, and water being reported as well as poor command.

By November, British intelligence said that recent weeks had "likely seen some of the highest Russian casualty rates of the war so far." On 17 February 2024, Russia captured Avdiivka , a longtime stronghold for Ukraine that had been described as a "gateway" to nearby Donetsk . Described by Forbes journalist David Axe as a pyrrhic Russian victory, the Russian 2nd and 41st Combined Arms Armies ended up with 16,000 men killed, tens of thousands wounded, and around 700 vehicles lost. Ukraine's shortage of ammunition caused by political deadlock in the US Congress and a lack of production capacity in Europe contributed to the Ukrainian withdrawal from Avdiivka and was "being felt across the front," according to Time .

The White House said on 7 June that the offensive had stalled and was unlikely to advance further.

Following the battle of Avdiivka, Russian forces advanced northwest to form a salient, capturing Ocheretyne in late April. Russian forces also launched an offensive towards Chasiv Yar in early April, and by early July had captured its easternmost district. Another offensive towards Toretsk was launched on 18 June, with the goal of capturing the city, and according to Ukrainian military observer Nazar Voloshyn, flanking Chasiv Yar from the south. Russian forces expanded the salient northwest of Avdiivka in July, and, on 19 July 2024, made a breakthrough to advance towards the operationally significant city of Pokrovsk . Ukrainian offensive into Russia Main article: Kursk campaign Ukrainian soldiers in Kursk Oblast in August 2024 On 6 August 2024, Ukraine launched their first direct offensive into Russian territory, the largest of any pro-Ukrainian incursion since the invasion's inception, into the bordering Kursk Oblast .

The main axis of the initial advance centred in the direction of Sudzha , 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) from the border, which was reported by President Zelenskyy to have been captured on 15 August. Ukraine, taking advantage of the lack of experienced units and defences along the border with Kursk Oblast, quickly seized territory in the opening days of the incursion.

The incursion caused Russia to divert thousands of troops from occupied Ukrainian territory. Despite repeated deadlines set by Putin during 2024 to push out Ukrainian troops, Russian forces had not done so by the end of January 2025, with advances in Donetsk Oblast being prioritised over the Kursk salient. However, by the summer of 2025, Ukrainian forces had been mostly repelled from the area. Late 2024 – early 2026 Russian advances Main articles: Velyka Novosilka offensive , Battle of Kurakhove , Battle of Toretsk , Pokrovsk offensive , Kupiansk offensive , Battle of Chasiv Yar , and Middle strike campaign Destruction during the Battle of Chasiv Yar Use of Russian drones (unmanned aerial vehicles) increased about tenfold from early 2024 through summer 2025. Russian troops continued advancing in eastern Ukraine at a faster pace than prior to the Kursk offensive, including towards the operationally important city of Pokrovsk .

In late August 2024, Russian forces seized Novohrodivka , southeast of Pokrovsk, while capturing Krasnohorivka and Ukrainsk in early September.

In late September, a Russian assault on the long-held city of Vuhledar began ; after it fell on 1 October, the city with a pre-war population of about 14,000 was described as a "sprawling ruin." On 30 October 2024, Ukrainian Major General Dmytro Marchenko was reported to have said "our front has crumbled" due to a dwindling ammunition supply, problems with military recruitment, and poor leadership. He said Zelensky's victory plan was too heavily focused on Western support. Briefings from Western officials had also become more pessimistic. According to the Prosecutor General's Office, more than 100,000 criminal cases for desertion were initiated by the end of November 2024. Russian forces captured the city of Kurakhove in late December 2024 and the nearby Kurakhove Power Station in January 2025.

In early 2025, Russian forces advanced in eastern Ukraine, with Russia claiming to have captured Velyka Novosilka in January. Russia continued attacks on Ukrainian energy infrastructure.

In February 2025, Ukraine's government approved a one-year contract for volunteers aged 18–24 not subject to mobilisation .

By April 2025, Russian advances had slowed, according to Seth Jones from the Center for Strategic and International Studies . Russian attacks on civilians also intensified, with the month of June seeing the highest civilian casualty count in Ukraine since the start of the invasion, with 232 killed and 1,343 injured. Russia killed at least 21 civilians, including children, in the second-largest strike of the war overnight on 27 and 28 August, damaging European diplomatic facilities along with civilian infrastructure. Putin declared in March 2025 that "there are reasons to believe we can finish off Ukrainian forces," as a Russian summer offensive was expected. Russia planned to expand into Sumy and Kharkiv; however, the actual offensive was generally considered a failure with modest gains at the cost of heavy casualties.

By September 2025, Russian forces had not achieved any frontline breakthroughs, with key strategic objectives like Pokrovsk still held by Ukraine. Russia escalated attacks on Ukrainian energy infrastructure.

In response, Ukraine attacked Russian energy and logistical networks, including targeting oil facilities, causing a Russian fuel crisis .

During October and November 2025, Russian forces intensified operations around Pokrovsk. Russia advanced hundreds of square miles, applying pressure on Ukrainian defensive lines.

By late October, there was fighting within Pokrovsk city proper.

On 1 December, Russia claimed to have captured the city, although there were still Ukrainian forces in the northern portion. Russia reportedly fully captured Pokrovsk , Myrnohrad , and Huliaipole in early 2026.

In December 2025, following Russian claims of controlling Kupiansk, Zelenskyy visited the city. A Ukrainian commander stated that Russian troops there were surrounded.

The ISW reported that Russian ultranationalist milbloggers acknowledged the severity of the situation for Russian forces and that Russian claims of advances in the area were part of a cognitive warfare effort. Early 2026 saw Ukraine make its largest battlefield gains in over two and a half years (not counting the Kursk offensive): according to ISW data, it retook over 200 square kilometres (77 sq mi) between 11 and 15 February.

The advance coincided with the Russian military being blocked from using Starlink , causing communication issues compounded by the Russian government cutting access to Telegram. Despite this, Russia gained net territory in February. Western officials also said that for the first time since the invasion, Russia was suffering more losses than it was able to recruit new personnel.

In April 2026, the Unmanned Systems Forces of Ukraine launched the middle strike campaign against Russian-occupied territories , especially Crimea , with one-way attack drones .

In mid-May 2026, Russia's spring offensive was described as unsuccessful by battlefield experts and military analysts, with Ukraine regaining more territory than it had lost for the second time in the year.

The same month, Russia launched one of the largest combined aerial assaults of the war against Kyiv and other Ukrainian cities.

In Kyiv, a residential building was destroyed, killing 24. Battlespaces Further information: Northern front , Eastern front , and Southern front Command Further information: Russo-Ukrainian war (2022–present) order of battle Putin with Shoigu , Gerasimov , Belousov , Yevkurov and commanders of military districts of Russia on 15 May 2024 Ukrainian commanders Oleksandr Syrskyi and Valerii Zaluzhnyi Russia As head of state, Vladimir Putin is the supreme commander of Russia's armed forces. Putin has reportedly intervened in operational decisions, bypassing senior commanders and giving orders directly to brigade commanders. Additionally, during the initial period of the war Russian forces suffered from a lack of unified command, with leadership of the operation divided between the four military districts involved in it. According to US officials, the commander of the Russian Southern Military District, Aleksandr Dvornikov , was placed in overall command on 8 April 2022. Analysts of the OSINT organisation CIT speculated that Dvornikov had been replaced by Gennady Zhidko in late May 2022, with US officials quoted in The New York Times also speculating that he had "disappeared".

In October 2022 the Russian ministry of defence officially announced that Sergei Surovikin had been placed in charge of Russia's forces fighting in Ukraine; according to analyst John Hardie writing for the Long War Journal , Surovikin was "likely the operation's first true unified commander". Surovikin, whom Hardie described as "a competent commander", was replaced in January 2023 by Valery Gerasimov .

By September 2022, Ukrainian air forces had shot down about 55 Russian warplanes.

In mid-October, Russian forces launched missile strikes against Ukrainian infrastructure , intended to knock out energy facilities.

By late November, hundreds of civilians had been killed or wounded, and rolling blackouts had left millions without power.

In December 2022, drones launched from Ukraine allegedly carried out several attacks on Dyagilevo and Engels air bases in western Russia , killing 10 and heavily damaging two Tu-95 aircraft.

On 1 June 2025, Ukraine carried out " Operation Spiderweb ," targeting several air bases deep inside Russian territory using smuggled drones.

The operation was seen as successful, with Ukraine saying it had damaged or destroyed 41 high-value aircraft, including strategic bombers used to coordinate and launch attacks on Ukrainian cities. US officials assessed a lower number, saying that Ukraine had hit 20 planes, destroying 10.

The operation is estimated to have caused billions of dollars in damage to Russian aircraft. Crimea attacks Main article: Crimea attacks Smoke from the Ukrainian attack on Saky airbase , Crimea, 2022 On 31 July 2022, Russian Navy Day commemorations were cancelled after a drone attack reportedly wounded several people at the Russian Black Sea Fleet headquarters in Sevastopol.

On 9 August 2022, large explosions were reported at Saky Air Base in western Crimea. Satellite imagery showed at least eight aircraft damaged or destroyed. Ukrainian general Valerii Zaluzhnyi claimed responsibility on 7 September. A week later Russia blamed "sabotage" for explosions and a fire at an arms depot near Dzhankoi in northeastern Crimea that also damaged a railway line and power station. Russian regional head Sergei Aksyonov said that 2,000 people were evacuated from the area.

On 18 August, explosions were reported at Belbek Air Base north of Sevastopol.

On 8 October 2022 the Kerch Bridge , linking occupied Crimea to Russia, partially collapsed due to an explosion .

On 17 July 2023, there was another large explosion on the bridge.

On 3 June 2025, an attack with underwater explosives damaged the foundations of the bridge; traffic resumed within hours. Russian attacks against Ukrainian civilian infrastructure Main article: Russian strikes against Ukrainian infrastructure Further information: Russian attacks on civilians in the Russo-Ukrainian war (2022–present) Fires on a combined heat and power plant in Kyiv after Russian missile strikes on 10 October 2022 Since 2022, Russia has carried out strikes on Ukrainian electrical and water systems.

On 6 October 2022, the Ukrainian military reported that 86 Shahed 136 kamikaze drones had been launched by Russian forces, and between 30 September and 6 October, Ukrainian forces had destroyed 24 out of 46 launched.

On 8 October, it was announced that General of the Army Sergey Surovikin would be commanding all Russian forces on the strength of his novel air assault technique.

On 16 October, The Washington Post reported that Iran was planning to supply Russia with drones and missiles.

On 18 October, the US State Department accused Iran of violating Resolution 2231 by selling Shahed 131 and Shahed 136 drones to Russia, agreeing with France and the UK. Iran denied sending arms for the Ukraine war.

On 22 October, France, Britain, and Germany called for a UN investigation.

On 1 November, CNN reported that Iran was preparing to send ballistic missiles and other weapons to Russia for use in Ukraine.

On 15 November 2022, Russia fired 85 missiles at the Ukrainian power grid , causing power outages in Kyiv and neighbouring regions.

In March 2023, The New York Times reported that Russia had used new hypersonic missiles in a massive missile attack on Ukraine. Such missiles are more effective in evading conventional Ukrainian anti-missile defences.

The UK Defence Ministry said strikes against Ukrainian infrastructure are part of Russia's 'Strategic Operation for the Destruction of Critically Important Targets' (SODCIT) military doctrine, intended to demoralise the population and force the Ukrainian leadership to capitulate. According to the Royal United Services Institute , half of Ukraine's electricity production capacity had been destroyed.

On 8 July 2024, Russia used a Kh-101 missile to kill two and injure 16 at the Okhmatdyt Children's Hospital in Kyiv.

At least 20 civilians were killed in Kyiv that night.

In late 2024, Russia switched from attacking energy distribution infrastructure to striking power stations, affecting 15% of Ukraine's pre-war generating capacity.

From the summer of 2025, attacks switched back to infrastructure with a much greater number of drones and ballistic missiles. Strikes were also made on Ukrainian gas production, with 60% of its capacity destroyed in October 2025. Ukrainian attacks on Russian oil production In 2025, Ukraine intensified efforts to disrupt Russian oil production and export facilities, using drone and missile strikes assisted by Western targeting intelligence.

By late October 2025, an estimated 50% of Russia's 38 major refineries had been hit more than once.

The result has been an estimated drop in oil production of between 10 and 15%, leading to raised domestic fuel prices and shortages in some regions. Naval blockade and engagements Main article: Naval warfare in the Russo-Ukrainian war (2022–present) Commemorative stamp about the phrase Russian warship, go fuck yourself!

The Russian Black Sea flagship Moskva was sunk on 14 April 2022, reportedly after being hit by two Ukrainian Neptune anti-ship missiles .

On 28 February 2022, Turkey invoked the 1936 Montreux Convention and sealed off the Bosphorus and Dardanelles straits to Russian warships that were not registered to Black Sea home bases and returning to their ports of origin. It specifically denied passage to four Russian naval vessels.

On 24 February, the State Border Guard Service of Ukraine announced that Russian Navy ships had begun an attack on Snake Island .

The guided missile cruiser and flagship of the Black Sea Fleet , Moskva and patrol boat Vasily Bykov bombarded the island.

The Russian warship instructed the Ukrainians on the island to surrender. Their response was " Russian warship, go fuck yourself! " After the bombardment, Russian soldiers landed and took control of Snake Island . Russia said on 26 February that US drones had supplied intelligence to the Ukrainian navy to help it target Russian warships in the Black Sea.

By 3 March, Ukrainian forces in Mykolaiv scuttled the frigate Hetman Sahaidachny , the flagship of the Ukrainian navy, to prevent its capture.

On 24 March, Ukrainian officials said that a Russian landing ship docked in Berdiansk was destroyed by a Ukrainian rocket attack.

In March 2022, the UN International Maritime Organization (IMO) sought to create a safe sea corridor for commercial vessels to leave Ukrainian ports.

On 27 March, Russia established a sea corridor 80 miles (130 km) long and 3 miles (4.8 km) wide through its Maritime Exclusion Zone , for the transit of merchant vessels from the edge of Ukrainian territorial waters southeast of Odesa.

The Moskva was, according to Ukrainian sources and a US senior official, hit on 13 April by two Ukrainian Neptune anti-ship cruise missiles .

The Russian Defence Ministry said the warship had suffered serious damage from a munition explosion caused by a fire and that its crew had been evacuated. Pentagon spokesman John Kirby reported on 14 April that satellite images showed that the Russian warship had suffered a sizeable explosion onboard but was heading to the east for expected repairs in Sevastopol .

Later the same day, the Russian Ministry of Defence stated that the Moskva had sunk .

On 15 April, Reuters reported that Russia launched an apparent retaliatory missile strike against the missile factory Luch Design Bureau in Kyiv, where the Neptune missiles used in the Moskva attack were manufactured.

On 5 May, a US official confirmed that the US gave "a range of intelligence" to assist in the sinking.

On 1 June, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov asserted that Ukraine's policy of mining its own harbours to impede Russian maritime aggression had contributed to the food export crisis, saying: "If Kyiv solves the problem of demining ports, the Russian Navy will ensure the unimpeded passage of ships with grain to the Mediterranean Sea." On 23 July, CNBC reported a Russian missile strike on the Ukrainian port of Odesa, swiftly condemned by world leaders amid a recent UN- and Turkish-brokered deal to secure a sea corridor for exports of foodstuffs.

On 26 December 2023, Ukraine's air force attacked the Russian landing ship Novocherkassk docked in Feodosia . Ukraine said it was destroyed, a claim that independent analysts confirmed. Russian authorities claimed that two attacking aircraft were destroyed.

On 31 January 2024, Ukrainian sea drones struck the Russian Tarantul-class corvette Ivanovets in the Black Sea, causing the ship to sink.

The Russian soldiers' response to unarmed civilian resistance varied from reluctance to engage the protesters, to firing directly into crowds. To facilitate Ukrainian attacks, civilians reported Russian military positions via a Telegram chatbot and Diia , a Ukrainian government app.

As a reaction to Russia's recognition of the occupied Ukrainian territories in Donetsk and Luhansk , Germany suspended its certification of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline on 22 February 2022.

In September 2022 the inactive Nord Stream pipeline between Russia and Germany was sabotaged , destroying three of the four pipelines.

As of August 2025 , no party has claimed nor admitted responsibility, and investigations are ongoing. A Ukrainian national was arrested in August 2025 on suspicion of being involved.

As part of the economic sanctions against Russia for its war, the EU Commission has banned the use of the Nord Stream pipelines. Pipelines carrying natural gas and oil from Russia to Central Europe continued to operate during the war in a reduced manner. They have been attacked several times; in May 2025 both sides accused each other of attacking gas infrastructure in Russia's Kursk Oblast.

In August 2025 Ukraine repeatedly attacked pumping stations of Russia's Druzhba pipeline , interrupting oil supply to Hungary and Slovakia, while the same month a Russian attack on Ukrainian energy infrastructure left more than 100,000 households without electricity.

By 28 August 2025, Ukraine's campaign to strike at Russia's petroleum industry had hit ten oil refineries and was estimated by Reuters to have disrupted Russia's refinery capacity by at least 17% or 1.1 million barrels a day.

The effect was a fuel crisis in Crimea and both southern and far eastern regions with price surges and dry gas stations.

In September 2025 the International Energy Agency stated that Russia's revenues from oil product exports had in August declined to five-year lows, contributing to Russia's economic slowdown. Acknowledging Russia's strained energy system , President Vladimir Putin pointed to Russia's coal reserves to offset its gas shortage, insufficient infrastructure, and underdeveloped grid economy.

Following its 14 September 2025 attack on Russia's second-largest refinery, Kinef , the General Staff of the Ukrainian Armed Forces claimed to be "working 'systematically' to weaken Russia's military and economic capabilities with a particular focus on fuel, weapons, and ammunition production." Foreign involvement Main article: Foreign involvement in the Russo-Ukrainian war (2022–present) Support for Ukraine Main article: Military aid to Ukraine during the Russo-Ukrainian war Further information: List of military aid to Ukraine during the Russo-Ukrainian war , International sanctions during the Russian invasion of Ukraine , and International Legion (Ukraine) Countries that have delivered military aid to Ukraine Heavy weaponry Light weaponry Non-lethal materiel Non-materiel Ukraine Many countries have supplied military aid to Ukraine, including weaponry, equipment, training, and logistical support. Several imposed limited sanctions on Russia in the prelude to the invasion and applied new sanctions when the invasion began, intending to cripple the Russian economy; sanctions targeted individuals, banks, businesses, monetary exchanges, exports, and imports. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy and Western leaders at the NATO Summit in Vilnius on 12 July 2023 Military assistance has mostly been co-ordinated through the Ukraine Defence Contact Group , whose more than fifty countries include all 32 member states of NATO .

From January 2022 to January 2024, $380 billion in aid to Ukraine was tracked by the Kiel Institute . European countries have provided the most aid in total (military, financial and humanitarian). Estonia and Denmark have provided the most military aid as a share of GDP.

The European Union co-ordinated the supply of military aid for the first time.

The US has provided the most military assistance to Ukraine, and has set aside $175 billion to help the country. Most of the US military aid has been old American weaponry and equipment from reserve stockpiles , while most of the US funding earmarked for Ukraine stays in the US economy and supports US industries, subsidising the manufacture of weapons and military equipment. Bulgaria supplied Ukraine with over one third of the ammunition needed in the early phase of the invasion and a plurality of needed fuel. Most of Ukraine's supporters ruled out sending troops to the country in the early months of the invasion.

Although India has maintained a neutral stance on the invasion, reports indicate that artillery shells made by Indian manufacturers were sold to European countries and then diverted to Ukraine. Indian officials have not intervened despite objections from Russia.

The Russian government has threatened retaliation against countries supplying military aid to Ukraine. According to the Atlantic Council 's Peter Dickinson, Russia's government has not followed through on its threats, despite most of its " red lines " being crossed.

Since the start of Russia's invasion, the US has been sharing intelligence with Ukraine, with a focus on finished signal intelligence to aid in targeting.

In March 2025, the US paused intelligence sharing with Ukraine, only to resume it a few days later.

In October 2025, the Wall Street Journal and Reuters reported that the US was to provide intelligence to enable long-range strikes on Russian energy infrastructure deep in Russian territory.

In November 2025, Reuters reported that the US threatened to cut intelligence sharing to pressure Ukraine into negotiating a peace agreement.

By January 2026, according to French president Macron, the coalition of the willing was providing all of the international military support to Ukraine, with France providing two-thirds of the military intelligence.

In April 2026, reports emerged that Ukrainian F-16 pilots had gone through an RAF -led program and were being instructed to operate in GPS -denied environments due to extensive Russian electronic warfare.

In October 2024, Ukraine and South Korea claimed North Korean engineers had been deployed to the battlefield to help with the launch of these missiles and suffered casualties.

In October 2024, Zelensky announced that Ukrainian intelligence believed there were 10,000 North Korean troops preparing to join Russian forces.

The North Korean government stated that none of their soldiers were fighting for Russia. US officials reported that North Korea had sent 3,000 soldiers to Russia for possible deployment to Ukraine, who had been transported by ship in October and were training at three military bases in eastern Russia.

On 28 October, NATO chief Mark Rutte confirmed earlier Ukrainian intelligence that North Korean troops had been deployed to Kursk Oblast to support Russia against the Kursk offensive , and the Pentagon reported that around 10,000 North Korean soldiers had been sent in total. Russian Defence Minister Andrey Belousov with North Korean Defence Minister No Kwang-chol on 29 November 2024 On 7 November, Ukraine's defence minister reported that North Korean troops had engaged in battle on 5 November in Kursk oblast, a report that was confirmed by US and South Korean officials.

On 24 November, the Ukrainian chief of general staff confirmed that North Korean troops had been engaged in battle.

On 2 December the Pentagon noted that North Korean soldiers had been integrated into Russian units, reports that were echoed by the Ukrainian intelligence directorate.

On 16 December, the US confirmed that North Korean troops had been killed in combat in Russia's Kursk oblast.

By 18 December, the number of killed and wounded North Korean soldiers had reportedly reached a couple of hundred, while South Korea reported 100 North Koreans dead and 1000 injured. US Army JAG officers Steve Szymanski and Joshua Keruski stated that North Korea had become a party to an international armed conflict with Ukraine as of the 5 November engagement. Zelenskyy showcased footage that he said showed Russian troops burning the faces of killed North Korean soldiers to conceal their presence on the battlefield.

In January 2025, two North Korean servicemen were taken prisoner while fighting in Kursk Oblast. Intelligence debriefings indicate that North Korean soldiers have been issued false military papers stating that they are Russians from Tuva .

In March 2025, South Korea's Joint Chiefs of Staff said that North Korea had sent an additional 3,000 soldiers early in the year, along with military equipment including short-range ballistic missiles. According to South Korea, roughly 11,000 North Korean soldiers had been sent to Russia, 4,000 of whom were killed or wounded.

The same month, Russia acknowledged the presence of North Korean soldiers fighting in Kursk for the first time.

In June 2025, former Russian defence minister Sergei Shoigu announced that 1,000 North Korean military workers would be deployed to Kursk for demining, and another 5,000 for reconstruction.

In May 2023, the European Union identified that Chinese and UAE firms were supplying weapon components to Russia.

In April 2024, China was reported to have provided Russia with geospatial intelligence , machine tools for tanks, and propellants for missiles.

In September 2024, Reuters reported documents indicating Russia had established a weapons programme in China to develop and produce long-range attack drones, with assistance from local specialists, for use in the invasion.

In July 2025, Ukraine's Main Directorate of Intelligence reported that Laos had sent a 50-person demining crew to Kursk, though Laos denied the claim. Russia imports sensitive electronics, machinery, auto parts, and defence equipment from India. Trade like oil sales has surged since 2022, boosting revenue for Russian state-owned companies. To bypass sanctions and manage its currency surplus, Russia pays in rupees, supporting both civilian and military needs. Reuters reported in July 2025 that according to Indian customs data, an Indian company shipped military-use explosive compounds valued at $1.4 million to Russia in December 2024. Russia has continued to make billions from fossil fuel exports to the West. Ukraine's Western allies have paid Russia more for its hydrocarbons than they have given Ukraine in aid.

In 2025 Slovakia and Hungary rejected an EU plan to phase out deliveries of Russian gas via Turkey by 2028. "Laundromat refineries" in Turkey and India process Russian crude and sell the refined fuel to sanctioning countries. Russia has also developed partnerships with India and the UAE that actively support its efforts to evade sanctions.

In 2022, approximately 400,000 US-made semiconductors worth $53.6 million were shipped to Russia via the Maldives , accounting for almost 20% the Maldives's exports.

The Maldives has no native semiconductor manufacturers; all of its exports are by Russian shell companies, most headquartered in Hong Kong.

From 2015 to 2021, average annual trade between Russia and Turkey in 45 military-linked materials was $28 million; from January to October 2023, it was $158 million.

The numbers of civilian and military deaths have been impossible to determine precisely. Agence France-Presse (AFP) reported that neither it nor independent conflict monitors could verify Russian and Ukrainian claims of enemy losses and suspected they were inflated.

In October 2022, the independent Russian media project iStories , citing sources close to the Kremlin, reported that more than 90,000 Russian soldiers had been killed, seriously wounded, or gone missing. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelensky stated in February 2026 that approximately 55,000 Ukrainian soldiers had been killed on the battlefield, noting that a significant number were also officially listed as missing in action.

While combat deaths can be inferred from a variety of sources, including satellite imagery of military action, measuring civilian deaths is more difficult.

In June 2022, the Ukrainian Minister of Defence told CNN that tens of thousands of Ukrainians had died, and he hoped the death toll was below 100,000.

By July 2024, about 20,000 Ukrainians had lost limbs.

In Mariupol, Ukrainian officials believe at least 25,000 have been killed, and bodies were still being discovered in September 2022.

The mayor said over 10,000 and possibly as many as 20,000 civilians died in the siege of Mariupol and Russian forces had brought mobile cremation equipment when they entered the city. An investigation by AP from the end of 2022 estimated up to 75,000 killed civilians in the Mariupol area alone. AFP says "a key gap in casualty counts is the lack of information from Russian-occupied places like the port city of Mariupol, where tens of thousands of civilians are believed to have died." There were at least 8,000 excess deaths in Mariupol between March 2022 and February 2023.

The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) believed the true civilian casualty numbers were significantly higher than it has been able to confirm.

In the Russian military, ethnic minorities have suffered disproportionately high casualties.

In October 2022, the Russian regions with the highest death tolls were Dagestan , Tuva , and Buryatia , all minority regions.

In February 2024, six out of ten Russian regions with the highest mortality rates in Ukraine were located in Siberia and the far east, and ethnic minorities' continuing outsized casualty rates prompted analysts to warn that the situation will lead to long-term destructive impacts on these communities. About 1,200 Russian soldiers were killed or wounded in Ukraine every day in May–June 2024, which climbed to 1,500 by November 2024, when 45,690 casualties were estimated. Newsweek estimated that on the bloodiest day in November 2024 the ratio of killed Russian men (1,950) exceeded the average daily male birth rate in Russia (1,836). Latvia-based news outlet Meduza estimated that up to 140,000 Russian soldiers had died by July 2024.

In December 2025, an analysis by the BBC suggested that Russian casualties were growing at a faster rate than at any point previously in the invasion, with 40% more obituaries of soldiers being published in Russia in 2025 compared to 2024.

The war in Ukraine and the associated emigration, lower birth rates , and war-related casualties further deepened the demographic crisis of Russia .

The Russian invasion became the deadliest European war since World War II (1939-1945).

In February 2025, the Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft estimated 250,000 dead.

In September 2024, The Wall Street Journal reported that there were now one million Ukrainians and Russians who were killed or wounded. Confirmed casualties Numbers Time period Source Ukrainian civilians 14,999 killed, 40,601 wounded 24 February 2022 – 31 December 2025 United Nations ( OHCHR ) Russian civilians 394 killed (in Western Russia ) 24 February 2022 – 25 December 2024 7x7 Ukrainian forces 86,142 killed (incl. non-combat), 89,324 missing, 4,461 captured (conf. by names) 24 February 2022 – 7 January 2026 UALosses project Russian forces ( DPR/LPR excluded) 230,624 killed ( conf. by names ) 24 February 2022 – 3 July 2026 BBC News Russian and Mediazona Russian forces ( Donetsk & Luhansk PR ) 21,000–23,500 killed 24 February 2022 – 30 September 2024 BBC News Russian Estimated and claimed casualties Numbers Time period Source Ukrainian civilians 12,000 killed (confirmed), 16,000+ captive 24 February 2022 – 17 June 2024 24 February 2022 – 16 December 2024 Ukraine 2,883 killed, 8,260 wounded (in DPR/LPR areas) 17 February 2022 – 22 December 2024 DPR and LPR Russian civilians 621 killed (including Crimea ), 789 missing 24 February 2022 – 19 May 2025 Russia Ukrainian forces 80,000 killed, 400,000 wounded 24 February 2022 – before September 2024 WSJ citing confidential Ukrainian estimate 60,000–100,000 killed, 400,000 wounded 24 February 2022 – 26 November 2024 The Economist estimate 55,000 killed, 380,000 wounded, 56,700 missing, 8,000 captured 24 February 2022 – 6 March 2025 24 February 2022 – 17 February 2025 24 February 2022 – 30 October 2024 Ukraine Russian forces 1,140,000 killed and wounded 24 February 2022 – 5 November 2025 UK MoD estimate 191,000–269,000 killed 24 February 2022 – 30 May 2025 BBC News Russian 1,425,990+ killed and wounded, 60,000 missing 24 February 2022 – 17 July 2026 24 February 2022 – 4 February 2025 Ukrainian MoD estimate Government of Ukraine DPRK forces 2,300 killed, 2 captured December 2024 – March 2026 BBC News War crimes and attacks on civilians Main articles: War crimes in the Russo-Ukrainian war (2022–present) and Russian attacks on civilians in the Russo-Ukrainian war (2022–present) Dead bodies following the Bucha massacre by Russian troops The Russian military and authorities have been responsible for deliberate attacks against civilian targets (including strikes on hospitals and on the energy grid ), massacres of civilians, abduction and torture of civilians, sexual violence , forced deportation of civilians, and torture and murder of Ukrainian prisoners of war. They have also carried out indiscriminate attacks in densely populated areas, including with cluster bombs , in one instance killing 61 people in the Kramatorsk railway station attack . According to Kyrylo Budanov , the chief of Ukrainian intelligence, Russia, before the start of the invasion, had created 'execution lists' of Ukrainian teachers, journalists, scientists, writers, priests, and politicians and was preparing for a genocide of Ukrainians; the plans included locations of mass graves and mobile crematoria . Aftermath of a Russian airstrike on Zaporizhzhia on 8 January 2025, which killed 13 people and wounded many more According to the United Nations' Human Rights Office (OHCHR), by December 2023, about 78% of confirmed civilian casualties had been killed in Ukrainian-held territory. Over 12,300 civilians have been killed since the invasion began. Russia has deliberately and repeatedly attacked Ukrainian civilians with FPV drones , including first responders , such as in the Kherson terror campaign dubbed the " human safari ." In October 2025, the UN concluded that the Russian military was systematically attacking Ukrainian civilians and civilian targets with drones along a 300-kilometre stretch of the Dnipro River to drive Ukrainians out of the region.

The report said that these are war crimes and crimes against humanity.

The UN Human Rights Office reports that Russia is committing severe human rights violations in occupied Ukraine , including arbitrary detentions ; enforced disappearances ; torture; crackdown on protests and freedom of speech ; enforced Russification ; indoctrination of children, and suppression of Ukrainian language and culture.

The UN also found that Russian authorities were systematically deporting Ukrainian civilians from occupied provinces, which is a crime against humanity. Ukrainians have been coerced into taking Russian passports and becoming Russian citizens. Those who refuse are denied healthcare and other rights, and can be imprisoned as a "foreign citizen." Ukrainian men who take Russian citizenship are drafted to fight against Ukraine. Russian forces have reportedly used banned chemical weapons , usually tear gas grenades.

In April 2024, a Daily Telegraph investigation concluded that "Russian troops are carrying out a systematic campaign of illegal chemical attacks against Ukrainian soldiers".

In January 2026, the UN reported that 2025 had been the deadliest year for Ukrainian civilians since 2022, with 2,514 deaths and 12,142 injuries being verified during the year, a 31% increase compared to 2024.

The report said that a "massive increase" of Russian long-range weapons was causing increased harm in urban centres. Prisoners of war Main article: Prisoners of war in the Russo-Ukrainian war (2022–present) Russian soldiers captured during the Battle of Sumy An August 2022 report by the Humanitarian Research Lab of the Yale School of Public Health identified 21 filtration camps for Ukrainian "civilians, POWs , and other personnel" in the vicinity of the Donetsk oblast. Imaging of one camp, Olenivka prison , found two sites of disturbed earth consistent with "potential graves." Kaveh Khoshnood, a professor at the Yale School of Public Health, said: "Incommunicado detention of civilians is more than a violation of international humanitarian law—it represents a threat to the public health of those currently in the custody of Russia and its proxies." Conditions described by freed prisoners include exposure, insufficient access to sanitation, food, and water; cramped conditions; electrical shocks; and assault.. An OHCHR report released in November 2022 documented abuses on both sides, based on interviews with prisoners.

In March 2023, UN human rights commissioner Volker Türk reported that more than 90% of the Ukrainian POWs interviewed by his office said they had been tortured or ill-treated in penitentiary facilities, which Russia, despite several requests, did not give UN staff access to.

In April 2023, several videos circulated on different websites purportedly showing Russian soldiers beheading Ukrainian soldiers.

In March 2024, the UN issued a report saying Russia may have executed more than 30 recently captured Ukrainian POWs over the winter.

The UN Human Rights Office verified three incidents in which Russian servicemen executed seven Ukrainian servicemen. According to the same report, 39 of 60 released Ukrainian POWs said that they had been subjected to sexual violence during their internment.

In October 2024, the EEAS described an increasing frequency of Russian executions of Ukrainian prisoners, with at least 177 prisoners dying in Russian captivity since the beginning of the war.

The statement included the OHCHR's confirmation of systematic use of different methods of torture used by Russians against Ukrainian prisoners.

The Ukrainian Armed Forces have been accused of executions and abuses of Russian POWs, but the number of allegations has been significantly lower. : para. 105 Abduction of Ukrainian children Main article: Child abductions in the Russo-Ukrainian war Ukrainian children from Kherson and Zaporizhzhia oblasts at Yevpatoria , Russian-occupied Crimea , October 2022 In June 2024, an investigation by the Financial Times identified four Ukrainian children on a Russian government-linked adoption website who had been abducted from state care homes.

The children's Ukrainian background was not mentioned. One child was shown with a new Russian name and an age that differed from their Ukrainian documents, while another was shown using a Russian version of their Ukrainian name. 17 other matches identified by the Financial Times on the adoption website were confirmed as Ukrainian children in a New York Times investigation. Ukrainian authorities estimate that nearly 20,000 Ukrainian children have been forcibly taken from occupied territories to Russia since the full-scale invasion began. Wayne Jordash, president of humanitarian law firm Global Rights Compliance, described forcibly transferring or deporting children as war crimes, adding that when done as part of a widespread or systematic attack on a civilian population, Russia is also committing crimes against humanity. A March 2025 report published by the ISW suggests that the mass transfer of Ukrainian children to Russia had been an established component of Russia's war plans prior to the invasion. It references Russian governmental documents that predate the invasion, which outlined plans to move Ukrainian orphans in occupied Ukraine to Russia, described as 'humanitarian evacuations.' Since the invasion, tens to hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian children have been deported to Russia, where they have been housed in camps, placed with adoptive families, and provided with new Russian identities, including new names, falsified birth certificates, and other state documentation.

The report claims that Russia intends to convert the abductees into 'the next generation of Russians' while 'depriving of its multi-generation potential.' Referencing Article 2 of the Genocide Convention , the author notes that 'international law explicitly forbids the forcible transfer of children from one group to another group for the purpose of destroying, in whole or in part, a national or ethnic group and considers these violations as constituent acts of genocide.' In August 2025, Mykola Kuleba , the head of a Ukrainian NGO , said that Russian occupation authorities in Ukraine had created an online "catalog" of Ukrainian children up for adoption sorted by physical traits, denouncing the practice as child trafficking . International arrest warrants Main article: International Criminal Court arrest warrants for Russian leaders Three of the indicted individuals (left to right): Valery Gerasimov, Vladimir Putin and Sergei Shoigu The International Criminal Court (ICC) opened an investigation into possible crimes against humanity , genocide , and war crimes committed in Ukraine.

On 17 March 2023, the ICC issued a warrant for Putin's arrest, charging him with individual criminal responsibility in the abduction of children forcibly deported to Russia. It was the first time that the ICC had issued an arrest warrant for the head of state of a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council (the world's five principal nuclear powers). Moscow has denied any involvement in war crimes, a response Vittorio Bufacchi of University College Cork says "has bordered on the farcical", and its contention that the images coming out of Bucha were fabricated is "a disingenuous response born by delusional hubris, post-truth on overdrive, (that) does not merit being taken seriously." Even the usually fractured United States Senate came together to call Putin a war criminal. One of several efforts to document Russian war crimes concerns its repeated bombardment of markets and bread lines, destruction of basic infrastructure, and attacks on exports and supply convoys in a country where deliberate starvation of Ukrainians by Soviets still looms large in public memory. Forcible deportation of populations, such as took place in Mariupol, is another area of focus.

In March 2024, the ICC issued arrest warrants for military officials Sergey Kobylash , Viktor Sokolov , Sergei Shoigu , and Valery Gerasimov .

In May 2026, a special tribunal was formalized by 36 countries to prosecute Putin for the crime of aggression against Ukraine. Impacts Humanitarian impact Main article: Humanitarian impacts of the Russo-Ukrainian war (2022–present) The invasion contributed to the 2022 food crises .

As of February 2025, 3.7 million Ukrainians were internally displaced and 6.9 million were refugees. Russian attacks on civilians, causing mass civilian casualties and displacement, have been characterised as genocide and democide .

In September 2023, a UN-mandated investigative body reported that Russian occupiers had tortured Ukrainians to death and forced families to listen as they raped women.

The commission previously found that violations committed by Russian forces in Ukraine may constitute crimes against humanity .

By August 2024, the WHO had recorded 1,940 attacks against Ukrainian healthcare and reported widespread double-tap attacks.

In 2023, Physicians for Human Rights described Russian attacks on Ukraine's healthcare system as having a "reasonable basis" to be considered war crimes, and potentially constitute crimes against humanity. Cultural heritage Main article: Ukrainian culture during the Russian invasion of Ukraine As of August 2025, UNESCO has verified damage to 508 Ukrainian cultural sites, including 151 religious sites, 34 museums, 33 monuments, and 18 libraries.

In the first week of the invasion, the UN reported over a million refugees had fled Ukraine; this reached over eight million by February 2023.

In May 2022, following an influx of military equipment into Ukraine, a significant number of refugees sought to return to regions relatively isolated from the front in southeastern Ukraine.

By 3 May, another 8 million people were displaced inside Ukraine. Most refugees were women, children, elderly, or disabled. Most male Ukrainian nationals aged 18 to 60 were denied exit from Ukraine as part of mandatory conscription , unless they were responsible for the financial support of three or more children, were single fathers, or were the parent/guardian of children with disabilities. Many Ukrainian men, including teenagers, opted to remain in Ukraine voluntarily to join the resistance. According to the UN High Commission for Refugees as of May 2022, there were 3,315,711 refugees in Poland, 901,696 in Romania, 594,664 in Hungary, 461,742 in Moldova, 415,402 in Slovakia, and 27,308 in Belarus, while Russia reported it had received over 800,104 refugees.

By July 2022, over 390,000 Ukrainian refugees had arrived in the Czech Republic. Turkey registered more than 58,000 Ukrainian refugees as of March 2022.

The EU invoked the Temporary Protection Directive for the first time, granting Ukrainian refugees the right to live and work in the EU for up to three years. Britain has accepted 146,379 refugees, as well as extending the ability to remain in the UK for three years. Flight from war affected especially the southern and eastern regions and especially educated women of childbearing age and their children. With an estimate of more than 20% of refugees not returning, study author Maryna Tverdostup concluded that long-term shrinking will significantly impair reconstruction. According to the OSCE , Russia has engaged in "massive deportation" of over 1.3 million Ukrainian civilians, potentially constituting crimes against humanity.

The OSCE and Ukraine have accused Russia of forcibly moving civilians to filtration camps in Russian-held territory and then into Russia. Ukrainian sources have compared this policy to Soviet-era population transfers and Russian actions in the Chechen War of Independence . For instance, as of April 2022, Russia claimed to have evacuated about 121,000 Mariupol residents to Russia. RIA Novosti and Ukrainian officials said that thousands were dispatched to centres in cities in Russia and Russian-occupied Ukraine, from which people were sent to economically depressed regions of Russia. Environmental impact Main article: Environmental impact of the Russian invasion of Ukraine An explosion due to the shelling of a tank of nitric acid during the battle of Sievierodonetsk , 31 May 2022 Based on a preliminary assessment, the war has inflicted $51 billion in environmental damage in Ukraine; according to a report by the Yale School of the Environment , 623,000 tonnes (1.4 billion pounds) of petrochemicals have burnt as a result of shelling, while nearly 1,500 tonnes (3.2 million pounds) of pollutants have leaked into bodies of water. Hazardous chemicals have contaminated around 28 hectares (70 acres) of soil and likely made agricultural activities temporarily impossible. Around 30% of Ukraine's land is littered with explosives, and more than 2.4 million hectares (5.9 million acres) of forest have been damaged. According to peace organisation PAX, Russia's "deliberate targeting of industrial and energy infrastructure" has caused "severe" pollution, and explosive weapons have left "millions of tonnes" of contaminated debris in cities and towns.

In June 2023, the Kakhovka Dam , under Russian occupation, was damaged , causing flooding and triggering warnings of an "ecological disaster." The Ukrainian government, international observers, and journalists have described the damage as ecocide .

The Ukrainian government is investigating more crimes against the environment and ecocide (a crime in Ukraine). Zelenskyy has met with prominent European figures ( Heidi Hautala , Margot Wallstrom , Mary Robinson , and Greta Thunberg ) to discuss the environmental damage and how to prosecute it. According to an investigation by NGL Media published in April 2024, Russia has completely destroyed over 60,000 hectares (150,000 acres) of Ukrainian forests.

The investigation stated that long-term ecological consequences may include lowering of the groundwater level, reduction of biodiversity, worsening of air quality, fire outbreaks, and rivers and ponds drying up.

The war in Ukraine has severely disrupted global climate policy and increased CO 2 emissions.

In August 2022, Zelenskyy described the situation as "Russian nuclear terror ." The International Atomic Energy Agency said it was the first time a military conflict occurred amid nuclear plants, and it called for a demilitarised zone around Zaporizhzhia NPP. Economic impact Main article: Economic impact of the Russo-Ukrainian war (2022–present) Viewed in context, the price of oil has been affected internationally at the times of the COVID-19 pandemic , the 2022 Russo-Ukrainian war and the 2026 Iran war . Ukraine Ukrainian Minister of Economic Development and Trade Yulia Svyrydenko announced that for 2022 Ukraine had a 30% loss in its gross domestic product (GDP).

The International Monetary Fund predicted that Ukraine's GDP would decrease between 10% and 35%; the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development predicted a 20% decrease.

The Ukrainian statistics service said that the GDP of Ukraine in 2023 grew by 5.3%.

By 2026 the total cost of rebuilding Ukraine was estimated by the World Bank at US$588 billion. Ukraine began issuing war bonds on 1 March 2022, and the following day the Ukrainian government announced that they had raised 6.14 billion hryvnias.

In May 2022 the European Commission banned grain sales in Bulgaria, Poland, Hungary, Romania and Slovakia, except if they were transiting through those countries; the ban was lifted in September 2023.

The war has caused a major humanitarian crisis in Ukraine: the United Nations Development Programme calculated in March 2022 that a prolonged conflict would cause 30% of the Ukrainian population to fall below the poverty line, while a further 62% would be at risk of falling into poverty within a year. Ukraine is home to substantial mineral, fossil-fuel, and agricultural resources, the capture of which analysts believe was a potential motivation for the launching of the war by Russia. Joint exploitation of Ukrainian mineral resources was subsequently the subject of the Ukraine–United States Mineral Resources Agreement . Russia The US government estimated that Russia's economic losses from the war and Western sanctions would be around $1.3 trillion by 2025, and Russia's direct financial spending on the invasion is estimated at $250 billion (as of late 2024)—costs that Russia could not have foreseen. Other estimates put the direct cost of the war to Russia at over US$450 billion.

The international sanctions led Russia to become heavily economically and technologically dependent on China.

The Russian Ministry of Economic Development said that for 2022 the GDP contracted by 2.1% and for 2023 Russia's government said the GDP grew by 3.6%.

In April 2024, it was reported that Russia was planning tax increases to help finance the war.

In January 2025, it was reported that, since early 2022, Russia had used a two-prong strategy to finance the war.

In addition to the official Russian government defence budget —direct financial expenditure for the war was estimated at US$250 billion through June 2024 for military spending through normal channels, with the military budget rising to over 20% of annual GDP—an additional off-budget financing mechanism was employed with over US$200 billion of debt funding obtained from preferential bank loans to defence contractors and war-related businesses, compelled by the Russian government. A report in April 2025 by the Stockholm Institute of Transition Economics noted that official Russian statistics are unreliable.

The report argued that Russian fiscal stimulus has kept the economy afloat so far but that it is on an unsustainable trajectory.

In August 2025, VEB , one of the largest Russian state banks, assessed that the Russian economy had started slipping into recession.

In April 2026, Putin said Russia's GDP shrank by a combined 1.8% in January and February; according to Fortune , Russian officials warned Putin earlier in the year about a possible financial crisis due to "spiraling" inflation. A price cap was placed on Russian oil by the G7 in December 2022.

The US banned all imports of Russian oil in March 2022.

The EU placed an embargo on oil products from Russia in February 2023. Other countries that embargoed Russian oil included Five Eyes partners Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand. Peace efforts Main article: Peace negotiations in the Russo-Ukrainian war (2022–present) Attendees at the June 2024 Ukraine peace summit Peace negotiations between Russia and Ukraine took place on 28 February , 3 March , and 7 March 2022 in Belarus. Further talks were held on 10 March and 14 March in Turkey. Peace negotiations in Istanbul , Turkey, began on 29 March 2022 and ended without agreement. Putin has demanded international recognition of the annexed provinces (pictured) as Russian, despite only controlling parts of them.

Since 2024, Ukraine's main peace terms are that Russia withdraw its troops; that Ukrainian prisoners be released; Russian leaders be prosecuted for war crimes ; and Ukraine be given security guarantees to prevent further aggression. Russia's main terms are that Russia must keep all the land it occupies , that it be given all of the provinces that it claims but does not fully control, that Ukraine end plans to join NATO, and that sanctions against Russia be lifted. According to Western analysts, allowing Russia to keep the land it seized would " reward the aggressor while punishing the victim" and set a dangerous precedent. They predicted this would encourage Russia "to continue its imperialist campaign of expansionism," and embolden other expansionist regimes.

After Donald Trump became US president in 2025, there was a major shift in US policy.

The Trump administration began negotiations with Russia and separately with Ukraine.

In February 2025, the US twice sided with Russia in UN resolutions, opposing a European-drafted resolution condemning Russia's actions and supporting the territorial integrity of Ukraine and then drafting and voting for a UN Security Council resolution calling for the end of the conflict but containing no criticism of Russia.

Since March 2025, Ukraine has accepted a proposal for a 30-day unconditional ceasefire , which is supported by the US and European allies. Russia has rejected calls for a ceasefire.

In March 2022 and February 2023, 141 member states of the UN General Assembly voted for a resolution that Russia should immediately withdraw. Seven, including Russia, opposed. Political reactions to the invasion included new sanctions on Russia , which triggered widespread effects on the Russian and world economies .

As of July 2025, the EU had adopted 18 packages of sanctions against Russia and Belarus. Sanctions forced Russia to reorient its oil exports, rely more on LNG (which was not subject to EU sanctions), and shift its coal exports from Europe to Asia. Most European countries cancelled nuclear cooperation with Russia. Over 70 countries and the EU delivered humanitarian aid to Ukraine, and nearly 50 countries plus the EU provided military aid . Economic sanctions included bans on Russian aircraft using EU airspace, certain Russian banks from the SWIFT payments system , and certain Russian media outlets. Reactions to the invasion have included public and media responses, peace efforts , and the examination of the invasion's legality . Demonstrations were held worldwide. Calls for a boycott of Russian goods spread on social media, while hackers attacked Russian websites. Anti-Russian sentiment against Russians living abroad surged.

In March 2022, Russian president Putin introduced prison sentences of up to 15 years for publishing "fake news" about Russian military operations, intended to suppress any criticism related to the war. Some countries, particularly in the Global South , saw public sympathy or support for Russia, due in part to distrust of US foreign policy . According to the Economist Intelligence Unit, in 2023, 31% of the world's population lives in countries that are leaning towards or supportive of Russia, 30.7% live in neutral countries, and 36.2% live in countries that are against Russia in some way. Several parliaments passed resolutions declaring Russia to be a state sponsor of terrorism .

By October 2022, Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia had declared Russia a terrorist state .

In August 2023, Iceland became the first European country to close its embassy in Russia as a result of the invasion.

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 18 February 2022 . Retrieved 18 February 2022 . ^ Hackett, James, ed. (February 2021).

The Conversation . Archived from the original on 18 May 2025 . Retrieved 15 December 2024 . ^ Al Jazeera Staff. " 'No other option': Excerpts of Putin's speech declaring war" . Al Jazeera . Archived from the original on 6 April 2025 . Retrieved 15 December 2024 . ^ melvin, Neil. "Nationalist and Imperial Thinking Define Putin's Vision for Russia" . Royal United Services Institute . Archived from the original on 25 May 2025 . Retrieved 15 December 2024 . ^ "Ukraine war: President Putin speech fact-checked" . BBC News . 21 February 2023 . Retrieved 3 August 2025 . ^ a b Etkind, Alexander (2022). "Ukraine, Russia, and Genocide of Minor Differences". Journal of Genocide Research . 25 ( 3– 4). Taylor & Francis : 1– 19. doi : 10.1080/14623528.2022.2082911 . S2CID 249527690 . ^ a b McGlynn, Jade (23 April 2024). "Russia Is Committing Cultural Genocide in Ukraine" . Foreign Policy . Retrieved 4 July 2024 . ^ a b Stavljanin, Dragan (2 April 2024). "Genocide Scholar: 'I Do Think that Russia's Violence in Ukraine is Genocidal' " . Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . Archived from the original on 22 June 2025 . Retrieved 4 July 2024 . ^ a b Richardson, Jon (11 March 2024). "Unmarked graves, violent repression and cultural erasure: the devastating human toll of Russia's invasion of Ukraine" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 6 July 2024 . ^ Budjeryn, Mariana. "Issue Brief #3: The Breach: Ukraine's Territorial Integrity and the Budapest Memorandum" (PDF) . Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars . Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 May 2025 . Retrieved 6 March 2022 . ^ Vasylenko, Volodymyr (15 December 2009). "On assurances without guarantees in a 'shelved document' " .

The Day . Archived from the original on 24 February 2021 . Retrieved 7 March 2022 . Harahan, Joseph P. (2014). "With Courage and Persistence: Eliminating and Securing Weapons of Mass Destruction with the Nunn-Luger Cooperative Threat Reduction Programs" (PDF) . DTRA History Series . Defense Threat Reduction Agency. ASIN B01LYEJ56H . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 February 2022 . Retrieved 7 March 2022 . ^ "Istanbul Document 1999" . Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe . 19 November 1999. p. 3 (PDF). Archived from the original on 1 June 2014 . Retrieved 21 July 2015 . ^ "Interview with French Television Company France 3" . President of Russia . 7 May 2005. ^ Interfax-Ukraine (22 February 2013). "Parliament passes statement on Ukraine's aspirations for European integration" . Kyiv Post . ^ Dinan, Desmond; Nugent, Neil (eds.).

The European Union in Crisis . Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 3, 274. ^ Walker, Shaun (22 September 2013). "Ukraine's EU trade deal will be catastrophic, says Russia" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 12 September 2023 . Dinan, Desmond; Nugent, Neil (eds.).

The European Union in Crisis . Palgrave Macmillan . pp. 3, 274. ^ Traynor, Ian; Grytsenko, Oksana (21 November 2013). "Ukraine suspends talks on EU trade pact as Putin wins tug of war: Ukraine was due to sign accord at summit next week but MPs reject key bills, especially on freeing Yulia Tymoshenko from jail" .

The Guardian . ^ "Russia 'grants Ukraine's Viktor Yanukovych protection' " . BBC News . 27 February 2014 . Retrieved 2 July 2026 . ^ "Ukrainian MPs vote to oust President Yanukovych" . BBC News . 22 February 2014 . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ "Poroshenko sworn in as Ukrainian president" . Interfax-Ukraine . 7 June 2014 . Retrieved 2 July 2026 . ^ Salem, Harriet; Walker, Shaun; Harding, Luke (27 February 2014). "Crimean parliament seized by unknown pro-Russian gunmen: Gunmen storm Crimea's regional administrative complex in Simferopol and hoist Russian flag above parliament building" .

The Guardian . ^ "Ukrainian forces withdraw from Crimea" . BBC News . 24 March 2014 . Retrieved 9 April 2025 . ^ "Ukraine: Conflict at the Crossroads of Europe and Russia" . Council on Foreign Relations . 5 February 2020. ^ Plokhy, Serhii (9 May 2023).

The Russo-Ukrainian War: The Return of History . W. W. Norton & Company . ISBN 978-1-324-05120-6 . ...

In an article published on the eve of the referendum, the historian Andrei Zubov, a professor at the elite Moscow Institute of International Relations, compared the planned annexation of the peninsula to Hitler's Anschluss of Austria in 1938. He drew parallels between Hitler's vision of Greater Germany and Russia's reunification rhetoric, pointed out that both acts were justified to the public by the need to protect allegedly persecuted minorities, German (in Czechoslovakia) in the first case and Russian in the second, and mentioned the staged referendum as a sham to provide legal cover for the forcible annexation. ... ^ Žalimas, Dainius (14 March 2017). "Lessons of World War II and the Annexation of Crimea" . International Comparative Jurisprudence . 3 (1): 25– 36. doi : 10.13165/j.icj.2017.03.003 . ISSN 2351-6674 . ^ Gouré, Daniel (3 March 2014). "Putin's Anschluss" . Lexington Institute . Retrieved 13 October 2025 . ^ "United Nations A/RES/68/262 General Assembly" (PDF) . United Nations. 1 April 2014. ^ "Ukraine Crisis: NATO Suspends Russia Co-operation" . BBC News, UK. 2 April 2014 . Retrieved 2 April 2014 . ^ "Crimea crisis: Russian President Putin's speech annotated" . BBC News . 19 March 2014. ^ Umland, Andreas (1 November 2016). "The Glazyev Tapes: Getting to the root of the conflict in Ukraine" . European Council on Foreign Relations . ^ "Russia's Igor Strelkov: I Am Responsible for War in Eastern Ukraine" .

The Moscow Times . 21 November 2014. Archived from the original on 23 February 2022 . Retrieved 11 December 2020 . ^ Arel, Dominique; Driscoll, Jesse, eds. (2023). Ukraine's Unnamed War . Cambridge University Press . pp. 138– 140. ^ Ragozin, Leonid (16 March 2019). "Annexation of Crimea: A masterclass in political manipulation" . Al Jazeera . Archived from the original on 7 November 2020 . Retrieved 24 May 2022 . ^ "Exclusive: Charred tanks in Ukraine point to Russian involvement" . Reuters . 23 October 2014. Archived from the original on 1 March 2022 . Retrieved 28 February 2022 . Walker, Shaun; Grytsenko, Oksana; Ragozin, Leonid (3 September 2014). "Russian soldier: 'You're better clueless because the truth is horrible' " .

The Guardian . ISSN 1756-3224 . OCLC 60623878 . Archived from the original on 1 March 2022 . Retrieved 28 February 2022 . ^ "Report on Preliminary Examination Activities (2016)" (PDF) . International Criminal Court . 14 November 2016. pp. 33– 38. ^ "Eastern Ukraine and flight MH17 case declared partly admissible" (PDF) . European Court of Human Rights . 25 January 2023. ^ "Ukraine declares Russian 'occupation' in eastern region" . Al Jazeera . 18 January 2018. ^ Socor, Vladimir (24 March 2014). "Putin's Crimea Speech: A Manifesto of Greater-Russia Irredentism" . Vol. 11, no. 56. Eurasia Daily Monitor . ^ Kimmage, Michael (2024). Collisions: The Origins of the War in Ukraine and the New Global Instability . Oxford University Press . p. 129. ^ "Ukraine: Are 2014 pro-Russia rebels fighting 1920s war?" . BBC News . 28 July 2014. ^ O'Loughlin, John (2017). "The rise and fall of "Novorossiya": examining support for a separatist geopolitical imaginary in southeast Ukraine" . Post-Soviet Affairs . 33 (2): 124– 144. doi : 10.1080/1060586X.2016.1146452 . ^ "Zelenskyy on meeting Putin in 2019: We talked and bargained a lot" . Ukrainska Pravda . 25 February 2024 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ Blank, Stephen (28 January 2022). "Ukrainian neutrality would not appease Putin or prevent further Russian aggression" . Atlantic Council . Archived from the original on 8 March 2024 . Retrieved 8 March 2024 . ^ "Deschytsia states new government of Ukraine has no intention to join NATO" . Interfax-Ukraine . 29 March 2014. ^ "New Ukraine president Petro Poroshenko vows to stop war" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 25 March 2025 . ^ Kazdobina, Julia; Hedenskog, Jakob; Umland, Andreas (17 July 2024). "How the West Misunderstood Moscow in Ukraine" . Foreign Policy . Retrieved 25 March 2025 . ^ Zwack, Peter B.; Andrusiv, Victor; Antonenko, Oksana (15 April 2021). "The Russian Military Buildup on Ukraine's Border: An Expert Analysis" . Wilson Center . Ullah, Zahra; Chernova, Anna; Mackintosh, Eliza (23 April 2021). "Russia pulls back troops after massive buildup near Ukraine border" . CNN . ^ Harris, Shane and Sonne, Paul (3 December 2021). "Russia planning massive military offensive against Ukraine involving 175,000 troops, U.S. intelligence warns" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 23 February 2023 . Schogol, Jeff (22 February 2022). "Here's what those mysterious white 'Z' markings on Russian military equipment may mean" . Task & Purpose . North Equity. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022 . Retrieved 27 February 2022 . ottom line is the 'Z' markings (and others like it) are a deconfliction measure to help prevent friendly fire incidents. ^ Taylor, Adam (24 February 2022). "Russia's attack on Ukraine came after months of denials it would attack" .

The Washington Post . Photograph by Evgeniy Maloletka ( Associated Press ) . Retrieved 26 February 2022 .

On Sunday ... "There is no invasion. There is no such plans," Antonov said. {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ Farley, Robert; Kiely, Eugene (24 February 2022). "Russian Rhetoric Ahead of Attack 66 Ukraine: Deny, Deflect, Mislead" . FactCheck.org . Annenberg Public Policy Center . Archived from the original on 27 February 2022 . Retrieved 26 February 2022 . Nov. 28 – ... 'Russia has never hatched, is not hatching and will never hatch any plans to attack anyone,' Peskov said. ... 19 Jan – ... Ryabkov ... 'We do not want and will not take any action of aggressive character. We will not attack, strike, invade, quote unquote, whatever Ukraine.' ^ Fořtová, Klára (8 March 2022). "Velvyslanec Ukrajiny v Česku denně promlouvá, ruský mlčí a je 'neviditelný' " . Mladá fronta DNES (in Czech). Archived from the original on 8 March 2022 . Retrieved 10 March 2022 . Zmejevský ... 'Důrazně jsme odmítli jako nepodložená obvinění Ruska z přípravy, agrese vůči Ukrajině a fámy o vstupu ruských jednotek na ukrajinské území,' stojí v něm. ^ "Ongoing Violations of International Law and Defiance of OSCE Principles and Commitments by the Russian Federation in Ukraine" (PDF) . United States Mission to the OSCE . 20 May 2021 . Retrieved 6 March 2025 . ^ "2021 trends and observations" (PDF) . Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe . 2022. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 May 2025 . Retrieved 6 March 2025 . ^ Düben, Björn Alexander (8 September 2023). "Revising History and 'Gathering the Russian Lands': Vladimir Putin and Ukrainian Nationhood" . LSE Public Policy Review . 3 (1) 4. doi : 10.31389/lseppr.86 . ^ Putin, Vladimir (12 July 2021). "Article by Vladimir Putin 'On the Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians' " .

The Kremlin . Government of Russia . Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 1 February 2022 . ^ Roth, Andrew (7 December 2021). "Putin's Ukraine rhetoric driven by distorted view of neighbor" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 7 December 2021 . Retrieved 25 January 2021 . fear has gone hand-in-hand with chauvinistic bluster that indicates Moscow has a distorted view of modern Ukraine and the goals it wants to achieve there. Lucas, Edward (15 September 2020). "Why Putin's history essay requires a rewrite" .

The Times . Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 September 2023 . Dickinson, Peter; Haring, Melinda; Lubkivsky, Danylo; Motyl, Alexander; Whitmore, Brian; Goncharenko, Oleksiy; Fedchenko, Yevhen; Bonner, Brian; Kuzio, Taras (15 July 2021). "Putin's new Ukraine essay reveals imperial ambitions" . Atlantic Council . Archived from the original on 15 July 2021 . Retrieved 25 September 2023 . Vladimir Putin's inaccurate and distorted claims are neither new nor surprising. They are just the latest example of gaslighting by the Kremlin leader. Wilson, Andrew (23 December 2021). "Russia and Ukraine: 'One People' as Putin Claims?" . Royal United Services Institute . Archived from the original on 24 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 . Putin's key trope is that Ukrainians and Russians are 'one people', and he calls them both 'Russian'. He starts with a myth of common origin: 'Russians, Ukrainians and Belarusians are all descendants of Ancient Rus', which was the largest state in Europe' from the 9th to 13th centuries AD. ^ "Putin warns Russia will act if NATO crosses its red lines in Ukraine" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 16 December 2024 . Retrieved 29 November 2025 . ^ Roth, Andrew (17 December 2021). "Russia issues list of demands it says must be met to lower tensions in Europe" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 5 January 2025 . ^ a b c Tétrault-Farber, Gabrielle; Balmforth, Tom (17 December 2021). "Russia demands NATO roll back from East Europe and stay out of Ukraine" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 22 February 2022 . Retrieved 24 February 2022 . ^ a b Kuzio, Taras; Jajecznyk-Kelman, Stefan (2023). Fascism and Genocide: Russia's War Against Ukrainians . Columbia University Press . pp. 17, 57. ISBN 978-3-8382-1791-8 . ^ MacKinnon, Mark (21 December 2021). "Putin warns of unspecified military response if U.S. and NATO continue 'aggressive line' " .

The Globe and Mail . Archived from the original on 15 January 2022 . Retrieved 24 February 2022 . ^ "NATO chief: "Russia has no right to establish a sphere of influence" " . Axios . 1 December 2021. Archived from the original on 14 February 2022 . Retrieved 17 December 2021 . ^ "NATO-Russia: Setting the record straight" . NATO . Retrieved 16 May 2023 . ^ Pifer, Steven (21 December 2021). "Russia's draft agreements with NATO and the United States: Intended for rejection?" . Brookings Institution . ^ Coyer, Cassandre (25 February 2022). "Why is Ukraine not in NATO and is it too late to join? Here's what experts, NATO say" .

The Miami Herald . Archived from the original on 29 March 2022 . Retrieved 28 February 2022 . ^ Person, Robert; McFaul, Michael (April 2022). "What Putin Fears Most" . Journal of Democracy . 33 (2): 18– 27. doi : 10.1353/jod.2022.0015 . ISSN 1045-5736 . Archived from the original on 6 April 2024 . Retrieved 8 June 2024 . ^ "US offers no concessions in response to Russia on Ukraine" . Associated Press . 26 January 2022. ^ a b "US offered disarmament measures to Russia in exchange for deescalation of military threat in Ukraine" . El País . 2 February 2022. ^ Brumme, Christoph (28 January 2024). "Der dysfunktionale russische Staat ist nicht wettbewerbsfähig" . Neue Zürcher Zeitung (in Swiss High German). ISSN 0376-6829 . Retrieved 6 December 2024 . ^ "Putin: U.S. and NATO have "ignored" Russia's main security demands" . Axios . 1 February 2022. ^ "U.S. and NATO Respond to Putin's Demands as Ukraine Tensions Mount" .

The New York Times . 26 January 2022. ^ Rose, Michael; Polityuk, Pavel (8 February 2022). "France's Macron calls for calm to resolve Ukraine crisis" . Reuters . ^ "Scholz: Putin started war for 'completely absurd' reasons" . Deutsche Welle . 21 August 2022. ^ Gordon, Michael R.; Pancevski, Bojan; Bisserbe, Noemie; Walker, Marcus (1 April 2022). "Vladimir Putin's 20-Year March to War in Ukraine—and How the West Mishandled It" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 18 June 2022 . ^ "West should stop 'appeasement' policy towards Russia, says Ukraine's Zelensky" . France 24 . 19 February 2022 . Retrieved 10 February 2024 . ^ a b c "Ukraine will not respond to provocations, Zelensky says" . BBC News . 19 February 2022. Archived from the original on 3 April 2025. ^ a b c d Walker, Shaun; Roth, Andrew (18 February 2022). "Pro-Russian separatists order mass evacuation of eastern Ukraine" .

The Kyiv Independent . 24 February 2022 . Retrieved 24 June 2022 . Haltiwager, John (23 February 2022). "Russian President Vladimir Putin announces military assault against Ukraine in surprise speech" . Business Insider . Archived from the original on 24 February 2022 . Retrieved 24 February 2022 . ^ a b "Full text: Putin's declaration of war on Ukraine" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 24 February 2022 . Retrieved 24 February 2022 . "Ukraine president declares martial law following Russia invasion" .

The Independent . 24 February 2022 . Retrieved 11 September 2023 . ^ "Zelensky signs decree declaring general mobilization" . Interfax-Ukraine . 25 February 2022. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ Gilbert, Asha C. (25 February 2022). "Reports: Ukraine bans all male citizens ages 18 to 60 from leaving the country" . USA Today . Retrieved 26 March 2022 . ^ a b c Bielieskov, Mykola (21 September 2021). "The Russian and Ukrainian Spring 2021 War Scare" . Center for Strategic & International Studies . Retrieved 25 November 2021 . ^ Kube, Courtney; Siemaszko, Corky (26 February 2022). "Russian offensive unexpectedly slowed by fierce Ukrainian resistance" . NBC News . Retrieved 16 September 2022 . ^ "Russia's failure to take down Kyiv was a defeat for the ages" . Associated Press News . 7 April 2022 . Retrieved 16 September 2022 . Sonne, Paul; Khurshudyan, Isabelle (24 August 2022). "Battle for Kyiv: Ukrainian valor, Russian blunders combined to save the capital" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 27 September 2022 . ^ a b Epstein, Jake; Haltiwanger, John (6 April 2022). "NATO chief says Putin still wants to control all of Ukraine, despite repositioning forces to the eastern Donbas region" . Retrieved 7 April 2022 . ^ Vandiver, John; Svan, Jennifer H. (26 April 2022). "US and allies gather at Ramstein to discuss how to help Ukraine defeat Russia's 'unjust invasion' " . Stars and Stripes . Ramstein Air Base, Germany. Archived from the original on 4 May 2022 . Retrieved 9 May 2022 . ^ "Russian forces launch full-scale invasion of Ukraine" . Al Jazeera . 24 February 2022 . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ Sly, Liz; Lamothe, Dan (20 March 2022). "Russia's war for Ukraine could be headed toward stalemate" .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . OCLC 2269358 . Archived from the original on 20 March 2022 . Retrieved 6 June 2022 . Roblin, Sebastien (27 February 2022). "At Vasylkiv, Ukrainians Repel Russia's Paratroopers and Commandos in Frantic Night Battle" . 19FortyFive . Retrieved 5 March 2022 . Boot, Max (21 March 2022). "Opinion: Against all odds, Ukrainians are winning. Russia's initial offensive has failed" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 24 March 2022 . ^ Kemp, Richard (22 March 2022). "The Russian army has run out of time" .

The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 24 March 2022 . ^ Ward, Alexander (25 February 2022). " 'Almost not possible' for Ukraine to win without West's help, Ukraine official says" . Politico . Archived from the original on 26 February 2022 . Retrieved 26 February 2022 . ^ "Ukraine war news from February 25: Kyiv suburbs breached, Russian forces face resistance, Zelensky warns Russia will 'storm' capital" . Financial Times . 26 February 2022. ISSN 0307-1766 . Archived from the original on 26 February 2022 . Retrieved 26 February 2022 . ^ "Live updates: Zelenskyy declines US offer to evacuate Kyiv" . AP News . 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 28 February 2023 . ^ Stern, David L. (5 March 2022). "After temporary cease-fires break down, Putin threatens Ukraine's government" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 6 March 2022 . ^ Lister, Tim; Pennington, Josh; McGee, Luke; and Gigova, Radina (7 March 2022). " 'A family died ... in front of my eyes': Civilians killed as Russian military strike hits evacuation route in Kyiv suburb" . CNN . Retrieved 9 March 2022 . ^ "Bucha, Vorzel, Hostomel under enemy's control, situation remains critical" . Ukrinform . 7 March 2022 . Retrieved 9 March 2022 . ^ Lister, Tim; Voitovych, Olga (8 March 2022). " "Irpin can't be bought, Irpin fights": Mayor refuses Russian demand to surrender" . CNN . Retrieved 8 March 2022 . ^ Murphy, Paul (11 March 2022). "Stalled 40-mile-long Russian convoy near Kyiv now largely dispersed, satellite images show" . CNN . Retrieved 11 March 2022 . ^ Cullison, Alan; Coles, Isabel; Trofimov, Yaroslav (16 March 2022). "Ukraine Mounts Counteroffensive to Drive Russians Back From Kyiv, Key Cities" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 16 March 2022 . Retrieved 16 March 2022 . ^ Gordon, Michael R.; Leary, Alex (21 March 2022). "The Wall Street Journal News Exclusive: Russia, Failing to Achieve Early Victory in Ukraine, Is Seen Shifting to 'Plan B' " .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 24 March 2022 . ^ Ali, Idrees; Stewart, Phil (27 February 2022). "Russian forces appear to shift to siege warfare in Ukraine- U.S. official" . Reuters . Retrieved 24 March 2022 . ^ "Ukraine war: Ukrainian fightback gains ground west of Kyiv" . BBC News . 23 March 2022 . Retrieved 29 March 2022 . ^ Walters, Joanna; Bartholomew, Jem; Belam, Martin; Lock, Samantha (25 March 2022). "Russia-Ukraine war latest: Ukraine takes back towns east of Kyiv; hopes of Mariupol humanitarian corridor grow – live" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 25 March 2022 . ^ "Ukraine war latest: Ukraine says it has retaken entire Kyiv region" . BBC News . Retrieved 2 April 2022 . ^ Rudenko, Olga (2 April 2022). "Hundreds of murdered civilians discovered as Russians withdraw from towns near Kyiv (Graphic Images)" .

The Kyiv Independent . Archived from the original on 3 April 2022 . Retrieved 3 April 2022 . ^ Demirjian, Karoun and Lamothe, Dan (6 April 2022). "Pentagon: Russia has fully withdrawn from Kyiv, Chernihiv" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 7 April 2022 . ^ Kalatur, Anastasiya (8 April 2022). "Sumy region liberated from Russian troops" . Ukrainska Pravda . Retrieved 15 April 2022 . ^ "Ukraine loses control over crossing to Kherson" . Ukrinform . 25 February 2022. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ Marrow, Alexander; Ostroukh, Andrey (24 February 2022). Balmforth, Tom (ed.). "Russian forces unblock water flow for canal to annexed Crimea, Moscow says" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 1 March 2022. ^ Schwirtz, Michael and Pérez-Peña, Richard (2 March 2022). "First Ukraine City Falls as Russia Strikes More Civilian Targets" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 3 March 2022 . Retrieved 3 March 2022 . ^ "Ukrainian defenders repelled attack on Mykolaiv city, fighting continues on outskirts" . Ukrinform . 4 March 2022 . Retrieved 4 March 2022 . ^ "Ukraine official says Russian troops approaching Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant" . National Post . 26 February 2022 . Retrieved 28 February 2022 . ^ "Battle ongoing near Mariupol – mayor" . Ukrinform . 25 February 2022. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . Richárd, Jabronka (25 February 2022). "Így áll most a háború Ukrajnában: több nagyvárosban harcok dúlnak, megtámadtak egy orosz repülőteret" . Ellenszél (in Hungarian). Archived from the original on 26 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ a b Lister, Tim; Alkhaldi, Celine; Voitovych, Olga; Mezzofiore, Gianluca (24 March 2022). "Ukrainians claim to have destroyed large Russian warship in Berdyansk" . CNN . Retrieved 24 March 2022 . ^ Polyakovskaya, Tanya (26 February 2022). "Rossiyskaya voyennaya tekhnika zanyala territoriyu byvshego aeroporta "Berdyansk" – gorsovet" Российская военная техника заняла территорию бывшего аэропорта "Бердянск" – горсовет (in Russian). Berdyansk City Council. Ukrainian Independent Information Agency . Archived from the original on 26 February 2022 . Retrieved 26 February 2022 . ^ NEXTA (26 February 2022). "The tanks of the occupiers have circled #Berdyansk and are heading towards #Mariupol. https://t.co/jwsIoORzH0" ( Tweet ). Archived from the original on 27 February 2022 . Retrieved 28 February 2022 – via Twitter . ^ Lister, Tim; Voitovych, Olya (1 March 2022). "Russian-backed separatist leader expects his forces to surround Mariupol on Tuesday" . CNN . Retrieved 1 March 2022 . ^ Boffey, Daniel and Tondo, Lorenzo (18 March 2022). "Fighting reaches central Mariupol as shelling hinders rescue attempts" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 21 March 2022 . ^ "Ukraine refuses to surrender Mariupol as scope of human toll remains unclear" . Canadian Broadcasting Corporation . 21 March 2022 . Retrieved 21 March 2022 . ^ Scully, Rachel (27 March 2022). "Ukrainian official: Mariupol 'simply does not exist anymore' " .

The Hill . Retrieved 29 March 2022 . ^ "Ukraine War: Putin demands Mariupol surrender to end shelling" . BBC News . 30 March 2022 . Retrieved 31 March 2022 . ^ "Ukraine: No 'plan B' for evacuation of shattered Mariupol, say humanitarians, as Friday attempt fails" . UN News . 1 April 2022 . Retrieved 3 April 2022 . ^ Losh, Jack (25 February 2022). "Kharkiv's Resistance to Russia's War Has Already Begun" . Foreign Policy . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 27 February 2022 . "Rosiya atakuvala ukrayinsʹki mista: de vidbulysya boyi" Росія атакувала українські міста: де відбулися бої . Channel 24 (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 27 February 2022 . ^ Bennett, Dalton (7 April 2022). "In eastern Ukraine, Russian military razing towns to take them over" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 21 February 2022 . ^ Hopkins, Nick; Wilson, Jamie; Harding, Luke (18 July 2023). "Militia units commanded by Russia named in Izium abuse investigation" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 21 February 2024 . ^ Trevelyan, Mark, ed. (25 March 2022). "Russia says first phase of Ukraine operation mostly complete, focus now on Donbass" . London: Yahoo! Finance . Reuters . Retrieved 28 March 2022 . ^ "Missiles hit Ukraine refinery, 'critical infrastructure' near Odessa" .

The Straits Times . SPH Media Trust . Reuters . 3 April 2022 . Retrieved 6 April 2022 . ^ "Video analysis reveals Russian attack on Ukrainian nuclear plant veered near disaster" . NPR . 11 March 2022 . Retrieved 1 April 2022 . ^ Picheta, Rob (6 April 2022). "The fight for Sloviansk may be 'the next pivotal battle' of Russia's war in Ukraine" . CNN . Retrieved 15 April 2022 . ^ a b "Ukraine war: Mariupol defenders will fight to the end" . Radio New Zealand News . 17 April 2022. ^ a b Arraf, Jane; Nechepurenko, Ivan; Landler, Mark (19 April 2022). "Ukraine Says Russia Begins Assault in the East After Raining Missiles Nationwide" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 20 April 2022 . ^ "US official briefs on Russia's war effort" . BBC . 2 May 2022. ^ Sabbagh, Dan (31 May 2022). "Biden will not supply Ukraine with long-range rockets that can hit Russia" .

The Guardian . ^ "Russia bombards Kyiv, vows to strike new targets if U.S. Sends long-range missiles to Ukraine" . CBS News Videos via Yahoo News . 6 June 2022. ^ Koshiw, Isobel (10 June 2022). "We're almost out of ammunition and relying on western arms, says Ukraine" .

The Guardian . ^ Alper, Alexandra; Freifeld, Karen; Landay, Jonathan (29 June 2022). "Putin still wants most of Ukraine, war outlook grim -U.S. intelligence chief" . Reuters . Retrieved 2 July 2022 . ^ Cherkasov, Alexander (26 June 2022). Люди, стрелявшие в наших отцов (in Ukrainian). Novaya Gazeta . ^ "Ukraine News: Kyiv Intensifies Attacks on Russian Positions in South" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 15 April 2025 . Retrieved 15 April 2022 . ^ Schreck, Adam (21 April 2022). "Putin claims victory in Mariupol despite steel-mill holdouts" . Associated Press News . Archived from the original on 4 June 2025. ^ Prentice, Alessandra (28 April 2022). "U.N. chief Guterres calls for escape route from Mariupol 'apocalypse' " . Reuters . Kyiv. Archived from the original on 29 April 2022 . Retrieved 24 May 2022 . ^ Balmforth, Tom; Hunder, Max; Prentice, Alessandra (1 May 2022). "Civilians flee Azovstal bunkers in evacuation led by U.N." Yahoo News . Reuters . Retrieved 2 September 2024 . ^ "Russia shells Mariupol plant with civilians still reported trapped" . Reuters . 3 May 2022. Archived from the original on 6 May 2022 . Retrieved 9 May 2022 . ^ Vasilyeva, Nataliya (5 May 2022). "Ukraine loses contact with Azovstal defenders as Russian troops storm steelworks" .

The Daily Telegraph . ^ " 'All' civilians have been evacuated from a besieged steel plant in Mariupol" . NPR . 7 May 2022 . Retrieved 2 June 2022 . ^ Koshiw, Isobel (8 May 2022). " 'Surrender is not an option': Azov battalion commander in plea for help to escape Mariupol" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 11 May 2025. ^ Petrenko, Roman (8 May 2022). "Mariupol defenders tell how the commander of marines fled the city" . Yahoo News . Ukrayinska Pravda . Archived from the original on 4 March 2025 . Retrieved 2 June 2022 . ^ Krasnolutska, Daryna; Champion, Marc (8 May 2022). "Mariupol Steel Plant's 'Dead Men' Defenders Call for Rescue Plan" . Bloomberg News . Retrieved 2 June 2022 . ^ Hopkins, Valerie; Nechepurenko, Ivan; and Santora, Marc (16 May 2022). "Ukrainian authorities declare an end to the combat mission in Mariupol after weeks of Russian siege" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 16 May 2022 . Retrieved 16 May 2022 . ^ Harrison, Virginia and agencies (17 May 2022). "Hundreds of Ukrainian troops evacuated from Mariupol steelworks after 82-day assault: Blow for Ukraine as removal of soldiers, many wounded, suggests city that became symbol of resistance has fallen into Russian hands" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 17 May 2022 . ^ "Azovstal siege ends as hundreds of Ukrainian fighters surrender" . Reuters . Mariupol. 17 May 2022. Archived from the original on 17 May 2022 . Retrieved 17 May 2022 . ^ "Tens of thousands feared dead in Mariupol" . NBC News . 11 April 2022 . Retrieved 15 April 2022 . ^ Bacon, John; Mansfield, Erin; Wadington, Katie; Santucci, Jeanine; Vanden Brook, Tom; and Tebor, Celina (10 April 2022). "EU to consider Ukraine membership in weeks; Russia warns of 'direct military confrontation' with US: April 10 recap" . USA Today . Archived from the original on 10 April 2022 . Retrieved 28 May 2022 . ^ Telford, Taylor; Timsit, Annabelle; Pietsch, Bryan; Duplain, Julian (10 April 2022). "As war enters bloody new phase, Ukraine again calls for more weapons" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 11 April 2022 . Retrieved 23 May 2022 . ^ Saric, Ivana (10 April 2022). "Satellite images: Russian military convoy heads south toward Donbas region" . Axios . ^ "Ukraine says 'Battle of Donbas' has begun, Russia pushing in east" . Reuters . 18 April 2022. Archived from the original on 18 April 2022 . Retrieved 23 May 2022 . ^ Murphy, Matt (23 May 2022). "Ukraine war: Russian assault on key Donbas city intensifies" . BBC . Archived from the original on 23 May 2022 . Retrieved 26 May 2022 . ^ "Russia seeking to capture Ukraine's Lyman: separatist leader" .

The Australian . 25 May 2022. ISSN 1038-8761 . Archived from the original on 26 May 2022 . Retrieved 15 June 2022 . ^ "Russian forces have 'upper hand' in Donbas fighting, Ukrainian officials say" .

The Guardian . 26 May 2022. ^ Markic, Igor. "Ucraina, Belgorod sotto attacco, ma i Russi stringono la morsa su Severodonetsk" . Rivista Italiana Difesa (in Italian). Coop Giornalistica La Riviera . Retrieved 22 May 2022 . ^ "Donetsk region: occupying forces capture Svitlodarsk" . Yahoo News . 24 May 2022 . Retrieved 24 May 2022 . ^ "Russian troops enter outskirts of key city in eastern Ukraine's Donbas" . NBC News . 30 May 2022 . Retrieved 2 June 2022 . ^ Thebault, Reis; Iati, Marisa; Timsit, Annabelle; Suliman, Adela; Pietsch, Bryan; Pannett, Rachel (2 June 2022). "Russia, U.S. trade barbs over weapons pledge; Severodonetsk on the brink" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 5 June 2022 . ^ "Russia 'suffering huge casualties' as troops retreat: Ukraine" . Al Jazeera . 4 June 2022 . Retrieved 5 June 2022 . ^ "Ukraine war: Chemical plant hit as fighting rages in Severodonetsk" . BBC News . 11 June 2022 . Retrieved 9 August 2022 . ^ Sauer, Pjotr (12 June 2022). "Fighting in eastern Ukraine rages as Sievierodonetsk chemical plant hit" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 9 August 2022 . ^ Gibbons-Neff, Thomas; Stevis-Gridneff, Matina (13 June 2022). "Ukraine Allies Ponder Options As Cities Falter" (PDF) .

The New York Times . Vol. 59, 453 (Late, New York ed.). p. 1. ^ Hughes, Clyde (20 June 2022). "Russian troops capture key suburb near Severodonetsk after months of battle" . UPI . ^ Berlinger, Joshua; Lister, Tim (24 June 2022). "Ukraine to withdraw from key city of Severodonetsk as Russia's advance grinds on" . CNN . ^ "Russia claims capture of pivotal city in eastern Ukraine" . CBS News . 3 July 2022. ^ Jones, Sam (4 July 2022). "Putin declares victory in Luhansk after fall of Lysychansk" .

The Guardian . ^ "Russian rockets destroy airport in Ukrainian city of Dnipro" . Al Jazeera . 10 April 2022 . Retrieved 1 October 2023 . ^ Rai, Arpan; Bancroft, Holly (2 May 2022). "Mariupol steelworks shelling resumes as doctors describe dire bunker conditions" . Yahoo! News . Retrieved 2 June 2022 . ^ Lewis, Simon (28 June 2022). "Dozens missing after Russian missile strike on mall kills 18" . Reuters . ^ "Russia accused of shelling from Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant in Ukraine" . France 24 . 7 July 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 . ^ Murphy, Francois (20 July 2023). "Russia yet to grant access to Zaporizhzhia nuclear reactor roofs, IAEA says" . Reuters . Retrieved 24 September 2023 . Mureephy, Matt (19 August 2022). "Ukraine war: Russia to allow inspectors at Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant – Putin" . BBC News . Retrieved 1 October 2023 . ^ "Growing concern about Zaporizhzya NPP sparks international diplomacy" . Nuclear Engineering International. 22 August 2022 . Retrieved 1 October 2023 . ^ "UK, US Set Ultimatum Against Russia Due To Provocations At Zaporizhzhia NPP" . Charter 97 . 20 August 2022. ^ "The West considers applying NATO's Article 5 in response to possible accident at Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant" . Ukrainska Pravda . Retrieved 20 August 2022 . ^ a b Hird, Karolina; Barros, George; Philipson, Layne; Kagan, Frederick W. (6 September 2022). Russian offensive campaign assessment, September 6 (PDF) (Report). Institute for the Study of War . Retrieved 10 September 2022 . "Oleksandr Syrskyi, o coronel-general que está a orquestrar a contraofensiva na Ucrânia" . Observador (in Portuguese). Sauer, Pjotr; Koshiw, Isobel (8 September 2022). "Ukraine launches surprise counterattack in Kharkiv region" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 10 September 2022 . ^ Troianovski, Anton (12 September 2022). "Retreat Dents Image of a Might Putin" (PDF) .

The New York Times . Vol. 59544 (Late, New York ed.). p. 1. Kramer, Andrew; Higgins, Andrew (12 September 2022). "An Emboldened Kyiv Wants More Arms" (PDF) .

The New York Times . Vol. 59544 (Late, New York ed.). Kharkiv, Ukraine. p. 1. ^ "Putin calls up reservists, warns Russia will use 'all means' for defence" . France 24 . 21 September 2022 . Retrieved 21 September 2022 . Scott-Geddes, Arthur (21 September 2022). "Putin calls up 300,000 reservists in 'partial mobilisation' " .

The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 21 September 2022 . "Russia calls up 300,000 reservists, says 6,000 soldiers killed in Ukraine" . Reuters . 21 September 2022 . Retrieved 21 September 2022 . ^ "Ukraina odpowiada na orędzie Władimira Putina: Rosjanie dostali "prezent" " . gazetapl (in Polish). 21 September 2022 . Retrieved 21 September 2022 . ^ Ellyatt, Holly (21 September 2022). "Russia's Putin announces partial military mobilization" . CNBC . Retrieved 21 September 2022 . ^ " 'We're minor losses': Russia's mobilisation targets ethnic minorities" . Financial Times . 4 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 November 2022 . ^ "Ukraine war: Russia claims win in occupied Ukraine 'sham' referendums" . BBC News . 27 September 2022 . Retrieved 29 September 2022 . ^ Berlinger, Joshua; Chernova, Anna; Lister, Tim (30 September 2022). "Putin announces annexation of Ukrainian regions in defiance of international law" . CNN . Retrieved 26 January 2023 . Speri, Alice (8 October 2022). "Will Putin Face Prosecution for the Crime of Aggression in Ukraine?" .

The Kyiv Independent . Retrieved 5 September 2022 . Gadzo, Mersiha; Ibrahim, Arwa (4 September 2022). "Ukraine-Russia live 4 September 2022" . Al Jazeera . ^ Dammers, Tobias (10 September 2022). "Gegenoffensive in Südukraine. "Je schneller vorbei, desto besser" " . Tagesschau (in German) . Retrieved 10 September 2022 . ^ Peter, Laurence; Murphy, Matt (4 October 2022). "Ukraine makes breakthrough in south against Russia Published" . BBC News . Retrieved 10 October 2022 . ^ "Ukraine says it recaptured 1,200 sq km of Kherson region in ongoing counteroffensive" . Reuters . 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 10 October 2022 . ^ Beaumont, Peter; Sauer, Pjotr (9 November 2022). "Russian troops ordered to retreat from Kherson in face of Ukrainian advance" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 10 November 2022 . ^ Kramer, Andrew E.; Santora, Marc (11 November 2022). "Russia-Ukraine War: Zelensky Hails 'Historic Day' as Ukrainian Troops Enter Kherson" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 26 April 2023 . ^ a b c Holder, Josh; Hernandez, Marco (6 April 2023). "How Russia's Offensive Ran Aground" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 26 April 2023 . ^ Galeotti, Mark (24 May 2023). "Ukraine's next move: can Putin be outsmarted?" .

The Spectator . Retrieved 25 May 2023 . ^ Schwirtz, Michael; Addario, Lynsey (6 February 2023). "Outnumbered and Worn Out, Ukrainians in East Brace for Russian Assault" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 25 March 2023 . ^ "The success of Russia's mercenary group says something about Putin's war" .

The Independent . 13 January 2023 . Retrieved 26 April 2023 . ^ Grove, Thomas (24 January 2023). "Fighting Intensifies in Southern Ukraine".

The Wall Street Journal . p. A6. ^ "Ukraine Latest: Russia Makes 'Incremental Gains' Around Bakhmut" . Bloomberg.com . 22 January 2023 . Retrieved 17 June 2023 . ^ Santora, Marc (16 February 2023). "Moscow's Military Capabilities Are in Question After Failed Battle for Ukrainian City" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 26 April 2023 . ^ Kramer, Andrew E. (1 March 2023). "How Russia Lost an Epic Tank Battle, Repeating Earlier Mistakes" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 26 April 2023 . ^ Sauer, Pjotr (27 March 2023). "Russian soldiers say commanders used 'barrier troops' to stop them retreating" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 25 January 2024 . ^ Axe, David (18 January 2024). " 'They're Just Choosing Where To Die.' When Russia's Poorly-Trained Stormtroopers Retreat, Russian Barrier Troops Gun Them Down" . Forbes . Retrieved 25 January 2024 . ^ "Ukrainian military source: Russia controls administrative territory of Soledar" .

The Kyiv Independent . 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 16 January 2023 . ^ "Ukraine confirms that Russia has taken control of disputed town of Soledar" . news360.es . 16 January 2023 . Retrieved 29 November 2025 . ^ "Russia Pours Fighters Into Battle for Bakhmut" .

The New York Times . 1 February 2023. Guerin, Orla (8 February 2023). "Ukraine war: Borrowed time for Bakhmut as Russians close in" . BBC News . Retrieved 10 February 2023 . Engel, Richard (9 February 2023). "Ukraine's defiant city struggles to hold out as Russia pushes for a bloody victory" . CBS News . Retrieved 10 February 2023 . ^ "Bakhmut: Fighting in the street but Russia not in control – deputy mayor" . BBC News . 4 March 2023 . Retrieved 4 March 2023 . Badshah, Nadeem; Clinton, Jane; Gerts, Mark (4 March 2023). "As it happened: street fighting in Bakhmut as battle rages for control of the city" .

The Guardian . ^ "Ukraine hits Russian naval targets in major Crimea attack" . Reuters . 13 September 2023. ^ "As Russia hits Ukraine's energy facilities with a deadly missile attack, fear mounts over nuclear plants". CBS News . 21 September 2023. ^ "Ukraine to receive US long-range ATACMS missiles, US media report". Al Jazeera . ^ Stern, David L. (22 September 2023). "Ukraine hits headquarters of Russia's Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol".

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . ^ Kilner, James (23 September 2023). "Russian commanders killed in Storm Shadow missile strike".

The Daily Telegraph . ISSN 0307-1235 . ^ a b Page, Lewis (12 November 2023). "Ukraine's counteroffensive has failed — here's why" .

The Telegraph . Retrieved 12 December 2023 . ^ Cooper, Helene; Schmitt, Eric (11 December 2023). "U.S. and Ukraine Seek New Strategy for War's Next Phase" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 12 December 2023 . ^ Jaffe, Greg; Ryan, Missy (4 December 2023). "Ukraine's counteroffensive stalls amid Russian defenses" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 12 December 2023 . ^ Cole, Brendan (26 October 2023). "Mutiny is brewing in the Russian army" . Newsweek . Retrieved 27 October 2023 . ^ "Russia ramping up attacks in eastern Ukrainian town of Avdiivka" . France 24 . 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 12 December 2023 . ^ Lukiv, Jaroslav (17 February 2024). "Avdiivka: Ukraine troops leaving embattled eastern town" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 17 February 2024 . Retrieved 17 February 2024 . ^ Walker, Shaun (17 February 2024). "Ukrainian forces withdraw from Avdiivka to avoid encirclement, army chief says" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Archived from the original on 17 February 2024 . Retrieved 17 February 2024 . ^ "Avdiivka, Longtime Stronghold for Ukraine, Falls to Russians" .

The New York Times . 17 February 2024. Archived from the original on 17 February 2024 . Retrieved 17 February 2024 . ^ Axe, David (8 March 2024). "Russian Regiments Collide With Ukraine's Rebuilt Defensive Line—And Lose 80 Vehicles In One Day" . Forbes . Retrieved 13 April 2024 . ^ Watling, Jack (19 February 2024). "The Peril of Ukraine's Ammo Shortage" . Time . Retrieved 19 April 2024 . ^ Kullab, Samya and Morton, Elise (25 May 2024). "Zelenskyy says Ukraine has taken back control in areas of Kharkiv region, aerial attacks continue" . AP News . Retrieved 7 June 2024 . ^ Mayer, Daryna and Talmazan, Yuliya (17 May 2024). "Ukraine halts Russia's advance and unleashes a wave of drones on Crimea" . NBC News . Retrieved 7 June 2024 . ^ Dress, Brad (7 June 2024). "US says Russia's advance on Kharkiv is 'all but over' " .

The Hill . Retrieved 12 June 2024 . ^ Barnes, Joe (24 April 2024). "Russian troops advance five miles after Ukrainians left front line unmanned" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 8 August 2024. ^ Farrell, Francis (8 August 2024). "Ukraine's unprecedented attack on Kursk Oblast brings war back to Russian soil" . Kyiv Independent . ^ Méheut, Constant (15 August 2024). "Ukraine Captures Russian Town, Zelensky Says" .

The New York Times . ^ "Ukraine's swift push into the Kursk region shocked Russia and exposed its vulnerabilities" . Associated Press . 16 August 2024. ^ Lister, Tim; Brennan, Eve; Goodwin, Allegra (17 August 2024). "How Ukraine turned the war on its head with surprise attack on southern Russia" . CNN . Retrieved 18 August 2024 . ^ O'Grady, Siobhán; Burianova, Tetiana; and Morgunov, Serhiy (31 August 2024). "Ukraine's gamble in Russia has yet to slow Moscow's eastern assault" .

The Washington Post . ^ O'Grady, Siobhán; Ebel, Francesca; Khudov, Kostiantyn; Morgunov, Serhiy; Korolchuk, Serhii (11 August 2025). "Ukraine invaded Russia, seizing land it hoped to trade. It couldn't hold on" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 18 December 2025 . ^ Johnson, Lizzie; Korolchuk, Serhii; Galouchka, Anastacia; Khudov, Kostiantyn; Ram, Ed; Chen, Yutao; Ledur, Júlia; Sand, Bishop (8 September 2025). "Russia bombs Ukraine almost every night. This is what it sounds like" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 9 September 2025. ^ a b Miller, Christopher (30 August 2024). "Volodymyr Zelenskyy faces backlash over Russia's breach of eastern defences" . FT . Archived from the original on 31 August 2024 . Retrieved 31 August 2024 . ^ Khurshudyan, Isabelle; Galouchka, Anastacia; and Morgunov, Serhiy (22 August 2024). "Ukrainians cheer push into Russia but fear it comes at the cost of the east" .

The Washington Post . ^ "The Kremlin is close to crushing Pokrovsk, a vital Ukrainian town" .

The Economist . 22 August 2024. ^ "Moscow sees one of Ukraine's largest drone attacks as fighting rages in Kursk and eastern Ukraine" . Associated Press . 22 August 2024.

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 18 September 2024 . Retrieved 18 September 2024 . ^ "Russian forces storming east Ukrainian town of Vuhledar, bloggers and media say" . Reuters . 24 September 2024. ^ Kilner, James (1 October 2024). "Russia secures biggest victory since February as it captures Ukrainian stronghold" .

The Daily Telegraph . ^ Harding, Luke (2 October 2024). "Ukraine says its forces have withdrawn from defensive bastion of Vuhledar" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 9 October 2024 . ^ Kilner, James; Hardaker, Daniel (30 October 2024). "Ukraine's front line is 'crumbling' against Russian advances, says general" .

The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 7 November 2024 . ^ Barnes, Julian E.; Schmitt, Eric; Cooper, Helene; Barker, Kim (1 November 2024). "As Russia Advances, U.S. Fears Ukraine Has Entered a Grim Phase" .

The Telegraph . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ Beaumont, Peter (11 June 2026). " 'Highway of death': the Ukrainian drone campaign menacing Russian logistics" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 14 June 2026 . ^ Eastwood, Brent M. (11 June 2026). "Russia's Last Supply Road to Crimea Has Earned a Grim New Name: The 'Highway of Death' " . National Security Journal . Retrieved 14 June 2026 . ^ Lohinov, Yehor; Eckel, Mike (20 May 2026). "On Springtime Battlefield In War's Fifth Year, Ukraine Claws Back Territory" . RFE/RL . Retrieved 22 May 2026 . ^ Verbian, Volodymyr (22 May 2026). "Ukraine, Allies Grow Confident Russia Invasion Losing Steam" . Bloomberg . Retrieved 22 May 2026 . ^ Beaumont, Peter (14 May 2026). "Ukraine hit by second day of large-scale Russian missile and drone strikes" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 14 May 2026 . ^ Khalili-Tari, Daniel (15 May 2026). "Zelenskyy vows response after Russian strike kills 24 in Kyiv" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 16 May 2026 . ^ "Kyiv in mourning after 24 killed in strike as Russia, Ukraine exchange POWs" . France 24 . 15 May 2026 . Retrieved 16 May 2026 . ^ Sabbagh, Dan (16 May 2022). "Putin involved in war 'at level of colonel or brigadier', say western sources" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 10 October 2023 . ^ a b "Russia's War in Ukraine: Military and Intelligence Aspects" . Congressional Research Service. 13 February 2023 . Retrieved 10 October 2023 . ^ Burns, Robert; Yen, Hope (10 April 2022). "US doubts new Russian war chief can end Moscow's floundering" . AP . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "General Dvornikov 'no longer in command' of Russian Army in Ukraine - CIT" . New Voice of Ukraine . 3 June 2022 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Cooper, Helene (31 May 2022). "Russian Military Is Repeating Mistakes in Eastern Ukraine, U.S. Says" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Hardie, John (12 January 2023). "Moscow Shakes Up Command of Its Forces in Ukraine (Again)" . Long War Journal . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Putin Likely Lets Gerasimov Stay On as Top General After Hitting Retirement Age" . Moscow Times . 9 September 2025 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Ryan, Mick (10 September 2023). "The Russians may be learning from the mistakes of the Ukraine war. But are they adapting fast enough?" . ABC News . Retrieved 10 October 2023 . ^ Deliso, Meredith (8 May 2022). "Why Russia has suffered the loss of an 'extraordinary' number of generals" . ABC News . Retrieved 26 June 2023 . ^ Shuster, Simon (26 September 2022). "Inside the Ukrainian Counterstrike That Turned the Tide of the War" . Time . Retrieved 10 September 2023 . ^ Moloney, Marita (8 February 2024). "Zelensky sacks Ukraine's commander-in-chief Valerii Zaluzhnyi" . BBC News . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Вооруженные силы Украины атаковали Миллерово «Точкой-У»" . Rostov Gazeta (in Russian). 25 February 2022. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ Insinna, Valerie (19 September 2022). "It took 'couple of months' to put US anti-radiation missiles on Ukrainian fighters, USAF reveals" . Breaking Defense . Retrieved 26 December 2022 . ^ Meilhan, Pierre; Roth, Richard (22 October 2022). "Ukrainian military says 18 Russian cruise missiles destroyed amid attacks on energy infrastructure" . CNN . Retrieved 26 December 2022 . ^ "UN: Russian attacks on Ukraine's energy system have killed 77 civilians since Oct. 10" .

The Kyiv Independent . 25 November 2022 . Retrieved 26 December 2022 . ^ "Ukraine battles to restore power as millions face blackouts" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 26 December 2022 . ^ "Three dead in explosions at Russian airbases" .

The New Voice of Ukraine . 5 December 2022 . Retrieved 11 February 2023 . "Three killed in second attack on Engels base deep inside Russia" . CNBC . Reuters . 26 December 2022 . Retrieved 11 February 2023 . ^ Boffey, Daniel (6 June 2025). " 'He's a bulldog': the man behind the success of Ukraine's Operation Spiderweb" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 10 June 2025 . ^ Bego, Katja (5 June 2025). "Ukraine's Operation Spider's Web is a game-changer for modern drone warfare. NATO should pay attention" . Chatham House – International Affairs Think Tank . Retrieved 10 June 2025 . ^ Stewart, Phil; Ali, Idrees (5 June 2025). "Exclusive: Ukraine hit fewer Russian planes than it estimated, US officials say" . Reuters . Retrieved 10 June 2025 . ^ Gozzi, Laura (2 June 2025). "How Ukraine carried out daring 'Spider Web' attack on Russian bombers" . BBC News . Retrieved 10 June 2025 . ^ Bondar, Kateryna (3 June 2025). "How Ukraine's Operation "Spider's Web" Redefines Asymmetric Warfare" . CSIS . Retrieved 10 June 2025 . ^ "Just how much damage did Ukraine do in its 'Spiderweb' drone attack on Russia?" . NBC News . 7 June 2025 . Retrieved 10 June 2025 . ^ Mazhulin, Artem; Holmes, Oliver; Swan, Lucy; Boulinier, Laure; Hecimovic, Arnel (2 June 2025). "Operation Spiderweb: a visual guide to Ukraine's destruction of Russian aircraft" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 10 June 2025 . ^ "Russian Navy Day Celebrations Canceled In Crimea's Sevastopol After Reported Drone Attack" . Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . 31 July 2022 . Retrieved 23 August 2022 . ^ Cheetham, Joshua (11 August 2022). "Ukraine war: Crimea airbase badly damaged, satellite images show" . BBC News . Retrieved 6 September 2022 . ^ Sands, Leo (7 September 2022). "Saky airfield: Ukraine claims Crimea blasts responsibility after denial" . BBC News . Retrieved 12 September 2022 . ^ Kirby, Paul (16 August 2022). "Ukraine war: Russia blames sabotage for new Crimea blasts" . BBC News . Retrieved 19 August 2022 . ^ Graham-Harrison, Emma (19 August 2022). "Fires and explosions reported at military targets in Russia and Crimea" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 19 August 2022 . ^ Kramer, Andrew E.; Schwirtz, Michael (11 October 2022) . "Explosion on 12-Mile Crimea Bridge Kills 3" .

The New York Times . eISSN 1553-8095 . ISSN 0362-4331 . OCLC 1645522 . Archived from the original on 8 October 2022 . Retrieved 8 October 2022 . ^ Pennington, Josh; Stambaugh, Alex (16 July 2023). "Emergency incident reported on bridge linking Crimea with Russia" . CNN . Archived from the original on 17 July 2023 . Retrieved 16 July 2023 . ^ Goldsmith, Adam (3 June 2025). "Crimea bridge reopens after Ukraine says it carried out underwater explosion" . BBC News . Retrieved 7 June 2025 . ^ "Russia launches another major missile attack on Ukraine" . Associated Press News . 16 December 2022 . Retrieved 17 December 2022 . ^ Impelli, Matthew (6 October 2022). "Half of Russia's Iranian-made drones obliterated in one week: Ukraine" . Newsweek . Archived from the original on 17 December 2022 . Retrieved 17 December 2022 . ^ "Russia names new commander of its forces engaged in Ukraine" . Al-Arabiya . 8 October 2022. Archived from the original on 30 October 2022 . Retrieved 8 October 2022 . ^ Warrick, Joby; Nakashima, Ellen; Harris, Shane (16 October 2022). "Iran plans to send missiles, drones to Russia for Ukraine war, officials say" .

The Washington Post . ^ "Ukraine war: US says Iranian drones breach sanctions" . BBC News . 18 October 2022. ^ a b Kennedy, Niamh; Mahmoodi, Negar; Kottasová, Ivana; Raine, Andrew (16 October 2022). "Iran denies supplying Russia with weapons for use in Ukraine" . CNN . Archived from the original on 12 September 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2022 . ^ "European countries urge UN probe of Iran drones in Ukraine" . France 24 . Agence France-Presse . 22 October 2022 . Retrieved 5 November 2022 . ^ Atwood, Kylie (1 November 2022). "Iran is preparing to send additional weapons including ballistic missiles to Russia to use in Ukraine, western officials say" . CNN . Retrieved 29 November 2022 . ^ "Barrage of Russian missiles causes blackouts across Ukraine: Ukraine's energy minister says the wave of attacks was the biggest bombardment of power facilities in war so far" . Al Jazeera . 17 November 2022. ^ Kramer, Andrew E. (10 March 2023). "Russia Fires Hypersonic Missiles in Largest Air Assault in Weeks".

The New York Times . ^ "UK Defense Ministry: Russia's strategy of attacking Ukraine's critical infrastructure becoming less effective" .

The Kyiv Independent . 1 December 2022. ^ Cranny-Evans, Sam (24 June 2024). "Bracing for the Hardest Winter: Protecting Ukraine's Energy Infrastructure" . Royal United Services Institute . ^ "Russian Missile Identified in Kyiv Children's Hospital Attack" . Bellingcat . 9 July 2024. ^ Arhirova, Hanna (11 July 2024). "Russian missile attack on Ukraine's largest hospital complicates treatment of kids with cancer" . AP . Retrieved 18 May 2025 . ^ Vlasova, Svitlana; Tarasova-Markina, Daria; Kostenko, Maria; Butenko, Victoria; Said-Moorhouse, Lauren (8 July 2024). "Ukrainian children's hospital attacked as Russian strikes on cities kill at least 43" . CNN . Retrieved 18 May 2025 . ^ Corp, Rob; Herrmannsen, Kyla (8 July 2024). "Children's hospital hit as Russian strikes kill dozens in Ukraine" . BBC News . Retrieved 18 May 2025 . ^ "Russian airstrikes kill at least 41 in Ukraine, damage Kyiv children's hospital" . CBC News . 8 July 2024 . Retrieved 18 May 2025 . ^ Melkozerova, Veronika (8 July 2024). "Russia bombs children's hospital as missiles kill dozens across Ukraine" . Politico . Retrieved 18 May 2025 . ^ "Russia cancelled Black Sea passage bid of four warships: Turkey" . Al Jazeera . 2 March 2022 . Retrieved 29 March 2022 . Tavsan, Sinan (2 March 2022). "Turkey rejects Russia's request for navy ships to pass Bosporus" . Nikkei Asia . Retrieved 17 March 2022 . "Turkey to implement pact limiting Russian warships to Black Sea" . Reuters . 28 February 2022 . Retrieved 17 March 2022 . ^ Boruah, Manash Pratim; Karle, Prathamesh; Tringham, Kate (25 February 2022). "Russian attacks on Ukraine's coast threaten loss of key naval bases as well as critical shipbuilding facilities" . Jane's Defence Weekly . ^ "Russian Navy Captures Ukraine's Outpost on Snake Island" .

The Maritime Executive . 24 February 2022. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ Lister, Tim; Pennington, Josh (24 February 2022). "February 24, 2022 Russia-Ukraine news" . CNN . Entry: Audio emerges appearing to be of Ukrainian fighters defending island from Russian warship. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . " "Russkyy korablʹ, ydy na kh.y!": zakhysnyky Zmiyinoho vidpovily vorohovi" "Русский корабль, иди на х.й!": захисники Зміїного відповіли ворогові . Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ Visontay, Elias (25 February 2022). "Ukraine soldiers told Russian officer 'go fuck yourself' before they died on island" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ Hodge, Nathan; Cotovio, Vasco; Lieberman, Oren (26 February 2022). "Pentagon denies Russia's claim that it's "highly likely" US used surveillance drones to help Ukrainian navy" . CNN . Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. ^ Evans, Michael (4 March 2022). "Ukraine scuttles its flagship frigate as the Russians close in" .

The Times . Retrieved 4 March 2022 . "Frehat Ukrayiny "Hetʹman Sahaydachnyy" vyvedenyy z ladu" Фрегат України "Гетьман Сагайдачний" виведений з ладу (in Ukrainian). Armed Forces of Ukraine . 4 March 2022 . Retrieved 28 March 2022 . "Hetman Sahaidachny frigate, being under repair, flooded not to get to enemy – Reznikov" . Interfax Ukraine . 4 March 2022 . Retrieved 4 March 2022 . ^ Polityuk, Pavel; Heritage, Timothy (24 March 2022). Heavens, Andrew (ed.). "Ukraine says it has destroyed a large Russian landing ship" . Reuters . Retrieved 24 March 2022 . ^ Saul, Jonathan (12 March 2022). "UN to work on safe corridor for ships stranded by Ukraine conflict" . Reuters . Retrieved 22 May 2022 . ^ Pedrozo, Raul (12 April 2022). "Ukraine Symposium – Maritime Exclusion Zones in Armed Conflicts" . West Point . United States Military Academy . Retrieved 22 May 2022 . ^ "Communication from the Government of the Russian Federation" (PDF) . Mission of the Russian Federation to the IMO . International Maritime Organization . 28 March 2022. Circular Letter No.4543 . Retrieved 8 June 2022 . ^ "Russia-Ukraine war latest: Ukraine PM to head to Washington; Russian warship sunk by Ukraine missile strike, say US officials – live" .

The Guardian . 16 April 2022. ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 16 April 2022 . ^ "Russia confirms severe damage to Black Sea Fleet Flagship Moskva, Crew Abandoned Ship" .

The Free Press Journal . 14 April 2022 . Retrieved 14 April 2022 . ^ Forgey, Quint (14 April 2022). "Pentagon confirms explosion aboard Russian warship" . Politico . Retrieved 14 April 2022 . ^ "Russian warship Moskva has sunk – state media" . BBC News . 14 April 2022 . Retrieved 14 April 2022 . ^ Polityuk, Pavel; Piper, Elizabeth (15 April 2022). "Ukraine says fighting rages in Mariupol, blasts rattle Kyiv" . Reuters . ^ "US intelligence helped Ukraine sink Russia's flagship cruiser Moskva" . ABC News . 6 May 2022. ^ "Lavrov said Russians would let through ships carrying grain if Ukraine demined ports" . Yahoo! News . Ukrainska Pravda . 31 May 2022 . Retrieved 1 June 2022 . ^ "Russia, Ukraine seal grain deal in Istanbul" . Le Monde . 22 July 2022 . Retrieved 2 August 2022 . Macias, Amanda (23 July 2022). " 'He simply cannot be trusted:' World leaders slam Putin's attack on Odesa following sea corridor deal" . CNBC . Retrieved 1 October 2023 . ^ Osborn, Andrew and Max Hunder: "Ukraine strikes Russian naval landing warship, Moscow admits damage," , 26 December 2023, Reuters ; video and transcript on YouTube ; also at NBC News as "Ukraine strikes Russian naval landing warship in Crimea," retrieved 26 December 2023 ^ Dorgan, Michael: "Ukraine missile attack strikes Russian warship in Crimea, killing at least 1: The landing ship, called Novocherkassk, was hit at a base in the city of Feodosia by plane-launched guided missiles, the Russian ministry said," 26 December 2023, Fox News , retrieved 26 December 2023 ^ Lovett, Ian: "Ukraine Strikes Russian Warship in Crimea, in Another Blow to Moscow's Black Sea Fleet: Kyiv shows it can land blows deep behind Russian lines as the ground war edges toward stalemate," , 26 December 2023, The Wall Street Journal , retrieved 26 December 2023 ^ "Watch: Ukraine sinks Russian warship in Black Sea drone strike" .

The Telegraph . 1 February 2024 . Retrieved 1 February 2024 . ^ Greenall, Robert (1 February 2024). "Ukraine 'hits Russian missile boat Ivanovets in Black Sea' " . BBC Home . Retrieved 1 February 2024 . ^ Goryashko, Sergey (14 February 2024). "Ukraine sinks Russian ship off Crimean coast" . Politico . Retrieved 14 February 2024 . ^ Tom Balmforth, Pavel Polityuk (14 February 2024). "Ukraine says it sank Russian large landing warship in Black Sea" . Reuters . Retrieved 14 February 2024 . ^ Raghavan, Sudarsan; O'Grady, Siobhán; Shefte, Whitney; Khudov, Kostiantyn (28 February 2022). "In a Kyiv under siege, neighbors dig trenches and raise barriers to brace for Russian assault" .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . OCLC 2269358 . Archived from the original on 1 March 2022 . Retrieved 30 May 2022 . ^ Kirby, Jen (3 March 2022). "The other members of Ukraine's resistance" . Vox . Retrieved 10 March 2022 . ^ Doubek, James (1 March 2022). "Road signs direct expletives at the Russian military" . NPR . ^ Bella, Timothy (26 February 2022). "Ukrainian agency, urging removal of road signs, posts fake photo with a colorful message for Russia" .

The Washington Post . ^ a b c Hunter, Daniel (1 March 2022). "How Ukrainian Civilians Are Resisting Military Force" . YES! Magazine . Retrieved 8 March 2022 . ^ "Ukrainian Civilians Take On Russian Invaders With Words And Deeds" . Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . 28 February 2022 . Retrieved 8 March 2022 . Schwirtz, Michael; Santora, Marc; Hill, Evan; Cardia, Alexander (5 March 2022). "Ukrainian protesters take to the streets in occupied Kherson" .

The New York Times . ISSN 1553-8095 . OCLC 1645522 . Archived from the original on 5 March 2022 . Retrieved 8 March 2022 . ^ Murphy, Paul P.; Lister, Tim; Mezzofiore, Gianluca; and Voitovych, Olga (5 March 2022). "Ukrainian authorities accuse Russians of opening fire on civilian protest" . CNN International . Retrieved 8 March 2022 . ^ Judah, Tim (10 April 2022). "How Kyiv was saved by Ukrainian ingenuity as well as Russian blunders" . Financial Times . Retrieved 7 June 2025 . ^ "What is the Real Cost and Benefit of Ukrainian Attacks on Russian Refining?" . Carnegie Russia Eurasia Center . 25 June 2024 . Retrieved 28 August 2025 . ^ a b Polityuk, Pavel; Komuves, Anita; Dvorakova, Vera (22 August 2025). "Ukrainian attack suspends Russian oil flows to Hungary, Slovakia" . Reuters . Kyiv/Budapest: Thomson Reuters . Retrieved 23 August 2025 . ^ "Scholz zu Russland-Sanktionen: Deutschland stoppt Nord Stream 2" . ZDFheute (in German). Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen. 22 February 2022 . Retrieved 24 August 2022 . ^ Lehberger, Roman; Schmid, Fidelius (21 August 2025). "(S+) Nord Stream: Mutmaßlicher Angreifer auf Ostseepipelines gefasst" . Der Spiegel (in German). ISSN 2195-1349 . Retrieved 21 August 2025 . ^ "EU adopts 18th package of sanctions against Russia" . ec.europa.eu . 18 July 2025 . Retrieved 22 July 2025 . ^ "EU imposes new sanctions on Russia's oil and banks after Robert Fico lifts his veto" . euronews.com . 18 July 2025 . Retrieved 22 July 2025 . ^ "Russia says Ukraine 'virtually destroys' gas infrastructure in Sudzha" . Reuters . Moscow: Thomson Reuters. 28 March 2025 . Retrieved 23 August 2025 . ^ "More than 100,000 Ukrainian homes lose power after Russia targets energy sites" . France 24 . 27 August 2025 . Retrieved 30 August 2025 . ^ "Russia says it put out fire at large oil refinery after latest Ukrainian drone attack" . Reuters . 25 August 2025 . Retrieved 30 August 2025 . ^ Sauer, Pjotr (27 August 2025). "Frustrated Russians grapple with fuel crisis as Ukraine attacks oil refineries" . theguardian.com . Retrieved 30 August 2025 . ^ "Russia's oil and fuel export revenue fell in August, IEA says" . reuters.com . 11 September 2025 . Retrieved 11 September 2025 . ^ Tan, Huileng (11 September 2025). "Putin's energy fix for drone-hit Russia: Dig up more coal" . businessinsider.com . Retrieved 11 September 2025 . ^ "Drones strike Russia's major export-oriented oil refinery" . Bloomberg . 14 September 2025 . Retrieved 14 September 2025 – via Business Line . ^ a b Melander, Ingrid; Gabriela, Baczynska (24 February 2022). "EU targets Russian economy after 'deluded autocrat' Putin invades Ukraine" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 26 February 2022 . Retrieved 26 February 2022 . "Western Countries Agree To Add Putin, Lavrov To Sanctions List" . Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . 25 February 2022. Archived from the original on 26 February 2022 . Retrieved 26 February 2022 . ^ Funakoshi, Minami; Lawson, Hugh; Deka, Kannaki (9 March 2022). "Tracking sanctions against Russia" . Reuters . Retrieved 28 May 2022 . ^ "NATO's response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine" . NATO . Retrieved 27 October 2022 . ^ Wilson, Rachel; Robinson, Lou; Pettersson, Henrik (20 March 2024). "Ukraine aid: Where the money is coming from, in 4 charts" . CNN . ^ a b Wolf, Zachary (21 September 2023). "$113 billion: Where the US investment in Ukraine aid has gone" . CNN . ^ a b c "How Much U.S. Aid Is Going to Ukraine?" . Council on Foreign Relations . 27 September 2024. ^ Mills, Claire (12 May 2024). "Military assistance to Ukraine since the Russian invasion" . House of Commons Library . ^ "How America's Aid to Ukraine Actually Works" . Lawfare . 16 July 2024. ^ Volkmann-Schluck, Philip (18 January 2023). "Bulgaria to the rescue: How the EU's poorest country secretly saved Ukraine" . Politico . Retrieved 18 January 2023 . ^ LeBlanc, Paul (28 February 2022). "Why the US isn't sending troops into Ukraine" . CNN . Retrieved 20 April 2022 . ^ "How India Profits From Its Neutrality in the Ukraine War" .

The New York Times . 22 June 2023. ^ Brunnstrom, David (19 September 2024). "Ammunition from India enters Ukraine, raising Russian ire" . Reuters . Retrieved 30 September 2024 . ^ "Russia accuses Nato of 'proxy war' in Ukraine as US hosts crucial defence summit" .

The Guardian . 26 April 2022. ^ Dickinson, Peter (17 September 2024). "Putin is becoming entangled in his own discredited red lines" . Atlantic Council . ^ Najibullah, Farangis; Dobrynin, Sergei (8 March 2025). "How Important Is US Intelligence For Ukraine's War Effort?" . RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty . Retrieved 24 December 2025 . ^ Murauskaite, Egle E. "U.S. Assistance to Ukraine in the Information Space: Intelligence, Cyber, and Signaling" (PDF) . Retrieved 24 December 2025 . ^ Vincent, Elise; Grynszpan, Emmanuel (7 March 2025). " "Pause" of US intelligence sharing with Ukraine poses unprecedented challenges for allies" . Retrieved 24 December 2025 . ^ Hudson, John; Dixon, Robyn (11 March 2025). "U.S. lifts pause on Ukraine aid as Kyiv agrees to ceasefire proposal" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 11 March 2025 . Retrieved 24 December 2025 . ^ "U.S.-Ukraine Intelligence Sharing: A Conversation with Calder Walton" . Belfer Center . 12 March 2025 . Retrieved 24 December 2025 . ^ Pancevski, Bojan; Ward, Alexander; Seligman, Lara (1 October 2025). "U.S. to Provide Ukraine With Intelligence for Missile Strikes Deep Inside Russia" . Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 2 October 2025 . Retrieved 24 December 2025 . ^ Holland, Steve; Slattery, Gram (2 October 2025). "US to give Ukraine intelligence on long-range energy targets in Russia" . Reuters . Retrieved 24 December 2025 . ^ Sabbagh, Dan; Roth, Andrew (2 October 2025). "US to give Ukraine intelligence on long-range energy targets in Russia, say reports" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 24 December 2025 . ^ Balmforth, Tom (22 November 2025). "Exclusive: US threatens to cut intel, weapons to press Ukraine into peace deal, sources say" . Reuters . Retrieved 24 December 2025 . ^ Dariia, Mykailenko (15 January 2026). "France Supplies Majority of Intelligence Ukraine Uses in War With Russia, Macron Says" . UNITED24 Media . Retrieved 15 January 2026 . ^ "Macron: Coalition of the Willing provides 100% military support to Ukraine" . ukrinform.net . 15 January 2026 . Retrieved 15 January 2026 . ^ Epstein, Jake. "Ukraine's future F-16 fighter pilots are learning to fly without GPS as Russian jamming complicates air combat" . Business Insider . Retrieved 7 May 2026 . ^ Epstein, Jake. "Ukrainian pilots are breaking from Soviet-era tactics and learning to fly with a Western mindset" . Business Insider . Retrieved 7 May 2026 . ^ "Ukraine war briefing: Zelenskyy boosts army wages and seeks foreign recruits to counter manpower shortage" .

The Guardian . 13 June 2026. ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 14 June 2026 . ^ "Lukashenko: Belarus willing to offer more help to Russia" . AP News . 31 January 2023 . Retrieved 26 April 2023 . ^ "Почему российские "шахеды" залетают в Беларусь и чем это опасно для Украины" . BBC News Русская служба (in Russian). 23 July 2024 . Retrieved 23 July 2024 . ^ Lozka, Katsiaryna (2023). Between the hammer and the anvil : Belarus, its people, and Russia's war against Ukraine . Vol. 6. Instytut Europy Środkowej. hdl : 1854/LU-01HGZF2NV7XH9AVKAZSP0VSVX3 . ISBN 978-83-67678-29-2 . ^ "Putin's Strategic Failure" . IISS . Retrieved 28 June 2024 . ^ Humphreys, Richard; Paegļkalna, Lauma. "Combat Without Warfighting: Non-Belligerent Actors and the Russian Invasion of Ukraine" . SSRN 4048994 . ^ Baturo, Alex; Anceschi, Luca; Cavatorta, Francesco (10 May 2024). Personalism and Personalist Regimes . Oxford University Press. p. 195. ISBN 978-0-19-266471-6 . ^ The International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) (6 December 2023). Armed Conflict Survey 2023 . Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-040-01544-5 . ... Belarus remains a co-belligerent but not a co-combatant, providing extensive assistance to Russia – including the use of its territory to base Russian forces and launch attacks – without directly intervening with its own military assets ... ^ Studies (IISS), The International Institute for Strategic (12 December 2024).

The Guardian . Retrieved 10 October 2024 . ^ Jochecová, Ketrin (8 October 2024). "North Korean soldiers are likely dying for Putin in Ukraine, Seoul says" . Politico . Retrieved 10 October 2024 . ^ Lee, Youkyung (9 October 2024). "North Korea Seen Likely to Send Troops to Ukraine to Aid Russia" . Bloomberg . Retrieved 10 October 2024 . ^ Cecil, Nicholas (17 October 2024). "Putin military doubling 'kamikaze' drone attacks on Ukraine to 1,500 last month, say western officials" . Evening Standard . ^ "North Korea UN representative denies Pyongyang sent troops to Russia" . CNA . 22 October 2024. Archived from the original on 13 November 2024 . Retrieved 2 November 2024 . North Korea has not sent troops to Russia to help Moscow fight Ukraine, one of its United Nations representatives said on Monday (Oct 22), dismissing Seoul's claims as 'groundless rumour'. ^ "North Korea UN representative denies Pyongyang sent troops to Russia" . TRT World . 23 October 2024 . Retrieved 2 November 2024 . ^ Denisova, Kateryna (22 October 2024). "North Korea denies sending troops to join Russia's war in Ukraine, dismisses 'groundless rumors' " .

The Kyiv Independent . Retrieved 2 November 2024 . ^ Phil Stewart, Hyonhee Shin (23 October 2024). "US says evidence shows North Korea has troops in Russia, possibly for Ukraine war" . Reuters . Retrieved 24 October 2024 . ^ "Russia to deploy 10,000 North Korean troops against Ukraine within 'weeks', Pentagon says" .

The Guardian . 29 October 2024 . Retrieved 29 October 2024 . ^ Phil Stewart, Andrew Gray (28 October 2024). "No new limits on Ukraine's use of US arms if North Korea joins fight, Pentagon says" . Reuters . Retrieved 28 October 2024 . ^ "NATO, Pentagon confirm deployment of North Korean troops to Russia" . Al Jazeera . 28 October 2024 . Retrieved 28 October 2024 . ^ "North Korean Soldiers Fighting in Kursk" . Kyiv Post . 7 November 2024 . Retrieved 7 December 2024 . ^ Kang, Taejun (13 November 2024). "US confirms North Korean troops joining Russia in combat against Ukraine" . Radio Free Asia . Retrieved 14 November 2024 . ^ "South Korea says North Korean soldiers are fighting Ukraine forces" . Reuters . 13 November 2024 . Retrieved 14 November 2024 . ^ Kim, Stella; Aggarwal, Mithil (16 November 2024). "Language barriers and inexperience may hamper North Korean troops on Russia's battlefield" . NBC News . Retrieved 16 November 2024 . ^ Vergun, David (18 November 2024). "North Korean Troops Enter Kursk Where Ukrainians Are Fighting" . U.S. Department of Defence . Retrieved 3 December 2024 . ^ Zimko, Oleksandra (24 November 2024). "DPRK soldiers already participated in battles against Ukrainian Armed Forces in Kursk region" . RBC-Ukraine . Retrieved 7 December 2024 . ^ "Pentagon addresses DPRK troops' role in Russia's offensive" . RBC-Ukraine . 3 December 2024 . Retrieved 3 December 2024 . ^ "2,000 North Korean Troops Led by 3 Generals Join Russians Against Ukraine – Intel" . Kyiv Post . 3 December 2024 . Retrieved 5 December 2024 . ^ "North Korean troops killed in combat against Ukraine for first time, Pentagon says" . Reuters . ^ "A couple hundred North Korean troops killed, wounded in battles with Ukrainian forces" . AP News . 17 December 2024 . Retrieved 18 December 2024 . ^ "At least 100 North Koreans dead in Ukraine war, says South Korea" . BBC News . 19 December 2024 . Retrieved 21 December 2024 . ^ Szymanski, Steve; Keruski, Joshua C. T. (10 December 2024). "Ukraine Symposium – North Korea's Entry into International Armed Conflict" . Articles of War . Lieber Institute . Retrieved 8 January 2025 . ^ "Russians 'burning faces' of dead North Koreans to keep them secret: Zelenskyy" . Radio Free Asia . 17 December 2024 . Retrieved 18 December 2024 . ^ "Ukraine reports North Korean losses on Russia's Kursk front" . Reuters . 16 December 2024 . Retrieved 18 December 2024 . ^ Psaropoulos, John T. (27 January 2025). "North Koreans are 'disciplined', armed with high-quality ammo, says Ukraine" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 27 January 2025 . ^ Melkozerova, Veronika (21 January 2025). "Suicide and soap operas: North Koreans react to being Ukrainian POWs" . Politico . Retrieved 27 January 2025 . ^ Harding, Luke (18 January 2025). "Suicides, new tactics and propaganda iPads: details from captured North Koreans expose new foe in Ukraine" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 19 January 2025 . Retrieved 19 January 2025 . ^ Harvey, Lex (27 March 2025). "North Korea has sent 3,000 more soldiers to bolster Russia's war on Ukraine, South Korea says" . CNN . Retrieved 22 April 2025 . ^ Munster, Ben (26 April 2025). "Russia claims complete 'liberation' of Kursk, admits North Korea assistance" . Politico . Retrieved 26 April 2025 . ^ "North Korea to send military construction workers, deminers to rebuild Russia's Kursk region" . AFP . 17 June 2025 . Retrieved 12 August 2025 . ^ Mackenzie, Jean (12 August 2025). "North Koreans tell BBC they are being sent to work 'like slaves' in Russia" . BBC . Retrieved 12 August 2025 . ^ Shidore, Sarang (31 August 2023). "The Return of the Global South" . Foreign Affairs . ^ Banco, Eric; Aarup, Sarah Anne (16 March 2023). " 'Hunting rifles' — really? China ships assault weapons and body armor to Russia" . Politico . ^ "Use of Chinese ammunition in Ukraine confirmed by U.S.: sources" . Kyodo News . 18 March 2023. ^ Rettman, Andrew (9 May 2023). "The EU fears that Chinese and UAE firms could be supplying weapons components to Russia, new sanctions indicate" . EU Observer . ^ Nardelli, Alberto; Jacobs, Jennifer (6 April 2024). "China Is Providing Geospatial Intelligence to Russia, US Warns" . Bloomberg News . Retrieved 6 April 2024 . ^ "Exclusive: Russia has secret war drones project in China, intel sources say" . Reuters . 25 September 2024 . Retrieved 16 November 2024 . ^ Shats, Daniel; Mappes, Grace; Campa, Kelly; Hird, Karolina; Kagan, Frederick W. (16 July 2025). "Adversary Entente Task Force Update, July 16" . Institute for the Study of War . Retrieved 25 July 2025 . ^ Walsh, Nick Paton and Davey-Attlee, Florence (19 February 2024). "The Kremlin has never been richer – thanks to a US strategic partner" . CNN . Retrieved 15 September 2024 . ^ "Russian firms buy $4 billion worth of India-made arms, pay in Indian rupee" . FP News . Retrieved 16 September 2024 . ^ Reed, John; Seddon, Max; Cook, Chris; Rathbone, John Paul (4 September 2024). "Russia built covert trade channel with India, leaks reveal" . Financial Times . ^ Slattery, Gram (24 July 2025). "Exclusive: Indian firm shipped explosives to Russia despite US warnings" . Reuters . Retrieved 24 July 2025 . ^ "Slovakia and Hungary reject EU plan to phase out Russian gas by end-2027" . Reuters . 7 May 2025. ^ "How the West is helping Russia to fund its war on Ukraine" . 29 May 2025. ^ "The EU's continued trade with Russia undermines its support for Ukraine – EUROPP" . 9 October 2024. ^ Cook, Chris; Sheppard, David (24 September 2023). "Russia dodges G7 price cap sanctions on most of its oil exports" . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 26 September 2023 . Retrieved 21 May 2024 . ^ Saul, Jonathan; Verma, Nidhi; Verma, Nidhi (26 May 2023). "Exclusive: Lloyd's Register drops ships of top Indian carrier of Russian oil" . Reuters . ^ "How Dubai became 'the new Geneva' for Russian oil trade" . Financial Times . Retrieved 30 July 2025 . ^ "Maldives is second-largest microcircuit supplier to Russia after China" . pravda.com.ua . Retrieved 31 July 2023 . ^ Creel, Katherine; Yano, Shoji. "Maldives: Small island nation with big role shipping chips to Russia" . Nikkei Asia . Retrieved 31 July 2023 . ^ Adam Samson in Ankara and Chris Cook and Max Seddon in London Financial Times (27 Nov 2023) Turkey's exports of military-linked goods to Russia soar ^ "Three years into war, US and Europe keep billions in trade with Russia" . Reuters . 6 August 2025 . Retrieved 15 August 2025 . ^ Hamourtziadou, Lily (1 February 2023). "Ukraine war: casualty counts from either side can be potent weapons and shouldn't always be believed" .

The Conversation . ^ Kirby, Paul (13 April 2023). "Ukraine war: Pentagon leaks reveal Russian infighting over death toll" . BBC News . ^ Meyer, David (14 March 2022). "Why is it so hard to get accurate death tolls in the Russia-Ukraine war?" . Fortune . Retrieved 21 March 2022 . Roth, Andrew (22 March 2022). "How many Russian soldiers have died in the war in Ukraine?" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 22 March 2022 . ^ "Russia admits 'significant losses of troops' in Ukraine" . Al Jazeera . 8 April 2022 . Retrieved 17 September 2023 . ^ "Ukraine not to reveal own military death toll until war ends" . Ukrinform . 29 March 2022. ^ " 'Dying by the dozens every day' – Ukraine losses climb" . BBC News . 29 August 2023 . Retrieved 17 September 2023 . ^ Khurshudyan, Isabelle; Witte, Griff (26 February 2022). "Civilians are dying in Ukraine. But exactly how many remains a mystery" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 19 September 2023 . "As Russian Troop Deaths Climb, Morale Becomes an Issue, Officials Say" .

The New York Times . 17 March 2022. Archived from the original on 16 March 2022 . Retrieved 16 March 2022 .

The conservative side of the estimate, at more than 7,000 Russian troop deaths, is greater than the number of American troops killed over 20 years in Iraq and Afghanistan combined. ^ "Ukraine conflict death toll: what we know" . France 24 . Agence France-Presse . 13 April 2022 . Retrieved 20 April 2022 . ^ "Russia's 'irrecoverable losses' in Ukraine: more than 90,000 troops dead, disabled, or AWOL" . Meduza . 12 October 2022. ^ a b "Fifty-five thousand Ukrainian soldiers killed on battlefield, Zelenskiy tells French TV" . ^ a b "Zelenskyy says 55,000 Ukrainian soldiers killed in Russian all-out war" . euronews . 4 February 2026 . Retrieved 5 February 2026 . ^ a b "55,000 Ukrainian soldiers killed in war with Russia, Zelensky says" . BBC News . 5 February 2026 . Retrieved 7 February 2026 . ^ Regan, Helen; Kottasová, Ivana; Haq, Sana Noor; Khalil, Hafsa; Vogt, Adrienne; Sangal, Aditi (16 June 2022). "Tens of thousands have been killed since the invasion, says Ukrainian defense minister" . CNN . Retrieved 15 September 2022 . ^ Bennetts, Marc (25 June 2024). "Facing annihilation, the Ukrainian towns praying for Western reinforcements" .

The Times . Retrieved 25 June 2024 . ^ Yuhas, Alan (24 August 2022). "Thousands of Civilian Deaths and 6.6 Million Refugees: Calculating the Costs of War" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 20 September 2022 . ^ Shandra, Alya (30 August 2022). "87,000 killed civilians documented in occupied Mariupol – volunteer" . Euromaidan Press . Retrieved 20 September 2022 . ^ "Mariupol: invaders don't bother to clear residential buildings of newly discovered bodies" . Ukrinform . 4 September 2022 . Retrieved 19 September 2023 . ^ Karmanau, Yuras; Schreck, Adam; Anna, Cara (11 April 2022). "Over 10,000 civilians killed in Mariupol siege, mayor says" . PBS . Retrieved 17 September 2023 . ^ " 'Terrible toll': Russia's invasion of Ukraine by the numbers" .

The Japan Times . 14 February 2023 . Retrieved 26 September 2023 . Kyiv said at least 20,000 Ukrainian civilians had been killed.

In total, some 30,000 to 40,000 civilians have lost their lives nationwide in the conflict, Western sources say. ^ "At What Cost?

The Economic and Human Costs of Russia's Invasion of Ukraine" . C.D. Howe Institute . Retrieved 7 October 2023 . ^ "The Cost of War to Ukraine" .

The Royal United Services Institute for Defence and Security Studies . Retrieved 8 October 2023 . ^ "Russia scrubs Mariupol's Ukraine identity, builds on death" . AP News . 23 December 2022 . Retrieved 1 October 2023 . ^ "10,368: The incomplete count of Ukraine's civilian dead" . Agence France-Presse republished in France 24 . 6 June 2023 . Retrieved 29 September 2023 . ^ " "Our City Was Gone": Russia's Devastation of Mariupol, Ukraine" . Human Rights Watch . 8 February 2024. p. 147 . Retrieved 15 August 2025 . Based on an assessment of satellite imagery and photo and video analysis, we estimate that at least 10,284 people were buried in four of the city's cemeteries and in Manhush cemetery between March 2022 and February 2023. We also estimate that around 2,250 people would have died of causes unrelated to war in Mariupol during that period, meaning the city saw at least an estimated 8,034 deaths above a peacetime rate. We are not able to determine how many of those buried in the city were civilians or military personnel, or how many were killed as a result of unlawful attacks. ^ "Ukraine: Ukraine: civilian casualty update 24 September 2023" . Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights . 25 September 2023. ^ Schifrin, Nick; Cutler, Sarah; Fellow, Columbia Journalism (11 December 2023). "Russia's ethnic minorities disproportionately die in the war in Ukraine" . PBS NewsHour . Retrieved 17 May 2024 . ^ Latypova, Leyla (17 May 2024). "2 Years Into Ukraine War, Russia's Ethnic Minorities Disproportionately Killed in Battle" .

The Moscow Times . Retrieved 17 May 2024 . ^ Petkova, Mariya (25 October 2022). " 'Putin is using ethnic minorities to fight in Ukraine': Activist" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 17 May 2024 . ^ Bessonov, Ania (4 October 2022). "Russian ethnic minorities bearing brunt of Russia's war mobilization in Ukraine" . CBC . Retrieved 17 May 2024 . ^ "Young, poor and from minorities: the Russian troops killed in Ukraine" . France 24 . 17 May 2022 . Retrieved 17 May 2024 . ^ "Ukraine calls them meat assaults: Russia's brutal plan to take ground" . BBC News . 4 July 2024. ^ Porter, Tom (6 December 2024). "Russia is suffering record casualties as the West steps up support for Ukraine, and it may struggle to replace them" . Business Insider . ^ "Russia's Loss of Men in Ukraine Surpasses Daily Birth Rate" . Newsweek . 12 November 2024. ^ "120,000 dead and counting A new estimate from Meduza and Mediazona shows the rate of Russian military deaths in Ukraine is only growing" . Meduza . 5 July 2024. Wikidata Q127245770 . Archived from the original on 30 December 2025. ^ Ivshina, Olga (30 December 2025). "Russia's losses in Ukraine rise faster than ever as US pushes for peace deal" . BBC . Retrieved 4 January 2026 . ^ Butt, Maira (31 December 2025). "Russian losses in Ukraine rising faster than ever, finds new analysis" .

The Independent . Retrieved 4 January 2026 . ^ "Russia stares into population abyss as Putin sends its young men to die" .

The Telegraph . 26 February 2023. ^ "Enduring Mayhem: Images From Year 3 of the War in Ukraine" .

The New York Times . 24 April 2024. ^ Stanley, Marcus (19 February 2025). "The Ukraine War After Three Years: Roads Not Taken" . Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft . ^ a b Pancevski, Bojan (17 September 2024). "One Million Are Now Dead or Injured in the Russia-Ukraine War" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 17 September 2024 . ^ "Ukraine: Protection of civilians in armed conflict. December 2025 upate" (PDF) . Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights . 12 January 2026 . Retrieved 25 January 2026 . ^ "Список жертв войны в российских регионах" . 7x7 . 1 August 2023. ^ "Ukraine's losses in the war" . UALosses . 7 January 2026. ^ "Важкі цифри: як сприймати нові дані про військові втрати – DW – 27.02.2024" . dw.com (in Ukrainian) . Retrieved 25 May 2024 . ^ a b c "Что известно о потерях России в Украине к концу июня?" . BBC. 26 June 2026. Archived from the original on 26 June 2026. "Russian casualties in Ukraine. Mediazona count, updated" . Mediazona . 1 August 2025 . Retrieved 3 July 2026 . ^ "Thousands of Ukrainian civilians lost in hellish archipelago of Russian jails" . Sky News . 16 May 2025. ^ "Ukraine brings back body of journalist Viktoriia Roshchyna tortured in Russian captivity, official says" .

The Kyiv Independent . 24 April 2025 . Retrieved 24 April 2025 . ^ "Only the Establishment of a Just Peace and Holding the Aggressor to Account will Stop Russia's War Crimes in Ukraine – a Separate Discussion on the Humanitarian Dimension of the War Was Held at the Peace Summit" . 17 June 2024. ^ "Over 16,000 Ukrainian civilians held captive in Russia – Ukraine's ombudsman" . 16 December 2024. ^ "Обзор социально-гуманитарной ситуации, сложившейся на территории Донецкой Народной Республики вследствие военных действий в период с 24 по 30 декабря 2022 г." (in Russian). Human rights Ombudsman in the Donetsk People's Republic. 30 December 2022. "Обзор социально-гуманитарной ситуации, сложившейся на территории Донецкой Народной Республики вследствие военных действий в период с 25 по 31 декабря 2023 г." (in Russian). Human rights Ombudsman in the Donetsk People's Republic. 9 January 2024. "Обзор социально-гуманитарной ситуации, сложившейся на территории Донецкой Народной Республики вследствие военных действий в период с 16 по 22 декабря 2024 г." (in Russian). Human rights Ombudsman in the Donetsk People's Republic. 22 December 2024. ^ "The overview of the current social and humanitarian situation in the territory of the Donetsk People's Republic as a result of hostilities in the period from 19 and 25 February 2022" . Human Rights Ombudsman in the Donetsk People's Republic . 12 February 2022 . Retrieved 21 March 2022 . ^ "3,200 LPR civilians killed as a result of Kiev's aggression since 2014 – ombudsperson" . lug-info.com . 2 March 2023 . Retrieved 2 March 2023 . ^ "Kiev artillery attacks claim 72 lives in LPR over year, 268 people wounded – ombudsperson" . lug-info.com . 28 December 2023. ^ "Ukrainian Attacks Have Killed 600 Russian Civilians Since Full-Scale Invasion, Chief Investigator Claims" .

The Moscow Times . 19 May 2025. ^ "Over 350 People Killed and Nearly 800 Still Missing in Kursk Region After Ukrainian Incursion, Prosecutor Says" .

The Moscow Times . 28 May 2025 . Retrieved 28 May 2025 . ^ "How many Ukrainian soldiers have died?" .

The Economist . 26 November 2024 . Retrieved 26 November 2024 . ^ Hodunova, Kateryna (17 February 2025). "Over 46,000 Ukrainian soldiers killed since start of Russia's full-scale war, Zelensky says" .

The Kyiv Independent . ^ "Ukraine war death toll: huge but not fully known" . France 24 . 17 February 2025. ^ "Red Cross Says Missing People in Ukraine and Russia War Doubles to 50,000 Over Past Year" . USNEWS . 13 February 2025. ^ "Ukrainians Tell of Brutal Russian Repression in Occupied Territories" .

The New York Times . 30 October 2024. ^ Allison, George (6 November 2025). "Russian casualties exceed 1.1m since invasion says Britain" . UK Defence Journal . Retrieved 9 November 2025 . ^ "War in Ukraine. Total Combat Losses of the Russian Forces for Day 1,605" . Ukrainska Pravda . 20 June 2026 . Retrieved 17 July 2026 . ^ "Ukraine Sees Surge in Inquiries From Russian Families on Missing Soldiers" . Moscow Times . 4 February 2025. ^ "N. Korean soldiers 'highly likely' killed in Ukraine: Seoul" . Yahoo News . ^ "Kremlin dismisses reports of North Korean soldiers fighting for Russia in Ukraine" . Euronews . 11 October 2024. ^ "Thousands of North Koreans fought for Russia. A memorial hints at the death toll" . BBC News . 7 May 2026 . Retrieved 8 May 2026 . ^ "Chernihiv: Are these Russia's weapons of war?" . BBC News . 9 April 2022 . Retrieved 3 May 2022 . Gall, Carlotta; Kramer, Andrew E. (3 April 2022). "In a Kyiv Suburb,'They Shot Everyone They Saw' " .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 12 April 2022 . Retrieved 3 May 2022 . ^ Cumming-Bruce, Nick (23 September 2022). "U.N. Experts find that war crimes have been committed in Ukraine" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 24 September 2022. Macias, Amanda (28 October 2022). "UN report details horrifying Ukrainian accounts of rape, torture and executions by Russian troops" . CNBC . Retrieved 29 January 2023 . ^ "Update on the human rights situation in Ukraine" (PDF) . Ukraine . 2 (1). 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 April 2022 . Retrieved 19 January 2023 – via United Nations Human Rights Council . ^ "Ukraine destruction: how the Guardian documented Russia's use of illegal weapons" .

The Guardian . 24 May 2022. ISSN 1756-3224 . OCLC 60623878 . Archived from the original on 29 August 2022 . Retrieved 19 January 2023 . ^ Cluster Munition Monitor 2022 (PDF) . Cluster Munition Coalition. 2022. ISBN 978-2-9701476-1-9 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 August 2022 . Retrieved 19 January 2023 – via The Monitor. ^ "Deadliest civilian attacks in Russia's invasion of Ukraine" . Reuters . 5 October 2023 . Retrieved 15 February 2025 . ^ "Russia was Preparing for a New Genocide of Ukrainians Long Before the Full-Scale Invasion, – Kyrylo Budanov" . Main Directorate of Intelligence of Ukraine . 23 November 2024. ^ "Update: Russian airstrike on Zaporizhzhia industrial site kills 13, injures 122" . Kyiv Independent . 8 January 2025. ^ "Ukraine: protection of civilians in armed conflict. December 2023 update" (PDF) . ukraine.un.org . Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights . Total civilians killed: 10,191; Killed in Ukrainian government-controlled territories: 7,967; Killed in Russian-occupied territories: 2,224. ^ "Over 12,300 civilians killed since start of Ukraine war, UN says" . Reuters . 8 January 2025. ^ "UN Commission concludes that Russian armed forces' drone attacks against civilians in Kherson Province amount to crimes against humanity of murder" . OHCHR . 28 May 2025 . Retrieved 29 May 2025 . ^ Hambling, David (11 October 2024). "Terrifying 'Human Safari' In Kherson As Russian Drones Hunt Civilians" . Forbes . Retrieved 6 February 2025 . ^ Limaye, Yogita (31 October 2024). "Drone strikes on civilians suggest new Russian terror tactic in Ukraine" . BBC News . Retrieved 6 February 2025 . ^ Horton, Alex; Korolchuk, Serhii (31 October 2024). "Russian drones hunt civilians in streets of southern Ukrainian city" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 6 February 2025 . ^ a b "Russian authorities committed crimes against humanity targeting civilian population through drone attacks as well as war crimes of forcible transfer and deportation of civilians" . OHCHR . 28 October 2025. ^ "Ordinary Ukrainians are resisting Vladimir Putin's occupying force in Kherson and elsewhere" .

The Economist . 9 March 2022 . Retrieved 10 March 2022 . ^ a b "UN report details 'climate of fear' in Russian occupied areas of Ukraine" . UN News . 20 March 2024. ^ Hinnant, Lori; Stepanenko, Vasilisa; Kullab, Samya; Hanna, Arhipova (15 March 2024). "Takeaways into AP investigation into Russian system to force its passports on occupied Ukraine" . Associated Press . ^ Hambling, David (29 December 2023). "What We Know About Russian Chemical Weapon Attacks" . Forbes . Retrieved 23 March 2024 . ^ Field, Matt (15 March 2024). "Russia appears to be using chemical weapons in Ukraine. And admitting it" . Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists . Retrieved 23 March 2024 . ^ Rushton, James (6 April 2024). "Russia carrying out illegal chemical attacks on Ukrainian soldiers" .

The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 7 April 2024 . ^ "2025 deadliest year for civilians in Ukraine since 2022, UN human rights monitors find" . UN Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine . 12 January 2026 . Retrieved 15 January 2026 . ^ Davies, Maia (13 January 2026). "Ukraine war: Last year was deadliest for civilians since 2022, UN says" . BBC Home . Retrieved 15 January 2026 . ^ a b "Yale researchers identify 21 sites in Donetsk oblast, Ukraine used for civilian interrogation, processing, and detention" . Yale School of Medicine . 25 August 2022 . Retrieved 27 August 2022 . ^ Waterhouse, James (16 February 2023). "Ukraine war: Inside a prisoner of war camp for Russians" . BBC News . Retrieved 26 February 2025 . ^ "On Ukraine, High Commissioner Türk details severe violations and calls for a just peace" . OHCHR . Retrieved 4 April 2023 . ^ "Ukraine's outrage grows over video seeming to show beheading" . AP News . 12 April 2023 . Retrieved 17 April 2023 . "Zelenskyy slams 'beasts' in gruesome beheading video; Kremlin calls footage 'terrible' " . CNBC . 12 April 2023 . Retrieved 26 September 2023 . Belam, Martin; Chao-Fong, Léonie (12 April 2023). "Russia-Ukraine war at a glance: what we know on day 413 of the invasion" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 26 September 2023 . Cotovio, Vasco; Carey, Andrew; Pennington, Josh; Kesaieva, Yulia (12 April 2023). "Zelensky slams 'beasts' who purportedly beheaded Ukrainian soldiers after video emerges" . CNN . Retrieved 26 September 2023 . "Ukraine says Russia 'worse than ISIS' after beheading video" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 26 September 2023 . ^ Melkozerova, Veronika (27 March 2024). "Russia executed Ukrainian POWs, UN report says" . Politico . Retrieved 27 March 2024 . ^ "Ukraine/Russia: Statement by the High Representative on the killing of Ukrainian prisoners of war" . EEAS . 16 October 2024 . Retrieved 25 January 2025 . ^ The situation of human rights in Ukraine in the context of the armed attack by the Russian Federation, 24 February to 15 May 2022 (Report). OHCHR . 29 June 2022 . Retrieved 27 July 2022 . ^ Shull, Abbie. "Video appears to show Ukrainian soldiers executing Russian soldier captured in an ambush outside Kyiv, New York Times reports" . Business Insider . Retrieved 7 April 2022 . ^ Gibbons-Neff, Thomas (6 July 2024). "In Ukraine, Killings of Surrendering Russians Divide an American-Led Unit" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 4 March 2025 . ^ "Report on the Human Rights Situation in Ukraine (1 December 2023 – 29 February 2024)" (PDF) . ukraine.un.org . OHCHR . pp. 14– 15 . Retrieved 13 March 2025 . ^ Miller, Christopher; Joiner, Sam; Killing, Alison; Andringa, Peter; Campbell, Chris; Stognei, Anastasia; Learner, Sam (12 June 2024). "FT investigation finds Ukrainian children on Russian adoption sites" . Financial Times . Retrieved 13 June 2024 . ^ "US aware of 'credible' reports Russia is listing Ukrainian children for adoption, White House says" . Reuters . 12 June 2024 . Retrieved 13 June 2024 . ^ Hird, Karolina (24 March 2025). "Putin is Still Stealing Ukrainian Children" . Institute for the Study of War . Retrieved 23 October 2025 . ^ Fornusek, Martin (7 August 2025). "Russia launches 'catalog' of Ukrainian children for adoption, sorted by eye and hair color" .

The Kyiv Independent . Retrieved 13 August 2025 . ^ Vakulina, Sasha (8 August 2025). "Russia creates 'catalogue' of Ukrainian children for adoption" . euronews . Retrieved 28 August 2025 . ^ "Russian occupation authorities publish database of Ukrainian children for adoption, sortable by hair and eye color" . Meduza . 8 August 2025 . Retrieved 28 August 2025 . ^ Cookman, Liz (8 August 2025). "Russia 'running slave catalogue of Ukrainian children to adopt' " .

The Times and The Sunday Times . Retrieved 28 August 2025 . ^ Allegretti, Aubrey (3 March 2022). "ICC launches war crimes investigation over Russian invasion of Ukraine" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 11 February 2023 . "Ukraine" . International Criminal Court . Retrieved 11 February 2023 . ^ a b "Ukraine war: International court issues warrant for Putin's arrest" . Reuters . 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 18 March 2023 . "Situation in Ukraine: ICC judges issue arrest warrants against Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin and Maria Alekseyevna Lvova-Belova" . International Criminal Court . 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 18 March 2023 . Hofmański, Piotr (17 March 2023). "ICC arrest warrants in the situation of Ukraine: Statement by President Piotr Hofmański" (video) . YouTube . International Criminal Court . Corder, Mike; Casert, Raf (17 March 2023). "ICC issues arrest warrant for Putin over Ukraine war crimes" . Associated Press . Archived from the original on 17 March 2023. Michaels, Daniel (17 March 2023). "U.N. Court Issues Arrest Warrant for Russia's Putin And Another Kremlin Official" .

The Wall Street Journal . Fowler, Sarah (17 March 2023). " "No excuse to deport children to Russia, says ICC prosecutor," " . BBC News . Archived from the original on 17 March 2023. ^ "10: "World nuclear forces" ". Military Spending and Armaments, 2019 (PDF) . Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI). Table 10.1. World nuclear forces, January 2020; page 326 . Retrieved 18 March 2023 . ^ Bufacchi, Vittorio (26 July 2022). "War crimes in Ukraine: is Putin responsible?" . Journal of Political Power . 16 (1): 6. doi : 10.1080/2158379X.2022.2105495 . hdl : 10468/13459 . S2CID 251124184 . ^ Warburton, Moira (15 March 2022). "U.S. Senate unanimously condemns Putin as war criminal" . Reuters . ^ Sabbagh, Dan (24 September 2023). "War crimes dossier to accuse Russia of deliberately causing starvation in Ukraine" .

The Guardian . ^ Colvin, Victoria; Orchard, Phil (28 March 2023). "Forced deportations and the Ukraine war: Russian culpability in atrocity crimes" . Violence . 3 (2): 281– 300. doi : 10.1177/26330024231167184 . S2CID 257852247 . ^ "Situation in Ukraine: ICC judges issue arrest warrants against Sergei Ivanovich Kobylash and Viktor Nikolayevich Sokolov" . International Criminal Court . International Criminal Court . 5 March 2024 . Retrieved 5 March 2024 . ^ Roth, Andrew (25 June 2024). "ICC issues arrest warrants for Russian officials over alleged Ukraine war crimes" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 25 June 2024 . ^ Liboreiro, Jorge (15 May 2026). " 'Point of no return': 36 countries join tribunal to prosecute Putin" . euronews . Retrieved 18 May 2026 . ^ "Ukraine exports 1 million tonnes of grain under new deal, train attacks may be war crimes, experts say" . ABC . 27 August 2022 . Retrieved 27 August 2022 . ^ "Ukraine Refugee Crisis: Aid, Statistics and News | USA for UNHCR" . unrefugees.org . Archived from the original on 25 April 2025 . Retrieved 25 April 2025 . ^ Farge, Emma (25 September 2023). "Russia tortured some Ukrainian victims to death, UN inquiry says" . Reuters . Retrieved 26 September 2023 . ^ Gabrielle Tétrault-Farber; Emma Farge (16 March 2023). "UN inquiry finds" . Reuters . Retrieved 26 September 2023 . ^ "Grim milestone on World Humanitarian Day: WHO records 1940 attacks on health care in Ukraine since start of full-scale war" . who.int . Retrieved 25 April 2025 . ^ "Destruction and Devastation: One Year of Russia's Assault on Ukraine's Health Care System" . PHR . 7 August 2023 . Retrieved 17 December 2023 . ^ "Damaged cultural sites in Ukraine verified by UNESCO" . UNESCO . Archived from the original on 13 April 2022 . Retrieved 25 April 2025 . ^ "Destruction of cultural heritage is a war crime" . EPP Group in the European Parliament . 20 October 2022. Retrieved 14 February 2023 . ^ "Salvaging Ukraine's culture: Country's history & language under threat" . Euronews . 13 September 2022 . Retrieved 11 November 2022 . ^ Pulver, Andrew; Shoard, Catherine (11 March 2024). "Ukraine war film 20 Days in Mariupol wins Oscar for best documentary" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 14 March 2024 . ^ Beaumont, Peter (6 March 2022). "Ukraine has fastest-growing refugee crisis since second world war, says UN" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 8 March 2022 . ^ a b "Situation Ukraine Refugee Situation" . United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees . Retrieved 23 July 2022 . ^ Wintour, Patrick (3 July 2022). "Liz Truss mulls seizure of Russian assets in UK to give to Ukraine" . the Guardian . Retrieved 4 July 2022 . ^ Bior, Ayen; Shapiro, Ari; Ozug, Matt (20 May 2022). "Millions rushed to leave Ukraine. Now the queue to return home stretches for miles" . NPR . Archived from the original on 20 May 2022 . Retrieved 28 May 2022 . ^ "Ukraine" . IDMC . Retrieved 15 May 2022 . ^ "Refugees flee Ukraine for the EU, men told to stay and fight" . ABC News . 26 February 2022 . Retrieved 3 March 2022 . Michaels, Samantha (7 March 2022). "More Than 1.5 Million Refugees Have Fled Ukraine" . Mother Jones . Retrieved 10 March 2022 . ^ Carpenter, Charli (15 July 2022). "Civilian Men Are Trapped in Ukraine: Human rights and humanitarian NGOs should pay attention to Kyiv's sex-selective martial law" . Foreign Policy . Retrieved 17 September 2023 . "Why banning men from leaving Ukraine violates their human rights" .

The Conversation . 8 March 2022. ^ Tondo, Lorenzo (9 March 2022). "Ukraine urged to take 'humane' approach as men try to flee war" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 9 March 2022 . ^ Men, some in their teens, join Ukraine's resistance fighters . DW News . 5 March 2022. Archived from the original on 6 March 2022 . Retrieved 8 March 2022 – via YouTube. "Generation UA: Young Ukrainians are driving the resistance to Russia's war" . Atlantic Council . 11 August 2022 . Retrieved 14 February 2023 . ^ Klimešová, Magdaléna; Šatava, Jiří; Ondruška, Michal (13 July 2022). "The situation of refugees from Ukraine" . Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (Czech Republic) . Retrieved 28 February 2024 . ^ "İçişleri Bakanı Soylu: 58 bin Ukraynalı savaş sonrası Türkiye'ye geldi" . BBC (in Turkish). 22 March 2022 . Retrieved 24 March 2022 . ^ "How many refugees have fled Ukraine and where are they going?" . BBC News . 30 March 2022 . Retrieved 15 April 2022 . ^ "Statistics on Ukrainians in the UK" . gov.uk . Retrieved 21 December 2022 . ^ Knapp, Andreas (13 July 2023). "Ukraine: Population loss endangers reconstruction" . WIIW . Retrieved 19 July 2023 . ^ Herb, Jeremy; Kaufman, Ellie; Atwood, Kylie (14 July 2022). "Experts document alleged crimes against humanity committed by Russian forces in Ukraine" . CNN . Retrieved 19 October 2022 . Subramaniam, Tara (19 October 2022). "Russia's war in Ukraine" . CNN . Retrieved 19 October 2022 . ^ a b Mackintosh, Eliza; Ochman, Oleksandra; Mezzofiore, Gianluca; Polglase, Katie; Rebane, Teele; Graham-Yooll, Anastasia (8 April 2022). "Russia or die: After weeks under Putin's bombs, these Ukrainians were given only one way out" . CNN . Retrieved 9 April 2022 . Peter, Laurence (27 March 2022). "Russia transfers thousands of Mariupol civilians to its territory" . BBC News . Retrieved 1 April 2022 . ^ "Ukraine war: Russians start leaving Ukraine's Kherson city" . BBC News . 19 October 2022 . Retrieved 19 October 2022 . ^ Butchenko, Maksym (15 April 2022). "V dukhe Stalina. Fil'tratsionnyye lagerya, doprosy i vyvoz v glush' — kak Moskva nasil'no deportiruyet ukraintsev Donbassa" В духе Сталина. Фильтрационные лагеря, допросы и вывоз в глушь — как Москва насильно депортирует украинцев Донбасса . NV.ua (in Russian) . Retrieved 20 April 2022 . Shapoval, Valentyna (18 April 2022). "Denisova: okkupanty derzhat v fil'tratsionnykh lageryakh RF boleye 20 000 mariupol'tsev" Денисова: оккупанты держат в фильтрационных лагерях РФ более 20 000 мариупольцев . Segodnya (in Russian) . Retrieved 20 April 2022 . Goricheva, Yuliya; Tokhmakhchi, Аnnа (11 April 2022). " "Razdevali, tatushki moi smotreli". Artem uyekhal iz Mariupolya v "DNR", a potom i iz Rossii.

On rasskazyvayet o tom, chto proiskhodilo na granitsakh" "Раздевали, татушки мои смотрели". Артем уехал из Мариуполя в "ДНР", а потом и из России. Он рассказывает о том, что происходило на границах . Current Time TV (in Russian) . Retrieved 20 April 2022 . Hanyukova, Ol'ga (10 April 2022). "Okkupanty sozdali v Rossii lager' dlya deportirovannykh iz Ukrainy: tam soderzhat boleye 400 chelovek" Оккупанты создали в России лагерь для депортированных из Украины: там содержат более 400 человек . Obozrevatel (in Russian) . Retrieved 20 April 2022 . Kurpita, Tat'yana (17 April 2022). " "Ne imeli odezhdy, yedy i predmetov gigiyeny": v Rossii obnaruzhili tri lagerya dlya deportirovannykh mariupol'tsev" "Не имели одежды, еды и предметов гигиены": в России обнаружили три лагеря для депортированных мариупольцев . TSN (in Russian) . Retrieved 20 April 2022 . Pylypenko, Yevgeniy (24 March 2022). "Rossiya sozdala bliz Donetska fil'tratsionnyy lager' dlya ukraintsev – razvedka" Россия создала близ Донецка фильтрационный лагерь для украинцев – разведка . LIGA.net (in Russian) . Retrieved 20 April 2022 . Klimov, Aleksandr (5 April 2022). "V Khar'kovskoy oblasti okkupanty sozdayut fil'tratsionnyye lagerya — Denisova" В Харьковской области оккупанты создают фильтрационные лагеря — Денисова . NV.ua (in Russian) . Retrieved 20 April 2022 . Ball, Tom (20 March 2022). "Ukraine accuses Russia of killing 56 care home residents in Luhansk" .

The Times . Retrieved 20 April 2022 . "Foto. Okkupanty stroyat fil'tratsionnyye lagerya dlya ukraintsev" Фото. Оккупанты строят фильтрационные лагеря для украинцев . sport.ua (in Russian). 28 March 2022 . Retrieved 20 April 2022 . ^ Kupriyanova, Olga (24 March 2022). "Fil'tratsionnyye lagerya i trudoustroystvo na Sakhaline: ukraintsev iz okkupirovannykh gorodov prinuditel'no otpravlyayut v rossiyu" Фильтрационные лагеря и трудоустройство на Сахалине: украинцев из оккупированных городов принудительно отправляют в россию . 1+1 (in Russian) . Retrieved 20 April 2022 . ^ "Putin i Shoygu planirovali sozdat' kontslagerya dlya ukraintsev v Zapadnoy Sibiri, – Danilov" Путин и Шойгу планировали создать концлагеря для украинцев в Западной Сибири, – Данилов . Цензор.НЕТ (in Russian). 21 April 2022 . Retrieved 25 April 2022 . ^ "Putin i Shoygu planirovali sozdat' kontslagerya dlya ukraintsev v Zapadnoy Sibiri – Danilov" Путин и Шойгу планировали создать концлагеря для украинцев в Западной Сибири – Данилов . LIGA (in Russian). 22 April 2022 . Retrieved 25 April 2022 . ^ "Shoygu nazval mesta dlya stroitel'stva novykh gorodov v Sibiri" Шойгу назвал места для строительства новых городов в Сибири . РБК (in Russian). 6 September 2021. ^ "One Year In, Russia's War on Ukraine Has Inflicted $51 Billion in Environmental Damage" e360.yale.edu. 22 February 2023. Accessed 25 September 2023. ^ " 'Environmental Destruction Is a Form of Warfare': Thunberg Joins Ecocide Investigation in Ukraine" . commondreams.org . Retrieved 3 July 2023 . ^ "Ten-Step plan to address environmental impact of war in Ukraine" PAX for Peace. 24 February 2023. Accessed 25 September 2023. ^ Finlay, Madeleine; Cox, Joel; Bury, Ellie (13 June 2023). "Kakhovka dam destruction: why is Ukraine calling it 'ecocide'? – podcast" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 9 October 2023 . Talmazan, Yuliya; Arkin, Daniel; Kaufman, Sarah; and Mayer, Daryna (6 June 2023). "Ukraine accuses Russia of blowing up major dam" . NBC News . Retrieved 25 September 2023 . Hallam, Jonny; Pennington, Josh; Regan, Helen; Voitovych, Olga; Nasser, Irene; Shukla, Sebastian; Kottasová, Ivana; Mezzofiore, Gianluca; and Shelley, Jo (6 June 2023). "Collapse of critical Ukrainian dam sparks region-wide evacuations. Here's what we know" . CNN . Retrieved 9 October 2023 . ^ "The Environmental Cost of the War in Ukraine" . International Relations Review . 2 June 2023 . Retrieved 7 June 2023 . Graham-Harrison, Emma (27 August 2022). "Toxins in soil, blasted forests – Ukraine counts cost of Putin's 'ecocide' " .

The Observer . ISSN 0029-7712 . Retrieved 25 September 2023 . "Ukrainians hope to rebuild greener country after Russia's war ravages environment" .

The Independent . 19 March 2022 . Retrieved 7 June 2023 . Gutman-Argemí, Clara; Ahn, Ashley; and Benson, Brawley (9 June 2023). "Ukrainians Are Accusing Russia of Ecocide. What Does That Mean?" . Foreign Policy . Retrieved 9 October 2023 . "Ukraine launches "ecocide" and war crimes probe into Nova Kakhovka dam incident" . CNN . 7 June 2023 . Retrieved 9 October 2023 . ^ Yermak, Andriy ; Wallström, Margot (16 August 2023). "Russia is committing grave acts of ecocide in Ukraine – and the results will harm the whole world" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 9 October 2023 . Graham-Harrison, Emma (27 August 2022). "Toxins in soil, blasted forests – Ukraine counts cost of Putin's 'ecocide' " .

The Guardian . ISSN 0029-7712 . Retrieved 9 October 2023 . Santora, Marc (17 August 2023). "As Dead Dolphins Wash Ashore, Ukraine Builds a Case of Ecocide Against Russia" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 9 October 2023 . ^ Gigova, Radina (2 July 2023). "Russia is accused of 'ecocide' in Ukraine. But what does that mean?" . CNN . Retrieved 25 September 2023 . "Zelenskyy meets Greta Thunberg, Mary Robinson to address war's effect on Ukraine's ecology" . TheJournal.ie . Press Association. 29 June 2023 . Retrieved 25 September 2023 . ^ Fornusek, Martin (8 April 2024). "Media: Russia destroys over 60,000 hectares of Ukrainian forests" . Yahoo News . Retrieved 12 April 2024 . ^ Singha, Sutandra (17 December 2024). "Ripples of War: The Russia-Ukraine Conflict's Impact on Global Carbon Dioxide Emissions and Climate Change" . Chintan India foundation blog . India Foundation . Retrieved 13 January 2025 . ^ "Russia owes 'whole world' for environment damage: Ukraine" . Euroactive . Retrieved 21 January 2025 . ^ de Guzman, Chad (19 May 2023). "Russia's War in Ukraine Is Worsening Asia's Heat Wave" . Time . Retrieved 21 May 2023 . ^ Tan, Huileng (22 May 2023). "Asia is in the middle of a record heatwave, and Russia is reaping the financial rewards of it" . Business Insider . Retrieved 23 May 2023 . ^ Chin, Yongchang (21 May 2023). "Crippling Heat Deepens Asia's Reliance on Russian Energy" . Bloomberg News . Retrieved 23 May 2023 . ^ "Climate bomb' warning over $200bn wave of new gas projects" .

The Guardian. 5 December 2024 . Retrieved 25 December 2024 . ^ Lakhani, Nina; Milman, Oliver (11 May 2022). "US fracking boom could tip world to edge of climate disaster" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Gill, Victoria (25 February 2022). "Chernobyl: Radiation spike at nuclear plant seized by Russian forces" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 . ^ " 'Russian nuclear terror': Ukraine atomic plant attacked again" . aljazeera.com . 7 August 2022 . Retrieved 10 September 2022 . ^ "U.N. nuclear watchdog calls for a 'security protection zone' around the Russian-held Zaporizhzhia power plant" . NBC News . 7 September 2022 . Retrieved 7 September 2022 . ^ "Petroleum & Other Liquids / Data ▼ / Download series history" . U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). Archived from the original on 5 June 2026. ^ Horowitz, Julia (5 January 2022). "Ukraine's economy shrank by more than 30% in 2022" . CNN (Digital) . Retrieved 11 May 2024 . ^ Shalal, Andrea; Zinets, Natalia; Lawder, David (14 March 2022). "Ukraine economy to contract sharply in 2022 due to war, IMF report says" . Reuters . ^ Porter, Richard (31 March 2022). "EBRD sees war on Ukraine causing major growth slowdown" . European Bank for Reconstruction and Development . ^ "Ukraine's economy grew 5.3% in 2023, statistics service says" . Reuters (Digital). 28 March 2024 . Retrieved 2 June 2024 . ^ "Ukraine: $588 billion recovery cost over the next 10 years | UN News" . news.un.org . 23 February 2026 . Retrieved 25 February 2026 . ^ Shalal, Andrea (23 February 2026). "Ukraine reconstruction estimate jumps 12% to $588 billion, World Bank says" . Reuters . Retrieved 25 February 2026 . ^ Tan, Weizhen; Wang, Christine (2 March 2022). "Ukraine raises $270 million from sale of war bonds to fund army as Russia's invasion continues" . CNBC (Digital) . Retrieved 10 May 2024 . ^ "How much grain is Ukraine exporting and how is it leaving the country?" . BBC (Digital). 2 April 2024 . Retrieved 11 May 2024 . ^ "UN: 90 Percent Of Ukrainians Could Slip Into Poverty If War Drags On" . RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty . 16 March 2022. ^ Kirby, Jason (25 February 2022). "In taking Ukraine, Putin would gain a strategic commodities powerhouse" .

The Globe and Mail . ^ Brewster, Murray (27 May 2022). "Natural gas, rare earth minerals: What's at stake for Ukraine in the territory Russia is trying to conquer" . CBC News . ^ Aikman, Ian; da Silva, João (26 February 2025). "What we know about US-Ukraine minerals deal" . BBC News . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ a b c Brumme, Christoph. "In der Ukraine kämpft Russland um Rohstoffe" . n-tv.de (in German) . Retrieved 6 December 2024 . ^ a b Aris, Ben (14 January 2025). "Russia's Hidden War Debt Creates a Looming Credit Crisis" . Moscow Times . Retrieved 24 January 2025 . ^ a b Hrazhdan, Olena (15 January 2025). "Russia's Preferential Defense Loans a Ticking Bomb for Moscow's Economy" . Kyiv Post . Retrieved 24 January 2025 . ^ Tharoor, Ishaan (12 August 2022). "Russia becomes China's 'junior partner' " .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 28 April 2023 . ^ "How China quietly helps Russia in Ukraine" .

The Economist . 20 May 2026. ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 23 May 2026 . ^ "Russian economy shrank 2.1% in 2022, much less than expected" . Al Jazeera . 21 February 2023 . Retrieved 11 May 2024 . ^ Garver, Rob (8 February 2024). "Russia's Economy Grew in 2023, Despite War and Sanctions" . Voice of America (Digital) . Retrieved 2 June 2024 . ^ Sonne, Paul (27 April 2024). "Putin's War Will Soon Reach Russians' Tax Bills" . New York Times . Retrieved 30 April 2024 . ^ a b Financing the Russian War Economy (PDF) (Report). Stockholm Institute of Transition Economics (SITE). April 2025 . Retrieved 18 July 2025 . ^ "SITE's Torbjörn Becker briefs EU on Russia's economy and effects of sanctions" . Stockholm School of Economics . Stockholm Institute of Transition Economics (SITE). 16 May 2025 . Retrieved 18 July 2025 . ^ "Китай принял первый груз санкционного российского СПГ перед визитом Путина к Си Цзиньпину" . Русская служба The Moscow Times (in Russian). 30 August 2025 . Retrieved 30 August 2025 . ^ Ma, Jason (18 April 2026). "Putin finally admits Russia's economy is in trouble and grasps for answers, after warnings about a financial crisis have been piling up" . Fortune . Retrieved 22 April 2026 . ^ a b Meredith, Sam (3 February 2023). "Europe is set to ramp up its oil war against Russia — and markets are bracing for more disruption" . CNBC (Digital) . Retrieved 10 May 2024 . ^ Bussewitz, Cathy; Daly, Matthew (8 March 2022). "EXPLAINER: What does a US ban on Russian oil accomplish?" . Associated Press (Digital) . Retrieved 11 May 2024 . ^ Goldman, David (24 March 2022). "Gas rationing, food vouchers and hunger: Economic pain from Russia's war is getting real" . CTV News . CNN . Retrieved 2 June 2024 . ^ Hopkins, Valerie (28 February 2022). "Initial talks between Russia and Ukraine yield no resolution" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 14 March 2022 . Retrieved 16 March 2022 . Reevell, Patrick; Hutchinson, Bill (2 March 2022). "2nd round of talks between Russia and Ukraine end with no cease-fire" . ABC News . Archived from the original on 14 March 2022 . Retrieved 15 March 2022 . "Ukraine and Russia hold third round of talks" . Deutsche Welle . Reuters , Agence France-Presse , Deutsche Presse-Agentur . 7 March 2022. Archived from the original on 14 March 2022 . Retrieved 15 March 2022 . Roshchina, Olena (28 February 2022). Переговори делегацій України та Росії почалися . Українська правда (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 14 March 2022 . Retrieved 7 March 2022 . Деталі: Переговори відбуваються на Гомельщині на березі річки Прип'ять. Із міркувань безпеки точне місце організатори переговорів не називають. ^ "Putin Signals Readiness for Peace Talks if Kyiv Cedes Occupied Regions" .

The Moscow Times . 5 January 2023. ^ Astier, Henri (14 June 2024). "Putin lays out his terms for ceasefire in Ukraine" . BBC News . Retrieved 14 June 2024 . "Vladimir Putin issues fresh demands to Ukraine to end war" .

The Guardian . 14 June 2024 . Retrieved 14 June 2024 . "Putin states Ukrainian Armed Forces must withdraw from 4 Ukrainian oblasts to begin peace talks" . Ukrainska Pravda . 14 June 2024 . Retrieved 14 June 2024 . ^ a b "How to end Russia's war on Ukraine" . Chatham House . 3 October 2023. ^ "Global Perspectives on Ending the Russia-Ukraine War" . Council of Councils . Council on Foreign Relations . 21 February 2024. ^ Karatnycky, Adrian (19 December 2023). "What a Russian Victory Would Mean for Ukraine" . Foreign Policy . ^ Danylyuk, Oleksandr (24 January 2024). "What Ukraine's Defeat Would Mean for the US, Europe and the World" . Royal United Services Institute . ^ Landale, James (25 February 2025). "US sides with Russia in UN resolutions on invasion of Ukraine" . BBC Home . Retrieved 9 July 2025 . ^ Ravid, Barak (11 March 2025). "Ukraine backs U.S. proposal for 30-day ceasefire with Russia" . Axios . Retrieved 11 March 2025 . ^ "Putin questions Ukraine ceasefire plan and sets out string of conditions" .

The Guardian . 13 March 2025. ^ "Russian drones attack Ukraine after Kremlin rejects 30-day ceasefire proposal" . PBS News . 12 May 2025. ^ "Trump says he did not want 'wasted meeting' after plan for Putin talks shelved" . BBC News . 21 October 2025. ^ Brennan, David (16 December 2025). "Trump-Putin Alaska summit looms large in Kremlin's Ukraine negotiating strategy" . ABC News . Retrieved 26 December 2025 . ^ Menon, Rajan (24 November 2025). "Trump's 'peace plan' was a pro-Kremlin abomination whose failure is a glimmer of hope for Ukraine" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 26 December 2025 . ^ Grozev, Christo; Weiss, Michael (26 November 2025). "Made in Moscow: The "U.S. peace plan" for Ukraine was substantially formulated months ago by Kremlin operative Kirill Dmitriev" .

The Insider (in Russian) . Retrieved 26 December 2025 . ^ Zadorozhnyy, Tim (11 February 2026). "Russia effectively dismisses US-Ukraine peace framework, says it contradicts 'real' American plan" .

The Kyiv Independent . ^ Bellinger, John B. III (28 February 2022). "How Russia's Invasion of Ukraine Violates International Law" . Council on Foreign Relations . Retrieved 26 January 2023 . ^ "Ukraine war: UN condemns Russian invasion ahead of anniversary" . BBC News . 23 February 2023 . Retrieved 24 February 2023 . ^ Chernova, Anna; Cotovio, Vasco; Thompson, Mark (28 February 2022). "Sanctions slams Russian economy" . CNN . Archived from the original on 28 February 2022 . Retrieved 28 May 2022 . ^ "Russia's war of aggression against Ukraine: EU adopts 18th package of economic and individual measures" . Council of the EU . 18 July 2025 . Retrieved 18 July 2025 . ^ Overland, Indra; Loginova, Julia (1 August 2023). "The Russian coal industry in an uncertain world: Finally pivoting to Asia?" . Energy Research & Social Science . 102 103150. Bibcode : 2023ERSS..10203150O . doi : 10.1016/j.erss.2023.103150 . ^ Szulecki, Kacper; Overland, Indra (April 2023). "Russian nuclear energy diplomacy and its implications for energy security in the context of the war in Ukraine" . Nature Energy . 8 (4): 413– 421. Bibcode : 2023NatEn...8..413S . doi : 10.1038/s41560-023-01228-5 . hdl : 11250/3106595 . ^ "Ukraine war aid: Austin asks U.S. allies to 'dig deep' " . Reuters . 15 June 2023. ^ "EU adopts new set of measures to respond to Russia's military aggression against Ukraine" . Europa (web portal). ^ "EU imposes sanctions on state-owned outlets RT/Russia Today and Sputnik's broadcasting in the EU" . Europa (web portal). ^ Tambur, Silver (26 February 2022). "Pictures: 30,000 people protest in Tallinn against the Russian invasion of Ukraine" . Estonian world. ^ Brooks, Hannah (2 May 2022). "Putin invaded Ukraine. But Russian immigrants are paying the price" . NBC News . ^ Srivastava, Mehul (6 May 2022). "Russia pummelled by pro-Ukrainian hackers following invasion" . Financial Times . ^ Beardsworth, James (4 March 2022). "Russians Abroad: Blamed for a Regime They Sought to Escape" .

The Moscow Times . Archived from the original on 6 March 2022. Brooks, Hannah (3 May 2022). "Putin invaded Ukraine. But Russian immigrants are paying the price" . NBC News . Archived from the original on 7 June 2022. ^ "Even Russia's Kremlin-backed media is going off message and beginning to question Putin's war on Ukraine" . Fortune . 11 March 2022. ^ Weir, Fred (5 December 2022). "In Russia, critiquing the Ukraine war could land you in prison" . Christian Science Monitor . ^ Eligon, John (17 March 2022). "In Some Parts of the World, the War in Ukraine Seems Justified" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 19 March 2022 . Holder, Josh; Leatherby, Lauren; Troianovski, Anton; Cai, Weiyi (23 February 2023). "The West Tried to Isolate Russia. It Didn't Work" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 30 July 2023 . ^ Garcia, Lucia (7 March 2023). "Russia's pockets of support are growing in the developing world" . Economist Intelligence Unit . Retrieved 7 July 2023 . ^ "European Parliament declares Russia a state sponsor of terrorism" . Reuters . 23 November 2022. Archived from the original on 23 November 2022 . Retrieved 13 December 2024 . ^ Fiedler, Tristan (18 October 2022). "Estonian parliament declares Russia a terrorist state" . Politico . Retrieved 8 June 2023 . ^ "Iceland is the first European country to close its embassy in Moscow" . Agenzia Nova . 1 August 2023 . Retrieved 3 August 2023 . ^ Harding, Luke; Koshiw, Isobel (30 September 2022). "Ukraine applies for Nato membership after Russia annexes territory" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 1 October 2022. ^ Emmott, Robin; Straus, Marine (18 May 2022). "Finland, Sweden apply to join NATO amid Turkish objections" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 18 May 2022. Finland and Sweden formally applied to join the NATO alliance on Wednesday, a decision spurred by Russia's invasion of Ukraine ^ Kirby, Paul; Beale, Jonathan (4 April 2023). "Nato's border with Russia doubles as Finland joins" . BBC News . BBC News . Archived from the original on 5 April 2023. ^ Erlanger, Steven (7 March 2024). "Sweden Officially Enters NATO Alliance, a Strategic Blow to Moscow" .