The film garnered her first Filmfare Award for Best Female Playback Singer for "Dola Re" (shared with Kavita Krishnamurthy ) and a National Film Award for Best Female Playback Singer for "Bairi Piya". Her performance also won her the Filmfare RD Burman Award for New Music Talent .

The Hindu mentioned that she was "able to impart the required emotions" for the song.

In 2004, Ghoshal contributed to the soundtrack album of Thoda Tum Badlo Thoda Hum by performing four tracks, which were labelled with an "average" tag by Joginder Tuteja from Bollywood Hungama . However, he was "impressed" with Ghoshal's rendition from her songs in Khakee , where he affirmed that Ghoshal's voice suits Aishwarya Rai to the "core" and she "lends credibility to the entire song" in "Wada Raha". Besides, the two duets with Nigam; "Dil Dooba" and "Youn Hi Tum Mujhse", were equally favored by music critics. Further complimenting her vocals in the song "Hum Tumko Nigahon Mein" and "Soniye" from Garv , Tuteja asserted that Ghoshal's "vocals have started to suit the current breed of actresses better and better with each passing day". Apart from Dil Bechara Pyaar Ka Maara , Ghoshal worked with Nikhil–Vinay in other projects, by recording "Betab Dil Hai" from Phir Milenge , and "Woh Ho Tum" from Muskaan .

During the time, Nadeem–Shravan composed Tumsa Nahin Dekha: A Love Story was considered to be the biggest album for Ghoshal, as she sang all the numbers with an exception of one song. She performed a wide variety of songs—from a jazzy number to soft romantic tunes—in the album. According to Ghoshal, the album allowed her to "experiment with the entire range" of her "singing capabilities". Besides, Ghoshal lent her voice for Malik, where she sang "Tumhe Jo Maine Dekha" and "Gori Gori" for Main Hoon Na apart from the title track. Mid-Day affirmed that Ghoshal provided "perfect accompaniment" for the track, while Rediff.com was "impressed with her rendition".

The year marks her first collaboration with Rajesh Roshan and Pritam by singing the melodious track for the former composed "Saansein Ghulne Lagi" from Aetbaar and performing the track "Shikdum" from Dhoom , for the latter. She made her debut in Kannada cinema with the song "Krishna Nee Begane Baaro" in the movie Paris Pranaya (2003). Ghoshal debuted in Malayalam cinema through a studio album of composer Alphons Joseph and later gave voice to his song "Vida Parayukayano" from Big B (2007). 2005–2007: Established singer Pratibha Patil presenting Ghoshal her second National Film Award . Ghoshal was bestowed with her second National Film Award for her rendition of "Dheere Jalna" in Paheli , which she sang alongside Sonu Nigam .

As claimed by Daily News and Analysis , the song "treads the fine balance between the classical and popular genre of Hindi film music". Barring the song "Dheere Jalna", Ghoshal was heard in two other tracks "Kangna Re" and "Minnat Kare", composed by M.M. Kreem. She provided vocals for Kreem in one of his another compositions: "Guzar Na Jaye" from Rog . With the film Parineeta , she made her first collaboration with Shantanu Moitra . She performed four tracks from the film alongside Sonu Nigam, which includes "Piyu Bole", "Kasto Mazza" and "Soona Man Ka Aangan". Thereupon, she worked for the soundtrack album of Yahaan , performing a soulful track "Naam Adaa Likhna", "Urzu Urzu Durkut" and a Punjabi track "Mele Chaliyan". Ghoshal's work in both the films was widely acclaimed, subsequently being nominated for the Filmfare Awards with the song "Piyu Bole". Reportedly, Ghoshal was selected to sing the female rendition of the track after being auditioned by many other artistes.

In an interview, Moitra stated; "Pradeep wanted a little trill of laughter in the middle of the song and she did it effortlessly". Along with " Piyu Bole ", Ghoshal received another Filmfare nomination for her rendition of the song "Agar Tum Mil Jao" from Zeher .

The song along with "Jaane Ja Jaane Ja" from the same film was acclaimed by music critics. Apart from providing supporting vocals for Himesh Reshammiya 's " Aashiq Banaya Aapne ", Ghoshal's voice had been used in some of his other compositions released during the year. However, while reviewing Malik-composed "Pehle Se", Bollywood Hungama wrote: "Ghoshal sang in a mature manner and did so well and once again she proved herself as a dependable playback singer". Similar sentiments were echoed for the song "Bolo To" from Shabd which was composed by Vishal–Shekhar . 2006 marks Ghoshal's first collaboration with Ravindra Jain in the film Vivah , where she performed three duets with Narayan titled "Mujhe Haq Hai", "Do Anjaane Ajnabi" and "Milan Abhi Aadha Adhura Hai". For the album, she also recorded "Hamari Shaadi Mein" with Babul Supriyo and two sisters conversation song "O Jiji" with Pamela Jain, along with a bhajan performed with Jain. Ghoshal's "obsessive" vocals were appraised in Roop Kumar Rathod 's composition, "So Jaoon Main" from Woh Lamhe . Despite the length, the version was particularly acclaimed from the album.

During the year, Ghoshal performed her first ever duet with Sunidhi Chauhan —though they have contributed in multi-singer songs together—with the Salim–Sulaiman 's composition, "Imaan Ka Asar" from Dor .

In spite of providing backing vocals for Lage Raho Munna Bhai ' s "Bande Mein Tha Dum", Ghoshal and Nigam performed a romantic duet titled "Pal Pal", a composition by Moitra. For the song, she received a Best Female Playback Singer nomination at the 52nd Filmfare Awards . She was next heard with Vishal Bhardwaj in the song "O Saathi Re", which exudes the feeling of intimacy and deep love. Ghoshal's low pitch rendition in the song was positively noted by critics.

In 2006, Ghoshal sang "Pyaar Ki Ek Kahani"and "Koi Tumsa Nahin" with Sonu Nigam and "Chori Chori Chupke Chupke" with Udit Narayan for Rajesh Roshan-composed Krrish which were also favored by the critics. Reviewing the album, Bollywood Hungama wrote: "Ghoshal is extremely competent and justifies her continued presence in the big league". They also mentioned that Ghoshal has reached to a similar level of Alka Yagnik in terms of "class, quality and style".

In 2007, Ghoshal recorded a thumri in the mujra style for Khoya Khoya Chand . Titled "Chale Aao Saiyan" and composed by Moitra, the song was particularly praised for Ghoshal's "different" vocal structure. She even lent her voice for two other songs for the album; "Sakhi Piya" and "Thirak Thirak". She reunited with Moitra for Laaga Chunari Mein Daag , where she performed "Hum To Aise Hain" along with Chauhan which also had Swanand Kirkire and Pranab Biswas lending supporting vocals. Raja Sen found "Kachchi Kaliyaan" song from the film less appealing with its "bad remix background" though praised Ghoshal, Chauhan, KK and Nigam for giving the song "the vim it requires". Apart from providing background alaap in Monty Sharma's composition "Masha-Allah", Ghoshal was heard in the classically oriented numbers "Jaan-E-Jaan" and "Sawar Gayi", included in the album Saawariya . She also recorded her first track in a Sanjay Leela Bhansali's composition, "Thode Badmaash" for the same album, providing a "feminine quality" to her "temperate nuances". Pratibha Patil presenting Ghoshal her third National Film Award .

During the same year, Ghoshal sang the peppy rain song, " Barso Re " for Mani Ratnam 's Guru , a composition by A. R. Rahman . A Review from Oneindia praised Ghoshal's rendition of the song and opined that it was a different incarnation of her in comparison to her previous records.

The song won her third Filmfare Award for Best Female Playback Singer.

The same year, she came up with the song "Yeh Ishq Haaye" from Jab We Met , composed by Pritam which was successful in earning her a third National Film Award for Best Female Playback Singer .

The duo also worked with the classical track "Mere Dholna" for Bhool Bhulaiyaa (2007), performed beside M. G. Sreekumar , which was acclaimed with special mention to the taan towards the "climax of the song". Ghoshal also lent her voice for Vishal–Shekhar with few of his compositions and was particularly praised for the theme song of Ta Ra Rum Pum along with the romantic song "Main Agar Kahoon", which she sang with Sonu Nigam and the dance song "Dhoom Taana" from film Om Shanti Om , where some critics compared her singing style of the latter with S. Janaki .

In the year, Ghoshal worked with Ilaiyaraaja for the album Cheeni Kum . 2008–2014: Further success After singing for films such as U Me Aur Hum , Sirf , Ghatothkach , Dashavatar , Mere Baap Pehle Aap , De Taali , Haal-e-Dil , Thoda Pyaar Thoda Magic and Kismat Konnection , Ghoshal recorded another hit song for Singh Is Kinng (2008), titled " Teri Ore ", composed by Pritam Chakraborty . It received mixed reviews from music critics.

The song earned her a fourth Filmfare Award for Best Female Playback Singer and overall fifth Filmfare Award.

After that, she lent her voice for films like Bachna Ae Haseeno , God Tussi Great Ho , Welcome to Sajjanpur , Kidnap , Karzzzz , Ghajini , Ek Vivaah... Aisa Bhi , Dostana , Yuvvraaj and others. She won her fourth National award for singing "Pherari Mon" for the Bengali film Antaheen (2008), and "Jeev Rangla" for the Marathi film Jogwa (2008). She rendered two songs for the 2010 film Dabangg , "Tere Mast Mast Do Nain" with Rahat Fateh Ali Khan and "Chori Kiya Re Jiya" with Sonu Nigam . According to a music review published by Planet Bollywood, "the biggest attraction of this song is the duet by the fantastic jodi of Sonu Nigam and Shreya Ghoshal who prove yet again why they rank as the finest singers of their generation" In 2010, Ghoshal sang for the English independent film When Harry Tries to Marry .

In the same year, Ghoshal rendered her voice for a song "Aadha Ishq" from film Band Baaja Baaraat which composed by Salim–Sulaiman . Satyajit of Glamsham stated, "Shreya Ghoshal's feminine vocal textures have always been reliable in ballads". Ghoshal on the sets of X Factor India , 2011 In 2011, Ghoshal recorded hit duet song "Saibo" in film Shor in the City with Tochi Raina , a composition by Sachin–Jigar. Satyajit from Glamsham reported, "Sweetly toned and mesmerized with mellifluous flows of Shreya Ghoshal singing, the first outing "Saibo" is a smoothening surprise that extols the feel of romanticism to perfection".

Later that year, Ghoshal sang the duet "Teri Meri" in film Bodyguard with Rahat Fateh Ali Khan . A Himesh Reshammiya composition, the song received positive to mixed reviews. NDTV labelled the song as "moderately paced and average". Ghoshal later collaborated with Bappi Lahiri in the duet "Ooh La La" from film The Dirty Picture . Abid from Glamsham stated that Ghoshal manage to keep up the fun tempo with an improvised and highly entertaining and excellent renditions. Ghoshal received further two nominations that year at Filmfare Awards for songs "Saibo" and "Teri Meri.

In 2012, Ghoshal rendered her voice for popular item song , " Chikni Chameli " from film Agneepath .

The song was composed by Ajay–Atul and was a remake of their own Marathi song "Kombdi Palali" from film Jatra . Joginder Tuteja of Bollywood Hungama stated, "A special word for Shreya Ghoshal too who changes her singing style in a big way and comes up trumps. She gets the kind of rustic flavour that was the need of the hour and is superb in her rendition." Ghoshal received her one of the two Filmfare nominations of the year for the song. Later, she revealed that she "wasn't very comfortable" singing the song because of its vulgar lyrics and requested the makers to change few words in it.

The song "Tera Ishq Bada Teekha" received mixed reviews from music critics. Ghoshal then lent her voice in a Four-part harmony song, "Radha" from Student of the Year alongside Udit Narayan , Vishal Dadlani and Shekhar Ravjiani which garnered critical appreciation.

In the same year, she again collaborated with A. R. Rahman for a duet song "Saans" from film Jab Tak Hai Jaan along with Mohit Chauhan .

The song received positive to mixed reviews by critics.

At the poll conducted by Indiatimes , the song Saans won the title of "Most Romantic Song of the year 2012".

The song earned Ghoshal second of her two Filmfare nominations of the year.

In early 2013, Ghoshal sang two duet songs "Naino Mein Sapna" and "Taki O Taki" for film Himmatwala .

The songs were originally composed by Bappi Lahri and re-created by Sajid–Wajid . Both songs received positive reviews from music critics. For "Naino Mein Sapna", critics of NDTV mentioned, "Shreya sounds tailormade for the track" and for "Taki Taki" they remarked, "Ghoshal proves yet again her mettle in the industry". For "Naino Mein Sapna", Shivi from Komoi stated, "Shreya Ghoshal replace Lata Mangeshkar and do a decent job". Ghoshal sang the female version of Sunn Raha Hai in Aashiqui 2 composed by Ankit Tiwari and written by Sandeep Nath. She garnered critical praise over Ankit Tiwari who sang the male version of the song . Apart from rendering vocals for A. R. Rahman composed "Banarasiya" in Raanjhanaa , Ghoshal lent her voice for duet "God, Allah aur Bhagwan" in Krrish 3 alongside Sonu Nigam . "Banarasiya" met with largely positive reviews, the latter received mixed reactions. Ghoshal next performed two tracks in Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram-Leela namely "Dhoop" and " Nagada Sang Dhol " both composed by the director of film, Sanjay Leela Bhansali . She earned positive to mixed response for former and mostly positive reviews for the latter. Mohar Basu of Koimoi stated in regards to "Dhoop", "Shreya Ghoshal's voice croons hauntingly and this song evokes a range of deep emotions. Passionately sung and flatteringly themed, this song makes evident the reason why Ghoshal can be compared to music veterans of the industry." Ghoshal received two Filmfare nominations for songs " Sunn Raha Hai " and " Nagada Sang Dhol " that year. Ghoshal at 4th Global Indian Music Academy Awards , 2014 In 2014, Ghoshal recorded three songs for film PK namely the solo " Nanga Punga Dost " and duets " Chaar Kadam " and "Love is a Waste of Time" with Shaan and Sonu Nigam respectively.

Later in the same year, she sang the duet " Manwa Laage " with Arijit Singh for film Happy New Year composed by Vishal–Shekhar duo and written by Irshad Kamil .

After its release, "Manwa Laage" crossed two million views in 48 hours on YouTube worldwide. Ghoshal got another nomination at Filmfare Awards for the song. Even though Ghoshal had a remarkable career in the Malayalam singing industry, her signature Malayalam song came with "Vijanathayil" from the Malayalam film How Old Are You? .

The Times of India described Ghoshal's voice to be magnetic and honey-dripping. She won the Filmfare Award for Best Malayalam Female Playback Singer and the Kerala State Film Award for Best Malayalam Best Playback Singer . She won the former award consecutively in 2014 and 2015 when she won it again for "Kaathirunnu" from Ennu Ninte Moideen . Her Malayalam accent and pronunciation was praised. 2015–2017: Career progression With regards to Shreya Ghoshal, we have to dig deep the dictionary to come up with some new adjectives to praise her singing." Later that year, Ghoshal sang the female version of song "Hasi" from film Hamari Adhuri Kahani composed by Ami Mishra which got critical precedence over male version sung by Ami Mishra himself. Devesh Sharma from Filmfare remarked, "The female version of Hasi, sung by Shreya Ghoshal, works better than the male version, sung by guest composer Ami Mishra himself. Ghoshal elevates it with her superb effort and the softer arrangement works better for it overall." Ghoshal also performed the female version of the song "Gaaye Jaa" for the film Brothers composed by Ajay–Atul which received positive reviews from music critics.

The Times of India stated, "Shreya Ghoshal scores brownie points for her rendition". Glamsham praised Ghoshal's vocals labelling them "sugary sweet and superbly controlled". Bollywood Life commented, "Shreya Ghoshal amazes the listener by making this situational song such a great listen and just for her lovely voice, one has to put this song on a loop" The same year saw Ghoshal again collaborating with Sanjay Leela Bhansali in Bajirao Mastani . She performed three songs in the film, namely " Mohe Rang Do Laal ", " Deewani Mastani " and "Pinga".

The qawwali interlude song " Deewani Mastani " in the film fetched her sixth Filmfare Award, fifth for Best female playback singer . Ghoshal at the 61st Filmfare Awards , 2016 In early 2016, Ghoshal provided vocals for duet "Tere Bin" from film Wazir alongside Sonu Nigam . Composed by Shantanu Moitra and written by Vidhu Vinod Chopra , the song opened to positive reviews by critics. Labelling the song as "a beautiful start for the film", critics from Bollywood Hungama commented, "Though the sound of song is quite classical for a film which is set in the current times, one can well expect that it would fit in well into the narrative." Ghoshal was next heard in song "Tum Bin Jiya" in film Sanam Re , composed by Jeet Ganguly . It was a recreation of a song with same title from 2001 film Tum Bin sung by K. S. Chithra and composed by Nikhil–Vinay .

The song received positive to negative reviews. Ghoshal sang the songs "Mere Aankhon Se Nikle Aansoo" and "Ishq Ki Baarish" written by Sameer and composed by Nadeem Saifi in the film Ishq Forever for which critics compared Ghoshal singing style to veteran singer Alka Yagnik . For the song "Mere Aankhon Se Nikle Aansoo", The Times of India commented, "Shreya create magic in , which is straight from the heart. Ghoshal provided vocals for song "Aatach Baya Ka Baavarla" in Marathi film Sairat composed by Ajay–Atul which was well received by critics. Ghoshal's collaboration with Ankit Tiwari in song "Jab Tum Hote Ho" from film Rustom was critically well received. Devesh Sharma of Filmfare labelled the song "sombre" and praised use of Ghoshal's "melodious" voice in the song.

In early 2017, Ghoshal rendered "Aashiq Surrender Hua" duet along with co-singer and composer Amaal Mallik from the film Badrinath Ki Dulhania . the song in itself was much appreciated for its quirky lyrics which were penned down by lyricist: Shabbir Ahmed . "Aashiq Surrender Hua" was one of the rare songs in which Ghoshal was heard in a lower register than what she usually sings in.

As Swetha Ramakrishnan from Firstpost reiterated, "The best thing about the song is Shreya Ghoshal singing in a lower pitch; something one rarely gets to hear." In regards to the singers, Gaurang Chauhan from Bollywood Life stated, "Both are a unique choice for such a song and they nail it." Ghoshal was next heard in "Rozana" from the film Naam Shabana for which Ghoshal's vocals were specifically met with critically positive reviews. Shriram Iyengar from Cinestaan mentioned, "Ghoshal's voice brings a mesmerising touch to the song, with a perfect balance of happiness and contentment." Praising Ghoshal's vocals in "Rozana", India West commented, "To say that she makes the best out of this increasingly rare occasion in film music is superfluous." Apart from rendering vocals for A. R. Rahman composed "Do Dilon Ke" duet along with Hariharan in the Hindi dubbed version of the film Viceroy's House , Ghoshal also lent her voice for duet "Hans Mat Pagli" in Toilet: Ek Prem Katha alongside Sonu Nigam. Both songs were critically acclaimed. Joginder Tuteja from Bollywood Hungama stated that "The combination of Sonu-Shreya takes the song to a different altogether and worthy of repeat hear." In 2017, Ghoshal also sang the duet " Thodi Der " with co-singer and music director Farhan Saeed for the film Half Girlfriend . She received a Filmfare Award for Best Female Playback Singer nomination for the song. Komoi stated, "Ghoshal's voice as sweet as honey mesmerizes the listener in Thodi Der". Glamsham reported, "Ghoshal is simply fantastic and can be put on repeat mode".

In the same year, Ghoshal sang two songs in fifth episode of Mixtape , a web series launched by T-Series for which she received positive response. Ghoshal's four Kannada songs were included in The Times of India list of "10 Best Romantic Songs of 2017", which are "Usire Usire" from Hebbuli , "Ondu Malebillu" from Chakravarthy , "Ninna Snehadinda" from Mugulu Nage and "Chippinolagade" from Maasthi Gudi . Her Telugu song "Blockbuster" from Sarrainodu was voted as number one in 10 Best Party Songs of 2017 by the same. 2018–2021: Independent work and career expansion Ghoshal at the Lokmat Maharashtrian of the Year Awards, 2018 Shreya lent her voice to four songs for the delayed film Phir Se... (2018). Ghoshal continued with the song " Ghoomar " from the period drama Padmaavat , along with Swaroop Khan . Composed by film's director Sanjay Leela Bhansali himself, it was based on the traditional music and dance forms performed by the Rajput queens of Rajasthan.

The song was well received, with critics praising Ghoshal for her rendition. Gaurang Chauhan from Times Now noted that the song "is appealing and will be, if not already, a favourite among dance performers across India." "Ghoomar" went on to earn Ghoshal the Filmfare Award for Best Female Singer. She was next heard in the recreated version of " Ek Do Teen " from Tezaab (1988) in Baaghi 2 and the title track of Dhadak (2018). Ghoshal started 2019 with two classical numbers, " Ghar More Pardesiya " and "Tabah Ho Gaye" for Abhishek Varman 's period drama Kalank , for which she won numerous awards and accolades including a Zee Cine Award for Best Female Playback Singer . Later, sang "Yeh Aaina" for the film Kabir Singh , composed by Amaal Mallik and written by Irshad Kamil , which was picturised on the film's lead Shahid Kapoor and supporting actress Nikita Dutta , and " Habibi Ke Nain " along with Jubin Nautiyal , composed by Sajid–Wajid , for the film Dabangg 3 .

Later that year, she was also heard as the lead singer, in a first, alongside fellow singer and rapper Mellow D, on Kiske Liye Tu Marega and Dega Jaan , two versions of the upbeat title track of Raj Nidimoru and Krishna D.K. 's Manoj Bajpayee – starrer Amazon Prime Video original series The Family Man , composed by Sachin–Jigar . Her rendition of the tracks was widely praised, with the lyrics receiving appreciation for being an ode to middle class struggles in the Indian society. Ghoshal at the 12th Mirchi Music Awards , 2020 Ghoshal started the new decade by featuring in several independent singles . She released an independent single titled " Nah Woh Main " in which she was also credited as a songwriter and composer. Ghoshal next recorded the musical renditions of poems by Pandit Birju Maharaj for the album Mann Bheetar (2020). She recorded two classical songs for the album, the title track "Mann Bheetar" and a song titled "Bhari Bhari".

Later she released a song titled "Apni Maati" which was released on the 73rd Independence Day of India as a tribute.

The song was praised for its patriotic message and was also used to promote the "Save Soil" movement initiated by Sadhguru 's Isha Foundation . Ghoshal was next featured on tracks titled, "Judaiyaan" a collaboration with Darshan Raval for his album named Judaiyaan (2020) which peaked at number-one on Billboard Top Triller Global chart, and "Muraliya" a collaboration with Salim–Sulaiman for their album named Bhoomi (2020). Additionally, Ghoshal also sang several Bollywood songs in 2020 including, "Maay Bhavani" from Tanhaji , "Ghar Bhara Sa Lage" from Shikara , "Taare Ginn" from Dil Bechara , "Paheli" from Shakuntala Devi , etc. Ghoshal started 2021 with a ballad titled "Chal Wahin Chalein" from Saina for which she received praise. A critic based at Filmfare in his music review wrote, "Shreya Ghoshal sure knows how to tease out the nuances hidden in the lyrics and Amaal Mallik lets the singer take the lead in this melodious song, keeping the music in check." Ghoshal was next featured in a song titled " Param Sundari " from Mimi which became one of the biggest hits of the year, and peaked at No. 184 on the Billboard Global Excl. U.S. chart.

The song also garnered critical acclaim and a Filmfare Award nomination for Ghoshal. Ghoshal next sang a song titled "Zaalima Coca Cola" for the film Bhuj: The Pride of India . Ghoshal then featured in two tracks of Atrangi Re soundtrack, "Chaka Chak" and "Tere Rang", both of which garnered critical acclaim.

The former also became an instant hit and went viral on Instagram Reels . It earned Ghoshal another Filmfare Award nomination. "Chaka Chak", " Param Sundari " and "Zaalima Coca Cola" were amongst the top twenty-five most viewed Hindi songs of 2021. Ghoshal also featured in several independent singles in 2021 including, "Oh Sanam" with Tony Kakkar , "Pyaar Ek Tarfaa" with Amaal Mallik , "Pyaar Karte Ho Na" with Javed–Mohsin , and "Angana Morey" which was a solo independent single of Ghoshal for which she was credited as a songwriter and composer.

The song peaked at number-one on the Billboard Top Triller Global chart. 2022–present: Further critical recognition Ghoshal started 2022 with a Punjabi-language independent single titled "Uff". Ghoshal was next featured in a song titled "Jab Saiyaan" from Gangubai Kathiawadi for which she received critical acclaim. Lakshmi Govindrajan of Firstpost in her music review called it the best song on the album and wrote, "This love ballad opens with a harmonium and a sarangi , perfectly establishing the ornate kotha vibe. Ghoshal next sang a song titled, "Heer Raanjhana" for the film Bachchhan Paandey .

The billboard of the song was featured at New York 's Times Square . Ghoshal then featured in the soundtrack of Ajay–Atul 's Marathi-language musical , Chandramukhi . She sang two songs, a lavani titled " Chandra " and a ballad titled "To Chand Rati" both of which garnered critical acclaim.

The former received a Marathi Filmfare nomination, and went viral on Instagram Reels becoming a global hit. She next sang a song titled "Makhmali" for the film Samrat Prithviraj . Ghoshal then featured in Bhool Bhulaiyaa 2 soundtrack in which she recorded several versions of her 2007 classical song "Mere Dholna" or "Ami Je Tomar". Ghoshal next recorded a new rendition of her 2014 Tamil-language song, "Sundari Pennae" for Berklee Indian Ensemble's Grammy-nominated album , Shuruaat (2022). Ghoshal next featured in an independent single titled "Baarish Aayi Hain" which was a duet with Stebin Ben . Ghoshal then featured in the soundtrack of film Raksha Bandhan for which she recorded three songs, the title track "Raksha Bandhan", "Dhaagon Se Baandhaa", and the reprise version of the title track, all of them met with positive critical response and the former two were listed amongst the best songs to celebrate the festival of Raksha Bandhan . Ghoshal then leant her voice to the female version of song "Dil" from the film Ek Villain Returns which was titled, "Dil (Shreya's Version)". Ghoshal was next featured in a Punjabi-language independent single titled, "Tere Bajjon" which was composed by Jatinder Shah . President , Droupadi Murmu presenting Ghoshal her fifth National Film Award . Shreya leant her voice to the Kannada "Dumbi Dumbi", Malayalam "Thumbi Thullal", Tamil "Thumbi Thullal", and Telugu "Choope Oohallo" versions. Ghoshal's final collaboration of 2022 with Rahman was a song titled "Ratchasa Maamaney" for Ponniyin Selvan , composed by A. R. Rahman . She also recorded the Kannada ("Rakshasa Maamane"), Malayalam ("Rakshasa Maamane"), Telugu ("Raachasa Maavaya"), and Hindi ("Rakshas Mama Re") versions of the same song, and in addition to that she sang a song titled "Bol" for the Hindi soundtrack of the film. Ghoshal received critical acclaim for both the songs, Suanshu Khurana of The Indian Express in her music review noted the "extraordinary delicacy" in the way Ghoshal sang "Rakshas Mama Re" and further wrote that Ghoshal "excels" in conversational and charming "Bol". Ghoshal then sang a Garba song titled, "Boom Padi" for the film Maja Ma which received critical praise. Ghoshal next featured in the soundtrack of film Brahmāstra: Part One – Shiva in which she sang a song called "Rasiya", which earned her the IIFA Award for Best Female Playback Singer . She then featured on a track titled, "Laut Aa Mere Des" a collaboration with Salim–Sulaiman for their album Bhoomi (2022). Ghoshal next featured on a track titled, "Invincible" a collaboration with American a cappella group Pentatonix for their Grammy-nominated album , Holidays Around the World (2022). Ghoshal then featured in Sanjay Leela Bhansali 's Ghazal album, Sukoon (2022) in which she leant her voice to two ghazals titled, "Tujhe Bhi Chand" and "Qaraar". Critic Subhash K. Jha in his review praised "Tujhe Bhi Chand" for having a playful lit and an evocative hook line and while praising "Qaraar" he wrote, "Shreya's interpretation of Momin Khan Momin 's immortal Ghazal woh jo hum mein tum mein qaraar tha is laborious". Ghoshal finished 2022 with songs titled, "Jo Tum Saath Ho" (Duet and Lullaby version) from Salaam Venky , "Sun Zara" from Cirkus , and "Sukh Kalale" from Marathi-language film Ved , which was met with positive critical response and received a Marathi Filmfare nomination. Ghoshal began 2023 with a rendition of a bhajan " Vaishnava Jana To ", which was rearranged and programmed by A. R. Rahman for the film Gandhi Godse – Ek Yudh . Next, she collaborated with new singer Laqshay Kapoor on an indie song titled "Sohnneyaa".

After that, she recorded the song "Nouka Doobi" for the film Lost . Later, she recorded "Baharla Ha Madhumas", a duet with Ajay Gogawale , for the Marathi-language film Maharashtra Shahir .

The song went viral on TikTok and Instagram Reels , gaining both domestic and global attention. She then recorded a song called "Maine Pi Rakhi Hai" for the film Tu Jhoothi Main Makkaar .

After that, she recorded a rendition of "Tere Hawaale" for the 2022 film Laal Singh Chaddha . Ghoshal leant her voice to four independent singles composed by Javed - Mohsin in 2023: "Zihaal e Miskin", "Barsaat Aa Gayi", "Jee Bhar Ke Tum", and "Ek Mulaqaat".

The former peaked at number three on the Billboard India Songs chart, and was the third-most searched and fifth-most viewed Indian song of the year on YouTube . Next, for the film Adipurush , she recorded a duet with Sonu Nigam called "Tu Hai Sheetal Dhaara". She then featured in the soundtrack of Rocky Aur Rani Kii Prem Kahaani for which she recorded two songs, "Tum Kya Mile" and "Ve Kamleya", both of which earned her Filmfare Award nominations. Rediff 's Sukanya Verma , Deccan Chronicle and NDTV listed the former as one of the year's best songs. She also recorded additional versions of the two songs: "Tum Kya Mile (Shreya's Version)", "Tum Kya Mile (Pritam's Version)", and "Ve Kamleya (Redux)". She then recorded a bilingual indie song, "Guli Mata" in which she sang in Hindi and Arabic.

The song peaked at number one on the Billboard Arabic Hot 100 chart, number two on the MENA Chart , number two on the UK Asian Music Chart , and number ten on the Billboard India Songs chart.

After that, she recorded the songs "Sammohanuda" for the Telugu film Rules Ranjann and "Kalapakkaara" for the Malayalam film King of Kotha , the latter was named one of the best Malayalam songs of the year by Times of India . Next, she collaborated with Afroto, an Egyptian rapper, on the Coke Studio International song "Sunn Beliya". Later, she and Shekhar Ravjiani worked together on the independent single "Vaari Vaari". "Bolo Na" from 12th Fail , "Jaan Da (Rab Ki Dua)" from Tejas , "Kashmir" from Animal , "Itni Si Baat" from Sam Bahadur , "Tu Jo Hai" from Kadak Singh , and "Main Tera Rasta Dekhunga" from Dunki are some of the songs that Ghoshal concluded 2023 with. Concerts, world tours and other activities Ghoshal performing at a concert in 2009 Ghoshal performs in musical concerts around the world.

In 2013, she went to Australia and New Zealand and gave performances at the Brisbane Convention Center , Dallas Brooks Center in Melbourne, the Sydney Opera House and Vodafone Events Centre in Auckland.

In the same year, she performed at the Sharjah Cricket Association Stadium in United Arab Emirates.

The same year, she paid her respects to the casualties of an excessive rainfall in Mauritius with a concert at the Swami Vivekananda International Convention Centre in Pailles. Along with Hrishikesh Ranade , she also made a stage performance during the 18th annual day celebration of Airports Authority of India . She made London tours, where she performed twice in the Royal Albert Hall in 2013 and 2014.

On the first tour in 2013, she also celebrated 100 years of Bollywood by performing many of the old Bollywood hits songs.

In 2006, along with Sonu Nigam, Sunidhi Chauhan and Shiamak Davar , Ghoshal performed the theme song of 2010 Commonwealth Games at its closing ceremony , as an invitation to everyone to the following Commonwealth Games in Delhi.

The same year, she along with Sonu Nigam, recorded the title track "Haath Se Haath Milaa" for the album put together by the BBC World Service Trust as part of an AIDS awareness campaign, where profits garnered through the album, was donated to HIV charities.

In 2011, she became the brand ambassador for Joyalukkas jewellery.

In 2016, Ghoshal performed a charity event to support a 17-year-old patient of acute lymphoblastic leukemia .

In the same year, Ghoshal performed her concert in Sydney Olympic Park . Ghoshal has been performing at the Bangalore Ganesh Utsava every year since 2010. Ghoshal at her concert in Toronto in 2012 During 2017 – 2018, Ghoshal went on a world tour with Symphony Orchestra of India . She performed in several countries including UK , Netherlands , USA , Canada , UAE , etc.

During this tour Ghoshal also became just the second Indian artist after Lata Mangeshkar to perform at the Fox Theatre in Detroit .

On 30 April 2020, Ghoshal participated in YouTube India's digital event called "One Nation", which raised funds for PM CARES Fund , a public charitable trust to provide relief during the COVID-19 pandemic . Participating in the virtual fund-raising concert " I for India: The Concert for Our Times ", on 3 May 2020, she also helped collect over ₹ 52 crore (US$5.4 million) for India's COVID-19 Relief Fund.

On 31 May 2022, Ghoshal performed at an event celebrating "Indore Gaurav Diwas" where she was felicitated by the Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh , Shivraj Singh Chauhan .

In 2022, Ghoshal embarked on another world tour to celebrate her completing milestone twenty years in the music industry.

During this tour she performed in various countries including Australia , New Zealand , Ireland , Netherlands and USA. Additionally, she also performed at the Jubilee Stage at Expo 2020 in Dubai , UAE to celebrate her completing twenty years in the music industry.

On 26 August 2023, Ghoshal performed at Daman 's "Monsoon Festival" where she was felicitated by the state administrator , Praful Khoda Patel . Ghoshal next embarked on her "All Hearts Tour" from September 2023 – March 2024.

During this tour, she performed in Mauritius , USA, Canada, India, Qatar , UK and Singapore .

While reviewing one of her shows, The Guardian lauded her billowing silk voice and richly varied setlist, and gave the show a four-star rating out of five.

On 25 November 2023, Ghoshal performed at Nagpur 's "Khasdar Sanskrutik Mahotsav", where she was felicitated by India's Union Minister , Nitin Gadkari .

On 16 December 2023, she performed at Karnataka 's national-level cultural festival called " Alva's Virasat ". Ghoshal headlined the "Ellora Ajanta International Festival" held in Aurangabad on 4 February 2024, with a musical concert.

On 1 March 2024, Ghoshal performed at Nagpur 's "Tadoba Festival" to raise awareness regarding wildlife conservation, where she was felicitated by India's Forest Minister , Sudhir Mungantiwar .

On March 23, 2025, Shreya Ghoshal delivered a landmark musical performance at the opening ceremony of the 18th edition of the Indian Premier League (IPL) , held at Eden Gardens , Kolkata . Accompanied by an 80-piece choir and a 100-piece orchestra, Ghoshal performed a 15-minute set that included patriotic and cinematic renditions of ten songs -each symbolically dedicated to one of the ten IPL teams — including stirring renditions of "Maa Tujhe Salaam", the title track from Om Shanti Om , " Ghar More Pardesiya " from Kalank , "Kar Har Maidan Fateh" from Sanju etc. She described the event as deeply sentimental, emphasising its cultural significance and her pride in representing India on such a grand stage.

The ceremony also featured appearances by Shah Rukh Khan , Disha Patani , and Karan Aujla . Artistry and recognition Influences One of Ghoshal's earliest musical memories is listening to her mother, Sarmistha Ghoshal, singing classical Bengali songs at clubs.

As a very young child, she was introduced to music by her mother, whom she refers as her first "guru". She states that her mother is her best critic. Ghoshal has mentioned both Lata Mangeshkar and K. S. Chithra as her singing "gurus" and idols and considered them as major influences in her style of singing. She has also acknowledged Asha Bhosle and Geeta Dutt as her inspirations in terms of versatility. She has also named Jagjit Singh as her inspiration to perform songs in the genre of Ghazal . Voice Ghoshal on the sets of Indian Idol Junior , 2013 Ghoshal has performed songs with a lower vocal range. However, Metro Times calls her voice a "sweet and smokey soprano". Her voice has been described as "sweet" with "slight huskiness".

The Recording Academy ( Grammys ) described her voice as "honeyed soprano" and also noted Ghoshal for her versatility.

In an interview, Ghoshal noted that her voice has transformed from the "girlish tenor" of the earlier days to a more matured texture. Her voice is characterized in the media for being most suitable for higher-pitched renditions, although some critics have said that her voice tends to screech when she reaches a higher note of scale. Similarly, in the book Confession of a Coward – an Indian Adventure , it was stated that Ghoshal's high-pitched vocals are interesting and impressive, but "certainly take some time getting used to it". Ghoshal has voiced against correcting pitch with Auto-Tune . About her singing and rehearsing style, she has said, "I have a special way of writing the lyrics when it is dictated to me. No matter what the language of the song, even if it is Bengali, I write it in Hindi. I have certain notations and markings to indicate the way it should be pronounced. I feel the Devanagari script is the closest to the phonetics of the language. English letters are not very good for that purpose. Moreover, I listen carefully and try to grasp as much as possible when the lyrics are read to me". Ghoshal is noted for her wide vocal range , and versatility. What makes Ghoshal remarkable among her contemporaries, according to The Indian Express is, the "serenity in her voice" and the "enviable range". Further complimenting her versatile vocal range, they noted: "The honey-dipped inflection of , which once put in the recording studio, can turn into naughty, sensuous, serious, sad, comic and pure classical, depending on the requirement of the job". Naming her as the "most versatile singer of this generation", India West remarked the smoothness of her voice when flowing from "lower registers to higher notes". According to The Times of India , Ghoshal maintains the "touch of versatility" with her music by singing different style of songs from classical to pure commercial music. Ghoshal is also noted for her voice quality, expressions and incredible ability to master pronunciation across different languages. Ghoshal has admitted in various interviews that language has never been a barrier when it comes to her craft and she is particular about her diction and expressions in every language she sings.

In 2003, Ghoshal admitted that she modulates her voice well, hence "none of the music directors have yet been able to label me". Film Companion described her as the stable sound of female desire and expression in Hindi Cinema . Ghoshal took vocal lessons and did workshops with Kalyanji Virji Shah , where she learnt the technique about "throw of voice, straight notes, vibratos." She considers classical music training as an asset in playback since it "keeps one's voice fit and fresh." Music director Shekhar Ravjiani praised Ghoshal for her singing versatility. According to Sonu Nigam, the best quality about Ghoshal is that the expressions come perfectly along with mannerisms. Music director and singer M. Jayachandran praised Ghoshal by saying, "It is amazing how she writes down the lyrics in Hindi and then gives her signature nuanced expressions to Malayalam words".

During her interviews, Ghoshal mentioned, "I cannot sing double meaning songs or the songs which have vulgar lyrics". Impact and recognition Ghoshal's work has been praised by veteran music composer Pyarelal of the Laxmikant-Pyarelal duo, music directors A.R. Rahman , Ankit Tiwari , Jeet Gannguli , Ghoshal's contemporary singers Papon , Palak Muchhal , Sukhwinder Singh , Bombay Jayashri , Javed Ali , Neha Kakkar , Richa Sharma , singers Ghulam Ali , Rahat Fateh Ali Khan , Asrar , A cappella band Penn Masala , film actress Dia Mirza , cricketer MS Dhoni . Film makers Sanjay Leela Bhansali , Vishal Bhardwaj , Karan Johar , and Vidhu Vinod Chopra , have picked Ghoshal as the best female singer from the generation. Canadian singer Nesdi Jones , Indo-Canadian playback singers Jonita Gandhi , Shashaa Tirupati , UK singer Roma Sagar, British Indian singers Tripet Garielle , Ananya Nanda , and actress Alia Bhatt , mentioned Ghoshal as their inspiration. Usha Uthup named her among the "voice for the future". Veteran singers Vani Jairam and Manna Dey had praised her musical abilities. Senior singers Anuradha Paudwal , Alka Yagnik , Asha Bhosle , Lata Mangeshkar , Sadhana Sargam , Hemlata , Kavita Krishnamurti , Kumar Sanu also picked Ghoshal as the best female singer from the generation. Sonu Nigam mentioned Ghoshal as his favourite singer: "If there'll be best all-time singers, Shreya will surely be included among them". Asjad Nazir, the editor of Eastern Eye called her undisputed queen of playback singing.

The Recording Academy ( Grammys ) cited Ghoshal as a "legend" among contemporary playback singers . Ghoshal is considered as one of the most awarded singers of India. IFFI described Ghoshal as a "generational talent" and one of India's greatest ever singers. Media image In 2010, Ghoshal was honoured from the U.S. state of Ohio , where the governor Ted Strickland declared 26 June as "Shreya Ghoshal Day".

The first Shreya Ghoshal Day (26 June 2010) was celebrated among her fans on popular microblogging and social networking sites.

In April 2013, she was awarded with the highest honour in London by the members of House of Commons of the United Kingdom .

In 2012, Ghoshal appeared in the Forbes Celebrity 100, a list based on income and popularity of India's celebrities. She remained in the top fifty spots for five consecutive years, listed at the forty-second spot in 2012–13, the twenty-eighth spot in 2014, the thirty-third spot in 2015, and the twenty-eighth spot in 2016.

In 2013, Forbes India placed her in their "Top 5 Celeb100 Singers and Musicians" list.

In 2020, Forbes listed her among Asia's Top 100 Digital Stars. She is the only Indian singer to be listed in the Verve 's 50 Power Women Of 2016. Ghoshal is also known for her style and fashion sense. Ghoshal has said that she has been offered acting roles which she has declined, citing her lack of interest in it.

In 2013, the UK-based newspaper Eastern Eye placed her forty-third in their "50 Sexiest Asian Women" list.

In 2015, John Cranley , the Mayor of the City of Cincinnati also honoured her by proclaiming 24 July 2015 as "Shreya Ghoshal Day of Entertainment and Inspiration" in Cincinnati .

In 2015, it placed her seventh in their "Greatest 20 Bollywood Playback Singers" list. Ghoshal was listed in Eastern Eye ' s "Top 50 Asian Celebrities" list in 2021 at fifth place, and in 2022 and 2023 at seventh place. She was the top-ranked singer each year.

In 2023, India Today featured her in their listing of the 100 most powerful women of India.

In 2024, Film Companion featured her in their Power List of Music. She was listed third among the "Top Ten Hottest Female Bollywood Lead Singers" by MensXP.com, an Indian lifestyle website for men. India's I&B and Sports, Youth Affairs Minister, Anurag Thakur and Goa's Chief Minister , Pramod Sawant felicitating Ghoshal at the 54th International Film Festival of India , where she was selected as a member of the 'Grand Jury.' Ghoshal is active on social media. She is the sixth most liked Indian personality on Facebook and 47th most followed Indian personality on Twitter, according to the statistics of Socialbakers . She is among the top ten most searched Indian singers on Google Search .

In March 2017, she became the first Indian singer to have a wax figure of her made for the display in the Indian wing of Madame Tussauds Museum in Delhi .

In 2023, Ghoshal was selected as one of the 'Grand Jury' members of the 54th edition of the International Film Festival of India .

During her 2024 "All Hearts Tour" in the United States , the City of Austin, Texas mayor Kirk Watson proclaimed June 15, 2024, as the "Shreya Ghoshal Day" for connecting the South Asian diaspora in the city to their homeland through her music.

The singer took her Instagram handle to express her joy and gratitude among fans. Ghoshal is one of the most streamed Indian artists across several music streaming platforms. She was the second-most streamed Indian female artist on Spotify in 2019 and 2020, and the most streamed Indian female artist on Spotify from 2021 to 2025. Additionally, Ghoshal was the most streamed Indian female artist on Apple Music in 2021. She was also the most streamed Indian female artist on Amazon Music in 2022. Personal life After ten years of dating, Ghoshal married her childhood friend and current Global Head of Truecaller (for Business) Shiladitya Mukhopadhyaya in a traditional Bengali ceremony on 5 February 2015.

The Recording Academy & Grammys . 30 May 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2023 . her (Ghoshal's) prodigious output and notorious versatility providing a link to the golden era of Indian cinema; Ghoshal's honeyed soprano has served her well, with a gallery of hits ^ "Shreya Ghoshal - Forbes India Magazine" . Forbes India . Archived from the original on 19 January 2023 . Retrieved 19 January 2023 . Shreya Ghoshal continues to be one of the most prolific and popular female playback singers in the country. ^ "Shreya Ghoshal has a low-key birthday celebration" .

The Times of India . 13 March 2020 . Retrieved 19 January 2023 .

While she is one of the most popular and prolific singers in the country today ^ "Shreya Ghoshal started learning music at a tender age of four" .

The Times of India . 10 April 2015 . Retrieved 5 May 2022 . ^ "I like my father being the boss in my life: Shreya" .

The Times of India . 25 December 2013 . Retrieved 12 August 2016 . ^ a b c d "Shreya Ghoshal Biography" . Shreya Ghoshal Official Website. Archived from the original on 24 October 2013 . Retrieved 17 October 2013 . ^ a b "Shreya Ghoshal Biography" . Saavn . Archived from the original on 20 December 2016 . Retrieved 13 August 2016 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal Birthday: She started singing at the age of 4, know how Shreya Ghoshal's fate changed with the reality show" (in Hindi). India TV . 12 March 2021 . Retrieved 20 September 2023 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal on zoom Baatein UNCUT" . 9 December 2015. Archived from the original on 15 July 2017 . Retrieved 19 February 2016 – via YouTube. ^ "Shreya Ghoshal teams with composer brother Soumyadeep for new single" . India TV . 3 February 2021 . Retrieved 20 September 2023 . ^ a b c d e f Kulkarni, Ronjita. "I simply closed my eyes and sang" . Rediff.com . Archived from the original on 12 October 2015 . Retrieved 4 October 2015 . ^ a b c d "Shreya Ghoshal: Lesser known facts" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 4 March 2015 . Retrieved 16 September 2015 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal Live in Auckland" . Indian Weekender. 7 July 2010. Archived from the original on 8 November 2017 . Retrieved 9 November 2017 . ^ "Birthday Special: Shreya Ghoshal turns 31 today" . Dainik Jagran . 12 March 2015. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 12 March 2015 . ^ "Birthday special: आज है सरगम के पहले शब्द जैसी श्रेया घोषाल का जन्मदिन जाने कौन से हैं उनके टॉप टेन सांग" . inext . 12 March 2015. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 12 March 2015 . ^ "Happy Birthday Shreya Ghosal" .

The Indian Express . 12 March 2012. Archived from the original on 9 April 2014 . Retrieved 30 September 2015 . ^ Chaturvedi, Vinita (23 January 2014). "I'd love to be called a Marathi Mulgi: Shreya Ghoshal" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 3 February 2018 . Retrieved 23 June 2017 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal" . AllMusic . Archived from the original on 1 October 2015 . Retrieved 22 September 2015 . ^ Dasgupta, Priyanka (21 July 2002). "Singing in Devdas was God's greatest gift: Shreya Ghoshal" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 4 November 2012 . Retrieved 23 July 2012 . ^ "Original Soundtrack Devdas" . AllMusic . Archived from the original on 1 October 2015 . Retrieved 29 September 2015 . ^ a b "Filmfare Awards (2003)" . IMDb . Archived from the original on 14 March 2016 . Retrieved 5 July 2016 . ^ a b "50th National Film Awards" (PDF) . Directorate of Film Festivals . Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 14 March 2012 . ^ " 'Desh Devi' songs" . Saavn. 19 September 2002. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 6 December 2014 . ^ a b Vijayakar, Rajiv (17 March 2013). "Reigning queen bees" . Deccan Herald . Archived from the original on 22 December 2015 . Retrieved 15 October 2015 . ^ a b c Vijayakar, Rajiv (28 July 2012). "Notes from a singer" . Deccan Herald . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 15 October 2015 . ^ a b "Winners of the 49th Manikchand Filmfare Awards" .

The Times of India . 21 February 2004. Archived from the original on 15 September 2016 . Retrieved 15 October 2015 . ^ Ojha 2003 , p. 88 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFOjha2003 ( help ) ^ "Saaya" . Middle East Broadcasting Center . 22 March 2014. Archived from the original on 25 March 2016 . Retrieved 18 March 2016 . ^ Siddiqui, Rana (30 January 2003). "Melody kid" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 11 March 2008 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ "Shreya comes to serenade" .

The Hindu . 25 May 2004. Archived from the original on 3 February 2018 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ "Chords & Notes – LOC Kargil (Saregama, Rs. 55)" .

The Hindu . 22 December 2003. Archived from the original on 18 April 2016 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ "Chords & Notes – Armaan – Shankar Ehsaan Loy – Music Review Hindi" .

The Hindu . 21 April 2003. Archived from the original on 12 October 2004 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (1 July 2004). "Thoda Tum Badlo Thoda Hum – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 3 July 2004 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ a b Tuteja, Joginder (2 January 2004). "Khakee – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 2 January 2004 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (28 May 2004). "Garv – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 4 August 2004 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ Kusnur, Narendra (23 June 2004). "Music review: Kaun Hai Jo... Music Review" . Mid-Day . Archived from the original on 6 March 2005 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ Kusnur, Narendra (21 January 2004). "Music review of 'Muskaan' " . Mid-Day . Archived from the original on 29 January 2004 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (26 July 2004). "Tumsa Nahi Dekha – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 19 October 2004 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ a b "I can do item songs too: Shreya Ghoshal" . Hindustan Times . 30 August 2004 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . Alt URL Archived 3 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ Tuteja, Joginder (8 March 2004). "Main Hoon Na – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 8 February 2005 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ Kusnur, Narendra (3 March 2004). "Music review of 'Main Hoon Na' " . Mid-Day . Archived from the original on 5 April 2004 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ Pant, Seema (15 March 2004). "You might not want to sing with Main Hoon Na" . Rediff.com . Archived from the original on 3 August 2016 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ Kusnur, Narendra (26 November 2003). "Music review of 'Aetbaar' " . Mid-Day . Archived from the original on 10 December 2003 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (9 July 2004). "Dhoom – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 13 March 2005 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal rocks" .

The Hindu . 5 February 2009 . Retrieved 29 September 2015 . ^ a b "53rd National Film Awards" (PDF) . Directorate of Film Festivals . Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 October 2013 . Retrieved 19 March 2012 . ^ "Amitabh gets best actor award for 'Black' " . Daily News and Analysis . 14 September 2007. Archived from the original on 31 July 2017 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ Verma, Sukanya (10 May 2005). "Paheli's music transports you" . Rediff.com . Archived from the original on 4 August 2016 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (24 November 2004). "Rog – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 14 February 2007 . Retrieved 24 December 2015 . ^ a b c Moitra 2014 , p. 57 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFMoitra2014 ( help ) ^ Pant, Seema (3 May 2005). "Parineeta is refreshing" . Rediff.com . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 23 December 2015 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (28 April 2005). "Parinneta – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 7 November 2006 . Retrieved 23 December 2015 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (30 June 2005). "Yahaan – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 26 June 2007 . Retrieved 23 December 2015 . ^ a b Tuteja, Joginder (9 February 2006). "51st Annual Filmfare Awards Nominees" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 7 March 2006 . Retrieved 23 December 2015 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (26 February 2005). "Yahaan – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 27 February 2005 . Retrieved 24 December 2015 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (2 August 2005). "Aashiq Banaya Aapne – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 21 February 2007 . Retrieved 24 December 2015 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (30 May 2005). "Fareb – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 17 February 2007 . Retrieved 26 December 2015 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (11 December 2004). "Shabd – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 29 October 2007 . Retrieved 26 December 2015 . ^ Verma, Sukanya (3 October 2008). "Vivah's music disappoints" . Rediff.com . Archived from the original on 14 April 2013 . Retrieved 28 December 2015 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (28 September 2006). "Vivah – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 29 June 2007 . Retrieved 28 December 2015 . ^ Roy, Indranil (23 September 2006). "Soaring polularity charts" . Daily News and Analysis . Archived from the original on 3 February 2018 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ Verma, Sukanya (23 August 2006). "Woh Lamhe's music is worth a listen" . Rediff.com . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 28 December 2015 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (16 August 2006). "Woh Lamhe – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 7 September 2007 . Retrieved 28 December 2015 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (26 July 2006). "Lage Raho Munnabhai – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 26 October 2007 . Retrieved 28 December 2015 . ^ "Nominations for the 52nd Filmfare Awards" . Bollywood Hungama . 8 February 2007. Archived from the original on 17 February 2007 . Retrieved 28 December 2015 . ^ a b Tuteja, Joginder (5 July 2006). "Omkara – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 3 April 2007 . Retrieved 28 December 2015 . ^ Verma, Sukanya (12 July 2008). "Omkara's music rocks" . Rediff.com . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 28 December 2015 . ^ a b c Tuteja, Joginder (28 April 2006). "Krrish – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 20 February 2007 . Retrieved 28 December 2015 . ^ "To Catch A Star: Shreya Ghoshal" . Rajeev Masand . Archived from the original on 22 December 2015 . Retrieved 3 December 2015 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (8 November 2007). "Khoya Khoya Chand – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 25 December 2007 . Retrieved 29 December 2015 . ^ a b Sen, Raja (6 November 2007). "Buy Khoya Khoya for the title song" . Rediff.com . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2015 . ^ "Laaga Chunari Mein Daag (Music Review)" . Sify . 7 September 2007. Archived from the original on 24 December 2015 . Retrieved 24 November 2015 . ^ "Moitra's magic continues with 'Laaga Chunari Mein Daag' " . Daily News and Analysis . 17 September 2007. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015 . Retrieved 24 November 2015 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (21 September 2007). "Saawariya – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 9 December 2007 . Retrieved 29 December 2015 . ^ Verma, Sukanya (24 September 2007). "Saawariya soundtrack, a superior product" . Rediff.com . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2015 . ^ Bhattacharya, Sumit (20 November 2006). "Guru's soundtrack is typical Rahman" . Rediff.com . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2015 . ^ "Barso Re song info" . Saavn . Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 2 September 2013 . ^ "Guru – Music Review" . Oneindia.in. 22 November 2006. Archived from the original on 7 January 2015 . Retrieved 2 September 2013 . ^ "Winners of 53rd Annual Filmfare Awards" . Bollywood Hungama . 23 February 2008. Archived from the original on 22 November 2011 . Retrieved 23 February 2008 . ^ "Kareena, SRK win Best actor awards" . Daily News and Analysis . 24 February 2008. Archived from the original on 3 February 2018 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ a b Sharma, Parul (7 September 2009). " 'Kanchivaram' wins national award for best feature film" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 5 May 2014 . Retrieved 11 September 2011 . ^ Verma, Sukanya (6 September 2007). "Bhool Bhulaiyaa's music is enjoyable" . Rediff.com . Archived from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 29 December 2015 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (3 April 2007). "Ta Ra Rum Pum – Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 22 December 2007 . Retrieved 29 December 2015 . ^ " 'Om Shanti Om' recalls music of an earlier age" . Daily News and Analysis . 20 September 2007. Archived from the original on 3 February 2018 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ a b c "Shreya Ghoshal" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 2 September 2015 . ^ "Singh Is Kinng" . Saavn . 30 June 2008. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 12 October 2013 . ^ "Singh Is Kinng music review" . Glamsham. Archived from the original on 16 October 2013 . Retrieved 12 October 2013 . ^ "Music review: Singh is Kinng" . Rediff.com . 7 July 2008. Archived from the original on 13 February 2014 . Retrieved 12 October 2013 . ^ "Filmfare: 'Jodha...' bags 5, Priyanka, Hrithik shine" .

The Times of India . 1 March 2009. Archived from the original on 3 September 2013 . Retrieved 5 March 2009 . ^ a b "National Film Awards: Priyanka gets best actress, 'Antaheen' awarded best film" .

The Times of India . 23 January 2010. Archived from the original on 27 March 2015 . Retrieved 27 January 2010 . ^ a b "56th National Film Awards" (PDF) . Directorate of Film Festivals . Retrieved 27 March 2012 . ^ "Dabangg – music review by Atta Khan" . Planet Bollywood. 5 August 2010 . Retrieved 26 February 2022 . ^ "Original Motion Picture Soundtrack: When Harry Tries To Marry" . AllMusic . Archived from the original on 13 March 2016 . Retrieved 28 September 2015 . ^ "Music Review of Band Baaja Baaraat" . glamsham.com. Archived from the original on 9 February 2017 . Retrieved 9 February 2017 . ^ a b "Music Review : Shor – In The City" . Glamsham. Archived from the original on 11 August 2016 . Retrieved 26 June 2016 . ^ a b "Music Review: Bodyguard" . NDTVMovies.com . NDTV . Archived from the original on 13 September 2015 . Retrieved 26 June 2016 . ^ Verma, Sukanya. "Review: Bodyguard music is average" . Rediff . Archived from the original on 27 April 2016 . Retrieved 26 June 2016 . ^ a b Abid. "Music Review : The Dirty Picture" . Glamsham. Archived from the original on 11 August 2016 . Retrieved 25 June 2016 . ^ "Nominations for 57th Idea Filmfare Awards 2012" . Bollywood Hungama . 11 January 2010. Archived from the original on 13 January 2012 . Retrieved 7 November 2014 . ^ "Music Review : Agneepath" . Glamsham. 26 December 2011. Archived from the original on 11 August 2016 . Retrieved 25 June 2016 . ^ "Meet the musician duo behind 'Chikni Chameli' " . Rediff. 25 January 2012. Archived from the original on 27 April 2012 . Retrieved 27 April 2012 . ^ "Agneepath: Critic Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 7 January 2012 . Retrieved 25 June 2016 . ^ a b "Nominations for 58th Idea Filmfare Awards 2012" . Bollywood Hungama . 13 January 2013. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013 . Retrieved 7 November 2014 . ^ "I was not comfortable singing many item songs post Chikni Chameli" . Archived from the original on 19 October 2015. ^ Vaishnav, Anand (27 April 2012). "Music Review of Rowdy Rathore" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 14 September 2016 . Retrieved 19 August 2016 . ^ Satyajit (14 May 2012). "Music Review of Rowdy Rathore" . Glamsham . Archived from the original on 21 March 2016 . Retrieved 19 August 2016 . ^ Sharma, Devesh (30 May 2012). "Music Review of Rowdy Rathore" . Filmfare . Archived from the original on 21 August 2016 . Retrieved 19 August 2016 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (3 May 2012). "Music Review of Rowdy Rathore" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 19 October 2015 . Retrieved 19 August 2016 . ^ "Student of the Year Music Review" . Yahoo! . Archived from the original on 1 February 2016 . Retrieved 25 June 2016 . ^ "Music Review : Jab Tak Hai Jaan" . Glamsham . Archived from the original on 19 October 2012 . Retrieved 25 October 2012 . ^ "MUSIC REVIEW – Jab Tak Hai Jaan" .

The Times of India . 10 October 2012. Archived from the original on 10 October 2012 . Retrieved 10 October 2012 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder. "Jab Tak Hai Jaan Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 12 October 2012 . Retrieved 10 October 2012 . ^ Gupta, Priya; Sharma, Garima (September 2013). "The most romantic song of 2012 is..." The Times of India . Archived from the original on 1 September 2013 . Retrieved 1 September 2013 . ^ a b "Music Review of Himmatwala" . NDTV.com . 7 March 2013. Archived from the original on 22 August 2016 . Retrieved 21 August 2016 . ^ a b Shivi (26 February 2013). "Music Review of Himmatwala" . Koimoi.com . Archived from the original on 28 August 2016 . Retrieved 21 August 2016 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (25 February 2013). "Music Review of Himmatwala" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 18 June 2013 . Retrieved 21 August 2016 . ^ Rafat (3 May 2012). "Music Review of Himmatwala" . glamsham.com . Archived from the original on 22 August 2016 . Retrieved 21 August 2016 . ^ a b Vijayakar, Rajiv (22 April 2013). "Aashiqui 2 (2013) Critic Music Review" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 23 January 2015 . Retrieved 21 January 2015 . ^ a b Sharma, Devesh (19 June 2013). "Music Review: Raanjhanaa" . Filmfare . Retrieved 10 July 2016 . ^ a b Basu, Mohar (19 September 2016). "Raanjhana Music Review" . Koimoi. Archived from the original on 21 February 2016 . Retrieved 10 July 2016 . ^ Mathur, Yashika (8 June 2013). "Music Review: 'Raanjhanaa' music glorifies love in unique way" . Daily News and Analysis . Archived from the original on 6 November 2016 . Retrieved 10 July 2016 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (23 September 2013). "Review: Krrish 3 music falls short of expectations" . Rediff . Archived from the original on 10 September 2016 . Retrieved 10 July 2016 . ^ a b c "Ram-Leela Music Review" . Mohar Basu . Koimoi. 5 October 2013. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013 . Retrieved 5 October 2013 . ^ "Music Review (Business Standard)" . Business Standard India . 9 October 2013. Archived from the original on 14 November 2013 . Retrieved 15 October 2013 . ^ "Review: Folk flavour dominates Ram-Leela's music" . Archived from the original on 14 October 2013 . Retrieved 15 October 2013 . ^ "Nominations for 59th Idea Filmfare Awards" . Bollywood Hungama . 14 January 2014. Archived from the original on 7 November 2014 . Retrieved 7 November 2014 . ^ "Music Review: PK" . Filmfare . Archived from the original on 9 March 2016 . Retrieved 17 January 2016 . ^ "Happy New Year Music Review" . Koimoi. 18 September 2014. Archived from the original on 10 March 2016 . Retrieved 25 June 2016 . ^ "Music review: Happy New Year's music is trendy and young at heart" . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 6 March 2016 . Retrieved 25 June 2016 . ^ "Manwa Laage crosses two millions views in 48 hours!" .

The Times of India . 12 September 2014. Archived from the original on 19 May 2017 . Retrieved 23 August 2016 . ^ "Nominations for the 60th Britannia Filmfare Awards" . Filmfare . 19 January 2015. Archived from the original on 10 January 2016 . Retrieved 19 January 2015 . ^ Nicy, V. P. (15 September 2014). " 'I' Music Review Roundup: AR Rahman-Shankar Team Creates Magic Again" . International Business Times . Archived from the original on 7 October 2014 . Retrieved 31 December 2014 . ^ a b Sharma, Devesh. "Music Review: Hamari Adhuri Kahani" . Filmfare . Archived from the original on 7 August 2016 . Retrieved 26 June 2016 . ^ Redkar, Surabhi (8 June 2015). "Hamari Adhuri Kahani Music Review" . Koimoi. Archived from the original on 21 February 2016 . Retrieved 26 June 2016 . ^ a b Rafat (3 August 2015). "Music Review of Brothers" . Glamsham . Archived from the original on 27 August 2016 . Retrieved 25 August 2016 . ^ a b Sudhakaran, Sreeju (12 August 2015). "Music Review of Brothers" . Bollywood Life . Archived from the original on 25 August 2016 . Retrieved 25 August 2016 . ^ a b Fernandes, Kasmin (7 August 2015). "Music review of Brothers" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 26 June 2016 . Retrieved 25 August 2016 . ^ "Music review of Brothers" . Rediff . 8 August 2015. Archived from the original on 10 September 2016 . Retrieved 25 August 2016 . ^ Fernandez, Kasmin. "Music Review: Bajirao Mastani" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 22 January 2016 . Retrieved 26 June 2016 . ^ "Review: Bajirao Mastani's music is a roller coaster ride" . Rediff.com . 5 December 2015. Archived from the original on 22 June 2016 . Retrieved 24 June 2016 . ^ " 'Bajirao Mastani' music review: swings between sombre, earthy, poignant, soulful and brash" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 26 August 2017 . Retrieved 26 June 2016 . ^ "61st Filmfare Awards" .

The Times of India . 16 January 2016. Archived from the original on 15 September 2016 . Retrieved 15 September 2016 . ^ "61st Britannia Filmfare Awards 2016: Arijit Singh and Shreya Samuktha win the Best Singer Award" . India.com . 15 January 2016 . Retrieved 17 January 2016 . ^ a b c Tuteja, Joginder (26 December 2015). "Music Review: Wazir" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 13 August 2016 . Retrieved 9 July 2016 . ^ "Review: Wazir's music is haunting" . Rediff . 3 January 2016. Archived from the original on 5 August 2017 . Retrieved 9 July 2016 . ^ a b c Kapoor, Aelina (16 January 2016). "Review: Sanam Re's music is impressive" . Rediff . Archived from the original on 10 September 2016 . Retrieved 9 July 2016 . ^ Fernandes, Kasmin (15 January 2016). "Music Review: Sanam Re" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 9 July 2016 . ^ Redkar, Surabhi (4 February 2016). "Sanam Re Music Review" . Koimoi. Archived from the original on 25 July 2016 . Retrieved 9 July 2016 . ^ a b "Music Review: Ishq Forever" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 12 August 2017 . Retrieved 13 July 2017 . ^ a b "Music Review: Ishq Forever" . Rediff.com . Archived from the original on 5 August 2017 . Retrieved 13 July 2017 . ^ a b "Music Review: Ishq Forever" . Bollywood Hungama . 19 February 2016. Archived from the original on 5 August 2017 . Retrieved 13 July 2017 . ^ Bhanage, Mihir (29 April 2016). "Music review of Sairat" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 10 August 2016 . Retrieved 23 August 2016 . ^ Ghosh, Sankhayan (24 April 2016). "Music beyond words" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 29 April 2016 . Retrieved 23 August 2016 . ^ Basu, Mohar (29 July 2016). "Music review: 'Rustom' " .

The Times of India . Retrieved 18 August 2016 . ^ a b Sharma, Devesh (16 July 2016). "Music Review: Rustom" . Filmfare . Archived from the original on 20 August 2016 . Retrieved 18 August 2016 . ^ "Badrinath Ki Dulhania music review: This album has chart-buster written all over" . Firstpost . 16 February 2017. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017 . Retrieved 5 November 2017 . ^ "Badrinath Ki Dulhania music review: Varun Dhawan and Alia Bhatt's romcom promises one chartbuster after another" . Bollywood Life . 15 February 2017. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017 . Retrieved 5 November 2017 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal at her finest in Naam Shabana song 'Rozana' " . Cinestaan . Archived from the original on 7 November 2017 . Retrieved 5 November 2017 . ^ "Naam Shabana Music Review" . Indiawest . Archived from the original on 8 May 2017 . Retrieved 3 December 2017 . ^ "Partition 1947 music review: AR Rahman's terrific Do Dilon Ke stands out in this short but sweet soundtrack" . Bollywood Life . 7 July 2017. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017 . Retrieved 5 November 2017 . ^ " 'Toilet: Ek Prem Katha' Music Review: Substantial and Credible Score Stays True to Film's Essence" . Indiawest . Archived from the original on 7 November 2017 . Retrieved 5 November 2017 . ^ "Music Review: Toilet – Ek Prem Katha" . Bollywood Hungama . 11 August 2017. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017 . Retrieved 5 November 2017 . ^ "63rd Filmfare Awards 2018: Nominations list" .

The Times of India . n.d. Archived from the original on 26 February 2018 . Retrieved 25 February 2018 . ^ a b Rafat (5 March 2017). "Music Review: Half Girlfriend by Glamsham" . Archived from the original on 6 June 2017 . Retrieved 22 June 2017 . ^ a b Bhattacharya, Ahana (9 May 2017). "Music Review: Half Girlfriend by Komoi" . Archived from the original on 25 June 2017 . Retrieved 22 June 2017 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal Mixtape out, Twitterati is all praise for the melody queen" . 29 June 2017. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017 . Retrieved 1 July 2017 . ^ "Kannada romantic songs that ruled 2017" .

The Times of India . 21 March 2018. Archived from the original on 30 September 2018 . Retrieved 22 March 2018 . ^ Tuteja, Joginder (29 January 2018). "Music Review: Phir Se..." Bollywood Hungama . ^ "Padmavati song Ghoomar: Deepika Padukone is every bit the queen and Shahid Kapoor's smitten. Watch video" . Hindustan Times . 25 October 2017 . Retrieved 2 April 2018 . ^ Khurana, Suanshu (26 January 2018). "Music review of Padmaavat: Sounds of War" .

The Indian Express . Retrieved 11 April 2018 . ^ Nair, Vipin (22 January 2018). " 'Padmaavat' album review: Music fit for a queen" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 11 April 2018 . ^ Sarka, Suparno (21 January 2018). "Padmaavat full music album review: From Ghoomar to Ek Dil Ek Jaan, variety in the songs makes it special" . International Business Times . Retrieved 11 April 2018 . ^ a b Chauhan, Gaurang (27 January 2018). "Padmaavat music review: One of the best music albums in recent times" . Times Now . Retrieved 11 April 2018 . ^ "Profiling the winners of the 64th Vimal Elaichi Filmfare Awards" . Filmfare . 20 April 2019 . Retrieved 4 May 2019 . ^ Kameshwari, A. (20 March 2018). "Baaghi 2 song Ek Do Teen: Jacqueline steps into Madhuri's shoes with her sensuous moves" .

The Indian Express . Retrieved 6 April 2018 . ^ "Janhvi Kapoor-Ishaan Khatter's Dhadak Title Track: Shreya Ghoshal fans have fallen in love with her voice all over again" . Daily News and Analysis . 20 June 2018 . Retrieved 22 July 2018 . ^ Paul, Shreya (19 June 2019). "Kabir Singh music review: A typical angst-laden soundtrack diluted by similar sounding songs" . Firstpost . Retrieved 5 September 2019 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal: Each state's music has its own style.

As a singer, I want to experience that every day" .

The Times of India . 11 March 2019 . Retrieved 26 December 2022 .

When asked what specific goal Ghoshal have set going forward she answered, I also want to do more different projects – in films as well as independent music ^ "I am not a born composer: Playback singer Shreya Ghoshal" .

The New Indian Express . 2 May 2020 . Retrieved 26 December 2022 . ^ "Birju Maharaj's Poems Gets A Musical Touch By Javed Ali, Shreya Ghoshal & Others In Mann Bheetar" . Koimoi . 7 February 2020 . Retrieved 13 September 2023 . ^ "Mann Bheetar Songs" . Bollywood Hungama . 7 February 2020 . Retrieved 13 September 2023 . ^ "Apni Maati l Shreya Ghoshal" . 14 August 2020 . Retrieved 26 December 2022 – via YouTube. ^ "Isha Home School Twitter Status" . 31 March 2022. Archived from the original on 13 July 2022 . Retrieved 26 December 2022 . ^ "R Madhavan, Harbhajan Singh, Prem Chopra, other celebs support Sadhguru's Save Soil Movement" . Hindustan Times . 18 August 2022 . Retrieved 26 December 2022 . ^ "Billboard Top Triller Global Chart" . Billboard . 20 November 2020. Archived from the original on 27 December 2022 . Retrieved 27 December 2021 . ^ "Darshan Raval on the Long Road to Releasing His Debut Record 'Judaiyaan' " . Rolling Stone India . 17 November 2020 . Retrieved 26 December 2022 . ^ "Bhoomi 2020" . Merchant Records. Archived from the original on 28 May 2023 . Retrieved 26 December 2022 . ^ "Saina Music review" . Filmfare . 11 April 2021 . Retrieved 26 December 2022 . ^ "Top 10 Hindi-Pop Hits Of 2021" . Outlook . 21 December 2021 . Retrieved 26 December 2022 . ^ "A. R. Rahman- Billboard Global Excl. U.S Chart History" . Billboard . 2 November 2021 . Retrieved 26 December 2022 . ^ a b "Nominations for the 67th Wolf777news Filmfare Awards 2022" . Filmfare . 18 August 2022. ^ "Zaalima Coca Cola Brings Shreya Ghoshal And Nora Fatehi Together" . Filmfare . 28 July 2021 . Retrieved 27 December 2022 . ^ "Atrangi Re review: A messy romantic drama" . Deccan Herald . 24 December 2021 . Retrieved 27 December 2022 . All the songs stand out and though one too many for a film of this genre, they are eminently watchable, Chaka Chak in particular (rendered feelingly by Shreya Ghoshal) ^ "Toddlers Dancing to 'Chaka Chak' in Adorable Video Will Make Sara Ali Khan Proud" . CNN-IBN . 5 April 2022 . Retrieved 27 December 2022 . Sara Ali Khan's energetic dance in Atrangi Re's Chaka Chak song had social media users hooked to it.

The song became an instant hit last year and the internet was flooded with a series of Instagram Reels made on the track. And the trend doesn't seem to die even after three months of the film being released. ^ "Saree-clad woman dances to Sara Ali Khan's Chaka Chak. Viral video has 7 million views" . India Today . 15 December 2021 . Retrieved 27 December 2022 . Sara Ali Khan's song Chaka Chak from her upcoming film Atrangi Re is furiously trending online. Instagram is totally obsessed with the catchy song and is filled with videos of people dancing to it. ^ "Top 25 Most viewed Bollywood Films Songs of 2021 on YouTube" . Bollywood Product. 25 December 2021 . Retrieved 27 December 2022 . ^ "Oh Sanam song: Shreya Ghoshal's song spread magic, Tony Kakkar supported in 'O Sanam' " . CNN-IBN . 10 April 2021 . Retrieved 27 December 2022 . ^ "Pyaar Ek Tarfaa: Amaal Mallik-Shreya Ghoshal's latest track is heartwrenching yet hummable" .

The Indian Express . 6 October 2021 . Retrieved 27 December 2022 . ^ " 'Pyaar Karte Ho Na' Sung By Shreya Ghoshal and Stebin Ben" .

The Times of India . 23 November 2021 . Retrieved 27 December 2022 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal's single Angana Morey leaves a soothing effect on the listener" .

The Indian Express . 4 February 2021 . Retrieved 27 December 2022 . "Angana Morey" has been sung, composed and written by Shreya Ghoshal, with music production by her brother Soumyadeep Ghoshal. ^ "Billboard Top Triller Global Chart" . Billboard . 27 February 2021. Archived from the original on 15 May 2022 . Retrieved 27 December 2021 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal comes up with her first single of 2022 titled 'Uff' " . India TV . 12 January 2022 . Retrieved 31 December 2022 . ^ "Check Out New Punjabi Song Music Video - 'Uff' Sung By Shreya Ghoshal" .

The Times of India . 14 January 2022 . Retrieved 31 December 2022 . ^ "Gangubai Kathiawadi music review: Sanjay Leela Bhansali harnesses unsaid emotions and sets them to memorable tunes" . Firstpost . 22 February 2022 . Retrieved 31 December 2022 . ^ "Breaking Down The Music Of Sanjay Leela Bhansali's Gangubai Kathiawadi" . Film Companion . 23 February 2022 . Retrieved 23 October 2023 . Shreya Ghoshal inhabits the song with her range that never sounds strained or stretched, moving between the sudden changes in the pace of the song without bringing attention to it — stretching through one syllable, rushing through others. ^ " 'Heer Raanjhana' from 'Bachchhan Paandey' makes it to Times Square billboard" . Deccan Herald . 22 March 2022 . Retrieved 31 December 2022 . ^ "Amruta Khanvilkar Posts Video of Grandmother Dancing to Viral Chandra Song -- Watch" . CNN-IBN . 11 April 2022 . Retrieved 31 December 2022 . A week ago, one of the songs from the film Chandra was released to widespread praise and acclaim. ^ "Why Amruta Khanvilkar And Addinath Kothare's Mammoth Starrer 'Chandramukhi' Looks Like Its Going To Make History" . Outlook (Indian magazine) . 4 May 2022 . Retrieved 31 December 2022 . With singing superstar Shreya Ghoshal lending her voice, the film's soundtrack emerges as mesmermising, enthralling and immersive experience; The subtly seductive 'To Chand Rati' or the playfully flirty 'Chandra' which is already trending on reels, have striked a hundred chords with audiences. ^ a b "Nominations announced for the Planet Marathi Filmfare Awards Marathi 2022" . Filmfare . 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 7 September 2023 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal Chandra song: Chandra's song made Shreya Ghoshal crazy! Chandramukhi fever still persists" (in Marathi). News18 Lokmat . 31 May 2022. Archived from the original on 30 October 2022 . Retrieved 31 December 2022 . This song of Chandramukhi has made people crazy not only in Maharashtra but also in India and abroad.

The number of reel makers on this has gone into the thousands. ^ "Chandra Song: Foreign citizens also love Chandra Song! Watch the awesome video" . Sakal (in Marathi). 18 October 2022 . Retrieved 31 December 2022 . ^ "Akshay Kumar considers 'Makhmali' the most soulful tracks of his film career" . ThePrint . 23 May 2022 . Retrieved 1 January 2023 . ^ "Bhool Bhulaiyaa 2 Makers Release Arijit Singh, Shreya Ghoshal and Tushar Joshi's Version of Ami Je Tomar" . leisurebyte.com . 2 June 2022 . Retrieved 1 January 2023 . There's also Shreya's Ami Je Tomar song used in Kiara Advani's scare scene. Ghoshal has also lent her voice for the Mere Dholna Revisited version and Mere Dholna The Sisters Version ^ "Hear Shreya Ghoshal and Berklee Indian Ensemble's Powerful Rendition of 'Sundari Pennae' " . Rolling Stone (India). 22 June 2022 . Retrieved 1 January 2023 . ^ "Berklee Indian Ensemble Earns Grammy Nomination in Best Global Music Album Category" . Rolling Stone (India). 16 November 2022 . Retrieved 1 January 2023 . ^ "Love birds Tejasswi Prakash, Karan Kundrra with Shreya Ghoshal and Stebin Ben come together to make their new song 'Baarish Aayi Hain' a massive hit" .

The Times of India . 13 July 2022 . Retrieved 3 January 2023 . ^ "Raksha Bandhan title track: New song from Akshay Kumar's film chronicles love and bond between siblings" . News9Live . 7 August 2022. Archived from the original on 3 January 2023 . Retrieved 3 January 2023 . ^ "Raksha Bandhan Song Dhaagon Se Baandhaa: A Glimpse of Akshay Kumar's Brotherly Love For Sadia Khateeb" . News 24 (India) . 28 July 2022 . Retrieved 3 January 2023 . ^ "Raksha Bandhan - Full Album" . 6 August 2022 . Retrieved 3 January 2023 – via YouTube . ^ "Raksha Bandhan 2022: From Abhi Mujh Mein Kahin to Phoolon Ka Taaron Ka, Bollywood songs defining siblings bond" . Daily News and Analysis . 10 August 2022 . Retrieved 3 January 2023 .

The title song sung by Shreya Ghoshal is one of the best tracks of recent time. Shreya's vocals and Irshad Kamil's lyrics will surely bring tears to every brother out there. ^ "Raksha Bandhan 2022: Bollywood songs that should be on your playlist" . Firstpost . 11 August 2022 . Retrieved 3 January 2023 . Sung by Arijit Singh and Shreya Ghoshal, this song, ("Dhaagon Se Baandhaa") is from the 2022 movie Raksha Bandhan, starring Akshay Kumar and Bhumi Pednekar. It is one of the most perfect songs that can be played on Raksha Bandhan. ^ "Dil: Shreya's Version I Ek Villain Returns" . 5 August 2022 . Retrieved 3 January 2023 – via YouTube . ^ "Check Out Latest Punjabi Video Song 'Tere Bajjon' Sung By Shreya Ghoshal" .

The Times of India . 28 August 2022 . Retrieved 3 January 2023 . ^ "The melodious soundtrack of Madhuri Dixit's Maja Ma out now!" . Firstpost . 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 5 January 2023 .

The foot-tapping, upbeat dance number Boom Padi, has cemented itself as the garba anthem of the year and has lit up the dance floors this festive season.

The energetic song is sung by the highly accomplished Shreya Ghoshal. ^ " 'Maja Ma' On Amazon Prime Video Movie Review: Patriarchal Take On A Woke Concept Ends Up Being Too Pedestrian" . Outlook (Indian magazine) . 19 October 2022 . Retrieved 5 January 2023 . Songs like Boom Padi, Kacchi Doriyaan and Ae Pagli are definitely a must-have in your playlists this season ^ " 'Rasiya': New song from 'Brahmastra' released" .

The Times of India . 24 September 2022 . Retrieved 5 January 2023 . ^ "IIFA Awards 2023: Here's the full list of winners" . Mid-Day . 27 May 2023 . Retrieved 28 May 2023 . ^ "IIFA 2023 nominations announced: Brahmastra, Gangubai Kathiawadi and Bhool Bhulaiyaa 2 lead the list" .

The Indian Express . 27 December 2022 . Retrieved 5 January 2023 . ^ "Album Bhoomi 2022" . Merchant Records . 28 October 2022 . Retrieved 5 January 2023 . ^ "PENTATONIX RELEASE NEW ALBUM TODAY!" . Sony Music . 28 October 2022 . Retrieved 5 January 2023 . ^ Enos, Morgan (10 November 2023). "2024 GRAMMY Nominees of the Year" . www.grammy.com . Retrieved 26 January 2024 . ^ "Sanjay Leela Bhansali's music album 'Sukoon' unveiled" .

The Times of India . 7 December 2022 . Retrieved 5 January 2023 . ^ "Sanjay Leela Bhansali reveals why he has dedicated his Ghazal album Sukoon to Lata Mangeshkar - Exclusive" .

The Times of India . 7 December 2022 . Retrieved 5 January 2023 . ^ "Sanjay Leela Bhansali's Sukoon is a modern-day masterpiece" . Firstpost . 13 December 2022 . Retrieved 5 January 2023 . ^ "Sukoon review: Lull without the Storm" .

The Indian Express . 26 December 2022 . Retrieved 5 January 2023 .

While Tujhe bhi chaand by Shreya Ghoshal is a reminder of the 90s sweet pop, she sings the famed Wo jo humme tumme qarar by Momin Khan Momin and immortalised by Akhtar with a lot of dexterity. ^ "Salaam Venky - Full Album" . Retrieved 5 January 2022 – via YouTube . ^ "Cirkus Song Sun Zara: Ranveer Singh, Pooja Hegde And Jacqueline Fernandez Go Retro" . NDTV . 16 December 2022 . Retrieved 5 January 2023 . ^ "Riteish Deshmukh, Genelia D'souza's romantic track 'Sukh Kalale' from 'Ved' out now" . Asian News International . 27 December 2022 . Retrieved 5 January 2023 . ^ "New song 'Sukh Kalale' from Riteish Deshmukh's movie 'Ved' is spellbinding" . Radio Mirchi . 29 December 2022 . Retrieved 5 January 2023 .

The new song 'Sukh Kalale' from Riteish Deshmukh's upcoming movie 'Ved' is out and it's pretty melodious. This is also justified by the fact that melody queen Shreya Ghoshal has lent her voice to the beautiful track composed by Ajay - Atul who has also penned down the mesmerizing lyrics of the song. ^ "Ved - Review" . Maharashtra Times (in Marathi). 1 January 2023 . Retrieved 5 January 2023 . the musical side of the movie has been strongly built by Ajay-Atul.

The songs 'Besuri Me...', 'Sukh Kalale...' are beautiful. ^ "Vaishnava Jan To from Gandhi Godse Ek Yudh: Shreya Ghoshal's emotional track captures Mahatma Gandhi's journey" .

The Indian Express . 25 January 2023 . Retrieved 23 January 2024 . ^ "Laqshay Kapoor On Cloud Nine As He Collaborates With Shreya Ghoshal For 'Sohnneyaa' " . Outlook . 25 January 2023 . Retrieved 23 January 2024 . ^ "Lost - Song - Nouka Doobi" . Times of India . 7 February 2023 . Retrieved 23 January 2024 . ^ " 'Maharashtra Shahir': Ankush Chaudhari And Sana Shinde's Love Song 'Baharala Ha Madhumas' Is Out!" . Times of India . 1 March 2023 . Retrieved 23 January 2024 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal's Marathi Song Baharla Ha Madhumas Creates A Storm On The Internet" . CNN-IBN . 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 23 January 2024 . ^ "Tanzania TikTokers Dance To Marathi Song 'Baharla Ha Madhumas' In Viral Video-Watch" . Times of India . 18 May 2023 . Retrieved 23 January 2024 . ^ "Japanese duo dances to Marathi song Baharla Ha Madhumas. Watch" . Hindustan Times . 19 May 2023 . Retrieved 23 January 2024 . ^ "Divya Kumar On 'Maine Pi Rakhi Hai': I Was Waiting For A Duet With Shreya Ghoshal And It Finally Happened; She Is A Modern-Era Nightingale - Exclusive" . Times of India . 31 March 2023 . Retrieved 23 January 2024 . ^ "Tere Hawaale (Arijit, Shreya Duet) - Laal Singh Chaddha (Extended)" . YouTube . 30 April 2023 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ "Enjoy New Hindi Video Song 'Zihaal e Miskin' Sung By Vishal Mishra And Shreya Ghoshal" . Times of India . 31 May 2023 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ "Hina Khan feels blessed to have Shreya Ghoshal as her playback singer in 'Barsaat Aa Gayi' " . Radio Mirchi . 17 June 2023 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ "Discover The New Hindi Music Video For Jee Bhar Ke Tum Sung By Shreya Ghoshal" . Times of India . 26 July 2023 . Retrieved 23 January 2024 . ^ "Check Out The Latest Hindi Music Video For Ek Mulaqaat By Vishal Mishra And Shreya Ghoshal" . Times of India . 24 November 2023 . Retrieved 23 January 2024 . ^ "Billboard India Songs (17th June 2023)" . Billboard . 17 June 2023 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ "Vicky Kaushal's Tere Vaste to Rajinikanth's Kaavaalaa: YouTube unveils the top 15 most viewed music videos of 2023" .

The Indian Express . 18 December 2023 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ " 'Jhoome Jo Pathaan' to 'Kaavaalaa,' here are the 10 Most viewed songs of 2023" . Radio Mirchi . 31 December 2023 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ "Adipurush - Song - Tu Hai Sheetal Dhaara (Full Video)" . Times of India . 28 June 2023 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ "Rocky Aur Rani Kii Prem Kahaani - Song - Tum Kya Mile" . Times of India . 28 June 2023 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ "Rocky Aur Rani Kii Prem Kahaani - Song - Ve Kamleya" . Times of India . 19 July 2023 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ "Nominations for the 69th Hyundai Filmfare Awards 2024 with Gujarat Tourism: Full list out" . Filmfare . 15 January 2024 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ "The Top 15 Hindi Film Songs of 2023" . Rediff . 12 December 2023 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ "Melodies That Ruled: Meet the Bollywood Artists Who Owned 2023's Music Scene" . Deccan Chronicle . 31 December 2023 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ "Recap 2023: Top 10 Bollywood Songs, From Jhoome Jo Pathaan To What Jhumka?" . NDTV . 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal's version of Tum Kya Mile out" . Cinema Express . 27 July 2023 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ "Tum Kya Mile - Pritam's Version (From "Rocky Aur Rani Kii Prem Kahaani")" . YouTube . 30 July 2023 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ "Ve Kamleya (Redux) (From "Rocky Aur Rani Kii Prem Kahaani")" . YouTube . 30 July 2023 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal's Arabic singing skills leave fans spellbound " .

The Siasat Daily . 13 July 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 . ^ "Billboard Arabic Hot 100 (Week of January 6, 2024)" . Billboard . 6 January 2024 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 . ^ "This Week's Official MENA Chart Top 20: from 28/07/2023 to 03/08/2023" . MENA Chart . 3 August 2023 . Retrieved 24 January 2024 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "Official Charts History - Guli Mata" . Official Charts Company . 25 January 2024 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 . ^ "Billboard India Songs Chart (Week of September 16, 2023)" . Billboard . 16 September 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 . ^ "Coke Studio 2023 witnesses a never-before-seen collaboration between Shreya Ghoshal and rapper Afroto" .

The New Indian Express . 29 July 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 . ^ "Romantic melody: Shreya Ghoshal, Shekhar Ravjiani come up with the single Vaari Vaari" .

The Tribune . 18 November 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 . ^ " 'Bolo Na' From '12th Fail' Is Soulful, Romantic Ballad" . Outlook . 14 October 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 . ^ "Jaan Da (Rab Ki Dua) - Tejas - Shreya Ghoshal" . YouTube . 4 January 2024 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 . ^ "Animal - Song - Kashmir" . Times of India . 8 December 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 . ^ " 'Itni Si Baat' from 'Sam Bahadur' sung by Sonu Nigam and Shreya Ghoshal is out! Watch now" . Radio Mirchi . 5 December 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 . ^ "Tu Jo Hai song from Kadak Singh is out" . Cinema Express . 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 . ^ "Dunki - Main Tera Rasta Dekhunga - Shreya Ghoshal" . YouTube . 20 December 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal Biography on Saavn" . Archived from the original on 3 March 2017 . Retrieved 3 March 2017 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal performs in Sharjah" . Gulf News . 13 May 2013. Archived from the original on 28 January 2017 . Retrieved 12 June 2013 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal dedicates concert to flood victims" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 30 October 2017 . Retrieved 11 June 2013 . ^ "Annual day celebration of Airports Authority of India" .

The Times of India . 5 April 2013. Archived from the original on 27 March 2015 . Retrieved 11 June 2013 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal performs at London's Royal Albert Hall" . NDTV.com. 7 May 2013. Archived from the original on 13 February 2017 . Retrieved 13 February 2017 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal makes her Royal Albert Hall debut on 6 May 2013" . Royal Albert Hall Official Website. 16 May 2013. Archived from the original on 13 February 2017 . Retrieved 13 February 2017 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal Twitter Status" . 25 May 2014. Archived from the original on 25 February 2017 . Retrieved 25 February 2017 . ^ Sadarangani, Anil (13 March 2006). "They're all game!" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 26 December 2016 . Retrieved 28 December 2015 . ^ "Straight Answers" .

The Times of India . 22 March 2006. Archived from the original on 26 December 2016 . Retrieved 28 December 2015 . ^ Jain, Princy (25 March 2006). "Bollywood masala at Melbourne" . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 6 May 2006 . Retrieved 28 December 2015 . ^ Ruhani, Faheem (9 January 2006). "Stars come to the AID(S)" . Daily News and Analysis . Archived from the original on 3 February 2018 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ Ranjit, Sahaya (26 June 2006). "Just cause" . India Today . Archived from the original on 2 June 2016 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ Sundaresan, Satish (18 October 2011). "Shreya Ghoshal to be the brand ambassador for Joy Alukkas?" . Bollywood Hungama . Archived from the original on 25 September 2015 . Retrieved 24 September 2015 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal to treat Vizag audience, for a cause" .

The Hindu . 19 April 2016 . Retrieved 13 July 2016 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal Twitter Status" . 22 August 2016. Archived from the original on 3 March 2017 . Retrieved 3 March 2017 . ^ "THINGS TO DO IN BENGALURU TODAY" . Bangalore Mirror . 22 September 2018 . Retrieved 29 August 2023 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal Live in UK/Europe 2018" . bizasialive.com . 12 October 2017 . Retrieved 29 August 2023 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal Live With Symphony - US Canada Tour 2017 Teaser" . Shreya Ghoshal Official. 2 March 2018 . Retrieved 19 October 2024 – via YouTube. ^ "Shreya Ghoshal to perform live in Dubai" . Gulf News . 26 July 2018 . Retrieved 29 August 2023 . ^ "Two decades after Lata Mangeshkar, Shreya Ghoshal performs at Fox Theatre" . Daily News and Analysis . 7 September 2017. Archived from the original on 12 September 2017 . Retrieved 12 September 2017 . ^ "Badshah, Shreya Ghoshal, Neha Kakkar among 75-plus artistes in April 30 YouTube gig" . India TV . 28 April 2020 . Retrieved 19 December 2023 . ^ Raghuvanshi, Aakanksha (4 May 2020). "I For India Concert: Amitabh Bachchan, Shah Rukh Khan, Will Smith, Priyanka Chopra, Aamir Khan, Aishwarya Rai Bachchan And Other Celebs Raise Funds" . NDTV . Retrieved 18 December 2023 . ^ "Star-studded digital concert 'I for India' raises over Rs 52 crore for COVID-19 relief" . Business Insider . Retrieved 4 May 2020 . ^ "Indore Pride day: In the night decorated with words, the winds spread the sweetness of the tunes, Shreya's tune and Manoj's words expressed the pride of Indore" . Amar Ujala (in Hindi). 1 June 2022 . Retrieved 30 August 2023 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal To Embark On Global Tour To Celebrate 20 Years In Music Industry" . Outlook . 6 October 2022 . Retrieved 29 August 2023 . ^ "UAE: Singer Shreya Ghoshal set to perform at Expo 2020 Dubai" .

The Siasat Daily . 13 February 2022 . Retrieved 29 August 2023 . ^ "Monsoon Festival: Daman decorated like a bride on the occasion of Monsoon Festival, tourists flocked to the music of Shreya Ghoshal" . ABP Asmita (in Gujarati). 27 August 2023 . Retrieved 30 August 2023 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal 'All Hearts Tour' " . shreyaghoshal.com . 25 September 2023 . Retrieved 26 November 2023 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Joshi, Tara (12 February 2024). "Shreya Ghoshal review – masterful Indian singer has a voice like billowing silk" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 12 February 2024 . ^ "More Than 900 Local Artists To Perform At Khasdar Festival" . Times of India . 16 November 2023 . Retrieved 26 November 2023 . ^ Deshpande, Chaitanya (26 November 2023). "Saturday Night Fever: Nagpurians Groove To Shreya's Melodic Ecstasy" . Times of India . Retrieved 26 November 2023 . ^ "Alva's Virasat 2023: Shreya Ghoshal's captivating renditions leave audience spellbound" . Udayavani . 17 December 2023 . Retrieved 18 December 2023 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal, Kailash Kher To Headline Ellora-Ajanta International Festival: Here's All You Need To Know" .

The Free Press Journal . 13 January 2024 . Retrieved 5 February 2024 . ^ "Kathak & Shreya Ghoshal's Performance To Mesmerise On Last Day Of Ajanta Ellora Fest" . Times of India . 4 February 2024 . Retrieved 5 February 2024 . ^ " 'Tadoba Festival' kicks off at Chandrapur district" . ThePrint . 1 March 2024 . Retrieved 2 March 2024 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal on her 'historic' IPL 2025 performance: Let the world watch what we are" . India Today . 23 March 2025 . Retrieved 30 August 2025 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal top 10 songs" . India TV. 12 March 2015. Archived from the original on 5 February 2016 . Retrieved 27 December 2015 . ^ Nagarajan, Saraswathy (7 April 2010). "Queen of the charts" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 30 October 2013 . Retrieved 17 October 2013 . ^ Arasi, Aadal (20 December 2009). "It's Jaadoo, It's Nasha" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 27 December 2015 . Retrieved 27 December 2015 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal treats fans to hits at Dubai concert" . Yahoo News. 1 December 2014. Archived from the original on 10 May 2017 . Retrieved 8 September 2016 . ^ a b Singh, Veenu (24 August 2013). "Personal Agenda: Shreya Ghoshal, Singer" . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 30 September 2015 . Retrieved 28 August 2013 . ^ Kumar, S. Shiva (14 August 2009). "Melody meaning" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 1 May 2014 . ^ "Bollywood wishes Lata Mangeshkar on her 85th birthday" . Daily News and Analysis . 28 September 2014. Archived from the original on 31 October 2015 . Retrieved 27 December 2015 . ^ Dasgupta, Piali (30 January 2010). "It's a pat on the back: Shreya" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 26 December 2015 . ^ Jasraj, Pandit (11 October 2011). "Kahaan tum chale gaye" . Afternoon . Archived from the original on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 27 December 2015 . ^ a b "Shreya Ghoshal on Top-Of-the-Charts" . Bollywood Hungama . 24 December 2009. Archived from the original on 26 December 2015 . Retrieved 26 December 2015 . ^ Jordan, Jerilyn (24 August 2017). "Bollywood queen Shreya Ghosal will perform at the Fox on Friday" . Metro Times . Archived from the original on 29 September 2020 . Retrieved 15 February 2018 . ^ Sarkar, Sonia (22 February 2015). "Voices they are a-changin' " .

The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 23 February 2016 . Retrieved 26 December 2015 . ^ "Chords & Notes: Jism... M.M. Kreem... Saregama" .

The Hindu . 20 January 2003. Archived from the original on 8 July 2004 . Retrieved 26 December 2015 . ^ Srinivas, Saraswathy (25 April 2007). "Ilayaraja creates history" . Rediff.com . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 26 December 2015 . ^ Turner 2014 , p. 42 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFTurner2014 ( help ) ^ a b c Khurana, Suanshu (4 April 2014). "India's idol: Shreya Ghoshal" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 26 December 2015 . ^ Fernandes, Kasmin (11 December 2015). "Shreya Ghoshal: I just follow what my body and vocal chords say" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 15 December 2015 . Retrieved 26 December 2015 . ^ "Queen of the charts" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 30 October 2013 . Retrieved 30 June 2013 . ^ "Happy Birthday To The Reigning Melody Queen Shreya Ghoshal" . Saregama . 12 March 2022 . Retrieved 8 March 2023 . One of the highlights of her career has been singing a wide range of songs in almost all major languages of India. ^ "The Sound of Shreya's Music" .

The Hans India . 11 August 2013 . Retrieved 8 March 2023 . Playback singer Shreya Ghoshal has a wide range and expression in her voice ^ "Shreya hits the right pitch" . Deccan Chronicle . 22 February 2021 . Retrieved 8 March 2023 . Down the years, she mesmerised the audiences with melodious sweet songs as well as peppy dance numbers, surprising everyone with her versatility. ^ "Revelling in success" .

The Hindu . 1 August 2010 . Retrieved 8 March 2023 .

From Bairi Piya bada bedardi to hip-shaking songs in Om Shanti Om to sultry numbers in Jism, this Bengali girl next-door has the versatility that ranges from the raunchy to romance ^ "EXCLUSIVE: "It is unfortunate that stats have become a benchmark for good and bad music"- Shreya Ghoshal on singers buying views" . Bollywood Hungama . 7 February 2021 . Retrieved 8 March 2023 . Shreya Ghoshal is arguably one of the most versatile singers of India. ^ Thombare, Suparna (17 November 2015). "From 'Devdas' to 'Bajirao Mastani': When Shreya Ghoshal, Sanjay Leela Bhansali Created Magic Together" . India West. Archived from the original on 25 December 2015 . Retrieved 26 December 2015 . ^ a b Tyagi, Shivli (23 December 2003). "Enter Bollywood's young nightingale" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 10 September 2016 . Retrieved 22 December 2015 . ^ "Coke Studio Artists - Shreya Ghoshal" . Coke Studio Global . 7 August 2023 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 . Shreya is known for her voice quality, expression, and incredible ability to master pronunciation ^ "Queen of the charts" .

The Hindu . 7 April 2010 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 . What is special is the way Shreya manages to get the right enunciation and expression in all the languages ^ "Berklee Indian Ensemble to Welcome Shreya Ghoshal for Signature Series Performance on December 7" . Berklee College of Music . 4 December 2017 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 . Shreya is unique in the Indian music industry as one of the most versatile vocalists of our time. But besides crossing genres, it is her ability to authentically sing in over 12 vastly different Indian languages that sets her apart ^ "21 years of Shreya" .

The New Indian Express (Indulge) . 28 April 2023 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 . she effortlessly transitions between the eloquent Telugu and the evocative Hindi songs, each word and syllable perfectly enunciated and exuberant with raw emotion ^ "Greetings SHREYA GHOSHAL" .

The Indian Telegraph . 25 July 2016. Archived from the original on 14 October 2023 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 . A highly melodious voice; ability to negotiate at any scale, her uncanny ability to sing in multitude of diverse hard to master textured Indian languages makes her successful ^ "Shreya Ghoshal: 'I am an ambassador of Indian music' " .

The Hindu . 13 February 2021 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 . ^ "Why Shreya Ghoshal, who will perform in Dubai soon, loves to sing in different languages" . Khaleej Times . 4 May 2022 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 . Concentration on diction and pronunciation is required, she (Ghoshal) said, to give 100 per cent to singing in multiple languages ^ "Bollywood Superstar Shreya Ghoshal Gives Berklee Indian Ensemble Tips at Master Class" . Berklee College of Music . 19 December 2017 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 . I have never let diction take a back seat. Ever. Clarity of words is something which is important in Indian music ^ "National Award has come as a big surprise" . Rediff . 8 September 2009 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 . Yes, I am very particular about diction. I always try to see that I sing the lines perfectly ^ "Happy Birthday To The Golden Voice : Shreya Ghoshal!" . Radio Olive . 12 March 2019. Archived from the original on 14 October 2023 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 . Shreya is always particular about the pronunciations. To ease it out, she even writes the lyrics in Hindi and practices the words like a thorough professional ^ a b "FC-Ormax Power List of Music 2024: Shreya Ghoshal" . Film Companion . 8 July 2024. Archived from the original on 9 July 2024 . Retrieved 10 July 2024 . ^ "Shekhar Ravjiani: The Voice India Kids more about mentoring than judging" .

The Times of India . 25 July 2016. Archived from the original on 30 July 2016 . Retrieved 15 August 2016 . ^ a b "Sonu Nigam, Shreya Ghoshal best singers: Vidhu Vinod Chopra" .

The Times of India . 5 December 2015. Archived from the original on 19 August 2017 . Retrieved 31 December 2014 . ^ a b "Sonu Nigam, Shreya Ghoshal best singers: Vidhu Vinod Chopra" .

The India Express . 5 December 2015. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017 . Retrieved 31 December 2014 . ^ "M. Jayachandran feels honoured to work with Shreya Ghoshal" .

The Times of India . 16 January 2017. Archived from the original on 5 March 2017 . Retrieved 6 March 2017 . ^ Ghosh, Devarsi (21 June 2020). "Pyarelal interview: 'Music is collaborative' with no room for 'I, me, myself' " . Scroll.in . Retrieved 13 December 2023 . ^ Ghosh, Sankhayan (6 January 2017). " 'Why would you autotune a Shreya Ghoshal?' " .

The Hindu . Mumbai . Retrieved 13 December 2023 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal And Many More Are Ankit Tiwari's Favorite Singers" . Bollywood Hungama . 25 October 2016. Archived from the original on 12 March 2017 . Retrieved 12 March 2017 . ^ "Sonu Nigam and Jeet Gannguli Interview and Rapid Fire" . 21 May 2016. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021 . Retrieved 3 June 2016 – via YouTube. ^ Singha, Sutapa (3 October 2013). "Interview with Papon" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 18 April 2017 . Retrieved 3 September 2016 . ^ "Salman sir tells me who not to work with, says singer Palak Muchhal" . Mid-Day . Archived from the original on 22 December 2017. ^ "My singing style is based on what the youth likes: Sukhwinder Singh" . DNA India . Archived from the original on 27 February 2018. ^ "Interview With Bombay Jayashri" . Daily News and Analysis . 19 March 2017. Archived from the original on 31 July 2017 . Retrieved 7 July 2017 . ^ "A soulful journey" .

The Hindu . 11 June 2013. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013 . Retrieved 12 June 2013 . ^ "Interview With Neha Kakkar" .

The Hindu . 29 December 2016. Archived from the original on 3 July 2017 . Retrieved 7 July 2017 . ^ Handoo, Ritika (16 January 2015). "Interview with Richa Sharma" . Zee News . Archived from the original on 30 January 2017 . Retrieved 30 January 2017 . ^ "Ghulam Ali believes rap culture is spoiling real culture of music" . Hindustan Times . 8 April 2016. Archived from the original on 6 March 2017 . Retrieved 6 March 2017 . ^ "I still cry remembering Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan sahab: Rahat" .

The Times of India . 24 January 2015 . Retrieved 18 July 2016 . ^ "Pakistani singer Syed Asrar Shah: I want to touch Lataji's feet" .

The Times of India . 21 August 2015 . Retrieved 18 July 2016 . ^ "Acapella band Penn Masala's final India gig in Delhi" . Business Standard . 27 May 2016. Archived from the original on 6 June 2016 . Retrieved 3 June 2016 . ^ "Diya Mirza is a fan of Shreya Ghoshal" . Zoom TV 's Verified YouTube channel. 2 March 2016. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021 . Retrieved 13 June 2016 . ^ "M. S. Dhoni at Audio Release Of 'Kya Yahi Sach Hai' " . Bollywood Hungama's Verified YouTube Channel . 6 December 2011. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021 . Retrieved 22 September 2017 . ^ "A. R. Rahman has changed Indian music scenario: Vishal Bharadwaj" . India.com. 16 December 2015. Archived from the original on 11 October 2016 . Retrieved 1 September 2016 . ^ "X Factor India – Karan Johar's surprise announcement- X Factor india – Episode 8 – 10th June 2011" . 29 June 2011. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021 . Retrieved 23 September 2017 – via YouTube. ^ Adivarekar, Priya (16 April 2014). "The musical prima donna" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 20 September 2016 . Retrieved 8 September 2016 . ^ Marik, Priyam (24 September 2022). "Jonita Gandhi: 'Female artistes have to take as much control of their own music as they can' " .

The Telegraph (India) . Retrieved 13 December 2023 . ^ "Shashaa Tirupati dedicates special video to five top musical influences from her teens – Times of India" .

The Times of India . 7 August 2020 . Retrieved 21 August 2021 . ^ "My Top Ten (Roma Sagar)" . Eastern Eye . 5 October 2017. Archived from the original on 17 October 2017 . Retrieved 8 October 2017 . ^ "Roma Sagar talks about Music and Collaboration" . DesiBlitz.com. 16 March 2017. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017 . Retrieved 8 October 2017 . ^ "I want to use my English twang to carve a niche in Bollywood: Tripet Garielle" .

The Times of India . 29 July 2017. Archived from the original on 17 November 2017 . Retrieved 22 September 2017 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal is my Idol, Ananya Nanda" . Mid-Day . 8 September 2015. Archived from the original on 19 September 2016 . Retrieved 19 September 2016 . ^ Giri, Aditi (12 May 2024). "Alia Bhatt Calls Kareena Kapoor 'Iconic', Says Aishwarya Rai, Shreya Ghoshal And Taylor Swift Inspire Her" . CNN-IBN . Retrieved 13 May 2024 . ^ "Usha Uthup: 42 forever and ever!" . Daily News and Analysis . 6 July 2007. Archived from the original on 2 December 2017 . Retrieved 5 May 2016 . ^ "I never considered myself a singer: Manna Dey" . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 18 May 2017 . Retrieved 7 July 2017 . ^ Sangeetha, P (29 May 2015). "I do not abuse my voice: Vani Jairam" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 21 June 2015 . Retrieved 31 October 2015 . ^ "Dada Sahab Phalke award is God's gift: Manna Dey" . India Today . 19 October 2009. Archived from the original on 9 June 2013 . Retrieved 12 June 2013 . ^ "There Isn't Much my Kind of Music These Days: Anuradha Paudwal" . CNN-IBN . 1 February 2017. Archived from the original on 3 December 2018 . Retrieved 24 November 2023 . ^ Pawa, Yogesh (17 August 2014). "Musical notes with Alka Yagnik" . Daily News and Analysis . Archived from the original on 22 January 2017 . Retrieved 1 September 2016 . ^ Olivera, Roshni (8 September 2012). "Asha Bhosle is against the word Halkat Jawani" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 21 December 2016 . Retrieved 1 September 2016 . ^ "Interview With Lata Mangeshkar" .

The Times of India . 25 April 2017 . Retrieved 7 July 2017 . ^ "Exclusive! Sadhana Sargam reveals her favourite singer, talks about change in music industry over years" . Radio Mirchi . 11 March 2023 . Retrieved 24 November 2023 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "Ankhiyon Ke Jharokhon Se singer returns to playback after two decades" . Mid-Day . ^ "Kavita Krishnamurthy: I have done enough in the industry" .

The Times of India . 17 January 2017. Archived from the original on 6 March 2017 . Retrieved 6 March 2017 . ^ "How Kumar Sanu stole many hearts" . telanganatoday.com. 10 February 2018. Archived from the original on 2 April 2018. ^ "The Historic A-Z Of Bollywood Music" . Eastern Eye . 25 October 2017. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. ^ "5 Bollywood Stars To Discover: Shreya Ghoshal, Badshah & Others" .

The Recording Academy & Grammys . 30 May 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2023 .

At 39, Shreya Ghoshal is already a legend among contemporary playback singers ^ a b "Shreya Ghoshal, the most awarded singer" .

The New Indian Express . 14 May 2012 . Retrieved 21 October 2023 . ^ "IFFI 2023 - Grand Jury - Shreya Ghoshal" . IFFI . 18 November 2023. Archived from the original on 19 November 2023 . Retrieved 19 November 2023 . ^ AR, Reshmi (26 June 2012). "June 26 is Shreya Ghoshal Day" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 8 July 2012 . ^ "Fans celebrate Shreya Ghoshal Day on micro-blogging sites" .

The Times of India . 26 June 2013. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 30 June 2013 . ^ "2012 Celebrity 100 List — Forbes India" . Forbes India . Archived from the original on 11 July 2015 . Retrieved 3 August 2013 . ^ "2013 Celebrity 100 List — Forbes India" . Forbes India . Archived from the original on 19 February 2014 . Retrieved 8 February 2014 . ^ "2014 Celebrity 100 List -Forbes India" . Forbes India . Archived from the original on 11 July 2015 . Retrieved 24 June 2015 . ^ "2015 Celebrity 100 List - Forbes India" . Forbes India . Archived from the original on 14 March 2016 . Retrieved 4 April 2015 . ^ "2016 Celebrity 100 List - Forbes India" . Forbes India . Archived from the original on 15 January 2017 . Retrieved 15 January 2017 . ^ "Top 5 Celeb100 Singers and Musicians" . Forbes India . 31 January 2013. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015 . Retrieved 31 August 2016 . ^ "Asia's 100 Digital Stars" . Forbes . 7 December 2020. ^ "VERVE'S 50 POWER WOMEN OF 2016 (List)" . Verve (Indian magazine) . 7 July 2016. Archived from the original on 30 September 2017 . Retrieved 30 September 2017 . ^ Salvadore, Sarah (10 September 2009). "I'll work even harder: Shreya" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 12 September 2016 . Retrieved 13 September 2016 . ^ Salvadore, Sarah (27 January 2010). "National Award made me conscious: Shreya" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 12 September 2016 . Retrieved 13 September 2016 . ^ "There is lack of sincerity in music today: Shreya Ghoshal" . Hindustan Times . 27 November 2015. Archived from the original on 5 October 2016 . Retrieved 5 October 2016 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal in Eastern Eye" . India Today . 5 December 2013. Archived from the original on 17 September 2016 . Retrieved 10 May 2015 . ^ Khan, Shamma (5 May 2018). "Shreya Ghoshal Week: Fun Facts About The Queen Of Melody" . BizAsia . Retrieved 7 October 2024 . ^ @ShreyaGhoshalFC (24 July 2015). "Shreya Ghoshal Day of Entertainment and Inspiration" ( Tweet ) . Retrieved 7 October 2024 – via Twitter . ^ "List of the greatest 20 Bollywood playback singers published in Eastern Eye newspaper" .

The Times of India . 25 June 2015. Archived from the original on 11 October 2016 . Retrieved 21 July 2016 . ^ "Top 50 Asian stars of 2021" . Eastern Eye . 15 December 2021 . Retrieved 14 December 2022 . ^ "JR NTR AND RAM CHARAN TOP GLOBAL ASIAN CELEBRITY LIST FOR 2022" . Eastern Eye . 14 December 2022 . Retrieved 14 December 2022 . ^ Nazir, Asjad (16 December 2023). "Top 50 Asian stars of 2023" . Eastern Eye . Retrieved 16 December 2023 . ^ "The She List - Entertainment" . India Today . 24 December 2023. Archived from the original on 29 December 2023 . Retrieved 29 December 2023 . ^ "Top 10 Hottest Female Bollywood Lead Singers" . MensXP.com. Archived from the original on 13 January 2016 . Retrieved 31 August 2016 . ^ Prasher, Shantanu (31 July 2014). "50 Most Influential Indians On Social Media" . MensXP.com. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015 . Retrieved 24 September 2015 . ^ "India Facebook page statistics" . Socialbakers . 5 December 2013. Archived from the original on 8 May 2016 . Retrieved 10 May 2016 . ^ "Twitter statistics for India" . Socialbakers. 5 December 2013. Archived from the original on 5 May 2016 . Retrieved 10 May 2016 . ^ "Ghoshal, the most searched celebrity on Google" . India Today . 15 July 2016. Archived from the original on 16 August 2016 . Retrieved 17 July 2016 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal to have her wax statue at Madame Tussauds" . Bollywood Hungama . 15 March 2017. Archived from the original on 16 March 2017 . Retrieved 16 March 2017 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal first Indian singer to be immortalised in wax at Madame Tussauds" . News Nation . 15 March 2017. Archived from the original on 16 March 2017 . Retrieved 16 March 2017 . ^ "Filmmakers and artists from 19 states to be part of 75 Creative Minds of Tomorrow at 54th IFFI" . Press Information Bureau . 9 November 2023 . Retrieved 17 November 2023 . ^ Shreya Ghoshal (17 June 2024). Shreya Ghoshal Day - 15th June, 2024 declared as Shreya Ghoshal Day in Austin . Shreya Ghoshal FC . Retrieved 7 October 2024 . ^ "Austin, Texas🩷 Thank you making it so special for me by marking 15th June 2024 as Shreya Ghoshal Day🙏🏻🙏🏻" . Shreya Ghoshal . 27 June 2024 . Retrieved 7 October 2024 . ^ "From Arijit Singh to Kabir Singh, Spotify Reveals India's Most-Streamed Songs, Artists, Albums in 2019" . gadgets360 a venture by NDTV . 3 December 2019 . Retrieved 5 December 2022 . "Arijit Singh, Tanishk Bagchi and Neha Kakkar Are 2020's Most Streamed Artists In India On Spotify" . CNN-IBN . 1 December 2020 . Retrieved 5 December 2022 . ^ "On Spotify, 2021's top singer is Shreya Ghoshal but song is 'Ranjha' " .

The Telegraph . 15 December 2021 . Retrieved 5 December 2022 . "India's 2022 playlist: Arijit Singh tops Spotify ranking, while Rahman & Shreya Ghoshal are most streamed" .

The Economic Times . 1 December 2022 . Retrieved 5 December 2022 . Mukherjee, Anindita (29 November 2023). "Arijit Singh tops most-streamed artist on Spotify Wrapped 2023. See full list" . India Today . Retrieved 30 November 2023 . Sneha Biswas (2025). "Shreya Ghoshal joins Taylor Swift, Billie Eilish as Spotify global's top 15 most-streamed female artists of 2025" . Live Mint . Retrieved 1 January 2026 . ^ "Best of 2021: These are most streamed songs, albums on Apple Music in India" . Deccan Herald . 1 December 2021 . Retrieved 5 December 2022 . ^ "Amazon Music India Twitter Status" . 26 November 2022. Archived from the original on 5 December 2022 . Retrieved 5 December 2022 . ^ "Photo of the day: Shreya Ghoshal ties the knot with childhood sweetheart Shiladitya" . CNN-IBN. 6 February 2015. Archived from the original on 9 June 2015 . Retrieved 6 February 2015 . ^ "Truecaller appoints Shiladitya Mukhopadhyaya as Global Head of Enterprise Solutions" . Best Media Info . 10 May 2022 . Retrieved 20 September 2023 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal and husband Shiladitya welcome baby boy: 'It's an emotion never felt before" . Hindustan Times . 22 May 2021 . Retrieved 22 May 2021 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal names her newborn son 'Devyaan', shares his first picture with fans" .

The Times of India . 2 June 2021 . Retrieved 2 June 2021 . ^ "Shreya Ghoshal is now five-time National Film Award winner" .