The Republic of South Africa was established on May 31, 1961 by the Crown of the United Kingdom of Great Britain , the senate and house of assembly of the Union of South Africa through the Republic of South Africa Act. It construed the powers of the Crown and monarch of South Africa to the office of State President. Pretoria is the administrative capital , while Cape Town , as the seat of Parliament , is the legislative capital, and Bloemfontein is regarded as the judicial capital.

The largest and most populous city is Johannesburg , followed by Cape Town and Durban . Archaeological findings suggest that various hominid species existed in South Africa about 2.5 million years ago, and modern humans inhabited the region over 100,000 years ago.

The first known people were the indigenous Khoisan , and Bantu-speaking peoples , who migrated in waves, from west and central Africa to the region 2,000 to 1,000 years ago.

In the north, the Kingdom of Mapungubwe formed in the 13th century, and the Venda Kingdom in the 17th century.

In 1652, the Dutch established the first European settlement at Table Bay , Dutch Cape Colony . Its invasion in 1795 , and the Battle of Blaauwberg in 1806 led to British occupation.

The Mfecane , a period of significant upheaval, led to the formation of various African kingdoms, including the Zulu Kingdom .

The region was further colonised, and the Mineral Revolution saw a shift towards industrialisation and urbanisation.

Following the Second Boer War , the Union of South Africa was created in 1910 after the amalgamation of the Cape , Natal , Transvaal , and Orange River colonies, becoming a republic after the 1961 referendum .

The multi-racial Cape Qualified Franchise in the Cape was gradually eroded, and the vast majority of Black South Africans were not enfranchised until 1994.

The National Party imposed apartheid in 1948, institutionalising previous racial segregation .

After a struggle by the African National Congress and other anti-apartheid activists, both inside and outside the country, the repeal of discriminatory laws began in the mid-1980s. Universal elections took place in 1994 , following which all racial groups have held political representation in the country's liberal democracy , which comprises a parliamentary republic and nine provinces. Recognised as a middle power in international affairs, South Africa maintains significant regional influence and is a member of BRICS+ , the African Union (hosting the seat of the Pan-African Parliament ), SADC , SACU , the Commonwealth of Nations , and the G20 . A developing , and newly industrialised country , it has the largest economy in Africa by nominal GDP , is tied with Ethiopia for the most UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Africa , and is a biodiversity hotspot with unique biomes , plant, and animal life. South Africa encompasses a variety of cultures , languages , and religions , and has been called the " rainbow nation ", especially in the wake of apartheid, to describe its diversity.

Since 1961, the long formal name in English has been the "Republic of South Africa" and Republiek van Suid-Afrika in Afrikaans .

The country has an official name in 12 official languages . Mzansi , derived from the Xhosa noun uMzantsi meaning "south", is a colloquial name for South Africa, while some Pan-Africanist political parties prefer the term " Azania ", which is a word originating from Greek, and not an African language. History Main article: History of South Africa Prehistory Front of Maropeng at the Cradle of Humankind South Africa contains some of the oldest archaeological and human-fossil sites in the world. Archaeologists have recovered extensive fossil remains from a series of caves in Gauteng known as the Cradle of Humankind , which has been declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site .

The sites include Sterkfontein , one of the richest sites for hominin fossils in the world, as well as Swartkrans , Gondolin Cave , Kromdraai , Cooper's Cave and Malapa .

The first hominin fossil discovered in Africa, the Taung Child , was found near Taung in 1924. Other hominin remains have come from the sites of Makapansgat in Limpopo ; Cornelia and Florisbad in the Free State ; Border Cave in KwaZulu-Natal ; Klasies River Caves in the Eastern Cape ; and Pinnacle Point , Elandsfontein and Die Kelders Cave in the Western Cape . These finds suggest that various hominid species existed in South Africa from about three million years ago, starting with Australopithecus africanus , followed by Australopithecus sediba , Homo ergaster , Homo erectus , Homo rhodesiensis , Homo helmei , Homo naledi and modern humans ( Homo sapiens ). Modern humans have inhabited Southern Africa for at least 170,000 years. Various researchers have located pebble tools within the Vaal River valley. Pre-colonial period Main article: Bantu expansion The indigenous San and Khoikhoi peoples of Southern Africa were predominantly hunter-gatherers and, in the case of the Khoikhoi, also practised pastoralism . Khoisan peoples may be the descendants of an early dispersal of anatomically modern humans to Southern Africa before 150,000 years ago. They were largely displaced or absorbed by the Bantu expansion which took place between 1,500 and 2,000 years ago. Mapungubwe Hill , the site of the former capital of the Kingdom of Mapungubwe Bantu settlers expanded from West Africa from approximately 3,000 BCE. Settlements of Bantu-speaking peoples , who were iron-using agriculturists and herdsmen , were present south of the Limpopo River (now the northern border with Botswana and Zimbabwe ) by the 4th or 5th century.

The earliest ironworks in modern-day KwaZulu-Natal are believed to date from around 1050.

The southernmost group was the Xhosa people , whose language incorporates certain linguistic traits from the Khoisan languages, and who eventually reached the Great Fish River in the present-day Eastern Cape.

As they migrated, these larger Iron Age populations displaced or assimilated earlier peoples.

In Mpumalanga , several stone circles have been found along with a stone arrangement that has been named Adam's Calendar , and the ruins are thought to be created by the Bakone , a Northern Sotho group. Around 1220, in the Limpopo - Shashe Basin, the elite of K2 moved to settle the flat-topped summit of Mapungubwe Hill, with the population settling below. Rainmaking was crucial to the development of sacral kingship , and several rainmaking sites have been found nearby including Ratho Kroonkop .

By 1250, the capital of the Mapungubwe Kingdom had a population of 5,000 and the state covered 30,000 km 2 (11,500 square miles), growing wealthy through the Indian Ocean trade .

The events around Mapungubwe's collapse circa 1300 are unknown; however, trade routes shifted north from the Limpopo to the Zambezi , precipitating the rise of Great Zimbabwe .

The hill was abandoned and Mapungubwe's population scattered.

In the Soutpansberg , interactions between early Shona inhabitants (possible from Mapungubwe), late-comer Shona and Sotho -speakers between the 15th and 17th centuries culminated in the formation of the Venda language and identity.

In the late-17th century, a splinter group from the dynasty of the Rozvi Empire migrated south; they were the Singo.

The Singo settled at Dzata , which became the capital of the Venda Kingdom , and came to subdue all of the Soutpansberg.

In the late-18th century, following trade routes moving south, the state collapsed.

On 4 December, he landed at Walfisch Bay (now known as Walvis Bay in present-day Namibia). This was south of the furthest point reached in 1485 by his predecessor, the Portuguese navigator Diogo Cão , being Cape Cross , north of the bay. Dias continued down the western coast of southern Africa.

After 8 January 1488, prevented by storms from proceeding along the coast, he sailed out of sight of land and passed the southernmost point of Africa without seeing it. He reached as far up the eastern coast of Africa as, what he called, Rio do Infante , probably the present-day Groot River , in May 1488.

On his return, he saw the cape, which he named Cabo das Tormentas ('Cape of Storms'). King John II renamed the point Cabo da Boa Esperança , or Cape of Good Hope , as it led to the riches of the East Indies . Dias' feat of navigation was immortalised in Luís de Camões ' 1572 epic poem, Os Lusíadas .

In 1497 Vasco Da Gama set sail from Lisbon and became the first European to reach India in 1498 via the Cape of Good Hope, opening up oceanic trade between Europe and Asia. He bypassed the coast of present-day South Africa and made landfall in present-day Mozambique. Dutch and British colonisation of the Cape Main articles: Dutch Cape Colony , Slavery in South Africa , and Cape Colony The Dutch first made contact with the coast of Southern Africa in 1595. With Portuguese maritime power declining in the early 17th century, English and Dutch merchants competed to dislodge Portugal's lucrative monopoly on the spice trade . British East India Company representatives sporadically called at the Cape in search of provisions from as early as 1601 but later came to favour Ascension Island and Saint Helena as ports of refuge. Dutch interest was aroused after 1647, when two employees of the Dutch East India Company were shipwrecked at the Cape for several months, and managed to survive by obtaining fresh water and meat from the indigenous peoples, and sowing crops in the fertile soil. Upon their return to Holland, they reported favourably on the Cape's potential as a "warehouse and garden" for provisions to stock passing ships for long voyages. Charles Davidson Bell 's 19th-century painting of Jan van Riebeeck , who founded the first European settlement in South Africa, arriving in Table Bay in 1652 In 1652, a century and a half after the discovery of the Cape Route , Jan van Riebeeck established a victualling station at the Cape of Good Hope, at what would become Cape Town , on behalf of the Dutch East India Company.

In time, the Cape became home to a large population of Free Burghers . Dutch traders also brought thousands of enslaved people to the fledgling colony from present-day Indonesia, Madagascar, and eastern Africa. Some of the earliest mixed race communities in the country were formed between Free Burghers, enslaved people, and indigenous peoples. This led to the development of a new ethnic group, the Cape Coloureds , most of whom adopted the Dutch language and Christian faith. Conflicts over resources between the indigenous Khoisan people and Dutch settlers began in the 17th century and continued for centuries. Dutch colonists' eastward expansion caused wars with the southwesterly migrating Xhosa nation , as both sides competed for the pastureland near the Great Fish River, which the colonists desired for grazing cattle. Free Burghers who became independent farmers on the frontier were known as Boers , with some (the trekboers ) adopting semi-nomadic lifestyles.

The Boers formed loose militias , which they termed commandos , and forged alliances with Khoisan peoples to repel Xhosa raids. Both sides launched bloody but inconclusive offensives, and sporadic violence, often accompanied by livestock theft, remained common for several decades. Depiction of a Zulu attack on a Boer camp in February 1838 Great Britain occupied Cape Town between 1795 and 1803 to prevent it from falling under the control of the French First Republic , which had invaded the Low Countries .

After briefly returning to Dutch rule under the Batavian Republic in 1803, the Cape was occupied again by the British in 1806.

Following the end of the Napoleonic Wars , it was formally ceded to Great Britain and became an integral part of the British Empire . British emigration to South Africa began around 1818, culminating in the arrival of the 1820 Settlers , the purpose of which was primarily to increase the size of the European workforce and bolster frontier regions against Xhosa incursions. Mfecane and colonial expansion Main articles: Cape Colony , Mfecane , Boer Republics , and Great Trek In the early 1800s, the Mfecane ( lit. ' crushing ' ) saw a heightened period of conflict, migration, and state formation among native groups, caused by the complex interplay of international trade, environmental instability, and European colonisation. Chiefdoms grew wealthier and competed over trade routes and grazing land, leading to the formation of the Ndwandwe and Mthethwa Paramountcies in the east of the country. Ndwandwe defeated Mthethwa, which in turn split into several groups, one of which was led by Shaka of the amaZulu .

The 1810s saw the fourth and fifth Xhosa Wars as British colonisation expanded.

The Ndwandwe Paramountcy splintered amid costly raids, and Shaka's Zulu Kingdom rose to fill the power vacuum.

The Gaza Empire concurrently formed, and while the Zulu managed to totally defeat the Ndwandwe, they were repelled by Gaza. 1876 map of South Africa During the early 19th century, many Dutch settlers departed from the Cape Colony , where they had been subjected to British control, in a series of migrant groups who came to be known as Voortrekkers ( lit. ' pathfinders ' or ' pioneers ' ). They migrated to the future Natal , Free State, and Transvaal regions, and following their victory over the Zulu Kingdom at the Battle of Blood River on 16 December 1838, founded the Boer republics : the Natalia Republic , the South African Republic and the Orange Free State .

In the interior, the Cape Colony expanded at the expense of the Batswana and Griqua , and Boer expansion destabilised the middle Orange River region.

The Matabele kingdom came to dominate the eastern interior, and raided the Venda kingdom.

The discovery of diamonds in 1867 and gold in 1884 in the interior initiated the Mineral Revolution , which increased economic growth and immigration and intensified British subjugation of the indigenous peoples.

The struggle to control these important economic resources shaped relations between Europeans and the indigenous population, as well as between the Boers and the British.

On 16 May 1876, President Thomas François Burgers of the South African Republic declared war against the Pedi people . King Sekhukhune defeated the army on 1 August 1876, with another attack by the Lydenburg Volunteer Corps being similarly repulsed.

On 16 February 1877, the two parties signed a peace treaty at Botshabelo .

The Boers' inability to subdue the Pedi led to the departure of Burgers in favour of Paul Kruger and the British annexation of the South African Republic.

In 1878 and 1879, three British attacks were successfully repelled until Garnet Wolseley defeated Sekhukhune in November 1879 with an army of 2,000 British soldiers, Boers and 10,000 Swazis.

The Anglo-Zulu War was fought in 1879 between the British and the Zulu Kingdom .

Following Lord Carnarvon 's successful introduction of federation in Canada , it was thought that similar political effort, coupled with military campaigns, might succeed with the African kingdoms, tribal areas and Boer republics in South Africa.

In 1874, Henry Bartle Frere was sent to South Africa as the British High Commissioner to bring such plans into being. Among the obstacles were the presence of the independent states of the Boers, and the Zulu army.

The Zulu nation defeated the British at the Battle of Isandlwana but ultimately lost the war, resulting in the termination of its independence. Boer Wars and independence Main articles: Boer Wars and Union of South Africa The Battle of Majuba Hill was the last decisive battle during the First Boer War .

The Boer republics successfully resisted British encroachments during the First Boer War (1880–1881) using guerrilla warfare tactics, which were well-suited to local conditions.

The British returned with greater numbers, more experience, and new strategy in the Second Boer War (1899–1902) and, although suffering heavy casualties due to Boer attrition warfare , were ultimately successful due in part to scorched earth tactics and concentration camps , in which 27,000 Boer civilians died due to a combination of disease and neglect. South Africa's urban population grew rapidly from the end of the 19th century onward.

After the devastation of the wars, Boer farmers fled into Transvaal and Orange Free State cities, many of whom would come to constitute an urban class of " poor whites ". Anti-British policies among white South Africans focused on independence.

The union was a dominion that included the former territories of the Cape, Transvaal and Natal colonies, as well as the Orange Free State republic.

The Natives Land Act of 1913, which was passed by the British ruling the Parliament of the newly formed Union of South Africa, severely restricted the ownership of land by black South Africans , who at that stage controlled only 7% of the country.

The amount of land reserved for indigenous peoples was later marginally increased.

In 1931, the union became fully sovereign from the United Kingdom with the passage of the Statute of Westminster , which abolished the last powers of the Parliament of the United Kingdom to legislate in the country.

In 1934, the South African Party and National Party merged to form the United Party , seeking reconciliation between Afrikaners and English-speaking whites.

In 1939, the party split over the entry of the Union into World War II as an ally of the United Kingdom, a move which National Party followers opposed. Apartheid era Main articles: History of South Africa (1948–1994) and Apartheid D. F. Malan , the first apartheid-era prime minister (1948–1954) In 1948, the National Party was elected to power. It strengthened the racial segregation begun under Dutch and British colonial rule. Taking Canada's Indian Act as a framework, the nationalist government classified all peoples into three races (being "Whites", "Blacks", and "Indians and Coloured people") and developed rights and limitations for each.

The white-led minoritarian government instituted a policy of legally institutionalised segregation which came to be known as apartheid .

While whites enjoyed a higher standard of living comparable to First World Western nations, the black majority remained disadvantaged by almost every standard, including income, education, housing, and life expectancy.

The Freedom Charter , adopted in 1955 by the Congress Alliance , which was multi-racial in makeup, demanded a non-racial society and an end to discrimination.

On 31 May 1961, the country became a republic following a referendum (only open to white voters) which narrowly passed; the British-dominated Natal province largely voted against the proposal. Elizabeth II lost the title Queen of South Africa , and the last Governor-General , Charles Robberts Swart , became state president .

As a concession to the Westminster system , the appointment of the president remained by parliament, and the position was virtually powerless until P. W. Botha 's Constitution Act of 1983 , which eliminated the office of prime minister and instated a unique "strong presidency" responsible to parliament . Pressured by other Commonwealth of Nations countries, South Africa withdrew from the organisation in 1961. Despite opposition to apartheid both within and outside the country from all racial backgrounds, the government legislated for a continuation of apartheid.

The security forces cracked down on internal dissent, and violence became widespread, with anti-apartheid organisations such as the African National Congress (ANC), the Azanian People's Organisation , and the Pan-Africanist Congress carrying out guerrilla warfare, urban sabotage and, according to Oxford Academic , acts of terrorism .

The three rival resistance movements also engaged in occasional inter-factional clashes as they jockeyed for domestic influence. Apartheid became increasingly controversial, and several countries began to boycott business with the South African government because of its racial policies.

The boycotts and restrictions were later extended to international sanctions and the divestment of holdings by foreign investors. Post-apartheid Further information: History of South Africa (1994–present) F.W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela shake hands in January 1992.

The Mahlabatini Declaration of Faith , signed by Mangosuthu Buthelezi and Harry Schwarz in 1974, enshrined the principles of peaceful transition of power and equality for all, the first of such agreements by black and white political leaders in South Africa. Ultimately, F.W. de Klerk opened bilateral discussions with Nelson Mandela in 1993 for a transition of policies and government.

In 1990, the National Party government took the first step towards dismantling apartheid when it lifted the ban on the ANC and other political organisations. It released Nelson Mandela from prison after 27 years of serving a sentence for sabotage and treason. A negotiation process followed. With approval from the white electorate in a 1992 referendum , the government continued negotiations to end apartheid. South Africa held its first universal elections in 1994 , which the ANC won by an overwhelming majority.

The country rejoined the Commonwealth of Nations and became a member of the Southern African Development Community . Supporters watching the 2010 FIFA World Cup with vuvuzelas in the township of Soweto , a suburb of Johannesburg The post-apartheid period, whilst plagued by high unemployment and increasing income inequality, has been characterised by relative political stability.

The country has, however, seen periodic outbreaks of violence, most notably the 2008 xenophobic riots — during which over 60 people were killed, and an estimated 100,000 people were driven from their homes — and the Marikana massacre , which constituted the most lethal use of force by South African security forces against civilians since the Soweto uprising. Widespread political corruption and state capture took place under the presidency of Jacob Zuma , whose brief imprisonment for contempt of court during the course of his trial for corruption in 2021 led to widespread unrest which left 354 people dead.

The electoral dominance of the ANC has gradually declined since the early 2000s, with the party failing to secure a parliamentary majority for the first time in the 2024 general election . President Cyril Ramaphosa subsequently formed the Government of National Unity with, amongst others, the Democratic Alliance . Geography Main article: Geography of South Africa Satellite image of South Africa South Africa is in southern Africa , with a coastline that stretches more than 2,500 km (1,553 mi) and along two oceans — the South Atlantic and the Indian Ocean .

At 1,219,912 km 2 (471,011 sq mi) in area, South Africa is the 24th-largest country in the world. Excluding the Prince Edward Islands , the country lies between latitudes 22° and 35°S , and longitudes 16° and 33°E .

The interior of South Africa consists of a large, and in most places almost flat, plateau with an altitude of between 1,000 m (3,300 ft) and 2,100 m (6,900 ft). It is highest in the east and slopes gently downwards towards the west and north, and slightly to the south and south-west. This plateau is surrounded by the Great Escarpment whose eastern, and highest, stretch is known as the Drakensberg . Mafadi in the Drakensberg is the highest peak in the country at 3,450 m (11,320 ft) above sea level.

The KwaZulu-Natal–Lesotho international border is formed by the highest portion of the Great Escarpment which reaches an altitude of over 3,000 m (9,800 ft).

The south and south-western parts of the plateau (at approximately 1,100–1,800 m above sea level) and the adjoining plain below (at approximately 700–800 m above sea level – see map on the right) are together known as the Great Karoo , which consists of sparsely populated shrubland . To the north, the Great Karoo fades into the more arid Bushmanland , which eventually becomes the Kalahari Desert in the north-west of the country.

The mid-eastern and highest part of the plateau is known as the Highveld . This relatively well-watered area is home to a great proportion of the country's commercial farmlands and contains its largest conurbation, Gauteng . To the north of the Highveld, from about the 25° 30' S line of latitude, the plateau slopes downwards into the Bushveld , which ultimately gives way to the Limpopo River lowlands, the Lowveld .

The coastal belt, below the Great Escarpment, moving clockwise from the northeast, consists of the Limpopo Lowveld, which merges into the Mpumalanga Lowveld, below the Mpumalanga Drakensberg (the eastern portion of the Great Escarpment). This is hotter, drier and less intensely cultivated than the Highveld above the escarpment.

The Kruger National Park , located in the provinces of Limpopo and Mpumalanga in north-eastern South Africa, occupies a large portion of the Lowveld, covering 19,633 square kilometres (7,580 sq mi) Drakensberg , the eastern and highest portion of the Great Escarpment which surrounds the east, south and western borders of the central plateau The coastal belt below the south and south-western stretches of the Great Escarpment contains several ranges of Cape Fold Mountains which run parallel to the coast, separating the Great Escarpment from the ocean.

The land between the Outeniqua and Langeberg ranges to the south and the Swartberg range to the north is known as the Little Karoo , which consists of semi-desert shrubland similar to that of the Great Karoo, except that its northern strip along the foothills of the Swartberg Mountains has a somewhat higher rainfall and is, therefore, more cultivated than the Great Karoo.

The Little Karoo is famous for its ostrich farming around Oudtshoorn .

The lowland area to the north of the Swartberg range up to the Great Escarpment is the lowland part of the Great Karoo, which is climatically and botanically almost indistinguishable from the Karoo above the Great Escarpment.

The narrow coastal strip between the Outeniqua and Langeberg ranges and the ocean, known as the Garden Route , has a moderately high year-round rainfall, and hosts the most extensive area of forest in the country .

In the south-west corner of the country, the Cape Peninsula forms the southernmost tip of the coastal strip which borders the Atlantic Ocean and ultimately terminates at the country's border with Namibia at the Orange River .

The Cape Peninsula has a Mediterranean climate , making it and its immediate surrounds the only portion of Sub-Saharan Africa which receives most of its rainfall in winter.

The coastal belt to the north of the Cape Peninsula is bounded on the west by the Atlantic Ocean and the first row of north–south running Cape Fold Mountains to the east.

The Cape Fold Mountains peter out at about the 32° S line of latitude, after which the Great Escarpment bounds the coastal plain.

The most southerly portion of this coastal belt is known as the Swartland and Malmesbury Plain, which is an important wheat-growing region, relying on winter rains.

The region further north is known as Namaqualand , which becomes more arid near the Orange River.

The little rain that falls tends to fall in winter, which results in one of the world's most spectacular displays of flowers carpeting huge stretches of veld in spring (August–September). South Africa also has one offshore possession, the small sub-Antarctic archipelago of the Prince Edward Islands, consisting of Marion Island (290 km 2 or 110 sq mi) and Prince Edward Island (45 km 2 or 17 sq mi). Climate Main article: Climate of South Africa Köppen climate types of South Africa South Africa has a generally temperate climate because it is surrounded by the Atlantic and Indian Oceans on three sides, because it is located in the climatically milder Southern Hemisphere , and because its average elevation rises steadily toward the north (toward the equator) and further inland. This varied topography and oceanic influence result in a great variety of climatic zones.

The climatic zones range from the extreme desert of the southern Namib in the farthest northwest to the lush subtropical climate in the east along the border with Mozambique and the Indian Ocean. Winters in South Africa occur between June and August.

The extreme southwest has a climate similar to that of the Mediterranean with wet winters and hot, dry summers, hosting the famous fynbos biome of shrubland and thicket . This area produces much of the wine in South Africa and is known for its wind, which blows intermittently almost all year.

The severity of this wind made passing around the Cape of Good Hope particularly treacherous for sailors, causing many shipwrecks. Further east on the south coast, rainfall is distributed more evenly throughout the year, producing a green landscape.

The annual rainfall increases south of the Lowveld, especially near the coast, which is subtropical .

The Free State is particularly flat because it lies centrally on the high plateau. North of the Vaal River , the Highveld becomes better watered and does not experience subtropical extremes of heat. Johannesburg, in the centre of the Highveld, is at 1,740 m (5,709 ft) above sea level and receives an annual rainfall of 760 mm (29.9 in). Winters in this region are cold, although snow is rare.

The coldest place on mainland South Africa is Buffelsfontein in the Eastern Cape , where a temperature of −20.1 °C (−4.2 °F) was recorded in 2013.

The Prince Edward Islands have colder average annual temperatures, but Buffelsfontein has colder extremes.

The deep interior of mainland South Africa has the hottest temperatures: a temperature of 51.7 °C (125.06 °F) was recorded in 1948 in the Northern Cape Kalahari near Upington , but this temperature is unofficial and was not recorded with standard equipment; the official highest temperature is 48.8 °C (119.84 °F) at Vioolsdrif in January 1993. Climate change in South Africa is leading to increased temperatures and rainfall variability. Extreme weather events are becoming more prominent. This is a critical concern for South Africans as climate change will affect the overall status and wellbeing of the country, for example with regards to water resources . Speedy environmental changes are resulting in clear effects on the community and environmental level in different ways and aspects, starting with air quality, to temperature and weather patterns, reaching out to food security and disease burden. According to computer-generated climate modelling produced by the South African National Biodiversity Institute, parts of southern Africa will see an increase in temperature by about 1 °C (1.8 °F) along the coast to more than 4 °C (7.2 °F) in the already hot hinterland such as the Northern Cape in late spring and summertime by 2050.

The Cape Floral Region is predicted to be hit very hard by climate change. Drought, increased intensity and frequency of fire, and climbing temperatures are expected to push many rare species towards extinction. South Africa has published two national climate change reports in 2011 and 2016. South Africa contributes considerable carbon dioxide emissions , being the 14th largest emitter of carbon dioxide, primarily from its heavy reliance on coal and oil for energy production .

The country is ranked sixth out of the world's seventeen megadiverse countries . Ecotourism in South Africa has become more prevalent in recent years, as a possible method of maintaining and improving biodiversity. Numerous mammals are found in the Bushveld including lions, African leopards , South African cheetahs , southern white rhinos , blue wildebeest , kudus , impalas , hyenas , hippopotamuses and South African giraffes . A significant extent of the Bushveld exists in the north-east including Kruger National Park and the Sabi Sand Game Reserve , as well as in the far north in the Waterberg Biosphere . South Africa houses many endemic species , among them the critically endangered riverine rabbit ( Bunolagus monticullaris ) in the Karoo. Up to 1945, more than 4,900 species of fungi (including lichen-forming species) had been recorded.

In 2006, the number of fungi in South Africa was estimated at 200,000 species but did not take into account fungi associated with insects. If correct, then the number of South African fungi dwarfs that of its plants.

In at least some major South African ecosystems, an exceptionally high percentage of fungi are highly specific in terms of the plants with which they occur.

The country's Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan does not mention fungi (including lichen-forming fungi). With more than 22,000 different vascular plants , or about 9% of all the known species of plants on Earth, South Africa is particularly rich in plant diversity.

The most prevalent biome is the grassland , particularly on the Highveld, where the plant cover is dominated by different grasses , low shrubs, and acacia , mainly camel-thorn ( Vachellia erioloba ). Vegetation is sparse towards the north-west because of low rainfall. There are numerous species of water-storing succulents, like aloes and euphorbias , in the very hot and dry Namaqualand area. And according to the World Wildlife Fund , South Africa is home to around a third of all succulent species.

The grass and thorn savanna turns slowly into a bush savanna towards the north-east of the country, with denser growth. There are significant numbers of baobab trees in this area, near the northern end of Kruger National Park.

The fynbos biome, which makes up the majority of the area and plant life in the Cape Floristic Region , is located in a small region of the Western Cape and contains more than 9,000 of those species, or three times more plant species than found in the Amazon rainforest , making it among the richest regions on Earth in terms of plant diversity. Most of the plants are evergreen hard-leaf plants with fine, needle-like leaves, such as the sclerophyllous plants. Another uniquely South African flowering plant group is the genus Protea , with around 130 different species.

While South Africa has a great wealth of flowering plants, only 1% of the land is forest, almost exclusively in the humid coastal plain of KwaZulu-Natal , where there are also areas of Southern Africa mangroves in river mouths. Even smaller reserves of forests are out of the reach of fire, known as montane forests . Plantations of imported tree species are predominant, particularly the non-native eucalyptus and pine. South Africa has lost a large area of natural habitat in the last four decades, primarily because of overpopulation, sprawling development patterns, and deforestation during the 19th century.

The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.94/10, ranking it 112th globally out of 172 countries. South Africa is one of the worst affected countries in the world when it comes to invasion by alien species with many (e.g., black wattle , Port Jackson willow , Hakea , Lantana and Jacaranda ) posing a significant threat to the native biodiversity and the already scarce water resources. Also, woody plant encroachment of native plants in grasslands poses a threat to biodiversity and related ecosystem services, affecting over 7 million hectares.

The original temperate forest found by the first European settlers was exploited until only small patches remained. Currently, South African hardwood trees like real yellowwood ( Podocarpus latifolius ), stinkwood ( Ocotea bullata ), and South African black ironwood ( Olea capensis ) are under strict government protection. Statistics from the Department of Environmental Affairs show a record 1,215 rhinos were killed in 2014.

The National Assembly , the lower house of Parliament, consists of 400 members and is elected every five years by a system of party-list proportional representation .

The National Council of Provinces , the upper house, consists of ninety members, with each of the nine provincial legislatures electing ten members.

After each parliamentary election, the National Assembly elects one of its members as president; hence the president serves a term of office the same as that of the Assembly, normally five years. No president may serve more than two terms in office.

The president appoints a deputy president and ministers (each representing a department ) who form the cabinet .

The National Assembly may remove the president and the cabinet by a motion of no confidence .

In the most recent election , held on 29 May 2024, the ANC lost its majority for the first time since the end of Apartheid, winning only 40% of the vote and 159 seats, while the main opposition, the Democratic Alliance (DA), won 22% of the vote and 87 seats. uMkhonto weSizwe , a new party founded by former President and ANC leader Jacob Zuma , won 14.6% of the vote and 58 seats, while the Economic Freedom Fighters , founded by Julius Malema , former president of the ANC Youth League who was later expelled from the ANC, won 9.5% of the vote and 39 seats.

After the election, the ANC formed a Government of National Unity with the DA and several smaller parties. South Africa has no legally defined capital city.

The fourth chapter of the constitution states "The seat of Parliament is Cape Town, but an Act of Parliament enacted in accordance with section 76(1) and (5) may determine that the seat of Parliament is elsewhere." The country's three branches of government are split over different cities. Cape Town, as the seat of Parliament, is the legislative capital; Pretoria, as the seat of the president and cabinet, is the administrative capital; and Bloemfontein is the seat of the Supreme Court of Appeal , and is regarded as the judicial capital; although the highest court, the Constitutional Court of South Africa has been based in Johannesburg since 1994. Most foreign embassies are located in Pretoria.

Since 2004, South Africa has had many thousands of popular protests, some violent, making it, according to one academic, the "most protest-rich country in the world". There have been numerous incidents of political repression as well as threats of future repression in violation of the constitution, leading some analysts and civil society organisations to conclude that there is or could be a new climate of political repression.

In 2022, South Africa was placed sixth out of 48 sub-Saharan African countries on the Ibrahim Index of African Governance . South Africa scored well in the categories of Rule of Law , Transparency , Corruption, Participation and Human Rights, but scored low in Safety and Security.

In 2006, South Africa became one of the first jurisdictions in the world to legalise same-sex marriage .

The Constitution of South Africa is the supreme rule of law in the country.

The primary sources of South African law are Roman-Dutch mercantile law and personal law and English Common law , as imports of Dutch settlements and British colonialism.

The first European-based law in South Africa was brought by the Dutch East India Company and is called Roman-Dutch law. It was imported before the codification of European law into the Napoleonic Code and is comparable in many ways to Scots law . This was followed in the 19th century by English law, both common and statutory .

After unification in 1910, South Africa had its own parliament which passed laws specific for South Africa, building on those previously passed for the individual member colonies.

The judicial system consists of the magistrates' courts , which hear lesser criminal cases and smaller civil cases; the High Court , which has divisions that serve as the courts of general jurisdiction for specific areas; the Supreme Court of Appeal; and the Constitutional Court, which is the highest court. Administrative divisions Main articles: Administrative divisions of South Africa and Provinces of South Africa Provinces of South Africa Each of the nine provinces is governed by a unicameral legislature , which is elected every five years by party-list proportional representation .

The legislature elects a premier as head of government, and the premier appoints an Executive Council as a provincial cabinet.

The powers of provincial governments are limited to topics listed in the constitution; these topics include such fields as health, education, public housing and transport.

The provinces are in turn divided into 52 districts : eight metropolitan and 44 district municipalities .

The district municipalities are further subdivided into 205 local municipalities .

The metropolitan municipalities, which govern the largest urban agglomerations, perform the functions of both district and local municipalities. Province Provincial capital Largest city Area (km 2 ) Population (2022) Eastern Cape Bhisho Port Elizabeth 168,966 7,230,204 Free State Bloemfontein Bloemfontein 129,825 2,964,412 Gauteng Johannesburg Johannesburg 18,178 15,099,422 KwaZulu-Natal Pietermaritzburg Durban 94,361 12,423,907 Limpopo Pietersburg Pietersburg 125,754 6,572,720 Mpumalanga Nelspruit Nelspruit 76,495 5,143,324 North West Mahikeng Klerksdorp 104,882 3,804,548 Northern Cape Kimberley Kimberley 372,889 1,355,946 Western Cape Cape Town Cape Town 129,462 7,433,019 Foreign relations Main article: Foreign relations of South Africa Ramaphosa and other BRICS leaders during the 15th BRICS Summit in Johannesburg, August 2023 As the Union of South Africa, the country is a founding member of the United Nations (UN), with Prime Minister Jan Smuts writing the preamble to the UN Charter . South Africa is one of the founding members of the African Union (AU) and has the largest economy of all the members . It is a founding member of the AU's New Partnership for Africa's Development .

After apartheid ended, South Africa was readmitted to the Commonwealth of Nations .

The country is a member of the Group of 77 and chaired the organisation in 2006. South Africa is also a member of the Southern African Development Community , South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone , Southern African Customs Union , Antarctic Treaty System , World Trade Organization , International Monetary Fund, G20 , G8+5 , and the Port Management Association of Eastern and Southern Africa . South Africa has played a key role as a mediator in African conflicts over the last decade, such as in Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Comoros, Mozambique and Zimbabwe. President Jacob Zuma and Chinese President Hu Jintao upgraded bilateral ties between the two countries in 2010 when they signed the Beijing Agreement which elevated South Africa's earlier "strategic partnership" with China to the higher level of "comprehensive strategic partnership" in both economic and political affairs, including the strengthening of exchanges between their respective ruling parties and legislatures.

In 2011, South Africa joined the Brazil-Russia-India-China ( BRICS ) grouping of countries, identified by Zuma as the country's largest trading partners and also the largest trading partners with Africa as a whole. Zuma asserted that BRICS member countries would also work with each other through the UN, G20, and the India, Brazil South Africa ( IBSA ) forum. Military Main article: South African National Defence Force Further information: Defence industry of South Africa and South Africa and weapons of mass destruction South African Army soldiers on manoeuvre with a locally developed Denel Rooivalk attack helicopter operated by the South African Air Force The South African National Defence Force (SANDF) serves as the unified armed forces of South Africa. Established in 1994, it was formed as a voluntary military through the integration of the former South African Defence Force (SADF) and several liberation movement forces.

The SANDF is organised into four branches: the South African Army , the South African Air Force , the South African Navy , and the South African Military Health Service .

As of 2025, the force comprises nearly 100,000 personnel, of whom around 75,000 are active professional soldiers , and operates under the authority of the president of South Africa, who serves as commander-in-chief .

In recent years, the SANDF has become a prominent peacekeeping force in Africa, participating in operations in Lesotho , the Democratic Republic of the Congo , and Mozambique , among others. It has also contributed to multinational United Nations peacekeeping missions, including the UN Force Intervention Brigade . Supporting these armed forces is a domestic defence industry that is the most advanced in Africa and among the most sophisticated in the world. Coordinated by the state-owned Armaments Corporation of South Africa (Armscor), it includes major companies such as Denel , Paramount Group , and Milkor .

The industry produces a wide range of advanced systems, including armoured vehicles, military aircraft, naval vessels, and missiles, with about 80% of SANDF equipment made in South Africa.

The country also remains a significant arms exporter and maintains self-sufficiency in most conventional military technologies. South Africa is the only African nation to have successfully developed nuclear weapons . Between 1980 and 1990, six operational nuclear devices were covertly assembled before the arsenal was voluntarily dismantled in 1991, making South Africa the first country to relinquish its nuclear capability.

The country is also alleged to have conducted a nuclear test over the Atlantic in 1979, known as the " Vela incident ", although this is officially denied; then-President F.W. de Klerk later asserted that South Africa had "never conducted a clandestine nuclear test". Despite dismantling its arsenal, South Africa still has the technical capability to restart its weapons of mass destruction programme if it ever chose to do so, as its Pelindaba Nuclear Research Centre still stores enriched uranium from the former programme. However, this material is now used primarily for civilian nuclear research and medical isotope production, reflecting South Africa's commitment to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. South Africa remains a strong advocate of nuclear disarmament , having ratified the UN Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in 2019. Law enforcement and crime Main articles: Law enforcement in South Africa and Crime in South Africa Officers of the South African Police Service with Vektor R5 rifles on parade in Johannesburg, 2010 Law enforcement in South Africa is primarily the responsibility of the South African Police Service (SAPS), the national police force operating more than 1,150 police stations and employing around 150,950 officers.

The SAPS is tasked with crime prevention, investigation, and national security. It also maintains an elite tactical unit, the Special Task Force (STF), which specialises in counter-terrorism , counter-insurgency , and hostage rescue operations.

In the 2023 International SWAT Competition, the STF ranked 9th out of 55 international law enforcement teams, making it the highest-ranked African police unit and one of the world's best. Alongside formal policing, South Africa has the world's largest private security industry , comprising over 10,000 companies and more than 2.5 million registered personnel, exceeding the combined size of both the police and the military. South Africa continues to experience high levels of violent crime , among the highest in the world and it leads Africa in this regard.

From April 2017 to March 2018, an average of 57 murders per day were recorded, with a homicide rate more than five times the global average. Serious crimes such as armed robbery, hijackings, cash-in-transit heists, gang-related killings, and sexual violence are common. South Africa also records one of the world's highest reported rates of rape , with tens of thousands of cases each year, though many go unreported. Between 1994 and 2019, more than 526,000 murders were reported nationwide. Gang violence remains a major driver of the homicide rate, particularly in the Cape Flats region of Cape Town, where rival groups compete over territory, drug trafficking routes, and extortion. These conflicts often result in civilian casualties, with bystanders and children frequently caught in the crossfire. Despite ongoing reforms, South Africa's criminal justice system faces persistent challenges, including corruption, inefficiency, incompetency, and underreporting, which have undermined public confidence in law enforcement.

As of 2026, South Africa has a nominal gross domestic product (GDP) exceeding US$450 billion and one of the highest GDPs per capita in sub-Saharan Africa.

The South African rand (ZAR) is the continent's most traded currency, while the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) is Africa's largest stock exchange . South Africa ranked 16th globally by total stock market capitalization in 2026, with its stock exchanges collectively valued at approximately US$1.53 trillion. South Africa is the only African member of the G20 and is also a member of BRICS , reflecting its importance within the global economy. South Africa is a major trading nation , with exports accounting for a significant share of the economy. Its principal exports include minerals, vehicles, machinery, agricultural products, and manufactured goods, while China , the European Union , the United States , Germany , Japan , India , and the United Kingdom rank among its largest trading partners.

The country also benefits from preferential access to international markets through agreements such as the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) and the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), reinforcing its role as a regional gateway for trade and investment. Despite significant economic reforms undertaken since the end of apartheid in 1994, South Africa continues to face significant socioeconomic challenges, including high unemployment , widespread poverty , and one of the highest levels of income inequality in the world. More than half of the population lives below the upper-bound poverty line , while the country's Gini coefficient consistently ranks among the world's highest.

Although the government has introduced measures to stabilise public finances, attract investment, and reduce inequality through social grants and a national minimum wage , progress has remained uneven. Industries and services Further information: Banking in South Africa , Retailing in South Africa , Automotive industry in South Africa , Mining in South Africa , and Agriculture in South Africa Canal Walk in Cape Town. Retail forms a significant component of South Africa's services -driven economy, with the country serving as a major retail hub.

The Paramount Mwari , a South African light reconnaissance and military attack aircraft developed by Paramount Aerospace Industries .

The services sector is the largest component of the South African economy, accounting for approximately 70% of GDP and employing the majority of the workforce. Johannesburg serves as Africa's premier financial centre and is home to the continent's largest banks, multinational corporations , and the Johannesburg Stock Exchange, which had a market capitalization of approximately US$1.36 trillion in 2023, representing around 90% of Africa's total stock market value.

The country's banking and financial services industry is the most developed on the continent, with major institutions including Standard Bank , First National Bank , Absa , and Nedbank operating extensively across Africa and internationally, while the South African Reserve Bank , the oldest central bank in Africa, oversees monetary policy and financial stability. South Africa possesses Africa's largest retail market and ranks sixth globally by total number of shopping centres .

The country is also home to Nando's , South Africa's most internationally successful fast-food restaurant chain, which operates in more than 20 countries worldwide. Manufacturing remains one of South Africa's largest industries, contributing around 13% of GDP and employing more than 1.7 million people.

The country possesses the most advanced and diverse manufacturing sector in Africa, producing a wide range of goods for both domestic and international markets.

The automotive industry forms the backbone of the sector, with Toyota , Volkswagen , BMW , Ford , Mercedes-Benz , and Nissan all operating large-scale assembly plants. South Africa is Africa's largest motor vehicle producer , manufacturing more than 600,000 vehicles annually, the majority of which are exported to Europe, Asia, and other African markets. Other major manufacturing industries include chemicals , steel , mining equipment , machinery , food and beverage processing , textiles , and military equipment , supported by a well-developed industrial base and extensive supply chains. Mining remains one of South Africa's most important industries, contributing around 7–8% of GDP, accounting for more than half of merchandise exports, and making the country the world's fifth-largest mining economy by mining's contribution to GDP. South Africa was the world's leading gold producer for much of the 20th century , and remains the largest producer of platinum , chrome , manganese , and vanadium , while also ranking among the world's leading producers of coal , iron ore , diamonds , uranium , titanium , and gold . South Africa holds some of the world's most valuable mineral reserves, estimated at over US$2.5 trillion in total value, and ranks in the top 10 globally for 16 different mineral commodities.

The country also possesses the world's largest reserves of platinum group metals (approximately 88% of the global total), manganese (around 80%), and chromite (about 72%).

Although agriculture contributes only around 2–3% of GDP, it remains strategically important to employment, food security, rural development, and exports. South Africa is one of the world's leading producers and exporters of citrus fruit , grapes , wine , maize , wool , mohair , and ostrich products. It is the world's largest producer of mohair and ostrich meat , while also ranking among the world's leading producers of pears , oranges , and sugar . Approximately half of the country's agricultural production is exported, making South Africa one of the Southern Hemisphere's leading agricultural exporters. Tourism Main article: Tourism in South Africa Cape Town's CBD and Table Mountain , viewed from the V&A Waterfront .

The city is South Africa's tourism capital and a leading tech hub on the continent. South Africa is one of Africa's leading tourist destinations , with tourism forming an important component of the national economy.

The sector contributes approximately 3.3% of gross domestic product and supports around 1.8 million jobs, representing more than 10% of national employment.

In 2024, South Africa welcomed approximately 8.9 million international visitors through its various ports of entry, while in 2025 it was ranked among the world's leading travel destinations and the highest-rated destination in Africa and the Indian Ocean region by The Daily Telegraph . South Africa is renowned for its diverse landscapes, abundant wildlife, and rich cultural heritage.

The country is home to some of Africa's most recognisable natural attractions, including Kruger National Park , one of the continent's largest and most visited game reserves ; Table Mountain , one of the New7Wonders of Nature ; the Garden Route ; the Drakensberg mountain range; Blyde River Canyon ; and the beaches of the Western Cape and KwaZulu-Natal provinces. Safari tourism remains one of the country's principal attractions, supported by an extensive network of national parks, private game reserves, and marine protected areas.

The country's major cities also attract millions of visitors each year. Cape Town , consistently ranked as the world's most beautiful city, is South Africa's leading tourist destination and is renowned for landmarks such as the V&A Waterfront , Table Mountain, Cape Point , and the nearby Cape Winelands . Johannesburg is the country's commercial centre and is home to attractions including the Apartheid Museum , Constitution Hill , and Gold Reef City , while Durban is known for its subtropical climate , beaches, and the Golden Mile waterfront promenade. Wine tourism has become a major industry, with the vineyards of Stellenbosch , Franschhoek , and Paarl ranking among the most visited destinations in the Southern Hemisphere. South Africa has twelve UNESCO World Heritage Sites , reflecting its exceptional natural and cultural significance. These include Robben Island , the Cradle of Humankind , iSimangaliso Wetland Park , the Cape Floral Region Protected Areas , Mapungubwe National Park , the Maloti-Drakensberg Park , and the Richtersveld Cultural and Botanical Landscape . Science and technology Main article: Science and technology in South Africa Mark Shuttleworth in space Several important scientific and technological developments have originated in South Africa. South Africa was ranked 61st in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.

The first human-to-human heart transplant was performed by cardiac surgeon Christiaan Barnard at Groote Schuur Hospital in December 1967; Max Theiler developed a vaccine against yellow fever , Allan MacLeod Cormack pioneered X-ray computed tomography ( CT scan ); and Aaron Klug developed crystallographic electron microscopy techniques. Cormack and Klug received Nobel Prizes for their work. Sydney Brenner won in 2002, for his pioneering work in molecular biology . Mark Shuttleworth founded an early Internet security company Thawte . South Africa has a burgeoning astronomy community. It hosts the Southern African Large Telescope , the largest optical telescope in the Southern Hemisphere . South Africa is currently building the Karoo Array Telescope as a pathfinder for the €1.5 billion Square Kilometre Array project. South Africa has also made significant contributions to military technology .

The country has approximately 750,000 kilometres (470,000 mi) of roads, making it the largest road network in Africa and the 12th-largest in the world.

The South African National Roads Agency (SANRAL) manages the national road system, including major highways such as the N1 , N2 , N3 and N4 , which connect the country's principal cities and form part of transcontinental routes such as the Cape to Cairo Highway .

The railway network extends approximately 36,000 kilometres (23,700 mi), making it the largest in Africa and the seventh-largest in the world. Freight services are operated primarily by Transnet Freight Rail , while commuter rail services are provided by the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (PRASA).

The Gautrain rapid rail system links Johannesburg and Pretoria, providing the country's only higher-speed rail service. South Africa has more than 1,500 airports , among the highest numbers in the world and the greatest of any African country. O.R. Tambo International Airport in Johannesburg is the largest and busiest airport in Africa, serving as the country's principal international gateway, while Cape Town International , King Shaka International and Chief Dawid Stuurman International airports are other major hubs. South Africa also has the continent's largest and most developed aviation market, served by airlines including South African Airways , Airlink , FlySafair , CemAir and LIFT . South Africa's maritime sector is centred on the commercial ports of Durban, Cape Town, Gqeberha, Richards Bay, Saldanha Bay and East London.

The Port of Durban is the busiest container port in sub-Saharan Africa and the fourth-largest in the Southern Hemisphere, while the Port of Richards Bay is one of the world's largest bulk export facilities. Port infrastructure is managed by the Transnet National Ports Authority , which plays a central role in supporting domestic logistics and international trade. Energy Main article: Energy in South Africa Further information: Electricity sector in South Africa Situated north of Cape Town, the Koeberg Nuclear Power Station is Africa's first and only commercial nuclear power facility , providing around 5% of South Africa's electricity supply South Africa has the largest and most advanced energy sector in Africa and is the world's 22nd-largest producer of electricity .

The sector is dominated by the state-owned utility Eskom , Africa's largest power company , which generates approximately 90% of the country's electricity. South Africa remains heavily reliant on coal , producing more than 200 million tonnes annually, making it the world's seventh-largest coal producer and one of the world's leading greenhouse gas emitters.

The national electricity grid has an installed generation capacity of approximately 60 GW, of which around 40–45 GW is supplied by coal-fired power stations . Electricity generation is supported by some of the world's largest coal-fired power stations, including Kusile , Medupi , Majuba and Kendal , while the Koeberg Nuclear Power Station is Africa's first and only commercial nuclear power plant . Renewable energy from wind , solar and hydroelectric sources has expanded rapidly in recent years through independent power producers , alongside planned gas-to-power projects such as the proposed Richards Bay Gas Power Plant. South Africa experienced a prolonged energy crisis during the 2010s and early 2020s, characterised by recurring load-shedding caused by ageing infrastructure, inadequate maintenance, corruption and sabotage at several power stations.

Following extensive maintenance programmes, governance reforms, the removal and arrest of corrupt Eskom officials and contractors, and increased private-sector investment, the electricity system stabilised in 2024, bringing an end to regular nationwide load-shedding. Government energy policy focuses on diversifying the country's electricity mix through the Integrated Resource Plan , which provides for significant investment in renewable energy, battery storage, gas and new nuclear generation while reducing long-term dependence on coal and strengthening national energy security . Water supply and sanitation Main article: Water supply and sanitation in South Africa The Blyde River Dam in Mpumalanga Two distinctive features of the South African water sector are the policy of free basic water and the existence of water boards , which are bulk water supply agencies that operate pipelines and sell water from reservoirs to municipalities. These features have led to significant problems concerning the financial sustainability of service providers, leading to a lack of attention to maintenance.

Following the end of apartheid, the country had made improvements in the levels of access to water as those with access increased from 66% to 79% from 1990 to 2010. Sanitation access increased from 71% to 79% during the same period. However, water supply and sanitation has come under increasing pressure in recent years despite a commitment made by the government to improve service standards and provide investment subsidies to the water industry.

The eastern parts of South Africa suffer from periodic droughts linked to the El Niño weather phenomenon.

In early 2018, Cape Town, which has different weather patterns to the rest of the country, faced a water crisis as the city's water supply was predicted to run dry before the end of June. Water-saving measures were in effect that required each citizen to use less than 50 litres (13 US gal) per day. Cape Town rejected an offer from Israel to help it build desalination plants. Telecommunications Main articles: Telecommunications in South Africa , Internet in South Africa , and Internet censorship in South Africa Growth in internet usage among the South African population, by year South Africa has the most advanced telecommunications sector in Africa, regulated by the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (ICASA).

The country serves as a key regional hub for digital connectivity, supported by several major undersea cable systems such as WACS , SAT-3 , Seacom , and 2Africa , which link South Africa to global networks. Mobile penetration is among the highest on the continent, and internet access continues to expand rapidly across urban and rural areas.

The mobile communications market is led by major South African operators including Vodacom , MTN , Telkom , Cell C , and Rain . MTN, in particular, stands out as Africa's largest mobile network operator and one of the top ten globally, with nearly 290 million users as of 2022. South Africa offers a full range of network technologies from 2G to 5G , with MTN, Vodacom, and Rain being the first to launch 5G services on the entire African continent.

While fixed-line connections have declined, fibre-optic broadband is growing quickly through providers such as Openserve , Vumatel , Frogfoot , Octotel , and MetroFibre . Satellite internet remains available for remote regions, though Starlink has yet to launch locally due to regulatory restrictions. Demographics Main articles: Demographics of South Africa and List of municipalities in South Africa Map of population density in South Africa The last census was held in 2022, with estimates produced on an annual basis. According to the United Nations World Population Prospects , South Africa's total population was 55.3 million in 2015, compared to only 13.6 million in 1950. South Africa is home to an estimated five million illegal immigrants , including some three million Zimbabweans. A series of anti-immigrant riots occurred beginning in May 2008. Statistics South Africa asks people to describe themselves in the census in terms of five racial population groups.

The 2022 census figures for these groups were: Black African at 81%, Coloured at 8.2%, White at 7.3%, Indian or Asian at 2.7%, and Other/Unspecified at 0.5%.

The first census in 1911 showed that whites made up 22% of the population; this had declined to 16% by 1980. South Africa hosts a sizeable refugee and asylum seeker population. According to the World Refugee Survey 2008 , published by the U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants , this population numbered approximately 144,700 in 2007. Groups of refugees and asylum seekers numbering over 10,000 included people from Zimbabwe (48,400), the DRC (24,800), and Somalia (12,900). These populations mainly lived in Johannesburg, Pretoria, Durban , Cape Town, and Port Elizabeth . One online database lists South Africa having more than 12,600 cities and towns.

The 2018 Revision Rank Name Province Pop. 1 Johannesburg Gauteng 9,167,045 2 Cape Town Western Cape 4,004,793 3 Durban KwaZulu-Natal 3,661,911 4 Pretoria Gauteng 2,437,000 5 Gqeberha Eastern Cape 1,263,051 6 Vereeniging Gauteng 957,528 7 Soshanguve Gauteng 841,000 8 East London Eastern Cape 810,528 9 Bloemfontein Free State 759,693 10 Pietermaritzburg KwaZulu-Natal 679,766 Languages Main article: Languages of South Africa Map showing the dominant South African languages by area Zulu (24.4%) Xhosa (16.0%) ⁠ Afrikaans (13.5%) English (9.6%) Pedi (9.1%) Tswana (8.0%) Southern Sotho (7.6%) Tsonga (4.5%) Swazi (2.5%) Venda (2.4%) Southern Ndebele (2.1%) None dominant Areas of little or no population South Africa has 12 official languages: Afrikaans , Zulu , Xhosa , English , Pedi , Tswana , Southern Sotho , Tsonga , Swazi , Venda , and Southern Ndebele (in order of first language speakers), as well as South African Sign Language, which was recognised as an official language in 2023.

In this regard, it is fourth only to Bolivia , India , and Zimbabwe in number.

While all the languages are formally equal, some languages are spoken more than others. According to the 2022 census, the three most spoken first languages are Zulu (24.4%), Xhosa (16.6%), and Afrikaans (10.6%).

Although English is recognised as the language of commerce and science, it is only the fifth most common home language, that of only 8.7% of South Africans in 2022; nevertheless, it has become the de facto lingua franca of the nation. Estimates based on the 1991 census suggest just under half of South Africans could speak English. It is the second most commonly spoken language outside of the household, after Zulu. Other languages are spoken, or were widely used previously, including Fanagalo , Khoe , Lobedu , Nama , Northern Ndebele , and Phuthi . Many of the unofficial languages of the San and Khoekhoe peoples contain regional dialects stretching northwards into Namibia and Botswana, and elsewhere. These people, who are a physically distinct population from the Bantu people who make up most of the Black Africans in South Africa, have their own cultural identity based on their hunter-gatherer societies. They have been marginalised, and the remainder of their languages are in danger of becoming extinct . White South Africans may also speak European languages, including Italian, Portuguese (also spoken by black Angolans and Mozambicans), Dutch, German, and Greek, while some Indian South Africans and more recent migrants from South Asia speak Indian languages , such as Gujarati, Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, and Urdu. French is spoken by migrants from Francophone Africa . Religion Main article: Religion in South Africa The present-day Jewish community in South Africa is the largest on the African continent, and the twelfth-largest in the world. Education Main article: Education in South Africa The University of Cape Town The adult literacy rate in 2025 was 95%. This was the second-highest in Africa , behind only Seychelles. South Africa has a three-tier system of education starting with primary school, followed by high school, and tertiary education in the form of (academic) universities and universities of technology. Learners have twelve years of formal schooling, from grade 1 to 12. Grade R, or grade 0, is a pre-primary foundation year. Primary schools span the first seven years of schooling. High school education spans a further five years.

The National Senior Certificate examination takes place at the end of grade 12, and is necessary for tertiary studies at a South African university . Public universities are divided into three types: traditional universities, which offer theoretically oriented university degrees; universities of technology (formerly called technikons ), which offer vocationally-oriented diplomas and degrees; and comprehensive universities, which offer both types of qualification. There are 23 public universities in South Africa: 11 traditional universities, 6 universities of technology, and 6 comprehensive universities. There are also a large amount of FET (Further Education and Training) and TVET (Technical and Vocational Education and Training) colleges in South Africa . Under apartheid, schools for black people were subject to discrimination through inadequate funding and a separate syllabus called Bantu Education which only taught skills sufficient to work as labourers.

In 2004, South Africa started reforming its tertiary education system, merging and incorporating small universities into larger institutions, and renaming all tertiary education institutions "university".

By 2015, 1.4 million students in higher education have been aided by a financial aid scheme which was promulgated in 1999. Health Main articles: Health in South Africa and Healthcare in South Africa Groote Schuur Hospital in Observatory, Cape Town , site of the world's first successful human-to-human heart transplant According to the South African Institute of Race Relations , the life expectancy in 2009 was 71 years for a white South African and 48 years for a black South African.

The healthcare spending in the country is about 9% of GDP. About 84% of the population depends on the public healthcare system, which is beset with chronic human resource shortages and limited resources. About 20% of the population use private healthcare. Only 16% of the population are covered by medical aid schemes ; the rest pay for private care out-of-pocket or through in-hospital-only plans.

The three dominant hospital groups, Mediclinic , Life Healthcare and Netcare , together control 75% of the private hospital market. These disparities have driven ongoing policy efforts to reform the healthcare system, including the introduction of National Health Insurance (NHI) aimed at expanding equitable access to healthcare. HIV/AIDS Main article: HIV/AIDS in South Africa Life expectancy in select Southern African countries, 1950–2019. HIV/AIDS has caused a fall in life expectancy. According to the 2015 UNAIDS medical report, South Africa has an estimated seven million people who are living with HIV – more than any other country in the world.

In 2018, HIV prevalence—the percentage of people living with HIV—among adults (15–49 years) was 20.4%, and in the same year 71,000 people died from an AIDS-related illness. A 2008 study revealed that HIV/AIDS infection is distinctly divided along racial lines: 13.6% of blacks are HIV-positive, whereas only 0.3% of whites have the virus. Most deaths are experienced by economically active individuals, resulting in many AIDS orphans who, in many cases, depend on the state for care and financial support. It is estimated that there are 1,200,000 orphans in South Africa.

The link between HIV, a virus spread primarily by sexual contact, and AIDS was long denied by President Thabo Mbeki and his health minister, Manto Tshabalala-Msimang , who insisted that the many deaths in the country are caused by malnutrition , and hence poverty, and not HIV.

In 2007, in response to international pressure, the government made efforts to fight AIDS.

After the 2009 general elections , President Jacob Zuma appointed Aaron Motsoaledi as the health minister and committed his government to increasing funding for and widening the scope of HIV treatment, and by 2015, South Africa had made significant progress, with the widespread availability of antiretroviral drugs resulted in an increase in life expectancy from 52.1 years to 62.5 years. Culture Main article: Culture of South Africa The South African black majority still has a substantial number of rural inhabitants who lead largely impoverished lives. It is among these people that cultural traditions survive most strongly; as black people have become increasingly urbanised and Westernised , aspects of traditional culture have declined. Members of the middle class, who have historically been predominantly white but whose ranks include growing numbers of black, Coloured and Indian people, have lifestyles similar in many respects to that of people found in Western Europe , North America and Australasia . Arts Rock painting by the San people , Cederberg South African art includes the oldest art objects in the world, which were discovered in a South African cave and dated from roughly 75,000 years ago.

The scattered tribes of the Khoisan peoples moving into South Africa from around 10,000 BC had their own fluent art styles seen today in a multitude of cave paintings. They were superseded by the Bantu/Nguni peoples with their own vocabularies of art forms. Forms of art evolved in the mines and townships: a dynamic art using everything from plastic strips to bicycle spokes.

The Dutch-influenced folk art of the Afrikaner trekboers and the urban white artists, earnestly following changing European traditions from the 1850s onwards, also contributed to this eclectic mix which continues to evolve to this day. Media Main article: Mass media in South Africa The South African media sector is large, and South Africa is one of Africa's major media centres.

While the many broadcasters and publications reflect the diversity of the population as a whole, the most commonly used language is English. However, all ten other official languages are represented to some extent. South Africa's media landscape is diverse and well-developed, comprising the public broadcaster SABC , the private free-to-air channel E.tv , and satellite television provider MultiChoice , which operates DStv across sub-Saharan Africa.

The country has partially rolled out digital terrestrial television (DTT), though full migration from analogue broadcasting has experienced delays. Popular culture Further information: Music of South Africa Zulus perform a traditional dance. There is great diversity in South African music . Black musicians have developed styles called Kwaito and Amapiano . Of note is Brenda Fassie , who launched to fame with her song " Weekend Special ", which was sung in English. More famous traditional musicians include Ladysmith Black Mambazo , while the Soweto String Quartet performs classical music with an African flavour. South Africa has produced world-famous jazz musicians, notably Hugh Masekela , Jonas Gwangwa , Abdullah Ibrahim , Miriam Makeba , Jonathan Butler , Chris McGregor , and Sathima Bea Benjamin . Afrikaans music covers multiple genres, such as the contemporary Steve Hofmeyr , the punk rock band Fokofpolisiekar , and the singer-songwriter Jeremy Loops . South African popular musicians that have found international success include Manfred Mann , Johnny Clegg , rap-rave duo Die Antwoord , Tyla , and rock band Seether . Rappers such as AKA , Nasty C and Cassper Nyovest gained notoriety in other avenues like the BET Awards for best African acts.

Although few South African film productions are known outside South Africa, many foreign films have been produced about South Africa. Arguably, the most high-profile film portraying South Africa in recent years was District 9 , as well as Chappie . Other notable exceptions are the film Tsotsi , which won the Academy Award for Foreign Language Film at the 78th Academy Awards in 2006, as well as U-Carmen e-Khayelitsha , which won the Golden Bear at the 2005 Berlin International Film Festival .

In 2015, the Oliver Hermanus film The Endless River became the first South African film selected for the Venice Film Festival . Literature Main article: South African literature Sol Plaatje Alan Paton Archibald Campbell Jordan Breyten Breytenbach South African literature emerged from a unique social and political history. It "embraces all the languages and cultures of the people of South Africa" and began as an oral tradition. South Africa has 11 official spoken languages: Sepedi, Sesotho, Setswana, siSwati, Tshivenda, Xitsonga, Afrikaans, English, isiNdebele, isiXhosa and isiZulu. Literature in English Notable white South African authors include anti-apartheid activist Alan Paton , who published the novel Cry, the Beloved Country in 1948. Nadine Gordimer became the first South African to be awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature , in 1991. J.M. Coetzee won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2003.

When awarding the prize, the Swedish Academy stated that Coetzee "in innumerable guises portrays the surprising involvement of the outsider." Antjie Krog is a poet, journalist, academic and writer noted for confronting apartheid and its aftermath in her work. She reported on the Truth and Reconciliation Commission for the South African Broadcasting Corporation, and her best-known book is Country of My Skull (1998). Elsa Joubert was an Afrikaans novelist, travel-writer and journalist whose work draws on African landscapes and human experiences. She is best known for the 1979 novel Die swerfjare van Poppie Nongena (The Long Journey of Poppie Nongena) , a story of a Black South African woman's endurance under apartheid, translated into many languages and widely celebrated. One of the first well-known novels written by a black author in an African language was Solomon Thekiso Plaatje 's Mhudi , written in 1930.

During the 1950s, Drum magazine became a hotbed of political satire, fiction, and essays, giving a voice to the urban black culture.

The most notable is Nando's , founded in Johannesburg in 1987, which specialises in flame-grilled peri-peri chicken and operates more than 1,250 outlets in over 23 countries. Other major South African fast-food franchises include Wimpy , Steers , Debonairs Pizza and Chicken Licken , many of which have expanded throughout Africa and other regions. International fast-food brands are also well established in South Africa; the country is among the world's leading markets for KFC outlets, reflecting the widespread popularity of fast food across income groups and urban centres.

In the beverage sector, South Africa has played an influential role in both global energy drinks and wine . Monster Energy , although marketed as an American brand, was founded by South African-born entrepreneurs Rodney Sacks and Hilton Schlosberg , who relocated to the United States and played a central role in the company's international expansion. South African wine is also renowned internationally, with vineyards in regions such as Stellenbosch , Franschhoek , Paarl and Barrydale . These wine-producing areas form a significant part of the country's culinary tourism industry, contributing to South Africa's international reputation for food and drink. Sports Main article: Sport in South Africa Cape Town Stadium is the 5th-largest stadium in South Africa, with a capacity of 55,000. Sport plays a significant role in South African culture, and the country's most popular sports are soccer , rugby union and cricket . Other sports with notable support are swimming , athletics , golf , boxing , mixed martial arts , tennis , ringball , field hockey , surfing and netball . Soccer is the most popular sport in South Africa. South Africa hosted the 2010 FIFA World Cup . It hosted the 1996 African Cup of Nations , with the national team Bafana Bafana going on to win the tournament. South Africa's men's U-20 team also won the 2025 U-20 Africa Cup of Nations .

In 2022, the women's team also won the Women's Africa Cup of Nations , beating Morocco 2–1 in the final .

The women's team went on to reach the last 16 at the 2023 FIFA Women's World Cup , beating Italy and tying with Argentina in the group stage. Famous combat sport personalities include Baby Jake Jacob Matlala , Vuyani Bungu , Welcome Ncita , Dingaan Thobela , Corrie Sanders , Gerrie Coetzee , Brian Mitchell , Garreth McLellan and current UFC Middleweight Champion Dricus du Plessis . Durban surfer Jordy Smith won the 2010 Billabong J-Bay Open making him the highest ranked surfer in the world. South Africa produced Formula One motor racing's 1979 world champion Jody Scheckter . Famous active Grand Prix motorcycle racing personalities include Brad Binder and his younger brother Darryn Binder .

The 2023 ICC Women's T20 World Cup was hosted in South Africa and the women's team won silver.

The men's team won silver at the 2024 ICC T20 World Cup , and won the 2023–2025 ICC World Test Championship , beating Australia in the final. South Africa's national blind cricket team also went on to win the inaugural edition of the Blind Cricket World Cup in 1998.

In 2004, the swimming team of Roland Schoeman , Lyndon Ferns , Darian Townsend and Ryk Neethling won the gold medal at the Olympic Games in Athens , simultaneously breaking the world record in the 4×100 Freestyle Relay . Penny Heyns won Olympic Gold in the 1996 Atlanta Olympic Games , and more recently, swimmers Tatjana Smith (née Schoenmaker), Lara van Niekerk , Akani Simbine and Wayde van Niekerk have all broken records and won medals at both the Olympic and Commonwealth Games , with Wayde van Niekerk being the world record holder in 400 metres since 2016.

The Australian Museum . Retrieved 29 May 2026 . ^ a b Gunnink, Hilde; Sands, Bonny; Pakendorf, Brigitte (2017). "Prehistoric Bantu-Khoisan language contact" . Language Dynamics and Change . 7 (1): 1. doi : 10.1163/22105832-00701002 . hdl : 1854/LU-8519242 . ISSN 2210-5824 . ^ Cooper, Andrew F; Antkiewicz, Agata; Shaw, Timothy M (10 December 2007). "Lessons from/for BRICSAM about South-North Relations at the Start of the 21st Century: Economic Size Trumps All Else?". International Studies Review . 9 (4): 675, 687. doi : 10.1111/j.1468-2486.2007.00730.x . ISSN 1468-2486 . ^ Lynch, David A. (2010). Trade and Globalization: An Introduction to Regional Trade Agreements . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 51. ISBN 978-0-7425-6689-7 . Archived from the original on 11 October 2013 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 . Southern Africa is home to the other of sub-Saharan Africa's regional powers: South Africa. South Africa is more than just a regional power; it is currently the most developed and economically powerful country in Africa, and is able to use that influence in Africa more than during the days of apartheid, when it was ostracised from the rest of the world. ^ "South Africa" . World Bank. Archived from the original on 1 November 2011 . Retrieved 23 July 2021 . ^ Waugh, David (2000). "Manufacturing industries (chapter 19), World development (chapter 22)" . Geography: An Integrated Approach . Nelson Thornes. pp. 563, 576– 579, 633, 640. ISBN 978-0-17-444706-1 . Archived from the original on 11 October 2013 . Retrieved 24 August 2013 . ^ a b "World Heritage List" . UNESCO World Heritage Centre . Retrieved 16 August 2024 . ^ "Rainbow Nation – dream or reality?" . BBC News . 18 July 2008. Archived from the original on 8 September 2013 . Retrieved 10 August 2013 . ^ Lieberman, Evan (2022). Until We Have Won Our Liberty . Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-20300-3 . Archived from the original on 24 November 2021 . Retrieved 25 November 2021 . ^ "Unemployment, total (% of labor force) (modeled ILO estimate) – South Africa" . World Bank . Archived from the original on 20 September 2022 . Retrieved 19 September 2022 . ^ "Statistics South Africa on official unemployment rate in third quarter of 2024" . South African Government . 12 November 2024 . Retrieved 10 February 2025 . ^ "Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty lines (% of population) – South Africa" . World Bank . Archived from the original on 31 July 2020 . Retrieved 19 September 2022 . ^ " "World Bank": South Africa" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 April 2023 . Retrieved 7 April 2023 . ^ "World Bank Open Data" . World Bank Open Data . Archived from the original on 4 April 2024 . Retrieved 4 April 2024 . ^ Francis, David; Webster, Edward (2 November 2019). "Poverty and inequality in South Africa: critical reflections" . Development Southern Africa . 36 (6): 788– 802. doi : 10.1080/0376835X.2019.1666703 . ISSN 0376-835X . Archived from the original on 4 April 2024 . Retrieved 4 April 2024 . ^ "The text" . www.concourt.org.za . Archived from the original on 25 December 2023 . Retrieved 25 December 2023 . ^ South African Sign Language is also an official language ^ Livermon, Xavier (2008). "Sounds in the City" .

In Nuttall, Sarah; Mbembé, Achille (eds.). Johannesburg: The Elusive Metropolis . Durham: Duke University Press. p. 283. ISBN 978-0-8223-8121-1 . Archived from the original on 2 May 2019 . Retrieved 5 January 2016 . Mzansi is another black urban vernacular term popular with the youth and standing for South Africa. ^ "Mzansi DiToloki" . Deaf Federation of South Africa. Archived from the original on 16 January 2014 . Retrieved 15 January 2014 . uMzantsi in Xhosa means 'south', Mzansi means this country, South Africa ^ Taylor, Darren. "South African Party Says Call Their Country 'Azania' " . VOA . Archived from the original on 24 June 2016 . Retrieved 18 February 2017 . ^ Wymer, John; Singer, R (1982).

The Middle Stone Age at Klasies River Mouth in South Africa . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-76103-9 . ^ Deacon, HJ (2001). "Guide to Klasies River" (PDF) . Stellenbosch University. p. 11. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 February 2011 . Retrieved 5 September 2009 . ^ "Fossil Hominid Sites of South Africa" . UNESCO World Heritage Centre . Archived from the original on 4 December 2019 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 . ^ Marean, Curtis W. (September 2010). "Pinnacle Point Cave 13B (Western Cape Province, South Africa) in context: The Cape Floral kingdom, shellfish, and modern human origins". Journal of Human Evolution . 59 ( 3– 4): 425– 443. Bibcode : 2010JHumE..59..425M . doi : 10.1016/j.jhevol.2010.07.011 . PMID 20934095 . ^ Broker, Stephen P. "Hominid Evolution" . Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute. Archived from the original on 7 April 2008 . Retrieved 19 June 2008 . ^ Langer, William L., ed. (1972). An Encyclopedia of World History (5th ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. p. 9 . ISBN 978-0-395-13592-1 . ^ Leakey, Louis Seymour Bazett (1936). "Stone Age cultures of South Africa" . Stone age Africa: an outline of prehistory in Africa (reprint ed.). Negro Universities Press. p. 79. ISBN 9780837120225 . Retrieved 21 February 2018 .

The Digging Stick . 37 (2). ISSN 1013-7521 . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ Alfred, Luke. "The Bakoni: From prosperity to extinction in a generation" . Citypress . Archived from the original on 20 October 2020 . Retrieved 13 September 2020 . ^ "Adam's Calendar in Waterval Boven, Mpumalanga" . www.sa-venues.com . Archived from the original on 17 December 2020 . Retrieved 13 September 2020 . ^ Chirikure, Shadreck; Delius, Peter; Esterhuysen, Amanda; Hall, Simon; Lekgoathi, Sekibakiba; Maulaudzi, Maanda; Neluvhalani, Vele; Ntsoane, Otsile; Pearce, David (1 October 2015). Mapungubwe Reconsidered: A Living Legacy: Exploring Beyond the Rise and Decline of the Mapungubwe State . Real African Publishers Pty Ltd. ISBN 978-1-920655-06-8 . ^ Huffman, Thomas (2022). "The origins of Tshivenda: an archaeological challenge to historical linguistics" . Southern African Humanities . 35 (1). ^ Loubser, Jannie (2024). "The Venda-Speaking People" . Oxford Research Encyclopedia of African History . Oxford University Press. ^ Domville-Fife, C.W. (1900).

The encyclopedia of the British Empire the first encyclopedic record of the greatest empire in the history of the world ed . London: Rankin. p. 25. ^ Mackenzie, W. Douglas; Stead, Alfred (1899). South Africa: Its History, Heroes, and Wars . Chicago: The Co-Operative Publishing Company. ^ "The Lusiads | Portuguese epic, 16th century, epic poem | Britannica" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived from the original on 10 September 2025 . Retrieved 11 January 2026 . ^ Fleminger, David. "Vasco da Gama in South Africa" . South Africa Online . Retrieved 11 January 2026 . ^ Pakeman, SA. Nations of the Modern World: Ceylon (1964 ed.). Frederick A Praeger, Publishers. pp. 18– 19. ^ a b c Wilmot, Alexander & John Centlivres Chase (February 2010). History of the Colony of the Cape of Good Hope: From Its Discovery to the Year 1819 (2010 ed.). Claremont: David Philip (Pty) Ltd. pp. 1– 548. ISBN 978-1-144-83015-9 . ^ Kaplan, Irving. Area Handbook for the Republic of South Africa (PDF) . pp. 46– 771. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 April 2015 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 . ^ "African History Timeline" . West Chester University of Pennsylvania. Archived from the original on 7 January 2009 . Retrieved 16 June 2008 . ^ a b Hunt, John (2005). Campbell, Heather-Ann (ed.). Dutch South Africa: Early Settlers at the Cape, 1652–1708 . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 13– 35. ISBN 978-1-904744-95-5 . ^ Worden, Nigel (5 August 2010). Slavery in Dutch South Africa (2010 ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 40– 43. ISBN 978-0-521-15266-2 . ^ a b Nelson, Harold. Zimbabwe: A Country Study . pp. 237– 317. ^ Elphick, R (1993). Khoikhoi and the Founding of White South Africa (1st ed.). Johannesburg: Ravan Press. p. 240. ^ a b c d e Stapleton, Timothy (2010). A Military History of South Africa: From the Dutch-Khoi Wars to the End of Apartheid . Santa Barbara: Praeger Security International. pp. 4– 6. ISBN 978-0-313-36589-8 . ^ Keegan, Timothy (1996). Colonial South Africa and the Origins of the Racial Order (1996 ed.). David Philip Publishers (Pty) Ltd. pp. 85–86 . ISBN 978-0-8139-1735-1 . ^ a b c Lloyd, Trevor Owen (1997).

The British Empire, 1558–1995 . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 201– 203. ISBN 978-0-19-873133-7 . ^ Eldredge, "Sources of Conflict in Southern Africa," 28. ^ Wright, "Turbulent Times," 250. ^ a b Wright, "Turbulent Times," 225–226. ^ Wright, "Turbulent Times," 233. ^ Wright, "Turbulent Times," 227. ^ Wright, "Turbulent Times," 249. ^ Hillier, Alfred Peter ; Cana, Frank Richardson (1911). "Orange Free State" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 20 (11th ed.). pp. 151– 160. ^ Wright, "Turbulent Times," 215. ^ Wright, "Turbulent Times," 235. ^ Williams, Garner F (1905).

The Diamond Mines of South Africa, Vol II . New York: B. F Buck & Co. pp. Chapter XX . Retrieved 27 November 2008 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ "South African Military History Society – Journal- THE SEKUKUNI WARS" . samilitaryhistory.org . Archived from the original on 23 July 2020 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 . ^ Knight, Ian (6 May 2011). Zulu Rising: The Epic Story of Isandlwana and Rorke's Drift . Pan Macmillan. ISBN 9781447202233 . Archived from the original on 28 June 2024 . Retrieved 26 December 2023 . ^ "5 of the worst atrocities carried out by the British Empire" .

The Independent . 19 January 2016. Archived from the original on 27 September 2019 . Retrieved 22 September 2019 . ^ Ogura, Mitsuo (1996). "Urbanization and Apartheid in South Africa: Influx Controls and Their Abolition" .

The Transvaal . London: Chatto & Windus. pp. 30 (n46) . Retrieved 30 July 2009 . ^ Cana, Frank Richardson (1911). "South Africa" .

In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 25 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 467. ^ "Native Land Act" . South African Institute of Race Relations. 19 June 1913. Archived from the original on 14 October 2010. ^ "National Party (NP) | South African History Online" . www.sahistory.org.za . Archived from the original on 8 May 2020 . Retrieved 25 December 2023 . ^ Gloria Galloway, "Chiefs Reflect on Apartheid" Archived 2 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine , The Globe and Mail , 11 December 2013 ^ Beinart, William (2001). Twentieth-century South Africa. Oxford University Press. p. 202. ISBN 978-0-19-289318-5 . ^ "apartheid | South Africa, Definition, Facts, Beginning, & End" . Britannica . Archived from the original on 7 May 2022 . Retrieved 15 May 2022 . ^ "Hendrik Frensch Verwoerd" . South African History Online. Archived from the original on 29 November 2017 . Retrieved 9 March 2013 .

On 5 October 1960 a referendum was held in which White voters were asked: "Do you support a republic for the Union?" – 52 percent voted 'Yes'. ^ Switzer, Les (2000). South Africa's Resistance Press: Alternative Voices in the Last Generation Under Apartheid. Issue 74 of Research in international studies: Africa series . Ohio University Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-89680-213-1 . Archived from the original on 11 December 2020 . Retrieved 19 October 2020 . ^ "SAPA - 26 Oct 98 - TRC IMPLICATES LIBERATION MOVEMENT IN HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES" . www.justice.gov.za . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ Simon Stevens, The Turn to Sabotage by The Congress Movement in South Africa, Past & Present , Volume 245, Issue 1, November 2019, Pages 221–255, https://doi.org/10.1093/pastj/gtz030 ^ Mitchell, Thomas (2008). Native vs Settler: Ethnic Conflict in Israel/Palestine, Northern Ireland and South Africa . Westport: Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 194– 196. ISBN 978-0-313-31357-8 . ^ Bridgland, Fred (1990).

The War for Africa: Twelve months that transformed a continent . Gibraltar: Ashanti Publishing. p. 32. ISBN 978-1-874800-12-5 . ^ Landgren, Signe (1989). Embargo Disimplemented: South Africa's Military Industry (1989 ed.). Oxford University Press. pp. 6–10 . ISBN 978-0-19-829127-5 . ^ "Russia, China And Palestine – Part III" . Crescent International . Retrieved 18 June 2026 . ^ "South Africa" . www.sadc.int . Archived from the original on 25 December 2023 . Retrieved 25 December 2023 . ^ Head, Tom (4 April 2018). " "Inequality has increased in South Africa since apartheid" – World Bank" .

The South African . Retrieved 7 February 2025 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ "South Africa's Unemployment Reaches New Highs" . Barron's . Agence France-Presse . 13 August 2024 . Retrieved 7 February 2025 . ^ "Post-Apartheid South Africa: the First Ten Years – Unemployment and the Labor Market" (PDF) . IMF. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 July 2013 . Retrieved 16 February 2013 . ^ Chance, Kerry (20 June 2008). "Broke-on-Broke Violence" . Slate . Archived from the original on 8 September 2011 . Retrieved 6 July 2011 . ^ "COHRE statement on Xenophobic Attacks" . 2 June 2008. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012 . Retrieved 6 July 2011 . ^ "South African police open fire as striking miners charge, killing and wounding workers" .

The Washington Post . Associated Press. 16 August 2012. Archived from the original on 17 August 2012 . Retrieved 16 August 2012 . ^ Ryan, Ciaran. "The deindustrialisation of SA" . Moneyweb . Retrieved 6 September 2025 . ^ "High rate of de-industrialization and the impact on South Africa's economic - resilience - Emeka Umeche" . 27 October 2023. ^ Momoniat, Ismail (10 April 2023). "How and Why Did State Capture and Massive Corruption Occur in South Africa ?" . International Monetary Fund . Archived from the original on 4 June 2024 . Retrieved 4 June 2024 . ^ Maseko, Nomsa (23 June 2022). "South Africa's Zondo commission: Damning report exposes rampant corruption" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 4 June 2024 . Retrieved 4 June 2024 . ^ "The Zondo Commission: A bite-sized summary" . Public Affairs Research Institute, University of the Witwatersrand . 5 September 2022. Archived from the original on 4 June 2024 . Retrieved 4 June 2024 . ^ Campbell, John (15 July 2021). "South Africa Sees the Best of Times and the Worst of Times" . Council on Foreign Relations . Archived from the original on 4 June 2024 . Retrieved 4 June 2024 . ^ Chothia, Farouk; Byaruhanga, Catherine (31 May 2024). "South Africa election result: Will ANC share power with MK party or DA?" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 1 June 2024 . Retrieved 4 June 2024 . ^ "South Africa's ANC moves closer to forming coalition government" . France 24 . 14 June 2024. Archived from the original on 15 June 2024 . Retrieved 15 June 2024 . ^ "Country Comparison" . World Factbook . CIA. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011 . Retrieved 4 September 2009 . ^ "Demographic Yearbook – 2015" . United Nations Statistics Division . 2016. Archived from the original on 8 July 2018 . Retrieved 12 December 2017 . ^ McCarthy, T. & Rubidge, B. (2005).

The story of earth and life . p. 263, 267–268. Struik Publishers, Cape Town. ^ a b c d Atlas of Southern Africa. (1984). p. 13. Reader's Digest Association, Cape Town ^ Encyclopædia Britannica (1975); Micropaedia Vol. III, p. 655. Helen Hemingway Benton Publishers, Chicago. ^ Atlas of Southern Africa. (1984). p. 151. Reader's Digest Association, Cape Town ^ Atlas of Southern Africa. (1984). p. 186. Reader's Digest Association, Cape Town ^ "Kruger National Park" . Africa.com. Archived from the original on 18 December 2014 . Retrieved 16 December 2014 . ^ McCarthy, T. & Rubidge, B. (2005).

The story of earth and life . p. 194. Struik Publishers, Cape Town. ^ a b Geological map of South Africa, Lesotho and Swaziland (1970). Council for Geoscience, Geological Survey of South Africa. ^ Encyclopædia Britannica (1975); Micropaedia Vol. VI, p. 750. Helen Hemingway Benton Publishers, Chicago. ^ a b Atlas of Southern Africa. (1984). p. 19. Reader's Digest Association, Cape Town ^ Atlas of Southern Africa. (1984). p. 113. Reader's Digest Association, Cape Town ^ Sullivan, Helen (11 July 2023). " 'Pure magic': snow falls on Johannesburg for first time in 11 years" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 28 June 2024 . Retrieved 29 December 2023 . ^ "These are the lowest ever temperatures recorded in South Africa" .

The South African . 1 July 2018. Archived from the original on 11 September 2020 . Retrieved 11 September 2020 . ^ "South Africa's geography" . Safrica.info. Archived from the original on 8 June 2010 . Retrieved 30 October 2011 . ^ South Africa yearbook . South African Communication Service. 1997. p. 3. ISBN 9780797035447 . Archived from the original on 24 January 2016 . Retrieved 14 October 2015 . ^ Republic of South Africa, National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (NCCAS) Archived 12 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine , Version UE10, 13 November 2019. ^ "International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health" . www.mdpi.com . Archived from the original on 10 June 2021 . Retrieved 26 November 2020 . ^ "South African National Biodiversity Institute" . Sanbi.org. 30 September 2011. Archived from the original on 1 September 2011 . Retrieved 30 October 2011 . ^ "South Africa's Second National Climate Change Report" . November 2017. Archived from the original on 14 June 2020 . Retrieved 17 May 2020 . ^ a b c "The Carbon Brief Profile: South Africa" . Carbon Brief . 15 October 2018. Archived from the original on 9 May 2021 . Retrieved 3 August 2020 . ^ "List of Parties" . Archived from the original on 24 January 2011 . Retrieved 8 December 2012 . ^ a b "South Africa's National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 May 2013 . Retrieved 10 December 2012 . ^ "Biodiversity of the world by countries" . Institutoaqualung.com.br. Archived from the original on 1 November 2010 . Retrieved 30 May 2010 . ^ Rong, I. H.; Baxter, A. P. (2006). "The South African National Collection of Fungi: Celebrating a centenary 1905–2005" . Studies in Mycology . 55 : 1– 12. doi : 10.3114/sim.55.1.1 . PMC 2104721 . PMID 18490968 . ^ Crous, P. W.; Rong, I. H.; Wood, A.; Lee, S.; Glen, H.; Botha, W. l; Slippers, B.; De Beer, W. Z.; Wingfield, M. J.; Hawksworth, D. L. (2006). "How many species of fungi are there at the tip of Africa?" . Studies in Mycology . 55 : 13– 33. doi : 10.3114/sim.55.1.13 . PMC 2104731 . PMID 18490969 . ^ Marincowitz, S.; Crous, P.W.; Groenewald, J.Z. & Wingfield, M.J. (2008). "Microfungi occurring on Proteaceae in the fynbos. CBS Biodiversity Series 7" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 July 2013 . Retrieved 26 June 2013 . ^ Lambertini, Marco (15 May 2000). "The Flora / The Richest Botany in the World". A Naturalist's Guide to the Tropics (Revised edition (15 May 2000) ed.). University of Chicago Press. p. 46. ISBN 978-0-226-46828-0 . ^ a b Trenchard, Tommy (31 July 2021). "In South Africa, Poachers Now Traffic in Tiny Succulent Plants" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 10 May 2022 . Retrieved 27 June 2022 . ^ "Plants and Vegetation in South Africa" . Southafrica-travel.net. Archived from the original on 28 October 2011 . Retrieved 30 October 2011 . ^ Lewton, Robin Cherry & Thomas (5 March 2019). "South Africa's flammable floral kingdom" . www.bbc.com . Archived from the original on 16 July 2022 . Retrieved 16 July 2022 . ^ Grantham, H. S.; et al. (2020). "Anthropogenic modification of forests means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity – Supplementary Material" . Nature Communications . 11 (1): 5978. Bibcode : 2020NatCo..11.5978G . doi : 10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3 . ISSN 2041-1723 . PMC 7723057 . PMID 33293507 . ^ Towards a policy on indigenous bush encroachment in South Africa (2019) Archived 19 April 2024 at the Wayback Machine , Department of Environmental Affairs, Pretoria, South Africa ^ "Progress in the war against poaching" . Environmental Affairs . South Africa. 22 January 2015. Archived from the original on 23 January 2015 . Retrieved 22 January 2015 . ^ "Term Limits in Africa" .

The Economist . 6 April 2006. Archived from the original on 19 October 2013 . Retrieved 26 June 2013 . ^ Akinwotu, Emmanuel (1 June 2024). "In a historic election, South Africa's ANC loses majority for the first time" . NPR . Retrieved 26 August 2024 . ^ Usher, Barbara Plett (14 June 2024). "A landmark moment in South Africa for a humbled ANC" . BBC . Retrieved 26 August 2024 . ^ "Chapter 4 – Parliament" . 19 August 2009. Archived from the original on 30 May 2013 . Retrieved 3 August 2013 . ^ Alexander, Peter (27 March 2012). "Protests and Police Statistics: Some Commentary" . Amandla . Archived from the original on 28 November 2023 . Retrieved 8 April 2024 . ^ Buccus, Imraan (27 August 2007). "Mercury: Rethinking the crisis of local democracy" . Abahlali.org. Archived from the original on 19 October 2011 . Retrieved 30 October 2011 . ^ J. Duncan (31 May 2010). "The Return of State Repression" . South African Civil Society Information Services. Archived from the original on 30 June 2013 . Retrieved 26 June 2013 . ^ "Increasing police repression highlighted by recent case" . Freedom of Expression Institute. 2006. Archived from the original on 20 January 2013 . Retrieved 26 June 2013 . ^ "South Africa's recent performance in the Ibrahim Index of African Governance" . Mo Ibrahim Foundation. Archived from the original on 18 February 2013 . Retrieved 16 February 2013 . ^ "SA marriage law signed" . BBC News . 30 November 2006. Archived from the original on 20 November 2021 . Retrieved 26 June 2013 . ^ Wines, Michael (2 December 2005). "Same-Sex Unions to Become Legal in South Africa" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 10 October 2018 . Retrieved 5 February 2018 . ^ Snyman, Pamela & Barratt, Amanda (2 October 2002). "Researching South African Law" . w/ Library Resource Xchange. Archived from the original on 17 June 2008 . Retrieved 23 June 2008 . ^ Stats in Brief, 2010 (PDF) . Pretoria: Statistics South Africa. 2010. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-621-39563-1 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 August 2018 . Retrieved 14 January 2011 . ^ Rosenberg, Rosalind (Summer 2001). "Virginia Gildersleeve: Opening the Gates (Living Legacies)" . Columbia Magazine . Archived from the original on 2 January 2004 . Retrieved 14 December 2009 . ^ Schlesinger, Stephen E. (2004). Act of Creation: The Founding of the United Nations: A Story of Superpowers, Secret Agents, Wartime Allies and Enemies, and Their Quest for a Peaceful World . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Westview, Perseus Books Group. pp. 236– 7. ISBN 978-0-8133-3275-8 . ^ ACMC, Edeh Samuel Chukwuemeka (16 September 2023). "Why Is Africa Underdeveloped? 12 Reasons African Countries Are Not Developed" . Bscholarly . Retrieved 18 June 2026 . ^ "China, South Africa upgrade relations to "comprehensive strategic partnership" " . Capetown.china-consulate.org. 25 August 2010. Archived from the original on 31 July 2013 . Retrieved 26 June 2013 . ^ "New era as South Africa joins BRICS" . Southafrica.info. 11 April 2011. Archived from the original on 18 April 2011 . Retrieved 26 June 2013 . ^ "SA brings 'unique attributes' to BRICS" . Southafrica.info. 14 April 2011. Archived from the original on 9 July 2011 . Retrieved 26 June 2013 . ^ a b "Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Act 200 of 1993 (Section 224)" . South African Government. 1993. Archived from the original on 12 June 2008 . Retrieved 23 June 2008 . ^ "Defence Act 42 of 2002" (PDF) . South African Government. 12 February 2003. p. 18. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 June 2008 . Retrieved 23 June 2008 . ^ Lekota, Mosiuoa (5 September 2005). "Address by the Minister of Defence at a media breakfast at Defence Headquarters, Pretoria" . Department of Defence. Archived from the original on 14 December 2007 . Retrieved 23 June 2008 . ^ "SOUTH AFRICA ARMAMENTS" (PDF) . www.cia.gov . ^ Lionel, Ekene (28 November 2017). "Here are some of South African Made weapons" . Military Africa . Archived from the original on 8 January 2023 . Retrieved 9 March 2023 . ^ "South Africa: An Overview of the Defence Industry" . ciaotest.cc.columbia.edu . Archived from the original on 6 April 2023 . Retrieved 14 April 2023 . ^ a b Roy E. Horton III (October 1999). "Out of (South) Africa: Pretoria's Nuclear Weapons Experience" . USAF Institute for National Security Studies. Archived from the original on 6 May 2008 . Retrieved 23 June 2008 . ^ Dodson, Christine (22 October 1979). "South Atlantic Nuclear Event (National Security Council, Memorandum)" (PDF) . George Washington University under Freedom of Information Act Request. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 June 2011 . Retrieved 23 June 2008 . ^ "South Africa comes clean" . Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists . Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists: Science and Public Affairs. Educational Foundation for Nuclear Science, Inc. May 1993. pp. 3– 4. ISSN 0096-3402 . Archived from the original on 11 October 2013 . Retrieved 26 June 2013 . ^ Bloomberg. "South Africa still owns highly enriched uranium, report says" . Engineering News . Retrieved 6 July 2025 . ^ Poplak, Richard (16 March 2015). "Things That Goes Boom: Is South African uranium the biggest threat to world peace?" . Daily Maverick . Retrieved 6 July 2025 . ^ "TerraPower plans to invest in South African HALEU laser enrichment technology" . www.ans.org . Retrieved 6 July 2025 . ^ "Chapter XXVI: Disarmament – No. 9 Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" . United Nations Treaty Collection. 7 July 2017. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021 . Retrieved 10 August 2019 . ^ "UNODA Treaties" . treaties.unoda.org . ^ "South Africa Yearbook 2019/20 | Government Communication and Information System (GCIS)" . www.gcis.gov.za . Archived from the original on 2 March 2023 . Retrieved 2 March 2023 . ^ Mitchley, Alex. "Best in Africa: SAPS' Special Task Force Unit places ninth at international SWAT competition" . News24 . Archived from the original on 2 March 2023 . Retrieved 2 March 2023 . ^ Martin, Guy (30 October 2012). "South Africa has world's largest private security industry; needs regulation – Mthethwa" . defenceWeb . Archived from the original on 9 April 2023 . Retrieved 9 April 2023 . ^ "Security guards vs police officers in South Africa" . BusinessTech . 13 May 2021. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. ^ Eastwood, Victoria (8 February 2013). "Bigger than the army: South Africa's private security forces | CNN Business" . CNN . Archived from the original on 9 April 2023 . Retrieved 9 April 2023 . ^ "Recent Growth In The Private Security Industry" . Building Security Services . Archived from the original on 28 June 2024 . Retrieved 9 April 2023 . ^ "Africa: countries with highest crime index 2024" . Statista . Retrieved 13 August 2025 . ^ Staff Writer. "Here's how South Africa's crime rate compares to actual warzones" . businesstech.co.za . Archived from the original on 19 July 2019 . Retrieved 19 July 2019 . ^ Govender, Indiran (31 March 2023). "Gender-based violence - An increasing epidemic in South Africa" . South African Family Practice . 65 (1): e1– e2. doi : 10.4102/safp.v65i1.5729 . ISSN 2078-6204 . PMC 10091185 . PMID 37042525 . ^ "Global Study on Homicide – Statistics and Data" . dataunodc.un.org . Archived from the original on 15 July 2019 . Retrieved 19 July 2019 . ^ "Countries with the highest rape incidents" .

The Business Standard . 13 October 2020 . Retrieved 24 July 2025 . ^ "GUIDE: Rape statistics in South Africa – Africa Check" . Archived from the original on 25 March 2019 . Retrieved 11 July 2018 . ^ Gibson, Douglas (3 March 2020). "SA's murder rate is worse than the coronavirus mortality rate" . iol.co.za. IOL. Archived from the original on 4 August 2021 . Retrieved 4 August 2021 . ^ "Rising Cape Town Gang Violence Is Yet Another Legacy of Apartheid" . Bloomberg.com . ^ Dziewanski, Dariusz (15 July 2020). "It's hard to leave a Cape Town gang. But these men's stories show that it's possible" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 23 July 2025 . ^ ThemeGrill. "Department of Correctional Services" . Retrieved 5 November 2025 . ^ Agbetiloye, Adekunle (30 September 2024). "Top 10 African countries with the highest prison populations" . Business Insider Africa . Retrieved 5 November 2025 . ^ "DA calls for a full Correctional Services spending review, as more Pollsmoor inmates die" . Democratic Alliance . Retrieved 5 November 2025 . ^ "Review of the Criminal Justice System | South African Government" . www.gov.za . Retrieved 13 August 2025 . ^ "JSE Trading Hours & Market Holidays " . www.tradinghours.com . Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ "South Africa - Market Overview" . www.trade.gov . 26 January 2024 . Retrieved 23 July 2025 . ^ "Economy" . South African Embassy Paris, France . Retrieved 23 July 2025 . ^ "African Countries of the Future 2013/14" . fDiIntelligence.com. 9 August 2013. Archived from the original on 11 December 2013 . Retrieved 4 December 2013 . ^ Agency, Content Works; Charlotte (19 February 2025). "Forex Trading in Africa - A 2025 Outlook" . Contentworks . Retrieved 12 July 2025 . ^ "JSE Trading Hours & Market Holidays " . www.tradinghours.com . Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 . ^ "Market capitalization of listed domestic companies (current US$)" . World Bank . Retrieved 16 June 2024 . ^ "South Africa's membership of BRICS has tangible benefits for South Africans" (PDF) .

The Department of Trade Industry and Competition . ^ a b c "South Africa" .

The World Factbook . CIA. Archived from the original on 10 January 2021 . Retrieved 23 January 2021 . ^ "South Africa has highest gap between rich and poor" . Business Report. 28 September 2009. Archived from the original on 23 October 2011 . Retrieved 7 November 2010 . ^ "Distribution of family income – Gini index" . Cia.gov. Archived from the original on 13 June 2007 . Retrieved 26 June 2013 . ^ "Inequality in income or expenditure / Gini index, Human Development Report 2007/08" . Hdrstats.undp.org. 4 November 2010. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013 . Retrieved 26 June 2013 . ^ "INEQUALITY IN SOUTHERN AFRICA: AN ASSESSMENT OF THE SOUTHERN AFRICAN CUSTOMS UNION" (PDF) . World Bank Group . ^ "The World Bank In South Africa" . Archived from the original on 28 May 2020 . Retrieved 17 May 2020 . ^ " "World Bank": South Africa" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 April 2023 . Retrieved 7 April 2023 . ^ "South Africa: finance sector's value added to GDP 2015-2023" . Statista . Retrieved 11 July 2025 . ^ "Top 10 Stock Exchange Markets in Africa 2025" .

The African Exponent . 15 April 2025 . Retrieved 7 September 2025 . ^ "South Africa: assets of financial institutions" . Statista . Retrieved 11 July 2025 . ^ "Standard Bank Group (SBK.JO) - Total assets" . companiesmarketcap.com . Retrieved 11 July 2025 . ^ "Standard Bank Ranked As Africa's Most Valuable Banking Brand For A Third Consecutive Year" . www.forbesafrica.com . 19 April 2024 . Retrieved 11 July 2025 . ^ South African Reserve Bank Annual Report 2024/25 (Report). South African Reserve Bank. 30 June 2025. ^ "SA has the 6th highest number of shopping malls in the world" . Retrieved 20 July 2025 . ^ Africa, FASA Franchise Association South (16 October 2018). "Survey shows SA has the sixth most shopping centre space in the world" . Franchise Association South Africa . Retrieved 20 July 2025 . ^ Seth Thorne (25 July 2024). "The men behind Nando's – South Africa's global Peri-Peri chicken empire" . BusinessTech . Retrieved 5 April 2026 . ^ "South Africa, Jobless growth – The Economist" .

The Economist . ^ Research, Bonafide (31 May 2026). "South Africa Motion Control Market Overview, 2031" . Bonafide Research . Retrieved 9 July 2026 . ^ "Automotive - BDO" . www.bdo.co.za . Archived from the original on 18 July 2025 . Retrieved 5 November 2025 . ^ "naamsa | Automotive exports surge 19% to new highs" . Retrieved 11 July 2025 . ^ Bhala, Sachin (8 November 2021). "Adcorp - The biggest industrial sectors in South Africa and why employment within these sectors keeps them going" . Adcorp . Retrieved 9 July 2026 . ^ "Critical Minerals and Metals Strategy South Africa 2025" (PDF) . www.gov.za . ^ "Critical Minerals and Metals Strategy South Africa 2025" (PDF) . www.gov.za . ^ "Mineral Resources" (PDF) . www.gcis.gov.za . ^ "USGS Platinum Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 29 April 2021 . ^ "USGS Chromium Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 May 2021 . Retrieved 29 April 2021 . ^ "USGS Manganese Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 June 2021 . Retrieved 29 April 2021 . ^ "USGS Vanadinum Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 April 2021 . Retrieved 29 April 2021 . ^ "USGS Titanium Production Statistics" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 29 April 2021 . ^ "USGS Minerals Information: Mineral Commodity Summaries" . minerals.USGS.gov . Retrieved 4 January 2018 . ^ "World Uranium Mining - World Nuclear Association" . www.world-nuclear.org . Retrieved 8 December 2024 . ^ "Critical Minerals and Metals Strategy South Africa 2025" (PDF) . www.gov.za . ^ "The South African mining sector - Wits University" . www.wits.ac.za . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ "The South African mining sector - Wits University" . www.wits.ac.za . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ "Trade-Probe-Issue-85" (PDF) . www.namc.co.za . ^ "Research | University Of Pretoria" . www.up.ac.za . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ "Agro-Processing Industry" . South African Embassy to the Kingdom of the Netherlands . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ Prowse, Wayne. "Analysis: Range of fruit drives South Africa's export growth" . Fruitnet . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ "Research | University Of Pretoria" . www.up.ac.za . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ "SA agriculture in an uncertain global trade environment - SA Grain" . 2 July 2025 . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ Ashiru, Grace (27 April 2025). "Cape Town: Africa's Tech Hub on the Rise" . Tech In Africa . Retrieved 9 July 2026 . ^ "3,5 million travellers to South Africa" . www.statssa.gov.za . 25 October 2017 . Retrieved 15 January 2026 . ^ Mthobisi Nozulela (14 May 2025). "Government plan aims to boost South Africa's tourism employment to 2. 5 million by 2029" . MSN . Retrieved 14 May 2025 . ^ "Travel & Tourism Economic Impact 2013 South Africa" (PDF) . WTTC. March 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2014 . Retrieved 20 November 2013 . ^ Sibuliso Duba (25 July 2025). "SA ranked fourth-best country in the world as tourism flourishes" . CapeTown ETC . Retrieved 27 July 2025 . ^ "Tourism" (PDF) . www.statssa.gov.za . ^ "GII Innovation Ecosystems & Data Explorer 2025" . WIPO . Retrieved 16 October 2025 . ^ Dutta, Soumitra; Lanvin, Bruno (2025). Global Innovation Index 2025: Innovation at a Crossroads . World Intellectual Property Organization . p. 19. doi : 10.34667/tind.58864 . ISBN 978-92-805-3797-0 . Retrieved 17 October 2025 . ^ "About Thawte - SSL and Code Signing Certificates from Thawte, Inc" . www.thawte.com . Retrieved 11 May 2024 . ^ "SKA announces Founding Board and selects Jodrell Bank Observatory to host Project Office" . SKA 2011. 2 April 2011. Archived from the original on 29 October 2012 . Retrieved 14 April 2011 . ^ a b FinGlobal (11 June 2020). "South African inventions: What is South Africa famous for?" . FinGlobal . Retrieved 13 August 2025 . ^ "A history of helmet mounted displays | Request PDF" . ResearchGate . Archived from the original on 8 November 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2025 . ^ defenceWeb (20 September 2021). "Passion for military aviation leads to flight gear collection - DefenceWeb" . Retrieved 9 July 2026 . ^ "SANRAL" . www.nra.co.za . Archived from the original on 15 September 2018 . Retrieved 5 July 2025 . ^ "Roads – The Department of Transport" . Retrieved 5 July 2025 . ^ "South Africa – Rail Infrastructure" . www.trade.gov . Archived from the original on 7 March 2023 . Retrieved 6 March 2023 . ^ "South Africa Transnet Freight Rail" . www.trade.gov . 5 April 2022. Archived from the original on 7 March 2023 . Retrieved 7 March 2023 . ^ "High-speed trains for South Africa are coming: Ramaphosa" . Retrieved 24 July 2025 . ^ "Department of Transport: National Airports Development Plan: NADP March 2024" (PDF) . www.gov.za . ^ Theafricalogistics (8 July 2019). "Top 10 largest airports in Africa" .

The Africa Logistics . Archived from the original on 2 April 2023 . Retrieved 2 April 2023 . ^ Yadav, Lalit (2 December 2021). "These 7 Awesome Airports In South Africa Are Making Travel Easy" . Archived from the original on 2 April 2023 . Retrieved 2 April 2023 . ^ Agbetiloye, Adekunle (26 March 2024). "10 African countries with the highest number of aircraft in 2024" . Business Insider Africa . Retrieved 5 July 2025 . ^ Polito, Sebastián (29 May 2025). "South African Airways rebuilding its wide body fleet" . Flightradar24 Blog . Retrieved 5 July 2025 . ^ "The bottleneck" .

The Economist . ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 24 July 2025 . ^ "Port of Richards Bay, South Africa" . www.findaport.com . Retrieved 24 July 2025 . ^ "Transnet - Port of Cape Town" (PDF) . Transnet . ^ "100 Years – Eskom Heritage" . www.eskom.co.za . 11 November 2022. Archived from the original on 23 April 2023 . Retrieved 22 April 2023 . ^ Sguazzin, Antony; Naidoo, Prinesha; Burkhardt, Paul. "Eskom turns 100 next year – here's how it went from world best to SA's biggest economic risk" . Business . Archived from the original on 23 April 2023 . Retrieved 22 April 2023 . ^ "Coal fired power stations – Eskom" . www.eskom.co.za . 16 February 2021. Archived from the original on 27 January 2023 . Retrieved 23 April 2023 . ^ Prater, Tom (15 October 2018). "The Carbon Brief Profile: South Africa" . Carbon Brief . Retrieved 14 December 2025 . ^ Labuschagne, Hanno. "18 years and R467 billion later — Most expensive mistakes in the history of Eskom" . Retrieved 14 December 2025 . ^ Vermeulen, Jan. "Most expensive coal power station ever built in the history of mankind" . Retrieved 14 December 2025 . ^ "Coal fired power stations - Eskom" . www.eskom.co.za . 16 February 2021 . Retrieved 14 December 2025 . ^ "Peaking power stations - Eskom" . www.eskom.co.za . 16 February 2021 . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ "Open Infrastructure Map" . openinframap.org . Retrieved 19 August 2025 . ^ "How eskom & the government can put an end to loadshedding in south africa" . Greenpeace Africa . 4 December 2025 . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ "Eskom load shedding" . loadshedding.eskom.co.za . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ "Top executive linked to acts of sabotage at Eskom: report" . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ Diemen, Ethan van (4 March 2023). "Eskom sabotage: how cartels plunge South Africa into darkness" . Daily Maverick . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ Eyaaz (18 December 2022). "Army deployed to Eskom power plants amid security threats" .

The Mail & Guardian . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ "Eskom's ongoing collaboration with law enforcement leads to six arrests for procurement fraud - Eskom" . 15 March 2025 . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ "Loadshedding continues to be suspended: R17.25 billion in year-on-year diesel savings achieved - Eskom" . 21 February 2025 . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ "South Africa load-shedding: How Eskom has kept the lights on" . www.bbc.com . 6 August 2024 . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ "Electricity Regulation Act: Integrated Resource Plan 2025" (PDF) . www.gov.za . ^ "IRP-2025" (PDF) . Department of Mineral Resources . ^ "South African government approves draft 2025 IRP" . World Nuclear News . 22 October 2025 . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ Moyo, Admire (31 October 2025). "SA readies 117GW of renewable energy projects" . ITWeb . Retrieved 15 December 2025 . ^ a b WHO / UNICEF : Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation : Data table South Africa Archived 9 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine , 2010. Retrieved 3 November 2012 ^ "Professor Says Cape Town Crisis Should Serve as a 'Wakeup Call to All Major U.S. Cities' " . www.newswise.com . Archived from the original on 14 June 2018 . Retrieved 14 June 2018 . ^ a b Hewitson, Bruce (19 October 2017). Patel, Ozayr (ed.). "Why Cape Town's drought was so hard to forecast" . doi : 10.64628/AAJ.vfseu9yet . Archived from the original on 11 July 2018 . Retrieved 11 July 2018 . ^ "The 11 cities most likely to run out of drinking water – like Cape Town" Archived 13 February 2018 at the Wayback Machine 11 February 2018. BBC News. ^ In drought-hit South Africa, the politics of water Archived 22 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine , Reuters, 25 January 2018 ^ Cape Town May Dry Up Because of an Aversion to Israel Archived 14 December 2021 at the Wayback Machine , Wall St. Journal, 21 February 2018 ^ The Cape Town Water Crisis and Hating Israel Archived 14 December 2021 at the Wayback Machine , aish, 11 February 2018 ^ South African stupidity Archived 14 December 2021 at the Wayback Machine , Jerusalem Post, 3 February 2018 ^ a b "Telecommunications Infrastructure in South Africa" . ICA . Retrieved 15 July 2025 . ^ "All the undersea cables connecting South Africa to the rest of the world" . Retrieved 15 July 2025 . ^ "MTN Group Limited" (PDF) . MTN Group Limited . ^ "The 5 African Countries That Have Launched 5G Services So Far" . itnewsafrica.com . 25 May 2022. ^ "Vodacom launches Africa's first live 5G network which supports both mobile and fixed wireless services | Vodacom Group" . www.vodacom.com . Retrieved 15 July 2025 . ^ Odendaal, Natasha. "South Africa's telecommunications growth boosted by fibre, expanding network coverage" . Engineering News . Retrieved 15 July 2025 . ^ "Elon Musk's Starlink faces fresh roadblock in South Africa amid tech sovereignty dispute" . Business Insider Africa . 12 July 2025 . Retrieved 15 July 2025 . ^ "World Population Prospects – Population Division – United Nations" . population.un.org . Archived from the original on 17 June 2020. ^ "Anti-immigrant violence spreads in South Africa, with attacks reported in Cape Town – The New York Times" . International Herald Tribune . 23 May 2008. Archived from the original on 21 February 2009 . Retrieved 30 October 2011 . ^ "Escape From Mugabe: Zimbabwe's Exodus" . Archived from the original on 24 January 2016. ^ "More illegals set to flood SA" . Fin24. Archived from the original on 14 February 2009 . Retrieved 30 October 2011 . ^ "South African mob kills migrants" . BBC. 12 May 2008. Archived from the original on 13 March 2017 . Retrieved 19 May 2008 . ^ Bearak, Barry (23 May 2008). "Immigrants Fleeing Fury of South African Mobs" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 1 May 2011 . Retrieved 5 August 2008 . ^ Lehohla, Pali (5 May 2005). "Debate over race and censuses not peculiar to SA" . Business Report . Archived from the original on 14 August 2007 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 . Others pointed out that the repeal of the Population Registration Act in 1991 removed any legal basis for specifying 'race'.

The Identification Act of 1997 makes no mention of race.

On the other hand, the Employment Equity Act speaks of 'designated groups' being 'black people, women and people with disabilities'.

The Act defines 'black' as referring to 'Africans, coloureds and Indians'. Apartheid and the racial identification which underpinned it explicitly linked race with differential access to resources and power. If the post-apartheid order was committed to remedying this, race would have to be included in surveys and censuses, so that progress in eradicating the consequences of apartheid could be measured and monitored. This was the reasoning that led to a 'self-identifying' question about 'race' or 'population group' in both the 1996 and 2001 population censuses, and in Statistics SA's household survey programme. ^ Study Commission on U.S. Policy toward Southern Africa (U.S.) (1981). South Africa: time running out: the report of the Study Commission on U.S. Policy Toward Southern Africa . University of California Press. p. 42. ISBN 978-0-520-04547-7 . Archived from the original on 24 January 2016 . Retrieved 14 October 2015 . ^ a b c "World Refugee Survey 2008" . U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants. 19 June 2008. Archived from the original on 19 October 2014. ^ "South African Cities And Provinces – A Complete List" . dirkstrauss.com . 27 December 2018. Archived from the original on 7 May 2021 . Retrieved 26 April 2021 . ^ "Community Survey 2016: Provinces at a Glance" (PDF) . Statistics South Africa . Retrieved 29 April 2019 . ^ United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2018). "World Urbanization Prospects: The 2018 Revision, Online Edition" . Retrieved 28 April 2019 . ^ "Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 – Chapter 1: Founding Provisions | South African Government" . www.gov.za . Archived from the original on 18 May 2019 . Retrieved 26 July 2020 . ^ "South Africa's languages" . 6 November 2007. Archived from the original on 26 June 2019 . Retrieved 21 February 2020 . ^ Staff Writer. "These are the most-spoken languages in South Africa in 2019" . businesstech.co.za . Archived from the original on 21 February 2020 . Retrieved 21 February 2020 . ^ "The languages of South Africa" . SouthAfrica.info. 4 February 1997. Archived from the original on 4 March 2011 . Retrieved 7 November 2010 . ^ "South Africa" .

The World Factbook . CIA. Archived from the original on 10 January 2021 . Retrieved 23 January 2021 . ^ "South Africa – Section I. Religious Demography" . U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 14 June 2020 . Retrieved 15 July 2006 . ^ "South Africa" . United States Department of State . Archived from the original on 7 December 2023 . Retrieved 7 December 2023 . ^ Bentley, Wessel; Dion Angus Forster (2008). "God's mission in our context, healing and transforming responses". Methodism in Southern Africa: A Celebration of Wesleyan Mission . AcadSA. pp. 97– 98. ISBN 978-1-920212-29-2 . ^ van Wyk, Ben-Erik; van Oudtshoorn, Gericke N (1999). Medicinal Plants of South Africa . Pretoria: Briza Publications. p. 10. ISBN 978-1-875093-37-3 . ^ "South Africa" . State.gov. 15 September 2006. Archived from the original on 14 June 2020 . Retrieved 30 October 2011 . ^ a b "In South Africa, many blacks convert to Islam / The Christian Science Monitor" .

The Christian Science Monitor . 10 January 2002. Archived from the original on 30 July 2013 . Retrieved 30 October 2011 . ^ "Muslims say their faith growing fast in Africa" . Religionnewsblog.com. 15 November 2004. Archived from the original on 1 October 2010 . Retrieved 7 November 2010 . ^ SA Jewish history Archived 18 December 2023 at the Wayback Machine South African Jewish Board of Deputies ^ Umamah Bakharia (29 April 2025). "South Africa has second highest rate of literate adults in Africa" . Mail & Guardian . Retrieved 1 May 2025 . ^ a b "A parent's guide to schooling" . Archived from the original on 22 July 2010 . Retrieved 31 August 2010 . ^ "Education in South Africa" . SouthAfrica.info. Archived from the original on 17 June 2010 . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ "TVET Colleges of South Africa" . nationalgovernment.co.za . Retrieved 9 January 2025 . ^ "FET Colleges" . www.education.gov.za . Retrieved 9 January 2025 . ^ Staff Reporter (1 February 2019). "Exploring FETs and TVETs as viable alternatives" .

The Mail & Guardian . Retrieved 9 January 2025 . ^ "Bantu Education" . Overcoming Apartheid. Archived from the original on 15 August 2020 . Retrieved 20 June 2010 . ^ Cele, S'thembile; Masondo, Sipho (18 January 2015). "Shocking cost of SA's universities" . fin24.com. City Press. Archived from the original on 19 January 2015 . Retrieved 19 January 2015 . ^ "Peoples Budget Coalition Comments on the 2011/12 Budget" . Archived from the original on 16 May 2012. ^ a b " 'Clinic-in-a-Box' seeks to improve South African healthcare" . SmartPlanet. Archived from the original on 30 July 2013 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 . ^ "South Africa" . ICAP at Columbia University. Archived from the original on 13 July 2013 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 . ^ a b c "Motsoaledi to reform private health care" . Financial Mail. Archived from the original on 7 July 2013 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 . ^ "What does the demand for healthcare look like in SA?" (PDF) . Mediclinic Southern Africa. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 October 2013 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 . ^ "National Health Insurance Bill" (PDF) . www.gov.za . ^ "HIV and AIDS estimates (2015)" . Archived from the original on 12 February 2015 . Retrieved 21 December 2014 . ^ "South Africa" . www.unaids.org . Archived from the original on 28 August 2019 . Retrieved 9 November 2019 . ^ "South Africa HIV & AIDS Statistics" . AVERT.org. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015 . Retrieved 6 May 2013 . ^ a b "AIDS orphans" . Avert. Archived from the original on 7 July 2010 . Retrieved 8 October 2006 . ^ "Sack SA Health Minister – world's AIDS experts" . afrol News. Archived from the original on 18 October 2006 . Retrieved 8 October 2006 . ^ "Situation Analysis. HIV & AIDS and STI Strategic Plan 2007–2011" (PDF) . info.gov.za. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 May 2013 . Retrieved 26 June 2013 . ^ "Zuma announces AIDS reforms" . UNPAN. Archived from the original on 27 December 2015 . Retrieved 9 March 2010 . ^ Mullick, Saiqa (December 2015). Bailey, Candice (ed.). "South Africa has excelled in treating HIV – prevention remains a disaster" . doi : 10.64628/AAJ.vygkpxsep . Archived from the original on 12 July 2018 . Retrieved 12 July 2018 . ^ "Black middle class explodes" . FIN24. 22 May 2007. Archived from the original on 22 August 2007. ^ "South Africa Black Middle-Class Demographic Study 2023" . Yahoo Finance . 4 May 2023 . Retrieved 5 November 2023 . ^ Radford, Tim (16 April 2004). "World's Oldest Jewellery Found in Cave" .

The Guardian . London. Archived from the original on 12 February 2021 . Retrieved 16 April 2011 . ^ "TV – DTT (Digital Terrestrial Television) | Sentech" . www.sentech.co.za . 21 June 2024 . Retrieved 15 July 2025 . ^ "South African music after Apartheid: kwaito, the "party politic," and the appropriation of gold as a sign of success" . Archived from the original on 13 June 2013. ^ Kwatsha, Linda (26 September 2012). " "South African literature is not South African English literature": Linda Kwatsha reviews The Cambridge History of South African Literature - LitNet" . LitNet - Die boekehuis met baie wonings . Retrieved 6 May 2026 . ^ Attwell, David; Attridge, Derek, eds. (2012).