The vehicle consists of two stages: the Super Heavy booster and the Starship spacecraft , both powered by Raptor engines burning liquid methane (the main component of natural gas ) and liquid oxygen . Both stages are intended to return to the launch site and land vertically at the launch tower for potential reuse. Once in space, the Starship upper stage is intended to function as a standalone spacecraft capable of carrying crew and cargo . Missions beyond low Earth orbit would require multiple in-orbit refueling flights.

At the end of its mission, Starship reenters the atmosphere using heat shield tiles similar to those of the Space Shuttle . SpaceX states that its goal is to reduce launch costs by reusing and mass producing both stages. SpaceX initially expressed ambitions to use Starship for crewed missions to Mars , but the plan was revised to prioritize returning humans to the Moon . SpaceX has also proposed a wide range of missions for Starship, such as deploying large satellites, space station modules, and space telescopes . A crewed variant, the Starship Human Landing System , is being developed under a contract with NASA as part of the Artemis program , with a docking test as part of Artemis III , currently scheduled for 2027, and a crewed lunar landing scheduled for 2028. SpaceX began developing concepts for a super heavy-lift reusable launch vehicle as early as 2005. Starship's current design and name were introduced in 2018. Development has followed an iterative and incremental approach, involving a high number of prototype vehicles and test flights.

The first full Starship rocket was launched April 20, 2023, exploding four minutes after liftoff.

The program has failed to meet many of its optimistic schedule goals, with several setbacks in development, including the failure of the first four Block 2 upper stages in 2025. Description When stacked and fully fueled, Starship has a mass of approximately 5,300 t (11,700,000 lb), a diameter of 9 m (30 ft) and a height of 121.3 m (398 ft).

The rocket has been designed with the goal of being fully reusable to reduce launch costs; it consists of the Super Heavy booster and the Starship upper stage which are powered by Raptor (RSL) and Raptor Vacuum (RVac) engines .

The bodies of both rocket stages are made from stainless steel and are manufactured by stacking and welding stainless steel cylinders. These cylinders have a height of 1.83 m (6 ft), and a thickness of 3.97 mm (0.156 in). Domes inside the spacecraft separate the methane and oxygen tanks. SpaceX has stated that Starship, in its "baseline reusable design", will have a payload capacity of 100–150 t (220,000–331,000 lb) to low Earth orbit and 27 t (60,000 lb) to geostationary transfer orbit . Super Heavy booster Main article: SpaceX Super Heavy Super Heavy was initially 71 m (233 ft) tall (in its Block 1 and Block 2 design, now retired), while Block 3 Super Heavy is 72.3 meters tall. It is 9 m (30 ft) wide, and is composed of four general sections, in ascending order: the engines, the liquid oxygen tank, the liquid methane tank, and the interstage. Tanks The two cryogenic propellant tanks on Super Heavy are separated by a common bulkhead, a similar structural design to the S-II and S-IVB stages on the Saturn V rocket.

After Starship's second flight test , the common dome's design was changed to be more elliptical, altering the propellant capacity of both tanks by a small amount. Each tank possesses roughly 74 stringers for structural reinforcement, attached to their interior walls.

The booster's two tanks hold a combined 3,400 t (7,500,000 lb) of propellant: 2,700 t (6,000,000 lb) of liquid oxygen and 700 t (1,500,000 lb) of liquid methane. Fuel is fed to the engines via a single liquid downcomer, and channeled into distribution manifolds of the engines. This system was upgraded on Block 3 boosters, featuring a substantially larger transfer tube connecting the engines and the methane tank. Block 1 booster's have a single booster quick disconnect, along with multiple quick disconnects for the outer engines, while Block 3 boosters have two quick disconnects. One disconnect feeds liquid oxygen into the vehicle, the other feeds liquid methane.

The oxygen tank ends at the thrust puck of the vehicle.

While the outer twenty engines are mounted on a ring attached to the first steel ring, the inner thirteen are mounted onto the thrust puck, a part of the aft dome. Large steel structures are attached to the bottom of the dome, reinforcing the puck sufficiently to fully support the inner thirteen engines, and at the same time providing pathways for methane and oxygen into the engines.

In addition, large filters were added in this region beginning on Booster 10. Liquid oxygen is supplied by a header tank during landing burn for the inner thirteen engines.

On Booster 15, the header tank had at least nine additional tanks attached, increasing capacity for the landing burn.

The added tanks may have been present on Boosters 12, 13, and 14, though this was unconfirmed as of February 2025. Booster 5 was the only 29-engine booster to receive a header tank, mounted to the side of the oxygen tank instead of being integrated with the thrust puck.

The methane funnel is partially contained within the header tank, as the methane sump is directly below it.

On Booster 7 and all subsequent vehicles, four aerodynamic chines are located on the outside of the oxygen tank, providing aerodynamic lift during descent, as well as housing batteries, composite overwrapped pressure vessels (COPVs) for spin start, and CO 2 tanks for fire suppression .

On vehicles with hydraulic power units (HPUs), COPVs dedicated to engine ignition, batteries, and communication antennae were located within the HPU cover instead of the chines. Propulsion Super Heavy is powered by 33 Raptor engines, which on Block 1 vehicles are housed within a dedicated shielding compartment. SpaceX upgraded the engines for their first Starship flight of 2026 from the Raptor 2 variant to the Raptor 3 variant. This compartment is not present before engine installation, thus boosters are roughly three meters shorter prior to engine installation.

The outer 20 engines, arranged in a ring, are fixed in place. To save weight, the 20 outer Raptor 2 engines are started using ground support equipment on the launch mount and cannot be reignited for subsequent burns.

The outer 20 Raptor 3's are able to relight, meaning all Raptor 3 engines can relight. For Raptor 2, the inner thirteen engines are equipped with gimbal actuators and reignite for the boostback and landing burns.

On Raptor 3, all engines relight for boostback.

After Starship's first flight test , this gimbaling system was switched from a hydraulic system to an electric one, enabling the removal of the hydraulic power units. This change was made to the upper stage after the second flight test .

During the ascent and boostback burns, the engines draw propellant from the main tanks, with the liquid oxygen being drawn from a dedicated header tank during the landing burn. Like the thrust vector control system, the engine shielding, which isolates individual engines in the event of a failure, was upgraded after Starship's first flight test, alongside the fire suppression system .

The aft bay has eighteen vents visible on the outside of the booster, which are believed to be connected to the outer 20 engines, while the center engines vent directly below the launch pad.

The Raptor engine uses a full-flow staged combustion cycle with oxygen and methane-rich turbopumps.

Before 2014, only two full-flow staged-combustion rocket engine designs had advanced enough to undergo testing: the Soviet RD-270 project in the 1960s and the Aerojet Rocketdyne Integrated Powerhead Demonstrator in the mid-2000s. To improve performance, the engines burn subcooled propellant; i.e. the propellants are cooled below their respective boiling points to further increase their density and the engine mass flow rates.

The Block 1 version of the booster (used through November 2024) produced a total of 73.5 MN (16,500,000 lb f ) just over twice that of the NASA Saturn V first stage , with this total being expected to increase to 80.8 MN (18,200,000 lb f ) for Block 3 boosters and later up to 98.1 MN (22,100,000 lb f ) with the Block 4 vehicle.

The thirty three engines collectively produce large shock diamonds in the exhaust jet, visible during ascent and descent.

During unpowered flight in the upper atmosphere, control authority is provided by cold gas thrusters fed with residual ullage gas . Four perpendicular vents are located within the interstage. Additional vents are located just below the common dome, pointing down toward the engines at a slight angle.

The Block 3 booster contains an updated aft dome, with metallic heat shield tiles mounted upon it. Interstage The interstage is equipped with four electrically actuated grid fins made of stainless steel, each with a mass of roughly 3 t (6,600 lb).

The fins remain extended during ascent to save weight, though this results in mild warping during stage separation.

The interstage also has protruding hardpoints , located between grid fins, allowing the booster to be lifted or caught by the launch tower, nicknamed "Mechazilla".

The ability to lift a booster from these hardpoints was proven on August 23, 2022, when Booster 7 was lifted onto OLM A.

The first catch of a booster occurred on October 13, 2024, using Booster 12. Animation of Super Heavy's integration to the launch mount, using mechanical arms After the first Starship test flight , all boosters have an additional 1.8 m tall vented interstage to enable hot staging .

During hot staging, Super Heavy shuts down all but the three center engines, while the second stage fires its engines before separating, thus the second stage "pushes off" from the first stage, giving added thrust.

The vented interstage contains a dome to shield the top of Super Heavy from the second stage's exhaust. Elon Musk in 2023 claimed that this change might result in a 10% increase in the payload to low Earth orbit . Beginning with Booster 11, the vented interstage is jettisoned after completion of the boostback burn, to reduce mass during descent.

As of December 2025, SpaceX does not intend to jettison the interstage when flying Block 3 boosters, as the vented section will be directly integrated into the vehicle.

On Block 3 boosters, the interstage is directly integrated into the methane tank, and the number of grid fins is reduced from four to three, in a 90/90/180 degree arrangement. These grid fins are roughly one and a half times the size of the Block 1 and 2 grid fins, and are positioned lower on the vehicle. According to SpaceX, the repositioning reduces the heat experienced during stage separation. Additionally, the fins are integrated with the catch pins.

The grids in the fin without an opposite are slightly angled to offset the asymmetry . Starship spacecraft Main article: SpaceX Starship (spacecraft) Diagram of a Block 1 Starship's internal structure. Not shown in this diagram are the flaps: the aft flaps are placed at the bottom (or left in this orientation), and the forward flaps are placed at the top (here, right) portion of the vehicle.

The Block 2 version of Starship is 52.1 m (171 ft) tall, 9 m (30 ft) wide, and is composed of four general sections: the engine bay, the oxygen tank, the fuel tank, and the payload bay.

The retired Block 1 was constructed in a similar manner, though it was only 50.3 m (165 ft) tall. Elon Musk stated in 2021 that the vehicle has a dry mass of roughly 100 t (220,000 lb).

The windward side is protected by a heat shield , which is composed of eighteen thousand hexagonal black tiles that can withstand temperatures of 1,400 °C (2,600 °F). It is designed to protect the vehicle during atmospheric entry and to be used multiple times with minimal maintenance between flights.

The silica -based tiles are attached to Starship with pins, and had small gaps in between to allow for heat expansion .

After flight test 4 , SpaceX added a secondary ablative layer under the primary heat shield, though this was only added to the flaps of the flight test 6 vehicle. This ablative layer is likely composed of pyron, which is similar in composition to carbon composites .

The total mass of the heat shield and ablative layer of a Block 1 ship is 10.5 t (23,000 lb).

After flight test 10 , SpaceX added a felt, called "crunch wrap," between the gaps in between the tiles to prevent heat seeping in. Tanks The propellant tanks on Starship are separated by a common bulkhead, similar to the ones used on the S-II and S-IVB stages on the Saturn V rocket.

While Block 2 vehicles use an elliptical dome, the common and forward domes of the Block 1 design were more conical. Block 1 vehicles only had 24 stringers within the oxygen tank, while Block 2 vehicles had these added to the methane tanks.

The vehicle's tanks hold 1,500 t (3,300,000 lb) of propellant, consisting of 1,170 t (2,580,000 lb) of liquid oxygen and 330 t (730,000 lb) of liquid methane. Fuel is fed to the engines via four downcomers, with three smaller downcomers feeding the Vacuum Raptors/RVacs and the central downcomer feeding the inner three engines.

The central downcomer connects to a large sump, instead of directly to the methane tank itself.

The original design only featured a single downcomer.

The liquid oxygen (LOX) downcomer extends into the LOX tank, with a small expanded portion of unknown purpose. Two additional downcomers route methane and oxygen from the header tanks. A camera is located on the walls of the tank, pointed towards the payload bay.

The oxygen tank terminates with the thrust structure of the vehicle.

The RVacs are mounted directly to the aft dome, which has reinforcements mounted inside of the tank.

The three sea level engines are mounted on the thrust puck, which forms the bottom of the aft dome. A conical steel structure is mounted inside the bottom of the dome, reinforcing the thrust puck enough to enable its support of the inner three engines.

The propellant lines on the vehicles are all vacuum jacketed , reducing boiloff while in orbit. Propulsion Starship is powered by six Raptor engines, which are housed within a dedicated shielding compartment. Blocks 1 through 3 feature three sea-level engines, as well as three engines optimized for operation in the vacuum of space, called RVacs. Block 4 ships are expected to feature three additional RVacs.

The sea-level engines are equipped with gimbal actuators , and reignite for the landing burns.

After Starship's second flight test , this gimbaling system was switched from a hydraulic system to an electric one, enabling the removal of the hydraulic power units. This change was made to the booster after the first flight test . There are four engine chill lines onboard the vehicle, though two of these lines may serve another purpose. Each engine is protected by a dedicated shielding compartment. Beginning with S25, the Block 1 design had between 14 and 16 such vents. Additional vents were added after flight 7.

The fire suppression system , which uses gaseous nitrogen to purge the engine bay during flight, was upgraded after flight 7. A similar system on the booster uses carbon dioxide to purge the individual engine compartments during flight and static fires.

The Raptor engine uses a full-flow staged combustion cycle, which has both oxygen and methane-rich turbopumps.

Before 2014, only two full-flow staged-combustion rocket engine designs had advanced enough to undergo testing: the Soviet RD-270 project in the 1960s and the Aerojet Rocketdyne Integrated Powerhead Demonstrator in the mid-2000s. To improve performance, the engines burn supercooled propellant.

The Block 1 version of the ship (used through November 2024) produces a total of 12.25 MN (2,750,000 lb f ) almost triple the thrust of the Saturn V second stage , with this being expected to increase to 15.69 MN (3,530,000 lb f ) for Block 2 boosters and later up to 26.48 MN (5,950,000 lb f ) with the Block 3 vehicle.

During unpowered flight in orbit, control authority is provided by cold gas thrusters fed with residual ullage gas . Four such thrusters are located just below the payload bay, and two on the oxygen tank. Near the top of the nosecone, there are two vents connected to the header tanks. Additional vents were added at the base of the vehicle after flight two. Payload bay The payload bay hosts the nosecone, header tanks, forward flaps, multiple COPVs, and the " PEZ dispenser".

The header tanks are mounted at the tip of the payload bay.

The LOX header tank forms the top of the nosecone, with the methane header tank attached directly below it. These tanks terminate in a conical sump, which are attached to the downcomers. Several COPVs are mounted in the space around the methane header tank, providing the startup gas for the engines, with twelve additional COPVs within the base of the payload bay.

The nosecone has substantial internal reinforcement, mainly around the forward flap attachment points and lifting points for the chopsticks.

The number of internal stringers was increased between Block 1 and Block 2 vehicles. Additional reinforcements are used to support the PEZ dispenser on ships equipped with one. Four Starlink antennas are located within the nosecone.

The PEZ dispenser is used to deploy Starlink satellites into LEO. It was first added to S24, though it was permanently sealed until flight 3 . It consists of the dispenser mechanism and the door.

The door opens by folding into the payload bay.

The dispenser itself is mounted directly to the forward dome. It has a truss structure for its base, with solid steel used elsewhere. A mobile track is used in the base, enabling the dispenser to push the satellite out of the vehicle.

After dispensing a satellite, the next payload is lowered onto the base, and is deployed.

The opposite occurs during loading, with the dispenser raising its payloads to receive another satellite.

In order to prevent the satellite from floating out of the mechanism during zero-g operations, the dispenser locks the satellites in position using a "retention frame". This is lowered alongside the satellites during operation. Flaps Forward flap on a suborbital Starship prototype Starship controls its reentry with four flaps, two aft flaps mounted to the sides of the engine bay and LOX tank and two forward flaps on the payload bay. Substantial reinforcements are present in the nosecone for the support of the forward flaps. According to SpaceX, the flaps replace the need for wings or tailplane , reduce the fuel needed for landing, and allow landing at destinations in the Solar System where runways do not exist (for example, Mars).

The flap's hinges are sealed in aerocovers because they would otherwise be easily damaged during reentry. Static wicks are present on the flaps, aiding in the discharge of static electricity. Despite this, damage to the forward flaps was observed on flights four , five , and six , with near complete loss occurring on flight 4. Beginning with Block 2, the design of these forward flaps was significantly changed, moving leeward and becoming thinner and angled. This sets them at an approximately 140-degree angle, compared to the 180-degree angle of the aft flaps and previous version of the forward flaps. This change was made to prevent the static aero from creating a tendency for the Ship to pitch up, even when the forward flaps were stowed, and also reduces the heating on the static aero and forward flaps observed on the last three flights of the Block 1 ship. Both sets of flaps feature cameras in their hinges. Raptor engine Main article: SpaceX Raptor Sea level-optimized Raptor 1 engine, May 2020 Raptor is a family of rocket engines developed by SpaceX for use in Starship and Super Heavy vehicles. It burns liquid oxygen and methane in an efficient and complex full-flow staged combustion power cycle.

The Raptor engine uses methane as fuel rather than kerosene because methane gives higher performance and prevents the build-up of deposits in the engine from coking . Methane can also be produced from carbon dioxide and hydrogen using the Sabatier reaction .

The engines are designed to be reused many times with little maintenance. Raptor operates with an oxygen-to-methane mixture ratio of about 3.6:1 , lower than the stoichiometric mixture ratio of 4:1 necessary for complete combustion, since operating at higher temperatures would melt the engine.

The propellants leave the pre-burners and get injected into the main combustion chamber as hot gases instead of liquid droplets, enabling a higher power density as the propellants mix rapidly via diffusion .

The methane and oxygen are at high enough temperatures and pressures that they ignite on contact , eliminating the need for igniters in the main combustion chamber.

The engine structure itself is mostly aluminum, copper, and steel; oxidizer-side turbopumps and manifolds subject to corrosive oxygen-rich flames are made of an Inconel -like SX500 superalloy . Some components are 3D printed . A Raptor 2 engine produces 2.3 MN (520,000 lbf) at a specific impulse of 327 seconds (3.21 km/s) at sea level and 350 seconds (3.4 km/s) in a vacuum. Raptor vacuum , used on the Starship upper stage, is modified with a regeneratively cooled nozzle extension made of brazed steel tubes, increasing its expansion ratio to about 90 and its specific impulse in vacuum to 380 seconds (3.7 km/s).

The main combustion chamber operates at a pressure of 350 bar (5,100 psi) exceeding that of any prior operational rocket engine.

The Raptor's gimbaling range is 15°, higher than the RS-25 's 12.5° and the Merlin's 5°. SpaceX has stated they aim to achieve a per unit production cost of US$250,000 upon starting mass production. Versions The integrated vehicle is 3.1 m (10 ft) taller than the previous Block 1 vehicle and was planned to have a payload capacity of at least 100 tons to orbit when reused (similar to the original design before the Block 2 rework) but was retired before an orbital flight, with the final estimate of 35 t of payload to orbit. Additionally, Block 2 vehicles were planned to use Raptor 3 engines, removing the need for secondary engine shielding. However, the first Block 2 vehicle, S33, received upgraded Raptor 2 engines, with an unknown increase in thrust.

The Block 2 ship and booster first flew on flight test 7. A total of six block 2 vehicles were produced .

After flight test 11 , Block 2 was retired. Block 3 Block 3 ships have an improved tile design, Raptor 3 engines, as well as hardware for refueling operations LEO, such as docking ports and a redesigned quick disconnect.

The switch to Raptor 3 also enables the removal of most of the aft section's shielding. Block 3 boosters have an integrated vented interstage/forward dome, three grid fins instead of the prior four, and use the grid fins as tower catch points, eliminating the need for separate catch point structure. Like with the ship, the Block 3 boosters use Raptor 3 engines, allowing for the removal of the majority of the booster's engine shielding, reducing weight by over a ton per engine. First test flights of Block 3 ships began in 2026. Planned launch and landing profile Super Heavy Booster 12 approaching the tower during Starship flight test 5 on October 13, 2024 Payloads will be integrated into Starship at a separate facility and then rolled out to the launch site . Super Heavy and Starship are then to be stacked onto their launch mount and loaded with fuel via the ship quick disconnect (SQD) arm and booster quick disconnect (BQD).

The SQD and BQD retract, all 33 engines of Super Heavy ignite, and the rocket lifts off.

At approximately 159 seconds after launch at an altitude of roughly 64 km (40 mi), Super Heavy cuts off all but three of its center gimbaling rocket engines. : 58 Starship then ignites its engines while still attached to the booster, and separates.

During hot-staging, the booster throttles down its engines.

The booster then rotates, before igniting ten additional engines for a "boostback burn" which stops all forward velocity.

After the boostback burn, the booster's engines shut off with Super Heavy on a trajectory for a controlled descent to the launch site using its grid fins for minor course corrections. Roughly six minutes after launch, shortly before landing, it ignites its inner 13 engines, then shuts off all but the inner 3, to perform a landing burn which slows it sufficiently to be caught by a pair of electric actuating arms attached to the launch tower.

The booster landing and catch was successfully demonstrated for the first time on October 13, 2024, with the landing of Booster 12. Meanwhile, the Starship spacecraft continues accelerating to orbital velocity with its six Raptor engines. Once in orbit, the spacecraft is planned to be able to be refueled by another Starship tanker variant. Musk has estimated that 8 launches would be needed to refuel a Starship in low Earth orbit completely. NASA has estimated that 16 launches in short succession (due to cryogenic propellant boil-off) would be needed to refuel Starship for one lunar landing partially. To land on bodies without an atmosphere, such as the Moon, Starship will fire its engines to slow down. To land on bodies with an atmosphere, such as the Earth and Mars, Starship first slows by entering the atmosphere using a heat shield .

The spacecraft would then perform a "belly-flop" maneuver by diving through the atmosphere at a 60° angle to the ground, controlling its fall using four flaps at the front and aft of the spacecraft. Shortly before landing, the Raptor engines fire, using fuel from the header tanks, to perform a "landing flip" maneuver to return to a vertical orientation, with the Raptor engines' gimbaling helping to maneuver the craft.

The HLS and depot cannot reenter the atmosphere, as they lack a thermal protection system , flaps, and other necessary catch hardware. If Starship's second stage lands on a pad, a mobile hydraulic lift will move it to a transporter vehicle. If it lands on a floating platform , it will be transported by a barge to a port and then transported by road.

The recovered Starship will either be positioned on the launch mount for another launch or refurbished at a SpaceX facility . : 22 Development Early design concepts (2012–2019) Main article: SpaceX Starship design history SpaceX CEO Elon Musk holding a model of BFR (Prior name of upper stage of Starship vehicle) In November 2005, before SpaceX had launched its first rocket the Falcon 1 , CEO Elon Musk first mentioned a high-capacity rocket concept able to launch 100 t (220,000 lb) to low Earth orbit , dubbed the BFR .

Later in 2012, Elon Musk first publicly announced plans to develop a rocket surpassing the capabilities of Space X's existing Falcon 9 . SpaceX called it the Mars Colonial Transporter , as the rocket was to transport humans to Mars and back.

In 2016, the descriptor was changed to Interplanetary Transport System , as the rocket was planned to travel beyond Mars as well.

The conceptual design called for a carbon fiber structure, a mass in excess of 10,000 t (22,000,000 lb) when fully fueled, a payload of 300 t (660,000 lb) to low Earth orbit while being fully reusable.

By 2017, the concept was again re-dubbed the BFR .

In December 2018, the structural material was changed from carbon composites to stainless steel, marking the transition from early design concepts of the Starship. Musk cited numerous reasons for the change of material; low cost and ease of manufacture, increased strength of stainless steel at cryogenic temperatures , as well as its ability to withstand high heat.

In 2019, SpaceX began to refer to the entire vehicle as Starship, with the second stage also being called Starship , and the booster Super Heavy . They also announced that Starship would use reusable heat-shield tiles similar to those of the Space Shuttle .

The second-stage design had also settled on six Raptor engines by 2019: three optimized for sea-level and three optimized for vacuum .

In 2019, SpaceX announced a change to the second stage's design, reducing the number of aft flaps from three to two to reduce weight.

In June 2020, SpaceX started constructing a launch pad for orbital Starship flights.

The first flight-capable prototype, SN5 , was cylindrical as it had no flaps or nose cone: just one Raptor engine, fuel tanks, and a mass simulator .

On August 5, 2020, SN5 performed a 150 m (500 ft) high flight and successfully landed on a nearby pad.

On September 3, 2020, the similar-looking Starship SN6 repeated the hop; later that month, a Raptor vacuum engine underwent its first full duration firing at McGregor, Texas . SN8 to SN15 Further information: List of Starship vehicles § High-altitude test flights (SN8–SN15) SN8 shortly after taking off, December 2020 SN8 remains after hard landing and subsequent explosion Computer animation depicting a successful high-altitude flight test such as SN10 and SN15 Starship SN8 was the first full-sized upper-stage prototype, though it lacked a heat shield. It underwent four preliminary static fire tests between October and November 2020.

On December 9, 2020, SN8 flew, slowly turning off its three engines one by one, and reached an altitude of 12.5 km (7.8 mi).

After SN8 dove back to the ground, its engines were hampered by low methane header tank pressure during the landing attempt, which led to a hard impact on the landing pad and subsequent explosion of the vehicle. SN7 used 304L stainless steel , which is less brittle and more weldable.

Later vehicles used a proprietary alloy, 30X, whose composition is proprietary that costs slightly over €3.6/kg. Because SpaceX had violated its launch license and ignored warnings of worsening shock wave damage, the Federal Aviation Administration investigated the incident for two months.

During the SN8 launch, SpaceX ignored FAA warnings that the flight profile posed a risk of explosion. FAA space division chief Wayne Monteith said SpaceX's violation was "inconsistent with a strong safety culture", and criticized the company for proceeding with the launch "based on 'impressions' and 'assumptions,' rather than procedural checks and positive affirmations".

On February 2, 2021, Starship SN9 launched to 10 km (6.2 mi) in a flight path similar to SN8.

The prototype crashed upon landing because one engine did not ignite properly. A month later, on March 3, Starship SN10 launched on the same flight path as SN9.

The vehicle landed hard and crushed its landing legs, leaning to one side. A fire was seen at the vehicle's base and it exploded less than ten minutes later, potentially due to a propellant tank rupture.

On March 30, Starship SN11 flew into thick fog along the same flight path.

The vehicle exploded during descent, possibly due to excess propellant in a Raptor's methane turbopump.

In March 2021, the company disclosed a public construction plan for two sub-orbital launch pads, two orbital launch pads, two landing pads, two test stands, and a large propellant tank farm.

The company soon proposed developing the surrounding Boca Chica Village, Texas , into a company town named Starbase . Locals raised concerns about SpaceX's authority, power, and a potential threat for eviction through eminent domain .

In 2025, it was incorporated as Starbase, Texas .

In early April, the orbital launch pad's fuel storage tanks began mounting. SN12 through SN14 were scrapped before completion; SN15 was selected to fly instead, due to improved avionics , structure, and engines.

In July 2022, Booster 7 tested the liquid oxygen turbopumps on all 33 Raptor engines, resulting in an explosion at the vehicle's base, which destroyed a pressure pipe and caused minor damage to the launchpad.

By the end of November, Ship 24 had performed 2 static test fires, : 20 while Booster 7 had performed 6 static test fires : 20 and finally on February 9, 2023, a static fire with 31 engines at 50% throttle.

In January 2023, the whole Starship stack underwent a full wet dress rehearsal .

After a launch attempt aborted on April 17, 2023, Booster 7 and Ship 24 lifted off on April 20 at 13:33 UTC in the first orbital flight test. Three engines were disabled during the launch sequence and several more failed during the flight.

The booster later lost thrust vectoring control of the Raptor engines, which led to the rocket spinning out of control.

The vehicle reached a maximum altitude of 24 mi (39 km). Approximately 3 minutes after lift-off the rocket's autonomous flight termination system was activated, though the vehicle tumbled for another 40 seconds before disintegrating.

The first flight test blasted large amounts of sand and soil in the air, reaching communities within a 10.7 km (6.6 mi) radius. A brushfire on nearby state parkland also occurred, burning 3.5 acres (1.4 ha) of state parkland. Second flight test Main article: Starship flight test 2 Starship during the second flight attempt After the first test flight, SpaceX began work on the launch mount to repair the damage it sustained during the test and to prevent future issues.

The foundation of the launch tower was reinforced and a water-powered flame deflector was built under the launch mount. Ship 25 and Booster 9 were rolled to the suborbital and orbital launch sites in May to undergo multiple tests.

On November 18, 2023, Booster 9 and Ship 25 lifted off the pad. All 33 engines continued to function until staging, where the second stage separated by pushing itself away from the first stage using a hot-staging technique.

Following separation, the Super Heavy booster completed its flip maneuver and initiated the boostback burn, but then experienced multiple successive engine failures and exploded. Blockage in a liquid oxygen filter caused one of the engines to fail in a way that resulted in the destruction of the booster, which occurred three and a half minutes into the flight at an altitude of ~90 km over the Gulf of Mexico.

The second stage continued until it reached an altitude of ~149 kilometres (93 mi), after over eight minutes of flight; before engine cutoff, telemetry was lost on the second stage. SpaceX said that a safe command based on flight performance data triggered the flight termination system and destroyed the second stage, before achieving its planned orbit or attempting re-entry. It appeared to re-enter a few hundred miles north of the Virgin Islands , according to NOAA weather radar data. Third flight test Main article: Starship flight test 3 Video of Starship during the third flight test Following the second flight test (which saw the loss of both stages), significant changes were implemented, including upgrading Starship's thrust vector control system to electric thrust vector control (TVC) and measures to delay liquid oxygen (LOX) venting until after Starship engine cutoff (SECO) has taken place. Flight 3 launched from the SpaceX Starbase facility along the South Texas coast around 8:25 a.m. CDT on March 14, 2024, coincidentally the 22nd anniversary of the founding of SpaceX. Like flight 2, all 33 engines on the booster ignited and stage separation was successful. B10 conducted a boostback burn , however, the planned landing in the Gulf of Mexico was not successful, as it exploded at 462 m (1,516 ft) above the surface.

The Starship spacecraft itself, after reaching space and orbital velocity, conducted several tests after engine cutoff, including initiating a propellant transfer demo and payload dispenser test. It attempted to re-enter the atmosphere , and at an altitude of around 65 km (40 mi), all telemetry from Ship 28 stopped, indicating a loss of the vehicle. This flight test demonstrated a cryogenic propellant transfer, by transferring propellant from the Ship's header tanks into its main tanks while in space, a technology which is required for Starship HLS to exit Low Earth orbit (LEO).

The result of this test was declared successful by NASA and SpaceX. Additional data analysis is occurring on the fluid dynamics such as slosh and boil-off of the propellant. Fourth flight test Main article: Starship flight test 4 The fourth flight test of the full Starship configuration launched on June 6, 2024, at 7:50 a.m. CDT.

The goals for the test flight were for the Super Heavy booster to land on a 'virtual tower' in the ocean, and for the Ship to survive peak heating during atmospheric reentry.

The flight test was successful in both regards, with Super Heavy achieving a soft splashdown and Ship surviving atmospheric reentry and a controlled splashdown despite significant damage to the flight control surfaces. Fifth flight test Main article: Starship flight test 5 Booster 12 is successfully caught by the launch tower during flight test 5.

In April 2024, Musk stated one of the goals was to attempt a booster tower landing based on successful booster performance in flight 4. Vehicle testing commenced in May 2024. SpaceX claimed that B12 and S30 were ready to launch in early August, in advance of regulatory approval. SpaceX flew S30 and B12 on October 13, 2024, with B12 returning to the launch site for a successful catch for the first time, and S30 successfully splashing down in the Indian Ocean. Sixth flight test Main article: Starship flight test 6 Ship 31 completed a successful cryogenic test in July 2024 and a static fire in September. Booster 13 completed similar tests in April and October. Flight 6 was flown on November 19, 2024, with a water landing of the booster rather than a catch. Flight 6 was the first to successfully conduct a Raptor engine relight in the vacuum of space, paving the way for payload deployments on future flights. A stuffed toy banana served as the zero-g indicator, becoming Starship's first payload, though it remained within the vehicle for the duration of the flight. Eric Berger claimed that due to the success of the in-space relight, Starship would likely be "cleared to travel into orbit". Seventh flight test Main article: Starship flight test 7 Ship 33 completed a successful cryogenic test in October 2024 and a static fire in late December. Its counterpart, Booster 14, also underwent cryogenic testing in October. Booster 14 rolled out to OLP-1 and conducted a successful spin prime test and static fire in early December. Flight 7 was flown on January 16, 2025; the mission profile for flight test 7 was expected to be similar to the previous launch, targeting a splashdown in the Indian Ocean after attempting an in-space engine relight. Ship 33 was also expected to deploy ten Starlink "simulators," which were also expected to reenter over the Indian Ocean. Contact with Ship 33 was lost shortly before its engines were scheduled to shut down. Subsequently, Ship 33 was seen exploding as it flew over the Turks and Caicos Islands .

The booster successfully returned to the launch site and was caught by the chopsticks on OLP-A.

As a result of the explosion, numerous commercial airline flights were diverted or delayed. Eighth flight test Main article: Starship flight test 8 On March 3, 2025, a launch attempt was aborted after multiple holds at T −40 seconds. Shortly before the scheduled launch at 6:45 p.m. CDT, an issue caused a hold for more than five minutes.

The hold was briefly lifted, but a new hold was put in place due to issues connected to the Super Heavy booster. SpaceX called for a cancellation of the launch and set March 6 for the launch.

The eighth flight test was later launched on March 6, 2025, at 23:30 hours UTC.

The Super Heavy booster was successfully caught by the launch tower.

During Ship 34's initial burn, four of its six engines experienced premature shutdowns that resulted in a loss of attitude control followed by a total loss of telemetry.

The vehicle's breakup was observed from Florida , Jamaica , and the Turks and Caicos Islands . According to SpaceX, communications with the spacecraft ended 9 minutes and 30 seconds after liftoff.

The flight was the second of the Block 2 Ship, and attempted to repeat the previous flight's profile. Due to the breakup of the vehicles, the Federal Aviation Administration briefly issued ground stop orders for multiple Florida airports. Ninth flight test Main article: Starship flight test 9 Starship's ninth flight test launched on May 27, 2025, with Booster 14, the program's first reused Super Heavy booster.

The booster completed its ascent, executed a boost-back and entry burn and re-entered at a higher angle of attack than previous flights, but was lost before its planned splashdown in the Gulf of Mexico. Ship 35 reached engine cutoff, yet a propellant leak caused loss of attitude control preventing reignition of a raptor engine and the payload bay door failed to open preventing deployment of the dummy starlink satellites; the vehicle broke up during re-entry. Ship 36 explosion On June 18, 2025, Ship 36, the Block 2 upper stage slated for the program's tenth flight test, exploded during a planned six-engine static-fire at SpaceX's Massey test stand near Starbase, Texas. Preliminary analysis suggested the failure of a composite-overwrapped pressure vessel (COPV) in the nose section, which ruptured and ignited methane and liquid-oxygen propellants. No personnel were injured, but SpaceX paused further testing to inspect Block 2 pressurization hardware and repair the damaged stand. Tenth flight test Main article: Starship flight test 10 Starship's tenth flight test was scheduled for August 24, 2025, but was scrubbed shortly before liftoff.

After a second aborted attempt on August 25, Flight 10 successfully launched on August 26.

The booster completed the ascent, boostback, and landing burns despite losing an engine on ascent, and the ship deployed its payload, eight Starlink simulators. It then completed a relight of a single engine before reentry and successfully splashed down in the Indian Ocean within a few meters of its target. Eleventh flight test Main article: Starship flight test 11 Starship's eleventh flight test launched on October 13, 2025, mostly repeating the mission profile of the tenth flight, though with a different arrangement of intentionally missing tiles.

The second booster to be reused, Booster 15-2 completed its ascent, boostback, and landing burns with a single engine failure during boostback.

The failed engine later relit for the landing burn.

After SECO, Ship 38 began performing its experiments, deploying eight Starlink simulators and relighting one of its engines before reentering Earth's atmosphere.

During reentry, the ship conducted multiple banking maneuvers, including a simulated trajectory which will be used in future missions for ship catch.

At approximately T+1:05:54, at an altitude of 1 km and descent speed of 338 km/h , the ship relit its three sea-level engines, flipped vertical, and softly splashed down before tipping over and exploding. This was the final launch of the Block 2 configuration of Starship and Super Heavy. Twelfth flight test Main article: Starship flight test 12 Starship's twelfth Starship test launch was on May 22, 2026, using Ship 39 and Booster 19. This flight was the first test of Version 3 of Starship. It conducted a successful ascent burn with 33 engines, but later one Raptor engine failed. Just before hot staging, the booster purposely went down to five engines.

After stage separation, Ship 39 nominally lit all six engines. Booster 19 went into an off-nominal flip. SpaceX tried to light all 33 engines for a few seconds of flight, but only 29 lit. Shortly after, an explosion in engine number E6 knocked out other Raptors near it. Only 10 engines were spared and the booster ended its boostback burn prematurely.

The booster lost control and broke apart over the Gulf of Mexico. Ship 39 had one RVac engine shut down early during its ascent burn. Ship 39 continued coasting until payload deployment of 20 Starlink simulators and two modified Starlink V3 satellites. One of the V3s took a clear video of the ship's belly side upon departure from Ship 39.

The ship entered entry interface and performed a banking maneuver similar to the eleventh flight test.

The ship landed successfully on target in the Indian Ocean before tipping and exploding as expected. Cost and funding SpaceX develops the Starship primarily with private funding . SpaceX Chief Financial Officer Bret Johnsen disclosed in court that SpaceX has invested more than $3 billion into the Starbase facility and Starship systems from July 2014 to May 2023. Elon Musk stated in April 2023 that SpaceX expected to spend about $2 billion on Starship development in 2023.

In a 2024 response to a lawsuit, SpaceX stated that the cost of the Starship program was approximately $4 million per day, : 25–26 adding that any day of delay to the Starship program represented a loss of $100,000. : 25–26 Musk has theorized that a Starship orbital launch might eventually cost SpaceX only $1 million to launch. Eurospace 's director of research Pierre Lionnet stated in 2022 that Starship's launch price to customers would likely be higher because of the rocket's development cost.

In an update on their website in late October 2025, SpaceX stated regarding Starship that "SpaceX is self-funding representing over 90% of system costs" .

As part of the development of the Human Landing System for the Artemis program , SpaceX was awarded in April 2021 a $2.89 billion fixed-price contract from NASA to develop the Starship lunar lander for Artemis III . Blue Origin , a bidding competitor to SpaceX, disputed the decision and began a legal case against NASA and SpaceX in August 2021, causing NASA to suspend the contract for three months until the case was dismissed in the Court of Federal Claims . Two years later Blue Origin was awarded a $3.4 billion fixed-price contract for its lunar lander .

In 2022, NASA awarded SpaceX a $1.15 billion fixed-price contract for a second lunar lander for Artemis IV .

The same year, SpaceX was awarded a $102 million five-year contract to develop the Rocket Cargo program for the United States Space Force . Launch history Summary Starship launch history by years Year Launches Success Failure Booster landings Ship landings 2023 2 0 2 0 0 2024 4 4 0 1 0 2025 5 2 3 2 0 2026 1 1 0 0 0 Total 12 7 5 3 0 Past launches This section is transcluded from List of Starship launches . ( edit | history ) 2023 The vehicle eventually entered an uncontrolled spin before stage separation due to loss of thrust vector control .

The flight termination system activated but the vehicle remained intact for 40 more seconds. SpaceX declared this flight a success, as their primary goal was to only clear the pad.

The launch resulted in extensive damage to the orbital launch mount and the infrastructures around it, including the propellant tank farm. 2 November 18, 2023 13:02:50 Block 1 B9 Block 1 S25 Starbase , OLP‑1 — N/a — N/a Transatmospheric SpaceX Failure Failure (gulf) Precluded Flight 2 had a test flight profile similar to the first flight, with the addition of a new hot-staging technique and the introduction of a water deluge system as part of the ground support equipment at the launch pad.

During the first stage ascent, all 33 engines fired to full duration. Starship and Super Heavy successfully accomplished a hot-staging separation .

After initiating a flip maneuver and initiating boostback burn, the booster suffered engine shutdowns and was lost.

The planned in-space engine relight of the spacecraft and its hard splashdown into the Indian Ocean did not occur.

The booster successfully propelled the spacecraft to staging, with 13 engines ignited for a boostback burn, though six engines shut down prematurely.

During the landing burn ignition, only three engines ignited, and the booster was lost around 400 meters above the ocean.

At reentry, Ship had an uncontrolled roll and lost telemetry, leading SpaceX to conclude the ship was lost during reentry. 4 June 6, 2024 12:50:00 Block 1 B11 Block 1 S29 Starbase , OLP‑1 — N/a — N/a Suborbital SpaceX Success Controlled (gulf) Controlled (ocean) Flight 4 flew a similar trajectory to Flight 3, with the addition of a ship landing burn and soft splashdown. One Raptor engine was lost shortly after liftoff, but the booster performed in accordance to its flight profile and conducted a controlled splashdown in the Gulf of Mexico on a "virtual tower", in preparation for a catch by the launch tower during Flight 5.

The spacecraft performed a successful reentry despite severe forward flap damage and conducted a controlled splashdown in the Indian Ocean, within the target region but 6 kilometers from the center. 5 October 13, 2024 12:25:00 Block 1 B12 Block 1 S30 Starbase , OLP‑1 — N/a — N/a Suborbital SpaceX Success Success (OLP-1) Controlled (ocean) Flight 5 was the first to achieve booster recovery and complete a flight without engine failures.

After stage separation, the booster returned to the launch site and was caught by the launch tower arms despite damage to a chine during descent.

Following a coast phase, Ship 30 reentered the atmosphere, performed reentry despite forward flap damage, and executed a landing burn, splashing down at its target in the Indian Ocean. 6 November 19, 2024 22:00:00 Block 1 B13 Block 1 S31 Starbase , OLP‑1 Plush banana Unknown Transatmospheric SpaceX Success Controlled (gulf) Abort (OLP‑1) Controlled (ocean) Flight 6 was the second attempt at booster recovery and the final use of a Block 1 upper stage. Heat shield tiles were removed from key areas of Ship 31, which also lacked the ablative backup layer from Flight 5.

Following stage separation, the booster was diverted to the ocean near the launch site due to damage to the catch tower during liftoff.

The ship completed an in-space engine relight test and re-entered, splashing down in the Indian Ocean during daylight—a first for Starship. Despite a reduced heat shield and steeper re-entry trajectory, Ship 31 sustained minimal flap damage.

The mission also aimed to test the deployment system for 10 Starlink mass simulator satellites.

During the Ship's initial burn, its engines experienced premature shutdowns due to a propellant leak larger than the Ship's systems could handle, followed by a total loss of telemetry. SpaceX stated the autonomous flight safety system destroyed the Ship about three minutes after loss of telemetry.

The booster successfully returned to the launch site, where it was caught by the launch tower arms on OLP-1 without noticeable damage to the chines. 8 March 6, 2025 23:31:02 Block 2 B15‑1 Block 2 S34 Starbase , OLP‑1 4 Starlink simulator satellites ~8,000 kg (18,000 lb) Transatmospheric SpaceX Failure Success (OLP-1) Precluded Flight 8 was to follow a trajectory similar to the previous mission, with a planned splashdown in the Indian Ocean.

During the Ship's initial burn, several engines shut down and the Ship lost control and later telemetry.

The booster was successfully commanded to return to the launch site despite having two engines fail to relight for its boostback burn. One of the failed engines managed to reignite for the catch, which was successful. 9 May 27, 2025 23:36:28 Block 2 B14-2 Block 2 S35 Starbase , OLP‑1 8 Starlink simulator satellites ~16,000 kg (35,000 lb) Transatmospheric SpaceX Failure Failure (gulf) Failure (ocean) Flight 9 was the first to reuse a Super Heavy booster, along with 29 engines having been used on a flight, which completed ascent and boostback into a high angle of attack but was lost before splashdown in the Gulf of Mexico.

The ship reached engine cutoff but failed to deploy its payload of eight Starlink simulator satellites and experienced a fuel leak, resulting in a loss of control.

The ship was passivated before reentry and broke up over the Indian Ocean. 10 August 26, 2025, 23:30:00 Block 2 B16 Block 2 S37 Starbase , OLP‑1 8 Starlink simulator satellites ~16,000 kg (35,000 lb) Transatmospheric SpaceX Success Controlled (gulf) Controlled (ocean) Flight 10 was delayed by around two months because the ship originally designated for the flight was lost during testing.

The booster ignited all thirty-three engines, though it lost one during the ascent burn. It would continue to complete its mission, splashing down in the Gulf of Mexico after simulating an engine out.

The ship reached the desired trajectory and deployed all eight of its Starlink simulators. It then relit a single Raptor engine in space, followed by atmospheric entry.

During descent through the atmosphere, there was substantial damage to the engine section. Despite this, S37 was able to softly splash down within three meters of its target site in the Indian Ocean. 11 October 13, 2025, 23:23:00 Block 2 B15‑2 Block 2 S38 Starbase , OLP‑1 8 Starlink simulator satellites ~16,000 kg (35,000 lb) Transatmospheric SpaceX Success Controlled (gulf) Controlled (ocean) Flight 11 was the last flight of Block 2 vehicles, as well as the last flight from Pad-1 before its retrofit. It flew a similar profile to the previous two flights, with twenty-four engines flying for a second time on Booster 15.

The booster performed nominally during its flight, with the only anomaly being the loss of a Raptor engine on the boostback burn, though it would later reignite on the landing burn.

The ship, like on the previous flight, made it to SECO before deploying its eight Starlink simulators.

The mission followed a flight profile similar to previous tests, with the ship targeting a trajectory just shy of orbit.

During ascent, the booster performed nominally despite losing a single outboard Raptor engine. However, following hot-staging, Booster 19 only successfully relit 20 of the 33 engines intended for the boostback burn, the majority of which failed during startup.

The burn was then aborted after only a few seconds.

During the landing sequence, only one engine relit, leading the vehicle to impact the water at high speed. Ship 39 suffered the loss of one Raptor Vacuum engine during its ascent, but the vehicle's engine-out capability allowed it to successfully reach its scheduled engine cutoff (SECO).

While the ship successfully deployed 20 satellite mass simulators and two functional Starlink satellites, the planned in-space Raptor relight was skipped.

At least one tanker will be needed for most launches beyond LEO. March 2027 Unknown HLS TBA Uncrewed Lunar Demo Lunar NASA NASA's demonstration mission for the Human Landing System prior to Artemis IV, announced in April 2021.

The Starship HLS lander will be placed in a Near-rectilinear halo orbit around the Moon and will then attempt to land on the surface. (Before this, an unknown number of successful refueling flights will be required, estimated to be in the high teens.) 2027 Unknown HLS TBA Astrolab FLEX rover Possible rideshare Lunar Astrolab Flexible Logistics and Exploration (FLEX) rover will include 1,000 kilograms of customer payloads. 2027 Unknown Unknown TBA Superbird-9 GTO SKY Perfect JSAT Superbird-9 is SKY Perfect JSAT 's fully flexible HTS ( High Throughput Satellite ) based on Airbus ' OneSat product line. 2027 Unknown HLS TBA ISRU Processing System Possible rideshare Lunar Luxembourg Space Agency In April 2023, LSA and a private firm, OffWorld Europe, announced a partnership to develop an ISRU process to extract, process, store and use water collected from the surface of the Moon in the form of ice.

The project, which is under the oversight of the European Space Agency (ESA), will use OffWorld's technical expertise in robotics with a technology demonstration mission slated for launch to the Moon in 2027 as part of SpaceX 's first Starship HLS mission for the Artemis program . An unknown number of refueling flights, estimated to be in the high teens, will be required prior to the mission. Mid 2027 Unknown Block 3 TBA Artemis III LEO NASA Artemis III will feature a Low Earth Orbit docking test between Starship and Orion. Will not be a complete HLS Starship and will not include life support equipment, instead functioning as a "docking target" for Orion. 2028 Unknown HLS TBA Crewed Lunar Demo Lunar NASA Artemis IV will be the first crewed lunar landing since Apollo 17 . An unknown number of refueling flights, estimated to be in the high teens, will be required prior to the mission. 2028 Unknown HLS TBA Sustaining Crewed Lunar Demo Lunar NASA On November 15, 2022, NASA announced it had awarded a contract to SpaceX as part of Option B of the Appendix H contract. This would allow SpaceX to use a second-generation Starship HLS design to conduct a Lunar Gateway -based demonstration mission as part of Artemis IV . An unknown number of refueling flights, estimated to be in the high teens, will be required prior to the mission. 2029 Unknown Unknown TBA Starlab LEO Voyager Space / Airbus Starlab is a planned commercial space station. 2029 Unknown HLS TBA Eagle Rover Possible rideshare Lunar Lunar Outpost The Eagle Rover has been selected by NASA for study as a Lunar Terrain Vehicle. 2030 Unknown Unknown TBA Haven-2 Core Module LEO VAST Launch of Haven-2 Core module. 2032 Unknown HLS TBA Lunar Cruiser Possible rideshare Lunar JAXA / NASA The Lunar Cruiser is a crewed pressurized lunar rover being developed jointly by JAXA and Toyota that astronauts can drive and live in on the Moon. 2035 Unknown Unknown TBA Vast artificial gravity station Module 1 LEO VAST First module for Vast's 100 m spinning artificial gravity station. 2035 Unknown Unknown TBA Vast artificial gravity station Module 2 LEO VAST Second module for Vast's artificial gravity station. 2035 Unknown Unknown TBA Vast artificial gravity station Module 3 LEO VAST Third module for Vast's artificial gravity station. 2035 Unknown Unknown TBA Vast artificial gravity station Module 4 LEO VAST Fourth module for Vast's artificial gravity station. 2035 Unknown Unknown TBA Vast artificial gravity station Module 5 LEO VAST Fifth module for Vast's artificial gravity station. 2035 Unknown Unknown TBA Vast artificial gravity station Module 6 LEO VAST Sixth module for Vast's artificial gravity station. TBA Unknown Unknown TBA Uncrewed Mars Demo TMI SpaceX plans to launch around five Starship upper stages to Mars , which would attempt to land on an as of yet unspecified location on the Martian surface upon arrival at Mars, as part of their iterative and incremental cycle of development .

The Italian Space Agency contracted SpaceX in 2025 for delivering several experiments to the Martian surface on the first Starship flight to Mars. TBA Unknown Crew TBA Polaris III TBA Jared Isaacman Polaris III will be the first crewed launch on Starship. It is not expected to occur until Starship has flown at least 100 successful cargo flights, though this is not a firm requirement. This is the final flight of the Polaris Program . Potential missions Starlink SpaceX plans to use Starship to launch the second generation of satellites for SpaceX's Starlink system, which as of 2021 delivered high-speed internet to over 70 countries. An analyst at financial services company Morgan Stanley stated development of Starship and Starlink are intertwined, with Starship's planned launch capacity enabling cheaper Starlink launches, and Starlink's profits financing Starship's development costs.

In deficit from its inception until the end of 2022, Starlink was first reported to be cash flow positive in the first quarter of 2023, though Elon Musk said that Starlink had only reached "break-even cashflow" in 2023.

In December 2023, the FCC issued a final denial of a $885 million Starlink RDOF subsidy because of Starlink's "continuing inability to successfully launch on the Starship rocket". Artemis Program Artemis III launch profile of a human landing on the Moon, involving Starship HLS, Starship tanker variants, and Orion spacecraft Starship HLS was initially chosen by NASA as the sole lunar Human Landing System for the planned Artemis III and Artemis IV crewed missions, as part of the Artemis program . Starship HLS is to be launched into a low Earth orbit, and refueled by multiple Starship tanker spacecraft. : 4, 5 Once fueled, it would perform a trans lunar injection burn and enter a near-rectilinear halo orbit around the Moon, with a perilune of 1,500 km (930 mi) occurring over the north pole and an apolune of 70,000 km (43,000 mi) occurring over the south pole. : 4, 5 The Orion spacecraft would then dock with Starship HLS and two of its four crew would transfer into Starship HLS. : 4, 5 Starship HLS would then use its engines to make a powered descent and land near the lunar south pole . : 4, 5 After the crew performs the surface portion of its mission, the HLS would ascend with the crew. : 4, 5 The crew would then transfer into the Orion spacecraft and return to Earth. : 4, 5 Astronomy Astronomers have called to consider Starship's larger mass to orbit and wider cargo bay for proposed space telescopes such as LUVOIR , and to develop larger telescopes to take advantage of these capabilities. Starship's 9 m (30 ft) fairing width could hold an 8 m (26 ft) wide space telescope mirror in a single piece, alleviating the need for complex unfolding such as that of the JWST 's 6.5 m (21 ft) mirror, which added cost and delays. Regarding larger mass to orbit limits, the Ariane 5 imposed a ~6,500 kg limit on the telescope's weight. Starship's low launch cost could also allow probes to use heavier, more common, less expensive materials, such as glass instead of beryllium for large telescope mirrors. With a 5 t (11,000 lb) mirror built using similar methods to the Hubble Space Telescope 's mirror, the JWST would represent only 10% of the mass deliverable by a (refueled) Starship to the Sun–Earth L2 point, and therefore minimizing the weight of the telescope would not have been a dominant design consideration.

The National Academies of Science 's 2020 survey recommended the Habitable Worlds Observatory (HWO); the space observatory, requiring a super heavy lift launch vehicle, will search for signs of life on exoplanets .

The HWO's team hopes for the success of big launchers due to their critical importance to the HWO's mission. Lee Feinberg, NASA HWO lead architect and JWST manager, stays in communication with SpaceX to track Starship's progress and has visited them in 2024 for that purpose.

The NASA Habitable Worlds Observatory will have a 6–8 meter mirror for now, but its design should be flexible to leverage launchers with potentially double the mass and volume by the time it launches in the 2040s. Former NASA JPL architect Casey Handmer believes the HWO to be far too conservative compared to what is possible with Starship. Handmer argues that Starship enables telescopes to scale up to the point of surface-level exoplanet imaging , perhaps big enough to detect seasonal migration patterns . Rocket cargo Main article: Rocket Cargo In January 2022, SpaceX was awarded a $102 million five-year contract to develop the Rocket Cargo program for the United States Space Force .

The five-year contract is intended to "determine exactly what a rocket can achieve when used for cargo transport", and will see the Air Force Research Laboratory collect data during commercial launches of Starship.

The contract includes an eventual demonstration mission with the launch and landing of a cargo-laden Starship in a point-to-point flight.

The Department of Defense has planned a test with Starship as part of its program to demonstrate the ability to rapidly deploy up to 100 tons of cargo and supplies, a capability it calls point-to-point delivery (P2PD).

The test was envisioned to take place in FY25 or FY26. Mars Sample Return In 2024, the NASA-ESA Mars Sample Return project, one of NASA's highest priority flagship projects, suffered a setback when an independent review board assessing the project's feasibility concluded that the project could not be completed under its mission profile.

In April 2024, the Administrator of NASA then announced that a new mission profile was needed for the project and that NASA would turn to industry for proposals, with responses due in fall 2024, and a high emphasis on lower total cost and lower risk. Starship was proposed by some space journalists as a leading candidate to serve as a central component of the new mission profile architecture. Transportation SpaceX has proposed using Starship for point-to-point flights (called "Earth to Earth" flights by SpaceX), traveling anywhere on Earth in under an hour. Musk stated that SpaceX would complete hundreds of cargo flights before launching with human passengers. Space colonization Further information: SpaceX Mars colonization program According to SpaceX, the design of Starship is driven by its requirement to be able to land crews on Mars, : 120 though SpaceX has not published technical plans or designs about Starship's life support systems , radiation protection , docking system, or in-orbit refueling system for Mars.

The spacecraft would be launched to low Earth orbit and refueled in orbit before heading to Mars.

After landing on Mars, the Sabatier reaction could be used to synthesize liquid methane and liquid oxygen, Starship's fuel, in a power-to-gas plant.

The plant's raw resources would be Martian water and Martian carbon dioxide .

On Earth, similar technologies could be used to make carbon-neutral propellant for the rocket. To date, there has been one proof of concept experiment ( MOXIE ) demonstrating the extraction of oxygen from Martian carbon dioxide, with George Dvorsky writing for Gizmodo commenting that we are not "remotely close" to turning this "into something practical". SpaceX and Musk have stated their goal of colonizing Mars to ensure the long-term survival of humanity , with an ambition of having sent one million people to Mars by 2050.

In March 2022, he estimated that the first crewed Mars landing could occur in 2029. This timeline has been criticized as unrealistic by Kevin Olsen, a physicist at the University of Oxford , England, who has said that "colony needs to become a factory" to produce air, fuel and water as it is "fundamentally impossible to create a completely closed environment in space", and that the technology to do so is "far, far behind the technology of space flight and habitation construction". Serkan Saydam, a mining engineering professor from the University of New South Wales , Australia, stated that humanity currently lacks the necessary technology to establish a Martian colony, and will likely lack the capacity to establish a Martian city with one million people by 2050. Other missions A future payload is the Superbird-9 communication satellite, which was Starship's first contract for externally made commercial satellites. Another planned payload is the Starlab space station , which Starship expects to launch in a single piece.

In the future, the spacecraft's crewed version could be used for space tourism —for example, for the third flight of the Polaris program . Research conducted by Project Lyra determined that with refueling in LEO, a Starship could send a spacecraft to ʻOumuamua on a journey taking 20 years. A gravity assist would be required at Jupiter. Facilities Further information: SpaceX Starbase and SpaceX facilities Testing and manufacturing Ship 27 , Ship 26 and Booster 10 forward section under construction in Starbase build site, March 2023 Starbase consists of a manufacturing facility and launch site, and is located at Boca Chica, Texas. Both facilities operate 24 hours a day. A maximum of 450 full-time employees may be onsite. : 28 The site consists of two launch sites, one payload processing facility, one seven-acre (2.8 ha) solar farm , and other facilities. : 34–36 Raptor engines are tested at the Rocket Development facility in McGregor, Texas.

The facility has two main test stands: one horizontal stand for both engine types and one vertical stand for sea-level-optimized rocket engines.

In the future, a nearby factory, which as of September 2021 was under construction, will make the new generation of sea-level Raptors while SpaceX's headquarters in California will continue building the Raptor Vacuum and test new designs.

At Florida, a facility at Cocoa purifies silica for Starship heat-shield tiles, producing a slurry that is then shipped to a facility at Cape Canaveral.

In the past, workers constructed the Starship MK2 prototype in competition with Starbase's crews.

The Kennedy Space Center , also in Florida, is planned to host other Starship facilities, such as a Starship launch site at Launch Complex 39A and a production facility at Roberts Road. This production facility is being expanded from "Hangar X", the Falcon rocket boosters' storage and maintenance facility. It will include a 30,000 m 2 (320,000 ft 2 ) building, loading dock , and a place for constructing integration tower sections. Adjacent to the Kennedy Space Center will be an additional launch site at Cape Canaveral Space Launch Complex 37 , likely to service missions for the complex owner, the United States Space Force . Launch sites Starbase Orbital launch mount A under construction in Starbase, August 2021 Starbase hosts two launch sites, named Pad A and Pad B or Orbital Launch Pads 1 and 2 (OLP-1 and 2). : 34 A launch site at Starbase has large facilities, such as a tank farm , an orbital launch mount, and an integration tower. Smaller facilities are present at the launch site: tanks surrounding the area containing methane, oxygen, nitrogen, helium, hydraulic fluid , etc.; : 161 subcoolers near the tank farm cool propellant using liquid nitrogen; and various pipes are installed at large facilities. Each tank farm consists of eight tanks, enough to support one orbital launch.

The current launch mount on Pad A has a water-powered flame diverter , 20 clamps holding the booster, and a quick disconnect mount providing liquid fuel and electricity to the Super Heavy booster before it lifts off.

The integration tower or launch tower consists of steel truss sections, a lightning rod on top, and a pair of mechanical arms that can lift, catch and recover the booster.

The decision to catch the booster with the arms was made to reduce the rocket's mass and mechanical complexity by removing the need for landing legs, as well as enabling more rapid reuse by placing the rocket directly back on the launchpad. : 2 The mechanical arms are attached to a carriage and controlled by a pulley at the top of the tower.

The pulley is linked to a winch and spool at the base of the tower using a cable. Using the winch and the carriage, the mechanical arms can move vertically, with support from bearings attached at the sides of the carriage. A linear hydraulic actuator moves the arms horizontally.

On top of the arms are tracks, which are used to position the booster or spacecraft.

The tower is mounted with a quick disconnect arm extending to and contracting from the Starship spacecraft; its functions are similar to the quick disconnect mount that powers the booster. Florida Starship launch tower construction can be seen (right) at LC-39A in January 2024 as Falcon 9 launches continue to take place SpaceX has been constructing a Starship launch pad at Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39A (LC-39A) since 2021.

The site was leased to the company in 2014 and is used to launch Falcon 9 rockets. A Finding of No Significant Impact was issued by SpaceX 's environmental impact statement (EIS), with NASA as the lead agency, earlier in September 2019 for the launch pad site.

In 2024, the Federal Aviation Administration began the process of preparing an EIS evaluating the potential impacts of the new infrastructure and a higher launch cadence of up to 44 per year at LC-39A.

In June 2024, Blue Origin and United Launch Alliance (ULA) provided comments as part of the EIS process, both objecting to the impact that Starship launch operations may have on their own activities at the site. Blue Origin suggested several mitigations, including allowing other operators to object to a Starship launch that would conflict with one of its own, limiting Starship operations to particular times, or expanding the number of launchpads in the area to reduce the impact of conflicting launches. ULA suggested regulators prevent Starship from launching in Florida altogether because a fully fueled Starship would require an evacuation zone so large that it would prevent other operators from using their facilities, and the noise generated by repetitive launches could be injurious to those who live or work nearby. Elon Musk suggested that the two companies' comments were disingenuous and that their true motivation was to impede SpaceX's progress by lawfare .

The company has also proposed building another Starship launch pad at the nearby Cape Canaveral Space Launch Complex 37 (SLC-37) which became vacant in 2024 after the retirement of the Delta IV rocket. That year, the United States Space Force began the process of preparing an EIS evaluating the potential impacts of new infrastructure and a launch cadence of up to 76 times per year at SLC-37. SpaceX and NASA have also worked on assessing LC-49 to the north of 39A.

The Kennedy Space Center's Master Plan One has stated that LC-49 could avoid overflight issues with pad 39B and minimize conflict with the Canaveral National Seashore .

As of January 18, 2024, NASA did not have activities underway at LC-49. Both EIS processes must be complete before SpaceX will be cleared to launch Starship from Florida, which likely will not occur until late 2025.

The Playalinda Beach has been closed by KSC Police and the National Park Service for many launches from 39A and 39B.

The towers and mechanical arms at the sites should be similar to the ones at Starbase. Responses to Starship development Further information: SpaceX Starbase § Impact In order to compete with SpaceX and close their technological gap with the company, the China Aerospace Science and Tech Corp and other aerospace actors in China have reportedly been working on their own equivalent of Starship—the Long March 9 super-heavy lift rocket, which is also designed to eventually be fully reusable.

In 2021, the China Academy of Launch Vehicle Technology (CALT) showed a rendered video of a rocket noted to be "strikingly" similar to Starship in appearance and function.

In a 2022 event organized by the International Astronautical Federation and the Chinese Society of Astronautics , the CALT communicated performing research on a crewed launch vehicle powered by LOX-methane propellant, with a second stage that was very similar to Starship's. SpaceNews noted that the Chinese start-up Space Epoch and engine maker Jiuzhou Yunjian were developing a smaller Starship-like rocket with a methane-LOX engine similar to Raptor, stainless steel tanks, and an iterative design. Starship's reusability and stainless-steel construction might also have inspired Project Jarvis , a reusable upper stage for Blue Origin 's New Glenn heavy-lift launch vehicle intended to replace New Glenn's expendable upper stage in the future.

In 2021, members of the U.S. Congress voiced concerns about the U.S. FAA's response to SpaceX's launch license violations following the explosion of SN8, calling on the FAA to "resist any potential undue influence on launch safety decision-making".

In 2023, prior to Starship's second test flight , SpaceX's vice president and ex-NASA engineer Bill Gerstenmaier made statements at the U.S. Senate on the importance of innovation in light of "strategic competition from state actors like China". He said SpaceX was under a contract with NASA to use Starship to land American astronauts on the Moon before China does, and that the Starship test flights campaign was being held up by "regulatory headwinds and unnecessary bureaucracy" unrelated to public safety.

Following the second flight test of Starship, the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) made recommendations to the U.S. FAA to "improve its mishap investigation process", finding that historically they have allowed the launch operator to conduct their investigation with the FAA supervising. Several environmental groups have filed lawsuits against the FAA and SpaceX, claiming that environmental reviews were bypassed due to Musk's political and financial influence. Notes The total of these masses is about 5,300 t (11,700,000 lb). ^ With a mixture ratio of 3.6 parts oxygen to 1 part methane, 78.3% of 3400 t is 2660 t of liquid oxygen. ^ 78% of 1,500 t (3,300,000 lb) is 1,170 t (2,580,000 lb) of liquid oxygen. ^ a b c d e f g h Starship vehicles have a multiple-digit serial number, followed by a hyphen and a number that indicates the flight count. Starship vehicles are in a S#-# format, while boosters are B#-#. For example, B14‑1 and B14‑2 represent the first and second flights of B14. Vehicles without a hyphen were either expended on their first flight or retired after recovery. Missions where a new vehicle is used are marked with a mint-colored The chart below is due for an update" ( Tweet ) – via X (formerly Twitter) . ^ a b c d e f g Sesnic, Trevor (August 11, 2021). "Starbase Tour and Interview with Elon Musk" .

The Everyday Astronaut (Interview). Archived from the original on August 12, 2021 . Retrieved October 12, 2021 . ^ Davies, Rachael (February 4, 2025). "SpaceX's Starship rocket explosion may have released more than just debris" . ReadWrite . Retrieved February 4, 2025 . ^ Clark, Stephen (July 16, 2025). "The ISS is nearing retirement, so why is NASA still gung-ho about Starliner?" . Ars Technica . Retrieved July 16, 2025 . ^ a b "Musk hopes "Mechazilla" will catch and assemble the Starship and Super Heavy boosters for rapid reuse" . Archived from the original on May 14, 2024 . Retrieved May 14, 2024 . ^ "Starship's Seventh Flight Test" . SpaceX.com . January 8, 2025 . Retrieved January 15, 2025 . ^ a b c Reichhardt, Tony (December 14, 2021). "Marsliner" . Air & Space/Smithsonian . Archived from the original on May 6, 2022 . Retrieved June 10, 2022 . ^ Harwood, William (May 28, 2025). "SpaceX loses contact with its Starship on 9th test flight after last 2 went down in flames" . CBS News . Retrieved June 28, 2025 . ^ Williams, Matthew (February 11, 2026). "SpaceX Makes a Huge Pivot, Wants to Build on the Moon Instead" . Universe Today . Retrieved May 23, 2026 . ^ a b c d e f g Wall, Mike (May 10, 2023). "Vast Space to launch 1st private station on SpaceX rocket in 2025" . Space.com . Archived from the original on February 8, 2025 . Retrieved February 13, 2025 . ^ Clark, Stephen (October 18, 2023). "Astronomers say new telescopes should take advantage of "Starship paradigm" " . Ars Technica . Retrieved June 28, 2025 . ^ "Artemis III: NASA's First Human Mission to the Lunar South Pole" . NASA. January 13, 2023. Archived from the original on January 7, 2024 . Retrieved January 7, 2024 . ^ Berger, Eric (February 27, 2026). "NASA shakes up its Artemis program to speed up lunar return" . Ars Technica . Retrieved February 27, 2026 . ^ O'Callaghan, Jonathan (October 1, 2023). "Termination shock" . Aerospace America . Archived from the original on October 22, 2023 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 . ^ Foust, Jeff (June 8, 2023). "NASA concerned Starship problems will delay Artemis 3" . Space News . Retrieved June 28, 2025 . ^ Lawler, Richard (September 29, 2019). "SpaceX's plan for in-orbit Starship refueling: a second Starship" . Engadget . Archived from the original on December 8, 2019 . Retrieved December 31, 2021 . ^ Dvorsky, George (January 4, 2021). "SpaceX Will Try to 'Catch' Its Starship Boosters Instead of Landing Them" . Gizmodo . Retrieved March 20, 2025 . ^ a b c d e f Berger, Eric (April 8, 2024). "Elon Musk just gave another Mars speech—this time the vision seems tangible" . Ars Technica . Retrieved January 17, 2025 . ^ a b Inman, Jennifer Ann; Horvath, Thomas J.; Scott, Carey Fulton (August 24, 2021). SCIFLI Starship Reentry Observation (SSRO) ACO (SpaceX Starship) . Game Changing Development Annual Program Review 2021. NASA . hdl : 2060/20210020835 . Archived from the original on October 11, 2021 . Retrieved October 12, 2021 . ^ Amos, Jonathan (August 6, 2021). "Biggest ever rocket is assembled briefly in Texas" . BBC News . Archived from the original on August 11, 2021 . Retrieved May 30, 2022 . ^ Ryan, Jackson (October 21, 2021). "SpaceX Starship Raptor vacuum engine fired for the first time" . CNET . Archived from the original on June 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 9, 2022 . ^ Shayotovich, Eli (September 23, 2022). "Why SpaceX's Starship Is Made Out Of Stainless Steel According To Elon Musk" . SlashGear . Archived from the original on November 21, 2023 . Retrieved November 21, 2023 . ^ a b c d Berger, Eric (March 5, 2020). "Inside Elon Musk's plan to build one Starship a week—and settle Mars" . Ars Technica . Archived from the original on December 6, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2021 . ^ a b "Starship Users Guide" (PDF) . SpaceX . March 2020. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 6, 2021 . Retrieved October 6, 2021 . ^ a b c Berger, Eric (April 8, 2024). "Elon Musk just gave another Mars speech—this time the vision seems tangible" . Ars Technica . Retrieved November 2, 2024 . ^ a b c Sesnic, Trevor (August 11, 2021). "Starbase Tour and Interview with Elon Musk" .

The Everyday Astronaut (Interview). Archived from the original on August 12, 2021 . Retrieved October 12, 2021 . ^ a b c d e Building SpaceX's Starship Super Heavy One Ring At A Time . NASASpaceflight. June 1, 2023. Archived from the original on December 13, 2023 . Retrieved February 14, 2024 – via YouTube. . ^ a b Everyday Astronaut (March 11, 2024). What Did SpaceX Change & Upgrade For Starship's 3rd Flight Test? . Event occurs at 2:12 . Retrieved March 4, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ Everyday Astronaut (May 31, 2024). What's different and new on Starship Flight 4? . Event occurs at 5:32 . Retrieved March 4, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ a b "SpaceX – Starship" . SpaceX . January 12, 2025 . Retrieved January 12, 2025 . ^ "Installing the redesigned fuel transfer tube into the first next generation Super Heavy booster. Roughly the same size as the first stage of a Falcon 9 rocket, the new transfer tube is responsible for channeling cryogenic fuel from Super Heavy's main tank to its 33 Raptor engines and will enable faster, more reliable flip maneuvers and the ability for simultaneous engine startup" . Twitter . July 9, 2025 . Retrieved July 9, 2025 . ^ a b c d e Weber, Ryan (May 30, 2025). "The Future of the Starship Program, Block 3 and Mars" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved May 30, 2025 . ^ a b c "BUILDING ON THE SUCCESS OF STARSHIP'S SECOND FLIGHT TEST" . SpaceX . Archived from the original on February 16, 2025 . Retrieved February 28, 2025 . ^ a b How SpaceX Solved Superheavy's Major Fuel Contamination Problem . CSI Starbase. August 31, 2024 . Retrieved January 30, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ a b c d NASASpaceflight (March 31, 2022). How SpaceX is Rapidly Iterating Starship . Retrieved March 4, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ SpaceX Rolls Booster 13 to the Launch Site | Starbase . NASASpaceflight. October 22, 2024 . Retrieved October 22, 2024 – via YouTube. ^ a b Alcantarilla Romera, Alejandro; Atkinson, Ian; Gebhardt, Chris; Beil, Adrian; Beyer, Jack (March 31, 2022). How SpaceX is Rapidly Iterating Starship . NASASpaceflight. Archived from the original on April 26, 2023 . Retrieved April 26, 2023 – via YouTube. ^ NASASpaceflight (August 21, 2025). Pushed to the Limit – SpaceX's Starship Raptor Engines . Event occurs at 21:30 . Retrieved August 21, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ a b c d e f g NASASpaceflight (September 21, 2023). SpaceX Starship’s Major Upgrades for Flight 2 . Retrieved March 1, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ @elonmusk (July 4, 2021). "Booster engines are not shrouded by skirt extension, as with ship. Engines extend about 3m below booster" ( Tweet ) – via Twitter . ^ Dodd, Tim (May 30, 2024). "Starship/Super Heavy | Flight #4" . Everyday Astronaut . Retrieved March 1, 2025 . ^ Bergin, Chris (July 19, 2021). "Super Heavy Booster 3 fires up for the first time" . NASASpaceflight . Archived from the original on August 12, 2021 . Retrieved April 26, 2023 . ^ Weber, Ryan (October 12, 2024). "SpaceX Catches a Super Heavy Booster During a Milestone Flight 5" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved October 18, 2024 . ^ "SpaceX's Mars rocket to be methane-fuelled" . October 30, 2013. Archived from the original on October 30, 2013 . Retrieved November 21, 2023 . ^ "SpaceX's new test rocket briefly hovers during first free flight – The Verge" . July 26, 2019. Archived from the original on July 26, 2019 . Retrieved November 21, 2023 . ^ Belluscio, Alejandro G. (March 7, 2014). "SpaceX advances drive for Mars rocket via Raptor power" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Archived from the original on March 7, 2014 . Retrieved November 21, 2023 . ^ Musk, Elon (November 19, 2024). "The chart below is due for an update, but is roughly accurate" ( Tweet ) . Retrieved December 5, 2024 – via X (formerly Twitter) . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Thorne, Muriel, ed. (May 1983). NASA, The First 25 Years: 1958-1983 (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: National Aeronautics and Space Administration. p. 69. ^ Parken, Oliver (November 20, 2023). "Starship's 33 Engines Created The Mother Of All 'Shock Diamonds' " .

The War Zone . Retrieved March 1, 2025 . ^ NASASpaceflight (May 12, 2025). Ship 35 Drama Continues + New Orbital Launch Mount Rolls Out! | Starbase Update . Retrieved May 12, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ Berger, Eric (November 17, 2023). "Here's why SpaceX really needed to change out that part on Starship" . Ars Technica . Retrieved March 18, 2025 . ^ NASASpaceflight (January 28, 2025).

From Pad A Repairs to Pad B's Chopsticks: A Week at Starbase | Starbase Update . Retrieved January 29, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ Weber, Ryan (October 31, 2021). "Major elements of Starship Orbital Launch Pad in place as launch readiness draws nearer" . NASASpaceflight . Archived from the original on December 5, 2021 . Retrieved December 19, 2021 . ^ a b c d e Moon, Mariella (May 23, 2026). "SpaceX Starship V3's first test flight was largely successful" . www.msn.com . Retrieved May 24, 2026 – via MSN. Cite error: The named reference ":0" was defined multiple times with different content (see the help page ). ^ Booster 7 Back At The Pad With 33 Engines For Testing . NASASpaceflight. August 24, 2022. Archived from the original on April 30, 2023 . Retrieved August 24, 2022 – via YouTube. . ^ SpaceX Launches Starship Flight 5 (and Catches A Booster) . NASASpaceflight. October 13, 2024 . Retrieved October 13, 2024 – via YouTube. ^ Wang, Brian (February 15, 2020). "SpaceX Super Heavy Starship Construction and Weight" . Nextbigfuture . Archived from the original on December 4, 2023 . Retrieved December 3, 2023 . ^ a b Wall, Mike (August 18, 2023). "SpaceX shows off newly modified Starship Super Heavy booster (photos)" . Space.com . Archived from the original on August 19, 2023 . Retrieved November 22, 2023 . ^ a b c d Skibba, Ramin. "Here's What's Next for SpaceX's Starship" . WIRED . ISSN 1059-1028 . Archived from the original on November 25, 2023 . Retrieved November 25, 2023 . ^ a b c Bergin, Chris (June 24, 2023). "Elon says there's a much higher chance of getting to orbit with the second test flight due to vast amount of mods" ( Tweet ) – via Twitter . Ship engines will fire up before all the Booster engines shut down. Now need vents for hot staging. Adding an extension to the booster that is all vent and more shielding to the top of the booster. It's the most risky thing for the next flight. ^ "STARSHIP'S FOURTH FLIGHT TEST" . SpaceX . June 18, 2024 . Retrieved June 18, 2024 . ^ a b SpaceX (August 13, 2025). "The first grid fin for the next generation Super Heavy booster.

The redesigned grid fins are 50% larger and higher strength, moving from four fins to three for vehicle control while enabling the booster to descend at higher angles of attack" . Twitter . Retrieved August 13, 2025 . ^ SpaceX (August 13, 2025). "They'll also be used for vehicle lift and catch, made possible by a new catch point addition and a lower positioning on the booster to align with the tower catch arms. Moving lower reduces the heat they receive from Starship's engines at hot-staging and places the fin shaft, actuator, and fixed structure inside the booster's main fuel tank" . Twitter . Retrieved August 13, 2025 . ^ Sheetz, Michael (August 6, 2021). "Musk: 'Dream come true' to see fully stacked SpaceX Starship rocket during prep for orbital launch" . CNBC . Archived from the original on August 19, 2021 . Retrieved December 17, 2021 . ^ Torbet, Georgina (March 29, 2019). "SpaceX's Hexagon Heat Shield Tiles Take on an Industrial Flamethrower" . Digital Trends . Archived from the original on January 6, 2022 . Retrieved January 6, 2022 . ^ Inman, Jennifer Ann; Horvath, Thomas J.; Scott, Carey Fulton (August 24, 2021). SCIFLI Starship Reentry Observation (SSRO) ACO (SpaceX Starship) . Game Changing Development Annual Program Review 2021. NASA . hdl : 2060/20210020835 . Archived from the original on October 11, 2021 . Retrieved October 12, 2021 . ^ a b Bergeron, Julia (April 6, 2021). "New permits shed light on the activity at SpaceX's Cidco and Roberts Road facilities" . NASASpaceflight . Archived from the original on December 6, 2021 . Retrieved June 23, 2022 . ^ NASASpaceflight (June 22, 2024). New Ablative Material Spotted on Ship 30 | SpaceX Boca Chica . Retrieved March 3, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ "Starship's Sixth Flight Test" . SpaceX . November 6, 2024 . Retrieved March 4, 2025 . ^ a b c Weber, Ryan (October 12, 2024). "SpaceX Catches a Super Heavy Booster During a Milestone Flight 5" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved January 30, 2025 . ^ "Starship's Fifth Flight Test" . SpaceX . October 13, 2024 . Retrieved October 14, 2024 . ^ NASASpaceflight (December 4, 2020). SpaceX Boca Chica - SN16 Common Dome Flipped - Work On SN8 Continues . Retrieved February 28, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ a b c d Weber, Ryan (December 10, 2024). "Ship 33 prepares for engine testing, Booster 14 Completes Static Fire" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved March 5, 2025 . ^ a b c d e f g Alcantarilla Romera, Alejandro; Atkinson, Ian; Gebhardt, Chris; Beil, Adrian; Beyer, Jack (March 31, 2022). How SpaceX is Rapidly Iterating Starship . NASASpaceflight. Archived from the original on April 26, 2023 . Retrieved April 26, 2023 – via YouTube. ^ Everyday Astronaut (March 11, 2024). What Did SpaceX Change & Upgrade For Starship's 3rd Flight Test? . Retrieved March 4, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ NASASpaceflight (October 23, 2024). Booster 13 Rolled Out While Booster 12's Hotstage Ring is Recovered | SpaceX Boca Chica . Retrieved March 4, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ a b c Weber, Ryan (January 16, 2025). "SpaceX catches Booster 14 but loses Ship 33 on ascent" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved March 5, 2025 . ^ NASASpaceflight (July 23, 2023). Booster 9 Ready for Raptor Engine Testing | SpaceX Boca Chica . Event occurs at 8:18 . Retrieved March 1, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ NASASpaceflight (April 26, 2023). How Does SpaceX Build Starships at Starbase?

From Steel to Starship . Event occurs at 2:56 . Retrieved March 5, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ a b c Everyday Astronaut (January 12, 2025). What's new with Flight 7's massively upgraded Starship?!? . Retrieved March 4, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ NASASpaceflight (April 26, 2023). How Does SpaceX Build Starships at Starbase?

From Steel to Starship . Event occurs at 3:27 . Retrieved March 5, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ NASASpaceflight (October 14, 2021). Thrust Puck for New Starship Spotted | SpaceX Boca Chica . Retrieved March 5, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ "Starship's Seventh Flight Test" . SpaceX . Retrieved March 4, 2025 . ^ a b Weber, Ryan (May 30, 2025). "The Future of the Starship Program, Block 3 and Mars" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved June 10, 2025 . ^ a b c "UPGRADES AHEAD OF STARSHIP'S SECOND FLIGHT TEST" . SpaceX . Archived from the original on February 16, 2025 . Retrieved February 28, 2025 . ^ a b c NASASpaceflight (September 21, 2023). SpaceX Starship's Major Upgrades for Flight 2 . Retrieved March 1, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ "NEW YEAR. NEW SHIP. NEW LESSONS" . SpaceX . February 24, 2025 . Retrieved March 4, 2025 . ^ "Starship's Eighth Flight Test" . SpaceX.com . February 24, 2025 . Retrieved February 24, 2025 . ^ "SpaceX's new test rocket briefly hovers during first free flight – The Verge" . July 26, 2019. Archived from the original on July 26, 2019 . Retrieved November 21, 2023 . ^ a b Belluscio, Alejandro G. (March 7, 2014). "SpaceX advances drive for Mars rocket via Raptor power" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Archived from the original on March 7, 2014 . Retrieved November 21, 2023 . ^ "SpaceX – Starship" . SpaceX . Archived from the original on July 3, 2022 . Retrieved November 29, 2023 . Starship is the fully reusable spacecraft and second stage of the Starship system. ^ Everyday Astronaut (May 31, 2024). What's different and new on Starship Flight 4? . Retrieved March 4, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ a b NASASpaceflight (March 31, 2022). How SpaceX is Rapidly Iterating Starship . Retrieved March 4, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ Everyday Astronaut (March 11, 2024). What Did SpaceX Change & Upgrade For Starship's 3rd Flight Test? . Event occurs at 3:35 . Retrieved March 5, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ a b c NASASpaceflight (February 24, 2025). Starship Stakeout - SpaceX Attempts to Launch Starship an 8th Time . Event occurs at 4:44:00 . Retrieved March 3, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ NASASpaceflight (April 26, 2023). How Does SpaceX Build Starships at Starbase?

From Steel to Starship . Retrieved February 28, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ NASASpaceflight (January 10, 2024). Potential Starship Version 2 Header Tank Spotted | SpaceX Boca Chica . Event occurs at 8:52 . Retrieved February 28, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ NASASpaceflight (June 23, 2025). Another Starship Explosion—How Long Before We're Back? | Starbase Update . Event occurs at 2:32 . Retrieved June 24, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ a b Jax (December 23, 2024). "It's About Damn Time: Starship's Upgraded Flaps & Nosecone" . Ringwatchers . Retrieved December 24, 2024 . ^ a b c d Everyday Astronaut (March 11, 2024). What Did SpaceX Change & Upgrade For Starship's 3rd Flight Test? . Event occurs at 3:50 . Retrieved March 5, 2025 – via YouTube. Cite error: The named reference ":6" was defined multiple times with different content (see the help page ). ^ Everyday Astronaut (March 11, 2024). What Did SpaceX Change & Upgrade For Starship's 3rd Flight Test? . Event occurs at 4:55 . Retrieved March 5, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ a b c d e f Jax (March 9, 2024). "The PEZ Dispenser: Starship's Payload Deployment System" . Ringwatchers . Retrieved December 9, 2024 . ^ a b Beil, Adrian (June 5, 2024). "Starship finds success on fourth flight test" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved December 9, 2024 . ^ Weber, Ryan (November 18, 2024). "SpaceX lands Ship 31 in the Indian Ocean but miss the Booster Catch" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved December 9, 2024 . ^ SpaceX Launches Fourth Starship Flight Test . NASASpaceflight. June 6, 2024 . Retrieved December 9, 2024 – via YouTube. ^ Musk, Elon (August 18, 2021). "Btw, there's a slight error with forward flap design. Moving section is needed for control, but passive section is counter-productive, as it pushes nose backwards" . X . Retrieved April 26, 2025 . ^ Musk, Elon (June 22, 2024). "First Look Inside SpaceX's Starfactory w/ Elon Musk" (Interview). Interviewed by Tim Dodd . Everyday Astronaut . Retrieved December 9, 2024 – via YouTube. ^ a b c O'Callaghan, Jonathan (July 31, 2019). "The wild physics of Elon Musk's methane-guzzling super-rocket" . Wired UK . Archived from the original on February 22, 2021 . Retrieved December 9, 2021 . ^ a b Sommerlad, Joe (May 28, 2021). "Elon Musk reveals Starship progress ahead of first orbital flight of Mars-bound craft" .

The Independent . Archived from the original on August 23, 2021 . Retrieved December 4, 2021 . ^ "The rockets NASA and SpaceX plan to send to the moon" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on April 17, 2023 . Retrieved August 24, 2023 . ^ a b c d Sesnic, Trevor (July 14, 2022). "Raptor 1 vs Raptor 2: What did SpaceX change?" .

The Everyday Astronaut . Archived from the original on August 19, 2022 . Retrieved August 21, 2022 . ^ Zafar, Ramish (March 23, 2021). "SpaceX's 3D Manufacturing Systems Supplier For Raptor Engine To Go Public Through SPAC Deal" . Wccftech . Archived from the original on November 5, 2022 . Retrieved November 22, 2023 . ^ Weber, Ryan (May 30, 2025). "The Future of the Starship Program, Block 3 and Mars" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved May 30, 2025 . ^ Foust, Jeff (April 6, 2024). "Musk outlines plans to increase Starship launch rate and performance" . SpaceNews . Retrieved May 4, 2024 . ^ Prophet, Chris (June 7, 2024). "Significance of Starship Flight Four" . Chris's Substack . Archived from the original on June 8, 2024 . Retrieved June 8, 2024 . ^ Clark, Stephen (January 9, 2025). "A taller, heavier, smarter version of SpaceX's Starship is almost ready to fly" . Ars Technica . Retrieved January 11, 2025 . ^ "Starship's Seventh Flight Test" . SpaceX.com . January 3, 2025 . Retrieved January 3, 2025 . ^ RGV Aerial Photography (November 3, 2024). Starbase Weekly, Ep.139: Starship Block 2 Testing Started! . Retrieved November 3, 2024 – via YouTube. ^ a b Starbase Weekly, Ep.112: Booster 11 Back On The Pad! . Archived from the original on April 6, 2024 . Retrieved April 7, 2024 – via YouTube. ^ Kuhr, Jack (November 28, 2023). "SpaceX Announces a Starship Version Two is in the Works" . Payload . Archived from the original on April 26, 2024 . Retrieved April 26, 2024 . ^ NASASpaceflight (November 25, 2024). Starship Flight 6 Aftermath: Pad Work, Vehicle Updates & Flight 7 News! . Retrieved November 26, 2024 – via YouTube. ^ "SpaceX Heads Back To The Drawing Board For Starship's Upper Stage" . Aviation Week . Retrieved January 23, 2025 . ^ Wall, Mike (January 16, 2025). "SpaceX catches Super Heavy booster on Starship Flight 7 test but loses upper stage (video, photos)" . Space.com . Retrieved January 17, 2025 . ^ Davenport, Justin (May 22, 2025). "Starship program at critical moment as Flight 9 and infrastructure work in focus" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved May 26, 2025 . ^ NASASpaceflight (July 31, 2025). SpaceX Conducts Starship 37 Testing . Event occurs at 2:50:00 . Retrieved July 31, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ a b c Weber, Ryan (May 30, 2025). "The Future of the Starship Program, Block 3 and Mars" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved July 31, 2025 . ^ a b c d e f g "Final Programmatic Environmental Assessment for the SpaceX Starship/Super Heavy Launch Vehicle Program at the SpaceX Boca Chica Launch Site in Cameron County, Texas" (PDF) . Federal Aviation Administration and SpaceX . June 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 14, 2022 . Retrieved June 14, 2022 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Weber, Ryan (October 31, 2021). "Major elements of Starship Orbital Launch Pad in place as launch readiness draws nearer" . NASASpaceflight . Archived from the original on December 5, 2021 . Retrieved December 19, 2021 . ^ Moon, Mariella (February 11, 2022). "SpaceX shows what a Starship launch would look like" . Engadget . Archived from the original on March 31, 2022 . Retrieved March 31, 2022 . ^ "WRITTEN RE-EVALUATION OF THE 2022 FINAL PROGRAMMATIC ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT FOR THE SPACE X STARSHIP /SUPER HEAVY LAUNCH VEHICLE PROGRAM AT THE BOCA CHICA LAUNCH SITE IN CAMERON COUNTY, TEXAS" . Federal Aviation Administration. 2022. Archived from the original on December 1, 2023 . Retrieved December 9, 2023 . ^ a b c d "SpaceX – Launches" . Space X. November 21, 2023. Archived from the original on November 21, 2023 . Retrieved November 21, 2023 . ^ Clark, Stephen (January 5, 2024). "Rocket Report: SpaceX's record year; Firefly's Alpha rocket falls short" . Ars Technica . Archived from the original on January 5, 2024 . Retrieved January 5, 2024 . ^ a b "Starship's Third Flight Test" . SpaceX . Archived from the original on March 6, 2024 . Retrieved March 7, 2024 . ^ Clark, Stephen (October 13, 2024). "SpaceX catches returning rocket in mid-air, turning a fanciful idea into reality" . Ars Technica . Retrieved October 14, 2024 . ^ DeSisto, Austin (April 5, 2023). "Starship/SuperHeavy IFT-1 Starship Flight Test" . Everyday Astronaut . Archived from the original on December 9, 2023 . Retrieved December 9, 2023 . ^ O'Callaghan, Jonathan (December 7, 2021). "How SpaceX's massive Starship rocket might unlock the solar system—and beyond" . MIT Technology Review . Archived from the original on December 8, 2021 . Retrieved December 30, 2021 . ^ Williams, Matt (August 18, 2021). "Musk Says That Refueling Starship for Lunar Landings Will Take 8 Launches (Maybe 4)" . Archived from the original on August 26, 2023 . Retrieved August 26, 2023 . ^ Foust, Jeff (November 17, 2023). "Starship lunar lander missions to require nearly 20 launches, NASA says" . SpaceNews . Archived from the original on February 23, 2024 . Retrieved November 20, 2023 . ^ Foust, Jeff (January 6, 2021). "SpaceX, Blue Origin, and Dynetics Compete to Build the Next Moon Lander" . IEEE Spectrum . Archived from the original on November 29, 2021 . Retrieved November 29, 2021 . ^ a b c Chang, Kenneth (September 29, 2019). "SpaceX Unveils Silvery Vision to Mars: 'It's an I.C.B.M. That Lands' " .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on October 30, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2021 . ^ a b c d Wattles, Jackie (December 10, 2020). "Space X's Mars prototype rocket exploded yesterday. Here's what happened on the flight" . CNN . Archived from the original on December 10, 2020 . Retrieved December 10, 2020 . ^ Kooser, Amanda (October 1, 2019). "Elon Musk video lets us peep inside SpaceX Starship" . CNET . Archived from the original on June 10, 2022 . Retrieved June 10, 2022 . ^ a b Foust, Jeff (November 14, 2005). "Big plans for SpaceX" .

The Space Review . Archived from the original on November 24, 2005 . Retrieved September 16, 2018 . ^ "SpaceX rocket fails first flight" . BBC News . March 24, 2006. Archived from the original on January 14, 2015 . Retrieved June 7, 2022 . ^ Rosenberg, Zach (October 15, 2012). "SpaceX aims big with massive new rocket" . FlightGlobal . Archived from the original on July 3, 2015 . Retrieved September 25, 2016 . ^ Berger, Eric (September 18, 2016). "Elon Musk scales up his ambitions, considering going "well beyond" Mars" . Ars Technica . Archived from the original on September 20, 2016 . Retrieved September 19, 2016 . ^ a b c Bergin, Chris (September 27, 2016). "SpaceX reveals ITS Mars game changer via colonization plan" . NASASpaceflight . Archived from the original on September 28, 2016 . Retrieved September 27, 2016 . ^ Making Life Multiplanetary . SpaceX . September 29, 2017. Archived from the original on August 19, 2021 . Retrieved August 22, 2021 – via YouTube . ^ Foust, Jeff (December 24, 2018). "Musk teases new details about redesigned next-generation launch system" . SpaceNews . Archived from the original on December 25, 2018 . Retrieved December 10, 2023 . ^ a b Berger, Eric (September 29, 2019). "Elon Musk, Man of Steel, reveals his stainless Starship" . Ars Technica. Archived from the original on December 28, 2019 . Retrieved September 30, 2019 . ^ Mohan, Aditya Krishnan (September 5, 2021). "The truth about the new SpaceX 'Mini-Bakery' " . Medium . Archived from the original on April 26, 2023 . Retrieved November 27, 2023 . ^ "Elon Musk Reveals SpaceX's New Starship, the Rocket Bound for Mars" . Popular Mechanics . September 29, 2019. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023 . Retrieved November 27, 2023 . ^ Foust, Jeff (September 27, 2019). "SpaceX to update Starship progress" . SpaceNews . Archived from the original on February 23, 2024 . Retrieved November 27, 2023 . ^ Harwood, William (August 27, 2019). "SpaceX launches "Starhopper" on dramatic test flight" . CBS News . Archived from the original on November 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 14, 2021 . ^ Ryan, Jackson (September 29, 2019). "Elon Musk says SpaceX Starship rocket could reach orbit within 6 months" . CNET . Archived from the original on December 15, 2021 . Retrieved December 15, 2021 . ^ Grush, Loren (November 20, 2019). "SpaceX's prototype Starship rocket partially bursts during testing in Texas" .

The Verge . Archived from the original on November 14, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2021 . ^ Wall, Mike (2020). "SpaceX's Starship will soon be made of different stuff" . space.com . Archived from the original on June 5, 2020 . Retrieved May 30, 2021 . ^ Berger, Eric (February 21, 2020). "SpaceX pushing iterative design process, accepting failure to go fast" . Ars Technica . Archived from the original on December 25, 2020 . Retrieved July 5, 2022 . ^ a b Kanayama, Lee; Beil, Adrian (August 28, 2021). "SpaceX continues forward progress with Starship on Starhopper anniversary" . NASASpaceflight . Archived from the original on August 31, 2021 . Retrieved February 10, 2022 . ^ "How significant is the flight of Starship SN5? – NSS" . August 7, 2020. Archived from the original on December 10, 2023 . Retrieved December 10, 2023 . ^ Mack, Eric (August 4, 2020). "SpaceX Starship prototype takes big step toward Mars with first tiny 'hop' " . CNET . Archived from the original on December 16, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2021 . ^ Sheetz, Michael (September 3, 2020). "SpaceX launches and lands another Starship prototype, the second flight test in under a month" . CNBC . Archived from the original on December 16, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2021 . ^ Kooser, Amanda (September 26, 2020). "Watch SpaceX fire up Starship's furious new Raptor Vacuum engine" . CNET . Archived from the original on March 3, 2021 . Retrieved January 11, 2022 . ^ SpaceX Boca Chica – Starship SN8 nosecone mate – Raptors on the move . Archived from the original on January 18, 2021 . Retrieved January 4, 2024 – via YouTube . ^ Ali, Areeb (October 28, 2020). "The Test Flight of SpaceX's Starship Prototype SN 8 Is Excitement Guaranteed" .

The Wire . Archived from the original on June 2, 2021 . Retrieved May 30, 2021 . ^ Torralba, José Manuel (October 3, 2024). "Why Elon Musk uses stainless steel for his new spacecraft" . materials.imdea.org . Retrieved December 23, 2024 . ^ a b c Roulette, Joey (June 15, 2021). "SpaceX ignored last-minute warnings from the FAA before December Starship launch" .

The Verge . Archived from the original on October 6, 2021 . Retrieved October 8, 2021 . ^ Mack, Eric (February 2, 2021). "SpaceX Starship SN9 flies high, explodes on landing just like SN8" . CNET . Archived from the original on September 18, 2021 . Retrieved December 17, 2021 . ^ "SN10" . SpaceX . Archived from the original on September 10, 2023 . Retrieved November 22, 2023 . ^ a b Chang, Kenneth (March 3, 2021). "SpaceX Mars Rocket Prototype Explodes, but This Time It Lands First" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on June 5, 2021 . Retrieved December 19, 2021 . ^ a b c Foust, Jeff (May 5, 2021). "Starship survives test flight" . SpaceNews . Archived from the original on June 22, 2022 . Retrieved June 22, 2022 . ^ a b Mack, Eric (March 30, 2021). "SpaceX Starship SN11 test flight flies high and explodes in the fog" . CNET . Archived from the original on December 20, 2021 . Retrieved December 20, 2021 . ^ Foust, Jeff (April 6, 2021). "Engine explosion blamed for latest Starship crash" . SpaceNews . Archived from the original on September 29, 2021 . Retrieved June 22, 2022 . ^ a b Berger, Eric (March 8, 2021). "SpaceX reveals the grand extent of its starport plans in South Texas" . Ars Technica . Archived from the original on October 20, 2023 . Retrieved November 22, 2023 . ^ Keates, Nancy; Maremont, Mark (May 7, 2021). "Elon Musk's SpaceX Is Buying Up a Texas Village. Homeowners Cry Foul" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on May 7, 2021 . Retrieved December 17, 2021 . ^ Mekelburg, Madlin (May 3, 2025). "Elon Musk Wins Vote to Establish His City in Starbase, Texas" . Bloomberg.com . Archived from the original on May 4, 2025 . Retrieved May 4, 2025 . ^ a b Mack, Eric (May 7, 2021). "SpaceX's Mars prototype rocket, Starship SN15, might fly again soon" . CNET . Archived from the original on December 20, 2021 . Retrieved December 20, 2021 . ^ a b "Starbase Overview" (PDF) . SpaceX . March 29, 2023. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 4, 2023 . Retrieved April 15, 2023 . ^ Chang, Kenneth (June 13, 2022). "SpaceX Wins Environmental Approval for Launch of Mars Rocket" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on June 22, 2022 . Retrieved June 23, 2022 . ^ Dvorsky, George (August 10, 2022). "SpaceX Performs Limited Static Fire Test of Starship Booster, Avoids Explosion" . Gizmodo . Archived from the original on September 20, 2022 . Retrieved September 18, 2022 . ^ a b Kshatriya, Amit; Kirasich, Mark (October 31, 2022). "Artemis I – IV Mission Overview / Status" (PDF) . NASA . Human Exploration and Operations Committee of the NASA Advisory Council. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 3, 2022 . Retrieved December 10, 2022 . ^ Iemole, Anthony (December 7, 2022). "Boosters 7 and 9 in dual flow toward Starbase test milestones" . NASASpaceflight . Archived from the original on December 10, 2022 . Retrieved December 10, 2022 . ^ "Starship fires (almost) all her engines" . earthsky.org . February 9, 2023. Archived from the original on January 7, 2024 . Retrieved January 7, 2024 . ^ Foust, Jeff (January 24, 2023). "SpaceX completes Starship wet dress rehearsal" . SpaceNews . Archived from the original on April 15, 2023 . Retrieved January 28, 2023 . ^ Wall, Mike (April 17, 2023). "SpaceX scrubs 1st space launch of giant Starship rocket due to fueling issue" . Space.com . Archived from the original on April 17, 2023 . Retrieved April 20, 2023 . ^ Wattles, Jackie; Strickland, Ashley (April 20, 2023). "SpaceX's Starship rocket lifts off for inaugural test flight, but explodes midair" . CNN . Archived from the original on April 21, 2023 . Retrieved April 20, 2023 . ^ a b Bergin, Chris (May 3, 2023). "Elon Musk pushes for orbital goal following data gathering objectives during Starship debut" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Archived from the original on May 5, 2023 . Retrieved May 5, 2023 . ^ Malik, Tariq; Wall, Mike (April 20, 2023). "SpaceX's 1st Starship launches on epic test flight, explodes in 'rapid unscheduled disassembly' " . Space.com . Archived from the original on September 20, 2023 . Retrieved September 16, 2023 . ^ Klotz, Irene (May 1, 2023). "Engine Issue Felled SpaceX First Super Heavy" . Aviation Week Network . Archived from the original on February 23, 2024 . Retrieved May 4, 2023 . ^ Leinfelder, Andrea (August 2, 2023). "SpaceX Starship sprinkled South Texas with mystery material. Here's what it was" . Houston Chronicle . Archived from the original on September 2, 2023 . Retrieved September 20, 2023 . ^ Grush, Loren; Hull, Dana (April 26, 2023). "SpaceX's Starship Launch Sparked Fire on State Park Land" . Bloomberg News . Archived from the original on February 23, 2024 . Retrieved April 28, 2023 . ^ Kolodny, Lora (July 28, 2023). "SpaceX hasn't obtained environmental permits for 'flame deflector' system it's testing in Texas" . CNBC. Archived from the original on October 7, 2023 . Retrieved September 1, 2023 . ^ Romera, Alejandro Alcantarilla (August 23, 2023). "Booster 9 conducts pre-flight static fire test" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Archived from the original on August 25, 2023 . Retrieved November 21, 2023 . ^ Harwood, William. "Super Heavy-Starship climbs high but falls short on second test flight – Spaceflight Now" . Archived from the original on November 18, 2023 . Retrieved November 23, 2023 . ^ "SpaceX launches its giant new rocket but a pair of explosions ends the second test flight" . AP News . November 18, 2023. Archived from the original on November 20, 2023 . Retrieved November 18, 2023 . ^ Berger, Eric (February 26, 2024). "SpaceX discloses cause of Starship anomalies as it clears an FAA hurdle" . Archived from the original on March 14, 2024 . Retrieved March 14, 2024 . ^ Dinner, Josh (November 18, 2023). "SpaceX Starship megarocket launches on 2nd-ever test flight, explodes in 'rapid unscheduled disassembly' (video)" . Space.com . Archived from the original on November 20, 2023 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 . ^ McDowell, Jonathan (November 19, 2023). "Thanks to NOAA's Kenneth Howard for pointing me to this NOAA weather radar data showing a debris cloud exactly over my estimated Starship reentry point!" ( Tweet ) . Retrieved June 16, 2024 – via X (formerly Twitter) . ^ a b "SpaceX – Updates" . SpaceX . February 26, 2024. Archived from the original on February 10, 2022 . Retrieved March 13, 2024 . ^ Weber, Ryan (December 14, 2023). "SpaceX Pushes Ahead to Flight 3 with the Rollout of Ship 28" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Archived from the original on December 31, 2023 . Retrieved April 18, 2024 . ^ SpaceX Launches Third Starship Flight Test , March 14, 2024, archived from the original on March 14, 2024 , retrieved March 14, 2024 ^ Wall, Mike (March 7, 2024). "SpaceX to push the envelope on 3rd Starship test flight" . Space.com . Archived from the original on March 7, 2024 . Retrieved March 7, 2024 . ^ Berger, Eric (March 6, 2024). "The next Starship mission has a tentative launch date: March 14" . Ars Technica . Archived from the original on March 6, 2024 . Retrieved March 7, 2024 . ^ Clark, Stephen (March 14, 2024). "SpaceX celebrates major progress on the third flight of Starship" . Archived from the original on March 16, 2024 . Retrieved March 16, 2024 . ^ Wattles, Jackie; Strickland, Ashley (March 15, 2024). "SpaceX's Starship reaches new heights in monumental test flight but is now lost" . ABC7 Chicago . Chicago, Illinois: CNN . Archived from the original on March 14, 2024 . Retrieved March 14, 2024 . ^ "Live updates: SpaceX to launch its Starship megarocket on a test flight to orbit" . NBC News. June 6, 2024 . Retrieved June 6, 2024 . ^ Davenport, Justin (April 19, 2024). "As IFT-4 prepares for launch, Starship's future is coming into focus" . NASASpaceflight . Archived from the original on April 20, 2024 . Retrieved April 20, 2024 . ^ SpaceX (June 6, 2024). "Splashdown confirmed! Congratulations to the entire SpaceX team on an exciting fourth flight test of Starship!" ( Tweet ) . Retrieved June 16, 2024 – via X (formerly Twitter) . ^ Musk, Elon (April 5, 2024). "Flight 4 next month" ( Tweet ) . Retrieved June 16, 2024 – via X (formerly Twitter) . ^ Wall, Mike (August 9, 2024). "Starship is ready for its 5th test flight, SpaceX says (photos)" . Space.com . Retrieved August 12, 2024 . ^ NASASpaceflight (October 11, 2024). SpaceX Launches Starship for the Fifth Time (and Tries to Catch a Booster) . Retrieved October 13, 2024 – via YouTube. ^ NASASpaceflight (September 18, 2024). SpaceX Static Fires Ship 31 – Upper Stage of the Sixth Starship Flight . Archived from the original on September 18, 2024 . Retrieved September 18, 2024 – via YouTube. ^ "SpaceX Starship Booster 13 LOX fill test looks successful" . www.youtube.com . Retrieved April 30, 2024 . ^ a b c NASASpaceflight (November 16, 2024). Starship Stakeout – SpaceX Launches Starship for the Sixth Time . Retrieved November 19, 2024 – via YouTube. ^ Berger, Eric (November 22, 2024). "Rocket Report: Next Vulcan launch slips into 2025; Starship gets a green light" . Ars Technica . Retrieved November 22, 2024 . ^ NASASpaceflight (October 31, 2024). New Starship Block 2 Cryo Proof Tested . Retrieved January 17, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ NASASpaceflight (December 16, 2024). SpaceX's Starship Prepares for Flight 7: Testing & Expansion at Starbase Starbase Update . Retrieved January 17, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ House, Marcus (October 5, 2024). Vulcan Booster Fail, yet Still Completed Mission, and SpaceX Starship Flight 5 in Only Days!? . Retrieved January 17, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ NASASpaceflight (December 7, 2024). SpaceX Tests Booster 14 – Spin Prime . Retrieved January 17, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ "SpaceX" . SpaceX . Archived from the original on January 16, 2025 . Retrieved January 17, 2025 . ^ a b Strickland, Jackie; Wattles, Ashley (January 16, 2025). "SpaceX executes second-ever 'chopsticks' booster catch but Starship spacecraft is lost" . CNN . Retrieved January 17, 2025 . ^ "SpaceX prototype fails in space after launch caused string of Qantas delays" . ABC News . January 16, 2025 . Retrieved January 17, 2025 . ^ NASASpaceflight (March 3, 2025). (SCRUB) SpaceX Launches Starship Flight 8 and Attempts to Catch Another Booster! . Retrieved March 4, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ Wattles, Jackie (March 3, 2025). "SpaceX calls off Starship's first flight attempt after January explosion of flight 7" . CNN . Retrieved March 7, 2025 . ^ Robinson-Smith, Will (March 3, 2025). "Launch preview: SpaceX to launch Starship Flight 8 following Monday scrub – Spaceflight Now" . Spaceflight Now . Retrieved March 7, 2025 . ^ Chow, Denise (March 6, 2025). "SpaceX again loses its Starship rocket on test flight after explosion during previous attempt" . NBC News . Retrieved March 6, 2025 . ^ Chang, Kenneth (March 6, 2025). "SpaceX's Starship Rocket Disrupts Florida Airports With Unsuccessful Test Flight" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved March 7, 2025 . ^ "Starship's Eighth Flight Test" . SpaceX.com . February 24, 2025 . Retrieved February 24, 2025 . ^ "SpaceX's Starship explodes in second failure for Musk's Mars program" .

The Guardian . March 7, 2025. ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved March 7, 2025 . ^ a b "SpaceX Starship: Smooth launch but spacecraft makes uncontrolled re-entry" . NBC News . May 28, 2025 . Retrieved May 28, 2025 . ^ Baehr, Jasmine (May 27, 2025). "SpaceX's Starship Flight 9 ends in failure after booster loss: 'Success comes from what we learn' " . Fox News . Retrieved May 28, 2025 . ^ Weber, Ryan (June 19, 2025). "Ship 36 experiences anomaly during engine testing, next steps unclear" . NASASpaceflight.com . Retrieved June 20, 2025 . ^ "Next Starship explodes on test stand" . Spaceflight Now . June 19, 2025 . Retrieved June 20, 2025 . ^ Clark, Stephen (June 19, 2025). "SpaceX's next Starship just blew up on its test stand in South Texas" . Ars Technica . Retrieved June 28, 2025 . ^ https://www.nytimes.com/2025/08/24/science/spacex-starship-launch.html , updated August 25 ^ NASASpaceflight (August 25, 2025). SpaceX Starship Flight 10 - Third Attempt . Retrieved August 27, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ a b c NASASpaceflight (October 13, 2025). SpaceX Starship Flight 11 - LAUNCH STREAM . Retrieved October 14, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ "MSN" . www.msn.com . Retrieved May 24, 2026 . ^ a b c d Grush, Loren (May 27, 2026). "SpaceX Starship rocket grounded by FAA after launch mishap" . www.msn.com . Bloomberg . Retrieved May 27, 2026 – via MSN. Cite error: The named reference ":1" was defined multiple times with different content (see the help page ). ^ Kolodny, Lora; Sheetz, Michael (May 22, 2023). "SpaceX set to join FAA to fight environmental lawsuit that could delay Starship work" . CNBC. Archived from the original on May 23, 2023 . Retrieved May 23, 2023 . ^ Maidenberg, Micah (April 30, 2023). "Elon Musk Expects SpaceX to Spend Around $2 Billion on Starship Rocket This Year" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on May 14, 2023 . Retrieved May 14, 2023 . ^ a b NASASpaceflight (November 16, 2024). SpaceX Launches Starship Flight 6 (and Catches a Booster) . Retrieved November 19, 2024 – via YouTube. ^ "Elon Musk: Each Starship Launch Could Cost Just $1 Million" . Futurism . February 11, 2022. Archived from the original on December 21, 2023 . Retrieved December 21, 2023 . ^ Scoles, Sarah (August 12, 2022). "Prime mover" . Science . 377 (6607): 702– 705. Bibcode : 2022Sci...377..702S . doi : 10.1126/science.ade2873 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 35951703 . S2CID 240464593 . Archived from the original on August 18, 2022 . Retrieved August 21, 2022 . ^ "SpaceX" . SpaceX . Archived from the original on October 31, 2025 . Retrieved October 31, 2025 . ^ "To the Moon and Beyond" . SpaceX . October 30, 2025 . Retrieved October 30, 2025 . ^ Brown, Katherine (April 16, 2021). "NASA Picks SpaceX to Land Next Americans on Moon" . NASA . Archived from the original on April 22, 2021 . Retrieved April 30, 2023 . ^ Pruitt-Young, Sharon (August 17, 2021). "Jeff Bezos' Blue Origin Sues NASA over a Lunar Lander Contract Given to Rival SpaceX" . NPR . Archived from the original on October 20, 2021 . Retrieved June 9, 2022 . ^ O'Shea, Claire (May 19, 2023). "NASA Selects Blue Origin as Second Artemis Lunar Lander Provider" . NASA . Archived from the original on May 19, 2023 . Retrieved May 19, 2023 . ^ "SpaceX Awarded $1.15 Billion Contract to Build NASA's Second Lunar Lander" . Yahoo News . November 17, 2022. Archived from the original on November 23, 2022 . Retrieved April 30, 2023 . ^ a b Erwin, Sandra (January 19, 2022). "SpaceX wins $102 million Air Force contract to demonstrate technologies for point-to-point space transportation" . SpaceNews . Archived from the original on March 29, 2022 . Retrieved March 23, 2022 . ^ Wall, Mike; published, Tariq Malik (April 20, 2023). "SpaceX's 1st Starship launches on epic test flight, explodes in 'rapid unscheduled disassembly' " . Space.com . Retrieved September 23, 2024 . ^ McDowell, Jonathan (May 13, 2023). "Jonathan's Space Report No. 819" . Jonathan's Space Report . Archived from the original on February 13, 2025 . Retrieved February 13, 2025 . ^ O'Callaghan, Jonathan (October 1, 2023). "Termination shock" . Aerospace America . Archived from the original on October 22, 2023 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 . ^ Kelly, Emre (April 20, 2023). "SpaceX Starship launches from Texas, then explodes over Gulf of Mexico" . USA Today . Archived from the original on November 18, 2023 . Retrieved November 18, 2023 . ^ "Powerful Blast from SpaceX's Starship Damages Launch Pad and Wrecks Nearby Minivan" . Yahoo News . April 20, 2023. Archived from the original on October 7, 2024 . Retrieved September 26, 2024 . ^ Dinner, Josh (November 18, 2023). "SpaceX Starship megarocket launches on 2nd-ever test flight, explodes in 'rapid unscheduled disassembly' (video)" . Space.com . Retrieved September 23, 2024 . ^ McDowell, Jonathan (November 18, 2023). "Jonathan's Space Report No. 826" . Jonathan's Space Report . Archived from the original on February 13, 2025 . Retrieved February 13, 2025 . ^ a b "SpaceX Updates" . SpaceX . February 26, 2024 . Retrieved February 28, 2024 . ^ Weber, Ryan (November 17, 2023). "After upgrades, Starship achieves numerous successes during second test flight" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Archived from the original on December 11, 2023 . Retrieved March 18, 2024 . ^ Dinner, Josh (March 14, 2024). "SpaceX launches giant Starship rocket into space on epic 3rd test flight (video)" . Space.com . Retrieved September 23, 2024 . ^ McDowell, Jonathan (April 24, 2024). "Jonathan's Space Report No. 832" . Jonathan's Space Report . Retrieved November 14, 2024 . ^ Sheetz, Michael (December 5, 2023). "SpaceX plans key NASA demonstration for next Starship launch" . CNBC . Archived from the original on December 5, 2023 . Retrieved December 5, 2023 . ^ "Starship's Third Flight Test" . SpaceX . Archived from the original on March 14, 2024 . Retrieved March 14, 2024 . ^ Tingley, Brett (June 6, 2024). "SpaceX's Starship 4th flight test looks epic in these stunning photos" . Space.com . Retrieved September 23, 2024 . ^ McDowell, Jonathan (June 23, 2024). "Jonathan's Space Report No. 834" . planet4589 . Retrieved November 8, 2024 . ^ Beil, Adrian (June 5, 2024). "Starship finds success on fourth flight test" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved October 14, 2024 . ^ Davenport, Justin (April 19, 2024). "As IFT-4 prepares for launch, Starship's future is coming into focus" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved October 14, 2024 . ^ "Starship Flight 4" . SpaceX . Retrieved June 6, 2024 . ^ Zafar, Ramish (June 7, 2024). "SpaceX Starship Missed Its Landing Spot By 6 Kilometers Says Musk" . Wccftech . Retrieved October 14, 2024 . ^ Wall, Mike (October 13, 2024). "SpaceX catches giant Starship booster with 'Chopsticks' on historic Flight 5 rocket launch and landing (video)" . Space.com (updated, last ed.) . Retrieved October 14, 2024 . ^ Foust, Jeff (October 9, 2024). "NASA "really looking forward" to next Starship test flight" . SpaceNews . Retrieved February 13, 2025 . ^ Weber, Ryan (October 12, 2024). "SpaceX Catches a Super Heavy Booster During a Milestone Flight 5" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved October 14, 2024 . ^ Wall, Mike (November 19, 2024). "SpaceX Starship launches banana to space, skips giant rocket catch on 6th test flight (video, photos)" . Space.com . Archived from the original on February 6, 2025 . Retrieved February 13, 2025 . ^ McDowell, Jonathan (December 27, 2024). "Jonathan's Space Report No. 840" . planet4589.org . Retrieved February 12, 2025 . ^ Weber, Ryan (November 18, 2024). "SpaceX lands Ship 31 in the Indian Ocean but miss the Booster Catch" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Archived from the original on December 22, 2024 . Retrieved February 13, 2025 . ^ CONACES 2024 Conferencia: SpaceX. Ing. Kathryn Lueders . Hacia el Espacio. November 7, 2024 . Retrieved November 11, 2024 – via YouTube. ^ Wall, Mike (January 16, 2025). "SpaceX catches Super Heavy booster on Starship Flight 7 test but loses upper stage (video, photos)" . Space.com . Retrieved January 16, 2025 . ^ Davenport, Justin (May 22, 2025). "Starship program at critical moment as Flight 9 and infrastructure work in focus" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved September 9, 2025 . ^ a b McCrea, Aaron (July 31, 2024). "Successful Static Fire Leads to Final Preparation Before Full Stack" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved September 25, 2024 . ^ "Starship's Seventh Flight Test" . SpaceX.com . January 8, 2025 . Retrieved January 15, 2025 . ^ "Consolidated opposition to petitions and response to comments of SPACEX. Exhibit A. satellite dimensions and DAS outputs" . May 30, 2023 . Retrieved October 22, 2023 . ^ Clark, Stephen (January 9, 2025). "A taller, heavier, smarter version of SpaceX's Starship is almost ready to fly" . Ars Technica . Retrieved February 14, 2025 . ^ McDowell, Jonathan (November 18, 2023). "Jonathan's Space Report No. 841" . Jonathan's Space Report . Archived from the original on January 24, 2025 . Retrieved February 13, 2025 . ^ a b McCrea, Aaron (November 27, 2024). "Starbase continues its rapid pace of advancement after Starship Flight 6" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved November 28, 2024 . ^ "New Year. New Ship. New Lessons" . SpaceX.com . February 24, 2025 . Retrieved February 24, 2025 . ^ Clark, Stephen (January 17, 2025). "Fire destroys Starship on its seventh test flight, raining debris from space" . Ars Technica . Retrieved January 24, 2025 . ^ a b c d "Starship's Eighth Flight Test" . SpaceX.com . February 27, 2025 . Retrieved March 5, 2025 . ^ Bergin, Chris (October 9, 2024). "Starship readying for Flight 5 amid future preparations" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved October 9, 2024 . ^ SpaceX (May 22, 2025). "Fly. Learn. Repeat" . ^ a b c d "Starship's Ninth Flight Test" . SpaceX . May 23, 2025 . Retrieved May 23, 2025 . ^ Booster 14 Fires Again! First Static Fire of a Reused Super Heavy . NASASpaceflight . April 7, 2025. Event occurs at 7:55 . Retrieved May 1, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ Weber, Ryan (April 4, 2025). "Booster 14 Completes Milestone Static Fire Ahead of Flight 9" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved April 6, 2025 . ^ a b NASASpaceflight (May 21, 2025). SpaceX Starship Flight 9 . Retrieved May 27, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ a b c d "Starship's Tenth Flight Test" . SpaceX . August 15, 2025 . Retrieved August 26, 2025 . ^ NASASpaceflight (April 21, 2025). Starship Flight 9 Preps, Chopstick Testing, and Pad B Progress | Starbase Update . Event occurs at 4:10 . Retrieved June 2, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ Weber, Ryan (July 29, 2025). "The Final Two Block 2 Ships leave Mega Bay 2 for Testing" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved July 31, 2025 . ^ Beil, Adrian (June 18, 2025). "Starship Flight 10 is NET June 29. This is according to the FAA advisory" . Twitter . Retrieved August 27, 2025 . ^ NASASpaceflight (June 18, 2025). SpaceX Performs A Second Static Fire of Ship 36 . Retrieved June 18, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ a b c d e NASASpaceflight (August 25, 2025). SpaceX Starship Flight 10 - Third Attempt . Retrieved August 26, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ a b c d e f NASASpaceflight (October 8, 2025). SpaceX Starship Flight 11 - LAUNCH STREAM . Retrieved October 13, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ a b Weber, Ryan (July 29, 2025). "The Final Two Block 2 Ships leave Mega Bay 2 for Testing" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved August 15, 2025 . ^ Davenport, Justin (August 17, 2025). "Launch Roundup: Falcon 9, Starship, and Russia flying this week" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved August 18, 2025 . ^ Clark, Stephen (September 9, 2025). "SpaceX's lesson from last Starship flight? "We need to seal the tiles." " . Ars Technica . Retrieved September 26, 2025 . ^ Clark, Stephen (September 30, 2025). "SpaceX has a few tricks up its sleeve for the last Starship flight of the year" . Ars Technica . Retrieved October 1, 2025 . ^ Weber, Ryan (November 21, 2025). "Booster 18 suffers anomaly during proof testing" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved November 23, 2025 . ^ Weber, Ryan (September 5, 2025). "Ten flights in, the Starship Program has had successes and failures" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved September 9, 2025 . ^ Bergin, Chris (September 9, 2025). "Eye on the future, as SpaceX prepare Pad 2 and Block 3 at Starbase" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved September 9, 2025 . ^ "Critical Path" continues the ongoing Starship series, following SpaceX engineers through the final days before launch of the first Starship V3 and the challenges that come with development of the world’s most powerful and fully reusable rocket. , SpaceX, 10 July 2026. ^ Berger, Eric (November 21, 2025). "Newest Starship booster is significantly damaged during testing early Friday" . Ars Technica . Retrieved November 21, 2025 . ^ a b c d e f g @SpaceX (May 22, 2026). "Watch Starship's twelfth flight test" ( Tweet ) – via X (formerly Twitter) . ^ Clark, Stephen (September 9, 2025). "SpaceX's lesson from last Starship flight? "We need to seal the tiles." " . Ars Technica . Retrieved September 9, 2025 . ^ @SpaceX (May 22, 2026). "Starship's Raptor engines ignite during hot-staging separation" ( Tweet ) – via X (formerly Twitter) . ^ a b Foust, Jeff (May 22, 2025). "SpaceX launches first Starship V3" . Space News . ^ @SpaceX (May 22, 2026). "Starship has successfully deployed our modified @Starlink satellites and simulators" ( Tweet ) – via X (formerly Twitter) . ^ @SpaceX (May 22, 2026). "Views of Starship in space from a @Starlink satellite" ( Tweet ) – via X (formerly Twitter) . ^ a b Musk, Elon (February 27, 2026). "Should note that SpaceX will only try to catch the ship with the tower after two perfect soft landings in the ocean" . Twitter . Retrieved April 11, 2026 . ^ Eric Lagatta (May 28, 2026). "Starship grounded as SpaceX investigates Super Heavy booster failure" . USA Today . Starship will not be cleared to fly again until the FAA approves SpaceX's final investigation report and corrective actions. ^ a b c d Clark, Stephen (July 5, 2024). "Here's why SpaceX's competitors are crying foul over Starship launch plans" . Ars Technica . Archived from the original on July 11, 2024 . Retrieved July 11, 2024 . ^ Clark, Stephen (January 7, 2026). "Here are the launches and landings we're most excited about in 2026" . Ars Technica . Retrieved January 7, 2026 . ^ a b "NASA, SpaceX Illustrate Key Moments of Artemis Lunar Lander Mission" . NASA . November 20, 2024 . Retrieved November 25, 2024 . ^ Philip Sloss (January 12, 2025). Starship flight test 7 on deck, Mobile Launcher-2 "rig and set," and Artemis II stacking continues . Retrieved January 12, 2025 – via YouTube. ^ "SpaceX delays Mars plans to focus on 2027 moon landing, WSJ reports" . Reuters . February 6, 2026 . Retrieved February 6, 2026 . ^ "Human Landing Systems" . NASA . Retrieved September 23, 2024 . ^ a b c d "At Least 15 Starship Launches Needed to Execute Artemis III Lunar Landing" . Retrieved October 13, 2024 . ^ "Astrolab" . astrolab.space . Retrieved June 9, 2024 . ^ "SKY Perfect JSAT signed Launch Service Contract for Superbird-9 satellite with SpaceX | SKY Perfect JSAT HD" . Archived from the original on August 14, 2023 . Retrieved April 29, 2025 . ^ Miller, Seth (November 6, 2023). "Panasonic Avionics picks Superbird-9 to further extend GEO capacity" . PaxEx.Aero . Retrieved September 26, 2024 . ^ a b c "OffWorld Europe and Luxembourg Space Agency Collaborate in New Lunar ISRU Exploration Program" . Business Wire (Press release) . Retrieved February 26, 2024 . ^ a b c Berger, Eric (February 27, 2026). "NASA shakes up its Artemis program to speed up lunar return" . Ars Technica . Retrieved February 27, 2026 . ^ Berger, Eric (June 9, 2026). "NASA assigns crew for Artemis III, sets aggressive timeline for flying it" . Ars Technica . Retrieved June 9, 2026 . ^ "Artemis III: NASA's First Human Mission to the Lunar South Pole" . NASA . January 13, 2023 . Retrieved September 23, 2024 . ^ Foust, Jeff (March 13, 2023). "NASA planning to spend up to $1 billion on space station deorbit module" . SpaceNews . Retrieved April 29, 2025 . ^ a b Lloyd, Vanessa (November 15, 2022). "NASA Awards SpaceX Second Contract Option for Artemis Moon Landing" . NASA . Archived from the original on November 21, 2022 . Retrieved February 4, 2023 . ^ Werner, Debra (October 3, 2025). "Starlab partners unveil full-scale mockup of commercial space station" . spacenews.com . Retrieved October 3, 2025 . ^ Sheetz, Michael (January 31, 2024). "Starlab, meet Starship: Private space station buys SpaceX launch for later this decade" . CNBC . Archived from the original on January 31, 2024 . Retrieved January 31, 2024 . ^ Fernholz, Tim (November 21, 2024). "Starship Hired To Fly Two Lunar Rovers" . Payload . Retrieved December 11, 2024 . ^ Foust, Jeff (November 21, 2024). "Lunar Outpost selects Starship to deliver rover to the moon" . SpaceNews . Retrieved November 21, 2024 . ^ "Lunar Outpost Signs with SpaceX for Starship Moon Mission" . businesswire . November 21, 2024 . Retrieved November 21, 2024 . ^ "NASA Selects Companies to Advance Moon Mobility for Artemis Missions" . NASA . Retrieved November 15, 2024 . ^ "Haven-2 — VAST" . www.vastspace.com . Retrieved February 12, 2025 . ^ Rosenstein, Sawyer (February 12, 2025). "Vast space station qualification article passes major milestone" . NASASpaceFlight.com . Retrieved February 12, 2025 . ^ Foust, Jeff (November 24, 2024). "NASA to make lunar cargo delivery awards to Blue Origin and SpaceX" . SpaceNews . Retrieved February 13, 2025 . ^ "JAXA and Toyota Announce "LUNAR CRUISER" As Nickname for Manned Pressurized Rover" . Toyota Motor Corporation. August 28, 2020 . Retrieved July 21, 2022 . ^ a b c d e f "Roadmap — VAST" . www.vastspace.com . Retrieved February 12, 2025 . ^ a b SpaceX (November 19, 2024). "Watch Starship's sixth flight test" . X.com . ^ Meenaktshi, Harshita; Dey, Mrinmay (September 22, 2024). "SpaceX plans to send five uncrewed Starships to Mars in two years, Musk says" . Reuters . ^ Guarnieri, Valeria (August 7, 2025). "L'Italia va su Marte" . ASI (in Italian) . Retrieved August 7, 2025 . ^ Foust, Jeff (September 15, 2024). "Crew Dragon splashes down to conclude Polaris Dawn mission" . SpaceNews . Retrieved September 15, 2024 . ^ Foust, Jeff (February 8, 2023). "Shotwell says SpaceX ready for Starship static-fire test" . SpaceNews . Archived from the original on September 15, 2024 . Retrieved September 15, 2024 . said she expected Starship to fly at least 100 times before it carries people for the first time In her later conversation with reporters, she called that 100-flight milestone a "great goal" but suggested it was not a requirement. ^ Davenport, Christian (February 14, 2022). "Jared Isaacman, who led the first all-private astronaut mission to orbit, has commissioned 3 more flights from SpaceX" . Washington Post . Archived from the original on February 24, 2022 . Retrieved February 15, 2022 . ^ Sheetz, Michael (August 19, 2021). "SpaceX adding capabilities to Starlink internet satellites, plans to launch them with Starship" . CNBC . Archived from the original on January 7, 2022 . Retrieved January 13, 2022 . ^ Sheetz, Michael (October 19, 2021). "Morgan Stanley says SpaceX's Starship may 'transform investor expectations' about space" . CNBC . Archived from the original on December 20, 2021 . Retrieved December 20, 2021 . ^ Smith, Rich (December 11, 2022). "Elon Musk Admits: Starlink Is Losing Money" .

The Motley Fool . Archived from the original on November 19, 2023 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 . ^ Sheetz, Michael (September 13, 2023). "SpaceX no longer taking losses to produce Starlink satellite antennas, a key step to improving profitability" . CNBC. Archived from the original on September 15, 2023 . Retrieved October 30, 2023 . ^ "Starlink achieves cash-flow breakeven, says SpaceX CEO Musk" . Reuters . November 2, 2023. Archived from the original on November 3, 2023 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 . ^ "FCC issues final denial of $885M Starlink subsidy" . December 13, 2023. Archived from the original on December 20, 2023 . Retrieved December 18, 2023 . ^ Burghardt, Thomas (April 20, 2021). "After NASA taps SpaceX's Starship for first Artemis landings, the agency looks to on-ramp future vehicles" . NASASpaceflight . Archived from the original on April 20, 2021 . Retrieved January 13, 2022 . ^ a b c d e f NASA's management of the Artemis missions (PDF) (Report). NASA Office of Inspector General . November 15, 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 15, 2021 . Retrieved November 22, 2021 . ^ "Cislunar and Gateway Overview" (PDF) . NASA. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 18, 2023 . Retrieved January 7, 2024 . ^ a b c d Elvis, Martin; Lawrence, Charles; Seager, Sara (2023). "Accelerating astrophysics with the SpaceX Starship" . Physics Today . 76 (2): 40– 45. Bibcode : 2023PhT....76b..40E . doi : 10.1063/PT.3.5176 . Archived from the original on October 21, 2023 . Retrieved October 25, 2023 . ^ Clark, Stephen (October 18, 2023). "Astronomers say new telescopes should take advantage of 'Starship paradigm' " . Ars Technica . Archived from the original on October 18, 2023 . Retrieved October 18, 2023 . ^ a b c d e f g h Kuhr, Jack (July 10, 2024). "Habitable Worlds Observatory and the Future of Space Telescopes in the Era of Super Heavy Lift Launch" . payloadspace.com . Archived from the original on July 11, 2024 . Retrieved July 11, 2024 . ^ "Lee Feinberg Biography Webb Telescope/NASA" . jwst.nasa.gov . Archived from the original on July 11, 2024 . Retrieved July 11, 2024 . ^ a b "USAF awards SpaceX $102M to test point-to-point Starship flights" . AeroTime . January 21, 2022. Archived from the original on December 26, 2023 . Retrieved December 26, 2023 . ^ Hitchens, Theresa (June 4, 2024). "ROC Stars: Air Force seeks more firms for cargo delivery via rocket" . Breaking Defense . Retrieved June 8, 2024 . ^ Robinson-Smith, Will. "NASA requests proposals to reduce cost, timeline of Mars Sample Return mission – Spaceflight Now" . Retrieved April 28, 2024 . ^ O'Callaghan, Jonathan. "NASA's Rocks Are Stuck on Mars. SpaceX's Starship Could Retrieve Them" . Scientific American . Archived from the original on April 29, 2024 . Retrieved April 28, 2024 . ^ Sheetz, Michael (June 4, 2021). "The Pentagon wants to use private rockets like SpaceX's Starship to deliver cargo around the world" . CNBC . Archived from the original on September 1, 2021 . Retrieved June 22, 2022 . ^ Sheetz, Michael (September 1, 2020). "Elon Musk says SpaceX's Starship rocket will launch "hundreds of missions" before flying people" . CNBC . Archived from the original on September 2, 2020 . Retrieved February 7, 2021 . ^ Goldsmith, Donald; Rees, Martin J. (April 19, 2022).

The End of Astronauts: Why Robots Are the Future of Exploration . Belknap Press . ISBN 978-0-674-25772-6 . OCLC 1266218790 . ^ Grush, Loren (October 4, 2019). "Elon Musk's future Starship updates could use more details on human health and survival" .

The Verge . Archived from the original on October 8, 2019 . Retrieved January 24, 2022 . ^ Pearson, Ben (June 3, 2019). "SpaceX beginning to tackle some of the big challenges for a Mars journey" . Ars Technica . Archived from the original on October 11, 2021 . Retrieved August 21, 2022 . ^ Zubrin, Robert M.; Muscatello, Anthony C.; Berggren, Mark (January 2013). "Integrated Mars In Situ Propellant Production System" . Journal of Aerospace Engineering . 26 (1): 43– 56. doi : 10.1061/(ASCE)AS.1943-5525.0000201 . ISSN 0893-1321 . Archived from the original on December 23, 2023 . Retrieved December 23, 2023 . ^ Killelea, Eric (December 16, 2021). "Musk looks to Earth's atmosphere as source of rocket fuel" . San Antonio Express-News . Archived from the original on December 20, 2021 . Retrieved March 31, 2022 . ^ a b c "Elon Musk's Plan to Send a Million Colonists to Mars by 2050 Is Pure Delusion" . Gizmodo . June 3, 2022. Archived from the original on December 23, 2023 . Retrieved December 26, 2023 . ^ Chang, Kenneth (September 27, 2016). "Elon Musk's Plan: Get Humans to Mars, and Beyond" .