The concept, in its broadest sense, has been applied to any permanent human presence in space, such as a space habitat or other extraterrestrial settlements . It may involve a process of territorial occupation or resource control for commercial purposes, such as extraterrestrial mining . Making territorial claims in space is prohibited by international space law , defining space as a common heritage . International space law has had the goal to prevent colonial claims and militarization of space , and has advocated the installation of international regimes to regulate access to and sharing of space, particularly for specific locations such as the limited space of geostationary orbit or the Moon. To date, no permanent space settlement other than temporary space habitats have been established, nor has any extraterrestrial territory or land been internationally claimed . Currently there are also no plans for building a space colony by any government. However, many proposals, speculations, and designs, particularly for extraterrestrial settlements have been made through the years, and a considerable number of space colonization advocates and groups are active. Currently, the dominant private launch provider SpaceX , has been the most prominent organization planning space colonization on Mars , though having not reached a development stage beyond launch and landing systems. Space colonization raises numerous socio-political questions. Many arguments for and against space settlement have been made.

The two most common reasons in favor of colonization are the survival of humans and life independent of Earth, making humans a multiplanetary species , in the event of a planetary-scale disaster (natural or human-made) , and the commercial use of space particularly for enabling a more sustainable expansion of human society through the availability of additional resources in space, reducing environmental damage on and exploitation of Earth.

The most common objections include concerns that the commodification of the cosmos may be likely to continue pre-existing detrimental processes such as environmental degradation , economic inequality and wars , enhancing the interests of the already powerful, and at the cost of investing in solving existing major environmental and social issues .

The mere construction of an extraterrestrial settlement, with the needed infrastructure, presents daunting technological, economic and social challenges. Space settlements are generally conceived as providing for nearly all (or all) the needs of larger numbers of humans.

The environment in space is very hostile to human life and not readily accessible, particularly for maintenance and supply. It would involve much advancement of currently primitive technologies, such as controlled ecological life-support systems . With the high cost of orbital spaceflight (around $1400 per kg, or $640 per pound, to low Earth orbit by SpaceX Falcon Heavy ), a space settlement would currently be massively expensive, but ongoing progress in reusable launch systems aim to change that (possibly reaching $20 per kg to orbit), and in creating automated manufacturing and construction techniques . Definition Space colonization has been in a broad sense referred to as space settlement, space humanization or space habitation. Space colonization in a narrow sense refers to space settlements , as envisioned by Gerard K. O'Neill . It is characterized by elements such as: settlement and exploitation, as well as territorial claim.

The concept in its broad sense has been applied to any permanent human presence, even robotic, particularly along with the term "settlement", being imprecisely applied to any human space habitat , from research stations to self-sustaining communities in space .

The words colony and colonization are terms rooted in colonial history on Earth, making them human geographic as well as particularly political terms. This broad use for any permanent human activity and development in space has been criticized, particularly as colonialist and undifferentiated (see below Objections ).

In this sense, a colony is a settlement that claims territory and exploits it for the settlers or their metropole . Therefore, a human outpost , while possibly a space habitat or even a space settlement , does not automatically constitute a space colony. Some have argued the presence of certain mechanisms or institutions are symptoms of having achieved a "critical mass"; for instance, sci-fi author Neal Stephenson argued a small Martian colony would feel more like living on a U.S. Navy nuclear submarine than being part of a vibrant community while economists Karl T. Muth and Jodi N. Beggs argued that, to meet American cultural and judicial norms, a Martian colony would need a large enough population to offer a defendant a jury of twelve strangers. Therefore, any basing can be part of colonization, while colonization can be understood as a process that is open to more claims, beyond basing.

The International Space Station , the longest-occupied extraterrestrial habitat thus far, does not claim territory and thus is not usually considered a colony. Moriba Jah has criticized existing approaches to orbital space as colonialist, such as for satellites, on the grounds that it involves claiming ownership instead of collaborative stewardship. Some advocates of peaceful human settlement of space have argued against use of the word "colony" and related terms, so as to avoid confusing their goals with colonialism on Earth. History In the first half of the 17th century John Wilkins suggested in A Discourse Concerning a New Planet that future adventurers like Francis Drake and Christopher Columbus might reach the Moon and allow people to live there.

The first known work on space colonization was the 1869 novella The Brick Moon by Edward Everett Hale , about an inhabited artificial satellite.

In 1897, Kurd Lasswitz also wrote about space colonies in his book Auf zwei Planeten ( Two Planets ).

The Russian rocket science pioneer Konstantin Tsiolkovsky foresaw elements of the space community in his book Beyond Planet Earth written about 1900. Tsiolkovsky imagined his space travelers building greenhouses and raising crops in space. Tsiolkovsky believed that going into space would help perfect human beings, leading to immortality and peace. One of the first to speak about space colonization was Cecil Rhodes who in 1902 spoke about "these stars that you see overhead at night, these vast worlds which we can never reach", adding "I would annex the planets if I could; I often think of that. It makes me sad to see them so clear and yet so far".

In the 1920s John Desmond Bernal , Hermann Oberth , Guido von Pirquet and Herman Noordung further developed the idea. Wernher von Braun contributed his ideas in a 1952 Colliers magazine article.

In the 1950s and 1960s, Dandridge M. Cole published his ideas.

When orbital spaceflight was achieved in the 1950s colonialism was still a strong international project, e.g. easing the United States to advance its space program and space in general as part of a " New Frontier ".

As the Space Age was developing, decolonization gained again in force, producing many newly independent countries. These newly independent countries confronted spacefaring countries, demanding an anti-colonial stance and regulation of space activity when space law was raised and negotiated internationally. Fears of confrontations because of land grabs and an arms race in space between the few countries with spaceflight capabilities grew and were ultimately shared by the spacefaring countries themselves. This produced the wording of the agreed on international space law, starting with the Outer Space Treaty of 1967, calling space a " province of all mankind " and securing provisions for international regulation and sharing of outer space.

The advent of geostationary satellites raised the case of limited space in outer space.

In the 1960s and with an initial focus on communications spectrum management, the international community agreed to regulate the assignment of slots in the geosynchronous (GEO) belt through the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) . Today, any company or nation planning to launch a satellite to GEO must apply to the ITU for an orbital slot. A group of equatorial countries, all of which were countries that were once colonies of colonial empires, but without spaceflight capabilities, signed in 1976 the Bogota Declaration . These countries declared that geostationary orbit is a limited natural resource and belongs to the equatorial countries directly below, seeing it not as part of outer space, humanity's common . Through this, the declaration challenged the dominance of geostationary orbit by spacefaring countries through identifying their dominance as imperialistic. Writers continued to address space colonization concepts by publishing books in the mid-1970s such as The High Frontier: Human Colonies in Space by Gerard K. O'Neill and Colonies in Space by T. A. Heppenheimer .

In 1975, the first international joint space mission occurred as a symbol of the policy of détente that the two superpowers were pursuing at the time.

The U.S. Apollo and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft docked in earth orbit for almost two days.

In 1977, the first sustained space habitat, the Salyut 6 station, was put into Earth's orbit. Eventually the first space stations were succeeded by the ISS , today's largest human outpost in space and closest to a space settlement. Built and operated under a multilateral regime, it has become a blueprint for future stations, such as around and possibly on the Moon . Additional discourse on living in space was generated by writers including Marianne J. Dyson who wrote Home on the Moon; Living on a Space Frontier in 2003; Peter Eckart wrote Lunar Base Handbook in 2006 and then Harrison Schmitt 's Return to the Moon written in 2007. An international regime for lunar activity was demanded by the international Moon Treaty , but is currently developed multilaterally as with the Artemis Accords . Threats to existing treaties come in areas such as space debris because of the lack of regulation on disposition of assets by operators (and controlling sovereign power) once their mission is complete.

The only habitation on a different celestial body so far have been the temporary habitats of the crewed lunar landers . Similar to the Artemis program, China is leading an effort to develop a lunar base called the International Lunar Research Station beginning in the 2030s. Justification Survival of human civilization Main article: Space and survival A primary argument calling for space colonization is the long-term survival of human civilization and terrestrial life.

By developing alternative locations off Earth, the planet's species, including humans, could live on in the event of natural or human-made disasters on Earth .

On two occasions, theoretical physicist and cosmologist Stephen Hawking argued for space colonization as a means of saving humanity.

In 2001, Hawking predicted that the human race would become extinct within the next thousand years unless colonies could be established in space.

In 2010, he stated that humanity faces two options: either we colonize space within the next two hundred years, or we will face the long-term prospect of extinction .

In 2005, then NASA Administrator Michael Griffin identified space colonization as the ultimate goal of current spaceflight programs, saying: The physicist Paul Davies also supports the view that if a planetary catastrophe threatens the survival of the human species on Earth, a self-sufficient colony could "reverse-colonize" Earth and restore human civilization .

The author and journalist William E. Burrows and the biochemist Robert Shapiro proposed a private project, the Alliance to Rescue Civilization , with the goal of establishing an off-Earth " backup " of human civilization. Based on his Copernican principle , J. Richard Gott has estimated that the human race could survive for another 7.8 million years, but it is not likely to ever colonize other planets. However, he expressed a hope to be proven wrong, because "colonizing other worlds is our best chance to hedge our bets and improve the survival prospects of our species".

In a theoretical study from 2019, a group of researchers have pondered the long-term trajectory of human civilization. It is argued that due to Earth's finitude as well as the limited duration of the Solar System , mankind's survival into the far future will very likely require extensive space colonization. : 8, 22f This 'astronomical trajectory' of mankind, as it is termed, could come about in four steps: First step, space colonies could be established at various habitable locations — be it in outer space or on celestial bodies away from Earth – and allowed to remain temporarily dependent on support from Earth.

In the second step, these colonies could gradually become self-sufficient, enabling them to survive if or when the mother civilization on Earth fails or dies. Third step, the colonies could develop and expand their habitation by themselves on their space stations or celestial bodies, for example via terraforming .

The Solar System has enough material and energy to support anywhere from several thousand to over a billion times the current Earth-based human population, mostly from the Sun itself. : 9 Asteroid mining will likely be a key player in space colonization. Water and materials to make structures and shielding can be easily found in asteroids. Instead of resupplying on Earth, mining and fuel stations need to be established on asteroids to facilitate better space travel. Optical mining is the term NASA uses to describe extracting materials from asteroids. NASA believes by using propellant derived from asteroids for exploration to the moon, Mars, and beyond will save $100 billion. If funding and technology come sooner than estimated, asteroid mining might be possible within a decade.

Although some items of the infrastructure requirements above can already be easily produced on Earth and would therefore not be very valuable as trade items (oxygen, water, base metal ores, silicates, etc.), other high-value items are more abundant, more easily produced, of higher quality, or can only be produced in space. These could provide (over the long-term) a high return on the initial investment in space infrastructure. Some of these high-value trade goods include precious metals, gemstones, power, solar cells, ball bearings, semi-conductors, and pharmaceuticals.

The mining and extraction of metals from a small asteroid the size of 3554 Amun or (6178) 1986 DA , both small near-Earth asteroids, may yield 30 times as much metal as humans have mined throughout history. A metal asteroid this size would be worth approximately US$20 trillion at 2001 market prices.

The main impediments to commercial exploitation of these resources are the very high cost of initial investment, the very long period required for the expected return on those investments ( The Eros Project plans a 50-year development), and the fact that the venture has never been carried out before—the high-risk nature of the investment. Expansion with fewer negative consequences Further information: Holocene extinction Expansion of humans and technological progress has usually resulted in some form of environmental devastation, and destruction of ecosystems and their accompanying wildlife .

In the past, expansion has often come at the expense of displacing many indigenous peoples , the resulting treatment of these peoples ranging anywhere from encroachment to genocide. Because space has no known life, this need not be a consequence, as some space settlement advocates have pointed out. However, on some bodies of the Solar System, there is the potential for extant native lifeforms and so the negative consequences of space colonization cannot be dismissed. Counterarguments state that changing only the location but not the logic of exploitation will not create a more sustainable future. Alleviating overpopulation and resource demand An argument for space colonization is to mitigate proposed impacts of overpopulation of Earth , such as resource depletion . If the resources of space were opened to use and viable life-supporting habitats were built, Earth would no longer define the limitations of growth.

Although many of Earth's resources are non-renewable, off-planet colonies could satisfy the majority of the planet's resource requirements. With the availability of extraterrestrial resources, demand on terrestrial ones would decline. Proponents of this idea include Stephen Hawking and Gerard K. O'Neill . Others including cosmologist Carl Sagan and science fiction writers Arthur C. Clarke , and Isaac Asimov , have argued that shipping any excess population into space is not a viable solution to human overpopulation. According to Clarke, "the population battle must be fought or won here on Earth".

The problem for these authors is not the lack of resources in space (as shown in books such as Mining the Sky ), but the physical impracticality of shipping vast numbers of people into space to "solve" overpopulation on Earth. Other arguments Advocates for space colonization cite a presumed innate human drive to explore and discover, and call it a quality at the core of progress and thriving civilizations. Nick Bostrom has argued that from a utilitarian perspective, space colonization should be a chief goal as it would enable a very large population to live for a very long time (possibly billions of years), which would produce an enormous amount of utility (or happiness). He claims that it is more important to reduce existential risks to increase the probability of eventual colonization than to accelerate technological development so that space colonization could happen sooner.

In his paper, he assumes that the created lives will have positive ethical value despite the problem of suffering .

In a 2001 interview with Freeman Dyson, J. Richard Gott and Sid Goldstein, they were asked for reasons why some humans should live in space. Their answers were: Spread life and beauty throughout the universe Ensure the survival of our species Make money through new forms of space commercialization such as solar-power satellites , asteroid mining , and space manufacturing Save the environment of Earth by moving people and industry into space Biotic ethics is a branch of ethics that values life itself. For biotic ethics, and their extension to space as panbiotic ethics, it is a human purpose to secure and propagate life and to use space to maximize life. Opposition Space colonization has been seen as a relief to the problem of human overpopulation as early as 1758, and listed as one of Stephen Hawking's reasons for pursuing space exploration. Critics note, however, that a slowdown in population growth rates since the 1980s has alleviated the risk of overpopulation. Critics also argue that the costs of commercial activity in space are too high to be profitable against Earth-based industries, and hence that it is unlikely to see significant exploitation of space resources in the foreseeable future. Other objections include concerns that the forthcoming colonization and commodification of the cosmos is likely to enhance the interests of the already powerful, including major economic and military institutions e.g. the large financial institutions, the major aerospace companies and the military–industrial complex , to lead to new wars , and to exacerbate pre-existing exploitation of workers and resources , economic inequality , poverty , social division and marginalization , environmental degradation, and other detrimental processes or institutions. Additional concerns include creating a culture in which humans are no longer seen as human, but rather as material assets.

The issues of human dignity , morality , philosophy , culture , bioethics , and the threat of megalomaniac leaders in these new "societies" would all have to be addressed in order for space colonization to meet the psychological and social needs of people living in isolated colonies.

In addition, return voyages may well be prohibitive considering the time and distance. Even communication with Earth would be slow, with delays of 4 – 24 minutes for a message to Mars , and 35 – 52 minutes to Jupiter and its moons. Extreme environments Extreme cold – due to the distance to the sun, temperatures are near absolute zero in many parts of the outer Solar System. Sustainable power sources Power – Solar power is many times less concentrated in the outer Solar System than in the inner Solar System. It is unclear as to whether it would be usable there, using some form of concentration mirrors, or whether nuclear power would be necessary. Use of geothermal systems to generate power may be practical on some of the planets and moons of the solar system. Physical and mental health risks to colonists Main article: Effect of spaceflight on the human body The health of the humans who may participate in a colonization venture would be subject to increased physical, mental and emotional risks. Effects of low gravity on the human body – All moons of the gas giants and all outer dwarf planets have a very low gravity, the highest being Io's gravity (0.183 g) which is less than 1/5 of the Earth's gravity.

The Moon is reachable from Earth in three days, has a near-instant communication to Earth, with minable minerals, no atmosphere, and low gravity, making it extremely easy to ship materials and products to orbit. : 175 Abundant ice is trapped in permanently shadowed craters near the poles, which could provide support for the water needs of a lunar colony, though indications that mercury is also similarly trapped there may pose health concerns. Native precious metals , such as gold , silver , and probably platinum , are also concentrated at the lunar poles by electrostatic dust transport. There are only a few materials on the Moon which have been identified to make economic sense to ship directly back to the Earth, which are helium-3 (for fusion power ) and rare-earth minerals (for electronics ). Instead, it makes more sense for these materials to be used in-space or being turned into valuable products for export. However, the Moon's lack of atmosphere provides no protection from space radiation or meteoroids, so lunar lava tubes have been proposed sites to gain protection.

The Moon's low surface gravity is also a concern, as it is unknown whether 1/6 g is enough to maintain human health for long periods.

Since the Moon has extreme temperature swings and toxic lunar regolith , it is argued by some that the Moon will not become a place of habitation, but instead attract polluting extraction and manufacturing industries . Furthermore, it has been argued that moving these industries to the Moon could help protect the Earth's environment and allow poorer countries to be released from the shackles of neocolonialism by wealthier countries.

In the space colonization framework, the Moon will be transformed into an industrial hub of the Solar System. : 161–172 Interest in establishing a moonbase has increased in the 21st century as an intermediate to Mars colonization.

The European Space Agency (ESA) head Jan Woerner at the International Astronautical Congress in Bremen, Germany, in October, 2018 proposed cooperation among countries and companies on lunar capabilities, a concept referred to as Moon Village .

In a December 2017 directive , the first Trump administration steered NASA to include a lunar mission on the pathway to other beyond Earth orbit (BEO) destinations.

In 2023, the U.S. Defense Department started a study of the necessary infrastructure and capabilities required to develop a moon-based economy over the following ten years.

As of 2024, on one side, China , along with other partner countries, has announced its intention to establish the International Lunar Research Station .

On the other side, the United States , in collaboration with international partners, is advancing its Artemis program , which includes plans to build moonbases near the lunar poles, close to permanently shadowed craters , in the 2030s.

The Chinese Lunar Exploration Program is seen as a means to bolster China's political influence and support its aspirations for superpower status, while the United States aims to maintain its position as the leading space power. Lagrange points Main article: Lagrange point colonization A contour plot of the gravitational potential of the Moon and Earth, showing the five Earth–Moon Lagrange points Another near-Earth possibility are the stable Earth–Moon Lagrange points L 4 and L 5 , at which point a space colony can float indefinitely.

The L5 Society was founded to promote settlement by building space stations at these points. Gerard K. O'Neill suggested in 1974 that the stable region around L 5 could fit several thousand floating colonies, and would allow easy travel to and from the colonies due to the shallow effective potential at this point. Mars Main article: Colonization of Mars SpaceX has long considered settling and colonizing Mars as its prime objective.

The hypothetical colonization of Mars has received interest from public space agencies and private corporations and has received extensive treatment in science fiction writing, film, and art.

While there have been many plans for a human Mars mission , including affordable ones such as Mars Direct , none has been realized as of 2025. Both the United States and China have plans to send humans to Mars sometime in the 2040s, but these plans are not backed with hardware and funding. : 219–223 However, SpaceX is currently developing Starship , a super-heavy-lift reusable launch vehicle , with a vision of sending humans to Mars.

As of November 2024, the company plans to send five uncrewed Starships to Mars in either 2026 or 2028–2029 launch windows and SpaceX's CEO Elon Musk has repeatedly stated his support for the Mars efforts, both financially and politically. Mars is more suitable for habitation than the Moon, with a stronger gravity, rich amount of materials needed for life, day/night cycle nearly identical to Earth, and a thin atmosphere to protect from micrometeroids .

The main disadvantage of Mars compared to the Moon is the six-to-nine-month transit time and the lengthy launch window, which occurs approximately every two years. : 175 Without in situ resource utilization , Mars colonization would be nearly impossible as it would require bringing thousands of tons of payload to sustain a handful of astronauts. If Martian materials can be used to make propellant (such as methane with the Sabatier process ) and supplies (such as oxygen for crews), the amount of supplies needed to bring to Mars can be greatly reduced. : 228–230 Even then, Mars colonies will not be economically viable in the near term; thus, reasons for colonizing Mars will be mostly ideological and prestige-based, such as a desire for freedom . : 267–270, 280 Other inner Solar System bodies Mercury Mercury is rich in metals and volatiles, as well as solar energy. However, Mercury is the most energy-consuming body on the Solar System to land for spacecraft launching from Earth, and astronauts there must contend with the extreme temperature differential and radiation. : 311–314 An artist's conception of a terraformed Mercury Once thought to be a volatile-depleted body like the Moon, Mercury is now known to be volatile-rich, surprisingly richer in volatiles than any other terrestrial body in the inner Solar System.

The planet also receives six and a half times the solar flux as the Earth/Moon system, making solar energy an effective energy source; it could be harnessed through orbital solar arrays and beamed to the surface or exported to other planets. Geologist Stephen Gillett suggested in 1996, that this could make Mercury an ideal place to build and launch solar sail spacecraft, which could launch as folded "chunks" by a mass driver from Mercury's surface. Once in space, the solar sails would deploy. Solar energy for the mass driver should be easy to produce, and solar sails near Mercury would have 6.5 times the thrust they do near Earth. This could make Mercury an ideal place to acquire materials useful in building hardware to send to (and terraform) Venus. Vast solar collectors could also be built on or near Mercury to produce power for large-scale engineering activities such as laser-pushed light sails to nearby star systems.

As Mercury has essentially no axial tilt, crater floors near its poles lie in eternal darkness , never seeing the Sun. They function as cold traps , trapping volatiles for geological periods. It is estimated that the poles of Mercury contain 10 14 –10 15 kg of water, likely covered by about 5.65 km 3 of hydrocarbons. This would make agriculture possible. It has been suggested that plant varieties could be developed to take advantage of the high light intensity and the long day of Mercury.

The poles do not experience the significant day-night variations the rest of Mercury do, making them the best place on the planet to begin a colony. Another option is to live underground, where day-night variations would be damped enough that temperatures would stay roughly constant. There are indications that Mercury contains lava tubes , like the Moon and Mars, which would be suitable for this purpose. Underground temperatures in a ring around Mercury's poles can reach room temperature on Earth, 22±1 °C; and this is achieved at depths starting from about 0.7 m. This presence of volatiles and abundance of energy has led Alexander Bolonkin and James Shifflett to consider Mercury preferable to Mars for colonization. Yet a third option could be to continually move to stay on the night side, as Mercury's 176-day-long day-night cycle means that the terminator travels very slowly. Because Mercury is very dense, its surface gravity is 0.38g like Mars, even though it is a smaller planet. This would be easier to adjust to than lunar gravity (0.16g), and presents advantages regarding lower escape velocity from Mercury than from Earth. Mercury's proximity gives it advantages over the asteroids and outer planets, and its low synodic period means that launch windows from Earth to Mercury are more frequent than those from Earth to Venus or Mars.

On the downside, a Mercury colony would require significant shielding from radiation and solar flares, and since Mercury is airless, decompression and temperature extremes would be constant risks. Venus Main article: Colonization of Venus Though the surface of Venus is extremely hostile, habitats high above the surface are fairly habitable, with temperatures ranging from 30 °C to 70 °C (86 to 158 °F) and a pressure similar to the Earth's sea level at an altitude of 50 kilometers (30 miles). However, beside tourism opportunities, the economic benefit of a Venusian colony is minimal. : 308–310 Asteroid belt Main article: Colonization of the asteroid belt Asteroids can provide enough material in the form of water, air, fuel, metal, soil, and nutrients to support ten to a hundred trillion humans in space. Many asteroids contain minerals that are inherently valuable, such as rare earths and precious metals. However, low gravity, distance from Earth and disperse nature of their orbits make it difficult to settle on small asteroids. : 203, 204, 218 Giant planets There have also been proposals to place robotic aerostats in the upper atmospheres of the Solar System's giant planets for exploration and possibly mining of helium-3 , which could have a very high value per unit mass as a thermonuclear fuel. : 158–160 Robert Zubrin identified Saturn , Uranus and Neptune as "the Persian Gulf of the Solar System", as the largest sources of deuterium and helium-3 to drive a fusion economy, with Saturn the most important and most valuable of the three, because of its relative proximity, low radiation, and large system of moons. : 161–163 On the other hand, planetary scientist John Lewis in his 1997 book Mining the Sky , insists that Uranus is the likeliest place to mine helium-3 because of its significantly shallower gravity well, which makes it easier for a laden tanker spacecraft to thrust itself away. Furthermore, Uranus is an ice giant , which would likely make it easier to separate the helium from the atmosphere. Because Uranus has the lowest escape velocity of the four giant planets, it has been proposed as a mining site for helium-3.

As Uranus is a gas giant without a viable surface, one of Uranus's natural satellites might serve as a base. It is hypothesized that one of Neptune 's satellites could be used for colonization. Triton 's surface shows signs of extensive geological activity that implies a subsurface ocean, perhaps composed of ammonia/water. If technology advanced to the point that tapping such geothermal energy was possible, it could make colonizing a cryogenic world like Triton feasible, supplemented by nuclear fusion power. Moons of outer planets Artist's impression of a hypothetical ocean cryobot in Europa Human missions to the outer planets would need to arrive quickly due to the effects of space radiation and microgravity along the journey.

In 2012, Thomas B. Kerwick wrote that the distance to the outer planets made their human exploration impractical for now, noting that travel times for round trips to Mars were estimated at two years, and that the closest approach of Jupiter to Earth is over ten times farther than the closest approach of Mars to Earth. However, he noted that this could change with "significant advancement on spacecraft design". Nuclear-thermal or nuclear-electric engines have been suggested as a way to make the journey to Jupiter in a reasonable amount of time. Another possibility would be plasma magnet sails , a technology already suggested for rapidly sending a probe to Jupiter.

The cold would also be a factor, necessitating a robust source of heat energy for spacesuits and bases. Most of the larger moons of the outer planets contain water ice , liquid water , and organic compounds that might be useful for sustaining human life. Robert Zubrin has suggested Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune as advantageous locations for colonization because their atmospheres are good sources of fusion fuels, such as deuterium and helium-3 . Zubrin suggested that Saturn would be the most important and valuable as it is the closest and has an extensive satellite system. Jupiter's high gravity makes it difficult to extract gases from its atmosphere, and its strong radiation belt makes developing its system difficult.

On the other hand, fusion power has yet to be achieved, and fusion power from helium-3 is more difficult to achieve than conventional deuterium–tritium fusion . Jeffrey Van Cleve, Carl Grillmair, and Mark Hanna instead focus on Uranus, because the delta-v required to get helium-3 from the atmosphere into orbit is half that needed for Jupiter, and because Uranus' atmosphere is five times richer in helium than Saturn's. Jupiter's Galilean moons (Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto) and Saturn's Titan are the only moons that have gravities comparable to Earth's Moon.

The Moon has a 0.17g gravity; Io, 0.18g; Europa, 0.13g; Ganymede, 0.15g; Callisto, 0.13g; and Titan, 0.14g. Neptune's Triton has about half the Moon's gravity (0.08g); other round moons provide even less (starting from Uranus' Titania and Oberon at about 0.04g). Jovian moons Artist's impression of a base on Callisto Jovian radiation Moon rem /day Io 3600 Europa 540 Ganymede 8 Callisto 0.01 Earth (Max) 0.07 Earth (Avg) 0.0007 The Jovian system in general has particular disadvantages for colonization, including a deep gravity well .

The magnetosphere of Jupiter bombards the moons of Jupiter with intense ionizing radiation delivering about 36 Sv per day to unshielded colonists on Io and about 5.40 Sv per day on Europa . Exposure to about 0.75 Sv over a few days is enough to cause radiation poisoning , and about 5 Sv over a few days is fatal. : 166–170 Jupiter itself, like the other gas giants, has further disadvantages. There is no accessible surface on which to land, and the light hydrogen atmosphere would not provide good buoyancy for some kind of aerial habitat as has been proposed for Venus. Radiation levels on Io and Europa are extreme, enough to kill unshielded humans within an Earth day. : 163–170 Therefore, only Callisto and perhaps Ganymede could reasonably support a human colony. Callisto orbits outside Jupiter's radiation belt. Ganymede's low latitudes are partially shielded by the moon's magnetic field, though not enough to completely remove the need for radiation shielding. Both of them have available water, silicate rock, and metals that could be mined and used for construction.

Although Io's volcanism and tidal heating constitute valuable resources, exploiting them is probably impractical. Europa is rich in water (its subsurface ocean is expected to contain over twice as much water as all Earth's oceans together) and likely oxygen, but metals and minerals would have to be imported. If alien microbial life exists on Europa, human immune systems may not protect against it. Sufficient radiation shielding might, however, make Europa an interesting location for a research base.

The private Artemis Project drafted a plan in 1997 to colonize Europa, involving surface igloos as bases to drill down into the ice and explore the ocean underneath, and suggesting that humans could live in "air pockets" in the ice layer. Ganymede and Callisto are also expected to have internal oceans. It might be possible to build a surface base that would produce fuel for further exploration of the Solar System.

In 2003, NASA performed a study called HOPE (Revolutionary Concepts for Human Outer Planet Exploration) regarding the future exploration of the Solar System.

The target chosen was Callisto due to its distance from Jupiter, and thus the planet's harmful radiation. It could be possible to build a surface base that would produce fuel for further exploration of the Solar System. : 21 HOPE estimated a round trip time for a crewed mission of about 2–5 years, assuming significant progress in propulsion technologies. Io is not ideal for colonization, due to its hostile environment.

The moon is under influence of high tidal forces, causing high volcanic activity. Jupiter's strong radiation belt overshadows Io, delivering 36 Sv a day to the moon.

The moon is also extremely dry. Io is the least ideal place for the colonization of the four Galilean moons. Despite this, its volcanoes could be energy resources for the other moons, which are better suited to colonization.

The magnetic field of Jupiter and co-rotation rotation enforcing currents Ganymede is the largest moon in the Solar System. Ganymede is the only moon with a magnetosphere , albeit overshadowed by Jupiter's magnetic field . Because of this magnetic field, Ganymede is one of only two Jovian moons where surface settlements would be feasible because it receives about 0.08 Sv of radiation per day. Ganymede could be terraformed.

The Keck Observatory announced in 2006 that the binary Jupiter trojan 617 Patroclus , and possibly many other Jupiter trojans, are likely composed of water ice, with a layer of dust. This suggests that mining water and other volatiles in this region and transporting them elsewhere in the Solar System, perhaps via the proposed Interplanetary Transport Network , may be feasible in the not-so-distant future. This could make colonization of the Moon , Mercury and main-belt asteroids more practical. Saturn Saturn's radiation belt is much weaker than Jupiter's, so radiation is less of an issue here. Dione, Rhea, Titan, and Iapetus all orbit outside the radiation belt, and Titan's thick atmosphere would adequately shield against cosmic radiation. Saturn has seven moons large enough to be round : in order of increasing distance from Saturn, they are Mimas , Enceladus , Tethys , Dione , Rhea , Titan , and Iapetus . Enceladus The small moon Enceladus is also of interest, having a subsurface ocean that is separated from the surface by only tens of meters of ice at the south pole, compared to kilometers of ice separating the ocean from the surface on Europa. Volatile and organic compounds are present there, and the moon's high density for an ice world (1.6 g/cm 3 ) indicates that its core is rich in silicates.

On 9 March 2006, NASA 's Cassini space probe found possible evidence of liquid water on Enceladus . According to that article, "pockets of liquid water may be no more than tens of meters below the surface." These findings were confirmed in 2014 by NASA. This means liquid water could be collected much more easily and safely on Enceladus than, for instance, on Europa (see above). Discovery of water, especially liquid water, generally makes a celestial body a much more likely candidate for colonization. An alternative model of Enceladus's activity is the decomposition of methane/water clathrates – a process requiring lower temperatures than liquid water eruptions.

The higher density of Enceladus indicates a larger than Saturnian average silicate core that could provide materials for base operations. Titan Main article: Colonization of Titan Authors like Robert Zubrin have offered that Saturn is the most important and valuable of the four gas giants in the Solar System , because of its relative proximity, low radiation, and excellent system of moons. He named Titan as the best candidate on which to establish a base to exploit the resources of the Saturn system. : 161–163 He pointed out that Titan possesses an abundance of all the elements necessary to support life, saying "In certain ways, Titan is the most hospitable extraterrestrial world within our solar system for human colonization." : 163–166 To consider a colony on Saturn 's largest moon Titan , protection against the extreme cold must be a primary consideration. Titan offers a gravity of approximately 1/7 of Earth gravity, in the same range as Earth's Moon. Atmospheric pressure at the surface of the planet is about 1.5x that of the surface of the Earth; there is however, no oxygen present in the environment.

The atmosphere is about 95% nitrogen and 5% methane. Some estimates suggest that abundant energy resources on Titan could power a colony with a population size of the United States.

The dense atmosphere of Titan shields the surface from radiation and would make any structural failures problematic, rather than catastrophic. With an oxygen mask and thermal clothing protection, humans could roam Titan's surface in the dim sunlight. Or, given the low gravity and dense atmosphere, they could float above it in a balloon or on personal wings. Trans-Neptunian region Main article: Colonization of trans-Neptunian objects The main difficulty is the vast distances to other stars. To reach such targets travel times of millennia would be necessary, with current technology.

At average speeds of even 0.1% of the speed of light ( c ) interstellar expansion across the entire Milky Way galaxy would take up to one-half of the Sun's galactic orbital period of ~240,000,000 years, which is comparable to the timescale of other galactic processes. Due to fundamental energy and reaction mass consideration such speeds would be with current technology limited to small spaceships. If humanity would gain access to a large amount of energy, on the order of the mass-energy of entire planets, it may become possible to construct spaceships with Alcubierre drives .

The following are plausible approaches with current technology: A generation ship which would travel much slower than light, with consequent interstellar trip times of many decades or centuries.

The crew would go through generations before the journey was complete, so none of the initial crew would be expected to survive to arrive at the destination, assuming current human lifespans. A sleeper ship , where most or all of the crew spend the journey in some form of hibernation or suspended animation , allowing some or all to reach the destination. An embryo-carrying interstellar starship (EIS), much smaller than a generation ship or sleeper ship, transporting human embryos or DNA in a frozen or dormant state to the destination. (Obvious biological and psychological problems in birthing, raising, and educating such voyagers, neglected here, may not be fundamental.) A nuclear fusion or fission powered ship (e.g. ion drive ) of some kind, achieving velocities of up to perhaps 10% c permitting one-way trips to nearby stars with durations comparable to a human lifetime. A Project Orion -ship, a nuclear-powered concept proposed by Freeman Dyson which would use nuclear explosions to propel a starship. A special case of the preceding nuclear rocket concepts, with similar potential velocity capability, but possibly easier technology. Laser propulsion concepts, using some form of beaming of power from the Solar System might allow a light-sail or other ship to reach high speeds, comparable to those theoretically attainable by the fusion-powered electric rocket, above. These methods would need some means, such as supplementary nuclear propulsion, to stop at the destination, but a hybrid (light-sail for acceleration, fusion-electric for deceleration) system might be possible. Uploaded human minds or artificial intelligence may be transmitted via radio or laser at light speed to interstellar destinations where self-replicating spacecraft have traveled subluminally and set up infrastructure and possibly also brought some minds. Extraterrestrial intelligence might be another viable destination. Intergalactic travel Main article: Intergalactic travel Proposed interstellar vessel based on Gerard K. O'Neill 's Island One version of Bernal sphere space habitat The distances between galaxies are on the order of a million times farther than those between the stars, and thus intergalactic colonization would involve voyages of millions of years via special self-sustaining methods. Implementation Building colonies in space would require access to water, food, space, people, construction materials, energy, transportation, communications , life support , simulated gravity , radiation protection, migration, governance and capital investment. It is likely the colonies would be located near the necessary physical resources.

The practice of space architecture seeks to transform spaceflight from a heroic test of human endurance to a normality within the bounds of comfortable experience.

In orbit around certain planets with magnetospheres (including Earth), the Van Allen belts make living above the atmosphere difficult. To protect life, settlements must be surrounded by sufficient mass to absorb most incoming radiation, unless magnetic or plasma radiation shields are developed.

In the case of Van Allen belts, these could be drained using orbiting tethers or radio waves. Passive mass shielding of four metric tons per square meter of surface area will reduce radiation dosage to several mSv or less annually, well below the rate of some populated high natural background areas on Earth. This can be leftover material (slag) from processing lunar soil and asteroids into oxygen, metals, and other useful materials. However, it represents a significant obstacle to manoeuvering vessels with such massive bulk (mobile spacecraft being particularly likely to use less massive active shielding). Inertia would necessitate powerful thrusters to start or stop rotation, or electric motors to spin two massive portions of a vessel in opposite senses. Shielding material can be stationary around a rotating interior. Psychological adjustment The monotony and loneliness that comes from a prolonged space mission can leave astronauts susceptible to cabin fever or having a psychotic break. Moreover, lack of sleep, fatigue, and work overload can affect an astronaut's ability to perform well in an environment such as space where every action is critical. Law, governance, and sovereignty Main articles: Space law , Space policy , Common heritage of humanity , and Extraterrestrial real estate A range of different models of transplanetary or extraterrestrial governance have been sketched or proposed. Often envisioning the need for a fresh or independent extraterrestrial governance, particularly in the void left by the contemporarily criticized lack of space governance and inclusivity. It has been argued that space colonialism would, similarly to terrestrial settler colonialism , produce colonial national identities. Federalism has been studied as a remedy of such distant and autonomous communities. Space activity is legally based on the Outer Space Treaty , the main international treaty. But space law has become a larger legal field, which includes other international agreements such as the significantly less ratified Moon Treaty and diverse national laws. Many articles of the Outer Space Treaty prevent the legal colonization of outer space.

The Outer Space Treaty established the basic ramifications for space activity in article one: "The exploration and use of outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies, shall be carried out for the benefit and in the interests of all countries, irrespective of their degree of economic or scientific development, and shall be the province of all mankind." And continued in article two by stating: "Outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies, is not subject to national appropriation by claim of sovereignty, by means of use or occupation, or by any other means." The development of international space law has revolved much around outer space being defined as common heritage of mankind .

The Magna Carta of Space presented by William A. Hyman in 1966 framed outer space explicitly not as terra nullius but as res communis , which subsequently influenced the work of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space . Economics Main article: Space-based economy Space colonization can roughly be said to be possible when the necessary methods of space colonization become cheap enough (such as space access by cheaper launch systems) to meet the cumulative funds that have been gathered for the purpose, in addition to estimated profits from commercial use of space . Overcoming access-to-space barriers Although there are no immediate prospects for the large amounts of money required for space colonization to be available given traditional launch costs, there is some prospect of a radical reduction to launch costs in the 2010s, which would consequently lessen the cost of any efforts in that direction. With a published price of US$56.5 million per launch of up to 13,150 kg (28,990 lb) payload to low Earth orbit, SpaceX Falcon 9 rockets are already the "cheapest in the industry". Advancements currently being developed as part of the SpaceX reusable launch system development program to enable reusable Falcon 9s "could drop the price by an order of magnitude, sparking more space-based enterprise, which in turn would drop the cost of access to space still further through economies of scale." If SpaceX is successful in developing the reusable technology, it would be expected to "have a major impact on the cost of access to space", and change the increasingly competitive market in space launch services.

The President's Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy suggested that an inducement prize should be established, perhaps by government, for the achievement of space colonization, for example by offering the prize to the first organization to place humans on the Moon and sustain them for a fixed period before they return to Earth. Money and currency Experts have debated on the possible use of money and currencies in societies that will be established in space.

The Quasi Universal Intergalactic Denomination, or QUID, is a physical currency made from a space-qualified polymer PTFE for inter-planetary travelers. QUID was designed for the foreign exchange company Travelex by scientists from Britain's National Space Centre and the University of Leicester. Other possibilities include the incorporation of cryptocurrency as the primary form of currency, as suggested by Elon Musk . Socio-economic issues Human spaceflight has enabled only temporarily relocating a few privileged people and no permanent space migrants.

The societal motivation for space migration has been questioned as rooted in colonialism, questioning the fundamentals and inclusivity of space colonization. Resources Further information: Asteroid mining Raw materials Colonies on the Moon, Mars, asteroids, or the metal-rich planet Mercury , could extract local materials.

The Moon is deficient in volatiles such as argon , helium and compounds of carbon , hydrogen and nitrogen .

The LCROSS impacter was targeted at the Cabeus crater , which was chosen as having a high concentration of water for the Moon. A plume of material erupted in which some water was detected. Mission chief scientist Anthony Colaprete estimated that the Cabeus crater contains material with 1% water or possibly more. Water ice should also be in other permanently shadowed craters near the lunar poles.

Although helium is present only in low concentrations on the Moon, where it is deposited into regolith by the solar wind, an estimated million tons of He-3 exists over all. It also has industrially significant oxygen , silicon , and metals such as iron , aluminium , and titanium . Launching materials from Earth is expensive, so bulk materials for colonies could come from the Moon, a near-Earth object (NEO), Phobos , or Deimos .

The benefits of using such sources include: a lower gravitational force, no atmospheric drag on cargo vessels, and no biosphere to damage. Many NEOs contain substantial amounts of metals. Underneath a drier outer crust (much like oil shale ), some other NEOs are inactive comets which include billions of tons of water ice and kerogen hydrocarbons, as well as some nitrogen compounds. Farther out, Jupiter's Trojan asteroids are thought to be rich in water ice and other volatiles. Recycling of some raw materials would almost certainly be necessary. Energy Solar energy in orbit is abundant, reliable, and is commonly used to power satellites today. There is no night in free space, and no clouds or atmosphere to block sunlight. Light intensity obeys an inverse-square law . Hence, the solar energy available at distance d from the Sun is E = 1367/ d 2 W/m 2 , where d is measured in astronomical units (AU) and 1367 watts/m 2 is the energy available at the distance of Earth's orbit from the Sun, 1 AU.

In the weightlessness and vacuum of space, high temperatures for industrial processes can easily be achieved in solar ovens with huge parabolic reflectors made of metallic foil with very lightweight support structures. Flat mirrors to reflect sunlight around radiation shields into living areas (to avoid line-of-sight access for cosmic rays, or to make the Sun's image appear to move across their "sky") or onto crops are even lighter and easier to build. Large solar power photovoltaic cell arrays or thermal power plants would be needed to meet the electrical power needs of the settlers' use.

In developed parts of Earth, electrical consumption can average 1 kilowatt/person (or roughly 10 megawatt-hours per person per year.) These power plants could be at a short distance from the main structures if wires are used to transmit the power, or much farther away with wireless power transmission . A major export of the initial space settlement designs was anticipated to be large solar power satellites (SPS) that would use wireless power transmission (phase-locked microwave beams or lasers emitting wavelengths that special solar cells convert with high efficiency) to send power to locations on Earth, or to colonies on the Moon or other locations in space. For locations on Earth, this method of getting power is extremely benign, with zero emissions and far less ground area required per watt than for conventional solar panels. Once these satellites are primarily built from lunar or asteroid-derived materials, the price of SPS electricity could be lower than energy from fossil fuel or nuclear energy; replacing these would have significant benefits such as the elimination of greenhouse gases and nuclear waste from electricity generation. Transmitting solar energy wirelessly from the Earth to the Moon and back is also an idea proposed for the benefit of space colonization and energy resources. Physicist Dr. David Criswell, who worked for NASA during the Apollo missions, proposed the idea of using power beams to transfer energy from space. These beams, microwaves with a wavelength of about 12 cm, would be almost untouched as they travel through the atmosphere. They could also be aimed at more industrial areas to keep away from humans or animal activities. This would allow for safer and more reliable methods of transferring solar energy.

In 2008, scientists were able to send a 20 watt microwave signal from a mountain on the island of Maui to the island of Hawaii.

Since then JAXA and Mitsubishi have been working together on a $21 billion project to place satellites in orbit which could generate up to 1 gigawatt of energy. These are the next advancements being done today to transmit energy wirelessly for space-based solar energy. However, the value of SPS power delivered wirelessly to other locations in space will typically be far higher than to Earth. Otherwise, the means of generating the power would need to be included with these projects and pay the heavy penalty of Earth launch costs. Therefore, other than proposed demonstration projects for power delivered to Earth, the first priority for SPS electricity is likely to be locations in space, such as communications satellites, fuel depots or "orbital tugboat" boosters transferring cargo and passengers between low Earth orbit (LEO) and other orbits such as geosynchronous orbit (GEO), lunar orbit or highly-eccentric Earth orbit (HEEO). : 132 The system will also rely on satellites and receiving stations on Earth to convert the energy into electricity. Because this energy can be transmitted easily from dayside to nightside, power would be reliable 24/7. Nuclear power is sometimes proposed for colonies located on the Moon or on Mars, as the supply of solar energy is too discontinuous in these locations; the Moon has nights of two Earth weeks in duration. Mars has nights, relatively high gravity, and an atmosphere featuring large dust storms to cover and degrade solar panels. Also, Mars' greater distance from the Sun (1.52 astronomical units, AU) means that only 1/1.52 2 or about 43% of the solar energy is available at Mars compared with Earth orbit. Another method would be transmitting energy wirelessly to the lunar or Martian colonies from solar power satellites (SPSs) as described above; the difficulties of generating power in these locations make the relative advantages of SPSs much greater there than for power beamed to locations on Earth.

The Mars Society promotes Robert Zubrin's Mars Direct plan and the settlement of Mars.

The National Space Society (NSS) is an organization with the vision of people living and working in thriving communities beyond the Earth.

The NSS also maintains an extensive library of full-text articles and books on space settlement.

The Space Frontier Foundation performs space advocacy including strong free market , capitalist views about space development.

The Space Settlement Institute is searching for ways to make space colonization happen within a lifetime. SpaceX is developing extensive spaceflight transportation infrastructure with the express purpose of enabling long-term human settlement of Mars.

The Space Studies Institute funds the study of outer space settlements, especially O'Neill cylinders .

The Alliance to Rescue Civilization plans to establish backups of human civilization on the Moon and other locations away from Earth.

The British Interplanetary Society (BIS) promotes ideas for the exploration and use of space, including a Mars colony , future propulsion systems (see Project Daedalus ), terraforming, and locating other habitable worlds.

In June 2013 the BIS began the SPACE project to re-examine Gerard O'Neill's 1970s space colony studies in light of the advances made since then.

The progress of this effort were detailed in a special edition of the BIS journal in September 2019. Asgardia (nation) – an organization seeking to circumvent limitations placed by Outer Space Treaty .

The most famous attempt to build an analogue to a self-sufficient settlement is Biosphere 2 , which attempted to duplicate Earth's biosphere. BIOS-3 is another closed ecosystem , completed in 1972 in Krasnoyarsk , Siberia .

The report directly acknowledges the foundation of various ideas for colonization in science fiction. It quotes author Robert Salkeld and highlights the role of the precursors of science fiction alongside the founders of astronautics, where for example Jules Verne rubs shoulders with Constantin Tsiolkovsky. Indeed, colonization as a fictional theme and colonization as a research project are not independent. Research feeds fiction and fiction sometimes inspires research. Many of the most fascinating ideas in science originated not in the laboratory but in the minds of such science fiction writers as Arthur C. Clarke and Ray Bradbury. Clarke's 1945 article on communications satellites was the original idea behind modern communications satellites. Bradbury's The Martian Chronicles explores the exploration and settlement of Mars and has been attributed as the main inspiration behind NASA's many missions to Mars. Communicators and tricorders from the science fiction of Star Trek are said to be inspirations for cell phones and wireless medical triage devices. Fiction inspired innovation and invention to develop new technologies. Communications, governance principles, and advanced technological devices, all speculated by science fiction, are all precursors to survival of an extraterrestrial colony.

The European Space Agency ITSF project (Innovative Technologies in Science Fiction for Space Applications) study offers similar consideration for the cross-fertilization between fiction and science. Science fiction writer Norman Spinrad highlights the role of science fiction as a visionary force that spawned the conquest of space, a term he believes betrays its imperialist tendencies, and the colonization of space. He also shows that political scientist and science fiction writer Jerry Pournelle, in wanting to revive the conquest of space for this purpose in the early 1980s, actually launched the Reagan administration 's Strategic Defense Initiative project, which he considers a failure, because instead of the military program reviving the space program, the opposite happens: the $40 billion cost of the program is actually taken away from the construction of a base on the Moon. One of the great names in science fiction, Arthur C. Clarke , a supporter of Marshall Savage's ideas, announced in a 2001 article, the date appearing in one of his most famous titles 2001: A Space Odyssey , that by 2057 there would be humans on the Moon, Mars , Europa, Ganymede, Titan and in orbit around Venus, Neptune and Pluto. Contemporary science fiction has extended the colonization vision further.

The TV series The Expanse which is based on a series of novels of the same name by James S. A. Corey, addresses the politics and conflict of humanity hundreds of years in the future after it has colonized the solar system and Mars has become an independent military power.

The Sociological Review . 57 (1_suppl). SAGE Publications: 47– 65. doi : 10.1111/j.1467-954x.2009.01816.x . ISSN 0038-0261 . S2CID 127857448 . ^ a b Goguichvili, Sophie; Linenberger, Alan; Gillette, Amber; Novak, Alexandra (1 October 2021). "The Global Legal Landscape of Space: Who Writes the Rules on the Final Frontier?" . Wilson Center . Retrieved 14 October 2022 . ^ Lagatta, Eric (9 September 2024). "Elon Musk says human could reach Mars in 4 years after uncrewed SpaceX Starship trips" . USA Today . Retrieved 2 October 2024 . ^ Chon-Torres, Octavio Alfonso; Murga-Moreno, César Andreé (October 2021). "Conceptual discussion around the notion of the human being as an inter and multiplanetary species" . International Journal of Astrobiology . 20 (5): 327– 331. Bibcode : 2021IJAsB..20..327C . doi : 10.1017/S1473550421000197 . ISSN 1473-5504 . ^ Calanchi, Alessandra (21 December 2023). "De-colonizing the Earth to Re-enact Colonialism on Mars". Iperstoria (22). doi : 10.13136/2281-4582/2023.I22.1373 . ^ a b c d Marshall, Alan (February 1995). "Development and imperialism in space" . Space Policy . 11 (1): 41– 52. Bibcode : 1995SpPol..11...41M . doi : 10.1016/0265-9646(95)93233-B . Retrieved 28 June 2020 . ^ Deudney, Daniel (2020). Dark Skies: Space Expansionism, Planetary Geopolitics, and the Ends of Humanity . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-009024-1 . OCLC 1145940182 . ^ a b Dickens, Peter; Ormrod, James (November 2010).

The Humanization of the Cosmos – to What End? . Monthly Review . Archived from the original on 3 October 2016 . Retrieved 3 October 2016 . ^ Simberg, Rand (7 February 2012). "Elon Musk on SpaceX's Reusable Rocket Plans" . Popular Mechanics . Archived from the original on 24 June 2017 . Retrieved 13 June 2015 . ^ Mane, Shreya (7 May 2022). "Space Colonization for Human Habitation in Space Environment" (PDF) . International Journal of Enhanced Research in Science, Technology & Engineering . 11 (5). ISSN 2319-7463 . Retrieved 28 December 2024 . ^ "Evolutionary Significance of Space Colonization" . Sylvia Engdahl , Author of Science Fiction Novels - Official Site . Retrieved 28 December 2024 . ^ Mane, Shreya (1 May 2022). "Moon Colonization for Human civilization: Theoretical Overview" . Environmental Science and Engineering . 1 (1): 30– 34. doi : 10.46632/ese/1/1/8 . ^ Dinerman, Taylor (15 January 2007). "Independent space colonization: questions and implications" .

The Space Review . Retrieved 28 December 2024 . ^ Lerner, Eric J. (1983). "Crossroads in space: Humanization: Man or machine?". IEEE Spectrum . 20 (9): 28– 30. Bibcode : 1983IEEES..20i..28L . doi : 10.1109/MSPEC.1983.6501447 . ISSN 0018-9235 . ^ Eaton, Kit (28 May 2010). "Japan vs. NASA in the Next Space Race: Lunar Robonauts" . Fast Company . Retrieved 12 June 2015 . ^ "Solar System Exploration Research" . Retrieved 11 August 2017 . ^ Bartels, Meghan (25 May 2018). "People are calling for a movement to decolonize space-here's why" . Newsweek . Retrieved 31 October 2021 . Robert Zubrin , said that the one word he shies away from is colony, preferring settlement because the first "confuses the issue with imperialism." ^ Stephenson, Neal (November 21, 2023). "Neal Stephenson on Depictions of Reality" (Video). Conversations with Tyler. Interviewed by Tyler Cowen. YouTube: Mercatus Center . Retrieved February 20, 2026 . ^ Muth, Karl T.; Beggs, Jodi N. (2025). "Choosing a Jury on Mars" . UIC Law Review . 58 (4): 929 . Retrieved February 20, 2026 . ^ "International Space Station legal framework" . ESA . Retrieved 19 April 2025 . ^ Jah, Moriba (1 November 2023). "Occupation, even in orbit, is colonialism" . Aerospace America . Retrieved 13 September 2024 . ^ Haskins, Caroline (14 August 2018). "The Racist Language of Space Exploration" . Retrieved 1 November 2020 . ^ Hale, E. E. (1869). " The Brick Moon ". Atlantic Monthly . 24 . ^ K. E. Tsiolkovsky. Beyond Planet Earth . Trans. by Kenneth Syers. Oxford, 1960. ^ The life of Konstantin Eduardovitch Tsiolkovsky 1857–1935 , Archived 15 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine . ^ Pop, Virgiliu (2008). Who Owns the Moon? Extraterrestrial Aspects of Land and Mineral Resources Ownership . Vol. 4. Springer. p. 13. doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-9135-3 . ISBN 978-1-4020-9134-6 . Retrieved 20 April 2025 . ^ Cole, Dandridge M.; Cox, Donald W. (1964). Islands in Space:The Challenge of the Planetoids . Chilton . Retrieved 17 April 2025 . ^ Gangestad, Joseph W. (March 2017). Orbital Slots for Everyone? (PDF) (Report).

The Aerospace Corporation . Retrieved 20 April 2025 . ^ Durrani, Haris A. (5 December 2017). "The Bogotá Declaration: A Case Study on Sovereignty, Empire, and the Commons in Outer Space" . Columbia Journal of Transnational Law . Archived from the original on 21 January 2020 . Retrieved 15 October 2022 . ^ Biondi, Charleyne (21 January 2018). "Haris A. Durrani – The Bogotá Declaration: A Global Uprising? – Uprising 13/13" . Log In ‹ Blogs @ Columbia Law School . Retrieved 15 October 2022 . ^ a b c d O'Neill, Gerard K. (1977).

The High Frontier: Human Colonies in Space . Anchor Books. ISBN 978-0-385-18232-4 . Retrieved 17 April 2025 . ^ Heppenheimer, T. A. (1977). Colonies in Space . Stackpole Books . Retrieved 16 April 2025 – via National Space Society. ^ "Apollo Soyuz Program Summary" . mannedspaceops.org . Retrieved 20 April 2025 . ^ Foust, Jeff (25 December 2018). "Is the Gateway the right way to the moon?" . SpaceNews . Retrieved 15 October 2022 . ^ "Moon Village: A vision for global cooperation and Space 4.0 – Jan Wörner's blog" . ESA Blog Navigator – Navigator page for active ESA blogs . 23 November 2016 . Retrieved 15 October 2022 . ^ Dyson, Marianne J. (2003). Living on a Space Frontier . National Geographic. ISBN 0792271939 . ^ Eckart, Peter (2006). Lunar Base Handbook . McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0072401710 . ^ Schmitt, Harrison H. (2007). Return to the Moon - Exploration, Enterprise, and Energy in the Human Settlement of Space . Springer. ISBN 978-0-387-31064-0 . Retrieved 18 April 2025 . ^ O’Brien, Dennis (29 June 2020). "The Artemis Accords: repeating the mistakes of the Age of Exploration" .

The Space Review . Retrieved 14 October 2022 . ^ Piper, Kelsey (22 October 2018). "Jeff Bezos and Elon Musk want to colonize space to save humanity" . Vox . Retrieved 2 April 2021 . ^ Kaku, Michio (2018).

The Future of Humanity: Terraforming Mars, Interstellar Travel, Immortality, and Our Destiny Beyond Earth . Doubleday. pp. 3– 6. ISBN 978-0385542760 . It is as inescapable as the laws of physics that humanity will one day confront some type of extinction -level event . ... e face threats global warming ... weaponized microbes ... the onset of another ice age ... the possibility that the supervolcano under Yellowstone National Park may awaken from its long slumber ... another meteor or cometary impact . ... several thousand NEOs (near-Earth objects) that cross the orbit of the Earth. ... Life is too precious to be placed on a single planet . ... Perhaps our fate is to become a multiplanet species that lives among the stars . ^ Highfield, Roger (16 October 2001). "Colonies in space may be only hope, says Hawking" .

The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 26 April 2009 . Retrieved 5 August 2012 . ^ Hawking, Stephen (9 August 2010). "Stephen Hawking: mankind must colonise space or die out" .

The Guardian . Press Association. ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 20 June 2020 . ^ "NASA's Griffin: 'Humans Will Colonize the Solar System' " . Washington Post . 25 September 2005. p. B07. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011 . Retrieved 14 September 2017 . ^ Halle, Louis J. (Summer 1980). "A Hopeful Future for Mankind" . Foreign Affairs . 58 (5): 1129– 36. doi : 10.2307/20040585 . JSTOR 20040585 . Archived from the original on 13 October 2004. ^ Morgan, Richard (1 August 2006). "Life After Earth: Imagining Survival Beyond This Terra Firma" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 17 April 2009 . Retrieved 23 May 2010 . ^ Tierney, John (17 July 2007). "A Survival Imperative for Space Colonization" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 29 June 2017 . Retrieved 23 February 2017 . ^ a b c Baum, Seth D. ; et al. (2019). "Long-Term Trajectories of Human Civilization" (PDF) . Foresight . 21 (1). Bingley: Emerald Group Publishing: 53– 83. doi : 10.1108/FS-04-2018-0037 . S2CID 52042667 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 January 2020 . Retrieved 23 September 2019 . ^ Estimated 10 quadrillion (10 16 ) people. Lewis, John S. (1997). Mining the Sky: Untold Riches from the Asteroids, Comets, and Planets . Helix Books/Addison-Wesley. ISBN 0-201-32819-4 version 3. ^ Estimated 5 quintillion (5 × 10 18 ) people. Savage, Marshall (1992, 1994).

The Millennial Project: Colonizing the Galaxy in Eight Easy Steps . Little, Brown. ISBN 0-316-77163-5 . ^ Sercel, Joel (6 April 2017). "Optical Mining of Asteroids, Moons, and Planets to Enable Sustainable Human Exploration and Space Industrialization" . NASA . Archived from the original on 4 March 2020. ^ Dorminey, Bruce (May 24, 2016). "Turning Near-Earth Asteroids Into Strategically-Placed Fuel Dumps" . Forbes . Archived from the original on 18 September 2017. ^ Sonter, Mark J. (28 September – 2 October 1998). "The Technical and Economic Feasibility of Mining the Near-Earth Asteroids" . 49th IAF Congress . Melbourne, Australia. Archived from the original on 15 August 2008. ^ Asteroid Mining , Archived 12 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine . Sol Station. ^ Whitehouse, David (22 July 1999). "Gold rush in space?" . BBC. Archived from the original on 7 March 2008 . Retrieved 2009-05-25 . ^ Yirka, Bob (23 October 2023). "Two groups look at the economic viability of mining asteroids" . phys.org . Retrieved 18 April 2025 . ^ Makoto Nagatomo, Susumu Sasaki and Yoshihiro Naruo. Conceptual Study of A Solar Power Satellite, SPS 2000 , Archived 25 July 2008 at the Wayback Machine , Proceedings of the 19th International Symposium on Space Technology and Science, Yokohama, Japan, May 1994, pp. 469–476 Paper No. ISTS-94-e-04 – Space Future. ^ a b c d Space Manufacturing , Archived 4 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine – Jim Kingdon's space markets page. ^ "National Space Society Applauds NASA Asteroid Capture Plan" . Space News . 11 April 2013 . Retrieved 20 April 2025 . ^ Lee, Ricky J. (2003). "Costing and financing a commercial asteroid mining venture" . 54th International Astronautical Congress . Bremen, Germany. IAC-03-IAA.3.1.06. Archived from the original on 9 August 2009 . Retrieved 25 May 2009 . ^ The Eros Project , Archived 5 July 2008 at the Wayback Machine – Orbital Development. ^ "The Meaning of Space Settlement" . Space Settlement Institute. Archived from the original on 3 October 2014 . Retrieved 5 September 2014 . ^ Savage, Marshall (1992, 1994).

The Millennial Project: Colonizing the Galaxy in Eight Easy Steps . Little, Brown. ISBN 0-316-77163-5 ^ See for example, the work of Dr. Alan Marshall in Alan Marshall (1993) ' Ethics and the Extraterrestrial Environment ', Journal of Applied Philosophy , Vol. 10, No 2, pp227-237; Alan Marshall (1994) 'Martians Beware', New Zealand Science Monthly , December 1994 issue; Alan Marshall (1997) 'Extraterrestrial Environmentalism', Australian Science , Vol. 18, No. 2, Winter issue, pp. 25–27. July 1997; and "Cosmic Preservationist", The Word: New Scientist , January 4th, 2003 issue. ^ Yun, Joon (2 January 2020). "The Problem With Today's Ideas About Space Exploration" . Worth.com . Retrieved 28 June 2020 . ^ Vajk, J.Peter (1 January 1976). "The impact of space colonization on world dynamics". Technological Forecasting and Social Change . 9 (4): 361– 99. doi : 10.1016/0040-1625(76)90019-6 . ISSN 0040-1625 . ^ Pournelle, Jerry (1979). A Step Farther Out . Ace . Retrieved 16 April 2025 . ^ Alleyne, Richard (17 August 2014). "Stephen Hawking: mankind must move to outer space within a century - Telegraph" . Archived from the original on 17 August 2014 . Retrieved 9 August 2021 . ^ a b Clarke, Arthur C. (1999). Greetings, Carbon-Based Bipeds! . Voyager. ISBN 0-00-224698-8 . Retrieved 18 April 2025 . ^ The Good Earth Is Dying (1971), Isaac Asimov , (published in Der Spiegel ). ^ a b Lewis, John S. (1996). Mining the Sky: Untold Riches from the Asteroids, Comets, and Planets . Helix Book. ISBN 0-201-47959-1 . ^ Clarke, Arthur C. (1962). "Rocket to the Renaissance" . Profiles of the Future: An Inquiry Into the Limits of the Possible . ^ McKnight, John Carter (20 March 2003). "The Space Settlement Summit" . Space Daily. Archived from the original on 14 May 2013 . Retrieved 12 March 2013 . ^ Bostrom, Nick (November 2003). "Astronomical Waste: The Opportunity Cost of Delayed Technological Development" . Utilitas . 15 (3): 308– 14. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.429.2849 . doi : 10.1017/S0953820800004076 . S2CID 15860897 . Archived from the original on 9 April 2014 . Retrieved 20 October 2009 . ^ Britt, Robert Roy (8 October 2001). "Stephen Hawking: Humanity Must Colonize Space to Survive" . space.com . Archived from the original on 25 November 2010 . Retrieved 28 July 2006 . . ^ a b Elhefnawy, Nader (2 February 2009). "Planetary demographics and space colonization" .

The Space Review. Archived from the original on 13 May 2016. ^ Alleyne, Richard (9 August 2010). "Stephen Hawking: mankind must move to outer space within a century" . Archived from the original on 23 April 2018 . Retrieved 5 April 2018 . ^ Marshall, P. (1981). "Nicole Oresme on the Nature, Reflection, and Speed of Light". Isis . 72 (3): 357–374 . doi : 10.1086/352787 . S2CID 144035661 . ^ Dickens, Peter (1 February 2008). "Who Really Won the Space Race?" . Monthly Review . Archived from the original on 3 October 2016. ^ Dickens, Pet (1 March 2017). "Astronauts at Work: The Social Relations of Space Travel" . Monthly Review . Archived from the original on 28 March 2017. ^ Bluth, B. J. "Sociology and Space Development" . California State University Northridge . Archived from the original on 28 June 2008. ^ "A Matrioshka Brain Is A Computer The Size of a Solar System" . curiosity.com . Archived from the original on 14 August 2018 . Retrieved 14 August 2018 . ^ "Robotic Exploration of the Solar System" . Scientific American . Archived from the original on 14 August 2018 . Retrieved 14 August 2018 . ^ Siegel, Ethan. "No, We Haven't Solved The Drake Equation, The Fermi Paradox, Or Whether Humans Are Alone" . Forbes . Archived from the original on 14 August 2018 . Retrieved 14 August 2018 . ^ Dickerson, Kelly. "The likeliest reasons why we haven't contacted aliens are deeply unsettling" . Business Insider . Archived from the original on 14 August 2018 . Retrieved 14 August 2018 . ^ Launius, Roger (8 June 2011). "Reconsidering the Foundations of Human Spaceflight in the 1950s" . Roger Launius's Blog . Retrieved 6 September 2021 . ^ Pearlman, Robert Z. (18 September 2019). "NASA Reveals New Gateway Logo for Artemis Lunar Orbit Way Station" . Space.com . Retrieved 28 June 2020 . ^ Cotterell, Art (2026-04-13), As Artemis II is celebrated, the world faces hard questions about US leadership in space , The Conversation, doi : 10.64628/aa.y3pheu6nv ^ Phillips, Camille (28 October 2015). "As Gateway Arch Turns 50, Its Message Gets Reframed" . NPR.org . Retrieved 27 June 2022 . ^ a b c d e f Durrani, Haris (19 July 2019). "Is Spaceflight Colonialism?" .

The Nation . Retrieved 2 October 2020 . ^ Cornish, Gabrielle (22 July 2019). "How imperialism shaped the race to the moon" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 23 July 2019 . Retrieved 19 September 2019 . ^ a b Haskins, Caroline (14 August 2018). "The racist language of space exploration" .

The Outline . Archived from the original on 16 October 2019 . Retrieved 20 September 2019 . ^ a b c Drake, Nadia (9 November 2018). "We need to change the way we talk about space exploration" . National Geographic . Archived from the original on 16 October 2019 . Retrieved 19 October 2019 . ^ a b c Bartels, Meghan (25 May 2018). "People are calling for a movement to decolonize space—here's why" . Newsweek . Retrieved 9 November 2021 . ^ a b Lee, D. N. (26 March 2015). "When discussing Humanity's next move to space, the language we use matters" . Scientific American . Archived from the original on 14 September 2019 . Retrieved 20 September 2019 . ^ Spencer, Keith A. (8 October 2017). "Against Mars-a-Lago: Why SpaceX's Mars colonization plan should terrify you" . Salon.com . Archived from the original on 19 September 2019 . Retrieved 20 September 2019 . ^ Zevallos, Zuleyka (26 March 2015). "Rethinking the Narrative of Mars Colonisation" . Other Sociologist . Archived from the original on 11 December 2019 . Retrieved 20 September 2019 . ^ Tavares, Frank; Buckner, Denise; Burton, Dana; McKaig, Jordan; Prem, Parvathy; Ravanis, Eleni; Trevino, Natalie; Venkatesan, Aparna; Vance, Steven D.; Vidaurri, Monica; Walkowicz, Lucianne; Wilhelm, Mary Beth (15 October 2020). "Ethical Exploration and the Role of Planetary Protection in Disrupting Colonial Practices". arXiv : 2010.08344v2 . ^ Spencer, Keith A. (2 May 2017). "Keep the Red Planet Red" . Jacobin . Archived from the original on 3 November 2019 . Retrieved 20 September 2019 . ^ Schaberg, Christopher (30 March 2021). "We're Already Colonizing Mars" . Slate Magazine . Retrieved 8 September 2021 . ^ Renstrom, Joelle (18 March 2021). "The Troubling Rhetoric of Space Exploration" . Undark Magazine . Retrieved 15 August 2021 . ^ Yun, Joon (2 January 2020). "The Problem With Today's Ideas About Space Exploration" . Worth.com . Retrieved 28 June 2020 . ^ Calma, Justine (21 July 2021). "Jeff Bezos eyes space as a new 'sacrifice zone' " .

The Verge . Retrieved 9 November 2021 . ^ Kim, Hae-Seo (26 March 2024). "Astro-Colonialism: Conversation with Willi Lempert" . Society for Cultural Anthropology . Retrieved 4 January 2025 . ^ Mitchell, A.; Wright, S.; Suchet-Pearson, S.; Lloyd, K.; Burarrwanga, L.; Ganambarr, R.; Ganambarr-Stubbs, M.; Ganambarr, B.; Maymuru, D.; Maymuru, R. (2020). "Dukarr lakarama: Listening to Guwak, talking back to space colonization" . Political Geography . 81 102218. Elsevier BV. doi : 10.1016/j.polgeo.2020.102218 . ISSN 0962-6298 . Retrieved 4 January 2025 . ^ Trevino, Natalie B (30 October 2020).

The Cosmos is Not Finished (PhD dissertation). University of Western Ontario . Retrieved 9 September 2021 . ^ Tickle, Glen (5 March 2015). "A Look into Whether Humans Should Try to Colonize Venus Instead of Mars" . Laughing Squid . Retrieved 1 September 2021 . ^ Warmflash, David (14 March 2017). "Colonization of the Venusian Clouds: Is 'Surfacism' Clouding Our Judgement?" . Vision Learning . Archived from the original on 11 December 2019 . Retrieved 20 September 2019 . ^ Matson, Zannah Mae; Nunn, Neil (6 September 2021). "Space Infrastructure, Empire, And The Final Frontier: What The Mauna Kea Land Defenders Teach Us About Colonial Totality" . Society & Space . Retrieved 7 September 2021 . ^ Queens University Belfast scientist helps NASA Mars project Archived 19 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine "No-one has yet proved that there is deep groundwater on Mars, but it is plausible as there is certainly surface ice and atmospheric water vapour, so we wouldn't want to contaminate it and make it unusable by the introduction of micro-organisms." ^ Cospar Planetary Protection Policy , Archived 6 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine (20 October 2002; As Amended to 24 March 2011). ^ Meltzer, Michael (31 May 2012). "When Biospheres Collide – a History of NASA's Planetary Protection Programs" . Archived from the original on 14 July 2019 . Retrieved 18 April 2025 . see Chapter 7, Return to Mars – final section: Should we do away with human missions to sensitive targets ^ Johnson, James E. "Planetary Protection Knowledge Gaps for Human Extraterrestrial Missions: Goals and Scope." (2015) Archived 26 October 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Potential Hazards of the Biological Environment (Chapter 5)". Safe on Mars: Precursor Measurements Necessary to Support Human Operations on the Martian Surface . Washington, DC: National Academies Press. 2002. doi : 10.17226/10360 . ISBN 978-0-309-08426-0 . Retrieved 19 April 2025 . Martian biological contamination may occur if astronauts breathe contaminated dust or if they contact material that is introduced into their habitat. If an astronaut becomes contaminated or infected, it is conceivable that he or she could transmit Martian biological entities or even disease to fellow astronauts, or introduce such entities into the biosphere upon returning to Earth. A contaminated vehicle or item of equipment returned to Earth could also be a source of contamination ^ "Communication Delays: The Hidden Challenge of Space Exploration - New Space Economy" . newspaceeconomy.ca . 26 February 2024 . Retrieved 10 April 2025 . ^ "NASA's Europa Probe Gets a Hotline to Earth" . NASA . 15 August 2023 . Retrieved 19 April 2025 . ^ Breuer, Doris; Spohn, Tilman; Johnson, Torrence (1999). Encyclopedia of the solar system . San Diego: Elsevier. ISBN 9780124160347 . ^ Rathbun, J. A.; Spencer, J. R.; Tamppari, L. K.; Martin, T. Z.; Barnard, L.; Travis, L. D. (1 May 2004). "Mapping of Io's thermal radiation by the Galileo photopolarimeter–radiometer (PPR) instrument" . Icarus . Special Issue: Io after Galileo. 169 (1): 127– 139. Bibcode : 2004Icar..169..127R . doi : 10.1016/j.icarus.2003.12.021 . ISSN 0019-1035 . ^ Landis, Geoffrey A.; Fincannon, James (19 June 2015). "Study of Power Options for Jupiter and Outer Planet Missions" (PDF) . 42nd IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference . New Orleans LA . Retrieved 18 April 2025 . ^ Wisian, Ken (21 December 2022). "Geothermal Energy on Solar System Bodies" . University of Texas . Retrieved 18 April 2025 . ^ Dzombak, Rebecca (14 March 2025). "Martian Dust Will Be a Health Hazard for Astronauts" . Eos . Retrieved 10 April 2025 . ^ "Here's what happens to your body in space" . BBC News . 10 January 2018. Archived from the original on 11 April 2019 . Retrieved 9 April 2019 . ^ a b Abadie, LJ; Lloyd, CW; Shelhamer, MJ (11 June 2018). "The Human Body in Space" . NASA. Archived from the original on 26 July 2019 . Retrieved 4 March 2019 . ^ Silverman, Lauren (4 March 2017). "Doctor Launches Vision Quest To Help Astronauts' Eyeballs" . NPR.org . Archived from the original on 5 March 2019 . Retrieved 7 March 2019 . ^ Stuster, Jack W. "NASA - Behavioral Issues Associated with isolation and Confinement: Review and Analysis of Astronaut Journals" . NASA. Archived from the original on 11 April 2019 . Retrieved 9 April 2019 . ^ a b Weir, Kirsten (1 June 2018). "Mission to Mars" . American Psychological Association. Archived from the original on 12 December 2019 . Retrieved 4 March 2019 . We are a circadian species, and if you don't have the proper lighting to maintain that chronobiology , it can create significant problems for crew members ^ a b c "Keeping Astronauts Healthy in Space" . NASA.gov . NASA. Archived from the original on 2 February 2019 . Retrieved 5 March 2019 . ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Wanjek, Christopher (2020). Spacefarers: how humans will settle the Moon, Mars, and beyond . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-98448-6 . ^ Pournelle, Jerry P. (April 1974). "A Step Farther Out, Halfway to Anywhere" . Galaxy Magazine . p. 94. ^ Gandhi, Divya (23 September 2009). "Water discovered on Moon?: "A lot of it actually" " .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 26 September 2009 . Retrieved 26 September 2009 . ^ Reed Jr., George W. (1999). "Don't drink the water" . Meteoritics & Planetary Science . 34 (5): 809– 811. Bibcode : 1999M&PS...34..809R . doi : 10.1111/j.1945-5100.1999.tb01394.x . S2CID 129733422 . ^ a b Platts, Warren J.; Boucher, Dale; Gladstone, G. Randall (12 December 2013). "Prospecting for Native Metals in Lunar Polar Craters". 7th Symposium on Space Resource Utilization . doi : 10.2514/6.2014-0338 . ISBN 978-1-62410-315-5 . ^ "Moon hole might be suitable for colony" . CNN . 1 January 2010. ^ Taylor, R. L. (March 1993). "The effects of prolonged weightlessness and reduced gravity environments on human survival". Journal of the British Interplanetary Society . 46 (3): 97– 106. PMID 11539500 . ^ a b Foust, Jeff (29 May 2018). "Bezos outlines vision of Blue Origin's lunar future" . SpaceNews . Retrieved 21 August 2018 . ^ Smith, Marcia (11 December 2017). "Text of Remarks at Signing of Trump Space Policy Directive 1 and List of Attendees" . Space Policy Online . Retrieved 21 August 2018 . ^ Easley, Mikayla (5 December 2023). "DARPA taps 14 companies to study infrastructure needs for future lunar economy" . defensescoop.com . Retrieved 22 March 2024 . ^ O'Neill, Gerard K. (September 1974). "The colonization of space" . Physics Today . 27 (9): 32– 40. Bibcode : 1974PhT....27i..32O . doi : 10.1063/1.3128863 . ^ Hindy, Joe (10 October 2024). "SpaceX Plans To Send Five Uncrewed Starships to Mars by 2026" . CNET . Retrieved 27 November 2024 . ^ Koren, Marina (5 November 2024). "MAGA Goes to Mars" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 27 November 2024 . ^ Pajares, Arturo; Govea-Alvarez, Paulina; Chen, Zhiyuan; Conti, Melchiorre; Michielsen, Bart (June 2025). "From local resources to in situ propellant and chemical production on Mars. A possible pathway" . Chemical Engineering Journal . 513 162490. Bibcode : 2025ChEnJ.51362490P . doi : 10.1016/j.cej.2025.162490 . ^ McCubbin, Francis M.; Riner, Miriam A.; Kaaden, Kathleen E. Vander; Burkemper, Laura K. (2012). "Is Mercury a volatile-rich planet?" . Geophysical Research Letters . 39 (9) 2012GL051711: n/a. Bibcode : 2012GeoRL..39.9202M . doi : 10.1029/2012GL051711 . ISSN 1944-8007 . ^ a b c d Bolonkin, Alexander A. (2015). "Chapter 19: Economic Development of Mercury: A Comparison with Mars Colonization".

In Badescu, Viorel; Zacny, Kris (eds.). Inner Solar System: Prospective Energy and Material Resources . Springer-Verlag. pp. 407– 419. ISBN 978-3-319-19568-1 . ^ a b c d e f Williams, Matt (3 August 2016). "How do we Colonize Mercury?" . Universe Today . Retrieved 22 August 2021 . ^ Schmidt, Stanley; Zubrin, Robert (1996). Islands in the Sky: Bold New Ideas for Colonizing Space . Wiley. pp. 71– 84. ISBN 978-0-471-13561-6 . Retrieved 18 April 2025 . ^ Shifflett, James (n.d.). "A Mercury Colony?" . einstein-schrodinger.com . Retrieved 31 July 2021 . ^ "Venus: Facts - NASA Science" . 9 November 2017 . Retrieved 29 January 2025 . ^ a b c d e f Zubrin, Robert (1999). Entering Space: Creating a Spacefaring Civilization . Tarcher/Putnam. ISBN 978-1-58542-036-0 . Retrieved 18 April 2025 . ^ a b c Van Cleve, Jeffrey; Grillmair, Carl; Hanna, Mark. "Helium-3 Mining Aerostats in the Atmosphere of Uranus" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 June 2006 . Retrieved 10 May 2006 . ^ Castro, Joseph (17 March 2015). "What It Would Be Like to Live on Uranus' Moons Titania and Miranda" . space.com . Retrieved 19 April 2025 . ^ Ruiz, Javier (2003). "Heat flow and depth to a possible internal ocean on Triton" (PDF) . Icarus . 166 (2): 436. Bibcode : 2003Icar..166..436R . doi : 10.1016/j.icarus.2003.09.009 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 December 2019 . Retrieved 10 April 2023 . ^ Aadithya, T.A.; Srivastava, Aman; Banerjee, Prinan; Partheban, P. (7 November 2015). "Case Study on Human Colonization of Triton" (PDF) . Proceedings of 3rd IASTEM International Conference . Singapore. ISBN 978-93-85832-33-8 . ^ Palaszewski, Bryan (2015). Solar System Exploration Augmented by In-Situ Resource Utilization: Human Mercury and Saturn Exploration . 8th Symposium on Space Resource Utilization. Kissimmee, Florida. doi : 10.2514/6.2015-1654 . hdl : 2060/20150004114 . ^ a b c d e f g h Kerwick, Thomas B. (2012). "Colonizing Jupiter's Moons: An Assessment of Our Options and Alternatives" . Journal of the Washington Academy of Sciences . 98 (4): 15– 26. JSTOR 24536505 . Retrieved 1 August 2021 . ^ a b c d Williams, Matt (23 November 2016). "How do we Colonize Jupiter's Moons?" . Universe Today . Retrieved 10 January 2022 . ^ Freeze, Brent; Greason, Jeff; Nader, Ronnie; Febres, Jaime Jaramillo; Chaves-Jiminez, Adolfo; Lamontagne, Michel; Thomas, Stephanie; Cassibry, Jason; Fuller, John; Davis, Eric; Conway, Darrel (1 February 2022). "Jupiter Observing Velocity Experiment (JOVE): Introduction to Wind Rider Solar Electric Propulsion Demonstrator and Science Objectives" . Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific . 134 (1032): 023001. Bibcode : 2022PASP..134b3001F . doi : 10.1088/1538-3873/ac4812 . ISSN 0004-6280 . ^ Consalmagno, G. J. (1 October 1983). "Ice-rich moons and the physical properties of ice" . Journal of Physical Chemistry . 87 (21): 4204– 4208. Bibcode : 1983JPhCh..87.4204C . doi : 10.1021/j100244a045 . ^ Lorenz, Ralph; Mitton, Jacqueline (2002). Lifting Titan's veil: exploring the giant moon of Saturn . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-79348-3 . ^ a b c Williams, Matt (22 December 2016). "How do we Colonize Saturns' Moons" . Universe Today . Retrieved 22 August 2021 . ^ Day, Dwayne (28 September 2015). "The helium-3 incantation" .

The Space Review . Retrieved 11 January 2019 . ^ "Vision for Space Exploration" (PDF) . NASA . 2004. ^ a b c d e Ringwald, Frederick A. (29 February 2000). "SPS 1020 (Introduction to Space Sciences)" . California State University, Fresno. Archived from the original on 25 July 2008 . Retrieved 5 January 2014 . ^ Fillius, R. Walker; McIlwain, Carl E.; Mogro-Campero, Antonio (2 May 1975). "Radiation Belts of Jupiter: A Second Look" . Science . 188 (4187): 465– 467. Bibcode : 1975Sci...188..465F . doi : 10.1126/science.188.4187.465 . PMID 17734363 . ^ Artemis Society International , Archived 20 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine official website. ^ Kokh, Peter; Kaehny, Mark; Armstrong, Doug; Burnside, Ken (November 1997). "Europa II Workshop Report" . Moon Miner's Manifesto . 110 . Archived from the original on 7 June 2019. ^ Hendrix, Amanda R.; Hurford, Terry A.; Barge, Laura M.; Bland, Michael T.; Bowman, Jeff S.; Brinckerhoff, William; Buratti, Bonnie J.; Cable, Morgan L.; Castillo-Rogez, Julie; Collins, Geoffrey C.; et al. (2019). "The NASA Roadmap to Ocean Worlds" . Astrobiology . 19 (1): 1– 27. Bibcode : 2019AsBio..19....1H . doi : 10.1089/ast.2018.1955 . PMC 6338575 . PMID 30346215 . ^ Troutman, Patrick A.; Bethke, Kristen; Stillwagen, Frederic H.; Caldwell, Jr, Darrell L.; Manvi, Ram; Strickland, Chris; Krizan, Shawn A. (28 January 2003). Revolutionary Concepts for Human Outer Planet Exploration (HOPE) (PDF) (Report). NASA Langley Research Center. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 August 2017 . Retrieved 19 April 2025 . ^ Seedhouse, Erik (2012). Interplanetary Outpost: The Human and Technological Challenges of Exploring the Outer Planets . Berlin: Springer. ISBN 978-1-4419-9747-0 . Retrieved 19 April 2025 . ^ "NASA's Cassini Discovers Potential Liquid Water on Enceladus" . Space News. 9 March 2006 . Retrieved 16 April 2025 . ^ Patel, Kasha (1 October 2018). "Mars vs. Titan: A Showdown of Human Habitability" . acs.org . Retrieved 20 April 2025 . ^ "Titan: Facts" . NASA . 2 May 2018 . Retrieved 21 April 2025 . ^ Nield, David (10 July 2017). "Titan Has Enough Energy to Power a Colony The Size of The US" . sciencealert.com . Retrieved 20 April 2025 . ^ Timmer –, John (13 May 2017). "Forget Mars—let's go colonize Titan!" . arstechnica.com . Retrieved 26 April 2025 . ^ Carter, Jamie (28 August 2017). "The tech we need to build a colony on Titan" . techradar.com . Retrieved 21 April 2025 . ^ Dyson, Freeman (February 2003). "Let's look for life in the outer solar system" . ted2003 . Retrieved 18 April 2025 . ^ a b Hein, Andreas M.; Pak, Mikhail; Pütz, Daniel; Bühler, Christian; Reiss, Philipp (2012). "World ships—architectures & feasibility revisited" . Journal of the British Interplanetary Society . 65 (4): 119. ^ NASA (1977). Space Settlements: A Design Study (1977) . ^ Leong, Stacy (2002). "Period of the Sun's Orbit around the Galaxy (Cosmic Year)" .

The Physics Factbook . Retrieved 19 April 2025 . ^ Williams, Matt (1 March 2020). "Scientists Are Starting to Take Warp Drives Seriously, Especially This One Concept" . ScienceAlert.com . Retrieved 19 April 2025 . ^ Brumfield, Ben (7 October 2014). "Sleeper spaceship could carry first humans to Mars in hibernation state" . CNN . Retrieved 18 April 2025 . ^ Crowl, Adam; et al. (2012). "Embryo Space Colonisation to Overcome the Interstellar Time Distance Bottleneck" . Journal of the British Interplanetary Society . 65 : 283– 285. Bibcode : 2012JBIS...65..283C . ^ Tackett, Stan (27 March 2013). "Nuclear Pulse Propulsion: Gateway to the Stars" . American Nuclear Society . Retrieved 19 April 2025 . ^ "The Case For Orion" . www.spacedaily.com . Archived from the original on August 3, 2023 . Retrieved 2023-08-03 . ^ Forward, Robert L. (April 1984). "Roundtrip interstellar travel using laser-pushed lightsails" . Journal of Spacecraft . 21 (2): 187– 195. Bibcode : 1984JSpRo..21..187F . doi : 10.2514/3.8632 . Retrieved 19 April 2025 . ^ "Uploaded e-crews for interstellar missions" . kurzweilai.net . 12 December 2012 . Retrieved 19 April 2025 . ^ Burruss, Robert Page; Colwell, J. (September–October 1987). "Intergalactic Travel: The Long Voyage From Home".

The Futurist . 21 (5): 29– 33. ^ Fogg, Martyn (November 1988). "The Feasibility of Intergalactic Colonisation and its Relevance to SETI" . Journal of the British Interplanetary Society . 41 (11): 491– 496. Bibcode : 1988JBIS...41..491F . ^ Armstrong, Stuart; Sandberg, Anders (2013). "Eternity in six hours: intergalactic spreading of intelligent life and sharpening the Fermi paradox" (PDF) . Acta Astronautica . 89 . Future of Humanity Institute, Philosophy Department, Oxford University: 1– 13. Bibcode : 2013AcAau..89....1A . doi : 10.1016/j.actaastro.2013.04.002 . ^ Hickman, John (November 1999). "The Political Economy of Very Large Space Projects" . Journal of Evolution and Technology . 4 . ISSN 1541-0099 . Archived from the original on 4 December 2013 . Retrieved 14 December 2013 . ^ Hickman, John (2010). Reopening the Space Frontier . Common Ground. ISBN 978-1-86335-800-2 . ^ Tyson, Neil deGrasse (2012). Space Chronicles: Facing the Ultimate Frontier . W.W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-08210-4 . ^ Huang, Zhi. "A Novel Application of the SAWD-Sabatier-SPE Integrated System for CO2 Removal and O2 Regeneration in Submarine Cabins during Prolonged Voyages" . Airiti Library . Retrieved 10 September 2018 . ^ Gitelson, I. I.; Lisovsky, G. M.; MacElroy, R. D. (2003). Manmade Closed Ecological Systems . Taylor & Francis . ISBN 0-415-29998-5 . ^ "NASA Study: Stress Management and Resilience Training for Optimal Performance (SMART-OP) – Anxiety and Depression Research Center at UCLA" . Archived from the original on 4 April 2019 . Retrieved 4 March 2019 . ^ "E-mental health tool may be key for astronauts to cope with anxiety, depression in space" . Phys.org . Archived from the original on 4 April 2019 . Retrieved 4 March 2019 . ^ a b Spacecraft Shielding Archived 28 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine engineering.dartmouth.edu. Retrieved 3 May 2011. ^ Mirnov, Vladimir; Üçer, Defne; Danilov, Valentin (10–15 November 1996). "High-Voltage Tethers For Enhanced Particle Scattering In Van Allen Belts". APS Division of Plasma Physics Meeting Abstracts . 38 : 7. Bibcode : 1996APS..DPP..7E06M . OCLC 205379064 . Abstract #7E.06. ^ "NASA Finds Lightning Clears Safe Zone in Earth's Radiation Belt - NASA" . Retrieved 11 December 2023 . ^ NASA SP-413 Space Settlements: A Design Study. Appendix E Mass Shielding Archived 27 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 3 May 2011. ^ Clynes, Manfred E. and Nathan S. Kline, (1960) "Cyborgs and Space," Astronautics, September, pp. 26–27 and 74–76. ^ Eller, Jack David (15 September 2022). "Space Colonization and Exonationalism: On the Future of Humanity and Anthropology" . Humans . 2 (3): 148– 160. doi : 10.3390/humans2030010 . ISSN 2673-9461 . ^ Crawford, Ian A. (2015). "Interplanetary Federalism: Maximising the Chances of Extraterrestrial Peace, Diversity and Liberty".

The Meaning of Liberty Beyond Earth . Space and Society. Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp. 199– 218. doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-09567-7_13 . ISBN 978-3-319-09566-0 . ^ Parkita, Piotr Filip (2025-04-11). "Tomorrow for which we are not prepared. Why is the Outer Space Treaty opposed to the idea of colonizing Mars?" . Harvard International Law Journal . ^ "Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies" . United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs . Retrieved 7 November 2020 . ^ Lock, Alexander (6 June 2015). "Space: The Final Frontier" .

The British Library – Medieval manuscripts blog . Retrieved 2 November 2020 . ^ Globus, Al. "Space Settlement Basics" . National Space Society . Retrieved 19 April 2025 . ^ Space Settlement Basics Archived 6 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine by Al Globus, NASA Ames Research Center. Last Updated: 2 February 2012 ^ "SpaceX Capabilities and Services" . SpaceX. 2013. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013 . Retrieved 11 December 2013 . ^ a b Belfiore, Michael (9 December 2013). "The Rocketeer" . Foreign Policy . Archived from the original on 10 December 2013 . Retrieved 11 December 2013 . ^ Amos, Jonathan (30 September 2013). "Recycled rockets: SpaceX calls time on expendable launch vehicles" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 3 October 2013 . Retrieved 2 October 2013 . ^ A Journey to Inspire, Innovate, and Discover , Archived 10 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Report of the President's Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy , June 2004. ^ Christensen, Bill (10 October 2007). "Scientists Design New Space Currency" . Space.com . Archived from the original on 21 January 2019 . Retrieved 21 January 2019 . ^ Delbert, Caroline (29 December 2020). "Elon Musk Says Mars Settlers Will Use Cryptocurrency, Like 'Marscoin' " . Popular Mechanics . Retrieved 24 February 2021 . ^ Shaw, Debra Benita (15 February 2023). "The Way Home: Space Migration and Disorientation" . New Formations: A Journal of Culture/Theory/Politics . 107 (107). Lawrence & Wishart: 118– 138. doi : 10.3898/NewF:107-8.07.2022 . ISSN 1741-0789 . Retrieved 14 May 2024 . ^ Klass, Morton (2000). "Recruiting new "huddled masses" and "wretched refuse": a prolegomenon to the human colonization of space". Futures . 32 (8). Elsevier BV: 739– 748. doi : 10.1016/s0016-3287(00)00024-0 . ISSN 0016-3287 . ^ Perlman, David (10 October 2009). "NASA's moon blast called a smashing success" .

The San Francisco Chronicle . Archived from the original on 21 July 2015 . Retrieved 19 July 2015 . ^ "The Second Moon Race: It's the USA vs. China vs. India vs. ... Nigeria?" . Archived from the original on 8 March 2012. ^ Zuppero, Anthony (1996). "Discovery of Abundant, Accessible Hydrocarbons nearly Everywhere in the Solar System". Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Space '96 . ASCE . doi : 10.1061/40177(207)107 . ISBN 0-7844-0177-2 . ^ Sanders, Robert (1 February 2006). "Binary asteroid in Jupiter's orbit may be icy comet from solar system's infancy" . UC Berkeley. Archived from the original on 11 December 2018 . Retrieved 25 May 2009 . ^ McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science & Technology, 8th Edition 1997; vol. 16, p. 654. ^ UNESCAP Electric Power in Asia and the Pacific , Archived 13 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine . ^ Gaertner, Ryan (9 November 2015). "Solar vs. Traditional Energy in Homes" . large.stanford.edu . Archived from the original on 24 October 2018 . Retrieved 26 February 2019 . ^ a b "Nuclear Power and Associated Environmental Issues in the Transition of Exploration and Mining on Earth to the Development of Off-World Natural Resources in the 21st Century" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 February 2015 . Retrieved 18 September 2017 . ^ Dance, Amber (16 September 2008). "Beaming energy from space". Nature . doi : 10.1038/news.2008.1109 . ISSN 0028-0836 . ^ Binns, Corey (2 June 2011). "Space Based Solar Power" . Popular Science. Archived from the original on 27 September 2017. ^ "Space-Based Solar Power As an Opportunity for Strategic Security: Phase 0 Architecture Feasibility Study" (PDF) . U.S. National Security Space Office. 10 October 2007. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 September 2022 . Retrieved 26 September 2022 . ^ Warmflash, David (29 March 2017). "Beaming solar energy from the Moon could solve Earth's energy crisis" . Wired . Archived from the original on 11 October 2017. ^ " 'Trash Can' Nuclear Reactors Could Power Human Outpost On Moon Or Mars" . ScienceDaily . 4 October 2009. Archived from the original on 18 September 2017. ^ Crawford, Ian (July 2000). "Where are they?" . Scientific American . Vol. 283, no. 1. pp. 38– 43. JSTOR 26058784 . ^ Margulis, Lynn ; Guerrero, Ricardo (1995). "Life as a planetary phenomenon: the colonization of Mars". Microbiología . 11 : 173– 84. PMID 11539563 . ^ Carrington, Damian (15 February 2002). " "Magic number" for space pioneers calculated" . New Scientist . ^ Marin, F; Beluffi, C (2018). "Computing the minimal crew for a multi-generational space travel towards Proxima Centauri b". Journal of the British Interplanetary Society . 71 : 45. arXiv : 1806.03856 . Bibcode : 2018JBIS...71...45M . ^ "This is how many people we'd have to send to Proxima Centauri to make sure someone actually arrives" . MIT Technology Review . 22 June 2018. "We can then conclude that, under the parameters used for those simulations, a minimum crew of 98 settlers is needed for a 6,300-year multi-generational space journey towards Proxima Centauri b," say Marin and Beluffi. ^ Salotti, Jean-Marc (16 June 2020). "Minimum Number of Settlers for Survival on Another Planet" . Scientific Reports . 10 (1) 9700. Bibcode : 2020NatSR..10.9700S . doi : 10.1038/s41598-020-66740-0 . PMC 7297723 . PMID 32546782 . ^ Clark, Nicola (8 March 2013). "Reality TV for the Red Planet" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 29 June 2017. ^ Lee, Jane J. (22 February 2013). "Businessman Dennis Tito Financing Manned Mission to Mars" . National Geographic News . Archived from the original on 1 March 2013. ^ Youn, Soo; Theodorou, Christine (9 May 2019). "Blue Origin, Jeff Bezos unveils plans for space colonization" . ABC News . Retrieved 15 April 2025 . ^ "NSS Space Settlement Library" . NSS.org. 16 December 2011. Archived from the original on 12 June 2011 . Retrieved 14 December 2013 . ^ "The Space Settlement Institute" . space-settlement-institute.org . Archived from the original on 28 April 2015 . Retrieved 13 June 2015 . ^ Ralph, Eric (24 December 2018). "SpaceX CEO Elon Musk: Starship prototype to have 3 Raptors and "mirror finish" " . Teslarati . Archived from the original on 24 December 2018 . Retrieved 30 December 2018 . ^ Foust, Jeff (24 December 2018). "Musk teases new details about redesigned next-generation launch system" . SpaceNews . Retrieved 27 December 2018 . ^ "Journal of the British Interplanetary Society" .

The British Interplanetary Society . Retrieved 26 September 2022 . ^ "BIS SPACE Project special issue" (PDF) . Journal of the British Interplanetary Society . 72 (9/10). September 2019. ^ "The World's Largest Earth Science Experiment: Biosphere 2" . EcoWatch . 16 October 2015. Archived from the original on 14 August 2018 . Retrieved 14 August 2018 . ^ Drake, Nadia (12 December 2016). "8 Amazing Places You Can Visit 'Mars' on Earth" . Archived from the original on 14 August 2018 . Retrieved 13 August 2018 . ^ "Devon Island is as close to Mars as you may get" . MNN - Mother Nature Network . Archived from the original on 14 August 2018 . Retrieved 13 August 2018 . ^ Zubrin, Robert M.; McKay, Christopher P. (2003). Technological Requirements for Terraforming Mars (PDF) (Report). American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc . Retrieved 21 April 2025 . ^ Stableford, Brian (2006). "Colonisation" . Science Fact and Science Fiction: An Encyclopedia . Taylor & Francis. pp. 93– 95. ISBN 978-0-415-97460-8 . ^ Johnson, Richard D.; Holbrow, Charles. "1.

The Colonization of Space". Space Settlements: A Design Study (PDF) (Report). NASA . Retrieved 21 April 2025 . ^ Tweney, Dylan (25 May 2011). "May 25, 1945: Sci-Fi Author Predicts Future by Inventing It" . Wired . Retrieved 21 April 2025 . ^ Montagne, Renee (7 June 2012). "Bradbury Revered In Space Exploration Community" . NPR . Retrieved 21 April 2025 . ^ Kurtz, Adam (1 October 2024). "Live long and prosper: Star Trek-inspired medical devices on agenda at UND" . University of North Dakota . Retrieved 21 April 2025 . ^ Klimek, Chris (8 September 2016). " 'Star Trek' at 50: How the Sci-Fi TV Show Changed Everything" . Rolling Stone . Retrieved 19 April 2025 . ^ Bly, Robert (2005).

The Spaceship Company Virgin Galactic CAS Space ARCA Association of Autonomous Astronauts Astronaute Club Européen Commercial Spaceflight Federation Copenhagen Suborbitals Space Frontier Foundation Space Tourism Society Defunct Armadillo Aerospace Bigelow Aerospace Canadian Arrow Golden Spike Company MirCorp Orion Span PlanetSpace RocketShip Tours Space Island Group ( Space Island Project ) XCOR Aerospace Vehicles Current Soyuz Dragon 2 New Shepard Future New Glenn Starliner Starship Retired SpaceShipTwo Living in space Commercialization of space Space colonization Space medicine Space settlement Space station Suborbital spaceplane Space competitions America's Space Prize Ansari X Prize Google Lunar X Prize Space elevator competitions Space tourists Past Dennis Tito Mark Shuttleworth Gregory Olsen Anousheh Ansari Charles Simonyi Richard Garriott Guy Laliberté Oliver Daemen Jared Isaacman Sian Proctor Hayley Arceneaux Christopher Sembroski Yusaku Maezawa Yozo Hirano Larry Connor Mark Pathy Eytan Stibbe John Shoffner Space tourism missions Past Inspiration4 Blue Origin NS-16 Blue Origin NS-18 Blue Origin NS-19 Blue Origin NS-20 Blue Origin NS-21 Blue Origin NS-22 Blue Origin NS-25 Blue Origin NS-26 Blue Origin NS-28 Blue Origin NS-30 Blue Origin NS-31 Blue Origin NS-32 Blue Origin NS-33 Blue Origin NS-34 Blue Origin NS-36 Blue Origin NS-37 Blue Origin NS-38 Galactic 02 Galactic 03 Galactic 04 Galactic 05 Galactic 06 Galactic 07 Axiom-1 Axiom-2 Axiom-3 Axiom-4 Polaris Dawn Fram2 Cancelled dearMoon Related Axiom Station Tourism on the Moon Tourism on Mars Haven-1 v t e ... in space Biology Human The human body Hygiene Locomotion Medicine Neuroscience Psychology Psychological and sociological effects Sex Sleep Non- human Animals Cats Cockroaches Dogs Frogs Fruit flies Mice Primates Tardigrades Tortoises Extraterrestrial life Microorganisms Plants Astrobotany Environment Climate Corrosion Debris Dust Magnetosphere Weather Weathering Society Advertising Alcohol Archaeology of Earth of items in space Art Burial Colonization Economy Mining Trade Ethics Exploration Food Law Military Music Religion Christmas Selfies Tourism Voting War Women Technology Human spaceflight Accidents Architecture Farming Food Carbonated drinks Toilets Writing Other technologies Logistics Manufacturing Mining Power Batteries Nuclear Solar for Earth for spacecraft Radar Telescopes Weapons Outer space portal v t e Solar System Sun Mercury Venus Earth Mars Ceres Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Orcus Pluto Haumea Quaoar Makemake Gonggong Eris Sedna Planets , dwarfs , minors Terrestrials Mercury Venus Earth Mars Giants Gas Jupiter Saturn Ice Uranus Neptune Dwarfs Ceres Orcus Pluto Haumea Quaoar Makemake Gonggong Eris Sedna Large Minor Planets Vesta Pallas Salacia Máni Achlys Aya Chiminigagua Varda Ixion List Moons Earth Moon claimed Mars Phobos Deimos Jupiter Ganymede Callisto Io Europa all 115 Saturn Titan Rhea Iapetus Dione Tethys Enceladus Mimas Hyperion Phoebe all 293 Uranus Titania Oberon Umbriel Ariel Miranda all 29 Neptune Triton Proteus Nereid all 16 Pluto Charon Nix Hydra Kerberos Styx Orcus Vanth Haumea Hiʻiaka Namaka Quaoar Weywot Makemake S/2015 (136472) 1 Gonggong Xiangliu Eris Dysnomia Exploration ( outline ) Colonization Discovery astronomy historical models timeline Space probes timeline list Human spaceflight space stations list programs Mercury Venus Moon mining Mars Ceres Asteroids mining Comets Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Pluto Deep space Hypothetical objects Bagby's moon Chiron Coatlicue Counter-Earth Chrysalis Fifth Giant Hyperion Lilith Mercury's moon Neith Nemesis Nibiru Petit's moon Phaeton Planet Nine Effects Planet Ten Planet V Planet X Subsatellites Synestia Theia Themis Tyche Vulcan Vulcanoids Waltemath's moons Lists Comets Possible dwarf planets Gravitationally rounded objects Minor planets Natural satellites Solar System models Solar System objects by size by discovery date Interstellar and circumstellar molecules Rings Planetary Terran Jovian Saturnian ( Rhean ?) Uranian Neptunian Minor objects' Charikloan Chironean Haumean Quaoarian Formation, evolution , contents, and History Star formation Accretion Accretion disk Excretion Capture theory Capture of Triton Circumplanetary disk Circumstellar disc Circumstellar envelope Coatlicue Co-orbital configuration Trojan moons Co-orbital moons Cosmic dust Debris disk Detached object Disk instability EXCEDE Exozodiacal dust Extraterrestrial materials Curation Sample-return mission Frost/Ice/Snow line Giant-impact hypothesis Grand tack hypothesis Gravitational collapse Hills cloud Hill sphere Interplanetary dust cloud Interplanetary medium/space Interstellar cloud Interstellar medium Interstellar space Kuiper belt Kuiper cliff Late Heavy Bombardment Molecular cloud Nebular hypothesis Nice model Nice 2 model Five-planet Nice model Oort cloud Oort limit Outer space Planet Disrupted Migration System Planetesimal Formation Merging stars Protoplanetary disk Ring system Roche limit vs. Hill sphere Rubble pile Scattered disc Small Solar System bodies Asteroid belt Asteroids Ceres Vesta Pallas Hygiea active List families PHA exceptional Kirkwood gap Centaurs Comets Damocloids Meteoroids Minor planets names and meanings moons Planetesimal Planetary orbit-crossers Mercury Venus Earth Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Trojans Venus Earth Mars Jupiter Trojan camp Greek camp Saturn Uranus Neptune Near-Earth objects NEAs Trans-Neptunian objects Kuiper belt Cubewanos Plutinos Detached objects Sednoids Scattered disc Hills cloud Oort cloud Oort limit Related Double planet Lagrange point Moonlet Syzygy Tidal locking Outline of the Solar System Solar System portal Astronomy portal Earth sciences portal Solar System → Local Interstellar Cloud → Local Bubble → Gould Belt → Orion Arm → Milky Way → Milky Way subgroup → Local Group → Local Sheet → Local Volume → Virgo Supercluster → Laniakea Supercluster → Pisces–Cetus Supercluster Complex → Local Hole → Observable universe → Universe Each arrow ( → ) may be read as "within" or "part of". v t e Space colonization Core concepts Interplanetary spaceflight Interstellar travel Intergalactic travel Planetary habitability Space and survival Space settlement Terraforming Space settlements Bernal sphere Bishop Ring McKendree cylinder O'Neill cylinder Stanford torus Colonization targets Lagrange points Solar System Mercury Venus Mars Asteroids mining Moon Titan Trans-Neptunian objects Free space Terraforming targets Mars Venus Europa Organizations Mars Society NASA National Space Society SpaceX The Planetary Society