The Tamils ( / ˈ t æ m ɪ l z , ˈ t ɑː -/ TAM -ilz, TAHM - ), also known by their demonym Tamilar , are a Dravidian ethnic group who natively speak the Tamil language and trace their ancestry mainly to the southern part of the Indian subcontinent . Tamil is one of the longest-surviving languages, with over two thousand years of written history , dating back to the Sangam period (between 300 BCE and 300 CE). Tamils constitute about 5.7% of the Indian population and form the majority in the South Indian state of Tamil Nadu and the union territory of Puducherry . They also form significant proportions of the populations in Sri Lanka (15.3%), Malaysia (7%) and Singapore (5%). Tamils have migrated world-wide since the 19th century CE and a significant population exists in South Africa , Mauritius , Fiji , as well as other regions such as the Southeast Asia , Middle East , Caribbean and parts of the Western World . Archaeological evidence from Tamil Nadu indicates a continuous history of human occupation for more than 3,800 years.

In the Sangam period, Tamilakam was ruled by the Three Crowned Kings of the Cheras , Cholas and Pandyas . Smaller Velir kings and chieftains ruled certain territories and maintained relationship with the larger kingdoms. Urbanisation and mercantile activity developed along the coasts during the later Sangam period with the Tamils influencing the regional trade in the Indian Ocean region. Artifacts obtained from excavations indicate the presence of early trade relations with the Romans .

The major kingdoms to rule the region later were the Pallavas (3rd–9th century CE), and the Vijayanagara Empire (14th–17th century CE).

The island of Sri Lanka often saw attacks from the Indian mainland with the Cholas establishing their influence across the island and across several areas in Southeast Asia in the 10th century CE. This led to the spread of Tamil influence and contributed to the cultural Indianisation of the region. Scripts brought by Tamil traders like the Grantha and Pallava scripts , induced the development of many Southeast Asian scripts.

The Jaffna Kingdom later controlled the Tamil territory in the north of the Sri Lanka from 13th to 17th century CE. European colonization began in the 17th century CE, and continued for two centuries until the middle of the 20th century. Due to its long history, the Tamil culture has seen multiple influences over the years and have developed diversely.

The Tamil visual art consists of a distinct style of architecture , sculpture and other art forms. Tamil sculpture ranges from stone sculptures in temples, to detailed bronze icons .

The ancient Tamil country had its own system of music called Tamil Pannisai . Tamil performing arts include the theatre form Koothu , puppetry Bommalattam , classical dance Bharatanatyam , and various other traditional dance forms . Hinduism is the major religion followed by the Tamils and the religious practices include the veneration of various village deities and ancient Tamil gods . A smaller number are also Christians and Muslims , and a small percentage follow Jainism and Buddhism . Tamil cuisine consist of various vegetarian and meat items, usually spiced with locally available spices . Historian Michael Wood called the Tamils the last surviving classical civilization on Earth, because the Tamils have preserved substantial elements of their past regarding belief, culture, music, and literature despite the influence of globalization . Etymology Tamil is derived from the name of the language .

The people are referred to as Tamiḻar in Tamil language, which is etymologically linked to the name of the language.

The origin and precise etymology of the word Tamil is unclear with multiple theories attested to it. Kamil Zvelebil suggests that the term tamiz might have been derived from tam meaning "self" and "-iz" having the connotation of "unfolding sound". Alternatively, he suggests a derivation of tamiz < tam-iz < *tav-iz < *tak-iz , meaning "the proper process (of speaking)". Franklin Southworth suggests that the name comes from tam-miz > tam-iz meaning "self-speak", or "our own speech". It is unknown whether the term Tamila and its equivalents in Prakrit such as Damela , Damila , or Tamira was first used as a self designation or by outsiders.

The Hathigumpha inscription from Udayagiri in Eastern India dated to the second century BCE, describes a Tamira samghata (Confederacy of Tamil rulers), which was in existence for the previous 113 years. Epigraphical evidence from the second century BCE mentioning Damela or Dameda from ancient Sri Lanka have been found.

In the Buddhist Jataka texts, there is a mention of a Damila-rattha (Tamil dynasty). Greek historian Strabo (first century BCE) mentions that the Roman Emperor Augustus received an ambassador from Pandyan of Dramira . An inscription from Amaravati dated to third century CE refers to a Dhamila-vaniya (Tamil trader). History In India The Sangam period lasted from 3rd century BCE to 3rd century CE with the main source of history during the period coming from the various Sangam literature . Ancient Tamilakam was ruled by a triumvirate of monarchical states, Cheras , Cholas and Pandyas . These kings are referred to as Vāṉpukaḻ Mūvar (Three glorified by heaven) in the Sangam literature.

The Cheras controlled the western part of Tamilkam, the Pandyas controlled the south, and the Cholas had their base in the Kaveri delta. They are mentioned in the inscriptions from the Mauryan Empire dated to third century BCE. Kalinga inscriptions from the second century BCE refers to a confederacy of the Tamil kingdoms.

The three kings called Vendhar ruled over several hill tribes headed by the Velir chiefs and settlements headed by clan chiefs called Kizhar .

The rulers of smaller territories were referred to as Kurunilamannar , with Purananuru mentioning the names of many such chieftains.

The Sangam period rulers patronized multiple religions including vedic religion , Buddhism and Jainism and sponsored some of the earliest Tamil literature with the oldest surviving work being Tolkāppiyam , a book of Tamil grammar. Purananuru describes the public life and various unique cultural practices that existed during the period.

The text talks about the Vedic Sacrifices performed by the kings as described in the Vedas and the rituals performed for the dead. Major trade routes and cities in the 1st century CE as per Periplus of the Erythraean Sea Agriculture was an important occupation during the period, and there is evidence that networks of irrigation channels were built as early as the 3rd century BCE.

The Sangam literature describe fertile lands and people organised into various occupational groups.

The governance of the land was through hereditary monarchies, although the sphere of the state's activities and the extent of the ruler's powers were limited through the adherence to an established order.

The kingdoms had significant diplomatic and trade contacts with other kingdoms to the north and with the Romans . Roman coins and other epigraphical evidence from South India and potsherds with Tamil writing found in excavations along the Red Sea indicate the presence of Roman commerce with the ancient Tamilakam. Much of the commerce from the Romans and Han China were facilitated via seaports including Muziris and Korkai with spices being the most prized goods along with pearls and silk . There is evidence of emissaries sent to the Roman Emperor Augustus by the Pandya kings. An anonymous Greek traveler's account from first century CE, Periplus Maris Erytraei , describes the ports of the Pandya and Chera kingdoms in Damirica and their commercial activity in detail. It also describes that the chief exports of the ancient Tamils were pepper , malabathrum , pearls , ivory , silk, spikenard , diamonds , sapphires , and tortoiseshell . Medieval era (4th–13th century CE) Rock cut monuments in Mahabalipuram built by the Pallavas in 7th-8th century CE From the fourth century CE, the region was ruled by the Kalabhras , warriors belonging to the Vellalar community, who were once feudatories of the three ancient Tamil kingdoms.

The Kalabhra era is referred to as the "dark period" of Tamil history, and information about it is generally inferred from any mentions in the literature and inscriptions that are dated many centuries after their era ended. Around the seventh century CE, the Kalabhras were overthrown by the Pandyas and Cholas. Though they existed previously, the period saw the rise of the Pallavas in the sixth century CE under Mahendravarman I , who ruled parts of South India with Kanchipuram as their capital.

The Pallavas were noted for their patronage of architecture. Throughout their reign, the Pallavas remained in constant conflict with the Cholas, the Pandyas and other kingdoms of Chalukyas of Badami and the Rashtrakutas .

The Pandyas were revived by Kadungon towards the end of the sixth century CE and with the Cholas in obscurity in Uraiyur , the Tamil country was divided between the Pallavas and the Pandyas.

The area west of the Western Ghats became increasingly distinct from the eastern parts. A new language Malayalam evolved from Tamil in the region and the socio-cultural transformation was altered further by the migration of Sanskrit -speaking Indo-Aryans from Northern India in the eighth century CE.

The Chola Empire at its greatest extent, during the reign of Rajendra Chola I in 1030 The Cholas were revived in the ninth century CE by Vijayalaya Chola and the last Pallavas ruler Aparajitavarman was defeated by the Chola prince Aditya I .

After the defeat of the Pallavas, the Cholas became the dominant kingdom with the capital at Thanjavur .

The Chola influence expanded subsequently with Rajaraja I conquering the entire Southern India and parts of present-day Sri Lanka and Maldives , and increased Chola influence across the Indian Ocean in the eleventh century CE. Rajaraja brought in administrative reforms including the reorganisation of Tamil country into individual administrative units. Under his son Rajendra Chola I , the Chola empire reached its zenith and stretched as far as Bengal in the north and across the Indian Ocean. He defeated the Eastern Chalukyas and the Chola navy invaded the Srivijaya Empire in South East Asia.

The Cholas had trade links with the Chinese Song Dynasty and across Southeast Asia.

The Cholas built many temples with the most notable being the Brihadisvara Temple at Thanjavur.

The latter half of the eleventh century saw the union of Chola and Vengi kingdoms under Kulottunga I .

The Cholas repulsed attacks from the Western Chalukyas and maintained its influence over the various kingdoms of Southeast Asia. According to historian Nilakanta Sastri , Kulottunga avoided unnecessary wars and had a long and prosperous reign characterized by unparalleled success that laid the foundations of the empire for the next 150 years. Extent of the Pandyas in 13th century CE The eventual decline of Chola power began towards the end of Kulottunga III 's reign in the thirteenth century CE.

The Pandyas again reigned supreme under Maravarman Sundara I and defeated the Cholas under Rajaraja III . Though the Cholas were revived briefly with the aid of Hoysalas , civil war between Rajaraja and Rajendra III weakened them further. With the Hoysalas later siding with the Pandyas, the Pandyas consolidated control over the region.

The Pandya empire reached its zenith in the thirteenth century CE under Jatavarman Sundara Pandyan I after he defeated the Hoysalas, the Kakatiyas and captured parts of Sri Lanka.

The Pandyas ruled from their capital of Madurai and expanded trade links with other maritime empires. Venetian explorer Marco Polo mentioned the Pandyas as the richest empire in existence.

The Pandyas also built a number of temples including the Meenakshi Amman Temple at Madurai.

In the fourteenth century CE, the Pandyan empire was engulfed in a civil war and also faced repeated invasions by the Delhi Sultanate .

In 1335, the Pandyan capital was conquered by Jalaluddin Ahsan Khan and the short-lived Madurai Sultanate was established. Vijayanagar and Nayak period (14th–17th century CE) The Vijayanagara kingdom was founded in 1336 CE .

The Vijayanagara empire eventually conquered the entire Tamil country by c. 1370 and ruled for almost two centuries.

In the sixteenth century, Vijaynagara king Krishnadeva Raya was forced to intervene in the conflict between their vassals, the Cholas and the Pandyas.

The Nayak governor under Raya briefly took control of Madurai before it was restored to the empire.

The Vijayanagara empire was defeated in the Battle of Talikota in 1565 by a confederacy of Deccan sultanates .

The Nayaks, who were the military governors in the Vijaynagara empire, took control of the region amongst whom the Nayaks of Madurai and Nayaks of Thanjavur were the most prominent. They introduced the palayakkararar system and re-constructed some of the temples in Tamil Nadu including the Meenakshi Temple in Madurai.

Later conflicts and European colonization (17th to 20th century CE) Painting of Madras with Fort St. George by Jan Van Ryne (1754) In the 18th century, the Mughal Empire administered the region through the Nawab of the Carnatic with his seat at Arcot , who defeated the Madurai Nayaks.

The Marathas attacked several times and defeated the Nawab after the Siege of Trichinopoly (1751–1752) . This led to a short-lived Thanjavur Maratha kingdom . Europeans started to establish trade centres from the 16th century along the eastern coast.

The Portuguese arrived in 1522 followed by the Dutch and the Danes .

In 1639, the British East India Company obtained a grant for land from the Vijayanager emperor and the French established trading posts at Pondichéry in 1693.

After several conflicts between the British and the French, the British established themselves as the major power in the eighteenth century CE.

The British regained control of Madras in 1749 through the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle and resisted a French siege attempt in 1759.

The British East India Company demanded tax collection rights, which led to constant conflicts with the local Palaiyakkarars and resulted in the Polygar Wars . Puli Thevar was one of the earliest opponents, joined later by Rani Velu Nachiyar and Kattabomman in the first series of Polygar wars.

The Maruthu brothers along with Oomaithurai , formed a coalition with Dheeran Chinnamalai and Kerala Varma Pazhassi Raja , which fought the British in the Second Polygar War.

In the later 18th century, the Mysore kingdom captured parts of the region and engaged in constant fighting with the British which culminated in the four Anglo-Mysore Wars .

By the late eighteenth century CE, the British had conquered most of the region and established the Madras Presidency with Madras as the capital.

On 10 July 1806, the Vellore mutiny , which was the first instance of a large-scale mutiny by Indian sepoys against the British East India Company, took place in Vellore Fort .

After the Indian Rebellion of 1857 , the British Parliament passed the Government of India Act 1858 , which transferred the governance of India from the East India Company to the British crown, forming the British Raj . V. O. Chidambaram Pillai (left) and Subramania Bharati were amongst the prominent Tamils contributing to the Indian Independence movement Failure of the summer monsoons and administrative shortcomings of the Ryotwari system resulted in two severe famines in the Madras Presidency, the Great Famine of 1876–78 and the Indian famine of 1896–97 which killed millions and the migration of many Tamils as bonded laborers to other British countries eventually forming the present Tamil diaspora .

The Indian Independence movement gathered momentum in the early 20th century with the formation of the Indian National Congress , which was based on an idea propagated by the members of the Theosophical Society movement after a Theosophical convention held in Madras in December 1884. Various Tamils were contributors to the Independence movement including V. O. Chidambaram Pillai , Subramaniya Siva and Bharatiyar .

The Tamils formed a significant percentage of the members of the Indian National Army (INA), founded by Subhas Chandra Bose . Post Indian Independence (1947–present) After the Independence of India in 1947, the Madras Presidency became Madras state , comprising present-day Tamil Nadu and parts of Andhra Pradesh , Karnataka and Kerala .

The state was further re-organised as a state for Tamils when the boundaries were redrawn linguistically in 1956 into the current shape.

On 14 January 1969, Madras state was renamed Tamil Nadu, meaning "Tamil country".

In 1965, Tamils agitated against the imposition of Hindi and in support of continuing English as a medium of communication which eventually led to English being retained as an official language of India alongside Hindi.

After experiencing fluctuations in the decades immediately after Indian independence, the Human Development Index of the Tamils have consistently improved due to reform-oriented economic policies and in the 2000s, the region has become one of the most urbanized states in the country.

In Sri Lanka Main article: Sri Lankan Tamils Pre-Anuradhapura period (before fifth century CE) A megalithic burial jar from north-western Sri Lanka, 5th-2nd century BCE, similar to the ones found in South India . There are various theories from scholars over the presence of Tamil people in Sri Lanka. Historian K. Indrapala states that Tamil replaced a previous language of an indigenous mesolithic population, who later became the Eelam Tamils and the cultural diffusion happened well before the arrival of Sinhalese people in Sri Lanka. Eelam Tamils consider themselves lineal descendants of the aboriginal Naga and Yaksha people of Sri Lanka. A cobra totem known as Nakam in the Tamil language is still part of the Tamil tradition in Sri Lanka. Remains of settlements and megalithic burial sites of people culturally similar to those of present-day Sri Lanka and Tamil Nadu in modern India have been excavated at Pomparippu on the west coast and in Kathiraveli on the east coast of the island. These epigraphical evidence have been dated to a period between fifth century BCE and second century CE. Cultural similarities in burial practices in South India and Sri Lanka were dated by archeologists to the beginning of the Iron Age in the region around twelfth century BCE. There were specific migration routes that extended from South India to the island. These people moved further to the South of the island, and intermingled with the existent people. Anuradhapura period (4th century BCE to 10th century CE) Black and red ware potsherds found in Sri Lanka from the early reign of Anuradhapura kingdom , indicate a similar cultural connection with the people of South India.

The Tamil Brahmi inscriptions on them indicate Tamil clan names such as Parumakal , Ay , Vel , Utiyan , Ticaiyan , Cuda and Naka , which points to the presence of Tamils in the region. Excavations in Poonakari in the north of the island have yielded several inscriptions including the mention of vela , a name related to velirs of the ancient Tamil country. Epigraphical evidence of people identified as Damelas (the Prakrit word for Tamil people) from the second century CE have been found in Anuradhapura , the capital city of the northern Rajarata region. Historical records mention that the three Tamil kingdoms were involved in the island's affairs from second century BCE. Chola king Ellalan captured the Anuradhapura Kingdom from 205 BCE to 161 BCE. Tamil soldiers from Tamilakam came to Anuradhapura in large numbers in the seventh century CE with the local chiefs and kings relying on them.

In the eighth century CE, various Tamil villages collectively known as Demel-kaballa (Tamil allotment), Demelat-valademin (Tamil villages), and Demel-gam-bim (Tamil villages and lands) were established.

In the ninth and tenth centuries CE, Pandya and Chola incursions started in the island which culminated with the Chola annexation of the island. Polonnaruwa and Jaffna kingdom (11th–15th century CE) Extent of Jaffna kingdom The Chola influence lasted until the latter half of the eleventh century CE and the Chola decline was followed by the restoration of the Polonnaruwa monarchy .

In 1215, following Pandya invasions, the Tamil-dominant Aryacakravarti dynasty established the Jaffna Kingdom on the Jaffna peninsula and in parts of northern and upper eastern Sri Lanka.

In the fourteenth century CE, the Aryacakaravarthi expansion into the south of the island was halted by Alagakkonara , who belonged to a feudal family from Kanchipuram that migrated to Sri Lanka in the previous century and converted to Buddhism. He served as the chief minister of the Sinhalese king Parakramabahu V (1344–59 CE) and his descendant Vira Alakeshwara briefly became the king later before the Ming admiral Zheng He overthrew him in 1409 CE after which the influence of his family declined.

The caste structure of the Sinhalese also accommodated Hindu immigrants from South India, which led to the emergence of new Sinhalese caste groups such as the Radala , the Salagama , the Durava and the Karava .

The wrested Mannar during the first invasion in 1560 and killed king Puvirasa Pandaram during the second expedition in 1591.

After the conflicts, the Portuguese secured the kingdom in 1619 from the unpopular Cankili II , who was helped by the Thanjavur Nayaks. English sailor Robert Knox arrived in the island in 1669 and described the Tamil settlements in the An Historical Relation of the Island Ceylon published in 1681.

The Dutch captured the island later and ruled for more than a century.

Following the 1795 invasion of the British and the Kandyan Wars , the island came to the control of the British in the early nineteenth century CE. Upon arrival in June 1799, Hugh Cleghorn , the island's first British colonial secretary, wrote to the British government: "Two different nations from a very ancient period have divided between them the possession of the island. First the Sinhalese, inhabiting the interior in its Southern and Western parts, and secondly the Tamils who possess the Northern and Eastern districts. These two nations differ entirely in their religion, language, and manners." Irrespective of the ethnic differences, the British imposed a unitary state structure in British Ceylon for better administration.

During the British colonial rule, Tamils held higher positions in the government and were favoured by the British for their qualification in English education.

In the northern highlands, the lands of the Sinhalese were seized by the British and Indian Tamils were settled there as plantation workers. Tamils who migrated in the nineteenth century CE to work on tea plantations were later termed as the Indian Tamils . Post Sri Lankan independence (1948–present) The northern and eastern areas of Sri Lanka with majority Tamil population Sri Lanka gained independence in 1948 and after the colonial rule ended, ethnic tension rose between the Sinhalese, who constituted a majority, and the Tamils.

In 1956, the Sinhala Only Act designated Sinhala as the only official language of Sri Lanka, which forced many Tamils to resign as civil servants because they were not fluent in the language.

The Tamils saw the act as linguistic, cultural and economic discrimination against them. Anti-Tamil pogroms in 1956 and 1958 resulted in deaths of many Tamils and further escalated the conflict. More than a million Indian Tamil plantation workers were made stateless after Sri Lanka refused citizenship to them.

In 1964, the Sri Lankan and Indian governments entered into an agreement, based on which, about 300,000 would be granted Sri Lankan citizenship and about 975,000 Tamils would be repatriated to India over a period of fifteen years. A new Constitution enacted in the 1970s further discriminated against the Tamils and various state-sponsored schemes led Sinhalese settlers into Tamil populated areas.

The 1977 anti-Tamil pogrom was followed by a crackdown against the Tamils, which curtailed their rights.

Following the declaration of state of emergency in 1981, state-backed Sinhalese mobs turned on Tamils, which led many Tamils to leave the country as refugees resulting in an exodus more than half a million to India and other countries.

By the 1970s, initial non-violent political struggle for an independent Tamil state in the north and east of Sri Lanka, developed into a violent secessionist insurgency. This led to the bloody Sri Lankan Civil War for more than three decades.

The conflict resulted in the deaths of at least 100,000 Tamils in the island and led to the flight of over 800,000 refugees.

The war ended after the Sri Lankan military offensive in 2009.

Since the end of the civil war, the Sri Lankan state has been subject to much global criticism for violating human rights as a result of committing war crimes through bombing civilian targets, usage of heavy weaponry, the abduction and massacres of Sri Lankan Tamils and sexual violence . Geographic distribution India Distribution of Tamil speakers in South India and Sri Lanka (1981) As per the 2011 Census , there were 69 million Tamil speakers, constituting about 5.7% of the Indian population. Tamils formed the majority in the South Indian state of Tamil Nadu (63.8 million) and the union territory of Puducherry (1.1 million). There were also significant Tamil population in other states of India such as Karnataka (2.1 million), Andhra Pradesh and Telangana (0.7 million), Maharashtra (0.5 million), and Kerala (0.5 million). Sri Lanka Further information: Sri Lankan Tamils , Indian Tamils of Sri Lanka , and Sri Lankan Moors Tamils in Sri Lanka are classified into two ethnic groups by the Sri Lankan government : Sri Lankan Tamils , also known as Eelam Tamils, and Indian Origin Tamils , who accounted for 11.2%, and 4.1% of the country's population, respectively, in 2011.

The Sri Lankan Tamils (or Ceylon Tamils) are the descendants of the Tamils of the old Jaffna Kingdom and east coast chieftainships called Vannimais .

The descendants of these Tamils continued to live in these countries, and practice their original culture, tradition and language. They form significant proportion of the population in Malaysia (7%) and Singapore (5%). A significant population also exists in South Africa, Mauritius, Fiji, as well as other regions such as the Southeast Asia and the Caribbean. However, subsequent generations might not speak the language as a mother tongue , but instead as a second or third language . There is a small Tamil community in Pakistan , notably settled since the partition in 1947.

Since the 20th century, Tamils have migrated to other regions such as Middle East and the Western World for employment. A large emigration of Sri Lankan Tamils began in the 1980s, as they sought to escape the ethnic conflict there.

The largest concentration of Eelam Tamils outside Sri Lanka is found in Canada . Culture Main article: Tamil culture Language Main articles: Tamil language and Sri Lankan Tamil dialects Tamil written in Tamil script Tamil people speak Tamil , which belongs to the Dravidian languages and is one of the oldest classical languages . According to epigraphist Iravatham Mahadevan , the rudimentary Tamil Brahmi script originated in South India in the 3rd century BCE. Though the old Tamil preserved features of Proto-Dravidian language, modern-day spoken Tamil uses loanwords from other languages such as English .

The existent Tamil grammar is largely based on the grammar book Naṉṉūl which incorporates facets from the old Tamil literary work Tolkāppiyam .

Since the later part of the 19th century, Tamils have made the language be a key part of the Tamil identity and the language is personified in the form of Tamil̲taay ("Tamil mother"). Various varieties of Tamil is spoken by the Tamils across regions such as Madras Bashai , Kongu Tamil , Madurai Tamil , Nellai Tamil , Kumari Tamil and various Sri Lankan Tamil dialects such as Batticaloa Tamil, Jaffna Tamil and Negombo Tamil in Sri Lanka. Literature Main articles: Tamil literature and Sri Lankan Tamil literature A 12th century statue of Agathiar , a poet from the first Sangam period Tamil literature is of considerable antiquity compared to the contemporary literature from other Indian languages and represents one of the oldest bodies of literature in South Asia.

The earliest epigraphic records have been dated to around the 3rd century BCE. Early Tamil literature was composed in three successive poetic assemblies known as Tamil Sangams , the earliest of which destroyed by floods.

The Sangam literature was broadly classified into three divisions: iyal (poetry), isai (music) and nadagam (drama).

The early Tamil literature was compiled and classified into two categories: Patinenmelkanakku ("Eighteen Greater Texts") consisting of the Ettuttokai ("Eight Anthologies") and the Pattuppattu ("Ten Idylls"), and the Patinenkilkanakku ("Eighteen Lesser Texts").

The Tamil literature that followed in the next 300 years after the Sangam period is generally called the "post-Sangam" literature which included the Five Great Epics . Another book of the post Sangam era is the Tirukkural , a book on ethics, by Thiruvalluvar .

In the beginning of the Middle Ages , Vaishnava and Saiva literature became prominent following the Bhakti movement in 7th century CE with hymns composed by Alwars and Nayanmars . Notable work from the post-Bhakti period included Ramavataram by Kambar in 12th century CE and Tiruppugal by Arunagirinathar in 15th century CE.

In 1578, the Portuguese published a Tamil book in old Tamil script named Thambiraan Vanakkam , thus making Tamil the first Indian language to be printed and published. Tamil Lexicon , published by the University of Madras between 1924 and 1939, was amongst the first comprehensive dictionaries published in the language.

The 19th century gave rise to Tamil Renaissance and writings and poems by authors such as Meenakshi Sundaram Pillai , U.V.Swaminatha Iyer , Damodaram Pillai , V. Kanakasabhai and others.

During the Indian Independence Movement , many Tamil poets and writers sought to provoke national spirit, notably Bharathiar and Bharathidasan . Art and architecture According to Tamil literature, there are 64 art forms called aayakalaigal .

The art is classified into two broad categories: kavin kalaigal (beautiful art forms) which include architecture, sculpture, painting and poetry and nun kalaigal (fine art forms) which include dance, music and drama. Architecture The large gopuram is a hallmark of Dravidian architecture Dravidian architecture is the distinct style of architecture of the Tamils.

The large gopurams , which are monumental ornate towers at the entrance of the temples form a prominent feature of Hindu temples of the Dravidian style. They are topped by kalasams ( finials ) and function as gateways through the walls that surround the temple complex. There are a number of early rock-cut cave-temples established by the various Tamil kingdoms.

The Group of Monuments at Mahabalipuram , built by the Pallavas in the 7th and 8th centuries has more than forty rock-cut temples, monoliths and rock reliefs .

The Pallavas, who built the group of monuments in Mahabalipuram and Kanchipuram , were one of the earliest patronisers of the Dravidian architectural style. These gateways became regular features in the Cholas and the Pandya architecture , was later expanded by the Vijayanagara and the Nayaks and spread to other parts such as Sri Lanka. There are more than 34,000 temples in Tamil Nadu built across various periods some of which are several centuries old.

The influence of Tamil culture had led to the construction of various temples outside India by the Tamil dispora.

The Mugal influence in medieval times and the British influence later gave rise to a blend of Hindu , Islamic and Gothic Revival styles, resulting in the distinct Indo-Saracenic architecture with several institutions during the British era following the style.

By the early 20th century, the Art Deco made its entry upon in the urban landscape.

In the later part of the century, the architecture witnessed a rise in the modern concrete buildings. Sculpture and paintings Krishna with Rukmini and Satyabhama and his mount Garuda (12th–13th century CE) Tamil sculpture ranges from stone sculptures in temples, to detailed bronze icons.

The Pallava inscriptions from the period describe the playing of string instrument veena as a form of exercise for the fingers and the practice of singing musical hymns ( Thirupadigam ) in temples.

From the 9th century CE, Shaivite hymns Thevaram and Vaishnavite hymns ( Tiruvaymoli ) were sung along with playing of musical instruments. Carnatic music originated later which included rhythmic and structured music by composers such Thyagaraja , Muthuswami Dikshitar , and Shyama Shastri . Villu Paatu is an ancient form of musical story-telling method where narration is interspersed with music played from a string bow and accompanying instruments. Gaana , a combination of various folk musics is sung mainly in Chennai. There are many traditional instruments from the region dating back to the Sangam period such as parai , tharai , yazh , and murasu . Nadaswaram , a reed instrument that is often accompanied by the thavil , a type of drum instrument are the major musical instruments used in temples and weddings. Melam is from a group of percussion instruments from the ancient Tamilakam which are played during events and functions. Performance arts Main article: Dance forms of Tamil Nadu A Bharatanatyam performance Bharatanatyam is a major genre of Indian classical dance that originated from the Tamils. It is one of the oldest classical dance forms of India. There are many folk dance forms that originated and are practiced in the region. Major folk dance forms include Karakattam and Kavadiattam which involve dancers balancing decorated pot(s) on their heads and arch shaped wooden sticks on their shoulders respectively while making dance movements with the body. Kolattam and Kummi are usually performed by women while singing songs.

In dances like Mayilattam , Puravaiattam , and Puliyattam , dancers dress like peacocks , horses and tigers respectively and headdresses perform movements imitating the animals. Other traditional dance forms include the war dance Oyilattam and Paraiattam . Koothu is a form of street theater that consists of a play performance which consists of dance along with music, narration and singing. Bommalattam is a type of puppetry that uses various doll marionettes manipulated by rods and strings attached to them. Martial arts Silambam is an old martial art originating in Tamil Nadu Silambam is a martial art involving the usage of a long staff of about 168 cm (66 in) in length, often made of wood such as bamboo. It was used for self-defense and to ward off animals and later evolved into a martial art and dance form. Adimurai (or Kuttu varisai) is a martial art specializing in empty-hand techniques and application on vital points of the body. Varma kalai is a Tamil traditional art of vital points which combines alternative medicine and martial arts, attributed to sage Agastiyar and might form part of the training of other martial arts such as silambattam, adimurai or kalari . Malyutham is the traditional form of combat-wrestling. Tamil martial arts uses various types of weapons such as valari (iron sickle), maduvu (deer horns), vaal (sword) and kedayam (shield), surul vaal (curling blade), itti or vel (spear), savuku (whip), kattari (fist blade), aruval (machete), silambam (bamboo staff), kuttu katai (spiked knuckleduster), kathi (dagger), vil ambu (bow and arrow), tantayutam (mace), soolam (trident), valari (boomerang), chakaram (discus) and theepandam (flaming baton). Wootz steel used to make weapons, originated in the mid-1st millennium BCE in South India. Locals in Sri Lanka adopted the production methods of creating wootz steel from the Cheras and the later trade introduced it to other parts of the world.

Since the early Sangam age, war was regarded as an honourable sacrifice and fallen heroes and kings were worshipped with hero stones and heroic martyrdom was glorified in ancient Tamil literature. Defeated kings committed Vatakkiruttal , a form of ritual suicide. Modern arts Main articles: Tamil cinema and Tamil television soap opera The Tamil film industry nicknamed as Kollywood and is one of the largest industries of film production in India. Independent Tamil film production have also originated outside India in Sri Lanka, Singapore, Canada, and western Europe.

The concept of "Tent Cinema" was introduced in the early 1900s, in which a tent was erected on a stretch of open land close to a town or village to screen the films.

The first silent film in South India was produced in Tamil in 1916 and the first Tamil talkie film was Kalidas , which released on 31 October 1931, barely seven months after the release of India's first talking picture Alam Ara . Clothing Kanchipuram silk saris worn by women on special occasions. Ancient literature and epigraphical records describe the various types of dresses worn by Tamil people. Tamil women traditionally wear a sari , a garment that consists of a drape varying from 4.6 m (15 ft) to 8.2 m (27 ft) in length and 0.61 m (2 ft) to 1.2 m (4 ft) in breadth that is typically wrapped around the waist, with one end draped over the shoulder, baring the midriff. Women wear colourful silk sarees on traditional occasions. Young girls wear a long skirt called pavaadai along with a shorter length sari called dhavani .

The men wear a dhoti , a 1.9 m (6 ft 3 in) long, white rectangular piece of non-stitched cloth often bordered in brightly coloured stripes which is usually wrapped around the waist and the legs and knotted at the waist. A colourful lungi with typical batik patterns is the most common form of male attire in the countryside. People in urban areas generally wear tailored clothing, and western dress is popular. Western-style school uniforms are worn by both boys and girls in schools, even in rural areas. Calendar Main article: Tamil calendar The Tamil calendar is a sidereal solar calendar .

The Tamil Panchangam is based on the same and is generally used in contemporary times to check auspicious times for cultural and religious events.

The calendar follows a 60-year cycle. There are 12 months in a year starting with Chithirai when the Sun enters the first rāśi with the number of days in a month varying between 29 and 32.

The new year starts following the March equinox in the middle of April.

The days of week ( kiḻamai ) in the Tamil calendar relate to the navagraha in the Hindu pantheon which correspond to the various celestial bodies in the Solar System – Sun ( Suriyan ), Moon ( Chandiran ), Mars ( Chevvai ), Mercury ( Budhan ), Jupiter ( Vyalan ), Venus ( Sukran ), and Saturn ( Shani ), in that order. Food and hospitality A traditional meal served on a banana leaf Main article: Tamil cuisine Hospitality is a major feature of Tamil culture. It was considered as a social obligation and offering food to guests was regarded as one of the highest virtues. Rice is the diet staple and is served with sambar , rasam , and poriyal as a part of a Tamil meal. Bananas find mention in the Sangam literature and the traditional way of eating a meal involves having the food served on a banana leaf , which is discarded after the meal. Eating on banana leaves imparts a unique flavor to the food, and is considered healthy. Food is usually eaten seated on the floor and the finger tips of the right hand is used to take the food to the mouth. There are regional sub-varieties namely Chettinadu, Kongunadu, Nanjilnadu, Pandiyanadu and Sri Lankan Tamil cuisines. There are both vegetarian and meat dishes with fish traditionally consumed across the coast and other meat preferred in the interiors.

The Chettinadu cuisine is popular for its meat based dishes and generous usage of spices .

The Kongunadu cuisine uses less spices and are generally cooked fresh. It uses coconut , sesame seeds , groundnut , and turmeric to go with various cereals and pulses grown in the region. Nanjilnadu cuisine is milder and is usually based on fish and vegetables. Sri Lankan Tamil cuisine uses gingelly oil and jaggery along with coconut and spices, which differentiates it from the other culinary traditions in the island. Biryani is a popular dish with several different versions prepared across various regions. Idli , and dosa are popular breakfast dishes and other dishes cooked by to the Tamil people include upma , idiappam , pongal , paniyaram , and parotta . Medicine Main article: Siddha medicine Siddha medicine is a form of traditional medicine originating from the Tamils and is one of the oldest systems of medicine in India.

The word literally means perfection in Tamil and the system focuses on wholesome treatment based on various factors.

As per Tamil tradition, the knowledge of Siddha medicine came from Shiva , which was passed on to 18 holy men known as Siddhar led by Agastya .

The knowledge was then passed on orally and through palm leaf manuscripts to the later generations. Siddha practitioners believe that all objects including the human body is composed of five basic elements – earth, water, fire, air, sky which are present in food and other compounds, which is used as the basis for the drugs and other therapies. Tamils decorate their homes with colorful Kolams . Festivals Pongal is a major and multi-day harvest festival celebrated by Tamils in the month of Thai according to the Tamil solar calendar (usually falls on 14 or 15 January). Puthandu is known as Tamil New Year which marks the first day of year on the Tamil calendar and falls in April every year on the Gregorian calendar . Other major festivals include Karthikai Deepam , Thaipusam , Panguni Uthiram , and Vaikasi Visakam . Aadi Perukku is a Tamil cultural festival celebrated in the Tamil month of Adi and the worship of Amman and Ayyanar deities are organized during the month in temples across Tamil Nadu with much fanfare. Other festivals celebrated include Ganesh Chaturthi , Navarathri , Deepavali , Eid al-Fitr and Christmas . Sports Main article: Sports in Tamil Nadu Jallikattu , a traditional bull taming event Jallikattu is a traditional event held during the period attracting huge crowds in which a bull is released into a crowd of people, and multiple human participants attempt to grab the large hump on the bull's back with both arms and hang on to it while the bull attempts to escape. It has been practised since Sangam period with the aim of keeping people fit. Proficiency in the sport was considered a virtue while untamable bulls were held as a pride of the owner. Kabaddi is a traditional contact sport that originated from the Tamils. Chess is a popular board game which originated as Sathurangam in the 7th century CE. Traditional games like Pallanguzhi , Uriyadi , Gillidanda , Dhaayam are played across the region.

While Shiva worship existed in the Shaivite culture as a part of the Tamil pantheon, Murugan became regarded as the Tamil kadavul ("God of the Tamils").

In Tamil tradition, Murugan is the youngest son of Shiva and Parvati and Pillayar is regarded as the eldest son, who is venerated as the Mudanmudar kadavul ("foremost god").

The cult of the mother goddess is treated as an indication of a society which venerated femininity.

The worship of Amman , also called Mariamman , is thought to have been derived from an ancient mother goddess , and is also very common. Kannagi , the heroine of the Cilappatikaram is worshipped as a goddess by many Tamils, particularly in Sri Lanka.

In the Sangam literature, there is a description of the rites performed by the priestesses in temples. Among the ancient Tamils, the practice of erecting memorial stones ( natukal ) was prevalent and it continued till the Middle ages . It was customary for people who sought victory in war to worship these hero stones to bless them with victory.

In rural areas, local deities called Aiyyan̲ār (also known as Karuppan, Karrupasami, Muniandi ), are worshipped who are thought to protect the villages from harm. Their worship probably emanated from the hero stone worship and appears to be the surviving remnants of an ancient Tamil tradition. Idol worship forms a part of the Tamil Hindu culture similar to the Hindu traditions. Meenakshi Temple (left); Kandaswamy Temple During the Sangam period, Ashivakam , Jainism and Buddhism also had a significant following. Jainism existed from the Sangam period with inscriptions and drip-ledges from 1st century BCE to 6th century CE describing the same.

The Kalabhra dynasty , who were patrons of Jainism, ruled over the ancient Tamil country in the 3rd–7th century CE. Buddhism had an influence in Tamil Nadu before the later Middle Ages with ancient texts referring to a Vihāra in Nākappaṭṭinam from the time of Ashoka in 3rd century BCE and Buddhist relics from 4th century CE found in Kaveripattinam . Around the 7th century CE, the Pandyas and Pallavas , who patronized Buddhism and Jainism, became patrons of Hinduism following the revival of Saivism and Vaishnavism during the Bhakti movement led by Alwars and Nayanmars. Erwadi Dargah (left); Velankanni basilica The Christian apostle, St. Thomas , is believed to have preached Christianity to the Tamils between 52 and 70 CE. Rowthers were Tamils who were converted to Islam by the Turkish preacher Nathar Shah in the tenth century CE and follow the Hanafi school . Other Muslim clans such as Marakkayar , Labbai , and Kayalar originated as a result of the trade with the Arab world . Majority of the Tamil Muslims speak Tamil rather than Urdu , which is spoken by Muslims in other parts of the Indian subcontinent. Mercantile groups introduced Cholapauttam , a syncretic form of Buddhism and Shaivism in northern Sri Lanka and Southern India.

The religion lost its importance in the 14th century when conditions changed for the benefit of Sinhala and Pali traditions.

As of the 21st century, majority of the Tamils are adherents of Hinduism.

The Pali Literature of Burma . p. 39. ^ Dines Andersen (1992).

The Jātaka: together with its commentary, being tales of the anterior births of Gotama Buddha . University of California . p. 66. ^ a b Tomás Morales y Durán (2020). Jesus of Nazareth: The Deep State of Rome . Amazon Digital Services . p. 27. ISBN 979-8-56272-624-7 . ^ Lal, Mohan, ed. (1992). Encyclopaedia of Indian Literature: Sasay to Zorgot . Sahitya Akademi . p. 4283. ^ "Science News : Archaeology – Anthropology : Sharp stones found in India signal surprisingly early toolmaking advances" . 31 January 2018. Archived from the original on 9 February 2018 . Retrieved 9 February 2018 . ^ "Very old, very sophisticated tools found in India.

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 10 February 2018 . Retrieved 9 February 2018 . ^ "Skeletons dating back 3,800 years throw light on evolution" .

The Times of India . 1 January 2006. Archived from the original on 24 November 2018 . Retrieved 11 June 2008 . ^ John, Vino (27 January 2006). "Reading the past in a more inclusive way: Interview with Dr. Sudharshan Seneviratne" . Frontline . Archived from the original on 2 February 2009 . Retrieved 9 July 2008 . But Indian/south Indian history/archaeology has pushed the date back to 1500 B.C., and in Sri Lanka, there are definitely good radiometric dates coming from Anuradhapura that the non-Brahmi symbol-bearing black and red ware occur at least around 900 B.C. or 1000 B.C. ^ Sastri 2002 , p. 67. ^ Codrington, K. De B. (October 1930). "Indian Cairn- and Urn-Burials". Man . 30 (30): 190– 196. doi : 10.2307/2790468 . JSTOR 2790468 . It is necessary to draw attention to certain passages in early Tamil literature which throw a great deal of light upon this strange burial ceremonial ... ^ Shekar, Anjana (21 August 2020). "Keezhadi sixth phase: What do the findings so far tell us?" .

The News Minute . Archived from the original on 24 January 2021 . Retrieved 31 January 2021 . ^ "A rare inscription" . Frontline . 1 July 2009. Archived from the original on 22 September 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2023 . ^ "Artifacts unearthed at Keeladi to find a special place in museum" .

The Hindu . 19 February 2023. Archived from the original on 14 November 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Jesudasan, Dennis S. (20 September 2019). "Keezhadi excavations: Sangam era older than previously thought, finds study" .

The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 12 August 2021 . ^ Joshi, Anjali (2017). Social and Cultural History of Ancient India . Online Gatha. pp. 123– 136. ISBN 978-9-386-35269-9 . ^ "Three Crowned Kings of Tamilakam" . National Geographic Society . Archived from the original on 24 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ A. Kiruṭṭin̲an̲ (2000). Tamil culture: religion, culture, and literature . Bharatiya Kala Prakashan. p. 17. ^ Sastri 2002 , p. 109. ^ Singh 2008 , p. 425. ^ "The Edicts of King Ashoka" . Colorado State University . Archived from the original on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved 1 November 2023 . Everywhere within Beloved-of-the-Gods, King Piyadasi's domain, and among the people beyond the borders, the Cholas, the Pandyas, the Satyaputras , the Keralaputras, as far as Tamraparni ^ "Hathigumpha Inscription" . Epigraphia Indica, Vol. XX (1929–1930). Delhi, 1933, pp. 86–89 . Missouri Southern State University. Archived from the original on 17 November 2006 . Retrieved 15 November 2006 . ^ P.J. Cherian (ed.). Perspectives on Kerala History . Kerala Council for Historical Research. Archived from the original on 26 August 2006 . Retrieved 15 November 2006 . There were three levels of redistribution corresponding to the three categories of chieftains, namely: the Ventar, Velir and Kilar in descending order. Ventar were the chieftains of the three major lineages, viz Cera, Cola and Pandya. Velir were mostly hill chieftains, while Kilar were the headmen of settlements ... ^ Sivathamby, K. (December 1974). "Early South Indian Society and Economy: The Tinai Concept". Social Scientist . 3 (5): 20– 37. doi : 10.2307/3516448 . JSTOR 3516448 . Those who ruled over small territories were called Kurunilamannar.

The area ruled by such a small ruler usually corresponded to a geographical unit.

In Purananuru a number of such chieftains are mentioned;.. ^ Zvelebil, Kamil (1991). "Comments on the Tolkappiyam Theory of Literature". Archiv Orientální . 59 : 345– 359. ^ "Poem: Purananuru - Part 224 by George L. III Hart" . Poetrynook . Archived from the original on 14 September 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Poem: Purananuru - Part 231 by George L. III Hart" . Poetrynook . Archived from the original on 27 February 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Narayanan, M. G. S. (September 1988). "The Role of Peasants in the Early History of Tamilakam in South India". Social Scientist . 16 (9): 17– 34. doi : 10.2307/3517170 . JSTOR 3517170 . ^ "Grand Anaicut" . Britannica . Archived from the original on 26 July 2008 . Retrieved 3 May 2006 . ^ William Dalrymple (23 September 2023). "The ancient history behind the maritime trade route between India and Europe" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 15 February 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "On the Roman Trail" .

The Hindu . 21 January 2008. Archived from the original on 10 November 2012 . Retrieved 9 June 2010 . ^ Sastri 2002 , p. 125-127. ^ "The Medieval Spice Trade and the Diffusion of the Chile" . Gastronomica . 7 . 26 October 2021. Archived from the original on 26 October 2021 . Retrieved 31 January 2021 . ^ W.H. Schoff (1912).

The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea: Travel and Trade in the Indian Ocean by a Merchant of the First Century . Archived from the original on 14 August 2014 . Retrieved 7 December 2006 . ^ Chakrabarty, D.K. (2010).

The Geopolitical Orbits of Ancient India: The Geographical Frames of the Ancient Indian Dynasties . Oxford. p. 84. ISBN 978-0-199-08832-4 . Archived from the original on 4 October 2023 . Retrieved 23 December 2023 . ^ Mahalingam, T.V. (1981). Proceedings of the Second Annual Conference . South Indian History Congress. pp. 28– 34. ^ a b Sastri 2002 , p. 333. ^ Hirsh, Marilyn (1987). "Mahendravarman I Pallava: Artist and Patron of Mamallapuram". Artibus Asiae . 48 (1/2): 109– 130. doi : 10.2307/3249854 . JSTOR 3249854 . ^ Francis, Emmanuel (28 October 2021). "Pallavas".

The Encyclopedia of Ancient History . pp. 1– 4. doi : 10.1002/9781119399919.eahaa00499 . ISBN 978-1-119-39991-9 . S2CID 240189630 . Archived from the original on 28 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 December 2023 . ^ a b c "Group of Monuments at Mahabalipuram" . UNESCO . Archived from the original on 2 December 2019 . Retrieved 3 April 2022 . ^ Sastri 2002 , p. 135-140. ^ "Pandya dynasty" . Britannica . Archived from the original on 5 October 2020 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Freeman, Rich (February 1998). "Rubies and Coral: The Lapidary Crafting of Language in Kerala" .

The Journal of Asian Studies . 57 (1): 38– 65. doi : 10.2307/2659023 . JSTOR 2659023 . S2CID 162294036 . ^ Subrahmanian, N. (1993). Social and cultural history of Tamilnad . Ennes. p. 209. ^ Paniker, K. Ayyappa (1997). Medieval Indian Literature: Surveys and selections . Sahitya Akademi . pp. 299– 300. ISBN 978-8-12600-365-5 . ^ Jouveau-Dubreuil, Gabriel (1995). "The Pallavas". Asian Educational Services : 83. ^ Biddulph, Charles Hubert (1964). Coins of the Cholas . Numismatic Society of India. p. 34. ^ Man, John (1999). Atlas of the year 1000 . Harvard University Press. p. 104. ISBN 978-0-674-54187-0 . ^ Singh 2008 , p. 590. ^ Thapar, Romila (2003) .

The Penguin History of Early India: From the Origins to AD 1300 . Penguin Books . pp. 364– 365. ISBN 978-0-143-02989-2 . Archived from the original on 28 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 December 2023 . ^ a b Smith, Vincent Arthur (1904).

The mission which Rajendra sent to China was essentially a trade mission, ... ^ Curtin, Philip D. (1984). Cross-Cultural Trade in World History . Cambridge University Press . p. 101. ISBN 978-0-521-26931-5 . ^ "Great Living Chola Temples" . UNESCO . Archived from the original on 12 September 2015 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ John Allan; Wolseley Haig; Henry Dodwell (1934).

The Cambridge Shorter History of India . Cambridge University Press . p. 191. ^ Sen 1999 , p. 485. ^ Kulke, Hermann; Kesavapany, K.; Sakhuja, Vijay, eds. (2009). Nagapattinam to Suvarnadwipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval Expeditions to Southeast Asia . Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. pp. 11– 12. ^ Nilakanta Sastri (1955).

The Cōḷas . University of Madras . p. 301. Archived from the original on 14 September 2024 . Retrieved 9 May 2019 . ^ Aiyangar, Sakkottai Krishnaswami (1921). South India and her Muhammadan Invaders . Oxford University Press . p. 44. ^ S. Jeyaseela Stephen, ed. (2008).

The Land, Peasantry, and Peasant Life in India New Direction, Renewed Debate . Manak Publications. p. 87. ^ Sen 1999 , p. 487. ^ Sen 1999 , p. 459. ^ Collins, Nick (2024).

The Millennium Maritime Trade Revolution, 700–1700: How Asia Lost Maritime Supremacy . Pen and Sword. ISBN 978-1-39906-016-5 . ^ "Meenakshi Amman Temple" . Britannica . 30 November 2023. Archived from the original on 23 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Cynthia Talbot (2001). Precolonial India in Practice: Society, Region, and Identity in Medieval Andhra . Oxford University Press . pp. 281– 282. ISBN 978-0-198-03123-9 . ^ Kenneth McPherson · (2012). 'How Best Do We Survive?' A Modern Political History of the Tamil Muslims . Routledge . p. 14. ISBN 978-1-13619-833-5 . Archived from the original on 14 September 2024 . Retrieved 14 September 2024 . ^ Raj Kumar (2003). Essays on Medieval India . Discovery Publishing House. p. 82. ISBN 978-8-17141-683-7 . Archived from the original on 26 May 2023 . Retrieved 14 September 2024 . ^ Gilmartin, David; Lawrence, Bruce B. (2000). Beyond Turk and Hindu: Rethinking Religious Identities in Islamicate South Asia . University Press of Florida. pp. 300– 306, 321– 322. ISBN 978-0-813-03099-9 . ^ Srivastava, Kanhaiya L (1980).

The position of Hindus under the Delhi Sultanate, 1206–1526 . Munshiram Manoharlal. p. 202. ISBN 978-8-12150-224-5 . Archived from the original on 19 July 2023 . Retrieved 14 September 2024 . ^ Burton Stein (1990).

The New Cambridge History of India Vijayanagara Volume 1 . Cambridge University Press . p. 57. ^ Ē. Kē Cēṣāttiri (1998). Sri Brihadisvara, the Great Temple of Thanjavur . Nile Books. p. 24. ^ P. K. S. Raja (1966). Mediaeval Kerala . Navakerala Co-op Publishing House. p. 47. ^ "Rama Raya (1484–1565): élite mobility in a Persianized world". A Social History of the Deccan, 1300–1761 . 2005. pp. 78– 104. doi : 10.1017/CHOL9780521254847.006 . ISBN 978-0-52125-484-7 . ^ Eugene F. Irschick (1969). Politics and Social Conflict in South India . University of California Press . p. 8. ISBN 978-0-520-00596-9 . ^ Balendu Sekaram, Kandavalli (1975).

The Nayaks of Madurai . Andhra Pradesh Sahithya Akademi. OCLC 4910527 . ^ Heather Elgood (2000). Hinduism and the Religious Arts . Bloomsbury Publishing . p. 162. ^ Bayly, Susan (2004). Saints, Goddesses and Kings: Muslims and Christians in South Indian Society, 1700–1900 (Reprinted ed.). Cambridge University Press . p. 48. ISBN 978-0-52189-103-5 . ^ Naravane, M.S. (2014). Battles of the Honourable East India Company . A.P.H. Publishing Corporation. pp. 151, 154– 158. ISBN 978-8-131-30034-3 . ^ Ramaswami, N. S. (1984). Political history of Carnatic under the Nawabs . Abhinav Publications. pp. 43– 79. ISBN 978-0-836-41262-8 . ^ Tony Jaques (2007). Dictionary of Battles and Sieges: F-O . Greenwood. pp. 1034– 1035. ISBN 978-0-313-33538-9 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2023 . Retrieved 23 December 2023 . ^ Subramanian, K. R. (1928).

The Maratha Rajas of Tanjore . Madras: K.R. Subramanian. pp. 52– 53. ^ Bhosle, Pratap Sinh Serfoji Raje (2017). Contributions of Thanjavur Maratha Kings . Notion press. p. 3. ISBN 978-1-948-23095-7 . ^ "Rhythms of the Portuguese presence in the Bay of Bengal" . Indian Institute of Asian Studies. Archived from the original on 7 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ "Origin of the Name Madras" . Corporation of Madras . Archived from the original on 6 April 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2023 . ^ "Danish flavour" . Frontline . India. 6 November 2009. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 5 August 2013 . ^ Rao, Velcheru Narayana; Shulman, David; Subrahmanyam, Sanjay (1998). Symbols of substance : court and state in Nayaka period Tamilnadu . Oxford University Press, Delhi. p. xix, 349 p., p. of plates : ill., maps; 22 cm. ISBN 978-0-195-64399-2 . ^ Thilakavathy, M.; Maya, R. K. (5 June 2019). Facets of Contemporary history . MJP Publisher. p. 583. Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 23 December 2023 . ^ Frykenberg, Robert Eric (26 June 2008). Christianity in India: From Beginnings to the Present . OUP Oxford. ISBN 978-0-198-26377-7 . Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 23 December 2023 . ^ Keay, John (1993).

The Honourable Company: A History of the English East India Company . Harper Collins. pp. 31– 36. ^ S., Muthiah (21 November 2010). "Madras Miscellany: When Pondy was wasted" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 1 May 2023 . Retrieved 28 December 2022 . ^ Tucker, Spencer C. (2010). A global chronology of conflict . ABC—CLIO. p. 756. ISBN 978-1-851-09667-1 . Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 23 December 2023 . ^ "Seven Years' War: Battle of Wandiwash" . History Net: Where History Comes Alive – World & US History Online . 21 August 2006. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015 . Retrieved 16 May 2015 . ^ "Velu Nachiyar, India's Joan of Arc" (Press release). Government of India . Archived from the original on 27 July 2022 . Retrieved 1 January 2024 . ^ Yang, Anand A (2007). "Bandits and Kings:Moral Authority and Resistance in Early Colonial India".

The Journal of Asian Studies . 66 (4): 881– 896. doi : 10.1017/S0021911807001234 . ISSN 0021-9118 . JSTOR 20203235 . ^ Caldwell, Robert (1881). A Political and General History of the District of Tinnevelly, in the Presidency of Madras . Government Press. pp. 195– 222. ^ Radhey Shyam Chaurasia (2002). History of Modern India:1707 A.D. to 2000 A.D . Atlantic Publishers and Distributors. p. 94. ISBN 978-8-126-90085-5 . Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 23 December 2023 . ^ "Madras Presidency" . Britannica . Archived from the original on 17 October 2017 . Retrieved 12 October 2015 . ^ Naravane, M. S. (2014). Battles of the Honourable East India Company: Making of the Raj . New Delhi: A.P.H. Publishing Corporation. pp. 172– 181. ISBN 978-8-131-30034-3 . ^ "July, 1806 Vellore" . Outlook . 17 July 2006. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015 . Retrieved 16 May 2015 . ^ Pletcher, Kenneth. "Vellore Mutiny" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on 1 May 2015 . Retrieved 16 May 2015 . ^ Adcock, C.S. (2013).

The Limits of Tolerance: Indian Secularism and the Politics of Religious Freedom . Oxford University Press. pp. 23– 25. ISBN 978-0-199-99543-1 . ^ Kolappan, B. (22 August 2013). "The great famine of Madras and the men who made it" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 9 May 2021 . Retrieved 9 May 2021 . ^ Sitaramayya, Pattabhi (1935).

The History of the Indian National Congress . Working Committee of the Congress. p. 11. ^ Bevir, Mark (2003). "Theosophy and the Origins of the Indian National Congress" . International Journal of Hindu Studies . 7 ( 1– 3). University of California: 14– 18. doi : 10.1007/s11407-003-0005-4 . S2CID 54542458 . Archived from the original on 30 June 2017 . Retrieved 23 December 2023 . Theosophical Society provided the framework for action within which some of its Indian and British members worked to form the Indian National Congress. ^ "Subramania Bharati: The poet and the patriot" .

The Hindu . 9 December 2019. Archived from the original on 14 June 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ "An inspiring saga of the Tamil diaspora's contribution to India's freedom struggle" .

The Hindu . 7 November 2023. Archived from the original on 31 March 2024 . Retrieved 15 November 2023 . ^ Bose, Sugata (2011). His Majesty's Opponent: Subhas Chandra Bose and India's Struggle against Empire . Harvard University Press . p. 246. ISBN 978-0-674-04754-9 .

At least eighteen thousand civilians, mostly Tamils from southern India, enlisted in the Indian National Army. ^ Andhra State Act, 1953 (PDF) . Madras Legislative Assembly . 14 September 1953 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (PDF) . Parliament of India . 14 September 1953 . Retrieved 1 May 2024 . ^ "Tracing the demand to rename Madras State as Tamil Nadu" .

The Hindu . 6 July 2023. Archived from the original on 28 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Sundari, S. (2007). Migrant women and urban labour market: concepts and case studies . Deep & Deep Publications. p. 105. ISBN 978-8-176-29966-4 . Archived from the original on 22 August 2023 . Retrieved 20 October 2020 . ^ V. Shoba (14 August 2011). "Chennai says it in Hindi" .

The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 30 April 2023 . Retrieved 28 December 2022 . ^ Demography of Tamil Nadu . Government of India (Report). Archived from the original on 9 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Krishna, K.L. (September 2004). Economic Growth in Indian States (PDF) (Report). Indian Council for Research on International Economic Relations. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 22 July 2015 . ^ de Silva, K. M. (2005). A History of Sri Lanka . Vijitha Yapa. p. 129. ISBN 978-9-55809-592-8 . ^ Indrapala 2007 , p. 53–54. ^ South Asia Bulletin: Volumes 7–8 . University of California . 1987. Archived from the original on 14 September 2024 . Retrieved 29 October 2020 . ^ de Silva 1997 , p. 129. ^ Indrapala 2007 , p. 91. ^ Subramanian, T.S. (27 January 2006). "Reading the past in a more inclusive way: Interview with Dr. Sudharshan Seneviratne" . Frontline . Archived from the original on 12 June 2008 . Retrieved 9 July 2008 . ^ a b Tambiah, Stanley Jeyaraja (1986). Sri Lanka: Ethnic Fratricide and the Dismantling of Democracy . I.B.Tauris. p. 90. ISBN 978-1-85043-026-1 . ^ Ragupathy, Ponnampalam (1987). Early Settlements in Jaffna: An Archaeological Survey . University of Jaffna . p. 223. ^ a b Mahadevan, Iravatham (2003). Early Tamil Epigraphy From The Earliest Times To The Sixth Century A. D. Harvard University Press . p. 48. ISBN 978-0-67401-227-1 . ^ Indrapala 2007 , p. 157. ^ de Silva 1997 , pp. 30–32. ^ Mendis, G.C. Ceylon Today and Yesterday . Associated Newspapers of Ceylon. pp. 24– 25. ^ Allen, C. (2017). Coromandel: A Personal History of South India . Little, Brown Book Group. p. 154. ISBN 978-1-40870-540-7 . Archived from the original on 14 September 2024 . Retrieved 10 June 2022 . A later chapter of the 'Great Chronicle' describes how the Chola prince Elara (Ellalan) of Thiruvarur invaded and captured the throne of Lanka in about 205 BCE but was later killed in battle by the Sinhala prince Dutugamunu in about 161 ^ a b c Spencer, George W (1976). "The politics of plunder: The Cholas in eleventh century Ceylon".

The Journal of Asian Studies . 35 (3): 405– 419. doi : 10.2307/2053272 . JSTOR 2053272 . S2CID 154741845 . ^ Indrapala 2007 , p. 214–215. ^ de Silva 1997 , p. 76. ^ de Silva 1997 , p. 100–102. ^ de Silva 1997 , p. 102–04. ^ de Silva 1997 , p. 104. ^ de Silva 1997 , p. 121. ^ Indrapala 2007 , p. 275. ^ Abeysinghe, Tikiri (1986). Jaffna Under the Portuguese . Lake House Investments. pp. 2– 3. ISBN 978-9-55552-000-3 . ^ Kunaraca, Kantaiya (2003).

The Jaffna Dynasty: Vijayakalingan to Narasinghan . Dynasty of Jaffna Kings' Historical Society. pp. 82– 84. ISBN 978-9-55845-500-5 . ^ Gnanaprakasar, S. (2020). A critical history of Jaffna: the Tamil era . Gyan. pp. 113– 117. ISBN 978-8-12122-063-7 . ^ de Silva 1997 , p. 166. ^ Vriddhagirisan, V. (1942).

The Political Economy of Armed Conflict: Beyond Greed and Grievance . New York: Lynne Rienner Publishers . p. 198. ISBN 978-1-58826-172-4 . Archived from the original on 14 September 2024 . Retrieved 14 September 2024 . ^ Picciotto, Robert; Weaving, Rachel (2006). Security And Development: Investing in Peace And Prosperity . London: Routledge . p. 171. ISBN 978-0-415-35364-9 . Archived from the original on 14 September 2024 . Retrieved 14 September 2024 . ^ Stokke, K. (2006). "Building the Tamil Eelam State: emerging state institutions and forms of governance in LTTE-controlled areas in Sri Lanka". Third World Quarterly . 27 (6): 1021– 40. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.466.5940 . doi : 10.1080/01436590600850434 . S2CID 45544298 . ^ McConnell, D. (2008). "The Tamil people's right to self-determination". Cambridge Review of International Affairs . 21 (1): 59– 76. doi : 10.1080/09557570701828592 . S2CID 154770852 . ^ "Sri Lanka's war 10 years on: Finding Father Francis" . BBC News . 18 May 2019. Archived from the original on 10 December 2020 . Retrieved 22 March 2021 . ^ "UN rights chief seeks sanctions against Sri Lanka generals" . France 24 . Agence France-Presse . 27 January 2021. Archived from the original on 27 January 2021 . Retrieved 22 March 2021 . ^ "Open Wounds and Mounting Dangers" . Human Rights Watch . 1 February 2021. Archived from the original on 22 March 2021 . Retrieved 22 March 2021 . ^ "Up to 100,000 killed in Sri Lanka's civil war: UN" . ABC News . 20 May 2009. Archived from the original on 23 September 2018 . Retrieved 1 March 2016 . ^ "Sri Lankan president declares war 'victory' " . CNN . Archived from the original on 12 November 2021 . Retrieved 8 February 2022 . ^ "War on the Displaced" . Human Rights Watch . 19 February 2009. Archived from the original on 11 April 2021 . Retrieved 14 September 2024 . ^ "The Sri Lankan Civil War and Its History, Revisited in 2020" . Harvard International Review . 31 August 2020. Archived from the original on 28 June 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "The Sri Lankan Conflict" . Council on Foreign Relations . 18 May 2009. Archived from the original on 27 March 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Sri Lanka: New Evidence of Wartime Abuses" . Human Rights Watch . 20 May 2010. Archived from the original on 9 May 2021 . Retrieved 9 March 2016 . ^ Census of India: Language (Table C-16) (PDF) . Government of India (Report). Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 August 2023 . Retrieved 1 July 2024 . ^ a b Population by Ethnicity according to District (PDF) . Government of Sri Lanka (Report). Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 July 2017 . Retrieved 3 May 2007 . ^ Suryanarayan, V. (2001). "In search of a new identity" . Frontline . Archived from the original on 29 May 2008 . Retrieved 2 July 2008 . ^ de Silva 1997 , pp. 3–5, 9. ^ Guilmoto, Christophe Z. (1993). "The Tamil Migration Cycle 1830–1950". Economic and Political Weekly . 28 (3): 111– 20. JSTOR 4399307 . ^ a b "Tamil Diaspora" . Institute of Asian Studies. Archived from the original on 2 October 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Tamil diaspora – a trans state nation" , Tamilnation , archived from the original on 21 July 2011 , retrieved 4 December 2006 ^ Shahbazi, Ammar (20 March 2012). "Strangers to their roots, and those around them" .

The News . Archived from the original on 17 June 2013 . Retrieved 8 September 2014 . ^ "Irregular migration" . United Nations . May 2010. Archived from the original on 26 April 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2023 . ^ Kelsey Clark Underwood. "Image and Identity: Tamil Migration to the United States" (PDF) . University of California . Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 March 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "New Beginnings: Tamil Heritage in Toronto" . Heritage Toronto . Archived from the original on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 15 December 2017 . ^ Krishnamurti, Bhadriraju (2003).

The Dravidian Languages . Cambridge Language Surveys. Cambridge University Press . p. 480. ISBN 978-0-52177-111-5 . ^ Tamil among the classical languages of the world (PDF) . Tamil Virtual University (Report). Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 January 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Tamil language" . Britannica . Archived from the original on 7 October 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ "A rare inscription" .

The Hindu . 1 July 2009. Archived from the original on 22 September 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2023 . ^ Bahata Ansumali Mukhopadhyay (3 August 2021). "Ancestral Dravidian languages in Indus Civilization" . Humanities and Social Sciences Communications . 8 (1): 1– 14. doi : 10.1057/s41599-021-00868-w . Archived from the original on 29 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ Asher, R.E.; Annamalai, E. (2002). Colloquial Tamil (PDF) . Routledge . p. 157. ISBN 978-0-41518-788-6 . ^ Southworth, Franklin C. (2005). Linguistic archaeology of South Asia . Routledge . pp. 129– 132. ISBN 978-0-41533-323-8 . ^ Kamil Zvelebil (2010). Pre-history of Tamil literature (PDF) (Report). p. 16. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ Ramasamy, Sumathi (1997). "Feminizing Language: Tamil as Goddess, Mother, Maiden". Passions of the Tongue: Language Devotion in Tamil India, 1891-1970 . Vol. 29. University of California . pp. 79– 134. ISBN 978-0-520-20804-9 . Retrieved 8 February 2024 . ^ Smirnitskaya, Anna (March 2019). "Diglossia and Tamil varieties in Chennai" . Acta Linguistica Petropolitana (3): 318– 334. doi : 10.30842/alp2306573714317 . Archived from the original on 28 March 2024 . Retrieved 4 November 2022 . ^ "Several dialects of Tamil" .

The Hindu . 31 October 2023. Archived from the original on 5 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ George L. Hart (August 2018). Credentials of Tamil as a classical language (PDF) (Report). Tamil Virtual University . Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 July 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Maloney, C. (1970). "The Beginnings of Civilization in South India".

The Journal of Asian Studies . 29 (3): 603– 616. doi : 10.2307/2943246 . JSTOR 2943246 . S2CID 162291987 . ^ Subramaniam, T.S. (29 August 2011). "Palani excavation triggers fresh debate" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 8 September 2011 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Abraham, S. A. (2003). "Chera, Chola, Pandya: Using Archaeological Evidence to Identify the Tamil Kingdoms of Early Historic South India" (PDF) . Asian Perspectives . 42 (2): 207. doi : 10.1353/asi.2003.0031 . hdl : 10125/17189 . S2CID 153420843 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 September 2019 . Retrieved 6 September 2019 . ^ Nadarajah, Devapoopathy (1994). Love in Sanskrit and Tamil Literature: A Study of Characters and Nature, 200 B.C.-A.D. 500 . Motilal Banarsidass . ISBN 978-8-12081-215-4 . ^ a b Zvelebil 1992 , p. 12-13. ^ M. S. Purnalingam Pillai (1994). Tamil Literature . Asian Educational Services. p. 2. ISBN 978-8-12060-955-6 . Archived from the original on 15 July 2024 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ "Overview of Sangam literature" . Tamil Sangam. Archived from the original on 27 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Takahashi, Takanobu (1995). Tamil Love Poetry and Poetics . Brill Publishers . pp. 1– 3. ISBN 90-04-10042-3 . Archived from the original on 15 July 2024 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ a b Early Tamil society (PDF) (Report). Indira Gandhi National Open University . p. 2. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 November 2023 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ Mahalingam, T.V. (1981). Proceedings of the Second Annual Conference of the South Indian History Congress . University of Michigan . pp. 28– 34. ^ S. Sundararajan (1991). Ancient Tamil Country: Its Social and Economic Structure . Navrang. p. 233. ^ P.S.Sundaram (2005).

The Kural . Penguin Books . ISBN 978-9-35118-015-9 . Archived from the original on 15 July 2024 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ a b Pillai, P. Govinda (4 October 2022).

The Bhakti Movement: Renaissance or Revivalism? . Taylor & Francis. p. 46. ISBN 978-1-00078-039-0 . Archived from the original on 15 July 2024 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ Padmaja, T. (2002). Temples of Kr̥ṣṇa in South India: History, Art, and Traditions in Tamil nāḍu . Abhinav Publications. p. 47. ISBN 978-8-17017-398-4 . Archived from the original on 30 June 2024 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ Nair, Rukmini Bhaya; de Souza, Peter Ronald (2020). Keywords for India: A Conceptual Lexicon for the 21st Century . Bloomsbury Publishing . ISBN 978-1-35003-925-4 . ^ P.S.Sundaram (3 May 2002). Kamba Ramayana . Penguin Books . pp. 18–. ISBN 978-9-351-18100-2 . Archived from the original on 15 July 2024 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ Bergunder, Michael; Frese, Heiko; Schröder, Ulrike (2011). Ritual, Caste, and Religion in Colonial South India . Primus Books. p. 107. ISBN 978-9-380-60721-4 . Archived from the original on 15 July 2024 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ Karthik Madhavan (21 June 2010). "Tamil saw its first book in 1578" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 1 January 2016 . Retrieved 8 October 2015 . ^ Kolappan, B. (22 June 2014). "Delay, howlers in Tamil Lexicon embarrass scholars" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 4 July 2014 . Retrieved 25 December 2014 . ^ "The Tamil Lexicon" .

The Hindu . 27 March 2011. Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Karen Prechilis (1999).

The embodiment of bhakti . Oxford University Press . p. 8. ISBN 978-0-19512-813-0 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ Arooran, K. Nambi (1980). Tamil Renaissance and the Dravidian Movement, 1905-1944 . University of Michigan . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ Theodore Baskaran (19 March 2014). "Seeds of Tamil Renaissance" . Frontline . Archived from the original on 21 October 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Bharathiyar Who Impressed Bharatidasan" . Journal of Language and Linguistic Studies . ISSN 1305-578X . Archived from the original on 24 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Indian Literature: An Introduction . Pearson Education . 2005. p. 125. ISBN 978-8-13170-520-9 . Archived from the original on 28 December 2023 . Retrieved 6 October 2016 . ^ Centur̲aimuttu (1978). Āya kalaikaḷ ar̲upattunān̲ku . University of Michigan . p. 2. Archived from the original on 15 July 2024 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ Cuppiramaṇiyan̲, Ca. Vē (1983). Heritage of the Tamils: Siddha Medicine . International Institute of Tamil Studies. p. 554. ^ Jose Joseph; L. Stanislaus, eds. (2007). Communication as Mission . Indian Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. p. 123. ISBN 978-8-18458-006-8 . Archived from the original on 15 July 2024 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ Fergusson, James (1910). History of Indian and Eastern Architecture: Volume 1 . London: John Murray. p. 309. ^ Francis Ching (1995). A Visual Dictionary of Architecture (PDF) . New York: John Wiley and Sons . p. 253. ISBN 978-0-4712-8451-2 . ^ Francis Ching; Mark Jarzombek ; Vikramaditya Prakash (2017). A Global History of Architecture . New York: John Wiley and Sons . p. 320. ISBN 978-1-11898-161-0 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ David Rose (1995). Hinduism . Folens . p. 6. ISBN 978-1-85276-770-9 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Jeannie Ireland (2018). History of Interior Design . Bloomsbury Publishing . p. 224. ISBN 978-1-50131-989-1 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Huntington, Susan L.; Huntington, John C. (2014).

The Art of Ancient India: Buddhist, Hindu, Jain . Motilal Banarsidass . p. 313. ISBN 978-8-12083-617-4 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Dayalan, D. (2014). Cave-temples in the Regions of the Pāṇdya, Muttaraiya, Atiyamān̤ and Āy Dynasties in Tamil Nadu and Kerala . Archaeological Survey of India . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Srinivasan, K.R. (1964). Cave-temples of the Pallavas . Archaeological Survey of India . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ James G. Lochtefeld (2002).

The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism: A-M . Rosen Publishing . p. 399. ISBN 978-0-82393-179-8 . ^ Sacred Places of a Lifetime: 500 of the World's Most Peaceful and Powerful Destinations . National Geographic Society . 2008. p. 154. ISBN 978-1-42620-336-7 . ^ Om Prakash (2005). Cultural History of India . New Age International. p. 15. ISBN 978-8-12241-5-872 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Crispin Branfoot (2015). "The Tamil Gopura From Temple Gateway to Global Icon" . Ars Orientalis . 45 . University of Michigan . doi : 10.3998/ars.13441566.0045.004 . Archived from the original on 4 June 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Michell, George (1988).

The Hindu Temple . Chicago: University of Chicago Press . pp. 151– 153. ISBN 978-0-22653-230-1 . ^ "Gopuram" . Britannica . Archived from the original on 19 August 2020 . Retrieved 20 January 2008 . ^ "Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh build temple ties to boost tourism" .

The Times of India . 10 August 2010. Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ "Ten Hindu temples to visit outside India" .

The Economic Times . 23 October 2021. Archived from the original on 2 August 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Five Hindu temples to visit outside India that are worth a visit" .

The Times of India . 29 October 2021. Archived from the original on 2 August 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Metcalfe, Thomas R. (31 August 1982). "A Tradition Created: Indo-Saracenic Architecture under the Raj" . History Today . 32 (9). Archived from the original on 18 June 2018 . Retrieved 28 December 2012 . ^ "Indo-saracenic Architecture" . Henry Irwin, Architect in India, 1841–1922 . higman.de. Archived from the original on 30 July 2020 . Retrieved 28 December 2012 . ^ Jeyaraj, George J. Indo Saracenic Architecture in Channai (PDF) . Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority (Report). Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 July 2021 . Retrieved 28 December 2012 . ^ "Art Deco Style Remains, But Elements Missing" .

The New Indian Express . 2 September 2014. Archived from the original on 8 December 2023 . Retrieved 28 December 2022 . ^ "Chennai, a rich amalgamation of various architectural styles" .

The Hindu . 27 August 2020. Archived from the original on 17 July 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Chennai looks to the skies" .

The Hindu . 31 October 2014. Archived from the original on 8 December 2023 . Retrieved 28 December 2022 . ^ "Krishna Rajamannar with His Wives, Rukmini and Satyabhama, and His Mount, Garuda | LACMA Collections" . collections.lacma.org. Archived from the original on 16 July 2014 . Retrieved 23 September 2014 . ^ Ganapathi, V. "Shilpaic literature of the tamils" . INTAMM. Archived from the original on 16 October 2006 . Retrieved 4 December 2006 . ^ Lippe, Aschwin (December 1971). "Divine Images in Stone and Bronze: South India, Chola Dynasty (c. 850–1280)". Metropolitan Museum Journal . 4 .

The Metropolitan Museum of Art: 29– 79. doi : 10.2307/1512615 . JSTOR 1512615 . S2CID 192943206 .

The bronze icons of the Early Chola period are one of India's greatest contributions to world art... ^ Vidya Dehejia (1990). Art of the Imperial Cholas . Columbia University Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-23151-524-5 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Ē. En̲ Perumāḷ (1983). Ca. Vē Cuppiramaṇiyan̲ (ed.). Heritage of the Tamils: Art & Architecture . International Institute of Tamil Studies. p. 459. Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Sudharsanam. A centre for Arts and Culture (PDF) . Indian Heritage Organization. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 August 2013 . Retrieved 26 October 2012 . ^ "Sittanavasal – A passage to the Indian History and Monuments" . Puratattva. 2 May 2011. Archived from the original on 14 August 2012 . Retrieved 26 October 2012 . ^ "The Ajanta of TamilNadu" .

The Tribune . 27 November 2005. Archived from the original on 5 April 2024 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Rajayyan, K. (2005). Tamil Nadu, a Real History . University of Michigan . p. 188. Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Raghavan Srinivasan (2021). Rajaraja Chola: Interplay Between an Imperial Regime and Productive Forces of Society . Leadstart Publishing. p. 141. ISBN 978-9-35458-2-233 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Nayanthara, S. (2006).

The World of Indian murals and paintings . Chillbreeze. pp. 55– 57. ISBN 978-8-19040-551-5 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ C. B. Gupta; Mrinalini Mani (2005). Thanjavur Paintings: Materials, Techniques & Conservation . National Museum. p. 14. ISBN 978-8-18583-223-4 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Appasamy, Jaya (1980). Tanjavur Painting of the Maratha Period: Volume 1 . Abhinav Publications. p. 9. ISBN 978-8-17017-127-0 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Rajagopal, Geetha (2009). Music rituals in the temples of South India, Volume 1 . Dorling Kindersley . pp. 111– 112. ISBN 978-8-12460-538-7 . ^ Nijenhuis, Emmie te (1974). Indian Music: History and Structure . Brill Publishers . pp. 4– 5. ISBN 978-9-00403-978-0 . Archived from the original on 10 October 2023 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Tamil Pozhil (in Tamil). Karanthai Tamil Sangam. 1976. p. 241. Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Richard Widdess (December 2019). "Orality, writing and music in South Asia" . School of Oriental and African Studies . doi : 10.13140/RG.2.2.31623.96169 . ^ Widdess, D. R. (1979). "The Kudumiyamalai inscription: a source of early Indian music in notation".

In Picken, Laurence (ed.). Musica Asiatica . Vol. 2. London: Oxford University Press . pp. 115– 150. ^ T. K. Venkatasubramanian (2010). Music as a history in Tamil Nadu . Primus Books. p. ix-xvi. ISBN 978-9-38060-7-061 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ "Karnatak music" . Britannica . Archived from the original on 7 March 2023 . Retrieved 1 March 2023 . ^ Alastair Dick (1984). Sadie, Stanley (ed.).

The New Grove Dictionary of Musical Instruments . Vol. 3. Macmillan Press . p. 727. ISBN 978-0-943818-05-4 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Encyclopaedia of Indian Literature . Sahitya Akademi . 1988. p. 1314. ISBN 978-8-12601-194-0 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ G, Ezekiel Majello (10 October 2019). "Torching prejudice through gumption and Gaana" . Deccan Chronicle . Archived from the original on 6 December 2020 . Retrieved 12 May 2020 . ^ Jeff Todd Titon; Svanibor Pettan, eds. (2015).

The Oxford Handbook of Applied Ethnomusicology . Oxford University Press . p. 370. ISBN 978-0-199-35171-8 . ^ Ramkumar, Nithyau (2016). Harihara the Legacy of the Scroll . Frog in well. ISBN 978-9-352-01769-0 . ..Thaarai and thappattai, native instruments of Tamil people.. ^ S.Krishnaswami (2017). Musical Instruments of India . Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, Government of India . ISBN 978-8-12302-494-3 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ "Secular and sacred" .

The Hindu . 3 January 2013. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017 . Retrieved 10 September 2016 . ^ Kiruṣṇan̲, Rājam (2002).

When the Kurinji Blooms . Orient BlackSwan . p. 124. ISBN 978-8-12501-619-9 . ^ K.Leelavathy. Problems and prospects of handicraft artisans in Thanjavur district . Archers & Elevators Publishing House. pp. 38, 43. ISBN 978-8-11965-350-8 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ "Mathalam - Ancient music instruments mentioned in Thirumurai" (in Tamil). Shaivam.org. Archived from the original on 19 January 2013. ^ "11th TirumuRai Paurams" (in Tamil). Project Madurai. Archived from the original on 27 June 2021 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ a b "An ode to Aadi and Ayyanar" . Indian Express . 26 July 2022. Archived from the original on 22 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Lochtefeld, James (2002).

The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism: A-M (PDF) . Rosen Publishing . pp. 103– 104. ISBN 978-0-82393-179-8 . ^ "Bhartanatyam" . Government of India . Archived from the original on 30 July 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Banerjee, Projesh (1983). Indian Ballet Dancing . Abhinav Publications. pp. 42– 43. ISBN 978-0-391-02716-9 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ "Bharata-natyam" . Britannica . Archived from the original on 28 October 2021 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ "On International Dance Day, a look at some of India's famous dance forms and their exponents" .

The Indian Express . 29 April 2023. Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Richard Schechner (2010). Between Theater and Anthropology . University of Pennsylvania . p. 65. ISBN 978-0-81227-929-0 . ^ Hanne M. de Bruin (1999). Kaṭṭaikkūttu: The Flexibility of a South Indian Theatre Tradition . University of Michigan . p. 344. ISBN 978-9-06980-103-2 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Heesterman, J. C. (1992). Ritual, State, and History in South Asia . Brill Publishers . p. 465. ISBN 978-9-00409-467-3 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Ethical Life in South Asia . Indiana University Press . 2010. p. 105. ISBN 978-0-25335-528-7 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Hume, Lynne (2020). Portals: Opening Doorways to Other Realities Through the Senses . Taylor & Francis . p. 88. ISBN 978-1-00018-987-2 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Shobana Gupta (2010). Dances Of India . Har-Anand Publications. pp. 60– 65. ISBN 978-8-12411-337-0 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ "Kolattam" . Merriam Webster . Archived from the original on 1 February 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Raghavan, M. D. (1971). Tamil Culture in Ceylon: A General Introduction . University of Michigan . pp. 274– 275. Archived from the original on 16 March 2016 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Allison Arnold, ed. (2017).

The Garland Encyclopedia of World Music . Taylor & Francis . p. 990. ISBN 978-1-35154-438-2 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Madhavan, Arya (2010). Kudiyattam Theatre and the Actor's Consciousness . Brill Publishers . p. 113. ISBN 978-9-04202-799-2 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Gaurab Dasgupta (2024). Jhal Muri: Embracing Life's Unpredictable Flavours . Blue Rose. p. 207. Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Spirit of the Tiger . Parragon Publishing. 2012. p. 206. ISBN 978-1-44545-472-6 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Snodgrass, Mary Ellen (2016).

The Encyclopedia of World Folk Dance . Rowman & Littlefield . pp. 26– 27. ISBN 978-1-44225-749-8 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ History, Religion and Culture of India . Isha books. 2004. p. 224. ISBN 978-8-18205-061-7 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Vatsyayan, Kapila (1987). Traditions of Indian Folk Dance . Clarion Books. p. 337. ISBN 978-8-18512-022-5 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Soneji, Devesh; Viswanathan Peterson, Indira (2008). Reinventing the Arts in Modern South India . Oxford University Press . pp. 334– 335. ISBN 978-0-19569-084-2 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ "Oyilattam" . Government of Tamil Nadu , South Zone Cultural Center. Archived from the original on 19 June 2009 . Retrieved 3 August 2009 . ^ "Parai" . Nathalaya. Archived from the original on 8 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Axel Michaels; Christoph Wulf, eds. (2012). Images of the Body in India: South Asian and European Perspectives on Rituals and Performativity . Taylor & Francis . ISBN 978-1-13670-392-8 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Wolf, Gita; Geetha, V.; Ravishankar, Anushka (2003). Masks and Performance with Everyday Materials . Tara Publishing. pp. 37– 38. ISBN 978-8-18621-147-2 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Liu, Siyuan (2016). Routledge Handbook of Asian Theatre . Taylor & Francis . p. 182. ISBN 978-1-317-27886-3 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Lal, Ananda (2009). Theatres of India: A Concise Companion . Oxford University Press . pp. 71, 433. ISBN 978-0-19569-917-3 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Brandon, James; Banham, Martin (1997).

The Cambridge Guide to Asian Theatre . Cambridge University Press . p. 84. ISBN 978-0-521-58822-5 . ^ "Martial Arts (Silambam & Kalaripayattu)" . Government of India . Archived from the original on 5 December 2020 . Retrieved 27 November 2020 . ^ Nainar, Nahla (20 January 2017). "A stick in time ..." The Hindu . ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 2 September 2023 . Retrieved 11 February 2023 . ^ Sarkar, John (17 February 2008). "Dravidian martial art on a comeback mode" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 31 July 2021 . Retrieved 5 December 2020 . ^ a b Chris Crudelli (2008).

The Way of the Warrior . Dorling Kindersley . p. 36. ISBN 978-1-40533-750-2 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ "Adimurai" .

The Hans India . 18 February 2023. Archived from the original on 29 March 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Luijendijk, D.H. (2005). Kalarippayat: India's Ancient Martial Art . Paladin Press. ISBN 978-1-40922-626-0 . ^ Zarrilli, Phillip B. (1992). "To Heal and/or To Harm: The Vital Spots (Marmmam/Varmam) in Two South Indian Martial Traditions Part I: Focus on Kerala's Kalarippayattu" . Journal of Asian Martial Arts . 1 (1). Archived from the original on 1 June 2023 . Retrieved 23 February 2023 . ^ Alter, Joseph S. (May 1992). "The sannyasi and the Indian wrestler: the anatomy of a relationship" . American Ethnologist . 19 (2): 317– 336. doi : 10.1525/ae.1992.19.2.02a00070 . ISSN 0094-0496 . JSTOR 645039 . Archived from the original on 9 March 2021 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ "Silambam weapons" . World Silambam Association . 17 November 2023. Archived from the original on 24 May 2022 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Hidden Dance of the Deadly Staff" . Daily News . 13 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Srinivasan, Sharada (15 November 1994). "Wootz crucible steel: a newly discovered production site in India" . Papers from the Institute of Archaeology . 5 : 49– 59. doi : 10.5334/pia.60 . ^ Wijepala, W. M. T. B.; Young, Sansfica M.; Ishiga, Hiroaki (1 April 2022). "Reading the archaeometallurgical findings of Yodhawewa site, Sri Lanka: contextualizing with South Asian metal history" . Asian Archaeology . 5 (1): 21– 39. doi : 10.1007/s41826-022-00046-0 . ISSN 2520-8101 . S2CID 247355036 . Archived from the original on 13 September 2024 . Retrieved 13 September 2024 . ^ Coghlan, Herbert Henery (1977). Notes on prehistoric and early iron in the Old World (2nd ed.). Pitt Rivers Museum . pp. 99– 100. ^ Sasisekharan, B. (1999). "Technology of Iron and Steel in Kodumanal" (PDF) . Indian Journal of History of Science . 34 (4). Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 July 2015. ^ Manning, Charlotte Speir. Ancient and Medieval India . Vol. 2. p. 365. ISBN 978-0-543-92943-3 . Archived from the original on 14 September 2024 . Retrieved 15 November 2015 . ^ Srinivasan, Sharada; Ranganathan, Srinivasa (2004). "India's Legendary Wootz Steel: An Advanced Material of the Ancient World" . Iron & Steel Heritage of India : 69– 82. OCLC 82439861 . Archived from the original on 11 February 2019 . Retrieved 23 July 2015 . ^ Peter J. Claus; Sarah Diamond; Margaret Ann Mills (2003). South Asian Folklore: An Encyclopedia . Routledge. pp. 21, 386. ISBN 978-0-415-93919-5 . Archived from the original on 29 May 2022 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ George L. Hart; Hank Heifet (2002).

The Four Hundred Songs of War and Wisdom: An Anthology of Poems from Classical Tamil, the Purananuru . Columbia University Press . p. 217. ISBN 978-0-23151-252-7 . ^ "Tamil Nadu leads in film production" .

The Times of India . 22 August 2013. Archived from the original on 16 November 2014 . Retrieved 25 March 2015 . ^ "Tamil, Telugu film industries outshine Bollywood" . Business Standard . 25 January 2006. Archived from the original on 25 March 2021 . Retrieved 19 February 2012 . ^ Hiro, Dilip (2010).

After Empire: The Birth of a Multipolar World . Public Affairs. p. 248. ISBN 978-1-56858-427-0 . Archived from the original on 22 August 2023 . Retrieved 20 October 2020 . ^ "A way of life" . Frontline . 18 October 2013. Archived from the original on 6 February 2014 . Retrieved 19 June 2018 . ^ "Cinema and the city" .

The Hindu . 9 January 2009. Archived from the original on 23 October 2022 . Retrieved 1 March 2023 . ^ "Farewell to old cinema halls" . Times of India . 9 May 2011. Archived from the original on 5 October 2015 . Retrieved 19 June 2018 . ^ Velayutham, Selvaraj (2008). Tamil cinema: the cultural politics of India's other film industry . Routledge . p. 2. ISBN 978-0-415-39680-6 . Archived from the original on 22 August 2023 . Retrieved 20 October 2020 . ^ "From silent films to the digital era — Madras' tryst with cinema" .

The Hindu . 30 August 2020. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020 . Retrieved 29 June 2021 . ^ "Weaving through the threads" .

The Hindu . 30 March 2012. Archived from the original on 14 June 2014 . Retrieved 7 March 2015 . ^ Parthasarathy, R. (1993).

The Tale of an Anklet: An Epic of South India – The Cilappatikaram of Ilanko Atikal, Translations from the Asian Classics . New York: Columbia University Press . ISBN 978-0-23107-849-8 . ^ a b c d Vijaya Ramaswamy (2017). Historical Dictionary of the Tamils . Rowman & Littlefield . p. 34. ISBN 978-1-53810-686-0 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Boulanger, Chantal (1997). Saris: An Illustrated Guide to the Indian Art of Draping . New York: Shakti Press International. p. 6,15. ISBN 978-0-96614-961-6 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Lynton, Linda (1995).

The Sari . New York: Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 978-0-50028-378-3 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ a b Anurag Kumar (2016). Indian Art & Culture . Arihant Publication. p. 196. ISBN 978-9-35094-484-4 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Nick Huyes (10 May 2024). Exploring The Riches Of India . Nicky Huys Books. p. 47. Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ C. Monahan, Susanne; Andrew Mirola, William; O. Emerson, Michael (2001). Sociology of Religion . Prentice Hall. p. 83. ISBN 978-0-13025-380-4 . ^ "About Dhoti" . Britannica . Archived from the original on 13 March 2016 . Retrieved 12 January 2016 . ^ a b "Clothing in India" . Britannica . Archived from the original on 17 March 2016 . Retrieved 12 January 2016 . ^ Robert Sewell; Sankara Dikshit (1995).

The Indian Calendar . Motilal Banarsidass . pp. 11– 12. ^ Singapore Ethnic Mosaic, The: Many Cultures, One People . World Scientific Publishing Company. 2017. p. 226. ISBN 978-9-81323-475-8 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ "Sixty year cycle" (PDF) . Sankara Vedic Culture and Arts. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ S.K. Chatterjee (1998). Indian Calendric System . Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India . pp. 9– 12. ^ Britannica Encyclopedia of World Religions . Encyclopaedia Britannica . 2008. p. 809. ISBN 978-1-59339-491-2 . Archived from the original on 6 August 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Johann Philipp Fabricius (1998). Tamil dictionary . Asian Educational Services. p. 631. ISBN 978-8-12060-264-9 . Archived from the original on 6 August 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ A. Kiruṭṭin̲an̲ (2000). Tamil Culture: Religion, Culture, and Literature . Bharatiya Kala Prakashan. p. 77. ISBN 978-8-18605-052-1 . ^ Selwyn Stanley (2004). Social Problems in India . Allied Publishers. p. 658. ISBN 978-8-17764-708-2 . Archived from the original on 15 July 2024 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ "Hospitality Characteristics of Tamil People" . International Tamil Research . 4 . 2022. Archived from the original on 17 August 2022 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . ^ "Rediscovering the richness of rice" .

The New Indian Express . 9 July 2024. Archived from the original on 11 July 2024 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 . ^ South India Heritage: An Introduction . East West Books. 2007. p. 412. ISBN 978-8-18866-164-0 . ^ The Bloomsbury Handbook of Indian Cuisine . Bloomsbury Publishing. 2023. p. 41. ISBN 978-1-350-12864-4 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ "Serving on a banana leaf" . ISCKON. Archived from the original on 31 May 2023 . Retrieved 1 January 2023 . ^ "The Benefits of Eating Food on Banana Leaves" . India Times . 9 March 2015. Archived from the original on 7 March 2016 . Retrieved 20 March 2016 . ^ Kalman, Bobbie (2009). India: The Culture . Crabtree Publishing Company. p. 29. ISBN 978-0-7787-9287-1 . Archived from the original on 19 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ "Food recipes" . Government of Tamil Nadu . Archived from the original on 10 June 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ a b "Big, bold flavours from a small island" . Deccan Herald . 28 January 2024. Archived from the original on 28 January 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ a b c "India's pluralism: Traditional cuisines of Tamil Nadu largely about meat & fish" .

The Economic Times . 11 October 2015. Archived from the original on 20 December 2020 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ a b "Flavours of Kongunadu: There are several Tamil Nadus when it comes to food" .

The New Indian Express . 22 July 2023. Archived from the original on 22 July 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "6 Breakfast Items From Tamil Nadu To Have Instead Of Idli and Dosa" . Times Now . 27 March 2024. Archived from the original on 27 March 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Achaya, K.T. (1 November 2003).

The Story of Our Food . Universities Press. p. 80. ISBN 978-8-17371-293-7 . ^ Conrad Bunk, ed. (2009). Acceptable Genes? Religious Traditions and Genetically Modified Foods . SUNY Press. p. 170. ISBN 978-1-43842-894-9 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ George Abraham Pottamkulam (2021). Tamilnadu A Journey in Time Part II People, Places and Potpourri . Notion Press . ISBN 978-1-63806-520-3 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Lopamudra Maitra Bajpai (2020). India, Sri Lanka and the SAARC Region: History, Popular Culture and Heritage . Taylor & Francis . ISBN 978-1-00020-581-7 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ "About Siddha medicine: Origins" . National Institute of Siddha . Archived from the original on 10 December 2023 . Retrieved 16 February 2024 . ^ "About Siddha" . Government of India . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Siddha system of medicine (PDF) (Report). National Siddha Council. August 2020. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Abbie Mercer (2007). Happy New Year . Rosen Publishing . p. 22. ISBN 978-1-4042-3808-4 . ^ James Stewart (2015). Vegetarianism and Animal Ethics in Contemporary Buddhism . Taylor & Francis . p. 126. ISBN 978-1-31762-398-4 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Beteille, Andre (1964). "89. A Note on the Pongal Festival in a Tanjore Village". Man . 64 (2). Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland: 73– 75. doi : 10.2307/2797924 . ISSN 0025-1496 . JSTOR 2797924 . ^ J. Gordon Melton (2011). Religious Celebrations: An Encyclopedia of Holidays, Festivals, Solemn Observances, and Spiritual Commemorations . ABC-CLIO. pp. 547– 548. ISBN 978-1-59884-206-7 . ^ Roy W. Hamilton; Aurora Ammayao (2003).

The art of rice: spirit and sustenance in Asia . University of California Press. pp. 156– 157. ISBN 978-0-93074-198-3 . Archived from the original on 21 April 2023 . Retrieved 30 October 2019 . ^ Roshen Dalal (2010). Hinduism: An Alphabetical Guide . Penguin Books . p. 406. ISBN 978-0-14341-421-6 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Spagnoli, Cathy; Samanna, Paramasivam (1999). Jasmine and Coconuts: South Indian Tales . Libraries Unlimited. p. 133. ISBN 978-1-56308-576-5 . Archived from the original on 30 September 2023 . Retrieved 8 February 2024 . ^ Gajrani, S. (2004). History, Religion and Culture of India . Gyan Publishing House. p. 207. ISBN 978-8-18205-061-7 . Archived from the original on 30 September 2023 . Retrieved 8 February 2024 . ^ Roy, Christian (2005). Traditional Festivals: A Multicultural Encyclopedia . Bloomsbury Publishing . pp. 462– 463. ISBN 978-1-85109-689-3 . ^ Alexandra Kent (2005). Divinity and Diversity: A Hindu Revitalization Movement in Malaysia . University of Hawaii Press . ISBN 978-8-79111-489-2 . ^ Pechilis, Karen (22 March 2013). Interpreting Devotion: The Poetry and Legacy of a Female Bhakti Saint of India . Routledge . p. 155. ISBN 978-1-136-50704-5 . Archived from the original on 13 February 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 . ^ Chambers, James (2015). Holiday Symbols & Customs . Infobase Publishing. ISBN 978-0-780-81365-6 . ^ Subodh Kant (2002). Indian Encyclopedia . Cosmo Publications. p. 7821. ISBN 978-8-177-55257-7 . ^ "Important festivals of Tamilnadu" . Government of Tamil Nadu . 14 June 2023. Archived from the original on 26 February 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Festivals" . Government of Tamil Nadu . Archived from the original on 11 June 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Christmas in Tamil Nadu" . Government of Tamil Nadu . Archived from the original on 1 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Ramakrishnan, T. (26 February 2017). "Governor clears ordinance on 'jallikattu' " .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 20 May 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ "Jallikattu bull festival" . Government of Tamil Nadu . Archived from the original on 10 June 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ Gautier, François (2001). A Western Journalist on India: The Ferengi's Columns . Har-Anand Publications. ISBN 978-81-241-0795-9 . Archived from the original on 14 September 2024 . Retrieved 7 August 2023 . ^ Grushkin, Daniel (22 March 2007). "NY Times: The ritual dates back as far as 2,000 years ... " .

The Hindu . 17 January 2011. Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 24 December 2023 . ^ Craig, Steve (2002). Sports and Games of the Ancients: (Sports and Games Through History) . Greenwood Publishing Group . p. 63. ISBN 978-0-313-31600-5 . ^ Finkel, Irving (2004). "Round and Round the Houses: The Game of Pachisi ".

In Mackenzie, Colin; Finkel, Irving (eds.). Asian Games: The Art of Contest . Asia Society. pp. 46– 57. ISBN 978-0-878-48099-9 . ^ "Top 10 Most Popular Sports in India" . Sporteology. Archived from the original on 22 June 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2013 . ^ Chandramouli, C. (2004). Arts and Crafts of Tamil Nadu . Directorate of Census Operations. p. 74. ^ Hardy, Friedhelm (2015). Viraha Bhakti: The Early History of Krsna Devotion . Motilal Banarsidass . p. 156. ISBN 978-8-12083-816-1 . ^ Padmaja, T. (2002). Temples of Kr̥ṣṇa in South India: History, Art, and Traditions in Tamilnāḍu . Abhinav Publications. p. 27. ISBN 978-81-7017-398-4 . ^ Clothey, Fred W. (2019).

The Many Faces of Murukan: The History and Meaning of a South Indian God. With the Poem Prayers to Lord Murukan . Walter de Gruyter . p. 34. ISBN 978-3-11080-410-2 . ^ Mahadevan, Iravatham (2006). A Note on the Muruku Sign of the Indus Script in light of the Mayiladuthurai Stone Axe Discovery . Harappa. Archived from the original on 4 September 2006. ^ Steven Rosen; Graham M. Schweig (2006). Essential Hinduism . Greenwood Publishing. p. 45. ^ Tamil Civilization:Quarterly Research Journal of the Tamil University . Vol. 5. University of Michigan . 1987. p. 9. ^ a b Neuenhofer, Christa (2012). Ayyanar and Mariamman, Folk Deities in South India . Blurb, Incorporated. ISBN 978-1-457-99010-6 . ^ "Principles and Practice of Hindu Religion" . Hindu Heritage Study Program . Archived from the original on 14 November 2006 . Retrieved 5 December 2006 . ^ "Amman temples" . Government of Tamil Nadu . Archived from the original on 23 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 . ^ Balachandran, P.K. (23 March 2006). "Tracing the Sri Lanka-Kerala link" .

The Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 10 December 2006 . Retrieved 5 December 2006 . ^ Lal, Mohan (2006).

The Encyclopaedia of Indian Literature (Volume Five Sasay To Zorgot), Volume 5 . Sahitya Akademi. p. 4396. ISBN 978-81-260-1221-3 . ^ Shashi, S.S. (1996). Encyclopaedia Indica: India, Pakistan, Bangladesh: Volume 100 . Anmol Publications. ^ Subramanium, N. (1980). Śaṅgam polity: the administration and social life of the Śaṅgam Tamils . Ennes Publications. ^ Cutler, Norman (1983). Clothey, Fred W.; Ramanujan, A. K.; Shulman, David Dean (eds.). "Tamil Religion: Melting Pot or Battleground?" . History of Religions . 22 (4): 381– 391. doi : 10.1086/462931 . ISSN 0018-2710 . JSTOR 1062405 . S2CID 162366616 . Archived from the original on 16 August 2023 . Retrieved 29 April 2021 . ^ Jarzombek, Mark (2009). "Horse Shrines in Tamil India: Reflections on Modernity" (PDF) . Future Anterior . 4 (1): 18– 36. doi : 10.1353/fta.0.0031 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 August 2022 . Retrieved 24 July 2015 . ^ " 'Hero stone' unearthed" .

The Hindu . 22 July 2006. Archived from the original on 1 October 2007 . Retrieved 5 December 2006 . ^ Swami Sivananda . "Philosophy of Idol Worship" (PDF) . Hindu Temple of Florida . Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 August 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Idol worship" . Saiva neethi . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . ^ "Tamil Virtual University" . Archived from the original on 15 August 2023 . Retrieved 15 August 2023 . ^ Nagarajan, Saraswathy (17 November 2011). "On the southern tip of India, a village steeped in the past" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 10 December 2017 . Retrieved 23 March 2017 . ^ Subramanian, T. S. (24 March 2012). "2,200-year-old Tamil-Brahmi inscription found on Samanamalai" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 1 January 2014 . Retrieved 19 January 2014 . ^ Kulke, Hermann ; Rothermund, Dietmar (2007). A History of India (4th ed.). London: Routledge . p. 105. ISBN 978-0-415-32920-0 . Archived from the original on 23 December 2023 . Retrieved 7 September 2016 . ^ Eraly, Abraham (2011).

The First Spring: The Golden Age of India . Penguin Books India. ISBN 978-0-6700-8478-4 . Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 8 February 2024 . ^ Rao, S.R. (1991). "Marine archaeological explorations of Tranquebar-Poompuhar region on Tamil Nadu coast" (PDF) . Journal of Marine Archaeology . 2 : 6. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 January 2011 . Retrieved 9 February 2024 . ^ Duraiswamy, Dayalan. Role of Archaeology on Maritime Buddhism . Archived from the original on 10 July 2024 . Retrieved 9 February 2024 . ^ Malik, Akhtar (2007). Survey of Buddhist temples and monasteries . Anmol Publications. p. 306. ISBN 978-8-12613-259-1 . ^ "Santhome Cathedral" . Government of Tamil Nadu . Archived from the original on 30 January 2023 . Retrieved 28 December 2022 . ^ Shafique Ali Khan (1985). Two Nation Theory: As a Concept, Strategy and Ideology . Royal Book Company. p. 70 . Retrieved 15 September 2013 . Nathar Wali (died in 1039) is supposed to be the earliest Muslim Sufi who dedicated his life to Islam in the south ^ Mohan, A. (2012). Utopia and the Village in South Asian Literatures . Springer Publishing . ISBN 978-1-13703-189-1 . ^ Singh, K. S. (1992). People of India: pt.1-3 Kerala . Anthropological Survey of India . ISBN 978-8-18593-899-8 . ^ Abraham, George (2020). Lanterns on the Lanes: Lit for Life . Notion Press . p. 104. ISBN 978-1-64899-659-7 . Archived from the original on 14 September 2024 . Retrieved 4 May 2021 . ^ Jean-Baptiste, Prashant More (1991). "The Marakkayar Muslims of Karikal, South India" . Journal of Islamic Studies . 2 : 25– 44. doi : 10.1093/jis/2.1.25 . PMC 355923 . PMID 15455059 . ^ Weekes, Richard V. (1984). Muslim Peoples : A World Ethnographic Survey . Bloomsbury Academic . p. 431. ISBN 978-0-313-23392-0 . ^ Wink, Andre (1990). Al-Hind: Early medieval India and the expansion of Islam, 7th-11th centuries . Brill Publishers . pp. 78– 80. ISBN 978-0-39104-173-8 . ^ Jain, Dhanesh (2003). "Sociolinguistics of the Indo-Aryan languages".

In Cardona, George; Jain, Dhanesh (eds.).

The Indo-Aryan Languages . Routledge language family series. London: Routledge . p. 57. ISBN 0-70071-130-9 . ^ More, J.B.P. (2007). Muslim identity, print culture and the Dravidian factor in Tamil Nadu . Orient Longman . ISBN 978-8-12502-632-7 . ^ Landis, Dan; Albert, Rosita D. (2012). Handbook of Ethnic Conflict: International Perspectives . Springer Science . p. 150. ISBN 978-1-4614-0447-7 . ^ Manguin, Pierre-Yves; Mani, A.; Wade, Geoff (2011). Early Interactions Between South and Southeast Asia: Reflections on Cross-cultural Exchange . Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. p. 138. ISBN 978-9-81434-510-1 . ^ Census 2001 – Statewise population by Religion . Government of India (Report). Archived from the original on 19 January 2008 . Retrieved 18 July 2010 . ^ Javier, A.G. (2014). They Do What: A Cultural Encyclopedia of Extraordinary and Exotic Customs from Around the World . Bloomsbury Publishing . ISBN 979-8-21615-549-2 . ^ Pathmanathan, S (September 1999). "The guardian deities of Sri Lanka: Skanda-Murgan and Kataragama" .

The Journal of the Institute of Asian Studies .