The production of textiles which were initially artisanal work, has grown into a vast field today that includes the production of fibres, yarns, fabrics, and various fibrous products for different domestic and industrial usages. Weaving demonstration on an 1830 handloom in the weaving museum in Leiden Textile is an umbrella term that includes various fibre-based materials, including fibres, yarns , filaments , threads , and different types of fabric .

At first, the word "textiles" only referred to woven fabrics . However, weaving is not the only manufacturing method, and many other methods were later developed to form textile structures based on their intended use. Knitting and non-woven are other popular types of fabric manufacturing.

In the contemporary world, textiles satisfy the material needs for versatile applications, from simple daily clothing to bulletproof jackets , spacesuits , doctor's gowns and technical applications like geotextiles . Textiles are divided into two groups: consumer textiles for domestic purposes and technical textiles .

In consumer textiles, aesthetics and comfort are the most important factors, while in technical textiles, functional properties are the priority.

The durability of textiles is an important property, with common cotton or blend garments (such as t-shirts) able to last twenty years or more with regular use and care. Geotextiles , industrial textiles , medical textiles , and many other areas are examples of technical textiles, whereas clothing and furnishings are examples of consumer textiles. Each component of a textile product, including fibre, yarn, fabric, processing, and finishing , affects the final product. Components may vary among various textile products as they are selected based on their fitness for purpose . Fibre is the smallest fabric component; fibres are typically spun into yarn, and yarns are used to manufacture fabrics. Fibre has a hair-like appearance and a higher length-to-width ratio.

The sources of fibres may be natural , synthetic , or both.

The techniques of felting and bonding directly transform fibres into fabric.

In other cases, yarns are manipulated with different fabric manufacturing systems to produce various fabric constructions.

The fibres are twisted or laid out to make a long, continuous strand of yarn. Yarns are then used to make different kinds of fabric by weaving, knitting, crocheting , knotting , tatting , or braiding .

After manufacturing, textile materials are processed and finished to add value, such as aesthetics, physical characteristics, and utility in certain use cases.

The manufacturing of textiles is the oldest industrial art . Dyeing , printing , and embroidery are all different decorative arts applied to textile materials. Etymology Textile The word 'textile' comes from the Latin adjective textilis , meaning 'woven', which itself stems from textus , the past participle of the verb texere , 'to weave'. Originally applied to woven fabrics , the term "textiles" is now used to encompass a diverse range of materials, including fibres, yarns , and fabrics , as well as other related items. Fabric "Fabric" redirects here. For other uses, see Fabric (disambiguation) . A "fabric" is defined as any thin, flexible material made from yarn, directly from fibres, polymeric film, foam, or any combination of these techniques. Fabric has a broader application than cloth. Fabric is synonymous with cloth, material, goods, or piece goods .

The word 'fabric' also derives from Latin, with roots in the Proto-Indo-European language . Stemming most recently from the Middle French fabrique , or "building," and earlier from the Latin fabrica ('workshop; an art, trade; a skillful production, structure, fabric'), the noun fabrica stems from the Latin faber " artisan who works in hard materials', which itself is derived from the Proto-Indo-European dhabh- , meaning 'to fit together'. Cloth Cloth merchant's shop A replica draper's shop at the Museum of Lincolnshire Life , in Lincoln, England .

Although cloth is a type of fabric, not all fabrics can be classified as cloth due to differences in their manufacturing processes, physical properties, and intended uses. Materials that are woven, knitted, tufted , or knotted from yarns are referred to as cloth, while wallpaper, plastic upholstery products, carpets, and nonwoven materials are examples of fabrics. Cloth is a flexible substance typically created through the processes of weaving, felting, or knitting using natural or synthetic materials.

The word 'cloth' derives from the Old English clað , meaning "a cloth, woven, or felted material to wrap around one's body', from the Proto-Germanic klaithaz , similar to the Old Frisian klath , the Middle Dutch cleet , the Middle High German kleit and the German kleid , all meaning 'garment'. History Textile machinery at the Cambrian Factory, Llanwrtyd , Wales in the 1940s. Main article: History of clothing and textiles Textiles themselves are too fragile to survive across millennia; the tools used for spinning and weaving make up most of the prehistoric evidence for textile work.

The earliest tool for spinning was the spindle , to which a whorl was eventually added.

The weight of the whorl improved the thickness and twist of the spun thread. Later, the spinning wheel was invented. Historians are unsure where; some say China, others India.

The precursors of today's textiles include leaves, barks, fur pelts, and felted cloths.

The Banton Burial Cloth, the oldest existing example of warp ikat in Southeast Asia, is displayed at the National Museum of the Philippines .

The cloth was most likely made by the native Asian people of northwest Romblon .

The first clothes, worn at least 70,000 years ago and perhaps much earlier, were probably made of animal skins and helped protect early humans from the elements.

At some point, people learned to weave plant fibres into textiles.

The discovery of dyed flax fibres in a cave in the Republic of Georgia dated to 34,000 BCE suggests that textile-like materials were made as early as the Paleolithic era.

The speed and scale of textile production have been altered almost beyond recognition by industrialization and the introduction of modern manufacturing techniques. However, for the main types of textiles, plain weave , twill , or satin weave , there is little difference between the ancient and modern methods. Textile industry Main article: textile industry The textile industry grew out of art and craft and was kept going by craft guilds .

In the 18th and 19th centuries, during the Industrial Revolution , it became increasingly mechanized.

In 1765, when a machine for spinning wool or cotton called the spinning jenny was invented in the United Kingdom, textile production became the first economic activity to be industrialized.

In the 20th century, science and technology were driving forces.

The textile industry exhibits inherent dynamism, influenced by a multitude of transformative changes and innovations within the domain. Textile operations can experience ramifications arising from shifts in international trade policies, evolving fashion trends, evolving customer preferences, variations in production costs and methodologies, adherence to safety and environmental regulations, as well as advancements in research and development.

The textile and garment industries exert a significant impact on the economic systems of numerous countries engaged in textile production. Naming Sample of calico printed with a six-colour machine by Walter Crum & Co., from Frederick Crace Calvert , Dyeing and Calico Printing (1878) Most textiles were called by their base-fibre generic names, their place of origin, or were put into groups based loosely on manufacturing techniques, characteristics, and designs. Bearskin (bearskin cloth) may have received its name from its "shaggy nap". "Nylon", "olefin" , and "acrylic" are generic names for some of the more commonly used synthetic fibres. Name Product Textiles named by Description Cashmere Wool fibre obtained from cashmere goats Origin Kashmir Cashmere is synonymous with the Kashmir shawl , with the term "cashmere" derived from an anglicization of Kashmir. Calico Plain weave textile material Origin Calicut The fabric originated in the southwestern Indian city of Calicut. Jaconet Lightweight cotton fabric in plain weave Origin Jagannath Puri Jaconet is an anglicization of Jagannath, where it was originally produced. Jersey A type of Knitted fabric Origin Jersey , Channel Islands Jersey fabric was produced first on Jersey in the Channel Islands. Kersey A coarse woollen cloth Origin Kersey, Suffolk The fabric is named after the town in the east of England. Paisley (design) A type of motif Design Paisley, Renfrewshire A town situated in the west central Lowlands of Scotland .

The motif originates from Iran/Persia, later moving to India with Mughals and transported by British through silk route to Scotland. Dosuti A handspun cotton cloth Characteristics A coarse and thick cotton cloth In and around the 19th century Punjab and Gujarat were famous for production of various handspun cloths. Dosuti was distinguished by the number of yarns (Do+Suti translates to 'two yarns') used to produce it. Eksuti was another variety using a single thread. Mulmul types such as āb-i-ravān (running water), Baft Hawa (woven air) Fine muslin fabric variations from Dacca in Bengal Characteristics Delicate muslin types Dacca, in the eastern Indian subcontinent, produced a wide range of handwoven and spun muslins. Baft Hawa , which means "woven air", Shabnam , which means "evening dew", and ab-i-ravan , which means "flowing water" are some poetic names for soft muslins. Nainsook A plain weave fabric with soft hand Characteristics Pleasing to the eyes Nain + Sook translates to "eye-pleasing". Swanskin A woven flannel cloth Characteristics Appears and feels like swan skin An 18th-century fabric developed at Shaftesbury . Tansukh Another type of Muslin with soft and delicate texture Characteristics Pleasing to the body Tan + Sukh translates to "body pleasing". Tansukh was a fine, soft, and delicate textured cloth.

The cloth type is mentioned in the 16th-century Mughal-time records, Ain-i-Akbari . Related terms The related words " fabric " and " cloth " and " material " are often used in textile assembly trades (such as tailoring and dressmaking ) as synonyms for textile . However, there are subtle differences in these terms in specialized usage. Material is an extremely broad term basically meaning consisting of matter , and requires context to be useful. A textile is any material made of interlacing fibres, including carpeting and geotextiles , which may not necessarily be used in the production of further goods, such as clothing and upholstery . A fabric is a material made through weaving , knitting , spreading, felting, stitching, crocheting or bonding that may be used in the production of further products, such as clothing and upholstery, thus requiring a further step of the production. Cloth may also be used synonymously with fabric , but often specifically refers to a piece of fabric that has been processed or cut. Greige goods: Textiles that are raw and unfinished are referred to as greige goods .

After manufacturing, the materials are processed and finished. Piece goods: Piece goods were textile materials sold in cut pieces as specified by the buyer. Piece goods were either cut from a fabric roll or made to a specific length, also known as yard goods. Types A baby wearing many items of soft winter clothing: headband, cap, fur-lined coat, scarf, and sweater Textiles are various materials made from fibres and yarns.

The term "textile" was originally only used to refer to woven fabrics, but today it covers a broad range of subjects. Textiles are classified at various levels, such as according to fibre origin (natural or synthetic), structure (woven, knitted, nonwoven), finish, etc. However, there are primarily two types of textiles: Consumer textiles Textiles have an assortment of uses, the most common of which are for clothing and for containers such as bags and baskets.

In the household, textiles are used in carpeting, upholstered furnishings, window shades , towels, coverings for tables, beds, and other flat surfaces, and in art. Textiles are used in many traditional hand crafts such as sewing , quilting , and embroidery . Technical textiles Technical textile is a branch of textile that focuses on the protection, safety and other functional performance attributes of textiles, unlike domestic textiles, where the primary focus is aesthetics and comfort. A technician wearing an explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) suit . Nonwoven geotextile bags are much more robust than woven bags of the same thickness. Textiles produced for industrial purposes, and designed and chosen for technical characteristics beyond their appearance, are commonly referred to as technical textiles . Technical textiles include textile structures for automotive applications, medical textiles (such as implants), geotextile (used for reinforcement of embankments), agrotextiles (textiles for crop protection ), and protective clothing (such as clothing resistant to heat, radiation, or molten metals, and clothing resistant to puncture (for example, stab-resistant or bulletproof clothing)).

In the workplace, textiles can be used in industrial and scientific processes such as filtering. Miscellaneous uses include flags, backpacks , tents , nets , cleaning rags , and transportation devices such as balloons , kites , sails , and parachutes; textiles are also used to provide strengthening in composite materials such as fibreglass and industrial geotextiles . Due to the often highly technical and legal requirements of these products, these textiles are typically tested to ensure they meet stringent performance requirements. Other forms of technical textiles may be produced to experiment with their scientific qualities and to explore the possible benefits they may have in the future. For example, threads coated with zinc oxide nanowires , when woven into fabric, have been shown capable of "self-powering nanosystems", using vibrations created by everyday actions like wind or body movements to generate energy. Significance Textiles are all around us.

The textile is a component of basic needs like food and shelter. Textiles are everywhere in our lives, from bath towels to space suits. Textiles help humans by comforting, protecting, and extending their lives. Textiles meet our clothing needs, keeping us warm in the winter and cool in the summer. There are several applications for textiles, such as medical textiles, intelligent textiles, and automotive textiles. All of them contribute to the well-being of humans. Serviceability in textiles The term "serviceability" refers to a textile product's ability to meet the needs of consumers.

The emphasis is on knowing the target market and matching the needs of the target market to the product's serviceability. Serviceability or performance in textiles is the ability of textile materials to withstand various conditions, environments, and hazards. Aesthetics, durability, comfort and safety, appearance retention, care, environmental impact, and cost are the serviceability concepts employed in structuring the material. Components Fibres, yarns, fabric construction, finishes and design are components of a textile product.

The selection of specific components varies with the intended use, therefore the fibres, yarns, and fabric manufacturing systems are selected with consideration of the required performance. Use and applications Commercial textiles/ Domestic textiles End uses Technical textiles/ Industrial purpose textiles End uses Clothing Clothing items for men, women and children. nightwear , sportswear , lingerie, undergarments , swimsuit . Accessories such as caps , umbrella , socks, gloves, and handbags. Agro-textiles Agro-textiles are used in agriculture, horticulture, aquaculture , landscape gardening and forestry . Mainly for crop protection , in crop development for instance shade nets, thermal insulation and sunscreen materials, windshield, antibird nets, covering livestock protection, suppressing weed and insect control, etc. Furnishing Upholstery , curtains , draperies , carpets , towels . Geotextile Technical textiles which are used in civil engineering, roads, airfields , railroads, embankments , retaining structures , reservoirs, canals , dams, bank protection, coastal engineering and construction site silt fences , and protection of melting glaciers. Bedding Bed sheets , khes , blankets , pillows . Automotive textile Airbags , seat belts , headliners , upholstery , car carpets, and door card . Others Shower curtains . Medical textile implants , sutures , dressings , bandages , medical gowns , face masks . Indutech This particular sector includes conveyor belts , drive belts , ropes and cordages, filtration products, glass battery separators, decatising and bolting cloth, AGM (absorption glass mat) plasma screens , coated abrasives, composite materials , printed circuit boards, printer ribbon, seals, gaskets, paper making fabrics. Other uses Textiles, textile production, and clothing were necessities of life in prehistory, intertwined with the social, economic, and religious systems. Other than clothing, textile crafts produced utilitarian, symbolic, and opulent items. Archaeological artifacts from the Stone Age and the Iron Age in Central Europe are used to examine prehistoric clothing and its role in forming individual and group identities. Source of knowledge Artifacts unearthed in various archaeological excavations informs us about the remains of past human life and their activities. Dyed flax fibres discovered in the Republic of Georgia indicate that textile-like materials were developed during the Paleolithic period . Radiocarbon dates the microscopic fibres to 36,000 years ago, when modern humans migrated from Africa. Several textile remnants, such as the Inca Empire's textile arts remnants, which embody the Incas' aesthetics and social ideals, serve as a means for disseminating information about numerous civilizations, customs, and cultures. There are textile museums that display history related to many aspects of textiles. A textile museum raises public awareness and appreciation of the artistic merits and cultural significance of the world's textiles on a local, national, and international scale.

The George Washington University Museum and Textile Museum in Washington, D.C., was established in 1925. Narrative art The Bayeux Tapestry is a rare example of secular Romanesque art .

The art work depicts the Norman Conquest of England in 1066. Decorative art Main article: Textile arts Textiles are also used for decorative art . Appliqué work of pipili is decorative art of Odisha , a state in eastern India , used for umbrellas , wall hangings, lamp shades, and bags. To make a range of decorative products, coloured cloth in the shapes of animals, birds, flowers, are sewn onto a base cloth.

The smallest component of a fabric is fibre; fibres are typically spun into yarn, and yarns are used to make fabrics. Fibres are very thin and hair-like structures.

The sources of fibres may be natural , synthetic , or both. Global consumption Global fibre production per person has increased from 8.4 kilograms in 1975 to 14.3 kilograms in 2021.

After a modest drop due to COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, global fibre output rebounded to 113 million tons in 2021. Global fibre output roughly doubled from 58 million tons in 2000 to 113 million tons in 2021 and is anticipated to reach 149 million tons in 2030.

The demand for synthetic fibres is increasing rapidly. This has numerous causes. Reasons include its low price, the demand-supply imbalance of cotton, and its versatility in design and application. Synthetic fibres accounts for 70% of global fibre use, mainly polyester.

By 2030, the synthetic fibre market will reach 98.21 billion US dollars.

From 2022 to 2030, the market is anticipated to increase by 5.1% per year. Fibre sources Natural fibres are obtained from plants, animals and minerals.

Since prehistoric times, textiles have been made from natural fibres. Natural fibres are further categorized as cellulosic, protein, and mineral. Synthetic or manmade fibres are manufactured with chemical synthesis . Semi-synthetic: A subset of synthetic or manmade fibres is semi-synthetic fibre. Rayon is a classified as a semi-synthetic fibre, made with natural polymers. Monomers are the building blocks of polymers. Polymers in fibres are of two types: additive or condensation. Natural fibres, such as cotton and wool, have a condensation polymer type, whereas synthetic fibres can have either an additive or a condensation polymer type. For example, acrylic fibre and olefin fibres have additive polymers, and nylon and polyester are condensation polymers. Types Types of fibres Natural Synthetic Semi-synthetic Cellulosic fibres (Vegetable or plant fibres) Protein fibres (Animal fibres) Mineral fibres Petroleum based Cellulose based Cotton Wool Asbestos Nylon Rayon Linen Silk Glass fibre Polyester Acetate Jute Acrylic fibre Triacetate Hemp Olefin fibre Bamboo Fibre Spandex Aramid Fibre properties Fibre properties influence textile characteristics such as aesthetics, durability, comfort, and cost. Fineness is one of the important characteristics of the fibres. They have a greater length-to-width ratio . Fibres need to be strong, cohesive, and flexible.

The usefulness of fibres are characterized on the basis of certain parameters such as strength, flexibility, and length to diameter ratio, and spinnability. Natural fibres are relatively short in length. Synthetic fibres are produced in longer lengths called filaments. Silk is the only natural fibre that is a filament.

The classification of fibres is based on their origin, derivation, and generic types. Certain properties of synthetic fibres, such as their diameter, cross section , and colour, can be altered during production. Cotton: Cotton has a long history of use in the clothing due to its favourable properties. This fibre is soft, moisture-absorbent, breathable, and is renowned for its long durability. Blends (blended textiles) Main article: Blend (textile) Fabric or yarn produced with a mixture of two or more types of different fibres , or yarns to obtain desired traits. Blending is possible at various stages of textile manufacturing . Final composition is liable for the properties of the resultant product. Natural and synthetic fibres are blended to overcome disadvantage of single fibre properties and to achieve better performance characteristics and aesthetic effects such as devoré , heather effect, cross dyeing and stripes pattern etc. Clothing woven from a blend of cotton and polyester can be more durable and easier to maintain than material woven solely from cotton. Other than sharing functional properties, blending makes the products more economical. Union or Union fabrics is the 19th century term for blended fabrics.

While it is no longer in use. Mixture or mixed cloth is another term used for blended cloths when different types of yarns are used in warp and weft sides. Blended textiles are not new. Mashru was a 16th-century fabric, is one of the earliest forms of "mixed cloth", a material composed of silk and cotton. Siamoise was a 17th-century cotton and linen material. Composition Fibre composition the fibre blend composition of mixtures of the fibres, is an important criterion to analyse the behaviour, properties such as functional aspects, and commercial classification of the merchandise.

The most common blend is cotton and polyester. Regular blended fabric is 65% polyester and 35% cotton. It is called a reverse blend if the ratio of cotton predominates—the percentage of the fibres changes with the price and required properties. Blending adds value to the textiles; it helps in reducing the cost (artificial fibres are less expensive than natural fibres) and adding advantage in properties of the final product. For instance, a small amount of spandex adds stretch to the fabrics. Wool can add warmth. Uses of different fibres Natural fibres Plant Bridal gown made from nettle fibres, probably worn by Eleonora Sophie Rantzau (1779-) at her wedding to Preben Bille-Brahe , Hvedholm Castle . National Museum of Denmark . Grass , rush , hemp , and sisal are all used in making rope .

In the first two, the entire plant is used for this purpose, while in the last two, only fibres from the plant are used. Coir ( coconut fibre) is used in making twine , and also in floormats, doormats , brushes , mattresses , floor tiles, and sacking . Straw and bamboo are both used to make hats. Straw, a dried form of grass, is also used for stuffing, as is kapok . Fibres from pulpwood trees, cotton, rice, hemp, and nettle are used in making paper. Cotton, flax , jute , hemp , modal , banana , bamboo , lotus , eucalyptus , mulberry , and sugarcane are all used in clothing. Piña ( pineapple fibre) and ramie are also fibres used in clothing, generally with a blend of other fibres such as cotton. Nettles have also been used to make a fibre and fabric very similar to hemp or flax.

The use of milkweed stalk fibre has also been reported, but it tends to be somewhat weaker than other fibres like hemp or flax.

The inner bark of the lacebark tree is a fine netting that has been used to make clothing and accessories as well as utilitarian articles such as rope. Acetate is used to increase the shininess of certain fabrics such as silks, velvets , and taffetas . Seaweed is used in the production of textiles: a water-soluble fibre known as alginate is produced and is used as a holding fibre; when the cloth is finished, the alginate is dissolved, leaving an open area. Rayon is a manufactured fibre derived from plant pulp. Different types of rayon can imitate feel and texture of silk, cotton, wool, or linen. Fibres from the stalks of plants, such as hemp, flax, and nettles, are also known as 'bast' fibres. Hemp fibre is yellowish-brown fibre made from the hemp plant.

The fibre characteristics are coarser, harsher, strong and lightweight. Hemp fibre is used primary to make twine, rope and cordage. Animal Animal textiles are commonly made from hair, fur, skin, or silk (in the case of silkworms). Wool refers to the hair of the domestic sheep or goat, which is distinguished from other types of animal hair in that the individual strands are coated with scales and tightly crimped, and the wool as a whole is coated with a wax mixture known as lanolin (sometimes called wool grease), which is waterproof and dirtproof.

The lanolin and other contaminants are removed from the raw wool before further processing. Woollen refers to a yarn produced from carded, non-parallel fibre, while worsted refers to a finer yarn spun from longer fibres which have been combed to be parallel. Other animal textiles which are made from hair or fur are alpaca wool , vicuña wool , llama wool , chiengora , shatoosh , yak fibre and camel hair , generally used in the production of coats, jackets, ponchos , blankets, and other warm coverings. Cashmere , the hair of the Indian cashmere goat , and mohair , the hair of the North African angora goat , are types of wool known for their softness. Pashmina is a type of very fine cashmere wool. Used in the production of sweaters and scarfs. Angora refers to the long, thick, soft hair of the angora rabbit . Qiviut is the fine inner wool of the muskox . Silk is an animal textile made from the fibres of the cocoon of the Chinese silkworm which is spun into a smooth fabric prized for its softness. There are two main types of the silk: 'mulberry silk' produced by the Bombyx mori , and 'wild silk' such as Tussah silk (wild silk). Silkworm larvae produce the first type if cultivated in habitats with fresh mulberry leaves for consumption, while Tussah silk is produced by silkworms feeding purely on oak leaves. Around four-fifths of the world's silk production consists of cultivated silk. Silk products include pillow covers, dresses, tops, skirts, bed sheets, curtains. Microbes Bacterial cellulose can be made from industrial organic and agricultural waste, and used as material for textiles and clothing. Mineral Asbestos and basalt fibre are used for vinyl tiles, sheeting and adhesives, "transite" panels and siding, acoustical ceilings, stage curtains, and fire blankets. Glass fibre is used in the production of ironing board and mattress covers, ropes and cables, reinforcement fibre for composite materials, insect netting, flame-retardant and protective fabric, soundproof, fireproof, and insulating fibres. Glass fibres are woven and coated with Teflon to produce beta cloth , a virtually fireproof fabric which replaced nylon in the outer layer of United States space suits since 1968. Metal fibre, metal foil, and metal wire have a variety of uses, including the production of cloth-of-gold and jewellery. Hardware cloth (US term only) is a coarse woven mesh of steel wire, used in construction. It is much like standard window screening , but heavier and with a more open weave. Minerals and natural and synthetic fabrics may be combined, as in emery cloth , a layer of emery abrasive glued to a cloth backing. Also, "sand cloth" is a US term for fine wire mesh with abrasive glued to it, employed like emery cloth or coarse sandpaper . Synthetic In the 20th century, they were supplemented by artificial fibres made from petroleum. Textiles are made in various strengths and degrees of durability, from the finest microfibre made of strands thinner than one denier to the sturdiest canvas . Synthetic textiles are used primarily in the production of clothing, as well as the manufacture of geotextiles . Synthetic fibres are those that are constructed by humans through chemical synthesis. Polyester fibre is used in all types of clothing, either alone or blended with fibres such as cotton. Aramid fibre (e.g. Twaron ) is used for flame-retardant clothing, cut-protection, and armour. Acrylic is a fibre used to imitate wools, including cashmere, and is often used in replacement of them. Nylon is a fibre used to imitate silk; it is used in the production of pantyhose . Thicker nylon fibres are used in rope and outdoor clothing. Spandex (trade name Lycra ) is a polyurethane product that can be made tight-fitting without impeding movement. It is used to make activewear , bras , and swimsuits . Olefin fibre is a fibre used in activewear, linings, and warm clothing. Olefins are hydrophobic, allowing them to dry quickly. A sintered felt of olefin fibres is sold under the trade name Tyvek . Ingeo is a polylactide fibre blended with other fibres such as cotton and used in clothing. It is more hydrophilic than most other synthetics, allowing it to wick away perspiration. Lurex is a metallic fibre used in clothing embellishment. Milk proteins have also been used to create synthetic fabric. Milk or casein fibre cloth was developed during World War I in Germany, and further developed in Italy and America during the 1930s. Milk fibre fabric is not very durable and wrinkles easily, but has a pH similar to human skin and possesses anti-bacterial properties. It is marketed as a biodegradable , renewable synthetic fibre. Carbon fibre is mostly used in composite materials, together with resin, such as carbon fibre reinforced plastic .

The fibres are made from polymer fibres through carbonization . Production methods Main articles: Textile manufacturing and Textile industry Textile manufacturing has progressed from prehistoric crafts to a fully automated industry. Over the years, there have been continuous improvements in fabric structure and design. Production methods Production method Description Inventors, inventions and milestones in progression Barkcloth Barkcloth is made by pounding bark until it is soft and flat. Bark is an older known fabric; ancient people around the world wore bark cloth daily until woven fabrics replaced it.

In Indonesia , the bark cloth is associated with the Torajan people , who made it from the fermentation of inner bark of certain local trees, mulberry and pandanus.

The Torajans used stones and wooden beaters to produce bark cloth. Barkcloth dress of Lore Bada people in Lore Valley, Poso Regency, Central Sulawesi, Indonesia. This collection of Central Sulawesi Museum was exhibited in Textile Museum Jakarta in November 2016. Felt and other nonwoven fabrics Felting is a method of manufacturing fabric directly from fibres by entangling, interlocking the fibres by mechanical action (like rubbing and pressing) and often aided by heat and moisture. Felting is another old method of fabric manufacturing.

While civilizations in the western Mediterranean improved their weaving skills, nomads in Central Asia learned how to make felt, a non-woven material, from wool. Felting involves applying pressure and friction to a mat of fibres, working and rubbing them together until the fibres become interlocked and tangled, forming a nonwoven textile. A liquid, such as soapy water, is usually added to lubricate the fibres, and to open up the microscopic scales on strands of wool. More recently, additional methods have been developed to bond fibres into nonwoven fabrics, including needle punching, adhesives, and chemical binding. Kazakh felt yurt Spunbond nonwoven fabric Weaving Weaving is a textile production method which involves interlacing a set of longer threads (called the warp ) with a set of crossing threads (called the weft ). This is done on a frame or machine known as a loom, of which there are a number of types. Some weaving is still done by hand, but the vast majority is mechanized. Handlooms: Early looms date to 5000 BC.

From antiquity until the mediaeval times, the loom improved in both Asia and Europe, despite the fact that the loom's fundamental operation remained unchanged.

In 200 BC, the Chinese invented vertical looms and pedal looms, transforming the craft into an industry.

By decreasing the worker's workload, innovative solutions improved productivity. There were harnesses and heddles to govern the movement of the warp yarn, a shuttle to transport the weft yarns, a reed to compact the cloth, and a take up roller to roll down the cloth.

By the 1st century AD, all necessary components for a loom were assembled. Power looms: John Kay invented the flying shuttle in 1734 in Bury, Lancashire. It was one of the first innovations in the cotton woven fabric industry. Samuel Crompton invented a spinning machine in 1779 that produced yarn faster than ever before. Then Edmund Cartwright invented the first power loom in 1785. Jacquard loom: The Jacquard machine was a modified version of programmable loom developed in 1804. It was developed by Joseph Marie Jacquard based on earlier inventions by Basile Bouchon (1725), Jean Baptiste Falcon (1728), and Jacques Vaucanson (1740).

The industrial revolution in the 18th century led to mass production of yarn and cloth, which led to the growth of the woven fabric part of the textile industry. Warp and weft Knitting Knitting involves interlacing loops of yarn, which are formed either on a knitting needle , needle, or on a crochet hook , together in a line.

The processes are different in that knitting has several active loops at one time, on the knitting needle waiting to interlock with another loop. Hand knitting: Though knitting was developed by Danes around 900 BC it did not reach to other civilizations until 900 AD. Europe learned to knit by hand around 1400. Three to four stockings could be knit in a week by 1450. William Lee invented a stocking frame in 1589 that could knit one stocking per day. Acceptance of Lee's invention and subsequent modifications resulted in a wide range of fabrics in Europe.

The machine knitting is separated into two main groups of production processes: warp knitting and weft knitting. Loop formation. Structure of stockinette stitch in a weft knitted fabric. Nålebinding Nålebinding involves the use of a needle to form loops of yarn, by passing the full length of yarn through each loop (unlike knitting and crocheting). Nålebinding is a precursor of crocheting and knitting. Mittens produced by nålebinding Crocheting Crocheting never involves more than one active stitch on the needle. Knitting can be performed by machine, but crochet can only be performed by hand. Crocheting was originally practised by Scottish peasants with a small, hooked needle known as a shepherd's hook. Most crochet uses one hook and works upon one stitch at a time. Crochet may be worked in circular rounds without any specialized tools, as shown here. Spread tow Spread tow is a production method where the tow fibres are spread into thin tapes, and then the tapes are woven as warp and weft. This method is mostly used for composite materials; spread tow fabrics can be made in carbon , aramid and other fibres. Braiding or plaiting Braiding or plaiting involves intertwining threads together into cloth. Braiding Knotting Knotting involves tying threads together and is used in making tatting and macrame . Lace Lace is made by interlocking threads together to create a fine fabric with open holes in the work. Lace can be made by either hand (e.g. needle lace or bobbin lace ) or machine. Bobbin lace in progress 3D Textiles Complex interlacement of yarns where the final product has not plain form as flat fabrics, but 3D form. All technologies - weft knitting, warp knitting, weaving and braiding allow production of complex products with 3D form if suitable machine configuration and pattern are used. This technologies are used for woven heart valves, composite profiles and other. Additive manufactured textile like structures Fabric manufacturing by 3D printer employs additive manufacturing, also known as additive layer manufacturing (ALM), a CAD-aided manufacturing technique that builds the object layer by layer.

The method is used in manufacturing of Auxetic textiles and in composite materials. 3D-printed outfit Important parameters in fabric selection: The primary consideration in fabric selection is the end use.

The competitive advantages of the China are low prices and abundant labor, lowered commercial obstacles, and a ready supply of raw materials. China, along with the United States and India, is a major producer of cotton. China's apparel market share has declined in recent years due to various reasons and a shift toward high-end, sophisticated products. Additionally, the investors from China made stakes in Myanmar, Vietnam, and Cambodia. Last year, its market share was 36.7%, or $161 billion, a decline of 8% year-over-year.

In other words, China lost $14 billion in garment work orders to other countries in a single year.

In 2016, Bangladesh's apparel market share was valued at $28 billion, increasing 7.69 percent from the previous year.

In 2016 the leading exporters of apparel were China ($161 billion), Bangladesh ($28 billion), Vietnam ($25 billion), India ($18 billion), Hong Kong ($16 billion), Turkey ($15 billion), and Indonesia ($7 billion). Garment exports from Bangladesh reached record high in the 2021–2022 fiscal year; China ($220,302 billion), Bangladesh ($38.70 billion), India ($8.127 billion), Pakistan ($19.33 billion). Finishing Early method of bleaching cotton and linen goods on lawns The fabric, when it leaves a loom or knitting machine, is not readily usable. It may be rough, uneven, or have flaws like skewing. Hence, it is necessary to finish the fabric. Finishing techniques enhance the value of the treated fabrics.

After manufacturing, textiles undergo a range of finishing procedures, including bleaching, dyeing, printing, as well as mechanical and chemical finishing. Coloration Textiles are often dyed , with fabrics available in almost every colour .

The dyeing process often requires several dozen gallons of water for each pound of clothing. Coloured designs in textiles can be created by weaving together fibres of different colours ( tartan or Uzbek Ikat), adding coloured stitches to finished fabric ( embroidery ), creating patterns by resist dyeing methods, tying off areas of cloth and dyeing the rest ( tie-dyeing ), drawing wax designs on cloth and dyeing in between them ( batik ), or using various printing processes on finished fabric. Woodblock printing , still used in India and elsewhere today, is the oldest of these dating back to at least 220 CE in China. Textiles are also sometimes bleached , making the textile pale or white. Colour matching In textiles, colour matching extends beyond selecting the appropriate dyestuffs or pigments and combining them in precise proportions to achieve the desired end product colour. Meeting criteria for fastness, cost, and quality is also essential. This process plays a critical role in materializing a designer's concept into an actual product. Finishes Textile finishing is the process of converting the loomstate or raw goods into a useful product, which can be done mechanically or chemically. Finishing is a broad term that refers to a variety of physical and chemical techniques and treatments that finish one stage of textile production while also preparing for the next. Textile finishing can include aspects like improving surface feel, aesthetical enhancement, and adding advanced chemical finishes. A finish is any process that transforms unfinished products into finished products. This includes mechanical finishing and chemical applications which alter the composition of treated textiles (fibre, yarn or fabric.) Since the 1990s, with advances in technologies such as permanent press process, finishing agents have been used to strengthen fabrics and make them wrinkle free. More recently, nanomaterials research has led to additional advancements, with companies such as Nano-Tex and NanoHorizons developing permanent treatments based on metallic nanoparticles for making textiles more resistant to things such as water, stains, wrinkles, and pathogens such as bacteria and fungi. Textiles receive a range of treatments before they reach the end-user.

From formaldehyde finishes (to improve crease-resistance) to biocidic finishes and from flame retardants to dyeing of many types of fabric, the possibilities are almost endless. However, many of these finishes may also have detrimental effects on the end user. A number of disperse, acid and reactive dyes, for example, have been shown to be allergenic to sensitive individuals. Further to this, specific dyes within this group have also been shown to induce purpuric contact dermatitis. Eisengarn , meaning "iron yarn" in English, is a light-reflecting, strong material invented in Germany in the 19th century. It is made by soaking cotton threads in a starch and paraffin wax solution.

The threads are then stretched and polished by steel rollers and brushes.

The result of the process is a lustrous, tear-resistant yarn which is extremely hardwearing. Finishing techniques Finishing Fabrics Brushing Carpets, rugs, velvet, velour , and velveteen , referred to as pile fabrics, are made by interlacing a secondary yarn through woven cloth, creating a tufted layer known as a nap or pile . Shearing "Shearing machine" is a machine equipped with shearing cylinder, ledger blade, fluff exhaust, and joint seam sensors.

The machine operates similarly to a lawn mower. Moleskin and velvet are sheared materials in which pile is cut to a certain level. Environmental and health impacts After the oil industry, the fashion industry is the second biggest polluter of agricultural land, which has several harmful impacts on the environment.

As the industry grows, the effect on the environment is worsening. Textile manufacturing is one of the oldest and most technologically complicated industries. This industry's fundamental strength stems from its solid manufacturing base of a diverse range of fibres/yarns ranging from natural fibres such as jute, silk, wool, and cotton, to synthetic or manufactured fibres that include polyester, viscose, nylon, and acrylic. Textile mills and their wastewater have grown in proportion to the increase in demand for textile products, generating a severe pollution concern around the world. Numerous textile industry chemicals pose environmental and health risks. Among the compounds in textile effluent, dyes are considered significant contaminants. Water pollution generated by the discharge of untreated wastewater and the use of toxic chemicals, particularly during processing, account for the majority of the global environmental concerns linked with the textile industry. Environmental impacts Clothing is necessary to meet the fundamental needs of humans. Increased population and living standards have increased the need for clothing, enhancing the demand for textile manufacturing; wet processing needs more water consumption. Conventional machinery and treatment procedures use enormous quantities of water, especially for natural fibres, which require up to 150 kg of water per kg of material.

The textile sector is accountable for a substantial number of environmental impacts. However, the discharge of untreated effluents into water bodies is responsible for the majority of environmental harm produced by the textile sector.

The textile sector is believed to use 79 trillion litres of water per year and to discharge around 20% of all industrial effluent into the environment. Reportedly, aromatic and heterocyclic compounds with colour-display and polar groups make up most of the dyes used in textile coloration processes.

The structure is more complex and stable, making it more difficult to degrade printing and dyeing wastewater.

In addition, textiles constitute a significant percentage of landfill waste.

In 2023, North Carolina State University researchers used enzymes to separate cotton from polyester in an early step towards reducing textile waste, allowing each material to be recycled. Textiles containing various kinds of plastics like polyesther, polyamide , elastan , polyacrylonitrile , aramid , polypropylene , etc. are also a significant source of environmental pollution and impose health risks through the emission of microplastics . Health impacts Many kinds of respiratory diseases, skin problems, and allergies may be caused by dyes and pigments discharged into the water.

The Textile Fiber Products Identification Act is a law that protects consumers in the United States.

The act protects producer and consumer interests by implementing labelling (required content disclosure) and advertising requirements on textile products.

The Textile Fiber Products Identification Act applies to all textile fibre products besides wool, which is governed by the Wool Product Label Number.

The law prohibits misinformation about the fibre content, misbranding, and any unfair advertising practice, as well as requires businesses to operate in a particular manner. Testing of textiles Testing occurs at various stages of the textile manufacturing process, from raw material to finished product.

The purpose of testing is to evaluate and analyse the regulatory compliance, the product's quality and performance, as well as to measure its specifications. Textile testing encompasses a wide range of methodologies, procedures, equipment, and sophisticated laboratories . Local governments and authorized organization's such as ASTM International , International Organization for Standardization , and American Association of Textile Chemists and Colorists establish standards for testing of textiles. Some examples of tests at different stages: For fibre: Fibre identification is a necessary test for determining fibre content and classifying products.

The labelling of items with their fibre content percentage is a regulatory requirement. Using microscopy , solubility, and burn tests, fibres are distinguished from one another. More fibre relating tests include fibre length, diameter, Micronaire . For yarn: Yarn count , denier , Strength, evenness. For fabric: Dimensional stability , colour fastness , thread count , G.S.M , pilling , flammability . Picture gallery Textile market on the sidewalks of Karachi , Pakistan Magnified view of a plain or tabby weave textile Fabric shop in canal town Mukalla , Yemen Late antique textile, Egyptian, now in the Dumbarton Oaks collection Mrs. Condé Nast wearing a silk Fortuny tea gown Traditional tablecloth , Maramureș , Romania Textiles made from Alpaca wool at the Otavalo Artisan Market in the Andes Mountains, Ecuador The Banton Burial Cloth, the oldest existing example of warp ikat in Southeast Asia, displayed at the National Museum of the Philippines .

The cloth was most likely made by the native Asia people of northwest Romblon . A double ikat weaving made by the Tausug people from Sulu , made of banana leaf stalk fibre ( Abacá ) Advertisement for Zepel, the trade name used to market Teflon as a fabric treatment A weaving shed of the Finlayson & Co factory in Tampere , Finland, in 1932 Textile machinery at the Cambrian Factory, Llanwrtyd , Wales, in the 1940s Cotton fibre Nylon A variety of contemporary fabrics.

From the left: evenweave cotton , velvet , printed cotton , calico , felt , satin , silk , hessian , polycotton. A textile factory in Israel, 1969 Woven tartan of Clan Campbell , Scotland Embroidered skirts by the Alfaro-Nùñez family of Cochas, Peru , using traditional Peruvian embroidery methods A modern umbrella fabric has specific requirements for colour fastness to light, water and wet rubbing, and permeability. Appliqué cross.

The Indian Ocean in the Making of Early Modern India . Routledge. p. 359. ISBN 978-1-351-99745-4 . Archived from the original on 2 June 2022 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ a b Peck, Amelia (2013). Interwoven Globe: The Worldwide Textile Trade, 1500–1800 . Metropolitan Museum of Art. p. 60. ISBN 978-1-58839-496-5 . Archived from the original on 2 June 2022 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ a b Corbman, Bernard P. (1983). Textiles: fiber to fabric . New York: Gregg Division, McGraw-Hill. pp. 2 to 8. ISBN 978-0-07-013137-8 . ^ a b Cerchia, Rossella Esther; Pozzo, Barbara (13 January 2021).

The New Frontiers of Fashion Law . MDPI. pp. 2, 3. ISBN 978-3-03943-707-8 . Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 . ^ "bearskin" . Oxford English Dictionary (online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ Caulfeild, Sophia Frances Anne (1882). "Bearskin Cloth".

The Dictionary of Needlework: An Encyclopædia of Artistic, Plain, and Fancy Needlework . London: L. Upcott Gill. p. 25 . Retrieved 16 September 2025 . Bearskin Cloth.—A coarse thick woollen cloth, with a shaggy nap, manufactured for the making of overcoats . ^ Elsasser 2005 , p. 219. ^ a b c d Boulanger, Jean-Claude (1990). Actes du XVIe Congrès international des sciences onomastiques: Québec, Université Laval, 16–22 août 1987: le nom propre au carrefour des études humaines et des sciences sociales . Presses Université Laval. p. 143. ISBN 978-2-7637-7213-4 . Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 7 June 2022 . ^ a b Humphries 1996 , p. 15. ^ Fashion, Guardian (26 September 2011). "A brief history of paisley" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 6 December 2025 . ^ Baden-Powell, Baden Henry (1872). Hand-book of the Manufactures & Arts of the Punjab: With a Combined Glossary & Index of Vernacular Trades & Technical Terms ... Forming Vol. Ii to the "Hand-book of the Economic Products of the Punjab" Prepared Under the Orders of Government . Punjab printing Company. p. 7. ^ Supplies and Disposals Year Book . 1964. pp. 74, 335, 351. Archived from the original on 7 June 2022 . Retrieved 7 June 2022 . ^ a b Weibel 1952 , p. 54. ^ King, Brenda M. (3 September 2005). Silk and Empire . Manchester University Press. pp. 61, xvi. ISBN 978-0-7190-6700-6 . ^ Harmuth, Louis (1915). Dictionary of textiles . University of California Libraries. New York, Fairchild publishing company. p. 149. ^ Sangar, S. P. (1965). "FEMALE COSTUMES IN THE SIXTEENTH AND SEVENTEENTH CENTURIES (as reflected in the contemporary Hindi literature)". Proceedings of the Indian History Congress . 27 : 243– 247. ISSN 2249-1937 . JSTOR 44140630 . ^ MATHEWS, KOLANJIKOMBIL (2017). Encyclopaedic Dictionary of Textile Terms: Four Volume Set . Woodhead Publishing India PVT. Limited. p. 690. ISBN 978-93-85059-66-7 . ^ Wingate, Isabel Barnum (1979). Fairchild's dictionary of textiles . New York: Fairchild Publications. p. 455. ISBN 978-0-87005-198-2 . ^ Blanco, A. E. (19 May 2021). Piece Goods Manual: Fabrics described; textile, knit goods, weaving terms, etc., explained; with notes on the classification of samples . Good Press. Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 27 May 2022 . ^ Keim, Brandon (13 February 2008). "Piezoelectric Nanowires Turn Fabric Into Power Source" . Wired News . CondéNet. Archived from the original on 15 February 2008 . Retrieved 13 February 2008 . ^ Yong Qin, Xudong Wang & Zhong Lin Wang (10 October 2007). "Letter/abstract: Microfibre–nanowire hybrid structure for energy scavenging". Nature . 451 (7180): 809– 813. Bibcode : 2008Natur.451..809Q . doi : 10.1038/nature06601 . PMID 18273015 . cited in "Editor's summary: Nanomaterial: power dresser" . Nature . Nature Publishing Group. 14 February 2008. Archived from the original on 15 February 2008 . Retrieved 13 February 2008 . ^ a b Kadolph 1998 , pp. 1–12. ^ a b c Abisch, Roz; Kaplan, Boche (1975). Textiles . New York: Watts. pp. 1, 2. ISBN 978-0-531-00824-9 . ^ Annapoorani, Grace S. (2018). Agro Textiles and Its Applications . Woodhead Publishing. ISBN 978-93-85059-89-6 . Archived from the original on 31 May 2022 . Retrieved 22 May 2022 . ^ "Italian glaciers tell the tale of climate change; lost 1/3rd of its volume – World News" . www.wionews.com . Archived from the original on 31 May 2022 . Retrieved 22 May 2022 . ^ Shishoo, Roshan (20 October 2008). Textile Advances in the Automotive Industry . Elsevier. ISBN 978-1-84569-504-0 . Archived from the original on 2 June 2022 . Retrieved 24 May 2022 . ^ Grömer, Karina (2016).

The Art of Prehistoric Textile Making.: The development of craft traditions and clothing in Central Europe . doi : 10.26530/oapen_604250 . ISBN 978-3-902421-94-4 . ^ "archaeology | Definition, History, Types, & Facts | Britannica" . www.britannica.com . Archived from the original on 4 July 2021 . Retrieved 27 May 2022 . ^ Phipps, Elena; Hecht, Johanna; Martín, Cristina Esteras; Martin, Cristina Esteras; N.Y.), Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York (2004).

The Colonial Andes: Tapestries and Silverwork, 1530–1830 . Metropolitan Museum of Art. p. 17. ISBN 978-1-58839-131-5 . Archived from the original on 31 May 2022 . Retrieved 22 May 2022 . ^ D.C.), Textile Museum (Washington (2003). Textile Museum Journal . Textile Museum. p. 123. Archived from the original on 31 May 2022 . Retrieved 22 May 2022 . ^ "The Textile Museum | Mission & History" . 28 April 2012. Archived from the original on 28 April 2012 . Retrieved 27 May 2022 . ^ Bernstein, David J. (1986).

The mystery of the Bayeux tapestry . London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. pp. 1– 10. ISBN 978-0-297-78928-4 . ^ King Harold II and the Bayeux Tapestry . Woodbridge, Suffolk; Rochester, NY: Boydell Press. 2005. ISBN 978-1-84383-124-2 . ^ "Facilitation of IPR Protection through Geographical Indications | Services | Textiles Committee (Ministry of Textiles, Government of India)" . 27 April 2015. Archived from the original on 27 April 2015 . Retrieved 24 May 2022 . ^ Garcia, Mark (2006). Architextiles . Wiley. p. 5. ISBN 978-0-470-02634-2 . Archived from the original on 2 June 2022 . Retrieved 24 May 2022 . ^ Willem. "Mughal Shahi Lal Dera Tent" . trc-leiden.nl . Archived from the original on 11 August 2022 . Retrieved 24 May 2022 . ^ Johnson, Marion (October 1980). "Cloth as Money: the Cloth Strip Currencies of Africa". Textile History . 11 (1): 193– 202. doi : 10.1179/004049680793691185 . ^ Kobayashi, Kazuo (2019). "Guinées in the Lower Senegal River: A Consumer-Led Trade in the Early Nineteenth Century". Indian Cotton Textiles in West Africa . pp. 81– 125. doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-18675-3_3 . ISBN 978-3-030-18674-6 . ^ Br¿ns, Cecilie (30 November 2016). Gods and Garments: Textiles in Greek Sanctuaries in the 7th to the 1st Centuries BC . Oxbow Books. p. 51. ISBN 978-1-78570-358-4 . Archived from the original on 9 April 2023 . Retrieved 3 December 2022 . ^ a b Smith 1982 , pp. 64, 69. ^ "Preferred Fiber and Materials" . Textile Exchange . Archived from the original on 19 November 2022 . Retrieved 19 November 2022 . ^ "Manmade Fibre Industry Outlook 2022" . Textile Magazine, Textile News, Apparel News, Fashion News . 26 September 2022. Archived from the original on 19 November 2022 . Retrieved 19 November 2022 . ^ Markets, Research and (21 September 2022). "Global Synthetic Fiber Market Report 2022: Shifting Fashion Trends Coupled With the Rising Urban Population Creates Opportunities" . GlobeNewswire News Room (Press release). Archived from the original on 19 November 2022 . Retrieved 19 November 2022 . ^ a b Kadolph 1998 , p. 18. ^ Smith 1982 , p. 70. ^ a b Smith 1982 , p. . ^ Smith 1982 , p. 68. ^ Smith 1982 , p. 69. ^ Smith 1982 , p. 66. ^ Barnett, Anne (1997). Examining Textiles Technology . Heinemann Educational. p. 51. ISBN 978-0-435-42104-5 . ^ Gulrajani, M. L. (1981). Blended Textiles: Papers of the 38th All India Textile Conference, an International Conference, November 18–20th ... Bombay . Textile Association. Archived from the original on 27 January 2022 . Retrieved 22 November 2020 . ^ Montgomery, Florence M. (1984). Textiles in America 1650–1870: a dictionary based on original documents, prints and paintings, commercial records, American merchants' papers, shopkeepers' advertisements, and pattern books with original swatches of cloth . New York; London: Norton. p. 369. ISBN 978-0-393-01703-8 . ^ Kadolph 1998 , p. 402. ^ Fairchild's dictionary of textiles . New York: Fairchild Publications. 1959. p. 355. ^ Indian Journal of History of Science . National Institute of Sciences of India. 1982. p. 120. ^ Montgomery, Florence M. (1984). Textiles in America 1650–1870: a dictionary based on original documents, prints and paintings, commercial records, American merchants' papers, shopkeepers' advertisements, and pattern books with original swatches of cloth . New York; London: Norton. p. 347. ISBN 978-0-393-01703-8 . ^ Kumar, Raj; Srivastava, H.C. (June 1980). "Analysis of Fiber Blends. Part II. Determination of Blend Composition by Moisture Regain". Textile Research Journal . 50 (6): 359– 362. doi : 10.1177/004051758005000607 . ^ "ASTM D629 - 15 Standard Test Methods for Quantitative Analysis of Textiles" . www.astm.org . Archived from the original on 18 May 2021 . Retrieved 24 May 2021 . ^ Rowell, R.M. (2014). "The use of biomass to produce bio-based composites and building materials". Advances in Biorefineries . pp. 803– 818. doi : 10.1533/9780857097385.2.803 . ISBN 978-0-85709-521-3 . ^ Mechanical Engineering . American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 1956. ^ Franck, R. R. (29 October 2001). Silk, Mohair, Cashmere and Other Luxury Fibres . Elsevier. p. 230. ISBN 978-1-85573-759-4 . Archived from the original on 27 January 2022 . Retrieved 23 May 2021 . ^ Joseph, Marjory L. (1992). Joseph's introductory textile science . Fort Worth: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College Publishers. p. 58. ISBN 978-0-03-050723-6 . ^ Langan, John; Anton, Harley F.; Bader, Carol H. (1992). Improving Reading Comprehension Skills . Townsend Press. ISBN 978-0-944210-54-3 . ^ Stauffer, Jeanne (2004). Sewing Smart with Fabric . DRG Wholesale. p. 139. ISBN 978-1-59217-018-0 . Archived from the original on 27 January 2022 . Retrieved 23 May 2021 . ^ Mendelson, Cheryl (17 May 2005). Home Comforts: The Art and Science of Keeping House . Simon and Schuster. p. 264. ISBN 978-0-7432-7286-5 . Archived from the original on 27 January 2022 . Retrieved 23 May 2021 . ^ The Atlas of the World Commerce Maps, Text and Diagrams . Newnes. 1907. p. xli. Archived from the original on 28 May 2023 . Retrieved 28 May 2023 . ^ Thalmann, B. (30 August 2022). "Tiare Hawaiʻi Is Making Ultra-Cute Dresses from Pineapple, Banana and Eucalyptus" . Honolulu Magazine . Retrieved 1 February 2024 . ^ Hendrickx, Katrien (2007).

The Origins of Banana-fibre Cloth in the Ryukyus, Japan . Leuven University Press. p. 188. ISBN 978-90-5867-614-6 . Archived from the original on 27 March 2018. ^ Kadapa-Bose, S. (15 September 2021). "Banana Saris, Lotus Shawls, Bamboo Jeans: How Desi Fashion Is Going Green!" . the better india . Retrieved 1 February 2024 . ^ Anstey, H. (Helen) (1997).

The Anstey Weston guide to textile terms . Great Britain: Weston. ISBN 978-0-9530130-0-5 . ^ Cohen, Allen (11 November 2011). J.J. Pizzuto's Fabric Science (tenth ed.). Fairchild Books. p. 41. ISBN 978-1-60901-380-6 . ^ Vatin Nikolai Ivanovich, Alexandr A. Berlin, Roman Joswik (2015). Engineering Textiles . Apple Academic Press. p. 142. ISBN 978-1-4987-0603-2 . Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 19 March 2023 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Arno Cahn, Edward C. Leonard, Edward George Perkins (1999). Proceedings of the World Conference on Palm and Coconut Oils for the 21st Century . AOCS Press. p. 115. ISBN 978-0-935315-99-8 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Trevisan, Adrian. "Cocoon Silk: A Natural Silk Architecture" . Sense of Nature. Archived from the original on 7 May 2012. ^ "Why Nanollose is on the verge of a major market opportunity with its fibre conversion technology, as global fashion brands come knocking" . 14 February 2022. Archived from the original on 15 December 2022 . Retrieved 26 September 2022 . ^ Apollo Accident, Hearing ... 1968. pp. 469, 557. Archived from the original on 28 May 2023 . Retrieved 28 May 2023 . ^ Hammerskog, Paula; Wincent, Eva (2009). Swedish Knits: Classic and Modern Designs in the Scandinavian Tradition . Skyhorse Publishing Inc. p. 32 . ISBN 978-1-60239-724-8 . acrylic fiber used to imitate wools. ^ Euroflax Industries Ltd. "Euroflaxx Industries (Import of Textiles)" Archived 13 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ Fonte, Diwata (23 August 2005). "Milk-fabric clothing raises a few eyebrows" .

The Orange County Register . Archived from the original on 1 May 2015 . Retrieved 21 October 2009 . ^ Birrell 1973 , p. . ^ Veys, Fanny Wonu (26 January 2017). Unwrapping Tongan Barkcloth: Encounters, Creativity and Female Agency . Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4742-8331-1 . ^ a b c d e Kadolph 1998 , p. 245. ^ Warming, Wanda (1981).

The world of Indonesian textiles . Tokyo; New York: Kodansha International. p. 56. ISBN 978-0-87011-432-8 . ^ a b c Smith 1982 , p. 5. ^ Birrell 1973 , pp. 1–14. ^ "loom | weaving | Britannica" . www.britannica.com . Archived from the original on 13 July 2022 . Retrieved 1 June 2022 . ^ a b Smith 1982 , p. 6. ^ "John Kay | British engineer and inventor | Britannica" . www.britannica.com . Archived from the original on 18 March 2022 . Retrieved 1 June 2022 . ^ Smith 1982 , p. 10. ^ Hammond, J. L. (John Lawrence); Hammond, Barbara Bradby (1919).

The skilled labourer, 1760–1832 . University of California Libraries. London, New York : Longmans, Green and co. p. 51. ^ a b Rowe, Ann Pollard (1997). Looping and Knitting . Washington, D.C.: The Textile Museum. p. 2. ^ Smith 1982 , p. 8. ^ Frances Lambert (1844). My crochet sampler . Oxford University. p. 12. ^ Collier, Billie J. (2009). Understanding textiles . Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Pearson Prentice Hall. p. 543. ISBN 978-0-13-118770-2 . ^ Birrell 1973 , p. 279. ^ Lyle, Dorothy Siegert (1982). Modern textiles . New York: Wiley. p. 474. ISBN 978-0-471-07805-0 . ^ Hu, Hong; Zhang, Minglonghai; Liu, Yanping (11 July 2019). Auxetic Textiles . Woodhead Publishing. ISBN 978-0-08-102212-2 . Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 27 May 2022 . ^ a b Smith 1982 , p. 18. ^ Humphries 1996 , p. 4. ^ Smith 1982 , p. 23. ^ "India overtakes Germany and Italy, is new world No. 2 in textile exports" .

The Times of India . 3 June 2014. Archived from the original on 15 February 2015 . Retrieved 3 February 2015 . ^ "India world's second largest textiles exporter: UN Comtrade" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 31 May 2022 . Retrieved 31 May 2022 . ^ "Largest textile exporting countries in 2019" . Statista . Archived from the original on 31 May 2022 . Retrieved 31 May 2022 . ^ "World cotton production by country 2019" . Statista . Archived from the original on 17 April 2020 . Retrieved 31 May 2022 . ^ Mirdha, Refayet Ullah (11 August 2017). "Exporters hardly grab orders diverted from China" .

The Daily Star . Archived from the original on 23 May 2022 . Retrieved 31 May 2022 . ^ Yusuf, Anik (12 March 2023). "Garment Exports in Bangladesh Reached Record High in 2021–2022 Fiscal Year" . TextileTuts . Archived from the original on 15 March 2023 . Retrieved 15 March 2023 . ^ Green Inc. Blog "Cutting Water Use in the Textile Industry." Archived 24 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine The New York Times . 21 July 2009. 28 July 2009. ^ a b Becker, Doreen (2016). "Color Matching". Color Trends and Selection for Product Design . pp. 183– 184. doi : 10.1016/B978-0-323-39395-9.00038-4 . ISBN 978-0-323-39395-9 . ^ Hollen, Norma R.; Hollen, Norma R. Textiles (1988). Textiles . New York: Macmillan. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-02-367530-0 . ^ "What makes fabric "wrinkle-free"? Is it the weave or a special type of fiber?" . Ask.yahoo.com. 15 March 2001. Archived from the original on 17 January 2012 . Retrieved 4 December 2011 . ^ "The Materials Science and Engineering of Clothing" . Tms.org. Archived from the original on 21 January 2012 . Retrieved 4 December 2011 . ^ Lazarov, A (2004). "Textile dermatitis in patients with contact sensitization in Israel: A 4-year prospective study". Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology . 18 (5): 531–7b. doi : 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2004.00967.x . PMID 15324387 . ^ Lazarov, A; Cordoba, M; Plosk, N; Abraham, D (2003). "Atypical and unusual clinical manifestations of contact dermatitis to clothing (textile contact dermatitis): Case presentation and review of the literature". Dermatology Online Journal . 9 (3): 1. doi : 10.5070/D30KD1D259 . PMID 12952748 . ^ Industriegeschichte aus dem Bergischen land Archived 14 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine (in German). (Accessed: 27 November 2016) ^ WDR digit project. Eisengarnfabrikation in Barmen . Archived 28 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine (Video (16 min) in German). (Accessed: 27 November 2016). ^ Elsasser 2005 , p. 196. ^ Choudhury, A. K. Roy (9 January 2006). Textile Preparation and Dyeing . Science Publishers. p. 138. ISBN 978-1-57808-404-3 . Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2022 . ^ Elsasser 2005 , p. 197. ^ Denny, Grace G. (Grace Goldena) (1923). Fabrics and how to know them;definitions of fabrics, practical textile tests, classification of fabrics .

The Library of Congress. Philadelphia, London, J.B. Lippincott Company. p. 103. ^ Gupta, Richa; Kushwaha, Anamika; Dave, Dushyant; Mahanta, Niva Rana (2022). "Waste management in fashion and textile industry: Recent advances and trends, life-cycle assessment, and circular economy". Emerging Trends to Approaching Zero Waste . pp. 215– 242. doi : 10.1016/B978-0-323-85403-0.00004-9 . ISBN 978-0-323-85403-0 . ^ Khan, Sana; Malik, Abdul (2014). "Environmental and Health Effects of Textile Industry Wastewater". Environmental Deterioration and Human Health . pp. 55– 71. doi : 10.1007/978-94-007-7890-0_4 . ISBN 978-94-007-7889-4 . ^ Muthu, Subramanian Senthilkannan (26 November 2018). Water in Textiles and Fashion: Consumption, Footprint, and Life Cycle Assessment . Woodhead Publishing. ISBN 978-0-08-102654-0 . Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 7 January 2023 . ^ van der Walt, G. H. J.; van Rensburg, N. J. J. (March 1986). "Low-Liquor Dyeing and Finishing". Textile Progress . 14 (2): 1– 50. doi : 10.1080/00405168608688900 . ^ Bhatia, S.C. (2017). Devraj, Sarvesh (ed.). Pollution Control in Textile Industry . doi : 10.1201/9781315148588 . ISBN 978-1-351-37306-7 . ^ Zhu, Lisha; Chen, Bilin; Liu, Junran; Chen, Shuang; Zhang, Ying; Wang, Xiaopeng; Wang, Laili (19 October 2022). "Assessing baseline water footprints of natural fiber textile products in China". Journal of Cleaner Production . 379 134747. Bibcode : 2022JCPro.37934747Z . doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.134747 . ^ Körlü, Ayşegül (2019). Textile Industry and Environment . BoD – Books on Demand. ISBN 978-1-83880-027-7 . ^ Oleniacz, Laura (20 March 2023). "Researchers Separate Cotton From Polyester in Blended Fabric" . North Carolina State University. Archived from the original on 12 April 2023 . Retrieved 12 April 2023 . ^ Sajn, Nikolina (2019). "Environmental Impact of the Textile and Clothing Industry: What Consumers Need to Know" (PDF) . European Parliament . European Parliamentary Research Service. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 August 2025 . Retrieved 19 May 2025 . ^ Scheman, AJ; Carroll, PA; Brown, KH; Osburn, AH (1998). "Formaldehyde-related textile allergy: An update" . Contact Dermatitis . 38 (6): 332– 6. doi : 10.1111/j.1600-0536.1998.tb05769.x . PMID 9687033 . ^ Alaee, M (September 2003). "An overview of commercially used brominated flame retardants, their applications, their use patterns in different countries/regions and possible modes of release". Environment International . 29 (6): 683– 689. Bibcode : 2003EnInt..29..683A . doi : 10.1016/S0160-4120(03)00121-1 . PMID 12850087 . ^ US EPA, OCSPP (29 April 2015). "Chemicals under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA)" . www.epa.gov . Archived from the original on 18 January 2010 . Retrieved 24 July 2021 . ^ Betts, Kellyn S. (2007). "Perfluoroalkyl Acids: What Is the Evidence Telling Us?" . Environmental Health Perspectives . 115 (5): A250– A256. Bibcode : 2007EnvHP.115.a250B . doi : 10.1289/ehp.115-a250 . ISSN 0091-6765 . PMC 1867999 . PMID 17520044 . ^ "Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA): 1. What is PFOA and what is it used for?" . www.greenfacts.org . Archived from the original on 9 July 2021 . Retrieved 1 July 2021 . ^ Hays, Hannah L.; Mathew, Dana; Chapman, Jennifer (2021), "Fluorides and Fluorocarbons Toxicity" , StatPearls , Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing, PMID 28613550 , archived from the original on 11 August 2021 , retrieved 1 July 2021 ^ "Brominated Flame retardants in the Environment" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 July 2021 . Retrieved 1 July 2021 . ^ Ermini, Maria Laura; Voliani, Valerio (27 April 2021). "Antimicrobial Nano-Agents: The Copper Age" . ACS Nano . 15 (4): 6008– 6029. Bibcode : 2021ACSNa..15.6008E . doi : 10.1021/acsnano.0c10756 . ISSN 1936-0851 . PMC 8155324 . PMID 33792292 . ^ AshaRani, P. V.; Low Kah Mun, Grace; Hande, Manoor Prakash; Valiyaveettil, Suresh (24 February 2009). "Cytotoxicity and Genotoxicity of Silver Nanoparticles in Human Cells" . ACS Nano . 3 (2): 279– 290. Bibcode : 2009ACSNa...3..279A . doi : 10.1021/nn800596w . PMID 19236062 . ^ Kadolph (2009). Textiles . Pearson Education. p. 433. ISBN 978-81-317-2570-2 . Archived from the original on 22 May 2022 . Retrieved 22 May 2022 . ^ a b Saville, B. P. (8 January 1999). Physical Testing of Textiles . Elsevier. pp. 1 to 24. ISBN 978-1-84569-015-1 . Archived from the original on 9 April 2023 . Retrieved 27 May 2022 . ^ a b Hu, J. (9 September 2008). Fabric Testing . Elsevier. pp. 1 to 15. ISBN 978-1-84569-506-4 . Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 27 May 2022 . ^ Kadolph, Sara J. (2007). Textiles . Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Pearson Prentice Hall. pp. 33, 34. ISBN 978-0-13-118769-6 . ^ Saville, B.P. (1999). "Fibre dimensions". Physical Testing of Textiles . pp. 44– 76. doi : 10.1533/9781845690151.44 . ISBN 978-1-85573-367-1 . ^ Houck, M. M. (30 January 2009). Identification of Textile Fibers . Elsevier. ISBN 978-1-84569-565-1 . Archived from the original on 5 March 2023 . Retrieved 27 May 2022 . ^ Doria-archive of the Finnish National Library ^ Art-Gourds.com Archived 2008-10-13 at the Wayback Machine Traditional Peruvian embroidery production methods ^ "Textile Doll" . Walters Art Museum site . Sources Birrell, Verla Leone (1973).