The US military stated that it used B-2 stealth bombers , as well as B-1 Lancers and B-52 Stratofortresses , to strike fortified ballistic missile facilities inside Iran.

At 06:45 UTC, the Israeli Air Force began an unprecedented wave of decapitation strikes . Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei and several high officials (attending three meetings at his residential compound) were killed, as were members of his family.

The United States Navy , United States Air Force and United States Marine Corps focused primarily on command-and-control infrastructure, missiles, UAV sites, and radar installations.

The Fars News Agency and CNN reported more explosions across other cities in Iran, including Qom , Kermanshah , Isfahan , and Karaj .

In Tehran, missile strikes were reported to have occurred on University Street, in the Jomhouri area, and in the northern Seyed Khandan area.

At 07:15 UTC, The Shajareh Tayyebeh girls' elementary school in Minab , Iran, was struck by a missile. Iranian media reported 180 killed. A sports hall in Lamerd was bombed during a girls' practice, killing at least 18 civilians, according to witnesses and Iranian state media.

The IRGC reported that the port city of Bushehr had also been struck; however, it was unclear whether the nuclear reactor had sustained any damage. Rafael Mariano Grossi, the UN nuclear watchdog chief stated that no evidence has been found that nuclear facilities have been hit from these attacks. Damaged residential area in Lamerd , southwest Iran, after a reported missile attack targeting local infrastructure Israel warned Iranian civilians residing near military industries and infrastructure to evacuate immediately, stating "Your presence in these areas puts your life at risk." Low-cost one-way attack drones (reverse-engineered from the Iranian Shahed 136 ) of Task were used for the first time in combat.

The attacks also used about 200 Israeli fighter jets, in the largest combat sortie in Israel's history, and the newly developed Black Sparrow air-launched ballistic missile, fired from F-15s. A spokesperson for the Iraqi Popular Mobilization Forces says that two of its fighters had been killed while three more had been injured during strikes in Jurf al-Sakhar , south of Baghdad . Iranian strikes Beginning at 09:05 UTC, Iran launched ballistic missiles towards Israel and several Gulf states in retaliation to the American and Israeli strikes.

At 09:26 UTC, a missile struck the USN Fifth Fleet service center in Bahrain .

At 10:15 UTC, missile strikes were confirmed in Israel.

The IDF estimated that about 170 ballistic missiles had been launched by Iran. Strikes were reported in Haifa and Tel Aviv . A strike on a residential area in Tel Aviv killed a civilian woman in her forties and injured 27 others.

The IRGC said that Iran had targeted four US bases in the Middle East: Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar; Ali Al Salem Air Base in Kuwait (which also hosted Italian soldiers); Al Dhafra Air Base in the UAE; and the US Navy Fifth Fleet headquarters in Bahrain. Bahrain activated air-raid sirens to warn of an Iranian attack on US military bases within the nation, with Arabic media saying explosions and smoke were seen in the capital, Manama . Drone attacks and strikes in the UAE Explosions were reported at Kuwait International Airport and Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates . There were missile and drone attacks on Kuwait. Saudi Arabia confirmed that there had been Iranian attacks on Riyadh and Eastern Province . It claimed to have successfully intercepted Iranian attacks aimed at those areas and said that the Kingdom will "take all necessary measures" to defend itself, "including the option of responding to aggression". Residential areas of Dubai in the proximity of the Burj Khalifa , Dubai Marina and the Dubai Palm were hit by strikes, setting the Fairmont The Palm hotel on fire and causing four injuries; a residential building on the outskirts of Doha was also hit. Local sources said Iran used Shahed drones , which are among the weapons most used by Iran and its proxies, including Hamas and Hezbollah.

The UAE said that it had intercepted a "new wave" of Iranian missiles and that "fragments from the interceptions" had fallen in Abu Dhabi and Dubai, causing damage to Burj Al Arab . Strikes on Kuwait International Airport caused several undefined injuries.

In Bahrain, during the evening a tower in a residential area was reported to be hit by an Iranian drone.

The first four US soldiers killed during the war The UAE stated that it had successfully intercepted a number of Iranian missiles and that one Asian national had been killed by interceptor debris which had fallen on a residential area. Qatar says that it had intercepted at least two waves of missile attacks, stating that no casualties or property damage had been reported.

In the Kurdistan Region of Iraq , Iranian aerial attacks targeted infrastructure hosting US military and civilian personnel, including Erbil International Airport and the US Consulate General in Erbil . According to local media reports, most missiles and drones were intercepted. Jordan said that its military had shot down two Iranian ballistic missiles targeting its territory and that it had handled 54 reports of falling debris that caused material damage but no casualties. Other developments Rescuers and residents searching through the rubble of the Minab girls' elementary school , destroyed by the United States Israel also conducted coordinated cyberattacks on Iranian infrastructure, media, and phone apps with messages calling on Iranians to rise up against their government.

The popular BadeSaba Calendar prayer app, with over 5 million downloads, was compromised in the attack, being hacked early that morning to broadcast push notifications in Persian urging military personnel and citizens to defect, lay down weapons, and join opposition forces with messages such as "Help has arrived" and "It's time for reckoning." Israel declared a state of emergency , citing expectation of an Iranian attack. Sirens blared in Israel as the government warned its citizens to remain in protected areas.

The Israeli Ministry of Health moved its hospital operations underground. Israel called up 20,000 reservists in addition to the 50,000 already on duty.

After the missile and drone attacks on Kuwait, its foreign ministry summoned Mohammad Toutounchi, Iran's ambassador in Kuwait.

During the American-Israeli attacks on a primary school in Minab (Iran), 6 of the killed ones were gymnasts, including: Reza Habashi, Arina Arabkish, Atena Ahmadzadeh, Makan Nasiri , and Araz Ahmadizadeh. 1 March US–Israeli attacks in Iran HRANA reported 72 strikes in 20 provinces, and at least 6 civilians killed and 4 injured. Targets hit included 15 military or security bases and facilities, 7 pieces of civilian infrastructure, 5 hospitals and emergency bases and two residential/educational facilities. Israel executed another wave of strikes against Iran, aiming at central Tehran.

The USAF flew B-2 Bombers to attack hardened ballistic missile facilities with 2,000 pound bombs. USN F/A-18s and USMC F-35s, aided by Tomahawk missiles were also employed along with Lucas drones . CENTCOM declared that it was instructed to "dismantle the Iranian regime's security apparatus." CENTCOM declared that it was instructed to "dismantle the Iranian regime's security apparatus." Israel and the United States launched strikes against targets in Tehran, Sanandaj, and military and strategic locations including command centers and missile sites.

The Israel Defense Forces says that it bombed an F-4 and an F-5 fighter jet preparing to take off from a runway, and the HQ-9 B system around Tehran was inactivated.

The Tehran Revolutionary Court was bombed and destroyed. Explosions are also reported near the Azadi Stadium , Azadi Square , and Milad Tower .

The Iranian Red Crescent Society reported explosions near hospitals in Tehran , as well as near its Peace Building.

The IDF declared that it had levelled Iran's internal security services' Thar-Allah Headquarters . Mohammad Baseri , an official in the ministry of intelligence, and Gholamreza Rezaian , the head of the intelligence department of FARAJA police, were both killed in strikes on Iran.

At least 5 people were killed by strikes on residential areas in the Absardar region. Iranian attacks Iran launched retaliatory missile and drone strikes against Israel, UAE, Qatar, Kuwait, Bahrain, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia. Iran claimed to have shot down an American MQ-9 Reaper drone.

The IRGC claimed that it struck USS Abraham Lincoln with four missiles, which was later denied by a US official.

On 1 or 2 March, Iran struck the radar bases for US THAAD missile defense systems in Jordan, the UAE and Saudi Arabia, destroying at least one of them. An Iranian missile breached Israeli defences and hit a synagogue and homes in Beit Shemesh , killing nine people and injuring 65. Towards the end of the day, an Iranian ballistic missile hit an area of Jerusalem , causing property damage in the surrounding road, damaging a civilian vehicle and wounding six people. Missiles from Iran were fired at Fifth Fleet headquarters in Bahrain. An Iranian drone hit the Crowne Plaza Hotel in Manama, Bahrain , causing a fire. Witnesses saw smoke from missile intercepts over Dubai and dark plumes rising from the Port of Jebel Ali , United Arab Emirates.

In Abu Dhabi a drone was intercepted near the Etihad Towers complex, near the Israeli embassy. Upon being intercepted its debris damaged the towers and caused minor injuries to a woman and her child.

The French naval base Camp de la Paix was reportedly struck by Iran. Two Iranian drones targeted a warehouse at Al-Salam Naval Base causing a fire in two containers storing general materials. Around 02:30 UTC, an Amazon Web Services data center within the UAE was "impacted by objects that struck" it, resulting in "sparks and fire". Reuters reported that this resulted in a complete power cut and shutdown of the center with the involvement of local fire department crews, leading to a temporary connectivity outage of the availability zone impacted.

During drone operations in the Strait of Hormuz, the port of Duqm in Oman was reportedly hit by two drones, injuring one expatriate worker. Oman's Maritime Security Centre confirmed that an oil tanker which was Palau -flagged, named Skylight , had been targeted 5 nautical miles (9.3 km) north of the port of Khasab , causing four injuries amongst the Indian-Iranian crew present on the vessel.

The Marshall Islands -flagged tanker MKD VYOM was damaged after being struck off the coast of Oman, killing one crew member.

As a result of the conflict and higher risk to ships, 150 freight ships, including many oil tankers, stalled behind the strait. Iranian attacks killed one person and injured 32 in Kuwait. UK military officials said an RAF Typhoon shot down an Iranian drone bound for Qatari airspace.

At about 22:00 UTC: a series of loud blasts were recorded in Doha, and continued to be heard hours later. Riyadh was again hit by direct strikes. A Saudi oil refinery was closed after being targeted by Iranian drones. Around 15:30 UTC, Saudi Arabia claimed that it had shot down missiles fired at Prince Sultan Airbase and King Khalid International Airport . An explosion occurred near the Erbil Airport after an attack by Iraqi militia drones. Debris from an unidentified missile fell in Ain Tarma , Syria, causing some damage and injuries. Around 00:20 UTC, the Royal Air Force station at Akrotiri , Cyprus, was targeted by a suspected drone strike, setting off air raid sirens across Akrotiri and Dhekelia . Five drones are reportedly intercepted although one managed to hit the airfield, causing minor damage.

The British military automated alert system stated that there was an "ongoing security threat", and the UK Ministry of Defence claimed that "the base has responded" to the attack. This was later confirmed by Cypriot authorities.

The drones were launched before the UK allowed the US to use its military bases for operations against Iran. UK defence secretary John Healey said that he did not believe they were under attack. Defence Minister of Cyprus Vasilis Palmas denied that missiles were launched at Cyprus, and Prime Minister Keir Starmer affirmed this. Other developments Iran's top security official, Ali Larijani , announced a temporary leadership council after the death of Ali Khamenei . He warned "secessionist groups" of severe consequences if they take action. Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman of Saudi Arabia authorized military force against further Iranian incursions. To avert further Iranian strikes, the E3 (the UK, France, and Germany) resolved to back, if needed, "proportionate military defensive measures" against drones and ballistic missiles. British prime minister Keir Starmer announces approval of US use of British bases for "defensive" strikes on Iran.

The EU announced the expansion of Operation Aspides in response to increased requests for protection from commercial vessels. State media reported gatherings in Enqelab Square , in Tehran, Iran, on 1 March.

The spokesperson for the Iraqi prime minister condemned the assassination of Ali Khamenei and declared three days of mourning for him. 2 March A US sailor signals a test for a catapult on the flight deck of the world's largest aircraft carrier, USS Gerald R. Ford , while operating in the Eastern Mediterranean Sea in support of Operation Epic Fury, 2 March 2026. US–Israeli attacks in Iran The Iranian Red Crescent reported 555 people killed. Israel launched strikes on targets in Tehran and Sanandaj, hitting military and strategic locations including command centers and missile sites. Satellite images taken by Vantor on 1 and 2 March were made public, which showed that Iran's Natanz Nuclear Facility in Isfahan , Iran, had sustained damage. Subsequently, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) confirmed that satellite imagery showed that entrance buildings at Natanz were damaged, but no radiological consequence was expected and no additional impact had been detected at the fuel enrichment plant itself.

The Khatam-al-Anbia and Gandhi hospitals in Tehran were hit by strikes.

The USAF hit military aircraft and drone launchers, including multiple F-14 Tomcats at airbases across Iran.

The IDF said that it hit dozens of command sites and other targets at night in Tehran, including ten belonging to the Ministry of Intelligence and one belonging to the Quds Force .

Later attacks hit the Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting headquarters in Evin , Tehran. According to Al Arabiya, Israeli special forces and Mossad operatives carried out a ground operation inside Iran; no details of the operation were reported. Iranian attacks Iran launched more strikes against the Gulf States. Explosions were reported in Dubai, Abu Dhabi, and Doha. Smoke rose from the US embassy in Kuwait , which was subsequently closed indefinitely. According to Kuwait News Agency, an oil refinery was hit by shrapnel. Iran carried out attacks targeting energy infrastructure in Qatar. Iranian drones struck Qatar's liquefied natural gas (LNG) facilities, halting production.

In addition, missiles and drones were launched at sites in Qatar, including the Al Udeid Air Base and industrial facilities. Qatari forces said they intercepted many of these. US-flagged tanker Stena Imperative was hit by projectiles off Bahrain, causing a fire that was extinguished.

In Bahrain, sirens had sounded across the country. Falling debris from an intercepted missile on a "foreign ship" in Salman industrial zone resulted in the death of a worker and serious injuries to two others. An Iranian strike targeted Mina Salman port, causing a fire. UAE officials claimed to have downed 148 Iranian drones, nine ballistic missiles, and half a dozen cruise missiles. A refining facility was damaged in Aramco 's Ras Tanura in Saudi Arabia, causing a contained fire. It was initially believed to be caused by a drone attack, but Saudi officials stated it was debris from an intercepted Iranian missile, and Iran denied it had targeting the facility. All staff members at the US–Jordanian embassy were evacuated "due to a threat". Two drones targeted the US Victory Base near Baghdad International Airport , one of which reportedly struck the base. There were reports of explosions in Erbil , Kurdistan Region , Iraq. A pro-Iran group called the " Guardians of the Blood Brigade " stated they were behind these two attacks, and claimed they were in retaliation for Khamenei's assassination.

The Islamic Resistance in Iraq claimed responsibility for over 23 drone strikes on US assets in Erbil.

In Cyprus, Paphos International Airport was evacuated upon the detection of a foreign unidentified object in the sky, and at the same time sirens sounded once again at Akrotiri base upon the detection of a possible threat.

Later on the Cypriot government confirmed that the objects were two drones which were intercepted without causing any damages.

After the incident, Greece announced that they would deploy frigates and F-16s to defend Cyprus from any further strikes by Iran.

Later in the day IRGC general Sardar Jabbari commented that there was a US presence on the island of Cyprus and that Iran planned to strike the island "with such intensity that the Americans will be forced to leave".

The IRGC claimed a drone strike on the Honduras-flagged tanker Athe Nova in the Strait of Hormuz. 19 people were injured after an Iranian missile hit a neighborhood in Beersheba , Israel.

The US Central Command announced the death of six US service members killed in action. Lebanon theater Projectiles were launched from within Lebanon toward Israel in the early hours of 2 March, setting off sirens across Haifa and the Upper Galilee .

The IDF said that it intercepted a rocket from Hezbollah, while others hit open areas.

The IDF spokesperson issued an emergency statement saying that the attack is to be considered "an official declaration of war by Hezbollah", vowing to "neutralize" the threat. Hezbollah confirmed its responsibility, saying that it attacked an IDF base in Haifa in response to Khamenei's killing.

The IDF proceeded with a series of airstrikes in Beirut and the Beqaa Valley . Strikes also hit southern Lebanon . Israel warned Lebanese people who fled from their homes not to return.

The IDF later announced that it struck more than 70 targets in Dahieh and southern Lebanon.

The IDF struck three southern Lebanese towns, including Haris , Nabatieh al-Fawqa , and Mayfadoun , and later issued an evacuation order in 50 adjacent communities.

The IDF said it killed the head of Hezbollah's intelligence headquarters Hussein Makled in the strikes.

In the night, it reported the killing of Abu Hamza Rami , the Palestinian Islamic Jihad commander in Lebanon, in Beirut. Other developments Qatar shoots down two Iranian Su-24 bombers , making it the first nation to shoot down crewed Iranian aircraft in the conflict. Three US F-15 fighters crash in Kuwait. Iran claims to have shot them down, while later CentCom attributed it to friendly fire by Kuwait. 3 March A photo of IRIS Shahid Soleimani after being struck by American forces during the 2026 Iran war The war dramatically expanded, with nine countries now involved. US–Israeli attacks in Iran Map of "Operation Epic Fury Timeline - First 100 Hours" during press briefing at the Pentagon on 4 March 2026 HRANA reported 104 attacks in 19 provinces, and at least 31 casualties including 15 civilians killed and 1 injured. Isfahan, Kermanshah, Shiraz and IEI were bombed, along with other cities. Targets hit included Imam Hossein University and a garrison in Tehran, a military headquarters in Kermanshah, garrisons in Marivan and Najafabad, the Shohada Hospital in Sarpol-e Zahab, a field hospital in Salas-e Babajani, the Criminal Investigation Department in Marivan, nuclear facilities in Natanz and the Dezful Radio building in Dezful. IRIB Tehran HQ was bombed second day in row and switched to Telewebion IP internet streaming TV. Old Mirdamad St., the historic imperial Senate of Iran and the current seat of the Assembly of Experts was bombed, as was the Expediency Discernment Council building.

The IDF said that it destroyed a covert nuclear site, and killed one of the commanders of the IRGC, as well as the commander of the Quds Force's Lebanon branch, in Tehran.

The IDF announced that it had destroyed the Supreme National Security Council (SNSC) headquarters, along with command-and-control infrastructure and the president's office, noting that it targeted "the regime's most central and significant headquarters". Golestan Palace , a UNESCO World Heritage Site , was hit by debris from an Israeli-US airstrike, causing some damage including to the Brilliant Hall and the Marble Throne .

The Ministry of Cultural Heritage, Tourism and Handicrafts officially asked UNESCO to evaluate the situation, and UNESCO issued a statement, noting that damaging UNESCO property is against international laws.

The Iranian Red Crescent Society raised the number killed to 787.

In southern Iran, Bushehr Airport was targeted in a precision strike that resulted in the total destruction of an Iran Air Airbus A319 (EP-IEP) parked on the tarmac.

The Mehr News Agency reported significant structural damage to the airport terminal.

The proximity of the strikes to the Bushehr Nuclear Power Plant (About 12 km (7.5 mi) away) prompted the Russian agency Rosatom to suspend construction on new units and evacuate non-essential staff due to a loss of communication with Iranian officials. CENTCOM commander Admiral Brad Cooper said that the United States "destroyed 17 Iranian ships, including the most operational Iranian submarine that now has a hole in its side." The US sunk missile corvette IRIS Shahid Soleimani , the lead ship of an Iranian class with the same name.

The US sunk the submarine IRIS Fateh , Iran's only operational Fateh -class submarine . It was the first submarine to be sunk during a conflict since the Falklands War . Iranian attacks Iran continued its strikes on Israel and the Gulf states.

The Israeli cities of Bnei Brak and Rosh HaAyin saw Iranian strikes causing a total of seven injuries amongst civilians. Israeli Police report that one person was injured after Iranian shrapnel fell in Tel Aviv.

In the early hours of the day, sirens were activated in Bahrain as the government called for residents to stay safe. Bahrain reported 74 successfully intercepted missiles and 92 drones since 28 February. Amazon Web Services were targeted across the Gulf states causing significant damages in their facilities located in the UAE and Bahrain.

The UAE detected numerous missiles heading from Iran 3:30 a.m. local time (23:30 GMT). An Iranian attack on the UAE's Fujairah Oil Industry Zone caused debris to fall and start a fire.

The US Consulate in Al Seef , Dubai was struck by multiple drones, resulting in a fire. An attack on Hamad International Airport was stopped by Qatari forces.

The US embassy in Riyadh was struck by two Iranian drones, causing a fire and prompting its closure.

The CIA headquarters in Riyadh was reportedly hit by a drone and later in the night the kingdom downed nine drones as soon as they entered Saudi airspace. Iran launched strikes against Irbil , Iraq.

The Islamic Resistance in Iraq also claimed responsibility for explosions in Erbil. Lebanon theater Israel's Defense Minister authorized a ground invasion of Lebanon to seize strategic positions. Israel said it detained a dozen Hezbollah members after a rocket strike on Israel. Hezbollah launched drones and missiles at a trio of Israeli bases, and claimed to have struck down an Israeli drone in Nabatieh . World Health Organization Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said that three paramedics were killed and six injured while working to help affected people in southern Lebanon. Other developments Iran banned food exports, and ordered people to uninstall and disable foreign social media apps on their phones over security concerns. State media announced that Iran has stocked one month of wheat flour and essential food products. Iran announced that the IRGC was setting up checkpoints in cities nationwide. State media reported that Ali Khamenei 's son and possible heir Mojtaba Khamenei "miraculously survived missile strike" that killed his father. He was subsequently elected as the new Supreme Leader of Iran. Western diplomats and other sources told The Jerusalem Post that Qatar had struck Iran after Iranian attempts to directly strike Doha's airport and that Qatar had shot down two Iranian Su-24 bombers; Channel 12 also reported Qatari strikes. Qatari Foreign Ministry spokesperson Majed al-Ansari vigorously denied the accusation that Qatar had joined the "campaign targeting Iran". According to Tasnim, GCC Gulf Shield units were deployed to Bahrain to quell Shia protests. 4 March US–Israeli attacks in Iran Damaged buildings in Tehran after US–Israeli strikes HRANA recorded 117 attacks in 23 provinces, and at least 53 casualties including 31 civilian deaths and 25 civilian injuries. Targets hit included industrial towns in Qazvin and Urmia, a garrison in Najafabad, Ba'athat Hospital and a separate surgical center in Tehran, Esmat Girls' High School and a blood transfusion center in Urmia. A joint US–Israeli strike targeted Azadi square in Tehran as well as military facilities and the metro station.

The IAF struck an Iranian military complex in eastern Tehran. Israeli strikes hit the Basij headquarters, as well as missile launch pads, defense systems and the supply and logistics directorate affiliated with Iranian ground forces.

At 16:15 UTC Israel announced it had completed a major large scale airstrikes on a major military outpost housing soldiers from all branches of Iran's security apparatus.

The IDF announced that an F-35I "Adir" shot down a Russian-made Iranian Yak-130 fighter jet over Tehran , marking the first time in history a stealth fighter has shot down a crewed fighter jet in combat. It was also the first time the Israeli Air Force shot down an aircraft since 1985. A US submarine sunk the Iranian warship IRIS Dena off the coast of Galle, Sri Lanka , killing 87 of its crewmen.

The Iranian frigate was returning from International Fleet Review 2026 , which was held in Visakhapatnam , India. 32 of its crewmen were rescued by the Sri Lankan navy .

At 13:15 UTC an Iranian warship sunk by US–Israeli airstrike in the port of Bandar Abbas .

The warship was a Soleimani Class Corvette. It was the second Iranian warship sunk that day. According to CENTCOM, the US military cumulatively destroyed 19 Iranian ships, 1 submarine, and nearly 2,000 targets by this point in the war.

The US launched multiple strikes on PMF forces in Iraq throughout the day Iranian attacks IRGCN NEDSA Navy stated they blew up 10 commercial vessels that were attempting to travel through the Strait of Hormuz ; one other vessel was hit by bomb near Port Muscat city.

The IRGC Aerospace Force launched an attack on the Port of Fujairah , Dubai, UAE with ballistic missiles. Drones attacked Sulaymaniyah , Iraqi Kurdistan . IRGC Ground Forces attacked Kuwait and Erbil with large amount of drones. An 11-year-old girl was killed in Kuwait after being hit by shrapnel.

At 13:45 UTC , Bahrain was attacked by Iranian missiles.

The Qatari Ministry of Defense said that Al Udeid Air Base , which has been described as "the largest American base in the Middle East" was hit with no casualties. Aramco's Ras Tanura oil refining facility in Saudi Arabia was hit by a projectile. A drone was downed in the proximity of Baghdad International Airport , whilst another wave of drones and missiles was intercepted in Erbil .

The pro-Iran militia Saraya Awliya al-Dam claim that they struck a "vital US asset" in Jordan, but this was unconfirmed by independent news outlets or CENTCOM. Lebanon theater At 10:00 UTC Syrian forces blocked the Syrian - Lebanese border, in what they said was an effort to block Hezbollah from crossing the border and smuggling weapons in and out of Lebanon.

At 11:55 to 12:35 UTC Multiple rockets, missiles, and drones launched towards Israel from Lebanon to the north and Iran from the east, and at 12:35 UTC Israel launched strikes at Hezbollah targets in southern Lebanon. Israeli ground forces moved into Lebanon skirmishing with Hezbollah in the first land based clashes of the war. Hezbollah said that it clashed with Israeli forces attempting to advance in Khiam and launched rocket barrages at a concentration of troops in Kiryat Shmona . Hezbollah also said that it struck an Israeli tank in the town of Houla, Lebanon . Israel later said that two of its soldiers were injured by anti-tank fire. Cyprus Hellenic Air Force F-16 fighters downed multiple Iranian Shahed drones near Cyprus . Larnaca International Airport was temporarily closed in response. Reports suggested a closure of Cypriot airspace, but it was later dismissed as false by the Cypriot government. A ballistic missile was intercepted by NATO forces in Turkey in Dörtyol , Hatay Province , with a statement after interception stating that Turkey reserved the right to defend its territory and that the ordnance had fallen in its territory. No casualties were reported by the statement. A senior US military official said that it had been shot down by an SM-3 interceptor launched from USS Oscar Austin . An anonymous Turkish official stated that the missile was directed towards "Greek Cyprus". Non-essential American workers in Cyprus were asked to evacuate the country due to the risks of a possible Iranian incursion in the future. After, the US State Department issued a travel advisory for Cyprus during the current crisis.

In an emergency meeting in Rome , Prime Minister of Italy Giorgia Meloni and other Italian officials considered sending reinforcement to Cyprus after the deployment by other European nations (Greece, France, Germany and the United Kingdom), specifically considering the deployment of the destroyer Caio Duilio as a possibility (with capability up to 350 kilometers). Other developments Iraq's national power grid went down. According to an unnamed official from the Coalition of Political Forces of Iranian Kurdistan , Iraqi-based Kurdish armed groups consisting of thousands of the Kurdistan Free Life Party (PJAK) troops began a military offensive into Iranian territory, with operations beginning earlier on 2 March. American and Israeli officials reportedly confirmed the events. However, an unnamed PJAK official denied the claims of an ongoing offensive and cross-border troop movements, as did Aziz Ahmed, deputy chief of staff to Kurdistan Region's prime minister Masrour Barzani . Qatar arrested ten individuals for operating as a cell of the IRGC in Qatari territory, collecting data on military infrastructure, with some trained to use drones. QatarEnergy declared force majeure on gas exports and shut down gas liquefaction . 5 March Damage after an airstrike on the 12,000-seat Azadi Hall 33 US–Israeli attacks in Iran HRANA recorded 170 attacks in 19 provinces and at least 79 casualties, including 9 civilians killed, one of whom was a child, and 38 civilians injured. 29 casualties could not be immediately classified as civilian or military. Targets hit included the Ministry of Intelligence office in Sardasht, an IRGC garrison in Sanandaj, a paper factory in Malayer, and a border terminal in Dasht-e Azadegan. Iran's largest sports complex, the 12,000-seat indoor arena at Tehran's Azadi Indoor Stadium , was destroyed by an American-Israeli strike, following reports that authorities had been using stadiums for military purposes. Israel and the US launched another wave of attacks on Tehran, also hitting a police station, a residential building, the Yas Nabi Girls' Elementary School, Basat Stadium and the District 18 municipality. Iranian and Hezbollah strikes Saudi Arabia reported that in the early hours of the day they had intercepted three cruise missiles outside the city of Al-Kharj . Iran said it targeted Kurdish groups in Iraq and warned separatists amid the expanding conflict. Early on 5 March, Iran launched another round of missiles at Israel, setting off air-raid alerts in areas including Tel Aviv, though no casualties were immediately reported. Suspected debris from an intercepted Iranian missile landed in Petah Tikva , causing a fire. Iran targeted a US oil tanker in the Persian Gulf. Iranian drones entered Azerbaijani airspace. One drone hit the terminal of the Nakhchivan International Airport and another fell near a school in the village of Şəkərabad . Azerbaijan summoned their Iranian ambassador, withdrew their diplomats from Iran, and promised a military response. Iran's foreign minister Abbas Araghchi denied that Iran had attacked Azerbaijan, and suggested that it was an Israeli false flag attack. Azer News reported that a Telegram channel affiliated with the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, "Sepah Pasdaran News Channel", claimed responsibility for the attack in Nakhchivan . Azerbaijani president Ilham Aliyev said that "Iran committed terror acts against Azerbaijan". Turkey likewise condemned the strikes in Azerbaijan. Other developments UK defence minister John Healey visited Cyprus. No missiles were sent toward the country, but alarms in British bases rang twice, causing widespread panic and self evacuations in the local population. Italy, the Netherlands and Spain confirmed that they will be sending warships to defend Cyprus, including the Cristóbal Colón frigate. If requested, Ireland stated they would be willing to protect Cyprus and join the European defense coalition that had mobilized around the island. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelensky stated that Ukraine had received an American request for assistance with Iranian Shahed drones . President Trump stated that he would accept Ukrainian assistance. 6 March Worshippers gather at the Imam Khomeini Mosalla for the first Friday prayer after the 2026 airstrikes on Tehran. US–Israeli strikes HRANA recorded 664 attacks in 28 provinces, and at least 25 casualties including 4 civilian deaths and 9 injuries.

The US and Israel executed heavy airstrikes on Tehran, on targets including Mehrabad airport, a police station, an IRGC base, and residential units. Strikes also took place on Kermanshah as well as Salmas, Maku and Saqqez in western Iran. US and Israeli airstrikes also hit intelligence sites in Lorestan and Ilam, and a Ministry of Intelligence office building in Sarpol-e Zahab. Other targets included the Fars Governate building and a medical emergency team/operational base in Shiraz, the Mahabad Red Crescent, and a facility of the National Iranian Oil Company in Miandoab. Iranian and Hezbollah strikes and renewed Gulf offensive Iran opened a new and wider campaign on Gulf states with attacks on Saudi Arabia (3 missiles had been intercepted at Prince Sultan Air Base), Kuwait (with drones and missiles), Qatar (where 13 missiles were intercepted), Bahrain (where a hotel and two residential buildings were targeted), and the UAE. Late on Friday, drones struck Iraqi airports and oil facilities; in Basra , a compound housing foreign oil-company workers, including Halliburton and KBR facilities, was hit and caught fire. Other developments President Masoud Pezeshkian issued an apology on state television for waves of Iranian attacks against neighbouring countries, stating that Iran had not attacked "friendly and neighboring countries".

The Sri Lanka Navy announced that the Sri Lanka Navy would take charge of the Iranian tanker IRIS Bushehr and its crew of 208, with the crew to be brought ashore and the vessel moved to the Trincomalee area. This is the first instance of a warship being interned in a neutral country since World War II. Three Ghanaian peacekeepers enrolled in UNIFIL were hit by a missile and wounded in Southern Lebanon. Responsibility for the attack was unclear.

In Azerbaijan, an alleged Iranian-linked terrorist plot against the Baku–Tbilisi–Ceyhan oil pipeline , the Israeli embassy and synagogues in Baku is prevented by local law enforcement, with the trial of said alleged terrorists starting on the same day, during which they were identified as being part of a cell of the Islamic State known as " Vilayati-Khorasan " and the IRGC. 7 March US–Israeli attacks in Iran HRANA reported 485 attacks in 30 provinces and 53 casualties, including at least 33 civilians killed and 8 injured. US and Israeli forces executed strikes on many targets in Tehran and Isfahan including Mehrabad International Airport , where the IDF said that it destroyed 16 Quds Force aircraft, as well as a logistics and support garrison and an emergency response base in Tehran. Other targets included airbases in Ahvaz and Isfahan, a medical clinic in Zanganeh, a girls' school in Khomein, a home in Eslamshahr, and a water desalination plant on Qeshm Island .

The IRGC said the desalination plant attack affected the water supply for 30 villages and said they had retaliated by striking the source of the attack; both the US and Israel denied attacking the plant. Iranian retaliation The IRGC said that it attacked the Malta-flagged oil tanker Prima with a drone after "ignoring repeated warnings from the IRGC Navy regarding the prohibition of traffic and the unsafe nature of the Strait of Hormuz".

The compounds and oil refineries structures of the US-based firm Halliburton located in Basra are hit by Iranian strikes. Other developments The US approved a $151M arms sale to Israel, and sent a third aircraft carrier, USS George H. W. Bush , to the Middle East. Kuwait Petroleum Corporation declared force majeure and began cutting its oil output by an unspecified amount. Iran's President Masoud Pezeshkian released a video message apologizing for "fire at will" attacks on neighbouring countries and instructed them to stop, although attacks continued shortly afterward. 8 March Sgt. Benjamin N. Pennington of the 1st Space Battalion , who died on 8 March 2026 from wounds sustained during an attack at Prince Sultan Air Base , Saudi Arabia US–Israeli strikes Overnight Israeli airstrikes hit Iran's oil facilities for the first time, killing four people and releasing large clouds of dark smoke into the air, raising concerns over fuel shortages, water and soil contamination and respiratory hazards. HRANA reported 752 attacks in 30 provinces, and 83 unclassified casualties, including 33 people killed and 50 injured. Targets struck included the Kamal Esmail Basij Base and an army garrison in Isfahan, an IRGC brigade in Shahin Shahr, a border guard regiment in Paveh, the Border Guard Command Headquarters in Kermanshah, a swimming complex in Isfahan, a stadium in Shahin Shahr, a seminary building in Qom, and a judiciary building in Zarrin Shahr. Israeli American airstrikes hit the IRGC aerospace headquarters and 50 ammunition storage shelters. US officials stated that Iran was using heavy populated areas to conduct military operations.

Following some missile attack(s), the Rowing Federation of Iran building suffered serious damage.

Following the Israeli and American attacks on Iranian soil, the Hockey Federation building located in Tehran's Enghelab Sports Complex was damaged and suffered serious damage.

The Tennis Federation of Iran building suffered serious damage by the attacks. Iranian strikes Israeli rescue services said that at least three people were injured by shrapnel belonging to Iranian missiles.

The IRGC said that its missiles hit "military targets" in Tel Aviv and Beersheba as well as the Muwaffaq Salti Air Base in Azraq, Jordan . An Iranian drone strike caused a fire in a Kuwait City tower belonging to the Public Institution for Social Security . Kuwait reported that two of its officers were killed on duty. US Central Command announced the death of a seventh US service member from an Iranian attack.

The United Kingdom's Ministry of Defence confirmed that its forces had intercepted an Iranian drone headed towards Iraq, and declared its intention to send a Merlin helicopter to the region to help aid in detecting future aerial threats. 9 March Blood donation in Isfahan , March 2026 US–Israeli strikes HRANA recorded 285 attacks in 17 provinces and at least 61 casualties, including at least 40 civilians killed and 8 injured, as well as 11 unclassified deaths. Strikes primarily targeted Tehran and Isfahan. Extensive damage was dealt to historical sites in Isfahan. Targets stuck included Optical Defense Industries in Isfahan, Soru Pier in Bandar Abbas, a law enforcement building in Mobarakeh, Shahid Montazeri Camp in Shahriar, Sahab Pardaz Informatics Company building in Tehran, the Chehel Sotoun Palace-Museum and Ali Qapu Palace-Museum in Isfahan, Shahidan Nasiri Stadium and Safaian Clinic and Medical Center, and an automobile dealership in Lam. Iranian strikes An explosion near Manama sparked a fire near a petroleum refinery and resulted in injuries to at least 32 Bahraini citizens, four of them "serious cases". An analysis by academic researchers examined by Reuters found that an American-operated Patriot missile was likely involved in the blast after it downed an Iranian drone mid-air.

The UAE said that it intercepted 12 ballistic missiles and 17 drones from Iran. Saudi Arabia said that its forces had destroyed four drones targeting Shaybah oil field . Iran continued firing missiles on Israel with reports saying that at least one was carrying a cluster of bomb warhead. A cluster bomb attack killed two workers at a construction site in Yehud and injured a third in Or Yehuda . Khamenei's election as new leader Following the killing of Ali Khamenei, the former leader of the Islamic Republic of Iran, in the Iran-2026 war, Mojtaba Khamenei was elected as the new leader of Iran. Other developments BAPCO declared force majeure on oil exports after an Iranian attack hit its only refinery. Iran declared that they would bring more security passage to the countries that expel US and Israel ambassadors.

By 9 March, shipping insurance rates for the strait were reported to have increased by four to six times over the previous week. 10 March US–Israeli strikes HRANA reported 202 attacks across 19 provinces, with 53 casualties including at least 17 civilians killed and 19 injured, as well as 8 unclassified deaths. An attack on an intersection along Tehran's Resalat Highway resulted in a large number of civilian casualties. Other targets stuck included airbases in Bandar Abbas and Isfahan, an IRGC intelligence headquarters in Qom, the Kerman Airport fuel depot, a law enforcement building in Azarshahr, the Najafabad courthouse, a residential neighborhood in Mehrshahr, and a battery company and municipal informatics building in Tehran. Israel said that it struck a weapons research site in Tehran.

The US said it struck multiple Iranian minelaying ships. Iranian strikes Abu Dhabi National Oil Company shut down its Ruwais refinery due to fire from a drone strike. Saudi Civil Defense said that a drone fell in Al-Zulfi City , causing material damage but no injuries. Iran targeted US military sites in Harir Air Base in the Kurdistan region of Iraq. Syrian media reported that Israeli had intercepted Iranian drones in the towns of Jalin and the Israeli-occupied town of Quneitra . Other developments The UNHCR reported that about 700 thousand people were displaced in Lebanon by Israeli bombing and mass evacuations. 11 March The Mayuree Naree pictured in 2023 US–Israeli strikes HRANA reported 208 attacks in 22 provinces and at least 44 casualties, including 14 civilians killed and 6 injured. Targets hit included army and IRGC bases in Isfahan and Chabahar, a missile site in Khomeinishahr, a police station in Saqqez, a training garrison in Birjand, the Persian Gulf Martyrs Hospital in Bushehr, the Shaqayeq Girls' School in Khomein, a gas station and oil depot in Tehran, and two residential homes in Bandar Lengeh. Israeli drone strikes hit checkpoints in Tehran, killing at least ten people, including several Basij members. Among the dead in the strike was eleven-year-old child soldier Alireza Jafari , whose death was cited by Amnesty International , which called the organized Iranian recruitment of children as young as Jafari a war crime . Iranian strikes Iran fired dozens of missiles at targets throughout the Gulf region as the US and Israel launched attacks on targets in Iran. IRGC announced attacks against Camp Buehring in Kuwait in a two-pronged missile attack, as well as drone and missile attacks on US infrastructure at the Mina Salman port in Bahrain ( Naval Support Activity Bahrain ), as well as the Kuwait Naval Base (Camp Patriot) and Ali Al Salem Air Base in Kuwait. Two drones fell near Dubai International Airport , wounding four people. Drones also struck fuel tanks at the Port of Salalah , Oman, leading the port to suspend its operations.

The bulk carrier Mayuree Naree (IMO 9323649) was hit by two missiles shortly after passing the Strait of Hormuz .

The vessel caught fire and most of the crew abandoned ship. Marshall Islands-flagged bulk carrier Star Gwyneth (IMO 9301031) and Japan-flagged container vessel One Majesty (IMO 9424912) were also reported to have been damaged by unknown projectiles in the vicinity of the Strait.

The spokesperson of the Iraqi armed forces, Lieutenant General Saad Maan , said that two foreign vessels were hit near the port of Al-Faw , one person was killed while 35 people were rescued. 12 March US–Israeli strikes HRANA recorded 312 attacks in 15 provinces and at least 124 casualties including 10 civilians killed and 91 injured, as well as 21 deaths that could not be immediately classified as civilian or military. Targets included the 92nd Armored Division and a military headquarters in Ahvaz, production units and a warehouse in an industrial district in Arak, a naval base in Konarak, the Dareh Shour tourist camp in Qeshm, Rashk-e Jenan Historic Palace in Isfahan, residential areas in Behbahan and Ahvaz, and the Boostan Hospital in Ahvaz.

The Popular Mobilization Forces (PMF) militia's 18th brigade headquarters in Al-Qa'im , Iraq, was hit by a direct strike.

The overnight strikes on Al-Qa'im killed 15 people, while another strike on a PMF base near Kirkuk killed five people.

The strikes on the PMF were condemned by the Iraqi government. Iranian strikes Iran fired 10 ballistic missiles with multiple warheads at Tel Aviv; Israel reported 124 people injured. Iran said it targeted IDF bases including Palmachim Airbase , and Ovda Airbase as well as the Shin Bet headquarters.

On the night of 11 to 12 March, Iranian drones hit Bahrain International Airport on Muharraq Island and set fuel tanks on fire. They also hit coalition military camps near Erbil and Baghdad in Iraq, wounding a number of US soldiers. 2 drones were shot down by British troops. A drone attack on a Peshmerga base in the Malla Qara subdistrict of Makhmur district , injured six French soldiers. One soldier, Arnaud Frion, 7th Chasseurs Alpins was later reported killed in action. Two fuel tankers, Maltese-flagged Zefyros (IMO 9515917) and Marshall Islands-flagged Safesea Vishnu (IMO 9327009), are attacked in Iraqi waters and catch fire. Iraqi oil terminals suspend operations. Reporters assume that the ships have been attacked by Iranian explosive-laden boats. Other developments An American Boeing KC-135 Stratotanker crashed in western Iraq, killing all six crew. Another was damaged and made an emergency landing.

The first statement attributed to Iran's new Supreme Leader Mojtaba Khamenei was read in Iranian state media by a newsreader.

In the statement, Mojtaba Khamenei vowed to keep the Strait of Hormuz closed and warned countries in the region to stop hosting US bases.

The UN High Commissioner for Refugees announced that 3 million people in Iran had been internally displaced due to the war. 13 March Infrastructure on Kharg Island, 2018 US–Israeli strikes The US bombed Kharg Island , a major Iranian oil export hub, with Trump stating that every military site was destroyed on the island . Explosions were reported in Tehran during rallies for Quds Day . One person was killed by shrapnel. Iranian strikes An Iranian missile strike in Zarzir , Israel damaged around 300 homes and injured around 60 people. A drone attack at the Awahi Industrial Area of Sohar , Oman, killed two people and injured 11 others.

The US Rewards for Justice Program offered an up to US$10 million bounty for ten top Iranian leaders, including Mojtaba Khamenei .

The Wall Street Journal reported that a strike on Prince Sultan Air Base earlier in the week damaged five US refueling tankers. 14 March US–Israeli strikes HRANA recorded 285 attacks in 18 provinces, with the largest number of attacks in Isfahan.

At least 24 civilians, including one child, were killed and 4 were injured. Targets included naval facilities in Bandar Abbas, Shiraz International Airport and an electronics factory in Shiraz, an aerospace research center in Tehran, as well as residential units in the Javadieh neighborhood and the dormitory of the Shooting Sports Federation. An aircraft manufacturing company in Shahin Shahr was hit, as was the Jamkaran Grand Mosque in Qom, a food processing factory in Sirjan and a residential house in Yazd.

The IDF announced that it killed two senior members of the Khatam al-Anbiya Central Headquarters intelligence unit who were appointed as its acting chiefs after the killing of Saleh Asadi . Iranian strikes A drone attack on Fujairah 's oil terminal caused a fire that forced a partial suspension of operations. A helipad at the US embassy in Iraq in Baghdad was struck by an aerial attack. A drone attack on the Ahmad al-Jaber Air Base lightly injured three Kuwaiti soldiers. Another attack on the Kuwait International Airport damaged a radar system. Iranian missile fragments hit Eilat , seriously injuring a child and lightly injuring another man. Indian tankers Shivalik and Nanda Devi , carrying a combined 92,700 metric tons of liquefied natural gas , pass safely through the Strait of Hormuz after talks between foreign minister of India Subrahmanyam Jaishankar and foreign minister of Iran Abbas Araghchi . Other developments Trump called on several nations to send warships to help secure the Strait of Hormuz amid the Iranian closure, expressing hopes that the UK , France, China , South Korea, and Japan, would support this international effort. 15 March US–Israeli strikes Destruction in a residential area of Tehran, Iran, following joint US–Israeli airstrikes on 15 March 2026 HRANA recorded 494 attacks in 16 provinces and a total of at least 49 casualties, including 11 civilians killed and 22 injured. Early on 15 March, heavy airstrikes were reported in the Isfahan area, along with 20 explosions heard near Shiraz , heavy explosions in southern Tehran, Dezful Air Base , Khomein , and Hamadan . A video showed extensive damage from an airstrike at the Jask port in Hormozgan Province . Residents throughout the country have reported increased deployment of security forces. A joint US–Israel attack on Isfahan killed 15 people. Targets of the day's strikes included airbases in Isfahan, Dezful and Bandar Abbas, the Kobraei missile base, the Al-Hadid Garrison in Ahvaz, a courthouse in Hamadan, two schools in Joulan, a sports hall in Arak, a municipal warehouse in Nobriz, and a medical center in the suburbs of Tehran. Iranian strikes The IRGC said it had launched its "50th wave of operations" against American bases (in UAE , Bahrain and Kuwait). Iran's military vowed to "pursue and kill" Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu. Iranian public As of 15 March, pro-government rallies have been visible in Tehran's major squares. 16 March US–Israeli strikes 65% of the day's attacks hit Tehran, with the remainder in a geographically dispersed pattern. HRANA recorded 243 attacks and at least 66 casualties, including 21 civilians killed and 31 injured. Targets included the District 13 Air Force Base in Tehran, the Peykanshahr Basij Base, and Mehrabad International Airport , where the IDF said that it destroyed an aircraft used by senior Iranian officials, including former supreme leader Ali Khamenei. An electricity department building and eleven residential buildings in Tehran, including an eight-story building on Zarafshan Street, were destroyed in the strikes. Military targets in Chabahar and Shiraz, as well as the Shahed Imam Reza School in Khomein and a desalination plant in Nikshahr. It also said that it destroyed a space research facility in Tehran that was used to develop attack satellites. Kata'ib Hezbollah announced the death of Abu Ali al-Askari, a senior commander who was reportedly killed in Baghdad. Iranian strikes A drone attack set a fuel tank at Dubai International Airport on fire in the early morning. Flights were initially suspended, but service was restored over the course of the morning. A drone attack also caused a fire at the Port of Fujairah , and a Palestinian was killed by a rocket near Abu Dhabi.

The first two floors of the Royal Tulip Al-Rasheed Hotel in Baghdad's Green Zone were hit by a drone whilst hosting a European Union and Saudi Arabian delegation.

The attack was not claimed by anyone, however, due to the proximity of a similar attack that had happened 48 hours earlier against the US embassy in Baghdad, it is suspected to have been an Iranian attack. Other items The Lebanese Ministry of Health: 38 healthcare workers have been killed and 69 injured since the escalation of the Israeli attacks on the country. 886 were killed in Israeli attacks on Lebanon from 2 to 16 March; and 2,141 people were also injured. Tehran said the Strait of Hormuz is open to all except the US and its allies. 17 March Ali Larijani was killed in an Israeli airstrike on 17 March. US–Israeli strikes HRANA recorded 179 attacks and at least 19 total casualties, included 3 civilians killed and 4 injured. Drone attacks targeting police stations and checkpoints increased, even in densely populated urban areas. Almost half of the day's attacks were on targets in the Tehran province.

The Basij Command Headquarters and the IRGC garrison in Saadat Abad were hit, as were the Panahi Sports Complex, the Shahid Kazemi Sports Complex and two wrestling halls. Historic buildings in the Saadabad complex were damaged.

The Shahid Ebadat garrison in Marivan and a missile site in Khomeini Shahr were also targeted. A strike hit the area of the Bushehr Nuclear Power Plant , causing no damage. Several senior Iranian officials, including Ali Larijani , Basij chief Gholamreza Soleimani , and 300 Basij officials were killed by overnight Israeli airstrikes .

The US used GBU-72 "bunker bombs" to target sites believed to contain Iranian anti-ship missiles ,. Iranian strikes Iran launched a missile barrage that killed an elderly couple in Ramat Gan while they were on their way to a bomb shelter. Iranian missiles also damaged platforms at the Tel Aviv–Savidor Center railway station . Kuwait-flagged liquified petroleum tanker Gas ⁠Al Ahmadiah suffered minor damage after being attacked by a projectile east of Fujairah . Other developments US director of the National Counterterrorism Center Joe Kent resigned over the war, stating that he believed that Iran did not pose an imminent threat to the US and that Donald Trump was induced to take action by Israel and its lobby in the US. 18 March Ras Laffan Industrial City (pictured in 2006) was struck by Iranian missiles. US–Israeli strikes An Israeli strike hit Russia-Iran weapons transport route in the Caspian Sea. Esmaeil Khatib , Iran's Minister of Intelligence , was assassinated during overnight Israeli strikes in Tehran. Multiple explosions were reported in the early morning hours. Targets included naval zones and major port facilities, including areas around Shahid Bahonar and Shahid Rajaee ports, as well as near an oil terminal in Bandar Abbas. A strong explosion shook Ahvaz in the Zeytoun Karmandi area. An early-morning blast was reported in Songhor, a town close to the Iraqi border, while another explosion was heard near Kazerun in southern Iran. West of Tehran, multiple blasts occurred in Malard over a short time span.

In Fardis , US–Israeli strikes targeted a helicopter manufacturing facility in the Naz industrial district. Fath Army Base in Karaj was hit by strikes, as were the town's welfare offices, rehabilitation center for persons with disabilities, and residential areas. Police stations in Qom and Bandar Lengeh were also hit. A video showed a heavy strike in northern Tehran on Wednesday morning. Israel said that it targeted Iran's command centers in Tehran. A medical center in Tehran was also hit. Parts of the Iranian South Pars gas field were hit by an Israeli airstrike , and the gas field's refineries in Asaluyeh were also hit. Israeli strikes targeted at least five Iranian naval vessels in the Caspian Sea , with explosions being heard in Bandar-e Anzali , threatening some of the two-way weapons traffic between Russia and Iran, mainly Shahed drone equipment, although the two countries also transport equipment through Azerbaijan. An airstrike hit the courthouse in Larestan . HRANA recorded 79 attacks and at least 125 casualties.

At least 15 civilians were killed and 105 were injured. Iranian strikes Iranian missiles hit Qatar's Ras Laffan Industrial City , causing fires and significant damage to the gas facility. Qatar responded by banning the Iranian embassy's military attaches from its territory. Fragments from an Iranian missile interception damaged three private jets at Ben Gurion Airport . A missile attack killed three Palestinians and injured 13 in Beit Awwa , West Bank, and killed a foreign worker in Adanim . Other developments The International Maritime Organization (IMO) held an extraordinary session regarding humanitarian passage for the 20,000 seafarers stranded on 3,200 vessels (both figures approximate) west of the strait.

On 18 March, thousands of civilians joined a funeral procession for Ali Larijani. 19 March US–Israeli strikes HRANA reported 70 attacks in 12 provinces, and at least 75 casualties including 25 civilians killed and 5 wounded.

The day's strikes were the first to target the Caspian Sea region, with strikes hitting several other provinces as well, especially Iran's oil and gas facilities in Asaluyeh.

The IDF said that it destroyed an IRGC Mil Mi-17 helicopter in Sanandaj Airport . An Israeli strike targeted Basij members. Israel said that it would continue to attack people associated with the Iranian government.

The representative of the armed forces to the Basij , Afshin Naghshbandi , was killed in an airstrike. An airstrike on a Basij checkpoint in Tabriz killed 13 fighters and injured 18 others. Iranian strikes A BAZAN Group refinery in Haifa was hit during a broader Iranian missile attack on the area. Mina Al-Ahmadi refinery in Kuwait was hit by Iranian drones, causing a fire. A US F-35 was allegedly damaged by Iranian fire during a combat mission over Iran.

The aircraft made an emergency landing at a US airbase in the Middle East. IRGC published footage of the shooting. This is considered as the first direct hit on an F-35 in history. Other developments Netanyahu hosted a press conference asserting he was well. Qatar declared the Iranian military and security attachés persona non grata , giving them 24 hours to leave the country. 20 March US–Israeli strikes HRANA recorded 640 strikes in 17 provinces, and at least 68 casualties including 4 civilians killed and 6 injured. Targets hit included Basij and army bases and garrisons in Semnan, Ahvaz, Bandar Abbas and Urmia. Residential and administrative buildings were hit in Tehran, as were the Falak-ol-Aflak Historic Site in Khorramabad, an accommodation complex in Shahmirzad and a residential building in Karaj. IRGC spokesman Ali Mohammad Naini and his deputy were assassinated by an Israeli airstrike.

The IDF also announced that Basij intelligence chief Ismail Ahmadi was killed in the strike that killed Gholamreza Soleimani . Iranian strikes Iran allegedly launched two ballistic missiles towards Diego Garcia , which houses a US–UK military base , though both failed to hit the island.

While one of the missile broke apart mid-flight, another was intercepted by a SM-3 air defence missile launched by a US warship. Iran later denied claims that it launched missiles towards Diego Garcia, saying that it was an "Israeli false flag" attack.

After Iran launched nine ballistic missiles towards Jerusalem, reports indicated that at least three of the missiles were equipped with cluster munition warheads.

The strikes caused damage to residential structures and resulted in minor injuries among several civilians. Debris from an intercepted missile fell within the Old City of Jerusalem , approximately 400 metres (1,300 ft) from the Western Wall and the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound on the Temple Mount . No injuries were reported. Other developments Iran denied targeting Turkey and Oman, saying that they were "Israeli false flag" attacks. Switzerland announced that the country would not issue licences to export weapons by companies to the United States, citing neutrality . 21 March US–Israeli strikes HRANA reported 348 attacks in 16 provinces, and at least 16 casualties including 8 civilians killed and 6 injured.

The majority of the day's strikes targeted the Tehran area. Targets hit included Imam Ali Hospital in Andimeshk, a tourist complex in Ahvaz, passenger and fishing piers in Bushehr, military facilities in Tehran, Bandar Abbas, Yazd and Dezful, and the regional headquarters of the IRGC in Isfahan. Israeli airstrikes targeted several Tehran sites used to produce ballistic missiles. Iran said that an airstrike hit a uranium enrichment center in Natanz .

The IDF said that it struck an alleged nuclear weapons development and research site at Tehran's Malek-Ashtar University of Technology . A Basij site in Najafabad was "flattened" in an airstrike. Iranian strikes Three drone strikes targeted an American diplomatic and logistics hub which houses troops in Baghdad International Airport . Later, a strike in a military base in Tuz Khurmatu killed a Hashed Al-Shaabi fighter and injured another. Iranian missile fragments hit a kindergarten in Tel Aviv. Later, an Iranian missile strike collapsed a building in Dimona , injuring 64 people, including one child critically. Iran said that it targeted Shimon Peres Negev Nuclear Research Center in response to the strikes on Natanz and Bushehr . A strike in Arad wounded 116 people, seven seriously. 22 March US–Israeli strikes HRANA recorded 206 attacks in 15 provinces with at least 4 casualties including one civilian killed and three injured. Targets hit included an airbase and naval base in Bushehr, the garrison in Garmdareh, an airbase and two power plants in Bandar Abbas, an army aviation base in Isfahan, residential buildings in Tabriz and Mohammadshahr, and the Shohada-ye Kargar Sports Complex in Masjed Soleyman. Airstrikes took place in several other places throughout Iran, including Ahvaz , Chabahar , Rasht , and Yazd . A powerful early morning explosion in Tehran briefly lit up the sky in the area. Ebrahim Mortazavi-Nasb, a Basij commander, was killed in an airstrike. Buildings were destroyed in an airstrike in the Alborz province . Iranian and Iran-aligned strikes Iranian missile attacks injured 15 people across central Israel. A Hezbollah rocket strike hit a car in Misgav Am , killing a man. 23 March US–Israeli strikes HRANA recorded 379 attacks in 20 provinces, and at least 175 casualties including 38 civilians killed and 138 injured. A majority of the day's attacks were carried out on Tehran. Targets hit included an air force base, a gas company and residential buildings in Tehran, bases and garrisons in Garmdareh, Khorramabad and Bushehr, the Shohada-ye Pasdar School in Khorramabad and the Velayat Cultural Center in Shahr-e Rey. Iran-aligned strikes Seven rockets were launched by a pro-Iranian Iraqi militia at a base in the Al-Hasakah Governorate , which was recently vacated by American forces. Other developments President Trump postponed US strikes against Iranian powerplants for five days amid "productive" negotiations. Iran denied Trump's claims about productive conversations and its Foreign Ministry stated that there will be no negotiations until Iran's goals have been achieved. Eyewitnesses in Iran described Basij patrols and security checkpoints stationed overnight throughout the country. 24 March Mohammad Bagher Zolghadr ( pictured in 2017 ) was appointed secretary of the Iranian Supreme National Security Council . US–Israeli strikes HRANA recorded 108 attacks in 10 provinces, and at least 61 casualties including 12 civilians killed and 38 injured.

The heaviest strikes were in Khuzestan and Isfahan. Strikes hit missile sites in Tabriz and Borazjan, military industries, a gas company facility and civilian businesses in Isfahan, a gas pipeline in Khorramshahr, a sports complex in Andimeshk, and a Basij base and residential buildings in Tehran. Airstrikes were also reported in Shahin Shahr , Najafabad , the Jowzdan industrial zone, and Bandar Kangan . An overnight US strike on a base in Al Anbar killed at least 15 and injured 30 members of the Iraqi Popular Mobilization Forces .

The group announced the death of Saad Dawai, its operations commander in Anbar . A strike also hit the home of PMF leader Falih al-Fayyadh in Mosul . Iranian strikes Iranian missiles were launched at targets in Tel Aviv , Eilat , Dimona and Haifa . Several people were injured. Kuwait reported damage to power lines due to Iranian attacks. Iranian missiles were intercepted over Beirut , resulting in minor injuries. A worker from Morocco was killed and several soldiers injured during an Iranian drone attack on Bahrain . Other developments Iran appointed Mohammad Bagher Zolghadr as secretary of the Supreme National Security Council following the assassination of Ali Larijani . 25 March Iranian drones set a fuel depot on Kuwait's international airport on fire, while security forces reported that another six drones were intercepted. An Iranian missile was intercepted over Jordan , with debris coming down near the capital Amman .

The IDF reported at least one rocket intercepted. An Iranian missile impacted on a field near Israel's largest powerplant near Hadera . No injuries or damages were reported. 11 people in northwestern Iran were killed by airstrikes. Two sites in Tehran that produced cruise missiles were destroyed by airstrikes. Overnight strikes were reported in numerous Iranian cities, including Chabahar , Nowshahr , and Larestan . Israel says it destroyed a naval research center in Isfahan. Iran claimed that it had fired Qader cruise missiles against USS Abraham Lincoln .

The Lebanese health ministry announced that the death toll from Israeli attacks in Lebanon since the start of the invasion had risen to 1,116. Iranian strikes Iran claimed to have shot down an F/A-18 over Chabahar . US CENTCOM denied the shootdown, stating that no US aircraft had been hit by Iranian missiles. Debris from an intercepted Iranian missile killed two civilians in Abu Dhabi . Other developments According to the open-source-intelligence investigative journalism group Bellingcat , the US apparently deployed what experts identified as BLU-91/B antitank landmines from a GATOR scatterable mine system over the village of Kafari , located near the southern Iranian city of Shiraz , early in the morning. No party in the war was known to possess the system besides the US, which had not used scatterable antitank landmines in conflict since the Gulf War in 1991 and had last used an antipersonnel mine in a single incident in 2002 during the War in Afghanistan . Photographs and videos of the landmines were posted on social media by state-controlled Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting , semi-official Tasnim News Agency , and Canadian independent journalist Dimitri Lascaris , who was accompanied by representatives of the Iranian government. Tasnim News Agency reported that the landmines had caused multiple casualties and published images of them that showed the presence of aeroballistic adapters, indicating that they had been scattered by an aircraft-dropped dispenser. Lascaris said that he had seen four landmines while touring Kafari and posted footage of a bloodstain where witnesses said that a 31-year-old father had been killed by one of the landmines, which are prone to detonating when moved, after picking it up near his vehicle.

The landmines may have been deployed in Kafari to prevent vehicles from accessing Shiraz South Missile Base , which was located about two kilometers away from some of the landmines. Rahim Nadali, an official from the Iranian Revolutionary Guards Corps , announced the "For Iran" initiative which allows children as young as 12 to be recruited into the IRGC in security-related roles. Donald Trump claimed that the Iranian leadership was "begging" for a peace deal and declares opposing Iranian government statements as false and hinted that Iranian negotiators don't go public because they fear their own people. Two IDF soldiers of the Golani Brigade were killed in clashes with Hezbollah fighters in southern Lebanon, bringing the total of Israeli soldiers killed since the start of the invasion of Lebanon to 4. Israel`s president Benjamin Netanyahu claimed in mid May 2026 to have met UAE leader Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan during a secret visit on 26 March in the remote desert location Al Ain . UAE officials denied the claim. 27 March IDF reported 4 missile salvos were fired from Iran on targets in Israel since the early morning, with most being intercepted and the rest causing no casualties. Kuwait reported an attack by drones on Shuwaikh Port , and drones and missiles on Mubarak Al Kabeer Port causing material damage but no human casualties. UAE authorities reported six ballistic missiles and nine drones from Iran were intercepted. Israeli strikes hit the factories of Mobarakeh Steel Company and Khouzestan Steel Company , located respectively in Isfahan and Ahvaz . Israel stated that these facilities were part of Iran's military-industrial complex and were partially controlled by the IRGC. Later, strikes hit a yellowcake plant near Yazd and the IR-40 heavy water reactor in Arak .

The IDF said that it struck a major missile and naval mine production site in Yazd. An Iranian cluster bomb attack impacted six sites across central Israel, killing one person in Ramat Gan and injuring three others. An Iranian missile and drone strike on Prince Sultan Air Base damaged several US refueling aircraft and injured fifteen US soldiers, including five critically. An E-3 Sentry was also damaged by the strike. It was also reported that an attack earlier that week injured 14 US soldiers. Iran's Ministry of Health claimed that over 230 children had been killed in US–Israeli attacks in the first month of the war. 28 March A Houthi ballistic missile was launched from Yemen toward Beersheba in Southern Israel after its military spokesman gave a speech. A Houthi cruise missile targeting Israel was intercepted hours later, and a drone from Yemen was intercepted near Eilat . Port installations in Salalah in southern Oman were hit by two drones. One worker was reported injured. Iran said that it targeted a logistics vessel belonging to US military in the vicinity of the port. Iran said that it targeted a Ukrainian anti-drone system depot in Dubai which it said was used to assist American forces. Iranian drones hit Kuwait international airport and damaged its radar system.

The fire, which had been burning in the airports fuel depot for 3 days, was finally extinguished.

The IDF said that it struck the headquarters of the Marine Industries Organization in Tehran alongside other arms manufacturing sites and air defenses. A drone attack targeted the home of Kurdistan Region president Nechirvan Barzani in Duhok . An overnight strike in Tehran damaged buildings belonging to Iran University of Science and Technology .

The IRGC to threatened to attack US universities in the region in response. Later, Israeli strikes reportedly hit a water reservoir in Haftkel and killed Ali Fouladvand, the head of the Organization of Defensive Innovation and Research 's research department, in Borujerd , along with members of his family. Fouladvand's death was later confirmed by Iranian media. An Iranian ballistic missile strike in Eshtaol injured 19 people and damaged several homes. Iranian president Masoud Pezeshkian reportedly clashed with IRGC chief-commander Ahmad Vahidi over how the war was being conducted; he also warned that without a ceasefire, Iran's economy could collapse within three to four weeks. He criticized the IRGC's attacks on neighboring countries and called for restoration of executive powers to the civilian government. An Iranian attack struck Emirates Global Aluminium 's Al Taweelah site in Abu Dhabi, causing damage. Aluminium Bahrain also announced that it was attacked the day earlier, injuring two people. A drone attack from Iraq targeting Syria's al-Tanf military base was intercepted.

The British navy sends the RFA Lyme Bay , an amphibius ship fitted with mine-hunting drones to the Straits of Hormuz. Iran agreed to allow 20 more Pakistani-flagged ships to transit Strait of Hormuz; Islamabad confirmed it. An IDF soldier of the Paratroopers Brigade was killed in a Hezbollah rocket attack in southern Lebanon, increasing the number of IDF soldiers killed since the start of the invasion to 5. 29 March Overnight drone attacks in Erbil , Iraq, targeted the home of Kurdistan Democratic Party leader Masoud Barzani , Iranian opposition headquarters, and a US base near Erbil International Airport . Explosions were reported in many places in Iran including Abad, Andisheh, District 15, Evin, Masoudieh, Nobonyad, Qaleh Hasan Khan, and Saadat. Israel said it struck mobile command centers and places used to produce weapons in Tehran. Iranian parliament speaker Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf rejected the ongoing negotiations with the United States, saying that Iran could not be forced into submission. An Iranian missile struck an ADAMA chemical facility in Ne'ot Hovav , injuring one person. Six people killed in US–Israeli attack on Iranian village; Five houses were destroyed, and 22 were severely damaged in the attack. Power was cut in parts of Tehran and Alborz province , including Karaj , after electrical infrastructure was damaged by shrapnel.

The International Atomic Energy Agency said that the IR-40 heavy water reactor was no longer operational after sustaining serious damage during the Israeli attack on 27 March. Late on 29 March Iranian drones hit a military installation in Kuwait injuring 10 soldiers. Explosions and strikes were reported in many places in Iran, including Kish Island , Qeshm Island , and Bandar Abbas in Hormozgan province , in Babol in Mazandaran province , in Dehgolan in Kurdistan province , and in Tabriz in East Azarbaijan province . 30 March The United States of America is in serious discussions with A NEW, AND MORE REASONABLE, REGIME to end our Military Operations in Iran. Great progress has been made but, if for any reason a deal is not shortly reached, which it probably will be, and if the Hormuz Strait is not immediately “Open for Business,” we will conclude our lovely “stay” in Iran by blowing up and completely obliterating all of their Electric Generating Plants, Oil Wells and Kharg Island (and possibly all desalinization plants!), which we have purposefully not yet “touched.” This will be in retribution for our many soldiers, and others, that Iran has butchered and killed over the old Regime’s 47 year “Reign of Terror.” Thank you for your attention to this matter. President DONALD J. TRUMP March 30, 2026 White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt in a March 2026 media briefing Alleged Iranian drones hit a power plant and a desalination plant in Kuwait, caused damage to buildings and killed one worker. Iran accused the Israeli government of attacking the plant, without providing evidence. Debris from an intercepted missile struck the BAZAN oil refinery in Haifa, hitting a fuel tanker and damaging a nearby roof.

The IDF said that it struck an IRGC weapons research and testing site at Imam Hossein University in Tehran. An Iranian missile was shot down by NATO air defenses over Turkish airspace. Iran denied firing missile at Turkey, saying that it was a false flag attack.

The US began using for the first time B-52 bombers, over Iranian territory. 31 March Avatar of Donald J. Trump Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) tweeted: English : All of those countries that can’t get jet fuel because of the Strait of Hormuz, like the United Kingdom, which refused to get involved in the decapitation of Iran, I have a suggestion for you: Number 1, buy from the U.S., we have plenty, and Number 2, build up some delayed courage, go to the Strait, and just TAKE IT. You’ll have to start learning how to fight for yourself, the U.S.A. won’t be there to help you anymore, just like you weren’t there for us. Iran has been, essentially, decimated.

The hard part is done. Go get your own oil! President DJT March 31, 2026 A power outage in much of Eastern Tehran was caused by rubble hitting a power substation. Heavy airstrikes were reported in the Vardavard neighborhood in western Tehran.

The US dropped bunker buster bombs on an underground ammunition depot in Isfahan.

The fully loaded crude oil tanker Al Salmi (IMO 9534793) was hit by an alleged Iranian drone on it's starboard side near Dubai Port and caught fire. IDF reported three Iranian missile attacks on Israel. Damage by cluster bombs was done in Bnei Brak, Ramat Gan and Petah Tikva, eight people were reported injured.

The Mobarakeh Steel Company factory in Isfahan was hit by airstrikes.

The IDF said that it struck a factory owned by the Tofiq Daru Company that was used to produce and supply substances such as fentanyl to the Organization of Defensive Innovation and Research for use in Iran's alleged chemical weapons program. Iran denied Israeli claims, saying that fentanyl factory was only supplying hospital drugs. A second tanker, Aqua 1 (IMO 9573660), was reported to have been hit late on 31 March by projectiles on it's port side 17 nmi north of Dubai. One exploded above waterline, causing a minor fire, while the other one failed to explode and got lodged in the engine room area.

The IDF said that it killed the commander of the Quds Force Lebanon Corps' engineering branch in an airstrike in Mahallat , adding that he led the construction of dozens of underground structures for Hezbollah and the Assad regime . Iran confirmed the death of brigadier general Jamshid Eshaghi , who led the Iranian General Staff 's budgeting and financial affairs and was killed alongside members of his family. 1 April A fuel storage at Kuwait International Airport was hit by Iranian drones, causing a major fire. Israel reported four missile barrages fired from Iran, with impacts of cluster munition reported from Bnei Brak and Tel Aviv, injuring 14 people. IDF reported a missile launched by Houthi militias was intercepted. Several waves of drones targeted a factory which produced motor oils in Erbil Iraq, causing a major fire. A US strike in Tehran reportedly damaged the former US embassy , which was converted into a museum following its takeover during the Iranian Revolution .

The St. Nicholas Orthodox Church was also damaged. A claim by Donald Trump that the Iranian president asked for a ceasefire was rejected by Iran as "false and baseless". Two US MQ-9 Reaper drones were shot down by Iran near Isfahan , bringing the total number of MQ-9s lost during the war to 16. Iranian outlet Nournews reported that former foreign minister Kamal Kharazi was seriously injured and his wife was killed in an airstrike which hit his home. Mohammad Ali Fathalizadeh, commander of the IRGC's Fatehin unit, was killed by an airstrike. US president Donald Trump delivered a speech stating the war's objectives were "nearing completion," projecting it could last a few more weeks, and threatening to bomb Iran "back to the stone age " if it did not agree to reopen the Strait of Hormuz and ease disruptions to global energy markets. 2 April The IDF said that it struck an IRGC Ground Forces base and mobile command centers in Tehran. Two US strikes on the Karaj B1 bridge between Tehran and Karaj , which was described as the highest bridge in the Middle East, reportedly killed eight people and caused it to collapse. Iraq began exporting crude by tanker trucks through Syria to Mediterranean ports such as Baniyas . Buildings of the Pasteur Institute of Iran were destroyed by an air attack. A fuel tank near Mashhad International Airport was struck by a projectile, sparking a fire. An Iranian strike targeted an Amazon cloud computing facility in Bahrain, causing a fire. Iran also said it attacked US fighter jets at Jordan's Al Azraq Air Base with drones.

The IRGC later said that it targeted an Oracle data center in Dubai, although the city denied this.

The IDF said that it killed the commander of Iran's ballistic missiles unit in Kermanshah and three other battalion commanders. An Iranian ballistic missile strike damaged an Israeli drone factory in Petah Tikva . 3 April A US-crewed McDonnell Douglas F-15E Strike Eagle ( example pictured ) was shot down over Iran. Iranian drones hit the Mina Al-Ahmadi refinery in Kuwait and set it on fire in multiple locations. Explosions were reported in many places across Iran, including Alborz, Bushehr, Fars, Isfahan, Khuzestan, and Tehran. Kuwait authorities reported Iranian drones damaged a desalination plant. Abu Dhabi media office reported debris from an interception caused a fire in the Habshan gas facility. An Egyptian citizen was killed and four other foreign nationals were injured by interception debris. Iranian forces shot down a US Air Force F-15E Strike Eagle fighter jet over the country, prompting a search and rescue mission by US helicopters. Both of the two crew members were rescued by US forces. Two US MC-130 Hercules , an A-10 aircraft and 4 helicopters were destroyed in the operation. A US A-10 Warthog crashed into the Persian Gulf , near the Strait of Hormuz .

The pilot was rescued. Iranian cluster munitions caused extensive damage in Kiryat Ata and injured one person. Israel claims to have killed Iranian missile commander Makram Azimi in Kermanshah province .

The Israeli government extended operational reserve duty for current and future reservists to approximately nine weeks. Emirates Global Aluminium reported that an Iranian attack on its plant in Abu Dhabi caused significant damage and may take up to a year to restore its full production. Iranian media reported that Iran executed two men linked to Mojahedin-e-Khalq for planning to carry out attacks across the country. Israel says it killed Mohammadreza Ashrafi, senior IRGC official responsible for the oil headquarters. 4 April Iranian missile attacks on Israel with cluster munitions damaging buildings and roads were reported from Bnei Brak, Ramat Gan , Tel Aviv and Petah Tikva . One of those cluster bombs hit in the vicinity of the IDF's Kirya headquarters in Tel Aviv .

The home of United Torah Judaism leader Moshe Gafni in Bnei Brak was also hit by a cluster munition. Iranian media reported an air attack on a cement factory in Bandar Khamir . A strike hit a building near the Bushehr Nuclear Power Plant in Iran, killing one of its security guards. Israeli strikes also hit petrochemical sites in Khuzestan province, injuring five people. Iranian press reported US–Israeli strikes did hit the Bandar-e Mahshahr and Bandar Imam petrochemical zones as well as petrochemical industries in Fajr, Rejal, and Amir-Kabir. Five people were killed and 170 others were injured in the strikes in Mahshahr, according to Iranian media. Iran claimed that it struck the container ship MSC Ishyka with a drone in the Strait of Hormuz, alleging that it was linked to Israel.

The attack was not independently verified. An airstrike hit the Iranian side of the Shalamcheh border crossing, killing an Iraqi citizen and seriously injuring five others. Iraq closed the crossing in response. 5 April After heavy fighting, the missing weapon systems officer (WSO) from the downed F-15E was successfully recovered by US commandos.

The temporary US forward operating base in Iran, established to rescue the WSO, was evacuated and two C-130s and at least one MH-6 Little Bird were left behind and destroyed by the retreating US forces. Explosions and overhead flights were reported overnight in many provinces, including Alborz , Boyer-Ahmad , Bushehr , Fars , Gilan , Hormozgan , Isfahan , Khuzestan , Kohgiluyeh , and Mazandaran . Iranian drones hit a BAPCO oil storage facility in Bahrain and set it on fire. Further drone attacks hit the Shuwaikh Oil Sector Complex and a desalination plant in Kuwait.

The IDF said that it killed Mohammad Reza Ashrafi Kahi, who was the Head of Commerce at the IRGC Oil Headquarters. An Iranian missile strike hit a residential building in Haifa , killing four people. Nine people were injured in the attack, one seriously. Iran announced that the number of attacks on civilian centers in Israeli and American attacks (on Iran) was: 83,351 residential units. Also, 322 medical centers and 763 schools (in Iran) have been attacked so far. 6 April US president Donald Trump on 6 April 2026 An Iranian missile barrage early in the morning impacted 15 areas, seriously injuring a woman in Petah Tikva and injuring two others in Tel Aviv. Four people were lightly wounded by a cluster bomb in Haifa . An airstrike hit two homes in Baharestan County , Tehran province , killing 23 people. Overnight strikes in Bandar Lengeh and Kong killed six people and injured 17 others. Five others were killed in Qom . Tehran's Sharif University of Technology was also struck. Debris from a missile interception fell on a Raneen Systems building in Mussafah , UAE, injuring a Ghanaian. Explosions and attacks in the early morning were reported at a military site in northern Iran and in Khorramshahr . IRGC intelligence chief Majid Khademi was killed in an American-Israeli airstrike. Israel also said that it killed Yazdan Mir , the commander of the Quds Force's Unit 840. Iran said that it targeted US satellite equipment and munitions on Bubiyan Island , Kuwait using drones. Four bodies were found during a search and rescue operation on a destroyed house hit by an Iranian missile in Haifa the day before. Israeli Minister of Defense Israel Katz said that the IDF struck Iran's most prominent petrochemical plant in Asaluyeh , causing major damage.

The IDF said that it struck Mehrabad International Airport and two smaller airfields, destroying dozens of Iranian airplanes and helicopters. Iraqi security sources said that two people were killed after an Iranian drone strike on the village of Zarka Zoy , in the Darashakran district of Erbil Governorate . 15 Americans were wounded in an overnight Iranian drone strike on Ali Al Salem Air Base . Trump threatened to send Iran 'back to the stone ages' if it does not reach a deal by the ultimatum he set. Up to 6 April, as a result of the US and Israeli attacks, damage(s) has also been done to sports federations and sports infrastructure in Iran. Among the damages are the following: the complete destruction of the 12,000-seat Azadi Hall , the camp of the national wrestling teams of the Iran , various parts of the Shooting Federation, parts of the Tennis Federation, the Hockey Federation building located in the Tehran Revolution Sports Complex, and the cycling and handball federations in Iran. 7 April Avatar of Donald J. Trump Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) tweeted: English : A whole civilization will die tonight, never to be brought back again. I don’t want that to happen, but it probably will. However, now that we have Complete and Total Regime Change, where different, smarter, and less radicalized minds prevail, maybe something revolutionarily wonderful can happen, WHO KNOWS? We will find out tonight, one of the most important moments in the long and complex history of the World. 47 years of extortion, corruption, and death, will finally end. God Bless the Great People of Iran! April 7, 2026 Iranian drones hit a SABIC petrochemical complex in Jubail in Saudi Arabia, causing a fire. Overnight strikes were reported in the greater Tehran area, in Ahvaz , Chabahar , Jask , Shiraz , and Yazd , and near the Shahid Kalantari port, Tis port, and the Imam Ali base.

The Rafi'-Nia synagogue in central Tehran was destroyed in an airstrike.

The IDF admitted to conducting the strike, stating that it targeted a commander in the Khatam al-Anbiya Central Headquarters and regretted damage to the synagogue.

The US said that it conducted strikes against military sites on Kharg Island , with Iranian media reporting several large explosions. A highway bridge connecting Hashtrud and Tabriz and a rail bridge in Kashan was hit in an airstrike, killing two people.

The IDF later said that it bombed eight bridges across Iran used to transport military equipment.

At least five people were killed after a rocket fired from Kuwait landed in Basra, southern Iraq. Iran distributes 180,000 iodine tablets to Bushehr residents as part of a crisis preparedness plan. Trump said he agreed to a two-week ceasefire with Iran in exchange for the immediate reopening of the Strait of Hormuz . Pakistani Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif announced an immediate ceasefire "everywhere, including Lebanon and elsewhere". 8 April Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu announced on social media that the ceasefire does not include Lebanon. Early morning, Iranian agencies reported explosions from Sirri Island and Lavan Island of unknown origin.

The strike on Lavan island was later attributed to the UAE by press research from The Wall Street Journal in mid May 2026. Iranian missiles and drones were intercepted over the UAE, and Iranian drones also targeted energy infrastructure and desalination plants in Kuwait, causing serious damage. Two people were injured by shrapnel in Sitra , Bahrain.

The Israeli air force launched the biggest wave of attacks against targets in Lebanon since the beginning of the conflict, hitting more than 100 sites.

At least 254 people were killed and 837 injured. Hezbollah claimed responsibility for launching rockets towards north Israel as a response to "cease-fire violations". Iranian media said that Iran paused Hormuz traffic over Israeli attacks in Lebanon. Masoud Pezeshkian said the ceasefire with the United States was broken as Lavan and Siri islands were bombed. Donald Trump claimed after the Israeli air assault on Lebanon, that the Pakistani Prime Minister's announcement of the peace deal was wrong and Israeli interpretation of the deal was correct and Lebanon was excluded. Iranian news agency Tasnim on the other hand reported that Iran will withdraw from the agreement if Israel attacks on Lebanon continue. US vice president JD Vance stated that there had been a "legitimate misunderstanding" about the inclusion of Lebanon, with Israel having promised to hold back a bit in Lebanon to help with the negotiations, but it was not part of the ceasefire. 9 April Kuwait announced that it was intercepting a drone attack on its territory that was targeting vital institutions.

The Kuwait National Guard later announced that one of its sites were attacked, causing damage. Iran denied responsibility.

The US said that an Iran-backed militia conducted drone attacks near the Baghdad Diplomatic Support Center and Baghdad International Airport . Former Iranian foreign minister Kamal Kharazi succumbed to wounds sustained by an airstrike on his home nine days prior.

The 40th-day commemoration of the passing of the former leader of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ali Khamenei, was held with the participation of people and groups of mourners from inside and outside the country. 10 April According to Iranian media Mehr News Agency , till 10 April 2026, 203 Iranian sports venues, including indoor arenas, swimming pools, artificial turf fields, and office buildings, have been damaged in US–Israeli attacks, with damage levels estimated to range from 2 to 100 percent. 11 April Trump said that American forces started " clearing " the Strait of Hormuz . Iran claimed that an American vessel on way to the strait turned back after warning.

The Wall Street Journal reported that several US Navy destroyers entered the Strait of Hormuz for the first time since the war began. A US official described the event as an "operation that focused on freedom of navigation through International waters". Iranian government reportedly threatened to attack the ships, accusing US of ceasefire violation. US Central Command said the ships are taking part in mine clearance operations. 12 April Early morning, local time in Islamabad , after some 20 hours of negotiations, US vice president JD Vance stated that Iranian negotiators didn't accept the terms the US representatives JD Vance, Jared Kushner and Steve Witkoff had laid out and that the talks have failed.

On his social media platform, Trump declared a naval blockade on the Strait of Hormuz, announcing that the US Navy will prevent ships from entering or exiting the Strait and intercept vessels that have paid tolls to Iran. United States Central Command announced that the blockade will be enforced on vessels of all nations entering or departing Iranian ports and coastal areas but "will not impede freedom of navigation for vessels transiting the Strait of Hormuz to and from non-Iranian ports." 13 April According to Donald Trump, the US Naval blockade of Iran was due to start at 13 April 10:00 a.m. ET (02:00 p.m. UTC). 14 April The director of the Hind Rajab Foundation , reported that Daniel Ella , commander of the 52nd Battalion of the 401st Brigade which was involved in the killing of Hind Rajab , was seriously injured in southern Lebanon. Iran was reported to have been digging underground to retrieve missile launchers. 15 April Donald Trump declared he is permanently opening the Strait of Hormuz. 16 April China's foreign minister Wang Yi told his Iranian counterpart, that opening the Strait of Hormuz was of "unanimous interest". 17 April Iranian foreign minister announced that passage of commercial vessels through the Strait of Hormuz would be permitted during the truce in Lebanon. 18 April Iran said that it reasserted control of Hormuz as a result of the US refusing to lift its naval blockade . UKMTO reported two Iranian gunboats opened fire on a tanker that tried to pass through the Strait of Hormuz. 19 April An explosive device was detonated in southern Lebanon, killing an Israeli soldier and injuring nine others. An announcement by Donald Trump of a new round of talks in Islamabad is dismissed as false by Iran's Tasnim News Agency based on informed sources.

The US intercepted an Iranian cargo ship in the Strait of Hormuz. Iran claimed this was a 'ceasefire violation' and promised a response. Iran retaliated against the seizure by firing drones at US ships, although no damage was reported. 21 April Donald Trump extended the Iran truce to allow time for an Iranian proposal to be submitted at Pakistan's request. 22 April Iranian Revolutionary Guards gunboats engaged three container vessels, the Epaminodes (IMO 9153862), Euphoria (IMO 9235828) and MSC-Francesca (IMO 9401116) in the Strait of Hormuz. Epaminodes and MSC-Francesca were seized and escorted to the coast of Iran, claiming safety violations. Euphoria reported heavy damage to the bridge by gun and rocketfire from Iranian gunboats. 23 April Trump ordered the US Navy to destroy any Iranian boats laying mines in the Hormuz. President Trump announced that Israel and Lebanon agreed to a three-week extension of the ceasefire . 24 April Iran said that it confiscated a vessel suspected of collaborating with American forces after the vessel committed violations and ignored warnings. Kuwait's defense ministry reported that two northern Kuwaiti border outposts were struck by fiber optic drones from Iraq, causing material damage but no casualties. 3 May Trump announced that the US will help free up ships in the Strait of Hormuz beginning the next morning. 4 May US Central Command announced two US-flagged ships, coming from the Gulf, passed the Strait of Hormuz unchallenged, while two US warships passed from the east. Two civilian ship reported attacks near the Strait of Hormuz, South Korean container vessel HMM Namu was damaged near Umm Al Quwain , while a tanker reported an incident near Dubai. Iranian state media claimed that the Iran's navy launched two missiles and hit an US naval frigate in the Strait of Hormuz. US Central Command denied that the projectiles struck the vessel. American forces reportedly destroyed six or seven small Iranian boats in the Strait of Hormuz during a clash.

The boats were destroyed after they allegedly tried to interfere with the transit of two US flagged commercial vessels and two Navy destroyer vessels ( USS Truxtun and USS Mason ). UAE officials state that Iran attacked the oil Industry Zone in the port of Fujairah with drones, setting several storage tanks on fire and injuring several workers. Four missiles were also launched by Iran according to the UAE, but those were destroyed.

The Fujairah port is used to export oil without having to use the Strait of Hormuz. Omani officials also reported Iranian strikes in their territory. 5 May UAE's ministry of defence stated the country was again defending against a barrage of Iranian missiles and drones.

The CMA CGM line stated that one of their freighters, CMA GGM San Antonio , was attacked in the Strait of Hormuz late on 5 May. Several crewmembers were injured and were evacuated for treatment. 6 May President Trump temporary stopped the US military's "Project Freedom" operation to reopen the Strait of Hormuz, citing "great progress" at a potential deal with Iran. Trump added that the operation will be halted for "a short period" to determine whether a "complete and final agreement" with Iran could be achieved. US Central Command stated that US aircraft used cannon fire to disable the rudder on the Iranian tanker MT Hasna because it had tried to break the blockade and reach Iran. 7 May The US said that it carried out strikes on Iranian military sites in Bandar Abbas and Qeshm Island in response to an earlier combined missile, drone, and small boat attack on American destroyers crossing the Strait of Hormuz. Iran accused the US of violating the truce by targeting an Iranian oil tanker and another vessel. It also claimed that the US air strikes hit civilian areas in Qeshm Island, and coastal areas in its vicinity in Bandar Khamir and Sirik .

The military said it targeted American military vessels east of the Strait of Hormuz and south of the Chabahar Port in response to these events.

The UAE said that its air defense systems intercepted two Iranian ballistic missiles and three drones, moderately wounding three people.

The US said that it conducted strikes on two empty oil tankers allegedly trying to reach Iran. Iranian officials stated that six individuals went missing and several others were wounded in US attacks which hit "Iranian fishing and cargo vessels" in the vicinity of Khasab . 8 May Iranian state TV reported that the tanker Ocean Koi (IMO 9255933) was seized by Iranian forces. US Central Command reported it fired on and disabled Iranian tankers MT Sea Star III and MT Sevda running the blockade. 9 May Security forces in Bahrain arrested 41 people, accused of conducting espionage on behalf of the Iranian IRGC. 10 May UAE and Kuwait reported drone incursions which were neutralized, and a fire allegedly broke out on a ship off Qatar after a drone strike. 13 May The Indian-flagged small freighter Haji Ali reported to have been stricken by a drone or missile off the coast of Oman and sank. All 14 crewmembers were rescued by Omani authorities. 14 May UKMTO reported unauthorized personnel seized an unidentified ship 38 nautical miles (70 km; 44 mi) off Fujairah and moved it towards Iran.

The ship was later identified as the Honduras-flagged Hui Chuan , which apparently functioned as a floating armory, storing weapons for PMC's . 17 May A drone strike caused a fire at the edge of the UAE's Barakah nuclear power plant . No injuries or radiation leaks were reported.

The Iranian police chief, Ahmad-Reza Radan , has said that more than 6,500 "traitors and spies" have been arrested since the start of the war. 18 May The New York Times reported that the IDF operated two "covert" outposts in Iraq's western desert and killed a shepherd and a soldier in a bid to hide one of the sites near the town of al-Nukhaib . 22 May Qatar assumed a mediator role in the war , despite suffering Iranian attacks . However, Pakistan remained the primary mediator. 24 May Iranian media reported that the Iranian military intercepted an Israeli Orbiter surveillance drone in its Hormozgan province . Israel said that it was unaware of any such incident. 25 May Iranian president Masoud Pezeshkian ordered to end the internet blackout.

The US Central Command reported "self-defense" strikes on Iran, saying that the ceasefire is still in place, with several Iranian soldiers reportedly killed. Qatari news broadcaster Al Jazeera reported that unnamed Iranian sources informed them, that the IRGC targeted a ship at sea before the US attacks. 26 May Israeli troops move north of the Litani river in Lebanon and fights are reported in Zawtar al-Sharqiyah . IDF reported 100 strikes in the Beqaa Valley . 27 May US forces conducted another attack at a base on Iran's southern coastline. Iranian forces launched several drones, four of which were allegedly intercepted. 28 May Kuwait downed a ballistic missile launched at its territory. Iran said that it targeted the American base in Kuwait responsible for the attack on the previous day. Bloomberg News reported, citing a person familiar with the incident that debris from the downed Fateh-110 missile fell on Ali Al Salem Air Base , slightly injuring roughly five American soldiers and contractors and destroying one US MQ-9 Reaper drone and causing serious damage to at least one more. 1 June After increased US strikes on Iran and Israeli attacks in Lebanon, Iran announced to end all peace talks with the US. Israel promised not to hit Beirut's southern suburbs, and Hezbollah pledged not to attack Israel as part of a US proposal, with the cease-fire framework to be expanded to include the entirety of Lebanon. 2 June US forces attacked the tanker M/T Lexie while it was en route to Kharg Island, after it ignored orders to stay away from Iran.

The ship was hit by a missile, intended to disable it. 3 June Kuwait International Airport was hit by an Iranian drone, killing one and injuring 63. 7 June Israeli forces did strike the southern suburbs of Lebanon's capital Beirut. Lebanese ⁠state media said that an Israeli strike in the southern suburbs of Beirut killed two people and wounded 11 others.

The IDF said that it targeted Hezbollah infrastructure after the group fired towards northern Israel.

The same day, Iran said that American bases and Israeli assets in Middle East are legitimate targets due to the American naval blockade against the country and Israeli strikes on Beirut 's southern suburbs, where neighborhoods that Hezbollah members live in are located. Iran later launched ballistic missiles towards Israel. Israel said that it downed all the missiles. Iran said that it targeted Ramat David Airbase . Israel said that it will retaliate "forcefully" to the alleged Iranian violation of the truce.

The next day, the IDF announced that it struck military sites in central and western Iran, with explosions being reported in Tehran, Isfahan, and Tabriz. This triggered an exchange of strikes between the two countries.

The Houthis also joined the strikes. Two Iranian soldiers were killed in an Israeli attack. Iran later says that it had ceased military actions against Israel. Israel later announces that it stopped Iran strikes at President Trump's request. 9 June A US Army AH-64 Apache attack helicopter crashed off the coast of Oman after a collision with an Iranian Shahed drone . Trump blamed Iran and pledged retaliation; Iran denied the collision was intentional.

The crew was rescued by a Saronic Technologies sea drone , reportedly the first US Navy search-and-rescue operation with a sea drone. CENTCOM said the incident was under investigation. CENTCOM subsequently said that it launched retaliatory strikes against Iran. 10 June Iran said that it launched strikes aimed at US Fifth Fleet , Ali Al Salem airbase and launched missiles towards American base in Jordan housing F-35s in retaliation to the US strikes. President Trump pledged to attack Iran "very hard", citing inadequate progress in war-ending negotiations. US ‌defense secretary Pete Hegseth said that ⁠the United States will strike Iran hard on ‌10 June and bomb "key facilities." The US military later launched strikes on multiple Iranian targets, firing 49 Tomahawk missiles during the process. US forces attacked the tanker M/T Settebello (IMO 9162916) killing three Indian crew members.

The US stated the crew had failed to comply with orders from American forces. Drinking water facilities in Bemani , near the Strait of Hormuz, were damaged amid precision US strikes near the Strait. A local official reported that some 20,000 people lost access to water. 11 June Iran declared the indefinite closure of the Strait of Hormuz and says that it fired at communication antennas and radar facilities of US 5th Fleet, American military bases in Kuwait and Bahrain and an American command center in Jordan in response to the US attacks. Iranian attacks hit a key radar station on Bahrains highest mountain Jabal al Dukhan . Press research done by the Neue Zürcher Zeitung from mid June confirmed that the installation had been damaged. 14 June Israel attacked the Dahiyeh district in Beirut, allegedly responding to a drone attack on targets in Israel earlier. 21 June The first talks between the U.S and Iran since the signing of the Islamabad Memorandum are held at the Bürgenstock Resort in Switzerland .

The talks were mediated by Pakistan and Qatar . Five known ships pass through the Strait of Hormuz, down from 26 ships the previous day, amidst the re-closure. 26 June Trump accused Iran of violating the truce with US by launching drone attacks on ships in the Hormuz. CENTCOM later announced that in retaliation to the alleged truce violations, the US hit Iranian missile and drone storage facilities, as well as coastal radar stations. Iran later stated it targeted American sites in the Gulf region in response to the attack. 27 June The US military announced it struck Iranian military surveillance infrastructure, communication systems, air defense sites, drone storage facilities, and minelayer capabilities at the commander-in-chief 's direction in retaliation to an alleged Iranian attack against a ship in the Hormuz. 28 June Iran said it fired ballistic missiles and drones towards the US Ali Al Salem Air Base in Kuwait and the US Fifth Fleet headquarters in Bahrain in retaliation to American attacks against five Iranian coastal sites.

The U.S. and Iran later agreed to stop exchange of attacks between them. 7 July Iran reportedly launched at least two missiles at commercial vessels including Al Rekayyat, a liquefied natural gas tanker owned by Nakilat QGTS.QA, part of Qatari LNG industry in the Hormuz, causing significant damage. Iranian state TV reported that one of those vessels was struck after ignoring warning, without directly claiming responsibility. Qatar accused Iran of carrying the attack against its gas tanker, describing it as a clear violation of international law .

On the same day, the UK military said that another tanker in the Hormuz was hit by an unidentified projectile. Americans announced that they revoked Iran oil sale and production deal in retaliation to the alleged Iranian attacks. Saudis condemned alleged Iranian attacks against one of their tankers and the Qatari tanker. Iran accused the US of violating the memorandum that ended the war with restoration of the oil sanctions. 8 July The US Central Command announced that the US struck over 80 Iranian targets including air defense systems , coastal radar sites and dozens of IRGC small boats to degrade Iranian capability to disrupt international maritime trade using precision munitions in retaliation to alleged Iranian truce violations. Iran said that it shot down an American MQ-9 drone in southern Iran.

On the same day, Iran announced that it targeted 85 American military targets in Bahrain, Kuwait in retaliation to alleged truce breaches. Iran later added that it targeted an American base in Bahrain. IRGC Navy announced that one of its soldiers was killed in a US drone attack.

The same day, Trump declared that the MOU with Iran is "over" and he did not want to continue dealing with the Iranian regime, which he referred to as “sick people.” He emphasized the need to "rid their cancer," advocating for early intervention akin to cutting out cancer. Trump later stated that US negotiators can continue negotiations, although he expressed pessimism about the outcome. Iranian state media announced that eight service members from the country's army were killed in American attacks, adding that they served in the air force and ⁠ navy and died because of attacks ‌in ⁠ Bandar Abbas and Bushehr . Mehr News Agency reported that the US attacks killed two Iranian fishermen.

The US Central Command announced that it hit roughly 90 Iranian military targets, including air defense systems, coastal surveillance assets, missile and drone storage facilities, naval capabilities, and military logistics infrastructure along the country's coastline. 9 July The IRGC said that it targeted two American bases in Kuwait and two in Bahrain.

On the same day, Trump said that Iran contacted him and they want to make an agreement.

The same day, the Iranian army said that it targeted American military sites in Kuwait, Qatar and Bahrain. Iran's Health Ministry said that 14 people were killed and 78 others were injured in American attacks in Iran. Iran accused the US of targeting civilian railway bridges in its strikes and described the Trump administration as "evil and psychopathic." Fars News Agency reported that the targeted bridges include a bridge on the China-Russia trade corridor in Golestan province , making it one of the deepest US strikes inside Iran since the war began, extending the target list beyond military sites in the south to trade infrastructure that the Iranian regime has relied on to circumvent sanctions and maintain overland links with China and Russia. Iranian media reported explosions in Bushehr , claiming the area around the nuclear power plant was affected. American officials denied the claim, raising chance of involvement by a Gulf state. Iran said that it targeted Muwaffaq Salti Air Base . Iran also conducted drone strikes against an Iranian-Kurdish rebel group in the vicinity of Erbil, Iraq. Iranian state media reported that three IRGC soldiers were killed in the American attacks. 11 July The IRGC navy said that it closed the Strait until further notice after firing a warning shot at a vessel trying to transit through an unapproved route. 12 July The US Central Command said that the Iranian attack significantly damaged a Cyprus-flagged container vessel and a crew member went missing.

The Central Command added it struck roughly 140 military targets in Iran after the attack.

The UAE announced interception of Iranian attacks and Qatar declared that it shot down an Iranian attack.

The IRGC reported US attacks on several bases and communication towers along the country's southern coast. It claimed that Iran responded by targeting and destroying drone hangars and a command and control center at Prince Hassan Air Base . It also claimed that it struck and destroyed a fighter jet maintenance center ⁠and command and control facility at Al Udeid Air Base , destroyed logistical support centers and refueling stations for US aircraft carriers at the Duqm Port , aimed at an American communications system and radar site in Bahrain, struck and disabled another vessel ‌in the Strait and attacked a U.S. military radar facility in Kuwait. Qatar announced that three people were injured, including a child, by falling shrapnel following Iranian attacks. Oman stated that drones aimed at Musandam Governorate .

The Indian Ministry of External Affairs confirmed that one Indian national went missing after one of those Iranian attacks. Semi-official media reported that a service member from the Islamic Republic of Iran Navy was killed in a US attack in Jask port . CENTCOM declared that the Strait is "open to all vessels" and "Iran does not control" it. Iran reaffirmed its position that the Strait remains blocked to shipping, blaming "illegal movements" by US military. Fars News Agency reported that Iran fired three ballistic missiles at the Al Mina area in Kuwait and the firing facility of the American ATCAM missiles. Kuwait Armed Forces announced that three Kuwaiti border centers were struck in one of those Iranian attacks, causing damage, adding that an offshore drilling platform owned by the Kuwait Oil Company was struck by an Iranian drone, causing material damage and the wounding of one employee. CENTCOM announced that it conducted additional strikes on dozens of Iranian targets over attacks against vessels to further degrade the regime's capability to attack civilian sailors and commercial ships in the Strait.

The US forces used suicide drone boats in combat for the first time to strike an Iranian submarine and ship maintenance facility in Bandar Abbas Naval Base. 13 July State media reported that an American strike hit a water pumping station in Bandar-e Mahshahr , killing one person, injuring four others. Iran claimed that it hit fuel tanks and weapons storage facilities in Prince Hassan Air Base, igniting a fire on them. It described the strike as the first stage of its retaliation to American attacks on its coastal bases. Iran said that in separate incidents the IRGC Navy executed an operation overnight to stop two vessels it accused of violating regulations and endangering shipping in the Strait through disabling their systems. Iran claimed that it hit American military facilities and infrastructure in Juffair in "second phase of retaliation". Iran also stated that it hit American airbases including Ali Al Salem and destroyed radar systems in Oman. Isfahan province deputy governor said that one of those American strikes hit a military base in Nain , killing one person and injuring seven others. Trump announced that the US will reinstate the " Iranian blockade in the Strait of Hormuz " and impose a 20% toll on cargo shipping through the strait. According to Trump, "The U.S.A. will be, from this point forward, known as 'THE GUARDIAN OF THE HORMUZ STRAIT.'" Trump described it as a matter of fairness, claiming that the toll would cover "any and all costs necessary to do the job of providing safety and security to this very volatile section of the world." American led Combined Maritime Forces ' Joint Maritime Information Centre (JMIC) announced that the US naval blockade on Iran will start the following day. Trump formally informed the US Congress that the country has renewed hostilities against Iran. Trump declared that the US will hit Iran hard on that day and the next day, saying that the MoU was a test that the regime did not honor. Trump stated that the US could "relatively soon" destroy Pickaxe Mountain , Iran's heavily fortified underground site suspected of hosting a covert nuclear plant that experts believe is beyond the reach of the most powerful bunker buster bombs in the US arsenal . Iranian army stated that it aimed at a "hostile" American vessel using cruise missiles.

The US announced that it hit military targets throughout Iran including Bushehr, Chabahar , Jask , Konarak , Abu Musa , and Bandar Abbas. Two Emirati tankers were reportedly struck by Iranian cruise missiles in the Strait in Oman's territorial waters, killing one Indian crew member and injuring 10 other Indian crews, two of them critically. 14 July Iran claimed that it destroyed Patriot radar, American air control radar and early warning radar in Bahrain. Iran also stated that it aimed at an American airbase in Jordan using its ballistic missiles, urging Jordanians to dismantle US bases in their nation. "You know very well that not only do we ⁠not have any enmity with your country, but ‌we ⁠also love you, ‌the noble people, who understand the pain and ⁠oppression of the Palestinian people more than any other nation," ‌the statement stated. Iranian media reported that the country saved a tanker's non-Iranian crew after collision of vessels in the strait. British military stated that an "unknown projectile" hit an oil tanker off Omani coast in the vicinity of the strait. Fars News reported that overnight American attacks in Hormozgan province killed three people. Trump cancelled plans to impose fees in the strait.

The IMO said that death toll from Hormuz ship attacks on that day increased to two. 15 July Trump threatened that the US will target Iranian power plants and bridges next week if negotiations are not pursued by the Iranian regime. He suggested that while a ground campaign may be necessary, there are others who could conduct it for the US. He stated he would authorize a seizure of Kharg Island only after US air and missile strikes have severely damaged Iran's coastal defenses and retaliatory capabilities. CENTCOM commander Admiral Brad Cooper said that Iran had deliberately attacked seven commercial vessels in the last week resulting in "nearly a dozen" civilian crews being killed, wounded or going missing. CENTCOM said that the US reinstated naval blockade on Iran ports, hit dozens of military sites in the vicinity of Hormuz the day before. Iran said that it targeted US sites in Jordan, Kuwait and Bahrain. IRIB reported that an American attack hit a wheat storage silo in Hoveyzeh . Kuwait said that Iranian attacks struck one of its navy ships , wounding four soldiers.

On the same day, CENTCOM stated that the US military conducted another series of strikes on coastal defense systems and cruise missile storage and launch sites on Greater Tunb Island "to further degrade military capabilities Iranian forces have used to attack commercial shipping in the Strait of Hormuz". An Iranian drone attacked a warehouse in Al Shuaiba in Kuwait the day before, with Kuwait stating several vital and civilian facilities were targeted by Iran. Iran claimed the facility in was a logistics and supply hub for American forces in the West Asia.

The US said that it redirected two commercial ships after restarting the naval blockade. American officials stated that recent US strikes on Iran are aimed at military abilities that may need to be neutralised before further sophisticated operations against the Iranian regime.

The US announced that it carried out additional strikes on Iran. CENTCOM stated that the US military disabled an unladen oil tanker trying to sail to a port in Iran by firing hellfire missiles into its funnel .

The Wall Street Journal reported, citing US officials, that Trump is mulling increasing US military operations in Iran after receiving days of briefings from key aides. Options include expanding airstrikes on more targets in Iran, including energy sites; sending American soldiers to invade Kharg Island and other territories near the strait; and attacking a tunnel network at Pickaxe Mountain, a fortified facility that could be used for covert nuclear operations. 16 July The Islamic Republic of Iran Army said that it aimed at American military targets in Jordan, Kuwait and Bahrain.

The IRGC stated that it aimed at an American airbase in Jordan. A spokesperson for the Iranian regime's top unified military command stated that the regime will "target all infrastructure in the region" if Trump "follows through with his threats of attacking Iranian infrastructure." Three sources told Reuters that the Iranian regime has urged the Houthis to stop the Red Sea oil route through Bab el-Mandeb if the US attack Iranian power network, posing a significant new danger to global energy supply.

The White House maintained that Iran is still in talks with the US and hopes to negotiate an agreement. CENTCOM said it had expanded strikes into northern Iran on targets including military logistics infrastructure to "further degrade Iranian military capabilities". That same day, the Iranian regime's judiciary dismissed Trump's claim that an American prisoner arrested during the Biden administration in 2024 was released or exchanged. 17 July Qatar stated that a child was wounded by shrapnel resulting from downing operations against an Iranian missile attack on the country.

The Iran Army said that it aimed at American force deployment and logistical support centers in Kuwait. Iranian state media reported that American attacks on infrastructure in southern and western Iran killed eight Iranians, and causing injury to 20 others.

The IRGC claimed that it aimed at an American command center in al-Tanf despite departure of US soldiers in the military base to Jordan in early that year. Iran said that it targeted an American maritime surveillance radar in Oman.

The US-led alliance intercepted several drones above Erbil . US-led coalition forces in Iraq intercepted several drones above Erbil .

The British military stated that a tanker was struck by an unknown projectile near Oman. Iranian Health Ministry stated that American attacks on Iran since the beginning of that month killed at least 38 people and injured more than 100 other. Iran stated that it aimed at American fighter jets in Jordan. Kuwait stated that Iran's attack caused damage to one of its electricity generation and water desalination ⁠stations. Iran claimed that it hit American Al Udeid Air Base . Komala Party of Iranian Kurdistan stated that nine Iranian Kurdish rebels were killed in attacks on a camp in the vicinity of Sulaymaniyah , blaming it on Iranian leadership. Two more drones aimed at Iranian Kurdish rebel camp in Iraq. Kuwait army stated that several soldiers from its land forces were injured in one of those Iranian attacks. Tasnim News Agency reported, citing informed source that a Thai-flagged ship was targeted in the ‌Hormuz by the IRGC navy, accusing it of ignoring warnings and trying to pass ⁠without approval from the navy.

The U.S. stated that it struck Iran's infrastructure including subterranean arsenals for seventh consecutive night. Iran claimed that its strikes destroyed main AI center in Bahrain and a US drone storage site. Iran media reported, citing a local official that American attacks in Hormozgan province killed three people and injured eight others.

The IRGC stated it had detained four tankers in the Hormuz, accusing them of breaching regulations while trying to pass through the strait. Iran state television claimed that Iran military struck American bases in Kuwait and Jordan. 18 July Iranian media and government officials stated that power facilities and desalination water pumps in Jask were struck, cutting of water supply to 10,000 people on the coastal area.

The IRGC stated that two oil tankers exploded in mined route in the vicinity of Hormuz. CENTCOM denied the claim. An American official told Axios that Iran aimed at a US military base in Saudi Arabia. Kuwait Ministry of Electricity and Kuwaiti fire service stated that an Iranian attack caused a fire in a power generation and water desalination plant in the country, causing injuries to several firemen. Kuwait Petroleum Corporation stated that "repeated Iranian attacks" hit one of its oil facilities, causing significant material damage and wounding some people. Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister Kazem Gharibabadi states that Iran suspended implementation of MoU commitments as part of the interim deal with the US, accusing the latter of breaching its own obligations. Iranian government stated that at least 50 people were killed and over 500 others were injured in American attacks in Iran since its renewal. CENTCOM stated that two American soldiers were killed, one went missing, four others were injured and some others were slightly wounded while defending against Iranian ballistic missile and drone attacks in Jordan the day before.

The Wall Street Journal . ^ "Update from Erika Solomon" .

The New York Times . 28 February 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Lendon, Brad (28 February 2026). "Strikes reported in multiple Iranian cities, state media says" . CNN . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "US, Israel launch attack on Iran, explosions across Tehran" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Bozorgmehr, Najmeh (28 February 2026). "Strike on Iranian primary school kills 108, authorities say" . Financial Times . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Death toll from Israeli strike on Iran girls school rises to 180" . Middle East Eye . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ McClure, Tess (1 March 2026). "Death toll from school bombing in southern Iran reportedly rises to 165" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Israel strikes two schools in Iran, killing more than 80 people" . Al Jazeera . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Aslan, Mahmoud. "After a Sports Hall in Iran Was Bombed, Witnesses Describe Chaos and 'Continuous Screaming' " . Dropsite News . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ a b c "Live – Israel and US launch strikes on Iran as Tehran prepares retaliation" . Iran International . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Reals, Tucker; Hubbard, Kaia; Dakss, Brian (2 March 2026). "Live updates: Trump says Iran operation could take 'four weeks or less', 3 U.S. troops killed" . CBS News. ^ Shalev, Tal (28 February 2026). "Timing of US-Israel attack on Iran bears symbolic meaning in Judaism" . CNN . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Updated: U.S., Israel Launch Strikes Against Iran, Tehran Retaliates Across Region" . USNI . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (28 February 2026). "IDF says 200 jets involved in Air Force's largest-ever attack sortie" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Halbfinger, David M.; Bergman, Ronen (1 March 2026). "How the Assault on Iran Unfolded" .

The New York Times . Jerusalem, Tel Aviv. ^ a b c Mohamed, Edna; Marsi, Federica. "US and Israel attack Iran; explosions heard in Israel" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "How Iran's fightback surprised the US" .

The Financial Times . 13 February 2026 . Retrieved 14 March 2026 . ^ "The 'Fourth Successor': Iran's plan for a long war with the US and Israel" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 14 March 2026 . ^ "Bahrain says a missile attack targeted the US Navy's 5th Fleet headquarters in the island kingdom" . WRAL-TV . Associated Press . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Iran-Backed Iraqi Militia Says Four Fighters Killed in US-Israeli Airstrike as Protests Erupt Across Iraq" . Kurdistan 24 . 1 March 2026. ^ "Watch: Scattered fires, damage seen across Israel as Iran retaliates" . Al Jazeera. 1 March 2026. ^ Summers, Charlie; Fabian, Emanuel (1 March 2026). "Woman killed, dozens injured as Iranian missile strikes Tel Aviv residential block" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Iran targets US military bases in the Middle East with retaliatory strikes" . France 24. 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ Salem, Mostafa (28 February 2026). "Iran's IRGC targeted four US bases in the Middle East, Iranian media reports" . CNN . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Lehmann, Noam (28 February 2026). "Bahrain: Sirens activated as Iran targets US bases" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Yee, Isaac; Rebane, Teele (28 February 2026). "Videos show smoke rising near US Navy facility in Bahrain" . CNN . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Explosions reported in Kuwait and UAE" . Armenia News . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Drone attacks targets Kuwait international airport" . Iran International . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ a b "Kuwait summons Iran envoy after missile, drone attacks" . Iran International . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Update from Ismaeel Naar" .

The New York Times . 28 February 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Update from Edward Wong" .

The New York Times . 28 February 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ a b "Iran latest: US launches 'major combat operations' against regime – as multiple Middle East cities struck during retaliation" . Sky News . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Blackburn, Gavin; Fisayo-Bambi, Jerry (28 February 2026). "Euronews journalists in Dubai report explosions and apparent missile strike on residential area" . Euronews . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ a b Dahir, Abdi Latif (28 February 2026). "Iran Hits Back Across the Mideast, Targeting U.S. Bases and Allies" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Nicastro, Andrea (28 February 2026). "Iran, le ultime notizie in diretta | Attacco di Usa e Israele: «Probabile che Khamenei sia morto». Teheran risponde: raffiche di missili su Israele e sulle basi Usa nel Golfo. Poi un sms: «Lasciate la capitale»" . Corriere della Sera (in Italian) . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Iranian Shahed-136 drone strike reported near Burj Khalifa, smoke plumes captured on video: Watch" . Moneycontrol . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Paul, Rohit (28 February 2026). "Video Shows Iranian Shahed Drone Striking Dubai, Huge Explosion" . NDTV . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Update from Ismaeel Naar" .

The New York Times . 28 February 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ El Masaiti, Amira (28 February 2026). "Dubai authorities say drone debris causes fire at Burj Al Arab Hotel" . Hespress English . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "US and Israel launch attack on Iran, as Trump says 'major combat operations' under way" . BBC News . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Salem, Mostafa (28 February 2026). "One person killed in UAE after Iranian strikes" . CNN . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Drones Shot Down Over Erbil Near U.S. Consulate as Iran-Israel Conflict Expands to Iraqi Kurdistan" . Kurdistan24 . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Air defense systems intercepted two ballistic missiles targeting Jordanian territory — JAF" .

The Jordan Times . 28 February 2026. ^ "Jordan's military says it downed two missiles targeting the country" . Reuters . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "Update from Rawan Sheikh Ahmad" .

The New York Times . 28 February 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Lieber, Dov; Ward, Alexander; Norman, Laurence (1 March 2026). "Why the U.S. and Israel Struck When They Did: A Chance to Kill Iran's Leaders" .

The Wall Street Journal . Washington . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Hackers hit Iranian apps, websites after US-Israeli strikes" . Reuters. 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Gal, Itai (28 February 2026). "Israel plunges Iran into darkness with largest cyberattack in history during attack against Iran" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Israel Hacked Popular Iranian Prayer App to Urge Defections, Resistance" .

The Wall Street Journal . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Liebermann, Oren (28 February 2026). "Israel launches strike against Iran, declares state of emergency across country" . CNN . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Mohamed, Edna; Marsi, Federica. "Israel Attacks Iran" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Yosef, Eugenia (28 February 2026). "Israeli hospitals shift underground as Health Ministry orders highest readiness level" . CNN . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (28 February 2026). "Israel calls up 20,000 reservists, in addition to the 50,000 reservists currently on duty" .

The Economist . ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ a b "Iran conflict widens as Israel strikes Lebanon following Hezbollah attacks" . Reuters . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ a b Bose, Saikat Kumar (2 March 2026). "On Camera, US Destroys Iran's Parked Fighter Jets, Drones" . NDTV . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ a b Fabian, Emanuel (2 March 2026). "IDF says most recent strikes targeted Tehran HQs and bases of Iranian security forces" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Israeli airstrike hits Iranian jets on runway" .

The Jerusalem Post . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Aroor, Shiv (1 March 2026). "China's HQ-9B Falls Short? Big Question After Airstrikes Level Iran Cities" . NDTV.in . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Tehran Revolutionary Court bombed, its building destroyed - state media" . Iran International . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ a b c d انفجارهای متعدد در تهران یک روز بعد از کشته شدن خامنه‌ای . BBC News (in Persian). 1 March 2026. ^ "Israel says it destroyed Iran internal security headquarters in Tehran" . Iran International . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "At least 5 people killed in US and Israeli strikes in Iran's Absardar region" . Financial Times . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ "Iran launches missiles at Israel, Israeli military launches defense system" . AiCoin . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ a b "Daily World Briefing, March 1" . Xinhua Net . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ a b Gambrell, Jon; Lidman, Melanie; Boak, Josh; Tucker, Eric (1 March 2026). "Iran fires missiles at Israel and Gulf states after US-Israeli strike kills Khamenei" . AP News . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Manieer, Pranay (2 March 2026). "Footage Shows Exact Moment Iran Intercepted And Shot Down American MQ-9 Drone" . News18 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Iran's Guards say they 'struck' US aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln" .

The Times of Israel . 1 March 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Bordeaux, Thomas; Mezzofiore, Gianluca (5 March 2026). "Radar bases housing key US missile interceptor hit in Jordan and UAE, satellite images show" . CNN . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ Mednick, Sam. "Rescuers dig through rubble after deadly strike on Israeli synagogue" . AP News . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Lidman, Melanie (6 March 2026). "Israeli family who buried 3 of their children after missile attack clings to faith" . AP News . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ "Six wounded in Iranian ballistic missile strike on West Jerusalem" . Al Jazeera . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Iran launches missile strike on U.S. Fifth Fleet Headquarters in Bahrain" . 2026. ^ Bhandari, Isha (1 March 2026). "Iranian drone hits Crowne Plaza hotel in Bahrain's Manama" . India TV . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Crowne Plaza in Bahrain confirms "incident" affected the hotel" . CNN . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Live Updates: Iran Vows to Avenge Leader's Death as Strikes Continue" .

The New York Times . 1 March 2026. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Smoke Rises Over French Naval Base in Abu Dhabi After Iranian Strike" . Yeshiva World News . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Iran names interim leaders as Israeli rescuers say nine killed in missile attack - live updates" . BBC News . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Dey, Mrinmay; Rajan, Gnaneshwar (2 March 2026). Ellis, Aurora (ed.). "Amazon's cloud unit reports fire after objects hit UAE data center" . Reuters . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "US-sanctioned oil tanker hit off Oman coast" . Reuters . 1 March 2026. ^ Hand, Marcus (1 March 2026). "Ships avoid the Strait of Hormuz, tanker hit off Oman" . SeatradeMaritime . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Three tankers damaged in Gulf as US-Iran conflict escalates" . Reuters . 1 March 2026. ^ "Seafarer death confirmed aboard product tanker struck off Oman" . Ship Management International . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Nahost-Liveblog: ++ Mehrere Tote bei Raketeneinschlag in Israel ++" . Tagesschau (in German) . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "One killed, 32 injured in Iranian attacks on Kuwait, health ministry says" . Iran International . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "UK says British fighter jet shot down Iranian drone heading toward Qatar" . Iran International . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Series of loud explosions rock Qatar's capital" . Al Jazeera . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Explosions heard over Doha" . Al Jazeera . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Explosions in Dubai as Iran continues to strike Gulf nations" . NBC News . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Reals, Tucker; Hubbard, Kaia; Dakss, Brian (2 March 2026). "Live updates: Trump says Iran operation could take "four weeks or less," 3 U.S. troops killed" . CBS News. ^ "Saudi Arabia intercepts missile attacks on airport, military base" . Al Jazeera . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Syria Iran" . HJ News . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "3 injured, including 2 children, in Damascus after missile debris falls amid Israel-Iran tensions: Report" . Anadolu Agency . 2 March 2026. ^ "RAF responding to suspected drone strike at UK base in Cyprus, MoD says" . BBC News . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "UK Cyprus base hit by drone" . cyprus-mail.com . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Urgent: Explosions heard at Britain's air force base in Cyprus: British media" . english.news.cn . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Further to the report that the UK's Akrotiri air force base in Cyprus has been hit by a drone" .

The Guardian . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ Smith, Helena (2 March 2026). "Authorities in Cyprus have confirmed the drone strike" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ Sabbagh, Dan (2 March 2026). "Hezbollah said to have launched drone that struck UK RAF airbase in Cyprus" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Two Iranian missiles fired in direction of Cyprus: British defence secretary" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Iran launched missiles at Cyprus, threatening thousands of British troops stationed there" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Maddox, David (1 March 2026). "Iran missiles fired towards UK military bases in Cyprus, defence minister says" .

The Independent . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Saudi Arabia authorizes retaliation against Iran, CNN" . Iran International . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "E3 say they may back defensive steps to destroy Iran's launch capability" . Iran International . 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "US can use UK bases for missile strikes on Iran: Starmer" . Euractiv. Agence France-Presse. 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Foy, Henry (1 March 2026). "EU's naval mission in Red Sea to be expanded in response" . Financial Times . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ "Live Updates: Iran Vows to Avenge Leader's Death as Strikes Continue" .

The Guardian . ^ Murphy, Francois; Landay, Jonathan (2 March 2026). "Satellite imagery shows apparent attack on Iranian nuclear site, report says" . Reuters . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Satellite images appear to show fresh damage to Iran's Natanz nuclear facility complex" .

The Times of Israel . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "IAEA confirms entrances to Iran's Natanz enrichment plant were bombed" . Reuters. 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "حملات گسترده هوایی به پایتخت ایران؛ آسیب‌ به بیمارستان‌های گاندی و خاتم‌الانبیاء در تهران" . BBC News (in Persian). 1 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "IDF strikes Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting hub" .

The Jerusalem Post . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Report: Israel carried out ground operation in Iran" . Arutz Sheva . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ a b c d Hanna Ziady; Hilary Whiteman; Eyad Kourdi; Helen Regan; Antoinette Radford; Karla Cripps; Brad Lendon; Karina Tsui; Jomana Karadsheh; Rhea Mogul; Esha Mitra; John Liu; Teele Rebane; Isaac Yee; Martin Goillandeau; Ross Adkin; Laura Sharman; Todd Symons; Aleena Fayaz; Catherine Nicholls; Tim Lister; Deva Lee; Lauren Kent; Billy Stockwell; Clay Voytek; Logan Schiciano; Isabelle D'Antonio (2 March 2026). "Live updates: Several US military aircraft have crashed but all crew survived, Kuwait's defense ministry says" . CNN . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ a b Reals, Tucker (2 March 2026). "Live updates: U.S. military confirms 4 troops killed in Iran war; Kuwait downs 3 U.S. jets in "friendly fire" " . CBS News . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ Reals, Tucker (3 March 2026). "Live Updates: U.S. death toll in Iran war rises to 6 as Trump says campaign could last 5 weeks" . CBS News. ^ "Gas prices soar as Iranian attacks shut down Qatari production" . Financial Times . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Qatar halts LNG production, Saudi refinery, Iraqi Kurdish and Israeli oil, gas fields shut amid Mideast strikes" . Reuters . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "US flagged products tanker hit by unknown projectiles in Bahrain port, sources say" . Reuters . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ Stepansky, Joseph; Sabah, Zaid (2 March 2026). "One killed in Iranian attack on Bahrain; Hezbollah fires rockets at Israel" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Iranian attack sets off fire near Bahrain's Mina Salman Port" . Al Jazeera . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "UAE intercepts 9 Iranian ballistic missiles, 6 cruise missiles, ministry says" . Iran International . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Small fire under control at Saudi Aramco refinery after apparent drone strike" .

The Times of Israel . 2 March 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ " 'Missile debris' sparks fire at Saudi's Aramco oil refinery" . Al Jazeera. 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Iran denies targeting Saudi oil facility" . CNN. 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ a b "Live updates: Trump on 'Operation Epic Fury'; won't rule out sending U.S. troops into Iran if 'necessary' " . NBC News. 2 March 2026. ^ a b Stepansky, Joseph; Sabah, Zaid (2 March 2026). "US, Israel attack Iran live: Trump vows to avenge 3 American soldiers" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 28 February 2026 . ^ "Explosions rock Iraq's Erbil" . Al Jazeera. 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ a b Boxerman, Aaron; Fassihi, Farnaz; Cooper, Helene; Kanno-Youngs, Zolan; Pager, Tyler; Zhuang, Yan (1 March 2026). "Israel Strikes Hezbollah in Lebanon as War With Iran Escalates" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Iran-aligned group claims 23 drone attacks on US sites in Erbil" . Al Jazeera. 2 March 2026. ^ "Paphos airport 'evacuated' – reports" . Cyprus Mail . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Sirens sound again at Akrotiri base as tensions remain high" . knews . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "RAF base in Cyprus hit by drone strike, Ministry of Defence says" . Sky News . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Greece deploys frigates and F-16s to Cyprus amid rising security tensions" . eKathimerini . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "We will strike Cyprus hard, Iranian general says over American presence on island" . In-Cyprus . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Iranian General warns of "intense" attacks on Cyprus over US presence – Video" . caliber.az . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Fuel tanker ablaze in Strait of Hormuz after drone strike, Iran Revolutionary Guards say" . Reuters . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Video shows Iranian missile strike hit Beersheba, Israel" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "The Israeli military is saying projectiles have been launched from Lebanon and sirens are sounding in several areas in northern Israel as a result" .

The Guardian . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Rockets launched from Lebanon for first time in months, setting off sirens across northern Israel" .

The Times of Israel . 1 March 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ Glikman, Eitan; Kraus, Yair (1 March 2026). "IDF: Rocket intercepted from Lebanon, several landed in open areas; drone intrusion alerts" . Ynetglobal . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ a b Kleinbaum, Yair (1 March 2026). "BREAKING: Hezbollah Officially Declared War on Israel" . JFeed . Retrieved 1 March 2026 . ^ "Hezbollah claims responsibility for attack on Israel" . Al Jazeera. 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ Kraus, Yair; Glikman, Eitan; Shashua, Itamar (1 March 2026). "Israel strikes southern Lebanon and Tehran as Hezbollah joins Iran war" . Ynetglobal . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Israel strikes Lebanon after Hezbollah rocket fire as Iran conflict widens" . BBC. 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Iran, le news dalla guerra. Missili di Hezbollah dal Libano verso Haifa, Israele risponde. Teheran sotto attacco dell'Idf" . la Repubblica (in Italian). 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (2 March 2026). "IDF says it killed Hezbollah intelligence chief in overnight strike" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "Israeli military says it killed head of Hezbollah's intelligence headquarters" . Reuters . 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "IDF kills head of Palestinian Islamic Jihad in Lebanon during strikes in Beirut" .

The Jerusalem Post . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ Salem, Mostafa; Kent, Lauren (2 March 2026). "Qatar says it shot down two Iranian bomber aircraft" . CNN . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ "سنتکام: سقوط سه اف-۱۵اشتباه پدافند کویت بود؛ قرارگاه خاتم‌الانبیاء: ما زدیم" . BBC News Persian (in Persian). 2 March 2026 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ Burke, Jason; Christou, William (2 March 2026). "US-Israel war on Iran dramatically expands across Middle East" .

The Guardian . ^ a b "The Fourth Day of the U.S.–Israel War on Iran: Strikes Continue in Western Regions of the Country" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 3 March 2026. ^ انفجار در اصفهان و شیراز shahrekhabar.com ^ "ببینید | اولین تصاویر از حمله آمریکا و اسرائیل به شمال اصفهان" . صاحب‌خبر . 3 March 2026. ^ عضو خبرگان رهبری: انتخاب رهبری جدید طولانی نخواهد بود/ خبرگان رهبری سوگند یاد کردند در انتخاب رهبری سلیقه‌ افراد یا جریانات سیاسی و حزبی دخیل نیست (Member of the Leadership Experts: The selection of a new leader will not take long/ The leadership experts swore that the preferences of individuals or political and party movements are not involved in the selection of the leader.) ^ حمله موشکی به ساختمان مجمع تشخیص مصلحت (Missile attack on Expediency Discernment Council building) ^ حمله دوباره به صدا و سیما ^ "Video shows ruins of Iran's Expediency Council building after strikes" . Iran International . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "IDF destroys secret nuclear site, thousands of missile pads" .

The Jerusalem Post . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Live updates: Israel hits Beirut and Tehran as Trump warns Iran of escalated strikes" . CNN. 3 March 2026. ^ Fabian, Emanuel (3 March 2026). "Top IRGC commander, responsible for Lebanon, killed in Tehran strike — IDF" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Israel strikes Iran leadership compound in central Tehran" . Iran International . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "UNESCO shares concerns over protection of cultural heritage sites" . euronews . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Purwar, Krati (3 March 2026). "How Iran Conflict Damaged Golestan Palace, Once Home Of Peacock Throne Looted From Delhi" . NDTV . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "آمار شهدا به ۷۸۷ نفر رسید" . صاحب‌خبر . 3 March 2026. ^ "Iran Air A319 Destroyed on the Ground at Bushehr — Tehran's Mehrabad Airport Was Hit Too" . View from the Wing . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Air Airbus A319 destroyed after military escalation in Iran" . Aeroflap . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Civilian Iran Air Passenger Jet Destroyed at Bushehr Airport, Rosatom Nuclear Plant Suspended" .

The Sunday Guardian . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ Lamb, Kate; Badshah, Nadeem; Campbell, Lucy; Ambrose, Tom; Ho, Vivian; Fulton, Adam (4 March 2026). "Iran war live updates: Trump says US may escort tankers through Strait of Hormuz; IDF launches strikes on Iran" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "U.S. Sank Iran's 'Soleimani' Warship, Hegseth Says" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Destroyed: 17 Iranian Navy ships, including 1 submarine, says US admiral" . Gulf News . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ a b Al Amir, Khitam (3 March 2026). "UAE air defences intercept Iranian ballistic missiles" . Gulf News . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ a b Magdy, Samy (3 March 2026). "Iranian drones strike U.S. Embassy in Saudi Arabia as war widens" . PBS News . Associated Press . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ a b "Israeli police say one injured by missile shrapnel in Tel Aviv" . Al Jazeera. 3 March 2026. ^ "Seven Israelis injured in Iranian missile attack: Report" . Al Jazeera. 3 March 2026. ^ "Bahrain "successfully" intercepts 74 missiles, 92 drones since Saturday" . aje.news . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ McCreesh, Shawn; Pager, Tyler; Schmitt, Eric; Cooper, Helene; Pérez-Peña, Richard (2 March 2026). "Live Updates: Trump Suggests Extended War on Iran as U.S. Adds to Forces in Mideast" .

The New York Times . ^ "Watch: Drone targets UAE oil facility" . Sky News . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Naman Trivedi (3 March 2026). "US Consulate In Dubai Hit As Fresh Explosions Rock UAE; Fire And Smoke Seen In Bur Dubai" . Times Now . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Qatar Says Thwarted Iran Attacks on Hamad International Airport" . Asharq al-Awsat . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Hansler, Jennifer (3 March 2026). "Trump warns Iran about larger strikes as US urges Americans to depart region" . CNN . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Fulton, Adam; Campbell, Lucy; Lawther, Fran; Ambrose, Tom; Lowe, Yohannes (3 March 2026). "Middle East crisis live: Israel launches further attacks on Iran and Beirut as US urges citizens to evacuate region" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "CIA headquarters in Riyadh struck by suspected Iranian drone, officials say" . NBC News. 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Saudi intercepts and destroys nine drones, state media says" . CNN. 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ فیلم/ اصابت پهپاد ایرانی به اردوگاه تروریست‌های حزب آزادی کردستانVideo/ Iranian drone hits Kurdistan Freedom Party terrorist camp ^ "Iraqi group claims attack on Erbil hotel housing US troops" . Al Jazeera English . 3 March 2026. ^ McShane, Asher (3 March 2026). "Israel launches ground invasion of Lebanon and Trump warns 'hardest hits were yet to come' " . LBC . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Israel orders troops to seize new positions in Lebanon" . France 24. 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ " 'Off-ramps available': Oman pushes peace talks as nearly 800 killed in Iran" . Al Jazeera. ^ "Hezbollah says targeted 3 Israeli bases after strikes on Lebanon" . France 24. Agence France-Presse . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Hezbollah Says Targeted 3 Israeli Bases after Strikes on Lebanon" . Asharq al-Awsat . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Hezbollah says it shot down Israeli drone above Nabatieh" . Al Jazeera . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "WHO chief says 3 paramedics killed while recovering victims in southern Lebanon" . Al Jazeera. 3 March 2026. ^ https://www.shahrekhabar.com/news/177253848038627 ^ صفحه اطلاع‌رسانی جنگ روز سوم و چهارم (War information page for the third and fourth days) way2pay.ir ^ "پیام‌رسان‌های خارجی را غیرفعال یا حذف کنید" . صاحب‌خبر . 2 March 2026. ^ تمهیدات ویژه برای تأمین نان/ هشدار جدی به نانوایی ها: تعطیل کنید، سهمیه آردتان قطع می شود Special arrangements for bread supply/Serious warning to bakeries: Close, your flour quota will be cut off ^ "سردار نائینی: دشمن از جنگ ۱۲ روزه درس نگرفت/ پاسخ‌های ما کوبنده‌تر و گسترده‌تر ادامه خواهد داشت" . صاحب‌خبر . 3 March 2026. ^ "آخرین خبر از وضعیت سید مجتبی خامنه‌ای" . صاحب‌خبر . 3 March 2026. ^ "Khamenei's son Mojtaba elected his successor sources say" . Iran International . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Trump Open to Supporting Armed Militias in Iran, U.S. Officials Say" .

The Wall Street Journal . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Freiberg, Nava (3 March 2026). "Qatar carried out strikes in Iran, Saudi Arabia to soon follow — Israeli reports" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "Qatar denies Israeli media report that it's carrying out retaliatory strikes in Iran" .

The Times of Israel . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ "ورود نیروهای سپر جزیره از عربستان به بحرین" . صاحب‌خبر . 3 March 2026. ^ "Day Five of the U.S.–Israel War on Iran: Expansion of Areas Affected by Military Strikes" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 4 March 2026. ^ "Fire in the west of Tehran, city shrouded in smoke after the attack" . Haberler.com . 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Israel says it struck major Iranian military complex east of Tehran" . Al Jazeera. 4 March 2026. ^ Fabian, Emanuel (4 March 2026). "Israel says it targeted major Iranian military HQ with 250 bombs dropped by 100 jets" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Israel says it hits security headquarters across Tehran, as Iran attacks US sites in Dubai and Qatar" . BBC News . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Israeli army: The Israeli army has just completed a large-scale airstrike on a major military complex belonging to the Iranian regime, which houses command headquarters and soldiers from all branches of the Iranian security establishment. Under precise guidance from Military Intelligence, Air Force fighter jets have just completed a large-scale airstrike on the complex. Tel Aviv-Yafo, Tel Aviv District" . iran.liveuamap.com . ^ "Israel F-35 downs Iranian YAK-130 in first dogfight of war" .

The Jerusalem Post . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Israel downs Iranian fighter jet over Tehran, IDF claims" .

The Independent . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Israel Says F-35 Shot Down Iran Jet Fighter Over Tehran" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "U.S. sub sinks Iranian warship off Sri Lanka, killing 87 and expanding war zone" . Reuters . 4 March 2026. ^ "At least 80 killed in US submarine strike on Iranian warship, Sri Lanka says" .

The National . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Sri Lanka recovers 87 bodies from Iranian warship sunk off its coast by a US submarine" .

The Washington Post . 4 March 2026. ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Iranian IRGC Navy Soleimani-class corvette burning off the port of Bandar Abbas today after a U.S./Israeli airstrike Bandar Abbas" . iran.liveuamap.com . ^ Epstein, Jake. "Satellite image shows Iran's largest naval vessel, a tanker-turned-base ship, smoking in port" . Business Insider . ^ "Live updates: US struggles to evacuate Americans from Middle East as its assets come under fire" . CNN. 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Iraq: US airstrikes continue to target Popular Mobilization Forces (PMF) positions in Iraq. Today, strikes targeted PMF sites: the PMF site in Khursibat village, Rashidiya, Mosul; the 30th Brigade (Shabak PMF) site near the Mosul Dam; and the 14th Brigade (Sayyid al-Shuhada Brigades) headquarters in Nineveh Mosul,Nineveh Governorate" . iraq.liveuamap.com . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ https://www.irna.ir/news/86093007/%D9%88%D9%82%D9%88%D8%B9-%DB%B2-%D8%AD%D8%A7%D8%AF%D8%AB%D9%87-%D8%AF%D8%B1%DB%8C%D8%A7%DB%8C%DB%8C-%D8%AF%D8%B1-%D9%86%D8%B2%D8%AF%DB%8C%DA%A9%DB%8C-%D8%B9%D9%85%D8%A7%D9%86-%D9%88-%D8%A7%D9%85%D8%A7%D8%B1%D8%A7%D8%AA ^ انفجار در تنگه هرمز / بیش از ۱۰ نفتکش در آتش سوختند (Explosion in the Strait of Hormuz / More than 10 oil tankers caught fire) shahrekhabar.com ^ "حمله به یک کشتی در نزدیکی بندر الفجیره امارات" (in Arabic). ^ "ببینید | ثبت لحظه حمله بالستیک ایران به امارات توسط کارگران چینی" . صاحب‌خبر . 4 March 2026. ^ "انفجار در سلیمانیه + جزییات" . صاحب‌خبر . 3 March 2026. ^ "نیروی زمینی سپاه با سه عملیات همزمان وارد عرصه جنگ شد" . صاحب‌خبر . 4 March 2026. ^ "Child dies from falling sharpnel in Kuwait: Health Ministry" . Kuwait Times . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Hundreds of drones target Kuwait, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, UAE amid Iran war" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Alarm sounds in Bahrain Manama, Bahrain" . iran.liveuamap.com . ^ "Qatar says Al Udeid Air Base hit by ballistic missile" . ABC News . ^ "Saudi Aramco's Ras Tanura struck again by unknown projectile, four sources say" . Reuters . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Drone downed near Baghdad airport as Iraq attacked by Iran" . Al Jazeera . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Pro-Iran armed group in Iraq claims attack on US target in Jordan" . Al Jazeera. 4 March 2026. ^ "Syria says closed border with Lebanon following Israeli warnings Ghajar" . syria.liveuamap.com . ^ "Syria has reinforced its border with Lebanon with rocket units and thousands of troops, eight Syrian and Lebanese sources said on Tuesday, as conflict spread in the region including between Israel and Hezbollah.

The Syrian officers, including a senior member of the military, said the move was aimed at preventing arms and drugs smuggling as well blocking Iran-backed Lebanese Hezbollah or other militants from infiltrating Syria Gouvernorat de Homs" . syria.liveuamap.com . ^ "Israeli media, citing sources: A simultaneous attack from Iran and southern Lebanon targeted Tel Aviv, southern Haifa, and Ashkelon. Ashkelon,South District" . iran.liveuamap.com . ^ "Israeli army: The Israeli army has begun a new wave of airstrikes in southern Lebanon Tel Aviv-Yafo, Tel Aviv District" . - lebanon.liveuamap.com . ^ "The Israeli army publishes footage of its new deployment in southern Lebanon, after Hezbollah began attacking Israel. Troops have pushed deeper into southern Lebanon in recent days, with the Israeli army saying it assumed "forward defensive positions to establish an additional defensive layer to remove the threats to the residents of northern Israel." The 146th Reserve Division is deployed to the western portion of southern Lebanon, the 91st "Galilee" Regional Division is operating in the east, and the 210th "Bashan" Regional Division is operating in the Mount Dov area, the army says.

The Israeli army says the forces include infantry, armored, and combat engineering troops Lebanon" . lebanon.liveuamap.com . ^ "Israeli forces begin ground operations in southern Lebanon" . i24NEWS . 3 March 2026. ^ "Hezbollah says its fighters engaged in clashes with Israeli troops in Lebanon" .

The Times of Israel . 4 March 2026. ^ "Israeli army: Northern Command forces control several points in southern Lebanon as part of the advanced defense concept. North District" . - lebanon.liveuamap.com . ^ "Hezbollah says it's fighting Israeli forces near Lebanon's Khiam" . Al Jazeera. 4 March 2026. ^ "Hezbollah claims to hit Israeli battle tank near border" . Al Jazeera. 4 March 2026. ^ Fabian, Emanuel (4 March 2026). "IDF says 2 troops moderately injured today from anti-tank fire in southern Lebanon" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Greek Air Force F-16s intercepted a pair of Iranian-made Shahed attack drones near Cyprus today Cyprus" . iran.liveuamap.com . ^ "Cyprus Closes Larnaca Airspace After Suspicious Object Detected Greek City Times" . Greek City Times . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Cyprus' Larnaca closes airspace due to suspicious object" . breakingthenews.net . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Govt insists Cypriot airspace is open" . Cyprus Mail . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Turkey says Iranian ballistic missile entered its airspace, shot down by NATO" .

The Times of Israel . 4 March 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Denies Firing Missile Toward Turkey" .

The New York Times . 5 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "Turkey says missile launched from Iran destroyed by NATO" . France 24. 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ Papadopoulos, Kosta (4 March 2026). "America Evacuates Non-Essential Workers from Cyprus Greek City Times" . Greek City Times . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ Chen, Eve. "Reconsider visiting this European country, State Department says" . USA Today . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Italian frigate mission to Cyprus on the table at emergency meeting convened by Meloni" . ProtoThema English . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "The entire Iraqi power grid is down: Iraq's Electricity Ministry says a total blackout has hit the entire national power grid across all provinces. A ministry spokesman says authorities are investigating the cause of the outage Mosul, Nineveh Governorate" . iraq.liveuamap.com . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "Thousands of Kurdish fighters launch ground offensive into Iran against regime, official says" . i24 News . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ Stein, Amichai; Kweller, Idan (4 March 2026). "Hundreds of Kurdish fighters launch ground offensive in Iran" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 4 March 2026 . ^ "Rojhilat'ta "kara harekatı" iddiası: Kürt güçlerinden yalanlama" (in Turkish). 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "Qatar State Security announces the arrest of two cells affiliated with the Iranian Revolutionary Guard" .

The Peninsula . 4 March 2026 . Retrieved 3 March 2026 . ^ Rashad, Marwa (4 March 2026). "Exclusive: Qatar shuts gas liquefaction, will take weeks to restart, sources say" . Reuters . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ a b "Day Six of the U.S.–Israel War on Iran: 170 Strikes in 19 Provinces" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 5 March 2026. ^ "Missile strike destroys 12,000-seat indoor arena at Tehran's Azadi complex" . Iran International . 5 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "Israel, US intensify Iran strikes, targeting homes, hospitals, stadium" . Al Jazeera . 5 March 2026 . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ a b c Ali, Taz; Fulton, Adam (5 March 2026). "Middle East crisis live: Israel launches fresh strikes on Tehran; Iran claims to have targeted Kurdish groups in Iraq" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "Saudi Arabia says it intercepted missiles" . BBC . 5 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "Suspected Iranian missile debris ignites fires in central Israel" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ "Official Baku issues statement on Iran's attack on Nakhchivan" . Trend News Agency . 5 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "Live - Azerbaijan summons Iran ambassador after strike injures two in Nakhchivan" . Iran International . 5 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "Azerbaijan withdraws its diplomats from Iran" . Iran International . 6 March 2026 . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ Grove, Thomas. "Azerbaijan Promises Response to Iran Drone Attack" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "Iran denies its drones hit airport in Azerbaijan's exclave as war widens" . Al Jazeera. 5 March 2026. pp. 5 March 2026. ^ "Iranian drones hit Azerbaijan's Nakhchivan Airport, four casualties reported " . Azernews. 5 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "President Aliyev: Iranian officials must provide an explanation to the Azerbaijani side, and an apology must be offered" . 5 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "Turkey condemns Iranian drone attacks on Azerbaijan's Nakhchivan" . Iran International . 5 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ Elgot, Jessica (5 March 2026). "Sirens over RAF Akrotiri in Cyprus are stark reminder of its proximity to war" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "Spain, Italy and Netherlands join European naval deployment to Cyprus" . Euronews . 5 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "Europe commits to expanding Iran campaign as Israel strikes southern Lebanon" . Los Angeles Times . 5 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ O'Keeffe, Cormac (5 March 2026). "Ireland urged to assist Cyprus if it invokes EU mutual defence clause" . Irish Examiner . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "Trump asks Zelensky for help defending against Iranian drones" . Ara . 5 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ "Trump tells Reuters he'll take help from any country on Iran after Ukraine drone offer" . Devdiscourse. Reuters . 5 March 2026 . Retrieved 5 March 2026 . ^ a b "Day 7 of the U.S.-Israeli War on Iran: Relentless Explosions in Tehran" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 6 March 2026. ^ "Live - Heavy US and Israeli strikes hit Tehran" . Iran International . 6 March 2026 . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ "Israeli, US strikes hit IRGC intelligence site in Lorestan" . Iran International . 6 March 2026 . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ a b "More Iranian attacks reported across the Gulf region" . Al Jazeera . 6 March 2026 . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ "Iran targets Bahrain hotels, Riyadh intercepts missiles" .

The Jerusalem Post . 6 March 2026 . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ Fulton, Adam; Marcos, Coral Murphy; Campbell, Lucy; Badshah, Nadeem; Ho, Vivian; Ali, Taz; Corlett, Eva (7 March 2026). "Tehran warns Europe to stay out of conflict or face 'retaliation' – as it happened" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 7 March 2026 . ^ Nikouzar, Leily; Boxerman, Aaron (7 March 2026). "Iranian President's Apology Showcases Leadership Rifts" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ "Sri Lanka Takes Control of Iranian Ship Iris Bushehr and 208 Crew" . News First . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ "War in Middle East live: Three Ghanaian peacekeepers in Lebanon wounded in missile attacks" . France 24 . 6 March 2026 . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ "Azerbaijan announces prevention of terrorist attacks planned by Iran against Israeli Embassy and synagogue" . Ukranews . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ Rustamova, Saida (6 March 2026). "Azerbaijan says it stopped Iranian terror attack plot and dismantled spy cell" . EuroNews . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ "Trial Begins in Azerbaijan for Individuals Accused of Planning Terrorist Attack on Foreign Embassy" . 1news.az . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ "Azerbaijan says it foiled alleged IRGC plot" . Iran International . 6 March 2026 . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ a b c "Day Eight of the U.S.-Israeli War on Iran: Roar of Explosions Across 30 Provinces of the Country" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 7 March 2026. ^ "Live – Iran will never surrender unconditionally, Pezeshkian says" . Iran International . 7 March 2026 . Retrieved 7 March 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (7 March 2026). "IDF says it destroyed 16 aircraft used by Revolutionary Guard's Quds Force in Tehran airport strikes" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 7 March 2026 . ^ "Live updates: Huge explosions rock Tehran airport as Trump demands Iran's 'unconditional surrender' " . BBC News . 7 March 2026 . Retrieved 7 March 2026 . ^ "IRGC says it attacked US base in Bahrain, claims it was used to strike desalination plant in Iran" .

The Times of Israel . Agence France-Presse. 7 March 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ "IRGC says it attacked US base in Bahrain, claims it was used to strike desalination plant in Iran" .

The Times of Israel . Agence France-Presse. 7 March 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ "Vital Desalination Plants in Iran and Bahrain Are Attacked" .

The New York Times . 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ Schneid, Rebecca; Serjoie, Kay Armin; Jamalpour, Fatemeh (8 March 2026). " 'The Air is Unbreathable': Tehran Shrouded in Toxic Cloud After Israel Strikes Fuel Depots" . Time . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . Both Israel and the U.S. military denied carrying out the attack. ^ "Iran attacks Malta-flagged tanker in Gulf near Strait of Hormuz" . Al Jazeera. 7 March 2026. ^ "Drone attack on foreign oil compound in Iraq's Basra sets Halliburton and KBR facilities ablaze" . Philenews . 7 March 2026 . Retrieved 6 March 2026 . ^ Fulton, Adam; Marcos, Coral Murphy; Campbell, Lucy; Badshah, Nadeem; Ho, Vivian; Ali, Taz; Corlett, Eva (7 March 2026). "Tehran warns Europe to stay out of conflict or face 'retaliation' – as it happened" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 7 March 2026 . ^ "Operation Epic Fury: Is US Deploying 3rd Carrier, USS George H.W. Bush (CVN‑77), To The Middle East Amid Iran War? Here's All We Know" . Free Press Journal . Retrieved 7 March 2026 . ^ Shelbourne, Mallory (6 March 2026). "USS Gerald R. Ford Now in the Red Sea, USS George H.W. Bush Wraps Pre-Deployment Exercises" . USNI News . Retrieved 7 March 2026 . ^ "US said expected to deploy 3rd aircraft carrier to the Middle East" . Azerbaijani Press Agency . 7 March 2026 . Retrieved 7 March 2026 . ^ Saba, Yousef; Yap, Trixie (7 March 2026). "Kuwait declares force majeure, cuts crude oil output due to Middle East conflict" . Reuters . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ a b "Rift deepens between Iran's president and Guards chief over war, economy" . Iran International . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ "Iran oil facilities hit for first time as war with US-Israel enters day 9" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ "Attack on Oil Facilities in Tehran and Karaj; Capital's Sky Filled with Smoke as Concerns Rise Over Pollution and Fuel Shortages" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 9 March 2026. ^ "Day Nine of the U.S.-Israeli War on Iran: Polluted Air and Black Rain in Tehran" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 8 March 2026. ^ "Israel's military says it struck IRGC aerospace HQ, ammunition depots" . iranintl.com . 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ "US military says Iran uses populated areas to launch drone, missile attacks" . iranintl.com . 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ "Lebanon says nearly 400 killed in Israeli strikes as US urges Iranians to 'stay at home' - follow live" . BBC News . 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ a b c آسیب دیدن ۳ فدراسیون دیگر در پی حملات موشکی + عکس (3 more federations damaged in missile attacks + photos) Retrieved 12 April 2026 ^ a b جزئیاتی از آسیب‌ها و خسارات به فدراسیون‌ها و اماکن ورزشی؛ ورزش ایران مجروح شد! (Details of the damage and losses to sports federations and venues;) Retrieved 7 April 2026 ^ "Three people in Israel wounded by shrapnel: Rescue service" . Al Jazeera. 8 March 2026. ^ "IRGC claims to have targeted Israeli cities, airbase in Jordan" . Al Jazeera. 8 March 2026. ^ a b "Kuwait city tower erupts in flames as Iran launches new wave of strikes in the Gulf" .

The Independent . 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ Din, Menna; Muhammad, Al Gebaly; Baum, Bernadette (8 March 2026). "Two Kuwaiti interior ministry officers killed 'while performing duties' " . Reuters . ^ "US troop dies from wounds sustained in Iran attack" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ a b Kelliher, Fiona; Magee, Caolán. " 'Projectile' kills 2 in Saudi Arabia as Iran attacks on the Gulf continue" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ "Day Ten of the U.S.-Israeli War on Iran: Extensive Damage to Isfahan's Historical Sites" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 9 March 2026. ^ Ali, Taz; Corlett, Eva (6 March 2026). "Middle East crisis live: Israel bombards Tehran and Beirut as US says attacks to intensify" . theguardian.com . ^ Abdulrahim, Raja (9 March 2026). "Dozens Wounded in Bahrain as Arab States Condemn Iranian Strikes" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ "Patriot missile involved in Bahrain blast likely US-operated, analysis finds" . 2026. ^ "Patriot missile involved in Bahrain blast likely U.S.-operated, analysis finds" .

The Hindu . 22 March 2026. ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . ^ "UAE says 12 ballistic missiles, 17 drones intercepted in latest attacks" . Iran International . 9 March 2026 . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ "Live updates: Mojtaba Khamenei has been chosen as Iran's new supreme leader" . AP News . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ "Video shows Iranian cluster bomb submunitions raining over Israel; why the weapon is tricky - The Times of India" .

The Times of India . 9 March 2026. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 9 March 2026 . ^ "Second victim dies after Monday's Iranian cluster missile strike in central Israel" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ إيران تختار مجتبى خامنئي مرشدًا جديدا خلفا لوالده al-ain.com Retrieved 31 March 2026 ^ Hajdari, Una (9 March 2026). "Bapco declares force majeure as Iran sets Bahrain's only refinery ablaze" . Euronews . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ "Iran signals Hormuz safe passage to countries expelling U.S. and Israeli diplomats" . News & Analysis for Stocks, Crypto & Forex . Archived from the original on 10 March 2026 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ Brewer, Contessa (9 March 2026). "There's another big reason why shipping companies and insurers aren't willing to risk the Strait of Hormuz" . CNBC News. Archived from the original on 9 March 2026 . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ "Day Eleven of the U.S.-Israeli War on Iran: Tragedy on Resalat Highway" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 10 March 2026. ^ "Israel says it struck IRGC weapons research site in Tehran" . Iran International . 10 March 2026 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ "US hits minelaying ships in Iran after warning of 'intense' day of bombs" . BBC News . 11 March 2026 . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ Saba, Yousef; Ghaddar, Ahmad (10 March 2026). "UAE oil giant ADNOC shuts Ruwais refinery after drone strike, source says" . Reuters . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ "Drone falls in Saudi Arabia's Az Zulfi city" . Al Jazeera. 10 March 2026. ^ "The Revolutionary Guard: We targeted the US military headquarters at Harir base in the Kurdistan region of Iraq" . MTV Lebanon . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ "Israeli army intercepts Iranian drone over southern Syria: Report" . Al Jazeera . 10 March 2026 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ Ward, Euan (10 March 2026). "Nearly 700,000 Displaced by War in Lebanon, U.N. Says" .

The New York Times . Beirut, Lebanon. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ "Day Twelve of the U.S.-Israeli War on Iran: 39 Percent of Strikes Concentrated in Tehran" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 11 March 2026. ^ "Tehran checkpoints hit in reported drone attacks" . Iran International . 11 March 2026 . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ Habibiazad, Ghoncheh. "Iran using children in security roles in war, reports and witnesses say" , BBC News Persian , 31 March 2026. Accessed 5 july 2026. "The death of an 11-year-old Iranian boy reportedly in an air strike while manning a security checkpoint alongside his father in Tehran has thrown focus on a new initiative to recruit children into the security services. Alireza Jafari's mother Sadaf Monfared told the municipality-run newspaper Hamshahri that the pair had been helping Basij volunteer militia patrols and checkpoints to 'maintain the security of Tehran and its people' when they were killed on 11 March." ^ "Iran: Recruitment of child soldiers as young as 12 amounts to a war crime" , 2 April 2026. Accessed 5 July 2026. "Iranian authorities are trampling upon children's rights and committing a grave violation of international humanitarian law amounting to a war crime by recruiting and mobilizing children as young as 12 into a military campaign led by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), Amnesty International said today....

On 29 March, 11-year-old boy, Alireza Jafari, was killed, while accompanying his father, a member of the IRGC's Basij, at a checkpoint in Tehran, laying bare the devastating consequences of the presence of children at military objectives. Authorities have confirmed that the child was killed 'while serving' at a checkpoint following an Israeli drone attack." ^ Corlett, Eva (11 March 2026). "Middle East crisis live: Regime issues threat against protesters; Iran launches wave of strikes on Gulf as Israel pounds Lebanon" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ "IRGC says it targeted US bases in Kuwait, Bahrain" . Middle East Eye . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ "جنگ آمریکا و اسرائیل با ایران؛ سفارت سوئیس در تهران موقتا تعطیل شد" . BBC News (in Persian). 11 March 2026 . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ "Iran targets ships, Dubai airport and oil facilities as economic concerns mount" . PBS News . 11 March 2026 . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ Wittels, Jack (11 March 2026). "Operations Suspended at Oman Port as Drones Hit Fuel Tanks" . Bloomberg L.P . Retrieved 11 March 2026 . ^ Thai cargo ship attacked near Strait of Hormuz , 10 March 2026, ISSN 0362-4331 , retrieved 11 March 2026 ^ Projectiles Strike Three Vessels in Strait of Hormuz , 11 March 2026 , retrieved 11 March 2026 ^ "One killed in attack on oil tankers at Iraqi port" . Al Jazeera. 12 March 2026. ^ a b "Day 13 of the U.S.-Israeli War on Iran: More Than Three Million Displaced" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 12 March 2026. ^ a b "Erbil governor reports injury of six French soldiers in Makhmour district attack" . Al Jazeera. 12 March 2026. ^ a b "U.S. military plane crashes in Iraq as status of crew is unknown, officials said" . CBS News. 12 March 2026 . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ "موج جدید حملات متقابل ایران و اسرائیل؛ شنیده شدن صدای انفجار در غرب تهران" . BBC News (in Persian). 12 March 2026. ^ "Iran says it targets Israeli bases, accuses Israel of targeting hospitals" . Al Jazeera . Agence France-Presse . 12 February 2026 . Retrieved 13 February 2026 . ^ "Iran attack sparks major fire in neighborhood housing Bahrain International Airport" .

The Times of Israel . 12 March 2026 . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ "UK troops at Iraq base shot down Iranian drones, Healey says" . BBC. 12 March 2026 . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ "Six French soldiers wounded at base in Iraq's Makhmour" .

The Jerusalem Post . 12 March 2026 . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ "French soldier killed, several wounded in Iraq attack, Macron confirms" . Politico . 12 March 2026 . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ "Two Tankers Attacked In Iraq Waters, Oil Terminals Suspended" . Bloomberg L.P. 12 March 2026 . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ "Iran's new supreme leader vows to keep Hormuz shut, Netanyahu issues threat" . Reuters . 12 March 2026 . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . ^ "A US military refueling plane crashed in Iraq, killing 6. Here's what to know" . AP News . 13 March 2026 . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ "Iran's new supreme leader vows to block Strait of Hormuz in first statement" . BBC . Agence France-Presse . 13 March 2026 . Retrieved 13 February 2026 . ^ "Iran threatens to strike oil facilities after U.S. hits military targets on Kharg Island, a critical oil hub" . NBC News . 14 March 2026 . Retrieved 14 March 2026 . ^ "Explosions reported near Tehran rally" . Al Jazeera. 13 March 2026. ^ "Attack during Tehran rally shows Israel's fear, confusion: Larijani" . Al Jazeera. 13 March 2026. ^ "One person at Tehran rally killed by shrapnel after attack: Report" . Al Jazeera . 13 March 2026. ^ " 'The children screamed, everything shattered': Iranian missile hits northern Israel village, dozens injured" . Ynet . 13 March 2026 . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ "2 Indians killed, 10 injured in Iranian drone attack in Oman, says MEA" .

The Times of India . ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ "Two killed in Oman by drones, several also fired at Saudi Arabia" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 13 March 2026 . ^ "US offers up to $10 million for information on Khamenei Jr, other officials" . Iran International . 13 March 2026 . Retrieved 14 March 2026 . ^ "Five Air Force Refueling Planes Hit in Iranian Strike on Saudi Arabia" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 14 March 2026 . ^ "Day 15 of the U.S.-Israeli War on Iran: Attacks on Isfahan" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 14 March 2026. ^ "IDF kills regime intelligence commanders in Tehran" .

The Jerusalem Post . 14 March 2026 . Retrieved 14 March 2026 . ^ "Some oil loading operations suspended after fire in UAE's Fujairah, sources say" . Reuters . 14 March 2026 . Retrieved 14 March 2026 . ^ "US embassy in Baghdad hit by missile" . POLITICO . 14 March 2026 . Retrieved 14 March 2026 . ^ "Kuwait Says Drone Strike Near Air Base Injures 3 in Armed Forces" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 14 March 2026 . ^ "Drones Target Kuwait International Airport, Radar System Damaged" . arabtimes . 14 March 2026 . Retrieved 14 March 2026 . ^ "Iran fires cluster missile at Eilat; 12-year-old boy and man lightly wounded" . ynetglobal . 14 March 2026 . Retrieved 14 March 2026 . ^ "2 India-Bound Ships Cross Hormuz After 4 Rounds Of Phone Calls, PM's Outreach" . ndtv.com . 14 March 2026 . Retrieved 14 March 2026 . ^ "Trump urges other nations to help secure shipping through Strait of Hormuz" . Reuters . 14 March 2026 . Retrieved 15 March 2026 . ^ a b "Day 16 of the U.S.-Israeli War on Iran: Over 450 Attacks Recorded" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 15 March 2026. ^ "Heavy pre-dawn airstrikes reported across Isfahan" . Iran International . 15 March 2026 . Retrieved 15 March 2026 . ^ a b c d e "Explosions reported in several Iranian cities" . Iran International . 15 March 2026 . Retrieved 15 March 2026 . ^ "Message to Iran International reports about 20 explosions near Shiraz" . Iran International . 15 March 2026 . Retrieved 15 March 2026 . ^ "Video shows heavy explosions across southern Tehran" . Iran International . 15 March 2026 . Retrieved 15 March 2026 . ^ "Heavy smoke rises over Dezful air base after explosions" . Iran International . 15 March 2026 . Retrieved 15 March 2026 . ^ "Video shows heavy damage at Jask port in southeastern Iran after US strikes" . Iran International . 15 March 2026 . Retrieved 15 March 2026 . ^ "Checkpoints expand as citizens report drones and strikes in several cities" . Iran International . 15 March 2026 . Retrieved 15 March 2026 . ^ a b Sharma, Yashraj. "Iran war: What is happening on day 16 of US-Israel attacks?" . Al Jazeera . ^ a b "flips-6390964465112" . Al Jazeera . ^ "Iran's military vows to 'pursue and kill' Israeli PM Netanyahu" . BBC News . 15 March 2026 . Retrieved 15 March 2026 . ^ Sanger, David E.; Schmitt, Eric; Pager, Tyler; Bergman, Ronen; Barnes, Julian E. (15 March 2026). "Entering War's Third Week, Trump Faces Stark Choices" .

The Jerusalem Post . 16 March 2026 . Retrieved 16 March 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (16 March 2026). "IDF says it destroyed Iranian space facility that worked on 'attacking satellites' " .

The Maritime Executive . 17 March 2026. ^ "Elderly couple killed in Iranian revenge strike on Israel" .

The Telegraph . 18 March 2026. ^ "Two people killed in Ramat Gan by Iranian ballistic missile" .

The Times of Israel . 17 March 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 17 March 2026 . ^ "Damage documented at Tel Aviv train station: crews working on site" . ynetglobal . 17 March 2026 . Retrieved 17 March 2026 . ^ "Projectile hits Kuwait-flagged gas tanker off UAE's Fujairah" . Reuters . 16 March 2026 . Retrieved 17 March 2026 . ^ "A Top U.S. Counterterrorism Official Resigns, Citing the Iran War" . New York Times . 17 March 2026 . Retrieved 17 March 2026 . ^ "Israel Hits Russian-Iranian Weapons Smuggling Route in the Caspian Sea" .

The Wall Street Journal . 24 March 2026 . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ Tondo, Lorenzo (18 March 2026). "Iran confirms death of intelligence minister after Israel says he was 'eliminated' " .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ "Wave of explosions reported across Iran in early morning hours" . Iran International . 18 March 2026 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ a b c d "Day 19 of the U.S.-Israeli War on Iran: Widespread Strikes on Oil and Gas Facilities" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 18 March 2026. ^ "Video shows a massive strike on Northern Tehran" . Iran International . 18 March 2026 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ "Israel strikes Iranian command centers in Tehran, IDF says" . Iran International . 18 March 2026 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ "Iran shuts several South Pars gas phases after strike" . Iran International . 18 March 2026 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ Ravid, Barak (18 March 2026). "Israel strikes Iran natural gas facility in coordination with U.S." Axios . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ "Israeli Air Force strikes Iranian naval vessels in Caspian Sea for first time" . ynetglobal . 18 March 2026 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ "Israel Strikes Iranian Naval Vessels on the Caspian Sea" .

The Maritime Executive . 18 March 2026. ^ "A Key Russia-Iran Supply Line Remains Open Despite the War" . OilPrice.com . 27 March 2026. ^ "Video: Airstrikes hit courthouse in Larestan, southern Iran" . Iran International . 18 March 2026 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ "Qatar says Iran attack caused significant damage at Ras Laffan gas facility" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel; Wrobel, Sharon (18 March 2026). "3 private planes at Ben Gurion Airport damaged by debris from Iranian missile attack" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ "Three Palestinian women killed in West Bank from Iran missile" .

The Jerusalem Post . 18 March 2026 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ "Iranian cluster-style missile kills migrant worker in central Israel" . ynetglobal . 18 March 2026 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . ^ Fulton, Adam; Campbell, Lucy; Ambrose, Tom; Ali, Taz; Frew, Wendy (19 March 2026). "Cathay Pacific suspends flights to and from Dubai until end of April – as it happened" . theguardian.com . ^ Orr, Robert; Kelly, Maxine; Wells, Peter; Provan, Sarah; Cash, Kieran (18 March 2026). "Middle East war live: Oil jumps after Iran says energy industry attacked" . Financial Times . ^ "Day 20 of the U.S.-Israeli War on Iran: The Fire of War Reaches the Caspian Sea" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 19 March 2026. ^ "IDF destroys IRGC helicopter at airport in western Iran" .

The Jerusalem Post . 19 March 2026 . Retrieved 19 March 2026 . ^ "Video: Basij member targeted at western Iran base" . Iran International . 19 March 2026 . Retrieved 19 March 2026 . ^ "Military representative to Basij killed in US-Israeli airstrikes - state media" . Iran International . 19 March 2026 . Retrieved 19 March 2026 . ^ "13 Basij members killed in Tabriz checkpoint attack" . Iran International . 20 March 2026 . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ "Israeli refinery owner says essential infrastructure damaged in Iranian strike" . Reuters . 20 March 2026 . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ "Damage at Haifa oil refineries after Iranian missile attack" . ynetnews.com . 19 March 2026 . Retrieved 19 March 2026 . ^ "Iranian drone attack on Kuwait oil refinery sparks fire; no injuries reported" . timesofisrael.com . 19 March 2026 . Retrieved 19 March 2026 . ^ "US F-35 damaged by suspected Iranian fire makes emergency landing, sources say" . CNN . ^ "سپاه: جنگنده F35 ارتش آمریکا در آسمان مرکزی ایران مورد اصابت قرار گرفت" . IRNA. ^ شکار اف-۳۵؛ چگونه «نصرالله» ۲هزارمیلیارد دلار غرور آمریکایی را سوزاند؟ Hunting the F-35: How Nasrallah Burned $2 Trillion in American Pride? Retrieved 20 March 2026 ^ Berman, Lazar; Levaton, Stav (19 March 2026). "On 19th day of war, Netanyahu says Iran can no longer enrich uranium, build missiles" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ Berman, Lazar; Levaton, Stav (20 March 2026). "Netanyahu transcript: 'We have to be more powerful than the barbarians, or they will crash our gates, destroy our societies' " .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ "Qatar declares Iranian military, security attaches 'persona non grata' " . AA . Retrieved 19 March 2026 . ^ "Day 21 of the U.S.-Israeli War on Iran: New Year begins with 640 strikes" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 20 March 2026. ^ "IRGC spokesman who threatened Trump killed in alleged US-Israeli strike" . ynetglobal . 20 March 2026 . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (20 March 2026). "IDF confirms killing Iranian Guards spokesman" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ "Israel says strike targeting Basij leadership also killed intel chief" .

The Times of Israel . 20 March 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ "Iran targeted but did not hit Diego Garcia base with missiles, WSJ reports" . Reuters . 20 March 2026 . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ "Iran fires 2 ballistic missiles towards US, UK military bases in Diego Garcia" .

The Times of India . 21 March 2026. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ " 'False flag attack': Iran denies claims it fired missiles at Diego Garcia" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 23 March 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel; Bletter, Diana (20 March 2026). "Fragment of downed Iranian missile impacts in Jerusalem's Old City; Rehovot homes damaged" .

The Times of Israel . Agencies and ToI Staff. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . ^ "Khamenei Denies Iran Role in Turkey, Oman Attacks, Calls Them "False Flag" Operations" . PA Turkey . Retrieved 23 March 2026 . ^ Williams, Matthias; Graham, Dave (20 March 2026). "Switzerland halts weapons exports to US due to Iran war, citing neutrality" . Reuters . Retrieved 20 March 2026 . ^ "Day 22 of the U.S.-Israeli War on Iran: More Than 50% of the Strikes Target Tehran" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 21 March 2026. ^ "Video: Explosion hits IRGC site in Isfahan" . Iran International . 22 March 2026 . Retrieved 23 March 2026 . ^ "Israel struck missile production sites in Tehran, IDF says" . Iran International . 21 March 2026 . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . ^ "Iran claims US, Israel strike on Natanz enrichment facility" .

The Jerusalem Post . 21 March 2026 . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (21 March 2026). "IDF says it struck 'strategic' nuclear weapons development site at university in Tehran" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ "Video: Airstrike hits Basij site in Najafabad" . Iran International . 21 March 2026 . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . ^ "Strike kills fighter in northern Iraq: ex-paramilitaries" . Arab News. Agence France Presse . 21 March 2026 . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ Magdy, Samy; Lawless, Jill; Mednick, Sam (21 March 2026). "Iran targets British-US base and its main nuclear enrichment site is struck again" . AP News . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ "Failed interception in Dimona strike leaves 51 hospitalized, child seriously hurt; Iran: Retaliation for Natanz strike" . ynetglobal . 21 March 2026 . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ "Iran targets Dimona nuclear facility as response to strike on Natanz" . İlke Haber Ajansı . 21 March 2026 . Retrieved 21 March 2026 . ^ " 'Very difficult evening': Israel says at least 180 wounded in Iran attacks" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . ^ "Day 23 of U.S. and Israeli Attacks on Iran: More Than 15% of the Total Fatalities Are Children" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 22 March 2026. ^ "Witnesses report early-morning strikes across Iran" . Iran International . 22 March 2026 . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . ^ "Video shows powerful explosion lighting up eastern Tehran sky" . Iran International . 22 March 2026 . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . ^ "Basij commander killed in US, Israeli strikes - Fars News" . Iran International . 22 March 2026 . Retrieved 23 March 2026 . ^ "Video: Buildings destroyed in strike on Iran's Alborz province" . Iran International . 22 March 2026 . Retrieved 23 March 2026 . ^ "Iranian missile strike wounds 15 in Tel Aviv area" . ynetglobal . 22 March 2026 . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . ^ Kraus, Yair (22 March 2026). "Man killed in rocket strike from Lebanon on vehicle in northern border community" . ynetglobal . Retrieved 22 March 2026 . ^ "Day 24 of U.S. and Israeli Attacks on Iran: A Deadly Day for Civilians" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 23 March 2026. ^ "Iraqi group fires rockets into northeastern Syria" . SpaceWar.com. Agence France Presse . 23 March 2026 . Retrieved 24 March 2026 . ^ "Trump postpones military strikes on Iranian power plants amid 'productive' talks" .

The Economic Times . 23 March 2026 . Retrieved 23 March 2026 . ^ "Iran denies Trump's claims: 'We reject all negotiations – US has failed and Hormuz will remain closed' " . ynetnews . 23 March 2026 . Retrieved 23 March 2026 . ^ "Security checkpoints and Basij patrols reported across Iran" . Iran International . 23 March 2026 . Retrieved 23 March 2026 . ^ "Day 25 of U.S. and Israeli Attacks on Iran: Heavy Strikes in Isfahan and Khuzestan" . Human Rights Activists News Agency . 24 March 2026. ^ "New wave of strikes hits cities across Iran" . Iran International . 24 March 2026 . Retrieved 24 March 2026 . ^ Rasheed, Ahmed; Hameed, Muayad (24 March 2026). "Airstrikes in Iraq on Iran-backed paramilitary alliance kill at least 15 fighters" . Reuters . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ "US strikes reportedly kill, wound 30 PMF fighters in Iraq" .

The Jerusalem Post . 24 March 2026 . Retrieved 24 March 2026 . ^ "Airstrike hit PMF commander's residence in Mosul, sources say" . Iran International . 24 March 2026 . Retrieved 24 March 2026 . ^ "Iran strikes persist Even as Trump claims talks to end conflict" . Bloomberg . 24 March 2026 . Retrieved 24 March 2026 . ^ "4 people lightly hurt, buildings mangled as Iranian missile attack hits Tel Aviv" . Times of Israel . 24 March 2026 . Retrieved 24 March 2026 . ^ "Iranian ballistic missile intercepted over Lebanon, US Embassy feared as target" . Al-Monitor . Retrieved 24 March 2026 . ^ "Toter und Verletzte bei iranischen Angriffen auf Bahrain" . orf (in German) . Retrieved 24 March 2026 . ^ "Iran names hardline ex-Revolutionary Guards commander to replace slain security chief" . Reuters . 24 March 2026. ^ "Zolghadr appointed Iran's security chief" . Mehr News Agency . 24 March 2026. ^ "Iranian drone strikes hit fuel depot at Kuwait airport" . gulfnews.com . Retrieved 25 March 2026 . ^ "Iran fires missiles at Israel, US bases in Kuwait, Jordan and Bahrain" . turkiyetoday.com . Retrieved 25 March 2026 . ^ "Iran appears to target Israeli power plant in missile attack, but misses" . Times of Israel . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ "Eleven killed in strikes in northwest Iran, official says" . Iran International . 25 March 2026 . Retrieved 25 March 2026 . ^ "Cruise missile production sites in Tehran were hit, Israel says" . Iran International . 25 March 2026 . Retrieved 25 March 2026 . ^ "Witnesses report overnight strikes in several Iranian cities" . Iran International . 25 March 2026 . Retrieved 25 March 2026 . ^ "Israel says it struck Iranian naval research center in Isfahan" . Iran International . 25 March 2026 . Retrieved 25 March 2026 . ^ Walia, Gandharv (25 March 2026). "Did Iranian Navy cruise missiles hit USS Abraham Lincoln or is it just a wild claim? Iran strike claim, US response, West Asia war update" .

The Economic Times . ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 25 March 2026 . ^ "WATCH: Iran claims second missile strike on 'USS Abraham Lincoln' amid US push for peace talks" .

The Week . Retrieved 25 March 2026 . ^ "Seven Iraqi soldiers killed, 13 wounded in strike near PMF base in Anbar" .

The Indian Express . 26 March 2026 . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ "Did Iran attack US today? CENTCOM fact-checks F18 shot down claims as video goes viral" . Hindustan Times . 26 March 2026 . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ Kelly, Meg; Horton, Alex (27 March 2026). "Iran images appear to show land mines scattered by U.S. forces, a first in years" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ Ball, Trevor (26 March 2026). "Evidence Points to US Scattering Mines over Iranian Village" . Bellingcat . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ "Children as young as 12 can join war support, IRGC says" . Iran International . 26 March 2026 . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ "Trump says Tehran negotiators 'begging' for US deal to end Iran war" . Euronews . 26 March 2026 . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ "IDF soldier killed in Hezbollah gunfight; terror group fires rockets, drones at north" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ "IDF soldier killed in southern Lebanon by Hezbollah anti-tank missile" .

The Jerusalem Post . 26 March 2026 . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ "Benjamin Netanyahu says he made secret trip to UAE at height of Iran war" .

The Guardian . 14 May 2026 . Retrieved 14 May 2026 . ^ "IDF soldier killed in southern Lebanon by Hezbollah anti-tank missile" . Times of Israel . 27 March 2026 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ "Drone, Missile Attack Damages Kuwait Port Infrastructure" . qna.org.qa . 27 March 2026 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ "Iran Launches Assault on Kuwait's Ports During Regional Escalation" .

The Maritime Executive . 27 March 2026. ^ "UAE Says Air Defenses Intercept Missiles and Drones from Iran" . qna.org.qa . 27 March 2026 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ "Air Force bombs two large steel factories in Iran partially owned by IRGC" .

The Times of Israel . 27 March 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ Ari, Lior Ben (28 March 2026). "One of the steel companies attacked in Iran announced production halt" . Ynetglobal . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (27 March 2026). "Israel bombs 2 IRGC-linked steel plants, 2 nuclear facilities as Iran vows revenge" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ "IDF strikes Iran's missile, sea mine production site in Yazd" .

The Jerusalem Post . 27 March 2026 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ "One killed in central Israel after Iranian cluster missile; multiple impact sites reported" . Ynetglobal . 27 March 2026 . Retrieved 27 March 2026 . ^ "12 US troops wounded in Iranian strike on Saudi base" . Free Malaysia Today. Agence France Presse. 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Yemen's Houthis claim responsibility for missile attack on Israel, their first since war started" . Associated Press . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . More than two dozen U.S. troops have been wounded in Iranian attacks on a Saudi air base in the past week, according two people who have been briefed on the matter. Iran fired six ballistic missiles and 29 drones at Saudi Arabia's Prince Sultan air base in a Friday attack that injured at least 15 troops, including five seriously, according to the people who were not authorized to comment publicly and spoke on the condition of anonymity.

The base had come under come attack twice earlier this week, including an incident that injured 14 U.S. troops, according to the people who had been briefed on the matter. Located about 96 kilometers (60 miles) from the Saudi capital of Riyadh, the base is run by the Royal Saudi Air Force, but also used by U.S. troops. ^ "Iranian attack on Saudi base wounds at least 10 US troops and damages several planes" . CJNI-FM. Associated Press. 27 March 2026 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ Leone, Dario (28 March 2026). "USAF E-3 Sentry, Multiple KC-135s damaged in Iranian attack on Prince Sultan Air Base" .

The Aviation Geek Club . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ "US AWACS aircraft hit in Iran strike: Damage to E-3 Sentry raises alarm over airpower blind spots" . Moneycontrol . 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ "Iran strikes US base in Saudi Arabia; Yemen's Houthis join the war" . POLITICO . 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ Over 230 children killed in US-Israeli attacks in first month of war, says Iran middleeastmonitor.com Retrieved 29 March 2027 ^ "Yemen's Houthis enter Iran war as bloodshed mounts daily across region" . Al Jazeera . 29 March 2026 . Retrieved 30 March 2026 . ^ "후티 "신에 대한 의지로 대응"…석유 위기 증폭" . Channel A . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "예멘 후티, 미국에 경고…"홍해로 이란 공격시 군사 개입"(상보)" . Yonhap . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "예멘 후티 반군 "중동 전황 따라 군사 대응" " . YTN . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ Frew, Wendy (28 March 2026). "Middle East crisis live: Yemen's Houthis claim first attack on Israel since outbreak of Iran war and warn 'operations will continue' " . the Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "IDF says it intercepted Houthi cruise missile earlier today" .

The Times of Israel . 28 March 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ Crissy, Ron (28 March 2026). "Suspected Houthi drone intercepted over southern Israel, no injuries reported" . Ynetglobal . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Drone attack targets Port of Salalah, expat worker injured" . timesofoman.com . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Iran military says targeted US vessel near Oman port" . Lebanese Broadcasting Corporation International. Agence France Presse . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Iran claims strike on Ukrainian defence site in UAE's Dubai" . Bangladesh Pratidin . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Kuwait airport hit by drones, radar system damaged, no casualties reported" . reuters.com . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (28 March 2026). "IDF says it bombed Tehran HQ of Iranian naval weapons and ship producer" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Baghdad orders probe after drone targets Kurdistan president's home" . Al Arabiya English . 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ Al-Samarraie, Jawad (28 March 2026). "Sudani condemns attack on Nechirvan Barzani's home" . Iraqi News . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Blast damage hits Iran University of Science and Technology" . Iran International . 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Iran threatens to hit US universities in the Middle East in retaliation for alleged strike on two universities" .

The Times of Israel . 28 March 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "IDF strikes infrastructure Iran; reports: senior nuclear program official killed" . Ynetglobal . 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Research chief of Iran suspected nuclear weapons program killed in airstrikes" . Iran International . 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (28 March 2026). "Several hurt as Iranian missile hits Jerusalem-area town; Hezbollah continues to strike north" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ a b "Iran blows hole in US aluminium supply chain with smelter strikes" . Reuters . 30 March 2026 . Retrieved 31 March 2026 . ^ "Iran strike on key aluminum producer threatens global supply chains" . Newsweek . 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Aluminium Bahrain confirms facilities attacked by Iran, lightly injuring two" .

The Times of Israel . 28 March 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 28 March 2026 . ^ "Syrian army says foiled drone attack on base" . Al Arabiya English . 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ "Navy fits RFA Lyme Bay with mine-hunting drones to end Iran blockade" . thetimes.com . 28 March 2026 . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ Iran agrees to allow 20 more Pakistani-flagged ships to transit Strait of Hormuz, Islamabad confirms middleeastmonitor.com Retrieved 29 March 2026 ^ "IDF soldier Moshe Yitzchak Katz, 22, from Connecticut, killed in south Lebanon" . Times of Israel . 29 March 2026. ^ "Drone attacks hits Iraqi Kurdistan amid Iran war" .

The New Arab . 29 March 2026 . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ "Explosions, fighter jet activity reported across multiple provinces in Iran" . Iran International . 29 March 2026 . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ "Israel says it struck mobile command centers in Tehran" . Iran International . 29 March 2026 . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ "After 30 days of war, parliament speaker says Iran rejects surrender and talks" . Iran International . 29 March 2026 . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ Curiel, Ilana (29 March 2026). "Fire, black smoke after Iranian missile strike on southern chemical plant; one lightly wounded" . Ynetglobal . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ "Ministry says hazardous materials leak has been ruled out after missile fragment hit factory in south" .

The Times of Israel . 29 March 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ Six people killed in US-Israeli attack on Iranian village of Osmavandan aljazeera.com Retrieved 29 March 2026 ^ "Iranian minister confirms blackouts in parts of Tehran and in Karaj after strikes hit power grid" .

The Times of Israel . 29 March 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ "Iran's heavy water production plant no longer operational, IAEA says" . Al Arabiya English . 30 March 2026 . Retrieved 29 March 2026 . ^ a b "Iranian attack damages Kuwait power and desalination plant, kills worker" . aljazeera.com . 29 March 2026. ^ "New wave of strikes reported across several Iran provinces" . Iran International . 30 March 2026 . Retrieved 30 March 2026 . ^ @realDonaldTrump (30 March 2026). "Truth Details" . Truth Social . ^ "Israel targeted desalination plant in Kuwait, Iran alleges" . Turkiye Today . 30 March 2026 . Retrieved 30 March 2026 . ^ "Haifa oil refinery hit by debris from intercepted missile, Fire and Rescue Service says" .

The Times of Israel . 30 March 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 30 March 2026 . ^ Levaton, Stav (30 March 2026). "IDF strikes IRGC-linked university in Tehran used for weapons research and development" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 30 March 2026 . ^ "Turkey says NATO defences downed fourth inbound Iranian missile" . Reuters . 30 March 2026 . Retrieved 30 March 2026 . ^ "Reports of Iranian Missile Launch Toward Turkey Are Completely Baseless" . WANA News Agency . 31 March 2026 . Retrieved 31 March 2026 . ^ Cooper, Greg JaffeJohn IsmayHelene; Fuller, Thomas (31 March 2026). "Confident of Air Supremacy, U.S. Sends B-52 Bombers Over Iran" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 3 April 2026 . ^ @realDonaldTrump (31 March 2026). "Truth Details" . Truth Social . ^ "East Tehran blackout caused by debris hitting substation - Iranian media" . Iran International . 31 March 2026 . Retrieved 31 March 2026 . ^ "Video: Heavy airstrikes hit west Tehran's Vardavard" . Iran International . 31 March 2026 . Retrieved 31 March 2026 . ^ "U.S. Drops Bunker Buster Bombs on Iranian Ammunition Depot" .

The Wall Street Journal . 31 March 2026 . Retrieved 31 March 2026 . ^ "Drone attack sparks fire on Kuwaiti tanker in UAE amid Iran's Gulf attacks" . aljazeera.com . 31 March 2026 . Retrieved 31 March 2026 . ^ "8 lightly hurt by cluster bomb in central Israel as Iranian attacks persist across region" . timesofisrael.com . 31 March 2026 . Retrieved 31 March 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (31 March 2026). "Fresh attack hits major Iranian steel factory — local media" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ "Cancer drug facility, religious site hit in Israeli-US strikes on Iran" . Al Jazeera . 31 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ "IDF attacks Iranian regime fentanyl producer" .

The Jerusalem Post . 1 April 2026 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ "UKMTO warning - 030-26" (PDF) . UKMTO.org . 31 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ "Crew safe as MR tanker struck by projectile off Qatar" . lloydslist.com . 1 April 2026 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (1 April 2026). "Crew safe as MR tanker struck by projectile off Qatar" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ "Iran Confirms Death Of Brigadier General In Israeli Strike" . NDTV . 31 March 2026 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ "Major fire breaks out in Kuwait International Airport after Iranian drone attacks" .

The Jerusalem Post . 1 April 2026 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ a b "Girl, 11, critically hurt by Iranian cluster bomb as repeated salvos target center" . Times of Israel . 1 April 2026 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ "Drone Strikes Target Erbil Oil Factory, Causing Major Fire" . channel8.com . 1 April 2026 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ "Former American embassy in Tehran damaged in US-Israeli strikes" . Iran International . 1 April 2026 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ "Strikes hit Russian Orthodox church in Tehran, Moscow says" .

The Times of Israel . 1 April 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ "Iran dismisses Trump's claim that their president wants a ceasefire as 'baseless' " . pbs.org . 1 April 2026 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ "US loses two more MQ-9 Reaper drones near Isfahan - CBS News" . Iran International . 1 April 2026 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ "Live Updates: Trump says Iran has requested a ceasefire as he threatens to pull U.S. out of NATO" . CBS News . 1 April 2026. Archived from the original on 1 April 2026 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 .

The U.S. military has lost two more MQ-9 Reaper drones near Isfahan, in central Iran, bringing the total to 16 Reapers lost since the U.S. and Israel launched their war on Iran, according to two U.S. officials who spoke to CBS News on the condition of anonymity as they were not authorized to speak publicly. ^ "Former Iran FM 'seriously injured,' wife killed in Tehran strike" . Al Arabiya English . 1 April 2026 . Retrieved 1 April 2026 . ^ "Senior IRGC special unit commander killed in strikes - state media" . Iran International . 2 April 2026 . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ "Trump offers few answers as he seeks to calm nerves over Iran war" . bbc.com . 2 April 2026 . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ "Trump threatens to pull out of Nato and warns he'll bomb Iran 'back to the Stone Age' " .

The Independent . 1 April 2026 . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ "IDF destroys IRGC Ground Forces base in Tehran" .

The Jerusalem Post . 2 April 2026 . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ "Trump announces destruction of Iran's tallest bridge" . Agence France Presse . Al-Monitor. 2 April 2026 . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ "Iraq begins oil exports on tankers through Syria: Ministry" . Al Arabiya English . 2 April 2026 . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ Lilia Sebuai: "Iran’s Pasteur medical research centre ‘heavily damaged’ in strike" The Daily Telegraph, 2 April 2026 ^ "Fire reported at Iran's Mashhad airport after projectile strikes fuel tank" .

The Times of Israel . 2 April 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ "IRGC attacking Amazon cloud computing center in Bahrain, Iran's ISNA reports" .

The Jerusalem Post . 2 April 2026 . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ "Iranian Army Launches Drone Attack on U.S. Fighter Base in Jordan" . WANA News Agency . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ "Dubai denies reports of an IRGC 'attack' on an Oracle data centre" . Gulf News . 3 April 2026 . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ "Iran claims attack on Oracle data center in Dubai; says: IRGC's navy command ..." The Times of India . ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 2 April 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (2 April 2026). "IDF spokesman says Israeli strike killed head of missile forces in Iran's Kermanshah" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 3 April 2026 . ^ "Israeli drone factory hit by Iranian missile" . CTech . 3 April 2026 . Retrieved 3 April 2026 . ^ "Iranian missile significantly damages Aerosol drone company factory in Petah Tikva" . Ynet . 2 April 2026 . Retrieved 3 April 2026 . ^ "AeroSentinel production facility severely damaged after Iranian ballistic missile strike" .

The Jerusalem Post . 3 April 2026 . Retrieved 3 April 2026 . ^ "Iranian drone attack sparks fires at Kuwait oil refinery, state media says" . AfP/The Times of Israel . 3 April 2026 . Retrieved 3 April 2026 . ^ "Iran International" . Iran International . Retrieved 3 April 2026 . ^ a b "Iranian drone attack sparks fires at Kuwait oil refinery, state media says" . AfP/aljazeera.com . 3 April 2026 . Retrieved 3 April 2026 . ^ "Debris from interception kills one, wounds fourth others at Abu Dhabi gas facility" .

The Times of Israel . 3 April 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 3 April 2026 . ^ Schmitt, Eric; Cooper, Helene; Bergman, Ronen (3 April 2026). "U.S. Searches for Crew After Fighter Jet Shot Down Over Iran, U.S. Officials Say" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 3 April 2026 . ^ Haley Britzky; Alayna Treene; Allegra Goodwin; Brad Lendon; Isaac Yee; Kevin Liptak; Kristen Holmes (3 April 2026). "US fighter jet shot down over Iran, 1 of 2 crew members rescued, US sources say" . Cable News Network . Retrieved 3 April 2026 . ^ "How rescue of US airman in remote part of Iran unfolded" . bbc.com . 6 April 2026. ^ "Second American plane involved in Iran war crashes; US officials say pilot safely rescued" .

The Times of Israel . 3 April 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 3 April 2026 . ^ a b "Cluster missile hits Kiryat Ata, severe damage, elderly man injured; reserve duty extended" . .ynetnews.com . 3 April 2026 . Retrieved 3 April 2026 . ^ "Israel claims it killed head of missile forces in Iran's Kermanshah province" . Anadolu (in Turkish). 3 April 2026 . Retrieved 12 April 2026 . ^ "It May Take a Year to Restore Abu Dhabi Aluminum Output, EGA Says" . Bloomberg . 3 April 2026 . Retrieved 3 April 2026 . ^ "Iran executes two men linked to opposition group" . Al Jazeera English . 3 April 2026. ^ "Israel says it killed IRGC oil headquarters chief in Tehran strike" . Iran International . 5 April 2026 . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ "Cluster munitions cause heavy damage to buildings in Bnei Brak and Ramat Gan" .

The Times of Israel . 4 April 2026 . Retrieved 4 April 2026 . ^ "WATCH: IDF confirms Iranian missile fragments hit near Kirya, multiple cars ablaze in Ramat Gan" .

The Jerusalem Post . 4 April 2026 . Retrieved 4 April 2026 . ^ "Home of UTJ chairman Gafni damaged by Iranian cluster munition impact this morning" .

The Times of Israel . 4 April 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 4 April 2026 . ^ "Iranian media reports strikes on cement factory in southern Iran" .

The Times of Israel . 4 April 2026 . Retrieved 4 April 2026 . ^ "Projectile strikes near Iran's Bushehr nuclear facility, killing 1, says UN nuclear watchdog" . CBC . 4 April 2026 . Retrieved 4 April 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (4 April 2026). "Israeli strikes on Iranian petrochemicals hub reported to wound five" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 4 April 2026 . ^ "Iraq shuts key Shalamcheh trade crossing with Iran after airstrikes" . aa.com.tr . 4 April 2026 . Retrieved 4 April 2026 . ^ "Five killed in Israeli strike on Iranian petrochemical complex - state media" . BBC News . 4 April 2026 . Retrieved 4 April 2026 . ^ "10 impact sites after Iran fires cluster missile; Tehran claims strike on 'Israel-linked ship' " . Ynetglobal . 4 April 2026 . Retrieved 4 April 2026 . ^ "Iraq shuts key Shalamcheh trade crossing with Iran after airstrikes" . Reuters . 4 April 2026 . Retrieved 4 April 2026 . ^ Regencia, Ted (5 April 2026). "Al Jazeera Live Blog - 5th of April" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 5 April 2026 . ^ "Trump says missing US crew member from downed jet rescued in 'daring' operation in Iran" . BBC News . 5 April 2026 . Retrieved 5 April 2026 . ^ "What we know so far about rescue of US air force officer in Iran" . BBC News . 4 April 2026 . Retrieved 5 April 2026 . ^ "Wreckage of US C-130s, MH-6 helicopter shown in Iranian footage" . Turkiye Today . 5 April 2026 . Retrieved 5 April 2026 . ^ "Explosions and warplane overflights reported in several Iranian provinces" . Iran International . 5 April 2026 . Retrieved 5 April 2026 . ^ "Iranian drone attack sparks fire at Shuwaikh Oil Complex in Kuwait" . jpost.com . 5 April 2026 . Retrieved 5 April 2026 . ^ "IDF strike kills Head of Commerce at Iranian regime's oil headquarters" .

The Jerusalem Post . 5 April 2026 . Retrieved 5 April 2026 . ^ a b "4 bodies found in wreckage of Haifa residential building hit by Iranian missile" . Times of Israel . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ "2 bodies recovered after Iran missile strike on Haifa home, 2 still missing" . Ynetglobal . 5 April 2026 . Retrieved 5 April 2026 . ^ a b مهاجرانی: تاکنون به ۳۲۲ مرکز درمانی و ۷۶۳ مدرسه حمله نظامی شده است (Mohajerani: 322 health centers and 763 schools have been attacked by military forces so far) Retrieved 6 April 2026 ^ "Woman seriously wounded after Iranian missile barrage on central Israel" . Ynetglobal . 6 April 2026 . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ "4 lightly hurt in Iranian cluster bomb attack on Haifa area" .

The Times of Israel . 6 April 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ "Attack on homes near Tehran kills 13 - IRGC-affiliated media" . Iran International . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ Gambrell, Jon. "Strikes in southern Iran kill 6 people" . AP News . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ "Iran's top university, oil facility bombed as US, Israel intensify attacks" . Al Jazeera English . 6 April 2026 . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ "Debris from air defense interception injures Ghanaian national in UAE" .

The Times of Israel . 6 April 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ "Military site struck in northern Iran, southern port city hit" . Iran International . 6 April 2026 . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ "IRGC intelligence chief killed in attack, Guards say" . Iran International . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ "Israel killed Quds Force Unit 840 commander, Netanyahu says" . Iran International . 6 April 2026 . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ "Iran struck US forces relocated on Kuwait's Bubiyan island, military spokesperson says" .

The Straits Times . Reuters . 6 April 2026 . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ "Israel hit Iran's biggest petrochemical site, defense minister says" . Iran International . 6 April 2026 . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (6 April 2026). "IDF says it hit Tehran's Mehrabad Airport, smaller airstrips overnight" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 6 April 2026 . ^ "Couple in northern Iraq killed in drone attack from Iran, local officials say" . Al Jazeera English . 6 April 2026. ^ "15 Americans injured in Iranian attack on Kuwaiti air base" . CBS News . 6 April 2026. An Iranian drone strike on Ali Al Salem Air Base in Kuwait overnight injured 15 Americans, two U.S. officials told CBS News. ^ Cobham, Tara (7 April 2026). "Trump warns US could send Iran 'back to the stone ages' if deadline not met" .

The Independent . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ @realDonaldTrump (7 April 2026). "Truth Details" . Truth Social . ^ "Overnight Iranian strike hits Saudi petrochemical plant" . Times of ISrael/AFP . 7 April 2026. ^ "Wave of overnight strikes reported across Iran" . Iran International . 7 April 2026 . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ "Synagogue in Tehran 'completely destroyed' in US-Israeli attack" . Al Jazeera English . AFP and AP . 7 April 2026 . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (7 April 2026). "IDF admits Tehran synagogue damaged in strike targeting Iranian commander, regrets 'collateral damage' " .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ " 'Several large explosions' heard on Kharg Island hours before Trump deadline" . metro.co.uk . 7 April 2026 . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ "US strikes military targets on Iran's Kharg Island, US official says" . Reuters . 7 April 2026 . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ "Iran reports strikes on bridges, key highway and railway" . Manila Standard . AFP . 7 April 2026 . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (7 April 2026). "IDF says it bombed rail bridges, roads used by Iran to transport weapons and military equipment" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ "Missile strike kills five in Basra home" . Shafaq.com . 7 April 2026 . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ "Iran distributes 180,000 iodine tablets to Bushehr residents" . iranintl.com . 7 April 2026. ^ "Donald Trump says two-week US-Iran ceasefire agreed" .

The Guardian . 7 April 2026. ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ a b "Donald Trump says two-week US-Iran ceasefire agreed" . Al Jazeera English . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 7 April 2026 . ^ "Donald Trump says two-week US-Iran ceasefire agreed" . ynetnews . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ "UAE secretly launched strikes on Iran during war, attacked oil refinery — report" . Times of Israel . 12 May 2026 . Retrieved 12 May 2026 . ^ "UAE, Kuwait, Bahrain report attacks despite Iran-US ceasefire" . Al Jazeera English . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ "At least 254 killed after Israel hits Lebanon with massive wave of airstrikes" .

The Guardian . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 9 April 2026 . ^ "Israel hits Lebanon with massive wave of airstrikes" .

The Guardian . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 9 April 2026 . ^ "Hezbollah: Rockets Fired at Northern Israel in Response to 'Cease-fire Violations' " . Haaretz . 9 April 2026 . Retrieved 9 April 2026 . ^ "Irã ameaça romper cessar-fogo se Israel continuar atacando o Líbano" . G1 . 8 April 2026. ^ "Presidente do Irã diz que cessar-fogo foi rompido com ataques a ilhas iranianas" . G1 . 8 April 2026. ^ "Trump says Lebanon not included in US-Iran ceasefire amid Israeli assault" . Al Jazeera English . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ "Middle East ceasefire threatens to unravel as Israel assaults Lebanon and Iran blocks oil tankers" .

The Guardian . 8 April 2026 . Retrieved 8 April 2026 . ^ "Kuwait's military says its air defenses are responding to drone attacks" .

The Times of Israel . 9 April 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 9 April 2026 . ^ "Hostile drone attack against Kuwait causes damage, no casualties" . Gulf News . 10 April 2026 . Retrieved 9 April 2026 . ^ "Kuwait condemns drone attacks denied by Iran" .

The Courier (Ballarat) . Australian Associated Press . 10 April 2026 . Retrieved 10 April 2026 . ^ "US summons Iraqi ambassador over drone strike on diplomatic facility in Baghdad" .

The Times of Israel . 9 April 2026. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 9 April 2026 . ^ "Iran's former foreign minister Kharazi dies from wounds in strike on his Tehran home" . Türkiye Today . Retrieved 9 April 2026 . ^ آغاز مراسم چهلمین روز شهادت مقام معظم رهبری (Commemoration ceremonies begin for the 40th anniversary of the martyrdom of the Supreme Leader) Retrieved 19 April 2026 ^ تصاویر جمعیت عظیم پاکستان در چهلم رهبر شهید انقلاب (Images of the massive Pakistani crowds commemorating the 40th-day commemoration of the martyrdom of the leader of the revolution) Retrieved 19 April 2026 ^ تخریب ۲۰۳ مکان در ۱۷ استان؛ میزان خسارت وارد شده به اماکن ورزشی کشور در جنگ ۴۰ روزه مشخص شد 203 venues destroyed in 17 provinces; extent of damage to country's sports venues in 40-day war revealed Retrieved 29 April 2026 ^ "Trump says U.S. forces are 'clearing' Strait of Hormuz" .

The Hindu . Reuters . 11 April 2026. ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 11 April 2026 . ^ "US military ship turns back from Hormuz route after Iran's 30-min warning" . Hindustan Times . 11 April 2026 . Retrieved 11 April 2026 . ^ "U.S. Warships Transit Hormuz as U.S.-Iran Meet Face-to-Face for Peace Talks" .

The Wall Street Journal . 11 April 2026. ^ Ravid, Barak (11 April 2026). "U.S. warships cross Strait of Hormuz for first time since Iran war began" . Axios . ^ "US military 'setting conditions' to clear mines from Strait of Hormuz" . Reuters . 11 April 2026. ^ "Direct U.S.-Iran talks fail to reach resolution after lengthy negotiation" . Washington Post . 11 April 2026 . Retrieved 12 April 2026 . ^ "Trump says U.S. will blockade Strait of Hormuz and intercept ships that paid tolls to Iran" . CBS News . 12 April 2026 . Retrieved 12 April 2026 . ^ "Trump announces naval blockade of Iran after Islamabad talks yield no deal" .

The Washington Post . 12 April 2026. ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 13 April 2026 . ^ "Trump says US to begin blockade on ships at Iranian ports at 10 a.m. ET" . ynetnews.com . 13 April 2026 . Retrieved 13 April 2026 . ^ "Israeli commander responsible for killing of Hind Rajab injured in Lebanon, says HRF" . Al Jazeera English . 14 April 2026. ^ Goodstone, Sydney (14 April 2026). Images show Iran digging for missile launchers trapped underground (News). CNN . Retrieved 15 April 2026 . ^ "Iran clears entrances to underground missile bases during ceasefire - CNN" . Iran International . Retrieved 15 April 2026 . ^ "Iran-US war latest: Trump says he will permanently open the Strait of Hormuz - 'for China' " .

The Independent . 15 April 2026 . Retrieved 15 April 2026 . ^ "Iran-US war latest: China tells Tehran to open Strait of Hormuz after Trump's promise to 'do it for Xi' " .

The Independent . 16 April 2026 . Retrieved 16 April 2026 . ^ "Iran's foreign minister says passage of vessels via Hormuz Strait is open during ceasefire" . Reuters . 17 April 2026 . Retrieved 23 April 2026 . ^ "Iran reimposes restrictions on Hormuz, accuses US of violating deal" . Business Standard . Associated Press . 18 April 2026 . Retrieved 23 April 2026 . ^ "Iran-US war latest: Tehran gunboats 'fire at tanker' after Strait of Hormuz closed again as supreme leader mocks Trump" .

The Independent . 18 April 2026 . Retrieved 18 April 2026 . ^ "Israel says soldiers killed by explosive devices in south Lebanon" . Al Jazeera English . 19 April 2026. ^ " "Solange es eine Seeblockade gibt": Iran lehnt von Trump anberaumte Verhandlungsrunde ab" . Tagesspiegel . 19 April 2026. ^ "Trump says US seizes Iranian-flagged cargo ship near Strait of Hormuz that tried to pass blockade" .

The Hill . Associated Press . 19 April 2026. ^ "Iran Calls US Seizure Of Cargo Ship Near Hormuz "Piracy, Ceasefire Violation" . NDTV . Associated Press. 20 April 2026 . Retrieved 23 April 2026 . ^ "Iran attacks US ships with drones, says Iranian media, with no reports of damage" . BBC . 19 April 2026 . Retrieved 23 April 2026 . ^ "Trump says the United States is extending ⁠its ⁠ceasefire with Iran at mediator Pakistan's request to allow more time for Tehran to put forward its proposal" . Al Jazeera English . 21 April 2026 . Retrieved 23 April 2026 . ^ "Iran says it has seized two ships in Strait of Hormuz after vessels attacked" . BBC . 22 April 2026 . Retrieved 22 April 2026 . ^ "Iran beschießt und beschlagnahmt Schiffe in Straße von Hormus" . Zeit.de (in German). 22 April 2026 . Retrieved 22 April 2026 . ^ "Trump orders US military to 'shoot and kill' Iranian boats in Hormuz" . Telangana Today . Associated Press . 23 April 2026 . Retrieved 23 April 2026 . ^ "Iran war updates: Trump announces three-week Lebanon ceasefire extension" . Al Jazeera English . 23 April 2026 . Retrieved 24 April 2026 . ^ "Iran Seizes Ship Suspected Of Collaborating With US Military, Cites Maritime Violations" . News 18 . 24 April 2026 . Retrieved 10 May 2026 . ^ "Kuwait Border Sites Again Targeted in Drone Attack From Iraq" . Arab Times . 24 April 2026 . Retrieved 25 April 2026 . ^ "Trump says US to help free up ships in Strait of Hormuz starting Monday morning" . Internazionale . Reuters. 3 May 2026 . Retrieved 10 May 2026 . ^ a b "Iran Responds to U.S. Shipping Corridor With Escalation and Attacks" . maritime-executive.com . 4 May 2026 . Retrieved 4 May 2026 . ^ "US destroys six Iranian small boats, shoots down missiles, drones, admiral says" .

The Economic Times . 4 May 2026. ^ "Missiles fired at U.S. frigate in Strait of Hormuz, claims Iranian media" .

The Hindu . Agence France Press . 4 May 2026. ^ "Attacks in Gulf Threaten to Reignite Conflict" .

The New York Times . NYT Press. 4 May 2026 . Retrieved 10 May 2026 . ^ "3 Indians injured in Fujairah as Iran launches fresh missile, drone attack on UAE" . indiatoday.in . 4 May 2026 . Retrieved 4 May 2026 . ^ "Strikes in U.A.E., Oman and at Sea Strain Iran Truce to the Breaking Point" .

The New York Times . 5 May 2026 . Retrieved 10 May 2026 . ^ "Iran-US war latest: UAE under fire as Tehran launches barrage of missiles and drones for second day running, drone attack on UAE" . independent . 5 May 2026 . Retrieved 5 May 2026 . ^ "French shipping firm says vessel targeted in Strait of Hormuz" . lemonde.fr . 6 May 2026 . Retrieved 6 May 2026 . ^ "Iran war live: Trump says Hormuz operation paused amid US, Tehran talks" . Al Jazeera English . 6 May 2026 . Retrieved 10 May 2026 . ^ "US forces disable Iranian-flagged unladen oil tanker amid blockade: CENTCOM" . Anadolu Agency . 6 May 2026 . Retrieved 10 May 2026 . ^ "US military strikes sites in Iran as countries exchange fire" . CNN . 7 May 2026 . Retrieved 10 May 2026 . ^ "US, Iran clash in Hormuz as war escalates: What happened, why it matters" . Al Jazeera English . 7 May 2026 . Retrieved 10 May 2026 . ^ "UAE says air defences intercepted two missiles, three drones from Iran" . Al Jazeera English . 8 May 2026. ^ "US forces strike two empty Iranian oil tankers, Central Command says" . Devdiscourse . Reuters. 8 May 2026. ^ "Six missing after US strikes near Hormuz, Iran says" . CNN . 9 May 2026 . Retrieved 10 May 2026 . ^ "Iran claims to have seized 'offending' oil tanker in Gulf of Oman" . aljazeera.com . 8 May 2026 . Retrieved 8 May 2026 . ^ Haley Britzky (8 May 2026). "US disables 2 more Iranian oil tankers attempting to run blockade, US military says" . CNN . ^ Tobias Holyman (9 May 2026). "Bahrain arrests 41 individuals linked with Iran's IRGC terrorist activities in the Kingdom" . jpost.com . ^ Julian Borger (10 May 2026). "Iran says it has replied to US proposal as reported drone strikes strain ceasefire" .

The Guardian . ^ "Indian cargo ship sinks after drone strike near Oman, Delhi calls attack deplorable" . indiatoday.in . 14 May 2026. ^ "Iran Seizes Chinese-Operated Floating Armory Vessel Near Fujairah" . marineinsight.com . 15 May 2026. ^ Gambrell, Jon; Magdy, Samy (17 May 2026). "Drone strikes UAE nuclear plant as US and Iran signal they are prepared to resume war" . Associated Press . Retrieved 17 May 2026 . ^ "Iran says more than 6,500 'traitors and spies' arrested since war began" . Al Jazeera English . 17 May 2026. ^ "Israel's military operated second covert site in Iraq: NYT" . Al Jazeera English . 18 May 2026. ^ "Exclusive: Qatari negotiating team in Tehran to try to help secure US-Iran deal to end war, says source" . Reuters . 22 May 2026 . Retrieved 25 May 2026 . ^ "Iran says it shot down Israeli drone amid signs of possible US-Iran peace deal: Report" . WION . 24 May 2026 . Retrieved 24 May 2026 . ^ "Iranian President Orders Reopening Of International Internet Access: Report" . NDTV . 25 May 2026 . Retrieved 25 May 2026 . ^ "U.S. renews strikes on Iran, citing threats posed to American troops" .

The Washington Post . 25 May 2026 . Retrieved 26 May 2026 . ^ "US military launches strikes on southern Iran amid talks in Qatar" . Al Jazeera English . 26 May 2026 . Retrieved 26 May 2026 . ^ "IDF pushes north of Lebanon security zone - Netanyahu says Israel seizing 'strategic positions' " . Times of Israel . 26 May 2026 . Retrieved 26 May 2026 . ^ "US launches airstrikes in Iran but says ceasefire still holds" . Politico . 27 May 2026 . Retrieved 27 May 2026 . ^ "Iran, US reach deal to extend ceasefire, pending Trump's approval" . Internazionale . Reuters. 28 May 2026 . Retrieved 28 May 2026 . ^ "Americans Hurt in Kuwait as Trump Sends Mixed Signals on War" . Bloomberg News . 30 May 2026 . Retrieved 30 May 2026 . ^ "Iran says it is breaking off talks to end war after U.S. and Israeli strikes" . Washington Post . 1 June 2026 . Retrieved 1 June 2026 . ^ "Lebanon's U.S. Embassy says Hezbollah accepted U.S. proposal on 'mutual cessation of attacks' " .

The Hindu . Agence France Presse. 1 June 2026. ^ a b "One killed and 63 hurt in Iran attack on Kuwait airport as Trump says ceasefire talks ongoing" .

The Guardian . 4 June 2026. ^ "Israel strikes Beirut's southern suburbs days after ceasefire agreement" . Washington Post . 7 June 2026. ^ "Israeli military says it hit Hezbollah in Beirut suburbs" . Reuters . 7 June 2026. ^ "Iran's top negotiator threatens US targets over Lebanon escalation" . Reuters . 7 June 2026. ^ "Iran Fires Missiles at Israel for First Time Since April Cease-Fire" .

The New York Times . 7 June 2026. ^ "Iran fires missiles at Israel, says Beirut strike has 'crossed all red lines' " . Moneycontrol . 7 June 2026. ^ "Iran's Revolutionary Guards say they targeted Israel's Ramat David air base" . Azerbaijani Press Agency . 7 June 2026. ^ "Israel to respond 'forcefully' to Iranian breach of ceasefire after missiles rain on North" .

The Jerusalem Post . 7 June 2026. ^ "Israel hits Iran with new strikes despite Trump admonition" . Reuters . 8 June 2026. ^ "Israel and Iran trade strikes, threatening to drag the region back into full-scale war" . Springfield News-Sun . Associated Press. 8 June 2026. ^ "At least 2 Iranian military members killed in Israeli attack on Iran" . Millenniumpost . Agencies. 9 June 2026. ^ "West Asia war LIVE: Iran ends military operations against Israel, warns of harsher attacks if strikes on Lebanon persist" .

The Hindu . 8 June 2026. ^ "Iran and Israel Halt Exchanges of Fire" .

The Wall Street Journal . 8 June 2026. ^ a b D'Agata, Charlie; Watson, Eleanor; Andrews, Frank (9 June 2026). "U.S. Apache helicopter shot down by Iran, Trump says; crew rescued by sea drone" . CBS News . Retrieved 16 June 2026 . ^ "Trump says Iran shot down US helicopter over Hormuz, vows to respond" . Al Jazeera English . 9 June 2026. ^ "Iranian Drone Took Out U.S. Apache Downed in the Strait of Hormuz" . theaviationist.com . 9 June 2026. ^ "US military says it began launching strikes against Iran" . Reuters . 9 June 2026. ^ "Iran Targets F-35 Hangars, US Bases After Strikes Over Apache Downing" . NDTV . 10 June 2026. ^ "Iran attacks Bahrain, Kuwait, Jordan in retaliation for US strikes" . Al Jazeera English . 10 June 2026. ^ "Trump vows to attack Iran again today" . CNN . 10 June 2026. ^ "Hegseth: U.S. to bomb 'key facilities' in Iran on Wednesday" . Internazionale . Reuters. 10 June 2026. ^ "Watch: US unleashes 49 Tomahawk missiles in fresh 'self-defence' strikes on Iran" .

The Times of India . 10 June 2026. ^ "US military has launched strikes 'against multiple targets in Iran' " . CNN . 10 June 2026. ^ "Three Indian sailors killed in US strike on oil tanker" . BBC . 11 June 2026. ^ "Analysis Suggests Precision U.S. Strikes on Iranian Water Facility" . New York Times . 10 June 2026 . Retrieved 16 June 2026 . ^ "Iran closes Strait of Hormuz, warns it will shoot vessels; strikes US Fifth in Bahrain again" .

The Economic Times . 11 June 2026. ^ "Iran Guards say targeted bases in Bahrain and Kuwait" .

The Hindu . 11 June 2026. ^ "Iran Guards say targeted US command centre in Jordan with missiles" . Bangladesh Sangbad Sangstha . Agence France Presse. 11 June 2026. ^ "Iraurz vor Kriegsende: Iranischer Luftangriff zerstört Radarkuppel in Bahrain" . NZZ . 21 June 2026. ^ "Israel braces for Iranian missile fire after strike on Hezbollah target in Beirut" . timesofisrael.com . 14 June 2026. ^ "US, Iran agree on 60-day roadmap to reach final deal even as talks stumble" . India Today . 22 June 2026 . Retrieved 27 June 2026 . ^ "US, Iran Launch High-Stakes Talks in Switzerland" . Kashmir Observer . 21 June 2026 . Retrieved 23 June 2026 . ^ Tan, Florence; Chow, Emily; Saul, Jonathan (21 June 2026). "Tanker traffic through Hormuz picks up after slower flows due to crossing concerns" . Reuters . Retrieved 23 June 2026 . ^ "Trump says Iran violated ceasefire: 'You'll find out' if there will be consequences" . CNBC . 26 June 2026. ^ "U.S. strikes Iran after Trump accuses Tehran of ceasefire violation in Strait of Hormuz" . CNBC . 26 June 2026. ^ "Iran Guards say targeted US sites in response to strikes: state TV" . Namibia Press Agency . Agence France Presse. 26 June 2026. ^ "US launches second night of strikes against Iran after ship struck by drone" . Al Jazeera English . 27 June 2026. ^ "Iran war day 121: Iran attacks Bahrain, Kuwait as US strikes near Hormuz" . Al Jazeera English . 28 June 2026. ^ "U.S. and Iran agree to halt strikes and meet this week, U.S. official says" . Axios . 28 June 2026. ^ "Iran fires missiles at commercial ships in Strait of Hormuz, Axios reports" . Reuters . 7 July 2026. ^ "Tanker set ablaze after being struck by projectile in the Strait of Hormuz as Iran mourns Khamenei" . Associated Press . 7 July 2026. ^ "Qatar blames Iran for striking tanker in strait as huge crowds mourn Khamenei" . Reuters . 7 July 2026. ^ "Additional tanker in Strait of Hormuz struck by unidentified projectile, UKMTO says" . Haaretz . Reuters. 7 July 2026. ^ "US revoking license that authorized Iranian oil sales, official says" . Reuters . 7 July 2026. ^ "Riyadh condemns 'Iran's targeting' of Saudi tanker in Hormuz strait" . Moneycontrol . 7 July 2026. ^ "Iran says U.S. breached war-ending memorandum by restoring oil sanctions" . Haaretz . Reuters. 7 July 2026. ^ "U.S. forces complete 'new round of retaliatory strikes' against Iran, CENTCOM says" . Haaretz . 8 July 2026. ^ "U.S. launches 'series of powerful strikes against Iran,' CENTCOM says" . Haaretz . Reuters. 7 July 2026. ^ "Revolutionary Guards say they downed U.S. MQ9 drone in southern Iran, Press TV reports" . Haaretz . Reuters. 8 July 2026. ^ "Revolutionary Guards say they targeted 85 U.S. military sites in Bahrain, Kuwait 'in response to cease-fire violation' " . Haaretz . Reuters. 8 July 2026. ^ "Iran says it targeted a U.S. BASE in Bahrain, pledges more attacks if U.S. repeats strikes" . Haaretz . Reuters. 8 July 2026. ^ "Iran's Revolutionary Guard Navy says member killed by 'enemy drones' " . Haaretz . Reuters. 8 July 2026. ^ "Trump says Iran deal 'is over' after Gulf strikes, calls Tehran 'sick people' " . Ynet . 8 July 2026. ^ "Trump Says Ceasefire with Iran is 'Over' but Negotiations Can Continue" . Asharq Al-Awsat . 8 July 2026. ^ "Eight Iranian soldiers killed in U.S. strikes, state media says" . Haaretz . Reuters. 8 July 2026. ^ "Two Iranian fishermen killed in U.S. strikes, Mehr News Agency says" . Haaretz . Reuters. 8 July 2026. ^ "CENTCOM: U.S. forces attacked 90 targets in Iran, including air defenses and missile and drone sites" . Haaretz . 9 July 2026. ^ "U.S. military says forces have started conducting additional strikes against Iran" . Haaretz . 8 July 2026. ^ "Iran's Revolutionary Guards say they attacked two U.S. bases in Kuwait, two in Bahrain" . Haaretz . Reuters. 9 July 2026. ^ "Trump: Iran called a while ago; they want to make a deal" . Haaretz . Reuters. 9 July 2026. ^ "Iran says it's targeted three Gulf nations in overnight strikes" . BBC News . 9 July 2026. ^ "U.S. strikes in Iran kill 14, wound 78, Iranian Health Ministry says" . Haaretz . Reuters. 9 July 2026. ^ "Iran: 'Evil and psychopathic' US hit civilian railway bridges, in 'gross war crime' " .

The Times of Israel . Agence France Presse. 9 July 2026. ^ "US strike on Iranian railway bridge hits China-Russia trade corridor near Turkmenistan" . bne IntelliNews . 9 July 2026. ^ "Explosions heard in Iranian port city - state media" . BBC News . 9 July 2026. ^ "US projectile hit perimeter area of Bushehr nuclear plant, Iran says" .

The Times of Israel . Reuters . 9 June 2026. ^ "U.S. ready to strike Iran if needed as diplomacy continues, official says" . Haaretz . 10 July 2026. ^ "It's a mystery who launched the latest airstrikes against Iran" . Associated Press . 10 July 2026. ^ "IRGC fires 10 ballistic missiles at Jordanian military base, Iran's state media reports" . Haaretz . 9 July 2026. ^ "Drone attack hits Iranian Kurdish opposition group camp near Iraq's Erbil, security sources say" .

The Times of Israel . 9 July 2026. ^ "Three IRGC members killed in U.S. strikes on Iran, Mizan News Agency reports" . Haaretz. Reuters. 9 July 2026. ^ "Iran says Strait of Hormuz is closed, claims it struck vessel using 'unauthorized route' " . Haaretz . Reuters. 11 July 2026. ^ "U.S. says it launched fresh strikes on Iranian targets, blasts reported in Iran" . Haaretz . Reuters. 12 July 2026. ^ "U.S. Central Command says third round of strikes on Iran complete" . Haaretz . Reuters. 12 July 2026. ^ "UAE, Qatar say they intercepted Iranian missile attack" . Haaretz . Reuters. 12 July 2026. ^ a b "U.S. strikes hit coastal bases; Iran retaliates with attack on Jordanian air base, IRGC says" . Haaretz . Reuters. 12 July 2026. ^ "IRGC says strikes on U.S. base in Qatar, vessel in Hormuz and port in Oman" . Haaretz . Reuters. 12 July 2026. ^ "US strikes Iran, Tehran says Strait of Hormuz closed, Gulf states hit" . Reuters . 12 July 2026. ^ "Iran attacks five Gulf nations, shuts Hormuz after US bombing: All to know" . Al Jazeera English . 12 July 2026. ^ "Three wounded, including child, by falling shrapnel after Iranian attacks, Qatar says" . Haaretz . Reuters. 12 July 2026. ^ "Drones target sites in Oman's Musandam, state news agency says" . Haaretz . Reuters. 12 July 2026. ^ "One Indian national missing after attack on vessel off Oman, foreign ministry says" . Reuters . 12 July 2026. ^ "Overnight US strikes killed Iranian soldier: media" .

The Hindu . Agence France Member. 12 July 2026. ^ "U.S. CENTCOM says Strait of Hormuz is 'open to all vessels' following U.S. strikes" . Haaretz . 12 July 2026. ^ "Iran reiterates that Hormuz is closed after US insists that it isn't" .

The Times of Israel . 12 July 2026. ^ "Iranian news reports launch of ballistic missiles towards Kuwait, U.S. missile launch site" . Haaretz . 12 July 2026. ^ "Three Kuwaiti border centers hit, damaged in attack, army says" . Haaretz . Reuters. 12 July 2026. ^ "Kuwait says three border posts, offshore oil platform attacked" . Arab News . Agence France Presse. 12 July 2026. ^ "CENTCOM says U.S. launches new strikes on Iran over attacks on ships" . Haaretz . Reuters. 12 July 2026. ^ "CENTCOM says latest wave of strikes hit dozens of targets across Iran" . Haaretz . 12 July 2026. ^ "US military posts footage of its first-ever suicide drone strike on Iranian submarine" .

The Times of Israel . 12 July 2026. ^ "One killed, four wounded in U.S. strike on water pumping station in southwestern Iran, state media says" . Haaretz . Reuters. 13 July 2026. ^ a b "Iran says U.S. strike in central Iran killed one, wounded seven" . Haaretz . 13 July 2026. ^ "Iran says it struck Jordanian air base, disabled two ships in Strait of Hormuz" . Haaretz . Reuters. 13 July 2026. ^ "Iran says it struck U.S. base in Bahrain in 'second phase of retaliation' " . Haaretz . Reuters. 13 July 2026. ^ a b "Iran's Guards claim strikes against Oman and Bahrain" .

The Times of Israel . 13 July 2026. ^ "West Asia war LIVE: U.S. military bases in Jordan, Bahrain, Kuwait struck by IRGC" .

The Hindu . 13 July 2026. ^ "Trump: U.S. 'reinstating the Iranian blockade' in Strait of Hormuz" . Haaretz . 13 July 2026. ^ "U.S. naval blockade of Iran to begin Tuesday, maritime security information center says" . Haaretz . Reuters. 13 July 2026. ^ "Report: Trump tells Congress U.S. has resumed hostilities with Iran" . Haaretz . 13 July 2026. ^ "Trump says U.S. will hit Iran hard on Monday and Tuesday, MoU was test that Tehran did not honor" . Haaretz . Reuters. 13 July 2026. ^ "Trump says U.S. could take out Pickaxe Mountain in Iran 'relatively soon' " . Haaretz . 13 July 2026. ^ "Iran's state TV cites Iranian army as saying that it targeted a 'hostile' U.S. vessel with cruise missiles" . Haaretz . Reuters. 13 July 2026. ^ "U.S. says it has completed latest wave of strikes on Iran" . Haaretz . Reuters. 13 July 2026. ^ "UAE says two tankers hit by Iranian cruise missiles in Strait of Hormuz; one crew member killed" . Haaretz . Reuters. 14 July 2026. ^ "India protests to Iran over killing of seafarer in Hormuz" . Reuters . 14 July 2026. ^ "Iran's IRGC: We destroyed Patriot radar, U.S. air control radar and early warning system in Bahrain" . Haaretz . Reuters. 13 July 2026. ^ "Iran's IRGC: We destroyed Patriot radar, U.S. air control radar and early warning system in Bahrain" . Haaretz . Reuters. 13 July 2026. ^ "Iran rescues tanker's foreign crew after vessel collision in Strait of Hormuz, Iranian media reports" . Haaretz . Reuters. 13 July 2026. ^ "Oil Tanker Hit By Unknown Missile In Strait Of Hormuz: UK Maritime Agency" . NDTV . Agence France Presse. 14 July 2026. ^ "Three killed in Iran's Hormozgan Province in overnight U.S. strikes, Fars News reports" . Haaretz . Reuters. 14 July 2026. ^ "Trump backs away from plans to charge fees in the Strait of Hormuz as attacks intensify" . Associated Press . 14 July 2026. ^ "London, July 14, 2026 (AFP) - Death toll in latest Hormuz vessel strikes rises to two: maritime group" . Namibia Press Agency . Agence France Press. 15 July 2026. ^ "Trump threatens to attack Iranian power plants and bridges if Tehran refuses to negotiate" . Haaretz . 15 July 2026. ^ "Trump spares Iran oil, eyes ground campaign" . AP7AM . Indo-Asian News Service . 15 July 2026. ^ "CENTCOM says Iran intentionally targeted civilians across the region by attacking seven commercial ships" . Haaretz . 15 July 2026. ^ "U.S. renews naval blockade on Iranian ports, strikes dozens of Iranian military sites near Hormuz, CENTCOM says" . Haaretz . 15 July 2026. ^ "Iran's Revolutionary Guards warn Hormuz will stay closed 'until US ends its acts of aggression' " .

The Times of Israel . Agencies. 15 July 2026. ^ "U.S. strike hit wheat storage silo in Iran's Hoveyzeh, Iran's IRIB reports" . Haaretz . Reuters. 15 July 2026. ^ "Kuwait says Iranian attacks hit navy vessel, injuring four troops" .

The Times of Israel . 15 July 2026. ^ "U.S. military commences new wave of strikes on Iran, CENTCOM says" . Haaretz . 15 July 2026. ^ "U.S. military says it completed fresh round of strikes targeting Iranian defense systems, cruise missile storage and launch sites" . Haaretz . 15 July 2026. ^ "Iranian drone hits warehouse in Kuwait port area, Kuwait says facilities targeted" . Haaretz. Reuters. 15 July 2026. ^ "U.S. says it redirected two commercial vessels after resuming Iran naval blockade" . Haaretz . Reuters. 15 July 2026. ^ "Strikes on Iran strengthen Trump's options for new escalation, officials say" . Haaretz . Reuters. 15 July 2026. ^ "U.S. launches fresh strikes against Iran" . Haaretz . 15 July 2026. ^ "U.S. military disables tanker headed toward Iranian port, CENTCOM says" . Haaretz . 15 July 2026. ^ "Trump Leans Toward Expanding U.S. Military Operations in Iran" .

The Wall Street Journal . 15 July 2026. ^ "Iran targeted U.S. military base in Jordan, state media says" . Haaretz . 16 July 2026. ^ "Iranian army says it launched drone attack on US military sites in Jordan" .

The Times of Israel . Agence France Presse. 16 July 2026. ^ "Iran army says struck US targets in Kuwait, Bahrain with drones" . Vanguard . Agence France Presse. 16 July 2026. ^ "Iran says it struck a US base in Jordan after claiming US hit area near children's cancer hospital" . TheJournal.ie. Agence France Presse. 16 July 2026. ^ "Iran will 'target all infrastructure in the region if Trump follows through with his threats,' Iranian military official says" . Haaretz . Reuters. 16 July 2026. ^ "Iran tells Houthis to close Red Sea gateway if U.S. strikes power network, sources say" . Haaretz . Reuters. 16 July 2026. ^ "Iran remains in contact with U.S., seeks deal, White House says" . Haaretz . Reuters. 16 July 2026. ^ "U.S. begins fifth wave of Iran strikes, CENTCOM says" . Haaretz . Reuters. 16 July 2026. ^ "U.S. military says it completed latest strikes on Iran, marking sixth night of attacks" . Haaretz . Reuters. 17 July 2026. ^ "Iran judiciary denies Trump statement that American prisoner was freed" . Haaretz . Reuters. 16 July 2026. ^ "Qatar says Iranian missile attack thwarted, child injured" . Haaretz . Reuters. 17 July 2026. ^ "Iranian army says it targeted U.S. force deployment and logistical support centers in Kuwait with drones" . Haaretz . Reuters. 17 July 2026. ^ "Overnight US attacks killed 8 Iranians, injured 20: state media" . Bangladesh Sangbad Sangstha . Agence France Presse. 17 July 2026. ^ "Iran's Revolutionary Guards say it targeted U.S. Command Center at Syria's al-Tanf" . Haaretz . Reuters Press. 17 July 2026. ^ "Iran claims attack on U.S. maritime surveillance radar in Oman" . Haaretz . Reuters. 17 July 2026. ^ "US coalition downs drones over Iraq's Erbil, Kurdish forces say" .

The Times of Israel . Agence France Presse. 17 June 2026. ^ "US coalition downs drones over Iraq's Erbil, Kurdish forces say" .

The Times of Israel . Agence France Presse. 17 June 2026. ^ "Tanker hit by unknown projectile off Oman, crew safe, UK says" .

The Times of Israel . Reuters. 17 June 2026. ^ "At least 38 killed, 400 wounded in U.S. strikes on Iran this month, Iran Health Ministry says" . Haaretz . Deutsche Presse-Agentur . 17 June 2026. ^ "Iran's IRGC says it targeted U.S. fighter jets in Jordan" . Haaretz . Reuters. 17 July 2026. ^ "Kuwait says Iranian attack damages power generation, water desalination station" . Haaretz . Reuters. 17 July 2026. ^ "Iran's IRGC say they struck U.S. Al Udeid base in Qatar" . Haaretz . Reuters. 17 July 2026. ^ "Strikes kill eight Iranian Kurdish rebels in Iraq: opposition group" . Bangladesh Sangbad Sangstha . Agence France Presse. 17 July 2026. ^ "Nine Kurdish opposition members killed in suspected Iranian strike, sources say" . Haaretz . Deutsche Presse-Agentur . 17 June 2026. ^ "Two drones target Iranian Kurdish opposition camp in Iraq, security sources say" . Bangladesh Sangbad Sangstha . Agence France Presse. 17 July 2026. ^ "Kuwait Says Army Personnel Injured In Iranian Drone Attack" . NDTV . Agence France Presse. 17 July 2026. ^ "Iran's Tasnim says IRGC navy targeted vessel in Strait of Hormuz" . Haaretz . Reuters. 17 July 2026. ^ "U.S. says it has launched strikes on Iranian infrastructure for seventh night in a row" . Haaretz . 17 July 2026. ^ a b "Iran renews attacks on Gulf states after another night of US strikes" . Reuters . 18 July 2026. ^ "Iran says it destroyed Bahrain AI center, U.S. drone depot in strikes" . Haaretz . 17 July 2026. ^ "Iran says three killed in U.S. strikes; IRGC detains four tankers in Strait of Hormuz" . Haaretz . 17 July 2026. ^ "Iranian state TV: Military struck U.S. bases in Kuwait and Jordan" . Haaretz . 17 July 2026. ^ "Power and desalination facilities reportedly hit in southern Iran" . Haaretz . 18 July 2026. ^ "U.S. attacks on Iran cut off water supply to 10,000 along coast, officials say" . Haaretz . Deutsche Presse-Agentur . 18 July 2026. ^ "CENTCOM denies Iranian claim that 2 tankers exploded after hitting mines" . Times of Israel . 18 July 2026. ^ "Saudi Arabia gives the all clear after warning of 'potential danger' amid reported Iranian missile attack" . Times of Israel . Reuters . 18 July 2026. ^ "Kuwait reports fire at power plant after Iranian attack; Bahrain says it intercepted aerial attacks" . Haaretz . Reuters . 18 July 2026. ^ "Iran attack sparks two fires in Kuwait, firefighters injured" .

The Peninsula . Agence France Presse . 18 July 2026. ^ "Iran strikes Kuwait oil facility, causes major damage, injuries" . Haaretz . Reuters . 18 July 2026. ^ "Kuwaiti oil firm says facility damaged, some wounded by 'repeated Iranian attacks' " .

The Times of Israel . Reuters . 18 July 2026. ^ "Report: Iran suspends implementation of MoU commitments, senior official says" . Haaretz . 18 July 2026. ^ "At least 50 killed and 500 wounded in Iran since renewal of U.S. strikes, Iranian government says" . Haaretz . Deutsche Presse-Agentur . 18 July 2026. ^ "Two U.S. soldiers killed in Jordan during Iranian strikes, another missing in action, U.S. military says" . Haaretz . 18 July 2026. ^ "CENTCOM: U.S. strikes Iran in response to IRGC attack on U.S. soldiers in Jordan" . Haaretz . 18 July 2026. ^ "US says it targeted IRGC forces who attacked troops in Jordan" .