The Golden Quadrilateral connects the eight major metro cities of India, viz., Delhi ( north ), Mumbai ( west ), Kolkata ( east ), Chennai ( south ). Transport in India consists of transport by land , water and air . Road transport is the primary mode of transport for most Indian citizens, and India's road transport systems are among the most heavily used in the world.

The growth of highway construction in India, fuelled by fast GDP growth (world's 3rd largest in PPP and 4th largest nominally), has reduced India's logistics costs to 9% (2025) compared to 8% in China, 12% in USA and EU. India's road network is the largest, and the busiest in the world, transporting 8.225 billion passengers and over 980 million tonnes of cargo annually, as of 2015. India's rail network is the fourth largest and second busiest in the world, transporting 8.09 billion passengers and 1.20 billion tonnes of freight annually, as of 2020. Aviation in India is broadly divided into military and civil aviation. India is the fastest-growing aviation market in the world ( IATA data). India's waterways network , in the form of rivers , canals , backwaters and creeks , is the ninth largest waterway network in the world. Freight transport by waterways is highly under utilised in India with the total cargo moved (in tonne kilometres) by inland waterways being 0.1 percent of the total inland traffic in India.

In total, about 21 percent of households have two wheelers whereas 4.70 percent of households in India have cars or vans as per the 2011 census of India .

The automobile industry in India is currently growing rapidly with an annual production of over 28.4 million vehicles (2025), with an annual growth rate of 10.5% (2015) and vehicle volume is expected to rise greatly in the future. For the construction of green highways and to reduce the piles of municipal waste, India aims to reuse all of the existing piles of garbage for the road construction by 2027, of which 80 trillion ton of solid waste has been already segregated and reused for the highway construction as of 2025. Research and education The Indian transport research and education ecosystem is a highly structured, multi-modal network designed to address the nation's immense logistical, safety, and strategic needs. This landscape is characterised by a core duality: critical sectors that require centralised, high-integrity governance, and decentralised urban sectors that demand agile, policy-driven innovation.

The foundational pillars of the centralised system are the high-technology, mission-critical domains of Rail and Space. This multi-modal ecosystem is therefore geared towards generating standardised, scalable, and sustainable solutions for India's future mobility challenges across all critical transport verticals. Transport policy Research : Organisations like Institute for Transportation and Development Policy (ITDP) India translate the technical findings into tangible policy action, assisting municipal corporations in implementing successful Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) systems and creating Complete Streets networks that prioritise walking and cycling, which is vital given India's large population. Space transport Research in space transport is managed entirely by the ISRO under the Department of Space, with specialised centres like the Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC) for launch vehicle design and the Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre (LPSC) for propulsion systems. Education : Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST) , Asia's first space university, for aerospace and avionics engineering. Roads and urban mobility Research : Research in Road, Urban Mobility, and Maritime logistics is highly collaborative, integrating government mandates with academic and non-governmental expertise.

The CSIR-Central Road Research Institute (CSIR-CRRI) is the national apex body for road infrastructure, dedicated to advancing pavement technology, geotechnical stability, and the implementation of Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) to enhance cost-efficiency and safety. Education : Specialised academic centres ensure policy is informed by cutting-edge science: the Transportation Research and Injury Prevention Programme (TRIPP) at IIT Delhi is globally recognised for its pioneering work on Vulnerable Road Users (VRUs), directly influencing indigenous vehicle and safety standards.

The focus on sustainable urban mobility is further advanced by the Centre of Excellence in Urban Transport (CoE-UT) at IIT Madras , which models advanced solutions for connected intelligent transportation (CIUT) and advises on concepts like Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) and Low Emission Zones (LEZ). Railways Research in Rail development is anchored by the Research Designs and Standards Organisation (RDSO) under the Ministry of Railways, which is responsible for standardisation, design, and developing safety systems like Kavach and sustainable solutions such as the Hydrogen Train model. Education : The specialised talent needed for these high-technology fields is systematically cultivated by dedicated universities, such as Gati Shakti Vishwavidyalaya (GSV) for rail and transport analytics. Maritime logistics Research : The Centre for Maritime Logistics (CML) at GMU focuses research on digitalisation and automation to maximise logistical efficiency across shipping, ports, and freight forwarding, directly supporting the strategic goals outlined in the national Maritime India Vision 2030. List of research and educational institutes and think tanks Category/Mode Institution Institutional Affiliation Primary Research/Educational Focus Notes Space Transport (Launch R&D) Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC) , Thiruvananthapuram ISRO / Dept. of Space Design and development of launch vehicle technology (PSLV, GSLV, RLV, Gaganyaan), including aeronautics, avionics, materials, and vehicle integration. Lead centre for launch vehicle realisation. Space Transport (Propulsion R&D) Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre (LPSC) , Thiruvananthapuram & Bengaluru ISRO / Dept. of Space Design, development, and realisation of liquid propulsion stages and cryogenic stages for ISRO's Launch Vehicles, including key component development. Specialised in developing high-performance propulsion systems. Space Transport (Education) Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST) , Thiruvananthapuram Dept. of Space (Autonomous Body) Undergraduate (Aerospace/Avionics), postgraduate, and doctoral programmes in core space science and technology disciplines. Asia's first Space University, established to meet demands of the Indian Space Programme. Rail (R&D & Standardisation) Research Designs and Standards Organisation (RDSO), Lucknow Ministry of Railways (MoR) Technical advisory, design, and standardisation of railway equipment; development of indigenous safety systems (**KAVACH**) and sustainable technologies (Hydrogen Train model); publishes standards (e.g., IRS Track Manual). Functions as the technical consultant to the Railway Board. Rail (Academic Research) Centre for Railway Research (CRR) Academic ( IIT Madras ), MoR Partnership Applied Computational Intelligence (AI/ML) to railway engineering, focusing on Signal and Communication, Condition Monitoring, and Predictive Maintenance. Nodal academic research hub for specialised domains assigned by the Ministry of Railways. Rail (Education & Training) GATI SHAKTI VISHWAVIDYALAYA (GSV) (formerly NRTI), Vadodara Central University (Ministry of Railways) Inter-disciplinary B.Tech (Rail Infrastructure), MBA (Transportation & Supply Chain Management), and MSc (Systems Engineering & Analytics) programmes for the transport sector. India's first university focusing exclusively on the transport sector. Road & Highways (R&D) CSIR-Central Road Research Institute (CSIR-CRRI), New Delhi CSIR Scientific advancement of road design, construction, maintenance (Pavements, Bridges, Geotech), Traffic Safety, and the adoption of Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS). Dedicated to shaping national policies and standards for road infrastructure. Road (Operational & Automotive) Central Institute of Road Transport (CIRT) Related to Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) Research concerning the management and operational aspects of road transport services and public sector efficiency. Focuses on operational and management training. Road (Operational & Automotive) Automotive Research Association of India (ARAI) Industry Association Vehicle technology, testing, and certification, addressing compatibility with road environment and safety norms. Urban Mobility, Traffic Design & Safety (Pedestrian Focus) Transportation Research and Injury Prevention Programme (TRIPP) Academic ( IIT Delhi ), WHO Collaborating Centre Pioneering research on Vulnerable Road Users (pedestrians, cyclists); promoting indigenous safety solutions and influencing helmet/vehicle standards. Integrates mobility, safety, and environmental concerns. Urban Mobility, ITS & Planning Centre of Excellence in Urban Transport (CoE-UT) Academic ( IIT Madras ), Industry Supported Modelling Connected Intelligent Urban Transportation (CIUT), TOD, Low Emission Zones (LEZ), and providing advisory services for Metros/BRT. Focuses on developing solutions for heterogeneous urban transport systems. Urban Policy & Complete Streets Institute for Transportation and Development Policy (ITDP) India Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO) Translating research into municipal policy implementation; successful projects in Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) and development of Complete Streets networks prioritising NMT. Provides technical assistance for politically sensitive urban reforms. Maritime & Logistics (R&D) CML Academic ( GMU ) Improving efficiency and sustainability of maritime logistics through digitalisation, automation, and data-driven strategies for ports, shipping, and freight forwarding. Aligned with Maritime India Vision 2030 goals. Maritime & Logistics (Education) Gujarat Maritime University (GMU) Academic/State University Education, research, and training in maritime and logistics, including executive education on topics like Public Private Partnerships (PPP) and industry-academia linkages. Academic (Specialised Planning) School of Planning and Architecture (SPA) , New Delhi / Vijayawada Academic (Central University) Offers specialised Master's Degree programmes in Traffic and Transportation Planning. Programmes recognised by the Institute of Town Planners, India (ITPI). Academic (Specialised Planning) CEPT University , Ahmedabad Academic Offers Master's in Urban Transport Systems, promoting an integrated planning approach across roads, railways, land use, and governance. Academic (General Transport Engineering) Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) (e.g., Bombay, Roorkee, Delhi, Madras) Academic Offers core graduate-level programmes (Masters/PhD) in Transportation Engineering and related Transportation Systems Engineering. Provides core engineering and analytical talent for the sector. Pre-modern transport Walking Walking was a major transport form in ancient times. People used to cover long distances on foot or bull carts. For instance, Adi Sankaracharya travelled all over India from Kalady near Kochi . Walking still constitutes an important mode of transport in rural areas.

In the city of Mumbai , to further improve the transit conditions for pedestrians , the Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority , has commenced the construction of more than 50 skywalks , as part of the Mumbai Skywalk project, which is very helpful as walk enthusiasts take part in reducing traffic.

The Dakshineswar Skywalk has also come up in West Bengal. Palanquins The ministry also controls aviation related autonomous organisations like the Airports Authority of India (AAI), Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS), Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi and Public Sector Undertakings including Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited and Hindustan Aeronautics Limited . Air India is India's national flag carrier, having merged with Indian Airlines in 2011 and plays a major role in connecting India with the rest of the world. IndiGo , Air India , Air India Express , Akasa and Spicejet are the major carriers in order of their market share. These airlines connect more than 80 cities across India and also operate overseas routes after the liberalisation of Indian aviation. Several other foreign airlines connect Indian cities with other major cities across the globe. However, a large section of country's air transport potential remains untapped, even though the Mumbai -Delhi air corridor was ranked the world's tenth busiest route by Amadeus in 2012. Airports Mumbai Airport Terminal Prime Minister Narendra Modi at the inauguration of Paykong Airport, Sikkim. Main article: List of airports in India While there are 346 civilian airfields in India – 253 with paved runways and 93 with unpaved runways, only 132 were classified as "airports" as of November 2014. Of these, Indira Gandhi International Airport in Delhi is the busiest in the country followed by Mumbai- Shivaji and Bengaluru Kempegowda international airport all which are world class.

The operations of the major airports in India have been privatised over the past five years and this has resulted in better equipped and cleaner airports.

The terminals have either been refurbished or expanded. India also has 33 "ghost airports," which were built in an effort to make air travel more accessible for those in remote regions but are now non-operational due to a lack of demand.

The Jaisalmer Airport in Rajasthan, for example, was completed in 2013 and was expected to host 300,000 passengers a year but has yet to see any commercial flights take off. Despite the number of non-operational airports, India is currently planning on constructing another 200 "low-cost" airports over the next 20 years. Length of runways Airports with paved runways Airports with unpaved runways 3,047 m (9,997 ft) or more 21 1 2,438 to 3,047 m (7,999 to 9,997 ft) 59 3 1,524 to 2,438 m (5,000 to 7,999 ft) 76 6 914 to 1,524 m (2,999 to 5,000 ft) 82 38 Under 914 m (2,999 ft) 14 45 Total 253 93 Heliports Pawan Hans VT-PHA Helicopter.

As of 2021, there are 45 heliports in India. India also has the world's highest helipad at the Siachen Glacier at a height of 6,400 m (21,000 ft) above mean sea level . Pawan Hans Limited is a public sector company that provides helicopter services to ONGC to its off-shore locations, and also to various State Governments in India, particularly in North-east India . Seaplane Skyhop Aviation plans to launch seaplane operations between Kochi and Lakshadweep using DHC6-400 aircraft. Bicycles Main article: Cycling in India Bicycles or cycles, have ownership rates ranging from around 30% to 75% at the state level. Along with walking, cycling accounts for 50% to 80% of the commuter trips for those in the informal sector in urban areas. However, recent developments suggest that bicycle riding is quickly becoming popular in Indian cities.

In smaller Indian cities, non-motorised transport, which includes cycling, accounts for close to 50% of the total trips by the working-class population.

In larger cities like Mumbai, Bengaluru, and Delhi, non-motorised transport accounts for 35%-37% of the total trips.

In recent years, government development authorities all over India have encouraged the setup and use of separate bicycle lanes alongside the roads to combat pollution and ease traffic congestion. Human-rickshaws Human-pulled rickshaws still run in Kolkata Human-pulled rickshaws are nowadays rarely available in various cities and villages in the country. Many local governments have proposed a ban on these rickshaws describing them as "inhuman".

The Government of West Bengal proposed a ban on these rickshaws in 2005. Though a bill aiming to address this issue, termed as Calcutta Hackney Carriage Bill, was passed by the West Bengal Assembly in 2006, it has not yet been implemented.

The Government of West Bengal is working on an amendment to this bill to avoid the loopholes that were exposed when the Hand-pulled Rickshaw Owners' Association filed a petition against the bill. Cycle rickshaw Cycle rickshaws were introduced in India in the 1940s. They are bigger than a tricycle where two people sit on an elevated seat at the back and a person pedals from the front.

In the late 2000s, they were banned in several cities for causing traffic congestion.

The Delhi Police recently submitted an affidavit against plying of cycle rickshaws to ease traffic congestion in the city but it was dismissed by the Delhi High Court .

In addition, environmentalists have supported the retention of cycle rickshaws as a non-polluting mode of transport. Public buses near Howrah Railway Station in Kolkata , West Bengal Delhi–Meerut Expressway is India's widest expressway with 14 lanes. Road Main article: Roads in India Kathipara Junction , Chennai Bandra-Worli Bridge in Mumbai As per 2024 estimates, the total road length in India is 6,700,000 km (4,200,000 mi); making the Indian road network the largest road network in the world.

At 0.66 km of highway per square kilometre of land the density of India's highway network is higher than that of the United States (0.65) and far higher than that of China's (0.16) or Brazil's (0.20). India has a network of National Highways connecting all the major cities and state capitals, forming the economic backbone of the country.

As of 2013, India has a total of 161,350 km (100,258 mi) of National Highways, of which 6,059 km (3,765 mi) are classified as expressways .

Although India has large network of four or more lane highways of international quality standards, but without access control (entry/exit control), they are not called as expressways but simply highways.

As per the National Highways Authority of India , about 66% of freight and 82% passenger traffic is carried by the roads.

The National Highways carry about 40% of total road traffic, though only about 2% of the road network is covered by these roads. Average growth of the number of vehicles has been around 10.16% per annum over recent years. India also has many bridges and flyovers in major cities to reduce traffic congestion. Some notable projects include Bandra - Worli Sea link in Mumbai and Kathipara Cloverleaf Interchange in Chennai. India's metropolitan intra-city average traffic vehicle speed in Delhi was 25 km/h (16 mph), in Mumbai 20.7 km/h (12.9 mph), in Chennai 18.9 km/h (11.7 mph) and in Kolkata 19.2 km/h (11.9 mph), as per a study by Ola Cabs in 2017. Under National Highways Development Project (NHDP), work is under progress to equip national highways with at least four lanes; there is also a plan to convert some stretches of these roads to six lanes.

In recent years construction has commenced on a nationwide system of multi-lane highways, including the Golden Quadrilateral connecting four important metropolitan cities of India ( Delhi - Kolkata - Chennai - Mumbai ) and North-South and East-West Corridors which link the largest cities in India .

In 2000, around 40% of villages in India lacked access to all-weather roads and remained isolated during the monsoon season. To improve rural connectivity, Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (Prime Minister's Rural Road Program), a project funded by the Central Government with the help of the World Bank , was launched in 2000 to build all-weather roads to connect all habitations with a population of 500 or above (250 or above for hilly areas). Type of road Length Expressways 6,059 km (3,765 mi) as of 2024 National Highways 161,350 km (100,260 mi) State Highways 186,528 km (115,903 mi) District and rural roads 5,167,665 km (3,211,038 mi) Total Length 6,700,000 km (4,200,000 mi) (Approx) The Mumbai Trans Harbour Link is the longest sea bridge in India. It was inaugurated on 12 January 2024, by Prime Minister Narendra Modi. It connects Mumbai with Navi Mumbai. Bus Mumbai's B.E.S.T. is India's oldest operating transport body Buses are an important means of public transport in India. Due to this social significance, urban bus transport is often owned and operated by public agencies, and most state governments operate bus services through a state road transport corporation. These corporations have proven extremely useful in connecting villages and towns across the country. However, a majority of smaller cities still lack a public bus system. Only 63 out of 458 Indian cities with populations exceeding 1 lakh have established formal city bus networks. Alongside the public companies there are many private bus fleets: As of 2020, there were about 150,000 publicly owned buses in India, and around 2,190,000 buses owned by private companies. However, the share of buses is negligible in most Indian cities as compared to personalised vehicles, and two-wheelers and cars account for more than 80 percent of the vehicle population in most large cities. Bus rapid transit systems Main article: Bus rapid transit in India Ahmedabad BRTS Raipur and Naya Raipur Bus Rapid Transit System A KSRTC Volvo low-floor bus. Such buses were procured by STUs across the country under the JNNURM scheme. Bus rapid transit systems (BRTS), exist in several cities. Buses take up over 90% of public transport in Indian cities, and serve as an important mode of transport . Services are mostly run by state government owned transport corporations.

Since the 1990s, government state transport corporations across the country have introduced various facilities like low-floor buses for the disabled and air-conditioned buses to attract private car owners to help decongest roads.

In 2010, the Ahmedabad Bus Rapid Transit System won the prestigious Sustainable Transport Award from the Transportation Research Board in Washington. Rainbow BRTS in Pune is the first BRTS system in the country. Mumbai introduced air conditioned buses in 1998. Bangalore was the first city in India to introduce Volvo B7RLE intra-city buses in India in January 2005. Bangalore was the first Indian city to have an air-conditioned bus stop, located near Cubbon Park . It was built by Airtel .

The city of Chennai houses one of Asia's largest bus terminus , the Chennai Mofussil Bus Terminus . Motor vehicles Two-wheelers Motorised two-wheeler vehicles like scooters , motorcycles and mopeds are very popular due to their fuel efficiency and ease of use in congested roads or streets.

The number of two-wheelers sold is several times to that of cars. There were 47.5 million powered two-wheelers in India in 2003 compared with just 8.6 million cars. Manufacture of motorcycles in India started when Royal Enfield began assembly in its plant in Chennai in 1948. Royal Enfield, an iconic brand name in the country, manufactures different variants of the British Bullet motorcycle which is a classic motorcycle that is still in production. Hero MotoCorp (formerly Hero Honda), Honda , Bajaj Auto , Yamaha , TVS Motors and Mahindra 2 Wheelers are the largest two-wheeler companies in terms of market-share. Manufacture of scooters in India started when Automobile Products of India (API) set up at Mumbai and incorporated in 1949. They began assembling Innocenti -built Lambretta scooters in India. They eventually acquired a licence for the Li150 series model, of which they began full-fledged production from the early 1960s onwards.

In 1972, Scooters India Limited (SIL), a state-run enterprise based in Lucknow , Uttar Pradesh, bought the entire manufacturing rights of the last Innocenti Lambretta model. API has infrastructural facilities at Mumbai, Aurangabad , and Chennai , but has been non-operational since 2002. SIL stopped producing scooters in 1998. Motorcycles and scooters can be rented in many cities, Wicked Ride, Metro Bikes and many other companies are working with state governments to solve last-mile connectivity problems with mass-transit. Wearing protective headgear is mandatory for both the rider and the pillion-rider in most cities. Automobiles Private automobiles account for 30% of the total transport demand in urban areas of India. An average of 1,800 new vehicles are registered every day in Delhi alone.

The number of automobiles produced in India rose from 6.3 million in 2002–2003 to 11 million (11.2 million) in 2008–2009 and 28.4 million in 2023-2024. There is substantial variation among cities and states in terms of dependence on private cars: Bangalore, Chennai, Delhi and Kolkata have 185, 127, 157 and 140 cars per 1,000 people respectively, which is much lower compared to developed countries. This reflects different levels of urban density and varied qualities of public transport infrastructure. Nationwide, India still has a very low rate of car ownership.

When comparing car ownership between BRICS developing countries, it is on a par with China, and exceeded by Brazil and Russia. Hyundai's manufacturing plant at Sriperumbudur , Chennai , Tamil Nadu Compact cars , especially hatchbacks and compact SUVs predominate due to affordability, fuel efficiency, congestion, and lack of parking space in most cities. Chennai is known as the "Detroit of India" for its automobile industry. Maruti , Hyundai , Mahindra and Tata Motors are the most popular brands in the order of their market share.

The Ambassador once had a monopoly, but is now an icon of pre- liberalisation India.

The Maruti 800 launched in 1984, created the first revolution in the Indian auto sector because of its low price and high quality. It had the highest market share until 2004, when it was overtaken by other low-cost models from Maruti such as the Alto and the Wagon R, the Indica from Tata Motors and the Santro from Hyundai . Over the 20 years since its introduction, about 2.4 million Maruti 800s were sold. However, with the launch of the Tata Nano , the least expensive production car in the world, the Maruti 800 lost its popularity. India is also known for a variety of indigenous vehicles made in villages out of simple motors and vehicle spare parts. A few of these innovations are the jugaad , maruta, chhakda, and the peter rehra .

In the city of Bangalore , Radio One and the Bangalore Traffic Police, launched a carpooling drive which has involved celebrities such as Robin Uthappa , and Rahul Dravid encouraging the public to carpool.

The initiative got a good response, and by the end of May 2009, 10,000 people are said to have carpooled in the city. There have been efforts to improve the energy efficiency of transport systems in Indian cities, including by introducing performance standards for private automobiles or by banning particularly polluting older cars.

The city of Kolkata, for example, passed a law in 2009/10 phasing out vehicles over 15 years old with the purpose of reducing air pollution. However, the effects were mixed.

On the one hand, poorer urban residents are more likely to see public health improvements from better air quality, since they are more likely to live in polluted areas and work outdoors than richer urban residents.

On the other hand, drivers of such vehicles suffered from losing their livelihoods as a result of this environmental regulation. Utility vehicles The first utility vehicle in India was manufactured by Mahindra . It was a copy of the original Willys Jeep and was manufactured under licence.

The vehicle was an instant hit and made Mahindra one of the top companies in India.

The Indian Army and police extensively use Mahindra vehicles along with Maruti Gypsys for transporting personnel and equipment. Tata Motors , the automobile manufacturing arm of the Tata Group , launched its first utility vehicle, the Tata Sumo , in 1994.

The Sumo, owing to its then-modern design, captured a 31% share of the market within two years.

The Tempo Trax from Force Motors until recently was ruling the rural areas. Sports utility vehicles now form a sizeable part of the passenger vehicle market. Models from Tata, Honda, Hyundai, Toyota and other brands are available. Taxis Main article: Taxis in India The passengers are charged according to the number of people with different destinations.

The city of Mumbai became the first city in India to have an "in-taxi" magazine, titled MumBaee , which was issued to taxis which are part of the Mumbai Taximen's Union.

In Kolkata , there are many no refusal taxis available with white and blue in colour. Auto Main article: Auto rickshaw An LPG auto rickshaw in Delhi, India An auto is a three-wheeler vehicle for hire that does not have doors and is generally characterised by a small cabin for the driver in the front and a seat for passengers in the rear. Generally it is painted in yellow, green or black and has a black, yellow or green canopy on the top, but designs vary considerably from place to place.

The colour of the auto rickshaw is also determined by the fuel that it is powered by, for example Agartala , Ahmedabad , Mumbai , Pune and Delhi have green or black autos indicating the use of compressed natural gas , whereas the autos of Kolkata , Bengaluru , Hyderabad have green autos indicating the use of LPG.

In Mumbai and other metropolitan cities, 'autos' or 'rickshaws', as they are popularly known, usually have regulated metered fares. A recent law prohibits auto rickshaw drivers from charging more than the specified fare, or charging night-fare before midnight, and also prohibits the driver from refusing to go to a particular location. Mumbai and Kolkata are also the only two cities, which prohibit auto rickshaws from entering certain parts of the city, these cases being South Mumbai and certain parts of Downtown Kolkata . However, in cities like Chennai and other areas, some autorickshaw drivers demand more than the specified fare and refuse to use the fare meter. Airports and railway stations at many cities such as Howrah , Chennai and Bengaluru provide a facility of prepaid auto booths, which requires a fixed payment, with a base fare of Rs. 30 and a rate of Rs.14.20 per kilometre after 1.5 kilometres of travel, set by the authorities as of May 2022.

The fare to be paid by the passenger is calculated on this basis. Electric rickshaw is a new popular means of transport, rapidly growing in number and popularity in India, due to low running and initial cost, and other economic and environmental benefits. E-Rickshaws are made in fibreglass or metal body, powered by a BLDC Electric Motor with max power 2000W and speed 25 km/h. They are usually painted white and blue though some E-autos use the conventional colour scheme as well. Intermediate or last-mile transport As per a report by CPPR , " Intermediate Public Transport (IPT), also known as para-transit or feeder service, refers to vehicles that work as a supplement to the public transport system by providing first and last mile connectivity to commuters.

In urban and suburban areas, they commonly take the form of autorickshaws , cycle rickshaws, taxis, mini buses and more recently e-rickshaws . Jeeps, chakdas and kadukas (usually tractor or jeep chassis fitted with a trailer) provide feeder services in rural areas, connecting villages to the nearest towns . If the public transport system forms the skeleton of the framework, feeder services are its veins and capillaries." IPT fills gaps in public transport and addresses deficiencies, catering to excess demand and serving areas lacking public transport. Despite its crucial role, IPT has been overlooked in policy for decades, remaining largely unorganised and neglected by the central government while facing heavy state regulation to avoid competition with state-owned transport systems. Public transport typically excludes informal services like autorickshaws , taxis , and minibuses, yet these play a vital role in cities where formal systems are lacking. "In larger cities with more than one crore population, the major share of transport is served by formal systems like the bus, metro and suburban rail (refer table below).

In medium sized cities with population less than one crore, IPT modes like autorickshaws are almost equal to the formal bus system.

In smaller cities, with less than 10 lakh population, the share of IPTs is almost three times that of the formal bus system." The high prevalence of two-wheelers in small cities highlights the inadequacy of both formal and informal transport. Comparing the number of informal transport options to city buses per one lakh population in Indian cities reveals that informal transport is often equal to or surpasses city buses, indicating heavy reliance on informal transport due to its demand-responsive nature compared to fixed-route city buses. Rail Main articles: Rail transport in India and Indian Railways Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj railway station entrance The dining saloon of the luxurious Maharajas' Express. Kolkata Metro is the only metro system in India to be controlled by Indian Railways. Country-wide rail services in India are provided by the state-run Indian Railways (IR) under the supervision of the Ministry of Railways. IR is divided into eighteen zones including the Kolkata Metro Railway.

The IR are further sub-divided into sixty seven divisions, each having a divisional headquarters.

The railway network travels across the country, covering more than 7,325 stations over a total route length of more than 68,080 km (42,300 mi) and track length of about 132,310 km (82,210 mi) as of March 2021. About 45,000 km (28,000 mi) or 97% of the route-kilometre was electrified as of 2025. IR provides an important mode of transport in India, transporting 23.1 million passengers and 3.3 million tons of freight daily as of March 2019. IR is the world's ninth-largest employer , it had 1.227 million employees as of March 2019.

As to rolling stock , IR owns over 289,185 (freight) wagons, 74,003 coaches and 12,147 locomotives as of March 2019. It also owns locomotive and coach production facilities. It operates both long distance and suburban rail systems. A steam locomotive operated by Nilgiris Mountain Railways between Coonoor and Ooty in the Nilgiris district of Tamil Nadu .

The IR runs a number of special types of services which are given higher priority.

The fastest train at present is the Vande Bharat Express with design speeds of up to 180 km/h, though the fastest service is Gatiman Express with an operational speed of 160 km/h (99 mph) and average speed of 100 km/h (62 mph), since the Vande Bharat Express is capped at 130 km/h for safety reasons.

The Rajdhani trains introduced in 1969 provides connectivity between the national capital, Delhi and capitals of the states.

On the other hand, Shatabdi Express provides connectivity between centres of tourism, pilgrimage or business.

The Shatabdi Express trains run over short to medium distances and do not have sleepers while the Rajdhani Expresses run over longer distances and have only sleeping accommodation. Both series of trains have a maximum permissible speed of 110 to 140 km/h (68 to 87 mph) but average speed of less than 100 km/h. .The Duronto Express trains provide connectivity between large cities. Besides, the IR also operates a number of luxury trains which cater to various tourist circuits. For instance, the Palace on Wheels serves the Rajasthan circuit and The Golden Chariot serves the Karnataka and Goa circuits. There are two UNESCO World Heritage Sites on IR, the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus and the Mountain railways of India .

The latter consists of three separate railway lines located in different parts of India, the Darjeeling Himalayan Railway , a 610 mm ( 2 ft ) narrow-gauge railway in Lesser Himalayas in West Bengal, the Nilgiri Mountain Railway , a 1,000 mm ( The RORO service, the first of its kind in India, allowed trucks to be transported on flatbed trailers. It was highly popular, carrying about 110,000 trucks and bringing in about ₹ 740 million worth of earnings to the corporation until 2007. Perhaps the game-changer for IR in the freight segment are the new dedicated freight corridors that are expected to be completed by 2020.

When fully implemented, the new corridors, spanning around 3300 km, could support hauling of trains up to 1.5 km in length with 32.5-ton axle-load at speeds of 100 kilometres per hour (62 mph). Also, they will free-up capacity on dense passenger routes and will allow IR to run more trains at higher speeds. Additional corridors are being planned to augment the freight infrastructure in the country. Commuter rail transport In many Indian metropolitan regions, rail is the more efficient and affordable mode of public transport for daily commute. Examples of types of services include long-established local or suburban rail services in cities such as Mumbai , Kolkata and Chennai , the century-old tram service in Kolkata , the more recent metro service in Kolkata , Delhi and Chennai and Monorail feeder service in Mumbai . Suburban rail Mumbai suburban rail.

The Chennai MRTS and Chennai Suburban , the first elevated railway in India. Main article: Urban rail transit in India The Mumbai Suburban Railway was the first rail system in India, which began its services in Mumbai in 1853, transporting 6.3 million passengers daily and has the highest passenger density in the world.

The Kolkata Suburban Railway was established in 1854, and the Chennai Suburban Railway in 1931.

The operational suburban rail systems in India are in Mumbai Suburban Railway , Kolkata Suburban Railway , Chennai Suburban Railway , Lucknow-Kanpur Suburban Railway , Delhi Suburban Railway , Pune Suburban Railway , Hyderabad Multi-Modal Transport System , Barabanki-Lucknow Suburban Railway and Karwar railway division . Other planned systems are Bengaluru Suburban Railway , Ahmedabad Suburban Railway and Coimbatore Suburban Railway . Mass rapid transit system The Chennai MRTS , which began services in 1995, remains the country's first and only mass rapid transit rail.

Although distinct from the Chennai Suburban Railway, the MRTS remains integrated in a wider urban rail network. Chennai Metro Metro Main article: Urban rail transit in India The first modern rapid transit in India is the Kolkata Metro which started its operations in 1984 as the 17th Zone of the Indian Railways.

The Delhi Metro in New Delhi is India's second conventional metro and began operations in 2002.

The Namma Metro in Bengaluru began operations in 2011 as India's third operational rapid transit system.

The operational systems are Kolkata Metro , Delhi Metro , Bengaluru Metro , Gurgaon Metro , Mumbai Metro , Jaipur Metro , Chennai Metro , Kochi Metro , Lucknow Metro , Nagpur Metro , Noida Metro , Hyderabad Metro , Kanpur Metro , Ahmedabad Metro , Pune Metro , Navi Mumbai Metro , Agra Metro , Meerut Metro , Bhopal Metro , Indore Metro and Patna Metro .

The under implementation systems are Varanasi Metro , Madurai Metro , Vijayawada Metro, Guwahati Metro , Chandigarh Metro , Kozhikode Metro , Thiruvananthapuram Metro , Coimbatore Metro , Visakhapatnam Metro, Surat Metro , Jammu Metro , Srinagar Metro , Greater Gwalior Metro, Jabalpur Metro and Greater Nashik Metro . India now operates over 900 km of metro rail across more than 15 cities, making it the third-largest urban rapid transit network in the world, after China and the United States. With over 900 km more under active construction or approved, India is witnessing one of the fastest metro rail expansions globally, reflecting the country's commitment to modern, sustainable urban transport. Monorail A monorail in Mumbai Main article: Urban rail transit in India Monorail is generally considered as a feeder system for metro trains in India.

In 2004, monorail was first proposed for Kolkata. But, later the idea was put on hold due to lack of funds and infeasibility.

The Mumbai Monorail , which started in 2014, is the first and only operational monorail network in India (excluding the Skybus Metro ) since the Patiala State Monorail Trainways closed in 1927. Monorail systems were also planned in Chennai , Kolkata , Allahabad, Bengaluru , Delhi , Indore , Kanpur , Navi Mumbai , Patna , Pune , Ahmedabad , Aizawl , Bhubaneswar , Jodhpur, Kota , Nagpur and Nashik. Tram New fibreglass made tram Main article: Trams in India In addition to trains, trams were introduced in many cities in the late 19th century, though almost all of these have been phased out.

The trams in Kolkata is currently the only tram system in the country. International links Rail links between India and neighbouring countries are not well-developed. Bangladesh is connected by a biweekly train, the Maitree Express that runs from Kolkata to Dhaka and a weekly train, the Bandhan Express that runs from Kolkata to Khulna . Two rail links to Nepal exist—passenger services between Jaynagar and Bijalpura , and freight services between Raxaul and Birganj . No rail link exists with Myanmar but a railway line is to be built through from Jiribam (in Manipur) to Tamu through Imphal and Moreh .

The construction of this missing link, as per the feasibility study conducted by the Ministry of External Affairs through RITES Ltd, is estimated to cost ₹ 29.41 billion (US$310 million). An 18 km railway link with Bhutan is being constructed from Hashimara in West Bengal to Toribari in Bhutan. No rail link exists with either China or Sri Lanka . High-speed rail Main article: High-speed rail in India India does not have any railways classified as high-speed rail (HSR), which have operational speeds in excess of 200 km/h (120 mph). Prior to the 2014 general election , the major national parties ( Indian National Congress and Bharatiya Janata Party ) pledged to introduce high-speed rail.

The INC pledged to connect "all of India's million-plus cities by high-speed rail." Later, the BJP, which won the election, promised to build the Diamond Quadrilateral project, which would connect the cities of Chennai , Delhi , Kolkata , and Mumbai via high-speed rail. This project was approved as a priority for the new government in the incoming prime minister's speech. Construction of one kilometre of high speed railway track will cost ₹ 1 billion (US$10 million) – ₹ 1.4 billion (US$15 million), which is 10–14 times higher than the construction of standard railway. Indian government approved the choice of Japan to build India's first high-speed railway.

The planned rail would run some 500 km (310 mi) between Mumbai and the western city of Ahmedabad , at a top speed of 320 km/h (200 mph). Under the proposal, construction was expected to begin in 2017 and be completed in 2023. It would cost about ₹ 980 billion (US$10 billion) and be financed by a low-interest loan from Japan. India will use the wheel-based 300 km/h HSR technology , instead of new maglev 600 km/h technology of Japan used in Chūō Shinkansen . India is expected to have its first HSR line operational from 2026 onwards. Hyperloop See hyperloop in India . Light rail Main article: Urban rail transit in India Like monorail, light rail is also considered as a feeder system for the metro systems.

In India, about 96% of the foreign trade by quantity and 70% by value takes place through the ports. Mumbai Port & JNPT ( Navi Mumbai ) handles 70% of maritime trade in India. There are twelve major ports: Navi Mumbai , Mumbai , Chennai , Ennore , Thoothukudi , Kochi , Kolkata (including Haldia ), Paradip , Visakhapatnam , New Mangaluru , Mormugao and Kandla . Other than these, there are 187 minor and intermediate ports, 43 of which handle cargo. Maritime transportation in India is managed by the Shipping Corporation of India , a government-owned company that also manages offshore and other marine transport infrastructure in the country. It owns and operates about 35% of Indian tonnage and operates in practically all areas of shipping business servicing both national and international trades.

The only Indian state with three ports is Tamil Nadu, they are Ennore, Chennai and Tuticorin. It has a fleet of 79 ships of 2,750,000 GT (4.8 million DWT) and also manages 53 research, survey and support vessels of 120,000 GT (060,000 DWT) on behalf of various government departments and other organisations. Personnel are trained at the Maritime Training Institute in Mumbai, a branch of the World Maritime University , which was set up in 1987.

The corporation also operates in Malta and Iran through joint ventures.

The distinction between major and minor ports is not based on the amount of cargo handled.

The major ports are managed by port trusts which are regulated by the central government. They come under the purview of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963.

The minor ports are regulated by the respective state governments and many of these ports are private ports or captive ports.

The total amount of traffic handled at the major ports in 2005–2006 was 382.33 Mt . Inland Waterways Main article: Inland Waterways Authority of India A parked vessel along the Chapora River in Goa. Boats sailing on National Waterway 2 at Guwahati India has an extensive network of inland waterways in the form of rivers, canals , backwaters and creeks .

The total navigable length is 14,500 kilometres (9,000 mi), out of which about 5,200 km (3,231 mi) of river and 485 km (301 mi) of canals can be used by mechanised crafts. Freight transport by waterways is highly underutilised in India compared to other large countries.

The total cargo moved by inland waterways is just 0.15% of the total inland traffic in India, compared to the corresponding figures of 20% for Germany and 32% for Bangladesh. Cargo that is transported in an organised manner is confined to a few waterways in Goa , West Bengal, Assam and Kerala .

The Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) is the statutory authority in charge of the waterways in India. It does the function of building the necessary infrastructure in these waterways, surveying the economic feasibility of new projects and also administration and regulation.

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 13 June 2018 . Retrieved 9 May 2016 . ^ a b "Motor Vehicle Writup – Statistical Year Book, India 2015" (PDF) . Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation . 2015. p. 7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 November 2015 . Retrieved 19 July 2016 . ^ a b "Bicycle Ownership in India" . Bike-eu.com. Archived from the original on 13 May 2009 . Retrieved 5 April 2010 . ^ a b "Society of Indian Automobile Manufactures" . www.siam.in . Retrieved 2 May 2025 . ^ Ramanathan, S. Kalyana. "India to top in car volumes by 2050" . Rediff. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018 . Retrieved 6 May 2010 . ^ India to utilize solid waste for road construction by 2027 , Economic Times, 9 Oct 2025. ^ a b c d The indigenous Collision Avoidance System (Kavach) includes non-signalling based non-guaranteed Collision Avoidance features, retaining its SIL-4 (Safety Integrity Level-4) features, which triggers immediate stops for two trains approaching each other on the same track section. ^ a b c ITDP India collaborates with cities to design and implement sustainable transportation projects, providing policy solutions that enhance social inclusion, reduce carbon emissions, and improve road safety.

The organisation assisted Pune in developing Urban Street Design Guidelines that prioritise walking and cycling, supporting the state's goal of reaching an 80% modal share for public transit and non-motorised transport. ^ a b c The Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC), Thiruvananthapuram, is the lead centre of ISRO responsible for the design and development of launch vehicle technology (PSLV, GSLV, RLV, and critical technologies for human spaceflight).

The Centre pursues active R&D in fields including aeronautics, avionics, materials, propulsion, and systems reliability. ^ a b c The Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre (LPSC), with campuses in Thiruvananthapuram and Bengaluru, is the centre for the design, development, and realisation of liquid propulsion and cryogenic stages for ISRO's Launch Vehicles. It also develops key components like fluid control valves. ^ a b c The Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST), established in Thiruvananthapuram in 2007, is Asia's first Space University. It offers undergraduate, postgraduate, doctoral, and post-doctoral programmes in broad areas of space science, technology, and applications. ^ a b c The CSIR-Central Road Research Institute (CSIR-CRRI), established in 1952, focuses on improving the design, construction, maintenance, and management of roads/highways. Its research areas include Bridge Engineering, Pavements, Traffic Safety, Geotechnical Engineering, and implementing Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) to minimise total transportation cost. ^ a b c Prof. Dinesh Mohan of TRIPP, IIT Delhi, conducted pioneering work on traffic safety issues and human tolerance to injury. He and his colleagues are credited with popularising the term 'vulnerable road users' (pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorcyclists) and influencing policies on motorcycle helmet design, child restraint regulations, and school bus designs. ^ a b c The objective of TRIPP, an Interdisciplinary Programme at IIT Delhi established in 1997, is to reduce the adverse health effects of transport by integrating mobility, safety, and environmental concerns specific to India and other less motorised countries. It is a WHO Collaborating Centre for injury control and safety promotion. ^ a b c The Connected Intelligent Urban Transportation (CIUT) lab at CoE-UT focuses on monitoring, measuring, and modelling the impacts of connected and emerging mobility technologies (including connected vehicles, shared mobility, and EVs) to develop solutions for heterogeneous transport systems and support safe, sustainable mobility. ^ a b c The Centre of Excellence in Urban Transport (CoE-UT) at IIT Madras, supported by TCS and LnT, is involved in policy-driven projects such as 'Strengthening Transit-Oriented Development (TOD)', 'Planning Framework for Low Emission Zone (LEZ)', and providing technical support for schemes like PM E-Bus Sewa.

The centre also conducts the "Leaders Program in Urban Transport Planning and Management" in collaboration with the World Bank. ^ a b c According to RDSO, the Hydrogen Train model, with a total 2,638 passenger capacity, uses fuel cells to generate electricity, resulting in zero harmful pollutants and 60% less noise than diesel engines. This initiative is a step toward Indian Railways' ambitious goal of achieving net-zero carbon emissions by 2030. ^ a b c The GATI SHAKTI VISHWAVIDYALAYA (GSV), formerly the National Rail and Transportation Institute (NRTI), is India's first university dedicated to the transport sector. ^ a b c GSV (formerly NRTI) has launched specialised, highly inter-disciplinary, and application-oriented programmes, including B.Tech in Rail Infrastructure, MBA in Transportation and Supply Chain Management, and MSc in Systems and Analytics, some in association with the University of Birmingham, UK. ^ a b c The 'Maritime India Vision 2030' (MIV 2030) is a blueprint prepared by the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways, identifying over 150 initiatives to accelerate the sector's growth, focusing on operational efficiency, port-driven industrialisation, and reducing logistics costs. ^ a b c The Centre for Maritime Logistics (CML) at Gujarat Maritime University focuses on improving the efficiency and sustainability of maritime logistics through digitalisation, automation, and data-driven strategies across shipping, port operations, and freight forwarding, aiming to contribute significantly to national maritime policy. ^ a b The major function of the Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre (LPSC) is the development of liquid stages and cryogenic stages for launch vehicles, while the Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC) focuses on launch vehicle technology design and development. ^ a b IIST offers undergraduate programmes in Aerospace Engineering and Avionics, as well as stand-alone postgraduate programmes in various specialisations of space science and technology, and doctoral/post-doctoral programmes. ^ a b RDSO is an ISO 9001 R&D organisation under the Ministry of Railways, functioning as a technical adviser and consultant to the Railway Board, Zonal Railways, and Production Units in respect of design and standardisation of railway equipment and problems related to construction, operation, and maintenance. ^ a b The RDSO-issued IRS Track Manual Metric (Revised 2024) was compiled in a single volume, incorporating the latest technological up-gradation in track-related components and fastening systems, reflecting ongoing engineering practice changes. ^ a b The Centre for Railway Research (CRR) at IIT Madras, established through an MoU with the Ministry of Railways, defines its focus areas as Signal and Communication, Condition Monitoring, and Predictive Maintenance, with a major initiative in Computational Intelligence (AI/ML) application. ^ a b The Center for Railway Research was set up at Indian Institute of Technology Madras based on the MoU signed between the Ministry of Railways and IIT Madras, with the objective to identify technological advancements and emerging technologies which show promise for application on Indian Railways. ^ a b c Related organisations under the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) include the Central Institute of Road Transport (CIRT) for operational management, the Automotive Research Association of India (ARAI) for vehicle technology and testing, and the Indian Road Congress (IRC) for standardisation. ^ a b GMU's Center of Executive Education programmes include courses on "Public Private Partnership in Maritime Sector" and cover topics such as "India Maritime Vision 2030 and PPP Challenges." ^ a b Gujarat Maritime University formalised a Memorandum of Understanding with Neptune Logitek Limited to strengthen cooperation in education, research, and training within the maritime and logistics sector, including the creation of internship avenues for students. ^ a b The School of Planning and Architecture (SPA) in New Delhi and Vijayawada offers Master's of Planning with a specialisation in Transport Planning, recognised by the Institute of Town Planners, India (ITPI). ^ a b The Master's in Urban Transport Systems programme at CEPT University adopts an integrated approach to transport solutions, covering sub-systems like roads and railways, various modes (public, private, NMT), and related dimensions of land use, energy, and governance. ^ a b Popular universities offering Masters/PhD programmes in Transportation Engineering and related Transportation Systems Engineering include the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) in Bombay, Delhi, Roorkee, and Madras. ^ According to RDSO, these hydrogen trains are powered by fuel cells that combine hydrogen and oxygen to generate electricity. There is no smoke, no harmful pollutants and it makes 60% less noise than diesel engines. “The train will have a total 2638 passenger capacity. It was built at Integral Coach Factory, Chennai,” said the RDSO director general, adding that it's a step toward Indian Railways' ambitious goal of achieving net-zero carbon emissions by 2030. ^ TRIPP is a WHO Collaborating Centre for injury control and safety promotion since 1997.

The objective of TRIPP is to reduce the adverse health effects of transport by integrating mobility, safety and environmental concerns specific to India in particular, and other less motorised countries in general. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya: The Traditional Life of Sri Sankaracharya by Madhava-Vidyaranya . India: Sri Ramakrishna Math. ISBN 978-81-7120-434-2 . ^ a b Tiwari, Geetam. "Urban Transport in Indian Cities" (PDF) . London School of Economics. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 July 2010 . Retrieved 23 June 2009 . ^ "MMRDA – Projects – Skywalk" . MMRDA . Archived from the original on 14 March 2009 . Retrieved 24 March 2009 . ^ "Mumbai pedestrians can walk safe in the sky" .

The Hindu Business Line . 23 November 2008. p. 1. Archived from the original on 10 February 2009 . Retrieved 24 March 2009 . ^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). "Palanquin" . Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. ^ Pattanaik, Devdutt (27 November 2016). "Pilgrim nation: The Goddess Meenakshi of Madurai" . Mumbai Mirror . Archived from the original on 9 January 2017 . Retrieved 8 January 2017 . ^ Anand, Jatin (21 November 2016). "Big, fat weddings getting trim" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 28 January 2019 . Retrieved 8 January 2017 . ^ a b "Tracing the course of infra technology : Indian ropeways have been used since the 1970s" . Financial Express. 20 April 2021. ^ a b "Top 5 ropeways rides in India" . Intermiles. 26 October 2020. ^ a b जमीन के बाद आसमान में 'सड़क' बनाएंगे गडकरी, खर्च होंगे 1.25 लाख करोड़, दुनिया का सबसे बड़ा प्रोजेक्‍ट शुरू Archived 17 August 2025 at the Wayback Machine , News18, 24 Jan 2024. ^ Archived 30 December 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ Archived 27 August 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Fleet Details" . Official webpage of Air India . Archived from the original on 23 April 2009 . Retrieved 11 June 2009 . ^ "IndiGo dominates market share in May, Akasa leads in punctuality: DGCA data - CNBC TV18" . CNBCTV18 . 14 June 2024 . Retrieved 15 June 2024 . ^ "Mumbai-Delhi 10th busiest air route" .

The Times of India . 12 May 2012. Archived from the original on 23 June 2012 . Retrieved 5 September 2012 . ^ "Mumbai airport's traffic control tower design bags award" . Thaindian News . Thaindian.com. 21 July 2009. Archived from the original on 3 January 2011 . Retrieved 16 August 2010 . ^ a b c d "CIA —The World Factbook – India" . Central Intelligence Agency . 2008. Archived from the original on 18 March 2021 . Retrieved 4 October 2022 . ^ India has a total of 34 operational International Airports. Archived 27 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Modi's bumbling aviation boom" .

The Economist . 21 September 2015. Archived from the original on 20 June 2017 . Retrieved 13 July 2017 . ^ Easen, Nick (17 September 2003). "Siachen: The world's highest cold war" . CNN. Archived from the original on 23 August 2016 . Retrieved 30 March 2009 . ^ "Civil Aviation" . Government of India Portal. Archived from the original on 8 May 2009 . Retrieved 3 June 2009 . ^ www.ETInfra.com. "First seaplane service trial between Kochi, Lakshadweep completed ahead of commercial rollout" . ETInfra.com . Retrieved 28 May 2026 . ^ Khan, Swarna Dutt & Azra (7 August 2021). "Ranchi shows how India's biggest cycling lessons lie in its smaller cities" . Scroll.in . Archived from the original on 15 February 2024 . Retrieved 15 February 2024 . ^ Singh, Amit (20 January 2010). "Now, paddle your way across Delhi" . Mid-day.com. Archived from the original on 17 June 2011 . Retrieved 5 April 2010 . ^ "Hand-pulled rickshaws to go off Kolkata roads" . Online edition of The Indian Express, dated 2005-08-15 . Archived from the original on 14 October 2012 . Retrieved 23 April 2009 . ^ a b "Rule review for rickshaw ban" . Online edition of The Telegraph, dated 2008-10-31 . Calcutta, India. 31 October 2008. Archived from the original on 17 May 2009 . Retrieved 23 April 2009 . ^ Farrell, Sean. "The Taj Mahal: Pollution and Tourism" . Trade and Environment Database (TED)(American University). Archived from the original on 26 September 2009 . Retrieved 29 November 2009 . ^ "Rickshaw ban from today" .

The Times of India . 9 June 2007. Archived from the original on 5 November 2011 . Retrieved 18 June 2009 . ^ "Ban on slow vehicles in select areas likely" . Online edition of The Telegraph, dated 2006-09-29 . Calcutta, India. 30 September 2006. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011 . Retrieved 18 June 2009 . ^ "Ban on fish-carts extended" . Online edition of The Hindu, dated 2002-10-15 . Archived from the original on 6 March 2005 . Retrieved 18 June 2008 . ^ "New Delhi News : Police opinion on plying of cycle-rickshaws irks Court" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 9 December 2009. Archived from the original on 14 December 2009 . Retrieved 5 April 2010 . ^ "Cycle rickshaws: Victims of car mania" (PDF) . Centre for Science and Environment . Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 July 2007 . Retrieved 18 June 2009 . ^ a b c "Indian Road Network" . National Highways Authority of India . Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 31 March 2009 . ^ "National Highways" . Portal of Government of India. Archived from the original on 10 January 2009 . Retrieved 23 June 2009 . ^ a b "Rural Roads: A Lifeline for Villages in India" . World Bank. p. 3. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 January 2019 . Retrieved 3 June 2009 . ^ "Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PGMSY)" . Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India. 2 November 2004. Archived from the original on 19 June 2009 . Retrieved 3 June 2009 . ^ "Speed limit 100 km/Hr, no bikes and autos: All about India's longest sea bridge" . 11 January 2024. Archived from the original on 12 January 2024 . Retrieved 12 January 2024 . ^ "Atal Setu news: PM Modi to inaugurate Mumbai Trans Harbour Link today" . 12 January 2024. Archived from the original on 12 January 2024 . Retrieved 12 January 2024 . ^ Gopalakrishnan, C. "Pricing of urban public bus transport in India : a study based on select undertakings" . Official webpage of the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay . Retrieved 1 June 2009 . ^ a b c d Singh, Sanjay K. (2005). "Review of Urban Transportation in India" (PDF) . Journal of Public Transportation . 8 (1): 79– 97. doi : 10.5038/2375-0901.8.1.5 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 June 2010 . Retrieved 23 June 2009 . ^ www.niti.gov.in https://web.archive.org/web/20220812170005/https://www.niti.gov.in/writereaddata/files/document_publication/BCG.pdf . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 August 2022 . Retrieved 10 October 2025 . {{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ FOUNDATION, OBSERVER RESEARCH. "Private bus operators: Drivers of India's E-bus adoption" . orfonline.org . Retrieved 2 May 2025 . ^ "BRT projects in Indian cities as inclusive transport systems?" (PDF) . CEPT University . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 December 2015 . Retrieved 28 November 2015 . ^ Pucher, John; Korattyswaropam, Nisha; Mittal, Neha; Ittyerah, Neenu. "Urban transport crisis in India" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 March 2007. ^ "Landmarks in Transport" . Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport . Archived from the original on 29 March 2009 . Retrieved 18 April 2009 . ^ "BMTC The Present" . Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation . Archived from the original on 17 May 2008 . Retrieved 18 April 2009 . ^ "Ahmedabad BRTS Corridor: A Rare Success Story" . India Today . 28 August 2010. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018 . Retrieved 25 February 2018 . ^ "A timeline of BEST buses in Mumbai" . Daily News and Analysis . Mumbai. 29 June 2013. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 11 March 2015 . ^ "Volvo's first city buses in India operating" . Volvo Buses . 25 January 2006. Archived from the original on 9 August 2009 . Retrieved 23 June 2009 . ^ "Volvo to foray into city bus segment in India" .

The Hindu Businessline. 9 August 2005. Archived from the original on 25 May 2006 . Retrieved 23 June 2009 . ^ "Volvo intra-city buses to hit B'lore roads on Jan 17" .

The Financial Express . 11 January 2005. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013 . Retrieved 23 June 2009 . ^ "India Gets First AC Bus Stop!" . EfyTimes. 15 December 2008. Archived from the original on 2 May 2009 . Retrieved 5 April 2009 . ^ Dorairaj, S. (28 December 2005). "Koyambedu bus terminus gets ISO certification" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 5 July 2006 . Retrieved 25 April 2009 . ^ "Transport in India" . International Transport Statistics Database . iRAP . Archived from the original on 7 March 2009 . Retrieved 17 February 2009 . ^ Woods, Phil (28 July 2001). "The star of India" . Online edition of the Telegraph, dated 2001-07-28 . London. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022 . Retrieved 19 June 2009 . ^ "Honda tightens two-wheeler grip in India" . Online edition of The Hindu Business Line, dated 2009-02-03 . Archived from the original on 6 February 2009 . Retrieved 19 June 2009 . ^ "Lambretta Scooter" . Archived from the original on 23 September 2017. ^ "Cambridge Lambretta Workshops" . www.lambretta.co.uk . Retrieved 24 March 2025 . ^ "Now hire bikes from Metro stations in Bengaluru – Times of India" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 13 August 2016 . Retrieved 13 February 2017 . ^ Swaroop, Mamta; Siddiqui, Selma Marie; Sagar, Sushma; Crandall, Marie L. (2014). "The problem of the pillion rider: India's helmet law and New Delhi's exemption" . Journal of Surgical Research . 188 (1): 64– 68. doi : 10.1016/j.jss.2014.01.003 . PMID 24529884 . ^ "2023 vehicle sales trump pre-Covid numbers" .

The Times of India . 1 January 2024. ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 2 May 2025 . ^ "Production Trend" . Official webpage of the Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers . Archived from the original on 9 April 2009 . Retrieved 13 April 2009 . ^ Ghate, AT; Sunder, S (2014). "Proliferation of Cars in Indian Cities: Let Us Not Ape the West". Energy Research Institute Policy . Brief 12. ^ a b "Transport in Brazil" . International Transport Statistics Database . iRAP . Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 17 February 2009 . ^ Dekho, Car. "Why Chennai turned into 'Detroit of India' " .

The Financial Express . Archived from the original on 13 November 2014 . Retrieved 26 November 2014 . ^ Muralidhar, S. (13 February 2005). "New face to good old Maruti 800" . Business Line . Archived from the original on 19 December 2008 . Retrieved 13 April 2009 . ^ O'Connor, Ashling (11 January 2008). "Tata Nano – world's cheapest new car is unveiled in India" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on 30 August 2008 . Retrieved 21 January 2008 . ^ Kurup, Saira (29 March 2009). "Homemade Nano" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 10 April 2009 . ^ "Bangalore's car pooling venture ropes in celebrities" . IANS . Archived from the original on 14 June 2010 . Retrieved 28 May 2009 . ^ "Radio One, CommuteEasy partner to promote car pooling in Bangalore" . Archived from the original on 20 July 2011 . Retrieved 28 May 2009 . ^ "Car pooling kicks off in City" (PDF) . Bangalore Traffic Police. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 28 May 2009 . ^ Shwetha S. "10,000 plunge into car pool" . Online edition of DNA, dated 22 May 2009 . Retrieved 28 May 2009 . ^ Sengupta, Atmadip Ray & Tamal (7 September 2009). "Kolkata breathes easy sans its old vehicles" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 11 April 2018 . Retrieved 10 April 2018 . ^ Colenbrander S, Gouldson A, Roy J, Kerr N, Sarkar S, Hall S, Sudmant A, Ghatak A, Chakravarty D, Ganguly D, Mcanulla F (2017). "Can low-carbon urban development be pro-poor?

The case of Kolkata, India" (PDF) . Environment & Urbanization . 29 (1): 139– 158. Bibcode : 2017EnUrb..29..139C . doi : 10.1177/0956247816677775 . S2CID 62880332 . Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 July 2018 . Retrieved 23 September 2019 . ^ Ghosh, P; Somanathan, R (2013). "Improving Urban Air Quality in India: Lessons from the Kolkata Clean Air Regulations of 2009" (PDF) . International Growth Centre . Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 August 2017 . Retrieved 10 April 2018 . ^ "Mahindra Jeeps on The CJ3B Page" . Film.queensu.ca. 31 January 2007. Archived from the original on 21 April 1999 . Retrieved 5 April 2010 . ^ "Company Profile: Tata Motors" . Official webpage of the Tata Group . Archived from the original on 23 January 2009 . Retrieved 23 June 2009 . ^ "The historic Tata Motors journey" . Rediff News. 20 March 2009. Archived from the original on 26 October 2012 . Retrieved 23 June 2009 . ^ "Telco net spurts 44%, to pay Rs 8 a share" . Online edition of The Financial Express, dated 1997-05-28 . Archived from the original on 15 May 2013 . Retrieved 23 June 2009 . ^ Sarkar, John. "SUVs still ruling the roads in India" . Online edition of the Economic Times, dated 2008-10-05 . Archived from the original on 9 November 2008 . Retrieved 7 June 2009 . ^ Ramakrishnan, N. "SUVs set to blaze new trail" . Online edition of The Hindu Business Line, dated 2003-03-13 . Archived from the original on 8 July 2004 . Retrieved 7 June 2009 . ^ Duggan, Chris (15 August 2006). "India's 'Amby' notches up half century" .

The Independent . London, UK. Archived from the original on 24 November 2009 . Retrieved 23 June 2009 . ^ "Your Premier ride is arriving now" . Uber Blog . 5 February 2018. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018 . Retrieved 25 February 2018 . ^ "uberXL: more room with more seats" . Uber Blog . 27 December 2016. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018 . Retrieved 25 February 2018 . ^ "Hop onto a MOTO during early morning and late night hours | Uber Blog" . Uber Blog . 19 February 2018. Archived from the original on 31 October 2018 . Retrieved 25 February 2018 . ^ Sankar, Anand (12 April 2006). "When did you last call a taxi?" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 20 September 2006 . Retrieved 23 June 2009 . ^ Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 : s. 74(2)(viii) ^ "App-based cabs like Ola, Uber preferred choice for commuters as personal vehicles take a back seat - ccier" . 27 February 2020 . Retrieved 2 May 2025 . ^ "Taxis to introduce 'in-Taxi' magazines from July" . ChennaiVision . p. 1. Archived from the original on 23 September 2009 . Retrieved 21 May 2009 . ^ "Kolkata gets 100 more no-refusal taxis – The Times of India" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 22 December 2013 . Retrieved 20 December 2013 . ^ "Auto" . MSN Encarta . Retrieved 18 June 2009 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ "Getting around Mumbai" . iGuide. Archived from the original on 11 February 2009 . Retrieved 12 March 2009 . ^ "Auto fares must be based on meter readings" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 30 March 2007. Archived from the original on 13 June 2006 . Retrieved 6 July 2009 . ^ "Vroom... enjoy a pre-paid auto ride" .

The Times of India . 18 March 2007. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 10 April 2009 . ^ "EV sales in India to breach the 9 mn mark by 2027: IVCA-EY-IndusLaw report" . Business Today . 27 July 2022. Archived from the original on 3 August 2022 . Retrieved 3 August 2022 . ^ a b c d "An Assessment of the Intermediate Public Transport (IPT) Sector in India" (PDF) . ^ "Kolkata Metro is now the 17th zone of Indian Railways" .

The Times of India . 29 December 2010. Archived from the original on 20 June 2014 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 . ^ Bhandari, R.R. (2005). Indian Railways: Glorious 150 years . Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. pp. 44– 52. ISBN 978-81-230-1254-4 . ^ "Geography: Railway zones" . Indian Railways Fan Club. Archived from the original on 19 August 2007 . Retrieved 23 December 2008 . ^ a b c d e "Indian Railways Year Book 2018-19" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 January 2021 . Retrieved 27 June 2020 . ^ indianrailways.gov.in https://indianrailways.gov.in/railwayboard/uploads/directorate/stat_econ/2024/Year%20Book%202022-23%20English.pdf . Retrieved 27 August 2024 . {{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ "12050/Gatiman Express - Hazrat Nizamuddin to Virangana Lakshmibai NR/Northern Zone - Railway Enquiry" . Archived from the original on 22 June 2020 . Retrieved 27 June 2020 . ^ "Gatimaan Express/12049 Time Table/Schedule: Agra Cantt./AGC to Hazrat Nizamuddin/NZM NR/Northern Zone – Railways Enquiry" . indiarailinfo.com . Archived from the original on 20 August 2016 . Retrieved 13 June 2017 . ^ "India's fastest train completes final test run in record time – Times of India" .

The Times of India . 6 June 2015. Archived from the original on 12 March 2023 . Retrieved 21 April 2024 . ^ "India launches first 160 km/h 'semi high speed' train" . railwaygazette.com . Archived from the original on 7 May 2018 . Retrieved 13 June 2017 . ^ "Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus (formerly Victoria Terminus)" . World Heritage List . World Heritage Committee . 2004. Archived from the original on 27 November 2018 . Retrieved 5 January 2009 . ^ a b "Mountain Railways of India" . World Heritage List . World Heritage Committee . 1999. Archived from the original on 19 December 2008 . Retrieved 5 January 2009 . ^ "Indian Railways White Paper 2016" (PDF) . 25 February 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 February 2018. ^ "INDIAN RAILWAYS 2017–2019 VISION & PLANS" (PDF) . 25 February 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 November 2017. ^ "Road-Rail Synergy System" . Press release, Press Information Bureau, dated 2004-20-05 . Archived from the original on 5 June 2011 . Retrieved 22 December 2008 . ^ "New Konkan Rly service begins" . Business Standard India . Archived from the original on 7 June 2011 . Retrieved 22 December 2008 . ^ "RORO service again on Konkan Railway" . Online edition of The Hindu Business Line, dated 2004-06-11 . Archived from the original on 10 August 2011 . Retrieved 22 December 2008 . ^ Vydhianathan, S. (14 November 2003). "Convergence on the Konkan Railway" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 27 June 2006 . Retrieved 22 December 2008 . ^ "Roll On–Roll Off (Roro) Service on Konkan Railway" (PDF) . Konkan Railway Corporation . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2009 . Retrieved 22 December 2008 . ^ "Overview of the existing Mumbai Suburban Railway" . Mumbai Railway Vikas Corporation . Archived from the original on 20 June 2008 . Retrieved 31 March 2009 . ^ "Opening up new frontiers" .

The Hindu Business Line . 27 October 2006 . Retrieved 5 April 2010 . ^ "Electric Traction – I" . IRFCA.org. Archived from the original on 5 November 2012 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 . ^ Ajai Sreevatsan (31 October 2011). "Evolution of Chennai's Public Transport System" (PDF) .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 November 2013 . Retrieved 29 February 2012 . ^ "Kolkata Metro is now the 17th zone of Indian Railways" .

The Times of India . 29 September 2016. Archived from the original on 3 October 2016 . Retrieved 5 May 2020 . ^ "Mumbai monorail to run in two years" .

The Times of India . 27 September 2007. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 19 March 2009 . ^ "Brief on the matter relating to Nepal" (PDF) . Official webpage of Indian Railways . Retrieved 1 June 2009 . ^ Ramachandran, Sudha (3 January 2007). "India's rail-building challenge" . Asia Times . p. 2. Archived from the original on 4 January 2007 . Retrieved 16 April 2009 . ^ "IRFCA:Indian Railways FAQ:Geography:International" . IRFCA, website of the Indian Railway Fan Club. Archived from the original on 29 August 2015 . Retrieved 24 June 2009 . ^ "High Speed Lines in the World" (PDF) . UIC.org . International Union of Railways. 1 September 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 November 2014 . Retrieved 27 September 2014 . ^ INC Manifesto – infrastructure Archived 2 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine ^ "BJP Manifesto 2014" (PDF) . bjp.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 July 2017 . Retrieved 13 June 2017 . ^ "Diamond quadrilateral of high-speed trains" . indianexpress.com . 10 June 2014. Archived from the original on 13 August 2017 . Retrieved 13 June 2017 . ^ "Laying high speed train corridor to cost Rs. 80,000 crore" .

The Hindu . 16 March 2015. Archived from the original on 27 January 2016 . Retrieved 13 June 2017 . ^ "India to sign deal with Japan to get first bullet train" .

The Hindu . 8 December 2015. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017 . Retrieved 13 June 2017 . ^ Wu, Shang-su. "Japan's High-Speed Rail Breakthrough" . thediplomat.com . Archived from the original on 20 December 2015 . Retrieved 12 February 2021 . ^ Roy, Rajesh (10 December 2015). "India Said to Pick Japan for High-Speed Rail Project" . Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 18 May 2017 . Retrieved 13 June 2017 – via www.wsj.com. ^ Thakur, Rajesh Kumar (6 January 2025). "India's first bullet train will be launched soon: PM Modi" .

The New Indian Express . Retrieved 18 March 2025 . ^ "Thane Gets Switzerland-Like Cable Cars: India's Longest Funicular Railway Is Now Open" . News18.com . 20 January 2026. ^ "Manorama Yearbook 2006 (India – The Country)". Manorama Year Book . Malayala Manorama: 515. 2006. ISSN 0542-5778 . ^ "World Port Rankings 2007" . American Association of Port Authorities (AAPA). 22 April 2009. Archived from the original (XLS) on 7 April 2010 . Retrieved 3 June 2009 . ^ "Discover Opportunity: Infrastructure in India" (PDF) . India Brand Equity Foundation (IBEF), An initiative of the Ministry of Commerce & Industry, Government of India. p. 6. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 October 2020 . Retrieved 1 June 2009 . ^ "10 worst oil spills that cost trillions in losses : Rediff.com Business" . Business.rediff.com. Archived from the original on 14 August 2010 . Retrieved 16 August 2010 . ^ a b c Mathew, K. M. (ed.). "India: Transportation". Manorama Yearbook 2009 . Malayala Manorama. p. 606. ISBN 978-81-89004-12-5 . ^ "About Us" . Official webpage of the Shipping Corporation of India . Archived from the original on 6 November 2007 . Retrieved 3 June 2009 . ^ a b "Shipping Corporation of India" . National Portal of India . Archived from the original on 9 October 2012 . Retrieved 3 June 2009 . ^ "The Maritime Training Institute (MTI)" . Official webpage of the Shipping Corporation of India . Archived from the original on 7 June 2008 . Retrieved 3 June 2009 . ^ "The Hindu Business Line : Minor ports, major trouble" . Archived from the original on 31 January 2003 . Retrieved 15 September 2015 . ^ a b Chandnani, Lajpat Ray. General Insurance, Reinsurance and Risk Management Glossary. Notion Press (2017). ^ "Inland Water Transport Policy : Introduction" . Inland Waterways Authority of India . Retrieved 20 June 2009 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Rangaraj, Narayan; Raghuram, G. "Viability of Inland Water Transport in India" (PDF) . INRM Policy Brief No. 13 . Asian Development Bank. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 January 2012 . Retrieved 20 June 2009 . ^ Sekhar, P. Secured Techno- Economic Growth of India: Unleashing Hidden Growth Potential . Micro Media Marketing Pvt. Ltd. ISBN 9788192497853 . ^ Sekhar, P. Secured Techno- Economic Growth of India: Unleashing Hidden Growth Potential . Micro Media Marketing Pvt. Ltd. ISBN 9788192497853 . ^ a b c "National Waterways" . Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) . Retrieved 10 May 2009 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ a b "House committee nod for two more national waterways" . Indian Express . 18 August 2007. Archived from the original on 26 March 2009 . Retrieved 10 May 2009 . ^ a b "Two New National Waterways" (PDF) . Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI). Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 April 2009 . Retrieved 3 June 2009 . ^ Vaid _12261, Rohit (14 November 2024). "India to deploy around 10 seaplanes with in 8-12 months: De Havilland" . BusinessLine . Retrieved 22 May 2025 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "India Seaplanes Market" . 27 March 2018. ^ Indias logistics cost at 8% of gdp, rail most efficient: report , The Economic Times, 26 Sept 2025. ^ a b c d India plans common logistics portal to ease movement of goods, reduce logistics cost Archived 12 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine , Economic Times , 17 January 2018. ^ If I were FM: Raamdeo proposes asset-light strategy for infra boost Archived 11 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine , Economic Times , 18 January 2018. ^ a b Districts to be export units, looking at logistics ministry: Suresh Prabhu Archived 18 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine , Daily Hunt, 8 January 2018. ^ are creating a digital logistics platform: Suresh Prabhu , Economic Times , 6 January 2018. ^ Government plans to overhaul 300 dry ports Archived 16 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine , Economic Times , 9 January 2018. ^ Government to construct 35 multimodal logistics parks: Gadkari Archived 19 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine , Business Standards , 3 May 2017. ^ India launches first auction of exploration blocks under new licensing policy Archived 12 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine , Economic Times , 18 January 2018. ^ "Ashgabat Agreement" .

The Hans India . 24 March 2016. Archived from the original on 3 August 2017 . Retrieved 17 April 2016 . ^ Roychaudhary, Anumita (1998). "CNG Delhi– the world's cleanest public bus system running on CNG" . Geneva: Product-Life Institute. Archived from the original on 13 December 2009 . Retrieved 23 November 2009 . ^ "KSRTC: Best Practices" . Karnataka, India: Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation . Retrieved 23 November 2009 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Sastry, Anil Kumar (31 January 2007). "KSRTC going that extra mile to conserve fuel" .

The Hindu . Karnataka India. Archived from the original on 10 November 2012 . Retrieved 23 November 2009 . ^ "State to promote biofuel buses" .