The Hattians were assimilated by the Hittites and other Anatolian peoples . Classical Anatolia transitioned into cultural Hellenization after Alexander the Great 's conquests, and later Romanization during the Roman and Byzantine eras.

The Seljuk Turks began migrating into Anatolia in the 11th century, starting the Turkification process.

The Seljuk Sultanate of Rum ruled Anatolia until the Mongol invasion in 1243, when it disintegrated into Turkish principalities . Beginning in 1299, the Ottomans united the principalities and expanded . Mehmed II conquered Constantinople (modern-day Istanbul) in 1453 .

During the reigns of Selim I and Suleiman the Magnificent , the Ottoman Empire became a global power .

From 1789 onwards, the empire saw major changes, reforms , centralization, and rising nationalism while its territory declined .

In the 19th and early 20th centuries, persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction and in the Russian Empire resulted in large-scale loss of life and mass migration into modern-day Turkey from the Balkans , Caucasus , and Crimea . Under the control of the Three Pashas , the Ottoman Empire entered World War I in 1914, during which the Ottoman government committed genocides against its Armenian , Greek , and Assyrian subjects.

Following Ottoman defeat, the Turkish War of Independence resulted in the abolition of the sultanate and the signing of the Treaty of Lausanne . Turkey emerged as a more homogenous nation state .

The Republic was proclaimed on 29 October 1923, modelled on the reforms initiated by its founder and first president, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk . Turkey remained neutral during most of World War II , but was involved in the Korean War . Several military interventions interfered with the transition to a multi-party system. Turkey is an upper-middle-income and emerging country ; its economy is the world's 16th-largest by nominal and 11th-largest by PPP-adjusted GDP .

As the 15th-largest electricity producer in the world, Turkey aims to become a hub for regional energy transportation. It is a unitary presidential republic . Turkey is a founding member of the OECD , G20 , and Organization of Turkic States . With a geopolitically significant location, Turkey is a NATO member and has its second-largest military personnel . It may be recognized as an emerging , a middle , and a regional power.

As an EU candidate , Turkey is part of the EU Customs Union . Turkey has coastal plains, a high central plateau , and various mountain ranges with rising elevation eastwards. Turkey's climate is diverse, ranging from Mediterranean and other temperate climates to semi-arid and continental types. Home to three biodiversity hotspots , Turkey is prone to frequent earthquakes and is highly vulnerable to climate change . Turkey has a universal healthcare system , growing access to education , and increasing levels of innovativeness . It is a leading TV content exporter. With numerous UNESCO World Heritage sites and intangible cultural heritage inscriptions, and a rich and diverse cuisine , Turkey is the fourth most visited country in the world. Etymology Main articles: Name of Turkey and Turkic peoples § Etymology The Mamluk Sultanate , with its ruling elite of Turkic origin, was called the "State of the Turks" ( Dawlat at-Turk , or Dawlat al-Atrāk , or Dawlat-at-Turkiyya ). Turkestan, also meaning the "land of the Turks", was used for a historic region in Central Asia . Middle English usage of Turkye or Turkeye is found in The Book of the Duchess (written in 1369–1372) to refer to Anatolia or the Ottoman Empire .

The modern spelling Turkey dates back to at least 1719.

The bird called turkey was named as such due to trade of guineafowl from Turkey to England.

The name Turkey has been used in international treaties referring to the Ottoman Empire.

The Government of the Grand National Assembly adopted the name Türkiye Devleti ("State of Turkey"). With the Treaty of Alexandropol in 1920, the name Türkiye entered international documents for the first time.

In the treaty signed with Afghanistan in 1921, the expression Devlet-i Âliyye-i Türkiyye ("Sublime Turkish State") was used, likened to the Ottoman Empire's name. Upon the proclamation of the republic on 29 October 1923, the name Türkiye Cumhuriyeti ( توركيه جمهوريتى ) was adopted.

In December 2021, President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan called for expanded official usage of Türkiye , saying that Türkiye "represents and expresses the culture, civilization, and values of the Turkish nation in the best way".

The languages in Anatolia at that time included Hattian, Hurrian, Hittite , Luwian , and Palaic . Hattian was a language indigenous to Anatolia, with no known modern-day connections. Hurrian language was used in northern Syria . Hittite, Palaic, and Luwian languages were "the oldest written Indo-European languages ", forming the Anatolian sub-group . Hattian rulers were gradually replaced by Hittite rulers.

The Hittite kingdom was a large kingdom in Central Anatolia, with its capital of Hattusa . It co-existed in Anatolia with Palaians and Luwians , approximately between 1700 and 1200 BC.

As the Hittite kingdom was disintegrating, further waves of Indo-European peoples migrated from southeastern Europe, which was followed by warfare.

In the late Bronze Age , there were three or four Greek-speaking settlements in Anatolia , including Miletus . Around 1000 BC, Greeks started migrating to the west coast of Anatolia. These eastern Greek settlements played a vital role in shaping the Archaic Greek civilization; important cities included Miletus , Ephesus , Halicarnassus , Smyrna (now İzmir ) and Byzantium (now Istanbul ). These settlements were grouped as Aeolis , Ionia , and Doris , after the specific Greek groups that settled them. Further Greek colonization in Anatolia was led by Miletus and Megara in 750–480 BC.

The Library of Celsus in Ephesus was built by the Romans in 114–117. Cyrus attacked eastern Anatolia in 547 BC, and Achaemenid Empire eventually expanded into western Anatolia .

In the east, the Armenian province was part of the Achaemenid Empire.

Following the Greco-Persian Wars , the Greek city-states of the Anatolian Aegean coast regained independence, but most of the interior stayed part of the Achaemenid Empire. Two of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World , the Temple of Artemis in Ephesus, and the Mausoleum of Halicarnassus , were located in Anatolia.

Following the victories of Alexander in 334 BC and 333 BC , the Achaemenid Empire collapsed. This led to increasing cultural homogeneity and Hellenization of Anatolia, which met resistance in some places.

Following Alexander's death, the Seleucids ruled large parts of Anatolia, while native Anatolian states emerged in the Marmara and Black Sea areas.

In eastern Anatolia, the kingdom of Armenia appeared.

Following Asiatic Vespers massacre, and Mithridatic Wars with Pontus , Rome emerged victorious. Around the 1st century BC, Rome expanded into parts of Pontus and Bithynia , while turning rest of Anatolian states into Roman satellites. Several conflicts with Parthians ensued , with peace and wars alternating. According to Acts of the Apostles , early Christian Church had significant growth in Anatolia because of St Paul 's efforts. Letters from St. Paul in Anatolia comprise the oldest Christian literature . Under Roman authority, ecumenical councils such as Council of Nicaea (Iznik) in 325 served as a guide for developing "orthodox expressions of basic Christian teachings".

The Hagia Sophia in Constantinople (now Istanbul ) was built by the Eastern Roman emperor Justinian the Great in 532–537.

The Byzantine Empire, also referred to as the Eastern Roman Empire, was the continuation of the Roman Empire centered in Constantinople during Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages .

The eastern half of the Empire survived the conditions that caused the fall of the West in the 5th century AD, and continued to exist until the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire in 1453.

During most of its existence, the empire remained the most powerful economic, cultural, and military force in the Mediterranean world .

The term Byzantine Empire was only coined following the empire's demise; its citizens referred to the polity as the "Roman Empire" and to themselves as Romans . Due to the imperial seat's move from Rome to Byzantium , the adoption of Christianity as the state religion , and the predominance of Greek instead of Latin , modern historians continue to make a distinction between the earlier Roman Empire and the later Byzantine Empire .

In the early Byzantine Empire period, the Anatolian coastal areas were Greek speaking.

In addition to natives, interior Anatolia had diverse groups such as Goths , Celts , Persians and Jews . Interior Anatolia had been "heavily Hellenized". Anatolian languages eventually became extinct after Hellenization of Anatolia. Seljuks and Anatolian beyliks Main articles: Seljuk Empire , Sultanate of Rum , and Anatolian beyliks Further information: Turkic migration , Oghuz Turks , and Turkification The ruling family of the Seljuks originated from the Kınık branch of the Oghuz Turks.

In 1040, the Seljuks defeated the Ghaznavids at the Battle of Dandanaqan and established the Seljuk Empire in Greater Khorasan . Baghdad , the Abbasid Caliphate 's capital and center of the Islamic world , was taken by Seljuks in 1055. Given the role Khurasani traditions played in art, culture, and political traditions in the empire, the Seljuk period is described as a mixture of " Turkish, Persian and Islamic influences ".

In the latter half of the 11th century, the Seljuk Turks began penetrating into medieval Armenia and Anatolia.

At the time, Anatolia was a diverse and largely Greek-speaking region after previously being Hellenized .

The Seljuk Turks defeated the Byzantines at the Battle of Manzikert in 1071, and later established the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum .

During this period, there were also Turkish principalities such as Danishmendids . Seljuk arrival started the Turkification process in Anatolia; there were Turkic/Turkish migrations, intermarriages, and conversions into Islam.

The shift took several centuries and happened gradually. Members of Islamic mysticism orders, such as Mevlevi Order , played a role in the Islamization of the diverse people of Anatolia. Seljuk expansion was one of the reasons for the Crusades .

In 13th century, there was a second significant wave of Turkic migration, as people fled Mongol expansion. Seljuk sultanate was defeated by the Mongols at the Battle of Köse Dağ in 1243 and disappeared by the beginning of the 14th century. It was replaced by various Turkish principalities. Ottoman Empire Main article: Ottoman Empire The Ottoman Empire at its greatest European extent, in 1683, during the Battle of Vienna Based around Söğüt , Ottoman Beylik was founded by Osman I in the early 14th century. According to Ottoman chroniclers, Osman descended from the Kayı tribe of the Oghuz Turks . Ottomans started annexing the nearby Turkish beyliks (principalities) in Anatolia and expanded into the Balkans . Mehmed II completed Ottoman conquest of the Byzantine Empire by capturing its capital, Constantinople , on 29 May 1453. Selim I united Anatolia under Ottoman rule. Turkification continued as Ottomans mixed with various indigenous people in Anatolia and the Balkans.

The Ottoman Empire was a global power during the reigns of Selim I and Suleiman the Magnificent .

In the 16th and 17th centuries, Sephardic Jews moved into Ottoman Empire following their expulsion from Spain.

From the second half of the 18th century onwards, the Ottoman Empire began to decline .

The Tanzimat reforms, initiated by Mahmud II in 1839, aimed to modernize the Ottoman state in line with the progress that had been made in Western Europe.

The Ottoman constitution of 1876 was the first among Muslim states, but was short-lived .

The decline of the Ottoman Empire led to a rise in nationalist sentiment among its various subject peoples , leading to increased ethnic tensions which occasionally burst into violence, such as the Hamidian massacres of Armenians , which claimed up to 300,000 lives. Ottoman territories in Europe ( Rumelia ) were lost in the First Balkan War (1912–1913). Ottomans managed to recover some territory in Europe, such as Edirne , in the Second Balkan War (1913).

In the 19th and early 20th centuries, persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction and in the Russian Empire resulted in estimated 5 million deaths, with the casualties including Turks. Five to seven or seven to nine million refugees migrated into modern-day Turkey from the Balkans , Caucasus , Crimea , and Mediterranean islands, shifting the center of the Ottoman Empire to Anatolia.

In addition to a small number of Jews, the refugees were overwhelmingly Muslim; they were both Turkish and non-Turkish people, such as Circassians and Crimean Tatars . Paul Mojzes has called the Balkan Wars an "unrecognized genocide", where multiple sides were both victims and perpetrators. Circassian refugees included the survivors of the Circassian genocide .

Following the 1913 coup d'état , the Three Pashas took control of the Ottoman government.

The Ottoman Empire entered World War I on the side of the Central Powers and was ultimately defeated.

During the war, the empire's Armenian subjects were deported to Syria as part of the Armenian genocide .

As a result, an estimated 600,000 to more than 1 million, or up to 1.5 million Armenians were killed.

The Turkish government has refused to acknowledge the events as genocide and states that Armenians were only "relocated " from the eastern war zone. Genocidal campaigns were also committed against the empire's other minority groups such as the Assyrians and Greeks .

Following the Armistice of Mudros in 1918, the victorious Allied Powers sought the partition of the Ottoman Empire through the 1920 Treaty of Sèvres . Republic of Türkiye Main article: History of the Republic of Turkey Mustafa Kemal Atatürk , the founder and the first President of the Turkish Republic The occupation of Istanbul (1918) and İzmir (1919) by the Allies in the aftermath of World War I initiated the Turkish National Movement . Under the leadership of Mustafa Kemal Pasha , a military commander who had distinguished himself during the Battle of Gallipoli , the Turkish War of Independence (1919–1923) was waged with the aim of revoking the terms of the Treaty of Sèvres (1920).

The Turkish Provisional Government in Ankara , which had declared itself the legitimate government of the country on 23 April 1920 , started to formalize the legal transition from the old Ottoman into the new Republican political system.

The Ankara Government engaged in armed and diplomatic struggle.

In 1921–1923, the Armenian, Greek, French, and British armies had been expelled.

The military advance and diplomatic success of the Ankara Government resulted in the signing of the Armistice of Mudanya on 11 October 1922.

On 1 November 1922, the Turkish Parliament in Ankara formally abolished the Sultanate, thus ending 623 years of monarchical Ottoman rule.

The Treaty of Lausanne of 24 July 1923, which superseded the Treaty of Sèvres, led to the international recognition of the sovereignty of the new Turkish state as the successor state of the Ottoman Empire.

On 4 October 1923, the Allied occupation of Turkey ended with the withdrawal of the last Allied troops from Istanbul .

The Turkish Republic was officially proclaimed on 29 October 1923 in Ankara, the country's new capital.

The Lausanne Convention stipulated a population exchange between Greece and Turkey . Anıtkabir in Ankara was completed in 1953 to become the mausoleum of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk . Mustafa Kemal became the republic's first president and introduced many reforms .

The reforms aimed to transform the old religion-based and multi-communal Ottoman monarchy into a Turkish nation state that would be governed as a parliamentary republic under a secular constitution . Women gained the right to vote nationally in 1934. With the Surname Law , the Turkish Parliament bestowed upon Kemal the honorific surname "Atatürk" ( Father Turk ). Atatürk's reforms caused discontent in some Kurdish and Zaza tribes leading to the Sheikh Said rebellion in 1925 and the Dersim rebellion in 1937. İsmet İnönü became the country's second president following Atatürk's death in 1938.

In 1939, the Republic of Hatay voted in favor of joining Turkey with a referendum. Turkey remained neutral during almost all of World War II , but entered the war on the side of the Allies on 23 February 1945 .

Later that year, Turkey became a charter member of the United Nations.

In 1950 Turkey became a member of the Council of Europe .

After fighting as part of the UN forces in the Korean War , Turkey joined NATO in 1952, becoming a bulwark against Soviet expansion into the Mediterranean . Tansu Çiller , Turkey's first female prime minister, attends a European Commission meeting in January 1994. Military coups or memorandums, which happened in 1960 , 1971 , 1980 , and 1997 , complicated Turkey's transition to a democratic multiparty system . Between 1960 and the end of the 20th century, the prominent leaders in Turkish politics who achieved multiple election victories were Süleyman Demirel , Bülent Ecevit and Turgut Özal . PKK started a "campaign of terrorist attacks on civilian and military targets" in the 1980s. It is designated as a terrorist organization by Turkey, the United States, and the European Union. Tansu Çiller became the first female prime minister of Turkey in 1993. Turkey applied for full membership of the EEC in 1987, joined the European Union Customs Union in 1995 and started accession negotiations with the European Union in 2005. Customs Union had an important impact on the Turkish manufacturing sector.

In 2014, prime minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan won Turkey's first direct presidential election .

On 15 July 2016, an unsuccessful coup attempt tried to oust the government. According to the Turkish government, there are 13,251 arrested or convicted people in jail as of 2024, related to the 2016 coup attempt. With a referendum in 2017 , the parliamentary republic was replaced by an executive presidential system .

The office of the prime minister was abolished, and its powers and duties were transferred to the president.

On the referendum day, while the voting was still underway, the Supreme Electoral Council lifted a rule that required each ballot to have an official stamp.

The opposition parties claimed that as many as 2.5 million ballots without a stamp were accepted as valid.

The country is encircled by seas on three sides: the Aegean Sea to the west, the Black Sea to the north and the Mediterranean Sea to the south. Turkey is bordered by Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan and Iran to the east. To the south, it's bordered by Syria and Iraq. To the north, its Thracian area is bordered by Greece and Bulgaria. Turkey is divided into " seven major regions ": Marmara , Aegean , Central Anatolia , Black Sea , Eastern Anatolia , Southeastern Anatolia and the Mediterranean .

As a general trend, the inland Anatolian Plateau becomes increasingly rugged as it progresses eastward. Mountain ranges include Köroğlu and Pontic mountain ranges to the north, and the Taurus Mountains to the south.

The Lakes Region contains some of the largest lakes in Turkey such as Lake Beyşehir and Lake Eğirdir . Tectonic map of Turkey. Straight lines and lines with triangles denote different types of faults , such as North Anatolian Fault and East Anatolian Fault . Geographers have used the eastern Anatolian plateau, Iranian plateau, and Armenian plateau terms to refer to the mountainous area around where Arabian and Eurasian tectonic plates merge.

The eastern Anatolian plateau and Armenian plateau definitions largely overlap.

The Eastern Anatolia region contains Mount Ararat , Turkey's highest point at 5,137 metres (16,854 feet), and Lake Van , the largest lake in the country. Eastern Turkey is home to the sources of rivers such as the Euphrates , Tigris and Aras .

The Southeastern Anatolia Region includes the northern plains of Upper Mesopotamia . Earthquakes happen frequently in Turkey. Almost the entire population lives in areas with varying seismic risk levels, with around 70% in highest or second-highest seismic areas. Anatolian plate is bordered by North Anatolian Fault zone to the north; East Anatolian Fault zone and Bitlis–Zagros collision zone to the east; Hellenic and Cyprus subduction zones to the south; and Aegean extensional zone to the west.

The Mediterranean climate is found in the Mediterranean, Aegean, Marmara, and Southeastern Anatolia regions of the country.

In the Black Sea area, humid subtropical and oceanic climate types are usually found. Large swaths of Central and Eastern Anatolia are classified into semi-arid or continental climate types. Turkey is highly vulnerable to climate change , due to socioeconomic, climatic, and geographic factors. This applies to nine out of ten climate vulnerability dimensions, such as "average annual risk to wellbeing". OECD median is two out of ten. Inclusive and swift growth is needed for decreasing vulnerability. Turkey aims to achieve net zero emissions by 2053. Accomplishing climate goals would require large investments, but would benefit the economy due to less illness and death from Turkey's air pollution , and less fuel imports. Government and politics Main articles: Politics of Turkey and Constitution of Turkey The Grand National Assembly , the legislative chamber in Ankara The Presidential Complex , residence and workplace of the President of Turkey The Court of Cassation is Turkey's supreme court for reviewing verdicts given by courts of criminal and civil justice. Turkey is a presidential republic within a multi-party system . Due to Erdoğan's judicial capture , imprisonment of opposition politicians and dissidents, and repression of protest movements, Turkey is not considered a democracy but rather as a competitive or fully authoritarian system.

The current constitution was approved by referendum in 1982 , which determines the government's structure, lays forth the ideals and standards of the state's conduct, and sets out the state's responsibility to its citizens. Furthermore, the constitution specifies the people's rights and obligations, as well as principles for the delegation and exercise of sovereignty that belongs to the people of Turkey.

In the Turkish unitary system , citizens are subject to three levels of government : national, provincial, and local.

The local government 's duties are commonly split between municipal governments and districts , in which the executive and legislative officials are elected by a plurality vote of citizens by district. Turkey is subdivided into 81 provinces for administrative purposes. Each province is divided into districts, for a total of 973 districts . National government Main article: Government of Turkey The government, regulated by a system of separation of powers as defined by the constitution of Turkey , comprises three branches: Legislative : The unicameral Parliament makes laws , debates and adopts the budget bills, declares war , approves treaties, proclaims amnesty and pardon , and has the power of impeachment , by which it can remove incumbent members of the government.

The Parliament has 600 voting members, each representing a constituency for a five-year term. Parliamentary seats are distributed among the provinces by population, conforming with the census apportionment. Executive : The president is the commander-in-chief of the military, can veto legislative bills before they become law (subject to parliamentary override), can issue presidential decrees on matters regarding executive power with the exception of fundamental rights, individual rights and certain political rights (parliamentary laws prevail presidential decrees), and appoints the members of the Cabinet and other officers, who administer and enforce national laws and policies.

The president is elected by direct vote and serves a five-year term.

The president can't run for re-elections after two terms of five-years, unless the parliament prematurely renews the presidential elections during the second term of the President. Elections for the Parliament and presidential elections are held on the same day. Judicial : The Constitutional Court (for constitutional adjudication and review of individual applications concerning human rights), the Court of Cassation (final decision maker in ordinary judiciary), the Council of State (final decision maker in administrative judiciary) and the Court of Jurisdictional Disputes (for resolving the disputes between courts for constitutional jurisdiction) are the four organizations that are described by the Constitution as supreme courts.

The Constitutional Court is composed of fifteen judges and are appointed by the president and the parliament. A member is elected for a term of twelve years and can't be re-elected.

The members of the Constitutional Court are obliged to retire when they are over the age of sixty-five.

In Turkey, turnout rates of both local and general elections are high compared to many other countries, which usually stands higher than 80%. President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan is currently serving as the head of state and head of government . Özgür Özel is the Main Opposition Leader .

The electoral threshold for political parties at national level is seven percent of the votes. Smaller parties can avoid the electoral threshold by forming an alliance with other parties. Independent candidates are not subject to an electoral threshold.

On the right side of the Turkish political spectrum , parties like the Democrat Party , Justice Party , Motherland Party , and Justice and Development Party became the most popular political parties in Turkey, winning numerous elections. Turkish right-wing parties are more likely to embrace the principles of political ideologies such as conservatism , nationalism or Islamism .

On the left side of the spectrum, parties like the Republican People's Party , Social Democratic Populist Party and Democratic Left Party once enjoyed the largest electoral success. Left-wing parties are more likely to embrace the principles of socialism , Kemalism or secularism .

The Constitutional Court can strip the public financing of political parties that it deems anti-secular or having ties to terrorism , or ban their existence altogether.

On 20 May 2016, the Turkish parliament stripped almost a quarter of its members of immunity from prosecution, including 101 deputies from the pro-Kurdish HDP and the main opposition CHP party.

In its 2023 report, the European Commission criticized how democratic institutions in Turkey operate.

The criticism was rejected by Turkey. Law Main articles: Judicial system of Turkey , Law enforcement in Turkey , and Hate speech laws in Turkey The Istanbul Justice Palace in Istanbul The Anadolu Justice Palace in Istanbul With the founding of the Republic, Turkey adopted a civil law legal system, replacing Sharia -derived Ottoman law .

The Civil Code , adopted in 1926, was based on the Swiss Civil Code of 1907 and the Swiss Code of Obligations of 1911.

Although it underwent a number of changes in 2002, it retains much of the basis of the original Code.

The Criminal Code , originally based on the Italian Criminal Code , was replaced in 2005 by a Code with principles similar to the German Penal Code and German law generally. Administrative law is based on the French equivalent and procedural law generally shows the influence of the Swiss, German and French legal systems. Islamic principles do not play a part in the legal system. Law enforcement in Turkey is carried out by several agencies under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Internal Affairs . These agencies are the General Directorate of Security , the Gendarmerie General Command and the Coast Guard Command .

In the years of government by the Justice and Development Party and Erdoğan, particularly since 2013, the independence and integrity of the Turkish judiciary has increasingly been said to be in doubt by institutions, parliamentarians and journalists both within and outside of Turkey, because of political interference in the promotion of judges and prosecutors and in their pursuit of public duty. Foreign relations Main article: Foreign relations of Turkey Turkey has been a member of NATO since 1952, has its second largest army and is the host of the Allied Land Command headquarters. Turkey has been characterized as an emerging , rising, middle , quasi-regional, and a regional power. Turkey's constant foreign policy goal is to pursue its national interests. These interests are mainly growing the economy, and maintaining security from internal terrorist and external threats.

After the establishment of the Republic, Atatürk and İnönü followed the " peace at home, peace in the world " principle until the Cold War 's start.

Following threats from the Soviet Union , Turkey sought to ally with the United States and joined NATO in 1952. Members and observers of the Organization of Turkic States Overall, Turkey aims for good relations with Central Asia , the Caucasus , Russia, the Middle East , and Iran. With the West, Turkey also aims to keep its arrangements.

By trading with the east and joining the EU, Turkey pursues economic growth. Turkey joined the European Union Customs Union in 1995, but its EU accession talks are frozen as of 2024. Turkey has sought closer relations with the Central Asian Turkic states after the breakup of the Soviet Union. Closer relations with Azerbaijan , a culturally close country, was achieved. Turkey is a founding member of the International Organization of Turkic Culture and Organization of Turkic States . It is also a member of Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe , Council of Europe , and Organisation of Islamic Cooperation .

Following the Arab Spring , Turkey had problems with countries such as United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, and Egypt. Relations with these countries have improved since then. There are disputes with Greece over maritime boundaries and with Cyprus .

In 2018, the Turkish military and the Turkish-backed forces began an operation in Syria aimed at ousting US-backed YPG (which Turkey considers to be an offshoot of the outlawed PKK ) from the enclave of Afrin . Turkey has also conducted airstrikes in Iraqi Kurdistan , which was criticized by Iraq for violating its sovereignty and killing civilians. Diplomatic relations with Israel were damaged after the 2010 Gaza flotilla raid , normalized in 2016, and cut again following the Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip .

The Turkish Armed Forces are responsible for defense against foreign threats.

Although the commander-in-chief is the president, the General Staff , Air Force , Naval Force , and Land Force usually report to the Minister of National Defence.

The Gendarmerie General Command and the Coast Guard Command are under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of the Interior . Military service is required for 6–12 months for men, which is reduced to one month after paying a fee. Turkey does not recognize conscientious objection and does not offer a civilian alternative to military service. Baykar Kızılelma UCAV on TCG Anadolu Turkey has the second-largest military force in NATO, after the United States , with an estimated strength of 890,700 military personnel as of February 2022. Turkey is considered a significant power in unmanned aerial vehicles .

As part of the nuclear sharing policy of NATO, Turkey hosts approximately 20 United States B61 nuclear bombs at the Incirlik Air Base .

In recent years, Turkey's defense industry has developed rapidly. Aselsan , Turkish Aerospace Industries , Roketsan , and ASFAT are among the top 100 defense companies in the world. Turkey has participated in international missions under the United Nations and NATO since the Korean War , including peacekeeping missions in Somalia , Yugoslavia and the Horn of Africa . It supported coalition forces in the First Gulf War , contributed military personnel to the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, and remains active in Kosovo Force , Eurocorps and EU Battlegroups .

As of 2016, Turkey has assisted Peshmerga forces in northern Iraq and the Somali Armed Forces with security and training.

The Turkish Armed Forces have a relatively substantial military presence abroad, with military bases in Albania , Iraq , Qatar , and Somalia .

The country also maintains a force of 36,000 troops in Northern Cyprus since 1974. Human rights Main article: Human rights in Turkey Women demonstrating and asking for non-interference with their clothing in Kadıköy , Istanbul Article 2 of the Turkish Constitution includes references to upholding the rule of law and human rights.

In the 2000s, legal changes were made for public use of and teaching in the Kurdish language. This included opening a Kurdish-language national TV channel . Various "openings" were made to address concerns of minorities such as Alevi , ethnic Kurds , and ethnic Romani people . Sentences for violence against women were strengthened.

In 2013, widespread protests erupted, sparked by a plan to demolish Gezi Park but soon growing into general anti-government dissent. Istanbul Pride was organized in 2003 for the first time.

Since 2015, parades in Istanbul have been denied permission by the government. Prior to 1858, Ottoman Empire had "a lenient legal accommodation of same-sex intimacy".

When prosecuted, the punishment was monetary fines.

In 1858, the 1810 French Penal Code was adopted by the Ottomans, which had no penalties for same-sex intimacy that is private. Under the Republic, same sex acts have never been criminalized. However, LGBT people in Turkey face discrimination, harassment and even violence.

In a survey conducted in 2016, 33% of respondents said that LGBT people should have equal rights, which increased to 45% in 2020. Another survey in 2018 found that the proportion of people who would not want a homosexual neighbor decreased from 55% in 2018 to 47% in 2019.

When the annual Istanbul Pride was inaugurated in 2003, Turkey became the first Muslim-majority country to hold a gay pride march.

Since 2015, parades at Taksim Square and İstiklal Avenue have been denied government permission, citing security concerns, but hundreds of people have defied the ban each year.

The service sector accounts for 61% of the economy, whereas industry accounts for 32% and agriculture contributes about 7%. According to IMF estimates, Turkey's GDP per capita by PPP is $43,790 in 2025, while its nominal GDP per capita is $18,200. Foreign direct investment in Turkey peaked at $22.05 billion in 2007 and dropped to $13.09 billion in 2022. Potential growth is weakened by long-lasting structural and macro obstacles, such as slow rates of productivity growth and high inflation. Turkey has a diversified economy; main industries include automobiles, electronics, textiles, construction, steel, mining, and food processing. Machinery and manufacturing lead among products in Turkey's merchandise exports. Turkey is a major agricultural producer . It ranks 8th in crude steel production , and 13th in motor vehicle production , ship building (by tonnage ), and annual industrial robot installation in the world. Turkish automative companies include TEMSA , Otokar , BMC and Togg . Togg is the first all-electric vehicle company of Turkey. Arçelik , Vestel , and Beko are major manufacturers of consumer electronics. Arçelik is one of the largest producers of household goods in the world.

In 2022, Turkey ranked second in the world in terms of the number of international contractors in the top 250 list. It is also the fifth largest in the world in terms of textile exports. Bodrum in Turkish Riviera . Bodrum peninsula is a high-end spot for vacationers. Turkey's services exports are mostly transport and tourism. Tourism accounts for about 8% of Turkey's GDP.

In 2024, Turkey ranked fourth in the world in the number of international tourist arrivals with 60.6 million foreign tourists. Turkey has 22 UNESCO World Heritage Sites and 84 World Heritage Sites in tentative list . Turkey is home to 625 Blue Flag beaches , third most in the world.

In 2024, Euromonitor International ranked Istanbul and Antalya among the top ten most visited cities in the world . Turkish Airlines is one of the largest airlines in the world . Between 2007 and 2021, the share of population below the PPP-$6.85 per day international poverty threshold declined from 20% to 7.6%.

In 2023, 13.9% of the population was below the national at-risk-of-poverty rate.

In 2021, 34% of the population were at risk of poverty or social exclusion, using Eurostat definition. Unemployment in Turkey was 10.4% in 2022.

When it comes to total final consumption , fossil fuels still play a large role, accounting for 73%. A major reason of Turkey's greenhouse gas emissions is the large proportion of coal in the energy system.

While the government has invested in low carbon energy transition, there are some fossil fuel subsidies until at least 2030.

By 2053, Turkey aims to have net zero emissions . Istanbul Airport is one of the top 10 busiest airports in the world . Turkey has made energy security a top priority, given its heavy reliance on gas and oil imports. Turkey's main energy supply sources are Russia , West Asia, and Central Asia. Gas production began in 2023 in the recently discovered Sakarya gas field .

When fully operational, it will supply about 30% of the natural gas needed domestically. Turkey aims to become a hub for regional energy transportation. Several oil and gas pipelines span the country, including the Blue Stream , TurkStream , and Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipelines.

As of 2023, Turkey has 3,726 kilometers of controlled-access highways and 29,373 kilometers of divided highways . Multiple bridges and tunnels connect Asian and European sides of Turkey; the Çanakkale 1915 Bridge on the Dardanelles strait is the longest suspension bridge in the world . Marmaray and Eurasia tunnels under the Bosporus connect both sides of Istanbul.

The Osman Gazi Bridge connects the northern and southern shores of the Gulf of İzmit . Turkish State Railways operates both conventional and high speed trains, with the government expanding both. High-speed rail lines include the Ankara-Istanbul , Ankara-Konya , and Ankara-Sivas routes. Istanbul Metro is the largest subway network in the country with around 704 million annual ridership in 2019. There are 115 airports as of 2024. Istanbul Airport is one of the top 10 busiest airports in the world. Turkey aims to become a transportation hub. It is part of various routes that connect Asia and Europe, including the Middle Corridor .

In all patent offices globally, Turkish residents rank 21st for overall patent applications .

In 2025, Turkey ranked 43rd in the world in the Global Innovation Index . TÜBİTAK is one of the main agencies for funding and carrying out research.

Although Turkey needs more national innovation, it is improving in areas such as high technology and defense. To boost the output of high- value-added products, Turkey launched its National Technology Initiative in 2019.

In line with its research priorities, Turkey developed roadmaps in various areas such as advanced materials , artificial intelligence , biotechnology , internet of things , nanoelectronics , robotics , and quantum technology . Some of the main science and technology programs include the National Research Program, Industry and Technology Strategy, Climate Change Strategy, National Artificial Intelligence Strategy, and National Space Program .

In 2023, the total fertility rate was 1.51 children per woman, below the replacement rate of 2.10 per woman .

In a 2018 health survey, the ideal children number was 2.8 children per woman, rising to 3 per married woman.

The Kurds make up a majority in the provinces of Ağrı , Batman , Bingöl , Bitlis , Diyarbakır , Hakkari , Iğdır , Mardin , Muş , Siirt , Şırnak , Tunceli and Van ; a near majority in Şanlıurfa (47%); and a large minority in Kars (20%).

In addition, internal migration has resulted in Kurdish diaspora communities in all of the major cities in central and western Turkey.

In Istanbul, there are an estimated three million Kurds, making it the city with the largest Kurdish population in the world. 19% of adult citizens identified as ethnic Kurds in a survey in 2021. Some people have multiple ethnic identities, such as both Turk and Kurd.

In 2006, an estimated 2.7 million ethnic Turks and Kurds were related from interethnic marriages. Areas with speakers of Turkic languages According to the World Factbook, non-Kurdish ethnic minorities are 7–12% of the population.

In 2006, KONDA estimated that non-Kurdish and non-Zaza ethnic minorities constituted 8.2% of the population; these were people who gave general descriptions such as Turkish citizen, people with other Turkic backgrounds , Arabs , and others.

In 2021, 4% of adult citizens identified as non-ethnic Turk or non-ethnic Kurd in a survey. According to the Constitutional Court, there are only four officially recognized minorities in Turkey : the three non-Muslim minorities recognized in the Treaty of Lausanne ( Armenians , Greeks , and Jews ) and the Bulgarians .

In 2013, the Ankara 13th Circuit Administrative Court ruled that the minority provisions of the Lausanne Treaty should also apply to Assyrians in Turkey and the Syriac language . Other unrecognized ethnic groups include Albanians , Bosniaks , Circassians , Georgians , Laz , Pomaks , and Roma .

The official language is Turkish , which is the most widely spoken Turkic language in the world. It is spoken by 85% to 90% of the population as a first language . Kurdish speakers are the largest linguistic minority. A survey estimated 13% of the population speak Kurdish or Zaza as a first language. Other minority languages include Arabic, Caucasian languages , and Gagauz .

The linguistic rights of the officially recognized minorities are de jure recognized and protected for Armenian , Bulgarian , Greek , Hebrew , and Syriac . There are multiple endangered languages in Turkey . Immigration Main article: Immigration to Turkey Excluding Syrians under temporary protection, there were 1,570,543 foreign citizens in Turkey in 2023.

Following the suppression of the Kurdish uprising in spring 1991, after the Gulf War ceasefire, hundreds of thousands of Kurds fled toward the Turkish border. Turkey largely refused entry, leaving many stranded in the mountains; the UNHCR estimated around 280,000 had crossed into Turkey by April 6, 1991. Most returned to Iraq within months after the establishment of a UN-protected safe haven in northern Iraq, with only around 8,000 remaining in Turkey by early 1992. Turkey's migrant crisis in the 2010s and early 2020s resulted in the influx of millions of refugees and immigrants. Turkey hosts the largest number of refugees in the world as of April 2020.

The Disaster and Emergency Management Presidency manages the refugee crisis in Turkey.

Before the start of the Syrian civil war in 2011, the estimated number of Arabs in Turkey varied from 1 million to more than 2 million.

In November 2020, there were 3.6 million Syrian refugees in Turkey; these included other ethnic groups of Syria , such as Syrian Kurds and Syrian Turkmens .

As of August 2023, the number of these refugees was estimated to be 3.3 million.

The number of Syrians had decreased by about 200,000 people since the beginning of the year.

The government has granted citizenship to 238 thousand Syrians by November 2023.

As of May 2023, approximately 96,000 Ukrainian refugees of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine have sought refuge in Turkey.

In 2022, nearly 100,000 Russian citizens migrated to Turkey, becoming the first in the list of foreigners who moved to Turkey, meaning an increase of more than 218% from 2021. Religion Main article: Religion in Turkey Left: Sultan Ahmed Mosque , also known as Blue Mosque in Istanbul is one of the most iconic and popular monuments of Ottoman architecture . Right: Mor Hananyo Monastery near Mardin .

From 1293 to 1932, it was the headquarters of Syriac Orthodox Church . Turkey is a secular state with no official state religion ; the constitution provides for freedom of religion and conscience . According to the CIA World Factbook , Muslims constitute 99.8% of the population, most of them being Sunni . Based on a survey, KONDA 's estimate for Muslims was 99.4% in 2006. According to Minority Rights Group International , estimates of share of Alevi are between 10% and 40% of the population. KONDA's estimate was 5% in 2006. 4% of adult citizens identified as Alevi in a survey in 2021, while 88% identified as Sunni.

The percentage of non-Muslims in modern-day Turkey was 19.1% in 1914, but fell to 2.5% in 1927. Currently, non-Muslims constitute 0.2% of the population according to the World Factbook.

In 2006, KONDA's estimate was that 0.18% of the population adhered to non-Islamic religions. Some of the non-Muslim communities are Armenians, Assyrians , Bulgarian Orthodox, Catholics , Greeks , Jews, and Protestants . Sources estimate that the Christian population in Turkey ranges between 180,000 and 320,000. Turkey has the largest Jewish community among the Muslim-majority countries. Currently, there are 439 churches and synagogues in Turkey.

In 2006, KONDA estimated that 0.47% of the population had no religion. According to KONDA, the share of adult citizens who identified as nonbelievers increased from 2% in 2011 to 6% in 2021. A 2020 Gezici Araştırma poll found that 28.5% of the Generation Z identified as irreligious . Education Main article: Education in Turkey Enrollment rates for primary , secondary and tertiary education in Turkey between 1971 and 2022. Completion rates for primary and lower secondary education.

In the past 20 years, Turkey has improved quality of education and has made significant progress in increasing education access.

From 2011 to 2021, improvements in education access include significant rise in the rates of upper secondary and tertiary education completion, and quadrupling of pre-school institutions. PISA results suggest improvements in education quality. There is still a gap with OECD countries. Significant challenges include differences in student outcomes from different schools, differences between rural and urban areas, pre-primary education access, and arrival of students who are Syrian refugees.

The Ministry of National Education is responsible for pre-tertiary education. Compulsory education is free at public schools and lasts 12 years, divided into three parts. There are 208 universities in Turkey . Students are placed to universities based on their YKS results and their preferences, by the Measuring, Selection and Placement Center . All state and private universities are under the control of the Higher Education Board .

The Ministry of Health has run a universal public healthcare system since 2003. Known as Universal Health Insurance ( Genel Sağlık Sigortası ), it is funded by a tax surcharge on employers, currently at 5%. Public-sector funding covers approximately 75.2% of health expenditures. Despite the universal health care, total expenditure on health as a share of GDP in 2018 was the lowest among OECD countries at 6.3% of GDP, compared to the OECD average of 9.3%. There are many private hospitals in the country.

In addition to Europe or Islam, Turkish culture was also influenced by Anatolia's native cultures.

From the Bronze Age , important architectural remnants include Alaca Höyük and the 2nd layer of Troy . There are various examples of Ancient Greek and Ancient Roman architectures, especially in the Aegean region. Byzantine architecture dates back to the 4th century AD. Its best example is Hagia Sophia . Byzantine architectural style continued to develop after the conquest of Istanbul , such as Byzantine Revival architecture .

During Seljuk Sultanate of Rum and Turkish principalities period, a distinct architecture emerged, which incorporated Byzantine and Armenian architectures with architectural styles found in West Asia and Central Asia . Seljuk architecture often used stones and bricks, and produced numerous caravanserais , madrasas and mausoleums . Ottoman architecture emerged in northwest Anatolia and Thrace. Early Ottoman architecture mixed "traditional Anatolian Islamic architecture with local building materials and techniques".

Following the conquest of Istanbul, classical Ottoman architecture emerged in the 16th and 17th centuries.

The most important architect of the classical period is Mimar Sinan , whose major works include the Şehzade Mosque , Süleymaniye Mosque , and Selimiye Mosque . Beginning in the 18th century, Ottoman architecture was influenced by European elements, resulting in development of Ottoman baroque style . European influence continued in the 19th century; examples include works of Balyan family such as neo-Baroque style Dolmabahçe Palace .

The last period of Ottoman architecture consists of the First National Architectural Movement , including works of Vedat Tek and Mimar Kemaleddin .

Since 1918, Turkish architecture can be divided into three parts.

From 1918 to 1950, the first one includes the First National Architectural Movement period, which transitioned into modernist architecture . Modernist and monumental buildings were preferred for public buildings, whereas "Turkish house" type vernacular architecture influenced private houses.

From 1950 to 1980, the second part includes urbanization, modernization, and internationalization. For residential housing, "reinforced concrete, slab-block, medium-rise apartments" became prevalent.

Since 1980, the third part is defined by consumer habits and international trends, such as shopping malls and office towers. Luxury residences with "Turkish house style" have been in demand.

In the 21st century, urban renewal projects have become a trend. Resilience against natural disasters such as earthquakes is one of the main goals for urban renewal projects. Around one-third of Turkey's building stock, corresponding to 6.7 million units, were assessed risky and needing urban renewal. Literature, theatre, and visual arts Main articles: Turkish literature , Theatre of Turkey , and Turkish art Nobel -laureate Turkish novelist Orhan Pamuk and his Turkish Angora cat at his personal writing space Süreyya Opera House is on the Asian side of Istanbul and Atatürk Cultural Center is the main opera house on the European side. Zorlu PSM is the city's largest performing arts theater and concert hall . Turkish literature goes back more than a thousand years.

The Seljuk and Ottoman periods include numerous works of literature and poetry. Turkic tales and poetry from Central Asia were also kept alive. Tales of Dede Korkut is an example of the oral narrative tradition. Dīwān Lughāt al-Turk , from the 11th century, contains Turkish linguistic information and poetry. Yunus Emre , influenced by Rumi , was one of the most important writers of Anatolian Turkish poetry. Ottoman Divan poetry used "refined diction" and complex vocabulary. It included Sufi mysticism , romanticism, and formal elements.

From the 19th century, Ottoman literature was influenced by the West. New genres, such as novels and journalistic style, were introduced. Aşk-ı Memnu , written by Halid Ziya Uşaklıgil , was the "first truly refined Turkish novel". Fatma Aliye Topuz , the first female Turkish novelist, wrote fiction.

After the proclamation of the republic in 1923, Atatürk instituted reforms such as the language reform and alphabet reform .

Since then, Turkish literature reflected the socioeconomic conditions in Turkey with increasing variety. "Village Novel" genre appeared in the mid-1950s, which talked about difficulties faced from poverty. An example is Memed, My Hawk by Yaşar Kemal , which was Turkey's first Nobel Prize in Literature nominee in 1973 . Orhan Pamuk won the 2006 Nobel Prize in Literature . Turkey has four "major theatrical traditions": "folk theatre, popular theatre, court theater, and Western theater." Turkish folk theatre goes back thousands of years and has survived among rural communities. Popular theatre includes plays by live actors, puppet and shadow plays, and storytelling performances . An example for shadow play is Karagöz and Hacivat . Court theatre was the refined version of popular theatre. Beginning in the 19th century, Western theatre tradition started appearing in Turkey.

Following the establishment of Turkish Republic, a state conservatory and the State Theatre Company were formed. Turkey's visual arts scene can be categorized into two, as "decorative" and "fine" arts. Fine arts, or güzel sanatlar , includes sculpture and painting . Turkish artists in these areas have gained global recognition. Photography, fashion design, graphic arts, and graphic design are some of the other areas Turkish artists are known for in the world.

The inaugural contemporary Turkish art sale by Sotheby's London was in 2009. Istanbul Modern and the Istanbul Biennial are examples of art galleries or exhibitions of contemporary Turkish art. Turkey has also seen a resurgence of traditional arts. This includes Ottoman-era traditional arts, such as ceramics and carpets . Textile and carpet design, glass and ceramics, calligraphy , paper marbling (ebru) are some of the art forms for which modern-day Turkish artists are recognized as leaders in the Islamic world. Music and dance Main articles: Music of Turkey and Turkish folk dance Barış Manço was a Turkish rock musician and one of the founders of the Anatolian rock genre.

Although classifying genres of Turkish music can be problematic, three broad categories can be considered. These are " Turkish folk music ", " Turkish art music ", and multiple popular music styles. These Popular music styles include arabesque , pop, and Anatolian rock .

The resurging popularity of pop music gave rise to several international Turkish pop stars such as Ajda Pekkan , Sezen Aksu , Erol Evgin , MFÖ , Tarkan , Mustafa Sandal , Sertab Erener , Teoman , Kenan Doğulu , Levent Yüksel and Hande Yener . Internationally acclaimed Turkish jazz and blues musicians and composers include Ahmet Ertegun . Media and cinema Main articles: Media in Turkey and Cinema of Turkey Hundreds of television channels, thousands of local and national radio stations, several dozen newspapers, a productive and profitable national cinema and a rapid growth of broadband Internet use constitute a vibrant media industry in Turkey.

The majority of the TV audiences are shared among public broadcaster TRT and the network-style channels such as Kanal D , Show TV , ATV and Star TV .

The broadcast media have a very high penetration as satellite dishes and cable systems are widely available.

The Radio and Television Supreme Council (RTÜK) is the government body overseeing the broadcast media.

By circulation, the most popular newspapers are Posta , Hürriyet , Sözcü , Sabah and Habertürk . Nuri Bilge Ceylan (left), Beren Saat (middle), and Türkan Şoray (right) Filiz Akın , Fatma Girik , Hülya Koçyiğit , and Türkan Şoray represent their period of Turkish cinema. Turkish directors like Metin Erksan , Nuri Bilge Ceylan , Yılmaz Güney , Zeki Demirkubuz and Ferzan Özpetek won numerous international awards such as the Palme d'Or and Golden Bear . Turkish television dramas are increasingly becoming popular beyond Turkey's borders and are among the country's most vital exports, both in terms of profit and public relations.

After sweeping the Middle East 's television market over the past decade, Turkish shows have aired in more than a dozen South and Central American countries in 2016. Turkey is today the world's second largest exporter of television series.

The latter describes "food-related guilds of Istanbul". Food staples in Turkey include bread and yogurt . Some of bread varieties are lavash and pide (a type of pita bread). Ayran is a drink made of yoghurt.

The Turkey national football team won the bronze medal at the 2002 FIFA World Cup , the 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup and UEFA Euro 2008 . Other mainstream sports such as basketball and volleyball are also popular.

The men's national basketball team and women's national basketball team have been successful. Anadolu Efes S.K. is the most successful Turkish basketball club in international competitions. Fenerbahçe reached the final of the EuroLeague in three consecutive seasons ( 2015–2016 , 2016–2017 and 2017–2018 ), becoming the European champions in 2017. VakıfBank S.K. is one of the best women's volleyball team in the world, having won the FIVB World Championship four times and the CEV Champions Cup six times.

The final of the 2013–14 EuroLeague Women basketball championship was played between two Turkish teams, Galatasaray and Fenerbahçe , and won by Galatasaray. Fenerbahçe won the 2023 FIBA Europe SuperCup Women after two consecutive Euroleague wins in the 2022–23 and 2023–24 seasons.

The women's national volleyball team has won several medals. Women's volleyball clubs, namely VakıfBank S.K. , Fenerbahçe and Eczacıbaşı , have won numerous European championship titles and medals.

The traditional national sport of Turkey has been yağlı güreş ( oil wrestling ) since Ottoman times. Edirne Province has hosted the annual Kırkpınar oil wrestling tournament since 1361, making it the oldest continuously held sporting competition in the world.

The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency . Archived from the original on 18 June 2022 . Retrieved 19 May 2024 . ^ Howard 2016 , p. 24 ^ Sagona & Zimansky 2015 , p. 1 Howard 2016 , p. xv McMahon & Steadman 2012a , pp. 3–12 Matthews 2012 , p. 49 ^ Ahmed 2006 , p. 1576: "Turkey's diversity is derived from its central location near the world's earliest civilizations as well as a history replete with population movements and invasions.

The Hattite culture was prominent during the Bronze Age prior to 2000 BCE, but was replaced by the Indo-European Hittites who conquered Anatolia by the second millennium. Meanwhile, Turkish Thrace came to be dominated by another Indo-European group, the Thracians for whom the region is named." Steadman 2012 , p. 234: "By the time of the Old Assyrian Colony period in the early second millennium b.c.e . (see Michel, chapter 13 in this volume) the languages spoken on the plateau included Hattian, an indigenous Anatolian language, Hurrian (spoken in northern Syria), and Indo-European languages known as Luwian, Hittite, and Palaic" Michel 2012 , p. 327 Melchert 2012 , p. 713 Howard 2016 , p. 26 ^ Howard 2016 , p. 29: "The sudden disappearance of the Persian Empire and the conquest of virtually the entire Middle Eastern world from the Nile to the Indus by Alexander the Great caused tremendous political and cultural upheaval. statesmen throughout the conquered regions attempted to implement a policy of Hellenization. For indigenous elites, this amounted to the forced assimilation of native religion and culture to Greek models. It met resistance in Anatolia as elsewhere, especially from priests and others who controlled temple wealth." Ahmed 2006 , p. 1576: "Subsequently, hellenization of the elites transformed Anatolia into a largely Greek-speaking region" McMahon & Steadman 2012a , p. 5 McMahon 2012 , p. 16 Sams 2012 , p. 617 Kaldellis 2024 , p. 26 ^ Davison 1990 , pp. 3–4: "So the Seljuk sultanate was a successor state ruling part of the medieval Greek empire, and within it the process of Turkification of a previously Hellenized Anatolian population continued. That population must already have been of very mixed ancestry, deriving from ancient Hittite, Phrygian, Cappadocian, and other civilizations as well as Roman and Greek." Howard 2016 , pp. 33–44 ^ a b Howard 2016 , pp. 38–39 ^ Howard 2016 , p. 45 Somel 2010 , p. xcvii ^ Hanioğlu 2012 , pp. 15–25 Kayalı 2012 , pp. 26–28 Davison 1990 , pp. 115–116 ^ Kaser 2011 , p. 336: "The emerging Christian nation states justified the prosecution of their Muslims by arguing that they were their former "suppressors".

The historical balance: between about 1820 and 1920, millions of Muslim casualties and refugees back to the remaining Ottoman Empire had to be registered; estimations speak about 5 million casualties and the same number of displaced persons" Fábos 2005 , p. 437: "Muslims had been the majority in Anatolia, the Crimea, the Balkans, and the Caucasus and a plurality in southern Russia and sections of Romania. Most of these lands were within or contiguous with the Ottoman Empire.

By 1923, 'only Anatolia, eastern Thrace, and a section of the southeastern Caucasus remained to the Muslim land Millions of Muslims, most of them Turks, had died; millions more had fled to what is today Turkey. Between 1821 and 1922, more than five million Muslims were driven from their lands. Five and one-half million Muslims died, some of them killed in wars, others perishing as refugees from starvation and disease' (McCarthy 1995, 1).

Since people in the Ottoman Empire were classified by religion, Turks, Albanians, Bosnians, and all other Muslim groups were recognized—and recognized themselves—simply as Muslims. Hence, their persecution and forced migration is of central importance to an analysis of 'Muslim migration.'" Schayegh, Cyrus (2024). "A Late/Post-Imperial Region of Difference: The Ottoman Empire and its Successor Polities in Southeastern Europe, Turkey, and the Arab East, c. 1850s–1940s". Journal of World History . 35 (4): 579– 622. doi : 10.1353/jwh.2024.a943172 . ISSN 1527-8050 . Between 1821 and the 1919–1922 Turko-Greek War, about five and a half million Muslims died of religious-ethnic war-related causes, including disease and hunger during forced migration, in southeastern Europe and the Crimea and Caucasus. Karpat 2001 , p. 343: "The main migrations started from Crimea in 1856 and were followed by those from the Caucasus and the Balkans in 1862 to 1878 and 1912 to 1916. These have continued to our day.

The quantitative indicators cited in various sources show that during this period a total of about 7 million migrants from Crimea, the Caucasus, the Balkans, and the Mediterranean islands settled in Anatolia. These immigrants were overwhelmingly Muslim, except for a number of Jews who left their homes in the Balkans and Russia in order to live in the Ottoman lands.

By the end of the century the immigrants and their descendants constituted some 30 to 40 percent of the total population of Anatolia, and in some western areas their percentage was even higher.

The immigrants called themselves Muslims rather than Turks, although most of those from Bulgaria, Macedonia, and eastern Serbia descended from the Turkish Anatolian stock who settled in the Balkans in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries." Karpat 2004 , pp. 5–6: "Migration was a major force in the social and cultural reconstruction of the Ottoman state in the nineteenth century.

While some seven to nine million, mostly Muslim, refugees from lost territories in the Caucasus, Crimea, Balkans and Mediterranean islands migrated to Anatolia and Eastern Thrace, during the last quarter of the nineteenth and the early part of the twentieth centuries " Pekesen 2012 : "The immigration had far-reaching social and political consequences for the Ottoman Empire and Turkey. Between 1821 and 1922, some 5.3 million Muslims migrated to the Empire.50 It is estimated that in 1923, the year the republic of Turkey was founded, about 25 per cent of the population came from immigrant families.51" Biondich 2011 , p. 93: "The road from Berlin to Lausanne was littered with millions of casualties.

In the period between 1878 and 1912, as many as two million Muslims emigrated voluntarily or involuntarily from the Balkans.

When one adds those who were killed or expelled between 1912 and 1923, the number of Muslim casualties from the Balkan far exceeds three million.

By 1923 fewer than one million remained in the Balkans" Armour 2012 , p. 213: "To top it all, the Empire was host to a steady stream of Muslim refugees. Russia between 1854 and 1876 expelled 1.4 million Crimean Tartars, and in the mid-1860s another 600,000 Circassians from the Caucasus. Their arrival produced further economic dislocation and expense." Bosma, Lucassen & Oostindie 2012a , p. 17: "In total, many millions of Turks (or, more precisely, Muslim immigrants, including some from the Caucasus) were involved in this 'repatriation' – sometimes more than once in a lifetime – the last stage of which may have been the immigration of seven hundred thousand Turks from Bulgaria between 1940 and 1990. Most of these immigrants settled in urban north-western Anatolia. Today between a third and a quarter of the Republic's population are descendants of these Muslim immigrants, known as Muhacir or Göçmen" ^ Tatz, Colin; Higgins, Winton (2016).

The Magnitude of Genocide . ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-4408-3161-4 . ^ Schaller, Dominik J.; Zimmerer, Jürgen (2008). "Late Ottoman genocides: the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire and Young Turkish population and extermination policies – introduction". Journal of Genocide Research . 10 (1): 7– 14. doi : 10.1080/14623520801950820 . ISSN 1462-3528 . S2CID 71515470 . ^ Morris, Benny; Ze'evi, Dror (2021).

The Thirty-Year Genocide - Turkey's Destruction of Its Christian Minorities, 1894–1924 . Harvard University Press . ISBN 978-0-674-25143-4 . ^ Pamuk 2012 , p. 50 Kayali 2008 , p. 112 ^ Birben, Üstüner (2019). "The Effectiveness of Protected Areas in Biodiversity Conservation: The Case of Turkey" . CERNE . 25 (4): 424– 438. doi : 10.1590/01047760201925042644 . ISSN 0104-7760 . Turkey has 3 out of the 36 biodiversity hotspots on Earth: the Mediterranean, Caucasus, and Irano-Anatolian hotspots Ahmed 2006 , pp. 1575–1576 World Bank Türkiye - Country Climate and Development Report 2022 , p. 7 ^ Atun, Rifat (2015). "Transforming Turkey's Health System — Lessons for Universal Coverage". New England Journal of Medicine . 373 (14): 1285– 1289. doi : 10.1056/NEJMp1410433 . PMID 26422719 . OECD Taking stock of education reforms for access and quality in Türkiye 2023 , p. 35 World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) 2024 , p. 22 ^ Berg, Miriam (2023). Turkish Drama Serials: The Importance and Influence of a Globally Popular Television Phenomenon . University of Exeter Press. pp. 1– 2. ISBN 978-1-80413-043-8 . ^ Agoston & Masters 2009 , p. 574 ^ Howard 2016 , p. 31 ^ a b c Everett-Heath 2020 , Türkiye (Turkey) ^ Golden 2021 , p. 30 ^ Clauson 1972 , pp. 542–543 ^ Golden 2021 , pp. 6–7 ^ Golden 2021 , pp. 9, 16 ^ Moravcsik, Gyula, ed. (1967). Constantine Porphyrogenitus: De Administrando Imperio . Translated by R.J.H. Jenkins (New, revised ed.). Washington, D.C.: Dumbarton Oaks Center for Byzantine Studies. p. 65. ISBN 978-0-88402-021-9 – via Google Books. Patzinakia, the Pecheneg realm, stretches west as far as the Siret River (or even the Eastern Carpathian Mountains), and is four days distant from Tourkia . ^ Findley 2005 , p. 51 ^ Golden 2021 , pp. 2–3 ^ Everett-Heath 2020 , Turkestan, Central Asia, Kazakhstan ^ Gray 2003 , Turkye, (Turkeye) Turkey; Book of the Duchess, The; Map 1; Map 3. ^ "Turkey" . Oxford English Dictionary (online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ Hertslet, Edward (1875). "General treaty between Great Britain, Austria, France, Prussia, Russia, Sardinia and Turkey, signed at Paris on 30th March 1856".

The Map of Europe by Treaty showing the various political and territorial changes which have taken place since the general peace of 1814, with numerous maps and notes . Vol. 2. Butterworth. pp. 1250– 1265. Protocols of conferences held at Paris relative to the general Treaty of Peace. Presented to both Houses of Parliament by command of Her Majesty, 1856 . London: Harrison and Sons. 1856 – via the Internet Archive. Hertslet, Edward (1891). "Treaty between Great Britain, Austria-Hungary, France, Germany, Italy, Russia, and Turkey, for the Settlement of Affairs in the East, Signed at Berlin, 13 July 1878 (Translation)" .

The Map of Europe by Treaty; which have taken place since the general peace of 1814. With numerous maps and notes . Vol. IV (1875–1891) (First ed.). Her Majesty's Stationery Office . pp. 2759– 2798 – via the Internet Archive . "Treaty Between Great Britain, Austria-Hungary, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and Turkey. (Berlin). July 13, 1878" . sourcebooks.fordham.edu . Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 9 May 2023 . ^ Ryan Gingeras (2019). Eternal Dawn: Turkey in the Age of Atatürk . p. 86. ^ Cevdet Küçük (2012). "Türkiye" . TDV Encyclopedia of Islam, Vol. 41 (Tevekkül – Tüsterî) (in Turkish). Istanbul: Presidency of Religious Affairs , Centre for Islamic Studies. p. 567. ISBN 978-975-389-713-6 . ^ "Marka Olarak 'Türkiye' İbaresinin Kullanımı (Presidential Circular No. 2021/24 on the Use of the Term "Türkiye" as a Brand)" (PDF) . Resmî Gazete (Official Gazette of the Republic of Türkiye) . 4 December 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 May 2022 . Retrieved 11 April 2022 . ^ Soylu, Ragip (17 January 2022). "Turkey to register its new name Türkiye to UN in coming weeks" . Middle East Eye . Archived from the original on 6 June 2022 . Retrieved 11 April 2022 . ^ "UN to use 'Türkiye' instead of 'Turkey' after Ankara's request" . TRT World . 2 June 2022. Archived from the original on 2 June 2022 . Retrieved 3 June 2022 . ^ Wertheimer, Tiffany (2 June 2022). "Turkey changes its name in rebranding bid" . BBC News Online . Archived from the original on 2 June 2022 . Retrieved 2 June 2022 . ^ "The World's First Temple" . Archaeology magazine . November–December 2008. p. 23. Archived from the original on 29 March 2012 . Retrieved 25 July 2012 . ^ a b Howard 2016 , p. 24 ^ Casson, Lionel (1977). "The Thracians" (PDF) .

The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin . 35 (1): 2– 6. doi : 10.2307/3258667 . JSTOR 3258667 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 May 2019. ^ Bellwood 2022 , p. 224 ^ a b c d Howard 2016 , p. 25 ^ a b Bellwood 2022 , p. 229 ^ Kılınç, Gülşah Merve; et al. (2016). "The Demographic Development of the First Farmers in Anatolia" . Current Biology . 26 (19): 2659– 2666. Bibcode : 2016CBio...26.2659K . doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2016.07.057 . PMC 5069350 . PMID 27498567 . ^ Lipson, Mark; et al. (2017). "Parallel palaeogenomic transects reveal complex genetic history of early European farmers" . Nature . 551 (7680): 368– 372. Bibcode : 2017Natur.551..368L . doi : 10.1038/nature24476 . ISSN 0028-0836 . PMC 5973800 . PMID 29144465 . ^ a b c d e Howard 2016 , p. 26 ^ a b c Steadman 2012 , p. 234 ^ Michel 2012 , p. 327 ^ Sagona & Zimansky 2015 , p. 246 ^ a b Beckman 2012 , p. 522 ^ Heggarty, Paul (2021). "Cognacy Databases and Phylogenetic Research on Indo-European" . Annual Review of Linguistics . 7 : 371– 394. doi : 10.1146/annurev-linguistics-011619-030507 . ^ Bellwood 2022 , p. 242 ^ Melchert 2012 , p. 713 ^ Howard 2016 , pp. 26–27 ^ a b Ahmed 2006 , p. 1576 ^ Jablonka 2012 , pp. 724–726 ^ McMahon 2012 , p. 17 ^ Denisyuk, Yulia (29 October 2023). "Photo story: tombs, turquoise seas and trekking along Turkey's Lycian Way" . National Geographic . National Geographic Traveller. ^ a b c d e f Howard 2016 , p. 27 ^ Yakubovich 2012 , p. 538 ^ Zimansky 2012 , p. 552 ^ a b c d e f Howard 2016 , p. 28 ^ a b Bryce 2012 , pp. 369–370: "The only clear evidence we have for significant Mycenaean settlement anywhere in the Near Eastern region is at Miletus on the southwestern Anatolian coast, at the mouth of the Maeander River, and at the site now called Müsgebi " ^ a b "Anatolia – Greek colonies on the Anatolian coasts, c. 1180–547 bce" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived from the original on 21 March 2023 . Retrieved 2 February 2024 .

Before the Greek migrations that followed the end of the Bronze Age (c. 1200 BCE), probably the only Greek-speaking communities on the west coast of Anatolia were Mycenaean settlements at Iasus and Müskebi on the Halicarnassus peninsula and walled Mycenaean colonies at Miletus and Colophon. ^ Harl 2012 , p. 760: "Greek cities on the shores of Asia Minor and on the Aegean islands were the nexus of trade and cultural exchange in the early Greek world, so Archaic Greek civilization was to a great extent the product of the Greek cities of Asia Minor." ^ Harl 2012 , pp. 753–756 ^ Greaves 2012 , p. 505 ^ Harl 2012 , p. 753 ^ Harl 2012 , pp. 753–754 ^ Mark Cartwright. "Celsus Library" . World History Encyclopedia . Archived from the original on 28 March 2024 . Retrieved 2 February 2017 . ^ "The Temple of Artemis at Ephesus: The Un-Greek Temple and Wonder" . World History Encyclopedia . Archived from the original on 28 March 2024 . Retrieved 17 February 2017 . ^ McMahon & Steadman 2012a , p. 5 ^ McMahon 2012 , p. 16 ^ Sams 2012 , p. 617 ^ Howard 2016 , p. 29: "The sudden disappearance of the Persian Empire and the conquest of virtually the entire Middle Eastern world from the Nile to the Indus by Alexander the Great caused tremendous political and cultural upheaval. statesmen throughout the conquered regions attempted to implement a policy of Hellenization. For indigenous elites, this amounted to the forced assimilation of native religion and culture to Greek models. It met resistance in Anatolia as elsewhere, especially from priests and others who controlled temple wealth." ^ Howard 2016 , pp. 28–29 ^ Mitchell 1995 , pp. 3–4 ^ Howard 2016 , p. 29 ^ Hoyos 2019 , pp. 35–37 ^ Hoyos 2019 , pp. 62, 83, 115 ^ a b Howard 2016 , p. 30 ^ "Hagia Sophia" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on 29 April 2021 . Retrieved 2 February 2017 . ^ a b Horrocks 2008 , pp. 778–779: "Thus the majority of traditional 'Greek' lands, including the coastal areas of Asia Minor, remained essentially Greek-speaking, despite the superimposition of Latin and the later Slavic incursions into the Balkans during the sixth and seventh centuries. Even on the Anatolian plateau, where Hellenic culture had come only with Alexander's conquests, both the extremely heterogeneous indigenous populations and immigrant groups (including Celts, Goths, Jews, and Persians) had become heavily Hellenized, as the steady decline in epigraphic evidence for the native languages and the great mass of public and private inscriptions in Greek demonstrate. Though the disappearance of these languages from the written record did not entail their immediate abandonment as spoken languages " ^ van den Hout 2011 , p. 1 ^ a b Uchiyama, Junzo; et al. (2020). "Populations dynamics in Northern Eurasian forests: a long-term perspective from Northeast Asia" . Evolutionary Human Sciences . 2 e16. doi : 10.1017/ehs.2020.11 . PMC 10427466 . PMID 37588381 . Most linguists and historians agree that Proto-Turkic, the common ancestor of all ancient and contemporary Turkic languages, must have been spoken somewhere in Central-East Asia This article incorporates text from this source, which is available under the CC BY 4.0 license. ^ Lee 2023 , p. 4: "It should also be noted that even the early Turkic peoples, including the Tiele and the Türks, were made up of heterogeneous elements. Importantly, DNA studies demonstrate that the expansion process of the Turkic peoples involved the Turkicization of various non-Turkic-speaking groups.

The "Turks" intermixed with and Turkicized various indigenous groups across Eurasia: Uralic hunter-gatherers in northern Eurasia; Mongolic nomads in Mongolia; Indo-European-speaking nomads and sedentary populations in Xinjiang, Transoxiana, Iran, Kazakhstan, and South Siberia; and Indo-European elements (the Byzantine subjects, among others) in Anatolia and the Balkans.11" Findley 2005 , p. 18: "Moreover, Turks do not all physically look alike. They never did.

The Turks of Turkey are famous for their range of physical types. Given the Turks' ancient Inner Asian origins, it is easy to imagine that they once presented a uniform Mongoloid appearance. Such traits seem to be more characteristic in the eastern Turkic world; however, uniformity of type can never have prevailed there either. Archeological evidence indicates that Indo-Europeans, or certainly Europoid physical types, inhabited the oases of the Tarim basin and even parts of Mongolia in ancient times.

In the Tarim basin, persistence of these former inhabitants' genes among the modern Uyghurs is both observable and scientifically demonstrable.32 Early Chinese sources describe the Kirghiz as blue-eyed and blond or red-haired.

The genesis of Turkic ethnic groups from earliest times occurred in confederations of diverse peoples.

As if to prove the point, the earliest surviving texts in Turkic languages are studded with terms from other languages." Golden, Peter B. (2018). "The Ethnogonic Tales of the Türks".

The Medieval History Journal . 21 (2): 291– 327. doi : 10.1177/0971945818775373 . ISSN 0971-9458 . S2CID 166026934 . "Some DNA tests point to the Iranian connections of the Ashina and Ashide,133 highlighting further that the Turks as a whole 'were made up of heterogeneous and somatically dissimilar populations'.134 Geographically, the accounts cover the regions of Inner Mongolia, Gansu, Xinjiang, the Yenisei zone and the Altay, regions with Turkic, Indo-European (Iranian and Tokharian), Yeniseic, Uralic and other populations. Wusun elements, like most steppe polities of an ethno-linguistic mix, may have also played a substratal role." Lee, Joo-Yup; Kuang, Shuntu (2017). "A Comparative Analysis of Chinese Historical Sources and Y-DNA Studies with Regard to the Early and Medieval Turkic Peoples" . Inner Asia . 19 (2): 197– 239. doi : 10.1163/22105018-12340089 . ISSN 2210-5018 . Both Chinese histories and modern dna studies indicate that the early and medieval Turkic peoples were made up of heterogeneous populations ^ a b c d Lee 2023 , p. 84 ^ a b c Howard 2016 , p. 34 ^ Lee 2023 , p. 90 ^ Lee 2023 , p. 91 ^ Peacock 2015 , p. 9 ^ Ahmed 2006 , p. 1576: "Subsequently, hellenization of the elites transformed Anatolia into a largely Greek-speaking region" ^ a b Davison 1990 , pp. 3–4: "So the Seljuk sultanate was a successor state ruling part of the medieval Greek empire, and within it the process of Turkification of a previously Hellenized Anatolian population continued. That population must already have been of very mixed ancestry, deriving from ancient Hittite, Phrygian, Cappadocian, and other civilizations as well as Roman and Greek." ^ Howard 2016 , pp. 34–36 ^ Howard 2016 , p. 36 ^ Findley 2005 , pp. 71–73, 225 ^ Howard 2016 , pp. 36–38 ^ Howard 2016 , p. 33 ^ Leiser 2010 , p. 303 ^ Davison 1990 , p. 4 ^ Howard 2016 , pp. 37–39 ^ Howard 2016 , p. 35 ^ Howard 2016 , p. 38 ^ Leiser 2010 , pp. 308–310 ^ Leiser 2010 , pp. 309–310 ^ Fleet 2010 , pp. 313–314 ^ a b Lee 2023 , p. 94 ^ Howard 2016 , pp. 40–41 ^ Howard 2016 , p. 43 ^ a b Howard 2016 , p. 45 ^ Somel 2010 , p. xcvii ^ Agoston & Masters 2009 , p. 302 ^ Hanioğlu 2012 , p. 19 ^ Özbudun 2012 , p. 194 ^ Simons, Marlise (22 August 1993). "Center of Ottoman Power" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 12 July 2018 . Retrieved 4 June 2009 . ^ "Dolmabahce Palace" . dolmabahcepalace.com . Archived from the original on 16 March 2016 . Retrieved 4 August 2014 . ^ Niall Ferguson (2 January 2008). "An Ottoman warning for indebted America" . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 25 January 2014 . Retrieved 5 September 2016 . ^ "Collapse of the Ottoman Empire, 1918–1920" . nzhistory.net.nz . Archived from the original on 19 December 2015 . Retrieved 9 August 2014 . ^ Isa Blumi (2013). Ottoman Refugees, 1878–1939: Migration in a Post-Imperial World . Bloomsbury Academic. ISBN 978-1-4725-1536-0 . ^ Kaser 2011 , p. 336 ^ a b Fábos 2005 , p. 437 ^ Pekesen 2012 Kaser 2011 , p. 336 Karpat 2001 , p. 343 Karpat 2004 , pp. 5–6 ^ Howard 2016 , p. 70 ^ Karpat 2001 , p. 343 ^ Armour 2012 , p. 213 ^ Mojzes, Paul (November 2013). "Ethnic cleansing in the Balkans, why did it happen and could it happen again" (PDF) . Cicero Foundation . Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 February 2024 . Retrieved 23 February 2024 . ^ Levene 2015 , pp. 430–431 ^ Roderic H. Davison ; Review "From Paris to Sèvres: The Partition of the Ottoman Empire at the Peace Conference of 1919–1920" by Paul C. Helmreich in Slavic Review , Vol. 34, No. 1 (March 1975), pp. 186–187 ^ a b "Armenian Genocide" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on 1 November 2020 . Retrieved 4 January 2023 . ^ "Fact Sheet: Armenian Genocide" . University of Michigan. Archived from the original on 18 August 2010 . Retrieved 15 July 2010 . ^ Freedman, Jeri (2009).

The Armenian genocide (1st ed.). Rosen Pub. Group. ISBN 978-1-4042-1825-3 . Archived from the original on 14 January 2023 – via Google Books. ^ Totten, Samuel, Paul Robert Bartrop, Steven L. Jacobs (eds.) Dictionary of Genocide . Greenwood Publishing Group, 2008, p. 19. ISBN 978-0-313-34642-2 . ^ Tatz, Colin; Higgins, Winton (2016).

The Magnitude of Genocide . ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-4408-3161-4 . ^ "Erdogan: Turkey will 'never accept' genocide charges" . Deutsche Welle . Archived from the original on 7 February 2018 . Retrieved 7 February 2018 . ^ Raziye Akkoç (15 October 2015). "ECHR: Why Turkey won't talk about the Armenian genocide" .

The Daily Telegraph . Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 28 May 2016 . ^ Donald Bloxham (2005).

The Great Game of Genocide: Imperialism, Nationalism, And the Destruction of the Ottoman Armenians . Oxford University Press. p. 150. ISBN 978-0-19-927356-0 – via Google Books. ^ Levene, Mark (Winter 1998). "Creating a Modern 'Zone of Genocide': The Impact of Nation- and State-Formation on Eastern Anatolia, 1878–1923". Holocaust and Genocide Studies . 12 (3): 393– 433. doi : 10.1093/hgs/12.3.393 . ISSN 1476-7937 . ^ Ferguson, Niall (2007).

The War of the World: Twentieth-Century Conflict and the Descent of the West . Penguin Group. p. 180. ISBN 978-0-14-311239-6 . ^ a b "The Treaty of Sèvres, 1920" . Harold B. Library, Brigham Young University . Archived from the original on 12 November 2017 . Retrieved 18 April 2020 . ^ a b c Mango, Andrew (2000). Atatürk: The Biography of the Founder of Modern Turkey . Overlook. p. lxxviii. ISBN 978-1-58567-011-6 . ^ Robert H. Hewsen. Armenia: A Historical Atlas , p. 237. ISBN 0-226-33228-4 ^ Psomiades, Harry J. (2000).

The Eastern Question, the Last Phase: a study in Greek-Turkish diplomacy . Pella. pp. 27– 38. ISBN 0-918618-79-7 . ^ Macfie, A. L. (1979). "The Chanak affair (September–October 1922)". Balkan Studies . 20 (2): 309– 41. ^ Heper, Metin; Criss, Nur Bilge (2009). Historical Dictionary of Turkey . Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-6281-4 . Archived from the original on 28 March 2024 – via Google Books. ^ Axiarlis, Evangelia (2014). Political Islam and the Secular State in Turkey: Democracy, Reform and the Justice and Development Party . I.B. Tauris. p. 11. ^ Clogg, Richard (2002). A Concise History of Greece . Cambridge University Press. p. 101. ISBN 978-0-521-00479-4 . Archived from the original on 28 March 2024 – via Google Books. ^ Gerhard Bowering; Patricia Crone; Wadad Kadi; Devin J. Stewart; Muhammad Qasim Zaman; Mahan Mirza (2012).

The Princeton Encyclopedia of Islamic Political Thought . Princeton University Press. p. 49. ISBN 978-1-4008-3855-4 – via Google Books.

Following the revolution, Mustafa Kemal became an important figure in the military ranks of the Ottoman Committee of Union and Progress (CUP) as a protégé Although the sultanate had already been abolished in November 1922, the republic was founded in October 1923. ambitious reform programme aimed at the creation of a modern, secular state and the construction of a new identity for its citizens. ^ Heper 2012 , p. 146 ^ Hassan, Mona (2017). Longing for the Lost Caliphate: A Transregional History . Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-8371-4 . Archived from the original on 17 January 2023 – via Google Books. ^ Çağaptay, Soner (2002). "Reconfiguring the Turkish nation in the 1930s". Nationalism and Ethnic Politics . 8 (2): 67– 82. doi : 10.1080/13537110208428662 . ISSN 1353-7113 . S2CID 143855822 . ^ Dodd 2012 , p. 55 ^ MacFie, A.L. (1989). "The Turkish straits in the second world war, 1939–45". Middle Eastern Studies . 25 (2): 238– 248. doi : 10.1080/00263208908700778 . ISSN 0026-3206 . ^ "Growth in United Nations membership (1945–2005)" . United Nations. 3 July 2006. Archived from the original on 17 January 2016 . Retrieved 30 October 2006 . ^ Sayarı 2012 , p. 1 ^ Karaosmanoğlu 2012 , p. 149 ^ Hale 2023 , p. xiii ^ a b "PKK" . mfa.gov.tr . Republic of Türkiye, Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 25 March 2023 . Retrieved 31 December 2022 . ^ "U.S. Department of State – Bureau of Counterterrorism: Foreign Terrorist Organizations" . U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 16 December 2020 . Retrieved 18 April 2020 . ^ "Council of the European Union: Council Decision (CFSP) 2019/1341 of 8 August 2019 updating the list of persons, groups and entities subject to Articles 2, 3 and 4 of Common Position 2001/931/CFSP on the application of specific measures to combat terrorism" . Official Journal of the European Union. Archived from the original on 18 December 2020 . Retrieved 18 April 2020 . ^ "Chronology of Turkey-EU relations" . Turkish Secretariat of European Union Affairs. Archived from the original on 15 May 2007 . Retrieved 30 October 2006 . ^ Dodd 2012 , pp. 59–63 ^ Yılmaz 2012 , p. 360 ^ Bartolomiej Kaminski; Francis Ng (1 May 2006). "Turkey's evolving trade integration into Pan-European markets" (PDF) . World Bank. p. 3. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2007 . Retrieved 27 December 2006 . ^ "Recep Tayyip Erdogan wins Turkish presidential election" . BBC News . 10 August 2014. Archived from the original on 25 November 2022 . Retrieved 25 November 2022 . ^ Cunningham, Erin; Sly, Liz; Karatas, Zeynep (16 July 2016). "Turkey rounds up thousands of suspected participants in coup attempt" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 18 July 2016 . Retrieved 17 July 2016 . ^ "Adalet Bakanı Yılmaz Tunç, 15 Temmuz'u Değerlendirdi" . Türkiye Cumhuriyeti Adalet Bakanlığı . 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 30 September 2024 . ^ Karakaş, İsmet; Sarica, Abdullah (12 July 2024). "Adalet Bakanı Tunç: Demokrasiye müdahale olmasın diye hem yargımız hem yasamamız gerekli tedbirleri almaya devam ediyor" . Anadolu Agency . ^ a b "Here's why Turkish opposition parties are contesting the referendum results" . Washington Post . 16 April 2017 . Retrieved 17 April 2017 . ^ "Kurds in Turkey back PKK's response to jailed leader's peace call" . Gazete Duvar . 3 April 2025 . Retrieved 4 March 2025 . ^ "UN Demographic Yearbook" (PDF) . Retrieved 1 November 2010 . ^ a b Kuzucuoğlu 2019 , p. 7 ^ Waskey 2005 , p. 922: "Thrace, its European area, is about the size of VERMONT at 9,412 square mi (24,378 square km). Its Asian area (Asia Minor) is called Anatolia and covers 291,971 square mi (756,202 square km)" Akbulut et al. 2022 , p. 853: "About 97% of the country is in Asia Minor (Anatolia) and 3% in Europe (Thrace)" "Turkey (Turkiye) | Geography - note" .

The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency . Archived from the original on 18 June 2022 . Retrieved 31 May 2024 . : "the 97% of the country in Asia is referred to as Anatolia" "Anatolia" . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 29 February 2024 . : "Anatolia, the peninsula of land that today constitutes the Asian portion of Turkey" Khatchadourian 2012 , p. 467 Howard 2016 , p. 7 Helen Chapin Metz, ed. (1995). "Turkey: A Country Study | Geography" . Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office; Library of Congress . Retrieved 31 May 2024 . : "The Asian part of the country is known by a variety of names--Asia Minor, Asiatic Turkey, the Anatolian Plateau, and Anatolia (Anadolu)" ^ Merriam-Webster, Inc 1997 , p. 46: "Anatolia: The part of Turkey in Asia equivalent to the peninsula of Asia Minor up to indefinite line on E from Gulf of Iskenderun to Black Sea comprising about three fifths of Turkey's provinces" ^ Helen Chapin Metz, ed. (1995). "Turkey: A Country Study | Geography" . Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office; Library of Congress . Retrieved 31 May 2024 . ^ a b c d Waskey 2005 , p. 922 ^ Helen Chapin Metz, ed. (1995). "Turkey: A Country Study | External Boundaries" . Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office; Library of Congress . Retrieved 31 May 2024 . ^ "Geography of Turkey" . Turkish Ministry of Tourism. 2005 . Retrieved 13 December 2006 . ^ Sianko, Ilya; et al. (2020). "A practical probabilistic earthquake hazard analysis tool: Case study Marmara region" . Bulletin of Earthquake Engineering . 18 (6): 2523– 2555. Bibcode : 2020BuEE...18.2523S . doi : 10.1007/s10518-020-00793-4 . This article incorporates text from this source, which is available under the CC BY 4.0 license. ^ Khatchadourian 2012 , p. 467 ^ "Mount Ararat" . britannica.com . Retrieved 18 February 2015 . ^ "Lake Van" . britannica.com . Retrieved 18 February 2015 . ^ Ahmed 2006 , pp. 1575–1576 ^ ISMEP Guide Books 4 2014 , p. 8 ^ a b c d "Türkiye Overview" .

The World Bank . Archived from the original on 3 May 2024 . Retrieved 3 May 2024 . ^ Kuzucuoğlu, Çiner & Kazancı 2019a , p. 41 ^ Kuzucuoğlu, Şengör & Çiner 2019 , p. 33 ^ "Rising toll makes quake deadliest in Turkey's modern history" . Associated Press News . 14 February 2023. Archived from the original on 28 October 2023. ^ "Şili ve Türkiye: Binalar yaşatır, binalar öldürür" . T24 . 12 February 2023. Archived from the original on 18 August 2023. ^ "Profesör Mustafa Erdik: Türkiye'de imar barışı olmasaydı da çok şey değişmezdi" . Independent Türkçe . Archived from the original on 6 April 2024. ^ "Şili depremle mücadelede nasıl başarılı oldu?" . BBC News Türkçe . 29 August 2023. Archived from the original on 29 December 2023. ^ Kuzucuoğlu 2019 , pp. 7, 12 ^ a b Demir, Sertif; Guzel, Adnan (2024). "Revisiting policy and practices of sustainable development in Turkey". Environment, Development and Sustainability . 28 (4): 9115– 9137. Bibcode : 2026EDSus..28.9115D . doi : 10.1007/s10668-024-05346-2 . ISSN 1573-2975 . ^ a b c d e Birben, Üstüner (2019). "The Effectiveness of Protected Areas in Biodiversity Conservation: The Case of Turkey" . CERNE . 25 (4): 424– 438. doi : 10.1590/01047760201925042644 . ISSN 0104-7760 . This article incorporates text from this source, which is available under the CC BY 4.0 license. ^ a b c d Republic of Turkey The Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock 2019 , pp. 6–7 ^ Dönmez & Yerli 2018 , p. 397 ^ Kazancı & Kuzucuoğlu 2019 , p. 603 ^ "Milli Parklar" . T.C. Tarım ve Orman Bakanlığı Doğa Koruma ve Milli Parklar Genel Müdürlüğü . n.d . Retrieved 10 September 2025 . ^ "Korunan Alanlarda Ziyaretçi Rekoru" . T.C. Tarım ve Orman Bakanlığı . 4 February 2023 . Retrieved 10 September 2025 . ^ "Distribution of the Forest Areas" . Republic of Türkiye Ministry of Environment, Urbanization and Climate Change . n.d . Retrieved 9 September 2025 . ^ a b Taşoğlu, Enes; Öztürk, Muhammed Zeynel; Yazıcı, Öznur (2024). "High Resolution Köppen-Geiger Climate Zones of Türkiye" . International Journal of Climatology . 44 (14): 5248– 5265. Bibcode : 2024IJCli..44.5248T . doi : 10.1002/joc.8635 . ^ a b Selek, Bulent; Tuncok, Kaan; Selek, Zeliha (March 2018). "Changes in climate zones across Turkey". Journal of Water and Climate Change . 9 (1): 178– 195. doi : 10.2166/wcc.2017.121 . ISSN 2040-2244 . ProQuest 2021148526 . ^ Komuscu, Ali Umran (2022). "Dynamics of precipitation regions of Turkey: A clustering approach by K-means methodology in respect of climate variability" . Journal of Water and Climate Change . 13 (10): 3578– 3606. Bibcode : 2022JWCC...13.3578K . doi : 10.2166/wcc.2022.186 . ISSN 2040-2244 . This article incorporates text from this source, which is available under the CC BY 4.0 license. ^ Beck, Hylke E.; Zimmermann, Niklaus E.; McVicar, Tim R.; Vergopolan, Noemi; Berg, Alexis; Wood, Eric F. (2018). "Present and future Köppen-Geiger climate classification maps at 1-km resolution" . Scientific Data . 5 180214. Bibcode : 2018NatSD...580214B . doi : 10.1038/sdata.2018.214 . PMC 6207062 . PMID 30375988 . This article incorporates text from this source, which is available under the CC BY 4.0 license. ^ Turkes 2020 , pp. 105–107 ^ a b c d World Bank Türkiye - Country Climate and Development Report 2022 , p. 7 ^ Turunçoğlu et al. 2018 , p. 25 ^ World Bank Türkiye - Country Climate and Development Report 2022 , p. 28: "The first prerequisite for reducing vulnerability and impacts of climate change is rapid, robust, and inclusive growth" ^ a b World Bank Türkiye - Country Climate and Development Report 2022 , p. 6 ^ a b c OECD 2025 , p. 9 ^ World Bank Türkiye - Country Climate and Development Report 2022 , pp. 9, 51 ^ "CIA World Factbook: Turkey" . Cia.gov. Archived from the original on 10 January 2021 . Retrieved 29 August 2011 . ^ Borsuk, Imren; Levin, Paul T. (3 April 2021). "Social coexistence and violence during Turkey's authoritarian transition" . Southeast European and Black Sea Studies . 21 (2). Informa UK Limited: 175– 187. doi : 10.1080/14683857.2021.1909292 . ISSN 1468-3857 . S2CID 233594832 . ^ Sarfati, Yusuf (June 2025). "Turkey's Slide to Full-scale Authoritarianism? Protests, Opposition, and Resistance". Political Insight . 16 (2): 13– 15. doi : 10.1177/20419058251351473 . ^ "Turkey: Government" . globaledge.msu.edu . Retrieved 11 April 2022 . ^ "Duties and Powers" . global.tbmm.gov.tr .

The Grand National Assembly of Turkey . Retrieved 12 April 2022 . ^ "Duties and Powers" . www.tccb.gov.tr . Presidency Of The Republic Of Turkey . Retrieved 11 April 2022 . ^ "Law on Constitutional Court" . www.anayasa.gov.tr . Retrieved 12 April 2022 . ^ Karabulut 2022 , pp. 712–718 ^ "Turkish women celebrate 85th anniversary of suffrage" . Hürriyet Daily News . 5 December 2019. Archived from the original on 12 April 2022 . Retrieved 12 April 2022 . ^ "Erdogan wins Turkey's election" . CNN. 28 May 2023. Archived from the original on 28 May 2023 . Retrieved 28 May 2023 . ^ "Erdogan wins five more years as Turkey's president" . BBC. 28 May 2023. Archived from the original on 28 May 2023 . Retrieved 28 May 2023 . ^ "AK Party, MHP announce draft for Turkey's new election law" . Daily Sabah. 14 March 2022. Archived from the original on 21 March 2022 . Retrieved 22 March 2022 . ^ Yılmaz, Hakan. "Conservatism in Turkey" (PDF) . European Stability Initiative . Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 March 2022 . Retrieved 12 April 2022 . ^ Kate Fleet; Suraiya Faroqhi; Reşat Kasaba (2008).

The Cambridge History of Turkey . Cambridge University Press. pp. 357– 358. ISBN 978-0-521-62096-3 . Archived from the original on 17 January 2023 – via Google Books. ^ "Euro court backs Turkey Islamist ban" . BBC. 31 July 2001. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018 . Retrieved 14 December 2006 . ^ "Turkey's Kurd party ban criticized" . BBC. 14 March 2003. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018 . Retrieved 14 December 2006 . ^ " Turkish parliament moves to strip lawmakers' immunity from prosecution Archived 21 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine ". Deutsche Welle . 20 May 2016. ^ "Turkey Violated Pro-Kurdish MPs' Rights, European Court Rules" . Balkan Insight . 1 February 2022. Archived from the original on 11 November 2022 . Retrieved 11 November 2022 . ^ EU Commission 2023 , p. 4 ^ "No: 291, 8 November 2023, Press Release Regarding the European Commission 2023 Report on Türkiye" . Republic of Türkiye Ministry of Foreign Affairs . 8 November 2023. ^ Tarman, Z. Derya (2012). "Turkey" .

In Smits, Jan M. (ed.). Elgar Encyclopedia of Comparative Law (2nd ed.). Edward Elgar. p. 940. ISBN 978-1-84980-415-8 . Archived from the original on 6 April 2023 – via Google Books. ^ Tarman, Z. Derya (2012). "Turkey" .

In Smits, Jan M. (ed.). Elgar Encyclopedia of Comparative Law (2nd ed.). Edward Elgar. p. 941. ISBN 978-1-84980-415-8 . Archived from the original on 6 April 2023 – via Google Books. ^ "OSCE POLIS" . Archived from the original on 16 April 2024 . Retrieved 16 April 2024 . ^ "European Commission: Turkey 2015 report" (PDF) . European Commission . 10 November 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 August 2016 . Retrieved 6 July 2016 . ^ "European Parliament resolution of 14 April 2016 on the 2015 report on Turkey" . European Parliament . 14 April 2016. Archived from the original on 17 August 2016 . Retrieved 6 July 2016 . ^ "Turkey's institutions are failing to comply with good governance principles and combat corruption" . Transparency International . 7 April 2016. Archived from the original on 3 December 2019 . Retrieved 6 July 2016 . ^ Acharya 2014 , Emerging Powers ^ Oğuzlu & Dal 2016 ^ Giedraityte, Ieva (2023). "Beyond hierarchy: Regional orders in the twenty-first century". International Politics . doi : 10.1057/s41311-023-00511-2 . ISSN 1740-3898 . ^ Mesquita, Rafael; Chien, Jia Huei (2021). "Do regional powers prioritise their regions? Comparing Brazil, South Africa and Turkey". Third World Quarterly . 42 (7): 1544– 1565. doi : 10.1080/01436597.2021.1898280 . ISSN 1360-2241 . ^ Bank & Karadag 2012 , p. 3 ^ Kardaş 2016 ^ Martin 2012 , p. 227 ^ a b Martin 2012 , p. 228 ^ Dodd 2012 , p. 56 ^ a b c Martin 2012 , pp. 234–235 ^ Martin 2012 , p. 229 ^ "Turkey's top diplomat attends first EU meeting in 5 years in bid to boost ties" . Reuters . 29 August 2024. ^ a b Martin 2012 , p. 230 ^ "About TURKSOY" . International Organization of Turkic Culture . Retrieved 23 September 2024 . ^ "Organization of Turkic States" . Organization of Turkic States . Archived from the original on 8 July 2024 . Retrieved 23 September 2024 . ^ "National Foreign Policy in the "Century Of Türkiye": A Synopsis" . Republic of Türkiye Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Retrieved 24 September 2024 . ^ a b "In Middle East, once improbable ententes set new tone" . Reuters . 19 May 2023 . Retrieved 24 September 2024 . ^ "Turkey heads to Arab League ministerial for first time in 13 years, source says" . Reuters . 9 September 2024 . Retrieved 24 September 2024 . ^ "Egypt's Sisi makes first presidential visit to Turkey in 12 years" . Reuters . 4 September 2024 . Retrieved 24 September 2024 . ^ Martin 2012 , p. 235 ^ Aaron Stein; Michelle Foley (26 January 2016). "The YPG-PKK connection" . Atlantic Council. Archived from the original on 31 December 2022 . Retrieved 31 December 2022 . ^ "Turkey takes full control of Syria's Afrin: military source" . reuters.com . Reuters. 24 March 2018. Archived from the original on 7 January 2023 . Retrieved 7 January 2023 . ^ "The YPG menace: Understanding PKK's Syria offshoot" . trtworld.com . TRT World. 25 May 2022. Archived from the original on 7 January 2023 . Retrieved 7 January 2023 . ^ Dana Taib Menmy (23 June 2020). "Fear and anger greets Turkish air strikes in northern Iraq" . Middle East Eye . Archived from the original on 18 March 2024 . Retrieved 18 March 2024 . 'Turkish incursions and air strikes on Iraqi territory have been a constant issue for the Iraqi foreign ministry since 2003, with no resolution in sight,' Sajad Jiyad, a political analyst based in Baghdad, told MEE. ^ Martin 2012 , p. 234 ^ "Israel and Turkey end rift over Gaza flotilla killings" . BBC News . BBC. 27 June 2016. Archived from the original on 5 May 2022 . Retrieved 27 June 2016 . ^ a b "Israeli-Turkish trade on life support as relations hit bottom" . Reuters . 28 May 2024 . Retrieved 24 September 2024 . ^ Gareth Jennings (24 November 2022). "Turkish future fighter comes together ahead of 'victory day' roll-out" . janes.com . Archived from the original on 17 February 2023 . Retrieved 4 December 2022 . ^ "Turkey's Domestic 5th Generation TF-X Fighter Jet Is On The Final Assembly Line" . overtdefense.com . 25 November 2022. Archived from the original on 4 December 2022 . Retrieved 4 December 2022 . ^ Joseph Trevithick (10 January 2023). "Unique Sensor Setup Emerges On Turkey's Stealthy New Fighter" . thedrive.com . Archived from the original on 14 March 2023 . Retrieved 12 January 2023 . ^ "Mission" . Republic of Türkiye Ministry of National Defence General Staff . Retrieved 29 September 2024 . ^ "İçişleri Bakanlığı Teşkilat Şeması" . Türkiye Cumhuriyeti İçişleri Bakanlığı . Retrieved 29 September 2024 . ^ "Recruiting Law" (PDF) . Türkiye Cumhuriyeti Millî Savunma Bakanlığı . Retrieved 29 September 2024 . ^ "New military service law approved" . Hürriyet Daily News . Ankara. 26 June 2019. ^ "EBCO: European Bureau for Conscientious Objection" . Ebco-beoc.eu. Archived from the original on 10 January 2016 . Retrieved 4 September 2010 . ^ The International Institute for Strategic Studies (2022).

The Military Balance . Routledge . ISBN 978-1-032-27900-8 . ISSN 0459-7222 . ^ Rossiter, Ash; Cannon, Brendon J. (2022). "Turkey's rise as a drone power: Trial by fire". Defense & Security Analysis . 38 (2): 210– 229. doi : 10.1080/14751798.2022.2068562 . ISSN 1475-1798 . ^ Fayet, Héloïse; Futter, Andrew; Kühn, Ulrich (2024). "Forum: Towards a European Nuclear Deterrent" . Survival . 66 (5): 67– 98. doi : 10.1080/00396338.2024.2403218 . ISSN 1468-2699 . ^ Kristensen, Hans M.; Korda, Matt (2021). "United States nuclear weapons, 2021" . Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists . 77 (1): 43– 63. Bibcode : 2021BuAtS..77a..43K . doi : 10.1080/00963402.2020.1859865 . ISSN 1938-3282 . ^ Baysal, Başar (2025). "Evaluating the advances and challenges in Turkey's defence industry: A comparative analysis". Southeast European and Black Sea Studies . 25 (1): 31– 52. doi : 10.1080/14683857.2025.2454722 . ISSN 1743-9639 . ^ "Türkiye's 4 defense firms included in world's top 100 list" . Anadolu Ajansı . 7 August 2023. ^ "Enter the EU Battle Groups" (PDF) . Chaillot Paper no. 97 . European Union Institute for Security Studies. February 2007. p. 88. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 18 February 2012 . ^ "Contribution of Turkish Armed Forces to Peace Support Operations" . tsk.tr . Turkish Armed Forces. Archived from the original on 19 February 2015 . Retrieved 3 August 2014 . ^ "Turkey finalizes military training base in Somalia" . hurriyetdailynews.com . 3 October 2016. Archived from the original on 6 April 2017 . Retrieved 5 April 2017 . ^ "Turkey trains Kurdish peshmerga forces in fight against Islamic State" . Reuters . 22 November 2014. Archived from the original on 23 April 2022 . Retrieved 5 April 2017 . ^ "Mapping the Turkish Military's Expanding Footprint" . Bloomberg . 7 March 2019 . Retrieved 17 March 2022 . ^ Larrabee, F. Stephen; Lesser, Ian O. (2003). Turkish foreign policy in an age of uncertainty . Rand Corporation. pp. 94 . ISBN 978-0-8330-3404-5 – via the Internet Archive. ^ "What is Turkey doing in Iraq?" . Hürriyet Daily News . 8 October 2016. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017 . Retrieved 5 April 2017 . ^ "Seeing shared threats, Turkey sets up military base in Qatar" . Reuters . 28 April 2016. Archived from the original on 8 February 2019 . Retrieved 2 July 2017 . ^ "Turkey to open its largest military base in Somalia" . TRT World. 30 September 2017. Archived from the original on 9 September 2022 . Retrieved 21 June 2018 . ^ Richmond, Oliver P. (1998). Mediating in Cyprus: The Cypriot Communities and the United Nations . Psychology Press. p. 260. ISBN 978-0-7146-4877-4 – via Google Books. ^ Uçar, Burcu Purtul (30 July 2017). "Kadıköy'de "Kıyafetime Karışma" eylemi" . Hürriyet . Archived from the original on 16 November 2022 . Retrieved 23 June 2024 . ^ Özbudun 2012 , p. 197 ^ a b Toprak 2012 , p. 222 ^ Mullen, Jethro; Cullinane, Susannah (4 June 2013). "What's driving unrest and protests in Turkey?" . CNN . Archived from the original on 14 October 2017 . Retrieved 6 June 2013 . ^ a b c "17th İstanbul LGBTI+ Pride Parade: Police Attack with Shields, Pepper Gas After Pride Parade Statement Read" . Bianet – Bagimsiz Iletisim Agi . ^ Ozsoy, Elif Ceylan (2021). "Decolonizing Decriminalization Analyses: Did the Ottomans Decriminalize Homosexuality in 1858?". Journal of Homosexuality . 68 (12): 1979– 2002. doi : 10.1080/00918369.2020.1715142 . hdl : 10871/120331 . ISSN 1540-3602 . PMID 32069182 . ^ Özbek 2019 , p. 34 ^ Birch, Nicholas (19 July 2008). "Was Ahmet Yildiz the victim of Turkey's first gay honour killing?" . Independent . Retrieved 8 May 2021 . ^ "Almost half of people in Turkey think that LGBT+ people should have equal rights, nine percent more than last year, according to a survey" . Retrieved 11 May 2010 . ^ "Perceptions of Gender Equality" . Retrieved 11 May 2010 . ^ "Turkey's LGBT community draws hope from Harvey Milk" . Al Monitor . 17 June 2016 . Retrieved 27 January 2022 . ^ Republic of Türkiye Ministry of Justice Human Rights Department 2024 , p. 1 ^ World Bank; OECD (24 January 2025). "Gross domestic product (GDP): In constant US$" . Our World in Data . Retrieved 5 June 2025 . ^ World Bank national accounts data, and OECD National Accounts data files (n.d.). "GDP (constant 2015 US$) - Turkiye" . World Bank . Retrieved 14 April 2025 . ^ Duttagupta, Rupa; Pazarbasioglu, Ceyla. "Miles to Go: Emerging markets must balance overcoming the pandemic, returning to more normal policies, and rebuilding their economies" . International Monetary Fund . Archived from the original on 5 May 2024 . Retrieved 5 May 2024 . ^ OECD 2025 , p. 7 ^ "Foreign direct investment, net inflows (BoP, current US$) – Turkey" .

The World Bank . Retrieved 10 August 2021 . ^ "Turkey (Turkiye) - Economy" . CIA World Factbook . May 2024. Archived from the original on 28 August 2022 . Retrieved 9 May 2024 . ^ OECD 2025 , p. 22 ^ "FAO in Türkiye | Türkiye at a glance" . Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations . Archived from the original on 20 December 2022 . Retrieved 17 May 2024 . ^ "Total production of crude steel" .

The World Steel Association . 22 March 2024. "2022 Production Statistics" . oica.net . OICA. Archived from the original on 8 April 2023 . Retrieved 18 April 2023 . "Ships built by country of building, annual" . United Nations Conference on Trade and Development . 8 November 2023 . Retrieved 9 May 2024 . " 'In world ranking, we are 6th based on the number of pieces, and 13th based on tonnage' " . 15 June 2022 . Retrieved 9 May 2024 . "World Robotics - Industrial Robots" .

The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency . Archived from the original on 18 June 2022 . Retrieved 14 May 2024 . ^ "Erdoğan reveals 2053 'Transport and Logistics Master Plan' " . Hürriyet Daily News . 13 April 2022. ^ a b Atlı, Altay (2018). "Turkey as a Eurasian Transport Hub: Prospects for Inter-Regional Partnership" . Perceptions: Journal of International Affairs . 23 (2): 117– 134. ^ "Iraq, Turkey, Qatar, UAE sign preliminary deal to cooperate on Development Road project" . Reuters . 22 April 2024. ^ OECD (2024). "Gross domestic spending on R&D (indicator)" . doi : 10.1787/d8b068b4-en . Retrieved 9 May 2025 . ^ a b OECD 2025 , p. 92 ^ "Scientific and technical journal articles" .

The World Bank . Retrieved 15 May 2024 . ^ "Nature Index | Country/Territory tables" . Nature . Retrieved 15 May 2024 . ^ World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) (2023). "Intellectual property statistical country profile 2022: Türkiye" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 March 2024. ^ "GII Innovation Ecosystems & Data Explorer 2025" . WIPO . Retrieved 16 October 2025 . ^ Dutta, Soumitra; Lanvin, Bruno (2025). Global Innovation Index 2025: Innovation at a Crossroads (PDF) . Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organization . p. 19. doi : 10.34667/tind.58864 . ISBN 978-92-805-3797-0 . Retrieved 17 October 2025 . ^ "Who we are" . TÜBİTAK . Retrieved 15 May 2024 . ^ a b c d "EURAXESS | Country profile: Türkiye" .

The Other Languages of Europe: Demographic, Sociolinguistic and Educational Perspectives . Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. ISBN 978-1-85359-509-7 – via Google Books. ^ a b KONDA 2006 , p. 17 ^ a b c d e "If Turkey Had 100 People" . KONDA . Archived from the original on 7 March 2024 . Retrieved 7 March 2024 . ^ a b Kirişci & Winrow 1997 , pp. 119–121 ^ Migdal, Joel S. (2004). Boundaries and Belonging: States and Societies in the Struggle to Shape Identities and Local Practices . Cambridge University Press. p. 129. ISBN 978-1-139-45236-6 – via Google Books. ^ Watts, Nicole F. (2010). Activists in Office: Kurdish Politics and Protest in Turkey (Studies in Modernity and National Identity) . University of Washington Press. p. 167. ISBN 978-0-295-99050-7 – via Google Books. ^ Amikam Nachmani (2003). Turkey: Facing a New Millenniium: Coping With Intertwined Conflicts . Manchester University Press. pp. 90 ff. ISBN 978-0-7190-6370-1 – via Google Books. ^ Kirişci & Winrow 1997 , p. 3 ^ Heper 2007 , p. 54 ^ KONDA 2006 , p. 18 ^ a b c Bayır, Derya (2013). Minorities and nationalism in Turkish law . Cultural Diversity and Law. Ashgate Publishing . pp. 88– 90, 203– 204. ISBN 978-1-4094-7254-4 . ^ Köksal, Yonca (2006). "Minority Policies in Bulgaria and Turkey: The Struggle to Define a Nation". Southeast European and Black Sea Studies . 6 (4): 501– 521. doi : 10.1080/14683850601016390 . ISSN 1468-3857 . S2CID 153761516 . ^ Özlem, Kader (2019). "An Evaluation on Istanbul's Bulgarians as the "Invisible Minority" of Turkey" . Turan-Sam . 11 (43): 387– 393. ISSN 1308-8041 . ^ a b Toktaş, Şule; Araş, Bulent (2009). "The EU and Minority Rights in Turkey". Political Science Quarterly . 124 (4): 697– 720. doi : 10.1002/j.1538-165X.2009.tb00664.x . ISSN 0032-3195 . JSTOR 25655744 . ^ a b c Yağmur, Kutlay (2001). "Languages in Turkey" .

The Other Languages of Europe: Demographic, Sociolinguistic and Educational Perspectives . Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. pp. 407– 427. ISBN 978-1-85359-510-3 – via Google Books. 'Mother tongue' education is mostly limited to Turkish teaching in Turkey. No other language can be taught as a mother tongue other than Armenian, Greek, and Hebrew, as agreed in the Lausanne Treaty Like Jews and Greeks, Armenians enjoy the privilege of an officially recognized minority status. No language other than Turkish can be taught at schools or at cultural centers. Only Armenian, Greek, and Hebrew are exceptions to this constitutional rule. ^ a b c Zetler, Reyhan (2014). "Turkish Jews between 1923 and 1933 – What Did the Turkish Policy between 1923 and 1933 Mean for the Turkish Jews?" (PDF) . Bulletin der Schweizerischen Gesellschaft für Judaistische Forschung (23): 26. OCLC 865002828 . ^ Ankara 13th Circuit Administrative Court, 18 June 2013 (E. 2012/1746, K. 2013/952). ^ a b Akbulut, Olgun (19 October 2023). "For Centenary of the Lausanne Treaty: Re-Interpretation and Re-Implementation of Linguistic Minority Rights of Lausanne". International Journal on Minority and Group Rights . -1 (aop): 1– 24. doi : 10.1163/15718115-bja10134 . ISSN 1385-4879 . S2CID 264412993 . ^ a b Erdem, Fazıl Hüsnü; Öngüç, Bahar (30 June 2021). "Süryanıce Anadılınde Eğıtım Hakki: Sorunlar Ve Çözüm Önerılerı" . Dicle Üniversitesi Hukuk Fakültesi Dergisi (in Turkish). 26 (44): 3– 35. ISSN 1300-2929 . ^ Jaipaul L. Roopnarine (2015). Fathers Across Cultures: The Importance, Roles, and Diverse Practices of Dads: The Importance, Roles, and Diverse Practices of Dads . ABC-CLIO. p. 328. ISBN 978-1-4408-3232-1 – via Google Books. Kurds are the largest ethnic minority group (about 20%), and Armenians, Greeks, Sephardic Jews ^ al-Shamahi, Abubakr (8 June 2015). "Turkey's ethnic make-up: A complex melting pot" . alaraby . Archived from the original on 7 November 2017 . Retrieved 3 November 2017 . ^ "The Ethnic Groups Of Turkey" . WorldAtlas . 18 July 2019. ^ Katzner, Kenneth (2002). Languages of the World, Third Edition . Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-25004-7 . ^ "Turkey Overview" . minorityrights.org. 19 June 2015. Archived from the original on 9 September 2015. ^ a b KONDA 2006 , p. 19 ^ "Türkiye'nin yüzde 85'i 'anadilim Türkçe' diyor" . Milliyet.com.tr . Retrieved 4 November 2012 . ^ a b c Kornfilt 2018 , p. 537 ^ "Chronology for Sunnis in Iraq" . Refworld . UNHCR: the UN Refugee Agency. 2004. Archived from the original on 14 October 2013. ^ "Endless Torment: The 1991 Uprising in Iraq And Its Aftermath" . Human Rights Watch . June 1992. ISBN 1-56432-069-3 . Retrieved 19 April 2026 . ^ "Trends in International Migrant Stock: The 2013 Revision" . esa.un.org . United Nations. Archived from the original on 10 December 2015 . Retrieved 14 August 2014 . ^ "Syria Regional Refugee Response: Turkey" . unhcr.org . Retrieved 21 April 2020 . ^ Luke Coffey (18 February 2016). "Turkey's demographic challenge" . www.aljazeera.com. ^ "UNHCR Turkey Operational Update November 2020" . UNHCR . 15 December 2020 . Retrieved 10 March 2024 . ^ "Number of Syrian Kurds fleeing to Turkey nears 140,000; humanitarian needs mount" . UNHCR . 23 September 2014. Archived from the original on 27 October 2023 . Retrieved 10 March 2024 . ^ Pamuk, Humeyra (29 January 2016). "Syrian Turkmens cross to Turkey, fleeing advances of pro-Assad forces" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 15 July 2023 . Retrieved 10 March 2024 . ^ "Number of Syrians in Turkey July 2023 – Refugees Association" . multeciler.org.tr . ^ "İçişleri Bakanı Yerlikaya, Türk vatandaşı olan Suriyelilerin sayısının 238 bine yaklaştığını açıkladı" . BBC . 9 November 2023 . Retrieved 10 March 2024 . ^ "Uncertain Futures: Ukrainian Refugees in Turkey, One Year On" . pulitzercenter.org . Retrieved 11 May 2023 . ^ Airport, Turkish Airlines planes are parked at the new Istanbul (24 July 2023). "Russian migration to Turkey spikes by 218% in aftermath of Ukraine war – Al-Monitor: Independent, trusted coverage of the Middle East" . al-monitor.com . ^ "Late Antique and Medieval Churches and Monasteries of Midyat and Surrounding Area (Tur 'Abdin)" . UNESCO . 15 April 2021. ^ Markessini, J. (2012). Around the World of Orthodox Christianity – Five Hundred Million Strong: The Unifying Aesthetic Beauty . Dorrance Publishing Company. p. 31. ISBN 978-1-4349-1486-6 – via Google Books. ^ Axel Tschentscher. "International Constitutional Law: Turkey Constitution" . Servat.unibe.ch . Retrieved 1 November 2010 . ^ "Turkey: Islam and Laicism Between the Interests of State, Politics, and Society" (PDF) . Peace Research Institute Frankfurt . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 October 2008 . Retrieved 19 October 2008 . ^ a b c d KONDA 2006 , p. 24 ^ "World Directory of Minorities and Indigenous Peoples – Turkey: Alevis" . refworld.org . Retrieved 22 April 2015 . ^ İçduygu, Ahmet; Toktaş, Şule; Ali Soner, B. (1 February 2008). "The politics of population in a nation-building process: Emigration of non-Muslims from Turkey" . Ethnic and Racial Studies . 31 (2): 358– 389. doi : 10.1080/01419870701491937 . hdl : 11729/308 . S2CID 143541451 . ^ Grigoriadis 2012 , p. 290 ^ "Türkiye farklı inançlara sağlanan ibadet yeri sayısında Batı'nın 5 kat önünde" . www.aa.com.tr . Retrieved 23 August 2024 . ^ "Global Christianity - A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World's Christian Population" (PDF) . Pew Research Center. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 February 2021 . Retrieved 2 June 2022 . ^ DellaPergola, Sergio (2018). "World Jewish Population, 2018" (PDF) .

In Dashefsky, Arnold; Sheskin, Ira M. (eds.).

The American Jewish Year Book, 2018 . Vol. 118. Cham, Switzerland: Springer. pp. 361– 452. ISBN 978-3-030-03906-6 . OCLC 1090130084 – via Jewishdatabank.org. ^ "Türkiye'de Hristiyan ve Yahudilere ait 439 ibadethane ve 24 dernek var" . Independent Türkçe . ^ "Gezici Araştırma Merkezi Başkanı Murat Gezici SÖZCÜ'ye açıkladı: Türkiye'nin kaderi Z kuşağının elinde" . sozcu.com.tr . 11 June 2020. ^ "Gezici Araştırma Merkezi Başkanı Murat Gezici: Türkiye'nin kaderi Z kuşağının elinde" . gercekgundem.com . 11 June 2020. ^ UNESCO Institute for Statistics (1 May 2025). "Primary, secondary and tertiary education enrolment and completion rates, Turkey" . Our World in Data . Retrieved 14 May 2025 . ^ a b OECD Taking stock of education reforms for access and quality in Türkiye 2023 , p. 3 ^ a b c OECD Taking stock of education reforms for access and quality in Türkiye 2023 , p. 35 ^ "Education in Turkey" . World Education Services . Retrieved 12 June 2013 . ^ "Turkish Higher Education System" . Study in Türkiye . Retrieved 21 May 2024 . ^ "Eurydice | Türkiye" .

The European Union . 27 November 2023. ^ Mustafa Akyol (7 November 2016). "Turkish universities latest domino in Erdogan's path" . Al-Monitor. ^ "World University Rankings 2024" . Times Higher Education . 25 September 2023 . Retrieved 22 May 2024 . ^ "2023 Academic Ranking of World Universities" . Shanghai Ranking . Retrieved 22 May 2024 . ^ Oz 2021 , Abstract ^ "Türkiye'deki yabancı öğrenci sayısı 795 bin 962'ye ulaştı" . Retrieved 5 January 2022 . ^ "Türkıye Scholarships – Türkıye for Education" (PDF) . Retrieved 30 August 2013 . ^ "Türkiye Scholarships-FAQ" . Türkiye Scholarships . Retrieved 30 August 2013 . ^ "Scholarships" . Turkey Scholarship . Retrieved 7 January 2019 . ^ "Başakşehir Çam ve Sakura Şehir Hastanesi'nde 2 bin 68 sismik izolatör var" . Türkiye Cumhuriyeti Sağlık Bakanlığı . 14 February 2023. ^ a b c d e Atun, Rifat (2015). "Transforming Turkey's Health System — Lessons for Universal Coverage". New England Journal of Medicine . 373 (14): 1285– 1289. doi : 10.1056/NEJMp1410433 . PMID 26422719 . ^ a b Oguz, Ahmet Bunyan (2020). "Turkish Health Policies: Past, Present, and Future". Social Work in Public Health . 35 (6): 456– 472. doi : 10.1080/19371918.2020.1806167 . hdl : 11729/2369 . PMID 32811368 . ^ "Türkiye ranks among top 10 health tourism destinations globally" . TRT World . Retrieved 22 May 2024 . ^ "WHO Mean Body Mass Index (BMI)" . World Health Organization . Retrieved 5 February 2019 . ^ Akyuz, Ezgi; Samavati, Mehrdad; Kaynak, Burcak (14 August 2020). "Spatial distribution of health risks associated with PM2.5 in Turkey and Iran using satellite and ground observations". Atmospheric Pollution Research . 11 (12): 2350– 2360. Bibcode : 2020AtmPR..11.2350A . doi : 10.1016/j.apr.2020.08.011 . ISSN 1309-1042 . S2CID 225477420 . ^ Kaya 2004 , pp. 57–59 ^ Kaya 2004 , p. 58 ^ Kaya 2004 , p. 63 ^ Howard 2016 , p. 6 ^ "Türkiye" . UNESCO . Archived from the original on 2 March 2024 . Retrieved 2 March 2024 . ^ "Odunpazari Historical Urban Site" . UNESCO . 13 April 2012. ^ Sagona & Zimansky 2015 , pp. 44–46, 82–86 ^ Matthews 2014 , pp. 9–13 ^ Curl & Wilson 2021 , Byzantine architecture ^ Bloom & Blair 2009 , Architecture | V. c. 900–c. 1250 | C. Anatolia ^ Curl & Wilson 2021 , Seljuk or Saljuk architecture ^ Bloom & Blair 2009 , Architecture | VI. c. 1250–c. 1500 | B. Anatolia | 2. Ottomans to 1453 ^ a b Bloom & Blair 2009 , Architecture | VII. c. 1500–c. 1900 | A. Ottoman Empire ^ a b Bloom & Blair 2009 , Architecture | VII. c. 1500–c. 1900 | A. Ottoman Empire | 2. Turkey ^ Bloom & Blair 2009 , Architecture | VII. c. 1500–c. 1900 | A. Ottoman Empire | 2. Turkey; Balyan ^ Bozdogan 2009 , Turkey, since 1918 ^ Bozdogan & Akcan 2013 , p. 284 ^ Tuğaç 2023 , p. 1469 ^ Tuğaç 2023 , p. 1465 ^ a b c d Halman 2012 , pp. 76–85 ^ "Turkey commemorates master author Yaşar Kemal" . Hürriyet Daily News . 27 February 2021. ^ And, M. (1983). "Theatre in Turkey". Turkish Studies Association Bulletin . 7 (2): 20– 31. JSTOR 43385121 . ^ Denny 2012 , pp. 94–95 ^ Stokes 2010 , p. 14 ^ "Award Winning Legends" . 28 February 2018. ^ "The Political Economy of the Media in Turkey: A Sectoral Analysis" (PDF) . tesev.org.tr . Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 July 2012 . Retrieved 18 February 2015 . ^ "Survey on Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Usage in Households and by Individuals, 2022" . data.tuik.gov.tr . Turkish Statistical Institute. 26 August 2022. ^ "Country Profile: Turkey" (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: Federal Research Division; Library of Congress. August 2008. p. 23. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 October 2008 . Retrieved 23 October 2008 . This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain . ^ "About RTÜK" .

The Radio and Television Supreme Council (RTÜK). Archived from the original on 6 August 2020 . Retrieved 18 April 2020 . ^ "Gazete Tirajları 02.05.2016 – 08.05.2016" . Gazeteciler.com . Archived from the original on 19 December 2015 . Retrieved 1 August 2016 . ^ Akser 2018 , p. 156 ^ "Berlinale 1964: Prize Winners" . berlinale.de . Archived from the original on 19 March 2015 . Retrieved 20 February 2010 . ^ Jenna Krajeski (30 March 2012). "Turkey: Soap Operas and Politics" . Pulitzer Center . Archived from the original on 17 January 2013 . Retrieved 15 January 2013 . ^ Irani, Delshad (22 February 2017). "Here's why Turkish soaps are a cultural force to reckon with! – The Economic Times" .

The Economic Times . ^ "Turkey world"s second highest TV series exporter after US – Business" . Hürriyet Daily News . 27 October 2014 . Retrieved 14 October 2017 . ^ Betül Alakent (17 October 2022). "Türkiye marches toward $600 million in worldwide TV series sales" . dailysabah.com . ^ Fatima Bhutto (13 September 2019). "How Turkish TV is taking over the world" .

The Guardian . ^ "Index 2026 – Global score" . Reporters Without Borders . Retrieved 1 May 2026 . ^ Getz, Arlene. "2023 prison census: Jailed journalist numbers near record high; Israel imprisonments spike" . Committee to Protect Journalists . Retrieved 30 September 2024 . ^ "Turkish coffee culture and tradition" . UNESCO. 5 December 2013 . Retrieved 18 August 2014 . ^ Çakır Morin, Arzu (5 December 2013). "Türk kahvesi Unesco korumasında" . Hürriyet (in Turkish) . Retrieved 18 August 2014 . ^ Yayla, Önder; Aktaş, Semra Günay (2021). "Mise en place for gastronomy geography through food: Flavor regions in Turkey". International Journal of Gastronomy and Food Science . 26 100384. doi : 10.1016/j.ijgfs.2021.100384 . ^ a b c d e f g Algar 2014 , Turkey ^ Jaine 2014 , doner kebab ^ Perry 2014a , dolma ^ Davidson & Jaine 2014 , mezze ^ Perry 2014b , filo: "Although known to Europeans and N. Americans by a Greek name, the dough is clearly of Turkish origin." ^ Davidson & Jaine 2014 , Turkish delight ^ Burak Sansal (2006). "Sports in Turkey" . allaboutturkey.com . Retrieved 13 December 2006 . ^ "Galatasaray AŞ" . UEFA . Retrieved 10 August 2014 . ^ "Historical Achievements" . tff.org . Retrieved 10 August 2014 . ^ Ian Whittell. "Basketball Capitals: Cities in Focus – Istanbul" . espn.co.uk . ESPN Sports Media Ltd . Retrieved 22 December 2022 . ^ "Historic achievements of the Efes Pilsen Basketball Team" . Anadolu Efes Spor Kulübü. Archived from the original on 3 May 2008 . Retrieved 9 February 2013 . ^ "Anadolu Efes S.K.: Our successes" . Archived from the original on 24 March 2012 . Retrieved 9 August 2014 . ^ "Galatasaray Lift EuroLeague Women Title" . fibaeurope.com . Retrieved 10 August 2014 . ^ "National Team's Activities" . tvf.org.tr . Archived from the original on 29 August 2014 . Retrieved 10 August 2014 . ^ "2023 CEV Women's Champions League Super Final: VakifBank Istanbul – Ezcacibasi Dynavit Istanbul" . championsleague.cev.eu . 20 May 2023. ^ Burak Sansal (2006). "Oiled Wrestling" . allaboutturkey.com . Retrieved 13 December 2006 . ^ "Historical Kırkpınar oil wrestling festival kicks off in northwestern Turkey" . Daily Sabah . 13 July 2018. ^ "Kırkpınar Oiled Wrestling Tournament: History" . Kirkpinar.com. 21 April 2007. Archived from the original on 1 August 2008 . Retrieved 1 November 2010 . ^ Gegner, Christiane. "FILA Wrestling Database" . Iat.uni-leipzig.de. Archived from the original on 13 March 2009 . Retrieved 1 November 2010 . Works cited The Political Economy of Regional Power: Turkey under the AKP (Report). German Institute of Global and Area Studies (GIGA). Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 February 2014. Biondich, Mark (2011).

The Balkans: Revolution, War, and Political Violence since 1878 . New York: Oxford University Press. doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199299058.001.0001 . ISBN 978-0-19-929905-8 . Bellwood, Peter (2022).

The Five-Million-Year Odyssey . Princeton University Press. doi : 10.1515/9780691236339 . ISBN 978-0-691-19757-9 . Bloom, Jonathan M. ; Blair, Sheila S. , eds. (2009).

The Grove Encyclopedia of Islamic Art and Architecture . Oxford University Press. doi : 10.1093/acref/9780195309911.001.0001 . ISBN 978-0-19-530991-1 . Bosma, Ulbe; Lucassen, Jan ; Oostindie, Gert , eds. (2012). Postcolonial Migrants and Identity Politics: Europe, Russia, Japan and the United States in Comparison . International Studies in Social History. Vol. 18. Berghahn Books. doi : 10.1515/9780857453280 . ISBN 978-0-85745-328-0 . Bosma, Ulbe; Lucassen, Jan; Oostindie, Gert (2012a). " Introduction: Postcolonial Migrations and Identity Politics: Towards a Comparative Perspective ".

In Bosma, Lucassen & Oostindie (2012) , pp. 1–22. doi : 10.1515/9780857453280-003 Bozdogan, Sibel; Akcan, Esra (2013). Turkey: Modern Architectures in History . Reaktion Books. ISBN 978-1-86189-979-8 – via Google Books. Clauson, Gerard (1972). An Etymological Dictionary of Pre-thirteenth-century Turkish . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-864112-4 – via Google Books. Cohen, Saul B. , ed. (2008).

The Columbia Gazetteer of the World: Volume 1 A to G (2nd ed.). Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-14554-1 . OCLC 212893637 . Comrie, Bernard , ed. (2018).

The World's Major Languages (3rd ed.). Routledge. doi : 10.4324/9781315644936 . ISBN 978-0-19-506511-4 . Kornfilt, Jaklin . "Turkish and the Turkic Languages".

In Comrie (2018) , pp. 536–561. Cormack, Robin; Haldon, John F.; Jeffreys, Elizabeth, eds. (2008).

The Oxford Handbook of Byzantine Studies . Oxford University Press. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199252466.001.0001 . ISBN 978-0-19-925246-6 . Horrocks, Geoffrey. "Language".

In Cormack, Haldon & Jeffreys (2008) , pp. 778–784. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199252466.013.0074 Curl, James Stevens ; Wilson, Susan (2021).

The Oxford Dictionary of Architecture (4 ed.). Oxford University Press. doi : 10.1093/acref/9780191918742.001.0001 . ISBN 978-0-19-191874-2 . Davidson, Alan ; Jaine, Tom, eds. (2014).

The Oxford Companion to Food (3 ed.). Oxford University Press. doi : 10.1093/acref/9780199677337.001.0001 . ISBN 978-0-19-967733-7 . Perry, Charles (2014a). "Dolma".

In Davidson & Jaine (2014) . Jaine, Tom. "Doner kebab".

In Davidson & Jaine (2014) . Perry, Charles (2014b). "Filo".

In Davidson & Jaine (2014) . Algar, Ayla. "Turkey".

In Davidson & Jaine (2014) . Davison, Roderic H. (1990). Essays in Ottoman and Turkish History, 1774-1923: The Impact of the West .

The University of Texas Press. doi : 10.7560/720640 . ISBN 978-0-292-72064-0 . Directorate-General for Neighbourhood and Enlargement Negotiations (European Commission), European Commission (8 November 2023). Commission Staff Working Document Türkiye 2023 Report (PDF) . Republic of Türkiye Ministry of Foreign Affairs Directorate for EU Affairs (Report). Everett-Heath, John (2020). Concise Oxford Dictionary of World Place Names (6 ed.). Oxford University Press. doi : 10.1093/acref/9780191905636.001.0001 . ISBN 978-0-19-190563-6 . Fierro, Maribel , ed. (2010).

The New Cambridge History of Islam . Vol. 2: The Western Islamic World, Eleventh to Eighteenth Centuries. Cambridge University Press. doi : 10.1017/chol9780521839570 . ISBN 978-1-139-05615-1 . Leiser, Gary. "The Turks in Anatolia before the Ottomans".

In Fierro (2010) , pp. 299–312. doi : 10.1017/CHOL9780521839570.012 Fleet, Kate. "The rise of the Ottomans".

In Fierro (2010) , pp. 313–331. doi : 10.1017/CHOL9780521839570.013 Filho, Walter Leal; Dinis, Maria Alzira Pimenta; Moggi, Sara; Price, Elizabeth; Hope, Alex, eds. (2023). SDGs in the European Region . Implementing the UN Sustainable Development Goals – Regional Perspectives. Springer Cham. doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-17461-2 . ISBN 978-3-031-17460-5 . Tuğaç, Çiğdem. "Urban Renewal: Turkey's Solution for Housing Problems for Low-Income Groups and Disaster-Resilient Urbanization".

In Filho et al. (2023) , pp. 1451–1474. doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-17461-2_4 Findley, Carter V. (2005).

The Turks in World History . Oxford University Press, USA. ISBN 978-0-19-517726-8 – via Google Books. Gibney, Matthew J.; Hansen, Randall , eds. (2005). Immigration and asylum: from 1900 to the present . ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-57607-796-2 – via Google Books. Fábos, Anita. "Muslim Immigration".

In Gibney & Hansen (2005) , pp. 434–440. Goode, Patrick, ed. (2009).

The Oxford Companion to Architecture . Oxford University Press. doi : 10.1093/acref/9780198605683.001.0001 . ISBN 978-0-19-860568-3 . Bozdogan, Sibel. "Turkey, since 1918".

In Goode (2009) . Gray, Douglas, ed. (2003).

The Oxford Companion to Chaucer . Oxford University Press. doi : 10.1093/acref/9780198117650.001.0001 . ISBN 978-0-19-811765-0 . Hacettepe University Institute of Population Studies (2019). 2018 Turkey Demographic and Health Survey (PDF) (Report). Ankara. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 March 2022. Harmancioglu, Nilgun B.; Altinbilek, Dogan, eds. (2020). Water Resources of Turkey . World Water Resources. Vol. 2. Springer Cham. doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-11729-0 . hdl : 20.500.11779/975 . ISBN 978-3-030-11728-3 . Turkes, Murat. "Climate and Drought in Turkey".

In Harmancioglu & Altinbilek (2020) . doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-11729-0_4 Heper, M. (2007).

The State and Kurds in Turkey: The Question of Assimilation . Palgrave Macmillan. doi : 10.1057/9780230593602 . ISBN 978-0-230-59360-2 . Heper, Metin; Sayarı, Sabri, eds. (2012).

The Routledge Handbook of Modern Turkey . Routledge. doi : 10.4324/9780203118399 . ISBN 978-1-138-11010-6 – via Google Books. Sayarı, Sabri. Introduction.

In Heper & Sayarı (2012) , pp. 1–2. Hanioğlu, M. Şükrü . "Modern Ottoman period".

In Heper & Sayarı (2012) , pp. 15–25. Kayalı, Hasan. "The Young Turks and the CUP".

In Heper & Sayarı (2012) , pp. 26–34. McMeekin, Sean . "World War I And The Establishment Of The Republic".

In Heper & Sayarı (2012) , pp. 35–43. Pamuk, Şevket . "Ottoman Economic Legacy From The Nineteenth Century".

In Heper & Sayarı (2012) , pp. 44–52. Dodd, Clement H. "The Turkish Republic".

In Heper & Sayarı (2012) , pp. 53–64. Halman, Talât S. "Literature".

In Heper & Sayarı (2012) , pp. 76–86. Denny, Walter B. "Fine Arts".

In Heper & Sayarı (2012) , pp. 87–95. Heper, Metin. "Kemalism/Atatürkism".

In Heper & Sayarı (2012) , pp. 139–148. Karaosmanoğlu, Ali L. "Civil-military relations".

In Heper & Sayarı (2012) , pp. 149–159. Özbudun, Ergun. "Constitutions and political system".

In Heper & Sayarı (2012) , pp. 194–204. Toprak, Binnaz. "Religion and politics".

In Heper & Sayarı (2012) , pp. 217–226. Martin, Lenore G. "Foreign Policy".

In Heper & Sayarı (2012) , pp. 227–236. Grigoriadis, Ioannis N. "Minorities".

In Heper & Sayarı (2012) , pp. 282–292. Yılmaz, Kamil. "Industry".

In Heper & Sayarı (2012) , pp. 352–363. Howard, Douglas A. (2016).

The History of Turkey (2nd ed.). Santa Barbara, Calif.: Greenwood. ISBN 978-1-4408-3466-0 – via Google Books. Hoyos, Dexter (2019). Rome Victorious.

The Irresistible Rise of the Roman Empire . I.B. Tauris & Co. Ltd. ISBN 978-1-78076-274-6 – via Google Books. IEA (2021). Turkey 2021 (PDF) (Report). Paris: IEA. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 May 2024. Kaldellis, Anthony (2024).

The New Roman Empire: A History of Byzantium . Oxford University Press. doi : 10.1093/oso/9780197549322.001.0001 . ISBN 978-0-19-754932-2 . Kapur, Selim; Akça, Erhan; Günal, Hikmet, eds. (2018).

The Soils of Turkey . World Soils Book Series. Springer Cham. doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-64392-2 . ISBN 978-3-319-64390-8 . Turunçoğlu, Ufuk Utku; Türkeş, Murat; Bozkurt, Deniz; Önol, Barış; Şen, Ömer Lütfi; Dalfes, Hasan Nüzhet. "Climate".

In Kapur, Akça & Günal (2018) , pp. 25–44. doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-64392-2_3 Karayolları Genel Müdürlüğü. 2023 Yılı Faaliyet Raporu (PDF) . Karayolları Genel Müdürlüğü (Report). Karpat, K.H. (2001).

The Politicization of Islam: Reconstructing Identity, State, Faith, and Community in the Late Ottoman State . Studies in Middle Eastern history. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-513618-0 – via Google Books. Karpat, Kemal H. (2004). Studies on Turkish Politics and Society: Selected Articles and Essays . Leiden: Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-13322-8 – via Google Books. Kasaba, Reşat, ed. (2008).

The Cambridge History of Turkey . Vol. 4: Turkey in the Modern World. Cambridge University Press . doi : 10.1017/CHOL9780521620963 . ISBN 978-1-139-05421-8 . Findley, Carter . "The Tanzimat II".

In Kasaba (2008) , pp. 9–37. doi : 10.1017/CHOL9780521620963.003 Kayali, Hasan. "The struggle for independence".

In Kasaba (2008) , pp. 112–146. doi : 10.1017/CHOL9780521620963.006 Kirişci, Kemal . "Migration and Turkey: the dynamics of state, society and politics".

In Kasaba (2008) , pp. 173–198. doi : 10.1017/CHOL9780521620963.008 Kaser, Karl (2011).

The Balkans and the Near East: Introduction to a Shared History . Berlin: LIT Verlag Münster. ISBN 978-3-643-50190-5 – via Google Books. Kaya, Ibrahim (2004). Social Theory and Later Modernities: The Turkish Experience . Liverpool University Press. doi : 10.2307/j.ctt5vjm76 . ISBN 978-1-78138-845-7 . Kirişci, Kemal ; Winrow, Gareth M. (1997).

The Kurdish Question and Turkey: An Example of a Trans-state Ethnic Conflict . Routledge. doi : 10.4324/9781315036649 . ISBN 978-0-7146-4304-5 . Krieger, Joel, ed. (2014).

The Oxford Companion to International Relations . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-973887-8 – via Google Books. Acharya, Amitav. "Emerging Powers".

In Krieger (2014) . Kubicek, Paul; Dal, Emel Parlar; Oğuzlu, H. Tarik, eds. (2016). Turkey's Rise as an Emerging Power . Routledge. doi : 10.4324/9781315745190 . ISBN 978-1-317-59445-1 . Oğuzlu, Tarik; Dal, Emel Parlar. "Decoding Turkey's Rise: An Introduction".

In Kubicek, Dal & Oğuzlu (2016) . Kardaş, Şaban. "Turkey: A Regional Power Facing a Changing International System".

In Kubicek, Dal & Oğuzlu (2016) . Kuzucuoğlu, Catherine; Çiner, Attila; Kazancı, Nizamettin, eds. (2019). Landscapes and Landforms of Turkey . World Geomorphological Landscapes. Springer Cham. doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-03515-0 . ISBN 978-3-030-03513-6 . Kuzucuoğlu, Catherine. "The Physical Geography of Turkey: An Outline".

In Kuzucuoğlu, Çiner & Kazancı (2019) , pp. 7–15. doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-03515-0_2 Kuzucuoğlu, Catherine; Şengör, A. M. Celâl ; Çiner, Attila. "The Tectonic Control on the Geomorphological Landscapes of Turkey".

In Kuzucuoğlu, Çiner & Kazancı (2019) , pp. 17–40. doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-03515-0_3 Kuzucuoğlu, Catherine; Çiner, Attila; Kazancı, Nizamettin (2019a). "The Geomorphological Regions of Turkey".

In Kuzucuoğlu, Çiner & Kazancı (2019) , pp. 41–178. doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-03515-0_4 Altunel, Erhan; D'Andria, Francesco. "Pamukkale Travertines: A Natural and Cultural Monument in the World Heritage List".

In Kuzucuoğlu, Çiner & Kazancı (2019) , pp. 219–229. doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-03515-0_8 Çiner, Attila. "Coastal Landforms and Landscapes of Turkey".

In Kuzucuoğlu, Çiner & Kazancı (2019) , pp. 233–247. doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-03515-0_9 Çiner, Attila; Aydar, Erkan. "A Fascinating Gift from Volcanoes: The Fairy Chimneys and Underground Cities of Cappadocia".

In Kuzucuoğlu, Çiner & Kazancı (2019) , pp. 535–549. doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-03515-0_31 Kazancı, Nizamettin; Kuzucuoğlu, Catherine. "Threats and Conservation of Landscapes in Turkey".

In Kuzucuoğlu, Çiner & Kazancı (2019) , pp. 603–632. doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-03515-0_36 Lee, Joo-Yup (2023).

The Turkic Peoples in World History . Routledge. doi : 10.4324/9781003256496 . ISBN 978-1-000-90421-5 . Leonard, Thomas M., ed. (2006). Encyclopedia of the Developing World . Routledge. doi : 10.4324/9780203943373 . ISBN 978-1-57958-388-0 . Ahmed, Ali. "Turkey".

In Leonard (2006) , pp. 1575–1578. Magnan-Park, Aaron Han Joon; Marchetti, Gina; Tan, See Kam, eds. (2018).

The Palgrave Handbook of Asian Cinema . Palgrave Macmillan. doi : 10.1057/978-1-349-95822-1 . ISBN 978-1-349-95821-4 – via Google Books. Akser, Murat. "Locating Turkish Cinema Between Populist Tendencies and Art Cinema".

In Magnan-Park, Marchetti & Tan (2018) , pp. 151–170. Matthews, Henry (2014). Greco-Roman Cities of Aegean Turkey: History, Archaeology, Architecture . Istanbul: Ege Yayınları. ISBN 978-605-4701-41-4 . OCLC 885231214 . McColl, R. W., ed. (2005). Encyclopedia of World Geography . Facts On File. ISBN 978-0-8160-5786-3 – via Google Books. Waskey, Andrew J. "Turkey".

In McColl (2005) , pp. 922–923. McMahon, Gregory; Steadman, Sharon, eds. (2012).

The Oxford Handbook of Ancient Anatolia: (10,000-323 BCE) . Oxford University Press. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.001.0001 . ISBN 978-0-19-537614-2 . McMahon, Gregory; Steadman, Sharon (2012a). "Introduction: The Oxford Handbook of Ancient Anatolia".

In McMahon & Steadman (2012) , pp. 3–12. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0001 McMahon, Gregory. "The Land and Peoples of Anatolia through Ancient Eyes".

In McMahon & Steadman (2012) , pp. 15–33. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0002 Matthews, Roger. "A History of the Preclassical Archaeology of Anatolia".

In McMahon & Steadman (2012) , pp. 34–55. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0003 Steadman, Sharon. "The Early Bronze Age on the Plateau".

In McMahon & Steadman (2012) , pp. 229–259. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0010 Michel, Cécile. "The Kārum Period on the Plateau".

In McMahon & Steadman (2012) , pp. 313–336. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0013 Bryce, Trevor. "The Late Bronze Age in the West and the Aegean".

In McMahon & Steadman (2012) , pp. 363–375. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0015 Khatchadourian, Lori. "The Iron Age in Eastern Anatolia".

In McMahon & Steadman (2012) , pp. 464–499. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0020 Greaves, Alan M. "The Greeks in Western Anatolia".

In McMahon & Steadman (2012) , pp. 500–514. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0021 Beckman, Gary. "The Hittite Language: Recovery and Grammatical Sketch".

In McMahon & Steadman (2012) , pp. 517–533. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0022 Yakubovich, Ilya. "Luwian and the Luwians".

In McMahon & Steadman (2012) , pp. 534–547. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0023 Zimansky, Paul. "Urartian and the Urartians".

In McMahon & Steadman (2012) , pp. 548–559. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0024 Sams, G. Kenneth. "Anatolia: The First Millennium B.C.E. in Historical Context".

In McMahon & Steadman (2012) , pp. 604–622. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0027 Melchert, H. Craig. "Indo-Europeans".

In McMahon & Steadman (2012) , pp. 704–716. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0031 Jablonka, Peter. "Troy in Regional and International Context".

In McMahon & Steadman (2012) , pp. 717–733. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0032 Harl, Kenneth W. "The Greeks in Anatolia: From the Migrations to Alexander the Great".

In McMahon & Steadman (2012) , pp. 752–774. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0034 McNeill, J. R. ; Pomeranz, Kenneth , eds. (2015). Production, Destruction and Connection, 1750-Present, Part 1, Structures, Spaces, and Boundary Making .

The Cambridge World History . Vol. 7. Cambridge University Press . doi : 10.1017/CBO9781139196079 . ISBN 978-1-108-40775-5 – via Google Books. Levene, Mark . "Genocide".

In McNeill & Pomeranz (2015) , pp. 420–440. Merriam-Webster, Inc, ed. (1997). Merriam-Webster's Geographical Dictionary . Merriam-Webster. ISBN 978-0-87779-546-9 – via Google Books. Mitchell, Stephen (1995). Anatolia: Land, Men, and Gods in Asia Minor Volume I: The Celts and the Impact of Roman Rule . Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-0-19-815029-9 – via Google Books. OECD (2023). Taking stock of education reforms for access and quality in Türkiye (PDF) (Report). OECD Education Policy Perspectives. Vol. 68. Paris: OECD Publishing. doi : 10.1787/5ea7657e-en . Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 May 2024. OECD (2025). OECD Economic Surveys: Türkiye 2025 (Report). OECD Economic Surveys: Turkey. Paris: OECD Publishing. doi : 10.1787/d01c660f-en . ISBN 978-92-64-38915-1 . Önder, Murat; Nyadera, Israel Nyaburi; Islam, Md. Nazmul, eds. (2022).

The Palgrave Handbook of Comparative Public Administration . Palgrave Macmillan Singapore. doi : 10.1007/978-981-19-1208-5 . ISBN 978-981-19-1207-8 . Karabulut, Niyazi. "Republic of Turkey".

In Önder, Nyadera & Islam (2022) . doi : 10.1007/978-981-19-1208-5_25 Özbek, Çağlar (2019). LGBT+ Studies in Turkey . Transnational Press London. ISBN 978-1-912997-11-4 – via Google Books. Özerdem, Alpaslan; Öztürk, Ahmet Erdi, eds. (2023). A Companion to Modern Turkey's Centennial: Political, Sociological, Economic and Institutional Transformations since 1923 . Edinburgh University Press. doi : 10.1515/9781474492546 . ISBN 978-1-4744-9254-6 . Hale, William. Foreword.

In Özerdem & Öztürk (2023) , pp. xii–xv. Peacock, A. C. S. (2015).

The Great Seljuk Empire . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 978-0-7486-3827-7 – via Google Books. Pekesen, Berna (7 March 2012). "Expulsion and Emigration of the Muslims from the Balkans" . European History Online . Leibniz Institute of European History . Archived from the original on 20 February 2024 . Retrieved 20 February 2024 . Pullaiah, T., ed. (2018). Global Biodiversity . Vol. 2: Selected Countries in Europe. Apple Academic Press. doi : 10.1201/9780429487750 . ISBN 978-0-429-48775-0 . Dönmez, Ali A.; Yerli, Sedat V. "Biodiversity in Turkey".

In Pullaiah (2018) , pp. 397–442. Republic of Turkey The Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock (2019). Country Report: the State of Turkey's Biodiversity for Food and Agriculture . Food and Agriculture Organization (Report). Turkey. Retrofitting and Reconstruction Works (PDF) (Report). ISMEP Guide Books. Vol. 4. 2014 . Retrieved 23 April 2024 . Sagona, Antonio ; Zimansky, Paul (2015). Ancient Turkey . Routledge. doi : 10.4324/9780203880463 . ISBN 978-1-134-44027-6 – via Google Books. Sensoy, Serhat; Demircan, Mesut; Ulupinar, Yusuf; Balta, İzzet (n.d.). Climate of Turkey (PDF) (Report). General Directorate of Meteorology. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 March 2014 . Retrieved 11 July 2025 . Somel, S.A. (2010).

The A to Z Guide Series. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-1-4617-3176-4 – via Google Books. Stokes, Martin (2010).

The Republic of Love: Cultural Intimacy in Turkish Popular Music . Chicago Studies in Ethnomusicology.

The University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-77506-7 – via Google Books. Taranto, Yael; Saygın, Değer (2019). Energy pricing and non-market flows in Turkey's energy sector (Report). Metin Koşar. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Tasar, Eren; Frank, Allen J.; Eden, Jeff, eds. (2021).

From the Khan's Oven: Studies on the History of Central Asian Religions in Honor of Devin Deweese . Brill. doi : 10.1163/9789004471177 . ISBN 978-90-04-47018-7 – via Google Books. Golden, Peter B. "Reflections on the Ethnonym Türk".

In Tasar, Frank & Eden (2021) , pp. 1–50. doi : 10.1163/9789004471177_002 Tockner, Klement; Zarfl, Christiane; Robinson, Christopher T., eds. (2022). Rivers of Europe (2nd ed.). doi : 10.1016/C2017-0-03745-X . ISBN 978-0-08-102612-0 . Akbulut, Nuray (Emir); Bayarı, Serdar; Akbulut, Aydın; Özyurt, Naciye Nur; Sahin, Yalcın. "Rivers of Turkey".

In Tockner, Zarfl & Robinson (2022) , pp. 853–882. doi : 10.1016/B978-0-08-102612-0.00021-3 Toplumsal Yapı Araştırması 2006 (PDF) (Report). KONDA Research and Consultancy . 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 February 2017 . Retrieved 21 February 2015 . van den Hout, Theo (2011).

The Elements of Hittite . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-13300-5 – via Google Books. Wiseman, Alexander W., ed. (2021). Annual Review of Comparative and International Education 2020 . International Perspectives on Education and Society. doi : 10.1108/S1479-3679202140 . ISBN 978-1-80071-908-8 . Oz, Yakup. "The Emergence of Turkey as a Regional Hub for International Students: A Macro-Level Analysis".