The Twelve-Day War was an armed conflict between Iran and Israel which lasted from 13 to 24 June 2025. It began when Israel bombed military and nuclear facilities in Iran in a surprise attack , assassinating prominent military leaders, nuclear scientists, and politicians, killing civilians, and damaging or destroying air defenses . Iran retaliated with over 550 ballistic missiles and over 1,000 suicide drones , hitting civilian population centers, one hospital and at least twelve military, energy, and government sites .

The United States intercepted Iranian attacks and bombed three Iranian nuclear sites on 22 June. Iran retaliated by firing missiles at a US base in Qatar .

On 24 June, Israel and Iran agreed to a ceasefire under US pressure.

The war followed a decades-long proxy conflict in which Iran supported an Axis of Resistance against Israeli and US interests in the region. Iran's development of nuclear enrichment capabilities has been an international controversy for decades, with Israel and its allies seeking to prevent Iranian nuclear weapons development .

In 2015, under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), six countries lifted sanctions on Iran, which froze its nuclear program.

In 2018, US president Donald Trump unilaterally withdrew from the plan. Iran began stockpiling enriched uranium and largely suspended International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) monitoring.

Following the October 7 attacks in 2023, both Hamas and Hezbollah entered into open conflict with Israel.

In April 2024, Israel bombed Iran's consulate in Damascus , Syria, killing senior Iranian military officials. Direct conflict continued in April and October of 2024.

The day before Israel started the Twelve-Day War in June 2025, the IAEA declared Iran non-compliant with its nuclear obligations in a resolution put forward by the United States, United Kingdom, France, and Germany. Israel's attacks, which reportedly involved commando units and Mossad operatives in Iran, killed several of Iran's military leaders , leaders of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), and at least 10 leading nuclear scientists.

The war saw internet blackouts by the Iranian government. Israeli and US airstrikes damaged the nuclear facilities at Natanz , Isfahan , and Fordow , damaging them extensively. Iran suspended cooperation with the IAEA, which it said had passed information about nuclear facilities and scientists to Israel. Iran's total death toll has been estimated at between 1,060 and 1,190; thousands were wounded, tens of thousands were displaced, and the government ordered internet blackouts. Israel struck high-rise buildings, including apartments. Iranian missiles struck military and government sites, apartments, a research center, and a hospital .

The United Nations and most countries expressed deep concern over Israel's strikes and called for a diplomatic solution.

The strikes were condemned by many countries, including most Muslim-majority and Arab states .

The International Commission of Jurists and some other legal scholars saw the Israeli strikes as a violation of international law . Meanwhile, Argentina , Germany , Ukraine , and the United States said the strikes on Iran were justified to prevent nuclear proliferation and said Iran should agree to a nuclear deal promptly. Nine months later, on 28 February 2026, Israel and the United States launched strikes on Iran beginning the 2026 Iran war . Name Donald Trump first labeled the conflict as the "12 day war" in his announcement of a ceasefire agreement between Israel and Iran on 23 June 2025. AP News speculated the title was a reference to the 1967 Six-Day War , fought between Israel and a coalition of Arab states. A few days afterwards, American academic Howard Stoffer also compared the two wars to each other, and Reuters began using "12-day war" as a descriptive title; however, some experts initially doubted that Trump's coining would catch on. Ultimately, the standardized name "Twelve-Day War" or "Twelve Day War" entered into common usage by late 2025.

In Iran, however, the conflict is labeled as the "Second Imposed War". Background Iran–Israel conflict Main articles: Iran–Israel proxy conflict and 2024 Iran–Israel conflict Further information: Iran–Israel relations and Assassinations of Iranian nuclear scientists Israel enjoyed a close relationship with the Pahlavi monarchy until the Iranian Revolution , when the monarchy was ousted and replaced by an anti-Western theocratic Islamic republic led by Ruhollah Khomeini . Ever since, Iran's government has repeatedly pledged to destroy Israel . Israel considers the Iranian nuclear program an existential threat, fearing that Iran will develop a nuclear weapon.

In 2024, Israel and Iran attacked each other openly and directly for the first time following decades of proxy war .

In April 2024, an Israeli airstrike on the Iranian consulate in Damascus killed Iranian officers. Iran retaliated with strikes on Israel in April 2024 , to which Israel then retaliated with strikes on Iran .

In July 2024, Israel assassinated Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh in Iran's capital Tehran , and then assassinated Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah and prominent IRGC commander Abbas Nilforoushan in Lebanon in September 2024.

In October 2024, Iran struck Israel , and Israel struck Iran .

The latter Israeli strikes destroyed nearly all of Iran's Russian-supplied defensive S-300 missile systems , paving the way for potential future Israeli strikes. Iranian nuclear program Further information: Iran and weapons of mass destruction and United States withdrawal from the Iran nuclear deal Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu cited Iran's nuclear program as the reason Israel preemptively struck Iran.

The country developed a covert nuclear weapons program named the AMAD Project in the 1980s and 1990s, which, according to US intelligence assessments, was suspended in 2003. Iran had consistently said that its nuclear program is solely for peaceful purposes and that it has never intended to develop nuclear weapons. However, since 2019, it had repeatedly violated the terms of the previous nuclear deal of 2015 , and in June 2025 the IAEA reported that Iran had acquired enough enriched uranium to produce nine nuclear warheads.

In 2015, six countries negotiated with Iran the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action nuclear deal to lift sanctions on Iran and freeze Iran's nuclear program.

In 2018, after being briefed on evidence that Iran sought to resume its nuclear weapons development, U.S. president Donald Trump unilaterally withdrew from and voided the deal – despite the report by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) that Iran was keeping to the deal.

After the withdrawal Iran began stockpiling enriched uranium, and the IAEA lost the ability to monitor Iran's nuclear facilities.

In a letter addressed to the president of the UN Security Council, the foreign ministers of France, Britain and Germany (E3) stated that since 2019, Iran had "increasingly and deliberately ceased performing its JCPOA commitments", including "the accumulation of a highly enriched uranium stockpile which lacks any credible civilian justification and is unprecedented for a state without a nuclear weapons program," a statement confirmed by the IAEA.

The letter detailed additional Iranian violations of the agreement despite the fact that the E3 "have consistently upheld their agreements under the terms of the JCPOA".

In March 2025, US Director of National Intelligence , Tulsi Gabbard , testified that the US intelligence community assessed that "Iran is not building a nuclear weapon". A month later, Trump announced negotiations between the United States and Iran regarding Iran's nuclear program.

The White House declared that Iran had two months to secure a deal, which expired the day before Israel's strikes.

On 31 May 2025, the IAEA issued a report in which it stated that Iran had enough uranium enriched up to 60% for the production of nine nuclear weapons, and enough for additional weapons at lower enrichment levels.

On 12 June 2025, the IAEA board of governors passed a resolution, drafted by the US, UK, France and Germany, that declared that Iran was non-compliant with its nuclear obligations for the first time since September 2005. IAEA director general Rafael Grossi stated in an interview that the IAEA did "not have any proof of a systematic effort to move into a nuclear weapon", on the other hand, in his statement to the board of governors on 9 June he stated that "Unless and until Iran assists the agency in resolving the outstanding safeguards issues, the Agency will not be in a position to provide assurance that Iran's nuclear programme is exclusively peaceful". Axis of Resistance Main article: Axis of Resistance Israel has fought wars with Iranian proxies including against Hezbollah since the 1982 Lebanon War .

In the October 7 attacks in 2023, Hamas, an Iranian proxy in Gaza, started the Gaza war , following which Israel severely weakened both Hamas and fellow Iranian proxy Hezbollah in Lebanon, while also attacking the Houthis in Yemen. This is said to have weakened Iranian deterrence and increased Iranian isolation. Gaza war Main article: Gaza war Israel's strikes on Iran came against the backdrop of its ongoing war with Iran-aligned Hamas in Gaza and a broader escalation of its military actions across the region , including Israeli military activity in Lebanon , Yemen , Syria , and the occupied West Bank . They also came in the context of a risk of famine and humanitarian crisis in the Israeli blockaded Gaza Strip that a growing number of scholars and human rights organizations have described as a genocide .

In the weeks leading up to Israeli attacks, the Israeli government faced international pressure over the high risk of famine in Gaza and killing of civilians . Even Israel's allies in Europe had become critical of the starvation in Gaza, and the EU had announced it would reconsider its free-trade deal with Israel. Political scientists stated that the attack on Iran provided a distraction from Israel's actions in Gaza. Nesrine Malik said the attack was an attempt by Israel to bring a Europe alienated by Israel's action in the suffering in Gaza back to its side. Announcement Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu announced Operation Rising Lion , targeting Iran's main enrichment facility in Natanz , its nuclear scientists, and parts of its ballistic missile program. He described Iran's nuclear efforts as "a clear and present danger to Israel's very survival", and said the operation would continue "for as many days as it takes".

In a speech announcing the attack, Netanyahu stated that for decades, Iran's leaders had openly called for Israel's destruction and warned that Iran could produce a nuclear weapon "in a very short time. It could be a year. It could be within a few months, less than a year." Timeline Further information: List of attacks during the Twelve-Day War 13 June Israeli airstrike locations at the Natanz Nuclear Facility Impact on a building in Tehran Aftermath of the Israeli strikes in Tehran In the early hours of 13 June 2025, the IDF attacked dozens of Iranian nuclear facilities, military bases and infrastructure installations, and key military commanders.

By 06:30 IDT , the Israeli Air Force (IAF) had launched five waves of air strikes, using more than 200 fighter jets to drop more than 330 munitions on about 100 targets. Israeli targets included the Natanz Nuclear Facility and other infrastructure of Iran's nuclear program, with no nuclear accidents occurring as a result of the airstrikes. Meanwhile, the Mossad operatives along with commando forces sabotaged Iran's air defense systems and missile infrastructure. An Israeli official said the Mossad had smuggled precision weapons and established a covert drone base near Tehran, which were used to disable air defenses, securing air superiority for Israeli aircraft.

The operations in the early hours, which killed 30 Iranian generals in minutes as well as nine nuclear scientists, are referred to as Operation Red Wedding and Operation Narnia. Israel conducted strikes in Tabriz in the early afternoon, reportedly targeting an area near Tabriz Airport . Explosions also occurred at the Hamadan Airbase the Parchin military base, and the subterranean Fordow Fuel Enrichment Plant .

The IDF later confirmed striking the Hamadan and Tabriz airbases and the Isfahan Nuclear Technology/Research Center . Iranian media reported that at least two Israeli fighter jets were downed over Iranian airspace and a female pilot was captured.

The IDF denied this. Western Wall Plaza under evacuation orders on 13 June 2025 Civil defense siren and missile explosions sounds, recorded in Central Israel, 13 June 2025 at 21:15 After the Israeli attack, Iranian leaders promised a "harsh response", with attacks against Israeli and US forces in military bases across the Middle East . Shortly thereafter, Iran launched missiles and drones at military bases and air bases under the codename Operation True Promise III . These included more than 100 Shahed drones , according to IDF Brigadier General Effie Defrin .

The US evacuated some of its troops from Iraq and also authorized the evacuation of family members of US troops across the region. Around 9 p.m. IDT—10 minutes before dozens of missiles hit—Israeli citizens received IDF Home Front Command phone alerts about an incoming attack. Some Iranian missiles hit targets in Tel Aviv including the Da Vinci high-rise apartment building and shopping centre on the corner of Leonardo Da Vinci and Kaplan Streets immediately bordering the Kirya military headquarters near Begin Road ; others were shot down. Sirens were activated in Amman , Jordan's capital. Some drones were intercepted by the Royal Jordanian Air Force in Jordanian air space; some by the IAF over Saudi Arabia and Syria. Various Israeli sources said that an order for Israeli civilians to seek shelter was later lifted, suggesting that a majority or all of the drones were destroyed. An intercepted drone fell on a house and wounded three people in Irbid , Jordan. Several hours later, Iranian state media announced that accurate military and intelligence sites had been targeted in retaliation for earlier Israeli attacks on Iranian territory.

At least 63 Israelis were injured: one critically, one seriously, eight mildly, and the rest lightly, according to Magen David Adom . One civilian woman later died of her wounds. Seven soldiers were lightly injured.

The Israel Fire and Rescue Services rescued two people from a building struck in Tel Aviv, while the IDF's Home Front Command rescued another civilian from a building in the city.

The IDF estimated that around 150 ballistic missiles were fired in two waves during the attack, which did little damage. Al-Mayadeen reports that Iranian missiles struck a nuclear energy research facility in Tel Aviv.

The Israeli military has prohibited the public from sharing photos and videos depicting the damage and destruction resulting from the Iranian missile attack. Elsewhere, The Houthis fired a ballistic missile from Yemen at Jerusalem. It landed in Sa'ir , West Bank, injuring five Palestinians, including three children. 14 June Debris in Narmak , Iran, following an Israeli strike on 14 June 2025 In the early morning of 14 June, Iranian media reported an explosion and a fire at Tehran's Mehrabad International Airport . It also reported Iranian air defenses engaging Israeli projectiles above Isfahan and exchanging fire with Israeli drones on reconnaissance missions in northwestern Iran.

The IDF later said that it bombed an underground facility in western Iran used to store ballistic and cruise missiles. Iran confirmed the deaths of General Gholamreza Mehrabi and General Mehdi Rabbani . Iran also made unsubstantiated claims to have downed three Israeli F-35 jets, captured two pilots, and killed a third, and the IDF repeatedly denied claims of air force casualties or damage. Iran's Ministry of Petroleum announced attacks on two oil fields in Bushehr province , where fires halted the production of gas.

The Red Crescent Society said Israel had attacked 18 of the 31 provinces of Iran .

In the evening, the IDF announced a new wave of strikes on "military targets" in Tehran, which cut off electricity in the Shahran neighborhood, striking oil and gasoline depots, the Iranian Ministry of Defence headquarters, and the Organization of Defensive Innovation and Research building. Iran launched 200 ballistic missiles overnight, killing two people, injuring more than 60, and heavily damaging several homes were reported heavily damaged, and at least two civilians killed and more than 20 injured.

The IDF asserted that a "small number" of missiles evaded air defenses, struck residential areas, and caused casualties in Tel Aviv, Ramat Gan , and Rishon LeZion The US help intercept incoming missiles. According to Xinhua News Agency , several Iranian missiles transited Syrian airspace en route to Israel, with at least two missiles falling in Daraa Governorate (southern Syria). Reportedly, several Arab states have participated in shooting down Iranian drones, or sharing radar information to help in destroying them.

In the night, Iran fired another barrage of missiles targeting northern Israel, killing five people and injuring at least 23 others. A fire also broke out near the BAZAN oil refinery in Haifa , where pipes and transmission lines were damaged.

The U.S. 6th Fleet stationed five Arleigh Burke class destroyers ( Thomas Hudner , Arleigh Burke , The Sullivans , Oscar Austin and Paul Ignatius ) in the Eastern Mediterranean Sea to assist with Israeli missile defense and disrupt Iranian air strikes.

In February 2025, the Department of Defense awarded the Armed Forces Service Medal to the USS Arleigh Burke for its role in shooting down missiles in the conflict. 15 June Aftermath of the Iranian attacks in Bat Yam On the morning of 15 June, Iran and the Houthis in Yemen launched ballistic missiles simultaneously, striking buildings in Bat Yam and Rehovot , a mall in Kiryat Ekron , and in Tel Aviv.

In Bat Yam, 61 buildings were damaged, according to Mayor Tzvika Brot . Nine people were killed and about 200 people were injured, according to the MDA. Israel later said that it intercepted most of the missiles and that the remainder failed to enter Israeli territory.

In Rehovot, Iranian missiles struck the Weizmann Institute of Science and damaged dozens of other buildings. Debris from Iranian missiles also hit two sites in the West Bank . A Shahab-class missile caused a rooftop fire in al-Bireh , close to Mahmoud Abbas , the president of the Palestinian Authority . Three children were wounded outside Sa'ir by debris from an intercepted missile.

Later in the day, Iran fired a barrage consisting of several ballistic missiles at Israel, Iran also fired a missile at an area in Caesarea , near the Netanyahu family home.

The IDF announced that the missiles were intercepted, with at least 50 rockets downed.

In the evening, Iran fired several barrages of missiles at Israel, injuring seven people in Haifa and one in Kiryat Gat , and causing fires and property damage. A strike was reported on the Ministry of Justice building in Tehran and the IAF said that it bombed a refueling plane at the Mashhad Shahid Hasheminejad International Airport in what was possibly the most distant operation in its history. Israel also struck surface-to-surface missiles in Iran as well as military bases and the Iranian foreign ministry. Missiles struck and killed the intelligence chief and the intelligence deputy chief of the IRGC. Along with the airstrikes, five car bombs detonated across Tehran, with explosions taking place next to government and nuclear-related sites and killing several nuclear scientists. and an Israeli official denied any involvement.

The IDF otherwise warned Iranian civilians to evacuate from the areas surrounding weapon factories and military bases in Shiraz. Iranian president Masoud Pezeshkian reportedly sustained light injuries to his leg following an airstrike targeting a meeting of the Supreme National Security Council in Tehran. He escaped with other officials through an emergency hatch. 16 June Israeli attack on IRIB studio in Tehran on 16 June 2025 The IDF hit the command center of the Quds Force in Tehran. Iran International reported explosions were heard in the vicinity of the Fordow nuclear facility. IDF strikes were said to have taken place in the vicinity of the Parchin military installations.

The IRGC's Ansar al-Mahdi Corps reported that one of its commanders and a soldier were killed in an attack in Ijrud County of Zanjan province .

The IDF said it has destroyed 120 surface-to-surface missile launchers in Iran. Brigadier-General Effie Defrin said that 30% of Iran's missile launchers have been destroyed and said it destroyed a weapons convoy between Tehran and Qom . IRNA reported that Israeli forces struck the Farabi Hospital in Kermanshah , causing significant damage and at least 15 buildings in the Kermanshah missile factory were hit by Israel. Israel bombed the Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting (IRIB) state broadcaster during a live broadcast.

At least one IRIB employee was killed in the attack, while the station said its offices were struck by four bombs. Israel issued evacuation orders to residents of some areas of Tehran and hit Iranian missile launchers in western Iran.

The IDF said one of its drones destroyed two Iranian F-14s . Nour News reported that Iranian forces claim to have shot down an F-35 over Tabriz.

The IDF hit a building killing Iran's intelligence chief and other key senior officials. Mohammad Kazemi , Hassan Mohaghegh , and Mohammad Khatami were confirmed to have been killed by the airstrike. According to Iran International , Khamenei was moved to a bunker located in the town of Lavizan , along with his family. Iran's attack on Haifa oil refineries on the night of 15 to 16 June 2025 Iran launched another barrage of missiles against Israel and fragments were reported to have caused damage to the US Embassy Branch Office in Tel Aviv . A school in Tel Aviv as well as homes in Bnei Brak , Haifa and Petah Tikva were hit. Eight civilians were killed and over 90 were injured. Israel reported 287 people were hospitalized overnight. Haifa's oil refinery was also targeted, causing significant damage and killing three workers. According to Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft executive vice president Trita Parsi , successive Iranian missile attacks may have eroded Israeli defenses, allowing a larger percentage of missiles to get through than before.

Following the attacks, Israel confirmed 24 fatalities to date, the majority of which occurred outside bomb shelters, and had tallied 350 Iranian missiles, clustering around 30–60 at a time. Additionally, a drone fired toward the US consulate in Erbil , Iraq , was intercepted. Iran fired ballistic missiles at Petah Tikva again, killing four people and injuring 15 people. Among the victims was Holocaust survivor Ivette Shmilovitz. Two missiles also hit Tel Aviv, destroying a number of buildings. 17 June Iranian bombardment against the Israeli Military Intelligence School In the morning, Iran launched about 20 missiles at Israel, lightly injuring five people, and struck targets across Israel, hitting Tel Aviv as well as residential neighbourhoods in Bat Yam and Tamra. Ynet reported that an Iranian missile struck the city of Herzliya , damaging an eight-story building and setting an empty bus on fire. Explosions were heard in the Dan district surrounding Tel Aviv and West Jerusalem .

The IDF said it shot down 30 Iranian drones overnight.

The IRGC claimed to have hit a military intelligence centre and a Mossad operations planning centre. Four impacts occurred in Tel Aviv, with one directly striking Camp Moshe Dayan. An Iranian ballistic missile attack toward northern Israel during the evening was successfully intercepted by Israel.

The IDF said 40% of Iran's ballistic missile launchers had been destroyed.

The Institute for the Study of War in the US noted that the five morning attacks had fewer missiles than previous salvos, which it held as indicating a degradation of Iran's missile forces.

The IDF assassinated Major-General Ali Shadmani just days after he was appointed as a commander of Khatam al-Anbiya Central Headquarters . According to The Jerusalem Post , Shadmani was killed alongside dozens of IRGC officers. Israel said that it conducted "several extensive strikes" on military targets in western Iran, targeting missile launchers and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) storage facilities. According to Mehr News Agency , an Israeli rocket hit a checkpoint in Kashan , killing three people and injuring four others. Israeli forces struck a residential building in Tehran, according to IRNA, which also reported that three people were rescued from the rubble by the Red Crescent .

The IDF announced that it conducted heavy strikes against Iranian ballistic missile launchers in Isfahan using 60 fighter jets and that 12 missile storage and launch sites were hit during the attacks.

The state-owned Bank Sepah was targeted in a cyberattack, with the hacker group Predatory Sparrow claiming responsibility. Israeli jets hit Iranian missile launchers in western Iran and the Iranian Army claimed to have shot down 28 "hostile aircraft" including a spy drone . Israel denied the latter claims. 18 June The IDF said that 50 fighter jets struck around 20 buildings in Tehran, including factories producing raw materials, components and manufacturing systems for ballistic missiles. Iranian media said that the IDF struck an IRGC-affiliated university and a missile factory in Khojir .

The IDF also said it had destroyed 70 missile batteries. Israel also attacked nuclear centrifuge production sites, with the IAEA confirming strikes on Karaj 's TESA Complex and the Tehran Research Complex.

In the morning, Israel hit sites in Tehran and issued an evacuation order for people in district 18 of Tehran. Iran's internal security headquarters was destroyed during the attacks, according to Israel. An Iranian Red Crescent building was also reportedly struck. Iranian media reported that Iranian forces shot down a "hostile" F-35 jet in the Javadabad area of Varamin .

In the afternoon, the IDF said that it had struck 40 military targets in western Iran, including a primed Emad missile launcher, missile storage sites, and soldiers, with 25 fighter jets. To date, IDF spokesperson Effie Defrin said that 1,100 targets in Iran had been struck by Israel. He added that five AH-1 helicopters were struck in Kermanshah in the morning. Later, the IDF said that it destroyed three more AH-1 helicopters.

The IDF later announced that 60 fighter jets participated in a wave of strikes against 20 targets in Tehran, including weapon manufacturing facilities, centrifuge production sites, and nuclear research and development locations.

During the night Israel downed three Iranian drones.

In the evening, Iran fired a single ballistic missile at Israel, setting off sirens in Tel Aviv and the surrounding area. According to the IRGC, the long-range Sejjil missile was used in the attack and one man was lightly injured.

By 18 June, the IDF estimated that Iran launched 400 missiles and 1,000 drones at Israel since the conflict began. It added that only 20 missiles impacted urban areas and less than 200 drones entered Israeli airspace. 19 June The IAF hit targets in Tehran with airstrikes during the night of 18 June.

In the morning, Israel hit dozens of military facilities in Iran including air defense and missile production sites.

The IR-40 reactor containment building at the Arak Nuclear Complex was destroyed as were nearby distillation towers . Earlier in the day, Israel had told told residents of the surrounding areas of Arak and Khondab to evacuate. Israel said there was no danger of radiation leakage.

The IAEA said that the reactor was "not operational and contained no nuclear material".

The IDF said it believes it has destroyed two thirds of the Iran's missile launchers.

The IDF said that its drones struck Iranian soldiers who were repairing ballistic missile launchers. Overnight Iran fired a ballistic missile salvo at Israel that was intercepted by the IDF. Israel also downed two Iranian drones headed toward the north of Israel.

In the early morning, Iran fired a barrage of around 20 ballistic missiles at Israel, striking at least four sites in central and southern Israel, including the Soroka Medical Center in Beersheba, Tel Aviv, Ramat Gan, and Holon . According to Israel's Ministry of Health , 271 people were injured, and a Soroka hospital spokesperson reported significant damage to the hospital. A cluster bomb was also used in the attack, with one hitting a home in Azor .

The Soroka Medical Center suffered a direct hit, causing extensive damage and a suspected chemical leak. Seventy-one people were lightly injured there. Israeli president Isaac Herzog said the hospital was a "beacon of coexistence for Israelis and Palestinians".

In Ramat Gan, 22 people were injured, a missile impacted near several high-rise buildings, and several apartment buildings were damaged with 16 people were injured. Later, Iran fired at least 10 missiles at northern Israel, with no reports of impacts or casualties. 20 June Protest in Tehran against Israeli strikes on Iran, 20 June 2025 Overnight, the IDF claimed to have targeted Iranian military sites, including missile production facilities, the SPND program headquarters, and a Tehran nuclear research center, later reporting the destruction of 35 missile launchers.

While the IDF stated it targeted infrastructure in western and central Iran, Iranian media reported a drone strike on a Gisha district residential building, allegedly a Basij military base, and the assassination of an unnamed nuclear scientist. Iranian missile barrages struck Beersheba, damaging apartment blocks, the central rail station , and sparking fires near high-tech facilities, resulting in seven civilian injuries. Subsequent strikes involving 25 missiles hit Haifa, striking the Al-Jarina Mosque , as well as central and southern Israel, injuring 23 people. Reports indicated cluster bomb use in Beersheba and explosions in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem. Cabinet secretary Yossi Fox noted that of 520 ballistic missiles fired by Iran, only 25 impacted the ground, a 5% impact rate. 21 June Israel struck three buildings in Isfahan , with Iranian media reporting that a nuclear facility was targeted. Defense Minister Israel Katz said the IDF killed Quds Force commander Saeed Izadi and struck the vehicle of IRGC commander Behnam Shahriyari . Iran confirmed the killing of a tenth nuclear scientist, Isar Tabatabai-Qamsheh.

The IAEA stated that a centrifuge workshop in the nuclear research complex in Isfahan was destroyed by the Israeli strikes. IAF struck a residential building in Qom, while explosions were reported over Najafabad , Malard , Isfahan and Tehran. Israeli airstrikes targeted a nuclear site in Isfahan, according to the deputy provincial governor who spoke to the Fars new agency. Fars reported that the air defense system in Isfahan had been activated.

The IDF said that it hit a military installation in Shiraz, no casualties were reported, and following an Israeli airstrike, the headquarters of the Iranian Cyber Police (FATA) in Tehran sustained significant damage.

The IDF announced that it attacked dozens of military targets in the Ahvaz area, using 30 fighter jets that dropped around 50 munitions. Among the targets were a ballistic missile storage facility and a radar site. A strike in Tehran killed a former bodyguard of assassinated Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah alongside a member of Kata'ib Sayyid al-Shuhada . Later, the IDF said that around 60 fighter jets conducted strikes in central Iran in the evening, destroying three F-14 fighter jets. Fires broke out in Tel Aviv and the nearby city of Holon after Iran launched a new wave of missiles and struck a residential building in Beit Shean , although no injuries were reported.

The IDF said that it intercepted 40 Iranian drones overnight, and added that 470 drones were shot down since the war began, a 99% interception rate. An Iranian Shahed-136 managed to strike a home in Beit She'an, causing damage, while another hit an open area near Highway 90 in the Arabah area. 22 June: US strikes on Iran nuclear sites Main article: 2025 United States strikes on Iranian nuclear sites Further information: List of attacks during the Twelve-Day War § American airstrikes President Donald Trump and Vice President JD Vance in the Situation Room of the White House during the attacks, 21 June 2025 ( EDT ) According to the IDF, 20 fighter jets conducted overnight strikes on dozens of military targets in central Iran, including weapons production and storage sites, air defenses, and infrastructure at Isfahan International Airport .

In the morning, the IDF said that it destroyed two Iranian F-5 fighter jets at Dezful Airport alongside eight ballistic missile launchers, killing nearby soldiers. Strong explosions were heard in Tehran, Isfahan and Bandar Lengeh , with Iranian air defense systems being activated. Explosions were also heard in Bushehr . Iranian media reported that Israel struck a power plant and a military garrison in Yazd .

The IDF confirmed conducting simultaneous strikes in the areas of Isfahan, Bushehr, Ahvaz, and Yazd, using 30 fighter jets that dropped around 60 munitions. Among the targets were the 'Imam Hussein' strategic missile headquarters in Yazd, an Iranian drone regiment headquarters, air defense battery factories, missile launchers, and drone storage sites.

The strikes killed several Iranian military personnel who were operating at launch platforms. Timeline of the U.S. strikes on Iranian sites A Northrop B-2 Spirit plane, used by the U.S. in the operation Later, the IDF said that 20 warplanes dropped 30 munitions against targets that included ballistic missile sites, satellites, and radars in Kermanshah and Hamadan, and an air defense system in the center of Tehran. Iranian media reported that an Israeli Hermes 900 drone was shot down by Iranian air defense.

The Iranian media also reported that Majid Masibi, who the Islamic Republic accused of "spying for Israel", had been executed.

The IDF stated that Iran launched 27 missiles at Israel in two barrages with 11 sites being hit spanning from the occupied Golan Heights , to the Upper Galilee , to the northern and central coastal areas of Israel and "extensive damages" were reported in Tel Aviv and Haifa. Eighty-six people were injured in the strikes. Thirteen people were lightly injured when a strike hit a building in Tel Aviv, and six others were hurt in Ness Ziona . A man was moderately hurt on Route 431 near Be'er Ya'akov . An undetected Iranian missile also hit a public square in Haifa, lightly injuring three people.

The images showed damage to the entrances of the facility which are blocked by dirt, and also several large holes/craters in the mountain which the facility is under. Prior to the strikes, satellite images of the facility appeared to show increase in logistics, with multiple trucks/heavy machinery gathering near the site, suggesting a possible move of Iran's nuclear material. Later, an Iranian source informed Reuters that they had moved the majority of enriched uranium out of the facility to an unknown location prior to the strikes. According to the IAEA, no new radiation has been detected from Iran's nuclear facilities since the US attack. Israel said that it was in "full coordination" with the US in planning the strikes. Pirhossein Kolivand , head of the Red Crescent , said that the strikes caused no fatalities.

On 25 June, Trump stated that people sent by Israel confirmed the destruction of the site. Protests erupted in Tehran against the US attacks on nuclear facilities, with President Masoud Pezeshkian joining in the protests.

Following the attack, during his remarks at the 2025 The Hague NATO summit , Trump said that the nuclear facilities were "obliterated" but called the intelligence "very inconclusive." The Iranian Parliament voted to close the Strait of Hormuz shortly after the American strikes took place, although the Supreme National Security Council was responsible for deciding whether to do so. 23 June: Iran strikes on US bases Further information: 2025 Iranian strikes on Al Udeid Air Base Damage to Evin Prison in Tehran following Israeli airstrikes on 23 June 2025 Iran launched 15 missiles toward Israel with shrapnel from Israeli interceptors falling in several cities. Explosions were heard in Jerusalem, causing sirens to sound for 30 minutes.

The IDF said that the attack consisted of five separate barrages, each made of several projectiles. It also said that most of the missiles were shot down by air defenses.

The Israel Electric Corporation said that power disruptions were caused in southern Israel after a missile struck close to a "strategic infrastructure facility". Iranian media reported that the rocket attack were organized by the IRGC and impacts were reported in five locations including Safed , Tel Aviv, Ashkelon , Ashdod , and Beisan while Israeli media reported four explosions including one in Ashdod and Tel Lachish , south of West Jerusalem. Israeli media reported air sirens in Israeli communities including Nahariya , Gesher Haziv , Hila , Me'ona and Mi'ilya . News reported that Iran had launched what they described as "devastating and powerful missile" strikes on US military bases in Qatar. According to TRT Global , Iranian state television had confirmed the operation since 23 June, citing military sources who said the attacks were in direct response to unspecified incidents that happened on Iranian territory. Iran launched at least six missiles on the American Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar with explosions being reported over Doha . It called the attack "Operation Annunciation of Victory". According to Qatari officials, the missiles targeting Al Udeid were intercepted and no casualties occurred. American bases in Iraq were reportedly also targeted, which was denied by an official. Israeli strikes hit six airfields located in western, eastern, and central Iran, targeting runways, underground facilities, and a refueling aircraft.

The strikes destroyed 15 Iranian fighter jets and helicopters such as the F-14, F-5, and AH-1 . Israel also targeted missile launchers and storage facilities in Kermanshah.

The IRGC shot down an Israeli Hermes 900 drone in Khorramabad . Iranian state-controlled media reported that an alleged spy, Mohammad Amin Mahdavi Shayesteh, was convicted and hanged for his connections to the Mossad. Around 50 Israeli warplanes conducted extensive strikes in Tehran, dropping over 100 munitions in the span of two hours.

In addition, Israel said it attacked Fordow's access routes.

The strike hit the entrance of Evin prison , while Israeli foreign minister Gideon Sa'ar posted "long live freedom". Iranian sources said that Israel struck an electric station in Evin , causing power cuts, and Shahid Beheshti University , although the university itself denied it. A spokesperson for the Iranian judiciary later said that at least 71 people had been killed in the attack on Evin prison. Announcement of ceasefire Main article: Twelve-Day War ceasefire Trump posting about the ceasefire on Truth Social , on 23 June, 6:02 p.m. EDT Following reports – later denied by the IDF – that Israel was running low on defensive interceptors and resupply efforts were putting the US in a 'bind', at 6:02 p.m. EDT on 23 June, Trump declared on social media that Iran and Israel had agreed to a ceasefire that would take effect the next day, labeling the conflict as the "12 Day War". Iran's minister of foreign affairs , Abbas Araghchi , contested this declaration, saying that no ceasefire proposal had been agreed to, but he stated that Iran would cease its military action if Israel likewise ceased hostilities "no later than 4 a.m. Tehran time".

At 6:45 a.m. Tehran time, Iranian air defense were activated in Tehran, and Iran fired another salvo of missiles at Beer Sheva at 7:07 a.m.

At 1:08 a.m. EDT (8:08 a.m. in Tel Aviv, 8:38 a.m. in Tehran) Trump stated that the ceasefire had begun and asked all sides not to violate it. Despite its volatile beginnings and initial violations by both Iran and Israel, the ceasefire held as of 24 June, in part due to Trump's continued direct intervention with Netanyahu. 24 June: Last missile exchanges and ceasefire The IDF stated that it killed hundreds of Basij operatives overnight and a nuclear scientist ahead of the announced ceasefire. Ali Bagheri also stated that nine people were killed in Israeli airstrikes on residential buildings in Gilan province overnight. Israel, after agreeing to a ceasefire with Iran, resumed its strikes, confirmed that it struck a radar system near Tehran in retaliation, and accused Iran of violating the peace deal by firing two missiles at Israeli cities. Iranian air defenses responded to continued Israeli strikes on the capital, with Iran firing another salvo of missiles at Beer Sheva. Early morning, Iran launched a total of around 20 missiles at Israel, targeting the country's north, south, and center. Four people were killed in Beersheba and 22 others were injured, and several buildings were damaged.

The IDF also stated that it intercepted two UAVs apparently launched from Iran around the same time as the missiles. Iraqi state media reported drone attacks on sites in Iraq: Iraq's Taji military base , the Imam Ali Air Base the Balad Air Base and the US Victory Base Complex . Sabah al-Numan, the military spokesman for the Iraqi Prime Minister, said several kamikaze drones targeted Iraqi military sites, severely damaging radar systems at the Taji military base and Imam Ali Air Base, while others were intercepted by Iraqi air defenses.

Later that morning, Israeli officials said that another wave of missiles were launched from Iran after the ceasefire went into effect, with the IDF stating that two missiles fired by Iran at 10:30 a.m. local time on Northern Israel were intercepted. Iran initially denied the attack but later stated that Israel conducted strikes until 9 a.m. local time. Iranian media reported sounds of explosions in Tehran, stated that the northern city of Babolsar was under attack, and that Israel had confirmed a strike against a radar facility near Tehran; Netanyahu's office stated it was destroyed. Post-ceasefire On 25 June, the IDF stated that it intercepted a UAV apparently launched by the Houthis.

On 28 June, another Houthi missile was intercepted by the IDF. A series of drone attacks were launched on airbases and oilfields in Iraq , allegedly by Iranian-backed militias.

The attacks began with the enforcement of ceasefire in the 12 day war. Iranian state broadcasters claimed that three suspected Mossad operatives were executed in Urmia .

On 26 June, French defence minister Sébastien Lecornu confirmed to the media that French forces in the region had intercepted Iranian drones targeting Israel prior to the ceasefire, stating that French Rafale jets and ground-to-air systems intercepted "less than 10 drones in the last few days" of the conflict. According to Lecornu, Iran had launched around 400 ballistic missiles and 1,000 drones towards Israel during the 12-day conflict.

In a public address on 27 June, President Trump was asked if the U.S. would consider bombing Iran again if intelligence suggested a dangerous level of uranium enrichment; he responded: "Sure, without question." In addition, Trump referred to Khamenei's statement where Khamenei declared victory, saying: "you're a man of great faith. A man who's highly respected in his country. You have to tell the truth. You got beat to hell". He added, "I wish the leadership of Iran would realize that you often get more with honey than you do with vinegar. Peace!" On 28 June, state funerals were held in Tehran for 60 people, including military commanders and nuclear scientists, killed in Israel's attacks.

The IDF meanwhile stated that it likely intercepted a ballistic missile launched by the Houthis.

On 5 July, Ali Khamenei made his first public appearance since the war began, attending a mourning ceremony on the eve of Ashoura in Tehran amid speculation over his whereabouts during the conflict.

On 6 July, the Houthis attacked a Liberian-flagged cargo ship in the Red Sea, killing three mariners and wounded two others.

In August 2025, Iran released information and photos of the person they claim is a female pilot that they captured on 13 June.

In December 2025, Iran's military admitted that earlier reports claiming it had shot down two Israeli F-35 fighter jets during the conflict were false.

On 5 January 2026, the Israeli Security Cabinet held a five-hour meeting and authorized additional strikes on Iran, following Netanyahu-Trump discussions and statements made the week before. Codenamed Operation Iron Strike, the expectation is that any new strike, and even the threat of new strikes, would further destabilize the Islamic Republic of Iran politically as it undergoes the ninth day of a mass street uprising in multiple cities across Iran.

In total, the IDF reported killing at least six senior military commanders.

At least 79 people were killed during the Israeli attack on Evin Prison . Two regional sources reported on 15 June that the death toll of Iranian nuclear scientists rose to 14, including some killed in car bombings.

The governor of Iran's East Azerbaijan province said 31 people were killed during the first day's strikes in the province, including 30 soldiers and one member of the Iranian Red Crescent Society .

In Israel during the war, 525 ballistic missiles were launched from Iran toward Israel. Between 50 and 60 of them struck the Israeli territory, and 8 missiles resulted in civilian deaths. Magen David Adom reported that 28 people had been killed by Iranian attacks, while the Ministry of Health added that 3,238 others had been hospitalized, including 28 in serious condition, 111 in moderate condition, and 30 in undetermined conditions.

The remaining individuals were lightly injured or treated for panic attacks. Over 9,000 others were displaced. Impact Further information: Economic impact of the Twelve-Day War International Flights were also suspended from Israel's airports and both Iraq and Jordan closed their airspace. Israel declared a state of special emergency , shut down its airspace, closed schools and banned large social gatherings. Israel also called up tens of thousands of IDF reservists in preparation for an Iranian retaliation.

The IDF announced that all of its pilots involved in the strikes returned unharmed.

The Community Security Trust issued warnings to the Jewish communities in the United Kingdom and France . Jewish Community Protection Service asked French Jews to be "extremely vigilant".

The Jerusalem Post reported the Anti-Defamation League was monitoring the situation within the United States.

The NYPD said they are increasing security at Jewish sites across New York City. New York governor Kathy Hochul said that the state is closely monitoring the situation, increasing security at sensitive sites and cybersecurity operations. New York City mayor Eric Adams and Police Commissioner Jessica Tisch said that they are deploying officers to Israeli embassies for protection, with Tisch saying: "That heightened deployment continued today and will continue for the next several days".

On 15 June, the US embassy in Iraq warned Americans may be targeted in attacks.

The State Department issued a level 4 travel advisory for Iraq.

On 17 June, CNN reported that India evacuated its students from Tehran through the Armenia–Iran border .

On 18 June, three Iranian government planes flew from Iran to Oman, one of those planes is the presidential plane, believed by some analysts to be Iranian diplomats heading to Oman for ceasefire talks. Airlines stopped flying over Israel, Iran, Iraq and Jordan, diverting some flights and canceling others. Iranians stood in lines for fuel and stocked up on food. Crude oil prices increased by 10% over the course of the 12-day conflict, as the OPEC+ coalition of producers, which includes Saudi Arabia, Russia, Iraq, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Kazakhstan, Algeria, and Oman, made substantial cuts to their output. Oil prices experienced a significant decline after Iran launched an attack on the US-operated Al-Udeid Air Base in Qatar. EU gas prices increased by 18% over the course of the 12-day conflict, and then decreased to previous levels. Diplomacy The United Nations Security Council meeting on 13 June concluded with statements from Iran's and Israel's respective ambassadors to the UN.

The Iranian ambassador Amir-Saeid Iravani stated that Israel's attacks constituted a declaration of war , accusing Israel of premeditated aggression and of a direct violation of the UN Charter .

The Israeli ambassador Danny Danon presented the attacks as "self-preservation for the state of Israel", asserted that they were prompted by a failure of diplomacy, and declared that he had come to seek "recognition that the international community has failed to stop Iran's nuclear programme".

Following the attack, diplomatic talks about nuclear energy between US and Iran which were scheduled to take place in Oman were indefinitely suspended.

On 15 June, Cypriot President Nikos Christodoulides announced he received a message from Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian meant for the Israeli government, which Christodoulides will discuss in a scheduled phone call with Netanyahu. That same day, Israeli media reported that Iran had approached the governments of Qatar and Oman to contact the United States in order to request a cessation of Israeli attacks. Trump announced that "many calls and meetings" were underway to broker a ceasefire, which was expected to take hold shortly, adding he anticipated a deal "soon".

On 16 June, the Iranian foreign ministry reported that the Islamic Consultative Assembly , the nation's parliament, had begun drafting a proposal to exit the Non-Proliferation Treaty , while insisting that Iran did not intend to pursue nuclear weapons. Several foreign ministers of European countries told Iran to return to diplomacy and "avoid escalation". Iran denied asking to come to the White House and said of Trump "The only thing more despicable than his lies is his cowardly threat to 'take out' Iran's Supreme Leader", Iran also said it will not negotiate under duress and threatened anyone who threatened it.

On 24 June 2025, a ceasefire between Israel and Iran formally took effect at approximately 04:00 GMT, following coordinated diplomatic efforts led by the United States.

On 8 October 2025, in a Fox News interview, Trump said there was a "set of circumstances" that enabled the Gaza war peace plan , some of them were Israeli and American strikes in Iran aimed at destroying the Islamic Republic's nuclear program.

In Israel Residential building in Petah Tikva after an Iranian attack Following the initial Israeli strikes on Iran, Israel declared a state of maximum alert, with the IDF urging civilians to remain in shelters in anticipation of further attacks. Public gatherings were prohibited, schools were closed, and flights at Israel's main airport were canceled as precautionary measures. Iran threatened to target American, British, and French bases and vessels in the region if they assist Israel in countering Iran's strikes. Israel launched an airlift operation to repatriate 100,000 Israelis stranded abroad due to the conflict. Israel's flag carrier El Al , along with local airlines Israir and Arkia , announced that they would participate, with El Al stating that repatriation flights were scheduled from Athens , Budapest , Milan , Rome , Paris , and London . Cruise ship operator Mano Maritime also announced its intent to participate.

The first two flights departed from Larnaca , Cyprus, on 18 June and returned hundreds of citizens.

The Iranian attack on the Weizmann Institute, a "world-leading multidisciplinary research institution in the natural and exact sciences" caused severe damage to advanced medical and biological research. A Weizmann professor told The Times of Israel that colleagues from around the world have shown solidarity with the institute. Israel has consistently targeted Iranian nuclear scientists for assassination in a bid to undermine Iran's nuclear program. Additionally, it is reported that the institute is collaborating with Israeli defense establishments.

The strike wiped out a hub of cancer research that had international reach. Scientists report that "everything inside was lost", including "irreplaceable samples" from cancer patients from the United States, France, Switzerland, and other countries, decades‑old cell lines, cancer biomarker studies, and anti-cancer vaccinations research. Many other research labs were ruined by the attack, including the neuroscience lab. Among the lost research material, the most valuable scientifically was more than 2000 transgenic Drosophila lines, a tool for genetic research.

During the war, there was a shortage of bomb shelters among Arab towns , causing frustration among Arab Israelis about safe spaces in times of missile attacks.

In response, a network of Arab professionals teamed up to create a website that locates shelter areas for local residents in these towns. Mahdi Kabaha, one of the co-founders of the project, stressed that the group is "filling the gap that the state is supposed to fill" and expressed dissatisfaction with the lack of preparation from the state on this matter before the war began.

On 25 June, Israeli defense minister Katz signed an order to designate the Central Bank of Iran and other Iranian banks as terrorist organizations because they were allegedly financing Iranian militant groups the day after the ceasefire agreement. He said that his move was made to target "the heart of the Iranian regime's terror financing system, which funds, arms and directs terror throughout the Middle East".

Although most Iranian missiles launched at Israel during the war were intercepted, 36 are known to have directly impacted Israel, causing significant damage. Seven missiles struck oil and power facilities, and six hit five military and intelligence facilities, including the Tel Nof Airbase and Camp Glilot, which contains the main base of Unit 8200 .

The Wall Street Journal reported that in the final days of the conflict Israel's inventory of defensive missiles was depleting, raising concerns regarding the effectiveness of its long-range missile defense systems. Iran adapted its missile tactics during the 12-day conflict, increasing its success rate from 8% to 16% by using more advanced, longer-range missiles and varying attack patterns, exposing vulnerabilities in Israel's sophisticated missile defense systems. Iran's most effective strikes occurred on 22 June, when 10 out of 27 missiles hit Israel.

The Haifa refinery, the largest in Israel, was entirely shut down for two weeks and was not expected to reach full capacity until October, incurring a loss of around US$300 million. Central Bank Governor Amir Yaron told Bloomberg that the war with Iran had cost Israel about 20 billion shekels (US$5.9 billion), or about 1% of its gross domestic product . He predicted that Israel could face a budget deficit.

During the war, the IDF occupied 250 Palestinian homes in the West Bank, expelling the residents and turning them into temporary military bases.

On their return days later, multiple families reported extensive damage, filth and theft. A report from The Daily Telegraph , utilizing radar data from Oregon State University that monitors bomb damage in conflict areas through satellite images, revealed that Iranian missiles hit several important military sites with "remarkable accuracy." These targets included the Tel Nof Airbase, the Gelilot intelligence base, and the Ziporit facility for armor and weapons manufacturing.

In total, the Iranian missile attacks caused 28 deaths, destroyed 2,305 homes within 240 buildings, damaged two universities and one hospital, and forced over 13,000 Israelis to evacuate their homes.

By 20th June 2025, at least 8,000 were reported to be homeless.

By 24th June 2025, the war had left at least 15,000 Israelis homeless.

In Iran Further information: 2025 Iran internal crisis and 2025 Afghan deportation from Iran A residential building in Tehran with missile damage, 13 June 2025 CNN reported that Iranians as of 15 June were fleeing major cities in Iran. Tasnim News Agency reported that Iranian authorities suspended flights at Imam Khomeini International Airport , although the facility itself was not directly affected by the attacks. Return flights were canceled for pilgrims in Saudi Arabia .

After the initial attack, widespread internet outages were reported across major Iranian cities. According to the Guardian, Iran was fearful of Israeli online aggression and almost completely shut down the internet at one point during the war. Local sources told the Guardian that no one except journalists working for accredited foreign media outlets had access to the internet. A student in Tehran told the Guardian he felt "walled in", another said that the blackout limited citizens to using local apps, which the government might use "to spy on us".

On 19 June, Iran blocked the internet for more than 12 hours according to NetBlocks .

On 21 June, Iran International reported that according to Netblocks the internet was disconnected again. Digiato reported that citizens said they had no internet access. Authorities told Iranians to delete WhatsApp over concerns regarding data gathered being shared with Israel. WhatsApp in response said they are "concerned these false reports will be an excuse for our services to be blocked at a time when people need them the most" and stated that it does not share any information with any government.

In response to the shutdown, Elon Musk 's SpaceX reactivated its Starlink satellite internet service for Iran. According to reports, the move was intended to provide Iranian civilians with uncensored access to the internet during the conflict. Aftermath of an Israeli strike on a residential building in Tehran A hacking group linked to Israel claimed responsibility for stealing $90 million (£67 million) from an Iranian cryptocurrency exchange , a day after it claimed to have destroyed data from Iran's Bank Sepah .

On 12 August 2025, Iranian police said they had detained 21,000 suspects during the war, including 260 accused of spying and 172 for illegal filming.

The Jerusalem Post reported that most arrests of individuals accused by Iranian authorities of being "Zionist collaborators" have occurred in the country's Kurdish regions ( Iranian Kurdistan ). Several Kurdish men were charged with espionage and subsequently executed in public . Amnesty International subsequently described the execution rate as "the highest figure recorded in decades," intended to suppress dissent among Iran's minority populations. Israel's use of military, cyber, media and psychological tools Discussions with high-ranking officials from Israel's intelligence sector disclosed the methods employed in the attack, which integrated both human and artificial intelligence. "This operation represents the culmination of extensive efforts by the Mossad aimed at undermining Iran's nuclear initiative," stated Sima Shain, a former director of research at Mossad. Israeli operatives covertly transported a number of drones and missile systems into Iran. Israeli media indicates that the killings of Iranian military leaders and various Israeli actions stemmed from Israeli intelligence activities. Reports indicated that Mossad penetrated the Iranian security system and that Israeli intelligence operatives attempted to influence public sentiment via media assaults.

The Iranian government instructed its officials to refrain from using Internet-connected smartphones because of data breaches. Iranian nuclear program Iran's uranium enrichment facilities at Natanz and Fordow were seriously damaged, according to Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi and the IAEA. Experts consulted by The New York Times concurred that all of the working centrifuges at the sites were likely destroyed.

The Isfahan research center, which could be involved in nuclear weapons development, was also damaged.

Before the war, the IAEA estimated that Iran's 400-kilogram (880 lb) stockpile of enriched uranium was enough for 10 nuclear bombs.

The status and location of this stockpile is unclear. Based on pre-attack satellite imagery of trucks at nuclear sites, the IAEA and some Israeli and Western officials believe Iran may have evacuated it.

Since Iran may have other locations where it can install centrifuges, the IAEA and many analysts, including Richard Nephew , concluded that the nuclear program was only set back by a few months.

After a "low confidence" Defense Intelligence Agency assessment to this effect was leaked, a Pentagon spokesman said "We have degraded their program by one to two years." Citing the extensive damage to nuclear sites and assassinations of key scientific personnel, the Institute for Science and International Security concluded that "The time Iran would need to build even a non-missile deliverable nuclear weapon has increased significantly." Other Israeli and Western officials contended that Iran could not have easily moved its uranium stockpile and it was buried under the rubble of the attacked sites, so recovery attempts would be detected. Nicholas Miller of Dartmouth College and Rosemary Kelanic of the think tank Defense Priorities suggested the war only strengthened Iran's ambition to achieve a nuclear deterrent, and began a " cat and mouse game ". According to The New York Times, US intelligence had determined that entering the war would likely lead Iran to lift the 2003 fatwa against nuclear weapons .

On 23 June, the Iranian parliament approved an outline of a bill fully suspending Iran's cooperation with the IAEA, intending to block the installation of surveillance cameras, inspections, and the IAEA's receiving of reports.

On 25 June, the parliament voted in favour of the bill, allowing the suspension to start.

On 2 July, Iranian president Masoud Pezeshkian ordered the country to suspend cooperation with the IAEA, though the order included no timetables or details about what that suspension would entail. Israeli Foreign Minister Gideon Saar called the decision "scandalous" and urged the European nations which were part of the 2015 Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action nuclear deal with Iran to implement the "snapback clause", reimposing all UN sanctions. A team of IAEA inspectors left Iran on 4 July. Misinformation A commonly shared fake AI-generated image that reportedly shows a damaged Israeli jet During the conflict, there were widespread psychological warfare and misinformation campaigns by both Israel and Iran. These campaigns made use of social media and AI tools to be "more intense and more targeted than anything that had come before". Roi Soussan of the Israeli fact-checking organisation FakeReporter said, "What sets this war apart from others is that our researchers found clear narratives aimed at the Israeli public, and clear narratives aimed at the Iranians that are pretty similar". BBC Verify reported on 21 June that "a wave of disinformation has been unleashed online" following Israel's strikes on Iran, including AI-generated videos that boasted of Iran's military capabilities. Pro-Palestinian social media accounts shared a video that falsely claimed to show an Israeli F-35 being shot down. It gained 21 million views, but the footage was actually from a flight simulator video game and was later removed by TikTok .

The three most-viewed Iranian fake videos collectively gained 100 million views across multiple platforms. According to the CEO of Alethea analyst group, the surge in such content is linked to Russian influence networks that have shifted focus from undermining support for Ukraine to spreading doubt about the effectiveness of Western, especially American, military technology. She noted that since Russia lacks a direct counter to the F-35, it instead aims to weaken support for the aircraft through disinformation. Other analysts have noted that the large amount of disinformation marks the first time generative AI has been used at scale during a conflict. Pro-Israel social media accounts also circulated old clips of Iranian protests and gatherings, falsely claiming they showed increasing Iranian support for Israel's campaign.

After Israel's 13 June strike, AI-manipulated video clips of Pakistani Defence Minister Khawaja Asif , former IRGC commander-in-chief Mohsen Rezaee and Trump, aimed at depicting Pakistan as Iran's accomplice, were posted online and subsequently picked up by media outlets such as the Daily Mail , Indian adversarial media and Arab news networks.

The Tehran Times posted a video generated using Veo that claimed to show destruction in Tel Aviv. Grok , an AI chatbot developed by xAI , falsely identified the fake videos as authentic footage of the war in some cases. Shortly after the explosions occurred at Evin Prison , a video surfaced on X and Telegram featuring the hashtag "#freeevin." The content of the posts and videos seemed to lack authenticity. According to the researchers, these videos were part of an "Israeli ruse." FakeReporter uncovered an Iranian influence network of 3,000 Twitter accounts posing as Israelis expressing opposition to the war and blaming Benjamin Netanyahu.

In October 2025, a Citizen Lab report found that after the Israeli strikes on Evin prison, a network of 50 fake accounts on X (Twitter) purporting to be Iranian residents near the prison had posted AI-generated and/or manipulated content that called for people to storm the prison in the aftermath of the strikes as part of an anti-government uprising. Based in part on the high production value of one of the videos and the release shortly after the strikes, Citizen Lab concluded that the network was mostly likely either directly run by an Israeli government agency or through contractors with advance knowledge of the strikes. Haaretz also found that Israeli-funded networks also promoted the restoration of Reza Pahlavi to the Iranian throne during the war. Reactions and responses Main article: Reactions to the Twelve-Day War The Zionist enemy has made a big mistake, has committed a great crime, it must be punished and it is being punished, it has already been punished." In Iran, after the initial wave of Israeli strikes, various authorities warned of a retaliation to follow. There were also local support for retaliation and trepidation as to what would follow. Diasporic figures were generally continuing their support for opposition to the government. Iran also claimed that Pakistan would use its nuclear weapons against Israel, should they be used on Iran. Pakistan denied this.

In Israel, Netanyahu stated that the strikes marked a pivotal moment claiming "We are at a decisive moment in Israel's history" and said would continue until the threat from Iran was neutralized. Defense Minister Israel Katz said, in response to Iran's initial attacks that it had crossed red lines by targeting civilians, and added that they will pay very heavy prices for that. Katz warned that "Tehran will burn" if Iran continues to fire missiles at Israel. IDF Chief of Staff Eyal Zamir stated that the Israeli Army is "mobilizing tens of thousands of soldiers and preparing across all borders," as he warned that "anyone who tries to challenge us will pay a heavy price" and that "it was at point of no return". Most Israelis supported Israeli strikes on Iran. Israel's attacks prompted Reza Pahlavi , Maryam Rajavi and other diasporic Iranian opposition figures to call for the overthrow of the Iranian government. Some leaders of the Woman, Life, Freedom movement condemned the attacks, which they said did not help the Iranian opposition. Sepideh Qolian said that war will not bring democracy. Shirin Ebadi , Narges Mohammadi and Jafar Panahi called for an end to the war and condemned the attacks on civilians by both Israel and Iran. Mehrangiz Kar said: "People are angry, and they hate the Islamic Republic. But they now probably hate Mr. Netanyahu and his military policies even more." University of South Florida political scientist Mohsen Milani said there was little evidence in Iran of the kind of opposition which could topple the Islamic republic.

In the United States, Trump said that he told Netanyahu to continue Israel's attack, but that the United States does not want a long term war, only to not allow Iran to have a nuclear weapon. Trump praised the initial attacks and ordered support to Israel. He also threatened Iran's head of state would be an easy target for assassination. Secretary of State Marco Rubio had initially stated that Israel had "acted independently," but that was later contradicted by Trump as having known about it.

The US also moved jets and the aircraft carrier USS Nimitz to the region. Most Americans oppose a US military intervention in the war. Some of his supporters criticized Trump's support for Israeli strikes, and the possible involvement of the United States in the war.

In a poll of Trump voters, 53% said the U.S. should not get involved in the Iran–Israel conflict. Secretary of Defense Pete Hegseth and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Dan Caine conduct a press briefing after the United States strikes on Iranian nuclear sites , 22 June 2025 G7 leaders issued a statement at the 2025 G7 summit in Canada that read: "We affirm that Israel has a right to defend itself. We reiterate our support for the security of Israel. Iran is the principal source of regional instability and terror." UK prime minister Keir Starmer convened the national emergencies committee ( COBRA ) and said that "Iran must never have a nuclear weapon" and also that the UK prefers a "diplomatic approach".

The White House said that Trump would decide "within two weeks" whether to join Israel's war against Iran. United States special envoy Steve Witkoff and Iranian Foreign Minister Araghchi reportedly spoke by phone several times after the start of hostilities.

In Germany, German chancellor Friedrich Merz praised Israel's strikes and stated that Israel is "doing the dirty work for us" in Iran during an interview with ZDF . Merz also said that the regime in Tehran has been weakened by Israel's attacks in the past few days and will probably not return to its former strength, making the future of the country uncertain.

The Iranian government described the comments by Merz as "shameful", and summoned the German ambassador in response. Multiple prominent international organizations, such as the United Nations, condemned the attacks on both countries and called for a restraint and Israel to de-escalate. Several countries, such as China , Japan , Russia , and Turkey , condemned the Israeli attack on Iran and called for de-escalation. Trump rejected Russian President Vladimir Putin 's offer to mediate a ceasefire in the Twelve-Day War, telling him to focus on mediating a ceasefire in the Russo-Ukrainian War . Opinion polling of Americans on US involvement in the Iran-Israel war Opinion polling of Americans on US involvement in the war by YouGov found 85% of those surveyed were opposed to the United States going to war with Iran, while 5% supported it and 10% were unsure.

The British Foreign Secretary declared that the Islamic Republic is the greatest threat to global security.

Following the US strikes on Iran, Russia and China stated that the conflict risked globalization . Former Russian president Dmitry Medvedev proposed that Pakistan and Russia could give Iran nuclear warheads in response to the war. China also stated that the US attacks would further destabilize the region.

In a televised address that day, Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu declared a "historic victory", stating that Israel had "removed two immediate existential threats", referring to Iran's nuclear program and its ballistic missile arsenal. Reports from the Institute for the Study of War and American Enterprise Institute revealed that moderate clerics and political elites were urging a ceasefire and even considering sidelining Khamenei if he did not accept. Iranian state television and pro-government outlets highlighted widespread public relief and celebratory mood across Tehran and other cities, depicting the ceasefire as an Iranian success and a signal of regional strength. According to The Economist , Israel has achieved a level of military dominance in the region that may surpass previous high points, including the aftermath of the 1967 Six-Day War .

In a prerecorded address released on 26 June, Khamenei warned the United States against future attacks.

The Foreign Ministry of Qatar issued a statement saying Qatari air defenses 'thwarted the attack and successfully intercepted the Iranian missiles,' with no injuries or deaths reported. ^ * Raine, John (23 July 2025). "How 12 days have changed Iran" . International Institute for Strategic Studies . United States President Donald Trump, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and the Iranian leadership have all made claims, in their widely different idioms, that they won. But those claims, and Trump's additional assertion that he will bring peace to the Middle East, require qualification.

The strategic outcome of the war is likely to prove inconclusive, bringing neither peace nor an end to military action. Strachota, Krzysztof (18 December 2025). "Iran in crisis: the landscape after the Twelve-Day War" . www.osw.waw.pl . Retrieved 18 March 2026 .

The outcome of the war remains inconclusive. There is no doubt that Iran's military capabilities were significantly degraded, its air defence systems crippled and its missile arsenal partially destroyed. Its ability to support regional proxies, including Hezbollah in Lebanon and the Houthis in Yemen, was significantly curtailed. Popalzay, Abdul Wasi; Mir, Musssaib Rasool; Mol, Rajani (December 2025). "From Proxy Warfare to Direct Confrontation: The Evolving Landscape of the Israel–Iran Conflict 2024–2025" . Chinese Journal of International Review . 07 (4): 2550017. doi : 10.1142/S2630531325500179 . ISSN 2630-5313 .

From a policy and academic perspective, expert assessments remain divided.

The IISS labeled the outcome "strategically inconclusive", suggesting the war may inaugurate a new phase of structured hostility, not resolution The International Institute for Strategic Studies underscores the inconclusive nature of the war, with Israeli objectives only partially fulfilled and Iran's nuclear infrastructure retaining limited operational capacity. "The Iran threat will haunt the Gulf for years" . IISS . Archived from the original on 13 March 2026 . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . Instead, and despite all their efforts, Israel attacked Iran two weeks ago, followed by a US strike against Iranian nuclear facilities The Gulf states must now plan for a prolonged period of uncertainty and instability.

From their perspective, the war has been inconclusive. Lonsdorf, Kat (25 June 2025). "Trump says early report on damage to Iran's nuclear program was inconclusive" . NPR . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . President Trump on Wednesday said that a preliminary U.S. intelligence assessment of the damage caused by U.S. strikes on Iranian nuclear facilities was inconclusive... ^ Jack Detsch; Paul McLeary (18 June 2025). "Hegseth defers to general on Pentagon's plans for Iran" . Politico . Retrieved 26 December 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel; Yohanan, Nurit; Berman, Lazar (16 October 2025). "Houthi military chief dies, group says, and Israel claims responsibility" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 16 October 2025 . ^ Spiro, Amy (30 June 2025). "These are the 28 victims killed in Iranian missile attacks during the 12-day conflict" .

The Times of Israel . ^ "Filipina caregiver dies of wounds from Iranian missile attack" .

The Times of Israel . 13 July 2025 . Retrieved 17 July 2025 . ^ "85-year-old man dies of wounds sustained in Iranian missile attack last month" .

The Times of Israel . 29 July 2025. ^ "91-year-old Holocaust survivor succumbs to wounds from Iran missile strike in June" .

The Times of Israel . 10 August 2025. ^ "Aharon Mizrahi, 76, succumbs to wounds sustained in Iranian missile attack" . 13 October 2025. ^ "Woman dies of heart attack while sheltering from Iran missiles; MDA raises Haifa injury toll to 23" .

The Times of Israel . 20 June 2025 . Retrieved 20 June 2025 . ^ a b Fabian, Emanuel (24 June 2025). "Medical officials say 28 people were killed, over 3,000 wounded by Iranian missiles during conflict" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ a b "Israel says drone downed in Iran" . Al Jazeera English . 18 June 2025. ^ "Air Defense HQ: Over 60 Israeli UAVs, Missiles Destroyed by Iran" . Iran Front Page . 18 June 2025. ^ "Iran foils Israeli spy cell: +10K quadcopter drones seized" . Shafaq News . 24 June 2025. ^ a b "Arrest of more than 700 Zionist spies and discovery of 10,000 drones in Iran" . Afghan Voice Agency . 25 June 2025. Archived from the original on 16 August 2025 . Retrieved 30 June 2025 . ^ "Iran executes alleged Mossad spy" . Al Jazeera English . 16 June 2025. ^ "Convicted Mossad spy executed in Iran: Report" . Al Jazeera English . 22 June 2025. ^ "Iran executes three people accused of spying for Israeli spy agency Mossad" . Hindustan Times . 25 June 2025. ^ "آمار کشته های جنگ با اسرائیل احتمالا به ۱۱۰۰ نفر میرسد" . Gooya (Iran) (in Persian). 7 July 2025 . Retrieved 8 July 2025 . Saeed Ohadi, head of the Islamic Republic Martyrs Foundation and Veterans Affairs, said in a television program on Monday evening, July 7, that around 1,100 people were probably killed during the war with Israel. Ohadi said: "As of tonight (Monday), we have buried 1,060 martyrs. Considering the number of wounded people in the hospital in intensive care, and perhaps some of our loved ones whose identities have not been completed, I think we will reach the 1,100 mark. ^ "Iran's government says at least 1,060 people were killed in the war with Israel" . Associated Press. 8 July 2025 . Retrieved 10 July 2025 – via Arab News . ^ a b "آخرین آمار شهدای ایران در جنگ با اسرائیل اعلام شد" . Hamshahri (in Persian). 16 July 2025 . Retrieved 16 July 2025 . According to Hammihan Online and quoted by ISNA, Fatemeh Mohajerani, referring to the number of martyrs of the 12-day war, stated: "We have had 32 families with 2 martyrs, 17 families with 3 martyrs, 7 families with 4 martyrs, 3 families with 5 martyrs, and one family with 8 martyrs. We had about 5,800 wounded, most of whom have been discharged from medical centers, and 140 of them are still hospitalized.

The number of martyrs so far has been announced as 1,062, of whom about 140 are women and children. These statistics show that the Zionist regime launched a war against the people of our country by targeting the people of Iran." ^ a b c d e "Twelve Days Under Fire. A Comprehensive Report on the Iran-Israel War" . HRANA . 28 June 2025 . Retrieved 29 June 2025 . ^ "IDF says some 950 Iranian drones destroyed before being launched at Israel" .

The Times of Israel . 21 June 2025. ^ Fabian, Emanuel (17 June 2025). "Israel will achieve its objectives against Iran within a week or two, say IDF officials" .

The Times of Israel . ^ a b "Israeli army claims it destroyed 30% of Iran's missile launchers" . Al Jazeera English . 16 June 2025. ^ Fabian, Emanuel (18 June 2025). "IDF says it bombed 5 Iranian AH-1 helicopters at Kermanshah airbase" .

The Times of Israel . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (18 June 2025). "IDF says it destroyed three more Iranian military helicopters" .

The Times of Israel . ^ Rogoway, Tyler (16 June 2025). "Iranian F-14 'Persian Tomcats' obliterated in Israeli airstrike" . TWZ . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (21 June 2025). "IDF spokesman says three Iranian F-14 fighter jets destroyed in latest strikes" .

The Times of Israel . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (22 June 2025). "IDF says it destroyed 2 Iranian fighter jets, 8 ballistic missile launchers, among dozens of targets" .

The Times of Israel . ^ "Iran Update Special Report, June 18, 2025, Evening Edition" . Institute for the Study of War . 18 June 2025. ^ a b Fassihi, Farnaz (24 June 2025). "Can Iran, Israel and the U.S. Now All Claim to Have Won?" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ "Israel Reports 24 Dead, 800 Injured in Iranian Strikes as War Enters Sixth Day" (Press release). Israel's Government Press Office via TPS. 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ "Iranian missiles have killed 24, injured more than 800" . Jewish News Syndicate (JNS) . 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ "Iranian missiles force evacuation of 3,800 people in Israel" . USMuslims . 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ a b "More than 8,000 Israelis left homeless due to conflict with Iran: Report" . Al Jazeera . 20 June 2025. ^ "Rights group says woman killed in western Syria, likely by Iranian drone" .

The Times of Israel . 16 June 2025. ^ Ahmed, Khitam (24 June 2025). "التوغل العسكري الإسرائيلي يتصاعد في جنوب سوريا" . Thawra (in Arabic). Archived from the original on 25 June 2025 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ Yohanan, Nurit. "Caught in the crossfire, Jordan (quietly) shields Israel as Iranian shrapnel rains down" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ a b "Five Palestinians wounded, including 3 children, after Houthi missile hits West Bank" .

The Times of Israel . 14 June 2025 . Retrieved 25 June 2025 . ^ Gordon, Michael (13 June 2025). "In Twist, U.S. Diplomacy Served as Cover for Israeli Surprise Attack" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 5 March 2026 . Retrieved 20 June 2025 . ^ Lam, Lana; Ferreira, Sofia (13 June 2025). "What we know as Israel-Iran conflict intensifies" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 13 March 2026 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ a b de Haldevang, Max; Bozorgmehr, Najmeh (18 June 2025). "The Iranian generals and scientists killed by Israel's offensive" . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ a b "Iranian president lightly wounded while escaping Israeli attack" . Al Jazeera English . 13 July 2025. ^ Regalado, Francesca; Ward, Euan; Fassihi, Farnaz; Granados, Samuel; Chutel, Lynsey (13 June 2025). "These Are Iranian Generals and Scientists Killed by Israel" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 4 February 2026 . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ Ebrahim, Nadeen; Adkin, Ross; Michaelis, Tamar (13 June 2025). "Israeli strikes kill some of Iran's most powerful men, including military and nuclear leaders" . CNN . Archived from the original on 23 March 2026 . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ a b "Report: Mossad carried out covert sabotage operations against Iranian air defenses, long-range missiles" .

The Times of Israel . 13 June 2025. Archived from the original on 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ Epstein, Jake (26 June 2025). "How Israel used Iran's massive attacks to enhance its top ballistic missile shield" . Business Insider . ^ Campa, Kelly; Morrison, Nidal; Reddy, Ria; Ganzeveld, Annika (15 June 2025). "Iran Update Special Report, June 15, 2025, Morning Edition" . Critical Threats Project . Washington, D.C. : Institute for the Study of War . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel. "Woman killed, 13 people hurt, after Iranian missile hits home in Tamra, near Haifa" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ Rios, Michael; Mando, Nechirvan; Nicholls, Catherine; Yosef, Eugenia; Karni, Dana (13 June 2025). "Iran launches 'hundreds' of missiles at Israel following attack" . CNN . Retrieved 4 September 2025 . ^ "Iranian missiles force evacuation of 3,800 people in Israel" . www.aa.com.tr . Retrieved 4 September 2025 . ^ "Iranian missiles hit hospital and wound over 200. Israel threatens Iran's top leader" . PBS News . 19 June 2025 . Retrieved 4 September 2025 . ^ "Verifying conflicting accounts of Iran's strike on an Israeli hospital" . euronews . 20 June 2025 . Retrieved 4 September 2025 . ^ a b "Update from David E. Sanger" .

The New York Times . 21 June 2025. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ a b c "Trump says US has bombed Fordo nuclear plant in attack on Iran" . BBC News . 21 June 2025 . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ "Iran sought US pressure on Israel for ceasefire via Gulf states, sources say" . Reuters . 16 June 2025. ^ a b "Trump says Iran and Israel agree to a ceasefire" . Reuters . 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ "A whirlwind 48 hours: How Trump's Israel-Iran ceasefire agreement came together" . AP News . 24 June 2025. ^ "Was Iran months away from producing a nuclear bomb?" . BBC . 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 2 March 2026 . ^ a b c d e f Salem, Mostafa; Regan, Helen; Robinson, Lou (13 June 2025). "Everything you need to know about Iran's nuclear program" . CNN . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ a b Deliso, Meredith (22 June 2025). "What was in the Iran nuclear deal and why did Trump withdraw the US from it?" . ABC News . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ a b c d Byman, Daniel (13 June 2025). "What to Know About the Israeli Strike on Iran" . Center for Strategic and International Studies . Archived from the original on 24 March 2026 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ a b Burrowa, Emma; Liechtenstein, Stephanie (14 June 2025). "Israeli strikes on Iran's nuclear program are sweeping but can they decimate it?" . AP News . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ a b "Israel strikes Iran. What happens next?" . Brookings Institution . 16 June 2025 . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ Bergman, Ronen; Fassihi, Farnaz; Schmitt, Eric; Entous, Adam; Pérez-Peña, Richard (17 April 2024). "Miscalculation Led to Escalation in Clash Between Israel and Iran" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ Bowen, Jeremy; Gritten, David (1 April 2024). "Israel accused of deadly strike on Iranian consulate in Syria" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 1 April 2024 . Retrieved 1 April 2024 . ^ a b c Cornwell, Alexander; Hafezi, Parisa; Holland, Steve; Cornwell, Alexander (13 June 2025). "Iran strikes back at Israel with missiles over Jerusalem, Tel Aviv" . Reuters . ^ a b Langford, Antonia; Hallows, Ruth; White, Josh; Hamblin, Andrea; Bodkin, Henry (14 June 2025). "Iran-Israel latest: Iran threatens to attack British and American bases" .

The Daily Telegraph . ISSN 0307-1235 . Archived from the original on 14 June 2025. ^ "Iran's attacks on Israel: World leaders warn against escalation, UN Security Council emergency meeting on Sunday" . Le Monde . 14 April 2024. Archived from the original on 14 April 2024 . Retrieved 14 April 2024 . ^ Schneider, Tal (6 October 2024). "How effective was Iran's attack?

The Israeli public doesn't have the full picture" .

The Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 3 March 2026 . Retrieved 6 October 2024 . ^ a b Murphy, Francois (12 June 2025). "IAEA board declares Iran in breach of non-proliferation obligations" . Reuters . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ a b Bozorgmehr, Najmeh (25 June 2025). "Iran's parliament votes to halt co-operation with nuclear watchdog" . Financial Times . Retrieved 25 June 2025 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ a b c Parent, Deepa (25 June 2025). " 'It's like being walled in': young Iranians try to break through internet blackout" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 25 June 2025 . ^ "Satellite imagery reveals damage to key Iran nuclear sites" . BBC News . 15 June 2025 . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ Picheta, Rob (14 June 2025). "Israel attacked three key Iranian nuclear facilities. Did it strike a decisive blow?" . CNN . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ a b "US bombing "seriously damaged" Iran's Fordow nuclear site, FM says" . Reuters . 2 July 2025 . Retrieved 13 July 2025 . ^ a b Albright, David; Faragasso, Spencer (24 June 2025). "Post-Attack Assessment of the First 12 Days of Israeli and U.S. Strikes on Iranian Nuclear Facilities" . Institute For Science And International Security . Retrieved 13 July 2025 . ^ a b c Sanger, David E. (10 July 2025). "Some of Iran's Enriched Uranium Survived Attacks, Israeli Official Says" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 13 July 2025 . ^ Solomon, Erika; Mahoozi, Sanam (2 July 2025). "Iran Suspends Cooperation with U.N. Nuclear Watchdog" .

The New York Times . ^ "Iran's government says at least 1,060 people were killed in the war with Israel" . AP News . 8 July 2025 . Retrieved 19 October 2025 . ^ Fassihi, Farnaz; Nikounazar, Leily; Behrooz, Parin (18 June 2025). "Israeli Strikes Kill Civilians Across Iran" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 12 July 2025 . Retrieved 22 July 2025 . ^ "World reacts to Israeli strike on Iran over nuclear activity" . Reuters . 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ "Nations react to US strikes on Iran with many calling for diplomacy" . Associated Press . 22 June 2025 . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ "French FM says Iran's nuclear program is an existential threat to Israel and the region, urges diplomatic solution" .

The Times of Israel . 15 June 2025. Archived from the original on 15 June 2025 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ "Starmer Says UK Has 'Grave Concerns' on Iran Nuclear Program" . Bloomberg News . 13 June 2025. ^ "Spanish Government condemns military escalation in the Middle East after Israel's attacks against Iran" . Spanish Ministry of Foreign Affairs . 13 June 2025. ^ Nour (13 June 2025). "Israel/Iran: Israel's attack on Iran violates international law, threatening peace and security" . International Commission of Jurists . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ "Israel's Iran attack sparks legal debate" . Deutsche Welle . 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . "My impression is that the majority of legal analysts see as a case of 'prohibited self-defense'," Matthias Goldmann, a law professor and international law expert at EBS University Wiesbaden, told DW. ... There's another reason why most legal experts believe Israel's attack was illegal, says Marko Milanovic, a professor of international law at the UK's University of Reading. ^ Doucet, Lyse (16 June 2025). "Where is Israel's operation heading?" . BBC News . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . They have also been condemned by legal scholars who argue that the strikes are illegal under international law. ^ "President Milei: 'Iran is an enemy of Argentina' " . Buenos Aires Times . 20 June 2025 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ a b Dodman, Benjamin (19 June 2025). "Israel-Iran conflict 'drives the final nail into the coffin' of postwar world order" . France 24 . ^ "Ukraine says US, Israeli strikes on Iran are justified to stop nuclear threat" . Times of Israel . AFP. 22 June 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ "Trump embraces Israel after 'successful' Iran attack" . Politico . 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ Klein, Betsy; Atwood, Kylie; Treene, Alayna; Jaramillo, Alejandra; Picheta, Rob; Bash, Dana (12 June 2025). "Trump warns Iran to agree to a deal 'before there is nothing left' " . CNN . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ "Germany's Merz says Israel is doing the 'dirty work for all of us' by countering Iran" .

The Times of Israel . 17 June 2025 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ "Trump holds out Israel-Iran ceasefire deal as validation for his gamble of US airstrikes" . AP News . 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ Mansfield, Erin (29 June 2025). "The '12-Day War,' World War III, and how we describe what's happening in Iran" . USA TODAY . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ^ Sources about widespread adoption of "Twelve-Day War" or "Twelve Day War": "U.S. Policy Options After the Twelve Day War" . Council on Foreign Relations . 9 September 2025 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 .

The Twelve Day War, as it became known, began on June 13... And we know, towards the end of what's now being referred to as the Twelve Day War, that Israel was running low on interceptors. "From the Twelve-Day War to the February War: The Gradual Path of US-Israeli Aggression Against Iran" . Al-Quds . 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ... when Israel, led by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, launched a widespread war on Iran, later known as the "Twelve-Day War." "The War on Iran" . Arab Center Washington DC . 6 March 2026 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . This was the second time in less than a year that the US and Israel attacked Iran.

The first time, in June 2025, in what came to be known as the Twelve-Day War... "Trump warns Iran against rebuilding nuclear program" . Deutsche Welles . 30 December 2025 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . Iran and Israel exchanged fire for two weeks in June in what became known as the Twelve-Day War... "The United States and Iran Must Overcome Four Challenges for Nuclear Talks to Succeed" . Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . 5 November 2025 . Retrieved 10 March 2026 . ... the United States directly intervened in what became known as the Twelve-Day War... ^ Zweiri, Mahjoob. "How Iran fights an imposed war" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 23 June 2026 . ^ Zimmt, Raz (December 2025). " 'The Second Imposed War': Operation Rising Lion and Its Implications for Iran's National Security" (PDF) . Institute for National Security Studies . ^ a b c d e Gregory, Andy; Hagopian, Alicja (23 June 2025). "The maps and numbers you need to know after US intervene in Iran-Israel conflict" .

The Independent . Archived from the original on 11 August 2025 . Retrieved 19 June 2026 . ^ Sheridan, Greg (13 June 2025). "Iranian nuclear threat meant Israelis had no choice" .

The Australian . ^ von Hein, Shabnam (13 June 2025). "Why are Iran and Israel sworn enemies?" . Deutsche Welle . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ Sykes, Patrick; Bronner, Ethan; Capaccio, Anthony (13 June 2025). "Why Israel Attacked Iran, and What to Watch for Next" . Bloomberg News . Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 12 January 2026 . Retrieved 19 June 2026 . ^ Rasmussen, Sune Engel; Norman, Laurence; Peled, Anat (27 October 2024). "Israeli Strikes on Iran Expose Gap in Prowess Between Two Arch Foes" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 27 October 2024 . Saturday's attack is believed to have hit most if not all of the remaining S-300s. ^ Hinz, Fabian (18 June 2025). "Israel's attack and the limits of Iran's missile strategy" . International Institute for Strategic Studies . ^ "Satellite photos suggest Iran air defense radar struck in Isfahan during apparent Israeli attack" . apnews . 22 April 2024. ^ Rosman, Rebecca (16 June 2025). "Israel strikes Iranian state TV during live broadcast on the fourth day of conflict" . NPR . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ "Was Iran really racing for nukes?" .

The Economist . 13 June 2025. ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . Iran fervently denies that it has ever pursued nuclear weapons. That is not true.

In the 1980s the Islamic Republic began importing nuclear equipment and material from Pakistan and China. And in the 1990s it approved and allocated funds for a plan to manufacture five nuclear weapons and carry out an underground nuclear test, according to documents acquired by Israel and analysed by experts at Harvard University's Belfer Centre. That decision was approved by a committee that included Ali Shamkhani, who was then the defence minister. ... This formal nuclear weapons programme, Project AMAD, was suspended by the Iranian government in 2003, according to an American "national intelligence estimate" published in 2007. ^ Gritten, David (18 June 2025). "Was Iran months away from producing a nuclear bomb?" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ Gritten, David (18 June 2025). "Was Iran months away from producing a nuclear bomb?" . BBC News . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ a b "Watchdog finds Iran failing to meet nuclear obligations" . www.bbc.com . 12 June 2025 . Retrieved 4 September 2025 . ^ Sanger, David E.; Bergman, Ronen (15 July 2018). "How Israel, in Dark of Night, Torched Its Way to Iran's Nuclear Secrets (Published 2018)" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 4 September 2025 . ^ Tirone, Jonathan (13 June 2025). "How Close Is Iran to a Nuclear Weapon as Trump Eyes a Deal?" . Bloomberg News . Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 5 September 2025 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ a b "Iran nuclear: E3 foreign ministers' letter announcing triggering of snapback, 28 August 2025" . GOV.UK . Retrieved 31 August 2025 . ^ a b Murphy, Francois (25 June 2025). "UN nuclear chief says it's possible Iran's highly enriched uranium 'is there' " . Reuters . Retrieved 4 September 2025 . ^ Lillis, Katie; Cohen, Zachary (17 June 2025). "Israel says Iran was racing toward a nuclear weapon. US intel says it was years away" . CNN . ^ Balmer, Crispian (13 June 2025). "After years of waiting, Israel's Netanyahu finally makes his move on Iran" . Reuters . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ Klein, Betsy; Ferris, Sarah; Lillis, Katie Bo; Atwood, Kylie; Treene, Alayna (14 June 2025). " 'We fight or we die': How days of frantic diplomacy and dire warnings culminated with Israel's attack on Iran" . CNN . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ Sharma, Yashraj; Psaropoulos, John T. (18 June 2025). "Is Iran 'very close' to building a nuclear bomb as Trump claims?" . Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ Maclean, William; Graff, Peter (16 June 2025). "Iran says parliament is preparing bill to leave nuclear non-proliferation treaty" . Reuters . Retrieved 20 June 2025 . ^ "Lack of cooperation from Iran hampers nuclear checks, says atomic energy watchdog" . UN News . 9 June 2025 . Retrieved 4 September 2025 . ^ a b "Twenty questions (and expert answers) on the Israel-Iran war" .

The Atlantic Council . 16 June 2025 . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ a b Nashed, Mat (19 June 2025). "Israel massacres in Gaza, locks down West Bank as attention shifts to Iran" . Al Jazeera English . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ a b Nelson, Rachel; Heras, Nicholas A. (13 June 2025). "Real-Time New Lines Analysis: Israel's Strike on Iran" .

The New Lines Institute . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ a b "Israel-Iran: Urgent call to end 'reckless military action' and protect civilians amid growing hostilities" . Amnesty International . 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ "Stop the War on Iran: 1,000+ Sign Petition Saying Iran War Deflects Attention from Gaza Genocide" . Democracy Now . 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ Dabashi, Hamid (23 June 2025). "The Iranian people will never forgive or forget US-Israeli attacks" . Middle East Eye . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ a b c Emma Graham-Harrison (14 June 2025). "Strikes on Iran ease pressure on Israel to end starvation in Gaza" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Wikidata Q134930850 . Archived from the original on 31 August 2025. ^ "Why is Israel attacking Iran? Tensions in the Middle East escalate" . Yahoo News .

The Standard. 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ Mohammad (14 June 2025). "Israel's Strike on Iran: What Happens Now?" . Hasht-e Subh . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ Malik, Nesrine (16 June 2025). "In Gaza, Israel destroyed its reputation. Attacking Iran is a belated and dangerous attempt to restore it" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ a b c d Liebermann, Oren ; et al. (14 June 2025). "More explosions in Tel Aviv and Tehran as Israel-Iran conflict escalates" . CNN . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ Rosman, Rebecca (16 June 2025). "Israel strikes Iranian state TV during live broadcast on the fourth day of conflict" . NPR . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ "Israel launches Operation Rising Lion to target Iran's nuclear threat" .

The Jerusalem Post . 13 June 2025. Archived from the original on 15 November 2025 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ Borger, Julian (13 June 2025). "Israel launches strikes on 'dozens' of targets in Iran, targeting nuclear program" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ "IDF strikes Iran nuclear targets, military commanders" .

The Jerusalem Post . 13 June 2025. Archived from the original on 17 February 2026 . Retrieved 12 June 2025 . ^ "Israel has so far carried out 5 waves of strikes in Iran, military official says" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ "IDF: 200 aircraft involved in opening strikes on Iran, with several top officials killed" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ a b Udi Etsion (13 June 2025). "After Natanz: Why the IDF won't strike Iran's live reactor at Bushehr" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ "Israeli Military Chief Says Commandos Operated in Iran During War" .

The Wall Street Journal . 25 June 2025 . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ "Israeli commandos operated in Iran during 12-day war: Military chief" . Al Arabiya English . 25 June 2025 . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ "Mossad set up drone base in Iran; UAVs were activated overnight to strike surface-to-surface missile launchers aimed at Israel" .

The Times of Israel . 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ "Inspired by Game of Thrones, Israel's deadly Red Wedding operation took out 30 Iran generals in minutes" .

The Economic Times . 28 June 2025. ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 9 July 2025 . ^ "Iran reports fresh explosions in Tabriz; adviser to Khamenei said injured in early strikes" .

The Times of Israel . 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ "Loud explosion reported near Noje airbase in Hamadan" . Azerbaijani Press Agency . 13 June 2025. ^ "Explosions rock airbase in Hamedan city, western Iran: local media" . China Daily . 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ "Parchin military site, Nojeh airbase hit by Israeli missiles" . Iran International . 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ "Two explosions hit areas near Iran's Fordo nuclear site - IRGC outlet" . Iran International . 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ "Iran downs Israeli drone near Fordo nuclear site, state media claims" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ a b Kelly, Kieran; Cleave, Iona; Bodkin, Henry; White, Josh; Stringer, Connor; Coen, Susie (13 June 2025). "Israel-Iran latest: Hidden Iranian nuclear site targeted in fresh attack" .

The Telegraph . ISSN 0307-1235 . ^ "Israeli military says it struck 2 Iranian air force bases and "dismantled" one of them" . CNN . 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ "Iran claims to have shot down at least 2 Israeli planes in Iranian airspace" . CNN . 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ Mil, Seb (13 June 2025). "BREAKING Iran claims to have shot down Israeli fighter jets and captured a female pilot" . AIRLIVE . ^ a b Fabian, Emanuel (13 June 2025). "IDF denies Iranian state media report claiming Tehran downed pair of Israeli fighter jets" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ "Iran launches 100 drones on Israel: Army spokesman" . Al Jazeera English . 13 June 2025. ^ Strobel, Warren P.; Hudson, John; DeYoung, Karen; Shih, Gerry; Balousha, Hazem; Bisset, Victoria; Ledur, Júlia; Shapiro, Leslie (12 June 2025). "Israel strikes Iran, as Trump officials say no U.S. military support" .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . ^ "See moment projectile strikes near key military facility in Tel Aviv" . CNN . 14 June 2025. ^ "Over 100 drones launched by Iran; air force begins shooting them down outside Israel's borders" . Times of Israel . 13 June 2025. ^ "What are the Iranian drones that attacked Israel?" .

The Jerusalem Post . 13 June 2025. ^ "Live: Israel launches 'major strike' on Iran's military, nuclear sites" . Al Jazeera English . 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ "3 Injured in Jordan by Unspecified Falling Object" . Asharq Al-Awsat . 14 June 2025. ^ "US media: Iran's June 13 missile strike exposed Israel's secret military bunker in central Tel Aviv" . Iranian Students' News Agency . 14 October 2025. ^ "MDA says 63 hurt, including one critically in Iranian missile barrage" .

The Times of Israel . 13 June 2025. ^ "Woman critically hurt in Iranian missile attack dies from wounds" .

The Times of Israel . 14 June 2025. ^ Fabian, Emanuel (14 June 2025). "7 soldiers lightly injured by ballistic missile impact in central Israel last night, IDF says" .

The Times of Israel . ^ "Israelis told they can leave shelters, but to remain nearby after second Iran missile barrage" .

The Times of Israel . 13 June 2025. ^ " 'Not for you': Israeli shelters exclude Palestinians as bombs rain down" . Al Jazeera English . 17 June 2025. ^ "IDF estimates that Iran has fired 150 missiles at Israel in two barrages" .

The Times of Israel . 13 June 2025. ^ Addington, Joseph (13 June 2025). "Israeli Airstrikes Hit Nuclear Facilities and Killed Iranian Leaders" .

The American Conservative . ^ "Latest news on Iran's attack on Israel, June 14, 2021 / From which provinces were Iranian missiles fired?" . eghtesadonline . 13 June 2025. ^ Fabian, Emanuel (13 June 2025). "Ballistic missile from Yemen triggers sirens in Jerusalem and West Bank" .

The Times of Israel . ^ "Blast reported at Tehran's Mehrabad Airport; 2 projectiles said to hit area" .

The Times of Israel . 14 June 2025. ^ "Israeli airstrikes continue in Tehran and Isfahan, videos show" . Iran International . 14 June 2025. ^ "Iran launches fresh wave of attacks on Israel, two killed: Reports" . Al Arabiya . 14 June 2025. ^ Fabian, Emanuel. "IDF spokesperson: Israel bombed underground Iranian facility storing dozens of missiles" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ "Iran confirms two more senior generals killed in Israeli strikes" .

The Times of Israel . Agence France-Presse. 14 June 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ "Third F-35 fighter jet downed in Iranian territory, two Israeli pilots now in custody" . Tehran Times . 14 June 2025. Archived from the original on 14 June 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ "Fact Check: Don't be fooled by this video claiming to show Iran downing Israeli fighter jets" . Yahoo News . Snopes. 16 June 2025 . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "Fact Check: Image doesn't show Israeli F-35 fighter jet shot down by Iran" . Yahoo News . Snopes. 16 June 2025 . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "IDF says aircraft operating in heart of Tehran, denies claim Iran shot down fighter jet" .

The Jerusalem Post . 14 June 2025. ^ "Iran says Israel has attacked two gas field" . BBC News . 14 June 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ "Iran's biggest gas refinery still on fire despite official denial" . Iran International . 14 June 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ "Fire halts 12 million cubic meters of gas production at South Pars Phase 14" . Iran International . 14 June 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ "Israeli attacks affect 18 of Iran's 31 provinces, Red Crescent says" . Iran International . 14 June 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ "Israel and Iran trade fire – what you need to know" . BBC News . 14 June 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ "Gasoline and oil depots in western Tehran hit by Israeli airstrikes" . Iran International . 14 June 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ "Israeli airstrikes hit SPND building in Tehran - Tasnim" . Iran International . 14 June 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ "IDF: Dozens of rockets fired by Iran in previous barrage, some of them downed" .

The Times of Israel . 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ "Reports say seven hurt, including one mildly, in latest Iranian missile barrage" .

The Times of Israel . 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ "At least 2 killed in Iranian missile strike on central Israel city" . Ynetnews . 14 June 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ "MDA spokesperson says one killed, 19 hurt in direct Iran missile impact" .

The Times of Israel . 14 June 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (14 June 2025). "Iran fired some 200 ballistic missiles at Israel in several barrages since last night, IDF says" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ "Missile debris falls in S. Syria as regional tensions escalate; Damascus halts flights" . Xinhua . 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ a b Levitt, Matthew (13 June 2025). "Israel Strikes Iran: Initial Assessments from Washington Institute Experts" .

The Washington Institute for Near East Policy . Archived from the original on 5 January 2026. ^ Fabian, Emanuel (14 June 2025). "Five killed near Haifa as Iranian missile barrage targets northern Israel" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ "Oil depot Tehran and Haifa oil refinery targeted in attacks" . BBC News . 14 June 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ "Iranian missile attacks damage Haifa oil refinery and Rehovot university buildings" .

The Times of Israel . 15 June 2025 . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ Ceder, Riley (30 June 2025). "Navy destroyers intercepted Iranian missiles, service confirms" . Navy Times . Retrieved 9 February 2026 . ^ Schogol, Jeff (6 February 2026). "Navy destroyer crew awarded Armed Forces Service Medal for downing Iranian missiles" . Task & Purpose . Retrieved 9 February 2026 . ^ "Initial reports indicate impacts in Bat Yam, Rehovot, Ramat Gan from Iran missiles" .

The Times of Israel . 15 June 2025 . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ "9 dead, including 3 children, in Iranian missile strike on Bat Yam apartment building" .

The Times of Israel . 15 June 2025. ^ "Death toll in Iranian missile impact on Bat Yam building rises to 3" .

The Times of Israel . 15 June 2025 . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ "Some 200 injured in overnight missile strikes – MDA" .

The Times of Israel . 15 June 2025 . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ "Israel says Iran missiles intercepted; Tehran says car bombs detonated" . Al Jazeera English . 15 June 2025 . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ Fassihi, Farnaz; Odenheimer, Natan; Regalado, Francesca; Rasgon, Adam (14 June 2025). "Israel Bombards Tehran, Setting Oil Facilities Ablaze" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ a b Tercatin, Rossella (19 June 2025). "From heart tissue to DNA samples, Weizmann scientists mourn work vaporized in Iran attack" .

The Times of Israel . ^ "Houthis claim missile attack on central Israel" . Al Jazeera English . 15 June 2025. ^ "Iran missile debris hits Palestinian West Bank city near Abbas home" .

The Jerusalem Post . 15 June 2025 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (15 June 2025). "IDF says Iran only fired 'several' ballistic missiles in most recent attack" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (15 June 2025). "No reports of impacts in latest barrage; Israelis given all-clear" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ "Iran airstrike targets Netanyahu's residence in Israel" . Middle East Monitor . 16 June 2025. ^ Fabian, Emanuel; Yohanan, Nurit (15 June 2025). "Iranian missile barrage sparks fires in Haifa, Kiryat Gat; eight people hurt" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ "Video shows smoke rising from Iranian Ministry of Justice" . BBC News . 15 June 2025 . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (15 June 2025). "In 'most distant strike,' Israeli Air Force bombs Iranian plane at Mashhad Airport in northeast Iran" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ a b c Yeung, Jessie; Harvey, Lex; Tanno, Sophie; Picheta, Rob; Danaher, Caitlin; Ebrahim, Nadeen; McCluskey, Mitchell; Hallam, Jonny; Tawfeeq, Mohammed (15 June 2025). "Israel and Iran broaden attacks as conflict enters fourth day" . CNN . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ Berman, Lazar (15 June 2025). "Netanyahu says Israel killed IRGC intelligence chief and his deputy" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ "Car bomb detonates near Iranian government buildings" . Iran Wire . 15 June 2025. ^ Eichner, Itamar; Ben Ari, Lior (15 June 2025). "Multiple car bombs rock Tehran, Iranian reports say nuclear scientists killed" . Ynet . ^ "Israeli official denies that Israel set off car bombs in Tehran" .

The Times of Israel . 15 June 2025. ^ "Live - Israel warns civilians near Iranian military sites to evacuate" . Iran International . 15 June 2025 . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ "10 dead, 200 injured in Iranian barrages; IDF warns Iranians near arms plants to evacuate" .

The Times of Israel . 15 June 2025 . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ "Iran president says Israel attempted to assassinate him" . France 24 . 7 July 2025. ^ "IDF says it his Quds force command centers in Tehran" .

The Times of Israel . 16 June 2025. Archived from the original on 15 November 2025 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ iranintl (16 June 2025). "Loud explosions reported near Iran's Fordo nuclear facility" .

The Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 17 June 2025. ^ "Israeli strikes reported in Parchin, where nuke research site was said to be destroyed in October" .

The Times of Israel . 15 June 2025. Archived from the original on 24 August 2025 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ "IRGC commander, soldier killed in Israeli attack" . Al Jazeera English . 16 June 2025. Archived from the original on 16 June 2025. ^ Fabian, Emanuel (16 June 2025). "Israeli Air Force hits arms convoy between Tehran and Qom" .

The Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ Howard, Sally (24 June 2025). "Hospitals are targeted and destroyed as Israel-Iran war hits healthcare". BMJ . 389 r1320. doi : 10.1136/bmj.r1320 . ISSN 1756-1833 . PMID 40555436 . ^ "Israeli attack damages hospital in western Iran" . Al Jazeera English . 16 June 2025. Archived from the original on 3 February 2026 . Retrieved 30 June 2025 . ^ Eugenia, Yosef; Harvey, Lex; Yeung, Jessie; Radford, Antoinette; Edwards, Christian; Salem, Mostafa; Chowdhury, Maureen (16 June 2025). "Live updates: Israel and Iran broaden attacks in fourth day of conflict" . CNN . Archived from the original on 18 February 2026 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ "Israeli army accuses Iran's armed forces of using state broadcaster" . Al Jazeera English . 16 June 2025. Archived from the original on 28 January 2026. ^ "Israel is 'the biggest enemy of truth', says Iran after IRIB attack" . Al Jazeera English . 16 June 2025. Archived from the original on 16 June 2025. ^ "Israel bombs Iran state TV during live broadcast" . BBC News . 16 June 2025. Archived from the original on 29 March 2026 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ "Israeli strike on Iranian state TV fills studio with dust and debris during live broadcast" . Associated Press . 16 June 2025. Archived from the original on 8 May 2026 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ a b c "Eight killed, hundreds hurt in overnight Iranian missile strikes on central Israel, Haifa" .

The Times of Israel . 16 June 2025. Archived from the original on 10 January 2026 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (16 June 2025). "IDF says it's attacking missile launchers in western Iran" .

The Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 12 January 2026 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ "IDF drone hits two of Iran's F-14 fighter jets in a Tehran airbase" .

The Jerusalem Post . 16 June 2025. Archived from the original on 8 March 2026 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ "Iranian media say F-35 shot down" . Al Jazeera English . 16 June 2025. ^ "הותר לפרסום: חוסלו 4 בכירים במשמרות המהפכה" . Srugim (in Hebrew). 16 June 2025 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ "BOOM! Israel eliminates 4 top Iranian intelligence officials; Is Khamenei the next target?" .

The Economic Times . 16 June 2025 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ "Khamenei in worst mental state due to Israeli strikes, report says" . Arutz Sheva . 18 June 2025. ^ Bentov, Ami; Lidman, Melanie (17 June 2025). "Israel warns 300,000 people in Tehran to evacuate as Trump issues ominous message" . AP . Retrieved 20 June 2025 . ^ "מטח קטלני מאיראן והרס עצום: 5 נהרגו בפ"ת ובני ברק, לכודים בחיפה ועשרות נפגעים" . Ynet (in Hebrew). 15 June 2025 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ "Iran strikes Tel Aviv and Haifa as Israel conflict enters fourth day" .

The Guardian . 16 June 2025. ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ "Death toll in Israel rises to 8: Report" . Al Jazeera English . 16 June 2025 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ "Iranian strike forces partial shutdown of Haifa oil refinery" .

The Wall Street Journal . 16 June 2025. ^ "All facilities at Haifa oil refinery shut down after deadly Iran missile strike" .

The Times of Israel . 17 June 2025 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ "Israel 'thought this was going to be easy' like 'bombing refugees in tents' " . Al Jazeera English . 16 June 2025 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ "Israel says 24 killed in total in Iranian missile strikes" . Al Jazeera English . 16 June 2025 . Retrieved 16 June 2025 . ^ "Drone aimed at US consulate in Erbil downed - report" .

The Times of Israel . 15 June 2025. ^ "Holocaust survivor killed in Iranian missile strike on Petah Tikva last week" .

The Times of Israel . 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (16 June 2025). "8 killed, nearly 300 injured as Iranian ballistic missiles strike central Israel, Haifa" .

The Times of Israel . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (17 June 2025). "Iranian missiles impact central Israel in morning barrage, injuring 5" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ Yeung, Jessie; Harvey, Lex; Lau, Chris; Michaelis, Tamar; Khadder, Kareem; Radford, Antoinette; Kemp, Olivia; Chowdhury, Maureen; Hamond, Elise; Sangal, Aditi; Powell, Tobi B. (17 June 2025). "June 17, 2025 – Israel-Iran conflict" . CNN World . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "Bus in central Israel on fire after Israeli attack: Report" . Al Jazeera English . 17 June 2025. ^ "Blasts over Jerusalem, Tel Aviv after Iran missile warning" . Al Jazeera English . 17 June 2025. ^ Fabian, Emanuel (17 June 2025). "Around 30 drones shot down overnight, IDF says" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ "Iran's IRGC says it targeted Israeli army centre, Mossad operations hub" . Al Jazeera English . 17 June 2025. ^ Shih, Gerry; George, Susannah; Hill, Evan; Mahfouz, Heba Farouk; Parker, Claire; Craw, Victoria; Bisset, Victoria; Ledur, Júlia; Shapiro, Leslie (17 June 2025). "Israel-Iran conflict may last only as long as their missiles hold out" .

The Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 20 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (17 June 2025). "MDA: No initial reports of impacts or injuries in Iranian missile attack on north" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (17 June 2025). "Iran launching smaller salvos of missiles due to Israel diminishing its capabilities — IDF" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ Borens, Avery; Schmida, Ben; Campa, Kelly; Reddy, Ria; Ganzeveld, Annika (17 June 2025). "Iran Update Special Report, June 17, 2025, Morning Edition" . Institute for the Study of War . ^ "IDF kills Iranian commander Ali Shademani, showcasing intel. superiority" .

The Jerusalem Post . 17 June 2025. ^ a b Yeung, Jessie; Harvey, Lex; Lau, Chris; Michaelis, Tamar; Khadder, Kareem (17 June 2025). "Live updates: Israel and Iran trade strikes on fifth day of conflict" . CNN . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (17 June 2025). "Israel says it took out new top Iranian military commander, after killing predecessor" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ "Israel assassinated Iranian army chief in secret mountain hideout" .

The Jerusalem Post . 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "Israel launches 'extensive strikes' on west Iran" . Al Arabiya . 17 June 2025. ^ "Three killed in Israeli attack on Iran's Isfahan" . Al Jazeera English . 17 June 2025. ^ "Three people pulled alive from rubble in Tehran" . Al Jazeera English . 17 June 2025. ^ Fabian, Emanuel (17 June 2025). "60 Israeli jets carrying out 'extensive wave of strikes' on Iran, says IDF spokesman" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (17 June 2025). "Israel strikes 12 Iranian missile storage and launch sites, says IDF" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ "Cyberattack 'disrupts' Iranian state-owned bank" . Al Jazeera English . 17 June 2025. ^ "Hacktivist group claims cyberattack on Iran's Bank Sepah" . Iran International . 17 June 2025 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ "Hackers hit Iran's Bank Sepah, disrupt services nationwide" . Jewish News Syndicate . 17 June 2025 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ "Cyberattack targets Iran's Sepah Bank, disrupting services, gas stations" .

The Jerusalem Post . 17 June 2025 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (17 June 2025). "Israeli jets complete wave of airstrikes on Iranian missile launchers, says IDF" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ "Iran claims to shoot down 28 'hostile aircraft' " . Al Jazeera English . 17 June 2025. ^ Balmer, Crispian; Holland, Steve; Hafezi, Parisa (18 June 2025). "Thousands flee Tehran, source says Trump's options include joining Israel in strikes" . Reuters . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (18 June 2025). "IDF confirms drone shot down over Iran overnight, says no fear of information leaking" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "Tehran downs first Israeli drone in Iranian territory, IDF confirms" .

The Jerusalem Post . 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ Yeung, Jessie; Harvey, Lex; Lau, Chris; Radford, Antoinette; Chowdhury, Maureen; Hammond, Elise; Sangal, Aditi; Powell, Tori B.; Kemp, Olivia (17 June 2025). "Live updates: Israel-Iran conflict, Trump weighs US options on sixth day" . CNN . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ Berman, Lazar (18 June 2025). "IAEA confirms Israel hit two centrifuge production sites in Iran overnight" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "IDF conducts fresh strikes in area of Tehran" .

The Times of Israel . 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (18 June 2025). "Katz says latest Tehran strike destroyed Iran internal security HQ" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "Israeli strike hits Iranian Red Crescent building in Tehran, Iranian media say" . Iran International . 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "Iran shoots down Israeli drone, F-35 jet: Reports" . Al Jazeera English . 18 June 2025. ^ Fabian, Emanuel (18 June 2025). "IAF continues to strike Tehran, targeting police HQ and centrifuge production sites" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (18 June 2025). "IDF says jets hit 20 nuclear and weapons production sites in Tehran" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (18 June 2025). "3 Iranian drones intercepted over Israel by air force overnight, military confirms" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (18 June 2025). "Medics say no immediate reports of impacts in urban areas; IDF says small number of missiles fired" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "Latest Iranian attack consisted of just one missile that was intercepted" .

The Times of Israel . 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "IRGC claims long-range Sejjil missile targets Israel in latest strike; France prepares to evacuate citizens" . Ynetnews . 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "Medics say one person lightly wounded as a fragment of Iranian missile hits car" .

The Times of Israel . 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "IDF says about 20 out of 400 Iranian missiles struck in urban areas; casualties far below prewar estimates" .

The Times of Israel . 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "IDF says it's conducting airstrikes in Tehran" .

The Times of Israel . 19 June 2025 . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (19 June 2025). "IDF hits Iran's Arak reactor, nuclear weapons development site, dozens of other targets" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ Gritten, David (19 June 2025). "Israel strikes unfinished Arak heavy water reactor in Iran" . BBC News . ^ "IDF warns Iranians to evacuate area of Arak heavy water reactor" .

The Times of Israel . AP. 19 June 2025 . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ "Iran TV: Israel hits Arak heavy water reactor after evacuation warning, 'no radiation danger' " .

The Times of Israel . 19 June 2025 . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ "IAEA says 'no radiological effects' after Arak reactor hit" . Al Jazeera English . 19 June 2025. ^ "IDF estimates it has hit two-thirds of Iran's missile launchers — official" .

The Times of Israel . Reuters. 19 June 2025 . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ "IAF drones struck Iranian soldiers who were repairing ballistic missile launch sites, says IDF" .

The Times of Israel . 19 June 2025. ^ Fabian, Emanuel (18 June 2025). "IDF says public can leave bomb shelters after latest Iran missile salvo" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ "Israel downs Iranian drone after sirens sound in northern Israel" .

The Times of Israel . 19 June 2025 . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ "IDF says air force downed another Iranian drone" .

The Times of Israel . 19 June 2025 . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ "Missiles hit Tel Aviv, Ramat Gan and Holon" .

The Times of Israel . 19 June 2025. Archived from the original on 19 June 2025 . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ "Reports of injuries, extensive damage in multiple impact sites following missile attack" .

The Times of Israel . 19 June 2025. Archived from the original on 20 June 2025 . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ a b Bletter, Diana (19 June 2025). "271 people treated in hospitals this morning due to Iranian missile attack, says Health Ministry" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ Livingstone, Helen (19 June 2025). "Israel-Iran conflict live: hospital in southern Israel 'extensively damaged' by Iran missile strike" . the Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (19 June 2025). "Iranian missile with cluster warhead scatters bombs in central Israel, IDF says" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ Trevithick, Joseph (19 June 2025). "Iran Just Used Ballistic Missiles With Cluster Warheads To Strike Israel" .

The War Zone . Retrieved 20 June 2025 . ^ "Soroka spokesperson says hospital suffered 'extensive damage,' people wounded" .

The Times of Israel . 19 June 2025. ^ "Suspected chemical leak at Soroka hospital following missile strike: See moment of impact and destruction" . Ynetnews . 19 June 2025 . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ "Soroka spokesperson says hospital suffered 'extensive damage,' people wounded" .

The Times of Israel . AP. 19 June 2025 . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ "Herzog hospital hit by Iranian ballistic missile cares for Israelis of all faiths and our neighbors - the Palestinians" .

The Times of Israel . 19 June 2025. ^ Sokol, Sam (19 June 2025). "Education minister posts photo of kindergarten yard hit in Iranian barrage" .

The Times of Israel . ^ Fabian, Emanuel; Summers, Charlie; Bletter, Diana (19 June 2025). "Heavy damage, injuries as Iranian missile hits Beersheba hospital; dozens hurt in central cities" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (19 June 2025). "No reports of injuries after Iran fires at least 10 missiles at northern Israel" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ "Israel says it struck dozens of military targets in Iran, including nuclear research site" . Reuters . 20 June 2025 . Retrieved 20 June 2025 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ a b Lau, Chris; Sharman, Laura; Watson, Angus (20 June 2025). "Live updates: Israel and Iran trade strikes as Trump weighs US involvement" . CNN . Retrieved 20 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (20 June 2025). "Fighter jets destroyed 35 missile launchers, storage sites in Iran this morning, IDF says" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 20 June 2025 . ^ "Israeli drone strike hits Tehran: Report" . Al Jazeera English . 20 June 2025. ^ "Senior nuclear scientist killed in targeted Tehran strike" . Israel Hayom . 20 June 2025. ^ "Nuclear scientist killed in Israeli strike on Tehran: Israeli media" . Al Arabiya . 20 June 2025. ^ "Israel says it is attacking western, central Iran" . Al Jazeera English . 20 June 2025. ^ Fabian, Emanuel (20 June 2025). "For second day in row, Iran missile hits Beersheba, damaging buildings, wounding 7" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 20 June 2025 . ^ "Fire erupts near Microsoft office in Israel's Beer Sheva, CNN reports" . Reuters . 20 June 2025. ^ "Iran missile strikes near Beersheba tech park, Microsoft office, Israeli military branch" . Al Jazeera English . 20 June 2025. ^ "Israel targets Isfahan nuclear site, Qom — Iranian media" . Deutsche Welle . 21 June 2025. ^ "Israel says 2 Revolutionary Guard commanders killed" . Deutsche Welle . 21 June 2025. ^ Mao, Frances (21 June 2025). "Israel says it killed Iran's military coordinator with Hamas" . BBC . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ "Iran FM warns US involvement in conflict would be 'very dangerous' as Israel targets commanders" . BBC News . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ Sadiq, Barzan (21 June 2025). "Iranian media says nuclear scientist Isar Tabatabai-Qamsheh killed in Israeli strike" .

The Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 21 June 2025 . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ a b Lockwood, Paullne; Lendon, Brad; Kourdl, Eyad (21 June 2025). "UN nuclear watchdog says centrifuge workshop damaged in Israeli strikes at Iran's Isfahan nuclear site" . CNN News . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ "IAEA chief confirms centrifuge manufacturing workshop in Isfahan hit" .

The Times of Israel . 21 June 2025 . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ "Teenager killed in Israeli attack on building in Qom" . Al Jazeera English . 21 June 2025. ^ a b c Lau, Chris; Sharman, Laura; Watson, Angus; Tanno, Sophie; Noor Haq, Sana; Kemp, Olivia; Hammond, Elise; Sangal, Aditi; B. Powell, Tori (21 June 2025). "June 20, 2025 – Israel-Iran conflict" . CNN News . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ "Iranian strikes hit Haifa as conflict stretches to eighth day" .

The Washington Post . 20 June 2025 . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ "Israel hits military site in Iran's city of Shiraz: Report" . Al Jazeera English . 21 June 2025. ^ "Tehran cyber police building damaged amid ongoing Israeli strikes" . Iran International . 21 June 2025 . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (21 June 2025). "IDF says missile launcher storage facility among targets hit in latest Iran strikes" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ "Israeli strike on Tehran kills bodyguard of slain Hezbollah chief" . Reuters . 21 June 2025 . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (21 June 2025). "IDF spokesman says three Iranian F-14 fighter jets destroyed in latest strikes" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ "LISTEN: Iran sends missiles to Israel; judge orders Mahmoud Khalil release" . Al Jazeera English . 21 June 2025. ^ "Tel Aviv district building on fire following latest Iranian missile salvo" . Al Jazeera English . 21 June 2025. ^ Fabian, Emanuel (21 June 2025). "MDA says no injuries found after search of home hit by Iranian drone" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (21 June 2025). "Drone hits Israeli home for first time; 'powerful explosions' heard in Iran amid strikes" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ "2 F-5 jets downed, key military sites hit: Israel gives 24-hour recap; shares video of strikes on Iran" .

The Times of India . 22 June 2025. ISSN 0971-8257 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel; Bletter, Diana; Lanzkron, Naomi (22 June 2025). "86 wounded by Iranian missile attacks on Israel after US strikes 3 Iran nuclear sites" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ Ari, Lior (21 June 2025). "Reports: Powerful explosions heard in central and northern Tehran" . Ynet . ^ "Explosions heard in Bushehr, home to Iran's only nuclear power plant" .

The Times of Israel . 22 June 2025. ^ "30 Israeli fighter jets strike dozens of targets in four areas of Iran, says military" .

The Times of Israel . 22 June 2025. ^ "Israel's army says four Iranian regions targeted" . Al Jazeera English . 22 June 2025. ^ Fabian, Emanuel (22 June 2025). "Israel presses airstrikes across Iran as US attacks bring battle to 'turning point' " .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ "Israeli Hermes drone shot down over central Iran" . Al Jazeera English . 22 June 2025. ^ "Iranians express shock and fear after US attack" . DW . 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 25 June 2025 . ^ " 'Extensive damage' in Tel Aviv, Haifa after missile attack" . Al Jazeera English . 22 June 2025. ^ a b Fabian, Emanuel (22 June 2025). "IDF says Haifa impact likely caused by misfired interceptor" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ Bletter, Diana (22 June 2025). "Health Ministry says 86 people treated for injuries after strikes, 2 moderately hurt" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (23 June 2025). "IDF says Sunday's Haifa impact not failed interceptor, but undetected Iranian missile" .

The Times of Israel . ^ "How the US says it hit Iran's nuclear sites" . BBC . 22 June 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ "Trump: Attacks on Iran 'spectacular success' " . NHK World . 22 June 2025. Archived from the original on 22 June 2025 . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ "Iran downplays US strikes, says "only two tunnels" damaged at Fordow" . Caliber . 22 June 2025 . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ "Fordow nuclear site 'seriously damaged', declares Araghchi" . CBS News . 1 July 2025 . Retrieved 3 July 2025 . ^ "Fordow nuclear site 'seriously damaged', declares Araghchi" . Tehran Times . 2 July 2025 . Retrieved 3 July 2025 . ^ "US strikes 'seriously damaged' Fordo nuclear site, Iran's FM says" .

The Times of Israel . 2 July 2025 . Retrieved 3 July 2025 . ^ a b "Iran-Israel ceasefire appears to hold under pressure from Trump" . Reuters . 24 June 2025. Archived from the original on 24 June 2025 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ Stewart, Phil; Ali, Idrees (3 July 2025). "Iranian nuclear program degraded by up to two years, Pentagon says" . Reuters . Retrieved 3 July 2025 . ^ a b Lowell, Hugo (3 July 2025). "Pentagon says US strikes set back Iran nuclear program 'one to two years' " .

The Guardian . Retrieved 3 July 2025 . ^ Scharf, Avi (22 June 2025). "Satellite images show damage to Iran's underground nuclear site at Fordow" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 22 June 2025. ^ "Images show damage to the entryways at Iran's Fordow nuclear site after US strikes" . Gulf Today . 22 June 2025 . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ Epstein, Jake (22 June 2025). "Satellite images show the damage at Iran's deeply buried Fordow nuclear site after massive US strikes" . Business Insider . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ "Did Iran move centrifuges before US strike? Satellite images show trucks lined up at Fordow" . Business Today . 22 June 2025 . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ "Iranian source says enriched uranium moved from Fordow before US strikes" . Middle East Eye . 22 June 2025 . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ "US joins Israel in attacking Iran, strikes Fordow, Isfahan, Natanz sites" . Al Jazeera English . 22 June 2025 . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ Mackintosh, Thomas (22 June 2025). "What we know about US air strikes on Iran's nuclear facilities" . BBC News . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ "Iran warns of 'everlasting consequences' of US strikes on nuclear sites" . Belga News Agency . 22 June 2025 . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ "Iran Red Crescent says no deaths in US strikes on nuclear sites" . Al Arabiya . 22 June 2025 . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ "Donald Trump suggests Israel secretly checked Iran's Fordow nuclear site" .

The Jerusalem Post . 25 June 2025 . Retrieved 25 June 2025 . ^ "WATCH: Iran's president joins Tehran protest condemning US, Israel" . Al Jazeera English . 22 June 2025. ^ Spencer, Richard (25 June 2025). "US to start talks with Iran amid nuclear damage confusion" .

The Times . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ "Iran's top security body to decide on Hormuz closure after parliament approval" . Al Arabiya English . 22 June 2025 . Retrieved 22 June 2025 . ^ "Israel reportedly strikes Iran's Fordow nuclear facility; Iran fires missiles across Israel" . Ynet . 23 June 2025. ^ "Iran and Israel trade fresh round of strikes amid heightened tension" . Al Arabiya . 23 June 2025. ^ Fabian, Emanuel (23 June 2025). "Iran fires 6-7 missiles at Israel over 40 minutes; IDF targets Tehran with 'unprecedented' strikes" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ "Missile and drone strikes launched against Israel: IRGC" . Al Jazeera English . 23 June 2025. ^ "Air raid sirens blare in northern Israel" . Al Jazeera English . 23 June 2025. ^ "Targeted US Base With Devastating, Powerful Missile Attack: Iran Statement" . NDTV News . 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ Lynch Baldwin, Sarah; Ott, Haley (23 June 2025). "Iran launches missile attack on U.S. base at Al Udeid in Qatar" . CBS News . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ "Iran launches missile strikes on US base in Qatar" . TRT Global . 24 June 2025 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ "Axios: Iran launches six missiles toward US bases in Qatar" . Reuters . 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ "Iran targeted bases in Qatar and Iraq in 'annunciation of victory' operation - state media" . Sky News . 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ "Qatar says no one was injured in the Iranian attack on base housing US troops" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ Cleave, Iona; Kelly, Kieran; Madadi, Afshin; Stringer, Connor; Riley-Smith, Ben; Zagon, Chanel (23 June 2025). "Explosions over Qatar as Iran attacks US base" .

The Daily Telegraph . ^ "Iran's Revolutionary Guards confirm attack on al-Udeid" . Al Jazeera English . 23 June 2025. ^ "No impact on US base in Qatar and no other sites attacked - report" . Sky News . 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ a b "Israel hits Basij HQ in Tehran, kills hundreds of IRGC fighters in Iran" .

The Jerusalem Post . 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ Mahmudov, Kamil (23 June 2025). "Israel attacks six airfields in western, eastern, central Iran" . Report News Agency . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ "Video shows debris of Israeli drone shot down by Iran" . Al Jazeera English . 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ "Iran executes another suspected Israeli spy: Reports" . Al Jazeera English . 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ "In Tehran, IDF strikes IRGC sites, gate of Evin Prison, 'Destruction of Israel' clock" .

The Times of Israel . 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ "Israel says strikes in Tehran hit Basij HQ, Evin Prison, 'Destruction of Israel' clock" .

The Times of Israel . 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ "Israel-Iran live: Blast 'destroys prison gates' as Israeli strikes target 'heart of Tehran'; Iran's supreme leader sends letter to Putin" . Sky News . 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ "Israel hits Iranian government targets, including Evin Prison in Tehran" . BreakingNews.ie . 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ Hafezi, Parisa; Cornwell, Alexander (23 June 2025). "Israel hits Iran's Evin prison a day after U.S. joins the war" . Reuters . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ Rising, David; Amiri, Farnoush (29 June 2025). "Iran's judiciary says at least 71 killed in Israel's attack on Tehran's notorious Evin prison" . Associated Press . Retrieved 29 June 2025 . ^ Mayes-Osterman, Cybele (20 June 2025). "Israel may run low on missile interceptors, putting US in a 'bind' " . USA Today . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (21 June 2025). "Denying reports, IDF indicates that it's not running low on missile interceptors" .

The Times of Israel . ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 4 July 2025 . ^ Atwood, Kylie; Regan, Helen (23 June 2025). "Iranian foreign minister says there's currently no agreement on a ceasefire with Israel" . CNN . Archived from the original on 24 June 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ a b "3 people killed in missile strike in southern Israel, Israel's emergency services says" . CNN . 23 June 2025. Archived from the original on 24 March 2026 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ "Live updates: Trump says ceasefire between Israel and Iran 'now in effect' " . BBC News . 24 June 2025. Archived from the original on 29 March 2026 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ Trump, Donald J. (23 June 2025). "THE CEASEFIRE IS NOW IN EFFECT. PLEASE DO NOT VIOLATE IT! DONALD J. TRUMP, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES!" . Truth Social . Archived from the original on 24 June 2025. ^ "How a volatile 24 hours edged Iran and Israel to a ceasefire" . BBC . 24 June 2025. Archived from the original on 9 March 2026. ^ a b Borger, Julian; Lowell, Hugo; Roth, Andrew (24 June 2025). "Fragile Israel-Iran truce appears to hold after Trump's fury at initial violations" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 2 March 2026. ^ "Fragile ceasefire appears to hold between Iran and Israel as Trump vents frustration with both sides" . AP News . 24 June 2025. Archived from the original on 5 May 2026 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ Trofimov, Yaroslav; Ward, Alexander; Malsin, Jared; Said, Summer (24 June 2025). "How Trump Cajoled Iran and Israel Into a Cease-Fire and Forced Them to Comply" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 4 February 2026 . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ Samuels, Ben (24 June 2025). "Why Trump dropped an angry verbal bunker-buster bomb on Israel and Netanyahu" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 14 November 2025 . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ Ben Ari, Lior; Zitun, Yoav (24 June 2025). "Iranian nuclear scientist killed in an IDF targeted strikes; others targeted but their fate is unknown" . Ynet . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ "Nine people killed in Israeli strikes on Iran before ceasefire takes effect: Governor" . Al Arabiya . 24 June 2025 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ a b Jeyaretnam, Miranda (24 June 2025). "Ceasefire Collapses as Israel Accuses Iran of Missile Attack" . Time . Archived from the original on 25 June 2025 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ "Israel confirms strike on radar system near Tehran" . Izvestia . 24 June 2025 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ "4 killed in Beersheba as Iran fires multiple missile salvos just before agreed-upon ceasefire" .

The Times of Israel . 24 June 2025 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ Taha, Jaidaa; Goller, Howard (24 June 2025). "Israeli military says it intercepted two drones 'most likely from Iran' " .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ Toomey, Bridget; Truzman, Joe; Roggio, Bill (24 June 2025). "Iraqi military bases targeted in overnight strikes just before agreed-upon ceasefire" . Long War Journal . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ "Live: Israel says Iran has launched more missiles hours after start of ceasefire" . Stuff . 24 June 2025 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel; Sokol, Sam (24 June 2025). "Warned by Trump, Israel hits Iranian radar in mild response to missile fire on north" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ MacLellan, Kylie; Suleiman, Farouq; Anagnostopoulos, Christina; Russell, Ros; Yip, Reagan (24 June 2025). "Live: Trump says both Israel and Iran violated ceasefire" . Reuters . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ Motamedi, Maziar; Quillen, Stephen; Sullivan, Rory (24 June 2025). "Israeli PM refraining 'from further strikes' on Iran after call with Trump" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ "IDF downs Houthi drone from Yemen" . Jewish News Syndicate . 25 June 2025 . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (28 June 2025). "IDF says missile fired by Houthis at Israel apparently downed, no reports of injuries" .

The Times of Israel . ^ "Iran-backed militias likely behind new wave of Iraq drone attacks" .

The Jerusalem Post . 5 July 2025 . Retrieved 17 September 2025 . ^ "Iran says 700 arrested for wartime ties with Israel; 3 alleged Mossad agents hanged" .

The Times of Israel . 25 June 2025 . Retrieved 25 June 2025 . ^ "Three Kurdish political prisoners executed on charges of espionage for Israel" . Hengaw . 25 June 2025 . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ Schneid, Rebecca (28 June 2025). "Trump Issues Blistering Response After Iran Threatens U.S." Time . Retrieved 29 June 2025 . ^ "Trump tells Iran's supreme leader: 'You got beat to hell' " .

The Associated Press . 27 June 2025 . Retrieved 29 June 2025 . ^ "Iran holds state funeral for military leaders killed in Israel conflict" . BBC . 28 June 2025 . Retrieved 28 June 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (28 June 2025). "IDF says missile fired by Houthis at Israel apparently downed; no reports of injuries" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 28 June 2025 . ^ "Iran's supreme leader makes first public appearance since Iran-Israel war started" . AP News . 6 July 2025 . Retrieved 6 July 2025 . ^ "Houthis resume deadly Red Sea shipping attacks" . Foundation for Defense of Democracies . 8 July 2025. ^ "فیلم/ افشای تصاویر و اطلاعات خلبانان اسراییل عامل حمله به ایران" . mashreghnews . 2 August 2025. ^ "The first reaction of Israelis to the publication of the image of the Israeli pilot and his wife by the IRNA + video | Hebrew media: How did the pilots' information reach the Iranians?" . hamshahrionline . 3 August 2025. ^ "Iranian army lied about downing Israeli F-35 during war" .

The Jerusalem Post . 11 December 2025 . Retrieved 11 December 2025 . ^ "False report on downing Israeli F-35 hit credibility, state TV chief says" . www.iranintl.com . 10 December 2025 . Retrieved 11 December 2025 . ^ Iran Fears New US Attack as Protests Grip Nation , Newsweek , 5 January 2026, accessed 6 January 2026. ^ Epstein, Jake. "Here are the weapons America used to strike Iran — and shield against retaliation" . Business Insider . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ "Attack coordinated with the United States, Israeli source tells CNN" . CNN . 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 8 March 2026 . ^ "The Latest: Israel and Iran trade strikes as new diplomatic efforts take place in Geneva" . Associated Press . 20 June 2025. Archived from the original on 28 February 2026 . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ "Israel-Iran conflict live updates: Fresh attacks as Trump sets two-week deadline for U.S. action" . NBC News . 20 June 2025. Archived from the original on 27 April 2026 . Retrieved 27 April 2026 . ^ "IDF reveals that it killed six top Iranian military commanders and nine nuclear scientists" .

The Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 14 November 2025 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ Fassihi, Farnaz; Behrooz, Parin; Nikounazar, Leily (6 July 2025). "Israel's Deadly Assault on Iran Prison Incites Fury, Even Among Dissidents" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 7 July 2025 . ^ Fabian, Emanuel (15 June 2025). "Extensive strikes in Tehran after IDF warns Iranians near arms plants to evacuate" .

The Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 14 May 2026 . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ "Iran official says 31 killed in north-west province" . BBC News . 15 June 2025. Archived from the original on 2 February 2026. ^ "Summary of Iran-Israel War on the Israeli Front- Operation Rising Lion (June 2025)" . Alma Research and Education Center . 30 June 2025. Archived from the original on 30 June 2025 . Retrieved 26 July 2025 . ^ Lifshitz-Klieger, Iris (13 June 2025). "Israeli strike on Iran grounds flights, leaves tens of thousands of Israelis stranded" . Ynetnews . Archived from the original on 13 June 2025. ^ "Iraq closes airspace, suspends flights at all airports: State media" . al-Arabiya . 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ "Jordanian army issues statement following 'Israeli' attack on Iran" . Roya News . 13 June 2025. ^ Regan, Helen (13 June 2025). "Israel hits Iran's nuclear program and military leadership in unprecedented strikes" . CNN . ^ "What you need to know as Israel launches strikes against Iran" . Sky News . 13 June 2025. ^ Heller, Mathilda (13 June 2025). "NSC issues warning for Israelis abroad following airstrikes on Iran" .

The Jerusalem Post . ^ "NYPD increases security at Jewish and Israeli sites following Israel's strike on Iran's nuclear program" . WABC-TV . 13 June 2025. ^ Tress, Luke (13 June 2025). "NYPD steps up protection of Jewish, Israeli sites after Iran strikes" .

The Times of Israel . ^ Tracy, Thomas (13 June 2025). "NYPD ramps up security at NYC Jewish sites after Israel launches offensive against Iran" . Daily News . New York. ^ scharf, avi (18 June 2025). "Three Iranian aircraft, including presidential plane, seen heading to Oman" .

The Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "European airline stocks tumble after Israel strikes on Iran" .

The Economic Times . 13 June 2025. ISSN 0013-0389 . ^ Fassihi, Farnaz (14 June 2025). "A Miscalculation by Iran Led to Israeli Strikes' Extensive Toll, Officials Say" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ Sen, Amrita (23 June 2025). "Impact of Iran-Israel conflict on oil could last for years" . financial times . ^ Raydan, Noam (23 June 2025). "How the Iran-Israel Conflict Is Affecting Gulf Energy and Maritime Security" . washington institute . ^ "Gas Market Monitor - Market tightness is here to stay until 2026" . ABN AMRO Bank. 31 July 2025. ^ Elizondo, Gabriel (13 June 2025). "Iran and Israel's ambassadors were the last to speak at the UNSC" . Al Jazeera English . Archived from the original on 7 February 2026 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ Crisp, Elizabeth (13 June 2025). "Iran pulls out of nuclear talks with the US" .

The Hill . Archived from the original on 2 February 2026. ^ Berman, Lazar (15 June 2025). "Cyprus PM says he will speak to Netanyahu today to convey message from Iran" .

The Times of Israel . ^ "Iran turns to mediators to reach ceasefire, prevent Israeli strikes" .

The Jerusalem Post . 15 June 2025. Archived from the original on 19 June 2026 . Retrieved 19 June 2026 . ^ "Trump says 'many calls, meetings' taking place, urges Iran-Israel deal" . Al Jazeera English . 15 June 2025. Archived from the original on 28 January 2026 . Retrieved 15 June 2025 . ^ "Iran's parliament preparing bill to leave NPT" . Al Jazeera English . 16 June 2025. Archived from the original on 9 March 2026 . Retrieved 16 June 2016 . ^ "European FMs urge Iran to return to diplomacy, avoid escalation" .

The Times of Israel . 16 June 2025. Archived from the original on 16 December 2025 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ Magid, Jacob (18 June 2025). "We don't 'grovel': Iran denies asking to come to White House for negotiations, calls Trump a 'has-been warmonger' " .

The Times of Israel . Archived from the original on 30 January 2026 . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ Mason, Jeff; Holland, Steve; Mason, Jeff (24 June 2025). "Trump brokered ceasefire in call with Netanyahu while US team spoke to Iran" . Reuters . Archived from the original on 25 June 2025 . Retrieved 25 June 2025 . ^ Magid, Jacob (9 October 2025). "Trump, after securing deal: 'This is more than Gaza. This is peace in the Middle East' " .

The Times of Israel . ToI Staff. ISSN 0040-7909 . Retrieved 12 October 2025 . ^ Martinez, Luis (12 June 2025). "Israel considering military action against Iran in coming days: Sources" . ABC News . ^ "Ben Gurion shut until further notice; Israeli airlines evacuate fleets to avoid Iranian attack" .

The Times of Israel . 13 June 2025. ^ "IDF Home Front Command extends ban on gatherings; schools and workplaces to remain closed" .

The Times of Israel . 15 June 2025. ^ Scheer, Steven; Kambas, Michele (18 June 2025). "Israel launches airlift to bring home stranded citizens after Iran strikes" . Reuters . ^ Wrobel, Sharon; Tercatin, Rossella (18 June 2025). "First repatriation flights spirit Israelis home from Cyprus as air mission takes off" .

The Times of Israel . ^ a b "Iranian missile strikes Israel's 'crown jewel of science' " . AP News . 19 June 2025 . Retrieved 29 June 2025 . ^ "Israel's Weizmann Institute mourns research lost in Iran strike" .

The Jerusalem Post . 28 June 2025 . Retrieved 29 June 2025 . ^ "Iranian missile strike devastates two buildings at Israel's Weizmann Institute" . Science . 17 June 2025 . Retrieved 29 June 2025 . ^ Dayan, Linda (23 June 2025). " 'We're Filling the Gap That the State Is Supposed to Fill': New Site Maps Bomb Shelters in Arab Localities" . Ha'aretz . Archived from the original on 24 June 2025. ^ "Israel-Iran live news: Donald Trump likens US strikes on Iran to atomic bombing of Hiroshima" .

The Guardian . 25 June 2025. ^ Kimon, Ben (25 June 2025). "Katz declares Iran's central bank a terrorist organization" . Ynet . ^ a b Nuki, Paul; Butcher, Ben; Madadi, Afshin (5 July 2025). "Iran struck five Israeli military bases during 12-day war" .

The Telegraph . ISSN 0307-1235 . Retrieved 6 July 2025 . ^ "Five Israeli Military Bases Directly Hit by Iranian Missiles During War, Report Says" . Haaretz . 5 July 2025. Archived from the original on 5 July 2025 . Retrieved 5 July 2025 . ^ Holliday, Shelby (18 June 2025). "Exclusive | Israel Is Running Low on Defensive Interceptors, Official Says" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 17 March 2026. ^ Smith, Zvi; Faucon, Benoit (15 July 2025). "Through Trial and Error, Iran Found Gaps in Israel's Storied Air Defenses" .

The Wall Street Journal . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ Pepper, Tom (14 August 2025). "Israel's Key Refinery Targets Q4 Start" . Energy Intelligence . Retrieved 19 August 2025 . ^ "Israel Long-Term Outlook Helped by Iran War, Central Bank Governor Says" . bloomberg . 25 June 2025. ^ Amira Hass (28 July 2025). "Israeli Soldiers' Excrement in Cooking Pots: When the IDF Took Over Hundreds of Houses in the West Bank" . Haaretz . ^ Berman, Lazar (6 July 2025). "Report: Iranian ballistic missiles hit five IDF bases during the war" . timesofisrael . TOI Staff. ^ Hana Levi Julian (24 June 2025). "More Than 15,000 Homeless in Operation Rising Lion" .

The Jewish Press . Archived from the original on 25 June 2025. ^ "Flights suspended at Tehran's main airport" . Al Jazeera English . 13 June 2025. ^ "After Israel strikes Iran, airlines divert flights, airspace closed" . Reuters . 13 June 2025. ^ "پروازهای بازگشت حجاج تا اطلاع ثانوی لغو شد" . IRNA (in Persian). 13 June 2025. ^ "Elon Musk's Starlink provides internet access to Iran amid war with Israel" . News9live . 14 June 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ Frąckiewicz, Marcin (3 June 2025). "Why Starlink Keeps Hitting Red Tape Around the World" . TS2 Space . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ "Monitor group says Iran cut off from the internet for more than 12 hours" .

The Times of Israel . 19 June 2025 . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ "نت‌‌بلاکس: اینترنت در ایران بار دیگر قطع شد" . Iran International (in Persian). 21 June 2025 . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ "WhatsApp decries 'false reports' after Iran tells public to delete the app" .

The Times of Israel . AP. 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "Mark Levin calls on Elon Musk to 'turn on Starlink' for Iranian people" . Fox News . 14 June 2025 . Retrieved 14 June 2025 . ^ "Tech in the Iran-Israel conflict: internet blackout, crypto burning and home camera spying" .

The Guardian . 23 June 2025. ^ "Iran says it detained 21,000 suspects during the June war with Israel" . AP News . 12 August 2025. ^ "Kurdish general to US, Israel: Don't abandon us to Iran" .

The Jerusalem Post . 30 November 2025 . Retrieved 11 December 2025 . ^ a b c "How extensive are Israel's intelligence operations inside Iran?" . aljazeera . 23 June 2025. ^ "Centrifuges at Iran's Natanz site likely destroyed, nuclear watchdog says" . www.bbc.com . 16 June 2025 . Retrieved 13 July 2025 . ^ Murphy, Francois (23 June 2025). "IAEA chief expects 'very significant damage' at Iran's Fordow site" . Reuters . Retrieved 13 July 2025 . ^ a b c d Srivastava, Mehul; England, Andrew; Zilber, Neri; Bozorgmehr, Najmeh (23 June 2025). "Where is Iran's uranium? Search continues for 400kg stockpile" . Financial Times . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ Landler, Mark (23 June 2025). "Iran's Nuclear Dreams May Survive Even a Devastating American Blow" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ a b "Trump's Iran attack was ambitious. But has it actually worked?" .

The Economist . 22 June 2025. ISSN 0013-0613 . Archived from the original on 18 August 2025 . Retrieved 19 June 2026 . ^ Sanger, David E. (22 June 2025). "Officials Concede They Don't Know the Fate of Iran's Uranium Stockpile" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ Barnes, Julian E.; Cooper, Helene; Schmitt, Eric; Bergman, Ronen; Haberman, Maggie; Swan, Jonathan (24 June 2025). "Strike Set Back Iran's Nuclear Program by Only a Few Months, U.S. Report Says" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ a b c Barnes, Julian E. (22 June 2025). "After U.S. Strikes, Iran May Be Determined to Build a Nuclear Weapon" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ Murphy, Francois; Irish, John (29 June 2025). "U.S. strikes on Iran's nuclear sites set up "cat-and-mouse" hunt for missing uranium" . Reuters . ^ "Iranian parliament committee approves general plan to suspend cooperation with IAEA, news agency reports" . Reuters . 23 June 2025. ^ MacRedmond, David (25 June 2025). "Iran moves to suspend inspections from nuclear watchdog after US and Israel attacks" .

The Journal . ^ "Iran's president orders country to suspend cooperation with UN nuclear watchdog IAEA" . Associated Press . 2 July 2025. ^ "IAEA inspectors depart Tehran after US-Israel-Iran conflict" . Al Jazeera English . 4 July 2025. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Murphy, Matt; Robinson, Olga; Sardarizadeh, Shayan (20 June 2025). "Israel-Iran conflict unleashes wave of AI disinformation" . BBC . Archived from the original on 26 March 2026 . Retrieved 26 March 2026 . ^ a b "Israel and Iran Usher In New Era of Psychological Warfare" . New York Times . 15 July 2025. ^ a b Dayan, Linda (19 June 2025). "Israeli base under a hospital, Iranians running in Nepal: Fake news is shaping the war" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 21 June 2025 . Retrieved 20 August 2025 . ^ Hussain, Tom (21 June 2025). "Pakistan gets caught in Iran-Israel disinformation crossfire" . South China Morning Post . Archived from the original on 28 February 2026. ^ a b Steinwehr, Uta; Sidibe, Adnan (18 June 2025). "Fact check: Old war videos recycled as fake news" . Deutsche Welle . Archived from the original on 23 March 2026. ^ "Iran-Israel fighting distorted by tech-fuelled misinformation" .

The Hindu . Agence France-Presse . 21 June 2025. Archived from the original on 9 February 2026. ^ "BBC Verify Live: Assessing Iran and Israel attacks ahead of ceasefire" . BBC News . 24 June 2025. Archived from the original on 29 August 2025 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 . ^ Fittarelli, Alberto; Scott, Maia; Deibert, Ron; Michaelsen, Marcus; Linvill, Darren (2 October 2025). We Say You Want a Revolution: PRISONBREAK - An AI-Enabled Influence Operation Aimed at Overthrowing the Iranian Regime (Report). Citizen Lab, University of Toronto. ^ Megiddo, Gur; Benjakob, Omer (3 October 2025). "The Israeli influence operation in Iran pushing to reinstate the shah monarchy" . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 3 October 2025 . Retrieved 4 October 2025 . ^ "Pakistan Will Nuke Israel If It Uses Nuclear Weapon Against Iran, Claims IRGC General Mohsen Rezae" . NDTV . 16 June 2025. ^ Mehmood, Arshad (17 June 2025). "Pakistan Denies Rumors of Nuclear Strike Against Israel" .

The Media Line . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "Netanyahu thanks Trump for support; tells Iranians 'your liberation from tyranny is closer than ever' " .

The Times of Israel . 13 June 2025. ^ "Israel attacks Iran, strikes to continue 'for as many days as it takes' " . 1News . 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ Bodkin, Henry (13 June 2025). "Iran could have built '15 nuclear bombs within days', says Israel after strike" .

The Telegraph . ISSN 0307-1235 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ Lidor, Canaan (13 June 2025). "Iranian opposition calls to overthrow the mullahs" . Jewish News Syndicate . Archived from the original on 31 January 2026. ^ Zitun, Yoav (13 June 2025). "Katz: Iran 'crossed red lines' by targeting civilians, will pay 'very heavy price' " . Ynetnews . Retrieved 13 June 2025 . ^ "Katz says Tehran will burn if Israeli civilians harmed; IDF reportedly strikes Iranian oil refineries" . Ynet . 14 June 2025. ^ "Israeli military chief says army 'mobilising tens of thousands' of soldiers" . Al Jazeera English . 13 June 2025. ^ Peled, Anat (17 June 2025). "Jewish Israelis Support Iran Offensive, Most Arab Israelis Oppose It, Survey Shows" .

The Wall Street Journal . ^ a b England, Andrew (19 June 2025). "Iran's exiled royal calls for regime change — but few are listening" . Financial Times . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . {{ cite news }} : CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ "Exiled opposition leader says only Iranians can bring about regime change" .

The Times of Israel . 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 21 June 2025 . ^ a b c d Azizi, Arash (16 June 2025). " 'This War Is Not Helping Us' " .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ de Guzman, Chad; Vick, Karl (19 June 2025). "Exclusive: Iranian Nobel Laureate Narges Mohammadi Calls for Ceasefire" . Time . Archived from the original on 19 June 2025 . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ MacDonald, Alex (19 June 2025). "Jailed Iranian women activists issue letter condemning Israeli attacks" . Middle East Eye . Retrieved 19 June 2025 . ^ Magid, Jacob (18 June 2025). " 'We're not looking for long-term war': Trump dismisses his supporters' opposition to becoming involved in Iran" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ Magid, Jacob (18 June 2025). "Trump says he told Netanyahu to 'keep going' " .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ Roth, Andrew (13 June 2025). "Trump scrambles to claim credit for Israel's Iran attack he publicly opposed" .

The Guardian . ^ Murphy, Matt; Spencer, Thomas; Murray, Alex (17 June 2025). "US moves 30 jets as Iran attack speculation grows" . BBC News . ^ McLeary, Paul (16 June 2025). "US builds up military presence in Middle East" . Politico . ^ Rascius, Brendan (17 June 2025). "Should US military get involved in Israel-Iran conflict? What a new poll found" . Miami Herald . ^ " 'Drop Israel': How military escalation with Iran divides Trump's base" . Al Jazeera . 14 June 2025. ^ Pager, Tyler; Broadwater, Luke (13 June 2025). "Republicans Are Divided Over Iran. Will Trump Pick a Side?" .

The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 . ^ "Top MAGA pollster warns Republicans will lose the majority for 'the next decade' if Trump gets involved in Israel-Iran" .

The Independent . 17 June 2025. ^ Luscombe, Richard (18 June 2025). "Most Trump supporters want to keep US military out of Israel-Iran conflict, poll finds" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "G7 expresses support for Israel, calls Iran source of instability" . Reuters . 17 June 2025. ^ Freiberg, Nava (18 June 2025). "Starmer calls emergency meeting as UK braces for possible US strike on Iran" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 18 June 2025 . ^ "Trump to decide whether US will strike Iran 'within next two weeks' " . Al Jazeera English . 19 June 2025. ^ "Iran holding direct talks with US, says it could bend on nukes if attacks stop" .

The Times of Israel . 19 June 2025. ^ "German Chancellor says Israel doing a 'dirty work for all of us' in Iran" . Middle East Monitor . 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 25 June 2025 . ^ Noss, Marla (18 June 2025). "Iran bestellt wegen Merz-Äußerung deutschen Botschafter ein" . Die Zeit (in German) . Retrieved 20 June 2025 . ^ McCarthy, Simone (16 June 2025). "Analysis: China 'condemns' Israel as it looks to show itself as a potential peace broker" . CNN . Retrieved 29 July 2025 . ^ "Japan condemns Israel attack on Iran, vows G7 unity to ease tensions" . Kyodo News . 13 June 2025 . Retrieved 2 July 2025 . ^ "Russia says Israeli attacks on Iran are illegal, notes Iran's commitment to NPT" . Reuters . 17 June 2025 . Retrieved 29 July 2025 . ^ Gumrukcu, Tuvan; Toksabay, Ece (19 June 2025). "Turkey ups border security as Iran-Israel conflict rages" . Reuters . ^ "Trump says Putin has no business mediating between Iran and Israel" . Le Monde . 19 June 2025. ^ "Russia warns US against 'military intervention' in Iran-Israel war" . France 24 . 19 June 2025. ^ a b "2025 Survey" . Yougov . 23 June 2025. ^ "بریتانیا: جمهوری اسلامی بزرگترین تهدید دولتی در جهان است" . Iran International (in Persian). 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ "US attacks on Iran risk global conflict, Russia and China warn" . Al Jazeera English . 23 June 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 . ^ a b "Russia's former president says countries are lining up to give Iran their nukes. Analysts are calling his bluff" . Yahoo News . Business Insider. 23 June 2025. ^ "Russia, Pakistan ready to supply nuclear weapons to Iran? This message from a top Russian leader gives clues" .

The Economic Times - The Times of India . 23 June 2025. ^ "China issues warning over US bombing of Iran" . Newsweek . 23 June 2025. ^ "Netanyahu declares historic win, says Israel removed Iran's nuclear threat in 12-day war" . Reuters . 24 June 2025 . Retrieved 25 June 2025 . ^ Parry, Audie; Reddy, Ria; Campa, Kelly; Ganzeveld, Annika (24 June 2025). "Iran Update Special Report, June 24, 2025, Morning Edition" . Institute for the Study of War . Archived from the original on 10 June 2026 . Retrieved 19 June 2026 . ^ Hafezi, Parisa (24 June 2025). "Iranians welcome ceasefire but fearful for future" . Reuters . Retrieved 25 June 2025 . ^ Borger, Julian (24 June 2025). "Israel, US and Iran all claim to have won the war, but who has really gained?" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 25 June 2025 . ^ Baloch, Shah Meer; Parent, Deepa; Borger, Julian (24 June 2025). " 'A pause before something worse': Iranians wary of what future holds" .

The Guardian . ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 25 June 2025 . ^ "Israel's dazzling, daunting, dangerous victory" .

The Economist . 24 June 2025. ISSN 0013-0613 . Archived from the original on 26 September 2025 . Retrieved 25 June 2025 . ^ "Iran's Khamenei resurfaces to warn against future US attacks in first statement since ceasefire" . Associated Press . 26 June 2025 . Retrieved 26 June 2025 . ^ "Azerbaijan rejects Iranian envoy's claims on Israeli drone incursions" . Caliber . 27 June 2025 . Retrieved 26 July 2025 . ^ "Iran/Israel: Iranian forces’ use of cluster munitions in ‘12 Day War’ violated international humanitarian law" , Amnesty International , 24 July 2025. Accessed 11 March 2026. "The Iranian forces’ use of cluster munitions during the ‘12 Day War’ with Israel was a flagrant violation of international humanitarian law, Amnesty International said today. Last month, the Iranian forces fired ballistic missiles whose warheads contained submunitions into populated residential areas of Israel, in attacks endangering civilians.... 'Cluster munitions are inherently indiscriminate weapons that must never be used.

The Conversation . 2 July 2025. ^ "Analysis: What options does Iran have in its conflict against Israel?" . Al Jazeera English . 15 June 2025. ^ Lamb, Kate; Sabbagh, Dan (23 June 2025). "The strait of Hormuz: how could Iran close it and why does it matter to global trade?" .