The United States of America (disambiguation) , and The States (disambiguation) .

The Star-Spangled Banner " Show globe ( states and D.C. only) Show the U.S., its territories , and the Compacts of Free Association states Show territories with boundaries of U.S. exclusive economic zone Capital Washington, D.C.

The United States of America ( USA ), also known as the United States ( U.S. ) or America , is a country primarily located in North America . It is a federal republic consisting of 50 states and a federal capital district , Washington, D.C.

The 48 contiguous states border Canada to the north and Mexico to the south, with the semi-exclave of Alaska in the northwest and the archipelago of Hawaii in the Pacific Ocean .

The United States also asserts sovereignty over five major island territories and various uninhabited islands in Oceania and the Caribbean . It is a megadiverse country , with the world's third-largest land area and third-largest population , exceeding 341 million. Paleo-Indians first migrated from North Asia to North America at least 15,000 years ago, and formed various civilizations. European discovery of the Americas began in 1492, and British colonization followed with the 1607 settlement of Virginia , the first of the Thirteen Colonies .

The American Enlightenment that spread throughout the colonies in the 18th century valued republicanism and liberalism . Clashes with the British Crown over taxation without parliamentary representation and the denial of other English rights evolved into the American Revolution , which led to the July 2, 1776, Lee Resolution formally declaring independence from Great Britain. Two days later, on the Fourth of July , the Declaration of Independence was adopted and publicly released. Victory in the 1775–1783 Revolutionary War brought international recognition of the country's sovereignty .

The U.S. rapidly expanded its territory westward by purchasing, settling and conquering various areas controlled by Europeans and Indigenous peoples.

As more states were admitted into the Union , a North–South division over slavery led 11 Southern states to declare secession and join as the Confederate States of America in order to preserve slavery there . These states fought against the Union in the American Civil War of 1861–1865 and were defeated. With the United States' victory and reunification, slavery was abolished nationally .

By 1900, the country had established itself as a great power , a status solidified after its involvement in World War I .

Following Japan 's attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941, the U.S. entered World War II on the side of the Allies .

The war's aftermath left the U.S. and the Soviet Union as rival superpowers , competing for ideological dominance and international influence during the Cold War .

The Soviet Union's collapse in 1991 left the U.S. as the world's sole superpower , although China has been widely cited since the 2020s as potentially achieving the same status .

The federal government is a representative democracy with a president and a constitution that creates a separation of powers among three branches: legislative , executive , and judicial .

The Congress is a bicameral national legislature composed of the House of Representatives (a lower house based on population) and the Senate (an upper house based on equal representation for each state). Federalism grants substantial autonomy to the 50 states. A developed country , the U.S. ranks high in economic competitiveness, innovation, and higher education . Accounting for over a quarter of nominal global GDP, its economy has been the world's largest since about 1890 . It is the wealthiest country , with the highest disposable household income per capita among OECD members, though its wealth inequality is highly pronounced. Shaped by centuries of immigration , the culture of the U.S. is diverse and globally influential . Making up nearly a third of global military spending, the country is widely considered to have the most powerful armed forces in the world and was the first to develop and employ nuclear weapons . A member of numerous international organizations including the United Nations Security Council , it plays a major role in global political, cultural, economic, and military affairs. Etymology Further information: Names of the United States , Demonyms for the United States , United Colonies , and Naming of the Americas Documented use of the phrase "United States of America" dates back to January 2, 1776.

On that day, Stephen Moylan , a Continental Army aide to General George Washington , wrote a letter to Joseph Reed , Washington's aide-de-camp , seeking to go "with full and ample powers from the United States of America to Spain" to seek assistance in the Revolutionary War effort.

The first known public usage is an anonymous essay published in the Williamsburg newspaper The Virginia Gazette on April 6, 1776. Sometime on or after June 11, 1776, Thomas Jefferson wrote "United States of America" in a rough draft of the Declaration of Independence , which was adopted by the Second Continental Congress on July 4, 1776.

The term "United States" and its initialism "U.S.", used as nouns or as adjectives in English, are common short names for the country.

The initialism "USA", a noun, is also common. "United States" and "U.S." are the established terms throughout the U.S. federal government , with prescribed rules. "The States" is an established colloquial shortening of the name, used particularly from abroad; "stateside" is the corresponding adjective or adverb. " The Americas " is the general term to describe the totality of the continents of North and South America . History Main article: History of the United States For a topical guide, see Outline of the history of the United States . Indigenous peoples Main articles: History of Native Americans in the United States and Pre-Columbian era Cliff Palace , a settlement of ancestors of the Native American Pueblo peoples in present-day Montezuma County, Colorado , built between c. 1200 and 1275 The first inhabitants of North America migrated from Siberia approximately 15,000 years ago, either across the Bering land bridge or along the now-submerged Ice Age coastline .

The Clovis culture , which appeared around 11,000 BCE in North America, is believed to be the first widespread culture in the Americas. Over time, Indigenous North American cultures grew increasingly sophisticated, and some, such as the Mississippian culture , developed agriculture , architecture , and complex societies .

In the post-archaic period , the Mississippian cultures were located in the midwestern , eastern , and southern regions, and the Algonquian in the Great Lakes region and along the Eastern Seaboard , while the Hohokam culture and Ancestral Puebloans inhabited the Southwest . Native population estimates of what is now the United States before the arrival of European colonizers range from around 500,000 to nearly 10 million. European exploration, colonization and conflict (1513–1765) Main articles: Colonial history of the United States and Colonial American military history The colonial possessions of Britain (the Thirteen Colonies in pink and others in purple), France (in blue), and Spain (in orange) in North America, 1750 Christopher Columbus began exploring the Caribbean for Spain in 1492, leading to Spanish-speaking settlements and missions from what are now Puerto Rico and Florida to New Mexico and California .

The first Spanish colony in the present-day continental United States was Spanish Florida , chartered in 1513.

After several settlements failed there due to starvation and disease, Spain's first permanent town, Saint Augustine , was founded in 1565. France established its own settlements in French Florida in 1562, but they were either abandoned (Charlesfort, 1578) or destroyed by Spanish raids ( Fort Caroline , 1565). Permanent French settlements were founded much later along the Great Lakes ( Fort Detroit , 1701), the Mississippi River ( St. Louis , 1764) and especially the Gulf of Mexico ( New Orleans , 1718). Early European colonies also included the thriving Dutch colony of New Nederland (settled 1626, present-day New York) and the small Swedish colony of New Sweden (settled 1638 in what became Delaware). British colonization of the East Coast began with the Virginia Colony (1607) and the Plymouth Colony (Massachusetts, 1620).

The Mayflower Compact in Massachusetts and the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut established precedents for local representative self-governance and constitutionalism that would develop throughout the American colonies.

While European settlers in what is now the United States experienced conflicts with Native Americans, they also engaged in trade, exchanging European tools for food and animal pelts. Relations ranged from close cooperation to warfare and massacres.

The colonial authorities often pursued policies that forced Native Americans to adopt European lifestyles, including conversion to Christianity. Along the eastern seaboard, settlers trafficked Africans through the Atlantic slave trade , largely to provide manual labor on plantations .

The original Thirteen Colonies that would later found the United States were administered as possessions of the British Empire by Crown-appointed governors, though local governments held elections open to most white male property owners .

The colonial population grew rapidly from Maine to Georgia, eclipsing Native American populations; by the 1770s, the natural increase of the population was such that only a small minority of Americans had been born overseas.

The colonies' distance from Britain facilitated the entrenchment of self-governance, and the First Great Awakening , a series of Christian revivals , fueled colonial interest in guaranteed religious liberty . American Revolution and the early republic (1765–1800) Main articles: History of the United States (1776–1789) , History of the United States (1789–1815) , American Revolution , and Founding Fathers of the United States The Declaration of Independence portrait depicts the Committee of Five presenting the Declaration to the Continental Congress on June 28, 1776, in Philadelphia .

Following its victory in the French and Indian War , Britain began to assert greater control over local affairs in the Thirteen Colonies, resulting in growing political resistance . One of the primary grievances of the colonists was the denial of their rights as Englishmen , particularly the right to representation in the British government that taxed them . To demonstrate their dissatisfaction and resolve, the First Continental Congress met in 1774 and passed the Continental Association , a colonial boycott of British goods enforced by local " committees of safety " that proved effective.

The British attempt to then disarm the colonists resulted in the 1775 Battles of Lexington and Concord , igniting the American Revolutionary War .

The political values of the American Revolution evolved from an armed rebellion demanding reform within an empire to a revolution that created a new social and governing system founded on the defense of liberty and the protection of inalienable natural rights ; equality under the law ; sovereignty of the people ; republicanism over monarchy , aristocracy , and other hereditary political power; civic virtue ; and an intolerance of political corruption .

The Founding Fathers of the United States , who included Washington, Jefferson, John Adams , Benjamin Franklin , Alexander Hamilton , John Jay , James Madison , Thomas Paine , and many others, were inspired by Classical , Renaissance , and Enlightenment philosophies and ideas. Though in practical effect since its drafting in 1777, the Articles of Confederation were ratified in 1781 and formally established a decentralized government that operated until 1789.

After the British surrender at the siege of Yorktown in 1781, American sovereignty was internationally recognized by the Treaty of Paris (1783), through which the U.S. also gained territory stretching west to the Mississippi River, north to present-day Canada, and south to Spanish Florida .

The Northwest Ordinance (1787) established the precedent by which the country's territory would expand with the admission of new states , rather than the expansion of existing states.

The Louisiana Purchase of 1803 from France nearly doubled the territory of the United States. Lingering issues with Britain remained , leading to the War of 1812 , which was fought to a draw. Spain ceded Florida and its Gulf Coast territory in 1819.

The Missouri Compromise of 1820, which admitted Missouri as a slave state and Maine as a free state, attempted to balance the desire of northern states to prevent the expansion of slavery into new territories with that of southern states to extend it there. Primarily, the compromise prohibited slavery in all other lands of the Louisiana Purchase north of the 36°30′ parallel .

As Americans expanded further into territory inhabited by Native Americans, the federal government implemented policies of Indian removal or assimilation .

The most significant such legislation was the Indian Removal Act of 1830 , a key policy of President Andrew Jackson . It resulted in the Trail of Tears (1830–1850), in which an estimated 60,000 Native Americans living east of the Mississippi River were forcibly removed and displaced to lands far to the west, causing 13,200 to 16,700 deaths along the forced march . Settler expansion as well as this influx of Indigenous peoples from the East resulted in the American Indian Wars west of the Mississippi.

During the colonial period, slavery became legal in all the Thirteen colonies , and by 1770 it provided the main labor force in the large-scale , agriculture-dependent economies of the Southern Colonies from Maryland to Georgia.

The practice began to be significantly questioned during the American Revolution, and spurred by an active abolitionist movement that had reemerged in the 1830s, states in the North enacted laws to prohibit slavery within their boundaries.

At the same time, support for slavery had strengthened in Southern states , with widespread use of inventions such as the cotton gin (1793) having made slavery immensely profitable for Southern elites .

The United States annexed the Republic of Texas in 1845, and the 1846 Oregon Treaty led to U.S. control of the present-day American Northwest . Dispute with Mexico over Texas led to the Mexican–American War (1846–1848).

After the victory of the U.S., Mexico recognized U.S. sovereignty over Texas, New Mexico , and California in the 1848 Mexican Cession ; the cession's lands also included the future states of Nevada , Colorado and Utah .

The California gold rush of 1848–1849 spurred a huge migration of white settlers to the Pacific coast, leading to even more confrontations with Native populations. One of the most violent, the California genocide of thousands of Native inhabitants, lasted into the mid-1870s. Additional western territories and states were created. Slave states and free states in 1858 Throughout the 1850s, the sectional conflict regarding slavery was further inflamed by national legislation in the U.S. Congress and decisions of the Supreme Court.

In Congress, the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 mandated the forcible return to their enslavers in the South of persons taking refuge in non-slave states, while the Kansas–Nebraska Act of 1854 effectively gutted the anti-slavery requirements of the Missouri Compromise.

In its Dred Scott decision of 1857, the Supreme Court ruled against an enslaved person brought into non-slave territory, simultaneously declaring the entire Missouri Compromise to be unconstitutional. These and other events exacerbated tensions between North and South that would culminate in the American Civil War (1861–1865). Beginning with South Carolina , 11 slave-state governments voted to secede from the United States in 1861, joining to create the Confederate States of America . All other state governments remained loyal to the Union . War broke out in April 1861 after the Confederacy bombarded Fort Sumter .

Following the Emancipation Proclamation on January 1, 1863, many freed slaves joined the Union army .

The war began to turn in the Union's favor following the 1863 Siege of Vicksburg and Battle of Gettysburg , and the Confederates surrendered in 1865 after the Union's victory in the Battle of Appomattox Court House . Reconstruction, Gilded Age, and Progressive Era (1866–1917) Main article: History of the United States (1865–1917) An Edison Studios film showing immigrants arriving at Ellis Island in New York Harbor , a major point of entry for European immigrants in the late 19th and early 20th centuries Efforts toward reconstruction in the secessionist South had begun as early as 1862, but it was only after President Lincoln's assassination that the three Reconstruction Amendments to the Constitution were ratified to protect civil rights .

The amendments codified nationally the abolition of slavery and involuntary servitude except as punishment for crimes, promised equal protection under the law for all persons, and prohibited discrimination on the basis of race or previous enslavement.

As a result, African Americans took an active political role in ex-Confederate states in the decade following the Civil War.

The former Confederate states were readmitted to the Union, beginning with Tennessee in 1866 and ending with Georgia in 1870. National infrastructure, including transcontinental telegraph and railroads , spurred growth in the American frontier . This was accelerated by the Homestead Acts , through which nearly 10 percent of the total land area of the United States was given away free to some 1.6 million homesteaders.

From 1865 through 1917, an unprecedented stream of immigrants arrived in the United States, including 24.4 million from Europe. Most came through the Port of New York , as New York City and other major cities on the East Coast became home to large Jewish , Irish , and Italian populations. Many Northern Europeans as well as significant numbers of Germans and other Central Europeans moved to the Midwest .

At the same time, about one million French Canadians migrated from Quebec to New England .

During the Great Migration , millions of African Americans left the rural South for urban areas in the North. Alaska was purchased from Russia in 1867.

The Compromise of 1877 is generally considered the end of the Reconstruction era, as it resolved the electoral crisis following the 1876 presidential election and led President Rutherford B. Hayes to reduce the role of federal troops in the South. Immediately, the Redeemers began evicting the Carpetbaggers and quickly regained local control of Southern politics in the name of white supremacy . African Americans endured a period of heightened, overt racism following Reconstruction, a time often considered the nadir of American race relations . A series of Supreme Court decisions, including Plessy v. Ferguson , emptied the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments of their force, allowing Jim Crow laws in the South to remain unchecked, sundown towns in the Midwest, and segregation in communities across the country , which would be reinforced in part by the policy of redlining later adopted by the federal Home Owners' Loan Corporation . An explosion of technological advancement , accompanied by the exploitation of cheap immigrant labor , led to rapid economic expansion during the Gilded Age of the late 19th century. It continued into the early 20th, when the United States already outpaced the economies of Britain, France, and Germany combined. Tycoons led the nation's expansion in the railroad , petroleum , and steel industries, as the United States emerged as a pioneer of the automotive industry . This fostered the amassing of enormous economic and political power by a few prominent industrialists , largely through the formation of trusts and monopolies to prevent competition. These changes resulted in significant increases in economic inequality , slum conditions , and social unrest , creating a fertile environment for labor unions to flourish and, to a more limited extent, socialist movements . This period eventually ended with the advent of the Progressive Era , which was characterized by significant economic, legislative and social reforms. Pro-American elements in Hawaii overthrew the Hawaiian monarchy ; the islands were annexed in 1898. That same year, Puerto Rico , the Philippines , and Guam were ceded to the U.S. by Spain after the latter's defeat in the Spanish–American War . (The Philippines was granted full independence from the U.S. on July 4, 1946, following World War II. Puerto Rico and Guam have remained U.S. territories.) American Samoa was acquired by the United States in 1900 after the Second Samoan Civil War .

The U.S. Virgin Islands were purchased from Denmark in 1917 after Danish voters approved the sale in a 1916 referendum . World War I, Great Depression, and World War II (1917–1945) Main article: History of the United States (1917–1945) The 1945 American Trinity test , the first-ever detonation of a nuclear weapon The United States entered World War I alongside the Allies in 1917 helping to turn the tide against the Central Powers .

In 1920, a constitutional amendment granted nationwide women's suffrage .

During the 1920s and 1930s, radio for mass communication and early television transformed communications nationwide.

The Wall Street Crash of 1929 had triggered the Great Depression , to which President Franklin D. Roosevelt responded with the New Deal plan of "reform, recovery and relief", a series of unprecedented and sweeping recovery programs and employment relief projects combined with financial reforms and regulations . Initially neutral during World War II , the U.S. began supplying war materiel to the Allies of World War II in March 1941 and entered the war in December after Japan 's attack on Pearl Harbor . Agreeing to a " Europe first " policy, the U.S. concentrated its wartime efforts on Japan's allies Italy and Germany until their final defeat in May 1945.

The U.S. developed the first nuclear weapons and used them against the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945, ending the war.

The United States was one of the " Four Policemen " who met to plan the post-war world , alongside the United Kingdom , the Soviet Union , and China .

The U.S. emerged relatively unscathed from the war, with even greater economic power and international political influence . Cold War and social revolution (1945–1991) Main articles: History of the United States (1945–1964) , History of the United States (1964–1980) , and History of the United States (1980–1991) Civil rights activists during the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom in Washington, D.C. in August 1963 The end of World War II in 1945 left the U.S. and the Soviet Union as superpowers , each with its own political, military, and economic sphere of influence . Geopolitical tensions between the two superpowers soon led to the Cold War .

The U.S. implemented a policy of containment intended to limit the Soviet Union's sphere of influence; engaged in regime change against governments perceived to be aligned with the Soviets ; and prevailed in the Space Race , which culminated with the first crewed Moon landing in 1969. Domestically, the U.S. experienced economic growth , urbanization , and population growth following World War II .

The civil rights movement emerged, with Martin Luther King Jr. becoming a prominent leader in the early 1960s.

The Great Society plan of President Lyndon B. Johnson 's administration resulted in groundbreaking and broad-reaching laws, policies and a constitutional amendment to counteract some of the worst effects of lingering institutional racism .

The counterculture movement in the U.S. brought significant social changes, including the liberalization of attitudes toward recreational drug use and sexuality . It also encouraged open defiance of the military draft (leading to the end of conscription in 1973) and wide opposition to U.S. intervention in Vietnam , with the U.S. totally withdrawing in 1975. A societal shift in the roles of women was significantly responsible for the large increase in female paid labor participation starting in the 1970s, and by 1985 the majority of American women aged 16 and older were employed.

The Fall of Communism and the dissolution of the Soviet Union from 1989 to 1991 marked the end of the Cold War and left the United States as the world's sole superpower . This cemented the United States' global influence, reinforcing the concept of the " American Century " as the U.S. dominated international political, cultural, economic, and military affairs. Contemporary (1991–present) Main articles: History of the United States (1991–2016) and History of the United States (2016–present) The Twin Towers in New York City during the September 11 attacks of 2001 The 1990s saw the longest recorded economic expansion in American history , a dramatic decline in U.S. crime rates , and advances in technology . Throughout this decade, technological innovations such as the World Wide Web , the evolution of the Pentium microprocessor in accordance with Moore's law , rechargeable lithium-ion batteries , the first gene therapy trial, and cloning either emerged in the U.S. or were improved upon there.

In the 1990s, the Human Genome Project was launched, while Nasdaq became the first stock market in the United States to trade online.

In the Gulf War of 1991, an American-led international coalition of states expelled an Iraqi invasion force that had occupied neighboring Kuwait .

The September 11 attacks on the United States in 2001 by the pan-Islamist militant organization al-Qaeda led to the U.S. launching the war on terror and military interventions in Afghanistan and Iraq .

The U.S. housing bubble culminated in 2007 with the Great Recession , the largest economic contraction since the Great Depression. Beginning in the 2010s, and accelerating in the 2020s, the United States has experienced increased political polarization and significant democratic backsliding .

The country's polarization was violently reflected in the January 2021 Capitol attack , when a mob of insurrectionists supporting President Donald Trump entered the U.S. Capitol and sought to prevent the peaceful transfer of power in an attempted self-coup d'état . It was the first presidential refusal of the peaceful transfer of power . Scholars have broadly classified the United States as transitioning from a liberal democratic polity to a hybrid regime since 2025.

By 2026, a poll by the London School of Economics found that a majority of political scientists surveyed did not believe that the 2026 United States elections would meet the criteria of being " free and fair ".

In 2026, the country also celebrated its 250th anniversary . Geography Main article: Geography of the United States A topographic map of the United States The United States is the world's third-largest country by total area behind Russia and Canada.

The 48 contiguous states and the District of Columbia have a combined area of 3,119,885 square miles (8,080,470 km 2 ).

In 2021, the United States had 8% of the Earth's permanent meadows and pastures and 10% of its cropland. Starting in the east, the coastal plain of the Atlantic seaboard gives way to inland forests and rolling hills in the Piedmont plateau region.

The Appalachian Mountains and the Adirondack Massif separate the East Coast from the Great Lakes and the grasslands of the Midwest .

The Mississippi River System , the world's fourth-longest river system , runs predominantly north–south through the center of the country.

The flat and fertile prairie of the Great Plains stretches to the west, interrupted by a highland region in the southeast.

The Grand Canyon in Arizona The Rocky Mountains , west of the Great Plains, extend north to south across the country, peaking at over 14,000 feet (4,300 m) in Colorado .

The supervolcano underlying Yellowstone National Park in the Rocky Mountains, the Yellowstone Caldera , is the continent's largest volcanic feature. Farther west are the rocky Great Basin and the Chihuahuan , Sonoran , and Mojave deserts.

In the northwest corner of Arizona , carved by the Colorado River , is the Grand Canyon , a steep-sided canyon and popular tourist destination known for its overwhelming visual size and intricate, colorful landscape.

The Cascade and Sierra Nevada mountain ranges run close to the Pacific coast .

The lowest and highest points in the contiguous United States are in the State of California, about 84 miles (135 km) apart.

At an elevation of 20,310 feet (6,190.5 m), Alaska's Denali (also called Mount McKinley) is the highest peak in the country and on the continent. Active volcanoes in the U.S. are common throughout Alaska's Alexander and Aleutian Islands . Located entirely outside North America, the archipelago of Hawaii consists of volcanic islands, physiographically and ethnologically part of the Polynesian subregion of Oceania .

The western Great Plains are semi-arid . Many mountainous areas of the American West have an alpine climate .

The climate is arid in the Southwest, Mediterranean in coastal California , and oceanic in coastal Oregon , Washington , and southern Alaska . Most of Alaska is subarctic or polar . Hawaii , the southern tip of Florida and U.S. territories in the Caribbean and Pacific are tropical .

The United States receives more high-impact extreme weather incidents than any other country. States bordering the Gulf of Mexico are prone to hurricanes, and most of the world's tornadoes occur in the country , mainly in Tornado Alley . Due to climate change , extreme weather has become more frequent in the U.S. in the 21st century, with three times the number of reported heat waves compared to the 1960s.

Since the 1990s, droughts in the American Southwest have become more persistent and more severe.

The regions considered as the most attractive to the population are the most vulnerable. Biodiversity and conservation Main articles: Fauna of the United States and Flora of the United States The bald eagle has been the national emblem of the United States since 1782, and was officially declared the national bird in 2024.

The U.S. is one of 17 megadiverse countries containing large numbers of endemic species : about 17,000 species of vascular plants occur in the contiguous United States and Alaska, and over 1,800 species of flowering plants are found in Hawaii, few of which occur on the mainland.

The United States is home to 428 mammal species, 784 birds, 311 reptiles, 295 amphibians , and around 91,000 insect species. There are 63 national parks , and hundreds of other federally managed monuments, forests, and wilderness areas , administered by the National Park Service and other agencies. About 28% of the country's land is publicly owned and federally managed, primarily in the Western States . Most of this land is protected , though some is leased for commercial use, and less than one percent is used for military purposes. Environmental issues in the United States include debates on non-renewable resources and nuclear energy , air and water pollution , biodiversity , logging and deforestation , and climate change .

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is the federal agency charged with addressing most environmental-related issues .

The idea of wilderness has shaped the management of public lands since 1964, with the Wilderness Act .

The Endangered Species Act of 1973 provides a way to protect threatened and endangered species and their habitats.

The United States Fish and Wildlife Service implements and enforces the Act.

In 2024, the U.S. ranked 35th among 180 countries in the Environmental Performance Index . Government and politics Main article: Politics of the United States The Capitol Building , seat of legislative government, houses both chambers of Congress .

The White House , the president's residence and workplace, includes offices for the executive staff .

The Supreme Court Building houses the nation's highest court .

The United States is a federal republic consisting of 50 states and a federal capital district, Washington, D.C.

The U.S. asserts sovereignty over five unincorporated territories and several uninhabited island possessions. It is the world's oldest surviving federation, and its presidential system of federal government has been adopted, in whole or in part, by many newly independent states worldwide following their decolonization .

The Constitution of the United States serves as the country's supreme legal document .

The United States was the most prominent liberal democracy for much of the 20th and early 21st centuries, but has undergone significant democratic backsliding and a shift toward a hybrid regime —a political system combining autocratic and democratic features. Gerrymandering , the manipulation of districts for political advantage, is widespread and has been driven by 2010s and 2020s Supreme Court rulings. There is an ongoing debate among political scientists on whether the country is more appropriately classified as an electoral autocracy or illiberal democracy , with few still considering it to meet the criteria of a robust liberal democracy. Federal government Main article: Federal government of the United States Composed of three branches, all headquartered in Washington, D.C., the federal government is the national government of the United States.

The U.S. Constitution establishes a separation of powers intended to provide a system of checks and balances to prevent any of the three branches from becoming supreme.

The three-branch system is known as the presidential system , in contrast to the parliamentary system where the executive is part of the legislative body. Many countries around the world adopted this aspect of the 1789 Constitution of the United States, especially in the postcolonial Americas. Legislature The U.S. Congress is a bicameral legislature made up of the Senate and the House of Representatives .

The Senate has 100 members—two residents from each state and elected by that state's voters for a six-year term.

The House of Representatives has 435 members, elected for a two-year term by the constituency of the congressional district where they reside. A state's legislature decides the district boundaries, which are contiguous within the state. Every U.S. congressional district is of equivalent population and sends one representative to Congress. Election years for senators are staggered so that only one-third of them will be up for election every two years. U.S. representatives are all up for election at the same time every two years.

The U.S. Congress makes federal law , declares war , approves treaties, has the power of the purse , and has the power of impeachment . One of its foremost non-legislative functions is the power to investigate and oversee the executive branch. Congressional oversight is usually delegated to committees and is facilitated by Congress' power to issue subpoenas . Much of the work of Congress is performed by a collection of committees , each appointed for a specific purpose or function. Committee membership is by tradition and statute bipartisan , but all committees are chaired by a member of the majority party , who sets the committee agenda. Executive Donald Trump President JD Vance Vice President The U.S. president is the head of state , commander-in-chief of the military, and chief executive of the federal government .

The president appoints the members of the Cabinet , subject to Senate approval, and names other officials who administer and enforce federal law and policy through their respective agencies .

The president has the ability to veto legislative bills from the U.S. Congress before they become law. However, presidential vetoes can be overridden by a two-thirds supermajority vote in both chambers of Congress.

The president also has clemency power for federal crimes and can issue pardons . Finally, the president has the authority to issue expansive " executive orders " in a number of policy areas, subject to judicial review . Candidates for president typically campaign with a vice-presidential running mate , and both candidates are typically elected together, or defeated together, in a presidential election. Unlike other votes in American politics, this is technically an indirect election in which the winner will be determined by the U.S. Electoral College . There, votes are officially cast by individual electors selected by their state legislature .

In practice, however, each of the 50 states chooses a group of presidential electors who are required by state law to confirm the winner of their state's popular vote. Each state is allocated two electors plus one additional elector for every congressional district in the state, which in effect combines to equal the number of elected officials that state sends to Congress.

The District of Columbia, with no representatives or senators, is allocated three electoral votes. Both the president and the vice president serve a four-year term, and the president may be reelected to the office only once , for one additional four-year term. Judiciary The U.S. federal judiciary , whose judges are all appointed for life by the president with Senate approval, consists primarily of the U.S. Supreme Court , the U.S. courts of appeals , and the U.S. district courts .

The lowest level in the federal judiciary is the federal district court, which decides all cases considered to be under " original jurisdiction ", such as federal statutes, constitutional law, or international treaties .

After a federal district court has decided a case, its ruling may be contested and sent to a higher court, a federal court of appeals.

The U.S. judicial system's 12 federal circuits divide the country into 12 separate geographic administrative regions for appeals decisions.

The next and highest court in the system is the Supreme Court of the United States.

The U.S. Supreme Court interprets laws and overturns those it finds unconstitutional .

On average, the Supreme Court receives about 7,000 appeals petitions for writs of certiorari each year, but only grants about 80. Consisting of nine members led by the Chief Justice of the United States , the court usually judges each case before it by majority decision.

In the case of an impeachment trial in the Senate of a sitting president, the chief justice presides.

As with all other federal judges, the members are appointed for life by the sitting president with Senate approval when a vacancy becomes available. Subdivisions Main articles: U.S. state , County (United States) , Indian country , and Territories of the United States Further information: List of states and territories of the United States , List of federally recognized tribes by state , and Federally recognized tribe Territories of the United States include American Samoa , Guam , the Northern Mariana Islands , Puerto Rico , and the U.S. Virgin Islands .

In the U.S. federal system , sovereign powers are shared between three levels of government specified in the Constitution: the federal government, the states, and Indian tribes.

The U.S. also asserts sovereignty over five permanently inhabited territories: American Samoa , Guam , the Northern Mariana Islands , Puerto Rico , and the U.S. Virgin Islands . Residents of the 50 states are governed by their elected state government, under state constitutions compatible with the national constitution , and by elected local governments that are administrative divisions of a state. States are subdivided into counties or county equivalents, which (except in Hawaii) can permit the formation of independent municipalities administered by their own elected representatives.

The District of Columbia is a federal district containing the U.S. capital, Washington, D.C.

The federal district is an administrative division of the federal government. Map of the 326 Indian reservations in the United States; 231 recognized Alaska Native tribes are not shown. Indian country is made up of 574 federally recognized tribes and 326 Indian reservations . They hold a government-to-government relationship with the U.S. federal government in Washington and are legally defined as domestic dependent nations with inherent tribal sovereignty rights .

In addition to the five major territories, the U.S. also asserts sovereignty over the United States Minor Outlying Islands in the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean .

The seven undisputed islands without permanent populations are Baker Island , Howland Island , Jarvis Island , Johnston Atoll , Kingman Reef , Midway Atoll , and Palmyra Atoll . U.S. sovereignty over the unpopulated Bajo Nuevo Bank , Navassa Island , Serranilla Bank , and Wake Island is disputed. Political parties Main article: Political parties in the United States Further information: List of political parties in the United States and Political party strength in U.S. states States and territories by partisan control, as of February 2025: The Constitution is silent on political parties. However, they developed independently in the 18th century with the Federalist and Anti-Federalist parties.

Since then, the United States has operated as a de facto two-party system , though the parties have changed over time.

Since the mid-19th century, the two main national parties have been the Democratic Party and the Republican Party . Political scientists and comparative political studies classify the modern Democratic Party as a liberal party whose political platform stands near the ideological center of the left–right political spectrum , and the modern Republican Party as a right-wing populist and nationalist party whose political platform is right-wing to far-right . Foreign relations Main articles: Foreign relations of the United States and Foreign policy of the United States The United Nations headquarters has been situated along the East River in Midtown Manhattan since 1952; in 1945, the United States was a founding member of the UN .

The United States has an established structure of foreign relations, with the world's second-largest diplomatic corps as of 2024 . It is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council and home to the United Nations headquarters .

The United States is a member of the G7 , G20 , and OECD intergovernmental organizations. Almost all countries have embassies and many have consulates (official representatives) in the country. Likewise, nearly all countries host formal diplomatic missions with the United States, except Iran , North Korea , and Bhutan . Though Taiwan does not have formal diplomatic relations with the U.S., it maintains close unofficial relations.

The United States regularly supplies Taiwan with military equipment to deter potential Chinese aggression.

The country's geopolitical attention has increasingly turned to the Indo-Pacific , where the U.S. joined the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue and AUKUS .

The United States has a " Special Relationship " with the United Kingdom and strong ties with Canada , Australia , New Zealand , the Philippines , Japan , South Korea , Israel , and several European Union countries such as France , Italy , Germany , Spain , and Poland .

The U.S. works closely with its NATO allies on military and national security issues, and with countries in the Americas through the Organization of American States and the United States–Mexico–Canada Free Trade Agreement .

The U.S. exercises full international defense authority and responsibility for Micronesia , the Marshall Islands , and Palau through the Compact of Free Association . It has increasingly conducted strategic cooperation with India , while its ties with China have steadily deteriorated. Beginning in 2014, the U.S. had become a key ally of Ukraine . Military Main article: United States Armed Forces The Pentagon , the headquarters of the U.S. Department of Defense in Arlington County, Virginia , is one of the world's largest office buildings with over 6.5 million square feet (600,000 m 2 ) of floor space .

The president is the commander-in-chief of the United States Armed Forces and appoints its leaders, the secretary of defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff .

The Department of Defense , headquartered at the Pentagon near Washington, D.C., administers five of the six service branches, which are made up of the U.S. Army , Marine Corps , Navy , Air Force , and Space Force .

The Coast Guard is administered by the Department of Homeland Security in peacetime and can be transferred to the Department of the Navy in wartime. Total strength of the entire military is about 1.3 million active duty with an additional 400,000 in reserve.

The United States military is widely regarded as the most powerful and advanced in the world.

The U.S. spent $954 billion on its military in 2025, which is by far the largest amount of any country , making up 33% of global military spending and accounting for 3.1% of the country's GDP.

The U.S. possesses 42% of the world's nuclear weapons—the second-largest stockpile after that of Russia .

The United States has the third-largest combined armed forces in the world, behind the Chinese People's Liberation Army and Indian Armed Forces .

In addition to the vast network of military bases on its soil, the U.S. maintains approximately 800 other bases and installations around the world, and it deploys greater than 100 active-duty personnel in each of 25 foreign countries.

The United States has engaged in over 400 military interventions since its founding in 1776, with over half of these occurring between 1950 and 2019 and 25% occurring in the post–Cold War era. State defense forces (SDFs) are military units that operate under the sole authority of a state government. SDFs are authorized by state and federal law but are under the command of the state's governor .

By contrast, the 54 U.S. National Guard organizations fall under the dual control of state or territorial governments and the federal government ; their units can also become federalized entities, but SDFs cannot be federalized.

The National Guard personnel of a state or territory can be federalized by the president under the National Defense Act Amendments of 1933 ; this legislation created the Guard and provides for the integration of Army National Guard and Air National Guard units and personnel into the U.S. Army and (since 1947) the U.S. Air Force.

The total number of National Guard members is about 430,000, while the estimated combined strength of SDFs is less than 10,000. Law enforcement and criminal justice Main articles: Law of the United States , Law enforcement in the United States , and Crime in the United States J. Edgar Hoover Building , the headquarters of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), in Washington, D.C. There are about 18,000 U.S. police agencies from local to national level in the United States. Law in the United States is mainly enforced by local police departments and sheriff departments in their municipal or county jurisdictions.

The state police departments have authority in their respective state , and federal agencies such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the U.S. Marshals Service have national jurisdiction and specialized duties, such as protecting civil rights , national security , enforcing U.S. federal courts ' rulings and federal laws, and interstate criminal activity. State courts conduct almost all civil and criminal trials, while federal courts adjudicate the much smaller number of civil and criminal cases that relate to federal law . There is no unified "criminal justice system" in the United States.

The American prison system is largely heterogenous, with thousands of relatively independent systems operating across federal, state, local, and tribal levels.

In 2026, "these systems hold nearly 2 million people in 1,566 state prisons, 98 federal prisons, 3,116 local jails, 1,277 juvenile correctional facilities, 220 immigration detention facilities, and 77 Indian country jails, as well as in military prisons, civil commitment centers, state psychiatric hospitals, and prisons in the U.S. territories—at a system-wide cost of at least $445 billion each year." Despite disparate systems of confinement, four main institutions dominate: federal prisons , state prisons , local jails, and juvenile correctional facilities . Federal prisons are run by the Federal Bureau of Prisons and hold pretrial detainees as well as people who have been convicted of federal crimes. State prisons, run by the department of corrections of each state, hold people sentenced and serving prison time (usually longer than one year) for felony offenses. Local jails are county or municipal facilities that incarcerate defendants prior to trial; they also hold those serving short sentences (typically under a year). Juvenile correctional facilities are operated by local or state governments and serve as longer-term placements for any minor adjudicated as delinquent and ordered by a judge to be confined.

In January 2023, the United States had the sixth-highest per capita incarceration rate in the world—531 people per 100,000 inhabitants—and the largest prison and jail population in the world, with more than 1.9 million people incarcerated. An analysis of the World Health Organization Mortality Database from 2010 showed U.S. homicide rates "were 7 times higher than in other high-income countries, driven by a gun homicide rate that was 25 times higher".

The country's legal system is classified by some political scientists and legal scholars as operating under a "partial rule of law " system, according to two 2026 surveys conducted by Bright Line Watch and the London School of Economics . Economy Main article: Economy of the United States The U.S. dollar is the most-used currency in international transactions and the world's foremost reserve currency .

The U.S. has a highly developed mixed economy that has been the world's largest nominally since about 1890 . Its 2024 gross domestic product (GDP) of more than $29 trillion constituted over 25% of nominal global economic output , or 15% at purchasing power parity (PPP).

From 1983 to 2008, U.S. real compounded annual GDP growth was 3.3%, compared to a 2.3% weighted average for the rest of the G7 .

The country ranks first in the world by nominal GDP , second when adjusted for purchasing power parities (PPP), and ninth by PPP-adjusted GDP per capita .

In February 2024, the total U.S. federal government debt was $34.4 trillion. New York City is the world's principal financial center , and its metropolitan area is the world's largest metropolitan economy . Of the world's 500 largest companies by revenue , 138 were headquartered in the U.S. in 2025, the highest number of any country.

The U.S. dollar is the currency most used in international transactions and the world's foremost reserve currency , backed by the country's dominant economy, its military , the petrodollar system, its large U.S. treasuries market , and its linked eurodollar . Several countries use it as their official currency , and in others it is the de facto currency .

The U.S. has free trade agreements with several countries , including the USMCA .

Although the United States has reached a post-industrial level of economic development and is often described as having a service economy , it remains a major industrial power; in 2024, the U.S. manufacturing sector was the world's second-largest by value output after China's .

The New York Stock Exchange on Wall Street , the world's largest stock exchange by market capitalization New York City is the world's principal financial center , and its metropolitan area is the world's largest metropolitan economy .

The New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq , both located in New York City, are the world's two largest stock exchanges by market capitalization and trade volume .

The United States is at the forefront of technological advancement and innovation in many economic fields, especially in artificial intelligence ; electronics and computers ; pharmaceuticals ; and medical, aerospace and military equipment .

The country's economy is fueled by abundant natural resources , a well-developed infrastructure , and high productivity .

The largest trading partners of the United States are the European Union , Mexico, Canada, China, Japan, South Korea, the United Kingdom, Vietnam, India, and Taiwan.

The United States is the world's largest importer and second-largest exporter . It is by far the world's largest exporter of services . Americans have the highest average household and employee income among OECD member states, and the fourth-highest median household income in 2023, up from sixth-highest in 2013. With personal consumption expenditures of over $18.5 trillion in 2023, the U.S. has a heavily consumer-driven economy and is the world's largest consumer market .

The U.S. ranked first in the number of dollar billionaires and millionaires in 2023, with 735 billionaires and nearly 22 million millionaires. Wealth in the United States is highly concentrated; in 2011, the richest 10% of the adult population owned 72% of the country's household wealth, while the bottom 50% owned just 2%. U.S. wealth inequality increased substantially since the late 1980s, and income inequality in the U.S. reached a record high in 2019.

In 2024, the country had some of the highest wealth and income inequality levels among OECD countries.

Since the 1970s, there has been a decoupling of U.S. wage gains from worker productivity.

In 2016, the top fifth of earners took home more than half of all income, giving the U.S. one of the widest income distributions among OECD countries. There were about 771,480 homeless persons in the U.S. in 2024.

In 2022, 6.4 million children experienced food insecurity. Feeding America estimates that around one in five, or approximately 13 million, children experience hunger in the U.S. and do not know where or when they will get their next meal. Also in 2022, about 37.9 million people, or 11.5% of the U.S. population, were living in poverty .

The United States has a smaller welfare state and redistributes less income through government action than most other high-income countries . It is the only advanced economy that does not guarantee its workers paid vacation nationally and one of a few countries in the world without federal paid family leave as a legal right.

The United States has a higher percentage of low-income workers than almost any other developed country, largely because of a weak collective bargaining system and lack of government support for at-risk workers. Science and technology Main articles: Science and technology in the United States and Science policy of the United States California's Silicon Valley is the largest and foremost technology and innovation hub in the world.

The United States has been a leader in technological innovation since the late 19th century and scientific research since the mid-20th century. Methods for producing interchangeable parts and the establishment of a machine tool industry enabled the large-scale manufacturing of U.S. consumer products in the late 19th century.

By the early 20th century, factory electrification , the introduction of the assembly line , and other labor-saving techniques created the system of mass production .

In the 21st century, the United States continues to be one of the world's foremost scientific powers, though China has emerged as a major competitor in many fields.

The U.S. has the highest research and development expenditures of any country and ranks ninth as a percentage of GDP.

In 2022, the United States was (after China) the country with the second-highest number of published scientific papers .

In 2021, the U.S. ranked second (also after China) by the number of patent applications, and third by trademark and industrial design applications (after China and Germany), according to World Intellectual Property Indicators .

In 2025 the United States ranked third (after Switzerland and Sweden) in the Global Innovation Index .

The United States is considered to be a world leader in the development of artificial intelligence technology.

In 2023, the United States was ranked the second most technologically advanced country in the world (after South Korea) by Global Finance magazine. Spaceflight Main article: Space policy of the United States Astronauts Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong (seen in visor reflection) during the 1969 Apollo 11 mission, the first crewed Moon landing .

The United States is the only country to have landed humans on the Moon.

The United States has maintained a space program since the late 1950s, beginning with the establishment of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) in 1958.

In 1961, the United States became the second country (after the USSR) to successfully launch a human into space . NASA's Apollo program (1961–1972) achieved the first crewed Moon landing with the 1969 Apollo 11 mission; it remains one of the agency's most significant milestones. Other major endeavors by NASA include the Space Shuttle program (1981–2011), the Voyager program (1972–present), the Hubble and James Webb space telescopes (launched in 1990 and 2021, respectively), and the multi-mission Mars Exploration Program ( Spirit , Opportunity , Curiosity , and Perseverance ). NASA is one of five agencies collaborating on the International Space Station (ISS); U.S. contributions to the ISS include several modules, including Destiny (2001), Harmony (2007), and Tranquility (2010), as well as ongoing logistical and operational support.

The United States private sector dominates the global commercial spaceflight industry . Prominent American spaceflight contractors include Blue Origin , Boeing , Lockheed Martin , Northrop Grumman , and SpaceX . NASA programs such as the Commercial Crew Program , Commercial Resupply Services , Commercial Lunar Payload Services , and NextSTEP have facilitated growing private-sector involvement in American spaceflight. Energy Main article: Energy in the United States In 2023, the United States received approximately 84% of its energy from fossil fuel, and its largest source of energy was petroleum (38%), followed by natural gas (36%), renewable sources (9%), coal (9%), and nuclear power (9%).

In 2022, the United States constituted about 4% of the world's population , but consumed around 16% of the world's energy .

The U.S. ranks as the second-highest emitter of greenhouse gases behind China.

The U.S. is the world's largest producer of nuclear power , generating around 30% of the world's nuclear electricity. It also has the highest number of nuclear power reactors of any country.

From 2024, the U.S. plans to triple its nuclear power capacity by 2050. Transportation Main article: Transportation in the United States Interchange between Interstate 10 and Interstate 45 in Houston , Texas The United States' 4 million miles (6.4 million kilometers) of road network, owned almost entirely by state and local governments, is the longest in the world.

The extensive Interstate Highway System that connects all major U.S. cities is funded mostly by the federal government but maintained by state departments of transportation .

The system is further extended by state highways and some private toll roads .

The U.S. is among the top ten countries with the highest vehicle ownership per capita (850 vehicles per 1,000 people) in 2022. A 2022 study found that 76% of U.S. commuters drive alone and 14% ride a bicycle, including bike owners and users of bike-sharing networks. About 11% use some form of public transportation. Public transportation in the United States is well developed in the largest urban areas, notably New York City, Washington, D.C., Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, and the San Francisco Bay Area; otherwise, coverage is generally less extensive than in most other developed countries.

The U.S. also has many relatively car-dependent localities. Long-distance intercity travel is provided primarily by airlines, but travel by rail is more common along the Northeast Corridor , where the only high-speed rail in the U.S. that meets international standards operates. Amtrak , the country's government-sponsored national passenger rail company, has a relatively sparse network compared to that of Western European countries. Service is concentrated in the Northeast, California, the Midwest, and the Pacific Northwest.

The country's rail transport network , the longest in the world at 182,412.3 mi (293,564.2 km), handles mostly freight (in contrast to more passenger-centered rail in Europe ). Because they are often privately owned operations, U.S. railroads lag behind those of the rest of the world in terms of electrification. Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International Airport , serving the Atlanta metropolitan area , is the world's busiest airport by passenger traffic with over 75 million passengers as of 2021.

The United States has an extensive air transportation network. U.S. civilian airlines are all privately owned.

The three largest airlines in the world, by total number of passengers carried, are U.S.-based; American Airlines became the global leader after its 2013 merger with US Airways . Of the 50 busiest airports in the world, 16 are in the United States, as well as five of the top 10.

The world's busiest airport by passenger volume is Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International in Atlanta, Georgia .

In 2022, most of the 19,969 U.S. airports were owned and operated by local government authorities, and there are also some private airports. Some 5,193 are designated as "public use", including for general aviation .

The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) has provided security at most major airports since 2001.

The Census Bureau's official 2025 population estimate was 341,784,857, an increase of 3.1% since the 2020 census. According to the Bureau's U.S. Population Clock , on July 1, 2024, the U.S. population had a net gain of one person every 16 seconds, or about 5400 people per day.

In 2023, 51% of Americans age 15 and over were married, 6% were widowed , 10% were divorced, and 34% had never been married.

In 2023, the total fertility rate for the U.S. stood at 1.6 children per woman, and, at 23%, it had the world's highest rate of children living in single-parent households in 2019. Most Americans live in the suburbs of major metropolitan areas.

The United States has a diverse population; 37 ancestry groups have more than one million members. White Americans with ancestry from Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa form the largest racial and ethnic group at 57.8% of the United States population. Hispanic and Latino Americans form the second-largest group and are 18.7% of the United States population. African Americans constitute the country's third-largest ancestry group and are 12.1% of the total U.S. population. Asian Americans are the country's fourth-largest group, composing 5.9% of the United States population.

The country's 3.7 million Native Americans account for about 1%, and some 574 native tribes are recognized by the federal government.

In 2024, the median age of the United States population was 39.1 years. Urbanization Main articles: Urbanization in the United States and List of United States cities by population Most Americans live in suburbs and exurbs , such as Monroe Township , New Jersey , in the New York metropolitan area . About 82% of Americans live in metropolitan areas , particularly in suburbs and outer-ring exurbs ; about half of those reside in cities with populations over 50,000.

In 2024, 346 incorporated U.S. municipalities had populations over 100,000, 11 cities had more than one million residents, and four cities— New York City , Los Angeles , Chicago , and Houston —had populations exceeding two million. Some 56 U.S. metropolitan areas have one million or more residents . More recently, the fastest-growing metropolitan areas were in the South, while southern metros along the Mexican border and Gulf Coast metros susceptible to hurricanes declined the most in 2025.

The New York metro area , which gained the most new residents in 2024, fell to 13th in 2025, due to a fall in immigrants.

The top metro areas with rising populations in 2025 were Houston and Dallas–Fort Worth , followed by Atlanta , Phoenix and Charlotte .

The Mexico–United States border wall between San Diego (left) and Tijuana (right) America's immigrant population is by far the world's largest in absolute terms .

In 2022, there were 87.7 million immigrants and U.S.-born children of immigrants in the United States, accounting for nearly 27% of the overall U.S. population.

In 2017, out of the U.S. foreign-born population, some 45% (20.7 million) were naturalized citizens, 27% (12.3 million) were lawful permanent residents, 6% (2.2 million) were temporary lawful residents, and 23% (10.5 million) were unauthorized immigrants .

In 2019, the top countries of origin for immigrants were Mexico (24% of immigrants), India (6%), China (5%), the Philippines (4.5%), and El Salvador (3%).

In fiscal year 2022, over one million immigrants (most of whom entered through family reunification ) were granted legal residence .

The undocumented immigrant population in the U.S. reached a record high of 14 million in 2023. Religion Main article: Religion in the United States The First Amendment guarantees the free exercise of religion in the country and forbids Congress from passing laws respecting its establishment . Religious practice is widespread, among the most diverse in the world, and profoundly vibrant.

The country has the world's largest Christian population , which includes the fourth-largest population of Catholics . Other notable faiths include Judaism , Buddhism , Hinduism , Islam , New Age , and Native American religions . Religious practice varies significantly by region. " Ceremonial deism " is common in American culture.

The overwhelming majority of Americans believe in a higher power or spiritual force, engage in spiritual practices such as prayer, and consider themselves religious or spiritual .

In 2018, it employed 120,000 people and treated 10 million patients. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), average U.S. life expectancy at birth reached 79.0 years in 2024, its highest recorded level. This was an increase of 0.6 years over 2023.

The CDC attributed the improvement to a significant fall in the number of fatal drug overdoses in the country, noting that "heart disease continues to be the leading cause of death in the United States, followed by cancer and unintentional injuries." In 2024, life expectancy at birth for American men rose to 76.5 years (+0.7 years compared to 2023), while life expectancy for women was 81.4 years (+0.3 years). Starting in 1998, life expectancy in the U.S. fell behind that of other wealthy industrialized countries , and Americans' "health disadvantage" gap has been increasing ever since.

The Commonwealth Fund reported in 2020 that the U.S. had the highest suicide rate among high-income countries . Approximately one-third of the U.S. adult population is obese , and another third is overweight.

The U.S. healthcare system far outspends that of any other country , measured both in per capita spending and as a percentage of GDP, but attains worse healthcare outcomes when compared to peer countries for reasons that are debated.

The United States is the only developed country without a system of universal healthcare , and a significant proportion of the population that does not carry health insurance . Government-funded healthcare coverage for the poor ( Medicaid ) and for those age 65 and older ( Medicare ) is available to Americans who meet the programs' income or age qualifications.

In 2010, President Barack Obama passed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act .

Since the 2022 U.S. Supreme Court decision Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization , which effectively overruled Roe v. Wade (1973), abortion in the United States is no longer federally protected but is subject to the laws of each state or territory. Education Main article: Education in the United States Some 77% of American college students attend public institutions such as the University of Virginia , founded by Thomas Jefferson in 1819. American primary and secondary education, known in the U.S. as K–12 ("kindergarten through 12th grade"), is decentralized. School systems are operated by state, territorial, and sometimes municipal governments and regulated by the U.S. Department of Education .

In general, children are required to attend school or an approved homeschool from the age of five or six ( kindergarten or first grade ) until they are 18 years old. This often brings students through the 12th grade , the final year of a U.S. high school, but some states and territories allow them to leave school earlier, at age 16 or 17.

The U.S. spends more on education per student than any other country, an average of $18,614 per year per public elementary and secondary school student in 2020–2021. Among Americans age 25 and older, 92.2% graduated from high school, 62.7% attended some college, 37.7% earned a bachelor's degree , and 14.2% earned a graduate degree.

The U.S. literacy rate is near-universal.

The U.S. has produced the most Nobel Prize winners of any country , with 411 (having won 413 awards). U.S. tertiary or higher education has earned a global reputation. Many of the world's top universities, as listed by various ranking organizations, are in the United States, including 19 of the top 25. American higher education is dominated by state university systems , although the country's many private universities and colleges enroll about 20% of all American students. Local community colleges generally offer open admissions , lower tuition, and coursework leading to a two-year associate degree or a non-degree certificate .

The United States is home to a wide variety of ethnic groups, traditions, and customs .

The country has been described as having the values of individualism and personal autonomy , as well as a strong work ethic and competitiveness . Voluntary altruism toward others also plays a major role; according to a 2016 study by the Charities Aid Foundation , Americans donated 1.44% of total GDP to charity—the highest rate in the world by a large margin. Americans have traditionally been characterized by a unifying political belief in an " American Creed " that emphasizes consent of the governed , liberty , equality under the law , democracy , social equality , property rights , and a preference for limited government .

The U.S. has acquired significant hard and soft power through its diplomatic influence , economic power , military alliances , and cultural exports such as American movies , music , video games , sports , and food .

The influence that the United States exerts on other countries through soft power is referred to as Americanization . Nearly all present Americans or their ancestors came from Europe, Africa, or Asia (the " Old World ") within the past five centuries. Mainstream American culture is a Western culture largely derived from the traditions of European immigrants with influences from many other sources, such as traditions brought by slaves from Africa . More recent immigration from Asia and especially Latin America has added to a cultural mix that has been described as a homogenizing melting pot , and a heterogeneous salad bowl , with immigrants contributing to, and often assimilating into, mainstream American culture. Under the First Amendment to the Constitution , the United States is considered to have the strongest protections of free speech of any country . Flag desecration , hate speech , blasphemy , and lese majesty are all forms of protected expression. A 2016 Pew Research Center poll found that Americans were the most supportive of free expression of any polity measured. Additionally, they are the "most supportive of freedom of the press and the right to use the Internet without government censorship".

The U.S. is a socially progressive country with permissive attitudes surrounding human sexuality . LGBTQ rights in the United States are among the most advanced by global standards.

The American Dream , or the perception that Americans enjoy high levels of social mobility , plays a key role in attracting immigrants. Whether this perception is accurate has been a topic of debate.

While mainstream culture holds that the United States is a classless society , scholars identify significant differences between the country's social classes , affecting socialization , language, and values. Americans tend to greatly value socioeconomic achievement, but being ordinary or average is promoted by some as a noble condition as well.

The American Revolutionary Period (1765–1783) is notable for the political writings of Benjamin Franklin , Alexander Hamilton , Thomas Paine , and Thomas Jefferson . Shortly before and after the Revolutionary War , the newspaper rose to prominence, filling a demand for anti-British national literature. An early novel is William Hill Brown 's The Power of Sympathy , published in 1791. Writer and critic John Neal in the early- to mid-19th century helped advance America toward a unique literature and culture by criticizing predecessors such as Washington Irving for imitating their British counterparts, and by influencing writers such as Edgar Allan Poe , who took American poetry and short fiction in new directions. Ralph Waldo Emerson and Margaret Fuller pioneered the influential Transcendentalism movement; Henry David Thoreau , author of Walden , was influenced by this movement.

The conflict surrounding abolitionism inspired writers, like Harriet Beecher Stowe , and authors of slave narratives, such as Frederick Douglass . Nathaniel Hawthorne 's The Scarlet Letter (1850) explored the dark side of American history, as did Herman Melville 's Moby-Dick (1851). Major American poets of the 19th century American Renaissance include Walt Whitman , Melville, and Emily Dickinson . Mark Twain was the first major American writer to be born in the West. Henry James achieved international recognition with novels like The Portrait of a Lady (1881).

As literacy rates rose, periodicals published more stories centered around industrial workers, women, and the rural poor. Naturalism , regionalism , and realism were the major literary movements of the period.

While modernism generally took on an international character, modernist authors working within the United States more often rooted their work in specific regions, peoples, and cultures.

Following the Great Migration to northern cities, African-American and black West Indian authors of the Harlem Renaissance developed an independent tradition of literature that rebuked a history of inequality and celebrated black culture. An important cultural export during the Jazz Age , these writings were a key influence on Négritude , a philosophy emerging in the 1930s among francophone writers of the African diaspora .

The four major broadcast television networks are all commercial entities.

The Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) is the country's major non-commercial public broadcast network ; it also provides educational programming through local PBS stations.

The U.S. cable television system offers hundreds of channels catering to a variety of niches.

In 2021, about 83% of Americans over age 12 listened to broadcast radio , while about 40% listened to podcasts .

In the prior year, there were 15,460 licensed full-power radio stations in the U.S. according to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Public radio broadcasting is largely supplied by National Public Radio (NPR), incorporated in February 1970 under the Public Broadcasting Act of 1967 . U.S. newspapers with a global reach and reputation include The Wall Street Journal , The New York Times , The Washington Post , and USA Today . About 800 publications are produced in Spanish. With few exceptions, newspapers are privately owned, either by large chains such as Gannett or McClatchy , which own dozens or even hundreds of newspapers; by small chains that own a handful of papers; or, in an increasingly rare situation, by individuals or families. Major cities often have alternative newspapers to complement the mainstream daily papers, such as The Village Voice in New York City and LA Weekly in Los Angeles.

The five most-visited websites in the world are Google , YouTube , Facebook , Instagram , and ChatGPT —all of them American-owned. Other popular platforms used include X (formerly Twitter) and Amazon .

In 2025, the U.S. was the world's second-largest video game market by revenue (after China).

In 2015, the U.S. video game industry consisted of 2,457 companies that employed around 220,000 jobs and generated $30.4 billion in revenue. There are 444 game publishers, developers, and hardware companies in California alone. According to the Game Developers Conference (GDC), the U.S. is the top location for video game development , with 58% of the world's game developers based there in 2025. Media freedom was classified as "problematic" by Reporters Without Borders in 2026, and scholars have noted a significant rise in censorship and self-censorship in recent years. Theater Main article: Theater in the United States Broadway theaters in Theater District, Manhattan The United States is well known for its theater. Mainstream theater in the United States derives from the old European theatrical tradition and has been heavily influenced by the British theater .

By the middle of the 19th century, America had created new distinct dramatic forms in the Tom Shows , the showboat theater and the minstrel show .

The central hub of the American theater scene is the Theater District in Manhattan , with its divisions of Broadway , off-Broadway , and off-off-Broadway . Many movie and television celebrities have gotten their big break working in New York productions. Outside New York City, many cities have professional regional or resident theater companies that produce their own seasons.

The biggest-budget theatrical productions are musicals. U.S. theater has an active community theater culture.

The Tony Awards recognize excellence in live Broadway theater and are presented at an annual ceremony in Manhattan .

The awards are given for Broadway productions and performances. One is also given for regional theater . Visual arts Main articles: Visual art of the United States and Architecture of the United States American Gothic (1930) by Grant Wood is one of the most famous American paintings and is widely parodied . Folk art in colonial America grew out of artisanal craftsmanship in communities that allowed commonly trained people to individually express themselves. It was distinct from Europe's tradition of high art , which was less accessible and generally less relevant to early American settlers. Cultural movements in art and craftsmanship in colonial America generally lagged behind those of Western Europe. For example, the prevailing medieval style of woodworking and primitive sculpture became integral to early American folk art, despite the emergence of Renaissance styles in England in the late 16th and early 17th centuries.

The new English styles would have been early enough to make a considerable impact on American folk art, but American styles and forms had already been firmly adopted. Not only did styles change slowly in early America, but there was a tendency for rural artisans there to continue their traditional forms longer than their urban counterparts did—and far longer than those in Western Europe.

The Hudson River School was a mid-19th-century movement in the visual arts tradition of European naturalism .

The 1913 Armory Show in New York City, an exhibition of European modernist art , shocked the public and transformed the U.S. art scene. American Realism and American Regionalism sought to reflect and give America new ways of looking at itself. Georgia O'Keeffe , Marsden Hartley , and others experimented with new and individualistic styles, which would become known as American modernism . Major artistic movements such as the abstract expressionism of Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning and the pop art of Andy Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein developed largely in the United States. Major photographers include Alfred Stieglitz , Edward Steichen , Dorothea Lange , Edward Weston , James Van Der Zee , Ansel Adams , and Gordon Parks .

The tide of modernism and then postmodernism has brought global fame to American architects, including Frank Lloyd Wright , Philip Johnson , and Frank Gehry .

The Metropolitan Museum of Art in Manhattan is the largest art museum in the United States and the fourth-largest in the world. Music Main article: Music of the United States The Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum in Nashville, Tennessee American folk music encompasses numerous music genres, variously known as traditional music, traditional folk music , contemporary folk music, or roots music. Many traditional songs have been sung within the same family or folk group for generations, and sometimes trace back to such origins as the British Isles , mainland Europe , or Africa .

The rhythmic and lyrical styles of African-American music in particular have influenced American music. Banjos were brought to America through the slave trade. Minstrel shows incorporating the instrument into their acts led to its increased popularity and widespread production in the 19th century.

The electric guitar , first invented in the 1930s, and mass-produced by the 1940s, had an enormous influence on popular music, in particular due to the development of rock and roll .

The synthesizer , turntablism , and electronic music were also largely developed in the U.S. Elements from folk idioms such as the blues and old-time music were adopted and transformed into popular genres with global audiences. Jazz grew from blues and ragtime in the early 20th century, developing from the innovations and recordings of composers such as W.C. Handy and Jelly Roll Morton . Louis Armstrong and Duke Ellington increased its popularity early in the 20th century. Country music developed in the 1920s, bluegrass and rhythm and blues in the 1940s, and rock and roll in the 1950s.

In the 1960s, Bob Dylan emerged from the folk revival to become one of the country's most celebrated songwriters.

The musical forms of punk and hip hop both originated in the United States in the 1970s.

The United States has the world's largest music market , with a total retail value of $15.9 billion in 2022, and is the largest exporter of music. Most of the world's major record companies are based in the U.S.; they are represented by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Mid-20th-century American pop stars, such as Frank Sinatra and Elvis Presley , became global celebrities and best-selling music artists , as have artists of the late 20th century, such as Michael Jackson , Madonna , Whitney Houston , and Mariah Carey , and of the early 21st century, such as Eminem , Britney Spears , Lady Gaga , Katy Perry , Taylor Swift and Beyoncé . Fashion Main article: Fashion in the United States Haute couture fashion models on the catwalk during New York Fashion Week The United States has the world's largest apparel market by revenue. Apart from professional business attire , American fashion is eclectic and predominantly informal. Americans' diverse cultural roots are reflected in their clothing; however, sneakers , jeans , T-shirts , and baseball caps are emblematic of American styles. New York, with its Fashion Week , is considered to be one of the "Big Four" global fashion capitals , along with Paris , Milan , and London . A study demonstrated that general proximity to Manhattan's Garment District has been synonymous with American fashion since its inception in the early 20th century. A number of well-known designer labels , among them Tommy Hilfiger , Ralph Lauren , Tom Ford and Calvin Klein , are headquartered in Manhattan . Labels cater to niche markets , such as preteens. New York Fashion Week is one of the most influential fashion shows in the world, and is held twice each year in Manhattan; the annual Met Gala , also in Manhattan, has been called the fashion world's "biggest night". Cinema Main article: Cinema of the United States The Hollywood Sign in the Hollywood Hills , often regarded as the symbol of the American film industry The U.S. film industry has a worldwide influence and following . Hollywood , a district in central Los Angeles, the nation's second-most populous city, is also metonymous for the American filmmaking industry.

The major film studios of the United States are the primary source of the most commercially successful movies selling the most tickets in the world. Largely centered in the New York City region from its beginnings in the late 19th century through the first decades of the 20th century, the U.S. film industry has since been primarily based in and around Hollywood. Nonetheless, American film companies have been subject to the forces of globalization in the 21st century, and an increasing number of films are made elsewhere.

The Academy Awards , popularly known as "the Oscars", have been held annually by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences since 1929, and the Golden Globes have been held annually since January 1944.

The industry peaked in what is commonly referred to as the " Golden Age of Hollywood ", from the early sound period until the early 1960s, with screen actors such as John Wayne and Marilyn Monroe becoming iconic figures.

In the 1970s, " New Hollywood ", or the "Hollywood Renaissance", was defined by grittier films influenced by French and Italian realist pictures of the post-war period .

The 21st century has been marked by the rise of American streaming platforms , which came to rival traditional cinema. Cuisine Main article: American cuisine A Thanksgiving dinner with roast turkey , mashed potatoes , pickles , corn , candied yams , cranberry jelly , shrimps , stuffing , green peas , deviled eggs , green salad , and apple sauce Early settlers were introduced by Native Americans to foods such as turkey , sweet potatoes , corn , squash , and maple syrup . Of the most enduring and pervasive examples are variations of the native dish called succotash . Early settlers and later immigrants combined these with foods they were familiar with, such as wheat flour , beef, and milk, to create a distinctive American cuisine. New World crops , especially pumpkin , corn, potatoes , and turkey as the main course are part of a shared national menu on Thanksgiving , when many Americans prepare or purchase traditional dishes to celebrate the occasion. Characteristic American dishes such as apple pie , fried chicken , doughnuts , french fries , macaroni and cheese , ice cream , hamburgers , hot dogs , and American pizza derive from the recipes of various immigrant groups. Mexican dishes such as burritos and tacos preexisted the United States in areas later annexed from Mexico, and adaptations of Chinese cuisine as well as pasta dishes freely adapted from Italian sources are all widely consumed. American chefs have had a significant impact on society both domestically and internationally.

In 1946, the Culinary Institute of America was founded by Katharine Angell and Frances Roth . This would become the United States' most prestigious culinary school, where many of the most talented American chefs would study prior to successful careers.

The United States restaurant industry was projected at $899 billion in sales for 2020, and employed more than 15 million people, representing 10% of the nation's workforce directly. It is the country's second-largest private employer and the third-largest employer overall.

The United States is home to over 220 Michelin-starred restaurants, 14 of which were awarded three stars . Wine has been produced in what is now the United States since the 1500s, with the first widespread production beginning in what is now New Mexico in 1628.

In the modern U.S., wine production is undertaken in all fifty states, with California producing 84 percent of all U.S. wine . With more than 1,100,000 acres (4,500 km 2 ) under vine, the United States is the fourth-largest wine-producing country in the world, after Italy , Spain , and France .

The classic American diner , a casual restaurant type originally intended for the working class, emerged during the 19th century from converted railroad dining cars made stationary.

The diner soon evolved into purpose-built structures whose number expanded greatly in the 20th century.

The American fast-food industry developed alongside the nation's car culture . American restaurants developed the drive-in format in the 1920s, which they began to replace with the drive-through format by the 1940s. American fast-food restaurant chains, such as McDonald's , Burger King , Chick-fil-A , Kentucky Fried Chicken , Dunkin' Donuts and many others , have numerous outlets around the world. Sports Main articles: Sports in the United States and United States at the Olympics American football is the most popular sport in the United States; in this 2009 National Football League game, Carolina Panthers quarterback Jake Delhomme (number 17) throws a forward pass against the Dallas Cowboys .

The most popular spectator sports in the U.S. are American football , basketball , baseball , soccer , and ice hockey . Their premier leagues are, respectively, the National Football League , the National Basketball Association , Major League Baseball , Major League Soccer , and the National Hockey League , All these leagues enjoy wide-ranging domestic media coverage and, except for MLS, all are considered the preeminent leagues in their respective sports in the world.

While most major U.S. sports such as baseball and American football have evolved out of European practices, basketball, volleyball , skateboarding , and snowboarding are American inventions, many of which have become popular worldwide. Lacrosse and surfing arose from Native American and Native Hawaiian activities that predate European contact.

The market for professional sports in the United States was approximately $69 billion in July 2013, roughly 50% larger than that of Europe, the Middle East, and Africa combined. Professional wrestling was widely popularized in the country, with the United States serving as the home country for World Wrestling Entertainment and All Elite Wrestling , the two largest wrestling promotions in the world. American football is by several measures the most popular spectator sport in the United States.

Although American football does not have a substantial following in other nations, the NFL does have the highest average attendance (67,254) of any professional sports league in the world.

In the year 2024, the NFL generated over $23 billion, making it the most valued professional sports league in the United States and the world. Baseball has been regarded as the U.S. " national sport " since the late 19th century.

The most-watched individual sports in the U.S. are golf and auto racing , particularly NASCAR and IndyCar .

On the collegiate level , earnings for the member institutions exceed $1 billion annually, and college football and basketball attract large audiences, as the NCAA March Madness tournament and the College Football Playoff are some of the most watched national sporting events.

In the U.S., the intercollegiate sports level serves as the main feeder system for professional and Olympic sports, with significant exceptions such as Minor League Baseball . This differs greatly from practices in nearly all other countries, where publicly and privately funded sports organizations serve this function. Eight Olympic Games have taken place in the United States.

The 1904 Summer Olympics in St. Louis, Missouri , were the first-ever Olympic Games held outside of Europe.

The Olympic Games will be held in the U.S. for a ninth time when Los Angeles hosts the 2028 Summer Olympics . U.S. athletes have won a total of 2,968 medals (1,179 gold) at the Olympic Games, the most of any country.

In other international competition, the United States is the home of a number of prestigious events, including the America's Cup , World Baseball Classic , the U.S. Open , and the Masters Tournament .

The U.S. men's national soccer team has qualified for eleven World Cups , while the women's national team has won the FIFA Women's World Cup and Olympic soccer tournament four and five times, respectively.

The 1999 FIFA Women's World Cup was hosted by the United States. Its final match was attended by 90,185, setting the world record for largest women's sporting event crowd at the time.

The seven undisputed island areas without permanent populations are Baker Island , Howland Island , Jarvis Island , Johnston Atoll , Kingman Reef , Midway Atoll , and Palmyra Atoll . U.S. sovereignty over the unpopulated Bajo Nuevo Bank , Navassa Island , Serranilla Bank , and Wake Island is disputed. ^ The U.S. Census Bureau 's latest official population estimate of 341,784,857 residents (2025) is for the 50 states and the District of Columbia; it excludes the 3.6 million residents of the five major U.S. territories and outlying islands.

The Census Bureau also provides a continuously updated but unofficial population clock: www.census.gov/popclock ^ The official U.S. Government Publishing Office Style Manual has prescribed specific usages for "U.S." and "United States" as part of official names.

In "formal writing (treaties, Executive orders, proclamations, etc.); congressional bills; legal citations and courtwork; and covers and title pages", "United States" is always used.

The Washington Post . ^ Broadwater, Luke (March 1, 2025). "Trump Signs Order to Designate English as Official Language of the U.S." The New York Times . Archived from the original on March 2, 2025 . Retrieved March 1, 2025 . ^ "FYI: English isn't the official language of the United States" . CNN. May 20, 2018. Archived from the original on December 19, 2021 . Retrieved March 19, 2025 . ^ Faingold 2018 , p. 8. "The United States has never had an official language and attempts to declare English its official language have been unsuccessful in the U.S. Congress." ^ "2020 Census Illuminates Racial and Ethnic Composition of the Country" . United States Census . Retrieved August 13, 2021 . ^ "Race and Ethnicity in the United States: 2010 Census and 2020 Census" . United States Census . Retrieved August 13, 2021 . ^ "A Breakdown of 2020 Census Demographic Data" . NPR. August 13, 2021. ^ a b "In Depth: Topics A to Z (Religion)" . Gallup . 2025 . Retrieved March 8, 2026 . ^ Compton's Pictured Encyclopedia and Fact-index: Ohio . 1963. p. 336. ^ "The Water Area of Each State" . United States Geological Survey . 2018 . Retrieved January 29, 2024 . ^ a b Areas of the 50 states and the District of Columbia but not Puerto Rico nor other island territories per "State Area Measurements and Internal Point Coordinates" . Census.gov . August 2010 . Retrieved March 31, 2020 . reflect base feature updates made in the MAF/TIGER database through August, 2010. ^ a b c "National Population Totals and Components of Change: April 1, 2020 to July 1, 2025" . United States Census Bureau . January 27, 2025 . Retrieved January 28, 2025 . ^ "U.S. Census Bureau Today Delivers State Population Totals for Congressional Apportionment" . United States Census . Retrieved April 26, 2021 .

The 2020 census was held on April 1, 2020. ^ a b c d e f "World Economic Outlook Database (April 2026 Edition)" . www.imf.org . International Monetary Fund . April 14, 2026 . Retrieved April 18, 2026 . ^ "Income in the United States: 2024" . Census.gov . p. 52 . Retrieved November 2, 2025 . ^ "Human Development Report 2025" (PDF) . United Nations Development Programme . May 6, 2025. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 6, 2025 . Retrieved May 6, 2025 . ^ Evans, Jacob (August 31, 2025). "How sheer luck made this tiny Caribbean island millions from its web address" . BBC World Service . Retrieved December 9, 2025 . ^ a b c d e "Common Core Document to U.N. Committee on Human Rights" . U.S. State Department. December 30, 2011. Item 22, 27, 80 . Retrieved April 6, 2016 . "U.S. Insular Areas: application of the U.S. Constitution" (PDF) . U.S. General Accounting Office Report. November 1997. pp. 1, 6, 39n. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 3, 2013 . Retrieved April 6, 2016 . ^ "Area" .

The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on January 31, 2014 . Retrieved January 15, 2015 . ^ "United States" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on December 19, 2013 . Retrieved January 31, 2010 . ^ a b c DeLear, Byron (July 4, 2013). "Who coined 'United States of America'? Mystery might have intriguing answer" .

The Christian Science Monitor . ^ Fay, John (July 15, 2016). "The forgotten Irishman who named the 'United States of America' " . IrishCentral . ^ Davis 1996 , p. 7. ^ "Is USA A Noun Or Adjective?" . Dictionary.com . March 9, 2017. Archived from the original on September 20, 2020 . Retrieved July 3, 2025 . ^ a b U.S. Government Publishing Office Style Manual . January 12, 2017. pp. 222– 223 . Retrieved September 3, 2020 . ^ " "The States" " . Longman dictionary . Retrieved September 27, 2024 . ^ "Stateside" . Merriam-Webster . September 27, 2024 . Retrieved October 4, 2024 . ^ "Amerigo Vespucci" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on July 10, 2012 . Retrieved July 7, 2011 . ^ Sider 2007 , p. 226. ^ Szalay, Jessie (September 20, 2017). "Amerigo Vespucci: Facts, Biography & Naming of America" . Live Science . Retrieved June 23, 2019 . ^ Allen, Erin (July 4, 2016). "How Did America Get Its Name?" . Library of Congress Blog . Retrieved September 3, 2020 . ^ Wilson 1993 , pp. 27–28. ^ "Cliff Palace" at Colorado Encyclopedia. Retrieved January 31, 2024. ^ Erlandson, Rick & Vellanoweth 2008 , p. 19. ^ Savage 2011 , pp. 55–58. ^ Waters & Stafford 2007 , pp. 1122–1126. ^ Flannery 2015 , pp. 173–185. ^ Lockard 2010 , p. 315. ^ Johansen 2006 , p. 51. ^ Thornton 1998 , p. 34. ^ a b Perdue & Green 2005 , p. 40. ^ Haines, Haines & Steckel 2000 , p. 12. ^ Vigil 2006 , p. 329. ^ Hudson 2018 , p. 130. ^ Davis 1932 , pp. 5–6. ^ Florida Center for Instructional Technology (2002). "Pedro Menendez de Aviles Claims Florida for Spain". A Short History of Florida . University of South Florida. ^ "Not So Fast, Jamestown: St. Augustine Was Here First" . NPR. February 28, 2015 . Retrieved March 5, 2021 . ^ Petto 2007 , p. 125. ^ Seelye & Selby 2018 , p. 344. ^ Bellah et al. 1985 , p. 220 ^ Remini 2007 , pp. 2–3. ^ Johnson 1997 , pp. 26–30. ^ Ripper 2008 , p. 6. ^ Ehrenpreis & Ehrenpreis 2022 , pp. 288–294 ^ Joseph 2016 , p. 590 ^ Stannard 1993 , p. xii ^ Ripper 2008 , p. 5. ^ Calloway, 1998 , p. 55 ^ Thomas 1997 , p. 516. ^ Bilhartz & Elliott 2007 . ^ Wood 1998 , p. 263. ^ Ratcliffe 2013 , p. 220. ^ Walton & Rockoff 2009 , pp. 38–39. ^ Walton & Rockoff 2009 , p. 35. ^ Otis 1764 . ^ Foner 1998 , pp. 4–5. ^ a b Young, Nash & Raphael 2011 , pp. 4–7. ^ Yick Wo vs. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356, 370 ^ Buel 1972 . ^ Becker et al (2002), ch 1 ^ "Republicanism" . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . June 19, 2006 . Retrieved September 20, 2022 . ^ Miller, Hunter (ed.). "British-American Diplomacy: The Paris Peace Treaty of September 30, 1783" .

The Avalon Project at Yale Law School. ^ Satō 1886 , p. 352. ^ Foner 2020 , p. 524. ^ Foner 2020 , pp. 538–540. ^ Boyer, 2007 , pp. 192–193 ^ a b Carlisle & Golson 2007 , p. 238. ^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 41–46. ^ "Louisiana Purchase" (PDF) . National Park Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 29, 2015 . Retrieved March 1, 2011 . ^ Harriss, Joseph A. "How the Louisiana Purchase Changed the World" . Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved June 25, 2024 . ^ Wait 1999 , p. 78. ^ Klose & Jones 1994 , p. 150. ^ Hammond 2019 . ^ Frymer 2017 . ^ Calloway 2019 . ^ McPherson 1988 , p. 45. ^ Michno 2003 . ^ Billington & Ridge 2001 , p. 22. ^ Walker Howe 2007 , p. 52–54; Wright 2022 . ^ Walker Howe 2007 , p. 52–54; Rodriguez 2015 , p. XXXIV; Wright 2022 . ^ Walton & Rockoff 2009 , p. 43. ^ Gordon 2004 , pp. 27–29. ^ Walker Howe 2007 , pp. 478, 481–482, 587–588. ^ Morrison 1997 , pp. 13–21. ^ Kemp 2010 , p. 180. ^ McIlwraith & Muller 2001 , p. 61. ^ Meyer et al. 2001 , From 1800 to 1900: "The discovery of gold in California in 1848 proved a momentous watershed for native people in the West. Hordes of single men stampeded to find fortune. Unrestrained by family, community, or church, they decimated the native population near the goldfields. California natives suffered the most complete genocide in U.S. history." Wolf, Jessica. "Revealing the history of genocide against California's Native Americans" . UCLA Newsroom . Retrieved July 8, 2018 . Madley 2016 Smithers 2012 , p. 339: "The genocidal intent of California settlers and government officials was acted out in numerous battles and massacres (and aided by technological advances in weaponry, especially after the Civil War), in the abduction and sexual abuse of Indian women, and in the economic exploitation of Indian child labourers" Blackhawk 2023 , p. 38: "With these works, a near consensus emerged.

By most scholarly definitions and consistent with the UN Convention, these scholars all asserted that genocide against at least some Indigenous peoples had occurred in North America following colonisation, perpetuated first by colonial empires and then by independent nation-states" ^ Rawls 1999 , p. 20. ^ "Milestone documents: Kansas–Missouri Act (1854)" . National Archives (Washington, D.C.). July 12, 2021 . Retrieved January 5, 2025 . ^ Murray 2004 , p. 76. ^ Lewis 2001 , p. 53. ^ Woods 2012 . ^ Silkenat 2019 , p. 25. ^ McPherson 1988 , p. 236. ^ Vinovskis 1990 , p. 4. ^ McPherson 1988 , pp. 273–274. ^ "The Fight for Equal Rights: Black Soldiers in the Civil War" . U.S. National Archives and Records Administration . August 15, 2016.

By the end of the Civil War, roughly 179,000 black men (10% of the Union army) served as soldiers in the U.S. Army and another 19,000 served in the Navy. ^ Davis, Jefferson. A Short History of the Confederate States of America , 1890, 2010. ISBN 978-1-175-82358-8 . Available free online as an ebook. Chapter LXXXVIII, "Re-establishment of the Union by force", p. 503. Retrieved March 14, 2012. ^ Price & Benton-Short 2008 , p. 51 . ^ "Overview + History | Ellis Island" . Statue of Liberty & Ellis Island . March 4, 2020 . Retrieved September 10, 2021 . ^ Dubois 1935 , p. 163. ^ "U.S. Senate: Landmark Legislation: Thirteenth, Fourteenth, & Fifteenth Amendments" . www.senate.gov . Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved January 3, 2021 . ^ Foner 1988 , pp. 66–7, 251–261, 446–449. ^ "The 15th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution" . National Constitution Center – The 15th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution . Archived from the original on December 30, 2020 . Retrieved January 3, 2020 . ^ Foner 1988 , p. xxv. ^ Dubois 1935 , pp. 381–727. ^ Glass, Andrew (July 24, 2008). "Tenn. is readmitted to the Union July 24, 1866" . Politico . Retrieved May 11, 2021 . ^ Glass, Andrew (July 15, 2014). "Georgia is readmitted to Union July 15, 1870" . Politico . Retrieved April 12, 2025 . ^ Black 2011 , p. 275. ^ The Homestead Act of 1862 ; Archives.gov ^ U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States (1976) series C89–C119, pp. 105–109 ^ Stephan Thernstrom, ed., Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups (1980) covers the history of all the main groups ^ "The Great Migration (1910–1970)" . National Archives. May 20, 2021. ^ "Purchase of Alaska, 1867" . Office of the Historian . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved December 23, 2014 . ^ Foner 1988 , pp. xxvii, 575–587. ^ Woodward 1991 . ^ Drew Gilpin Faust ; Eric Foner ; Clarence E. Walker . "White Southern Responses to Black Emancipation" . American Experience . ^ Trelease 1979 . ^ Bowman 1993 , p. 221 . ^ Ware 2021 . ^ Hirschman & Mogford 2009 . ^ The Pit Boss (February 26, 2021). "The Pit Stop: The American Automotive Industry Is Packed With History" . Rumble On . Archived from the original on April 25, 2021 . Retrieved December 5, 2021 . ^ Carson & Bonk 1999 . ^ Riggs 2015 , p. 1179. ^ Maddison, Angus. "The World Economy: Historical Statistics" (PDF) . OECD . Retrieved February 16, 2026 . ^ Dole 1907 . ^ Tindall, George Brown and Shi, David E. (2012). America: A Narrative History (Brief Ninth Edition) (Vol. 2). W. W. Norton & Company . ISBN 978-0-393-91267-8 , p. 589. ^ Zinn 2005 , pp. 321–357. ^ Fraser 2015 , p. 66. ^ Aldrich, Mark. Safety First: Technology, Labor and Business in the Building of Work Safety, 1870-1939. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997. ISBN 978-0-8018-5405-7 . ^ "Progressive Era to New Era, 1900-1929 | U.S. History Primary Source Timeline | Classroom Materials at the Library of Congress | Library of Congress" . Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 20540 USA . Retrieved November 11, 2023 . ^ "The Spanish–American War, 1898" . Office of the Historian . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved December 24, 2014 . ^ Ryden, George Herbert.

The Foreign Policy of the United States in Relation to Samoa . New York: Octagon Books, 1975. ^ "Virgin Islands History" . Vinow.com . Retrieved January 5, 2018 . ^ McDuffie, Jerome; Piggrem, Gary Wayne; Woodworth, Steven E. (2005). U.S. History Super Review . Piscataway, NJ: Research & Education Association. p. 418. ISBN 978-0-7386-0070-3 . ^ Larson & Meltvedt 2021 . ^ Winchester 2013 , pp. 410–411. ^ Axinn & Stern 2007 . ^ Gregory 1991 . ^ "Mass Exodus From the Plains" . American Experience . WGBH Educational Foundation. 2013 . Retrieved October 5, 2014 . ^ Fanslow, Robin A. (April 6, 1997). "The Migrant Experience" . American Folklore Center . Library of Congress . Retrieved October 5, 2014 . ^ Stein 1973 . ^ Yamasaki, Mitch. "Pearl Harbor and America's Entry into World War II: A Documentary History" (PDF) . World War II Internment in Hawaii. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 13, 2014 . Retrieved January 14, 2015 . ^ Kingston, Jeff (August 6, 2016). "Why did Japan surrender in World War II?" .

The Japan Times . Retrieved February 8, 2017 . ^ Pacific War Research Society (2006). Japan's Longest Day . New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-4-7700-2887-7 . ^ Hoopes & Brinkley 1997 , p. 100. ^ Gaddis 1972 , p. 25. ^ Kennedy, Paul (1989).

The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers . New York: Vintage. p. 358. ISBN 978-0-679-72019-5 . ^ Blakemore, Erin (March 22, 2019). "What was the Cold War?" . National Geographic . Archived from the original on April 1, 2019 . Retrieved August 28, 2020 . ^ Mark Kramer, "The Soviet Bloc and the Cold War in Europe," in Larresm, Klaus, ed. (2014). A Companion to Europe Since 1945 . Wiley. p. 79. ISBN 978-1-118-89024-0 . ^ Sempa 2017 . ^ Blakeley 2009 , pp. 85-96 . ^ Collins 1988 . ^ Winchester 2013 , pp. 305–308. ^ "The Civil Rights Movement" . PBS . Retrieved January 5, 2019 . ^ Brinkley 1991 , p. 472. ^ "Playboy: American Magazine" . Encyclopædia Britannica . August 25, 2022 . Retrieved February 2, 2023 . ...the so-called sexual revolution in the United States in the 1960s, marked by greatly more permissive attitudes toward sexual interest and activity than had been prevalent in earlier generations. ^ Svetlana Ter-Grigoryan (February 12, 2022). "The Sexual Revolution Origins and Impact" . study.com . Retrieved April 27, 2023 . ^ "Selective Service Records" . National Archives . August 15, 2016 . Retrieved June 15, 2025 . ^ Levy, Daniel (January 19, 2018). "Behind the Protests Against the Vietnam War in 1968" . Time . Archived from the original on October 14, 2021 . Retrieved May 5, 2021 . ^ "Women in the Labor Force: A Databook" (PDF) . U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2013. p. 11 . Retrieved March 21, 2014 . ^ Gaĭdar 2007 , p. 102; Howell 2006 , p. 352; Kissinger 2011 , pp. 781–884; Mann 2009 , p. 432 Hayes 2009 ^ Frum, David (December 24, 2014). "The Real Story of How America Became an Economic Superpower" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved December 10, 2024 . ^ "U.S. army was smaller than the army for Portugal before World War II" . Politifact . Retrieved January 23, 2018 . ^ CFI Team. "NASDAQ" . Corporate Finance Institute . Archived from the original on December 11, 2023 . Retrieved December 11, 2023 . ^ Holsti 2011 , p. 20. ^ Walsh, Kenneth T. (December 9, 2008). "The 'War on Terror' Is Critical to President George W. Bush's Legacy" . U.S. News & World Report . Retrieved March 6, 2013 . Atkins 2011 , p. 872 Wong, Edward (February 15, 2008). "Overview: The Iraq War" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 7, 2013 . Johnson 2005 , p. 159 Durando, Jessica; Green, Shannon Rae (December 21, 2011). "Timeline: Key moments in the Iraq War" . USA Today . Associated Press . Archived from the original on September 4, 2020 . Retrieved March 7, 2013 . ^ Hilsenrath, Jon; Ng, Serena; Paletta, Damian (September 18, 2008). "Worst Crisis Since '30s, With No End Yet in Sight" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on June 18, 2022. ^ Harvey, Michael (2022). "Introduction: History's Rhymes".

In Harvey, Michael (ed.). Donald Trump in Historical Perspective . Routledge. doi : 10.4324/9781003110361-1 . ISBN 978-1-003-11036-1 .

As with the Beer Hall Putsch, a would-be leader tried to take advantage of an already scheduled event (in Hitler's case, Kahr's speech; in Trump's, Congress's tallying of the electoral votes) to create a dramatic moment with himself at the center of attention, calling for bold action to upend the political order. Unlike Hitler's coup attempt, Trump already held top of office, so he was attempting to hold onto power, not seize it (the precise term for Trump's intended action is a 'self-coup' or 'autogolpe'). Thus, Trump was able to plan for the event well in advance, and with much greater control, including developing the legal arguments that could be used to justify rejecting the election's results. (p. 3) Pion-Berlin, David; Bruneau, Thomas; Goetze, Richard B. Jr. (April 7, 2022). "The Trump self-coup attempt: comparisons and civil–military relations" . Government and Opposition . 58 (4): 789– 806. doi : 10.1017/gov.2022.13 . hdl : 10945/72654 . S2CID 248033246 . Castañeda, Ernesto; Jenks, Daniel (April 17, 2023). Costa, Bruno Ferreira; Parton, Nigel (eds.). "January 6th and De-Democratization in the United States" . Social Sciences . 12 (4). MDPI : 238. doi : 10.3390/socsci12040238 . ISSN 2076-0760 . What the United States went through on January 6th was an attempt at a self-coup, where Trump would use force to stay as head of state even if abandoning democratic practices in the U.S. Some advised Trump to declare martial law to create a state of emergency and use that as an excuse to stay in power. Eisen, Norman; Ayer, Donald; Perry, Joshua; Bookbinder, Noah; Perry, E. Danya (June 6, 2022). Trump on Trial: A Guide to the January 6 Hearings and the Question of Criminality (Report). Brookings Institution . Retrieved December 16, 2023 . tried to delegitimize the election results by disseminating a series of far fetched and evidence-free claims of fraud. Meanwhile, with a ring of close confidants, Trump conceived and implemented unprecedented schemes to – in his own words – "overturn" the election outcome. Among the results of this "Big Lie" campaign were the terrible events of January 6, 2021 – an inflection point in what we now understand was nothing less than an attempted coup. Eastman v Thompson, et al. , 8:22-cv-00099-DOC-DFM Document 260 , 44 (S.D. Cal. May 28, 2022) ("Dr. Eastman and President Trump launched a campaign to overturn a democratic election, an action unprecedented in American history. Their campaign was not confined to the ivory tower – it was a coup in search of a legal theory.

The plan spurred violent attacks on the seat of our nation's government, led to the deaths of several law enforcement officers, and deepened public distrust in our political process... If Dr. Eastman and President Trump's plan had worked, it would have permanently ended the peaceful transition of power, undermining American democracy and the Constitution. If the country does not commit to investigating and pursuing accountability for those responsible, the Court fears January 6 will repeat itself."). Graham, David A. (January 6, 2021). "This Is a Coup" .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on January 6, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2023 . Musgrave, Paul (January 6, 2021). "This Is a Coup. Why Were Experts So Reluctant to See It Coming?" . Foreign Policy . Archived from the original on January 6, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2023 . Solnit, Rebecca (January 6, 2021). "Call it what it was: a coup attempt" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2023 . Coleman, Justine (January 6, 2021). "GOP lawmaker on violence at Capitol: 'This is a coup attempt' " .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2023 . Duignan, Brian (August 4, 2021). "January 6 U.S. Capitol attack" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on January 17, 2023 . Retrieved September 22, 2021 . Because its object was to prevent a legitimate president-elect from assuming office, the attack was widely regarded as an insurrection or attempted coup d'état. ^ a b Klaas, Brian (September 9, 2025). "Is The United States Still A Democracy?" . London School of Economics . Retrieved April 9, 2026 . Political scientists continue to debate this topic, but few would classify the United States as a robust democracy. It is either a democracy in crisis that is barely clinging onto the label, or one that has tipped over the edge into competitive authoritarianism - and I believe it's the latter. ^ a b c d "Political scientists studying democracy and autocracy think that US democracy has declined significantly" . London School of Economics . May 1, 2026 . Retrieved May 30, 2026 . ^ "Freedom 250" . White House . July 4, 2026 . Retrieved July 4, 2026 . ^ "Field Listing: Area" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 18, 2015 . ^ Vincent, Carol H.; Hanson, Laura A.; Argueta, Carla N. (March 3, 2017). Federal Land Ownership: Overview and Data (Report). Congressional Research Service. p. 2 . Retrieved June 18, 2020 . ^ Gorte, Ross W.; Vincent, Carol Hardy.; Hanson, Laura A.; Marc R., Rosenblum. "Federal Land Ownership: Overview and Data" (PDF) . fas.org . Congressional Research Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 24, 2015 . Retrieved January 18, 2015 . ^ "Chapter 6: Federal Programs to Promote Resource Use, Extraction, and Development" . doi.gov . U.S. Department of the Interior. Archived from the original on March 18, 2015 . Retrieved January 19, 2015 . ^ The National Atlas of the United States of America (January 14, 2013). "Forest Resources of the United States" . Nationalatlas.gov. Archived from the original on May 7, 2009 . Retrieved January 13, 2014 . ^ "Land Use Changes Involving Forestry in the United States: 1952 to 1997, With Projections to 2050" (PDF) . 2003. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 28, 2008 . Retrieved January 13, 2014 . ^ Daynes & Sussman, 2010 , pp. 3, 72, 74–76, 78 ^ Hays, Samuel P. (2000). A History of Environmental Politics since 1945 . ^ Collin 2006 , p. 1 . ^ Turner, James Morton (2012).

The Promise of Wilderness , pp. 29–32 ^ Endangered species Fish and Wildlife Service . General Accounting Office, Diane Publishing. 2003. pp. 1– 3, 42. ISBN 978-1-4289-3997-4 . Retrieved October 25, 2015 . ^ "Environmental Performance Index" . epi.yale.edu . July 10, 2024 . Retrieved July 10, 2024 . ^ Onuf 2010 , p. xvii. ^ Desjardins, Jeff (August 8, 2019). "Mapped: The world's oldest democracies" . World Economic Forum . Retrieved June 25, 2024 . ^ Ryan 2000 . ^ Burnham 2006 , p. 41. ^ a b "DEMOCRACY REPORT 2026: Unraveling The Democratic Era?" (PDF) . V-Dem Institute . March 17, 2026 . Retrieved March 22, 2026 . One notable shift is the transformation of the Republican Party to endorsing a far-right, nationalist, and anti-pluralist agenda. Nationalist, anti-liberal, far-right parties and leaders have largely driven the "third wave of autocratization." Yet the USA stands out as the only case where such movement seized control over one party in a rigid two-party system. ^ Langfitt, Frank (April 22, 2025). "Hundreds of scholars say U.S. is swiftly heading toward authoritarianism" . NPR . Retrieved May 25, 2026 . A survey of more than 500 political scientists finds that the vast majority think the United States is moving swiftly from liberal democracy toward some form of authoritarianism. ^ Killian, Johnny H. Ed. "Constitution of the United States" .

The Office of the Secretary of the Senate . Retrieved February 11, 2012 . ^ Sundquist 1997 . ^ "The Senate and the House of Representatives: lesson overview (article)" . Khan Academy . ^ "US midterm election: What you need to know – DW – 11/07/2022" . Deutsche Welle . Archived from the original on February 16, 2024 . Retrieved February 16, 2024 . ^ "The Legislative Branch" . United States Diplomatic Mission to Germany. Archived from the original on November 15, 2021 . Retrieved August 20, 2012 . ^ "The Process for impeachment" . ThinkQuest. Archived from the original on April 8, 2013 . Retrieved August 20, 2012 . ^ Broder, David S. (March 18, 2007). "Congress's Oversight Offensive" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on May 1, 2011 . Retrieved September 11, 2010 . ^ Ferraro, Thomas (April 25, 2007). "House committee subpoenas Rice on Iraq" . Reuters . Archived from the original on January 14, 2021 . Retrieved September 11, 2010 . ^ "Rules – Committee on Standards of Official Conduct" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 7, 2010 . Retrieved August 23, 2010 . ^ "The Executive Branch" .

The White House . Retrieved February 11, 2017 . ^ "Interpretation: Article II, Section 1, Clauses 2 and 3 | Constitution Center" . National Constitution Center – constitutioncenter.org . ^ a b c Hall, Kermit L.; McGuire, Kevin T. (2005). Institutions of American Democracy: The Judicial Branch . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-988374-5 . U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (2013). Learn about the United States: Quick Civics Lessons for the Naturalization Test . Government Printing Office. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-16-091708-0 . Giddens-White, Bryon (2005).

The Supreme Court and the Judicial Branch . Heinemann Library. ISBN 978-1-4034-6608-2 . Zelden, Charles L. (2007).

The Judicial Branch of Federal Government: People, Process, and Politics . ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-702-9 . Retrieved October 25, 2015 . "Federal Courts" . United States Courts . Retrieved October 19, 2014 . ^ "Supreme Court Procedure" . SCOTUSblog . Retrieved October 20, 2024 . ^ Cossack, Roger (July 13, 2000). "Beyond politics: Why Supreme Court justices are appointed for life" . CNN . Archived from the original on July 12, 2012. ^ a b O'Connor 1997 . ^ a b Cohen 1942 . ^ Levy, Robert A. (October 2011). "Rights, Powers, Dual Sovereignty, and Federalism" . Cato Institute . Retrieved January 13, 2024 . ^ 8 U.S.C. § 1101 (a)(36) and 8 U.S.C. § 1101 (a)(38) U.S. Federal Code, Immigration and Nationality Act. 8 U.S.C. § 1101a ^ Feldstein 2017 . ^ "What is a federal Indian reservation?" . bia.gov . Bureau of Indian Affairs . August 19, 2017 . Retrieved August 26, 2023 . ^ "Attorney General June 1, 1995 Memorandum on Indian Sovereignty" . www.justice.gov . March 8, 2017 . Retrieved May 9, 2024 . ^ Hofstadter 1969 , p. iv. ^ Blake, Aaron (November 25, 2021). "Why are there only two parties in American politics?" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved May 4, 2024 . ^ Martone & Piccio 2023 , p. 167. "The American Democratic Party, typically labelled as a centre party (Armingeon et al., 2018), contributes to the incidence of this group of parties." ^ a b Chinoy, Sahil (June 26, 2019). "What Happened to America's Political Center of Gravity?" .

The New York Times . Retrieved April 26, 2026 .

The Republican Party leans much further right than most traditional conservative parties in Western Europe and Canada, according to an analysis of their election manifestos. It is more extreme than Britain's Independence Party and France's National Rally (formerly the National Front), which some consider far-right populist parties.

The Democratic Party, in contrast, is positioned closer to mainstream liberal parties. ^ "An International Far-Right Alliance? A Comparative Analysis of the Linkages Between the Republican Party and European Far-Right Parties" . SSRN 4739346 . Retrieved April 26, 2026 . Norris's findings conveyed that the Republican Party is as far-right ideologically as many prominent European far-right parties.

The Republican Party was measured to be more conservative in comparison to various mainstream European parties. More specifically, the Republican Party was valued to be as economically conservative as the Swiss People's Party and as socially conservative as the German Alternative for Germany (AfD). ^ "Current Members" . United Nations Security Council . Retrieved July 15, 2022 . ^ United Nations Headquarters Agreement 1948 . ^ "Where is the G7 Headed?" . Council on Foreign Relations . New York City. June 28, 2022. Archived from the original on July 18, 2022 . Retrieved July 15, 2022 . ^ "The United States and G20: Building a More Peaceful, Stable, and Prosperous World Together" . United States Department of State . July 6, 2022 . Retrieved July 15, 2022 . ^ "Our global reach" . OECD . Retrieved July 15, 2022 . ^ Fialho, Livia Pontes; Wallin, Matthew (August 1, 2013). Reaching for an Audience: U.S. Public Diplomacy Towards Iran (Report). American Security Project. JSTOR resrep06070 . ^ Oliver, Alex; Graham, Euan (December 19, 2017). "Which are the countries still talking to North Korea?" . BBC News . London . Retrieved July 15, 2022 . ^ Ferraro, Matthew F. (December 22, 2014). "The Case for Stronger Bhutanese-American Ties" .

The Diplomat . Retrieved July 15, 2022 . ^ "US will continue to strengthen 'unofficial ties' with Taiwan, says Harris" . South China Morning Post . September 28, 2022 . Retrieved September 28, 2022 . ^ Ruwitch, John (September 22, 2020). "Formal Ties With U.S.? Not For Now, Says Taiwan Foreign Minister" . NPR . Retrieved July 15, 2022 . ^ Madan 2022 . ^ Saaliq, Sheikh (May 26, 2026). "Quad ministers announce new Indo-Pacific initiatives on maritime security and energy" . Associated Press . Retrieved May 26, 2026 . ^ Li, Wentong (December 5, 2025). "AUKUS and the Reconfiguration of Indo-Pacific Security: An Analysis of the Trilateral Security Partnership" . thediplomaticaffairs.com . Retrieved May 30, 2026 . ^ Dumbrell & Schäfer 2009 , p. 45. ^ Ek, Carl & Fergusson, Ian F. (September 3, 2010). "Canada–U.S. Relations" (PDF) . Congressional Research Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 13, 2020 . Retrieved August 28, 2011 . ^ Vaughn 2008 . ^ Vaughn, Bruce (May 27, 2011). "New Zealand: Background and Bilateral Relations with the United States" (PDF) . Congressional Research Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 22, 2021 . Retrieved August 28, 2011 . ^ Lum, Thomas (January 3, 2011). "The Republic of the Philippines and U.S. Interests" (PDF) . Congressional Research Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 13, 2021 . Retrieved August 3, 2011 . ^ Chanlett-Avery, Emma; et al. (June 8, 2011). "Japan-U.S. Relations: Issues for Congress" (PDF) . Congressional Research Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 13, 2020 . Retrieved August 28, 2011 . ^ Manyin, Mark E.; Chanlett-Avery, Emma; Nikitin, Mary Beth (July 8, 2011). "U.S.–South Korea Relations: Issues for Congress" (PDF) . Congressional Research Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 13, 2020 . Retrieved August 28, 2011 . ^ Zanotti, Jim (July 31, 2014). "Israel: Background and U.S. Relations" (PDF) . Congressional Research Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 5, 2019 . Retrieved September 12, 2014 . ^ "U.S. Relations With Poland" . State.gov . January 20, 2021 . Retrieved June 19, 2023 . ^ "INDO- PACIFIC STRATEGY OF THE UNITED STATES" (PDF) . White House . Retrieved February 3, 2022 . ^ Meidan, Michal (July 1, 2019). US-China: The Great Decoupling (Report). Oxford Institute for Energy Studies . JSTOR resrep33982 . ^ Bala, Sumathi (March 28, 2023). "U.S.-China relations are going downhill with 'no trust' on either side, Stephen Roach says" . CNBC . Retrieved May 7, 2023 . ^ Rumer, Eugene; Sokolsky, Richard (June 20, 2019). "Thirty Years of U.S. Policy Toward Russia: Can the Vicious Circle Be Broken?" . Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . Washington, D.C . Retrieved July 14, 2022 . ^ Macias, Amanda (June 17, 2022). "Here's a look at the $5.6 billion in firepower the U.S. has committed to Ukraine in its fight against Russia" . CNBC . Retrieved September 28, 2022 . ^ "Our Forces" . United States Department of Defense . Retrieved July 12, 2024 . ^ Lindsay, James M. (August 4, 2021). "Happy 231st Birthday to the United States Coast Guard!" . New York City: Council on Foreign Relations . Retrieved July 16, 2022 .

During peacetime it is part of the Department of Homeland Security.

During wartime, or when the president or Congress so direct, it becomes part of the Department of Defense and is included in the Department of the Navy. ^ "United States country profile" . BBC News . January 27, 2012 . Retrieved July 6, 2025 . ^ Ryan, Missy; Jeong, Andrew; Masih, Niha; Sands, Leo; Somasundaram, Praveena; Wu, Daniel; Haspel, Tamar; Dougherty, Jesse; Nusbaum, Spencer (April 1, 2021). "The U.S. system created the world's most advanced military. Can it maintain an edge?" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved July 6, 2025 . ^ "Trends in Military Expenditure 2025" (PDF) . Stockholm International Peace Research Institute . April 2026 . Retrieved April 26, 2026 . ^ "Role of nuclear weapons grows as geopolitical relations deteriorate—new SIPRI Yearbook out now | SIPRI" . Stockholm International Peace Research Institute . June 17, 2024 . Retrieved June 18, 2024 . ^ Hackett 2023 . ^ Harris, Johnny (May 18, 2015). "Why does the US have 800 military bases around the world?" . Vox . Archived from the original on September 24, 2020 . Retrieved September 23, 2020 . ^ "Active Duty Military Personnel Strengths by Regional Area and by Country (309A)" (PDF) . Department of Defense. March 31, 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 24, 2013 . Retrieved October 7, 2010 . ^ Kushi & Toft 2023 . ^ "StateDefenseForce.com" . StateDefenseForce.com . September 17, 2024. ^ "State Guard Association of the United States – Supporting the State Defense Forces of the United States" . sgaus.org . ^ "32 U.S. Code § 109 - Maintenance of other troops" . LII / Legal Information Institute . ^ "National Guard: FAQ" . United States National Guard . Retrieved August 23, 2025 . ^ "Legal Basis of the National Guard" . Army National Guard. 2013. Archived from the original on May 21, 2013 . Retrieved May 17, 2013 . ^ "2023 Demographics Profile of the Military Community" (PDF) . Military OneSource . Retrieved May 18, 2026 . ^ Banks, Hendrix & Hickman 2016 , p. 1. ^ "U.S. Federal Law Enforcement Agencies, Who Governs & What They Do" . Chiff.com. Archived from the original on February 10, 2014 . Retrieved November 10, 2021 . ^ Manweller 2006 , p. 55. ^ "Introduction To The Federal Court System" . United States Attorney . Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Justice . November 7, 2014 . Retrieved July 14, 2022 . ^ Sawyer, Wendy; Wagner, Peter (March 11, 2026). "Mass Incarceration: The Whole Pie 2026" . Prison Policy Initiative . Retrieved April 1, 2026 . ^ a b c d Travis, Western & Redburn 2014 . ^ Foundation, The Annie E. Casey (November 14, 2020). "Juvenile Detention Explained" .

The Annie E. Casey Foundation . Retrieved July 6, 2023 . ^ Sawyer, Wendy; Wagner, Peter (March 11, 2025). "Mass Incarceration: The Whole Pie 2025" . Prison Policy Initiative . Retrieved May 19, 2025 . ^ United States of America . World Prison Brief . ^ Highest to Lowest . World Prison Brief (WPB). Use the dropdown menu to choose lists of countries by region or the whole world. Use the menu to select highest-to-lowest lists of prison population totals, prison population rates, percentage of pre-trial detainees/remand prisoners, percentage of female prisoners, percentage of foreign prisoners, and occupancy rate. Column headings in WPB tables can be clicked to reorder columns lowest to highest, or alphabetically. For detailed information for each country click on any country name in lists. See the WPB main data page and click on the map links or the sidebar links to get to the region and country desired. ^ Grinshteyn & Hemenway 2016 . ^ Moffatt, Mike (January 27, 2020). "A Mixed Economy: The Role of the Market" . ThoughtCo . Retrieved May 30, 2025 .

The US has a mixed economy because both private businesses and the government are important. ^ Fordham 2017 . ^ "United States Datasets" . International Monetary Fund . Retrieved February 10, 2025 . ^ Hagopian & Ohanian 2012 . ^ "Gross Domestic Product, Fourth Quarter and Year 2022 (Third Estimate), GDP by Industry, and Corporate Profits" . U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis . U.S. Department of Commerce . March 30, 2023. ^ Fox, Michelle (March 1, 2024). "The U.S. national debt is rising by $1 trillion about every 100 days" . CNBC. ^ "Global 500" . Fortune Global 500 . Retrieved October 25, 2025 . ^ Hyam, Benji (November 29, 2023). "Most Profitable Companies: U.S. vs. Rest of the World, 2023" . www.growandconvert.com . Retrieved July 16, 2024 . ^ "The Implementation of Monetary Policy – The Federal Reserve in the International Sphere" (PDF) . Retrieved August 24, 2010 . ^ Benjamin J. Cohen, The Future of Money , Princeton University Press, 2006, ISBN 978-0-691-11666-2 ; cf . "the dollar is the de facto currency in Cambodia", Charles Agar, Frommer's Vietnam , 2006, ISBN 978-0-471-79816-3 , p. 17. ^ "US GDP Growth Rate by Year" . multpl.com . US Bureau of Economic Analysis. March 31, 2014 . Retrieved June 18, 2014 . ^ "United States free trade agreements" . Office of the United States Trade Representative . Retrieved May 31, 2019 . ^ a b Collins, Michael (August 11, 2023). "The Post-Industrial Service Economy Isn't Working for the Middle Class" . IndustryWeek . Retrieved August 10, 2024 . ^ "USA Economy in Brief" . U.S. Dept. of State, International Information Programs. Archived from the original on March 12, 2008. ^ "The State of Manufacturing in the United States" . International Trade Administration. July 2010. Archived from the original on February 26, 2013 . Retrieved March 10, 2013 . ^ "Manufacturing, Value Added (Current US$)" . World Bank . Retrieved October 25, 2025 . ^ Kat Tretina and Benjamin Curry (April 9, 2021). "NYSE: What Is The New York Stock Exchange" . Forbes . Retrieved July 24, 2022 . ^ Jones, Huw (March 24, 2022). "New York widens lead over London in top finance centres index" . Reuters . Retrieved July 29, 2022 . ^ "The Global Financial Centres Index 35" . Long Finance. March 21, 2024 . Retrieved May 1, 2024 . ^ Ghosh, Iman (September 24, 2020). "This 3D map shows the U.S. cities with the highest economic output" . World Economic Forum . Retrieved March 5, 2023 .

The New York metro area dwarfs all other cities for economic output by a large margin. ^ "Monthly Reports – World Federation of Exchanges" . WFE. ^ Table A – Market Capitalization of the World's Top Stock Exchanges (As at end of June 2012) . Securities and Exchange Commission (China). ^ a b c "The World Factbook: United States" . Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved November 10, 2018 . ^ Wright, Gavin, and Jesse Czelusta, "Resource-Based Growth Past and Present", in Natural Resources: Neither Curse Nor Destiny , ed. Daniel Lederman and William Maloney (World Bank, 2007), p. 185. ISBN 978-0-8213-6545-8 . ^ "Top Trading Partners – October 2022" . U.S. Census Bureau. October 2022 . Retrieved May 12, 2023 . ^ "World Trade Statistical Review 2019" (PDF) . World Trade Organization . p. 100 . Retrieved May 31, 2019 . ^ "Exports of goods, services and primary income (BoP, current US$)" . data.worldbank.org . Retrieved May 24, 2024 . ^ "Service exports (BoP, current US$)" . World Bank . Retrieved August 4, 2023 . ^ "Income" . Better Life Index . OECD . Retrieved September 28, 2019 .

In the United States, the average household net adjusted disposable income per capita is USD 45 284 a year, much higher than the OECD average of USD 33 604 and the highest figure in the OECD. ^ "Median Income by Country 2023" . Wisevoter . Retrieved July 28, 2023 . ^ "Society at a Glance 2014" . Society at a Glance 2014: OECD Social Indicators . OECD Publishing. March 18, 2014. doi : 10.1787/soc_glance-2014-en . ISBN 978-92-64-20072-2 . Retrieved May 29, 2014 . ^ "Personal Consumption Expenditures" . fred.stlouisfed.org . March 28, 2024 . Retrieved July 24, 2024 . ^ Steenkamp 2024 . ^ Napoletano, E. (October 20, 2023). "Here's How Many Billionaires And Millionaires Live In The U.S. – Forbes Advisor" . Forbes . Retrieved November 20, 2023 . ^ Piketty 2014 , p. 257 . ^ Smith, Zidar & Zwick 2022 . ^ "Income inequality in America is the highest it's been since Census Bureau started tracking it, data shows" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved July 27, 2020 . ^ "Society at a glance 2024: OECD social indicators" . OECD . June 20, 2024 . Retrieved April 12, 2025 . ^ a b Hopkin 2020 . ^ Long, Heather (September 12, 2017). "U.S. middle-class incomes reached highest-ever level in 2016, Census Bureau says" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved November 11, 2019 . ^ Smeeding 2005 . ^ Casey, Michael (December 27, 2024). "US homelessness up 18% as affordable housing remains out of reach for many" . Associated Press . Retrieved August 25, 2025 . ^ "USDA ERS – Key Statistics & Graphics" . ers.usda.gov . Archived from the original on January 19, 2020 . Retrieved December 4, 2019 . ^ "Facts About Child Hunger in America | Feeding America" . feedingamerica.org . Retrieved December 4, 2019 . ^ "National Poverty in America Awareness Month: January 2023" . Census.gov . ^ Joumard, Isabelle; Pisu, Mauro; Bloch, Debbie (2012). "Tackling income inequality The role of taxes and transfers" (PDF) . OECD. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 13, 2014 . Retrieved May 21, 2015 . ^ Rank 2023 , pp. 116–117. ^ Min, Sarah (May 24, 2019). "1 in 4 workers in U.S. don't get any paid vacation time or holidays" . CBS News . Retrieved July 15, 2022 .

The United States is the only advanced economy that does not federally mandate any paid vacation days or holidays. ^ Bernard, Tara Siegel (February 22, 2013). "In Paid Family Leave, U.S. Trails Most of the Globe" .

The New York Times . Retrieved August 27, 2013 . ^ Van Dam, Andrew (July 4, 2018). "Is it great to be a worker in the U.S.? Not compared with the rest of the developed world" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved July 12, 2018 . ^ Lee, Dave (July 16, 2015). "Silicon Valley: 'Centre of the universe' - but for how long?" . BBC News . Retrieved August 17, 2025 . It was this secret sauce that provided the spark for the biggest and most powerful technology hub in the world. ^ Cellan-Jones, Rory (February 7, 2020). "Tech Tent - has Silicon Valley still got it?" . BBC . Retrieved August 17, 2025 . For decades it has been the beating heart of the tech industry, the place where the future is created and where anyone who wants to be part of it has to come in search of inspiration and funding. ^ Mowery, David. "Technological Change and the Evolution of the U.S. "National Innovation System", 1880-1990" . OpenMind . Archived from the original on January 27, 2022 . Retrieved July 10, 2024 . ^ Goodfriend & McDermott 2021 . ^ Hounshell 1984 . ^ Tollefson & Van Noorden 2024 . ^ "U.S. science no longer leads the world. Here's how top advisers say the nation should respond" . www.science.org . Retrieved February 10, 2025 . ^ Desjardins, Jeff (December 18, 2018). "Innovators wanted: these countries spend the most on R&D" . www.weforum.org . Retrieved May 22, 2024 . ^ Fleming, Sean (November 16, 2020). "These countries spend the most on research and development" . www.weforum.org . Retrieved May 22, 2024 . ^ "SJR – International Science Ranking" . Scimagojr.com . Retrieved February 5, 2022 . ^ World Intellectual Property Organization. (2021). World Intellectual Property Indicators 2021 . World IP Indicators (WIPI). World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). doi : 10.34667/tind.44461 . ISBN 978-92-805-3329-3 . Retrieved April 27, 2022 . ^ "GII Innovation Ecosystems & Data Explorer 2025" . WIPO . Retrieved October 16, 2025 . ^ Dutta & Lanvin 2025 , p. 19. ^ "Global AI Power Rankings: Stanford HAI Tool Ranks 36 Countries in AI" . hai.stanford.edu . November 21, 2024 . Retrieved January 1, 2025 . ^ Getzoff, Marc (December 1, 2023). "Most Technologically Advanced Countries In The World 2023" . Global Finance Magazine . Retrieved July 29, 2024 . ^ "65 Years Ago: The National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 Creates NASA – NASA" . July 26, 2023 . Retrieved September 6, 2024 . ^ "National Aeronautics and Space Administration | US Space Agency & Exploration Achievements | Britannica" . www.britannica.com . September 4, 2024 . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ "Apollo | History, Missions, Significance, & Facts | Britannica" . www.britannica.com . August 29, 2024 . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ "The Apollo Missions" .

The Apollo Missions . July 4, 2019 . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ "Space Shuttle – NASA" . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ "Quick Facts" . HubbleSite . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ "Quick Facts" . Webb . August 12, 2024 . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ "Mars Exploration – NASA Science" . science.nasa.gov . February 27, 2008 . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ "International Space Station Facts and Figures – NASA" . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ Howell, Elizabeth (August 24, 2022). "International Space Station: Facts, History & Tracking" . Space.com (updated, last ed.) . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ "Companies are commercializing outer space. Do government programs still matter?" . Washington Post . January 11, 2022 . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ "Commercial Space – NASA" . Retrieved September 5, 2024 . ^ "U.S. energy facts explained – consumption and production – U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA)" . eia.gov . Retrieved November 21, 2023 . ^ "Energy Flow Charts: Charting the Complex Relationships among Energy, Water, and Carbon" . Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. March 2022 . Retrieved May 16, 2023 . ^ "What is the United States' share of world energy consumption?" . U.S. Energy Information Administration . November 5, 2021. ^ US Environmental Protection Agency, OAR (February 8, 2017). "Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks" . US EPA . Retrieved December 3, 2020 . ^ "Nuclear Power in the USA - World Nuclear Association" . world-nuclear.org . Retrieved March 1, 2025 . ^ Rouse, Sabina (November 5, 2019). "Where are the world's 449 nuclear reactors?" . World Economic Forum . Archived from the original on February 14, 2025 . Retrieved March 1, 2025 . ^ "U.S. Sets Targets to Triple Nuclear Energy Capacity by 2050" . Energy.gov . November 12, 2024 . Retrieved March 1, 2025 . ^ "Roadways – The World Factbook" . Cia.gov . Archived from the original on July 12, 2021 . Retrieved July 15, 2021 . ^ "Public Road and Street Mileage in the United States by Type of Surface" . United States Department of Transportation . Archived from the original on January 2, 2015 . Retrieved January 13, 2015 . ^ "Cars still dominate the American commute" . World Economic Forum . May 19, 2022 . Retrieved May 21, 2023 . ^ Humes, Edward (April 12, 2016). "The Absurd Primacy of the Automobile in American Life" .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on April 12, 2016 . Retrieved July 12, 2023 . ^ Black 1995 . ^ Delouya, Samantha (November 25, 2023). "Why doesn't the US have more passenger trains?" . CNN . Retrieved July 4, 2026 . ^ "Amtrak Five Year Service Line Plans" (PDF) . Amtrak . March 16, 2019 . Retrieved July 4, 2026 . ^ "Railways – The World Factbook" .

The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency . Archived from the original on November 24, 2018 . Retrieved July 14, 2022 . ^ "Seasonally Adjusted Transportation Data" . Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Transportation Statistics. 2021. Archived from the original on April 22, 2021 . Retrieved February 16, 2021 . ^ Fitzsimmons, Emma G. (April 24, 2017). "Amtrak at a Junction: Invest in Improvements, or Risk Worsening Problems" .

The New York Times . Retrieved April 16, 2023 . ^ The Antiplanner (May 13, 2016). "Comparing European and American Transport" . ^ Thomas, Maddock (March 7, 2023). "US Railroads Lag Behind the World in Railroad Electrification, and the Reason is Private Ownership" . Brown Political Review . Retrieved March 9, 2025 . ^ a b Hunter, Marnie (April 11, 2022). "This US airport has reclaimed its title as the world's busiest" . CNN . ^ "Preliminary World Airport Traffic and Rankings 2013—High Growth Dubai Moves Up to 7th Busiest Airport" . March 31, 2014. Archived from the original on April 1, 2014 . Retrieved May 17, 2014 . ^ "Scheduled Passengers Carried" . International Air Transport Association (IATA) . 2011. Archived from the original on January 2, 2015 . Retrieved February 17, 2012 . ^ a b "2021 Airport Traffic Report" (PDF) . Port Authority of New York and New Jersey . April 2022. p. 32. ^ "Number of U.S. Airports" . Bureau of Transportation Statistics . Retrieved December 15, 2023 . ^ "Waterways – The World Factbook" .

The World Factbook . Central Intelligence Agency . Archived from the original on April 12, 2022 . Retrieved July 14, 2022 . ^ "The Top 50 Container Ports" . World Shipping Council . Washington, D.C. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021 . Retrieved July 14, 2022 . ^ "U.S. population growth slows due to historic decline in net international migration" . U.S. Census Bureau . Retrieved January 27, 2026 . ^ "Census Bureau's 2020 Population Count" . United States Census . Retrieved April 26, 2021 . ^ "World Population Dashboard" . United Nations Population Fund . Retrieved February 12, 2026 . ^ "Population Clock" . Census.gov . ^ "Table MS-1. Marital Status of the Population 15 Years Old and Over, by Sex, Race and Hispanic Origin: 1950 to Present" . Historical Marital Status Tables . U.S. Census Bureau . Retrieved September 11, 2019 . ^ Saric, Ivana (April 25, 2024). "Births dropped in 2023, ending pandemic baby boom" . Axios . Retrieved July 1, 2024 . ^ "U.S. has world's highest rate of children living in single-parent households" . Pew Research Center . December 12, 2019 . Retrieved March 17, 2020 . ^ a b c "Ancestry 2000" (PDF) . U.S. Census Bureau. June 2004. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 4, 2004 . Retrieved December 2, 2016 . ^ "The Chance That Two People Chosen at Random Are of Different Race or Ethnicity Groups Has Increased Since 2010" . Census.gov . U.S. Census Bureau. ^ "Table 52. Population by Selected Ancestry Group and Region: 2009" (PDF) . U.S. Census Bureau. 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 25, 2012 . Retrieved February 11, 2017 . ^ "Federally recognized American Indian tribes and Alaska Native entities | USAGov" . www.usa.gov . Retrieved April 5, 2024 . ^ Wilder, Kristie; Mackun, Paul. "Median Age in 192 Metro Areas Higher Than National Median of 39.1" . Census.gov . Retrieved July 4, 2025 . ^ "United States—Urban/Rural and Inside/Outside Metropolitan Area" . U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on April 3, 2009 . Retrieved September 23, 2008 . ^ "City and Town Population Totals: 2020-2022" . Census.gov . Retrieved November 26, 2023 . ^ a b c "Census shows population growth in U.S. metro areas" . CBS News . March 26, 2026 . Retrieved March 30, 2026 . ^ "Metropolitan and Micropolitan Statistical Areas Population Totals: 2020-2025" . United States Census Bureau , Population Division. March 26, 2026 . Retrieved March 26, 2026 . ^ Kaur, Harmeet (May 20, 2018). "FYI: English isn't the official language of the United States" . CNN . Retrieved May 11, 2023 . ^ "States Where English Is the Official Language" .

The Washington Post . August 12, 2014 . Retrieved September 12, 2020 . ^ "The Constitution of the State of Hawaii, Article XV, Section 4" . Hawaii Legislative Reference Bureau. November 7, 1978. Archived from the original on July 24, 2013 . Retrieved June 19, 2007 . ^ Chapel, Bill (April 21, 2014). "Alaska OKs Bill Making Native Languages Official" . NPR. ^ "South Dakota recognizes official indigenous language" . Argus Leader . Retrieved March 26, 2019 . ^ Siebens, Julie; Julian, Tiffany (December 2011). "Native North American Languages Spoken at Home in the United States and Puerto Rico: 2006–2010" (PDF) . United States Census Bureau . Retrieved April 5, 2024 . ^ "Translation in Puerto Rico" . Puerto Rico Channel . Archived from the original on December 30, 2013 . Retrieved December 29, 2013 . ^ "ACS B16001" . ACS B16001 . U.S. Census Bureau . Retrieved December 26, 2022 . ^ U.S. Census Bureau. Language spoken at home by ability to speak English for the population 5 years and over . data.census.gov (Report). U.S. Census Bureau . Retrieved February 24, 2026 . ^ United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (August 2019). "International Migrant Stock 2019 Documentation" (PDF) . United Nations. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 17, 2019 . Retrieved June 19, 2023 . ^ "UN Migrant Stock Total 2019" . United Nations. Archived from the original on September 17, 2019 . Retrieved June 19, 2023 . ^ "Frequently Requested Statistics on Immigrants and Immigration in the United States" . Migration Policy Institute . March 14, 2019. ^ "Key findings about U.S. immigrants" . Pew Research Center. June 17, 2019. Archived from the original on June 17, 2019. ^ "Immigrants in the United States" (PDF) . americanimmigrationcouncil.org . September 21, 2021 . Retrieved August 18, 2023 . ^ "Who Are America's Immigrants?" . Population Reference Bureau . May 22, 2024. ^ "U.S. Unauthorized Immigrant Population Reached a Record 14 Million in 2023" . Pew Research Center . August 21, 2025. ^ Donadio, Rachel (November 22, 2021). "Why Is France So Afraid of God?" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved March 25, 2023 . ^ "First Amendment" . Constitution Annotated . United States Congress . ^ Alesina 2003 . ^ Fahmy, Dalia (July 31, 2018). "Americans are far more religious than adults in other wealthy nations" . Pew Research Center . Archived from the original on January 9, 2020 . Retrieved January 23, 2020 . ^ ANALYSIS (December 19, 2011). "Global Christianity" . Pewforum.org. Archived from the original on July 30, 2013 . Retrieved August 17, 2012 . ^ Sewell 2010 . ^ a b Williams, Daniel (March 1, 2023). " 'Christian America' Isn't Dying. It's Dividing" . Christianity Today . Retrieved March 25, 2023 . ^ Merriam, Jesse; Lupu, Ira; Elwood, F; Davis, Eleanor (August 28, 2008). "On Ceremonial Occasions, May the Government Invoke a Deity?" . Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project . Retrieved March 31, 2023 . ^ Kallo, Becka; et al. (December 7, 2023). "Spirituality Among Americans" . Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project . Retrieved December 8, 2023 . ^ Froese & Uecker 2022 . ^ Fahmy, Dalia; Smith, Gregory A.; Cooperman, Alan; Alper, Becka A.; Mohamed, Besheer; Rotolo, Chip; Tevington, Patricia; Nortey, Justin; Kallo, Asta; Diamant, Jeff (February 26, 2025). "Decline of Christianity in the U.S. Has Slowed, May Have Leveled Off" . Pew Research Center . Retrieved April 22, 2025 . ^ Howe 2008 , pp. 727–728. ^ "About Us" . Retrieved November 19, 2025 . ^ "Texas Medical Center, largest medical complex in the world, reaches 98 percent ICU capacity" . Newsweek . August 19, 2020. ^ "TMC Facts & Figures" (PDF) . Retrieved November 19, 2025 . ^ "U.S. life expectancy hits record high as drug overdose deaths decline in 2024" . U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . January 29, 2026 . Retrieved February 1, 2026 . ^ Xu et al. 2026 . ^ Achenbach, Joel (November 26, 2019). " 'There's something terribly wrong': Americans are dying young at alarming rates" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved December 19, 2019 . ^ "New International Report on Health Care: U.S. Suicide Rate Highest Among Wealthy Nations | Commonwealth Fund" . Commonwealthfund.org . January 30, 2020 . Retrieved March 17, 2020 . ^ "Prevalence of Overweight and Obesity Among Adults: United States, 2003–2004" . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. Archived from the original on January 10, 2009 . Retrieved June 5, 2007 . ^ "The U.S. Healthcare System: The Best in the World or Just the Most Expensive?" (PDF) . University of Maine. 2001. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 9, 2007 . Retrieved November 29, 2006 . ^ Vladeck 2003 . ^ Oberlander 2010 . ^ "Abortion regulations by state" . Ballotpedia . April 2, 2026. Archived from the original on June 16, 2026 . Retrieved June 16, 2026 . HIGHLIGHTS As of April 2, 2026, 41 states restricted abortions at specific stages of pregnancy.

The remaining nine states and Washington, D.C., did not. Of the 41 states that restricted abortion, 12 restricted abortion beginning at the stage of fetal viability, which was defined in Roe v. Wade . Thirteen states restricted abortion after conception. ^ National Center for Education Statistics . " U.S. Undergraduate Enrollment ". Accessed July 29, 2024. ^ "Ages for Compulsory School Attendance ..." U.S. Dept. of Education, National Center for Education Statistics . Retrieved June 10, 2007 . ^ Rushe, Dominic (September 7, 2018). "The US spends more on education than other countries. Why is it falling behind?" .

The Guardian . Retrieved August 29, 2020 . ^ "Fast Facts: Expenditures" . nces.ed.gov . April 2020 . Retrieved August 29, 2020 . ^ "Educational Attainment in the United States: 2022" . U.S. Census Bureau . Retrieved July 20, 2024 . ^ For more detail on U.S. literacy, see A First Look at the Literacy of America's Adults in the 21st century , U.S. Department of Education (2003). ^ "All Nobel Prizes" . Nobel Foundation. ^ "2022–2023 Best Global Universities Rankings" . U.S. News & World Report . Retrieved April 27, 2023 . ^ Fink, Jenni (October 22, 2019). "U.S. Schools Take 8 of 10 Top Spots on U.S. News' Best Global Universities" . Newsweek . Retrieved April 18, 2023 . ^ "Best Countries for Education: North American and European countries are seen as offering the best opportunities for education" . U.S. News & World Report . April 19, 2023. ^ Pannoni, Alexandra; Kerr, Emma (July 14, 2020). "Everything You Need to Know About Community Colleges: FAQ" . U.S. News & World Report . Retrieved July 9, 2022 . ^ "U.S. education spending tops global list, study shows" . CBS. Associated Press. June 25, 2013. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013 . Retrieved October 5, 2013 . ^ "The Biden administration cancelled $9.5B in student loan debt. Here's who it affects" . USAFacts . Retrieved July 15, 2022 . ^ Hess, Abigail Johnson (December 22, 2020). "U.S. student debt has increased by more than 100% over the past 10 years" . CNBC . Retrieved January 8, 2022 . ^ Dickler, Jessica; Nova, Annie (May 6, 2022). "This is how student loan debt became a $1.7 trillion crisis" . CNBC . Retrieved July 8, 2022 . ^ "Statue of Liberty" . World Heritage . UNESCO . Retrieved January 4, 2022 . ^ Volokh, Eugene (January 17, 2015). "The American tradition of multiculturalism" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved July 30, 2024 . ^ Jackson, Lucas (August 22, 2014). "America's Tipping Point: Most Of U.S. Now Multicultural, Says Group" . NBC News . Retrieved July 30, 2024 . ^ Grabb, Baer & Curtis 1999 . ^ Marsh, Abigail (May 26, 2021). "Everyone Thinks Americans Are Selfish. They're Wrong" .

The New York Times . Retrieved July 16, 2023 . ^ Porter 2010 . ^ Stephens 1952 . ^ "World Giving Index 2022" (PDF) . Charities Aid Foundation . September 9, 2022 . Retrieved April 27, 2023 . ^ "Country-level estimates of altruism" . Our World in Data . Retrieved March 14, 2023 . ^ Marsh, Abigail (February 5, 2018). "Could A More Individualistic World Also Be A More Altruistic One?" . NPR . Retrieved March 14, 2023 . ^ "GROSS DOMESTIC PHILANTHROPY: An international analysis of GDP, tax and giving" (PDF) . Charities Aid Foundation . January 2016 . Retrieved July 18, 2022 . ^ Huntington 2004 . ^ Hoeveler, J. David, Creating the American Mind: Intellect and Politics in the Colonial Colleges , Rowman & Littlefield, ISBN 978-0-7425-4839-8 , 2007, p. xi. ^ Fergie, Dexter (March 24, 2022). "How American Culture Ate the World" .

The New Republic . ISSN 0028-6583 . Retrieved July 3, 2022 . ^ Shah, Ritula (November 19, 2014). "Is US monopoly on the use of soft power at an end?" . BBC News . Retrieved February 14, 2025 . ^ Berghahn 2010 . ^ Fiorina & Peterson 2010 , p. 97. ^ Holloway 2005 , pp. 18–38. ^ Johnson 2000 , p. 116. ^ a b Coleman 2013 , pp. 10, 201. ^ "Held Dear In U.S., Free Speech Perplexing Abroad" . NPR . September 19, 2012 . Retrieved March 4, 2023 . ^ Liptak, Adam (June 11, 2008). "Hate speech or free speech? What much of West bans is protected in U.S." .

The New York Times . Retrieved February 21, 2023 . ^ Durkee, Alison (April 25, 2018). "What if we didn't... have the First Amendment?" . Mic . Retrieved February 6, 2023 . ^ Wike, Richard (October 12, 2016). "Americans more tolerant of offensive speech than others in the world" . Pew Research Center . Retrieved February 6, 2023 . ^ Gray, Alex (November 8, 2016). "Freedom of speech: which country has the most?" . World Economic Forum . Retrieved February 6, 2023 . ^ Norris 2023 . "As predicted, in post-industrial societies, characterized by predominately liberal social cultures, like the US, Sweden, and UK ... " ^ a b Derks & van den Berg 2020 , p. 338. " ... (the United States and Europe) as "already in crisis" for their permissive attitudes toward nonnormative sexualities ... " ^ Leveille, Dan (December 4, 2009). "LGBT Equality Index: The most LGBT-friendly countries in the world" . Equaldex . Retrieved January 26, 2023 . 13.) United States ^ Garretson 2018 . "In the late 1980s and early 1990s, a dramatic wave began to form in the waters of public opinion: American attitudes involving homosexuality began to change...

The transformation of America's response to homosexuality has been — and continues to be — one of the most rapid and sustained shifts in mass attitudes since the start of public polling." ^ Clifton, Jon (March 21, 2013). "More Than 100 Million Worldwide Dream of a Life in the U.S. More than 25% in Liberia, Sierra Leone, Dominican Republic want to move to the U.S." Gallup . Retrieved January 10, 2014 . ^ Kulkarni, Jay (January 12, 2022). "Attracting Immigrant Talent With A New American Dream" . Forbes . Retrieved July 24, 2024 . ^ "A Family Affair: Intergenerational Social Mobility across OECD Countries" (PDF) . Economic Policy Reforms: Going for Growth . OECD. 2010 . Retrieved September 20, 2010 . ^ "Understanding Mobility in America" . Center for American Progress . April 26, 2006. ^ Gould, Elise (October 10, 2012). "U.S. lags behind peer countries in mobility" . Economic Policy Institute . Retrieved July 15, 2013 . ^ Gutfeld 2002 , p. 65. ^ Zweig 2004 . ^ Hoff-Ginsberg 1989 . ^ O'Keefe 2005 . ^ "National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities" . Federal Register . Retrieved October 1, 2022 . ^ Jelliffe 1956 . ^ Baym & Levine 2013 , pp. 157–159. ^ Lauter 1994a , pp. 503–509. ^ Baym & Levine 2013 , p. 163. ^ Mulford, Carla. "Enlightenment Voices, Revolutionary Visions." In Lauter 1994a , pp. 705–707. ^ Lease 1972 , p. 80. ^ Finseth, Ian Frederick. "The Emergence of Transcendentalism" . American Studies @ The University of Virginia .

The University of Virginia . Archived from the original on July 18, 2023 . Retrieved November 9, 2014 . ^ Coviello 2005 . ^ Baym & Levine 2013 , pp. 444–447. ^ Lauter 1994a , pp. 1228, 1233, 1260. ^ Baym & Levine 2013 , pp. 1269–1270. ^ Lauter 1994b , pp. 8–10. ^ Baym & Levine 2013 , pp. 1271–1273. ^ Lauter 1994b , p. 12. ^ Baym & Levine 2013 , pp. 1850–1851. ^ Spillers, Hortense . "The New Negro Renaissance." In Lauter 1994b , pp. 1579–1585. ^ Philipson 2006 . ^ Baym & Levine 2013 , pp. 2260–2261. ^ Baym & Levine 2013 , p. 2262. ^ Lauter 1994b , pp. 1975–1977. " Literature of the Cold War ". ^ Baym & Levine 2013 , pp. 2266–2267. ^ "All Nobel Prizes in Literature" .

The Nobel Prize . Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2024 . Retrieved August 6, 2024 . ^ "About PBS – Overview" . PBS. Archived from the original on September 7, 2018 . Retrieved September 10, 2018 . ^ Terbo, William. "Video Documentaries" . Tesla Memorial Society . Archived from the original on March 26, 2023 . Retrieved June 26, 2023 . "Tesla, Master of Lightning", New Voyage Communications for PBS Television Network, 2000, 90 minutes. ^ "Ray Suarez" . Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs . Archived from the original on June 12, 2022 . Retrieved July 14, 2022 . Suarez joined the PBS NewsHour in 1999 and was a senior correspondent for the evening news program on the PBS television network until 2013. ^ "PBS Television Broadcasts" . Inside Peace . Archived from the original on June 28, 2022 . Retrieved July 14, 2022 . We are pleased to announce the release of Inside Peace throughout the PBS television network in the United States. ^ "Federal Funding for Public Broadcasting" . WFYI. Archived from the original on November 11, 2021 . Retrieved October 26, 2021 . ^ "Streaming TV Services: What They Cost, What You Get" .

The New York Times . Associated Press . October 12, 2015. Archived from the original on October 15, 2015 . Retrieved October 12, 2015 . ^ "Audio and Podcasting Fact Sheet" . Washington, D.C.: Pew Research Center . June 29, 2021 . Retrieved July 3, 2022 . ^ "BROADCAST STATION TOTALS AS OF SEPTEMBER 30, 2020" (PDF) . docs.fcc.gov . ^ "History: NPR" . NPR . June 20, 2013. Archived from the original on July 22, 2013 . Retrieved May 5, 2021 . ^ Shaffer 2006 , p. 116. ^ "Spanish Newspapers in United States" . W3newspapers . Retrieved August 5, 2014 . ^ "Spanish Language Newspapers in the USA: Hispanic Newspapers: Periódiscos en Español en los EE.UU" . Onlinenewspapers.com. Archived from the original on June 26, 2014 . Retrieved August 5, 2014 . ^ "Top Sites in United States" . Alexa. 2021. Archived from the original on June 21, 2020 . Retrieved October 6, 2021 . ^ "Similarweb Top Websites Ranking" . Similarweb . January 9, 2026 . Retrieved January 9, 2026 . ^ "Top countries and markets by video game revenues" . Newzoo . Retrieved October 28, 2025 . ^ Takahashi, Dean (February 15, 2017). "The U.S. game industry has 2,457 companies supporting 220,000 jobs" . GamesBeat . Retrieved July 4, 2025 . ^ "California (CA)" . ESA Impact Map . July 20, 2017 . Retrieved December 14, 2022 . ^ "Number of Devs Aged 45 or Older Has Tripled Since 2015" . 80.lv . March 25, 2025 . Retrieved July 4, 2025 . ^ "Index 2026 – Global score" . Reporters Without Borders . Retrieved May 1, 2026 . ^ Saxon 2011 . ^ Meserve, Walter J. An Outline History of American Drama, New York: Feedback/Prospero, 1994. ^ Londré & Watermeier 1998 . ^ Stephen Watt, and Gary A. Richardson, American Drama: Colonial to Contemporary (1994). ^ Staff (undated). "Who's Who" . Archived December 23, 2016, at the Wayback Machine . tonyawards.com. Retrieved September 13, 2013. ^ Güner, Fisun (February 8, 2017). "How American Gothic became an icon" . BBC . Retrieved March 2, 2017 . ^ American folk art the art of the common man in America, 1750-1900. New York, N.Y.: The Museum of Modern Art. 1932. ^ Brown 1988 . ^ Davenport 1991 , p. 67. ^ Janson & Janson 2003 , p. 955. ^ Lester, Alfred (December 6, 1993). "Letter: The Louvre: tourism on the grand scale" .

The Independent . Retrieved December 2, 2023 . ^ "The Largest Art Museums In The World" . WorldAtlas . May 30, 2017. ^ "Folk Music and Song: American Folklife Center: An Illustrated Guide (Library of Congress)" . Loc.gov . ^ "Musical Crossroads: African American Influence on American Music" . Smithsonian . September 22, 2016 . Retrieved April 14, 2023 . ^ Winans 1976 . ^ Shi 2016 , p. 378. ^ a b "The Invention of the Electric Guitar" . Lemelson Center Studies in Invention and Innovation . Smithsonian Institution. April 18, 2014. ^ a b Biddle 2001 , p. ix . ^ Stoia, Nicholas (October 21, 2014). "Early blues and country music" . OUP blog . Oxford University Press. ^ "Bluegrass music" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved June 19, 2020 . ^ Corbett et al. 2014 , 28.4 . ^ "No. 1 Bob Dylan" . Rolling Stone . April 10, 2020 . Retrieved January 29, 2021 . ^ Funk 2016 . ^ "2022 Year-End Music Industry Revenue Report" . Record Industry Association of America . Retrieved November 26, 2023 . ^ Posada, Susana Pérez (November 6, 2025). "Made in the USA: American artists rule Spotify at home and abroad" .

The Bellingham Herald . Retrieved May 28, 2026 . America exports more music than any other country. ^ Savage, Mark (June 16, 2021). "British music exports reach a record high" . BBC . Retrieved May 28, 2026 . According to the BPI, the UK is still the largest exporter of music in the world, after the USA ^ Hennessy, Eoin (March 27, 2014). "How American Music Took Over the World" .

The University Times . Retrieved April 28, 2023 . ^ "10 ways that Frank Sinatra changed the world" . USA Today . December 8, 2015 . Retrieved June 24, 2021 . ^ "Universal Music can't help falling for Elvis Presley, to manage song catalog" . Reuters . April 12, 2022 . Retrieved April 12, 2022 . ^ "Michael Jackson's 'Thriller' First Ever 30X Multi-Platinum RIAA Certification" . Recording Industry Association of America. December 16, 2015 . Retrieved December 17, 2021 . ^ Marcos, Carlos (August 17, 2022). "Madonna has been scandalizing people for 40 years, and nobody's going to stop her" . El País . Retrieved August 17, 2022 . ^ "The 200 Greatest Singers of All Time" . Rolling Stone . January 1, 2023 . Retrieved January 2, 2023 . ^ "Mariah Carey To Receive Global Impact Award At Recording Academy Honors Presented By The Black Music Collective" . Grammy Awards. Archived from the original on February 2, 2024 . Retrieved February 2, 2024 . ^ "11 Guinness World Records Eminem Still Holds" . September 12, 2017. Archived from the original on September 14, 2017. ^ a b c Edmondson 2013 , p. 490. ^ "Taylor Swift and Beyoncé reporters wanted by biggest newspaper chain in US" . Sky News . September 14, 2023. Archived from the original on November 9, 2023 . Retrieved November 8, 2023 . ^ "Global Apparel Industry Statistics (2024)" . uniformmarket.com . June 19, 2024 . Retrieved August 25, 2024 . ^ "American Classics How seven everyday clothing items became American style staples" . CNN . Retrieved December 4, 2023 . ^ Caplin, John (September 1, 2021). "Made In New York: The Future Of New York City's Historic Garment District" . Forbes . Retrieved December 5, 2023 . Spanning just about 20 square blocks between Times Square and Penn Station along Seventh Avenue (also known as "Fashion Avenue"), the vibrant and always-busy neighborhood has a long and rich history that has become synonymous with American fashion since its inception more than a century ago. ^ "About Calvin Klein, Inc" . calvinklein.us . Retrieved June 8, 2025 . ^ "About US – Polo Ralph Lauren" . Ralph Lauren Corporation . Retrieved June 8, 2025 . ^ Juarez, Diana (October 4, 2023). "The Economic Impact of New York Fashion Week" .

The Fordham Ram . Retrieved December 5, 2023 . ^ Bauman, Ali (May 1, 2023). "Met Gala 2023: Fashion's biggest night honors Karl Lagerfeld" . CBS News . Retrieved April 30, 2024 . ^ "Met Gala 2024: How to Watch Fashion's Biggest Night" . Glamour . April 29, 2024 . Retrieved April 30, 2024 . ^ Annual Report of the Controller of the City of Los Angeles, California .

By Office of Controller Los Angeles, CA (1914). 1914 . Retrieved February 22, 2014 . ^ Report of the Auditor of the City of Los Angeles California of the Financial Affairs of the Corporation in Its Capacity as a City for the Fiscal Year .

By Auditor's Office of Los Angeles, CA (1913). 1913 . Retrieved February 22, 2014 . ^ "Nigeria surpasses Hollywood as world's second-largest film producer" (Press release). United Nations. May 5, 2009 . Retrieved February 17, 2013 . ^ Kerrigan 2010 , p. 18. ^ Davis et al. 2015 , p. 299. ^ Kannapell, Andrea (October 4, 1998). "Getting the Big Picture; The Film Industry Started Here and Left. Now It's Back, and the State Says the Sequel Is Huge" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on December 19, 2019 . Retrieved January 19, 2023 . ^ "Market Data" .

The Numbers . Archived from the original on May 15, 2011 . Retrieved July 11, 2024 . ^ Amith, Dennis (January 1, 2011). "Before Hollywood There Was Fort Lee, N.J.: Early Movie Making in New Jersey (a J!-ENT DVD Review)" . J!-ENT. Archived from the original on December 22, 2019 . Retrieved January 19, 2023 .

When Hollywood, California, was mostly orange groves, Fort Lee, New Jersey, was a center of American film production. ^ Rose, Lisa (April 29, 2012). "100 years ago, Fort Lee was the first town to bask in movie magic" . NJ.com . Archived from the original on September 29, 2018 . Retrieved January 19, 2023 . Back in 1912, when Hollywood had more cattle than cameras, Fort Lee was the center of the cinematic universe. Icons from the silent era like Mary Pickford, Lionel Barrymore, and Lillian Gish crossed the Hudson River via ferry to emote on Fort Lee back lots. ^ "John Landis Rails Against Studios: 'They're Not in the Movie Business Anymore' " .

The Hollywood Reporter . Retrieved January 24, 2015 . ^ Drowne & Huber 2004 , p. 236. ^ Kroon 2014 , p. 338. ^ Matthews, Charles (June 3, 2011). "Book explores Hollywood 'Golden Age' of the 1960s-'70s" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved August 6, 2015 . ^ Banner, Lois (August 5, 2012). "Marilyn Monroe, the eternal shape shifter" . Los Angeles Times . Retrieved August 6, 2015 . ^ Rick, Jewell (August 8, 2008). "John Wayne, an American Icon" . University of Southern California. Archived from the original on August 22, 2008 . Retrieved August 6, 2015 . ^ Greven 2013 , p. 23. ^ Morrison 1998 , p. 11. ^ Seitz, Matt Zoller (April 29, 2019). "What's Next: Avengers, MCU, Game of Thrones, and the Content Endgame" . RogerEbert.com . Ebert Digital LLC . Retrieved July 21, 2021 . ^ Avery, Hannah (January 18, 2023). "US streaming market growth continues, despite changes in the industry" . Kantar Group . Retrieved April 29, 2023 . ^ "Wheat Info" . Wheatworld.org . Archived from the original on October 11, 2009 . Retrieved January 15, 2015 . ^ "Traditional Indigenous Recipes" . American Indian Health and Diet Project . Retrieved September 15, 2014 . ^ Akenuwa, Ambrose (July 1, 2015). Is the United States Still the Land of the Free and Home to the Brave? . Lulu Press. pp. 92– 94. ISBN 978-1-329-26112-9 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 . ^ Mintz 1996 , p. 134. ^ Diner 2001 , p. 1. ^ Poe 1999 , p. 5. ^ Cawthon, Haley (December 31, 2020). "KFC is America's favorite fried chicken, data suggests" .

The Business Journals . Retrieved May 8, 2021 . ^ Russell, Joan (May 23, 2016). "How Pizza Became America's Favorite Food" . Paste . Retrieved May 8, 2021 . ^ Klapthor, James N. (August 23, 2003). "What, When, and Where Americans Eat in 2003" . Newswise/Institute of Food Technologists . Retrieved June 19, 2007 . ^ "Our Story: CIA History | Culinary Institute of America" . ciachef.edu . Retrieved October 11, 2022 . ^ Averbuch, Bonnie (September 2015). "Attention Food Entrepreneurs: School's Back in Business" . Food Tank . Retrieved June 19, 2017 . ^ a b Brownfield, Andy (March 20, 2020). "Cincinnati restaurants ask feds for coronavirus bailout" . login.research.cincinnatilibrary.org . Retrieved March 22, 2020 . ^ Ramirez, Elva. "The Restaurant Industry Needs A Coronavirus Bailout. Will They Get It?" . Forbes . Retrieved March 22, 2020 . ^ Noguchi, Yuki (March 22, 2020). "Closed All At Once: Restaurant Industry Faces Collapse" . NPR . Retrieved March 22, 2020 . ^ "Restaurant industry reeling from coronavirus" . MSNBC . Retrieved March 22, 2020 . ^ "3 Stars – The MICHELIN Guide USA" . guide.michelin.com . Retrieved April 17, 2026 . ^ "World Wine Situation and Outlook" (PDF) .

The Foreign Agricultural Service (FAS). August 2006. pp. 7– 9. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 8, 2008 . Retrieved April 12, 2026 . ^ Birchell & Steel 2013 . ^ New Mexico. Office of Cultural Affairs (1995). Enchanted Lifeways: The History, Museums, Arts & Festivals of New Mexico . New Mexico Magazine. ISBN 978-0-937206-39-3 . Retrieved November 15, 2019 . ^ T. Stevenson, The Sotheby's Wine Encyclopedia Fourth Edition, p. 462, Dorling Kindersly, 2005, ISBN 978-0-7566-1324-2 . ^ J. Robinson, ed.

The Oxford Companion to Wine , Third Edition, p. 719; Oxford University Press, 2006, ISBN 978-0-19-860990-2 . ^ "The History of the American Diner" . pastemagazine.com . September 5, 2016 . Retrieved November 30, 2021 . ^ "America's Love Of Drive-thrus" . NPR . December 11, 2023 . Retrieved May 4, 2024 . ^ "When Was the First Drive-Thru Restaurant Created?" . Wisegeek.org . Retrieved January 15, 2015 . ^ Sheldon, Andrew (July 23, 2020). "The History of the Drive-Thru in America" . Your AAA Network . ^ Pavlova, Rada (April 8, 2019). "Globalization of American Fast-Food Chains: the Pinnacle of Effective Management and Adaptability – The Yale Globalist" .

The Yale Globalist . Retrieved May 4, 2024 . ^ "Sports" . Gallup, Incorporated. September 25, 2007 . Retrieved April 16, 2023 . ^ "History of the NBA" . NBA.com . Retrieved June 8, 2025 . ^ "About MLB" . MLB Advanced Media . Retrieved June 8, 2025 . ^ "About MLS Soccer" . mlssoccer.com . Retrieved June 8, 2025 . ^ "About the NHL" . NHL.com . Retrieved June 8, 2025 . ^ Krasnoff, Lindsay Sarah (December 26, 2017). "How the NBA went global" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on December 26, 2017 . Retrieved September 14, 2023 . ^ Liss, Howard. Lacrosse (Funk & Wagnalls, 1970), p. 13. ^ "Global sports market to hit $141 billion in 2012" . Reuters . June 18, 2008 . Retrieved July 24, 2013 . ^ Krane, David K. (October 30, 2002). "Professional Football Widens Its Lead Over Baseball as Nation's Favorite Sport" . Harris Interactive. Archived from the original on July 9, 2010 . Retrieved September 14, 2007 . MacCambridge, Michael (2004). America's Game: The Epic Story of How Pro Football Captured a Nation . New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-375-50454-9 . ^ Guliza, Anthony (August 14, 2019). "How the NFL took over America in 100 years" . ESPN . Retrieved May 8, 2021 . ^ Fischer, Ben (April 3, 2026). "Sources: NFL revenue passes $23B in latest FY" . Sports Business Journal . Retrieved April 3, 2026 . ^ "As American as Mom, Apple Pie and Football? Football continues to trump baseball as America's Favorite Sport" (PDF) . Harris Interactive . January 16, 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 9, 2014 . Retrieved July 2, 2014 . ^ Cowen, Tyler; Grier, Kevin (February 9, 2012). "What Would the End of Football Look Like?" . Grantland/ESPN . Retrieved February 12, 2012 . ^ "Sports Illustrated: NCAA Reports $1.1 Billion in Revenues" . Sports Illustrated . March 7, 2018. ^ "Passion for College Football Remains Robust" . National Football Foundation. March 19, 2013. Archived from the original on April 7, 2014 . Retrieved April 1, 2014 . ^ Rosandich 2002 , p. 471. ^ Schaus & Wenn 2007 , p. 224. ^ "Greatest Sporting Nation" . greatestsportingnation.com . Archived from the original on January 10, 2025 . Retrieved April 11, 2023 . ^ "1,000 times gold – The thousand medals of Team USA – Washington Post" .

The Washington Post . ^ Chase, Chris (February 7, 2014). "The 10 most fascinating facts about the all-time Winter Olympics medal standings" . USA Today . Archived from the original on November 15, 2021 . Retrieved February 28, 2014 . Loumena, Dan (February 6, 2014). "With Sochi Olympics approaching, a history of Winter Olympic medals" . Los Angeles Times . Retrieved February 28, 2014 . ^ Carlisle, Jeff (April 6, 2020). "MLS Year One, 25 seasons ago: The Wild West of training, travel, hockey shootouts and American soccer" . ESPN . Retrieved May 5, 2021 . ^ Gerson, Aria (July 10, 2020). "Impact of 1999 Women's World Cup went far beyond Brandi Chastain's iconic goal" . USA Today . Retrieved February 14, 2024 . ^ Wamsley, Laurel (June 16, 2022). "The U.S. cities hosting the 2026 World Cup are announced" . NPR . Retrieved April 16, 2023 . Sources The 9/11 Encyclopedia: Second Edition . ABC-CLIO . ISBN 978-1-59884-921-9 . Axinn, June; Stern, Mark J. (2007). Social Welfare: A History of the American Response to Need (7th ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. ISBN 978-0-205-52215-6 . Banks, Duren; Hendrix, Joshua; Hickman, Mathhew (October 2016). "National Sources of Law Enforcement Employment Data" (PDF) . U.S. Department of Justice : 1. Baym, Nina ; Levine, Robert S. , eds. (2013).

The Norton Anthology of American Literature (Shorter 8th ed.). New York, New York: W. W. Norton & Company . ISBN 978-0-393-91885-4 . Bellah, Robert N. ; Madsen, Richard ; Sullivan, William M.; Swidler, Ann ; Tipton, Steven M. (1985). Habits of the Heart: Individualism and Commitment in American Life . University of California Press . ISBN 978-0-520-05388-5 . OL 7708974M – via Google Books . Berghahn, Volker R. (February 2010). "The debate on 'Americanization' among economic and cultural historians". Cold War History . 10 (1): 107– 130. doi : 10.1080/14682740903388566 . ISSN 1468-2745 . S2CID 144459911 . Bianchine, Peter J.; Russo, Thomas A. (1992). "The Role of Epidemic Infectious Diseases in the Discovery of America". Allergy and Asthma Proceedings . 13 (5): 225– 232. doi : 10.2500/108854192778817040 . PMID 1483570 . Biddle, Julian (2001). What Was Hot!: Five Decades of Pop Culture in America . New York: Citadel. ISBN 978-0-8065-2311-8 . Bilhartz, Terry D.; Elliott, Alan C. (2007). Currents in American History: A Brief History of the United States . M. E. Sharpe . ISBN 978-0-7656-1817-7 – via Internet Archive . Billington, Ray Allen ; Ridge, Martin (2001) . Westward Expansion: A History of the American Frontier . University of New Mexico Press . p. 22 . ISBN 978-0-8263-1981-4 . Birchell, D.B.; Steel, G. (2013). New Mexico Wine: An Enchanting History . American Palate Series (in Italian). American Palate. ISBN 978-1-60949-643-2 . Retrieved November 15, 2019 . Black, Alan (1995). Urban mass transportation planning . New York: McGraw Hill Education . ISBN 978-0-07-005557-5 . OCLC 31045097 . Black, Jeremy (2011). Fighting for America: The Struggle for Mastery in North America, 1519–1871 . Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-35660-4 . Blackhawk, Ned (2023). " 'The Centrality of Dispossession': Native American Genocide and Settler Colonialism".

In Blackhawk, Ned; Kiernan, Ben ; Madley, Benjamin; Taylor, Rebe (eds.).

The Cambridge World History of Genocide . Vol. 2: Genocide in the Indigenous, Early Modern and Imperial Worlds, from c.1535 to World War One. Cambridge University Press . pp. 23– 45. doi : 10.1017/9781108765480.002 . Blakeley, Ruth (2009). State Terrorism and Neoliberalism: The North in the South . Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-68617-4 . Bowman, Shearer Davis (1993). Masters and Lords: Mid-19th-Century U.S. Planters and Prussian Junkers . Oxford UP. ISBN 978-0-19-536394-4 . Boyer, Paul S.; Clark Jr., Clifford E.; Kett, Joseph F.; Salisbury, Neal; Sitkoff, Harvard; Woloch, Nancy (2007).

The Enduring Vision: A History of the American People . Vol. 1. Cengage Learning. p. 588. ISBN 978-0-618-80161-9 . Brinkley, Alan (January 1991). "Great Society".

In Eric Foner; John Arthur Garraty (eds.).

The Reader's Companion to American History . Houghton Mifflin Books. ISBN 978-0-395-51372-9 . Brown, Milton W. (1988).

The Story of the Armory Show (2nd ed.). New York: Abbeville Press . ISBN 978-0-89659-795-2 . Buel, Richard (1972). Securing the revolution; ideology in American politics, 1789-1815 . Cornell University Press . ISBN 978-0801491474 – via Internet Archive . Burnham, William (2006). Introduction to the Law and Legal System of the United States (4th ed.). St. Paul, Minnesota: Thomson West . ISBN 978-0-314-06661-9 . Calloway, Colin G. (1998). New Worlds for All: Indians, Europeans, and the Remaking of Early America . JHU Press . p. 229. ISBN 978-0-8018-5959-5 . Calloway, Colin G. (2019). First peoples: a documentary survey of American Indian history (6th ed.). Boston: Bedford/St. Martin's, Macmillan Learning. ISBN 978-1-319-10491-7 . OCLC 1035393060 . Carlisle, Rodney P.; Golson, J. Geoffrey (2007). Manifest destiny and the expansion of America . Turning Points in History Series. Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO. p. 238. ISBN 978-1-85109-834-7 . OCLC 659807062 . Carson, Thomas; Bonk, Mary (1999). "Industrial Revolution". Gale Encyclopedia of U.S. Economic History . Gale. Cohen, Felix S. (1942). Handbook of federal Indian law: with reference tables and index . Washington, D.C.: GPO. LCCN 42038386 . Cohen, Eliot A. (July–August 2004). "History and the Hyperpower" . Foreign Affairs . Washington, D.C . Retrieved July 14, 2006 . Coleman, Gabriella (2013). Coding Freedom . Princeton University Press . pp. 10, 201. ISBN 978-0-691-14461-0 . Collin, Robert W. (2006).

The Environmental Protection Agency: Cleaning Up America's Act . Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-33341-5 . Collins, Michael (1988). Liftoff: The Story of America's Adventure in Space . New York: Grove Press. ISBN 978-0-8021-1011-4 . Corbett, P. Scott; Janssen, Volker; Lund, John M.; Pfannestiel, Todd; Waskiewicz, Sylvie; Vickery, Paul (2014). U.S. History . Houston, Texas: OpenStax at Rice University. Coviello, Peter (2005). "Transcendentalism".

The Oxford Encyclopedia of American Literature . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-530772-6 . Retrieved October 23, 2011 – via Oxford Reference Online. "Country Profile: United States of America" . BBC News . London. April 22, 2008 . Retrieved May 18, 2008 . Davenport, Alma (1991).

The History of Photography: An Overview . University of New Mexico Press . ISBN 978-0-8263-2076-6 . Davis, Frederick T. (1932). "The Record of Ponce de Leon's Discovery of Florida, 1513" .

The QUARTERLY Periodical of THE FLORIDA HISTORICAL SOCIETY . XI (1). Archived from the original on January 5, 2023 . Retrieved March 24, 2026 . Davis, Kenneth C. (1996). Don't know much about the Civil War . New York: William Marrow and Company. p. 518 . ISBN 978-0-688-11814-3 . Davis, Glyn; Dickinson, Kay; Patti, Lisa; Villarejo, Amy (2015). Film Studies: A Global Introduction . Abingdon: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-62338-0 . Retrieved August 24, 2020 . Daynes, Byron W.; Sussman, Glen (2010). White House Politics and the Environment: Franklin D. Roosevelt to George W. Bush . Texas A&M University Press . p. 320. ISBN 978-1-60344-254-1 . OCLC 670419432 . Presidential environmental policies, 1933–2009 Derks, Marco; van den Berg, Mariecke (2020). Public Discourses About Homosexuality and Religion in Europe and Beyond . Springer International Publishing . ISBN 978-3-030-56326-4 . Dole, Charles F. (1907). "The Ethics of Speculation".

The Atlantic Monthly . Vol. C, no. December 1907. pp. 812– 818. Dubois, W. E. B. (1935). Black Reconstruction: an essay toward a history of the part which black folk played in the attempt to reconstruct democracy in America, 1860-1880 . New York: Harcourt, Brace and Co. Dumbrell, John; Schäfer, Axel (2009). America's 'Special Relationships': Foreign and Domestic Aspects of the Politics of Alliance . Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-203-87270-3 . Retrieved October 25, 2015 . Dutta, Soumitra; Lanvin, Bruno (2025). Global Innovation Index 2025: Innovation at a Crossroads . World Intellectual Property Organization . doi : 10.34667/tind.58864 . ISBN 978-92-805-3797-0 . Edmondson, Jacqueline (2013). Music in American Life: An Encyclopedia of the Songs, Styles, Stars, and Stories that Shaped our Culture : An Encyclopedia of the Songs, Styles, Stars, and Stories That Shaped Our Culture . ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-313-39348-8 . Ehrenpreis, Jamie E.; Ehrenpreis, Eli D. (April 2022). "A Historical Perspective of Healthcare Disparity and Infectious Disease in the Native American Population" .

The American Journal of the Medical Sciences . 363 (4): 288– 294. doi : 10.1016/j.amjms.2022.01.005 . ISSN 0002-9629 . PMC 8785365 . PMID 35085528 . Erlandson, Jon M.; Rick, Torben C.; Vellanoweth, Rene L. (2008). A Canyon Through Time: Archaeology, History, and Ecology of the Tecolote Canyon Area, Santa Barbara County . California: University of Utah Press. ISBN 978-0-87480-879-7 . Faingold, Eduardo D. (2018). Language Rights and the Law in the United States and Its Territories . Lexington Books. Feldstein, Sylvan G.; Fabozzi, Frank J. (2011).

The Handbook of Municipal Bonds . John Wiley & Sons . p. 1376. ISBN 978-1-118-04494-0 . Feldstein, Martin (March 2017). "Why is Growth Better in the United States Than in Other Industrial Countries?" . National Bureau of Economic Research . Cambridge, Massachusetts. doi : 10.3386/w23221 . Fiorina, Morris P. ; Peterson, Paul E. (2010).

The New American democracy (7th ed.). London: Longman. ISBN 978-0-205-78016-7 . Flannery, Tim (2015).

The Eternal Frontier: An Ecological History of North America and Its Peoples . Open Road + Grove/Atlantic. ISBN 978-0-8021-9109-0 . Foner, Eric (1988). Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution 1863-1877 . New York: Harper & Row. ISBN 978-0-06-235451-8 . OCLC 915826909 . Foner, Eric (1998).

The Story of American Freedom (1st ed.). W.W. Norton. pp. 4 –5. ISBN 978-0-393-04665-6 . story of American freedom. Foner, Eric (2020). Give Me Liberty: An American History . Vol. 1 (6th ed.). New York, New York; London, England: W.W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-44123-9 . Ebook. Fordham, Benjamin (October 2017). "Protectionist Empire: Trade, Tariffs, and United States Foreign Policy, 1890–1914". Studies in American Political Development . 31 (2): 170– 192. doi : 10.1017/s0898588x17000116 . ISSN 0898-588X . S2CID 148917255 . Fraser, Steve; Gerstle, Gary (1989).

The Rise and Fall of the New Deal Order: 1930–1980 . American History: Political science. Princeton University Press. p. 311. ISBN 978-0-691-00607-9 . Fraser, Steve (2015).

The Age of Acquiescence: The Life and Death of American Resistance to Organized Wealth and Power . Little, Brown and Company . ISBN 978-0-316-18543-1 . Froese, Paul; Uecker, Jeremy E. (September 2022). "Prayer in America: A Detailed Analysis of the Various Dimensions of Prayer" . Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion . 61 ( 3– 4): 663– 689. doi : 10.1111/jssr.12810 . ISSN 0021-8294 . S2CID 253439298 . Frymer, Paul (2017). Building an American empire: the era of territorial and political expansion . Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press . ISBN 978-1-4008-8535-0 . OCLC 981954623 . Funk, Clayton (August 2016). "9. Neo-Expressionism, Punk, and Hip Hop Emerge". A Quick and Dirty Guide to Art, Music, and Culture .

The Ohio State University. Gaddis, John Lewis (1972).

The United States and the Origins of the Cold War, 1941–1947 . Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-12239-9 . Gaĭdar, E.T. (2007). Collapse of an Empire: Lessons for Modern Russia . Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press . pp. 190– 205. ISBN 978-0-8157-3114-6 . Galloway, Patricia K., ed. (2006). "The Expedition and the Struggle for Justice" .

The Hernando de Soto Expedition: History, Historiography, and "discovery" in the Southeast . University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-7132-6 . Vigil, Ralph H. " The Expedition and the Struggle for Justice ".

In Galloway (2006) . Garretson, Jeremiah (2018). "A Transformed Society: LGBT Rights in the United States".

The Path to Gay Rights: How Activism and Coming Out Changed Public Opinion . New York University Press . ISBN 978-1-4798-5007-5 . Goodfriend, Marvin; McDermott, John (February 24, 2021). "The American System of economic growth" . Journal of Economic Growth . 26 (1): 31– 75. doi : 10.1007/s10887-021-09186-x . ISSN 1573-7020 . PMC 7902180 . PMID 33642936 . Gordon, John Steele (2004). An Empire of Wealth: The Epic History of American Economic Power . HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-009362-4 . Grabb, Edward; Baer, Douglas; Curtis, James (1999). "The Origins of American Individualism: Reconsidering the Historical Evidence" . Canadian Journal of Sociology . 24 (4). University of Alberta : 511– 533. doi : 10.2307/3341789 . ISSN 0318-6431 . JSTOR 3341789 . Gregory, James Noble (1991). American Exodus: The Dust Bowl Migration and Okie Culture in California . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-507136-8 . Greven, David (2013). Psycho-Sexual: Male Desire in Hitchcock, De Palma, Scorsese, and Friedkin . University of Texas Press . ISBN 978-0-292-74204-8 . Grinshteyn, Erin; Hemenway, David (March 2016). "Violent Death Rates: The US Compared with Other High-income OECD Countries, 2010" .

The American Journal of Medicine . 129 (3): 226– 273. doi : 10.1016/j.amjmed.2015.10.025 . PMID 26551975 . Retrieved June 18, 2017 . Grumbach, Jacob M. (December 2021). "Laboratories of Democratic Backsliding" . American Political Science Review . 117 (3): 967– 984. doi : 10.1017/S0003055422000934 . ISSN 0003-0554 . Gutfeld, Amon (2002). American Exceptionalism: The Effects of Plenty on the American Experience . Brighton and Portland: Sussex Academic Press. ISBN 978-1-903900-08-6 . Hackett, James (2023).

The Military Balance. 2023 . London: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-032-50895-5 . Haines, Michael Robert; Haines, Michael R.; Steckel, Richard H. (2000). A Population History of North America . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-49666-7 . Hagopian, Kip; Ohanian, Lee (August 2012). "The Mismeasure of Inequality" . Policy Review (174). Hoover Institution. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013 . Retrieved January 23, 2020 . Hammond, John Craig (March 2019). "President, Planter, Politician: James Monroe, the Missouri Crisis, and the Politics of Slavery" .

The Journal of American History . 105 (4): 843– 867. doi : 10.1093/jahist/jaz002 . Diner, Hasia (2001). Hungering for America: Italian, Irish, and Jewish Foodways in the Age of Migration . Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Drowne, Kathleen Morgan; Huber, Patrick (2004).

The 1920s . Greenwood Publishing Group . ISBN 978-0-313-32013-2 . Hayes, Nick (November 6, 2009). "Looking back 20 years: Who deserves credit for ending the Cold War?" . MinnPost . Retrieved March 11, 2013 . Hirschman, Charles; Mogford, Elizabeth (December 2009). "Immigration and the American Industrial Revolution From 1880 to 1920" . Social Science Research . 38 (4): 897– 920. doi : 10.1016/j.ssresearch.2009.04.001 . ISSN 0049-089X . PMC 2760060 . PMID 20160966 . Hoff-Ginsberg, Erika (April 1989). Effects of Social Class and Interactive Setting on Maternal Speech (Report). Bethesda, MD: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NIH) – via Education Resource Information Center. Republished with revisions as Hoff-Ginsberg, Erika (1991). "Mother-Child Conversation in Different Social Classes and Communicative Settings". Child Development . 62 (4): 782– 796. doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8624.1991.tb01569.x . ISSN 0009-3920 . PMID 1935343 . Hofstadter, Richard (1969).

The Idea of a Party System: The Rise of Legitimate Opposition in the United States, 1780-1840 . University of California Press. p. iv. ISBN 978-0-520-01389-6 . Retrieved October 5, 2022 . Holloway, Joseph E. (2005). Africanisms in American culture (2nd ed.). Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-21749-3 . Holsti, Ole R. (November 7, 2011). "The United States and Iraq before the Iraq War". American Public Opinion on the Iraq War . University of Michigan Press . ISBN 978-0-472-03480-2 . Hoopes, Townsend; Brinkley, Douglas (1997). FDR and the Creation of the U.N . Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-08553-2 . Hopkin, Jonathan (2020). "American Nightmare: How Neoliberalism Broke US Democracy" . Anti-System Politics: The Crisis of Market Liberalism in Rich Democracies . Oxford University Press . pp. 87– 92. doi : 10.1093/oso/9780190699765.003.0004 . ISBN 978-0-19-069976-5 . Hounshell, David A. (1984), From the American System to Mass Production, 1800–1932: The Development of Manufacturing Technology in the United States , Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press , ISBN 978-0-8018-2975-8 , LCCN 83016269 , OCLC 1104810110 Howe, Daniel Walker (2008). What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America, 1815–1848 . New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-507894-7 . Howell, Buddy Wayne (2006).

The Rhetoric of Presidential Summit Diplomacy: Ronald Reagan and the U.S.-Soviet Summits, 1985–1988 . Texas A&M University . ISBN 978-0-549-41658-6 . Hudson, Charles M. (2018). Knights of Spain, Warriors of the Sun: Hernando de Soto and the South's Ancient Chiefdoms . University of Georgia Press. ISBN 978-0-8203-5290-9 . Huntington, Samuel P. (2004). "Chapters 2–4" . Who are We?: The Challenges to America's National Identity . Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-87053-3 . Retrieved October 25, 2015 . Janson, Horst Woldemar; Janson, Anthony F. (2003). History of Art: The Western Tradition . Prentice Hall . ISBN 978-0-13-182895-7 . Jelliffe, Robert A. (1956). Faulkner at Nagano . Tokyo: Kenkyusha, Ltd. Johansen, Bruce (2006).

The Native Peoples of North America: A History, Volume 1 . Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-0-8135-3899-0 . Johnson, Paul (1997). A History of the American People . HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-195213-5 . Johnson, James Turner (2005).

The War to Oust Saddam Hussein: Just War and the New Face of Conflict . Rowman & Littlefield . ISBN 978-0-7425-4956-2 . Johnson, Fern L. (2000). Speaking culturally: language diversity in the United States . Sage Publications. ISBN 978-0-8039-5912-5 . Joseph, Paul (2016).

The Sage Encyclopedia of War: Social Science Perspectives . Sage Publications. ISBN 978-1-4833-5988-5 . Kemp, Roger L. (2010). Documents of American Democracy: A Collection of Essential Works . McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-4210-2 . Kerrigan, Finola (2010). Film Marketing . Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann. ISBN 978-0-7506-8683-9 . Retrieved February 4, 2022 . Kissinger, Henry (2011). Diplomacy . Simon & Schuster . pp. 781– 784. ISBN 978-1-4391-2631-8 . Klose, Nelson; Jones, Robert F. (1994). United States History to 1877 . B.E.S. Publishing . p. 150 . ISBN 978-0-8120-1834-9 . Kroon, Richard W. (2014). A/V A to Z: An Encyclopedic Dictionary of Media, Entertainment and Other Audiovisual Terms . McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-5740-3 . Kushi, Sidita; Toft, Monica (April 2023). "Introducing the Military Intervention Project: A New Dataset on US Military Interventions, 1776–2019" . Journal of Conflict Resolution . 67 (4): 752– 779. doi : 10.1177/00220027221117546 . ISSN 0022-0027 . Larson, Elizabeth C.; Meltvedt, Kristi R. (2021). "Women's suffrage: fact sheet" . CRS Reports (Library of Congress. Congressional Research Service) . Report / Congressional Research Service . Retrieved August 9, 2023 . Lauter, Paul, ed. (1994a).

The Heath Anthology of American Literature . Vol. 1 (2nd ed.). Lexington, Massachusetts: D.C. Heath and Company. ISBN 978-0-669-32972-8 . Lauter, Paul, ed. (1994b).

The Heath Anthology of American Literature . Vol. 2 (2nd ed.). Lexington, Massachusetts: D.C. Heath and Company. ISBN 978-0-669-32973-5 . Lease, Benjamin (1972). That Wild Fellow John Neal and the American Literary Revolution . Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-46969-0 . Lewis, Harold T. (2001). Christian Social Witness . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 53. ISBN 978-1-56101-188-9 . Lien, Arnold Johnson (1913). Studies in History, Economics, and Public Law . Vol. 54. New York: Columbia University. p. 604. Lockard, Craig (2010). Societies, Networks, and Transitions, Volume B: From 600 to 1750 . Cengage Learning. ISBN 978-1-111-79083-7 . Londré, Felicia Hardison; Watermeier, Daniel J. (1998).

The History of North American Theater: From Pre-Columbian Times to the Present . Continuum. ISBN 978-0-8264-1079-5 . OCLC 1024855967 . Lührmann, Anna ; Lindberg, Staffan I. (2019). "A third wave of autocratization is here: what is new about it?" . Democratization . 26 (7): 1097. doi : 10.1080/13510347.2019.1582029 . S2CID 150992660 . Now evidence is mounting that a global reversal is challenging a series of established democracies, including the United States who were downgraded by both Freedom House and V-Dem in 2018. Madan, Tanvi (October 2022). "The Quad as a Security Actor". Asia Policy . 17 (4): 49– 56. doi : 10.1353/asp.2022.0065 . ISSN 1559-2960 . Madley, Benjamin (2016). An American Genocide: The United States and the California Indian Catastrophe, 1846-1873 . Yale University Press . ISBN 978-0-300-23069-7 . Mann, James (2009).

The Rebellion of Ronald Reagan: A History of the End of the Cold War . Penguin Books . p. 432. ISBN 978-1-4406-8639-9 . Manweller, Mathew (2006). "Chapter 2, The Roles, Functions, and Powers of State Courts" .

The Judicial Branch of State Government: People, Process, and Politics . Santa Barbara, California : ABC-Clio . pp. 37– 96. ISBN 978-1-85109-751-7 . Retrieved October 5, 2020 . Martone, Vittorio; Piccio, Daniela R. (2023). "Political institutions, governments, and parties".

In Carlo Trigilia (ed.). Capitalisms and Democracies: Can Growth and Equality be Reconciled? . Routledge Advances in Sociology. Routledge. doi : 10.4324/9781003297130 . ISBN 978-1-003-29713-0 . McGranahan, Devan Allen; Wonkka, Carissa L. (2024). "Pyrogeography of the Western Great Plains: A 40-Year History of Fire in Semi-Arid Rangelands" . Fire . 7 (1). Bibcode : 2024Fire....7...32M . doi : 10.3390/fire7010032 . McIlwraith, Thomas F.; Muller, Edward K. (2001). North America: The Historical Geography of a Changing Continent . Rowman & Littlefield . p. 61 . ISBN 978-0-7425-0019-8 . McPherson, James M. (1988). Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era . Oxford, England; New York, New York: Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-503863-7 . Meyer, M.; Snow, D.; Snow, D.; Cohen, C.; Meyer, M.; Thornton, R.; Grinde, D.; Dilworth, L. (2001). "Indian History and Culture" .

The Oxford Companion to United States History . Oxford University Press . doi : 10.1093/acref/9780195082098.001.0001 . ISBN 978-0-19-508209-8 . Michno, Gregory (2003). Encyclopedia of Indian Wars: Western Battles and Skirmishes, 1850–1890 . Mountain Press Publishing Company . ISBN 978-0-87842-468-9 . Mintz, Sidney Wilfred (1996). Tasting Food, Tasting Freedom: Excursions Into Eating, Culture, and the Past . Beacon Press. p. 134 . ISBN 978-0-8070-4629-6 . Retrieved October 25, 2015 . Morrison, Michael A. (April 28, 1997). Slavery and the American West: The Eclipse of Manifest Destiny and the Coming of the Civil War . University of North Carolina Press . ISBN 978-0-8078-4796-1 . Morrison, James (1998). Passport to Hollywood: Hollywood Films, European Directors . SUNY Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-3938-8 . Murray, Stuart (2004). Atlas of American Military History . Infobase Publishing. p. 76. ISBN 978-1-4381-3025-5 . Norris, Pippa (February 2023). "Cancel Culture: Myth or Reality?" . Political Studies . 71 (1): 145– 174. doi : 10.1177/00323217211037023 . ISSN 0032-3217 . S2CID 238647612 . Oberlander, Jonathan (June 2010). "Long Time Coming: Why Health Reform Finally Passed" . Health Affairs . 29 (6): 1112– 1116. doi : 10.1377/hlthaff.2010.0447 . ISSN 0278-2715 . PMID 20530339 . O'Connor, Sandra Day (1997). "Lessons from the Third Sovereign: Indian Tribal Courts" (PDF) . Tulsa Law Journal . 33 (1). O'Keefe, Kevin (2005).

The Average American . New York: PublicAffairs. ISBN 978-1-58648-270-1 . Onuf, Peter S. (2010).

The Origins of the Federal Republic: Jurisdictional Controversies in the United States, 1775–1787 . University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 978-0-8122-0038-6 . Otis, James (1764).

The Rights of the British Colonies Asserted and Proved . Boston: Edes and Gill . Petto, Christine M. (2007).

When France Was King of Cartography: The Patronage and Production of Maps in Early Modern France . Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0-7391-6247-7 . Perdue, Theda; Green, Michael D. (2005).

The Columbia Guide to American Indians of the Southeast . Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-50602-1 . Philipson, Robert (2006). "The Harlem Renaissance as Postcolonial Phenomenon". African American Review . 40 (1): 145– 160. JSTOR 40027037 . Piketty, Thomas (2014). Capital in the Twenty-First Century . Belknap Press . ISBN 978-0-674-43000-6 . Poe, Tracy N. (February 1999). "The Origins of Soul Food in Black Urban Identity: Chicago, 1915–1947". American Studies International . 37 (1). Porter, Gayle (November 2010). "Work Ethic and Ethical Work: Distortions in the American Dream". Journal of Business Ethics . 96 (4). Springer : 535– 550. doi : 10.1007/s10551-010-0481-6 . JSTOR 29789736 . S2CID 143991044 . Price, Marie ; Benton-Short, Lisa (2008). Migrants to the Metropolis: The Rise of Immigrant Gateway Cities . Syracuse University Press . ISBN 978-0-8156-3186-6 . Quirk, Joel (2011).

The Anti-Slavery Project: From the Slave Trade to Human Trafficking . University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 344. ISBN 978-0-8122-4333-8 . Rank, Mark Robert (2023).

The Poverty Paradox: Understanding Economic Hardship Amid American Prosperity . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-021263-6 . Ratcliffe, Donald (2013). "The Right to Vote and the Rise of Democracy, 1787–1828". Journal of the Early Republic . 33 (2): 219– 254. doi : 10.1353/jer.2013.0033 . ISSN 0275-1275 . S2CID 145135025 . Rawls, James J. (1999). A Golden State: Mining and Economic Development in Gold Rush California . University of California Press . ISBN 978-0-520-21771-3 . Remini, Robert V. (2007).

The House: The History of the House of Representatives . HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-134111-3 . Riggs, Thomas (2015). Gale Encyclopedia of U.S. Economic History Vol. 3 (2 ed.). Gale. Ripper, Jason (2008). American Stories: To 1877 . M.E. Sharpe. p. 299. ISBN 978-0-7656-2903-6 . Rodriguez, Junius (2015). Encyclopedia of Emancipation and Abolition in the Transatlantic World (Illustrated ed.). Routledge ( Taylor & Francis ). ISBN 978-1-317-47180-6 . Rosandich, Thomas (2002). "Collegiate Sports Programs: A Comparative Analysis". Education . 122 (3). Project Innovation Austin LLC.: 471. Ryan, David (2000). Ryan, David; Pungong, Victor (eds.).

The United States and Decolonization . Springer. doi : 10.1057/9780333977958 . hdl : 1887/72726 . ISBN 978-1-349-40644-9 . Satō, Shōsuke (1886). History of the land question in the United States . Johns Hopkins University – via Google Books . Savage, Candace (2011). Prairie: A Natural History . Greystone Books. ISBN 978-1-55365-899-3 . Saxon, Theresa (October 2011). American Theatre: History, Context, Form . Edinburgh University Press. pp. 7–. ISBN 978-0-7486-3127-8 . OCLC 1162047055 . Schaus, Gerald P.; Wenn, Stephen R. (2007). Onward to the Olympics: Historical Perspectives on the Olympic Games . Wilfrid Laurier University Press . ISBN 978-0-88920-505-5 . Schultz, David Andrew (2009). Encyclopedia of the United States Constitution . Infobase Publishing. p. 904. ISBN 978-1-4381-2677-7 . Seelye, James E. Jr.; Selby, Shawn (2018). Shaping North America: From Exploration to the American Revolution . ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-4408-3669-5 . Sempa, Francis (July 2017). Geopolitics: From the Cold War to the 21st Century . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-351-51768-3 . Sewell, Elizabeth (2010). "Religious Liberty and Religious Minorities in the United States".

The Oxford Handbook of Church and State in the United States . University of Oxford . pp. 249– 275. ISBN 978-0-19-989222-8 . Shaffer, Brenda (2006).

The Limits of Culture: Islam and Foreign Policy . MIT Press . ISBN 978-0-262-19529-4 . Shi, David Emory (2016). America: A Narrative History . Vol. 1 (Brief 10th ed.). New York: W.W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-26594-1 . Sider, Sandra (2007). Handbook to Life in Renaissance Europe . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-533084-7 . Silkenat, D. (2019). Raising the White Flag: How Surrender Defined the American Civil War . Civil War America. University of North Carolina Press . ISBN 978-1-4696-4973-3 . Smeeding, T. M. (2005). "Public Policy: Economic Inequality and Poverty: The United States in Comparative Perspective". Social Science Quarterly . 86 : 955– 983. doi : 10.1111/j.0038-4941.2005.00331.x . S2CID 154642286 . Smith, Matthew; Zidar, Owen; Zwick, Eric (2022). "Top Wealth in America: New Estimates under Heterogeneous Returns".

The Quarterly Journal of Economics . 138 : 515– 573. doi : 10.1093/qje/qjac033 . ISSN 0033-5533 . Smithers, Gregory D. (2012). "Rethinking Genocide in North America".

In Bloxham, Donald ; Moses, A. Dirk (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Genocide Studies . Oxford University Press . pp. 322– 342. doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199232116.013.0017 . Soss, Joe (2010). Hacker, Jacob S.; Mettler, Suzanne (eds.). Remaking America: Democracy and Public Policy in an Age of Inequality . Russell Sage Foundation. ISBN 978-1-61044-694-5 . Stannard, David E. (1993). American Holocaust: The Conquest of the New World . New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-508557-0 . Steenkamp, Jan-Benedict E. M. (March 2024). "What is holding private label back in the United States and in emerging markets?" . Journal of Retailing . 100 (1): 56– 69. doi : 10.1016/j.jretai.2023.11.002 . ISSN 0022-4359 . Stein, Walter J. (1973). California and the Dust Bowl Migration . Greenwood Press . ISBN 978-0-8371-6267-6 . Stephens, R. H. (September 1952). "The Role Of Competition In American Life".

The Australian Quarterly . 24 (3). Australian Institute of Policy and Science : 9– 14. JSTOR 41317686 . Sundquist, James L. (1997). "The U.S. Presidential System as a Model for the World".

In Baaklini, Abdo I.; Desfosses, Helen (eds.). Designs for Democratic Stability: Studies in Viable Constitutionalism . Routledge . pp. 53– 72. ISBN 978-0-7656-0052-3 .

The New York Times Guide to Essential Knowledge: A Desk Reference for the Curious Mind (2nd ed.). St. Martin's Press . 2007. ISBN 978-0-312-37659-8 . Tinkham, Ernest R. (March 1944). "Biological, Taxonomic and Faunistic Studies on the Shield-Back Katydids of the North American Deserts".

The American Midland Naturalist . 31 (2).

The University of Notre Dame : 257– 328. doi : 10.2307/2421073 . JSTOR 2421073 . Thomas, Hugh (1997).

The Slave Trade: The Story of the Atlantic Slave Trade: 1440–1870 . Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-83565-5 . Thornton, Russell (1998). Studying Native America: Problems and Prospects . University of Wisconsin Press . ISBN 978-0-299-16064-7 . Tollefson, Jeff; Van Noorden, Richard (October 23, 2024). "The US is the world's science superpower — but for how long?" . Nature . 634 (8035): 770– 774. Bibcode : 2024Natur.634..770T . doi : 10.1038/d41586-024-03403-4 . PMID 39443789 . Travis, Jeremy; Western, Bruce; Redburn, Steve, eds. (April 2014).

The Growth of Incarceration in the United States: Exploring Causes and Consequences (Report). Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press . Bibcode : 2014nap..book18613N . doi : 10.17226/18613 . ISBN 978-0-309-29801-8 . Trelease, Allen W. (1979). White Terror: The Ku Klux Klan Conspiracy and Southern Reconstruction . New York: Harper & Row . ISBN 978-0-313-21168-3 . "United Nations Headquarters Agreement".

The American Journal of International Law . 42 (2). Cambridge University Press : 445– 447. April 1948. doi : 10.2307/2193692 . JSTOR 2193692 . S2CID 246008694 . Vaughn, Bruce (August 2008). Australia: Background and U.S. Relations . Congressional Research Service. OCLC 70208969 . Vinovskis, Maris (1990). Toward A Social History of the American Civil War: Exploratory Essays . Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-39559-5 . Vladeck, Bruce (January 2003). "Universal Health Insurance in the United States: Reflections on the Past, the Present, and the Future" . American Journal of Public Health . 93 (1): 16– 19. doi : 10.2105/ajph.93.1.16 . PMC 1447684 . PMID 12511377 . Wait, Eugene M. (1999). America and the War of 1812 . Kroshka Books . p. 78. ISBN 978-1-56072-644-9 . Walker Howe, Daniel (2007). What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America, 1815–1848 . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-972657-8 . Walton, Gary M.; Rockoff, Hugh (2009). History of the American Economy . Cengage Learning. ISBN 978-0-324-78662-0 . Ware, Leland (February 2021). "Plessy's Legacy: The Government's Role in the Development and Perpetuation of Segregated Neighborhoods" . RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences . 7 (1): 92– 109. doi : 10.7758/rsf.2021.7.1.06 . S2CID 231929202 . Waters, M. R.; Stafford, T. W. (2007). "Redefining the Age of Clovis: Implications for the Peopling of the Americas". Science . 315 (5815): 1122– 1126. Bibcode : 2007Sci...315.1122W . doi : 10.1126/science.1137166 . ISSN 0036-8075 . PMID 17322060 . S2CID 23205379 . Wilson, Kenneth G. (1993).

The Columbia guide to standard American English . New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-06989-2 . Winans, Robert B. (1976). "The Folk, the Stage, and the Five-String Banjo in the Nineteenth Century".

The Journal of American Folklore . 89 (354). American Folklore Society: 407– 437. doi : 10.2307/539294 . JSTOR 539294 . Winchester, Simon (2013).

The men who United the States . Harper Collins. pp. 198 , 216, 251, 253. ISBN 978-0-06-207960-2 . Wood, Gordon S. (1998).

The Creation of the American Republic, 1776–1787 . UNC Press Books. ISBN 978-0-8078-4723-7 . Woods, Michael E. (2012). "What Twenty-First-Century Historians Have Said about the Causes of Disunion: A Civil War Sesquicentennial Review of the Recent Literature".