The state is bordered by Rajasthan to the west, Haryana , Himachal Pradesh and Delhi to the northwest, Uttarakhand and Nepal to the north, Bihar to the east, Madhya Pradesh , Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand to the south. It is the fourth-largest Indian state by area covering 243,286 km 2 (93,933 sq mi), accounting for 7.3 per cent of the total area of India. Lucknow serves as the state capital , with Prayagraj being the judicial capital . It is divided into 18 divisions and 75 districts . Uttar Pradesh is the Indian state with the highest number of bordering states, sharing its boundaries with nine other states and one union territory. Uttar Pradesh was established in 1950 after India had become a republic. It is a successor to the United Provinces , established in 1935 by renaming the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh , in turn established in 1902 from the North-Western Provinces and the Oudh Province .

The two major rivers of the state, the Ganges and its tributary Yamuna , meet at the Triveni Sangam in Prayagraj, a Hindu pilgrimage site. Other notable rivers are Gomti and Sarayu . Most of the state is covered by the Indo Gangetic plain which is intensely farmed.

The forest cover in the state is 6.1 per cent of the state's geographical area, mainly in the northern Terai.

The cultivable area is 82 per cent of the total geographical area, and the net area sown is 68.5 per cent of the cultivable area. Uttar Pradesh encompasses several distinct cultural regions, forming a continuum from Braj and Rohilkhand in the west to Bundelkhand and Awadh in the centre and Purvanchal in the east. Hindi is the official and most widely-spoken language, with Urdu as an additional official language.

The region has been a major centre of political and cultural development throughout Indian history. It was the core area of several dominant Indian dynasties, including the Maurya , Gupta , Vardhana , Pala , Delhi Sultanate , and Mughal empires.

During the British colonial period, the area contained several princely states, notably Rampur , Benares , and Ramgadi, and played a central role in the Indian independence movement, including the Indian Rebellion of 1857 . Though long known for sugar production, the state's economy is now dominated by the services industry.

The service sector comprises travel and tourism , hotel industry , real estate , insurance and financial consultancies.

The economy of Uttar Pradesh is just the third-largest state economy in India, with ₹ 39.8 trillion (US$420 billion) in gross domestic product and a per capita GSDP of ₹152,366 The High Court of the state is located in Prayagraj .

The state plays an important role in national politics, sending 80 seats to the lower house Lok Sabha and 31 seats to the upper house Rajya Sabha . Uttar Pradesh is significant for several major world religions. It is home to many of Hinduism 's most important pilgrimage sites, including Varanasi , Mathura , Ayodhya , and Prayagraj.

The state is also important to Buddhism ; Gautama Buddha delivered his first sermon at Sarnath near Varanasi. Several sites in the state are associated with Jainism, and Uttar Pradesh has been an important centre of Islamic culture, architecture, and learning since the medieval period.

The state contains three UNESCO World Heritage Sites . History The region of present-day Uttar Pradesh has been inhabited since prehistoric times, with evidence of modern human hunter-gatherers dating to between approximately 85,000 and 72,000 years ago. Archaeological finds from the Middle and Upper Paleolithic periods (c. 31,000–21,000 years ago) have been reported, while Mesolithic or microlithic settlements, such as those at Sarai Nahar Rai in Pratapgarh , date to around 10,550–9,550 BCE and indicate subsistence patterns based on hunting, fishing, and early burial practices. Early Stone Age remains have also been identified in the Belan Valley, where tools such as hand axes and cleavers reflect long-term habitation by hunter-gatherer communities. Neolithic sites, including Koldihwa , provide evidence of early agriculture, including rice cultivation, alongside domestication of cattle, sheep, and goats, with village settlements emerging as early as 6000 BCE and gradually developing between c. 4000 and 1500 BCE. This developmental phase overlaps with broader cultural transitions from the Indus Valley Civilisation and Harappan traditions to the Vedic period .

During the Chalcolithic phase, the use of copper alongside stone tools is reflected in the Ochre Coloured Pottery culture at sites such as Atranjikhera, along with copper hoards found across the Ganga–Yamuna Doab.

The subsequent Iron Age is marked by the Painted Grey Ware culture at sites including Hastinapur and Ahichchhatra, followed by the Northern Black Polished Ware (NBPW) culture at urban centres such as Kaushambi and Varanasi, reflecting increasing urbanisation and socio-economic complexity in the region. Ancient and classical period The Dhamekh Stupa in Sarnath is where Gautama Buddha first taught the Dharma , and where the Buddhist Sangha came into existence through the enlightenment of Kondanna . Out of the sixteen mahajanapadas ( lit. ' great realms ' ) or oligarchic republics that existed in ancient India, seven fell entirely within the present-day boundaries of the state.

The kingdom of Kosala , in the Mahajanapada era, was also located within the regional boundaries of modern-day Uttar Pradesh. According to Hinduism, the divine King Rama of the Ramayana epic reigned in Ayodhya , the capital of Kosala. Krishna , another divine king of Hindu legend, who plays a key role in the Mahabharata epic and is revered as the eighth reincarnation ( Avatar ) of the Hindu god Vishnu , is said to have been born in the city of Mathura .

The aftermath of the Kurukshetra War is believed to have taken place in the area between the Upper Doab and Delhi , (in what was Kuru Mahajanapada), during the reign of the Pandava King Yudhishthira .

The kingdom of the Kurus corresponds to the Black and Red Ware and Painted Gray Ware culture and the beginning of the Iron Age in northwest India, around 1000 BCE. Control over Gangetic plains region was of vital importance to the power and stability of all of India's major empires, including the Maurya (320–200 BCE), Kushan (100–250 CE), Gupta (350–600), and Gurjara-Pratihara (650–1036) empires.

Following the Huns ' invasions that broke the Gupta empire, the Ganges-Yamuna Doab saw the rise of Kannauj .

During the reign of Harshavardhana (590–647), the Kannauj empire reached its zenith. It spanned from Punjab in the north and Gujarat in the west to Bengal in the east and Odisha in the south. It included parts of central India, north of the Narmada River and it encompassed the entire Indo-Gangetic Plain . Many communities in various parts of India claim descent from the migrants of Kannauj. Soon after Harshavardhana's death, his empire disintegrated into many kingdoms, which were invaded and ruled by the Gurjara-Pratihara empire, which challenged Bengal's Pala Empire for control of the region. Kannauj was several times invaded by the South Indian Rashtrakuta dynasty , from the 8th century to the 10th century.

After the fall of the Pala empire, the Chero dynasty ruled from the 12th century to the 18th century. Delhi Sultanate Uttar Pradesh was partially or entirely ruled by the Delhi Sultanate for 320 years (1206–1526). Five dynasties ruled over the Delhi Sultanate sequentially: the Mamluk dynasty (1206–90), the Khalji dynasty (1290–1320), the Tughlaq dynasty (1320–1414), the Sayyid dynasty (1414–51), and the Lodi dynasty (1451–1526).

The first Sultan of Delhi, Qutb ud-Din Aibak , conquered some parts of Uttar Pradesh, including Meerut , Aligarh , and Etawah . His successor, Iltutmish , expanded the Sultanate's rule over Uttar Pradesh by defeating the King of Kannauj .

During the reign of Sultan Balban , the Mamluk dynasty faced numerous rebellions in the state, but he was able to suppress them and establish his authority. Alauddin Khilji , extended his conquests to various regions in the state, including Varanasi and Prayagraj . Apart from the rulers, the Delhi Sultanate era also saw the growth of Sufism in Uttar Pradesh. Sufi saints, such as Nizamuddin Auliya and Qutbuddin Bakhtiar Kaki , lived during this period and their teachings had a significant impact on the people of the region. Sultanat era in the state also witnessed the construction of mosques and tombs, including the Atala Masjid in Jaunpur , the Jama Masjid in Fatehpur Sikri , and the Ghiyath al-Din Tughluq's Tomb in Tughlaqabad . Medieval and early modern period In the 16th century, Babur , a Timurid descendant of Timur and Genghis Khan from Fergana Valley (modern-day Uzbekistan ), swept across the Khyber Pass and founded the Mughal Empire , covering India , along with modern-day Afghanistan , Pakistan and Bangladesh .

The Mughals were descended from Persianised Central Asian Turks (with significant Mongol admixture).

In the Mughal era, Uttar Pradesh became the heartland of the empire. Mughal emperors Babur and Humayun ruled from Delhi.

In 1540 an Afghan , Sher Shah Suri , took over the reins of Uttar Pradesh after defeating the Mughal King Humanyun. Sher Shah and his son Islam Shah ruled Uttar Pradesh from their capital at Gwalior .

After the death of Islam Shah Suri , his prime minister Hemu became the de facto ruler of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, and the western parts of Bengal. He was bestowed the title of Hemchandra Vikramaditya (title of Vikramāditya adopted from Vedic period ) at his formal coronation took place at Purana Qila in Delhi on 7 October 1556. A month later, Hemu died in the Second Battle of Panipat , and Uttar Pradesh came under Emperor Akbar 's rule. Akbar ruled from Agra and Fatehpur Sikri .

In the 18th century, after the fall of Mughal authority, the power vacuum was filled by the Maratha Empire , in the mid-18th century, the Maratha army invaded the Uttar Pradesh region, which resulted in Rohillas losing control of Rohilkhand to the Maratha forces led by Raghunath Rao and Malha Rao Holkar .

The conflict between Rohillas and Marathas came to an end on 18 December 1788 with the arrest of Ghulam Qadir , the grandson of Najeeb-ud-Daula, who was defeated by the Maratha general Mahadaji Scindia .

In 1803–04, following the Second Anglo-Maratha War , when the British East India Company defeated the Maratha Empire, much of the region came under British suzerainty. British India era Timeline of reorganisation and name changes of UP 1807 Ceded and Conquered Provinces 14 November 1834 Presidency of Agra 1 January 1836 North-Western Provinces 3 April 1858 Oudh taken under British control, Delhi taken away from NWP and merged into Punjab 1 April 1871 Ajmer , Merwara & Kekri made separate commissioner-ship 15 February 1877 Oudh added to North-Western Provinces 22 March 1902 Renamed United Provinces of Agra and Oudh 3 January 1921 Renamed United Provinces of British India 1 April 1937 Renamed United Provinces 1 April 1946 Self rule granted 15 August 1947 Part of independent India 24 January 1950 Renamed Uttar Pradesh 9 November 2000 Uttaranchal state, now known as Uttarakhand , created from part of Uttar Pradesh Starting from Bengal in the second half of the 18th century, a series of battles for north Indian lands finally gave the British East India Company accession over the state's territories. Ajmer and Jaipur kingdoms were also included in this northern territory, which was named the " North-Western Provinces " (of Agra).

Although UP later became the fifth-largest state of India, NWPA was one of the smallest states of the British Indian empire. Its capital shifted twice between Agra and Allahabad. Due to dissatisfaction with British rule, a serious rebellion erupted in various parts of North India, which became known as the Indian Rebellion of 1857 ; Bengal regiment 's sepoy stationed at Meerut cantonment , Mangal Pandey , is widely considered as its starting point.

After the revolt failed, the British divided the most rebellious regions by reorganising their administrative boundaries, splitting the Delhi region from 'NWFP of Agra' and merging it with Punjab Province , while the Ajmer – Marwar region was merged with Rajputana and Oudh was incorporated into the state.

The new state was called the North Western Provinces of Agra and Oudh, which in 1902 was renamed as the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh . It was commonly referred to as the United Provinces or its acronym UP.

In 1920, the capital of the province was shifted from Allahabad to Lucknow .

The high court continued to be at Allahabad, but a bench was established at Lucknow. Allahabad continues to be an important administrative base of today's Uttar Pradesh and has several administrative headquarters. Uttar Pradesh continued to be central to Indian politics and was especially important in modern Indian history as a hotbed of the Indian independence movement .

The state hosted modern educational institutions such as the Aligarh Muslim University , Banaras Hindu University and Darul Uloom Deoband . Nationally known figures such as Ram Prasad Bismil and Chandra Shekhar Azad were among the leaders of the movement in Uttar Pradesh, and Motilal Nehru , Jawaharlal Nehru , Madan Mohan Malaviya and Govind Ballabh Pant were important national leaders of the Indian National Congress .

The All India Kisan Sabha was formed at the Lucknow session of the Congress on 11 April 1936, with the famous nationalist Sahajanand Saraswati elected as its first president, to address the longstanding grievances of the peasantry and mobilise them against the zamindari landlords' attacks on their occupancy rights, thus sparking the farmers movements in India.

During the Quit India Movement of 1942, Ballia district overthrew the colonial authority and installed an independent administration under Chittu Pandey . Ballia became known as "Baghi Ballia" (Rebel Ballia) for this significant role in India's independence movement. Post-independence After India's independence, the United Provinces were renamed "Uttar Pradesh" ( lit. ' northern province ' ), preserving UP as the abbreviation of the state's name, with the change coming into effect on 24 January 1950.

The new state was formed after the merger of several princely states and territories, including the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh , and the Delhi territory.

The state has provided nine of India's prime ministers which is more than any other state and is the source of the largest number of seats in the Lok Sabha . Despite its political influence since ancient times, its poor record in economic development and administration, poor governance, organised crime and corruption have kept it among India's backward states.

The state has been affected by repeated episodes of caste-related and communal violence .

In December 1992 the disputed Babri Mosque located in Ayodhya was demolished by Hindu activists, leading to widespread violence across India.

In 2000, northern districts of the state were separated to form the state of Uttarakhand . Geography Main article: Geography of Uttar Pradesh A part of the Gangetic Plain Uttar Pradesh, with a total area of 240,928 km 2 (93,023 sq mi), is India's fourth-largest state in terms of land area and is roughly of same size as United Kingdom. It is situated on the northern spout of India and shares an international boundary with Nepal.

The Himalayas border the state on the north, but the plains that cover most of the state are distinctly different from those high mountains.

The larger Gangetic Plain region is in the north; it includes the Ganges-Yamuna Doab , the Ghaghra plains, the Ganges plains and the Terai .

The smaller Vindhya Range and plateau region are in the south. It is characterised by hard rock strata and a varied topography of hills, plains, valleys and plateaus.

The Bhabar tract gives place to the Terai, which is covered with tall elephant grass and thick forests interspersed with marshes and swamps .

The sluggish rivers of the bhabhar deepen in this area, their course running through a tangled mass of thick undergrowth.

The Terai runs parallel to the Bhabhar in a thin strip.

The entire alluvial plain is divided into three sub-regions.

The first in the eastern tract consisting of 14 districts which are subject to periodical floods and droughts and have been classified as scarcity areas. These districts have the highest population density , which gives the lowest per capita land.

The other two regions, the central and the western , are comparatively better with a well-developed irrigation system. They suffer from waterlogging and large-scale user tracts.

The state has more than 32 large and small rivers; of them, the Ganga , Yamuna , Saraswati , Sarayu , Betwa , and Ghaghara are larger and of religious importance in Hinduism . Cultivation is intensive in the state. Uttar Pradesh falls under three agro-climatic zones viz. Middle Gangetic Plains region (Zone–IV), Upper Gangetic Plains region (Zone–V) and Central Plateau and Hills region (Zone–VIII).

The valley areas have fertile and rich soil. There is intensive cultivation on terraced hill slopes, but irrigation facilities are deficient.

The Siwalik Range which forms the southern foothills of the Himalayas , slopes down into a boulder bed called 'bhabhar'.

The transitional belt running along the entire length of the state is called the Terai and Bhabhar area. It has rich forests, cutting across it are innumerable streams which swell into raging torrents during the monsoon . Climate Main article: Climate of Uttar Pradesh Agra Climate chart ( explanation ) J F M A M J J A S O N D 9 22 8 12 25 10 10 32 16 10 39 22 16 42 27 67 41 29 196 35 27 227 34 26 113 34 24 27 34 20 3 30 14 5 24 9 █ Average max. and min. temperatures in °C █ Precipitation totals in mm Source: NOAA Imperial conversion J F M A M J J A S O N D 0.4 72 46 0.5 77 51 0.4 90 61 0.4 101 72 0.6 107 80 2.6 105 83 7.7 95 80 8.9 93 78 4.4 94 76 1.1 94 68 0.1 85 57 0.2 75 48 █ Average max. and min. temperatures in °F █ Precipitation totals in inches Monsoon clouds over Indirapuram Uttar Pradesh has a humid subtropical climate and experiences four seasons.

The winter in January and February is followed by summer between March and May and the monsoon season between June and September. Summers are extreme with temperatures fluctuating anywhere between 0–50 °C (32–122 °F) in parts of the state coupled with dry hot winds called the Loo .

The Gangetic plain varies from semiarid to sub-humid.

The mean annual rainfall ranges from 650 mm (26 in) in the southwest corner of the state to 1,000 mm (39 in) in the eastern and south eastern parts of the state. Primarily a summer phenomenon, the Bay of Bengal branch of the Indian monsoon is the major bearer of rain in most parts of state.

After summer it is the southwest monsoon which brings most of the rain here, while in winters rain due to the western disturbances and north-east monsoon also contribute small quantities towards the overall precipitation of the state.

The rain in Uttar Pradesh can vary from an annual average of 170 cm (67 in) in hilly areas to 84 cm (33 in) in Western Uttar Pradesh . Given the concentration of most of this rainfall in the four months of the monsoon, excess rain can lead to floods and then the shortage of rain can lead to droughts.

As such, these two phenomena, floods and droughts, commonly recur in the state.

The climate of the Vindhya Range and plateau is subtropical, with a mean annual rainfall between 1,000 and 1,200 mm (39 and 47 in), most of which comes during the monsoon. Typical summer months are from March to June, with maximum temperatures ranging from 30–38 °C (86–100 °F). There is a low relative humidity of around 20% and dust-laden winds blow throughout the season.

In 2011, the recorded forest area in the state was 16,583 km 2 (6,403 sq mi) which is about 6.9% of the state's geographical area.

In spite of rapid deforestation and poaching of wildlife, a diverse flora and fauna continue to exist in the state. Uttar Pradesh is a habitat for 4.2% of all species of Algae recorded in India, 6.4% of Fungi , 6.0% of Lichens , 2.9% of Bryophytes , 3.3% of Pteridophytes , 8.7% of Gymnosperms , 8.1% of Angiosperms . Several species of trees, large and small mammals , reptiles , and insects are found in the belt of temperate upper mountainous forests. Medicinal plants are found in the wild and are also grown in plantations .

The Terai–Duar savanna and grasslands support cattle. Moist deciduous trees grow in the upper Gangetic plain, especially along its riverbanks. This plain supports a wide variety of plants and animals.

The Ganges and its tributaries are the habitat of large and small reptiles, amphibians , freshwater fish, and crabs. Scrubland trees such as the Babool ( Vachellia nilotica ) and animals such as the Chinkara ( Gazella bennettii ) are found in the arid Vindhyas. Tropical dry deciduous forests are found in all parts of the plains.

Since much sunlight reaches the ground, shrubs and grasses are also abundant. Large tracts of these forests have been cleared for cultivation. Tropical thorny forests, consisting of widely scattered thorny trees, mainly babool are mostly found in the southwestern parts of the state. Uttar Pradesh is known for its extensive avifauna .

The Divisional Commissioner is an IAS officer of high seniority, and part of revenue department. Each district is divided into subdivisions, administered by a Sub-Divisional Magistrate , and again into Tehsils for land revenue administration. Each district is divided into Blocks , primarily for rural development administration, and consists of gram panchayats (village councils). These blocks consists of urban units viz. census towns and rural units called gram panchayat . Local governance comprises Panchayati Raj Institutions in rural areas — Zilla Parishads , Kshettra Panchayats , and Gram Panchayats —and urban local bodies such as Nagar Nigams ( municipal corporations ), Nagar Palikas ( municipal councils ), and Nagar Panchayats , all governed by elected councils with five-year terms. Uttar Pradesh has more metropolitan cities than any other state in India.

The absolute urban population of the state is 44.4 million, which constitutes 11.8% of the total urban population of India, the second-highest of any state.

In the 2011 census , there were 15 urban agglomerations with a population greater than 500,000. Uttar Pradesh has a complex system of municipalities. Nagar Nigam (Municipal Corporation) are urban local bodies in large cities such as Lucknow, Kanpur, Varanasi and cities having population more than 4 million. These governed by a mayor and councillors elected from wards. Nagar Palika Parishad or Municipal Council, serves medium-sized towns like Bela Pratapgarh , Jalaun , or Bisalpur and are governed by a chairperson and councillors. Nagar Panchayat which operate in smaller towns and semi-urban areas like Badlapur, Jaunpur , Bikapur , or Chilkana Sultanpur , are governed by a chairman and councillors. There are 14 Municipal Corporations . Noida and Greater Noida in Gautam Budha Nagar district are specially administered by statutory authorities under the Uttar Pradesh Industrial Development Act of 1976.

In 2011, state's cabinet ministers headed by the then Chief Minister Mayawati announced the separation of Uttar Pradesh into four different states of Purvanchal, Bundelkhand, Avadh Pradesh and Paschim Pradesh with twenty-eight, seven, twenty-three and seventeen districts, respectively, later the proposal was turned down when the Akhilesh Yadav –led Samajwadi Party came to power in the 2012 election . Demographics Main article: Demographics of Uttar Pradesh The state contributes to 16.2 per cent of India's population.

As of 2023, the estimated population of the state is around 235.7 million people.

The population density is 828 people per square kilometre, making it one of the most densely populated states in the country. It has the largest scheduled caste population, making up 23 per cent of the state's population, whereas scheduled tribes are less than 1 per cent of the total population.

The sex ratio in 2011, at 912 women to 1,000 men, was lower than the national figure of 943.

The low sex ratio in Uttar Pradesh is a result of various factors, such as sex-selective abortion , female infanticide , and discrimination against girls and women.

The state's 2001–2011 decennial growth rate (including Uttrakhand) was 20.1 per cent, higher than the national rate of 17.64 per cent.

The 2011 literacy rate was 67.7 per cent, which was below the national average of 74 per cent.

The literacy rate for men is 79 per cent and for women 59 per cent.

The 2001 literacy rate was 56 per cent overall, 67 per cent for men and 43 per cent for women. A report based on a National Statistical Office (NSO) survey revealed that Uttar Pradesh's literacy rate is 73 per cent, less than the national average of 77.7 per cent. According to the report, in the rural region, the literacy rate among men is 80.5 per cent and women is 60.4 per cent, while in urban areas, the literacy rate among men is 86.8 per cent and women is 74.9 per cent. Economically, a large number of the population lives below the poverty line .

As per a World Bank document released in 2016, the pace of poverty reduction in the state has been slower than the rest of the country. Estimates released by the Reserve Bank of India for the year 2011–12 revealed that the state had 59.819 million people below the poverty line, the most for any state in India.

The central and eastern districts in particular have very high levels of poverty.

The state is also experiencing widening consumption inequality.

As per the report of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation released in 2020, the state per capita income is below ₹ 80,000 (US$840) per annum. Religion The state's Hindu population is estimated at 186 million, making it the largest Hindu population of any state in the country. Uttar Pradesh also has an estimated 44 million Muslims, a figure that exceeds the Muslim populations of several Muslim‑majority countries, including Saudi Arabia , Iraq , Malaysia , Syria , the United Arab Emirates , and Libya . Hinduism is the predominant religion and is especially strong in rural areas. Islam is more prominent in urban areas and northwestern parts of the state. Moradabad and Rampur are the districts in which Muslims constitute an absolute majority, accounting for 50.80 per cent and 50.57 per cent of the population, respectively. Uttar Pradesh has historically been an important centre of both Buddhism and Jainism .

In Buddhism, Gautama Buddha delivered his first sermon at Sarnath after attaining enlightenment, making it one of the religion’s most significant pilgrimage sites. Other major Buddhist centres, including Kushinagar , where Buddha attained Mahaparinirvana , are located in the state. Jain Tirthankaras are believed to have been born in the state. According to Jain traditions and scriptures, Ajitanatha , the second Tirthankara, is closely associated with Ayodhya, which is also traditionally regarded as the birthplace of other Tirthankaras , including Abhinandananatha and Sumatinatha . Important Jain pilgrimage sites in the state includes Deogarh , Ahichchhatra (present-day Ramnagar ). A sizeable population of Jains lives in urban areas in the northwest part of the state.

The Sikh history of Uttar Pradesh is closely linked to the travels of the Sikh Gurus and later post-Partition migrations. Guru Nanak traveled extensively through Uttar Pradesh during his first and third Udasis (spiritual journeys). Sikh Gurus visited and established sangats (congregations) in the state. Guru Nanak visited Mathura ( Guru Nanak Bagichi ) and Varanasi ( Guru Bagh ). Guru Hargobind sent representatives to Lucknow around 1580 to establish Sikh congregations. Sikhs, mainly descendants of refugees from Partition, are settled in Prayagraj , Sultanpur , Benaras and Jaunpur , and northern districts bordering Delhi . Language Languages of Uttar Pradesh from 2011 census Hindi (80.2%) Bhojpuri (10.9%) Urdu (5.42%) Awadhi (1.90%) Others (1.59%) Uttar Pradesh is a linguistically diverse state where several Indo-Aryan languages and dialects are widely spoken.

The primary official language is Hindi , used in government, education, and media, and it is also the most widely spoken language across the state. A significant portion of the population speaks various regional languages grouped under the Hindi. These include Awadhi , spoken in Awadh in central Uttar Pradesh; Bhojpuri spoken in Purvanchal in eastern Uttar Pradesh; and Braj Bhasha spoken in the Braj region in Western Uttar Pradesh. These languages have been recognised by the state government for official use in their respective regions. Bhojpuri is the second most spoken language in the state, with nearly 11 per cent of the population using it. This is partly due to the high population density in eastern Uttar Pradesh, where Bhojpuri is predominantly spoken, compared to the central and western regions of the state. Urdu was granted the status of a second official language in 1989, through the Official Languages Act. It is spoken by approximately 5.4 per cent of the population. English is used as a means of communication for education, commerce, and governance. It is commonly spoken and employed as a language of instruction in educational institutions, as well as for conducting business transactions and managing administrative affairs. Other notable languages spoken in the state include Punjabi (0.3 per cent) and Bengali (0.1 per cent). Human Development Index In 2026, Uttar Pradesh’s Human Development Index (HDI), which is calculated on the basis of life expectancy , education, and per capita income, stands at approximately 0.600, placing the state in the medium human development category.

While the state has shown consistent, steady improvements across health, education, and per capita income over the last decade, it continues to rank in the lower third among Indian states. Governance and administration Main articles: Government of Uttar Pradesh and Vidhan Bhavan, Lucknow Uttar Pradesh Legislative Assembly (Vidhan Sabha), the lower house of the bicameral legislature The state is governed by a parliamentary system of representative democracy . Uttar Pradesh is one of the seven states in India, where the state legislature is bicameral, comprising two houses: the Vidhan Sabha (Legislative Assembly) and the Vidhan Parishad (Legislative Council).

The Legislative Assembly consists of 404 members who are elected for five-year terms.

The Legislative Council is a permanent body of 100 members with one-third (33 members) retiring every two years.

The state sends the largest number of legislators to the national Parliament.

The state contributes 80 seats to Lok Sabha , the lower house of the Indian Parliament , and 31 seats to Rajya Sabha , the upper house.

The Government of Uttar Pradesh is a democratically elected body in India with the governor as its constitutional head and is appointed by the president of India for a five-year term.

The leader of the party or coalition with a majority in the Legislative Assembly is appointed as the chief minister by the governor, and the council of ministers is appointed by the governor on the advice of the chief minister.

The governor remains a ceremonial head of the state, while the chief minister and his council are responsible for day-to-day government functions.

The Council of Ministers consists of Cabinet Ministers and Ministers of State (MoS).

The Secretariat headed by the Chief Secretary assists the council of ministers.

The Chief Secretary is also the administrative head of the government. Each government department is headed by a minister, who is assisted by an Additional Chief Secretary or a Principal Secretary , who is usually an officer of Indian Administrative Service (IAS), the Additional Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary serves as the administrative head of the department they are assigned to. Each department also has officers of the rank of Secretary, Special Secretary, Joint Secretary etc. assisting the Minister and the Additional Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary. For administration, the state is divided into 18 divisions and 75 districts. Divisional Commissioner , an IAS officer is the head of revenue administration on the divisional level.

The administration in each district is headed by a District Magistrate (DM), who is also an IAS officer, and is assisted by several officers belonging to state services.

The District Magistrate, as the head of the district administration, is responsible for revenue administration, maintenance of law and order, disaster management, conducting elections, coordination among various departments, and delivery of public services in the district.

At the block level, the Block Development Officer (BDO) is responsible for the overall development of the block .

The Uttar Pradesh Police is headed by an IPS officer of the rank of Director general of police (DGP). A Superintendent of Police (SP), an IPS officer assisted by the officers of the Uttar Pradesh Police Service, is entrusted with the responsibility of maintaining law and order and related issues in each district.

The Divisional Forest Officer (DFO), an officer belonging to the Indian Forest Service manages the forests, environment, and wildlife of the district, assisted by the officers of Provincial Forest Service and Uttar Pradesh Forest Subordinate Service. Allahabad High Court The judiciary in the state consists of the Allahabad High Court in Prayagraj , the Lucknow Bench of Allahabad High Court, district courts and session courts in each district or Sessions Division, and lower courts at the tehsil level.

The president of India appoints the chief justice of the High Court of the Uttar Pradesh judiciary on the advice of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of India as well as the governor of Uttar Pradesh. Subordinate Judicial Service, categorised into two divisions viz. Uttar Pradesh civil judicial services and Uttar Pradesh higher judicial service are another vital part of the judiciary of Uttar Pradesh.

While the Uttar Pradesh civil judicial services comprise the Civil Judges (Junior Division)/Judicial Magistrates and civil judges (Senior Division)/Chief Judicial Magistrate, the Uttar Pradesh higher judicial service comprises civil and sessions judges.

The district court of Etawah and the district court of Kanpur Dehat) of the judiciary at Uttar Pradesh is controlled by the District Judge. Politics in Uttar Pradesh has been dominated by four political parties – the Samajwadi Party , the Bahujan Samaj Party , the Bharatiya Janata Party , and the Indian National Congress .

The political landscape of the state is often characterised by intense competition and polarisation , leading to caste-based tensions and communal conflicts . Critics often suggest that despite Uttar Pradesh's significant political legacy of producing eight Prime Ministers , the state continues to struggle with issues that hinder its overall advancement. Crime and accidents According to the National Human Rights Commission of India (NHRC), Uttar Pradesh tops the list of states of encounter killings and custodial deaths.

In 2014, the state recorded 365 judicial deaths out of a total 1,530 deaths recorded in the country. NHRC further said, of the over 30,000 murders registered in the country in 2016, Uttar Pradesh had 4,889 cases. A data from Minister of Home Affairs (MHA) avers, Bareilly recorded the highest number of custodial death at 25, followed by Agra (21), Allahabad (19) and Varanasi (9). National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) data from 2011 says, the state has the highest number of crimes among any state in India, but due to its high population , the actual per capita crime rate is low.

The state also continues to top the list of states with maximum communal violence incidents. An analysis of Ministers of State of Home Affairs states (2014), 23% of all incidents of communal violence in India took place in the state. According to a research assembled by State Bank of India , Uttar Pradesh failed to improve its Human Development Index (HDI) ranking over a period of 27 years (1990–2017). Based on sub-national human development index data for Indian states from 1990 to 2017, the report also stated that the value of human development index has steadily increased over time from 0.39 in 1990 to 0.59 in 2017.

The Uttar Pradesh Police , governed by the Department of Home and Confidential , is the largest police force in the world. Uttar Pradesh also reported the highest number of deaths – 41,746 – due to road accidents till December 2022, according to "Road Accidents in India" report of Union Ministry of Road Transport and Highways .

The UP Transport Department report also indicates that the primary cause of road accident fatalities was over-speeding, which accounted for 40% of deaths. Drunken driving contributed to 10% of fatalities, while 12% of deaths were due to driving on the wrong side. Additionally, 10% of accident deaths were caused by the use of mobile phones, and 5% resulted from running red lights.

The remaining 23% of deaths were attributed to factors such as losing control of the vehicle, drowsiness, poor road visibility, and engineering defects. Between 2006 and 2010, the state has been hit with three terrorist attacks, including explosions in a landmark holy place, a court and a temple.

The 2006 Varanasi bombings were a series of bombings that occurred across the Hindu holy city of Varanasi on 7 March 2006.

At least 28 people were killed and as many as 101 others were injured.

In the afternoon of 23 November 2007, within a span of 25 minutes, six consecutive serial blasts occurred in the Lucknow, Varanasi, and Faizabad courts, in which 28 people were killed. Another blast occurred on 7 December 2010, the blast occurred at Sheetla Ghat in Varanasi in which more than 38 people were killed.

In terms of net state domestic product (NSDP), Uttar Pradesh is the fourth-largest economy in India, with an estimated gross state domestic product of ₹ 14.89 lakh crore (US$160 billion), contributing 8.4 per cent of India's gross domestic product. According to the report generated by India Brand Equity Foundation (IBEF), in 2014–15, Uttar Pradesh has accounted for 19 per cent share in the country's total food grain output. About 70 per cent of India's sugar comes from Uttar Pradesh. Sugarcane is the most important cash crop as the state is the country's largest producer of sugar.

As per the report generated by Indian Sugar Mills Association (ISMA), total sugarcane production in India was estimated to be 28.3 million tonnes in the fiscal ending September 2015 which includes 10.47 million tonnes from Maharashtra and 7.35 million tonnes from Uttar Pradesh.

The state has significant reserves of cement-grade limestone and crystalline marble , in districts of Mirzapur and Sonbhadra , supporting a growing cement and refractory industry. With 359 manufacturing clusters, cement is the top sector of SMEs in Uttar Pradesh.

The Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation (UPFC) was established in 1954 under the SFCs Act of 1951 mainly to develop small- and medium-scale industries in the state.

The UPFC also provides working capital to existing units with a soundtrack record and to new units under a single window scheme.

In July 2012, due to financial constraints and directions from the state government, lending activities were suspended except for State Government Schemes.

The state has reported total private investment worth over Rs. 25,081 crores during the years of 2012 and 2016. According to the 2024 Ease of Doing Business ranking by the Commerce and Industry ministry , Uttar Pradesh ranked among the top 10 states in India and secured the highest position among all northern states.

The state is home to over 11,500 leather production units, primarily concentrated in Agra and Kanpur, making it one of India's leading leather manufacturing regions. Uttar Pradesh also contributes around 15 per cent of India's total fabric production and employs nearly 30 per cent of the country's artisan workforce. According to the Uttar Pradesh Budget Documents (2019–20), Uttar Pradesh's debt burden is 29.8 per cent of the GSDP .

The state's total financial debt stood at ₹ 2.09 lakh crore (US$22 billion) in 2011. Uttar Pradesh has not been able to witness double-digit economic growth despite consistent attempts over the years.

The GSDP is estimated to have grown 7 per cent in 2017–18 and 6.5 per cent in 2018–19 which is about 10 per cent of India's GDP. According to a survey conducted by the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE), Uttar Pradesh's unemployment rate increased 11.4 percentage points, rising to 21.5 per cent in April 2020. Uttar Pradesh has the largest number of net migrants migrating out of the state.

The 2011 census data on migration shows that nearly 14.4 million (14.7 per cent) people had migrated out of Uttar Pradesh. Marriage was cited as the predominant reason for migration among females. Among males, the most important reason for migration was work and employment. Uttar Pradesh continues to have regional disparities, particularly with the western districts of the state showing higher development indicators such as per capita district development product (PCDDP) and gross district development product (GDDP) compared to other regions. Due to inadequate infrastructure and a dense population, Purvanchal faces notable socio-economic disparities. For 2021–22 the GDDP for Purvanchal it is ₹5.37 lakh crore, while for Western Uttar Pradesh (including the Upper Doab , Rohilkhand and Braj ) it is ₹9.44 lakh crore. For the Bundelkhand and Awadh regions, the GDDP remained ₹99,029.34 crore and ₹3.36 lakh crore, respectively.

As of 2021–22, the per capita annual income in eastern districts is about one-fourth of the national average at ₹12,741 while the state's average stood at ₹17,349. IT Parks in Noida, which are known for their infrastructure and services, as well as high-end housing complexes.

In 2009–10, the tertiary sector of the economy (service industries) was the largest contributor to the gross domestic product of the state, contributing 44.8 per cent of the state domestic product compared to 44 per cent from the primary sector (agriculture, forestry, and tourism) and 11.2 per cent from the secondary sector (industrial and manufacturing). Noida , Meerut , and Agra rank as the top 3 districts with the highest per capita income, whereas Lucknow and Kanpur rank 7th and 9th in per capita income.

During the 11th five-year plan (2007–2012), the average gross state domestic product (GSDP) growth rate was 7.3 per cent, lower than 15.5 per cent, the average for all states of the country.

The state's per capita GSDP was ₹ 29,417 (US$310), lower than the national per capita GSDP of ₹ 60,972 (US$640). Labor efficiency is higher at an index of 26 than the national average of 25. Textiles and sugar refining, both long-standing industries in Uttar Pradesh, employ a significant proportion of the state's total factory labour.

The economy also benefits from the state's tourism industry. Transportation Further information: List of state highways in Uttar Pradesh , List of airports in Uttar Pradesh , and Uttar Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation A section of the Delhi–Noida Direct Flyway Uttar Pradesh has the largest railway network in the country, but in relative terms has only sixth-highest railway density despite its plain topography and largest population.

As of 2015 , there were 9,077 km (5,640 mi) of rail in the state.

The railway network in the state is controlled by two divisions of the Indian Railways viz. North Central Railway and North Eastern Railway. Prayagraj is the headquarters of the North Central Railway and Gorakhpur is the headquarters of the North Eastern Railway . Lucknow and Moradabad serve as divisional Headquarters of the Northern Railway Division.

The Lucknow Swarna Shatabdi Express , the second fastest Shatabdi Express train, connects the Indian capital of New Delhi to Lucknow while Kanpur Shatabdi Express , connects New Delhi to Kanpur Central . This was the first train in India to get the new German LHB coaches .

The railway stations of Prayagraj Junction , Agra Cantonment , Lucknow Charbagh, Gorakhpur Junction , Kanpur Central, Mathura Junction and Varanasi Junction are included in the Indian Railways list of 50 world-class railway stations.

The Lucknow Metro , along with the Kanpur Metro (Orange line), are rapid transit systems that serve Lucknow and Kanpur, respectively.

The state has a large, multimodal transportation system with the largest road network in the country. It has 42 national highways, with a total length of 4,942 km (3,071 miles) comprising 8.9% of the total national highways length in India.

The Uttar Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation (UPSRTC) was established in 1972 to provide transportation in the state with connecting services to adjoining states.

The UPSRTC's fleet consists of 11,238 buses operating on 2,762 routes across a total distance of 768,065 km (477,253 mi) throughout the state, generating an average daily income of ₹ 16 crore (US$1.7 million). Despite its extensive operation, many of UPSRTC buses are now outdated and unreliable, raising concerns about their condition and the impact on passenger safety. All cities are connected to state highways , and all district headquarters are being connected with four lane roads which carry traffic between major centres within the state. One of them is Agra–Lucknow Expressway , which is a 302 km (188 miles) controlled-access highway constructed by UPEIDA . Uttar Pradesh has the highest road density in India – 1,027 km (638 miles) per 1,000 km 2 (390 square miles) – and the largest surfaced urban-road network in the country – 50,721 km (31,517 miles). IGRUA's Trinidad TB-20 aircraft taking off By passenger traffic in India, Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport in Lucknow and Lal Bahadur Shastri Airport in Varanasi, are the major international airports and the main gateway to the state. Another international airport has been built at Kushinagar . However, since its inauguration, Kushinagar International Airport has not yet seen any outbound flights to international destinations. Ayodhya Airport , officially known as Maharshi Valmiki International Airport, was inaugurated on 30 December 2023 and currently facilitates domestic air travel. Uttar Pradesh has six domestic airports located at Agra , Allahabad , Bareilly , Ghaziabad , Gorakhpur and Kanpur . Under the collaboration with civilian aviation authority , these domestic airports are primarily used by the Indian Air Force for operational flexibility, especially during emergencies or natural disasters. Developed under Regional Connectivity Scheme ( UDAN ), Chitrakoot Airport is the first and only airport in the Bundelkhand region.

Although inaugurated in 2024, the airport has remained largely inactive due to low passenger traffic, and flight operations were suspended in December 2024 owing to poor visibility and operational challenges. Similarly, the airports in Azamgarh , Aligarh , Moradabad , Shravasti , and Saharanpur have faced temporary closures due to limited commercial viability, low passenger traffic, and a shortage of suitable aircraft.

The Uttar Pradesh football team (UPFS) serves as the governing body for football in Uttar Pradesh. It holds authority over the Uttar Pradesh football team and is officially affiliated with the All India Football Federation .

The UPFS participates in sending state teams to compete in all National Football Championships organised by the All India Football Federation. Additionally, the UPFS oversees two Mandal Football Associations: the Aligarh Football Association and the Kanpur Football Association.

The Uttar Pradesh Badminton Association is a sports body affiliated to Badminton Association of India responsible for overseeing players representing Uttar Pradesh at the national level.

The Buddh International Circuit hosted India's inaugural F1 Grand Prix race on 30 October 2011. Races were only held three times before being cancelled due to falling attendance and lack of government support.

As cultures travelled through the region they brought their bodies of knowledge with them, adding Pali , Persian and Arabic scholarship to the community. These formed the core of Hindu-Buddhist-Muslim education until the rise of British colonialism.

The present schools-to-university system of education owes its inception and development in the state (as in the rest of the country) to foreign Christian missionaries and the British colonial administration . Schools in the state are either managed by the government or by private trusts. Hindi is used as a medium of instruction in most of the schools except those affiliated to the CBSE or the council for ICSE boards. Under the 10+2+3 plan , after completing secondary school, students typically enroll for two years in a junior college , also known as pre-university, or in schools with a higher secondary facility affiliated with the Uttar Pradesh Board of High School and Intermediate Education (commonly referred to as U.P. Board) or a central board. Students choose from one of three streams, namely liberal arts , commerce, or science. Upon completing the required coursework, students may enrol in general or professional degree programs.

In a study done by Child Rights and You (CRY) and the Centre for Budgets, Governance, and Accountability (CBGA), Uttar Pradesh spent ₹9,167 per pupil , which is below the national average of ₹12,768.

The pupil/teacher ratio is 39:1, lower than the national average of 23:1. According to the National Bureau of Economic Research , the state reported the second-highest teacher absenteeism (31%) in rural public schools among 19 surveyed states. According to an answer given by the Union Education Minister in 2020 in the Lok Sabha, about 17.1% of all elementary teacher posts in government schools in Uttar Pradesh are vacant.

In terms of absolute numbers, the figure stands at 210,000.

In February 2024, the Uttar Pradesh government informed legislative assembly that, 85,152 posts of headmasters and assistant teachers are vacant in the state. La Martiniere college , Lucknow Uttar Pradesh has more than 45 universities, including six central universities , twenty eight state universities , eight deemed universities , two IITs in Varanasi and Kanpur , AIIMS Gorakhpur and AIIMS Rae Bareli , an IIM in Lucknow Founded in 1845, La Martinière Girls' College in Lucknow, stands as one of the oldest schools in India. Located in Amethi, Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology (RGIPT), provides education and training in STEM fields, particularly emphasising the petroleum industry. With deemed university status, the RGIPT awards degrees in its own right. King George's Medical University (KGMU), located in Lucknow, is an institution for medical education, research, and healthcare services.

The Integral University , a state level institution, was established by the Uttar Pradesh Government to provide education in different technical, applied science , and other disciplines .

The Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies was founded as an autonomous organisation by the national ministry of culture . Jagadguru Rambhadracharya Handicapped University is the only university established exclusively for the disabled in the world.

The Taj Mahal attracts some 7 million people a year, earning almost ₹ 98 crore (US$10 million) in ticket sales in 2023–24.

The state is home to three World Heritage Sites : the Taj Mahal , Agra Fort , and the nearby Fatehpur Sikri . Religious tourism plays a significant role in the state's economy. Varanasi is a major religious hub and one of the seven sacred cities ( Sapta Puri ) in Hinduism and Jainism . Vrindavan is considered to be a holy place for Vaishnavism . Sravasti generally considered as revered sites in Buddhism , believed to be where the Buddha taught many of his Suttas (sermons). Owing to the belief as to the birthplace of Rama , Ayodhya (Awadh) has been regarded as one of the seven most important pilgrimage sites. Millions gather at Prayagraj to take part in the Magh Mela festival on the banks of the Ganges. This festival is organised on a larger scale every 12th year and is called the Kumbh Mela , where over 10 million Hindu pilgrims congregate in one of the largest gatherings of people in the world. Deogarh temple is an early example of Nagara-style Hindu architecture Buddhist attractions in Uttar Pradesh include stupas and monasteries .

The historically important towns of Sarnath where Gautama Buddha gave his first sermon after his enlightenment and died at Kushinagar ; both of which are important pilgrimage sites for Buddhists . Also at Sarnath are the Pillars of Ashoka and the Lion Capital of Ashoka , both important archaeological artefacts with national significance.

At a distance of 80 km (50 miles) from Varanasi, Ghazipur is famous for its Ghats on the Ganges and for the tomb of Lord Cornwallis , the 18th-century Governor of East India Company ruled Bengal Presidency .

The tomb is maintained by the Archaeological Survey of India . Jhansi Fort , located in the city of Jhansi , is closely associated with the "First War of Indian Independence", also known as the "Great Rebellion" or the Indian Rebellion of 1857 .

The fort is constructed in accordance with medieval Indian military architecture, featuring thick walls, bastions, and various structures within its complex.

The architecture reflects a blend of Hindu and Islamic styles. Healthcare District Hospital, Kanpur Dehat Uttar Pradesh has a mix of public as well as private healthcare infrastructure. Public healthcare in Uttar Pradesh is provided through a grid of primary health centres, community health centres , district hospitals , and medical colleges .

Although an extensive network of public and private sector healthcare providers has been built, the available health infrastructure is inadequate to meet the demand for health services in the state.

In 15 years to 2012–13, the population increased by more than 25%.

The public health centres, which are the frontline of the government's health care system, decreased by 8%. Smaller sub-centres, the first point of public contact, increased by no more than 2% over the 25 years to 2015, a period when the population grew by more than 51%.

The state is also facing challenges such as a shortage of healthcare professionals, increasing cost of healthcare, a lack of essential medicines and equipment, the mushrooming of private healthcare and a lack of planning.

The number of doctors registered with State Medical Councils or the Medical Council of India in Uttar Pradesh was 77,549.

In 2019, the number of government hospital in rural and urban areas of Uttar Pradesh stood at 4,442 with 39,104 beds and 193 with 37,156 beds respectively.

The average population served per government hospital stands at 47,782 individuals.

As of December 2023 , Out-of-pocket expenditures in Uttar Pradesh is ₹ 60,883 crore (US$6.4 billion), highest in India. A newborn in Uttar Pradesh is expected to live four years fewer than in the neighbouring state of Bihar , five years fewer than in Haryana and seven years fewer than in Himachal Pradesh .

The state contributed to the largest share of almost all communicable and noncommunicable disease deaths, including 48% of all typhoid deaths (2014); 17% of cancer deaths and 18% of tuberculosis deaths (2015). Its maternal mortality ratio is higher than the national average at 285 maternal deaths for every 100,000 live births (2021), with 64.2% of pregnant women unable to access minimum ante-natal care . Around 42% of pregnant women, more than 1.5 million, deliver babies at home . About two-thirds (61%) of childbirths at home in the state are unsafe. It has the highest child mortality indicators, from the neonatal mortality rate to the under-five mortality rate of 64 children who die per 1,000 live births before five years of age, 35 die within a month of birth, and 50 do not complete a year of life. Culture Main article: Culture of Uttar Pradesh Language and literature Main article: Languages of Uttar Pradesh The battle of Kurukshetra , folio from the Mahabharata Several texts and hymns of the Vedic literature were composed in Uttar Pradesh. Renowned Indian writers who have resided in Uttar Pradesh were Kabir , Ravidas , and Tulsidas , who wrote much of his Ram Charit Manas in Varanasi.

The festival of Guru Purnima is dedicated to Sage Vyasa , and also known as Vyasa Purnima as it is the day which is believed to be his birthday and also the day he divided the Vedas. Hindi became the language of state administration with the Uttar Pradesh Official Language Act of 1951. A 1989 amendment to the act added Urdu , as an additional language of the state. There are numerous language varieties spoken in the state.

The north and northwestern parts of the state speak Khadi Boli , the language variety from which Standard Hindi and Urdu developed.

In the southwest is spoken Braj Bhasha , seen as the language of Krishna and an important literary language for Krishna Bhakti literature. To the east of Braj and Khadi Boli is Kannauji , a transitional dialect between western and eastern Hindi varieties.

In the southwest of the state, south of the Yamuna, is spoken Bundeli . Awadhi , the language of the Ram Charit Manas, is spoken in the centre of the state with small pockets of Bagheli speakers in the far southeast. East of Awadhi is spoken Bhojpuri . Rather than having clean linguistic boundaries, these language varieties form part of one large dialect continuum covering north and east India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.

In urban areas, Standard Hindi and Urdu are dominant, with Lucknow being a major centre for Urdu literature. Music and dance Main article: Music of Uttar Pradesh With each district of Uttar Pradesh having its unique music and tradition, traditional folk music in Uttar Pradesh has been categorised in three different ways including music transmitted orally, music with unknown composers and music performed by custom.

During the medieval period, two distinct types of music began to emerge in Uttar Pradesh. One was the courtly music, which received support from cities like Agra, Fatehpur Sikri , Lucknow, Jaunpur, Varanasi, and Banda .

The other was the religious music stemming from the Bhakti Cult , which thrived in places like Mathura, Vrindavan, and Ayodhya.

The popular folk music of Uttar Pradesh includes sohar, which is sung to celebrate the birth of a child. Evolved into the form of semi-classical singing, Kajari sung during the rainy season, and its singing style is closely associated the Benares gharana. Ghazal , Thumri and Qawwali which is a form of Sufi poetry is popular in the Awadh region, Rasiya (especially popular in Braj ), which celebrate the divine love of Radha and Krishna . Khayal is a form of semi-classical singing which comes from the courts of Awadh. Other forms of music are Biraha , Chaiti , Chowtal , Alha , and Sawani . Kathak , a classical dance form, owes its origin to the state of Uttar Pradesh. Ramlila is one of the oldest dramatic folk dances; it depicts the life of the Hindu deity Rama and is performed during festivals such as Vijayadashami . Nautanki is a traditional form of folk theatre that originated in Uttar Pradesh. It typically portrays a variety of themes ranging from historical and mythological tales to social and political commentary.

In the gharana dance form, both the Lucknow and the Benares gharanas are situated in the state. Charkula is popular dance of the Braj region. Fairs and festivals Uttar Pradeshi thali with naan , sultani dal , raita , and shahi paneer Chhath Puja is the biggest festival of eastern Uttar Pradesh .

The Kumbh Mela , organised in the month of Maagha (February—March), is a major festival held every twelve years in rotation at Prayagraj on the river Ganges. Lathmar Holi is a local celebration of the Hindu festival of Holi . It takes place well before the actual Holi in the town of Barsana near Mathura. Taj Mahotsav , held annually at Agra, is a colourful display of the culture of the Braj area. Ganga Mahotsav , a festival of Kartik Purnima , is celebrated fifteen days after Diwali. Cuisine Main article: Cuisine of Uttar Pradesh Mughlai cuisine is a style of cooking developed in the Indian subcontinent by the imperial kitchens of the Mughal Empire . It represents the cooking styles used in North India , especially Uttar Pradesh, and has been strongly influenced by Central Asian cuisine . Awadhi cuisine from the city of Lucknow consists of both vegetarian and non-vegetarian dishes. It has been greatly influenced by Mughlai cuisine. Bhojpuri cuisine is a style of food preparation common in the districts located near the Bihar border. Bhojpuri foods are mostly mild and tend to be less hot in terms of spices used.

The Rise of Civilization in India and Pakistan . Cambridge University Press. p. 58. ISBN 052128550X . Archived from the original on 25 March 2017 . Retrieved 23 July 2012 . ^ Hasmukhlal Dhirajlal Sankalia; Shantaram Bhalchandra Deo; Madhukar Keshav Dhavalikar (1985). Studies in Indian Archaeology: Professor H.D. Sankalia Felicitation Volume . Popular Prakashan. p. 96. ISBN 978-0861320882 . Archived from the original on 24 March 2017. ^ Gibling, Sinha; Sinha, Roy; Roy, Tandon; Tandon, Jain; Jain, M (2008). "Quaternary fluvial and eolian deposits on the Belan river, India: paleoclimatic setting of Paleolithic to Neolithic archeological sites over the past 85,000 years". Quaternary Science Reviews . 27 ( 3– 4): 391. Bibcode : 2008QSRv...27..391G . doi : 10.1016/j.quascirev.2007.11.001 . ISSN 0277-3791 . S2CID 129392697 . ^ Kenneth A. R. Kennedy (2000). God-apes and Fossil Men . University of Michigan Press. p. 263. ISBN 0472110136 . Archived from the original on 24 March 2017 . Retrieved 23 July 2012 . ^ Bridget Allchin, Frank Raymond Allchin (1982).

The Rise of Civilization in India and Pakistan . Cambridge University Press. p. 119. ISBN 052128550X . Archived from the original on 3 March 2018 . Retrieved 23 July 2012 . ^ Misra, V N (November 2001). "Prehistoric human colonization of India" . Journal of Biosciences . 26 (4 Supp). Indian Academy of Sciences : 491– 531. Bibcode : 2001JBios..26..491M . doi : 10.1007/bf02704749 . PMID 11779962 . S2CID 26248907 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2017 . Retrieved 19 September 2017 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh – History" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on 1 April 2020 . Retrieved 12 January 2020 . A systematic history of India and the area of Uttar Pradesh dates to the end of the 7th century BCE, when 16 mahajanapadas (great states) in northern India were contending for supremacy. Of those, seven fell entirely within the present-day boundaries of Uttar Pradesh. ^ a b c d Sailendra Nath Sen (1999). Ancient Indian History And Civilization . New Age International. pp. 105– 106. ISBN 978-8122411980 . Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 1 October 2012 . ^ William Buck (2000). Ramayana . Motilal Banarsidass. ISBN 978-8120817203 . Archived from the original on 4 June 2013 . Retrieved 1 October 2012 . ^ Richard White (2010).

The Middle Ground: Indians, Empires, and Republics in the Great Lakes Region, 1650–1815 . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1107005624 . Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 1 October 2012 . ^ a b Marshall Cavendish Corporation (2007). World and Its Peoples: Eastern and Southern Asia . Marshall Cavendish. pp. 331– 335. ISBN 978-0761476313 . Archived from the original on 5 June 2013 . Retrieved 1 October 2012 . ^ a b Pran Nath Chopra (2003). A Comprehensive History of Ancient India . Sterling Publishers Pvt. Ltd. p. 196. ISBN 978-8120725034 . Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 1 October 2012 . ^ a b John Stewart Bowman (2000). Columbia Chronologies of Asian History and Culture . Columbia University Press. p. 273 . ISBN 978-0231110044 . Retrieved 2 August 2012 . ^ The History of India by Kenneth Pletcher p. 102 ^ The City in South Asia by James Heitzman p. 37 ^ Singh, Pradyuman (19 January 2021). Bihar General Knowledge Digest . Prabhat Prakashan. ISBN 978-9352667697 . ^ * Srivastava, Ashirvadi Lal (1929).

The Sultanate of Delhi 711–1526 A D . Shiva Lal Agarwala & Company. Archived from the original on 8 April 2016 . Retrieved 29 April 2018 . ^ Islam; Bosworth (1998). History of Civilizations of Central Asia . UNESCO. pp. 269– 291. ISBN 978-9231034671 . Archived from the original on 28 March 2024 . Retrieved 21 May 2020 . ^ "Atala Masjid" . District Jaunpur, Government of Uttar Pradesh . 20 June 2017 . Retrieved 6 May 2024 . ^ Datta, Rangan (22 July 2022). "The tomb of Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq" . Telegraph India . Retrieved 6 May 2024 . ^ "The Islamic World to 1600: Rise of the Great Islamic Empires (The Mughal Empire)" . Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. ^ Annemarie Schimmel (2004).

The Empire of the Great Mughals: History, Art and Culture . Reaktion Books. ISBN 978-1861891853 . Retrieved 1 October 2012 . ^ Babur (Emperor of Hindustan); Dilip Hiro (2006). Babur Nama: Journal of Emperor Babur . Penguin Books India. ISBN 978-0144001491 . Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 1 October 2012 . ^ Carlos Ramirez-Faria (2007). Concise Encyclopedia of World History . Atlantic Publishers & Dist. p. 171. ISBN 978-8126907755 . Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 2 August 2012 . ^ Stronge, Susan (2012). Mughal Hindustan is renowned for its opulence . London: The Arts of the Sikh Kingdoms. p. 255. ISBN 9788174366962 . Archived from the original on 16 February 2017 . Retrieved 23 July 2012 . ^ Ashvini Agrawal (1983). Studies in Mughal History . Motilal Banarsidass. pp. 30– 46. ISBN 978-8120823266 . Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 27 July 2012 . ^ Fergus Nicoll, Shah Jahan: The Rise and Fall of the Mughal Emperor (2009) ^ Mayaram, Shail (2003). Against history, against state: counterperspectives from the margins Cultures of history . Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0231127318 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh Day: How the state was born 67 years back" . 3 May 2017. Archived from the original on 3 May 2017 . Retrieved 3 May 2017 . ^ Gyanesh Kudaisya (1994). Region, nation, "heartland": Uttar Pradesh in India's body-politic . LIT Verlag Münster. pp. 126– 376. ISBN 978-3825820978 . ^ K. Sivaramakrishnan (1999). Modern Forests: Statemaking and Environmental Change in Colonial Eastern India . Stanford University Press. pp. 240– 276. ISBN 978-0804745567 . Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 26 July 2012 . ^ Ashutosh Joshi (2008). Town Planning Regeneration of Cities . New India Publishing. p. 237. ISBN 978-8189422820 . Archived from the original on 3 March 2018. ^ Rudrangshu Mukherjee (2005). Mangal Pandey: brave martyr or accidental hero? . Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0143032564 . Archived from the original on 5 June 2013 . Retrieved 1 October 2012 . ^ United Provinces of Agra and Oudh (India); D.L. Drake-Brockman (1934). District Gazetteers of the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh: supp.D.Pilibhit District . Supdt., Government Press, United Provinces. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 1 October 2012 . ^ Dilip K. Chakrabarti (1997). Colonial Indology: sociopolitics of the ancient Indian past . Michigan: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers Pvt. Ltd. p. 257. ISBN 978-8121507509 . Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 26 July 2012 . ^ Bernard S. Cohn (1996). Colonialism and Its Forms of Knowledge: The British in India . Princeton University Press. p. 189. ISBN 978-0691000435 . Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 26 July 2012 . ^ Clare M. Wilkinson-Weber (1999). Embroidering Lives: Women's Work and Skill in the Lucknow Embroidery Industry . SUNY Press. p. 18. ISBN 978-0791440872 . Archived from the original on 28 March 2024 . Retrieved 24 May 2020 . ^ Mathur, Prakash Narain. "A History of the Lucknow Bench Of The Allahabad High Court" (PDF) . Allahabad High Court. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 February 2021 . Retrieved 24 May 2020 . ^ K. Balasankaran Nair (2004). Law of Contempt of Court in India . Atlantic Publishers & Dist. p. 320. ISBN 978-8126903597 . Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 26 July 2012 . ^ Śekhara, Bandyopādhyāya (2004).

From Plassey to Partition: A History of Modern India . Orient Longman . p. 407. ISBN 978-8125025962 . ^ Bandyopādhyāya, Śekhara (2004).

From Plassey to Partition: A History of Modern India . Orient Longman . p. 406. ISBN 978-8125025962 . ^ Bankim Chandra Chatterji (2006). Anandamath . Orient Paperbacks. p. 168. ISBN 978-8122201307 . Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 26 July 2012 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh – States and Union Territories" . Know India: National Portal of India . Archived from the original on 15 July 2015 . Retrieved 14 July 2015 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh" . What is India. 22 August 2007. Archived from the original on 12 October 2016 . Retrieved 8 October 2016 . ^ "Communal violence" . Business Standard . Ananda Publishers . Kotak Mahindra Bank . 6 August 2014. Archived from the original on 26 August 2014 . Retrieved 25 August 2014 . ^ communal violence, in uttar pradesh. "Communal conflicts in state" . Tehalka . Archived from the original on 12 January 2014 . Retrieved 12 January 2014 . ^ J. C. Aggarwal; S. P. Agrawal (1995). Uttarakhand: Past, Present, and Future . Concept Publishing Company of India. p. 391. ISBN 978-8170225720 . Archived from the original on 24 March 2017. ^ "Most critical factors" . Uttar Pradesh climate department. Archived from the original on 15 December 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh Geography" . Uttar Pradesh State Profile. Archived from the original on 23 July 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ "The larger Gangetic Plain" (PDF) . Gecafs . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 December 2013 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ "Gangetic Plains and Vindhya Hills and plateau" . Zee news . Archived from the original on 6 April 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ Anwar, S. (2018). "List of major canals and dams in Uttar Pradesh" . Dainik Jagran . Jagran Prakashan Limited. Archived from the original on 22 June 2020 . Retrieved 21 June 2020 . ^ "Indo–African Journal for Resource Management" (PDF) . Indo–African Journal for Resource Management and Planning. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 April 2022 . Retrieved 21 June 2020 . ^ Anwar, S. "The Great Plains of India" . Dainik Jagran . Archived from the original on 21 November 2017 . Retrieved 19 May 2020 . ^ Clift, C. (1977). "Progress of irrigation in Uttar Pradesh: East-West Differences". Economic and Political Weekly . 12 (39): A83– A90. ^ Meena, R. P. Uttar Pradesh Current Affairs Yearbook 2020 . New Era Publication. p. 6. GGKEY:XTXLJ8SQZFE. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024 . Retrieved 19 May 2020 . ^ "Rivers of Uttar Pradesh" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 7 May 2013 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ "The Glossary of Meteorology" . Allen Press Inc. Archived from the original on 5 October 2012 . Retrieved 23 July 2012 . ^ "Agriculture Mechanization Guide for Uttar Pradesh" . Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India. Archived from the original on 16 May 2021 . Retrieved 16 May 2021 . ^ "Potential Creation and Utilisation" . Irrigation department U.P. Archived from the original on 13 February 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ "Purports to define every important meteorological term likely to be found in the literature today" . Allen Press, Inc. Archived from the original on 12 July 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ Singh, V. (1998). Mountain Ecosystems: A Scenario of Unsustainability . Indus Publishing. pp. 102– 264. ISBN 978-8173870811 . Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 27 July 2012 . ^ a b c d Upkar Prakashan – Editorial Board (2008). Uttar Pradesh General Knowledge . Upkar Prakashan. pp. 26–. ISBN 978-8174824080 . Archived from the original on 5 June 2013 . Retrieved 9 March 2011 . ^ a b c "Climate change impacts" . Uttar Pradesh climate department. Archived from the original on 15 November 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ S.V.S. Rana (2007), Essentials of Ecology and Environmental Science , Prentice Hall of India, ISBN 978-81-203-3300-0 ^ Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow, Irrigation Department Uttar Pradesh. "Average rainfall pattern of Uttar Pradesh" . Irrigation Department Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 24 August 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ Sethi, N. (2007). "Met dept blames it on 'western disturbance' " .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 9 March 2011 . ^ "State Animal, Bird, Tree and Flower" . Panna Tiger Reserve . Archived from the original on 13 October 2014 . Retrieved 29 August 2014 . ^ "Music & Dance" . uptourism.gov.in . Uttar Pradesh Tourism. Archived from the original on 23 January 2017 . Retrieved 3 March 2017 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh Forest Corporation" . Forest department uttar pradesh. Archived from the original on 20 January 2013 . Retrieved 23 July 2012 . ^ "Forest and tree resources in states and union territories: Uttar Pradesh" (PDF) . India state of forest report 2009 . Forest Survey of India, Ministry of Environment & Forests, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 November 2013 . Retrieved 4 March 2012 . ^ "Floral and Faunal Diversity of Uttar Pradesh" . Uttar Pradesh State Biodiversity Board. Archived from the original on 5 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 May 2020 . ^ "Aegyptica" . Bsienvis.nic.in. Archived from the original on 6 May 2009 . Retrieved 21 September 2009 . ^ "Bird Sanctuary" . U.P. Tourism. Archived from the original on 4 July 2012 . Retrieved 23 July 2012 . ^ "Sanctuary Park in U.P" . U.P tourism. Archived from the original on 18 July 2012 . Retrieved 23 July 2012 . ^ "Few patches of natural forest" . State government of Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 20 May 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ The Forests and biodiversity, in UP are important in many ways. "Miscellaneous Statistics" . Ministry of Environment and Forests. Archived from the original on 15 November 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ "Conservation of the Avifauna" (PDF) . Dudhwa National Park . Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 July 2012 . Retrieved 20 July 2012 . ^ "Bakhira Bird Sanctuary" . upforest.gov.in . UP Forest and Wildlife Department. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017 . Retrieved 4 February 2017 . ^ "National Chambal Gharial Wildlife Sanctuary" . National Chambal Sanctuary. Archived from the original on 1 January 2017 . Retrieved 4 February 2017 . ^ "Chandra Prabha Wildlife Sanctuary And Picnic Spots" . uptourism.gov.in . Uttar Pradesh Tourism. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017 . Retrieved 4 February 2017 . ^ "Hastinapur Wild Life Sanctuary" . upforest.gov.in . P Forest and Wildlife Department. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017 . Retrieved 4 February 2017 . ^ "Kaimoor Wild Life Sanctuary" . upforest.gov.in . Forest and Wildlife Department Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017 . Retrieved 4 February 2017 . ^ "Inside Okhla Bird Sanctuary" . upforest.gov.in . UP Forest and Wildlife Department. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017 . Retrieved 4 February 2017 . ^ Agarwal, S. K. (1998). Environment Biotechnology . APH Publishing. p. 61. ISBN 978-8131302941 . Archived from the original on 23 May 2013 . Retrieved 25 July 2012 . ^ "Processing of manuscripts of fauna" (PDF) . Indian Government. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 May 2013 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ "State division of Uttar Pradesh" . Government of India. Archived from the original on 10 May 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ "Indian Districts by population" . 2011 Census of India . Archived from the original on 11 June 2011 . Retrieved 5 October 2012 . ^ a b "Panchayati Raj Act, 1947" (PDF) . Department of Panchayati Raj, Government of Uttar Pradesh . 1947. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 July 2017 . Retrieved 16 August 2017 . ^ "Objectives & Functions | Division Prayagraj, Government of Uttar Pradesh | India" . Retrieved 3 January 2026 . ^ "Panchayati Raj Act, 1947 – Chapter 6 – The Nyaya Panchayat" (PDF) . Department of Panchayati Raj, Government of Uttar Pradesh . 1947. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 13 September 2017 . ^ "Panchayati Raj Uttar Pradesh" . panchayatiraj.up.nic.in . Archived from the original on 3 August 2025 . Retrieved 3 January 2026 . ^ "State Election Commission::UP" . sec.up.nic.in . Archived from the original on 9 December 2025 . Retrieved 3 January 2026 . ^ "Urban Development, Government of Uttar Pradesh" . urbandevelopment.up.nic.in . Retrieved 25 May 2026 . ^ "The Uttar Pradesh Kshettra Panchayats and Zila Panchayats Adhiniyam, 1961 | Ministry Of Panchayati Raj | India" . Retrieved 3 January 2026 . ^ "Panels to draft development plans for 13 cities" .

The Indian Express . 30 August 2010. Archived from the original on 19 February 2014 . Retrieved 13 July 2012 . ^ "The area and density of metropolitan cities" (PDF) .

The Ministry of Urban Development. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 October 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ "Provisional population totals, Census of India 2011" (PDF) . Census of India 2011. p. 19. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 February 2012 . Retrieved 14 March 2012 . ^ "Provisional population totals paper 1 of 2011 : Uttar Pradesh" . Census of India 2011. Archived from the original on 27 April 2012 . Retrieved 23 July 2012 . ^ "Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment" (PDF) . Retrieved 21 April 2025 . ^ a b "THE UTTAR PRADESH MUNICIPALITIES ACT, 1916" (PDF) . Retrieved 21 April 2025 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1959" (PDF) . 1959. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 August 2017 . Retrieved 16 August 2017 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1959" (PDF) . Uttar Pradesh State Election Commission . 1959. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2012 . Retrieved 17 August 2017 . ^ "U.P. Industrial Development Act – 1976 (U.P. Act Number 6, of 1976)" (PDF) . Noida Authority Online . 1976. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 August 2017 . Retrieved 13 August 2017 . ^ "U.P. Industrial Development Act – 1976 (U.P. Act Number 6, of 1976)" (PDF) . Greater Noida Authority . 1976. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 May 2015 . Retrieved 13 August 2017 . ^ Khan, Atiq (16 November 2011). "Maya splits U.P. poll scene wide open" .

The Hindu . Lucknow. Archived from the original on 12 January 2014 . Retrieved 15 June 2013 . ^ A-2: DECADAL VARIATION IN POPULATION SINCE 1901 (PDF) (Report). Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 October 2021. ^ "The density of population in U.P." Environment and Related Issues Department U.P. Archived from the original on 15 December 2012 . Retrieved 23 July 2012 . ^ "Provisional population totals" (PDF) . Census of India 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 February 2013 . Retrieved 23 July 2012 . ^ "Macro and Fiscal Landscape of the State of Uttar Pradesh" (PDF) . Retrieved 22 June 2026 . ^ "Statistics of Uttar Pradesh" . up.gov.in . Government of Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 12 April 2017 . Retrieved 12 April 2017 . ^ "Scheduled castes and scheduled tribes" . Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India. Archived from the original on 27 April 2020 . Retrieved 12 June 2020 . ^ Kaul, Sudesh. "Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework" (PDF) . World Bank. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 June 2020 . Retrieved 12 June 2020 . ^ "Census 2011 (Final Data) – Demographic details, Literate Population (Total, Rural & Urban)" (PDF) . planningcommission.gov.in . Planning Commission, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 January 2018 . Retrieved 3 October 2018 . ^ Ara, Ismat (16 July 2021). "Higher Female Foeticide, Targeted Harassment: UP's Population Control Bill May Be Dangerous" .

The Wire (India) . Foundation for Independent Journalism (FIJ). Archived from the original on 1 May 2023 . Retrieved 1 May 2023 . ^ Rao, Menaka (16 February 2017). "How one Uttar Pradesh district is using technology to prevent sex-selective abortions" . Scroll.in . Scroll Media Incorporation. Archived from the original on 1 May 2023 . Retrieved 1 May 2023 . ^ "Decennil growth of population by census" (PDF) . Census of India (2011) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 April 2009 . Retrieved 5 October 2011 . ^ "Decennial growth rate and density for 2011 at a glance for Uttar Pradesh and the districts: provisional population totals paper 1 of 2011" . Census of India(2011) . Archived from the original on 7 October 2011 . Retrieved 5 October 2011 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh Profile" (PDF) . Census of India 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 February 2013 . Retrieved 16 October 2010 . ^ "A comparison of the literacy rates" (PDF) . censusmp.gov.in. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 April 2012 . Retrieved 16 October 2010 . ^ "Literacy rate in Uttar Pradesh" . Census of India 2011. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011 . Retrieved 16 October 2010 . ^ "UP literacy rate poor than national average: Report" . Hindustan Times . HT Media Ltd. 8 September 2020. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021 . Retrieved 20 June 2021 . ^ a b "The state with large no. of peoples living below poverty line" . Government of India . Press Information Bureau. Archived from the original on 8 February 2013 . Retrieved 5 October 2012 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh Poverty, Growth & Inequality" (PDF) . World Bank. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 November 2017 . Retrieved 23 May 2020 . ^ "Press Note on Poverty Estimates, 2011–12" (PDF) . Planning Commission . Government of India. p. 7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2014 . Retrieved 11 August 2014 . ^ Singh, Hemant (7 April 2020). "Per Capita Income of Indian States 2019–20" . Dainik Jagran . Jagran Josh. Jagran Prakashan Limited. Archived from the original on 26 August 2019 . Retrieved 23 May 2020 . ^ Number, Religion. "U.P religions by numbers" .

The Hindu . No. 26 August 2015. N. Ravi.

The Hindu Group. Archived from the original on 15 November 2018 . Retrieved 29 March 2020 . ^ "STATEMENT REFERRED TO IN REPLY TO PART (a)" . Digital Sansad (in Chinese) . Retrieved 5 June 2026 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh Hindu Muslim Population" (PDF) . Retrieved 5 June 2026 . ^ Swapnajit, Kundu (18 January 2024). "From Rishabhanatha to Anantanatha: The five Jain Tirthankaras who were born in Ayodhya" . news9live.com . Retrieved 25 May 2026 . ^ "Udasis of Guru Nanak Dev" . Retrieved 25 May 2026 . ^ "URU TEGH BAHADUR - HOLY TRAVELS TO THE EAST" (PDF) . Retrieved 25 May 2026 . ^ "Guru Hargobind" (PDF) . Retrieved 5 June 2026 . ^ "Muslim population grew faster: Census" . Archived from the original on 27 August 2015. ^ "Sikhs Population Districts" (PDF) . Retrieved 5 June 2026 . ^ "Table C-16: Language by States and Union Territories – Uttar Pradesh" . censusindia.gov.in . Archived from the original on 24 February 2021 . Retrieved 24 February 2021 . ^ a b Experts, Disha (1 July 2020). Amazing Uttar Pradesh – General Knowledge for UPPSC, UPSSSC & other Competitive Exams . Disha Publications. ISBN 978-93-90486-72-4 . Archived from the original on 27 April 2023 . Retrieved 11 September 2022 . ^ Saleem, MD Tarique. "Urdu now 2nd official language of UP" . Arab News . Retrieved 25 May 2026 . ^ Sen, Shreeja (5 September 2014). "SC approves Urdu as second official language of UP" . Mint . Retrieved 25 May 2026 . ^ a b "Language – India, States and Union Territories" (PDF) . Census of India 2011 . Office of the Registrar General. pp. 13– 14. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 November 2018 . Retrieved 21 November 2018 . ^ "Subnational HDI (v10.2)" . Global Data Lab . Retrieved 26 May 2026 . ^ "Human Development Index (HDI) of Indian States: 2022-23" (PDF) . National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP) . Retrieved 26 May 2026 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh Vidhan Parishad structure" . Legislative Bodies of India . Government of India . Archived from the original on 17 April 2016 . Retrieved 19 September 2017 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh Vidhan Sabha structure" . Legislative Bodies of India . Government of India . Archived from the original on 17 April 2016 . Retrieved 19 September 2017 . ^ Four other states seen as a barometer of support for the federal government. "Legislative elections in Uttar Pradesh" . Al Jazeera . Archived from the original on 10 February 2012 . Retrieved 8 February 2012 . ^ Grover, Verinder (1989). Legislative Council in State Legislatures . Deep & Deep Publications. pp. 37– 255. ISBN 978-8171001934 . Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 27 July 2012 . ^ "Composition of Rajya Sabha" (PDF) . Rajya Sabha . New Delhi: Rajya Sabha Secretariat. pp. 24– 25. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 15 February 2012 . ^ "Role of The Governor" . upgovernor.gov.in . Raj Bhavan Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 7 April 2017 . Retrieved 17 March 2017 . ^ a b c d e f g h "Constitutional Setup" . Government of Uttar Pradesh . Archived from the original on 31 August 2017 . Retrieved 30 August 2017 . ^ Laxmikanth, M. (2014). Governance in India (2nd ed.). Noida : McGraw Hill Education. pp. 4.3 – 4.5 . ISBN 978-9339204785 . ^ Maheshwari, S.R. (2000). Indian Administration (6th ed.). New Delhi : Orient Blackswan Private Ltd. pp. 563– 572. ISBN 978-8125019886 . ^ Singh, G.P. (1993). Revenue administration in India: A case study of Bihar . Delhi : Mittal Publications. pp. 26– 129. ISBN 978-8170993810 . ^ "Contact Details of Commissioners and District Magistrates of U.P." Department of Home and Confidential , Government of Uttar Pradesh . Archived from the original on 16 August 2017 . Retrieved 15 August 2017 . ^ "Revenue | District Varanasi, Government of Uttar Pradesh | India" . Retrieved 1 January 2026 . ^ "LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS" (PDF) . Government of Uttarakhand . Retrieved 8 July 2024 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh judiciary" . Maps of India. Archived from the original on 4 September 2012 . Retrieved 19 September 2012 . ^ "The Uttar Pradesh Judicial Service Rules, 2001" (PDF) . Allahabad High Court. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 October 2019 . Retrieved 19 May 2020 . ^ a b Bind, Basini Prasad. "The History and Role of Subordinate Civil Judiciary in Uttar Pradesh" (PDF) . Allahabad High Court. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 May 2013 . Retrieved 19 May 2020 . ^ "Subordinate Civil Judiciary in Uttar Pradesh" (PDF) . Allahabad High Court . Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 May 2013 . Retrieved 19 September 2012 . ^ Salam, Ziya Us (20 October 2020). "Casteism and social apartheid the norm in Uttar Pradesh" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 1 November 2024 . ^ "UP: the nerve center of politics" . Zee news . Archived from the original on 24 May 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ Sarda, Kanu (19 August 2018). "In Custody: Six died daily in four months" .

The New Indian Express . Express Publications (Madurai) Limited D. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020 . Retrieved 7 June 2020 . ^ Sandhu, Kamaljit Kaur (14 May 2018). "More bad news for Yogi Adityanath as data show UP tops crime chart" . India Today . Living Media India Limited. Archived from the original on 28 August 2019 . Retrieved 20 May 2020 . ^ Rao, Phalguni. "NHRC registered 1,782 fake encounter cases between 2000–2017; Uttar Pradesh alone accounts for 44.55%" . Firstpost . Network 18. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020 . Retrieved 7 June 2020 . ^ Pervez Iqbal Siddiqui (30 October 2011). "UP tops in crime, low on 'criminality' " .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 26 December 2013 . Retrieved 14 September 2013 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh tops the list of communal violence hit states in 2017: Govt" .

The Economic Times . Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. 14 March 2018. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 20 May 2020 . ^ Sharma, Neeta (14 March 2018). "Communal Violence Goes Up In Country, Uttar Pradesh Still Tops List" . NDTV. New Delhi Television Limited. Archived from the original on 12 August 2019 . Retrieved 20 May 2020 . ^ "Human Development Index Across Indian States: Is the Glass Still Half Empty?" (PDF) . State Bank of India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 April 2020 . Retrieved 20 May 2020 . ^ Chauhan, Saurabh. "UP fails to improve human development index ranking in 27 years" . Hindustan Times . HT Media Ltd. Archived from the original on 26 January 2020 . Retrieved 20 May 2020 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh Human Development Report" (PDF) . United Nations Development Programme . December 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 July 2017 . Retrieved 13 September 2017 . ^ "India Human Development Report report raps Gujarat, praises UP and Bihar" .

The Times of India . 22 October 2011. Archived from the original on 26 December 2013 . Retrieved 13 September 2017 . ^ Shafi, Alam. "The strength of Armed Police in Uttar Pradesh" (PDF) . National Crime Records Bureau . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 November 2011 . Retrieved 23 July 2012 . ^ "General Information" . Uttar Pradesh Police . Archived from the original on 6 September 2017 . Retrieved 6 September 2017 . ^ "Highlight of criminal statistics" (PDF) . Ministry of statistics and program implementation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 November 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ "UP sees 6.5% rise in road accidents, 4% in fatalities this yr, says govt data" . Express News Service .

The Indian Express. 3 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 November 2024 . ^ Chauhan, Arvind (7 January 2017). "At 23,219, UP reports highest number of road, rail accident" .

The Times of India . Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd.

The Times Group. Archived from the original on 18 June 2020 . Retrieved 7 June 2020 . ^ "An accident reported every two hours in UP: Fatal accidents in the state" . Archived from the original on 5 May 2017. ^ "A powerful bomb placed in" . Zee news . 20 July 2012. Archived from the original on 29 January 2012 . Retrieved 20 July 2012 . ^ "Sankat Mochan Hanuman temple blast" . ' Rediff.com . Archived from the original on 9 August 2016 . Retrieved 14 July 2012 . ^ "Varanasi blast" . NDTV . 7 December 2010. Archived from the original on 12 December 2012 . Retrieved 15 July 2012 . ^ Swami, Praveen (25 November 2007). "Uttar Pradesh bombings mark new phase" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 26 January 2012 . Retrieved 20 July 2012 . ^ Swami, Praveen (26 December 2007). "Wiretap warning on Uttar Pradesh bombings went in vain" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 4 March 2008 . Retrieved 20 July 2012 . ^ "Massive terror attacks" .

The Sunday Indian. 25 November 2011. Archived from the original on 6 June 2013 . Retrieved 20 July 2012 . ^ "Chronology of recent terror attacks" . Yahoo . Archived from the original on 17 July 2011 . Retrieved 13 July 2011 . ^ "Freak blast sets panic alarm ringing" .

The Times of India . Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd.

The Times Group. 5 March 2009. Archived from the original on 2 May 2023 . Retrieved 2 May 2023 . ^ "Gross State Domestic Product by Economic Activity (crore Rs) Uttar Pradesh" (PDF) . Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Government of Uttar Pradesh . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 January 2018 . Retrieved 11 January 2018 . ^ a b Khullar, Vatsal (20 February 2018). "Uttar Pradesh Budget Analysis 2018–19" (PDF) . PRS Legislative Research . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 February 2018 . Retrieved 28 March 2018 . ^ "TABLE 27: GROSS STATE DOMESTIC PRODUCT" (PDF) . Retrieved 12 April 2024 . ^ a b "Uttar Pradesh: A Rainbow Land" (PDF) . ibef.org . India Brand Equity Foundation . 2015. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 September 2018 . Retrieved 13 May 2019 . ^ "Indian sugar mills association" . indiansugar.com . Archived from the original on 26 August 2016 . Retrieved 8 August 2016 . ^ Goyal, Malini (9 June 2013). "SMEs employ close to 40% of India's workforce, but contribute only 17% to GDP" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 31 December 2016 . Retrieved 20 June 2013 . ^ "Details of financing & limits of accommodation" (PDF) . UPFC India. Archived from the original on 30 May 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ "A statement of the categories of documents that are held by the Corporation" (PDF) . Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 November 2012 . Retrieved 9 July 2012 . ^ "The budget allocated to each of its agency" (PDF) . UPFC India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 November 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ Rawat, Virendra Singh (27 March 2016). "Private investment under Akhilesh government more than doubles" . Business Standard India . Archived from the original on 20 August 2016 . Retrieved 8 August 2016 . ^ V, Shyam P (6 September 2024). "Efforts pay off: Kerala ranked no.1 in ease of doing business reforms" .

The New Indian Express . Retrieved 22 June 2026 . ^ Husain, Saman (13 August 2025). "Trump's 50% tariff: Beginning to get foothold in US market, Agra's leather belt takes a hit" .

The Indian Express . Retrieved 28 October 2025 . ^ "UP govt's new policy aims to boost leather manufacturing, exports" . Business Standard . 7 August 2025 . Retrieved 28 October 2025 . ^ a b Raghuvanshi, Umesh (23 October 2019). "Finance commission asks Uttar Pradesh to bring down its debt burden" . Hindustan Times . HT Media Ltd. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020 . Retrieved 24 May 2020 . ^ "State slipping into debt burden" .

The Times of India . 14 June 2011. Archived from the original on 6 May 2013 . Retrieved 14 June 2011 . ^ "Unemployment in Uttar Pradesh increased 11.4 pct points, rose to 21.5 per cent in Apr 2020: CMIE Survey" . Mint . HT Media. 1 May 2020. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020 . Retrieved 5 June 2020 . ^ Jha, Abhishek; Kawoosa, Vijdan Mohammad (26 July 2019). "What the 2011 census data on migration tells us" . Hindustan Times . HT Media. Archived from the original on 14 August 2020 . Retrieved 31 July 2020 . ^ Edwin, Tina (30 July 2019). "Migrants seem to prefer neighbouring States for livelihood" . Business Line .

The Hindu Group. Kasturi and Sons Limited. Archived from the original on 25 October 2020 . Retrieved 31 July 2020 . ^ "Census of India 2001 – Data Highlights" (PDF) . Government of India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 November 2020 . Retrieved 31 July 2020 . ^ Singh, Mahendra (21 October 2013). "Eastern UP, not Bundelkhand, most backward: Govt data" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 10 July 2024 . ^ Tiwari, Anil Kumar; Pandey, Ravindra K.; Sharma, Vishwambhar Nath (31 December 2021). "A study of disparities in the socio-economic development of eastern Uttar Pradesh, India" . National Geographical Journal of India . 67 (4): 438– 446. doi : 10.48008/ngji.1789 . ISSN 0027-9374 . Retrieved 10 July 2024 . ^ Raghuvanshi, Umesh (7 September 2023). "Regional disparities persist, west U.P. far ahead of east" . Hindustan Times . Retrieved 10 July 2024 . ^ IT park, Infrastructure and (4 January 2016). "Noida-Greater Noida's world class infrastructure to be highlighted in UP Pravasi Diwas" .

The Times of India . Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. Archived from the original on 31 January 2017 . Retrieved 2 April 2020 . ^ "Investment climate of a state" (PDF) . IBEF organization. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 May 2013 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ "Service sector over the present crisis" .

The Economic Times . 14 March 2009. Archived from the original on 7 May 2013 . Retrieved 14 March 2009 . ^ "Statistical Diary of Uttar Pradesh" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 October 2023 . Retrieved 2 October 2023 . ^ "Only 5 states exceed 11th Plan growth targets: Govt: Ruled by CNBC TV18 News" . CNBC TV18-MoneyControl Post . 13 May 2011. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. ^ "RBI releases Study on State Finances 2009–10" . Reserve Bank of India (RBI). Archived from the original on 25 February 2010 . Retrieved 22 February 2010 . ^ Ministry of statistics and Program Implementation (PDF) (Report). Ministry of statistics and Program Implementation Govt. Of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. ^ "Small scale industries and other small trades" (PDF) . Ministry of Small Scale Industries. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 April 2009 . Retrieved 17 January 2008 . ^ "total railway route length uttar pradesh" . Northern Railways Lucknow Division. Archived from the original on 14 August 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ "The Network" (PDF) . Ministry of Railways . Retrieved 28 June 2024 . ^ "North Central Railway-The Allahabad Division" . Indian Railways Portal CMS Team. Archived from the original on 18 March 2014 . Retrieved 22 February 2011 . ^ a b "the Portal of Indian Railways" . Indian Railways . Archived from the original on 11 April 2011 . Retrieved 14 April 2011 . ^ "Equipment arrives for integrated security system" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 14 May 2013 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ "Lucknow New Delhi Shatabdi Express" .

The Times of India . 2 July 2012. Archived from the original on 26 September 2012 . Retrieved 28 July 2012 . ^ "Introducing the Railway Budget 2011–12" (PDF) . Indian Railways . Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 May 2016 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ Investment Promotion & Infrastructure Development Cell. "Road" (PDF) . Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 October 2011 . Retrieved 7 January 2012 . ^ "Basic Road Statistics, 2018 - 19" (PDF) . Ministry of Road Transport and Highways of India . Retrieved 28 June 2024 . ^ "Road network" (PDF) . India Brand Equity Foundation. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 September 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ "UPSRTC to replace 45% of its existing fleet with e-buses" . Hindustan Times . 24 June 2024 . Retrieved 24 August 2024 . ^ Dash, Deepak (26 March 2019). "UPSRTC has set a new record by registering the highest profit among all state transport undertakings" . Times of India .

The Times Group . Retrieved 24 August 2024 . ^ "Welcome :: U.P. Expressways Industrial Development Authority" . upeida.in . Archived from the original on 12 July 2016 . Retrieved 26 July 2016 . ^ "Pervasive road network of Uttar Pradesh" (PDF) . Planning commission, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 December 2012 . Retrieved 20 September 2012 . ^ "contributing to economic growth and prosperity of the nation" . Airports Authority of India. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 . ^ Kumar, Mayank (30 November 2023). "The over-promise of Uttar Pradesh's Kushinagar International Airport" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 5 April 2024 . ^ "Kushinagar international airport to get ready for take-off" . Virendra Singh Rawat. 7 January 2013. Archived from the original on 21 May 2014. ^ "PM inaugurates Maharishi Valmiki International Airport at Ayodhya Dham" . Press Information Bureau . Retrieved 27 October 2025 . ^ "DFCCIL" . dfccil.com . Archived from the original on 1 July 2020 . Retrieved 2 October 2023 . ^ "UP gets its 8th airport" . mint . 9 March 2021. Archived from the original on 24 April 2021 . Retrieved 24 April 2021 . ^ a b "Four UP airports shut down during winter schedule 2025" . BusinessLine . 27 October 2025 . Retrieved 27 October 2025 . ^ a b Sahu, Rajesh Kumar (26 October 2025). "7 new Uttar Pradesh airports closed after inauguration: Shravasti gets airport despite no railway station; multiple facilities built within 50–70 km" . Bhaskar English . Retrieved 27 October 2025 . ^ "UP to seek DGCA nod for Taj airport" . Hindustan Times . 21 June 2013. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 29 July 2015 . ^ "Hindustan Times e-Paper" . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 8 June 2014 . Retrieved 29 July 2015 . ^ Mishra, Mihir (24 June 2017). "Jewar to be second airport in Delhi NCR" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 11 August 2018 . Retrieved 11 August 2018 . ^ "About Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi" . Official Website of Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi under the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Government of India . 7 November 1985 . Retrieved 27 October 2025 . ^ Sinha, Saurabh (23 October 2021). "Haryana signs up with IGRUA & Drone Destination to train personnel for speedy implementation of schemes" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 27 October 2025 . ^ Rao, Mohan (2005).

From Population Control To Reproductive Health: Malthusian Arithmetic . Sage Publications. pp. 244– 246. ISBN 978-0761932697 . Archived from the original on 4 June 2013 . Retrieved 26 July 2012 . ^ "Hapless victim of a TV sting, this hockey player is now a rising star" .

The Indian Express . 19 April 2012 . Retrieved 29 June 2012 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh: Sports" . Jagran Josh . Jagran Prakashan Limited. 29 July 2013. Archived from the original on 29 October 2021 . Retrieved 19 October 2021 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh win Ranji Trophy" . Rediff.com . Archived from the original on 19 October 2012 . Retrieved 2 February 2006 . ^ "UP to get one more cricket stadium by 2011" . First Published:PTI, Friday, 27 November 2009, 21:26. Archived from the original on 24 May 2013 . Retrieved 2 February 2006 . ^ Singh, Prithviraj (24 October 2021). "Akhara body caught in successor row after UP mahant's 'murder', 1 group claims leader is elected" . ThePrint . Retrieved 6 May 2024 . ^ "District Football Association Kanpur – Uttar Pradesh Football Sangh" . Uttar Pradesh Football Sangh . Retrieved 5 April 2024 . ^ "Arunachal Pradesh to host Final Rounds of 77th National Football Championship for Santosh Trophy" . Official Website of All India Football Federation . 6 September 2023 . Retrieved 5 April 2024 . ^ "About Us – Uttar Pradesh Football Sangh" . Uttar Pradesh Football Sangh . Retrieved 5 April 2024 . ^ "Up Players Dominate In Badminton C'ship" .

The Times of India . 22 June 2023 . Retrieved 5 April 2024 . ^ "The Buddh International Circuit (BIC), which played host to India's first Formula One Grand Prix" . CNN-IBN . 18 November 2011. Archived from the original on 22 December 2011 . Retrieved 14 July 2012 . ^ "Why India's Formula 1 Grand Prix is under threat" . BBC News . 24 October 2013. Archived from the original on 27 October 2013. ^ "Islamic religious schools" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 6 May 2013 . Retrieved 25 April 2003 . ^ "British colonial administration system in state education system" . State Education Board. Archived from the original on 21 April 2003 . Retrieved 25 April 2003 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh Facts & Figures" . Uttar Pradesh education department. Archived from the original on 3 April 2011 . Retrieved 16 October 2010 . ^ Jain, Isha (12 May 2017). "At Rs 9, 167, UP spends least on per child school education, reveals study" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 9 July 2024 . ^ Balani, Khushboo (7 January 2017). "Uttar Pradesh has India's largest population of children, but least teachers per student" . Scroll.in . Retrieved 9 July 2024 . ^ "The Fiscal Cost Of Weak Governance: Evidence From Teacher Absence In India" (PDF) . Retrieved 9 July 2024 . ^ "17% of teaching posts in govt schools vacant" .

The Times of India . 20 September 2020 . Retrieved 9 July 2024 . ^ "85,152 posts of headmasters and assistant teachers are vacant in Uttar Pradesh, says state government" . Deccan Herald . 6 February 2024 . Retrieved 9 July 2024 . ^ "List of universities" . Education info India . Archived from the original on 11 April 2017 . Retrieved 13 September 2017 . ^ "List of Universities in Uttar Pradesh" . Education department of U.P. Archived from the original on 21 June 2012 . Retrieved 27 June 2012 . ^ "Official Website of IIM Lucknow" . IIM Lucknow . Archived from the original on 13 April 2012 . Retrieved 11 April 2012 . ^ "India's Best Schools, 2014" . Rediff.com . Archived from the original on 22 July 2015. ^ "The Integral University Lucknow state level institution" . Government of Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 7 January 2012 . Retrieved 28 June 2012 . ^ Ragini, Dikshit (10 July 2007). "चित्रकूट: दुनिया का प्रथम विकलांग विश्वविद्यालय" (in Hindi). Jansatta Express. ^ "No. of public libraries in different States and Union Territories" (PDF) . Ministry of Culture, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 October 2019 . Retrieved 8 July 2024 . ^ a b "Public Library network" . Government of Uttar Pradesh . Retrieved 8 July 2024 . ^ "Top libraries of UP" . Government of Uttar Pradesh . Retrieved 8 July 2024 . ^ "Public library witnesses 37% increase in readers" .

The Times of India . 23 September 2014 . Retrieved 8 July 2024 . ^ "List of Famous Freedom Fighters from Uttar Pradesh" . Jagranjosh.com . 4 September 2018 . Retrieved 6 May 2024 . ^ Upkar Prakashan – Editorial Board (2010). Uttar Pradesh General Knowledge . Upkar Prakashan. pp. 46– 287. ISBN 978-8174824080 . Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 26 July 2012 . ^ Siddiqui, Masood H.; Tripathi, Shalini N. (2011). "Performance of Tourist Centres in Uttar Pradesh: An Evaluation Using Data Envelopment Analysis" (PDF) . ASCI Journal of Management . 40 (1). Administrative Staff College of India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 August 2016 . Retrieved 22 March 2019 . ^ "Arrivals of Foreign Tourist" . Press Information Bureau . Retrieved 27 October 2025 . ^ "Taj Mahal tops ASI charts with INR 98 crore ticket sales in FY24, outshines Red Fort" .

The Times of India . 5 April 2025 . Retrieved 27 October 2025 . ^ "Taj Mahal" . UNESCO World Heritage Centre . Archived from the original on 27 August 2016 . Retrieved 22 January 2023 . ^ "Agra Fort" . UNESCO World Heritage Centre . Archived from the original on 17 July 2010 . Retrieved 22 January 2023 . ^ "Fatehpur Sikri" . UNESCO World Heritage Centre . Archived from the original on 14 May 2011 . Retrieved 22 January 2023 . ^ Fouberg, Erin H.; Moseley, William G. (2018). Understanding World Geography . New York: John Wiley & Sons. p. 173. ISBN 9781119473169 . OCLC 1066742384 . ^ Eck, Diana (2013) . Banaras, the City of Light . Alfred Knopf Inc, . p. 324. ^ Parry, Jonathan P. (2000) . Death in Banaras . Lewis Henry Morgan Lectures. Cambridge University Press. p. 1. ISBN 9780521466257 . ^ Hawley, John Stratton (2020). Krishna's Playground: Vrindavan in the 21st Century . Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0190123987 . ^ Gopal, Madan (1990). K.S. Gautam (ed.). India through the ages . Publication Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. p. 176 . ^ "Ministry of Tourism presents its latest webinar on "In the Footsteps of the Buddha" under Dekho Apna Desh Webinar Series" . Press Information Bureau . 7 February 2019 . Retrieved 6 May 2024 . ^ Paramasivan, Vasudha (2009). "Yah Ayodhya Vah Ayodhya: Earthly and Cosmic Journeys in the Anand-lahari".

In Heidi R. M. Pauwels (ed.). Patronage and Popularisation, Pilgrimage and Procession . Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. pp. 101– 116. ISBN 978-3-447-05723-3 . ^ "District Ayodhya – Government of Uttar Pradesh: City Of Lord Rama: India" . Archived from the original on 8 November 2020 . Retrieved 10 August 2021 . ^ "About District" . District Ayodhya – Government of Uttar Pradesh . Archived from the original on 9 November 2019 . Retrieved 22 January 2023 . ^ MacLean, Kama (2008). Pilgrimage and Power: The Kumbh Mela in Allahabad, 1765–1954 . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195338942 . Archived from the original on 27 May 2013 . Retrieved 25 July 2012 . ^ "Hindus gather for the Kumbh Mela at the Ganges in India and Maha Shivaratri in Allahabad" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. 12 February 2010. Archived from the original on 27 January 2011 . Retrieved 25 January 2011 . ^ "Sarnath General Information" . Tourism department of Varanasi. Archived from the original on 8 May 2012 . Retrieved 8 July 2012 . ^ Joon, Sanjeev. Complete Guide for SSC . Tata McGraw-Hill Education. p. 255. ISBN 978-0070706453 . Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 25 July 2012 . ^ "Jhansi Fort" . Government of Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 23 March 2023 . Retrieved 29 November 2023 . ^ "Ticketed Monuments – Uttar Pradesh jhansi Fort" . Archaeological Survey of India. Archived from the original on 5 December 2023 . Retrieved 29 November 2023 . ^ Anand, Manjaree (1 July 2014). "Health status and health care services in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar: A comparative study" . Indian Journal of Public Health . 58 (3): 174– 9. doi : 10.4103/0019-557X.138624 . ISSN 0019-557X . PMID 25116823 . ^ a b c "Annual Health Survey 2012–13 Fact Sheet – Uttar Pradesh" (PDF) . Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner . Ministry of Home Affairs , Government of India . 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 November 2017 . Retrieved 13 September 2017 . ^ Perappadan, Bindu Shajan (11 May 2019). "India facing critical shortage of healthcare providers: WHO" .

The Hindu Group. Archived from the original on 17 June 2020 . Retrieved 17 June 2020 . ^ "Doctors Registered" (PDF) .

The Ministry Of Health And Family Welfare . Retrieved 30 July 2024 . ^ "State/UT wise Number of Government Hospitals" (PDF) . Directorate General of State Health Services . Retrieved 30 July 2024 . ^ "Out Of Pocket Expenditure Data" (PDF) . Department Of Health And Family Welfare . Retrieved 31 July 2024 . ^ "Maternal & Adolescent Healthcare" (PDF) . Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 December 2020 . Retrieved 30 July 2024 . ^ "Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) (Per 100000 Live Births)" . NITI Aayog. Archived from the original on 15 January 2020 . Retrieved 24 May 2020 . ^ Rao, Menaka (8 February 2017). "Uttar Pradesh has a free ambulance service for pregnant women but substandard hospitals" . Scroll.in . Scroll Media Inc, US. Archived from the original on 28 September 2020 . Retrieved 24 May 2020 . ^ "State of Urban Health in Uttar Pradesh – Urban Health Resource Center" (PDF) . Urban Health Resource Centre . Ministry of Health and Family Welfare , Government of India . Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 July 2017 . Retrieved 14 August 2017 . ^ "Estimates of mortality indicators" (PDF) . Census of India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 November 2019 . Retrieved 24 May 2020 . ^ "Rural Health Statistics 2014–15" (PDF) . Ministry of Health and Family Welfare , Government of India . 2015. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 August 2017 . Retrieved 13 September 2017 . ^ Awakening Indians to India . Chinmaya Mission. 2008. p. 167. ISBN 978-8175974340 . Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 5 August 2012 . ^ "Uttar Pradesh Legislature" . U.P assembly. Archived from the original on 19 June 2009 . Retrieved 21 September 2009 . ^ "The Uttar Pradesh Official Language (Amendment) Act, 1989" (PDF) . Archived from the original on 7 July 2019 . Retrieved 7 May 2020 . ^ "Ethnologue report for language code: bfy" . Ethnologue. Archived from the original on 16 April 2009 . Retrieved 21 September 2009 . ^ Frawley, William (May 2003). International Encyclopedia of Linguistics: 4-Volume Set . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-513977-8 . Archived from the original on 27 April 2023 . Retrieved 11 September 2022 . ^ "Ethnologue report for language code: bfy" . Ethnologue. Archived from the original on 16 April 2009 . Retrieved 21 September 2009 . ^ Frawley, William (May 2003). International Encyclopedia of Linguistics: 4-Volume Set . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-513977-8 . Archived from the original on 27 April 2023 . Retrieved 11 September 2022 . ^ a b "Visit the land of the Taj for some Hindustani music & dance" .

The Economic Times . 10 March 2016 . Retrieved 6 May 2024 . ^ "List of Folk Music of Uttar Pradesh" . Jagranjosh.com . 12 July 2018 . Retrieved 6 May 2024 . ^ Walker, Margaret E. (2016). India's Kathak Dance in Historical Perspective . Routledge. pp. 100– 102. ISBN 978-1-317-11737-7 . ^ Schechner, Richard; Hess, Linda (1977). "The Ramlila of Ramnagar ".

The MIT Press: 51– 82. doi : 10.2307/1145152 . JSTOR 1145152 . ^ Goyal, Shikha (3 January 2022). "List of Folk Dances of Different States in India" . Jagranjosh.com . Retrieved 6 May 2024 . ^ "Kathak: The cultural gem of Uttar Pradesh" .

The Statesman . 10 January 2022. Archived from the original on 22 January 2023 . Retrieved 22 January 2023 . ^ "Charkula Dance" . Charkula . Archived from the original on 26 January 2020 . Retrieved 27 January 2023 . ^ "Chhath puja and the centrality of the Purvanchal community in Delhi politics" . Hindustan Times . 18 October 2021. Archived from the original on 1 January 2023 . Retrieved 6 September 2022 . ^ Maclean, Kama (2003). "Making the Colonial State Work for You: The Modern Beginnings of the Ancient Kumbh Mela in Allahabad".

The Journal of Asian Studies . 62 (3): 873– 905. doi : 10.2307/3591863 . JSTOR 3591863 . S2CID 162404242 . ^ "What is Lathmar Holi? Why is it celebrated?" . India Today. 21 March 2016. Archived from the original on 5 November 2017 . Retrieved 6 December 2017 . ^ "The Braj Holi: Legend in real life" . Hindustan Times . 19 March 2011. Archived from the original on 22 March 2011 . Retrieved 13 July 2012 . ^ "The glorious traditions and mythological legacy" . Department of tourism U.P. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012 . Retrieved 18 July 2012 . ^ "How is Awadhi Cuisine different from Mughlai Cuisine" .