The intermediate stage is found in the Brahmanas ( 1, 2, 5; 2, 1, 3; 1, 6, 1), where Vishnu takes the form of a dwarf, to reclaim the earth for the devas by means of sacrifice.

The three points in sun's course: Roy states that ' Vishnu 's three strides alluded to in the Rigveda have been variously interpreted as symbolizing the three different positions of the sun at its rising, peak and setting.

The three worlds and the three planes: J. Muir mentions Sayanas take on the three steps of Vishnu found the White Yajurveda (5.15). 'Vishnu, becoming incarnate as Trivikrama (the god who stepped thrice), strode over the whole universe.

The same idea is expressed by the Rishis , "In three places he planted his step, (one step on the earth, a second in the atmosphere, and a third in the sky) as Agni , Vayu , and Surya each after the other". Agni (Fire) is found on the ground, Vayu (Air) prevades the atmosphere and Surya(Sun) high in the dome of sky, thus the three steps symbolise the three planes, the ground below, air in between, and the sky above. A yajna Three states of sleep and wakefulness : S. Chanda states the three strides symbolize the three states of existence – Jagrat (Awake), Swapna (Dream Sleep) and sushupti (Deep Sleep).

The final step of Vamana is on the head of Bali which symbolizes Liberation and the transcendence of these states. Nirukta Written by the grammarian Yaska , Nirukta is one of the six Vedangas or 'limbs of the Vedas ', concerned with correct etymology and interpretation of the Vedas.

The entry for Vishnu (relating to the Rigveda ) states (square brackets '' are as per the original author): The Nighantu and the Nirukta, translated by Lakshman Sarup (1967), Chapter 12, Section 19 This account essentially states that the three footsteps may symbolise the positions of the sun or physical existence conceptualised as 'three worlds'.

In regard to the above-quoted verses, it is commonly accepted that there are Seven Continents or 'regions of the earth'. A. Glucklich adds that 'In the Matsya Purana , for instance, there is a seven-part map of the world ... one centre, where an immense mountain – Mount Meru (or Maha Meru, Great Meru) – stands ...

The continents encircle the mountain in seven concentric circles ... It seems clear that the Himalayas were the approximate location of Mt. Meru'.

In regard to the three steps of Vishnu , Glucklich points out that in some legends of Vamana and the Asura -King Bali , that 'the first covered the entire earth, the second covered the atmosphere, and the third measured heaven in its entirety'. M. Haug , in his translation of the Aitareya Brahmana (1.1.5) of the Rigveda , clarifies that the 'three worlds' often means the Ground (Earth), the Air (Atmosphere), and the Sky (Heavens). Three steps thus encompasses all of physical existence (although in some Puranic accounts Vamana does so in only two steps). D. Goodall also relates more a mystical interpretation of what 'three worlds' symbolises, as provided by the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad , including Mind , Speech , and Breath (see Upanishad section, below). Notably, Muir also states that although ' Adabhya' can be translated as 'who cannot be deceived' (as provided by Griffiths, above), it can also be translated as 'the unconquerable preserver', and notes that the 'idea of Vishnu being preeminently the preserver of the universe, which became current in later times , may possibly have been derived from this verse'. Aitareya Brahmana In the words indras cha Visno yad apaspridhetham (there is hinted) that Indra and Vishnu fought with the Asuras .

After they had defeated them, they said to them, "Let us divide!" The Asuras accepted the offer. Indra then said, "All through which Vishnu makes his three steps is ours, the other part is yours." Then Indra stepped through these (three worlds), then over the Vedas , and (lastly) over Vach . — The Aitareya Brahmana, translated by Martin Haug (1922), Book 6, Chapter 3, Section 15 (pp. 275) The concept of Vishnu obtaining the three worlds for the Devas from the Asuras in three steps is clearly explained in the Aitareya Brahmana .

The Rigveda Samhita verse referred to (6.69.8) regarding Indra and Vishnu battling the Asuras states 'Ye Twain have conquered, ne’er have ye been conquered: never hath either of the Twain been vanquished. Ye, Indra-Vishnu, when ye fought the battle, produced this infinite with three divisions'. Should the Hotar repeat that verse ( tan vo maho ), he would prevent the rain from coming, for Parjanya has power over the rain (but there is no allusion to him in that verse). But if he repeat the verse pinvanty apo , where there is a pada referring to rain (the third atyam na mihe ), and one referring to the Marutas (the storms accompanying the rain, in the first pada), and the word viniyanti , "they carry off," which refers to Vishnu , whose characteristic feature is said to be vichakrame , i.e., he strode (thrice through the universe), which meaning is (also) implied in the term vinayanti , and (where is further in it) the word, vajie , "being laden with booty," referring to Indra (then the rain would come). — The Aitareya Brahmana, translated by Martin Haug (1922), Book 3, Chapter 3, Section 18 ('On the Origin of the Dhayyas, their Nature and Meaning', pp. 126–127) The Maruts , referred to as 'the sons of Rudra ' are frequently mentioned throughout the Rigveda , including in relation to the above quotation, producing rain (1.38.7). Indra is the god of rain and as stated in the Aitareya Brahmana , 'rain gives food' (2.5.41; pp. 106). This is elaborated upon in the Aitareya Aranyaka (Aranyaka 2, Adhyaya 3) which states "the seed of the devas is rain.

The above-quoted Sama Veda hymn, for example, is taken directly from Rigveda hymn 1.22. Pancavimsa Brahmana Prajapati created the (domestic) animals (the cattle, the cows). These, being created, left him. Through the agnistoma, he did not reach them, nor through the uktha(-land)s, nor through the sodasin, nor through the night (-rite), nor through the twilight(-laud), nor through the asvina (-sastra).

In regard to them, he said to Agni ; 'Try thou to reach these for me’. Agni was not able to reach them through (the first extra-laud:) the nine-versed stoma, the jarabodhlya-(-saman)... He said about them to Vishnu : ‘Try thou to reach these for me’. Vishnu reached them, through (the fourth extra laud) the twenty-one-versed stoma, through the varavantiya (-saman), he restrained them (from passing away farther, avarayata): with the verse: ‘Here did Vishnu stride’, he strode. — Pancavimsa Brahmana, translated by W. Caland (1931), Chapter XX, 3.2 The terms 'stoma' and 'saman' from the above-quoted Pancavimsa Brahmana refer to mantras and hymns, such from the Sama Veda .

The Jaiminīya Brahmana has a similar verse (1.3.3.2; also of the Sama Veda) which omits Vishnu 's strides but explains the Varavantiya saman as 'He who desired cattle should apply the Varavantiya Saman. Prajapati created the animals. Having been created they ran away from him.

By means of the Varavantiya Saman he held them back. Because he held them back ( avarayat ) therefore the Varavantiya is called the Varavantiya.

The application of the Varavantiya as the agnistoma Saman is made in order that the animals remain present and do not run away'.

In the Taittiriya Samhita 5.5.8 (Black Yajurveda ) Varavantiya is also explained as 'Prajapati created Agni ; he , created, went away from him; him he checked ( avarayata ) by the Varavantiya, and that is why the Varavantiya has its name.

By the Cyaita he congealed him, and that is why the Cyaita has its name.

In that he reverences, with the Varavantiya, he restrains him, and by the Cyaita he congeals him'.

The gods then heard of this, and said: 'The Asuras are actually dividing this earth: come, let us go to where the Asuras are dividing it. For what would become of us, if we were to get no share in it?' Placing Vishnu , (in the shape of) this very sacrifice, at their head, they went (to the Asuras). They then said: 'Let us share in this earth along with yourselves! Let a part of it be ours!' The Asuras replied rather grudgingly: 'As much as this Vishnu lies upon, and no more, we give you!' Now Vishnu was a dwarf .

The gods, however, were not offended at this, but said: 'Much indeed they gave us, who gave us what is equal in size to the sacrifice ' ... Having thus enclosed him on all (three) sides, and having placed Agni (the fire) on the east side, they went on worshipping and toiling with it (or him, i.e. Vishnu, the sacrifice).

By it they obtained (sam-vid) this entire earth... — Shatapatha Brahmana, translated by Julius Eggeling (1900), Kanda I, Adhyaya 2, Brahmana 5, Verses 1–7 Muir states about this legend in the Shatapatha Brahmana that ' Vishnu is represented as a dwarf , and as having, under the form of sacrifice , conquered the whole earth... contains the germ of the story of the Dwarf incarnation'. This legend is given in relation to the Darsapûrnamâseshtî , or 'New and Full-moon Sacrifices'.

The translator, Eggeling , states (footnote 59:1 of the given link) that the above-quoted legend 'represents the Purva-Parigraha , or first enclosing of the altar by a single line being drawn with the wooden sword on each of the three sides'. He also supposes (while admitting he cannot prove it) that the size of Vishnu may represent 'the sun-light, which, on shrinking to a dwarf's size in the evening, is the only means of preservation left to the devas'. He now strides the (three) Vishnu -strides. He who sacrifices assuredly gratifies the gods.

In gratifying the gods by that sacrifice--partly by riks , partly by yagus , partly by oblations--he acquires a share among them; and having acquired a share among them, he goes to them. And again why he strides the Vishnu-strides, is; Vishnu, truly, is the sacrifice, by striding (vi-kram) he obtained for the gods that all-pervading power (vikrânti) which now belongs to them.

By his first step he gained this same (earth), by the second this aërial expanse, and by his last (step) the sky. And this same pervading power Vishnu, as the sacrifice, obtains by his strides for him (the sacrificer): for this reason he strides the Vishnu-strides. Now it is indeed from this (earth) that most (beings) go (upwards).. — Shatapatha Brahmana, translated by Julius Eggeling (1900), Kanda I, Adhyaya 9, Brahmana 3, Verses 8-9 This instruction, relating directly to the Vishnu strides mentioned in the Rigveda , is also given in relation to the Darsapūrnamāseshtī , or 'New and Full-moon Sacrifices'.

The three strides of Vishnu are not mentioned in direct relation to the legend of Vishnu as a dwarf. Instead, they are mentioned in regard to the performance of sacrifices to consecrate the sacrificial ground (e.g. to drive away the Rakshasas or 'demons' and solidify their own power). Now when he offers in the evening after sunset, he does so thinking, 'I will offer to the gods of this life-giving juice: we subsist on this which belongs to them.' And when he afterwards takes his evening meal, he eats what remains of the offering, and whereof oblative portions (bali) have been distributed all round; for he who performs the Agnihotra eats only what remains of the offering. — Shatapatha Brahmana, translated by Julius Eggeling (1900), Kanda 2, Adhyaya 3, Brahmana 1, Verse 12 This quote shows that 'Bali' is used refer to oblative portions or sacrificial offerings in ritual ceremonies such as the Agnihotra .

The organ of speech is this World (The Earth), the mind is the sky, and the vital force is that World (Heaven). These are the three Vedas .

The organ of speech is the RigVeda , the mind is the YajurVeda , and the vital force the SamaVeda . These are the Gods , the Manes and Men .

The organ of speech is the gods, the mind the Manes, and the vital force men. These are the father, mother and child.

The mind is the father, the organ of speech the mother, and the vital force the child. — Brihadaranyaka Upanishad with commentary of Shankaracharya (translated by Swami Madhavananda, 1934), Section 5, Verses 4-7 Agni , God Of Fire.

The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad is one of the Mukhya or Principal 108 Upanishads .

From the last book of the Satapatha Brahmana (Kanva recension ; this article cites the Madhyandina recension in the section above, which does not contain the Upanishad), it is a treatise on Atman (Soul or Self), and has been commented upon by figures such as Adi Shankar and Madhvacharya . According to this Sruti scripture, the concept of the 'three worlds' does not just refer to physical reality (i.e. ground, atmosphere, and sky). It also has other - more mystical - meanings, including Speech , Mind , and Vital Force .

As such, the legend of Vamana striding over the three worlds in two or three steps also may have more mystical meanings, and those provided by the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad seem to be consistent with established Vedic concepts such as Pancha Bhoota (the Hindu classical elements ). For example, it is stated by the above-quoted Upanishad that the first step on the earth also represents the organ of speech (' vac ' or 'vak'). According to other authoritative - including Sruti sources - the first step, ground, and speech are all represented by Agni (God of Fire; fire-altars are key components of sacrifices ): Sayana states that the first step on the earth is represented by Agni (see above).

The Taittiriya Samhita (Black Yajurveda ) 1.7.11 states 'Agni with one syllable won speech' (2.1.4 also explains the symbolic significance of the number three).

At this sacrifice Sarasvati ( Lakshmi ) appears and grants Bali a boon. Vamana is then born, takes the three worlds away from Bali in three footsteps, and restores Indra to power while the ' Daityas entered into the nether region '. Bali gratifies the devas with an 'offering of ambrosia ', and so 'was shorn of his sins and became immortal'. Second account There Daksha and other Patriarchs, Pracheta, Pulaha , the foremost of the twice-born Marichi , Bhrigu , Atri, Vasishtha , Goutama, and Narada , were worshipping him. Learning, mind, sky, fire, water, earth, sound, touch, form, taste, smell, these objects of sense, the principle of greatness, the four vedas ... — HariVamsa (Dutt Translation, 1897), Bhavishya Parva, Chapter XLII, Verses 28-47 Translation: There venerable Brahmanas, Daksa, Pracetas, Pulaha, Marichi, Bhrgu, Atri, Vasistha, Gautama and Narada. Learning, the sky, Wind, Light, Water, Earth, Sound, Touch, Form, Taste, Odour, Nature, Manifestation, and the Great Cause, the Four Vedas... — Vamana Purana (Gupta Translation, 1968), Chapter 3, Verses 27-29 The second account of the legend of Vamana is very similar to the accounts in the Matsya Purana and Vamana Purana .

As shown above in comparison to the Vamana Purana, there are even strong similarities in wording, despite being a different translation of different text by a different translator. It therefore seems likely that either all three texts share a common source, or that one is the origin of the others.

When the Lord was born as Kashyapa 's son, he had eyes blood-red like the clouds of an unfair day and was of the form of a dwarf .

On his breast was the mystic mark of Srivatsa . With expanded eyes the Apsaras looked at him. His effulgence was like that of a thousand suns rising simultaneously in the sky. That beautiful Lord was the supporter of Bhur, Bhuva and other lokas , had high shoulders and pure hairs, was the refuge of the pious, and offered no shelter to the iniquitous. — Harivamsa (translated by Manmatha Nath Dutt,1897), Bhavishya Parva, Chapter XLIV, Verses 30-42 The second - and main - account of Vamana consists of 7 chapters (Bhavishya Parva: XL-XLVI / 40–46). ' Kashyapa , the well-dressed son of Marichi , espoused two sisters of Prajapati , Diti and Aditi '. Aditi gives birth to the twelve classes of celestials / Adityas / Suras (e.g. ' Indra ' is the name of a post or class of a god, not an individual), and Diti gives birth to the demons / Daityas / Asuras , including Hiranyakashipu , the great-grandfather of Bali .

After Hiranyakashipu is destroyed by the Narasimha incarnation, the noble Bali is crowned King of the Asuras (XL). Having defeated Indra and the Suras, Bali is congratulated by Lakshmi (XLI).

The devas seek refuge with their mother, Aditi, at her Hermitage. She tells Indra 'yourself and all the immortals cannot slay Virochana 's son, Bali. Only the thousand-headed Purusha is capable of slaying him and none else'.

The devas and Aditi then approach Kashyapa, who agreeing with their desire to restore Indra's throne, takes them to the celestial abode of Brahmaloka to speak with Brahma . Brahma advises them to seek Vishnu , and they do so 'at the northern bank of the ocean of milk ... Reaching that place called Amrita the Suras along with Kashyapa began to practice hard austerities for many years with a view to propitiate the thousand-eyed intelligent Yogin Narayana ' (XLII). Vishnu, pleased with the austerities of the devas, agrees to Kashyapa's request to be born as Indra's 'younger brother, ever enhancing the joy of thy kinsmen and as the son of myself and Aditi'. Back at the Hermitage 'filled with saints they engaged in the study of the Vedas and awaited Aditi's conception;.

After a thousand years of pregnancy, Aditi, gives birth to Vamana, 'the protector of the devas and the destroyer of the Asuras' (XLIII). Praised and Eulogised by the devas, Vamana agrees to attend the horse sacrifice of Bali with the Rishi Vrihaspati , and while there 'will do what I think proper for regaining the three worlds'.

At the sacrifice Vamana 'assumed the form of a boy, had smokey eyes, wore sacrificial thread well-polished, and deer-skin. He had an umbrella and staff in his hands.

Although not aged he appeared like an old man'. Appearing to Bali, Vamana 'of wonderful speech, with reasons and arguments laid down in the Vedas, but not visible to any, described himself unto Bali as being identical with sacrifice '. Astonished, Bali asks about Vamana and what He wants (XLIV).

After describing the details and merits of the Ashvamedha sacrifice, Vamana requests three steps of land before Bali is warned by Shukra 'do not promise him any gift... He is the Great Lord Hari . Having assumed the form of a dwarf through his Maya he has come here to impose on you for the well-being of the king of devas '. Bali, pleased that the Lord of Sacrifice has personally attended, rejects the protests of both Shukra and his grandfather Prahlada to gift three footsteps of land to Vamana, who then displays his Universal Form. Angry, the other Asuras approach Vamana 'like insects going to a fire' (XLV). Increasing His gigantic form, Vamana smashes 'all the sons of Diti with his palms and feet'.

The dwarf asked Bali, "Get (me) three of spaces for the sake of the preceptor. (Bali) said to him, "I shall give (you)".

When the water was poured on the hand the Dwarf became a Giant (and) measured the worlds of Bhuh, Bhuvah , and Svar with the three strides and (sent) Bali to Sutala (a nether world) and (then) Hari (Vishnu) gave the worlds to Sakra ( Indra ). Sakra (Indra) praised Hari (Vishnu) along with the celestials (and) remained happy as ruler of the world. — Agni Purana (unabridged), translated by J.L. Shastri, G.P. Bhatt, and N. Gangadharan (1998), Chapter 4, Verses 5-11 Aditi .

The main account of the legend of Vamana in the Bhagavata Puran is narrated by Sukadeva Gosvami to King Pariksit (canto 8, chapters 15–22). Given its similarity to legends provided in the Harivamsa , as well as the Matsya , Vamana , and Skanda Purunas , it seems this account either shares a common source, or more likely (on the assumption the Bhagavata was written later) was derived from at least one of these other accounts. Quotes given below in the chapter summaries are taken from the chapter introductions provided by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust (BBT) for conciseness.

After the Churning Of The Ocean Of Milk (see Kurma ), Bali was defeated and killed by the Devas led by Indra , but was brought back by Sukracarya , who becomes his preceptor (or acarya ; 11).

After performing the Visvajit- yajna , and rebuilding his strength, Bali travels to the city of Indrapuri with his army for another battle with Indra, while ' Brhaspati advised the demidevas to leave the heavenly planets and keep themselves somewhere invisible... , in performing one hundred asvamedha -yajnas... enjoyed the opulences of the heavenly planets' (15). Aditi , to help her son Indra, performs penances to propitiate Vishnu , as taught by Kashyapa (16). Krishna , 'being very pleased by the payo-vrata ceremony performed by Aditi... agreed to become her son' (17).

After Vamana is born and assumes the form of a dwarf, the Jatakarma (birthday) and sacred thread ceremonies are performed. Vamana then visits the sacrificial arena on the northern side of the Narmada River , at the field known as Bhṛgukaccha, where brahmanas of the Bhrigu dynasty were performing yajnas ... after washing the Lord's feet, Bali Maharaja immediately accepted the water from the Lord's feet on his head and felt that he and his predecessors had certainly been glorified. Then Bali Maharaja inquired of Lord Vamanadeva's welfare and requested the Lord to ask him for money, jewels or anything He might desire' (18). Bhrigu . Vamana praises Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa before asking for three footsteps of land. However, Sukracarya knows the dwarf is Vishnu acting on behalf of Indra, and so forbids Bali to gift anything (19).

As it 'is the duty of a householder to maintain the principles of religion... Bali Maharaja thought it improper to withdraw his promise... Lord Vamanadeva then immediately extended Himself into a universal body.

By the mercy of Lord Vamanadeva, Bali Maharaja could see that the Lord is all-pervading and that everything rests in His body...

The Lord gradually covered the entire surface of the world, and by extending His body He covered the entire sky. With His hands He covered all directions, and with His second footstep He covered the entire upper planetary system. Therefore, there was no vacant place where He could take His third footstep' (20). Seeing Bali deprived of everything in two steps, angry demons attack Vamana, but are defeated and - on Bali's order - are banished to the netherworld . Bali is arrested and bound with the rope of Varuna by Garuda , before Vishnu asks for the third step of land promised. However, as 'Lord Vishnu appreciated Bali Maharaja's determination and integrity, when Bali Maharaja was unable to fulfill his promise, Lord Vishnu ascertained that the place for him would be the planet Sutala , which is better than the planets of heaven' (21). Bali remembers the devotion of his grandfather, Prahlada , and so offers his head to Vishnu for the third step; pleased with this devotion , Krishna offers 'His disc to protect Bali Maharaja' and promises to remain with him as a doorkeeper (22). Other details include: Vamana is the 15th overall incarnation of Krishna (1.3.19) Vamana is stated to have had a wife called Kirti with whom 'He begot one son, named Bṛhatsloka, who had many sons, headed by Saubhaga' (6.18.8). Aiyangar states that Kirti means 'Fame', Brihat-soka means 'great praise', and Sanbhaga means 'Happiness'.

As he grew in size and roamed over the Earth, the moon and the sun at first stood on a level with his chest.

When he flew up in the sky they stood against his umbilicus.

When he of unmeasured prowess further grew in size they stood on a level with his knees. — Brahma Purana (unknown translator, 1955), Chapter 104, Verses 94-96 Although the first account of the legend of Vamana in Brahma Purana is brief and otherwise entirely typical in nature, it is notable that 20 of the 28 verses focus on detailing the names and attributes of the Asuras that either attacked and/or were destroyed by Vamana.

The remaining 8 verses (or slokas ) relay the legend itself, whereby Vishnu adopts the dwarf-form of Vamana, attends 'the yajna of the powerful Bali ', crushes the demons in His gigantic form, and returns control of the three worlds to Indra . Second account After standing firmly on the back of the tortoise he placed a step in the sacrificial hall of Bali . He, the eternal lord, placed the second step over the whole world. Then he said to Bali: "O lord of Asuras , there is no place for the third step. Where shall I place the third step? Give me the ground." Laughingly Bali said with palms joined in reverence. He was accompanied by his wife.

The entire universe has been created by you, O lord of Devas . I am not a creator. Due to your fault it has become too small, O lord of cosmic identity. Still I have never uttered a lie, nor will I ever utter a lie proving me to be a man of truthful statement. Step on my back. — Brahma Purana (unknown translator, 1955), Gautami-Mahatmya, Chapter 4, Verses 48-52 Brahma on Hamsa.

The second account of the legend of Vamana consists of an entire chapter (Gautami-Mahatmya: 4; 68 verses). Narrated by Brahma to Narada , it differs from the usual accounts insofar as the devas led by Indra are 'defeated' not in a literal battle, but rather by the good and noble qualities of the invincible Bali , under whose rule 'there were no enemies, no ailments, no anxieties in any way..

While Bali was ruling over the kingdom, none of these was seen even in dream, viz. famine , evil, denial of God , wickedness'. Jealous and miserable, the devas seek refuge in Vishnu , who states Bali is a devotee , 'cannot be conquered by Devas or Asuras ', but can be bound 'by means of words with miraculous power' to return the kingdom to them. Vishnu enters the womb of Aditi and is born as the dwarf, Vamana. Assuming the form of a Brahmin , Vamana then attends the sacrifice of Bali 'singing Saman verses'.

The preceptor of the demons, Sukra - a descendant of Bhrgu - warns Bali and his wife about Vamana, and Bali responds 'Blessed I am because the lord of sacrifices is coming to my house so unexpectedly'. Vamana requests three steps of land, this is granted by Bali, and Vamana grows in size, covering all of existence in two steps, as quoted above. Pleased with Bali, Vamana offers a boon but Bali does not wish for anything.

In addition, while Bali and other ' Asuras along with their sons and grandsons' are driven to Sutala by Vamana, the 'cruel ones among them were killed'.

In these Brahmandas several Brahma , Vishnu , Mahesvara and Indras have emerged. Who can count their numbers but I am aware of all of them. O best of the gods, even if one is able to count the particles of dust on earth, in spite of that the number of Indras cannot be counted...

The life and sovereignty of Indra is limited to four yugas .

After the fall of twenty eight Indras, a day of Brahma is counted. — Brahmavaivarta Purana (translated by R.N. Sen, 1920), Krsna-Janma-Khanda, 47 (p.379) Vamana.

The legend of Vamana quoted above seems to be unique to the Brahmavaivarta Purana (Krsna-Janma-Khanda: Chapter 47).

In this account, Visvakarma is employed by Indra to rebuild the city of Amaravati after it is destroyed. A year later, with Indra still not satisfied and unable to return to his abode, Visvakarma seeks the help of Brahma . Brahma in turn seeks the help of Vishnu , who incarnates in the 'form of a Brahmana boy... He wore a serene smile on his face which was quite charming'. Indra becomes arrogant and haughty after being asked about the length of time Visvakarma must be engaged, so as quoted above, Vamana points out there have been innumerable Indras in innumerable universes . Countless thousands of ants appear, and Vamana states to Indra that every one of them was previously enthroned as an Indra . He adds that all the ants had achieved their positions - high and low - because of their Karmas , alone. A sage called Lomasa arrives later, and asked why a patch of hair was missing from his chest, states that he loses a hair every time an Indra dies. He adds that there have been innumerable Brahmas, and that yet with 'the fall of Brahma , Vishnu winks but once'. Vamana - who turns out to be ' Shiva in the form of Vishnu' - and Lomasa disappear. Indra, looking at 'the whole scene like a dream', is left more humbled and intelligent. Visvakarma is thus generously rewarded with riches for his work by Indra and sent back to his own abode. A more typical account of Vamana is also provided elsewhere in the Purana . Quoted below, it is given as one of a series of examples where Indra becomes arrogant and so has his pride shattered by Vishnu (Indra's pride and humbling is also the premise of other legends such as that of Kurma , the tortoise incarnation): In the earlier times Indra , after churning the ocean , consumed the nectar and defeated the demons .

As a result of this he was inflated with pride. Thereafter lord Krsna got his pride shattered through Bali . All the gods like Indra and others had been deprived of their glory. Thereafter with the reciting of the stotra of Brhaspati and performing of the vratas by Aditi , the lord was pleased and he incarnated himself as the incarnation of Vamana from the womb of Aditi. Thereafter the compassionate lord begged from Bali for his kingdom and restored Mahendra to the gem-studded lion-throne and well established the gods. — Brahmavaivarta Purana (translated by R.N. Sen, 1920), Krsna-Janma-Khanda, 61 (p.431) Other details include: It is stated that Bali consumes the sacrifices improperly performed (also stated in other texts such as the Harivamsa and Vamana Purana ; Part 1: Prakrti-Khanda - 42) The Supunyaka Vrata (vow) is undertaken by women ('in the bright thirteenth day of the moon in the month of Magha ') to propitiate Krishna and through His favour beget a son; it is stated that Aditi performed the Supunyaka Vrata to get 'a son who happened to be the dwarf incarnation' (Part 1: Ganapati-Khanda - 6); According to the Bhagavata Puran , Aditi instead performed the payovrata (see above).

The Siddhas who dwelt there bent down in obeisance to that lord who was equal to thousand suns in lustre. — Kurma Purana (translated by A.S. Gupta, 1972), Chapter 16, Verses 46-54 In the Kurma Purana , there are two accounts of Vamana. First account Vamana.

In the first account, following the part quoted above, Vamana covering all three worlds in three steps splits the cosmic egg , and the consequent flow of water rushing into it is 'termed by Brahma ' as the Ganges . Vamana then tells Bali that he will be banished to the netherworld until merging with Him at the time of dissolution (i.e. at the end of the Kalpa , which lasts 1,000 Yugas in total). Vamana gives the three worlds back to Indra before disappearing in front of everyone's eyes.

In the nether world , the devotee Bali seeks instruction from his grandfather, Prahlada , to worship and seek refuge in Vishnu (16.46-69). Prahlada is also directly linked with the legend of Narasimha , the fourth (man-lion) incarnation of Vishnu, who killed Hiranyakashipu . Hiranyakashipu is the father of Prahlada, great-grandfather of Bali, and elder brother of Hiranyaksha .

The latter was killed by Varaha , the third (boar) incarnation of Vishnu. Both Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksha themselves are the first of three incarnations of Jaya and Vijaya , the doorkeepers of Vishnu cursed by the Four Kumaras . Second account In a second and much briefer account, it is stated that in 'this Vaivasvata Manuvantra, Vishnu was born of Kashyapa and Aditi as Vamana. Winning the three worlds with his three steps, this high-souled lord gave in to Indra the triple world bereft of all obstacles...

When Bali uttered such words with so much feeling, Lord Vamana smiled and gravely said - "King, give Me simply land measured by My three . Give gems, gold, villages, etc., to those who ask for them". Bali said - "Why do you ask for three of land only? What purpose of yours will be served by that? You are most welcome to take hundred or thousand of land". Vamana said - "I shall be amply satisfied with this much land. I only want this much.

The rest of your gifts you may confer on other people who ask for them". Hearing those words of Vamana, the demon king Bali gave three of land to the Lord.

After the Lord has received the promise that Bali would make the required gift, He instantly began to grow, who is composed of all the Devas. He had the Sun and the Moon for His eyes, Heaven was His forehead, the earth became His feet... — Matsya Purana (translated by A. Taluqdar, 1916), Chapter CCXLVI (246), Verses 45-53 Vamana with Bali , painting by the Mahesh of Chamba ( fl. c. 1730 - 1770). Rietberg Museum In the Matsya Purana , three chapters are dedicated to the legend of Vamana. It has elements and descriptions very similar to that of the Vamana Purana in particular.

In this account, Shaunaka tells Arjuna that after Indra is vanquished by the Asuras , his mother, Aditi , 'the mother of the Devas began to practise rigid austerities. For one thousand years she worshipped Lord Krishna by living on air alone, and on seeing Her children oppressed by the she said to Herself that Her sons were born in vain'. Vishnu , pleased with the devotion of Aditi, agrees to her request to restore Indra to power and states 'I shall therefore be born of you through Kashyapa when I shall kill all the demons' (CCXLIV / 244).

After the demons lose their lustre, Bali enquiries from his grandfather and Devotee of Vishnu , Prahlada , what the reason is. Meditating on Hari , Prahlada has a vision of Vamana and informs Bali, who initially scoffs but apologises after being cursed as 'indiscriminate, vicious and disrespectful'. Upon the birth of Vamana, 'all the Devas, even the Demons, men, earth, heaven, sky became peaceful', while Brahma prays and performs the appropriate birth ceremonies. Brahma gives Vamana a (Black) deerskin to wear, Vrihaspati the sacred thread, Marichi (Son Of Brahma) the Danda, Vasitha the Kamandala, Angira gives Kusa grass and the Vedas , Pulaha the Aksasutra (Rosary Beads), and Pulastya the white raiment.

As Vamana proceeds to the sacrifice of King Bali, the 'portion of the land on which Vamana put His feet in walking sank down and a deep hole appeared there and He made the whole world with all its mountains to oceans... quiver though He walked slowly' (CCXLV / 245). Kashyapa . Bali enquires from his preceptor Shukra why his sacrifices are not being accepted by Agni , and is informed Vamana is coming to the sacrifice.

The pot of nectar and curds mixed with cooked rice were in his hands. He was Lord Vishnu himself resembling thousand suns in brilliance. He eyes were like a full blown lotus . He was adorned with all ornaments and was clad in a yellow garment. Realising that Hari who was worthy of being eulogised and was the sole leader of all the worlds, had manifested himself accompanied by hosts of sages, Kashyapa was overwhelmed with joy. With palms joined in reverence, he bowed to him and began to praise him. — Narada Purana, unknown translator (1952), Part 1, Chapter 11, Verses 68-71 In the Narada Purana , the legend of Vamana is given in chapter eleven.

The (anonymous) translator in footnote 12 to this chapter (p. 208) states that the 'gift of land has been highly praised as the most meritorious, from ancient times. Apararka quotes many verses from the Visnudharmottara Puran , the Aditya Purana and Matsya Purana ... and states that there is no gift comparable to the gift of land. Verses pertaining to land-grant are common not only in Puranas or Smrti works but are recorded on inscriptions and copper-plates of such grants all over India'.

In this account, Vishnu visits and offers Aditi a boon, being pleased with her penances. Aditi requests that her sons, the Devas , be restored to power, but without 'any harm unto Daityas , since they too are my sons' (i.e. via her sister and co-wife of Kashyapa , Diti ). Vishnu agrees, and promises to be born as her son, Vamana. Praised by Kashyapa upon His birth before taking 'leave of his mother and father, that Brahmana bachelor Vamana, went over to the great sacrifice of the supremely affluent Daitya , that was being performed'. Sukra warns Bali and advises him not to give anything to Vamana, but Bali refuses, stating 'O preceptor, you should not tender such advice which is contrary to the path of virtue. If Visnu himself partakes of oblations or gifts, what can be better than that?' Vamana arrives, is greeted by Bali in reverence, and explains the virtues of gifting lands to Brahmanas with the story of Bhadramati before asking for 'a plot of land measuring three steps'.

As Bali takes up a pitcher of water to offer the land, Sukra attempts to obstruct the flow of water to prevent the offering, but Vamana uses the tip of Kusa/Darbha grass to touch the spout of the pitcher and completes it. 'Vishnu, that Soul of the Universe began to grow in size till he reached the abode of Brahma ', and taking three steps, pierces the crust of the Cosmic Egg .

The water that flows in and washes His feet 'thereby became pure and sanctified the world... It was served as resorted by the seven sages (The Ursa Major ). Then it fell on the top of mount Meru' to become the Ganges .

The residence of Vishnu is in heaven, the great-souled one lives in Vaikuntha . How is it that he planted his foot (-step) in the human world?... Tell me in detail, O Brahman , how (is it that the lord), leaving these worlds, planted his two foot-steps on the earth and (how is it that he) planted his foot steps on the sacrificial mountain in this place, viz. Pushkaram , which is sacred to Brahma . — Padma Purana (translated by N.A. Deshpande, 1988), Part 1, Chapter 30 ('Origin of Visnu's Steps'), Verses 1-8 In the Padma Purana , two accounts of the legend of Vamana are given. First Account Vamana.

The first is related by the sage Pulastya to Bhishma (Part 1: chapter 30), which took place 'formerly in the Satya Yuga '. Similar to the legend of Vritra in the Bhagavata Puran , Baskali (i.e. Bali) conquers the devas led by Indra after attaining the boon of invincibility from Brahma , forcing them to ultimately seek Vishnu for refuge. Vishnu agrees to help, and Aditi (Wife Of Kashyapa ) is pregnant for 1,000 divine years with the Vamana incarnation . It is noted that Aditi 'entertained a malicious design' to destroy the demons during her pregnancy.

At 'the time as ordained, the god, the lord of lords (i.e. Visnu), kind to all beings, of pure and scanty hair, having the beauty of the moon, the conch and the (sun-) rise, became (i.e. was born as) Aditi's son'. Vamana later travels with Indra to the city of Baskali to request three steps of land. To the amazement of Indra, in the city there 'was no religious merit, no lore, no architecture, no art that did not exist (i.e. that was not found)', and even the Vedas were being recited by 'virtuous demons'. Baskali himself 'was conversant with righteousness, was grateful, truth-speaking, and had his senses controlled'. Delighted, Baskali compares seeing Indra to sacrifices like the Agnistoma and Rajasuya . Indra praises Baskali and requests three steps of land for the dwarf- brahmin to have a fire-sanctuary to make sacrifices. Baskali praises and surrenders to Vamana as Vishnu who 'has performed a hundred sacrifices endowed with excellent sacrificial fees', adding that Vishnu 'killed Vrtra Namuci' (a legend also related to the development of the Narasimha incarnation).

Although advised by Sukra to gift nothing to Vamana or else face total destruction, Baskali considers himself lucky to be able to surrender to Vishnu and wants to give everything. Indra repeats that only three steps of land are requested, and 'Baskali then gave (the piece of land measured by) three (foot-) steps to the dwarf, after (pouring) water (on his hand), saying 'Let Hari himself be pleased with me'.

The first step of Vamana is on the sun , the second is on Dhruva (the polar star), and the third reaches outside the universe. Water rushing in through the crack in the edge of the universe caused by the tip of Vishnu's toe becomes the river Visnupadi (i.e. the Ganges ), an auspicious and holy river . Vishnu offers Baskali a boon, and is requested only for increased devotion and a death at His hands in order to enter the realm even 'inaccessible to the ascetics'. Vishnu agrees and promises to kill Baskali when they incarnate and battle as Varaha and Hiranyaksha , respectively. Otherwise, after being deposed, 'Baskali lived happily in the netherworld Indra also protected the three worlds'. Second account and other details Then at the end of a thousand years Aditi gave birth to Vamana, Vishnu , Acyuta, Hari , the lord, who was the great lord of all the worlds, who had Srivatsa and Kaustubha on his chest, whose lustre was like that of the full moon, who was handsome, whose eyes were like lotuses, whose body was very short... who could be known by means of the Vedas and Vedangas , who was marked with such signs as a girdle, a (piece of) deer-hide, and a staff. Seeing him of a great vigor, all deities led by Indra . along with great sages, praised and saluted him. — Padma Purana (translated by N.A. Deshpande, 1988), Part 9, Chapter 240 ('Visnu incarnates as Vamana'), Verses 1-5a The second account, narrated by Mahadeva (i.e. Shiva ), is much shorter and more typical in nature.

In this, Vamana is implored by the devas to visit the sacrifice of Bali to request the three worlds from him. Vamana, this time alone without Indra, is greeted and worshipped by Bali, explains the merit of donating land, and requests three steps, which is granted despite the protests of Sukra . Vamana then 'abandoned his dwarfish form... extending up to fifty crores (of yojanas ) he seized the earth along with the seas and mountains, along with the oceans, islands, devas, demons and human beings'.

In the form of a Man-Lion Hiranyaksipu has been killed . Again in the form of a Dwarf , you had bound Bali . You are the origin of all living beings. You are the eternal lord. — Shiva Purana (translated by J.L.Shastri, 1950), Part 3 (Satarudra Samhita), Chapter 11, Verses 18-20 It seems that the legend of Vamana is only briefly mentioned in the Shiva Purana .

The translator, J.L.Shastri, notes in the fourth part (page 1659, footnote 93) that ' Patala is called Balisadman - the abode of Bali . According to a legend God Vishnu in the form of a Brahman dwarf craved from Bali the boon of three steps of ground and having obtained it stepped over heaven and earth in two strides but then out of respect to Bali's devotion and his grandson Prahlada 's virtues, he stopped short and left to him Patala, the nether region'. However, Prahlada is actually the grandfather of Bali (being the son of Hiranyakashipu ), not his grandson as incorrectly stated by Shastri. Other details include: Bali conquering the devas led by Indra is a prelude to the legend of the Kurma incarnation, where the Devas and Asuras form a pact to churn of the ocean of milk (Part 2: 15). Bali is present at the churning where a 'great battle for the possession of Amrta ensued between the devas and the Asuras', and after gaining possession of it, where Vishnu incarnates as Mohini to give the Amrita to the devas (Part 3: 22) Aniruddha (incarnation / grandson of Krishna ) sneaks into the residence of Bana (son of Bali ) to form an alliance with Usa (daughter of Bana; Part 2: 51–53). This legend is repeated in other Puranas such as the Srimad Bhagavatam .

When he obstructed the flow of water at the time of the gift of the earth by Bali (to Vamana), Bhargava (i.e. Sukra ) lost his eye on being pricked with the tip of the Darbha grass held in his hand by Vishnu (i.e. Vamana). He went to Sonacala and performed a very difficult penance. With his soul purified, he regained his eye. — Skanda Purana (Unknown translator, 1951), Part 3 (Purvardha), Chapter 6, Verses 51b-53 Notably, this above-quoted incident is not mentioned in either of the two legends of Vamana given in the Skanda Purana . First account Vamana, Bali , and Vindhyabali.

In the first account (part 1, chapters 18–19), after being defeated by the Daityas (led by Bali ), the shamed Suras (led by Indra ) disguise themselves as different animals and go to the hermitage of Kashyapa and Aditi for refuge. Aditi wishes to help the Suras, so on the advice of Kashyapa, she performs the Ekabhakta rite for Vishnu for a year (details and instructions are provided, including the most auspicious timings and star constellations ). Pleased with Aditi's holy penance, Janardana (Vishnu), on 'the Dvadasi day which coincided with Sravana constellation the form of a Brahmacarin (religious student). He was two-armed and had lotus-like eyes. He had the colour of the flower of Atasi ( Hemp ). He was adorned with a garland of sylvan flowers'. Pondering how to defeat the Daityas, Vamana first orders his gada (mace) to kill Bali, but it replies that this is impossible as Bali is 'a great Brahmanya (well-versed in the Vedas , friendly and hospitable to Brahmanas )'. His discus and Sarnga bow give the same reply when ordered to kill Bali, too: 'Just as you are Brahmanya, O Vishnu , so is this great Daitya also'. Meanwhile, the Daityas conquer heaven (abandoned by the Suras) and install Bali on Indra's throne. Bali's previous life as a sinful gambler is recounted, before it is revealed Aditi completed her Vrata (vow) - upon which Vamana, 'Aditi's son in the form of a great religious student' appeared - just before Bali's 100th horse-sacrifice .

At the sacred thread ceremony performed by Kashyapa for Vamana, Brahma gives the sacred thread, Soma gives the staff, the Earth gives two sandals , and Bhavani gives alms . Also given a girdle and deer-hide by unknown parties, Vamana proceeds to Bali's next sacrifice.

Although Bali is willing to give the Brahmin the whole earth, Vamana requests only three steps of land, before Sukra warns Bali that the religious student ('Batu') is Vishnu in disguise, and in relation to the Kurma incarnation, that Vishnu had previously incarnated as Mohini to take the Amrita away from the Daityas to give to the Suras (Chapter 18).

In the next chapter, Bali states that he intends to give whatever is asked as 'Lord Hari , the soul of everyone has come here out of sympathy for me, in order to redeem me'. Sukra curses Bali for ignoring his advice and retreats to a Hermitage. There is no mention of Sukra attempting to block the offering or losing his eye. Vamana takes two steps, the first covering the earth and the second all existence; the water used by Brahma to wash the foot of Vishnu that took the second step produces the Ganges . Vamana returns to His original size, and through Garuda , admonishes and binds Bali for only gifting two steps, not three as promised (since all existence had been covered in only two). Vindhyavali, Bali's wife, sees through this ruse and offers the heads of Bali, her son Bana , and herself for Vishnu to step on. Delighted, Vishnu releases Bali from his bonds, instructs Bali to rule in Sutala , and offers a boon. Bali states 'I do not wish for anything except your lotus-like feet, O Lord'. Vishnu promises to be Bali's gatekeeper forever, and all 'the beggars and mendicants of the three worlds went to Bali. Visnu who stood at the entrance to his abode, granted to them whatever they desired to get'.

The account then ends with a eulogy to Shiva , by whose favour 'that Bali became thus' (i.e. happy and blessed; Chapter 19). Second account and other details In the second account (part 12, chapter 63, verse 237 onward), after the request of the devas granted a boon by Vishnu , Vamana is born 'as the delighter of Aditi ' some time later.

At this time Bali was performing 'a hundred horse sacrifices with a desire to take away the kingdom of Indra '. Vamana, singing 'the Mantras of all the four Vedas', arrives at Bali's sacrifice officiated by figures such as Kashyapa and Bhrgu . Announced by the doorkeepers, Vamana is taken by Bali to the centre of the hall, and asked His reason for coming as well as whatever He may desire. Vamana requests three steps of land. Bali offers much more, but Vamana repeats he wishes for three steps of land. Against the advice of Bhrgu ( Sukra in the first account), this is granted by Bali, and 'Hari immediately occupied the cosmos.

The entire region of earth including mountains, forests and jungles was covered by two and a half '. Having conquered the Asuras , Vamana gives the three worlds back to Satakratu ( Indra ) and returns to earth.

At least 18 chapters relate directly to Vamana and events or characters relating to the legend. H.H. Wilson summarises the legend of Vamana in this Purana as 'the birth of Krishna as a dwarf, for the purpose of humiliating Bali by fraud, as he was invincible by force.

The story is told as usual; but the scene is laid at Kurukshetra '. This somewhat curt summation is fundamentally inaccurate and misleading since Bali is neither humiliated nor defrauded.

As a general rule, Bali is a noble-souled and religious character fully aware of exactly who Vamana is and who knowingly grants three footsteps of land in spite of being warned of the consequences. This is the case in both accounts contained in the Vamana Purana, where far from being 'humiliated', Bali is installed as ruler of the netherworlds and is promised the post of Indra (i.e. King of the devas). First account Prahlada and his father, Hiranyakasipu .

The first account is remarkably similar to that of the Matsya Purana (see above), and consists of 9 chapters (Saromabatmya: 2-10). It begins with the coronation of Bali as the King after defeating Indra . Noble and religious, Bali is congratulated for his victory and blessed by Sri (2). Meanwhile, Indra returns to his mother, Aditi , who states Bali can only be defeated by Vishnu . Aditi and the devas go to Kashyapa , 'the creator of beings, the Supreme Master of the entire progeny' who then takes them to Brahmaloka , the celestial abode of Brahma (3). Brahma informs the devas that the three worlds will be delivered by 'Him who is the Lord of all the worlds, the eternal master of the universe, and the First born they call the Primordial First Deity. Even the devas do not know who the Great One is'.

From there the devas travel to 'the northern bank of the Ksiroda Ocean, in the northern direction, where the Creator of the universe is present... the region known as Amrta '. There, knowing 'Lord Narayana , the thousand-eyed god' could only be realised through spiritual union, practiced holy vows and recited the Vedas for 1,000 years (4). Kashyapa also eulogises Vishnu by reciting many of His names, including 'Devadeva' ('God of devas') and 'Prasitara' ('the Eater of the oblation at the sacrifice') and states the importance of sacrifice (5). Narayana agrees to the request of Kashyapa to 'be born as the younger brother of Indra, the promoter of the happiness of the relatives, and the dear son of Aditi'. Returning to the Hermitage of Kashyapa, Aditi then performs penances for 10,000 years (6). Pleased with her penance Vishnu appears, agrees to Aditi's wish to restore her son Indra to power, and becomes conceived in the womb (7).

After the demons lose their lustre, Bali enquiries from his grandfather and Devotee of Vishnu , Prahlada , what the reason is. Meditating on Hari , Prahlada has a vision of Vamana and informs Bali, who scoffs and is consequently cursed as for his disrespect towards 'the all-pervasive, supreme spirit' (8). Bali apologises, is forgiven by Prahlada, and accepts he will lose his kingdom as a result of the curse. Meanwhile, Vamana is born to Aditi after 10 months of pregnancy. Brahma performs the Jatakarma ceremony and other rites before gifting a black deer skin, Brhaspati the sacred thread, Marici the Asadha staff, Vasistha a Kamandalu, Angiras a silken cloth, and so on.

The dwarf then proceeds slowly to the sacrifice of Bali, His footsteps leaving hollows in the earth (9). Bali is warned by Sukra about the arrival of Vamana, and advised to refuse any request made. Bali responds that he could not refuse the Lord of Sacrifices even if he wanted to, and considers himself very fortunate the Lord is arriving to his Yajna personally. Bali offers Vamana 'a gift of anything that belongs to me' and Vishnu requests 'three strides for a Fire Sanctuary '. Bali agrees and as 'soon as water fell in his palm the Dwarf assumed non-dwarfish dimensions and showed instantly his form, comprehending all devas'.

In three steps Vamana regains the three worlds which are returned to Indra, while Bali is promised to become Indra on 'the expiry of the Vaivasvata period' (i.e. end of the rule of the seventh Manu); until then, he is to rule in Sutala , 'crowded with hundreds of palaces and provided with comforts necessary for devas'.

The remainder of the chapter concerns the importance of sacrifices, and the merits achieved by Bali though improper practices of others, such as 'sacrifices performed without faith' (10). Second account Vamana with Bali .

The second account - excluding chapters not directly related to the legend, such as Bali conquering the devas beforehand and the pilgrimage of Prahlada after cursing Bali - consists of at least 5 chapters (Saromabatmya: 50–51, 62, and 64–65).

In this, Indra travels to Brahmaloka to confer with Brahma and Kashyapa , where he is told that he lost his Kingdom due to his sin of attempting to destroy the fetus of Diti (saved by Vishnu ), another wife of Kashyapa and mother of the Daityas . Indra performs penances, of which he tells his mother, Aditi . Aditi in turn performs penances, and pleased, Vishnu agrees to be born as her son (i.e. Vamana) to restore Indra to power (50). Similar the first account, Bali is warned about the birth of Vamana and cursed after failing to take the threat seriously, albeit this time by his grandfather Prahlada (not Sukra ), who then goes on a pilgrimage (51). Vamana is born, and eulogised by Brahma who performs the Upanayana and Jatakarma ceremonies and others. Pulaha gives the sacred thread to Vamana, Pulastya two white garments, Agastya a deer skin, Bharadvaja a girdle, Marici a staff, Vasistha (son of Varuna ) rosary beads, Angiras a broom of Kusa grass , King Raghu an umbrella, Nrga a pair of shoes, Brhaspati a water-jar, and so on. Vamana states 'I will go to Kuruksetra which confers great prosperity. There the sacred Asvamedha Sacrifice of the king of demons is going on' (62). Sukra advises Bali not to give anything to Vamana. This advice is rejected by Bali, who relates the story of Nisakara 'the son of Kosakara, which took place on the Malaya Mountain in olden days'. It is similar to the legend of Bharat , insofar as it concerns a person that having remembered their previous births, pretended to be mentally-handicapped, and suffered mistreatment by others as a result, in order to 'no longer commit terrible sins with my mind, actions and speech' (64). Vamana arrives at the sacrifice of Bali and requests three steps of land. Bali offers much more but Vamana again repeats 'Give me three steps; I do ask for this much only'. Bali agrees, and just 'as the water (of the pitcher) fell on the hand (of Vishnu ) he assumed a divine, multifarious, world-embracing form for the purpose of pervading the three worlds'.

In two steps, Vamana covers all existence and creates the Ganges . Vamana then tells Bali he must 'supply my (remaining) step or accept captivity'. Bali's son, Bana , sees through the ruse and points out Vishnu could traverse all of existence in a single step despite being in the small form of a dwarf. Vishnu responds that His three steps were also for the benefit of Bali, and to the King directly, says, 'O King, till my honorarium is paid, you go and live free from diseases in the subterranean region called Sutala (good-surfaced) which is highly beneficial'.

On knowing that he was a Vamana (Dwarf), he was delighted mich. But, O excellent Brahmanas, that lord Vamana measured the entire universe, the Earth, the Heaven, and the Sky by means of three paces. — Vayu Purana (Unknown translator, 1960), Part 2, Chapter 36, Verses 74-76 In the Vayu Purana , the legend of Vamana is briefly recounted in the second part (36.74-85), an excerpt of which is quoted above. A simplified version of the legend (in comparison to many others), after Vamana takes back the three worlds from the Asuras , 'he forced them to retreat to the bottom of the nether-world along with their sons and grandsons. Namuci, Sambara and Prahlada (were among them).

The cruel Danavas were killed'. Bali is also stated to have been 'bound with great nooses along with his kinsmen, friends, and followers'.

The previous two incarnations of Vishnu prior to Vamana are stated to be Varaha and Narasimha . Notably, deviating from incarnations typically listed, the fourth listed (occurring in the tenth Treta Yuga ) is Dattatreya , the fifth (fifteenth Treta Yuga) is Mandhatr , the sixth (nineteenth Treta Yuga) is Parashurama , and the seventh (twenty-fourth Treta Yuga) is Ram . Other incarnations following Rama have not been listed here. Other details include: The sons of Bali 'established the disciplines of four castes on this earth' (Part 2: 37.26-32) There are two different Balis.

The first is Mahabali , the rival of Indra conquered by Vishnu/Vamana in three steps.

The second is 'another East Indian King who being childless requested thus to Dirghatamas ' (Part 2: 37, footnote 1, page 796).

In the other descents of Vishnu , she is his associate. If he takes a celestial form, she appears as divine; if a mortal, she becomes a mortal too, transforming her own person agreeably to whatever character it pleases Vishnu to put on. — Vishnu Purana, (translated by H.H. Wilson , 1840), Book 3, Chapter 1 It seems that the legend of Vamana is only briefly mentioned in the Vishnu Purana . According to the notes of the translator, H.H. Wilson , 'Fuller details occur in the Bhagavata Purana , Kurma , Matsya , and Vamana Purana '. However, it is stated in the above quotation that Vamana had a wife called Padma or Kamala, an incarnation of His eternal consort Lakshmi .

The only other mention of a wife is made in the Bhagavata Purana, whose name was Kirti (meaning 'Fame', see above). Sangam Literature Several texts of the Tamil Sangam literature such as Mullaippāṭṭu and Perumpāṇāṟṟuppaṭai mention Vishnu's incarnation of Vamana, addressed as Trivikrama, referring to his act of spanning the Earth. Festivals BaliPāḍyami Balipaadyami or Balipratipada is an ancient festival observed during the five days of Diwali that amongst other things commemorates the Bali-Vamana legend.

The legend signifies devotion, goodwill and generosity. Onam Thrikkakara Appan Onathappan idol (anicon of Vamana incarnation) inside Pookalam during Onam Main article: Onam In one version of the Vamana legend, when Mahabali offered himself for Vishnu's third step, it was an act of Mahabali's devotion. Vishnu granted him a boon. Mahabali chose to revisit earth, once every year, the lands and people he previously ruled. This revisit marks the festival of Onam , as reminder of the virtuous rule and his humility in keeping his promise before Vishnu. A simpler form of this legend, one without Mahabali, is found in the Rigveda and the Vedic text Shatapatha Brahmana where a solar deity is described with powers of Vishnu. This story likely grew over time, and is in part allegorical, where Bali is a metaphor for thanksgiving offering after a bounty of rice harvest during monsoon, and Vishnu is the metaphor of the Kerala Sun and summer that precedes the Onam.

The story of Mahabali is important to Onam in Kerala, but similar Mahabali legends are significant in the region of Balia in Uttar Pradesh, Bawan also in the same state, Bharuch in Gujarat, and Mahabaleshwar in Maharashtra.

The story is significant not because Mahabali's rule ended, but it emphasizes the Hindu belief in cyclical nature of events, that no individual, no ruler and nothing lasts forever, except the virtues and self understanding that overcomes all sorrow. Iconography Vamana iconography varies by region. Three icons are common, one shows his left foot raised above his knee, the second shows his foot above his navel, and the third shows it raised above the forehead. These icons respectively symbolize the three worlds – netherworld, earth and heaven – Vamana covered as Trivikrama. Temples Thrikkakara Temple in Kerala The Vamana iconography and images are found in many Vaishnava temples. Some Vamana temples include: Vamana temple at Marhia, Jabalpur (dated to 5th-century, Gupta Empire era) Vamana temple in Nagpur complex of Ramagiri Temples , Maharashtra (5th-century CE) Vamana along with other avatars of Vishnu, at the Dashavatara Temple, Deogarh , Jhansi ( Uttar Pradesh , dated 500-500 CE) Thrikkakara Temple , Thrikkakkara , Cochin , Kerala Velloor Sree Vamana Swamy Temple, Kottayam , Kerala Mithranandapuram Vamanamoorthy Temple , Thrissur , Kerala Mathampilly Vamana Murthy Temple, Chelamattom , Ernakulam , Kerala Thrivikramamangalam Mahavishnu (Vamana) Temple, Thirumala , Thiruvananthapuram (Protected monument) Ulagalantha Perumal Temple, Kanchipuram in Kanchipuram Vamana Temple , Eastern Group of Temples, Khajuraho , Madhya Pradesh Ulagalantha Perumal Temple, Tirukoyilur in Tirukoilur , Viluppuram District , Tamil Nadu Kazheesirama Vinnagaram in Sirkazhi , Tamil Nadu In Jagannath Puri Temple the tower of the main sanctuary has three subsidiary shrines, Varaha on south, Narasigha on west and Vamana on north.

The Rosen Publishing Group, Inc. pp. 175 . ISBN 978-0-8239-3179-8 . ^ "Monier-Williams Sanskrit-English Dictionary: 'Triloka' " . faculty.washington.edu . Archived from the original on 6 August 2020 . Retrieved 19 February 2020 . ^ Kalidasan, Vinod Kottayil (1 April 2015). "A king lost and found: Revisiting the popular and the tribal myths of Mahabali from Kerala" . Studies in South Asian Film & Media . 7 ( 1– 2): 103– 118. doi : 10.1386/safm.7.1-2.103_1 . ISSN 1756-4921 . ^ "Monier-Williams Sanskrit-English Dictionary: 'Dadhi' " . faculty.washington.edu . Archived from the original on 28 June 2020 . Retrieved 18 February 2020 . ^ "Sanskrit Dictionary for Spoken Sanskrit: 'Dadhi' " . spokensanskrit.org . Retrieved 18 February 2020 . ^ "Sanskrit Dictionary for Spoken Sanskrit: 'vikrama' " . spokensanskrit.org . Retrieved 19 February 2020 . ^ www.wisdomlib.org (28 January 2019). "Story of Vāmana" . www.wisdomlib.org . Retrieved 27 November 2022 . ^ Cole, Owen; Kanit, V. P. Hermant (25 June 2010). Hinduism - An Introduction . John Murray Press. p. 30. ISBN 978-1-4441-3100-0 . ^ "Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12): First Kânda: I, 2. 5. Fifth Brāhmana" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 17 March 2020 . ^ a b "Yajur Veda Kanda II" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 17 March 2020 . ^ Macdonell, A. A. (1897). Vedic Mythology . p. 38. ^ a b c d Muir, John (1873). Original Sanskrit Texts on the Origin and History of the People of India (Vol. 4) (in Sanskrit). Harvard University. Trübner. pp. 64, 67, 87, 122. ^ Chandra, Suresh (2012). Encyclopaedia of Hindu Gods and Goddesses . Kindle Edition. ^ Yaska; Sarup, Lakshman (1967).

The Nighantu and the Nirukta . Robarts – University of Toronto. Delhi Motilal Banarsidass. pp. 190– 191. ^ Murty, K. Satchidananda (1993). Vedic Hermeneutics . Motilal Banarsidass Publ. p. 12. ISBN 978-81-208-1105-8 . ^ "Rig Veda: Rig-Veda Book 1: HYMN XXII. Aśvins and Others" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 19 January 2020 . ^ "Rig Veda: Rig-Veda Book 1: HYMN CLIV. Viṣṇu" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 19 January 2020 . ^ "Rig Veda: Rig-Veda, Book 6: HYMN LXIX. Indra-Viṣṇu" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 20 January 2020 . ^ "Rig Veda: Rig-Veda, Book 7: HYMN XCIX. Viṣṇu" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 21 January 2020 . ^ "Rig Veda: Rig-Veda, Book 7: HYMN C. Viṣṇu" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 21 January 2020 . ^ "Rig Veda: Rig-Veda, Book 5: HYMN I. Agni" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 19 February 2020 . ^ "Rig Veda: Rig-Veda, Book 7: HYMN VI. Agni" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 19 February 2020 . ^ "Rig Veda: Rig-Veda, Book 4: HYMN L. Bṛhaspati" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 19 February 2020 . ^ Haug, Martin (1922).

The Aitareya Brahmanam of the Rigveda . Robarts – University of Toronto. Bahadurganj, Allahabad Sudhindra Nath Vasu. ^ "RigVeda Book I XXI 'Aśvins and Others' (Sanskrit and Transliteration)" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 19 January 2020 . ^ "RigVeda Book I XXI 'Aśvins and Others' " . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 19 January 2020 . ^ a b Roy, Janmajit (2002). Theory of Avatāra and Divinity of Chaitanya . Atlantic Publishers & Dist. pp. 24, 102. ISBN 978-81-269-0169-2 . ^ Wilkins, W. J. (1913). Hindu Mythology . pp. 126– 127. ^ a b Glucklich, Ariel (9 May 2008).

The Strides of Vishnu: Hindu Culture in Historical Perspective . Oxford University Press. pp. 4, 153. ISBN 978-0-19-971825-2 . ^ Haug, Martin (1922).

The Aitareya Brahmanam of the Rigveda . Robarts – University of Toronto. Bahadurganj, Allahabad Sudhindra Nath Vasu. p. 9. ^ Goodall, Dominic (2001). Hindu Scriptures . Motilal Banarsidass Publ. pp. 53– 55. ISBN 978-81-208-1770-8 . ^ "Rig Veda: Rig-Veda Book 1: HYMN XXXVIII. Maruts" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 21 January 2020 . ^ Keith, Arthur Berriedale (1909). Aitareya Aranyaka . p. 203. ^ "Vedabase: Bhagavad Gita, 3.14" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 21 January 2020 . ^ "Hymns of the Samaveda" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 22 January 2020 . ^ Dr. Narinder Sharma (1931). Pancavimsa Brahmana English Translation . Translated by W. Caland.

The Asiatic Society Of Bengal. pp. 411, 526. ^ "Sanskrit Dictionary" . www.sanskritdictionary.com . Retrieved 17 March 2020 . ^ "Sanskrit Dictionary" . sanskritdictionary.com . Retrieved 17 March 2020 . ^ Bodewitz, H. W. (1990).

The Jyotiṣṭoma Ritual: Jaiminīya Brāhmaṇa I, 66-364 . BRILL. p. 97. ISBN 978-90-04-09120-7 . ^ "Yajur Veda Kanda V" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 17 March 2020 . ^ "White Yajur Veda: Book II" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 21 January 2020 . ^ "White Yajur Veda: Book V" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 16 March 2020 . ^ "White Yajur Veda: Book XVI" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ "Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12): First Kânda: I, 2. 5. Fifth Brâhmana" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 21 January 2020 . ^ "Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12): First Kânda: I, 9, 3. Third Brâhmana" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 21 January 2020 . ^ "Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12): Second Kânda: II, 3, 1. Third Adhyâya. First Brâhmana" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 19 February 2020 . ^ "Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12): First Kânda: I, 3, 2. Second Brâhmana" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 19 February 2020 . ^ "Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12): First Kânda: I, 5, 3. Third Brâhmana" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 19 February 2020 . ^ "Satapatha Brahmana Part 1 (SBE12): First Kânda: I, 6, 3. Third Brâhmana" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 19 February 2020 . ^ "Satapatha Brahmana Part V (SBE44): Eleventh Kânda: XI, 2, 6. Sixth Brâhmana" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 19 February 2020 . ^ a b "Yajur Veda Kanda I" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 22 January 2020 . ^ "Yajur Veda Kanda II" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 22 January 2020 . ^ "Yajur Veda Kanda III" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 22 January 2020 . ^ "Yajur Veda Kanda IV" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 22 January 2020 . ^ "Yajur Veda Kanda V" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 22 January 2020 . ^ "Yajur Veda Kanda VI" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 22 January 2020 . ^ "Yajur Veda Kanda VII" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 22 January 2020 . ^ Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa: Text in Devanāgari and Translation . Sri Aurobindo Kapāli Sāstry Institute of Vedic Culture. 2017. pp. 107 (Volume 1), 144 (Volume 2). ISBN 978-81-7994-166-9 . ^ a b Narayan Aiyangar (1901). Essays On Indo Aryan Mythology . pp. 217, 236, 257. ^ "Meaning of shipivishta in English - Shipivishta meaning" . www.maxgyan.com . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ Soifer, Deborah A. (1 January 1991).

The Myths of Narasimha and Vamana: Two Avatars in Cosmological Perspective . SUNY Press. p. 37. ISBN 978-0-7914-0799-8 . ^ "Atharva Veda: Book 7: Hymn 26: Praise of Vishnu" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 18 February 2020 . ^ "Atharva Veda: Book 3: Hymn 4: A benediction at the election of a king" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 19 February 2020 . ^ "Atharva Veda: Book 11: Hymn 1: An accompaniment to the preparation and presentation of a Brahmaudana" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 19 February 2020 . ^ "Atharva Veda: Book 11: Hymn 4: A glorification of Prāna, Breath or Vital Spirit" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 19 February 2020 . ^ Macdonell, Arthur Anthony; Keith, Arthur Berriedale (1912). Vedic index of names and subjects (Vol 2) . Robarts - University of Toronto. London, Murray. p. 62. ^ Madhavananda, Swami Tr (1934).

The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad . pp. 217– 218. ^ Paul Deussen, Sixty Upanishads of the Veda, Volume 2, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120814691 , pages 556-557 ^ Paul Deussen , The Philosophy of the Upanishads , Motilal Banarsidass (2011 Edition), ISBN 978-8120816206 , page 23 ^ Paul Deussen, Sixty Upanishads of the Veda, Volume 1, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120814684 , pages 389-397 ^ Brihadaranyaka Upanishad with Adi Shankara's commentary Swami Madhavananada (Translator) ^ Brihadaranyaka Upanisad with the commentary of Madhvacharya, Translated by Rai Bahadur Sriśa Chandra Vasu (1933), OCLC 222634127 ^ "Black / Krishna YajurVeda: Kanda I" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 17 March 2020 . ^ "Satapatha Brahmana Part II (SBE26): Third Kânda: III, 2, 2. Second Brâhmana" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 17 March 2020 . ^ Bäumer, Bettina; Vatsyayan, Kapila (1988). Kalātattvakośa: Primal elements-Mahābhūta . Motilal Banarsidass Publishers. pp. 216 ('agnir vai vak'). ISBN 978-81-208-1402-8 . ^ "The Mahabharata, Book 3: Vana Parva: Tirtha-yatra Parva: Section CII" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 18 February 2020 . ^ "The Mahabharata, Book 3: Vana Parva: Draupadi-harana Parva: Section CCLXX" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 18 February 2020 . ^ "The Mahabharata, Book 3: Vana Parva: Aranya Parva: Section CCCXIII" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 18 February 2020 . ^ "The Mahabharata, Book 6: Bhishma Parva: Bhagavat-Gita Parva: Section LXVII" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 18 February 2020 . ^ "The Mahabharata, Book 12: Santi Parva: Rajadharmanusasana Parva: Section XLIV" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 18 February 2020 . ^ "The Mahabharata, Book 12: Santi Parva: Mokshadharma Parva: Section CCVII" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 18 February 2020 . ^ "The Mahabharata, Book 12: Santi Parva: Section CCCXL" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 18 February 2020 . ^ "The Mahabharata, Book 12: Santi Parva: Section CCCL" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 18 February 2020 . ^ "The Mahabharata, Book 13: Anusasana Parva: Anusasanika Parva: Section XVII" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 18 February 2020 . ^ "The Mahabharata, Book 13: Anusasana Parva: Section CIX" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 18 February 2020 . ^ "The Mahabharata, Book 13: Anusasana Parva: Section CXXVI" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 18 February 2020 . ^ "The Mahabharata, Book 13: Anusasana Parva: Section CXLIX" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 18 February 2020 . ^ Melton, J. Gordon (13 September 2011). Religious Celebrations: An Encyclopedia of Holidays, Festivals, Solemn Observances, and Spiritual Commemorations . ABC-CLIO. p. 659. ISBN 978-1-59884-206-7 . ^ Dutt, Manmatha Nath, ed. (1897). A Prose English Translation Of Harivamsha . ^ Debroy, Bibek (9 September 2016). Harivamsha . Penguin UK. pp. xvi-xvii (introduction). ISBN 978-93-86057-91-4 . ^ Dāsa, Bhūmipati; Dāsa, Purnaprajna (2005). Harivaṁśa Purāṇa: Ch. 26-55 . Rasbihari Lal & Sons. ISBN 978-81-87812-70-8 . ^ Manmathnath Dutt (1891). Ramayana . ^ Hari Prasad Shastri.

The Ramayana of Valmiki, translated by Hari Prasad Shastri - 3 Volumes Combined - 1709 Pages, with complete Outline . ^ Rai Bahadur Lala Baij Nath (1979).

The Adhyatma Ramayana . ^ J. L. Shastri, G. P. Bhatt (1 January 1998). Agni Purana Unabridged English Motilal . ^ "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 1, Chapter 3, Verse 19" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 2, Chapter 7, Verse 17" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 5, Chapter 24, Verse 18" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 6, Chapter 8, Verse 13" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 6, Chapter 18, Verse 8" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 8, Chapter 13, Verse 6" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ Prabhupada, Swami. "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 8: Withdrawal of the Cosmic Creations" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 10, Chapter 3, Verse 42" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 10, Chapter 62, Verse 2" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 11, Chapter 4, Verse 20" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 12, Chapter 12, Verse 20" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ Prabhupada, Swami. "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 8, Chapter 11" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ Prabhupada, Swami. "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 8, Chapter 15" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ Prabhupada, Swami. "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 8, Chapter 16" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ Prabhupada, Swami. "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 8, Chapter 17" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ Prabhupada, Swami. "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 8, Chapter 18" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ Prabhupada, Swami. "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 8, Chapter 19" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ Prabhupada, Swami. "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 8, Chapter 20" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ Prabhupada, Swami. "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 8, Chapter 21" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ Prabhupada, Swami. "Srimad Bhagavatam: Canto 8, Chapter 22" . vedabase.io . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ "Sanskrit Dictionary for Spoken Sanskrit: 'kaccha' " . spokensanskrit.org . Retrieved 15 March 2020 . ^ Motilal Banarsidass (1 January 1955). Brahma Purana - Parts I - IV . ^ G.V.Tagare (1958). Brahmanda Purana - English Translation - Part 1 of 5 . ^ G.V.Tagare (1958). Brahmanda Purana - English Translation - Part 2 of 5 . ^ G.V.Tagare (1958). Brahmanda Purana - English Translation - Part 3 of 5 . ^ G.V.Tagare. Brahmanda Purana - English Translation - Part 4 of 5 . ^ G.V.Tagare (1959). Brahmanda Purana - English Translation - Part 5 of 5 . ^ Nager, Shanti Lal. Brahmavaivarta Purana (Volume 1: Brahma, Prakrti, and Ganapati Khandas, and Volume 2: Krsna-Janma Khanda) . ^ N.A. (1957). THE GARUDA-PURANA PART. 1 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. DELHI. ^ N.A. (1957). THE GARUDA-PURANA PART. 2 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. DELHI. ^ N.A (1957). THE GARUDA-PURANA PART. 3 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ Gupta, Anand Swarup (1972). Kūrmapurāṇa (Kashiraj Trust edition with English translation) . ^ J.L.Shastri (1951). Linga Purana - English Translation - Part 1 of 2 . ^ J.L.Shastri (1951). Linga Purana - English Translation - Part 2 of 2 . ^ Dutt, Manmatha Nath (1896). Markandeya Puranam . ^ Taluqdar, a (1916).

The Matsya Puranam . ^ a b N.A (1950). THE NARADA-PURANA PART. 1 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED, DELHI DELHI. ^ N.A. (1950). THE NARADA-PURANA PART. 2 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. DELHI. ^ N.A. (1952). THE NARADA-PURANA PART. 3 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. DELHI. ^ N.A (1952). THE NARADA-PURANA PART. 4 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ N.A (1952). THE NARADA-PURANA PART. 5 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ N. A. Deshpande (1 January 1988). Padma Purana Part 1 Srishti Khanda Motilal Banarsidass 1988 . ^ N. A. Deshpande (1 January 1989). Padma Purana Part 2 Srishti Khanda Motilal Banarsidass 1989 . ^ N.A. (1951). THE PADMA-PURANA PART. 3 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. DELHI. ^ N.A (1952). THE PADMA-PURANA PART. 4 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ N.A (1952). THE PADMA-PURANA PART. 5 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. DELHI. ^ N.A (1952). THE PADMA-PURANA PART. 6 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. DELHI. ^ N.A (1952). THE PADMA-PURANA PART. 7 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ N.A (1952). THE PADMA-PURANA PART. 8 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ N.A (1956). THE PADMA-PURANA PART. 9 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ N.A. (1956). THE PADMA-PURANA PART.10 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. DELHI. ^ Soifer, Deborah A. (8 November 1991).

The Myths of Narasimha and Vamana: Two Avatars in Cosmological Perspective . SUNY Press. pp. 30, 38– 39. ISBN 978-0-7914-0800-1 . ^ J.L.Shastri (1950). Siva Purana - English Translation - Part 1 of 4 . ^ J.L.Shastri (1950). Siva Purana - English Translation - Part 2 of 4 . ^ J.L.Shastri (1950). Siva Purana - English Translation - Part 3 of 4 . ^ J.L.Shastri (1950). Siva Purana - English Translation - Part 4 of 4 . ^ N.A (1950). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART. 1 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ N.A (1950). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART. 2 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ N.A. (1951). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART. 3 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. DELHI. ^ N.A (1951). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART. 4 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ N.A. (1951). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART. 5 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. DELHI. ^ N.A. (1951). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART. 6 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. DELHI. ^ N.A (1951). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART. 7 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ N.A. (1953). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART. 8 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. DELHI. ^ N.A. (1953). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART. 9 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. DELHI. ^ N.A (1953). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART.10 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ N.A (1955). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART.11 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ N.A. (1955). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART.12 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. DELHI. ^ N.A. (1955). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART.13 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. DELHI. ^ Not Available (1957).

The Skanda-purana Part.14 . ^ N.A. (1957). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART.15 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. DELHI. ^ N.A (1958). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART.16 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ N.A (1958). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART.17 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ N.A (1960). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART.18 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ N.A (1960). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART.19 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ N.A (1960). THE SKANDA-PURANA PART.20 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. ^ Gupta, anand Swarup (1968).

The Vamana Purana With English Translation . ^ Wilson, H. H. (Horace Hayman) (1862). Works by the late Horace Hayman Wilson (Vol 6) . Princeton Theological Seminary Library. London : Trübner. pp. LXXVI (preface). {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ N.A (1960). THE VARAHA PURANA PART. 1 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS, DELHI. ^ N.A (1960). THE VARAHA PURANA PART. 2 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS, DELHI. ^ N.A (1960). THE VAYU PURANA PART. 1 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD, DELHI. pp. 377– 382. ^ N.A. (1960). THE VAYU PURANA PART. 2 . MOTILAL BANARSIDASS, DELHI. ^ "The Vishnu Purana: Book I: Chapter IX" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 12 March 2020 . ^ a b "The Vishnu Purana: Book III: Chapter I" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 12 March 2020 . ^ "The Vishnu Purana: Book V: Chapter V" . www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 12 March 2020 . ^ Wilson, H. H. (Horace Hayman) (1862). Works by the late Horace Hayman Wilson (Vol. 8) . Princeton Theological Seminary Library. London : Trübner. pp. 18–19 (footnote 1). {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ "Pattupattu Ten Tamil Idylls Chelliah J. V." ^ "Pattupattu Ten Tamil Idylls Chelliah J. V." ^ PV Kane (1958). History of Dharmasastra, Volume 5 Part 1 . Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. pp. 201 –207. ^ Narayan, R.K (1977).

The Ramayana: a shortened modern prose version of the Indian epic . Penguin Classics. pp. 14– 16. ISBN 978-0-14-018700-7 . {{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ a b J. Gordon Melton (2011). Religious Celebrations: An Encyclopedia of Holidays, Festivals, Solemn Observances, and Spiritual Commemorations . ABC-CLIO. p. 659. ISBN 978-1-59884-206-7 . ^ a b Nanditha Krishna (2009). Book of Vishnu . Penguin Books. pp. 58– 61. ISBN 978-81-8475-865-8 . ^ Roshen Dalal (2010). Hinduism: An Alphabetical Guide . Penguin Books. pp. 229– 230. ISBN 978-0-14-341421-6 . ^ Rajarajan, R. K. K. (January 2020). "Water, Source of 'Genesis' and the End Macro and Micro Viṣṇu in the Hymns of the Āḻvārs" .